VERS

RARY

OU 218138

CD =

73 <
> m

OSMANIA imiVERSlTY UBRART

CaUNo. j ^Aw<£i^No. "L.

Author ■

>1 jfj t 1 v-^r j^A

LlBAARir

Author

This book shoiud be returned on or before the date
ia^tnarkcd below. j ^

CENTENARY EDITION

THE WORKS OF

THOMAS CARLYLE

IN THIRTY VOLUMES

VOL. XII

HISTORY OF
FREDERICK THE GREAT

I

THOMAS CARLYLE

HISTORY

OF

FRIEDRICH II. OF PRUSSIA

CALLED

FREDERICK THE GREAT

IN EIGHT VOLUMES
VOLUME I

LONDON
CHAPMAN AND HALL
LIMITED

vi HISTORY OF FREDERICK THE GREAT

OBAP.

IV. Albert the Bear .

V. Conrad of Hohenzollern, and Kaiser Barbarossa

Conrad has become Burggraf of Nllmberg (a.d. 1170), p. 84.
Of the Hohenzollern Burggraves generally, 87.

VI. The Teutsch Ritters, or Teutonic Order .

Head of Teutsch Order moves to Venice, p. 92.

Teutsch Order itself goes to Preussen, 94.

The stuff Teutsch Ritters were made of. Conrad of Thiirin-
gen : Saint Elizabeth ; Town of Marburg, 99.

VII. Margraviate of Culmbach : Baireuth, Anspach .

Burggraf Friedrich iii., and the Anarchy of Nineteen Years,

p. 106.

Kaiser Rudolf and Burggraf Friedrich iii., 110.

VIII. Ascanier Markgraves in Brandenburg . .

Of Berlin City, p. 113.

Margraf Otto iv., or Otto with the Arrow, 114.

IX, Burggraf Friedrich iv

Contested Elections in the Reich: Kaiser Albert i., after
whom Six Non-Hapsburg Kaisers, p. 118.

Of Kaiser Henry vn. and the Luxemburg Kaisers, 121.
Henry’s Son Johann is King of Bohemia ; and Ludwig the
Bavarian, with a Contested Election, is Kaiser, 123.

X. Brandenburg lapses ►o the Kaiser . , /

XI. Bavarian Kurfursts in Brandenburg .

A Resuscitated Ascanier ; the False Waldomar, p. 133.
Margaret with the Pouch-mouth, 135.

XII. Brandenburg in Kaiser Karl’s Time : End of the

Bavarian Kurfursts

End of Resuscitated Waldemar; Kurfurst Ludwig sells
out, p. 141.

Second, and then Third and Last, of the Bavarian Kurfursts
in Brandenburg, 143.

PAQX

74

80

90

103

112

117

128

132

139

XIII. Luxemburg Kurfursts in Brandenburg

144

CONTENTS

vii

CHAP.

XIV. Burggraf Friedrich vi

Sigisxnund is Kurfurst of Brandenburg, but is King of
Hungary also, p. 148.

Cousin J obst has Brandenburg in Pawn, 160.

Brandenburg in the hands of the Pawnbrokers j Rupert of
the Pfalz is Kaiser, 152.

Sigismund, with a struggle, becomes Kaiser, 154.
Brandenburg is pawned for the last time, 167.

The Seven Intercalary or Non-Hapsburg Kaisers, 160.

BOOK IIJ

THE HOIIENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG, 1412-1713

I. Kurfurst Friedrich i. . . . . . .

II. Matinees du Roi de Prusse . . » , .

III. Kurfurst Friedrich ii. • •

IV. Kurfurst Albert Achilles, and his Successor

Johann the Cicero is Fourth Kurfurst, and leaves Two
notable Sons, p. 184.

V. Of the Baireuth-Anspach Branch ,

Two Lines in Culmbach or Baireuth-Anspach; the Gera
Bond of 1698, p. 188.

The Elder Line of Culmbach ; Friedrich and his Three
notable Sons there, 191.

Friedrich’s Second Son, Margraf George of Anspach, 193.

VI. Hochmeister Albert, Third notable Son of
Friedrich ........

VII. Albert Alcibiades ..••••

VIII. Historical Meaning of the Reformation

IX. Kurfurst Joachim i, , . . . .

Of Joachim’s Wife and Brother-in-law, p. 224.

PAOX

146

162

167

172

179

187

203

213

219

223

viii HISTORY OF FREDERICK THE GREAT

OHAF. PAOB

X. Kurfurst Joachim ii . 229

Joachim gets Co-infeftment in Preussen, p. 235.

Joachim makes ‘Heritage-Brotherhood’ with the Duke of
Leignitz, 235.

XI, Seventh Kurfurst, Johann George . . . 24j1

XII. Of Albert Friedrich, the Second Duke of

Preussen . 244

Of Duke Albert Friedrich’s Marriage: who his Wife was,
and what her possible Dowry, p. 246.

Margraf George Friedrich comes to Preussen, to administer,

249.

XIII. Ninth Kurfurst, Johann Sigismund • , . 252

How the Oleve Heritage dropped, and many sprang to pick
it up, p. 263.

The Kaiser’s Thoughts about it, and the World’s, 267.

XIV. Symptoms of a Great War coming . . . 259

First Symptom j Donauworth, 1608, p. 269.

Second Symptom ; Seizure of Jiilich by the Kaiser, and
Siege and Recapture of it by the Protestant parties, 1610.
Whereupon ‘Catholic League,’ to balance Evangelical
Union, 261.

Symptom Third; a Dinner-scene at Diisseldorf, 1613;
Spaniards and Dutch shoulder-arms in Cleve, 263.

Symptom Fourth, and Catastrophe upon the heels of it, 267. «

What became of the Oleve -Jiilich Heritage, and of the
Preussen one, 269.

XV. Tenth Kurfurst, George Wilhelm * . . 271

XVI. Thirty-Years War 274

Second Act, or Epoch, 1624-1629. A second Uncle put to
the Ban, and Pommern snatched away, p. 276.

Third Act, and what the Kurfurst suffered in it, 279.

XVII. Duchy of Jagerndorf 283

Duke of Jagerndorf, Elector’s Uncle, is put under Ban,
p. 283.

CONTENTS

IX

OHAP.

XVIII. Friedrich Wilhelm, the Great Kurfurst,
Eleventh of the Series . . , . .

What became of Fommem at the Peace ; final Glance into
Cleve-Jtllich, p. 289,

The Great Kurfurat’s Wars ; what he achieved in War and
Peace, 290.

XIX. King Friedrich i. again • . . a .

How Austria settled the Silesian Claims, p. 304.

His real Character, 307.

XX. Death of King Friedrich i. . . , .

The Twelve Hohenzollem Electors, p. 316.

Genealogical Diagram ; the Two Culmbach Lines, 318.

BOOK IV

Friedrich’s apprenticeship, first stage, 1713-1723

I. Childhood; Double Educational Element * ,

First Educational Element, the French one, p. 320.

II. The German Element

Of the Dessauer, not yet ‘ Old,’ p. 327.

III. Friedrich Wilhelm is King . . , . •

IV. His Majesty’s Ways . • . ^ .

V. Friedrich Wilhelm’s One War t . . .

The Devil in harness : Creutz the Finance-Minister, p. 367.

VI. The Little Drummer

VII. Transit of Czar Peter ......

VIII. The Crown-Prince is put to his Schooling .

PAOX

286

803

310

319

326

334

347

355

370

375

385

IX. Wusterhausen

398

X HISTORY OF FREDERICK THE GREAT

CHAP. PAOl

X. The Heidelberg Protestants .... 404

Of Kur-Pfalz Karl Philip : How he got a Wife long since,
and did Feats in the World, p. 405.

Karl Philip and his Heidelberg Protestants, 408.

Friedrich Wilhelm’s Method 'proves remedial in Heidel-
berg, 411.

Prussian Majesty has displeased the Kaiser and the King of
Poland, 413.

There is an absurd Flame of War, blown out by Admiral
Byng ; and a new Man of Genius announces himself to the
dim Populations, 416.

XI. Op the Crown-Prince's Progress in his Schooling 418

The Noltenius-and-Panzendorf Drill-exercise, p. 423.

XII. Crown-Prince falls into Disfavour with Papa . 426

XIII. Results op the Crown-Prince's Schooling . . 430

MAP

Cleve-Julich, Baireuth-Anspach t t t at page 252

LIST OF PLATES

FREDERICK THE GREAT .... frontispiece
THE LITTLE DRUMMER .... „ 370

INTRODUCTION

The vast historical project which was in its execution to occupy
nearly the whole remaining portion of Carlyle's working life may
first have suggested itself to him as early as 1844, a good many
years, that is to say, before it took definite shape as a determined
plan. For, as we know from his distinguished biographer, it was
in 1844 that he first came across Preuss's work upon Frederick,
and he had thoughts of an expedition to Berlin after finishing
Cromwell In the interval, however, between the birth of his con-
ception and the beginnings of his attempt to realise it, he had still
much literary work to do. It was during these years that he pub-
lished the Latter Day Pamphlets, the most vehemently controversial
of all his writings, and the Life of Sterling, which, on the other
hand, is perhaps the one among them all which divides readers the
lealSt. Not until this last-named volume had been got off his hands
did he at length resolve upon undertaking the great biography
and settle resolutely down to the collection and arrangement of
his mountainous materials. From that time forth until the appear-
ance of the last volume — fourteen years later — his life, according
to his own incessant complaints, was a continuous martyrdom,
in which Mrs. Carlyle too often involuntarily shared. It was at
the end of 1851 that he set seriously to work, commencing by six
months of steady reading, during which he cut himself almost
entirely from his wife's society, and was only at last driven from
his seclusion by the 'maddening' noise of the workmen engaged
in the repairs of his house. A tour in Germany followed in the
autumn of 1852, and, returning enriched with fresh materials
for his biography. Carlyle applied himself doggedly to his task in

xii HISTORY OF FREDERICK THE GREAT

London throughout the whole of the next two years. Nor indeed
till the autumn of the year following does he seem to have
allowed himself any respite from his labours. In August 1855,
however, and at intervals in 1856, we find him indulging in
occasional holidays ; but in the winter of the latter year, he again
buried himself among his books at Chelsea and took another long
spell of work in the ' sound-proof room which he had erected at
the top of his house. In July 1857 the first chapters of Frederick
were at last getting into print, and in the autumn of 1858 he
again visited Germany on a tour of inspection of the historic
scenes of the Seven Years* War, thus enabling himself to combine
the fine dramatic quality of his battle-pieces with a technical and
scientific accuracy which has earned for his Frederick the Great a
well-merited place among the text-books of German military
students. He returned to England in September 1858, and a
little later — that is to say, more than seven years after the com-
mencement of the work — its first two volumes were given to the
world. Its success was immediate, and considering its subject,
remarkable, four thousand copies being sold before the end of the
year. The third volume appeared in 1862, the fourth in 1864,
and the fifth and sixth, by which the great work was brought to a
conclusion, in 1865,

To call in question the merits of this colossal biography would
be of course absurd. Even were it not informed — one cannot per-
haps say throughout, but in many brilliant passages and pages —
by Carlyle’s extraordinary genius, it would yet remain a monu-
ment of historical industry and acumen, and an achievement on
which, though it stood alone, the most ambitious of historians
might be well content to rest his fame. We cannot even say
that, with due allowance made where allowance is due, it is in
any way inferior in execution to its author s lofty standard of
literary workmanship. Emerson, as quoted by Mr. Leslie Stephen,
pronounced it ^ the wittiest book in the world,' and it is certainly
rich in the inimitable humour of the mind which gave it birth.

INTRODUCTION xiH

Still it cannot be denied that the work is guilty of a double
oifence against the canons of proportion. Great as was the part
played by Frederick ii. in the history of his country, and indirectly
in that of Europe, it can hardly be contended that it deserved
treatment at such portentous length. Nor, even if such a con-
tention were tenable, can it be admitted that the various parts of
this monumental structure stand in due relation to each other.
The biographer unquestionably dwells at excessive length on the
parentage and upbringing of his hero, and takes an unconscionable
time in getting to close quarters with the real subject of his
narrative. The early years and training of Frederick, and the
stem experiences of his youth, had, no doubt, an important bearing
on his future career, which indeed would be hardly intelligible
without a somewhat full account not only of his predecessor s
work of military organisation, but of the singularly though
un designedly fortifying discipline to which he subjected his son.
But Carlyle lingers beyond all tolerable measure over his minute
portrait of the brutal old grenadier, and his readiness in excuse
or palliation of Frederick William's half - insane excesses of
savagery, is not only irritating in itself, but, worse still, is apt to
beget a not unnatural distrust of his advocacy when he comes to
deal with the more questionable passages of his hero's life.

The general dimensions, however, of the ^ Frederick,* and even
the \indue elaboration of its preliminaries, were determined by
causes which it is not difficult to indicate. Carlyle had always
been too apt to write both history and biography in the spirit of
the denunciatory political prophet, and the habit had grown upon
him with years. The spirit in question may almost be said to have
dictated his choice of a subject. His enthusiasm for the founder
of the Prussian Monarchy was partly factitious ; indeed if certain
reported remarks may be taken as seriously meant, he had in
reality no very high opinion of Vater Fritz. But, unsatisfactory
though he was as a hero in one sense of the word, he served Carlyle's
turn well enough in another. When Carlyle speaks of Frederick

xiv HISTORY OF FREDERICK THE GREAT

as the last specimen of the King (' King, Kdnig, Canning, Able-
Man, *one who kens or cans’), his eulogies must be taken
with some reservation. All that can fairly be said of Frederick
in the character of the ^ Hero as King,' is that he was a good
enough stick to beat the dog of Democracy withal. Carlyle
was just then in his most contentious mood. The Latter-day
Pamphlets had, as has been said, aroused vehement protest. He
had a feeling that it had set the world against him, and he became
daily more and more convinced that he had been cast by destiny
for the r6le of Athanasius. This is hardly the spirit in which to
look about for a subject of biography, and certainly if a writer
is to select a hero with a special view to using his biography
for a temporary polemical purpose, it is just as well that he should
not plan his work on such a scale as to make it last him the
remainder of his life. But no doubt it was the selection which
determined the plan, and it was the mass of biographical detail
which German industry, German formlessness, and German in-
artistic lack of perception for the inessential had accumuluted
round the hero, which made the choice so fatal a one. It was not
exactly a free choice either. Theoretically speaking, any born
* leader of men,’ any one of the figures, for instance, whom he had
robed and crowned as ideal rulers in his lectures on Hero-Worship,
would have answered that temporary polemical purpose to which
he eventually made so gigantic a sacrifice. But practically he
found on examination that none of them would do. ‘ He thought
of Ireland,* writes the late Professor Nichol, 'but that was too
burning a subject ; of William the Conqueror, of Simon de Mont-
fort, the Norsemen, the Cid ; but these may have seemed to him
too remote. Why, ask patriotic Scotsmen, did he not take up his
and their favourite Knox.? But Knox’s life had been fairly
handled by M'Crie, and Carlyle would have found it hard to adjust
his treatment of that essentially national hero to the exodus from
Houndsditch. Luther might have been an apter theme ; but there
too it would have been a strain to steer clear of theological con-

INTRODUCTION

XV

troversy, of which he had had enough. Napoleon was at heart
too much of a gamin for his taste. Looking over Prussia in more
recent times, he concluded * that the Prussian monarchy had been
the centre of modern stability, and that it had been made so by
its actual creator Frederick ii. called the Great.' And thus it
was that he found himself at last, spade in hand, before that
Titanic midden, that * Pelion laid on Ossa of Prussian Dryasdust,'
which in the result it took him fourteen mortal years to dig
through.'

Merely to have played the ^ Golden Dustman ' to this huge pile
of biographical refuse; merely to have ^screened' and sifted it
with such resolute and untiring labour ; to have extricated, stored,
arranged, labelled and catalogued its buried treasures, and to have
carted away the mass of superincumbent rubbish, to be ^shot'
once for all in its proper limbo of oblivion — this alone would have
been a great and valuable work. But seeing that to this Carlyle
has added the construction of a magnificently imposing, if imper-
fectly proportioned, museum, for the safe custody and perpetual
preservation of the recovered treasures, it might seem ungracious
to grudge the long years that were consumed on the accomplish-
ment of the work. Regret only awakens when we turn away from
what we have gained — no doubt a quite indefensible proceeding
— to consider what we have lost; to reflect on the matchless
exceRence and perfect adequacy of so many of Carlyle's shorter
pieces; and mentally to enumerate all those memorable events
in the world's history which have waited in vain to hear their
story told as he alone could tell it, all those its epic figures who
might be living for us now with the full and vivid life of a
Mirabeau or a Cromwell, had not he who of all men was best
fitted to play their vales sacer been * otherwise engaged.'

H. D. TRAILL.

BOOK I

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE
1712

CHAPTER I

proem: FRIEDRICH'S HISTORY FROM THE DISTANCE
WE ARE AT

Aboxjt fourscore years ago, there used to be seen sauntering
on the terraces of Sans Souci, for a short time in the after-
noon, or you might have met him elsewhere at an earlier hour,
riding or driving in a rapid business manner on the open
roads or through the scraggy woods and avenues of that
intricate amphibious Potsdam region, a highly interesting
lean little old man, of alert though slightly stooping figure ;
whose name among strangers was King Friedrich the Second,
or Ffederick the Great of Prussia, and at home among the
common people, who much loved and esteemed him, was Voter
Fritz , — Father Fred, — a name of familiarity which had not
bred contempt in that instance. He is a King every inch of
him, though without the trappings of a King. Presents him-
self in a Spai-tan simplicity of vesture : no crown but an old
military cocked-hat, — generally old, or trampled and kneaded
into absolute softness, if new ; — no sceptre but one like Aga-
memnon’s, a walking-stick cut from the woods, which serves
also as a riding-stick (with which he hits the horse ‘ between
the ears,’ say authors) ; — ^and for royal robes, a mere soldier's
blue coat with red facings, coat likely to be old, and sure to

VOL. I. A

J8 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [BOOK I.

have a good deal of Spanish snuff on the breast of it ; rest of
the apparel dim, unobtrusive in colour or cut, ending in high
over-knee military boots, which may be brushed (and, I hope,
kept soft with an underhand suspicion of oil), but are not
permitted to be blackened or varnished ; Day and Martin
with their soot-pots forbidden to approach.

The man is not of godlike physiognomy, any more than
of imposing stature or costume : close-shut mouth with thin
lips, prominent jaws and nose, receding brow, by no means
of Olympian height ; head, however, is of long form, and has
superlative gray eyes in it. Not what is called a beautiful
man; nor yet, by all appearance, what is called a happy.
On the contrary, the face bears evidence of many sorrows, as
they are termed, of much hard labour done in this world;
and seems to anticipate nothing but more still coming. Quiet
stoicism, capable enough of what joy there were, but not
expecting any worth mention ; great unconscious suid some
conscious pride, well tempered with a cheery mockery of
humour, — are written on that old face ; which carries its chin
well forward, in spite of the slight stoop about the neck;
snufiy nose rather flung into the air, under its old cocked-hat,
— like an old snuffy lion on the watch ; and such a pair of
eyes as no man or lion or lynx of that Century bore else-
where, according to all the testimony we have. ^ Those eyes,’
says Mirabeau, ‘which, at the bidding of his great* soul,
fascinated you with seduction or with terror {portaientj au
grk de son dme hh'diqve^ la seduction on la terreury ^ Most
excellent potent brilliant eyes, swift-darting as the stars, sted-
fast as the sun; gray, we said, of the azure-gray colour;
large enough, not of glaring size ; the habitual expression
of them vigilance and penetrating sense, rapidity resting on
depth. Which is an excellent combination; and gives us
the notion of a lambent outer radiance springing from some
great inner sea of light and fire in the man. The voice, if

* Mirabeau, Histoire SecrHe de la Caur de Berlin^ Lettre 28®® (24 Septembre
1786), p. 128 (in edition of Paris, 1821}.

CHAP. I.] PROEM: FROM THIS DISTANCE 8

he speak to you, is of similar physiognomy : clear, melodious
and sonorous ; all tones are in it, from that of ingenuous
inquiry, graceful sociality, light-flowing banter (rather prickly
for most part) up to definite word of command, up to deso-
lating word of rebuke and reprobation ; a voice ® the clearest
and most agreeable in conversation I ever heard,’ says witty
Dr. Moore.^ ‘ He speaks a great deal,’ continues the doctor ;
‘ yet those who hear him, regret that he does not speak a
good deal more. His observations are always lively, very
often just ; and few men possess the talent of repartee in
greater perfection.’

Just about threescore and ten years ago,^ his speakings and
his workings came to finis in this World of Time ; and he
vanished from all eyes into other worlds, leaving much inquiry
about him in the minds of men ; — which, as my readers and
I may feel too well, is yet by no means satisfied. As to his
speech, indeed, though it had the worth just ascribed to it
and more, and though masses of it were deliberately put on
paper by himself, in prose and verse, and continue to be
printed and kept legible, what he spoke has pretty much
vanished into the inane ; and except as record or document
of what he did, hardly now concerns mankind. But the
things he did were extremely remarkable; and cannot be
forgotten by mankind. Indeed, they bear such fruit to the
present hour as all the Newspapers are obliged to be taking
note of, sometimes to an unpleasant degree. Editors vaguely
account this man the ‘ Creator of the Prussian Monarchy ’ ;
which has since grown so large in the world, and troublesome
to the Editorial mind in this and other countries. He was
indeed the first who, in a highly public manner, notified its
creation; announced to all men that it was, in very deed,
created ; standing on its feet there, and would go a great
way, on the impulse it had got from him and others. As it

^ Moore, View of Society and Manners in France^ Switzerland^ and Germany
(London, 1779), ii. 246.

* A.D. 1856,— 17th August 1786.

4 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [BOOK L

has axxx)rdingly done ; and may still keep doing to lengths
little dreamt of by the British Editor in our time; whose
prophesyings upon Prussia, and insights into Prussia, in its
past, or present or future, are truly as yet inconsiderable,
in proportion to the noise he makes with them ! The more
is the pity for him, — and for myself too in the Enterprise
now on hand.

It is of this Figure, whom we see by the mind’s eye in
those Potsdam regions, visible for the last time seventy years
ago, that we are now to treat, in the way of solacing in-
genuous human curiosity. We are to try for some Historical
Conception of this Man and King ; some answer to the ques-
tions, * What was he, then ? Whence, how ? And what
did he achieve and suffer in the world ? ’ — such answer as
may prove admissible to ingenuous mankind, especially such
as may correspond to the Fact (which stands there, abstruse
indeed, but actual and unalterable), and so be sure of admis-
sibility one day.

An Enterprise which turns out to be, the longer one looks
at it, the more of a formidable, not to say unmanageable
nature ! Concerning which, on one or two points, it were
good, if conveniently possible, to come to some preliminary
understanding with the reader. Here, flying on loose leaves,
are certain incidental utterances, of various date : these, as
the topic is difficult, I will merely label and insert, instead of
a formal Discourse, which were too apt to slide into something
of a Lamentation, or otherwise take an unpleasant turn.

1. Friedrich theriy and Friedrich now

This was a man of infinite mark to his contemporaries ;
who had witnessed surprising feats from him in the world ;
very questionable notions and ways, which he had contrived
to maintain against the world and its criticisms. As an
original man has always to do ; much more an original nder

CHAP. I.] PROEM: NOW AND THEN 5

of men. The world, in fact, had tried hard to put him
down, as it does, unconsciously or consciously, with all such ;
and after the most conscious exertions, and at one time
a dead-lift spasm of all its energies for Seven Years, had
not been able. Principalities and powers. Imperial, Royal,
Czarish, Papal, enemies innumerable as the sea-sand, had risen
against him, only one helper left among the world'^s Poten-
tates (and that one only while there should be help rendered
in return); and he led them all such a dance as had astonished
mankind and them.

No wonder they thought him worthy of notice. Eveiy
original man of any magnitude is; — nay, in the long-run, who
or what else is ? But how much more if your original man
was a king over men ; whose movements were polar, and car-
ried from day to day those of the world along with them.
The Samson Agonistes, — were his life passed like that of
Samuel Johnson in dirty garrets, and the produce of it only
some bits of written paper, — ^the Agonistes, and how he will
comport himself in the Philistine mill ; this is always a spec-
tacle of truly epic and tragic nature. The rather, if your
Samson, royal or other, is not yet blinded or subdued to
the wheel ; much more if he vanquish his enemies, not by
suicidal methods, but march out at last flourishing his mira-
culous fighting implement, and leaving their mill and them
in quile ruinous circumstances. As this King Friedrich fairly
managed to do.

For he left the world all bankrupt, we may say ; fallen
into bottomless abysses of destruction ; he still in a paying
condition, and with footing capable to carry his affairs and
him. When he died, in 1786, the enormous Phenomenon
since called French Revolution was already growling audibly
in the depths of the world; meteoric-electric coruscations
heralding it, all round the horizon. Strange enough to note,
one of Friedrich’s last visitors was Gabriel Honors Riquetti,
Comte de Mirabeau. These two saw one another ; twice, for
half an hour ^ch time. The last of the old Gods and the

6 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [BOOK 1.

first of the modem Titans; — ^before Pelion leapt on Ossa;
and the foul Earth taking fire at last, its vile mephitic
elements went up in volcanic thunder. This also is one of
the peculiarities of Friedrich, that he is hitherto the last of
the Sings; that he ushers-in the French Revolution, and
closes an Epoch of World-History. Finishing-off forever the
trade of King, think many ; who have grown profoundly dark
as to Kingship and him.

The French Revolution may be said to have, for about
half a century, quite submerged Friedrich, abolished him from
the memories of men ; and now on coming to light again, he
is found defaced under strange mud-incrustations, and the
eyes of mankind look at him from a singularly changed, what
we must call oblique and perverse, point of vision. This is
one of the difficulties in dealing with his History ; — especially
if you happen to believe both in the French Revolution and
in him ; tiiat is to say, both that Real Kingship is eternally
indispensable, and also that the destmction of Sham Kingship
(a frightful process) is occasionally so.

On the breaking-out of that formidable Explosion, and
Suicide of his Century, Friedrich sank into comparative ob-
scurity ; eclipsed amid the ruins of that universal earthquake,
the very dust of which darkened all the air, and made of daj
a disastrous midnight. Black midnight, broken only by the
blaze of conflagrations; — wherein, to our terrified imagina-
tions, were seen, not men, French and other, but ghastly
portents, stalking wrathful, and shapes of avenging gods. It
must be owned the figure of Napoleon was titanic ; especieJly
to the generation that looked on him, and that waited shud-
dering to be devoured by him. In general, in that French
Revolution, all was on a huge scale ; if not greater than any-
thing in human experience, at least more grandiose. All was
recoiled in bulletins, too, addressed to the shilling-gallery ;
and there were fellows on the stage with such a breadth of
sabre, extent of whiskerage, strength of windp^ipe, and com-

7

CHAP, I.] PROEM; NOW AND THEN

mand of men and gunpowder, as had never been seen before.
How they bellowed, stalked and flourished about ; counter-
feiting Jove’s thunder to an amazing degree ! Terrific Draw-
cansir figures, of enormous whiskerage, unlimited command of
gunpowder ; not without sufficient ferocity, and even a certain
heroism, stage-heroism, in them; compared with whom, to
the shilling-gallery, and frightened excited theatre at large, it
seemed as if there had been no generals or sovereigns before ;
as if Friedrich, Gustavus, Cromwell, William Conqueror and
Alexander the Great were not worth speaking of henceforth.

All this, however, in half a century is considerably altered.
The Drawcansir equipments getting gradually tom off, the
natural size is seen better ; translated from the bulletin style
into that of fact and history, miracles, even to the shilling-
gallery, are not so miraculous. It begins to be apparent that
there lived great men before the era of bulletins and Agamem-
non. Austerlitz and Wagram shot away more gunpowder, —
gunpowder probably in the proportion of ten to one, or a
hundred to one ; but neither of them was tenth-part such a
beating to your enemy as that of Rossbach, brought about by
strategic art, human ingenuity and intrepidity, and the loss of
165 men. Leuthen, too, the battle of Leuthen (though so
few English readers ever heard of it) may very well hold up
its head beside any victory gained by Napoleon or another.
For the odds were not far from three to one; the soldiers
were of not far from equal quality; and only the General
was consummately superior, and the defeat a destruction.
Napoleon did indeed, by immense expenditure of men and
gunpowder, overmn Europe for a time : but Napoleon never,
by husbanding and wisely expending his men and gunpowder,
defended a little Prussia against all Europe, year after year
for seven years long, till Europe had enough, and gave-up the
enterprise as one it could not manage. So soon as the Draw-
cansir equipments are well tom off, and the shilling-gallery
got to silence, it will be found that there were great kings
before Napoleon, — and likewise an Art of War, grounded on

a

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book L

veracity and human courage and insight, not upon Draw-
cansir rodomontade, grandiose Dick-Turpinism, revolutionary
madness, and unlimited expenditure of men and gunpowder.
‘ You may paint with a very big brush, and yet not be a
great painter,’ says a satirical friend of mine ! This is be-
coming more and more apparent, as the dust-whirlwind, and
huge uproar of the last generation, gradually dies away
again.

2. Eighteenth Century

One of the grand difficulties in a History of Friedrich is,
all along, this same. That he lived in a Century which has no
History and can have little or none. A Century so opulent
in accumulated falsities, — sad opulence descending on it by
inheritance, always at compound interest, and always largely
increased by fresh acquirement on such immensity of stand-
ing capital ; — opulent in that bad way as never Century be-
fore was ! Which had no longer the consciousness of being
false, so false had it grown ; and was so steeped in falsity,
and impregnated with it to the very bone, that — in fact the
measure of the thing was full, and a French Revolution had
to end it. To maintain much veracity in such an element,
especially for a king, was no doubt doubly remarkable. But
now, how extricate the man from his Century ? How show
the man, who is a Reality worthy of being seen, and yet" keep
his Century, as a Hypocrisy worthy of being hidden and for-
gotten, in the due abeyance ?

To resuscitate the Eighteenth Century, or call into men’s
view, beyond what is necessary, the poor and sordid person-
ages and transactions of an epoch so related to us, can be no
purpose of mine on this occasion. The Eighteenth Century,
it is well known, does not figtire to me as a lovely one ; need-
ing to be kept in mind, or spoken of unnecessarily. To me
the Eighteenth Century has nothing grand in it, except that
grand universal Suicide, named French Revolution, by which
it terminated its otherwise most worthless existence with at

I

CHAP, l] PROEM: EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 9

least one worthy ax;t ; — setting fire to its old home and self ;
and going up in flames and volcanic explosions, in a truly
memorable and important manner. A very fit termination,
as I thankfully feel, for such a Centuiy. Century spend-
thrift, fraudulent-bankrupt ; gone at length utterly insolvent,
without real money of performance in its pocket, and the
shops declining to take hypocrisies and speciosities any farther :
— what could the poor Century do, but at length admit,
^Well, it is so. I am a swindler-century, and have long
been ; having learned the trick of it from my father and
grandfather; knowing hardly any trade but that in false
bills, which I thought foolishly might last forever, and still
bring at least beef and pudding to the favoured of mankind.
And behold it ends ; and I am a detected swindler, and have
nothing even to eat. What remains but that I blow my
brains out, and do at length one true action ? ’ Which the
poor Century did ; many thanks to it, in the circumstances.

For there was need once more of a Divine Revelation to
the torpid frivolous children of men, if they were not to sink
altogether into the ape condition. And in that whirlwind of
the Universe, — lights obliterated, and the tom wrecks of
Earth and Hell hurled aloft into the Empyrean ; black whirl-
wind, which made even apes serious, and drove most of them
madj — there was, to men, a voice audible; voice from the
heart of things once more, as if to say : ‘ Lying is not per-
mitted in this Universe. The wages of lying, you behold, are
death. Lying means damnation in this Universe ; and Beel-
zebub, never so elaborately decked in crowns and mitres, is not
God ! This was a revelation truly to be named of the Eternal,
in our poor Eighteenth Century ; and has greatly altered the
complexion of said Century to the Historian ever since.

Whereby, in short, that Century is quite confiscate, fallen
bankrupt, given up to the auctioneers ; — Jew-brokers sorting
out of it at this moment, in a confused distressing manner,
what is still valuable or saleable. And, in fact, it lies massed
up in our mjnds as a disastrous wrecked inanity, not useful to

10

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book I.

dwell upon ; a kind of dusky chaotic background, on which
the figures that had some veracity in them, — a small com-
pany, and ever growing smaller as our demands rise in strict-
ness, — are delineated for us. — ^‘And yet it is the Century
of our own Grandfathers ? ’ cries the reader. Yes, reader !
truly. It is the ground out of which we ourselves have
sprung ; whereon now we have our immediate footing, and
first of all strike down our roots for nourishment ; — and, alas,
in large sections of the practical world, it (what we specially
mean by if) still continues flourishing all round us ! To for-
get it quite is not yet possible, nor would be profitable.
What to do with it, and its forgotten fooleries and ‘His-
tories,’ worthy only of forgetting ? — ^Well : so much of it as
by nature adheres ; what of it cannot be disengaged from our
Hero and his operations : approximately so much, and no
more ! Let that be our bargain in regard to it.

3. English Prepossessions

With such wagonloads of Books and Printed Records as
exist on the subject of Friedrich, it has always seemed possible,
even for a stranger, to acquire some real understanding of
him ; — though practically, here and now, I have to own, it
proves difficult beyond conception. Alas, the Books are not
cosmic, they are chaotic ; and turn out unexpectedly void of
instruction to us. Small use in a talent of writing, if there be
not first of all the talent of discerning, of loyally recognising ;
of discriminating what is to be written ! Books bom mostly
of Chaos, — ^which want all things, even an IndeXy — are a painful
object. In sorrow and disgust, you wander over those multi-
tudinous Books : you dwell in endless regions of the superficial,
of the nugatory : to your bewildered sense it is as if no insight
into the real heart of Friedrich and his affairs were anywhere
to be had. Truth is, the Pmssian Dryasdust, otherwise an
honest fellow, and not afraid of labour, excels all other Dryas-
dusts yet known ; I have often sorrowfully felt as if there were

CHAP.L] PROEM : ENGLISH PREPOSSESSIONS 11

not in Nature, for darkness, dreariness, immethodic platitude,
anything comparable to him. He writes big Books wanting in
almost every quality ; and does not even give an Index to them.
He has made of Friedrich’s History a wide-spread, inorganic,
trackless matter ; dismal to your mind, and barren as a con-
tinent of Brandenburg sand ! — ^Enough, he could do no other :
I have striven to forgive him. Let the reader now forgive me ;
and think sometimes what probably my raw-material was ! —

Curious enough, Friedrich lived in the Writing Era, —
morning of that strange Era which h6is grown to such a noon
for us ; — and his favourite society, all his reign, was with the
literary or writing sort. Nor have they failed to write about
him, they among the others, about him and about him ; and
it is notable how little real light, on any point of his existence
or environment, they have managed to communicate. Dim
indeed, for most part a mere epigrammatic sputter of darkness
visible, is the ‘ picture ’ they have fashioned to themselves of
Friedrich and his Country and his Century. Men not ^of
genius,’ apparently ? Alas, no ; men fatally destitute of true
eyesight, and of loyal heart first of all. So far as I have
noticed, there was not, with the single exception of Mirabeau
for one hour, any man to be called of genius, or with an
adequate power of human discernment, that ever personally
looked on Friedrich. Had many such men looked successively
on his History and him, we had not found it now in such a
condition. Still altogether chaotic as a History; fatally
destitute even of the Indexes and mechanical appliances :
Friedrich’s self, and his Country, and his Century, still unde-
ciphered ; very dark phenomena, all three, to the intelligent
part of mankind.

In Prussia there has long been a certain stubborn though
planless diligence in digging for the outward details of Fried-
rich’s Life-History ; though as to organising them, assorting
them, or even putting labels on them ; much more as to the
least interpretation or human delineation of the man and his

12 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book I.

affairs , — you need not inquire in Prussia. In France, in
England, it is still worse. There an immense ignorance prevails
even as to the outward facts and phenomena of Friedrich’s
life ; and instead of the Prussian no-interpretation, you find,
in these vacant circumstances, a great promptitude to interpret.
Whereby judgments and prepossessions exist among us on that
subject, especially on Friedrich’s character, which are very
ignorant indeed.

To Englishmen, the sources of knowledge or conviction about
Friedrich, I have observed, are mainly these two. for

his Public Character : it was an all-important fact, not to it,
but to this country in regard to it. That George ii., seeing
good to plunge head-foremost into German Politics, and to
take Maria Theresa’s side in the Austrian-Succession War of
1740-48, — needed to begin by assuring his Parliament and
Newspapers, profoundly dark on the matter, that Friedrich was
a robber and villain for taking the other side. Which assur-
ance, resting on what basis we shall see by and by, George’s
Parliament and Newspapers cheerfully accepted, nothing doubt-
ing. And they have reechoed and reverberated it, they and
the rest of us, ever since, to all lengths, down to the present
day ; as a fact quite agreed upon, and the preliminary item in
Friedrich’s character. Robber and villain to begin with ; that
was one settled point.

Afterwards when George and Friedrich came to be allies,
and the grand fightings of the Seven- Years War took place,
Greorge’s Parliament and Newspapers settled a second point, in
regard to Friedrich : ‘ One of the greatest soldiers ever bom.’
This second item the British Writer fully admits ever since :
but he still adds to it the quality of robber, in a loose way ; —
and images to himself a royal Dick Turpin, of the kind known
in Review- Articles, and Disquisitions on Progress of the Species,
and labels it Frederick \ very anxious to collect new babble-
ment of lying Anecdotes, false Criticisms, hungry French
Memoirs, which will confirm him in that impossible idea. Had
such proved, on survey, to be the character of Friedrich, there

CHAP. I.] PROEM: ENGLISH PREPOSSESSIONS 18

is one British Writer whose curiosity concerning him would
pretty soon have died away ; nor could any amount of unwise
desire to satisfy that feeling in fellow-creatures less seriously
disposed have sustained him alive, in those baleful Historic
Acherons and Stygian Fens, where he has had to dig and to fish
so long, far away from the upper light ! — ^Let me request all
readers to blow that sorry chaflF entirely out of their minds ;
and to believe nothing on the subject except what they get
some evidence for.

Second English source relates to the Private Character.
Friedrich’s Biography or Private Character, the English, like
the French, have gathered chiefly from a scandalous libel by
Voltaire, which used to be called Vie Privee du Roi de Pruase
(Private Life of the King of Prussia):^ libel undoubtedly
written by Voltaire, in a kind of fury ; but not intended to be
published by him ; nay burnt and annihilated, as he afterwards
imagined. No line of which, that cannot be otherwise proved,
has a right to be believed ; and large portions of which can be
proved to be wild exaggerations and perversions, or even down-
right lies, — written in a mood analogous to the Frenzy of John
Dennis. This serves for the Biography or Private Character
of Friedrich ; imputing all crimes to him, natural and unna-
tural ; — offering indeed, if combined with facts otherwise
known, or even if well considered by itself, a thoroughly flimsy,
incredible and impossible image. Like that of some flaming
Devil’s Head, done in phosphorus on the walls of the black-
hole, by an Artist whom you had locked-up there (not quite
without reason) overnight.

Poor Voltaire wrote that Vie PrivSe in a state little inferior
to the Frenzy of John Dennis, — how brought about we shall
see by and by. And this is the Document which English

^ First printed, from a stolen copy, at Geneva, 1784 ; first proved to be
Voltaire’s (which some of his admirers had striven to doubt), Paris, 1788 ; stands
avowed ever since, in all the Editions of his Works (ii. 9-1 13 of the Edition
Baudouin Freres, 97 vols., Paris 1825-1834), under the title Mimoires pour servir
h la Vie de M, de Voltaire^ — with patches of repetition in the thing called Com*
mentairo Historique, which follows ibid, at great length.

14

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [BOOK L

readers are surest to have read, and tried to credit as far as
possible. Our counsel is. Out of window with it, he that
would know Friedrich of Prussia ! Keep it a while, he that
would know Fran9ois Arouet de Voltaire, and a certain
numerous unfortunate class of mortals, whom Voltaire is some-
times capable of sinking to be spokesman for, in this world ! —
Alas, go where you will, especially in these irreverent ages, the
noteworthy Dead is sure to be found lying under infinite dung,
no end of calumnies and stupidities accumulated upon him.
For the class we speak of, class of ^ flunkies doing saturnalia
below stairs,' is numerous, is innumerable; and can well
remunerate a ‘ vocal flunky ’ that will serve their purposes on
such an occasion ! —

Friedrich is by no means one of the perfect demigods ; and
there are various things to be said against him with good
ground. To the last, a questionable hero ; with much in him
which one could have wished not there, and much wanting
which one could have wished. But there is one feature which
strikes you at an early period of the inquiry. That in his way
he is a Reality; that he always means what he sp^ks;^
grounds his actions, too, on what he recognises for the truth ;
and, in short, has nothing whatever of the Hypocrite or
Phantasm. Which some readers will admit to be an estremely
rare phenomenon.

We perceive that this man was far indeed from trying to
deal swindler-like with the facts around him ; that he honestly
recognised said facts wherever they disclosed themselves, and
was very anxious also to ascertain their existence where still
hidden or dubious. For he knew well, to a quite uncommon
degree, and with a merit all the higher as it was an unconscious
one, how entirely inexorable is the nature of facts, whether
recognised or not, ascertained or not ; how vain all cunning of
diplomacy, management and sophistry, to save any mortal
who does not stand on the truth of things, from sinking, in
the long-run. Sinking to the very Mudgods, with all his

CHAP.I.] PROEM: ENCOURAGEMENTS 16

diplomacies, possessions, achievements ; and becoming an un-
nameable object, hidden deep in the Cesspools of the Universe.
This I hope to make manifest ; this which 1 long ago discerned
for myself, with pleasure, in the physiognomy of Friedrich and
his life. Which indeed was the first real sanction, and has all
€Jong been my inducement and encouragement, to study his
life and him. How this man, officially a King withal, com-
ported himself in the Eighteenth Century, and managed not to
be a liar and Charlatan as his Century was, deserves to be
seen a little by men and kings, and may silently have didactic
meanings in it.

He that was honest with his existence has always meaning
for us, be he king or peasant. He that merely shammed and
grimaced with it, however much, and with whatever noise and
trumpet-blowing, he may have cooked and eaten in this world,
cannot long have any. Some men do coolc enormously (let us
call it coohingy what a man does in obedience to his htmger
merely, to his desires and passions merely), — ^roasting whole
continents and populations, in the flames of war or other dis-
cord ; — witness the Napoleon above spoken of. For the appe-
tite of man in that respect is unlimited ; in truth, infinite ;
and the smallest of us could eat the entire Solar System, had
we the chance given, and then cry, like Alexander of Macedon,
because we had no more Solar Systems to cook and eat. It
is not the extent of the man’s cookery that can much attach
me to him ; but only the man himself, and what of strength
he had to wrestle with the mud-elements, and what of victory
he got for his own benefit and mine.

4. EmouragementSy Discouragements

French Revolution having spent itself, or sunk in France
and elsewhere to what we see, a certain curiosity reawakens as
to what of great or manful we can discover on the other side
of that still troubled atmosphere of the Present and immediate
Past. Curiosity quickened, or which should be quickened, by

16 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book I.

the great and all-absorbing question, How is that same exploded
Past ever to settle down again ? Not lost forever, it would ap-
pear : the New Era has not annihilated the old eras : New Era
could by no means manage that ; — never meant that, had it
known its own mind (which it did not): its meaning was and

is, to get its own well out of them ; to readapt, in a purified
shape, the old eras, and appropriate whatever was true and mt
combustible in them : that was the poor New Era’s meaning,
in the frightful explosion it made of itself and its possessions,
to begin with !

And the question of questions now is : What part of that
exploded Past, the ruins and dust of which still darken all the
air, will continually gravitate back to us ; be reshaped, trans-
formed, readapted, that so, in new figures, under new condi-
tions, it may enrich and nourish us again ? What part of it,
not being incombustible, has actually gone to flame and gas in
the huge world-conflagration, and is now gaseous^ mounting
aloft ; and will know no beneficence of gravitation, but mount,
and roam upon the waste winds forever, — Nature so ordering

it, in spite of any industry of Art? This is the universal
question of afflicted mankind at present ; and sure enough it
will be long to settle.

On one point we can answer : Only what of the Past was
trtie will come back to us. That is the one asbestos which
survives all fire, and comes out purified; that is still* ours,
blessed be Heaven, and only that. By the law of Nature,
nothing more than that ; and also, by the same law, nothing
less than that. Let Art struggle how it may, for or against,
— as foolish Art is seen extensively doing in our time, — there
is where the limits of it will be. In which point of view, may
not Friedrich, if he was a true man and King, justly excite
some curiosity again ; nay some quite peculiar curiosity, as the
last Crowned Reality there was antecedent to that general out-
break and abolition ? To many it appears certain there are
to be no Kings of any sort, no Government more ; less and
less need of them henceforth, New Era having come. Which

CHAP.I.] PROEM: DISCOURAGEMENTS 17

is a very wonderful notion ; important if true ; perhaps still
more important, just at present, if untrue ! My hopes of
presenting, in this Last of the Kings, an exemplar to my con-
temporaries, I confess, are not high.

On the whole, it is evident the difficulties to a History of
Friedrich are great and many : and the sad certainty is at last
forced upon me that no good Book can, at this time, especially
in this country, be written on the subject. Wherefore let the
reader put up with an indifferent or bad one ; he little knows
how much worse it could easily have been ! — ^Alas, the Ideal
of History, as my friend Sauerteig knows, is very high ; and
it is not one serious man, but many successions of such, and
whole serious generations of such, that can ever again build
up History towards its old dignity. We must renounce ideals.
We must sadly take up with the moumfulest barren realities ;
— dismal continents of Brandenburg sand, as in this in-
stance ; mere tumbled mountains of marine-stores, without so
much as an Index to them !

Has the reader heard of Sauerteig’s last batch of Sprmg-
wurzeln^ a rather curious valedictory Piece ? ^ All History is

an imprisoned Epic, nay an imprisoned Psalm and Prophecy,’
says Sauerteig there. I wish, from my soul, he had disim-
prisoned it in this instance ! But he only says, in magnilo-
quent language, how grand it would be if disimprisoned ; —
and hurls out, accidentally striking on this subject, the follow-
ing rough sentences, suggestive though unpractical, with which
I shall conclude :

^ Schiller, it appears, at one time thought of writing an Epic
Poem upon Friedrich the Great y upon some action of Fried-
rich’s,” Schiller says. Happily Schiller did not do it. By
oversetting fact, disregarding reality, and tumbling time and
space topsyturvy, Schiller with his fine gifts might no doubt
have written a temporary epic poem,” of the kind read and
admired by many simple persons. But that would have helped
little, and could not have lasted long. It is not the untrue
imaginary Picture of a man and his life that I want from my

VOL. I. * B

18 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book I.

Schiller, but the actual natural Likeness, true as the face
itself, nay truer ^ in a sense. Which the Artist, if there is one,
might help to give, and the Botcher {Pfuscher) never can !
Alas, and the Artist does not even tiy it ; leaves it altogether
to the Botcher, being busy otherwise ! —

‘ Men surely will at length discover again, emerging from
these dismal bewilderments in which the modem Ages reel
and stagger this long while, that to them also, as to the most
ancient men, all Pictures that cannot be credited are — Pic-
tures of an idle nature ; to be mostly swept out of doors. Such
veritably, were it never so forgotten, is the law ! Mistakes
enough, lies enough will insinuate themselves into our most
earnest portrayings of the Tme : but that we should, deliber-
ately and of forethought, rake together what we know to be
not true, and introduce that in the hope of doing good with
it? I tell you, such practice was unknown in the ancient
earnest times ; and ought again to become unknown except to
the more foolish classes !’ That is Sauerteig’s strange notion,
not now of yesterday, as readers know : — and he goes then into
‘ Homer’s Iliad,’ the ^ Hebrew Bible,’ * terrible Hebrew veracity
of every line of it’ ; discovers an alarming ‘ kinship of Fiction
to lying’ ; and asks, If anybody can compute ‘ the damage we
poor modems have got from our practices of fiction in litera-
ture itself, not to speak of awfully higher provinces ? Men
will either see into all this by and by,’ continues he ; ^ or
plunge head foremost, in neglect of all this, whither they little
dream as yet ! —

‘ But I think all real Poets^ to this hour, are Psalmists and
Iliadists after their sort ; and have in them a divine impatience
of lies, a divine incapacity of living among lies. Likewise,
which is a corollary, that the highest Shakspeare producible
is properly the fittest Historian producible ; — and that it
is frightful to see the Gelehrte Dummkopf^ (what we here may
translate, Dryasd'ust) * doing the function of History, and the
Shakspeare and the Goethe neglecting it. Interpreting
events” ; interpreting the universally visible, entirely indubit-

CHAP.Lj PROEM: ENCOURAGEMENTS 19

able Revelation of the Author of this Universe : how can
Dryasdust interpret such things, the dark chaotic dullard, who
knows the meaning of nothing cosmic or noble, nor ever will
know ? Poor wretch, one sees what kind of meaning he educes
from Man’s History, this long while past, and has got all the
world to believe of it along with him. Unhappy Dryasdust,
thrice-unhappy world that takes Dryasdust’s reading of the
ways of God ! But what else was possible ? They that
could have taught better were engaged in fiddling ; for which
there are good wages going. And our damage therefrom, our
damage^ — ^yes, if thou be still human and not cormorant, —
perhaps it will transcend all Califomias, English National
Debts, and show itself incomputable in continents of Bullion ! —

‘Believing that mankind are not doomed wholly to dog-
like annihilation, I believe that much of this will mend. I
believe that the world will not always waste its inspired men
in mere fiddling to it. That the man of rhythmic nature
will feel more and more his vocation towards the Interpreta-
tion of Fact ; since only in the vital centre of that, could we
once get thither, lies all real melody ; and that he will
become, he, once again the Historian of events, — bewildered
Dryasdust having at last the happiness to be his servant,
and to have some guidance from him. Which will be blessed
indeed. For the present, Dryasdust strikes me like a hapless
Nigger gone masterless : Nigger totally unfit for self-guidance ;
yet without master good or bad ; and whose feats in that
capacity no god or man can rejoice in.

‘History, with faithful Genius at the top and faithful
Industry at the bottom, will then be capable of being written.
History will then actually be written, — the inspired gift of
God employing itself to illuminate the dark ways of God. A
thing thrice-pressingly needful to be done ! Whereby the
modem Nations may again become a little less godless, and
again have their “ epics ” (of a different from the Schiller
sort), and again have several things they are still more fatally
in want of at present ! i

*0 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book L

So that, it would seem, there will gradually among man-
kind, if Friedrich last some centuries, be a real Epic made of
his History? That is to say (presumably), it will become
a perfected Melodious Truth, and duly significant and duly
beautiful bit of Belief, to mankind ; the essence of it fairly
evolved from all the chaff, the portrait of it actually given,
and its real harmonies with the laws of this Universe brought
out, in bright and dark, according to the God’s Fact as it
was ; which poor Dryasdust and the Newspapers never could
get sight of, but were always far from ! —

Well, if so, — and even if not quite so ^ — it is a comfort to
reflect that every true worker (who has blown away chaff
etc.), were his contribution no bigger than my own, may have
brought the good result nearer by a handbreadth or two.
And so we will end these preludings, and proceed upon our
Problem, courteous reader.

CHAPTER II
FRIEDRICH’S BIRTH

FaiEDRicH OF Brandenburg-Hohenzollern, who came by
course of natural succession to be Friedrich ii. of Prussia,
and is known in these ages as Frederick the Great, was bom
in the palace of Berlin, about noon, on the 24th of Januaiy
1712. A small infant, but of great promise or possibility;
and thrice and four times welcome to all sovereign and other
persons in the Prussian Court, and Prussian realms, in those
cold winter days. His Father, they say, was like to have
stifled him with his caresses, so overjoyed was the man ; or at
least to have scorched him in the blaze of the fire; when
happily some much suitabler female nurse snatched this little
creature from the rough paternal paws, — and saved it for the
benefit of Prussia and mankind. If Heaven will but please
to grant it length of life ! For there have already been two

CHAP. IL] FRIEDRICH’S BIRTH *1

little Princekins, who are both dead ; this Friedrich is the
fourth child; and only one little girl, wise Wilhelmina, of
almost too sharp wits, and not too vivacious aspect, is other-
wise yet here of royal progeny. It is feared the Hohen-
zollem lineage, which has flourished here with such beneficent
efiect for three centuries now, and been in truth the very
making of the Prussian Nation, may be about to fail, or pass
into some side branch. Which change, or any change in that
respect, is questionable, and a thing desired by nobody.

Five years ago, on the death of the first little Prince,
there had surmises risen, obscure rumours and hints, that the
Princess Royal, mother of the lost baby, never would have
healthy children, or even never have a child more : upon
which, as there was but one other resource, — a widowed
Grandfather, namely, and except the Prince Royal no son to
him, — said Grandfather, still only about fifty, did take the
necessary steps : but they have been entirely unsuccessful ; no
new son or child, only new affliction, new disaster has resulted
from that third marriage of his. And though the Princess
Royal has had another little Prince, that too has died within
the year ; — killed, some say on the other hand, by the noise
of the cannon firing for joy over it Yes; and the first
baby Prince, these same parties farther say, was crushed to
death by the weighty dress you put upon it at christening
time, especially by the little crown it wore, which had left
a visible black mark upon the poor soft infant’s brow ! In
short, it is a questionable case ; undoubtedly a questionable
outlook for Prussian mankind; and the appearance of this
little Prince, a third trump-card in the Hohenzollem game,
is an unusually interesting event. The joy over him, not in
Berlin Palace only, but in Berlin City, and over the Prussian
Nation, was very great and universal ; — still testified in

^ Forster, Friedrich Wilhelm /., Kbnig von Freussen (Potsdam, 1854), i.
126 (who quotes Morgenstern, a contemporary reporter). But see also Preuss,
Friedrich der Gressc mit seinen Verwandten und Freundcn (Berlini 1838), pp.

379 - 80 *

8« BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book l.

manifold dull, unreadable old pamphlets, records official and
volunteer, — ^which were then all ablaze like the bonfires, and
are now fallen dark enough, and hardly credible even to the
fancy of this new Time.

The poor old Grandfather, Friedrich i. (the first King of
Prussia), — ^for, as we intimate, he was still alive, and not very
old, though now infirm enough, and laden beyond his strength
with sad reminiscences, disappointments and chagrins, — ^had
taken much to Wilhelm ina, as she tells us ; ^ and would
amuse himself whole days with the pranks and prattle of the
little child. Good old man : he, we need not doubt, bright-
ened up into unusual vitality at sight of this invaluable little
Brother of hers ; through whom he can look once more into
the waste dim future with a flicker of new hope. Poor old
man : he got his own back half-broken by a careless nurse
letting him fall ; and has slightly stooped ever since, some
fifty and odd years now : much against his will ; for he would
fain have been beautiful ; and has struggled all his days, very
hard if not very wisely, to make his existence beautiful, — to
make it magnificent at least, and regardless of expense ; — and
it threatens to come to little. Courage, poor Grandfather .
here is a new second edition of a Friedrich, the first having
gone off with so little effect : this one’s back is still unbroken,
his life’s seedfield not yet filled with tares and thorns : who
knows but Heaven will be kinder to this one ? Heaven was
much kinder to this one. Him Heaven had kneaded of more
potent stuff : a mighty fellow this one, and a strange ; related
not only to the Upholsteries and Heralds’ Colleges, but to
the Sphere-harmonies and the divine and demonic powers ; of
a swift far-darting nature this one, like an Apollo clad in
sunbeams and in lightnings (after his sort) ; and with a back
which all the world could not succeed in breaking ! — ^Yes, if,
by most rare chance, this were indeed a new man of genius,
bom into the purblind rotting Century, in the acknowledged

' Mdmoires de Fridirique Sophie Wilhelmine de Prttsse, Margrave de Bareith^
Seeur de Fr 4 dhie-U-Grand (London, 1812), i. 5.

CHAP. III.] FATHER AND MOTHER *8

rank of a king there, — ^man of genius, that is to say, man of
originality and veracity ; capable of seeing with his eyes, and
incapable of not believing what he sees ; — ^then truly ! — But
as yet none knows ; the poor old Grandfather never knew.

Meanwhile they christened the little fellow, with immense
magnificence and pomp of apparatus ; Kaiser Karl, and the
very Swiss Republic being there (by proxy), among the
gossips; and spared no cannon-volleyings, kettle-drummings,
metal crown, heavy cloth-of-silver, for the poor soft creature’s
sake; all of which, however, he survived. The name given
him was Karl Friedrich (Charles Frederick); Karl perhaps,
and perhaps also not, in delicate compliment to the chief
gossip, the above-mentioned Kaiser, Karl or Charles vi. ? At
any rate, the JTarZ, gradually or from the first, dropped alto-
gether out of practice, and went as nothing : he himself, or
those about him, never used it; nor, except in some dim
English pamphlet here and there, have I met with any trace
of it. Friedrich (Rich-in-Peacey a name of old prevalence in
the Hohenzollem kindred), which he himself wrote Frideric in
his French way, and at last even Federic (with a very singular
sense of euphony), is throughout, and was, his sole designation.

Sunday 31st January 1712, age then precisely one week :
then, and in this manner, was he ushered on the scene, and
labelled among his fellow-creatures. We must now look round
a little ; and see, if possible by any method or exertion, what
kind of scene it was.

CHAPTER III

FATHER AND MOTHER: THE HANOVERIAN
CONNEXION

Friedrich Wilhelm, Crown- Prince of Prussia, son of Fried-
rich I. and Father of this little infant, who will one day be

384 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [BOOK L

Friedrich ii., did himself make some noise in the world as
second King of Prussia; notable not as Friedrich’s father
alone ; and will much concern us during the rest of his life.
He is, at this date, in his twenty-fourth year : a thick-set,
sturdy, florid, brisk young fellow ; with a jovial laugh in him,
yet of solid grave ways, occasionally somewhat volcanic ; much
given to soldiering, and out-of-door exercises, having little else
to do at present. He has been manager, or, as it were, Vice-
King, on an occasional absence of his Father; he knows
practically what the state of business is; and greatly dis-
approves of it, as is thought. But being bound to silence on
that head, he keeps silence, and meddles with nothing political.
He addicts himself chiefly to mustering, drilling and practical
military duties, while here at Berlin | runs out, often enough,
wife and perhaps a comrade or two along with him, to hunt,
and take his ease, at Wusterhausen (some fifteen or twenty
miles ^ southeast of Berlin), where he has a residence amid the
woody moorlands.

But soldiering is his grand concern. Six years ago, summer
1706,^ at a very early age, he went to the wars, — grand
Spanish-Succession War, which was then becoming very fierce
in the Netherlands ; Prussian troops always active on the
Marlborough - Eugene side. He had just been betrothed,
was not yet wedded ; thought good to turn the interim to ad-
vantage in that way. Then again, spring 1709, after his
marriage and after his Father’s marriage, ‘ the Court being full
of intrigues,’ and nothing but silence recommendable there,
a certain renowned friend of his, Leopold, Prince of AnhaJt-
Dessau, of whom we shall yet hear a great deal, — who, still
only about thirty, had already covered himself with laurels in
those wars (Blenheim, Bridge of Casano, Lines of Turin, and
other glories), but had now got into intricacies with the
weaker sort, and was out of command, — agreed with Friedrich

* English miles, —as always unless the contrary be stated. The German Meilt
is about five miles English ; German Stunde about three.

Fbrster, i. Il6.

25

CHAP. III.] FATHER AND MOTHER

Wilhelm that it would be well to go and serve there as volun-
teers, since not otherwise.' A Crown-Prince of Prussia, ought
he not to learn soldiering, of all things ; by every opportunity ?
Which Friedrich Wilhelm did, with industry ; serving zealous
apprenticeship under Marlborough and Eugene, in this
manner; plucking knowledge, as the bubble reputation, and
all else in that field has to be plucked, from the cannon's
mouth. Friedrich Wilhelm kept by Marlborough, now as
formerly ; friend Leopold being commonly in Eugene's quarter,
who well knew the worth of him, ever since Blenheim and
earlier. Friedrich Wilhelm saw hot service, that campaign of
1709 ; siege of Toumay, and far more ; — stood, among other
things, the fiery Battle of Malplaquet, one of the terriblest
and deadlift feats of war ever done. No want of intrepidity
and rugged soldier -virtue in the Prussian troops or their
Crown-Prince; least of all on that terrible day, 11th Sep-
tember 1709 ; — of which he keeps the anniversary ever since,
and will do all his life, the doomsday of Malplaquet always
a memorable day to him.^ He is more and more intimate
with Leopold, and loves good soldiering beyond all things.
Here at Berlin he has already got a regiment of his own,
tallish fine men ; and strives to make it in all points a very
pattern of a regiment.

For the rest, much here is out of joint, and far from
satisfactory to him. Seven years ago ® he lost his own brave
Mother and her love ; of which we must speak farther by and
by. In her stead he has got a fantastic, melancholic, ill-
natured Stepmother, with whom there was never any good to
be done ; who in fact is now fairly mad, and kept to her own
apartments. He has to see here, and say little, a chagrined
heartwom Father flickering painfully amid a scene much filled

1 Varnhagen von Ense, Fiirsi Leopold von Anhall-Dessau (in Biographiscki
DenkmalOf 2d edition, Berlin, 1845), p. 185. Tkaten und Lehen des weh-
htrUhmten Fiirstem Leopoldi von Anhalt • Dessau (Leipzig, 1742), p. 73.
Forster, i. 129.

• Forster, i. 138. • 1st February 1705.

«6 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book l.

with expensive futile persons, and their extremely pitiful cabals
and mutual rages ; scene chiefly of pompous inanity, and the
art of solemnly and with great labour doing nothing. Such
waste of labour and of means : what can one do but be
silent ? The other year, Preussen {Prussia Proper, province
lying far eastward, out of sight) was sinking under pestilence
and black ruin and despair: the Crown-Prince, contrary to
wont, broke silence, and begged some dole or subvention for
these poor people; but there was nothing to be had. Nothing
in the treasury, your Royal Highness : — Preussen will shift
for itself; sublime dramaturgy, which we call his Majesty’s
Government, costs so much I And Preussen, mown away by
death, lies much of it vacant ever since ; which has completed
the Crown-Prince’s disgust ; and, I believe, did produce some
change of ministry, or other ineffectual expedient, on the old
Father’s part. Upon which the Crown-Prince locks up his
thoughts again. He has confused whirlpools, of Court-
intrigues, ceremonials, and troublesome fantasticalities, to
steer amongst ; which he much dislikes, no man more ; having
an eye and heart set on the practical only, and being in mind
as in body something of the genus robustum^ of the genus
ferox withal. He has been wedded six years ; lost two
children, as we saw ; and now again he has two living.

His wife, Sophie Dorothea of Hanover, is his cousin as
well. She is brother’s-daughter of his Mother, Sophie Char-
lotte : let the reader learn to discriminate these two names.
Sophie Charlotte, late Queen of Prussia, was also of Hanover :
she probably had sometimes, in her quiet motherly thought,
anticipated this connexion for him, while she yet lived. It is
certain Friedrich Wilhelm was carried to Hanover in early
childhood : his Mother, — that Sophie Charlotte, a famed
Queen and lady in her day, Daughter of Electress Sophie,
and Sister of the George who became George i. of England
by and by, — ^took him thither ; some time about the beginning
of 1693, his age then five; and left him there on trial;

CHAP. III.] FATHER AND MOTHER *7

alleging, and expecting, he might have a better breeding
there. And this, in a Court where Electress Sophie was
chief lady, and Elector Ernst, fit to be called Gentleman
Ernst, ^ the politest of men, was chief lord, — and where
Leibnitz, to say nothing of lighter notabilities, was flourish-
ing, — seemed a reasonable expectation. Nevertheless, it
came to nothing, this articulate purpose of the visit ; though
perhaps the deeper silent purposes of it might not be quite
unfulfilled.

Gentleman Ernst had lately been made ‘Elector’ {KurJ^rsty
instead of Herzog)y — ^his Hanover no longer a mere sovereign
Duchy, but an Electorate henceforth, new ‘ Ninth Electorate,’
by Ernst’s life-long exertion and good luck; — which has
spread a fine radiance, for the time, over court and people in
those parts ; and made Ernst a happier man than ever, in his
old age. Gentleman Ernst and Electress Sophie, we need not
doubt, were glad to see their burly Prussian grandson, — a
robust, rather mischievous boy of five year old ; — and any-
thing that brought her Daughter oftener about her (an only
Daughter too, and one so gifted) was sure to be welcome to
the cheery old Electress, and her Leibnitz and her circle.
For Sophie Charlotte was a bright presence, and a favourite
with sage and gay.

Uncle George again, ‘ Kurprinz Georg Ludwig ’ (Electoral
Prince and Heir- Apparent), who became George i. of England;
he, always a taciturn, saturnine, somewhat grim-visaged man,
not without thoughts of his own but mostly inarticulate
thoughts, was, jjust at this time, in a deep domestic intricacy.
Uncle George the Kurprinz was painfully detecting, in these

^ ‘Her Highness* (the Electress Sophie) ‘has the character of the merry
debonnaire Princess of Germany; a lady of extraordinary virtues and accomplish-
ments; mistress of the Italian, French, High and Low Dutch, and English
languages, which she speaks to perfection. Her husband * (Elector Ernst) ‘ has
the title of the Gentleman of Germany; a graceful and* etc. etc. W. Carr,
Remarks of the Governments of the severall Parts of Germanuy Denmark^
Swetdland (Amsterdam, 1 688), p, 147. See also Ker of Kersland (still more
emphatic on this point, sapius)^

88 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [bcx)K L

very months, that his august Spouse and cousin, a brilliant
not uninjured lady, had become an indignant injuring one ;
that she had gone, and was going, far astray in her walk of
life! Thus all is not radiance at Hanover either, Ninth
Elector though we are; but, in the soft sunlight, there
quivers a streak of the blackness of very Erebus withal.
Kurprinz George, I think, though he too is said to have been
good to the boy, could not take much interest in this biu*ly
Nephew of his just now !

Sure enough, it was in this year 1693, that the famed
Konigsmark tragedy came ripening fast towards a crisis in
Hanover; and next year the catastrophe arrived. A most
tragic business ; of which the little Boy, now here, will know
more one day. Perhaps it was on this very visit, on one
visit it credibly was, that Sophie Charlotte witnessed a sad
scene in the Schloss of Hanover: high words rising, where
low cooings had been more appropriate; harsh words, mutually
recriminative, rising ever higher; ending, it is thought, in
things^ or menaces and motions towards things (actual box on
the ear, some call it), — never to be forgotten or forgiven !
And on Sunday 1st of July 1694, Colonel Count Philip
Konigsmark, Colonel in the Hanover Dragoons, was seen for
the last time in this world. From that date, he has vanished
suddenly underground, in an inscrutable manner ; never more
shall the light of the sun, or any human eye behold that
handsome blackguard man. Not for a hundred and fifty years
shall human creatures know, or guess with the smallest
certainty, what has become of him.

And shortly after Koningsmark’s disappearance, there is
this sad phenomenon visible : A once very radiant Princess
(witty, haughty-minded, beautiful, not wise or fortunate) now
gone all ablaze into angry tragic conflagration ; getting locked
into the old Castle of Ahlden, in the moory solitudes of Liine-
burg Heath : to stay there till she die, — thirty years as it
proved, — and go into ashes and angry darkness as she may.
Old peasants, late in the next century, will remember that they

89

CHAP. III.] FATHER AND MOTHER

used to see her sometimes driving on the Heath, — ^beautiful
lady, long black hair, and the glitter of diamonds in it ; some-
times the reins in her own hand, but always with a party of
cavalry round her, and their swords drawn.^ ‘Duchess of
Ahlden,’ that was her title in the eclipsed state. Bom Princess
of Zelle ; by marriage. Princess of Hanover {Kurprinzessm ) ;
would have been Queen of England, too, had matters gone
otherwise than they did. — Her name, like that of a little
Daughter she had, is Sophie Dorothee : she is Cousin and
Divorced Wife of Kurprinz George ; divorced, and as it were
abolished alive, in this manner. She is little Friedrich Wil-
helm’s Aunt-in-law ; and her little Daughter comes to be his
Wife in process of time. Of him, or of those belonging to
him, she took small notice, I suppose, in her then mood, the
crisis coming on so fast. In her happier innocent days she had
two children, a King that is to be, and a Queen ; George ii.
of England, Sophie Dorothee of Prussia ; but must not now
call them hers, or ever see them again.

This was the Konigsmark tragedy at Hanover ; fast ripen-
ing towards its catastrophe while little Friedrich Wilhelm was
there. It has been, ever since, a rumour and dubious fright-
ful mystery to mankind: but within these few years, by curious
accidents (thefts, discoveries of written documents, in various
countries, and diligent study of them), it has at length become
a certainty and clear fact, to those who are curious about it.
Fact surely of a rather horrible sort ; — ^yet better, I must say,
than was suspected : not quite so bad in the state of fact as
in that of rumour. Crime enough is in it, sin and folly on
both sides ; there is killing too, but not assassination (as it
turns out) ; on the whole there is nothing of atrocity, or
nothing that was not accidental, unavoidable ; — and there is
a certain greatness of decorum on the part of those Hanover
Princes and oflBcial gentlemen, a depth of silence, of polite
stoicism, which deserves more praise than it will get in our

' Die Herzogin ven Ahlden (Leipzig, 1852), p. 22. Divorce was, 28th De
ccmber 1694 i death, Z3th November 1726, — age then 6a

30

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book L

times. Enough now of the Konigsmark tragedy contempo-
raneous with Friedrich Wilhelm’s stay at Hanover, but not
otherwise much related to him or his doings there.

He got no improvement in breeding, as we intimated;
none at all ; fought, on the contrary, with his young Cousin
(afterwards our George ii.), a boy twice his age, though of
weaker bone ; and gave him a bloody nose. To the scandal
and consternation of the French Protestant gentlewomen and
court-dames in their stiff silks : ‘ Ahee, your Electoral High-
ness ! ’ This had been a rough unruly boy from the first dis-
covery of him. At a very early stage, he, one morning while
the nurses were dressing him, took to investigating one of his
shoe-buckles ; would, in spite of remonstrances, slobber it about
in his mouth ; and at length swallowed it down, — beyond mis-
take ; and the whole world cannot get it up ! Whereupon,
wild wail of nurses ; and his ‘ Mother came screaming,’ poor
mother : — it is the same small shoe-buckle which is still shown,
with a ticket and date to it, ‘31 December 1692,’ in the Berlin

^ A considerable dreary mass of books, pamphlets, lucubrations, false all and
of no worth or of less, have accumulated on this dark subject, during the last
hundred-and'fifty years : nor has the process yet stopped, — as it now well might.
For there have now two things occurred in regard to it. First : In the year 1847,
a Swedish Professor, named Palmblad, groping about for other objects in the
College Library of Lund (which is in the country of the Konigsmark connexions),
came upon a Box of Old Letters, — Letters undated, signed only with initials, and
very enigmatic till well searched into, — which have turned out to be the very
Autographs of the Princess and her Konigsmark ; throwing of course a hence-
forth indisputable light on their relation. Second thing : A cautious exact old
gentleman, of diplomatic habits (understood to be ‘ Count von Schulenburg-
Klosterrode of Dresden has, since that event, unweariedly gone into the whole
matter ; and has brayed it everywhere, and pounded it small ; sifting, with sub-
lime patience, not only those Swedish Autographs, but the whole mass of lying
books, pamphlets, hints and notices, old and recent ; and bringing out (truly in
an intricate and thrice-wearisome, but for the first time in an authentic way)
what real evidence there is. In which evidence the facts, or essential fact, lie at
last indisputable enough. His Book, thick Pamphlet rather, is that same Her-^
zogin von Ahlden (Leipzig, 1852) cited above. The dreary wheelbarrowful of
others I had rather not mention again ; but leave Count von Schulenburg to
mention and describe them, — which he does abundantly, so many as had accumu-
lated up to that date of 1852, to the affliction more or less of sane mankind.

81

CHAP. III.] FATHER AND MOTHER

Kunsikammer ; for it turned out harmless, after all the scream-
ing ; and a few grains of rhubarb restored it safely to the light
of day ; henceforth a thrice-memorable shoe-buckle.^

Another time, it is recorded, though with less precision of
detail, his Governess the Dame Montbail having ordered him
to do something which was intolerable to the princely mind,
the princely mind resisted in a very strange way : the princely
body, namely, flung itself suddenly out of a third-story win-
dow, nothing but the hands left within ; and hanging on there
by the sill, and fixedly resolute to obey gravitation rather than
Montbail, soon brought the poor lady to terms. Upon which,
indeed, he had been taken from her, and from the women
altogether, as evidently now needing rougher government.
Always an unruly fellow, and dangerous to trust among
crockery. At Hanover he could do no good in the way of
breeding : sage Leibnitz himself, with his big black periwig
and large patient nose, could have put no metaphysics into
such a boy. Sublime Theodick (Leibnitzian ‘ justification of
the ways of God’) was not an article this individual had the
least need of, nor at any time the least value for. ^ Justify ?
What doomed dog questions it, then ? Are you for Bedlam,
then?’ — and in maturer years his rattan might have been
dangerous ! For this was a singular individual of his day ;
human soul still in robust health, and not given to spin its
bowels into cobwebs. He is known only to have quarrelled
much with Cousin George, during the year or so he spent in
those parts.

But there was another Cousin at Hanover, just one other,
little Sophie Dorothee (called after her mother), a few months
older than himself ; by all accounts, a really pretty little child,
whom he liked a great deal better. She, I imagine, was his
main resource, while on this Hanover visit ; with her were
laid the foundations of an intimacy which ripened well after-
wards. Some say it was already settled by the parents that
there was to be a marriage in due time. Settled it could
^ Forster, i. 74. Erman, M/moires <U Sophu Charlotte (Berlin, 1801) p. 130.

Sa BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book I.

hardly be ; for Wilhelmina tells us,^ her Father had a ^ choice
of three’ allowed him, on coming to wed ; and it is otherwise
discernible there had been eclipses and uncertainties, in the
interim, on his part. Settled, no ; but hoped and vaguely
prefigured, we may well suppose. And at all events, it has
actually come to pass ; ^ Father being ardently in love with
the Hanover Princess,’ says our Margravine, ‘ and much pre-
ferring her to the other two,’ or to any and all others.
Wedded, with great pomp, 28th November 1706;^ — and
Sophie Dorothee, the same that was his pretty little Cousin
at Hanover twenty years ago, she is mother of the little
Boy now bom and christened, whom men are to call Frederick
the Great in coming generations.

Sophie Dorothee is described to us by courtier contem-
poraries as < one of the most beautiful princesses of her day’ :
Wilhelmina, on the other hand, testifies that she was never
strictly to be called beautiful, but had a pleasant attractive
physiognomy ; which may be considered better than strict
beauty. Uncommon grace of figure and look, testifies Wil-
helmina ; much dignity and soft dexterity, on social occasions ;
perfect in all the arts of deportment ; and left an impression
on you at once kindly and royal. Portraits of her, as Queen
at a later age, are frequent in the Prussian Galleries ; she is
painted sitting, where I best remember her. A serious, comely,
rather plump, maternal-looking Lady ; something thoughtful
in those gray still eyes of hers, in the turn of her face and
carriage of her head, as she sits there, considerately gazing
out upon a world which would never conform to her will.
Decidedly a handsome, wholesome and affectionate aspect of
face. Hanoverian in type, that is to say, blond, florid, slightly
profuse ; — ^yet the better kind of Hanoverian, little or nothing
of the worse or at least the worst kind. The eyes, as I say,
are gray, and quiet, almost sad ; expressive of reticence and

^ Mimoires dc la Margrave de Bareithf i. I.

• Forster, i, 117.

CHAP. III.] FATHER AND MOTHER 88

reflection, of slow constancy rather than of speed in any kind.
One expects, could the picture speak, the querulous sound of
maternal and other solicitude ; of a temper tending towards
the obstinate, the quietly unchangeable ; — ^loyal patience not
wanting, yet in still larger measure royal impatience well con-
cealed, and long and carefully cherished. This is what I read
in Sophie Dorothee’s Portraits, — ^probably remembering what
I had otherwise read, and come to know of her. She too will
not a little concern us in the first part of this History. I find,
for one thing, she had given much of her physiognomy to the
Friedrich now bom. In his Portraits as Prince-Royal, he
strongly resembles her ; it is his mother’s face informed with
youth and new fire, and translated into the masculine gender :
in his later Portraits, one less and less recognises the mother.

Friedrich Wilhelm, now in the sixth year of wedlock, is
still very fond of his Sophie Dorothea, — ‘ Fiechen^ {Feekin^
diminutive of Sophie)^ as he calls her ; she also having, and
continuing to have, the due wife’s regard for her solid, honest,
if somewhat explosive bear. He troubles her a little now and
then, it is said, with whiffs of jealousy ; but they are whiffs
only, the product of accidental moodinesses in him, or of
transient aspects, misinterpreted, in the court-life of a young
and pretty woman. As the general rule, he is beautifully
goodhumoured, kind even, for a bear; and, on the whole,
they have begun their partnership under good omens. And
indeed we may say, in spite of sad tempests that arose, they
continued it under such. She brought him gradually no
fewer than fourteen children, of whom ten survived him and
came to maturity : and it is to be admitted their conjugal
relation, though a royal, was always a human one ; the main
elements of it strictly observed on both sides ; all quarrels in
it capable of being healed again, and the feeling on both
sides true, however troublous. A rare fact among royal wed-
locks, and perhaps a unique one in that epoch.

The young couple, as is natural in their present position,

VOL. I. c

84 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [BOOK I.

have many eyes upon them, and not quite a paved path in
this confused court of Friedrich i. But they are true to one
another ; they seem indeed to have held well aloof from all
public business or private cabal ; and go along silently expect-
ing, and perhaps silently resolving this and that in the
future tense ; but with moderate immunity from paternal or
other criticisms, for the present. The Crown-Prince drills
or hunts, with his Grumkows, Anhalt-Dessaus : these are
harmless employments ; — and a man may have within his own
head what thoughts he pleases, without offence so long as he
keeps them there. Friedrich the old Grandfather lived only
thirteen months after the birth of his grandson : Friedrich
Wilhelm was then King ; thoughts then, to any length, could
become actions on the part of Friedrich Wilhelm.

CHAPTER IV
father’s mother

Friedrich Wilhelm^'s Mother, as we hinted, did not live to
see this marriage which she had forecast in her maternal heart.
She died, rather suddenly, in 1706,^ at Hanover, whither she
had gone on a visit ; shortly after parting with this her one
boy and child, Friedrich Wilhelm, who is then about seven-
teen ; whom she had with effort forced herself to send abroad,
that he might see the world a little, for the first time. Her
sorrow on this occasion has in it something beautiful, in so
bright and gay a woman : shows us the mother strong in her,
to a touching degree. The rough cub, in whom she noticed
rugged perverse elements, ‘ tendencies to avarice,’ and a want
of princely graces, and the more brilliant qualities in mind
and manner, had given her many thoughts and some uneasy
ones. But he was evidently all she had to love in the world ;

I 1st February (Erman, p. 241 ; Forster, i. 1x4): bom, 20th October l668 ;
wedded, 28th September 1684 ; died, ist February 1705.

CHAP. IV.] FATHER’S MOTHER 85

a rugged creature inexpressibly precious to her. For days
after his departure, she had kept solitary ; busied with little ;
indulging in her own sad reflections without stint. Among
the papers she had been scribbling, there was found one slip
with a heart sketched on it, and round the heart ‘Parti’
(Gone) : My heart is gone ! — ^poor lady, and after what a
jewel ! But Nature is very kind to all children and to all
mothers that are true to her.

Sophie Charlotte’s deep sorrow and dejection on this part-
ing was the secret herald of fate to herself. It had meant ill
health withal, and the gloom of broken nerves. All autumn
and into winter she had felt herself indefinitely unwell; she
determined, however, on seeing Hanover and her good old
Mother at the usual time. The gloomy sorrow over Fried-
rich Wilhelm had been the premonition of a sudden illness
which seized her on the road to Hanover, some five months
afterwards, and which ended fatally in that city. Her death
was not in the light style Friedrich her grandson ascribes to
it ; ^ she died without epigram, and though in perfect simple
courage, with the reverse of levity.

Here, at first hand, is the specific account of that event ;
which, as it is brief and indisputable, we may as well fish
from the imbroglios, and render legible, to counteract such
notions, and illuminate for moments an old scene of things.
The writing, apparently a quite private piece, is by ‘ M.
de la Bergerie, Pastor of the French Church at Hanover,’
respectable Edict-of-Nantes gentleman, who had been called
in on the occasion ; — gives an authentic momentary picture,
though a feeble and vacant one, of a locality at that time
very interesting to Englishmen. M. de la Bergerie privately
records :

‘The night between the last of January and the first of February 1705 ,
between one and two o’clock in the morning, I was called to the Queen
of Prussia, who was then dangerously ill.

^ dc Brandchourg (Preuss’s Edition of CEuvres^ Berlin, 1847 ct

seqq.), i. 112.

36 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book I.

' Entering the room^ I threw myself at the foot of her bed^ testifying
to her in words my profound grief to see her in this state. After which
I took occasion to say^ ^^She might know now that Kings and Queens
are mortal equally with all other men; and that they are obliged to
appear before the throne of the majesty of God^ to give an account of
their deeds done^ no less than the meanest of their subjects.” To which
her Majesty replied, know it well (Je le sais bien )/* — I went on to say
to her, Madam, your Majesty must also recognise in this hour the
vanity and nothingness of the things here below, for which, it may be, you
have had too much interest ; and the importance of the things of Heaven,
which perhaps you have neglected and contemned.” Thereupon the
Queen answered, ^'True (Oela est vrai) I** ^^Nevertheless, Madam,”
said I, does not your Majesty place really your trust in God ? Do you
not very earnestly (bien sMeusement) crave pardon of Him for all the
sins you have committed ? Do not you fly (rCa-t-elle pas recours) to the
blood and merits of Jesus Christ, wilhout which it is impossible for us to
stand before God?” The Queen answered, Out (Yes).” — ^While this
was going on, her Brother, Duke Ernst August, came into the Queen's
room,' — perhaps with his eye upon me and my motions? ^As they
wished to speak together, I withdrew by order.'

This Duke Ernst August, age now 31, is the youngest
Brother of the family ; there never was any Sister but this
dying one, who is four years older. Ernst August has some
tincture of soldiership at this time (Marlborough Wars, and
the like), as all his kindred had ; but ultimately he got the
Bishopric of Osnabriick, that singular spiritual heirloom, or
Aa^heirloom of the family ; and there lived or vegetated
without noise. Poor soul, he is the same Bishop of Osna-
briick, to whose house, twenty-two years hence, George i.,
struck by apoplexy, was breathlessly galloping in the summer
midnight, one wish now left in him, to be with his brother ;
— and arrived dead, or in the article of death. That was
another scene Ernst August had to witness in his life. I
suspect him at present of a thought that M. de la Bergerie,
with his pious commonplaces, is likely to do no good. Other
trait of Ernst August’s life; or of the Schloss of Hanover
that night, — or where the sorrowing old Mother sat, invin-
cible though weeping, in some neighbouring room, — I cannot
give, M. de la Bergerie continues his narrative :

87

CHAP. IV.] PATHS R’S MOTHER

* Some time after^ I again presented myself before the Queen’s bed^ to
see if 1 could have occasion to speak to her on the matter of her salva-
tion. But Monseigneur the Duke Ernst August then said to me^ That it
was not necessary ; that the Queen was at peace with her God {etait Men
avec eon Dieu)* — Which will mean also that M, de la Bergerie may go
home ? However, he still writes :

^ Next day the Prince told me. That observing I was come near the
Queen’s bed, he had asked her if she wished I should still speak to her ;
but she had replied, that it was not necessary in any way {nullement)^
that she already knew all that could be said to her on such an occasion ;
that she had said it to herself, that she was still saying it, and that she
hoped to be well with her God.

^In the end a faint coming upon the Queen, which was what ter-
minated her life, I threw myself on my knees at the other side of her
bed, the curtains of which were open ; and I called to God with a loud
voice, ^^That He would rank his angels round this great Princess, to
guard her from the insults of Satan ; that He would have pity on her
soul ; that He would wash her with the blood of Jesus Christ he*
heavenly Spouse ; that, having forgiven her all her sins. He would
receive her to His glory.” And in that moment she expired .*^ — Age
thirty-six and some months. Only Daughter of Electress Sophie ; and
Father’s Mother of Frederick the Great.

She was, in her time, a highly distinguished woman ; and
has left, one may say, something of her likeness still traceable
in the Prussian Nation, and its form of culture, to this day.
Charlottenburg (Charlotte'’s-town, so called by the sorrowing
Widower), where she lived, shone with a much-admired French
light under her presidency, — ^French essentially, Versaillese,
Sceptico-Calvinistic, reflex and direct, — illuminating the dark
North; and indeed has never been so bright since. The
light was not what we can call inspired ; lunar rather, not of
the genial or solar kind : but, in good truth, it was the best
then going; and Sophie Charlotte, who was her Mother’s
daughter in this as in other respects, had made it her own.
They were deep in literature, these two Royal Ladies ;
especially deep in French theological polemics, with a strong
leaning to the rationalist side.

They had stopped in Rotterdam once, on a certain journey

^ Enzian, p. 242.

88

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book I.

liomewards from Flanders and the Baths of Aix-la-Chapelle,
to see that admirable sage, the doubter Bayle. Their sub-
lime messenger roused the poor man, in his garret there, in
the Bompies, — after dark : but he had a headache that night ;
was in bed, and could not come. He followed them next
day ; leaving his paper imbroglios, his historical, philo-
sophical, anti-theological marine-stores ; and suspended his
never-ending scribble, on their behalf ; — but would not accept
a pension, and give it up.^

They were shrewd, noticing, intelligent and lively women ;
persuaded that there was some nobleness for man beyond
what the tailor imparts to him ; and even very eager to dis-
cover it, had they known how. In these very days, while our
little Friedrich at Berlin lies in his cradle, sleeping most of
his time, sage Leibnitz, a rather weak but hugely ingenious
old gentleman, with bright eyes and long nose, with vast
black peruke and bandy legs, is seen daily in the Linden
Avenue at Hanover (famed Linden Alley, leading from Town
Palace to Country one, a couple of miles long, rather dis-
appointing when one sees it), daily driving or walking towards
Herrenhausen, where the Court, where the old Electress is,
who will have a touch of dialogue with him to diversify her
day. Not very edifying dialogue, we may fear; yet once
more, the best that can be had in present circumstances.
Here is some lunar reflex of Versailles, which is a polite
court ; direct rays there are from the oldest written Gospels
and the newest ; from the great unwritten Gospel of the Uni-
verse itself ; and from one’s own real effort, more or less
devout, to read all these aright. Let us not condemn that
poor French element of Eclecticism, Scepticism, Tolerance,
Theodicea, and Bayle of the Bompies versus the College of
Saumur. Let us admit that it was profitable, at least that
it was inevitable ; let us pity it, and be thankful for it, and
rejoice that we are well out of it. Scepticism, which is
there beginning at the very top of the world-tree, and has
> Erman, pp. ill, 112. Date is 1700 (late in the autumn probably).

CHAP. IV.] FATHER’S MOTHER 8&

to descend through all the boughs with terrible results to
mankind, is as yet pleasant, tinting the leaves with fine
autumnal red.

Sophie Charlotte partook of her Mother’s tendencies ; and
carried them with her to Berlin, there to be expanded in
many ways into ampler fulfilment. She too had the sage
Leibnitz often with her, at Berlin ; no end to her question-
ings of him ; eagerly desirous to draw water from that deep
well, — a wet rope, with cobwebs sticking to it, too often
all she got ; endless rope, and the bucket never coming to
view. Which, however, she took patiently, as a thing accord-
ing to Nature. She had her learned Beausobres and other
Reverend Edict-of-Nantes gentlemen, famed Berlin divines;
whom, if any Papist notability, Jesuit Ambassador or the
like, happened to be there, she would set disputing with him,
in the Soiree at Charlottenburg. She could right well preside
over such a battle of the Cloud-Titans, and conduct the
lightnings softly, without explosions. There is a pretty
and very characteristic Letter of hers, still pleasant to read,
though turning on theologies now fallen dim enough; ad-
dressed to Father Vota, the famous Jesuit, King’s-confessor,
and diplomatist, from Warsaw, who had been doing his best
in one such rencontre before her Majesty (date March 1703),
— seemingly on a series of evenings, in the intervals of his
diplomatic business ; the Beausobre champions being intro-
duced to him successively, one each evening, by Queen Sophie
Charlotte. To all appearance the fencing had been keen;
the lightnings in need of some dextrous conductor. Vota, on
his way homeward, had written to apologise for the sputter-
ings of fire struck out of him in certain pinches of the
combat; says. It was the rough handling the Primitive
Fathers got from these Beausobre gentlemen, who indeed to
me, Vota in person, under your Majesty’s fine presidency,
were politeness itself, though they treated the Fathers so ill.
Her Majesty, with beautiful art, in this Letter, smooths the
raven plumage of Vota ; — and, at tbe same time, throws into

40 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book 1.

him, as with invisible needle-points, an excellent dose of acu-
puncturation, on the subject of the Primitive Fathers and the
Ecumenic Councils, on her own score. Let us give some
Excerpt, in condensed state :

^How can St. Jerome, for example, be a key to Scripture?’ she in-
sinuates ; citing from Jerome this remarkable avowal of his method of
composing books ; ' especially of his method in that Book, Commentary
on the Galatiansj where he accuses both Peter and Paul of simulation and
even of hypocrisy. The great St. Augustine has been charging him with
this sad fact,* says her Majesty, who gives chapter and verse ; * ' and
Jerome answers: followed the Commentaries of Origen, of**’ — five

or six different persons, who turned out mostly to be heretics before
Jerome had quite done with them in coming years ! — ^ And to confess
the honest truth to you," continues Jerome, I read all that ; and after
having crammed my head with a great many things, I sent for my
amanuensis, and dictated to him now my own thoughts, now those of
others, without much recollecting the order, nor sometimes the words,
nor even the sense." In another place (in the Book itself farther ont),
he says ; ^^1 do not myself write ; I have an amanuensis, and I dictate
to him what comes into my mouth. If I wish to reflect a little, to say
the thing better or a better thing, he knits his brows, and the whole look
of him tells me sufficiently that he cannot endure to wait.** * — Here is a
sacred old gentleman, whom it is not safe to depend on for interpreting
the Scriptures, thinks her Majesty ; but does not say so, leaving Father
Vota to his reflections.

Then again, coming to Councils, she quotes St. Gregory Nazianzen
upon him ; who is truly dreadful in regard to Ecumenic Councils of the
Church, — and indeed may awaken thoughts of Deliberative Assemblies
generally, in the modern constitutional mind. ^He says, J No Council
ever was successful ; so many mean human passions getting into con-
flagration there; with noise, with violence and uproar, ^^more like
those of a tavern or still worse place,” — these are his words. He, for
his own share, had resolved to avoid all such ^^rendezvousing of the
Geese and Cranes, flocking together to throttle and tatter one another in
that sad manner.” Nor had St Theodoret much opinion of the Council
of Nice, except as a kind of miracle. Nothing good to be expected
from Councils," says he, " except when God is pleased to interpose, and
destroy the machinery of the Devil.” *

♦ * Epist. 28 ®, edit. Paris.* And Jerome’s answer, * Ibid, Epist. 76*.*

^ * Commentary on the Galatians^ chap, iii.*

X ‘ (rfXf. Na%ian, de Vita suaJ

41

CHAP. IV.] FATHER^S MOTHER

— ^With more of the like sort ; all delicate, as invisible needle-
points, in her Majesty’s hand.^ What is Father Vota to
say ? — ^The modem reader looks through these chinks into a
strange old scene, the stuff of it fallen obsolete, the spirit of
it not, nor worthy to fall.

These were Sophie Charlotte’s reunions ; very charming in
their time. At which how joyful for Irish Toland to be pre-
sent, as was several times his luck. Toland, a mere broken
heretic in his own country, who went thither once as Se-
cretary to some Embassy (Embassy of Macclesfield’s, 1701,
announcing that the English Crown had fallen Hanover-
wards), and was no doubt glad, poor headlong soul, to find
himself a gentleman and Christian again, for the time being,
— admires Hanover and Berlin very much ; and looks upon
Sophie Charlotte in particular as the pink of women. Some-
thing between an earthly Queen and a divine Egeria; * Serena’
he calls her ; and, in his high-flown fashion, is very laudatory.
* The most beautiful Princess of her time,’ says he, — meaning
one of the most beautiful : her features are extremely regular,
and full of vivacity ; copious dark hair, blue eyes, complexion
excellently fair ; — ‘ not very tall, and somewhat too plump,’
he admits elsewhere. And then her mind, — for gifts, for
graces, culture, where will you find such a mind ? ^ Her

reading is infinite, and she is conversant in all manner of
subjects ’ ; ‘ knows the abstrusest problems of Philosophy ’ ;
says admiring Toland : much knowledge everywhere exact, and
handled as by an artist and queen ; for ‘ her wit is inimi-
table,’ ‘ her justness of thought, her delicacy of expression,’
her felicity of utterance and management, are great. Foreign

' Letter undated (dateable ‘ LUtzelburg, March 1703 ’) is to be found entire,
with all its adjuncts, in Erman, pp. 246-55. It was subsequently translated by
Toland, and published here, as an excellent Polemical Piece, — entirely forgotten
in our time {A Letter against Popery by Sophia Charlotte the late Queen of
Prussia: Being tic. etc. London, 1712). But the finest Duel of all was pro-
bably that between Beausobre and Toland himself (reported by Beausobre, in
something of a crowing manner, in Erman, pp. 203-41, * October 1701 of
which Toland makes no mention anywhere.

42 filRtH AND ^ARENtAGE [book L

courtiers call her ^ the Republican Queen.’ She detects you
a sophistry at one glance; pierces down direct upon the
weak point of an opinion : never in my whole life did I,
Toland, come upon a swifter or sharper intellect. And then
she is so good withal, so bright and cheerful ; and ‘ has the
art of imiting what to the rest of the world are antagonisms,
mirth and learning,’ — say even, mirth and good sense. Is
deep in music, too ; plays daily on her harpsichord, and fan-
tasies, and even composes, in an eminent manner.^ Toland’s
6idmiration, deducting the highflown temper and manner of
the man, is sincere and great.

Beyond doubt a bright airy lady, shining in mild radiance
in those Northern parts; very graceful, very witty and in-
genious ; skilled to speak, skilled to hold her tongue, — which
latter art also was frequently in requisition with her. She
did not much venerate her Husband, nor the Court popula-
tion, male or female, whom he chose to have about him : his
and their ways were by no means hers, if she had cared to
publish her thoughts. Friedrich i., it is admitted on all
hands, weis ‘ an expensive Herr ’ ; much given to magnificent
ceremonies, etiquettes and solemnities ; making no great way
anywhither, and that always with noise enough, and with a
dust vortex of courtier intrigues and cabals encircling him, —
from which it is better to stand quite to windward. More-
over, he was slightly crooked ; most sensitive, thin of skin
and liable to sudden flaws of temper, though at heart very
kind and good. Sophie Charlotte is she who wrote once,
‘ Leibnitz talked to me of the infinitely little {de Vinfiniment
petit) : mon Dieu^ as if I did not know enough of that ! ’
Besides, it is whispered, she was once near marrying to
Louis xrv.’s Dauphin; her Mother Sophie, and her Cousin

^ An Account of tht Courts of Prussia and Hanover^ sent to a Minister of State
in Holland^ by Mr. Toland (London, 1705), p. 322. Toland’s other Book, which
has reference to her, is of didactic nature (* immortality of the soul,* * origin of
idolatry,* etc. ), but with much fine panegyric direct and oblique : Letters ta
Sorona (* Serena* being Queen) ^ a thin 8 to, London, 1704.

CHAP, iv.] PATHER^S MOTHER

the Dowager Duchess of Orleans, cunning women both, had
brought her to Paris in her girlhood, with that secret object ;
and had very nearly managed it. Queen of France that might
have been ; and now it is but Brandenburg, and the dice have
fallen somewhat wrong for us ! She had Friedrich Wilhelm,
the rough boy ; and perhaps nothing more of very precious
property. Her first child, likewise a boy, had soon died, and
there came no third : tedious ceremonials, and the infinitely
little, were mainly her lot in this world.

All which, however, she had the art to take up not in the
tragic way, but in the mildly comic, — often not to take up at
all, but leave lying there ; — and thus to manage in a handsome
and softly victorious manner. With delicate female tact, with
fine female stoicism too ; keeping all things within limits.
She was much respected by her Husband, much loved indeed ;
and greatly mourned for by the poor man : the village Liitzel-
burg (Littletown), close by Berlin, where she had built a
mansion for herself, he fondly named Charhttenburg (Char-
lotte’s-town), after her death, which name both House and
Village still bear. Leibnitz found her of an almost trouble-
some sharpness of intellect; ‘wants to know the why even
of the why,’ says Leibnitz. That is the way of female
intellects when they are good ; nothing equals their acuteness,
and their rapidity is almost excessive. Samuel Johnson, too,
had a young-lady friend once ‘ with the acutest intellect I
have ever known.’

On the whole, we may pronounce her clearly a superior
woman, this Sophie Chsirlotte ; notable not for her Grandson
alone, though now pretty much forgotten by the world, — as
indeed all things and persons have, one day or other, to be !
A Lyi of her, in feeble watery style, and distracted arrange-
ment, by one IWman^ a Berlin Frenchman, is in existence, and
will repay a cursory perusal ; curious traits of her, in still

^ Monsieur Erman, Historiographe de Brandebourg, Mimoires pour servir d
VHistoirc dc Sophie Charlotte^ Reine de Preusse^ lus dans les Stances e/e^ (i voL
8vo, Berlin, x8ox.)

44 BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book 1 .

looser form, are also to be found in Pollnitz but for our
purposes here is enough, and more than enough.

CHAPTER V

KING FRIEDRICH I.

The Prussian royalty is now in its twelfth year when this
little Friedrich, who is to carry it to such a height, comes into
the world. Old Friedrich the Grandfather achieved this
dignity, after long and intricate negotiations, in the first year
of the Century ; 1 6th November 1700, his ambassador returned
triumphant from Vienna ; the Kaiser had at last consented :
We are to wear a crown royal on the top of our periwig ; the
old Electorate of Brandenburg is to become the Kingdom of
Prussia; and the Family of Hohenzollem, slowly mounting
these many centuries, has reached the uppermost round of the
ladder.

Friedrich, the old Gentleman who now looks upon his little
Grandson (destined to be Third King of Prussia) with such
interest, — is not a very memorable man ; but he has had his
adventures too, his losses and his gains : and surely among the
latter, the gain of a crown royal into his House gives him, if
only as a chronological milestone, some place in History. He
was son of him they call the Great Elector, Friedrich Wilhelm
by name ; of whom the Prussians speak much, in an eagerly
celebrating manner, and whose strenuous toilsome work in this
world, celebrated or not, is still deeply legible in the actual life
and affairs of Germany. A man of whom we must yet find
some opportunity to say a word. From him and a beautiful and
excellent Princess Luise, Princess of Orange, — Dutch William,

* Carl Ludwig Freiherr von Pollnitz, Memoiren zur Lebens-und jRegierungs^
Gsschickte der vier Uizten Regenten des Preussischen Stoats (was published in
French also), 2 vols. l2mo, Berlini 1791.

CHAP.V.] KING FRIEDRICH L 45

our Dutch William’s aunt, — this crooked royal Friedrich
came.

He was not bom crooked ; straight enough once, and a fine
little boy of six months old or so ; there being an elder Prince
now in his third year, also full of hope. But in a rough
journey to Konigsberg and back (winter of 1657, as is guessed),
one of the many rough jolting journeys this faithful Electress
made with her Husband, a careless or unlucky nurse, who had
charge of pretty little Fritzchen, was not sufficiently attentive
to her duties on the worst of roads. The ever-jolting carriage
gave some bigger jolt, the child fell backwards in her arms —
did not quite break his back, but injured it for life : — and with
his back, one may perceive, injured his soul and history to an
almost corresponding degree. For the weak crooked boy, with
keen and fine perceptions, and an inadequate case to put them
in, grew up with too thin a skin : — that may be considered as
the summary of his misfortunes ; and, on the whole, there is
no other heavy sin to be charged against him.

He had other loads laid upon him, poor youth : his kind
pious Mother died, his elder Brother died, he at the age of
seventeen saw himself Heir- Apparent ; — and had got a Step-
mother with new heirs, if he should disappear. Sorrows
enough in that one fact, with the venomous whisperings, com-
mentaries and suspicions, which a Court population, female and
male, in little Berlin Town, can contrive to tack to it. Does
not the new Sovereign Lady, in her heart, wish you were dead,
my Prince ? Hope it, perhaps ? Health, at any rate, weak ;
and, by the aid of a little pharmacy — ^ye Heavens ’

Such suspicions are now understood to have had no basis
except in the waste brains of courtier men and women ; but
their existence there can become tragical enough. Add to
which, the Great Elector, like all the Hohenzollems, was a
choleric man ; capable of blazing into volcanic explosions,

* Johann Wegflihrer, Leben der KurfUrstin Luiscy gebornen Prinzessin von
Nassau-Oranun, Gemahlin FrUdrick Wilhelm dts Grossen (Leipzig, 1838),
p. 107.

46

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book I.

when affronted by idle masses of cobwebs in the midst of his
serious businesses ! It is certain, the young Prince Friedrich
had at one time got into quite high, shrill and mutually
minatory terms with his Stepmother ; so that once, after some
such shrill dialogue between them, ending with ^You shall
repent this. Sir ! ’ — ^he found it good to fly off in the night,
with only his Tutor or Secretary and a valet, to Hessen>Cassel
to an Aunt ; who stoutly protected him in this emergency ;
and whose Daughter, after the difficult readjustment of matters,
became his Wife, but did not live long. And it is farther
certain the same Prince, during this his first wedded time,
dining one day with his Stepmother, was taken suddenly ill.
Felt ill, after his cup of coffee ; retired into another room in
violent spasms, evidently in an alarming state, and secretly in
a most alarmed one : his Tutor or Secretary, one Dankelmann,
attended him thither ; and as the Doctor took some time to
arrive, and the symptoms were instant and urgent, Secretary
Dankelmann produced ^ from a pocketbook some drug of his
own, or of the Hessen-Cassel Aunt,’ emetic I suppose, and gave
it to the poor Prince ; — ^who said often, and felt ever after,
with or without notion of poison, That Dankelmann had saved
his life. In consequence of which adventure he again quitted
Court without leave ; and begged to be permitted to remain
safe in the country, if Papa would be so good.^

Fancy the Great Elector’s humour on such an occurrence ;
and what a furtherance to him in his heavy continual labours,
and strenuous swimming for life, these beautiful humours and
transactions must have been ! A crookbacked boy, dear to
the Great Elector, pukes, one afternoon; and there arises
such an opening of the Nether Floodgates of this Universe :
in and round your poor workshop, nothing but sudden dark-
ness, smell of sulphur ; hissing of forked serpents here, and the
universal alleleu of female hysterics there ; — to help a man
forward with his work ! O reader, we will pity the crowned
head, as well as the hatted and even hatless one. Humatn
* Pollnitz, Memoiren, i. ipl-K

47

CHAP.V.l KING FRIEDRICH I.

creatures will not go quite accurately together, any more than
clocks will ; and when their dissonamce once rises fairly high,
and they cannot readily kill one another, any Great Elector
who is tiiird party will have a terrible time of it.

Electress Dorothee, the Stepmother, was herself somewhat
of a hard lady ; not easy to live with, though so far above
poisoning as to have ‘ despised even the suspicion of it.' She
was much given to practical economics, dairy-farming, market-
gardening, and industrial and commercial operations such as
offered ; and was thought to be a very strict reckoner of money.
She founded the Dorotheenstadt^ now oftener called the Neu-
stadt^ chief quarter of Berlin ; and planted, just about the time
of this unlucky dinner, ‘a.d. 1680 or so,'^ the first of the
celebrated Lindens^ which (or the successors of which, in a
stunted condition) are still growing there. Unter-den-Lmden :
it is now the gayest quarter of Berlin, full of really fine edifices :
it was then a sandy outskirt of Electress Dorothee's dairy-farm ;
good for nothing but building upon, thought Electress
Dorothee. She did much dairy-and-vegetable trade on the
great scale; — was thought even to have, underhand, a com-
mercial interest in the principal Beerhouse of the city.* People
did not love her : to the Great Elector, who guided with a
steady bridlehand, she complied not amiss ; though in him too
there rose sad recollections and comparisons now and then :
but with a Stepson of unsteady nerves it became evident to
him there could never be soft neighbourhood. Prince Friedrich
and his Father came gradually to some understanding, tacit or
express, on that sad matter ; Prince Friedrich was allowed to
live, on his separate allowance, mainly remote from Court.
Which he did, for perhaps six or eight years, till the Great
Elector’s death ; henceforth in a peaceable manner, or at least
without open explosions.

* Nicolai, Beschreibung der koniglichen Residenzstddte Berlin und Potsdam
(Berlin, 1786), i. 172.

* Horn, Leben Friedrich Wilhelms des Grossen Kurfursten von Brandenburg
(Berlin, 1814).

48

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [BOOK L

His young Hessen-Cassel Wife died suddenly in 1683 ;
and again there was mad rumour of poisoning ; which Elec-
tress Dorothee disregarded as below her, and of no conse-
quence to her, and attended to industrial operations that
would pay. That poor young Wife, when dying, exacted a
promise from Prince Friedrich that he would not wed again,
but be content with the Daughter she had left him : which
promise, if ever seriously given, could not be kept, as we have
seen. Prince Friedrich brought his Sophie Charlotte home
about fifteen months after. With the Stepmother and with
the Court there was armed neutrality under tolerable forms,
and no open explosion farther.

In a secret way, however, there continued to be difficulties.
And such difficulties had already been, that the poor young
man, not yet come to his Heritages, and having, with pro-
bably some turn for expense, a covetous unamiable Step-
mother, had fallen into the usual difficulties ; and taken the
methods too usual. Namely, had given ear to the Austrian
Court, which offered him assistance, — somewhat as an aged
Jew will to a young Christian gentleman in quarrel with
papa, — upon condition of his signing a certain bond : bond
which much surprised Prince Friedrich when he came to
understand it ! Of which we shall hear more, and even
much more, in the course of time ! —

Neither after his accession (year 1688 ; his Cousin Dutch
William, of the glorious and immortal memory, just lifting
anchor towards these shores) was the new Elector’s life an
easy one. We may say, it was replete with troubles rather ;
and unhappily not so much with great troubles, which could
call forth antagonistic greatness of mind or of result, as with
never-ending shoals of small troubles, the antagonism to
which is apt to become itself of smallish character. Do not
search into his history ; you will remember almost nothing of
it (I hope) after never so many readings 1 Garrulous Pollnitz
and others have written enough about him ; but it all runs off
from you again, as a thing that has no affinity with the

CHAP.v.] KING FRIEDRICH I. 49

human skin. He had a court ^rempli (TintrigmSy full of

never-ending cabals,’ ^ — about what ?

One question only are we a little interested in • How he
came by the Kingship ? How did the like of him contrive
to achieve Kingship ? We may answer : It was not he that
achieved it ; it was those that went before him, who had
gradually got it, — ^as is very usual in such cases. All that
he did was to knock at the gate (the Kaiser^s gate and the
world’s), and ask ^ Is it achieved, then ? ’ Is Brandenburg
grown ripe for having a crown ? Will it be needful for
you to grant Brandenburg a crown ? Which question, after
knocking as loud as possible, they at last took the trouble to
answer, ‘ Yes, it will be needful.’ —

Elector Friedrich’s turn for ostentation, — or, as we may
interpret it, the high spirit of a Hohenzollern working
through weak nerves and a crooked back, — had early set him
a-thinking of the Kingship ; and no doubt, the exaltation of
rival Saxony, which had attained that envied dignity (in a
very unenviable manner, in the person of Elector August made
King of Poland) in 1697, operated as a new spur on his
activities. Then also Duke Ernst of Hanover, his father-in-
law, was struggling to become Elector Ernst ; Hanover to be
the Ninth Electorate, which it actually attained in 1698 ;
not to speak of England, and quite endless prospects there for
Ernst and Hanover. These my lucky neighbours are all
rising ; all this the Kaiser has granted to my lucky neigh-
bours : why is there no promotion he should grant me, among
them ! —

Elector Friedrich had 30,000 excellent troops ; Kaiser
Leopold, the ^ little man in red stockings,’ had no end of
Wars. Wars in Turkey, wars in Italy ; all Dutch William’s
wars and more, on our side of Europe ; — and here is a Spanish-
Succession War, coming dubiously on, which may prove
greater than all the rest together. Elector Friedrich some-

^ Forster, i. 74 (quoting Mimoires du Comte dt Dohna ) ; etc. etc.

VOL. I. J>

50

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [BOOK L

times in his own high person (a courageous and high though
thin-skinned man), otherwise by skilful deputy, had done the
Kaiser service, often signal service, in all these Wars; and
was never wanting in the time of need, in the post of diffi-
culty with those famed Prussian Troops of his. A loyal
gallant Elector this, it must be owned ; capable withal of
doing signal damage, if we irritated him too far ! Why not
give him this promotion, since it costs m absolutely nothing
real, not even the price of a yard of ribbon with metal cross
at the end of it ? Kaiser Leopold himself, it is said, had no
particular objection ; but certain of his ministers had ; and
the little man in red stockings, — much occupied in hunting,
for one thing, — let them have their way, at the risk of anger-
ing Elector Friedrich. Even Dutch William, anxious for it,
in sight of the future, had not yet prevailed.

The negotiation had lasted some seven years, without re-
sult. There is no doubt but the Succession War, and Marl-
borough, would have brought it to a happy issue : in the
mean while, it is said to have succeeded at last, somewhat on
the sudden, by a kind of accident. This is the curious
mythical account ; incorrect in some unessential particulars,
but in the main and singular part of it well-founded. Elector
Friedrich, according to Pollnitz and others, after failing in
many methods, had sent 100,000 thalers (say 16,000?.) to
give, by way of — bribe we must call it, — to the chief opposing
Hofrath at Vienna. The money was offered, accordingly;
and was refused by the opposing Hofrath : upon which the
Brandenburg Ambassador wrote that it was all labour lost ;
and even hurried off homewards in despair, leaving a Secretary
in his place. The Brandenburg Court, nothing despairing,
orders in the mean while. Try another with it, — some other
Hofrath, whose name they wrote in cipher, which the blunder-
ing Secretary took to mean no Hofrath, but the Kaiser’s Con-
fessor and Chief Jesuit, Pater Wolf. To him accordingly he
hastened with the cash, to him with the respectful Electoral
request ; who received both^ it is said, especially the 15,000?.,

51

CHAP.v.] KING FRIEDRICH I.

with a Gloria in excelsis ; and went forthwith and persuaded
the Kaiser.^ — ^Now here is the inexactitude, say modem
Doctors of History ; an error no less than threefold. 1®.
Elector Friedrich was indeed advised, in cipher, by his agent
at Vienna, to write in person to — ‘ Who is that cipher,
then ? ’ asks Elector Friedrich, rather puzzled. At Vienna
that cipher was meant for the Kaiser ; but at Berlin they
take it for Pater Wolf ; and write accordingly, and are
answered with readiness and animation. 2®. Pater Wolf
was not ofKcial Confessor, but was a Jesuit in extreme favour
with the Kaiser, and by birth a nobleman, sensible to human
decorations. 3^ He accepted no bribe, nor was any sent ;
his bribe was the pleasure of obliging a high gentleman who
condescended to ask, and possibly the hope of smoothing
roads for St. Ignatius and the Black Militia, in time coming.
And thtLS at last, and not otherwise than thus, say exact
Doctors, did Pater Wolf do the thing.^ Or might not the
actual death of poor King Carlos ii. at Madrid, 1st November
1700, for whose heritages all the world stood watching with
swords half drawn, considerably assist Pater Wolf? Done
sure enough the thing was ; and before November ended,
Friedrich’s messenger returned with ‘ Yes ’ for answer, and a
Treaty signed on the 1 6th of that month.®

To the huge joy of Elector Friedrich and his Court, almost
the very nation thinking itself glad. Which joyful Potentate
decided to set out straightway and have the coronation done ;
though it was midwinter ; and Konigsberg (for Prussia is to be
our title, ‘ King in Prussia,’ and Konigsberg is Capital City
there) lies 450 miles off, through tangled shaggy forests,
boggy wildernesses, and in many parts only corduroy roads.
We order ‘ 30,000 posthorses,’ besides all our own large stud,
to be got ready at the various stations ; our boy Friedrich

^ Pollnitz, Memoirsn, i. 310.

* G. A. H. Stenzel, Geschickfe des Freussischen Stoats (Hamburg, 1841), iii.
104. Nicolai {Berliner MoHatschrift, year 1799 ) 5 etc.

• Pollnitz (i. 318) gives the Treaty (date corrected by his Editor, ii. 589).

52

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book I.

Wilhelm, rugged boy of twelve, rough and brisk, yet much
‘ given to blush ’ withal (which is a feature of him), shall go
with us ; much more, Sophie Charlotte our august Electress-
Queen that is to be : and we set out, on the 17 th of
December 1700, last year of the Century; ^in 1800 car-
riages ’ : such a cavalcade as never crossed those wintry wilder-
nesses before. Friedrich Wilhelm went in the third division
of carriages (for 1800 of them could not go quite together);
our noble Sophie Charlotte in the second ; a Margraf of
Brandenburg-Schwedt, chief Margraf, our eldest Half-Brother,
Dorothee'^s eldest Son, sitting on the coach-box, in correct in-
signia, as similitude of Driver. So strict are we in etiquette ;
etiquette indeed being now upon its apotheosis, and after such
efforts. Six or seven years of efforts on Elector Friedrich'^s
part ; and six or seven hundred years, unconsciously, on that
of his ancestors.

The magnificence of Friedrich’s processionings into Konigs-
berg, and through it or in it, to be crowned, and of his coro-
nation ceremonials there : what pen can describe it, what pen
need ! Folio volumes with copper-plates have been written on
it; and are not yet all pasted in bandboxes, or slit into spills.^
‘The diamond buttons of his Majesty’s coat’ (snuff-coloured or
purple, I cannot recollect) ‘cost 1,5 OOZ. apiece’; by this one
feature judge what an expensive Herr. Streets were hung with
cloth, carpeted with cloth, no end of draperies and cloth ; your
oppressed imagination feels as if there was cloth enough, of
scarlet and other bright colours, to thatch the Arctic Zone.
With illuminations, cannon-salvos, fountains running wine.
Friedrich had made two Bishops for the nonce. Two of his
natural Church-Superintendents made into Quasi-Bishops, on
the Anglican model, — which was always a favourite with him,
and a pious wish of his ; — but they remained mere cut branches,
these two, and did not, after their haranguing and anointing

^ British Museum, short of very many necessary Books on this subject, offers
the due Coronation Folio, with its prints, upholstery Catalogues, and official
harangues upon nothing, to ingenuous human curiosity.

crHAP. V.] KING FRIEDRICH 1. 68

functions, take root in the country. He himself put the crown
on his head : ‘ King here in my own right, after all !’ — and
looked his royalest, we may fancy ; the kind eyes of him almost
partly fierce for moments, and ^ the cheerfulness of pride’ well
blending with something of awful.

In all which sublimities, the one thing that remains for
human memory is not in these Folios at all, but is considered
to be a fact not the less : Electress Charlotte’s, now Queen
Charlotte’s, very strange conduct on the occasion. For she
cared not much about crowns, or upholstery magnificences of
any kind ; but had meditated from of old on the infinitely
little ; and under these genuflexions, risings, sittings, shiftings,
grimacings on all parts, and the endless droning eloquence of
Bishops invoking Heaven, her ennui, not ill-humoured or offen-
sively ostensible, was heartfelt and transcendent. At one turn
of the proceedings. Bishop This and Chancellor That droning
their empty grandiloquences at discretion, Sophie Charlotte was
distinctly seen to smuggle out her snuff-box, being addicted to
that rakish practice, and fairly solace herself with a delicate
little pinch of snuflT. Rasped tobacco, tabac rdpe^ called by
mortals rape or rapee : there is no doubt about it ; and the
new King himself noticed her, and hurled back a look of due
fulminancy, which could not help the matter, and was only lost
in air. A memorable little action, and almost symbolic in the
first Prussian Coronation. ‘ Yes, we are Kings, and are got
so near the stars, not nearer ; and you invoke the gods, in
that tremendously longwinded manner; and I — Heavens, I
have my snuff-box by me, at least !’ Thou wearied patient
Heroine ; cognisant of the infinitely little ! — This symbolic
pinch of snuff is fragrant all along in Prussian History. A
fragrancy of humble verity in the middle of all royal or other
ostentations; inexorable, quiet protest against cant, done with
such simplicity: Sophie Charlotte’s symbolic pinch of snuff.
She was always considered something of a Republican Queen.

Thus Brandenburg Electorate has become Kingdom of

54

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE [book I.

Prussia ; and the Hohenzollems have put a crown upon their
head. Of Brandenburg, what it was, and what Prussia was ;
and of the Hohenzollems and what they were, and how they
rose thither, a few details, to such as are dark about th^se
matters, cannot well be dispensed with here.

BOOK II

OF BRANDENBURG AND THE HOHENZOLLERNS

928-1417

CHAPTER I

BRANNIBOR: HENRY THE FOWLER

The Brandenburg Countries, till they become related to the
Hohenzollem Family which now rules there, have no History
that has proved memorable to mankind. There has indeed
been a good deal written under that title ; but there is by no
means much known, and of that again there is alarmingly
little that is worth knowing or remembering.

Pytheas, the Marseilles Travelling Commissioner, looking
out for new channels of trade, somewhat above 2,000 years ago,
saw the country actually lying there; sailed past it, occasion-
ally landing; and made report to such Marseilles ‘Chamber
of Commerce ’ as there then was : — report now lost, all to a
few indistinct and insignificant fractions.^ This was ‘ about
the year 327 before Christ,’ while Alexander of Macedon was
busy conquering India, Beyond question, Pytheas, the first
wrtimg or civilised creature that ever saw Germany, gazed
with his Greek eyes, and occasionally landed, striving to speak
and inquire, upon those old Baltic Coasts, north border of the
now Prussian Kingdom ; and reported of it to mankind we
know not what. Which brings home to us the fact that it

^ M^moires de VAcadenm dss InscripHons^ t. xix. 46, xxxvii. 439, etc.

65

56 OF BRANDENBURG [book ll.

[A.D. 600

existed, but almost nothing more : A Country of lakes and
woods, of marshy jungles, sandy wildernesses ; inhabited by
bears, otters, bisons, wolves, wild swine, and certain shaggy
Germans of the Suevic type, as good as inarticulate to Pytheas.
After which all direct notice of it ceases for above three
hundred years. We can hope only that the jungles were
getting cleared a little, and the wild creatures hunted down ;
that the Germans were increasing in number, and becoming a
thought less shaggy. These latter, tall Suevi Semnones, men
of blond stem aspect {oculi truces ccerulei) and great strength
of bone, were known to possess a formidable talent for fight-
ing Drusus Germanicus, it has been guessed, did not like to
appear personally among them : some ‘ gigantic woman pro-
phesying to him across the Elbe’ that it might be dangerous,
Dmsus contented himself with erecting some triumphal pillar
on his own safe side of the Elbe, to sa?/ that they were
conquered.

In the Fourth Century of our era, when the German popu-
lations, on impulse of certain ‘ Huns expelled from the Chinese
frontier,’ or for other reasons valid to themselves, began flow-
ing universally southward, to take possession of the rich Roman
world, and so continued flowing for two centuries more; the old
German frontiers generally, and especially those Northern
Baltic countries, were left comparatively vacant ; so that new
immigrating populations from the East, all of Sclavic origin,
easily obtained footing and supremacy there. In the Northern
parts, these immigrating Sclaves were of the kind called
Vandals, or Wends : they spread themselves as far west as
Hamburg and the Ocean, south also far over the Elbe in some
quarters ; while other kinds of Sclaves were equally busy else-
where. With what difficulty in settling the new boundaries,
and what inexhaustible funds of quarrel thereon, is still visible
to every one, though no Historian was there to say the least
word of it. ^ All of Sclavic origin’ ; but who knows of how
many kinds ; Wends here in the North, through the Lausitz
* Tacitus, jDg Moribus G<rman<frum^ c. 45*

57

CHAP. L] HENRY THE FOWLER
^ 8 ]

(Lusatia) and as far as Thiiringen ; not to speak of Polacks,
Bohemian Czechs, Huns, Bulgars, and the other dim nomen-
clatures, on the Eastern frontier. Five-hundred years of
violent unrecorded fighting, abstruse quarrel with their new
neighbours in settling the marches. Many names of towns in
Germany ending in itz (Meuselwitz, Mollwitz), or bearing the
express epithet Wmdisch (Wendish), still give indication of
those old sad circumstances ; as does the word Slave^ in all
our Western languages, meaning captured Sclavonian. What
long-drawn echo of bitter rage and hate lies in that small
etymology !

These things were ; but they have no History : why should
they have any ? Enough that in those Baltic regions, there
are for the time (Year 600, and till long after Charlemagne
is out) Sclaves in place of Suevi or of Holstein Saxons and
Angli ; that it is now shaggy Wends who have the task of
taming the jungles, and keeping down the otters and wolves.
Wends latterly in a waning condition, much beaten upon by
Charlemagne and others; but never yet beaten out. And
so it has to last, century after century ; Wends, wolves, wild
swine, all alike dumb to us. Dumb, or sounding only one
huge unutterable message (seemingly of tragic import), like
the voice of their old Forests, of their old Baltic Seas : —
perhaps more edifying to us so. Here at last is a definite
date and event •

‘a.d. 928, Henry the Fowler, marching across the frozen
bogs, took Brannibor, a chief fortress of the Wends — frst
mention in human speech of the place now called Branden-
burg : Bor or ‘ Burg of the Brenns ’ (if there ever was any
Tribe of Brenns, — Brenniis, there as elsewhere, being name
for King or Leader) ; ‘ Burg of the Woods,’ say others, — who
as little know. Probably, at that time, a town of clay hu s,
with ditch and palisaded sod- wall round it ; certainly ‘ a chief

^ Kohler, Reichs- Historic (Brankfurth und Leipzig, 1737), p. 63. Michaelis,
Chur- und Fiirst lichen Hauser in Deutschland (Lemgo, 1 759, ’60, *85), i. 255.

68 OF BRANDENBURG [book II.

[sag

fortress of the Wends,’ — who must have been a good deal
surprised at sight of Henry on the rimy winter morning near
a thousand years ago.

This is the grand old Henry, called ^ the Fowler ’ {Heinrich
der Vogler\ because he was in his Vogelheerde (Falconry or
Hawk establishment, seeing his Hawks fly) in the upland
Hartz Country, when messengers came to tell him that the
German Nation, through its Princes and Authorities assembled
at Fritzlar, had made him King ; and that he would have
dreadful work henceforth. Which he undertook ; and also
did, — this of Brannibor only one small item of it, — ^warring
right manfully all his days against Chaos in that country, no
rest for him thenceforth till he died. The beginning of
German Kings ; the first, or essentially the first sovereign of
united Germany, — Charlemagne'^s posterity to the last bastard
having died out, and only Anarchy, Italian and other, being
now the alternative.

very high King/ says one whose Note -books I have got, ^an
authentically noble human figure, visible still in clear outline in the
gray dawn of Modern History, llie Father of whatever good has since
been in Germany. He subdued his Dukes, Schwaben, Baiern (Swabia,
Bavaria) and others, who were getting too hereditary, and inclined to
disobedience. He managed to get back Lorraine ; made truce with the
Hungarians, who were excessively invasive at that time. Truce with
the Hungarians ; and then, having gathered strength, made dreadful
beating of them ; two beatings, — one to each half, for the invasive Savagery
had split itself, for better chance of plunder ; first beating was at Sonder-
hausen, second was at Merseburg, Year 933; — which settled them
considerably. Another beating from Henry's son, and they never came
back. Beat Wends, before this, — Brannibor through frozen bogs'*
five years ago. Beat Sclavic Meisseners (Misnians) ; Bohemian Czechs,
and took Prag ; Wends again, with huge slaughter ; then Danes, and
made ^^King Worm tributary" (King Gorm the Hard, our Knut*s or
Canute’s great-grandfather, Year 931); — last of all, those invasive
Hungarians as above. Had sent the Hungarians, when they demanded
tribute or black ~ mail of him as heretofore. Truce being now out, — a
mangy hound : There is your black-mail. Sirs ; make much of that 1
^ He had the image of St. Michael painted on his standard ” ; con-
trary to wont. He makes, or re -makes, Markgrafs (Wardens of the

CHAP. I.] HENRY THE FOWLER 59

Marches), to be under his Dukes, — and not too hereditary. Who his
Markgraves were.^ Dim History counts them to the number of six;^
which take in their order :

'1®, Sleswig, looking over into the Scandinavian countries, and the
Norse Sea-kings. This Markgraviate did not last long under that title.
I guess, it became Stade-and^Ditmarsch afterwards.

^2®. Soltwedel, — which grows to be Markgraviate of Brandenburg by
and by. Soltwedel, now called Salzwedel, an old Town still extant,
sixty miles to west and north of Brandenburg, short way south of the
Elbe, was as yet headquarters of this second Markgraf ; and any Warden
we have at Brandenburg is only a deputy of him or some other.

^ 3®. Meissen (which we call Misnia), a country at that time still full
of Wends.

^4®. LausitZy also a very Wendish country (called in English maps
Lusatia, — which is its name in Monk-Latin, not now a spoken language).
Did not long continue a Markgraviate ; fell to Meissen (Saxony), fell to
Brandenburg, Bohemia, Austria, and had many tos and fros. Is now
(since the Thirty- Years-War time) mostly Saxon again.

^5®. Austria (CEsterreich, Eastern-Kingdom, Eastemrey as we might
say ) ; to look after the Hungarians, and their valuable claims to black-
mail.

^6®. Antwerp (^^ At-the-Wharf,** ^^On-t -Wharf,*' so to speak), against
the French ; which function soon fell obsolete.

^ These were Henry's six Markgraviates (as my best authority enumer-
ates them) ; and in this way he had militia captains ranked all round his
borders, against the intrusive Sclavic element.

^ He fortified Towns ; all Towns are to be walled and warded, — to be
Burgs in fact ; and the inhabitants Burgh&cs, or men capable of defending
Burgs. Everywhere the ninth man is to serve as soldier in his 1 own ;
other eight in the country are to feed and suppoi*t him : Heergeriithe
(War-tackle, what is called Ueriot in our old Books) descends to the
eldest son of a fighting man who had served, as with us. All robbers
are made soldiers " (unless they prefer hanging) ; and weaponshows and
drill are kept up. This is a man who will make some impression upon
Anarchy, and its Wends and Huns. His standard was St. Michael, as
we have seen, — whose sword is derived from a very high quarter 1 A

1 Kohler, ReichS' Histories p. 66. This is by no means Kohler’s chief Book ;
but this too is good, and does, in a solid effective way, what it attempts. He
seems to me by far the best Historical Genius the Germans have yet produced,
though I do not find much mention of him in their Literary Histories and
Catalogues. A man of ample learning, and also of strong cheerfiil human sense
and human honesty ; whom it is thrice-pleasant to meet with in those ghastly
solitudes, populous chiefly with doleful creatures.

60

OF BRANDENBURG [book 11.

.'***

pious man ; — founded Quedlinburg Abbey^ and much else in that kind^
having a pious Wife withal^ Mechtildis^ who took the main hand in that
of Quedlinburg ; whose lAfe is in Leibnitz^^ not the legiblest of Books. —
On the whole, a right gallant King and Fowler.” Died, a.d. 936 (at
Memmleben, a Monastery on the Unstrut, not far from Schulpforte),
age sixty ; had reigned only seventeen years, and done so much. Lies
buried in Quedlinburg Abbey : — any Tomb ? I know no Life of him but
Chindling* 8 , which is an extremely inextricable Piece, and requires mainly
to be forgotten.— Hail, brave Henry : across the Nine dim Centuries, we
salute thee, still visible as a valiant Son of Cosmos and Son of Heaven,
beneficently sent us ; as a man who did in grim earnest serve God ” in
his day, and whose works accordingly bear fruit to our day, and to
all days I ' —

So far my rough Note-books ; which require again to be
shut for the present, not to abuse the reader'^s patience or lead
him from his road.

This of Markgrafs (Grafs of the Marches, marhed Places,
or Boundaries) was a natural invention in that state of cir-
cumstances. It did not quite originate with Henry ; but was
much perfected by him, he first recognising how essential it
was. On all frontiers he had his (Count, Reeve, G^eeve,
whom some think to be only Grau, Gray, or Senior, the
hardiest, wisest steel-^rm/ man he could discover) stationed
on the March, strenuously doing watch and ward there : the
post of difficulty, of peril, and naturally of honour too,
nothing of a sinecure by any means. Which post, like every
other, always had a tendency to become hereditary, if the
kindred did not fail in fit men. And hence have come the
innumerable Markgraves, Marquises, and suchlike, of modern
times : titles now become chimerical, and more or less men-
dacious, as most of our titles are, — like so many Burgs
changed into ‘ Boroughs,’ and even into ‘ Rotten Boroughs,’
with Defensive Burghers of the known sort : very mournful
to discover. Once Norroy was not all pasteboard ! At the
heart of that huge whirlwind of his, with its dusty heraldries,
and fantasmal nomenclatures now become mendacious, there
lay, at first, always an earnest human fact. Henry the
^ Leibnitz, ScriftQrcs Herwn Brunswicemium, etc. (Hanover, 1707), i. 196.

61

CHAP. I.] HENRY THE EOWLER

ga8]

Fowler was so happy as to have the fact without any mixture
of mendacity : we are in the sad reverse case ; reverse case
not yet altogether complete^ but daily becoming so, — one of
the saddest and strangest ever heard of, if we thought of
it ! — But to go on with business.

Markgraviates there continued to be ever after, — Six in
Henry'^s time : — but as to the number, place, arrangement
of them, all this varied according to circumstances outward
and inward, chiefly according to the regress or the reintrusion
of the circumambient hostile populations; and underwent
many changes. The sea-wall you build, and what main flood-
gates you establish in it, will depend on the state of the outer
sea. Markgraf of Sleswig grows into Markgraf of Ditmarsch
and Stade ; retiring over the Elbe, if Norse Piracy get very
triumphant. Antwerp falls obsolete ; so does Meissen by
and by. Lausitz and Salzwedel^ in the third century hence,
shrink both into Brandenburgs which was long only a subaltern
station, managed by deputy from one or other of these. A
Markgraf that prospered in repelling of his Wends and Huns
had evidently room to spread himself, and could become very
great, and produce change in boundaries : observe what
(Esterreich (Austria) grew to, and what Brandenburgs Meissen
too, which became modem Saxony, a state once greater than
it now is.

In old Books are Lists of the primitive Markgraves of
Brandenburg, from Henryk’s time downward ; two sets, ‘ Mark-
graves of the Witekind race,’ and of another : ^ but they are
altogether uncertain, a shadowy intermittent set of Markgraves,
both the Witekind set and the Non-Witekind ; and truly, for
a couple of centuries, seem none of them to have been other
than subaltern Deputies, belonging mostly to Lausitz or
Salzwedel ; of whom therefore we can say nothing here, but
must leave the first two hundred years in their natural gray
state, — perhaps sufficiently conceivable by the reader.

^ Hlibner, Genealogischt Tabcllen (Leipzig, 1725*8), i. 172, 173. A Book of
rare excellence in its kind.

63

OF BRANDENBURG [book IL

[928

But thus, at any rate, was Brandenburg {Bor or Burg of
the Brenns, whatever these are) first discovered to Christen-
dom, and added to the firm land of articulate History : a feat
worth putting on record. Done by Henry the Fowler, in the
Year of Grace 928, — while (among other things noticeable
in this world) our Knut’s great-grandfather, Gormo Durus^
‘ Henry’s Tributary,’ was still King of Denmark ; when Harald
Bluetooth (Blaatand) w£is still a young fellow, with his teeth
of the natural colour ; and Swen with the Forked Beard
{Tvaeshaeg^ Double-beard, ‘ Twa-shag'') was not bom; and
the Monks of Ely had not yet (by about a hundred years)
begun that singing,^ nor the tide that refusal to retire, on
behalf of this Knut, in our English part of his dominions.

That Henry appointed due Wardenship in Brannibor was
in the common course. Sure enough, some Markgraf must
take charge of Brannibor, — ^he of the Lausitz eastward, for
example, or he of Salzwedel westward : — that Brannibor, in
time, will itself be found the fit place, and have its own
Markgraf of Brandenburg ; this, and what in the next nine
centuries Brandenburg will grow to, Henry is far from sur-
mising. Brandenburg is fairly captured across the frozen
bogs, and has got a warden and ninth-man garrison settled
in it : Brandenburg, like other things, will grow to what
it can.

Henry’s son and successor, if not himself, is reckoned to
have founded the Cathedral and Bishopric of Brandenburg, —
his Clergy and he always longing much for the conversion

^ Without note or comment, in the old Book of Ely (date before the Conquest)
is preserved this stave giving picture, if we consider it, of the Fen Country
all a lake (as it was for half the year, till drained, six centuries after), with
Ely Monastery rising like an island in the distance; and the music of its
nones or vespers sounding soft and far over the solitude, eight hundred years
ago and more.

Merie sungen the Munecher binncn Ely Merry (genially) semg the Monks in Ely

Tha Cnut ching re w therby ; As Knut King rowed ( re w) there-by :

P oweth cnites near the lant, Row^/elUnus (knights), near the land^

And here we tbes Muneches saeng. And hear we these Monks' s song.

See Bentham’s History of Ely (Cambridge, I77i)> P* 94

CHAP. II.] PREUSSEN: SAINT ADALBERT 68

9971

of these Wends and Huns ; which indeed was, as the like
still is, the one thing needful to rugged heathens of that
kind.

CHAPTER II

PREUSSEN: SAINT ADALBERT

Five-hundred miles, and more, to the east of Brandenburg,
lies a Country then as now called Preussen (Prussia Proper),
inhabited by Heathens, where also endeavours at conversion
are going on, though without success hitherto. Upon which
we are now called to cast a glance.

It is a moory flat country, full of lakes and woods, like
Brandenburg ; spreading out into grassy expanses, and bosky
wildernesses humming with bees ; plenty of bog in it, but
plenty also of alluvial mud ; sand too, but by no means so
high a ratio of it as in Brandenburg ; tracts of Preussen are
luxuriantly grassy, frugiferous, apt for the plough ; and the
soil generally is reckoned fertile, though lying so far north-
ward. Part of the great plain or flat which stretches, sloping
insensibly, continuously, in vast expanse, from the Silesian
Mountains to the amber-regions of the Baltic ; Preussen is
the seaward, more alluvial part of this, — extending west and
east, on both sides of the Weichsel (Vistula), from the regions
of the Oder river to the main stream of the Memel. Bordering-
on-Russia its name signifies : Bor-Russia, B’russia, Prussia ;
or — some say it was only on a certain inconsiderable river on
those parts, river Reiissen, that it ‘ bordered,’ and not on the
great Country, or any part of it, which now in our days is
conspicuously its next neighbour. Who knows ? —

In Henry the Fowler’s time, and long afterwards, Preussen
was a vehemently Heathen country ; the natives a Miscellany
of rough Serbic Wends, Letts, Swedish Goths, or Dryasdust
knows not what ; — very probably a sprinkling of Swedish
Goths, from old time, chiefly along the coasts. Dryasdust

^4 OF BRANDENBURG [book ll.

[997

knows only that these Preussen were a strong-boned, iracund
herdsman-and-fisher people ; highly averse to be interfered
with, in their religion especially. Famous otherwise, through
all the centuries, for the amber they had been used to fish,
and sell in foreign parts.

Amber, science declares, is a kind of petrified resin, dis-
tilled by pines that were dead before the days of Adam ;
which is now thrown up, in stormy weather, on that remote
coast, and is there fished out by the amphibious people, — who
can likewise get it by running mine-shafts into the sandhills
on their coast ; — by whom it is sold into the uttermost parts
of the Earth, Arabia and beyond, from a very early period of
time. No doubt Pytheas had his eye upon this valuable
product, when he ventured into survey of those regions, —
which are still the great mother of amber in our world.
By their amber-fishery, with the aid of dairy-produce and
plenty of beef and leather, these Heathen Preussen, of un-
certain miscellaneous breed, contrived to support existence in
a substantial manner; they figure to us as an inarticulate,
heavy-footed, rather iracund people. Their knowledge of
Christianity was trifling, their aversion to knowing anything
of it was great.

As Poland, and the neighbours to the south, were already
Christian, and even the Bohemian Czechs were mostly con-
verted, pious wishes as to Preussen, we may fancy, were a
constant feeling : but no effort hitherto, if efforts were made,
had come to anything. Let some daring missionary go to
preach in that country, his reception is of the worst, or
perhaps he is met on the frontier with menaces, and for-
bidden to preach at all ; except sorrow and lost labour,
nothing has yet proved attainable. It was very dangerous
to go ; — and with what likelihood of speeding ? Efforts, we
may suppose, are rare ; but the pious wish being continual
and universal, efforts can never altogether cease. From Henry
the Fowler’s capture of Brannibor, count seventy years, we
find Henry’s great-grandson reigning as Elective Kaiser, —

CHAP. IL] PREUSSEN: SAINT ADALBERT 66
997]

Otto HI., last of the direct ‘Saxon Kaisers,’ Otto, Wonder of
the World ; — and alongside of Otto’s great transactions, which
were once called Mirabilia Mundi and are now fallen so ex-
tinct, there is the following small transaction, a new attempt
to preach in Preussen, going on, which, contrariwise, is still
worth taking notice of.

About the year 997 or ’6, Adalbert, Bishop of Prag, a
very zealous, most devout man, but evidently of hot temper,
and liable to get into quarrels, had determined, after many
painful experiences of the perverse ungovernable nature of
corrupt mankind, to give up his nominally Christian flock
altogether ; to shake the dust off his feet against Prag, and
devote himself to converting those Prussian Heathen, who,
across the frontiers, were living in such savagery, and express
bondage to the Devil, worshipping mere stocks and stones.
In this enterprise he was encouraged by the Christian poten-
tates who lay contiguous ; especially by the Duke of Poland,
to whom such next-neighbours, for all reasons, were an eye-
sorrow.

Adalbert went, accordingly, with stafl* and scrip, two monks
attending him, into that dangerous country : not in fear, he ;
a devout high-tempered man, verging now on fifty, his hair
getting gray, and face marred with innumerable troubles and
provocations of past time. He preached zealously, almost
fiercely, — ^though chiefly with his eyes and gestures, I should
think, having no command of the language. At Dantzig,
among the Swedish-Goth kind of Heathen, he had some suc-
cess, or affluence of attendance ; not elsewhere that we hear
of. In the Pillau region, for example, where he next landed,
an amphibious Heathen lout hit him heavily across the
shoulders with the flat of his oar ; sent the poor Preacher to
the ground, face foremost, and suddenly ended his salutary
discourse for that time. However, he pressed forward, regard-
less of results, preaching the Evangel to all creatures who
were willing or unwilling; — and pressed at last into the

VOL. I. B

66

OF BRANDENBURG [BCX)K IL

[997

Sacred Circuit, the ‘ Romova^ or Place of Oak-trees, and of
Wooden or Stone Idols (Bangputtis, Patkullos, and I know
not what diabolic dumb Blocks), which it was death to enter.
The Heathen Priests, as we may conceive it, rushed out;
beckoned him, with loud unintelligible bullyings and fierce
gestures, to begone ; hustled, shook him, shoved him, as he
did not go ; then took to confused striking, struck finally a
death-stroke on the head of poor Adalbert : so that ‘ he
stretched out both his arms ’ (Jesus, receive me thou !), ‘ and
fell with his face to the ground, and lay dead there, — in the
form of a crucifix,’’ say his Biographers : only the attendant
monks escaping to tell.

Attendant monks, or Adalbert, had known nothing of their
being on forbidden ground. Their accounts of the pheno-
menon accordingly leave it only half-explained : How he was
surprised by armed Heathen DeviPs-servants in his sleep ; was
violently set upon, and his ^ beautiful bowels {jndchra viscera)
were run-through with seven spears ’ ; but this of the ‘ Romova,’
or Sacred Bangputtis Church of Oak-trees, perhaps chief
Romova of the Country, rashly intruded into, with conse-
quent strokes, and fall in the form of a crucifix, appears now
to be the intelligible account.^ We will take it for the real
manner of Adalbert’s exit ; — no doubt of the essential trans-
action, or that it was a very flaming one on both sides.
The date given is 23d April 997 ; date famous in the Romish
Calendar since.

He was a Czech by birth, son of a Heathen Bohemian man
of rank : his name (Adalbert, A’lbert, Bright-m-Nohleness) he
got * at Magdeburg, whither he had gone to study ’ and seek
baptism ; where, as generally elsewhere, his fervent devout ways
were admirable to his fellow-creatures. A ‘ man of genius,’ we
may well say : one of Heaven’s bright souls, born into the
muddy darkness of this world ; — ^laid hold of by a transcendent

^ Baillet, Vies des Saints {VdLtis, 1739), iii. 722. Bollandus, Acta Sanctorum^
Aprilis tom. iii. {die 23* ; in Edition Venetiis, 1738), pp. 174-205. Voigt,
Ceschichte Preussens (Konigsberg, i827-’39), i. 266-70.

CHAP. 11.] PREUSSEN : SAINT ADALBERT 67

9971

Message, in the due transcendent degree. He entered Prag,
as Bishop, not in a carriage-and-six, but ‘ walking barefoot,’
his contempt for earthly shadows being always extreme.
Accordingly, his quarrels with the scecvlum were constant and
endless ; his wanderings up and down, and vehement arguings,
in this world, to little visible effect, lasted all his days. We
can perceive he was short-tempered, thin of skin : a violently
sensitive man. For example, once in the Bohemian solitudes,
on a summer afternoon, in one of his thousandfold pilgrimings
and wayfarings, he had lain down to rest, his one or two monks
and he, in some still glade, ‘ with a stone for his pillow ’ (as
was always his custom even in Prag), and had fallen sound
asleep. A Bohemian shepherd chanced to pass that way,
warbling something on his pipe, as he wended towards looking
after his flock. Seeing the sleepers on their stone pillows, the
thoughtless Czech mischievously blew louder, — started Adal-
bert broad awake upon him ; who, in the fury of the first
moment, shrieked : ‘ Deafness on thee ! Man cruel to the
human sense of hearing ! ’ or words to that effect. Which
curse, like the most of Adalbert’s, was punctually fulfilled : the
amazed Czech stood deaf as a post, and went about so all his
days after; nay, for long centuries (perhaps down to the
present time, in remote parts), no Czech blows into his pipe in
the woodlands, without certain precautions, and preliminary
fuglings of a devotional nature.^ — ^From which miracle, as
indeed from many other indications, I infer an irritable nervous-
system in poor Adalbert ; and find this death in the Romova
was probably a furious mixture of Earth and Heaven.

At all events, he lies there, beautiful though bloody, ‘ in the
form of a crucifix ’ ; zealous Adalbert, the hot spirit of him
now at last cold ; — and has clapt his mark upon the Heathen
country, protesting to the last. This was in the year 997,
think the best Antiquaries. It happened at a place called
FischhatLseUy near Pillau, say they ; on that narrow strip of
country which lies between the Baltic and the Frische Haf
^ Bollandus, ubi supri.

68

OF BRANDENBURG [BOOK II.

[997

(immense Lake, Wash as we should say, or leakage of shallow
water, one of two such, which the Baltic has spilt out of it in
that quarter), — near the Fort and Haven of Pillau; where
there has been much stir since ; where Napoleon, for one thing,
had some tough fighting, prior to the Treaty of Tilsit, fifty
years ago. The place,— or if not this place, then Gnesen
in Poland, the final burial-place of Adalbert, which is better
known, — ^has ever since had a kind of sacredness ; better or
worse expressed by mankind : in the form of canonisation,
endless pilgrimages, rumoured miracles, and suchlike. For
shortly afterwards, the neighbouring Potentate, Boleslaus Duke
of Poland, heart-struck at the event, drew sword on these
Heathens, and having (if I remember) gained some victory,
bargained to have the Body of Adalbert delivered to him at
its weight in gold. Body, all cut in pieces, and nailed to
poles, had long ignominiously withered in the wind ; perhaps
it was now only buried overnight for the nonce ? Being dug
up, or being cut down, and put into the balance, it weighed —
less than was expected. It was as light as gossamer, said pious
rumour. Had such an excellent odour too ; — and came for a
mere nothing of gold ! This was Adalbert’s first miracle after
death ; in life he had done many hundreds of them, and has
done millions since, — chiefly upon paralytic nervous-systems,
and the element of pious rumour ; — which any Devil’s- Advocate
then extant may explain if he can ! Kaiser Otto, Wonder of
the World, who had known St. Adalbert in life, and much
honoured him, ‘ made a pilgrimage to his tomb at Gnesen in
the year 1000’; — and knelt there, we may believe, with
thoughts wondrous enough, great and sad enough.

There is no hope of converting Preussen, then? It will
never leave off* its dire worship of Satan, then? Say not.
Never ; that is a weak word. St. Adalbert has stamped his
life upon it, in the form of a crucifix, in lasting protest against
that.

CHAP. III.] MARKGRAVES OF BRANDENBURG 69

IM3]

CHAPTER III

MARKGRAVES OF BRANDENBURG

Meanwhile our first enigmatic set of Markgraves, or
Deputy-Markgraves, at Brandenburg, are likewise faring ill.
Whoever these valiant steel-gray gentlemen might be (which
Dryasdust does not the least know, and only makes you more
uncertain the more he pretends to tell), one thing is very
evident, they had no peaceable possession of the place, nor for
above a hundred years, a constant one on any terms. The
Wends were highly disinclined to conversion and obedience :
once and again, and still again, they burst up ; got temporary
hold of Brandenburg, hoping to keep it ; and did frightful
heterodoxies there. So that to our distressed imagination
those poor ‘ Markgraves of Witekind descent,’ our first set in
Brandenburg, become altogether shadowy, intermittent, enig-
matic, painfully actual as they once were. Take one instance,
omitting others ; which happily proves to be the finish of that
first shadowy line, and introduces us to a new set very slightly
more substantial.

E7uI of the First Shadowy Line

In the year 1023, near a century after Henry the Fowler'^s
feat, the Wends bursting up in never-imagined fury, get
hold of Brandenburg again, — for the third and, one would
fain hope, the last time. The reason was, words spoken by
the then Markgraf of Brandenburg, Dietrich or Theodoric, last
of the Witekind Markgraves ; who hearing that a Cousin of
his (Markgraf or Deputy-Markgraf like himself) was about
wedding his daughter to ‘ Mistevoi King of the Wends,’ said
too earnestly : ‘ Don’t ! Will you give your daughter to a

70

OF BRANDENBURG [BOOK ll.

[I13G

dog ? ’ Word ‘ dog ** was used, says my authority.^ Which
threw King Mistevoi into a paroxysm, and raised the Wends.
Their butchery of the German population in poor Brandenburg,
especially of the Priests ; their burning of the Cathedral, and
of Church and State generally, may be conceived. The Har-
Imtgshergy — in our time Marienherg, pleasant Hill near Bran-
denburg, with its gardens, vines, and whitened cottages : — on
the top of this Harlungsberg the Wends ‘set up their god
Triglaph ’ ; a threeheaded Monster of which I have seen prints,
beyond measure ugly. Something like three whale'^s-cubs
combined by boiling, or a triple porpoise dead-drunk (for the
dull eyes are inexpressible, as well as the amorphous shape) :
ugliest and stupidest of all false gods. This these victorious
Wends set up on the Harlungsberg, Year 1023; and
worshipped after their sort, benighted mortals, — with joy, for
a time. The Cathedral was in ashes. Priests all slain or fled,
shadowy Markgraves the like ; Church and State lay in ashes ;
and Triglaph, like a Triple Porpoise under the influence of
laudanum, stood (I know not whether on his head or on his
tail) aloft on the Harlungsberg, as the Supreme of this
Universe, for the time being.

Second Shadowy Line

Whereupon the Ditviarsch-Stade Markgrafs (as some
designate them) had to interfere, these shadowy Deputies of
the WiteMnd breed having vanished in that manner. The
Ditmarschers recovered the place ; and with some fighting, did
in the main at least keep Triglaph and the Wends out of it
in time coming. The Wends were fiercely troublesome, and

^ See Michaelis, CAur- und Furstlichen Hauser, i. 257-9 ; Pauli, Allgemeine
Preussischi StaatS’Geschickte (Halle, 1760- ’69), i. 1-182 (the ‘standard work* on
Prussian History; in eight watery quartos, intolerable to human nature): Kioss,
Vaterldndische Gemdlde (Berlin, 1833), i. 59-108 (a Bookseller’s-compilation,
with some curious Excerpts) : — under which lie modern Sagittarius, ancient Adam
of Bremen, Ditmarus Merseburgensis^ Witichindus Corbeiensts, Arno/dus
LubccensiSf etc., etc., to all lengths and breadths.

CHAP. III.] MARKGRAVES OF BRANDENBURG 71

XX30]

fought much; but I think they never actually got hold of
Brandenburg again. They were beginning to get notions of
conversion : well preached-to and well beaten-upon, you can-
not hold-out for ever. Even Mistevoi at one time professed
tendencies to Christianity ; perhaps partly for his Bride’s sake,
— ^the dog, we may call him, in a milder sense ! But he
relapsed dreadfully, after that insult ; and his son worse. On
the other hand, Mistevoi’s grandson was so zealous he went
about with the Missionary Preachers, and interpreted their
German into Wendish : ‘ Oh, my poor Wends, will you hear,
then, will you understand ? This solid Earth is but a shadow :
Heaven forever or else Hell forever, that is the reality ! ’
Such ^difference between right and wrong’ no Wend had
heard of before ; quite tremendously ‘ important if true ’ ! —
And doubtless it impressed many. There are heavy Ditmarsch
strokes for the unimpressible. By degrees all got converted,
though many were killed first ; and, one way or other, the
Wends are preparing to efface themselves as a distinct people.

This Stade-cmd-Ditmarsch family (of Anglish or Saxon
breed, if that is an advantage) seem generally to have fur-
nished the Salzxvedel Office as well, of which Brandenburg
was an offshoot, done by deputy, usually also of their kin.
Tliey lasted in Brandenburg rather more than a hundred
years ; — with little or no Book-History that is good to read ;
their History inarticulate rather, and stamped beneficently on
the face of things. Otto is a common name among them.
One of their sisters, too, Adelheid (Adelaide, Nobleness) had
a strange adventure with ‘ Ludwig the Springer ’ : romantic
mythic man, famous in the German world, over whom my
readers and I must not pause at this time.

In Salzwedel, in Ditmarsch, or wherever stationed, they
had a toilsome fighting life : sore difficulties with their DiU
marschers too, with the plundering Danish populations ;
Markgraf after Markgraf getting killed in the business.
* Erschlagen^ slain fighting with the Heathen,’ say the old
Books, and pass on to another. Of all which there is now

72

OF BRANDENBURG [book II.

C1130

silence forever. So many years men fought and planned and
struggled there, all forgotten now except by the gods ; and
silently gave away their life, before those countries could
become fencible and habitable ! Nay, my friend, it is our
lot too : and if we would win honour in this Universe, the
rumour of Histories and Morning Newspapers, — which have
to become wholly zero, one day, and fall dumb as stones, and
which were not perhaps very wise even while speaking, — will
help us little ! —

Substantial MarTcgraves: Glimpse of the Contemporary Kaisers

The Ditmarsch-Stade kindred, much slain in battle with
the Heathen, and otherwise beaten upon, died out, about the
year 1130 (earlier perhaps, perhaps later, for all is shadowy
still); and were succeeded in the Salzwedel part of their
function by a kindred called ‘ of Ascanien and Ballenstadt ’ ;
the Ascamier or Anhalt Markgraves ; whose History, and that
of Brandenburg, becomes henceforth articulate to us ; a His-
tory not doubtful or shadowy any longer ; but ascertainable,
if reckoned worth ascertaining. Who succeeded in Dit-
marsch, let us by no means inquire. The Empire itself was
in some disorder at this time, more abstruse of aspect than
usual ; and these Northern Markgrafs, already become im-
portant people, and deep in general politics, had their own
share in the confusion that was going.

It was about this same time that a second line of Kaisers
had died out : the Frankish or Salk line, who had succeeded
to the Saxony of Henry the Fowler'^s blood. For the Empire
too, though elective, had always a tendency to become heredi-
tary, and go in lines : if the last Kaiser left a son not unfit,
who so likely sis the son ? But he needed to be fit, otherwise
it would not answer, — otherwise it might be worse for him !
There were great labours in the Empire too, as well as on
the Sclavic frontier of it : brave men fighting against anarchy
(actually set in pitched fight against it, and not always strong

CHAP. IIL] MARKGRAVES OF BRANDENBURG 73

1x30]

enough), — ^toiling sore, according to their faculty, to pull the
innumerable crooked things straight. Some agreed well with
the Pope, — as Henry ii., who founded Bamberg Bishopric,
and much else of the like ; ^ ^ a sore saint for the crown,’ as
was said of David i., his Scotch congener, by a descendant.
Others disagreed very much indeed ; — Henry rv.’s scene at
Canossa, with Pope Hildebrand and the pious Countess (year
1077, Kaiser of the Holy Roman Empire waiting, three days,
in the snow, to kiss the foot of excommunicative Hildebrand),
has impressed itself on all memories ! Poor Henry rallied
out of that abasement, and dealt a stroke or two on Hilde-
brand ; but fell still lower before long, his very Son going
against him ; and came almost to actual want of bread, had
not the Bishop of Liege been good to him. Nay, after death,
he lay four years waiting vainly even for burial, — but indeed
cared little about that.

Certainly this Son of his, Kaiser Henry v., does not shine
in filial piety : but probably the poor lad himself was hard
bestead. He also came to die, a.d. 1125, still little over
forty, and was the last of the Frankish Kaisers. He ^ left the
Reichs-Insignien'' (Crown, Sceptre, and Coronation gear) ‘to
his Widow and young Friedrich of Hohenstauffen,’ a sister’s
son of his, — hoping the said Friedrich might, partly by
that help, follow as Kaiser. Which Friedrich could not do ;
being wheedled, both the Widow and he, out of their insignia,
under false pretences, and otherwise left in the lurch. Not
Friedrich, but one Lothar, a stirring man who had grown
potent in the Saxon countries, was elected Kaiser. In the
end, after waiting till Lotheir was done, Friedrich’s race did
succeed, and with brilliancy, — Kaiser Barbarossa being that
same Friedrich’s son. In regard to which dim complicacies,
take this Excerpt from the imbroglio of Manuscripts, before
they go into the fire :

1 Kohler, pp. 102-4. See, for instance, Description de la Table d'Auiel en
or JiUj donn^e h la CathMrale de B&le^ par V Empereur Henri //. en 1019
(Porcntruy, 1838}.

74 OF BRANDENBURG [book il.

[1x43

^By no means to be forgotten that the Widow we here speak of,
Kaiser Henry v/s Widow, who brought no heir to Henry v., was our
English Henry Beauclerc's daughter, — grand-daughter therefore of
William Conqueror, — the same who, having (in 1127, the second year
of her widowhood) married Godefroi Count of Anjou, produced our
Henry ii. and our Plantagenets ; and thereby, through her victorious
Controversies with King Stephen (that noble peer whose breeches stood
him so cheap), became very celebrated as the Empress Maud,” in our
old History-Books. Mathildis, Dowager of Kaiser Henry v., to whom
he gave his Reichs-Insignia at dying : she is the Empress Maud ” of
English Books ; and relates herself in this manner to the Hohenstauffen
Dynasty, and intricate German vicissitudes. Be thankful for any hook
whatever on which to hang half an acre of thrums in fixed position, out
of your way ; the smallest flint-spark, in a world all black and unremem-
berable, will be welcome.* —

And 80 we return to Brandenburg and the ^ Ascanien and
Ballenstadt ’ series of Markgraves.

CHAPTER IV

AI.BERT THE BEAR

This Ascanien^ happily, has nothing to do with Brute of
Troy or the pious ^Eneas’s son ; it is simply the name of a
most ancient Castle (etymology unknown to me, ruins still
dimly traceable) on the north slope of the Hartz Mountains ;
short way from Aschersleben, — the Castle and Town of
Aschersleben are, so to speak, a second edition of Ascanien.
Ballenstadt is still older ; Ballenstadt was of age in Charle-
magne’s time ; and is still a respectable little Town in that
upland range of country. The kindred, called Grafs and
ultimately Herzogs (Dukes) of ‘ Ascanien and Ballenstadt,’
are very famous in old German History, especially down from
this date. Some reckon that they had intermittently been
Markgrafs, in their region, long before this ; which is con-
ceivable enough : at all events it is very plain they did now
attain the Office in Salzwedel (straightway shifting it to

76

CHAP. IV.] ALBERT THE BEAR

* 14*3

Bra/ndenburg) ; and held it continuously, it and much else
that lay adjacent, for centuries, in a highly conspicuous
manner.

In Brandenburg they lasted for about two-hundred years ;
in their Saxon dignities, the younger branch of them did not
die out (and give place to the Wettins that now are) for five-
hundred. Nay they have still their representatives on the
Earth : Leopold of Anhalt-Dessau, celebrated ‘ Old Dessauer,’
come of the junior branches, is lineal head of the kin in
Fidedrich Wilhelm’s time (while our little Fritzchen lies asleep
in his cradle at Berlin) ; and a certain Prince of Anhalt-
Zerbst, Colonel in the Prussian Army, authentic Prince, but
with purse much shorter than pedigree, will have a Daughter
by and by, who will go to Russia, and become almost too
conspicuous, as Catharine ii., there ! —

^Brandenburg now as afterwards,' says one of my old Papers, ^was
officially reckoned Sascon ; part of the big Duchy of Saxony ; where
certain famed Billungs, lineage of an old Count Billung " (connected
or not with Billings-gaXe in our country, I do not know) had long borne
sway. Of which big old Billungs I will say nothing at all ; — this only,
that they died out ; and a certain Albert, Count of Ascanien and
Ballenstadt " (say, of Anhalt, in modern terms), whose mother was one
of their daughters, came in for the northern part of their inheritance.
He made a clutch at the Southern too, but did not long retain that.
Being a man very swift and very sharp, at once nimble and strong, in the
huge scramble that there then was, — Uncle Billung dead without heirs, a
Salic line of emperors going or gone out, and a Hohenstauffen not yet
come in, — he made a rich game of it for himself ; the rather as Lothar,
the intermediate Kaiser, was his cousin, and there were other good cards
which he played well.

^This is he they call Albert the Bear {Albrecht der Bar)** ; first of
the Ascanien Markgraves of Brandenburg ; — first wholly definite Markgrof
qf Brandenburg that there is ; once a very shining figure in the world,
though now fallen dim enough again. It is evident he had a quick eye,
as well as a strong hand ; and could pick what way was straightest among
crooked things. He got the Northern part of what is still called Saxony,
and kept it in his family ; got the Brandenburg Countries withal, got the
Lausitz ; was the shining figure and great man of the North in his day.
The Markgrafdom of Salzwedel (which soon became of Brandenburg) he

76 OF BRANDENBURG [book il.

^ [« 4 »

very naturally acquired (a.d. 1142 or earlier) ; very naturally, con-
sidering what Saxon and other honours and possessions he had already
got hold of / —

We can only say, it was the luckiest of events for Brandenburg,
and the beginning of all the better destinies it has had. A
conspicuous Country ever since in the world, and which grows
ever more so in our late times.

He had many wars ; inextricable coil of claimings, quarrel-
lings and agreeings : fought much, — fought in Italy, too,
‘ against the Pagans’ (Saracens, that is). Cousin to one
Kaiser, the Lothar above named ; then a chief stay of the
Hohenstauffen, of the two HohenstaufFens who followed : a
restless, much-managing, wide-warring man. He stood true
by the great Barbarossa, second of the Hohenstauffen, greatest
of all the Kaisers ; which was a luck for him, and perhaps a
merit. He kept well with three Kaisers in his time. Had
great quarrels with ^ Henry the Lion’ about that ‘ Billung’
Saxon Heritage ; Henry carrying off the better part of it
from Albert. Except that same Henry, head of the Guelphs
or Welfs, who had not Albert’s talent, though wider lands
than Albert, there was no German prince so important in
that time.

He transferred the Markgrafdom to Brandenburgs probably
as more central in his wide lands ; Salzxvedel is henceforth the
led Markgrafdom or MarcTcj and soon falls out of notice in the
world. Salzwedel is called henceforth ever since the ‘ Old
Marck (AUe Marckj Altmarcky ; the Brandenburg countries
getting the name of ^ New Marck.’ Modem Neumarks modem
‘ Middle-Marck’ (in which stands Brandenburg itself in our
time), ^Ucker-lAavc\/ {Outside Marck, — word Ucker is still seen
in Ukraines for instance) : these are posterior Divisions, fallen-
upon as Brandenburg (under Albert chiefly) enlarged itself, and
needed new Official parcellings into departments.

Under Albert the Markgrafdom had risen to be an Elector-
ode withal. The Markgraf of Brandenburg was now further-

77

CHAP. IV.] ALBERT THE BEAR

ixsa]

more the Kurfursi of Brandenburg ; officially ^ Arch-treasurer
of the Holy Roman Empire'* ; and one of the Seven who have
a right (which became about this time an exclusive one for those
Seven) to choose, to Jcieren the Romish Kaiser ; and who are
therefore called Kur Princes, Kurfurste or Electors, as the
highest dignity except the Kaiser’s own. In reference to
which abstruse matter, likely to concern us somewhat, will the
uninstructed English reader consent to the following Excerpt,
slightly elucidatory of KurfursU and their function ?

' Fiirst (Prince) I suppose is equivalent originally to our noun of num-
ber, F%r%L The old verb kieren (participle erkoren still in use, not to
mention Val-A:^r’* and other instances) is essentially the same word as
our choose, being written kiesen as well as kieren* Nay, say the etymolo-
gists, it is also written kilssen (to kiss, — to choose with such emphasis !),
and is not likely to fall obsolete in that form. — ^The other Six Electoral
Dignitaries, who grew to Eight by degrees, and may bo worth noting
once by the readers of this Book, are :

' 1®. Three Ecclesiastical, Mainz, Coin, Trier (Mentz, Cologne, Treves),
Archbishops all, with sovereignty and territory more or less considerable ;
— who used to be elected as Popes are, theoretically by their respective
Chapters and the Heavenly Inspirations, but practically by the intrigues
and pressures of the neighbouring Potentates, especially France and
Austria.

^2*. Three Secular, Sachsen, Pfalz, Bohmen (Saxony, Palatinate, Bo-
hemia) ; of which the last, Bohmen, since it fell from being a Kingdom in
itself, to being a Province of Austria, is not very vocal in the Diets.
These Six, with Brandenburg, are the Seven Kurfiirsts in old time;
Septemvirs of the Country, so to speak.

‘ But now Pfalz, in the Thirty-Years War (under our Prince Rupert's
Father, whom the Germans call the ^^Winter-King"), got abrogated,
put to the ban, so far as an indignant Kaiser could ; and the vote and
Kur of Pfalz was given to his Cousin of Baiem (Bavaria), — so far as an
indignant Kaiser could. However, at the Peace of Westphalia (1648) it
was found incompetent to any Kaiser to abrogate Pfalz or the like of
Pfalz, a Kurfiirst of the Empire. So, after jargon inconceivable, it was
settled, That Pfalz must be reinstated, though with territories much
clipped, and at the bottom of the list, not the top as formerly ; and that
Baiem, who could not stand to be balked after twenty-years possession,
must be made Eighth Elector, The Ninth, we saw (Year 1692), was
Gentleman Ernst of Hanover* There never was any Tenth ; and the
Holy Bomisches Reich, which was a grand object once, but had gone about

78

OF BRANDENBURG [BOOK II.

(H70

in a superannuated and plainly crazy state for some centuries back, was
at last put out of pain, by Napoleon, 6th August 1806,** and allowed
to cease from this world.* ^

None of Albert’s wars are so comfortable to reflect on as
those he had with the anarchic Wends ; whom he now fairly
beat to powder, and either swept away, or else damped down
into Christianity and keeping of the peace. Swept them away
otherwise ; ‘ peopling their lands extensively with Colonists
from Holland, whom an inroad of the sea had rendered home-
less there.’ Which surely was a useful exchange. Nothing
better is known to me of Albert the Bear than this his intro-
ducing large numbers of Dutch Netherlanders into those
countries ; men thrown-out of work, who already knew how
to deal with bog and sand, by mixing and delving, and who
first taught Brandenburg what greenness and cow-pasture
was. The Wends, in presence of such things, could not but
consent more and more to efface themselves, — either to become
German, and grow milk and cheese in the Dutch manner, or
to disappear from the world.

The Welldish Princes had a taste for German wives ; in
which just taste the Albert genealogy was extremely willing to
indulge them. Affinities produce inheritances ; by proper mar-
riage-contracts you can settle on what side the most contingent
inheritance shall at length fall. Dim but pretty certain lies a
time coming when the Wendish Princes also shall have effaced
themselves; and all shall be German -Brandenburgish, not
Wendish any more. — The actual Inhabitants of Brandenburg,
therefore, are either come of Dutch Bog-farmers, or are simple
Lower Saxons Q Anglo-Saxon,’ if you like that better), Platt-
Teatsch of the common type ; an unexceptionable breed of
people. Streaks of Wendish population, extruded gradually
into the remoter quagmires, and more inaccessible, less valu-
able sedgy moors and sea-strands, are scattered about ; Meck-
lenburg, which still subsists separately after a sort, is reckoned
peculiarly Wendish. In Mecklenburg, Pommem, Pommerellcu

^ MS, pmes

79

CHAP. IV,] ALBERT THE BEAR
XI70]

(little Pomerania), are still to be seen physiognomies of a
Wendish or Vandalic type (more of cheek than there ought to
be, and less of brow ; otherwise good enough physiognomies of
their kind) : but the general mass, tempered with such admix-
tures, is of the Platt-Deutsch, Saxon or even Anglish character
we are familiar with here at home. A patient stout people ;
meaning considerable things, and very incapable of speaking
what it means.

Albert was a fine tall figure himself ; der Schone^ ^ Albert
the Handsome,’ was his name as often as ^ Albert the Bear.’
That latter epithet he got, not from his looks or qualities, but
merely from his heraldic cognisance : a Bear on his shield. As
was then the mode of names ; surnames being scant, and not
yet fixedly in existence. Thus too his contemporaries, Henry
the Lion of Saxony and Welfdom, William the Lion of Scotland,
were not, either of them, specially leonine men : nor had the
Plantagenets^ or Geoffrey of Anjou, any connexion with the
Plant of Broom^ except wearing a twig of it in their caps on
occasion. Men are glad to get some designation for a grand
Albert they are often speaking of, which shall distinguish him
from the many small ones. Albert ‘ the Bear, der Bdr^ will
do as well as another.

It was this one first that made Brandenburg peaceable and
notable. We might call him the second founder of Branden-
burg ; he, in the middle of the Twelfth Century, completed for
it what Henry the Fowler had begun early in the Tenth. After
two-hundred and fifty years of barking and worrying, the Wends
are now finally reduced to silence ; their anarchy well buried,
and wholesome Dutch cabbage planted over it : Albert did
several great things in the world ; but this, for posterity, re-
mains his memorable feat. Not done quite easily ; but done :
big destinies of Nations or of Persons are not founded gratis
in this world. He had a sore toilsome time of it, coercing,
warring, managing among his fellow-creatures, while his days-
work lasted, — fifty years or so, for it began early. He died
in his Castle of BallenstMt, peaceably among the Hartz

80 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [BOOK II.

C1X70

Mountains at last, in the year 1170, age about sixty-five. It
was in the time while Thomas k Becket was roving about the
world, coming home excommunicative, and finally getting
killed in Canterbury Cathedral ; — while Abbot Samson, still a
poor little brown Boy, came over from Norfolk, holding by his
mother’s hand, to St. Edmundsbury ; having seen ‘ Satanas
with outspread wings’ fearfully busy in this world.

CHAPTER V

CONRAD OF HOHENZOLLERN ; AND KAISER
BARBAROSSA

It was in those same years that a stout young fellow, Conrad
by name, far off in the southern parts of Germany, set out
from the old Castle of Hohenzollern, where he was but junior,
and had small outlooks, upon a very great errand in the world.
From Hohenzollern ; bound now towards Gelnhausen, Kaisers-
lautern, or whatever temporary lodging the great Kaiser Bar-
barossa might be known to have, who was a wandering man,
his business lying everywhere over half the world, and needing
the master’s eye. Conrad’s purpose is to find Barbarossa, and
seek fortune under him.

This is a very indisputable event of those same years. The
exact date, the figure, circumstances of it were, most likely,
never written anywhere but on Conrad’s own brain, and are
now rubbed out forevermore ; but the event itself is certain ;
and of the highest concernment to this Narrative. Somewhere
about the year 1170, likeliest a few years before that,^ this
Conrad, riding down from Hohenzollern, probably with no

^ Rentsch, Brandenburgischer Ceder-Hein (Baireuth, 1682), pp. 2 Ty 6 . — Sec
also Johann Ulrich Pregitzern, Teutscher Regierungs- und Ehren- Spiegel^ vor*
bildend etc. des I/auses Hohenzollern (Berlin, 1703), pp. 90-3. A learned and
painful Book : by a Tubingen Professor, who is deeply read in the old Histories,
and gives Portraits and other Engravings of some value.

81

CHAP. V.] CONRAD OF HOHENZOLLERN

X1701

great stock of luggage about him, — ^little dreams of being
connected with Brandenburg on the other side of the world ;
but is unconsciously more so than any other of the then sons
of Adam. He is the lineal ancestor, twentieth in direct
ascent, of the little Boy now sleeping in his cradle at Berlin ;
let him wait till nineteen generations, valiantly like Conrad,
have done their part, and gone out, Conrad will find he is
come to this ! A man’s destiny is strange always ; and never
wants for miracles, or will want, though it sometimes may for
eyes to discern them.

Hohenzollem lies far south in Schwahen (Suabia), on the
sunward slope of the Rauhe-Alp Country ; no great way
north from Constance and its Lake ; but well aloft, near the
springs of the Danube ; its back leaning on the Black Forest ;
it is perhaps definable as the southern summit of that same
huge old Hercynian Wood, which is still called the Schwarz-
wald (Black Forest), though now comparatively bare of trees.^
Fanciful Dryasdust, doing a little etymology, will tell you the
name Zollern is equivalent to Tollery or Place of Tolls.
Whereby Hohenzollem comes to mean the High or Upper
Tollery ; — and gives one the notion of antique pedlars climb-
ing painfully, out of Italy and the Swiss valleys, thus far;
unstrapping their pack-horses here, and chaffering in unknown
dialect about toll. Poor souls ; — it may be so, but we do not
know, nor shall it concern us. This only is known : That a
human kindred, probably of some talent for coercing anarchy
and guiding mankind, had, centuries ago, built its Burg
there, and done that function in a small but creditable way
ever since ; — kindred possibly enough derivable from ^ Thas-
silo,’ Charlemagne, King Dagobert, and other Kings, but
certainly from Adam and the Almighty Maker, who had given

^ ‘There are still considerable spottings of wood {pine mainly, and “black”
enough); Holz-handel (timber-trade) still a considerable branch of business
there ; — and on the streams of the country are cunning contrivances noticeable,
for floating down the article into the Neckar river, and thence into the Rhine
and to Holland.’ {Tourisfs Note).

VOL. I.

F

82 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book 11.

txxTO

it those qualities ; — and that Conrad, a junior member of the
same, now goes forth from it in the way we see. ‘Why
should a young fellow that has capabilities,’ thought Conrad,
‘stay at home in hungry idleness, with no estate but his
javelin and buff jerkin, and no employment but his hawks,
when there is a wide opulent world waiting only to be con-
quered ? ’ This was Conrad’s thought ; and it proved to be
a very just one.

It was now the flower-time of the Romish Kaisership of
Germany ; about the middle or noon of Barbarossa himself,
second of the Hohenstauffens, and greatest of all the Kaisers
of that or any other house. Kaiser fallen unintelligible to
most modem readers, and wholly unknown, which is a pity.
No Bung so fumished-out with apparatus and arena, with
personal faculty to rule and scene to do it in, has appeared
elsewhere. A magnificent magnanimous man ; holding the
reins of the world, not quite in the imaginary sense ;
scourging anarchy down, and urging noble effort up, really on
a grand scale. A terror to evildoers and a praise to well-
doers in this world, probably beyond what was ever seen since.
Whom also we salute across the centuries, as a choice Bene-
ficence of Heaven. ‘ Encamped on the Plain of Roncaglia ’
(when he entered Italy, as he too often had occasion to do),
‘ his shield was hung out on a high mast over his tent ’ ; and
it meant in those old days, ‘ Ho, every one that has suffered
wrong ; here is a Kaiser come to judge you, as he shall answer
it to his Master.’ And men gathered round him ; and
actually found some justice, — if they could discern it when
found. Which they could not always do ; neither was the
justice capable of being perfect always. A fearfully difficult
function, that of Friedrich Redbeard. But an inexorably in-
dispensable one in this world ; — ^though sometimes dispensed
with (to the huge joy of Anarchy, which sings Hallelujah
through all its Newspapers) for a season !

Kaiser Friedrich had immense difficulties with his Popes,
with his Milanese, and the like ; — besieged Milan six times

CHAP.v.] CONRAD OF HOHENZOLLERN 88

XX70]

over, among other anarchies ; — ^had indeed a heavy-laden hard
time of it, his task being great and the greatest. He made
Gebhardus, the anarchic Governor of Milan, Mie chained
under his table, like a dog, for three days.’ For the man
was in earnest, in that earnest time : — and let us say, they
are but paltry sham-men who are not so, in any time;
paltry, and far worse than paltry, however high their plumes
may be. Of whom the sick world (Anarchy, both vocal and
silent, having now swoln rather high) is everywhere getting
weary. — Gebhardus, the anarchic Governor, lay three days
under the Kaiser’s table ; as it would be well if every anarchic
Governor, of the soft type and of the hard, were made to do
on occasion ; asking himself, in terrible earnest, ^ Am I a dog,
then ; alas, am not I a dog ? ’ Those were serious old times.

On the other hand, Kaiser Friedrich had his Tourneys,
his gleams of bright joyances now and then ; one great
gathering of all the chivalries at Mainz, which lasted for three
weeks long, the grandest Tourney ever seen in this world.
Gelnhausen, in the Wetterau (ruin still worth seeing, on its
Island in the Kinzig river), is understood to have been one of
his Houses ; Kaiserslautern (Kaiser’s Limpid^ from its clear
spring- water) in the Pfalz (what we call Palatinate)^ another.
He went on the Crusade in his seventieth year ; ^ thinking to
himself, ‘ Let us end with one clear act of piety ’ : — ^he cut
his way through the dangerous Greek attomeyisms, through
the hungry mountain passes, furious Turk fanaticisms, like a
gray old hero : ‘ Woe is me, my son has perished, then ? ’ said
he once, tears wetting the beard now white enough ; ‘ My son
is slain ! — But Christ still lives ; let us on, my men ! ’ And
gained great victories, and even found his son ; but never
returned home ; — died, some unknown sudden death, ‘ in the
river Cydnus,’ say the most.^ Nay German Tradition thinks

* A.D. 1189 j Saladin having, to the universal sorrow, taken Jerusalem.

* Kohler (p. i88), and the Authorities cited by him. Biinau’s Deutsche
Kaiser- und Reichs- Historic (Leipzig, 1728'’43), i., is the express Book on Bar-
barossa : an elaborate, instructive Volume.

84

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book ll.

[1x70

he is not yet dead; but only sleeping, till the bad world
reach its worst, when he will reappear. He sits within the
Hill near Salzburg yonder, — says German Tradition, its fancy
kindled by the strange noises in that Hill (limestone Hill)
from hidden waters, and by the grand rocky look of the
place ; — A peasant once, stumbling into the interior, saw the
Kaiser in his stone cavern ; Kaiser sat at a marble table, lean-
ing on his elbow ; winking, only half asleep ; beard had grown
through the table, and streamed out on the floor ; he looked
at the peasant one moment ; asked him something about the
time it was ; then drooped his eyelids again : Not yet time,
but will be soon ! ^ He is winking as if to awake. To
awake, and set his shield aloft by the Roncalic Fields again,
with : Ho, every one that is suffering wrong ; — or that has
strayed guideless, devil-ward, and done wrong, which is far
fataler !

Conrad has become Burggrqf of Number g (a.d. 1170)

This was the Kaiser to whom Conrad addressed himself ;
and he did it with success ; which may be taken as a kind of
testimonial to the worth of the young man. Details we have
absolutely none : but there is no doubt that Conrad recom-
mended himself to Kaiser Redbeard, nor any that the Kaiser
was a judge of men. Very earnest to discern men’s worth
and capabilities ; having unspeakable need of worth, in-
stead of unworth, in those under him ! We may conclude
he had found capabilities in Conrad ; found that the young
fellow did effective services as the occasion rose, and knew
how to work, in a swift, resolute, judicious and exact manner.
Promotion was not likely on other terms ; still less, high
promotion.

One thing farther is known, significant for his successes :
Conrad found favour with ‘the Heiress of the Vohburg

^ Kiesebeck’s Travels (English Translation, London, 1787), i. 1 40. Bttsching,
Velks-SageHi etc. (Leipzig, 1820), i, 333; etc. etc.

86

CHAP. V.] KAISER BARBAROSSA

1170]

Family,’ desirable young heiress, and got her to wife. The
Vohburg Family, now much forgotten everywhere, and never
heard of in England before, had long been of supreme import-
ance, of immense possessions, and opulent in territories, and
we need not add, in honours and offices, in those Franconian
Nurnberg regions; and was now gone to this one girl. I
know not that she had much inheritance after all ; the vast
Vohburg properties lapsing all to the Kaiser, when the male
heirs were out. But she had pretensions, tacit claims; in
particular, the Vohburgs had long been habitual or in effect
hereditary Burggrafs of Niimberg ; and if Conrad had the
talent for that office, he now, in preference to others, might
have a chance for it. Sure enough, he got it ; took root in
it, he and his ; and, in the course of centuries, branched up
from it, high and wide, over the adjoining countries ; waxing
towards still higher destinies. That is the epitome of Con-
rad’s history; history now become very great, but then no
bigger than its neighbours, and very meagerly recorded ; of
which the reflective reader is to make what he can.

There is nothing clearly known of Conrad more than these
three facts : That he was a cadet of Hohenzollem (whose
father’s name, and some forefathers’ names are definitely
known in the family archives, but do not concern us); that
he married the Heiress of the Vohburgs, whose history is on
record in like manner ; and that he was appointed Burggraf
of Niimberg, year not precisely known, — but before 1170, as
would seem. ‘ In a Reichstag (Diet of the Empire) held at
Regensburg in or about 1170,’ he formally complains, he and
certain others, all stanch Kaiser’s-friends (for in fact it was
with the Kaiser’s knowledge, or at his instigation), of Henry
the Lion’s high procedures and malpractices; of Henry’s
League with the Pope, League with the King of Denmark,
and so forth; the said Henry having indeed fallen into
opposition, to a dangerous degree ; — and signs himself Burg-
graf of Nurnherg ^%^'^ old Chronicles.^ The old Document

* Rcntsch, p. 276 (who cites Aveniinus Trittheinti etc.).

86 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [BOOKII.

[X170

itself has long since perished, I conclude : but the Chronicles
may be accepted as reporters of so conspicuous a thing; which
was the beginning of long strife in Germany, and proved the
ruin of Henry the Lion, supreme Welf grown over-big, — ^and
cost our English Henry u., whose daughter he had married, a
world of trouble and expense, we may remark withal. Conrad
therefore is already Burggraf of Niimberg, and a man of mark,
in 1170 : and his marriage, still more his first sally from the
paternal Castle to seek his fortune, must all be dated earlier.

More is not known of Conrad : except indeed that he did
not perish in Barbarossa’s grand final Crusade. For the
antiquaries have again found him signed to some contract, or
otherwise insignificant document, a.d. 1200. Which is proof
positive that he did not die in the Crusade; and proof probable
that he was not of it, — few, hardly any, of those stalwart
160,000 champions of the Cross having ever got home again.
Conrad, by this time, might have sons come to age ; fitter
for arms and fatigues than he : and indeed at Niimberg, in
Deutschland generally, as Official Prince of the Empire, and
man of weight and judgment, Conrad’s services might be still
more useful, and the Kaiser’s interests might require him
rather to stay at home in that juncture. Burggraf of Niirn-
berg he continued to be ; he and his descendants, first in a
selective, then at length in a directly hereditary way, century
after century ; and so long as that office lasted in Niimberg
(which it did there much longer than in other Imperial Free-
Cities), a Comes de Zolre of Conrad’s producing was always
the man thenceforth.

Their acts, in that station and capacity, as Burggraves
and Princes of the Empire, were once conspicuous enough in
Grerman History ; and indeed are only so dim now, because
the History itself is, and was always, dim to us on this side
of the sea. They did strenuous work in their day; and
occasionally towered up (though little driven by the poor wish
of ‘ towering ’ or ‘ shining ’ without need) into the high places
of Public History. They rest now from their labours, Conrad

87

CHAP. V.] KAISER BARBAROSSA

1x70]

and his successors, in long series, in the old Monastery of
Heilsbronn (between Niimberg and Anspach), with Tombs to
many of them, which were very legible for slight Biographic
purposes in my poor friend Rentsch’s time, a hundred and
fifty years ago ; and may perhaps still have some quasi-use,
as ‘ sepulchral brasses,’ to another class of persons. One or
two of those old buried Figures, more peculiarly important
for our little Friend now sleeping in his cradle yonder, we
must endeavour, as the Narrative proceeds, to resuscitate a
little, and render visible for moments.

Of the Hohenzollem Burggraves generally

As to the Office, it was more important than perhaps the
reader imagines. We already saw Conrad first Burggraf,
among the magnates of the country, denouncing Henry the
Lion. Every Burggraf of Niimberg is, in virtue of his office,
* Prince of the Empire ’ : if a man happened to have talent of
his own, and solid resources of his own (which are always on
the growing hand with this family), here is a basis from which
he may go far enough. Burggraf of Niimberg : that means
again Graf (judge, defender, manager, f reeve) of the Kaiser’s
Burg or Castle, — in a word Kaiser’s Representative and Alter
Ego ^ — in the old Imperial Free-town of Niimberg ; with
much adjacent very complex territory, also, to administer for
the Kaiser. A flourishing extensive City, this old Niimberg,
with valuable adjacent territory, civic and imperial, intricately
intermixed; full of commercial industries, opulences, not with-
out democratic tendencies. Nay it is almost, in some senses,
the London and Middlesex of the Germany that then was, if
we will consider it !

This is a place to give a man chances, and try what stuff
is in him. The office involves a talent for governing, as well
as for judging ; talent for fighting also, in cases of extremity,
and what is still better, a talent for avoiding to fight. None
but a man of competent superior parts can do that function ;

88

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [bookh.

fKT*

I suppose, no imbecile could have existed many months in
it, in the old earnest times. Conrad and his succeeding
Hohenzollems proved very capable to do it, as would seem ;
dnd grew and spread in it, waxing bigger and bigger, from
their first planting there by Kaiser Barbarossa, a successful
judge of men. And ever since that time, from ‘ about the
year 1170,’ down to the year 1815, — when so much was
changed, owing to another (temporary) ‘ Kaiser ’ of new type,
Napoleon his name, — the Hohenzollems have had a footing
in Frankenland; and done sovereignty in and round Niim-
berg, with an enlarging Territory in that region. Territory
at last of large compass; which, under the names Margrqfdom
of Anspach^ and of Baireuth^ or in general Margrafdom of
Cuhnhachy which includes both, has become familiar in
History.*

For the House went on steadily increasing, as it were, from
the first day ; the Hohenzollems being always of a growing,
gaining nature ; — ^as men are that live conformably to the
laws of this Universe, and of their place therein ; which, as
will appear from good study of their old records, through idle
rumour, grounded on no study, sometimes says the contrary,
these Hohenzollems eminently were. A thrifty, steadfast,
diligent, clear-sighted, stout-hearted line of men; of loyal
nature withal, and even to be called just and pious, some-
times to a notable degree. Men not given to fighting, where
it could be avoided ; yet with a good swift stroke in them,
where it could not : princely people after their sort, with a
high, not an ostentatious turn of mind. They, for most part,
go upon solid pmdence ; if possible, are anxious to reach the
goal without treading on any one ; are peaceable, as I often
say, and by no means quarrelsome, in aspect and demeanour ;
yet there is generally in the Hohenzollems a very fierce flash
of anger, capable of blazing out in cases of urgency : this
latter also is one of the most constant features I have noted
• See Map at p. 252.

89

CHAP. V.] KAISER BARBAROSSA

1x701

in the long series of them. That they grew in Frankenland,
year after year, and century after century, while it was their
fortune to last, alive and active there, is no miracle, on such
terms.

Their old big Castle of Plassenburg (now a Penitentiary,
with treadmill and the other furnishings) still stands on its
Height, near Culmbach, looking down over the pleasant meet-
ing of the Red and White Mayn Rivers and of their fruitful
valleys ; awakening many thoughts in the traveller. Anspach
Schloss, and still more Baireuth Schloss (Mansion, one day, of
our little Wilhelmina of Berlin, Fritzkin’s sister, now prattling
there in so old a way ; where notabilities have been, one and
another ; which Jean Paul, too, saw daily in his walks, while
alive and looking skyward) : these, and many other castles
and things, belonging now wholly to Bavaria, will continue
memorable for Hohenzollern history.

The Family did its due share, sometimes an excessive one,
in religious beneficences and foundations ; which was not
quite left-off in recent times, though much altering its figure.
Erlangen University, for example, was of Wilhelmina’s doing.
Erlangen University ; — and also an Opera-House of excessive
size in Baireuth. Such was poor Wilhelmina’s sad figure of
‘religion.’ In the old days, their largest bequest that I
recollect was to the Teutsche Ritter^ Order of Teutonic
Knights, very celebrated in those days. Junior branches
from Hohenzollern, as from other families, sought a career
in that chivalrous devout Brotherhood now and then ; one
pious Burggraf had three sons at once in it ; he, a very
bequeathing Herr otherwise, settled one of his mansions,
Vimsperg, with rents and incomings, on the Order. Which
accordingly had thenceforth a Comihurei (Commandery) in that
country ; Comthurei of Vimsperg the name of it : the date of
donation is a.d. 1294 ; and two of the old Herr’s three Ritter
sons, we can remark, were successively Comthurs (Commanders,
steward-prefects) of Vimsperg, the first two it had.^

^ Rentsch, p. 288.

90

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [BOOKIL

[xigo

This was in 1294 ; the palmy period, or culmination time
of the Teutsches Ritterthum, Concerning which, on wider
accounts, we must now say a word.

CHAPTER VI

THE TEUTSCH RITTERS OR TEUTONIC ORDER

Barbarossa’s Army of Crusaders did not come home again,
any more than Barbarossa. They were stronger than Turk or
Saracen, but not than Hunger and Disease ; Leaders did not
know then, as our little Friend at Berlin came to know, that
‘an Army, like a serpent, goes upon its belly!" After fine
fighting and considerable victories, the end of this Crusade
was, it took to ‘ besieging Acre,’ and in reality lay perishing
as of murrain on the beach at Acre, without shelter, with-
out medicine, without food. Not even Richard Coeur-de-
Lion, and his best prowess and help, could avert such issue
from it.

Richard’s Cmsade fell-in with the fag-end of Barbarossa’s ;
and it was Richard chiefly that managed to take Acre ; — at
least so Richard flattered himself, when he pulled poor Leopold
of Austria’s standard from the towers, and trailed it through
the gutters : ‘ Your standard ? You have taken Acre ? ’
Which turned out ill for Richard afterwards. And Duke
Leopold has a bad name among us in consequence; much
worse than he deserves. Leopold had stuff in him too. He
died, for example, in this manner : falling with his horse, I
think in some siege or other, he had got his leg hurt ; which
hindered him in fighting. Leg could not be cured : ‘ Cut it
off, then ! ’ said Leopold. This also the leech could not do ;
durst not, and would not ; so that Leopold was come quite to
a halt. Leopold ordered out two squires ; put his thigh upon
a block, the sharp edge of an axe at the right point across his
thigh : ‘ Squire first, hold you that axe ; steady ! Squire

91

CHAP. VI.] THE TEUTONIC ORDER

1190]

second, smite you on it with forge-hammer, with all your
strength, heavy enough ’ ! Squire second struck, heavy enough,
and the leg flew off ; but Leopold took inflammation, died in
a day or two, as the leech had predicted. That is a fact to
be found in current authors (quite exact or not quite), that
surgical operation such a man cannot have his flag trailed
through the gutters by any Coeur-de-Lion. — But we return to
the beach at Acre, and the poor Crusaders, dying as of murrain
there. It is the year 1190, Acre not yet taken, nor these
quarrels got to a height.

‘The very Templars, Hospitallers, neglect us,’ murmured
the dying Germans; ‘they have perhaps enough to do, and
more than enough, with their own countrymen, whose speech
is intelligible to them ? For us, it would appear, there is no
help ! ’ Not altogether none. A company of pious souls, —
compassionate Llibeck ship-captains diligently forwarding it,
and one Walpot von Bassenheim, a citizen of Bremen, taking
the lead, — ^formed themselves into a union for succour of the
sick and dying ; ‘ set up canvas tents,’ medicinal assuagements,
from the Liibeck ship-stores ; and did what utmost was in
them, silently in the name of Mercy and Heaven. ‘This
Walpot was not by birth a nobleman,’ says one of the old
Chroniclers, ‘ but his deeds were noble.’ This pious little union
proved unconsciously the beginning of a great thing. Finding
its work prosper here, and gain favour, the little union took
vows on itself, strict chivalry forms, and decided to become
permanent. ‘ Knights Hospitallers of our dear Lady of Mount
Zion,’ that or something equivalent was their first title, under
Walpot their first Grand-Master; which soon grew to be
‘German Order of St. Mary’ (Teutsclie Ritter of the Marie-
Orden)y or for shortness Teutsches Ritterthum ; under which
name it played a great part in the world for above three
centuries to come, and eclipsed in importance both the Templars
and Hospitallers of St. John.

This was the era of Chivalry Orders, and Geliibde ; time for
^ Mentzel, Gesckichte der Deutschm (Stuttgard and Tiibingen, 1837), p. 309.

92

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [bookii.

[zaxo-39

Bodies of Men uniting themselves by a Sacred Vow, ‘ Gelubde ’ ;
— which word and thing have passed over to us in a singularly
dwindled condition : ‘ Club ’ we now call it ; and the vow, if
sacred, does not aim very high ! Templars and Hospitallers
were already famous bodies ; the latter now almost a century
old. Walpot’s new Gelubde was of similar intent, only German
in kind, — ^the protection, defence and solacement of Pilgrims,
with whatever that might involve.

Head qf Teutsch Order moves to Venice

The Teutsch Ritters earned character in Palestine, and
began to get bequests and recognition ; but did not long con-
tinue there, like their two rival Orders. It was not in
Palestine, whether the Orders might be aware of it or not,
that their work could now lie. Pious Pilgrims certainly there
still are in great numbers ; to these you shall do the sacred
rites : but these, under a Saladin bound by his word, need
little protection by the sword. And as for Crusading in the
armed fashion, that has fallen visibly into the decline. After
Barbarossa, Coeur-de-Lion and Philippe Auguste have tried it
with such failure, what wise man will be in haste to try it
again ? Zealous Popes continue to stir-up Crusades ; but the
Secular Powers are not in earnest as formerly ; Secular Powers,
when they do go, ^ take Constantinople,’ ‘ conquer Sicily,’ never
take or conquer anything in Palestine. The Teutsch Order
helps valiantly in Palestine, or would help ; but what is the
use of helping ? The Teutsch Order has already possessions
in Europe, by pious bequest and otherwise; all its main
interests lie there ; in fine, after less than thirty years, Her-
mann von der Salza, a new sagacious TeutscJimeister or
Hochmeister (so they call the head of the Order), fourth in the
series, a far-seeing, negotiating man, finds that Venice will be
a fitter place of lodging for him than Acre : and accordingly
during his long Mastership (a.d. 1210-39), he is mostly to be
found there, and not at Acre or Jerusalem

98

CHAP. VI.] THE TEUTONIC ORDER

1236 ]

He is very great with the busy Kaiser, Friedrich ii., Bar-
barossa^s grandson ; who has the usual quarrels with the Pope,
and is glad of such a negotiator, statesman as well as armed
monk. The usual quarrels this great Kaiser had, all along,
and some unusual. Normans ousted from Sicily, who used to
be so Papal ; a Kaiser not gone on the Crusade, as he had
vowed ; Kaiser at last suspected of freethinking even : — in
which matters Hermann much serves the Kaiser. Sometimes
he is appointed arbiter between the Pope and Kaiser ; — does
not give it in the Kaiser’s favour, but against him, where he
thinks the Kaiser is wrong. He is reckoned the first great
Hochmeister, this Hermann von der Salza, a Thiiringer by
birth, who is fourth in the series of Masters : perhaps the
greatest to be found there at all, though many were con-
siderable. It is evident that no man of his time was busier
in important public affairs, or with better acceptance, than
Hermann. His Order, both Pope and Emperor so favouring
the Master of it, was in a vigorous state of growth all this
while ; Hermann well proving that he could help it better at
Venice than at Acre.

But if the Crusades are ended, — as indeed it turned out,
only one other worth speaking of, St. Louis’s, having in earnest
come to eflect, or rather to miserable non-effect, and that not
yet for fifty years ; — if the Crusades are ended, and the Teutsch
Order increases always in possessions, and finds less and less
work, what probably will become of the Teutsch Order ? Grow
fat, become luxurious, incredulous, dissolute, insolent; and
need to be burnt out of the way ? That was the course of the
Templars, and their sad end. They began poorest of the poor,
‘ two Knights to one Horse,’ as their Seal bore ; and they at
last took Jire on very opposite accounts. ‘ To carouse like a
Templar ’ : that had become a proverb among men ; that was
the way to produce combustion, ‘ spontaneous ’ or other !
Whereas their fellow Hospitallers of St. John, chancing upon
new work (Anti-Turk garrison-duty, so we may call it,
successively in Cyprus, Rhodes, Malta, for a series of ages).

9« THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book il.

[I33(>

and doing it well, managed to escape the like. As did the
Teutsch Order in a still more conspicuous manner.

Teutsch Order itself goes to Premsen

Ever since St. Adalbert fell massacred in Prussia, stamping
himself as a Crucifix on that Heathen soil, there have been
attempts at conversion going on by the Christian neighbours,
Dukes of Poland and others : intermittent fits of fighting
and preaching for the last two hundred years, with extremely
small result. Body of St. Adalbert was got at light weight,
and the poor man canonised ; there is even a Titular Bishop
of Prussia ; and pilgrimages wander to the shrine of Adalbert
in Poland, reminding you of Prussia in a tragic manner ; but
what avails it ? Missionaries, when they set foot in the country,
are killed or flung out again. The Bishop of Prussia is titular
merely ; lives in Liefland {Livonia) properly Bishop of Riga^
among the Bremen trading-settlers and converted Lieflanders
there, which is the only safe place, — if even that were safe
without aid of armed men, such as he has there even now. He
keeps his Schwerthriider (Brothers of the Sword), a small Order
of Knights, recently got-up by him, for express behoof of
Liefland itself ; and these, fighting their best, are sometimes
troublesome to the Bishop, and do not much prosper upon
Heathendom, or gain popularity and resources in the Christian
world. No hope in the Schwerthriider for Prussia ; — and in
massacred Missionaries what hope ? The Prussian population
continues Heathen, untamable to Gospel and Law ; and after
two centuries of effort, little or no real progress has been
made.

But now, in these circumstances, in the year 1^26, the
Titular Bishop of Prussia, having well considered the matter
and arranged it with the Polish Authorities, opens a com-
munication with Hermann von der Salza, at Venice, on the
subject ; ‘ Cnisading is over in the East, illustrious Hoch-
meister ; no duty for a Teutsch Order there at present : what

95

CHAP. VI.] THE TEUTONIC ORDEK

1328]

is the use of crusading far off in the East, when Heathenism
and the Kingdom of Satan hangs on our own borders, close
at hand, in the North? Let the Teutsch Order come to
Preussen ; head a Crusade there. The land is fruitful ; flows
really with milk and honey, not to speak of amber, and was
once called the Terrestrial Paradise’' — by I forget whom.^
In fact, it is clear, the land should belong to Christ ; and
if the Christian Teutsch Ritterdom could conquer it from
Satanas for themselves, it would be well for all parties. Her-
mann, a man of sagacious clear head, listens attentively. The
notion is perhaps not quite new to him : at all events, he
takes up the notion ; negotiates upon it, with Titular Bishop,
with Pope, Kaiser, Duke of Poland, Teutsch Order ; and in
brief, about two years afterwards (a.d. 1SS8), having done
the negotiatings to the last item, he produces his actual
Teutsch Ritters, ready, on Prussian ground.

Year 1228, thinks Dryasdust, after a struggle. Place
where, proves also at length discoverable in Dryasdust, — not
too far across the north Polish frontier, always with ‘ Masovia **
(the now Warsaw region) to fall back upon. But in what
number ; how ; nay almost when, to a year, — do not ask poor
Dryasdust, who overwhelms himself with idle details, and by
reason of the trees is unable to see the wood.^ — The Teutsch
Ritters straightway build a Burg for headquarters, spread
themselves on this hand and that ; and begin their great task.
In the name of Heaven, we may still say in a true sense ; as
they, every Ritter of them to the heart, felt it to be in all
manner of senses.

The Prussians were a fierce fighting people, fanatically
Anti-Christian ; the Teutsch Ritters had a perilous never-
resting time of it, especially for the first fifty years. They
built and burnt innumerable stockades for and against; built
wooden Forts which are now stone Towns. They fought
much and prevalently ; galloped desperately to and fro, ever
on the alert. In peaceabler ulterior times they fenced-in the
' Voigt (if he had an Index I) knowi* * Ibid, iL 177, 184, 192.

96

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [BOOK II.

[zaa8

Nogat and the Weichsel with dams, whereby unlimited quag-
mire might become grassy meadow, — as it continues to this
day. Marienburg {Mary's Burg), still a town of importance
in that same grassy region, with its grand stone Schloss still
visible and even habitable ; this was at length their Head-
quarter. But how many Burgs of wood and stone they built,
in different parts ; what revolts, surprisals, furious fights in
woody boggy places, they had, no man has counted. Their
life, read in Dryasdust’s newest chaotic Books (which are of
endless length, among other ill qualities), is like a dim night-
mare of unintelligible marching and fighting : one feels as if
the mere amount of galloping they had would have carried
the Order several times round the Globe. What multiple of
the Equator was it, then, O Dryasdust ? The Herr Professor,
little studious of abridgment, does not say.

But always some preaching, by zealous monks, accompanied
the chivalrous fighting. And colonists came in from Ger-
many ; trickling in, or at times streaming. Victorious Ritter-
dom offers terms to the beaten Heathen ; terms not of tolerant
nature, but which will be punctually kept by Ritterdom.
When the flame of revolt or general conspiracy bumt-up
again too extensively, there was a new Crusade proclaimed in
Germany and Christendom ; and the Hochmeister, at Mar-
burg or elsewhere, with all his marshals and ministers were
busy, — ^generally with effect. High personages came on
crusade to them. Ottocar King of Bohemia, Duke of
Austria and much else, the great man of his day, came once
(a.d. 1255); Johann King of Bohemia, in the next century,
once and again. The mighty Ottocar,^ with his extensive far-
shining chivalry, ‘ conquered Samland in a month ’ : tore-up
the Romova where Adalbert had been massacred, and burnt
it from the face of the Earth. A certain Fortress was
founded at that time, in Ottocar’s presence ; and in honour
of him they named it King's Fortress^ ‘ Konigsberg ’ : it is
now grown a big-domed metropolitan City, — where we of
^ Voigt, iii. 80-87.

97

CHAP. VI.] THE TEUTONIC ORDER

iaa8]

this Narrative lately saw a Coronation going on, and Sophie
Charlotte furtively taking a pinch of snuff* Among King
Ottocar’s esquires or subaltern junior officials on this occasion,
is one Rudolfs heir of a poor Swiss Lordship and gray Hill-
Castle, called Hapsburg^ rather in reduced circumstances,
whom Ottocar likes for his prudent hardy ways ; a stout,
modest, wise young man, — who may chance to redeem Haps-
burg a little, if he live ? How the shuttles fly, and the life-
threads, always, in this ‘ loud-roaring Loom of Time ’ ! —

Along with Ottocar too, as an ally in the Crusade, was
Otto III. Ascanier Markgraf and Elector of Brandenburg,
great-grandson of Albert the Bear ; — named Otto the Pious
in consequence. He too founded a Town in Prussia, on this
occasion, and called it Brandenburg \ which is still extant
there, a small Brandenburg the Second ; for these procedures
he is called Otto the Pious in History. His Wife, withal,
was a sister of Ottocar’s ; 1 — ^which, except in the way of
domestic felicity, did not in the end amount to much for
him ; this Ottocar having flown too high, and melted his
wings at the sun, in a sad way, as we shall see elsewhere.

None of the Orders rose so high as the Teutonic in favour
with mankind. It had by degrees landed possessions far and
wide over Germany and beyond : I know not how many
dozens of Baileys (rich Bailliwicks, each again with its dozens
of Comthureis^ Commanderies, or subordinate groups of estates),
and Baillies and Commanders to match ; — and was thought
to deserve favour from above. Valiant servants, these ; to
whom Heaven had vouchsafed great labours and unspeakable
blessings. In some fifty or fifty-three years they had got
Prussian Heathenism brought to the ground; and they en-
deavoured to tie it well down there by bargain and arrange-
ment. But it would not yet lie quiet, nor for a century
to come ; being still secretly Heathen ; revolting, conspiring
ever again, ever on weaker terms, till the Satanic element
^ Michaelis, i. 270 ; HUbner, t. 174.

VOL. I.

Q

98

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [bookil

[M3*

had burnt itself out, and conversion and composure could
ensue.

Conversion and complete conquest once come, there was a
happy time for Prussia : ploughshare instead of sword ; busy
sea-havens, German towns, getting built ; churches everywhere
rising ; grass growing, and peaceable cows, where formerly had
been quagmire and snakes. And for the Order a happy
time ? A rich, not a happy. The Order was victorious ;
Livonian ‘ Sword-Brothers, ** ‘ Knights of Dobryn,’ minor
Orders and Authorities all round, were long since subordi-
nated to it or incorporated with it ; Livonia, Courland,
Lithuania, are all got tamed under its influence, or tied down
and evidently tamable. But it was in these times that the
Order got into its wider troubles outward and inward ; quar-
rels, jealousies, with Christian neighbours, Poland, Pommem,
who did not love it and for cause ; — wider troubles, and by
no means so evidently useful to mankind. The Order’s wages,
in this world, flowed higher than ever, only perhaps its work
was beginning to run low ! But we will not anticipate.

On the whole, this Teutsch Ritterdom, for the first century
and more, was a grand phenomenon ; and flamed like a bright
blessed beacon through the night of things, in those Northern
Countries. For above a century, we perceive, it was the
rallying-place of all brave men who had a career to seek on
terms other than vulgar. The noble soul, aiming beyond
money, and sensible to more than hunger in this world, had
a beacon burning (as we say), if the night chanced to overtake
it, and the earth to grow too intricate, as is not uncommon.
Better than the career of stump-oratory, I should fancy, and
its Hesperides Apples, golden and of gilt horse-dung. Better
than puddling away one’s poor spiritual gift of God (loan^ not
gift), such as it may be, in building the lofty rhyme, the
lofty Review- Article, for a discerning public that has six-
pence to spare ! Times alter greatly. — ^Will the reader take
a glimpse of Conrad von Thiiringen’s biography, as a sample
of the old ways of proceeding? Conrad succeeded Hermann

CHAP. VI.] CONRAD OF THURINGEN 99

1932}

von der Salza as Grand-Master, and his history is memorable
as a Teutonic Knight.

TTie stitff Teutsch Ritters were made of. Conrad ofThUringen :

Saint Elizabeth ; Town of Marburg

Conrad, younger brother of the Landgraf of Thiiringen, —
which Prince lived chiefly in the Wartburg, romantic old
Hill-Castle, now a Weimar-Eisenach property and show-place,
then an abode of very earnest people, — was probably a child-
in-arms, in that same Wartburg, while Richard Coeur-de-Lion
was getting home from Palestine and into troubles by the
road : this will date Conrad for us. Ilis worthy elder brother
was Husband of the lady since called Saint Elizabeth, a very
pious but also very fanciful young woman ; — and I always
guess his going on the Crusade, where he died straightway,
was partly the fruit of the life she led him ; lodging beggars,
sometimes in his very bed, continually breaking his nighPs
rest for prayer, and devotional exercise of undue length ;
^weeping one moment, then smiling in joy the next’ ; mean-
dering about, capricious, melodious, weak, at the will of devout
whim mainly ! However, that does not concern us.^ Sure
enough her poor Landgraf went crusading. Year 1227 (Kaiser
Friedrich ii.’s Crusade, who could not put it off* longer) ; poor
Landgraf fell ill by the road, at Brindisi, and died, — ^not to
be driven farther by any cause.

Conrad, left guardian to his deceased Brother’s children,
had at first much quarrel with Saint Elizabeth, though he
afterwards took far other thoughts. Meanwhile he had his
own apanage, ‘Landgraf’ by rank he too; and had troubles
enough with that of itself. For instance : once the Arch-

* Many Lives of the Saint. See, in particular, Libellus de Dictis Quatu^r
Ancillarum, etc. — (that is, Report of the evidence got from Elizabeth's Four
Maids, by an Official Person, Devil’s- Advocate or whatever he was, missioned
by the Pope to question them, when her Canonisation came to be talked of. A
curious piece) : — in Menckenii Scriptores Rerum Germanicarum (Lipsise, 1728-30},
iL dd. ; where also are other details.

100 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book IL

ixaaa

bishop of Mainz, being in debt, laid a heavy tax on all
Abbeys under him ; on Reichartsbronn, an Abbey of Con-
rad'*s, among others. ‘ Don’t pay it ! ’ said Conrad to the
Abbot. Abbot refused accordingly ; but was put under ban
by the Pope ; — obliged to comply, and even to be ‘ whipt
thrice ’ before the money could be accepted. Two whippings
at Erfurt, from the Archbishop, there had been ; and a third
was just going on there, one morning, when Conrad, travel-
ling that way, accidentally stept in to matins. Conrad flames
into a blazing whirlwind at the phenomenon disclosed. ‘ Whip
my Abbot ? And he is to pay, then, — ^Archbishop of Beel-
zebub ? ’ — ^and took the poor Archbishop by the rochets, and
spun him hither and thither ; nay was for cutting him in two,
had not friends hysterically busied themselves, and got the
sword detained in its scabbard and the Archbishop away.
Here is a fine coil like to be, for Conrad.

Another soon follows ; from a quarrel he had with Fritzlar,
an Imperial Free-Town in those parts, perhaps a little stiff
upon its privileges, and high towards a Landgraf. Conrad
marches, one morning (Year 1232), upon insolent Fritzlar ;
burns the environs ; but on looking practically at the ram-
parts of the place, thinks they are too high, and turns to go
home again. Whereupon the idle women of Fritzlar, who are
upon the ramparts gazing in fear and hope, burst into shrill
universal jubilation of voice, — ^and even into gestures, and
liberties with their dress, which are not describable in His-
tory ! Conrad, suddenly once more all flame, whirls round ;
storms the ramparts, slays what he meets, plunders Fritzlar
with a will, and leaves it blazing in a general fire, which had
broken-out in the business. Here is a pair of coils for Con-
rad ; the like of which can issue only in Papal ban or worse.

Conrad is grim and obstinate under these aspects ; but
secretly feels himself very wicked ; knows not well what will
come of it. Sauntering one day in his outer courts, he
notices a certain female beggar; necessitous female of loose
life, who tremulously solicits charity of him. Necessitous

CHAP. VI.] CONRAD OF THURINGEN 101

1234 )

female gets some fraction of coin, but along with it bullying
rebuke in very liberal measure; and goes away weeping
bitterly, and murmuring about ‘ want that drove me to those
courses.’ Conrad retires into himself : ‘ What is her real sin,
perhaps, to mine?’ Conrad Mies awake all that night’;
mopes about, in intricate darkness, days and nights ; rises one
morning an altered man. He makes ‘pilgrimage to Glad-
bach,’ barefoot; kneels down at the church-door of Pritzlar
with bare back, and a bundle of rods beside him. ‘ Whip
me, good injured Christians, for the love of Jesus ! ’ — in brief,
reconciles himself to Christian mankind, the Pope included ;
takes the Teutsch-Ritter vows upon him ; ^ and hastens off to
Preussen, there to spend himself, life and life’s resources
thenceforth, faithfully, till he die. The one course left for
Conrad. Which he follows with a great strong step, — with
a thought still audible to me. It was of such stuff that
Teutsch Ritters were then made ; Ritters evidently capable of
something.

Saint Elizabeth, who went to live at Marburg, in Hessen-
Cassel, after her Husband’s death, and soon died there, in a
most melodiously pious sort,^ made the Teutsch Order
guardian of her Son. It was from her and the Grand-
Mastership of Conrad that Marburg became such a metropolis
of the Order ; the Grand-Masters often residing there, many
of them coveting burial there, and much business bearing
date of the place. A place still notable to the ingenuous
Tourist, who knows his whereabout. Philip the Mag-
nanimous, Luther’s friend, memorable to some as Philip with
the Two Wives, lived there, in that old Castle, — which is
now a kind of Correction-House and Garrison, idle blue
uniforms strolling about, and unlovely physiognomies with a
jingle of iron at their ankles, — where Luther has debated
with the Zwinglian Sacramenters and others, and much has
happened in its time. Saint Elizabeth and her miracles
1 A.D. 1234 (Voigt, ii. 375-423). * A.D. 1231 ; age 24.

108 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book IL

[1334

(considerable, surely, of their kind) were the first origin of
Marburg as a Town : a mere Castle, with adjoining Hamlet,
before that.

Strange gray old silent Town, rich in so many memories ;
it stands there, straggling up its rocky hill-edge, towards its
old Castles and edifices on the top, in a not unpicturesque
manner ; flanked by the river Lahn and its fertile plains :
very silent, except for the delirious screech, at rare intervals,
of a railway train passing that way from Frankfurt-on-Mayn
to Cassel. ‘ Church of St. Elizabeth,’ — ^high, grand Church,
built by Conrad our Hochmeister, in reverence of his once
terrestrial Sister-in-law, — ^stands conspicuous in the plain
below, where the Town is just ending. St. Elizabeth’s
Shrine was once there, and pilgrims wending to it from all
lands. Conrad himself is buried there, as are many Hoch-
meisters ; their names, and shields of arms, Hermann’s fore-
most, though Hermann’s dust is not there, are carved, care-
fully kept legible, on the shafts of the Gothic arches, — from
floor to groin, long rows of them ; — ^and produce, with the
other tombs, tomb-paintings by Durer and the like, thoughts
impressive almost to pain. St. Elizabeth’s loculus was put
into its shrine here, by Kaiser Friedrich n. and all manner of
princes and grandees of the Empire, ‘ one million two hundred
thousand people looking on,’ say the old records, perhaps not
quite exact in their arithmetic. Philip the Magnanimous,
wishing to stop ‘ pilgrimages nowhither,’ buried the loculits
away, it was never known where ; under the floor of that
Church somewhere, as is likeliest. Enough now of Marburg,
and of its Teutsch Ritters too.

They had one or two memorable Hochmeisters and Teutsch-
meisters ; whom we have not named here, nor shall.^ There
is one Hochmeister, somewhere about the fiftieth on the list,

^ In our excellent Kohler’s MUntzbelustigungcn (Niirnberg, 1729 et seqq. ii.
382 ; V. 102 ; viii. 380 ; etc.) are valuable glimpses into the Teutonic Order,—
as into hundreds of other things. The special Book upon it is Voigt’s, often
cited here ; Nine heavy volumes ; grounded on faithful reading, but with a fatal
defect of almost every other quality.

CHAP. VII.] BAIREUTH, ANSPACH 103

19483

and properly the last real Hochmeister, Albert of Hohen-
zollem-Culmbach by name, who will be very memorable to us
by and by.

Or will the reader care to know how Culmbach came into
the possession of the Hohenzollems, Burggraves of Niimberg ?
The story may be illustrative, and will not occupy us long.

CHAPTER VII

MARGIIAVIATE OF CULMBACH: BAIREUTH, ANSPACH

In the Year 1248 , in his Castle of Plassenburg, — which is
now a Conrection-House, looking down upon the junction of
the Red and White Mayn, — Otto Duke of Meran, a very
great potentate, more like a King than a Duke, was suddenly
clutched hold of by a certain wedded gentleman, name not
given, ^one of his domestics or dependants,’ whom he had
enraged beyond forgiveness (signally violating the Seventh
Commandment at his expense) ; and was by the said wedded
gentleman there and then cut down, and done to death.
^ Lamentably killed, jdmmerlich erstochen^ says old Rentsch.'
Others give a different colour to the homicide, and even a
different place ; a controversy not interesting to us. Slain at
any rate he is ; still a young man ; the last male of his line.
Whereby the renowned Dukes of Meran fall extinct, and
immense properties come to be divided among connexions and
claimants.

Meran, we remark, is still a Town, old Castle now
abolished, in the Tyrol, towards the sources of the Etsch
(called Adige by Italian neighbours). The Merans had been
lords not only of most of the Tyrol ; but Dukes of ‘ the
Voigtland’; — Voigtland, that is, Baillie-land^ wide country

^ P. 293. Kohler, Reichs- Histories p. 245. Holle, Alte Gesckichte dtr Stadi
Baireuth (Baireuth, 1833), pp. 34-37.

104 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [bookil

CX94S

between Numberg and the Fichtelwald ; why specially so
called, Dryasdust dimly explains, deducing it from certain
Counts von Reuss, those strange Reusses who always call
themselves Hemy^ and now amount to Henry the Eightieth
and Odd^ with side-branches likewise called Henry; whose
nomenclature is the despair of mankind, and worse than that
of the Naples Lazzaroni who candidly have no names ! —
Dukes of Voigtland, I say ; likewise of Dalmatia ; then also
Markgraves of Austria ; also Counts of Andechs, in which
latter fine country (north of Miinchen a day’s ride), and not
at Plassenburg, some say, the man was slain. These immense
possessions, which now (a.d. 1248) all fall asunder by the
stroke of that sword, come to be divided among the slain
man’s connexions, or to be snatched-up by active neighbours,
and otherwise disposed of.

Active Wurzburg, active Bamberg, without much connexion,
snatched-up a good deal : Count of Orlamunde, married to the
eldest Sister of the slain Duke, got Plassenburg and most of
the Voigtland : a Tyrolese magnate, whose Wife was an Aunt
of the Duke’s, laid hold of the Tyrol, and transmitted it to
daughters and their spouses, — the finish of which line we
shall see by and by ; — in short, there was much property in a
disposable condition. The Hohenzollem Burggraf of Niim-
berg, who had married a younger Sister of the Duke’s two
years before this accident, managed to get at least Baireuth
and some adjacencies ; big Orlamunde, who had not much
better right, taking the lion’s share. This of Baireuth proved
a notable possession to the Hohenzollem family: it was
Conrad the first BurggraTs great-grandson, Friedrich, counted
‘ Friedrich iii.’ among the Burggraves, who made the acqui-
sition in this manner, a.d. 1248.

Onolzbach (On’z-6acA or ^-brook,’ now called Anspach) they
got, some fourscore years after, by purchase and hard money
down 0 24,000 pounds of farthings,’ whatever that may be),^
which proved a notable twin possession of the family. And

* A.D. 1331: Siadt Anspach^ by J. B. Fischer (Anspach, 1786), p. 196.

105

CHAP. VII.] BAIREUTH, ANSPACH

1348]

then, in some seven years more (a.d. 1838), the big Orlamiinde
people, having at length, as was too usual, fallen considerably
insolvent, sold Plassenburg Castle itself, the Plassenbiurg with
its Town of Culmbach and dependencies, to the Hohenzollem
Burggraves,^ who had always ready-money about them. Who
in this way got most of the Voigtland, with a fine Fortress,
into hand ; and had, independently of Niimberg and its
Imperial properties, an important Princely Territory of their
own. Margraviate or Principality of Culmbach (Plassenburg
being only the Castle) was the general title ; but more fre-
quently in later times, being oftenest split in two between
brothers unacquainted with primogeniture, there were two
Margraviates made of it : one of Baireuth, called also ‘ Mar-
graviate On the HilP; and one of Anspach, ‘Margraviate
Under the Hill’: of which, in their modern designations, we
shall by and by hear more than enough.

Thus are the Hohenzollem growing, and never declining :
by these few instances judge of many. Of their hard labours,
and the storms they had to keep under control, we could also
say something : How the two young Sons of the Burggraf
once riding out with their Tutor, a big hound of theirs, in
one of the streets of Niimberg, accidentally tore a child ;
and there arose wild mother’s-wail ; and ‘ all the Scythe-smiths
turned out,’ fire-breathing, deaf to a poor Tutor’s pleadings
and explainings ; and how the Tutor, who had ridden forth in
calm humour with two Princes, came galloping home with only
one, — the Smiths having driven another into boggy ground,
and there caught and killed him with the Burggraf’s
commentary on that sad proceeding (the same Friedrich iii.
who had married Meran’s Sister); and the amends exacted
by him, strict and severe, not passionate or inhuman. Or
again how the Nurnbergers once, in the Burggraf’s absence,
built a ringwall round his Castle ; entrance and exit now to

* Rentsch, p. 157.

• Rentsch, p. 306 (Date not given ; guess, about i27o>.

106 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book it

tia54-73

depend on the Niirnbergers withal ! And how the Burggraf
did not fly out into battle in consequence, but remedied it by
imperturbable countenance and power of driving. With enough
of the like sort ; which readers can conceive.

Burggraf Friedrich III.; and the Anarchy of Nineteen

Years

This same Friedrich iii., great-grandson of Conrad the
first Burggraf, was he that got the Burggraviate made heredi-
tary in his family (a.d. 1273); which thereby rose to the
fixed rank of Princes, among other advantages it was gaining.
Nor did this acquisition come gratis at all, but as the fruit of
good service adroitly done ; service of endless importance as
it proved. Friedrichs life had fallen in times of huge anarchy :
the HohenstaufFen line gone miserably out, — Boy Conradin,
its last representative, perishing on the scaffold even (by a
desperate Pope and a desperate Duke of Anjou) Germans,
Sicilian Normans, Pope and Reich, all at daggers-drawn with
one another ; no Kaiser, nay as many as Three at once !
Which lasted from 1254 onwards; and is called ‘the Inter-
regnum,’ or Anarchy ‘ of Nineteen Years,’ in German History.

Let us at least name the Three Kaisers, or Triple-elixir of
No-Kaiser; though, except as chronological landmarks, we
have not much to do with them. First Kaiser is William
Count of Holland, a rough fellow. Pope’s protege, Pope even
raising cash for him ; till William perished in the Dutch peat-
bogs (horse and man, furiously pursuing, in some fight there,
and getting swallowed up in that manner); which happily
reduces our false Kaisers to two : Second and Third, who are
both foreign to Germany.

Second Kaiser is Alphonso King of Castille, Alphonso the
Wise, whose saying about Ptolemy’s Astronomy, ‘That it
seemed a crank machine ; that it was pity the Creator had
not taken advice !’ is still remembered by mankind ; — this
^ At Naples, 25th October 1268.

CHAP, m] BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH HI 107

1371 )

and no other of his many sayings and doings. He was wise
enough to stay at home ; and except wearing the title, which
cost nothing, to concern himself very little about the Holy
Roman Empire, — some clerk or two dating ‘ Toleti (At
Toledo),’ did languidly a bit of official writing now and then,
and that was all. Confused crank machine this of the German
Empire too, your Majesty ? Better stay at home, and date
‘ ToletV

The Third false Kaiser, — futile call him rather, wanting
clear majority, — was the English Richard of Cornwall ;
younger Son of John Lackland; and little wiser than his
Father, to judge by those symptoms. He had plenty of
money, and was liberal with it ; — no other call to Germany,
you would say, except to get rid of his money ; in which he
succeeded. He lived actually in Germany, twice over for a
year or two : — Alphonso and he were alike shy of the Pope,
as Umpire ; and Richard, so far as his money went, found
some gleams of authority and comfortable flattery in the
Rhenish provinces: at length, in 1263, money and patience
being both probably out, he quitted Germany for the second
and last time ; came home to Berkhamstead in Hertfordshire
here,^ more fool than he went. Till his death (a.d. 1271),
he continued to call himself, and was by many persons called,
Kaiser of the Holy Roman Empire ; — needed a German clerk
or two at Berkhamstead, we can suppose : but never went
back; preferring pleasant Berkhamstead, with troubles of
Simon de Montfort or whatever troubles there might be, to
anything Germany had to offer him.

These were the Three futile Kaisers : and the late Kaiser
Conrad’s young Boy, who one day might have swept the
ground clear of them, perished, — bright young Conradin, bright
and brave, but only sixteen, and Pope’s captive by ill luck, —
perished on the scaffold ; ‘ throwing out his glove’ (in S 3 rm-
bolical protest) amid the dark mute Neapolitan multitudes,
that wintry morning. It was October 26th, 1268, — Dante
^ Gough's Camden, u 339 .

108 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book IL

[1*71

Alighieri then a little boy at Florence, not three years old ;
gazing with strange eyes as the elders talked of such a per-
formance by Christ’s Vicar on Earth. A very tragic perform-
ance indeed, which brought-on the Sicilian Vespers by and by ;
for the Heavens never fail to pay debts, your Holiness ! —
Germany was rocking down towards one saw not what, —
an Anarchic Republic of Princes, perhaps, and of Free Barons
fast verging towards robbery ? Sovereignty of multiplex
Princes, with a Peerage of intermediate Robber Barons ?
Things are verging that way. Such Princes, big and little,
each wrenching- off for himself what lay loosest and handiest
to him, found it a stirring game, and not so much amiss.
On the other hand, some voice of the People, in feeble
whimperings of a strange intensity, to the opposite effect, are
audible to this day. Here are Three old Minstrels (Minne-
sdnger) picked from Manesse’s Collection by an obliging hand,
who are of this date, and shall speak each a word :

No. 1 loquitur (in cramp doggerel, done into speech) : ^ To thee, O
Lord, we poor folk make moan ; the Devil has sown his seeds in this
land J Law thy hand created for protection of thy children : but where
now is Law ? Widows and orphans weep that the Princes do not unite
to have a Kaiser.'

No. 2 : ^ The Princes grind in the Kaiser's mill : to the Reich they fling
the siftings ; and keep to themselves the meal. Not much in haste, they,
to give us a Kaiser. *

No. 3 : ^ Like the Plague of Frogs, there they are come out ; defiling
the Reich's honour. Stork, when wilt thou appear, then,' and with thy
stiff mandibles act upon them a little

It was in such circumstances, that Friedrich in. Burggraf
of Niimberg, who had long moaned and striven over these
woes of his country, came to pay that visit, late in the night
(1st or 2d of October 1273), to his Cousin Rudolf Lord of
Hapsburg, under the walls of Basel ; a notable scene in History.
Rudolf was besieging Basel, being in some feud with the
Bishop there, of which Friedrich and another had been pro-
^ Mentzel, Gtschdciti dUr Diutschent p. 345,

CHAP, m] BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH III 109

12731

posed as umpires ; and Friedrich now waited on his Cousin, in
this hasty manner, — not about the Basel feud, but on a far
higher quite unexpected errand, — to say, That he, Rudolf, was
elected Kaiser, and that better times for the Holy Roman
Empire were now probable, with Heaven’s help.^ We call him
Cousin ; though what the kindred actually was, a kindred by
mothers, remains, except the general fact of it, disputable by
Dryasdust. The actual visit, under the walls of Basel, is
by some considered romantic. But that Rudolf, tough steel-
gray man, besieging Basel on his own quarrel, on the terms
just stated, was altogether unexpectedly apprised of this great
news, and that Cousin Friedrich of Niimberg had mainly con-
tributed to such issue, is beyond question.^ The event was
salutary, like life instead of death, to anarchic Germany ; and
did eminent honour to Friedrich’s judgment in men.

Richard of Cornwall having at last died, and his futile
German clerks having quitted Berkham stead forever, — Al-
phonse of Castille, not now urged by rivalry, and seeing long
since what a crank machine the thing was, had no objection to
give it up; said so to the Pope, — who was himself anxious for a
settled Kaiser, the supplies of Papal German cash having run
almost dry during these troubles. Whereupon ensued earnest
consultations among leading German men; Diet of the Empire,
sternly practical (we may well perceive), and with a minimum
of talk, the Pope too being held rather well at a distance : the
result of which was what we see.® Mainly due to Friedrich
of Numberg, say all Historians; conjoining with him the
then Archbishop of Mainz, who is officially President Elector
(literally Convener of Electors) : they two did it. Archbishop
of Mainz had himself a pleasant accidental acquaintance with
Rudolf, — a night’s lodging once at Hapsburg, with escort over
the Hills, in dangerous circumstances ; — and might the more
readily be made to understand what qualities the man now
had ; and how, in justness of insight, toughness of character,

* Rentsch, pp. 299, 285, 298. * Kohler, pp. 249, 251.

• 29th September 1273.

110 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [BOOK n.

[1078

and general strength of bridle-hand, this actually might be the
adequate man.

Kaiser Rudolf amd Burggrqf Friedrich III

Lost time we saw Rudolf, near thirty years ago, he was
some equerry or subaltern dignitary among the Ritters of King
Ottocar, doing a Crusade against the Prussian Heathen, and
seeing his master found Konigsberg in that country. Changed
times now ! Ottocar King of Bohemia, who (by the strong
hand mainly, and money to Richard of Cornwall, in the late
troubles) has become Duke of Austria and much else, had
himself expected the Kaisership ; and of all astonished men.
King Ottocar was probably the most astonished at the choice
made. A dread sovereign, fierce, and terribly opulent, and
everyway resplendent to such degree ; and this threadbare Swiss
gentleman-at-arms, once ‘my domestic’ (as Ottocar loved to
term it), preferred to me ! Flat insanity, King Ottocar
thought ; refused to acknowledge such a Kaiser ; would not in
the least give up his unjust properties, or even do homage for
them or the others.

But there also Rudolf contrived to be ready for him.
Rudolf invaded his rich Austrian territories ; smote down
Vienna, and all resistance that there was ; ^ forced Ottocar to
beg pardon and peace. ‘ No pardon, nor any speech of peace,
till you first do homage for all those lands of yours, whatever
we may find them to be !’ Ottocar was very loath ; but could
not help himself. Ottocar quitted Prag with a resplendent
retinue, to come into the Danube country, and do homage to
‘my domestic’ that once was. He bargained that the sad
ceremony should be at least private; on an Island in the
Danube, between the two retinues or armies ; and in a tent,
80 that only official select persons might see it. The Island is
called Camberg (near Vienna, I conclude), in the middle of the
Donau River : there Ottocar accordingly knelt ; he in great
‘ 1276 (Kohler, p. 253).

CHAP. VII.] BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH III. Ill
*378)

pomp of tailorage, Rudolf in mere buff jerkin, practical
leather and iron ; — ^hide it, charitable canvas, from all but a
few 1 Alas, precisely at this moment, the treacherous canvas
rushes down, — hung so on purpose, thinks Ottocar ; and it is
a tent indeed, but a tent without walls ; and all the world sees
me in this scandalous plight !

Ottocar rode home in deep gloom ; his poor Wife, too,
upbraided him : he straightway rallied into War again ; Rudolf
again very ready to meet him. Rudolf met him, Friedrich of
Niimberg there among the rest under the Reichs-Banner ; on
the Marchfeld by the Donau (modem Wagram near by) ; and
entirely beat and even slew and ruined Ottocar.^ Whereby
Austria fell now to Rudolf, who made his sons Dukes of it ;
which, or even Archdukes, they are to this day. Bohemia,
Moravia, of these also Rudolf would have been glad ; but of
these there is an heir of Ottocar'^s left ; these will require time
and luck.

Prosperous though toilsome days for Rudolf ; who proved
an excellent bit of stuff for a Kaiser; and found no rest,
proving what stuff he was. In which prosperities, as indeed he
continued to do in the perils and toils, Burggraf Friedrich iii.
of Niimberg naturally partook : hence, and not gratis at all,
the Hereditary Burggrafdom, and many other favours and
accessions he got. For he continued Rudoirs steady helper,
friend and first-man in all things, to the very end. Evidently
one of the most important men in Germany, and candour will
lead us to guess one of the worthiest, during those bad years
of Interregnum, and the better ones of Kaisership. After
Conrad his great-grandfather he is the second notable architect
of the Family House ; — founded by Conrad ; conspicuously
built-up by this Friedrich iii., and the first story of it finished,
so to speak. Then come two Friedrichs as Burggrafs, his son
and his grandson’s grandson, ‘Friedrich iv.’ and ‘Friedrich vi.,’
by whom it was raised to the second story and the third, —
thenceforth one of the high houses of the world.

^ 26th August 1278 (Kohler, p. 253).

112 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book ii.

[1*78

That is the glimpse we can give of Friedrich first Hereditary
Burggraf, and of his Cousin Rudolf first Hapsburg Kaiser,
The latest Austrian Kaisers, the latest Kings of Prussia, they
are sons of these two men.

CHAPTER VIII

ASCANIER MARKGIIAVES IN BRANDENBURG

We have said nothing of the Ascanier Markgraves, Electors
of Brandenburg, all this while ; nor, in these limits, can we now
or henceforth say almost anything. A proud enough, valiant
and diligent line of Markgraves ; who had much fighting and
other struggle in the world, — steadily enlarging their border
upon the Wends to the north ; and adjusting it, with mixed
success, against the Wettin gentlemen, who are Markgraves
farther east (in the Lausitz now), who bound us to the south
too {Meissen^ Misnia), and who in fact came in for the whole
of modem Saxony in the end. Much fighting, too, there was
with the Archbishops of Magdeburg, now that the Wends are
down : standing quarrel there, on the small scale, like that of
Kaiser and Pope on the great ; such quarrel as is to be seen
in all places, and on all manner of scales, in that era of the
Christian world.

None of our Markgraves rose to the height of their Pro-
genitor, Albert the Bear; nor indeed, except massed-up, as
‘Albert’s Line,’ and with a History ever more condensing itself
almost to the form of lahel^ can they pretend to memorability
with us. What can Dryasdust himself do with them ? That
wholesome Dutch cabbages continued to be more and more
planted, and peat -mire, blending itself with waste sand,
became available for Christian mankind, — ^intrusive Chaos, and
especially Divine Triglaph and his ferocities being well held
aloof : — this, after all, is the real History of our Markgraves ;

CHAP.viiL] ASCANIER MARKGRAVES 113

1378]

and of this, by the nature of the case, Dryasdust can say
nothing. ‘New Mark,’ which once meant Brandenburg at
large, is getting subdivided into Mid-Mark, into t/cfermark
(closest to the Wends) ; and in Old Mark and New much is
spreading, much getting planted and founded. In the course
of centuries there will grow gradually to be ‘ seven cities ; and
as many towns,’ says one old jubilant Topographer, ‘ as there
are days in the year,’ — struggling to count-up 365 of them.

Of Berlin City

In the year (guessed to be) 1240, one Ascanier Markgraf
‘ fortifies Berlin ’; that is, first makes Berlin a German Burg
and inhabited outpost in those parts : — the very name, some
think, means ‘ Little Rampart ’ ( Wehr\m\ built there, on the
banks of the Spree, against the Wends, and peopled with
Dutch ; of which latter fact, it seems, the old dialect of the
place yields traces.^ How it rose afterwards to be chosen for
Metropolis, one cannot say, except that it had a central situa-
tion for the now widened principalities of Brandenburg : the
place otherwise is sandy by nature, sand and swamp the con-
stituents of it ; and stands on a sluggish river the colour of
oil. Wendish fishermen had founded some first nucleus of it
long before ; and called their fishing-hamlet Co/n, which is
said to be the general Wendish title for places founded on
piles^ a needful method where your basis is swamp. At all
events, ‘ Coin ’ still designates the oldest quarter in Berlin ;
and ‘ Coin on the Spree ’ (Cologne, or Coin on the Rhine, being
very different) continued, almost to modem times, to be the
Official name of the Capital.

^ Nicolai, Beschreibung der Kdniglichen Rtsidenzstddte Berlin und Potsdam
(Berlin, 1786), i. pp. 16, 17 of ‘Einleitung.’ Nicolai rejects the Wekrlin etymology;
admits that the name was evidently appellative, not proper, ‘ The Berlin,^ * To
the Berlin ’ ; finds in the world two objects, one of them at Halle, still called
‘The Berlin'; and thinks it must have meant (in some language of extinct
mortals) ‘Wild Pasture-ground,* — ‘The Scrubs,^ as we should call it. — Possible;
perhaps likely.

VOL. I. H

114

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [BOOK 11.

[M78

How the Dutch and Wends agreed together, within their
rampart, inclusive of both, is not said. The river lay between;
they had two languages ; peace was necessary : it is probable
they were long rather on a taciturn footing ! But in the oily
river you do catch various fish ; Coin, amid its quagmires and
straggling sluggish waters, can be rendered very strong. Some
husbandry, wet or dry, is possible to diligent Dutchmen.
There is room for trade also ; Spree Havel Elbe is a direct
water-road to Hamburg and the Ocean ; by the Oder, which
is not very far, you communicate with the Baltic on this hand,
and with Poland and the uttermost parts of Silesia on that.
Enough, Berlin grows ; becomes, in about 300 years, for one
reason and another. Capital City of the country, of these
many countries. The Markgraves or Electors, after quitting
Brandenburg, did not come immediately to Berlin ; their next
Residence was Tangermiinde {Mouth of the Tanger^ where
little Tanger issues into Elbe) ; a much grassier place than
Berlin, and which stands on a Hill, clay-and-sand Hill, like-
wise advantageous for strength. That Berlin should have
grown, after it once became Capital, is not a mystery. It has
quadrupled itself, and more, within the last hundred years,
and I think doubled itself within the last thirty.

Markgrqf Otto /F., or Otto zvith the Arrow

One Ascanier Markgraf, and one only, Otto iv. by title,
was a Poet withal ; had an actual habit of doing verse. There
are certain so-called Poems of his, still extant, read by Dryas-
dust, with such enthusiasm as he can get up, in the old
Collection of Minne-singcrs^ made by Manesse the Zurich
Biirgermeister, while the matter was much fresher than it now
is.^ Madrigals all; Minne-t^Xig% describing the passion of

^ Rudiger von Manesse, who fought the Austrians, too, made his Sammlung
(Collection) in the latter half of the fourteenth century ; it was printed, after many
narrow risks of destruction in the interim, in 1758, — Bodmer and Breitinger
editing ; — at Zurich, 2 vols. 4^a

CHAP. VIII.] OTTO WITH THE ARROW 115
1278]

love ; how Otto felt under it, — well and also ill ; with little
peculiarity of symptom, as appears. One of his lines is,

Ich wQnsch ich wdre tot, I wish that I were dead :

■ — ^the others shall remain safe in Manesse’s Collection.

This same Markgraf Otto iv., Year 1278, had a dreadful
quarrel with the See of Magdeburg, about electing a Brother
of his. The Chapter had chosen another than Otto’s Brother ;
Otto makes war upon the Chapter. Comes storming along ;

will stable my horses in your Cathedral,” on such and such
a day ! But the Archbishop chosen, who had been a fighter
formerly, stirs-up the Magdeburgers, by preaching Horses
to be stabled here, my Christian brethren”), by relics, and
quasi-miracles, to a furious condition ; leads them out against
Otto, beats Otto utterly ; brings him in captive, amid hooting
jubilations of the conceivable kind : ‘ Stable ready ; but where
are the horses, — Serene child of Satanas ! ’ Archbishop
makes a Wooden Cage for Otto (big beams, spars stout
enough, mere straw to lie on), and locks him up there. In a
public situation in the City of Magdeburg ; — visible to man-
kind so, during certain months of that year 1278. It was in
the very time while Ottocar was getting finished in the
Marchfeld; much mutiny still abroad, and the new Kaiser
Rudolf very busy.

Otto’s Wife, all streaming in tears, and flaming in zeal
what shall she do ? ‘ Sell your jewels,’ so advises a certain

old Johann von Buch, discarded Ex-official : ‘Sell your jewels.
Madam ; bribe the Canons of Magdeburg with extreme secrecy,
none knowing of his neighbour ; they will consent to ransom
on terms possible.’ Poor Wife bribed as was bidden ; Canons
voted as they undertook ; unanimous for ransom, — high, but
humanly possible. Markgraf Otto gets out on parole. But
now, How raise such a ransom, our very jewels being sold ?
Old Johann von Buch again indicates ways and means, —
miraculous old gentleman : — Markgraf Otto returns, money
in hand ; pays, and is solemnly discharged. The title of the

116 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book n.

[xajB

sum I could give exact ; but as none will in the least tell me
what the value is, I humbly forbear.

‘ We are clear, then, at this date ? ’ said Markgraf Otto
from his horse, just taking leave of the Magdeburg Canonry.
‘ Yes,’ answered they . — ^ Pshaw, you don’t know the value of
a Markgraf ! ’ said Otto, ^ What is it, then ? ’ — ‘ Rain gold
ducats on his war-horse and him,’ said Otto, looking up with
a satirical grin, ‘ till horse and Markgraf are buried in them,
and you cannot see the point of his spear atop ! ’ — ^That
would be a cone of gold coins equal to the article, thinks our
Markgraf ; and rides grinning away.^ — ^The poor Archbishop,
a valiant pious man, finding out that late strangely unanimous
vote of his Chapter for ransoming the Markgraf, took it so ill,
that he soon died of a broken heart, say the old Books. Die
he did, before long ; — and still Otto’s Brother was refused as
successor. Brother, however, again survived ; behaved always
wisely ; and Otto at last had his way. ‘ Makes an excellent
Archbishop, after all ! ’ said the Magdeburgers. Those were
rare times, Mr. Rigmarole.

The same Otto, besieging some stronghold of his Magde-
burg or other enemies, got an arrow shot into the skull of
him ; into, not through ; which no surgery could extract, not
for a year to come. Otto went about, sieging much the
same, with the iron in his head ; and is called Otto mit dem
Pfeiley Otto Sagittariiis^ or Otto with the Arrow, in conse-
quence. A Markgraf who writes Madrigals ; who does sieges
with an arrow in his head ; who lies in a wooden cage, jeered
by the Magdeburgers, and proposes such a cone of ducats : I
thought him the memorablest of those forgotten Markgraves ;
and that his jolting Life-pilgrimage might stand as the general
sample. Multiply a year of Otto by 200, you have, on easy
conditions, some imagination of a History of the Ascanier
Markgraves. Forgettable otherwise ; or it can be read in the
gross, darkened with endless details, and thrice-dreary, half-
intelligible traditions, in Pauli’s fatal Quartos, and elsewhere,
^ Michaelis, i. 271 ; Pauli, x. 316; Kloss; etc.

CHAP. IX.] BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH IV 117

1278]

if any one needs. — The year of that Magdeburg speech about
the cone of ducats is 1278 : King Edward the Rrst, in this
country, was walking about, a prosperous man of forty, with
very Long Shanks^ and also with a head of good length.

Otto, as had been the case in the former line, was a
frequent name among those Markgraves : ‘ Otto the Pious ’
(whom we saw crusading once in Preussen, with King Ottocar
his Brother-in-law), ‘Otto the Tall,’ ‘Otto the Short (Panmsy;
I know not how many Ottos besides him ‘ with the Arrow.’
Half a century after this one of the Arrow (under his Grand-
Nephew it was), the Ascanier Markgraves ended, their line
also dying out.

Not the successfulest of Markgraves, especially in later
times. Brandenburg was indeed steadily an Electorate, its
Markgraf a Kurfurst^ or Elector of the Empire ; and always
rather on the increase than otherwise. But the Territories
were apt to be much split-up to younger sons ; two or more
Markgraves at once, the eldest for Elector, with other arrange-
ments ; which seldom answer. They had also fallen into the
habit of borrowing money ; pawning, redeeming, a good deal,
with Teutsch Ritters and others. Then they puddled con-
siderably, — and to their loss, seldom choosing the side that
proved winner, — in the general broils of the Reich, which at
that time, as we have seen, was unusually anarchic. None of the
successfulest of Markgraves latterly. But they were regretted
beyond measure in comparison with the next set that came ;
as we shall see.

CHAPTER IX
BURGGEAF FRIEDRICH IV

Brandenburg and the Hohenzollem Family of Niimberg
have hitherto no mutual acquaintanceship whatever : they go,
each its own course, wide enough apart in the world ; — little

118

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book IL

[lagS

dreaming that they are to meet by and by, and coalesce, wed
for better and worse, and become one flesh. As is the way in
all romance. ‘ Marriages,’ among men, and other entities of
importance, ‘ are, evidently, made in Heaven.’

Friedrich iv. of Niimberg, Son of that Friedrich m., Kaiser
Rudolfs successful friend, was again a notabler increaser of
his House; which finally, under his Great-grandson, named
Friedrich vi., attained the Electoral height. Of which there
was already some hint. Well ; under the first of these two
Friedrichs, some slight approximation, and under his Son, a
transient express introduction (so to speak) of Brandenburg
to Hohenzollern took place, without immediate result of con-
sequence ; but under the second of them occurred the wedding,
as we may call it, or union ‘ for better or worse, till death do
us part.’ — How it came about ? Easy to ask. How ! The
reader will have to cast some glances into the confused
jR^A^-History of the time ; — ^timid glances, for the element
is of dangerous, extensive sort, mostly jungle and shaking
bog ; — and we must travel through this corner of it, as on
shoes of swiftness, treading lightly.

Contested Elections in the Reich : Kaiser Albert /. ; after
whom Six Non-Hapshurg Kaisers

The Line of Rudolf of Hapsburg did not at once succeed
continuously to the Empire, as the wont had been in such
cases, where the sons were willing and of good likelihood.
After such a spell of anarchy, parties still ran higher than
usual in the Holy Roman Empire ; and wide-yawning splits
would not yet coalesce to the old pitch. It appears too the
posterity of Rudolf, stiff, inarticulate, proud men, and of a
turn for engrossing and amassing, were not always lovely to
the public. Albert, Rudolfs eldest son, for instance, Kaiser
Albert i., — who did succeed, though not at once, or till after
killing Rudolfs immediate successor,^ — Albert was by no

^ Adolf of Nassau ; slain by Albert's own hand ; * Battle * of Hasenbiihel
* near Worms, 2d July 1298 ' (Kohler, p. 265).

119

CHAP. IX.] CONTESTED ELECTIONS

lagB]

means a prepossessing man, though a tough and hungry one.
It must be owned, he had a harsh ugly character ; and face
to match : big-nosed, loose-lipped, blind of an eye : not
Kaiser-like at all to an Electoral Body. ^ Est homo mono-
culm^ et vultu rmtico ; non potest esse Imperator (A one-eyed
fellow', and looks like a clown ; he cannot be Emperor) ! ’
said Pope Boniface vm., when consulted about him.^

Enough, from the death of Rudolf, a.d. 1291, there inter-
vened a hundred-and-fifty years, and eight successive Kaisers
singly or in line, only one of whom (this same Albert of the
unlovely countenance) was a Hapsburger, — before the Family,
often trying it all along, could get a third time into the Im-
perial saddle. Where, after that, it did sit steady. Once in
for the third time, the Hapsburgers got themselves ‘ elected ’
(as they still called it) time after time ; always elected, —
with but one poor exception, which will much concern my
readers by and by, — to the very end of the matter. And
saw the Holy Roman Empire itself expire, and as it were
both saddle and horse vanish out of Nature, before they would
dismount. Nay they still ride there on the shadow of a
saddle, so to speak ; and are ‘ Kaisers of Austria ’ at this
hour. Steady enough of seat at last, after many vain trials !

For during those Hundred-and-fifty years, — among those
six intercalary Kaisers, too, who followed Albert, — they were
always trying; always thinking they had a kind of quasi
right to it ; whereby the Empire often fell into trouble at
Election-time. For they were proud stout men, our Haps-
burgers, though of taciturn unconciliatory ways ; and Rudolf
had so fitted them out with fruitful Austrian Dukedoms,
which they much increased by marriages and otherwise, —
Styria, Carinthia, the Tyrol, by degrees, not to speak of their
native Hapsburg much enlarged, and claims on Switzerland
all round it, — they had excellent means of battling for their
pretensions and disputable elections. None of them suc-
ceeded, however, for a Hundred-and-fifty years, except that
^ Kohler, pp. 267-73 ; and Munizbelustigungen^ xix, 156-60.

120 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book II.

[1308

same one-eyed, loose-lipped unbeautiful Albert i., a Kaiser
dreadfully fond of earthly goods, too. Who indeed grasped
all round him, at property half his, or wholly not his : Rhine-
tolls, Crown of Bohemia, Landgraviate of Thiiringen, Swiss
Forest Cantons, Crown of Hungary, Crown of France even :
— ^getting endless quarrels on his hands, and much defeat
mixed with any victory there was. Poor soul, he had six-
and-twenty children by one wife ; and felt that there was
need of apanages ! He is understood (guessed, not proved) to
have instigated two assassinations in pursuit of these objects ;
and he very clearly underwent one in his own person. Assas-
sination first was of Dietzman the Thiiringian Landgraf, an
Anti- Albert champion, who refused to be robbed by Albert, —
for whom the great Dante is (with almost palpable absurdity)
fabled to have written an Epitaph still legible in the Church
at Leipzig.^ Assassination second was of Wenzel, the poor
young Bohemian King, OttocaFs Grandson and last heir. Sure
enough, this important young gentleman ^wa^ murdered by
some one at Olmlitz next year’ (1306, a promising event for
Albert then), ‘ but none yet knows who it was.^

Neither of which suspicious transactions came to any re-
sult for Albert; as indeed most of his unjust graspings
proved failures. He at one time had thoughts of the Crown
of France ; ‘ Yours / solemnly declare ! ’ said the Pope. But
that came to nothing ; — only to France’s shifting of the
Popes to Avignon, more under the thumb of France. What
his ultimate success with Tell and the Forest Cantons was,
we all know ! A most clutching, strong-fisted, dreadfully
hungry, tough and unbeautiful man. Whom his own Nephew,
at last, had to assassinate, at the Ford of the Reuss (near
Windisch Village, meeting of the Reuss and Aar ; 1st May
1308): ‘Scandalous Jew pawnbroker of an Uncle, wilt thou
flatly keep from me my Father’s heritage, then, intrusted to
thee in his hour of death ? Regardless of God and man, and

1 Menckenii Scriptores^ i. § Fredericus Admorsus (by Tentzel).

* Kohler, p. 270.

121

CHAP. IX.] KAISER HENRY VII

*3131

of the last look of a dying Brother ? Uncle worse than
pawnbroker ; for it is a heritage with wo pawn on it, with
much the reverse ! ’ thought the Nephew, — and stabbed said
Uncle down dead ; having gone across with him in the boat ;
attendants looking on in distraction from the other side of
the river. Was called Johannes Parricida in consequence;
fled out of human sight that day, he and his henchmen, never
to tum-up again till Doomsday. For the pursuit was tran-
scendent^ regardless of expense ; the cry for legal vengeance
very great (on the part of Albert’s daughters chiefly), though
in vain, or nearly so, in this world.^

Of Kaiser Henry VII. and the Luxemburg Kaisers

Of the other six Kaisers not Hapsburgers we are bound to
mention one, and dwell a little on his fortunes and those of
the family he founded ; both Brandenburg and our Hohen-
zollems coming to be much connected therewith, as time
went on. This is Albert’s next successor, Henry Count of
Luxemburg ; called among Kaisers Henry vii. He is founder,
he alone among these Non-Hapsburgers, of a small intercalary
line of Kaisers, ^ the Luxemburg Line ’ ; who amount indeed
only to Four, himself included ; and are not otherwise of
much memorability, if we except himself ; though straggling
about like well-rooted briers, in that favourable ground, they
have accidentally hooked themselves upon World-History in
one or two points. By accident a somewhat noteworthy line,
those Luxemburg Kaisers : — a celebrated place, too, or name
of a place, that ^Luxembourg"* of theirs, with its French
Marshals, grand Parisian Edifices, lending it new lustre :
what, thinks the reader, is the meaning of Liizzenburg,
Luxemburg, Luxembourg? Merely Lutzelhurg^ wrong pro-
nounced ; and that again is nothing but Zi^^feborough : such
is the luck of names ! —

1 Kohler, p. 272. Hormayr, CEsterreichischer Plutarch^ oder Leben und Bild*
nisscj etc. (12 B'andchen ; Wien, 1807, — a superior Book), i. 65,

122

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [BOOK IL

[X313

Heinrich Graf von Luxemburg was, after some pause on
the parricide of Albert, chosen Kaiser, ‘ on account of his
renowned valour,’ say the old Books, — and also, add the
shrewder of them, because his Brother, Archbishop of Trier,
was one of the Electors, and the Pope did not like either the
Austrian or the French candidate then in the field. Chosen,
at all events, he was, 27th November 1808 ; ^ clearly, and by
much, the best Kaiser that could be had. A puissant soul,
who might have done great things, had he lived. He settled
feuds ; cut-off oppressions from the Reichstddte (Free Towns) ;
had a will of just sort, and found or made a way for it.
Bohemia lapsed to him, the old race of Kings having perished
out, — the last of them far too suddenly ‘ at Olmiitz,’ as we
saw lately ! Some opposition there was, but much more
favour especially by the Bohemian People ; and the point,
after some small ‘ Siege of Prag ’ and the like, was definitely
carried by the Kaiser. The now Burggraf of Niimberg,
Friedrich iv., son of Rudolfs friend, was present at this Siege
of Prag ; ^ a Burggraf much attached to Kaiser Henry, as all
good Germans were. But the Kaiser did not live.

He went to Italy, our Burggraf of Niimberg and many
more along with him, to pull the crooked Guelf-Ghibelline
Facts and Avignon Pope a little straight, if possible ; and was
vigorously doing it, when he died on a sudden ; ^ poisoned in
sacramental wine,’ say the Germans I One of the crowning
summits of human scoundrelism, which painfully stick in the
mind. It is certain he arrived well at Buonconvento near
Sienna, on the 24th of September 1318, in full march
towards the rebellious King of Naples, whom the Pope much
countenanced. At Buonconvento, Kaiser Henry wished to
enjoy the communion and a Dominican monk, whose dark
rat-eyed look men afterwards bethought them of, administered
it to him in both species (Council of Trent not yet quite
prohibiting the liquid species, least of all to Kaisers, who are
by theory a kind of ‘ Deacons to the Pope,’ or something
1 Kohler, p. 274. *1310 (Rentsch, p. 31 1).

CHAP. IX.] JOHANN KING OF BOHEMIA 1*8

X3*3]

else ; — administered it in both species : that is certain, and
also that on the morrow Henry was dead. The Dominicans
endeavoured afterwards to deny; which, for the credit of
human nature, one wishes they had done with effect.* But
there was never any trial had; the denial was considered
lame; and German History continues to shudder, in that
passage, and assert. Poisoned in the wine of his sacrament :
the Florentines, it is said, were at the bottom of it, and had
hired the rat - eyed Dominican ; — ^ O Italia^ O Firenze ! ’
That is not the way to achieve Italian Liberty, or Obedience
to God ; that is the way to confirm, as by frightful stygian
oath, Italian Slavery, or continual Obedience, under varying
forms, to the Other Party ! The voice of Dante, then alive
among men, proclaims, sad and loving as a mother’s voice, and
implacable as a voice of Doom, that you are wandering, and
have wandered, in a terrible manner ! —

Peter, the then Archbishop of Mainz, says there had not
for hundreds of years such a death befallen the German
Empire ; to which Kohler, one of the wisest modems, gives
his assent : ‘ It could not enough be lamented,’ says he, ‘ that
so vigilant a Kaiser, in the flower of his years, should have
been tom from the world in so devilish a manner : who, if
he had lived longer, might have done Teutschland unspeakable
benefit.’ ®

Henryks Son Johann is King of Bohemia ; and Ludxvig the
Bavarian^ with a Contested Election^ is Kaiser

Henry vii., having thus perished suddenly, his Son Johann,
scarcely yet come of age, could not follow him as Kaiser,
according to the Father’s thought; though in due time he
prosecuted his advancement otherwise to good purpose, and

1 Voltaire, Essai sur les Mcsursy c. 67, § Henry vii. {(EuvreSy xxi. 184).

* Kohler, p. 281 (Ptolomey of Lucca, himself a Dominican, is one of the
accusing spirits i Muratori, 1 . xi. § Piolomceus Lucensis^ A.D. 1313).

• Kohler, pp. 282’5.

124

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book ll.

Cx3*a

proved a very stirring man in the world. By his Father’s
appointment, to whom as Kaiser the chance had fallen, he
was already King of Bohemia, strong in his right and in the
favour of the natives ; though a titular Competitor, Henry
of the Tyrol, beaten-off by the late Kaiser, was still extant :
whom, however, and all other perils Johann contrived to
weather ; growing up to be a far-sighted stout-hearted man,
and potent Bohemian King, widely renowned in his day. He
had a Son, and then two Grandsons, who were successively
Kaisers, after a sort ; making up the ^ Luxemburg Four ’ we
spoke of. He did Crusades, one or more, for the Teutsch
Ritters, in a shining manner; — ^unhappily with the loss of
an eye; nay ultimately, by the aid of quack oculists, with
loss of both eyes. An ambitious man, not to be quelled by
blindness ; man with much negotiation in him ; with a heavy
stroke of fight too, and temper nothing loath at it ; of which
we shall see some glimpse by and by.

The pity was, for the Reich if not for him, he could not
himself become Kaiser. Perhaps we had not then seen
Henry vii.’s fine enterprises, like a fleet of half-built ships,
go mostly to planks again, on the waste sea, had his Son
followed him. But there was, on the contrary, a contested
election; Austria in again, as usual, and again unsuccessful.
The late Kaiser’s Austrian competitor, ‘Friedrich the Fair,
Duke of Austria,’ the parricided Albert’s Son, weis again one
of the parties. Against whom, with real but not quite
indisputable majority, stood Ludwig Duke of Bavaria :
‘ Ludwig IV.,’ ‘ Ludwig der Baier (the Bavarian)’ as they call
him among Kaisers. Contest attended with the usual
election expenses; war -wrestle, namely, between the parties
till one threw the other. There was much confused wrestling
and throttling for seven years or more (1315-1322). Our
Niirnberg Burggraf, Friedrich iv., held with Ludwig, as did
the real majority, though in a languid manner, and was busy
he as few were; the Austrian Hapsburgs also doing their
best, now under, now above. Johann King of Bohemia was

CHAP. IX.] JOHANN KING OF BOHEMIA 126

133a]

on Ludwig’s side as yet. Ludwig’s own Brother, Kur-Pfalz
(ancestor of all the Electors, and their numerous Branches,
since known there), an elder Brother, was, ‘out of spite’ as
men thought, decidedly against Ludwig.

In the eighth year came a Fight that proved decisive.
Fight at Muhldorf on the Inn, 28th September 1322, — far
down in those Danube Countries, beyond where Marlborough
ever was, where there has been much fighting first and last ;
Burggraf Friedrich was conspicuously there. A very great
Battle, say the old Books, — says Hormayr, in a new readable
Book,^ giving minute account of it. Ludwig rather held
aloof rearward ; committed his business to the Hohenzollern
Burggraf and to one Schweppermann, aided by a noble lord
called Rindsmaul (‘ Cowmouth^ no less), and by others
experienced in such work. Friedrich the Hapsburger der
Sch&ne^ Duke of Austria, and self-styled Kaiser, a gallant
handsome man, breathed mere martial fury, they say . he
knew that his Brother Leopold was on march with a rein-
forcement to him from the Strasburg quarter, and might
arrive any moment ; but he could not wait, — perhaps afraid
Ludwig might run ; — he rashly determined to beat Ludwig
without reinforcement. Our rugged fervid Hormayr (though
imitating Tacitus and Johannes von Muller over-much) will
instruct fully any modern that is curious about this big
Battle : what furious charging, worrying ; how it ‘ lasted ten
hours,’ how the blazing Handsome Friedrich stormed about,
and ‘ slew above fifty with his own hand.’ To us this is the
interesting point : At one turn of the Battle, tenth hour of
it now ending, and the tug of war still desperate, there arose
a cry of joy over all the Austrian ranks, “ Help coming !
Help ! ” — and Friedrich noticed a body of Horse, ‘ in Austrian
cognisance’ (such the cunning of a certain man), coming in
upon his rear. Austrians and Friedrich never doubted but it
was Brother Leopold just getting on the ground ; and rushed
forward doubly fierce. Doubly fierce ; and were doubly
^ Hormayr, CEsterrcichUcher PhUarch^ ii. 31-7.

126

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book IL

[X3af

astonished when it plunged in upon them, sharp -edged, aa
Burggraf Friedrich of Numberg, — and quite ruined Austrian
Friedrich ! Austrian Friedrich fought personally like a lion at
bay; but it availed nothing. Rindsmaul (not lovely of lip,
Cowmouth so-called) disarmed him: ‘I will not surrender
except to a Prince ! ■* — so Burggraf Friedrich was got to take
surrender of him ; and the Fight, and whole Controversy
with it, was completely won.^

Poor Leopold, the Austrian Brother, did not arrive till the
morrow ; and saw a sad sight, before flying off again. Fried-
rich the Fair sat prisoner in the old Castle of Traussnitz
{Oher Ffalz^ Upper Palatinate, or Nlirnberg country) for three
years; whittling sticks: — ^Tourists, if curious, can still procure
specimens of them at the place, for a consideration. There
sat Friedrich, Brother Leopold moving Heaven and Earth, —
and in fact they said, the very Devil by art magic, ^ — to no
purpose, to deliver him. And his poor Spanish Wife cried
her eyes, too literally, out ^ — sight gone in sad fact.

Ludwig the Bavarian reigned thenceforth, — though never
on easy terms. How grateful to Friedrich of Numberg we
need not say. For one thing he gave him all the Austrian
Prisoners; whom Friedrich, judiciously generous, dismissed
without ransom except that they should be feudally subject
to him henceforth. This is the third Hohenzollera whom we
mark as a conspicuous acquirer in the Hohenzollem family,
this Friedrich iv., builder of the second story of the House.
If Conrad, original Burggraf, founded the House, then (figura-
tively speaking) the able Friedrich iii., who was Rudolf of
Hapsburg's friend, built it one story high ; and here is a new
Friedrich, his Son, who has added a second story. It is
astonishing, says Dryasdust, how many feudal superiorities the
Anspach and Baireuth people still have in Austria; — ^they
' Jedem Mann tin Ey (One egg to every man),

Dem frommtn Schweppertnann zwey (Two to the excellent Schweppermann) i
Tradition still repeats this old rhyme, as the Kaiser’s Address to his Army, or his
Head Captains, at supper, after such a day’s work, — ^in a country already eaten
to the bone. * Kohler, p. 288.

CHAP. IX.] JOHANN KING OF BOHEMIA 127

maintain their own Lehnprohst^ or Official Manager for fief-
casualties, in that country : — all which proceed from this
Battle of Mlihldorf.^ Battle fought on the 28th of September
1322: — eight years after Bannockburn \ while our poor
Edward ii. and England with him were in such a welter
with their Spencers and their Gavestons : eight years after
Bannockburn, and four-and-twenty before Crecy. That will
date it for English readers.

Kaiser Ludwig reigned some twenty-five years more, in a
busy and even strenuous, but not a successful way. He had
good windfalls, too ; for example, Brandenburg, as we shall
see. He made friends ; reconciled himself to his Brother
Kur-Pfalz and junior Cousinry there, settling handsomely, and
with finality, the debateable points between them. Enemies,
too, he made ; especially Johann the Luxemburger, King of
Bohemia, on what ground will be seen shortly, who became at
last inveterate to a high degree. But there was one supremely
sore element in his lot : a Pope at Avignon to whom he
could by no method make himself agreeable. Pope who put
him under ban, not long after that Miihldorf victory ; and
kept him so ; inexorable, let poor Ludwig turn as he might.
Ludwig's German Princes stood true to him ; declared, in
solemn Diet, the Pope’s ban to be mere spent shot, of no
avail in Imperial Politics. Ludwig went vigorously to Italy ;
tried setting-up a Pope of his own ; but that did not answer,
nor of course tend to mollify the Holiness at Avignon.

In fine, Ludwig had to carry this cross on his back, in a
sorrowful manner, all his days. The Pope at last, finding
Johann of Bohemia in a duly irritated state, persuaded him
into setting-up an Anti-Kaiser, — Johann’s second Son as Anti-
Kaiser, — who, though of little account, and called PJuffen-
Kaiser (Parsons’ Kaiser) by the public, might have brought
new troubles, had that lasted. We shall see some ultimate
glimpses of it farther on.

^ Rentsch, p. 313 ; Pauli ; etc.

128

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [BOOK IL

[1319

CHAPTER X

BRANDENBURG LAPSES TO THE KAISER

Two years before the victory at Miihldorf, a bad chance
befell in Brandenburg : the Ascanier Line of Markgraves or
Electors ended. Magniloquent Otto with the Arrow, Otto the
Short, Hermann the Tall, all the Ottos, Hermanns and others,
died by course of nature ; nephew Waldemar himself, a stir-
ring man, died prematurely (a.d. 1319), and left only a young
cousin for successor, who died few months after the Line of
Albert the Bear went out in Brandenburg. They had lasted
there about Two-hundred years. They had not been, in late
times, the successfulest Markgraves ; territories much split-up
among younger sons, joint Markgraves reigning, which seldom
answers ; yet to the last they always made stout fight for
themselves ; walked the stage in a high manner ; and surely
might be said to quit it creditably, leaving such a Branden-
burg behind them, chiefly of their making, during the Two
Centuries that had been given them before the night came.

There were plenty of Ascanier Cousins still extant in those
parts, Saxon dignitaries, Anhalt dignitaries, lineal descendants
of Albert the Bear ; to some of whom, in usual times, Albert’s
inheritance would naturally have been granted. But the times
were of battle, uncertainty, contested election : and the
Ascaniers, I perceive, had rather taken Friedrich of Austria’s
side, which proved the losing one. Kaiser Ludwig der Baier
would appoint none of these ; Anti-Kaiser Friedrich’s appoint-
ments, if he made any, could be only nominal, in those distant
Northern parts. Ludwig, after his victory of Muhldorf, pre-
ferred to consider the Electorate of Brandenburg as lapsed,
lying vacant, ungovemed these three years ; and now become
the Kaiser’s again. Kaiser, in consequence, gave it to his Son ;
whose name also is Ludwig : the date of the Investiture is
^ September 1390 (Pauli i. 391). Michaelis, i. 260-277.

CHAP. X.] BRANDENBURG TO THE KAISER 129
Z333]

1323 (year after that victory of Miihldorf) ; a date unfortunate
to Brandenburg. We come now into a Line of Bavaria/n
Markgraves, and then of Ltucemburg ones ; both of which are
of fatal significcmce to Brandenburg.

The Ascanier Cousins, high Saxon dignitaries some of them,
gloomed mere disappointment, and protested hard ; but could
not mend the matter, now or afterwards. Their Line went out
in Saxony too, in course of time ; gave place to the Wettins^
who are still there. The Ascanier had to be content with
the more pristine state of acquisitions, — ^high pedigrees, old
castles of Ascanien and Ballenstadt, territories of Anhalt or
what else they had ; — and never rose again to the lost height,
though the race still lives, and has qualities besides its
pedigree. We said the ^ Old Dessauer,’ Leopold Prince of
Anhalt-Dessau, was the head of it in Friedrich Wilhelm’s
time ; and to this day he has descendants. Catherine ii. of
Russia was of Anhalt-Zerbst, a junior branch. Albert the
Bear, if that is of any use to him, has still occasionally
notable representatives.

Ludwig junior, Kaiser Ludwig the Bavarian’s eldest son,
was still under age when appointed Kurfiirst of Brandenburg
in 1323 ; of course he had a ^ Stateholder'" (Viceregent, Statt-
halter) ; then, and afterwards in occasional absences of his, a
series of such. Kaiser’s Councillors, Burggraf Friedrich iv.
among them, had to take some thought of Brandenburg in its
new posture. Who these Brandenburg Statthalters were, is
heartily indifferent even to Dryasdust, — except that one of
them for some time was a Hohenzollern : which circumstance
Dryasdust marks with the due note of admiration. ‘ What
he did there,’ Dryasdust admits, ‘ is not written anywhere’ ;
— ^good, we will hope, and not evil ; — but only the Diploma
nominating him (of date 1346, not in Ludwig’s minority, but
many years after that ended now exists by way of record.
A difficult problem he, like the other regents and viceregents,
' Rentsch, p. 323.

VOL. L ^

130

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book IL

[1330

must have had ; little dreaming that it was intrinsically for a
grandson of his own, and long line of grandsons. The name of
this temporary Statthalter, the first Hohenzollem who had ever
the least concern with Brandenburg, is Burggraf Johann n.,
eldest Son of our distinguished MuUdorf friend Friedrich iv.;
and Grandfather (through another Friedrich) of Burggraf
Friedrich vi., — which last gentleman, as will be seen, did
doubtless reap the sowings, good and bad, of all manner of
men in Brandenburg. The same Johann ii. it was who pur-
chased Plassenburg Castle and Territory (cheap, for money
down), where the Family afterwards had its chief residence.
Hof, Town and Territory, had fallen to his Father in those
parts ; a gift of gratitude from Kaiser Ludwig : — most of the
Voigtland is now Hohenzollem.

Kaiser Ludwig the Bavarian left his sons Electors of
Brandenburg ; — ^ Electors, KurfurstSy now becomes the com-
moner term for so important a Country ; — ^Electors not in easy
circumstances. But no son of his succeeded Ludwig as Kaiser,
— successor in the Reich was that Pfaffen-Kaiser, Johann of
Bohemia's son, a Luxemburger once more. No son of
Ludwig’s ; nor did any descendant, — except, after four hun-
dred years, that unfortunate Kaiser Karl vii., in Maria
Theresa’s time. He was a descendant. Of whom we shall
hear more than enough. The unluckiest of all Kaisers, that
Karl VII. ; less a Sovereign Kaiser than a bone thrown into
the ring for certain royal dogs, Louis xv., George n. and
others, to worry about ; — watch-dogs of the gods ; apt some-
times to run into hunting instead of warding. — We will say
nothing more of Ludwig the Baier, or his posterity, at pre-
sent . we will glance across to Preussen, and see, for one
moment, what the Teutsch Ritters are doing in their new
Century. It is the year 1330; Johann n. at Numberg, as
yet only coming to be Burggraf, by no means yet administer-
ing in Brandenburg ; and Ludwig junior seven years old in
his new dignity there.

CHAP. X.] BRANDENBURG TO THE KAISER 131

* 330 ]

The Teutsch Ritters, after infinite travail, have subdued
heathen Preussen ; colonised the country with industrious
German immigrants; banked the Weichsel and the Nogat,
subduing their quagmires into meadows, and their waste
streams into deep ship-courses. Towns axe built, Konigsberg
(Kinff Ottocar’s town% Thoren (Thom, City of the Gates)y with
many others : so that the wild population and the tame now
lived tolerably together, under Gospel and Liibeck Law ; and
all was ploughing and trading, and a rich country ; which had
made the Teutsch Ritters rich, and victoriously at their ease
in comparison. But along with riches and the ease of victory,
the common bad consequences had ensued. Bitters given up
to luxuries, to secular ambitions ; Ritters no longer clad in
austere mail and prayer ; Bitters given up to wantonness of
mind and conduct ; solemnly vowing, and quietly not doing ;
without remorse or consciousness of wrong, daily eating for-
bidden fruit ; Ritters swelling more and more into the
fatted ox condition, for whom there is but one doom.
How far they had carried it, here is one symptom that
may teach us.

In the year 1330, one Werner von Orseln was Grandmaster
of these Ritters. The Grandmaster, who is still usually the
best man they can get, and who by theory is sacred to them
as a Grand-Lama or Pope among Cardinal-Lamas, or as an
Abbot to his Monks, — Grandmaster Werner, we say, had lain
down in Marienburg one afternoon of this year 1330, to take
his siesta, and was dreaming peaceably after a moderate repast,
when a certain devil-ridden mortal, Johann von Endorf, one of
his Ritters, long grumbling about severity, want of promotion
and the like, rushed in upon the good old man; ran him
through, dead for a ducat — and consummated a parricide
at which the very cross on one’s white cloak shudders ! Parri-
cide worse, a great deal, than that at the Ford of Reuss upon
one-eyed Albert.

We leave the shuddering Ritters to settle it, sternly
1 Voigt, iv. 474, 482.

182 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book ll.

U33®

vengeful ; whom, for a moment, it has struck broad-awake to
some sense of the very questionable condition they are getting
into.

CHAPTER XI

BAVARIAN KURFURSTS IN BRANDENBURG

Young Ludwig Kurfiirst of Brandenburg, Kaiser Ludwig’s
eldest son, having come of years, the Tutors or Statthalters
went home, — not wanted except in cases of occasional absence
henceforth ; — and the young man endeavoured to manage on
his own strength. His success was but indifferent ; he held
on, however, for a space of twenty years, better or worse.
‘ He helped King Edward iii. at the Siege of Cambray (a.d.
1839) ’ ; ^ whose French politics were often connected with the
Kaiser’s : it is certain, Kurfiirst Ludwig ‘ served personally
with 600 horse’ (on good payment, I conclude) ‘at that Siege
of Cambray ’ ; — and probably saw the actual Black Prince, and
sometimes dined with him, as English readers can imagine.
In Brandenburg he had many checks and difficult passages,
but was never quite beaten out, which it was easy to have
been.

A man of some ability, as we can gather, though not of
enough . he played his game with resolution, not without
skill ; but from the first the cards were against him. His
Father’s affairs going mostly ill were no help to his, which of
themselves went not well. The Brandenburgers, mindful of
their old Ascanier sovereigns, were ill-affected to Ludwig and
the new Bavarian sort. The Anhalt Cousinry gloomed
irreconcilable ; were never idle, digging pitfalls, raising
troubles. From them and others Kurfiirst Ludwig had
troubles enough ; which were fronted by him really not
amiss; which we wholly, or all but wholly, omit in this
place.

^ Michaelis, i. 279.

CHAP. XL] BAVARIAN KURPURSTS 188

S345[

A Resuscitated Ascanier ; the False Waldemar

The wickedest and worst trouble of their raising was that
of the resuscitated Waldemar (a.d. 1345) : ‘False Waldemar,’
as he is now called in Brandenburg Books. Waldemar was
the last, or as good as the last, of the Ascanier Markgraves ;
and he, two years before Ludwig ever saw those countries,
died in his bed, twenty-five good years ago ; and was buried,
and seemingly ended. But no ; after twenty-five years,
Waldemar reappears : ‘ Not buried or dead, only sham-buried,
sham-dead ; have been in the Holy Land all this while, doing
pilgrimage and penance; and am come to claim my own
again, — which strangers are much misusing ! ’ ^

Perkin Warbeck, Post-mortem Richard il, Dimitri of
Russia, Martin Guerre of the Causes Celebres : it is a common
story in the world, and needs no commentary now Post-
mortem Waldemar, it is said, W6is a Miller’s Man, ‘ of the
name of Jakob Rehback ’ ; who used to be about the real
Waldemar in a menial capacity, and had some resemblance to
him. He showed signets, recounted experiences, which had
belonged to the real Waldemar. Many believed in his pre-
tension, and took arms to assert it ; the Reich being in much
internal battle at the time ; poor Kaiser Ludwig, with his
Avignon Popes and angry Kings Johann, wading in deep
waters. Especially the disaffected Cousinry, or Princes of
Anhalt, believed and battled for Post-mortem Waldemar;
who were thought to have got him up from the first. Kur-
fiirst Ludwig had four or five most sad years with him ; —
all the worse when the PJaffen-Kaiser (King Johann’s son)
came on the stage, in the course of them (a.d. 1346), and
Kaiser Ludwig, yielding not indeed to him, but to Death,
vanished from it two years after ; ^ leaving Kurfiirst Ludwig
to his own shifts with the Pfaffen-Kaiser. Whom he could
not now hinder from succeeding to the Reich. He tried

* Michaelis, i. 279.

* Elected, 1314 ; Miihldorf, and Election complete ^ 1322 ; died, 1347, age 60.

lU THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book il.

[I34S

hard; set up, he and others, an Anti-Kaiser (Gunther of
Schwartzburg^ temporary Anti-Kaiser, whom English readers
can forget again) : he bustled, battled, negotiated, up and
down ; and ran across, at one time, to Preussen to the Teutsch
Ritters, — ^presumably to borrow money : — but it all would not
do. The Pfaffen-Kaiser carried it, in the Diet and out of the
Diet • Karl iv. by title ; a sorry enough Kaiser, and by nature
an enemy of Ludwig’s.

It was in this whirl of intricate misventures that Kurfiirst
Ludwig had to deal with his False Waldemar, conjured from
the deeps upon him, like a new goblin, where already there
were plenty, in the dance round poor Ludwig. Of which
nearly inextricable goblin-dance; threatening Brandenburg,
for one thing, with annihilation, and yet leading Brandenburg
abstrusely towards new birth and higher destinies, — how will
it be possible (without raising new ghosts, in a sense) to give
readers any intelligible notion ? — Here, flickering on the edge
of conflagration after duty done, is a poor Note which perhaps
the reader had better, at the risk of superfluity, still in part
take along with him ;

^Kaiser Henry vii., who died of sacramental wine, First of the Luxem-
burg Kaisers, left Johann still a boy of fifteen, who could not become
the second of them, but did in time produce the Second, who again
produced the Third and Fourth.

^Johann was already King of Bohemia; the important young gentle-
man, Ottocar’s grandson whom we saw murdered at Olmiitz none yet
knows by whom,” had left that throne vacant, and it lapsed to the Kaiser ;
who, the Nation also favouring, duly put in his son Johann. There was
a competitor, ^^Duke of the Tyrol,” who claimed on loose grounds;

My wife was Aunt of the young murdered King,” said he ; where-
fore” — ! — Kaiser, and Johann after him, rebutted this competitor; but
he long gave some trouble, having great wealth and means. He pro-
duced a Daughter, Margaret Heiress of the T3rrol, — with a terrible mouth
to her face, and none of the gentlest hearts in her body: — ^that was
perhaps his principal feat in the world. He died 1331 ; had styled
himself King of Bohemia " for twenty years, — ever since 1308 ; — but in
the last two years of his life he gave it up, and ceased from troubling,
having come to a beautiful agreement with Johann.

CHAP. XL] BAVARIAN KURPURSTS 135

*345]

Vohann^ namely^ wedded his eldest Son to this competitor’s fine
Daughter with the mouth (Year 1329) : In this manner do not Bohemia
and the Tyrol come together in my blood and in yours^ and both of us are
made men?" said the two contracting parties. — Alas^ no : the competitor
Duke, father of the Bride, died some two years after, probably with
diminished hopes of it ; and King Johann lived to see the hope expire
dismally altogether. There came no children, there came no— In fact
Margaret, after a dozen years of wedlock, in unpleasant circumstances,
broke it off as if by explosion ; took herself and her Tyrol irrevocably
over to Kaiser Ludwig, quite away from King Johann, — who, his hopes
of the Tyrol expiring in such dismal manner, was thenceforth the bitter
enemy of Ludwig and what held of him.*

Tyrol explosion was in 1342. And now, keeping these
preliminary dates and outlines in mind, we shall understand
the big-mouthed Lady better, and the consequences of her in
the world.

Margaret with the Pouch-mouth

What principally raised this dance of the devils round poor
Ludwig, I perceive, was a marriage he had made, three years
before Waldemar emerged ; of which, were it only for the sake
of the Bride’s name, some mention is permissible. Margaret
of the Tyrol, commonly called, by contemporaries and posterity,
MauUasche (Mouthpoke, Pocket-mouth), she was the bride : —
marriage done at Innspruck, 1342, under furtherance of father
Ludwig the Kaiser : — such a mouth as we can fancy, and a
character corresponding to it. This, which seemed to the
two Ludwigs a very conquest of the golden-fleece under con-
ditions, proved the beginning of their worst days to both of
them.

Not a lovely bride at all, this Maultasche ; who is verging
now towards middle life withal, and hsus had enough to cross
her in the world. Was already married thirteen years ago ;
not wisely nor by any means too well. A terrible dragon of
a woman. Has been in nameless domestic quarrels ; in wars
and sieges with rebellious vassals ; claps you an iron cap on
her head, and takes the field when need is : furious she-bear of

136 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book il.

[1343

the Tyrol. But she hfiw immense possessions, if wanting in
female charms. She came by mothers from that Duke of
Meran whom we saw get his death (for cause), in the Plassen-
burg a hundred years ago.^ Her ancestor was Husband to an
Aunt of that homicided Duke: from him, principally from
him, she inherits the Tyrol, Carinthia, Styria ; is herself an
only child, the last of a line : hugest Heiress now going. So
that, in spite of the mouth and humour, she has not wanted
for wooers, — especially prudent Fathers wooing her for their
sons.

In her Father’s lifetime, Johann King of Bohemia, always
awake to such symptoms of things, and having very peculiar
interests in this case, courted and got her for his Crown-
Prince (as we just saw), a youth of great outlooks, outlooks
towards Kaisership itself perhaps ; to whom she was wedded,
thirteen years ago, and duly brought the Tyrol for Heritage :
but with the worst results. Heritage, namely, could not be
had without strife with Austria, which likewise had claims.
Far worse, the marriage itself went awry : Johann’s Crown-
Prince was ^ a soft-natured Herr,’ say the Books : why bring
your big she-bear into a poor deer’s den ? Enough, the mar-
riage came to nothing, except to huge brawlings far enough
away from us : and Margaret Pouch-mouth has now divorced
her Bohemian Crown-Prince as a Nullity ; and again weds, on
similar terms, Kaiser Ludwig’s son, our Brandenburg Kurfiirst,
— who hopes possibly that he now may succeed as Kaiser, on
the strength of his Father and of the Tyrol. Which turned
out far otherwise.

The marriage was done in the Church of Innspruck, 10th
February 1342 (for we love to be particular), ‘ Kaiser Ludwig,’
happy man, ‘ and many Princes of the Empire, looking on ’ ;
little thinking what a coil it would prove. ^ At the high altar
she stript-oflF her veil’ (symbol of wifehood or widowhood),
‘and put on a jung^ernkranz (maiden*s-g8iTla,Tid)f symbolically
testifying how happy Ludwig junior still was. They had a

^ Antea, p. 103.

CHAP. XL] BAVARIAN KURFURSTS 187

* 3 «)

son by and by ; but their course otherwise, and indeed this-
wise too, was much chequered.

King Johann, seeing the Tyrol gone in this manner, gloomed
terribly upon his Crown-Prince ; flung him aside as a Nullity,
‘ Go to Moravia, out of sight, on an apanage, you ; be Crown-
Prince no longer!’ — ^And took to fighting Kaiser Ludwig;
colleagued diligently with the hostile Pope, with the King of
France ; intrigued and colleagued far and wide ; swearing by
every method everlasting enmity to Kaiser Ludwig ; and set-
up his son Karl as PfafFen-Kaiser. Nay, perhaps he was at
the bottom of Post-obit Waldemar too. In brief, he raised, he
mainly, this devils’-dance, in which, Kaiser Ludwig having
died, poor Kurfurst Ludwig, with Maultasche hanging on him,
is sometimes near his wits’ end.

Johann’s poor Crown-Prince, finding matters take this turn,
retired into Mahren (Moravia) as bidden ; ‘ Margrave of
Mahren’ ; and peaceably adjusted himself to his character of
Nullity and to the loss of Maultasche ; — chose, for the rest, a
new Princess in wedlock, with more moderate dimensions of
mouth ; and did produce sons and daughters on a fresh score.
Produced, among others, one Jobst, his successor in the apanage
or Margrafdom ; who, as Jobst^ or Jodocus, of Mahren^ made
some noise for himself in the next generation, and will tum-up
again in reference to Brandenburg in this History.

As for Margaret Pouch-mouth, she, with her new Husband
as with her old, continued to have troubles, pretty much as
the sparks fly upwards. She had fierce siegings after this, and
explosive procedures, — little short of Monk Schwartz, who was
just inventing gunpowder at the time. We cannot hope she
lived in Elysian harmony with Kurfurst Ludwig ; — ^the reverse,
in fact ; and oftenest with the whole breadth of Germany
between them, he in Brandenburg, she in the Tyrol. Nor did
Ludwig junior ever come to be Kaiser, as his Father and she
had hoped; on the contrary. King Johann of Bohemia’s people,
— it was they that next got the Kaisership and kept it ; a
new provocation to Maultasche.

138 THE MOHENZOLLERNS [book il.

1*345

Ludwig and she had a son, as we said ; Prince of the Tyrol
and appendages, titular Margraf of Mahren and much else, by
nature : but alas, he died about ten ; a precocious boy, — fancy
the wild weeping of a maternal She-bear ! And the Father
had already died a malicious world whispering that perhaps
she poisoned them both. The proud woman, now old too,
pursed her big coarse lips together at such a rumour,
and her big coarse soul, — ^in a gloomy scorn appealing
beyond the world ; in a sorrow that the world knew not of.
She solemnly settled her Tyrol and appendages upon the
Austrian Archdukes, who were children of her Mother’s Sister ;
whom she even installed into the actual government, to make
matters surer. This done, she retired to Vienna, on a pension
from them, there to meditate and pray a little, before Death
came ; as it did now in a short year or two. Tyrol and the
appendages continue with Austria from that hour to this,
Margaret’s little boy having died.

Margaret of the Pouch-mouth, rugged dragoon-major of a
woman, with occasional steel cap on her head, and capable of
swearing terribly in Flanders or elsewhere, remains in some
measure memorable to me. Compared with Pompadour,
Duchess of Cleveland, of Kendal and other high-rouged
unfortunate-females, whom it is not proper to speak of with-
out necessity, though it is often done, — Maultasche rises to the
rank of Historical. She brought the Tyrol and appendages
permanently to Austria ; was near leading Brandenburg to
annihilation, raising such a goblin-dance round Ludwig and
it, yet did abstrusely lead Brandenburg towards a far other
goal, which likewise has proved permanent for it.

^ In 1361, died Kurfiirst Ludwig ; 1363, the Boy ; 1366, Maultasche herself.

CHAP, XIL] BRANDENBURG IN KARLAS TIME 139

X347]

CHAPTER XII

BRANDENBURG IN KAISER KARL’s TIME; END OF
THE BAVARIAN KURFURSTS

E[aisee Ludwig died in 1347, while the False Waldemar
was still busy. We saw Karl iv., Johann of Bohemia’s second
son, come to the Kaisership thereupon, Johann’s eldest Nullity
being omitted. This Fourth Karl, — other three Karls are of
the Charlemagne set, Karl the Bald, the Fat, and suchlike, and
lie under our horizon, while Charles F^ih is of a still other set,
and known to everybody, — this Karl rv. is the Kaiser who
discovered the Well of Karlsbad (Bath of Karl), known to
Tourists of this day ; and made the Golden Bull^ which I forbid
all Englishmen to take for an agricultural Prize Animal, the
thing being far other, as is known to several.

There is little farther to be said of Karl in Reichs-History.
An unesteemed creature ; who strove to make his time peace-
able in this world, by giving from the Holy Roman Empire
with both hands to every bull-beggar, or ready-payer who
applied. Sad sign what the Roman Empire had come and
was coming to. The Kaiser’s shield, set up aloft in the
Roncalic Plain in Barbarossa’s time, intimated, and in earnest
too, ‘ Ho, every one that has suffered wrong ! ’ — ^intimates now,
‘ Ho, every one that can bully me, or has money in his pocket ! ’
Unadmiring posterity has confirmed the nickname of this
Karl IV.; and calls him PJaffen- Kaiser, He kept mainly at
Prag, ready for receipt of cash, and holding well out of harm’s
way. In younger years he had been much about the French
Court ; in Italy he had suffered troubles, almost assassinations ;
much blown to and fro, poor light wretch, on the chaotic
winds of his Time, — steering towards no star.

Johann, King of Bohemia, did not live to see Karl an
acknowledged Kaiser. Old Johann, blind for some time back,

UO THE HOHENZOLLEHNS [book ii.

[X347

had perished two years before that event; — bequeathing a
Heraldic Symbol to the World’s History and to England’s, if
nothing more. Poor man, he had crusaded in Preussen in a
brilliant manner, being fond of fighting. He wrung Silesia,
gradually by purchase and entreaty (pretio ac prece\ from the
Polish King;^ joined it firmly to Bohemia and Germany, —
unconsciously waiting for what higher destinies Silesia might
have. For Maultasche and the Tyrol he brought sad woes on
Brandenburg ; and yet was unconsciously leading Brandenburg,
by abstruse courses, whither it had to go. A restless, osten-
tatious, far-grasping, strong-handed man ; who kept the world
in a stir wherever he was. All which has proved voiceless in
the World’s memory ; while the casual Shadow of a Feather he
once wore has proved vocal there. World’s memory is very
whimsical now and then.

Being much implicated with the King of France, who with
the Pope was his chief stay in these final Anti-Ludwig opera-
tions, Johann, — in 1346, Pfaffen-Kaiser Karl just set on foot,
— had led his chivalry into France, to help against the English
Edwards, who were then very intrusive there. Johann was
blind, but he had good ideas in war. At the Battle of Crecy,
24th August 1346, he advised we know not what; but he
actually fought, though stone-blind. ‘ Tied his bridle to that
of the Knight next him ; and charged in,’ — like an old blind
war-horse kindling madly at the sound of the trumpet ; — and
was there, by some English lance or yew, laid low. They
found him on that field of carnage (field of honour, too, in a
sort) ; his old blind face looking, very blindly, to the stars : on
his shield was blazoned a Plume of three ostrich-feathers with
‘ Ich dien (I serve) ’ written under : — with which emblem every
English reader is familiar ever since ! This Editor himself, in
very tender years, noticed it on the Britannic Majesty’s war-
drums ; and had to inquire of children of a larger growth
what the meaning might be.

That is all I had to say of King Johann and his ‘ Ich dim^
^ X327-41 (Kohler, p. 302).

CHAP. XII.] BRANDENBURG IN KARL’S TIME 141
1349}

Of the Luxemburg Kaisers (four in number, two sons of Karl
still to come) ; who, except him of the sacramental wine, with
^ Ich dim ’ for son, are good for little ; and deserve no memory
from mankind except as they may stick, not easily extricable,
to the history of nobler men : — of them also I could wish to
be silent, but must not. Must at least explain how they came
in, as ‘ Luxemburg Kurfursts ’ in Brandenburg ; and how they
went out, leaving Brandenburg not annihilated, but veiy
near it.

End of Resuscitated Waldemar ; Kurfurst Ludwig sells out

Imaginary Waldemar being still busy in Brandenburg, it
was natural for Kaiser Karl to find him genuine, and keep-up
that goblin-dance round poor Kurfurst Ludwig, the late
Kaiser’s son, by no means a lover of Karl’s. Considerable
support was managed to be raised for Waldemar. Kaiser
Karl regularly infeoffed him as real Kurfurst, so far as parch-
ment could do it; and in case of his decease, says Karl’s
diploma farther, the Princes of Anhalt shall succeed, — Ludwig
in any case is to be zero henceforth. War followed, or what
they called war: much confused invading, bickering and
throttling, for two years to come. ‘Most of the Towns
declared for Waldemar, and their old Anhalt line of Mar-
graves’ : Ludwig and the Bavarian sort are clearly not popular
here. Ludwig held-out strenuously, however ; would not be
beaten. He had the King of Denmark for Brother-in-law ;
had connexions in the Reich : perhaps still better he had the
Reichs^Insignia^ lately his Father’s, still in hand. He stood
obstinate siege from the Kaiser’s people and the Anhalters;
shouted-in Denmark to help ; started an Anti-Kaiser, as we
said, — ^temporary Anti-Kaiser Gunther of Schwartzburg, whom
the reader can forget a second time : — in brief, Ludwig con-
trived to bring Kaiser Karl, and Imaginary Waldemar with his
Anhalters, to a quietus and negotiation, and to get Branden-
burg cleared of them. Year 1349, they went their ways;

14* THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book il.

[1349

and that devils'-dance, which had raged five years and more
round Ludwig, was fairly got laid or lulled again.

Imaginary Waldemar, after some farther ineffectual wrig-
glings, retired altogether into private life, at the Court of
Dessau; and happily died before long. Died at the Court
of Dessau; the Anhalt Cousins treating him to the last as
Head Representative of Albert the Bear, and real Prince
Waldemar ; for which they had their reasons. Portraits of
this False Waldemar still turn-up in the German Print-
shops ; ^ and represent a very absurd fellow, much muffled in
drapery, mouth partially open, eyes wholly and widely so, —
never yet recovered from his astonishment at himself and
things in general ! How it fared with poor Brandenburg, in
these chaotic throttlings and vicissitudes, under the Bavarian
Kurfiirsts, we can too well imagine ; and that is little to
what lies ahead for it.

However, in that same year 1349, temporary quietus having
come, Kurfurst Ludwig, weary of the matter, gave it over
to his Brother : ‘ Have not I an opulent Maultasche, Gorgon-
Wife, susceptible to kindness, in the Tyrol ; have not I in
the Reich elsewhere resources, appliances ? ’ thought Kurfurst
Ludwig. And gave the thing over to his next Brother.
Brother whose name also is Ludwig (as their Fathers also had
been, three Ludwigs at once, for our dear Germans shine in
nomenclature) : ‘ Ludwig the Roman this new one ; — the
elder Brother, our acquaintance, being Ludwig simply, dis-
tinguishable too as Kurfurst Ludwig, or even as Ludwig
Senior at this stage of the affair. Kurfurst Ludwig, there-
fore, Year 1349, washes his hands of Brandenburg while the
quietus lasts ; retaining only the Electorship and Title ; and
goes his ways, resolving to take his ease in Bavaria and the
Tyrol thenceforth. How it fared with him there, with his
loving Gorgon and him, we will not ask farther. They had
always separate houses to fly to, in case of extremity ! They

^ In Kloss ( Vaterldndtsche GemaldCy ii. 29), a sorry Compilation, above referred
to, without value except for the old Excerpts, etc., there is a Copy of it.

CHAP. XII.J BRANDENBURG IN KARUS TIME 148

1361]

held out, better or worse, twelve years more ; and Ludwig
left his little Boy still surviving him, in 1861.

Second^ and then ITiird and last^ of the Bavarian Kwfursta
in Brandenburg

In Brandenburg, the new Markgraf Ludwig, who we say is
called Hhe Roma/n'' {Lvdmg der iZom^r, having been in Rome)
to distinguish him, continued warring with the Anarchies,
fifteen years in a rather tough manner, without much victory
on either side ; — made his peace with Kaiser Karl however,
delivering-up the Reichs-Insignia ; and tried to put down the
domestic Robbers, who had got on foot, ‘ many of them per-
sons of quality';^ — till he also died, childless, a.d. 1865;
having been Kurfiirst too, since his Brother’s death, for some
four years.

Whereupon Brandenburg, Electorship and all Titles with
it, came to Otto, third son of Kaiser Ludwig, who is happily
the last of these Bavarian Electors. They were an unlucky
set of Sovereigns, not hitherto without desert ; and the un-
lucky Country suffered much under them. By far the
unluckiest, and by far the worst, was this Otto ; a dissolute,
drinking, entirely worthless Herr; under whom, for eight
years, confusion went worse confounded ; as if plain Chaos
were coming ; and Brandenburg and Otto grew tired of each
other to the last degree.

In which state of matters, a.d. 1378, Kaiser Karl offered
Otto a trifle of ready-money to take himself away. Otto
accepted greedily ; sold his Electorate and big Mark of Bran-
denburg to Kaiser Karl for an old song, — 200,000 thalers
(about 30,000Z., and only half of it ever paid) ; ^ — withdrew
to his Schloss of Wolfstein in Bavaria ; and there, on the
strength of that or other sums, * rolled deep as possible in
every sort of debauchery.’ And so in few years puddled him-
self to death ; foully ending the Bavarian set of Kurfiirsts.

^ Michaelis, i. 282. • Ib. i. 283.

144 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book ll.

1x373

They had lasted fifty years ; with endless trouble to the
Country and to themselves; and with such mutual profit
as we have seen.

CHAPTER XIII

LUXEMBURG KURFURSTS IN BRANDENBURG

If Brandenburg suffered much imder the Bavarian Kur-
fiirsts for Fifty years, it was worse, and approached to the
state of worst, under the Luxemburgers, who lasted for some
Forty more. Ninety years of anarchy in all ; which at length
brought it to great need of help from the Fates ! —

Karl IV. made his eldest Boy Wenzel, still only about twelve,
Elector of Brandenburg ; ^ Wenzel shall be Kaiser and King
of Bohemia, one day, thinks Karl ; — which actually came to
pass, and little to Wenzel’s profit, by and by. In the mean
while Karl accompanied him to Brandenburg ; which country
Karl liked much at the money, and indeed ever after, in his
old days, he seemed rather to busy himself with it. He
assembled some kind of Stdnde (States) twice over ; got the
Country incorporated with Bohemia’ by them, and made
tight and handy so far. Brandenburg shall rest from its
woes, and be a silent portion of Bohemia henceforth, thinks
Karl, — if the Heavens so please. Karl, a futile Kaiser, would
fain have done something to ‘ encourage trade ’ in Branden-
burg ; though one sees not what it was he did, if anything.
He built the Schloss of Tangermiinde, and oftenest lived
there in time coming ; a quieter place than even Prag for him.
In short, he appears to have fancied his cheap Purchase, and
to have cheered his poor old futile life with it, as vrith one
thing that had been successful. Poor old creature : he had
been a Kaiser on false terms, ‘ Ho, every one that dare bully
me, or that has money in his pocket ’ ; — a Kaiser that could
* 1373 (bom 1361).

145

CHAP. XilL] LUXEMBUEG KURFUESTS
1373]

not but be futile ! In five-years time he died ; ^ and doubt-
less was regretted in Brandenburg and even in the Reich, in
comparison with what came next.

In Brandenburg he left, instead of one indifierent or even
bad governor steadily tied to the place and in earnest to
make the best of it, a fluctuating series of governors holding
loose, and not in earnest ; which was infinitely worse. These
did not try to govern it ; sent it to the Pawnbroker, to a
fluctuating series of Pawnbrokers ; under whom, for the next
Five-and-thirty years, Brandenburg tasted all the fruits of
Non-govemment, that is to say, Anarchy or Government by
the Pawnbroker; and sank faster and faster, towards anni-
hilation as it seemed. That was its fate under the Luxem-
burg Kurfursts, who made even the Bavarian and all others
be regretted.

One thing Kaiser Karl did, which ultimately proved the
saving of Brandenburg : made friendship with the Hohen-
zollem Burggraves. These, Johann ii., temporary ^ Statt-
halter ’ Johann, and his Brother, who were Co-regents in the
Family Domain, when Karl first made appearance, — had stood
true to Kaiser Ludwig and his Son, so long as that play
lasted at all ; nay one of these Burggraves was talked of
as Kaiser after Ludwig’s death, but had the wisdom not to
try. Kaiser Ludwig being dead, they still would not recog-
nise the PJbffen-Kaiser Karl, but held gloomily out. So
that Karl had to march in force into the Niimberg country ;
and by great promises, by considerable gifts, and the ^ex-
ample of the other Princes of the Empire,’ ^ brought them
over to do homage.

After which, their progress, and that of their successor
(Johann’s son, Friedrich v.), in the grace of Karl, was some-

^ King of Bohemia, 1346, on bis Father’s death ; Kaiser (acknowledged on
Ludwig the Baief^s death), 1347 ; died, 1378, aged 62.

* ‘Hallow-eve, 1347, on the Field of NUrnberg,’ Agreement was come to
(Rentsch, p. 326).

VOL. I.

X

146 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book rt.

(1378

thing extraordinary. Karl gave his Daughter to this Fried-
rich v.’s eldest Son ; appointed a Daughter of Friedrich’s for
his own Second Prince, the famed Sigismimd, famed that is
to be, — which latter match did not take effect, owing to
changed outlooks after Karl’s death. Nay there is a Deed
stiU extant about marrying children not yet bom : Karl to
produce a Princess within five years, and Burggraf Friedrich v.
a Prince, for that purpose ! ^ But the Burggraf never had
another Prince ; though Karl produced the due Princess, and
was ready, for his share. Unless indeed this strange eager-
looking Document, not dated in the old Books, may itself
relate to the above wedding which did come to pass ? — Years
before that, Karl had made his much-esteemed Burggraf
Friedrich v. ‘ Captain - General of the Reich ’ ; ‘ Imperial
Vicar’ {Substitute^ if need were), and much besides ; nay, had
given him the Landgraviate of Elsass (Alsace )^ — so far as
lay with him to give, — of which valuable country this Fried-
rich had actual possession so long as the Kaiser lived.
‘ Best of men,’ thought the poor light Kaiser ; ‘ never saw
such a man ! ’

Which proved a salutary thought, after all. The man
had a little Boy Fritz (not the betrothed to Karl’s Princess),
still chasing butterflies at Culmbach, when Karl died. In
this Boy lie new destinies for Brandenburg : towards him,
and not towards annihilation, are Karl and the Luxemburg
Kurfursts and Pawnbrokers unconsciously guiding it.

CHAPTER XIV

BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH VI

Karl left three young Sons, Wenzel, Sigismund, Johann;
and also a certain Nephew much older ; all of whom now
more or less concern us in this unfortunate History.

^ Rcntsch, p. 336,

CHAP. XIV.] BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH VI 147

1398]

Wenzel the eldest Son, heritable Kurfiirst of Brandenburg
as well as King of Bohemia, was as yet only seventeen, who
nevertheless got to be Kaiser,^ — and went widely astray, poor
soul. The Nephew was no other than Margrave Jobst of
Moravia (son of Maultasche‘*s late Nullity there), now in the
vigour of his years and a stirring man : to him, for a time,
the chief management in Brandenburg fell, in these circum-
stances. Wenzel, still a minor, and already Kaiser and King
of Bohemia, gave - up Brandenburg to his two younger
Brothers, most of it to Sigismund, with a cutting for Johann,
to help their apanages ; and applied his own powers to
govern the Holy Roman Empire, at that early stage of life.

To govern the Holy Roman Empire, poor soul ; — or rather
* to drink beer, and dance with the girls ’ ; in which, if
defective in other things, Wenzel had an eminent talent. He
was one of the worst Kaisers, and the least victorious on
record. He would attend to nothing in the Reich ; ‘ the
Prag white beer, and girls ’ of various complexion, being
much preferable, as he was heard to say. He had to fling
his poor Queen’s Confessor into the River Moldau, — Johann
of Nepomuk, Saint so-called, if he is not a fable altogether ;
whose Statue stands on Bridges ever since, in those parts.
Wenzel’s Bohemians revolted against him ; put him in jail ;
and he broke prison, a boatman’s daughter helping him out,
with adventures. His Germans were disgusted with him ;
deposed him from the Kaisership ; ^ chose Rupert of the
Pfalz ; and then after Rupert’s death,® chose Wenzel’s own
Brother Sigismund, in his stead, — left Wenzel to jumble
about in his native Bohemian element, as King there, for
nineteen years longer, still breaking pots to a ruinous extent.

He ended, by apoplexy, or sudden spasm of the heart;
terrible Zisca, as it were, killing him at secondhand. For
Zisca, stout and furious, blind of one eye and at last of both,
a kind of human rhinoceros driven mad, had risen out of the

' 1378* on his Father’s death.

• 25th May 1400 (Kohler, p. 331).

• 1410 {a. p. 336).

148

THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book It

ashes of murdered Huss, and other bad Papistic doings, in
the interim ; and was tearing-up the world at a huge rate.
Rhinoceros Zisca was on the Weissenberg, or a still nearer
Hill of Prag since called Zisca-Berg (Zisca Hill) ; and none
durst whisper of it to the King. A servant waiting at dinner
inadvertently let -slip the word: — ‘Zisca there? Deny it,
slave ! ’ cried Wenzel frantic. Slave durst not deny. Wenzel
drew his sword to run at him, but fell down dead : that was
the last pot broken by Wenzel. The hapless royal ex-imperial
Phantasm self-broken in this manner.^ Poor soul, he came
to the Kaisership too early; was a thin violent creature,
sensible to the charms and horrors of created objects; and
had terrible rhinoceros Ziscas and unruly homed-cattle to
drive. He was one of the worst Kaisers ever known, — could
have done Opera -singing much better; — and a sad sight
to Bohemia. Let us leave him there : he was never actual
Elector of Brandenburg, having given it up in time ; never
did any ill to that poor Country.

Sigismund is Kxirfurst of Brandenburgs but is King Of
Hungary also

The real Kurfurst of Brandenburg all this while was Sigis-
mund Wenzel’s next Brother, under tutelage of Cousin Jobst
or otherwise ; — real and yet imaginary, for he never himself
governed, but always had Jobst of Mahren or some other in
his place there. Sigismund, as above said, was to have
married a Daughter of Burggraf Friedrich v. ; and he was
himself, as was the young lady, well inclined to this arrange-
ment. But the old people being dead, and some offer of a
King’s Daughter turning-up for Sigismund, Sigismund broke
off; and took the King’s Daughter, King of Hungary’s, —
not without regret then and afterwards, as is believed. At
any rate, the Hungarian charmer proved a wife of small merit,
and a Hungarian successor she had was a wife of light con-
' 30th July 1419 (Hormayr, vii. 119).

CHAP. XIV.] SIGISMUND AND BURGGRAVES 149

duct even ; Hungarian charmers, and Hungarian affairs, were
much other than a comfort to Sigismund.

As for the disappointed Princess, Burggraf Friedrich’s
Daughter, she said nothing that we hear ; silently became a
Nun, an Abbess : and through a long life looked out, with
her thoughts to herself, upon the loud whirlwind of things,
where Sigismund (oftenest like an imponderous rag of con-
spicuous colour) was riding and tossing. Her two Brothers
also, joint Burggraves after their Father’s death, seemed to
have reconciled themselves without difficulty. The elder of
them was already Sigismund’s Brother-in-law; married to
Sigismund’s and Wenzel’s sister, — by such predestination as
we saw. Burggraf Johann in. was the name of this one :
a stout fighter and manager for many years ; much liked, and
looked to, by Sigismund. As indeed were both the Brothers,
for that matter ; always, together or in succession, a kind of
right-hand to Sigismund. Friedrich the younger Burggraf,
and ultimately the survivor and inheritor (Johann having left
no sons), is the famed Burggraf Friedrich vi., the last and
notablest of all the Burggraves. A man of distinguished
importance, extrinsic and intrinsic; chief or among the very
chief of German public men in his time ; — and memorable to
Posterity, and to this History, on still other grounds ! But
let us not anticipate.

Sigismund, if apanaged with Brandenburg alone, and wedded
to his first love, not a King’s Daughter, might have done
tolerably well there ; — better than Wenzel, with the Empire
and Bohemia, did. But delusive Fortune threw her golden
apple at Sigismund too ; and he, in the wide high world, had
to play strange pranks. His Father-in-law died in Hungary,
Sigismund’s first wife his only child. Father-in-law bequeath^
Hungary to Sigismund ; ^ who plunged into a strange sea
thereby; got troubles without number, beatings not a few,
— and had even to take boat, and sail for his life down
to Constantinople, at one time. In which sad adventure
^ 1387 (Sigismund’s age then twenty).

160 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book II.

[1387

Burggraf Johann escorted him, and as it were tore him out
by the hair of the head. These troubles and adventures
lasted many years ; in the course’of which, Sigismund, trying
all manner of friends and expedients, found in the Burggraves
of Niimberg, Johann and Friedrich, with their talents, posses-
sions and resources, the main or almost only sure support
he got.

No end of troubles to Sigismund, and to Brandenburg
through him, from this sublime Hungarian legacy ! Like a
remote fabulous golden -fleece, which you have to go and
conquer first, and which is worth little when conquered.
Before ever setting out (a.d. 1387), Sigismund saw too clearly
he would have cash to raise : an operation he had never done
with, all his life afterwards. He pawned Brandenburg to
Cousin Jobst of Mahren; got ‘20,000 Bohemian gulden,’
— I guess, a most slender sum, if Dryasdust would but interpret
it. This was the beginning of Pawnings to Brandenburg ; of
which when will the end be? Jobst thereby came into
Brandenburg on his own right for the time, not as Tutor or
Guardian, which he had hitherto been. Into Brandenburg ;
and there was no chance of repayment to get him out again.

Cousin Jobst has Brandenburg m Pawn

Jobst tried at first to do some governing ; but finding all
very anarchic, grew unhopeful ; took to making matters easy
for himself. Took, in fact, to turning a penny on his pawn-
ticket; alienating crown domains, winking hard at robber-
barons, and the like ; — and after a few years, went home to
Moravia, leaving Brandenburg to shift for itself, under a
Statthalter iVkeregent^ more like a hungiy land -steward),
whom nobody took the trouble of respecting. Robber-castles
flourished ; all else decayed. No highway not unsafe ; many
a Turpin with sixteen quarters, and styling himself Edler Herr
(noble Gentleman), took to ‘ living from the saddle ’ : — ^what
are Hamburg pedlars made for but to be robbed ?

CHAP. XIV.] BRANDENBURG IN PAWN 161
13983

The Towns suffered much ; any trade they might have had,
going to wreck in this manner. Not to speak of private feuds,
which abounded ad liUtwm. Neighbouring potentates. Arch-
bishop of Magdeburg and others, struck-in also at discretion,
as they had gradually got cwjcustomed to do, and snapped
away {abzwacicten) some convenient bit of territory, or, more
legitimately, they came across to coerce, at their own hand,
this or the other Edler Herr of the Turpin sort, whom there
was no other way of getting at, when he carried matters quite
too high. ‘Droves of six-hundred swine,’ — I have seen (by
reading in those old Books) certain noble Gentlemen, ‘of
Putlitz,’ I think, driving them openly, captured by the
stronger hand; and have heard the short querulous squeak
of the bristly creatures ; ‘ What is the use of being a pig at
all, if I am to be stolen in this way, and surreptitiously made
into ham ? ’ Pigs do continue to be bred in Brandenburg •
but it is under such discouragements. Agriculture, trade,
well-being and well-doing of any kind, it is not encourage-
ment they are meeting here. Probably few countries, not
even Ireland, have a worse outlook, unless help come.^

Jobst came back in 1398, after eight-years absence ; but
no help came with Jobst. The Neumark part of Brandenburg,
which was Brother Johann’s portion, had fallen home to Sigis-
mund. Brother Johann having died : but Sigismund, far from
redeeming old pawn-tickets with the Newmark, pawned the
Newmark too, — the second Pawnage of Brandenburg. Pawned
the Newmark to the Teutsch Ritters ‘ for 63,000 Hungarian
gold gulden ’ (I think, about 30,000Z.) : and gave no part of
it to Jobst ; had not nearly enough for himself and his Hun-
garian occasions.

Seeing which, and hearing such squeak of pigs surreptitiously
driven, with little but discordant sights and sounds everywhere,
Jobst became disgusted with the matter; and resolved to
wash his hands of it, at least to have his money out of it
again. Having sold what of the Domains he could to persons
' Pauli, i. 541-612. Michaelis, i. 283-285.

162 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book il.

[X410

of quality, at an uncommonly easy rate, and so pocketed what
ready-cash there was among them, he made-over his pawn-
ticket, or properly he himself repawned Brandenburg to the
Saxon Potentate, a speculative moneyed man, Markgraf of
Meissen, ‘ Wilhelm the Rich ’ so-called. Pawned it to Wilhelm
the Rich, — sum not named ; and went home to Moravia,
there to wait events. This is the third Brandenburg pawn-
ing : let us hope there may be a fourth and last.

Brandenburg in the hands of the Pawnbrokers ; Rupert of
the Pfalz is Kaiser

And so we have now reached that point in Brandenburg
History when, if some help do not come, Brandenburg will
not long be a country, but will either get dissipated in pieces
and stuck to the edge of others where some government
is, or else go waste again, and fall to the bisons and wild
bears.

Who now is Kurfiirst of Brandenburg, might be a question.
‘ I wwquestionably ! ’ Sigismund would answer, with astonish-
ment. ‘Soft, your Hungarian Majesty,’ thinks Jobst : ‘till
my cash is paid, may it not probably be another ? ’ This
question has its interest : the Electors just now (a.d. 1400)
are about deposing Wenzel ; must choose some better Kaiser.
If they wanted another scion of the House of Luxemburg ; a
mature old gentleman of sixty; full of plans, plausibilities,
pretensions,— Jobst is their man. Jobst and Sigismund were
of one mind as to Wenzel’s going ; at least Sigismund voted
clearly so, and Jobst said nothing counter : but the Kurfursts
did not think of Jobst for successor. After some stumbling,
they fixed upon Rupert Kur-Pfalz (Elector Palatine, Ruprecht
von der Pfalz) as Kaiser.

Rupert of the Pfalz proved a highly respectable Kaiser;
lasted for ten years (1400-1410), with honour to himself and
the Reich. A strong heart, strong head, but short of means.
He chastised petty mutiny with vigour ; could not bring down

CHAP. XIV.] KAISER RUPERT AND BURGGRAF 168
14101

the Milanese Visconti, who had perched themselves so high
on money paid to Wenzel ; could not heal the schism of the
Church (Double or Triple Pope, Rome- Avignon affair), or
awaken the Reich to a sense of its old dignity and present
loose condition. In the late loose times, as Antiquaries
remark,^ most Members of the Empire, Petty Princes even and
Imperial Towns, had been struggling to set-up for themselves ;
and were now concerned chiefly to become Sovereign in their
own Territories. And Schilter informs us, it was about this
period that most of them attained such rather unblessed con-
summation ; Rupert of himself not able to help it, with all his
willingness. The People called him ^ Rupert Klemm (Rupert
SmitKs-vice) ’ from his resolute ways ; which nickname, — given
him not in hatred, but partly in satirical goodwill, — ^is itself a
kind of history. From Historians of the Reich he deserves
honourable regretful mention.

He had for Empress a Sister of Burggraf Friedrich’s ; which
high lady, unknown to us otherwise, except by her Tomb at
Heidelberg, we remember for her Brother’s sake. Kaiser
Rupert, — ^great-grandson of that Kur-Pfalz who was Kaiser
Ludwig’s elder brother, — is the culminating point of the
Electors Palatine; the Highest that ♦leidelberg produced.
Ancestor of those famed Protestant ^ Palatines ’ ; of all the
Palatines or PJhlzes that reign in these late centuries. Ancestor
of the present Bavarian Majesty ; Kaiser Ludwig’s race having
died out. Ancestor of the unfortunate Wimterlcbnig^ Friedrich
King of Bohemia, who is too well known in English History ;
— ancestor also of Charles xii. of Sweden, a highly creditable
fact of the kind to him. Fact indisputable : a cadet of Pfalz-
Zweibriick {Deux-Pcmis^ as the French call it), direct from
Rupert, went to serve in Sweden in his soldier business ; distin-
guished himself in soldiering; — had a Sister of the great
Gustaf Adolf to wife ; and from her a renowned Son, Karl
Gustaf (Christina’s Cousin), who succeeded as King ; who again
had a Grandson made in his own likeness, only still more of
^ Kohler, p. 334 ; who quotes S

154 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [BOOK n.

[X4X*

iron in his composition. — Enough now of Rupert SmitlCs-vice ;
who died in 1410, and left the Reich again vacant.

Rupert’s funeral is hardly done, when, over in Preussen, far
off in the Memel region, place called Tannenberg, where there
is still * a churchyard to be seen,’ if little more, the Teutsch
Ritters had, unexpectedly, a terrible Defeat : consummation of
their Polish Miscellaneous quarrels of long standing ; and the
end of their high courses in this world. A ruined Teutsch
Ritterdom, as good as ruined, ever henceforth. Kaiser Rupert
died 18th May; and on the 15th July, within two months,
was fought that dreadful ‘ Battle of Tannenberg,’ — Poland and
Polish King, with miscellany of savage Tartars and revolted
Prussians, versus Teutsch Ritterdom ; all in a very high mood
of mutual rage ; the very elements, ‘ wild thunder, tempest and
rain-deluges,’ playing chorus to them on the occasion.^ Ritter-
dom fought lionlike, but with insufficient strategic and othet
wisdom ; and was driven nearly distracted to see its pride
tripped into the ditch by such a set. Vacant Reich could not
in the least attend to it ; nor can we farther at present.

Sigismimd^ with a struggle^ becomes Kaiser

Jobst and Sigismund were competitors for the Kaisership ;
Wenzel, too, striking-in with claims for reinstatement : the
House of Luxemburg divided against itself. Wenzel, finding
reinstatement not to be thought of, threw his weight, such as
it was, into the scale of Cousin Jobst ; remembering angrily
how Brother Sigismund voted in the Deposition case, ten years
ago. The contest was vehement, and like to be lengthy. Jobst,
though he had made-over his pawn-ticket, claimed to be
Elector of Brandenburg ; and voted for Himself. The like,
with still more emphasis, did Sigismund, or Burggraf Friedrich
acting for him ; ^ Sigismund, sure, is Kur-Brandenburg, though
under pawn !’ argued Friedrich, — and, I almost guess, though
that is not said, produced from his own purse, at some stage
' Voigt, vii. 82. BUschin£, Erdbtschreibung (Hamburg, 1770), ii. 1038.

CHAP. XIV.] KAISER SIGISMUND 166

X4XX1

of the business, the actual money for Jobst, to close his
Brandenburg pretension.

Both were elected (majority contested in this manner) ; and
old Jobst, then above seventy, was like to have given much
trouble : but happily in three months he died ; ^ and Sigismund
became indisputable. Jobst was the son of Maultasche’s
Nullity ; him too, in an involuntary sort, she was the cause of.
In his day Jobst made much noise in the world, but did little
or no good in it. ‘ He was thought a great man,’ says one
satirical old Chronicler ; ‘ and there was nothing great about
him but the beard.’

^ The cause of Sigismund's success with the Electors,’ says
Kohler, ^or of his having any party among them, was the
faithful and unwearied diligence which had been used for him
by the above-named Burggraf Friedrich vi. of Niimberg, who
took extreme pains to forward Sigismund to the Empire;
pleading that Sigismund and Wenzel would be sure to agree
well henceforth, and that Sigismund, having already such
extensive territories (Hungary, Brandenburg and so forth) by
inheritance, would not be so exact about the /2^icAj-Tolls and
other Imperial Incomes. This same Friedrich also, when the
Election fell out doubtful, was Sigismund’s best support in
Germany, nay almost his right-hand, through whom he did
whatever was done.’ ^

Sigismund is Kaiser, then, in spite of Wenzel. King of
Hungary, after unheard-of troubles and adventures, ending
some years ago in a kind of peace and conquest, he has long
been. King of Bohemia, too, he at last became; having
survived Wenzel, who was childless. Kaiser of the Holy
Roman Empire, and so much else : is not Sigismund now a
great man ? Truly the loom he weaves upon, in this world, is
very large. But the weaver was of headlong, high-pacing,
flimsy nature ; and both warp and woof were gone dreadfully
entangled ! —

This is the Kaiser Sigismund who held the Council of
^ ‘ Jodocus Barhatus^ 2ist July 1411. * Kohler, p. 337.

166 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [BOOK IL

[I4M

Constance; and ‘blushed visibly,’ when Huss, about to die,
alluded to the Letter of Safeconduct granted him, which was
issuing in such fashion.^ Sigismund blushed ; but could not
conveniently mend the matter, — so many matters pressing on
him just now. As they perpetually did, and had done. An
always-hoping, never-resting, unsuccessful, vain and empty
Kaiser. Specious, speculative ; given to eloquence, diplomacy,
and the windy instead of the solid arts; — always short of
money for one thing. He roamed about, and talked
eloquently ; — aiming high, and generally missing : — how he
went to conquer Hungary, and had to float down the Donau
instead, with an attendant or two, in a most private manner,
and take refuge with the Grand Turk : this we have seen, and
this is a general emblem of him. Hungary and even the Reich
have at length become his ; but have brought small triumph
in any kind ; and instead of ready-money, debt on debt. His
Majesty has no money, and his Majesty’s occasions need it
more and more.

He is now (a.d. 1414) holding this Council of Constance,
by way of healing the Church, which is sick of Three simul-
taneous Popes and of much else. He finds the problem
difficult ; finds he will have to run into Spain, to persuade a
refractory Pope there, if eloquence can (as it cannot) . all
which requires money, money. At opening of the Council, he
‘officiated as deacon’; actually did some kind of litanying
‘ with a surplice over him,’ * though Kaiser and King of the
Romans. But this passage of his opening speech is what I
recollect best of him there : ‘ Right Reverend Fathers, date
operam ut ilia nefanda schisma eradicetur^ exclaims Sigismund,
intent on having the Bohemian Schism well dealt with, —
which he reckons to be of the feminine gender. To which a
Cardinal mildly remarking ^Domine^ schisma est generis neutrius
{Schisma is neuter, your Majesty),’ — Sigismund loftily replies,
‘ Ego sum Rex Romcmus et super grammaticam (I am King of

^ 15th June 1415.

* 25th December 1414 (Kohler, p. 340).

chap. XIV.] Last pawning of Brandenburg ui

8th July 14x1]

the Romans, and above Grammar) !’ ^ For which reason I
call him in my Note-books Sigismund super Grammatkcm^ to
distinguish him in the imbroglio of Kaisers.

Brandenhwrg is pawned for the last time

How Jobst’s pawn-ticket was settled I never clearly heard ;
but can guess it was by Burggraf Friedrich’s advancing the
money, in the pinch above indicated, or paying it eifterwards to
Jobst’s heirs whoever they were. Thus much is certain : Burg-
graf Friedrich, these three years and more (ever since 8th July
1411) holds Sigismund’s Deed of acknowledgment ‘for 100,000
gulden lent at various times’ : and has likewise got the Elec-
torate of Brandenburg in pledge for that sum; and does
himself administer the said Electorate till he be paid. This
is the important news ; but this is not all.

The new journey into Spain requires new moneys ; this
Council itself, with such a pomp as suited Sigismund, has cost
him endless moneys. Brandenburg, tom to ruins in the way
we saw, is a sorrowful matter ; and, except the title of it, as a
feather in one’s cap, is worth nothing to Sigismund. And he is
still short of money ; and will forever be. Why could not he
give up Brandenburg altogether ; since, instead of paying, he
is still making new loans from Burggraf Friedrich ; and the
hope of ever paying were mere lunacy ! Sigismund revolves
these sad thoughts too, amid his world-wide diplomacies, and
efforts to heal the Church. ‘Pledged for 100,000 gulden,’
sadly ruminates Sigismund ; ‘ and 50,000 more borrowed since,
by little and little ; and more ever needed, especially for this
grand Spanish journey !’ these were Sigismund’s sad thoughts :
— ‘Advance me, in a roxmd sum, 260,000 gulden more,’ said
he to Burggraf Friedrich, ‘ 250,000 more, for my manifold
occasions in this time ; — that will be 400,000 in whole ; ^ —
and take the Electorate of Brandenburg to yourself. Land,

* Wolfgang Mentiel, GeschUhU dcr Dcutschcn^ i. 477.

• Rentsch, pp. 75, 357.

I5d THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book 11.

[X7th April 14x7

Titles, Sovereign Electorship and all, and make me rid of it !’
That was the settlement adopted, in Sigismund’s apartment at
Constance, on the 30th of April 1415 ; signed, sealed and
ratified, — and the money paid. A very notable event in
World-History ; virtually completed on the day we mention.

The ceremony of Investiture did not take place till two
years afterwards, when the Spanish journey had proved fruit-
less, when much else of fruitless had come and gone, and
Kaiser and Council were probably more at leisure for such a
thing. Done at length it was by Kaiser Sigismund in utmost
gala, with the Grandees of the Empire assisting, and august
members of the Council and world in general looking on ; in
the big Square or Marketplace of Constance, 17th April
1417 ; — ^is to be found described in Rentsch, from Nauclerus
and the old Newsmongers of the time. Very grand indeed :
much processioning on horseback, under powerful trumpet-
peals and flourishes; much stately kneeling, stately rising,
stepping backwards (done well, zierlich^ on the Kurfiirst’s
part) ; liberal expenditure of cloth and pomp ; in short,
‘above 100,000 people looking on from roofs and windows,’^
and Kaiser Sigismund in all his glory. Sigismund was on a
high Platform in the Marketplace, with stairs to it and from
it ; the illustrious Kaiser, — ^red as a flamingo, ‘ with scarlet
mantle and crown of gold ,** — a treat to the eyes of simple
mankind.

What sum of modern money, in real purchasing power,
this ‘ 400,000 Hungarian Gold Gulden’ is, I have inquired
in the likely quarters without result ; and it is probable no
man exactly knows. The latest existing representative of
the ancient Gold Gulden is the Ducat^ worth generally about
a Half-sovereign in English. Taking the sum at that latest
rate, it amounts to 200,000Z. ; and the reader can use that
as a note of memory for the sale-price of Brandenburg with
all its lands and honours, — multipljdng it perhaps by four or
^ Pauli, Allgemeine Preusstsche Stoats- Geschichte^ ii. 74. Rentsch, pp. 76* 78*

CHAfxiv.] LAST PAWNING OF BRANDENBURG 169

* 4 * 7 ]

six to bring out its effective amount in current coin. Dog-
cheap, it must be owned, for size and capability ; but in the
most waste condition, full of mutiny, injustice, anarchy and
highway robbery ; a purchase that might have proved dear
enough to another man than Burggraf Friedrich.

But so, at any rate, moribund Brandenburg has got its
Hohenzollem Kurfiirst ; and started on a new career it little
dreamt of ; — and we can now, right willingly, quit Sigismund
and the Reichs-History ; leave Kaiser Sigismund to sink or
swim at his own will henceforth. His grand feat in life, the
wonder of his generation, was this same Council of Constance ;
which proved entirely a failure ; one of the largest wind-eggs
ever dropped with noise and travail in this world. Two-
hundred thousand human creatures, reckoned and reckoning
themselves the elixir of the Intellect and Dignity of Europe ;
Two-hundred thousand, nay some, counting the lower menials
and numerous unfortunate-females, say Four-hundred thou-
sand, — were got congregated into that little Swiss Town ;
and there as an Ecumenic Council, or solemnly distilled elixir
of what pious Intellect and Valour could be scraped together
in the world, they laboured with all their select might for
four-years space. That was the Council of Constance. And
except this transfer of Brandenburg to Friedrich of Hohen-
zollem, resulting from said Council in the quite reverse and
involuntary way, one sees not what good result it had.

They did indeed bum Huss ; but that could not be called
a beneficial incident ; that seemed to Sigismund and the
Council a most small and insignificant one. And it kindled
Bohemia, and kindled rhinoceros Zisca, into never-imagined
flame of vengeance ; brought mere disaster, disgrace, and
defeat on defeat to Sigismund, and kept his hands full for
the rest of his life, however small he had thought it. As
for the sublime four-years deliberations and debates of this
Sanhedrim of the Universe, — eloquent debates, conducted, we
may say, under such extent of xvig as was never seen before
or since, — they have fellen wholly to the domain of Dryas-

160 THE HOHENZOLLERNS [book 11.

[1417

dust ; and amount, for mankind at this time, to zero pliis the
Burning of Huss. On the whole, Burggraf Friedrich’s
Electorship, and the first Hohenzollem to Brandenburg, is the
one good result.

Adieu, then, to Sigismund. Let us leave him at this his
culminating point, in the Marketplace of Constance ; red as a
flamingo ; doing one act of importance, though unconsciously
and against his will. — I subjoin here, for refreshment of the
reader’s memory, a Synopsis, or bare arithmetical List, of
those Intercalary Non-Hapsburg Kaisers, which, now that its
original small duty is done, may as well be printed as burnt :

The Seven Intercalary or Non-Hapsburg Kaisers,

Rudolf of Hapsburg died a.d. 1291, after a reign of eighteen vigorous
years, very useful to the Empire after its Anarchic Interregnum, He was
succeeded, not by any of his own sons or kindred, but by

1*. Adolf of Nassau, 1291-1298. A stalwart but necessitous Herr ;
much concerned in the French projects of our Edward Longshanks :
miles stipendiariusEduardi, as the Opposition party scornfully termed him.
Slain in battle by the Anti>Kaiser, Albrecht or Albert eldest son of
Rudolf, who thereupon became Kaiser.

Albert i. (of Hapsburg, he), 1298-1308. Parricided, in that latter year,
at the Ford of the Reuss.

2* (a). Henry vii. of Luxemburg, 1308-1313; poisoned (1313) in
sacramental wine. The first of the Luxemburgers ; who are marked
here, in their order, by the addition of an alphabetic letter.

3*. Ludwig der Baier, 1314-1347 (Duke of Ober-Baiern, Upper Bavaria ;
progenitor of the subsequent Kurfiirsts of Baiern, who are Cousins of the
Pfalz Family).

4* (6). Kwl IV,, 1347-1378, Son of Johann of Bohemia (Johann Ich-
dien), and Grandson of Henry vii. Nicknamed the Pfaffen-Kaiser
(Parsons*-Kaiser). Karlsbad ; the Golden Bull ; Castle of Tanger-
munde.

6* (c). Wenzel (or Wenceslaus), 1378-1400 ; KarPs eldest Son. Elected
1378, still very young; deposed in 1400, Kaiser Rupert succeeding.
Continued King of Bohemia till his death (by Zisca at second-hand) nine-
teen years after. Had been Kaiser for twenty-two years.

6*. Rupert of the Pfalz, 1400-1410 ; called Rupert Kkmm (Pincers,
Smith's-vice) ; Brother-in-law to Burggraf Friedrich vi. (afterwards
Kurfdrst Friedrich i.), who marched with him to Italy and often else«

CHAP.XkV.] NON-HAPSBURG KAISERS 161

whither, Burgg^af Johann the elder Brother-in-law being then oftenest
in Hungary with Sigismund, Karl iv/s second Son.

7* (d). Sigismund, 1410-1437, WenzeFs younger Brother ; the fourth
and last of the Luxemburgers, seventh and last of the Intercalary Kaisers,
Sold Brandenburg, after thrice or oftener pawning it. Sigismund super
Grammaticam,

Super-Grammaticam died 9th December 1437 ; left only a Daughter,
wedded to the then Albert Duke of Austria; which Albert, on the
strength of this, came to the Kingship of Bohemia and of Hungary, as
his Wife’s inheritance, and to the Empire by election. Died thereupon
in few months : ^ three crowns, Bohemia, Hungary, the Reich, in that
one year, 1438,* say the old Historians ; ‘ and then next year he quitted
them all, for a fourth and more lasting crown, as is hoped.* Kaiser
Albert ii., 1438-1439 : After whom all are Hapsburgers, — excepting, if
that is an exception, the unlucky Karl vn. alone (1742-1745), who
descends from Ludwig the Baier.

BOOK III

THE HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG

1412-1713

CHAPTER I

KURFURST FRIEDRICH I

Bueggraf Feiedeich, on his first coming to Brandenburg,
found but a cool reception as Statthalter.^ He came as the
representative of law and rule; and there had been many
helping themselves by a ruleless life, of late. Industry was
at a low ebb, violence was rife ; plunder, disorder everywhere ;
too much the habit for baronial gentlemen to ‘ live by the
saddle,’ as they termed it, that is, by highway robbery, in
modem phrase.

The Towns, harried and plundered to skin and bone, were
glad to see a Statthalter, and did homage to him with all
their heart. But the Baronage or Squirearchy of the country
were of another mind. These, in the late anarchies, had
set-up for a kind of kings in their own right : they had their
feuds ; made war, made peace, levied tolls, transit-dues ; lived
much at their own discretion in these solitary countries ; —
rushing out from their stone towers (‘ walls fourteen feet
thick’), to seize any herd of ‘ six-hundred swine,’ any convoy
of Liibeck or Hamburg merchant-goods, that had not con-

^ * Johannistage' (24 June) ‘ 1412/ he first set foot in Brandenburg, with due
escort, in due state ; only Statthalter (Viceregent) as yet : Pauli, i. 594, ii. 58 ;
Stenzel, Geschichte des Preussischen Staats 1830-1851), i. 167-169.

CHAP.L] KURFURST FRIEDRICH 1 168

14x4]

tented them in passing. What were pedlars and mechanic
fellows made for, if not to be plundered when needful.^
Arbitrary rule, on the part of these Noble Robber-Lords !
And then much of the Crown-Domains had gone to the
chief of them, — pawned (and the pawn -ticket lost, so to
speak), or sold for what trifle of ready-money was to be had,
in Jobst and Company’s time. To these gentlemen, a Statt-
halter coming to inquire into matters was no welcome
phenomenon. Your Edler Herr (Noble Lord) of Putlitz,
Noble Lords of Quitzow, Rochow, Maltitz and others, supreme
in their grassy solitudes this long while, and accustomed to
nothing greater than themselves in Brandenburg, how should
they obey a Statthalter ?

Such was more or less the universal humour in the Squire-
archy of Brandenburg ; not of good omen to Burggraf
Friedrich. But the chief seat of contumacy seemed to be
among the Quitzows, Putlitzes above spoken of ; big Squires
in the district they call the Priegnitz, in the Country of the
sluggish Havel River, north-west from Berlin a fifty or forty
miles. These refused homage, very many of them ; said they
were ‘ incorporated with Bohmen’ ; said this and that ; —
much disinclined to homage; and would not do it. StiflF
surly fellows, much deficient in discernment of what is above
them and what is not : — a thick-skinned set ; bodies clad in
buff leather; minds elso cased in ill habits of long continuance.

Friedrich was very patient with them ; hoped to prevail by
gentle methods. He ‘ invited them to dinner ’ ; ^ had them
often at dinner for a year or more’ : but could make no
progress in that way. * Who is this we have got for a
Governor?’ said the noble lords privately to each other: ‘A
Nurrtberger Tcmd (Niimberg Plaything, — wooden image, such
€is they make at Niimberg),’ said they, grinning, in a thick-
skinned way : ^ If it rained Burggraves all the year round,
none of them would come to luck in this Country’; — and
continued their feuds, toll-levyings, plunderings and other
contumacies.

164 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

Seeing matters come to this pass after waiting above a
year, Burggraf Friedrich gathered his Frankish men-at-arms ;
quietly made league with the neighbouring Potentates,
Thiiringen and others; got some munitions, some artillery
together, — especially one huge gun, the biggest ever seen,
‘a twenty-four pounder’ no less; to which the peasants,
dragging her with difficulty through the clayey roads, gave
the name of Faule Grete (Lazy, or Heavy Peg) ; a remark-
able piece of ordnance. Lazy Peg he had got from the
Landgraf of Thiiringen, on loan merely; but he turned her
to excellent account of his own. I have often inquired after
Lazy Peg’s fate in subsequent times ; but could never learn
anything distinct : — the German Dryasdust is a dull dog,
and seldom carries anything human in those big wallets of
his ! —

Equipped in this way, Burggraf Friedrich (he was not yet
Kurfurst, only coming to be) marches for the Havel Country
(early days of 1414) makes his appearance before Quitzow’s
strong-house of Friesack, walls fourteen feet thick ; ‘You
Dietrich von Quitzow, are you prepared to live as a peace-
able subject henceforth : to do homage to the Laws and me?"
— ‘ Never !’ answered Quitzow, and pulled-up his drawbridge.
Whereupon Heavy Peg opened upon him. Heavy Peg and
other guns; and, in some eight -and -forty hours, shook
Quitzow’s impregnable Friesack about his ears. This was in
the month of February 1414, day not given : Friesack was
the name of the impregnable Castle (still discoverable in our
time) ; and it ought to be memorable and venerable to
every Prussian man. Burggraf Friedrich vi., not yet quite
become Kurfurst Friedrich i., but in a year’s space to become
so, he in person was the beneficent operator; Heavy Peg,
and steady Human Insight, these were clearly the chief im-
plements.

Quitzow being settled, — ^for the country is in military

^ Michaelis, i. 287 ; Stenzil, i. 168 (where, contrary to wont, is an insignifi-
cant error or two). Pauli (ii. 58) is, as usual, lost in water.

166

CHAP. L] KURFURST FRIEDRICH I

* 4 * 0 ]

occupation of Friedrich and his allies, and except in some
stone castle a man has no chance, — straightway Putlitz or
another mutineer, with his drawbridge up, was battered to
pieces, and his drawbridge brought slamming down. After
this manner, in an incredibly short period, mutiny was
quenched ; and it became apparent to Noble Lords, and to
all men, that here at length was a man come who would
have the Laws obeyed again, and could and would keep
mutiny down.

Friedrich showed no cruelty ; far the contrary. Your
mutiny once ended, and a little repented of, he is ready to
be your gracious Prince again : Fairplay and the social
wine-cup, or inexorable war and Lazy Peg, it is at your dis-
cretion which. Brandenburg submitted ; hardly ever rebelled
more. Brandenburg, under the wise Kurfiirst it has got,
begins in a small degree to be cosmic again, or of the domain
of the gods ; ceases to be chaotic and a mere cockpit of the
devils.

There is no doubt but this Friedrich also, like his ancestor
Friedrich in., the First Hereditary Burggraf, was an excellent
citizen of his country : a man conspicuously important in all
German business in his time. A man setting up for no par-
ticular magnanimity, ability or heroism, but unconsciously
exhibiting a good deal ; which by degrees gained universal
recognition. He did not shine much as Reichs-Generalissimo,
under Kaiser Sigismund, in his expeditions against Zisca ; on
the contrary, he presided over huge defeat and rout, once
and again, in that capacity ; and indeed had represented in
vain that, with such a species of militia, victory was impos-
sible. He represented and again represented, to no purpose ;
whereupon he declined the office farther; in which others
fared no better.^

The offer to be Kaiser was made him in his old days ; but
he wisely declined that too. It was in Brandenburg, by what
^ Hormayr (Esterreichischtr Flutarch^ vii. Z09-158, § Zisca^

166 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [BK.ni.

11440

he silently founded there, that he did his chief benefit to
Germany and mankind. He understood the noble art of
governing men ; had in him the justice, clearness, valour and
patience needed for that. A man of sterling probity, for one
thing. Which indeed is the first requisite in said art : — ^if
you will have your laws obeyed without mutiny, see well that
they be pieces of God Almighty’s Law : otherwise all the
artillery in the world will not keep down mutiny.

Friedrich ‘ travelled much over Brandenburg’ ; looking into
everything with his own eyes ; — making, I can well fancy,
innumerable crooked things straight. Reducing more and
more that famishing dogkennel of a Brandenburg into a fruit-
ful arable field. His portraits represent a square- headed,
mild-looking solid gentleman, with a certain twinkle of mirth
in the serious eyes of him. Except in those Hussite wars for
Kaiser Sigismund and the Reich, in which no man could
prosper, he may be defined as constantly prosperous. To
Brandenbimg he was, very literally, the blessing of blessings ;
redemption out of death into life. In the ruins of that old
Friesack Castle, battered down by Heavy Peg, Antiquarian
Science (if it had any eyes) might look for the taproot of the
Prussian Nation, and the beginning of all that Brandenburg
has since grown-to under the sun.

Friedrich, in one capacity or another, presided over Bran-
denburg near thirty years. He came thither first of all in
1412; was not completely Kurfui'st in his own right till
1416 ; nor publicly installed, ^ with 100,000 looking on from
the roofs and windows, in Constance yonder, till 1417, — age
then some forty-five. His Brandenburg residence, when he
happened to have time for residing or sitting still, was Tan-
germiinde, the Castle built by Kaiser Karl iv. He died there,
21st September 1440 ; laden tolerably with years, and still
better with memories of hard work done. Rentsch guesses
by good inference he was bom about 1372. As I count, he
is seventh in descent from that Conrad, Burggraf Conrad i..
Cadet of Hohenzollem, who came down from the Rauhe Alp,

CHAP. II.] MATINEES DU ROl DE PEUSSE 167

1440] ^

seeking service with Kaiser Redbeard, above two centuries
ago: Conrad’s generation and six others had vanished suc-
cessively from the world-theatre in that ever-mysterious
manner, and left the stage clear, when Burggraf Friedrich the
Sixth came to be First Elector. Let three centuries, let
twelve generations farther come and pass, and there will be
another still more notable Friedrich, — our little Fritz, destined
to be Third King of Prussia, officially named Friedrich ii.,
and popularly Frederick the Great. This First Elector is his
lineal ancestor, twelve times removed.'

CHAPTER II

MATINEES DU ROI DE PRUSSE

Eleven successive Kurfiirsts followed Friedrich in Bran-
denburg. Of whom and their births, deaths, wars, mar-
riages, negotiations and continual multitudinous stream of
smaller or greater adventures, much has been written, of a
dreary confused nature ; next to nothing of which ought to
be repeated here. Some list of their Names, with what
rememberable human feature or event (if any) still speaks to
us in them, we must try to give. Their Names, well dated,
with any actions, incidents, or phases of life, which may in
this way get to adhere to them in the reader’s memory, the
reader can insert, each at its right place, in the grand Tide
of European Events, or in such Picture as the reader may
have of that. Thereby with diligence he may produce for
himself some faint twilight notion of the Flight of Time in
remote Brandenburg, — convince himself that remote Branden-
burg was present all along, alive after its sort, and assisting,
dumbly or otherwise, in the great World -Drama as that
went on.

We have to say in general, the history of Brandenburg
^ Rentsch, pp. 349-372; HUbner, t. 176.

168 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. IIL

[1440

under the Hohenzollems has very little in it to excite a
vulgar curiosity, though perhaps a great deal to interest an
intelligent one. Had it found treatment duly intelligent ; —
which, however, how could it, lucky beyond its neighbours,
hope to do ! Commonplace Dryasdust, and voluminous
Stupidity, not worse here than elsewhere, play their part.

It is the history of a State, or Social Vitality, growing from
small to great ; steadily growing henceforth under guidance :
and the contrast between guidance and no-guidance, or mis-
guidance, in such matters, is again impressively illustrated
there. This we see well to be the fact ; and the details of
this would be of moment, were they given us : but they are
not ; — ^how could voluminous Dryasdust give them ? Then,
on the other hand, the Phenomenon is, for a long while, on
so small a scale, wholly without importance in European
politics and affairs, the commonplace Historian, writing of it
on a large scale, becomes unreadable and intolerable. Witness
grandiloquent Pauli our fatal friend, with his Eight watery
Quartos ; which gods and men, unless driven by necessity,
have learned to avoid ! ^ The Phenomenon of Brandenburg
is small, remote ; and the essential particulars, too delicate
for the eye of Dryasdust, are mostly wanting, drowned deep
in details of the unessential. So that we are well content,
my readers and I, to keep remote from it on this occasion.

On one other point I must give the reader warning. A
rock of offence on which if he heedlessly strike, I reckon he
will split; at least no help of mine can benefit him till he
be got off again. Alas, offences must come ; and must stand,
like rocks of offence, to the shipwreck of many ! Modem
Dryasdust, interpreting the mysterious ways of Divine Provi-
dence in this Universe, or what he calls writing History, has
done uncountable havoc upon the best interests of mankind.
Hapless godless dullard that he is ; driven and driving on

^ Dr. Carl Friedrich Pauli, Allgemeim Preussischc Stoats - Geschichie, often
enough cited here.

CHAP. II.] MATINEES DU ROI DE PRUSSE 169

X440]

courses that lead only downward, for him as for us ! But
one could forgive him all things, compared with this doctrine
of devils which he has contrived to get established, pretty
generally, among his unfortunate fellow - creatures for the
time ! — must insert the following quotation, readers guess
from what author :

^ In an impudent Pamphlet, forged by I know not whom, and published
in 1766, under the title of Matinees du Eoi de Prusse, purporting to be

Morning Conversations” of Frederick the Great with his Nephew the
Heir-Apparent, every line of which betrays itself as false and spurious to
a reader who has made any direct or effectual study of Frederick or his
manners or affairs, — it is set forth, in the way of exordium to these pre-
tended royal confessions, that ^^notre maison,** our Family of Hohenzollern,
ever since the first origin of it among the Swabian mountains, or its first
descent therefrom into the Castle and Imperial Wardenship of Niimberg,
some six-hundred years ago or more, has consistently travelled one road,
and this a very notable one. We, as I myself the royal Frederick still
do, have all along proceeded,” namely, in the way of adroit Macchia-
vellism, as skilful gamblers in this world's business, ardent gatherers of
this world's goods ; and in brief as devout worshippers of Beelzebub, the
grand regulator and rewarder of mortals here below. Which creed we,
the Hohenzollerns, have found, and I still find, to be the true one;
learn it you, my prudent Nephew, and let all men learn it. By holding
steadUy to that, and working late and early in such spirit, we are come
to what you now see ; — and shall advance still farther, if it please
Beelzebub, who is generally kind to those that serve him well.” Such
is the doctrine of this impudent Pamphlet ; original Manuscripts ” of
which are still purchased by simple persons, — who have then nobly
offered them to me, thrice over, gratis or nearly so, as a priceless
curiosity. A new printed edition of which, probably the fifth, has
appeared within few years. Simple persons consider it a curious and
interesting Document ; rather ambiguous in origin perhaps, but probably
authentic in substance, and throwing unexpected light on the character
of Frederick whom men call the Great. In which new light they are
willing a meritorious Editor should share.

^Who wrote that Pamphlet I know not, and am in no condition to
guess. A certain snappish vivacity (very unlike the style of Frederick
whom it personates) ; a wearisome grimacing, gesticulating malice and
smartness, approaching or reaching the sad dignity of what is called

wit ” in modern times ; in general the rottenness of matter, and
the epigrammatic unquiet graciosity of manner in this thing, and its

170 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG

elaborately tnhuman turn both of expression and of thought^ are vis^e
characteristics of it Thought^ we said^ — ^if thought it can be called:
thought all hamstrung^ shrivelled by inveterate rheumatism^ on the
part of the poor ill-thriven thinker ; nay tied (so to speak^ for he is of
epigrammatic turn withal)^ as by cross ropes^ right shoulder to left foot ;
and forced to advance^ hobbling and jerking along^ in that sad guise :
not in the way of walk^ but of saltation and dance; and this towards
a false not a true aim^ rather nowhither than somewhither : — Here were
features leading one to think of an illustrious Prince de Ligne as perhaps
concerned in the affair. The Bibliographical Dictionaries^ producing
no evidence^ name quite another person^ or series of persons^^ highly
unmemorable otherwise. Whereupon you proceed to said other person's
acknowledged Works (as they are called) ; and find there a style bearing
no resemblance whatever ; and are left in a dubious state^ if it were of
any moment. In the absence of proofs I am unwilling to charge his
Highness de Ligne with such an action ; and indeed am little careful to
be acquainted with the individual who did it^ who could and would do
it. A Prince of Coxcombs I can discern him to have been ; capable of
shining in the eyes of insincere foolish persons^ and of doing detriment
to them^ not benefit ; a man without reverence for truth or human
excellence ; not knowing in fact what is true from what is false^ what is
excellent from what is sham-excellent and at the top of the mode ; an
apparently polite and knowing man^ but intrinsically an impudent^ dark
and merely modish-insolent man ; — who^ if he fell-in with Rhadamanthus
on his travels^ would not escape a horse-whipping. Him we will willingly
leave to that beneficial chance^ which indeed seems a certain one sooner
or later ; and address ourselves to consider the theory itself^ and the facts
it pretends to be grounded on.

'As to the theory^ I must needs say^ nothing can be falser^ more
heretical or more damnable. My own poor opinion^ and deep conviction
on that subject is well known, this long while. And, in fact, the
summary of all 1 have believed, and have been trying as I could to teach
mankind to believe again, is even that same opinion and conviction,
applied to all provinces of things. Alas, in this his sad theory about
the world, our poor impudent Pamphleteer is by no means singular at
present; nay rather he has in a manner the whole practical part of
mankind on his side just now ; the more is the pity for us all ! —

'It is very certain, if Beelzebub made this world, our Pamphleteer,
and the huge portion of mankind that follow him, are right. But if God

^ A certain ‘ N. de Bonneville * (afterwards a Revolutionary spiritual-mounte-
bank, for some time) is now the favourite Name ; — proves, on investigation, to be
an impossible one. Barbier {Dicftonnaire dcs An9nytnes\ in a helpless doubting
manner, gives still others.

CHAP, n.] MATINEES DU ROI DE PRUSSE 171

mi^e the world ; and only leads Beelzebub^ as some ugly muzzled bear
is led^ a longer or shorter temporary dance in this divine worlds and
always draws him home again^ and peels the unjust gains off him^ and
ducks him in a certain hot Lake^ with sure intent to lodge him there to
all eternity at last^ — then our Pamphleteer^ and the huge portion of
mankind t^t follow him^ are wrong.

'More 1 will not say; being indeed quite tired of speaking on that
subject Not a subject which it concerns me to speak of; much as it
concerns me^ and all men^ to know the truth of it^ and silently in every
hour and moment to do said truth. As indeed the sacred voice of their
own soul^ if they listen^ will conclusively admonish all men ; and truly
if it do not^ there will be little use in my logic to them. For my own
share^ I want no trade with men who need to be convinced of that feict.
If I am in their premises^ and discover such a thing of them^ 1 will quit
their premises ; if they are in mine^ 1 will^ as old Samuel advised^ count my
spoons. Ingenious gentlemen who believe that Beelzebub made this
worlds are not a class of gentlemen I can get profit from. Let them keep
at a distance^ lest mischief fall out between us. They are of the set
deserving to be called^ — and this not in the way of profane swearings but
of solemn wrath and pity^I say of virtuous anger and inexorable reprobation^
— ^the damned set. For^ in very deed^ they are doomed and damned^ by
Nature's oldest Act of Parliament, they, and whatsoever thing they do or
say or think ; unless they can escape from that devil<element. Which I
still hope they may ! —

'But with regard to the facts themselves, "de noire maison/* I take
leave to say, they too are without basis of truth. They are not so false
as the theory, because nothing can in falsity quite equal that Notre
maison,* this Pamphleteer may learn, if he please to make study and
inquiry before speaking, did not rise by worship of Beelzebub at all in
this world ; but by a quite opposite line of conduct It rose, in fact, by
the course which all, except fools, stockjobber stags, cheating gamblers,
forging Pamphleteers and other temporary creatures of the damned sort,
have found from of old to be the one way of permanently rising : by
steady service, namely, of the Opposite of Beelzebub. By conforming to
the Laws of this Universe ; instead of trying by pettifogging to evade and
profitably contradict them. The Hohenzollems too have a History still
articulate to the human mind, if you search sufiiciently; and this is
what, even with some emphasis, it will teach us concerning their adven-
tures, and achievements of success in the field of life. Resist the Devil,
good reader, and he will flee from you I* —

So ends our indignant friend.

How the Hohenzollems got their big Territories, and came

172 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

tx44a

to what they are in the world, will be seen. Probably they
were not, any of them, paragons of virtue. They did not
walk in altogether speckless Sunday pumps, or much clear-
starched into consciousness of the moral sublime; but in
rugged practical boots, and by such roads as there were.
Concerning their moralities, and conformities to the Laws of
the Road and of the Universe, there will much remain to be
argued by pamphleteers and others. Men will have their
opinion, Men of more wisdom and of less ; Apes by the Dead-
Sea also will have theirs. But what man that believed in
such a Universe as that of this Dead-Sea Pamphleteer could
consent to live in it at all ? Who that believed in such a
Universe, and did not design to live like a Papin’s-Digester,
or Porous Epicure in an extremely ugly manner in it, could
avoid one of two things : Going rapidly into Bedlam, or else
blowing his brains out ? ‘ It will not do for me at any

rate, this infinite Doghouse ; not for me, ye Dryasdusts, and
omnipotent Dog-monsters and Mud-gods, whoever you are.
One honourable thing I can do : take leave of you and your
Dog-establishment. Enough ! ’ —

CHAPTER III
KURl^URST FRIEDRICH II

The First Friedrich’s successor was a younger son, Fried-
rich II. ; who lasted till 1471, above thirty years ; and proved
likewise a notable manager and governor. Very capable to
assert himself, and his just rights, in this world. He was
but Twenty-seven at his accession ; but the Berlin Burghers,
attempting to take some liberties with him, found he was
old enough. He got the name Ironieeth^ Friedrich Ferratis
Dentibus^ from his decisive ways then and afterwards. He
had his share of brabbling with intricate litigant neighbours ;
quarrels now and then not to be settled without strokes. His

CHAP.IIL] KURFURST FRIEDRICH II 173

»44a]

worst war was with Pommem, — just claims disputed there,
and much confused bickering, sieging and harassing in con-
sequence : of which quarrel we must speak anon. It was he
who first built the conspicuous Schloss or Palace at Berlin,
having got the ground for it (same ground still covered
by the actual fine Edifice, which is a second edition of Fried-
rich’s) from the repentant Burghers; and took up his chief
residence there.^

But his principal achievement in Brandenburg History is
his recovery of the Province called the Neumark to that Elec-
torate. In the thriftless Sigismund times, the Neumark had
been pledged, had been sold ; Teutsch Ritterdom, to whose
dominions it lay contiguous, had purchased it with money
down. The Teutsch Ritters were fallen moneyless enough
since then ; they offered to pledge the Neumark to Fried-
rich, who accepted, and advanced the sum . after a while the
Teutsch Ritters, for a small farther sum, agreed to sell Neu-
mark.^ Into which Transaction, with its dates and circum-
stances, let us cast one glance, for our behoof afterwards.
The Teutsch Ritters were an opulent domineering Body in
Sigismund’s early time ; but they are now come well down
in Friedrich ii.’s ! And are coming ever lower. Sinking
steadily, or with desperate attempts to rise, which only in-
crease the speed downwards, ever since that fatal Tannen-
berg Business, 15th July 1410. Here is the sad progress
of their descent to the bottom ; divided into three stages
or periods :

* Period First is of Thirty years : 1410 - 1440 . A peace with Poland
soon followed that Defeat of Tannenberg; humiliating peace, with
mulct in money, and slightly in territory, attached to it. Which again
was soon followed by war, and ever again ; each new peace more humili-
ating than its foregoer. Teutsch Order is steadily sinking, — into debt,
among other things ; driven to severe finance-measures (ultimately even
to debase its coin”), which produce irritation enough. Poland is
gradually edging itself into the territories and the interior troubles of
Preussen ; prefatory to greater operations that lie ahead there.

^ 1442*1451 (Nicolai, i. 81). * Michaelis, i. 301.

174 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ni.

^ Second Period, of Fourteen years. So it had gone on, from bad*1bo
worse, till 1440 ; when the general population, through its Heads, the
Land^ Gentry and the Towns, wearied out with fiscal and other op-
pressions from its domineering Ritterdom brought now to such a pinch,
began everywhere to stir themselves into vocal complaint Complaint
emphatic enough : Where will you find a man that has not suffered
u^ury in his rights, perhaps in his person? Our friends they have
invited as guests, and under show of hospitality have murdered them.
Men, for the sake of their beautiful wives, have been thrown into the
river like dogs,”— and enough of the like sort' No want of complaint,
nor of complainants : Town of Thom, Town of Dantzig, Kulm, all
manner of Towns and Baronages, proceeded now to form a Bund, or
general Covenant for complaining ; to repugn, in hotter and hotter
form, against a domineering Ritterdom, with back so broken ; in fine,
to colleague with Poland, — what was most ominous of all. Baronage,
Burgherage, they were German mostly by blood, and by culture were
wholly German ; but preferred Poland to a Teutsch Ritterdom of that
nature. Nothing but brabblings, scufHings, objurgations ; a great out-
break ripening itself. Teutsch Ritterdom has to hire soldiers ; no money
to pay them. It was in these sad years that the Teutsch Ritterdom,
fallen moneyless, offered to pledge the Neumark to our Kurfiirst ; 1444,
that operation was consummated.^ All this goes on, in hotter and hotter
form, for ten years longer.

* Period Third begins, early in 1454, with an important special cata-
strophe ; and ends, in the Thirteenth year after, with a still more
important universal one of the same nature. Prussian Bund, or Anti-
Oppression Covenant of the Towns and Landed Gentry, rising in tem-
perature for fourteen years at this rate, reached at last the igniting
point, and burst into fire. February 4th, 1454, the Town of Thom,
darling first-child of Teutsch Ritterdom, — child 223 years old at this
time,® and grown very big, and now very angry, — ^suddenly took its old
parent by the throat, so to speak, and hurled him out to the dogs ; to
the extraneous Polacks first of all. Town of Thorn, namely, sent that
day its Letter of Renunciation to the Hochmeister over at Marien-

^ Voigt, vii. 747 ; quoting, evidently, not an express manifesto, but one
manufactured by the old Chroniclers.

* Pauli, ii. 187,— does not name the sum,

» ‘Founded 1231, as a wooden Burg, just across the river, on the Heathen
side, mainly round the stem of an immense old Oak that grew handy there,—
Seven Barges always on the river (Weichsel), to fly to our own side if quite over-
whelmed.’ Oak and Seven Barges is still the Town’s-Arms of Thom. See
Kohler, Munzbelustigungen, xxii. 107 ; quoting Dusburg (a Priest of the Order)
and his old Chronus Terree Pruscia, written in 1326.

CHAR in.] KURFURST FRIEDRICH II 175

MSS)

burg ; seized in a day or two more the Hocbmeister’s Official Envoys^
Dignitaries of the Order ; led them through the streets, amid univers^
storm of execrations, hootings and unclean projectiles, straight to jail ;
and besieged the Hochmeister’s Burg {BcuHUe of Thom, with a few
Ritters in it), all the artillery and all the throats and hearts of the place
raging deliriously upon it So that the poor Ritters, who had no chance
in resisting, were in few days obliged to surrender ; ^ had to come out
in bare jerkin ; and Thom ignominiously dismissed them into space
forevermore, — with actual " kicks,** I have read in some Books, though
others veil that sad feature. Thom threw out its old parent in this
manner ; swore fealty to the King of Poland ; and invited other Towns
and Knightages to follow the example. To which all were willing,
wherever able.

^War hereupon, which blazed up over Preussen at large, — Prussian
Covenant and King of Poland venus Teutsch Ritterdom, — and lasted
into the thirteenth year, before it could go out again ; out by lack of
fuel mainly. One of the fellest wars on record, especially for burning
and ruining; above ^^300,000 fighting-men ** are calculated to have
perished in it ; and of towns, villages, farmsteads, a cipher which makes
the fancy, as it were, black and ashy altogether. Ritterdom showed no
lack of fighting energy ; but that could not save it, in the pass things
were got-to. Enormous lack of wisdom, of reality and human veracity,
there had long been ; and the hour was now come. Finance went out,
to the last coin. Large mercenary armies all along ; and in the end not
the colour of money to pay them with ; mercenaries became desperate ;

besieged the Hochmeister and his Ritters in Marienburg ** ; — finally
sold the Country they held ; formally made it over to the King of Poland,
to get their pay out of it. Hochmeister had to see such things, and say
liHle. Peace, or extinction for want of fuel, came in the year 1466.
Poland got to itself the whole of that fine German Country, henceforth
called West Preussen ** to distinguish it, which goes from the left bank
of the Weichsel to the borders of Brandenburg and Neumark ; — would
have got Neumark too, had not Kurfiirst Friedrich been there to save it.
The Teutsch Order had to go across the Weichsel, ignominiously driven ;
to content itself with East Preussen,** the Kdnigsberg-Memel country,
and even to do homage to Poland for that. Which latter was the bitterest
clause of all : but it could not be helped, more than the others. In this
manner did its revolted children fiing out Teutsch Ritterdom ignomini-
ously to the dogs, to the Polacks, first of all, — Thorn, the eldest child,
leading o£P or setting the example.’

^ 8th February 1454, says Voigt (viii. 361) ; i6th, says Kohler (MunibelustU
gungeriy xxii. 1 10).

176 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

[1455

And so the Teutsch Ritters are sunk beyond retrieval ;
and West Preussen, called subsequently ‘Royal Preussen/
not having homage to pay as the ‘ Ducal ’ or East Preussen
h€id, is German no longer, but Polish, Sclavic ; not prosper-
ing by the change.^ And all that fine German country,
reduced to rebel against its unwise parent, was cut away by
the Polish sword, and remained with Poland, which did not
prove very wise either ; till — ^till, in the Year 1773, it was
cut back by the German sword ! All readers have heard of
the Partition of Poland ; but of the Partition of Preussen,
307 years before, all have not heard.

It was in the second year of that final tribulation, marked
above as Period Third, that the Teutsch Ritters, famishing
for money, completed the Neumark transaction with Kurfiirst
Friedrich ; Neumark, already pawned to him ten years before,
they in 1455, for a small farther sum, agreed to sell; and
he, long carefully steering towards such an issue, and dex-
trously keeping out of the main broil, failed not to buy.
Friedrich could thenceforth, on his own score, protect the
Neumark ; keep up an invisible but impenetrable wall be-
tween it and the neighbouring anarchic conflagrations of
thirteen years ; and the Neumark has ever since remained
with Brandenburg, its original owner.

As to Friedrich’s Pomeranian quarrel, this is the figure of
it. Here is a scene from Rentsch, which falls-out in Fried-
rich’s time ; and which brought much battling and broiling
to him and his. Symbolical withal of much that befell in
Brandenburg, from first to last. Under the Hohenzollems as
before, Brandenburg grew by aggregation, by assimilation ;
and we see here how difficult the process often was.

Pommem {Pomerania)^ long Wendish, but peaceably so

1 What Thorn had sunk to, out of its palmy state, see in Nanke’s Wan*
derungen durch Preussen (Hamburg and Altona, i8oo), ii. 177-200 : — a pleasant
little Book, treating mainly of Natural History ; but drawing you, by its innocent
simplicity and geniality, to read with thanks whatever is in it.

CHAP. III.] KUEFURST FRIEDRICH II 177

1464)

since the time of Albert the Bear, and growing ever more
German, had, in good part, according to Friedrich’s notion, if
there were force in human Treaties and Imperial Laws, fallen
fairij to Brandenburg, — that is to say, the half of it, Stettin-
Pommern had fairly fallen, — in the year 1464, when Duke
Otto of Stettin, the last Wendish Duke, died without heirs.
In that case by many bargains, some with bloody crowns, it
had been settled, If the Wendish Dukes died out, the country
was to fall to Brandenburg ; — and here they were dead. ‘ At
Duke Otto’s burial, accordingly, in the High Church of Stettin,
when the coffin was lowered into its place, the Stettin Biirger-
meister, Albrecht Glinde, took sword and helmet, and threw
the same into the grave, in token that the Line was extinct.
But Franz von Eichsted,’ apparently another Burgher instructed
for the nonce, ^ jum})ed into the grave, and picked them out
again ; alleging, No, the Dukes of Wolgast-Fommern were of
kin ; these tokens we must send to his Grace at Wolgast, with
offer of our homage, said Franz von Eichsted.’ And sent
they were, and accepted by his Grace. And perhaps half-a-
score of bargains, with bloody crowns to some of them ; and
yet other chances, and centuries, with the extinction of new
Lines, — had to supervene, before even Stettin-Pommem, and
that in no complete state, could be got.^ As to Pommern at
large, Pommern not denied to be due, after such extinction and
re-extinction of native Ducal Lines, did not fall home for
centuries more ; and what struggles and inextricable armed-
litigations there were for it, readers of Brandenburg-History
too wearisomely know. The process of assimilation not the
least of an easy one ! —

This Friedrich was second son : his Father’s outlook for
him had, at first, been towards a Polish Princess and the crown
of Poland, which was not then so elective as afterwards : and

^ Rentsch, p. no (whose printer has put his date awry) ; Stenzel (i. 233) calls
the man ‘ Lorenz Eikstetten, a resolute Gentleman,’

* 1648, by Treaty of Westphalia.

VOL. L

M

IIS HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

tX47»

with such view his early breeding had been chiefly in Poland ;
Johann, the eldest son and heir-apparent, helping his Father
at home in the mean while. But these Polish outlooks went
to nothing, the young Princess having died ; so that Friedrich
came home ; possessed merely of the Polish language, and of
what talents the gods had given him, which were considerable.
And now, in the mean while, Johann, who at one time promised
well in practical life, had taken to Alchemy ; and was busy
with crucibles and speculations, to a degree that seemed
questionable. Father Friedrich, therefore, had to interfere, and
deal with this ‘Johann the Alchemist ’ {Johannes Alchemistay
so the Books still name him); who loyally renounced the
Electorship, at his Father’s bidding, in favour of Friedrich ;
accepted Baireuth (better half of the Culmbach Territory) for
apanage ; and there peacefully distilled and sublimated at
discretion ; the government there being an easier task, and
fitter for a soft speculative Herr. A third Brother, Albert
by name, got Anspach, on the Father’s decease ; very
capable to do any fighting there might be occasion for, in
Culmbach.

As to the Burggrafship, it was now done, all but the Title.
The First Friedrich, once he was got to be Elector, wisely
parted with it. The First Friedrich found his Electorship had
dreadfully real duties for him, and that this of the Burggraf-
ship had fallen mostly obsolete ; so he sold it to the Niirn-
bergers for a round sum : only the Principalities and Territories
are retained in that quarter. About which too, and their
feudal duties, boundaries and tolls, with a jealous litigious
Niimberg for neighbour, there at length came quarrelling
enough. But Albert the third Brother, over at Anspach, took
charge of all that ; and nothing of it fell in Johann’s way.

The good Alchemist died, — performed his last sublimation,
poor man, — six or seven years before his Brother Friedrich ;
age then sixty-three.^ Friedrich, with his Iron Teeth and
faculties, only held-out till fifty-eight, — 10th February 1471.

^ 14th November 1464.

CHAP. IV.] KURPURST ALBERT ACHILLES 179

14713

The manner of his end was peculiar. In that War with
Pommem, he sat besieging a Pomeranian town, Uckermiinde
the nB ie of it : when at dinner one day, a cannon-ball plunged
down upon the table, ^ with such a crash as we can fancy ; —
which greatly confused the nerves of Friedrich ; much injured
his hearing, and even his memory thenceforth. In a few
months afterwards he resigned, in favour of his Successor;
retired to Plassenburg, and there died in about a year more.

CHAPTER IV

KURFURST AI.BERT ACHILLES, AND HIS SUCCESSOR

Neither Friedrich nor Johann left other than daughters :
so that the united Heritage, Brandenburg and Culmbach both,
came now to the third Brother, Albert ; who has been in
Culmbach these many years already. A tall, fiery, tough old
gentleman, of formidable talent for fighting, who was called
the ‘ Achilles of Germany ’ in his day ; being then a very
blazing far-seen character, dim as he has now grown.^ This
Albert Achilles was the Third Elector ; Ancestor he of all the
Brandenburg and Culmbach Hohenzollem Princes that have
since figured in the world. After him there is no break or
shift in the succession, down to the little Friedrich now bom ;
— Friedrich the old Grandfather, first Kingy was the Twelfth
Kurfurst,

We have to say, they followed generally in their Ancestors'*
steps, and had success of the like kind, more or less ; Hohen-
zollerns all of them, by character and behaviour as well as by
descent. No lack of quiet energy, of thrift, sound sense.
There was likewise solid fairplay in general, no founding of
yourself on ground that will not carry ; — and there was instant,
gentle but inexorable, crushing of mutiny, if it showed itself ;
which, after the Second Elector, or at most the Third, it had
^ Michaelis, i. 303. f Bom 14x4 ; Kurfurst 1471 >86.

180 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. IIL

C147*

altogether ceased to do. Young Friedrich n., upon whom
those Berlin Burghers had tried to close their gates, till he
should sign some ‘ Capitulation ’ to their mind, got from them,
and not quite in ill-humour, that name Ironteeth : — * Not the
least a Nose-of-wax, this one ! No use trying here, then ! —
which, with the humoui attached to it, is itself symbolical of
Friedrich and these Hohenzollern Sovereigns. Albert, his
Brother, had plenty of fighting in his time : but it was in the
Numberg and other distant regions ; no fighting, or hardly
any, needed in Brandenburg henceforth.

With Numberg, and the Ex-Burggrafship there, now when
a new generation began to tug at the loose clauses of that
Bargain with Friedrich i., and all Free-Towns were going high
upon their privileges, Albert had at one time much trouble,
and at length actual furious War; — other Free-Towns
countenancing and assisting Numberg in the affair ; numerous
petty Princes, feudal Lords of the vicinity, doing the like by
Albert. Twenty years ago, all this ; and it did not last, so
furious was it. ^ Eight victories,’ they count on Albert’s part,
— furious successful skirmishes, call them ; — in one of which, I
remember, Albert plunged in alone, his Ritters being rather
shy ; and laid about him hugely, hanging by a standard he
had taken, till his life was nearly beaten out.^ Eight victories ;
and also one defeat, wherein Albert got captured, and had to
ransom himself. The captor was one Kunz of Kauffungen,
the Numberg hired General at the time : a man known to
some readers for his Stealing of the Saxon Princes {Prinzenrauhy
they call it) ; a feat which cost Kunz his head.^ Albert,
however, prevailed in the end, as he was apt to do ; and got
his Niimbergers fixed to clauses satisfactory to him.

In his early days he had fought against Poles, Bohemians
and others, as Imperial general. He was much concerned, all
along, in those abstruse armed-litigations of the Austrian
House with its dependencies ; and diligently helped the

1 1449 (Rentsch, p. 399).

• Carlyle’s Miscellanies (London, 1872), vii. § PHmenraub,

CHAP. IV.] KURFURST ALBERT ACHILLES 181

148a]

Kaiser, — ^Friedrich iii., rather a weakish, but an eager and
greedy Kaiser, — through most of them. That inextricable
Hun^ dan-Bohemian-Polish DonnyhrooTc (so we may call it)
which Austria had on hand, one of Sigismund’s bequests to
Austria; distressingly tumultuous Donnybrook, which goes
from 1440 to 1471, fighting in a fierce confused manner; —
the Anti-Turk Hunniades, the Anti-Austrian Corvinus, the
royal Majesties George Podiebrad, Ladislaus PosthvmuSy
Ludwig Ohne Haul (Ludwig No-Skin\ and other Ludwigs,
Ladislauses and Vladislauses, striking and getting struck at
such a rate : — Albert was generally what we may call chief-
constable in all that ; giving a knock here and then one there,
in the Kaiser’s name.^ Almost from boyhood, he had learned
soldiering, which he had never afterwards leisure to forget.
Great store of fighting he had, — say half a century of it, off
and on, during the seventy and odd years he lasted in this
world. With the Donnybrook we spoke of ; with the Niim-
bergers ; with the Dukes of Bavaria (endless bickerings with
these Dukes, Ludwig Beardy^ Ludwig Superhus^ Ludwig
Gibhosus or Hunchback, against them and about them, on his
own and the Kaiser’s score) ; also with the French, already
clutching at Lorraine ; also with Charles the Rash of Bur-
gundy ; — lastly with the Bishop of Bamberg, who got him
excommunicated and would not bury the dead.

Kurfurst Albert's Letter on this last emergency, to his
Vicegerent in Culmbach, is a famed Piece still extant (date
1481);^ and his plan in such emergency, is a simple and
likely one : ‘ Carry the dead bodies to the Parson’s house ;
let him see whether he will not bury them by and by ! — One
must fence-off the Devil by the Holy Cross,’ says Albert, —
appeal to Heaven with what honest mother-wit Heaven has
vouchsafed one, means Albert. ‘ These fellows’ (the Priests),
continues he, ‘ would fain have the temporal sword €is well as

I

^ Hormayr, ii. 138, 140 (§ Hunyady Corvin)\ Rentsch, pp. 389-422;
Michaelis, i. 304-13.

^ Rentsch, p. 409.

182 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. m.

11486

the spiritual. Had God wished there should be only one
sword, he could have contrived that as well as the two.
He surely did not want for intellect {Enr war gar ein weiser
Mann)y — ^want of intellect it clearly was not ! — ^In short,
they had to bury the dead, and do reason ; and Albert
hustled himself well clear of this broil, as he had done of
many.

Battle enough, poor man, with steel and other weapons :
— and we see he did it with sharp insight, good forecast ;
now and then in a wildly leonine or aquiline manner. A
tall hook-nosed man, of lean, sharp, rather taciturn aspect ;
nose and look are very aquiline ; and there is a cloudy
sorrow in those old eyes, which seems capable of sudden
effulgence to a dangerous extent. He was a considerable
diplomatist too : very great with the Kaiser, old Frederich in.
(Max’s father, Charles v.’s Great-Grandfather) and managed
many things for him. Managed to get the thrice-lovely
Heiress of the Netherlands and Burgundy, Daughter of that
Charles the Rash, with her Seventeen Provinces, for Max,^
— who was thought thereupon by everybody to be the
luckiest man alive ; thou^ the issue contradicted it before
long.

Kurfiirst Albert died in 1486, March 11, aged seventy-
two. It was some months after Bosworth Fight, where our
Crooked Richard got his quietus here in England and brought
the Wars of the Roses to their finale : — a little chubby Boy,
the son of poor parents at Eisleben in Saxony, Martin
Luther the name of him, was looking into this abstruse Uni-
verse, with those strange eyes of his, in what rough woollen
or linsey-woolsey short-clothes we do not know.®

^ How admirable Albert is, not to say ‘ almost divine,* to the Kaiser’s then
Secretary, oily-mouthed ^Kneas Sylvius, afterwards Pope, Rentsch can testify
(pp. 401, 586) ; quoting Eneas’s eulogies and gossipries (Historia Rerum Frede-
rid Imperatorisy I conclude, though no book is named). Oily diligent /Eneas,
in his own young years and in Albert’s prime, had of course seen much of this
* miracle ’ of Arms and Art, — ‘ miracle * and ‘ almost divine,* so to speak.

* 1477. • Bom loth November 1483.

CHAP. IV.] KURFURST ALBERT ACHILLES 188

i486]

Albert’s funeral was very grand ; the Kaiser himself, and
all the magnates of the Diet and Reich attending him from
Franks ± to his last resting-place, many miles of road. For
he died at the Diet, in Frankfort-on-Mayn ; having fallen ill
there while busy, — perhaps too busy for that age, in the
harsh spring weather, — electing Prince Maximilian Q lucky
Max,’ who will be Kaiser too before long, and is already deep
in iZZ-luck, tragical and other !) to be King of the Romans.
The old Kaiser had ‘ looked in on him at Onolzbach’ (Ans-
pach), and brought him along ; such a man could not be
wanting on such an occasion. A man who ^perhaps did
more for the German Empire than for the Electorate of
Brandenburg,’ hint some. The Kaiser himself, Friedrich ni.,
was now getting old ; anxious to see Max secure, and to set
his house in order. A somewhat anxious, croaky, close-fisted,
ineffectual old Kaiser;^ distinguished by his luck in getting
Max so provided for, and bringing the Seventeen Provinces of
the Netherlands to his House. He is the first of the Haps-
burg Kaisers who had what has since been called the ‘ Austrian
lip’ — protrusive under-jaw, with heavy lip disinclined to shut.
He got it from his Mother, and bequeathed it in a marked
manner; his posterity to this day bearing traces of it.
Mother’s name was Cimburgis, a Polish Princess, *Duke of
Masovia’s daughter’ ; a lady who had something of the
Maultasche in her, in character as well as mouth. — In old
Albert, the poor old Kaiser has lost his right hand ; and no
doubt muses sadly as he rides in the funeral procession.

Albert is buried at Heilsbronn in Frankenland, among his
Ancestors, — burial in Brandenburg not yet common for these
new Kurfiirsts : — his skull, in an after-time, used to be shown
there, laid on the lid of the tomb ; skull marvellous for
strength, and ‘for having no visible sutures,’ says Rentsch.
Pious Brandenburg Officiality at length put an end to that
profanation, and restored the skull to its place, — marvellous

^ See Kohler {Aiiinzbelusti^n^en, vi. 393-401 } ii. 89-96, etc.) for a vivid
account of him.

184 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

[1499

enough, with what had once dwelt in it, whether it had
sutures or not.

Johann the Cicero is Fourth Kurfurst^ and leaves Txvo
notable Sons

Albert's eldest Son, the Fourth Kurfiirst, was Johannes
Cicero (1486-1499) : Johannes was his natural name, to
which the epithet ‘ Cicero of Germany {Cicero Germanicey
was added by an admiring public. He had commonly
administered the Electorate during his Father’s absences ; and
done it with credit to himself. He was an active man, nowise
deficient as a Governor ; creditably severe on highway robbers,
for one thing, — destroys you ‘ fifteen baronial robber-towers’
at a stroke ; was also concerned in the Hungarian-Bohemian
DonnybrooTc^ and did that also well. But nothing struck a
discerning public like the talent he had for speaking. Spoke
‘ four hours at a stretch in Kaiser Max’s Diets, in elegantly-
flowing Latin’ ; with a fair share of meaning, too ; — and had
bursts of parliamentary eloquence in him that were astonish-
ing to hear. A tall, square-headed man, of erect, cheerfully
composed aspect, head flung rather back if anything : his
bursts of parliamentary eloquence, once glorious as the day,
procured him the name ‘ Johannes Cicero'' ; and that is what
remains of them : for they are sunk now, irretrievable he and
they, into the belly of eternal Night ; the final resting-place,
I do perceive, of much Ciceronian ware in this world. Ap-
parently he had, like some of his Descendants, what would
now be called ‘ distinguished literary talents,’ — insignificant to
mankind and us. I find he was likewise called der Grosse^
‘ John the GreaC ; but on investigation it proves to be mere
‘ John the Big^ a name coming from his tall stature and
ultimate fatness of body.

For the rest, he left his family well off, connected with
high Potentates all around ; and had increased his store, to a

CHAP. IV.] KURFURST ALBERT ACHILLES 186

14991

fair degree, in his time. Besides his eldest Son who followed
as Elector, by name Joachim i., a burly gentleman of whom
much . written in Books, he left a second Son, Archbishop
of Magdeburg, who in time became Archbishop of Mainz
and Cardinal of Holy Church,^ — and by accident got to be
forever memorable in Church-History, as we shedl see anon.
Archbishop of Mainz means withal Kur-Matnz^ Elector of
Mainz ; who is Chief of the Seven Electors, and as it were
their President or ‘Speaker.’ Albert was the name of this
one ; his elder Brother, the then Kur-Brandenburg, was called
Joachim. Cardinal Albert Kur-Mainz, like his brother
Joachim Kur-Brandenburg, figures much, and blazes widely
abroad, in the busy reign of Karl v., and the inextricable
Lutheran-Papal, Turk-Christian business it had.

But the notable point in this Albert of Mainz was that of
Leo X. and the Indulgences.^ Pope Leo had permitted
Albert to retain his Archbishopric of Magdeburg and other
dignities along with that of Mainz; which was an unusual
favour. But the Pope expected to be paid for it, — to have
30,000 ducats (15,000/.), almost a King’s ransom at that
time, for the ‘Pallium’ to Mainz; Palliiirn^ or little Bit of
woollen Cloth, on sale by the Pope, without which Mainz
could not be held. Albert, with all his dignities, was dread-
fully short of money at the time. Chapter of Mainz could
or would do little or nothing, having been drained lately*;
Magdeburg, Halberstadt, the like. Albert tried various
shifts ; tried a little stroke of trade in relics, — gathered in
the Mainz district ^ some hundreds of fractional sacred bones,
and three whole bodies,’ which he sent to Halle for pious
purchase; — but nothing came of this branch. The 15,000/.
remained unpaid ; and Pope Leo, building St. Peter’s, ‘ fur-

^ Ulrich von Hutten’s grand * Panegyric ’ upon this Albert on his first Entrance
into Mainz (9th October 1514), — ‘entrance with a retinue of 2000 horse, mainly
furnished by the Brandenburg and Cuhnbach kindred,* say the old Books, — is in
Ulrichi ah Hutien Equitis Germani Opera (Milnch*s edition ; Berlin, 1821), i.
276*310.

* Fauli, V. 496*499 ; Rentsch, p. 869,

186 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

[1-499

nishing a sister’s toilet,’ and doing worse things, was in extreme
need of it. What is to be done? ‘I could borrow the
money from the Fuggers of Augsburg,’ said the Arch-
bishop hesitatingly ; ^ but then — ?’ — ‘ I could help you to
repay it !’ said his Holiness ; ‘ Could repay the half of it, —
if only we had (but they always make such clamour about
these things) an Indulgence published in Germany !’ — ‘ Well ;
it must be !’ answered Albert at last, agreeing to take the
clamour on himself, and to do the feat ; being at his wits’-end
for money. He draws out his Full-Power, which, as first
Spiritual Kurfurst, he has the privilege to do; nominates
(1516) one Tetzel for Chief Salesman, a Priest whose hard-
ness of face, and shiftiness of head and hand, were known to
him ; and — ^here is one Hohenzollem that has a place in
History ! Poor man, it was by accident, and from extreme
tightness for money. He was by no means a violent Church-
man ; he had himself inclinations towards Luther, even of a
practical sort, as the thing went on. But there was no help
for it.

Cardinal Albert, Kur-Mainz, shows himself a copious
dextrous public speaker at the Diets and elsewhere in those
times ; a man intent on avoiding violent methods ; — un-
comfortably fat in his later years, to judge by the Portraits.
Kur-Brandenburg, Kur-Mainz (the younger now officially
even greater than the elder), these names are perpetually
turning up in the German Histories of that Reformation-
Period ; absent on no great occasion ; and they at length,
from amid the meaningless bead-roll of Names, wearisomely
met with in such Books, emerge into Persons for us aa
above.

CHAP.v.] BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH 187

1516-1553)

CHAPTER V

OF THE BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH

Albert Achilles the Third Elector had, before his acces-
sion, been Margraf of Anspach, and since his Brother the
Alchemist’s death, Margraf of Baireuth too, or of the whole
Principality, — ‘Margraf of Culmbach’ we will call it, for
brevity’s sake, though the bewildering old Books have not
steadily any name for it.^ After his accession, Albert Achilles
naturally held both Electorate and Principality during the
rest of his life. Which was an extremely rare predicament
for the two Countries, the big and the little.

No other Elector held them both, for nearly a hundred
years ; nor then, except as it were for a moment. The two
countries, Electorate and Principality, Hohenzollem both, and
constituting what the Hohenzollerns had in this world, con-
tinued intimately connected ; with affinity and clientship
carefully kept up, and the lesser standing always under the
express protection and as it were cousinship of the greater.
But they had their separate Princes, Lines of Princes ; and
they only twice, in the time of these Twelve Electors, came
even temporarily under the same head. And as to ultimate
union, Brandenburg-Baireuth and Brandenburg- Anspach were
not incorporated with Brandenburg-Proper, and its new
fortunes, till almost our own day, namely in 1791 ; nor then
either to continue ; having fallen to Bavaria, in the grand

^ A certain subaltern of this express title, * Margraf of Culmbach ’ (a Cadet,
with some temporary apanage there, who was once in the service of him they
call the Winter-King, and may ^ain be transiently heard-of by us here), is the
altogether mysterious Personage who prints himself ‘ Marquis dt Lulenhach * in
Bromley’s Collection of Royal Letters (London, 1787), pp. 52, etc. : — one of the
most curious Books on the Thirty- Years War; ‘edited* with a composed
stupidity, and cheerful infinitude of ignorance, which still farther distinguish it.
The Bromley Originals, well worth a real editing, turn out, on inquiry, to have
been * sold as Autographs, and dispersed beyond recovery, about fifty years ago.*

188 HOHENZOLLEBNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. m.

[15x6-1558

Congress of Vienna, within the next Five-and-twenty years.
All which, with the complexities and perplexities resulting
from it here, we must, in some brief way, endeavour to eluci-
date for the reader*

Two Lines in Culmhach or Baireuth-Anspach : The Gera

Culmhach the Elector left, at his death, to his Second Son,
— properly to two sons, but one of them soon died, and the
other became sole possessor; — ^Friedrich by name; who, as
founder of the Elder Line of Brandenburg-Culmbach Princes,
must not be forgotten by us. Founder of the First or Elder
Line, for there are two Lines ; this of Friedrich'^s having
gone out in about a hundred years ; and the Anspach-
Baireuth territories having fallen home again to Brandenburg ;
— where, however, they continued only during the then
Kurfiirst’s life. Johann George (1525-1598), Seventh Kur-
furst, was he to whom Brandenburg-Culmbach fell home, —
nay, strictly speaking, it was but the sure prospect of it that
fell home, the thing itself did not quite fall in his time,
though the disposal of it did,^ — to be conjoined again with
Brandenburg- Proper. Conjoined for the short potential
remainder of his own life ; and then to be disposed of as an
apanage again ; — which latter operation, as Johann George
had three-and-twenty children, could be no difficult one.

Johann George, accordingly (Year 1598), split the Territory
in two ; Brandenburg-Baireuth was for his second son, Branden-
burg- Anspach for his third : hereby again were two new pro-
genitors of Culmbach Princes introduced, and a New Line,
Second or ‘ Younger Line ’ they call it (Line mostly split in
twOj as heretofore) ; which, — ^after complex adventures in its
split condition, Baireuth under one head, Anspach under
another, — continues active down to our little Fritz’s time and

* * Disposal,’ 1598; thing itself, 1603, in his Son’s time*

CHAP.v.] BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH 189

X5i6-»552l

farther. As will become but too apparent to us in the course
of this History ! —

From of old these Territories had been frequently divided :
each has its own little capital, Town of Anspach, Town of
Baireuth,^ suitable for such arrangement. Frequently divided ;
though always under the closest cousinship, and ready for
reuniting, if possible. Generally under the Elder line too,
under Friedrich’s posterity, which was rather numerous and
often in need of apanages, they had been in separate hands.
But the understood practice was not to divide farther ;
Baireuth by itself, Anspach by itself (or still luckier if one
hand could get hold of both), — and especially Brandenburg
by itself, uncut by any apanage : this, I observe, was the
received practice. But Johann George, wise Kurfiirst as he
was, wished now to make it surer ; and did so by a famed
Deed, called the Gera Bond (Geraische Vertrag)^ dated
1598,^ the last year of Johann George’s life.

Hereby, in a Family Conclave held at that Gera, a little
town in Thuringen, it was settled and indissolubly fixed, That
their Electorate, unlike all others in Germany, shall continue
indivisible : Law of Primogeniture, here if nowhere else, is to
be in full force ; and only the Culmbach Territory (if other-
wise unoccupied) can be split off for younger sons. Culmbach
can be split off ; and this again withal can be split, if need be,
into two (Baireuth and Anspach) ; but not in any case farther.
Which Household Law was strictly obeyed henceforth. Date
of it 1598 ; principal author, Johann George, Seventh
Elector. This ‘ Gera Bond ’ the reader can note for himself
as an excellent piece of Hohenzollern thrift, and important
in the Brandenburg annals. On the whole, Brandenburg
keeps continually growing under these Twelve Hohenzollems,
we perceive ; slower or faster, just as the Burggrafdom had
done, and by similar methods. A lucky outlay of money (as
in the case of Friedrich Ironteeth in the Neumark) brings

* Populations about the same ; 16,000 to 17,000 in our time*

* Michaeiis, i. 345.

190 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

[1516-1558

them one Province, lucky inheritance another : good manage-
ment is always there, which is the mother of good luck.

And so there goes on again, from Johann George down-
wards, a new stream of Culmbach Princes called the Younger
or New Line, — ^properly two contemporary Lines, of Bai-
reuthers and Anspachers ; — ^always in close affinity to
Brandenburg, and with ultimate reversion to Brandenburg,
should both Lines fail ; but with mutual inheritance if only
one. They had intricate fortunes, service in foreign armies,
much wandering about, sometimes considerable scarcity of
cash : but, for a hundred-and-fifty years to come, neither
Line by any means failed, — rather the contrary, in fact.

Of this latter or New Culmbach Line, or split Line especi-
ally of the Baireuth part of it, our little Wilhelmina, little
Fritz’s Sister, who became Margravine there, has given all the
world notice. From the Anspach part of it (at that time in
sore scarcity of cash) came Queen Caroline, famed in our
George the Second’s time.^ From it too came an unmoment-
ous Margraf, who married a little Sister of Wilhelmina’s and
Fritz’s ; of whom we shall hear. There is lastly a still more
unmomentous Margraf, only son of said Unmomentous and
his said Spouse ; who again combined the two Territories,
Baireuth having failed of heirs ; and who, himself without
heirs, and with a frail Lady Craven as Margravine, — died at
Hammersmith, close by us, in 1806 ; and so ended the
troublesome affair. He had already, in 1791, sold off to
Prussia all temporary claims of his ; and let Prussia have the
Heritage at once without waiting farther. Prussia, as we
noticed, did not keep it long; and it is now part of the
Bavarian Dominion ; — ^for the sake of editors and readers,
long may it so continue !

Of this Younger Line, intrinsically rather insignificant to
mankind, we shall have enough to write in time and place ;
we must at present direct our attention to the Elder
line.

^ See a Synoptic Diagram of these Genealogies, inira, p. 3x8.

CHAP.v.] BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH 191

15x6-1553]

The Elder Line of Culmhach : Friedrich and his Three
notable Sons there

Kurfurst Albert Achilles'^s second son, Friedrich (1460-
1636),^ the founder of the Elder Culmbach Line, ruled his
country well for certain years, and was ‘a man famed for
strength of body and mind ’ ; but claims little notice from us,
except for the sons he had. A quiet, commendable, honour-
able man, — with a certain pathetic dignity, visible even in the
eclipsed state he sank into. Poor old gentleman, after grand
enough feats in war and peace, he fell melancholy, fell imbe-
cile, blind, soon after middle life; and continued so for
twenty years, till he died. During which dark state, say
the old Books, it was a pleasure to see with what attention
his Sons treated him, and how reverently the eldest always
led him out to dinner.^ They live and dine at that high
Castle of Plassenburg, where old Friedrich can behold the Red
or White Mayn no more. Alas, alas, Plassenburg is now a
Correction-House, where male and female scoundrels do
beating of hemp; and pious Friedrich, like eloquent Johann,
has become a forgotten object. He was of the German
Reichs- Array, who marched to the Netherlands to deliver Max
from durance ; Max, the King of the Romans, whom, for all
his luck, the mutinous Flemings had put under lock-and-key
at one time.® That is his one feat memorable to me at
present.

He was Johann Cicero'^s /Ta^brother, child by a second
wife. Like his Uncle Kurfurst Friedrich ii., he had married
a Polish Princess ; the sharp Achilles having perhaps an eye
to crowns in that direction, during that Hungarian-Bohemian-
Polish Donnybrook. But if so, there again came nothing of

* Rentsch, pp. 593-602. • Rentsch, p. 612.

* 1482 (Pauli, ii. 389) ; his beautiful young Wife, * thrown from her horse,* had
perished in a thrice-tragic way, short while before ; and the Seventeen Provinces
were unruly under the Guardianship of Max,

192 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. iih

[»537

a crown with it ; though it was not without its good results
for Friedrich’s children by and by.

He had eight Sons that reached manhood ; five or six of
whom came to something considerable in the world, and Three
are memorable down to this day. One of his daughters he
married to the Duke of Liegnitz in Silesia ; which is among
the first links I notice of a connexion that grew strong with
that sovereign Duchy, and is worth remarking by my readers
here. Of the Three notable Sons it is necessary that we say
something. Casimir, George, Albert are the names of these
Three.

Casimir, the eldest,^ whose share of heritage is Baireuth,
was originally intended for the Church ; but inclining rather
to secular and military things, or his prospects of promotion
altering, he early quitted that ; and took vigorously to the
career of arms and business. A truculent-looking Herr, with
thoughtful eyes, and hanging under-lip : — hat of enviable soft-
ness ; loose disk of felt flung carelessly on, almost like a
nightcap artificially extended, so admirably soft; — and the
look of the man Casimir, between his cataract of black beard
and this semi-nightcap, is carelessly truculent. He had much
fighting with the Nurnbergers and others ; laid it right terribly
on, in the way of strokes, when needful. He was especially
truculent upon the Revolt of Peasants in their Bauernkrieg
(1525). Them in their wildest rage he fronted; he, that
others might rally to him : ^ Unhappy mortals, will you shake
the world to pieces, then, because you have much to complain
of?’ and hanged the ringleaders of them literally by the
dozen, when quelled and captured. A severe, rather truculent
Herr. His brother George, who had Anspach for heritage,
and a right to half those prisoners, admonished and forgave
his half ; and pleaded hard with Casimir for mercy to the
others, in a fine Letter still extant ; ^ which produced no effect
on Casimir. For the dog’s sake, and for all sakes, ‘ let not the
^ 1481-1527. 2 In Rentsch, p. 627.

CHAP. V.] BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH 198

15*7]

dog leam to cat leather (of which his indispensable leashes
and muzzles are meide) ! That was a proverb often heard on
the occaision, in Luther’s mouth among the rest.

Casimir died in 1527, age then towards fifty. For the last
dozen years or so, when the Father’s malady became hopeless,
he had governed Culmbach, both parts of it ; the Anspach
part, which belonged to his next brother George, going
naturally, in almost all things, along with Baireuth ; and
George, who was commonly absent, not interfering, except on
important occasions. Casimir left one little Boy, age then
only six, name Albert ; to whom George, henceforth practical
sovereign of Culmbach, as his Brother had been, was appointed
Guardian, This youth, very full of fire, wildfire too much
of it, exploded dreadfully on Germany by and by (Albert
Aldhiades the name they gave him) ; nay, towards the end of
his nonage, he had been rather sputtery upon his Uncle, the
excellent Guardian who had charge of him.

FriedricJCs Second *Sbn, Ma/rgrqf George of Anspach

Uncle George of Anspach, Casimir’s next Brother, had
always been of a peaceabler disposition than Casimir; not
indeed without heat of temper, and sufficient vivacity of every
kind. As a youth, he had aided Kaiser Max in two of his
petty wars ; but was always rather given ‘ to reading Latin,’
to Learning, and ingenious pursuits. His Polish Mother,
who, we perceive, had given ‘ Casimir ’ his name, proved much
more important to George. At an early age he went to his

Uncle Vladislaus, King of Hungary and Bohemia : for

Alas, after all, we shall have to cast a glance into that
unbeautiful Hungarian-Bohemian scramble, comparable to an
‘Irish Donnybrook,’ where Albert Achilles long walked as
Chief-Constable. It behoves us, after all, to point out some
of the tallest heads in it; and whitherward, bludgeon in
hand, they seem to be swaying and struggling. — Courage,
patient reader t

VOL. I. • U

194 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

(1527

George, then, at an early age went to his Uncle Vladislaiis,
King of Hungary and Bohemia : for George’s Mother, as we
know, was of royal kin; daughter of the Polish King, Casimir iv.
(late mauler of the Teutsch Ritters); which circumstance
had results for George and us. Daughter of Casimir iv. the
Lady was ; and therefore of the Jagellon blood by her father,
which amounts to little ; but by her mother she was Grand-
daughter of that Kaiser Albert n. who ‘ got Three Crowns in
one year, and died the next ’ ; whose posterity have ever since,
— up to the lips in trouble with their confused competitive
accompaniments, Hunniades, Corvinus, George Podiebrad and
others, not to speak of dragon Turks coiling ever closer round
you on the frontier, — been Kings of Hungary and Bohemia ;
two of the crowns (the heritable two) which were got by
Kaiser Albert in that memorable year. He got them, as the
reader may remember, by having the daughter of Kaiser
Sigismund to wife, — Sigismund Super-Grcutnmaticam^ whom we
left standing, red as a flamingo, in the marketplace of
Constance a hundred years ago. Thus Time rolls on in its
many-coloured manner, edacious and feracious.

It is in this way that George’s Uncle, Vladislaus, Albert’s
daughter’s son, is now King of Hungary and Bohemia : the
last King Vladislaus they had; and the last King but one,
of any kind, as we shall see anon. Vladislaus was heir of
Poland too, could he have managed to get it ; but he gave
up that to his brother, to various younger brothers in suc-
cession; having his hands full with the Hungarian and
Bohemian difficulty. He was very fond of Nephew George ;
well recognising the ingenuous, wise and loyal nature of the
young man. He appointed George tutor of his poor son
Ludwig; whom he left at the early age of ten, in an evil
world, and evil position there, ‘ Born without Skin,’ they
say, that is, bom in the seventh month ; — called Ludwig
Ohne Haul (Ludwig Ad-skin), on that account. Born
certainly, I can perceive, rather thin of skin; and he
would have needed one of a rhinoceros thickness !

CHAP.V.] BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH 195

X5x6-X55a]

George did his function honestly, and with success :
liUdwig grew up a gallant, airy, brisk young King, in spite
of difficulties, constitutional and other ; got a Sister of the
great Kaiser Karl v. to wife; — determined (a.d. 1526) to
have a stroke at the Turk dragon ; which was coiling round
his frontier, and spitting fire at an intolerable rate. Ludwig,
a fine young man of twenty, marched away with much
Hungarian chivalry, right for the Turk (Summer 1526);
George meanwhile going busily to Bohemia, and there with
all his strength levying troops for reinforcement. Ludwig
fought and fenced, for some time, with the Turk outskirts ;
came at last to a furious general battle with the Turk
(29th August 1526), at a place called Mohacz, far east in
the flats of the Lower Donau ; and was there tragically beaten
and ended. Seeing the Battle gone, and his chivalry all in
flight, Ludwig too had to fly ; galloping for life, he came
upon bog which proved bottomless, as good as bottomless ;
and Ludwig, horse and man, vanished in it straightway from
this world. Hapless young man, like a flash of lightning
suddenly going down there — and the Hungarian Sovereignty
along with him. For Hungary is part of Austria ever since ;
having, with Bohemia, fallen to Karl v.’s Brother Ferdinand,
as now the nearest convenient heir of Albert with his Three
Crowns. Up to the lips in difficulties to this day ! —

George meanwhile, with finely-appointed reinforcements,
was in full march to join Ludwig; but the sad news of
Mohacz met him : he withdrew, as soon as might be, to his
own territory, and quitted Hungarian politics. This, I
think, was George’s third and last trial of war. He by no
means delighted in that art, or had cultivated it like Casimir
and some of his brothers. —

George by this time had considerable property ; part of it
important to the readers of this History. Anspach we
already know ; but the Duchy of Jagemdorf, — ^that and its
pleasant valleys, fine hunting-grounds and larch-clad heights,

196 HOHENZOLUEBNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

[1516-155^

among the Giant Mountains of Silesia, — that is to us the
memorable territory. George got it in this manner :

Some ten or fifteen years ago, the late King Vladislaus, our
Uncle of blessed memory, loving George, and not having royal
moneys at command, permitted him to redeem with his own
cash certain Hungarian Domains, pledged at a ruinously cheap
rate, but unredeemable by Vladislaus. George did so ; years
ago, guess ten or fifteen. George did not like the Hungarian
Domains, with their Turk and other inconveniences; he
proposed to exchange them with King Vladislaus for the
Bohemian-Silesian Duchy of Jagerndorf ; which had just then,
by failure of heirs, lapsed to the King. This also Vladislaus,
the beneficent cashless Uncle, liking George more and more,
permitted to be done. And done it was ; I see not in what
year ; only that the ultimate investiture (done, this part of the
affair, by I^udwig Ohne Haut^ and duly sanctioned by the
Kaiser) dates 1524, two years before the fatal Mohacz
business.

From the time of this purchase, and especially till Brother
Casimir’s death, which happened in 1527, George resided
oftener at Jagerndorf than at Anspach. Anspach, by the side
of Baireuth, needed no management ; and in Jagerndorf much
probably required the hand of a good Governor to put it
straight again. The Castle of Jagerndorf, which towers up
there in a rather grand manner to this day, George built :
‘ the old Castle of the Schellenbergs ’ (extinct predecessor Line)
now gone to ruins, ^ stands on a Hill with larches on it, some
miles off.’ Margraf George was much esteemed as Duke of
Jagerndorf. What his actions in that region were, I know
not ; but it seems he was so well thought of in Silesia, two
smaller neighbouring Potentates, the Duke of Oppeln and the
Duke of Ratibor, who had no heirs of their body, bequeathed,
with the Kaiser’s assent, these towns and territories to George

^ Rentsch, pp. 623, 127-131. Kaiser is Ferdinand, Karl v.’s Brother, — as yet
only King of Bohemia and Hungary, but supreme in regard to such points. Hii
assent is dated * 17th June 1531 * in Rentsch

CHAP. V.] BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH 197

1516-1558)

— in mere love to their subjects (Rentsch intimates), that poor
men might be governed by a wise good Duke, in the time
coming. The Kaiser would have got the Duchies otherwise.

Nay the Kaiser, in spite of his preliminaiy assent, proved
extortionate to George in this matter ; and exacted heavy sums
for the actual possession of Oppeln and Ratibor. George,
going so zealously ahead in Protestant affairs, grew less and
less a favourite with Kaisers. But so, at any rate, on peaceable
unquestionable grounds, grounds valid as Imperial Law and
ready-money, George is at last Lord of these two little
Countries, in the plain of South-Silesia, as of J^erndorf among
the Mountains hard by. George has and holds the Duchy of
Jiigemdorf, with these appendages (Jagemdorf since 1524,
Ratibor and Oppeln since some years later) ; and lives con-
stantly, or at the due intervals, in his own strong Mountain-
Castle of Jagemdorf there, — we have no doubt, to the marked
benefit of good men in those paits. Hereby has Jagemdorf
joined itself to the Brandenburg Territories : and the reader
can note the circumstance, for it will prove memorable one
day.

In the business of the Reformation, Margraf George was
very noble. A simple-hearted, truth-loving, modestly valiant
man ; rising unconsciously, in that great element, into the
heroic figure. ‘ George the Pious {der Fromme),'* * George the
Confessor {Be1cenner)y were the names he got from his country-
men. Once this business had become practical, George
interfered a little more in the Culmbach Government; his
brother Casimir, who likewise had Reformation tendencies,
rather hanging back in comparison to George.

In 1625 the Town-populations, in the Culmbach region,
big Niimberg in the van, had gone quite ahead in the new
Doctrine ; and were becoming irrepressibly impatient to clear-
out the old mendacities, and have the Gospel preached freely
to them. This was a questionable step ; feasible perhaps for
a great Elector, of Saxony ; — but for a Margraf of Anspach ?

198 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

[1516-155*

Greorge had come home from Jiigemdorf, some three-hundred
miles away, to look into it for himself ; found it, what with
darkness all round, what with precipices menacing on both
hands, and zealous, inconsiderate Town-populations threatening
to take the bit between their teeth, a frightfully intricate
thing. George mounted his horse, one day this year, day not
dated farther, and ^ with only six attendants ’ privately rode
oflp, another two-hundred miles, a good three-days ride, to
Wittenberg ; and alighted at Dr. Martinus Lutherus’s door.'
A notable passage ; worth thinking of. But such visits of
high Princes, to that poor house of the Doctor’s, were not
then uncommon. Luther cleared the doubts of George ;
George returned with a resolution taken ; ^ Ahead then, ye
poor Voigtland Gospel populations ! I must lead you, we
must on ! ’ — And perils enough there proved to be, and
precipices on each hand : Bauern-Krieg^ that is to say
Peasants’-War, Anabaptistry and Red-Republic, on the one
hand; Reichs-Acht^ Ban of Empire, on the other. But
George, eagerly, solemnly attentive, with ever new light rising
on him, dealt with the perils as they came ; and went steadily
on, in a simple, highly manful and courageous manner.

He did not live to see the actual Wars that followed on
Luther’s preaching : — ^he was of the same age with Luther,
bom few months later, and died two years before Luther —
but in all the intermediate principal transactions George is
conspicuously present ; ‘ George of Brandenburg,’ as the Books
call him, or simply ^ Margraf George,’

At the Diet of Augsburg (1630), and the signing of the
Augsburg Confession there, he was sure to be. He rode thither
with his Anspach Knightage about him, ^ four-hundred
cavaliers,’ — Seckendorfs, Huttens, Flanses and other known
kindreds, recognisable among the lists ; ® — and spoke there, not

' Rentsch, p. 625.

* 4th March 1484— 27th Dec. 1543, George, lOth November 1483 — i8th
February 1546, Luther.

* Rentsch, p. 633. «

CHAP.v.] BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH 199

X5th June 1530]

bursts of parliamentary eloquence, but things that had mean-
ing in them. One speech of his, not in the Diet, but in the
Kaiser’s Lodging (16th June 1630 ; no doubt, in Anton
Fugger’s house, where the Kaiser ‘ lodged for year and day ’
this time, but without the ^ fires of cinnamon ’ they talk of on
other occasions ^), is still very celebrated. It was the evening
of the Kaiser Karl Fifth’s arrival at the Diet ; which was then
already, some time since, assembled there. And great had
been the Kaiser’s reception that morning ; the flower of
Germany, all the Princes of the Empire, Protestant and Papal
alike, riding out to meet him, in the open country, at the
Bridge of the Lech. With highflown speeches and benignities,
on both sides ; — only that the Kaiser willed all men, Protestant
and other, should in the mean while do the Popish litanyings,
wax-light processionings and idolatrous stage-performances with
him on the morrow, which was Corpus-Christi Day ; and the
Protestants could not nor would. Imperial hints there had
already been, from Innspruck ; benign hopes, of the nature of
commands, That loyal Protestant Princes would in the interim
avoid open discrepancies, — perhaps be so loyal as keep their
chaplains, peculiar divine-services, private in the interim?
These were hints ; — and now this of the Corpus-Christi, a still
more pregnant hint ! Loyal Protestants refused it, therefore ;
flatly declined, though bidden and again bidden. They*
attended in a body, old Johann of Saxony, young Philip of
Hessen, and the rest; Margraf George, as spokesman, with
eloquent simplicity stating their reasons, — to somewhat this
effect :

Invinciblest all-gracious Kaiser, loyal are we to your high
Majesty, ready to do your bidding by night and by day. But
it is your bidding under God, not against God. Ask us not,
O gracious Kaiser ! I cannot, and we cannot ; and we must
not, and dare not. And ‘ before I would deny my God and

^ See Carlyle’s Miscellanies (iii. 1990.). The House is at present an Inn,
* Gasthaus zu den drei Mohren * ; where tourists lodge, and are still shown the
room which the K%^ser occupied on such visits.

200 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

(1516-155*

his Evangel,’ these are George’s own words, * I would rather
kneel down here before your Majesty, and have my head struck
oflF,’ — hitting his hind-head, or neck, with the edge of his
hand, by way of accompaniment ; a strange radiance in the
eyes of him, voice risen into musical alt : ^ Ehe Ich wolte
mei/nen Gott und sein Evangelium verlditgneny ehe wolte Ich
hier vor Eurer Mqjestdt mderknien^ und mir den Kopf abhauen
laseen? — Nit Kop ab^ lover Fbrsty nit Kop obT answered
Charles in his Flemish-German; ‘Not head off, dear Furst,
not head off ! ’ said the Kaiser, a faint smile enlightening those
weighty grey eyes of his, and imperceptibly animating the thick
Austrian underlip.^

Speaker and company attended again on the morrow ; Mar-
graf George still more eloquent. Whose Speech flew over
Germany, like fire over dry flax; and still exists, — both
Speeches now oftenest rolled into one by inaccurate editors.^
And the Corpus-Christi idolatries were forborne the Margraf
and his company this time; — the Kaiser himself, however,
walking, nearly roasted in the sun, in heavy purple-velvet
cloak, with a big wax-candle, very superfluous, guttering and
blubbering in the right hand of him, along the streets of
Augsburg. Kur-Brandenburg, Kur-Mainz, high cousins of
George, were at this Diet of Augsburg; Kur-Brandenburg
(Elector Joachim i., Cicero’s son, of whom we have spoken,
and shall speak again) being often very loud on the con-
servative side ; and eloquent Kur-Mainz going on the
conciliatory tack. Kur-Brandenburg, in his zeal, had ridden
on to Innspruck, to meet the Kaiser there, and have a pre-
liminary word with him. Both these high Cousins spoke, and
bestirred themselves, a good deal, at this Diet. They had met
the Kaiser on the plains of the Lech, this morning ; and, no
doubt, gloomed unutterable things on George and his Speech.
George could not help it.

* Rentsch, p. 637. Marheineke, Geschichte der Teutschen Reformation (Berlin,
1831), il 487-

^ As by Rentsch, ubi supr^ ^

CHAP. V.] BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH 201
15x6-1553]

Till his death in 1543, George is to be found always in
the front line of this high Movement, in the line where Kur-
Sachsen, John the Steadfast {der Bestdndige\ and young
Philip the Magnanimous of Hessen were, and where danger
and difficulty were. Readers of this enlightened gold-nugget
generation can form to themselves no conception of the spirit
that then possessed the nobler kingly mind. ‘ The command
of God endures through Eternity, Verbum Dei Manet In
JEternvm^ was the Epigraph and Life-motto which John the
Steadfast had adopted for himself ; ‘ V.D.M.I.dE.,’ these initials
he had engraved on all the furnitures of his existence, on his
standards, pictures, plate, on the very sleeves of his lackeys,
— and I can perceive, on his own deep heart first of all.
V.D.M.I.E. : — or might it not be read withal, as Philip of
Hessen sometimes said (Philip, still a young fellow, capable
of sport in his magnanimous scorn), ‘ Verbum Diaboli Manet
In Episcopisy The DeviPs Word sticks fast in the Bishops ’ ?

We must now take leave of Margraf George and his fine
procedures in that crisis of World-History. He had got
Jagemdorf, which became important for his Family and
others : but what was that to the Promethean conquests
(such we may call them) which he had the honour to assist
in making for his Family, and for his Country, and for all
men ; — yevy unconscious he of ‘ bringing fire from Heaven,’
good modest simple man ! So far as I can gather, there lived,
in that day, few truer specimens of the Honest Man. A
rugged, rough-hewn, rather blunt-nosed physiognomy : cheek-
bones high, cheeks somewhat bagged and wrinkly ; eyes with
a due shade of anxiety and sadness in them ; affectionate
simplicity, faithfulness, intelligence, veracity looking out of
every feature of him. Wears plentiful white beard short-cut,
plentiful gold-chains, ruffs, ermines ; — a hat not to be ap-
proved of, in comparison with brother Casimir’s ; miserable
inverted-colander of a hat ; hanging at an angle of forty-five
degrees ; with band of pearls round the top not the bottom

202 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. iil

[15x6-1553

of it ; insecure upon the fine head of George, and by no means
to its embellishment.

One of his Daughters he married to the Duke of Liegnitz ;
a new link in that connexion. He left one Boy, George
Friedrich ; who came under Alcibiades^ his Cousin of Baireuth’s
tutelage ; and suffered much by that connexion, or indeed
chiefly by his own conspicuously Protestant turn, to punish
which, the Alcibiades connexion was taken as a pretext. In
riper years, George Friedrich got his calamities brought well
under ; and lived to do good work, Protestant and other, in
the world. To which we may perhaps allude again. The
Line of Margraf George the Pious ends in this George Fried-
rich, who had no children ; the Line of Margraf George, and
the Elder Culmbach Line altogether (1603), Albert Alcibiades,
Casimir’s one son, having likewise died without posterity.

* Of the younger Brothers/ says my Authority, ^ some four were in the
Church ; two of whom rose to be Prelates ; — here are the four :

'1®. One, Wilhelm by name, was Bishop of Riga, in the remote
Prussian outskirts, and became Protestant; — among the first great
Prelates who took that heretical course ; being favoured by circumstances
to cast out the V.D. (Verbum Diaboli)/* as Philip read it. He is a wise-
looking man, with magnificent beard, with something of contemptuous
patience in the meditative eyes of him. lie had great troubles with his
Riga people, — as indeed was a perennial case between their Bishop and
them, of whatever creed he might be.

^ 2*. The other Prelate held fast by the Papal Orthodoxy : he had got
upon the ladder of promotion towards Magdeburg ; hoping to follow his
Cousin Kur~MainZf the eloquent conciliatory Cardinal, in that part of
his pluralities. As he did, — little to his comfort, poor man; having
suffered a good deal in the sieges and religious troubles of his Magde-
burgers; who ended by ordering him away, having openly declared
themselves Protestant, at length. He had to go; and occupy himself
complaining, soliciting Aulic>Councils and the like, for the rest of his
life.

'8®. The Probst of Wurzburg {Provost, kind of Head-Canon there);
orthodox Papal he too ; and often gave his Brother George trouble.

^4®. A still more orthodox specimen, the youngest member of the
family, who is likewise in orders : Gumbrecht(^^Gumbei’tus, a Canonicus
of’* Something or other, say the Books) ; who went earl^ to Rome, and

20S

CHAP. VI.] HOCHMEISTER ALBERT

X5x6-X55a]

became one of bis Holiness Leo Tenth’s Chamberlains ; — stood the Sack
of Rome” (Constable de Bourbon’s), and was captured there and ran-
somed ; — ^but died still young (1628). These three were Catholics, he of
Wurzburg a rather virulent one.’

Catholic also was Johannes^ a fifth Brother, who followed the soldiering
and diplomatic professions, oftenest in Spain ; did Government-messages
to Diets, and the like, for Karl v. ; a high man and well seen of his
Kaiser ; — he had wedded the young Widow of old King Ferdinand in
Spain; which proved, seemingly, a troublous scene for poor Johannes.
\^at we know is, he was appointed Commandant of Valencia; and died
there, still little turned of thirty, — by poison it is supposed, — and left his
young Widow to marry a third time.

These are the Five minor Brothers, four of them Catholic,
sons of old blind Friedrich of Plassenburg ; who are not, for
their own sake, memorable, but are mentionable for the sake
of the three major Brothers. So many orthodox Catholics,
while Brother George and others went into the heresies at
such a rate ! A family much split by religion : — and blind
old Friedrich, dim of intellect, knew nothing of it ; and the
excellent Polish Mother said and thought, we know not what.
A divided Time ! —

Johannes of Valencia, and these Chief Priests, were all men
of mark ; conspicuous to the able-editors of their day : but
the only Brother now generally known to mankind is Albert,
Hochmeister of the Teutsch Ritterdom ; by whom Preussen
came into the Family. Of him we must now speak a little.

CHAPTER VI

HOCHMEISTER ALBERT, THIRD NOTABLE SON OF
FRIEDRICH

Albert was born in 1490 ; George’s junior by six years,
Casimir’s by nine. He too had been meant for the Church ;
but soon quitted that, other prospects and tendencies opening.
He had edw^s loved the ingenuous arts ; but the activities

204 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. Ill-

[1490.15x1

too had charms for him. He early shone in his exercises
spiritual and bodily ; grew tall above his fellows, expert in
arts, especially in arms ; — rode with his Father to Kaiser
Max^s Court ; was presented by him, as the light of his eyes,
to Kaiser Max ; who thought him a very likely young fellow ;
and bore him in mind, when the Mastership of the Teutsch
Ritterdom fell vacant.^

The Teutsch Ritterdom, ever since it got its back broken
in that Battle of Tannenberg in 1410, and was driven out of
West-Preussen with such ignominious kicks, has been lying
bedrid, eating its remaining revenues, or sprawling about in
helpless efforts to rise again, which require no notice from us.
Hopeless of ever recovering West-Preussen, it had quietly
paid its homage to Poland for the Eastern part of that
Country ; quietly for some couple of generations. But, in
the third or fourth generation after Tannenberg, there began
to rise murmurs, — in the Holy Roman Empire first of all.
‘ Preussen is a piece of the Reich,’ said hot, inconsiderate
people ; ‘ Preussen could not be alienated without consent of
the Reich ! ’ To which discourses the afilicted Ritters
listened only too gladly ; their dull eyes kindling into new
false hopes at sound of them. The point was. To choose as
Hochmeister some man of German influence, of power and
connexion in the Country, who might help them to their so-
called right. With this view, they chose one and then
another of such sort ; — and did not find it very hopeful, as
we shall see.

Albert was chosen Grand-Master of Preussen, in February
1511 ; age then twenty-one. Made his entry into Konigs-
berg, November next year ; in grand cavalcade, ‘ dreadful
storm of rain and wind at the time,’ — poor Albert all in
black, and full of sorrow, for the loss of his Mother, the
good Polish Princess, who had died since he left home.
Twenty months of preparation he had held since his Election,

^ Rentsch, pp. 840-863. .

SOS

CHAP. VL] HOCHMEISTER ALBERT

1512-1535]

before doing anything : for indeed the case was intricate.
He, like his predecessor in office, had undertaken to refuse
that Homage to Poland ; the Reich generally, and Kaiser
Max himself, in a loose way of talk, encouraging him : ‘ A
piece of the Reich,’ said they all ; ^ Teutsch Ritters had no
power to give it away in that manner.’ Which is a thing
more easily said, than made good in the way of doing.

Albert’s predecessor, chosen on this principle, was a Saxon
Prince, Friedrich of Meissen ; cadet of Saxony ; potently
enough connected, he too ; who, in like manner, had under-
taken to refuse the Homage. And zealously did refuse it,
though to his cost, poor man. From the Reich, for all its
big talking, he got no manner of assistance ; had to stave-off
a Polish War as he could, by fair-speaking, by diplomacies
and contrivances ; and died at middle age, worn down by the
sorrows of that sad position.

An idea prevails, in ill-informed circles, that our new
Grand-Master Albert was no better than a kind of cheat;
that he took this Grand-Mastership of Preussen ; and then,
in gaiety of heart, surreptitiously pocketed Preussen for his
own behoof. Which is an idle idea ; inconsistent with the
least inquiry, or real knowledge how the matter stood.^ By
no means in gaiety of heart did Albert pocket Preussen ; nor
till after as tough a struggle to do other with it as could
have been expected of any man.

One thing not suspected by the Teutsch Ritters, and least
of all by their young Hochmeister, was. That the Teutsch
Ritters had well deserved that terrible downcome at Tannen-
berg, that ignominious dismissal out of West-Preussen with
kicks. Their insolence, luxury, degeneracy had gone to great
lengths. Nor did that humiliation mend them at all ; the
reverse rather. It was deeply hidden from the young Hoch-
meister as from them. That probably they were now at
length got to the end of their capability : and ready to be
withdrawn from the scene, as soon as any good way offered !

* Voigt, ix. 740-749 ; Pauli, iv. 404-407.

206 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

[ 15*5

— Of course, they were reluctant enough to fulfil their bargain
to Poland ; very loath they to do Homage now for Preussen,
and own themselves sunk to the second degree. For the
Ritters had still their old haughtiness of humour, their deep-
seated pride of place, gone now into the unhappy cmscious
state. That is usually the last thing that deserts a sinking
House : pride of place, gone to the conscious state ; — as
if, in a reverse manner, the House felt that it deserved to
sink.

For the rest, Albert’s position among them was what
Friedrich of Sachsen’s had been ; worse, not better ; and the
main ultimate difference wa^, he did not die of it, like Fried-
rich of Sachsen ; but found an outlet, not open in Friedrich’s
time, and lived. To the Ritters, and vague Public which
called itself the Reich, Albert had promised he would refuse
the Homage to Poland ; on which Ritters and Reich had
clapt their hands : and that was pretty much all the assist-
ance he got of them. The Reich, as a formal body, had
never asserted its right to Preussen, nor indeed spoken
definitely on the subject : it was only the vague Public that
had spoken, in the name of the Reich. From the Reich, or
from any individual of it, Kaiser or Prince, when actually
applied to, Albert could get simply nothing. From what
Ritters were in Preussen, he might perhaps expect prompti-
tude to fight, if it came to that ; which was not much as
things stood. But from the great body of the Ritters,
scattered over Germany, with their rich territories (baileys^
bailliwicks), safe resources, and comfortable ‘ Teutschmeister ’
over them, he got flat refusal : ^ ‘ We will not be concerned

* The titles Hockmeister and Teutschmeister are defined, in many Books and
in all manner of Dictionaries, as meaning the same thing. But that is not quite
the case. They were at first synonymous, so far as I can see ; and after Albert’s
time, they again became so ; but at the date where we now are, and for a long
while back, they represent different entities, and indeed oftenest, since the
Prussian Decline began, antagonistic ones. Teutschmeister, Sub-president over
the German affairs and possessions of the Order, resides at Mergentheim in that
Country : Hochmeister is Chief President of the whole, but resident at Marien-

CHAP. VI.] HOCHMEISTER ALBERT 207
15x6-1553]

in {he adventure at all ; we wish you well through it ! ^
Never was a spirited young fellow placed in more impossible
position.

His Brother Casimir (George was then in Hungary), his
Cousin Joachim Kur-Brandenburg, Friedrich Duke of Lieg-
nitz, a Silesian connexion of the Family,^ consulted, advised,
negotiated to all lengths ; Albertis own effort was incessant.

^ Agree with King Sigismund,’ said they ; ‘ Uncle Sigismund,
your good Mother’s Brother; a King softly inclined to us
all ! ’ — ^ How agree ? ’ answered Albert : ‘ He insists on the
Homage, which I have promised not to give 1 ’ Casimir went
and came, to Koningsberg, to Berlin ; went once himself to
Cracow, to the King, on this errand : but it was a case of
‘ Yes cmd No ’ ; not to be solved by Casimir.

As to King Sigismund, he was patient with it to a degree ;
made the friendliest paternal professions ; — testifying withal,
That the claim was undeniable ; and could by him, Sigismund,
never be foregone with the least shadow of honour, and of
course never would : ‘ My dear Nephew can consider whether
his dissolute, vain - minded, half - heretical Ritterdom, nay
whether this Prussian fraction of it, is in a condition to
take Poland by the beard in an unjust quarrel; or can
hope to do Tannenberg over again in the reverse way, by
Beelzebub’s help ? ’ —

For seven years, Albert held out in this intermediate state,
neither peace nor war; moving Heaven and Earth to raise
supplies, that he might be able to defy Poland, and begin
war. The Reich answers, ‘ We have really nothing for you.
Teutschmeister answers again and again, ‘ I tell you we have
nothing ! ’ In the end, Sigismund grew impatient ; made
(December 1619) some movements of a hostile nature. Albert

burg in Preussen ; and feels there acutely where the shoe pinches,— much too
acutely, thinks the Teutschmeister in his soft list-slippers, at Mergentheim in the
safe Wiirrburg region.

^ ‘ Duke Friedrich II.’ : comes by mothers from Kurflirst Friedrich I. ; marries
Margraf George’s Daughter even now, 1519 (Hubner, tt 179, 100, loi).

208 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. IIL

{1516-155*

did not yield ; eager only to procrastinate till he were ready.
By superhuman efforts, of borrowing, bargaining, soliciting,
and galloping to and fro, Albert did, about the end of next
year, get-up some appearance of an Army; * 14,000 German
mercenaries horse and foot,' so many in theory ; who, to the
extent of 8,000 in actual result, came marching towards him
(October 1520); to serve ‘for eight months.' With these
he will besiege Dantzig, besiege Thorn ; will plunge, suddenly,
like a fiery javelin, into the heart of Poland, and make
Poland surrender its claim. Whereupon King Sigismund
bestirred himself in earnest; came out with vast clouds of
Polish chivalry ; overset Albert's 8,000 ; — who took to eating
the country, instead of fighting for it ; being indeed in want
of all things. One of the gladdest days Albert had yet seen,
was when he got the 8,000 sent home again.

What then is to be done? ‘Armistice for four years,’
Sigismund was still kind enough to consent to that : ‘ Truce
for four years : try everywhere, my poor Nephew ; after that,
your mind will perhaps become pliant.' Albert tried the
Reich again : ‘ Four years, O Princes, and then I must do it,
or be eaten ! ’ Reich, busy with Lutheran - Papal, Turk-
Christian quarrels, merely shrugged its shoulders upon Albert.
Teutschmeister did the like ; everybody the like. In Heaven
or Earth, then, is there no hope for me? thought Albert.
And his stock of ready-money — we will not speak of that !

Meanwhile Dr. Osiander of Anspach had come to him;
and the pious young man was getting utterly shaken in his
religion. Monkish vows, Pope, Holy Church itself, what is
one to think, Herr Doctor ? Albert, religious to an eminent
degree, was getting deep into Protestantism. In his many
joumeyings, to Niimberg, to Brandenburg, and up and down,
he had been at Wittenberg too ; he saw Luther in person
more than once there ; corresponded with Luther ; in fine
believed in the truth of Luther. The Culmbach Brothers
were both, at least George ardently was, inclined to Pro-
testantism, as we have seen ; but Albert was foremost of the

209

CHAP, VL] HOCHMEISTER ALBERT

1516-1552]

three in this course. Osiander and flights of zealous Culnibach
Preachers made many converts in Preussen. In these circum-
stances the Four Years came to a close.

Albert, we may believe, is greatly at a loss ; and deep
deliberations, Culmbach, Berlin, Liegnitz, Poland all called in,
are held : — a case beyond measure intricate. You have given
your word ; word must be kept, — and cannot, without plain
hurt, or ruin even, to those that took it of you. Withdraw,
therefore ; fling it up ! — Fling it up ? A valuable article to
fling up ; fling it up is the last resource. Nay, in fact, to
whom will you fling it up ? The Prussian Ritters themselves
are getting greatly divided on the point ; and at last on all
manner of points, Protestantism ever more spreading among
them. As for the German Brethren, they and their com-
fortable Teutschmeister, who refused to partake in the
dangerous adventure at all ; are they entitled to have much
to say in the settlement of it now ? —

Among others, or as chief oracle of all, Luther was con-
sulted. ‘ What would you have me do towards reforming
the Teutsch Order ? ’ inquired Albert of his oracle. Luther’s
answer was, as may be guessed, emphatic. ^ Luther,’ says one
reporter, ‘ has in his Writings declared the Order to be “ a
thing serviceable neither to God nor man,” and the consti-
tution of it a monstrous, frightful, hermaphroditish, neither
secular nor spiritual constitution.” ’ ^ We do not know what
Luther’s answer to Albert was ; — but can infer the purport of
it : That such a Teutsch Ritterdom was not, at any rate, a
thing long for this world ; that white cloaks with black
crosses on them would not, of themselves, profit any Ritter-
dom ; that solemn vows and high supramundane professions,
followed by such practice as was notorious, are an afflicting,
not to say a damnable, spectacle on God’s Earth ; — that a
young Herr had better marry; better have done with the
wretched Babylonian Nightmare of Papistry altogether ; better
shake oneself awake, in God’s name, and see if. there are not

^ C. J. Weber, Das Ritterwesen (Stuttgart, 1837), iii* 208.

VOL. I ' O

210 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

[8th April 1525

still monitions in the eternal sky as to what it is wise to do,
and wise not to do ! — ^This I imagine to have been, in modem
language, the purport of Dr. Luther’s advice to Hochmdster
Albrecht on the present interesting occasion.

It is certain, Albert, before long, took this course ; Uncle
Sigismund and the resident Officials of the Ritterdom having
made agreement to it as the one practicable course. The
manner as follows ; 1°, Instead of Elected Hochmeister, let us
be Hereditary Duke of Preussen, and pay homage for it to
Uncle Sigismund in that character. 2°. Such of the resident
Officials of the Ritterdom as are prepared to go along with
us, we will in like manner constitute permanent Feudal Pro-
prietors of what they now possess as Liferent, and they shall
be Subvassals under us as Hereditary Duke. 3®. In all which
Uncle Sigismund and the Republic of Poland engage to main-
tain us against the world.

That is, in sum, the Transaction entered into, by King
Sigismund i. of Poland, on the one part, and Hochmeister
Albert and his Ritter Officials, such as went along with him
(which of course none could do that were not Protestant), on
the other part : done at Cracow, 8th April 1525.^ Whereby
Teutsch Ritterdom, the Prussian part of it, vanished from the
world ; dissolving itself, and its ^ hermaphrodite constitution,’
like a kind of Male Nunnery, as so many female ones had
done in those years. A Transaction giving rise to endless
criticism, then and afterwards. Transaction plainly not
reconcilable with the letter of the law ; and liable to have
logic chopped upon it to any amount, and to all lengths of

1 Rentsch, p. 850. — Here, certified by Rentsch, Voigt, and others, is a worn-
out patch of Paper, which is perhaps worth printing :

1490, May 17, Albert is born. 1520, November 17, give it up.

1511, February 14, Hochmeister. 1521, April 10, Truce for Four Years.

1519, December, King Sigismund’s first 1523, June, Albert consults Luther,

hostile movements. 1524, November, sees Luther.

1520, October, German Mercenaries 1525, April 8, Peace of Cracow, and

arrive. Albert to be Duke of Prussia.

1520, November, try Siege of Danteig.

211

CHAP. VL] HOCHMEISTER ALBERT

I5i6-X55a]

time. The Teutschmeister and his German Brethren shrieked
murder ; the whole world, then, and for long afterwards, had
much to say and argue.

To us, now that the logic-chaff is all laid long since, the
question is substantial, not formal. If the Teutsch Ritterdom
was actually at this time dead^ actually stumbling about as a
mere galvanised Lie beginning to be putrid, — then, sure
enough, it behoved that somebody should bury it, to avoid
pestilential effects in the neighbourhood. Somebody or other ;
— ^first flaying the skin off, as was natural, and taking that for
his trouble. All turns, in substance, on this latter question !
If, again, the Ritterdom was not dead — ? —

And truly it struggled as hard as Partridge the Almanac-
maker to rebut that fatal accusation ; complained (Teutsch-
meister and German-Papist part of it) loudly at the Diets ;
got Albert and his consorts put to the Ban {gedchtet\ fiercely
menaced by the Kaiser Karl v. But nothing came of all that ;
nothing but noise. Albert maintained his point ; Kaiser Karl
always found his hands full otherwise, and had nothing but
stamped parchments and menaces to fire-oft‘ at Albert. Teutsch
Ritterdom, the Popish part of it, did enjoy its valuable
bailliwicks, and very considerable rents in various quarters of
Germany and Europe, having lost only Preussen ; and walked
about, for three centuries more, with money in its pocket, and
a solemn white gown with black cross on its back, — the most
opulent Social Club in existence, and an excellent place for
bestowing younger sons of sixteen quarters. But it was, and
continued through so many centuries, in every essential
respect, a solemn Hypocrisy ; a functionless merely eating
Phantasm, of the nature of goblin, hungry ghost or ghowl (of
which kind there are many) ; — till Napoleon finally ordered it
to vanish ; its time, even as Phantasm, being come.

Albert, I can conjecture, had his own difficulties as Regent
in Preussen.^ Protestant Theology, to make matters worse

» 1525-1568.

212 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

[I5i6-X55a

for him, had split itself furiously into ’'dooms % and there
was an Osianderism (Osiander being the Duke’s chaplain)^
much flamed-upon by the more orthodox ism. ‘ Foreigners,’
too, Grerman-Anspach and other, were ill seen by the native
gentlemen ; yet sometimes got encouragement. One Funccius,
a shining Niimberg immigrant there, son-in-law of Osiander,
who from Theology got into Politics, had at last (1564) to be
beheaded, — old Duke Albert himself ‘ bitterly weeping ’ about
him ; for it wa^ none of Albert’s doing. Probably his new
allodial Ritter gentlemen were not the most submiss, when
made hereditary? We can only hope the Duke was a
Hohenzollem, and not quite unequal to his task in this respect.
A man with high bald brow ; magnificent spade-beard ; air
much pondering, almost gaunt, — ^gaunt kind of eyes especially,
and a slight cast in them, which adds to his severity of aspect.
He kept his possession well, every inch of it ; and left all safe
at his decease in 1568. His age was then near eighty. It
was the tenth year of our Elizabeth as Queen ; invincible
Armada not yet built ; but Alba very busy, cutting-oflP high
heads in Brabant ; and stirring-up the Dutch to such fury as
was needful for exploding Spain and him.

This Duke Albert was a profoundly religious man, as all
thoughtful men then were. Much given to Theology, to
Doctors of Divinity ; being eager to know God’s Laws in this
Universe, and wholesomely certain of damnation if he should
not follow them. Fond of the profane Sciences too, especially
of Astronomy : Erasmus Reinhold and his Tabulce Frutenicoo
were once very celebrated ; Erasmus Reinhold proclaims
gratefully how these his elaborate Tables (done according to
the latest discoveries, 1551 and onwards) were executed upon
Duke Albert’s high bounty ; for which reason they are
dedicated to Duke Albert, and called ‘ Prutenlcoe^ meaning
Pmssicm} The University of Konigsberg was already founded
several years before, in 1544.

Alb^ had not failed to marry, as Luther counselled : by
^ Rentsch, p. 855 .

CHAP. VIL] ALBERT ALCIBIADES *13

I5x6-X55a]

his first Wife he had only daughters ; by his second, one son,
Albert Friedrich, who, without opposition or difficulty, suc-
ceeded his Father. Thus was Preussen acquired to the
Hohenzollem family ; for, before long, the Electoral branch
managed to get Mithelehmmg (Co-infeftment), that is to say.
Eventual Succession ; and Preussen became a Family Heritage,
as Anspach and Baireuth were.

CHAPTER VII
ALBERT ALCIBIADES

One word must be spent on poor Albert, CasimiFs son,^
already mentioned. This poor Albert, whom they call
Alcibiades^ made a great noise in that epoch ; being what some
define as the ^ Failure of a Fritz ’ ; who has really features of
him we are to call ^ Friedrich the Great,’ but who burnt away
his splendid qualities as a mere temporary shine for the able-
editors, and never came to anything.

A high and gallant young fellow, left fatherless in child-
hood ; perhaps he came too early into power : — ^he came, at
any rate, in very volcanic times, when Germany was all in
convulsion ; the Old Religion and the New having at length
broken out into open battle, with huge results to be hoped and
feared ; and the largest game going on, in sight of an
adventurous youth. How Albert staked in it ; how he
played to immense heights of sudden gain, and finally to
utter bankruptcy, I cannot explain here : some German
delineator of human destinies, ‘ Artist ’ worth the name, if
there were any, might find in him a fine subject.

He was ward of his Uncle George ; and the probable fact
is, no guardian could have been more faithful. Nevertheless,
on approaching the years of majority, of majority but not
discretion, he saw good to quarrel with his Uncle ; claimed

^ » 1522-1557.

214 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

ti5i6**55a

this and that, which was not granted : quarrel lasting for
years. Nay matters ran so high at last, it was like to come
to war between them, had not George been wiser. The young
fellow actually sent a cartel to his Uncle ; challenged him to
mortal combat, — at which George only wagged his old beard,
we suppose, and said nothing. Neighbours interposed, the
Diet itself interposed; and the matter was got quenched again.
Leaving Albert, let us hope, a repentant young man. We
said he was full of fire, too much of it wildfire.

His profession was Arms ; he shone much in war ; went
slashing and fighting through those Schmalkaldic broils, and
others of his time ; a distinguished captain ; cutting his way
towards something high, he saw not well what. He had great
comradeship with Moritz of Saxony in the wars : two sworn
brothers they, and comrades in arms : — it is the same dextrous
Moritz, who, himself a Protestant, managed to get his too
Protestant Cousin’s Electorate of Saxony into his hand, by
luck of the game ; the Moritz, too, from whom Albert by
and by got his last defeat, giving Moritz his death in return.
That was the finale of their comradeship. All things end,
and nothing ceases changing till it end.

He was by position originally on the Kaiser’s side ; had
attained great eminence, and done high feats of arms and
generalship in his service. But being a Protestant by creed,
he changed after that Schmalkaldic downfall (rout of Miihl-
berg, 24th April 1547), which brought Moritz an Electorate,
and nearly cost Moritz’s too Protestant Cousin his life as well
as lands.^ The victorious Kaiser growing now very high in his
ways, there arose complaints against him from all sides, very
loud from the Protestant side ; and Moritz and Albert took
to arms, with loud manifestos and the other phenomena.

This was early in 1552, five years after Miihlberg Rout
or Battle. The there victorious Kaiser was now suddenly
almost ruined ; chased like a partridge into the Innspruck

* Account of it in De Wette, LtbensgeschichU der Herzoge zu Sachsen (Weimar,
*770). PP- 32-35-

S15

CHAP. viL] ALBERT ALCIBIADES

X553]

Mountains, — could have been caught, only Moritz would not ;

‘ had no cage to hold so big a bird,’ he said. So the Treaty
of Passau was made, and the Kaiser came much down from
his lofty ways. Famed Treaty of Passau (22d August
1552), which was the finale of these broils, and hushed them
up for a Fourscore years to come. That was a memorable
year in German Reformation History.

Albert, meanwhile, had been busy in the interior of the
country; blazing aloft in Frankenland, his native quarter,
with a success that astonished all men. For seven months he
was virtually King of Germany ; ransomed Bamberg, ransomed
Wurzburg, Niirnberg (places he had a grudge at) ; ransomed
all manner of towns and places, — especially rich Bishops and
their towns, with Verhum Diaboli sticking in them, — at
enormous sums. King of the world for a brief season ; — .
must have had some strange thoughts to himself, had theji
been recorded for us. A pious man, too ; not in the least
like ^ Alcibiades,’ except in the sudden changes of fortune he
underwent. His Motto, or old rhymed Prayer, which he
would repeat on getting into the saddle for military work, —
a rough rhyme of his own composing, — is still preserved.
Let us give it, with an English facsimile, or roughest
mechanical pencil-tracing, — by way of glimpse into the heart
of a vanished Time and its Man-at-arms : ^

Das wait der Herr Jesus Christy Guide it the Lord Jesus Christ,*

Mit dem Vater, der uher uns ist : And the Father, who over us is :

Wer starker ist als dieser Mann, He that is stronger than that Man,*

Der komm und thu* ein Leid mir an. Let him do me a hurt when he can.

He was at the Siege of Metz (end of that same 1552), and
a principal figure there. Readers have heard of the Siege
of Metz : How Henry ii. of France fished-up those ‘ Three
Bishoprics ’ (Metz, Toul, Verdun, constituent part of Lorraine,
a covetable fraction of Teutschland) from the troubled sea of
German things, by aid of Moritz now Kur-Sachsen^ and of

* Rentsch, p. 644.

* Read ‘ Chris * or^ ‘ Chriz,* for the rhyme’s sake.

» Sic,

216 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

[X55a

Albert; and would not throw them in again, according to
bargain, when Peace, the Peace of Passau came. How
Kaiser Karl determined to have them back before the year
ended, cost what it might ; and Henry ii. to keep them, cost
what it might. How Guise defended, with all the Chivalry
of France; and Kaiser Karl besieged,^ with an Army of
100,000 men, under Duke Alba for chief captain. Siege
protracted into mid- winter; and the ‘sound of his cannon
heard at Strasburg,’ which is eighty miles off, ‘ in the winter
nights.’ ^

It had depended upon Albert, who hung in the distance
with an army of his own, whether the Siege could even begin ;
but he joined the Kaiser, being reconciled again ; and the
trenches opened. By the valour of Guise and his Chivalry, —
still more perhaps by the iron frosts and by the sleety rains
of Winter, and the hungers and the hardships of a hundred-
thousand men, digging vainly at the ice-bound earth, or
trampling it when sleety into seas of mud, and themselves
sinking in it, of dysentery, famine, toil and despair, as they
cannonaded day and night, — Metz could not be taken.
‘ Impossible ! ’ said the Generals with one voice, after trying
it for a couple of months. ‘ Try it one other ten days,’ said
the Kaiser with a gloomy fixity; ‘ let us all die, or else do it ! ’
They tried, with double desperation, another ten days ;
cannon booming through the winter midnight far and wide,
fourscore miles round : ‘ Cannot be done, your Majesty !
Cannot, — the winter and the mud, and Guise and the walls ;
man’s strength cannot do it in this season. We must march
away ! ’ Karl listened in silence ; but the tears were seen to
run down his proud face, now not so young as it once was :
‘ Let us march, then ! ’ he said, in a low voice, after some pause.

Alcibiades covered the retreat to Diedenhof {Thionville

* 19th October 1552 and onwards.

* Kohler, Reichs- Historic y p. 453 ; — and more especially Miinzbelustigungcn
(Numberg, 1729-1750), ix. I2i>i29. The Year of this Volume, and of the
Number in question, is X737 ; the Miinzc or Medal ‘recreated upon* is of
Henri II.

*17

CHAP. viL] ALBERT ALCIBIADES

*553-1557]

they now call it) : outmanoeuvred the French, retreated with
success ; he had already captured a grand Due d’Aumale, a
Prince of the Guises, — valuable ransom to be looked for
there. It was thought he should have made his bargain
better with the Kaiser, before starting ; but he had neglected
that. Albert’s course was downward thenceforth ; Kaiser
Karl’s too. The French keep these * Three Bishoprics (Trots
Eviches)^ and Teutschland laments the loss of them, to this
hour. Kaiser Karl, as some write, never smiled again; —
abdicated, not long after; retired into the Monastery of
St. Just, and there soon died. That is the siege of Metz,
where Alcibiades was helpful. His own bargain with the
Kaiser should have been better made beforehand.

Dissatisfied with any bargain he could now get ; dissatisfied
with the Treaty of Passau, with such a finale and hushing up
of the Religious Controversy, and in general with himself and
with the world, Albert again drew sword ; went loose at a
high rate upon his Bam berg- Wurzburg enemies, and, having
raised supplies there, upon Moritz and those Passau-Treatiers.
He was beaten at last by Moritz, ‘ Sunday, 9th July 1653,’
at a place called Sievershausen in the Hanover Country,
where Moritz himself perished in the action. — Albert fled
thereupon to France, No hope in France. No luck in other
small and desperate stakings of his : the game is done. Albert
returns to a Sister he had, to her Husband’s Court in Baden ;
a broken, bare and bankrupt man ; — soon dies there, childless,
leaving the shadow of a name.^

^ Here, chiefly from Kohler {Munzbelustigungefiy iii. 414-416), is the chrono-
logy of Albert’s operations :

Seizure of Niirnberg etc., nth May to 22d June 1552; Iimspruck (with
Treaty of Passau) follows. Then Siege of Metz, October to December 1552 ;
Bamberg, Wurzburg and Niirnberg ransomed again, April 1553 ; Battle of
Sievershausen, 9th July 1553. Wurzburg etc. explode against him; Ban of the
Empire, 4th May 1554. To France thereupon; returns, hoping to negotiate,
end of 1556 ; dies at Pforzheim, at his Sister’s, 8th January 1557. — See Pauli,
iii. 120-138. See also Dr. Erinnerungen an diejentgen Markgrafm^ etc,

(a reprint from the Archiv fur GeschichU und Alterthumskunde in Ober-Franken^
Year 1841).

«18 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

[*557

His death brought huge troubles upon Baireuth and the
Family Possessions. So many neighbours, Bamberg, Wurz-
burg and the rest, were eager for retaliation ; a new Kaiser
greedy for confiscating. Plassenburg Castle was besieged,
bombarded, taken by famine and burnt ; much was burnt
and tom to waste. Nay, had it not been for help from
Berlin, the Family had gone to utter ruin in those parts.
For this Alcibiades had, in his turn, been Guardian to
Uncle George’s Son, the George Friedrich we once spoke
of, still a minor, but well known afterwards ; and it
was attempted, by an eager Kaiser Ferdinand, to involve
this poor youth in his Cousin’s illegalities, as if Ward and
Guardian had been one person. Baireuth which had been
Alcibiades’s, Anspach which was the young man’s own, nay,
Jagemdorf with its Appendages, were at one time all in the
clutches of the hawk, — had not help from Berlin been there.
But in the end, the Law had to be allowed its course ; George
Friedrich got his own Territories back (all but some surrepti-
tious nibblings in the Jagemdorf quarter, to be noticed else-
where), and also got Baireuth, his poor Cousin’s Inheritance ;
— sole heir, he now, in Culmbach, the Line of Casimir being
out.

One owns to a kind of love for poor Albert Alcibiades. In
certain sordid times, even a * Failure of a Fritz ’ is better than
some Successes that are going. A man of some real noble-
ness, this Albert ; though not with wisdom enough, not with
good fortune enough. Could he have continued to ‘ rule the
situation ’ (as our French friends phrase it) ; to march the
fanatical Papistries, and Kaiser Karl, clear out of it, home to
Spain and San Justo a little earlier; to wave the coming
Jesuitries away, as with a flaming sword ; to forbid before-
hand the doleful Thirty- Years War, and the still dolefuler
spiritual atrophy (the flaccid Pedantry, ever rummaging and
rearrainging among learned marine-stores, which thinks itself
Wisdom and Insight ; the vague maunderings, flutings ;

CHAP.vilL] MEANING OF THE REFORMATION «19

I5i«-X55a]

indolent, impotent day-dreaming and tobacco-smoking, of
poor Modern Germany) which has followed therefrom , — Ach
Gott^ he might have ^en a ‘ Success of a Fritz ’ three times
over ! He might have been a German Cromwell ; beckoning
his People to fly, eagle-like, straight towards the Sun ; instead
of screwing about it in that sad, uncertain, and far too spiral
manner ! — ^But it lay not in him ; not in his capabilities or
opportunities, after all : and we but waste time in such
speculations.

CHAPTER VIII

HISTORICAL MEANING OF THE REFORMATION

The Culmbach Brothers, we observe, play a more import-
ant part in that era than their seniors and chiefs of Branden-
burg. These Culmbachers, Margraf George and Albert of
Preussen at the head of them, march valiantly forward in the
Reformation business ; while Kur-Brandenhurg^ Joachim i.,
their senior Cousin, is talking loud at Diets, galloping to
Innspruck and the like, zealous on the Conservative side ; and
Cardinal Albert, Kur-Mainz^ his eloquent brother, is eager to
make matters smooth and avoid violent methods.

The Reformation was the great Event of that Sixteenth
Century ; according as a man did something in that, or did
nothing and obstructed doing, has he much claim to memory,
or no claim, in this age of ours. The more it becomes
apparent that the Reformation was the Event then transact-
ing itself, was the thing that Germany and Europe either did
or refused to do, the more does the historical significance of
men attach itself to the phases of that transaction. Accord-
ingly we notice henceforth that the memorable points of
Brandenburg History, what of it sticks naturally to the
memory of a reader or student, connect themselves of their
own accord, almost all, with the History of the Reformation.

220 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

[1516.155a

That has proved to , be the Law of Nature in regard to
them, softly establishing itself ; and it is ours to follow that
law.

Brandenburg, not at first unanimously, by no means too
inconsiderately, but with overwhelming unanimity when the
matter became clear, was lucky enough to adopt the Refor-
mation ; — and stands by it ever since in its ever- widening
scope, amid such difficulties as there might be. Brandenburg
had felt somehow, that it could do no other. And ever onwards
through the times even of our little Fritz and farther, if we
will understand the word ‘ Reformation,’ Brandenburg so
feels ; being, at this day, to an honourable degree, incapable
of believing incredibilities, of adopting solemn shams, or pre-
tending to live on spiritual moonshine. Which has been of
uncountable advantage to Brandenburg : — ^how could it
fail ? This was what we must call obeying the audible voice
of Heaven. To which same ‘ voice,’ at that time, all that
did not give ear, — what has become of them since ; have they
not signally had the penalties to pay !

^ Penalties’ ; quarrel not with the old phraseology, good
reader ; attend rather to the thing it means. The word was
heard of old, with a right solemn meaning attached to it, from
theological pulpits and such places ; and may still be heard
there with a half meaning, or with no meaning, though it has
rather become obsolete to modem ears. But the thing should
not have fallen obsolete ; the thing is a grand and solemn
truth, expressive of a silent Law of Heaven, which continues
forever valid. The most untheological of men may still
assert the thing ; and invite all men to notice it, as a silent
monition and prophecy in this Universe ; to take it, with
more of awe than they are wont, as a correct reading of the
Will of the Eternal in respect of such matters ; and, in their
modem sphere, to bear the same well in mind. For it is
perfectly certain, and may be seen with eyes in any quarter of
Europe at this day.

Protestant or not Protestant ? The question meant every-

CHAP. viiL] MEANING OF THE REFORMATION 221

X5x6-X55a]

where : ‘ Is there anything of nobleness in you, O Nation,
or is there nothing ? Are there, in this Nation, enough of
heroic men to venture forward, and to battle for God'^s Truth
versus the DeviPs Falsehood, at the peril of life and more ?
Men who prefer death, and all else, to living under False-
hood, — who, once for all, will not live under Falsehood ; but
having drawn the sword against it (the time being come for
that rare and important step), throw away the scabbard, and
can say, in pious clearness, with their whole soul : Come on,
then ! Life under Falsehood is not good for me ; and we
will try it out now. Let it be to the death between us, then ! ’

Once risen into this divine white-heat of temper, were it
only for a season and not again, the Nation is thenceforth
considerable through all its remaining history. What im-
mensities of dross and crypto-poisonous matter will it not
bum-out of itself in that high temperature, in the course of
a few years ! Witness Cromwell and his Puritans, — making
England habitable even under the Charles-Second terms for a
couple of centuries more. Nations are benefited, I believe,
for ages, by being thrown once into divine white-heat in this
manner. And no Nation that has not had such divine
paroxysms at any time is apt to come to much.

That was now, in this epoch, the English of ‘adopting
Protestantism’ ; and we need not wonder at the results which
it has had, and which the want of it has had. For the want
of it is literally the want of loyalty to the Maker of this
Universe. He who wants that, what else has he, or can he
have ? If you do not, you Man or you Nation, love the

Tmth enough, but try to make a chapman -bargain with

Truth, instead of giving yourself wholly soul and body and
life to her. Truth will not live with you. Truth will depart
from you ; and only Logic, ‘ Wit’ (for example, ‘ London
Wit’), Sophistry, Virtii, the ^Esthetic Arts, and perhaps (for
a short while) Book-keeping by Double Entry, will abide with
you. You will follow falsity, and think it truth, you unfor-
tunate man or nation. You will right surely, you for one,

222 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. hi.

stumble to the Devil ; and are every day and hour, little as
you imagine it, making progress thither.

Austria, Spain, Italy, France, Poland, — the oiFer of the
Reformation was made everywhere ; and it is curious to see
what has become of the nations that would not hear it. In
all countries were some that accepted ; but in many there
were not enough, and the rest, slowly or swiftly, with fatal
diflScult industry, contrived to bum them out. Austria was
once full of Protestants ; but the hide-bound Flemish-Spanish
Kaiser-element presiding over it, obstinately, for two centuries,
•kept saying, ^No; we, with our dull, obstinate Cimburgis
underlip and lazy eyes, with our ponderous Austrian depth of
Habituality and indolence of Intellect, we prefer steady
Darkness to uncertain new Light ! ’ — ^and all men may see
where Austria now is. Spain still more ; poor Spain, going
about, at this time, making its ^ pronunciamientos'* \ all the
factious attorneys in its little towns assembling to pronounce
virtually this, ‘ The Old is a lie, then ; — good Heavens, after
we so long tried hard, harder than any nation, to think it a
tmth ! — and if it be not Rights of Man, Red Republic and
Progress of the Species, we know not what now to believe or
to do ; and are as a people stumbling on steep places, in the
darkness of midnight T — ^They refused Truth when she came ;
and now Tmth knows nothing of them. All stars, and
heavenly lights, have become veiled to such men ; they must
now follow terrestrial ignes fatuij and think them stars. That
is the doom passed upon them.

Italy too had its Protestants ; but Italy killed them ;
managed to extinguish Protestantism. Italy put up silently
with Practical Lies of all kinds ; and, shmgging its shoulders,
preferred going into Dilettantism and the Fine Arts. The
Italians, instead of the sacred service of Fact and Performance,
did Music, Painting, and the like ; — ^till even that has become
impossible for them ; and no noble Nation, sunk from virtue
to ever offered such a spectacle before. He that will

223

CHAP. IX.] KURFURST JOACHIM I

X5i6-X55a]

prefer Dilettantism in this world for his outfit, shall have it ;
but all the gods will depart from him ; and manful veracity,
earnestness of purpose, devout depth of soul, shall no more
be his. He can if he like make himself a soprano, and sing
for hire ; — and probably that is the real goal for him.

But the sharpest-cut example is France ; to which we con-
stantly return for illustration. France, with its keen intellect,
saw the truth and saw the falsity, in those Protestant times ;
and, with its ardour of generous impulse, was prone enough
to adopt the former. France was within a hairsbreadth of
becoming actually Protestant. But France saw good to
massacre Protestantism, and end it in the night of St. Bar-
tholomew 1572. The celestial Apparitor of Heaven’s
Chancery, so we may speak, the Genius of Fact and Veracity,
had left his Writ of Summons ; Writ was read ; — and replied
to in this manner. The Genius of Fact and Veracity ac-
cordingly withdrew; — was staved-off, got kept away, for
two-hundred years. But the writ of Summons had been
served ; Heaven’s Messenger could not stay away for ever.
No ; he returned duly ; with accounts run up, on compound
interest, to the actual hour, in 1792; — and then, at last,
there had to be a ^Protestantism’; and we know of what
kind that was ! —

Nations did not so understand it, nor did Brandenburg
more than the others ; but the question of questions for them
at that time, decisive of their history for half a thousand
years to come, was, Will you obey the heavenly voice, or will
you not ?

CHAPTER IX
KURFURST JOACHIM I

Brandenburg, in the matter of the Reformation, was at
first, — with Albert of Mainz, Tetzel’s friend, on the one side,

224 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. iil

1x5*6-155*

and Pious George of Anspach, ‘ Nit Kdb ab^ on the other, —
certainly a divided house. But, after the first act, it conspicu-
ously ceased to be divided ; nay, Kur-Brandenburg and Kur-
Mainz themselves had known tendencies to the Reformation,
and were well aware that the Church could not stand as it
was. Nor did the cause want partisans in Berlin, in Branden-
burg, — ^hardly to be repressed from breaking into flame, while
Kurfiirst Joachim was so prudent and conservative. Of this
loud Kurfiirst Joachim i., here and there mentioned already,
let us now say a more express word.^

Joachim i.. Big John’s son, hesitated hither and thither
for some time, trying if it would not do to follow the Kaiser
Karl v.’s lead ; and at length, crossed in his temper perhaps
by the speed his friends were going at, declared formally
against any farther Reformation ; and in his own family and
country was strict upon the point. He is a man, as I judge,
by no means without a temper of his own ; very loud
occasionally in the Diets and elsewhere ; — reminds me a little
of a certain King Friedrich Wilhelm, whom my readers shall
know by and by. A big, surly, rather bottle-nosed man, with
thick lips, abstruse wearied eyes, and no eyebrows to speak of :
not a beautiful man, when you cross him overmuch.

Of Joachivfis Wi/e cmd Brother-m-law

His wife was a Danish Princess, Sister of poor Christian n.,
Kang of that Country : dissolute Christian, who took up with
a huxter-woman’s daughter, — ^ mother sold gingerbread,’ it
would appear, ‘at Bergen in Norway,’ where Christian was
Viceroy; Christian made acceptable love to the daughter,
^ Divihe (Dovekin, Columbina)y as he called her. Nay he
made the gingerbread mother a kind of prime-min’ster, said
the angry public, justly scandalised at this of the ‘ Dovekin.’
He was married, meanwhile, to Karl v.’s own Sister ; but con-

^ X484, 1499, 1535 ; birth, accession, death of Joachim*

CHAP. IX.] KURFURST JOACHIM I 826

1516-1553]

tinned that other connexion.^ He had rash notions, now for
the Reformation, now against it, when he got to be King ; a
very rash, unwise, explosive man. He made a ^Stockholm
Blutbad"' still famed in History (kind of open, ordered or
permitted. Massacre of eighty or a hundred of his chief
enemies there), ‘ Bloodbath,’ so they name it ; in Stockholm,
where indeed he was lawful King, and not without unlawful
enemies, had a bloodbath been the way to deal with them.
Gustavus Vasa was a young fellow there, who dextrously
escaped this Bloodbath, and afterwards came to something.

In Denmark and Sweden, rash Christian made ever more
enemies ; at length he was forced to run, and they chose
another King or successive pair of Kings. Christian fled to
Kaiser Karl at Brussels ; complained to Kaiser Karl, his
Brother-in-law, — whose Sister he had not used well. Kaiser
Karl listened to his complaints, with hanging underlip, with
heavy, deep, undecipherable eyes; evidently no help from
Karl.

Christian, after that, wandered about with inexecutable
speculations, and projects to recover his crown or crowns ;
sheltering often with Kurfurst Joachim, who took a great deal
of trouble about him, first and last ; or with the Elector of
Saxony, Friedrich the Wise, or after him, with Johann the
Steadfast V.D.M.I.iE.’ whom we saw at Augsburg), who
were his Mother’s Brothers, and beneficent men. He was in
Saxony, on such terms, coming and going, when a certain
other Flight thither took place, soon to be spoken of, which
is the cause of our mentioning him here. — In the end (a.d.
1538) he did get some force together, and made sail to
Norway ; but could do no execution whatever there ; — on the
contrary, was frozen-in on the coast during winter; seized,
carried to Copenhagen, and packed into the ‘ Castle of
Sonderburg,’ a grim sea-lodging on the shore of Schleswig, —

^ Here are the dates of this poor Christian, in a lump. Bom, 1481 ; King,
1513 (Dovekin before) ; married, 1515 5 turned off, 1523 ; invades, taken
prisoner, 1532; dies 1559. Cousin, and then Cousin’s Son, succeeded.

VOL. I. • P

226 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

[X 5 x 6 .xs 5 a

prisoner for the rest of his life, which lasted long enough.
Six-and-twenty years of prison ; the first seventeen years of it
strict and hard, almost of the dungeon sort ; the remainder,
on his fairly abdicating, was in another Castle, that of
Callundborg in the Island of Zealand, ‘ with fine apartments
and conveniences,’ and even ‘a good bouse of liquor now and
then,’ at discretion of the old soul. That was the end of
headlong Christian n. ; he lasted in this manner to the age
of seventy-eight.^

Hif\Jister Elizabeth at Brandenburg is perhaps, in regard
to natural character, recognisably of the same kin as Christian ;
but her behaviour is far different from his. She too is zealous
for the Reformation ; but she has a right to be so, and her
notions that way are steady ; and she has hitherto, though in
a difficult position, done honour to her creed. Surely Joachim
is difficult to deal with ; is very positive now that he has declared
himself : ‘ In my house at least shall be nothing farther ol
that unblessed stuff.’ Poor Lady, I see domestic difficulties
very thick upon her ; nothing but division, the very children
ranging themselves in parties. She can pray to Heaven ; she
must do her wisest.

She partook once, by some secret opportunity, of the ‘ com-
munion under both kinds ’ ; one of her Daughters noticed and
knew ; told Father of it. Father knits-up his thick lips ;
rolls his abstruse dissatisfied eyes, in an ominous manner : the
poor Lady, probably possessed of an excitable imagination too,
trembles for herself. ‘It is thought. His Durchlaucht will
wall you up for life, my Serene Lady ; dark prison for life,
which probably may not be long ! ’ These surmises were
of no credibility : but there and then the poor Lady, in a
shiver of terror, decides that she must run ; goes off actually,
one night (‘ Monday after the Lcetarey which we find is 24th

^ Kohler, Miinzbelustigungen^ xi. 47, 48 ; Holberg, Danemarckische Stoats^
und Reichs-Histgrie (Copenhagen, 1731, not the big Book by Holberg), p. 241 ;
Buddaus, Allgomiims Historisches Lexicon (Leipzig, 1709), § Christianus II.

CHAP. IX.] KURPURST JOACHIM I «*7

* 5 * 8 ]

March) in the year 1528,^ in a mean vehicle under cloud of
darkness, with only one maid and groom, — driving for life.
That is very certain : she too is on flight towards Saxony, to
shelter with her uncle Kurfiirst Johann, — ^unless for reasons of
state he scruple ? On the dark road her vehicle broke down ;
a spoke given way, — ‘ Not a bit of rope to splice it,’ said the
improvident groom. ‘ Take my lace- veil here,’ said the poor
Princess ; and in this guise she got to Torgau (I could guess,
her poor Brother’s lodging), — and thence, in short time, to the
fine Schloss of Liclitenberg hard by; Uncle Johann, to whom
she had zealously left an option of refusal, having as zealously
permitted and invited her to continue there. Which she did
for many years.

Nor did she get the least molestation from Husband
Joachim ; who I conjecture had intended, though a man of a
certain temper, and strict in his own house, something short
of walling-up for life : — poor Joachim withal ! ‘ However,

since you are gone. Madam, go ! ’ Nor did he concern himself
with Christian ii. farther, but let him lie in prison at his
leisure. As for the Lady, he even let his children visit her
at Lichtenberg ; Crypto-Protestants all ; and, among them,
the repentant Daughter who had peached upon her.

Poor Joachim, he makes a pious speech on his death-bed,
solemnly warning his Soq against these newfangled heresies;
the Son being already possessed of them in his heart.^ What

* Pauli (ii. 584) ; who cites Seckendorf, and this fraction of a Letter of Luther’s,
to one ^ Linckus^ or Lincke, written on the Friday following (28th March 1528) :

* The Electress * (Margravine he calls her) ‘ has fled from Berlin, by help of
her Brother the King of Denmark’ (poor Christian ii.) ‘to our Prince* (Johann
the Steadfast), ‘ because her Elector had determined to wall her up, as is reported,
on account of the Eucharist under both species. Pray for our Prince ; the pioui
man and affectionate soul gets a great deal of trouble with his kindred,* Or thus
in the Original ;

* Marchionissa aufugit a Berlin^ auxilio fratris^ Regis Dania^ ad nostrum

Prindpem, quod Marchio statuerat earn immurare (ut dicitur) propter Eucha-
ristiam utriusque speciei. Ora pro nostro Principe ; der fromme Mann und
herzliche Mensch ist doch ja wohl geplaget * (Seckendorf, Historia Lutheranismi^
ii. § 62, No. 8, p. 122). ^ Speech given in Rentsch, pp. 434*439.

228 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [BK. m.

[XS3S

could Father do more? Both Father and Son, I suppose,
were weeping. This was in 1535, this last scene; things
looking now more ominous than ever. Of Kurfurst Joachim
I will remember nothing farther, except that once, twenty-
three years before, he ‘ held a Tourney in Neu-Ruppin,’ year
1512; Tourney on the most magnificent scale, and in New-
Ruppin,^ a place we shall know by and by.

As to the Lady, she lived eighteen years in that fine
Schloss of Lichtenberg; saw her children as we said; and,
silently or otherwise, rejoiced in the creed they were getting.
She saw Luther’s self sometimes ; ‘ had him several times to
dinner ’ ; he would call at her Mansion, when his journeys lay
that way. She corresponded with him diligently; nay, once,
for a three months, she herself went across and lodged with
Dr. Luther and his Kate ; as a royal Lady might with a
heroic Sage, — though the Sage’s income was only Twenty-four
pounds sterling annually. There is no doubt about that visit
of three months ; one thinks of it, as of something human,
something homely, ingenuous and pretty. Nothing in surly
Joachim’s history is half so memorable to me, or indeed
memorable at all in the stage we are now come to.

The Lady survived Joachim twenty years ; of these she
spent eleven still at Lichtenberg, in no over-haste to return.
However, her Son, the new Elector, declaring for Protestantism,
she at length yielded to his invitations: came back (1546),
and ended her days at Berlin in a peaceable and venerable
manner. Luckless Brother Christian is lying under lock-and-
key all this while ; smuggling out messages, and so on ; — ^like
a voice from the land of Dreams or of Nightmares, painful,
impracticable, coming now and then*

» PauU, ii. 466.

ftZ9

CHAP. X.J KURFURST JOACHIM II
isxe-issa]

CHAPTER X
KURFURST JOACHIM II

Joachim n., Sixth Elector, no doubt after painful study,
and intricate silent consideration ever since his twelfth year
when Luther was first heard of over the world, came gradually,
and before his Father’s death had already come, to the con-
clusion of adopting the Confession of Augsburg, as the true
Interpretation of this Universe, so far as we had yet got ; and
did so, publicly, in the year 1539.^ To the great joy of
Berlin and the Brandenburg populations generally, who had
been of a Protestant humour, hardly restrainable by Law, for
some years past. By this decision Joachim held fast, with a
stout, weighty grasp ; nothing spasmodic in his way of handling
the matter, and yet a heartiness which is agreeable to see. He
could not join in the Schmalkaldic War ; seeing, it is probable,
small chance for such a War, of many chiefs and little coimsel ;
nor was he willing yet to part from the Kaiser Karl v., who
was otherwise very good to him.

He had fought personally for this Kaiser, twice over, against
the Turks; first as Brandenburg Captain, learning his art;
and afterwards as Kaiser’s Generalissimo, in 1542. He did no
good upon the Turks, on that latter occasion ; as indeed what
good was to be done, in such a quagmire of futilities as
Joachim’s element there was ? ^ Too sumptuous in his dinners,

too much wine withal ! ’ hint some calumniously.* ‘ Hector of
Germany ! ’ say others. He tried some small prefatory Siege
or scalade of Pesth ; could not do it ; and came his ways home
again, as the best course. Pedant Chroniclers give him the
name Hector^ ‘ Joachim Hector,’ — to match that of Cicero and
that of Achilles. A man of solid structure, this our Hector, in
body and mind : extensive cheeks, very large heavy-laden face ;
capable of terrible bursts of anger, as his kind generally were.

^ Rentscb, p. 43a. * Paulus Jovius, etc. See Pauli, iii. 70-73.

280 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. HI.

txM7

The Schmalkaldic War went to water, as the Germans
phrase it : Kur-Sachsen, — ^that is, Johann Friedrich the Mag-
nanimous, Son of Johann ‘ V.D.M.I.iE.,’ and Nephew of
Friedrich the Wise, — ^had his sorrowfully valid resusons for the
War ; large force too, plenty of zealous copartners, Philip of
Hessen and others; but no generalship, or not enough, for
such a business. Big Army, as is apt enough to happen,
fell short of food ; Kaiser Karl hung on the outskirts, waiting
confidently till it came to famine. Johann Friedrich would
attempt nothing decisive while provender lasted ; — ^and having
in the end, strangely enough, and somewhat deaf to advice,
divided his big army into three separate paits, — Johann
Friedrich was himself, with one of those parts, surprised at
Miihlberg, on a Sunday when at church (24th April 1647);
and was there beaten to sudden ruin, and even taken captive,
like to have his head cut oiBP, by the triumphant angry Kaiser.
Philip of Hessen, somewhat wiser, w£is home to Marburg, safe
with his part, in the interim. — ^Elector Joachim n. of Branden-
burg had good reason to rejoice in his own cautious reluctances
on this occasion. However, he did now come valiantly up,
hearing what severities were in the wind.

He pleaded earnestly, passionately, he and Cousin or already
‘Elector’ Moritz,^ — who was just getting Johann Friedrich’s
Electorship fished-away from him out of these troubles,^ — ^for
Johann Friedrich of Saxony’s life, first of all. For Johann’s
life first ; this is a thing not to be dispensed with, your
Majesty, on any terms whatever ; a sine qua noriy this life to
Protestant Germany at large. To which the Kaiser indicated,
‘ He would see ; not immediate death at any rate ; we will
see.’ A life that could not and must not be taken in this
manner : this was the first point. Then, secondly^ that Philip
of Hessen, now home again at Marburg, — not a bad or disloyal
man, though headlong, and with two wives, — ^might not be
forfeited ; but that peace and pardon might be granted him,
on his entire submission. To which second point the Kaiser

\ Pauli, iii. I02. * KurfUrsI, 4th June 1547.

CHAP.X.J KURFURST JOACHIM II 231

90 th June Z547]

answered, ^ Yes, then, on his submission.’ These were the two
points. These pleadings went on at Halle, where the Kaiser
now lies, in triumphantly victorious humour, in the early days
of June, Year 1647. Johann Friedrich of Saxony had been,
by some Imperial Court-Council or other, — Spanish merely, I
suppose, — doomed to die. Sentence was signified to him while
he sat at chess: ‘Can wait till we end the game,’ thought
Johann ; — ‘ Pergamus^ said he to his comrade, ‘ Let us go on,
then !’ Sentence not to be executed till one see.

With Philip of Hessen things had a more conclusive aspect.
Philip had accepted the terms procured for him ; which had
been laboriously negotiated, brought to paper, and now wanted
only the sign-manual to them : ‘ Ohne einigen Gefangniss
(without any imprisonment),’ one of the chief clauses. And
so Philip now came over to Halle ; was met and welcomed by
his two friends, Joachim and Moritz, at Naumburg, a stage
before Halle; — clear now to make his submission, and beg
pardon of the Kaiser, according to bargain. On the morrow,
19th June 1647, the Papers were got signed. And next day,
20th June, Philip did, according to bargain, openly beg pardon
of the Kaiser, in his Majesty’s Hall of Audience (Town House
of Halle, I suppose) ; ‘ knelt at the Kaiser’s feet publicly on
both knees, while his Kanzler read the submission and entreaty,
as agreed upon’ ; and, alas, then the Kaiser said nothing at
all to him I Kaiser looked haughtily, with impenetrable eyes
and shelf-lip, over the head of him ; gave him no hand to kiss ;
and left poor Philip kneeling there. An awkward position
indeed ; — which any German Painter that there were, might
make a Picture of, I have sometimes thought. Picture of
some real meaning, more or less, — if for symbolic Towers of
Babel, mediaeval mythologies, and extensive smearings of that
kind, he could find leisure ! Philip having knelt a reason-

able time, and finding there was no help for it, rose in the
dread silence (some say, with too sturdy an expression of
countenance) ; and retired from the afiair, having at least done
his part of it.

882 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

[i5*6-*55a

The next practical thing was now supper, or as we of this
age should call it, dinner. Uncommonly select and high
supper: host the Duke of Alba; where Joachim, Elector
Moritz, and another high Official, the Bishop of Arras, were to
welcome poor Philip after his troubles. How the grand supper
went, I do not hear : possibly a little constrained ; the Kaiser’s
strange silence sitting on all men’s thoughts ; not to be spoken
of in the present company. At length the guests rose to go
away. Philip’s lodging is with Moritz (who is his son-in-law,
as learned readers know) : ‘You Philip, your lodging is mine ;
my lodging is yours, — I should say ! Cannot we ride to-
gether?’ — ‘Philip is not permitted to go,’ said Imperial
Officiality; ‘Philip is to continue here, and we fear go to
prison.’ — ‘ Prison ? ’ cried they all : ‘ Ohne einigen Grfmgniss
(without any imprisonment) ! ’ — ‘ As we read the words, it is
“ Olme EWiGEN Grfdngnisa (without eternal imprisonment),” ’
answer the others. And so, according to popular tradition,
which has little or no credibility, though printed in many
Books, their false Secretary had actually modified it.

‘No intention of imprisoning his Durchlaucht of Hessen
forever ; not forever ! ’ answered they. And Kurfiirst Joachim,
in astonished indignation, after some remonstrating and argu-
ing, louder and louder, which profited nothing, blazed out into
a very whirlwind of rage ; drew his sword, it is whispered with
a shudder, — drew his sword, or was for drawing it, upon the
Duke of Alba; and would have done, God knows what, had
not friends flung themselves between, and got the Duke away,
or him away.^ Other accounts bear, that it was upon the
Bishop of Arras he drew his sword; which is a somewhat
diflerent matter. Perhaps he drew it on both ; or on men and
things in general ; — for his indignation knew no bounds. The
heavy solid man ; yet with a human heart in him after all, and
a Hohenzollem abhorrence of chicanery, capable of rising to
the transcendent pitch ! His wars against the Turks, and his
other Hectorships, I will forget ; but this, of a face so extensive

^ Pauli, iii. 103. •

CHAP. X.] KURFURST JOACHIM II 238
*5481

kindled all into divine lire for poor Philip’s sake, shall be
memorable to me.

Philip got out by and by, though with difficulty ; the Kaiser
proving very stiff in the matter ; and only yielding to obstinate
pressures, and the force of time and events. Philip got away ;
and then how Johann Friedrich of Sachsen, after being led
about for five years, in the Kaiser’s train, a condemned man,
liable to be executed any day, did likewise at last get away,
with his head safe and Electorate gone : these are known
Historical events, which we glanced at already, on another
score.

For, by and by, the Kaiser found tougher solicitation than
this of Joachim’s. The Kaiser, by his high carriage in this
and other such matters, had at length kindled a new War
round him ; and he then soon found himself reduced to
extremities again ; chased to the Tyrol Mountains, and obliged
to comply with many things. New War, of quite other
emphasis and management than the Schmalkaldic one ;
managed by Elector Moritz and our poor friend Albert
Alcibiades as principals. A Kaiser chased into the mountains,
capable of being seized by a little spurring ; — ‘ Capture him ? ’
said Albert. ‘ I have no cage big enough for such a bird ! ’
answered Moritz ; and the Kaiser was let run. How he ran
then towards Treaty of Passau (1552), towards Siege of Metz
and other sad conclusions, ‘ Abdication ’ the finale of them ;
these also are known phases in the Reformation History, as
hinted at above.

Here at Halle, in the year 1547, the great Kaiser, with
Protestantism manacled at his feet, and many things going
prosperous, was at his culminating point. He published his
Interim (1548), What you troublesome Protestants are to do,
in the mean time, while the Council of Trent is sitting, and
till it and I decide for you) ; and in short, drove and reined-in
the Reich with a high hand and a sharp whip, for the time
being. Troublesome Protestants mostly rejected the. Interim;
Moritz and Alcibiades, with France in the rear of them.

234 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. hi.

tx5xfi.i55a

took to arms in that way ; took to ransoming fat Bishoprics

Verhum Diaboli Manet^ we know where !) ; — ^took to chas-
ing Kaisers into the mountains ; — and times came soon round
again. In all these latter broils Kurfiirst Joachim ii., deeply
interested, as we may fancy, strove to keep quiet; and to
prevail, by weight of influence and wise counsel, rather than
by fighting with his Kaiser.

One sad little anecdote I recollect of Joachim : an Acci-
dent, which happened in those Passau-Interim days, a year or
two after that drawing of the sword on Alba. Kurfiirst
Joachim unfortunately once fell through a staircase, in that
time ; being, as I guess, a heavy man. It was in the Castle
of Grimnitz, one of his many Castles, a spacious enough old
Hunting-seat, the repairs of which had not been well attended
to. The good Herr, weighty of foot, was leading down his
Electress to dinner one day in this Schloss of Grimnitz ; broad
stair climbs round a grand Hall, hung with stag-trophies,
groups of weapons, and the like hall-furniture. An unlucky
timber yielded ; yawning chasm in the staircase ; Joachim and
his good Princess sank by gravitation ; Joachim to the floor
with little hurt ; his poor Princess (horrible to think of),
being next the wall, came upon the stag-horns and boar-
spears down below ! ^ The poor Lady’s hurt was indescrib-
able : she walked lame all the rest of her days ; and Joachim,
I hope (hope, but not with confidence),^ loved her all the
better for it. This unfortunate old Schloss of Grimnitz,
some thirty miles northward of Berlin, was, — by the Eighth
Kurfiirst, Joachim Friedrich, Grandson of this one, with great
renown to himself and to it, — converted into an Endowed
High School : the famed Joachimsthal Gymnasium^ still famed,
though now under some change of circumstances, and removed
to Berlin itself.®

Joachim’s first Wife, from whom descend the following
Kurfiirsts, was a daughter of that Duke George of Saxony,

» Pauli, iii. 112. * Jb, iii. 194.

• Nicolai, p. 725.

CHAP.X.] KURFURST JOACHIM II *35
15x6.1559]

Luther'^s celebrated friend, ‘ If it rained Duke-Georges nine
days running."

Joachim gets Co-infefhftient in Preussen

This second Wife, she of the accident at Grimnitz, was
Hedwig, King Sigismund of Poland’s daughter ; which con-
nexion, it is thought, helped Joachim well in getting what they
call the Mitbelehnung of Preussen (for it was he that achieved
this point) from King Sigismund.

Mitbelehnung (Co-infeftment) in Preussen ; — whereby is
solemnly acknowledged the right of Joachim and his Posterity
to the reversion of Preussen, should the Culmbach Line of
Duke Albert happen to fail. It was a thing Joachim long
strove for ; till at length his Father-in-law did, some twenty
years hence, concede it him.^ Should Albert’s Line fail, then,
the other Culmbachers get Preussen ; should the Culmbachers
all fail, the Berlin Brandenburgers get it. The Culmbachers
are at this time rather scarce of heirs : poor Alcibiades died
childless, as we know, and Casimir’s Line is extinct; Duke
Albert himself has left only one Son, who now succeeds in
Preussen ; still young, and not of the best omens. Margraf
George the Pious, he left only George Friedrich ; an excellent
man, who is now prosperous in the world, and wedded long
since, but has no children. So that between Joachim’s line
and Preussen there are only two intermediate heirs ; — and it
was a thing eminently worth looking after. Nor has it wanted
that. And so Kurfurst Joachim, almost at the end of his
course, has now made sure of it.

Joachim makes ^ Heritage-Brotherhood ’ with the Duke of

Liegnitz

Another feat of like nature Joachim ii. had long ago
achieved ; which likewise in the long-run proved important in
his Family, and in the History of the world : an ‘ Erbver-

* Date, Lublin, 19th July 1568: Pauli, iii. X 77 -I 79 > X 93 ] Rentsch, p. 457;
Stenzel, I 341, 342.*

236 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

tX5i6-X55»

brUdertmffi so they term it, with the Duke of Liegnitz, —
date 1637. Erbverbrilderung' (‘ Heritage - Brotherhood,’
meaning Covenant to succeed reciprocally on Failure of Heirs
to either) had in all times been a common paction among
German Princes well affected to each other. Friedrich ii.,
the then Duke of Liegnitz, we have transiently seen, was
related to the Family; he had been extremely helpful in
bringing his young friend Albert of Preussen’s affairs to a
good issue, — whose Niece, withal, he had wedded : — in fact,
he was a close friend of this our Joachim’s ; and there had
long been a growing connexion between the two Houses, by
intermarriages and good offices.

The Dukes of Liegnitz were Sovereign-Princes, come of
the old Piasts of Poland ; and had perfect right to enter into
this transaction of an Erbverhruderung with whom they
liked. True, they had, above two-hundred years before, in
the days of King Johann Ich-dten (a.d. 1329), voluntarily
constituted themselves Vassals of the Crown of Bohemia:*
but the right to dispose of their Lands as they pleased had,
all along, been carefully acknowledged, and saved entire.
And, so late as 1521, just sixteen years ago, the Bohemian
King Vladislaus the Last, our good Margraf George’s friend,
had expressly, in a Deed still extant, confirmed to them, with
all the emphasis and amplitude that Law-Phraseology could
bring to bear upon it, the right to dispose of said Lands in
any manner of way : ‘ by written testament, or by verbal on
their deathbed, they can, as they see wisest, give away, sell,
pawn, dispose of, and exchange (vergeben^ verhmifen^ versetzen,
verschaffen^ verwechseln) these said lands,’ to all lengths, and
with all manner of freedom. Which privilege had likewise
been confirmed, twice over (1622, 1524), by Ludwig the next
King, Ludwig Ohne-Haut^ who perished in the bogs of
Mohacz, and ended the native Line of Bohemian-Hungarian
Kings. Nay, Ferdinand, King of the Romans, Karl v.’s
Brother, afterwards Kaiser, who absorbed that Bohemian

^ Pauli, iii. 22.

*87

CHAP. X.} KURFURST JOACHIM II

{8th Oct. 1537]

Crown among the others, had himself, by implication, sanc-
tioned or admitted the privilege, in 1529, only eight years
ago.^ The right to make the Erbverhruderung could not
seem doubtful to anybody.

And made accordingly it was; signed, sealed, drawn-out
on the proper parchments, 18th October 1537 ; to the fol-
lowing clear effect : ‘ That if Duke Friedrich'^s Line should
die out, all his Liegnitz countries, Liegnitz, Brieg, Wohlau,
should fall to the Hohenzollern Brandenburgers ; and that, if
the Line of Hohenzollern Brandenburg should first fail, then
all and singular the Bohemian Fiefs of Brandenburg (as
Crossen, Ziillichau, and seven others there enumerated) should
fall to the House of Liegnitz.’^ It seemed a clear Paction,
questionable by no mortal. Double-marriage between the two
Houses (eldest Son, on each side, to suitable Princess on the
other) was to follow; and did follow, after some delays, 17th
February 1545. So that the matter seemed now complete;
secure on all points, and a matter of quiet satisfaction to both
the Houses and to their friends.

But Ferdinand, King of the Romans, King of Bohemia
and Hungary, and coming to be Emperor one day, was not of
that sentiment. Ferdinand had once implicitly recognised
the privilege, but Ferdinand, now when he saw the privilege
turned to use, and such a territory as Liegnitz exposed to the
possibility of falling into inconvenient hands, explicitly took
other thoughts ; and gradually determined to prohibit this
Erbverbrudermig, The States of Bohemia, accordingly, in
1544 (it is not doubtful, by Ferdinand’s suggestion), were
moved to make inquiries as to this Heritage-Fraternity of
Liegnitz.^ On which hint King Ferdinand straightway in-
formed the Duke of Liegnitz that the act was not justifiable,
and must be revoked. The Duke of Liegnitz, grieved to the
heart, had no means of resisting. Ferdinand, King of the
Romans, backed by Kaiser Karl, with the States of Bohemia
barking at his wink, were too strong for poor Duke Friedrich
* Stenzel, i. 323. * 73 . L 320. • 73 . L 322.

288 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

[8th May 1548

of liegnitz. Great corresponding between Berlin, liegnitz,
Prag ensued on this matter: but the end was a summons
to Duke Friedrich, — summons from King Ferdinand in March
1646, ‘To appear in the Imperial Hall {Kaiserhqf) at
Breslau,’ and to submit that Deed of Erbverhrudenmg to the
examination of the States there. The States, already up to
the affair, soon finished their examination of it (8th May
1646). The deed was annihilated ; and Friedrich was ordered,
furthermore, to produce proofs within six months that his
subjects too were absolved of all oaths or the like regarding
it, and that in fact the Transaction was entirely abolished
and reduced to zero. Friedrich complied, had to comply ;
very much chagrined, he returned home ; and died next year,
— it is supposed, of heartbreak from this business. He had
yielded outwardly ; but to force only. In a Codicil appended
to his last Will, some months afterwards (which Will, written
years ago, had treated the E/rhverhrudervniig as a Fact settled),
he indicates, as with his last breath, that he considered the
thing still valid, though overruled by the hand of power.
Let the reader mark this matter ; for it will assuredly become
memorable, one day.

The hand of power, namely, Ferdinand, King of the
Romans, had applied in like manner to Joachim of Branden-
burg to surrender his portion of the Deed, and annihilate on
his side too this Erhverbruderung. But Joachim refused
steadily, and all his successors steadily, to give up this Bit of
Written Parchment ; kept the same, among their precious
documents, against some day that might come (and I suppose
it lies in the Archives of Berlin even now) ; silently, or in
words, asserting that the Deed of Heritage-Brothership was
good, and that though some hands might have the power, no
hand could have the right to abolish it on those terms.

How King Ferdinand permitted himself such a procedure ?
Ferdinand, says one of his latest apologists in this matter,
‘ considered the privileges granted by his Predecessors, in
respect to rights of Sovereignty, as fallen extinct on their

CHAP. X.] KURFURST JOACHIM II SS9

15Z6-Z5531

death,’' Which, — if Reality and Fact would but likewise
be so kind as ‘ consider ’ it so, — ^was no doubt convenient for
Ferdinand !

Joachim was not so great with Ferdinand aa he had been
with Charles the Imperial Brother. Joachim and Ferdinand
had many debates of this kind, some of them rather stiff.
Jagerndorf, for instance, and the Baireuth-Anspach confisca-
tions, in George Friedrich’s minority. Ferdinand, now
Kaiser, had snatched Jagerndorf from poor young Greorge
Friedrich, son of excellent Margraf George whom we knew ;
‘ Part of the spoils of Albert Alcibiades,’ thought Ferdinand,
‘ and a good windfall,’ — though young George Friedrich had
merely been the Ward of Cousin Alcibiades, and totally with-
out concern in those political explosions. ‘ Excellent wind-
fall,’ thought Ferdinand ; and held his grip. But Joachim,
in his weighty steady way, intervened ; Joachim, emphatic in
the Diets and elsewhere, made Ferdinand quit grip, and pro-
duce Jagerndorf again. Jagerndorf and the rest had all to
be restored; and, except some filchings in the Jagerndorf
Appendages (Ratibor and Oppeln, ^ restored ’ only in sem-
blance, and at length juggled away altogether),^ everything
came to its right owner again. Nor would Joachim rest till
Alcibiades’s Territories too were all punctually given back, to
this same George Friedrich ; to whom, by law and justice,
they belonged. In these points Joachim prevailed against a
strong-handed Kaiser, apt to ‘ consider one’s rights fallen
extinct ’ now and then. In this of Liegnitz all he could do
was to keep the Deed, in steady protest silent or vocal.

But enough now of Joachim Hector, Sixth Kurfiirst, and of
his workings and his strugglings. He walked through this
world, treading as softly as might be, yet with a strong
weighty step ; rending the jungle steadily asunder ; well see-
ing whither he was bound. Rather an expensive Herr ;
built a good deal, completion of the Schloss at Berlin one
* Stenzel, i. 323. * Rcntsch, pp. 129, 130.

240 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. IIL

1 1 T t . [*5I6-I5sa

example ; and was not otherwise afraid of outlay, in the
Reich’^s Politics, or in what seemed needful : If there is a
harvest ahead, even a distant one, it is poor thrift to be
stingy of your seed-corn !

Joachim was always a conspicuous Public Man, a busy
Politician in the Reich ; stanch to his kindred, and by no
means blind to himself or his own interests. Stanch also, we
must grant, and ever active, though generally in a cautious,
weighty, never in a rash swift way, to the great Cause of
Protestantism, and to all good causes. He was himself a
solemnly devout man ; deep awe-stricken reverence dw veiling
in his view of this Universe. Most serious, though with a
jocose dialect commonly, having a cheerful wit in speaking to
men. Luther’s Books he called his Seelenschatz (Soul’s-
treasure); Luther and the Bible were his chief reading.
Fond of profane learning too, and of the useful or orna-
mental Arts ; given to music, and ‘ would himself sing aloud ’
when he had a melodious leisure-hour. Excellent old gentle-
man : he died, rather suddenly, but with much nobleness, 3d
January 1571 ; age sixty-six. Old Rentsch’s account of this
event is still worth reading:* Joachim’s death-scene has a
mild pious beauty which does not depend on creed.

He had a Brother, too, not a little occupied with Politics,
and always on the good side ; a wise pious man, whose fame
was in all the churches : ^ Johann of Ciistrin,’ called also
‘ Johann the IPw,’ who busied himself zealously in Protestant
matters, second only in piety and zeal to his Cousin, Margraf
George the Pious ; and was not so held back by official con-
siderations as his Brother the Elector now and then. Johann
of Ciistrin is a very famous man in the old Books : Johann
was the first that fortified Ciistrin ; built himself an illustrious
Schloss, and ‘ roofed it with copper,’ in Ciistrin (which is a
place we shall be well acquainted with by and by) ; and lived
there, with the Neumark for apanage, a true man’s life ; —
^ Nicolai, p. 82. * Rentsch, p. 458.

CHAP. XLJ KURFURST JOHANN GEORGE 241

*5471

mostly with a good deal of business, warlike and other, on
his hands ; with good Books, good Deeds, and occasionally
good Men, coming to enliven it, — according to the terms
then given.

CHAPTER XI

SEVENTH KURFURST, JOHANN GEORGE

Kaiser Karl, we said, was very good to Joachim ; who
always strove, sometimes with a stretch upon his very con-
science, to keep well with the Kaiser. The Kaiser took
Joachim’s young Prince along with him to those Schmalkaldic
Wars (not the comfortable side for Joachim’s conscience, but
the safe side for an anxious Father) ; Kaiser made a Knight
of this young Prince, on one occasion of distinction ; he wrote
often to Papa about him, what a promising young hero he
was, — seems really to have liked the young man. It was
Johann George, Elector afterwards. Seventh Elector. — This
little incident is known to me on evidence.^ A small thing
that certainly befell, at the siege of Wittenberg (a.d. 1547),
during those Philip-of-Hessen Negotiations, three-hundred
and odd years ago.

The Schmalkaldic War having come all to nothing, the
Saxon Elector sitting captive with sword overhead in the way
we saw, Saxon Wittenberg was besieged, and the Kaiser was
in great hurry to get it. Kaiser in person, and young Johann
George for sole attendant, rode round the place one day, to
take a view of the works, and judge how soon, or whether
ever, it could be compelled to give in. Gunners noticed them
from the battlements ; gunners Saxon-Protestant most likely,
and in just gloom at the perils and indignities now lying on
their pious Kurfiirst Johann Friedrich the Magnanimous.
‘ Lo, you ! Kaiser’s self riding yonder, and one of his silk
Junkers. Suppose we gave the Kaiser’s self a shot, then?’

' Rentsch, p. 465.

VOL. I.

«4* HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. hi.

[1547

said the gunner, or thought : ^ It might help a better man
from his life-perils, if such shot did — ! ’ — In fact the gun
flashed off, with due outburst, and almost with due effect.
The ball struck the ground among the very horses’ feet of the
two riders ; so that they were thrown, or nearly so, and
covered from sight with a cloud of earth and sand ; — ^and the
gunners thought, for some instants, an unjust, obstinate
Kaiser’s life was gone ; and a pious Elector’s saved. But it
proved not so. Kaiser Karl and Johann George both
emerged, in a minute or two, little the worse ; — Kaiser
Karl perhaps blushing somewhat, and flurried this time, I
think, in the impenetrable eyes ; and his Cimburgis lip closed
for the moment ; — and galloped out of shot-range. ‘ I never
forget this little incident,’ exclaims Smelfungus : ‘ It is one of
the few times I can get, after all my reading about that
surprising Karl v., I do not say the least understanding or
practical conception of him and his character and his affairs,
but the least ocular view or imagination of him, as a fact
among facts !’ Which is unlucky for Smelfungus. — Johann
George, still more emphatically, never to the end of his life
forgot this incident. And indeed it must be owned, had the
shot taken effect as intended, the whole course of human
things would have been surprisingly altered ; — and for one
thing, neither Friedrich the Greats nor the present History of
Friedrich^ had ever risen above ground, or troubled an en-
lightened public or me I

Of Johann George, this Seventh Elector,^ who proved a
good Governor, and carried on the Family Affairs in the old
style of slow steady success, I will remember nothing more,
except that he had the surprising number of Three-and-
Twenty children ; one of them posthumous, though he died
at the age of seventy-three. —

He is Founder of the New Culmbach Line : two sons of
these twenty-three children he settled, one in Baireuth, the
^ 1525; 1571-1598.

CHAP. XI.] KURPURST JOHANN GEORGE 243

1568-1603]

other in Anspach ; from whom come all the subsequent Heads
of that Principality, till the last of them died in Hammersmith
in 1806, as above said.^ He was a prudent, thrifty Herr;
no mistresses, no luxuries allowed; at the sight of a new-
fashioned coat, he would fly out on an unhappy youth, and
pack him from his presence. Very strict in point of justice .
a peasant once appealing to him, in one of his inspection-
journeys through the country, ‘ Grant me justice, Durchlaucht,
against So-and-so ; I am your highness’s bom subject ! ’ —

‘ Thou shouldst have it, man, wert thou a bom Turk ! ’
answered Johann George. — There is something anxious, grave
and, as it were, surprised in the look of this good Herr. He
made the Gera Bond above spoken of ; — founded the Younger
Culmbach Line, with that important Law of Primogeniture
strictly superadded. A conspicuous thrift, veracity, modest
solidity, looks through the conduct of this Herr ; — a deter-
mined Protestant he too, as indeed all the following were
€uid are.^

Of Joachim Friedrich, his eldest Son, who at one time was
Archbishop of Magdeburg, — called home from the wars to fill
that valuable Heirloom, which had suddenly fallen vacant by
an Uncle’s death, and keep it warm ; — and who afterwards,
in due course, carried on a lohliche Regierung of the old style
and physiognomy, as Eighth Kurfiirst, from his fiftieth to his
sixtieth year (1598-1608):® of him we already noticed the
fine ‘ t/bocAwTW-thal Gymnasium,’ or Foundation for learned
purposes, in the old Schloss of Grimnitz, where his serene
Grandmother got lamed ; and will notice nothing farther, in
this place, except his very great anxiety to profit by the
Pmssian Mitbelehnung^ — that Co-infeftment in Preussen,
achieved by his Grandfather Joachim ii., which was now

^ Rentsch, p. 475 {Christian to Baireuth ; Joachim Ernst to Anspach) see
Genealogical Diagram, infr^, p. 3x8.

■ AJ. pp. 470, 471-

• Bom, 1547 ; Magdeburg, 1566-98 (when his Third Son got it,— very unlucky
in the Thirty-Years War afterwards.)

244 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. lit.

11568

about coming to its full maturity. Joachim Friedrich had
already married his eldest Prince to the daughter of Albert
Friedrich, Second Duke of Preussen, who it was by this time
evident would be the last Duke there of his Line. Joachim
Friedrich, having himself fallen a widower, did next year,

though now counting fifty-six But it will be better if we

explain first, a little, how matters now stood with Preussen.

CHAPTER XII

OF ALBERT FRIEDRICH, THE SECOND DUKE OF
PREUSSEN

Duke Albert died in 1568, laden with years, and in his
latter time greatly broken-down by other troubles. His
Prussian Raths (Councillors) were disobedient, his Osianders
and Lutheran-Calvinist Theologians were all in fire and flame
against each other : the poor old man, with the best disposi-
tions, but without power to realise them, had much to do and
to suffer. Pious, just and honourable, intending the best;
but losing his memory, and incapable of business, as he now
complained. In his sixtieth year he had married a second
time, a young Brunswick Princess, with whose foolish Brother,
Eric, he had much trouble ; and who at last herself took so
ill with the insolence and violence of these intrusive Councillors
and Theologians, that the household life she led beside her
old Husband and them became intolerable to her; and she
withdrew to another residence, — ^a little Hunting-seat at
Neuhausen, half a dozen miles from Konigsberg ; — ^and there,
or at Labiau still farther off, lived mostly, in a separate
condition, for the rest of her life. Separate for life : — ^never-
theless they happened to die on the same day ; 20 th March
1668, they were simultaneously delivered from their troubles
in this world.^

^ HUbner, tab. i8i ; Stenzel, i. 34^

US

CHAP. XII.] ALBERT FRIEDRICH
1568)

Albert left one Son ; the second child of this last Wife :
his one child by the former Wife, a daughter now of good
years, was married to the Duke of Mecklenburg. Son’s name
was Albert Friedrich ; age, at his Father’s death, fifteen. A
promising young Prince, but of sensitive abstruse temper ; —
held under heavy tutelage by his Raths and Theologians ; and
spurting-up against them, in explosive rebellion, from time to
time. He now (1668) was to be sovereign Duke of Preussen,
and the one representative of the Culmbach Line in that fine
Territory ; Margraf George Friedrich of Anspach, the only
other Culmbacher, being childless, though wedded.

We need not doubt, the Brandenburg House, — old Kurfurst
Joachim 11 . still alive, and thrifty Johann George the Heir-
Apparent, — ^kept a watchful eye on those emergencies. But
it was difficult to interfere directly ; the native Prussian Raths
were very jealous, and Poland itself was a ticklish Sovereignty
to deal with. Albert Friedrich being still a Minor, the
Polish King, Sigismund, proposed to undertake the guardian-
ship of him, as became a superior lord to a subject vassal on
such an occasion. But the Prussian Raths assured his
Majesty, ‘ Their young Prince was of such a lively intellect,
he was perfectly fit to conduct the affairs of the Government ’
(especially with such a Body of expert Councillors to help
him), ‘ and might be at once declared of age.’ Which was
accordingly the course followed ; Poland caring little for it ;
Brandenburg digesting the arrangement as it could. And
thus it continued for some years, even under new difficulties
that arose; the official Clique of Raths being the real
Government of the Country ; and poor young Albert Friedrich
bursting out occasionally into tears against them, occasionally
into futile humours of a fiery nature. Osiander-Theology,
and the battle of the '"doocies^ ran very high ; nor was Prussian
Officiality a beautiful thing.

These Prussieui Raths, and the Prussian Riiterschaft
generally (Knightage, Land-Aristocracy), which had its
Stdnde (States, or meetings of Parliament after a sort), were

246 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

[ x 568- x 6 o 3

all along of a mutinous, contumacious humour. The idea
had got into their minds. That they were by birth what the
ancient Ritters by election had been ; entitled, fit or not fit,
to share the Government promotions among them : ‘ The
Duke is hereditary in his office ; why not we ? All Offices,
are they not, by nature, ours to share among us?’ The
Duke’s notion, again, was to have the work of his Offices
effectually done ; small matter by whom : the Ritters looked
less to that side of the question ; — regarded any ‘ Foreigner ’
(German-Anspacher, or other Non-Prussian), whatever his
merit, as an intruder, usurper, or kind of thief, when seen in
office. Their contentions, contumacies and pretensions were
accordingly manifold. They had dreams of an ‘ Aristocratic
Republic, with the Sovereign reduced to zero,’ like what their
Polish neighbours grew to. They had various dreams ; and
individuals among them broke out, from time to time, into
high acts of insolence and mutiny. It took a hundred-and-
fifty years of Brandenburg horse-breaking, sometimes with
sharp manipulation and a potent curb-bit, to dispossess them
of that notion, and make them go steadily in harness. Which
also, however, was at last got done by the Hohenzollems.

Of Duke Albert Friedrich"' s Marriage : who his Wife waSy and
what her possible Dowry

In a year or two, there came to be question of the marrying
of young Duke Albert Friedrich, After due consultation,
the Princess fixed upon was Maria Eleonora, eldest Daughter
of the then Duke of Cleve : to him a proper Embassy was
sent with that object ; and came back with Yes for answer.
Duke of Cleve, at that time, was Wilhelm, called ^ the Rich ’
in History-Books ; a Sovereign of some extent in those lower
Rhine countries. Whom I can connect with the English
reader’s memory in no readier way than by the fact. That he
was younger brother, one year younger, of a certain ‘ Anne of
Cleves ’ ; — a large fat Lady, who was rather scurvily used in

CHAP. XIL] ALBERT FRIEDRICH 247

Z56a-i603]

this country ; being called by Henry vm. and us, a ‘ great
Flanders mare,’ unsuitable for espousal with a King of delicate
feelmgs ! This Anne of Cleves, who took matters quietly
and lived on her pension, when rejected by King Henry, was
Aunt of the young Lady now in question for Preussen. She
was still alive here in England, pleasantly quiet, * at Burley
on the Hill,’ till Maria Eleonora was seven years old ; — who
possibly enough still reads in her memory some fading vestige
of new black frocks or trimmings, and brief court-mourning,
on the death of poor Aunt Anne over seas. — ^Another Aunt
is more honourably distinguished ; Sibylla, Wife of our noble
Saxon Elector, Johann Friedrich the Magnanimous, who lost
his Electorate and almost his Life for religion’s sake, as we
have seen ; by whom, in his perils and distresses, Sibylla stood
always, like a very true and noble Wife.

Duke Wilhelm himself was a man of considerable mark in
his day. His Duchy of Cleve included not only Cleve-Proper,
but Jiilich {Julkrs\ Berg, which latter pair of Duchies were a
better thing than Cleve-Proper : — Jiilich, Berg and various
other small Principalities, which, gradually agglomerating by
marriage, heritage and the chance of events in successive
centuries, had at length come all into Wilhelm’s hands ; so
that he got the name of Wilhelm the Rich among his con-
temporaries. He seems to have been of a headlong, blustery,
uncertain disposition ; much tossed about in the contro-
versies of his day. At one time he was a Protestant de-
clared ; not without reasons of various kinds. The Duchy of
Geldern (what we call Guelders) had fallen to him, by express
bequest of the last Owner, whose Line was out ; and Wilhelm
took possession. But the Kaiser Karl v. quite refused to let
him keep possession. Whereupon Wilhelm had joined with
the French (it was in the Moritz- Alcibiades time) ; had de-
clared war, and taken other high measures : but it came to
nothing, or to less. The end was, Wilhelm had to ‘come
upon his knees ’ before the Kaiser, and beg forgiveness ; quite

248 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

[157a

renouncing Greldem, which accordingly has gone its own dif-
ferent road ever since. Wilhelm was zealously Protestant in
those days ; as his people are, and as he still is, at the period
we treat of. But he went into Papistry, not long after ; and
made other sudden turns and misventures : to all appearance,
rather an abrupt, blustery, uncertain Herr. It is to him that
Albert Friedrich, the young Duke of Preussen, guided by his
Council, now (Year 1572) sends an Embassy, demanding his
eldest Daughter, Maria Eleonora, to wife.

Duke Wilhelm answered Yea ; ‘ sent a Counter-Embassy,’
with whatever else was necessary ; and in due time the young
Bride, with her Father, set out towards Preussen, such being
the arrangement, there to complete the matter. They had
got as far as Berlin, warmly welcomed by the Kurfiirst Johann
George ; when, from Konigsberg, a sad message reached them :
namely, that the young Duke had suddenly been seized with
an invincible depression and overclouding of mind, not quite
to be characterised by the name of madness, but still less by
that of perfect sanity. His eagerness to see his Bride was the
same as formerly ; but his spiritual health was in the ques-
tionable state described. The young Lady paused for a little,
in such mood as we may fancy. She had already lost two
offers, Bridegrooms snatched away by death, says Pauli ; ^ and
thought it might be ominous to refuse the third. So she
decided to go on ; dashed aside her father’s doubts ; sent her
unhealthy Bridegroom * a flower-garland as love-token,’ who
duly responded ; and Father Wilhelm and she proceeded,
as if nothing were wrong. The spiritual state of the Prince,
she found, had not been exaggerated to her. His humours
and ways were strange, questionable ; other than one could
have wished. Such as he was, however, she wedded him on
the appointed terms ; — ^hoping probably for a recovery, which
never came.

The case of Albert’s malady is to this day dim ; and
strange tales are current as to the origin of it, which the

1 Pauli, iv. 512,

249

CHAP. xiLj ALBERT FRIEDRICH

1603]

curious in Physiology may consult; they are not fit for
reporting here.^ It seems to have consisted in an over-
clouding, rather than a total ruin of the mind. Incurable
depression there was ; gloomy torpor alternating with fits of
vehement activity or suffering; great discontinuity at all
times : — evident unfitness for business. It was long hoped
he might recover. And Doctors in Divinity and in Medicine
undertook him : Theologians, Exorcists, Physicians, Quacks ;
but no cure came of it, nothing but mutual condemnations,
violences and even execrations, from the said Doctors and their
respective Official patrons, lay and clerical. Must have been
such a scene for a young Wife as has seldom occurred, in
romance or reality ! Children continued to be bom ; daughter
after daughter ; but no son that lived.

Margr of George Friedrich comes to Pretissen to administer

After five-years space, in 1578,^ cure being now hopeless,
and the very Council admitting that the Duke was incapable
of business, — George Friedrich of Anspach-Baireuth came into
the country to take charge of him ; having already, he and
the other Brandenburgers, negotiated the matter with the
King of Poland, in whose power it mostly lay.

George Friedrich was by no means welcome to the Prussian
Council, nor to the Wife, nor to the Landed Aristocracy ; —
other than welcome, for reasons we can guess. But he proved,
in the judgment of all fair witnesses, an excellent Governor ;
and, for six-and-twenty years, administered the country with
great and lasting advantage to it. His Portraits represent
to us a large ponderous figure of a man, very fat in his latter
years ; with an air of honest sense, dignity, composed solidity ;
— very fit for the task now on hand.

He resolutely, though in mild form, smoothed-down the
flaming fires of his Clergy ; commanding now this controversy
and tljen that other controversy de concreto et de inconcreto^

^ Pauli, iv. 476. * Id, iv. 476, 481, 482.

SSa HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill-

1x603

or whatever they were) to fall strictly silent ; to carry them-
selves on by thought and meditation merely, and without
words. He tamed the mutinous Aristocracy, the mutinous
Biirgermeisters, Town-Council of Konigsberg, whatever mutiny
there was. He drained bogs, says old Rentsch ; he felled
woods, made roads, established inns. Prussia was well
governed till George’s death, which happened in the year
1603.^ Anspach, in the mean while, Anspach, Baireuth and
Jagemdorf, which were latterly all his, he had governed by
deputy ; no need of visiting those quiet countries, except for
purposes of kindly recreation, or for a swift general super-
vision, now and then. By all accounts, an excellent, stedfast,
wise and just man, this fat George Friedrich ; worthy of the
Father that produced him (‘ Nit K&p ahy lover Forst^ nit Kop
ab ! ’), — and that is saying much.

By his death without children much territory fell home to
the Elder House ; to be disposed of as was settled in the Gera
Bond five years before. Anspach and Baireuth went to two
Brothers of the now Elector, Kiirfurst Joachim Friedrich, sons
of Johann George of blessed memory : founders, they, of the
‘New Line,’ of whom we know. Jagemdorf the Elector
himself got ; and he, not long after, settled it on one of his
own sons, a new Johann George, who at that time was fallen
rather landless and out of a career : ‘ Johann George of
Jagemdorf,’ so called thenceforth ; whose history will concern
us by and by. Preussen was to be incorporated with the
Electorate, — were possession of it once had. But that is a
ticklish point ; still ticklish in spite of rights, and liable to
perverse accidents that may arise.

Joachim Friedrich, as we intimated once, was not wanting
to himself on this occasion. But the affair was full of intri-
cacies ; a very wasps’-nest of angry humours ; and required
to be handled with delicacy, though with force and decision.
Joachim Friedrich’s eldest Son, Johann Sigisraund, Electoral
^ Rentsch, pp. 666-688.

U1

CHAP. XIL] ALBERT FRIEDRICH
ifiosl

Prince of Brandenburg, had already, in 1694, married one
of Albert Friedrich the hypochoniiac Duke of Preussen’s
daughters ; and there was a promising family of children ; no
lack of children. Nevertheless prudent Joachim Friedrich
himself, now a widower, age towards sixty, did farther, in
the present emergency, marry another of these Princesses, a
younger Sister of his Son’s Wife, — seven months after Greorge
Friedrich’s death, — ^to make assurance doubly sure. A man
not to be balked, if he can help it. By virtue of excellent
Management, — Duchess, Prussian Stdnde (States), and Polish
Crown, needing all to be contented, — Joachim Friedrich, with
gentle strong pressure, did furthermore squeeze his way into
the actual Guardianship of Preussen and the imbecile Duke,
which was his by right. This latter feat he achieved in
the course of another year (11th March 1605) and thereby
fairly got hold of Preussen ; which he grasped, ‘ knuckles-
white,’ as we may say ; and which his descendants have never
quitted since.

Good management was very necessary. The thing was
difficult ; — and also was of more importance than we yet
altogether see. Not Preussen only, but a still better country,
the Duchy of Cleve, Cleve-Jiilich, Duke Wilhelm’s Heritage
down in the Rhineland, — Heritage turning out now to be of
right his eldest Daughter’s here, and likely now to drop soon,
— is involved in the thing. This first crisis, of getting into
the Prussian Administratorship, fallen vacant, our vigilant
Kiirfurst Joachim Friedrich has successfully managed ; and he
holds his grip, knuckles-white. Before long, a secopd crisis
comes ; where also he will have to grasp decisively in, — ^he, or
those that stand for him, and whose knuckles can still hold.
But that may go to a new Chapter.

1 Stenzcl, i. 358.

*52 HOHENZOLLERNS IS BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

[z6o8

CHAPTER XIII
NINTH KITEFURST, JOHANN SIGISMUND

In the summer of 1608 (*3d May 1608) Johann Sigis-
mund’s (and his Father’s) Mother-in-law, the poor Wife of
the poor imbecile Duke of Preussen, died.^ Upon which
Johann Sigismund, Heir- Apparent of Brandenburg and its
expectancies, was instantly dispatched from Berlin, to gather-
up the threads cut loose by that event, and see that the
matter took no damage. On the road thither news reached
him that his own Father, old Joachim Friedrich, was dead
(18th July 1608); that he himself was now Kurfiirst ; ^ and
that numerous threads were loose at both ends of his affairs.

The ^ young man,’ — ^not now so young, being full thirty-
five and of fair experience, — was in difficulty, under these over-
whelming tidings ; and puzzled, for a little, whether to advance
or to return. He decided to advance, and settle Prussian
matters, where the peril and the risk were; Brandenburg
business he could do by rescripts.

His difficulties in Preussen, and at the Polish Court, were
in fact immense. But after a space of eight or nine months,
he did, by excellent management, not sparing money judiciously
laid-out on individuals, arrive at some adjustment, better or
worse, and got Preussen in hand ; ® legal Administrator of the
imbecile Duke, as his Father had been. After which he had
to run for Brandenburg, without loss of time : great matters
being there in the wind. Nothing wrong in Brandenburg,
indeed ; but the great Cleve Heritage is dropping, has dropped;
over in Cleve, an immense expectancy is now come to the point
of deciding itself.

^ Maria Eleonora, Duke Wilhelm of Cleye’s eldest Daughter: 1550, 1 573 ,
1608 (HUbner, t. 286).

* 1572, 1608-1619.

* 29th April 1609 . Stenzel, i. 37 a

CHAP. XIIL] KURFURST JOHANN SIGISMUND 85S

tiPdi

How the Ckve Heritage dropped, and rrumy" sprang to
pick it up

Wilhelm of Cleve, the explosive Duke, whom we saw at
Berlin and Eonigsberg at the wedding of this poor Lady now
deceased, had in the marriage-contract, as he did in all subse-
quent contracts and deeds of like nature, announced a Settle-
ment of his Estates, which was now become of the highest
moment for Johann Sigismund. The Country at that time
called Duchy of Cleve, consisted, as we said above, not only of
Cleve-Proper, but of two other still better Duchies, Jiilich and
Berg ; then of the Grqfschqft (County) of Ravensberg, County

of Mark, Lordship of In fact, it was a multifarious

agglomerate of many little countries, gathered by marriage,
heritage and luck, in the course of centuries, and now united
in the hand of this Duke Wilhelm. It amounted perhaps to
two Yorkshires in extent.^ A naturally opulent Country, of
fertile meadows, shipping capabilities, metalliferous hills ; and,
at this time, in consequence of the Dutch-Spanish War, and
the multitude of Protestant refugees, it was getting filled with
ingenious industries ; and rising to be, what it still is, the
busiest quarter of Germany. A Country lowing with kine;
the hum of the flax-spindle heard in its cottages, in those old
days, — ^ much of the linen called Hollands is made in Jiilich,
and only bleached, stamped and sold, by the Dutch,’ says
Busching. A Country, in our days, which is shrouded at short
intervals with the due canopy of coal-smoke, and loud with
sounds of the anvil and the loom.

This Duchy of Cleve, all this fine agglomerate of Duchies,
Duke Wilhelm settled, were to be inherited in a piece, by his
eldest (or indeed, as it soon proved, his only) Son and the heirs
of that Son, if there were any. Failing heirs of that only
Son, then the entire Duchy of Cleve was to go to Maria
^ See Bttsching, Erdbmhnibung, r, 642-734.

264 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

Ci609

Eleonora as eldest Daughter, now marrying to Friedrich Albert,
Duke of Prussia, and to their heirs lawfully begotten : heirs
female, if there happened to be no male. ITie other Sisters,
of whom there were three, were none of them to have the least
pretence to inherit Cleve or any part of it. On the contrary,
they were, in such event, of the eldest Daughter or her heirs
coming to inherit Cleve, to have each of them a sum of ready-
money paid^ by the said inheritrix of Cleve or her heirs ; and
on receiving that, were to consider their claims entirely fulfilled,
and to cease thinking of Cleve for the future.

This Settlement, by express privilege of Kaiser Karl v., nay
of Kaiser Maximilian before him, and the Laws of the Reich,
Duke Wilhelm doubted not he was entitled to make ; and this
Settlement he made ; his Lawyers writing down the terms, in
their wearisome way, perhaps six times over ; and struggling
by all methods to guard against the least misunderstanding.
Cleve with all its appurtenances, Jiilich, Berg and the rest,
goes to the eldest Sister and her heirs, male or female. If she
have no heirs, male or female, then, but not till then, the next
Sister steps into her shoes in that matter: but if she have,
then, we repeat for the sixth and last time, no Sister or Sister'^s
Representative has the least word to say to it, but takes her
100,000Z., and ceases thinking of Cleve.

The other three Sisters were all gradually married ; — one
of them to Pfalz-Neuburg, an eminent Prince, in the Bavarian
region called the Ober-PJhlz (Upper Palatinate), who, or at
least whose eldest Son, is much worth mentioning and remem-
bering by us here; — and, in all these marriage-contracts,
Wilhelm and his Lawyers expressed themselves to the like
effect, and in the like elaborate sixfold manner : so that
Wilhelm and they thought there could nowhere in the world
be any doubt about it.

Shortly after signing the last of these marriage-contracts,
or perhaps it was in the course of signing them, Duke Wilhelm
had a stroke of palsy. He had, before that, gone into Papistry
^ * Qioofioo goldgulden^^ about ioo,ooo/. : PauH, vi. 54a, iii. 504.

CHAP. XIII.] KURFURST JOHANN SIGISMUND 265

1609]

again, poor man. The truth is, he had repeated rtrokes ; and
being an abrupt, explosive Herr, he at last quite yielded to
palsy ; and sank slowly out of the world, in a cloud of semi-
insanity, which lasted almost twenty years.^ Duke Wilhelm
did leave a Son, Johann \\^ilhelm, who succeeded him as Duke.
But this Son also proved explosive ; went half and at length
wholly insane. Jesuit Priests, and their intrigues to bring
back a Protestant country to the bosom of the Church, wrapped
the poor man, all his days, as in a burning Nessus’-Shirt ; and
he did little but mischief in the world. He married, had no
children ; he accused his innocent Wife, the Jesuits and he, of
infidelity. Got her judged, not properly sentenced ; and then
strangled her, he and they, in her bed : — ‘ Jacobea of Baden
(1597)’; a thrice- tragic history. Then he married again;
Jesuits being extremely anxious for an Orthodox heir : but
again there came no heir ; there came only new blazings of the
Nessus’-Shirt. In fine, the poor man died (Spring 1609), and
made the world rid of him. Died 25th March 1609 ; that is
the precise date; — about a month before our new Elector,
Johann Sigismund got his affairs winded-up at the Polish
Court, and came galloping home in such haste. There was
pressing need of him in the Cleve regions.

For the painful exactitude of Duke A Vilhelm and his Law-
yers has profited little ; and there are claimants on claimants
rising for that valuable Cleve Country. As indeed Johann
Sigismund had anticipated, and been warned from all quarters
to expect. For months past, he has had his faculties bent,
with lynx-eyed attention, on that scene of things ; doubly and
trebly impatient to get Preussen soldered-up, ever since this
other matter came to the bursting point. What could be
done by the utmost vigilance of his Deputies, he had done.
It was the 25th of March when the mad Duke died : on the
4th of April, Johann Sigismund’s Deputy, attended by a
Notary to record the act, ‘ fixed-up the Brandenburg Arms on
^ Died 25th January 1592, age 76.

266 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

[1609

the Government- House of Cleve ’ ; ^ on the 6th, they did the
same at Diisseldorf ; on the following days, at Jiilich and the
other Towns. But already on the 5th, they had hardly got
done at Diisseldorf, when there appeared — ^young Wolfgang
Wilhelm, Heir- Apparent of that eminent Pfalz-Neuburg, he in
person, to put up the Pfalz-Neuburg Arms ! Pfalz-Neuburg,
who married the Second Daughter, he is actually claiming,
then ; — the whole, or part ? Both are sensible that possession
is nine points in law.

Pfalz-Neuburg’s claim was for the whole Duchy. ‘ All my
serene Mother’s ! ’ cried the young Heir of Pfalz-Neuburg :
^ Properly all mine ! ’ cried he. ‘ Is not she nearest of kin ?
Second Daughter, true ; but the Daughter ; not Daughter of b.
Daughter, as you are (as your serene Electress is), O, Durch-
laucht of Brandenburg : — consider, besides, you are female,
I am male ! ’ That W6U5 Pfalz-Neuburg’s logic : none of the
best, I think, in forensic genealogy. His tenth point was
perhaps rather weak ; but he had possession, co-possession, and
the nine points good. The other Two Sisters, by their Sons
or Husbands, claimed likewise ; but not the whole : ‘ Divide
it,’ said they : ^ that surely is the real meaning of Karl v.’s
Deed of Privilege to make such a Testament. Divide it among
the Four Daughters or their representatives, and let us all
have shares ! ’

Nor were these four claimants by any means all. The Saxon
Princes next claimed ; two sets of Saxon Princes. First the
minor set, Gotha-Weimar and the rest, the Ernestine Line so-
called ; representatives of Johann Friedrich the Magnanimous,
who lost the Electorate for religion’s sake at Miihlberg in the
past century, and from major became minor in Saxon Genea-
logy. ‘Magnanimous Johann Friedrich,’ said they, ‘had to
wife an Aunt of the now deceased Duke of Cleve ; Wife
Sibylla (sister of the Flanders Mare), of famous memory, our
lineal Ancestress. In favour of whom Jier Father, the then
reigning Duke of Cleve, made a marriage-contract of precisely

^ Panli, vi, 566.

CHAP, xm.] KUBJFUBST JOHANN SIGISMUND 267

1009]

similar import to this your Prussian one : he^ and barred all
his descendants, if contracts are to be valid.^ This is the claim
of the Ernestine line of Saxon Princes ; not like to go for
much, in their present disintegrated condition.

But the Albertine line, the present Elector of Saxony,
also claims : ^ Here is a Deed,' said he, ^ executed by Kaiser
Friedrich in. in the year 1483,^ generations before your
Kaiser Karl; Deed solemnly granting to Albert, junior of
Sachsen, and to his heirs, the reversion of those same Duchies,
should the Male line happen to fail, as it was then likely
to do. How could Kaiser Max revoke his Father's deed, or
Kaiser Karl his Great-grandfather's? Little Albert, the
Albert of the Frmzenravbj he who grew big, and fought lion-
like for his Kaiser in the Netherlands and Western Countries ;
he and his have clearly the heirship of Cleve by right ; and
we, now grown Electors, and Seniors of Saxony, demand it
of a grateful House of Hapsburg, — and will study to make
ourselves convenient in return.' —

‘ Nay, if that is your rule, that old Laws and Deeds are
to come in bar of new, we,' cry a multitude of persons, —
French Dukes of Nevers, and all manner of remote, exotic
figures among them, — ^ we are the real heirs i Ravensberg,
Mark, Berg, Ravenstein, this patch and the other of that
large Duchy of yours, were they not from primeval time
expressly limited to heirs-male? Heirs-male; and we now
are the nearest heirs-male of said patches and portions ; and
will prove it !' — In short, there never was such a Lawsuit,
— so fat an affair for the attorney species, if that had been
the way of managing it, — as this of Cleve was likely to
prove.

The Kaiser^s Thoughts about ity and the WorWs

What greatly complicated the affair, too, was the interest
the Kaiser took in it. The Kaiser could not well brook a
powerful Protestant in that country ; still less could his

^ Pauli, ubi suprii ; HUbner, t. 286.

268 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. hi.

{1809

Coufiin the Spaniard. Spaniards, worn to the ground, coercing
that world-famous Dutch Revolt, and astonished to find that
they could not coerce it at all, had resolved at this time to
take breath before trying farther. Spaniards and Dutch,
after FiRy years of such fighting as we know, have made a
Twelve-years Truce (1609) : but the bafiled Spaniard, pant-
ing, pale in his futile rage and sweat, has not given-up the
matter; he is only taking breath, and will try it again.
Now Qeve is his road into Holland, in such adventure ; no
success possible if Cleve be not in good hands. Brandenburg
is Protestant, powerful; Brandenburg will not do for a
neighbour there.

Nor will Pfalz- Neuburg. A Protestant of Protestants,
this Palatine Neuburg too, — junior branch, possible heir in
time coming, of Kur-FJulx (Elector Palatine) himself, in the
Rhine Countries; of Eur-Pfalz, who is acknowledged Chief
Protestant : official ‘ President ’ of the ‘ Evangelical Union ’
they have lately made among them in these menacing times ;
— ^PfaJz-Neuburg too, this young Wolfgang Wilhelm, if he
do not break-off kind, might be very awkward to the Kaiser
in Cleve-Jiilich. Nay, Saxony itself ; for they are all
Protestants : — unless perhaps Saxony might become pliant,
and try to make itself useful to a munificent Imperial House ?

Evidently what would best suit the Kaiser and Spaniards,
were this. That no strong Power whatever got footing in
Cleve, to grow stronger by the possession of such a country : —
better than best it would suit, if he, the Kaiser, could himself
get it smuggled into his hands, and there hold it fast ! Which
privately was the coiu^ resolved upon at head-quarters. — In
this way the ‘ Succession Controversy of the Cleve Duchies’ is
coming to be a very high matter ; mixing itself up with the
grand Protestant-Papal Controversy, the general armed-lawsuit
of mankind in that generation. Kaiser, Spaniard, Dutch,
English, French Henri rv. and all mortals, are getting con-
cerned in the decision of it.

CHAP. XIV.] A GREAT WAR COMING «69
tfa>]

CHAPTER XIV

^ SYMPTOMS OF A GREAT WAR COMING

Meanwhile Brandenburg and Neuburg both hold grip of
Cleve in that mfiuiner, with a mutually menacing inquiring
expression of countenance ; each grasps it (so to speak) con-
vulsively with the one hand, and has with the other hand his
sword % the hilt, ready to fly out. But to understand this
Brandenburg-Neuburg phenomenon and the then significance
of the Cleve-Jiilich Controversy, we must take the following
bits of Chronology along with us. For the German Empire,
with Protestant complaints, and Papist usurpations and
severities, was at this time all a continent of sour thick smoke,
already breaking out into dull-red flashes here and there, —
s 3 miptoms of the universal conflagration of a Thirty-Years
War, which followed. Symptom First is that of Donauworth,
and dates above a year back.

First Symptom; Donmwbrthy 1608

Donauworth, a Protestant Imperial Free-town, in the
Bavarian regions, had been, for some fault on the part of the
populace against a flaring Mass-procession which had no
business to be there, put under Ban of the Empire; had
been seized accordingly (December 1607), and much cuffed,
and shaken about, by Duke Maximilian of Bavaria, as exe-
cutor of the said Ban — who, what was still worse, would
by no means give-up the Town when he had done with it ;
Town being handy to him, and the man being stout and
violently Papist. Hence the ‘ Evangelical Union’ which we
saw, — ^which has not taken Donauworth yet. Nor ever will !
Donauworth never was retaken ; but is Bavarian at this hour.
A Town nameable in History ever since. Not to say withal,

^ Michaelis, ii. 316 ; Buddsei Lexicpn^ i, 853.

260 HOHENZOLLEKNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. HI.

that it is where Marlborough did ^ the Lines of Schellenberg'
long after : Schellenberg (‘ Jingle-Hill,’ so to render it) looks
down across the Danube or Donau River, upon Donauworth,
— ^its ‘ Lines,’ and other histories, now much abolished, and
quiet under grass.

But now all Protestantism sounding everywhere, in angry
mournful tone, ‘ Donauworth ! Give up Donauworth! ’ — and
an * Evangelical Union,’ with moneys, with theoretic con-
tingents of force, being on foot for that and the like objects ;
— ^we can fancy what a scramble this of Cleve-Jiilich was like
to be; and especially what effect this duelling attitude of
Brandenburg and Neuburg had on the Protestant mind.
Protestant neighbours, Landgraf Moritz of Hessen-Cassel at
their head, intervene in tremulous haste, in the Cleve-Jiilich
affair : ‘ Peace, O friends ! Some bargain ; peaceable joint-
possession ; any temporary bargain, till we see ! Can two
Protestants fall to slashing one another, in such an aspect of
the Reich and its Jesuitries ?’ — And they did agree (Dort-
mund, 10th May 1609), the first of their innumerable
‘ agreements,’ to some temporary joint-possession ; — the thrice-
thankful Country doing homage to both, ‘ with oath to the
one that shall be found genuine.’ And they did endeavour
to govern jointly, and to keep the peace on those terms,
though it was not easy.

For the Kaiser had already said (or his Aulic Council and
Spanish Cousin, poor Kaiser Rodolf caring too little about
these things,^ had already said), Cleve must absolutely not go
into wrong hands. For which what safe method is there, but

^ Rodolf II. (Kepler’s too insolvent ‘Patron’), i 576 -i 6 i 3 ; then Matthias,
Rodolf s Brother, 161 2> 1619, rather tolerant to Protestants ; — then Ferdinand it.
his Uncle’s Son, 1619-1637, much the reverse of tolerant, by whom mainly came
the Thirty-Years War, — were the Kaisers of this period.

Ferdinand iii.. Son of ii. (1637-1657), who finished out the Thirty- Years War,
partly by fighting of his own in young days (Battle of Nordlingen his grandest
feat), was Father of

Kaiser Leopold (1658-1705), — whose Two Sons were

Kaiser Joseph (1705-1711), and Kaiser Karl vi. (1711-1740), Maria Theresa’s
Father.

CttAP. XIV.] A GUIS AT WAlt COMING S61

i6so)

that the Kaiser himself become proprietor ? A Letter is yet
extant, from the Aulic Council to their Vice-Chancellor, who
had been sent to negotiate this matter with the parties;
Letter to the effect. That such result was the only good one ;
that it must be achieved ; * that he must devise all manner of
quirks ((die SpitzJindigJceiten ariffordem sollte)^ and achieve it.^
This curious Letter of a sublime Aulic Council, or Imperial
Hqf^Raihy to its Vice-Kanzlevy still exists.

And accordingly quirks did not prove undevisable on behalf
of the Kaiser. ‘ Since you cannot agree,' said the Kaiser,
‘ and there are so many of you who claim (we having privately
stirred-up several of you to the feat), there will be nothing for
it, but the Kaiser must put the Country under sequestration,
and take possession of it with his own troops, till a decision
be arrived at, — which probably will not be soon ! ’

Second Symptcm ; Seizure of Jiilich by the Kaiser ^ and Siege
and Recapture it by the Protestant Parties^ 1610.
Whereupon ‘ Catholic League^ to balance ‘ Evangelical
Union''

And the Kaiser forthwith did as he had said ; sent Arch-
duke Leopold with troops, who forcibly took the Castle of
Jiilich ; commanding all other castles and places to surrender
and sequestrate themselves, in like fashion ; threatening
Brandenburg and Neuburg, in a dreadful manner, with
Reichs-Acht (Ban of the Empire), if they presumed to show
contumacy. Upon which Brandenburg and Neuburg, ranking
themselves together, showed decided contumacy ; ‘ tore-down
the Kaiser's Proclamation,' * having good help at their
back.

And accordingly, ‘on the 4th of September 1610,' after a
two-months siege, they, or the Dutch, French, and Evangelical-

^ Pauli, iii. 505.

* Ibid, iii. 524. Emperor’s Proclamation, in DUsseldorf, 23d July 1609,—
taken down solemnly, 18\ August 1609.

«6* H0HEN20LLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ni.

C161O

Union Troops bombarding along with them, and ‘many
English volunteers^ to help, retook Jiilich, and packed
Leopold away again.' The Dutch and the French were
especially anxious about this Cleve business, — poor Henri iv.
was just putting those French troops in motion towards Jiilich,
when Ravaillac, the distracted Devil’s- Jesuit, did his stroke
upon him ; so that another than Henri had to lead in that
expedition. The actual Captain at the Siege was Prince
Christian of Anhalt, by repute the first soldier of Grermany at
that period : he had a horse shot under him, the business
being very hot and furious ; — ^he had still worse fortune in the
course of years. There were ‘many English volunteers’ at
this Siege; English nation hugely interested in it, though
their Sing would not act except diplomatically. It w€is the
talk of all the then world, — ^the evening song and the morn-
ing prayer of Protestants especially, — ^tUl it was got ended in
this manner. It deserves to rank as Symptom Second in this
business ; far bigger flare of dull-red in the universal smoke-
continent, than that of Donauworth had been. Are there no
memorials left of those ‘ English volunteers,’ then ? ^ Alas,
they might get edited as Bromley’s Royal Letters are ; — and
had better lie quiet !

‘Evangelical Union,’ formed some two years before, with
what cause we saw, has Kur-Pfalz ® at the head of it : but its
troops or operations were never of a very forcible character.
Kur-Brandenburg now joined it formally, as did many more ;
Kur-Sachsen, anxious to make himself convenient in other
quarters, never would. Add to these phenomena, the now
decisive appearance of a ‘ Catholic Liga ’ (League of Catholic
Princes), which, by way of counterpoise to the ‘ Union,’ had
been got-up by Duke Maximilian of Bavaria several months
ago ; and which now, under the same guidance, in these bad
^ Pauli, iii. 527.

• In Carlyle’s Miscellanies (vii. | • Two Hundred and Fifty Years ago : a
Fragment about Duels *) is one small scene belonging to them.

* Winter-King’s , Father ; died 9th September 16 lo, few days after this

recapture of Julich. ,

CHAP. xrv.] A GREAT WaR COMING

16x3]

circumstances, took a great expansion of figure. Duke
Maximilian, ^ Donmworih Max,’ finding the Evangelical Union
go so very high, and his own Kaiser like to be good for little
in such business (poor hypochondriac Kaiser Rudolf ii., more
taken-up with turning-looms and blow-pipes than with matters
political, who accordingly is swept-out of Julich in such
summary way), — Donauworth Max has seen this a necessary
institution in the present aspect. Both ‘ Union ’ and * League ’
rapidly waxed under the sound of the Julich cannon, as was
natural.

Kur-Sachsen, for standing so well aloof from the Union,
got from the thankful Kaiser written Titles for these Duchies
of Cleve and Julich ; Imperial parchments and infeftments of
due extent ; but never any Territory in those parts. He never
offered fight for his pretensions ; and Brandenburg and Neu-
burg, — Neuburg especially, — always answered him, ‘ No ! ’
with sword half-drawn. So Kur-Sachsen faded out again, and
took only parchments by the adventure. Practically there
was no private Competitor of moment to Brandenburg, except
this Wolfgang Wilhelm of Pfalz-Neuburg ; he alone having
clutched hold. — But we hasten to Symptom Thirds which
particularly concerns us, and will be intelligible now at
last.

Symptom Third ; a Dinner-scene at DusseldorJ^ 1613 :

Spaniards and Dutch shoulder-arms in Cleve

Brandenburg and Neuburg stood together against third
parties ; but their joint-government was apt to fall in two,
when left to itself, and the pressure of danger withdrawn.
* They governed by the Roths and Stdnde of the Country ; ’
old methods and old official men : each of the two had his
own Vice-Regent (Statthalter) present on the ground, who
jointly presided as they could^ Jarrings were unavoidable ;
but how mend it ? Settle the litigated Territory itself, and
end their big lawsuit, they could not ; often as they tried it.

264 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. 111.

Ci«x3

with the whale world encouraging and urging them.^ The
meetings they had, and the treaties and temporary bargains
they made, and kept, and could not keep, in these and in
the following years and generations, pass our power of
recording.^

In 1618 the Brandenburg Statthalter was Ernst, the
Elector’s younger Brother ; Wolfgang Wilhelm in person, for
his Father, or rather for himself as heir of his Mother,
represented Pfalz - Neuburg. Ernst of Brandenburg had
adopted Calvinism as his creed ; a thing hateful and horrible
to the Lutheran mind (of which sort was Wolfgang Wilhelm),
to a degree now altogether inconceivable. Discord arose in
consequence between the Statthalters, as to official appoint-
ments, sacred and secular : ‘You are for promoting Calvinists ! ’
— ‘ And you, I see, are for promoting Lutherans ! ’ — Johann
Sigismuiid himself had to intervene : Wolfgang Wilhelm and
he had their meetings, friendly colloquies ; — ^the final colloquy
of which is still memorable ; and issues in Symptom Third.

We said, a strong flame of choler burnt in all these
Hohenzollems, though they held it well down. Johann
Sigismund, an excellent man of business, knew how essential a
mild tone is : nevertheless he found, as this colloquy went on,
that human patience might at length get too much. The
scene, after some examination, is conceivable in this wise:
Place Diisseldorf, Elector’s apartment in the Schloss there ;
time late in the Year 1613, Day not discoverable by me. The
two sat at dinner, after much colloquy all morning : Johann
Sigismund, a middle-aged, big-headed, stem-faced, honest-

^ Old Sir Henry Wotton, Provost of Eton in his old days, remembers how he
went Ambassador on this errand, — as on many others equally bootless j — and
writes himself * Legatus,' not only ‘thrice to Venice, twice to,* etc., etc., but
also ‘once to Holland in the Juliers matter {semel in Juliacemi negotUy : see
Reliquias Wottonianm (London, 1672), Preface. It was ‘in 1614,* say the
Biographies vaguely. His Despatches, are they in the Paper-Office still ? His
good old Book deserves new editing, his good old genially pious life a proper
elucidation, by some faithful man.

* Map of Cleve-Jillich, at p. 252.

CHAP, xiv.j A GHEAT WAR C0M1N(^ ^65

i6«3]

looking man; hair cropped^ I observe; and eyelids slightly
contracted) as if for sharper vision into matters : Wolfgang
Wilhelm, of features fallen dim to me ; an airy gentleman,
well out of his teens, but, I doubt, not of wisdom sufficient ;
evidently very high and stiff in his ways.

His proposal, by way of final settlement, and end to all
these brabbles, was this, and he insisted on it : * Give me
your eldest Princess to wife; let her dowry be your whole
claim on Cleve-Julich ; I will marry her on that condition,
and we shall be friends ! ’ Here evidently is a gentleman that
does not want for conceit in himself : — consider too, in
Johann Sigismund’s opinion, he had no right to a square inch
of these Territories, though for peace’s sake a joint share had
been allowed him for the time ! ‘ On that condition,

jackanapes?’ thought Johann Sigismund : ‘My girl is not
a monster; nor at a loss for husbands fiilly better than
you, I should hope ! ’ This he thought, and could not help
thinking ; but endeavoured to say nothing of it. The young
jackanapes went on, insisting. Nature at last prevailed ;
Johann Sigismund lifted his hand (princely etiquettes melting
all into smoke on the sudden), and gave the young jackanapes
a slap over the face. Veritable slap ; which opened in a
dreadful manner the eyes of young Pfalz-Neuburg to his real
situation ; and sent him off high-flaming, vowing never-ima-
gined vengeance. A remarkable slap ; well testified to, —
though the old Histories, struck blank with terror, reverence
and astonishment, can for most part only symbol it in dumb-
show ; ^ — a slap that had important consequences in this
world.

* Pufendorf {Rer, Brandenb, lib. iv. § i6, p. 213), and many others, are in this
case. Tobias Pfanner {Historia Pacts Westphalica^ lib. i. § 9, p. 26) is
explicit : * Neqtu^ ut injida regnandi societas est, Brandenburgio et Neoburgio diu
tmveniebcU; eorumque jurgia^ citm matrimonii fotdere pacari posse propinqui
ipsorum credidisseni^ acrius exarsere ; inter epulasy quibus futurum generum
Septemvir (the ‘Sevensman,* or Elector, ‘One of The Seven*) excipiebaty hujus
tnim filia Wolfgango sperabatur, ob nescio quos sermones eh inter utrumqtu
aUercatione preveetd, ut Elector ira impotentior, nulld dignitatis, hospitii, cogna-

S66 H0HEN20LLERNS tN BRANDENBURG [bK. IIL

[1614

For now Wolfgang Wilhelm, flaming-ofi* in never-imagined
vengeance, posted straight to Miinchen, to Max of Bavaria
there ; declared himself convinced, or nearly so, of the Roman-
Catholic Religion ; wooed, and in a few weeks (10th November
1613) wedded Maxi’s younger Sister; and soon after, at
Dusseldorf, pompously professed such his blessed change of
Belief, — with immense flourish of trumpeting, and jubilant
pamphleteering, from Holy Church.' His poor old Father,
the devoutest of Protestante, wailed aloud his ‘ Ichabod ! the
glory is departed ! ’ — holding ^ weekly fast and humiliation ’
ever after, — and died in few months of a broken heart. The
Catholic League has now a new Member on those terms.

And on the other hand, Johann Sigismund, nearly with the
like haste (S5th December 1613), declared himself convinced
of Calvinism, his younger Brother’s creed ; ^ — which continues
ever since the Brandenburg Court-creed, that of the People
being mostly Lutheran. Men said, it was to please the Dutch,
to please the Jiilichers, most of whom are Calvinist. Apologetic
Pauli is elaborate, but inconclusive. It was very ill taken at
Berlin, where even popular riot arose on the matter. In
Prussia too it had its drawbacks.^

And now, all being full of mutation, rearrangement and
inflnite rumour, there marched next year (1614), on slight
pretext, resting on great suspicions, Spanish troops into the
Jiilich-Cleve country, and, countenanced by Neuburg, began
seizing garrisons there. Whereupon Dutch troops likewise
marched, countenanced by Brandenburg, and occupied other
fortresses and garrisons : and so, in every strong-place, there
were either Papist-Spaniards or Calvinist- Dutch ; who stood
there, fronting one another, and could not by treatying be got

tionist affinUcUisve verecundiA cohibitus, intenderit Neoburgio manust et contrh
tendeniis os verbercsverit, Ita, qucs apud Concordes vincula caritatiSf incitamenta
irarum apud infensos erant* (Cited in Kohler, Miinzbelustigungen^ xxi. 341;
who refers also to Levassor, Histoire de Louis XIIL ) — Pauli (iii. 542) becomes
quite vaporous.

^ Kohler, ubi suprh, • Pauli, iii. 546.

* lb* iii. 544 ; Michaelis, i. 349.

CMap.Xiv.1 a great war coming ^61

1618]

out again ^ — ^like clouds positively electric versus clouds
negatively. As indeed was getting to be the case of Germany
in general ; case fatally visible in every Province, Principality
and Parish there: till a thunderstorm, and succession of
thunderstorms, of Thirty- Years continuance, broke out. Of
which these huge rumours and mutations, and menacings of
war, springing out of that final colloquy and slap in the face,
are to be taken as the Thwd premonitory Symptom. Spaniards
and Dutch stand electrically fronting one another in Cleve for
seven years, till their Truce is out, before they clash together ;
Germany does not wait so long by a couple of years.

Symptom Fourth, and Catastrophe upon the heels of it

Five years more (1618), and there will have come a Fourth
Symptom, biggest of all, rapidly consummating the process ; —
Symptom still famed, of the following external figure : Three
Official Gentlemen descending from a window in the Castle of
Prag: hurled out by impatient Bohemian Protestantism, a
depth of seventy feet, — happily only into dung, and without
loss of life. From which follows a ‘ King of Bohemia ’ elected
there, King not unknown to us ; — ‘ thunderclouds ’ all in one
huge clash, and the ‘ continent of sour smoke ’ blazing all into
a continent of thunderous fire : Thirty- Years War, as they
now call it ! Such a conflagration as poor Germany never
saw before or since.

These were the Four preliminary Symptoms of that dismal
business. ‘As to the primary causes of it,’ says one of my
Authorities, ‘ these lie deep, deep almost as those of Original
Sin. But the proximate causes seem to me to have been these
two: First, that the Jesuit-Priests and Principalities had
vowed and resolved to have, by God’s help and by the Devil’s
(this was the peculiarity of it), Europe made Orthodox again :
and then Secondly, The fact that a Max of Bavaria existed at
that time, whose fiery character, cunning but rash head, and
fanatically Papist heart disposed him to attempt that enterprise,

S68 HOHENZOLLErNS tN BRANDENBURG [bk. 111.

[s6x8

him with such resources and capacities, under their bad
guidance.’

Johann Sigismund did many swift decisive strokes of business
in his time, businesses of extensive and important nature ; but
this of the slap to Neuburg has stuck best in the idle memory
of mankind. Diisseldorf, Year 1618 : it was precisely in the
time when that same Friedrich, not yet by any means ‘ King
of Bohemia,’ but already Kur-Pfalz (Cousin of this Neuburg,
and head man of the Protestants), was over here in England,
on a fine errand ; — ^namely, had married the fair Elizabeth
(14th February 1618), James the First’s Princess; ‘Goody
Palsgrave,’ as her Mother floutingly called her, not liking the
connexion. What kind of a ‘ King of Bohemia ’ this Friedrich
made, five or six years after, and what sea of troubles he and
his entered into, we know ; the ‘ Winter-Konig ’ (Winter-King,
fallen in times of Jrost^ or built of mere frost, a snow-king
altogether soluble again) is the name he gets in German
Histories. But here is another hook to hang Chronology
upon.

This brief Bohemian Kingship had not yet exploded on the
Weissenberg of Prag,^ when old Sir Henry Wotton being sent
as Ambassador ‘ to lie abroad ’ (as he wittily called it, to his
cost) in that Business, saw, in the City of Lintz, in the
picturesque green country by the shores of the Donau there,
an ingenious person, who is now recognisable as one of the
remarkablest of mankind, Mr. John Kepler, namely : Keplmr as
Wotton writes him ; addressing the great Lord Bacon (un-
happily without strict date of any kind) on that among other
subjects. Mr. John’s now ever-memorable watching of those
Motions of the Star Mars^ with ‘ calculations repeated seventy
times,’ and also with Discovery of the Planetary Laws of this
Universe, some ten years ago, appears to be unknown to
Wotton and Bacon ; but there is something else of Mr. John’s

^ Battle there, Sunday 8th November i620» \ A

® Vs Motibus Sulla Mortis ; Prag, 1609.

CHAP. XIV.] A GREAT WAR COMING 269

i6ao]

devising^ which deserves attention from an Instaurator of
Philosophy :

' He hath a little black Tent (of what stuff is not much importing).
Bays the Ambassador, ^ which he can suddenly set up where he will in a
Field ; and it is convertible (like a windmill) to all quarters at pleasure ;
capable of not much more than one man, as 1 conceive, and perhaps at no
great ease ; exactly close and dark, — save at one hole, about an inch and
a half in the diameter, to which he applies a long perspective Trunk,
with the convex glass fitted to the said hole, and the concave taken out at
the other end, which extendeth to about the middle of this erected Tent :
through which the visible radiations of all the Objects without are
intromitted, falling upon a Paper, which is accommodated to receive them ;
and so he traceth them with his pen in their natural appearance ; turning
his little Tent round by degrees, till he hath designed the whole Aspect
of the Field.* * — In fact he hath a Camera Obscura, and is exhibiting the
same for the delectation of Imperial gentlemen lounging that way. Mr.
John invents such toys, writes almanacks, practises medicine, for good
reasons ; his encouragement from the Holy Roman Empire and mankind
being only a pension of 18/. a year, and that hardly ever paid. An
ingenious person, truly, if there ever was one among Adam's Posterity.
Just turned of fifty, and ill-off for cash. This glimpse of him, in his little
black tent with perspective glasses, while the Thirty- Years War blazes
out, is welcome as a date.

fVhat became qfth^ Cleve-Julich Heritage^ and of the
Premsen one

In the Cleve Duchies joint government had now become
more difficult than ever : but it had to be persisted in, — ^under
mutual offences, suspicions and outbreaks hardly repressed ; —
no final Bargain of Settlement proving by any method possible.
Treaties enough, and conferences, and pleadings, manifesto-
ings : — Could not some painful German collector of Statistics
try to give us the approximate quantity of impracticable
treaties, futile conferences, manifestos, correspondences; in

^ It seems, Baptista Porta (of Naples, dead some years before) must have given
him the essential hint,-^f whom, or whose hint, Mr, John does not happen to
Inform his Excellency at present.

* Riliquia Wottcnianas (London, 1672), p. 300.

270 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

Cx690

brief, some authentical cipher (say in round millions) of idle
Words spoken by official human creatures, and approximately
(in square miles) the extent of Law-Stationery and other Paper
written, first and last, about this Controversy of the Cleve
Duchies ? In that form it might have a momentary interest.

When the Winter-King’s explosion took place,^ and his
own unfortunate Pfalz (Palatinate) became the theatre of war
(Tilly, Spinola versus Pfalzers, English, Dutch), involving all
the neighbouring regions, Cleve- Jiilich did not escape its fate.
The Spaniards and the Dutch, who had long sat in gloomy
armed-truce, occupying with obstinate precaution the main
Fortresses of these Julich-Cleve countries, did now straightway,
their Twelve-Years truce being out (1621),* fall to fighting
and besieging one another there ; the huge War, which proved
of Thirty Years, being now all a-blaze. What the country
suffered in the interim may be imagined.

In 1624, in pity to all parties, some attempt at practical
Division of the Territory was again made : Neuburg to have
Berg and Jiilich, Brandenburg to have Cleve, Mark, Ravens-
berg and the minor appurtenances : and Treaty to that effect
was got signed (11th May 1624), But it was not well kept,
nor could be ; and the statistic cipher of new treaties, msmi-
festos, conferences, and approximate written area of Law-Paper
goes on increasing.

It was not till forty-two years after, in 1666, as will be
more minutely noticeable by and by, that an effective partition
could be practically brought about. Nor in this state was the
Lawsuit by any means ended, — ^as we shall wearisomely see, in
times long following that. In fact there never was, in the
German Chanceries or out of them, such a Lawsuit, Armed or
Wigged, as this of the Cleve Duchies first and last. And the
sentence was not practically given, till the Congress of Vienna
(1816) in our own day gave it; and the thing Johann Sigis-

^ Crowned at Prag, 4th November n.s. 1619 ; beaten to ruin there, and obliged
to gallop (almost before dinner done), Sunday 8th November i6ao.

* Paidi, vi. 578-580,

CHAP. XV.] KURFURST GEORGE WILHELM 271

X620]

mund had claimed legally in 1609 was actually handed-over
to Johann Sigismund'^s Descendant in the seventh generation,
after two-hundred and six years. Handed-over to him then, —
and a liberal rate of interest allowed. These litigated Duchies
are now the Prussian Province Jiilich-Berg-Cleve, and the
nucleus of Prussia'^s possessions in the Rhine country.

A year before Johann Sigismund’s death, Albert Friedrich,
the poor eclipsed Duke of Prussia, died (8th August 1618) :
upon which our swift Kurfiirst, not without need of his
dexterities there too, got peaceable possession of Prussia ; —
nor has his Family lost hold of that, up to the present time.
Next year (23d December 1619), he himself closed a swift
busy life (labour enough in it for him perhaps, though only
an age of forty-nine) ; and sank to his long rest, his works
following him, — ^unalterable thenceforth, not unfruitful some
of them.

CHAPTER XV

TENTH KURFURST, GEORGE WILHELM

By far the unluckiest of these Electors, whether the most
unworthy of them or not, was George Wilhelm, Tenth
Elector, who now succeeded Johann Sigismund his Father.
The Father’s eyes had closed when this great flame was break-
ing out ; and the Son’s days were all spent amid the hot
ashes and fierce blazings of it.

The position of Brandenburg during this sad Thirty- Years
War was passive rather than active ; distinguished only in
the former way, and as far as possible from being glorious or
victorious. Never since the Hohenzollems came to that
Country had Brandenburg such a time. Difficult to have
mended it ; impossible to have quite avoided it ; — and Kur-
furst George Wilhelm was not a man so superior to all his
neighbours, that he could clearly see his way in such an

272 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [BK. III.

[1690

element. The perfect or ideal course was clear: To have
frankly drawn sword for his Religion and his Rights, so soon
as the battle fairly opened; and to have fought for these
same, till he got either them or died. Alas, that is easily
said and written ; but it is, for a George Wilhelm especially,
difficult to do ! His capability in all kinds was limited ; his
connexions, with this side and that, were very intricate.
Gustavus and the Winter-King were his Brothers-in-law ;
Gustavus wedded to his Sister, he to Winter-King’s. His
relations to Poland, feudal superior of Preussen, were
delicate; and Gustavus was in deadly quarrel with Poland.
And then Gustavus’s sudden laying-hold of Pommem, which
had just escaped from Wallenstein and the Kaiser ? It
must be granted, poor George Wilhelm’s case demanded
circumspectness.

One can forgive him for declining the Bohemian-King
speculation, though his Uncle of Jagemdorf and his Cousins
of Liegnitz were so hearty and forward in it. Pardonable in
him to decline the Bohemian speculation ; — ^though surely it
is very sad that he found himself so short of ‘ butter and fire-
wood ’ when the poor ex-King, and his young Wife, then in a
specially-interesting state, came to take shelter with him ! '
But when Gustavus landed, and flung-out upon the winds
such a banner as that of his, — ^truly it was required of a
Protestant Governor of men to be able to read said banner in
a certain degree. A Governor not too imperfect, would have
recognised this Gustavus, what his purposes and likelihoods
were ; the feeling would have been, checked by due drcum-
spectness : * Up, my men, let us follow this man ; let us live
and die in the Cause this man goes for ! Live otherwise with
honour, or die otherwise with honour, we cannot, in the pass
things have come to ! ’ And thus, at the very worst,

^ SoUtl {Geschichte des Dreissigjakrigen Krieges^^-^ trivial modem Book)
gives a notable memorial from the Brandenburg Raths, concerning these their
difficulties of housekeeping. Their real object, we perceive, was to get rid of a
Guest so dangerous as the ex>King, under Ban of the Empire, had now
become.

CttAt.xv.j K:URt*tJitSt GfeORGfe WlLHElM 21^3

z6ao]

Brandenburg would have had only one class of enemies to
ravage it ; and might have escaped with, arithmetically speak-
ing, Ao^the hanging it got in that long Business.

But Protestant Germany, — sad shame to it, which proved
lasting sorrow as well, — was all alike torpid ; Brandenburg
not an exceptional case. No Prince stood up as beseemed :
or only one, and he not a great one ; Landgraf Wilhelm of
Hessen, who, and his brave Widow after him, seemed always
to know what hour it was. Wilhelm of Hessen all along ; —
and a few wild hands, Christian of Brunswick, Christian of
Anhalt, Johann George of Jagemdorf, who stormed-out
tumultuously at first, but were soon blown away by the
Tilly-Wallenstein trade-winds and regulated armaments : —
the rest sat still, and tried all they could to keep out of
harm’s way. The ‘ Evangelical Union ’ did a great deal of
manifestoing, pathetic, indignant and other; held solemn
Meetings at Heilbronn, old Sir Henry Wotton going as
Ambassador to them ; but never got any redress. Had the
Evangelical Union shut-up its ink-homs sooner ; girt-on its
fighting-tools when the time came, and done some little
execution with them then, instead of none at all, — we may
fancy the Evangelical Union would have better discharged
its function. It might have saved immense wretchedness to
Germany. But its course went not that way.

In fact, had there been no better Protestantism tlmn that
of Germany, all was over with Protestantism ; and Max of
Bavaria, with fanatical Ferdinand ii. as Kaiser over him, and
Father Lammerlein at his right hand and Father Hyacinth at
his left, had got their own sweet way in this world. But
Protestant Germany was not Protestant Europe, after all.
Over seas there dwelt and reigned a certain King in Sweden ;
there farmed, and walked musing by the shores of the Ouse
in Huntingdonshire, a certain man ; — there was a Gustav
Adolf over seas, an Oliver Cromwell over seas ; and a ‘ com-
pany of poor men ’ were found capable of taking Lucifer by
the beard, — ^who accordingly, with his Lammerleins, Hyacinths,

274 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bK. 111.

Habernfeldts and others, was forced to withdraw, after a tough
struggle ! —

CHAPTER XVI

THIRTY-YEAKS WAR

The enormous Thirty-Years War, most intricate of modem
Occurrences in the domain of Dryasdust, divides itself, after
some unravelling, into Three principal Acts or Epochs ; in
all of which, one after the other, our Kurfiirst had an
interest mounting progressively, but continuing to be a
passive interest.

Act First goes from 1620 to 1624 ; and might be entitled
‘ The Bohemian King Made and Demolished.’ Personally the
Bohemian King was soon demolished. His Kingship may be
said to have gone-off by explosion ; by one Fight, namely,
done on the Weissenberg near Prag (Sunday 8th November
1620), while he sat at dinner in the City, the boom of the
cannon coming in with interest upon his high guests and him.
He had to run, in hot haste, that night, leaving many of his
important papers, — and becomes a Winter- King. Winter-
King’s account was soon settled. But the extirpating of his
Adherents, and capturing of his Hereditary Lands, Palatinate
and Upper-Palatinate, took three years more. Hard fighting
for the Palatinate ; Tilly and Company against the ‘ Evan-
gelical Union Troops, and the English under Sir Horace
Vere.’ Evangelical-Union Troops, though marching about
there, under an Uncle of our Kurfiirst (Margraf Joachim
Ernst, that lucky Anspach Uncle, founder of ‘the Line’),
who professed some skill in soldiering, were a mere Picture of
an Army ; would only ‘ observe,’ and would not fight at all.
So that the whole fighting fell to Sir Horace and his poor
handful of English ; of whose grim posture ‘ in Frankendale ’ ^

^ Frankenthal, a little Town in the Palatinate, N.W. from Mannheim a
short way.

CHAP. XVI.] THIRTY-YEARS WAR *75

i6a4l

and other Strongholds, for months long, there is talk enough
in the old English History-Books.

Then there were certain stem War-Captains, who rallied
from the Weissenberg Defeat : — Christian of Brunswick, the
chief of them, titular Bishop of Halberstadt, a high-flown,
fiery young fellow, of terrible fighting gifts; he flamed-up
considerably, with ^ the Queen of Bohemia’s glove stuck in his
Hat ’ : ‘ Bright Lady, it shall stick there, till I get you your
own again, or die ! ’ ^ Christian of Bmnswick, George of
Jagemdorf (our Kurfiirst’s Uncle), Count Mansfeldt and
others, made stormy fight once and again, hanging upon this
central ^ Frankendale ’ Business, till they and it became hope-
less. For the Kaiser and his Jesuits were not in doubt ; a
Kaiser very proud, unscrupulous ; now clearly superior in
force, — and all along of great superiority in fraud.

Christian of Brunswick, Johann George and Mansfeldt were
got rid of : Christian by poison ; Johann George and Mans-
feldt by other methods, — chiefly by playing upon poor King
James of England, and leading him* by the long nose he was
found to have. The Palatinate became the Kaiser’s for the
time being ; Upper Palatinate {Ober-PJulz) Duke Max of
Bavaria, lying contiguous to it, had easily taken. ‘Incor-
porate the Ober-Pfalz with your Bavaria,’ said the Kaiser,
‘ you, illustrious, thrice-serviceable Max ! And let Lammer-
lein and Hyacinth, with their Gospel of Ignatius, loose upon
it. Nay, as a still richer reward, be yours the forfeited Kv/r
(Electorship) of this mad Kur-Pfalz, or Winter-King. I will
hold his Rhine-Lands, his Unter-PJhlz : his Electorship and
Ober-Pfalz^ I say, are yours, Duke, henceforth Kurfurst Maxi-
milian ! ’ ^ Which was a hard saying in the ears of Branden-
burg, Saxony and the other Five, and of the Reich in general ;

^ 1621-1623, age not yet twenty-five ; died (by poison), 1626, having again
become supremely important just then. * GotUs Freund^ der I^affen Feind
(God’s Friend, Priests’ Foe)’; ^ Alles fur Ruhm und Ihr (All for Glory and
Her,’ — the bright Elizabeth, become Ex-Queen), were mottoes of bis. — Buddaus
in voce (i. 649) ; Michaelis, i. 1 10.

* Kohler, Rekhs-Historie, p. 5aa

*76 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [BK. m.

[x63O<I&|0

but they had all to comply, after wincing. For the Kaiser
proceed^ with a high hand. He had put the Ex-King
under Ban of the Empire (never aaking ‘ the Empire ’ about
it); put his Three principal Adherents, Johann George of
Jagemdorf one of them. Prince Christian of Anhalt (once
captain at the Siege of Juliers) another, likewise under Ban
of the Empire ; ^ and in short had flung about, and was fling-
ing, his thunderbolts in a very Olympian manner. Under
all which, what could Brandenburg and the others do ; but
whimper some trembling protest, ^ Clear against Law ’ ! — ^and
sit obedient ? The Evangelical Union did not now any more
than formerly draw out its fighting-tools. In fact, the
Evangelical Union now fairly dissolved itself ; melted into a
deliquium of terror under these thunderbolts that were flying,
and was no more heard of in the world. —

Second Act^ or Epochs 1624-1629. A second Uncle put to
the Ban^ and Pommem snatched away

Except in the ‘ Netker-Saocon Circle ’ (distant North-west
region, with its Hanover, Mecklenburg, with its rich Ham-
burgs, Liibecks, Magdeburgs, all Protestant, and abutting on
the Protestant North), trembling Grermany lay ridden over as
the Kaiser willed. Foreign League got up by France, King
James, Christian rv. of Denmark (James’s Brother-in-law, with
whom he had such ‘ drinking ’ in Somerset House, long ago,
on Christian’s visit hither *), went to water, or worse. Only
the ‘ Nether-Saxon Circle ’ showed some life ; was levying an
army ; and had appointed Christian of Brunswick its Captain,
till he was got poisoned ; — upon which the drinking King of
Denmark took the command.

Act Second goes from 1624 to 1627 or even ’29 ; and
contains drunken Christian’s Exploits. Which were unfor-
tunate, almost to the ruin of Denmark itself, as well as of the

^ 22d Jan. 1621 (Kohler, Rcichs-Nistorie^ p. 518).

* Old Histories of James i. (Wilson, etc. ).

*77

CHAP.XVL] THIRTY-YEARS WAR

1639}

Nether-Saxon Circle; — ^till in the latter of these years he
slightly rallied, and got a supportable Peace granted him
(Peace of Liibeck, 16*9); after which he sits quiet, con-
templative, with an evil eye upon Sweden now and then.
The beatings he got, in quite regular succession, from Tilly
and Consorts, are not worth mentioning : the only thing one
now remembers of him is his alarming accident on the ram-
parts of Hameln, just at the opening of these Campaigns.
At Hameln, which was to be a strong post, drunken
Christian rode out once, on a summer afternoon (16*4), to
see that the ramparts were all right, or getting all right ; —
and tumbled, horse and self (self in liquor, it is thought), in
an ominous alarming manner. Taken up for dead ; — nay
some of the vague Histories seem to think he was really dead :
— but he lived to be often beaten after that, and had many
moist years more.

Our Kurfiirst had another Uncle put to the Ban in this
Second Act, — Christian Wilhelm Archbishop of Magdeburg,
^ for assisting the Danish King ^ ; nor was Ban all the ruin
that fell on this poor Archbishop. What could an unfor-
tunate Kurfiirst do, but tremble and obey ? There was still
a worse smart got by our poor Kurfiirst out of Act Second :
the glaring injustice done him in Pommem.

Does the reader remember that scene in the High Church
of Stettin a hundred-and-fifty years ago ? How the Biiiger-
meister threw sword and helmet into the grave of the last
Duke of Pommem-Stettin there ; and a forward Citizen
picked them out again in favour of a Collateral Branch ?
Never since, any more than then, could Brandenburg get
Pommem according to claim. Collateral Branch, in spite of
Friedrich Ironteeth, in spite even of Albert Achilles and
some fighting of his, contrived, by pleading at the Diets and
stirring-up noise, to maintain its pretensions: and Treaties
without end ensued, as usual ; Treaties refreshed and new-
signed by every Successor of Albert, to a wearisome degree.

878 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. hi.

(x6si9

The sum of which always was ; ‘ Pommem does actual homage
to Brandenburg; vassal of Brandenburg; — and falls home
to it, if the now Extant line go extinct.** Nay there is an
ErbverbrUdertmg (Heritage-Fraternity) over and above, estab-
lished this long time, and wearisomely renewed at every new
Accession. Hundreds of Treaties, oppressive to think of : —
and now the last Duke, old Bogislaus, is here, without hope
of children ; and the fruit of all that heiggling, actual Pom-
mem to wit, will at last fall home ? Alas, no ; far otherwise.

For the Kaiser having so triumphantly swept-off the
Winter-King, and Christian rv, in the rear of him, and got
Germany ready for converting to Orthodoxy, — wished now to
have some hold of the Seaboard, thereby to punish Denmark ;
nay thereby, as is hoped, to extend the blessings of Ortho-
doxy into England, Sweden, Holland, and the other Heretic
States, in due time. For our plans go far 1 This is the
Kaiser’s fixed wish, rising to the rank of hope now and then :
all Europe shall become Papist again by the help of God
and the Devil. So the Kaiser, on hardly any pretext, seized
Mecklenburg from the Proprietors, — ‘ Traitors, how durst
you join Danish Christian ? ’ — ^and made Wallenstein Duke
of it. Duke of Mecklenburg, ‘ Admiral of the East Sea
(Baltic) ’ ; and set to ‘ building ships of war in Rostock,’ —
his plans going far.^ This done, he seized Pommem, which
also is a fine Sea-country, — stirring-up Max of Bavaria to
make some idle pretence to Pommem, that so the Kaiser
might seize it ‘ in sequestration till decided on.’ Under
which hard treatment, George Wilhelm had to sit sad and
silent, — ^though the Stralsunders would not. Hence the
world-famous Siege of Stralsund (1628); fierce Wallenstein
declaring, ‘ I will have the Town, if it hung by a chain from
Heaven ’ ; but finding he could not get it ; owing to the
Swedish succour, to the stubborn temper prevalent among the
Townsfolk, and also greatly to the rains and peat-bogs.

A second Uncle of George Wilhelm’s, that unlucky Arch-
^ Kohler, Reichs- Histories pp. 524, 52 J.

879

CHAP. XVI.] THIRTY-YEARS WAR

xo-iath May 1631]

bishop of Magdeburg above-mentioned, the Kaiser, once more
by his own arbitrary will, put under Ban of the Empire, in
this Second Act : ‘ Traitor, how durst you join with the
Danes ? ’ The result of which was Tilly’s Sack of Magde-
burg (10-12th May 1631), a transaction never forgettable
by mankind. — As for Pommem, Gustav Adolf, on his inter-
vening in these matters, landed there : Pommern was now
seized by Gustav Adolf, as a landing-place and place-of-arms,
indispensable for Sweden in the present emergency ; and was
so held thenceforth. Pommem will not fall to George
Wilhelm at this time.

Third Act^ cmd what the Kurfurst suffered in it

And now we are at Act Third : — Landing of Gustav
Adolf ‘in the Isle of Usedom, 24th June 1630,’ and onward
for Eighteen Years till the Peace of Westphalia, in 1648 ; —
on which, as probably better known to the reader, we will
not here go into details. In this Third Act too, George
Wilhelm followed his old scheme, peace at any price ; —
as shy of Gustav as he had been of other Champions of the
Cause ; and expect complaining, petitioning and manifestoing,
studiously did nothing.

Poor man, it was his fate to stand in the range of these
huge collisions, — Bridge of Dessau, Siege of Stralsund, Sack
of Magdeburg, Battle of Leipzig, — where the Titans were
bowling rocks at one another ; and he hoped, by dextrous
skipping, to escape share of the game. To keep well with
his Kaiser, — and such a Kaiser to Germany and to him, —
this, for George Wilhelm, was always the first commandment.
If the Kaiser confiscate your Uncles, against law ; seize your
Pommem ; rob you on the public highways, — George Wil-
helm, even in such case, is full of dubitations. Nay his
Prime-Minister, one Schwartzenberg, a Catholic, an Austrian
Official at one time, — Progenitor of the Austrian Schwart-
zenbergs that now are, — was secretly in the Kaiser’s interest,

280 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

[3d May 1631

and is even thought to have been in the Eaiser^s pay,
all along.

Gustav, at his first landing, had seized Pommem, and
swept it clear of Austrians, for himself and for his own
wants ; not too regardful of George Wilhelm'^s claims on it.
He cleared-out Frankfurt-on-Oder, Ciistrin and other Bran-
denburg Towns, in a similar manner, — by cannon and storm,
when needful ; — drove the Imperialists and Tilly forth of
these countries. Advancing, next year, to save Magdeburg,
now shrieking under Tilly’s bombardment, Gustav insisted on
having, if not some bond of union from his Brother-in-law of
Brandenburg, at least the temporary cession of two Places of
War for himself, Spandau and Ciistrin, indispensable in any
farther operation. Which cession Kurfiirst George Wilhelm,
though giving all his prayers to the Good Cause, could by no
means grant. Gustav had to insist, with more and more
emphfiisis; advancing at last, with military menace, upon
Berlin itself. He was met by George Wilhelm and his
Council, ‘ in the woods of Copenick,’ short way to the east of
that City ; there George Wilhelm and his Council wandered
about, sending messages, hopelessly consulting ; saying among
each other, ‘ Qut faire ? ih out des canons^ What can one do ;
they have got cannon ? ’ ^ For many hours so ; round the
inflexible Gustav, — who was there like a fixed milestone, and
to all questions and comers had only one answer ! — ‘ Que
faire? ils ont des commsT This was the 3d May 1631.
This probably is about the nadir-point of the Brandenburg-
Hohenzollem History. The little Friedrich, who became
Frederick the Great, in writing of it, has a certain grim
banter in his tone ; and looks rather with mockery on the
perplexitfes of his poor Ancestor, so fatally ignorant of the
time of day it hAd now become.

1 (Euvres de Fridiric le Grand (Berlin, 1846*1856 et teqq. : M^ntoires de
Brandebourg)^ i. 38. For the rest, Friedrich’s Account of the Transaction if
very loose and scanty : sec Pauli (iv. 568) and his minute details.

281

CHAP. XVI.] THIRTY-YEARS WAR

6th Nov. 1633]

On the whole, George Wilhelm did what is to be called
nothing, in the Thirty- Years War ; his function was only
that of suffering. He followed always the bad lead of Johann
George, Elector of Saxony ; a man of no strength, devoutness
or adequate human worth ; who proved, on these n^ative
grounds, and without flagrancy of positive badness, an unspeak-
able curse to Germany. Not till the Kaiser fulminated forth
his Restitution-Edict, and showed he was in earnest about it
(1629-1631), ‘Restore to our Holy Church what you have
taken from her since the Peace of Passau ! ’ — could this
Johann George prevail upon himself to join Sweden, or even
to do other than hate it for reasons he saw. Seized by the
throat in this manner, and ordered to deliver^ Kur-Sachsen
did, and Brandenburg along with him, make Treaty with the
Swede.^ In consequence of which they two, some months
after, by way of cooperating with Gustav on his great march
Vienna-ward, sent an invading force into Bohemia, Branden-
burg contributing some poor 3,000 to it ; who took Prag, and
some other open Towns ; but ‘ did almost nothing there,’ say
the Histories, ‘except dine and drink.’ It is clear enough
they were instantly scattered home ^ at the first glimpse of
Wallenstein dawning on the horizon again in those parts.

Gustav having vanished (Field of Liitzen, 6th November
1632^), Oxenstiem, with his high attitude, and ‘Presidency’
of the ‘ Union of Heilbronn,’ was rather an offence to Kur-
Sachsen, who used to be foremost man on such occasions.
Kur-Sachsen broke away again ; made his Peace of Prag,* whom
Brandenburg again followed ; Brandenburg and gradually all
the others, except the noble Wilhelm of Hessen-Cassel alone.
Miserable Peace ; bit of Chaos clouted up, and done over
with Official varnish ; — which proved to be the signal for con-
tinuing the War beyond visible limits, and rendering peace
impossible.

^ 8th February 1631 (Kohler, Reichs-Historiey pp. 526-531).

* October 1633 (Stenzel, i. 503),

• Pauli, iv. 576. * ^635* (Stenzel, i, 513).

282 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

[z633’X640

After this, George Wilhelm retires from the scene ; lives
in Custrin mainly; mere miserable days, which shall be
invisible to us. He died in 1640 ; and, except producing
an active brave Son very unlike himself, did nothing consider-
able in the world. ^ Que faire f Us ont des canons ! '

Among the innumerable sanguinary tussellings of this War
are counted Three great Battles, Leipzig, Liitzen, Nordlingen.
Under one great Captain, Swedish Gustav, and the two or
three other considerable Captains, who appeared in it, high
passages of furious valour, of fine strategy and tactic, are on
record. But on the whole, the grand weapon in it, and
towards the latter times the exclusive one, was Hunger. The
opposing Armies tried to starve one another ; at lowest, tried
each not to starve. Each trying to eat the country, or at any
rate to leave nothing eatable in it : what that will mean for
the country, we may consider. As the Armies too frequently,
and the Kaiser’s Armies habitually, lived without commissariat,
often enough without pay, all horrors of war and of being a
seat of war, that have been since heard of, are poor to those
then practised. The detail of which is still horrible to read.
Germany, in all eatable quarters of it, had to undergo the
process ; — tortured, tom to pieces, wrecked, and brayed as in
a mortar under the iron mace of war.^ Brandenburg saw its
towns sieged and sacked, its country populations driven to
despair, by the one party and the other. Three times, — first
in the Wallenstein Mecklenburg period, while fire and sword
were the weapons, and again, twice over, in the ultimate
stages of the struggle, when starvation had become the method,
— Brandenburg fell to be the principal theatre of conflict,
where all forms of the dismal were at their height. In 1688,
three years after that precious ‘Peace of Prag,’ the Swedes

^ Curious incidental details of the state it was reduced to, in the Rhine and
Danube Countries, turn-up in the Earl of Arundel and Surrey’s Travels (‘ Arundel
of the Marbles’) as Ambassador Extraordinary to the Emperor Ferdinando 11 .
in 1636 (a small Volume, or Pamphlet, London, 1637),

CHAP. Xvii.j DUCHY OF JAGERNDORF 888

x 6 iio«x 640 ]

(Banier versus Gallas) starving-out the Imperialists in those
North-Western parts, the ravages of the starving Gallas and
his Imperialists excelled all precedent ; and the ^ famine about
Tangermunde had risen so high that men ate human flesh,
nay, human creatures ate their own children. ’ ^ ‘ Qu^Jbkre f

its ont des ccmons ! ’

CHAPTER XVII
DUCHY OF JAGERNDORF

This unfortunate George Wilhelm failed in getting
Pommem when due; Pommern, firmly held by the Swedes,
was far from him. But that was not the only loss of territory
he had. Jagemdorf, — we have heard of Johann George of
Jagemdorf, Uncle of this George Wilhelm, how old Joachim
Friedrich put him into Jagemdorf, long since, when it fell
home to the Electoral House. Jagemdorf is now lost ; Johann
George is under Rekhs-Acht (Ban of Empire), ever since the
Winter-King’s explosion, and the thunderbolts that followed ;
and wanders landless ; — nay he is long since dead, and has
six-feet of earth for a territory, far away in Transylvania, or
the Riesen-Gebirge (Giant-Mountains) somewhere. Concerning
whom a word now.

Duke of Jdgerndorjy Electcrr's Uncles is put under Ban

Johann George, a frank-hearted valiant man, concerning
whom only good actions, and no bad one, are on record, had
notable troubles in the world ; bad troubles to begin with,
and worse to end in. He was second Son of Kurfurst
Joachim Friedrich, who had meant him for the Church.^
The young fellow was Coadjutor of Strasburg, almost from
the time of getting into short-clothes. He was then, still
^ 1638: Pauli, iv. 604^ * 1577-1624: Rentsdi, p. 486.

284 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [BK. HI.

[ x 6 m - i 640

very young, elected Bishop there (1692); Bishop of Stras-
burg, — ^but only by the Protestant part of the Canons ; the
Catholic part, unable to submit longer, and thinking it a good
time for revolt against a Protestant population and obstinately
heterodox majority, elected another Bishop, — one ‘Karl of
the House of Lorraine ^ ; and there came to be dispute, and
came even to be fighting needed. Fighting ; which prudent
Papa would not enter into, except faintly at second-hand,
through the Anspach Cousins, or others that were in the
humour. Troublesome times for the young man ; which
lasted a dozen years or more. At last a Bargain was made
(1604); Protestant and Catholic Canons splitting the
difference in some way ; and the House of Lorraine paying
Johann George a great deal of money to go home again.'
Poor Johann George came out of it in that way ; not second-
best, think several.

He was then (1606) put into Jagemdorf, which had just
fallen vacant ; our excellent fat friend, George Friedrich of
Anspach, Administrator of Preussen, having lately died, and
left it vacant, as we saw. George Friedrich’s death yielded
fine apanages, three of them in all : ^rst Anspach, second
Baireuth, and this third of Jagemdorf for a still younger
Brother. There was still a fourth younger Brother, Uncle of
George Wilhelm; Archbishop of Magdeburg this one; who also,
as we have seen, got into Rekhs-Acht^ into deep trouble in the
Thirty- Years War. He was in Tilly’s thrice-murderous Storm
of Magdebimg (10th May 1681); was captured, tumbled
about by the wild soldiery, and nearly killed there. Poor man,
with his mitre and rochets left in such a state ! In the end
he even became Catholky — ^from conviction, as was evident, and
bewilderment of mind ; — and lived in Austria on a pension ;
occasionally publishing polemical pamphlets.^ —

As to Johann George, he much repaired and beautified the

' (Euvrts complies de Voltaire 97 vols. (Paris, 1825-32), xxxiii. 284. — Kohler,
{Reicks-HUtorie^ p. 487) gives the authentic particulars.

® 1587; 1628; 1665 (Rentsch, pp. 905-910).

28S

CHAP.xm] DUCHY OF JAGERNDORP

Ite4)

Castle of Jagerndorf, says Rentsch: but he unfortunately
went ahead into the Winter-Eing^s adventure ; which, in that
sad battle of the Weissenberg, made total shipwreck of itself,
drawing Johann George and much else along with it.
Johann George was straightway tyrannously put to the Ban,
forfeited of life and lands Johann George disowned the
said Ban ; stood out fiercely for self and Winter-King ; and
did good fighting in the Silesian strongholds and mountain-
passes : but was forced to seek temporary shelter in
StebenbUrgen (Transylvania) ; and died far away, in a year or
two (1624), while returning to try it again. Sleeps, I think,
in the ^ Jablunka Pass ^ ; the dumb Giant-Mountains {Rieaen-
Gebirge) shrouding-up his sad shipwreck and him.

Jagemdorf was thus seized by Ferdinand n. of the House
of Hapsburg ; and though it was contrary to all law that the
Kaiser should keep it, — poor Johann George having left Sons
very innocent of treason, and Brothers, and an Electoral
Nephew, very innocent ; to whom, by old compacts and new,
the Heritage in defect of him was to fall, — neither Kaiser
Ferdinand n. nor Kaiser Ferdinand in. nor any Kaiser
would let-go the hold; but kept Jagemdorf fast clenched,
deaf to all pleadings, and monitions of gods or men. Till at
length, in the fourth generation afterwards, one * Friedrich
the Second,’ not unknown to us, — a sharp little man, little in
stature, but large in faculty and renown, who is now called
‘ Frederick the Great,’ — clutched hold of the Imperial fist (so
to speak), seizing his opportunity in 1740 ; and so wrenched
and twisted said close fist, that not only Jagemdorf dropped
out of it, but the whole of Silesia along with Jagemdorf,
there being other claims withal. And the account was at
last settled, with compound interest, — as in fact such accounts
are sure to be, one way or other. And so we leave Johann
George among the dumb Giant-Mountains again.

^ 22d January 1621 (Kahler, Rcichs-HUtsrU^ p. 518; and rectify HUbner,
tab. 128).

. 986 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

[1640-X688

CHAPTER XVIII

FRIEDRICH WILHELM, THE GREAT KURFURST,
ELEVENTH OF THE SERIES

Brandenburg had again sunk very low under the Tenth
Elector, in the unutterable troubles of the times. But it was
gloriously raised up again by his Son Friedrich Wilhelm, who
succeeded in 1640. This is he whom they call the ^ Great
Elector (Grosser KwJUrst) ’ ; of whom there is much writing
and celebrating in Prussian Books. As for the epithet, it is
not uncommon among petty German populations, and many
times does not mean too much : thus Max of Bavaria, with
his Jesuit Lambkins and Hyacinths, is, by Bavarians, called
‘Maximilian the Great.’ l^edrich Wilhelm, both by his
intrinsic qualities and the success he met with, deserves it
better than most. His success, if we look where he started
and where he ended, was beyond that of any other man in his
day. He found Brandenburg annihilated, and he left Bran-
denburg sound and flourishing; a great country, or already
on the way towards greatness. Undoubtedly a most rapid,
clear-eyed, active man. There was a stroke in him swift as
lightning, well-aimed mostly, and of a respectable weight
withal ; which shattered asunder a whole world of impedi-
ments for him, by assiduous repetition of it for fifty years.^
There hardly ever came to sovereign power a young man of
twenty under more distressing, hopeless-looking circumstances.
Political significance Brandenburg had none ; a mere Protes-
tant appendage dragged about by a Papist Kaiser. His
Father’s Prime-Minister, as we have seen, was in the interest
of his enemies; not Brandenburg’s servant, but Austria’s.
The very Commandants of his Fortresses, Commandant of
Spandau more especially, refused to obey Friedrich Wilhelm,
^ 1620; 1640; x688. ,

CH. XVIII.] KURFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM 287

1644]

on his accession ; ^ were bound to obey the Kaiser in the first
place.** He had to proceed softly as well as swiftly ; with
the most delicate hand to get him of Spandau by the collar,
and put him under lock -and -key, him as a warning to
others.

For twenty years past, Brandenburg had been scoured by
hostile armies, which, especially the Kaiser’s part of which,
committed outrages new in human history. In a year or two
hence, Brandenburg became again the theatre of business ;
Austrian Gallas advancing thither again (1644), with intent
‘to shut-up Torstenson and his Swedes in Jutland,’ where
they had teen chastising old Christian iv., now meddlesome
again, for the last time, and never a good neighbour to
Sweden. Gallas could by no means do what he intended ; on
the contrary, he had to run from Torstenson, what feet could
do ; was hunted, he and his Merode-Bruder (beautiful inventors
of the ‘ Marauding ’ Art), ‘ till they pretty much all died
{crepirten)y says Kohler.^ No great loss to society, the death
of these Artists ; but we can fancy what their life, and
especially what the process of their dying, may have cost poor
Brandenburg again ! —

Friedrich Wilhelm’s aim, in this as in other emergencies,
was sun-clear to himself, but for most part dim to everybody
else. He had to walk very warily, Sweden on one hand of
him, suspicious Kaiser on the other ; he had to wear
semblances, to be ready with evasive words ; and advance
noiselessly by many circuits. More delicate operation could
not be imagined. But advance he did ; advance and arrive.
With extraordinary talent, diligence and felicity the young
man wound himself out of this first fatal position ; got those
foreign Armies pushed out of his country, and kept them out.
His first concern had been to find some vestige of revenue, to
put that upon a clear footing ; and by loans or otherwise to
scrape a little ready-money together. On the strength of which
a small body of soldiers could be collected about him, and drilled
' Reichs-Hist^rie^ p. 556 ; Fauli, v. 24.

288 ttOri^K2JOLLfeRNS tK MANl)ENBtJR6 tsK. iti.

[Z640-X688

into real ability to fight and obey. This as a basis ; on this
followed all manner of things ; freedom from Swedish- Austrian
invasions, as the first thing.

He was himself, as appeared by and by, a fighter of the
first quality, when it came to that ; but never was willing to
fight if he could help it. Preferred rather to shift, manoeuvre
and negotiate ; which he did in a most vigilant, adroit and
masterly manner. But by degrees he had grown to have, and
could maintain it, an Army of 24,000 men ; among the best
troops then in being. With or without his will, he was in all
the great Wars of his time, — ^the time of Louis xiv., who
kindled Europe four times over, thrice in our Kurfurst’s day.
The Kurfiirst’s Dominions, a long straggling country, reaching
from Memel to Wesel, could hardly keep out of the way of
any war that might rise. He made himself available, never
against the good cause of Protestantism and German Free-
dom, yet always in the place and way where his own best
advantage was to be had. Louis xiv. had often much need of
him ; still oftener, and more pressingly, had Kaiser Leopold,
the little Gentleman ‘ in scarlet stockings, with a red feather
in his hat,’ whom Mr. Savage used to see majestically walking
about, with Austrian lip that said nothing at all.^ His
24,000 excellent fighting-men, thrown in at the right time,
were often a thing that could turn the balance in great
questions. They required to be allowed for at a high rate,
— which he well knew how to adjust himself for exacting and
securing always.

^ A Compleat History of Germany ^ by Mr. Savage (8vo, London, 1702), p. 553.
Who this Mr. Savage was, we have no trace. Prefixed to the volume is the
Portrait of a solid Gentleman of forty ; gloomily polite, with ample wig and
cravat, — in all likelihood some studious subaltern Diplomatist in the Succession
War. His little Book is very lean and barren ; but faithfully compiled, — and
might have some illumination in it, where utter darkness is so prevalent.
Most likely, Addison picked his story of the Sie^e of Weinsberg (‘ Women carry-
ing out their Husbands on their back,’ — one of his best Spectators)^ out of this
poor Book.

CH. XVIII.] KUKFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM 289

x&|0-x688]

What became of Pommern at the Peace ; Jinal Glance into
Cleve-Julich

When the Peace of Westphalia (1648) concluded that
Thirty- Years Conflagration, and swept the ashes of it into
order again, Friedrich Wilhelm’s right to Pommern was
admitted by everybody ; and well insisted on by himself : but
right had to yield to reason of state, and he could not get it.
The Swedes insisted on their expenses ; the Swedes held
Pommern, had all along held it, — in pawn, they said, for
their expenses. Nothing for it but to give the Swedes the
better half of Pommern. -Fbr^-Pommem (so they call it,
‘ Swedish Pomerania ’ thenceforth), which lies next the Sea ;
this, with some Towns and cuttings over and above, was
Sweden’s share : Friedrich Wilhelm had to put up with
jHi7id!b*-Pommem, docked furthermore of the Town of Stettin,
and of other valuable cuttings, in favour of Sweden. Much
to Friedrich Wilhelm’s grief and just anger, could he have
helped it. »

They gave him Three secularised Bishoprics, Magdeburg,
Halberstadt, Minden, with other small remnants, for com-
pensation ; and he had to be content with these for the
present. But he never gave-up the idea of Pommern ; much
of the effort of his life was spent upon recovering Fore-
Pommem ; thrice-eager upon that, whenever lawful oppor-
timity offered. To no purpose then ; he never could recover
Swedish Pommern ; only his late descendants, and that by
slowish degrees, could recover it all. Readers remember that
Biirgermeister of Stettin, with the helmet and sword flung
into the grave and picked out again ; — and can judge whether
Brandenburg got its good-luck quite by lying in bed ! —

Once, and once only, he had a voluntary purpose towards
War, and it remained a purpose only. Soon after the Peace
of Westphalia, old Pfalz-Neuburg, the same who got the slap
on the face, went into tyrannous proceedings against the

VOL. I. * T

890 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

Protestant part of his subjects in Jiilich-Cleve ; who called to
Friedrich Wilhelm for help. Friedrich Wilhelm, a zealous
Protestant, made remonstrances, retaliations : ere long the
thought struck him, ‘Suppose, backed by the Dutch, we
threw-out this fantastic old gentleman, his Papistries, and
pretended claims and self, clear out of it ? ’ This was
Friedrich Wilhelm’s thought ; and he suddenly marched
troops into the Territory, with that view. But Europe was
in alarm, the Dutch grew faint: Friedrich Wilhelm saw it
would not do. He had a conference with old Pfalz-Neuburg :
‘ Young gentleman, we remember how your Grandfather made
free with us and our august countenance ! Nevertheless we —
In fine, the ‘ statistic of Treaties ’ was increased by One ; and
there the matter rested till calmer times.

In 1666, as already said, an effective Partition of these
litigated Territories was accomplished : Prussia to have the
Duchy of Cleve-Proper, the Counties of Mark and Ravens-
berg, with other Patches and Pertinents ; Neuburg, what was
the better share, to have Jiilich Duchy and Berg Duchy.'
Furthermore, if either of the Lines failed, in no sort was
a collateral ^to be admitted ; but Brandenburg was to inherit
Neuburg, or Neuburg Brandenburg, as the case might be.*
A clear Bargain this at last; and in the times that had
come, it proved executable so far. But if the reader fancies
the Lawsuit was at last out in this way, he will be a
simple reader ! In the days of our little Fritz, the Line of
Pfalz-Neuburg was evidently ending ; but that Brandenburg
and not a collateral should succeed it, there lay the quarrel,
— open still, as if it had never been shut ; and we shall hear
enough about it ! — -

TTie Great Kurfursfs Wars: what he achieved in War and Peace

Friedrich Wilhelm’s first actual appearance in War, Polish-
Swedish War (1655-1660), was involuntary in the highest
* See Map at p. 252. * Pauli, v. 120- 129.

CH. xviii.] KURFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM «91

X640-1688]

degree ; forced upon him for the sake of his Preussen, which
bade fair to be lost or ruined, without blame of his or its.
Nevertheless, here too he made his benefit of the affair. The
big King of Sweden had a standing quarrel with his big Cousin
of Poland, which broke-out into hot War ; little Preussen lay
between them, and was like to be crushed in the collision.
Swedish King was Karl Gustav, Christina^s Cousin, Charles
Twelfth’s Grandfather ; a great and mighty man, lion of the
North in his time : Polish King was one John Casimir ;
chivalrous enough, and with clouds of forward Polish chivalry
about him, glittering with barbaric gold. Frederick ui.,
Danish King for the time being, he also was much involved
in the thing. Fain would Friedrich Wilhelm have kept out
of it, but he could not. Karl Gustav as good as forced him
to join : he joined ; fought along with Karl Gustav an
illustrious Battle; ‘Battle of Warsaw,’ three days long
(28-30th July 1656), on the skirts of Warsaw, — crowds
‘ looking from the upper windows ’ there ; Polish chivalry,
broken at last, going like chaff upon the winds, and John
Casimir nearly ruined.

Shortly after which, Friedrich Wilhelm, who had shone
much in the Battle, changed sides. An inconsistent, treach-
erous man.^ Perhaps not, O reader; perhaps a man advancing
‘ in circuits,’ the only way he has ; spirally, face now to east,
now to west, with his own reasonable private aim sun-clear to
him all the while ?

John Casimir agreed to give-up the ‘ Homage of Preussen ’
for this service ; a grand prize for Friedrich Wilhelm.' What
the Teutsch Ritters strove for in vain, and lost their existence
in striving for, the shifty Kurfiirst has now got: Ducal
Prussia, which is also called East Prussia, is now a free
sovereignty, — and will become as ‘ Royal ’ as the other Polish
part. Or perhaps even more so, in the course of time ! —
Karl Gustav, in a high frame of mind, informs the Kurfiirst,

^ Treaty of Labiau, loth November 1656 (Pauli, v. 73-75) ; 20tb Novembei
(Stenzel, iv. 128, — who always uses JViW Style\

29Je HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ni.

[ x 640- x 688

that he has him on his books, and will pay the debt one
day !

A dangerous debtor in such matters, this Karl Gustav.
In these same months, busy with the Danish part of the Con-
troversy, he was doing a feat of war, which set all Europe
in astonishment. In January 1658, Earl Gustav marches
his Army, horse, foot and artillery, to the extent of twenty-
thousand, across the Baltic ice, and takes an Island without
shipping, — Island of Fiinen, across the Little Belt; three
miles of ice ; and a part of the sea open^ which has to be
crossed on planks. Nay, forward from Fiinen, when once
there, he achieves ten whole miles more of ice ; and takes
Zealand itself,^ — to the wonder of all mankind. An imperious,
stem-browed, swift-striking man ; who had dreamed of a new
Goth Empire : The mean Hypocrites and Fribbles of the South
to be coerced again by noble Norse valour, and taught a new
lesson. Has been known to lay his hand on his sword while
apprising an Ambassador (Dutch High-Mightiness) what his
royal intentions were : ^ Not the sale or purchfiuse of groceries,
observe you. Sir ! My aims go higher ! ’ — Charles Twelfth’s
Grandfather, and somewhat the same type of man.

But Karl Gustav died, short while after ; ^ left his big
wide-raging Northern Controversy to collapse in what way
it could. Sweden and the fighting-parties made their ‘ Peace
of Oliva’ (Abbey of Oliva, near Dantzig, 1st May 1660);
and this of Preussen was ratified, in all form, among the
other points. No homage more ; nothing now above Ducal
Pmssia but the Heavens; and great times coming for it.
This was one of the successfulest strokes of business ever done
by Friedrich Wilhelm ; who had been forced, by sheer com-
pulsion, to embark in that big game. — ^ Royal Prussia,’ the
Western or Polish Prussia : this too, as all Newspapers know,
has, in our times, gone the same roeul as the other. Which
probably, after all, it may have had, in Nature, some tendency

^ Heiberg’s Ddnemarkische Reichs-HistorU^ pp. 406-409.

• 13th February 1660, age 38.

CH. xvilij KURFtJRST FRIEDRICH WILHELM 293

i 640* x 688]

to do ? Cut away, for reasons, by the Polish sword, in that
Battle of Tannenberg, long since ; and then, also for reasons,
cut back again ! That is the fact ; — not unexampled in
human History.

Old Johann Casimir, not long after that Peace of Oliva,
getting tired of his unruly Polish chivalry and their ways,
abdicated ; — retired to Paris ; and ‘ lived much with Ninon
de FEnclos and her circle,’ for the rest of his life. He used
to complain of his Polish chivalry, that there was no solidity
in them ; nothing but outside glitter, with tumult and anarchic
noise ; fatal want of one essential talent, the talent of Obeying ;
and has been heard to prophesy that a glorious Republic, per-
sisting in such courses, would arrive at results which would
surprise it.

Onward from this time, Friedrich Wilhelm figures in the
world ; public men watching his procedure ; Kings anxious to
secure him, — Dutch printsellers sticking-up his Portraits for
a hero-worshipping Public. Fighting hero, had the Public
known it, was not his essential character, though he had to
fight a gi*eat deal. He was essentially an Industrial man ;
great in organising, regulating, in constraining chaotic heaps
to become cosmic for him. He drains bogs, settles colonies
in the waste-places of his Dominions, cuts canals ; unweariedly
encourages trade and work. The Friedrich- WilhelrrCs Canal^
which still carries tonnage from the Oder to the Spree,' is a
monument of his zeal in this way ; creditable, with the means
he had. To the poor French Protestants, in the Edict-of-
Nantes Affair, he was like an express Benefit of Heaven : one
Helper appointed, to whom the help itself was profitable. He
munificently welcomed them to Brandenburg ; showed really
a noble piety and human pity, as well as judgment ; nor did
Brandenburg and he want their reward. Some 20,000
nimble French souls, evidently of the best French quality,

^ Executed, 1662-68 ; fifteen English miles long (BUsching, Erdbtschreibung^
vi. 2193).

294 ttOHENZOLLERNS IN MANDENBURG [bk. III.

[1681

found a home there ; — made ‘ waste sands about Berlin into
potherb gardens ’ ; and in the spiritual Brandenburg, too, did
something of horticulture, which is still noticeable.^

Certainly this Elector was one of the shiftiest of men.
Not an unjust man either. A pious, god-fearing man rather,
staunch to his Protestantism and his Bible; not unjust by
any means, — nor, on the other hand, by any means thick-
skinned in his interpretings of justice : Fairplay to myself
always ; or occasionally even the Height of Fairplay ! On
the whole, by constant energy, vigilance, adroit activity, by
an ever-ready insight and audacity to seize the passing fact
by its right handle, he fought his way well in the world ; left
Brandenburg a flourishing and greatly-increased Country, and
his own name famous enough.

A thickset stalwart figure; with brisk eyes, and high
strong irregularly- Roman nose. Good bronze Statue of him,
by Schliiter, once a famed man, still rides on the Lcmge-
Bruche (Long-Bridge) at Berlin ; and his Portrait, in huge
frizzled Louis-Quatorze wig, is frequently met with in German
Galleries. Collectors of Dutch Prints, too, know him : here
a gallant, eagle-featured little gentleman, brisk in the smiles
of youth, with plumes, with truncheon, caprioling on his war-
charger, view of tents in the distance ; — there a sedate,
ponderous, wrinkly old man, eyes slightly puckered (eyes
huMtr than mouth) ; a face well-ploughed by Time, and not
found unfruitful ; one of the largest, most laborious, potent
faces (in an ocean of circumambient periwig) to be met with
in that Century.^ There are many Histories about him, too ;
but they are not comfortable to read.® He also has wanted
a sacred Poet ; and found only a bewildering Dryasdust.

^ Erman (weak Biographer of Queen Sophie-Charlotte, already cited), Mimoires
pour servir d VHistoire des Rifugiis Fran^ais dans Us Etats du Rot de Prusse
(Berlin, 1782-94), 8 tt. 8vo.

* Both Prints are Dutch ; the Younger, my copy of the Younger, has lost the
Engraver’s Name (Kurfiirst’s age is twenty-seven) ; the Elder is by Masson^ 1683,
when Friedrich Wilhelm was sixty-three.

• G. D. Gcylcr, Lcben und Thaten Friedrich Wilhelm des Grossen (Frankfort

CH.xvni.3 KURFURST FRlEDRlCH WILHELM 2^5

16751

His Two grand Feats that dwell in the Prussian memory
are perhaps none of his greatest, but were of a kind to strike
the imagination. They both relate to what was the central
problem of his life, — the recovery of Pommem from the
Swedes. Exploit First is the famed ‘ Battle of Fehrbellin
(Ferry of Belkm),’ fought on the 18th June 1676. Fehrbellin
is an inconsiderable Town still standing in those peaty regions,
some five-and-thirty miles north-west of Berlin ; and had for
ages plied its poor Ferry over the oily-looking, brown, sluggish
stream called Rhin, or Rhein in those parts, without the
least notice from mankind, till this fell out. It is a place
of pilgrimage to patriotic Prussians, ever since Friedrich
Wilhelm’s exploit there. The matter went thus :

Friedrich Wilhelm was fighting, far south of Alsace, on
Kaiser Leopold’s side, in the Louis -Fourteenth War; that
second one, which ended in the treaty of Nimwegen. Doing
his best there, — when the Swedes, egged-on by Louis xiv.,
made war upon him ; crossed the Pomeranian marches, troop
after troop, and invaded his Brandenburg Territory with a
force which at length amounted to some 16,000 men. No
help for the moment : Friedrich Wilhelm could not be spared
from his post. The Swedes, who had at first professed wel),
gradually went into plunder, roving, harrying, at their own
will ; and a melancholy time they made of it for Friedrich
Wilhelm and his People. Lucky if temporary harm were all
the ill they were likely to do ; lucky if — ! He stood steady,
however ; in his solid manner, finishing the thing in hand
first, since that was feasible. He then even retired into
winter-quarters, to rest his men ; and seemed to have left the
Swedish 16,000 autocrats of the situation; who accordingly
went storming about at a great rate.

Not so, however ; very far indeed from so. Having rested

and Leipzig, 1703) folio. Franz Horn, Das Leben Friedrich Wilhelms des
Grossen (Berlin, 1814). Pauli, Stoats - Geschichtcy Band v. (Halle, 1764).
Pufendorf, De rebus gestis Friderici Wilhelmi Magni Electoris E^andenburgensis
Commentaria (Lips, et Berol. 1733, fol.).

SD6 MoHENZOLLEttNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

[1640-1688

his men for certain months, Friedrich Wilhelm silently in the
first days of June (1675) gets them under march again;
marches, his Cavalry and he as first instalment, with best
speed from Schweinfurt,^ which is on the river Mayn, to
Magdeburg ; a distance of two-hundred miles. At Magde-
burg, where he rests three days, waiting for the first handful
of foot and a field-piece or two, he learns that the Swedes
are in three parties wide asunder ; the middle party of them
within forty miles of him. Probably stronger, even this
middle one, than his small body (of ^ Six- thousand Horse,
Twelve-hundred Foot and three guns") ; — stronger, but cap-
able perhaps of being surprised, of being cut in pieces, before
the others can come up ? Rathenau is the nearest skirt of
this middle party : thither goes the Kurfiirst, softly, swiftly,
in the June night (16th-17th June 1675); gets into
Rathenau, by brisk stratagem ; tumbles-out the Swedish
Horse-regiment there, drives it back towards Fehrbellin.

He himself follows hard ; — swift riding enough, in the
summer-night, through those damp Havel lands, in the old
Hohenzollern fashion : and indeed old Freisack Castle, as it
chances, — Freisack, scene of Dietrich von Quitzow and Lazy
Peg long since, — is close by ! Follows hard, we say : strikes-in
upon this midmost party (nearly twice his number, but In-
fantry for the most part) ; and after fierce fight, done with
good talent on both sides, cuts it into utter ruin, as proposed.
Thereby he has left the Swedish Army as a mere head and
tail without body ; has entirely demolished the Swedish Army.*
Same feat intrinsically as that done by Cromwell, on Hamilton
and the Scots, in 1648. It was, so to speak, the last visit
Sweden paid to Brandenburg, or the last of any consequence ;
and ended the domination of the Swedes in those quarters.
A thing justly to be forever remembered by Brandenburg ;
— on a smallish modern scale, the Bannockburn, Sempach,
Marathon, of Brandenburg.®

> Stenzel, ii. 347, • Ib. ii. 350-357.

• See Pauli, v. 161-169; Stenzel, iL 335, 340-347, 354; Kausler ^ Atlas des

CH. XVIII.] KURFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM 297

1640-1688]

Exploit Second was four years later ; in some sort a corol-
lary to this ; and a winding-up of the Swedish business. The
Swedes, in farther prosecution of their Louis-Fourteenth
speculation, had invaded Preussen this time, and were doing
sad havoc there. It was in the dead of winter, Christmas

1678, more than four-hundred miles off; and the Swedes, to
say nothing of their other havoc, were in a case to take
Konigsberg, and ruin Prussia altogether, if not prevented.
Friedrich Wilhelm starts from Berlin, with the opening Year,
on his long march ; the Horse-troops first. Foot to follow at
their swiftest ; he himself (his Wife, his ever-true ‘ Louisa,’
accompanying, as her wont was) travels, towards the end, at
the rate of ‘ sixty miles a day.’ He gets in still in time, finds
Konigsberg unscathed. Nay it is even said, the Swedes are
extensively falling sick ; having, after a long famine, found
infinite ^ pigs, near Insterburg,’ in those remote regions, and
indulged in the fresh pork over-much.

I will not describe the subsequent manoeuvres, which would
interest nobody : enough if I say that on the 1 6th of January

1679, it had become of the highest moment for Friedrich
Wilhelm to get from Carwe (village near Elbing) on the shore
of the Frische Hof, where he was, through Konigsberg, to
Gilge on the Curische Hqfy where the Swedes are, — in a
minimum of time. Distance, as the crow flies, is about a
hundred miles ; road, which skirts the two Hafs^ (wide shal-
low Washes^ as we should name them), is of rough quality,
and naturally circuitous. It is ringing frost today, and for
days back : — ^Friedrich Wilhelm hastily gathers all the sledges,
all the horses of the district ; mounts some Four-thousand
men in sledges ; starts, with the speed of light, in that
fashion. Scours along all day, and after the intervening bit
of land, again along; awakening the ice-bound silences.

plus m^morablcs BcUailUs^ Combats ct SUges^ or Atlas der merkwurdigsten
Schlachieftp Treffen und Belagef'ungen (German and French, Carlsruhe and
Freiburg, 1831), p. 417, Blatt 62. ^

1 Pauli, Y. 2 IS- 222 J Stenzcl, ii. 392'397-

2d8 tlOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [ bk . ill.

Gloomy Frische Haf, wrapt in its Winter cloud-coverlids,
with its wastes of tumbled sand, its poor frost-bound fishing-
hamlets, pine-hillocks, — desolate-looking, stern as Greenland
or more so, says Biisching, who travelled there in winter-
time,^ — hears unexpected human noises, and huge grinding
and trampling ; the Four-thousand, in long fleet of sledges,
scouring across it, in that manner. All day they rush along,
— out of the rimy hazes of morning into the olive-coloured
clouds of evening again, — with huge loud-grinding rumble ; —
and do arrive in time at Gilge. A notable streak of things,
shooting across those frozen solitudes, in the New- Year 1679 ;
— little short of Karl Gustav’s feat, which we heard of, in the
other or Danish end of the Baltic, twenty years ago, when he
took Islands without ships.

This Second Exploit, — suggested or not by that prior one
of Karl Gustav on the ice, — is still a thing to be remembered
by Hohenzollems and Prussians. The Swedes were beaten
here, on Friedrich Wilhelm’s rapid arrival ; were driven into
disastrous rapid retreat Northward ; which they executed in
hunger and cold; fighting continually, like Northern bears,
under the grim sky ; Friedrich Wilhelm sticking to their
skirts, — ^holding by their tail, like an angry bearward with
steel whip in his hand. A thing which, on the small scale,
reminds one of Napoleon’s experiences. Not till Napoleon’s
huge fighting-flight, a Hundred-and-thirty-four years after,
did I read of such a transaction in those parts. The Swedish
invasion of Preussen has gone utterly to ruin.

And this, then, is the end of Sweden, and its bad neigh-
bourhood on these shores, where it has tyrannously sat on our
skirts so long ? Swedish Pommem the Elector already had :
last year, coming towards it ever since the Exploit of Fehr-
bellin, he had invaded Swedish Pommem ; had besieged and
taken Stettin, nay Stralsund too, where Wallenstein had
failed; — cleared Pommem altogether of its Swedish guests.
Who had tried next in Preussen, with what luck we see. Of
^ Biisching’s Beitra^e (Halle, 1789), vi. 160.

Ctt. xvlll.] KURFURSt' RRIEDRICtt WILHELM 299

i«75l

Swedish Pommem the Elector might now say : ^ Surely it is
mine ; again mine, as it long was ; well won a second time,
since the first would not do ] ' But no : — Louis xiv. proved
a gentleman to his Swedes. Louis, now that the Peace of
Nimwegen had come, and only the Elector of Brandenburg
was still in harness, said steadily, though anxious enough to
keep well with the Elector : ‘ They are my allies, these
Swedes ; it was on my bidding they invaded you : can I leave
them in such a pass ? It must not be ! ’ So Pommem had
to be given back. A miss which was infinitely grievous to
Friedrich Wilhelm. The most victorious Elector cannot hit
always, were his right never so good.

Another miss which he had to put up with, in spite of his
rights, and his good services, was that of the Silesian Duchies.
The Heritage-Fraternity with Liegnitz had at length, in
1676, come to fruit. The last Duke of Liegnitz was dead :
Duchies of Liegnitz, of Brieg, Wohlau, are Brandenburg’s
if there were right done ! But Kaiser Leopold in the scarlet
stockings will not hear of Heritage-Fraternity. ‘Nonsense!’
answers Kaiser Leopold : ‘ A thing suppressed at once, ages
ago ; by Imperial power : flat zero of a thing at this time ; —
and you, I again bid you, return me your Papers upon it !’
This latter act of duty Friedrich Wilhelm would not do ; but
continued insisting.^ ‘ Jagemdorf, at least, O Kaiser of the
world,’ said he ; ‘ Jagemdorf, there is no colour for your keep-
ing that I’ To which the Kaiser again answers, ‘ Nonsense I’ —
and even falls upon astonishing schemes about it, as we shall
see ; — but gives nothing. Ducal Preussen is sovereign, Cleve
is at Peace, Hinter-Pommem ours; — this Elector has con-
quered much : but the Silesian Heritages and Vor-Pommem,
and some other things, he will have to do without. Louis xrv.,
it is thought, once offered to get him made King but that
he declined for the present.

His married and domestic life is very fine and human ;
especially with that Oranien-Nassau Princess, who was his first

^ Pauli, V. 3ai, * li, vii. 215.

300 MOHENZOLLEliNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

[x640-xG68

Wife (1646-1667) : Princess Louisa of Nassau-Orange ; Aunt
to our own Dutch William, King William iii., in time coming.
An excellent wise Princess ; from whom came the Orange
Heritages, which afterwards proved difficult to settle : — Orange
was at last exchanged for the small Principality of Neufchatel
in Switzerland, which is Prussia’s ever since. ‘Oranienburg
{Orange- Bur gy a Royal Country-house, still standing, some
Twenty miles northwards from Berlin, was this Louisa’s place :
she had trimmed it up into a little jewel, of the Dutch type, —
potherb gardens, training-schools for young girls, and the like ;
— a favourite abode of hers, when she was at liberty for recrea-
tion. But her life was busy and earnest : she was helpmate,
not in name only, to an ever-busy man. They were married
young ; a marriage of love withal. Young Friedrich Wilhelm’s
courtship, wedding in Holland ; the honest trustful walk and
conversation of the two Sovereign Spouses, their joumeyings
together, their mutual hopes, fears and manifold vicissitudes ;
till Death, with stem beauty, shut it in : — all is human, true
and wholesome in it ; interesting to look upon, and rare among
sovereign persons.

Not but that he had his troubles with his womankind.
Even with this his first Wife, whom he loved truly, and who
truly loved him, there were scenes ; the Lady having a judg-
ment of her own about everything that passed, and the man
being choleric withal. Sometimes, I have heard, ‘he would dash
his hat at her feet,’ saying symbolically, ‘ Govern you, then,
Madam ! Not the Kurfiirst-Hat ; a Coif is my wear, it
seems ! ’ ^ Yet her judgment was good ; and he liked to have
it on the weightiest things, though her powers of silence might
halt now and then. He has been known, on occasion, to run
from his Privy-Council to her apartment, while a complex
matter was debating, to ask her opinion, hers too, before it was
decided. Excellent Louisa ; Princess full of beautiful piety,
good-sense and affection ; a touch of the Nassau- Heroic in her.
At the moment of her death, it is said, when speech had fled,
^ Forster, Friedrich Wilhelm /. Konig von Preussen (Potsdam, 1834), L 177.

CH. xviil] KURFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM 801
X667)

he felt, from her hand which lay in his, three slight, slight
pressures : ‘ Farewell ! ’ thrice mutely spoken in that manner,
— ^not easy to forget in this world.^

His second Wife, Dorothea, — who planted the Lindens in
Berlin, and did other husbandries, of whom we have heard,
fell far short of Louisa in many things ; but not in tendency
to advise, to remonstrate, and plaintively reflect on the finished
and unalterable. Dreadfully thrifty lady moreover ; did much
in dairy produce, farming of town-rates, provision-taxes : not
to speak again of that Tavern she was thought to have in
Berlin, and to draw custom to in an oblique manner i What
scenes she had with Friedrich her stepson, we have seen.
^ Ah, I have not my Louisa now ; to whom now shall I run
for advice or help ! ’ would the poor Kurfiirst at times exclaim.

He had some trouble, considerable trouble now and then,
with mutinous spirits in Preussen ; men standing on antique
Prussian franchises and parchments ; refusing to see that the
same were now antiquated, incompatible, not to say impossible,
as the new Sovereign alleged ; and carrying themselves very
stiffly at times. But the Hohenzollems had been used to such
things ; a Hohenzollem like this one would evidently take his
measures, soft but strong, and ever stronger to the needful
pitch, with mutinous spirits. One Biirgermeister of Konigs-
berg, after much stroking on the back, was at length seized in
open Hall, by Electoral writ, — soldiers having first gently
barricaded the principal streets, and brought cannon to bear
upon them. This Biirgermeister, seized in such brief way, lay
prisoner for life ; refusing to ask his liberty, though it was
thought he might have had it on asking.^

Another gentleman, a Baron von Kalkstein, of old Teutsch-
Ritter kin, of very high ways, in the Provincial Estates (Stande)
and elsewhere, got into lofty almost solitary opposition, and
at length into mutiny proper, against the new ^Non-Polish
Sovereign^ and flatly refused to do homage at his accession in

^ WegfUhrer, Leben der Kurfurstin (Leipzig, 1838), p. 175.

* Horn, Das Leben Friedrich Wilhelms des Grossen (Berlin, 1814), p. 68.

308 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

(x688

that new capacity.^ Refused, Kalkstein did, for his share;
fled to Warsaw ; and very fiercely, in a loud manner, carried
on his mutinies in the Diets and Court-Conclaves there ; his
plea being, or plea for the time, ‘ Poland is our liege lord ’
(which it was not always), ‘ and we cannot be transferred to
you, except by our consent asked and given, ’ which too had
been a little neglected on the former occasion of transfer. So
that the Great Elector knew not what to do with Kalkstein ;
and at length (as the case was pressing) had him kidnapped
by his Ambassador at Warsaw ; had him ‘ rolled into a carpet ’
there, and carried swiftly in the Ambassador’s coach, in the
form of luggage, over the frontier, into his native Province,
there to be judged, and, in the end (since nothing else would
serve him), to have the sentence executed, and his head cut off.
For the case was pressing ! ^ — ^These things, especially this of
Kalkstein, with a boisterous Polish Diet and parliamentary
eloquence in the rear of him, gave rise to criticisms; and
required management on the part of the Great Elector.

Of all his Ancestors, our little Fritz, when he grew big,
admired this one. A man made like himself in many points.
He seems really to have loved and honoured this one. In the
year 1750 there had been a new Cathedral got finished at
Berlin ; the ancestral bones had to be shifted over from the
vaults of the old one, — the burying- place ever since Joachim ii.,
that Joachim who drew his sword on Alba. ‘ King Friedrich,
with some attendants, witnessed the operation, January 1750.
When the Great Kurfiirst’s coffin came, he made them open
it ; gazed in silence on the features for some time, which were
perfectly recognisable ; laid his hand on the hand long dead,
and said, Messieurs^ celui-ci a Jait de grandes choses (This
one did a great work) ” | *

He died 89th April 1688 ; — ^looking with intense interest
upon Dutch William’s preparations to produce a Glorious
Revolution in this Island ; being always of an ardent Protes-

^ Supr^, pp. 247 sqq» • Horn, pp. 80-83,

• Sec Preuss, f. 270.

803

CHAP. XIX.] KING FRIEDRICH I. AGAIN

1640-1688]

tant feeling, and a sincerely religious man. Friedrich, Crown-
Prince, age then thirty-one, and already married a second time,
was of course left Chief Heir; — who, as we see, has not
declined the Kingship, when a chance for it offered. There
were four Half brothers of Friedrich, too, who got apanages,
appointments. They had at one time confidently looked for
much more, their Mother being busy ; but were obliged to be
content, and conform to the Gera Bond and fundamental Laws
of the Country. They are entitled Margraves ; — two of whom
left children, Margraves of Brandenburg-Schwedt, Heermeisters
(Head of the Malta-Knighthood) at Sonnenburg, Statthalters
in Magdeburg, or I know not what; whose names tum-up
confusedly in the Prussian Books ; and, except as temporary
genealogical puzzles, are not of much moment to the Foreign
reader. Happily there is nothing else in the way of Princes
of the Blood, in our little Friedrich’s time ; and happily what
concern he had with these, or how he was related to them, will
not be abstruse to us, if occasion rise.

CHAPTER XIX

KING FRIEDRICH I. AGAIN

We said the Great Elector never could work his Silesian
Duchies out of Kaiser LeopoWs grip : to all his urgencies the
little Kaiser in red stockings answered only in evasions, refusals ;
and would quit nothing. We noticed also what quarrels the
young Electoral Prince, Friedrich, afterwards King, had got
into with his Stepmother ; suddenly feeling poisoned after
dinner, running to his Aunt at Cassel, coming back on treaty,
and the like. These are two facts which the reader knows :
and out of these two grew a third, which it is fit he should
know.

In his last yeai's, the Great Elector, worn-out with labour,
and harassed with such domestic troubles over and above, bad

304 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [BK. III.

[x6^

evidently fallen much under his Wife’s management ; cutting-
out large apanages (clear against the Gera Bond) for her
children; — longing probably for quiet in his family at any price.
As to the poor young Prince, negotiated back from Cassel,
he lived remote, and had fallen into open disfavour, — with a
very ill effect upon his funds, for one thing. His father kept
him somewhat tight on the money-side, it is alleged ; and he
had rather a turn for spending money handsomely. He was
also in some alarm about the proposed apanages to his Half-
Brothers, the Margraves above mentioned, of which there were
rumours going.

How Austria settled the Silesian Claims

Now in these circumstances the Austrian Court, who at
this time (1685) greatly needed the Elector’s help against
Turks and others, and found him very urgent about these
Silesian Duchies of his, fell upon what I must call a very
extraordinary shift for getting rid of the Silesian question.
‘ Serene Highness,’ said they, by their Ambassador at Berlin,
‘ to end these troublesome talks, and to liquidate all claims,
admissible and inadmissible, about Silesia, the Imperial
Majesty will give you an actual bit of Territory, valuable,
though not so large as you expected ! ’ The Elector listens
with both ears : What Territory, then ? The ‘ Circle of
Schwiebus,’ hanging on the north-western edge of Silesia, con-
tiguous to the Elector’s own Dominions in these Frankfurt-
on-Oder regions : this the generous Imperial Majesty proposes
to give in fee-simple to Friedrich Wilhelm, and so to end
the matter. Truly a most small patch of Territory in com-
parison ; not bigger than an English Rutlandshire, to say
nothing of soil and climate ! But then again it was an
actual patch of territory ; not a mere parchment shadow of
one : this last was a tempting point to the old harassed
Elector. Such friendly offer they made him, I think, in
1686, at the^time they were getting 8,000 of his troops to

CHAt>. XIX.] KING^ FRIEDRICH 1. AGAIN 805

t640-x688]

march against the Turks for them ; a very needful service at
the moment. ‘ By the bye, do not march through Silesia,
you ! — Or march faster ! ’ said the cautious Austrians on
this occasion : * Other roads will answer better than Silesia ! ’
said they.^ Baron Freytag, their Ambassador at Berlin
had negotiated the affair so far : ‘ Circle of Schwiebus,’
said Freytag, ^ and let us have done with these thorny
talks ! '

But Baron Freytag had been busy, in the mean while, with
the young Prince ; secretly offering sympathy, counsel, help ;
of all which the poor Prince stood in need enough. ^ We
will help you in that dangerous matter of the Apanages,’
said Freytag ; ‘ Help you in all things,’ — (I suppose he would
say), — ‘ necessary pocket-money is not a thing your Highness
need want ! ’ And thus Baron Freytag, what is very curious,
had managed to bargain beforehand with the young Prince,
That directly on coming to power, he would give-up Schwiebus
again, should the offer of Schwiebus be accepted by Papa. To
which effect Baron Freytag held a signed Bond, duly executed
by the young man, before Papa had concluded at all. Which
is very curious indeed ! —

Poor old Papa, worn-out with troubles, accepted Schwiebus
in liquidation of all claims (8th April 1686), and a few days
after set his men on march against the Turks : — and, exactly
two months beforehand, on the 8th of February last, the
Prince had signed his secret engagement, That Schwiebus
should be a mere phantasm to Papa; that he, the Prince,
would restore it on his accession. Both these singular Parch-
ments, signed, sealed and done in the due legal form, lay
simultaneously in Freytag’s hand ; and probably enough they
exist yet, in some dusty comer, among the solemn sheepskins
of the world. This is literally the plan hit upon by an
Imperial Court, to assist a young Prince in his pecuniary
and other diftculties, and get rid of Silesian claims. Plan
actually not unlike that of swindling money-lenders to a young
1 Pauli, V. 327, 332. *

306 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

(X688-X7X3

gentleman in difficulties, and of manageable turn, who has
got into their hands.

The Great Elector died two years after ; Schwiebus then
in his hand. The new Elector, once instructed as to the
nature of the affair, refused to give-up Schwiebus ; ^ declared
the transaction a swindle : — and in fact, for seven years more,
retained possession of Schwiebus. But the Austrian Court
insisted, with emphasis, at length with threats (no insuperable
pressure from Louis, or the Turks, at this time) ; the poor
cheated Elector had, at last, to give-up Schwiebus, in terms
of his promise.^ He took act that it had been a surrep-
titious transaction, palmed upon him while ignorant, and
while without the least authority or power to make such a
promise; that he was not bound by it, nor would be, except
on compulsion thus far : and as to binding Brandenburg by
it, how could he, at that period of his history, bind Branden-
burg ? Brandenburg was not then his to bind, any more
than China was.

His Raths had advised Friedrich against giving-up Schwie-
bus in that manner. But his answer is on record : ^ I must,
I will and shall keep my own word. But my rights on
Silesia, which I could not, and do not in these unjust cir-
cumstances, compromise, I leave intact for my posterity to
prosecute. If God and the course of events order it no
otherwise than now, we must be content. But if God shall
one day send the opportunity, those that come after me will
know what they have to do in such case.’ ® And so Schwiebus
was given up, the Austrians paying back what Brandenburg
had laid out in improving it, ‘250,000 gulden (25,000/.)’ ;
— and the Hand of Power had in this way, finally as it
hoped, settled an old troublesome account of Brandenburg’s.
Settled the Silesian- Duchies Claim, b}’ the temporary Phan-
tasm of a Gift of Schwiebus. That iS literally the Liegnitz-
Jagerndorf case ; and the reader is to note it and remember

^ 19th September 1689 (Pauli, vii. 74),

* Pauli, viii 150.

• 3Jst December 1694.

CHAP. XIX.] KING FRIEDRICH I. AGAIN 307

X688-X7X3]

it. For it will tum-up again in History The Hand of
Power is very strong : but a stronger may perhaps get hold
of its knuckles one day, at an advantageous time, and do a
feat upon it.

The ‘eventual succession to East-Friesland,’ which had
been promised by the Reich, some ten years ago, to the Great
Elector, ‘ for what he had done against the Turks, and what
he had suffered from those Swedish Invasions, in the Com-
mon Cause ’ : this shadow of Succession, the Kaiser now
said, should not be haggled with any more ; but be actually
realised, and the Imperial sanction to it now given, — effect to
follow i/*the Friesland Line died out. Let this be some con-
solation for the loss of Schwiebus and your Silesian Duchies.
Here in Friesland is the ghost of a coming possession ; there
in Schwiebus was the ghost of a going one : phantasms you
shall not want for ; but the Hand of Power parts not with
its realities, however come by.

His real Charaxter

Poor Friedrich led a conspicuous life as Elector and King ;
but no public feat he did now concerns us like this private
one of Schwiebus. Historically important, this, and requiring
to be remembered, while so much else demands mere oblivion
from us. He was a spirited man ; did soldierings, fine Siege
of Bonn (July — October 1689), sieges and campaignings, in
person, — valiant in action, royal especially in patience there,
— during that Third War of Louis-Fourteenth’s, the Treaty-
of-Ryswick one. All through the Fourth, or Spanish Suc-
cession-War, his Prussian Ten-Thousand, led by fit generals,
showed eminently what stuff they were made of. Witness
Leopold of Anhalt-Dessau (still a young Dessauer) on the
field of Blenheim ; — Leopold had the right wing there, and
saved Prince Eugene who was otherwise blown to pieces,
while Marlborough stormed and conquered on the left. Wit-
ness the same Dessauer on the field of Hochstifdt the year

308 HOHENZOLLERNS tN BRANDENBURG [ bk . itl.

[f688>X7X3

before;^ how he managed the retreat there. Or see him
at the Bridge of Cassano (1706) ; in the Lines of Turin
(1706) ; ^ wherever hot service was on hand. At Malplaquet,
in those murderous inexpugnable French Lines, bloodiest of
obstinate Fights (upwards of Thirty-thousand left on the
ground), the Prussians brag that it was they who picked their
way through a certain peat-bog, reckoned impassable ; and
got fairly in upon the French wing, — ^to the huge comfort of
Marlborough, and little Eugene his brisk comrade on that
occasion. Marlborough knew well the worth of these Prussian
troops, and also how to stroke his Majesty into continuing
them in the field.

He was an expensive King, surrounded by cabals, by War-
tenbergs male and female, by whirlpools of intrigues, which,
now that the game is over, become very forgettable. But one
finds he was a strictly honourable man ; with a certain height
and generosity of mind, capable of other nobleness than the
upholstery kind. He had what we may call a hard life of it ;
did and suffered a good deal in his day and generation, not
at all in a dishonest or unmanful manner. In fact, he is quite
recognisably a Hohenzollem, — with his back half broken.
Readers recollect that sad accident : how the Nurse, in one
of those headlong journeys which his Father and Mother were
always making, let the poor child fall or jerk backward ; and
spoiled him much, and indeed was thought to have killed
him, by that piece of inattention. He was not yet Heredi-
tary Prince, he was only second son : but the elder died ; and
he became Elector, King ; and had to go with his spine dis-
torted, — distortion not glaringly conspicuous, though im-
deniable ; — and to act the Hohenzollem so. Nay, who knows
but it was this very jerk, and the half-ruin of his nervous
system, — this doubled wish to be beautiful, and this crooked-
back capable of being hid or decorated into straightness,—

' Vamhagen von Ense, Btographische DenkmaU (Berlin, 1845), ii. 155.

* Des wcltber^hmten Fiirstens Leopoldi von Anhalt- Dessau Leben und Thaten
(Leipzig, 1742, anonymous, by one Michael Ranfft)^ pp. 53, 6i,

CHAP. XIX.] KING FRIEDRICH I. AGAIN 809

I688-Z7X3]

that first set the poor man on thinking of expensive oma-
mentalities, and Kingships in particular ? History will forgive
the Nurse in that case.

Perhaps History has dwelt too much on the blind side of
this expensive King, Toland, on entering his country, was
struck rather with the signs of good administration every-
where. No sooner have you crossed the Prussian Border, out
of Westphalia, says Toland, than smooth highways, well-tilled
fields, and a general air of industry and regularity, are
evident : solid milestones, brass-bound, and with brass inscrip-
tion, tell the traveller where he is ; who finds due guidance
of fingerposts, too, and the blessing of habitable inns. The
people seem all to be busy, diligently occupied ; villages
reasonably swept and whitewashed ; — never was a better set
of Parish Churches ; whether new-built or old, they are all in
brand-new repair. The contrast with Westphalia is imme-
diate and great; but indeed that was a sad country, to
anybody but a patient Toland, who knows the causes of
phenomena. No inns there, except of the naturally savage sort.
‘ A man is very happy if he finds clean straw to sleep on,
without expecting sheets or coverings ; let him readily dispense
with plates, forks and napkins, if he can get anything to eat.’
‘ He must be content to have the cows, swine and poultry for
his fellow-lodgers, and to go in at the same passage that the
smoke comes out at, for there ’s no other vent for it but the
door ; which makes foreigners commonly say that the people
of Westphalia enter their houses by the chimney.’ And
observe withal : ^ This is the reason why their beef and hams
are so finely prepared and ripened ; for the fireplace being
backwards, the smoke must spread over all the house before it
gets to the door ; which makes everything within of a russet
or sable colour, not excepting the hands and faces of the
meaner sort.^ If Prussia yield to Westphalia in ham, in
all else she is strikingly superior.

^ An Account of the Courts of Prussia and Hanover^ by Mr. Toland (dted
already), p. 4,

810 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

[1688-17x3

He founded Universities, this poor King; University of
Halle ; Royal Academy of Berlin, Leibnitz presiding : he
fought for Protestantism ; — did what he could for the cause
of Cosmos versm Chaos, after his fashion. The magnificences
of his Charlottenburgs, Oranienburgs and numerous Country-
houses made Toland almost poetic. An afiable kindly man
withal, though quick of temper ; his word sacred to him. A
man of many troubles, and acquainted with ^the infinitely
little (Tinfiniment petit)^ as his Queen termed it.

CHAPTER XX

DEATH OF KING FRIEDRICH I

Old King Friedrich i. had not much more to do in the
world, after witnessing the christening of his Grandson of like
name. His leading forth or sending forth of troops, his
multiplex negotiations, solemn ceremonials, sad changes of
ministry, sometimes transacted ‘ with tears,’ are mostly ended ;
the ever-whirling dust-vortex of intrigues, of which he has
been the centre for a five-and-twenty years, is settling down
finally towards everlasting rest. No more will Marlborough
come and dextrously talk him over, — proud to * serve as cup-
bearer,’ on occasion, to so high a King, — for new bodies of
men to help in the next campaign : we have ceased to be a
King worthy of such a cupbearer, and Marlborough’s campaigns
too are all ended.

Much is ended. They are doing the sorrowful Treaty of
Utrecht ; Louis xiv. himself is ending ; mournfully shrunk
into the comer, with his Missal and his Maintenon ; looking
back with just horror on Europe four times set ablaze for the
sake of* one poor mortal in big periwig, to no purpose.
Lucky if perhaps Missal-work, orthodox litanies, and even
Protestant Dfagonades, can have virtue to wipe-out such a
score against a man ! Unhappy Louis : the sun-bright gold

CHAP. XX.] DEATH OF KING FRIEDRICH I 311

1712]

has become dim as copper ; we rose in storms, and we are
setting in watery clouds. The Kaiser himself (Karl vi.,
Leopold’s Son, Joseph i.’s younger Brother) will have to con-
form to this Treaty of Utrecht : what other possibility for
him ?

The English, always a wonderful nation, fought and sub-
sidied from side to side of Europe for this Spanish-Succession
business ; fought ten years, such fighting as they never did
before or since, under ‘John Duke of Marlborough,’ who, as is
well known, ‘ beat the French thorough and thorough.’ French
entirely beaten at last, not without heroic difficulty and as
noble talent as was ever shown in diplomacy and war, are
ready to do your will in all things ; in this of giving-up
Spain, among others : — whereupon the English turn round,
with a sudden new thought, ‘ No, we will not have our will
done ; it shall be the other way, the way it was ^ — now that
we bethink ourselves, after all this fighting for our will ! ’
And make Peace on those terms, as if no war had been ; and
accuse the great Marlborough of many things, of theft for
one. A wonderful People ; and in the Continental Politics
(which indeed consist chiefly of Subsidies) thrice wonderful.
So the Treaty of Utrecht is transacting itself ; which that of
Rastadt, on the part of Kaiser and Empire, unable to get
on without Subsidies, will have to follow : and after such
quantities of powder burnt, and courageous lives wasted,
general As-you-were is the result arrived at.

Old Friedrich’s Ambassadors are present at Utrecht,
jangling and pleading among the rest; at Berlin too the
dispatch of business goes lumbering on ; but what thing, in
the shape of business, at Utrecht or at Berlin, is of much
importance to the old man ? Seems as if Europe itself were
waxing dim, and sinking to stupid sleep, — as we, in our poor
royal person, full surely are. A Crown has been fichieved,
and diamond buttons worth 1600Z. apiece; but what is a
Crown, and what are buttons, after all ? — I supj)ose the tattle
and stngeries of little Wilhelmina, whom he would spend

312 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. ill.

[X688-X7X3

whole days with ; this and occasional visits to a young
Fritzchen’s cradle, who is thriving moderately, and will speak
and do aperies one day, — are his main solacements in the
days that are passing. Much of this Friedrich’s life has
gone-off like the smoke of fireworks, has faded sorrowfully,
and proved phantasmal. Here is an old Autograph Note,
written by him at the side of that Cradle, and touching on a
slight event there ; which, as it connects two venerable
Correspondents and their Seventeenth Century with a grand
Phenomenon of the Eighteenth, we will insert here. The old
King addresses his older Mother-in-law, famed Electress
Sophie of Hanover, in these terms (spelling corrected) :

* Cha/rlottenbwrgt den 30 Auguti 171*.

' Ew, Churf, Durchlaucht werden sich zweifelsohne mit uns er/reuen dass
der kleine Printz (Prinz) Fritz nuhnmero (nunmehr) 6 Zehne (Zahne) hat
und ohne die geringste incommoditet (-tat). Daraus kann man auch die
predestination sehen, dose aXle seine Bruder haben daran sterben mussen,
dieser aber bekommt sie ohne Muhe wie seine Schwester. Gott erhalte ihn
uns noch lange sum trohst (Trost), in dessen Schutz ich dieselbe ergebe und
lebenslang verbleibe,

* Ew, Churf, Durchl, gehorsamster Diener und treuer Sohn,

^ Friedrich R.' ^

Of which this is the literal English :

' Your Electoral Serenity will doubtless rejoice with us that the little
Prince Fritz has now got his sixth tooth without the least incommoditi.
And therein we may trace a predestination, inasmuch as his Brothers died
of teething' (Not qf cannon-sound and weight of head-gear ^ then, your
Majesty thinks f That were a painful thought !) ; ^ and this one, as his Sister '
( Wilhelmina) ^ did, gets them ’ (the teeth) ' ' without trouble. God preserve
him long for a comfort to us : — to whose protection I commit Dieselbe '
( Your Electoral Highness, in the third person), ^ and remain lifelong your
Electoral Highness's most obedient Servant and true Son,

^ Friedrich Rex.*

One of Friedrich Rex’s worst adventures was his latest ;

commenced some five or six years ago (1708), and now not

far from terminating. He was a Widower, of weakly con-

«

' Preuss, Fredrick d^r Grosss (Histsrischs Skizze^ Berlin, 1838), p. 38a

CHAP. XX.] DEATH OF KING FRIEDRICH I 813

I7<^i7i3l

stitution, towards fifty : his beautiful ingenious ‘ Serena,’ with
all her Theologies, pinch-of-snuff Coronations and other
earthly troubles, was dead ; and the task of continuing
the Hohenzollem progeny, given-over to Friedrich Wilhelm
the Prince Royal, was thought to be in good hands. Majesty
Friedrich with the weak back had retired, in 1708, to
Karlsbad, to rest from his cares ; to take the salutary waters,
and recruit his weak nerves a little. Here, in the course of
confidential promenadings, it was hinted, it was represented to
him by some pickthank of a courtier, That the task of con-
tinuing the Hohenzollem progeny did not seem to prosper in
the present good hands ; that Sophie Dorothee, Princess
Royal, had already borne two royal infants which had speedily
died ; that in fact it was to be gathered from the medical men,
if not from their words, then from their looks and cautious
innuendos, that Sophie Dorothee, Princess Royal, would never
produce a Prince or even Princess that would live : which
task, therefore, did now again seem to devolve upon his
Majesty, if his Majesty had not insuperable objections?
Majesty had no insuperable objections ; old Majesty listened
to the flattering tale ; and, sure enough, he smarted for it in
a signal manner.

By due industry, a Princess was fixed upon for Bride,
Princess Sophie Louisa of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, age now
twenty-four : she was got as Wife, and came home to Berlin
in all pomp ; — but good came not with her to anybody there.
Not only did she bring the poor old man no children, which
was a fault to be overlooked, considering Sophie Dorothee’s
success ; but she brought a quemlous, weak and self-sufficient
female humour ; found his religion heterodox, — he being
Calvinist, and perhaps even lax-Calvinist, she Lutheran as the
Prussian Nation is, and strict to the bone : — heterodox wholly,
to the length of no salvation possible ; and times rose on the
Berlin Court such as had never been seen before ! ‘ No

salvation possible, says my Dearest ? Hah ! And an innocent
Court-Mask or Dancing Soiree is criminal in th% sight of God

314 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. in.

[X688-I7Z3

and of the Queen? And we are children of wrath wholly, and
a frivolous generation ; and the Queen will see us all — ! ’ —

The end was, his Majesty, through sad solitary days and
nights, repented bitterly that he had wedded such a She-
Dominic; grew quite estranged from her; the poor She-
Dominic giving him due return in her way, — namely, living
altogether in her own apartments, upon orthodoxy, jealousy
and other bad nourishment. Till at length she went quite
mad ; and, except the due medical and other attendants,
nobody saw her, or spoke of her, at Berlin. Was this a
cheering issue of such an adventure to the poor old expensive
Gentleman ? He endeavoured to digest in silence the bitter
morsel he had cooked for himself ; but reflected often, as an
old King might. What dirt have I eaten !

In this way stands that matter in the Schloss of Berlin,
when little Friedrich, who will one day be called the Great, is
bom. Habits of the expensive King, hours of rising, modes of
dressing, and so forth, are to be found in Pollnitz ; ^ but we
charitably omit them all. Even from foolish Pollnitz a good
eye will gather, what was above intimated, that this feeble-
backed, heavy-laden old King was of humane and just disposi-
tion ; had dignity in his demeanour ; had reticence, patience ;
and, though hot-tempered like all the Hohenzollerns, that he
bore himself like a perfect gentleman for one thing; and
tottered along his high-lying lonesome road not in an un man-
ful manner at all. Had not his nerves been damaged by that
fall in infancy, who knows but we might have had something
else to read of him than that he was regardless of expense in
this world !

His last scene, of date February 1713, is the tragical
ultimatum of that fine Karlsbad adventure of the Second

«

' Pollnitz, Memoirenzur Lebens -und Regierungs-Geschichte der Vier Utzten
Rigenten des Preussischen Staais (Berlin, 1791). A vague, inexact, but not quite
uninstructive or uninteresting Book; Printed also in French^ which was the
Original, same place and time.

CHAP. XX.] DEATH OF KING FRIEDRICH I 815

asth Feb. 1713]

marriage, — ^Third marriage, in fact, though the First, anterior
to * Serena,’ is apt to be forgotten, having lasted short while,
and produced only a Daughter, not memorable except by
accident. This Third marriage, which had brought so many
sorrows to him, proved at length the death of the old man.
For he sat one morning, in the chill February days of the Year
1713, in his Apartment, as usual ; weak of nerves, but think-
ing no special evil ; when, suddenly with huge jingle, the
glass-door of his room went to shreds ; and there rushed in —
bleeding and dishevelled, the fatal ‘White Lady’ {Weisse
Frau\ who is understood to walk that Schloss at Berlin, and
announce Death to the Royal inhabitants. Majesty had
fainted, or was fainting. ‘ Weisse Frau ? Oh no, your
Majesty ! ’ — not that ; but indeed something almost worse.

Mad Queen, in her Apartments, had been seized, that

day, when half or quarter dressed, with unusual orthodoxy or
unusual jealousy. Watching her opportunity, she had whisked
into the corridor, in extreme deshabille ; and gone, like the
wild roe, towards Majesty’s Suite of Rooms ; through Majesty’s
glass-door, like a catapult; and emerged as we saw, — in
petticoat and shift, with hair streaming, eyes glittering, arms
cut, and the other sad trimmings. O Heaven, who could
laugh ? There are tears due to Kings and to all men. It
was deep misery ; deep enough ‘ sin and misery,’ as Calvin well
says, on the one side and the other ! The poor old King was
carried to bed ; and never rose again, but died in a few days.
The date of the Weisse Fraus death, one might have hoped,
was not distant either ; but she lasted, in her sad state, for
above twenty years coming.

Old King Friedrich’s death-day was 25th February 1713 ;
the unconscious little Grandson being then in his Fourteenth
month. To whom, after this long voyage round the world,
we now gladly return.

1516 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG [bk. III.

By way qf reinforoemenl to any recollection the reader may have of
these Twelve Hohenzollem KurfUrsts, I will append a continuous list of them,
with here and there an indication,

THE TWELVE HOHENZOLLERN ELECTORS

1 *. Fbiedrioh I. (as Burggraf^ was Friedrich vi.): bom^ it is inferred^
1372 {Rentsch, p. 350 ); accession, 18th April 1417 ; died 21 st September
1440. Had come to Brandenburg, 1412, as Statthalter. The Quitzows
and Heavy Peg,

2®. Friedrich il : 19th November 1413 ; 2l8t September 1440 ;
10 th Febr. 1472. Friedrich Ironteeth; tames the Berlin Burghers. Spoke
Polish, was to have been Polish King. Cannon-shot upon his dinner-
table shatters his nerves so, that he abdicates, and soon dies. Johannes
Alchymista his elder Brother ; Albert AchiUes his younger.

3®. Albert (Achilles) : 24th November 1414 ; 10 th February 1471 ;
11 th March 1486. Third son of Friedrich i. ; is lineal Progenitor of
all the rest.

Eldest Son, Johann Cicero, follows as Eurfiirst ; a Younger Son, Friedrich (bj
a different Mother), got Oolmbaoh, and produced the Elder Line there. (See
Genealogical Diagram, p. 318.)

4*. Johann (Cicero) : 2 d August 1465 ; 11 th March 1486 ; 9th Jan.
1499. Big John. Friedrich of Culmbach's elder (Half-) Brother.

5®. Joachim l : 2l8t February 1484 ; 9th January 1499; 11 th July
1636. Loud in the Reformation times; finally declares peremptorily
for the Conservative side. Wife (Sister of Christian ii. of Denmark)
runs away.

Younger Brother Albert Kur-Mainz, whom Hutten celebrated : born 1490 ; Arch-
bishop of Magdeburg and Halberstadt 1513, of Mainz 1514 ; died 1545 : set
Tetzel, and the Indulgence, on foot.

6 ®. Joachim ii. (Hector): 9th January 1606; 11 th July 1636; 3d
January 1671. Sword drawn on Alba once. JErhverbrUderung with
Liegnitz. Staircase at Grimnitz. A weighty industrious Kurfiirst.

Declared himself Froteetant, 1539. First Wife (mother of his Successor) was
Daughter to Duke George of Saxony, Luther’s ‘ If it rained Duke Georges.’
—Johann o^ Cii^trin was a younger Brother of hist died ten days after
Joachim ; left no Sot^

CHAP. XX.] THE HOHENZOLLEEN ELECTORS Sit

7*. Johann George: 11th September 1526; 3d January 1671;
8th January 1698. Cannon-ehot^ at Siege of Wittenberg^ upon Kaiser
Karl and him. Gera Bond.

Married a Silesian Duke of Leignits’a Daughter (result of the Erhverbrilderung
there,— >Antea, p. S37). Had twenty>tbree children. It was to him that
Bairenth and A^pach fell home ; he settled them on his second and his third
sons, Ohristian and Joachim Ernst ; founders of the New Line of Baireuth
and Anspach. (See Genealogical Diagram, p. 318.)

8*. JoAORiM Friedrich: 27th January 1646; 8th January 1698;
18th July 1608. Archbishop of Magdeburg first of all, — to keep the place
filled. Joachimsthal School at old Castle of Grimnitz. Very vigilant
for Preussen ; which was near falling due.

Two of his Younger Sons, Johann Gieorge (1577-1624) to whom he gave Jdgern^
dor/f and that Archbishop of Magdeburg, who was present in Tilly’s storm,
got both wrecked in the Thirty-Years War; — not without results, in the
Jagerndorf case.

9*. Johann Sigishund : 8th November 1672 ; 18th July 1608; 23d
December 1619. Preussen : Cleve ; Slap on the face to Neuburg.

10*. George Wilhelm : 3d November 1595 ; 22d November 1619 ;
2lBt November 1640. The unfortunate of the Thirty-Years War. ^ Que
faire ; ils ont dea canons ! *

11*. Friedrich Wilhelm : 6th February 1620; 21st November 1640;
29th April 1688. The Great Elector.

12*. Friedrich hi. : Ist July 1657 ; 29th April 1688 ; 26th February
1713. First King (18th January 1701).

818 Genealogical Diagram: The Two Culmback Lines.

yl KurfUrsi (147X-1486),

Albert Achilles. ELDER CULMBACH LINE.

Friedrich, second son of Kurfurst Albert Achilles, younger Brother of Johannes Cicero, %^ CMlminu:k\
Anspach first, then Blureuth on the death of a younger Brother. Born Xj^6o; got Anspach 1486. Baireuth X495 ;
followed Max in his Venetian Campaign^ 15^ ; fell imbecile 15x5 ; died 1536. Had a Polish Wife ; nr«tt
whom came interests in Hungary as well as Poland to his children. Friedrich had Three notable Sons,

f

X. Casimir, who
got Baireuth (1515);
bom 1481 ; died 1527.
Very truculent in the
Peasants’ War.

3. George the Pious, who got Anspach (151';) *. born
1484 ; died 1543 ; ^ot J&gerndorf, by purchase, from bis
Mother’s Hungarian connexion, 1524. Protestant de*
dared, 1528 ; and makes honourable figure in the His-
tories thenceforth. The George of Kaiser Karl’s ‘ NiU
Kop-ab' One Son, I

Albert Aldbiades'.
a man of great mark
in his day (1522- 1557);
never married. Two
Sisters, with one of
whom ne took shelter
at last ; no Brother.

George Friedrich : born 1539 ; went to administer
Preussen when Cousin became incompetent ; died 1603.
Heir to his Father in Anspach and Jagemderf\ also to
his Cousin Alcibiades in Baireuth. Had been left a minor
(boy of 4, u the reader sees) ; Alcibiades his Guardian for
a little while : from which came great difiBculties, and un-
just ruin would have come, had not Kurfurst Joachim i.
been helpful and vigorous in his ^half.^ George Fried*
rich got at length most of his Territories into hand : Ans-
pach and Baireuth unimpaired, Jagemdorf too, except
that Ratibor and Oppeln were much eaten into by the
Imperial chicaneries in that quarter. Died 1603, without
children upon which his Territories all reverted to the
main Brandenburg line^ namely, to Johann George
Seventh Kurfiirst, or his rwrescntatives, according to
the Gera Bond\ and the ‘Elder Culmbach Line' had
ended in this manner.

'jtk Kurfurst (iS7i-i598X

Johann George. YOUNGER CULMBACH LINE.

3. Albert; bom 1490;
Hochmeister of the TeutKh
Ritters, X511; declares him-
self Protestant, and Duke of
Prusua, 1535 ; died 1568.

One Son, Albert Fried-
rich : born 1553 ; follows as
Duke X568, declared mtlar^
cholic 1573; died x6i8. His
Cousin George Friedrich ad-
ministered for him till 1^3;
after which Joachim Fried-
rich; and then, lastly, Joachim
Friedrich’s Son, Johann Sigis-
mund, the Ninth Kurfiirst.
Had married the Heiress of
Cleve (whence came a cele-
brated Cleve Controversy in
after-times). No son ; a good
many daughters^ eldest of
whom was married to Kur-
(first Johann Sigismund ; from
her came the controverted
Cleve Property.

Kurffirst Johann George settled Baireuth .and Anspach on Two of his Younger Sons, who are Founders of
the ‘ Younger Culmbach Line ’ (fpht Line or Pair of Lints'). Jagemdorf the new Kurffirst. Joachim Friedrich,
kept; settled it on one of his younger sons. Here are the two new Founders in Baireuth and Anspach, and
some indication of their ‘ Lines,’ so far as important to us at present :

Baireuth.

(x.) Christian, second son of Kurfurst
Johann George : born 1581 ; got Baireuth
1603 ; died 1655. A distinguished Governor
in his sphere. Had two sons ; the elder died
before him, but left a son, Christian Ernst ;
who (2.) succeeded, and (3.) whose son, George
Wilhelm : 1644, 1655, 1712 ; 1678, 1712, 1726,
(are births accession^ end of these two) ; the
latter of whom had no son that lived.

Upon which the posterity of Christian’s
second son succeeded. Second son of Christian
notable to us in two little ways :

Firsts That Ae, George Albert, Margraf of
C«/»*bach, is the inscrutable ‘ Marquis de
Laibach' of Bromley's Letters (antea, p.
1B7, let the Commentators lake comfort !) ;

^ Second and better, That from him came our
little Wilhelmina’s Husband,— as will be after-
wards explained. It was his grandson (4.)
that succeeded in Baireuth, George Friedrich
Karl(x688, 1726, 1735) ; Father of Wilhelmina’s
Husband. After wfom (5.) his Son Friedrich
(i7ii, 1735, 1763), Wilhelmina's Husband;
who leaving (1763) nothing but a daughter.
Baireuth fell to Anspach, 1769, after an old
Unde ^.)^ childless, nad also died.

Six Baueuth Margraves o. this Line ; five
fenerations ; and then to Anspach, in 1769.

Anspach.

(i.) Joachim Ernst, third son of Kurfurst Johann George:
born 1583 ; got Anspach 1603 ; died 1625. Had military ten-
dencies, experiences ; did not thrive as Captain of the Evan-
gelical Union (1619-1620) when Winter-King came up and
Thirty-Years War along with him. Left two sons ; elder of
whom (2.) Friedrich, nominally Sovereign, age still only
eighteen, fell in the Battle of Nfirdlingen (worst battle of the
Thirty- Years War 1634) ; and the younger of whom ($.) Albert,
succeeded (1620, 1634, 1667), and his son (4) Johann Friedrich
(1654, 1667, 1686) ; and (5, 6, 7), no fewer tnan t^ee grand-
sons, — children mostly, though entitled ‘sovereign,’ — in a
Parallel way (Christian Albert. 1675, x686, 169a ; George Fried-
rich, 1678, 1692, 1703 ; Wilhelm Friedrich, 1685, 1703, 1723).
Two little points notable here also, and no third :

Firsty Tnat one of the gtea\d.-daui^hterSy full-sister of the last
of these three parallel figures, half-sister of the two former, was
— ()ueen Caroline, George 11. ’s wife, who has still some fame
with us.

Secondy That the youngest of said three grandsons, (^ueen
Caroline’s full-brotheij left a son then minor, who became major
(8.) and wedded a Sister of our dear little Wilhelmina's, of
whom we shall hear (Karl Wilhelm Friedrich, 1712, 1733, 1757);
unmomentous Marg^ otherwise. His and her one son it was
0 .) Christian^ Friedrich Karl Alexander (1736, X757, x8o6), who
inherited Baireuth, inherited Actress Clairon, Lady Craven,
and at Hammersmith (House once Bubb Duddington’s, if that
has any charm) ended the affair.

Nine Anspaw Margraves ; in Ave generatioxu : end, 1806.

BOOK IV

FRIEDRICH’S APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE
1713-1723

CHAPTER I

childhood: double educational element

Of Friedrich’s childhood, there is not, after all our reading,
much that it would interest the English public to hear tell
of. Perhaps not much of knowable that deserves anywhere
to be known. Books on it, expressly handling it, and Books
on Friedrich Wilhelm’s Court and History, of which it is
always a main element, are not wanting : but they are mainly
of the sad sort, which, with pain and difficulty teach us
nothing. Books done by pedants and tenebrific persons, under
the name of men; dwelling not on things, but, at endless
length, on the outer husks of things : of unparalleled confusion,
too ; — not so much as an Index granted you ; to the poor
htilf-peck of cinders, hidden in these wagonloads of ashes, no
sieve allowed ! Books tending really to fill the mind with
mere dust-whirlwinds, — if the mind did not straightway blow
them out again ; which it does. Of these let us say nothing.
Seldom had so curious a Phenomenon worse treatment from
the Dryasdust species.

Among these Books, touching on Friedrich’s childhood, and
treating of his Father’s Court, there is hardly above *one that
we can characterise as fairly human ; the Book written by his
little Sister Wilhelmina, when she grew to size und knowledge

819

320 APPHENTICESUIP, PmsT STAGE [book iv.

H7X3-X7a3

of good and evil ; ^ — and this, of what flighty uncertain nature
it is, the world partly knows. A human Book, however, not
a pedant one : there is a most shrill female soul busy with
intense earnestness here; looking, and teaching us to look.
We find it a veradom Book, done with heart, and from
eyesight and insight ; of a veracity deeper than the superficial
sort. It is full of mistakes, indeed ; and exaggerates dread-
fully, in its shrill female way ; but is above intending to
deceive : deduct the due subtrahend, — say perhaps twenty-
five per cent., or in extreme cases as high as seventy-five, —
you will get some human image of credible actualities from
Wilhelmina. Practically she is our one resource on this
matter. Of the strange King Friedrich Wilhelm and his
strange Court, with such an Heir- Apparent growing up in it,
there is no real light to be had, except what Wilhelmina
gives, — or kindles dark Books of others into giving. For
that, too, on long study, is the result of her, here and there.
With so flickery a wax-taper held over Friedrich’s childhood,
— and the other dirty tallow-dips all going out in intolerable
odour, — judge if our success can be very triumphant !

We perceive the little creature has got much from Nature ;
not the big arena only, but fine inward gifts, for he is well-
born in more senses than one ; — and that in the breeding of
him there are two elements noticeable, widely diverse : the
French and the German. This is perhaps the chief peculiarity :
best worth laying hold of, with the due comprehension, if our
means allow.

First Educational Element^ the French one

His nurses, governesses, simultaneous and successive, mostly
of French breed, are duly set down in the Prussian Books, and
held in mind as a point of duty by Prussian men ; but, in

^ M^moires de FridMque Sophie Wilhelmine de Prusstf Margrave de Bareith
f Brunswick, Park et Londres, 1812), 2 vols. 8vo.

CHAP. I.] DOUBLE EDUCATIONAL ELEMENT 821

17X3-X723]

foreign parts, cannot be considered otherwise than as a group,
and merely with generic features. He had a Frau von
Kamecke for Head Governess, — ^the lady whom Wilhelmina,
in her famed M&moireSj always writes Ka/niken ; and of whom,
except the floating gossip found in that Book, there is
nothing to be remembered. Under her, as practical super-
intendent, Scms-gcmvernante and quasi-mother, was the Dame
de Roucoulles, a more important person for us here. Dame
de Roucoulles, once de Montbail, the same respectable Edict-
of-Nantes French lady who, five-and-twenty years ago, had
taken similar charge of Friedrich Wilhelm ; a fact that speaks
well for the character of her performance in that office. She
had done her first edition of a Prussian Prince in a satisfactory
manner ; and not without difficult accidents and singularities,
as we have heard : the like of which were spared her in this
her second edition (so we may call it) ; a second and, in all
manner of ways, an improved one. The young Fritz swallowed
no shoebuckles ; did not leap out of window, hanging-on by
the hands ; nor achieve anything of turbulent, or otherwise
memorable, in his infantine history ; the course of which was
in general smooth, and runs, happily for it, below the ken of
rumour. The Boy, it is said, and is easily credible, was of
extraordinary vivacity ; quick in apprehending all things, and
gracefully relating himself to them. One of the prettiest,
vividest little boys; with eyes, with mind and ways, of
uncommon brilliancy ; — only he takes less to soldiering than
the paternal heart could wish ; and appears to find other
things in the world fully eis notable as loud drums, and stiff
men drawn-up in rows. Moreover, he is apt to be a little
unhealthy now «md then, and requires care from his nurses,
over whom the judicious Roucoulles has to be very vigilant.

Of this respectable Madame de Roucoulles I have read, at
least seven times, what the Prussian Books say of her Jby way
of Biography ; but it is always given in their dull tombstone
style ; it has moreover next to no importance ; and I, — alas,
I do not yet too well remember it ! She was froA Normandy ;

VOL. I. • X

S2« APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[17*3-1733

of gentle blood, never very rich ; Protestant, in the Edict-of-
Nantes time ; and had to fly her country, a young widow, with
daughter and mother-in-law hanging on her; the whole of
them almost penniless. However, she was kindly received at
the Court of Berlin, as usual in that sad case ; and got some
practical help towards living in her new country. Queen
Sophie Charlotte had liked her society ; and finding her of
prudent intelligent turn, and with the style of manners suitable,
had given her Friedrich Wilhelm to take charge of. She was
at that time Madame de Montbail ; widow, as we said : she
afterwards wedded Roucoulles, a refugee gentleman of her own
Nation, who had gone into the Prussian Army, as was common
for the like of him. She had again become a widow, Madame
de Roucoulles this time, with her daughter Montbail still
about her, when, by the grateful good sense of Friedrich
Wilhelm, she was again intrusted as we see ; — and so had the
honour of govemessing Frederick the Great for the first seven
years of his life. Respectable lady, she oversaw his nurses,
pap-boats, — ‘beer-soup and bread,’ he himself tells us once,
was his main diet in boyhood, — beer-soups, dress-frocks, first
attempts at walking ; and then also his little bits of
intellectualities, moralities ; his incipiencies of speech, de-
meanour, and spiritual development ; and did her function very
honestly, there is no doubt.

Wilhelmina mentions her, at a subsequent period ; and we
have a glimpse of this same Roucoulles, gliding about among
the royal young-folk, ‘ with only one tooth left ’ (figuratively
speaking), and somewhat given to tattle, in Princess Wilhel-
mina’s opinion. Grown very old now, poor lady ; and the
dreadfulest bore, when she gets upon Hanover and her
experiences, and Queen Sophie Charlotte’s, in that stupendously
magnificent court under Gentleman Ernst. Shun that topic,
if you Jove your peace of mind ! ^ — She did certainly super-
intend the Boy Fritzkin for his first seven years ; that is a
glory that cannot be taken from her. And her pupil, too,
^ Mhnoircs (above cited).

CHAP. I.] DOUBLE EDUCATIONAL ELEMENT 888

17x317231

we agreeably perceive, was always grateful for her services in
that capacity. Once a-week, if he were in Berlin, during his
youthful time, he was sure to appear at the Roucoulles Soiree,
and say and look various pleasant things to his ‘ chh’e Maman
(dear Mamma),’ as he us^ to call her, and to the respectable
small party she had. Not to speak of other more substantial
services, which also were not wanting.

Roucoulles and the other female souls, mainly French,
among whom the incipient Fritz now was, appear to have done
their part as well as could be looked for. Respectable Edict-
of-Nantes French ladies, with high head-gear, wide hoops ; a
clear, correct, but somewhat barren and meagre species, tight-
laced and high-frizzled in mind and body. It is not a very
fertile element for a young soul ; not very much of silent piety
in it ; and perhaps of vocal piety more than enough in pro-
portion. An element founding on what they call ‘ enlightened
Protestantism,’ ‘ freedom of thought,’ and the like, which is
apt to become loquacious, and too conscious of itself ; tending,
on the whole, rather to contempt of the false, than to deep
or very effective recognition of the true.

But it is, in some important senses, a clear and pure
element withal. At lowest, there are no conscious semi-
falsities or volunteer hypocrisies, taught the poor Boy ;
honour, clearness, truth of word at least ; a decorous digni-
fied bearing ; various thin good things, are honestly incul-
cated and exemplified ; nor is any bad, ungraceful or
suspicious thing permitted there, if recognised for such. It
might have been a worse element ; and we must be thankful
for it. Friedrich, through life, carries deep traces of this
French-Protestant incipiency : a very big wide-branching
royal tree, in the end ; but as small and flexible a seedling
once as any one of us.

The good old Dame De Roucoulles just lived to witness his
accession ; on which grand juncture and afterwards, as he had
done before, he continued to express, in graceful and useful
ways, his gratitude and honest affection to Rer and hers.

824 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[Z7X3-X793

Tea-services, presents in cut-glass and other kinds, with
Letters that were still more precious to the old Lady, had
come always at due intervals : and one of his earliest kingly
gifts was that of some suitable small pension for Montbail,
the elderly daughter of this poor old Roucoulles,^ who was
just singing her DimittaSy as it were, still in a blithe and
pious manner. For she saw now (in 1740) her little nurse-
ling grown to be a brilliant man and King ; King gone out
to the Wars, too, with all Europe inquiring and wondering
what the issue would be. As for her, she closed her poor old
eyes, at this stage of the business ; piously, in foreign parts,
far from her native Normandy ; and did not see farther what
the issue was. Good old Dame, I have, as was observed,
read some seven times over what they call biographical
accounts of her ; but have seven times (by Heaven’s favour, I
do partly believe) mostly forgotten them again ; and would
not, without cause, inflict on any reader the like sorrow. To
remember one worthy thing, how many thousand unworthy
things must a man be able to forget !

From this Edict-of-Nantes environment, which taught our
young Fritz his first lessons of human behaviour, — a polite
sharp little Boy, we do hope and understand, — ^he learned
also to clothe his bits of notions, emotions, and garrulous
utterabilities, in the French dialect. Learned to speak, and
likewise, what is more important, to thinks in French ; which
was otherwise quite domesticated in the Palace, and became

^ Preuss, Friedrich der Grosse^ eine Lebensgeschichte (5 vols. Berlin, 1832-
1834), V. (Urkundenbuch, p. 4). CEuvres de Fridiric (same Preuss’s Edition,
Berlin, 1846-1850, etc.), xvi. 184, 191. — The Herr Doctor J. D. E. Preuss,
‘ Historiographer of Brandenburg,* devoted wholly to the study of Friedrich for
fivc-and-twenty years past, and for above a dozen years busily engaged in edit-
ing the CEuvres de FrddSricy — has, besides that Lebensgeschichte just cited, three
or four smaller Books, of indistinctly different titles, on the same subject. A
meritoriously exact man ; acquainted with the outer details of Friedrich’s Bio-
graphy (had he any way of arranging, organising or setting them forth) as few
men ever were or will be. We shall mean always this Lebensgeschichte here,
when no other tjUe is given ; and CEuvres de Fridiric shall signify his Edition
unless the contrary be stated.

CHAP. L] DOUBLE EDUCATIONAL ELEMENT 326

17x3-17831

his second mother-tongue. Not a bad dialect ; yet also none
of the best. Very lean and shallow, if veiy clear and con-
venient; leaving much in poor Fritz unuttered, unthought,
unpractised, which might otherwise have come into activity in
the course of his life. He learned to read very soon, I
presume ; but he did not, now or afterwards, ever learn to
spell. He spells indeed dreadfully ill^ at his first appearance
on the writing stage, as we shall see by and by ; and he con-
tinued, to the last, one of the bad spellers of his day. A
circumstance which I never can fully account for, and will
leave to the reader’s study.

From all manner of sources, — from inferior valetaille,
Prussian Officials, Royal Majesty itself when not in gala, —
he learned, not less rootedly, the corrupt Prussian dialect of
German ; and used the same, all his days, among his soldiers,
native officials, common subjects and wherever it was most con-
venient; speaking it, and writing and mis-spelling it, with
great freedom, though always with a certain aversion and
undisguised contempt, which has since brought him blame in
some quarters. It is true, the Prussian form of German is
but rude ; and probably Friedrich, except sometimes in
Luther’s Bible, never read any German Book. What, if we
will think of it, could he know of his first mother-tongue 1
German, to this day, is a frightful dialect for the stupid, the
pedant and dullard sort ! Only in the hands of the gifted
does it become supremely good. It had not yet been the
language of any Goethe, any Lessing ; though it stood on the
eve of becoming such. It had already been the language of
Luther, of Ulrich Hutten, Friedrich Barbarossa, Charlemagne
and others. And several extremely important things had been
said in it, and some pleasant ones even sung in it, from an old
date, in a very appropriate manner, — ^had Crown-Pringe Fried-
rich known all that. But he could not reasonably be ex-
pected to know ; — and the wiser Germans now forgive him
for not knowing, and are even thankful that he did not.

826 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[I7i3-X7a3

CHAPTER II
THE GERMAN ELEMENT

So that, as we said, there are two elements for young
Fritz, and highly diverse ones, from both of which he is to
draw nourishment, and assimilate what he can. Besides that
Edict-of-Nantes French element, and in continual contact
and contrast with it, which prevails chiefly in the Female
Quarters of the Palace, — there is the native German element
for young Fritz, of which the centre is Papa, now come to be
King, and powerfully manifesting himself as such. An abrupt
peremptory young King ; and German to the bone. Along
with whom, companions to him in his social hours, and
fellow-workers in his business, are a set of very rugged
German sons of Nature; differing much from the French
sons of Art. Baron Grumkow, Leopold Prince of Anhalt-
Dessau (not yet called the ‘ Old Dessauer,’ being under forty
yet). General Glasenap, Colonel Derschau, General Flans; these,
and the other nameless Generals and Officials, are a curious
counterpart to the Camases, the Hautcharmoys and Forcades,
with their nimble tongues and rapiers ; still more to the
Beausobres, Achards, full of ecclesiastical logic, made of Bayle
and Calvin kneaded together ; and to the high-frizzled ladies
rustling m stiff silk, with the shadow of Versailles and of the
Dragonades alike present to them.

Bom Hyperboreans these others ; rough as hemp, and
stout of fibre as hemp ; native products of the rigorous North.
Of whom, after all our reading, we know little. — O Heaven,
they have had long lines of rugged ancestors, cast in the same
rude stalwart mould, and leading their rough life there, of
whom ve know absolutely nothing ! Dumb all those pre-
ceding busy generations ; and this of Friedrich Wilhelm is
grown almost^^ dumb. Grim semi-articulate Pmssian men ;
gone ail to pipeclay and moustache for us. Strange blond-

327

CHAP. li.] THE GERMAN ELEMENT

17x3-1723]

complexioned, not unbeautiful Prussian honourable women, in
hoops, brocades, and unintelligible head-gear, and hair-towers,
— ach Gott ! they too are gone ; and their musical talk, in
the French or German language, that also is gone ; and the
hollow Eternities have swallowed it, as their wont is, in a
very surprising manner ! —

Grumkow, a cunning, greedy-hearted, long-headed fellow,
of the old Pomeranian Nobility by birth, has a kind of super-
ficial polish put upon his Hyperboreanisms ; he has been in
foreign countries, doing legations, diplomacies, for which, at
least for the vulpine parts of which, he has a turn. He
writes and speaks articulate grammatical French ; but neither
in that, nor in native Pommerish Platt-Deutsch, does he show
us much, except the depths of his own greed, of his own
astucities and stealthy audacities. Of which we shall hear
more than enough by and by.

O/' the Dessatier^ not yet ‘ Old ’

As to the Prince of Anhalt-Dessau, rugged man, whose
very face is the colour of gunpowder, he also knows French,
and can even write in it, if he like, — Shaving duly had a Tutor
of that nation, and strange adventures with him on the grand
tour and elsewhere ; — but does not much practise writing,
when it can be helped. His children, I have heard, he
expressly did not teach to read or write, seeing no benefit in
that effeminate art, but left them to pick it up as they could.
His Princess, all rightly ennobled now, — whom he would not
but marry, though sent on the grand tour to avoid it, — was
the daughter of one Fos an Apothecary at Dessau ; and is
still a beautiful and prudent kind of woman, who seems to
suit him well enough, no worse than if she had been born a
Princess. Much talk has been of her, in princely and other
circles ; nor is his marriage the only strange thing^Leopold
has done. He is a man to keep the world’s tongue wagging,
not too musically always ; though himself of very unvocal

328 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[17x3-1723

nature. Perhaps the biggest mass of inarticulate human
vitality, certainly one of the biggest, then going about in the
world. A man of vast dumb faculty ; dumb, but fertile,
deep ; no end of ingenuities in the rough head of him : — as
much mother-wit there, I often guess, as could be found in
whole talking parliaments, spouting themselves away in
vocables and eloquent wind !

A man of dreadful impetuosity withal. Set upon his will
as the one law of Nature ; storming forward with incontrol-
lable violence : a very whirlwind of a man. He was left a
minor ; his Mother guardian. Nothing could prevent him
from marrying this Fos the Apothecary’s Daughter ; no tears
nor contrivances of his Mother, whom he much loved, and
who took skilful measures. Fourteen months of travel in
Italy ; grand tour, with eligible French Tutor, — whom he
once drew sword upon, getting some rebuke from him one
night in Venice, and would have killed, had not the man been
nimble, at once dextrous and sublime : — ^it availed not. The
first thing he did, on reentering Dessau, with his Tutor, was
to call at Apothecary Fos’s, and see the charming Mamsell ;
to go and see his Mother, was the second thing. Not even
his grand passion for war could eradicate Fos : he went to
Dutch William’s wars ; the wise mother still counselling, who
was own aunt to Dutch William, and liked the scheme. He
besieged Namur ; fought and besieged up and down, — ^with
insatiable appetite for fighting and sieging ; with great
honour, too, and ambitions awakening in him ; — campaign
after campaign ; but along with the flamy-thundery ideal
bride, figuratively called Bellona, there was always a soft
real one, Mamsell Fos of Dessau, to whom he continued con-
stant. The Government of his Dominions he left cheerfully
to his Mother, even when he came of age : ^ I am for learning
War, as the one right trade; do with all things as you
please, iPtamma, — only not with Mamsell, not with her ! ’

Readers may figure this scene too, and shudder over it.
Some rather ^handsome male Cousin of Mamsell, Medical

829

CHAP.li.] THE GERMAN ELEMENT

X7i3-X7a3l

Graduate or whatever he was, had appeared in Dessau : —
‘ Seems to admire Mamsell much ; of course, in a Platonic
way,’ said rumour. — ‘He? Admire?’ thinks Leopold; —
thinks a good deal of it, not in the philosophic mood. As
he was one day passing Fos’s, Mamsell and the Medical
Graduate are visible, standing together at the window inside.
Pleasantly looking out upon Nature, — of course quite casually,
say some Histories with a sneer. In fact, it seems possible
this Medical Graduate may have been set to act shoeing-
hom ; but he had better not. Leopold storms into the
House, ‘ Draw, scandalous canaille, and defend yourself 1 ’ —
And in this, or some such way, a confident tradition says,
he killed the poor Medical Graduate there and then. One
tries always to hope not : but Vamhagen is positive, though
the other Histories say nothing of it. God knows. The
man was a Prince ; no Reichshofrath, Speyer- Wetzlar Kammer^
or other Supreme Court, would much trouble itself, except
with formal shakings of the wig, about such a peccadillo. In
fine, it was better for Leopold to marry the Miss Fos ; which
he actually did (1698, in his twenty-second year), ‘with the
left hand,’ — and then with the right and both hands ; having
got her properly ennobled before long, by his splendid military
services. She made, as we have hinted, an excellent Wife to
him, for the fifty or sixty ensuing years.

This is a strange rugged specimen, this inarticulate
Leopold ; already getting mythic, as we can perceive, to the
polished vocal ages ; which mix all manner of fables with the
considerable history he has. Readers will see him turn-up
again in notable forms. A man hitherto unknown except in
his own country ; and yet of very considerable significance to
all European countries whatsoever ; the fruit of his activities,
without his name attached, being now manifest in all of
them. He invented the iron ramrod ; he invented the equal
step ; in fact, he is the inventor of modern milita?y tactics.
Even so, if we knew it : the Soldiery of every civilised country
still receives from this man, on parade-fields ant^battle-fields, its

330 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [bookiv.

[1713-1783

word of command; out of his rough head proceeded the essential
of all that the innumerable Drill-sergeants, in various languages,
daily repeat and enforce. Such a man is worth some transient
glance from his fellow-creatures, — especially with a little Fritz
trotting at his foot, and drawing inferences from him.

Dessau, we should have said for the English reader’s behoof,
was and still is a little independent Principality ; about the
size of Huntingdonshire, but with woods instead of bogs ; —
revenue of it, at this day, is 60,000/., was perhaps not 20,
or even 10,000 in Leopold’s first time. It lies some fourscore
miles south-west of Berlin, attainable by post-horses in a day.
Leopold, as his Father had done, stood by Prussia as if wholly
native to it. Leopold’s Mother was Sister of that fine Louisa,
the Great Elector’s first Wife ; his Sister is wedded to the
Margraf of Schwedt, Friedrich Wilhelm’s half-uncle. Lying in
such neighbourhood, and being in such affinity to the Prussian
House, the Dessauers may be said to have, in late times, their
headquarters at Berlin. Leopold and Leopold’s sons, as his
father before him had done, without neglecting their Dessau
and Principality, hold by the Prussian Army as their main
employment. Not neglecting Dessau either ; but going thither
in winter, or on call otherwise ; Leopold least of all neglecting
it, who neglects nothing that can be useful to him.

He is General Field-Marshal of the Prussian Armies, the
foremost man in war-matters with this new King ; and well
worthy to be so. He is inventing, or brooding in the way to
invent, a variety of things, — ‘ iron ramrods,’ for one ; a very
great improvement on the fragile ineffective wooden implement,
say all the Books, but give no date to it; that is the first
thing; and there will be others, likewise undated, but posterior,
requiring mention by and by. Inventing many things ; — and
always well practising what is already invented, and known for
certain. In a word, he is drilling to perfection, with assiduous
rigour, tffe Prussian Infantry to be the wonder of the world.
He has fought with them, too, in a conclusive manner; and
is at all times ffeady for fighting.

chap.il] the german ELEMENT 831

1713-1733]

He was in Malplaquet with them, if only as volunteer on
that occasion. He commanded them in Blenheim itself;
stood, in the right or Eugene wing of that famed Battle of
Blenheim, fiercely at bay, when the Austrian Cavalry had all
fled ; — fiercely volleying, charging, dextrously wheeling and
manoeuvring ; sticking to his ground with a mastiff- like
tenacity, — till Marlborough, and victory from the left, relieved
him and others. He was at the Bridge of Cassano ; where
Eugene and Vendome came to handgrips ; — where Mirabeau’s
Grandfather, Col-d"' Argent^ got his six - and - thirty wounds,
and was ‘ killed ’ as he used to term it.^ ‘ The hottest fire
I ever saw,’’ said Eugene, who had not seen Malplaquet at
that time. While Col -d ’Argent sank collapsed upon the
Bridge, and the horse charged over him, and again charged,
and beat and were beaten three several times, — Anhalt-
Dessau, impatient of such fiddling hither and thither, swashed
into the stream itself with his Prussian Foot ; swashed through
it, waistdeep or breastdeep; and might have settled the matter,
had not his cartridges got wetted. Old King Friedrich
rebuked him angrily for his impetuosity in this matter, and
the sad loss of men.

Then again he was at the Storming of the Lines of Turin,
— Eugene’s feat of 1706, and a most volcanic business; — was
the first man that got over the entrenchment there. Fore-
most man ; face all black with the smoke of gunpowder, only
channeled here and there with rivulets of sweat ; — not a
lovely phenomenon to the French in the interior ! Who still
fought like madmen, but were at length driven into heaps,
and obliged to run. A while before they ran, Anhalt-Dessau,
noticing some Captain posted with his company in a likely
situation, stept aside to him for a moment, and asked, ^ Am
I wounded, think you ? — No ? Then have you anything to
drink ? ’ and deliberately ‘ drank a glass of aquavitae,’ the
judicious Captain carrying a pocket-pistol of th^ sort, in
case of accident ; and likewise ‘ eat, with great appetite, a
^ Carlyle’s Miscellanies^ v. § Mirabeau.

332 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

^ [X7i3.x7a3

bit of bread from one of the soldiers*’ havresacks ; saying, He
believed the heat of the job was done, and that there was
no fear now.’ ^ —

A man that has been in many wars ; in whose rough head
are schemes hatching. Any religion he has is of Protestant
nature ; but he has not much, — on the doctrinal side, very
little. Luther’s Hymn, EirC Jeste Burg ist unser Gotty he
calls ‘ God Almighty’s grenadier- march.’ On joining battle,
he audibly utters, with bared head, some growl of rugged
prayer, far from orthodox at times, but much in earnest :
thttt lifting of his hat for prayer, is his last signal on such
occasions. He is very cunning as required, withal ; not dis-
daining the serpentine method when no other will do. With
Friedrich Wilhelm, who is his second-cousin (Mother’s grand-
nephew, if the reader can count that), he is from of old on
the best footing, and contrives to be his Mentor in many
things besides War. Till his quarrel with Grumkow, of
which we shall hear, he took the lead in political advising,
too ; and had schemes, or was thought to have, of which
Queen Sophie was in much terror.

A tall, strong - boned, hairy man ; with cloudy brows,
vigilant swift eyes ; has ^ a bluish tint of skin,’ says Wil-
helmina, ‘as if the gunpowder still stuck to him.’ He wears
long moustaches ; triangular hat, plume and other equip-
ments, are of thrifty practical size. Can be polite enough
in speech ; but hides much of his meaning, which indeed is
mostly inarticulate, and not always joyful to the bystander.
He plays rough pranks, too, on occasion; and has a big
horse-laugh in him, where there is a fop to be roasted,
or the like. We will leave him for the present, in hope
of other meetings.

Remarkable men, many of those old Prussian soldiers : of
whom one wishes, to no purpose, that there had more know-

2 Des weliberumkten Leopoldi, etc. (Anonymoug, by Ranfft, cited above),
PP- 42-45. S*. *

CHAP.il] the german element 833

1713-1733]

ledge been attainable. But the Books are silent ; no painter,
no genial seeing-man to paint with his pen, was there. Grim
hirsute Hyperborean figures, they pass mostly mute before us :
burly, surly; in moustaches, in dim uncertain garniture, of
which the buflP- belts and the steel are alone conspicuous.
Growling in guttural Teutsch what little articulate meaning
they had: spending, of the inarticulate, a proportion in
games of chance, probably too in drinking beer ; yet having
an immense overplus which they do not so spend, but
endeavour to utter in such working as there may be. So
have the Hyperboreans lived from of old. From the times
of Tacitus and Pytheas, not to speak of Odin and Japhet,
what hosts of them have marched across Existence, in that
manner ; — and where is the memory that would, even if it
could, speak of them all ! —

We will hope the mind of our little Fritz has powers of
assimilation. Bayle-Calvin logics, and shadows of Versailles,
on this hand, and gunpowder Leopolds and inarticulate Hyper-
boreans on that : here is a wide diversity of nutriment, all
rather tough in quality, provided for the young soul. Innumer-
able unconscious inferences he must have drawn in his little
head ! Prince Leopold’s face, with the whiskers and blue skin,
I find he was wont, at after periods, to do in caricature, under the
figure of a Cat’s ; — horror and admiration not the sole feelings
raised in him by the Field-Marshal. — For bodily nourishment
he had ‘ beer-soup ’ ; a decided Spartan tone prevailing,
wherever possible, in the breeding and treatment of him.

And we need not doubt, by far the most important element
of his education was the unconscious Apprenticeship he con-
tinually served to such a Spartan as King Friedrich Wilhelm.
Of whose works and ways he could not help taking note, angry
or other, every day and hour ; nor in the end, if he were
intelligent, help understanding them, and learning from them.
A harsh Meister and almost half-mad, as it many times seemed
to the poor Apprentice ; yet a true and solid 8ne, whose real

334 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

I7i3*i7a3

wisdom was worth that of all the others, as he came at length
to recognise.

CHAPTER III
FRIEDRICH WIIJIEI.M IS KING

With the death of old Bang Friedrich, there occurred at
once vast changes in the Court of Berlin ; a total and universal
change in the mode of living and doing business there. Fried-
rich Wilhelm, out of filial piety, wore at his fathers funeral
the grand French peruke and other sublimities of French
costume ; but it was for the last time : that sad duty once
done, he flung the whole aside, not without impatience, and on
no occasion wore such costume again. He was not a friend to
French fashions, nor had ever been ; far the contrary. In his
boyhood, say the Biographers, there was once a grand
embroidered cloth-of-gold, or otherwise supremely magnificent,
little Dressing-gown given him ; but he would at no rate put
it on, or be concerned with it; on the contrary, stuffed it
indignantly ‘ into the fire ’ ; and demanded wholesome useful.
duffel instead.

He began his reform literally at the earliest moment. Being
summoned into the apartment where his poor Father was in
the last struggle, he could scarcely get across for Kammer-
junker^ Kammerherrn^ Goldsticks, Silversticks, and the other
solemn histrionic functionaries, all crowding there to do their
sad mimicry on the occasion : not a lovely accompaniment in
Friedrich Wilhelm’s eyes. His poor Father’s death-struggle
once done, and all reduced to everlasting rest there, Friedrich
Wilhelm looked in silence over the Unutterable, for a short
space, disregardful of the Goldsticks and their eager new
homagifig ; walked swiftly away from it to his own room, shut
the door with a slam ; and there, shaking the tears from his
eyes, comment by a notable duty, — the duty nearest hand,

CHAP. III.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING 886

X7X3*X7a3]

and therefore first to be done, as it seemed to him. It was about
one in the afternoon, 25th February 1713 ; his Father dead
half-an-hour before : ‘ Tears at a Father’s deathbed, must they
be dashed with rage by such a set of greedy Histrios ? ’ thought
Friedrich Wilhelm. He summoned these his Court-people,
that is to say, summoned their Ober-Hofmarschall and repre-
sentative ; and through him signified to them, That, till the
Funeral was over, their service would continue ; and that on
the morrow after the Funeral they were, every soul of them,
discharged ; and from the highest Goldstick down to the lowest
Page-in-waiting, the King’s House should be swept entirely
clean of them ; — said House intending to start afresh upon a
quite new footing.^ Which spread such a consternation
among the courtier people, say the Histories, as was never seen
before.

The thing was done, however ; and nobody durst whisper
discontent with it ; this rugged young King, with his plangent
metallic voice, with his steady-beaming eyes, seeming dread-
fully in earnest about it, and a person that might prove
dangerous if you crossed him. He reduced his Household
accordingly, at once, to the lowest footing of the indispens-
able ; and discharged a whole regiment of superfluous ofiicial
persons, court - flunkies, inferior, superior and supreme, in
the most ruthless manner. He does not intend keeping
any Ober - Hofmarschall, or the like idle person, hence-
forth ; thinks a minimum of Goldsticks ought to suffice
every man.

Eight I^ackeys, in the ante-chambers and elsewhere, these,
with each a Jdgerbursch (what we should call an Under-keeper)
to assist when not hunting, will suffice : Lackeys at * eight
thalers monthly,’ which is six shillings a week. Three active
Pages, sometimes two, instead of perhaps three-dozen idle that
there used to be. In King Friedrich’s time, there were wont
to be a Thousand saddle-horses at corn and hayT*but how
many of them were in actual use ? Very many of them were
* Forstexi i. 174 ; Pollnitr, Memoiren,

S36 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[X7X3-i7a3

mere imaginary quadrupeds ; their price and keep pocketed by
some knavish Stalhicister^ EqueiTy or Head-groom. Friedrich
Wilhelm keeps only Thirty Horses ; but these are very actual,
not imaginary at all ; their com not running into any knave'^s
pocket ; but lying actually in the mangers here; getting ground
for you into actual fourfooted speed, when, on turf or highway,
you require such a thing. About thirty for the saddle, with
a few carriage-teams, are what Friedrich Wilhelm can employ
in any reasonable measure ; and more he will not have about
him.

In the like ruthless humour he goes over his Pension-list ;
strikes three-fourths of that away, reduces the remaining fourth
to the very bone. In like humour, he goes over every depart-
ment of his Administrative, Household and other Expenses ;
shears everything down, here by the Hundred thalers, there by
the Ten, willing even to save half a thaler. He goes over all
this three several times ; — ^his Papers, the three successive Lists
he used on that occasion, have been printed.^ He has satisfied
himself, in about two months, what the effective minimum is ;
and leaves it so. Reduced to below the fifth of what it was ;
55,000 thalers^ instead of 276,000.®

By degrees he went over, went into and through, every
department of Prussian Business, in that fashion ; steadily,
warily, irresistibly compelling every item of it, large and little,
to take that same character of perfect economy and solidity, of
utility pure and simple. Needful work is to be rigorously well
done ; needless work, and ineffectual or imaginary workers, to be
rigorously pitched out of doors. What a blessing on this Earth;
worth purchasing almost at any price ! The money saved is
something, nothing if you will ; but the amount of mendacity
expunged, has any one computed that ? Mendacity not of
tongue ; but the far feller sort, of hand, and of heart, and
of head ; short summary of all Devil’s- worship whatsoever.

w-

^ Rodenbeck Beitrdge zur Bereicherung der Lebmsbesckreibungin Friedrich
Wilhelms I. und Friedrichs des Grossen (Berlin, 1836), pp. 99-127.

* Stenzel, iii. 237

CHAP. III.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING 837

X7X3’i7a3l

Which spreads silently along, once you let it in, with full
purse or with empty ; some fools even praising it : the quiet
dry-rot of Nations ! To expunge such is greatly the duty of
every man, especially of every King. Unconsciously, not
thinking of DeviPs-worship, or spiritual dry-rot, but of money
chiefly, and led by Nature and the ways she has with us, it
was the task of Friedrich Wilhelm’s life to bring about this
beneficent result in all departments of Prussian Business, great
and little, public and even private. Year after year, he brings
it to perfection ; pushes it unweariedly forward every day and
hour. So that he has Prussia, at last, all a Prussia made after
his own image ; the most thrifty, hardy, rigorous and Spartan
country any modem King ever ruled over ; and himself (if he
thought of that) a King indeed. He that models Nations
according to his own image, he is a King, though his sceptre
were a walking-stick ; and properly no other is.

Friedrich Wilhelm was wondered at, and laughed at, by
innumerable mortals for his ways of doing ; which indeed were
very strange. Not that he figured much in what is called
Public History, or desired to do so ; for, though a vigilant
ruler, he did not deal in protocolling and campaigning, — he
let a minimum of that suffice him. But in court soirees,
where elegant empty talk goes on, and of all materials for it
scandal is found incomparably the most interesting, I suppose
there turned-up no name oftener than that of his Prussian
Majesty ; and during these Twenty-seven years of his Reign,
his wild pranks and explosions gave food for continual talk in
inch quarters.

For he was like no other King that then existed, or had
ever been discovered. Wilder Son of Nature seldom came
into the artificial world ; into a royal throne there, probably
never. A wild man, wholly in earnest, veritable as the old
rocks, — and with a terrible volcanic fire in him too. He
would have been strange anywhere ; but among tS? dapper
Royal gentlemen of the Eighteenth Century, what was to be
done with such an Orson of a King ? — Clap lilm in Bedlam,

VOL. I. . Y

S88 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[1713-17*3

and bring out the ballot-boxes instead ? The modem genera-
tion, too, still takes its impression of him from these rumours,
— ^still more now from Wilhelmina’s Book ; which paints the
outside savagery of the royal man, in a most striking manner;
and leaves the inside vacant, undiscovered by Wilhelmina or
the mmours.

Nevertheless it appears there were a few observant eyes
even of contemporaries, who discerned in him a surprising
talent for ^ National Economics ’ at least. One Leipzig Pro-
fessor, Saxon, not Prussian by nation or interest, recognises in
Friedrich Wilhelm ^ den grossen Wirth (the great Manager,
Husbandiy-man, or Landlord) of the epoch ’ ; and lectures
on his admirable ‘ works, arrangements and institutions ’ in
that kind.' Nay the dapper Royal gentlemen saw, with envy,
the indubitable growth of this mad savage Brother ; and
ascribed it to ^his avarice,’ to his mean ways, which were
in such contrast to their sublime ones. That he understood
National Economics has now become very certain. His grim
semi-articulate Papers and Rescripts, on these subjects, are
still almost worth reading, by a lover of genuine human
talent in the dumb form. For spelling, grammar, penman-
ship and composition, they resemble nothing else extant ; are
as if done by the paw of a bear : indeed the utterance
generally sounds more like the growling of a bear than any-
thing that could be handily spelt or parsed. But there is a
decisive human sense in the heart of it ; and there is such a
dire hatred of empty bladders, unrealities and hypocritical
forms and pretences, what he calls ‘ wind and humbug ( Wind
und blauer Dunst)^ as is very strange indeed. Strange among
all mankind ; doubly and trebly strange among the unfor-
tunate species called Kings in our time. To whom, — for sad
reasons that could be given, — ^ wind and blue vapour {blauer
Thmst')^ artistically managed by the rules of Acoustics and
Optics, seem to be all we have left us ! —

It must be owned that this man is inflexibly, and with a
1 Rodenbeck’s 14), — Year, or Name of Lecturer, not mentioned.

CHAP. III.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING 889

1713.1793]

fierce slow inexorable determination, set upon having realities
round him. There is a divine idea of fact put into him ; the
genus sham was never hatefuler to any man. Let it keep out
of his way, well beyond the swing of that rattan of his, or it
may get something to remember ! A just man, too ; would
not wrong any man, nor play false in word or deed to any
man. What is Justice but another form of the reality we
love ; a truth acted out ? Of all the humbugs or ^ painted
vapours ’ known. Injustice is the least capable of profiting
men or kings ! A just man, I say ; and a valiant and vera-
cious : but rugged as a wild-bear ; entirely inarticulate, as if
dumb. No bursts of parliamentary eloquence in him, nor
the least tendency that way. His talent for Stump-Oratory
may be reckoned the minimum conceivable, or practically
noted as zero, A man who would not have risen in modem
Political Circles ; man unchoosable at hustings or in caucus ;
man forever invisible, and very unadmirable if seen, to the
Able-Editor and those that hang by him. In fact, a kind
of savage man, as we say ; but highly interesting, if you can
read dumb human worth ; and of inexpressible profit to the
Prussian Nation.

For the first ten years of his reign, he had a heavy, con-
tinual struggle, getting his finance and other branches of
administration extricated from their strangling imbroglios of
coiled nonsense, and put upon a rational footing. His labour
in these years, the first of little Fritz’s life, must have been
great ; the pushing and pulling strong and continual. The
good plan itself, this comes not of its own accord ; it is the
fruit of ‘ genius ’ (which means transcendent capacity of talcing
trouble, first of all) : given a huge stack of tumbled thrums,
it is not in your sleep that you will find the vital centre of it,
or get the first thrum by the end ! And then the e^cution,
the realising, amid the contradiction, silent or expressed, of
men and tibings ? Explosive violence was by no means
Friedrich Wilhelm’s method ; the amount of slow stubborn

340 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV,

[i7X3-i7a3

broad-shouldered strength, in all kinds, expended by the man,
strikes us as very great. The amount of patience even,
though patience is not reckoned his forte.

That of the Ritter-Dienst (Knights’-Service), for example,
which is but one small item of his business, the commuting
of the old feudal duty of his Landholders to do Service in
War-time, into a fixed money payment : nothing could be
fairer, more clearly advantageous to both parties; and most
of his ^ Knights ’ gladly accepted the proposal : yet a certain
factious set of them, the Magdeburg set, stirred-up by some
seven or eight of their number, ‘ hardly above seven or eight
really against me,’ saw good to stand out ; remonstrated,
recalcitrated ; complained in the Diet (Kaiser too happy to
hear of it, that he might have a hook on Friedrich Wilhelm);
and for long years that paltry matter was a provocation to
him.^ But if your plan is just, and a bit of Nature’s plan,
persist in it like a law of Nature. This secret too was known
to Friedrich Wilhelm. In the space of ten years, by actual
human strength loyally spent, he had managed many things ;
saw all things in a course towards management. All things,
as it were, fairly on the road ; the multiplex team pulling one
way, in rational human harness, not in imbroglios of coiled
thrums made by the Nightmares.

How he introduced a new mode of farming his Domain
Lands, which are a main branch of his revenue, and shall be
farmed on regular lease henceforth, and not wasted in pecula-
tion and indolent mismanagement as heretofore ; ^ new modes
of levying his taxes and revenues of every kind : ® How he at
last concentrated, and harmonised into one easy-going effective
General Directory^ the multifarious conflicting Boards, that
were jolting and jangling in a dark use-and-wont manner,
and leaving their work half-done, when he first came into

^ 1717^5. Forster, ii. 162-165, iv. 31-34; Stenzel, iii. 316-319; Samuel
Buchholz, Neueste Preussisch-Brandenburgiscke Geschickte i 77 S)ii‘ I 97 *

* Forster, ii. 2 £ 6 , 216. * 190, 195.

* Completed 19th January 1723 {/<J. ii. 172).

CHAP. III.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING 841

i7X3*i7a3l

power : ^ How he insisted on having daylight introduced to
the very bottom of every business, fair-and-square observed as
the rule of it, and the shortest road adopted for doing it :
How he drained bogs, planted colonies, established manu*
factures, made his own uniforms of Prussian wool, in a Lager-
haus of his own : How he dealt with the Jew Gompert about
farming his Tobacco ; — ^how, from many a crooked case and
character he, by slow or short methods, brought out some-
thing straight; would take no denial of what was his, nor
make any demand of what was not ; and did prove really a
terror to evil-doers of various kinds, especially to prevari-
cators, defalcators, imaginary workers, and slippery unjust
persons : How he urged diligence on all mortals, would not
have the very Applewomen sit ^ without knitting ’ at their
stalls ; and brandished his stick, or struck it fiercely down,
over the incorrigibly idle : — All this, as well as his ludicrous
explosions and unreasonable violences, is on record concerning
Friedrich Wilhelm, though it is to the latter chiefly that the
world has directed its unwise attention, in judging of him.
He was a very arbitrary King. Yes, but then a good deal of
his arhitrium, or sovereign will, was that of the Eternal
Heavens as well ; and did exceedingly behove to be done, if
the Earth would prosper. Which is an immense considera-
tion in regard to his sovereign will and him ! He was prompt
with his rattan, in urgent cases ; had his gallows also, prompt
enough, where needful. Let him see that no mistakes happen,
as certainly he means that none shall !

Yearly he made his country richer ; and this not in money
alone (which is of very uncertain value, and sometimes has
no value at all, and even less), but in frugality, diligence,
punctuality, veracity, — the grand fountains from which money,
and all real values and valours spring for men. To Fried-
rich Wilhelm, in his rustic simplicity, money had fia lack of
value ; rather the reverse. To the homespun man it was a

' Dohm, DenkwUrdigkeiten meiner Zcit (Lemgo und Hanover, 1814-1819),

iv. 88.

842 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[X7i3-i7a3

success of most excellent quality, and the chief symbol of
success in all kinds. Yearly he made his own revenues, and
his people’s along with them and as the source of them,
larger : and in all states of his revenue, he had contrived to
make his expenditure less than it ; and yearly saved masses
of coin, and ^ reposited them in barrels in the cellars of his
Schloss,’ — where they proved very useful, one day. Much in
Friedrich Wilhelm proved useful, beyond even his expecta-
tions. As a Nation’s Husband he seeks his fellow among
Kings, ancient and modem. Happy the Nation which gets
such a Husband, once in the half- thousand years. The
Nation, as foolish Wives and Nations do, repines and grudges
a good deal, its weak whims and will being thwarted very often;
but it advances steadily, with consciousness or not, in the way
of well-doing ; and after long times the harvest of this diligent
sowing becomes manifest to the Nation and to all Nations.

Strange as it sounds in the Republic of Letters, we axe
tempted to call Friedrich Wilhelm a man of genius ; — ^genius
fated and promoted to work in National Husbandry, not in
writing Verses or three-volume Novels. A silent genius. His
melodious stanza, which he cannot bear to see halt in any
syllable, is a rough fact reduced to order ; fact made to stand
firm on its feet, with the world-rocks under it, and looking
free towards all the winds and all the stars. He goes about
suppressing platitudes, ripping-off futilities, turning deceptions
inside out. The realm of Disorder, which is Unveracity,
Unreality, what we call Chaos, has no fiercer enemy. Honest
soul, and he seemed to himself such a stupid fellow often ; no
tongue-learning at all ; little capable to give a reason for the
faith that was in him. He cannot argue in articulate logic,
only in inarticulate bellowings, or worse. He must do a
thing, leave it undemonstrated ; once done, it will itself tell
what kii!6 of thing it is, by and by. Men of genius have a
hard time, I perceive, whether bora on the throne or off it ;
and must expect contradictions next to unendurable, — -the
plurality of blockheads being so extreme !

CHAP. III.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING 848

X7x3-X7a3]

I find, except Samuel Johnson, no man of equal veracity
with Friedrich Wilhelm in that epoch : and Johnson too,
with all his tongue-learning, had not logic enough. In fact,
it depends on how much conviction you have. Blessed be
Heaven, there is here and there a man bom who loves truth
as truth should be loved, with all his heart and all his soul ;
and hates untruth with a corresponding perfect hatred. Such
men, in polite circles, which understand that certainly truth
is better than untruth, but that you must be polite to both,
are liable to get to the end of their logic. Even Johnson
had a bellow in him ; though Johnson could at any time
withdraw into silence, his kingdom l 3 dng all under his own
hat. How much more Friedrich Wilhelm, who had no logic
whatever ; and whose kingdom lay without him, far and wide,
a thing he could not withdraw from. The rugged Orson,
he needed to be right. From utmost Memel down to Wese?
again, ranked in a straggling manner round the half-circumfer
ence of Europe, all manner of things and persons were depend-
ing on him, and on his being right, not wrong, in his notion.

A man of clear discernment, very good natural eyesight;
and irrefragably confident in what his eyes told him, in what
his belief was ; — ^yet of huge simplicity withal. Capable of
being coaxed about, and led by the nose, to a strange degree,
if there were an artist dextrous enough, daring enough !
His own natural judgment was good, and, though apt to be
hasty and headlong, was always likely to come right in the
end ; but internally, we may perceive, his modesty, self-
distrust, anxiety and other unexpected qualities, must have
been great. And then his explosiveness, impatience, excit-
ability ; his conscious dumb ignorance of all things beyond his
own small horizon of personal survey ! An Orson capable
enough of being coaxed and tickled, by some first-rate con-
juror ; — first-rate ; a second-rate might have failed, and got
tom to pieces for his pains. But Seckendorf anST Grumkow,
what a dance they led him on some matters, — as we shall
see, and as poor Fritz and others will see !

844 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[I7i3-i7as

He was full of sensitiveness, rough as he was and shaggy
of skin. His wild imaginations drove him hither and
thither at a sad rate. He ought to have the privileges of
genius. His tall Potsdam Regiment, his mad-looking passion
for enlisting tall men ; this also seems to me one of the whims
of genius, — ^an exaggerated notion to have his * stanza'
polished to the last punctilio of perfection ; and might be
paralleled in the history of Poets. Stranger ‘ man of genius,’
or in more peculiar circumstances, the world never saw !

Friedrich Wilhelm, in his Crown-Prince days, and now still
more when he was himself in the sovereign place, had seen all
along, with natural arithmetical intellect. That his strength in
this, world, as at present situated, would very much depend
upon the amount of potential-battle that lay in him, — on
the q^uantity and quality of Soldiers he could maintain, and
have ready for the field at any time. A most indisputable
truth, and a heartfelt one in the present instance. To aug-
ment the quantity, to improve the quality, in this thrice-
essential particular : here lay the keystone and crowning
summit of all Friedrich Wilhelm’s endeavours ; to which he
devoted himself, as only the best Spartan could have done.
Of which there will be other opportunities to speak in detail.
For it was a thing world-notable; world-laughable, as was
then thought ; the extremely serious fruit of which did at
length also become notable enough.

In the Malplaquet time, once on some occasion, it is said,
two English Officers, not well informed upon the matter, and
provoking enough in their contemptuous ignorance, were
reasoning with one another in Friedrich Wilhelm’s hearing, as
to the warlike powers of the Prussian State, and Whether the
King of Prussia could on his own strength maintain a stand-
ing army of 16,000.^ Without subsidies, do you think, so
many as lj^,000 ? Friedrich Wilhelm, incensed at the thing
and at the tone, is reported to have said with heat : ^ Yes,
80,000 ’ !' wh^eat the military men slightly wagged their

' Forster, i. 138.

CHAP. III.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING 846

X7I3-X723)

heads, letting the matter drop for the present. But he makes
it good by degrees ; twofold or threefold ; — and will have an
army of from seventy to a hundred-thousand before he dies,^
the best-drilled of fighting men ; and what adds much to the
wonder, a full Treasury withal. This is the Brandenburg
Spartan King ; acquainted with National Economics. Alone
of existing Kings he lays-by money annually ; and is laying-by
many other and far more precious things, for Prussia and the
little Boy he has here.

Friedrich Wilhelm^’s passion for drilling, recruiting and per-
fecting his army attracted much notice : laughing satirical
notice, in the hundred mouths of common rumour, which he
regarded little ; and notice iracund and minatory, when it led
him into collision with the independent portions of mankind,
now and then. This latter sort was not pleasant, and some-
times looked rather serious ; but this too he contrived always
to digest in some tolerable manner. He continued drilling
and recruiting, — we may say not his Army only, but his
Nation in all departments of it, — as no man before or since
ever did : increasing, by every devisable method, the amount
of potential-battle that lay in him and it.

In a military, and also in a much deeper sense, he may be
defined as the great Drill-sergeant of the Prussian Nation.
Indeed this had been the function of the Hohenzollems all
along; this difficult, unpleasant and indispensable one of
drilling. From the first appearance of Burggraf Friedrich,
with good words and with Heavy Peg^ in the wreck of
anarchic Brandenburg, and downwards ever since, this has
steadily enough gone on. And not a little good drilling
these populations have had, first and last ; just orders given
them (wise and just, which to a respectable degree were
Heaven’s orders as well) : and certainly Heavjfc, Peg, for
instance, — Heavy Peg, bringing Quitzow’s strong House about

* ‘ 72, OCX) field-troops, 30,000 garrison-troops * (Gestdndnffse cines (Es(erreich»
ischen Veterans, Breslau, 1788, i. 64).

846 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[I7i3-X7a3

his ears, — was a respectable drummer’s-cat to enforce the
same. This has been going on these Three-hundred years.
But Friedrich Wilhelm completes the process ; finishes it off
to the last pitch of perfection. Friedrich Wilhelm carries
it through every fibre and cranny of Prussian Business, and
so far as possible, of Prussian Life ; so that Prussia is all a
drilled phalanx, ready to the word of command ; and what
we see in the Army is but the last consummate essence of
what exists in the Nation everywhere. That was Friedrich
Wilhelm’s function, made ready for him, laid to his hand by
his Hohenzollem foregoers; and indeed it proved a most
beneficent function.

For I have remarked that, of all things, a Nation needs
first to be drilled; and no Nation that has not first been
governed by so-called ‘ Tyrants,’ and held tight to the curb
till it became perfect in its paces and thoroughly amenable to
rule and law, and heartily respectful of the same, and totally
abhorrent of the want of the same, ever came to much in this
world. England itself, in foolish quarters of England, still
howls and execrates lamentably over its William Conqueror,
and rigorous line of Normans and Plantagenets ; but without
them, if you will consider well, what had it ever been ? A
gluttonous race of Jutes and Angles, capable of no grand
combinations ; lumbering about in potbellied equanimity ; not
dreaming of heroic toil and silence and endurance, such as
leads to the high places of this Universe, and the golden
mountain-tops where dwell the Spirits of the Dawn. Their
very ballotboxes and suffrages, what they call their ‘ liberty,’
if these mean ‘ Liberty,’ and are such a road to Heaven,
Anglo-Saxon highroad thither, — could never have been pos-
sible for them on such terms. How could they ? Nothing
but collision, intolerable interpressure (as of men not perpen-
dicular), a’^d consequent battle often supervening, could have
been appointed those undrilled Anglo-Saxons; their pot-
bellied equanimity itself continuing liable to perpetual inter-
ruptions, as in the Heptarchy time. An enlightened Public

CHAP. IV.] HIS MAJESTY’S WAYS 847

does not reflect on these things at present ; but will again,
by and by. Looking with human eyes over the England that
now is, and over the America and the Australia, from pole to
pole; and then listening to the Constitutional litanies of
Dryasdust, and his lamentations on the old Norman and
Plantagenet Kings, and his recognition of departed merit and
causes of effects, — the mind of man is struck dumb !

CHAPTER IV
HIS majesty’s ways

Friedrich Wilhelm’s History is one of Economics ; which
study, so soon as there are Kings again in this world, will be
precious to them. In that happy state of matters, Friedrich
Wilhelm’s History will well reward study; and teach by
example, in a very simple and direct manner. In what is
called the Political, Diplomatic, ^ Honour- to-be ’ department,
there is not, nor can ever be, much to be said of him ; this
Economist King having always kept himself well at home, and
looked steadily to his own affairs. So that for the present he
has, as a King, next to nothing of what is called History ;
and it is only as a fellow-man, of singuleu* faculty, and in a
most peculiju: and conspicuous situation, that he can be
interesting to mankind. To us he has, as Father and daily
teacher and master of young Fritz, a continual interest ; and
we must note the master’s ways, and the main phenomena of
the workshop as they successively turned up, for the sake of
the notable Apprentice serving there.

He was not tall of stature, this arbitrary King : a florid-
complexioned stout-built man ; of serious, sincere, authoritative
face ; his attitudes and equipments very Spartan in type. Man
of short firm stature ; stands (in Pesne’s best Portraits of him)
at his ease, and yet like a tower. Most soTid ; ^ plumb and

848 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[X7X3-X7a3

rather more’; eyes steadfastly awake; cheeks slightly com-
pressed, too, which fling the mouth rather forward; as if
asking silently, ^ An 3 rthing astir, then ? All right here ? ’
Face, figure and bearing, all in him is expressive of robust
insight, and direct determination; of healthy energy, prac-
ticality, unquestioned authority, — a certain air of royalty
reduced to its simplest form. The face, in Pictures by Pesne
and others, is not beautiful or agreeable ; healthy, genuine,
authoritative, is the best you can say of it. Yet it may have
been, what it is described as being, originally handsome.
High enough arched brow, rather copious cheeks and jaws ;
nose smallish, inclining to be stumpy ; large gray eyes, bright
with steady fire and life, often enough gloomy and severe, but
capable of jolly laughter too. Eyes ^ naturally with a kind
of laugh in them,’ says Pollnitz ; — which laugh can blaze-out
into fearful thunderous rage, if you give him provocation.
Especially if you lie to him ; for that he hates above all
things. Look him straight in the face : he fancies he can
see in ymr eyes, if there is an internal mendacity in you :
wherefore you must look at him in speaking ; such is his
standing order.

His hair is flaxen, falling into the ashgray or darker ; fine
copious flowing hair, while he wore it natural. But it soon
got tied into clubs, in the military style ; and at length it
was altogether cropped away, and replaced by brown, and at
last by white, round wigs. Which latter also, though bad
wigs, became him not amiss, under his cocked-hat and cockade,
says Pollnitz.^ The voice, I guess, even when not loud, was
of clangorous and penetrating, quasi-metallic nature ; and I
learn expressly once, that it had a nasal quality in it.* His
Majesty spoke through the nose ; snuffled his speech, in an
earnest ominously plangent manner. In angry moments,
which were frequent, it must have been — unpleasant to listen
to. For the rest, a handsome man of his inches ; con-
spicuously well-built in limbs and body, and delicately finished-
* Pollnitz, Mcmoiren (Berlin, 1791), ii. 568. * BUsching, i. 568.

349

CHAP. IV.] HIS MAJESTY’S WAYS

X713-17331

off to the very extremities. His feet and legs, says Pollnitz,
were very fine. The hands, if he would have taken care of
them, were beautifully white ; fingers long and thin ; a hand
at once nimble to grasp, delicate to feel, and strong to clutch
and hold : what may be called a beautiful hand, because it is
the usefulest.

Nothing could exceed his Majesty’s simplicity of habitudes.
But one loves especially in him his scrupulous attention to
cleanliness of person and environment. He washed like a very
Mussulman, five times a day ; loved cleanliness in all things,
to a superstitious extent ; which trait is pleasant in the rugged
man, and indeed of a piece with the rest of his character.
He is gradually changing all his silk and other cloth room-
fumiture ; in his hatred of dust, he will not suffer a floor-
carpet, even a stuffed chair ; but insists on having all of wood,
where the dust may be prosecuted to destruction.^ Wife and
womankind, and those that take after them, let such have
stuffing and sofas: he, for his part, sits on mere wooden chairs;
— sits, and also thinks and acts, after the manner of a
Hyperborean Spartan, which he was. He ate heartily, but
as a rough farmer and hunter eats ; country messes, good
roast and boiled ; despising the French Cook, as an entity
without meaning for him. His favourite dish at dinner was
bacon and greens, rightly dressed ; what could the French
Cook do for such a man ? He ate with rapidity, almost with
indiscriminate violence : his object not quality but quantity.
He drank too, but did not get drunk : at the Doctor’s order
he could abstain ; and had in later years abstained. Pollnitz
praises his fineness of complexion, the originally eminent
whiteness of his skin, which he had tanned and bronzed by
hard riding and hunting, and otherwise worse discoloured by his
manner of feeding, and digesting : alas, at last his waistcoat
came to measure, I am afraid to say how many Prussian ells,
— a very considerable diameter indeed ! ^ •

For some years after his accession he still appeared occa-

* Forster, i. 208. ^ ® /W/. i. 163.

S60 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

rx7i3-i7a3

sionolly in ‘biu^her dress,’ or unmilitaiy clothes; ‘brown
English coat, yellow waistcoat ’ and the other indispensables.
But this fashion became rarer with him every year; and
ceased altogether (say Chronologists) about the year 1719 :
after which he appeared always simply as Colonel of the
Potsdam Guards (his own Lifeguard Regiment) in simple
Prussian uniform : close military coat ; blue, with red cuffs
and collar, buff waistcoat and breeches ; white linen gaiters to
the knee. He girt his sword about the loins, well out of the
mud ; walked always with a thick bamboo in his hand. Steady,
not slow of step ; with his triangular hat, cream- white round
wig (in his older days), and face tending to purple, — ^the eyes
looking out mere investigation, sharp swift authority, and
dangerous readiness to rebuke and set the cane in motion : —
it was so he walked abroad in this earth ; and the common
run of men rather fled his approach than courted it.

For, in fact, he was dangerous; and would ask in an
alarming manner, ‘Who are you?’ Any fantastic, much
more any suspicious-looking person, might fare the worse.
An idle lounger at the street-corner he has been known to hit
over the crown ; and peremptorily dispatch : ‘ Home, Sirrah,
and take to some work ! ’ That the Applewomen be en-
couraged to knit, while waiting for custom ; — encouraged and
quietly constrained, and at length packed away, and their stalls
taken from them, if unconstrainable, — ^there has, as we
observed, an especial rescript been put forth ; very curious
to read.'

Dandiacal figures, nay people looking like Frenchmen, idle
flaimting women even, — better for them to be going. ‘ Who
are you ? ’ and if you lied or prevaricated (‘ jE> Uicke mich
gerade an^ Look me in the face, then ! ’), or even stumbled,
hesitated, and gave suspicion of prevaricating, it might be
worse for you. A soft answer is less effectual than a prompt
clear one, to turn away wrath. ‘ A Candidatus Theologice^
your Majesty,’ answered a handfast threadbare youth one day,
^ In Rddenbeck, p. X5.

861

CHAP. IV.] HIS MAJESTY’S WAYS

17*3-17*3]

when questioned in this manner. — ^ Where from ? ’ * Berlin,

your Majesty.’ — ‘Hm, na, the Berliners are a good-for-
nothing set.’ ‘Yes, truly, too many of them; but there are
exceptions ; I know two.’ — ‘ Two ? which then ? ’ ‘ Your

Majesty and myself!’ — Majesty bursts into a laugh: the
Candidatus was got examined by the Consistoriums, and
Authorities proper in that matter, and put into a chaplaincy.

This King did not love the French, or their fashions, at all.
We said he dismissed the big Peruke, — put it on for the last
time at his Father’s funeral, so far did filial piety go ; and
then packed it aside, dismissing it, nay banishing and pro-
scribing it, never to appear more. The Peruke, and, as it
were, all that the Peruke symbolised. For this was a King
come into the world with quite other aims than that of wearing
big perukes, and, regardless of expense, playing burst-frog to
the ox of Versailles, which latter is itself perhaps a rather
useless animal. Of Friedrich Wilhelm’s taxes upon wigs ; of
the old ‘ Wig-inspectors,’ and the feats they did, plucking off
men’s periwigs on the street, to see if the government-stamp
were there, and to discourage wiggery, at least all but the
simple scratch or useful Welsh- wig, among mankind : of these,
and of other similar things, I could speak ; but do not. This
little incident, which occurred once in the review-ground on
the outskirts of Berlin, will suffice to mark his temper in that
respect. It was in the spring of 1719 ; our little Fritz then
six years old, who of course heard much temporary confused
commentary, direct and oblique, triumphant male laughter,
and perhaps rebellious female sighs, on occasion of such a
feat.

Count Rothenburg, Prussian by birth,^ an accomplished
and able person in the diplomatic and other lines of business,
but much used to Paris and its ways, had appeared lately
in Berlin, as French Envoy, — and, not unnaturaily, in high
French costume ; cocked-hat, peruke, laced coat, and the
^ Buchholz, JVcuesU PreussUch-Brand€nburgisch$ Chchichti^ L

S52 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[i7X3-*7a3

other trimmings. He, and a group of dashing followers and
adherents, were accustomed to go about in that guise ; very
capable of proving infectious to mankind. What is to be
done with them ? thinks the anxious Father of his People.
They were to appear at the ensuing grand Review, as Fried-
rich Wilhelm understood. Whereupon Friedrich Wilhelm
took his measures in private. Dressed up, namely, his
Scavenger-Executioner people (what they call Prq/bssen in
Prussian regiments) in an enormous exeiggeration of that
costume ; cocked-hats about an ell in diameter, wigs reaching
to the houghs, with other fittings to match : these, when
Count Rothenburg and his company appeared upon the
ground, Friedrich Wilhelm summoned out, with some trumpet-
peal or burst of field-music ; and they solemnly crossed Count
Rothenburg’s field of vision ; the strangest set of Phantasms
he had seen lately. Awakening salutary reflections in him.^
Fancy that scene in History ; Friedrich Wilhelm for comic-
S 3 mibolic Dramaturgist. Gods and men (or at least Houyhnm
horses) might have saluted it with a Homeric laugh, — so
huge and vacant is it, with a suspicion of real humour too :
— but the men were not permitted, on parade, more than
a silent grin, or general irrepressible rustling murmur; and
only the gods laughed inextinguishably, if so disposed. The
Scavenger-Executioners went back to their place ; and Count
Rothenburg took a plain German costume, so long as he
continued in those parts.

Friedrich Wilhelm has a dumb rough wit and mockery, of
that kind, on many occasions ; not without geniality in its
Brobdingnag exaggeration and simplicity. Like a wild-bear
of the woods taking his sport ; with some sense of humour
in the rough skin of him. Very capable of seeing through
sumptuous costumes ; and respectful of realities alone. Not
in French sumptuosity, but in native German thrift, does this

1 Forster, i. 165 ; Fassmann, Leden und Thaten des allerdurchlduchiigsUn
ttc» Kbnigs von Preussen Frederici WUhclmi (Hamburg und Breslau, 1735),
pp. a 23 » 319*

CHAP. IV.] HIS MAJESTY’S WAYS . 863

1713-1723]

King see his salvation ; so has Nature constructed him : and
the world which has long lost its Spartans, will see again an
original North-German Spartan ; and shriek a good deal over
him ; Nature keeping her own counsel the while, and as it
were, laughing in her sleeve at the shrieks of the flunky
world. For Nature, when she makes a Spartan, means a good
deal by it ; and does not expect instant applauses, but only
gradual and lasting.

' For my own part,* exclaims a certain Editor once, ^ I perceive well
there was never yet any great Empire founded, Roman, English, down
to Prussian or Dutch, nor in fact any great mass of work got achieved
under the Sun, but it was founded even upon this humble-looking
quality of Thrift, and became achievable in virtue of the same. Which
will seem a strange doctrine, in these days of gold-nuggets, railway-
fortunes, and miraculous sumptuosities regardless of expense. Earnest
readers are invited to consider it, nevertheless. TTiough new, it is very
old ; and a sad meaning lies in it to us of these times ! That you have
squandered in idle fooleries, building where there was no basis, your
Hundred-thousand Sterling, your Eight-hundred Million Sterling, is to
me a comparatively small matter. You may still again become rich,
if you have at last become wise. But if you have wasted your capacity
of strenuous, devoutly-valiant labour, of patience, perseverance, self-
denial, faith in the causes of effects ; alas, if your once just judgment ot
what is worth something and what is worth nothing, has been wasted, and
your silent steadfast reliance on the general veracities, of yourself and of
things, is no longer there, — then indeed you have had a loss ! You are,
in fact, an entirely bankrupt individual ; as you will find by and by.
Yes ; and though you had California in fee-simple ; and could buy all
the upholsteries, groceries, funded-properties, temporary (very temporary)
landed properties of the world, at one swoop, it would avail you nothing.
Henceforth for you no harvests in the Seedfield of this Universe, which
reserves its salutary bounties, and noble heaven-sent gifts, for quite
other than you ; and I would not give a pin*s value for all you will ever
reap there. Mere imaginary harvests, sacks of nuggets and the like ;
empty as the east-wind ; — with all the Demons laughing at you ! Do
you consider that Nature too is a swollen flunky, hungry for vails ; and
can be taken-in with your sublime airs of sumptuosity, and the large
balance you actually have in Lombard-street? Go to yie — General
Cesspool, with your nuggets and your ducats ! *

The flunky world, much stript of its plusk and fat per-

VOL. I. 2

354. APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

ti7*3-*7a3

quisites, accuses Friedrich Wilhelm bitterly of avarice and the
cognate vices. But it is not so ; intrinsically, in the main,
his procedure is to be defined as honourable thrift, — ^verging
towards avarice here and there ; as poor human virtues
usually lean to one side or the other ! He can be magnificent
enough too, and grudges no expense, when the occasion seems
worthy. If the occasion is inevitable, and yet not quite
worthy, I have known him have recourse to strange shifts.
The Czar Peter, for example, used to be rather often in the
Prussian Dominions, oftenest on business of his own : such
a man is to be royally defrayed while with us ; yet one
would wish it done cheap. Posthorses, ‘ two-hundred and
eighty-seven at every station,’ he has from the Community ;
but the rest of his expenses, from Memel all the way to
Wesel ? Friedrich Wilhelm’s marginal response to his Finanz-
Directorium^ requiring orders once on that subject, runs in
the following strange tenour : ‘ Yes, all the way (except
Berlin, which I take upon myself) ; and observe, you contrive
to do it for 6,000 thalers (900Z.),’ — which is uncommonly
cheap, about 1/. per mile; — ‘won’t allow you one other
penny (nit einen Pfennig gebe mehr dazu) ; but you are (sollen
Sie)j this is the remarkable point, ‘ to give-out in the world
that it costs me from Thirty to Forty Thousand ! ’ ^ So that
here is the Majesty of Prussia, who beyond all men abhors
lies, giving orders to tell one ? Alas, yes ; a kind of lie, or
fib (white fib, or even gray\ the pinch of Thrift compelling !
But what a window into the artless inner-man of his Majesty,
even that gray fib ; — ^not done by oneself, but ordered to be
done by the servant, as if that were cheaper !

‘ Verging upon avarice,’ sure enough : but, unless we are
unjust and unkind, he can by no means be described as a
Miser King. He collects what is his ; gives you accurately
what is yours. For wages paid he will see work done ; he
will ascerJain more and more that the work done be work
needful for him ; and strike it off, if not. A Spartan man,
* 1717 : Forster, i. 213.

CHAP. V.] FRIEDRICH WILHELJTS ONE WAR S55

X7i3i7a3]

as we said, — though probably he knew as little of the
Spartans as the Spartans did of him. But Natiure is still
capable of such products : if in Hellas long ages since, why
not in Brandenburg now ?

CHAPTER V
FRIEDRICH Wilhelm’s one war

One of Fritz’s earliest strong impressions from the outer
world chanced to be of War, — so it chanced, though he had
shown too little taste that way, and could not, as yet, under-
stand such phenomena ; — and there must have been much
semi-articulate questioning and dialoguing with Dame de
Roucoulles, on his part, about the matter now going on.

In the year 1715, little Fritz’s third year, came grand
doings, not of drill only, but of actual war and fighting : the
‘ Stralsund Expedition,’ Friedrich Wilhelm’s one feat in that
kind. Huge rumour of which fills naturally the maternal
heart, the Berlin Palace drawing-rooms ; and occupies, with
new vivid interests, all imaginations young and old. For the
actual battle-drums are now beating, the big cannon-wains
are creaking under way ; and military men take farewell, and
march, tramp, tramp ; Majesty in grenadier-guard uniform
at their head : horse, foot and artillery ; northward to Stral-
sund on the Baltic shore, where a terrible human Lion has
taken up his lair lately. Charles xii. of Sweden, namely ; he
has broken out of Turkish Bender or Demotica, and ended
his obstinate torpor, at last ; has ridden fourteen or sixteen
days, he and a groom or two, through desolate steppes and
mountain wildernesses, through crowded dangerous cities ; —
‘ came by Vienna and by Cassel, then through Pommem ’ ;
leaving his ^ royal train of two- thousand person! ’ to follow
at its leisure. He, for his part, has ridden without pause,
forward, ever forward, in darkest incognito, the indefatigable

866 APPRENTICESHIP, URST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[i7X3.x7a3

man ; — ^and finally, on Old-Hallowmas Eve(22d-llth Novem-
ber 1714), far in the night, a Horseman, with two others
still following him, travel-splashed, and ^ white with snow,’
drew bridle at the gate of Stralsimd ; and, to the surprise of
the Swedish sentinel there, demanded instant admission to the
Governor. The Governor, at first a little surly of humour,
saw gradually how it was ; sprang out of bed, and embraced
the knees of the snowy man ; Stralsund in general sprang out
of bed, and illuminated itself, that same Hallow-Eve : — and
in brief, Charles xii., after five years of eclipse, has reappeared
upon the stage of things ; and menaces the world, in his old
fashion, from that City. From which it becomes urgent to
many parties, and at last to Friedrich Wilhelm himself, that
he be dislodged.

The root of this Stralsund story belongs to the former
reign, as did the grand apparition of Charles xii. on the
theatre of European History, and the terror and astonish-
ment he created there. He is now thirty-three years old ;
and only the winding-up, both of him and of the Stralsund
story, falls within our present field. Fifteen years ago, it
was like the bursting of a cataract of bombshells in a dull
ballroom, the sudden appearance of this young fighting Swede
among the luxurious Kings and Kinglets of the North, all
lounging about and languidly minuetting in that manner,
regardless of expense ! Friedrich iv. of Denmark rejoicing
over red- wine ; August the Strong gradually producing his
‘ three-hundred and fifty- four bastards ’ ; ^ these and other
neighbours had confidently stept in, on various pretexts;
thinking to help themselves from the young man’s properties,
who was still a minor ; when the young minor suddenly de-
veloped himself as a major and maximus, and turned out to
be such a Fire-King among them !

In consequence of which there had been no end of Northern
troubles ; and all through the Louis-Fourteenth or Marl-

' M 4 fnoires cU Barcith (Wilhelmm»*» Book, Londrei, 18x2), L ill.

CHAP. V.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR 357
1713]

borough grand ‘ Succession War,’ a special ‘ Northern War ’
had burnt or smouldered on its own score ; Swedes versus
Saxons, Russians and Danes, bickering in weary intricate
contest, and keeping those Northern regions in smoke if not on
fire. Charles xii., for the last five years (ever since Pultawa,
and the summer of 1709), had lain obstinately dormant in
Turkey; urging the Turks to destroy Czar Peter. Which
they absolutely could not, though they now and then tried ;
and Viziers not a few lost their heads in consequence. Charles
lay sullenly dormant ; Danes meanwhile operating upon his
Holstein interests and adjoining territories ; Saxons, Russians,
battering continually at Swedish Pommem, continually march-
ing thither, and then marching home again, without success, —
always through the Brandenburg Territory, as they needs
must. Which latter circumstance Friedrich Wilhelm, while
yet only Crown-Prince, had seen with natural displeasure,
could that have helped it. But Charles xii. would not yield
a whit ; sent orders peremptorily, from his bed at Bender or
Demotica, that there must be no surrender. Neither could
the sluggish enemy compel surrender.

So that, at length, it had grown a feeble wearisome welter
of inextricable strifes, with worn-out combatants, exhausted of
all but their animosity ; and seemed as if it would never end.
Inveterate ineffective war ; ruinous to all good interests in
those parts. What miseries had Holstein from it, which last
to our own day ! Mecklenburg also it involved in sore troubles,
which lasted long enough, as we shall see. But Brandenburg,
above all, may be impatient; Brandenburg, which has no
business with it except that of unlucky neighbourhood. One
of Friedrich Wilhelm’s very first operations, as King, was to
end this ugly state of matters, which he had witnessed with
impatience, as Prince, for a long while.

He had hailed even the Treaty of Utrecht with j^relcome, in
hopes it might at least end these Northern brabbles. This
the Treaty of Utrecht tried to do, but could ipt : however, it
gave him back his Prussian Fighting Men ; which he has

S58 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[1713-1733

already increased by six regiments, raised, we may perceive, on
the ruins of his late court-flunkies and dismissed goldsticks ; —
with these Friedrich Wilhelm will try to end it himself.
These he at once ordered to form a Camp on his frontier,
close to that theatre of contest ; and signified now with
emphasis, in the beginning of 1713, that he decidedly wished
there were peace in those Pommem regions. Negotiations in
consequence;^ very wide negotiations, Louis xiv. and the
Kaiser lending hand, to pacify these fighting Northern Kings
and their Czar : at length the Holstein Government, repre-
senting their sworn ally, Charles xii., on the occasion, made an
offer which seemed promising. They proposed that Stettin
and its dependencies, the strong frontier Town, and, as it were,
key of Swedish Pommem, should be evacuated by the Swedes,
and be garrisoned by neutral troops, Prussians and Holsteiners
in equal number ; which neutral troops shall prohibit any
hostile attack of Pommem from without, Sweden engaging not
to make any attack through Pommem from within. That
will be as good as peace in Pommem, till we get a general
Swedish Peace. With which Friedrich Wilhelm gladly
complies.^

Unhappily, however, the Swedish Commandant in Stettin
would not give up the place, on any representative or secondary
authority ; not vrithout an express order in his King’s own
hand. Which, as his King was far away, in abstmse Turkish
circumstances and localities, could not be had at the moment ;
and involved new difficulties and uncertainties, new delay which
might itself be fatal. The end was, the Russians and Saxons
had to cannonade the man out by regular siege : they then
gave up the Town to Prussia and Holstein ; but required first
to be paid their expenses incurred in sieging it, — 400,000
thalers, as they computed and demonstrated, or somewhere
about 60,Q00Z. of our money.

Friedrich Wilhelm paid the money (Holstein not having a
groschen) ; toolf possession of the Town, and dependent towns
' loth June 1713 : Bucbholi, L 21 . ■ 22d June 1713 : /did. i, 21.

CHAP. V.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR 369

17141

and forts ; intending well to keep them till repaid. This was
in October 1713; and ever since, there has been actual
tranquillity in those parts : the embers of the Northern War
may still bum or smoulder elsewhere, but here they are quite
extinct. At first, it was a joint possession of Stettin,
Holsteiners and Prussians in equal number ; and if Friedrich
Wilhelm had been sure of his money, so it would have con-
tinued. But the Holsteiners had paid nothing ; Charles xn.’s
sanction never could be expressly got, and the Holsteiners were
mere dependants of his. Better to increase our Prussian force,
by degrees ; and, in some good way, with a minimum of
violence, get the Holsteiners squeezed out of Stettin : Friedrich
Wilhelm has so ordered and contrived. The Prussian force
having now gradually increased to double in this important
garrison, the Holsteiners are quietly disarmed, one night, and
ordered to depart, under penalties ; — which was done. Holding
such a pawnticket as Stettin, buttoned in our own pocket, we
count now on being paid our 60,000Z. before parting with it.

Matters turned out as Friedrich William had dreaded they
might. Here is Charles xii. come back ; inflexible as cold
Swedish iron ; will not hear of any Treaty dealing with his pro-
perties in that manner : Is he a bankrupt, then, that you will
sell his towns by auction ? Charles does not, at heart, believe
that Friedrich Wilhelm ever really paid the 60,0001 ; Charles
demands, for his own part, to have his own Swedish Town of
Stettin restored to him ; and heis not the least intention, or
indeed ability, to pay money. Vain to answer : ‘ Stettin, for
the present, is not a Swedish Town ; it is a Prussian Pawn-
ticket ! ’ — ^There was much negotiation, correspondence ; Louis
xiv. and the Kaiser stepping in again to produce settlement.
To no purpose. Louis, gallant old Bankrupt, tried hard to
take Charles’s part with effect. But he had, himself, no money
now ; could only try finessing by ambassadors, tiy a little
menacing by them ; neither of which profited. Friedrich
Wilhelm, wanting only peace on his borders, after fifteen years
of extraneous uproar there, has paid 60,00o5. in hard cosh to

860 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv,

[17x3-1783

have it : repay him that sum, with promise of peace on his
borders, he will then quit Stettin ; till then not. Big words
from a French Ambassador in big wig, will not suffice*
‘ Bullying goes for nothing (JBcmge machen gilt nicht\ ’ — ^the
thing covenanted for will need to be done ! Poor Louis the
Great, whom we now call ‘ RonArt^^-Great,’ died while these
affairs were pending ; while Charles, his ally, was arguing and
battling against all the world, with only a grandiloquent
Ambassador to help him from Louis. ^J^ai trop aiimk la
guerre^ ’ said Louis at his death, addressing a new small Louis
(five years old), his great-grandson and successor : ^ I have
been too fond of war ; do not imitate me in that, ne nCimitez
pas en cela!" ^ Which counsel also, as we shall see, was con-
siderably lost in air.

Friedrich Wilhelm had a true personal regard for
Charles xii., a man made in many respects after his own
heart ; and would fain have persuaded him into softer
behaviour. But it was to no purpose. Charles would not
listen to reasons of policy; or believe that his estate was
bankrupt, or that his towns could be put in pawn. Danes,
Saxons, Russians, even George i. of England (George having
just bought, of the Danish King, who had got hold of it, a
great Hanover bargain, Bremen and Verden, on cheap terms,
from the quasi-bankrupt estate of poor Charles), — have to
combine against him, and see to put him down. Among
whom Prussia, at length actually attacked by Charles in the
Stettin regions, has reluctantly to take the lead in that
repressive movement. On the 28th of April 1716, Friedrich
Wilhelm declares war €igainst Charles ; is already on march,
with a great force, towards Stettin, to coerce and repress said
Charles. No help for it, so sore as it goes against us : ^ Why
will the very King whom I most respect compel me to be his
enemy ? ’ said Friedrich Wilhelm.*

* 1st September 1/15.

* (Euures tU Fridiric {Histoir$ de Brandebourg)^ f. 132 ; Buchholz, i. 28.

CHAP. V.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR 361
17*5)

One of Friedrich Wilhelm’s originalities is his farewell
Order and Instruction, to his Three chief Ministers, on this
occasion. Ilgen, Dohna, Prinzen, tacit dusky figures, whom
we meet in Prussian Books, and never gain the least idea of,
except as of grim, rather cunning, most reserved antiquarian
gentlemen, — a kind of human iron-safes, solemnly filled (under
triple and quadruple patent-locks) with what, alas, has now all
grown waste-paper, dust and cobweb, to us : — these three
reserved cunning Gentlemen are to keep a thrice- watchful eye
on all subordinate boards and persons, and see well that
nobody nod or do amiss. Brief weekly report to his Majesty
will be expected ; stafTettes, should cases of hot haste occur :
any questions of yours are ^to be put on a sheet of paper
folded down, to which I can write marginalia ’ : if nothing
particular is passing, ^ nit schreiben^ you don’t write.’ Pay out
no money, except what falls due by the Books ; none ; — if an
extraordinary case for payment arise, consult my Wife, and
she must sign her order for it. Generally in matters of any
moment, consult my Wife ; but her only, ^ except her and the
Privy Councillors, no mortal is to poke into my affairs ’ : I say
no mortal, ^ sonst kein Mensch!"

* My Wife shall be told of all things,’ he says elsewhere,
‘and counsel asked of her.’ The rugged Paterfamilias, but
the human one ! ‘ And as I am a man,’ continues he, ‘ and

may be shot dead, I command you and all to take care of
Fritz {Jur Fritz zu sorgen\ as God shall reward you. And
I give you all. Wife to begin with, my curse (meinen Fluch\
that God may punish you in Time and Eternity, if you do
not, after my death,’ — do what, O Heavens — ‘ bury me in
the vault of the Schlosskirche,’ Palace - Church at Berlin !
‘And you shall make no grand to-do {Jkem Fest) on the
occasion. On your body and life, no festivals and ceremonials,
except that the regiments one after the other fire a volley
over me.’ Is not this an ursine man-of-genius, in some sort,
as we once defined him ? He adds suddenly, and concludes :
‘ I am assured you will manage everything wi?h all the exact-

36Ji APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[i7X3-x7a3

ness in the world ; for which I shall ever zealously, as long as
I live, be your friend.’^

Russians, Saxons affected to intend joining Friedrich Wil-
helm in his Pommern Expedition ; and of the latter there did,
under a so-called Field -Marshal von Wackerbarth, of high
plumes and titles, some four- thousand, — of whom only Colonel
von Seckendorf, commanding one of the horse-regiments, is
remarkable to us, — come and serve. The rest, and all the
Russians, he was as well pleased to have at a distance.
Some sixteen-thousand Danes joined him, too, with the King of
Denmark at their head ; very furious, all, against the Swedish-
iron Hero ; but they were remarked to do almost no real
service, except at sea a little against the Swedish ships.
George i. also had a fleet in the Baltic ; but only ‘ to pro-
tect English commerce.’ On the whole, the Siege of Stralsund,
to which the Campaign pretty soon reduced itself, was done
mainly by Friedrich Wilhelm. He stayed two months in
Stettin, getting all his preliminaries completed ; his good
Queen, Wife ‘ Feekin,’ was with him for some time, I know
not whether now or afterwards. In the end of June, he
issued from Stettin ; took the interjacent outpost places ; and
then opened ground before Stralsund, where, in a few days
more, the Danes joined him. It was now the middle of
July : a combined Army of well-nigh Forty-thousand against
Charles ; who, to man his works, musters about the fourth
part of that number.^

Stralsund, with its outer lines and inner, with its marshes,
ditches, ramparts and abundant cannon to them, and leaning,
one side of it, on the deep sea, which Swedish ships command
as yet, is very strong. Wallenstein, we know, once tried it
with furious assault, with bombardment, sap and storm ;
swore he would have it, though it hung by a chain from

^ 26th April 1715: Cosmars und Klaproths Staatsrath, s. 223 (in Stenzel,
iii. 269).

* Pauli, viii. 85-ini ; Buchholz, i. 31-39; Forster, ii« 34-39; Stenzel, Iii.
272-278.

CHAP. V.] FRIEDRICH WlLHELM^S ONE WAR 363

«7*5]

Heaven ’ ; but could not get it, after all his volcanic raging ;
and was driven away, partly by the Swedes and armed
Townsfolk, chiefly by the marsh-fevers and continuous rains.
Stralsund has been taken, since that, by Prussian sieging ; as
old men, from the Great Elector’s time, still remember.^ To
Louis Fourteenth’s menacing Ambassador, Friedrich Wilhelm
seems to intimate that indeed big bullying words will not
take it, but that Prussian guns and men, on a just ground,
still may.

The details of this Siege of Stralsund are all on record,
and had once a certain fame in the world ; but, except as
a distant echo, must not concern us here. It lasted till
midwinter, under continual fierce counter - movements and
desperate sallies from the Swedish Lion, standing at bay
there against all the world. But Friedrich Wilhelm was
vigilance itself ; and he had his Anhalt -Dessaus with him,
his Borcks, Buddenbrocks, Finkensteins, veteran men and
captains, who had learned their art under Marlborough and
Eugene. The Lion King’s fierce sallies, and desperate valour,
could not avail. Point after point was lost for him. Koppen,
a Prussian Lieutenant-Colonel, native to the place, who has
bathed in those waters in his youth, remembers that, by
wading to the chin, you could get round the extremity of
Charles’s main outer line. Koppen states his project, gets it
approved of ; — wades accordingly, with a select party, under
cloud of night (4th of November, eve of Gunpowder day, a
most cold-hot job) ; other ranked Prussian battalions awaiting
intently outside, with shouldered firelock, invisible in the dark,
what will become of him. Koppen wades successfully ; seizes
the first battery of said line, — masters said lines with its
batteries, the outside battalions and he. Irrepressibly, with
horrible uproar from without and from within ; the flying
Swedes scarcely getting up the Town drawbridge, as he
chased them. That important line is lost to Charles.

Next they took the Isle of Riigen from him, which shuts
* I0th-I5th October 1678 (Pauli, v. 203, 205).

364 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[17x3-17*3

up the harbour. Leopold of Anhalt -Dessau, our rugged
friend, in Danish boats, which were but ill navigated, con-
trives, about a week after that Koppen feat, to effect a landing
on Kiigen at nightfall ; beats off the weak Swedish party ; —
entrenches, palisades himself to the teeth, and lies down under
arms. That latter was a wise precaution. For, about four
in the morning, Charles comes in person, with eight pieces of
cannon and four-thousand horse and foot : Charles is struck
with amazement at the palisade and ditch Mein Gott^ who
would have expected this ! ’ he was heard murmuring) ; dashes,
like a fire-flood, against ditch and palisade ; tears at the
pales himself, which prove impregnable to his cannon and
him. He storms and rages forward, again and again, now
here, now there ; but is met everywhere by steady deadly
musketry ; and has to retire, fruitless, about daybreak, him-
self wounded, and leaving his eight cannons, and four-hundred
slain.

Poor Charles, there had been no sleep for him that night,
and little for very many nights : ‘ on getting to horse, on
the shore at Stralsund, he fainted repeatedly ; fell out of
one faint into another; but such was his rage, he always
recovered himself, and got on horseback again.’ ^ Poor
Charles : a bit of right royal Swedish -German stuff, after
his kind ; and tragically ill bestead now at last ! This is his
exit he is now making, — still in a consistent manner. It is
fifteen years now since he waded ashore at Copenhagen, and
first heard the bullets whistle round him. Since which time,
what a course has he run ; crashing athwart all manner of
ranked armies, diplomatic combinations, right onward, like
a cannon-ball ; tearing off many solemn wigs in those
Northern parts, and scattering them upon the winds, — even
as he did his own full -bottom wig, impatiently, on that
first day at Copenhagen, finding it unfurthersome for actual
business in battle.^

In about a month hence, the last important homwork is
^ BuchhoU, i. 36* ^ Kohler, Miinzbelusiiguti^cn^ xiv. 213.

CHAP. V.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR 865

xgth Dec. 1715]

forced ; Charles, himself seen fiercely fighting on the place,
is swept back from his last horn work ; and the general storm,
now altogether irresistible, is evidently at hand. On entreaty
from his followers, entreaty often renewed, with tears even
(it is said) and on bended knees, Charles at last consents to
go. He left no orders for surrender; would not name the
word ; ‘ left only ambiguous vague orders.’ But on the 1 9th
December 1715, he does actually depart; gets on board a
little boat, towards a Swedish frigate, which is lying above
a mile out ; the whole road to which, between Riigen and the
mainland, is now solid ice, and has to be cut as he proceeds.
This slow operation, which lasted all day, was visible, and its
meaning well known, in the besiegers’ lines. The King of
Denmark saw it; and brought a battery to bear upon it;
his thought had always been, that Charles should be captured
or killed in Stralsund, and not allowed to get away. Fried-
rich Wilhelm was of quite another mind, and had even used
secret influences to that effect ; eager that Charles should
escape. It is said, he remonstrated very passionately with
the Danish King and this battery of his ; nay, some add, since
remonstrances did not avail, and the battery still threatened
to fire, Friedrich Wilhelm drew-up a Prussian regiment or
two at the muzzles of it, and said, You shall shoot us first,
then.^ Which is a pleasant myth at least ; and symbolical
of what the reality was.

Charles reached his frigate about nightfall, but made little
way from the place, owing to defect of wind. They say,
he even heard the chamade beating in Stralsund next day,
and that a Danish frigate had nearly taken him ; both which
statements are perhaps also a little mythical. Certain only
that he vanished at this point into Scandinavia ; and general
Europe never saw him more. Vanished into a cloud of
untenable schemes, guided by Alberoni, Baron Gortz and
others ; wild schemes, financial, diplomatic, warlike, nothing
not chimerical in them but his own unquenchable real energy;

^ Buchholz, p. 138 n.

S66 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[1713-1723

— ^and found his death (by assassination, as appears) in the
trenches of Frederickshall, among the Norway Hills, one
winter night, three years hence. Assassination instigated
by the Swedish Official Persons, it is thought. The bullet
passed through both his temples ; he had clapt his hand
upon the hilt of his sword, and was found leant against the
parapet, in that attitude, — gone upon a long march now.
So vanished Charles Twelfth ; the distressed Official Persons
and Nobility exploding upon him in that rather damnable
way, — ^anxious to slip their muzzles at any cost whatever.
A man of antique character; true as a child, simple, even
bashful, and of a strength and valour rarely exampled
among men. Open-hearted Antique populations would have
much worshipped such an Appearance; — Voltaire, too, for
the artificial Modems, has made a myth of him, of another
type ; one of those impossible cast-iron gentlemen, heroically
mad, such as they show in the Playhouses, pleasant but not
profitable, to an undiscerning Public.^ The last of the
Swedish Kings died in this way ; and the unmuzzled Official
Persons have not made much of kinging it in his stead.
Charles died; and, as we may say, took the life of Sweden
along with him ; for it has never shone among the Nations
since, or been much worth mentioning, except for its mis-
fortunes, spasmodic impotences and unwisdoms.

Stralsund instantly beat the chamade, as we heard ; and
all was surrender and subjection in those regions. Surrender ;
not yet pacification, not while Charles lived : nor for half-a-
centmy after his death, could Mecklenburg, Holstein-Gottorp,
and other his confederates, escape a sad coil of calamities
bequeathed by him to them. Friedrich Wilhelm returned to
Berlin, victorious from his first, which was also his last
Prussian War, in January 1716 ; and was doubtless a happy
man, not ^ to be buried in the Schlosskirche (under penalty of

' See Adlerfeld (Military History of Charles XI L London, 1740, 3 vols.,
‘from the Swedish,’ through the French) and Kohler (Miinzbclustigungeny ubi
supr^), for some authentic traits of his life and him.

CHAP. V.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR 867

17*51

God’s curse),’ but to find his little Fritz and Feekin, and all
the world, merry to see him, and all things put square again,
abroad as at home. He forbade the ‘ triumphal entry ’ which
Berlin was preparing for him ; entered privately ; and ordered
a thanksgiving sermon in all the churches next Sunday.

The Devil in Harness : Creutz the Fmance-Mmister

In the King’s absence nothing particular had occurred, —
except indeed the walking of a dreadful Spectre, three nights
over, in the corridors of the Palace at Berlin ; past the doors
where our little Prince and Wilhelmina slept : bringing with
it not airs from Heaven, we may fear, but blasts from the
Other place ! The stalwart sentries shook in their paces, and
became ‘ half-dead’ from terror. ^ A horrible noise, one
night,’ says Wilhelmina, ^ when all were buried in sleep : all
the world started up, thinking it was fire; but they were
much surprised to find that it was a Spectre.’ Evident
Spectre, seen to pass this way, ‘ and glide along that gallery,
as if toward the apartments of the Queen’s Ladies.’ Captain
of the Guard could find nothing in that gallery, or anywhere,
and withdrew again : — but lo, it returns the way it went !
Stalwart sentries were found melted into actual deliquium of
swooning, as the Preternatural swept-by this second time.
‘ They said. It was the Devil in person ; raised by Swedish
wizards to kill the Prince-Royal.’ ^ Poor Prince-Royal ;
sleeping sound, we hope ; little more than three years old at
this time, and knowing nothing of it ! — All Berlin talked of
the affair. People dreaded it might be a ‘ Spectre’ of
Swedish tendencies ; aiming to bum the Palace, spirit-off the
Royal Children, and do one knew not what ^

Not that at all, by any means ! The Captain of the
Guard, reinforcing himself to defiance even of the Preter-
natural, does, on the third or fourth apparition? clutch the
Spectre ; finds him to be — a prowling Scullion of the Palace,
^ Wilhelmina, Mhnoires (U Bareiik^ L

868 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[1713-17*3

employed here he will not say how ; who is straightway locked
in prison, and so exorcised at least. Exorcism is perfect ; but
Berlin is left guessing as to the rest, — secret of it discover-
able only by the Queen’s Majesty and some few most interior
parties. To the following effect.

Spectre-Scullion, it turns out, had been employed by
Grumkow, as spy upon one of the Queen’s Maids of Honour,
— suspected by him to be a No-maid of Dishonour, and of
ill intentions too, — who lodges in that part of the Palace :
of whom Herr Grumkow wishes intensely to know, ‘ Has she
an intrigue with Creutz the new Finance-Minister, or has she
not ?’ ‘ Has, beyond doubt !’ the Spectre-Scullion hopes he

has discovered, before exorcism. Upon which Grumkow,
essentially illuminated as to the required particular, manages
to get the Spectre-Scullion loose again, not quite hanged;
glozing the matter off to his Majesty on his return : for the
rest, ruins entirely the Creutz speculation ; and has the
No-maid called of Honour, — with whom Creutz thought to
have seduced the young King also, and made the young King
amenable, — dismissed from Court in a peremptory irrefragable
manner. This is the secret of the Spectre-Scullion, fully
revealed by Wilhelmina many years after.

This one short glance into the Satan’s Invisible- World of
the Berlin Palace, we could not but afford the reader, when an
actual Goblin of it happened to be walking in our neigh-
bourhood. Such an Invisible- World of Satan exists in most
human houses, and in all human Palaces ; — with its imps
familiar-demons, spies, go-betweens, and industrious baA
angels, continually mounting and descending by their Jacob’s-
Ladder, or Palace Backstairs : operated upon by Conjurors
of the Grumkow-Creutz or other sorts. Tyrannous Mamsell
Leti,^ treacherous Mamsell Ramen, valet-surgeon Eversmann,

1 Leti, Governess to Wilhelmina, but soon dismissed for insolent cruelty and
other bad conCact, was daughter of that Gregorio Leti (‘Protestant Italian’
Refugee, ‘ Historiographer of Amsterdam,* etc. etc.), who once had a pension in
this country ; and wljo wrote History-Books, a Life of Cromwell one of them, so
regardless of the difference between true and false.

CHAP. V.] FRIEDRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR 869
*7*5]

and plenty more : readers of Wilhelmina’s Book are too well
acquainted with them. Nor are expert Conjurors wanting ;
capable to work strange feats with so plastic an element as
Friedrich Wilhelm’s mind. Let this one short glimpse of
such Subterranean-World be sufficient indication to the
reader’s fancy.

Creutz was not dismissed, as some people had expected he
might be. Creutz continues Finance-Minister ; makes a great
figure in the fashionable Berlin world in these coming years,
and is much talked of in the old Books, — though, as he
works mostly underground, and merely does budgets and
finance-matters with extreme talent and success, we shall hope
to hear almost nothing more of him. Majesty, while Crown-
Prince, when he first got his regiment from Papa, had found
this Creutz ‘Auditor’ in it; a poor but handsome fellow,
with perhaps seven shillings a week to live upon ; but with
such a talent for arranging, for reckoning and recording, in
brief for controlling finance, as more and more charmed the
royal mind.*

One of Majesty’s first acts was to appoint him Finance-
Minister and there he continued steady, not to be overset
by little flaws of wind like this of the Spectre-Scullion’s
raising. It is certain he did, himself, become rich ; and
helped well to make his Majesty so. We are to fancy him his
Majesty’s bottle-holder in that battle with the Finance Night-
mares and Imbroglios, when so much had to be subjugated,
and drilled into step, in that department. Evidently a long-
headed cunning fellow, much of the Grumkow type ; — stand-
ing very low in Wilhelmina’s judgment ; and ill-seen, when
not avoidable altogether, by the Queen’s Majesty. ‘ The man
was a poor Country Bailift*’s (Amtmann^Sj kind of Tax-

^ Mauvillon (* Elder Mauvillon/ Anonymous)^ HUtoirt dt Fridiric Guillaume

par M. de M * • * (Amsterdam et Leipzig, 1741), i, 47. A? vague flimsy
Compilation ; — ogives abundant * State-Papers* (to such as want them), and
echoes of old Newspaper rumour. Very copious on Creutz. ^

* 4th May 1713 : Preuss, i. 349 n.

VOL. I. , 2 A

*70 - APPBENTTCESfflP, PIBST STAGE [bookiv.

(X7Z3-i7«3

manager's) son: from Auditor of a regimenV Papa^s own
regiment, * he had risen to be Director of Finance, and a
Minister of State. His soul was as low as his birth ; it was
an assemblage of all the vices,^^ says Wilhelmina, in the
language of exaggeration. — ^Let him stand by his budgets;
keep well out of Wilhelmina’s and the Queen’s way ; — and
▼ery especially beware of coming on Grumkow’s field again.

CHAPTER VI
THE LITTLE DEUMMER

This Siege of Stralsund, the last military scene of
Charles xii., and the first ever practically heard of by our
little Fritz, who is now getting into his fourth year, and
must have thought a great deal about it in his little head, —
Papa and even Mamma being absent on it, and such a march-
ing and rumouring going on all round him, — proved to be
otherwise of some importance to little Fritz,

Most of his Tutors were picked up by the careful Papa in
this Stralsund business. Duhan de Jandun, a young French
gentleman, family- tutor to General Count Dohna (a cousin of
our Minister Dohna’s), but fonder of fighting than of teaching
grammar; whom Friedrich Wilhelm found doing soldier’s
work in the trenches, and liked the ways of ; he, as the
foundation-stone of tutorage, is to be first mentioned. And
then Count Fink von Finkenstein, a distinguished veteran,
high in command (of whose qualities as Head-Tutor, or
occasional travelling-guardian, Friedrich Wilhelm had ex-
perience in his own young days ; and Lieutenant-Colonel
Ealkstein, a prisoner-of-war from the Swedish side, whom
» Wilhelm^, i. i6.

* Biographisches JLexikm alter Helden und Militair Personen^ vtelche sick in
PreussiscAen Diensten berUmht gemacht haben (4 vols. Berlin, 17S8), i. 418,
§ Finkenstein. — A^praiseworthy, modest, highly correct Book, of its kind ; which
we ihaU| in future, call MilUair'Lexikm when referring to it.

CHAP.VI.] THE LITTLE DRUMMER 371

17151

Friedrich Wilhelm, judging well of him, adopts into his own
service with this view : these Three come all from Stralsund
Siege ; and were of vital moment to our little Fritz in the
subsequent time« Colonel Seckendorf, again, who had a
command in the Four-thousand Saxons here, and refreshed
into intimacy a transient old acquaintance with Friedrich
Wilhelm, — is not he too of terrible importance to Fritz and
him ? As we shall see in time 1—

For the rest, here is another little incident. We said it
had been a disappointment to Papa that his little Fritz showed
almost no appetite for soldiering, but found other sights
more interesting to him than the drill-ground. Sympathise,
then, with the earnest Papa, as he returns home one afternoon,
— date not given, but to all appearance of that year 1716,
when there was such war-rumouring, and marching towards
Stralsund ; — and found the little Fritz, with Wilhelmina
looking over him, strutting about, and assiduously beating a
little drum.

The paternal heart ran over with glad fondness, invoking
Heaven to confirm the omen. Mother was told of it; the
phenomenon was talked of, — ^beautifulest, hopefulest of little
drummers. Painter Pesne, a French Immigrant, or Importee,
of the last reign, a man of great skill with his brush, whom
Histoiy yet thanks on several occasions, was sent for ; or he
heard of the incident, and volunteered his services. A Portrait
of little Fritz drumming, with Wilhelmina looking on ; to
which, probably for the sake of colour and pictorial effect, a
Blackamoor, aside with parasol in hand, grinning approbation,
has been added, — was sketched, and dextrously worked out
in oil, by Painter Pesne. Picture approved by mankind there
and then. And it still hangs on the wall, in a perfect state,
in Charlottenburg Palace; where the judicious toArist may
see it without difficulty, and institute reflections on it.

A really graceful little Picture ; and certainly, to Prussian
men, not without weight of meaning. Nor perhaps to Picture-

878 AK^RENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[I7X3-I7«3

CoUeetars and Cognoscenti generally, of whatever country,— if
they could forget, for a moment, the coreggiosity of Coreggio,
and the learned babble of the Sale-room and varnishing
Aucticmeer ; and think, ‘ Why it is, probably, that Pictmres
exist in this world, and to what end the divine art of Painting
was bestowed, by the earnest gods, upon poor mankind ? ' 1

could advise it once, for a little ! Flaying of Saint Bar-
tholomew, Rape of Europa, Rape of the Sabines, Piping and
Amours of goat-footed Pan, Romulus suckled by the Wolf :
all this, and much else of fabulous, distant, unimportant, not
to say impossible, ugly and unworthy, shall pass without undue
severity of criticism, in a Household of such opulence as ours,
where much goes to waste, and where things are not on an
earnest footing for this long while past ! As Created Objects,
or as Phantasms of such, pictorially done, all this shall have
much worth, or shall have little. But I say, Here withal is
one not phantasmal ; of indisputable certainty, homegrown,
just commencing business, who carried it far !

Fritz is still, if not in ‘ long-clothes,’ at least in longish and
flowing clothes, of the petticoat sort, which look as of dark-
blue velvet, very simple, pretty and appropriate ; in a cap of
the same ; has a short raven’s feather in the cap ; and looks
up, with a face and eyes full of beautiful vivacity and child’s
enthusiasm, one of ihe beautifulest little figures, while the
little drum responds to his bits of drumsticks. Sister Wilhel-
mina, taller by some three years, looks on in pretty marching
attitude, and with a graver smile. Blackamoor, and accom-
paniments elegant enough ; and finally the figure of a
grenadier, on guard, seen far off through an opening, — ^make
up the background.

We have Engravings of this Picture ; which are oi clumsy
poor quality, and misrepresent it much : an excellent Copy in
oil, Vhat •might be call^ almost a facsimile and the perfection
of a Copy, is now (1854) in Lord Ashburton’s Collection here
in England. ^Jn the Berlin Galleries, — which are made up,
like other Galleries, of goat-footed Pan, Europa’s Bull,

CHAP. VI.] THE LITTLE DRUMMfiB 8T*

1715]

Romulus^s She-Wolf, and the coreggiositj of Coreggio ; aiid
contain, for instance, no Portrait of Frederick the Great ; no
likenesses at all, or next to none at all, of the noble series of
Human Realities, or of any part of them, who have q>nuig
not from the idle brains of dreaming Dilettanti, but from the
Head of God Almighty, to make this poor authentic Earth
a little memorable for us, and to do a little work that may be
eternal there : — in those expensive Halls of * High Art ’ at
Berlin, there were, to my experience, few Pictures more agree-
able than this of Pesne^s. Welcome, like one tiny islet of
Reality amid the shoreless sea of Phantasms, to the reflective
mind, seriously loving and seeking what is worthy and
memorable, seriously hating and avoiding what is the reverse,
and intent not to play the dilettante in this world.

The same Pesne, an excellent Artist, has painted Friedrich
as Prince-Royal : a beautiful young man with moiri^-looking
enthusiastic eyes of extraordinary brilliancy, smooth oval face ;
considerably resembling his Mother. After which period,
authentic Pictures of Friedrich are sought for to little purpose.
For it seems he never sat to any Painter, in his reigning days ;
and the Prussian Chodowiecki,^ Saxon GraiF, English Cunning-
ham had to pick-up his physiognomy from the distance, inter-
mittently, as they could. Nor is Rauch’s grand equestrian
Sculpture a thing to be believed, or perhaps pretending much
to be so. The commonly-received Portrait of Friedrich, which
all German limners can draw at once, — ^the cocked-hat, big
eyes and alert air, reminding you of some uncommonly brisk
Invalid Drill-sergeant or Greenwich Pensioner, as much as of
a Royal Hero, — ^is nothing but a general extract and average
of all the faces of Friedrich, such as has been tacitly agreed
upon ; and is definable es a received pictorial-myth, by no
means as a fact, or credible resemblance of life.

But enough now of Pictures. This of the Little Drummer,
the painting and the thing painted which remaift to may

' Pronounce Kodav-yetski endeavour to make s^me acquaintance with

this * Prussian Hogarth,’ who has real worth and originality.

874 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[17x3-17*3

be taken as Friedrich‘’s first appearance on the stage of the
world ; and welcomed accordingly. It is one of the very few
visualities or definite certainties we can lay hold of, in those
young years of his, and bring conclusively home to our
imagination, out of the waste Prussian dust-clouds of unin*
structive garrulity which pretend to record them for us.
Whether it came into existence as a shadowy emanation from
the Stralsund Expedition, can only be matter of conjecture.
To judge by size, these figures must have been painted about
the year 1716 ; Fritz some three or four years old, his sister
Wilhelmina seven.

It remains only to be intimated, that Friedrich Wilhelm,
for his part, had got all he claimed from this Expedition :
namely, Stettin with the dependent Towns, and quietness in
Pommem. Stettin was, from of old, the capital of his own
part of Pommem ; thrown-in along with the other parts of
Pommem, and given to Sweden (from sheer necessity, it was
avowed), at the Peace of Westphalia, sixty years ago or more :
— and now, by good chance, it has come back. Wait another
hundred years, and perhaps Swedish Pommem altogether will
come back ! But from all this Friedrich Wilhelm is still far.
Stettin and quiet are all he dreams of demanding there.

Stralsund he did not reckon his ; left it with the Danes,
to hold in pawn till some general Treaty. Nor was there
farther outbreak of war in those regions ; though actual Treaty
of Peace did not come till 1720, and make matters sure. It
was the new Queen of Sweden, Ulrique Eleonora (Charles’s
younger Sister, wedded to the young Landgraf of Hessen-
Cassel), — ^much aided by an English Envoy, — who made this
Peace with Friedrich Wilhelm. A young English Envoy,
called Lord Carteret, was very helpful in this matter ; one of
his first feats in the diplomatic world. For which Peace ^
Friedrich Wllhelm was so thankful, good pacific armed-man,

^ Stockholm, 3ist tjanuary 1730: in Mauvillon (i. 380-417) the Document
lUeU at large.

CHAP.viL] TRANSIT OP CZAR PETER 876
17171

that happening to have a Daughter bom to him just about
that time, he gave the little creature her Swedish Majesty’s
name; a new ‘Ulrique,’ who grew to proper stature^ and
became notable in Sweden, herself, by and by,^

CHAPTER VII
TRANSIT OP CZAH PETER

In the Autumn of 1717, Peter the Great, coming home
from his celebrated French journey, paid Friedrich Wilhelm a
visit ; and passed four days at Berlin, Of which let us give
one glimpse, if we can with brevity.

Friedrich Wilhelm and the Czar, like in several points,
though so dissimlilar in others, had always a certain regard
for one another ; and at this time, they had been brought
into closer intercourse by their common peril from Charles xii.,
ever since that Stralsund business. The peril was real,
especially with a Gdrtz and Alberoni putting hand to it ;
and the alarm, the rumour, and uncertainty were great in
those years. The wounded Lion driven indignant into
his lair, with Plotting Artists now operating upon the
rage of the noble animal : who knows what spring he will
next take ?

George i, had a fleet cruising in the Baltic Sounds, and
again a fleet ; — ^paying, in that oblique way, for Bremen and
Verden ; which were got, otherwise, such a bargain to his
Hanover. Czar Peter had marched an Army into Denmark ;
united Russians and Danes count Fifty-thousand there ; for a
conjunct invasion, and probable destruction, of Sweden : but
that came to nothing ; Charles looking across upon it too
dangerously, ‘ visible in clear weather over from the Danish
side.’ ^ So Peter’s troops have gone home again ; Denmark

^ Louisa Ulrique, born 24th July 1720 ; Queen of Sweden in time coming.

* 1716: Fassmann, p. 171.

870 APPHEimcaESHlP, PffiST STAGE [book nr.

Cz7i3-tm

too glad to get tiiem away. Perhaps they would have staid
in Denmark altogether ; much liking the green pastures and
convenient situation,— had not Admiral Norris with his
cannon been there! Ftohaps? And the Pretender is
coming again, they say ? And who knows what is coming P
— How Gortz, in about a year hence was laid hold of, and let
go, and then ultimately tried and beheaded (once his lion
Master was disposed of) ; ^ how. Ambassador Cellamare, and
the Spanish part of the Plot, having been discovered in Paris,
Cardinal Alberoni at Madrid was discovered, and the whole
mystery laid bare ; all that mad business, of bringing the
Pretender into England, throwing out George i., throwing
out the Regent dX)rl^8, and much more, — is now sunk
silent enough, not worthy of reawakening ; but it was then a
most loud matter ; filling the European Courts, and especially
that of Berlin, with rumours and apprehensions. No wonder
Friedrich Wilhelm was grateful for that Swedish Peace of his,
and named his little daughter * Ulrique ’ in honour of it.
Tumultuous cloud-world of Lapland Witchcraft had ceased
hereby, and daylight had begun : old women (or old Cardinals)
riding through the sky, on broomsticks, to meet Satsui, where
now are they ? The fact still dimly perceptible is, Europe,
thanks to that pair of Black- Artists, Grortz and Alberoni, not
to mention Law the Finance- Wizard and his French incanta-
tions, had been kept generally, for these three or four years
past, in the state of a Haunted House ; riotous Goblins, of
unknown dire intent, wadking now in this apartment of it,
now in that ; no rest anywhere for the perturbed inhabitants.

As to Friedrich Wilhelm, his plan in 1717, as all along,
in this bewitched state of matters, was : To fortify his
Frontier Towns ; Memel, Wesel, to the right and left,
especially to fortify Stettin, his new acquisition; — and to
put hi$ Army, and his Treasury (or AimyChest)y more and
more in order. In tiiat way we shall better meet whatever

^ 19th March 1719*^ see Kohler vL 233-240, zviL 297-

304) for many curious details of Gorts and his end.

CKAP.viL] TRANSIT OP CZAR PETER 877

f7i7l ,

goblins there may be, thinks Friedrich Wilhelm. Count
Lottum, hero of the Prussians at Malplaquet, is doing his
scientific uttermost in Stettin and those Frontier Towns.
For the rest, his Majesty, invited by the Czar and France,
has been found willing to make paction with them, as he is
with all pacific neighbours. In fact, the Czar and he had
their private Conference, at Havelberg, last year, — ^Hayd[ba:g,
some sixty miles from Berlin, on the road towards Denmark,
as Peter was passing that way; — ample Conference of five
days;^ — ^privately agreeing there, about many points con-
ducive to tranquillity.

And it was on that same errand, though ostensibly to look
after Art and the higher forms of Civilisation so-called, that
Peter had been to France on this celebrated occasion of 1717.
We know he saw much Art withal ; saw Marly, Trianon and
the grandeurs and politenesses ; — saw, among other things,
Medal of himself fall accidentally at his feet’; polite
Medal < just getting struck in the Mint, with a rising sun on it ;
and the motto, vires AcauiRir eitndo.’ ^ Ostensibly it was to
see cette belle France ; but privately withal the Czar wished to
make his bargain, with the Regent d'*Orldans, as to these
goblins walking in the Northern and Southern parts, and
what was to be done with them. And the result has been,
the Czar, Friedrich Wilhelm and the said Regent have just
concluded an Agreement ; ® undertaking in general, that the
goblins shall be well watched ; that they Three will stand by
one another in watching them. And now the Czar will visit
Berlin in passing homewards again. That is the position of
affairs, when he pays this visit. Peter had been in Berlin
more than once before ; but almost always in a succinct rapid
condition ; never with his ‘ Court ’ about him till now. TTiis
is his last, and by far his greatest, appearance in Berlin.

* 23d-28th November 1716 : Fassmann, p. 172. #

• Voltaire, (Euvres Computes {Histoire du Czar Pierre), xxxi. 336. —Kohler,

in MiinzbelusHgungm, xvii. 386-392 (this very Medal the subject), gives authentis
account, day by day, of the Czar’s visit there. •

’ 4th August 1717 : Buchholz, i. 43.

S78 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[X713-X733

Sudb a transit, of the Barbaric semi-fabulons Sovereignties,
could not but be wonderful to everybody there. It evidently
struck Wilhelmina’s fancy, now in her ninth year, very much.
What her little Brother did in it, or thought of it, I nowhere
find hinted ; conclude only that it would remain in his head
too, visible occasionally to the end of his life. Wilhelmina^s
Narrative, very loose, dateless or misdated, plainly wrong in
various particulars, has still its value for us : human eyeSy
even a child's, are worth something, in comparison to human
want-of-eyes, which is too frequent in History-books and else-
where ! — Czar Peter is now forty-five, his Czarina Catherine
about thirty-one. It was in 1698 that he first passed this
way, going towards Saardam and practical Shipbuilding :
within which twenty years what a spell of work done !
Victory of Pultawa is eight years behind him ; ^ victories in
many kinds are behind him : by this time he is to be
reckoned a triumphant Czar; and is certainly the strangest
mixture of heroic virtue and brutish Samoeidic savagery the
world at any time had.

It was Sunday 19th September 1717, when the Czar
arrived in Berlin. Being already sated with scenic parades,
he had begged to be spared all ceremony; begged to be
lodged in Monbijou, the Queen’s little Garden-Palace with
river and trees round it, where he hoped to be quietest.
Monbijou has been set apart accordingly ; the Queen, not in
the benignest humour, sweeping all her crystals and brittle
things away ; knowing the manners of the Muscovites. Nor
in the way of ceremony was there much : King and Queen
drove out to meet him ; rampart-guns gave three big salvos,
as the Czarish Majesty stept forth. ‘ I am glad to see you,
my Brother Friedrich,’ said Peter, in German, his only in-
telligible language ; shaking hands with the Brother Majesty,
in a qDrdial human manner. The Queen he, still more
cordially, ‘ would have kissed ’ ; but this she evaded, in some
graceful efiective way. As to the Czarina, — who, for obstetric
' a7thjunc, 1709.

CHAP.m] TRANSIT OF CZAR PETER 979

17*71

and other reasons, of no moment to us, had staid in Wesel all
the time he was in France, — she followed him now at two-
days distance ; not along with him, as Wilhelmina has it*
Wilhelmina says, she kissed the Queen's hand, and again and
again kissed it ; begged to present her Ladies, — ‘ about four-
hundred so-called Ladies, who were of her Suite.' — Surely not
so many as Four-hundred, you too- witty Princess ? ‘ Mere

Grerman serving-maids for the most part,' says the witty
Princess ; < Ladies when there is occasion, then acting as
chambermaids, cooks, washerwomen, when that is over.'

Queen Sophie was averse to salute these creatures ; but the
Czarina Catherine making reprisals upon our Margravines,
and the King looking painfully earnest in it, she prevailed
upon herself. Was tiiere ever seen such a travelling tag-
raggery of a Sovereign Court before ? ‘ Several of these

creatures ' (presqtie touteSj says the exaggerative Princess)
‘ had, in their arms, a baby in rich dress ; and if you asked,
Is that yours, then ? " they answered, making salaams in
Russian style, The Czar did me the honour (m'a Jmt Vhon^
newr de me Jhire cet erifanf) ! " ’ —

Which statement, if we deduct the due 26 per cent, is
probably not mythic, after all. A day or two ago, the Czar
had been at Magdeburg, on his way hither, intent upon
inspecting matters there ; and the Official Gentlemen, — ^Pre-
sident Cocceji (afterwards a very celebrated man) at the head
of them, — waited on the Czar, to do what was needful. On
entering, with the proper Address or complimentary Harangue,
they found his Czarish Majesty ‘ standing between two Russian
Ladies,' clearly Ladies of the above sort ; for they stood close
by him, one of his arms was round the neck of each, and his
hands amused themselves by taking liberties in that posture,
all the time Cocceji spoke. Nay, even this was as nothing
among the Magdeburg phenomena. Next day, for instance,
there appeared in the audience-chamber a Certain^serene high-
pacing Duke of Mecklenburg, with his Duchess ; — ^thrice-un-
fortunate Duke, of whom we shall too often hear again ; who.

SSO AFFBENnCESHIP, FIBST STAGE {book IV.

iftar same aoraitiireB, nnckr Charles xn. first af all, and then
under the enemies of Charles, had, about a year ago, after
divorcing his first Wife, married a Niece of Petor^s : — ^Duke
and Duchess arrive now, by order or gracious invitation of
their Sovereign Unde, to accompany him in those parts ; and
axe announced to an eager Czar, giving audience to his select
Magdeburg public. At sight of which most desirable Duchess
and Brother’s Daughter, how Peter started up, satyrlike,
clasping her in his arms, and snatching her into an inner
room, with the door left ajar, and there — It is too Samoeidic
for human speech ! and would excel belief, were not the testi-
mony so strong.^ A Duke of Mecklenburg, it would appear,
who may count himself the Non-plus-vUra of Husbands in
that epoch ; — as among Sovereign Rulers, too, in a small or
great way, he seeks his fellow for ill-luck !

Duke and Duchess accompanied the Czar to Berlin, where
Wilhelmina mentions them, as presentees ; part of those
^ four-hundred ’ anomalies. They took the Czar home with
them to Mecklenburg : where indeed some Russian Regiments
of his, left here on their return from Denmark, had been
very useful in coercing the rebellious Ritterschaft {Knightagey
or Landed-Gentry) of this Duke, — till at length the general
outcry, and voice of the Reich itself, had ordered the said
Regiments to get on march again, and take themselves away.^
For all is rebellion, passive-rebellion, in Mecklenburg ; taxes
being so indispensable ; and the Benights so disinclined ; and
this Duke a Sovereign, — such as we may construe from his
quarrelling with almost everybody, and his not quarrelling
with an Uncle Peter of that kind.® His troubles as Sovereign
Duke, his flights to Dantzig, oustings, returns, law-pleadings
and foolish confusions, lasted all his life, thirty years to come ;

^ PSUnitz {Mgffipiren, ii. 95) gives Friedrich Wilhelm as voucher, * who used
to relate it as irom eye>and-ear witnesses.*

• Thtlast of (hem, * July 1717 ’ ; two months ago. (Michaelis, ii. 418.)

* One poor hint, on his behalf, let us not omit : * Wife quitted him in 1719,
and lived at Mosco^ afterwards I * (General Mannstein, Memoirs of Russia^
Loadoo, rifOy p. s; n.).

CHAP.VIL] TRANSIT OF CZAR PETER »81
wi

and were bequeathed as a sorrowful legacy to Posterity and
the neighbouring Countries, Voltaire says, the Casar wished
to buy his Duchy from him,^ And truly, for this wretched
Duke, it would have been good to sell it at any price : but
there were other words than his to such a bargain, had it
ever been seriously meditated. By this extraordinary Duchess
he becomes Father (real or putative) of a certain Princesa
whom we may hear of; €uid through her again is Grand-
father of an unfortunate Russian Prince, much bruited about,
as ‘ the murdered Iwan,’ in subsequent times. With such a
Duke and Duchess let our acquaintance be the minimum of
what necessity compels.

Wilhelmina goes by hearsay hitherto; and, it is to be
hoped, had heard nothing of these Magdeburg-Mecklenburg
phenomena ; but after the Czarina’s arrival, the little creature
saw with her own eyes :

'Next day/ that is, Wednesday 22d, 'the Czar and his Spouse came
to return the Queen’s visit ; and I saw 'the Court myself.* Palace
Grand-Apartments ; Queen advancing a due length, even to the outer
guard-room ; giving the Czarina her right hand, and leading her into
her audience-chamber in that distinguished manner: King and Czar
followed close ; — and here it was that Wilhelmina’s personal experiences
began. 'The Czar at once recognised me, having seen me before, five
years ago* (March 1713). 'He caught me in his arms ; fell to kissing
me, like to day the skin off my face. I boxed his ears, sprawled, and
struggled with all my strength ; saying I would not allow such
familiarities, and that he was dishonouring me. He laughed greatly at
this idea ; made peace, and talked a long time with me. I had got my
lesson : I spoke of his fleet and his conquests ; — which charmed him so
much, that he said more than once to the Czarina, " If he could have a
child like me, he would willingly give one of his Provinces in ex-
change.** The Czarina also caressed me a good deal. The Queen*
(Mamma) ^ and she placed themselves under the dais, each in an arm-
chair * of proper dignity ; ' I was at the Queen's side, and the Princesses
of the Blood,' Margravines above spoken of, ' were opposite Ip her,* — ^all
in a standing posture, as is proper.

' The Czarina was a little stumpy body, very brown, and had neither
^ Ubi auprit, xxxL 4x4. *

8858 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[X7I3-X7«

air nor grace ; you needed only look at ker^ to guess her low extraction.
It b no secret^ eke kad been a kitcken-wenck in ker litkuanian native
country ; afterwards a female of tke kind called unfortunate^ under
several figures : kowever^ ske saved tke Czar once^ by ker ready-wit and
courage^ from a devouring Turkbk Difficulty^ and ke made ker fortunate
and a Czarina^ to sit under the dais as now. ^Witk ker huddle of
clothes^ ske looked for all tke world like a German Playactress ; ker
dress^ you would have said^ kad been bought at a secondhand shop ; all
was out of fashion^ all was loaded with silver and greasy dirt Tke front
of ker bodice she kad ornamented with jewels in a very singular pattern :
A double-eagle in embroidery^ and tke plumes of it set with poor little
diamonds^ of tke smallest possible carats and very ill mounted. All
along tke facing of ker gown were Orders and little things of metal ; a
dozen Orders^ and as many Portraits of saints^ of relics and the like ; so
that when she walked, it was with a jingling, as if you heard a mule with
bells to its harness.' — Poor little Czarina ; shifty nutbrown fellow-
creature, strangely chased about from tke bottom to the top of tkb world ;
it is evident she does not succeed at Queen Sophie Dorothee's Court ! —
^The Czar, on the other hand, was very tall, and might be called hand-
some,' continues Wilhelmina : * his countenance was beautiful, but had
something of savage in it which put you in fear.' Partly a kind of
Milton's-Devil physiognomy ? The Portraits give it rather so. Archangel
not quite ruined, yet in sadly ruinous condition ; its heroism so bemired,
— with a turn for strong drink, too, at times ! A physiognomy to make
one reflect. ^ His dress was of sailor fashion, coat altogether plain.*

* The Czarina, who spoke German very ill herself, and did not under-
stand well what the Queen said, beckoned to her Fool to come near,’ — a
poor female creature, who had once been a Princess Galitzin, but having
got into mischief, had been excused to the Czar by her high relations as
mad, and saved from death or Siberia, into her present strange harbour
of refuge. With her the Czarina talked in unknown Russ, evidently
* laughing much and loud,' till Supper was announced.

^ At table,’ continues Wilhelmina, ^ the Czar placed himself beside the
Queen. It is understood this Prince was attempted with poison in his
youth, and that something of it had settled on his nerves ever after.
One thing b certain, there took him very often a sort of convulsion,
like Tic or St -Vitus, which it was beyond his power to control. That
happened at table now. He got into contortions, gesticulations ; and as
the knife was in his hand, and went dancing about within armslength
of the Queen, it frightened her, and she motioned several times to rise.
The Czar begged her not to mind, for he would do her no ill ; at
the same time he took her by the hand, which he grasped with such
violence that the Queej^n was forced to shriek out This set him heartily

CHAP. VII.] TRANSIT OP CZAR PETER 883
*7*7] ^ ,

laughing ; saying she had not bones of so hard a texture as his Catherine’s.
Supper done^ a grand Ball had been got ready ; but the Czar escaped
at once^ and walked home by himself to Monbijou^ leaving the others
to dance.*

Wilhelmina’s story of the Cabinet of Antiques ; of the
Indecent little Statue there, and of the orders Catherine got
to kiss it, with a ‘ Kopf ah (Head off, if you won't) ! ’ from
the bantering Czar, whom she had to obey, — is not incredible,
after what we have seen. It seems, he begged this bit of
Antique Indecency from Friedrich Wilhelm ; who, we may
fancy, would give him such an article with especial readiness.
That same day, fourth of the Visit, Thursday 23cl of the
month, the august Party went its ways again ; Friedrich
Wilhelm convoying ‘ as far as Potsdam ’ ; Czar and Suite
taking that route towards Mecklenburg, where he still intends
some little pause before proceeding homeward. Friedrich
Wilhelm took farewell ; and never saw the Czar again.

It was on this Journey, best part of which is now done,
that the famous Order bore, ^ Do it for six-thousand thalers ;
won't allow you one other penny (nit einen Pfennig gehe mehr
dazu) ; but give out to the world that it costs me thirty or
forty thousand ! ' Nay, it is on record that the sum proved
abundant, and even superabundant, near half of it being left
as overplus.' The hospitalities of Berlin, Friedrich Wilhelm
took upon himself, and he has done them as we see. You
shall defray his Czarish Majesty, to the last Prussian mile-
stone ; punctually, properly, though with thrift !

Peter’s viaticumy the Antique Indecency, Friedrich Wilhelm
did not grudge to part with ; glad to purchase the Czar's
goodwill by coin of that kind. Last year, at Havelberg, he
had given the Czar an entire Cabinet of Amber Articles,
belonging to his late Father. Amber Cabinet, in the lump ;
and likewise such a Yacht, for shape, splendour and outfit,
as probably Holland never launched before ;#--Yaftht also
belonging to his late Father, and without value to Friedrich

^ Forster, L 815.

884 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[X7X3-X7as

Wilhelm. The dd King had got it built in Holland reg^-
less ci expense, — 15,000Z., they say, perhaps as good as
50,0002. now ; — and it lay at Potsdam : good for what ?
Friedrich Wilhelm sent it down the Havel, down the Elbe,
silk sailors and all, towards Hamburg and Petersburg, with a
great deal of pleasure. For the Czar, and peace and goodwill
with the Czar, was of essential value to him. Neither, at any
rate, is the Czar a man to take gifts without return. Tall
fellows for soldiers : that is always one prime object with
Friedrich Wilhelm ; for already these Potsdam Guards of his
are getting ever more gigantic. Not less an object, though
less an ideal or poetic one (as we once defined), was this other,
to find buyers for the Manufactures, new and old, which
he was so bent on encouraging. ^It is astonishing, what
quantities of cloth, of hardware, salt, and all kinds of manu-
factured articles the Russians buy from us,^ say the old Books ;
— * see how our Russian Company ^ flourishes ! ’ In both
these objects, not to speak of peace and goodwill in general,
the Czar is our man.

Thus, this very Autumn, there €UTive, astonished and
astmiishing, no fewer than a Hundred-and-fifty human figures
(one-half more than were promised), probably from seven to
eight feet high ; the tallest the Czar could riddle out from his
Dominions : what a windfall to the Potsdam Guard and its
Colonel-King ! And all succeeding Autumns the like, so long
as Friedrich Wilhelm lived ; every Autumn, out of Russia a
hundred of the tallest mortals living. Invaluable, — ^to a ^ man
of genius ’ mounted on his hobby ! One’s ‘ stanza ’ can be
polished at this rate.

In return for these Russian sons of Anak, Friedrich Wilhelm
grudged not to send German smiths, millwrights, drill-
sergeants, cannoneers, engineers ; having plenty of them. By
whom, as Peter well calculated, the inert opaque Russian mass
might be kin(?led into luminosity and vitality ; and drilled to
know the Art of War, for one thing. Which followed
accordingly. And it is observable, ever since, that the Russian

CH. viiL] CROWN-PRINCE PUT TO SCHOOLING 886

1719]

Art of War has a tincture of Gernum in it (solid German,
as contradistinguished from unsolid Revolutionary-French) ;
and hints to us of Friedrich Wilhelm and the Old Dessauer,

to this hour. Execmt now the Betrbaric semi-fabulous

Sovereignties, till wanted again.

CHAPTER VIII

THE CROWN-PRINCE IS PUT TO HIS SCHOOLING

In his seventh year, young Friedrich was taken out of the
hands of the women ; and had Tutors and Sub-Tutors of
masculine gender, who had been nominated for him some time
ago, actually set to work upon their function. These we have
already heard of ; they came from Stralsund Siege, all the
principal hands.

Duhan de Jandun, the young French gentleman who had
escaped from grammar-lessons to the trenches, he is the
practical teacher. Lieutenant-General Graf Fink von Finken-
stein and Lieutenant-Colonel von Kalkstein, they are Head
Tutor {Oberhojmeister) and Sub-Tutor; military men both,
who had been in many wars besides Stralsund. By these
Three he was assiduously educated, subordinate schoolmasters
working under them when needful, in such branches as the
paternal judgment would admit; the paternal object and
theirs being to infuse useful knowledge, reject useless, and
wind-up the whole into a military finish. These appoint-
ments, made at different precise dates, took effect, all of them,
in the year 1719.

Duhan, independently of his experience in the trenches,
appears to have been an accomplished, ingenious and conscien-
tious man ; who did credit to Friedrich Wilhelm’s judgment ;
and to whom Friedrich professed himself much^ indebted in
after life. Their progress in some of the technical branches,
as we shall perceive, was indisputably unsatisfactory. But the

886 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[17x3-17*3

mind of the Boy seems to have been opened by this Duhan, to
a lively, and in some sort genial, perception of things round
him ; — of the strange confusedly opulent Universe he had got
into ; and of the noble and supreme function which Intelligence
holds there ; supreme, in Art as in Nature, beyond all other
functions whatsoever. Duhan was now turned of thirty : a
cheerful amiable Frenchman ; poor, though of good birth and
acquirements; originally from Champagne. Friedrich loved
him very much ; always considered him his spiritual father ;
and to the end of Duhan’s life, twenty years hence, was eager
to do him any good in his power. Anxious always to repair,
for poor Duhan, the great sorrows he came to on his account,
as we shall see.

Of Graf Fink von Finkenstein, who has had military
experiences of all kinds and all degrees, from march-
ing as prisoner into France, ‘wounded and without his
hat,’ to fighting at Malplaquet, at Blenheim, even at Steen-
kirk, as well as Stralsund ; who is now in his sixtieth year,
and seems to have been a gentleman of rather high solemn
manners, and indeed of undeniable perfections, — of this
supreme Count Fink we learn almost nothing farther in the
Books, except that his little Pupil did not dislike him either.
The little Pupil took not unkindly to Fink ; welcoming any
benignant human ray, across these lofty gravities of the
Oberhofmeister ; went often to his house in Berlin ; and made
acquaintance with two young Finks about his own age, whom
he found there, and who became important to him, especially
the younger of them, in the course of the future. ^ This
Pupil, it may be said, is creditably known for his attachment
to his Teachers and others; an attached and attaching
little Boy.

Of Kalkstein, a rational, experienced and earnest kind of
man, though as yet but young, it is certain also that the little
Fritz loved ^nim ; and furtliermore that the Great Friedrich

^ Zedliti-Neukirch^ Preussischcs AaUls-Lexikm (Leipzig, 1836), ii. 168. Mili^
tair-L$xikon^ i. 420.

CH. VIII.] CROWN.PRINCaE PUT TO SCHOOLING 887

was grateful to him, and had a high esteem of his int^ity
and sense. ‘ My master, Kalkstein,’ used to be his designation
of him, when the name chanced to be mentioned in after
times. They continued together, with various passages of
mutual history, for forty years afterwards, till Kalkstein^s
death. Ealkstein is at present twenty-eight, the youngest of
the three Tutors ; then, and ever after, an altogether down-
right correct soldier and man. He is of Preussen, or Prussia
Proper, this Ealkstein ; — of the same kindred as that mutinous
Ealkstein, whom we once heard of, who was * rolled in a
carpet,’ and kidnapped out of Warsaw, in the Great Elector’s
time. Not a direct descendant of that beheaded Ealkstein’s,
but, as it were, his nephew so many times removed. Preussen
is now far enough from mutiny ; subdued, with all its Ealk-
steins, into a respectful silence, not lightly using the right
even of petition, or submissive remonstrance, which it may still
have. Nor, except on the score of parliamentary eloquence
and newspaper copyright, does it appear that Preussen has
suffered by the change.

How these Fink-Ealkstein functionaries proceeded in the
great task they had got, — very great task, had they known
what Pupil had fallen to them, — is not directly recorded for
us, with any sequence or distinctness. We infer only that
everything went by inflexible routine ; not asking at all. What
pupil ? — nor much, Whether it would suit any pupil ? Duhan,
with the tendencies we have seen in him, who is willing to
soften the inflexible when possible, and to ‘ guide Nature ’ by
a rather loose rein, was probably a genial element in the
otherwise strict affair. Fritz had one unspeakable advantage,
rare among princes and even among peasants in these ruined
ages : that of not being taught, or in general not, by the kind
called ^ Hypocrites, and even Sincere- Hypocrites,’ — ^fatalest
species of the class Hypocrite. We perceive he^was lessoned,
all along, not by enchanted Phantasms of that dangerous sort,
breathing mendacity of mind, unconsciously, out of every look ;

S88 APPBENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[1713-1793

but by real Men, who believed from the heart outwards, and
were daily doing what they taught. To which unspeakable
advantage we add a second, likewise considerable : That his
masters, though rigorous, were not unlovable to him ; — ^that
his affections, at least, were kept alive ; that whatever of seed
(or of chaff and hail, as was likelier) fell on his mind, had Jtm-
ahme to help in dealing with it. These are two advantages
still achievable, though with difficulty, in our epoch, by an
earnest father in behalf of his poor little son. And these are,
at present, nearly all ; with ^ese well achieved, the earnest
father and his son ought to be thankful. Alas, in matter of
education, there are no highroads at present; or there are
such only as do not lead to the goal. Fritz, like the rest of
us, had to struggle his way, Nature and Didactic Art differing
very much from one another : and to* do battle, incessant
partial battle, with his schoolmasters for any education he
had.

A very rough Document, giving Friedrich Wilhelm^s regula-
tions on this subject, from his own hand, has come down to
us. Most dull, embroiled, heavy Document ; intricate,
gnarled, and, in fine, rough and stiff as natural bullheadedness
helped by Prussian pipeclay can make it ; — contains some
excellent hints, too ; and will show us something of Fritzchen
and of Friedrich Wilhelm both at once. That is to say,
always, if it can be read ! If by aid of abridging, elucidating
and arranging, we can get the reader engaged to peruse it
patiently; — which seems doubtful. The points insisted on,
in a ponderous but straggling confused manner, by his didactic
Majesty, are chiefly these :

1*. * Must impress my Son with a proper love and fear of God, as the
foundation and sole pillar of our temporal and eternal welfare. No false
religions, or sects of Atheist, Arian (Arrian), Socinian, or whatever name
the poisonous things have, which can so easily corrupt a young mind, are
to be eveh namf^d in his hearing : on the other hand, a proper abhorrence
(Ab^cheu) of Papistry, and insight into its baselessness and nonsensicallty
(Ungrund und Absy^itdt), is to be communicated to him:' — Papistry,
which is false enough, like the otiiers, but impossible to be ignor^ like

CH. vui.] CROWN-PRINCE PUT TO SCHOOLING 889

mgl

them ; mention theti and give him due abhorrence for it. For we are
Protestant to the bone in this country ; and cannot stand AbsurditiU,
least of all hypocritically-religious ditto 1 But the grand thing will be^

* To impress on him the true religion, which consists essentially in this,
That Christ died for all men,’ and generally that the Almighty’s justice
is eternal and omnipresent, — ^ which consideration is the only means of
keeping a sovereign person (^ouveraine Maeht), or one freed from human
penalties, in the right way.’

2*’. ' He is to learn no Latin ; ’ observe that, however it may surprise
you. What has a living German man and King, of the eighteenth
Christian SdBculum, to do with dead old Heathen Latins^ Romans, and the
lingo they spoke their fraction of sense and nonsense in ? Frightful, how
the young years of the European Generations have been wasted, for ten
centuries back ; and the Thinkers of the world have become mere walking
Sacks of Marine-stores, ^ Qdehrten, Learned,* as they call themselves ;
and gone hst to the world, in that manner, as a set of confiscated Pedants ;
— babbling about said Heathens, and their extinct lingo and fraction of
sense and nonsense, for the thousand years last past ! Heathen Latins,
Romans ; — who perhaps were no great things of Heathen, after all, if
well seen into ? 1 have heard judges say, they were inferior, in real
worth and grist, to German homegrowths we have had, if the confiscated
Pedants could have discerned it ! At any rate, they are dead, buried
deep, these two-thousand years ; well out of our way ; — and nonsense
enough of our own left, to keep sweeping into corners. Silence about
their lingo and them, to this new Crown-Prince ? ^ Let the Prince learn
French and German,’ so as to write and speak, ^with brevity and
propriety,’ in these two languages, which may be useful to him in life.
That will suffice for language8,-^provided he have anything effectually
rational to say in them. For the rest,

3*. 'Let him learn Arithmetic, Mathematics, Artillery, — Economy
to the very bottom,’ And, in short, useful knowledge generally ; useless
ditto not at all. ' History in particular ; — Ancient History only slightly
(nur Uberhin ) ; — but the History of the last Hundred-and-fifty Years to
the exactest pitch. The /its Naturale and Jue Gentium,* by way of hand-
lamp to History, ' he must be completely master of ; as also of Geography,
whatever is remarkable in each Country. And in Histories, most
especially the History of the House of Brandenburg ; where he will find
domestic examples, which are always of more force than foreign. And
along with Prussian History, chiefly that of the Countries which have been
connected with it, as England, Brunswick, Hessen and the others. And
in reading of wise History-books there must be consfcerations made
{soUen heym Lesen hluger HisUniarum BetrcLchtungen gemacht werden) upon
the causes of the events.' — Surely, O King ! *

390 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[17x3 1733

4 *. ^With increasing years^ you will more and more^ to a most
especial degree, go upon Fortification,' — mark you ! — ^the Formation
of a Camp, and the other War-Sciences ; that the Prince may, from youth
upwards, be trained to act as Officer and General, and to seek all his
glory in the soldier profession/ This is whither it must all tend. You,
Finkenstein and Kalkstein, ^ have both of you, in the highest measure,
to make it your care to infuse into my Son’ (einxuprdgeny stamp into
him), 'a true love for the Soldier business, and to impress on him
that, as there is nothing in the world which can bring a Prince renown
and honour like the sword, so he would be a despised creature before all
men, if he did not love it, and seek his sole glory {die einzige Gloria)
therein.*^ Which is an extreme statement of the case; showing how
much we have it at heart

These are the chief Friedrich Wilhelm traits ; the rest of
the document corresponds in general to what the late Majesty
had written for Friedrich Wilhelm himself on the like
occasion.^ Ruthless contempt of Useless Knowledge; and
passionate insight into the distinction between Useful and
Useless, especially into the worth of Soldiering as a royal
accomplishment, are the chief peculiarities here. In which
latter point too Friedrich Wilhelm, himself the most pacific
of men, unless you pulled the whiskers of him, or broke into
his goods and chattels, knew very well what he was meaning,
— much better than we of the ‘ Peace Society ’ and ‘ Philan-
thropic Movement ’ could imagine at first sight ! It is a
thing he, for his part, is very decided upon.

Already, a year before this time,® there had been instituted,
for express behoof of little Fritz, a miniature Soldier Company,
above a hundred strong ; which grew afterwards to be near
three-hundred, and indeed rose to be a permanent Institution
by degrees ; called Kompagnie der Kronprinzlichen Kadetten
(Company of Crown-Prince Cadets). A hundred-and-ten boys
about his own age, sons of noble families, had been selected
from the three Military Schools then extant, as a kind of tiny
regiment for him ; where, if he was by no means commander

^ Preuss, L 11-14 (dT date 13th August 1718). * Stenzel, iii. 57a.

• lit September 1717 ; Preuss, i. 13.

CH. VIII.] CROWN-PRINCE PUT TO SCHOOLING 391

all at once, he might leam his exercise in fellowship with
others. Czar Peter, it is likely, took a glance of this tiny
regiment just getting into rank and file there ; which would
remind the Czar of his own young days. An experienced
Lieutenant-Colonel was appointed to command in chief. A
certain handy and correct young fellow, Rentzel by name,
about seventeen, who already knew his fugling to a hairs-
breadth, was Drillmaster ; and exercised them all, Fritz
especially, with due strictness ; till, in the course of time and
of attainments, Fritz could himself take the head charge.
Which he did duly, in a year or two ; a little soldier thence-
forth ; properly strict, though of small dimensions ; in tight
blue bit of coat and cocked-hat : — miniature image of Papa
(it is fondly hoped and expected), resembling him as a sixpence
does a half-crown. In 17^1 the assiduous Papa set-up a ^ little
arsenal ’ for him, ‘ in the Orange Hall of the Palace ’ : there
let him, with perhaps a chosen comrade or two, mount
batteries, fire exceedingly small brass ordnance, — his Engineer-
Teacher, one Major von Senning, limping about (on cork leg),
and superintending if needful.

Rentzel, it is known, proved an excellent Drill-sergeant ; —
had good talents everyway, and was a man of probity and
sense. He played beautifully on the flute too, and had a
cheerful conversible turn ; which naturally recommended him
still farther to Fritz ; and awoke or encouraged, among other
faculties, the musical faculty in the little Boy. Rentzel
continued about him, or in sight of him, through life ;
advancing gradually, not too fast, according to real merit and
service (Colonel in 1759); and never did discredit to the
choice Friedrich Wilhelm had made of him. Of Senning, too,
Engineer-Major von Senning, who gave Fritz his lessons in
Mathematics, Fortification and the kindred branches, the like,
or better, can be said. He was of graver years ; and lost a
leg in the Marlborough Campaigns, poor gentleman ;*but had
abundant sense, native worth and cheery rational talk, in him :
so that he too could never be parted with^ by Friedrich, but

892 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[I7i3-i7a3

was kept on hand till the last, a permanent and variously
serviceable acquisition.

Thus, at least, is the military education of our Crown-
Prince cared for. And we are to fancy the little fellow, jfrom
his tenth year or earlier, going about in miniature soldier
figure, for most part ; in strict Spartan-Brandenburg costume,
of body as of mind. Costume little flattering to his own
private taste for finery ; yet by no means unwholesome to him,
as he came afterwards to know. In October 1723, it is on
record, when George i. came to visit his Son-in-law and
Daughter at Berlin, his Britannic Majesty, looking out from
his new queurters on the morrow, saw Fritzchen drilling his
Cadet Company ’ ; a very pretty little phenomenon. Drilling
with clear voice, militaiy sharpness, and the precision of clock-
work on the Esplanade {Lustgarteri) there; — and doubtless
the Britannic Majesty gave some grunt of acquiescence,
perhaps even a smile, rare on that square heavy-laden coun-
tenance of his. That is the record : ^ and truly it forms for
us by far the liveliest little picture we have got, from those
dull old years of European History. Years already sunk, or
sinking, into lonesome unpeopled Dusk for all men ; and fast
verging towards vacant Oblivion and eternal Night; — which
(if some few articles were once saved out of them) is their just
and inevitable portion from afflicted human nature.

Of riding - masters, fencing - masters, swimming - masters ;
much less of dancing-masters, music-masters (celebrated Graun,
‘ on the organ,’ with Psalm-tunes), we cannot speak ; but the
reader may be satisfied they were all there, good of their kind,
and pushing on at a fair rate. Nor is there lack anywhere of
paternal supervision to our young Apprentice. From an early
age. Papa took the Crown-Prince with him on his annual
Reviews. From utmost Memel on the Russian border, down
to Wesel on the French, all Prussia, in every nook of it, garrison,
marching-regiment, board of management, is rigorously reviewed
by Majesty once a year. There travels little military Fritz,

' Forster, i. 215.

CH. viil] CROWN-PRINCE PUT TO SCHOOLING 393

iTax]

beside the military Majesty, amid the generals and official
persons, in their hardy Spartan manner ; and learns to look
into everything like a Rhadamanthine Argus, and how the eye
of the master, more than all other appliances, fattens the
cattle.

On his hunts, too, Papa took him. For Papa was a
famous hunter, when at Wusterhausen in the season : — ^hot
Beagle-chase, hot Stag -hunt, your chief game deer; huge
^ Force-Hunt ’ (JParJbrce-Jagdy the woods all beaten, and your
wild-beasts driven into straits and caudine- forks for you);
Boar-hunting {Sauhetze^ ^ sow -baiting,’ as the Germans call
it), Partridge - shooting, Fox- and Wolf - hunting : — on all
grand expeditions of such sort, little Fritz shall ride with
Papa and party. Rough furious riding ; now on swift steed,
now at places on Wurstwagen^ — Wurstwagen^ ‘Sausage-Car’
so-called, most Spartan of vehicles, a mere stuffed pole or
‘ sausage ’ with wheels to it, on which you sit astride, a dozen
or so of you, and career ; — regardless of the summer heat and
sandy dust, of the winter’s frost-storms and muddy rain. All
this the little Crown-Prince is bound to do ; — but likes it
less and less, some of us are sorry to observe 1 In fact he
could not take to hunting at all, or find the least of per-
manent satisfaction in shooting partridges and baiting sows,
— ‘with such an expenditure of industry and such damage
to the seedfields,’ he would sometimes allege in extenuation.
In later years he has been known to retire into some glade
of the thickets, and hold a little Flute-Hautbois Concert with
his musical comrades, while the sows were getting baited.
Or he would converse with Mamma and her Ladies, if her
Majesty chanced to be there, in a day for open driving.
Which things by no means increased his favour with Papa, a
sworn hater of ‘ effeminate practices.’

He was ‘ nourished on beer - soup,’ as we said ^ before.
Frugality, activity, exactitude were lessons daily and hourly
brought home to him, in everytliing he did and saw. His
very sleep was stingily meted out to him : ' Too much sleep

394 APPRUNTlCjESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[I7X3.X713

stupefies a fellow ! ’ Friedrich Wilhelm was wont to say ; — so
that the very doctors had to interfere, in this matter, for little
Fritz. Frugal enough, hardy enough; urged in every way to look
with indifference on hardship, and take a Spartan view of life.

Money-allowance completely his own, he does not seem to
have had till he was seventeen. Exiguous pocket - money,
counted in groschen (English pence^ or hardly more), only his
Kalkstein and Finkenstein could grant as they saw good ; —
about eighteenpence in the month, to start with, as would
appear. The other small incidental moneys, necessary for his
use, were likewise all laid out under sanction of his Tutors,
and accurately entered in Day-books by them, audited by
Friedrich Wilhelm ; of which some specimens remain, and
one whole month, September 1719 (the Boy’s eighth year),
has been published. Very singular to contemplate, in these
days of gold-nuggets and irrational man-mountains fattened
by mankind at such a price ! The monthly amount appears
to have been some 3Z. 10^. : — ^and has gone, all but the
eighteenpence of sovereign pocket-money, for small furnishings
and very minute necessary luxuries ; — as thus :

^ To putting his Highness's shoes on the last ; ' for stretching them to
the little feet, — and only one ^ last,' as we perceive. ^ To twelve yards of
Hairtape ’ {Haarhand, for our little queue, which becomes visible here).
^For drinkmouey to the Postillions.' ^For the Housemaids at Wuster-
hausen' (Don't I pay them myself? objects the auditing Papa, at that
latter kind of items : No more of that). ^ For mending the flute, four
groschen (or pence) ;' ^Two Boxes of Colours, sixteen ditto;' ^For a live
snipe, twopence ; ' ^ For grinding the hanger ' (little swordkin) ; ^ To a
Boy whom the dog bit ; ' — and chiefly of all, ^ To the Klingheutel ' (Collec-
tion-plate, or bag, at Church), which comes upon us once, nay twice, and
even thrice a week, eighteenpence each time, and eats deep into our
straitened means. ^

On such terms can a little Fritz be nourished into a Fried-
rich the Great ; while irrational man - mountains, of the
beaverisn or beaverish-vulpine sort, take such a price to fatten
them into monstrosity ! The Art - manufacture of your

^ Preuss, i. 17.

CH. VIII.] CROWN-PRINCE PUT TO SCHOOLING S95

IViedrich can come very cheap, it would appear, if once
Nature have done her part in regard to him, and there
be mere honest will on the part of the bystanders. Thus
Samuel Johnson, too, cost next to nothing in the way of
board and entertainment in this world. And a Robert Bums,
remarkable modem Thor, a Peasant-god of these sunk ages,
with a touch of melodious runes in him (since all else lay
under ban for the poor fellow), was raised on frugal oatmeal,
at an expense of perhaps half-a-crown a week. Nuggets and
ducats are divine; but they are not the most divine. I
offen wish the Devil had the lion’s share of them, — at once,
and not circuitously as now. It would be an unspeakable
advantage to the bewildered sons of Adam, in this epoch !

But with regard to our little Crown -Prince’s intellectual
culture, there is another Document, specially from Papa’s
hand, which, if we can redact, adjust and abridge it, as in
the former case, may be worth the reader’s notice, and eluci-
date some things for him. It is of date, Wusterhausen, 3d
September 1721 ; little Fritz now in his tenth year, and out
there, with his Duhans and Finkensteins, while Papa is
rusticating for a few weeks. The essential title is, or
might be ;

To Head-Governor von Finkenstein, Sub-Governor von Kalkstein, Preceptor
Jacques Egide Duhan de Jandun, and others whom it may concern:
Regulations for schooling, at Wusterhausen, ^d September 1721 ; ^ — in
greatly abridged form.

Sunday, ^ On Sunday he is to rise at 7 ; and as soon as he has got his
slippers on, shall kneel down at his bedside, and pray to God, so as all
in the room may hear it * (that there be no deception or short measure
palmed upon us), ^ in these words : Lord God, blessed Father, I thank
thee from my heart that thou hast so graciously preserved me through
this night. Fit me for what thy holy will is ; and grant that I do
nothing this day, nor all the days of my life, which can divide me from
thee. For the Lord Jesus my Redeemer’s sake. Amei^” After which
the Lord’s Prayer. Then rapidly and vigorously {geschimnde und hurtig)
wash himself clean, dress and powder and comb lumself : * we forget to

^ Preuss, i. 19 .

896 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[17X3.1TO

Bay^ that while they are combing and queuing him, he breakfasts, with
brevity, on tea: ^Prayer, with washing, breakfast and the rest, to be
done pointedly within fifteen minutes,' — ^that is, at a quarter-past 7.

^This finished, all his Domestics and Duhan shall come in, and do
family worship {das grosse Gebet ssu halten): Prayer on their knees,
Duhan withal to read a Chapter of the Bible, and sing some proper
Psalm or Hymn’ (as practised in well-regulated families): — ^It will
then be a quarter to 8. All the Domestics then withdraw again ; and
Duhan now reads with my Son the Gospel of the Sunday ; expounds
it a little, adducing the main points of Christianity;' — ^questioning
from Noltenius's Catechism ' (which Fritz knows by heart) : — ^ it will
then be 9 o'clock.

^ At 9 he brings my Son down to me ; who goes to Church, and dir^s,
along with me ' (dinner at the stroke of Noon) : ‘ the rest of the day is
then his own ' (Fritz's and Duhan's). ^ At half-past 9 in the evening, he
shall come and bid me goodnight. Shall then directly go to his room ;
very rapidly (sehr geschwind) get off his clothes, wash his hands ' (get into
some tiny dressing-gown or cassaquin, no doubt) ; and so soon as that is
done, Duhan makes a prayer on his knees, and sings a hymn ; all the
Servants being again there. Instantly after which, my Son shall get into
bed ; shall be in bed at half-past 10 ; ' — and fall asleep how soon, your
Majesty ? This is very strict work.

Monday, ‘ On Monday, as on all weekdays, he is to be called at 6 ;
and so soon as called he is to rise ; you are to stand to him (anhalten)
that he do not loiter or turn in bed, but briskly and at once get up ; and
say his prayers, the same as on Sunday morning. This done, he shall as
rapidly as possible get on his shoes and spatterdashes ; also wash his face
and hands, but not with soap. Farther shall put on his cassaquin*
(short dressing-gown), ^have his hair combed out and queued, but not
powdered. While getting combed and queued, he shall at the same time
take breakfast of tea, so that both jobs go on at once ; and all this
shall be ended before half-past 6.' Then enter Duhan and the Domestics,
with worship, Bible, Hymn, all as on Sunday ; this is done by 7, and the
Servants go again.

^From 7 till 9 Duhan takes him on History; at 9 comes Noltenius*
(a sublime Clerical Gentleman from Berlin) with the ^ Christian Religion,
till a quarter to 11. Then Fritz rapidly (geschwind) washes his face with
water, hands with soap-and-water ; clean shirt; powders, and puts on
his coat ; — about 11 comes to the King. Stays with the King till 2,'
— perhaps promenading a little; dining always at Noon; after which
Majesty is apt 1 5 be slumbrous, and light amusements are over.

^ Directly at 2, he goes back to his room. Duhan is there, ready ;
takes him upon the Maps and Geography, from 2 to 3, — giving account*
(gradually !) * of all the European Kingdoms ; their strength and weak-

CH. VIIL] CROWN-PRINCE PUT TO SCHOOLING 897

lyxa-iTaaJ

ness; size, riches and poverty of their towns. From 3 to 4, Duhan
treats of Morality {soil die Moral tractiren\ From 4 to 5, Duhan shall
write German Letters with him^ and see that he gets a good stylum*
(which he never in the least did). * About 5, Fritz shall wash his hands^
and go to the King ; — ride out ; divert himself, in the air and not in his
room ; and do what he likes, if it is not against God.’

There^ then, is a Sunday, and there is one Weekday; which latter
may serve for all the other five ; — ^though they are strictly specified in
the royal monograph, and every hour of them marked out : How, and at
what points of time, besides this of History, of Morality, and Writing in
German, of Maps and Geography with the strength and weakness of
Kingdoms, you are to take-up Arithmetic more than once; Writing of
French Letters, so as to acquire a good stylum : in what nook you may
intercalate ^ a little getting by heart of something, in order to strengthen
the memory ’ ; how instead of Noltenius, Panzendorf (another sublime
Reverend Gentleman from Berlin, who comes out express) gives the
clerical drill on Tuesday morning ; — with which two onslaughts, of an
hour-and-half each, the Clerical Gentlemen seem to withdraw for the week,
and we hear no more of them till Monday and Tuesday come round again.

On Wednesday we are happy to observe a liberal slice of holiday
come in. At half-past 9, having done his History, and ^ got something
by heart to strengthen the memory* (very little, it is to be feared), ^ Fritz
shall rapidly dress himself, and come to the King. And the rest of the
day belongs to little Fritz {gehort vor Fritzchen),* On Saturday, too,
there is some fair chance of half-holiday :

^Saturday, forenoon till half-past 10, come History, Writing and
Ciphering; especially repetition of what was done through the week,
and in Morality as well* (adds the rapid Majesty), ^to see whether he
has profited. And General Graf von Finkenstein, with Colonel von
Kalkstein, shall be present during this. If Fritz has profited, the after-
noon shall be his own. If he has not profited, he shall, from 2 to 6,
repeat and learn rightly what he has forgotten on the past days.* And
so the labouring week winds itself up. Here, however, is one general
rule which cannot be too much impressed upon you, with which we
conclude :

^ In undressing and dressing, you must accustom him to get out of,
and into, his clothes as fast as is humanly possible (hurtig so viel als
menschenmdglich ist). You will also look that he learn to put on and put
off his clothes himself, without help from others ; and that he be clean
and neat, and not so dirty (nicht so schmutzig)/ ^Not sondirty,^ that is
my last word ; and here is my sign-manual.

^ FrIEDUUGH WlLHBLlf*’ ^

^ Preuss, L 31*

S98 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

tX7Z3.i7S3

CHAPTER IX

WUSTERHAUSEN

WusTERHAUSEN, where for the present these operations go
on, lies about twenty English miles south-east of Berlin, as
you go towards Schlesien (Silesia) ; — on the old Silesian road,
in a flat moory country made of peat and sand ; — and is not
distinguished for its beauty at all among royal Hunting-
lodges. The Gohrde at Hanover, for example, whaL a
splendour there in comparison ! But it serves Friedrich
Wilhelm’s simple purposes : there is game abundant in the
scraggy woodlands, otter-pools, fish-pools, and miry thickets, of
that old ‘ Schenkenland’ (belonged all once to the ‘ SchenJcen
Family,’ till old King Friedrich bought it for his Prince);
retinue sufficient find nooks for lodgment in the poor old
Schloss so-called; and Noltenius and Panzendorf drive out
each once a week, in some light vehicle, to drill Fritz in his
religious exercises.

One Zollner, a Tourist to Silesia, confesses himself rather
pleased to find even Wusterhausen in such a country of sandy
bent-grass, lean cattle, and flat desolate languor.

^Getting to the top of the ridge’ (most insignificant * ridge/ made by
hand, WUhelmina satirically says). Tourist Zollner can discern with
pleasure ^ a considerable Brook,' — visible, not audible, smooth Stream, or
chain of meres and lakelets, flowing languidly northward towards
Kdpenik. Inaudible big Brook or Stream ; which, we perceive, drains
a slightly hollowed Tract ; too shallow to be called valley, — of several
miles in width, of several yards in depth ; — Tract with wood here and
there on it, and signs of grass and culture, welcome after what you have
passed. On the foreground close to you is the Hamlet of Konigs-
Wusterhausen, with tolerable Lime-tree Avenue leading to it, and the
air of something sylvan from your Hilltop. Konigs- Wusterhausen was
once TTcndwhf Wusterhausen, and not far off is Hcutec A- Wusterhausen,
famed, I suppose, by faction-fights in the Vandalic times : both of them
are now Etwp’^-Wi’sterhausen (since the King came thither), to distin**
guish them from other Wusterhiusens that there are.

CHAP. IX.] WUSTERHAUSEN 399

^ descending, advancing through your Lime-tree Avenue, you come
upon the backs of officehouses, outhouses, stables or the like, — on your
left hand I have guessed, — extending along the Highway. And in the
middle of these you come at last to a kind of Gate or vaulted passage
(Art von Thor, says ZoUner), where, if you have liberty, you face to the
left, and enter. Here, once through into the free light again^ you are
in a Court : four-square space, not without prospect ; right side and left
side are lodgings for his Majesty's gentlemen ; behind you, well in their
view, are stables and kitchens : in the centre of the place is a Fountain
^ with hewn steps and iron railings' ; where his simple Majesty has been
known to sit and smoke, on summer evenings. The fourth side of your
square, again, is a palisade ; beyond which, over bridge and moat and
ip+o^vening apparatus, you perceive, on its trim terraces, the respectable
old Schloss itself. A rectangular mass, not of vast proportions, with
tower in the centre of it (tower for screw-stair, the general roadway of
the House) ; and looking though weatherbeaten yet weathertight, and as
dignified as it can. This is Wusterhausen ; Friedrich Wilhelm's Hunting-
seat from of old.

A dreadfully crowded place, says Wilhelmina, where you are stuffed
into garrets, and have not room to turn. The terraces are of some
magnitude, trimmed all round with a row of little clipped trees, one big
lime-tree at each corner ; — under one of these big limo-trees, aided by
an awning, it io his Majesty's delight to spread his frugal but substantial
dinner, four-and-twenty covers, at the stroke of 12, and so dine sub dio.
If rain came on, says Wilhelmina, you are wet to midleg, the ground
being hollow in that place, — and indeed in all weathers your situation
everyway, to a vehement young Princess's idea, is rather of the horrible
sort. After dinner, his Majesty sleeps, stretched perhaps on some
wooden settle or garden-chair, for about an hour ; regardless of the
flaming heat, under his awning or not ; and we poor Princesses have to
wait, praying all the Saints that they would resuscitate him soon. This
is about 2 p.m« ; happier Fritz is gone to his lessons in the interim.

These four Terraces, this rectangular Schloss with the four big lindens
at the corners, are surrounded by a Moat ; black abominable ditch,
Wilhelmina calls it ; of the hue of Tartarean Styx, and of a far worse
smell, in fact enough to choke one, in hot days after dinner, thinks the
vehement Princess. Three Bridges cross this Moat or ditch, from the
middle of three several Terraces or sides of the Schloss; and on the
fourth it is impassable. Bridge first, coming from the palisade and
Ofiicehouse Court, has not only human sentries walking at it ; but two
white Eagles perch near it, and two black ditto, symbols #f the heraldic
Prussian Eagle, screeching about in their littery way ; item two black
Bears, ugly as Sin, which are vicious wretches withal, and many times
do passengers a mischief. As perhaps we shall see, on some occasion.

400 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[X7i3-i7a3

This is Bridge firsts leading to the Court and to the outer Highway ; a
King’s gentleman^ going to bed at nighty has always to pass these Bears.
Bridge second leads us southward to a common Mill which is near by ;
its clacking audible upon the common Stream of the region^ and not
unpleasant to his Majesty^ among its meadows fringed with alders^ in
a country of mere and moor. Bridge thirds directly opposite to Bridge
first and its Bears, leads you to the Garden ; whither Mamma^ playing
tooadille all day with her women, will not, or will not often enough, let
us poor girls go.* ^

Such is Wusterhausen, as delineated by a vehement
Princess, some years hence, — who becomes at last intelligible,
by study and the aid of our Silesian Tourist. It is
distinguished among Country Palaces : but the figure of
Friedrich Wilhelm asleep there after dinner, regardless of the
flaming sun (should he sleep too long and the shadow of his
Linden quit him), — this is a sight which no other Palace in
the world can match ; this will long render Wusterhausen
memorable to me. His Majesty, early always as the swallows,
hunts, I should suppose, in the morning ; dines and sleeps,
we may perceive, till towards three, or later. His Official
business he will not neglect, nor shirk the hours due to it ;
toward sunset there may be a walk or ride with Fritz, or
Feekin and the womankind : and always, in the evening, his
Majesty holds Tdbagie^ Tahdks-CoUegium (Smoking College,
kind of Tobacco-Parliament, as we might name it), an Insti-
tution punctually attended to by his Majesty, of which we
shall by and by speak more. At Wusterhausen his Majesty
holds his Smoking Session mostly in the open air, oftenest
‘ on the steps of the Great Fountain’ (how arranged, as to
seating and canvas-screening, I cannot say) ; — smokes there,
with his Grumkows, Derschaus, Anhalt-Dessaus, and select
Friends, in various slow talk ; till Night kindle her mild
starlights, shake down her dark curtains over all Countries,
and admonish weary mortals that it is now bedtime.

<

Not much of the Picturesque in this autumnal life of our
* Zbllner, Brief e iiber Schlesicn (Berlin, 1792), i. 2, 3 ; Wilhelmina, i. 364,

401

CHAP. IX.] WUSTERHAUSEN

X7x3-X7a3l

little Boy. But he has employments in abundance ; and
these make the permitted open air, under any terms, a delight.
He can rove about with Duhan among the gorse and heath,
and their wild summer tenantry winged and wingless. In the
woodlands are wild swine, in the meres are fishes, otters ; the
drowsy Hamlets, scattered round, awaken in an interested
manner at the sound of our pony-hoofs and dogs. Mitten-
walde, where are shops, is within riding distance ; we could
even stretch to Kbpenik, and visit in the big Schloss there, if
Duhan were willing, and the cattle fresh. From some church-
steeple or sand-knoll, it is to be hoped, some blue streak of
the Lausitz Hills may be visible : the Sun and the Moon and
the Heavenly Hosts, these full certainly are visible ; and on
an Earth which everywhere produces miracles of all kinds,
from the daisy or heather-bell up to the man, one place is
nearly equal to another for a brisk little Boy.

Fine Palaces, if Wusterhausen be a sorry one, are not
wanting to our young Friend : whatsoever it is in the power
of architecture and upholstery to do for him, may be con-
sidered withal as done. Wusterhausen is but a Hunting-
lodge for some few Autumn weeks : the Berlin Palace and
the Potsdam, grand buildings both, few Palaces in the world
surpass them ; and there, in one or the other of these, is our
usual residence. — Little Fritz, besides his young Finkensteins
and others of the like, has Cousins, children of his Grand-
father’s Half-brothers, who are comrades of his. For the
Great Elector, as we saw, was twice wedded, and had a second
set of sons and daughters : two of the sons had children ;
certain of these are about the Crown-Prince’s own age,
‘ Cousins’ of his (strictly speaking, Half-cousins of his
Father's^ who are much about him in his young days, — and
more or less afterwards, according to the worth they proved
to have. Margraves and Margravines of Schwedt, — there
are five or six of such young Cousins. Not to mention the
eldest, Friedrich Wilhelm by name, who is now come to man-
hood (bom 1700 ); — who wished much in after years to have

VOL. I. 2 c

402 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[i7X3-x7a3

Wilhelmina to wife; but had to put-up with a younger
Princess of the House, and ought to have been thankful.
This one has a younger Brother, Heinrich, slightly Fritz’s
senior, and much his comrade at one time ; of whom we shall
transiently hear again. Of these two the Old Dessauer is
Uncle : if both his Majesty and the Crown-Prince should die,
one of these would be king. A circumstance which Wilhel-
mina and the Queen have laid well to heart, and build many
wild suspicions upon, in these years ! As that the Old
Dessauer, with his gunpowder face, has a plot one day to
assassinate his Majesty, — ^plot evident as sunlight to Wilhel-
mina and Mamma, which providentially came to nothing ; —
and other spectral notions of theirs.^ The Father of these
two Margraves (elder of the two Half-brothers that have
children) died in the time of old King Friedrich, eight or
nine years ago. Theii Mother, the scheming old Margravine,
whom I always fancy to dress in high colours, is still living,
— as Wilhelmina well knows !

Then, by another, the younger of those old Half-brothers,
there is a Karl, a second Friedrich Wilhelm, Cousin-Margraves:
plenty of Cousins ; — and two young Margravines among them,®
the youngest about Fritz’s own age.® No want of Cousins ;

^ Wilhelmina, i. 35, 41. ^ Michaelis, i. 425.

• Note of the Cousin-Margraves, — Great Elector, by his Second Wife had Five
Sons, Two of whom left Children ; — ^as follows (so far as they concern us, — the
others omitted) ;

I®. Son Philips Children (Mother the Old Dessauer’s Sister) are : Friedrich
Wilhelm (1700), who wished much, but in vain, to marry Wilhelmina, Heinrich
Friedrich (1709), a comrade of Fritz’s in youth ; sometimes getting into scrapes ;
— misbehaved, some way, at the Battle of Molwitz (first of Friedrich’s Battles),
1741, and was inexorably cut by the new King, and continued under a cloud
thenceforth. — This Philip (‘Philip Wilhelm’) died 1711, his forty-third year;
Widow long survived him.

2®. Son Alberfs Children (Mother a Courland Princess) are: Karl (1705);
lived near CUstrin; became a famed captain, in the Silesian Wars, under his
Cousin Friedrich (1701); fell at Molwitz, 1741. Friedrich Wilhelm (a Margraf
Friedrich Wilhelm ‘ No. 2,’ — namesake of his now Majesty, it is like) ; born
1714; killed afPrag, by a cannon-shot (at King Friedrich’s hand, reconnoitring
the place)| 1744* — This Albert (‘Albert Friedrich’) died suddenly 1731, age
fifty-nine.

403

CHAP. IX.] WUSTERHAUSEN

I7i3-X7a3l

the Crown -Prince seeing much of them all ; and learning
pleasantly their various qualities, which were good in most,
in some not so good, and did not turn out supreme in any
case. But, for the rest. Sister Wilhelmina is his grand con-
federate and companion; true in sport and in earnest, in joy
and in sorrow. Their truthful love to one another, now and
till death, is probably the brightest element their life yielded
to either of them.

What might be the date of Fritz’s first appearance in the
Rqjncoulles ‘ Soiree held on Wednesdays,’ in the Finkenstein
or any other Soirfe, as an independent figure, I do not know.
But at the proper time, he does appear there, and with dis-
tinction not extrinsic alone; — talks delightfully in such
places ; can discuss, even with French Divines, in a charmingly
ingenious manner. Another of his elderly consorts I must
mention : Colonel Camas, a highly cultivated Frenchman
(French altogether by parentage and breeding, though bom
on Prussian land), who was Tutor, at one time, to some of
those young Margraves. He has lost an arm, — left it in
those Italian Campaigns, under Anhalt-Dessau and Eugene ;
— but by the aid of a cork substitute, dextrously managed,
almost hides the want. A gallant soldier, fit for the
diplomacies too ; a man of fine high ways.^ And then his
Wife — In fact, the Camas House, we perceive, had from an
early time been one of the Crown-Prince’s haunts. Madam
Camas is a German Lady ; but for genial elegance, for
wit and wisdom and goodness, could not readily be paralleled
in France or elsewhere. Of both these Camases there will
be honourable and important mention by and by ; especially
of the Lady, whom he continues to call ‘ Mamma ’ for fifty
years to come, and corresponds with in a very beautiful and
human fashion.

Under these auspices, in such environment, dimly visibk
^ Militair-Ldxikon^ i. 308.

404 ArPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[17x3-17*3

to us, at Wusterhausen and elsewhere, is the remarkablest
little Crown-Prince of his Century growing up, — prosperously
as yet.

CHAPTER X
THE HEIDELBERG PROTESTANTS

Friedrich Wilhelm holds Tabagie nightly ; but at Wus-
terhausen or wherever he may be, there is no lack of intricate
Official Labour, which, even in the Tabagie, Friedrich
helm does not forget. At the time he was concocting those
Instructions for his little Prince’s Schoolmasters, and smoking
meditative under the stars, with Magdeburg ‘ Ritter-Dienst ’
and much else of his own to think of, — there is an extraneous
Political Intricacy, making noise enough in the world, much
in his thoughts withal, and no doubt occasionally murmured
of amid the tobacco-clouds. The Business of the Heidelberg
Protestants ; which is just coming to a height in those
Autumn months of 1719.

Indeed this Year 1719 was a particularly noisy one for
him. This is the year of the ‘ nephritic cholic,’ which befell
at Brandenburg on some journey of his Majesty’s ; with alarm
of immediate death; Queen Sophie sent for by express;
testament made in her favour ; and intrigues, very black
ones, Wilhelmina thinks, following thereupon.^ And the
‘ Affair of Clement,’ on which the old Books are so profuse,
falls likewise, the crisis of it falls, in 1719. Of Clement the
‘ Hungarian Nobleman,’ who was a mere Hungarian Swindler,
and Forger of Royal Letters ; sowing mere discords, black
suspicions, between Friedrich Wilhelm and the neighbouring
Courts, Imperial and Saxon ; ‘ Your Majesty to be snapt up,
some day, by hired ruffians, and spirited away, for behoof of
those treach^jrous Courts ’ : so that Friedrich Wilhelm fell
into a gloom of melancholy, and for long weeks ‘ never slept
^ Memoires de Bareithf i. 26-29.

CHAP. X.] THE HEIDELBERG PROTESTANTS 405

* 7*91

but with a pair of loaded pistols under his pillow ’ : — of this
Clement, an adroit Phenomenon of the kind, and intensely
agitating to Friedrich Wilhelm; — whom Friedrich Wilhelm
had at last to lay hold of, try, this very year, and ultimately
hang,^ amid the rumour and wonder of mankind : — of him,
noisy as he was, and still filling many pages of the old Books,
a hint shall suffice, and we will say nothing farther. But
this of the Heidelberg Protestants, though also rather an
extinct business, has still some claims on us. This, in justice
to the ‘ inarticulate man of genius,’ and for other reasons, we
¥.iust endeavour to resuscitate a little.

Of Kur-PJhlz Karl Philip : How he got a Wfe long smce^
and did Feats in the Wcyrld

There reigns, in these years, at Heidelberg, as Elector-
Palatine, a kind-tempered but abrupt and somewhat unreason-
able old gentleman, now verging towards sixty, Karl Philip
by name ; who has come athwart the Berlin Court and its
affairs more than once ; and will again do so, in a singularly
disturbing way. From before Friedrich Wilhelm’s birth, all
through Friedrich Wilhelm’s life and farther, this Karl Philip
is a stone-of-stumbling there. His first feat in life was that
of running off with a Prussian Princess from Berlin ; the
rumour of which was still at its height when Friedrich Wil-
helm, a fortnight after, came into the world, — ^the gossips
still talking of it, we may fancy, when Friedrich Wilhelm
was first swaddled. An unheard-of thing; the manner of
which was this.

Readers have perhaps forgotten, that old King Friedrich i,

^ Had arrived in Berlin, * end of 1717' ; staid about a year, often privately in
the King’s company, poisoning the royal mind ; withdrew to the Hague, suspect-
ing Berlin might soon grow dangerous ; — is wiled out of that Territory into the
Prussian, and arrested, by one of Friedrich Wilhelm’s Colonrfs, ‘end of 1718*;
lies in Spandau, getting tried, for seventeen months ; hanged, with two Accom-
plices, i8th April 1720. (See, in succession, Stenzel, iH. 298, 302; Fassmann,
p, 711 ; Forster, ii. 272, and iii. 320-324.)

406 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[1713-1723

once had a Brother ; elder Brother, who died, to the Father’s
great sorrow, and made way for Friedrich as Crown-Prince.
This Brother had been married a short time; he left a
Widow without children; a beautiful Lithuanian Princess,
bom Radzivil, and of great possessions in her own country :
she, in her crapes and close-cap, remained an ornament to
the new Berlin Court for some time ; — not too long. The
mourning-year once out, a new marriage came on foot for
the brilliant widow ; the Bridegroom, a James Sobieski, eldest
Prince of the famous John, King Sobieski; Prince with fair
outlooks towards Polish Sovereignty, and handy for those
Lithuanian Possessions of hers . altogether an eligible match.

This marriage was on foot, not quite completed ; when
Karl Philip, Cadet of the Pfalz, came to Berlin ; — a rather idle
young man, once in the clerical way; now gone into the
military, with secular outlooks, his elder Brother, Heir-
Apparent of the Pfalz, ‘ having no children ’ : — came to
Berlin, in the course of visiting, and roving about. The
beautiful Widow - Princess seemed very charming to Karl
Philip ; he wooed hard ; threw the Princess into great per-
plexity. She had given her Yes to James Sobieski ; inevitable
wedding-day was coming on with James ; and here was Karl
Philip wooing so : — in brief, the result was, she galloped off
with Karl Philip, on the eve of said wedding-day ; married
Karl Philip (24th July 1688); and left Prince James stand-
ing there, too much like Lot’s Wife, in the astonished Court
of Berlin.^ Judge if the Berlin public talked, — unintelligible
to Friedrich Wilhelm, then safe in swaddling-clothes.

King Sobieski, the Father, famed Deliverer of Vienna, was
in high dudgeon. But Karl Philip apologised, to all lengths ;
made his peace at last, giving a Sister of his own to be Wife
to the injured James. This was Karl Philip’s first outbreak
in life ; and it was not his only one. A man not ill-disposed,
all grant ; bur evidently of headlong turn, with a tendency to
leap fences in thisc world. He has since been soldiering about,
* Michaeltt, u. 93 .

CHAP. X.] THE HEIDELBERG PROTESTANTS 407

in a loose way, governing Innspruck, fighting the Turks.
But, lately, his elder Brother died childless (year 1716); and
left him Kurfiirst of the Pfalz. His fair Radzivil is dead
long ago ; she, and a successor, or it may be two. Except
one Daughter, whom the fair Radzivil left him, he has no
children ; and in these times, I think, lives with a third Wife,
of the hft-hcmd kind.

His scarcity of progeny is not so indifferent to my readers
as they might suppose. This new Kur-PJulz (Elector-Palatine)
Karl Philip is by genealogy — who, thinks the reader ? Pfalz-
Nmhurg by line ; own Grandson of that Wolfgang Wilhelm,
who got the slap on the face long since, on account of the
Cleve-Jiilich matter ! So it has come round. The Line of
Simmem died out, Winter-King’s Grandson the last of that ;
and then, as right was, the line of Neuburg took the top
place, and became Kur-Pfalz. The first of these was this
Karl Philip’s Father, son of the Beslapped ; an old man when
he succeeded. Karl Philip is the third Kur-Pfalz of the
Neuburg Line ; his childless elder Brother (he who collected
the Pictures at Diisseldorf, once notable there) was second
of the Neuburgs. They now, we say, are Electors-Palatine,
Head of the House ; — and, we need not add, along with
their Electorate and Neuburg Country, possess the Cleve-
Jiilich Moiety of Heritage, about which there was such
worrying in time past. Nay the last Kur-Pfalz resided there,
and collected the ‘ Diisseldorf Gallery,’ as we have just said ;
though Karl Philip prefers Heidelberg hitherto.

To Friedrich Wilhelm the scarcity of progeny is a thrice-
interesting fact. For if this actual Neuburg should leave no
male heir, as is now humanly probable, — the Line of Neu-
burg too is out ; and then great things ought to follow for
our Prussian House. Then, by the last Bargain, made in
1666, with all solemnity, between the Great Elector, our
Grandfather of famous memory, and your ^rene Father
the then Pfalz-Neuburg, subsequently Kur-Pfalz, likewise of
^mgus memory, son of the Beslapped, — the whole Heritage

408 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[17131733

falls to Prussia, no other Pfalz Branch having thenceforth
the least claim to it. Bargain was express ; signed, sealed,
sanctioned, drawn-out on the due extent of sheepskin, which
can still be read. Bargain clear enough : but will this Karl
Philip incline to keep it ?

That may one day be the interesting question. But that
is not the question of controversy at present : not that, but
another ; for Karl Philip, it would seem, is to be a frequent
stone-of-stumbling to the Prussian House. The present ques-
tion is of a Protestant-Papist matter ; into which Friedrich
Wilhelm has been drawn by his public spirit alone.

Ka/rl Philip and his Heidelberg Protestants

The Pfalz population was, from of old, Protestant-Cal-
vinist ; the Electors-Palatine used to be distinguished for
their forwardness in that matter. So it still is with the
Pfalz population ; but with the Electors, now that the
House of Simmern is out, and that of Neuburg in, it is not
so. The Neuburgs, ever since that slap on the face, have
continued Popish ; a sore fact for this Protestant population,
when it got them for Sovereigns. Karl Philip’s Father, an
old soldier at Vienna, and the elder Brother, a Collector of
Pictures at Dlisseldorf, did not outwardly much molest the
creed of their subjects. Protestants, and the remnant of
Catholics (remnant naturally rather expanding now that the
Court shone on it), were allowed to live in peace, according
to the Treaty of Westphalia, or nearly so; dividing the
churches and church-revenues equitably between them, as
directed there. But now that Karl Philip is come in, there
is no mistaking his procedures. He has come home to Heidel-
berg with a retinue of Jesuits about him ; to whom the poor
old gentleman, looking before and after on this troublous
world, find^it salutary to give ear.

His nibblings at Protestant rights, his contrivances to slide
Catholics into churches which were not theirs, and the like

CHAP. X.] THE HEIDELBERG PROTESTANTS 409

1719!

foul-play in that matter, had been sorrowful to see, for some
time past. The Elector of Mainz, Chief-Priest of Germany,
is busy in the same bad direction ; he and others. Indeed,
ever since the Peace of Ryswick, where Louis xiv. surrep-
titiously introduced a certain ‘ Clause,’ which could never be
got rid of again,^ nibbling aggressions of this kind have gone
on more and more. Always too sluggishly resisted by the
Corpis EvangeUcorum^ in the Diets or otherwise, the ^ United
Protestant Sovereigns ’ not being an active ^ Body ’ there.
And now more sluggishly than ever ; — said Corpus having
August Elector of Saxony, Catholic (Sham-Catholic) King of
Poland, for its Official Head ; ^ August the Physically Strong,’
a man highly unconcerned for matters Evangelical ! So that
the nibblings go on worse and worse. An offence to all
Protestant Rulers who had any conscience ; at length an
unbearable one to Friedrich Wilhelm, who, alone of them all,
decided to intervene effectually, and say, at whatever risk
there might be, We will not stand it !

Karl Philip, after some nibblings, took-up the Heidelberg
Catechism (which candidly calls the Mass ^ idolatrous ’), and
ordered said Catechism, an Authorised Book, to cease in his
dominions. Hessen-Cassel, a Protestant neighbour, pleaded,
remonstrated, Friedrich Wilhelm glooming in the rear ; but
to no purpose. Our old gentleman, his Priests being very
diligent upon him, decided next to get possession of the
Heilige-Geist Kirche (Church of the Holy Ghost, principal^
Place of Worship at Heidelberg), and make it his principal
Cathedral Church there. By Treaty of Westphalia, or peace-

^ * Clause of the Fourth Article * is the technical name of it. Fourth Article
stipulates that King Louis xiv. shall punctually restore all manner of towns and
places, in the Palatinate etc. (much burnty somewhat befesuited too, in late
Wars, by the said King, during his occupancy) : Clause of Fourth Article (added
to it, by a quirk, ‘ at midnight,’ say the Books) contains merely these words,

‘ Religione tamen CaiholicA Komand, in locis sic restitutisy in statu quo nunc est
remanente ; Roman- Catholic religion to continue as it now i%’ (as we have made
it to be) * in such towns and places.’ — Which Clause gave rise to very great but
ineffectual lamenting and debating. (Scholl, Traith^ie Paix (Par. 1817), L
-"^8; Buchholz; Spittler, Geschichte Wurtember^s ; etc.)

410 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK iv.

ti7X3-i7a3

ably otherwise, the Catholics sire already in possession of the
Choir : but the whole Church would be so much better.
‘ Was it not Catholic once ? ’ thought Karl Philip to himself :
‘built by our noble Ancestor Kaiser Rupert of the Pfalz,
Rupert KUmm (‘ Pincers,’ so-named for his firmness of mind) :
— why should these Heretics have it? I will build them
another!’ These thoughts, in 1719, the third year of Karl
Philip’s rule, had broken out into open action (29th August,
4th September the consummation of it) ; ^ and precisely in
the time when Friedrich Wilhelm was penning that first
Didactic Morsel which we read, grave clouds from the
Palatinate were beginning to overshadow the royal mind
more or less.

For the poor Heidelberg Consistorium, as they could not
undertake to give-up their Church on request of his Serenity,
— ‘ How dare we, or can we ? ’ answered they, — had been
driven out by compulsion and stratagem. Partly strategic
was the plan adopted, to avoid violence ; smith’s picklocks
being employed, and also mason’s crowbars : but the end was.
On the 31st of August 1719, Consistorium and Congre-
gation found themselves fairly in the street, and the Heilige-
Geist Kirche clean gone from them. Screen of the Choir is
tom down ; one big Catholic edifice now ; getting decorated
into a Court Church, where Serene Highness may feel his
mind comfortable.

The poor Heidelbergers, thus thrown into the street, made
applications, lamentations ; but with small prospect of help :
to whom apply with any sure prospect ? Remonstrances from
Hessen-Cassel have proved unavailing with his bigoted Serene
Highness. Corpus Evcungelicorum^ so presided over as at pre-
sent, what cau be had of such a Corpus ? Long-winded
lucubrations at the utmost ; real action, in such a matter,
none. Or will the Kaiser, his Jesuits advising him, interfere
to do us justice ? Kur-Mainz and the rest ; — it is every-
where one story. Everywhere unhappy Protestantism getting
^ Mauvillon, i. 340-345.

CHAP.X.J THE HEIDELBERG PROTESTANTS 411

1719]

bad usage, and ever worse ; and no Corpus Evimgelkarumy
or appointed Watch-dog doing other than hang its ears, and
look sorry for itself and us ! —

The Heidelbergers, however, had applied to Friedrich
Wilhelm among others. Friedrich Wilhelm, who had long
looked on these Anti-Protestant phenomena with increasing
anger, found now that this of the Heidelberg Catechism and
Heilige-Geist Kirche was enough to make one'^s patience run
over. Your unruly Catholic bull, plunging about, and goring
men in that mad absurd manner, it will behove that some-
body take him by the horns, or by the tail, and teach him
manners. Teach him, not by vocal precepts, it is likely,
which would avail nothing on such a brute, but by practical
cudgelling and scourging to the due pitch. Pacific Friedrich
Wilhelm perceived that he himself would have to do that
disagreeable feat : — the growl of him, on coming to such
resolution, must have been consolatory to these poor Heidel-
bergers, when they applied ! — His plan is very simple, as the
plans of genius are; but a plan leading direct to the end
desired, and probably the only one that would have done so,
in the circumstances. Cudgel in hand, he takes the Catholic
bull, — shall we say, by the horns? — more properly perhaps
by the tail ; and teaches him manners.

Friedrich Wilhelm! s Method ; — proves remedial in Heidelberg

Friedrich Wilhelm’s first step, of course, was to remonstrate
pacifically with his Serene Highness on the Heidelberg-Church
affair : from this he probably expected nothing ; nor did he
get anything. Getting nothing from this, and the counten-
ance of external Protestant Powers, especially of George i. and
the Dutch, being promised him in ulterior measures, he
directed his Administrative Officials in Magdeburg, in IWinden,
in Hamersleben, where are Catholic Foundations of import-
ance, to assemble the Catholic Canons, Abbots, chief Priests

41* APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[1713-17*3

and all whom it might concern in these three Places, and to
signify to them as follows :

‘From us, your Protestant Sovereign, you yourselves and
all men will witness, you have hitherto had the best of usage,
fair-play, according to the Laws of the Reich^ and even more.
With the Protestants of Heidelberg, on the part of the
Catholic Powers, it is different. It must cease to be different ;
it must become the same. And to make it do so, you are the
implement I have. Sorry for it, but there is no other handy.
From this day your Churches also axe closed, your Public
Worship ceases, and furthermore your Revenues cease ; and all
makes dead halt, and falls torpid in respect of you. From
this day ; and so continues, till the day (may it be soon !) when
the Heidelberg Church of the Holy Ghost is opened again,
and right done in that question. Be it yours to speed such
day : it is you that can and will, you who know those high
Catholic regions, inaccessible to your Protestant Sovereign.
Till then you are as dead men ; temporarily fallen dead for a
purpose. And herewith God have you in his keeping ! ’ ^

That was Friedrich Wilhelm’s plan ; the simplest, but pro-
bably the one effectual plan. Infallible this plan, if you dare
stand upon it ; which Friedrich Wilhelm does. He has a
formidable Army, ready for fight ; a Treasury or Army-chest
in good order. George i. seconds, according to bargain ;
shuts the Catholic Church at Zelle in his Liineberg Country,
in like fashion ; Dutch, too, and Swiss will endorse the
matter, should it grow too serious. All which, involving
some diplomacy and correspondence, is managed with the due
promptitude, moreover.^ And so certain doors are locked ;
and Friedrich Wilhelm’s word, unalterable as gravitation, has
gone forth. In this manner is the mad Catholic bull taken

^ Mauvillon, i. 347, 349.

® Churcli of Zelle shut up, 4th November ; Minden, 28th November ; Mon-
astery of Hametsleben, 3d December, etc. (Putter, Historische Entwicke*
lung der heutigen Staatsverfassung des Teutschen Reichs^ Gottingen, 1788, ii.
384, 390)-

CHAP.x.] THE HEIDELBERG PROTESTANTS 413

1730]

by the tcM : keep fast hold, and apply your cudgel duly in
that attitude, he will not gore you any more !

The Magdeburg- Hamersleben people shrieked piteously;
not to Friedrich Wilhelm, whom they knew to be deaf on
that side of his head, but to the Kaiser, to the Pope, to the
Serenity of Heidelberg. Serene Highness of Heidelberg was
much huffed ; Kaiser dreadfully so, and wrote heavy menacing
rebukes. To which Friedrich Wilhelm listened with a mini-
mum of reply ; keeping firm hold of the tail, in such bellow-
ing of the animal. The end was, Serene Highness had to
corriply ; within three months, Kaiser, Serene Highness and
the other parties interested, found that there would be
nothing for it but to compose themselves, and do what was
just. April 16th, 1720, the Protestants are reinstated in
their Heilige-Gcist Ktrche ; Heidelberg Catechism goes its
free course again. May 1 6th ; and one Baron Reck ^ is
appointed Commissioner, from the Corpus Evangelkoruniy to
Heidelberg ; who continues rigorously inspecting Church
matters there for a considerable time, much to the grief of
Highness and Jesuits, till he can report that all is as it
should be on that head. Karl Philip felt so disgusted with
these results, he removed his Court, that same year, to Mann-
heim ; quitted Heidelberg ; to the discouragement and visible
decay of the place ; and, in s])ite of humble petitions and
remonstrances, never would return ; neither he nor those that
followed him would shift from Mannheim again, to this day.

Prussian Majesty has displeased the Kaiser and the
King of Poland

Friedrich Wilhelm’s praises from the Protestant public
were great, on this occasion. Nor can we, who lie much
farther from it in every sense, refuse him some grin of
approval. Act, and manner of doing the act, are creditably
of a piece with Friedrich Wilhelm ; physiognomic of the
^ Mkhaelis, ii. 95 j Piltter, ii. 384, 390 ; Buchhtlz, pp. 61*63.

414 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

1x713-17*3

rugged veracious man. It is one of several such acts done by
him : for it was a duty apt to recur in Grermany, in his day.
This duty Friedrich Wilhelm, a solid Protestant after his sort,
and convinced of the ‘ nothingness and nonsensicality (CTn-
grmid und Ahsurditdt) of Papistry,’ was always honourably
prompt to do. There is an honest bacon-and-greens con-
science in the man ; almost the one conscience you can find in
any royal man of that day. Promptly, without tremulous
counting of costs, he always starts up, solid as oak, on the
occurrence of such a thing, and says, ‘ That is unjust ; contrary
to the Treaty of Westphalia; you will have to put 4own,
that ! ’ — And if words avail not, his plan is always this same :
Clap a similar thumbscrew, pressure equitably calculated, on
the Catholics of Prussia ; these can complain to their Popes
and Jesuit Dignitaries : these are under thumbscrew till the
Protestant pressure be removed. Which always did rectify
the matter in a little time. One other of these instances, that
of the Salzburg Protestants, the last such instance, as this of
Heidelberg was the first, will by and by claim notice from us.

It is very observable, how Friedrich Wilhelm, hating
quarrels, was ever ready to turn out for quarrel on such an
occasion; though otherwise conspicuously a King who staid
well at home, looking after his own affairs ; meddling with no
neighbour that would be at peace with him. This properly
is Friedrich Wilhelm^’s ‘ sphere of political activity ’ among
his contemporaries , this small quasi-domestic sphere, of for-
bidding injury to Protestants. A most small sphere, but
then a genuine one . nor did he seek even this, had it not
forced itself upon him. And truly we might ask, What has
become of the other more considerable ‘ spheres ’ in that
epoch ? The supremest loud-trumpeting ‘ political activities ’
which then filled the world and its newspapers, what has the
upshot of them universally been ? Zero and oblivion ; no
other. -While this poor Friedrich-Wilhelm sphere is perhaps
still a countable quantity. Wise is he who stays well at
home, and does t[ie duty he finds lying there ! —

CHAP.x.] THE HEIDELBERG PROTESTANTS 415

1730]

Great favour from the Protestant public : but, on the
other hand, his Majesty had given offence in high places.
What help for it? The thing was a point of conscience
with him ; natural to the surly Royal Overseer, going his
rounds in the world, stick in hand ! However, the Kaiser
was altogether gloomy of brow at such disobedience, A
Kaiser unfriendly to IViedrich Wilhelm . witness that of the
Ritter-Dienst (our unreasonable Magdeburg Ritters, counten-
anced by him, on such terms, in such style too), and other
offensive instances that could be given. Perhaps the Kaiser
will not always continue gloomy of brow ; perhaps the
thoughts of the Imperial breast may alter, on our behalf
or his own, one day ? —

Nor could King August the Physically Strong be glad to
see his ‘ Director ' function virtually superseded, in this
triumphant way. A year or two ago, Friedrich Wilhelm
had with the due cautions and politic reserves, inquired of
the Corpus Evangeliconm^ ‘ If they thought the present
Directorship (that of August the Physically Strong) a good
one ? ’ and ^ Whether he, Friedrich Wilhelm, ought not per-
haps himself to be Director ? ’ — To which, though the answer
was clear as noonday, this poor Corpus had only mumbled
some ‘ Quieta non movers^ or other wise-foolish saw ; and
helplessly shrugged its shoulders.^ But King August him-
self, — though a jovial social kind of animal, quite otherwise
occupied in the world ; busy producing his Three-hundred
and fifty-four Bastards there, and not careful of Church
matters at all, — had expressed his indignant surprise. And
now, it would seem nevertheless, though the title remains
where it was, the function has fallen to another, who actually
does it : a thing to provoke comparisons in the public.

Clement the Hungarian Forger, vendor of false state-

^ 1717-1719, when August’s Kurprinz, Heir- Apparent, likewise declared him-
self Papist, to the horror and astonishment of poor Saxony, and weddpd the late
ifaiser Joseph’s Daughter ; — not to Father August’s horror ; >ho was steering
towards ‘ popularity in Poland,* ‘ hereditary Polish Crown,* etc. with the young
man. (Buchholz, i. 53*56.)

416 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book IV.

[xoth Aug. 1718

secrets, is well hanged ; went to the gallows (18th April
1720) with much circumstance, just two days before that
Heidelberg Church was got reopened. But the suspicions
sown by Clement cannot quite be abolished by the hanging of
him : Forger indisputably ; but who knows whether he had
not something of fact for basis ? IVhat with Clement, what
with this Heidelberg business, the Court of Berlin has fallen
wrong with Dresden, with Vienna itself, and important clouds
have risen.

There is an absurd Flame of War^ blown out by Admiral

Byng ; and a new Man of Genius announces himself to the

dim Populations.

The poor Kaiser himself is otherwise in trouble of his own,
at this time. The Spaniards and he have fallen out, in spite
of Utrecht Treaty and Rastadt ditto ; the Spaniards have
taken Sicily from him ; and precisely in those days while Karl
Philip took to shutting-up the Heilige-Geist Church at Heidel-
berg, there W6is, loud enough in all the Newspapers, silent as
it now is, a ^ Siege of Messina ’ going on ; Imperial and
Piedmontese troops doing duty by land, Admiral Byng still
more effectively by sea, for the jiurpose of getting Sicily back.
Which was achieved by and by, though at an extremely
languid pace.^ One of the most tedious Sieges ; one of the
paltriest languid Wars (of extreme virulence and extreme
feebleness, neither party having any cash left), and for an
object which could not be excelled in insignificance. Object
highly interesting to Kaiser Karl vi. and Elizabeth Farnese
Termagant Queen of Spain. These two were red, or even
were pale, with interest in it; and to the rest of Adam^^s

^ Byng’s Seafight, loth August 1718 (Campbell’s Lives of the Admirals ^ iii.
468) ; whereupon the Spaniards, who had hardly yet completed their capture of
Messina, are besieged in it; — 29th October 1719, Messina retaken (this is the
‘Siege of Messiiua ’) ; February 1720, Peace is clapt up (the chief article, that
Alberoni shall be packed away), and a ‘ Congress of Cambrai ’ is to meet, and
settle everything. l

417

CHAP. X.] SIEGE OF MESSINA

10th Aug. 17x8]

Posterity it was not intrinsically worth an ounce of gunpowder,
many tons of that and of better commodities as they had to
spend upon it. True, the Spanish Navy got well lamed in the
business ; Spanish Fleet blown mostly to destruction, — ‘ Roads
of Messina, 10th August 1718,’ by the dextrous Byng (a
creditable handy figure both in Peace and War) and his con-
siderable Seafight there : — ^if that was an object to Spain or
mankind, that was accomplished. But the ‘ War,’ except that
many men were killed in it, and much vain babble was uttered
upon it, ranks otherwise with that of Don Quixote, for
concjjuest of the enchanted Helmet of Mambrino, which when
looked into proved to be a Barber’s Basin.

Congress of Cambrai, and other high Gatherings and con-
vulsive Doings, which all proved futile, and look almost like
Lapland witchcraft now to us, will have to follow this futility
of a War. It is the first of a long series of enchanted
adventures, on which Kaiser Karl, — duelling with that Spanish
Virago, Satan’s Invisible World in the rear of her, — has now
embarked, to the woe of mankind, for the rest of his life.
The first of those terrifico-ludicrous paroxysms of crisis into
which he throws the European Universe ; he with his
Enchanted Barber’s-Basin enterprises ; — as perhaps was fit
enough, in an epoch presided over by the Nightmares. Con-
gress of Cambrai is to follow ; and much else equally spectral.
About all which there will be enough to say anon ! For it
was a fearful operation, though a ludicrous one, this of the
poor Kaiser ; and it tormented not the big Nations only, and
threw an absurd Europe into paroxysm after paroxysm ; but
it whirled up, in its wide-sweeping skirts, our little Fritz and
his Sister, and almost dashed the lives out of them, as we shall
s^e ! Which last is perhaps the one claim it now has to a
cursory mention from mankind.

Byng’s Seafight, done with due dexterity of manoeuvering,
and then with due emphasis of broadsiding, deceive of that
absurd War, and almost the one creditable action in it, dates
itself 10th August 1718. And about three months later, on

2 D

418 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [ OOK iv.

[1713-1783

the mimic stage at Paris there came out a piece, (Edipe the
title of it,^ by one Francois Arouet, a young gentlema about
twenty-two ; and had such a run as seldom was ; — apprising
the French Populations that, to all appearance, a new man of
genius had appeared among them (not intimating what work
he would do) ; and greatly angering old M. Arouet of the
Chamber of Accounts ; who thereby found his Son as good as
cast into the whirlpools, and a solid Law-career thenceforth
impossible for the young fool. — The name of that ‘ M. Arouet
junior changes itself, some years hence, into M. de Voltaire ;
under which latter designation he will conspicuously reappear
in this Narrative.

And now we will go to our little Crown- Prince again ; —
ignorant, he, of all this that is mounting up in the distance,
and that it will envelop him one day.

CHAPTER XI

OF THE crown-prince’s PROGRESS IN HIS
SCHOOLING

WiLHEi.MiNA says, ^ her Brother was ^ slow ’ in learning : we
may presume, she means idle, volatile, not always prompt in
fixing his attention to what did not interest him. Moreover,
he was often weakly in health, as she herself adds ; so that
exertion was not recoinmendable for him. Herr von Loen (a
witty Prussian Official, and famed man-of-letters once, though
forgotten now) testifies expressly that the Boy was of bright
parts, and that he made rapid progress. * The Crown-Prince
manifests in this tender age ’ (his seventh year) ‘ an uncommon
capacity ; nay we may say, something quite extraordinary
{etwas Amserordentliches). He is a most alert and

vivacious Prince ; he has fine and sprightly manners ; and
* l8th November 1718, ® Mimoirfs^ i. 22.

CHAP. XL] CROWN-PRINCE’S PROGRESS 419

X7X3.x7a3l

shows a certain kindly sociality, and so aiffectionate a dispo-
sition that all things may be hoped of him. The French
Lady who ’ (under Roucoulles) ^ has had charge of his learning
hitherto, cannot speak of him without enthusiasm. C ''est un
esprit angelique (A little angel),” she is wont to say. He
takes up, and learns, whatever is put before him, with the
greatest facility. ’ ^

For the rest, that Friedrich Wilhelm’s intentions and
Rhadamanthine regulations, in regard to him, were fulfilled in
every point, we will by no means affirm. Rules of such
excQ^ding preciseness, if grounded here and there only on the
sic-volo^ how could they be always kept, except on the surface
and to the eye merely ? The good Duhan, diligent to open
his pupil’s mind, and give Nature fair-play, had practically
found it inexpedient to tie him too rigorously to the arbitrary
formal departments where no natural curiosity, but only order
from without, urges the ingenious pupil. What maximum
strictness in school-drill there can have been, we may infer
from one thing, were there no other : the ingenious Pupil’s
mode of spelling, Fritz learned to write a fine, free-flowing,
rapid and legible business-hand ; ‘ Arithmetic ’ too, ‘ Geo-
graphy,’ and many other Useful Knowledges that had some
geniality of character, or attractiveness in practice, were among
his acquisitions ; much, very much he learned in the course of
his life ; but to spells much more to punctuate, and subdue
the higher mysteries of Grammar to himself, was always an
unachievable perfection. He did improve somewhat in after
life ; but here is the length to which he had carried that
necessary art in the course of nine-years’ exertion, under Duhan
and the subsidiary preceptors ; it is in the following words
and alphabetic letters that he gratefully bids Duhan farewell,
— who surely cannot have been a very strict drill-sergeant in
the arbitrary branches of schooling !

* Mon cher Duhan Je Vous promais (promets) que quand paurez (j'aurai)
mon propre argent en main, je Vous donnerez (doiinerai) enuelement

' Von Loen KUim SchrifUn, ii. 27 (as died in Rodenbeck No. iv. 479).

420 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

1x713^1723

(annuellement) 2400 ecu (ecus) par an, et je vous aimerais (aimerai) toujour
encor (toujours encore) un peu plus qasteure (qu’4 cette heure) s*il me
Vest (m*est) posihle (possible).*

^ My dear Duhan, — I promise to you, that when 1 shall have my money
in my own hands, I will give you annually 2400 crowns* (say 350/.) ^ ecery
year ; and that I will love you always even a little more than at present,
if that be possible.

'Friderio P.R.* (Prince-Royal).

* Potsdam Ic 20 dejuin 1727.’ ^

The Document has otherwise its beauty ; but such is the
spelling of it. In fact his Grammar, as he would himself
now and then regretfully discern, in riper years, with some
transient attempt or resolution to remedy or help it, seems to
have come mainly by nature ; so likewise his ^ stylus ’ both in
French and German, — a very fair style, too, in the former
dialect : — but as to his spelling, let him try as he liked, he
never came within sight of perfection.

The things ordered with such rigorous minuteness, if but
arbitrary things, were apt to be neglected ; the things
forbidden, especially in the like case, were apt to become
doubly tempting. It appears, the prohibition of Latin gave
rise to various attempts, on the part of Friedrich, to attain
that desirable Language. Secret lessons, not from Duhan, but
no doubt with Duhan’s connivance, were from time to time
undertaken with this view : once, it is recorded, the vigilant
Friedrich Wilhelm, going his rounds, came upon Fritz and one
of his Preceptors (not Duhan but a subaltern) actually engaged
in this illicit employment. Friedrich himself was wont to
relate this anecdote in after lifc.^ 1’hcy had Latin books,
dictionaries, grammars on the table, all the contrabrand
apparatus ; busy with it there, like a pair of coiners taken in
the fact. Among other Books was a copy of the Golden Bull
of Kaiser Karl iv., — A urea Bulla, from the little golden
or pellets hung to it, — by which sublime Document, as perhaps

^ Preuss, i. 22 .

* Blisching, Beitrd^e zu dcr Lebensgeschichte denkwurdtger Pcrsonm v. 33 .
Preuss, i. 24 .

CHAP. XL] CROWN-PRINCE’S PROGRESS 421

X713.17231

we hinted long ago, certain so-called Fundamental Constitu-
tions, or at least formalities and solemn practices, method of
election, rule of precedence, and the like, of the Holy Roman
Empire, had at last been settled on a sure footing, by that
busy little Kaiser, some three-hundred and fifty years before ;
a Document venerable almost next to the Bible in Friedrich
Wilhelm’s loyal eyes. ‘ What is this ; what are you venturing
upon here ? ’ exclaims Paternal Vigilance, in an astonished
dangerous tone. ‘ Ihro Maj estate wh explicire dem Prinzen
Auream Bullam^ exclaimed the trembling pedagogue : ‘ Your
Majesty, I am explaining Aurea Bulla (Golden Bull) to the
Prince ! ’ — ‘ Dog, I will Golden-Bull you ! ’ said his Majesty,
flourishing his rattan, ‘ Ich will dich^ Schurhe^ be-auream-
hxdlam I ’ which sent the terrified wretch oft* at the top of his
speed, and ended the Latin for that time.^

Friedrich’s I^tin could never come to much, under these
impediments. But he retained some smatterings of it in
mature life ; and was rather fond of producing his classical
scraps, — often in an altogether mouldy, and indeed hitherto
inexplicable condition. ‘ De gustibus non est disputandns^
^Beati posso.dentcs^ ‘ Compille intrare^ ^Beatm pauper es spiritu^-^
the meaning of these can be guessed . but ‘ Tot verbas tot
spondera^ for example, what can any commentator make of
that ? ‘ Festina lentc^ ^Doviinus vobiscum^ ‘ Flcctamus genual
‘ Quod bene notandum ’ ; these phrases too, and some three or
four others of the like, have been riddled from his Writings
by diligent inen:^ ‘O tern/ tor O mores! You see I don’t
forget niy Latin,’ writes he once.

The worst fruit of these contraband operations was, that
they involved the Boy in clandestine practices, secret disobedi-
ences, apt to be found out from time to time, and tended to
alienate his Father from him. Of which sad mutual humour
we already find traces in that early Wusterhausgn Document :

^ Forster, i. 356. ^

‘ Preuss (i. 24) furnishes the whole stock of thcoi.

422 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[X7i3-i7a3

‘ Not to be SO dirty,’ says the reproving Father. And the
Boy does not take to hunting at all, likes verses, story-books,
flute-playing better ; seems to be of effeminate tendencies, an
effeminwter Kerl\ affects French modes, combs -out his hair
like a cockatoo, the foolish French fop, instead of conforming
to the Army-regulation, which prescribes close-cropping and
a club !

This latter grievance Friedrich Wilhelm decided, at last, to
abate, and have done with ; this, for one. It is an authentic
fact, though not dated, — dating perhaps from about Fritz’s
fifteenth year. ‘Fritz is a Qiierpfe^fer und Poet^ not a
Soldier ! would his indignant Father growl ; looking at those
foreign effeminate ways of his. Querpfeife^ that is simply
‘ German-flute,’ ‘ Cross-pipe ’ (or jife of any kind, for we
English have thriftily made two useful words out of the
Deutsch root) ; ‘ Cross-pipe,’ being held across the mouth
horizontally. Worthless employment, if you are not born to
be of the regimental band ! thinks Friedrich Wilhelm. Fritz
is celebrated, too, for his fine foot ; a dapper little fellow,
altogether pretty in the eyes of simple female courtiers, with
his blond locks combed-out at the temples, with his bright
eyes, sharp wit and sparkling capricious ways. The cockatoo
locks, these at least we will abate ! decides the Paternal
mind.

And so, unexpectedly, PViedrich Wilhelm has commanded
these bright locks, as contrary to military fashion, of which
Fritz has now unworthily the honour of being a specimen, to
be ruthlessly shorn away. Inexorable : the Hof-Chirurgus
(Court - Surgeon, of the nature of Barber - Surgeon), with
scissors and comb, is here; ruthless Father standing by.
Crop him, my jolly Barber; close down to the accurate
standard ; soaped club, instead of flowing locks ; we suffer
no exceptions in this military department : I stand here till
it is done. Poor Fritz, they say, had teai*s in his eyes ; but
what help in tears ? The judicious Chirurgus, however,
proved merciful. The judicious Chirurgus struck in as if

CHAP. xi.J CROWN-PRINCE’S PROGRESS 42S

X7i3*X7a3]

nothing loath, snack, snack ; and made a great show of
clipping. Friedrich Wilhelm took a newspaper till the job
were done ; the judicious Barber, still making a great show
of work, combed back rather than cut off these Apollo locks ;
did Fritz accurately into soaped club, to the cursory eye ;
but Ipft him capable of shaking-out his chevelure again on
occasion, — to the lasting gratitude of Fritz.^

The Noltenlxis-and-PanzendorJ' Drill-exercise

«On the whole, as we said, a youth needs good assimilating
power, if he is to grow in this world ! Noltenius and Pan-
zendorf, for instance, they were busy ^teaching Friedrich
religion.’ Rather a strange operation this too, if we were to
look into it. We will not look too closely. Another pair
of excellent most solemn drill - sergeants, in clerical black
serge; they also are busy instilling dark doctrines into the
bright young Boy, so far as possible ; but do not seem at
any time to have made too deep an impression on him.
May we not say that, in matter of religion too, Friedrich was
but ill-bestead ? Enlightened Edict-of-Nantes Protestantism,
a cross between Bayle and Calvin : that was but indifferent
babe’s-milk to the little creature. Nor could Noltenius’s
Catechism, and ponderous drill-exercise in orthodox theology,
much inspire a clear soul with pieties, and tendencies to soar
Heavenward.

Alas, it is a dreary litter indeed, mere wagonload off
wagonload of shot-rubbish, that is heaped round this new
human plant, by Noltenius and Company, among others. A
wonder only that they did not extinguish all Sense of the
Highest in the poor young soul, and leave only a Sense of
the Dreariest and Stupidest. But a healthy human soul
can stand a great deal. The healthy soul shakes off, in
an unexpectedly victorious manner, immense rnas^s of dry
rubbish that have been shot upon it by its assiduous*

^ Preuss, i. i6.

484 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[I7X3-X7*3

pedagogues and professors. What would become of any of
us otherwise ! Duhan, opening the young soul, by such
modest gifts as Duhan had, to recognise black from white
a little, in this embroiled high Universe, is probably an
exception in some small measure. But, Duhan excepted, it
may be said to have been in spite of most of his teachers,
and their diligent endeavours, that Friedrich did acquire some
human piety ; kept the sense of truth alive in his mind ;
knew^ in whatever words he phrased it, the divine eternal
nature of Duty ; and managed, in the muddiest element and
most eclipsed Age ever known, to steer by the heavenly loc-d-
stars and (so we must candidly term it) to follow God’s Law,
in some measure, with or without Noltenius for company.

Noltenius’s Catechism^ or ghostly Drill-manual for Fritz, at
least the Catechism he had plied Wilhelmina with, which no
doubt was the same, is still extant.^ A very abstruse Piece ,
orthodox Lutheran - Calvinist, all proved from Scripture ;
giving what account it can of this unfathomable Universe, to
the young mind. To modem Prussians it by no means shines
as the indubitablest Theory of the Universe. Indignant
modem Prussians produce excerpts from it, of an abstmse
nature ; and endeavour to deduce therefrom some of Fried-
rich’s aberrations in matters of religion, which became notorious
enough by and by. Alas, I fear, it would not have been easy,
even for the modern Pmssian, to produce a perfect Catechism
for the use of Friedrich ; this Universe still continues a little
abstruse !

And there is another deeper thing to be remarked * the
notion of ‘ teaching ’ religion, in the way of drill-exercise ;
which is a very strange notion, though a common one, and
not peculiar to Noltenius and Friedrich Wilhelm. Piety to
God, the nobleness that inspires a human soul to struggle
Heavenward, cannot be ‘ taught ’ by the most exquisite cate-
chisms, 01 the most industrious preachings and drillings.
1^0 ; alas, no. Only by far other methods, — chiefly by silent
^ Preuss, ’.15 ; — specimens of it in Rodenbeck.

CHAP. XI.] CROWN-PRINCE'S PROGRESS 425

1713-1723]

continual Example, silently waiting for the favourable mood
and moment, and aided then by a kind of miracle, well enough
named Hhe grace of God,’ — can that sacred contagion pass
from soul into soul. How much beyond whole Libraries of
orthodox Theology is, sometimes, the mute action, the uncon-
scious look of a father, of a mother, who had in them
‘ Devoutness, pious Nobleness ’ ! In whom the young soul,
not unobservant, though not consciously observing, came at
length to recognise it ; to read it, in this irrefragable manner •
a seed planted thenceforth in the centre of his holiest affections
forevermore !

Noltenius wore black serge ; kept the corners of his mouth
well down ; and had written a Catechism of repute ; but I
know not that Noltenius carried much seed of living piety
about with him ; much affection from, or for, young Fritz he
could not well carry. On the whole, it is a bad outlook on
the religious side ; and except in Apprenticeship to the rugged
and as yet repulsive Honesties of Friedrich Wilhelm, I see
no good element in it. Bayle- Calvin, with Noltenius and
Catechisms of repute * there is no ‘ religion ’ to be had for
a little Fritz out of all that. Endless Doubt will be provided
for him out of all that, probably disbelief of all that ; — and,
on the whole, if any form at all, a very scmggy form of
moral existence ; from which the Highest shall be hopelessly
absent ; and in which anything High, anything not I.ow and
Lying, will have double merit.

It is indeed amazing what quantities and kinds of extinct
ideas apply for belief, sometimes in a menacing manner, to
the poor mind of man, and poor mind of child, in these days.
They come bullying in upon him, in masses, as if they were
quite living ideas ; ideas of a dreadfully indispensable nature,
the evident counterpart, and salutary interpretation, of Facts
round him, which, it is promised the poor young creature, he
shall recognise to correspond with them, one daj^. At which
‘ correspondence,’ when the Facts are once well recognised, he
has at last to ask himself with amazemtnt, ^Did I ever

426 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV.

[x7X3-x7a3

recognise it, then ? ’ Whereby come results incalculable ; not
good results any of them ; — some of them unspeakably bad !
The case of Crown-Prince Friedrich in Berlin is not singular ;
all cities and places can still show the like. And when it will
end, is not yet clear. But that it ever should have begun,
will one day be the astonishment. As if the divinest function
of a human being were not even that of believing; of dis-
criminating, with his god-given intellect, what is from what
is not ; and as if the point were, to render that either an
impossible function, or else what we must sorrowfully call a
revolutionary, rebellious and mutinous one. O Nolterius,
O Panzendorf, do for pity'^s sake take away your Catechetical
ware ; and say either nothing to the poor young Boy, or some
small thing he will find to be beyond doubt when he can
judge of it ! Fever, pestilence, are bad for the body ; but
Doubt, impious mutiny, doubly impious hypocrisy, are these
nothing for the mind ? Who would go about inculcating
Doubt, unless he were far astray indeed, and much at a loss
for employment ?

But the sorest fact in Friedrich’s schooling, the sorest, for
the present, though it ultimately proved perhaps the most
beneficent one, being well dealt with by the young soul, and
nobly subdued to his higher uses, remains still to be set forth.
Which will be a long business, first and last !

CHAPTER XII

CROWN-PRINCE FATJ.S INTO DISFAVOUR WITH PAPA

Thosk vivacities of young Fritz, his taste for music, finery,
those fuMiive excursions into the domain of Latin and forbidden
things, were ^distasteful and incomprehensible to Friedrich
Wilhelm : Where can such things end ? They begin in

CHAP. XII.] CROWN-PRINCE IN DISFAVOUR 427

X7I3-I733]

disobedience and intolerable perversity ; they will be the ruin
of Prussia and of Fritz ! — Here, in fact, has a great sorrow
risen. We perceive the first small cracks of incurable divisions
in the royal household ; the breaking-out of fountains of
bitterness, which by and by spread wide enough. A young
sprightly, capricious and vivacious Boy, inclined to self-will,
had it been permitted ; developing himself into foreign tastes,
into French airs and ways ; very ill seen by the heavy-footed
practical Germanic Majesty.

The beginnings of this sad discrepancy are traceable from
Ffiedrich’s sixth or seventh year : ‘ Not so dirty. Boy ! ’ And
there could be no lack of growth in the mutual ill-humour,
while the Boy himself continued growing ; enlarging in bulk
and in activity of his own. Plenty of new children come, to
divide our regard withal, and more are coming ; five new
Princesses, wise little Ulricjiie the youngest of them (named of
Sweden and the happy Swedish Treaty), whom we love much
for her gi’ave staid ways. Nay, next after Ulrique comes even
a new Prince; August Wilhelm, ten years younger than
Friedrich ; and is growing up much more according to the
paternal heart. Pretty children, all of them, more or less ;
and towardly, and comfortable to a Father ; — and the worst
of them a paragon of beauty, in comparison to perverse,
clandestine, disobedient Fritz, with his French fopperies,
flutings, and cockatoo fashions of hair ! —

And so the silent divulsion, silent on Fritz’’s part, exploding
loud enough now and then on his Father's part, goes steadily
on, splitting ever wider ; new offences ever superadding them-
selves. Till, at last, the rugged Father has grown to hate the
son ; and longs, with sorrowful indignation, that it were
possible to make August Wilhelm Crown-Prince in his stead.
This Fritz ought to fashion himself according to his Father’s
pattern, a well-meant honest pattern ; and he does not !
Alas, your Majesty, it cannot be. It is the^ew generation^
come ; which cannot live quite as the old one did. A perennial
controversy in human life ; coeval with the^enealogies of men.

428 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [BOOK IV,

[X7x3*x7a3

This little Boy should have been the excellent paternal
Majesty’s exact counterpart ; resembling him at all points,
‘ as a little sixpence does a big half-crown ’ : but we perceive
he cannot. This is a new coin, with a stamp of its own.
A surprising Friedrich dTor this ; and may pi;ove a good
piece yet ; but will never be the half-crown your M -jesty
requires ! —

Conceive a rugged thick-sided Squire Western, of supreme
degree, — for this Squire Western is a hot Hohenzollern, and
wears a crown royal ; — conceive such a burly ne-plits-ultra of
a Squire, with his broad-based rectitudes and surly irrefraga-
bilities ; the honest German instincts of the man, convictions
certain as the Fates, but capable of no utterance, or next to
none, in words ; and that he produces a Son who takes unto
Voltairism, piping, fiddling and belles-lettres, with apparently
a total contempt for Grumkow and the giant-regiment I
Sulphurous rage, in gusts or in lasting tempests, rising
from a fund of just implacability, is inevitable. Such as we
shall see.

The Mother, as mothers will, secretly favours Fritz ; anxious
to screen him in the day of high-wind. Withal she has plans
of her own in regard to Fritz, and the others ; being a lady of
many plans. That of the ‘ Double- Marriage,’ for example ; of
marrying her Prince and Princess to a Princess and Prince
of the English-Hanoverian House ; it was a pleasant eligible
plan, consented to by Papa and the other parties ; but when
it came to be perfected by treaty, amid the rubs of external
and internal politics, what new amazing discrepancies rose upon
her poor children and her ! Fearfully aggravating the quarrel
of Father and Son, almost to the fatal point. Of that
‘Double-Marriage,’ whirled up in a universe of intriguing
diplomacies, in the ‘ skirts of the Kaiser’s huge Spectre-
Hunt,’ we have called it, there will be sad things to say
by and by*

CHAP. XII.] CROWN-PRINCE IN DISFAVOUR 4^9
1713*17231

Plans her Majesty has ; and silently a will of her own. She
loves all her children, especially Fritz, and would so love that
they loved her. — For the rest, all along, Fritz and Wilhelmina
are sure allies. We perceive they have fallen into a kind of
cipher-speech ; ^ they communicate with one another by tele-
graphic signs. One of their words, ^ Ragotin (Stumpy),’ whom
does the reader think it designates ? Papa himself, the Royal
Majesty of Prussia, Friedrich Wilhelm i., he to his rebellious
children is tyrant ^ Stumpy,’ and no better ; being indeed
short of stature, and growing ever thicker, and surlier in these
prgvocations ! —

Such incurable discrepancies have risen in the Berlin Palace :
fountains of bitterness flowing ever wider, till they made
life all bitter for Son and for Father ; necessitating the proud
Son to hypocrisies towards his terrible Father, which were very
foreign to the proud youth, had there been any other resource.
But there was none, now or afterwards. Even when the
young man, driven to reflection and insight by intolerable
miseries, had begun to recognise the worth of his surly
Rhadamanthine Father, and the intrinsic wisdom of much
that he had meant with him, the Father hardly ever could, or
could only by fits, completely recognise the Son’s worth.
Rugged suspicious Papa requires always to be humoured,
cajoled, even when our feeling towards him is genuine and
loyal. Friedrich, to the last, we can perceive, has to assume
masquerade in addressing him, in writing to him, — and, m
spite of real love, must have felt it a relief when such a thing
was over.

That is, all along, a sad element of Friedrich’s education !
Out of which there might have come incalculable damage to
the young man, had his naturally assimilative powers, to
extract benefit from all things, been less considerable. As it
was, he gained self-help from it ; gained reticence, 4:he power
to keep his own counsel ; and did not let th# hypocrisy tak#
^ Mimoirei cU Bareithf i, 16^

430 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[1713-1733

hold of him, or be other than a hateful compulsory masquerade.
At an uncommonly early age, he stands before us accomplished
in endurance, for one thing ; a very bright young Stoic of his
sort ; silently prepared for the injustices of men and things.
And as for the masquerade, let us hope it was essentially
foreign even to the skin of the man ! The reader will judg^e as
he goes on. 11 ai jamais trompe personne durant ma vie^ I

have never deceived anybody during my life ; still less will
I deceive posterity,’^ writes Friedrich when his head was now
grown very gray.

CHAPTER XIII

RESULTS OF THE CROWN-PRINCE’S SCHOOLING

Neither as to intellectual culture, in Duhan’s special
sphere, and with all Duhan’s goodwill, was the opportunity
extremely golden. It cannot be said that Friedrich, who
spells in the way we saw, ‘ asteure ’ for ‘ a cette heure^ has
made shining acquisitions on the literary side. However, in
the longrun it becomes clear, his intellect, roving on devious
courses, or plodding along the prescribed tram-roads, had
been wide awake ; and busy all the while, bringing-in abun-
dant pabulum of an irregular nature.

He did learn ‘ Arithmetic,’ ^ Geography,’ and the other
useful knowledges that were indispensable to him. He knows
History extensively ; though rather the Roman, French, and
general European as the French have taught it him, than
that of ‘ Hessen, Brunswick, England,’ or even the ‘ Electoral
and Royal House of Brandenburg,’ which Papa had recom-
mended. He read History, where he could find it readable,
to the end of his life ; and had early begun reading it, —
immensely eager to learn, in his little head, what strange

^ Mimoites depuis la Paix cU Hubertsbourg^ 1763-1774 (Avant-Propos),
CEuvres, vii. 8.

CHAP. XIII.] RESULTS OF SCHOOLING 431
171^x733]

things had been, and were, in this strange Planet he was
come into.

We notice with pleasure a lively taste for facts in the
little Boy ; which continued to be the taste of the Man, in
an eminent degree. Fictions he also knows ; an eager ex-
tens^e reader of what is called Poetry, Literature, and himself
a performer in that province by and by ; but it is observable
how much of Realism there always is in his Literature ; how
close, here as elsewhere, he always hangs on the practical
truth of things ; how Fiction itself is either an expository
illustrative garment of Fact, or else is of no value to him.
Romantic readers of his Literature are much disappointed in
consequence, and pronounce it bad Literature ; — and sure
enough, in several senses, it is not to be called good ! Bad
Literature, they say ; shallow, barren, most unsatisfactory to
a reader of romantic appetites. Which is a correct verdict,
as to the romantic appetites and it. But to the man himself,
this quality of mind is of immense moment and advantage ;
and forms truly the basis of all he was good for in life. Once
for all, he has no pleasure in dreams, in particoloured clouds
and nothingnesses. All his curiosities gravitate towards what
exists, what has being and reality round him. That is the
significant thing to him ; that he would right gladly know,
being already related to that, as friend or as enemy ; and
feeling an unconscious indissoluble kinship, who shall say of
what importance, towards all that. For he too is a little
Fact, big as can be to himself ; and in the whole Univerie
there exists nothing as fact but is a fellow-creature of his.

That our little Fritz tends that way, ought to give Nol-
tenius, Finkenstein and other interested parties, the very
highest satisfaction. It is an excellent symptom of his intel-
lect, this of gravitating irresistibly towards realities. Better
symptom of its quality (whatever quantity there be of it),
human intellect cannot show for itself. However it may
go with Literature, and satisfaction to readers of romantic?
appetites, this young soul promises to become a successful

432 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[i7X3*J:7a3

Worker one day, and to do something under the Sun. For
work is of an extremely unfictitious nature ; and no man can
roof his house with clouds and moonshine, so as to turn the
rain from him.

It is also to be noted that his style of French, though he
spelt it so ill, and never had the least mastery of punctua-
tion, has real merit. Rapidity, easy vivacity, perfect clearness,
here and there a certain quaint expressiveness : on the whole,
he had learned the Art of Speech, from those old French
Governesses, in those old and new French Books of his. We
can also say of his Literature, of what he hastily wrote in
mature life, that it has much more worth, even as Literature,
than the common romantic appetite assigns to it. A vein
of distinct sense, and good interior articulation, is never
wanting in that thin-flowing utterance. The true is well
riddled out from amid the false ; the important and essential
are alone given us, the unimportant and superfluous honestly
thrown away. A lean wiry veracity (an immense advantage
in any Literature, good or bad !) is everywhere beneficently
observable; the quality of the intellect always extremely
good, whatever its quantity may be.

It is true, his spelling, — ^ asteure ’ for ‘ d cette lieure ^ — is
very bad. And as for punctuation, he never could under-
stand the mystery of it ; he merely scatters a few commas
and dashes, as if they were shaken out of a pepper-box upon
his page, and so leaves it. These are deficiencies lying very
i^are to criticism ; and I confess I never could completely
understand them in such a man. He that would have
ordered arrest for the smallest speck of mud on a man’s
buff-belt, indignant that any pipe-clayed portion of a man
should not be perfectly pipe-clayed : how could he tolerate
false spelling, and commas shaken as out of a pepper-box
over his page ? It is probable he cared little about Litera-
time, after all ; cared, at least, only about the essentials of it ;
had practically no ambition for himself, or none considerable,
in that kind ; — and so might reckon exact obedience and

CHAP, XIII.] RESULTS OF SCHOOLING 483

17x3-1783]

punctuality, in a soldier, more important than good spelling
to an amateur literary man. He never minded snufF upon
his own chin, not even upon his waistcoat and breeches : A
merely superficial thing, not worth bothering about, in the
press of real business ! —

That Friedrich’s Course of Education did on the whole
prosper, in spite of every drawback, is known to all men.
He came out of it a man of clear and ever-improving intel-
ligence ; equipped with knowledge, true in essentials, if not
punctiliously exact, upon all manner of practical and specu-
lative things, to a degree not only unexampled among modern
Sovereign Princes so-called, but such as to distinguish him
even among the studious class. Nay many ^ Men-of-Letters ’
have made a reputation for themselves with but a fraction
of the real knowledge concerning men and things, past and
present, which Friedrich was possessed of. Already at the
time when action came to be demanded of him, he was what
we must call a well-informed and cultivated man ; which
character he never ceased to merit more and more ; and as
for the action, and the actions, — we shall see whether he was
fit for these or not.

One point of supreme importance in his Education was all
along made sure of, by the mere presence and presidence of
Friedrich Wilhelm in the business : That there was an in-
flexible law of discipline everywhere active in it ; that there
was a Spartan rigour, frugality, veracity inculcated upon him.

‘ Economy he is to study to the bottom ’ ; and not only sd?
but, in another sense of the word, he is to practise economy ;
and does, or else suffers for not doing it. Economic of his
time, first of all : generally every other noble economy will
follow out of that, if a man once understand and practise
that. Here was a truly valuable foundation laid ; and as for
the rest. Nature, in spite of shot-rubbish, had to do what she
could in the rest.

But Nature had been very kind to this new^child of hers.
And among the confused hurtful elements of his Schooling,
I. 2 E

434 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE [book iv.

[1713.17*3

there was always, as we say, this eminently salutary and most
potent one, of its being, in the gross, cm Apprenticeship to
Friedrich Wilhelm the Rhadamanthine Spartan King, who
hates from his heart all empty Nonsense, and Unveracity
most of all. Which one element, well aided by docility, by
openness and loyalty of mind, on the Pupil’s part, proved at
length sufficient to conquer the others ; as it were to bum-up
all the others, and reduce their sour dark smoke, abounding
everywhere, into flame and illumination mostly. This radiant
swift-paced Son owed much to the surly, irascible, sure-footed
Father that bred him. Friedrich did at length see into
Friedrich Wilhelm, across the abstruse, thunderous, sulphurous
embodiments and accompaniments of the man ; — and proved
himself, in all manner of important respects, the filial sequel
of Friedrich Wilhelm. These remarks of a certain Editor
are perhaps worth adding :

^ Friedrich Wilhelm, King of Prussia, did not set-up for a Pestalozzi ;
and the plan of Education for his Son is open to manifold objections.
Nevertheless, as Schoolmasters go, 1 much prefer him to most others we
have at present. The wild man had discerned, with his rugged natural
intelligence (not wasted away in the idle element of speaking and of
being spoken to, but kept wholesomely silent for most part). That human
education is not^ and cannot be, a thing of vocables. That it is a thing
of earnest facts ; of capabilities developed, of habits established, of dis-
positions well dealt with, of tendencies confirmed and tendencies re-
pressed : — a laborious separating of the character into two firmaments ;
shutting down the subterranean, well down and deep ; an earth and
waters, and what lies under them ; then your everlasting azure sky,
and immeasurable depths of aether, hanging serene overhead. To make
of the human soul a Cosmos, so far as possible, that was Friedrich
Wilhelm’s dumb notion : not to leave the human soul a mere Chaos ; —
how much less a Singing or eloquently Spouting Chaos, which is ten
times worse than a Chaos left mute, confessedly chaotic and not cosmic !
To develop the man into doing something ; and withal into doing it as
the Universe and the Eternal Laws require, — which is but another
name for really doing and not merely seeming to do it : — that was
Friedrich Wilhelm’s dumb notion : and it was, 1 can assure you, very
far from being a foolish one, though there was no Latin in it, and much
of Prussian pipeclay ! ’

CHAP.xiiL] RESULTS OF SCHOOLING 436

X7i3.X7a3]

But the Cc^gress of Cambrai is met, and much else is met
and parted : and the Kaiser’s Spectre-Hunt, especially his
Duel with the She-Dragon of Spain, is in full course ; and it
IS time we were saying something of the Double-Marriage in
a directly narrative way.

END OF VOL. 1

Printed by T. and A. Constable, Printers to His MaJ^isty,
at tbe Edinburgh University Press
