The French Revolution, Vol. 2: The Constitution (Thomas Carlyle, 1837)
==========================================================
Continues Carlyle's epic: the Revolution's constitutional phase in prophetic prose. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (frenchrevoluti02carl).

.•vJVJi":i; 


mx- 


•;        t 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Arciiive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


http://www.archive.org/details/frenchrevoluti02carl 


METHUEN'S   STANDARD   LIBRARY 


THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION 


THE 

FRENCH    REVOLUTION 


A    HISTORY 

IN  THREE   PARTS 

1.    THE  bastille;    il    the  constitution; 

HL     THE   GUILLOTINE 


BY 

THOMAS   CARLYLE 


A    NEW    EDITION, 

WITH    AN    INTRODUCTION,    NOTES    AND    APPENDICES 

BY    C.    R.    L.    FLETCHER,    MA. 

FELLOW    AND    TUTOR    OF    MAODALEN    COLLBOE,     OXFORD 


IN   THREE  VOLUMES 
VOL.  II 


METHUEN     &     CO. 

36  ESSEX  STREET  W.C. 

LONDON 

1902 


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  SECOND 


PART  II :  THE  CONSTITUTION 


BOOK  II 

NANCI 

CHAP.  PAGE 

I.   Bouill^ I 

II.  Arrears  and  Aristocrats 3 

III.  Bouill^  at  Metz 10 

IV.  Arrears  at  Nanci 14 

V.  Inspector  Malseigne     .........  ig 

VI.  Bouill^  at  Nanci 23 


BOOK  III 

THE    TUILERIES 

I.  Epimenides 34 

II.  The  Wakeful 38 

III.  Sword  in  Hand    ..........  45 

IV.  To  fly  or  not  to  fly 52 

V.  The  Day  of  Poniards ,         .  62 

VI.  Mirabeau 69 

VII.  Death  of  Mirabeau 74 

BOOK  IV 

VARBNNES 

I.  Easter  at  Saint-Cloud 84 

II.  Easter  at  Paris go 


VI 


CONTENTS 


III.  Count  Fersen 

IV.  Attitude 

V.  The  New  Berline 
VI.  Old-Dragoon  Drouet 
VII.  The  Night  of  Spurs 
VIII.  The  Return 
IX.  Sharp  Shot 


PAGE 

93 

I02 
107 

"3 

117 

127 
130 


BOOK  V 


PARLIAMENT   FIRST 


I.  Grande  Acceptation 138 

II.  The  Book  of  the  Law 147 

III.  Avignon 158 

IV.  No  Sugar 167 

V.  Kings  and  Emigrants  .........  171 

VI.  Brigands  and  Jales       .........  184 

VII.  Constitution  will  not  march 188 

VIII.  The  Jacobins  195 

IX.  Minister  Roland 200 

X,  Petion-National-Pique 205 

XI.  The  Hereditary  Representative ao8 

XII.  Procession  of  the  Black  Breeches 213 


BOOK  VI 


THE  MARSEILLESE 


I.  Executive  that  does  not  act  .......  220 

II.  Let  us  march 228 

III.  Some  Consolation  to  Mankind 231 

IV.  Subterranean 236 

V.  At  Dinner 24c 

VI.  The  Steeples  at  Midnight 244 

VII.  The  Swiss 235 

VIII.  Constitution  burst  in  Pieces         , 263 


CONTENTS  vii 

PART  III:  THE  GUILLOTINE 
BOOK  I 

SEPTEMBER 

CHAP.  PAOE 

I.  The  Improvised  Commune 273 

II.  Danton 287 

III.  Dumouriez 293 

IV.  September  in  Paris 297 

V.  A  Trilogy 307 

VI.  The  Circular 314 

VII.  September  in  Argonne 326 

VIII.  Exeunt 337 

BOOK  II 

REGICIDE 

I.  The  Deliberative 347 

II.  The  Executive 358 

III.  Discrowned 363 

IV.  The  Loser  pays 367 

V.  Stretching  of  Formulas        ........  370 

VI.  At  the  Bar 376 

VII.  The  Three  Votings 387 

VIII.  Place  de  la  Revolution 393 


VOL.    II. 


MAPS 

VOL.  II 

Environs  of  Paris  ........  To  face  page    98 

The  Flight  to  Varennes „             98 

The  Eastern  Frontier  of  France „           326 


THE  FRENCH   REVOLUTION 


BOOK  II 

NANCI 

CHAPTER  I 

BOUILLE 
Dimly  visible,  at  Metz  on  the  North-Eastern  frontier,  a  certain 
brave  Bouille,i  last  refuge  of  Royalty  in  all  straits  and  meditations 
of  flight,  has  for  many  months  hovered  occasionally  in  our  eye  ; 
some  name  or  shadow  of  a  brave  Bouille  :  let  us  now,  for  a  little, 
look  fixedly  at  him,  till  he  become  a  substance  and  person  for  us. 
The  man  himself  is  worth  a  glance  ;  his  position  and  procedure 
there,  in  these  days,  will  throw  light  on  many  things. 

For  it  is  with  Bouille  as  with  all  French  Commanding  Officers  ; 
only  in  a  more  emphatic  degree.  The  grand  National  Federation, 
we  already  guess,  was  but  empty  sound,  or  worse  :  a  last  loudest 
universal  Hep-hep-hiirrah,  with  fiill  bumpers,  in  that  National 
Lapithae- feast  of  Constitution- making  ;  as  in  loud  denial  of  the 

^[Bouill^'s  own  M^moires  were  first  printed  in  London  in  1797  in  English,  and 
in  180T  in  Paris  in  French.  They  are,  with  the  exception  of  Malouet's,  about  the 
soundest  and  fairest  among  the  writings  of  those  who  played  any  leading  part  in 
the  Revolution.  Bouille  had  served  as  Governor  of  Guadeloupe  with  great  distinc- 
tion in  the  American  war — to  him  in  fact  more  than  to  any  one  the  safety  of  the 
French  West  Indies  was  then  due.  He  was  50  years  of  age  when  he  had  to  face 
the  complete  disorganisation  of  the  French  Army  caused  by  the  Revolution.  His 
own  opinions  were  entirely  those  of  Malouet  and  the  Constitutional  Royalists. 
When  after  the  failure  of  the  Varennes  episode  he  had  to  tiy  for  his  life,  he  met 
with  scant  courtesy  from  the  Iimign's,  and  would  have  met  with  none  but  for  his 
great  military  talents.  He  died  in  England  1800,  and  his  name  is  now  chiefly 
remembered  because  a  verse  of  the  Marseillaise  has  handed  it  down  to  most  un- 
merited obloquy.] 

VOL.    II.  1 


2  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

palpably  existing  ;  as  if,  with  hurrahings,  you  would  shut  out 
notice  of  the  inevitable,  already  knocking  at  the  gates  !  Which 
new  National  bumper,  one  may  say,  can  but  deepen  the  drunken- 
ness ;  and  so,  the  louder  it  swears  Brotherhood,  will  the  sooner 
and  the  more  surely  lead  to  Cannibalism.  Ah,  under  that  fra- 
ternal shine  and  clangour,  what  a  deep  world  of  irreconcilable 
discords  lie  momentarily  assuaged,  damped  down  for  one  moment ! 
Respectable  military  Federates  have  barely  got  home  to  their 
quarters  ;  and  the  inflammablest,  '  dying,  burnt  up  with  liquors, 
and  kindness,'  has  not  yet  got  extinct  ;  the  shine  is  hardly  out 
of  men's  eyes,  and  still  blazes  filling  all  men's  memories, — when 
your  discords  burst  forth  again  very  considerably  darker  than 
ever.     Let  us  look  at  Bouille,  and  see  how. 

Bouille  for  the  present  commands  in  the  Garrison  of  Metz,  and 
far  and  wide  over  the  East  and  North  ;  being  indeed,  by  a  late  act 
of  Government  with  sanction  of  National  Assembly,  appointed 
one  of  our  Four  supreme  Generals.  Rochambeau  ^  and  Mailly,- 
men  and  Marshals  of  note  in  these  days,  though  to  us  of  small 
moment,  are  two  of  his  colleagues ;  tough  old  babbling  Luckner,^ 
also  of  small  moment  for  us,  will  probably  be  the  third.  Marquis 
de  Bouille  is  a  determined  Loyalist ;  not  indeed  disinclined  to 
moderate  reform,  but  resolute  against  immoderate.  A  man  long 
suspect  to  Patriotism  ;  who  has  more  than  once  given  the  august 
Assembly  trouble  ;  who  would  not,  for  example,  take  the  National 
Oath,  as  he  was  bound  to  do,  but  always  put  it  off  on  this  or  the 
other  pretext,  till  an  autograph  of  Majesty  requested  him  to  do  it 
as  a  favour.  There,  in  this  post,  if  not  of  honour  yet  of  eminence 
and  danger,  he  waits,  in  a  silent  concentred  manner  ;  very  dubious 
of  the  future.  '  Alone,'  as  he  says,  or  almost  alone,  of  all  the  old 
military  Notabilities,  he  has  not  emigrated  ;  but  thinks  always,  in 

'  [Rochambeau,  vid.  note  stipr.,  i.  57.] 

^[Augustin  de  Mailly,  Marquis  d'Haucourt,  was  made  a  Marshal  of  France 
1783,  guillotined  (aged  86)  in  March  '94.  He  played  a  leading  part  in  the  defence 
of  the  Tuileries  on  Aug.  loth  '92,  at  the  age  of  84.] 

^  [The  Baron  de  Luckner,  a  Bavarian  soldier  of  fortune,  served  in  the  Seven 
Years'  War,  became  Lieut. -Gen.  in  the  French  Army  1763,  Marshal  of  France 
Dec.  '91,  was  successively  in  Command  of  the  Army  of  Alsace  and  of  the  North, 
and  was  suspended  by  Dumouriez  m  tJae  end  of  '92,  guillotined  in  Jan.  '94,  aged  72.}, 


ARKEARS  AND  ARISTOCRATS  3 

atrabiliar  moments,  that  there  will  be  nothing  for  him  too  but  to 
cross  the  marches.  He  might  cross,  say,  to  Treves  or  Coblentz 
where  Exiled  Princes  will  be  one  day  ranking  ;  or  say,  over  into 
Luxemburg  where  old  Broglie  loiters  and  languishes.  Or  is  there 
not  the  great  dim  Deep  of  European  Diplomacy  ;  where  your  Ca- 
lonnes,  your  Breteuils  are  beginning  to  hover,  dimly  discernible  ? 
With  immeasurable  confused  outlooks  and  purposes,  with  no 
clear  purpose  but  this  of  still  trying  to  do  his  Majesty  a  sei-vice, 
Bouille  waits  ;  struggling  what  he  can  to  keep  his  district  loyal, 
his  troops  faithful,  his  garrisons  furnished.  He  maintains,  as  yet, 
with  his  Cousin  Lafayette  some  thin  diplomatic  correspondence, 
by  letter  and  messenger ;  chivalrous  constitutional  professions  on 
the  one  side,  military  gravity  and  brevity  on  the  other ;  which 
thin  correspondence  one  can  see  growing  ever  the  thinner  and 
hollower,  towards  the  verge  of  entire  vacuity. ^  A  quick,  choleric, 
sharply  discerning,  stubbornly  endeavouring  man  ;  with  suppressed- 
explosive  resolution,  with  valour,  nay  headlong  audacity :  a  man 
who  was  more  in  his  place,  lionlike  defending  those  Windward 
Isles,  or,  as  with  military  tiger-spring,  clutching  Nevis  and  Mont- 
serrat  from  the  English,— than  here  in  this  suppressed  condition, 
muzzled  and  fettered  by  diplomatic  packthreads  ;  looking  out  for 
a  civil  war,  which  may  never  arrive.  Few  years  ago  Bouille  was 
to  have  led  a  French  East- Indian  Expedition,  and  reconquered 
or  conquered  Pondicherri  and  the  Kingdoms  of  the  Sun  :  but  the 
whole  world  is  suddenly  changed,  and  he  with  it ;  Destiny  willed 
it  not  in  that  way,  but  in  this. 

CHAPTER  II 

ARREARS  AND  ARISTOCRATS 
Indeed,  as  to  the  general  outlook  of  things,  Bouille  himself  augurs 
not  well  of  it.  The  French  Army,  ever  since  those  old  Bastille 
days,  and  earlier,  has  been  universally  in  the  questionablest  state, 
and  growing  daily  worse.  Discipline,  which  is  at  all  times  a  kind 
of  miracle,  and  works  by  faith,  broke  down  then ;  one  sees  not 

iBouill(5,  M^nioires  (London,  1797),  i.  c.  8. 


4  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

with  what  near  prospect  of  recovering  itself.  The  Gardes  Fran- 
daises  played  a  deadly  game  ;  but  how  they  won  it,  and  wear  the 
prizes  of  it,  all  men  know.  In  that  general  overturn,  we  saw  the 
Hired  Fighters  refuse  to  fight.  The  very  Swiss  of  Chateau- Vieux, 
which  indeed  is  a  kind  of  French  Swiss,  from  Geneva  and  the 
Pays  de  Vaud,  are  understood  to  have  declined.  Deserters  glided 
over ;  Royal-Allemand  itself  looked  disconsolate,  though  stanch 
of  purpose.  In  a  word,  we  there  saw  MUitarii  Rule,  in  the  shape 
of  poor  Besenval  with  that  convulsive  unmanageable  Camp  of  his, 
pass  two  martyr  days  on  the  Champ-de-Mars  ;  and  then,  veiling 
itself,  so  to  speak,  '  under  cloud  of  night,'  depart  '  down  the  left 
bank  of  the  Seine,'  to  seek  refuge  elsewhere  ;  this  ground  having 
clearly  become  too  hot  for  it. 

But  what  new  ground  to  seek,  what  remedy  to  try  ?  Quarters 
that  were  '  uninfected  : '  this  doubtless,  with  judicious  strictness 
of  drilling,  were  the  plan.  Alas,  in  all  quarters  and  places,  from 
Paris  onward  to  the  remotest  hamlet,  is  infection,  is  seditious 
contagion  :  inhaled,  propagated  by  contact  and  converse,  till  the 
dullest  soldier  catch  it !  There  is  speech  of  men  in  uniform  with 
men  not  in  uniform  ;  men  in  uniform  read  journals,  and  even 
write  in  them.^  There  are  public  petitions  or  remonstrances, 
private  emissaries  and  associations  ;  there  is  discontent,  jealousy, 
uncertainty,  sullen  suspicious  humour.  The  whole  French  Army, 
fermenting  in  dark  heat,  glooms  ominous,  boding  good  to  no  one. 

So  that,  in  the  general  social  dissolution  and  revolt,  we  are  to 
have  this  deepest  and  dismallest  kind  of  it,  a  revolting  soldieiy  ? 
Barren,  desolate  to  look  upon  is  this  same  business  of  revolt  under 
all  its  aspects  ;  but  how  infinitely  more  so,  when  it  takes  the 
aspect  of  military  mutiny !  The  very  implement  of  rule  and 
restraint,  whereby  all  the  rest  was  managed  and  held  in  order, 
has  become  precisely  the  frightfullest  immeasurable  implement 
of  misrule ;  like  the  element  of  Fire,  our  indispensable  all- 
ministering  servant,  when  it  gets  the  maslery,  and  becomes  con- 
flagration. Discipline  we  called  a  kind  of  miracle  :  in  fact,  is  it 
not  miraculous  how  one  man  moves  hundreds  of  thousands ;  each 
'  See  Newspapers  of  July  1789  (in  Hist.  Pari.  ii.  35),  &c. 


ARREARS  AND  ARISTOCRATS  5 

unit  of  whom,  it  may  be,  loves  him  not,  and  singly  fears  him  not, 
yet  has  to  obey  him,  to  go  hither  or  go  thither,  to  march  and 
halt,  to  give  death,  and  even  to  receive  it,  as  if  a  Fate  had 
spoken  ;  and  the  word-of-command  becomes,  almost  in  the  literal 
sense,  a  magic-word  ? 

Which  magic- word,  again,  if  it  be  once  forgotten  ;  the  spell  of 
it  once  broken  !  The  legions  of  assiduous  ministering  spirits  rise 
on  you  now  as  menacing  fiends  ;  your  free  orderly  arena  becomes 
a  tumult-place  of  the  Nether  Pit,  and  the  hapless  magician  is  rent 
limb  from  limb.  Military  mobs  are  mobs  with  muskets  in  their 
hands ;  and  also  with  death  hanging  over  their  heads,  for  death 
is  the  penalty  of  disobedience,  and  they  have  disobeyed.  And 
now  if  all  mobs  are  properly  frenzies,  and  work  frenetically  with 
mad  fits  of  hot  and  of  cold,  fierce  rage  alternating  so  incoherently 
with  panic  terror,  consider  what  your  military  mob  will  be,  with 
such  a  conflict  of  duties  and  penalties,  whirled  between  remorse 
and  fury,  and,  for  the  hot  fit,  loaded  fire-arms  in  its  hand  !  To 
the  soldier  himself,  revolt  is  frightful,  and  oftenest  perhaps 
pitiable  ;  and  yet  so  dangerous,  it  can  only  be  hated,  cannot  be 
pitied.  An  anomalous  class  of  mortals  these  poor  Hired  Killers  ! 
With  a  frankness,  which  to  the  Moralist  in  these  times  seems 
surprising,  they  have  sworn  to  become  machines ;  and  neverthe- 
less they  are  still  partly  men.  Let  no  prudent  person  in  authority 
remind  them  of  this  latter  fact ;  but  always  let  force,  let  injustice 
above  all,  stop  short  clearly  on  this  side  of  the  rebounding-point ! 
Soldiers,  as  we  often  say,  do  revolt :  were  it  not  so,  several  things 
which  are  transient  in  this  world  might  be  perennial.^ 

Over  and  above  the  general  quarrel  which  all  sons  of  Adam 
maintain  with  their  lot  here  below,  the  grievances  of  the  French 
soldiery  reduce  themselves  to  two.  First,  that  their  Officers  are 
Aristocrats ;  secondly,  that  they  cheat  them  of  their  Pay.     Two 

^  [Carlyle  does  not  clearly  mention  the  very  important  decree  of  the  Assembly  on 
Aug.'ioth,  enjoining  on  all  officers  a  new  oath  '  that  they  will  never  use  their  troops 
against  citizens,  save  at  the  request  of  the  Municipal  authorities/  which  must  be 
read  aloud  to  the  soldiers  first  (but  see  in/r.,  ii.  9).  Aulard  in  R6v.  Fr.  xxxv. 
134-5,  rightly  points  out  that  this  was  simply  breaking  the  sword  in  the  King's 
hand  (see  App.  on  the  Army).] 


6  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

grievances ;  or  rather  we  might  say  one,  capable  of  becoming  a 
hundred  ;  for  in  that  single  first  proposition,  that  the  Officers 
are  Aristocrats,  what  a  multitude  of  corollaries  lie  ready !  It  is 
a  bottomless  ever-flowing  fountain  of  grievances  this  ;  what  you 
may  call  a  general  raw-material  of  grievance,  wherefrom  individual 
grievance  after  grievance  will  daily  body  itself  forth.  Nay  there 
will  even  be  a  kind  of  comfort  in  getting  it,  from  time  to  time, 
so  embodied.  Peculation  of  one's  Pay  !  It  is  embodied  ;  made 
tangible,  made  denounceable  ;  exhalable,  if  only  in  angry  words. 
For  unluckily  that  grand  fountain  of  grievances  does  exist  : 
Aristocrats  almost  all  our  Officers  necessarily  are  ;  they  have  it  in 
the  blood  and  bone.  By  the  law  of  the  case,  no  man  can  pretend 
to  be  the  pitifuUest  lieutenant  of  militia  till  he  have  first  verified, 
to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Lion-King,  a  Nobility  of  four  generations. 
Not  nobility  only,  but  four  generations  of  it  :  this  latter  is  the  im- 
provement hit  upon,  in  comparatively  late  years,  by  a  certain  War- 
minister  much  pressed  for  commissions.^  An  improvement  which 
did  relieve  the  overpressed  War-minister,  but  which  split  France 
still  further  into  yawning  contrasts  of  Commonalty  and  Nobility, 
nay  of  new  Nobility  and  old  ;  as  if  already  with  your  new  and  old, 
and  then  with  your  old,  older  and  oldest,  there  were  not  con- 
trasts and  discrepancies  enough  ; — the  general  clash  whereof  men 
now  see  and  hear,  and  in  the  singular  whirlpool,  all  contrasts 
gone  together  to  the  bottom !  Gone  to  the  bottom  or  going ; 
with  uproar,  without  return  ;  going  everywhere  save  in  the 
Military  section  of  things  ;  and  there,  it  may  be  asked,  can  they 
hope  to  continue  always  at  the  top  ?     Apparently,  not. 

It  is  true,  in  a  time  of  external  Peace,  when  there  is  no  fight- 
ing, but  only  drilling,  this  question.  How  you  rise  from  the  ranks, 
may  seem  theoretical  rather.      But  in  reference  to  the  Rights 

1  Dampmartin,  ]^v6nemens,  i.  89.  [For  the  Edict  of  the  year  1781,  as  to 
quahfications  for  Commissions,  see  Appendix  on  Army,  where  the  relative  propor- 
tion between  noble  and  roiuriei-  officers  in  1789  is  discussed.  It  is  hardly  fair  for 
Carlyle  to  quote  this  passage  from  Dampmartin  without  adding  that  it  occurs  in 
the  middle  of  a  long  eulogy  on  the  old  French  Army  and  a  practical  defence  of  the 
aristocratic  system.  The  reason  assigned  by  Dampmartin  for  the  Edict,  viz.,  the 
great  pressure  of  candidates  for  commissions,  is  not  likely — it  was  prompted  rather 
by  a  wish  to  keep  out  the  ?wuveai(x  riches,  who  were  becoming  a  nuisance  to 
the  service.] 


AKKEARS  AND  ARISTOCRATS  7 

of  Man  it  is  continually  practical.  The  soldier  has  sworn  to  be 
faithful  not  to  the  King  only,  but  to  the  Law  and  the  Nation. 
Do  our  commanders  love  the  Revolution  ?  ask  all  soldiers.  Un- 
happily no,  they  hate  it,  and  love  the  Counter- Revolution.  Young 
epauletted  men,  with  quality-blood  in  them,  poisoned  with  quality- 
pride,  do  sniff  openly,  with  indignation  struggling  to  become 
contempt,  at  our  Rights  of  Man,  as  at  some  newfangled  cobweb, 
which  shall  be  brushed  down  again.^  Old  Officers,  more  cautious, 
keep  silent,  with  closed  uncurled  lips ;  but  one  guesses  what  is 
passing  within.  Nay  who  knows,  how,  under  the  plausiblest  word 
of  command,  might  lie  Counter-Revolution  itself,  sale  to  Exiled 
Princes  and  the  Austrian  Kaiser :  treacherous  Aristocrats  hood- 
winking the  small  insight  of  us  common  men  ? — In  such  manner 
works  that  general  raw-material  of  grievance  ;  disastrous  ;  instead 
of  trust  and  reverence,  breeding  hate,  endless  suspicion,  the  im- 
possibility of  commanding  and  obeying.  And  now  when  this 
second  more  tangible  grievance  has  articulated  itself  universally 
in  the  mind  of  the  common  man  :  Peculation  of  his  Pay  !  Pecu- 
lation of  the  despicablest  sort  does  exist,  and  has  long  existed ; 
but,  unless  the  new-declared  Rights  of  Man,  and  all  rights  whatso- 
ever, be  a  cobweb,  it  shall  no  longer  exist. '^ 

The  French  Military  System  seems  dying  a  sorrowful  suicidal 
death.  Nay  more,  citizen,  as  is  natural,  ranks  himself  against 
citizen  in  this  cause.  The  soldier  finds  audience,  of  numbers  and 
sympathy  unlimited,  among  the  Patriot  lower-classes.  Nor  are 
the  higher  wanting  to  the  officer.  The  officer  still  dresses  and 
perfumes  himself  for  such  sad  unemigrated  soiree  as  there  may  still 
be  ;  and  speaks  his  woes, — which  woes,  are  they  not  Majesty's  and 
Nature's  ?  Speaks,  at  the  same  time,  his  gay  defiance,  his  firm-set 
resolution.  Citizens,  still  more  Citizenesses,  see  the  right  and  the 
wrong  ;  not  the  Military  System  alone  will  die  by  suicide,  but  much 
along  with  it.     As  was  said,  there  is  yet  possible  a  deeper  overturn 

^[Bouill6  (127)  speaks  of  the  needless  multiplication  of  the  oaths  to  the  Constitu- 
tion, especially  referring  to  the  one  of  Aug.  loth.] 

*  [Bouill^  admits  that,  under  the  old  system  of  Inspectors,  there  were  arrears 
of  pay  in  several  regiments,  but  this  system  was  being  rectified  at  the  time. 
Arrears  of  pay  are  a  very  different  thing  from  peculation,  and  there  is  no  evidence 
.T.t  all  of  peculation,  a  thing  in  itself  most  unlikely.] 


8  THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION 

than  any  yet  witnessed  :  that  deepest  tipturn  of  the  black-burning 
sulphurous  stratum  whei'eon  all  rests  and  grows  ! 

But  how  these  things  may  act  on  the  rude  soldier-mind,  with 
its  military  pedantries,  its  inexperience  of  all  that  lies  off  the 
parade-ground  ;  inexperience  as  of  a  child,  yet  fierceness  of  a  man, 
and  vehemence  of  a  Frenchman !  It  is  long  that  secret  com- 
munings, in  mess-room  and  guard-room,  sour  looks,  thousandfold 
petty  vexations  between  commander  and  commanded,  measure 
everywhere  the  weary  military  day.  Ask  Captain  Dampmartin ; 
an  authentic,  ingenious  literary  officer  of  horse ;  who  loves  the 
Reign  of  Liberty,  after  a  sort :  yet  has  had  his  heart  grieved  to 
the  quick  many  times,  in  the  hot  South- Western  region  and  else- 
where ;  and  has  seen  riot,  civil  battle  by  daylight  and  by  torch- 
light, and  anarchy  hatefuUer  than  death.  How  insubordinate 
Troopers,  with  drink  in  their  heads,  meet  Captain  Dampmartin 
and  another  on  the  ramparts,  where  there  is  no  escape  or  side-path  ; 
and  make  military  salute  punctually,  for  we  look  calm  on  them ; 
yet  make  it  in  a  snappish,  almost  insulting  mamier :  how  one 
morning  they  '  leave  all  their  chamois  shirts  '  and  superfluous  buffs, 
which  they  are  tired  of,  laid  in  piles  at  the  Captains'  doors ; 
whereat  'we  laugh,'  as  the  ass  does  eating  thistles  :  nay  how  they 
'  knot  two  forage-cords  together,'  with  universal  noisy  cursing,  with 
evident  intent  to  hang  the  Quartermaster : — all  this  the  worthy 
Captain,  looking  on  it  through  the  ruddy-and-sable  of  fond  regretful 
memory,  has  flowingly  written  down.^  Men  growl  in  vague  dis- 
content ;  officers  fling  up  their  commissions,  and  emigrate  in  disgust. 

Or  let  us  ask  another  literary  Officer ;  not  yet  Captain ;  Sub- 
lieutenant only,  in  the  Artillery  Regiment  La  Fere  :  a  young  man 
of  twenty-one ;  not  unentitled  to  speak  ;  the  name  of  him  is 
Napoleon  Buonaparte.  To  such  height  of  Sublieutenancy  has  he 
now  got  promoted,  from  Brienne  School,  five  years  ago ;  '  being 
found  qualified  in  mathematics  by  La  Place.'  He  is  lying  at 
Auxonne,  in  the  West,  in  these  months ;  not  sumptuously  lodged 
— '  in  the  house  of  a  Barber,  to  whose  wife  he  did  not  pay  the 
*  customary  degree  of  respect ; '  or  even  over  at  the  Pavilion,  in  a 
1  Dampmartin,  Ev^nemens,  i.  122-146. 


ARKEARS  AND  ARISTOCRATS  9 

chamber  with  bare  walls ;  the  only  furniture  an  indifferent  '  bed 
*  without  curtains,  two  chairs,  and  in  the  recess  of  a  window  a  table 
'  covered  with  books  and  papers :  his  Brother  Louis  sleeps  on  a 
'coarse  mattress  in  an  adjoining  room.'  However,  he  is  doing 
something  great :  writing  his  first  Book  or  Pamphlet, — eloquent 
vehement  Letter  to  M.  Matteo  Buttafuoco,  our  Corsican  Deputy, 
who  is  not  a  Patriot,  but  an  Aristocrat  unworthy  of  Deputyship. 
Joly  of  Dole  is  Publisher.  The  literary  Sublieutenant  corrects 
the  proofs ;  *  sets  out  on  foot  from  Auxonne,  every  morning  at 
'  four  o'clock,  for  Dole  :  after  looking  over  the  proofs,  he  partakes 
'of  an  extremely  frugal  breakfast  with  Joly,  and  immediately 
'  prepares  for  returning  to  his  Garrison ;  where  he  arrives  before 
'noon,  having  thus  walked  above  twenty  miles  in  the  course  of 
'the  morning.'  ^ 

This  Sublieutenant  can  remark  that,  in  di'awing-rooms,  on 
streets,  on  highways,  at  inns,  everywhere  men's  minds  are  ready 
to  kindle  into  a  flame.  That  a  Patriot,  if  he  appear  in  the  draw- 
ing-room, or  amid  a  group  of  officers,  is  liable  enough  to  be  dis- 
couraged, so  great  is  the  majority  against  him  :  but  no  sooner 
does  he  get  into  the  street,  or  among  the  soldiers,  than  he  feels 
again  as  if  the  whole  Nation  were  with  him.  That  after  the 
famous  Oath,  To  the  King,  to  the  Nation,  and  Law,  there  was  a 
great  change ;  that  before  this,  if  ordered  to  fire  on  the  people, 
he  for  one  would  have  done  it  in  the  King's  name  ;  but  that  after 
this,  in  the  Nation's  name,  he  would  not  have  done  it.  Likewise 
that  the  Patriot  officers,  more  numerous  too  in  the  Artillery  and 
Engineers  than  elsewhere,  were  few  in  number ;  yet  that  having 
the  soldiers  on  their  side,  they  ruled  the  regiment ;  and  did  often 

1  [Napoleon's  regiment  at  Auxonne  had  mutinied,  Aug.  i6th  '89 ;  he  left  for 
Corsica  on  Sept.  15th,  where  he  occupied  himself  in  openly  expressing  his  Revolu- 
tionary views.  He  issued  a  vehement  manifesto  to  the  deputy  for  the  Corsican 
Noblesse  (Matteo  Buttafuoco)  dated  de  son  cabinet  de  Milleli  (which  was  really  a 
volcanic  grotto  in  the  Ajaccio  mountains),  on  Jan.  23rd  1791.  He  returned  to 
France  and  rejoined  his  regiment  at  Auxonne  in  Feb.  '91,  accompanied  by  his 
brother  Louis.  {See  Chuquet,  La  Jeunesse  de  Napoleon  (Paris,  1897 — 9),  i.  308  ;  ii. 
138-148. )  I  find  in  Chuquet  (who  is  scrupulously  exact)  no  mention  of  the  barber's 
shop,  and  Napoleon  appears  to  have  occupied  on  his  return  the  same  rooms  as 
before  his  departure,  viz.,  in  one  of  the  pavillo?is  attached  to  the  barracks.  Louis 
occupied  his  brother's  cabinet  de  domestique.  Carlyle  is  correct  as  to  the  walks  to 
Dole.] 


10  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

deliver  the  Aristocrat  brother  officer  out  of  peril  and  strait.  One 
day,  for  example,  'a  member  of  our  own  mess  roused  the  mob, 
'  by  singing,  from  the  windows  of  our  dining-room,  0  Richard,  0 
'mi/  King ;  and  I  had  to  snatch  him  from  their  fury.'  ^ 

All  which  let  the  reader  multiply  by  ten  thousand  ;  and  spread 
it,  with  slight  variations,  over  all  the  camps  and  garrisons  of  France. 
The  French  Army  seems  on  the  verge  of  universal  mutiny. 

Universal  mutiny !  There  is  in  that  what  may  well  make 
Patriot  Constitutionalism  and  an  august  Assembly  shudder.^  Some- 
thing behoves  to  be  done  ;  yet  what  to  do  no  man  can  tell.  Mira- 
beau  proposes  even  that  the  Soldiery,  having  come  to  such  a  pass, 
be  forthwith  disbanded,  the  whole  Two  Hundred  and  Eighty 
Thousand  of  them  ;  and  organised  anew.^  Impossible  this,  in  so 
isudden  a  manner  !  cry  all  men.  And  yet  literally,  answer  we,  it 
is  inevitable,  in  one  manner  or  another.  Such  an  army,  with  its 
four-generation  Nobles,  its  peculated  Pay,  and  men  knotting 
forage-cords  to  hang  their  Quartermaster,  cannot  subsist  beside 
such  a  Revolution.  Your  alternative  is  a  slow-pining  chronic 
dissolution  and  new  organisation  ;  or  a  swift  decisive  one  ;  the 
■agonies  spread  over  years,  or  concentrated  into  an  hour.  With  a 
Mii-abeau  for  Minister  or  Governor,  the  latter  had  been  the  choice  ; 
with  no  Mirabeau  for  Governor,  it  will  naturally  be  the  former. 

CHAPTER  ni 

BOUILLE  AT  METZ 

To  Bouille,  in  his  North-Eastern  circle,  none  of  these  things  are 
altogether  hid.  Many  times  flight  over  the  marches  gleams  out 
on  him  as  a  last  guidance  in  such  bewilderment :  nevertheless  he 
continues  here  ;  struggling  always  to  hope  the  best,  not  from  new 
organisation,  but  from  happy  Counter-Revolution  and  return  to 
the  old.     For  the  rest,  it  is  clear  to  him  that  this  same  National 

1  Norvins,  Histoire  de  Napol(^on,  i.  47  ;  Las  Cases,  M^moires  (translated  into 
Hazlitt's  Life  of  Napoleon,  i.  23-31). 

2  [On  Aug.  6th  '90  the  Assembly  prohibited  Clubs  and  deliberative  assemblies 
in  the  army,  and  appointed  a  series  of  Inspectors,  of  whom  Malseigne  (vzd.  infr. 
cap.  V.)  was  one,  to  examine  the  accounts  of  the  regiments.] 

^  Moniteur,  1790,  No.  233. 


BOUILLE  AT  METZ  11 

Federation,  and  universal  swearing  and  fraternising  of  People 
and  Soldiers,  has  done  '  incalculable  mischief.'  So  much  that  fer- 
mented secretly  has  hereby  got  vent,  and  become  open  :  National 
Guards  and  Soldiers  of  the  line,  solemnly  embracing  one  another 
on  all  parade-fields,  drinking,  swearing  patriotic  oaths,  fall  into 
disorderly  street-processions,  constitutional  unmilitary  exclama- 
tions and  hurrahings.  On  Avhich  account  the  Regiment  Picardie, 
for  one,  has  to  be  drawn  out  in  the  square  of  the  barracks,  here 
at  Metz,  and  sharply  harangued  by  the  General  himself;  but 
expresses  penitence.^ 

Far  and  near,  as  accounts  testify,  insubordination  has  begun 
grumbling  louder  and  louder.  Officers  have  been  seen  shut  up  in 
their  mess-rooms  ;  assaulted  with  clamorous  demands,  not  without 
menaces.  The  insubordinate  ringleader  is  dismissed  with  'yellow 
furlough,'  yellow  infamous  thing  they  call  cartouche  j mine  :  but  ten 
new  ringleaders  rise  in  his  stead,  and  the  yellow  cartouche  ceases 
to  be  thought  disgraceful.  '  Within  a  fortnight,'  or  at  furthest  a 
month,  of  that  sublime  Feast  of  Pikes,  the  whole  French  Army, 
demanding  Arrears,  forming  Reading  Clubs,  frequenting  Popular 
Societies,  is  in  a  state  which  Bouille  can  call  by  no  name  but  that 
of  mutiny.  Bouille  knows  it  as  few  do  ;  and  speaks  by  dire  ex- 
perience.    Take  one  instance  instead  of  many. 

It  is  still  an  early  day  of  August,  the  precise  date  now  undis- 
coverable,  when  Bouille,  about  to  set  out  for  the  waters  of  Aix-la- 
Chapelle,  is  once  more  suddenly  summoned  to  the  barracks  of 
Metz.  The  soldiers  stand  ranged  in  fighting  order,  muskets 
loaded,  the  officers  all  there  on  compulsion  ;  and  required  with 
many-voiced  emphasis  to  have  their  arrears  paid.  Picardie  was 
penitent ;  but  we  see  it  has  relapsed  :  the  wide  space  bristles  and 
lours  with  mere  mutinous  armed  men.  Brave  Bouille  advances  to 
the  nearest  Regiment,  opens  his  commanding  lips  to  harangue  ; 
obtains  nothing  but  (querulous-indignant  discordance,  and  the 
sound  of  so  many  thousand  livres  legally  due.  The  moment  is 
trying  ;  there  are  some  ten  thousand  soldiers  now  in  Metz,  and  one 
spirit  seems  to  have  spread  among  them. 

'  Bouille,  M^nioires,  i.  iii. 


12  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Bouille  is  firm  as  the  adamant ;  but  what  shall  he  do  ?  A 
German  Regiment,  named  of  Salm,  is  thought  to  be  of  better 
temper :  nevertheless  Salm  too  may  have  heard  of  the  precept. 
Thou  shall  not  sleal ;  Salm  too  may  know  that  money  is  money. 
Bouille  walks  trustfully  towards  the  Regiment  de  Salm,  speaks 
trustful  words  ;  but  here  again  is  answered  by  the  cry  of  forty- 
four  thousand  livres  odd  sous.  A  cry  waxing  more  and  more 
vociferous,  as  Salm's  humour  mounts ;  which  cry,  as  it  will 
produce  no  cash  or  promise  of  cash,  ends  in  the  wide  simultaneous 
whirr  of  shouldered  muskets,  and  a  determined  quick-time  march 
on  the  part  of  Salm — towards  its  Colonel's  house,  in  the  next 
street,  there  to  seize  the  colours  and  military  chest.  Thus  does 
Salm,  for  its  part ;  strong  in  the  faith  that  meum  is  not  luum,  that 
fair  speeches  are  not  forty- four  thousand  livres  odd  sous. 

Unrestrainable !  Salm  tramps  to  military  time,  quick  con- 
suming the  way.  Bouille  and  the  officers,  drawing  sword,  have 
to  dash  into  double-quick  pas-de-charge,  or  unmilitary  running ; 
to  get  the  start ;  to  station  themselves  on  the  outer  staircase, 
and  stand  there  with  what  of  death-defiance  and  sharp  steel  they 
have  ;  Salm  truculently  coiling  itself  up,  rank  after  rank,  opposite 
them,  in  such  humour  as  we  can  fancy,  which  happily  has  not 
yet  mounted  to  the  murder-pitch.  There  will  Bouille  stand, 
certain  at  least  of  one  man's  purpose  :  in  grim  calmness,  awaiting 
the  issue.  What  the  intrepidest  of  men  and  generals  can  do  is 
done.  Bouille,  though  there  is  a  barricading  picket  at  each  end 
of  the  street,  and  death  under  his  eyes,  contrives  to  send  for 
a  Dragoon  Regiment  with  orders  to  charge  :  the  dragoon  officers 
mount ;  the  dragoon  men  will  not :  hope  is  none  there  for  him. 
The  street,  as  we  say,  barricaded ;  the  Earth  all  shut  out,  only 
the  indifferent  heavenly  Vault  overhead :  perhaps  here  or  there 
a  timorous  householder  peering  out  of  window,  with  prayer  for 
Bouille ;  copious  Rascality,  on  the  pavement,  with  prayer  for 
Salm :  there  do  the  two  parties  stand ; — like  chariots  locked  in 
a  narrow  thoroughfare ;  like  locked  wrestlers  at  a  dead-grip ! 
For  two  hours  they  stand  :  Bouille's  sword  glittering  in  his  hand, 
adamantine  resolution  clouding  his  brows  :  for  two  hours  by  the 


BOUILLE  AT  METZ  13 

clocks  of  Metz.  Moody-silent  stands  Salm,  with  occasional 
clangour ;  but  does  not  fire.  Rascality,  from  time  to  time,  urges 
some  grenadier  to  level  his  musket  at  the  General ;  who  looks 
on  it  as  a  bronze  General  would  :  and  always  some  corporal  or 
other  strikes  it  up. 

In  such  remarkable  attitude,  standing  on  that  staircase  for  two 
hours,  does  brave  Bouille,  long  a  shadow,  dawn  on  us  visibly  out 
of  the  dimness,  and  become  a  person.  For  the  rest,  since  Salm 
has  not  shot  him  at  the  first  instant,  and  since  in  himself  there  is 
no  variableness,  the  danger  will  diminish.  The  Mayor,  'a  man 
infinitely  respectable/  with  his  Municipals  and  tricolor  sashes, 
finally  gains  entrance  ;  remonstrates,  perorates,  promises ;  gets 
Salm  persuaded  home  to  its  barracks.  Next  day,  our  respectable 
Mayor  lending  the  money,  the  officers  pay  down  the  half  of  the 
demand  in  ready  cash.  With  which  liquidation  Salm  pacifies 
itself;  and  for  the  present  all  is  hushed  up,  as  much  as  may  be.^ 

Such  scenes  as  this  of  Metz,  or  preparations  and  demonstra- 
tions towards  such,  are  universal  over  France  :  Dampmartin, 
with  his  knotted  forage-cords  and  piled  chamois  jackets,  is  at 
Strasburg  in  the  South-East ;  in  these  same  days  or  rather  nights. 
Royal  Champagne  is  'shouting  Vive  la  Nation,  au  (liable  les  Aristo- 
crates,  with  some  thirty  lit  candles,'  at  Hesdin,  on  the  far  North- 
West.  "The  gamson  of  Bitche,"  Deputy  Rewbell  is  sorry  to 
state,  "  went  out  of  the  town  with  drums  beating  ;  deposed  its 
officers ;  and  then  returned  into  the  toAvn,  sabre  in  hand."  ^ 
Ought  not  a  National  Assembly  to  occupy  itself  with  these 
objects  ?  MiUtary  France  is  everywhere  full  of  sour  inflammatory 
humour,  which  exhales  itself  fuliginously,  this  way  or  that :  a 
whole  continent  of  smoking  flax  ;  which,  bloAvn  on  here  or  there 
by  any  angry  wind,  might  so  easily  start  into  a  blaze,  into 
a  continent  of  fire. 

Constitutional  Patriotism  is  in  deep  natiu"al  alarm  at  these 
things.  The  august  Assembly  sits  diligently  deliberating  ;  dare 
nowise  resolve,  with  Mirabeau,  on  an  instantaneous  disbandment 

1  Bouille,  i.  134-5. 

2  Moniteur  (in  Hist.  Pari.  vii.  29). 


14  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

and  extinction ;  finds  that  a  course  of  palliatives  is  easier.  But 
at  least  and  lowest,  this  grievance  of  the  Arrears  shall  be  recti- 
fied. A  plan,  much  noised  of  in  those  days,  under  the  name 
'  Decree  of  the  Sixth  of  August,'  has  been  devised  for  that. 
Inspectors  shall  visit  all  armies  ;  and,  with  certain  elected  cor- 
porals and  'soldiers  able  to  write,'  verify  what  arrears  and 
peculations  do  lie  due,  and  make  them  good.  Well  if  in  this 
way  the  smoky  heat  be  cooled  down  ;  if  it  be  not,  as  we  say,  ven- 
tilated overmuch,  or,  by  sparks  and  collision  somewhere,  sent  up  ! 

CHAPTER  IV 

ARREARS  AT  NANCI 

We  are  to  remark,  however,  that  of  all  districts,  this  of  Bouille's 
seems  the  inflammablest.  It  was  always  to  Bouille  and  Metz 
that  Royalty  would  fly  :  Austria  lies  near ;  here  more  than  else- 
where must  the  disunited  People  look  over  the  borders,  into 
a  dim  sea  of  Foreign  Politics  and  Diplomacies,  with  hope  or 
apprehension,  Avith  mutual  exasperation. 

It  was  but  in  these  days  that  certain  Austrian  troops,  marching 
peaceably  across  an  angle  of  this  region,  seemed  an  Invasion 
realised ;  and  there  rushed  towards  Stenai,  with  musket  on 
shoulder,  from  all  the  winds,  some  thirty  thousand  National 
Guards,  to  inquire  what  the  matter  was.^  A  matter  of  mere 
diplomacy  it  proved  ;  the  Austrian  Kaiser,  in  haste  to  get  to 
Belgium,-^  had  bargained  for  this  short  cut.  The  infinite  dim 
movement  of  European  Politics  waved  a  skirt  over  these  spaces, 
passing  on  its  way  ;  like  the  passing  shadow  of  a  condor ;  and 
such  a  winged  flight  of  thirty  thousand,  with  mixed  cackling  and 
crowing,  rose    in  consequence !       For,   in    addition  to  all,    this 

'  Moniteur,  Seance  du  9  Aout  1790. 

-  [The  Austrian  troops  were  being  moved  up  from  Luxemburg  to  Belgium,  to 
stamp  out  the  insurrection  which  had  been  sputtering  there  since  Kaiser  Joseph's 
reforms,  and  which  his  successor,  Leopold,  had  not  entirely  succeeded,  by  his  con- 
ciliatory measures,  in  putting  down.  At  Mercy's  request  Montmorin  had  given 
permission  for  these  troops  to  pass  through  the  department  of  the  Ardennes.  A 
petition  was  drawn  up  by  the  inhabitants  of  this  department  and  presented  to  the 
Assembly  by  Dubois-Cranc6  against  this  passage  of  the  Austrian  troops  ;  the 
Assembly  thereon  annulled  the  leave  granted  by  Montmorin  (Aug.  7th  '90).] 


ARKEAES  AT  NANCI  15 

people,  as  we  said,  is  much  divided  :  Aristocrats  abound  ;  Patriot- 
ism has  both  Aristocrats  and  Austrians  to  watch.  It  is  Lorraine, 
this  region  ;  not  so  illumined  as  old  France  :  it  remembers  ancient 
Feudalisms ;  nay,  within  man's  memory  it  had  a  Court  and 
King  ^  of  its  own,  or  indeed  the  splendour  of  a  Court  and  King, 
without  the  burden.  Then,  contrariwise,  the  Mother  Society, 
which  sits  in  the  Jacobins  Church  at  Paris,  has  Daughters  in  the 
Towns  here ;  shrill-tongued,  driven  acrid :  consider  how  the 
memory  of  good  King  Stanislaus,  and  ages  of  Imperial  Feudal- 
ism, may  comport  with  this  New  acrid  Evangel,  and  what  a 
virulence  of  discord  there  may  be  !  In  all  which,  the  Soldiery,, 
officers  on  one  side,  private  men  on  the  other,  takes  part,  and 
now  indeed  principal  part ;  a  Soldiery,  moreover,  all  the  hotter 
here  as  it  lies  the  denser,  the  frontier  Province  requiring  more 
of  it. 

So  stands  Lorraine  :  but  the  capital  City  more  especially  so. 
The  pleasant  city  of  Nanci,  which  faded  Feudalism  loves,  where 
King  Stanislaus  personally  dwelt  and  shone,  has  an  Aristocrat 
Municipality,  and  then  also  a  Daughter  Society :  it  has  some 
forty  thousand  divided  souls  of  population ;  and  three  large 
Regiments,^  one  of  which  is  Swiss  Ch^iteau-Vieux,  dear  to  Patriot- 
ism ever  since  it  refused  fighting,  or  was  thought  to  refuse,  in 
the  Bastille  days.  Here  unhappily  all  evil  influences  seem  to 
meet  concentred ;  here,  of  all  places,  may  jealousy  and  heat 
evolve  itself.  These  many  months,  accordingly,  man  has  been 
set  against  man.  Washed  against  Unwashed ;  Patriot  Soldier 
against  Aristocrat  Captain,  ever  the  more  bitterly :  and  a  long 
score  of  grudges  has  been  running  up. 

Nameable  grudges,  and  likewise  unnameable  :  for  there  is 
a  punctual  nature  in  Wrath ;  and  daily,  were  there  but  glances 
of  the  eye,  tones  of  the   voice,  and  minutest   commissions    or 

i  [Stanislas  Leszczynski,  titular  King  of  Poland  and  father-in-law  of  Louis  XV. 
Lorraine  was  given  to  him  for  life  by  the  Treaty  of  1738,  and  on  his  death  in  1766 
passed  to  France.] 

2  [The  garrison  of  Nancy  consisted  of  four  battalions  of  Rigivient-du-Roi,  two 
of  the  Swiss  Chdtenii-Vieux.  and  the  Cavalry  Regiment  of  Mestre-dc-Camp 
(Bouill6,  145).] 


16  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

omissions,  it  will  jot  down  somewhat,  to  account,  under  the  head 
of  sundries,  which  always  swells  the  sum-total.  For  example,  in 
April  last,  in  those  times  of  preliminary  Federation,  when 
National  Guards  and  Soldiers  were  everywhere  swearing  brother- 
hood, and  all  France  was  locally  federating,  preparing  for  the 
grand  National  Feast  of  Pikes,  it  was  observed  that  these  Nanci 
Officers  threw  cold  water  on  the  whole  brotherly  business ;  that 
they  first  hung  back  from  appearing  at  the  Nanci  Federation ; 
then  did  appear,  but  in  mere  redingote  and  undress,  with  scarcely 
a  clean  shirt  on ;  nay  that  one  of  them,  as  the  National  Colours 
flaunted  by  in  that  solemn  moment,  did,  without  visible  necessity, 
take  occasion  to  spit.^ 

Small  'sundries  as  per  journal,'  but  then  incessant  ones  !  The 
Aristocrat  Municipality,  pretending  to  be  constitutional,  keeps 
mostly  quiet ;  -  not  so  the  Daughter  Society,  the  five  thousand 
adult  male  Patriots  of  the  place,  still  less  the  five  thousand 
female  :  not  so  the  young,  whiskered  or  whiskerless,  four-genera- 
tion Noblesse  in  epaulettes ;  the  grim  Patriot  Swiss  of  Chateau- 
Vieux,  effervescent  infantry  of  Regiment  du  Roi,  hot  troopers  of 
Mestre-de-Camp !  Walled  Nanci,  which  stands  so  bright  and 
trim,  with  its  straight  streets,  spacious  squares,  and  Stanislaus' 
Architecture  on  the  fruitful  alluvium  of  the  Meurthe ;  so  bright, 
amid  the  yellow  cornfields  in  these  Reaper- Months, — is  inwardly 
but  a  den  of  discord,  anxiety,  inflammability,  not  for  from  ex- 
ploding. Let  Bouille  look  to  it.  If  that  universal  military  heat, 
which  we  liken  to  a  vast  continent  of  smoking  flax,  do  anywhere 
take  fire,  his  beard,  here  in  Lorraine  and  Nanci,  may  the  most 
readily  of  all  get  singed  by  it. 

Bouille,  for  his  part,  is  busy  enough,  but  only  with  the  general 
superintendence  ;  getting  his   pacified  Salm,  and  all   other  still 

1  Deux  Amis,  v.  217. 

2  [Bouille  states  that  he  intercepted  letters  from  the  Jacobin  members  of  the 
Assembly  to  soldiers  of  the  mutinous  regiments,  giving  instructions  for  insurrection. 
M.  Aulai-d,  in  his  '  Recueil  de  Documents  relatifs  au  Club  Jacobin,"  Paris,  1889,  sqq., 
shows  what  an  enormous  proportion  of  the  debates  of  that  Society  were  taken  up 
with  the  Nancy  affair  ;  the  deputies  of  the  mutineers  were  received  at  the  Club  with 
open  arms  until  the  Assembly  ordered  their  arrest.] 


ARREARS  AT  NANCI  17 

tolerable  Regiments,  marched  out  of  Metz,  to  southward  towns 
and  villages ;  to  rural  Cantonments  as  at  Vic/  Marsal  and  there- 
about, by  the  still  waters ;  where  is  plenty  of  horse-forage, 
sequestered  parade-ground,  and  the  soldier's  speculative  faculty 
can  be  stilled  by  drilling.  Salm,  as  we  said,  received  only  half 
payment  of  arrears ;  naturally  not  without  grumbling.  Never- 
theless that  scene  of  the  drawn  sword  may,  after  all,  have  raised 
Bouille  in  the  mind  of  Salm  ;  for  men  and  soldiers  love  intrepidity 
and  swift  inflexible  decision,  even  when  they  suffer  by  it.  As 
indeed  is  not  this  fundamentally  the  quality  of  qualities  for 
a  man  ?  A  quality  which  by  itself  is  next  to  nothing,  since 
inferior  animals,  asses,  dogs,  even  mules  have  it ;  yet,  in  due 
combination,  it  is  the  indispensable  basis  of  all. 

Of  Nanci  and  its  heats,  Bouille,  commander  of  the  whole,  knows 
nothing  special :  understands  generally  that  the  troops  in  that 
City  are  perhaps  the  worslP'  The  Officers  there  have  it  all,  as  they 
have  long  had  it,  to  themselves  ;  and  unhappily  seem  to  manage 
it  ill.  '  Fifty  yellow  furloughs,'  given  out  in  one  batch,  do  surely 
betoken  difficulties.  But  what  was  Patriotism  to  think  of  certain 
light-fencing  Fusileers  'set  on,'  or  supposed  to  be  set  on,  'to 
insult  the  Grenadier-club,' — considerate  speculative  Grenadiers 
and  that  reading-room  of  theirs  ?  With  shoutings,  with  hootings  ; 
till  the  speculative  Grenadier  drew  his  side-arms  too ;  and  there 
ensued  battery  and  duels  !  Nay  more,  are  not  swashbucklers  of 
the  same  stamp  '  sent  out '  visibly,  or  sent  out  presumably,  now 
in  the  dress  of  Soldiers,  to  pick  quarrels  with  the  Citizens  ;  now, 
disguised  as  Citizens,  to  pick  quarrels  with  the  Soldiers  ?  For  a 
certain  Roussiere,  expert  in  fence,  was  taken  in  the  very  fact ; 
four  Officers  (presumably  of  tender  years)  hounding  him  on,  who 
thereupon  fled  precipitately  !  Fencemaster  Roussiere,  haled  to 
the  guard-house,  had  sentence  of  three  months'  imprisonment : 
but   his   comrades  demanded   '  yellow  furlough '   for  him  of   all 

i[Aug.  2Sth.] 

"^  Bouille,  i.  c.  9.     [Bouille  on  the  contrary  had  received  full  instruction  from  La 
Tour-du-Pin,  the  War  Minister,  of  the  events  at  Nancy  and  Lun^ville,  and  he  cal- 
culates that  of  his  whole  Command  (90  battalions  of  infantry  and  104  squadrons 
of  cavalry)  he  can  rely  only  on  some  20  and  60  respectively.] 
VOL.    II.  2 


18  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

persons ;  nay,  thereafter  they  produced  him  on  parade  ;  capped 
him  in  paper-hehnet,  inscribed  Iscariot ;  marched  him  to  the 
gate  of  the  City  ;  and  there  sternly  commanded  him  to  vanish 
forevermore. 

On  all  which  suspicions,  accusations  and  noisy  procedure,  and 
on  enough  of  the  like  continually  accumulating,  the  Officer  could 
not  but  look  with  disdainful  indignation ;  perhaps  disdainfully 
express  the  same  in  words,  and  'soon  after  fly  over  to  the  Austrians.' 

So  that  when  it  here,  as  elsewhere,  comes  to  the  question  of 
Arrears,  the  humour  and  procedure  is  of  the  bitterest :  Regiment 
Mestre-de-Camp  getting,  amid  loud  clamour,  some  three  gold 
louis  a-man, — which  have,  as  usual,  to  be  bori'owed  from  the 
Municipality  ;  Swiss  Chateau- Vieux  applying  for  the  like,  but 
getting  instead  instantaneous  courrois,  or  cat-o' -nine-tails,^  with 
subsequent  unsufferable  hisses  from  the  women  and  children : 
Regiment  du  Roi,  sick  of  hope  deferred,  at  length  seizing  its 
military  chest,  and  marching  it  to  quarters,^  but  next  day  marching 
it  back  again,  through  streets  all  struck  silent : — unordered  par- 
adings  and  clamours,  not  without  strong  liquor ;  objurgation, 
insubordination ;  your  military  ranked  Arrangement  going  all 
(as  the  Typographers  say  of  set  types,  in  a  similar  case)  rapidly 
to  pie !  ^  Such  is  Nanci  in  these  early  days  of  August ;  the 
sublime   Feast  of  Pikes  not  yet  a  month  old. 

Constitutional  Patriotism,  at  Paris  and  elsewhere,  may  well 
quake  at  the  news.  War-Minister  Latour  du  Pin  runs  breathless 
to  the  National  Assembly,  with  a  written  message  that  'all  is 
burning,  tout  binde,  tout  presse.'  *  The  National  Assembly,  on  the 
spur  of  the  instant,  renders  such  Decret,  and  'order  to  submit 

1  [Aug.  nth.  It  was  two  soldiers  of  Ckdfeaji-l'ieux  who  were  flogged  ;  they  were 
deUvered  by  their  comrades  and  both  Hoi  and  Chateau-  Vieux  drew  up  in  battle 
array  on  the  Place  Royalc.  Colonel  Denoue  thereon  had  the  incredible  feebleness 
to  give  way,  indemnify  the  two  men  flogged  with  loo  louis  each,  and  distribute  the 
27,000  Hit.  referred  to  in  the  next  note  but  one.     (Mortimer-Ternaux,  i.  55-6.)] 

2  [Aug.  loth.] 

3  Ueux  Amis,  v.  c.  8.  [There  are  some  slight  inaccuracies  in  Carlyle's  citations 
from  Deux  Amis,  which  does  not  call  the  Club  of  the  soldiers  a  '  Grenadier  Club ' 
(215)  ;  Chdteau-Vieux  A\A  force  its  officers  to  give  it  27,000  livr\  (225),  but  (230)  after 
the  military  chest  was  returned  Chateau-  Vieux  and  Roi  repented  and  took  the  oath 
of  fealty  again.     [Cf.  also  Mortimer-Ternaux,  i.  53.)] 

•»LAug.  i6th.] 


INSPECTOR  MALSEIGNE  19 

and  repent,'  as  he  requires ;  if  it  will  avail  anything. ^  On  the 
other  hand.  Journalism,  tlwough  all  its  throats,  gives  hoarse  outcry, 
condemnatory,  elegiac-applausive.  The  Forty-eight  Sections  Uft 
up  voices ;  sonorous  Brewer,  or  call  him  now  Colonel  Santerre,  is 
not  silent,  in  the  Faubourg  Saint- Antoine.  For,  meanwhile,  the 
Nanci  Soldiers  have  sent  a  Deputation  of  Ten,  furnished  with 
documents  and  proofs  ;  who  will  tell  another  story  than  the  'all- 
is-buming  '  one.  Which  deputed  Ten,  before  ever  they  reach  the 
Assembly  Hall,  assiduous  Latour  du  Pin  picks  up,  and  on  warrant 
of  Mayor  Bailly,  claps  in  prison !  Most  unconstitutionally ;  for  they 
had  officers'  furloughs.  Whereupon  Saint-Antoine,  in  indignant 
uncertainty  of  the  future,  closes  its  shops.  Is  Bouille  a  traitor 
then,  sold  to  Austria .''  In  that  case,  these  poor  private  sentinels 
have  revolted  mainly  out  of  Patriotism  ? 

New  Deputation,  Deputation  of  National  Guardsmen  now,  sets 
forth  from  Nanci  to  enlighten  the  Assembly.  It  meets  the  old 
deputed  Ten  returning,  quite  unexpectedly  i^whanged ;  and  pro- 
ceeds thereupon  with  better  prospects ;  but  effects  nothing. 
Deputations,  Government  Messengers,  Orderlies  at  hand-gallop. 
Alarms,  thousand-voiced  Rumours,  go  vibrating  continually ; 
backwards  and  forwards, — scattering  distraction.  Not  till  the 
last  week  of  August  does  M.  de  Malseigne,  selected  as  Inspector, 
get  down  to  the  scene  of  mutiny  ;  with  Authority,  with  cash,  and 
'  Decree  of  the  Sixth  of  August.'  He  now  shall  see  these  Arrears 
liquidated,  justice  done,  or  at  least  tumult  quashed. 

CHAPTER  V 

INSPECTOR  ]yLA.LSEIGNE 
Of  Inspector  Malseigne  -  we  discern,  by  direct  light,  that  he  is 
*  of  Herculean  stature ; '  and  infer,  with  probability,  that  he  is  of 

'  [This  seems  to  confuse  the  decree  of  Aug.  6th,  already  referred  to,  with  that 
of  the  i6th,  which  ordered  the  instigators  of  the  revolt  to  be  punished.] 

-  [The  Chevalier  Guyot  de  Malseigne  served  in  San  Domingo  in  early  life,  and 
became  Marickal  de  Camp  in  1788.  He  emigrated  soon  after  the  events  at  Nancy, 
served  the  campaign  of  1792  in  Gondii's  army  with  the  Prussians,  and  entered  the 
Prussian  army  with  the  rank  of  General  at  the  close  of  the  war,  became  Aide-de- 
Camp  to  the  King  of  Prussia  1795,  and  refused  to  join  the  Breton  Royalists  in  1795, 
although  they  offered  him  a  high  command  ;  died  at  Anspach  1800.  {See  Docu- 
ments in^dits  sur  I'Emigration,  Journal  de  Thiboult  de  Puisact  (Paris,  1882),  p.  66.)] 


20  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

truculent  moustachioed  aspect, — for  Royalist  Officers  now  leave 
the  upper  lip  unshaven ;  that  he  is  of  indomitable  bull-heart ; 
and  also,  unfortunately,  of  thick  bull-head. 

On  Tuesday  the  24th  of  August  1790,  he  opens  session  as 
Inspecting  Commissioner ;  meets  those  '  elected  corporals,  and 
soldiers  that  can  write.'  He  finds  the  accounts  of  Chateau- Vieux 
to  be  complex ;  to  require  delay  and  reference  :  he  takes  to 
haranguing,  to  reprimanding ;  ends  amid  audible  grumbling. 
Next  morning,  he  resumes  session,  not  at  the  Townhall  as  prudent 
Municipals  counselled,  but  once  more  at  the  barracks.  Unfor- 
tunately Chateau-Vieux,  grumbling  all  night,  will  now  hear  of 
no  delay  or  reference  ;  from  reprimanding  on  his  part,  it  goes  to 
bullying, — answered  with  continual  cries  of  "  Jugez  tout  de  suite, 
Judge  it  at  once  ;  "  whereupon  M.  de  Malseigne  will  off  in  a  huff. 
But  lo,  Chateau-Vieux,  swarming  all  about  the  barrack-court,  has 
sentries  at  every  gate  ;  M.  de  Malseigne,  demanding  egress, 
cannot  get  it,  not  though  Commandant  Denoue  backs  him ;  can 
get  only  "  Jugez  tout  de  suite."     Here  is  a  nodus  ! 

Bull-hearted  M.  de  Malseigne  draws  his  sword  ;  and  will  force 
egress.  Confused  splutter.  M.  de  Malseigne's  sword  breaks  :  he 
snatches  Commandant  Denoue's :  the  sentry  is  wounded.  M.  de 
Malseigne,  whom  one  is  loath  to  kill,  does  force  egress, — followed 
by  Chateau-Vieux  all  in  disarray ;  a  spectacle  to  Nanci.  M.  de 
Malseigne  walks  at  a  sharp  pace,  yet  never  runs  ;  wheeling  from 
time  to  time,  with  menaces  and  movements  of  fence ;  and  so 
reaches  Denoue's  house,  unhurt ;  which  house  Chateau-Vieux,  in 
an  agitated  manner,  invests, — hindered  as  yet  from  entering,  by 
a  crowd  of  officers  formed  on  the  staircase.  M.  de  Malseigne 
retreats  by  back  ways  to  the  Townhall,  flustered  though  undaunted ; 
amid  an  escort  of  National  Guards.  From  the  Townhall  he,  on  the 
morrow,  emits  fresh  orders,  fresh  plans  of  settlement  with  Chateau- 
Vieux  ;  to  none  of  which  will  Chateau-Vieux  listen  :  whereupon  he 
finally,  amid  noise  enough,  emits  order  that  Chateau-Vieux  shall 
march  on  the  morrow  morning,  and  quarter  at  Sarre  I^ouis.  Chateau- 
Vieux  flatly  refuses  marching;  M.  de  Malseigne  'takes  act,'  due 
notarial  protest  of  such  refusal,— if  happily  that  may  avail  him. 


INSPECTOR  MALSEIGNE  21 

This  is  the  end  of  Thursday  ;  and,  indeed,  of  M.  de  Malseigne's 
Inspectorship,  which  has  lasted  some  fifty  hours.  To  such  length, 
in  fifty  hours,  has  he  unfortunately  brought  it.  Mestre-de-Camp 
and  Regiment  du  Roi  hang,  as  it  were,  fluttering ;  Chateau- Vieux 
is  clean  gone,  in  what  way  we  see.  Overnight,  an  Aide-de-Camp 
of  Lafayette's,  stationed  here  for  such  emergency,  sends  swift 
emissaries  far  and  wide  to  summon  National  Guards.  The  slumber 
of  the  country  is  broken  by  clattering  hoofs,  by  loud  fraternal 
knockings  ;  everywhere  the  Constitutional  Patriot  must  clutch 
his  fighting-gear,  and  take  the  road  for  Nanci. 

And  thus  the  Herculean  Inspector  has  sat  all  Thursday,  among 
terror-struck  Municipals,  a  centre  of  confused  noise  :  all  Thursday, 
Friday,  and  till  Saturday  towards  noon.  Chateau- Vieux,  in  spite 
of  the  notarial  protest,  will  not  march  a  step.  As  many  as  four 
thousand  National  Guards  are  dropping  or  pouring  in  ;  uncertain 
what  is  expected  of  them,  still  more  uncertain  Avhat  will  be 
obtained  of  them.  For  all  is  uncertainty,  commotion  and  sus- 
picion :  there  goes  a  word  that  Bouille,  beginning  to  bestir  himself 
in  the  rural  Cantonments  eastward,  is  but  a  Royalist  traitor  ;  that 
Chateau-Vieux  and  Patriotism  are  sold  to  Austria,  of  which  latter 
M.  de  Malseigne  is  probably  some  agent.  Mestre-de-Camp  and 
Roi  flutter  still  iitiore  questionably :  Chjiteau- Vieux,  far  from 
marching,  '  waves  red  flags  out  of  two  carriages,'  in  a  passionate 
manner,  along  the  streets  ;  and  next  morning  answers  its  Officers  : 
"  Pay  us,  then  ;  and  we  will  march  with  you  to  the  world's  end  !  " 

Under  which  circumstances,  towards  noon  on  Saturday,  M.  de 
Malseigne  thinks  it  were  good  perhaps  to  inspect  the  ramparts, — 
on  horseback.  He  mounts,  accordingly,  with  escort  of  three 
troopers.  At  the  gate  of  the  City,  he  bids  two  of  them  wait  for 
his  return  ;  and  with  the  third,  a  trooper  to  be  depended  upon, 
he — gallops  off  for  Luneville ;  where  lies  a  certain  Carbineer 
Regiment  not  yet  in  a  mutinous  state !  The  two  left  troopers 
soon  get  uneasy  ;  discover  how  it  is,  and  give  the  alarm.  Mestre- 
de-Camp,  to  the  number  of  a  hundred,  saddles  in  frantic  haste,  as 
if  sold  to  Austria  ;  gallops  out  pellmell  in  chase  of  its  Inspector. 
And  so  they  spur,  and  the  Inspector  spurs  ;  careering,  with  noise 


22  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

and  jingle,  up  the  valley  of  the  River  Meurthe,  towards  Luneville 
and  the  midday  sun  :  through  an  astonished  country ;  indeed 
almost  to  their  own  astonishment. 

What  a  hunt ;  Actaeon-like  ; — which  Actaeon  de  Malseigne 
happily  gains.  To  arms,  ye  Carbineers  of  Luneville  :  to  chastise 
mutinous  men,  insulting  your  General  Officer,  insulting  your  own 
quarters ; — above  all  things,  fire  soon,  lest  there  be  parleying  and 
ye  refuse  to  fire !  The  Carbineers  fire  soon,  exploding  upon  the 
first  stragglers  of  Mestre-de-Camp ;  who  shriek  at  the  very  flash, 
and  fall  back  hastily  on  Nanci,  in  a  state  not  far  from  distraction. 
Panic  and  fury :  sold  to  Austria  without  an  if ;  so  much  per 
regiment,  the  very  sums  can  be  specified ;  and  traitorous  Malseigne 
is  fled  !  Help,  O  Heaven ;  help,  thou  Earth, — ye  unwashed 
Patriots  ;  ye  too  are  sold  like  us  ! 

Effervescent  Regiment  du  Roi  primes  its  firelocks,  Mestre-de- 
Camp  saddles  wholly :  Commandant  Denoue  is  seized,  is  flung  in 
prison  with  a  '  canvass  shirt  (sarreau  de  toile)'  about  him  ;  Chateau- 
Vieux  bursts  up  the  magazines  ;  distributes  '  three  thousand  fusils  ' 
to  a  Patriot  people  :  Austria  shall  have  a  hot  bargain.  Alas,  the 
unhappy  hunting-dogs,  as  we  said,  have  hunted  away  their  hunts- 
man ;  and  do  now  run  howling  and  baying,  on  what  trail  they 
know  not ;  nigh  rabid  ! 

And  so  there  is  tumultuous  march  of  men  through  the  night, 
with  halt  on  the  heights  of  Flinval,  whence  Luneville  can  be  seen 
all  illuminated.  Then  there  is  parley,  at  four  in  the  morning ; 
and  reparley  ;  finally  there  is  agreement :  the  Carbineers  gave  in  ; 
Malseigne  is  surrendered,  with  apologies  on  all  sides.  After 
weary  confused  hours,  he  is  even  got  under  way ;  the  Lunevillers 
all  turning  out,  in  the  idle  Sunday,  to  see  such  departure  :  home- 
going  of  mutinous  Mestre-de-Camp  with  its  Inspector  captive. 
Mestre-de-Camp  accordingly  marches ;  the  Lunevillers  look.  See! 
at  the  comer  of  the  first  sti'eet,  our  Inspector  bounds  off  again, 
bull-hearted  as  he  is ;  amid  the  slash  of  sabres,  the  crackle  of 
musketry  ;  and  escapes,  full  gallop,  with  only  a  ball  lodged  in  his 
huff-jerkin.  The  Herculean  man !  And  yet  it  is  an  escape  to  no 
purpose.     For  the  Carbineers,  to  whom  after  the  hardest  Sunday's 


BOUILLE  AT  NANCI  23 

ride  on  record,  he  has  come  circling  back,  '  stand  deliberating  by 
their  nocturnal  watch-fires  ; '  deliberating  of  Austria,  of  traitors, 
and  the  rage  of  Mestre-de-Camp.  So  that,  on  the  whole,  the 
next  sight  we  have  is  that  of  M.  de  Malseigne,  on  the  Monday 
afternoon,  faring  bull-hearted  through  the  streets  of  Nanci ;  in 
open  carriage,  a  soldier  standing  over  him  with  drawn  sword  ; 
amid  the  '  furies  of  the  women,'  hedges  of  National  Guards,  and 
confusion  of  Babel :  to  the  Prison  beside  Commandant  Denoue  ! 
That  finally  is  the  lodging  of  Inspector  Malseigne.^ 

Surely  it  is  time  Bouille  were  drawing  near.  The  Country  all 
round,  alarmed  with  watchfires,  illuminated  towns,  and  marching 
and  rout,  has  been  sleepless  these  several  nights.  Nanci,  with 
its  uncertain  National  Guards,  with  its  distributed  fusils,  mutinous 
soldiers,  black  panic  and  redhot  ire,  is  not  a  City  but  a  Bedlam. 

CHAPTER  VI 

BOUILLE  AT  NANCI 

Haste  with  help,  thou  brave  Bouille  •.'^  if  swift  help  come  not,  all 
is  now  verily  'burning;'  and  may  burn, — to  what  lengths  and 
breadths  !  Much,  in  these  hours,  depends  on  Bouille  ;  as  it  shall 
now  fare  with  him,  the  whole  Future  may  be  this  way  or  be  that. 
If,  for  example,  he  were  to  loiter  dubitating,  and  not  come  ;  if 
he  were  to  come,  and  fail :  the  whole  Soldiery  of  France  to  blaze 
into  mutiny.  National  Guards  going  some  this  way,  some  that ; 
and  Royalism  to  draw  its  rapier,  and  Sansculottism  to  snatch  its 
pike  ;  and  the  Spirit  of  Jacobinism,  as  yet  young,  girt  with  sun- 
rays,  to  grow  instantaneously  mature,  girt  with  hell-fire, — as 
mortals,  in  one  night  of  deadly  crisis,  have  had  their  heads  turned 
gray! 

Brave  Bouille  is  advancing  fast,  with  the  old  inflexibility ; 
gathering  himself,   unhappily   'in  small  affluences,'    from   East, 

1  Deux  Amis,  v.  206-251  ;  Newspapers  and  Documents  (in  Hist.  Pari.  vii. 
59-162). 

2[Bouill6's  determination  to  march  was  taken  when  he  heard  of  the  advance  of 
the  Nancy  garrison  on  Lun^ville  on  Aug.  28th  {147).] 


24  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

from  West  and  North  ;  and  now  on  Tuesday  morning,  the  last 
day  of  the  month/  he  stands  all  concentred,  unhappily  still  in 
small  force,  at  the  village  of  Frouarde,  within  some  few  miles. 
Son  of  Adam  with  a  more  dubious  task  before  him  is  not  in  the 
world  this  Tuesday  morning.  A  weltering  inflammable  sea  of 
doubt  and  peril,  and  Bouille  sure  of  simply  one  thing,  his  own 
determination.  Which  one  thing,  indeed,  may  be  worth  many. 
He  puts  a  most  firm  face  on  the  matter  :  *  Submission,  or  unspar- 
ing battle  and  destruction ;  twenty- four  hours  to  make  your 
choice  : '  this  was  the  tenor  of  his  Proclamation ;  thirty  copies 
of  which  he  sent  yesterday  to  Nanci : — all  which,  we  find,  were 
intercepted  and  not  posted."^ 

Nevertheless,  at  half-past  eleven  this  morning,  seemingly  by 
way  of  answer,  there  does  wait  on  him  at  Frouarde  some  Deputa- 
tion from  the  mutinous  Regiments,  from  the  Nanci  Municipals, 
to  see  what  can  be  done.  Bouille  receives  this  Deputation  '  in  a 
large  open  court  adjoining  his  lodging : '  pacified  Salm,  and  the 
rest,  attend  also,  being  invited  to  do  it,— all  happily  still  in  the 
right  humour.  The  Mutineers  pronounce  themselves  with  a 
decisiveness,  which  to  Bouille  seems  insolence ;  and  happily  to 
Salm  also.  Salm,  forgetful  of  the  Metz  staircase  and  sabre,  de- 
mands that  the  scoundrels  '  be  hanged  '  there  and  then.  Bouille 
represses  the  hanging ;  but  answers  that  mutinous  Soldiers  have 
one  course,  and  not  more  than  one  :  To  liberate,  with  heartfelt 
contrition,  Messieurs  Denoue  and  De  Malseigne;  to  get  ready 
forthwith  for  marching  off,  whither  he  shall  order ;  and  '  submit 
and  repent,'  as  the  National  Assembly  has  decreed,  as  he  yester- 
day did  in  thirty  printed  Placards  proclaim.  These  ^  are  his  terms, 
unalterable  as  the  decrees  of  Destiny.  Which  terms  as  they,  the 
Mutineer  deputies,  seemingly  do  not  accept,  it  were  good  for 
them  to  vanish  from  this  spot,  and  even  to  do  it  promptly  ;  with 
him  too,   in   few  instants,   the   word   will   be.    Forward  !      The 


1  [Aug.  30th.] 

2  Compare  Bouille,  M^moires,  i.  153-176  ;  Deux  Amis,  v.  251-271  ;  Hist.  Par], 
ubi  supra. 

'  [And  the  surrender  of  the  ringleaders,  to  be  sent  to  Paris  to  be  tried.] 


BOUILLE  AT  NANCI  26 

Mutineer  deputies  vanish,  not  unpromptly  ;  the  Municipal  ones, 
anxious  beyond  right  for  their  own  individualities,  prefer  abiding 
with  Bouille. 

Brave  Bouille,  though  he  puts  a  most  firm  face  on  the  matter, 
knows  his  position  full  well :  how  at  Nanci,  what  with  rebellious 
soldiers,  with  uncertain  National  Guards,  and  so  many  distributed 
fusils,  there  rage  and  roar  some  ten  thousand  fighting  men  ;  while 
with  himself  is  scarcely  the  third  part  of  that  number,  in  National 
Guards  also  uncertain,  in  mere  pacified  Regiments,— for  the  pre- 
sent full  of  rage,  and  clamour  to  march  ;  but  whose  rage  and 
clamour  may  next  moment  take  such  a  fatal  new  figure.  On  the 
top  of  one  uncertain  billow,  therewith  to  calm  billows  !  Bouille 
must  'abandon  himself  to  Fortune;'  who  is  said  sometimes  to 
favour  the  brave.  At  half-past  twelve,  the  Mutineer  deputies 
having  vanished,  our  drums  beat ;  we  march :  for  Nanci !  Let 
Nanci  bethink  itself,  then  ;  for  Bouille  has  thought  and  deter- 
mined. 

And  yet  how  shall  Nanci  think  :  not  a  City  but  a  Bedlam  ! 
Grim  Chateau- Vieux  is  for  defence  to  the  death  ;  forces  the 
Municipality  to  order,  by  tap  of  drum,  all  citizens  acquainted 
with  artillery  to  turn  out,  and  assist  in  managing  the  cannon. 
On  the  other  hand,  effervescent  Regiment  du  Roi  is  drawn  up  in 
its  barracks  ;  ^  quite  disconsolate,  hearing  the  humour  Salm  is  in  ; 
and  ejaculates  dolefully  from  its  thousand  throats  :  "  La  loi,  la 
lui,  Law,  law !  "  Mestre-de-Camp  blusters,  with  profane  swear- 
ing, in  mixed  terror  and  fui-or ;  National  Guards  look  this  way 
and  that,  not  knowing  what  to  do.  What  a  Bedlam- City  :  as 
many  plans  as  heads ;  all  ordering,  none  obeying :  quiet  none, — 
except  the  Dead,  who  sleep  underground,  having  done  their 
fighting. 

And,  behold,  Bouille  proves  as  good  as  his  word  :  '  at  half-past 
two '  scouts  report  that  he  is  within  half  a  league  of  the  gates  ; 
rattling  along,  with  cannon,  and  array  ;  breathing  nothing  but 

1  [Most  part  of  the  Regiment  du  Roi  was  persuaded  by  its  officers  to  return  to 
barracks  and  defend  them  if  necessary  ;  but  some  part  of  it  did  not  return,  and 
Bouille  afterwards  made  i8o  prisoners  from  it  (157-160).] 


26  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

destruction.  A  new  Deputation,  Municipals,  Mutineers,  Officers, 
goes  out  to  meet  him  ;  with  passionate  entreaty  for  yet  one  other 
hour.  Bouille  grants  an  hour.  Then,  at  the  end  thereof,  no 
Denoue  or  Malseigne  appearing  as  promised,  he  rolls  his  drums, 
and  again  takes  the  road.  Towards  four  o'clock,  the  terrorstruck 
Townsmen  may  see  him  face  to  face.  His  cannons  rattle  there, 
in  their  carriages ;  his  vanguard  is  within  thirty  paces  of  the 
Gate  Stanislaus.  Onward  like  a  Planet,  by  appointed  times,  by 
law  of  Nature  !  What  next  r  Lo,  flag  of  truce  and  chamade  ; 
conjuration  to  halt :  Malseigne  and  Denoue  are  on  the  street, 
coming  hither  ;  the  soldiers  all  repentant,  ready  to  submit  and 
march !  Adamantine  Bouille's  look  alters  not ;  yet  the  word 
Halt  is  given :  gladder  moment  he  never  saw.  Joy  of  joys ! 
Malseigne  and  Denoue  do  verily  issue ;  escorted  by  National 
Guards ;  from  streets  all  frantic,  with  sale  to  Austria  and  so 
forth  :  they  salute  Bouille,  unscathed.  Bouille  steps  aside  to 
speak  with  them,  and  with  other  heads  of  the  Town  there ;  hav- 
ing already  ordered  by  what  Gates  and  Routes  the  mutineer 
Regiments  shall  file  out. 

Such  colloquy  with  these  two  General  Officers  and  other  prin- 
cipal Townsmen  was  natural  enough  ;  nevertheless  one  wishes 
Bouille  had  postponed  it,  and  not  stepped  aside.  Such  tumultu- 
ous inflammable  masses,  tumbling  along,  making  way  for  each 
other  ;  this  of  keen  nitrous  oxide,  that  of  sulphurous  firedamp, — 
were  it  not  well  to  stand  between  them,  keeping  them  well  separate, 
till  the  space  be  cleared  ?  Numerous  stragglers  of  Chateau- Vieux 
and  the  rest  have  not  marched  with  their  main  columns,  which 
are  filing  out  by  the  appointed  Gates,  taking  station  in  the  open 
meadows.  National  Guards  are  in  a  state  of  nearly  distracted 
uncertainty ;  the  populace,  armed  and  unarmed,  roll  openly 
delirious, — betrayed,  sold  to  the  Austrians,  sold  to  the  Aristocrats. 
There  are  loaded  cannon  with  lit  matches  among  them,  and 
Bouille's  vanguard  is  halted  within  thirty  paces  of  the  Gate. 
Command  dwells  not  in  that  mad  inflammable  mass ;  which 
smoulders  and  tumbles  there,  in  blind  smoky  rage  ;  which  will 
not   open   the   Gate   when    summoned ;   says   it  will    open    the 


BOUILLE  AT  NANCI  27 

cannon's  throat  sooner ! — Cannonade  not,  O  Friends,  or  be  it 
through  my  body !  cries  heroic  young  Desilles,  young  Captain  of 
Rui,  clasping  the  murderous  engine  in  his  arms,  and  holding  it. 
Chateau- Vieux  Swiss,  by  main  force,  with  oaths  and  menaces, 
wrench  off  the  heroic  youth  ;  who  undaunted,  amid  still  louder 
oaths,  seats  himself  on  the  touch-hole.  Amid  still  louder  oaths, 
with  ever  louder  clangour, — and,  alas,  with  the  loud  crackle  of 
first  one,  and  then  of  three  other  muskets ;  which  explode  into 
his  body  ;  which  roll  it  in  the  dust, — and  do  also,  with  the  loud 
madness  of  such  moment,  bring  lit  cannon-match  to  ready  prim- 
ing ;  and  so,  with  one  thunderous  belch  of  grapeshot,  blast  some 
fifty  of  Bouille's  vanguard  into  air  ! 

Fatal !  That  sputter  of  the  first  musket-shot  has  kindled  such 
a  cannon-shot,  such  a  death-blaze  ;  and  all  is  now  redhot  madness, 
conflagration  as  of  Tophet.  With  demoniac  rage,  the  Bouille 
vanguard  storms  through  that  Gate  Stanislaus  ;  with  fiery  sweep, 
sweeps  Mutiny  clear  away,  to  death,  or  into  shelters  and  cellars ; 
from  which  latter,  again.  Mutiny  continues  firing.^  The  ranked 
Regiments  hear  it  in  their  meadow  ;  they  rush  back  again 
through  the  nearest  Gate ;  Bouille  gallops  in,  distracted,  in- 
audible ; — and  now  has  begun,  in  Nanci,  as  in  that  doomed  Hall 
of  the  Nibelungen,    'a.  murder  grim  and  great.' 

Miserable  :  such  scene  of  dismal  aimless  madness  as  the  anger 
of  Heaven  but  rarely  permits  among  men  !  From  cellar  or  from 
garret,  from  open  street  in  front,  from  successive  corners  of  cross- 
streets  on  each  hand,  Chateau-Vieux  and  Patriotism  keep  up  the 
murderous  rolling-fire,  on  murderous  not  Unpatriotic  fires.  Your 
blue  National  Captain,  riddled  with  balls,  one  hardly  knows  on 
whose  side  fighting,  requests  to  be  laid  on  the  colours  to  die  :  '^  the 
patriotic  Woman  (name  not  given,  deed  surviving)  screams  to 
Chateau-Vieux  that  it  must  not  fire  the  other  cannon  ;  and  even 
flings  a  pail  of  water  on  it,  since  screaming  avails  not.^     Thou 

1  [Bouille  says  that  his  own  soldiers  fought  with  the  more  fury,  as  they  believed 
themselves  to  have  been  entrapped  by  the  hesitation  of  the  mutineers.] 

2['M.  Bouthillier,'  a  very  young  man— not  called  a  Captain  in  the  National 
Guard.     (Deux  Amis  in /cir.  «/.)] 

'  Deux  Amis,  v.  268. 


28  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

shalt  fight ;  thou  shalt  not  fight ;  and  with  whom  shalt  thou  fight ! 
Could  tumult  awaken  the  old  Dead,  Burgundian  Charles  the  Bold 
might  stir  from  under  that  Rotunda  of  his  :  never  since  he,  raging, 
sank  in  the  ditches,  and  lost  Life  and  Diamond,  was  such  a  noise 
heard  here. 

Three  thousand,  as  some  count,  lie  mangled,  gory  :  the  half 
of  Chateau-Vieux  has  been  shot,  without  need  of  Court- Martial. 
Cavalry,  of  Mestre-de-Camp  or  their  foes,  can  do  little.  Regiment 
du  Roi  was  persuaded  to  its  barracks ;  stands  there  palpitating. 
Bouille,  armed  with  the  terrors  of  the  Law,  and  favoured  of 
Fortune,  finally  triumphs.  In  two  murderous  hours,  he  has 
penetrated  to  the  grand  Squares,  dauntless,  though  with  loss 
of  forty  officers  and  five  hundred  men  :  the  shattered  remnants 
of  Chateau-Vieux  are  seeking  covert.  Regiment  du  Roi,  not 
effervescent  now,  alas  no,  but  having  effervesced,  will  offer  to 
ground  its  arms  ;  will  *  march  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour.'  Nay 
these  poor  effervesced  require  '  escort '  to  march  with,  and  get 
it ;  though  they  are  thousands  strong,  and  have  thirty  ball- 
cartridges  a-man  !  The  Sim  is  not  yet  down,  when  Peace, 
which  might  have  come  bloodless,  has  come  bloody  :  the  mutin- 
ous Regiments  are  on  march,  doleful,  on  their  three  Routes  ; 
and  from  Nanci  rises  wail  of  women  and  men,  the  voice  of  weep- 
ing and  desolation  ;  the  City  weeping  for  its  slain  who  awaken 
not.^     These  streets  are  empty  but  for  victorious  patrols. 

Thus  has  Fortune,  favouring  the  brave,  dragged  Bouille,  as 
himself  says,  out  of  such  a  frightful  peril  '  by  the  hair  of  the 
head.'  An  intrepid  adamantine  man,  this  Bouille  : — had  he  stood 
in  old  Broglie's  place  in  those  Bastille  days,  it  might  have  been 
all  different  !  He  has  extinguished  mutiny,  and  immeasurable 
civil  war.  Not  for  nothing,  as  we  see  ;  yet  at  a  rate  which  he 
and  Constitutional  Patriotism  consider  cheap.  Nay,  as  for  Bouille, 
he,  urged  by  subsequent  contradiction  which  arose,  declares 
coldly,  it  was  rather  against  his  own  private  mind,  and  more  by 

^  [Bouille  says  he  lost  40  officers  and  400  men  killed  and  wounded.  It  is  to  be 
noticed  that  he  had  to  detach  some  force  on  the  Lun^ville  road,  to  prevent  a  pos- 
sible advance  from  the  Carabineers  there  (156).] 


BOUILLE  AT  NANCI  29 

public  military  rule  of  duty,  that  he  did  extinguish  it/ — im- 
measurable civil  war  being  now  the  only  chance.  Urged,  we 
say,  by  subsequent  contradiction  !  Civil  war,  indeed,  is  Chaos  ; 
and  in  all  vital  Chaos  there  is  new  Order  shaping  itself  free  : 
but  what  a  faith  this,  that  of  all  new  Orders  out  of  Chaos  and 
Possibility  of  Man  and  his  Universe,  Louis  Sixteenth  and  Two- 
Chamber  Monarchy  were  precisely  the  one  that  would  shape 
itself!  It  is  like  undertaking  to  throw  deuce-ace,  say  only  five 
hundred  successive  times,  and  ami  other  throw  to  be  fatal — for 
Bouille.  Rather  thank  Fortune,  and  Heaven,  always,  thou  in- 
trepid Bouille ;  and  let  contradiction  go  its  way  !  Civil  war,^ 
conflagrating  universally  over  France  at  this  moment,  might 
have  led  to  one  thing  or  to  another  thing  :  meanwhile,  to  quench 
conflagration,  wheresoever  one  finds  it,  wheresoever  one  can  ; 
this,  in  all  times,  is  the  rule  for  man  and  General  Officer. 

But  at  Paris,  so  agitated  and  divided,  tancy  how  it  went,  when 
the  continually  vibrating  Orderlies  vibrated  thither  at  hand-gallop, 
with  such  questionable  news  !  High  is  the  gratulation  ;  and  also 
deep  the  indignation.  An  august  Assembly,  by  overwhelming 
majorities,  passionately  thanks  Bouille  ;  a  King's  autograph,  the 
voices  of  all  Loyal,  all  Constitutional  men  run  to  the  same  tenor. 
A  solemn  National  funeral-service,  for  the  Law-defenders  slain  at 
Nanci,  is  said  and  sung  in  the  Champ-de-Mars  ;  Bailly,  Lafayette 
and  National  Guards,  all  except  the  few  that  protested,  assist. 
With  pomp  and  circumstance,  with  episcopal  Calicoes  in  tricolor 
girdles.  Altar  of  Fatherland  smoking  with  cassolettes,  or  incense- 
kettles  ;  the  vast  Champ-de-Mars  wholly  hung  round  with  black 
mortcloth, — which  mortcloth  and  expenditure  Marat  thinks  had 
better  have  been  laid  out  in  bread,  in  these  dear  days,  and  given 
to  the  hungry  living  Patriot."^  On  the  other  hand,  living  Patriot- 
ism, and  Saint- Antoine,  which  we  have  seen  noisily  closing  its 
shops  and  such  like,  assembles  now  '  to   the  number  of  forty 

1  Bouille,  i.  175. 

^  [Compare  Mirabeau's  view  expressed  at  this  very  time  in  his  i6th  Note  for  the 
Court,  Aug.  13th,  "In  two  words  civil  war  is  certain  and  perhaps  necessary" 
(Bacourt,  ii.  126).] 

•'Ami  du  Peuple  {in  Hist.  Pari,  ubi  supra). 


30  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

thousand ; '  and,  with  loud  cries,  under  the  very  windows  of  the 
thanking  National  Assembly,  demands  revenge  for  murdered 
Brothers,  judgment  on  Bouille,  and  instant  dismissal  of  War- 
Minister  La  tour  du  Pin. 

At  soiuid  and  sight  of  which  things,  if  not  War-Minister  Latour, 
yet  '  Adored  Minister '  Necker,  sees  good  on  the  3rd  of  Septem- 
ber 1 790,  to  withdraw  softly,  almost  privily, — with  an  eye  to  the 
'  recovery  of  his  health.'  Home  to  native  Switzerland  ;  not  as 
he  last  came  ;  lucky  to  reach  it  alive !  Fifteen  months  ago,  we 
saw  him  coming,  with  escort  of  horse,  with  sound  of  clarion  and 
trumpet ;  and  now,  at  Arcis-sur-Aube,  while  he  departs,  unes- 
corted, soundless,  the  Populace  and  Municipals  stop  him  as  a 
fugitive,  are  not  unlike  massacring  him  as  a  traitor ;  the  National 
Assembly,  consulted  on  the  matter,  gives  him  free  egress  as  a 
nullity.  Such  an  unstable  '  drift-mould  of  Accident  '  is  the 
substance  of  this  lower  world,  for  them  that  dwell  in  houses  of 
clay  ;  so,  especially  in  hot  regions  and  times,  do  the  proudest 
palaces  we  build  of  it  take  wings,  and  become  Sahara  sand- 
palaces,  spinning  many-pillared  in  the  whirlwind,^  and  bury  us 
under  their  sand  ! — 

In  spite  of  the  forty  thousand,  the  National  Assembly  persists 
in  its  thanks  ;  and  Royalist  Latour  du  Pin  continues  Minister. 
The  forty  thousand  assemble  next  day,  as  loud  as  ever  ;  roll 
towards    Latour's   Hotel  ;  find  cannon  on  the   porch-steps  with 

^[Carlyle's  ostentatious  contempt  for  Economics  prevented  him  from  doing  even 
such  justice  as  Necker  merits.  It  must  be  remembered  that  since  November  '89 
Necker  had  been  compelled  to  carry  out  a  financial  policy  of  which  he  cordially 
disapproved,  viz. ,  that  of  the  Assignais,  and  that  the  first  400  millions  of  these  had 
done  nothing  to  extinguish  the  debt,  which  in  Aug.  '90  the  Financial  Committee 
of  the  Assembly  reckoned  to  stand  at  190,000,000  livr.  Dupont  de  Nemours  had 
already  pointed  out  the  rottenness  of  the  system,  but  Mirabeau  on  Aug.  27th  sup- 
ported a  new  issue  of  Assignafs,  largely  prompted  thereto  by  his  hatred  of  Necker. 
[See  Bacourt,  li.  149.)  Necker  thereon  resigned.  It  would  have  been  only  fair  of 
Carlyle  to  state  this  reason  of  his  resignation ;  and  Lafayette's  alleged  reason, 
viz.,  motions  made  against  him  in  consequence  of  the  affair  of  Nancy  (Lafayette,  i. 
143),  is  quite  far  from  the  truth. 

The  resignation  of  Necker  brought  on  a  great  Constitutional  question,  which 
Carlyle  also  ignores,  viz.,  the  King's  right  to  a  choice  of  ministers.  On  Oct.  20th 
a  report  of  four  Committees  was  read  to  the  effect  that  the  King  be  asked  to  change 
his  ministers.  Cazales  combated  this  in  one  of  his  best  speeches.  Mirabeau  with 
great  prudence,  in  his  Notes  for  the  Court,  continually  insisted  that  the  King  should 
change  his  ministers,  but  not  at  the  demand  of  the  Assembly.] 


BOUILLE  AT  NANCI  31 

Hambeau  lit ;  and  have  to  retire  elsewhither,  and  digest  their 
spleen,  or  reabsorb  it  into  the  blood. 

Over  in  Lorraine  meanwhile,  they  of  the  distributed  fusils, 
ringleaders  of  Mestre-de-Camp,  of  Roi,  have  got  marked  out  for 
judgment ; — yet  shall  never  get  judged.  Briefer  is  the  doom  of 
Chateau- Vieux.  Chateau- Vieux  is,  by  Swiss  law,  given  up  for 
instant  trial  in  Court-Martial  of  its  own  officers.  Which  Court- 
Martial,  with  all  brevity  (in  not  many  hours),  has  hanged  some 
Twenty-three,  on  conspicuous  gibbets ;  marched  some  Three-score  ^ 
in  chains  to  the  Galleys ;  and  so,  to  appearance,  finished  the 
matter  off.  Hanged  men  do  cease  for  ever  from  this  Earth  ;  but 
out  of  chains  and  the  Galleys  there  may  be  resuscitation  in 
triumph.  Resuscitation  for  the  chained  Hero  ;  and  even  for  the 
chained  Scoundrel,  or  Semi -scoundrel !  Scottish  John  Knox, 
such  World-Hero  as  we  know,  sat  once  nevertheless  pulling 
grim-taciturn  at  the  oar  of  French  Galley,  '  in  the  Water  of 
Lore  ;  '  and  even  flung  their  Virgin- Mary  over,  instead  of  kissing 
her, —  as  a  '  pented  bredd,'  or  timber  Virgin,  who  could  naturally 
swim.2  So,  ye  of  ChAteau- Vieux,  tug  patiently,  not  without 
hope  ! 

But  indeed  at  Nanci  generally.  Aristocracy  rides  triumphant, 
rough.  Bouille  is  gone  again,  the  second  day  ;  an  Aristocrat 
Mimicipality,  with  free  course,  is  as  cruel  as  it  had  before  been 
cowardly.  The  Daughter  Society,  as  the  mother  of  the  whole 
mischief,  lies  ignominiously  suppressed  ;  the  Prisons  can  hold  no 
more  ;  bereaved  down-beaten  Patriotism  murmurs,  not  loud  but 
deep.  Here  and  in  the  neighbouring  Towns,  '  flattened  balls ' 
picked  from  the  streets  of  Nanci  are  worn  at  buttonholes  :  balls 
flattened  in  carrying  death  to  Patriotism  ;  men  wear  them  there, 
in  perpetual  memento  of  revenge.  Mutineer  deserters  roam  the 
woods  ;  have  to  demand  charity  at  the  musket's  end.  All  is 
dissolution,  mutual  rancour,  gloom  and  despair  : — till  National 
Assembly  Commissioners  arrive,  with    a  steady  gentle  flame  of 

'  [Twenty-two  and  fifty  respectively.  Why  Bouille  did  not  shoot  at  least  a  pro- 
portion of  the  mutineers  of  the  non-Swiss  Regiments  is  not  clear.  He  simply  says 
he  had  no  power  to  do  so,  and  none  of  them  were  punished  (p.  i6o).] 

-  Kno.x's  History  of  the  Reformation,  b.  i. 


32  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Constitutionalism  in  their  hearts  ;  who  gently  lift  up  the  down- 
trodden, gently  pull  down  the  too  uplifted  ;  reinstate  the 
Daughter  Society,  recall  the  mutineer  deserter  ;  gradually  level- 
ling, strive  in  all  wise  ways  to  smooth  and  soothe.  With  such 
gradual  mild  levelling  on  the  one  side  ;  as  with  solemn  funeral- 
service,  cassolettes,  Courts-Martial,  National  thanks,  on  the 
other, — all  that  Officiality  can  do  is  done.  The  buttonhole  will 
drop  its  flat  ball ;  the  black  ashes,  so  far  as  may  be,  get  green 
again. 

This  is  the  '  Affair  of  Nanci  ; '  by  some  called  the  '  Massacre  of 
Nanci  ; ' — properly  speaking,  the  unsightly  wrong-side  of  that 
thrice-glorious  Feast  of  Pikes,  the  right-side  of  which  formed 
a  spectacle  for  the  very  gods.  Right-side  and  wi'ong  lie  always 
so  near  :  the  one  was  in  July,  in  August  the  other  !  Theatres, 
the  theatres  over  in  London,  are  bright  with  their  pasteboard 
simulacrum  of  that  '  Federation  of  the  French  people,'  brought 
out  as  Drama  :  this  of  Nanci,  we  may  say,  though  not  played  in 
any  pasteboard  Theatre,  did  for  many  months  enact  itself,  and 
even  walk  spectrally, — in  all  French  heads.  For  the  news  of  it 
fly  pealing  through  all  France  :  awakening,  in  town  and  village, 
in  clubroom,  messroom,  to  the  utmost  borders,  some  mimic  reflex 
or  imaginative  repetition  of  the  business  ;  always  with  the  angry 
questionable  assertion  :  It  was  right  ;  It  was  wrong.  Whereby 
come  controversies,  duels  ;  embitterment,  vain  jargon  ;  the  has- 
tening foi-ward,  the  augmenting  and  intensifying  of  whatever 
new  explosions  lie  in  store  for  us. 

Meanwhile,  at  this  cost  or  at  that,  the  mutiny,  as  we  say,  is 
stilled.  The  French  Army  has  neither  burst  up  in  universal 
simultaneous  delirium  ;  nor  been  at  once  disbanded,  put  an  end 
to,  and  made  new  again.  It  must  die  in  the  chronic  manner, 
through  years,  by  inches ;  with  partial  revolts,  as  of  Brest  Sailors 
or  the  like,  which  dare  not  spread  ;  with  men  unhappy,  in- 
subordinate ;  officers  unhappier,  in  Royalist  moustachioes,  taking 
horse,  singly  or  in  bodies,  across  the  Rhine  :  ^  sick  dissatisfaction, 
1  See  Dampinartin,  i.  249,  &c.  &c. 


BOUILLE  AT  NANCI  33 

sick  disgust  on  both  sides ;  the  Army  moribund,  fit  for  no  duty  : 
— till  it  do,  in  that  unexpected  mannei%  Phoenix-like,  with  long 
throes,  get  both  dead  and  newborn ;  then  start  forth  strong,  nay 
stronger  and  even  strongest. 

Thus  much  was  the  brave  Bouille  hitherto  fated  to  do.  Where- 
with let  him  again  fade  into  dimness  ;  and,  at  Metz  or  the  rural 
Cantonments,  assiduously  drilling,  mysteriously  diplomatising,  in 
scheme  within  scheme,  hover  as  formerly  a  faint  shadow,  the  hope 
of  Royalty.  1 

^  [Again  as  in  the  previous  book  it  seems  to  me  that  Carlyle  has  wasted  a  great 
deal  of  space  over  the  Nancy  mutiny.  It  was  indeed  a  thing  of  far  greater  import- 
ance than  the  '  Feast  of  Pikes,'  as  a  symptom  of  the  progress  of  Anarchy,  but 
such  large  separate  sketches  of  single  events  are  apt  to  mar  the  proportion  of  the 
whole.] 


VOL.    II. 


34 


BOOK  III 
THE  TUILERIES 

CHAPTER  I 

EPIMENIDES 

How  true,  that  there  is  nothing  dead  in  this  Universe  ;  that  what 
we  call  dead  is  only  changed,  its  forces  working  in  inverse  order ! 
'  The  leaf  that  lies  rotting  in  moist  winds/  says  one,  '  has  still 
'  force  ;  else  how  could  it  rol  ? '  Our  whole  Universe  is  but  an 
infinite  Complex  of  Forces  ;  thousandfold,  from  Gravitation  up  to 
Thought  and  Will  ;  man's  Freedom  environed  with  Necessity  of 
Nature :  in  all  which  nothing  at  any  moment  slumbers,  but  all 
is  forever  awake  and  busy.  The  thing  that  lies  isolated  inactive 
thou  shalt  nowhere  discover  ;  seek  everywhere,  from  the  granite 
mountain,  slow-mouldering  since  Creation,  to  the  passing  cloud- 
vapour,  to  the  living  man ;  to  the  action,  to  the  spoken  word  of 
man.  The  word  that  is  spoken,  as  we  know,  flies  irrevocable : 
not  less,  but  more,  the  action  that  is  done.  '  The  gods  themselves,' 
sings  Pindar,  'cannot  annihilate  the  action  that  is  done.'  No: 
this,  once  done,  is  done  always ;  cast  forth  into  endless  Time ; 
and,  long  conspicuous  or  soon  hidden,  must  verily  work  and  grow 
forever  there,  an  indestructible  new  element  in  the  Infinite  of 
Things.  Or,  indeed,  what  is  this  Infinite  of  Things  itself,  which 
men  name  Universe,  but  an  Action,  a  sum-total  of  Actions  and 
Activities .''  The  living  ready-made  sum-total  of  these  three, — 
which  Calculation  cannot  add,  cannot  bring  on  its  tablets  ;  yet 
the  sum,  we  say,  is  written  visible  :  All  that  has  been  done,  All 
that  is  doing.  All  that  will  be  done !  Understand  it  well,  the 
Thing  thou  beholdest,  that  Thing  is  an  Action,  the  product  and 
expression  of  exerted   Force :   the  All  of  Things  is  an  infinite 


EPIMENIDES  35 

conjugation  of  the  verb  To  do.  Shoreless  Fountain-Ocean  of 
Force,  of  power  to  do  ;  wherein  Force  rolls  and  circles,  billowing, 
many-streamed,  harmonious  ;  wide  as  Immensity,  deep  as  Eternity ; 
beautiful  and  terrible,  not  to  be  comprehended  :  this  is  what  man 
names  Existence  and  Universe ;  this  thousand-tinted  Flame- 
image,  at  once  veil  and  revelation,  reflex  such  as  he,  in  his  poor 
brain  and  heart,  can  paint,  of  One  Unnameable  dwelling  in 
inaccessible  light !  From  beyond  the  Star-galaxies,  from  before 
the  Beginning  of  Days,  it  billows  and  rolls, — round  thee,  nay 
thyself  art  of  it,  in  this  point  of  Space  where  thou  now  standest, 
in  this  moment  which  thy  clock  measures. 

Or  apart  from  all  Transcendentalism,  is  it  not  a  plain  truth  of 
sense,  which  the  duller  mind  can  even  consider  as  a  truism,  that 
human  things  wholly  are  in  continual  movement,  and  action  and 
reaction ;  working  continually  forward,  phasis  after  phasis,  by 
unalterable  laws,  towards  prescribed  issues  ?  How  often  must 
we  say,  and  yet  not  rightly  lay  to  heart :  The  seed  that  is  sown, 
it  will  spring !  Given  the  summer's  blossoming,  then  there  is 
also  given  the  autumnal  withering :  so  is  it  ordered  not  with 
seedfields  only,  but  with  transactions,  arrangements,  philosophies, 
societies,  French  Revolutions,  whatsoever  man  works  with  in  this 
lower  world.  The  Beginning  holds  in  it  the  End,  and  all  that 
leads  thereto  ;  as  the  acorn  does  the  oak  and  its  fortunes.  Solemn 
enough,  did  we  think  of  it, — which  unhappily,  and  also  happily, 
we  do  not  very  much  !  Thou  there  canst  begin  ;  the  Beginning 
is  for  thee,  and  there  :  but  where,  and  of  what  sort,  and  for  whom 
will  the  End  be  ?  All  grows,  and  seeks  and  endures  its  destinies  : 
consider  likewise  how  much  grows,  as  the  trees  do,  whether  we 
think  of  it  or  not.  So  that  when  your  Epimenides,  your  somnolent 
Peter  Klaus,  since  named  Rip  van  Winkle,  awakens  again,  he 
finds  it  a  changed  woi'ld.  In  that  seven-years  sleep  of  his,  so 
much  has  changed  !  All  that  is  without  us  will  change  while  we 
think  not  of  it ;  much  even  that  is  within  us.  The  truth  that 
was  yesterday  a  restless  Problem,  has  today  grown  a  Belief  burning 
to  be  uttered  :  on  the  morrow,  contradiction  has  exasperated  it 
into  mad  Fanaticism ;  obstruction  has  dulled  it  into  sick  Inert- 


36  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

ness  ;  it  is  sinking  towards  silence,  of  satisfaction  or  of  resignation. 
Today  is  not  Yesterday,  for  man  or  for  thing.  Yesterday  there 
was  the  oath  of  Love  ;  today  has  come  the  curse  of  HAte.  Not 
willingly  :  ah,  no  ;  but  it  could  not  help  coming.  The  golden 
radiance  of  youth,  would  it  willingly  have  tarnished  itself  into 
the  dimness  of  old  age .'' — Fearful :  how  we  stand  enveloped, 
deep-sunk,  in  that  Mystery  of  Time  ;  and  are  Sons  of  Time  ; 
fashioned  and  woven  out  of  Time  ;  and  on  us,  and  on  all  that  we 
have,  or  see,  or  do,  is  written :  Rest  not,  Continue  not.  Forward 
to  thy  doom ! 

But  in  seasons  of  Revolution,  which  indeed  distinguish  them- 
selves from  common  seasons  by  their  velocity  mainly,  your  miracu- 
lous Seven-sleeper  might,  with  miracle  enough,  awake  .sooner  : 
not  by  the  century,  or  seven  years,  need  he  sleep ;  often  not  by 
the  seven  months.  Fancy,  for  example,  some  new  Peter  Klaus, 
sated  with  the  jubilee  of  that  Federation  day,  had  lain  down,  say 
directly  after  the  Blessing  of  Talleyrand  ;  and,  reckoning  it  all 
safe  now,  had  fallen  composedly  asleep  under  the  timber-work  of 
the  Fatherland's  Altar ;  to  sleep  there,  not  twenty-one  years, 
but  as  it  were  year  and  day.  The  cannonading  of  Nanci,  so  far 
off,  does  not  disturb  him  ;  nor  does  the  black  mortcloth,  close  at 
hand,  nor  the  requiems  chanted,  and  minute-guns,  incense-pans 
and  concourse  right  over  his  head  :  none  of  these  ;  but  Peter 
sleeps  through  them  all.  Through  one  circling  year,  as  we  say  ; 
from  July  the  14th  of  1790,  till  July  the  I7th  of  1791  :  but  on 
that  latter  day,  no  Klaus,  nor  most  leaden  Epimenides,  only  the 
Dead  could  continue  sleeping :  and  so  our  miraculous  Peter 
Klaus  awakens.  With  what  eyes,  O  Peter !  Earth  and  sky  have 
still  their  joyous  July  look,  and  the  Champ-de-Mars  is  multitudin- 
ous with  men  :  but  the  jubilee-huzzahing  has  become  Bedlam- 
shrieking,  of  terror  and  revenge  ;  not  blessing  of  Talleyrand, 
or  any  blessing,  but  cursing,  imprecation  and  shrill  wail ;  our 
cannon-salvoes  are  turned  to  sharp  shot ;  for  swinging  of  incense- 
pans  and  Eighty-thi'ee  Departmental  Banners,  we  have  waving 
of  the   one   sanguineous  Drapeau- Rouge. — Thou   foolish   Klaus ! 


EPIMENIDES  37 

The  one  lay  in  the  other,  the  one  was  the  other  minus  Time  ; 
even  as  Hannibal's  rock-rending  vinegar  lay  in  the  sweet  new 
wine.  That  sweet  Federation  was  of  last  year ;  this  sour  Divul- 
sion  is  the  selfsame  substance,  only  older  by  the  appointed  days. 

No  miraculous  Klaus  or  Epimenides  sleeps  in  these  times  ;  and 
yet,  may  not  many  a  man,  if  of  due  opacity  and  levity,  act  the 
same  miracle  in  a  natural  way  ;  we  mean,  with  his  eyes  open  ? 
Eyes  has  he,  but  he  sees  not,  except  what  is  under  his  nose. 
With  a  sparkling  briskness  of  glance,  as  if  he  not  only  saw  but 
saw  through,  such  a  one  goes  whisking,  assiduous,  in  his  circle  of 
officialities ;  not  dreaming  but  that  it  is  the  whole  world  :  as 
indeed,  where  your  vision  terminates,  does  not  inanity  begin 
there,  and  the  world's  end  clearly  disclose  itself — to  you  ?  Where- 
by our  brisk-sparkling  assiduous  official  person  (call  him,  for 
instance,  Lafayette),  suddenly  startled,  after  year  and  day,  by 
huge  grapeshot  tumult,  stares  not  less  astonished  at  it  than  Peter 
Klaus  would  have  done.  Such  natural-miracle  can  Lafayette 
perform ;  and  indeed  not  he  only  but  most  other  officials,  non- 
officials,  and  generally  the  whole  French  People  can  perform  it ; 
and  do  bounce  up,  ever  and  anon,  like  amazed  Seven-sleepers 
awakening ;  awakening  amazed  at  the  noise  they  themselves 
viake.  So  strangely  is  Freedom,  as  we  say,  environed  in  Necessity ; 
such  a  singular  Somnambulism,  of  Conscious  and  Unconscious,  of 
Voluntaiy  and  Involuntary,  in  this  life  of  man.  If  anywhere  in 
the  world  there  was  astonishment  that  the  Federation  Oath  went 
into  grapeshot,  surely  of  all  persons  the  French,  first  swearers 
and  then  shooters,  felt  astonished  the  most. 

Alas,  offences  must  come.  The  sublime  Feast  of  Pikes,  with 
its  effulgence  of  brotherly  love,  unknown  since  the  Age  of  Gold, 
has  changed  nothing.  That  prurient  heat  in  Twenty-five  millions 
of  hearts  is  not  cooled  thereby  ;  but  is  still  hot,  nay  hotter.  Lift 
off  the  pressure  of  command  from  so  many  millions  ;  all  pressure 
or  binding  rule,  except  such  melodramatic  Federation  Oath  as 
they  have  bound  themselves  with  !  For  Thou  shalt  was  from  of 
old  the  condition  of  man's  being,  and  his  weal  and  blessedness 
was  in  obeying  that.     Wo  for  him  when,  were  it  on  the  hest  of 


38  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

the  clearest  necessity,  rebellion,  disloyal  isolation,  and  mere  / 
will,  becomes  his  rule  !  But  the  Gospel  of  Jean-Jacques  has  come, 
and  the  first  Sacrament  of  it  has  been  celebrated :  all  things, 
as  we  say,  are  got  into  hot  and  hotter  prurience  ;  and  must  go 
on  pruriently  fermenting,  in  continual  change  noted  or  unnoted. 
'Worn  out  with  disgusts,'  Captain  after  Captain,  in  Royalist 
moustachioes,  mounts  his  war-horse,  or  his  Rozinante  war-garron, 
and  rides  minatory  across  the  Rhine  ;  till  all  have  ridden.  Neither 
does  civic  Emigration  cease  ;  Seigneur  after  Seigneur  must,  in  like 
manner,  ride  or  roll ;  impelled  to  it,  and  even  compelled.  For 
the  very  Peasants  despise  him,  in  that  he  dare  not  join  his  order 
and  fight.  1  Can  he  bear  to  have  a  Distaff,  a  Quenouille  sent  to 
him  :  say  in  copper-plate  shadow,  by  post ;  or  fixed  up  in  wooden 
reality  over  his  gate-lintel :  as  if  he  were  no  Hercules,  but  an 
Omphale .''  Such  scutcheon  they  forward  to  him  diligently  from 
beyond  the  Rhine  ;  till  he  too  bestir  himself  and  march,  and  in 
sour  humour  another  Lord  of  Land  is  gone,  not  taking  the  Land 
with  him.  Nay,  what  of  Captains  and  emigrating  Seigneurs .'' 
There  is  not  an  angry  word  on  any  of  those  Twenty-five  million 
French  tongues,  and  indeed  not  an  angry  thought  in  their  hearts, 
but  is  some  fraction  of  the  great  Battle.  Add  many  successions 
of  angry  words  together,  you  have  the  manual  brawl ;  add  brawls 
together,  with  the  festering  sorrows  they  leave,  and  they  rise  to 
riots  and  revolts.  One  reverend  thing  after  another  ceases  to 
meet  reverence :  in  visible  material  combustion,  chateau  after 
chateau  mounts  up  ;  in  spiritual  invisible  combustion,  one  author- 
ity after  another.  With  noise  and  glare,  or  noiselessly  and 
unnoted,  a  whole  Old  System  of  things  is  vanishing  piecemeal : 
the  morrow  thou  shalt  look,  and  it  is  not. 

CHAPTER  n 

THE  WAKEFUL 

Sleep  who  will,  cradled  in  hope  and  short  vision,  like  Lafayette, 

who  '  always  in  the  danger  done  sees  the  last  danger  that  will 

threaten  him,' — Time  is  not  sleeping,  nor  Time's  seedfield. 

'  Dampmartin,  passim. 


THE  WAKEFUL  39 

That  sacred  Herald's-College  of  a  new  Dynasty ;  we  mean  the 
Sixty  and  odd  Billstickers  with  tJieir  leaden  badges,  are  not 
sleeping.  Daily  they,  with  pastepot  and  cross-staff,  new-clothe 
the  walls  of  Paris  in  colours  of  the  rainbow  ;  authoritative-heraldic, 
as  we  say,  or  indeed  almost  magical-thaumaturgic  ;  for  no  Placard- 
Journal  that  they  paste  but  will  convince  some  soul  or  souls  of 
men.  The  Hawkers  bawl ;  and  the  Balladsingers :  great  Jour- 
nalism blows  and  blusters,  through  all  its  throats,  forth  from 
Paris  towards  all  corners  of  France,  like  an  ^Eolus'  Cave  ;  keeping 
alive  all  manner  of  fires. 

Throats  or  Journals  there  are,  as  men  count,^  to  the  number  of 
some  Hundred  and  thirty-three.  Of  various  calibre  ;  from  your 
Cheniers,  Gorsases,  Carailles,  down  to  your  Marat,  down  now  to 
your  incipient  Hebert '-  of  the  Pere  Duchesne  ;  these  blow,  with 

1  Mercier,  iii.  163. 

'■^[Jacques  Ren6  Hubert,  born  at  Alen9on  1755,  was  a  splendid  specimen  of  his 
order.  His  origin  is  obscure,  but  he  appears  to  have  been  employed  in  some 
subordinate  capacity  at  the  Theatre  des  I  'ariiltds  before  the  Revolution.  A  Royalist 
pamphleteer  called  Le  Maire,  having  conceived  the  idea  of  appealing  to  the  lowest 
classes  in  language  approaching  their  own,  began  to  issue  in  1789  a  short  series  of 
'  letters  of  Pere  Duchesne,'  the  earliest  numbers  bearing  the  title  of  '  Broken 
windows,'  and  Leitres  b — t patriotiques.  Le  Maire's  series  continued  to  appear  at 
intervals  with  various  titles,  but  principally  as  La  Trompette  du  Pere  Duchesne 
and  L Ami  des  SoLdats.  At  what  exact  date  it  occtu-red  to  Hubert  to  commence 
a  counterfeit  and  anti-RoyaUst  series  of  Letters  of  Pere  Duchesne  is  uncertam. 
Brunet  in  his  '  Monographe  sur  Pere  Duchesne'  says  not  till  Jan.  ist  1791,  from 
which  date  he  traces  355  consecutive  numbers,  all  by  Hubert,  down  to  March  12th 
1794  (day  of  Hubert's  arrest):  but  Le  Maire  had  been  counterfeited  before  that 
date.  From  No.  131  Hubert's  signature  is  attached.  The  pamphlets  are  printed 
on  small  quarto,  on  dirty  paper  and  with  bad  type,  and  are  usually  illustrated 
on  the  cover  with  a  picture  of  a  large  man  smoking  a  pipe,  and  brandishing  a 
cleaver,  ^with  pistols  in  his  belt  and  a  musket  by  his  side,  while  a  priest  kneels 
and  clasps  his  hands  in  the  background,  over  the  legend  Metnento  Mori  ;  under 
the  picture  the  legend  Je  suis  le  veritable  Pire  Duchesne,  f — e.  H6bert  seems  to 
have  had  a  talent  for  quarrelling  with  his  printers,  for  the  Pire  Duchesne  is  printed 
at  a  great  many  different  addresses. 

Pire  Duchesne  has  been  the  favourite  Revolution  pamphlet  with  the  great  book 
collectors  on  account  of  its  numerous  counterfeits  and  doubtful  copies.  The 
Lab6doy^re  collection  (now  in  the  Bibl.  Nat.)  is  probably  the  most  complete 
in  France,  and  the  Earl  of  Crawford's  in  England.  M.  Brunet  and  M.  Hatin,  the 
great  bibliographers,  have  devoted  immense  labour  to  its  history.  Practically  all 
that  is  now  known  may  be  found  summarised  in  Tourneux,  ii.  736. 

The  early  numbers  are  devoted  to  the  attack  on  the  King,  Queen  and  ministers  ; 
from  1792  the  Girondists  and  above  all  Mme  Roland  are  the  chief  butts  of  attack  ; 
from  May  '93  there  is  no  one  special  victim,  but  every  one  who  shows  the  least 
symptom  of  mercy  or  moderation  is  attacked  in  turn.  He  habitually  addresses 
his  hearers  as  '  my  dear  b— s.'  From  the  early  days  of  1793  Hubert  began  to  draw 
large  sums  out  of  the  war  ministry  as  subventions  for  this  filthy  print,  which 
he  distributed  gratis  to  the  armies.     Camille  Desmoulins  in  the  5th  Number  of 


40  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

fierce  weight  of  argument  or  quick  light  banter,  for  the  Rights  of 
Man  ;  Durosoys,  Royous,  Peltiers,  Sulleaus,  equally  with  mixed 
tactics  (inclusive,  singular  to  say,  of  much  profane  Parody),^  are 
blowing  for  Altar  and  Throne.  As  for  Marat  the  People's-Friend, 
his  voice  is  as  that  of  the  bullfrog,  or  bittern  by  the  solitary  pools  ; 
he,  unseen  of  men,  croaks  harsh  thunder,  and  that  alone  con- 
tinually,— of  indignation,  suspicion,  incurable  sorrow.  The  People 
are  sinking  toward  ruin,  near  starvation  itself:  'My  dear  friends,' 
cries  he,  '  your  indigence  is  not  the  fruit  of  vices  nor  of  idleness ; 
'you  have  a  right  to  life,  as  good  as  Louis  XVI.,  or  the  happiest 
'  of  the  century.  What  man  can  say  he  has  a  right  to  dine, 
'  when  you  have  no  bread  ? '  ^  The  People  sinking  on  the  one 
hand :  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  but  wretched  Sieur  Motiers, 
treasonous  Riquetti  Mirabeaus ;  traitors,  or  else  shadows  and 
simulacra  of  Quacks  to  be  seen  in  high  places,  look  where  you 
will !  Men  that  go  mincing,  grimacing,  with  plausible  speech 
and  brushed  raiment ;  hollow  within  :  Quacks  political ;  Quacks 
scientific,  academical :  all  with  a  fellow-feeling  for  each  other, 
and  kind  of  Quack  public-spirit !  Not  great  Lavoisier  himself,  or 
any  of  the  Forty  can  escape  this  rough  tongue ;  which  wants  not 
fanatic  sincerity,  nor,  strangest  of  all,  a  certain  rough  caustic 
sense.  And  then  the  '  three  thousand  gaming-houses '  that  are 
in  Paris ;  cesspools  for  the  scoundrelism  of  the  world ;  sinks  of 
iniquity  and  debauchery, — whereas  without  good  morals  Liberty 
is  impossible  !     There,  in  these  Dens  of  Satan,  which  one  knows, 

'  Vieux  Cordelier'  asserts  that  Hubert  had  drawn  43,000  Hvr.  in  the  year  beyond 
the  cost  of  the  600,000  copies  of  Pere  Duchesne  distributed  to  the  soldiers.  This 
accusation  was  repeated  by  Camille  in  the  Jacobin  Club,  Jan.  5th  '94,  and  Hubert 
was  unable  to  disprove  it. 

Hubert  made  his  first  political  mark  as  a  member  of  the  insurrectionary  Com- 
mune  of  1792,  in  which  he  filled  the  office  of  Procureur-Syndic-Substitut  under 
Chaumette  ;  in  the  massacres  of  September  he  was  a  principal  director:  above  all 
he  distinguished  himself  in  the  trial  of  the  Queen  by  accusing  her  of  inciting  her 
little  son  to  mcestuous  acts.  Together  with  Chaumette  he  organised  the  worship 
of  Reason  in  Nov.  '93,  but  this  brought  him  into  conflict  with  Robespierre  as  well 
as  with  the  Dantonists,  and  after  some  hesitation  Robespierre  decided  to  strike 
him  down  in  March  '94.  He  was  guillotined  March  22nd  with  18  of  his  party, 
and  with  him  fell  the  power  of  the  Commune.'^ 

iSee  Hist.  Pari.  vii.  51. 

2  Ami  du  Peuple,  No.  306.  See  other  Elxcerpts  in  Hist.  Pari.  viii.  139 — 149,  428 — 
433  ;  ix.  85—93,  &c. 


THE  WAKEFUL  41 

and  perseveringly  denounces,  do  Sieur  Motier's  moiichards  consort 
and  colleague  ;  battening  vampyre-like  on  a  People  next-door  to 
starvation.  '  0  Peiiple  ! '  cries  he  ofttimes,  with  heart-rending 
accent.  Treason,  delusion,  vampyrism,  scoundrelism,  from  Dan 
to  Beersheba  !  The  soul  of  Marat  is  sick  with  the  sight :  but 
what  remedy  ?  To  erect  '  Eight  Hundred  gibbets,'  in  convenient 
rows,  and  proceed  to  hoisting  ;  '  Riquetti  on  the  first  of  them  ! ' 
Such  is  the  brief  recipe  of  Marat,  Friend  of  the  People. 

So  blow  and  bluster  the  Hundi'ed  and  thirty-three  :  nor,  as 
would  seem,  are  these  sufficient ;  for  there  are  benighted  nooks 
in  France,  to  which  Newspapers  do  not  reach  ;  and  everywhere 
is  '  such  an  appetite  for  news  as  was  never  seen  in  any  country.' 
Let  an  expeditious  Dampmartin,  on  furlough,  set  out  to  return 
home  from  Paris,i  he  cannot  get  along  for  '  peasants  stopping 
him  on  the  highway ;  overwhelming  him  with  questions  : '  the 
Maitre  de  Paste  will  not  send  out  the  horses  till  you  have  well 
nigh  quarrelled  with  him,  but  asks  always.  What  news  ?  At 
Autun,  in  spite  of  the  dark  night  and  '  rigorous  frost,'  for  it  is 
now  January  1791?  nothing  will  serve  but  you  must  gather 
your  wayworn  limbs  and  thoughts,  and  'speak  to  the  multitudes 
from  a  window  opening  into  the  market-place.'  It  is  the  shortest 
method :  This,  good  Christian  people,  is  verily  what  an  august 
Assembly  seemed  to  me  to  be  doing ;  this  and  no  other  is  the 
news : 

Now  my  weary  lips  I  close ; 

Leave  me,  leave  me  to  repose  ! 

The  good  Dampmartin  ! — But,  on  the  whole,  are  not  Nations 
astonishingly  true  to  their  National  character ;  which  indeed 
runs  in  the  blood .''  Nineteen  hundi-ed  years  ago,  Julius  Caesar, 
with  his  quick  sure  eye,  took  note  how  the  Gauls  waylaid  men. 
*  It  is  a  habit  of  theirs,'  says  he,  *  to  stop  travellers,  were  it  even 
'by  constraint,  and  inquire  whatsoever  each  of  them  may  have 
'  heard  or  known  about  any  sort  of  matter :  in  their  towns,  the 
'  common  people  beset  the  passing  trader ;  demanding  to  hear 
'  from  what  regions  he  came,  what  things  he  got  acquainted  with 
'  Dampmartin,  i.  184. 


42  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

*  there.  Excited  by  which  rumours  and  hearsays  they  will  decide 
'about  the  weightiest  matters ;  and  necessarily  repent  next  moment 
'  that  they  did  it,  on  such  guidance  of  uncertain  reports,  and 
'  many  a  traveller  answering  with  mere  fictions  to  please  them, 
'and  get  off.' ^  Nineteen  hundi'ed  years;  and  good  Damp- 
martin,  wayworn,  in  winter  frost,  probably  with  scant  light  of 
stars  and  fish-oil,  still  perorates  from  the  Inn-window !  This 
People  is  no  longer  called  Gaulish ;  and  it  has  wholly  become 
hraccatus,  has  got  breeches,  and  suffered  change  enough  :  certain 
fierce  German  Franken  came  storming  over ;  and,  so  to  speak, 
vaulted  on  the  back  of  it;  and  always  after,  in  their  grim  tenacious 
way,  have  ridden  it  bridled ;  for  German  is,  by  his  very  name, 
Giierre-xaaxi,  or  man  that  ivars  and  gars.  And  so  the  People,  as 
we  say,  is  now  called  French  or  Prankish  :  nevertheless,  does 
not  the  old  Gaulish  and  Gaelic  Celthood,  with  its  vehemence, 
effervescent  promptitude,  and  what  good  and  ill  it  had,  still 
vindicate  itself  little  adulterated  ? — 

For  the  rest,  that  in  such  prurient  confusion,  Clubbism  tlirives 
and  spreads,  need  not  be  said.  Already  the  Mother  of  Patriotism, 
sitting  in  the  Jacobins,  shines  supreme  over  all  ;  and  has  paled 
the  poor  lunar  light  of  that  Monarchic  Club  near  to  final  extinc- 
tion. She,  we  say,  shines  supreme,  girt  with  sun-light,  not  yet 
with  infernal  lightning ;  reverenced,  not  without  fear,  by  Muni- 
cipal Authorities ;  counting  her  Barnaves,  Lameths,  Petions,  of  a 
National  Assembly  ;  most  gladly  of  all,  her  Robespierre.  Corde- 
liers, again,  your  Hebert,  Vincent,^  Bibliopolist  Momoro,  groan 
audibly  that  a  tyrannous  Mayor  and  Sieur  Motier  harrow  them 
with  the  sharp  tnbula  of  Law,  intent  apparently  to  suppress  them 
by  tribulation.  How  the  Jacobin  Mother-Society,  as  hinted 
formerly,  sheds  forth  Cordeliers  on  this  hand,  and  then  Feuillans 
on  that ;  the  Cordeliers  '  an  elixir  or  double  distillation  of  Jacobin 

1  De  Bello  Gallico,  lib.  iv.  5. 

2  [Vincent  was  a  sort  of  right-hand  man  of  Hubert  in  the  Co^nmune  of  1793. 
He  had  been  a  lawyer's  clerk  and  was  only  26  years  of  age.  He  got  a  place  in 
the  War  Office  in  1793,  and  was  the  agent  in  transferring  large  sums  of  stolen 
money  from  Bouchotte  the  War  Minister  to  Hubert  and  the  Commune.  Arrested 
in  Dec.  '93  with  Ronsin  and  some  of  the  H^bertist  '  tail,'  he  was  liberated  again, 
only  to  be  but  finally  arrested  and  executed  with  H(?bert  March  22nd  '94.] 


THE  WAKEFUL  43 

Patriotism  ; '  the  other  a  wide-spread  weak  dilution  thereof :  how 
she  will  reabsorb  the  former  into  her  Mother-bosom,  and  storm- 
fiilly  dissipate  the  latter  into  Nonentity :  how  she  breeds  and 
brings  forth  Three  Hundred  Daughter- Societies ;  her  rearing  of 
them,  her  correspondence,  her  endeavourings  and  continual  travail  : 
how,  under  an  old  figure.  Jacobinism  shoots  forth  organic  filaments 
to  the  utmost  comers  of  confused  dissolved  France  ;  organising 
it  anew  : — this  properly  is  the  grand  fact  of  the  Time. 

To  passionate  Constitutionalism,  still  more  to  Royalism,  which 
see  all  their  own  Clubs  fail  and  die,  Clubbism  will  naturally  grow 
to  seem  the  root  of  all  evil.  Nevertheless  Clubbism  is  not  death, 
but  rather  new  organisation,  and  life  out  of  death  :  destructive, 
indeed,  of  the  remnants  of  the  Old  ;  but  to  the  New  important, 
indispensable.  That  man  can  cooperate  and  hold  communion 
with  man,  herein  lies  his  miraculous  strength.  In  hut  or  hamlet. 
Patriotism  mourns  not  now  like  voice  in  the  desert :  it  can  walk 
to  the  nearest  Town ;  and  there,  in  the  Daughter-Society,  make 
its  ejaculation  into  an  articulate  oration,  into  an  action,  guided 
forward  by  the  Mother  of  Patriotism  herself  All  Clubs  of  Con- 
stitutionalists, and  such  like,  fail,  one  after  another,  as  shallow 
fountains :  Jacobinism  alone  has  gone  down  to  the  deep  subter- 
ranean lake  of  waters  ;  and  may,  unless  Jilled  in,  flow  there, 
copious,  continual,  like  an  Artesian  well.  Till  the  Great  Deep 
have  drained  itself  up ;  and  all  be  flooded  and  submerged,  and 
Noah's  Deluge  out-deluged ! 

On  the  other  hand,  Claude  Fauchet,  preparing  mankind  for  a 
Golden  Age  now  apparently  just  at  hand,  has  opened  his  Cercle 
Social,  with  clerks,  corresponding  boards,  and  so  forth ;  in  the 
precincts  of  the  Palais  Royal.  It  is  Te-Deum  Fauchet ;  the  same 
who  preached  on  Franklin's  Death,  in  that  huge  Medicean  ro- 
tunda of  the  Halle-aux-bieds.  He  here,  this  winter,  by  Printing- 
press  and  melodious  Colloquy,  spreads  bruit  of  himself  to  the 
utmost  City-barriers.  '  Ten  thousand  persons  of  respectability  ' 
attend  there  ;  and  listen  to  this  '  Prucureur-General  de  la  Verile 
Attorney -General  of  Truth,'  so  has  he  dubbed  himself;  to  his 
sage  Condorcet,  or  other  eloquent  coadjutor.     Eloquent  Attorney- 


44  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

General !  He  blows  out  from  him,  better  or  worse,  what  crude 
or  ripe  thing  he  holds  :  not  without  result  to  himself;  for  it  leads 
to  a  Bishopric,  though  only  a  Constitutional  one.^  Fauchet  approves 
himself  a  glib-tongued,  strong-lunged,  whole-hearted  human  in- 
dividual :  much  flowing  matter  there  is,  and  really  of  the  better 
sort,  about  Right,  Nature,  Benevolence,  Progress ;  which  flowing 
matter,  whether  'it  is  pantheistic,'  or  is  pot-theistic,  only  the 
greener  mind,  in  these  days,  need  examine.  Busy  Brissot  '^  was 
long  ago  of  purpose  to  establish  precisely  some  such  regenerative 
Social  Circle :  nay  he  had  tried  it  in  '  Newman-street  Oxford- 
street,'  of  the  Fog  Babylon;  andfailed, — as  some  say,  surreptitiously 
pocketing  the  cash.  Fauchet,  not  Brissot,  was  fated  to  be  the 
happy  man  ;  whereat,  however,  generous  Brissot  will  with  sincere 
heart  sing  a  timber-toned  Nunc  Domine.^  But  '  ten  thousand 
persons  of  respectability : '  what  a  bulk  have  many  things  in 
proportion  to  their  magnitude  !  This  Cercle  Social,  for  which 
Brissot  chants  in  sincere  timber-tones  such  Nunc  Domine,  what 
is  it .''  Unfortunately  wind  and  shadow.  The  main  reality  one 
finds  in  it  now,  is  perhaps  this :  that  an  '  Attorney-General  of 
Truth '  did  once  take  shape  of  a  body,  as  Son  of  Adam,  on  our 
Earth,  though  but  for  months  or  moments ;  and  ten  thousand 
persons  of  respectability  attended,  ere  yet  Chaos  and  Nox  had 
reabsorbed  him. 

Hundred  and  thirty-three  Paris  Journals ;  regenerative  Social 

1  [Claude  Fauchet  was  born  1744,  and  had  a  distinguished  ecclesiastical  career  : 
in  1785  he  was  made  Chaplain  to  the  King,  but  dismissed  1788  ;  elector  for  the  Clergy 
of  Paris  and  draftsman  of  their  cahier ;  played  an  important  part  in  the  Assembly 
of  Electors  in  July  '89;  sat  in  the  Provisionary  Municipality,  where  his  hostility  to 
Bailly  was  verj"  marked.  He  became  ' '  Constitutional  Bishop  "  of  Calvados  in 
May  1791,  and  deputy  for  that  department  to  the  Legislative  and  afterwards  to 
the  Convention.  It  was  he  who  denounced  Delessart  in  Feb.  and  the  "Austrian 
Committee"  in  May  '92.  He  voted  against  the  King's  death  and  was  denounced 
by  Barere  in  July  '93  as  an  accomplice  of  Charlotte  Corday  :  executed  with  the 
Girondins  Oct.  31st  '93. 

The  Ceixle  Social,  called  also  Amis  de  la  V^rifJ,  was  older  than  Fauchet's 
connection  with  it,  being  originally  a  Masonic  lodge,  with  wide  and  vague  aims  of 
a  socialist  character  (universal  love  and  brotherhood,  etc.).  It  met  in  the.  Palais 
Royal,  and  included  Condorcet  and  Sieves  among  its  members.  Its  mouthpiece 
was  the  Bouche  de  Per  newspaper,  which  Fauchet  directed.  ] 

2  [Brissot,  vid.  supr.  note  on  i.  170.] 

2 See  Brissot,  Patriote-Franpais  Newspaper;  Fauchet,  Bouche-de-Fer,  &c. 
(excerpted  in  Hist.  Pari.  viii.  ix.  et  sqq.). 


SWORD  IN  HAND  45 

Circle ;  oratory,  in  Mother  and  Daughter  Societies,  from  the 
balconies  of  Inns,  by  chimney-nook,  at  dinner-table, — polemical, 
ending  many  times  in  duel !  Add  ever,  like  a  constant  growling 
accompaniment  of  bass  Discord  :  scarcity  of  work,  scarcity  of  food. 
The  winter  is  hard  and  cold  ;  ragged  Bakers'-queues,  like  a  black 
tattered  flag-of-distress,  Avave  out  ever  and  anon.  It  is  the  third 
of  our  Hunger-years,  this  new  year  of  a  glorious  Rev^olution.  The 
rich  man  when  invited  to  dinner,  in  such  distress-seasons,  feels 
bound  in  politeness  to  carry  his  own  bread  in  his  pocket :  how  [do] 
the  poor  dine .''  And  your  glorious  Revolution  has  done  it,  cries 
one.  And  our  glorious  Revolution  is  subtilely,  by  black  traitors 
worthy  of  the  Lamp-iron,  perverted  to  do  it,  cries  another.  Who 
will  paint  the  huge  whirlpool  whei'ein  France,  all  shivered  into 
wild  incoherence,  whirls .''  The  jarring  that  went  on  under  every 
French  roof,  in  every  French  heart ;  the  diseased  things  that  were 
spoken,  done,  the  sum-total  whereof  is  the  French  Revolution, 
tongue  of  man  cannot  tell.  Nor  the  laws  of  action  that  work 
unseen  in  the  depths  of  that  huge  blind  Incoherence  !  With 
amazement,  not  with  measurement,  men  look  on  the  Immeasur- 
able ;  not  knowing  its  laws ;  seeing,  with  all  diiferent  degrees  of 
knowledge,  what  new  phases,  and  results  of  event,  its  laws  bring 
forth.  France  is  as  a  monstrous  Galvanic  Mass,  wherein  all  sorts 
of  far  stranger  than  chemical  galvanic  or  electric  forces  and  sub- 
stances are  at  work ;  electrifying  one  another,  positive  and  negative ; 
filling  with  electricity  your  Leyden-jars, — Twenty-five  millions  in 
number !  As  the  jars  get  full,  there  will,  from  time  to  time,  be, 
on  slight  hint,  an  explosion. 

CHAPTER  III 

SWORD  IN  HAND 

On  such  wonderful  basis,  however,  has  Law,  Royalty,  Authority, 
and  whatever  yet  exists  of  visible  Order,  to  maintain  itself,  while 
it  can.  Here,  as  in  that  Commixture  of  the  Four  Elements  did 
the  Anarch  Old,  has  an  august  Assembly  spread  its  pavilion  ;  cur- 
tained by  the  dark  infinite  of  discords ;  founded  on  the  wavering 


46  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

bottomless  of  the  Abyss  ;  and  keeps  continual  hubbub.  Time  is 
around  it,  and  Eternity,  and  the  Inane  ;  and  it  does  what  it  can, 
what  is  given  it  to  do. 

Glancing  reluctantly  in,  once  more,  we  discern  little  that  is 
edifying :  a  Constitutional  Theory  of  Defective  Verbs  struggling 
forward,  with  perseverance,  amid  endless  interruptions  :  Mirabeau, 
from  his  tribune,  with  the  weight  of  his  name  and  genius,  awing 
down  much  Jacobin  violence ;  which  in  return  vents  itself  the 
louder  over  in  its  Jacobins  Hall,  and  even  reads  him  sharp  lectures 
there.^  This  man's  path  is  mysterious,  questionable ;  difficult, 
and  he  walks  without  companion  in  it.  Pure  Patriotism  does  not 
now  count  him  among  her  chosen  ;  pure  Royalism  abhors  him  : 
yet  his  weight  with  the  world  is  overwhelming.  Let  him  travel 
on,  companionless,  unwavering,  whither  he  is  bound, — while  it  is 
yet  day  with  him,  and  the  night  has  not  come. 

But  the  chosen  band  of  pure  Patriot  brothers  is  small ;  count- 
ing only  some  Thirty,  seated  now  on  the  extreme  tip  of  the  Left, 
separate  from  the  world,  A  virtuous  Petion ;  an  incorruptible 
Robespierre,  most  consistent,  incorruptible  of  thin  acrid  men ; 
Triumvirs  Barnave,  Duport,  Lameth,  great  in  speech,  thought, 
action,  each  according  to  his  kind  ;  a  lean  old  Goupil  de  Prefeln  :  ^ 
on  these  and  what  will  follow  them  has  pure  Patriotism  to  depend. 

There  too,  conspicuous  among  the  Thirty,  if  seldom  audible, 
Philippe  d' Orleans  may  be  seen  sitting :  in  dim  fuliginous  be- 
wilderment ;  having,  one  might  say,  arrived  at  Chaos !  Gleams 
there  are,  at  once  of  a  Lieutenancy  and  Regency ;  debates  in  the 
Assembly  itself,  of  succession  to  the  Throne  *  in  case  the  present 
Branch  should  fail ; '  and  Philippe,  they  say,  walked  anxiously, 
in  silence,  through  the  corridors,  till  such  high  argument  were 
done  :  but  it  came  all  to  nothing  ;  Mirabeau,  glaring  into  the  man, 
and  through  him,  had  to  ejaculate  in  strong  untranslatable  lan- 
guage :  "  Ce  J — /' —  7ie  vaiit  pas  la  peine  qu'on  sc  donne  pour  lui." 


1  Camille's  Journal  (in  Hist.  Pari.  ix.  366 — 85). 

'^[Goupil  de  Prefeln  sat  for  Alencon  in  the  Constituent,  and  occasionally  displayed 
Republican  tendencies.  He  retired  from  political  life  from  1791  until  1795,  when 
he  again  sat  in  the  Council  of  Ancients.     Died  1801.] 


SWOKD  IN  HAND  47 

It  came  all  to  nothing  ;  and  in  the  meanwhile  Philippe's  money, 
they  say,  is  gone  !  Could  he  refuse  a  little  cash  to  the  gifted 
Patriot,  in  want  only  of  that ;  he  himself  in  want  of  all  bid  that  ? 
Not  a  pamphlet  can  be  printed  without  cash  ;  or  indeed  written, 
without  food  purchasable  by  cash.  Without  cash  your  hopefullest 
Projector  cannot  stir  from  the  spot ;  individual  patriotic  or  other 
Projects  require  cash :  how  much  more  do  wide-spread  Intrigues, 
which  live  and  exist  by  cash ;  lying  wide-spread,  with  dragon- 
appetite  for  cash  ;  fit  to  swallow  Princedoms !  And  so  Prince 
Philippe,  amid  his  Sillerys,  Lacloses  and  confused  Sons  of  Night, 
has  rolled  along :  the  centre  of  the  strangest  cloudy  coil ;  out  of 
which  has  visibly  come,  as  we  often  say,  an  Epic  Preternatural 
Machinery  of  Suspicion  ;  and  within  which  there  has  dwelt  and 
worked, — what  specialities  of  treason,  stratagem,  aimed  or  aimless 
endeavour  towards  mischief,  no  party  living  (if  it  be  not  the  pre- 
siding Genius  of  it,  Prince  of  the  Power  of  the  Air)  has  now  any 
chance  to  know,  Camille's  conjecture  is  the  likeliest :  that  poor 
Philippe  did  mount  up,  a  little  way,  in  treasonable  speculation, 
as  he  mounted  formerly  in  one  of  the  earliest  Balloons ;  but, 
frightened  at  the  new  position  he  was  getting  into,  had  soon 
turned  the  cock  again,  and  come  down.  More  fool  than  he  rose  ! 
To  create  Preternatural  Suspicion,  this  was  his  function  in  the 
Revolutionary  Epos.  But  now  if  he  have  lost  his  cornucopia  of 
ready-money,  what  else  had  he  to  lose  ?  In  thick  darkness, 
inward  and  outward,  he  must  welter  and  flounder  on,  in  that 
piteous  death-element,  the  hapless  man.  Once,  or  even  twice, 
we  shall  stilJ  behold  him  emerged ;  struggling  out  of  the  thick 
death-element :  in  vain.  For  one  moment,  it  is  the  last  moment, 
he  starts  aloft,  or  is  flung  aloft,  even  into  clearness  and  a  kind  of 
memorability, — to  sink  then  forevermore  ! 

The  C6t&  Droit  persists  no  less ;  nay  with  more  animation  than 
ever,  though  hope  has  now  well  nigh  fled.  Tough  Abbe  Maury, 
when  the  obscure  country  Royalist  grasps  his  hand  with  transport 
of  thanks,  answers,  rolling  his  indomitable  brazen  head  :  "  H&las, 
Monsieur,  all  that  I  do  here  is  as  good  as  simply  nothing."  Gallant 
Faussigny,  visible  this  one  time  in  History,  advances  frantic,  into 


48  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

the  middle  of  the  Hall,  exclaiming :  "  There  is  but  one  way  of 
dealing  with  it,  and  that  is  to  fall  sword  in  hand  on  those  gentry 
there,  sahre  a  (a  main  sur  ces  gaillards  Id,"  ^  franticly  indicating  our 
chosen  Thirty  on  the  extreme  tip  of  the  Left !  Whereupon  is 
clangour  and  clamour,  debate,  repentance, — evaporation.  Things 
ripen  towards  downright  incompatibility,  and  what  is  called  *  scis- 
sion : '  that  fierce  theoretic  onslaught  of  Faussigny's  was  in  August 
1 790  ;  next  August  will  not  have  come,  till  a  famed  Two  Hundred 
and  Ninety-two,  the  chosen  of  Royalism,  make  solemn  final  '  scis- 
sion '  from  an  Assembly  given  up  to  faction  ;  and  depart,^  shaking 
the  dust  off  their  feet. 

Connected  with  this  matter  of  sword  in  hand,  there  is  yet 
another  thing  to  be  noted.  Of  duels  we  have  sometimes  spoken  : 
how,  in  all  parts  of  France,  innumerable  duels  were  fought ;  and 
argumentative  men  and  messmates,  flinging  down  the  wine-cup 
and  weapons  of  reason  and  repartee,  met  in  the  measured  field  ;  to 
part  bleeding  ;  or  perhaps  not  to  part,  but  to  fall  mutually  skewered 
through  with  iron,  their  wrath  and  life  alike  ending, — and  die  as 
fools  die.  Long  has  this  lasted,  and  still  lasts.  But  now  it  would 
seem  as  if  in  an  august  Assembly  itself,  traitorous  Royalism,  in  its 
despair,  had  taken  to  a  new  course  :  that  of  cutting  off  Patriotism 
by  systematic  duel !      Bully-swordsmen,  '  Spadassins '  of  that  party, 

1  Moniteur,  Stance  du  21  Aoiit  1790.  [The  passage  is  quoted  from  the  Monitcur 
of  the  22nd.  It  was  in  answer  to  some  remark  of  Barnave's  about  '  prison  being 
the  mildest  form  of  punishment  '  that  Faucigny  cried  '  This  means  open  war  of  the 
majority  on  the  minority,  and  there  is  only  one  way  of  dealing  with  it,'  etc.  He 
was  called  to  order,  made  a  complete  disavowal  of  such  bloodthirsty  sentiments,  and 
received  the  pardon  of  the  Assembly  for  them. 

The  Comte  de  Faucigny  de  Lucinge  was  deputy  for  the  Noblesse  of  Bourg-en- 
Bresse.  He  emigrated  in  Sept.  '91,  and  died  in  London  in  poverty.  In  a  letter 
dated  1801,  a  few  months  before  his  death,  he  signed  himself  '  Miniature  painter, 
Panton  Street,  Leicester  Square.'  [See  Dictionnaire  des  Parlementaires  Fran9ais 
(Paris,  1889),  i.  607.)] 

2  [This  refers  to  the  protest  of  the  Right  made  against  the  decrees  of  the 
Assembly  (after  the  King's  return  from  Varennes)  suspending  the  exercise  of  the 
Royal  power.  The  protest  was  mnde  on  July  5th  '91  by  290  deputies  of  the  Right 
and  was  presented  by  M.  Foucauli.  It  appears  to  have  been  drawn  up  a  week 
earlier.  The  Assembly  refused  to  receive  the  protest  and  passed  to  the  order  of 
the  day.  The  protesters  did  not  by  any  means  make  'final  scission,'  but  in  the 
debates  on  Revision  of  the  Constitution  (August  '91)  the  Right,  as  a  whole,  made 
a  poor  fight.  [See  Hist.  Pari.  x.  432  and  Les  Premieres  Annees  de  la  Revolution 
a  Lyon,  par  Maurice  Wahl,  Paris,  1894,  pp.  395-6.)] 


SWORD  IN  HAND  49 

go  swaggering ;  or  indeed  they  can  be  had  for  a  trifle  of  money. 
'  Twelve  Spadassins '  were  seen,  by  the  yellow  eye  of  Journalism, 
*  arriving  recently  out  of  Switzerland ; '  also  '  a  considerable 
'  number  of  Assassins,  nombre  considerable  d' assassins,  exercising  in 
'fencing-schools  and  at  pistol-targets.'  Any  Patriot  Deputy  of 
mark  can  be  called  out ;  let  him  escape  one  time,  or  ten  times, 
a  time  there  necessarily  is  when  he  must  fall,  and  France  mourn. 
How  many  cartels  has  Mirabeau  had  ;  especially  while  he  was 
the  People's  champion  !  Cartels  by  the  hundred  :  which  he,  since 
the  Constitution  must  be  made  first,  and  his  time  is  precious, 
answers  now  always  with  a  kind  of  stereotype  formula  :  '  Monsieur, 
'  you  are  put  upon  my  List ;  but  I  warn  you  that  it  is  long,  and 
'  I  grant  no  preferences.' 

Then,  in  Autumn,  had  we  not  the  Duel  of  Cazales  and  Barnave  ;  ^ 
the  two  chief  masters  of  tongue-shot  meeting  now  to  exchange 
pistol-shot }  For  Cazales,  chief  of  the  Royalists,  whom  we  call 
'  Blacks  or  Noirs,'  said,  in  a  moment  of  passion,  "  the  Patriots 
were  sheer  Brigands,"  nay  in  so  speaking,  he  darted,  or  seemed 
to  dart,  a  fii'e-glance  specially  at  Barnave ;  who  thereupon  could 
not  but  reply  by  fire-glances, — by  adjournment  to  the  Bois-de- 
Boulogne.  Bamave's  second  shot  took  effect :  on  Cazales'  kat. 
The  '  front  nook '  of  a  triangular  Felt,  such  as  mortals  then  wore, 
deadened  the  ball ;  and  saved  that  fine  brow  from  more  than 
temporary  injury.  But  how  easily  might  the  lot  have  fallen  the 
other  way,  and  Barnave's  hat  not  been  so  good !  Patriotism 
raises  its  loud  denunciation  of  Duelling  in  general ;  petitions  an 
august  Assembly  to  stop  such  Feudal  barbarism  by  law.  Barbarism 
and  solecism  :  for  will  it  convince  or  convict  any  man  to  blow  half 
an  ounce  of  lead  through  the  head  of  him  ?  Surely  not. — Barnave 
was  received  at  the  Jacobins  with  embraces,  yet  with  rebukes. 

Mindful  of  which,  and  also  that  his  reputation  in  America  was 
that  of  headlong  foolhardiness  rather,  and  want  of  brain  not  of 
heart,  Charles  Lameth  does,  on  the  eleventh  day  of  November, 

ifThe  Duel  was  fought  in  the  Bois  de  Boulogne  on  Aug.  nth.  See  R6v.  de 
Paris,  No.  57(1790),  p.  320.] 

VOL.    II.  4 


50  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

with  little  emotion,  decline  attending  some  hot  young  Gentleman 
from  Artois,  come  expressly  to  challenge  him  :  nay  indeed  he  first 
coldly  engages  to  attend  ;  then  coldly  permits  two  Friends  to  at- 
tend instead  of  him,  and  shame  the  young  Gentleman  out  of  it, 
which  they  successfully  do.  A  cold  procedure  ;  satisfactory  to  the 
two  Friends,  to  Lameth  and  the  hot  young  Gentleman ;  whereby, 
one  might  have  fancied,  the  whole  matter  was  cooled  down. 

Not  so,  however :  Lameth,  proceeding  to  his  senatorial  duties, 
in  the  dechne  of  the  day,  is  met  in  those  Assembly  corridors 
by  nothing  but  Royalist  hrocards ;  sniffs,  huffs  and  open  insuks. 
Human  patience  has  its  limits  :  "  Monsieur,"  said  Lameth,  break- 
ing silence  to  one  Lautrec,  a  man  with  hunchback,  or  natural 
deformity,  but  sharp  of  tongue,  and  a  Black  of  the  deepest  tint, 
"  Monsieur,  if  you  were  a  man  to  be  fought  with  !  " — "  I  am  one," 
cries  the  young  Duke  de  Castries.  Fast  as  fireflash  Lameth  re- 
plies, "  Tout  a  I'heure,  On  the  instant,  then  !  "  ^  And  so,  as  the 
shades  of  dusk  thicken  in  that  Bois-de-Boulogne,  we  behold  two 
men  with  lion-look,  with  alert  attitude,  side  foremost,  right  foot 
advanced ;  flourishing  and  thrusting,  stoccado  and  passado,  in 
tierce  and  quart ;  intent  to  skewer  one  another.  See,  with  most 
skewering  purpose,  headlong  Lameth,  with  his  whole  weight, 
makes  a  fiu-ious  lunge ;  but  deft  Castries  whisks  aside  :  Lameth 
skewers  only  the  air, — and  slits  deep  and  far,  on  Castries'  sword's- 
point,  his  own  extended  left  arm !  Whereupon,  with  bleeding, 
pallor,  surgeon's-lint  and  formalities,  the  Duel  is  considered  satis- 
factorily done.-^ 

But  will  there  be  no  end,  then  ?  Beloved  Lameth  lies  deep- 
slit,  not  out  of  danger.  Black  traitorous  Aristocrats  kill  the 
People's  defenders,  cut  up  not  with  arguments,  but  with  rapier- 
slits.  And  the  Twelve  Spadassins  out  of  Switzerland,  and  the 
considerable  number  of  Assassins  exercising  at  the  pistol-target .'' 

^  [Nov.  i2th  1790.] 

2  [Lameth  had  been  charged  by  the  Assembly  in  March  with  the  duty  of  making 
a  search  at  Poiuoise  for  Barentin  (Ex-Keeper  of  the  Seals).  Castries  had  rallied 
him  on  the  subject  in  an  insulting^  manner,  and  Lameth  thereupon  challenged 
Castries.  Sec  a  letter  from  Mme  Elisabeth  to  Mme  de  Raigecourt  printed  in 
Feuillet  de  Conches  (Louis  XVI,  Marie  Antoinette  et  Mme  Elisabeth  ;  lettres  et 
documents  in^dits,  Paris,  1864 — 73),  i.  368.      Cf.  also  Malouet,  ii.  98,  note.] 


SWORD  IN  HAND  51 

So  meditates  and  ejaculates  hurt  Patriotism,  with  ever-deepening, 
ever-widening  fervour,  for  the  space  of  six  and  thirty  hours. 

The  thirty-six  hours  past,  on  Saturday  the  13th,  one  beholds 
a  new  spectacle  :  The  Rue  de  Vai'emies,  and  neighbouring  Boule- 
vard des  Invalides,  covered  with  a  mixed  flowing  multitude  :  the 
Castries  Hotel  gone  distracted,  devil-ridden,  belching  from  every 
window,  '  beds  with  clothes  and  curtains,'  plate  of  silver  and  gold 
with  filigree,  mirrors,  pictures,  images,  commodes,  chiffoniers, 
and  endless  crockery  and  jingle  :  amid  steady  popular  cheers, 
absolutely  without  theft :  for  there  goes  a  cry,  "  He  shall  be 
hanged  that  steals  a  nail."  It  is  a  P/ebiscitum,  or  informal 
iconoclastic  Decree  of  the  Common  People,  in  the  course  of  being 
executed  ! — The  Municipality  sit  tremulous  ;  delibei-ating  whether 
they  will  hang  out  the  Drapeau  Rouge  and  Martial  Law  :  National 
Assembly,  part  in  loud  wail,  part  in  hardly  suppressed  applause  ; 
Abbe  Maury  unable  to  decide  whether  the  iconoclastic  Plebs 
amount  to  forty  thousand  or  to  two  hundred  thousand. 

Deputations,  swift  messengers,  for  it  is  at  a  distance  over  the 
River,  come  and  go.  Lafayette  and  National  Guards,  though 
without  Drapeau  Rouge,  get  under  way  ;  apparently  in  no  hot 
haste.  Nay,  arrived  on  the  scene,  Lafayette  salutes  with  doffed 
hat,  before  ordering  to  fix  bayonets.  What  avails  it  ?  The 
Plebeian  '  Court  of  Cassation,'  as  Camille  might  punningly  name 
it,  has  done  its  work  ;  steps  forth,  with  unbuttoned  vest,  with 
pockets  turned  inside  out :  sack,  and  just  ravage,  not  plunder ! 
With  inexhaustible  patience,  the  Hero  of  two  Worlds  remon- 
strates ;  persuasively,  with  a  kind  of  sweet  constraint,  though 
also  with  fixed  bayonets,  dissipates,  hushes  down  :  on  the  morrow 
it  is  once  more  all  as  usual. 

Considering  which  things,  however,  Duke  Castries  may  justly 
'  write  to  the  President,'  justly  transport  himself  across  the 
Marches ;  to  raise  a  corps,  or  do  what  else  is  in  him.  Royalism 
totally  abandons  that  Bobadilian  method  of  contest,  and  the 
twelve  Spadassiiis  returned  to  Switzerland, — ^or  even  to  Dream- 
land  through   the  Horn-gate,   whichsoever  their  true  home   is. 


52  THE  FKENCH  REVOLUTION 

Nay  Editor  Prudhomme  is  authorised  to  publish  a  curious  thing : 
'  We  are  authorised  to  pubUsh/  says  he,  dull-blustering  Publisher, 
'  that  M.  Boyer  champion  of  good  Patriots  is  at  the  head  of 
*  Fifty  Spadassinicides  or  Bully-^«7/erA-.  His  Address  is  :  Passage  du 
'  Bois-de-Boulogne,  Faubourg  St.  Denis.'  ^  One  of  the  strangest 
Institutes,  this  of  Champion  Boyer  and  the  Bully-killers  !  Whose 
services,  however,  are  not  wanted ;  Royalism  having  abandoned 
the  rapier-method,  as  plainly  impracticable. 

CHAPTER  IV 

TO  FLY  OR  NOT  TO  FLY 

The  truth  is,  Royalism  sees  itself  verging  towards  sad  extremities  ; 
nearer  and  nearer  daily.  From  over  the  Rhine  it  comes  asserted 
that  the  King  in  his  Tuileries  is  not  free :  this  the  poor  King 
may  contradict,  with  the  official  mouth,  but  in  his  heart  feels 
often  to  be  undeniable.  Civil  Constitution  of  the  Clergy  ;  Decree 
of  ejectment  against  Dissidents  from  it :  not  even  to  this  latter, 
though  almost  his  conscience  rebels,  can  he  say  Nay ;  but,  after 
two  months'  hesitating,  signs  this  also.  It  was  'on  January  21st,' 
of  this  1791,  that  he  signed  it ;  to  the  sorrow  of  his  poor  heart 
yet,  on  another  Twenty-first  of  January !  Whereby  come  Dis- 
sident ejected  Priests ;  unconquerable  Martyrs  according  to 
some,  incurable  chicaning  Traitors  according  to  others.  And 
so  there  has  arrived  what  we  once  foreshadowed  :  with  Religion, 
or  with  the  Cant  and  Echo  of  Religion,  all  France  is  rent  asunder 
in  a  new  rupture  of  continuity ;  complicating,  embittering  all 
the  older ; — to  be  cured  only  by  stern  surgery,  in  La  Vendee  ! 

Unhappy  Royalty,  unhappy  Majesty,  Hereditary  Representa- 
tive, Repr&sentant  H&r&ditaire,  or  howsoever  they  may  name  him  ; 
of  whom  much  is  expected,  to  whom  little  is  given !  Blue 
National  Guards  encircle  that  Tuileries ;  a  Lafayette,  thin  con- 


J  Revolution  de  Paris,  in  Hist.  Pari.  viii.  440.  [The  Hist.  Pari,  here  quotes 
from  the  wrong  number  of  the  Rh'.  de.  Paris.  It  should  be  No.  82  (Jan.  29th — Feb. 
ist  1791),  p.  183.  I  can  find  no  mention  of  this  Boyer,  except  two  letters  from  him 
in  the  Rt!v.  de  Paris  on  tyrannicide  (Dec.  4th — nth  1790,  and  Dec.  25th  1790 — Jan. 
1st  1791) :  but  there  were  several  Boyers  in  the  Revolution  besides  Boyer-FonfrMe.] 


TO  FLY  OR  NOT  TO  FLY  53 

stitutional  Pedant ;  clear,  thin,  inflexible,  as  water  turned  to  thin 
ice ;  whom  no  Queen's  heart  can  love.  National  Assembly,  its 
pavilion  spread  where  we  know,  sits  near  by,  keeping  continual 
hubbub.  From  without,  nothing  but  Nanci  Revolts,  sack  of  Cas- 
tries Hotels,  riots  and  seditions  ;  riots  North  and  South,  at  Aix,  at 
Douai,  at  Befort,  Usez  [Uzes],  Perpignan,  at  Nismes,  and  that 
incurable  Avignon  of  the  Pope's :  a  continual  crackling  and 
sputtering  of  riots  fi-om  the  whole  face  of  France  ; — testifying 
how  electric  it  grows.  Add  only  the  hard  winter,  the  famished 
strikes  of  operatives ;  that  continual  running-bass  of  Scarcity, 
ground-tone  and  basis  of  all  other  Discords ! 

The  plan  of  Royalty,  so  far  as  it  can  be  said  to  have  any  fixed 
plan,  is  still,  as  ever,  that  of  flying  towards  the  frontiers.^     In 

'  [One  must  distinguish  carefully  between  : — 
(i.)  The  idea  of  an  appeal  to  the  Powers  of  Europe, 
(ii. )  The  idea  of  a  flight  out  of  Paris. 

(iii.)  The  idea  of  a  flight  to,  or  over,  the  frontier. 

We  begin  to  hear  of  the  first  of  these  ideas  about  June  1790,  soon  after  Leopold 
became  Kaiser.  The  objections  to  any  combined  action  of  the  Powers  have  been 
pointed  out  at  length  by  M.  Sorel  in  the  second  volume  of  his  '  L'Europe  et  la 
R^v.  Fr.'  Briefly  they  were  that  the  Eastern  question  occupied  all  men's  thoughts 
in  1790  and  during  the  first  eight  months  of  1791,  and  that  no  union  between  even 
any  two  Powers  could  be  expected  until  this  was  settled. 

The  second  plan  was  constantly  advocated  in  Mirabeau's  advice  to  the  Court, 
and  he  recommended  Normandy  as  the  Province  to  which  the  King  should  fly, 
regarding  a  short  civil  war  as  necessary  to  teach  Paris  reason  :  he  was  steadily 
against  the  third  plan  ;  but  the  Court  paid  no  heed  to  his  advice. 

The  third  plan  begins  to  take  shape  in  the  autumn  of  1790,  and  we  begin  to 
hear  of  Fersen  in  connection  with  the  details  of  it.  Bouilld  was  communicated 
with,  Oct.  22nd  '90,  and  his  plan  was  a  good  one.  '  The  Austrian  troops  are  very 
'  near  ("  too  near  "  you  can  easily  say).  Let  the  King  receive  a  petition  from  the 
'  officers  of  my  army  to  come  and  put  himself  at  their  head  to  repress  indiscipline 
'and  observe  the  motions  of  the  Austrians.'  But  beyond  this  Bouill^  took  no 
initiative,  and  when  the  flight  was  arranged  he  merely  obeyed  directions.  Flight, 
however,  to  the  frontier  without  a  prospect  of  foreign  intervention  might  easily 
become  equivalent  to  abdication,  and  so  the  first  and  third  of  the  ideas  mentioned 
above  came  to  be  fused.  Of  the  foreign  Powers  Leopold  was  clearly  the  one  to 
whom  both  appeal  and  flight  should  be  made  ;  though,  as  Mercy  long  ago  (March 
loth  '90)  pointed  out  to  Kaunitz,  it  was  not  to  be  expected  that  he  should  have  much 
personal  regard  for  his  sister,  who  was  only  ten  years  old  when  he  left  Vienna  for 
Tuscany,  and  whom  he  had  never  seen  since.  But  Leopold  was  becoming  profoundly 
anxious  on  account  of  Revolutionary  propaganda  in  Belgium,  and  as  Head  of  the 
Empire  he  was  bound  to  support  the  Diet  in  its  diplomatic  struggle  with  France 
over  the  "  possessioned  Princes"  question  [vid.  infr.  ii.  179).  For  the  internal 
affairs  of  France  he  cared  nothing,  though  he  might  possibly  interfere  to  prevent 
the  actual  dethroning  of  Louis  XVI.  The  Eniigrds  and  their  wild  proposals,  to 
which  he  steadily  turned  a  deaf  ear,  prevented  him  from  expressing  even  this  much. 
Breteuil  was  therefore  instructed  to  explain  to  Leopold  that  the  King  and  Queen 


54  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

very  truth,  the  only  plan  of  the  smallest  promise  for  it !  Fly  to 
Bouille ;  bristle  yourself  round  Avith  cannon,  served  by  your 
*  forty-thousand  undebauched  Germans  : '  summon  the  National 
Assembly  to  follow  you,  summon  what  of  it  is  Royalist,  Con- 
stitutional, gainable  by  money ;  dissolve  the  rest,  by  grapeshot 
if  need  be.  Let  Jacobinism  and  Revolt,  with  one  wild  wail,  fly 
into  Infinite  Space  ;  driven  by  grapeshot.  Thunder  over  France 
with  the  cannon's  mouth ;  commanding,  not  entreating,  that 
this  riot  cease.  And  then  to  rule  afterwards  with  utmost  possible 
Constitutionality ;  doing  justice,  loving  mercy ;  hcing  Shepherd 
of  this  indigent  People,  not  Shearer  merely,  and  Shepherd's- 
similitude  !  All  this,  if  ye  dare.  If  ye  dare  not,  then,  in 
Heaven's  name,  go  to  sleep  :  other  handsome  alternative  seems 
none. 

Nay,  it  were  perhaps  possible  ;  with  a  man  to  do  it.  For  if 
such  inexpressible  whirlpool  of  Babylonish  confusions  (which  our 
Era  is)  cannot  be  stilled  by  man,  but  only  by  Time  and  men,  a 
man  may  moderate  its  paroxysms,  may  balance  and  sway,  and 
keep  himself  unswallowed  on  the  top  of  it, — as  several  men  and 
Kings  in  these  days  do.  Much  is  possible  for  a  man ;  men  will 
obey  a  man  that  kens  and  cans,  and  name  him  reverently  their 
Ken-ning  or  King.  Did  not  Charlemagne  rule  ?  Consider  too 
whether  he  had  smooth  times  of  it ;  hanging  '  four-thousand 
Saxons  over  the  Weser- Bridge,'  at  one  dread  swoop !  So  like- 
wise, who  knows  but,  in  this  same  distracted  fanatic  France,  the 
right  man  may  verily  exist  ?  An  olive-complexioned  taciturn 
man ;  for  the  present.  Lieutenant  in  the  Artillery-service,  who 
once  sat  studying  Mathematics  at  Brienne  ?  The  same  who 
walked  in  the  morning  to  correct  proof-sheets  at  Dole,  and 
enjoyed  a  frugal  breakfast  with  M.  Joly  ?     Such  a  one  is  gone, 

were  equally  averse  to  these  proposals  of  the  E»iigri>s  ;  but  Breteuil,  though  loyal, 
was  an  ambitious  intriguer  and  executed  his  mission  much  to  the  shrewd  Kaiser's 
dissatisfaction.  In  June  '91  (a  few  days  before  Varennes)  a  new  factor  comes  on 
the  scene,  in  the  person  of  Frederick  William  King  of  Prussia  ;  the  two  Sovereigns 
discussed  sympathetically  the  condition  of  the  French  Royal  Family  {vid.  infr. 
ii.  178).  Leopold  was  at  Padua  when  he  received  news  of  the  flight,  and,  at  first, 
false  news  of  an  escape  ;  not  till  July  6th  did  he  learn  of  the  King's  recapture, 
whereon  he  immediately  returned  home  to  concert  measures  for  rescuing  the 
captives.     (Sorel,  ii.  148,  sq(j.)\ 


TO  FLY  OR  NOT  TO  FLY  55 

whither  also  famed  General  Paoli  his  friend  is  gone,  in  these 
very  days,  to  see  old  scenes  in  native  Corsica,  and  what  Demo- 
cratic good  can  be  done  there. 

Royalty  never  executes  the  evasion-plan,  yet  never  abandons 
it ;  living  in  variable  hope  ;  undecisive,  till  fortune  shall  decide. 
In  utmost  secrecy,  a  brisk  CoiTespondence  goes  on  with  Bouille  ; 
there  is  also  a  plot,  which  emerges  more  than  once,  for  candying 
the  King  to  Rouen  :  ^  plot  after  plot,  emerging  and  submerging, 
like  igne.s  fatui  in  foul  weather,  which  lead  nowhither.  'About 
ten  o'clock  at  night,'  the  Hereditary  Representative,  in  pariie 
quarree,  with  the  Queen,  with  Brother  Monsieur,  and  Madame, 
sits  playing  '  wisk,'  or  whist.  Usher  Campan  enters  mysteriously, 
with  a  message  he  only  half  comprehends  :  How  a  certain  Comte 
D'Inisdal  waits  anxious  in  the  outer  antechamber ;  National 
Colonel,  Captain  of  the  watch  for  this  night,  is  gained  over ; 
post-horses  ready  all  the  way ;  party  of  Noblesse  sitting  armed, 
determined ;  will  his  Majesty,  before  midnight,  consent  to  go } 
Profound  silence  ;  Campan  waiting  with  upturned  ear.  "  Did 
your  Majesty  hear  what  Campan  said  .''  "  asks  the  Queen.  "  Yes, 
I  heard,"  answers  Majesty,  and  plays  on.  "  'T^vas  a  pretty  coup- 
let, that  of  Campan's,"  hints  Monsieur,  who  at  times  showed  a 
pleasant  wit :  Majesty,  still  unresponsive,  plays  wisk.  "  After 
all,  one  must  say  something  to  Campan,"  remarks  the  Queen. 
"Tell  M.  D'Inisdal,"  said  the  King,  and  the  Queen  puts  an  em- 
phasis on  it,  "That  the  King  cannot  consent  to  be  forced  away." 
— "  I  see  !  "  said  D'Inisdal,  whisking  round,  peaking  himself  into 
flame  of  irritancy  :  "  we  have  the  risk  ;  we  are  to  have  all  the 
blame  if  it  fail,"  - — and  vanishes,  he  and  his  plot,  as  will-o'-wisps 
do.  The  Queen  sat  till  far  in  the  night,  packing  jewels  :  but  it 
came  to  nothing  ;  in  that  peaked  flame  of  irritancy  the  will-o'-wisp 
had  gone  out. 

Little  hope  there  is  in  all  this.     Alas,  with  whom  to  fly  ?     Our 
loyal  Gardes-du-Corps,  ever  since  the  Insurrection  of  Women,  are 

^See  Hist.  Pari.  vii.  316;  Bertrand-Moleville,  &c. 

''Campan,  ii.  105.     [I  have  hitherto  been  unable  to  verify  this  story.] 


56  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

disbanded  ;  gone  to  their  homes ;  gone,  many  of  them,  across 
the  Rhine  towards  Coblentz  and  Exiled  Princes  :  brave  Mio- 
mandre  and  brave  Tardivet,  these  faithful  Two,  have  received,  in 
nocturnal  interview  with  both  Majesties,  their  viaticum  of  gold 
louis,  of  heartfelt  thanks  from  a  Queen's  lips,  though  unluckily 
'his  Majesty  stood,  back  to  fire,  not  speaking ;' ^  and  do  now 
dine  through  the  Provinces ;  recounting  hairsbreadth  escapes, 
insurrectionary  horrors.  Great  hon-ors  ;  to  be  swallowed  yet  of 
greater.  But,  on  the  whole,  what  a  falling  off  from  the  old 
splendour  of  Versailles !  Here  in  this  poor  Tuileries  a  National 
Brewer-Colonel,  sonorous  Santerre,  parades  officially  behind  her 
Majesty's  chair.  Our  high  dignitaries  all  fled  over  the  Rhine : 
nothing  now  to  be  gained  at  Court ;  but  hopes,  for  which  life  itself 
must  be  risked !  Obscure  busy  men  frequent  the  back  stairs ; 
with  hearsays,  wind-projects,  unfruitful  fanfaronades.  Young 
Royalists,  at  the  Theatre  de  Vaudeiille,  '  sing  couplets ; '  if  that 
could  do  anything.  Royalists  enough.  Captains  on  furlough, 
burnt-out  Seigneurs,  may  likewise  be  met  with,  '  in  the  Cafe  de 
Valois,  and  at  Meot  the  Restaurateur's.'  There  they  fan  one 
another  into  high  loyal  glow  ;  drink,  in  such  wine  as  can  be  pro- 
cured, confusion  to  Sansculottism ;  show  purchased  dirks,  of  an 
improved  structure,  made  to  order ;  and,  greatly  daring,  dine.^ 
It  is  in  these  places,  in  these  months,  that  the  epithet  Sansculotte 
first  gets  applied  to  indigent  Patriotism ;  in  the  last  age  we  had 
Gilbert  Sansculotte,  the  indigent  Poet.^  Destitute-of-Breeches : 
a  mournful  Destitution  ;  which  however,  if  Twenty  millions  share 
it,  may  become  more  effective  than  most  Possessions !  * 

Meanwhile,  amid  this  vague  dim  whirl  of  fanferonades,  wind- 

iCampan,  ii.  199-201.  ^Dampmartin,  ii.  129. 

'Mercier,  Nouveau  Paris,  iii.  204.  [Gilbert,  the  son  of  a  well-to-do  peasant  in 
the  Vosges,  born  1750,  went  to  Nancy  and  wrote  poetry  1771  (Le  Poete  Mal- 
heureux,  Le  Carnaval  des  Auteurs,  Le  xviiime  Siecle).  He  went  to  Paris  and 
enjoyed  a  season  or  two  of  success  (1774 — 80),  dying  from  a  fall  from  his  horse  1780, 
being  then  in  receipt  of  a  royal  pension  and  24,000  lizn-.  of  annual  income.  So  far 
from  being  a  Sansculotte  he  should  rather  be  called  a  spoiled  child  of  fortune. 
(See  Lescur^'s  preface  to  the  Selection  of  his  works  published  1882.)] 

'*[It  must  be  remembered  that  a  Sansculotte  is  not  necessarily  a  Sanspantalon  : 
Culotte  is  the  nether  garment  of  the  upper  classes  of  the  i8th  century  as  opposed 
\.o  pantalon,^ 


TO  FLY  OK  NOT  TO  FLY  57 

projects,  poniards  made  to  order,  there  does  disclose  itself  one 
punctum-saliens  of  life  and  feasibility  :  the  finger  of  Mirabeau  ! 
Mirabeau  and  the  Queen  of  France  have  met ;  have  parted  with 
mutual  trust !  It  is  strange  ;  secret  as  the  Mysteries ;  but  it  is 
indubitable.  Mirabeau  took  horse,  one  evening;^  and  rode 
westward,  unattended, — to  see  Friend  Claviere  in  that  country 
house  of  his  ?  Before  getting  to  Claviere's,  the  much-musing 
horseman  struck  aside  to  a  back  gate  of  the  Garden  of  Saint- 
Cloud  :  some  Duke  D'Aremberg,  or  the  like,  was  there  to  in- 
troduce him ;  the  Queen  was  not  far ;  on  a  '  round  knoll,  rond 
point,  the  highest  of  the  Garden  of  Saint-Cloud,'  he  beheld  the 
Queen's  face  ;  spake  with  her,  alone,  under  the  void  canopy  of 
Night.  What  an  interview ;  fateful  secret  for  us,  after  all 
searching  ;  like  the  colloquies  of  the  gods  !  '^  She  called  hira  '  a 
Mirabeau  : '  elsewhere  we  read  that  she  '  was  charmed  with  him,'  ' 
the  wild  submitted  Titan ;  as  indeed  it  is  among  the  honourable 
tokens  of  this  high  ill-fated  heart  that  no  mind  of  any  endowment, 
no  Mirabeau,  nay  no  Barnave,  no  Dumouriez,  ever  came  face  to 
face  with  her  but,  in  spite  of  all  prepossessions,  she  was  forced 
to  recognise  it,  to  draw  nigh  to  it,  with  trust.  High  imperial 
heart ;  with  the  instinctive  attraction  towards  all  that  had  any 
height!  "You  know  not  the  Queen,"  said  Mirabeau  once  in 
confidence  ;  "  her  force  of  mind  is  prodigious ;  she  is  a  man  for 
courage."  ^ — And  so,  under  the  void  Night,  on  the  crown  of  that 
knoll,  she  has  spoken  with  a  Mirabeau  :  he  has  kissed  loyally  the 
queenly  hand,  and  said  with  enthusiasm :  "  Madame,  the  Monarchy 
is  saved ! " — Possible  ?    The  Foreign  Powers,  mysteriously  sounded, 

1  [July  3rd  1790.] 

^Campan,  ii.  126-7.  [La  Marck's  account  differs  from  this  (Bacourt,  i.  189); 
Mirabeau  slept,  the  night  before  the  interview,  at  Auteuil  at  the  house  of  his  niece 
Mme  d'Aragon,  and  met  the  Queen  on  the  3rd  in  her  private  room  at  St.  Cloud, 
the  King  being  also  present.  The  Orateur  du  Peuple  (Fr^ron's  organ),  as  well  as 
L Ami  du  Peuple,  got  wind  of  the  interview  and  denounced  it.  La  Marck  however 
misdates  the  pamphlet  about  the  Grande  Trahison  [vid.  supr.  i.  358),  which  he 
attributes  to  these  days,  whereas  it  was  really  published  on  May  20th  or  21st,  after 
Mirabeau's  speech  on  the  right  of  making  peace  and  war.     {See  Lom^nie,  v.  145.)] 

'[But  on  the  other  hand  La  Marck  expressly  says  that,  charmed  as  Mirabeau 
was  with  the  Queen,  she  was  not  pleased  with  him,  his  repulsive  face  frightened  her. 
(Bacourt,  i.  188-191,  ii.  80.)] 

■*  Dumont,  p.  147. 


58  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

gave  favourable  guarded  response  ;  ^  Bouille  is  at  Metz,  and  could 
find  forty- thousand  sure  Germans.  With  a  Mirabeau  for  head, 
and  a  Bouille  for  hand,  something  verily  is  possible, — if  Fate 
intervene  not.^ 

But  figure  under  what  thousandfold  wrappages,  and  cloaks  of 
darkness,  Royalty,  meditating  these  things,  must  involve  itself 
There  ai'e  men  with  '  Tickets  of  Entrance  ; '  there  are  chivalrous 
consultings,  mysterious  plottings.  Consider  also  whether,  involve 
as  it  like,  plotting  Royalty  can  escape  the  glance  of  Patriotism  ; 
lynx-eyes,  by  the  ten  thousand,  fixed  on  it,  which  see  in  the  dark  ! 
Patriotism  knows  much  :  knows  the  dirks  made  to  order,  and  can 
specify  the  shops  ;  knows  Sieur  Motier's  legions  of  moiichards  ;  the 
Tickets  of  Entree,  and  men  in  black  ;  and  how  plan  of  evasion 
succeeds  plan, — or  may  be  supposed  to  succeed  it.  Then  conceive 
the  couplets  chanted  at  the  Theatre  de  Vaudeville ;  or  woi'se,  the 
whispers,  significant  nods  of  traitors  in  moustachios.  Conceive, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  loud  cry  of  alarm  that  came  through  the 
Hundred-and-Thirty  Journals  ;  the  Dionysius'-Ear  of  each  of  the 
Forty-eight  Sections,  wakeful  night  and  day. 

Patriotism  is  patient  of  much ;  not  patient  of  all.  The  Cafe 
de  Procope  has  sent,  visibly  along  the  streets,  a  Deputation  of 
Patriots,  '  to  expostulate  with  bad  Editors,'  by  trustful  word  of 
mouth :  singular  to  see  and  hear.  The  bad  Editors  promise  to 
amend,  but  do  not.^  Deputations  for  change  of  Ministry  were 
many  ;  Mayor  Bailly  joining  even  with  Cordelier  Danton  in  such  ; 
and  they  have  prevailed.  With  what  profit  ?  Of  Quacks,  willing 
or  constrained  to  be  Quacks,  the  race  is  everlasting :  Ministers 
Duportail  and  Dutertre  will  have  to  manage  much  as  Ministers 
Latour-du-Pin  and  Cice  did.     So  welters  the  confused  world.* 

1  Correspondance  Secrete  (in  Hist.  Pari.  viii.  169-73). 

2  [This  is  a  confusion.  I  have  already  shown  that  Mirabeau  would  have  no 
connection  with  a  flight  to  the  frontier — only  to  Normandy,  or  even  nearer  (Com- 
pifegne  was  suggested) ;  viJ.  note  sup;:,  ii.  53.] 

'[This  refers  to  the  threatening  deputation  that  visited  Mallet  du  Pan  in  May 
'90  (vid.  supr.,  i.  387).] 

*  [One  could  easily  tabulate  the  ministers  who  held  office  after  the  retirement  of 
Necker,  but  with  the  exception  of  Montmorin  they  were  such  mere  nonentities  as 
to  be  hardly  worth  considering.  Mirabeau's  efforts  were  bent  to  prevent  a  Lafa- 
yettist  ministry,  but  in  vain,  and  it  is  not  to  the  credit  of  Lafayette  that  the  said 


TO  FLY  OR  NOT  TO  FLY  59 

But  now,  beaten  on  forever  by  such  inextricable  contradictory 
influences  and  evidences,  what  is  the  indigent  French  Patriot,  in 
these  unhappy  days,  to  believe,  and  walk  by  ?  Uncertainty  all ; 
except  that  he  is  wretched,  indigent ;  that  a  glorious  Revolution, 
the  wonder  of  the  Universe,  has  hithei'to  brought  neither  Bread 
nor  Peace ;  being  marred  by  traitors,  difficult  to  discover.  Traitors 
that  dwell  in  the  dark,  invisible  there  ; — or  seen  for  moments,  in 
pallid  dubious  twilight,  stealthily  vanishing  thither !  Preterna- 
tural Suspicion  once  more  rules  the  minds  of  men. 

'  Nobody  here,'  writes  Carra,  of  the  Annales  Patnotiques,  so  early 
as  the  first  of  February,  '  can  entertain  a  doubt  of  the  constant 
'obstinate  project  these  people  have  on  foot  to  get  the  King  away  ; 
'or  of  the  perpetual  succession  of  manceuvi-es  they  employ  for 
'that.'  Nobody:  the  watchful  Mother  of  Patriotism  deputed 
two  Members  to  her  Daughter  at  Versailles,  to  examine  how  the 
matter  looked  there.  Well,  and  there  ?  Patriotic  Carra  con- 
tinues :  '  The  Report  of  these  two  deputies  we  all  heard  with 
'  our  own  ears  last  Saturday.  They  went  with  others  of  Versailles, 
'  to  inspect  the  King's  Stables,  also  the  stables  of  the  whilom 
'  Gardes-du-Corps  ;  they  found  there  from  seven  to  eight  hundred 
'  horses  standing  always  saddled  and  bridled,  ready  for  the  road 
'at  a  moment's  notice.  The  same  deputies,  moreover,  saw  with 
'  their  own  two  eyes  several  Royal  Carriages,  which  men  were 
'  even  then  busy  loading  with  large  well-stuffed  luggage-bags,' 
leather  cows,  as  we  call  them,  '  vaches  de  ci/ir ;  the  Royal  Arms 
'on  the  panels  almost  entirely  effaced.'  Momentous  enough! 
Also  'on  the  same  day  the  whole  Marechaussce,  or  Cavalry 
'  Police,  did  assemble  with  arms,  horses  and  baggage,' — and 
disperse  again.  They  want  the  King  over  the  marches,  that  so 
Emperor  Leopold  and  the  German  Princes,  whose  troops  are 
ready,  may  have  a  pretext  for  beginning  :  '  this,'  adds  Carra,  '  is 
'  the  word  of  the  riddle  :  this  is  the  reason  why  our  fugitive 
'  Aristocrats  are   now   making  levies   of  men   on    the   frontiers  ; 


nonentities  were  his  creatures.  Mirabeau  even  advised  the  King  to  take  Radicals 
in  preference ;  "  Jacobins  when  ministers  will  not  be  Jacobin  ministers,"  said  he. 
(Bacourt,  ii.  228.)] 


60  THE  FKENCH  REVOLUTION 

'expecting  that,  one  of  these  mornings,  the  Executive  Chief 
'  Magistrate  will  be  brought  over  to  them,  and  the  civil  war 
'  commence. '  ^ 

If  indeed  the  Executive  Chief  Magistrate,  bagged,  say  in  one 
of  these  leather  cows,  were  once  brought  safe  over  to  them ! 
But  the  strangest  thing  of  all  is,  that  Patriotism,  whether  barking 
at  a  venture,  or  guided  by  some  instinct  of  preternatural  sagacity, 
is  actually  barking  aright  this  time  ;  at  something,  not  at  nothing. 
Bouille's  Secret  Correspondence,  since  made  public,  testifies  as 
much. 

Nay,  it  is  undeniable,  visible  to  all,  that  Mesdames  the  King's 
Aunts  are  taking  steps  for  departure :  '^  asking  passports  of  the 
Ministry,  safe-conducts  of  the  Municipality ;  which  Marat  warns 
all  men  to  beware  of.  They  will  carry  gold  with  them,  'these 
old  Beguines ;  '  nay  they  will  carry  the  little  Dauphin,  '  having 
nursed  a  changeling,  for  some  time,  to  leave  in  his  stead ! ' 
Besides,  they  are  as  some  light  substance  flung  up,  to  show  how  the 
wind  sits ;  a  kind  of  proof-kite  you  fly  off"  to  ascertain  whether 
the  grand  paper-kite.  Evasion  of  the  King,  may  mount ! 

In  these  alarming  circumstances.  Patriotism  is  not  wanting  to 
itself  Municipality  deputes  to  the  King  ;  Sections  depute  to  the 
Municipality ;  a  National  Assembly  will  soon  stir.  Meanwhile, 
behold,  on  the  19th  of  February  1791,  Mesdames,  quitting 
Bellevue  and  Versailles  with  all  privacy,  are  off"!  Towards  Rome, 
seemingly ;  or  one  knows  not  whither.  They  are  not  without 
King's  passports,  countersigned  ;  and  what  is  more  to  the  purpose, 
a  serviceable  Escort.  The  Patriotic  Mayor  or  Mayorlet  of  the 
Village  of  Moret  tried  to  detain  them :  but  brisk  Louis  de 
Narbonne,  of  the  Escort,  dashed  off"  at  hand-gallop ;  returned 
soon  with  thirty  dragoons,  and  victoriously  cut  them  out.  And 
so  the  poor  ancient  women  go  their  way  ;  to  the  terror  of  France 
and  Paris,  whose  nervous  excitability  is  become  extreme.  Who 
else  would  hinder  poor  Loque  and  Graille,  now  grown  so  old,  and 

1  Carra's  Newspaper,  ist  Feb.  1791  (in  Hist.  Pari.  ix.  39). 

2 [Madame  Adelaide  and  Madame  Victoire,  vid.  note  supr.,  i.  22.  They  had  a 
small  escort^of  20  soldiers  under  Narbonne.] 


TO  FLY  OR  NOT  TO  FLY  61 

fallen  into  such  unexpected  circumstances,  when  gossip  itself 
turning  only  on  terrors  and  horrors  is  no  longer  pleasant  to  the 
mind,  and  you  cannot  get  so  much  as  an  orthodox  confessor  in 
peace, — from  going  what  way  soever  the  hope  of  any  solacement 
might  lead  them  ? 

They  go,  poor  ancient  dames, — whom  the  heart  were  hard  that 
did  not  pity  :  they  go  ;  with  palpitations,  with  unmelodious  sup- 
pressed screechings  ;  all  France  screeching  and  cackling,  in  loud 
H^suppressed  terror,  behind  and  on  both  hands  of  them  :  such 
mutual  suspicion  is  among  men.  At  Arnay  le  Due,  above  half- 
way to  the  frontiers,  a  Patriotic  Municipality  and  Populace  again 
takes  courage  to  stop  them :  Louis  Narbonne  must  now  back  to 
Paris,  must  consult  the  National  Assembly.  National  Assembly 
answers,  not  without  an  effort,  that  Mesdames  may  go.^  Where- 
upon Paris  rises  worse  than  ever,  screeching  half-distracted. 
Tuileries  and  precincts  are  filled  with  women  and  men,  while 
the  National  Assembly  debates  this  question  of  questions ;  La- 
fayette is  needed  at  night  for  dispersing  them,  and  the  streets 
are  to  be  illuminated.  Commandant  Berthier,  a  Berthier  before 
whom  are  great  things  unknown,  lies  for  the  present  under 
blockade  at  Bellevue  in  Versailles.^  By  no  tactics  could  he 
get  Mesdames'  Luggage  stirred  from  the  Courts  there ;  frantic 
Versaillese  women  came  screaming  about  him ;  his  very  troops 
cut  the  wagon-traces ;  he  '  retired  to  the  interior,'  waiting  better 
times.^ 

Nay,  in  these  same  hours,  while  Mesdames,  hardly  cut  out 
from  Moret  by  the  sabre's  edge,  are  driving  rapidly,  to  foreign 
parts,  and  not  yet  stopped  at  Arnay,  their  august  Nephew  poor 
Monsieur,  at  Paris,  has  dived  deep  into  his  cellars  of  the  Luxem- 
bourg for  shelter ;  and,  according  to  Montgaillard,  can  hardly 
be  persuaded  up  again.  Screeching  multitudes  environ  that 
Luxembourg  of  his ;  drawn  thither  by  report  of  his  departure  : 

^[Mirabeau  spoke  tor  them,  or  they  might  not  have  been  allowed  to  go.  Their 
flight  raised  the  question  of  '  liberty  of  emigration '  {vid.  infr.,  ii.  65).] 

"^  ['  Under  blockade,'  i.e.,  kept  prisoner  by  his  own  troops,  says  Campan  (in  loc. 
cit.).\ 

'  Campan,  ii.  132. 


62  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

but  at  sight  and  sound  of  Monsieur,  they  become  crowing 
multitudes  ;  ^  and  escort  Madame  and  him  to  the  Tuileries  with 
vivats.^  It  is  a  state  of  nervous  excitability  such  as  few  nations 
know. 

CHAPTER  V 

THE  DAY  OF  PONIARDS 

Or,  again,  what  means  tliis  visible  reparation  of  the  Castle  of 
Vincennes  ?  ^  Other  Jails  being  all  crowded  with  prisoners,  new 
space  is  wanted  here  :  that  is  the  Municipal  account.  For  in  such 
changing  of  Judicatures,  Parlements  being  abolished,  and  New 
Courts  but  just  set  up,  prisoners  have  accumulated.  Not  to  say 
that  in  these  times  of  discord  and  club-law,  offences  and  commit- 
tals are,  at  any  rate,  more  numerous.  Which  Municipal  account, 
does  it  not  sufficiently  explain  the  phenomenon  .-^  Surely,  to 
repair  the  Castle  of  Vincennes  was  of  all  enterprises  that  an 
enlightened  Municipality  could  undertake,  the  most  innocent. 
Not  so,  however,  does  neighbouring  Saint-Antoine  look  on  it  : 
Saint- Antoine  to  whom  these  peaked  turrets  and  grim  donjons, 
ail-too  near  her  own  dark  dwelling,  are  of  themselves  an  offence. 
Was  not  Vincennes  a  kind  of  minor  Bastille  ?  Great  Diderot  and 
Philosophes  have  lain  in  durance  here  ;  great  Mirabeau,  in  disas- 
trous eclipse,  for  forty-two  months.  And  now  when  the  old 
Bastille  has  become  a  dancing-ground  (had  any  one  the  mirth  to 
dance),  and  its  stones  are  getting  built  into  the  Pont  Louis-Seize, 
does  this  minor,  comparative  insignificance  of  a  Bastille  flank  itself 

1  [Feb.  22nd  '91.] 

2  Montgaillard,  ii.  282.  Deux  Amis,  vi.  c.  i.  [I  have  hitherto  failed  to  verify 
tliis  unlikely  story.  It  is  probably  an  exaggeration,  at  least,  about  Monsieur  hiding 
in  the  cellars.     Deu.x  Amis  (in  loc.  cit.)  say  nothing  of  it.] 

'  [Vincennes,  a  short  distance  beyond  the  Porte  Saint-Antoine,  was  a  favourite 
residence  of  mediaeval  Kings  of  France  and  was  first  used  as  a  State  prison  by 
Louis  XI.  Mirabeau  had  written  his  pamphlet  against  Lettres  de  Cachet  there. 
It  was  dismantled  as  a  prison  before  the  lievolution,  but  in  Feb.  '91,  the  other 
prisons  being  full — owing  to  the  natural  increase  of  petty  crime  and  crimes  of  vio- 
lence which  the  Revolution  had  produced — orders  for  its  repair  were  given  by  the 
Municipality.     (Dulaure,  Hist,  des  Environs  de  Paris  (Paris,  1825 — 8),  p.  393.) 

Lafayette  had  written  to  the  King  in  May  1790  begging  him  to  order  the  de- 
struction of  Vincennes  as  an  act  of  popularity  (Lafayette,  ii.  465).] 


THE  DAY  OF  PONIARDS  63 

with  fresh- hewn  mullions,  spread  out  tyrannous  wings  ;  menacing 
Patriotism  ?  New  space  for  prisoners  :  and  what  prisoners  ?  A 
D' Orleans,  with  the  chief  Patriots  on  the  tip  of  the  Left  ?  It  is 
said,  there  runs  '  a  subterranean  passage  '  all  the  way  from  the 
Tuileries  hither.  Who  knows  ?  Paris,  mined  with  quarries 
and  catacombs,  does  hang  wondrous  over  the  abyss  ;  Paris  was 
once  to  be  blown  up, — though  the  powder,  when  we  went  to 
look,  had  got  withdrawn.  A  Tuileries,  sold  to  Austria  and  Cob- 
lentz,  should  have  no  subterranean  passage.  Out  of  which  might 
not  Coblentz  or  Austria  issue,  some  morning ;  and,  with  camion 
of  long  range,  'Joudroyer,'  bethunder  a  patriotic  Saint-Antoine 
into  smoulder  and  ruin ! 

So  meditates  the  benighted  soul  of  Saint-Antoine,  as  it  sees  the 
aproned  workmen,  in  early  spring,  busy  on  these  towers.  An 
official-speaking  MunicipaUty,  a  Sieur  Motier  with  his  legions  of 
mouchards,  deserve  no  trust  at  all.  Wei*e  Patriot  Santerre,  indeed, 
Commander !  But  the  sonorous  Brewer  commands  only  our  own 
Battalion  :  of  such  secrets  he  can  explain  nothing,  knows  nothing, 
perhaps  suspects  much.  And  so  the  work  goes  on  ;  and  afflicted 
benighted  Saint-Antoine  hears  rattle  of  hammers,  sees  stones 
suspended  in  air.^ 

Saint-Antoine  prostrated  the  first  great  Bastille  :  will  it  falter 
over  this  comparative  insignificance  of  a  Bastille  ?  Friends,  what 
if  we  took  pikes,  firelocks,  sledgehammers  ;  and  helped  ourselves  ! 
— Speedier  is  no  remedy  ;  nor  so  certain.  On  the  28th  day  of 
February,  Saint-Antoine  turns  out,  as  it  has  now  often  done  ;  and, 
apparently  with  little  superfluous  tumult,  moves  eastward  to  that 
eye-sorrow  of  Vincennes.  With  grave  voice  of  authority,  no  need  of 
bullying  and  shouting,  Saint-Antoine  signifies  to  parties  concerned 
there,  that  its  purpose  is.  To  have  this  suspicious  Stronghold 
razed  level  with  the  general  soil  of  the  country.  Remonstrance 
may  be  proffered,  with  zeal  ;  but  it  avails  not.  The  outer 
gate  goes  up,  drawbridges  tumble  ;  iron  window-stanchions, 
smitten  out  with  sledgehammers,  become  iron-ci-owbars  :  it  rains 

1  Montgaillard,  ii.  285.  [Santerre,  with  the  Saint-Antoine  battalion  of  the  National 
Guard,  merely  looked  on  at  the  riot  of  Vincennes  and  did  nothing  to  slop  it.] 


64  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

a  rain  of  furniture,  stone-masses,  slates  :  with  chaotic  clatter  and 
rattle,  Demolition  clatters  down.  And  now  hasty  expresses 
rush  through  the  agitated  streets,  to  warn  Lafayette,  and  the 
Municipal  and  Departmental  Authorities  ;  Rumour  warns  a 
National  Assembly,  a  Royal  Tuileries,  and  all  men  who  care  to 
hear  it :  That  Samt  Antoine  is  up  ;  that  Vincennes,  and  probably 
the  last  remaining  Institution  of  the  Country,  is  coming  down.^ 

Quick,  then  !  Let  Lafayette  roll  his  drums  and  fly  eastward  ; 
for  to  all  Constitutional  Patriots  this  is  again  bad  news.  And 
you,  ye  Friends  of  Royalty,  snatch  your  poniards  of  improved 
structure,  made  to  order ;  your  sword-canes,  secret  arms,  and 
tickets  of  entry ;  quick,  by  backstairs  passages,  rally  round  the 
Son  of  Sixty  Kings.  An  effervescence  probably  got  up  by 
D' Orleans  and  Company,  for  the  overthrow  of  Throne  and  Altar  : 
it  is  said  her  Majest)^  shall  be  put  in  prison,  put  out  of  the  way  ; 
what  then  will  his  Majesty  be  ?  Clay  for  the  Sansculottic  Potter  ! 
Or  were  it  impossible  to  fly  this  day  ;  a  brave  Noblesse  sud- 
denly all  rallying  ?  Peril  threatens,  hope  invites :  Dukes  de 
Villequier,  de  Duras,  Gentlemen  of  the  Chamber  give  Tickets 
and  admittance  ;  a  brave  Noblesse  is  suddenly  all  rallying.  Now 
were  the  time  to  '  fall  sword  in  hand  on  those  gentry  there,' 
could  it  be  done  with  effect. 

The  Hero  of  two  Worlds  is  on  his  white  charger :  blue 
Nationals,  horse  and  foot,  hurrying  eastward ;  Santerre,  with  the 
Saint- Antoine  Battalion,  is  already  there,  —  apparently  indis- 
posed to  act.  Heavy-laden  Hero  of  two  Worlds,  what  tasks 
are  these  !  The  jeerings,  provocative  gambollings  of  that  Patriot 
Suburb,  which  is  all  out  on  the  streets  now,  are  hard  to  endure  ; 
unwashed  Patriots  jeering  in  sulky  sports  ;  one  unwashed  Patriot 
'  seizing  the  General  by  the  boot,'  to  unhorse  him.  Santerre, 
ordered  to  fire,  makes  answer  obliquely,  "  These  are  the  men 
that  took  the  Bastille  ; "  and  not  a  trigger  stirs.  Neither  dare 
the  Vincennes   Magistracy   give   warrant  of  arrestment,  or  the 

1  Deux  Amis,  vi.  11-15.  Newspapers  in  Hist.  Pari.  ix.  111-117.  [Deux  Amis, 
who  are  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  legend  of  the  Brigands,  say  the  attack  on  Vin- 
cennes was  the  work  of  brigands,  with  a  few  Saint- Antoine  men  joining  in.] 


THE  DAY  OF  PONIARDS  65 

smallest  countenance:  wherefore  the  General  'will  take  it  on 
himself '  to  arrest.  By  promptitude,  by  cheerful  adroitness, 
patience  and  brisk  valour  without  limits,  the  riot  may  be  again 
bloodlessly  appeased. 

Meanwhile,  the  rest  of  Paris,  with  more  or  less  unconcern, 
may  mind  the  rest  of  its  business :  for  what  is  this  but  an 
effervescence,  of  which  there  are  now  so  many  ?  The  National 
Assembly,  in  one  of  its  stormiest  moods,  is  debating  a  Law 
against  Emigration  ;  ^  Mirabeau  declaring  aloud,  "  I  swear  before- 
hand that  I  will  not  obey  it."  Mirabeau  is  often  at  the  Tribune 
this  day  ;  with  endless  impediments  from  without ;  with  the  old 
unabated  energy  from  within.  What  can  murmurs  and  clamours, 
from  Left  or  from  Right,  do  to  this  man ;  like  Teneriffe  or  Atlas 
unremoved  ?  With  clear  thought ;  with  strong  bass-voice,  though 
at  first  low,  uncertain,  he  claims  audience,  sways  the  storm  of 
men :  anon  the  sound  of  him  waxes,  softens  ;  he  rises  into  far- 
sounding  melody  of  strength,  triumphant,  which  subdues  all 
hearts ;  his  rude  seamed  face,  desolate,  fire-scathed,  becomes 
fire-lit,  and  radiates  :  once  again  men  feel,  in  these  beggarly 
ages,  Avhat  is  the  potency  and  omnipotency  of  man's  word  on  the 
souls  of  men.  "  I  will  triumph  or  be  torn  in  fragments,"  he  was 
once  heard  to  say.  "  Silence,"  he  cries  now,  in  strong  word  of 
command,  in  imperial  consciousness  of  strength,  "  Silence,  the 
thirty  voices,  Silence  aiur  trente  voix  !  " — and  Robespierre  and  the 
Thirty  Voices  die  into  mutterings ;  and  the  Law  is  once  more  as 
Mirabeau  would  have  it. 

How  different,  at  the  same  instant,  is  General  Lafayette's 
street-eloquence  ;    wrangling  with    sonoi-ous    Brewers,    with   an 

1  [Feb.  28th  1791.  The  first  debate  on  the  question  of  emigration  showed 
already  the  principles  of  1793  in  conflict  with  those  of  1789.  More  than  a  year 
before  a  decree  had  been  passed  declaring  it  unlawful  in  any  case  for  the  State 
to  confiscate  the  goods  of  condemned  persons:  and  the  "Rights  of  Man"  had 
expressly  declared  the  liberty  of  going  anywhere  to  be  open  to  all  men.  Now  on 
Feb.  2ist  it  was  proposed  for  discussion  whether  in  a  moment  of  crisis  the  liberty  to 
emigrate  might  be  suspended,  and  on  28th  it  was  proposed  to  put  the  granting  of 
passports  into  the  hands  of  a  Committee  of  three  persons,  nominated  by  the 
Assembly.  Mirabeau's  fierce  speech — his  last  great  speech — against  it  led  to  the 
reference  of  the  whole  question  back  to  a  Committee,  and  nothing  further  was 
done  until  Aug.  ist  {vid.  infr.,  ii.  190).] 

VOL.    II,  5 


66  THE  FKENCH  REVOLUTION 

ungrammatical  Saint-Antoine !  Most  different,  again,  from  both 
is  the  Cafe-de-Valois  eloquence,  and  suppressed  fanfai-onade, 
of  this  multitude  of  men  with  Tickets  of  Entry ;  who  are  now 
inundating  the  Corridors  of  the  Tuileries.  Such  things  can  go 
on  simultaneously  in  one  City.  How  much  more  in  one  Country  ; 
in  one  Planet  with  its  discrepancies,  every  Day  a  mere  crackling 
infinitude  of  discrepancies,— which  nevertheless  do  yield  some 
coherent  net-product,  though  an  infinitesimally  small  one  ! 

But  be  this  as  it  may,  Lafayette  has  saved  Vincennes  ;  and  is 
marching  homewards  with  some  dozen  of  arrested  demolitionists. 
Royalty  is  not  yet  saved ;  — nor  indeed  specially  endangered. 
But  to  the  King's  Constitutional  Guard,i  to  these  old  Gardes 
Fran9aises,  or  Centre  Grenadiers,  as  it  chanced  to  be,  this 
affluence  of  men  with  Tickets  of  Entry  is  becoming  more  and 
more  unintelligible.  Is  his  Majesty  verily  for  Metz,  then;  to 
be  carried  off  by  these  men,  on  the  spur  of  the  instant  ?  That 
revolt  of  Saint-Antoine  got  up  by  traitor  Royalists  for  a 
stalkinghorse  ?  Keep  a  sharp  outlook,  ye  Centre  Grenadiers  on 
duty  here:  good  never  came  from  the  'men  in  black.'  Nay 
they  have  cloaks,  redwgotes ;  some  of  them  leather-breeches, 
boots, — as  if  for  instant  riding !  Or  what  is  this  that  sticks 
visible  from  the  lapelle  of  Chevalier  de  Court  ?  ^  Too  like  the 
handle  of  some  cutting  or  stabbing  instrument !  He  glides  and 
goes  ;  and  still  the  dudgeon  sticks  from  his  left  lapelle.  "'  Hold, 
Monsieur!" — a  Centre  Grenadier  clutches  him;  clutches  the 
protrusive  dudgeon,  whisks  it  out  in  the  face  of  the  world  :  by 
Heaven,  a  very  dagger ;  hunting-knife  or  whatsoever  you  will 
call  it ;  fit  to  drink  the  life  of  Patriotism  ! 

So  fared  it  with  Chevalier  de  Court,  early  in  the  day  ;  not 
without   noise  ;    not    without    commentaries.        And    now    this 

^  [The  Garde  Cotistitutionelle  is  here  made  to  come  into  existence  too  early  :  it 
was  instituted  by  the  last  decree  of  the  Constituent  (Sept.  30th  1791) ;  to  consist  of 
1,800  men  :  the  Due  de  Brissac  was  its  first  commander  :  it  was  not  however  actu- 
ally enrolled  until  March  i6th  '92  ;  it  was  disbanded  on  May  29th,  as  being  too 
likely  to  render  efficient  service  to  the  tottering  throne,  and  its  loyal  and  brave 
commander  sent  to  Orleans  to  be  tried  for  high  treason  :  he  was  m;issacred  at 
Versailles  Sept.  9th  '92  [vid.  infr.,  ii.  321).] 

''Weber,  ii.  286. 


THE  DAY  OF  PONIARDS  67 

continually  increasing  multitude  at  nightfall  ?  Have  they 
daggers  too  ?  Alas,  with  them  too,  after  angry  parleyings,  there 
has  begun  a  groping  and  a  rummaging ;  all  men  in  black,  spite 
of  their  Tickets  of  Entry,  are  clutched  by  the  collar,  and  groped. 
Scandalous  to  think  of:  for  always,  as  the  dirk,  sword-cane, 
pistol,  or  were  it  but  tailor's  bodkin,  is  found  on  him,  and  with 
loud  scorn  drawn  forth  from  him,  he,  the  hapless  man  in  black, 
is  flung  ail-too  rapidly  down  stairs.  Flung  ;  and  ignominiously 
descends,  head  foremost ;  accelerated  by  ignominious  shovings 
from  sentry  after  sentry ;  nay,  as  is  written,  by  smitings,  twitch - 
ings, — spurnings  a  pustenori,  not  to  be  named.  In  this  acceler- 
ated way,  emerges,  uncertain  which  end  uppermost,  man  after 
man  in  black,  through  all  issues,  into  the  Tuileries  Garden. 
Emerges,  alas,  into  the  arms  of  an  indignant  multitude,  now 
gathered  and  gathering  there,  in  the  hour  of  dusk,  to  see  what 
is  toward,  and  whether  the  Hereditary  Representative  is  carried 
off  or  not.  Hapless  men  in  black  ;  at  last  convicted  of  poniards 
made  to  order  ;  convicted  '  Chevaliers  of  the  Poniard  ! '  Within 
is  as  the  burning  ship  ;  without  is  as  the  deep  sea.  Within  is 
no  help;  his  Majesty,  looking  forth,  one  moment,  from  his 
interior  sanctuaries,  coldly  bids  all  visitors  '  give  up  their  weapons ; ' 
and  shuts  the  door  again,  i  The  weapons  given  up  form  a  heap  : 
the  convicted  Chevaliers  of  the  Poniard  keep  descending  pell- 
mell,  with  impetuous  velocity  ;  and  at  the  bottom  of  all  staircases, 
the  mixed  multitude  receives  them,  hustles,  buffets,  chases  and 
disperses  them.^ 

Such  sight  meets  Lafayette,  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening,  as  he 
returns,  successful  with  difficulty  at  Vincennes  :  Sansculotte  Scylla 
hardly  weathered,  here  is  Aristocrat  Charybdis  gurgling  under 
his  lee  !  The  patient  Hero  of  two  Worlds  almost  loses  temper. 
He  accelerates,  does  not  retard,  the  flying  Chevaliers ;  delivers, 
indeed,  this  or  the  other  hunted  Loyalist  of  quality,  but  rates 
him  in  bitter  words,    such  as  the  hour   suggested ;   such  as  no 

1  [Lafayette  (iii.  57)  says  this  order  was  given  by  the  King  at  his  request  :  and 
adds  that  the  King  said  to  him  '  the  extravagance  of  those  who  call  themselves  my 
friends  will  end  in  my  destruction.'] 

'■^Hist.  Pari.  ix.  139-48. 


68  THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION 

saloon  could  pardon.  Hero  ill-bested  ;  hanging,  so  to  speak,  in 
mid  air ;  hateful  to  Rich  divinities  above  ;  hateful  to  Indigent 
mortals  below  !  Duke  de  Villequier,  Gentleman  of  the  Chamber, 
gets  such  contumelious  rating,  in  presence  of  all  people  there, 
that  he  may  see  good  first  to  exculpate  himself  in  the  Newspapers ;  ^ 
then,  that  not  prospering,  to  retire  over  the  Frontiers,  and  begin 
plotting  at  Brussels.2  His  Apartment  will  stand  vacant ;  usefuller, 
as  we  may  find,  than  when  it  stood  occupied.  ^ 

So  fly  the  Chevaliers  of  the  Poniard  ;  hunted  of  Patriotic  men, 
shamefully  in  the  thickening  dusk.  A  dim  miserable  business ; 
born  of  darkness ;  dying  away  there  in  the  thickening  dusk  and 
dimness.  In  the  midst  of  which,  however,  let  the  reader  discern 
clearly  one  figure  running  for  its  life  :  Crispin-Catiline  d'Espre- 
menil, — for  the  last  time,  or  the  last  but  one.  It  is  not  yet  three 
years  since  these  same  Centre  Grenadiers,  Gardes  Fran9aises 
then,  marched  him  towards  the  Calypso  Isles,  in  the  gray  of  the 
May  morning ;  and  he  and  they  have  got  thus  far.  Buffeted, 
beaten  down,  delivered  by  popular  Petion,  he  might  well  answer 
bitterly  :  "  And  I  too.  Monsieur,  have  been  carried  on  the  People's 
shoulders."  ^    A  fact  which  popular  Petion,  if  he  like,  can  meditate. 

But  happily,  one  way  and  another,  the  speedy  night  covers  up 
this  ignominious  Day  of  Poniards  ;  and  the  Chevaliers  escape, 
though  maltreated,  with  torn  coat-skirts  and  heavy  hearts,  to 
their  respective  dwelling-houses.  Riot  twofold  is  quelled ;  and 
little  blood  shed,  if  it  be  not  insignificant  blood  from  the  nose : 
Vincennes  stands  undemolished,  reparable ;  and  the  Hereditary 
Representative  has  not  been  stolen,  nor  the  Queen  smuggled 

1  [April  19th.]  -Montgaillard,  ii.  286. 

5  [This  refers  to  the  fact  that  it  was  through  Villequier's  empty  room  that  the 
King  escaped  on  June  21st.  The  Due  de  Villequier,  afterwards  (1799)  Due  d'Au- 
mont,  was  born  1736,  was  first  gentleman  of  the  bed-chamber  to  the  King  and  sat  for 
Boulogne  in  the  States-General,  but  resigned  his  seat  in  1790.  Died  1814.  He  and 
the  Marquis  de  Duras  wrote  and  published  a  sharp  Lcttrc  a  M.  de  la  Fayette, 
apropos  of  his  treatment  of  them  on  the  "  Day  of  Poniards."  Mme  de  Tourzel 
{M6ni.  i.  275)  says  the  King  ordered  them  to  leave  France,  as  he  feared  their  loyalty 
would  provoke  attacks  on  themselves.  He  felt  the  parting  with  Villequier  very 
much.  The  Rev.  de  Paris  (April  2Sth— 30th  '91)  has  a  story  about  Villequier's 
carriage  being  upset  on  his  flight,  at  Boulogne,  and  his  thigh  broken.] 

*  See  Mercier,  ii.  40,  202. 


MIRABEAU  69 

into  Prison.  A  day  long  remembered  :  commented  on  with  loud 
hahas  and  deep  grumblings  ;  with  bitter  scornfulness  of  triumph, 
bitter  rancour  of  defeat.  Royalism,  as  usual,  imputes  it  to 
D'Orleans  and  the  Anarchists  intent  on  insulting  Majesty : 
Patriotism,  as  usual,  to  Royalists,  and  even  Constitutionalists, 
intent  on  stealing  Majesty  to  Metz :  we,  also  as  usual,  to  Pre- 
ternatural Suspicion,  and  Phoebus  Apollo  having  made  himself 
like  the  Night. 

Thus,  however,  has  the  reader  seen,  in  an  unexpected  arena, 
on  this  last  day  of  February  1791,  the  Three  long -contending 
elements  of  French  Society  dashed  forth  into  singular  comico- 
tragical  collision. ;  acting  and  reacting  openly  to  the  eye.  Con- 
stitutionalism, at  once  quelling  Sansculottic  riot  at  Vincennes, 
and  Royalist  treachery  in  the  Tuileries,  is  great,  this  day,  and 
prevails.  As  for  poor  Royalism,  tossed  to  and  fro  in  that  manner, 
its  daggers  all  left  in  a  heap,  what  can  one  think  of  it .''  Every 
dog,  the  Adage  says,  has  its  day  :  has  it ;  has  had  it ;  or  will 
have  it.  For  the  present,  the  day  is  Lafayette's  and  the  Consti- 
tution's. Nevertheless  Hunger  and  Jacobinism,  fast  growing 
fanatical,  still  work  ;  their  day,  were  they  once  fanatical,  will 
come.  Hitherto,  in  all  tempests,  Lafayette,  like  some  divine 
Sea -ruler,  raises  his  serene  head :  the  upper  ^Eolus'  blasts  fly  back 
to  their  caves,  like  foolish  unbidden  winds  :  the  under  sea-billows 
they  had  vexed  into  froth  allay  themselves.  But  if,  as  we  often 
write,  the  iv/imarine  Titanic  Fire-powers  came  into  play,  the 
Ocean-bed  from  beneath  being  burst  ?  If  they  hurled  Poseidon 
Lafayette  and  his  Constitution  out  of  Space  ;  and,  in  the  Titanic 
melly,  sea  were  mixed  with  sky  ? 

CHAPTER  VI 
MIRABEAU 
The  spirit  of  France  waxes  ever  more  acrid,  fever-sick  :  towards 
the  final  outburst  of  dissolution  and  delirium.     Suspicion  rules  all 
minds  :  contending  parties  cannot  now  commingle ;  stand  sepa- 
rated sheer  asunder,  eyeing  one  another,  in  most  aguish  mood,  of 


70  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

cold  terror  or  hot  rage.  Counter- Revolution,  Days  of  Poniards, 
Castries  Duels  ;  Flight  of  Mesdames,  of  Monsieur  and  Royalty ! 
Journalism  shrills  ever  louder  its  cry  of  alarm.  The  sleepless 
Dionysius's  Ear  of  the  Forty-eight  Sections,  how  feverishly  quick 
has  it  grown ;  convulsing  with  strange  pangs  the  whole  sick 
Body,  as  in  such  sleeplessness  and  sickness  the  ear  will  do  ! 

Since  Royalists  get  Poniards  made  to  order,  and  a  Sieur  Motier 
is  no  better  than  he  should  be,  shall  not  Patriotism  too,  even  of 
the  indigent  sort,  have  Pikes,  secondhand  Firelocks,  in  readiness 
for  the  worst  ?  The  anvils  ring,  during  this  March  month,  with 
hammering  of  Pikes.  A  Constitutional  Municipality  promulgated 
its  Placard,  that  no  citizen  except  the  '  active '  or  cash-citizen 
was  entitled  to  have  arms  ;  but  there  rose,  instantly  responsive, 
such  a  tempest  of  astonishment  fronci  Club  and  Section,  that  the 
Constitutional  Placard,  almost  next  morning,  had  to  cover  itself 
up,  and  die  away  into  inanity,  in  a  second  improved  edition.  ^  So 
the  hammering  continues  ;  as  all  that  it  betokens  does. 

Mark,  again,  how  the  extreme  tip  of  the  Left  is  mounting  in 
favour,  if  not  in  its  own  National  Hall,  yet  with  the  Nation, 
especially  with  Paris.  For  in  such  universal  panic  of  doubt,  the 
opinion  that  is  sure  of  itself,  as  the  meagrest  opinion  may  the 
soonest  be,  is  the  one  to  which  all  men  will  rally.  Great  is 
Belief,  were  it  never  so  meagre  ;  and  leads  captive  the  doubting 
heart.  Incorruptible  Robespierre  has  been  elected  Public  Accuser 
in  our  new  Courts  of  Judicature  ;  virtuous  Petion,'^  it  is  thought, 
may  rise  to  be  Mayor.  Cordelier  Danton,^  called  also  by  triumph- 
ant majorities,  sits  at  the  Departmental  Council-table ;  colleague 
there  of  Mirabeau.     Of  incorruptible  Robespierre  *  it  was  long 

1  Ordonnance  du  17  Mars  1791  (Hist.  Pari.  ix.  257). 

'^[Petion,  elected  Maire  in  place  of  Bailly  Nov.  7th  '91  {;uid.  supr.,  i.  429).] 

'[Danton  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Conseil-Gdru'ral  of  the  Commune  in 
Sept.  '90,  by  the  section  T/u'dtre  Fran^ais,  but  rejected  on  a  general  scrutiny  of 
the  Electors.  In  Feb.  '91  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Directory  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  Seme  [yid.  supr.,  i.  294).  In  Jan.  '92  he  was  elected  Deputy  Procureur- 
Svndic  of  the  Commune,  Manuel  being  PiocureurSyndic.  (See  Mortimer-Ternaux, 
i-'43-)] 

■*[lt  is  in  April  '91  that  Robespierre  really  comes  forward  as  a  leader  of  the  Ex- 
treme Left,  and  true  spokesman  of  the  anarchic  forces.  The  ground  that  he  takes 
up  is  a  demand  for  universal  suffrage.     The  Cordeliers  backed  him  up,  and  con- 


MIEABEAU  71 

ago  predicted  that  he  might  go  far,  mean  meagre  mortal  though 
he  was ;  for  Doubt  dwelt  not  in  him. 

Under  which  circumstances  ought  not  Royalty  likewise  to 
cease  doubting,  and  begin  deciding  and  acting?  Royalty  has 
always  that  sure  trump-card  in  its  hand  :  Flight  out  of  Paris. 
Which  sure  trump-card  Royalty,  as  we  see,  keeps  ever  and  anon 
clutching  at,  grasping ;  and  swashes  it  forth  tentatively ;  yet 
never  tables  it,  still  puts  it  back  again.  Play  it,  O  Royalty  !  If 
there  be  a  chance  left,  this  seems  it,  and  verily  the  last  chance ; 
and  now  every  hour  is  rendering  this  a  doubtfuller.  Alas,  one 
would  so  fain  both  fly  and  not  fly  ;  play  one's  card  and  have  it  to 
play.  Royalty,  in  all  human  likelihood,  will  not  play  its  trump- 
card  till  the  honours,  one  after  one,  be  mainly  lost ;  and  such 
trumping  of  it  pi'ove  to  be  the  sudden  finish  of  the  game ! 

Here  accordingly  a  question  always  arises  ;  of  the  prophetic 
sort ;  which  cannot  now  be  answered.  Suppose  Mirabeau,  with 
whom  Royalty  takes  deep  counsel,  as  with  a  Prime  Minister  that 
cannot  yet  legally  avow  himself  as  such,  had  got  his  arrangements 
completed  ?  Arrangements  he  has  ;  far-stretching  plans  that  dawn 
fitfully  on  us,  by  fragments,  in  the  confused  darkness.  Thirty 
Departments  ready  to  sign  loyal  Addresses,  of  prescribed  tenor  : 
King  carried  out  of  Paris,  but  only  to  Compiegne  and  Rouen, 
hardly  to  Metz,  since,  once  for  all,  no  Emigrant  rabble  shall  take 
the  lead  in  it :  National  Assembly  consenting,  by  dint  of  loyal 
Addresses,  by  management,  by  force  of  Bouille,  to  hear  reason, 
and  follow  thither  !  ^  Was  it  so,  on  these  terms,  that  Jacobinism 
and  Mirabeau  were  then  to  grapple,  in  their  Hercules-and-Typhon 
duel ;  Death  inevitable  for  the  one  or  the  other  ?  The  duel 
itself  is  determined  on,  and  sure  :  but  on  what  terras ;  much 
more,  with  what  issue,  we  in  vain  guess.     It  is  vague  darkness 

tinually  agitated  for  the  abolition  of  all  property  qualification.  When  the  Assembly 
refused,  as  it  sometimes  did,  to  receive  their  petitions,  they  placarded  the  streets 
with  them.  But  three  fatal  motions,  passed  in  April  and  May,  were  all  proposed 
by  Robespierre  in  the  interests  of  Anarchy, (i. )  that  of  April  yth,  that  for  four  years  after 
the  dissolution  of  the  Assembly  no  one  who  had  sat  in  it  could  become  a  Minister 
of  the  Crown,  (ii.)  that  of  April  29th,  removing  the  property  qualilication  for  service 
in  the  National  Guard,  (iii.)  that  of  May  i6th,  that  no  member  of  the  Assembly  be 
eligible  for  the  next  Assembly.] 

'  See  Fils  Adoptif,  vii.  i,  6  ;  Dumont,  c.  11,  12,  14. 


72  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

all :  unknown  what  is  to  be ;  unknown  even  what  has  already 
been.  The  giant  Mirabeau  walks  in  darkness,  as  we  said  ;  com- 
panionless,  on  wild  ways  :  what  his  thoughts  during  these  months 
were,  no  record  of  Biographer,  nor  vague  Fils  Adoptif,  will  now 
ever  disclose. 

To  us,  endeavouring  to  cast  his  horoscope,  it  of  course  remains 
doubly  vague.  There  is  one  Herculean  Man ;  in  internecine 
duel  with  him,  there  is  Monster  after  Monster.  Emigrant  No- 
blesse return,  sword  on  thigh,  vaunting  of  their  Loyalty  never 
sullied  ;  descending  from  the  air,  like  Harpy-swarms  with  ferocity, 
with  obscene  greed.  Earthward  there  is  the  Typhon  of  Anarchy, 
Political,  Religious  ;  sprawling  hundred-headed,  say  with  Twenty- 
five  million  heads  ;  wide  as  the  area  of  Fi'ance  ;  fierce  as  Frenzy  ; 
strong  in  very  Hunger.  With  these  shall  the  Serpent-queller  do 
battle  continually,  and  expect  no  rest. 

As  for  the  King,  he  as  usual  will  go  wavering  chameleonlike ; 
changing  colour  and  purpose  with  the  colour  of  his  environment ; 
— good  for  no  Kingly  use.  On  one  royal  person,  on  the  Queen 
only,  can  Mirabeau  perhaps  place  dependence.  It  is  possible, 
the  greatness  of  this  man,  not  unskilled  too  in  blandishments, 
courtiership,  and  graceful  adroitness,  might,  with  most  legitimate 
sorcery,  fascinate  the  volatile  Queen,  and  fix  her  to  him.  She 
has  courage  for  all  noble  daring ;  an  eye  and  a  heart :  the  soul  of 
Theresa's  Daughter.  '  Faut-il  done,  Is  it  fated  then,'  she  passion- 
ately writes  to  her  Brother,  '  that  I  with  the  blood  I  am  come 
of,  with  the  sentiments  I  have,  must  live  and  die  among  such 
mortals  .-' '  ^  Alas,  poor  Princess,  Yes.  '  She  is  the  only  ma7i,'  as 
Mirabeau  observes,  'whom  his  Majesty  has  about  him.'  ^  Of  one 
other  man  Mirabeau  is  still  surer :  of  himself.  There  lie  his 
resources  ;  sufficient  or  insufficient. 

1  Fils  Adoptit  ubi  supra,  vii.  335.  [The  passage  is  from  a  letter  of  the  Queen  to 
Mercy,  Sept.  12th  1791.  See  Lettres  de  Marie  Antoinette,  Recueil  des  Lettres 
Authtntiques  de  la  Reine,  public  par  la  Soci6t6  de  I'Hist.  Contemp.,  par  MM.  de 
la  Rocheterre  et  de  Beaucourt,  Paris,  1896,  ii.  307.  The  original  is  in  the  Austrian 
Archives,  and  there  is  a  copy  in  the  Archives  at  Paris.] 

-  [The  expression  occurs  in  Mirabeau's  2nd  note  for  the  Court,  June  20th  '90 
(Bacourt,  ii.  38).  Cf.  also  Mirabeau's  41st  note  (Bacourt,  ii.  317),  '  The  Queen 
vi'ill  be  the  first  object  of  attack  because  they  know  she  is  the  advanced  guard  of  the 
King.'] 


MIRABEAU  73 

Dim  and  great  to  the  eye  of  Prophecy  looks  that  future.  A 
perpetual  life-aiid-death  battle  ;  confusion  from  above  and  from 
below ; — mere  confused  darkness  for  us ;  with  here  and  there 
some  streak  of  faint  lurid  light.  We  see  a  King  perhaps  laid 
aside  ;  not  tonsured,  tonsuring  is  out  of  fashion  now  ;  but  say, 
sent  away  anywhither,  with  handsome  annual  allowance,  and 
stock  of  smith-tools.  We  see  a  Queen  and  Dauphin,  Regent  and 
Minor ;  a  Queen  '  mounted  on  horseback,'  in  the  din  of  battles, 
with  Moriamur  pro  rege  nostra  !  '  Such  a  day,'  Mirabeau  writes, 
'may  come.' 

Din  of  battles,  wars  more  than  civil,  confusion  from  above  and 
from  below  :  in  such  environment  the  eye  of  Prophecy  sees  Comte 
de  Mirabeau,  like  some  Cardinal  de  Retz,  stormfully  maintain 
himself;  with  head  all-devising,  heart  all-daring,  if  not  victorious, 
yet  unvanquished,  while  life  is  left  him.  The  specialities  and 
issues  of  it,  no  eye  of  Prophecy  can  guess  at :  it  is  clouds,  we 
repeat,  and  tempestuous  night ;  and  in  the  middle  of  it,  now 
visible,  far-darting,  now  labouring  in  eclipse,  is  Mirabeau  indomit- 
ably struggling  to  be  Cloud-Compeller !— One  can  say  that,  had 
Mirabeau  lived,  the  History  of  France  and  of  the  World  had 
been  different.  Further,  that  the  man  would  have  needed,  as 
few  men  ever  did,  the  whole  compass  of  that  same  '  Art  of 
Daring,  Art  d'Oser,'  which  he  so  prized;  and  likewise  that  he, 
above  all  men  then  living,  would  have  practised  and  manifested 
it.  Finally,  that  some  substantiality,  and  no  empty  simulacrunti 
of  a  formula,  would  have  been  the  result  realised  by  him  :  a 
result  you  could  have  loved,  a  result  you  could  have  hated  ;  by 
no  likelihood,  a  result  you  could  only  have  rejected  with  closed 
lips,  and  swept  into  quick  forgetfulness  forever.  Had  Mirabeau 
lived  one  other  year  !  ^ 

i[Yes  ;  but  it  is  an  interesting  question  on  which  side  Mirabeau  would  have  been 
found  at  the  epoch  of  the  flight  to  Varennes.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  in  his  anger  at 
the  way  the  Court  neglected  his  earnest,  but  not  very  practical,  advice  he  would 
have  been  found  rather  with  Danton  than  with  Barnave.] 


74  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 


CHAPTER  VII 

DEATH  OF  MIRABEAU 

But  Mirabeau  could  not  live  another  year,  any  more  than  he 
could  live  another  thousand  years.  Men's  years  are  numbered, 
and  the  tale  of  Mirabeau's  was  now  complete.  Important  or 
unimportant  ;  to  be  mentioned  in  World-History  for  some 
centuries,  or  not  to  be  mentioned  there  beyond  a  day  or  two, — 
it  matters  not  to  peremptory  Fate.  From  amid  the  press  of 
ruddy  busy  Life,  the  Pale  Messenger  beckons  silently  :  wide- 
spreading  interests,  projects,  salvation  of  French  Monarchies, 
what  thing  soever  man  has  on  hand,  he  must  suddenly  quit  it 
all,  and  go.  Wert  thou  saving  French  Monarchies ;  wert  thou 
blacking  shoes  on  the  Pont  Neuf !  The  most  important  of  men 
cannot  stay ;  did  the  World's  History  depend  on  an  hour,  that 
hour  is  not  to  be  given.  Whereby,  indeed,  it  comes  that  these 
same  woidd-have-beens  are  mostly  a  vanity ;  and  the  World's 
History  could  never  in  the  least  be  what  it  would,  or  might,  or 
should,  by  any  manner  of  potentiality,  but  simply  and  altogether 
what  it  /.y. 

The  fierce  wear  and  tear  of  such  an  existence  has  wasted  out 
the  giant  oaken  strength  of  Mirabeau.  A  ft'et  and  fever  that 
keeps  heart  and  brain  on  fire  :  excess  of  effort,  of  excitement ; 
excess  of  all  kinds  :  labour  incessant,  almost  beyond  credibility ! 
'  If  I  had  not  lived  with  him,'  says  Dumont,  '  I  never  should 
'  have  known  what  a  man  can  make  of  one  day ;  what  things 
'  may  be  placed  within  the  interval  of  twelve  hours.  A  day  for 
'  this  man  was  more  than  a  week  or  a  month  is  for  others  :  the 
'  mass  of  things  he  guided  on  together  was  prodigious  ;  from  the 
'  scheming  to  the  executing  not  a  moment  lost.' — "  Monsieur  le 
Comte,"  said  his  Secretary  to  him  once,  "what  you  require  is 
impossible." — "Impossible!" — answered  he,  starting  from  his 
chair,  "  Xe  me  dites  jamais  ce  bete  de  mot,  Never  name  to  me  that 
blockhead  of  a  word."  ^  And  then  the  social  repasts  ;  the 
^  Dumont,  p.  218. 


DEATH  OF  MIRABEAU  75 

dinner  which  he  gives  as  Commandant  of  National  Guards, 
which  '  cost  five  hundred  pounds  ; '  alas,  and  '  the  Syrens  of  the 
Opera ; '  and  all  the  ginger  that  is  hot  in  the  mouth  : — down 
w^hat  a  course  is  this  man  hurled!  Cannot  Mirabeau  stop; 
cannot  he  fly,  and  save  himself  alive  ?  No  !  There  is  a  Nessus' 
Shirt  on  this  Hercules  ;  he  must  storm  and  burn  there,  without 
rest,  till  he  be  consumed.  Human  strength,  never  so  Herculean, 
has  its  measure.  Herald  shadows  flit  pale  across  the  fire-brain 
of  Mirabeau  ;  heralds  of  the  pale  repose.  While  he  tosses  and 
storms,  straining  every  nerve,  in  that  sea  of  ambition  and  confu- 
sion, there  comes,  sombre  and  still,  a  monition  that  for  him  the 
issue  of  it  will  be  swift  death. 

In  January  last,  you  might  see  him  as  President  of  the 
Assembly ;  *  his  neck  wrapt  in  linen  cloths,  at  the  evening 
session : '  there  was  sick  heat  of  the  blood,  alternate  darkening 
and  flashing  in  the  eyesight ;  he  had  to  apply  leeches,  after  the 
morning  labour,  and  preside  bandaged.  '  At  parting  he  embraced 
me,'  says  Dumont,  '  with  an  emotion  I  had  never  seen  in  him  : 
' "  I  am  dying,  my  friend  ;  dying  as  by  slow  fire  ;  ^  we  shall 
'  perhaps  not  meet  again.  When  I  am  gone,  they  will  know  what 
'  the  value  of  me  was.  The  miseries  I  have  held  back  will  burst 
'  from  all  sides  on  France."  '  Sickness  gives  louder  warning  ; 
but  cannot  be  listened  to.  On  the  27th  day  of  March,  proceed- 
ing towards  the  Assembly,  he  had  to  seek  rest  and  help  in 
Friend  de  Lamarck's,  by  the  road ;  and  lay  there,  for  an  hour, 
half-fainted,  stretched  on  a  sofa.  To  the  Assembly  nevertheless 
he  went,  as  if  in  spite  of  Destiny  itself;  spoke,  loud  and  eager, 
five  several  times ;  -  then  quitted  the  Tribune — forever.  He 
steps  out,  utterly  exhausted,  into  the  Tuileries  Gardens ;  many 
people  press  round  him,  as  usual,  with  applications,  memorials  ; 
he  says  to  the  Friend  who  was  with  him  :  "  Take  me  out  of  this  !  " 

^  Dumont,  p.  185.  ['  By  slow  fire  ;  '  the  words  are  a  la  peine,  i.e.,  '  by  torture  ' 
(Dumont  in  loc.  cit.).\ 

-  [Mirabeau's  last  speech  was  on  the  subject  of  the  control  of  the  Mines  of  France. 
La  Marck  had  large  interests  in  French  mines,  and  it  was  to  oblige  his  friend  that 
Mirabeau  made  the  effort  to  speak  on  the  subject.  Pellenc  prepared  the  speech 
for  him  (Bacourt,  i.  248).  Lafayette  (iii.  47)  says  it  was  only  remarkable  as 
hastening  on  his  death.] 


76  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

And  so,  on  the  last  day  of  March  1791,  endless  anxious  multi- 
tudes beset  the  Rue  de  la  Chaussee  d'Antin ;  incessantly  inquir- 
ing ;  within  doors  there,  in  that  House  numbered,  in  our  time, 
42,  the  overwearied  giant  has  fallen  down,  to  die.^  Crowds  of 
all  parties  and  kinds ;  of  all  ranks  from  the  King  to  the  meanest 
man  !  The  King  sends  publicly  twice  a-day  to  inquire  ;  privately 
besides  :  from  the  world  at  large  there  is  no  end  of  inquiring. 
'  A  written  bulletin  is  handed  out  every  three  hours,'  is  copied 
and  circulated  ;  in  the  end,  it  is  printed.  The  People  spontane- 
ously keep  silence  ;  no  carriage  shall  enter  with  its  noise  :  there 
is  crowding  pressure ;  but  the  Sister  of  Mirabeau  is  reverently 
recognised,  and  has  free  way  made  for  her.  The  People  stand 
mute,  heart-stricken ;  to  all  it  seems  as  if  a  great  calamity  were 
nigh :  as  if  the  last  man  of  France,  who  could  have  swayed 
these  coming  troubles,  lay  there  at  hand-grips  with  the  unearthly 
Power. 

The  silence  of  a  whole  People,  the  wakeful  toil  of  Cabanis, 
Friend  and  Physician,  skills  not :  on  Saturday,  the  second  day  of 
April,  Mirabeau  feels  that  the  last  of  the  Days  has  risen  for  him  ; 
that  on  this  day  he  has  to  depart  and  be  no  more.  His  death  is 
Titanic,  as  his  life  has  been !  Lit  up,  for  the  last  time,  in  the 
glare  of  coming  dissolution,  the  mind  of  the  man  is  all  glowing 
and  burning  ;  utters  itself  in  sayings,  such  as  men  long  remember. 
He  longs  to  live,  yet  acquiesces  in  death,  argues  not  with  the 
inexorable.  His  speech  is  wild  and  wondrous :  unearthly  Phan- 
tasms dancing  now  their  torch- dance  round  his  soul ;  the  soul 
itself  looking  out,  fire-radiant,  motionless,  girt  together  for  that 
great  hour !  At  times  comes  a  beam  of  light  from  him  on  the 
world  he  is  quitting.  "  I  carry  in  my  heart  the  death-dirge  of 
the  French  Monarchy ;  the  dead  remains  of  it  will  now  be  the 
spoil  of  the  factious."  Or  again,  when  he  heard  the  cannon  fire, 
what  is  characteristic  too :  "  Have  we  the  Achilles'  Funeral 
already .'' "  So  likewise,  while  some  friend  is  supporting  him  : 
"  Yes,  support  that  head !  would  I  could  bequeath  it  thee ! " 
For  the  man  dies  as  he  has  lived ;    self-conscious,   conscious  of 

^  Fils  Adoptif,  viii.  420-79. 


\ 


DEATH  OF  MIRABEAU  77 

a  world  looking  on.  He  gazes  forth  on  the  young  Spring,  which 
for  him  will  never  be  Summer.  The  Sun  has  risen  ;  he  says,  "  Si 
ce  ii' est  pas  la  Dieit,  c'est  du  mains  son  cousin  gennain."  ^ — Death  has 
mastered  the  out-works  ;  power  of  speech  is  gone  ;  the  citadel  of 
the  heart  still  holding  out :  the  moribund  giant,  passionately,  by 
sign,  demands  paper  and  pen  ;  writes  his  passionate  demand  for 
opium,  to  end  these  agonies.  The  sorrowful  Doctor  shakes  his 
head :  Donnir,  '  To  sleep,'  writes  the  other,  passionately  pointing 
at  it  I  So  dies  a  gigantic  Heathen  and  Titan  ;  stumbling  blindly, 
undismayed,  down  to  his  rest.  At  half-past  eight  in  the  morn- 
ing. Doctor  Petit,  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  says,  "  //  nc 
soiiffre  phis."     His  suffering  and  his  working  are  now  ended. 

Even  so,  ye  silent  Patriot  multitudes,  all  ye  men  of  France  ; 
this  man  is  rapt  away  from  you.  He  has  fallen  suddenly,  with- 
out bending  till  he  broke ;  as  a  tower  falls,  smitten  by  sudden 
lightning.  His  word  ye  shall  hear  no  more,  his  guidance  follow 
no  more, — The  multitudes  depart,  heartstruck  ;  spread  the  sad 
tidings.  How  touching  is  the  loyalty  of  men  to  their  Sovereign 
Man  !  All  theatres,  public  amusements  close  ;  no  joyful  meeting 
can  be  held  in  these  nights,  joy  is  not  for  them  :  the  People 
break  in  upon  private  dancing-parties,  and  sullenly  command 
that  they  cease.  Of  such  dancing-parties  apparently  but  two 
came  to  light ;  and  these  also  have  gone  out.  The  gloom  is 
universal  ;  never  in  this  city  was  such  sorrow  for  one  death  ; 
never  since  that  old  night  when  Louis  XII.  departed,  'and  the 

*  Crieurs  des  Corps  went  sounding  their  bells,  and  crying  along 

*  the  streets  :  Le  hon  roi  Louis,  pere  du  peup/e,  est  mort,  The  good 
'  King  Louis,  Father  of  the  People,  is  dead  ! '  "^  King  Mirabeau 
is  now  the  lost  King  ;  and  one  may  say  with  little  exaggeration, 
all  the  People  mourns  for  him. 

1  Fils  Adoptif,  viii.  450 ;  Journal  de  la  maladie  et  de  la  mort  de  Mirabeau  par  J. 
G.  Cabanis,  Paris,  1803.  [Cabanis  says  he  died  of  u/ie  affectioji  injlammatoire  du 
diaphragme,  provoqui!c  par  unc  hiimcur  rhiiniatismale,  goutteuse,  vague.  He 
had  long  been  subject  to  both  kidney  and  liver  attacks,  and  to  ophthalmia.  Soon 
after  the  meeting  of  the  States-General,  he  had  a  bad  attack  of  jaundice  which  had 
never  been  properly  cured  (Lonit-nie,  v.  333,  sqq.).  Malouet  (ii.  108)  speaks  of  the 
germ  of  the  malady  being  visible  for  two  months  before  his  death,  his  eyes  being 
all  inflamed  and  bloodshot,  and  his  appearance  horrible.] 

-  H6nault,  Abrege  Chronologique,  p.  429. 


78  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

For  three  days  there  is  low  wide  moan ;  weeping  in  the 
National  Assembly  itself.  The  streets  are  all  mournful ;  orators 
mounted  on  the  homes,  with  large  silent  audience,  preaching  the 
funeral  sermon  of  the  dead.  Let  no  coachman  whip  fast,  distrac- 
tively  with  his  rolling  wheels,  or  almost  at  all,  through  these 
groups  !  His  traces  may  be  cut ;  himself  and  his  fare,  as  incurable 
Aristocrats,  hurled  sulkily  into  the  kennels.  The  bournestone 
orators  speak  as  it  is  given  them ;  the  Sansculottic  People,  with 
its  rude  soul,  listens  eager, — as  men  will  to  any  Sermon,  or 
SeiTiio,  when  it  is  a  spoken  Word  meaning  a  Thing,  and  not 
a  Babblement  meaning  No-thing.  In  the  Restaurateur's  of  the 
Palais- Royal,  the  waiter  remarks,  "Fine  weather.  Monsieur:" — 
"Yes,  my  friend,"  answers  the  ancient  Man  of  Letters,  "  verj' 
fine  ;  but  Mirabeau  is  dead."  Hoarse  rhythmic  threnodies  come 
also  from  the  throats  of  ballad-singers ;  are  sold  on  gray-white 
paper  at  a  sou  each.^  But  of  Portraits,  engraved,  painted,  hewn 
and  written  ;  of  Eulogies,  Reminiscences,  Biographies,  nay,  Fau- 
deiilles,  Dramas  and  Melodramas,  in  all  Provinces  of  France, 
there  will,  tlirough  these  coming  months,  be  the  due  immeasur- 
able crop ;  thick  as  the  leaves  of  Spring.  Nor,  that  a  tincture 
of  burlesque  might  be  in  it,  is  Gobel's  Episcopal  Mandement 
wanting  ;  goose  Gobel,  who  has  just  been  made  Constitutional 
Bishop  of  Paris.  A  Mandement  wherein  Ca  ira  alternates  very 
strangely  with  Nomine  Domini ;  and  you  are,  with  a  grave  counte- 
nance, invited  to  'rejoice  at  possessing  in  the  midst  of  you  a 
'body  of  Prelates  created  by  Mirabeau,  zealous  followers  of  his 
'doctrine,  faithful  imitators  of  his  virtues.' ^  So  speaks,  and 
cackles  manifold,  the  Sorrow  of  France ;  wailing  articulately, 
inarticulately,  as  it  can,  that  a  Sovereign  Man  is  snatched  away. 
In  the  National  Assembly,  when  difficult  questions  are  astir,  all 

'  Fils  Adoptif,  viii.  1.  lo  ;  Newspapers  and  Excerpts  (in  Hist.  Pari.  ix.  366-402). 

2  Hist.  Pari.  ix.  405.  [Mandement  de  J.  B.  J.  Gobel  {sic),  Eveque  de  Lydda 
et  de  Paris  sur  la  mort  d'Honor^  Riquetti-Mirabeau  ;  a  Paris  ;  se  vend  a  I'arche- 
vech^  1791-  This  pamphlet  of  loA  pages,  signed  J.  B,  Gobel  with  the  words 
Courte-Queue  secretaire  appended  to  the  signature,  is  printed  :?'//  exfensoin  Hist. 
Pari.  It  reads  like  a  satire,  and  probably  really  is  one,  and  not  a  formal  pro- 
nouncement of  Gobel's  at  all.  It  is  not  mentioned  in  any  biographical  notice  of 
Gobel ;  and  "  Mr.  Short-tail,  Secretary  "  looks  suspicious.] 


DEATH  OF  MIEABEAU  79 

eyes  will  'turn  mechanically  to  the  place  where  Mirabeau  sat,' — 
and  Mirabeau  is  absent  now. 

On  the  third  evening  of  the  lamentation,  the  fourth  of  April, 
there  is  solemn  Public  Funeral ;  such  as  deceased  mortal  seldom 
had.  Procession  of  a  league  in  length  ;  of  mourners  reckoned 
loosely  at  a  hvmdred  thousand.  All  roofs  are  thronged  with  on- 
lookers, all  windows,  lamp-irons,  branches  of  trees.  '  Sadness  is 
painted  on  every  countenance  ;  many  persons  weep.'  There  is 
double  hedge  of  National  Guards  ;  there  is  National  Assembly 
in  a  body ;  Jacobin  Society,  and  Societies ;  King's  Ministers, 
Municipals,  and  all  Notabilities,  Patriot  or  Aristocrat.  Bouille 
is  noticeable  there,  '  with  his  hat  on ; '  say,  hat  drawn  over  his 
brow,  hiding  many  thoughts  !  Slow-wending,  in  religious  silence, 
the  Procession  of  a  league  in  length,  under  the  level  sun-rays, 
for  it  is  five  o'clock,  moves  and  marches  :  with  its  sable  plumes  ; 
itself  in  a  rehgious  silence  ;  but,  by  fits  with  the  muffled  roll  of 
drums,  by  fits  with  some  long-drawn  wail  of  music,  and  strange 
new  clangour  of  trombones,  and  metallic  dirge-voice  ;  amid  the 
infinite  hum  of  men.  In  the  Church  of  Saint- Eustache,  there  is 
fiineral  oration  by  Cerutti  ;  and  discharge  of  fire-arms,  which 
'brings  down  pieces  of  the  plaster.'  Thence,  forward  again  to 
the  Church  of  Sainte-Genevieve ;  ^  which  has  been  consecrated, 
by  supreme  decree,  on  the  spur  of  this  time,  into  a  Pantheon  for 
the  Great  Men  of  the  Fatherland,  Aiix  Grands  Homines  la  Patrie 
reconnaissante.  Hardly  at  midnight  is  the  business  done  ;  and 
Mirabeau  left  in  his  dark  dwelling :  first  tenant  of  that  Father- 
land's Pantheon. 

Tenant,  alas,  who  inhabits  but  at  will,  and  shall  be  cast  out.^ 
For,  in  these  days  of  convulsion  and  disjection,  not  even  the  dust 


1  [The  Church  of  Sainte-Genevieve,  which  was  intended  to  be  the  greatest  monu- 
ment of  eighteenth  century  art,  was  begun  in  1747,  but  the  construction  went  on 
very  slowly,  and  it  was  not  really  completed  in  1789.  The  decree  consecrating  it 
Aux  Grands  Hommes,  etc.,  is  of  April  4th  '91,  and  the  architect,  Quatremere,  was 
ordered  to  carry  out  the  necessary  alterations.  Mirabeau's  bones  were  removed 
from  the  PaiitlUon  to  make  room  for  Marat,  Sept.  21st  '94.  By  decree  of  the 
Convention  Feb.  8th  '95  no  one  was  to  be  buried  in  the  Panthdon  till  ten  years  after 
his  death  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  68).] 

^[Sept.  2ist  '94.] 


80  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

of  the  dead  is  permitted  to  rest.  Voltaire's  bones  are,  by  and 
by,  to  be  carried  from  their  stolen  grave  in  the  Abbey  of  Scellieres,^ 
to  an  eager  stealing  grave,  in  Paris  his  birth-city :  all  mortals 
processioning  and  perorating  there  ;  cars  drawn  by  eight  white 
horses,  goadsters  in  classical  costume,  with  fillets  and  wheat-ears 
enough ; — though  the  weather  is  of  the  wettest.^  Evangelist 
Jean  Jacques  too,  as  is  most  proper,  must  be  dug  up  from  Er- 
menonville,  and  processioned,  with  pomp,  with  sensibility,  to 
the  Pantheon  of  the  Fatherland.^  He  and  others :  while  again 
Mirabeau,  we  say,  is  cast  forth  from  it,  happily  incapable  of  being 
replaced  ;  and  rests  now,  irrecognisable,  reburied  hastily  at  dead 
of  night  '  in  the  central  part  of  the  Churchyard  Sainte-Catherine, 
'in  the  Suburb  Saint  Marceau,'  to  be  disturbed  no  further. 

So  blazes  out,  farseen,  a  Man's  Life,  and  becomes  ashes  and  a 
caput  inoiiuuvi,  in  this  World-Pyre,  which  we  name  French  Revo- 
lution :  not  the  first  that  consumed  itself  there  ;  nor,  by  thousands 
and  many  millions,  the  last !  A  man  who  '  had  swallowed  all 
formulas  ; '  who,  in  these  strange  times  and  circumstances,  felt 
called  to  live  Titanically,  and  also  to  die  so.  As  he,  for  his  part, 
had  swallowed  all  formulas,  what  Formula  is  there,  never  so 
comprehensive,  that  will  express  truly  the  plus  and  the  minus  of 
him,  give  us  the  accurate  net-result  of  him .''  There  is  hitherto 
none  such.  Moralities  not  a  few  must  shriek  condemnatory  over 
this  Mirabeau ;  the  Morality  by  which  he  could  be  judged  has 
not  yet  got  uttered  in  the  speech  of  men.  We  will  say  this  of 
him  again  :  That  he  is  a  Reality  and  no  Simulacrum  ;  a  living 
Son  of  Nature  our  general  Mother ;  not  a  hollow  Artifice,  and 
mechanism  of  Conventionalities,  son  of  nothing,  brother  to  nothing. 
In  which  little  word,  let  the  earnest  man,  walking  sorrowful  in 

J  [July  nth  '91.  Voltaire  (vid.  siipr.,  i.  53)  had  not  unnaturally  been  refused  a 
Catholic  burial.  M.  de  Villette,  the  close  friend  of  his  old  age,  began  agitating 
for  a  public  funeral  for  him  ;  the  matter  was  brought  before  the  Assembly  in 
May  '91,  and  on  May  30th  it  was  decreed  to  remove  his  remains  from  the 
Abbey  of  Sellieres  to  the  Pauih^o}i.  Accordingly  on  July  nth  the  Fete  of  his 
funeral  was  celebrated  with  great  pomp  (Robinet,  Le  Mouvement  Religieux,  i.  527, 
and  Rev.  de  la  R6v.  vi.  92).] 

"^  Moniteur,  du  13  Juillet  1791. 

3  Moniteur,  du  18  Septembre  1794.  See  also  du  30  Aoftt,  &c.  1791.  [The  real 
date  is  Oct.  i6th  1791.] 


DEATH  OF  MIRABEAU  81 

a  world  mostly  of  '  Stuffed  Clothes-suits/  that  chatter  and  grin 
meaningless  on  him,  quite  ghastly  to  the  earnest  soul, — think 
what  significance  there  is  ! 

Of  men  who,  in  such  sense,  are  alive,  and  see  with  eyes,  the 
number  is  now  not  great :  it  may  be  well,  if  in  this  huge  French 
Revolution  itself,  with  its  all-developing  fury,  we  find  some  Three. 
Mortals  driven  rabid  we  find ;  sputtering  the  acridest  logic ; 
baring  their  breast  to  the  battle-hail,  their  neck  to  the  guillotine  : 
— of  whom  it  is  so  painful  to  say  that  they,  too,  are  still,  in  good 
part,  manufactured  Formalities,  not  Facts  but  Hearsays ! 

Honour  to  the  strong  man,  in  these  ages,  who  has  shaken 
himself  loose  of  shams,  and  is  something.  For  in  the  way  of 
being  worthy,  the  first  condition  surely  is  that  one  he.  Let  Cant 
cease,  at  all  risks  and  at  all  cost :  till  Cant  cease,  nothing  else 
can  begin.  Of  human  criminals,  in  these  centuries,  writes  the 
Moralist,  I  find  but  one  unforgivable  :  the  Quack.  '  Hateful  to 
God,'  as  divine  Dante  sings,  '  and  to  the  Enemies  of  God, 

'  A  Dio  spiacente  ed  a'  nemici  sui  /' 

But  whoever  will,  with  sympathy,  which  is  the  first  essential 
towards  insight,  look  at  this  questionable  Mirabeau,  may  find 
that  there  lay  verily  in  him,  as  the  basis  of  all,  a  Sincerity,  a 
great  free  Earnestness ;  nay  call  it  Honesty,  for  the  man  did 
before  all  things  see,  with  that  clear  flashing  vision,  into  what 
was,  into  what  existed  as  fact ;  and  did,  with  his  wild  heart, 
follow  that  and  no  other.  Whereby  on  what  ways  soever  he 
travels  and  struggles,  often  enough  falling,  he  is  still  a  brother 
man.  Hate  him  not ;  thou  canst  not  hate  him  !  Shining  through 
such  soil  and  tarnish,  and  now  victorious  effulgent,  and  oftenest 
struggling  eclipsed,  the  light  of  genius  itself  is  in  this  man ; 
which  was  never  yet  base  and  hateful ;  but  at  worst  was  lamentable, 
loveable  with  pity.  They  say  that  he  was  ambitious,  that  he 
wanted  to  be  Ministei'.  It  is  most  true.  And  was  he  not  simply 
the  one  man  in  France  who  could  have  done  any  good  as  Minister .'' 
Not  vanity  alone,  not  pride  alone  ;  far  from  that !  Wild  burstings 
of  affection  were  in  this  great  heart ;  of  fierce  lightning,  and  soft 
VOL.    II.  6 


82  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

dew  of  pity.  So  sunk  bemired  in  wretchedest  defacements,  it 
may  be  said  of  him^  like  the  Magdalen  of  old,  that  he  loved 
much  :  his  Father,  the  harshest  of  old  crabbed  men,  he  loved 
with  warmth,  with  veneration. 

Be  it  that  his  falls  and  follies  are  manifold, — as  himself  often 
lamented  even  with  tears. ^  Alas,  is  not  the  Life  of  every  such 
man  already  a  poetic  Tragedy  ;  made  up  '  of  Fate  and  of  one's  own 
Deservings,'  of  Schicksal  und  eigene  Schuld ;  full  of  the  elements 
of  Pity  and  Fear  }  This  brother  man,  if  not  Epic  for  us,  is  Tragic  ; 
if  not  great,  is  large  ;  large  in  his  qualities,  world-large  in  his 
destinies.  Whom  other  men,  recognising  him  as  such,  may, 
through  long  times,  remember,  and  draw  nigh  to  examine  and 
consider  :  these,  in  their  several  dialects,  will  say  of  him  and  sing 
of  him, — till  the  right  thing  be  said  ;  and  so  the  Formula  that 
can  judge  him  be  no  longer  an  undiscovered  one. 

Here  then  the  wild  Gabriel  Honore  drops  from  the  tissue  of 
our  History  ;  not  without  a  tragic  farewell.  He  is  gone  :  the 
flower  of  the  wild  Riquetti  or  Arrighetti  kindred ;  which  seems 
as  if  in  him,  with  one  last  effort,  it  had  done  its  best,  and  then 
expired,  or  sunk  down  to  the  undistinguished  level.  Crabbed 
old  Marquis  Mirabeau,  the  Friend  of  Men,  sleeps  sound.  The 
Bailli  Mirabeau,^  worthy  Uncle,  will  soon  die  forlorn,  alone. 
Barrel -Mirabeau,  already  gone  across  the  Rhine,  his  Regiment  of 
Emigrants  will  drive  nigh  desperate.  '  Barrel- Mirabeau,'  says  a 
biographer  of  his,  '  went  indignantly  across  the  Rhine,  and  drilled 
'  Emigrant  Regiments.  But  as  he  sat  one  morning  in  his  tent,^ 
'  sour  of  stomach  doubtless  and  of  heart,  meditating  in  Tartarean 
'  humour  on  the  turn  things  took,  a  certain  Captain  or  Subaltern 
'  demanded  admittance  on  business.  Such  Captain  is  refused ; 
'  he  again  demands,  with  refusal ;  and  then  again ;  till  Colonel 
'Viscount  Barrel- Mirabeau,  blazing  up  into  a  mere  burning 
'  brandy- barrel,  clutches  his  sword,  and  tumbles  out  on  this  ca- 

1  Dumont,  p.  199.  [La  Marck  says  '  a  violent  and  fiery  temper  ;  a  great  opinion 
of  his  high  birth  ;  bitter  chagrin  at  his  poverty  and  follies  ;  pride  his  master 
passion.'     (Bacourt,  i.  104.)] 

2 [The  Bailli  retired  to  Malta  in  1792  and  died  i8th  April  1794.] 

'[At  Freiburg  Sept.  15th  1792.] 


DEATH  OF  MIRABEAU  83 

'  naiUe  of  an  intruder, — alas,  on  the  canaille  of  an  intruder's  sword- 
'  point,  who  had  drawn  with  swift  dexterity  ;  and  dies,  and  the 
*  Newspapers  name  it  apoplesy  and  alanning  accident.'  So  die 
the  Mirabeaus. 

New  Mirabeaus  one  hears  not  of;  the  wild  kindred,  as  we 
said,  is  gone  out  with  this  its  greatest.  As  families  and  kindreds 
sometimes  do  ;  producing,  after  long  ages  of  unnoted  notability, 
some  living  quintessence  of  all  the  qualities  they  had,  to  flame 
forth  as  a  man  world-noted  ;  after  whom  they  rest  as  if  exhausted  ; 
the  sceptre  passing  to  others.  The  chosen  Last  of  the  Mirabeaus 
is  gone  ;  the  chosen  man  of  France  is  gone.  It  was  he  who  shook 
old  France  from  its  basis  ;  and,  as  if  with  his  single  hand,  has 
held  it  toppling  there,  still  un fallen.  What  things  depended  on 
that  one  man !  He  is  as  a  ship  suddenly  shivered  on  sunk  rocks : 
much  swims  on  the  waste  waters,  far  from  help.^ 

^  [While  retaining  all  my  admiration  for  the  force  and  talent  of  Mirabeau,  and 
allowing  immense  weight  to  the  devoted  friendship  felt  for  him  by  such  an  honour- 
able man  as  La  Marck,  my  opinion  tends  more  and  more  towards  that  of  M. 
Lom^nie  ;  and  even  to  that  of  Morris,  recorded  in  a  letter  to  Washington  in  Feb. 
'92  (i.  502),  "  that  he  was  beyond  all  controversy  one  of  the  most  unprincipled 
scoundrels  that  ever  lived  ;  "  and  towards  that  of  Ferrieres  (Mem.  i.  90-2),  which 
differs  little  from  Morris's.] 


84 


BOOK  IV 

VARENNES 

CHAPTER  I 

EASTER  AT  SAINT-CLOUD 

The  French  Monarchy  may  now  therefore  be  considered  as,  in 
all  human  probability,  lost ;  as  struggling  henceforth  in  blindness 
as  well  as  weakness,  the  last  light  of  reasonable  guidance  having 
gone  out.  What  remains  of  resources  their  poor  Majesties  will 
waste  still  further,  in  uncertain  loitering  and  wavering.  Mirabeau 
himself  had  to  complain  that  they  only  gave  him  half  confidence, 
and  always  had  some  plan  within  his  plan.  Had  they  fled 
frankly  with  him  to  Rouen  or  anywhither,  long  ago  !  They  may 
fly  now  with  chance  immeasurably  lessened ;  which  will  go  on 
lessening  towards  absolute  zero.^  Decide,  O  Queen  ;  poor  Louis 
can  decide  nothing :  execute  this  Flight-project,  or  at  least 
abandon  it.  Correspondence  with  Bouille  there  has  been  enough  ; 
what  profits  consulting,  and  hypothesis,  while  all  around  is  in 
fierce  activity  of  practice  ?  The  Rustic  sits  waiting  till  the  river 
run  dry  :  alas,  with  you  it  is  not  a  common  river,  but  a  Nile 
Inundation ;  snows  melting  in  the  unseen  mountains ;  till  all, 
and  you  where  you  sit,  be  submerged. 

Many  things  invite  to  flight.  The  voice  of  Journals  invites ; 
Royalist  Journals  proudly  hinting  it  as  a  threat.  Patriot  Journals 

i[On  the  death  of  Mirabeau  some  of  his  schemes  for  influencing  public  opinion 
in  Paris  and  in  the  provinces  were  pursued  for  a  time  by  La  Marck,  Cabanis  and 
Pellenc  (see  Bacourt,  vol.  iii. ).  But  the  Court,  which,  if  it  had  ever  been  inclined 
to  trust  Mirabeau,  could  never  forgive  his  attitude  on  the  question  of  the  Clergy 
(Nov.  '90 — Jan.  '91),  manifested  only  relief  at  his  death.  Louis  had  probably 
groaned  '  Encore  tin  Mdmoire  ?'  over  his  '  Notes  for  the  Court,'  as  he  had  groaned 
over  the  projects  laid  before  him  by  Turgot.] 


EASTER  AT  SAINT-CLOUD  85 

rapidly  denouncing  it  as  a  terror.  Mother  Society,  waxing  more 
and  more  emphatic,  invites ; — so  emphatic  that,  as  was  pro- 
phesied, Lafayette  and  your  limited  Patriots  have  ere  long  to 
branch  off  from  her,  and  form  themselves  into  Feuillans  ;  ^  with 
infinite  public  controversy  ;  the  victory  in  which,  doubtful  though 
it  look,  will  remain  with  the  ?<«limited  Mother.  Moreover,  ever 
since  the  Day  of  Poniards,  we  have  seen  unlimited  Patriotism 
openly  equipping  itself  with  arms.  Citizens  denied  'activity,' 
which  is  facetiously  made  to  signify  a  certain  weight  of  purse, 
cannot  buy  blue  uniforms,  and  be  Guardsmen  ;  but  man  is  greater 
than  blue  cloth  ;  man  can  fight,  if  need  be,  in  multiform  cloth, 
or  even  almost  without  cloth, — -as  Sansculotte.  So  pikes  continue 
to  be  hammered,  whether  those  Dirks  of  improved  structure 
with  barbs  be  '  meant  for  the  West-India  market,'  or  not  meant. 
Men  beat,  the  wrong  way,  their  ploughshares  into  swords.  Is 
there  not  what  we  may  call  an  '  Austrian  Committee,'  ^  Comiie, 
Autrichien,  sitting  daily  and  nightly  in  the  Tuileries  .''  Patriotism, 
by  vision  and  suspicion,  knows  it  too  well !     If  the  King  fly,  will 

^  [The  name  Feuiilants  {vid.  supr.,  i.  392)  properly  only  attaches  to  the  Club 
founded  by  a  schism  from  the  Jacobins  in  July  1791,  when  a  large  part  of  the 
Jacobin  Club  followed  Barnave  and  established  themselves  in  the  Feuiilants  Con- 
vent. Carlyle,  as  in  the  passage  above,  mixes  it  up  with  the  '  Club  of  '89  '  (which 
before  all  things  was  Lafayette's  Club)  :  but  the  mistake  is  not  unnatural,  for  the 
name  Feuiilants  is  used  by  contemporaries  indiscriminately  for  both  Clubs,  and 
the  word  came  in  '91  to  mean,  on  Jacobin  lips,  'any  moderate  man.'  The  Feuii- 
lants proper  had  a  hard  struggle  for  existence  until  the  date  of  the  King's  accept- 
ance of  the  Constitution  (Sept.  14th),  but  on  the  meeting  of  the  new  Legislature  in 
October  they  were  largely  reinforced  by  the  accession  of  the  entire  Right.  On  Dec. 
27th  however,  the  Assembly  voted  that  the  Club  should  remove  from  the  Feuiilants 
Convent,  part  of  which  was  occupied  by  the  Committee-rooms  of  the  Assembly 
itself.  The  Club  occupied  several  other  places,  and  was  not  '  shut '  or  '  extinct ' 
until  Aug.  loth  '92;  at  that  date  it  still  counted  some  40  members.] 

'-[The  myth  of  the  so-called  Austrian  Committee  (the  denunciation  of  it  was 
made  by  Carra  in  his  newspaper,  May  isth  '92)  rests  upon  the  basis  of  fact  that  the 
Queen  corresponded  with  Count  Mercy  :  one  of  his  letters  (that  of  March  7th  '91 )  was 
intercepted,  and  laid  before  the  ComitiUie  Su>-veillance  of  the  Constituent  Assembly, 
but  Carlyle  is  really  putting  the  myth  a  year  too  early.  La  Marck  (Bacourt,  i.  226) 
says  '  Mercy  and  I  were  the  Austrian  Committee,  and  we  were  so  only  in  1790,  and 
'  it  was  not  denounced  till  May  '92,  when  Mercy  had  been  out  of  France  nearly 
'  two  years  :  but  we  were  both  Austrian  subjects  by  birth.'  And  Bertrand-Mole- 
ville  tells  us  (i.  359)  how,  at  that  date  (May  '92),  the  King's  unofficial  advisers,  viz., 
the  Queen,  Malouet,  Regnauld  and  himself  were  denounced  as  the  '  Austrian 
Committee,'  and  how  he  turned  the  tables  on  Carra  and  had  him  arrested  for 
sedition  :  but  the  Legislative  Assembly  instantly  exploded,  and  the  Juge  de  Paix 
before  whom  Carra  had  been  brought,  was  accused  of  high  treason  and  sent  to 
Orleans.      Vid.  also  infr.,  ii.  176.] 


86  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

there  not  be  Aristoci'at- Austrian  invasion ;  butchery  ;  replace- 
ment of  Feudalism  ;  wars  more  than  civil  ?  The  hearts  of  men 
are  saddened  and  maddened. 

Dissident  Priests  likewise  give  trouble  enough.  Expelled 
from  their  Parish  Churches,  where  Constitutional  Priests,  elected 
by  the  Public,  have  replaced  them,  these  unhappy  persons  resort 
to  Convents  of  Nuns,  or  other  such  receptacles  ;  and  there,  on 
Sabbath,  collecting  assemblages  of  Anti- Constitutional  individuals, 
who  have  grown  devout  all  on  a  sudden,^  they  worship  or  pretend 
to  worship  in  their  strait-laced  contumacious  manner ;  to  the 
scandal  of  Patriotism.  Dissident  Priests,  passing  along  with  their 
sacred  wafer  for  the  dying,  seem  wishful  to  be  massacred  in  the 
streets  ;  wherein  Patriotism  will  not  gratify  them.  Slighter  palm 
of  martyrdom,  however,  shall  not  be  denied :  martyrdom  not  of 
massacre,  yet  of  fustigation.  At  the  refractory  places  of  worship. 
Patriot  men  appear ;  Patriot  women  with  strong  hazel  wands, 
which  they  apply.  Shut  thy  eyes,  O  Reader ;  see  not  this 
misery,  peculiar  to  these  later  times, — of  martyrdom  without 
sincerity,  with  only  cant  and  contumacy !  A  dead  Catholic 
Church  2  is  not  allowed  to  lie  dead ;  no,  it  is  galvanised  into  the 
detestablest  death-life  ;  whereat  Humanity,  we  say,  shuts  its 
eyes.  For  the  Patriot  women  take  their  hazel  wands,  and  fusti- 
gate, amid  laughter  of  bystanders,  with  alacrity :  broad  bottom 
of  Priests  ;  alas.  Nuns  too,  reversed  and  cotillons  retrousses  !  The 
National  Guard  does  what  it  can :  Municipality  '  invokes  the 
Principles  of  Toleration ; '  grants  Dissident  worshippers  the 
Church  of  the  Theatins  :  promising  protection.  But  it  is  to  no 
purpose  :  at  the  door  of  that  Theatins  Church  appears  a  Placard,^ 
and  suspended  atop,  like  Plebeian  Consular  /'aire*, — a  Bundle  of 

^Toulongeon,  i.  262. 

-  [This  is  of  course  grossly  unfair  and  untrue.  One  cannot  help  wearying  very 
much  of  Carlyle's  inveterate  and  childish  disbelief  in  the  possibility  of  sincerity 
within  the  pale  of  the  Catholic  Church.  How  true  it  is  that  the  Revolution  failed 
because  of  its  intolerance,  and  is  still  failing  for  the  same  reason  !  Dr.  Robinet 
in  his  '  Mouvement  Religieux '  (Paris,  1896),  i.  465,  sijq.,  qualifies  these  brutalities 
as  repression  extra-Wgale,  admits  that  300  nuns  were  flogged  by  the  lowest  scum  of 
Paris,  and  lays  it  all  to  the  account  of  the  priests  and  nuns  themselves,  who  were 
exciting  opposition  to  the  new  Civil  Constitution  of  the  Clergy.] 

*[June  2nd.] 


EASTER  AT  SAINT-CLOUD  87 

Rods  !  The  Principles  of  Toleration  must  do  the  best  they  may  : 
but  no  Dissident  man  shall  worship  contumaciously ;  there  is 
a  Plebiscitum  to  that  effect ;  which,  though  unspoken,  is  like  the 
laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians.  Dissident  contumacious  Priests 
ought  not  to  be  harboured,  even  in  private,  by  any  man :  the 
Club  of  the  Cordeliers  openly  denounces  Majesty  himself  as 
doing  it.^ 

Many  things  invite  to  flight :  but  probably  this  thing  above  all 
others,  that  it  has  become  impossible  !  On  the  1 5th  of  April, 
notice  is  given  that  his  Majesty,  who  has  suffered  much  from 
catarrh  lately,  will  enjoy  the  Spring  weather,  for  a  few  days,  at 
Saint-Cloud.  Out  at  Saint-Cloud .''  Wishing  to  celebrate  his 
Easter,2  his  Pdquca  or  Pasch,  there ;  with  refractory  Anti-Con- 
stitutional Dissidents .'' — Wishing  rather  to  make  off  for  Com- 
piegne,  and  thence  to  the  Frontiers  ?  As  were,  in  good  sooth, 
perhaps  feasible,  or  would  once  have  been ;  nothing  but  some 
two  cJmsseurs  attending  you ;  chasseurs  easily  corrupted !  It  is 
a  pleasant  possibility,  execute  it  or  not.  Men  say  there  are 
thirty  thousand  Chevaliers  of  the  Poniard  lurking  in  the  woods 
there :  lurking  in  the  woods,  and  thirty  thousand, — for  the 
human  Imagination  is  not  fettered.  But  now,  how  easily  might 
these,  dashing  out  on  Lafayette,  snatch  off  the  Hereditary  Re- 
presentative ;  and  roll  away  with  him,  after  the  manner  of 
a  whirlblast,  whither  they  listed ! — Enough,  it  were  well  the 
King  did  not  go.  Lafayette  is  forewarned  and  forearmed  :  but, 
indeed,  is  the  risk  his  only ;  or  his  and  all  France's  ? 

Monday  the  eighteenth  of  April  is  come  ;  the  Easter  Journey 

1  Newspapers  of  April  and  June  1791  (in  Hist.  Pari.  ix.  449;  x.  217). 

2  [Louis  was  in  doubt  whether  he  ought  to  communicate  at  all  this  Easter,  owing 
to  his  sin  in  sanctioning  the  decree  of  Nov.  27th  on  the  oath  of  the  Clergy  :  all  the 
churches  in  Paris  (and  even  the  private  chapel  of  the  Tuileries)  served  by  non-juring 
priests  were  closed  in  April  by  the  Municipality,  "  to  avoid  riots  :  "  and  the  Radicals 
demanded  that  the  King  should  give  a  proof  of  his  sincere  adhesion  to  the  Civil 
Constitution  of  the  Clergy,  by  communicating  at  his  parish  church  under  a  '  Con- 
stitutional Priest. '  This  to  Louis  would  have  been  a  blasphemous  farce  :  it  was 
for  this  reason  that  he  proposed  to  go  and  spend  Holy  Week  at  Saint-Cloud. 
(Sorel,  ii.  187.) 

I  cannot  find  at  what  date  the  Tht'atins  Church  was  allowed  to  be  reopened  for 
the  non-juring  priests,  but  I  conjecture  that  it  was  at  some  time  in  May,  as  the  riot 
which  closed  it  again  took  place  on  June  2nd.] 


88  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

to  Saint-Cloud  shall  take  effect.  National  Guard  has  got  its 
orders ;  a  First  Division,  as  Advanced  Guard,  has  even  marched, 
and  probably  arrived.  His  Majesty's  Maison-bouche,  they  say,  is 
all  busy  stewing  and  frying  at  Saint- Cloud  ;  the  King's  dinner 
not  far  from  ready  there.  About  one  o'clock,  the  Royal  Carriage, 
with  its  eight  royal  blacks,  shoots  stately  into  the  Place  du 
Carrousel ;  draws  up  to  receive  its  royal  burden.  But  hark  ! 
from  the  neighbouring  Church  of  Saint- Roch,  the  tocsin  begins 
ding-dong-ing.  Is  the  King  stolen  then ;  is  he  going ;  gone  ? 
Multitudes  of  persons  crowd  the  Carrousel :  the  Royal  Carriage 
still  stands  there  ; — and,  by  Heaven's  strength,  shall  stand  ! 

Lafayette  comes  up,  with  aides-de-camp  and  oratory  ;  pervading 
the  groups  :  "  Taisez-vous,"  answer  the  groups,  "the  King  shall 
not  go."  Monsieur  appears,  at  an  upper  window  :  ten  thousand 
voices  bray  and  shriek,  "  Nous  ne  voulons  pas  que  le  Roi  parte." 
Their  Majesties  have  mounted.  Crack  go  the  whips  ;  but  twenty 
Patriot  arms  have  seized  each  of  the  eight  bridles :  there  is 
rearing,  rocking,  vociferation  ;  not  the  smallest  headway.  In  vain 
does  Lafayette  fret,  indignant ;  and  perorate  and  strive  :  Patriots 
in  the  passion  of  terror  bellow  round  the  Royal  Carriage ;  it  is 
one  bellowing  sea  of  Patriot  terror  run  frantic.  Will  Royalty  fly 
oif  towards  Austria ;  like  a  lit  rocket,  towards  endless  Conflagra- 
tion of  Civil  War  ?  Stop  it,  ye  Patriots,  in  the  name  of  Heaven  ! 
Rude  voices  passionately  apostrophise  Royalty  itself  Usher 
Campan,  and  other  the  like  official  persons,  pressing  forward 
with  help  or  advice,  are  clutched  by  the  sashes,  and  hurled  and 
whirled,  in  a  confused  perilous  manner  ;  so  that  her  Majesty  has 
to  plead  passionately  from  the  carriage- window. 

Order  cannot  be  heard,  cannot  be  followed ;  National  Guards 
know  not  how  to  act.  Centre  Grenadiers,  of  the  Observatoire 
Battalion,  are  there  ;  not  on  duty  ;  alas,  in  quasi-mutiny  ;  speak- 
ing rude  disobedient  words ;  threatening  the  mounted  Guards 
with  sharp  shot  if  they  hurt  the  people.  Lafayette  mounts  and 
dismounts ;  runs  haranguing,  panting ;  on  the  verge  of  despair. 
For  an  hour  and  three-quarters  ;  '  seven  quarters  of  an  hour,'  by 
the  Tuileries  Clock !     Desperate  Lafayette  will  open  a  passage, 


EASTER  AT  SAINT-CLOUD  89 

were  it  by  the  cannon's  mouth,  if  his  Majesty  will  order.^  Their 
Majesties,  counselled  to  it  by  Royalist  friends,  by  Patriot  foes, 
dismount ;  and  retire  in,  with  heavy  indignant  heart ;  giving  up 
the  enterprise.  Maisun-bouche  may  eat  that  cooked  dinner  them- 
selves :  his  Majesty  shall  not  see  Saint-Cloud  this  day, — nor  any 
day.2 

The  pathetic  fable  of  imprisonment  in  one's  own  Palace  has 
become  a  sad  fact,  then  ?  Majesty  complains  to  Assembly ; 
Municipality  deliberates,  proposes  to  petition  or  address ;  Sec- 
tions respond  with  sullen  brevity  of  negation.  Lafayette  flings 
down  his  Commission ;  appears  in  civic  pepper-and-salt  frock  ; 
and  cannot  be  flattered  back  again  ;  not  in  less  than  three  days ;  ^ 
and  by  unheard-of  entreaty  ;  National  Guards  kneeling  to  him, 
and  declaring  that  it  is  not  sycophancy,  that  they  are  free  men 
kneeling  here  to  the  Statue  of  Liberty.  For  the  rest,  those  Centre 
Grenadiers  of  the  Observatoire  are  disbanded, — yet  indeed  are 
reenlisted,  all  but  fourteen,  under  a  new^  name,  and  with  new 
quarters.  The  King  must  keep  his  Easter  in  Paris ;  meditating 
much  on  this  singular  posture  of  things ;  but  as  good  as  deter- 
mined now  to  fly  from  it,  desire  being  whetted  by  difficulty.'^ 

^  [Lafayette  seems  to  have  acted  honestly  but,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  feebly  :  pro- 
bably he  was  not  sorry  to  keep  the  King  in  Paris,  for  it  would  be  much  easier  for 
him  to  escape  from  Saint-Cloud  than  from  Paris.  He  admits  (Mi^moires  et  Corresp. 
iii.  65)  that  he  was  badly  seconded  by  the  National  Guard  on  this  day.  The  mob, 
so  far  as  it  had  any  will  more  than  a  mere  desire  to  riot,  had  an  uneasy  feeling 
that,  if  the  King  left  Paris,  civil  war  would  soon  follow  ;  the  King  was  a  sort  of 
hostage  against  this.] 

2 Deux  Amis,  vi.  c.  1.  (Hist.  Pari.  ix.  407-14.) 

^  [April  24th.  C/.  Morris  (i.  411-418)  who  is  delighted,  and  expects  Gouvion  to 
succeed  Lafayette  as  commander  of  National  Guard.  The  Municipality  actually 
referred  to  the  Section-Assemblies  the  question  "Shall  the  King  be  prayed  to 
execute  his  project  of  going  to  Saint-Cloud,  or  be  thanked  for  remaining?"  The 
force  of  irony  could  hardly  go  further.     (Robiquet,  i.  452.)] 

•*  [Immediate  flight  was  from  this  time  decided  on  :  and  it  was  with  the  deliberate 
intention  of  hoodwinking  the  Assembly  that  the  King  went  to  it  on  April  19th 
and  declared  that  he  was  "  free  :  "  he  also  sent  a  circular  on  April  23rd,  through 
Montmorin,  to  the  European  Courts,  declaring  the  same  (together  with  private 
assurances  of  the  reverse).  The  .-Im/  du  Pcuple  (No.  443)  and  the  Monitcur 
(May  31st)  suspected  the  genuineness  of  this  circular.  Montmorin  however  appears 
to  have  believed  it  quite  genuine  ;  from  first  to  last  he  knew  nothing  of  the  proposed 
flight,  yet  he  was  the  King's  warmest  personal  friend  and  the  playmate  of  his  child- 
hood.    {See  Masson,  Affaires  Etrangeres,  92-4;   Sorel,  ii.  188.)] 


90  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 


CHAPTER  II 

EASTER  AT  PARIS 

For  above  a  yeai',  ever  since  March  1790,  it  would  seem,  there 
has  hovered  a  project  of  Flight  ^  before  the  royal  mind  ;  and  ever 
and  anon  has  been  condensing  itself  into  something  like  a  pur- 
pose ;'^  but  this  or  the  other  difficulty  always  vaporised  it  again. 
It  seems  so  full  of  risks,  perhaps  of  civil  war  itself;  above  all,  it 
cannot  be  done  without  effort.  Somnolent  laziness  will  not  serve  : 
to  fly,  if  not  in  a  leather  vache,  one  must  verily  stir  himself.  Better 
to  adopt  that  Constitution  of  theirs  ;  execute  it  so  as  to  show  all 
men  that  it  is  wzexecutable  .''  Better  or  not  so  good  :  surely  it  is 
easier.  To  all  difficulties  you  need  only  say.  There  is  a  lion  in 
the  path,  behold  your  Constitution  will  not  act !  For  a  somnolent 
person  it  requires  no  effort  to  counterfeit  death, — as  Dame  de 
Stael  and  Friends  of  Liberty  can  see  the  King's  Government  long 
doing,  faisanf  la  murt. 

Nay  now,  when  desire  whetted  by  difficulty  has  brought  the 

1  [The  original  authorities  on  the  flight  to  Varennes  are,  with  the  exception  of 
Bouill^'s  own  Mhnoircs,  extraordinarily  contradictory  ;  several  of  the  principal 
actors  left  accounts  written  long  afterwards,  in  which  they  severally  sought  to  ex- 
culpate themselves,  and  to  throw  the  blame  of  the  failure  upon  others.  This  is 
especially  the  case  with  regard  to  Choiseul,  'Relation  du  depart  de  Louis  XVI' 
(Paris,  1822) ;  Louis  Bouillt?,  '  M^moire  sur  le  dispart  de  Louis  XVI '  (Paris,  1821) ; 
Goguelat,  '  M^moire  sur  les  ^v^nements  relatifs  au  voyage  de  Louis  XVI '  (Paris, 
1823) ;  Valory,  '  Pr&is  Historique  du  voyage  entrepris  par  sa  Majest6,  Louis  XVI ' 
(Paris,  1823).  There  are  also  Damas,  'Rapport  sur  I'afiaire  de  Varennes'  (Paris, 
1821) ;  '  Exposd  de  la  Conduite  de  M.  C-harles  de  Raigecourt  a  I'affaire  de 
Varennes'  (Paris,   1821). 

The  great  modern  authority  is  M.  Bimbenet,  '  Fuite  de  Louis  XVI  k  Varennes 
d'apres  les  documents  jitdiciaires,'  1844  (2nd  edition  1868),  who  analyses  the  results  of 
the  inquiry  held  by  the  Court  at  Orleans  into  the  culpability  of  the  various  officers 
implicated  :  and  the  most  comprehensive  summary  of  the  whole  business  is  in 
'  Ludwig  XVI.  und  Marie  Antoinette  und  der  Flucht  nach  Montmi^dy,'  edited  by 
Emil  Daniels  from  the  papers  of  the  late  Baron  Stockmar  (Berlin,  1890).  A  de- 
lightful sketch  of  the  flight  itself,  with  a  very  spirited  criticism  of  Carlyle's  account, 
is  given  by  Mr.  Oscar  Browning,  'The  Flight  to  Varennes  and  other  essays' 
(London,  1892).  Mr.  Browning  performed  his  flight  to  Varennes  on  a  tricycle, 
with  some  startling  discoveries  as  to  the  inaccuracy  of  Carlyle's  distances.] 

^[The  actual  communication  was  made  to  Bouill^,  Oct.  26th  '90,  and  Bouillt5  at 
once  said  that  Austrian  help  was  indispensable,  both  because  he  could  not  trust  his 
own  troops  and  also  to  give  him  a  chance  of  mobilising  them.  The  date  was  at 
first  fixed  for  the  early  spring  of  '91.  Fersen  and  young  BouillcS  were  in  the  secret 
before  the  end  of  'go,  and  a  cipher  correspondence  had  been  arranged.  (Stockmar, 
14 -W-)] 


EASTER  AT  PARIS  91 

matter  to  a  head,  and  the  royal  mind  no  longer  halts  between  two, 
what  can  come  of  it  ?  Grant  that  poor  Louis  were  safe  with 
Bouille,  what,  on  the  whole,  could  he  look  for  there  ?  Exasperated 
Tickets  of  Entry  answer  :  Much,  all.  But  cold  Reason  answers  : 
Little,  almost  nothing.  Is  not  loyalty  a  law  of  Nature  ?  ask  the 
Tickets  of  Entry.  Is  not  love  of  your  King,  and  even  death  for 
him,  the  glory  of  all  Frenchmen, — except  these  few  Democrats  ? 
Let  Democrat  Constitution-builders  see  what  they  will  do  without 
their  Keystone  ;  and  France  rend  its  hair,  having  lost  the  Heredi- 
tary Representative  ! 

Thus  will  King  Louis  fly ;  one  sees  not  reasonably  towards 
what.  As  a  maltreated  Boy,  shall  we  say,  who,  having  a  Step- 
mother, rushes  sulky  into  the  wide  world  ;  and  will  wring  the 
paternal  heart  ? — Poor  Louis  escapes  from  known  unsupportable 
evils,  to  an  unknown  mixture  of  good  and  evil,  coloured  by  Hope. 
He  goes,  as  Rabelais  did  when  dying,  to  seek  a  great  May-be  :  Je 
vais  ckercher  un  grand  Peut-etre  !  As  not  only  the  sulky  Boy  but 
the  wise  grown  Man  is  obliged  to  do,  so  often,  in  emergencies. 

For  the  rest,  there  is  still  no  lack  of  stimulants,  and  stepdame 
maltreatments,  to  keep  one's  resolution  at  the  due  pitch. ^  Factious 
disturbances  cease  not :  as  indeed  how  can  they,  unless  authorita- 
tively conjured,  in  a  Revolt  which  is  by  nature  bottomless  ?  If  the 
ceasing  of  faction  be  the  price  of  the  King's  somnolence,  he  may 
awake  when  he  will,  and  take  wing. 

Remark,  in  any  case,  what  somersets  and  contortions  a  dead 
Catholicism  is  making, — skilfully  galvanised  :  hideous,  and  even 
piteous,  to  behold !  Jurant  and  Dissident,  with  their  shaved 
crowns,  argue  frothing  everywhere  ;  or  are  ceasing  to  argue,  and 
stripping  for  battle.  In  Paris  was  scourging  while  need  con- 
tinued :  contrariwise,  in  the  Morbihan  of  Brittany,  without  scourg- 
ing, armed  Peasants  are  up,  roused  by  pulpit-drum,  they  know 
not  why.     General  Dumouriez,  who  has  got  missioned  thitherward. 


1  [Perhaps  the  thing  that  stimulated  the  King  most  was  the  taking  away  from 
him  the  right  of  pardon,  by  decree  of  the  Assembly,  June  4th.  He  refers  to  this 
with  excusable  bitterness  in  his  manifesto.  As  far  back  as  iVIarch  28th  the  As- 
sembly had  voted  that  '  if  the  King  leaves  the  Kingdom  he  forfeits  his  crown.'] 


92  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

finds  all  in  sour  heat  of  darkness  ;  finds  also  that  explanation  and 
conciliation  will  still  do  much.^ 

But  again,  consider  this :  that  his  Holiness,  Pius  Sixth,  has 
seen  good  to  excommunicate  Bishop  Talleyrand  !  ^  Surely,  we  will 
say  then,  considering  it,  there  is  no  living  or  dead  Church  in 
the  Earth  that  has  not  the  indubitablest  right  to  excommunicate 
Talleyrand.  Pope  Pius  has  right  and  might,  in  his  Avay.  But  truly 
so  likewise  has  Father  Adam,  ci-devant  Marquis  Saint-Huruge,  in 
his  way.  Behold,  therefore,  on  the  Fourth  of  May,  in  the  Palais- 
Royal,  a  mixed  loud  sounding  multitude  ;  in  the  middle  of  whom, 
Father  Adam,  bull-voiced  Saint-Huruge,  in  white  hat,  towers 
visible  and  audible.  With  him,  it  is  said,  walks  Journalist  Gorsas, 
walk  many  othei's  of  the  washed  sort ;  for  no  authority  will  inter- 
fere. Pius  Sixth,  with  his  plush  and  tiara,  and  power  of  the  Keys, 
they  bear  aloft :  of  natural  size, — made  of  lath  and  combustible 
gum.  Royou,  the  King's  Friend,  is  bonie  too  in  effigy ;  with  a 
pile  of  Newspaper  King  s-Friends,  condemned  Numbers  of  the 
Ami-du-Koi ;  fit  fuel  of  the  sacrifice.  Speeches  are  spoken ;  a 
judgment  is  held,  a  doom  proclaimed,  audible  in  bull-voice,  towards 
the  four  winds.  And  thus,  amid  great  shouting,  the  holocaust 
is  consummated,  under  the  summer  sky  ;  and  our  lath-and-gum 
Holiness,  with  the  attendant  victims,  mounts  up  in  flame,  and 
sinks  down  in  ashes ;  a  decomposed  Pope  :  and  right  or  might, 
among  all  the  parties,  has  better  or  worse  accomplished  itself,  as 
it  could."^  But,  on  the  whole,  reckoning  fi'om  Martin  Luther  in 
the  Market-place  of  Wittenberg  to  Marquis  Saint-Huruge  in  this 
Palais  Royal  of  Paris,  what  a  journey  have  we  gone  ;  into  what 
strange  temtories  has  it  carried  us  !  No  Authority  can  now  inter- 
fere. Nay  Religion  herself,  mourning  for  such  things,  may  after 
all  ask.  What  have  /  to  do  with  them .'' 

In  such  extraordinary  maimer  does  dead  Catholicism  somerset 

'  Deux  Amis,  v.  410-21  ;  Dumouriez,  ii.  c.  5. 

-[Bref  du  Pape,  a  tous  les  Cardinaux,  Archeveques,  Eveques,  au  Clerg^  et  au 
Peuple  de  France,  Paris,  April  13th  1791.  There  is  no  separate  bull  for  the  excom- 
munication of  Talleyrand,  but  he  is  included  with  Gobel,  etc.  (British  Museum, 
F.  loi.)] 

'  Hist.  Pari.  x.  99-102. 


COUNT  FERSEN  93 

and  caper,  skilfully  galvanised.     For,  does  the  reader  inquire  into 

the  subject-matter  of  controversy  in  this  case  ;  what  the  difference 

between  Orthodoxy  or  Mi/-doxi/  and  Heterodoxy  or  Thy-duxy  might 

here  be  ?     My-doxy  is,   that  an  august   National  Assembly  can 

equalise  the  extent  of  Bishopricks ;  that  an  equalised  Bishop,  his 

Creed  and  Formularies  being  left  quite  as  they  were,  can  swear 

Fidelity  to  King,  Law  and  Nation,  and  so  become  a  Constitutional 

Bishop.     Thy-doxy,  if  thou  be  Dissident,  is  that  he  cannot ;  but 

that  he  must  become  an  accursed  thing.     Human  ill-nature  needs 

but  some  Homoiousian  iota,  or  even  the  pretence  of  one  ;  and  wdl 

flow  copiously  through  the  eye  of  a  needle  :  thus  always  must 

mortals  go  jargoning  and  fuming. 

And,  like  the  ancient  Stoics  in  their  porches, 
With  fierce  dispute  maintain  their  churches. ^ 

This  Auto-da-fe  of  Saint-Huruge's  was  on  the  Fourth  of  May,  1791- 
Royalty  sees  it ;  but  says  nothing. 

CHAPTER  in 

COUNT  FERSEN 

Royalty,  in  fact,  should,  by  this  time,  be  far  on  with  its  prepara- 
tions. Unhappily  much  preparation  is  needful.  Could  a  Heredi- 
tary Representative  be  carried  in  leather  vache,  how  easy  were  it ! 
But  it  is  not  so. 

New  Clothes  are  needed ;  as  usual,  in  all  Epic  transactions, 
were  it  in  the  grimmest  iron  ages ;  consider  '  Queen  Chrimhilde, 
with  her  sixty  sempstresses,'  in  that  iron  Nibelungen  Song  !  No 
Queen  can  stir  without  new  clothes.  Therefore,  now.  Dame 
Campan  whisks  assiduous  to  this  mantua-maker  and  to  that  : 
and  there  is  clipping  of  frocks  and  gowns,  upper  clothes  and 
under,  great  and  small ;  such  a  clipping  and  sewing,  as  might 
have  been  dispensed  with.  Moreover,  her  Majesty  cannot  go  a 
step  anywhither  without  her  Necessaire  ;  dear  Necessaire,  of  inlaid 
ivory  and  rosewood ;  cunningly  devised ;  which  holds  perfumes, 

1  [So  th'  Ancient  Stoics  in  their  porch 

With  fierce  dispute  maintained  their  church. 

— Hudibras,  ii.  canto  ii.  lines  15-16.] 


94  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

toilette-implements,  infinite  small  queenlike  furnitures  :  necessary 
to  terrestrial  life.  Not  without  a  cost  of  some  five  hundred  louis, 
of  much  precious  time,  and  difficult  hoodwinking  which  does  not 
blind,  can  this  same  Necessary  of  life  be  forwarded  by  the  Flan- 
ders Carriers, — never  to  get  to  hand.^  All  which,  you  would  say, 
augurs  ill  for  the  prospering  of  the  enterprise.  But  the  whims  of 
women  and  queens  must  be  humoured. 

Bouille,  on  his  side,  is  making  a  fortified  Camp  at  Montmedi ;  ^ 
gathering  Royal-Allemand,  and  all  manner  of  other  German  and 
true  French  Troops  thither,  'to  watch  the  Austrians.'  His  Ma- 
jesty will  not  cross  the  frontiers,  unless  on  compulsion.  Neither 
shall  the  Emigrants  be  much  employed,  hateful  as  they  are  to  all 
people.^  Nor  shall  old  war-god  Broglie  have  any  hand  in  the 
business ;  but  solely  our  brave  Bouille ;  to  whom,  on  the  day  of 
meeting,  a  Marshal's  Baton  shall  be  delivered,  by  a  rescued  King, 
amid  the  shouting  of  aU  the  troops.  In  the  meanwhile,  Paris 
being  so  suspicious,  were  it  not  perhaps  good  to  write  your  Foreign 
Ambassadors  an  ostensible  Constitutional  Letter  ;  desiring  all 
Kings  and  men  to  take  heed  that  King  Louis  loves  the  Constitu- 
tion, that  he  has  voluntarily  sworn,  and  does  again  swear,  to 
maintain  the  same,  and  will  reckon  those  his  enemies  who  aifect 
to  say  otherwise  ?  Such  a  Constitutional  Circular  is  despatched 
by  Couriers,  is  communicated  confidentially  to  the  Assembly,  and 
printed  in  all  Newspapers ;  with  the  finest  effect,*  Simulation 
and  dissimulation  mingle  extensively  in  human  affairs. 


^  Campan,  ii.  cap.  i8.  [This  box  was  sent  as  if  a  present  to  the  Queen's  sister 
(the  Archduchess  Marie-Christine,  Regent  in  the  Netherlands),  and  a  duplicate 
was  left  in  its  place  in  the  Tuileries.  The  sending  of  several  things  to  Brussels 
looks  strange,  but  Marie  Antoinette  probably  believed  that  it  -would  be  necessary 
to  cross  the  frontier  after  all.     (Stockmar,  51.)] 

-  [Bouill6's  command  had  been  much  curtailed  by  the  new  War  Minister,  Du- 
portail  (a  creature  of  Lafayette's),  at  the  end  of  '90 ;  and  he  had  a  sore  task  to 
fortify  and  provision  Montm^dy,  but  by  the  end  of  April  everything  was  ready, 
even  a  chateau  for  the  Royal  Family  in  a  neighbouring  village.  Large  sums  of 
money  were  borrowed  by  Bouille  for  the  purpose  (Bimbenet,  46,  scjg.  ;  Stockmar, 
20-3).  Bouille  kept  on  pressmg  for  immediate  action,  but  no  distinct  promise  of 
help  from  Austria  came  till  June  12th  ;  the  monthly  payment  of  the  Civil  List  (two 
million  Uvr.)  was  not  due  till  June  7th,  and  the  King  wished  to  wait  for  this.] 

5  Bouill6,  M6moires,  ii.  c.  10. 

^Moniteur,  .Stance  du  23  Avril  1791  [zid.  supr.,  note  4,  ii.  89]. 


COUNT  FERSEN  95 

We  observe,  however,  that  Count  Fersen  is  often  using  his 
Ticket  of  Entry  ;  ^  which  surely  he  has  clear  right  to  do.  A  gallant 
Soldier  and  Swede,  devoted  to  this  tair  Queen ;— as  indeed  the 
Highest  Swede  now  is.  Has  not  King  Gustav,'^  famed  fiery  Cheva- 
lier du  Nord,  sworn  himself,  by  the  old  laws  of  chivalry,  her  Knight .'' 
He  will  descend  on  fire-wings,  of  Swedish  musketry,  and  deliver 
her  from  these  foul  dragons, — if,  alas,  the  assassin's  pistol  inter- 
vene not ! 

But,  in  fact,  Count  Fersen  does  seem  a  likely  young  soldier, 
of  alert  decisive  ways  :  he  circulates  widely,  seen,  unseen ;  and 
has  business  on  hand.  Also  Colonel  the  Duke  de  Choiseul,-^ 
nephew  of  Choiseul  the  great,  of  Choiseul  the  now  deceased ;  he 
and  Engineer  Goguelat  are  passing  and  repassing  between  Metz 
and  the  Tuileries  :  and  Letters  go  in  cipher, — one  of  them,  a  most 
important  one,  hard  to  f/f-cipher ;  Fersen  having  ciphered  it  in 


1  [Axel  Fersen  was  by  no  means  the  hot-headed  young  seigneur  of  Carlyle's 
imagination.  He  was  about  thirty-six  years  of  age,  grave  and  of  high  character. 
He  had  visited  Versailles  in  1779,  served  as  a  Volunteer  in  America,  and  returned 
to  France  on  a  mission  from  Gustavus  HI.  in  1788,  when  he  took  up  his  command 
of  the  French  regiment,  Royal-Suidois,  to  which  he  had  been  named  colonel  in 
1783.  Mercy  was  undoubtedly  jealous  of  Fersen's  influence  with  the  Queen,  and 
does  not  spare  him  in  his  correspondence  ;  but  though  not  as  wise  or  experienced 
a  man  as  Mercy,  he  had  at  least  no  diplomatic  ends  to  gain,  and  cared  not  a  straw 
for  the  Austrian  alliance.  Fersen  escaped  on  the  Varennes  night,  and  returned  in 
disguise  at  the  utmost  hazard  of  his  life  to  persuade  the  King  to  attempt  another 
flight  (Feb.  14th  '92),  and  departed  again  believing  he  had  arranged  everything. 
{See  Klinckowstrom,  Fersen  et  la  Cour  de  France,  Paris,  1877.)] 

2 [This  is  Gustavus  HI.,  who  had  striven  since  1770  to  restore  the  prestige  of  the 
Swedish  Monarchy,  and  had  been  favoured  by  the  French  Court  in  doing  so.  His 
subsidy  treaty  with  France  expired  1790,  and  he  had  just  escaped  from  a  costly  and 
unsuccessful  war  with  Russia.  Catherine  O.  was  not  unwilling  to  make  use  of  him 
against  the  French  Revolution,  which  she  genuinely  detested,  but  he  was  unpopular 
with  the  unpatriotic  Swedish  nobles,  and  was  assassinated  on  March  i6th  1792. 
There  is  a  life  of  him  in  English  by  Mr.  Nisbet  Bain,  but  the  best  authority  is  M. 
Geffroy,  Gustave  HI.  et  la  Cour  de  France  (Paris,  1867).] 

'  [The  Due  de  Choiseul  is  the  person  whom  Bouill6  considers  most  responsible- 
for  the  mistakes  on  the  day  of  the  King's  flight,  and  it  is  difficult  to  come  to  any 
other  conclusion  (but  see  Browning,  p.  24).  He  was  imprisoned  at  Verdun  after 
the  failure,  amnestied  Sept.  '91,  and  stood  loyally  by  the  King  until  the  Royal 
Family  were  in  the  Temple  and  a  price  was  set  upon  his  own  head.  He  then 
escaped  and,  after  an  adventurous  and  honourable  career  as  a  champion  of  liberty 
under  the  Restoration,  died  in  1838,  a  worthy  descendant  of  the  great  minister 
whose  favourite  nephew  he  had  been.  He  did  not  "  pass  and  repass,"  as  he  was 
only  initiated  into  the  secret  by  Bouill^  on  the  8th.  He  went  to  Paris  on  nth,  saw 
the  King  on  12th  and  13th,  and  stayed  in  Paris  till  21st,  leaving  with  Li^onard  a 
tew  hours  before  the  Royal  Family  (Stockmar,  70,  sqq.).^ 


96  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

haste.^  As  for  Duke  de  Villequier,  he  is  gone  ever  since  the  Day 
of  Poniards  ;  but  his  Apartment  is  useful  for  her  Majesty. 

On  the  other  side,  poor  Commandant  Gouvion,  watching  at  the 
Tuileries,^  second  in  National  command,  sees  several  things  hard  to 
interpret.  It  is  the  same  Gouvion  who  sat,  long  months  ago,  at 
the  Townhall,  gazing  helpless  into  that  Insurrection  of  Women ; 
motionless,  as  the  brave  stabled  steed  when  conflagration  rises, 
till  Usher  Maillard  snatched  his  drum.  Sincerer  Patriot  there  is 
not ;  but  many  a  shiftier.  He,  if  Dame  Campan  gossip  credibly, 
is  paying  some  similitude  of  love-court  to  a  certain  false  Chamber- 
maid 2  of  the  Palace,  who  betrays  much  to  him :  the  Nicessaire, 
the  clothes,  the  packing  of  jewels, — could  he  understand  it  when 
betrayed.  Helpless  Gouvion  gazes  with  sincere  glassy  eyes  into 
it ;  stirs  up.  his  sentries  to  vigilance ;  walks  restless  to  and  fro ; 
and  hopes  the  best. 

But,  on  the  whole,  one  finds  that,  in  the  second  week  of  June, 
Colonel  de  Choiseul  is  privately  in  Paris ;  ^  having  come  '  to  see 
his  children.'  Also  that  Fersen  has  got  a  stupendous  new  Coach 
built,  of  the  kind  named  Berline ;  ^  done  by  the  first  artists ; 
according  to  a  model :  they  bring  it  home  to  him,  in  Choiseul's 
presence ;    the  two  friends  take  a  proof-drive  in  it,  along  the 

^  Choiseul,  Relation  du  Depart  de  Louis  XVI  (Paris,  1822),  p.  39. 

2  [Gouvion,  vid.  siipr.,  i.  309.] 

5  Campan,  ii.  141-6.  [The  chambermaid  was  Mdlle  de  Rochereuil ;  she  also  be- 
trayed the  design  to  Bailly,  who  pretended  to  refuse  credence,  but  probably 
would  by  this  time  have  been  only  too  glad  to  see  the  Royal  Family  safe  away 
(Stockmar,  51).] 

■•[June  nth.  Goguelat's  last  news  to  Bouill^  was  that  the  19th  was  to  be  the 
date.  Choiseul  had  a  private  interview  with  the  King  on  13th,  in  which  he  was 
obliged  to  threaten  him  that  if  he  didn't  start  by  20th  at  latest  the  whole  thing 
would  be  thrown  up,  and  Bouill6  would  emigrate  at  once.  On  15th  Bouill6  heard 
that  20th  was  to  be  the  day  (Stockmar,  71).] 

^  [The  Berline  was  ordered  on  Dec.  22nd  '90,  cost  6,000  livr. ,  was  built  for  comfort 
and  solidity,  but  was  not  otherwise  conspicuous  (as  Carlyle  here  and  elsewhere 
implies).  Stockmar  (44)  says  Fersen  took  the  carriage  to  his  own  house  where  it 
remained  three  months.  The  fatal  mistake  was  not  in  the  carriage,  which  was 
probably  the  best  possible,  but  in  the  gomg  all  in  one  carriage  and  jjy  one  route. 
The  Queen  however  obstinately  refused  to  desert  the  King.  Mnie  Elisabeth  was 
originally  to  have  gone  with  Monsieur  and  Madame,  but  she  too  was  obstinate. 
Lastly  it  was  madness  to  take  Mme  de  Tourzel  in  place  of  a  man  of  some  sort. 
Bouill^  had  suggested  taking  d'Agoult ;  it  was  d'Agoult  who  chose  the  three  Body- 
Guards,  who  appear  to  have  been  stupid  men,  ignorant  of  the  road  :  {see  the 
deposition  of  Louis  the  coachmaker,  in  Bimbenet,  part  ii.  p.  51).] 


COUNT  FEKSEN  97 

streets ;  in  meditative  mood ;  then  send  it  up  to  '  Madame 
Sullivan's,  in  the  Rue  de  Clichy/  far  North,  to  wait  there  till 
wanted.  Apparently  a  certain  Russian  Baroness  de  Korff,i  with 
Waiting-woman,  Valet,  and  two  Children,  will  travel  homewards 
with  some  state  :  in  whom  these  young  military  gentlemen  take 
interest  ?  A  Passport  has  been  procured  for  her ;  and  much 
assistance  shown,  with  Coach-builders  and  such  like  ; — so  help- 
ful-polite are  young  military  men.  Fersen  has  likewise  purchased 
a  Chaise  fit  for  two,  at  least  for  two  waiting-maids  ;  further, 
certain  necessary  horses :  one  would  say,  he  is  himself  quitting 
France,  not  without  outlay .''  We  observe  finally  that  their  Ma- 
jesties, Heaven  willing,  will  assist  at  Corpus-Christi  Day,  this 
blessed  Summer  Solstice,  in  Assumption  Church,  here  at  Paris, 
to  the  joy  of  all  the  world.  For  which  same  day,  moreover, 
brave  Bouille,  at  Metz,  as  we  find,  has  invited  a  party  of  friends 
to  dinner ;  but  indeed  is  gone  from  home,  in  the  interim,  over 
to  Montmedi. 

These  are  of  the  Phenomena,  or  visual  Appearances,  of  this 
wide-working  terrestrial  world :  which  truly  is  all  phenomenal, 
what  they  call  spectral ;  and  never  rests  at  any  moment ;  one 
never  at  any  moment  can  know  why. 

On  Monday  night,  the  Twentieth  of  June  1791,  about  eleven 
o'clock,  there  is  many  a  hackney-coach,  and  glass -coach  (carrosse 
de  remise),  still  rumbling,  or  at  rest,  on  the  streets  of  Paris.  But 
of  all  glass-coaches,  we  recommend  this  to  thee,  O  Reader, 
which  stands  drawn  up  in  the  Rue  de  I'Echelle,  hard  by  the 
Carrousel  and  outgate  of  the  Tuileries ;  in  the  Rue  de  I'Echelle 
that  then  was  ;  '  opposite  Ronsin  the  saddler's  door,'  as  if  waiting 
for  a  fare  there  !  Not  long  does  it  wait :  a  hooded  Dame,  with 
two  hooded  Children  has  issued  from  Villequier's  door,  where  no 

1  [Mme  de  Korff  was  the  widow  of  a  Russian  colonel.  She  procured  through 
the  Russian  ambassador  a  passport  for  herself  and  family  from  Montmorin  (who 
had  no  suspicion  of  the  truth),  then  wrote  to  her  ambassador  to  say  she  had  acci- 
dentally burned  it  and  required  another.  This  she  obtained  also.  She  appears  to 
have  lent  the  King  money  to  assist  in  the  flight,  for  Fersen  wrote  in  1795  to  the 
Empress  Catherine  begging  her  to  use  her  influence  at  Vienna  to  get  some  of  this 
repaid  to  Mme  de  Korff,  who  was  then  in  great  want.  (Rev.  de  la  Rdv.  vii.  2, 
78,  sqq.)  The  passport  is  given  in  facsimile  in  Bimbenet  (pt.  ii.  151).] 
VOL,    II.  7 


98  THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION 

sentry  walks/  into  the  Tuileries  Court-of-Princes ;  into  the  Car- 
rousel ;  into  the  Rue  de  TEchelle  ;  where  the  Glass-coachman 
readily  admits  them ;  and  again  waits.  Not  long,  another 
Dame,  likewise  hooded  or  shrouded,  leaning  on  a  servant,  issues 
in  the  same  manner ;  bids  the  servant  good  night  ;  and  is,  in 
the  same  manner,  by  the  Glass-coachman,  cheerfully  admitted. 
Whither  go  so  many  Dames  ?  'Tis  his  Majesty's  Couchee^  Ma- 
jesty just  gone  to  bed,  and  all  the  Palace-world  is  retiring  home. 
But  the  Glass-coachman  still  waits  ;  his  tare  seemingly  incomplete. 
By  and  by,  we  note  a  thickset  Individual,  in  round  hat  and 
peruke,  arm-and-arm  with  some  servant,  seemingly  of  the  Runner 
or  Courier  sort ;  he  also  issues  through  Villequier's  door  ;  starts 
a  shoebuckle  as  he  passes  one  of  the  sentries,  stoops  down  to 
clasp  it  again  ;  is  however,  by  the  Glass-coachman,  still  more 
cheerfully  admitted.  And  now,  is  his  fare  complete  ?  Not  yet ; 
the  Glass-coachman  still  waits.^ — Alas !  and  the  false  Chamber- 
maid has  warned  Gouvion  that  slie  thinks  the  Royal  Family  will 
fly  this  very  night ;  and  Gouvion  distrusting  his  own  glazed  eyes, 
has  sent  express  for  Lafayette  ;  and  Lafayette's  Carriage,  flaring 
with  lights,  rolls  this  moment  through  the  inner  Arch  of  the 
Carrousel, — where  a  Lady  shaded  in  broad  gypsy-hat,  and  lean- 
ing on  the  arm  of  a  servant,  also  of  the  Runner  or  Courier  sort, 
stands  aside  to  let  it  pass,  and  has  even  the  whim  to  touch  a 
spoke  of  it  with  her  badine, — light  little  magic  rod  which  she 
calls  hadine,  such  as  the  Beautiful  then  wore.  The  flare  of 
Lafayette's  Carriage  rolls  past :  all  is  found  quiet  in  the  Court- 
of-Princes  ;  sentries  at  their  post ;  Majesties'  Apartments  closed 
in  smooth  rest.     Your  false  Chambermaid  must  have  been  mis- 


i[The  Chateau  was  full  of  people  who  had  been  present  at  the  ceremony  of  the 
King's  coucher,  and  who  had  not  yet  departed  ;  this  made  it  easier  for  the  Royal 
Family  to  escape  in  disguise.  Gouvion  declared  to  the  Assembly  next  day  that  it 
was  impossible  that  the  escape  could  have  been  made  by  Villequier's  door,  as  ' '  there 
were  five  officers  on  guard  there  all  night."  As  a  matter  of  fact  these  guards  were 
not  placed  until  a  few  minutes  after  the  Queen  left.  The  children,  with  Mdme  de 
Tourzel,  came  tirst ;  then  Princess  Elisabeth,  then  the  King  with  Maldent,  who 
then  went  back  to  fetch  the  Queen  ;  all  were  in  the  coach  by  midnight  (i^imbenet, 
79,  si]q.  :  Stockmar,  77-9).  The  care  taken  to  disguise  the  children  is  explained  by 
Bimbenet,  38.] 

''■{^Sic,  for  'coucher.'^ 


"--^ 


fpngji 


\^Z.lfaes?. 


Havre 


j^mieris-     Lille 
Calais        Flanders 


Compx. 


firgenton 
Q-ranvilh 


COUNT  FERSEN  99 

taken  ?  Watch  thou,  Gouvion,  with  Argus'  vigilance  ;  for,  of  a 
truth,  treachery  is  within  these  walls. 

But  where  is  the  Lady  that  stood  aside  in  gypsy- hat,  and 
touched  the  wheel-spoke  with  her  hndiiie  ?  O  Reader,  that 
Lady  that  touched  the  wheel-spoke  was  the  Queen  of  France  ! 
She  has  issued  safe  through  that  inner  Arch,  into  the  Carrousel 
itself;  but  not  into  the  Rue  de  I'Echelle.  Flurried  by  the  rattle 
and  rencounter,  she  took  the  right  hand  not  the  left ;  neither 
she  nor  her  Courier  knows  Paris  ;  he  indeed  is  no  Courier,  but  a 
loyal  stupid  ci-devant  Bodyguard  disguised  as  one.  They  are  off, 
quite  wrong,  over  the  Pont  Royal  and  River ;  roaming  disconso- 
late in  the  Rue  du  Bac ;  far  from  the  Glass-coachman,  who  still 
waits.  Waits,  with  flutter  of  heart ;  with  thoughts — which  he 
must  button  close  up,  under  his  jarvie-surtout !  ^ 

Midnight  clangs  from  all  the  City-steeples ;  one  precious  hour 
has  been  spent  so ;  most  mortals  are  asleep.  The  Glass-coach- 
man waits  ;  and  in  what  mood !  A  brother  jarvie  drives  up, 
enters  into  conversation  ;  is  answered  cheerfully  in  jarvie-dialect  : 
the  brothers  of  the  whip  exchange  a  pinch  of  snuff; ^  decline 
drinking  together ;  and  part  with  good  night.  Be  the  Heavens 
blest !  here  at  length  is  the  Queen-lady,  in  gypsy-hat ;  safe 
after  perils ;  who  has  had  to  inquire  her  way.  She  too  is 
admitted  ;  her  Courier  jumps  aloft,  as  the  other,  who  is  also  a 
disguised  Bodyguard,  has  done  :  and  now,  O  Glass-coachman  of 
a  thousand, — Count  Fersen,  for  the  Reader  sees  it  is  thou, — 
drive ! 

Dust  shall  not  stick  to  the  hoofs  of  Fei-sen  :  crack  !  crack ! 
the  Glass-coach  rattles,  and  every  soul  breathes  lighter.  But  is 
Fersen  on  the  right  road }  Northeastward,  to  the  Barrier  of 
Saint-Martin  and  Metz  Highway,  thither  were  we  bound  :  and 
lo,  he  drives  right  Northward  !     The  royal   Individual,  in  round 

1  [The  myth  of  the  Queen  losing  her  way  is  rejected  by  all  modern  authorities 
(except  Bimbenet,  p.  82)  ;  no  time  seems  to  have  been  lost  in  getting  into  the 
carriage  ;  but  a  whole  hour  was  spent  in  the  drive  to  the  barrier.  Mnie  de 
Tourzel  only  says  La  Reine  se  fit  attendre  quelques  minutes.  {See  her  interroga- 
tory quoted  in  Bifnbenet,  Pieces  Justificatives,  part  ii.  87-8.)] 

^  Weber,  ii.  340-2  ;  Choiseul,  pp.  44-56. 


100        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

hat  and  peruke,  sits  astonished ;  but  right  or  wrong,  there  is  no 
remedy.  Crack,  crack,  we  go  incessant,  through  the  slumbering 
City.  Seldom,  since  Paris  rose  out  of  mud,  or  the  Longhaired 
Kings  went  in  Bullock-carts,  was  there  such  a  drive.  Mortals 
on  each  hand  of  you,  close  by,  stretched  out  horizontal,  dormant ; 
and  we  alive  and  quaking !  Crack,  crack,  through  the  Rue  de 
Grammont ;  ^  across  the  Boulevard  ;  up  the  Rue  de  la  Chaussee 
d'Antin, — these  windows,  all  silent,  of  Number  4'2,  were  Mira- 
beau's.  Towards  the  Barrier  not  of  Saint- Martin,  but  of  Clichy 
on  the  utmost  North  !  Patience,  ye  royal  Individuals ;  Fersen 
understands  what  he  is  about.  Passing  up  the  Rue  de  Clichy, 
he  alights  for  one  moment  at  Madame  Sullivan's  :  "  Did  Count 
Fersen's  Coachman  get  the  Baroness  de  Korff 's  new  Berline  ?  " 
— "  Gone  with  it  an  hour-and-half  ago,"  grumbles  responsive  the 
drowsy  Porter. — "  Cesf  bieii."  Yes,  it  is  well ; — though  had  not 
such  hour-and-half  been  lost,  it  were  still  better.  Forth  there- 
fore, O  Fersen,  fast,  by  the  Barrier  de  Clichy ;  then  Eastward 
along  the  Outer  Boulevard,  what  horses  and  whipcord  can  do  ! 

Thus  Fersen  drives,  through  the  ambrosial  night.  Sleeping 
Paris  is  now  all  on  the  right-hand  of  him  ;  silent  except  for  some 
snoring  hum  :  and  now  he  is  Eastward  as  far  as  the  Barrier  de 
Saint-Martin  ;  looking  earnestly  for  Baroness  de  Korffs  Berline. 
This  Heaven's  Berline  he  at  length  does  descry,  drawn  up  with 
its  six  horses,^  his  own  German  Coachman  waiting  on  the  box. 
Right,  thou  good  German :  now  haste,  whither  thou  knowest ! 
— And  as  for  us  of  the  Glass-coach,  haste  too,  O  haste  ;  much 
time  is  already  lost !  The  august  Glass-coach  fare,  six  Insides, 
hastily  packs  itself  into  the  new  Berline  ;  two  Bodyguard  Couriers 
behind.  The  Glass-coach  itself  is  turned  adrift,  its  head  towards 
the  City  ;  to  wander  whither  it  lists, — and  be  found  next  mom- 

^  [This  is  wrong  ;  Fersen  drove  west  down  the  J?!fe  Faubonrg-Siahii-Hono)'^ ,  in 
order  to  visit  his  own  stables,  and  then  down  the  Rue  de  Clichy  to  Crawford's  house 
to  see  if  the  berline  had  been  sent  on  ;  finding  that  it  had  been,  he  then  drove  straight 
to  the  Barritre  St.  Martin.     (Stockmar,  79  ;  Browning,  61.)] 

2 [Four  horses:  Balthasar  Sapel  (Fersen's  coachman)  acting  as  postilhon, 
Moustier  on  the  box,  Maldent  alone  on  the  dickey  behind.  The  chaise  with  the 
"maids"  (Mme  Brunier  and  Mme  Neuville)  was  at  Claye  (2nd  stage),  not  at 
Bondy  (Stockmar,  79  ;  Bimbenet,  86-7).] 


COUNT  FERSEN  101 

ing  tumbled  in  a  ditch.  But  Fersen  is  on  the  new  box,  with  its 
brave  new  hammer-cloths  ;  flourishing  his  whip  ;  he  bolts  forward 
towards  Bondy.  There  a  third  and  final  Bodyguard  Courier  of 
ours  ought  surely  to  be,  with  post-horses  ready- ordered.  There 
likewise  ought  that  purchased  Chaise,  with  the  two  Waiting- 
maids  and  their  band-boxes,  to  be ;  whom  also  her  Majesty 
could  not  travel  without.  Swift,  thou  deft  Fersen,  and  may  the 
Heavens  turn  it  well ! 

Once  more,  by  Heaven's  blessing,  it  is  all  well.  Here  is  the 
sleeping  Hamlet  of  Bondy  ;  Chaise  with  Waiting-women  ;  horses 
all  ready,  and  postilions  with  their  churn-boots,  impatient  in  the 
dewy  dawn.  Brief  harnessing  done,  the  postilions  with  their 
chum-boots  vault  into  the  saddles ;  brandish  circularly  their 
little  noisy  whips.  Fersen,  under  his  jarvie-surtout,  bends  in 
lowly  silent  reverence  of  adieu  ;  royal  hands  wave  speechless 
inexpressible  response ;  ^  Baroness  de  KorfTs  Berline,  with  the 
Royalty  of  France,  bounds  off:  forever,  as  it  proved.  Deft 
Fersen  dashes  obliquely  Northward,  through  the  country,  to- 
wards Bougret ;  gains  Bougret,-  finds  his  German  Coachman 
and  chariot  waiting  there ;  cracks  off,  and  drives  undiscovered 
into  unknown  space.  A  deft  active  man,  we  say ;  what  he 
undertook  to  do  is  nimbly  and  successfully  done. 

And  so  the  Royalty  of  France  is  actually  fled  ?  This  precious 
night,  the  shortest  of  the  year,  it  flies,  and  drives !  Barotiess  de 
Korff  is,  at  bottom.  Dame  de  Tourzel,  Governess  of  the  Royal 
Children :  she  who  came  hooded  with  the  two  hooded  little 
ones ;  little  Dauphin ;  little  Madame  Royale,  known  long  after- 
wards as  Duchesse  d'Angouleme.  Baroness  de  KorfTs  Waiting- 
maid  is  the  Queen  in  gypsy-hat.  The  royal  Individual  in  round 
hat  and  peruke,  he  is  Valet  for  the  time  being.  That  other 
hooded  Dame,  styled   TraveUing-companion,  is  kind  Sister  Eliza- 

1  [Carlyle  does  not  mention  Fersen's  passionate  appeal  to  be  allowed  to  accom- 
pany them.] 

2[Le  Bourget,  not  Bougret.  Sapel  cannot  have  been  postillion  on  the  leader  in 
the  berline  and  at  the  same  time  waiting  for  Fersen  at  Le  Bourget.  Weber  (ii.  88) 
says  that  Fersen  returned  to  Paris  :  there  is  no  confirmation  of  this.  He  reached 
Mons  in  Belgium  within  thirty  hours.] 


102        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

beth  ;  she  had  sworn,  long  since,  when  the  Insurrection  of 
Women  was,  that  only  death  should  part  her  and  them.  And 
so  they  rush  there,  not  too  impetuously,  through  the  Wood  of 
Bondy  : — over  a  Rubicon  in  their  own  and  France's  History.^ 

Great ;  though  the  ftiture  is  all  vague  !  If  we  reach  Bouille  ? 
If  we  do  not  reach  him  ?  O  Louis !  and  this  all  round  thee  is 
the  great  slumbering  Earth  (and  overhead,  the  great  watchful 
Heaven)  ;  the  slumbering  Wood  of  Bondy, — where  Longhaired 
Childeric  Do-nothing  was  struck  through  with  iron  ;  '^  not  un- 
reasonably, in  a  world  like  ours.  Tliese  peaked  stone-towers 
are  Raincy  ;  towers  of  wicked  D'Orleans.  All  slumbers  save 
the  multiplex  rustle  of  our  new  Berline.  Loose-skirted  scarecrow 
of  an  Herb-merchant,  with  his  ass  and  early  greens,  toilsomely 
plodding,  seems  the  only  creature  we  meet.  But  right  ahead 
the  great  Northeast  sends  up  evermore  his  gray  brindled  dawn  : 
from  dewy  branch,  birds  here  and  there,  with  short  deep  wai-ble, 
salute  the  coming  Sun.  Stars  fade  out,  and  Galaxies  ;  Street- 
lamps  of  the  City  of  God.  The  Universe,  O  my  brothers,  is 
flinging  wide  its  portals  for  the  Levee  of  the  Great  High  King. 
Thou,  poor  King  Louis,  farest  nevertheless,  as  mortals  do,  towards 
Orient  lands  of  Hope ;  and  the  Tuileries  with  its  Levees,  and 
France  and  the  Earth  itself,  is  but  a  larger  kind  of  doghutch, — 
occasionally  going  rabid. 

CHAPTER  IV 

ATTITUDE 

But  in  Paris,  at  six  in  the  morning ;  when  some  Patriot  Deputy, 
warned  by  a  billet,  awoke  Lafayette,  and  they  went  to  the 
Tuileries  ? — Imagination  may  paint,  but  words  cannot,  the  surprise 

'  ["  Not  too  impetuously."  Mr.  Browning  has  shown  with  great  humour  how 
hopelessly  all  Carlyle's  account  of  the  Flight  is  vitiated  by  his  ignorance  of  the 
common  facts  of  life  and  his  ignorance  of  the  distance.  The  berline  went  as  a 
matter  of  fact  at  what  was  then  considered  a  rattling  pace,  and  must  have  done  so 
to  cover  the  distance  in  the  time.  Dr.  Rigby  speaks  of  the  excellence  of  the  roads 
in  Northern  France  and  the  excellence  of  the  post  horses,  which  made  it  possible  to 
travel  at  seven  miles  an  hour.  That  indeed  was  a  very  great  rate  for  the  eighteenth 
century.] 

2  H6nault,  Abr6g6  Chronologique,  p.  36. 


ATTITUDE  103 

of  Lafayette ;  1  or  with  what  bewiklerment  helpless  Gouvion  rolled 
glassy  Argus'  eyes,  discerning  now  that  his  false  Chambermaid 
had  told  true ! 

However,  it  is  to  be  recorded  that  Paris,  thanks  to  an  august 
National  Assembly,  did,  on  this  seeming  doomsday,  surpass  itself. 
Never,  according  to  Historian  eye-witnesses,  was  there  seen  such 
an  'imposing  attitude.'^  Sections  all  'in  permanence;'  our 
Towuhall  too,  having  first,  about  ten  o'clock,  fired  three  solemn 
alarm-cannons  :  above  all,  our  National  Assembly  !  ^  National 
Assembly,  likewise  permanent,  decides  what  is  needful ;  with 
unanimous  consent,  for  the  C6t4  Droit  sits  dumb,*  afraid  of  the 
Lanterne.  Decides  with  a  calm  promptitude,  which  rises  towards 
the  sublime.  One  must  needs  vote,  for  the  thing  is  self-evident, 
that  his  Majesty  has  been  abducted/'  or  spirited  away,  '  enleve,'  by 
some  person  or  persons  unknown  :  in  which  case,  what  will  the 
Constitution  have  us  do  ?  Let  us  return  to  first  principles,  as  we 
always  say  :  "  revenons  aux  priticipes." 

By  first  or  by  second  principles,  much  is  promptly  decided  ; 
Ministers  are  sent  for,  instructed  how  to  continue  their  functions  : 
Lafayette  is  examined  ;  and  Gouvion,  who  gives  a  most  helpless 
account,  the  best  he  can.  Letters  are  found  written  :  one  Letter, 
of  immense  magnitude;  all  in  his  Majesty's  hand,  and  evidently 
of  his    Majesty's   own  composition ;  addressed  to  the   National 

1  ["  We  had  to  give  the  he,"  says  Lafayette  (M6m.  et  Corresp.  iii.  73,  si/q.),  "  to 
the  Royahst  assertion  that  the  King  was  not  free,  so  our  precautions  against  his 
escape  were  bound  to  be  insufficient.  The  National  Guard  and  the  Ce?!f-Suisses 
were  on  guard  inside,  the  National  Guard  and  Ganies-Suisses  OMlside,  all  the  troops 
for  fifteen  leagues  round  being  under  my  command.  I  constantly  talked  to  the 
King  of  the  rumours  of  plots  for  his  escape  ;  he  solemnly  assured  me  he  would  not 
attempt  it."] 

2  Deux  Amis,  vi.  67-178 ;  Toulongeon,  ii.  1-38 ;  Caniille,  Prudhomnie  and 
Editors  (in  Hist.  Pari.,  x.  240-4). 

'[The  Conseil-Genh-al  of  the  Commune  met  at  10  A.M.  on  21st,  and  received 
the  news  of  the  King's  flight  and  '  sat  permanent '  till  the  evening  of  26th.  Many 
but  not  all  of  the  Sections  also  sat  in  permanence.  Seals  were  placed  on  the 
Tuileries  and  Luxembourg,  and  a  strict  regulation  of  passports  ordered.] 

■*  [Not  true.  A  great  number  of  deputies  protested  against  the  permanent 
session — Alalouet  most  energetically,  as  he  saw  how  likely  it  was  to  lead  to 
Republican  motions.] 

^[This  refers  to  the  vote  of  July  15th  ;  the  debate  really  lasted  from  June  21st 
till  then.  The  news  of  the  King's  recapture  was  received  by  the  Assembly  at 
9  P.M.  on  22nd.] 


104        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Assembly.  It  details,  with  earnestness,  with  a  childlike  simplicity, 
what  woes  his  Majesty  has  suffered.  Woes  great  and  small :  A 
Necker  seen  applauded,  a  Majesty  not ;  then  insurrection  ;  want 
of  due  furniture  in  Tuileries  Palace  ;  want  of  due  cash  in  Civil 
List ;  general  want  of  cash,  of  furniture  and  order ;  anarchy 
everywhere  :  Deficit  never  yet,  in  the  smallest,  '  choked  or 
combU  : ' — wherefore,  in  brief,  his  Majesty  has  retired  towards 
a  place  of  Liberty ;  and,  leaving  Sanctions,  Federation,  and 
what  Oaths  there  may  be,  to  shift  for  themselves,  does  now  refer 
— to  what,  thinks  an  august  Assembly  ?  To  that  '  Declaration 
of  the  Twenty-third  of  June,'  with  its  "  Seul  il  fera,  He  alone 
will  make  his  People  happy."  As  if  that  were  not  buried,  deep 
enough,  under  two  irrevocable  Twelve-months,  and  the  wreck 
and  rubbish  of  a  whole  Feudal  World !  This  strange  autograph 
Letter  the  National  Assembly  decides  on  printing ;  on  trans- 
mitting to  the  Eighty-three  Departments,  with  exegetic  com- 
mentary, short  but  pithy. ^  Commissioners  also  shall  go  forth 
on  all  sides  ;  the  People  be  exhorted ;  the  Armies  be  increased  ; 
care  taken  that  the  Commonweal  suifer  no  damage.— And  now, 
with  a  sublime  air  of  calmness,  nay  of  indifference,  we  '  pass  to 
the  order  of  the  day  ! ' 

By  such  sublime  calmness,  the  terror  of  the  People  is  calmed. 


1  [The  King's  manifesto— in  his  own  hand,  full  of  erasures  and  evident  hesitations 
— may  be  briefly  calendared  thus  : — 

'  As  long  as  I  could  hope  that  you  gentlemen  were  doing  good  to  my  people, 
and  that  I  could  help  you  by  staying  here,  I  did  not  mind  my  personal  sacrifices, 
which  have  so  much  increased  since  October  1789.  But  now  the  reward  I  have 
had  for  this  is  to  see  my  kingdom  brought  to  nothing,  all  Executive  powers  de- 
spised, property,  personal  safety  everywhere  in  danger  and  Anarchy  completely 
victorious ;  I  therefore  protest  against  all  the  Acts  which  I  have  sanctioned  during 
my  imprisonment.  .  .  .  Religion  is  in  the  utmost  peril  .  .  .  my  Body  Guards  have 
been  murdered  .  .  .  the  Tuileries  is  an  extremely  uncomfortable  residence.  .  .  . 
I  am  quite  powerless  to  promote  good  or  to  hinder  evil,  and  so  I  have  withdrawn 
myself  and  my  family  into  a  place  of  safety.  Frenchmen,  Parisians,  so  favoured 
by  my  ancestors  and  me,  don't  believe  the  lies  they  tell  you.  .  .  .  Return  to  your 
King,  Father  and  best  friend.  ...  I  shall  be  delighted  when  I  am  in  complete 
freedom,  to  sanction  a  constitution  of  which  I  approve,  and  which  shall  secure 
religion,  property,  personal  safety  and  the  supremacy  of  the  law'  (Stockmar,  73-4). 
Lafayette  is  right  when  he  calls  (M6m.  et  Corresp.  iii.  76)  this  a  "  pitiable  mani- 
festo," not  right  when  he  calls  it  a  "  complete  abdication  of  Constitutional  Royalty." 
This  paper  was  left  behind  addressed  to  Laporte,  Intendant  of  the  Civil  List,  who 
suffered  for  it  after  Aug.  loth  '92,  although  he  had  known  nothing  of  the  projected 
flight.] 


ATTITUDE  105 

These  gleaming  Pike-forests,  which  bristled  fateful  in  the  early 
sun,  disappear  again  ;  the  far-sounding  Street- orators  cease,  or 
spout  milder.  We  are  to  have  a  civil  war  ;  let  us  have  it  then. 
The  King  is  gone  ;  but  National  Assembly,^  but  France  and  we 
remain.  The  People  also  takes  a  great  attitude  ;  the  People  also 
is  calm  ;  motionless  as  a  couchant  lion.  With  but  a  few  broolings, 
some  waggings  of  the  tail ;  to  show  what  it  will  do  !  Cazales, 
for  instance,  was  beset  by  street- groups,  and  cries  of  Lantenie ; 
but  National  Patrols  easily  delivered  him.  Likewise  all  King's 
effigies  and  statues,  at  least  stucco  ones,  get  abolished.  Even 
King's  names  ;  the  word  Roi  fades  suddenly  out  of  all  shop-signs  ; 
the  Royal  Bengal  Tiger  itself,  on  the  Boulevards,  becomes  the 
National  Bengal  one,  Tigre  National.'^ 

How  great  is  a  calm  couchant  People  !  On  the  morrow,  men 
will  say  to  one  another :  "  We  have  no  King,  yet  we  slept  sound 
enough."  On  the  moiTow,  fervent  Achille  de  Chatelet,  and 
Thomas  Paine  the  rebellious  Needleman,  shall  have  the  walls  of 
Paris  profusely  plastered  with  their  Placard  ;  announcing  that 
there  must  be  a  Republic.'^ — Need  we  add,  that  Lafayette  too, 
though  at  first  menaced  by  Pikes,  has  taken  a  great  attitude, 
or  indeed  the  greatest  of  all  ?  Scouts  and  Aides-de-camp  fly 
forth,  vague,  in  quest  and  pursuit ;  young  Romceuf  towards 
Valenciennes,  though  with  small  hope.^ 

Thus  Paris ;  sublimely  calmed,  in  its  bereavement.  But  from 
the  Messageiies  Roijales,  in  all  Mail-bags,  radiates  forth  far-darting 

*  [The  President  of  the  Assembly  (who  happened  to  be  Alexandre  de  Beauhar- 
nais  !)  quietly  filled  at  the  Fete-Dieu  the  place  usually  occupied  by  the  King:  the 
Minister  of  Justice  (Duport-du-Tertre)  came  to  the  Assembly  and  demanded  of  // 
leave  to  affix  the  Great  Seal  to  State  documents.     (Mortimer-Ternaux,  i.,  32.)] 

2  Walpoliana  [ii.  99]. 

•'  Dumont,  c.  16.  [There  were  a  great  many  Republican  placards  stuck  up 
during  the  ensuing  days,  but  that  of  the  Cordeliers  of  June  21st  is  most  important. 
Mr.  Belloc  (Danton,  140)  denies  that  it  was  the  work  of  Danton,  who  confined 
himself  to  denouncing  Lafayette  at  the  Jacobins  for  not  guarding  the  King  better.] 

"*['  When  the  news  was  known  the  people  murmured  fiercely  against  me  ;  indeed 
at  one  time  on  the  Place  de  Grtve  it  looked  very  nasty  for  me.  .  .  .  We  did  not 
know  which  way  the  King  was  gone,  and  my  first  aide-de-camp,  Romceuf,  was 
ordered  to  ride  towards  Valenciennes  .  .  .  just  as  he  was  starting  this  was  changed 
for  Chalons'  (Lafayette,  M6m.  at  Corresp.  iii.  76).  But  Lafayette's  first  messenger 
was  not  Romceuf,  but  Baillou  or  Bayou,  who  had  been  detained  at  the  barrier : 
he  met  Romceuf  in  Chalons  {yid.  infr.,  p.  125).] 


106         THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

the  electi'ic  news :  Our  Hereditary  Representative  is  flown. 
Laugh,  black  Royalists :  yet  be  it  in  your  sleeve  only ;  lest 
Patriotism  notice,  and  waxing  frantic,  lower  the  Lanterne !  In 
Paris  alone  is  a  sublime  National  Assembly  with  its  calmness  ; 
truly,  other  places  must  take  it  as  they  can  :  with  open  mouth 
and  eyes ;  with  panic  cackling,  with  wrath,  with  conjecture. 
How  each  one  of  those  dull  leathern  Diligences,  with  its  leathern 
bag  and  '  The  King  is  fled,'  furrows  up  smooth  France  as  it  goes  ; 
through  town  and  hamlet,  ruflles  the  smooth  public  mind  into 
quivering  agitation  of  death-terror ;  then  lumbers  on,  as  if 
nothing  had  happened !  Along  all  highways ;  towards  the 
utmost  borders  ;  till  all  France  is  ruflled, — roughened  up  (meta- 
phorically speaking)  into  one  enormous,  desperate-minded,  red 
guggling  Turkey  Cock  ! 

For  example,  it  is  under  cloud  of  night  that  the  leathern 
Monster  reaches  Nantes  ;  deep  sunk  in  sleep.  The  word  spoken 
rouses  all  Patriot  men :  General  Dumouriez,  enveloped  in  roque- 
laures,  has  to  descend  from  his  bedroom  ;  finds  the  street  covered 
with  'four  or  five  thousand  citizens  in  their  shirts.'  ^  Here  and 
there  a  faint  farthing  rushlight,  hastily  kindled  ;  and  so  many 
swart-featured  haggai-d  faces  with  nightcaps  pushed  back  ;  and 
the  more  or  less  flowing  drapery  of  nightshirt :  open-mouthed 
till  the  General  say  his  word !  And  overhead,  as  always,  the 
Great  Bear  is  turning  so  quiet  round  Bootes  ;  steady,  indifferent 
as  the  leathern  Diligence  itself  Take  comfort  ye  men  of  Nantes  ; 
Bootes  and  the  steady  Bear  are  turning  ;  ancient  Atlantic  still 
sends  his  brine,  loud-billowing,  up  your  Loire-stream  ;  brandy 
shall  be  hot  in  the  stomach  :  this  is  not  the  Last  of  the  days, 
but  one  before  the  Last. — The  fools !  If  they  knew  what  was 
doing,  in  these  very  instants,  also  by  candlelight,  in  the  far 
Northeast ! 

Perhaps,  we  may  say,  the  most  teri'ified  man  in  Paris  or  France 
is — who  thinks  the  Reader  ? — seagreen  Robespierre.  Double 
paleness,  with  the  shadow  of  gibbets  and  halters,  overcasts  the 

'  Dumouriez,  M^nioires,  ii.  109. 


THE  NEW  BERLINS  107 

seagreen  features:  it  is  too  clear  to  him  that  there  is  to  be  'a 
Saint- Bartholomew  of  Patriots,'  that  in  fom--and- twenty  hours  he 
will  not  be  in  life.  These  horrid  anticipations  of  the  soul  he  is 
heard  uttering  at  Petion's  :  by  a  notable  witness.  By  Madame 
Roland,  namely ;  her  whom  we  saw,  last  year,  radiant  at  the 
Lyons  Federation.  1  These  four  months,-  the  Rolands  have  been 
in  Paris  ;  arranging  with  Assembly  Committees  the  Municipal 
affairs  of  Lyons,  affairs  all  sunk  in  debt ; — commiming,  the  while, 
as  was  most  natural,  with  the  best  Patriots  to  be  foimd  here,  with 
our  Brissots,  Petions,  Buzots,  Robespierres :  who  were  wont  to 
come  to  us,  says  the  fair  Hostess,  four  evenings  in  the  week. 
They,  running  about,  busier  than  ever  this  day,  would  fain  have 
comforted  the  seagreen  man  ;  spake  of  Achille  de  Chatelet's 
Placard  ;  of  a  Journal  to  be  called  The  Republican  ;  of  preparing 
men's  minds  for  a  Republic.  "  A  RepubUc  ?  "  said  the  Seagreen, 
with  one  of  his  dry  husky  ////sportful  laughs,  "  What  is  that  ?  "  ^ 
O  seagreen  Incorruptible,  thou  shalt  see ! 

CHAPTER  V 

THE  NEW  BERLINE 

But  scouts,  all  this  while,  and  aides-de-camp,  have  flown  forth 
faster  than  the  leathern  Diligences.  Young  Romoeuf,  as  we  saidi, 
was  off  early  towards  Valenciennes  :  distracted  Villagers  seize  him, 
as  a  traitor  with  a  finger  of  his  own  in  the  plot ;  drag  him  back 
to  the  Townhall ;  to  the  National  Assembly,  which  speedily  grants 

1  [Robespierre  was  such  a  coward  that  this  accusation  of  Mme  Roland  (in  her 
M^mflires)  is  quite  possible,  but  in  her  contemporary  letters  she  does  not  hint  at  it. 
Certainly  the  idea  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  he  made  no  open  pronouncement 
of  his  opinions  in  the  Assembly,  though  he  had  virtually  led  the  Left  since  Mira- 
beau's  death.  He  spoke  however  at  the  Jacobins  against  the  ministers,  whose 
dismissal  he  demanded  (21st),  and  talked  about  'expecting  to  be  killed.'  Brissot 
in  the  Patriate  Fraticais  went  openly  over  to  the  Republican  view  (22nd),  inspired 
thereto  no  doubt  by  Mme  Roland.  Marat  on  same  date,  22nd,  in  the  Ami  du 
Peuple,  demanded  but  did  not  specify  a  dictator.  Possibly  there  were  Orl6anist 
movements  on  foot,  for  d'Orl^ans  was  admitted  to  the  Jacobin  Club  as  a  member 
on  23rd.  Condorcet,  in  his  paper  Le  Ri!publicain  July  i6th,  was  the  author  of  the 
suggestion  for  a  '  mechanical  King  '  (Belloc,  142).  But  these  spurts  of  Republican 
feeling  found  as  yet  little  sympathy  among  the  people  of  Paris,  \sho,  however 
shocked  and  frightened  by  the  '  emigration  '  of  the  King,  were  as  a  whole  attached 
to  Monarchy,  and  were  still  more  or  less  free.] 

-[Feb. — Sept.  1791.]  ^ Madame  Roland,  ii.  70. 


108         THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

a  new  passport.  Nay  now,  that  same  scarecrow  of  an  Herb- 
merchant  with  his  ass  has  bethought  him  of  the  grand  new 
Berline  seen  in  the  Wood  of  Bondy ;  and  deUvered  evidence  of 
it :  ^  Romoeuf,  furnished  with  new  passport,  is  sent  forth  with 
double  speed  on  a  hopefuller  track ;  by  Bondy,  Claye  and  Chalons, 
towards  Metz,  to  track  the  new  Berline  ;  and  gallops  d  franc 
&trier. 

Miserable  new  Berline  !  Why  could  not  Royalty  go  in  some 
old  Berline  similar  to  that  of  other  men  ?  Flying  for  life,  one 
does  not  stickle  about  his  vehicle.  Monsieur,  in  a  commonplace 
travelUng-carriage  is  off  Northwards ;  -  Madame,  his  Princess,  in 
another,  with  variation  of  route  :  they  cross  one  another  while 
changing  horses,  without  look  of  recognition  ;  and  reach  Flanders, 
no  man  questioning  them.  Precisely  in  the  same  manner,  beauti- 
ful Princess  de  Lamballe  set  off,  about  the  same  hour ;  and  will 
reach  England  safe  : — would  she  had  continued  there !  The 
beautiful,  the  good,  but  the  unfortunate ;  reserved  for  a  frightful 
end  !  ^ 

All  runs  along,  unmolested,  speedy,  except  only  the  new  Ber- 
line.^ Huge  leathern  vehicle  : — huge  Argosy,  let  us  say,  or 
Acapulco  ship  ;  with  its  heavy  stern-boat  of  Chaise-and-pair  ;  with 
its  three  yellow  Pilot-boats  of  mounted  Bodyguard  Couriers, 
rocking  aimless  round  it  and  ahead  of  it,  to  bewilder,  not  to 
guide !      It  lumbers   along,  lurchingly   with   stress,   at  a   snail's 

1  Moniteur,  &c.  (in  Hist.  Pari.  x.  244 — 253). 

^[Monsieur  and  Madame  had  wished  to  escape  on  Good  Friday,  but  had  been 
expressly  requested  by  the  King  to  wait  until  he  himself  escaped.  Louis  XVIII. 
wrote  an  account  of  his  own  escape,  which  was  published  in  1823  {see  Forneron,  i. 
234,  sqq.).     He  reached  Brussels  in  safety  on  22nd  (Bimbenet,  144,  sqg.).'\ 

^[Mdme  de  Lamballe  reached  Aimiale  (her  father-in-law's  house)  June  22nd  at 
6  P.M.  with  two  ladies-in-waiting.  She  only  stayed  half  an  hour,  and  then  went 
on  to  Boulogne,  via  Abbeville,  embarking  on  an  English  ship  for  Dover,  where 
she  arrived  on  23rd.  She  immediately  re-embarked  for  Ostend,  and  travelled 
straight  to  Brussels.  She  left  that  city  for  Aix-la-Chapelle  on  July  loth  [see  '  Mme 
de  Lamballe  d'apr^s  des  documents  int§dits,'  par  G.  Bertin  (Paris,  1888),  pp.  237-8, 
and  Klinckowtrom's  Fersen,  i.  4).] 

■•  [Valory  rode  ahead  as  hard  as  he  could  to  order  relays  of  horses  all  the  way  : 
there  was  nothing  unusual  in  this  (Browning,  63),  but  Valory  had  too  short  a  start 
of  the  berline,  and  took  a  long  time  paying  the  postillions  (Stockmar,  82)  and  paid 
three  times  too  much  at  each  stage.  There  were  six  horses  on  from  Bondy ;  the 
traces  broke  twice  between  Chaintrix  and  Chalons,  not  at  Etoges  (ibid.).^ 


THE  NEW  BERLINE  109 

pace  ;  noted  of  all  the  world.  The  Bodyguard  Couriers,  in  their 
yellow  liveries,  go  prancing  and  clattering  ;  loyal  but  stupid  ; 
unacquainted  with  all  things.  Stoppages  occur ;  and  breakages, 
to  be  repaired  at  Etoges.  King  Louis  too  will  dismount,  will 
walk  up  hills,^  and  enjoy  the  blessed  sunshine  : — with  eleven 
horses  and  double  drink-money,  and  all  furtherances  of  Nature 
and  Art,  it  will  be  found  that  Royalty,  flying  for  life,  accomplishes 
Sixty-nine  miles  in  Twenty-two  incessant  hours.^  Slow  Royalty  ! 
And  yet  not  a  minute  of  these  hours  but  is  precious :  on  minutes 
hang  the  destinies  of  Royalty  now. 

Readers,  therefore,  can  judge  in  what  humour  Duke  de  Choiseul 
might  stand  waiting,  in  the  village  of  Pont-de-Sommevelle,^  some 
leagues  beyond  Chalons,  hour  after  hour,  now  when  the  day  bends 
visibly  westward.  Choiseul  drove  out  of  Paris,  in  all  privity,  ten 
hours  before  their  Majesties'  fixed  time  ;  his  Hussars,  led  by 
Engineer  Goguelat,  are  here  duly,  come  'to  escort  a  Treasure 
that  is  expected  : '  but,  hour  after  hour,  is  no  Baroness  de  KorfTs 
Berline.     Indeed,  over  all  that  Northeast  Region,  on  the  skirts 

1  [Bimbenet,  following  the  depositions  taken  before  the  Court  of  Orleans,  says 
that  the  King  and  Queen  both  got  out  :  that  the  King  talked  to  the  peasants  : 
that  he  was  recognised  at  least  once  (p.  92),  and  Stockmar  confirms  this  ;  but 
Browning,  quoting  Mme  de  Tourzel's  M^moires  (published  in  1883),  says  the 
King  only  left  the  carriage  once.  The  children  walked  up  two  hills,  but  without 
causing  any  delay.  There  was  no  sunshine  till  late  in  the  afternoon  (Browning,  p. 
16;  Stockmar,  p.  82).] 

2  [The  distances  and  times  are  as  follows  : — 
Leave  Paris  2  a.m. 

To  Bondy  6  miles        .         .         .     arrive  3  A.M. 


Claye  10  miles  . 
Meaux  10  miles 


La  Fert^-sous-Jouarre  12  miles       ,,      7.30  A.M. 


Jtlontmirail  20  miles 
Etoges  17  miles 
Chaintrix  13  miles 
Chalons  13  miles    . 
Pont-Sommevesle  14  miles 
Saint-Menehould  15  miles 
Clermont  to  miles 
Varennes  10  miles . 


4.30  A.M. 
6  A.M. 


,,       10  .\.M. 
,,       12  noon. 

2  P.M. 
,,      5  P.M.   (allow  for  traces  breaking  twice). 

6.30  P.M. 

8  P.M. 
,,       9.30  P.M. 

II  P.M. 

These  are  Mr.  Browning's  figures  :  Stockmar  puts  everything  about  half  an  hour 
earlier.     Total  150  (not  69)  miles  in  21  (not  22)  hours.] 

^  [There  was  no  village  at  Pont-Sommevesle,  only  a  lonely  post-house  in  a  deep 
valley.  The  King  had  been  timed  to  get  there  at  3  P.M.  Choiseul  had  got 
there  by  11  a.m.,  Goguelat  and  Bondet  with  forty  hussars  at  noon.] 


no        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

of  Champagne  and  of  Lorraine,  where  the  great  Road  runs,  the 
agitation  is  considerable.  For  all  along,  from  this  Pont-de-Som- 
mevelle  Northeastward  as  far  as  Montmedi,  at  Post- villages  and 
Towns,  escorts  of  Hussars  and  Di'agoons  do  lounge  Avaiting  ;  a 
train  or  chain  of  Military  Escorts  ;  at  the  Montmedi  end  of  it 
our  bi'ave  Bouille  :  an  electric  thunder-chain  ;  which  the  invisible 
Bouille,  like  a  Father  Jove,  holds  in  his  hand — for  wise  purposes  ! 
Brave  Bouille  has  done  what  man  could  ;  has  spread  out  his 
electric  thunder-chain  of  Military  Escorts,  onwards  to  the  thresh- 
old of  Chalons  : '  it  waits  but  for  the  new  Korff  Berline  ;  to  receive 
it,  escort  it,  and,  if  need  be,  bear  it  off  in  whirlwind  of  military 
fire.  They  lie  and  lounge  there,  we  say,  these  fierce  Troopers  ; 
from  Montmedi  and  Stenai,  through  Clermont,  Sainte-Menehould 
to  utmost  Pont-de-Sommevelle,  in  all  Post-villages  ;  for  the  route 
shall  avoid  Verdun  and  great  Towns  ;  they  loiter  impatient,  '  till 
the  Treasure  arrive.' 

Judge  what  a  day  this  is  for  brave  Bouille  :  perhaps  the  first 
day  of  a  new  glorious  life  ;  surely  the  last  day  of  the  old  !  Also, 
and  indeed  still  more,  what  a  day,  beautiful  and  terrible,  for  your 
young  full-blooded  Captains  :  your  Dandoins,  Comte  de  Damas, 
Duke  de  Choiseul,  Engineer  Goguelat,  and  the  like ;  entrusted 
with  the  secret ! — Alas,  the  day  bends  ever  more  westward  ;  and 
no  Korff  Berline  comes  to  sight.  It  is  four  hours  beyond  the 
time,  and  still  no  Berline.  In  all  Village-streets,  Royalist 
Captains  go  lounging,  looking  often  Paris-ward  ;  with  face  of 
unconcern,  with  heart  full  of  black  care  :  rigorous  Quarter- 
masters can  hardly  keep  the  private  dragoons  from  cafes  and 
dramshops.-  Dawn  on  our  bewilderment,  thou  new  Berline ; 
dawn  on  us,  thou  Sun-Chariot  of  a  new  Berline,  with  the 
destinies  of  France  ! 

It  was  of  his  Majesty's  ordering,  this  military  array  of  Escorts  :  ^ 

'  [Bouilles  command  only  extended  to  Chalons  :  the  first  detachment  of  troops 
was  to  be  at  the  first  post-house  after  Chalons.] 

-D&laration  du  Sieur  La  Gache  du  Regiment  Royal-Dragons  (in  Choiseul,  pp. 
125-39)- 

^[^SeeXhe.  letter  of  the  King  to  Bouille  (dated  June  15th)  quoted  in  Bimbenet, 
58.] 


THE  NEW  BERLINE  111 

a  thing  solacing  the  Royal  imagination  with  a  look  of  security  and 
rescue  ;  yet,  in  reality,  creating  only  alarm,  and,  where  there  was 
otherwise  no  danger,  danger  without  end.  For  each  Patriot,  in 
these  Post-viDages,  asks  naturally  :  This  clatter  of  cavalry,  and 
marching  and  lounging  of  troops,  what  means  it  ?  To  escort  a 
Treasure  ?  Why  escort,  when  no  Patriot  will  steal  from  the 
Nation ;  or  where  is  your  Treasure  ? — -There  has  been  such 
marching  and  counter-marching  :  for  it  is  another  fatality,  that 
certain  of  these  Military  Escorts  came  out  so  early  as  yesterday  ; 
the  Nineteenth  not  the  Twentieth  of  the  month  being  the  day 
Jirst  appointed  ;  which  her  Majesty,  for  some  necessity  or  other, 
saw  good  to  alter.  And  now  consider  the  suspicious  nature  of 
Patriotism  ;  suspicious,  above  all,  of  Bouille  the  Aristocrat ;  and 
how  the  sour  doubting  humour  has  had  leave  to  accumulate  and 
exacei'bate  for  four-and-twenty  hours  ! 

At  Pont-de-Sommevelle,  these  Forty  foreign  Hussars  of  Gogue- 
lat  and  Duke  Choiseul  are  becoming  an  unspeakable  mystery  to 
all  men.  They  lounged  long  enough,  already,  at  Sainte-Mene- 
hould ;  lounged  and  loitered  till  our  National  Volunteers  there, 
all  risen  into  hot  wrath  of  doubt,  '  demanded  three  hundred 
fusils  of  their  Townhall,'  and  got  them.  At  which  same  moment 
too,  as  it  chanced,  our  Captain  Dandoins  was  just  coming  in, 
from  Clermont  with  his  troop,  at  the  other  end  of  the  Village.  ^  A 
fresh  troop  ;  alarming  enough ;  though  happily  they  are  only 
Dragoons  and  French !  So  that  Goguelat  with  his  Hussars  had 
to  ride,  and  even  to  do  it  fast ;  till  here  at  Pont-de-Sommevelle, 
where  Choiseul  lay  waiting,  he  found  resting-place.  Resting- 
place  as  on  burning  marie.  For  the  rumour  of  him  flies  abroad  ; 
and  men  run  to  and  fro  in  fright  and  anger :  Chalons  sends  forth 
exploratory  pickets  of  National  Volunteers  towards  this  hand  ; 
which  meet  exploratory  pickets,  coming  from  Sainte-Menehould, 
on  that.  What  is  it,  ye  whiskered  Hussars,  men  of  foreign  gut- 
tural speech  ;  in  the  name  of  Heaven,  what  is  it  that  brings  you  .'' 
A  Treasure  ? — exploratory  pickets  shake  their  heads.      The  hungry 

'  [D'Andoins  with  30  men  of  the  Roya/-A l/emavd  r^B-chtd  Saint-Menehould  at 

10  A.M.] 


112        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Peasants,  however,  know  too  well  what  Treasure  it  is  ;  Military 
seizure  for  rents,  feudalities  ;  which  no  Bailiff  could  make  us  pay  ! 
This  they  know  ; — and  set  to  jingling  their  Parish-bell  by  way  of 
tocsin  ;  with  rapid  effect !  Choiseul  and  Goguelat,  if  the  whole 
country  is  not  to  take  fire,  must  needs,  be  there  Berline,  be 
there  no  Berline,  saddle  and  ride.^ 

They  mount ;  and  this  parish  tocsin  happily  ceases.  They  ride 
slowly  Eastward  ;  towards  Sainte-Menehould ;  still  hoping  the 
Sun-Chariot  of  a  Berline  may  overtake  them.  Ah  me,  no  Berline  ! 
And  near  now  is  that  Sainte-Menehould,  which  expelled  us  in 
the  morning,  with  its  '  three  hundred  National  fusils ; '  which 
looks,  belike,  not  too  lovingly  on  Captain  Dandoins  and  his  fresh 
Dragoons,  though  only  French ; — -which,  in  a  word,  one  dare  not 
enter  the  second  time,  under  pain  of  explosion !  With  rather 
heavy  heart,  our  Hussar  Party  strikes  off  to  the  left ;  -  through 
by-ways,  through  pathless  hills  and  woods,  they,  avoiding  Sainte- 
Menehould  and  all  places  which  have  seen  them  heretofore,  will 
make  direct  for  the  distant  Village  of  Varennes.  It  is  probable 
they  will  have  a  roug'i  evening-ride. 

This  first  military  post,  therefore,  in  the  long  thunder-chain, 
has  gone  off  with  no  effect ;  or  with  worse,  and  your  chain  threatens 
to  entangle  itself ! — The  Great  Road,  however,  is  got  hushed  again 

1  [This  is  all  taken  from  Choiseul  and  is  inaccurate.  It  is  evident  (i)  that  Choiseul 
exaggerated  the  danger  from  the  peasants,  (2)  that  he  must  have  left  Pont- 
Sommevesle  some  long  time  before  5.45  (the  hour  he  assigns),  (3)  that  he  must 
have  ridden  fast,  when  he  did  start,  at  least  until  he  left  the  high  road,  (4)  that 
the  National  Guard  of  Saint-Menehould  were  not  armed  with  muskets  until  after  the 
departure  of  the  hussars.  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  soon  after  3  P.M.  that  Choiseul 
sent  Leonard  off  eastwards  with  the  message  (incredibly  foolish,  for  the  King  was 
not  due  till  3)  that  the  treasure  would  not  arrive  that  day,  and  that  he  was  going 
to  join  Boaille. 

This  then  is  the  first  great  mistake,  Choiseul's  departure  from  Pont-Sommevesle. 
His  second  mistake  (vid.  hifr. )  was  leaving  the  high  road  :  had  he  stuck  to  it  not 
only  would  he  have  been  overtaken  by  the  King's  carriage,  but  he  would  have  cut 
off  the  first  pursuer  (Viet  from  Chalons,  vid.  in/r.  note  on  p.  114) ;  his  instructions 
being  to  stop  all  traffic  behind  the  King  for  20  hours.  Goguelat  is  next  to  blame  ; 
he  had  no  business  to  leave  the  road  even  if  Choiseul  disobeyed  his  orders  :  his 
business  was  to  provide  the  relays  between  Pont-Sommevesle  and  Varennes  ;  we 
shall  see  presently  that  in  Varennes  itself  he  made  the  worst  mistake  of  all.  Both 
he  and  Choiseul  seem  to  have  completely  lost  their  heads  (Bimbenet,  90,  scjq.  ; 
Stockmar,  88,  sqq.).'\ 

-  [It  was  at  Orbeval,  some  distance  along  the  road  to  Saint-Menehould,  that  they 
left  the  high  road  :  they  reached  Varennes  at  12.30  A.M.  on  22nd,  one  and  a  half 
hours  after  the  King.] 


OLD-DRAGOON  DROUET  118 

into  a  kind  of  quietude,  though  one  of  the  wakefullest.  Indolent 
Dragoons  cannot,  by  any  Quartermaster,  be  kept  altogether  from 
the  dramshop ;  where  Patriots  drink,  and  will  even  treat,  eager 
enough  for  news.  Captains,  in  a  state  near  distraction,  beat  the 
dusty  highway,  with  a  face  of  indifference  ;  and  no  Sun-Chariot 
appears.  Why  lingers  it }  Incredible,  that  with  eleven  horses, 
and  such  yellow  Couriers  and  furtherances,  its  rate  should  be 
under  the  weightiest  dray-rate,  some  three  miles  an  hour  !  Alas, 
one  knows  not  whether  it  ever  even  got  out  of  Paris  ; — and  yet 
also  one  knows  not  whether,  this  very  moment,  it  is  not  at  the 
Village-end  !     One's  heart  flutters  on  the  verge  of  unutterabilities. 

CHAPTER  VI 

OLD-DRAGOON  DROUET 
In  this  manner,  however,  has  the  Day  bent  downwards.  Wearied 
mortals  are  creeping  home  from  their  field-labour ;  the  village- 
artisan  eats  with  relish  his  supper  of  herbs,  or  has  strolled  forth 
to  the  village-street  for  a  sweet  mouthful  of  air  and  human  news. 
Still  summer-eventide  everywhere  !  The  great  Sun  hangs  flaming 
on  the  utmost  Northwest ;  for  it  is  his  longest  day  this  year.  The 
hill-tops  rejoicing  will  ere  long  be  at  their  ruddiest,  and  blush 
Good-night.  The  thrush,  in  green  dells,  on  long-shadowed  leafy 
spray,  pours  gushing  his  glad  serenade,  to  the  babble  of  brooks 
grown  audibler  ;  silence  is  stealing  over  the  Earth.  Your  dusty 
Mill  of  Valmy,  as  all  other  mills  and  drudgeries,  may  furl  its 
canvass,  and  cease  swashing  and  circling.  The  swenkt  grinders 
in  this  Treadmill  of  an  Earth  have  ground  out  another  Day  ;  and 
lounge  there,  as  we  say,  in  village-groups  ;  movable,  or  ranked 
on  social  stone-seats ;  i  their  children,  mischievous  imps,  sporting 
about  their  feet.  Unnotable  hum  of  sweet  human  gossip  rises 
from  this  Village  of  Sainte-Menehould,  as  from  all  other  villages.^ 
Gossip  mostly  sweet,  unnotable  ;  for  the  very  Dragoons  are  French 

'  Rapport  de  M.  Remy  (in  Choiseul,  p.  143). 

2  [Saint-Menehould  was  a  town  of  4,000  inhabitants  with  300  National  Guards 
(Stockmar,  95).] 

VOL,    II.  8 


114        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

and  gallant ;  nor  as  yet  has  the  Paris-and- Verdun  Diligence,  with 
its  leathern  bag,  rumbled  in,  to  terrify  the  minds  of  men. 

One  figure  nevertheless  we  do  note  at  the  last  door  of  the 
Village  :  that  figure  in  loose-flowing  nightgown,  of  Jean  Baptiste 
Drouet,  Master  of  the  Post  here.  An  acrid  choleric  man,  rather 
dangerous-looking ;  still  in  the  prime  of  life,  though  he  has 
served,  in  his  time,  as  a  Conde  Dragoon.^  This  day,  from  an 
early  hour  Drouet  got  his  choler  stirred,  and  has  been  kept 
fretting.  Hussar  Goguelat  in  the  morning  saw  good,  by  way  of 
thrift,  to  bargain  with  his  own  Innkeeper,  not  with  Drouet  regular 
Maiire  de  Poste,  about  some  gig-horse  for  the  sending  back  of  his 
gig  ;  which  thing  Drouet  perceiving  came  over  in  red  ire,  mena- 
cing the  Innkeeper,  and  would  not  be  appeased.  Wholly  an 
unsatisfactory  day.  For  Drouet  is  an  acrid  Patriot  too,  was  at 
the  Paris  Feast  of  Pikes  :  and  what  do  these  Bouille  soldiers 
mean  .''  Hussars, — with  their  gig,  and  a  vengeance  to  it ! — have 
hardly  been  thrust  out,  when  Dandoins  and  his  fresh  Dragoons 
arrive  from  Clermont,  and  stroll.  For  what  purpose  ?  Choleric 
Drouet  steps  out  and  steps  in,  with  long- flowing  nightgo^vn ; 
looking  abroad,  with  that  sharpness  of  faculty  which  stirred  choler 
gives  to  man.- 

On  the  other  hand,  mark  Captain  Dandoins  on  the  street  of 
that  same  Village  ;  sauntering  with  a  face  of  indifference,  a  heart 
eaten  of  black  care  !  For  no  KorfF  Berline  makes  its  appearance. 
The  great  Sun  flames  broader  towards  setting  :  one's  heart  flutters 
on  the  verge  of  dread  unutterabilities. 

1  [Drouet  was  28  years  old  at  the  time  ;  was  not  '  master  of  the  post '  but  son 
of  the  postmaster  (Bimbenet,  95),  and  not  to  be  confused  with  Napoleon's  general 
(afterwards  Marshal)  Drouet  d'Erlon.  After  the  eminent  service  to  his  country 
here  recorded,  Drouet  sat  in  the  Convention,  voted  the  King's  death,  was  taken 
prisoner  by  the  Austnans  at  the  siege  of  Maubeuge,  and  confined  till  1795,  when 
with  other  Conventionals  of  note  he  was  exchanged  for  Madame  Royale.  He 
was  imphcated  in  Babceuf's  conspiracy  but  amnestied,  became  sons-prdfet  of  Saint- 
Menehould  under  the  Empire,  and  after  the  Restoration  lived  at  Macon  under  a 
feigned  name,  dying  1824.] 

-  [Carlyle  did  not  know  that  the  Royal  Family  had  been  recognised  in  Chalons, 
and  that  the  first  courier  from  the  Assembly  had  sent  on  word  to  that  place  :  there- 
on the  postmaster,  Viet,  was  despatched  from  Chalons  and  it  was  his  arrival  that 
confirmed  the  suspicions  of  the  town  council  of  Saint-Menehould  ;  nor  that  d'Andoins 
had  received  Choiseul's  message  sent  by  Leonard  at  about  5,  and  had  ordered  his 
dragoons  to  unsaddle  only  about  half  an  hour  before  Valory's  arrival  (Bimbenet, 
96;  Stockmar,  91,  97-8).] 


OLD-DRAGOON  DROUET  115 

By  Heaven !  here  is  the  yellow  Bodyguard  Courier ;  spurring 
fast,  m  the  ruddy  evening  light !  Steady,  O  Dandoins,  stand  with 
inscrutable  indifferent  face  ;  though  the  yellow  blockhead  spurs 
past  the  Post-house  ;  inquires  to  find  it ;  and  stirs  the  Village,  all 
dehghted  with  his  fine  livery, — Lumbering  along  with  its  moun- 
tains of  bandboxes,  and  Chaise  behind,  the  Korff  Berline  rolls  in  ; 
huge  Acapulco-ship  with  its  Cockboat,  having  got  thus  far.  The 
eyes  of  the  Villagers  look  enlightened,  as  such  eyes  do  when  a 
coach-transit,  which  is  an  event,  occurs  for  them.  Strolling  Dra- 
goons respectfully,  so  fine  are  the  yellow  liveries,  bring  hand  to 
helmet ;  and  a  Lady  in  gypsy-hat  responds  with  a  grace  peculiar 
to  her.^  Dandoins  stands  with  folded  arms,  and  what  look  of 
indifference  and  disdainful  garrison-air  a  man  can,  while  the  heart 
is  like  leaping  out  of  him.  Curled  disdainful  moustachio  ;  care- 
less glance, — which  however  surveys  the  Village-groups,  and  does 
not  like  them.  With  his  eye  he  bespeaks  the  yellow  Courier, 
Be  quick,  be  quick  !  Thick-headed  Yellow  camiot  understand  the 
eye  ;  comes  up  mumbling,  to  ask  in  words  :  seen  of  the  village  ! 

Nor  is  Post-master  Drouet  unobservant,  all  this  while  :  but 
steps  out  and  steps  in,  with  his  long-flowing  nightgown,  in  the 
level  sunlight ;  prying  into  several  things.  When  a  man's  facul- 
ties, at  the  right  time,  are  sharpened  by  choler,  it  may  lead  to 
much.  That  Lady  in  slouched  gypsy-hat,  though  sitting  back 
in  the  Carriage,  does  she  not  resemble  some  one  we  have  seen, 
some  time ; — at  the  Feast  of  Pikes,  or  elsewhere  ?  And  this 
Grosse-Teie  in  round  hat  and  peruke,  which,  looking  rearward, 
pokes  itself  out  from  time  to  time,  methinks  there  are  features 

in    it ?      Quick,  Siem"   Guillaume,    Clerk   of  the    Directaire, 

bring  me  a  new  Assignat !  Drouet  scans  the  new  Assignat ; 
compares  the  Paper-money  Picture  with  the  Gross  Head  in 
round  hat  there:  by  Day  and  Night!  you  might  say  the  one 
was  an  attempted  Engraving  of  the  other.  And  this  march  of 
Troops  ;  tliis  sauntering  and  whispering, — I  see  it ! 

Drouet  Post-master  of  this  Village,  hot  Patriot,  Old- Dragoon 

'  Declaration  de  La  Gache  (in  Choiseul,  ubi  supra). 


116        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

of  Conde,  consider,  therefore,  what  thou  wilt  do.  And  fast,  for 
behold  the  new  Berline,  expeditiously  yoked,  cracks  whipcord, 
and  rolls  away ! — Drouet  dare  not,  on  the  spur  of  the  instant, 
clutch  the  bridles  in  his  own  two  hands ;  Dandoins,  with  broad- 
sword, might  hew  you  off.  Our  poor  Nationals,  not  one  of  them 
here,  have  three  hundred  fusils,  but  then  no  powder ;  besides 
one  is  not  sure,  only  morally-certain.  Drouet,  as  an  adroit  Old- 
Dragoon  of  Conde,  does  what  is  advisablest ;  privily  bespeaks 
Clerk  Guillaume,  Old-Dragoon  of  Conde  he  too  ;  privily,  while 
Clerk  Guillaume  is  saddling  two  of  the  fleetest  horses,  slips  over 
to  the  Townhall  to  whisper  a  word  ;  then  mounts  with  Clerk 
Guillaume  ;  and  the  two  bound  eastward  in  pursuit,  to  see  what 
can  be  done.^ 

They  bound  eastward,  in  sharp  trot :  their  moral- certainty 
permeating  the  Village,  from  the  Townhall  outwards,  in  busy 
whispers.  Alas !  Captain  Dandoins  orders  his  Dragoons  to 
mount ;  but  they,  complaining  of  long  fast,  demand  bread-and- 
cheese  first ; — before  which  brief  repast  can  be  eaten,  the  whole 
Village  is  permeated ;  not  whispering  now,  but  blustering  and 
shrieking !  National  Volunteers,  in  hurried  muster,  shriek  for 
gunpowder ;  Dragoons  halt  between  Patriotism  and  Rule  of  the 
Service,  between  bread-and-cheese  and  fixed  bayonets  :  Dandoins 
hands  secretly  his  Pocket-book,  with  its  secret  despatches,  to 
the  rigorous  Quartermaster :  the  very  Ostlers  have  stable-forks 
and  flails.  The  rigorous  Quartermaster,  half-saddled,  cuts  out 
his  way  with  the  sword's  edge,  amid  levelled  bayonets,  amid 
Patriot  vociferations,  adjurations,  flail-strokes  ;  and  rides  frantic  ; 
— few  or  even  none  following  hiin ;  the  rest,  so  sweetly  con- 
strained, consenting  to  stay  there. - 

And  thus  the  new  Berline  rolls  ;  and  Drouet  and  Guillaume 

1  [The  minutes  of  the  Municipality  of  Saint-Menehould  leave  no  doubt  of  the  fact 
that  Drouet  did  not  follow  the  King  of  his  own  initiative,  but  was  despatched 
together  with  Guillaume  by  official  authority.  Viet  rode  in  from  Chalons  just  as 
Drouet  started  (Browning,  29  ;  Stockmar,  99).] 

-  Di^claration  de  La  Gache  in  Choiseul,  p.  134.  [La  Cache  in  fact  alone  did  his 
duty.  D'Andoins  was  not  sorry  to  have  his  troopers  detained  by  the  townsfolk  of 
Saint-Menehould.  He  seems  to  have  been  a  singularly  incompetent  person 
(Stockmar,  98).] 


THE  NIGHT  OF  SPURS  117 

gallop  after  it,  and  Dandoins'  Troopers  or  Trooper  gallops  after 
them  ;  and  Sainte-Menehould,  with  some  leagues  of  the  King's 
Highway,  is  in  explosion  ; — and  your  Military  thunder-chain  has 
gone  off  in  a  self-destructive  manner  ;  one  may  fear,  with  the 
frightfullest  issues. 

CHAPTER  VII 

THE  NIGHT  OF  SPURS 

This  comes  of  mysterious  Escorts,  and  a  new  Berline  with  eleven 
horses  :  '  he  that  has  a  secret  should  not  only  hide  it,  but  hide 
that  he  has  it  to  hide.'  Your  first  Military  Escort  has  exploded 
self-destructive  ;  and  all  Military  Escorts,  and  a  suspicious  Country 
will  now  be  up,  explosive ;  comparable  not  to  victorious  thunder. 
Comparable,  say  rather,  to  the  first  stirring  of  an  Alpine  Ava- 
lanche ;  which,  once  stir  it,  as  here  at  Sainte-Menehould,  will 
spread, — all  round,  and  on  and  on,  as  far  as  Stenai ;  thundering 
with  wild  ruin,  till  Patriot  Villagers,  Peasantry,  Military  Escorts, 
new  Berline  and  Royalty  are  down, — ^jumbling  in  the  Abyss  ! 

The  thick  shades  of  Night  are  falling.  Postilions  crack  and 
whip :  the  Royal  Berline  is  through  Clermont,  where  Colonel 
Comte  de  Damas  got  a  word  whispered  to  it ;  is  safe  through, 
towards  Varennes  ;  rushing  at  the  rate  of  double  drink-money : 
an  Unknown,  '  Inconnu  on  horseback,'  shrieks  earnestly  some 
hoarse  whisper,  not  audible,  into  the  rushing  Carriage -window, 
and  vanishes,  left  in  the  night. i  August  Travellers  palpitate ; 
nevertheless  overwearied  Nature  sinks  every  one  of  them  into 
a  kind  of  sleep.  Alas,  and  Drouet  and  Clerk  Guillaume  spur ; 
taking  side-roads,  for  shortness,  for  safety  ;  scattering  abroad  that 
moral-certainty  of  theirs  ;  which  flies,  a  bird  of  the  air  carrying  it ! 

And  your  rigorous  Quartermaster  spurs  ;  awakening  hoarse 
trumpet-tone, — as  here  at  Clermont,^  calling  out  Dragoons  gone 

'  Campan,  ii.  159. 

'•^[Clermont  in  Argonne  was  a  little  town  of  1,500  people.  Damas  had  100  dragoons 
of  the  R6giment  Monsieur.  Like  d'Andoins  he  had  received  Choiseul's  message 
by  Leonard  and  half  believed  it— nevertheless  he  kept  to  his  orders  till  9  p.m. 
Then  he  let  his  dragoons  go  to  bed  ;  only  five  men  followed  Remy  probably  because 
only  five  were  on  guard  (Stockmar,  loi),] 


118        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

to  bed.  Brave  Colonel  de  Damas  has  them  mounted,  in  part, 
these  Clermont  men  ;  young  Comet  Remy  dashes  ofF  with  a  few. 
But  the  Patriot  Magistracy  is  out  here  at  Clermont  too  ;  National 
Guards  shrieking  for  ball-cartridges  ;  and  the  Village  '  illuminates 
itself;' — deft  Patriots  springing  out  of  bed;  alertly,  in  shirt  or 
shift,  striking  a  light ;  sticking  up  each  his  farthing  candle,  or 
penurious  oil-cruise,  till  all  glitters  and  glimmers  ;  so  deft  are 
they !  A  camisado,  or  shirt-tumult,  everywhere  :  storm-bell  set 
a-ringing  ;  village-drum  beating  furious  ginerale,  as  here  at 
Clermont,  under  illumination ;  distracted  Patriots  pleading  and 
menacing !  Brave  young  Colonel  de  Damas,  in  that  uproar  of 
distracted  Patriotism,  speaks  some  fire-sentences  to  what  Troopers 
he  has :  "  Comrades  insulted  at  Sainte-Menehould  :  King  and 
Country  calling  on  the  brave  ; "  then  gives  the  fire- word.  Draw 
swords.  Whereupon,  alas,  the  Troopers  only  S7nite  their  sword- 
handles,  driving  them  further  home  !  "  To  me,  whoever  is  for 
the  King !  "  cries  Damas  in  despair ;  and  gallops,  he  with  some 
poor  loyal  Two,  of  the  Subaltern  sort,  into  the  bosom  of  the 
Night.  1 

Night  unexampled  in  the  Clermontais ;  shortest  of  the  year ; 
remarkablest  of  the  century :  Night  deserving  to  be  named  of 
Spurs  !  Cornet  Remy,  and  those  Few  he  dashed  off  with,  has 
missed  his  road  ;  is  galloping  for  hours  towards  Verdun ;  then, 
for  hours,  across  hedged  country,  through  roused  hamlets,  to- 
wards Varennes.  Unlucky  Cornet  Remy ;  unluckier  Colonel 
Damas,  with  whom  there  ride  desperate  only  some  loyal  Two ! 
More  ride  not  of  that  Clermont  Escort :  of  other  Escorts,  in 
other  Villages,  not  even  Two  may  ride  ;  but  only  all  curvet  and 
prance, — impeded  by  storm-bell  and  your  Village  illuminating 
itself. 

And  Drouet  rides  and  Clerk  Guillaume  ;  and  the  Country 
runs. — Goguelat  and  Duke  Choiseul  are  plunging  thi'ough  mor- 
asses, over  cliffs,  over  stock  and  stone,  in  the  shaggy  woods  of 
the  Clermontais ;  by  tracts  ;  or  trackless,  with  guides ;  Hussars 

1  Proces-verbal  du  Directoire  de  Clermont  (in  Choiseul,  pp.  189-95). 


THE  NIGHT  OF  SPURS  119 

tumbling  into  pitfalls,  and  lying  'swooned  three  quarters  of  an 
hour,'  the  rest  refusing  to  march  without  them.  What  an 
evening-ride  from  Pont-de-Sommevelle  ;  what  a  thirty  hours, 
since  Choiseul  quitted  Paris,  with  Queen's-valet  Leonard  in  the 
chaise  by  him !  Black  Care  sits  behind  the  rider.  Thus  go 
they  plunging ;  rustle  the  owlet  from  his  branchy  nest ;  champ 
the  sweet-scented  forest-herb,  queen-of-the-meadows  spilling  her 
spikenard  ;  and  frighten  the  ear  of  Night.  But  hark !  towards 
twelve  o'clock,  as  one  guesses,  for  the  very  stars  are  gone  out : 
sound  of  the  tocsin  from  Varennes  ?  Checking  bridle,  the 
Hussar  Officer  listens  :  "  Some  fire  undoubtedly  !  " — yet  rides 
on,  with  double  breathlessness,  to  verify. 

Yes,  gallant  friends  that  do  your  utmost,  it  is  a  certain  sort  of 
fire  :  difficult  to  quench. — The  Korff  Berline,  fairly  ahead  of  all 
this  riding  Avalanche,  reached  the  little  paltry  Village  of  Va- 
rennes ^  about  eleven  o'clock  ;  hopeful,  in  spite  of  that  hoarse- 
whispering  Unknown.  Do  not  all  towns  now  lie  behind  us; 
Verdun  avoided,  on  our  right .''  Within  wind  of  Bouille  himself, 
in  a  manner ;  and  the  darkest  of  midsummer  nights  favouring 
us !  And  so  we  halt  on  the  hill-top  at  the  South  end  of  the 
Village  ;  expecting  our  relay ;  which  young  Bouille,  Bouille's 
own  son,  with  his  Escort  of  Hussars,  was  to  have  ready ;  for  in 
this  Village  is  no  Post.  Distracting  to  think  of:  neither  horse 
nor  Hussar  is  here  !  Ah,  and  stout  horses,  a  proper  relay  be- 
longing to  Duke  Choiseul,  do  stand  at  hay,  but  in  the  Upper 
Village  over  the  Bridge ;  and  we  know  not  of  them.  Hussars 
likewise  do  wait,  but  drinking  in  the  taverns.  For  indeed  it  is 
six  hours  -  beyond  the  time  ;  young  Bouille,  silly  stripling,  think- 

1  [Varennes  was  about  the  same  size  as  Clermont — 1,500  in  population.  It  is  28 
miles  from  Stenay,  where  was  Bouille  with  the  whole  R^gimetit  Royal-AlLemand, 
and  20  miles  from  Verdun  (on  the  other  road).  The  town  consists  of  one  long 
narrow  street,  half  downhill  and  half  uphill,  divided  at  the  bottom  by  the  river 
Aire.  Choiseul's  horses  were  waiting  on  the  far  side  of  the  bridge  ;  they  should 
have  waited  at  the  nearer  entrance  to  the  town.] 

2[At  the  fastest  reckoning  it  was  not  above  three  hours  beyond  the  time.  It 
was  Goguelat  who  had  made  this  most  fatal  of  all  the  mistakes  in  countermanding 
Choiseul's  orders  to  have  the  horses  on  the  near  side  of  Varennes.  Not  Louis  but 
Charles  Bouill6  was  in  command  :  he  had  not  gone  to  bed  but  had  retired  to  his 
own  room  with  a  certain  M.  Raigecourt.  But  he  was  at  the  further  end  of  the 
town  at  the    Grand  Monarque  Inn,   whereas   the   60  hussars   who   were  at  the 


120        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

ing  the  matter  over  for  this  night,  has  retired  to  bed.  And  so 
our  yellow  Couriers,  inexperienced,  must  rove,  groping,  bungling, 
through  a  Village  mostly  asleep :  Postilions  will  not,  for  any 
money,  go  on  with  the  tired  horses  ;  not  at  least  without  refresh- 
ment ;  not  they,  let  the  Valet  in  round  hat  argue  as  he  likes. 

Miserable  !  '  For  five-and-thirty  minutes  '  by  the  King's  watch, 
the  Berline  is  at  a  dead  stand :  ^  Round-hat  arguing  with  Chum- 
boots  ;  tired  horses  slobbering  their  meal-and-water ;  yellow 
Couriers  groping,  bungling  ; — young  Bouille  asleep,  all  the  while, 
in  the  Upper  Village,  and  Choiseul's  fine  team  standing  there 
at  hay.  No  help  for  it ;  not  with  a  King's  ransom  ;  the  horses 
deliberately  slobber.  Round- hat  argues,  Bouille  sleeps.  And 
mark  now,  in  the  thick  night,  do  not  two  Horsemen,  with  jaded 
trot,  come  clank-clanking  ;  and  start  with  half-pause,  if  one 
noticed  them,  at  sight  of  this  dim  mass  of  a  Berline,  and  its 
dull  slobbering  and  arguing ;  then  prick  off  faster,  into  the 
Village  ?  ^  It  is  Drouet,  he  and  Clerk  Guillaume  !  Still  ahead, 
they  two,  of  the  whole,  riding  hurlyburly  ;  unshot,  though  some 
brag  of  having  chased  them.  Perilous  is  Drouet's  errand  also ; 
but  he  is  an  Old-Dragoon,  with  his  wits  shaken  thoroughly 
awake. 

The  Village  of  Varennes  lies  dark  and  slumberous  ;  a  most  un- 
level  Village,  of  inverse  saddle-shape,  as  men  write.  It  sleeps ; 
the  rushing  of  the  River  Aire  singing  lullaby  to  it.  Neverthe- 
less from  the  Golden  Arm,  Bras  d'Or  Tavern,  across  that  sloping 
Marketplace,  there  still  comes  shine  of  social  light ;  comes 
voice  of  rude  drovers,  or  the  like,  who  have  not  yet  taken  the 
stirrup-cup ;  Boniface  Le  Blanc,  in  white  apron,  serving  them : 
cheerful  to  behold.  To  this  Bras  d'Or,  Drouet  enters,  alacrity 
looking  through  his  eyes ;    he  nudges  Boniface,  in  all  privacy, 

nearer  end  were  under  Lieutenant  Robrig,  a  boy  of  i8,  who  was  not  in  the  secret, 
and  had  retired  to  their  quarters.  Why  Goguelat  made  the  change  in  Choiseul's 
orders  is  quite  past  comprehension  (Stockmar,  109).] 

1  [Carlyle  doesn't  mention  tliat  the  Queen  got  down  and  knocked  at  the  door  of 
a  M.  de  PrtSfontaine,  to  ask  where  relays  were  to  be  obtained  (.Browning,  73).] 

2  [Drouet  was  accompanied  by  two  other  riders  from  Clermont  and  as  he  passed 
the  berline  called  out  to  warn  the  postillions  (ibid.).  Bimbenet  makes  Drouet  reach 
Varennes  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  the  King  (p.  100).  J 


THE  NIGHT  OF  SPURS  121 

"  Camnrade,  es-tu  bon  Patriote,  Art  thou  a  good  Patriot?" — "Si 
jesuisi"  answers  Boniface. — "In  that  case,"  eagerly  whispers 
Drouet — what  whisper  is  needful,  heard   of  Boniface  alone.^ 

And  now  see  Boniface  Le  Blanc  bustling,  as  he  never  did  for 
the  jolliest  toper.  See  Drouet  and  Guillaume,  dexterous  Old- 
Dragoons,  instantly  down  blocking  the  Bridge,  with  a  '  furniture- 
wagon  they  find  there,'  with  whatever  wagons,  tumbrils,  barrels, 
barrows  their  hands  can  lay  hold  of; — till  no  carriage  can  pass. 
Then  swiftly,  the  Bridge  once  blocked,  see  them  take  station 
hard  by,  under  Varennes  Archway  :  ^  joined  by  Le  Blanc,  Le 
Blanc's  Brother,  and  one  or  two  alert  Patriots  he  has  roused. 
Some  half-dozen  in  all,  with  National  muskets,  they  stand  close, 
waiting  under  the  Archway,  till  that  same  Korff  Berline  rumble 
up. 

It  rumbles  up  :  A  lie  la  I  lanterns  flash  out  from  under  coat- 
skirts,  bridles  chuck  in  strong  fists,  two  National  nmskets  level 
themselves  fore  and  aft  through  the  two  Coach-doors  :  "  Mes- 
dames,  your  Passports  ?  " — Alas,  alas  !  Sieur  Sausse,"^  Procureur 
of  the  Township,  Tallow-chandler  also  and  Grocer,  is  there,  with 
official  grocer-politeness  ;  Drouet  with  fierce  logic  and  ready  wit : 
— The  respected  Travelling  Party,  be  it  Baroness  de  KorflTs,  or 
persons  of  still  higher  consequence,  will  perhaps  please  to  rest 
itself  in  M.  Sausse's  till  the  dawn  strike  up ! 

0  Louis  ;  O  hapless  Marie-Antoinette,  fated  to  pass  thy  life 
with  such  men  !  Phlegmatic  Louis,  art  thou  but  lazy  semi-ani- 
mate phlegm  then,  to  the  centre  of  thee  ?  King,  Captain-General, 
Sovereign  Frank  !  if  thy  heart  ever  formed,  since  it  began  beat- 
ing under  the  name  of  heart,  any  resolution  at  all,  be  it  now 
ithen,  or  never  in  this  world  : — "  Violent  nocturnal  individuals, 
and  if  it  were  persons  of  high  consequence  ?     And  if  it  were  the 

1  Deux  Amis,  vi.  139-78. 

^[Valory  had  already  returned  saying  that  he  had  found  the  relays  at  the 
'Grand  Monarqitc  and,  thirty-five  minutes  having  been  wasted,  the  carriage  de- 
scended the  hill.  The  archway  was  some  distance  above  and  before  the  bridge 
.(Stockmar,  113).] 

5  [Sauce,  not  Sausse.  Carlyle  does  not  say  that  the  travellers  replied  they  were 
going  to  Frankfort,  and  that  some  one  (probably  Drouet)  replied  \tben  you  took ihe 
wrong  road  before  Clermont '  (Bimbenet,  loi  ;  Browning,  73).!] 


122        THE  FRENCH  EE VOLUTION 

King  himself?  Has  the  King  not  the  power,  which  all  beggars 
have,  of  travelling  unmolested  on  his  own  Highway  ?  Yes  :  it  is 
the  King  ;  and  tremble  ye  to  know  it !  The  King  has  said,  in 
this  one  small  matter ;  and  in  France,  or  under  God's  Throne,  is 
no  power  that  shall  gainsay.  Not  the  King  shall  ye  stop  here 
under  this  your  miserable  Archway  ;  but  his  dead  body  only,  and 
answer  it  to  Heaven  and  Earth.  To  me.  Bodyguards  ;  Postilions, 
en  avant  !  " — One  fancies  in  that  case  the  pale  paralysis  of  these 
two  Le  Blanc  musketeers  ;  the  drooping  of  Drouet's  underjaw ; 
and  how  Procureur  Sausse  had  melted  like  tallow  in  ftirnace- 
heat :  Louis  faring  on ;  in  some  few  steps  awakening  Young 
Bouille,  awakening  relays  and  Hussars  :  ^  triumphant  entry,  with 
cavalcading  high-bi-andishing  Escort,  and  Escorts,  into  Montmedi ; 
and  the  whole  course  of  French  History  different ! 

Alas,  it  was  not  in  the  poor  phlegmatic  man.  Had  it  been  in 
him,  French  History  had  never  come  under  this  Varennes  Arch- 
way to  decide  itself — He  steps  out ;  all  step  out.  Procureur 
Sausse  gives  his  grocer-arms  to  the  Queen  and  Sister  Elizabeth  ; 
Majesty  taking  the  two  children  by  the  hand.  And  thus  they 
walk,  coolly  back,  over  the  Marketplace,  to  Procureur  Sausse's ; 
mount  into  his  small  upper  story  ;  where  straightway  His  Majesty 
'  demands  refreshments.'  Demands  refreshments,  as  is  written  ; 
gets  bread-and-cheese  with  a  bottle  of  Burgundy  ;  '^  and  remarks, 
that  it  is  the  best  Burgundy  he  ever  drank ! 

Meanwhile,  the  Varennes  Notables,  and  all  men,  official  and 
non-official,  are  hastily  drawing  on  their  breeches ;  getting  their 
fighting  gear.  Mortals  half-dressed  tumble  out  barrels,  lay  felled 
trees ;  scouts  dart  off  to  all  the  four  winds, — the  tocsin  begins 
clanging,   '  the  Village  illuminates  itself     Very  singular :  how 

1  [It  seems  extraordinary  that  all  the  noise,  alarm  bells,  etc. ,  should  not  on  a 
quiet  summer  night  have  informed  young  Bouill6  and  Raigecourt  earlier.  They  were 
not  in  bed,  but  sitting  at  an  open  window  with  lights  out ;  and  yet  for  nearly  an  hour 
they  seem  to  have  heard  nothing.  When  they  did  come  down  they  found  their 
house  surrounded  by  armed  men ;  they  cut  their  way  through  with  difficulty  and 
fled  to  Stenay  (Stockmar,  117-8).] 

2  [This  story  seems  quite  apocryphal,  though  characteristic  of  Louis  if  it  were 
true ;  the  Queen  asked  for  some  hot  water  and  a  little  wine,  and  a  pair  of  sheets 
for  the  children  (who  must  have  been  worn  out).  The  Royal  Family  had  plenty 
of  food  with  them  in  the  carriage  (Browning,  37).] 


THE  NIGHT  OF  SPURS  123 

these  little  Villages  do  managCj  so  adroit  are  they,  when  startled 
in  midnight  alarm  of  war.  Like  little  adroit  municipal  rattle- 
snakes, suddenly  awakened  :  for  their  storm-bell  rattles  and  rings  ; 
their  eyes  glisten  luminous  (with  tallow-light),  as  in  rattle-snake 
ire  ;  and  the  Village  will  sting.  Old-Dragoon  Drouet  is  our  en- 
gineer and  generalissimo  ;  valiant  as  a  Ruy  Diaz  : — Now  or  never, 
ye  Patriots,  for  the  soldiery  is  coming ;  massacre  by  Austrians, 
by  Aristocrats,  wars  more  than  civil,  it  all  depends  on  you  and 
the  hour ! — National  Guards  rank  themselves,  half-buttoned : 
mortals,  we  say,  still  only  in  breeches,  in  under-petticoat,  tumble 
out  barrels  and  lumber,  lay  felled  trees  for  barricades  :  the  Village 
will  sihig.  Rabid  Democracy,  it  would  seem,  is  7iot  confined  to 
Paris,  then  ?  Ah  no,  whatsoever  Courtiers  might  talk  ;  too  clearly 
no.  This  of  dying  for  one's  King  is  grown  into  a  dying  for  one's 
self,  against  the  King,  if  need  be. 

And  so  our  riding  and  running  Avalanche  and  Hurlyburly  has 
reached  the  Abyss,  Korff  Berline  foremost ;  and  may  pour  itself 
thither,  and  jumble  :  endless  !  For  the  next  six  hours,  need  we 
ask  if  there  was  a  clattering  far  and  wide  ?  Clattering  and  tocsin- 
ing  and  hot  tumult,  over  all  the  Clermontais,  spreading  through 
the  Three-Bishopricks  :  Dragoon  and  Hussar  Troops  galloping  on 
roads  and  no-roads  ;  National  Guards  arming  and  starting  in  the 
dead  of  night ;  tocsin  after  tocsin  transmitting  the  alarm.  In 
some  forty  minutes,^  Goguelat  and  Choiseul,  with  their  wearied 
Hussars,  reach  Varennes.  Ah,  it  is  no  fire,  then ;  or  a  fire  diffi- 
cult to  quench !  They  leap  the  tree-barricades,  in  spite  of 
National  sergeant ;  they  enter  the  village,  Choiseul  instructing 
his  Troopers  how  the  matter  really  is ;  who  respond  interjection- 
ally,  in  their  guttural  dialect,  "  Der  Konig  ;  die  Koniginn  !  "  and 
seem  stanch.  These  now,  in  their  stanch  humour,  will,  for  one 
thing,  beset  Procureur  Sausse's  house.  Most  beneficial :  had  not 
Drouet  stormfuUy  ordered  otherwise  ;  and  even  bellowed,  in  his 


'  [This  must  mean  forty  minutes  after  the  King's  arrest ;  directly  Choiseul 
arrived  he  went  about  the  town  trying  to  collect  hussars,  and  so  missed  Rohrig 
who  was  doing  the  same  (Stockmar,  117).] 


124        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

extremity,  "Cannoneers,  to  your  guns  !  " — two  old  honeycombed 
Field-pieces,  empty  of  all  but  cobwebs  ;  the  rattle  whereof,  as  the 
Cannoneers  with  assured  countenance  trundled  them  up,  did 
nevertheless  abate  the  Hussar  ardour,  and  produce  a  respectfuller 
ranking  further  back.  Jugs  of  wine,  handed  over  the  ranks, — 
for  the  German  throat  too  has  sensibility, — will  complete  the 
business.  When  Engineer  Goguelat,  some  hour  or  so  afterwards, 
steps  forth,  the  response  to  him  is — ^a  hiccuping  Five  la  Nation  ! 

What  boots  it?  Goguelat,  Choiseul,  now  also  Count  Damas, 
and  all  the  Varennes  Officiality  are  with  the  King  ;  and  the  King 
can  give  no  order,  form  no  opinion  ;  but  sits  there,  as  he  has  ever 
done,  like  clay  on  potter's  wheel ;  perhaps  the  absurdest  of  all 
pitiable  and  pardonable  clay-figures  that  now  circle  under  the 
Moon.  He  will  go  on,  next  morning,^  and  take  the  National  Guard 
with  him ;  Sausse  permitting !  Hapless  Queen :  with  her  two 
children  laid  there  on  the  mean  bed,  old  Mother  Sausse  kneeling 
to  Heaven,  with  tears  and  an  audible  prayer,  to  bless  them  ;  im- 
perial Marie- Antoinette  near  kneeling  to  Son  Sausse  and  Wife 
Sausse,  amid  candle-boxes  and  treacle-barrels, — in  vain !  There 
are  Three  thousand  National  Guards  got  in  ;  before  long  they  will 
count  Ten  thousand  :  tocsins  spreading  like  fire  on  dry  heath,  or 
far  faster. 

Young  Bouille,  roused  by  this  Varennes  tocsin,  has  taken 
horse,  and — fled  towards  his  Father.  Thitherward  also  rides, 
in  an  almost  hysterically  desperate  manner,  a  certain  Sieur  Au- 
briot,  Choiseul's  Orderly  ;  swimming  dark  rivers,  our  Bridge  being 
blocked  ;  spurring  as  if  the  Hell-hunt  were  at  his  heels.^  Through 
the  village  of  Dun,  he  galloping  still  on,  scatters  the  alarm ;  at 
Dun  brave  Captain  Deslons  and  his  Escort  of  a  Hundred  saddle 
and  ride.     Deslons  too  gets  into  Varennes  ;  leaving  his  Himdred 

i[Carlyle  fails  to  point  out  that  Sauce  kept  on  lulling  the  King's  suspicions  by 
repeated  promises  that  he  should  go  on  in  the  morning,  and  that  Louis  expected 
that  by  the  morning  Bouill6  and  his  whole  regiment  would  arrive  and  rescue  him. 
Goguelat  did  make  one  attempt  to  disperse  the  crowd  before  Sauce's  house,  but 
was  slightly  wounded  and  taken  to  the  Inn.  The  Municipality  debated  all  night 
what  was  to  be  done,  for  a  strong  party  of  them  feared  Bouill6's  revenge  (Bimbenet, 
106-7;  Stockmar,  119,  sqq.).'\ 

2  Rapport  de  M.  Aubriot  (in  Choiseul,  pp.  150-7), 


THE  NIGHT  OF  SPURS  125 

outside,  at  the  tree-barricade  ;  offers  to  cut  King  Louis  out,  if  he 
will  order  it:  but  unfortunately  "the  work  will  prove  hot:" 
whereupon  King  Louis  has  "no  orders  to  give."  ^ 

And  so  the  tocsin  clangs,  and  Dragoons  gallop,  and  can  do 
nothing,  having  galloped :  National  Guards  stream  in  like  the 
gathering  of  ravens  :  your  exploding  Thunder-chain,  falling  Ava- 
lanche, or  what  else  we  liken  it  to,  does  play,  with  a  vengeance, — 
up  now  as  far  as  Stenai  and  Bouille  himself.^  Brave  Bouille,  son 
of  the  whirlwind,  he  saddles  Royal- Allemand  ;  speaks  fire- words, 
kindling  heart  and  eyes  ;  distributes  twenty-five  gold-louis  a  com- 
pany : — Ride,  Royal- Allemand,  long-famed  :  no  Tuileries  Charge 
and  Necker-Orleans  Bust-Procession  ;  a  very  King  made  captive, 
and  world  all  to  win  ! — Such  is  the  Night  deserving  to  be  named 
of  Spurs. 

At  six  o'clock  two  things  have  happened.  Lafayette's  Aide-de- 
camp, Romoeuf,'^  riding  a  franc  etrier,  on  that  old  Herb-merchant's 
route,  quickened  during  the  last  stages,  has  got  to  Varennes ; 
where  the  Ten  thousand  now  furiously  demand,  with  fury  of  panic 
terror,  that  Royalty  shall  forthwith  return  Paris-ward,  that  there 
be  not  infinite  bloodshed.  Also,  on  the  other  side, '  English  Tom,' 
Choiseul'sjoArei,  flying  with  that  Choiseul  relay,  has  met  Bomlle 
on  the  heights  of  Dun  ;  the  adamantine  brow  flushed  with  dark 
thunder ;  thunderous  rattle  of  Royal-Allemand  at  his  heels. 
English  Tom  answers  as  he  can  the  brief  question.  How  it  is 
at  Varennes  ? — then  asks  in  turn.  What  he,  English  Tom,  with 
M.  de  Choiseul's  horses,  is  to  do,  and  whither  to  ride  ? — To  the 
Bottomless  Pool !  answers  a  thunder-voice  ;  then  again  speaking 
and  spuiTing,  orders  Royal-Allemand  to  the  gallop  ;  and  vanishes, 

1  Extrait  d'un  Rapport  de  M.  Desloiis  (in  Choiseul,  pp.  164-7).  [D'Eslon  arrived 
at  s  A.M.  ;  he  had  got  the  news  from  Rohrig  (who  had  also  fled),  not  from  Charles 
Bouill6  :  Dun  is  about  15  miles  east  of  Varennes  (Bimbenet,  no,  250).] 

2  Bouille,  ii.  74-6. 

3  [With  RomcEuf,  who  had  the  decree  of  the  Assembly  for  the  King's  arrest  in 
his  pocket,  arrived  Bayou,  who  entered  the  house  first  and  frightened  the  King 
with  false  news  of  a  terrible  outbreak  in  Paris.  Romoeuf,  who  loathed  the  part  he 
had  to  play,  would  willingly  have  saved  the  King  if  he  could.  The  King  set 
himself  steadily  to  gain  time  till  the  arrival  of  Bouill(?,  and  to  put  off  his  departure 
for  Paris  by  all  possible  e.Kpedients  (Stockmar,  124-5).] 


126        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

swearing  [enjurant).^  'Tis  the  last  of  our  brave  Bouille.  Within 
sight  of  Varennes,  he  having  drawn  bridle,  calls  a  council  of 
officers ;  finds  that  it  is  in  vain.  King  Louis  has  departed,  con- 
senting : "  amid  the  clangour  of  universal  stormbell ;  amid  the 
tramp  of  Ten  thousand  armed  men,  already  arrived ;  and  say,  of 
Sixty  thousand  flocking  thither.  Brave  Deslons,  even  without 
'  orders,'  darted  at  the  River  Aire  with  his  Hundred  ;  ^  swam  one 
branch  of  it,  could  not  the  other ;  and  stood  there,  dripping  and 
panting,  with  inflated  nostril ;  the  Ten  thousand  answering  him 
with  a  shout  of  mockery,  the  new  Berline  lumbering  Paris-ward 
its  weary  inevitable  way.  No  help,  then,  in  Earth ;  nor,  in  an 
age  not  of  miracles,  in  Heaven  ! 

That  night,  '  Marquis  de  Bouille  and  twenty-one  more  of  us 
'  rode  over  the  Frontiers :  the  Bernardine  monks  at  Orval  in 
*  Luxemburg  gave  us  supper  and  lodging.'  ^  With  little  of  speech, 
Bouille  rides ;  with  thoughts  that  do  not  brook  speech.  North- 
ward, towards  uncertainty,  and  the  Cimmerian  Night :  towards 
West-Indian  Isles,  for  with  thin  Emigrant  delirium  the  son  of  the 
whirlwind  cannot  act ;  towards  England,  towards  premature  Stoical 
death  ;  not  towards  France  any  more.  Honour  to  the  Brave  ;  who, 
be  it  in  this  quarrel  or  in  that,  is  a  substance  and  articulate-speak- 
ing piece  of  human  Valour,  not  a  fanfaronading  hollow  Spectrum 
and  squeaking  and  gibbering  Shadow  !  One  of  the  few  Royalist 
Chief-actors  this  Bouille,  of  whom  so  much  can  be  said. 

The  brave  Bouille  too,  then,  vanishes  from  the  tissue  of  our 
Story.  Story  and  tissue,  faint  ineffectual  Emblem  of  that  grand 
Miraculous  Tissue,  and  Living  Tapestry  named  French  Revolution, 
which  did  weave  itself  then  in  very  fact,  '  on  the  loud-sounding 
Loom   of  Time  ! '     The  old  Brave  drop  out  from  it,  with  their 

1  Declaration  du  Sieur  Thomas  (in  Choiseul,  p.  i68). 

2  [The  Royal  Family  started  back  at  about  7.30.  Bouille  had  received  the  news  of 
the  King's  arrest,  at  Stenay  at  4.30:  and  he  arrived  at  Varennes  at  9.30.  In  his 
Alhnoircs  (ii.  242)  he  blames  his  son  for  not  bringing  the  news  earlier.  He  also  blames 
the  Colonel  (Mandel)  of  Koyal-ALlemand  for  several  instances  of  slowness  during 
these  days  (^cf.  Bimbenet,  71  and  iii,  251).  Bimbenet  is  however  of  opinion  that 
Bouillii  ought  to  have  been  disquieted  earlier,  and  that  he  might  have  moved  Royal- 
Allemand  a  good  deal  earlier  in  the  night.] 

■'Weber,  ii.  386.  ••  Aubriot,  ut  supra,  p.  156. 


THE  RETURN  127 

strivings ;  and  new  acrid  Drouets,  of  new  strivings  and  colour, 
come  in : — as  is  the  manner  of  that  weaving. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

THE  RETURN 

So,  then,  our  grand  Royalist  Plot,  of  Flight  to  Metz,  has  executed 
itself.  Long  hovering  in  the  background,  as  a  dread  royal  ulti- 
matum, it  has  rushed  forward  in  its  terrors  :  verily  to  some 
purpose.  How  many  Royalist  Plots  and  Projects,  one  after 
another,  cunningly- devised,  that  were  to  explode  like  powder- 
mines  and  thunder-claps ;  not  one  solitary  Plot  of  which  has 
issued  otherwise !  Powder-mine  of  a  Seance  Roijale  on  the 
Twenty-third  of  June  1789,  which  exploded  as  we  then  said, 
'  through  the  touchhole  ; '  which  next,  your  wargod  Broglie  hav- 
ing reloaded  it,  brought  a  Bastille  about  yom-  ears.  Then  came 
fervent  Opera-Repast,  with  flourishing  of  sabres,  and  O  Richard, 
0  my  King;  which,  aided  by  Hunger,  produces  Insurrection  of 
Women,  and  Pallas  Athene  in  the  shape  of  Demoiselle  Theroigne. 
Valour  profits  not ;  neither  has  fortune  smiled  on  fanfaronade. 
The  Bouille  Armament  ends  as  the  Broglie  one  had  done.  Man 
after  man  spends  himself  in  this  cause,  only  to  work  it  quicker 
ruin ;  it  seems  a  cause  doomed,  forsaken  of  Earth  and  Heaven. 

On  the  Sixth  of  October  gone  a  year.  King  Louis,  escorted  by 
Demoiselle  Theroigne  and  some  two  hundred  thousand,  made  a 
Royal  Progress  and  Entrance  into  Paris,  such  as  man  had  never 
witnessed ;  we  prophesied  him  Two  more  such  ;  and  accordingly 
another  of  them,  after  this  Flight  to  Metz,  is  now  coming  to 
pass.  Theroigne  will  not  escort  here  ;  neither  does  Mirabeau 
now  'sit  in  one  of  the  accompanying  carriages.'  Mirabeau  lies 
dead,  in  the  Pantheon  of  Great  Men.  Theroigne  lies  living,  in 
dark  Austrian  Prison ;  having  gone  to  Liege,  professionally,  and 
been  seized  there.  Bemurmured  now  by  the  hoarse-flowing 
Danube  :  the  light  of  her  Patriot  Supper-parties  gone  quite  out ; 
so  lies  Theroigne  :  she  shall  speak  with  the  Kaiser  face  to  face, 
and  return.      And   France   lies — how  !       Fleetiny;  Time    shears 


128        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

down  the  great  and  the  little ;  and  in  two  years  alters  many 
things. 

But  at  all  events,  here,  we  say,  is  a  second  Ignominious  Royal 
Procession,^  though  much  altered  ;  to  be  witnessed  also  by  its 
hundreds  of  thousands.  Patience,  ye  Paris  Patriots ;  the  Royal 
Berline  is  returning.  Not  till  Saturday  :  for  the  Royal  Berline 
travels  by  slow  stages  ;  amid  such  loud-voiced  confluent  sea  of 
National  Guards,  sixty  thousand  as  they  count ;  amid  such  tumult 
of  all  people.  Three  National- Assembly  Commissioners,'^  famed 
Barnave,  famed  Petion,  generally-respectable  Latour-Maubourg, 
have  gone  to  meet  it ;  of  whom  the  two  former  ride  in  the 
Berline  itself  beside  Majesty,  day  after  day.  Latour,  as  a  mere 
respectability,  and  man  of  whom  all  men  speak  well,  can  ride 
in  the  rear,  with  Dame  de  Tourzel  ^  and  the  Soubrettes. 

So  on  Saturday  evening,  about  seven  o'clock,*  Paris  by  hundreds 
of  thousands  is  again  drawn  up  :  not  now  dancing  the  tricolor 
joy-dance  of  hope ;  nor  as  yet  dancing  in  fury-dance  of  hate  and 
revenge :  but  in  silence,  with  vague  look  of  conjectm'e,  and 
curiosity  mostly  scientific.  A  Saint- Antoine  Placard  ^  has  given 
notice  this  morning  that  '  whosoever  insults  Louis  shall  be  caned, 

1  [The  return  was  made  by  the  same  road  as  the  flight  as  far  as  Chalons  (reached 
at  II  P.M.  on  22nd) ;  there  the  Royal  Family  went  to  bed.  The  King  wished  to 
rest  a  day  there  to  recover  from  his  fatigues,  but  this  was  not  allowed.  Ne.xt 
morning  an  army  of  roughs  entered  the  chapel  where  he  was  hearing  mass  and 
insisted  on  his  immediate  departure.  From  Chalons  on  23rd  the  Royal  Family 
went  by  Epernay  and  Chateau-Thierry,  rejoining  the  southern  road  at  La  Fert6- 
sous-Jouarre.  They  slept  at  Dormans  on  23rd  and  at  Meaux  on  24th  ;  on  Satur- 
day 25th  they  had  to  travel  13  hours  in  blazing  sunshine :  the  crowd  would  not 
allow  the  blinds  to  be  drawn  down,  and  the  dust  was  choking  (Browning,  47,  sqq.). 
The  Commissioners  writing  to  the  Assembly  say  that  it  is  the  great  number  of 
National  Guards  acting  as  a  voluntary  escort  that  is  delaying  the  return  journey 
(Bimbenet,  136).] 

2  [The  lives  of  the  Royal  Family  were  several  times  in  danger  before  the  arrival 
of  the  Commissioners  ;  the  lives  of  the  Body  Guards  hung  on  a  thread  the  whole 
time.  The  Marquis  de  Dampierre,  who  came  to  pay  his  respects  to  the  King 
between  Saint-Menehould  and  Chalons,  was  murdered  before  his  eyes  and  his  head 
shown  to  the  King.  Even  as  far  as  Dormans  the  crowd  of  60,000  National  Guards 
seems  to  have  dreaded  a  rescue  by  Bouill6  (Stockmar,  139,  sqq.  ;  Bimbenet,  131).] 

3[Mme  de  Tourzel  was  in  the  same  carriage  with  the  King  and  Petion  [see 
Mortimer-Ternaux,  i.  352  ;  Stockmar,  149).] 

•*  [The  journey  from  the  Barriire  de  I'Atoile  to  the  Tuileries  alone  took  five 
hours  (Stockmar,  160).] 

■''  [Camille  Desmoulins  in  '  R6v.  de  France  et  de  Brabant '  (No.  82)  says  this 
placard  was  carried  on  a  pikehead,  and  also  posted  on  the  walls  of  Saint-Antoine.] 


THE  RETUKN  129 

whosoever  applauds  him  shall  be  hanged.'  Behold  then,  at  last, 
that  wonderful  New  Berline  ;  encircled  by  blue  National  sea  with 
fixed  bayonets,  which  flows  slowly,  floating  it  on,  through  the 
silent  assembled  hundreds  of  thousands.  Three  yellow  Couriers 
sit  atop  bound  with  ropes  ;  ^  Petion,  Barnave,  their  Majesties, 
with  Sister  Elizabeth,  and  the  children  of  France,  are  within. 

Smile  of  embarrassment,  or  cloud  of  dull  sourness,  is  on  the 
broad  phlegmatic  face  of  his  Majesty ;  who  keeps  declaring  to 
the  successive  Official  persons,  what  is  evident,  "  Eh  hien,  me 
voild,  Well,  here  you  have  me  ; "  and  what  is  not  evident,  "  I  do 
assure  you  I  did  not  mean  to  pass  the  frontiers  ; "  and  so  forth : 
speeches  natural  for  that  poor  Royal  Man  ;  which  Decency  would 
veil.  Silent  is  her  Majesty,  with  a  look  of  grief  and  scorn ; 
natural  for  that  Royal  Woman.  Thus  lumbers  and  creeps  the 
ignominious  Royal  Procession,  through  many  streets,  amid  a 
silent-gazing  people  :  comparable,  Mercier  thinks,^  to  some  P)-o- 
cession  du  Roi  de  Basoche ;  or  say.  Procession  of  King  Crispin, 
with  his  Dukes  of  Sutor-mania  and  royal  blazomy  of  Cordwainery. 
Except  indeed  that  this  is  7iof  comic  ;  ah  no,  it  is  comico-tragic ; 
with  bound  Couriers,  and  a  Doom  hanging  over  it ;  most  fan- 
tastic, yet  most  miserably  real.  Miserablest  Jlebile  ludibrium  of 
a  Pickleherring  Tragedy !  It  sweeps  along  there,  in  most  n?i- 
gorgeous  pall,  through  many  streets  in  the  dusty  summer  even- 
ing ;  gets  itself  at  length  wriggled  out  of  sight ;  vanishing  in  the 
Tuileries  Palace — towards  its  doom,  of  slow  torture,  peine  forte  et 
dure. 

Populace,  it  is  true,  seizes  the  three  rope-bound  yellow  Cou- 
riers ;  will  at  least  massacre  them.  But  our  august  Assembly, 
which  is  sitting  at  this  great  moment,  sends  out  Deputation  of 
rescue  ;  and  the  whole  is  got  huddled  up.  Barnave,  '  all  dusty,' 
is  already  there,  in  the   National  Hall ;  making  brief  discreet 

'  [Lafayette  (iii.  89)  denies  that  the  Body  Guards  were  bound.] 
*  Mercier,  Nouveau  Paris,  iii.  22.  [The  Bazoche  (vid.  note  supr.,  vol.  i.  p.  109) 
held  an  annual  festival  in  which  the  President  of  the  Corporation  figured  as  the 
Roi  de  Bazoche.  This  was  abolished  by  Henry  III.,  but  the  Corporation  con- 
tinued to  exist  until  1789,  and  the  "Volunteers  of  the  Bazoche,"  afterwards 
incorporated  with  the  National  Guard,  distinguished  themselves  after  their  kind  in 
October  '89.] 

VOL.    II.  9 


130        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

address  and  report.  As  indeed,  through  the  whole  journey, 
this  Barnave  has  been  most  discreet,  sympathetic  ;  and  has 
gained  the  Queen's  trust,  whose  noble  instinct  teaches  her 
always  who  is  to  be  trusted.  Very  diflPei-ent  from  heavy  Petion ; 
who,  if  Campan  speak  truth,  ate  his  luncheon,  comfortably  filled 
his  wine-glass,  in  the  Royal  Berline  ;  flung  out  his  chicken-bones 
past  the  nose  of  Royalty  itself;  and,  on  the  King's  saying, 
"  France  cannot  be  a  Republic,"  answered,  "  No,  it  is  not  ripe 
yet."  Barnave  is  henceforth  a  Queen's  adviser,  if  advice  could 
profit :  and  her  Majesty  astonishes  Dame  Campan  by  signifying 
almost  a  regard  for  Barnave  ;  and  that,  in  a  day  of  retribution 
and  Royal  triumph,  Barnave  shall  not  be  executed.^ 

On  Monday  night  Royalty  went;  on  Saturday  evening  it 
returns  :  so  much,  within  one  short  week,  has  Royalty  accom- 
plished for  itself.  The  Pickleherring  Tragedy  has  vanished  m 
the  Tuileries  Palace,  towards  'pain  strong  and  hard.'  Watched, 
fettered  and  humbled,  as  Royalty  never  was.  Watched  even  in 
its  sleeping-apartments  and  inmost  recesses :  for  it  has  to  sleep 
with  door  set  ajar,  blue  National  Argus  watching,  his  eye  fixed 
on  the  Queen's  curtains  ;  nay,  on  one  occasion,  as  the  Queen 
cannot  sleep,  he  offers  to  sit  by  her  pillow,  and  converse  a 
little  !  2 

CHAPTER  IX 

SHARP  SHOT 
In  regard  to  all  which,  this  most  pressing  question  arises  :  ^  What 
is  to  be  done  with  it  ?    Depose  it !  resolutely  answer  Robespierre 

1  Campan,  ii.  c.  i8.  [When  Malouet  first  saw  the  King  after  his  return  the 
only  thing  the  latter  said  to  him  was  '  We  were  very  much  pleased  with  Barnave  ' 
(Malouet,  ii.  140).  Petion  left  a  report  of  the  journey  (which  is  printed  at  length 
in  Mortimer- Ternaux,  1.  347-367)  in  which  he  spoke  with  distrust  of  Barnave's 
attitude,  and  with  the  most  ludic,rous  self-satisfaction  of  his  own,  adding  the  loath- 
some insinuation  that  Madame  Elisabeth  (of  all  people  in  the  world  !)  made  during 
the  journey  indecent  advances  to  him,  Petion  !  !J 

2  Ibid.  ii.  149. 

•■'[Morris  (i.  436),  wrongly  I  think,  says  that  the  "  King's  attempt  at  escape  was 
mistaken  in  time ;  had  he  kept  quiet  a  little  longer  he  would  soon  have  been 
master,"  but  Morris  never  allows  either  for  the  cowardice  of  the  Bourgeoisie  nor 
the  fierceness  of  the  proletariat.     It  must  be  remembered  that  during  the  three 


SHARP  SHOT  131 

and  the  thoroughgoing  few.  For,  truly,  with  a  King  who  runs 
away,  and  needs  to  be  watched  in  his  very  bedroom  that  he  may 
stay  and  govern  you,  what  other  reasonable  thing  can  be  done  ? 
Had  Philippe  d' Orleans  not  been  a  caput  mortuum  !  But  of  him, 
known  as  one  defunct,  no  man  now  dreams.  Depose  it  not ;  say 
that  it  is  inviolable,  that  it  was  spirited  away,  was  enleve  ;  at  any 
cost  of  sophistry  and  solecism,  reestablish  it !  so  answer  with  loud 
vehemence  all  manner  of  Constitutional  Royalists ;  as  all  your 
pure  Royalists  do  naturally  likewise,  with  low  vehemence,  and 
rage  compressed  by  fear,  still  more  passionately  answer.  Nay 
Barnave  and  the  two  Lameths,i  and  what  will  follow  them,  do 
likewise  answer  so.  Answer,  with  their  whole  might :  terror- 
struck  at  the  unknown  Abysses  on  the  verge  of  which,  driven 
thither  by  themselves  mainly,  all  now  reels,  ready  to  plunge. 

By  mighty  effort  and  combination,  this  latter  course  is  the 
course  fixed  on ;  and  it  shall  by  the  strong  arm,  if  not  by  the 
clearest  logic,  be  made  good.  With  the  sacrifice  of  their  hard- 
earned  popularity,  this  notable  Triumvirate,  says  Toulongeon, 
'  set  the  Throne  up  again,  which  they  had  so  toiled  to  overturn : 

months  that  followed  France  made  a  virtual  experiment  in  Republican  government. 
The  executive  power  was  suspended  and  the  King  only  recovered  such  nominal 
liberty  as  he  had  previously  possessed  when  he  accepted  the  Constitution  on  Sept. 
14th.  Lafayette  (iii.  93)  explains  that  the  rigid  guard  at  the  Tuileries  was  inevit- 
able, but  that  he  took  care  that  it  should  be  composed  as  agreeably  to  the  King  as 
possible.  He  further  admits  that  for  a  time  he  himself  now  leant  towards  the  idea 
of  a  Republic,  as  did  La  Rochefoucauld  and  Dupont  de  Nemours ;  but  the  over- 
whelming majority  of  the  Assembly  thought  otherwise.] 

^  [The  first  symptoms  of  a  separation  between  the  Triumvirate  and  the 
extreme  Left  had  been  visible  as  early  as  April  :  and  in  May  a  temporary  alliance 
of  these  new  moderates  with  the  Right  took  place,  Cazales,  Barnave  and  Duport 
coalescing  to  oppose  Robespierre  on  the  question  of  re-eligibility  of  members.  The 
Right  had  hitherto  as  a  rule  taken  the  extremely  foolish  course  of  hounding  on  the 
extreme  Left  in  its  violent  motions,  in  order  to  destroy  its  credit.  A  very  useful 
law  was  passed  by  these  allies  on  May  i8th  forbidding  the  Sections  of  Paris  or  any 
municipal  bodies  to  get  up  or  present  organised  petitions.  This  was  striking  at 
the  root  of  the  anarchy  ;  it  was  however  little  obeyed  during  the  next  12  months  and 
overridden  for  good  in  June  '92.  We  have  abundant  evidence  in  M.  Taine's  second 
volume  and  in  Schmidt's  Police  Reports  to  show  how  completely  every  section  of 
Paris  was  dominated  by  its  violent  minority.  Even  when  by  chance  the  radicals 
were  outvoted  in  one  section,  they  had  only  to  send  for  reinforcements  to  another 
or  to  prolong  their  meetings  till  midnight  when  the  respectable  people  went  to  bed. 

The  vote  of  July  15th  was  that  Bouill(J  and  his  accomplices  were  to  be  prosecuted 
for  "  taking  away"  the  King  and  Royal  Family.  The  objection  to  admitting  it 
to  be  a  voluntary  flight  was  that,  by  the  Constitution,  the  King  alone  was  inviolable 
and  the  Queen  would  therefore  have  to  be  prosecuted.] 


132        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

'  as  one  might  set  up  an  overturned  pyramid,  on  its  vertex ; '  to 
stand  so  long  as  it  is  held. 

Unhappy  France  ;  unhappy  in  King,  Queen  and  Constitution  ; 
one  knows  not  in  which  unhappiest !  Was  the  meaning  of  our 
so  glorious  French  Revolution  this,  and  no  other,  That  when 
Shams  and  Delusions,  long  soul-killing,  had  become  body-killing, 
and  got  the  length  of  Bankruptcy  and  Inanition,  a  great  People 
rose  and,  with  one  voice,  said,  in  the  name  of  the  Highest : 
Shams  shall  he  no  more  ?  So  many  sorrows  and  bloody  horrors, 
endured,  and  to  be  yet  endured  through  dismal  coming  centuries, 
were  they  not  the  heavy  price  paid  and  payable  for  this  same  : 
Total  Destruction  of  Shams  from  among  men  ?  And  now,  O 
Bamave  Triumvirate !  is  it  in  such  c?0K&/e-distilled  Delusion,  and 
Sham  even  of  a  Sham,  that  an  effort  of  this  kind  will  rest  ac- 
quiescent ?  Messieurs  of  the  popular  Triumvirate,  never  ! — But, 
after  all,  what  can  poor  popular  Triumvirates,  and  fallible  august 
Senators,  do  ?  They  can,  when  the  Truth  is  ail-too  horrible, 
stick  their  heads  ostrich-like  into  what  sheltering  Fallacy  is 
nearest ;  and  wait  there,  a  posteriori. 

Readers  who  saw  the  Clermontais  and  Three-Bishopricks  gallop 
in  the  Night  of  Spui-s  ;  Diligences  ruffling  up  all  France  into  one 
terrific  terrified  Cock  of  India ;  and  the  Town  of  Nantes  in  its 
shirt, — may  fancy  what  an  affair  to  settle  this  was.  Robespierre, 
on  the  extreme  Left,  with  perhaps  Petion  and  lean  old  Goupil, 
for  the  very  Triumvirate  has  defalcated,  are  shrieking  hoarse  ; 
drowned  in  Constitutional  clamour.  But  the  debate  and  arguing 
of  a  whole  Nation ;  the  Ijellowings  through  all  Journals,  for  and 
against ;  the  reverberant  voice  of  Danton  ;  the  Hyperion  shafts 
of  Camille,  the  porcupine-quills  of  implacable  Marat : — conceive 
all  this. 

Constitutionalists  in  a  body,  as  we  often  predicted,  do  now 
secede  from  the  Mother  Society,  and  become  Feuillans ;  threaten- 
ing her  with  inanition,  the  rank  and  respectability  being  mostly 
gone.  Petition  after  Petition,  forwarded  by  Post,  or  borne  in 
Deputation,  comes  praying  for  Judgment  and  Decheance,  which 


SHARP  SHOT  133 

is  our  name  for  Deposition ;  praying,  at  lowest,  for  Reference 
to  the  Eighty-three  Departments  of  France.  Hot  Marseillese 
Deputation  comes  declaring,  among  other  things  :  "  Our  Phocean 
Ancestors  flung  a  Bar  of  Iron  into  the  Bay  at  their  first  landing ; 
this  Bar  will  float  again  on  the  Mediterranean  brine  before  we 
consent  to  be  slaves."  All  this  for  four  weeks  or  more,  while 
the  matter  still  hangs  doubtful ;  Emigration  streaming  with 
double  violence  over  the  frontiers ;  ^  France  seething  in  fierce 
agitation  of  this  question  and  prize-question :  What  is  to  be 
done  with  the  fugitive  Hereditary  Representative  ? 

Finally,  on  Friday  the  15th  of  July  1791,  the  National  Assembly 
decides  ;  in  what  negatory  manner  we  know.  Whereupon  the 
Theatres  all  close,  the  Bourne-stones  and  Portable-chairs  begin 
spouting.  Municipal  Placards  flaming  on  the  walls,  and  Pro- 
clamations published  by  sound  of  trumpet,  '  invite  to  repose ; ' 
with  small  effect.  And  so,  on  Sunday  the  1 7th,  there  shall  be  a 
thing  seen,  worthy  of  remembering.  Scroll  of  a  Petition,  drawn 
up  by  Brissots,  Dantons,  by  Cordeliers,  Jacobins  ;  for  the  thing 
was  infinitely  shaken  and  manipulated,  and  many  had  a  hand  in 
it :  such  Scroll  lies  now  visible,  on  the  wooden  framework  of  the 
Fatherland's  Altar,  for  signature.'^  Unworking  Paris,  male  and 
female,  is  crowding  thither,  all  day,  to  sign  or  to  see.  Our  fair 
Roland  herself  the  eye  of  History  can  discern  there  '  in  the 
morning  ; '  ^  not  without  interest.  In  few  weeks  the  fair  Patriot 
will  quit  Paris  ;  yet  perhaps  only  to  return. 

But,  what  with  sorrow  of  balked  Patriotism,  what  with  closed 
theatres,  and  Proclamations  still  publishing  themselves  by  sound 

1  BouilM,  ii.  loi. 

2  [There  were  in  fact  /kree  petitions  laid  on  the  altar  on  three  successive  days, 
(i.)  On  15th  that  the  Assembly  should  not  decide  the  King's  fate  until  it  had 

appealed  to  the  primary  assemblies  all  over  France — in  short,  for  the  principle  of 
the  Referendum. 

(ii.)  On  i6th  (Danton's  handiwork)  that  the  Assembly  should  receive  the  abdica- 
tion of  Louis  (made  on  June  21st  by  his  flight),  and  provide  for  replacing  him  by 
Constitutional  means  (was  Danton  here  acting  in  the  Organist  interest  or  for  a 
Regency  for  the  Dauphin  ?). 

(iii. )  On  17th  demanding  the  punishment  of  the  King  and  the  establishment  ol 
a  Republic ;  this  is  the  only  one  which  obtained  any  considerable  number  of  signa- 
tures, and  this  is  the  one  to  which  Carlyle  refers  here  and  on  the  next  page.  (See 
R6v.  Fr.  XXXV.  430,  and  Belloc,  Danton,  p.  148.)] 

''Madame  Roland,  ii.  74. 


134        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

of  trumpet,  the  fervour  of  men's  minds,  this  day,  is  great.  Nay, 
over  and  above,  there  has  fallen  out  an  incident,  of  the  nature  of 
Farce-Tragedy  and  Riddle  ;  enough  to  stimulate  all  creatures. 
Early  in  the  day,  a  Patriot  (or  some  say,  it  was  a  Patriotess,  and 
indeed  the  truth  is  undiscoverable),  while  standing  on  the  firm 
dealboard  of  Fatherland's  Altar,  feels  suddenly,  with  indescribable 
torpedo-shock  of  amazement,  his  bootsole  pricked  through  from 
below  ;  clutches  up  suddenly  this  electrified  bootsole  and  foot  ; 
discerns  next  instant — the  point  of  a  gimlet  or  bradawl  playing 
up,  through  the  firm  deal-board,  and  now  hastily  drawing  itself 
back  !  Mystery,  perhaps  Treason  ?  The  wooden  framework  is 
impetuously  broken  up ;  and  behold,  verily  a  mystery ;  never 
explicable  fully  to  the  end  of  the  world !  Two  human  individ- 
uals, of  mean  aspect,  one  of  them  with  a  wooden  leg,  lie  ensconced 
there,  gimlet  in  hand :  they  must  have  come  in  overnight ;  they 
have  a  supply  of  provisions, — no  *  barrel  of  gunpowder '  that  one 
can  see  ;  they  affect  to  be  asleep ;  look  blank  enough,  and  give 
the  lamest  account  of  themselves.  "  Mere  curiosity  ;  they  were 
•boring  up,  to  get  an  eyehole ;  to  see,  perhaps  '  with  lubricity,' 
whatsoever,  from  that  new  point  of  vision,  could  be  seen  :  " — little 
that  was  edifying,  one  would  think  !  But  indeed  what  stupidest 
thing  may  not  human  Dulness,  Pruriency,  Lubricity,  Chance  and 
the  Devil,  choosing  Two  out  of  Half-a-million  idle  human  heads, 
tempt  them  to  >  ^ 

Sure  enough,  the  two  human  individuals  with  their  gimlet  are 
there.  Ill-starred  pair  of  individuals  !  For  the  result  of  it  all  is, 
that  Patriotism,  fretting  itself,  in  this  state  of  nervous  excitability, 
with  hypothesis,  suspicions  and  reports,  keeps  questioning  these 
two  distracted  human  individuals,  and  again  questioning  them  ; 
claps  them  into  the  nearest  Guardhouse,  clutches  them  out  again  ; 
one  hypothetic  group  snatching  them  fronti  another  :  till  finally,  in 
such  extreme  state  of  nervous  excitability,  Patriotism  hangs  them 
as  spies  of  Sieur  Motier ;  and  the  life  and  secret  is  choked  out 
of  them  forevermore.     Forevermore,  alas  !     Or  is  a   day  to  be 

1  Hist.  Pari.  xi.  104.  [Lafayette  calls  them  "  two  invalides,  moved  by  indecent 
curiosity"  (iii.  105).] 


SHARP  SHOT  135 

looked  for  when  these  two  evidently  mean  individuals,  who  are 
human  nevertheless,  will  become  Historical  Riddles  ;  and,  like 
him  of  the  Iron  Mask  (also  a  human  individual,  and  evidently 
nothing  more), — have  their  Dissertations  ?  To  us  this  only  is 
certain,  that  they  had  a  gimlet,  provisions  and  a  wooden  leg  ;  and 
have  died  there  on  the  Lanterne,  as  the  unluckiest  fools  might 
die. 

And  so  the  signature  goes  on,  in  a  still  more  excited  mamier. 
And  Chaumette,  for  Antiquarians  possess  the  very  Paper  to  this 
hour,^ — has  signed  himself  '  in  a  flowing  saucy  hand  slightly 
leaned  ; '  and  Hebert,  detestable  F&re  Duchesne,  as  if  '  an  inked 
spider  had  dropped  on  the  paper  ; '  Usher  Maillard  also  has  signed, 
and  many  Crosses,  which  cannot  write.  And  Paris,  through  its 
thousand  avenues,  is  welling  to  the  Champ-de-Mars  and  from  it, 
in  the  utmost  excitability  of  humour ;  central  Fatherland's  Altar 
quite  heaped  with  signing  Patriots  and  Patriotesses ;  the  Thirty 
benches  and  whole  internal  Space  crowded  with  onlookers,  with 
comers  and  goers  ;  one  regurgitating  whirlpool  of  men  and  women 
in  their  Sunday  clothes.  All  which  a  Constitutional  Sieur  Motier 
sees  ;  and  Bailly,  looking  into  it  with  his  long  visage  made  still 
longer.  Auguring  no  good ;  perhaps  Decheance  and  Deposition 
after  all !  Stop  it,  ye  Constitutional  Patriots ;  fire  itself  is 
quenchable,  yet  only  quenchable  at  Jirst. 

Stop  it,  truly  :  but  how  stop  it .''  Have  not  the  first  free  People 
of  the  Universe  a  right  to  petition  .'' — Happily,  if  also  unhappily, 
here  is  one  proof  of  riot :  these  two  human  individuals  hanged  at 
the  Lanterne.  Proof,  O  treacherous  Sieur  Motier  }  Were  they 
not  two  human  individuals  sent  thither  by  thee  to  be  hanged  ;  to 
be  a  pretext  for  thy  bloody  Drapeau  Rouge  ?  This  question  shall 
many  a  Patriot,  one  day,  ask  ;  and  answer  affirmatively,  strong  in 
Preternatural  Suspicion. 

Enough,  towards  half-past  seven  in  the  evening,  the  mere 
natural  eye  can  behold  this  thing  :  Sieur  Motier,  with  Municipals 
in  scarf,  with  blue  National  PatroUotism,  I'ank  after  rank,  to  the 

'  Hist.  Pari.  xi.  113,  &c. 


136        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

clang  of  drums  ;  wending  resolutely  to  the  Champ-de-Mars ;  Mayor 
Bailly,  with  elongated  visage,  bearing,  as  in  sad  duty  bound,  the 
Drapeau  Rouge.  Howl  of  angry  derision  rises  in  treble  and  bass 
from  a  hundred  thousand  throats,  at  the  sight  of  Martial  Law ; 
which  nevertheless,  waving  its  Red  sanguinary  Flag,  advances 
there,  from  the  Gros-Caillou  Entrance ;  advances,  drumming 
and  waving,  towards  Altar  of  Fatherland.  Amid  still  wilder 
howls,  with  objurgation,  obtestation ;  with  flights  of  pebbles 
and  mud,  saxa  et  faeces  ;  with  crackle  of  a  pistol-shot ; — finally 
with  volley-fire  of  Patrollotism ;  levelled  muskets ;  roll  of 
volley  on  volley  !  Precisely  after  one  year  and  three  days,  our 
sublime  Federation  Field  is  wetted,  in  this  manner,  with  French 
blood. 

Some  '  Twelve  unfortunately  shot,'  ^  reports  Bailly,  counting  by 
units  ;  but  Patriotism  counts  by  tens  and  even  by  hmidreds.  Not 
to  be  forgotten,  nor  forgiven  !  Patriotism  flies,  shrieking,  execrat- 
ing. ^  Camille  ceases  journalising,  this  day ;  great  Dan  ton  with 
Camille  and  Freron  have  taken  wing,  for  their  life  ;  Marat  burrows 
deep  in  the  Earth,  and  is  silent.  Once  more  Patrollotism  has 
triumphed ;  one  other  time ;  but  it  is  the  last. 

This    was    the    Royal   Flight    to    Varennes.      Thus    was    the 

1  [Twelve  is  the  official  number  given  in  the  Prods-Verbal  of  the  Co7nmune 
(Von  Sybel,  i.  315) ;  Lafayette  (iii.  105),  Morris  (i.  436),  and  Bailly  (i.  401,  sqq.) 
agree  pretty  fairly  as  to  the  "  massacre"  and  the  first  and  last  of  these  were  the 
two  people  most  concerned  in  it.  The  National  Guard  only  fired  after  two  of  their 
number  had  been  killed  by  stones,  and  Lafayette  himself  fired  at  (Bailly  does  not 
mention  the  two  killed,but  only  several  wounded) ;  the  crowd  was  dispersed  by  cavalry 
without  more  bloodshed.  Not  till  6  p.m.  did  the  Comeil-Ginh-al  of  the  Commune 
decide  to  proclaim  martial  law  :  they  then  marched  in  a  body  to  the  Champ-de- 
Mars,  and  arrived  at  about  8.  Morris,  who  on  July  15th  "expected  a  battle  under 
his  windows"  on  account  of  the  leniency  of  the  Assembly  to  the  King,  is  now  much 
more  cheerful,  and  considers  the  17th  a  great  blow  to  Anarchy.  As  late  as  Dec. 
'91  he  told  Talleyrand  that  "since  the  frolic  at  the  Champ-de-Mars  there  is  little 
fear  of  Anarchy,  for  the  people  have  discovered  that  death  is  a  game  two  can  play 
at"  (i.  491).] 

■■^  [There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Radicals  took  the  thing  very  seriously.  A  warrant 
was  issued  by  Lafa)'ette  for  Danton's  arrest  on  Aug.  4th  ;  but  he  had  already  left 
Paris,  first  for  Rosny,  then  for  Arcis,  then  for  Troyes,  and,  on  the  news  of  the 
warrant,  for  England.  He  remained  in  England  till  about  Sept.  loth  when  he 
was  again  in  Paris.  He  would  not  have  returned  had  it  not  been  certain,  on  the 
eve  of  the  acceptance  of  the  Constitution,  that  an  amnesty  for  all  Revolutionary  acts 
would  be  published  (Belloc,  Danton,  148).] 


SHARP  SHOT  137 

Throne  overturned  thereby  ;  but  thus  also  was  it  victoriously 
set  up  again — on  its  vertex  ;  and  will  stand  while  it  can  be 
held.i 

^  [The  preliminary  inquiry  into  the  King's  enltvement  was  opened  on  July  nth 
and  lasted  lo  days ;  43  depositions  in  all  were  received,  which  may  be  read  in 
Bimbenet's  Pieces  Justificatives.  The  trial  of  the  prisoners  (Choiseul,  Goguelat, 
Damas,  Maldent,  Moustier,  Valory)  was  never  finished,  and,  by  the  amnesty  at 
the  end  of  the  Constituent,  they  were  liberated  at  the  beginning  of  October  (Bim- 
benet,  Introd.  xi.  sqq.W 


138 


BOOK  V 
PARLIAMENT  FIRST 

CHAPTER  I 

GRANDE  ACCEPTATION 

In  the  last  nights  of  September,  when  the  autumnal  equinox  is 
past,  and  gray  September  fades  into  brown  October,  why  are  the 
Champs  Elysees  illuminated ;  why  is  Paris  dancing,  and  flinging 
fire-works  ?  They  are  gala-nights,  these  last  of  September ; 
Paris  may  well  dance,  and  the  Universe :  the  Edifice  of  the 
Constitution  is  completed !  Completed  ;  nay  revised,  to  see  that 
there  was  nothing  insufficient  in  it ;  solemnly  proffered  to  his 
Majesty;  solemnly  accepted  by  him,  to  the  sound  of  cannon- 
salvoes,  on  the  fourteenth  of  the  month.  And  now  by  such 
illumination,  jubilee,  dancing  and  fire-working,  do  we  joyously 
handsel  the  new  Social  Edifice,  and  first  raise  heat  and  reek  there, 
in  the  name  of  Hope. 

The  Revision,  especially  with  a  throne  standing  on  its  vertex,^ 
has  been  a  work  of  difficulty,  of  delicacy.  In  the  way  of  propping 
and  buttressing,  so  indispensable  now,  something  could  be  done  ; 
and  yet,  as  is  feared,  not  enough.  A  repentant  Barnave  Trium- 
virate,  our   Rabauts,    Duports,    Thourets,   and    indeed  all    Con- 

1  [The  Committee  to  revise  the  Constitution  had  been  appointed  as  far  back  as 
Sept.  23rd  '90,  and  Mirabeau  had  proposed  to  take  advantage  of  it  to  rescind  the 
fatal  decree  which  forbade  ministers  to  have  seats  in  the  Assembly  :  the  same 
thing  was  attempted  by  Thouret  and  Duport  in  Aug.  '91,  but  on  an  amendment 
by  Buzot,  it  was  decreed  that  members  might  not  take  office  till  two  years  after 
the  dissolution  of  the  Assembly.  The  Conmiittee,  with  two  exceptions,  Beaumetz 
and  Clermont-Tonnerre,  consisted  of  members  of  the  Left  [e.g.,  Lameth,  Barnave, 
Duport)  and  even  Republicans  like  Buzot  and  Petion.  The  days  of  revision  were 
fatally  wasted  by  the  moderates,  and  the  Right  broke  away  from  their  temporary 
league  with  the  moderates  {vid.  note  supr.,  p.  131)  :  time  was  thus  given  to  the 
Anarchic  forces  to  raise  their  head  again  after  the  severe  blow  they  had  received  on 
July  17th.  The  electoral  qualification  was  slightly  raised  on  the  Revision  [vid. 
note  supr. ,  i.  383),  but  no  other  change  was  made.  J 


GEANDE  ACCEPTATION  139 

stitutionai  Deputies  did  strain  every  nerve :  but  the  Extreme 
Left  was  so  noisy  ;  the  People  were  so  suspicious,  clamorous  to 
have  the  work  ended :  and  then  the  loyal  Right  Side  sat  feeble- 
petulant  all  the  while,  and  as  it  were  pouting  and  petting ; 
unable  to  help,  had  they  even  been  willing.  The  Two  Hundred 
and  Ninety  had  solemnly  made  scission,  before  that ;  and  departed, 
shaking  the  dust  off  their  feet.  To  such  transcendency  of  fret, 
and  desperate  hope  that  worsening  of  the  bad  might  the  sooner 
end  it  and  bring  back  the  good,  had  our  unfortunate  loyal  Right 
Side  now  come  !  ^ 

However,  one  finds  that  this  and  the  other  little  prop  has  been 
added,  where  possibility  allowed.  Civil-list  ^  and  Privy-purse  were 
fi'om  of  old  well  cared  for.  King's  Constitutional  Guard,  Eighteen 
hundred  loyal  men  from  the  Eighty-three  Departments,  under  a 
loyal  Duke  de  Brissac  ;  this,  with  trustworthy  Swiss  besides,  is  of 
itself  something.  The  old  loyal  Bodyguards  are  indeed  dissolved, 
in  name  as  well  as  in  fact ;  and  gone  mostly  towards  Coblentz. 
But  now  also  those  Sansculottic  violent  Gardes  Fran9aises,  or 
Centre  Grenadiers,  shall  have  their  mittimus :  they  do  ere  long, 
in  the  Journals,  not  without  a  hoarse  pathos,  publish  their  Fare- 
well ;  '  wishing  all  Aristocrats  the  graves  in  Paris  which  to  us  are 
denied.'  ^  They  depart,  these  first  Soldiers  of  the  Revolution  ; 
they  hover  very  dimly  in  the  distance  for  about  another  year ; 
till  they  can  be  remodelled,  new-named  and  sent  to  fight  the 
Austrians ;  and  then  History  beholds  them  no  more.  A  most 
notable  Corps  of  men ;  which  has  its  place  in  World-History ; — 
though  to  us,  so  is  History  written,  they  remain  mere  rubrics 
of  men ;  nameless ;  a  shaggy  Grenadier  Mass,  crossed  with  buff- 

iToulongeon,  ii.  56,  59. 

2  [The  'Civil  List 'was  the  annual  sum  which  the  Assembly  allowed  to  the 
King  for  the  maintenance  of  his  household.  On  Jan.  4th  "90  they  asked  the  King 
what  he  would  require,  and  on  June  9th  he  asked  for  25  million  livr.,  and  got  it 
decreed  (see  Bacourt,  i.  447).] 

3  Hist.  Pari.  xiii.  73.  [The  fact  is  that  the  battalions  of  the  National  Guard  called 
'  Centre  Grenadiers '  consisted  not  only  of  the  old  Gardes-Franfaises  but  also  of 
deserters  from  other  hne  regiments,  and  were  the  real  hindrance  to  the  establish- 
ment of  an  orderly  police  in  Paris.  The  enrolled  Bourgeoisie,  or  unpaid  part  of 
the  National  Guard,  practically  never  turned  out  for  duty,  and  the  National  Guard 
was  therefore  a  band  of  police  pledged  to  serve  the  cause  of  anarchy.  Most  of 
these  disbanded  men  re-enlisted  in  other  paid  battalions  of  National  Guard.] 


140        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

belts.  And  yet  might  we  not  ask :  What  Argonauts,  what 
Leonidas'  Spartans  had  done  such  a  work  ?  Think  of  their 
destiny :  since  that  May  morning,  some  three  years  ago,  when 
they,  unparticipating,  trundled  off  D'Espremenil  to  the  Calypso 
Isles ;  since  that  July  evening,  some  two  years  ago,  when  they, 
participating  and  .sacre-ing  with  knit  brows,  poured  a  volley  into 
Besenval's  Prince  de  Lambesc !  History  waves  them  her  mute 
adieu. 

So  that  the  Sovereign  Power,  these  Sansculottic  Watchdogs, 
more  like  wolves,  being  leashed  and  led  away  from  his  Tuileries, 
breathes  freer.  The  Sovereign  Power  is  guarded  henceforth  by 
a  loyal  Eighteen  Hundred, — whom  Contrivance,  under  various 
pretexts,  may  gradually  swell  to  Six  Thousand  ;  who  will  hinder 
no  journey  to  Saint-Cloud.  The  sad  Varennes  business  has  been 
soldered  up  ;  cemented,  even  in  the  blood  of  the  Champ-de-Mars, 
these  two  months  and  more  ;  and  indeed  ever  since,  as  formerly, 
Majesty  has  had  its  privileges,  its  *  choice  of  residence,'  though, 
for  good  reasons,  the  royal  mind  '  prefers  continuing  in  Paris.' 
Poor  royal  mind,  poor  Paris ;  that  have  to  go  mumming ;  enveloped 
in  speciosities,  in  falsehood  which  knows  itself  false  ;  and  to  enact 
mutually  your  sorrowful  farce-tragedy,  being  bound  to  it ;  and  on 
the  whole,  to  hope  always,  in  spite  of  hope  ! 

Nay,  now  that  his  Majesty  has  accepted  the  Constitution,^  to 
the  sound  of  cannon-salvoes,  who  would  not  hope  ?  '■^  Our  good 
King  was  misguided,  but  he  meant  well.  Lafayette  has  moved 
for  an  Amnesty,  for  universal  forgiving  and  forgetting  of  Revolu- 
tionary faults ;  and  now  surely  the  glorious  Revolution,  cleared 
of  its  rubbish,  is  complete !     Strange  enough,  and  touching  in 

'  [The  words  in  which  the  King  should  notify  his  acceptance  were  a  subject  of 
much  discussion  in  the  Tuileries,  and  were  finally  drawn  up  by  La  Marck.  The 
formal  ceremony  was  made  as  humiliating  as  possible  ;  no  throne  was  placed  for 
the  King,  but  a  chair  on  the  left  of  the  President's  chair.  When  the  King  had 
sworn  the  Assembly  put  their  hats  on  before  he  put  on  his.  Mme  Campan  (ii.  19) 
says  he  sobbed  when  he  re-entered  the  Tuileries.  The  acceptance  was  notified  to 
the  Powers,  but  no  formal  answers  were  returned.  Morris  (who  was  at  this  time 
intimately  /zV  with  Montmorin)  writes  on  Aug.  6th  that  the  King  considers  himself 
as  good  as  gone,  and  that  whatever  is  now  done  must  be  done  for  his  son.  {C/.  also 
Mallet,  i.  245,  sqg.)] 

2  [Sept.  14th.  J 


GRANDE  ACCEPTATION  141 

several  ways,  the  old  cry  of  Five  le  Rot  once  more  rises  round 
King  Louis  the  Hereditary  Representative.  Their  Majesties 
went  to  the  Opera ;  gave  money  to  the  Poor :  the  Queen  herself, 
now  when  the  Constitution  is  accepted,  hears  voice  of  cheering. 
Bygone  shall  be  bygone  ;  the  New  Era  shall  begin  !  To  and  fro, 
amid  those  lamp-galaxies  of  the  Elysian  Fields,  the  Royal  Carriage 
slowly  wends  and  rolls  ;  everywhere  with  vivat.s,  from  a  multitude 
striving  to  be  glad.  Louis  looks  out,  mainly  on  the  variegated 
lamps  and  gay  human  groups,  with  satisfaction  enough  for  the 
hour.  In  her  Majesty's  face,  'under  that  kind  graceful  smile  a 
deep  sadness  is  legible.'  ^  Brilliancies,  of  valour  and  of  wit  stroll 
here  observant :  a  Dame  de  Stael,  leaning  most  probably  on  the 
arm  of  her  Narbonne.  She  meets  Deputies  ;  who  have  built  this 
Constitution  ;  who  saunter  here  with  vague  communings, — not 
without  thoughts  whether  it  will  stand.  But  as  yet  melodious 
fiddle-strings  twang  and  warble  everywhere,  with  the  rhythm  of 
light  fantastic  feet ;  long  lamp-galaxies  fling  their  coloured 
radiance ;  and  brass-lunged  Hawkers  elbow  and  bawl,  "  Grande 
Acceptation,  Constitution  Monarchique  :  "  it  behoves  the  Son  of  Adam 
to  hope.  Have  not  Lafayette,  Bamave,  and  all  Constitutionalists 
set  their  shoulders  handsomely  to  the  inverted  pyramid  of  a 
throne  ?  Feuillans,  including  almost  the  whole  Constitutional 
Respectability  of  France,  pei'orate  nightly  from  their  tribune  ; 
con-espond  through  all  Post-offices  ;  denouncing  unquiet  Jaco- 
binism ;  trusting  well  that  its  time  is  nigh  done.  Much  is 
uncertain,  questionable  ;  but  if  the  Hereditary  Representative 
be  wise  and  lucky,  may  one  not,  with  a  sanguine  Gaelic  temper, 
hope  that  he  will  get  in  motion  better  or  worse  ;  that  what  is 
wanting  to  him  will  gradually  be  gained  and  added  ? 

For  the  rest,  as  we  must  repeat,  in  this  building  of  the  Consti- 
tutional Fabric,  especially  in  this  Revision  of  it,  nothing  that  one 
could  think  of  to  give  it  new  strength,  especially  to  steady  it, 
to  give  it  permanence,  and  even  eternity,  has  been  forgotten. 
Biennial  Parliament,  to  be  called  Legislative,  Assemhlee  Legislative; 
with  Seven  Hundred  and  Forty-five  Members,  chosen  in  a  judicious 
^  De  Stael,  Considerations,  i.  c.  23,  p.  434. 


142        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

manner  by  the  '  active  citizens '  alone^  and  even  by  electing  of 
electors  s^ll  more  active :  this,  with  privileges  of  Parliament, 
shall  m^t,  self-authorised  if  need  be,  and  self-dissolved ;  shall 
grant  money-supplies  and  talk  ;  watch  over  the  administration 
and  authorities  ;  discharge  forever  the  functions  of  a  Constitu- 
tional Great  Council,  Collective  Wisdom  and  National  Palaver — 
as  the  Heavens  will  enable.  Our  First  biennial  Parliament, 
which  indeed  has  been  a-choosing  since  early  in  August,  is  now  as 
good  as  chosen.  Nay  it  has  mostly  got  to  Paris  :  it  arrived  gradu- 
ally ; — not  without  pathetic  greeting  to  its  venerable  Parent,  the 
now  moribund  Constituent ;  and  sat  there  in  the  Galleries,  rever- 
ently listening  ;  ready  to  begin,  the  instant  the  ground  were  clear. 
Then  as  to  changes  in  the  Constitution  itself?  This,  impossible 
for  any  Legislative,  or  common  biennial  Parliament,  and  possible 
solely  for  some  resuscitated  Constituent  or  National  Convention, 
is  evidently  one  of  the  most  ticklish  points.  The  august  moribund 
Assembly  debated  it  for  four  entire  days.  Some  thought  a  change, 
or  at  least  a  reviewal  and  new  approval,  might  be  admissible  in 
thirty  years,  some  even  went  lower,  down  to  twenty,  nay  to 
fifteen.  The  august  Assembly  had  once  decided  for  thirty  years  ; 
but  it  revoked  that,  on  better  thoughts  ;  and  did  not  fix  any  date 
of  time,  but  merely  some  vague  outline  of  a  posture  of  circum- 
stances, and,  on  the  whole,  left  the  matter  hanging.^  Doubtless 
a  National  Convention  can  be  assembled  even  within  the  thirty 
years  :  yet  one  may  hope,  not ;  but  that  Legislatives,  biennial 
Parliaments  of  the  common  kind,  with  their  limited  faculty,  and 
perhaps  quiet  successive  additions  thereto,  may  suffice,  for  genera- 
tions, or  indeed  while  computed  Time  runs. 

1  Choix  des  Rapports,  &c.  (Paris,  1825),  vi.  239-317.  [No  date  for  an  Assembly 
to  revise  the  Constitution  was  fixed,  Lafayette  sensibly  carrying  that  it  was  un- 
desirable to  attempt  to  bind  posterity.  Malouet's  still  more  interesting  proposal, 
that  until  1793  the  Constitution  should  be  considered  provisional,  and  any  con- 
stituted authority  might  petition  against  it,  was  of  course  rejected.  When  three 
successive  Legislatures  had  proposed  a  change  in  the  Constitution  such  change 
might  be  carried  out  by  the  fourth,  but  it  was  voted  "  undesirable  that  such  change 
should  be  made  for  thirty  years  to  come."  The  whole  of  subsequent  French 
history  is  an  ironical  commentary  on  this  clause.  Robespierre  had  the  last  word 
in  the  debates  on  Revision,  with  a  tremendous,  though  covert,  denunciation  of 
the  Triumvirate,  and  a  menace  for  the  future.  [See  Duvergier  de  Hauranne,  i.  i86  ; 
Lom^nie,  Les  Mirabeau,  v.  171  ;  Ferrieres,  ii.  419.)] 


GRANDE  ACCEPTATION      ^-^143 


n-li^^woii 


Furthermore,  be  it  noted  that  no  member  of  this^^^^ment 
has  been,  or  could  be,  elected  to  the  new  Legislative.^^^^Bble- 
minded  were  these  Law-makers  !  cry  some  :  and  Solon-li^^would 
banish  themselves.^  So  splenetic  !  cry  more  :  each  grudging  the 
other,  none  daring  to  be  outdone  in  self-denial  by  the  other.  So 
unwise  in  either  case  !  answer  all  practical  men.  But  consider 
this  other  self-denying  ordinance.  That  none  of  us  can  be  King's 
Minister,  or  accept  the  smallest  Court  Appointment,  for  the  space 
of  four,  or  at  lowest  (and  on  long  debate  and  Revision),  for  the 
space  of  two  years  !  -  So  moves  the  incorruptible  seagreen  Robes- 
pierre ;  with  cheap  magnanimity  he  ;  and  none  dare  be  outdone 
by  him.  It  was  such  a  law,  not  superfluous  then,  that  sent  Mira- 
beau  to  the  gardens  of  Saint-Cloud,  under  cloak  of  darkness,  to 
that  colloquy  of  the  gods  ;  and  thwarted  many  things.  Happily 
and  unhappily  there  is  no  Mirabeau  now  to  thwart. 

Welcomer  meanwhile,  welcome  surely  to  all  right  hearts,  is 
Lafayette's  chivalrous  Amnesty.^  Welcome  too  is  that  hard-wrung 
Union  of  Avignon ;  ■*  which  has  cost  us,  first  and  last,  '  thirty 
sessions  of  debate,'  and  so  much  else  :  may  it  at  length  prove 
lucky !  Rousseau's  statue  is  decreed :  virtuous  Jean-Jacques, 
Evangelist  of  the  Contrat  Social.  Not  Drouet  of  Varennes  ;  nor 
worthy  Lataille,  master  of  the  old  world-famous  Tennis-Court  in 
Versailles,  is  forgotten  ;  but  each  has  his  honourable  mention,  and 
due  reward  in  money.  ^     Whereupon,  things  being  all  so  neatly 

i[May  i6th  '91.]  2 [April  7th  91.]  '[Sept.  30th  '91.] 

■*[The  territory  of  Avignon  and  the  Venaissin,  Papal  possessions  since  the  four- 
teenth century,  had  always  been  a  trouble  to  France,  the  city  of  Avignon  especially 
becomuig  an  asylum  for  smugglers  and  escaped  convicts.  The  territory  was 
governed  by  a  Cardinal  Legate.  In  Nov.  '89  it  had  been  proposed  in  the  Assembly 
to  unite  it  to  France,  and  in  June  '90  a  little  Revolution  in  the  city  drove  out  the 
Cardinal  Legate  and  demanded  union.  Carpentras,  the  capital  of  the  Venaissin, 
was  rather  jealous  of  Avignon  and  opposed  the  union.  The  Assembly  hesitated 
long  :  to  seize  Avignon,  even  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  its  inhabitants,  was  to 
violate  the  public  law  of  Europe,  and  for  that  it  was  hardly  yet  prepared.  In 
Nov.  '90,  after  endless  debates,  it  was  decided  to  request  the  King  to  send  troops 
thither  to  preserve  order.  Finall)'  the  last  act  of  the  Constituent  was  to  declare  the 
union  of  the  whole  district  with  France,  without  compensation  to  the  Pope.  In 
these  debates  the  principles  of  1793  and  1795  are  already  foreshadowed  ;  "  natural 
frontiers"  are  talked  of  and  the  right  to  Avignon  compared  to  the  right  to 
Alsace.  But  the  troops  had  not  been  sent,  and  the  massacres  had  meanwhile 
broken  out  (vid.  infr.,  ii.  159,  sqq.).] 

5  Moniteur,  m  Hist.  Pari.  .xi.  473.  [Two  millions  in  all  were  voted  for  distribution 
among  those  who  were  employed  in  bringing  the  King  back  to  Paris  and  in  other 


144^«i^THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 


sctionatelv 


win^^^B^and  the  Deputations,  and  Messages,  and  royal  and 
othe^^^^ponials  having  rustled  by ;  and  the  King  having  now 
affectionately  perorated  about  peace  and  tranquillisation,  and 
members  having  answered  "  Otii  !  oid  !"  with  effusion,  even  with 
tears, — President  Thouret,  he  of  the  Law  Reforms,  rises,  and, 
with  a  strong  voice,  utters  these  memorable  last- words :  "  The 
National  Constituent  Assembly  declares  that  it  has  finished  its 
mission ;  and  that  its  sittings  are  all  ended."  Incorruptible 
Robespierre,  virtuous  Petion  are  borne  home  on  the  shoulders  of 
the  people  ;  with  vivats  heaven-high.  The  rest  glide  quietly  to 
their  respective  places  of  abode.  It  is  the  last  afternoon  of 
September  17,91  ;  on  the  morrow  morning  the  new  Legislative 
will  begin. 

So,  amid  glitter  of  illuminated  streets  and  Champs  Elysees, 
and  crackle  of  fireworks  and  glad  deray,  has  the  first  National 
Assembly  vanished  ;  dissolving,  as  they  well  say,  into  blank  Time  ; 
and  is  no  more.  National  Assembly  is  gone,  its  work  remaining  ; 
as  all  Bodies  of  men  go,  and  as  man  himself  goes :  it  had  its 
beginning,  and  must  likewise  have  its  end.  A  Phantasm- Reality 
bom  of  Time,  as  the  rest  of  us  are  ;  flitting  ever  backwards  now 
on  the  tide  of  Time  ;  to  be  long  remembered  of  men.  Very 
strange  Assemblages,  Sanhedrims,  Amphictyonics,  Trades -Unions, 
Ecumenic  Councils,  ParUaments  and  Congresses,  have  met  together 
on  this  Planet,  and  dispersed  again  ;  but  a  stranger  Assemblage 
than  this  august  Constituent,  or  with  a  stranger  mission,  perhaps 
never  met  there.  Seen  from  the  distance,  this  also  will  be  a 
miracle.  Twelve  Hundred  human  individuals,  with  the  Gospel 
of  Jean-Jacques  Rousseau  in  their  pocket,  congregating  in  the 
name  of  Twenty-five  Millions,  with  full  assurance  of  faith,  to 
'  make  the  Constitution  : '  such  sight,  the  acme  and  main  product 
of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  our  World  can  witness  once  only.  For 
Time  is  rich  in  wonders,  in  monstrosities  most  I'ich  ;  and  is  ob- 
served never  to  repeat  himself,  or  any  of  his  Gospels : — surely 

services  to  the  State :  of  this  Drouet  obtained  30,000  /ivr.  and  La  Taille  6,000. 
La  Taille's  grant  was  almost  the  last  act  of  the  Constituent  (Sept.  30th)  (Moniteur, 
Aug.  19th  '91,  Oct.  and  '91).] 


GRANDE  ACCEPTATION  145 

least  of  all,  this  Gospel  according  to  Jean-Jacques.  Once  it  was 
right  and  indispensable,  since  such  had  become  the  Belief  of  men  ; 
but  once  also  is  enough. 

They  have  made  the  Constitution,  these  Twelve  Hundred 
Jean-Jacques  Evangelists  ;  not  without  result.  Near  twenty- 
nine  months  they  sat,  with  various  fortune  ;  in  various  capacity  ; 
— always,  we  may  say,  in  that  capacity  of  car-borne  Carroccio, 
and  miraculous  Standard  of  the  Revolt  of  Men,  as  a  Thing  high 
and  lifted  up  ;  whereon  whosoever  looked  might  hope  healing. 
They  have  seen  much,  cannons  levelled  on  them  ;  then  suddenly, 
by  interposition  of  the  Powers,  the  cannons  drawn  back  ;  and  a 
wargod  Broglie  vanishing,  in  thunder  not  his  own,  amid  the  dust 
and  downrushing  of  a  Bastille  and  Old  Feudal  France.  They 
have  suffered  somewhat :  Royal  Session,  with  rain  and  Oath  of 
the  Tennis-Court  ;  Nights  of  Pentecost ;  Insurrections  of  Women. 
Also  have  they  not  done  somewhat  ?  Made  the  Constitution, 
and  managed  all  things  the  while  ;  passed,  in  these  twenty-nine 
months,  'twenty-five  hundred  Decrees,'  which  on  the  average  is 
some  three  for  each  day,  including  Sundays  !  Brevity,  one  finds, 
is  possible,  at  times  :  had  not  Moreau  de  St.  Mery  to  give  three 
thousand  orders  before  rising  from  his  seat  ? — There  was  valour 
(or  value)  in  these  men ;  and  a  kind  of  faith, — were  it  only  faith 
in  this.  That  cobwebs  are  not  cloth  ;  that  a  Constitution  could  be 
made.  Cobwebs  and  chimeras  ought  verily  to  disappear  ;  for  a 
Reality  there  is.  Let  formulas,  soul-killing,  and  now  grown 
body-killing,  insupportable,  begone,  in  the  name  of  Heaven  and 
Earth  ! — Time,  as  we  say,  brought  forth  these  Twelve  Hundred ; 
Eternity  was  before  them.  Eternity  behind :  they  worked,  as  we 
all  do,  in  the  confluence  of  Two  Eternities  ;  what  work  was  given 
them.  Say  not  that  it  was  nothing  they  did.  Consciously  they 
did  somewhat ;  unconsciously  how  much  !  They  had  their  giants 
and  their  dwarfs,  they  accomplished  their  good  and  their  evil ; 
they  are  gone,  and  return  no  more.  Shall  they  not  go  with  our 
blessing,  in  these  circumstances  ;  with  our  mild  farewell  }  ^ 

'  [Sorel  (who  knows  his  countrymen  well),  ii.  466,  points  out  that  the  Assembly 
was  already  long  ago  discredited  in  public  opinion  because  it  h&d  failed  to  govern, 
VOL.    II.  10 


146        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

By  post,  by  diligence,  on  saddle  or  sole ;  they  are  gone  : 
towards  the  four  winds.  Not  a  few  over  the  marches,  to  rank 
at  Coblentz.  Thither  wended  Maury,  among  others  ;  but  in  the 
end  towards  Rome, — to  be  clothed  there  in  red  Cardinal  plush ; 
in  falsehood  as  in  a  garment ;  pet-son  (her  last  born  ?)  of  the  Scarlet 
Woman.  Talleyrand-Perigord,  excommunicated  Constitutional 
Bishop,  will  make  his  way  to  London :  to  be  Ambassador,  spite 
of  the  Self-denying  Law  ;  brisk  young  Marquis  Chauvelin  acting 
as  Ambassador's-Cloak.i  In  London  too,  one  finds  Petion  the 
virtuous  ;  harangued  and  haranguing,  pledging  the  wine-cup 
with  Constitutional  Reform-Clubs,  in  solemn  tavern-dinner.  In- 
corruptible Robespierre  retires  for  a  little  to  native  Arras  :  seven 
short  weeks  of  quiet ;  the  last  appointed  him  in  this  world.  Public 
Accuser  in  the  Paris  Department,  acknowledged  highpriest  of  the 
Jacobins  ;  the  glass  of  incorruptible  thin  Patriotism,  for  his  narrow 
emphasis  is  loved  of  all  the  narrow, — this  man  seems  to  be  rising, 
somewhither  }  He  sells  his  small  heritage  at  Arras  ;  accompanied 
by  a  Brother  and  a  Sister,  he  returns,  scheming  out  with  resolute 
timidity  a  small  sure  destiny  for  himself  and  them,  to  his  old  lodg- 
ing, at  the  Cabinet-maker's  in  the  Rue  St.  Honore  : — O  resolute- 
tremulous  incorruptible  seagreen  man,  towards  what  a  destiny  ! 

just  as  the  old  Monarchy  was  discredited  for  the  same  reason  before  '89.  The  New 
Legislative  Assembly  even  more  signally  failed  to  govern,  or  rather  prevented  the 
ministers  from  governing,  and  so  the  inert  mass  of  the  nation  was  at  last  not 
unwilling  to  see  if  a  Republican  Executive  \\o\x\d govern  more  successfully.] 

'  [Carlyle  here  mixes  up  Talleyrand's  two  first  missions  to  London,  and  ante- 
dates the  first  of  them.  It  was  not  as  ambassador,  but  in  a  private  capacity,  that 
he  first  went  to  London  (Jan.  '92— March  '92),  to  sound  not  the  English  Government 
but  the  English  Whig  party — in  short  to  intrigue  against  Pitt.  The  mission  was 
part  of  Narbonne's  policy  of  securing  the  neutrality,  or  perhaps  even  the  alliance 
of  England  in  the  coming  Continental  war  at  the  price  of  a  West  Indian  island  or 
two.  Talleyrand  was  warmly  received  in  Whig  circles,  notably  at  Lansdowne 
House.  It  was  Biron  not  Chauvelin  who  accompanied  him  on  this  mission  ;  and 
it  was  Talleyrand  who  afterwards  suggested  the  despatch  of  Chauvelin  as  an  ac- 
credited ambassador. 

His  second  mission,  this  time  with  Chauvelin,  was  at  the  end  of  April  '92,  after 
war  had  been  declared  on  Austria  ;  and  this  time  he  sought  to  obtain  Pitt's  con- 
sent to  the  establishment  of  Belgium  as  an  independent  Republic.  But  England 
only  answered  with  a  quasi-growl  on  the  subject  of  Holland  and  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary propaganda. 

Talleyrand  returned  on  June  20th,  and  was  again  sent  to  London  as  Danton's 
emissary  on  Sept.  8th  ;  when,  learning  that  he  was  compromised  by  the  papers 
found  in  the  Iron  press,  he  remained  in  England  as  an  ordinary  Emigre,  till  he 
went  to  America.     {I'^id.  supr.,  note  on  i.  147.)] 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  LAW  147 

Lafayette,  for  his  part,  will  lay  down  the  command.  ^  He  re- 
tires Cincinnatus-like  to  his  hearth  and  farm ;  but  soon  leaves 
them  again.  Our  National  Guard,  however,  shall  henceforth 
have  no  one  Commandant  ;  but  all  Colonels  shall  command  in 
succession,  month  about.-  Other  Deputies  we  have  met,  or  Dame 
de  Stael  has  met,  '  sauntering  in  a  thoughtful  manner  ; '  perhaps 
uncertain  what  to  do.  Some,  as  Barnave,  the  Lameths,  and  their 
Duport,  will  continue  here  in  Paris ;  watching  the  new  biennial 
Legislative,  Parliament  the  First ;  teaching  it  to  walk,  if  so  might 
be  ;  and  the  Court  to  lead  it. 

Thus  these  :  sauntering  in  a  thoughtful  manner  ;  travelling  by 
post  or  diligence, — -whither  Fate  beckons.  Giant  Mirabeau  slum- 
bers in  the  Pantheon  of  Great  Men  :  and  France  ?  and  Europe  ? — 
The  brass-lunged  Hawkers  sing  "  Grand  Acceptation,  Monarchic 
Constitution  "  through  these  gay  crowds  :  the  Morrow,  grandson 
of  Yesterday,  must  be  what  it  can,  as  Today  its  father  is.  Our 
new  biennial  Legislative  begins  to  constitute  itself  on  the  first  of 
October  1791. 

CHAPTER  II 

THE  BOOK  OF  THE  LAW 

If  the  august  Constituent  Assembly  itself,  fixing  the  regards  of 
the  Universe,  could,  at  the  present  distance  of  time  and  place, 
gain  comparatively  small  attention  from  us,  how  much  less  can 
this  poor  Legislative !  It  has  its  Right  Side  and  its  Left ;  the 
less  Patriotic  and  the  more,  for  Aristocrats  exist  not  here  or  now  : 
it  spouts  and  speaks  ;  listens  to  Reports,  reads  Bills  and  Laws  ; 
works  in  its  vocation,  for  a  season  :  but  the  History  of  France 

i[Oct.  8th  '91.] 

"[On  Lafayette's  resignation  theNational  Guard  underwent  considerablechanges. 
It  was  by  the  decrees  of  Sept.  23rd  and  29th  that  each  of  the  six  Legion  Com- 
manders was  to  command  in  turn  ;  but  oddly  enough  the  names  of  the  old  districts 
of  Paris  are  retained  for  the  battalions  long  after  Paris  was  divided  into  Sections. 
Yet  the  same  decree  (of  Sept.  29th)  authorises  each  Section  to  provide  itself  with 
two  pieces  of  cannon.  The  frequent  additions  of  paid  battalions  constitute  a 
puzzle.  The  effective  force  of  paid  troops  at  the  end  of  '91  is  calculated  by 
Mortimer-Ternaux  (i.  339)  as  32,600  men  :  of  the  six  Commandants  three  perished 
violently  in  1792.     (See  Tourneux,  ii.  xi.,  sqq.^l 


148        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

one  finds,  is  seldom  or  never  there.  Unhappy  Legislative,  what 
can  History  do  with  it ;  if  not  drop  a  tear  over  it,  almost  in 
silence  ?  First  of  the  two-year  Parliaments  of  France,  which,  if 
Paper  Constitution  and  oft-repeated  National  Oath  could  avail 
aught,  were  to  follow  in  softly-strong  indissoluble  sequence  while 
Time  ran, — it  had  to  vanish  dolefully  within  one  year  ;  and  there 
came  no  second  like  it.  Alas  !  your  biennial  Parliaments  in  end- 
less indissoluble  sequence ;  they,  and  all  that  Constitutional  Fabric, 
built  with  such  explosive  Federation  Oaths,  and  its  top-stone 
brought  out  with  dancing  and  variegated  radiance,  went  to  pieces, 
like  frail  crockery,  in  the  crash  of  things  ;  and  already,  in  eleven 
short  months,  were  in  that  Limbo  near  the  Moon,  with  the  ghosts 
of  other  Chimeras.  There,  except  for  rare  specific  purposes,  let 
them  rest,  in  melancholy  peace. 

On  the  whole,  how  unknown  is  a  man  to  himself;  or  a  pubhc 
Body  of  men  to  itself!  iEsop's  fly  sat  on  the  chariot-wheel,  ex- 
claiming. What  a  dust  I  do  raise  !  Great  Governors,  clad  in  purple 
with  fasces  and  insignia,  are  governed  by  their  valets,  by  the  pout- 
ing of  their  women  and  children  ;  or,  in  Constitutional  countries, 
by  the  paragraphs  of  their  Able  Editors.  Say  not,  I  am  this  or 
that ;  I  am  doing  this  or  that !  For  thou  knowest  it  not,  thou 
knowest  only  the  name  it  as  yet  goes  by.  A  purple  Nebuchad- 
nezzar rejoices  to  feel  himself  now  verily  Emperor  of  this  great 
Babylon  which  he  has  builded  ;  and  is  a  nondescript  biped-quad- 
ruped, on  the  eve  of  a  seven-years  course  of  grazing !  These 
Seven  Hundred  and  Forty-five  elected  individuals  doubt  not  but 
they  are  the  first  biennial  Parliament,  come  to  govern  France  by 
parliamentary  eloquence  :  and  they  are  what  .''  And  they  have 
come  to  do  what .''     Things  foolish  and  not  wise ! 

It  is  much  lamented  by  many  that  this  First  Biennial  had  no 
members  of  the  old  Constituent  in  it,  with  their  experience  of 
parties  and  parliamentary  tactics ;  that  such  was  their  foolish 
Self-denying  Law.  Most  surely,  old  members  of  the  Constituent 
had  been  welcome  to  us  here.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  what  old 
or  what  new  members  of  any  Constituent  under  the  Sun  could 
have  effectually  profited  .''     There  are  first  biennial  Parliaments  so 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  LAW  149 

postured  as  to  be,  in  a  sense,  hei/ond  wisdom  ;  where  wisdom  and 
folly  differ  only  in  degree,  and  wreckage  and  dissolution  are  the 
appointed  issue  for  both, 

Old-Constituents,  your  Barnaves,  Lameths  and  the  like,  for 
whom  a  special  Gallery  has  been  set  apart,  where  they  may  sit 
in  honour  and  listen,  are  in  the  habit  of  sneering  at  these  new 
Legislators  ;  ^  but  let  not  us !  The  poor  Seven  Hundred  and 
Forty-five,  sent  together  by  the  active  citizens  of  France,  are 
what  they  could  be :  do  what  is  fated  them.  That  they  are  of 
Patriot  temper  we  can  well  understand.  Aristocrat  Noblesse  had 
fled  over  the  marches,  or  sat  brooding  silent  in  their  unbumt 
Chateaux ;  small  prospect  had  they  in  Primary  Electoral  As- 
semblies. What  with  flights  to  Varennes,  what  with  Days  of 
Poniards,  with  plot  after  plot,  the  People  are  left  to  themselves  ; 
the  People  must  needs  choose  Defenders  of  the  People,  such  as 
can  be  had.  Choosing,  as  thei/  also  will  ever  do,  '  if  not  the 
ablest  man,  yet  the  man  ablest  to  be  chosen ! '  Fervour  of 
character,  decided  Patriot-Constitutional  feeling  ;  these  are  quali- 
ties :  but  free  utterance,  mastership  in  tongue-fence  ;  this  is  the 
quality  of  qualities.  Accordingly  one  finds,  with  little  astonish- 
ment, in  this  First  Biennial,  that  as  many  as  Four  hundred  Mem- 
bers are  of  the  Advocate  or  Attorney  species.  Men  who  can 
speak,  if  there  be  aught  to  speak :  nay  here  are  men  also  who 
can  think,  and  even  act.  Candour  will  say  of  this  ill-fated  First 
French  Parliament,  that  it  wanted  not  its  modicum  of  talent,  its 
modicum  of  honesty  ;  that  it,  neither  in  the  one  respect  nor  in 
the  other,  sank  below  the  average  of  Pai-liaments,  but  rose  above 
the  average.  Let  average  Parliaments,  whom  the  world  does 
not  guillotine,  and  cast  forth  to  long  infamy,  be  thankful  not  to 
themselves  but  to  their  stars  !  ^ 

1  Dumouriez,  ii.  150,  &c. 

-  [The  great  characteristic  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  was  the  extreme  youth 
of  its  members  as  a  whole.  There  were  few  men  of  any  mark  among  them  ;  most 
of  them  being  esurient  barristers,  editors  or  pamphleteers.  The  Right  might 
perhaps  number  160,  among  whom  were  some  honourable  men  such  as  \'aublanc, 
Beugnot,  Daverhoult,  Raymond,  Hua,  Dumas,  Jaucourt,  Pastoret  and  Theodore 
Lameth.  The  Left  were  over  300  in  number,  and  the  Centre  on  the  whole  inclined 
steadily  to  the  Left.  It  was  unfortunate  that  the  elections  to  the  Legislative  took 
place  during  the  temporary  suspension  of  the  Monarchy.] 


150        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

France,  as  we  say,  has  once  more  done  what  it  could :  fervid 
men  have  come  together  from  wide  separation ;  for  strange 
issues.  Fiery  Max  Isnard  is  come,  from  the  utmost  Southeast ;  ^ 
fiery  Claude  Fauchet,  Te-Deum  Fauchet  Bishop  of  Calvados,^ 
from  the  utmost  Northwest.  No  Mirabeau  now  sits  here,  who 
had  swallowed  formulas :  our  only  Mirabeau  now  is  Danton, 
working  as  yet  out  of  doors  ;  whom  some  call  '  Mirabeau  of  the 
Sansculottes.' 

Nevertheless  we  have  our  gifts, — especially  of  speech  and 
logic.  An  eloquent  Vergniaud  ^  we  have  ;  most  mellifluous  yet 
most  impetuous  of  public  speakers ;  from  the  region  named 
Gironde,  of  the  Garonne :  a  man  unfortunately  of  indolent 
habits  ;  who  will  sit  playing  with  your  children,  when  he  ought 
to  be  scheming  and  perorating.  Sharp-bustling  Guadet ;  *  con- 
siderate grave  Gensonn6 ;  ^  kind-sparkling  mirthful  young  Ducos  ; " 
Valaze ''  doomed  to  a  sad  end :  all  these  likewise  are  of  that 
Gironde  or  Bourdeaux  region :  men  of  fervid  Constitutional 
principles  ;  of  quick  talent,  irrefragable  logic,  clear  respecta- 
bility ;  who  will  have  the  Reign  of  Liberty  establish  itself,  but 
only   by   respectable    methods.       Round    whom   others    of  like 

^[Isnard,  vid.  supr.,  i.  403.]  ^ [Fauchet,  vid.  supr.,  ii.  44.] 

3  [Vergniaud  (Pierre-Victurnien)  was  the  son  of  an  army  contractor,  and  was 
born  at  Limoges  in  1753.  He  had  been  patronised  by  Turgot  as  a  boy  when  the 
great  minister  was  Intendant  of  the  Limousin  :  and  had  at  first  studied  theology,  but 
finally  decided  for  the  bar  and  became  one  of  the  leading  barristers  at  Bordeaux. 
He  had  been  on  the  Administrative  Council  of  the  Department  of  the  Gironde  in 
1790,  and  sat  for  that  Department  in  the  Legislative  and  Convention.  There  is  no 
doubt  of  his  extraordinary  eloquence  :  but  also  none  of  his  laziness  and  instability 
of  character.  He  was  guillotined  with  the  other  Girondins  Oct.  31st  '93.  His 
speeches  have  been  collected  by  M.  Vermorel  and  a  monograph  written  on  him 
by  M.  Charles  Vatel  (Paris,  1873).] 

■*  [Guadet,  born  at  Saint-Emilion  1758,  also  a  barrister,  followed  the  fortunes  of 
Vergniaud,  sat  for  Gironde  in  Legislative  and  Convention,  guillotined  at  Bordeaux 
Jan.  isth  1794.] 

•■' [Gensonn^,  born  at  Bordeaux  1758,  also  a  barrister,  sat  for  the  Gironde  in 
Legislative  and  Convention :  more  of  a  statesman,  less  of  an  orator  than  Guadet 
or  Vergniaud  ;  guillotined  with  Vergniaud,  Oct.  31st  1793.] 

^  [Ducos,  a  merchant  at  Bordeaux,  born  1765,  sat  for  Gironde  in  Legislative 
and  Convention,  guillotined  Oct.  31st  1793.] 

'[Valaz6  (C.  E.  Dufriche  de),  born  at  Alenfon  1751,  had  served  in  the  army  as 
Lieutenant,  then  turned  barrister,  sat  in  the  Convention  [not  in  the  Legislative  at 
all)  for  the  Department  of  Orne ;  was  one  of  the  more  courageous  among  the  not  too 
courageous  party  of  the  Girondists  ;  when  condemned  to  death,  Oct.  3otb  '93,  with 
tht  rest,  he  committed  suicide  in  the  court.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  LAW  151 

temper  will  gather ;  known  by  and  by  as  Girondins,  to  the 
sorrowing  wonder  of  the  world.  Of  which  sort  note  Condorcet,^ 
Marquis  and  Philosopher ;  who  has  worked  at  much,  at  Paris 
Municipal  Constitution,  Differential  Calculus,  Newspaper  Chroni- 
que  de  Paris,  Biography,  Philosophy ;  and  now  sits  here  as  two- 
years  Senator :  a  notable  Condorcet,  with  stoical  Roman  face, 
and  fiery  heai't ;  '  volcano  hid  under  snow ; '  styled  likewise,  in 
irreverent  language,  '  mouton  enrage,'  peaceablest  of  creatures 
bitten  rabid !  Or  note,  lastly,  Jean-Pierre  Brissot ;  ^  whom 
Destiny,  long  working  noisily  with  him,  has  hurled  hither,  say, 
to  have  done  with  him.  A  biennial  Senator  he  too ;  nay,  for 
the  present,  the  king  of  such.  Restless,  scheming,  scribbling 
Brissot ;  who  took  to  himself  the  style  de  Warville,  heralds 
know  not  in  the  least  why  ; — unless  it  were  that  the  father  of 
him  did,  in  an  unexceptionable  manner,  perform  Cookery  and 
Vintnery  in  the  Village  of  Owffrville  ?  A  man  of  the  windmill 
species,  that  grinds  always,  turning  towards  all  winds  ;  not  in 
the  steadiest  manner. 

In  all  these  men  there  is  talent,  faculty  to  work  ;  and  they 
will  do  it :  working  and  shaping,  not  without  effect,  though  alas 
not  in  marble,  only  in  quicksand ! — But  the  highest  faculty  of 
them  all  remains  yet  to  be  mentioned  ;  or  indeed  has  yet  to  un- 
fold itself  for  mention :   Captain  Hippolyte  Carnot,^  sent  hither 

^[Condorcet,  vid.  supr.,  i.  171.]  ^[Brissot,  vid.  supr.,  i.  170.] 

"^  [Carnot's  name  was  not  Hippolyte  but  Lazare  Nicholas  Marguerite.  He  was 
born  at  Nolay  in  1753,  the  son  of  a  notary.  He  had  two  distinguished  brothers, 
and  a  distinguished  son  and  grandson,  the  latter  being  once  President  of  the 
French  Republic.  He  was  an  officer  in  the  Engineers  1777,  captain  1783,  won 
a  prize  for  an  Eloge  stir  Vaul<an,  was  for  a  moment  in  the  Bastille,  sent  a  mhnoire 
on  a  financial  question  to  the  Constituent  Assembly,  sat  in  the  Legislative  and 
Convention  for  the  Pas-de-Calais.  Carlyle's  judgment  of  him  is  excellent.  He 
was  absolutely  deficient  in  statesmanship  or  political  knowledge  ;  but  he  was  high- 
minded  and  clean-handed.  A  grim  republican,  he  was  prepared  to  serve  any 
Government  which  would  defend  France,  and  even  to  sit  in  the  Comitii  de  Salut 
Public  with  Robespierre  (whom  he  loathed)  provided  he  could  have  a  free  hand 
for  the  reorganisation  of  the  army ;  so  he  became,  without  ever  having  to 
conduct  a  campaign  himself,  the  hero  of  the  National  defence  of  1793 — 4  and  the 
"  Organiser  of  Victory."  He  stoutly  defended  the  remaining  Terrorists  in  the 
Thermidorian  period,  though  he  himself  was  in  much  danger  after  the  insurrection 
of  Prairial ;  became  a  Director  ;  was  banished  in  '97  ;  returned  '99  and  was  for  a 
moment  minister  of  war  in  the  Consulate  ;  protested  almost  alone  of  the  old 
Republicans  against  the  Consulate-for-life  and  the  Empire,  during  which  he  retired 
into  private  life,  only  to  emerge  in  time  to  defend  Antwerp  in   1814  ;    he  was 


152        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

from  the  Pas  de  Calais  ;  with  his  cold  mathematical  head,  and 
silent  stubbornness  of  will :  iron  Carnot,  far-planning,  impertur- 
bable, unconquerable  ;  who,  in  the  hour  of  need,  shall  not  be 
found  wanting.  His  hair  is  yet  black  ;  and  it  shall  grow  gray, 
under  many  kinds  of  fortune,  bright  and  troublous ;  and  with 
iron  aspect  this  man  shall  face  them  all. 

Nor  is  Cote  Droit,  and  band  of  King's  friends,  wanting :  Vau- 
blanc,^  Dumas, '^  Jaucourt  the  honoured  Chevalier ;  ^  who  love 
Liberty,  yet  with  Monarchy  over  it ;  and  speak  fearlessly 
according  to  that  faith  ; — whom  the  thick-coming  hurricanes  will 
sweep  away.  With  them,  let  a  new  military  Theodore  Lameth 
be  named ;  ^ — were  it  only  for  his  two  Brothers'  sake,  who  look 
down  on  him,  approvingly  there,  from  the  Old-Constituents' 
Gallery.  Frothy  professing  Pastorets,^  honey-mouthed  concilia- 
tory Lamourettes,^  and  speechless  nameless  individuals  sit  plenti- 
ful, as   Moderates,   in  the  middle.     Still  less   is  a  Cote  Gauche 

Minister  of  War  during  the  loo  days,  and  was  proscribed  at  the  Restoration  ; 
died  at  Magdebourg  in  1823.  His  second  son  was  Lazare  Hippolyte  who  published 
in  1861  the  well-known  '  M^moires  sur  Carnot.'  His  Correspondence,  which  was 
in  course  of  publication  by  the  late  M.  Charavay,  is  one  of  our  principal  sources  of 
information  on  the  army  under  the  Terror.] 

1  [Vaublanc  (Vincent  Marie  Vienot,  Comte  de),  born  1756  at  St.  Domingo,  served 
in  the  Army  there,  returned  early  to  France  and  sat  for  Seine-et-Marne  in  the 
Legislative  ;  proscribed  under  the  Terror  he  wandered  over  France  on  foot,  took 
part  in  the  insurrection  of  l-'^enddmiaire,  and  was  condemned  to  death  for  it,  but 
pardoned  ;  served  each  successive  Government  till  the  fall  of  Charles  X.  ;  has  left 
interesting  memoirs  ;  died  1845.] 

2  [Dumas  (Mathieu,  Comte),  born  1753,  served  in  America,  sat  in  the  Legislative, 
emigrated  after  Aug.  loth,  returned  '95,  served  all  successive  Governments  and  died 
a  Peer  of  France  in  1837.] 

'  [Jaucourt  (Arnail  Fran9ois  Marquis  de),  born  1757,  Colonel  of  Dragoons  in  the 
old  Army,  sat  in  the  Legislative,  resigned  his  seat  in  July,  imprisoned  in  the  Abbaye 
and  escaped  with  difficulty  in  the  September  massacres,  emigrated  to  England, 
returned  but  did  not  serve  the  Empire  ;  died  a  Peer  of  France  1852  ;  was  a 
Protestant.] 

•*  [Theodore  Comte  de  Lameth  was  the  eldest  of  the  three  brothers,  born  1756, 
Colonel  in  the  cavalry  before  the  Revolution,  sat  in  the  Legislative,  emigrated  after 
Aug.  loth,  returned  after  Brumaire,  and  served  no  Government  except  that  of  the 
loo  days.     Died  1854.     (  Vid.  supr. ,  i.  183. )] 

5  [Pastoret,  born  1756,  sat  in  the  Cou?-  des  Aides,  began  life  as  a  follower  of 
Duport  and  only  rallied  to  Royalism  during  the  session  of  the  Legislative,  emigrated 
Aug.  loth,  returned,  served  the  Empire  and  Restoration  ;  Professor  of  Law  in  the 
College  of  France  1804,  Chancellor  of  France  1829,  died  1840.] 

^  [Adrien  Lamourette,  born  1742,  Grand  Vicar  of  Arras  in  1789,  "  Constitutional 
Bishop  "  of  Lyons,  sat  in  the  Legislative,  was  in  Lyons  during  the  siege  and  arrested 
there,  guillotined  at  Paris  Jan.  loth  1794.  j 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  LAW  153 

wanting :  extreme  Left ;  sitting  on  the  topmost  benches,  as  if 
aloft  on  its  speculatory  Height  or  Mountain,  which  will  become  a 
practical  fulminatory  Height,  and  make  the  name  of  Mountain 
famous-infamous  to  all  times  and  lands. 

Honour  waits  not  on  this  Mountain ;  nor  as  yet  even  loud  dis- 
honour. Gifts  it  boasts  not,  nor  graces,  of  speaking  or  of  think- 
ing ;  solely  this  one  gift  of  assured  faith,  of  audacity  that  will 
defy  the  Earth  and  the  Heavens.  Foremost  here  are  the  Cor- 
delier Trio  :  hot  Merliii  from  Thionville,^  hot  Bazire,'^  Attorneys 
both ;  Chabot,^  disfrocked  Capuchin,  skilful  in  agio.  Lawyer 
Lacroix,*  who  wore  once  as  subaltern  the  single  epaulette,  has 
loud  lungs  and  a  hungry  heart.  There  too  is  Couthon,  little 
dreaming  tvhaf  he  is  ; — whom  a  sad  chance  has  paralysed  in  the 
lower  extremities.  For,  it  seems,  he  sat  once  a  whole  night,  not 
warm  in  his  true-love's  bower  (who  indeed  was  by  law  another's), 
but  sunken  to  the  middle  in  a  cold  peat-bog,  being  hunted  out 
from  her ;  quaking  for  his  life,  in  the  cold  quaking  morass ;  ^ 
and  goes  now  on  crutches  to  the  end.  Cambon  likewise,  in 
whom  slumbers  undeveloped  such  a   finance-talent  for  printing 

^  [Merlin  of  Thionville  (so  called  to  distinguish  him  from  Merlin  of  Douai),  born 
1762,  trained  for  the  Church,  sat  in  Legislative  and  Convention,  defended  Mainz 
against  the  Prussians  1793,  was  sent  to  La  Vendue  with  the  garrison  of  Mainz,  took 
an  active  part  against  Robespierre  at  Thermidor,  retired  into  private  life  1798, 
only  emerging  during  the  too  days,  died  1833.] 

'^[Bazire,  born  1764,  a  follower  of  Danton's,  needy  barrister,  sat  in  Legislative 
and  Convention,  got  involved  in  disreputable  stock  exchange  transactions  with  the 
brothers  Frey,  guillotined  April  5th  '94.] 

3[Chabot,  a  Capuchin  friar,  born  1759,  Vicar  of  "  Bishop"  Gr^goire,  deputy  to 
Legislative  and  Convention,  guillotined  with  Danton  April  5th  '94.] 

■*  [Lacroix,  another  follower  of  Danton  born  1754,  sat  in  Legislative  and  Con- 
vention, followed  Danton  to  Belgium  in  the  autumn  of  '92  and  made  a  fortune 
there  by  questionable  means,  executed  with  the  Dantonists,  April  sth  '94.  The 
'  single  epaulette  '  is  a  reference  to  his  having  served  in  the  Gendarmerie.'] 

^  Dumouriez,  ii.  370.  [Georges  Couthon,  born  1756  in  Auvergne,  a  barrister, 
sat  for  Puy-de-D6me  in  Legislative  and  Convention.  He  was  a  great  orator  and 
a  man  of  sincere  convictions,  though  of  the  most  violent  kind.  He  seems  really 
to  have  believed  in  Robespierre,  and  stuck  to  him  to  the  last ;  which  is  curious, 
because  on  first  entering  the  Convention  he  seems  to  have  leant  more  towards  the 
Girondins.  He  was  a  member  of  the  great  ComiW  de  Salut  Public  (July  '93),  one 
of  the  chiefs  in  the  massacres  at  Lyons  ;  guillotined  with  Robespierre  at  Thermidor. 
His  Correspondence  has  been  published  by  M.  Mege  in  the  '  Documents  Inc^dits 
sur  la  R^v.  Fran9aise,'  Paris,  1870.  For  the  history  of  his  paralysis  (in  one  leg  only, 
and  that  only  a  violent  rlieumatic  affection)  see  M^ge,  p.  15,  who  refutes  the  story 
of  its  origin  given  here  by  Carlyle.] 


154        THE  FRENCH  EE VOLUTION 

of  Assignats  ;  Father  of  Paper-money ;  who,  in  the  hour  of 
menace,  shall  utter  this  stern  sentence.  "War  to  the  Manor- 
house,  peace  to  the  Hut,  Guerre  mix  Chdteaux,  paix  aux  Chau- 
mieres ! "  ^  Lecointre,^  the  intrepid  Draper  of  Versailles,  is 
welcome  here  ;  known  since  the  Opera- Repast  and  Insurrection 
of  Women.  Thuriot  ^  too ;  Elector  Thuriot,  who  stood  in  the 
embi'asures  of  the  Bastille,  and  saw  Saint-Antoine  rising  in  mass  ; 
who  has  many  other  things  to  see.  Last  and  grimmest  of  all, 
note  old  Ruhl,*  with  his  brown  dusky  face  and  long  white  hair ; 
of  Alsatian  Lutheran  breed  ;  a  man  whom  age  and  book-learning 
have  not  taught  ;  who,  haranguing  the  old  men  of  Rheims,  shall 
hold  up  the  sacred  Ampulla  ^  (Heaven-sent,  wherefrom  Clovis  and 
all  Kings  have  been  anointed)  as  a  mere  worthless  oil-bottle,  and 
dash  it  to  sherds  on  the  pavement  there ;  who,  alas,  shall  dash 
much  to  sherds,  and  finally  his  own  wild  head  by  pistol-shot,  and 
so  end  it. 

Such  lava  welters  redhot  in  the  bowels  of  this  Mountain ; 
unknown  to  the  world  and  to  itself!  A  mere  commonplace 
Mountain  hitherto ;  distinguished  from  the  Plain  chiefly  by  its 
superior  barrenness,  its  baldness  of  look :    at  the  utmost  it  may, 

1  Choix  des  Rapports,  xi.  25.  [Cambon,  a  merchant  at  Montpellier,  born  1754  : 
was  never  a  real  Montagnard  nor  a  party  man  at  all.  He  was  the  only  person  who 
could  during  the  Revolution  lay  any  claim  to  the  title  of  a  financier ;  a  member  of 
the  first  (Dantonist)  Comiti  de  Salut  Public,  April— July  '93,  the  creator  of  the 
Livre  Rouge  with  which  the  Government  pretended  to  begin  the  liquidation  of  the 
Debt  (Aug.  '93) ;  in  a  manner  subsidiary  to  Carnot  he  must  be  regarded  as  one  of 
the  heroes  of  the  National  defence  in  '93—4,  for  he  had  to  find  the  means  for  it,  and 
somehow  or  other  he  found  them.  He  earned  the  hatred  of  all  parties  by  belonging 
to  none,  and  was  proscribed  in  the  spring  of  '95  ;  amnestied  in  '96,  he  retired  with 
honourable  independence  to  his  business  at  Montpellier,  and  after  that  time  served 
only  the  Government  of  the  100  days.  Exiled  1816,  died  1820.  It  is  absurd  to  call 
him  the  father  of  paper  money,  a  title  that  should  rather  be  given  to  Clavi^re.] 

^[Lecointre,  vid.  supr.,  note  i.  172.] 

3  [Thuriot,  vid.  supr.,  note  i.  238.] 

*  [Ruhl,  a  Protestant  minister  at  Strasburg  :  date  of  his  birth  unknown  ;  sat  in 
Legislative  and  Convention  for  Bas-Rhin,  member  of  Comiti  de  S&reti  Ginirale, 
1793 — 4.     Arrested  during  the  insurrection  of  Prairial,  he  stabbed  himself  in  court.] 

s[The  Ampoule,  said  to  have  been  brought  by  an  angel  at  the  prayer  of  St. 
Remi  for  the  anointing  of  Clovis,  was  preserved  in  the  Abbey  of  Saint-Remi  at 
Rheims  in  a  reliquary  of  crystal  and  gold  ;  the  abbot  was  its  perpetual  guardian, 
and  only  delivered  it  to  the  Archbishop  of  Rheims  on  the  occasion  of  the  Sacre  ; 
the  anointintj  ceremony  took  place  on  nine  separate  parts  of  the  Royal  person 
before  the  crown  was  placed  on  the  King's  head.  The  Ampoule  was  broken  by 
Ruhl  on  July  7th,  1793.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  LAW  155 

to  the  most  observant,  perceptibly  smoke.  For  as  yet  all  lies  so 
solid,  peaceable ;  and  doubts  not,  as  was  said,  that  it  will  endure 
while  Time  runs.  Do  not  all  love  Liberty  and  the  Constitution  ? 
All  heartily ; — and  yet  with  degrees.  Some,  as  Chevalier  Jau- 
court  and  his  Right  Side,  may  love  Liberty  less  than  Royalty, 
were  the  trial  made  ;  others,  as  Brissot  and  his  Left  Side,  may 
love  it  more  than  Royalty.  Nay  again,  of  these  latter  some  may 
love  Liberty  more  than  Law  itself;  others  not  more.  Parties 
will  unfold  themselves  ;  no  mortal  as  yet  knows  how.  Forces 
work  within  these  men  and  without :  dissidence  grows  opposi- 
tion ;  ever  widening ;  waxing  into  incompatibility  and  inter- 
necine feud ;  till  the  strong  is  abolished  by  a  stronger ;  himself 
in  his  turn  by  a  strongest !  Who  can  help  it  ?  Jaucourt  and 
his  Monarchists,  Feuillans,  or  Moderates ;  Brissot  and  his  Bris- 
sotins,  Jacobins,  or  Girondins ;  these,  with  the  Cordelier  Trio, 
and  all  men,  must  work  what  is  appointed  them,  and  in  the  way 
appointed  them.^ 

And  to  think  what  fate  these  poor  Seven  Hundred  and  Forty- 
five  are  assembled,  most  unwittingly,  to  meet !  Let  no  heart  be 
so  hard  as  not  to  pity  them.  Their  soul's  wish  was  to  live  and 
work  as  the  First  of  the  French  Parliaments  ;  and  make  the  Con- 
stitution march.  2  Did  they  not,  at  their  very  instalment,  go 
through  the  most  affecting  Constitutional  ceremony,  almost  with 
tears  ?  The  Twelve  eldest  are  sent  solemnly  to  fetch  the  Con- 
stitution itself,  the  printed  Book  of  the  Law.  Archivist  Camus,^ 
an  Old-Constituent   appointed    Archivist,   he   and   the   Ancient 

1  [The  names  Girondist  and  Gironde  never  appear  as  party  names  during  the 
Legislative  ;  all  the  left  are  lumped  together  by  contemporaries  either  as  Brissotiiu 
or  Jacobins,  and  the  name  Montagne  is  used  for  the  extreme  wing  of  this  party. 
{See  Bir6,  La  L^gende  des  Girondins  (Paris,  1882),  34.)] 

2  [This  sentence  is  contradictory  of  much  that  Carlyle  has  just  said  ;  it  is  evident 
that  the  extreme  left  wanted  to  discredit  the  Constitution  in  order  to  establish  a 
Republic,  and  the  extreme  right  desired  to  alter  it  considerably  in  order  to  restore 
the  Royal  prerogative.] 

3  [Camus,  born  1740,  Advocate  of  the  Clergy,  a  rigid  Jansenist,  deputy  for  the 
Tiers-Atat  of  Paris  to  the  States-General,  nominated  to  the  control  of  the  National 
Archives  1789  (August),  deputy  to  Convention,  delivered  with  other  prisoners  to 
the  Austrians  by  Dumouriez,  and  exchanged  for  Madame  Royale  1795,  member  of 
the  Council  of  500,  died  1804.  He  was  one  of  the  authors  of  the  Civil  Constitution 
of  the  Clergy ;  and,  though  of  great  personal  piety,  always  of  extreme  opinions.] 


156        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Twelve,  amid  blare  of  military  pomp  and  clangour,  enter,  bear- 
ing the  divine  Book  :  and  President  and  all  Legislative  Senators, 
laying  their  hand  on  the  same,  successively  take  the  Oath,  with 
cheers  and  heart-effusion,  universal  three-times-three.^  In  this 
manner  they  begin  their  Session.  Unhappy  mortals  !  For,  that 
same  day,  his  Majesty  having  received  their  Deputation  of 
welcome,  as  seemed,  rather  drily,  the  Deputation  cannot  but 
feel  slighted,  cannot  but  lament  such  slight :  and  thereupon  our 
cheering  swearing  First  Parliament  sees  itself,  on  the  morrow, 
obliged  to  explode  into  fierce  retaliatory  sputter  of  anti-royal 
Enactment  as  to  how  they,  for  their  part,  will  receive  Majesty  ; 
and  how  Majesty  shall  not  be  called  Sire  any  more,  except  they 
please :  and  then,  on  the  following  day,  to  recall  this  Enactment 
of  theirs,  as  too  hasty,  and  a  mere  sputter,  though  not  unprovoked.^ 
An  effervescent  well-intentioned  set  of  Senators  ;  too  combus- 
tible, where  continual  sparks  are  flying !  Their  History  is  a 
series  of  sputters  and  quarrels  ;  true  desire  to  do  their  function, 
fatal  impossibility  to  do  it.  Denunciations,  reprimandings  of 
King's  Ministers,  of  traitors  supposed  and  real ;  hot  rage  and 
fulmination  against  fulminating  Emigrants  ;  terror  of  Austrian 
Kaiser,  of  '  Austrian  Committee '  in  the  Tuileries  itself ;  rage 
and  haunting  terror,  haste  and  doubt  and  dim  bewilderment ! — 
Haste,  we  say  ;  and  yet  the  Constitution  Iiad  provided  against 
haste.  No  Bill  can  be  passed  till  it  have  been  printed,  till  it 
have  been  thrice  read,  with  intervals  of  eight  days  ; — '  unless  the 
Assembly  shall  beforehand  decree  that  there  is  urgency.'  Which, 
accordingly  the  Assembly,  scrupulous  of  the  Constitution,  never 
omits  to  do :  Considering  this,  and  also  considering  that,  and 
then  that  other,  the  Assembly  decrees  always  '  iju'U  i/  a  urgence  ;  ' 
and  thereupon  'the  Assembly,  having  decreed  that  there  is 
urgence,'  is  free  to  decree — what  indispensable  distracted  thing 
seems  best  to  it.     Two  thousand  and  odd  decrees,  as  men  reckon, 

1  Moniteur,  Stance  du  4  Octobre  1791. 

2  [Oct.  5th — Oct.  6th.  The  motion  was  Couthon's  ;  the  motion  for  repeal  was 
Vosgien's.  Morris  (i.  461)  says  that  the  repeal  was  '  due  to  outside  opinion  ; ' 
Paris  apparently  becoming  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  a  bankruptcy,  '  for  it  exists 
upon  the  interests  of  the  National  Debt. 'J 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  LAW  157 

within  Eleven  months  !  ^  The  haste  of  the  Constituent  seemed 
great ;  but  this  is  treble-quick.  For  the  time  itself  is  rushing 
treble-quick  ;  and  they  have  to  keep  pace  with  that.  Unhappy 
Seven  Hundred  and  Forty-five  :  true-patriotic,  but  so  combus- 
tible ;  being  fired,  they  must  needs  fling  fire  :  Senate  of  touch- 
wood and  rockets,  in  a  world  of  smoke-storm,  with  sparks 
wind-driven  continually  flying  ! 

Or  think,  on  the  other  hand,  looking  forward  some  months,  of 
that  scene  they  call  Baiser  de  Lamourette  !  "^  The  dangers  of  the 
country  are  now  grown  imminent,  immeasurable ;  National  As- 
sembly, hope  of  France,  is  divided  against  itself  In  such  extreme 
circumstances,  honey-mouthed  Abbe  Lamourette,  new  Bishop  of 
Lyons,  rises,  whose  name,  I'amuurette,  signifies  the  sweetheart,  or 
Delilah  doxy, — he  rises,  and,  with  pathetic  honeyed  eloquence, 
calls  on  all  august  Senators  to  forget  mutual  griefs  and  grudges, 
to  swear  a  new  oath,  and  unite  as  brothers.  Whereupon  they 
all,  with  vivats,  embrace  and  swear ;  Left  Side  confounding 
itself  with  Right ;  barren  Mountain  rushing  down  to  fruitful 
Plain,  Pastoret  into  the  arms  of  Condorcet,  injured  to  the  breast 
of  injurer,  with  tears :  and  all  swearing  that  whosoever  wishes 
either  Feuillant  Two-Chamber  Monarchy  or  Extreme-Jacobin 
Republic,  or  any  thing  but  the  Constitution  and  that  only,  shall 
be  anathema  maranatha."^  Touching  to  behold  !  For,  literally 
on  the  morrow  morning,  they  must  again  quarrel,  driven  by 
Fate  ;  and  their  sublime  reconcilement  is  called  derisively  the 
Baiser  de  L'amourette,  or  Delilah  Kiss. 

Like  fated  Eteocles-Polynices  Brothers,  embracing,  though  in 
vain  ;  weeping  that  they  must  not  love,  that  they  must  hate  only, 
and  die  by  each  other's  hands !  Or  say,  like  doomed  Familiar 
Spirits ;  ordered,  by  Art  Magic  under  penalties,  to  do  a  harder 

1  Montgaillard,  iii.  i,  237. 

^  [Baiser  Lamoicrette  (not  de  Lamourette')  was  not  till  July  7th  '92.  Malouet, 
writing  to  Mallet  du  Pan,  attributes  it  to  a  momentary  fear  of  both  parties 
(Mallet,  i.  314).  A  deputation  of  twenty-four  was  sent  to  carry  the  news  to  the 
King.  The  King  came  to  the  Assembly,  expressed  his  gratification  and  was  well 
received  (for  the  last  time).  It  is  unfortunate  that  it  should  be  placed  so  utterly  out 
of  chronological  order  here.     (See  Mortimer-Ternaux,  ii.  35.)] 

"'  Moniteur,  Sf'ance  du  6  Juillet  1792. 


158        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

than  twist  ropes  of  sand  :  'to  make  the  Constitution  march.'  If 
the  Constitution  would  but  march !  Alas,  the  Constitution  will 
not  stir.  It  falls  on  its  face  ;  they  tremblingly  lift  it  on  end 
again  :  march,  thou  gold   Constitution !     The  Constitution  will 

not  march. — "  He  shall  march,  by !  "  said  kind  Uncle  Toby, 

and  even  swore.  The  Corporal  answered  mournfully  :  ^  "  He  will 
never  march  in  this  world." 

A  Constitution,  as  we  often  say,  will  march  when  it  images,  if 
not  the  old  Habits  and  Beliefs  of  the  Constituted ;  then  accu- 
rately their  Rights,  or  better  indeed  their  Mights  ; — for  these  two, 
well-understood,  are  they  not  one  and  the  same  ?  The  old  Habits 
of  France  are  gone  :  her  new  Rights  and  Mights  are  not  yet  ascer- 
tained, except  in  Paper-theorem  ;  nor  can  be,  in  any  sort,  till  she 
have  tried.  Till  she  have  measured  herself,  in  fell  death-grip, 
and  were  it  in  utmost  preternatural  spasm  of  madness,  with  Princi- 
palities and  Powers,  with  the  upper  and  the  under,  internal  and 
external  ;  with  the  Earth  and  Tophet  and  the  very  Heaven ! 
Then  will  she  know. — Three  things  bode  ill  for  the  marching  of 
this  French  Constitution  :  the  French  People  ;  the  French  King  ; 
thirdly,  the  French  Noblesse  and  an  assembled  European  World. 

CHAPTER  HI 

AVIGNON 
But  quitting  generalities,  what  strange  Fact  is  this,  in  the  far 
Southwest,  towards  which  the  eyes  of  all  men  do  now,  in  the  end 
of  October,  bend  themselves  ?  A  tragical  combustion,  long  smok- 
ing and  smouldering  unluminous,  has  now  burst  into  flame  there. 
Hot  is  that  Southern  Proven9al  blood  :  alas,  collisions,  as  was 
once  said,  must  occur  in  a  career  of  Freedom  ;  different  directions 
will  produce  such ;  nay  different  velocities  in  the  same  direction 
will !  To  much  that  went  on  there.  History,  busied  elsewhere, 
would  not  specially  give  heed :  to  troubles  of  Uzes,  troubles  of 

1  [Tristram  Shandy,  Edition  1782,  vol.  iv.  cap.  51,  very  loosely  quoted.  The 
last  words  of  the  paragraph  are  "Ah,  well-a-day  ! — do  what  we  can  for  him," 
said  Trim,  maintaining  his  point,  "  the  poor  soul  will  die  ;  " — "  He  shall  not  die, 
by  G— ."  cried  my  uncle  Toby.     It  is  from  the  '  Story  of  Le  F^vre.'] 


AVIGNON  159 

Nismes,  Protestant  and  Catholic,  Patriot  and  Aristocrat  ;  to 
troubles  of  Marseilles,  Montpellier,  Aries  ;  to  Aristocrat  Camp 
of  Jales,  that  wondrous  real-imaginary  Entity,  now  fading  pale- 
dim,  then  always  again  glowing  forth  deep-hued  (in  the  imagina- 
tion mainly)  ; — ominous  magical,  '  an  Aristocrat  picture  of  war  done 
naturally  ! '  All  this  was  a  tragical  deadly  combustion,  with  plot 
and  riot,  tumult  by  night  and  by  day ;  but  a  dark  combustion, 
not  luminous,  not  noticed  ;  which  now,  however,  one  cannot  help 
noticing. 

Above  all  places,  the  unluminous  combustion  in  Avignon  and 
the  Comtat  Venaissin  was  fierce.  Papal  Avignon,  with  its  Castle 
rising  sheer  over  the  Rhone-stream  ;  beautifuUest  Town,  with  its 
purple  vines  and  gold-orange  groves  ;  why  must  foolish  old  rhym- 
ing Rene,  the  last  Sovereign  of  Provence,  bequeath  it  to  the  Pope 
and  Gold  Tiara,  not  rather  to  Louis  Eleventh  with  the  Leaden 
Virgin  in  his  hatband  ?  ^  For  good  and  for  evil !  Popes,  Antipopes, 
with  their  pomp,  have  dwelt  in  that  Castle  of  Avignon  rising  sheer 
over  the  Rhone-stream  :  there  Laura  de  Sade  went  to  hear  mass  ; 
her  Petrarch  twanging  and  singing  by  the  Fountain  of  Vaucluse 
hard  by,  surely  in  a  most  melancholy  manner.  This  was  in  the 
old  days. 

And  now  in  these  new  days  such  issues  do  come  from  a  squirt 
of  the  pen  by  some  foolish  rhyming  Rene,  after  centuries, — this 
is  what  we  have :  Jourdan  Coupe-tete,-  leading  to  siege  and  war- 
fare an  Army,  from  three  to  fifteen  thousand  strong,  called  the 
Brigands  of  Avignon ;  which  title  they  themselves  accept,  with 
the  addition  of  an  epithet,  'The  brave  Brigands  of  Avignon!' 
It  is  even  so.  Jourdan  the  Headsman  fled  hither  from  that 
Chiitelet  Inquest,  from  that  Insurrection  of  Women  ;  and  began 
dealing  in  madder  :  but  the  scene  was  rife  in  other  than  dye-stuffs  ; 
so  Jourdan  shut  his  madder-shop,  and  has  risen,  for  he  was  the 

^  [It  was  not  R6n6  (died  1480)  but  Joanna  I.  of  Naples  who  sold  Avignon  in 
1348  to  Pope  Clement  VI.  for  80,000  gold  florins.  The  Venaissin  had  been  papal 
territory  ever  since  1271.  {See  Lavisse  et  Rambaud,  Hist.  Gen.  iii.  313;  and 
Lodge,  Close  of  the  Middle  Ages  (London,  1901),  pp.  47  and  153.)] 

■■^[KiV/.  note  j«/r. ,  i.  171.] 


160        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

man  to  do  it.  The  tile-beard  of  Jourdan  is  shaven  off;  his  fat 
visage  has  got  coppered  and  studded  with  black  carbuncles ;  the 
Silenus  trunk  is  swollen  with  drink  and  high  living  :  he  wears 
blue  National  uniform  with  epaulettes,  'an  enormous  sabre,  two 
horse-pistols  crossed  in  his  belt,  and  other  two  smaller  sticking 
from  his  pockets  ; '  styles  himself  General,  and  is  the  tyrant  of 
men.i  Consider  this  one  fact,  O  Reader ;  and  what  sort  of  facts 
must  have  preceded  it,  must  accompany  it !  Such  things  come 
of  old  Rene ;  and  of  the  question  which  has  risen.  Whether 
Avignon  cannot  now  cease  wholly  to  be  Papal,  and  become  French 
and  free  ? 

For  some  twenty-five  months  the  confusion  has  lasted. ^  Say 
three  months  of  arguing  ;  then  seven  of  raging  ;  then  finally  some 
fifteen  months  now  of  fighting,  and  even  of  hanging.  For  already 
in  February  1790,  the  Papal  Aristocrats  had  set  up  four  gibbets, 
for  a  sign ;  but  the  People  rose  in  June,  in  retributive  frenzy ; 
and,  forcing  the  public  Hangman  to  act,  hanged  four  Aristocrats, 
on  each  Papal  gibbet  a  Papal  Haman.  Then  were  Avignon 
Emigrations,  Papal  Aristocrats  emigrating  over  the  Rhone  River ; 
demission  of  Papal  Consul,  flight,  victory :  re-entrance  of  Papal 
Legate,  truce,  and  new  onslaught ;  and  the  various  turns  of  war. 
Petitions  there  were  to  National  Assembly  ;  Congresses  of  Town- 
ships ;  threescore  and  odd  Townships  voting  for  French  Reunion, 
and  the  blessings  of  Liberty ;  while  some  twelve  of  the  smaller, 
manipulated  by  Aristocrats,  gave  vote  the  other  way  :  with  shrieks 
and  discord  !  Township  against  Township,  Town  against  Town  : 
Carpentras,  long  jealous  of  Avignon,  is  now  turned  out  in  open 
war  with  it ; — and  Jourdan  Coupe-tete,  your  first  General  being 
killed  in  mutiny,  closes  his  dye-shop  ;  and  does  there  visibly,  with 
siege-artillery,  above  all  with  bluster  and  tumult,  with  the  '  brave 
Brigands  of  Avignon,'  beleaguer  the  rival  Town,  for  two  months, 
in  the  face  of  the  world. 

Feats  were  done,  doubt  it  not,  far-famed  in  Parish  History  ; 
but  to  Universal  History  unknown.     Gibbets  we  see  rise,  on  the 

'  Dampmartin,  Ev^nemens,  i.  267. 
'^\_Viil.  note,  supr.,  ii.  143.J 


AVIGNON  161 

one  side  and  on  the  other  ;  and  wretched  carcasses  swinging  there, 
a  dozen  in  the  row  ;  wretched  Mayor  of  Vaison  buried  before  dead.^ 
The  fruitful  seedfields  He  unreaped,  the  vineyards  trampled  down  ; 
there  is  red  cruelty,  madness  of  universal  choler  and  gall.  Havoc 
and  anarchy  everywhere ;  a  combustion  most  fierce,  but  7<?ducent, 
not  to  be  noticed  here  ! — Finally,  as  we  saw,  on  the  14th  of  Sep- 
tember last,  the  National  Constituent  Assembly, — having  sent 
Commissioners  and  heard  them ;  ^  having  heard  Petitions,  held 
Debates,  month  after  month  ever  since  August  1789  ;  and  on  the 
whole  '  spent  thirty  sittings  '  on  this  matter, — did  solemnly  decree 
that  Avignon  and  the  Comtat  were  incorporated  with  France,  and 
his  Holiness  the  Pope  should  have  what  indemnity  was  reason- 
able.^ 

And  so  hereby  all  is  amnestied  and  finished  ?  Alas,  when 
madness  of  choler  has  gone  through  the  blood  of  men,  and 
gibbets  have  swung  on  this  side  and  on  that,  what  will  a  parch- 
ment Decree  and  Lafayette  Amnesty  do  ?  Oblivious  Lethe  flows 
not  above  ground !  Papal  Aristocrats  and  Patriot  Brigands  are 
still  an  eye-sorrow  to  each  other ;  suspected,  suspicious,  in  what 
they  do  and  forbear.  The  august  Constituent  Assembly  is  gone  but 
a  fortnight,  when,  on  Sunday  the  Sixteenth  morning  of  October 
1791,  the  unquenched  combustion  suddenly  becomes  luminous. 
For  Anti-constitutional  Placards  are  up,  and  the  Statue  of  the 
Virgin  is  said  to  have  shed  tears,  and  grown  red.^  Wherefore, 
on  that  morning.  Patriot  I'Escuyer,  one  of  our  '  six  leading  Patriots,' 
having  taken  counsel  with  his  brethren  and  General  Jourdan, 
determines  on  going  to  Church,  in  company  with  a  friend  or  two  : 
not  to  hear  mass,  which  he  values  little  ;  but  to  meet  all  the 
Papalists  there  in  a  body,  nay  to  meet  that  same  weeping  Virgin, 

^  Barbaroux,  MtSmoires,  p.  26. 

"Lescene  Desmaisons,  Compte  rendu  a  I'Assembl^e  Nationale  10  Septembre 
1791  (Choix  des  Rapports,  vii.  273  93). 

^[The  hardship  of  this  lay  not  in  the  union  to  France  of  Avignon  (which  de- 
sired union),  or  even  of  Carpentras  and  the  Venaissin  (which  did  not) ;  but  in  the 
culpable  slackness  of  the  French  Government — both  King  and  Assembly — in  not 
sending  troops  to  preserve  order.  That  really  gave  away  the  lives  of  the  respect- 
able people  of  both  Avignon  and  Carpentras  into  the  hands  of  the  Brigands.] 

*Proces  verbal  de  la  Commune  d'Avignon,  &c.  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xii.  419-23). 
VOL.    II,  11 


162        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

for  it  is  the  Cordeliers  Church  ;  and  give  them  a  word  of  admoni- 
tion. Adventurous  errand  ;  which  has  the  fatallest  issue  !  What 
L'Escuyer's  word  of  admonition  might  be,  no  History  records;  but 
the  answer  to  it  was  a  shrieking  howl  from  the  Aristocrat  Papal 
worshippers,  many  of  them  women.  A  thousand-voiced  shriek 
and  menace  ;  which,  as  L'Escuyer  did  not  fly,  became  a  thousand- 
handed  hustle  and  jostle  ;  a  thousand-footed  kick,  with  tumblings 
and  tramplings,  with  the  pricking  of  sempstress  stilettoes,  scissors 
and  female  pointed  instruments.  Horrible  to  behold  ;  the 
ancient  Dead,  and  Petrarchan  Laura,  sleeping  round  it  there  ;  ^ 
high  Altar  and  burning  tapers  looking  down  on  it ;  the  Virgin 
quite  tearless,  and  of  the  natural  stone-colour  ! — L'Escuyer's  friend 
or  two  rush  off,  like  Job's  Messengers,  for  Jourdan  and  the  National 
Force.  But  heavy  Jourdan  will  seize  the  Town-Gates  first ;  does 
not  run  treble-fast,  as  he  might :  on  arriving  at  the  Cordeliers 
Church,  the  Church  is  silent,  vacant ;  L'Escuyer,  all  alone,  lies 
there,  swimming  in  his  blood,  at  the  foot  of  the  high  Altar;  pricked 
with  scissors,  trodden,  massacred  ; — gives  one  dumb  sob,  and  gasps 
out  his  miserable  life  forevermore.^ 

Sight  to  stir  the  heart  of  any  man  ;  much  more  of  many  men, 
self-styled  Brigands  of  Avignon !  The  corpse  of  L'Escuyer, 
stretched  on  a  bier,  the  ghastly  head  girt  with  laurel,  is  borne 
through  the  streets ;  with  many-voiced  unmelodious  Nenia ; 
funeral-wail  still  deeper  than  it  is  loud  !  The  copper-face  of 
Jourdan,  of  bereft  Patriotism,  has  grown  black.  Patriot  Munici- 
pality despatches  official  Narrative  and  tidings  to  Paris  ;  orders 
numerous  or  innumerable  arrestments  for  inquest  and  perquisi- 
tion. Aristocrats  male  and  female  are  haled  to  the  Castle  ;  lie 
crowded  in  subterranean  dungeons  there,  bemoaned  by  the 
hoarse  rushing  of  the   Rhone  ;  cut  out  from  help. 

So  lie   they ;    waiting  inquest  and  perquisition.     Alas !    with 

^  Ugo  Foscolo,  Essay  on  Petrarch,  p.  35. 

2 [The  Brigands  had  taken  possession  of  the  old  Papal  castle,  and  Lescuyer,  one 
of  the  members  of  the  Electoral  Assembly  of  Avignon,  was  attempting  to  carry  off 
the  funds  of  the  Mont  de  PidW  ior  the  benefit  of  the  Brigands,  when  the  Papalists 
rose  and  murdered  him.  Jourdan  and  his  friends  knew  of  the  approach  of  the 
French  troops,  and,  thinking  they  were  nearer  than  they  really  were,  determined 
to  murder  their  opponents  first  (Von  Sybel,  i.  412).] 


AVIGNON  163 

a  Jourdan  Headsman  for  Generalissimo,  with  his  copper-face 
grown  black,  and  armed  Brigand  Patriots  chanting  their  Nenia, 
the  inquest  is  likely  to  be  brief  On  the  next  day  and  the  next, 
let  Municipality  consent  or  not,  a  Brigand  Court-Martial  estab- 
lishes itself  in  the  subterranean  stories  of  the  Castle  of  Avignon  ; 
Brigand  Executioners,  with  naked  sabre,  waiting  at  the  door 
for  a  Brigand  verdict.  Short  judgment,  no  appeal!  There  is 
Brigand  \vrath  and  vengeance  ;  not  unrefreshed  by  brandy.  Close 
by  is  the  dungeon  of  the  Glacierc,^  or  Ice-Tower :  there  may 
be  deeds  done — ?  For  which  language  has  no  name  ! — Darkness 
and  the  shadow  of  horrid  cruelty  envelopes  these  Castle  Dungeons, 
that  Glaciere  Tower :  clear  only  that  many  have  entered,  fhat 
few  have  returned.  Jourdan  and  the  Brigands,  supreme  now 
over  Municipals,  over  all  authorities  Patriot  or  Papal,  reign  in 
Avignon,  waited  on  by  Terror  and  Silence. 

The  result  of  all  which  is,  that,  on  the  15th  of  November 
17.91,  we  behold  Friend  Dampmartin,  and  subalterns  beneath 
him,  and  General  Choisi  above  him,  with  Infantry  and  Cavalry, 
and  proper  cannon-carriages  rattling  in  front,  with  spread  banners, 
to  the  sound  of  fife  and  drum,  wend,  in  a  deliberate  formidable 
manner,  towards  that  sheer  Castle  Rock,  towards  those  broad 
Gates  of  Avignon ;  three  new  National- Assembly  Commissioners 
following  at  safe  distance  in  the  rear.^  Avignon,  summoned  in 
the  name  of  Assembly  and  Law,  flings  its  Gates  wide  open ; 
Choisi  with  the  rest,  Dampmartin  and  the  '  Eons  Enfans,  Good 
Boys,  of  Baufremo7it,' — so  they  name  these  brave  Constitutional 
Dragoons,  known  to  them  of  old, — do  enter,  amid  shouts  and 
scattered  flowers.  To  the  joy  of  all  honest  persons  ;  to  the  terror 
only  of  Jourdan  Headsman  and  the  Brigands.  Nay  next  we 
behold  carbuncled  swollen  Jourdan  himself  show  copper-face, 
with  sabre  and  four  pistols  ;  affecting  to  talk  high ;  engaging, 
meanwhile,  to  surrender  the  Castle  that  instant.  So  the  Choisi 
Grenadiers  enter  with  him  there.  They  start  and  stop,  passing 
that   Glaciere,  snuffing  its  horrible  breath  ;  with  wild  yell,  with 

^  [The  Glaciere  is  one  of  the  seven  towers  of  the  old  Papal  palace.] 
2  Dampmartin,  i.  251-94. 


164        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

cries  of  "  Cut  the  Butcher  down  !  " — and  Jourdan  has  to  whisk 
himself  through  secret  passages,  and  instantaneously  vanish. 

Be  the  mystery  of  iniquity  laid  bare  then !  A  Hundred  and 
Thirty  Corpses,^  of  men,  nay  of  women  and  even  children  (for 
the  trembling  mother,  hastily  seized,  could  not  leave  her  infant), 
lie  heaped  in  that  Glaciere  ;  putrid,  under  putridities  :  the  horror 
of  the  world.  For  three  days  there  is  mournful  lifting  out,  and 
recognition ;  amid  the  cries  and  movements  of  a  passionate 
Southern  people,  now  kneeling  in  prayer,  now  storming  in  wild 
pity  and  rage :  lastly  there  is  solemn  sepulture,  with  muffled 
drums,  religious  requiem,  and  all  the  people's  wail  and  tears. 
Th^r  Massacred  rest  now  in  holy  ground  ;  buried  in  one  grave. 

And  Jourdan  Coupe-tete  ?  Him  also  we  behold  again,  after 
a  day  or  two :  in  flight,  through  the  most  romantic  Petrarchan 
hill-country ;  vehemently  spurring  his  nag ;  young  Ligonnet,  a 
brisk  youth  of  Avignon,  with  Choisi  Dragoons,  close  in  his  rear ! 
With  such  swollen  mass  of  a  rider  no  nag  can  run  to  advantage. 
The  tired  nag,  spur-driven,  does  take  the  River  Sorgue ;  but 
sticks  in  the  middle  of  it ;  firm  on  that  chiaro  fondo  di  Sorga ; 
and  will  proceed  no  further  for  spurring !  Young  Ligonnet 
dashes  up ;  the  Copper-face  menaces  and  bellows,  draws  pistol, 
perhaps  even  snaps  it ;  is  nevertheless  seized  by  the  collar ;  is 
tied  firm,  ancles  under  horse's  belly,  and  ridden  back  to  Avi- 
gnon, hardly  to  be  saved  from  massacre  on  the  streets  there.'^ 

Such  is  the  combustion  of  Avignon  and  the  Southwest,  when 
it  becomes  luminous.  Long  loud  debate  is  in  the  august  Legis- 
lative, in  the  Mother-Society,  as  to  what  now  shall  be  done  with 
it.  Amnesty,^  cry  eloquent  Vergniaud  and  all  Patriots:  let 
there  be  mutual  pardon  and  repentance,  restoration,  pacification, 

1  [Von  Sybel  gives  no  as  the  figure  ;  some  2,000  brigands  were  expelled  from 
the  city  by  the  French  troops.  ] 

2Dampmartin,  ubi  supra.  [Dampmartin  calls  him  Ligon6.] 
'[The  Amnesty  to  the  Avignon  murderers  occupied  a  great  deal  of  the  time  of 
the  Assembly  until  the  following  spring,  and  produced  a  notable  if  somewhat 
Jesuitical  speech  from  Vergniaud  (March  19th  '92)  in  which  he  argued  that  some  of 
the  crimes  were  committed  before,  some  after  the  amnesty  of  Sept.  30th  '91.  This 
was  of  course  assuming  that  the  massacre  of  Oct.  i6th  was  an  ordinary  episode  in 
the  little  civil  war  which  had  been  sputtering  for  nearly  a  year  in  that  country.] 


AVIGNON  165 

and,  if  so  might  anyhow  be,  an  end !  Which  vote  ultimately 
prevails.^  So  the  Southwest  smoulders  and  welters  again  in  an 
'  Amnesty,'  or  Non-remembrance,  which  alas  cannot  but  remem- 
ber, no  Lethe  flowing  above  ground !  Jourdan  himself  remains 
unhanged ;  gets  loose  again,  as  one  not  yet  gallows-ripe  ;  nay, 
as  we  transiently  discern  from  the  distance,  is  '  carried  in  triumph 
through  the  cities  of  the  South.'  ^     What  things  men  carry  ! 

With  which  transient  glimpse,  of  a  Copper-faced  Portent 
faring  in  this  manner  through  the  cities  of  the  South,  we  must 
quit  these  regions  ; — and  let  them  smoulder.  They  want  not 
their  Aristocrats  ;  proud  old  Nobles,  not  yet  emigrated.  Aries  has 
its  '  Chiffonne,'  so,  in  symbolical  cant,  they  name  that  Aristocrat 
Secret-Association ;  Aries  has  its  pavements  piled  up,  by  and 
by,  into  Aristocrat  barricades.  Against  which  Rebecqui,  the 
hot-clear  Patriot  must  lead  Marseillese  with  cannon.  The  Bar 
of  Iron  has  not  yet  risen  to  the  top  in  the  Bay  of  Marseilles  ; 
neither  have  these  hot  Sons  of  the  Phoceans  submitted  to  be 
slaves.  By  clear  management  and  hot  instance,  Rebecqui  dissi- 
pates that  Chiffonne,  without  bloodshed ;  restores  the  pavement 
of  Aries.  He  sails  in  Coast-barks,  this  Rebecqui,  scrutinising 
suspicious  Martello-towers,  with  the  keen  eye  of  Patriotism  ; 
marches  overland  with  despatch,  singly,  or  in  force ;  to  City 
after  City  ;  dim  scouring  far  and  wide  ;  '^ — argues,  and  if  it  must 
be,  fights.*  For  there  is  much  to  do ;  Jales  itself  is  looking 
suspicious.  So  that  Legislator  Fauchet,  after  debate  on  it,  has 
to  propose  Commissioners  and  a  Camp  on  the  plain  of  Beaucaire  ; 
with  or  without  result. 

Of  all  which,  and  much  else,  let  us  note  only  this  small 
consequence,  that  Young  Barbaroux,  Advocate,  Town-Clerk  of 
Marseilles,  being  charged  to  have  these  things  remedied,  arrives 

1  [March  20th  92.]  2  Dg^x  Amis,  vii.  (Paris,  1797),  pp.  59-71. 

'Barbaroux,  p.  21  ;  Hist.  Pari.  xiii.  421-4. 

** [Rebecqui,  born  at  Marseilles  in  1760,  was  a  member  of  its  Departmental  Direc- 
tory and  had  served  as  civil  commissary  at  Avignon  after  the  massacre.  He 
followed  Barbaroux  to  Paris,  threw  in  his  lot  with  the  same  Girondist  party,  sat 
in  the  Convention  for  Bouches-du-Rhone,  resigned  his  seat  in  April  '93,  was  out- 
lawed after  May  31st,  drowned  himself  May  6th  '94.] 


166        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

at  Paris  in  the  month  of  February  1792.^  The  beautiful  and 
brave  :  young  Spartan,  ripe  in  energy,  not  ripe  in  wisdom  ;  over 
whose  black  doom  there  shall  flit  nevertheless  a  certain  ruddy 
fervour,  streaks  of  bright  Southern  tint,  not  wholly  swallowed  of 
Death !  Note  also  that  the  Rolands  of  Lyons  are  again  in 
Paris ;  '^  for  the  second  and  final  time.  King's  Inspectorship  is 
abrogated  at  Lyons,^  as  elsewhere :  Roland  has  his  retiring- 
pension  to  claim,  if  attainable  ;  has  Patriot  friends  to  commune 
with ;  at  lowest,  has  a  Book  to  publish.  That  young  Barbaroux 
and  the  Rolands  came  together ;  that  elderly  Spartan  Roland 
liked,  or  even  loved  the  young  Spartan,  and  was  loved  by  him, 
one  can  fancy :  and  Madame ?  Breathe  not,  thou  poison- 
breath.  Evil-speech  !  That  soul  is  taintless,  clear  as  the  mirror- 
sea.  And  yet  if  they  two  did  look  into  each  other's  eyes,  and 
each,  in  silence,  in  tragical  renunciance,  did  find  that  the  other 
was  ail-too  lovely  ?  Honi  soil !  She  calls  him  '  beautiful  as 
Antinous  : '  he  '  will  speak  elsewhere  of  that  astonishing  woman.' 
— A  Madame  d'Udon  (or  some  such  name,  for  Dumont  does  not 
recollect  quite  clearly)  gives  copious  Breakfast  to  the  Brissotin 
Deputies  and  us  Friends  of  Freedom,  at  her  House  in  the  Place 
Vendome  ;  with  temporary  celebrity,  with  graces  and  wreathed 
smiles ;  not  without  cost.  There,  amid  wide  babble  and  jingle, 
our  plan  of  Legislative  Debate  is  settled  for  the  day,  and  much 
counselling  held.  Strict  Roland  is  seen  there,  but  does  not  go 
often.  4 

'[March.]  ^[Dec.  isth '91.] 

^  [The  Lyons  silk  industry  remained  fairly  prosperous  till  1792.  Before  the 
Revolution  Lyons  worked  up  all  the  home-grown  silk  of  France,  and  imported 
27  millions'  worth  of  the  raw  material.  During  the  years  1792 — 9  it  hardly  used 
one-quarter  of  the  home-grown  material,  and  imported  none  [see  Rev.  de  la  R^v. 
vii.  8s).] 

*  Dumont,  Souvenirs,  p.  261.  [In  Feb.  '92  the  Radical  party  in  Marseilles  got 
the  upper  hand  m  the  small  civil  war  which  raged  all  over  the  South-Eastern  corner 
of  France  from  Oct.  '91  to  the  end  of  '93.  About  the  same  time  the  moderates  in 
Aries  got  the  upper  hand  in  that  city  ;  everywhere  else  in  the  district  parties  were 
more  evenly  balanced.  Barbaroux  was  sent  to  Paris  (March  '92)  to  denounce  to 
the  Assembly  the  aristocratic  tendencies  of  Aries,  and  he  there  fell  entirely  into  the 
toils  of  iMme  Roland,  posing  as  one  of  her  platonic  lovers.  About  the  same  time 
(March  12th)  Rebecqui  led  4,000  Marseilliiis  with  six  cannons  against  Aries,  and 
was  completely  successful.  The  Assembly  in  Paris  was  delighted,  and  ordered  the 
disarming  of  all  respectable  citizens  in  Aries.     These  successes  of  the  Marseillais, 


NO  SUGAR  167 


CHAPTER  IV 

NO  SUGAR 

Such  are  our  inward  troubles  ;  seen  in  the  Cities  of  the  South  ; 
extant,  seen  or  unseen,  in  all  cities  and  districts.  North  as  well 
as  South.  For  in  all  are  Aristocrats,  more  or  less  malignant ; 
watched  by  Patriotism ;  which  again,  being  of  various  shades, 
from  light  Fayettist-Feuillant  down  to  deep-sombre  Jacobin,  has 
to  watch  even  itself. 

Directories  of  Departments,  what  we  call  County  Magis- 
tracies, being  chosen  by  Citizens  of  a  too  '  active '  class,  are 
found  to  pull  one  way  ;  Municipalities,  Town  Magistracies,  to  pull 
the  other  way.^  In  all  places  too  are  Dissident  Priests  ;  whom 
the  Legislative  will  have  to  deal  with  :  contumacious  individuals, 
working  on  that  angriest  of  passions  ;  plotting,  enlisting  for 
Coblentz  ;  or  suspected  of  plotting  :  fuel  of  a  universal  unconsti- 
tutional heat.  What  to  do  with  them  ?  They  may  be  con- 
scientious as  well  as  contumacious :  gently  they  should  be  dealt 
with,  and  yet  it  must  be  speedily.  In  unilluminated  La  Vendee 
the  simple  are  like  to  be  seduced  by  them ;  many  a  simple 
peasant,  a  Cathelineau  -  the  wooldealer  wayfaring  meditative 
with  his  woolpacks,  in  these  hamlets,  dubiously  shakes  his  head  ! 

and  the  missson  of  Barbaroux,  put  it  into  the  head  of  the  Paris  Radicals  to  use 
them  against  the  Tuileries  when  the  time  should  come.  {See  Von  Sybel,  i.  415,  436  ; 
and  vid.  infr.,  ii.  228-9.)] 

1  [The  President  of  the  Directory  of  the  Department  of  the  Seine  (Paris)  was  the 
Due  de  La  Rochefoucauld  ;  four  moderate  ex-Constituents  also  sat  in  it  (Talley- 
rand being  one) ;  Roederer  was  \Xs, pi-ocureur-syndic.  Mirabeau  had  been  a  member 
of  it,  and  had  placed  some  confidence  in  its  action  ;  he  had  a  hand  in  drawing  up 
the  address  against  disorder  with  which  it  placarded  the  walls  of  Paris  on  March  4th 
{see  Schmidt,  Tableaux  de  la  Rev.  Fr.  i.  12-16).  It  was  at  perpetual  variance  with 
the  Conseil-Giindral  of  the  Cominunc,  in  which  the  January  elections  had  produced 
the  return  of  several  very  violent  men,  such  as  Panis  and  Sergent  (a  barrister  and 
an  engraver),  both  unheard  of  men  at  the  time.  The  Commune  was  legally  (by 
decree  of  May  27th  '90)  subject  to  the  Department  of  the  Seine  ;  but  the  power  of 
calling  out  the  armed  force,  and  the  police  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Coviiniaic,  which 
really  made  the  authority  of  the  Department  of  no  effect.  {See  Mortimer-Ternaux, 
i.  46  ;  vid.  supr. ,  i.  429. )] 

2  [Jacques  Cathelineau  was  born  1759,  and  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the 
first  great  insurrection  of  La  Vendue,  March  12th  1793  ;  on  June  12th  he  was  chosen 
General  in  chief  of  the  Vcndt'.an  forces,  and  was  mortally  wounded  at  the  attack 
on  Nantes,  June  29th.] 


168        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Two  Assembly  Commissioners  went  thither  last  Autumn ;  con- 
siderate Gensonne,  not  yet  called  to  be  a  senator ;  Gallois,  an 
editorial  man.  These  Two,  consulting  with  General  Dumouriez, 
spake  and  worked,  softly,  with  judgment ;  they  have  hushed 
down  the  irritation,  and  produced  a  soft  Report, — for  the  time. 

The  General  himself  doubts  not  in  the  least  but  he  can  keep 
peace  there  ;  being  an  able  man.  He  passes  these  frosty  months 
among  the  pleasant  people  of  Niort,  occupies  '  tolerably  handsome 
apartments  in  the  Castle  of  Niort,'  and  tempers  the  minds  of 
men.i  Why  is  there  but  one  Dumouriez  ?  Elsewhere  you  find. 
South  or  North,  nothing  but  untempered  obscure  jarring  ;  which 
breaks  forth  ever  and  anon  into  open  clangour  of  riot.  Southern 
Perpignan  has  its  tocsin,  by  torchlight ;  with  rushing  and  on- 
slaught :  Northern  Caen  not  less,  by  daylight ;  with  Aristocrats 
ranged  in  arms  at  Places  of  Worship  ;  Departmental  compromise 
proving  impossible ;  breaking  into  musketry  and  a  plot  dis- 
covered !  '^  Add  Hunger  too  :  for  bread,  always  dear,  is  getting 
dearer :  not  so  much  as  Sugar  can  be  had  ;  for  good  reasons. 
Poor  Simoneau,  Mayor  of  Etampes,  in  this  Northern  region, 
hanging  out  his  Red  Flag  in  some  riot  of  grains,  is  trampled 
to  death  by  a  hungry  exasperated  People.-^  What  a  trade  this  of 
Mayor,  in  these  times !  Mayor  of  Saint-Denis  hung  at  the 
Lanterne,  by  Suspicion  and  Dyspepsia,  as  we  saw  long  since  ; 
Mayor  of  Vaison,  as  we  saw  lately,  buried  before  dead ;  and  now 
this  poor  Simoneau  the  Tanner,  of  Etampes, — whom  legal  Con- 
stitutionalism will  not  forget.* 

With  factions,  suspicions,  want  of  bread  and  sugar,  it  is  verily 
what  they  call  dechird,  torn  asunder,  this  poor  country :  France 
and  all  that  is  French.  For,  over  seas  too  come  bad  news.  In 
black  Saint-Domingo,  before  that  variegated  Glitter  in  the  Champs 
Elysees  was  lit  for  an  Accepted  Constitution,  there  had  risen,  and 

1  Dumouriez,  ii.  129.  ^Hist.  Pari.  xii.  131,  141  ;  xiii.  114,  417. 

^  [March  3rd  '92.] 

*  [This  was  on  the  occasion  of  one  of  the  few  attempts  to  put  down  a  bread  riot 
with  legal  forms.  Simonneau  was  a  rich  tanner.  He  called  out  the  troops  in 
Ltampes  (eighty  men  of  the  i8th  cavalry),  but  they  would  not  respond,  and 
allowed  him  to  be  murdered  before  their  eyes.     {Vid.  infr.,  ii.  207.)] 


NO  SUGAR  169 

was  burning  contemporaiy  with  it,  quite  another  variegated  Glitter 
and  nocturnal  Fulgor,  had  we  known  it :  of  molasses  and  ardent- 
spirits  ;  of  sugar-boileries,  plantations,  furniture,  cattle  and  men  : 
sky-high  ;  the  Plain  of  Cap  Fran9ais  one  huge  whirl  of  smoke  and 
flame ! 

What  a  change  here,  in  these  two  years  ;  since  that  first  '  Box 
of  Tricolor  Cockades '  got  through  the  Custom-house,  and  atra- 
biliar  Creoles  too  rejoiced  that  there  was  a  levelling  of  Bastilles  ! 
Levelling  is  comfortable,  as  we  often  say  :  levelling,  yet  only  down 
to  oneself.  Your  pale-white  Creoles  have  their  grievances  : — and 
your  yellow  Quarteroons  ?  And  your  dark-yellow  Mulattoes  ? 
And  your  Slaves  soot-black  ?  Quarteroon  Oge,  Friend  of  our 
Parisian- Brissotin  Friend.s  of  the  Blacks,  felt  for  his  share  too,  that 
Insurrection  was  the  most  sacred  of  duties.  So  the  tricolor 
Cockades  had  fluttered  and  swashed  only  some  three  months  on 
the  Creole  hat,  when  Oge's  signal-conflagrations  went  aloft ;  with 
the  voice  of  rage  and  terror.  Repressed,  doomed  to  die,  he  took 
black  powder  or  seedgrains  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  this  Oge  ; 
sprinkled  a  film  of  white  ones  on  the  top,  and  said  to  his  Judges, 
"  Behold  they  are  white  ;  "  then  shook  his  hand,  and  said,  "  Where 
are  the  whites.  Oil  sotii  les  blancs  !"  ^ 

So  now,  in  the  Autumn  of  1791,  looking  from  the  sky-windows 
of  Cap  Fran9ais,  thick  clouds  of  smoke  girdle  our  horizon,  smoke 
in  the  day,  in  the  night  fire  ;  preceded  by  fugitive  shrieking  white 
women,  by  Terror  and  Rumour.  Black  demonised  squadrons  are 
massacring  and  harrying,  with  nameless  cruelty.  They  fight  and 
fire  *  from  behind  thickets  and  coverts,'  for  the  Black  man  loves 
the  Bush  ;  they  rush  to  the  attack,  thousands  strong,  with  bran- 
dished cutlasses  and  fusils,  with  caperings,  shoutings  and  voci- 
feration,— which,  if  the  White  Volunteer  Company  stands  firm, 
dwindle  into  sttiggerings,  into  quick  gabblement,  into  panic  flight 
at  the  first  volley,  perhaps  before  it.^  Poor  Oge  could  be  broken 
on  the  wheel ;  this  fire-whirlwind  too  can  be  abated,  driven  up 
into  the  mountains  :  but  Saint-Domingo  is  shaken,  as  Oge's  seed- 

1  [Vid.  yupr.,  i.  364  and  note.]  ^Dgyx  Amis,  x.  157. 


170        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

grains  were  ;  shaking,  writhing  in  long  hoiTid  death-throes,  it  is 
Black  without  remedy  ;  and  remains,  as  African  Haiti,  a  monition 
to  the  world. 

0  my  Parisian  Friends,  is  not  this,  as  well  as  Regraters  and 
Feuillant  Plotters,  one  cause  of  the  astonishing  dearth  of  Sugar  ! 
The  Grocer,  palpitant,  with  drooping  lip,  sees  his  Sugar  taxe ;  ^ 
weighed  out  by  female  Patriotism,  in  instant  retail,  at  the  i" 
adequate  rate  of  twenty-five  sous,  or  thirteen  pence  a  pound. 
"  Abstain  from  it  ?  "  Yes,  ye  Patriot  Sections,  all  ye  Jacobins, 
abstain!  Louvet  and  Collot-d'Herbois  so  advise;  resolute  to 
make  the  sacrifice  ;  though  "  how  shall  literary  men  do  without 
coffee  .-* "     Abstain,  with  an  oath  ;  that  is  the  surest !  ^ 

Also,  for  like  reason,  must  not  Brest  and  the  Shipping  Interest 
languish  .''  Poor  Brest  languishes,  sorrowing,  not  without  spleen  ; 
denounces  an  Aristocrat  Bertrand-Moleville,  traitorous  Aristocrat 
Marine  Minister.  Do  not  her  Ships  and  King's  Ships  lie  rotting 
piecemeal  in  harbour  ;  Naval  Officers  mostly  fled,  and  on  furlough 
too,  with  pay  ?  ^  Little  stirring  there  ;  if  it  be  not  the  Brest 
Galleys,  whip-driven,  with  their  Galley-Slaves, — alas,  with  some 
Forty  of  our  hapless  Swiss  Soldiers  of  Chateau-Vieux,  among 
others  !  These  Forty  Swiss,  too  mindful  of  Nanci,  do  now,  in 
their  red  wool  caps,  tug  sorrowfully  at  the  oar ;  looking  into  the 
Atlantic  brine,  which  reflects  only  their  own  sorrowful  shaggy 
faces  ;  and  seem  forgotten  of  Hope. 

But,  on  the  whole,  may  we  not  say,  in  figurative  language,  that 
the  French  Constitution  which  shall  march  is  very  rheumatic,  full 
of  shooting  internal  pains,  in  joint  and  muscle  ;  and  will  not 
march  without  difficulty  ?  * 

1  [This  probably  refers  to  the  riots  on  Jan.  20th  and  23rd  1792,  when  a  lot  of 
grocers'  shops  were  plundered,  and  sugar,  then  worth  3  livr.  the  pound,  was  forcibly 
sold  at  25  sous.'] 

"^  D^bats  des  Jacobins,  &c.  (Hist.  Pari.  xiii.  171,  92-8). 

'^{See  Appendix  on  Navy.] 

^1  The  most  fatal  symptom  was  the  weakness  of  the  ministry — nay,  the  complete 
want  of  a  ministry.  Montmorin  remained  Foreign  Minister  till  the  end  of  October 
'91,  simply  because  the  King  could  find  no  one  to  take  his  place.  The  post  was 
successively  offered  to  Moustier,  Si^gur,  Choiseul-Gouffier,  Barth^lemy :  all  de- 
clined. At  the  end  of  November  Delessart,  who  was  already  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
was  compelled  to  take  the  Foreign  Office  and  resign  the  Home  Office  to  Cahier  de 


KINGS  AND  EMIGRANTS  171 

CHAPTER  V 

KINGS  AND  EMIGRANTS 

Extremely  rheumatic  Constitutions  have  been  known  to  march, 
and  keep  on  their  feet,  though  in  a  staggering  sprawling  manner, 
for  long  periods,  in  virtue  of  one  thing  only  :  that  the  Head  were 
healthy.  But  this  Head  of  the  French  Constitution !  What 
King  Louis  is  and  cannot  help  being.  Readers  already  know.  A 
King  who  cannot  take  the  Constitution,  nor  reject  the  Constitu- 
tion :  nor  do  any  thing  at  all,  but  miserably  ask.  What  shall  I  do  } 
A  King  environed  with  endless  confusions  ;  in  whose  own  mind  is 
no  germ  of  order.  Haughty  implacable  remnants  of  Noblesse 
struggling  with  humiliated  repentant  Barnave-Lameths  ;  strug- 
gling in  that  obscure  element  of  fetchers  and  carriers,  of  Half- 
pay  braggarts  from  the  Cafe  Valois,  of  Chambermaids,  whisperers, 
and  subaltern  officious  persons  ;  fierce  Patriotism  looking  on  all 
the  while,  more  and  more  suspicious,  from  without :  what,  in  such 
struggle,  can  they  do  ?  At  best,  cancel  one  another,  and  produce 
zero.  Poor  King  !  Barnave  and  your  Senatorial  Jaucourts  speak 
earnestly  into  this  ear  ;  Bertrand-Moleville,  and  Messengers  from 
Coblentz,!  speak  earnestly  into  that :  the  poor  Royal  head  turns 
to  the  one  side  and  to  the  other  side ;  can  turn  itself  fixedly  to 

Gerville.  The  incessant  interference  of  the  Diplomatic  Committee  of  the  Assembly, 
during  the  session  of  the  Constituent,  had  frightened  all  the  old  emp/o\u's  at  the 
Foreign  Office  :  the  new  Assembly  was  not  to  be  a  whit  behind  the  old  one  in  usurping 
the  functions  of  the  Executive  Government,  and  its  Diplomatic  Committee  was  consti- 
tuted on  Oct.  i6th  ;  Brissot,  Gensonnf§  and  Koch  were  the  leading  members  ;  and 
from  the,first  they  meant  War  and  a  Republic  by  means  of  War.  {Cf.  Masson, 
Affaires  Etrang^res,  112  sqq.  ;  Morris,  i.  470,  482.)] 

'  [Antoine  Fran9ois  de  Bertrand-Moleville  was  born  at  Toulouse  1744.  of  a  legal 
family,  became  Intcndant  of  Brittany  1784,  Minister  of  Marine  Oct.  '91 — March  '92. 
quarrelled  in  that  capacity  with  Narbonne,  and  remained  one  of  the  unofticial 
advisers  of  the  King  until  ."^ug.  loth,  when  he  was  accused  by  the  Assembly,  and 
with  great  difficulty  remained  hidden  until  his  escape  to  England  in  September. 
He  had  courage  and  wit  ;  and,  as  his  M^moires  too  often  prove,  a  lively  imagination. 
They  were  published  m  London  in  1797.  They  show  that  Bertrand  '  played  the 
game'  of  Constitutional  Minister  with  much  spirit,  if  with  little  success;  they 
demonstrate  in  fact  the  utterly  unworkable  character  of  the  Constitution  of  1791. 
-As  Minister  of  Marine  he  had  to  be  responsible  for  the  safety  of  the  Colonies,  and 
he  really  seems  to  have  done  the  best  he  could  with  the  wretched  materials  to  his 
hand.  He  remained  in  England  till  the  Restoration,  and  found  himself  utterly 
neglected  by  the  Restored  Monarchy  ;  died  1818.] 


172        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

no  side.  Let  Decency  drop  a  veil  over  it :  sorrier  misery  was 
seldom  enacted  in  the  world.  This  one  small  fact,  does  it  not 
throw  the  saddest  light  on  much  ?  The  Queen  is  lamenting  to 
Madame  Campan :  "  What  am  I  to  do  ?  When  they,  these 
Barnaves,  get  us  advised  to  any  step  which  the  Noblesse  do  not 
like,  then  I  am  pouted  at ;  nobody  comes  to  my  card-table ;  the 
King's  Couchee  is  solitary."  ^  In  such  a  case  of  dubiety,  what  is 
one  to  do  ?     Go  inevitably  to  the  ground  ! 

The  King  has  accepted  this  Constitution,  knowing  beforehand 
that  it  will  not  serve :  he  studies  it,  and  executes  it  in  the  hope 
mainly  that  it  will  be  found  inexecutable.  King's  Ships  lie 
rotting  in  harbour,  their  officers  gone  ;  the  Armies  disorganised ; 
robbers  scour  the  Highways,  which  wear  down  unrepaired ;  all 
Public  Service  lies  slack  and  waste :  the  Executive  makes  no 
effort,  or  an  effort  only  to  throw  the  blame  on  the  Constitution. 
Shamming  death,  '  faisant  la  mart  ! '  What  Constitution,  use  it  in 
this  manner,  can  march  ?  '  Grow  to  disgust  the  Nation,'  it  will 
truly,  unless  yoti  first  grow  to  disgust  the  Nation  !  It  is  Bertrand 
de  Moleville's  plan,  and  his  Majesty's ;  the  best  they  can  form.^ 

Or  if,  after  all,  this  best-plan  proved  too  slow ;  proved  a  failure  ? 
Provident  of  that  too,  the  Queen,  shrouded  in  deepest  mystery, 
'  writes  all  day,  in  cipher,  day  after  day,  to  Coblentz ; '  Engineer 
Goguelat,  he  of  the  Night  of  Spurs,  whom  the  Lafayette  Amnesty 
has  delivered  from  Prison,  rides  and  runs.  Now  and  then,  on 
fit  occasion,  a  Royal  familiar  visit  can  be  paid  to  that  Salle  de 
Manege,  an  affecting  encouraging  Royal  Speech  (sincere,  doubt 
it  not,  for  the  moment)  can  be  delivered  there,  and  the  Senators 
all  cheer  and  almost  weep ; — at  the  same  time  Mallet  du  Pan 
has  visibly  ceased  editing,^  and  invisibly  bears  abroad  a  King's 
Autograph,     soliciting    help     from    the     Foreign     Potentates.^ 

1  Campan,  ii.  177,  202.  [Carlyle  persists  in  spelling  Coucher  ^Couchee'  or 
'  Couchde'  .~\ 

^Bertrand  Moleville,  i.  c.  4.  [It  was  not  really  Bertrand's  plan,  but  Mirabeau's, 
much  diluted  and  worked  by  lesser  men.  It  was  afterwards  still  more  feebly  copied 
by  the  Roland  ministry,  and  much  jeered  at  as  the  Bureau  de  I' Esprit  Publique.'\ 

3 [May  2ist  '92.] 

^  Moleville,  i.  370.  [For  Mallet's  connection  with  the  Mercure,  vid.  sjipr.,  i.  387. 
Mallet  du  Pan  was  born  at  Celigny  near  Geneva  1749,  had  been  early  patronised  by 


KINGS  AND  EMIGRANTS  173 

Unhappy  Louis,  do  this  thing  or  else  that  other, — if  thou 
couldst ! 

The  thing  which  the  King's  Government  did  do  was  to  stagger 
distractedly  from  contradiction  to  contradiction  ;  and  wedding 
Fire  to  Water,  envelope  itself  in  hissing,  and  ashy  steam.  Danton 
and  needy  corruptible  Patriots  are  sopped  with  presents  of  cash  : 
they  accept  the  sop  ;  they  rise  refreshed  by  it,  and — travel  their 
own  way.^  Nay,  the  King's  Government  did  likewise  hire  Hand- 
clappers,  or  claqueurs,  persons  to  applaud.  Subterranean  Rivarol 
has  Fifteen  Hundred  Men  in  King's  pay,  at  the  rate  of  some 
£10,000  sterling  per  month;  what  he  calls  'a  staff  of  genius:' 
Paragraph- writers.  Placard  Journalists  ;  '  two  hundred  and  eighty 
Applauders,  at  three  shillings  a  day : '  one  of  the  strangest  Staffs 
ever  commanded  by  man.  The  muster-rolls  and  account-books 
of  which  still  exist.^  Bertrand-Moleville  himself,  in  a  way  he 
thinks  very  dexterous,  contrives  to  pack  the  Galleries  of  the 
Legislative ;  gets  Sansculottes  hired  to  go  thither,  and  applaud 
at  a  signal  given,  they  fancying  it  was  Petion  that  bade  them : 
a  device  which  was  not  detected  for  almost  a  Aveek.  Dexterous 
enough ;  as  if  a  man,  finding  the  Day  fast  decline,  should  deter- 
mine on  altering  the  Clock-hands  :  that  is  a  thing  possible  for 
him.^ 

Voltaire,  contributed  to  Linguet's  Annales,  and  came  to  Paris  as  editor  of  the 
Mercure  1784.  He  had  no  connection  with  the  Court  till  Nov.  1791,  when  the 
Queen  sent  him  some  information  which  she  wished  to  appear  in  the  Mercure. 
In  May  he  was  desirous  of  a  rest  and  wished  to  visit  Geneva  ;  and  his  name  was 
suggested  to  the  King  by  Malouet  (to  whom  the  Court  sometimes  listened)  as  that 
of  a  possible  messenger  to  the  Allies.  The  choice  of  such  a  man  proves  that  the 
King  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Eynigrt's.  Bertrand  does  not  honestly  state  the 
truth  about  his  mission  in  the  passage  here  cited  ;  it  was  simply  to  prevent  the 
^migrh  having  a  hand  in  the  councils  of  the  Allies.  To  this  plan  however  Louis 
did  not  stick,  and  forgot  all  about  Mallet  as  soon  as  he  had  gone  {vid.  infr.,  ii.  235). 

Mallet  had  no  success,  returned  to  France  and  continued  the  Mercure,  in 
the  face  of  still  greater  threats  and  dangers,  till  the  eve  of  August  loth,  and 
then  emigrated.  His  counsels  were  always  valued  by  the  wiser  heads  among  the 
Allies  and  he  remained  the  warm  friend  of  Mounier,  Malouet,  L.ally  Tollendal  and 
also  of  the  best  men  in  England  until  he  died  in  that  country  in  1800.  Englishmen 
owe  him  a  warm  debt  of  gratitude  for  his  courageous  championship  of  Warren 
Hastings.] 

^  Ibid.  i.  c.  17.  2  Montgaillard,  iii.  41. 

'[Among  those  mentioned  by  Bertrand  as  receiving  Court  pay  are  Condorcet, 
Brissot  and  Danton  ;  Vergniaud,  (juadet,  Isnard  and  Fauchet  had  also  offered 
their  services,  but  Delessart  found  them  too  dear.  With  the  exception  of  Condorcet 
there  is  no  antecedent  improbability  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  Bertrand  is  not  to  be 


174         THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Here  too  let  us  note  an  unexpected  apparition  of  Philippe 
d'Orleans  at  Court :  his  last  at  the  Levee  of  any  King.  D'Orleans, 
sometime  in  the  winter  months  seemingly,  has  been  appointed 
to  that  old  first-coveted  rank  of  Admiral, — though  only  over 
ships  rotting  in  port.^  The  wished-for  comes  too  late  !  However, 
he  waits  on  Bertrand-Moleville  to  give  thanks  :  nay  to  state  that 
he  would  willingly  thank  his  Majesty  in  person  ;  that,  in  spite 
of  all  the  horrible  things  men  have  said  and  sung,  he  is  far  from 
being  his  Majesty's  enemy ;  at  bottom,  how  far !  Bertrand 
delivers  the  message,  brings  about  the  royal  Interview,  which 
does  pass  to  the  satisfaction  of  his  Majesty ;  D'Orleans  seeming 
clearly  repentant,  determined  to  turn  over  a  new  leaf.  And  yet, 
next  Sunday,  what  do  we  see  ?  '  Next  Sunday,'  says  Bertrand, 
'he  came  to  the  King's  Levee  ;^  but  the  Courtiers  ignorant  of 
'  what  had  passed,  the  Ci'owd  of  Royalists  who  were  accustomed 
*  to  resort  thither  on  that  day  specially  to  pay  their  court,  gave 
'  him  the  most  humiliating  reception.  They  came  pressing  round 
'  him  ;  managing,  as  if  by  mistake,  to  tread  on  his  toes,  to  elbow 
'  him  towards  the  door,  and  not  let  him  enter  again.  He  went 
'down  stairs  to  her  Majesty's  Apartments,  where  cover  was  laid  ; 
'  so  soon  as  he  showed  face,  sounds  rose  on  all  sides,  "  Messieurs, 
'take  care  of  the  dishes,"  as  if  he  had  carried  poison  in  his  pockets. 
'The  insults,  which  his  presence  everywhere  excited,  forced  him 
'  to  retire  without  having  seen  the  Royal  Family :  the  crowd 
'  followed  him  to  the  Queen's  staircase  ;  in  descending,  he  re- 
'ceived  a  spitting  (crachat)  on  the  head,  and  some  others  on  his 
'  clothes.      Rage  and  spite  were  seen  visibly  painted  on  his  face  : '  '^ 

trusted  on  any  matter  of  the  kind.  With  regard  to  Danton,  Lafayette  (iii.  83) 
categorically  accuses  him  of  having  received  a  certain  sum  from  Montmorin  ;  but 
this  is  probably  a  twisting  of  the  fact  that  Danton  was  reimbursed,  as  all  the 
lawyers  of  the  old  Corporations  were,  when  the  Parlement  of  Paris  was  suppressed 
(vid.  note  supr.,  i.  294).] 

1  [Among  the  Naval  promotions  signed  by  the  King  Sept.  i6th  'gi  was  that  of 
d'Orleans  ;  almost  all  the  other  officers  promoted  refused  to  accept  promotion  ; 
but  the  Duke  accepted,  and  there  remain  several  letters  signed  by  him  as  Admiral 
to  the  Minister  of  Marine  (Hist,  de  L.  P.  J.  Due  d'Orl&ms  et  du  Parti  d'Orl6ans, 
par  Touraois,  Paris,  1842,  vol.  ii.  p.  206,  .^qq.).  So  far  as  I  know  the  Duke's  name 
does  not  occur  in  any  list  of  French  Admirals,  but  L6on  Gu^rin,  Hist.  Maritime  de 
la  France  (v.  338),  confirms  the  statement.] 
2|jan.  ist  1792.]  -^Bertrand-Moleville,  i.  177. 


KINGS  AND  EMIGRANTS  175 

as  indeed  how  could  they  miss  to  be  ?  He  imputes  it  all  to  the 
King  and  Queen,  who  know  nothing  of  it,  who  are  even  much 
grieved  at  it ;  and  so  descends  to  his  Chaos  again.  Bertrand 
was  there  at  the  Chateau  that  day  himself,  and  an  eye-witness 
to  these  things. 

For  the  rest,  Non-jurant  Priests,  and  the  repression  of  them,  will 
distract  the  King's  conscience  ;  Emigrant  Princes  and  Noblesse 
will  force  him  to  double-dealing ;  there  must  be  x'cto  on  veto ; 
amid  the  ever-waxing  indignation  of  men.  For  Patriotism,  as 
we  said,  looks  on  from  without,  more  and  more  suspicious. 
Waxing  tempest,  blast  after  blast,  of  Patriotic  indignation,  from 
without ;  dim  inorganic  whirl  of  Intrigues,  Fatuities,  within ! 
Inorganic,  fatuous  ;  from  which  the  eye  turns  away.  De  Stael 
intrigues  for  her  so  gallant  Narbonne,  to  get  him  made  War- 
Minister  ;  and  ceases  not,  having  got  him  made.^  The  King 
shall  fly  to  Rouen ;  shall  there,  with  the  gallant  Narbonne, 
properly  'modify  the  Constitution.'  This  is  the  same  brisk 
Narbonne,  who,  last  year,  cut  out  from  their  entanglement,  by 
force  of  dragoons,  those  poor  fugitive  Royal  Aunts :  men  say  he 
is  at  bottom  their  Brother,  or  even  more,  so  scandalous  is  scandal. 
He  drives  now,  with  his  De  Stael,  rapidly  to  the  Armies,  to 
the  Frontier  Towns  ;  produces  rose-coloured  Reports,  not  too 
credible  ;  perorates,  gesticulates  ;  wavers  poising  himself  on  the 
top,  for  a  moment,  seen  of  men  ;  then  tumbles,  dismissed,  washed 
away  by  the  Time-flood."^ 

1  [Dec.  6th  91.] 

'^  [Count  Louis  de  Narbonne,  who  became  War  Minister  in  Dec.  '91,  was  a 
spirited  man  of  Hberal  views,  but  too  ambitious  and  too  ill-balanced  for  such  a 
crisis.  He  was  probably  the  grandson  of  Louis  XV.,  whose  personal  beauty  was 
reproduced  in  him,  and  was  almost  certainly  the  lover  of  Mme  de  Stael.  He  was 
so  far  under  the  influence  of  the  Radicals  as  to  wish  for  war,  but  he  also  wished  to 
save  the  Monarchy  ;  and  his  aim  was  to  get  the  King  to  retire  from  Paris,  and 
put  himself  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  to  restore  discipline  before  the  war  began. 
Narbonne  seems  to  have  hoped  only  for  a  small  war,  e.g.,  with  the  Elector  of 
Trier,  or  at  most  with  Austria,  whose  position  as  head  of  the  Empire  he  entirely 
misjudged.  He  misjudged  also  the  temper  of  the  Assembly,  for  the  Gironde  was 
rapidly  pushing  France  into  a  war  of  principles  against  as  many  European  powers 
as  liked  to  Join.  The  res'ilt  was  that  Narbonne's  name  became  suspect  to  the 
Girondists,  who  would  have  demanded  his  dismissal,  had  not  Bertrand  persuaded 
the  King  to  dismiss  Narbonne  and  himself  on  March  loth,  and  to  replace  the 
former  by  de  Grave.  Result — the  Assembly  voted  that  Narbonne  carried  with  him 
the  regrets  of  the  Nation,  and  fell  upon  the  remnants  of  his  ministry  instead. 


176        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

Also  the  fair  Princess  de  Lamballe  intrigues,  bosom-friend  of 
her  Majesty :  to  the  angering  of  Patriotism.  Beautiful  Unfor- 
tunate, why  did  she  ever  return  from  England  ?  Her  small 
silver-voice,  what  can  it  profit  in  that  piping  of  the  black  World- 
tornado  ?  Which  will  whirl  her,  poor  fragile  Bird  of  Paradise, 
against  grim  rocks.  Lamballe  and  De  Stael  intrigue  visibly, 
apart  or  together :  but  who  shall  reckon  how  many  others,  and 
in  what  infinite  ways,  invisibly !  Is  there  not  what  one  may 
call  an  '  Austrian  Committee,'  sitting  invisible  in  the  Tuileries ; 
centre  of  an  invisible  Anti-National  Spiderweb,  which,  for  we 
sleep  among  mysteries,  stretches  its  threads  to  the  ends  of  the 
Earth  ?  Journalist  CaiTa  has  now  the  clearest  certainty  of  it : 
to  Brissotin  Patriotism,^  and  France  generally,  it  is  growing  more 
and  more  probable. 

0  Reader,  hast  thou  no  pity  for  this  Constitution  ?  Rheumatic 
shooting  pains  in  its  members ;  pressure  of  hydrocephale  and 
hysteric  vapours  on  its  Brain :  a  Constitution  divided  against 
itself;  which  Avill  never  march,  hardly  even  stagger !  Why  were 
not  Drouet  and  Procureur  Sausse  in  their  beds,  that  unblessed 
Varennes  Night !  Why  did  they  not,  in  the  name  of  Heaven,  let 
the  KorfF  Berline  go  whither  it  listed  !  Nameless  incoherency,  in- 
compatibility, perhaps  prodigies  at  which  the  world  still  shudders, 
had  been  spared. 

But  now  comes  the  third  thing  that  bodes  ill  for  the  marching 
of  this  French  Constitution :  besides  the  French  People,  and  the 
French  King,  there  is  thirdly — the  assembled  European  World. 
It  has  become  necessary  now  to  look  at  that  also.  Fair  France 
is  so  luminous :  and  round  and  round  it,  is  troublous  Cimmerian 

Narbonne  emigrated  after  Aug.  loth,  returned  to  France  1800  and  served  the 
Empire  from  1809  till  his  death  in  1814.  Frances  Burne}'  met  him  in  England,  and 
found  her  future  husband  (M.  d'Arblay)  in  his  train  in  Nov.  1792.  Her  estimate 
of  him  was  very  high,  and  she  seems  to  have  blinded  herself  to  the  relations  between 
him  and  Mdme  de  Stael  (Diary  of  Mdme  d'Arblay,  vol.  iii.  pp.  32,  51-4,  etc., 
edition  1891).] 

1  [For  the  '  Austrian  Committee '  vid.  note  supr. ,  ii.  85.  The  Comity  de 
Surveillance  of  the  Legislative  had  established  a  vast  system  of  spies  on  all 
officials,  and  these  had  correspondents  in  the  Tuileries  itself.  Fauchet  in  the  name 
of  this  committee  avowed  this  fact  (May  i8th  '92)  in  supporting  Carra's  denunciation 
of  the  Austrian  Committee  {see  Mortimer-Ternaux,  i.  39).] 


KINGS  AND  EMIGEANTS  177 

Night.  Calonnes,  Breteuils  hovei*  dim,  far-flown ;  overnetting 
Europe  with  intrigues.  From  Turin  to  Vienna ;  to  Berlin,  and 
utmost  Petersburg  in  the  fi'ozen  North  !  Great  Burke  has  raised 
his  great  voice  long  ago ;  eloquently  demonstrating  that  the  end 
of  an  Epoch  is  come,  to  all  appearance  the  end  of  Civilised  Time. 
Him  many  answer :  Camille  Desmoulins,  Clootz  Speaker  of  Man- 
kind, Paine  the  rebellious  Needleman,  and  honourable  Gaelic 
Vindicators  in  that  country  and  in  this :  but  the  great  Burke 
remains  unanswerable ;  *  the  Age  of  Chivalry  is  gone,'  and  could 
not  but  go,  having  now  produced  the  still  more  indomitable  Age 
of  Hunger.  Altars  enough,  of  the  Dubois-Rohan  sort,  changing 
to  the  Gobel-and-Talleyrand  sort,  are  faring  by  rapid  transmuta- 
tions to — shall  we  say,  the  right  Proprietor  of  them  ?  French 
Game  and  French  Game-Preservers  did  alight  on  the  Cliffs  of 
Dover,  with  cries  of  distress.  Who  will  say  that  the  end  of 
much  is  not  come  ?  A  set  of  mortals  has  risen,  who  beHeve  that 
Truth  is  not  a  printed  Speculation,  but  a  practical  Fact ;  that 
Freedom  and  Brotherhood  are  possible  in  this  Earth,  supposed 
always  to  be  Belial's,  which  '  the  Supreme  Quack  '  was  to  inherit ! 
Who  will  say  that  Church,  State,  Throne,  Altar  are  not  in  danger  ; 
that  the  sacred  Strongbox  itself,  last  Palladium  of  effete  Humanity, 
may  not  be  blasphemously  blown  upon,  and  its  padlocks  undone  .'' 

The  poor  Constituent  Assembly  might  act  with  what  delicacy 
and  diplomacy  it  would  ;  declare  that  it  abjured  meddling  with 
its  neighbours,  foreign  conquest,  and  so  forth ;  but  from  the  first 
this  thing  was  to  be  predicted :  that  old  Europe  and  new  France 
could  not  subsist  together.  A  Glorious  Revolution,  oversetting 
State-Prisons  and  Feudalism  ;  publishing,  with  outburst  of  Feder- 
ative Cannon,  in  face  of  all  the  Earth,  that  Appearance  is  not 
Reality,  how  shall  it  subsist  amid  Governments  which,  if  Appear- 
ance is  not  Reality,  are — -one  knows  not  what  ?  In  death-feud, 
and  internecine  wrestle  and  battle,  it  shall  subsist  with  them  ;  not 
otherwise. 

Rights  of  iMan,  printed  on  Cotton  Handkerchiefs,  in  various 
dialects  of  human  speech,  pass  over  to  the  Frankfort  Fair.^     What 

1  Toulongeon,  i.-256. 
VOL.    II.  12 


178        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

say  we,  Frankfort  Fair  ?  They  have  crossed  Euphrates,  and  the 
fabulous  Hydaspes ;  wafted  themselves  beyond  the  Ural,  Altai, 
Himmalayah ;  struck  off  from  wood  stereotypes,  in  angular 
Picture-writing,  they  are  jabbered  and  jingled  off  in  China  and 
Japan.  Where  will  it  stop  ?  Kien-Lung  smells  mischief ;  not 
the  remotest  Dalai-Lama  shall  now  knead  his  dough-pills  in 
peace. — Hateful  to  us  as  is  the  Night !  Bestir  yourselves,  ye 
Defenders  of  Order !  They  do  bestir  themselves :  all  Kings 
and  Kinglets,  with  their  spiritual  temporal  array,  are  astir ; 
their  brows  clouded  with  menace.  Diplomatic  emissaries  fly 
swift ;  Conventions,  privy  Conclaves  assemble  ;  and  wise  wigs 
wag,  taking  what  counsel  they  can. 

Also,  as  we  said,  the  Pamphleteer  draws  pen,  on  this  side  and 
that :  zealous  fists  beat  the  Pulpit-drum.  Not  without  issue ! 
Did  not  iron  Birmingham,  shouting  '  Church  and  King,'  itself 
kneAv  not  why,  burst  out,  last  July,  into  rage,  drunkenness  and 
fire  ;  and  your  Priestleys,  and  the  like,  dining  there  on  that 
Bastille  day,  get  the  maddest  singeing  :  ^  scandalous  to  consider  ! 
In  which  same  days,  as  we  can  remark.  High  Potentates,  Austrian 
and  Prussian,  with  Emigrants,  were  faring  towards  Pilnitz  in 
Saxony ;  there,  on  the  27th  of  August,  they,  keeping  to  them- 
selves what  further  '  secret  Treaty '  there  might  or  might  not 
be,  did  publish  their  hopes  and  their  threatenings,  their  Declara- 
tion that  it  was  '  the  common  cause  of  Kings.'  '^ 

i[Carlyle  seems  to  infer  that  Priestley  was  at  the  '  Bastille  Dinner,'  held  by  the 
'  Constitutional  Society '  of  Birmingham,  July  14th  '91.  The  Diet.  Nat.  Biogr.  says 
that  he  intended  to  be  present  but  received  advice  to  stay  away.  After  the  guests 
had  left  an  angry  crowd  hung  about  the  doorways,  and  broke  the  windows  of  the 
Hotel  in  which  they  had  dined  :  then  wrecked  seven  houses,  one  of  them  being 
Priestley's.  The  magistrates  were  powerless,  and  order  was  not  restored  till  the 
arrival  of  the  dragoons  from  Nottingham  on  i6th  (see  Lecky,  v.  528).] 

2[The  interference  of  '  Kings  in  the  Cause  of  Kings'  (yid.  supr.,  ii.  54)  would 
hardly  take  place  without  some  return  for  their  trouble.  Frederick  William  of 
Prussia,  who  had  been  quite  outwitted  by  Leopold  in  the  Eastern  question,  began 
to  be  deeply  interested  in  French  affairs,  and  to  draw  nearer  to  Austria  in  considera- 
tion of  them.  False  and  foolish  as  he  was,  he  was  not  without  honourable  ideas, 
honestly  desired  to  save  the  King  of  France,  was  genuinely  charitable  to  the  Emigrh, 
though  quite  deceived  by  them  (which  Leopold  never  was).  Neither  of  theni  how- 
ever gave  any  sort  of  sanction  to  the  'crusade'  that  Gustavus  IH.  was  meditating. 
On  Aug.  27th  1791  they  held  their  conference  at  Pillnitz  (near  Dresden),  and 
issued  the  famous  '  Declaration  of  Pillnitz,'  the  points  of  which  are  these  :  (i.)  the 
situation  of  Louis  XVL  and  the  anarchy  in  France  are  a  matter  of  concern  to  all 


KINGS  AND  EMIGRANTS  179 

Where  a  will  to  quarrel  is,  there  is  a  way.  Our  readers  re- 
member that  Pentecost-Night,  Fourth  of  August  178,9,  when 
Feudalism  fell  in  a  few  hours  ?  The  National  Assembly,  in 
abolishing  Feudalism,  promised  that  '  compensation '  should  be 
given  ;  and  did  endeavour  to  give  it.  Nevertheless  the  Austrian 
Kaiser  answers  that  his  German  Princes,  for  their  part,  cannot 
be  unfeudalised  ;  that  they  have  Possessions  in  French  Alsace, 
and  Feudal  Rights  secured  to  them,  for  which  no  conceivable 
compensation  will  suffice.  So  this  of  the  Possessioned  Princes,^ 
'  Princes  Possessionis,'  is  bandied  from  Court  to  Court ;  covers  acres 

European  Sovereigns,  (ii.)  an  attempt  shall  be  made  to  bring  this  fact  to  the  notice 
of  the  other  Powers,  and  it  is  hoped  a  common  plan  of  working  may  be  arranged, 
so  as  to  employ  coiijointly  the  tnost  efficacious  means  of  remedy  for  these  evils, 
(iii.)  '  alors  et  dans  ce  cas'  (i.e.,  if  the  other  Powers  will  consent)  prompt  action 
shall  be  taken  (by  Us,  the  signatories),  (iv.)  and  meanwhile  (We,  the  signatories) 
will  hold  our  troops  in  readiness.  It  will  then  be  seen  that  any  action  was  to 
depend  on  the  consent  of  other  Powers  (of  whom  some,  e.g.,  England,  would 
probably  refuse  altogether).  Leopold  therefore  was  much  relieved  when  on  Sept. 
14th  Louis  XVL  accepted  a  new  Constitution,  and  was  restored  (?)  to  Constitu- 
tional power.  Not  unnaturally  the  Itjnigrc's  put  a  different  interpretation  on  the 
language  of  Pillnitz,  and  their  influence  on  Frederick  William  grew  daily,  as  it  became 
manifest  that  the  "  re-establishment  of  order  "  in  France  was  imaginary.  Monsieur 
assumed  the  "  Regency"  of  France,  established  a  regular  ministry  and  government 
at  Coblentz  ;  and  published  an  absurd  manifesto  which  irritated  the  Tuileries  as 
much  as  it  did  the  Legislative  Assembly.  Leopold  too,  though  he  sternly  warned 
the  Elector  of  Trier  to  dismiss  the  P.migrt's,  could  not  refuse  to  accept  the 
Conclusurn  of  the  Diet  calling  on  him  to  defend  with  arms  the  rights  of  the 
Empire  :  and  at  last  on  Feb.  7th  '92  signed  with  Frederick  William  the  Treaty  of 
Berlin,  by  which  Austria  and  Prussia  agreed  to  interfere  with  arms  to  restore  order  in 
France,  and  to  be  indemnified  in  hard  cash,  if  Louis  XVL  were  successfully  restored  ; 
if  not,  to  indemnify  themselves  by  conquests.  This  treaty  is  of  course  the  starting 
point  of  the  War.  But  Leopold  died  on  March  ist  and  during  the  last  three  weeks 
of  his  life  seems  to  have  done  little  to  put  it  in  force.     (Sorel,  vol.  ii.  passim. )] 

1  [These  "  Possessioned  Princes  "  were  landowners  who  held  lands  on  both  sides 
of  the  frontier.  On  the  German  side  they  were  Sovereign  Princes  of  the  Empire, 
on  the  French  mere  French  Country  Gentlemen.  They  lost,  in  common  with  all 
other  French  gentlemen,  all  '  feudal '  rights  on  Aug.  4th  '89,  but  these  rights  had 
been  solemnly  guaranteed  to  them  by  treaties  between  France  and  the  Empire  long 
before.  The  chief  persons  affected  were  the  three  Ecclesiastical  Electors  (Mainz, 
Trier,  Koln),  the  Bishops  of  Speyer  and  Basel,  the  Markgraf  of  Baden,  the  Dukes 
of  Wurtemburg  and  Zweibriicken,  the  Landgraf  of  Hesse  Darmstadt  and  the 
Princes  of  Nassau,  Leiningen  and  Lowenstein.  They  not  unnaturally  complained 
to  the  Diet  and  to  Leopold.  On  Feb.  nth  '90  Montmorin  informed  the  Assembly 
of  this  complaint,  and  at  first  there  was  talk  of  compensation  ;  but  this  attitude  did 
not  suit  the  dominant  party  in  Paris,  in  justice  to  which  it  must  be  remembered 
that  in  the  territory  of  these  very  princes  the  Ii.7nigris  were  breathing  out  fire  and 
slaughter.  When  the  Diet  at  last  uttered  its  Conclusurn  (Aug.  '91),  demand- 
ing the  Kaiser's  armed  intervention,  Leopold  had  no  choice  but  to  support  it :  there 
is  no  doubt  that  he  profoundly  regretted  and  dreaded  the  war,  yet  even  had  he  lived 
one  does  not  see  how  he  could  have  averted  it.  Carlyle  does  not  even  mention  his 
death  !  {See  Haiis.ser,  Deutsche  Geschichte  seit  der  Tod  Friedrichs  des  Grossen 
(Berhn,  1869),  1.  275,  sqq.)\ 


180        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

of  diplomatic  paper  at  this  day  :  a  weariness  to  the  world.  Kaunitz 
argues  from  Vienna ;  Delessart  responds  from  Paris,  though  per- 
haps not  sharply  enough.  The  Kaiser  and  his  Possessioned  Princes 
will  too  evidently  come  and  take  compensation, — so  much  as  they 
can  get.  Nay  might  one  not  partition  France,  as  we  have  done 
Poland,  and  are  doing  ;  and  so  pacify  it  with  a  vengeance  ? 

From  South  to  North  !  For  actually  it  is  '  the  common  cause 
of  Kings.'  Swedish  Gustav,  sworn  Knight  of  the  Queen  of 
France,  will  lead  Coalised  Armies  ;— had  not  Ankarstrom  treason- 
ously  shot  him  ;  for,  indeed,  there  were  gi'iefs  nearer  home.^ 
Austria  and  Prussia  speak  at  Pilnitz  ;  all  men  intensely  listening. 
Imperial  Rescripts  have  gone  out  from  Turin ;  there  will  be 
secret  Convention  at  Vienna.  Catherine  of  Russia  beckons  ap- 
provingly ;  will  help,  were  she  ready.  Spanish  Bourbon  stirs 
amid  his  pillows  ;  from  him  too,  even  from  him,  shall  there  come 
help.  Lean  Pitt,  '  the  Minister  of  Preparatives,'  looks  out  from 
his  watch-tower  in  Saint  James's,  in  a  suspicious  manner.  Coun- 
cillors plotting,  Calonnes  dim-hovering  ; — alas.  Sergeants  rub- 
a-dubbing  openly  through  all  manner  of  German  market-towns, 
collecting  ragged  valour  !  -  Look  where  you  will,  immeasurable 
Obscurantism  is  girdling  this  fair  France  ;  which,  again,  will  not 
be  girdled  by  it.  Europe  is  in  travail ;  pang  after  pang ;  what 
a  shriek  was  that  of  Pilnitz  !     The  birtli  will  be  :  War. 

Nay  the  worst  feature  of  the  business  is  this  last,  still  to  be 
named  ;  the  Emigrants  at  Coblentz.  So  many  thousands  ranking 
thei*e,  in  bitter  hate  and  menace  :  King's  Brothers,  all  Princes  of 
the  Blood  except  wicked  D' Or! cans  ;  your  duelling  De  Castries, 
your  eloquent  Cazales ;  bull-headed  Malseignes,  a  wargod  Broglie  ; 
Distaff  Seigneurs,  insulted  Officers,  all  that  have  ridden  across  the 
Rhine-stream  ; — D'Artois  welcoming  Abbe  Maury  with  a  kiss, 
and  clasping  him  publicly  to  his  own  royal  heart !  Emigration, 
flowing  over  the  Frontiers,  now  in  drops,  now  in  streams,  in 
various  humours  of  fear,  of  petulance,  rage  and  hope,  ever  since 

1  30th  March  1792  (Annual  Register,  p.  11). 
-  Toulongeon,  ii.  100-117. 


KINGS  AND  EMIGRANTS  181 

those  first  Bastille  days  when  D'Artois  went,  'to  shame  the 
citizens  of  Paris/ — has  swollen  to  the  size  of  a  Phenomenon  for 
the  world.  Coblentz  is  become  a  small  extra-national  Versailles  ; 
a  Versailles  in  partibus  :  briguing,  intriguing,  favouritism,  strum- 
petocracy  itself,  they  say,  goes  on  there  ;  all  the  old  activities, 
on  a  small  scale,  quickened  by  hungry  Revenge, ^ 

Enthusiasm,  of  loyalty,  of  hatred  and  hope,  has  risen  to  a  high 
pitch  ;  as,  in  any  Coblentz  tavern  you  may  hear,  in  speech  and  in 
singing.  Maury  assists  in  the  interior  Council ;  much  is  decided 
on :  for  one  thing,  they  keep  lists  of  the  dates  of  your  emigrat- 
ing ;  a  month  sooner,  or  a  month  later,  determines  your  greater 
or  your  less  right  to  the  coming  Division  of  the  Spoil.  Cazales 
himself,  because  he  had  occasionally  spoken  with  a  Constitutional 
tone,  was  looked  on  coldly  at  first :  so  pure  are  our  principles. ^ 
And  arms  are  a-hammering  at  Liege;  'three  thousand  horses' 
ambling  hitherward  from  the  Fairs  of  Germany  :  Cavalry  en- 
rolling ;  likewise  Foot-soldiers,  '  in  blue  coat,  red  waistcoat  and 
nankeen  trousers.'  ^  They  have  their  secret  domestic  corre- 
spondences, as  their  open  foreign :  with  disaffected  Crypto- 
Aristocrats,  with  contumacious  Priests,  with  Austrian  Committee 
in  the  Tuileries.  Deserters  are  spirited  over  by  assiduous  crimps  ; 
Royal-Allemand  is  gone  almost  wholly.  Their  route  of  march, 
towards  France  and  the  Division  of  the  Spoil,  is  mai'ked  out, 
were  the  Kaiser  once  ready.  "  It  is  said,  they  mean  to  poison 
the  sources  ;  but,"  adds  Patriotism  making  report  of  it,  "  they 
will  not  poison  the  source  of  Liberty  ;"  whereat  'on  applaudit,' 
we  cannot  but  applaud.  Also  they  have  manufactories  of  False 
Assignats  ;  and  men  that  circulate  in  the  interior,  distributing 

1  [The  Emigris,  with  the  exxeption  of  the  two  princes,  left  Coblentz  in  Dec.  '91, 
when  Leopold,  in  his  anxiety  for  peace,  ordered  the  Elector  of  Trier  to  dismiss  those 
in  arms.  Cond6  and  some  few  leaders  established  themselves  at  Ettenheim  (which 
belonged  to  the  Rohan  family),  but  until  the  actual  declaration  of  war  the  Emigres 
ceased  to  e.xist  as  a  coherent  body.  The  War  gave  them  again  some  cohesion, 
and  a  large  contingent  accompanied  the  Prussian  army  into  Lorraine  ;  but  Austria 
always  looked  coldly  on  them.  The  name  CondJens  is  found  for  them  as  early 
as  Jan.  '91,  and  stuck  to  them  until  their  final  dispersal  in  1797  (Forneron,  ii.  caps. 
8,  9,  etc.).] 

-Montgaillard,  iii.  5-17.     Toulongeon,  ubi  supra. 
^See  Hist.  Pari.  xiii.  11-38,  41-61,  358,  &c. 


182        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

and  disbursing  the  same  ;  one  of  these  we  denounce  now  to 
Legislative  Patriotism  :  '  a  man  Lebrun  by  name  ;  about  thirty 
'years  of  age,  with  blonde  hair  and  in  quantity;  has,'  only  for 
the  time  being  surely,  '  a  black-eye,  ceil  poche ;  goes  in  a  7viski 
'with  a  black  horse,' ^ — always  keeping  his  Gig! 

Unhappy  Emigrants,  it  was  their  lot,  and  the  lot  of  France  ! 
They  are  ignorant  of  much  that  they  should  know :  of  themselves, 
of  what  is  around  them.  A  Political  Party  that  knows  not  when 
it  is  beaten,  may  become  one  of  the  fatallest  of  things,  to  itself, 
and  to  all.  Nothing  will  convince  these  men  that  they  cannot 
scatter  the  French  Revolution  at  the  first  blast  of  their  war- 
trumpet  ;  that  the  French  Revolution  is  other  than  a  blustering 
Effervescence,  of  brawlers  and  spouters,  which,  at  the  flash  of 
chivalrous  broad-swords,  at  the  rustle  of  gallows-ropes,  will  burrow 
itself,  in  dens  the  deeper  the  welcomer.  But,  alas,  what  man 
does  know  and  measure  himself,  and  the  things  that  are  round 
him  ; — else  where  were  the  need  of  physical  fighting  at  all  ? 
Never,  till  they  are  cleft  asunder,  can  these  heads  believe  that 
a  Sansculottic  arm  has  any  vigour  in  it :  cleft  asunder,  it  will  be 
too  late  to  believe. 

One  may  say,  without  spleen  against  his  poor  erring  brothers 
of  any  side,  that  above  all  other  mischiefs,  this  of  the  Emigrant 
Nobles  acted  fatally  on  France.  Could  they  have  known,  could 
they  have  understood!  In  the  beginning  of  1789,  a  splendour 
and  a  terror  still  surrounded  them :  the  Conflagration  of  their 
Chateaux,  kindled  by  months  of  obstinacy,  went  out  after  the 
Fourth  of  August ;  and  might  have  continued  out,  had  they  at 
all  known  what  to  defend,  what  to  relinquish  as  indefensible. 
They  were  still  a  graduated  Hierarchy  of  Authorities,  or  the 
accredited  similitude  of  such  :  they  sat  there,  uniting  King  with 
Commonalty  ;  transmitting  and  translating  gradually,  from  degree 

1  Moniteur,  Stance  du  2  Nov.  1791  (Hist.  Pari.  xii.  212).  [A  long  mhnoire  was 
read  from  a  M.  Boller6don  in  which  he  says  that  he  came  across  this  Lebrun 
'  during  a  journey  he  had  recently  made '  without  further  specifying.  Lebrun,  he 
says,  was  only  one  of  the  agents  of  the  Emtgn's ;  for  this  purpose  (the  manufacture 
of  false  Assignats)  he  professed  to  be  a  Lyons  merchant  {Moniteur,  Nov.  3rd  '91).] 


KINGS  AND  EMIGRANTS  183 

to  degree,  the  command  of  the  one  into  the  obedience  of  the 
other ;  rendering  command  and  obedience  still  possible.  Had 
they  understood  their  place,  and  what  to  do  in  it,  this  French 
Revolution,  which  went  forth  explosively  in  years  and  in  months, 
might  have  spread  itself  over  generations ;  and  not  a  torture- 
death  but  a  quiet  euthanasia  have  been  provided  for  many 
things. 

But  they  were  proud  and  high,  these  men  ;  they  were  not  wise 
to  consider.  They  spurned  all  from  them  in  disdainful  hate,  they 
drew  the  sword  and  flung  away  the  scabbard.  France  has  not 
only  no  Hierarchy  of  Authorities,  to  translate  command  into 
obedience ;  its  Hierarchy  of  Authorities  has  fled  to  the  enemies 
of  France  ;  calls  loudly  on  the  enemies  of  France  to  interfere 
armed,  who  want  but  a  pretext  to  do  that.  Jealous  Kings  and 
Kaisers  might  have  looked  on  long,  meditating  interference,  yet 
afraid  and  ashamed  to  interfere :  but  now  do  not  the  King's 
Brothers,  and  all  French  Nobles,  Dignitaries  and  Authorities 
that  are  free  to  speak,  which  the  King  himself  is  not, — passion- 
ately invite  us,  in  the  name  of  Right  and  of  Might  ?  Ranked  at 
Coblentz,  from  Fifteen  to  Twenty  thousand  stand  now  brandish- 
ing their  weapons,  with  the  cry  :  On,  on !  Yes,  Messieurs,  you 
shall  on ; — and  divide  the  spoil  according  to  your  dates  of 
emigrating. 

Of  all  which  things  a  poor  Legislative  Assembly,  and  Patriot 
France,  is  informed :  by  denunciant  friend,  by  triumphant  foe. 
SuUeau's  Pamphlets,  of  the  Rivarol  Staff  of  Genius,  circulate  ; 
heralding  supreme  hope.  Durosoy's  Placards  tapestry  the  walls ; 
Chant  dit  Coq  ^  crows  day,  pecked  at  by  Tallien's  A7ni  des  Citoijens. 
King's-Friend  Royou,  Ami  du  Rot,  can  name,  in  exact  arithmetical 
ciphers,  the  contingents  of  the  various  Invading  Potentates  ;  in 
all.  Four  hundred  and  nineteen  thousand  Foreign  fighting  men, 

^[Z,^  Chant  du  Coq,  July  22n(l — Oct.  30th  '91,  was,  like  the  Sentinelle,  a 
placarded  news-sheet  the  work  of  some  obscure  men,  whose  names  are  given  by 
Tourneux.  ii.  620.  L' Ami  des  Cltoyetis  is  by  Tallien  :  the  first  number  of  which 
a  copy  exists  is  dated  Aug.  28th  '91  :  it  continued  to  appear  {very  irregularly)  until 
Jan.  '93  {ibid.  621,  624).] 


184        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

with  Fifteen  thousand  Emigrants.  Not  to  reckon  these  your 
daily  and  hourly  desertions,  which  an  Editor  must  daily  record,  of 
whole  Companies,  and  even  Regiments,  crying  Five  le  Roi,  Vive 
la  Reine,  and  marching  over  with  banners  spread^ — lies  all,  and 
wind  ;  yet  to  Patriotism  not  wind ;  nor,  alas,  one  day,  to  Royou ! 
Patriotism,  therefore,  may  brawl  and  babble  yet  a  little  while : 
but  its  hours  are  numbered  :  Europe  is  coming  with  Four  hundred 
and  nineteen  thousand  and  the  Chivalry  of  France  ;  the  gallows, 
one  may  hope,  will  get  its  own. 

CHAPTER  VI 

BRIGANDS  AND  JAlI^S 

We  shall  have  War,  then  ;  and  on  what  terms  !  With  an  Execu- 
tive 'pretending,'  really  with  less  and  less  deceptiveness  now, 
*  to  be  dead ; '  casting  even  a  wishful  eye  towards  the  enemy  ; 
on  such  terms  we  shall  have  War. 

Public  Functionary  in  vigorous  action  there  is  none  ;  if  it  be 
not  Rivarol  with  his  staff  of  Genius  and  Two  Hundred  and 
eighty  Applauders.  The  Public  Service  lies  waste ;  the  very 
Taxgatherer  has  forgotten  his  cunning :  in  this  and  the  other 
Provincial  Board  of  Management  {directoire  de  Departemoit)  it  is 
found  advisable  to  retain  what  Taxes  you  can  gather,  to  pay 
your  own  inevitable  expenditures.  Our  Revenue  is  Assignats ; 
emission  on  emission  of  Paper-money.  And  the  Army ;  our 
Three  grand  Armies,  of  Rochambeau,  of  Liickner,  of  Lafayette .'' 
Lean,  disconsolate  hover  these  Three  grand  Armies,  watching 
the  Frontiers  there ;  three  Flights  of  long-necked  Cranes  in 
moulting  time  ; — wrecked,  disobedient,  disorganised  ;  who  never 
saw  fire ;  the  old  Generals  and  Officers  gone  across  the  Rhine. 
War-Minister  Narbonne,  he  of  the  rose-coloured  Reports,  solicits 
recruitments,  equipments,  money,  always  money ;  threatens, 
since  he  can  get  none,  to  'take  his  sword,'  which  belongs  to 
himself,  and  go  serve  his  country  with  that.'' 

1  Ami-du-Roi  Newspaper  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xiii.  175). 

'■^  Moniteur,  Stance  du  23  Janvier  1792  ;  Biographie  des  Ministres,  §  Narbonne. 

[It  was  the  bad  condition  of  the  Army  (which  had  lost  both  its  olticers  and  its 


BRIGANDS  AXD  JALES  185 

The  question  of  questions  is  :  What  shall  be  done  ?  Shall  we, 
with  a  desperate  defiance  which  Fortune  sometimes  favours, 
draw  the  sword  at  once,  in  the  face  of  this  in-rushing  world  of 
Emigration  and  Obscurantism ;  or  wait,  and  temporise  and 
diplomatise,  till,  if  possible,  our  resources  mature  themselves  a 
little  ?  And  yet  again,  are  our  resources  growing  towards 
maturity ;  or  growing  the  other  way  ?  Dubious :  the  ablest 
Patriots  are  divided ;  Brissot  and  his  Brissotins,  or  Girondins, 
in  the  Legislative,  cry  aloud  for  the  former  defiant  plan ; 
Robespierre,  in  the  Jacobins,  pleads  as  loud  for  the  latter 
dilatory  one :  with  responses,  even  with  mutual  reprimands ; 
distracting  the  Mother  of  Patriotism.^     Consider  also  what  agi- 

discipline)  that  led  Naibonne  to  conceive  the  idea  of  entrusting  the  reorganisation 
of  the  whole  service  to  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  nephew  of  the  hero  of  Minden.  A 
negotiation  was  opened  with  him  in  Jan.  '92,  by  means  of  the  younger  Custine : 
Brunswick  liowever  refused,  and  was  shortly  afterwards  -ordered  by  Frederick 
William  to  prepare  the  plan  of  a  campaign  against  France.  The  total  French 
regular  Army  might  amount  to  something  under  100,000,  of  whom  80,000  were  on 
the  Eastern  frontier  when  the  war  broke  out.  To  these  must  be  added  some  83 
out  of  169  battalions  of  the  "Volunteers  of  1791,"  the  levy  of  which  had  been 
decreed  by  the  Constituent  in  July  '91.  The  Legislative  however,  m  spite  of  the  repre- 
sentations of  all  the  Generals  and  of  Narbonne  himself,  had  refused  to  allow  these 
volunteers  to  be  brigaded  with  the  regulars,  as  they  feared  that  the  military  spirit 
would  corrupt  these  'citizen  soldiers'  (Jan.  24th  '92).  M.  Chuquet  (La  Premiere 
Invasion  Prussienne,  cap.  ii. )  has  done  good  service  in  pointing  out  how  essentially 
these  '  Volunteers  of  '91 '  differed  from  those  of  '92  [vid.  infr.,  note  ii.  234).  They 
were  he  says  full  of  patriotic  ardour,  though  quite  untrained  :  but  cf.  Morris  to 
Washington  Dec.  27th  '91  (i.  492),  who  calls  them  "  the  corrupted  scum  of  overgrown 
"populations,  of  which  great  cities  purge  themselves  .  .  .  without  constitution  to 
"support  the  fatigues  or  courage  to  encounter  the  perils  of  war,  they  have  every 
"vice  and  every  disease  which  can  render  them  the  scorn  of  their  friends  and  the 
"scoff  of  their  foes."  It  must  be  remembered  that  Morris  had  seen  ^ri?/ citizen 
soldiers,  drawn  from  a  very  different  class  in  his  native  country,  and  seen  them  win 
great  victories  :  and  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  Volunteers  of  '91  did  not  at  first 
distinguish  themselves  by  valour  in  the  field.  Yet  among  their  officers  were  Bessieres, 
Championnet,  Davoust,  Jourdan,  Marceau,  Moreau,  Oudinot,  Lefebvre,  Saint-Cyr, 
Desai.x,  Mortier,  Soult,  Mass^na  and  Lannes,  all  of  whom  except  Moreau  had 
served  in  the  old  royal  army.  As  two-thirds  of  the  officers  of  the  Line  regiments 
had  emigrated  (though  fewer  of  the  Artillery  and  Engineers),  these  men  soon  came 
to  commands  in  the  regular  Army,  and,  when  the  war  actually  began,  a  good  deal 
of  brigading  of  Volunteers  with  Regulars  was  done  in  spite  of  the  prohibition,  which, 
on  the  motion  of  Dubois-Crance,  in  Feb.  '93,  was  removed  by  the  Convention. 
{Cf.  also  Sorel,  ii.  334,  sqq.  ;  Lafayette,  iii.  296,  sqq.)'\ 

1  [Robespierre's  speech  at  the  Jacobins  against  the  war  (Jan.  12th  '92)  was  quite  as 
much  directed  against  V'ergniaud's  speech  ol  loth  as  against  Brissot 's.  His  argument 
was  not  '  wait  and  temporise,'  but  "  first  destroy  your  domestic  tyrants,  and  then 
■ '  those  of  the  rest  of  the  World  :  the  war  if  fought  now  will  be  all  for  the  glory  of 
"  Lafayette  or  for  the  interests  of  the  Court."  (Vermorel,  CEuvres  de  Robespierre 
p.  217,  sqq.)  Robespierre  in  fact  was  playing  his  usual  game  of  undermining  the 
party  which  seemed  to  be  challenging  power  {viz.,  the  Gironde).] 


186        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

tated  Breakfasts  there  may  be  at  Madame  d'Udon's  in  the  Place 
Vendome  !  The  alarm  of  all  men  is  great.  Help,  ye  Patriots ; 
and  O  at  least  agree  ;  for  the  hour  presses.  Frost  was  not  yet 
gone,  when  in  that  '  tolerably  handsome  apartment  of  the  Castle 
of  Niort,'  there  arrived  a  Letter :  General  Dumouriez  must  to 
Paris.  It  is  War-Minister  Narbonne  that  writes  ;  the  General 
shall  give  counsel  about  many  things.^  In  the  month  of  February 
1792,  Brissotin  friends  welcome  their  Dumouriez  Polymetis, — 
comparable  really  to  an  antique  Ulysses  in  modern  costume  ; 
quick,  elastic,  shifty,  insuppressible,  a  'many-counselled   man.' 

Let  the  Reader  fancy  this  fair  France  with  a  whole  Cimmerian 
Europe  girdling  her,  rolling  in  on  her,  black,  to  burst  in  red 
thunder  of  War ;  fair  France  herself  hand-shackled  and  foot- 
shackled  in  the  weltering  complexities  of  this  Social  Clothing, 
or  Constitution,  which  they  have  made  for  her ;  a  France  that, 
in  such  Constitution,  cannot  march !  And  Hunger  too ;  and 
plotting  Aristocrats,  and  excommunicating  Dissident  Priests : 
'  the  man  Lebrun  by  name '  urging  his  black  wiski,  visible  to 
the  eye ;  and,  still  more  terrible  in  his  invisibility.  Engineer 
Goguelat,  with  Queen's  cipher,  riding  and  running ! 

The  excommunicatory  Priests  give  new  trouble  in  the  Maine 
and  Loire  ;  La  Vendee,  nor  Cathelineau  the  wool-dealer,  has 
not  ceased  grumbling  and  rumbling.  Nay  behold  Jales  itself 
once  more :  ^  how  often  does  that  real-imaginary  Camp  of  the 
Fiend  require  to  be  extinguished !  For  near  two  years  now,  it 
has  waned  faint  and  again  waxed  bright,  in  the  bewildered  soul 
of  Patriotism :  actually,  if  Patriotism  knew  it,  one  of  the  most 
surprising  products  of  Nature  working  with  Art.  Royalist 
Seigneurs,  under  this  or  the  other  pretext,  assemble  the  simple 
people  of  these  Cevennes  Mountains ;  men  not  unused  to  revolt, 
and  with  heart  for  fighting,  could  their  poor  heads  be  got  per- 
suaded. The  Royalist  Seigneur  harangues ;  harping  mainly  on 
the  religious  string:  "True  Priests  maltreated,  false  Priests 
intruded,  Protestants  (once  dragooned)  now  triumphing,  things 

^  Dumouriez,  ii.  c.  6.  "^[Vid,  supr.,  i.  363.] 


BEIGANDS  AND  JALES  187 

sacred  given  to  the  dogs  ; "  and  so  produces,  from  the  pious 
Mountaineer  throat,  rough  growUngs : — "  Shall  we  not  testify, 
then,  ye  brave  hearts  of  the  Cevennes ;  march  to  the  rescue  ? 
Holy  Religion;  duty  to  God  and  the  King?" — "Si  fait,  si  fait, 
Just  so,  just  so,"  answer  the  brave  hearts  always  :  "  Mais  il  y  a 
de  hien  bonnes  choses  dans  la  R&volution,  But  there  are  main  good 
things  in  the  Revolution  too  ! " — And  so  the  matter,  cajole  as  we 
may,  will  only  turn  on  its  axis,  not  stir  from  the  spot,  and  remains 
theatrical  merely.^ 

Nevertheless  deepen  your  cajolery,  harp  quick  and  quicker, 
ye  Royalist  Seigneurs  ;  with  a  dead-lift  effort  you  may  bring  it 
to  that.  In  the  month  of  June  next,  this  Camp  of  Jatds  will 
step  forth  as  a  theatricality  suddenly  become  real ;  Two  thou- 
sand strong,  and  with  the  boast  that  it  is  Seventy  thousand  : 
most  strange  to  see  ;  with  flags  flying,  bayonets  fixed ;  with 
Proclamation,  and  D'Artois  Commission  of  civil  war !  Let 
some  Rebecqui,  or  other  the  like  hot-clear  Patriot ;  let  some 
'  Lieutenant-Colonel  Aubry,'  '^  if  Rebecqui  is  busy  elsewhere, 
raise  instantaneous  National  Guards,  and  disperse  and  dissolve 
it ;  and  blow  the  Old  Castle  asunder,  ^  that  so,  if  possible, 
we  hear  of  it  no  more ! 

In  the  Months  of  February  and  March,  it  is  recorded,  the 
terror,  especially  of  rural  France,  had  risen  even  to  the  transcen- 
dental pitch :  not  far  from  madness.  In  Town  and  Hamlet  is 
rumour,  of  war,  massacre  :  that  Austrians,  Aristocrats,  above  all, 
that  The  Brigands  are  close  by.  Men  quit  their  houses  and 
huts  ;  rush  fugitive,  shrieking,  with  wife  and  child,  they  know 
not  whither.  Such  a  terror,  the  eye-witnesses  say,  never  fell  on 
a  Nation  ;  nor  shall  again  fall,  even  in  Reigns  of  Terror  expressly 

iDampmartin,  i.  201.  ^[July  nth.j 

3  Moniteur,  Stance  du  15  Juillet  1792.  [The  insurrection  of  the  southern  Royal- 
ists in  the  summer  of  '92  was  the  work  of  the  two  AUiers  (Dominique  and  Claude), 
of  the  Abb6  de  la  Bastide  and  the  Comte  de  Saillant.  It  was  never  so  serious  as  that 
of  the  "First  Federation  of  Jales,"  but  cost  some  bloodshed  to  put  down.  On 
July  8th  the  Castle  of  Bannes  was  surrendered  :  on  July  nth  the  forces  of  the  De- 
partment of  the  Card  under  d'Albignac  defeated  the  Royalists  under  the  Chevalier 
de  Melon,  and  burned  the  town  of  Saint-Andr6  and  the  Castle  of  Jales  immediately 
afterwards.  {C/.  supr.,  i.  363,  and  E.  Daudet,  Conjurations  Royalistes  du  Midi, 
p.  190,  sqq.y^ 


188        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

so-called.  The  Countries  of  the  Loire,  all  the  Central  and  South- 
east regions,  start  up  distracted,  '  simultaneously  as  by  an  electric 
shock  ; ' — for  indeed  grain  too  gets  scarcer  and  scarcer.  '  The 
'people  barricade  the  entrances  of  Towns,  pile  stones  in  the 
'  upper  stories,  the  women  prepare  boiling  water ;  from  moment 
'  to  moment,  expecting  the  attack.  In  the  Country,  the  alarm- 
'  bell  rings  incessant  ;  troops  of  peasants,  gathered  by  it,  scour 
'  the  highways,  seeking  an  imaginary  enemy.  They  are  armed 
'  mostly  with  scythes  stuck  in  wood  ;  and,  arriving  in  wild  troops 
'at  the  barricaded  Towns,  are  themselves  sometimes  taken  for 
'  Brigands.'  ^ 

So  rushes  old  France  :  old  France  is  rushing  down.  What  the 
end  will  be  is  known  to  no  mortal ;  that  the  end  is  near  all 
mortals  may  know. 

CHAPTER  VII 

CONSTITUTION  WILL  NOT  MARCH  ^ 

To  all  which  our  poor  Legislative,  tied  up  by  an  unmarching 
Constitution,  can  oppose  nothing,  by  way  of  remedy,  but  mere 
bursts  of  parliamentary  eloquence !  They  go  on,  debating, 
denouncing,  objurgating :  loud  weltering  Chaos,  which  devours 
itself. 

But  their  two  thousand  and  odd  Decrees .''  Reader,  these 
happily  concern  not  thee,  nor  me.  Mere  Occasional-Decrees, 
foolish  and  not  foolish  ;  sufficient  for  Ihaf  day  was  its  own  evil ! 

1  Newspapers,  &c.  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xiii.  325). 

^Cf.  Morris  to  Washington  (Sept.  30th  91).  "  It  is  a  general  and  almost 
"  universal  opinion  that  the  Constitution  is  inexecutable  .  .  .  the  makers  to  a  man 
"condemn  it  .  .  .  the  King's  present  business  is  to  make  himself  popular,  indeed 
"  his  life  and  crown  depend  upon  it.  The  new  Assembly,  as  far  as  can  be  ascer- 
"  tained,  is  deeply  imbued  with  Republican  or  rather  with  Democratical  principles  : 
"  the  Southern  part  of  the  Kingdom  is  in  the  same  disposition  :  the  Northern  is 
"ecclesiastical  in  its  temper:  the  Eastern  attached  to  Germany:  Normandy  is 
"  aristocratical,  and  so  is  a  part  of  Brittany  :  the  interior  part  of  the  Kingdom  is 
"  Monarchical.  The  Assembly  has  left  the  finances  in  a  worse  state  than  it  found 
"  them,  and  the  chance  is  now  in  my  opinion  rather  for  than  against  a  bankruptcy. 
"  The  aristocrats  believe  sincerely  in  a  coalition  of  the  Powers  of  Europe  to  reinstate 
"  their  Sovereign  in  his  ancient  authority,  but  I  believe  they  are  very  much  mis- 
"  taken  ...  it  is  very  possible  that  the  attempt,  if  any,  will,  so  far  as  France  is 
"  concerned,  be  confined  to  a  dismemberment."  Morris  was  pretty  shrewd  in  his 
prophecy.  ] 


CONSTITUTION  WILL  NOT  MARCH    189 

Of  the  whole  two  thousand  there  are  not  now  half  a  score,  and 
these  mostly  blighted  m  the  bud  by  royal  Felu,  that  will  profit 
or  disprofit  us.  On  the  17th  of  January,  the  Legislative,  for 
one  thing,  got  its  High  Court,  its  Haute  Cour,  set  up  at  Orleans.^ 
The  theory  had  been  given  by  the  Constituent,  in  May  last,  but 
this  is  the  reality  :  a  Court  for  the  trial  of  Political  Offences  ;  a 
Court  which  cannot  want  work.  To  this  it  was  decreed  that 
there  needed  no  royal  Acceptance,  therefore  that  there  could 
be  no  Veto.  Also  Priests  can  now  be  married ;  ever  since  last 
October.  A  patriotic  adventurous  Priest  had  made  bold  to 
marry  himself  then  ;  and  not  thinking  this  enough,  came  to  the 
bar  with  his  new  spouse  ;  that  the  whole  world  might  hold 
honeymoon  with  him,  and  a  Law  be  obtained. 

Less  joyful  are  the  Laws  against  Refractory  Priests ;  and  yet 
not  less  needful !  Decrees  on  Priests  and  Decrees  on  Emi- 
grants :  these  are  the  two  brief  Series  of  Decrees,  worked  out 
with  endless  debate,  and  then  cancelled  by  Veto,  which  mainly 
concern  us  here.  For  an  august  National  Assembly  must  needs 
conquer  these  Refractories,  Clerical  or  Laic,  and  thumbscrew 
them  into  obedience :  yet,  behold,  always  as  you  turn  your 
legislative  thumbscrew,  and  will  press  and  even  crush  till  Re- 
fractories give  way, — King's  J'eto  steps  in  with  magical  paralysis  ; 
and  your  thumbscrew,  hardly  squeezing,  much  less  crushing, 
does  not  act ! 

Truly  a  melancholy  Set  of  Decrees,  a  pair  of  Sets  ;  paralysed 
by  Veto  !  First,  under  date  the  28th  of  October  1791,^  we  have 
Legislative  Proclamation,  issued  by  herald  and  bill-sticker ;  in- 
viting Monsieur,  the  King's  Brother,  to  return  within  two 
months,  under  penalties.  To  which  invitation  Monsieur  replies 
nothing  ;  or  indeed  replies  by  Newspaper  Parody,  inviting  the 
august  Legislative  'to  return  to  common  sense  within  two 
months,'  under  penalties.  Whereupon  the  Legislative  must 
take  stronger  measures.  So,  on  the  9th  of  November,  we 
declare  all    Emigrants  to   be  '  suspect   of  conspiracy ; '   and,  in 

^[The  Court  for  the  trial  of  cases  of  Treason  against  the  nation,  sec  Appx.  on 
Judicial  system.]  -[Oct.  31st  91.] 


190        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

brief,  to  be  '  outlawed/  if  they  have  not  returned  at  Newyear's- 
day  : — Will  the  King  say  Feto  ?  That  '  triple  impost '  shall  be 
levied  on  these  men's  Properties,  or  even  their  Properties  be 
'put  in  sequestration,'  one  can  understand.  But  further,  on 
Newyear's-day  itself,  not  an  individual  having  'returned,'  we 
declare,  and  with  fresh  emphasis  some  fortnight  later  again 
declare.  That  Monsieur  is  de'chu,  forfeited  of  his  eventful  Heir- 
ship to  the  Crown ;  nay  more,  that  Conde,  Calonne,  and  a  con- 
siderable List  of  others  are  accused  of  high  treason ;  and  shall 
be  judged  by  our  High  Court  of  Orleans:  Veto  ! — Then  again 
as  to  Non-jurant  Priests  :  it  was  decreed,  in  November  last, ^_^ that 
they  should  forfeit  what  Pensions  they  had ;  be  '  put  under 
inspection,  under  surveillance,'  and,  if  need  were,  be  banished : 
Veto !  A  still  sharper  turn  is  coming ;  but  to  this  also  the 
answer  will  be,   Veto.^ 

i[Nov.  29th  '91.] 

2  [The  Laws  against  the  Itmigrds  (for  the  first  proposal  of  such,  vid.  supr., 
ii.  65)  falsified  one  of  the  first  principles  of  the  '  Rights  of  Man,'  but  they  were  only 
parallel  to  those  which  all  Governments  put  in  force  against  rebellious  subjects,  and 
almost  exactly  parallel  to  those  which  Louis  XIV.  issued  against  the  exiled  Pro- 
testants. The  '  triple  impost '  here  referred  to  by  Carlyle  was  really  voted  by  the 
Constituent  in  its  last  days,  Aug.  ist  '91.  There  followed  the  King's  proclama- 
tions of  October  14th  and  31st,  and  the  law  of  Nov.  9th  here  alluded  to  ;  then  the 
laws  of  Feb.  12th,  April  8th,  and  July  27th  '92,  ordering  the  sequestration  of  goods 
of  all  Amigrh,  which  the  King  vetoed,  m  my  judgment,  wrongly  :  but  immediately 
after  Aug.  loth  these  laws  were  passed,  confiscation  being  substituted  for  sequestra- 
tion (Oct.  6th) ;  wives  and  children  of  Itmign's  were  to  be  put  under  sitrveillance 
of  their  Municipalities.  By  a  fresh  law  of  Oct.  9th  ^inigri^s  taken  in  arms  were  to 
be  shot  by  a  Military  Commission  ;  but  the  Generals  as  a  rule  refused  to  shoot  their 
countrymen  and  preferred  to  send  them  to  Paris  (the  first  batch  was  condemned 
in  Paris  on  Oct.  20th).  Several  additionally  stringent  laws  were  passed  during  the 
Convention,  notably  that  of  March  ist  '93,  declaring  them  '  civilly  dead,'  and  all 
their  successions  to  fall  to  the  Republic,  and  that  of  Nov.  ist  confiscating  the  goods 
of  all  Frenchmen  who  had  left  France  before  or  during  the  Revolution  and  not  re- 
turned. A  '  black  list '  of  ^r/ngn!s  and  their  relations  was  kept ;  this  was  finally 
closed  on  Dec.  25th  1799  ;  and  all  limigres  were  amnestied  by  the  law  of  1802. 

But  the  Laws  against  non-juring  priests  not  only  violated  every  principle  of 
toleration,  which  was  the  very  keystone  of  the  arch  of  1789,  but  wantonly  irritated 
the  enormous  inert  mass  of  the  Nation.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  they  were 
more  unjust  or  impolitic.  They  are  (specially)  the  decree  of  Nov.  29th  '91,  depriving 
of  salary  all  non-juring  priests  (vetoed);  May  27th  '92  (vetoed  but  re-enacted 
Aug.  loth),  declaring  the  pain  of  banishment  against  them  under  penalty  of  ten 
years'  imprisonment,  if  they  continue  to  exercise  priestly  functions  ;  March  22nd  '93, 
ordering  such  priests  to  be  transported  to  Guiana  ;  finally  the  law  of  Flor^al  an  II. 
(May  '94),  decreeing  the  penalty  of  death  against  such  priests  if  in  hiding,  and 
against  those  who  conceal  them.  For  the  fall  of  the  "  Constitutional  Church,"  vid. 
infr.,  note  on  iii.  142  ;  and  for  the  whole,  see  Appx.  on  Civil  Constitution  of  the 
Clergy.] 


CONSTITUTION  WILL  NOT  MARCH    191 

Veto  after  Feto  ;  your  thumbscrew  paralysed  !  ^  Gods  and  men 
may  see  that  the  Legislative  is  in  a  false  position.  As,  alas,  who 
is  in  a  true  one  ?  Voices  already  murmur  for  a  '  National  Conven- 
tion.' 2  This  poor  Legislative,  spurred  and  stung  into  action  by  a 
whole  France  and  a  whole  Europe,  cannot  act ;  can  only  obj  urgate 
and  perorate;  with  stormy  'motions,'  and  motion  in  which  is  no 
way  ;  with  effervescence,  with  noise  and  fuliginous  fury  ! 

What  scenes  in  that  National  Hall !  President  jingling  his 
inaudible  bell ;  or,  as  utmost  signal  of  distress,  clapping  on  his 
hat ;  '  the  tumult  subsiding  in  twenty  minutes,'  and  this  or  the 
other  indiscreet  Member  sent  to  the  Abbaye  Prison  for  three  days  ! 
Suspected  Persons  must  be  summoned  and  questioned ;  old  M. 
de  Sombreuil  of  the  Invalides  has  to  give  account  of  himself,  and 
why  he  leaves  his  Gates  open.  Unusual  smoke  rose  from  the 
Sevres  Pottery,  indicating  conspiracy  ;  the  Potters  explained  that 
it  was  Necklace-Lamotte's  Mhnoires,  bought  up  by  her  Majesty, 
which  they  were  endeavouring  to  suppress  by  fire,^ — which  never- 
theless he  that  runs  may  still  read. 

Again,  it  would  seem,  Duke  de  Brissac  and  the  King's  Consti- 
tutional-Guard are  '  making  cartridges  secretly  in  the  cellars  : '  a 
set  of  Royalists,  pure  and  impure  ;  black  cut-throats  many  of  them, 
picked  out  of  gaming-houses  and  sinks  ;  in  all  Six  thousand  instead 
of  Eighteen  hundred  ;  who  evidently  gloom  on  us  every  time  we 
enter  the  Chateau."*  Wherefore,  with  infinite  debate,  let  Brissac 
and  King's  Guard  be  disbanded.  Disbanded  accordingly  they  are  ; 
after  only  two  months  of  existence,  for  they  did  not  get  on  foot 

'[On  Dec.  19th  Morris  learns  that  "  the  King  is  in  high  spirits,  since  his  Vetos 
"  have  gone  off  so  easily,  and  says  that  he  will  apply  them  every  now  and  then. 
"  Poor  King!  "] 

2  December  1791  (Hist.  Pari.  xii.  257). 

'Moniteur,  Stance  du  28  Mai  1792:  Campan,  ii.  196.  [The  M^moires  justi- 
ficatifs  de  la  Comtesse  de  la  Motte,  London,  1789,  was  the  edition  which  was 
sent  to  the  Paris  bookseller  Gueffrier,  from  whom  it  was  bought  by  La  Porte  [In- 
tetidant  of  the  Civil  List)  to  be  burnt.  It  was  sent  to  Sevres  for  that  purpose,  but 
the  whole  edition  was  not  destroyed,  and  it  formed  the  basis  of  the  '  Vie  de  Jeanne 
Saint-Remy,  6crite  par  elle-meme,'  published  in  1793  by  Garnery.] 

■•  Dumouriez,  ii.  168.  [The  disbandment  of  the  Constitutional  Guard  {vid.  supr., 
ii.  139)  occurred  on  May  29th  '92,  as  one  of  the  measures  by  which  the  Girondists 
sought  to  render  the  King  entirely  impotent  against  the  insurrection  which  they 
were  planning.] 


192        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

till  March  of  this  same  year.  So  ends  briefly  the  King's  new 
Constitutional  Maison  Militaire  ;  he  must  now  be  guarded  by  mere 
Swiss  and  blue  Nationals  again.  It  seems  the  lot  of  Constitu- 
tional things.  New  Constitutional  Maison  Civile  he  would  never 
even  establish,  much  as  Barnave  urged  it ;  old  resident  Duchesses 
sniffed  at  it,  and  held  aloof;  on  the  whole  her  Majesty  thought 
it  not  worth  while,  the  Noblesse  would  so  soon  be  back  trium- 
phant.^ 

Or,  looking  still  into  this  National  Hall  and  its  scenes,  behold 
Bishop  Torne,  a  Constitutional  Prelate,  not  of  severe  morals,  de- 
manding that  '  religious  costumes  and  such  caricatures '  be  abo- 
lished. Bishop  Torne  ^'  warms,  catches  fire  ;  finishes  by  untying, 
and  indignantly  flinging  on  the  table,  as  if  for  gage  or  bet,  his 
own  pontifical  cross.^  Which  cross,  at  any  rate,  is  instantly 
covered  by  the  cross  of  Te-Dcum  Fauchet,  then  by  other  crosses, 
and  insignia,  till  all  are  stripped ;  this  clerical  Senator  clutching 
off  his  skull-cap,  that  other  his  fiuU-collar, — lest  Fanaticism  re- 
turn on  us.^ 

Quick  is  the  movement  here  !  And  then  so  confused,  unsub- 
stantial, you  might  call  it  almost  spectra/ :  pallid,  dim,  inane,  like 
the  Kingdoms  of  Dis !  Unruly  Linguet,  shrunk  to  a  kind  of 
spectre  for  us,  pleads  here  some  cause  that  he  has ;  amid  rumour 
and  interruption,  which  excel  human  patience :  he  '  tears  his 
papers,  and  withdraws,'  the  irascible  adust  little  man.  Nay 
honourable  Members  will  tear  their  papers,  being  effervescent : 
Merlin  of  Thionville  tears  his  papers,  crying  :  "  So,  the  People  can- 
not be  saved  by  i/ou  !  "  Nor  are  Deputations  wanting  :  Deputa- 
tions of  Sections  ;  generally  with  complaint  and  denouncement, 
always  with  Patriot  fervour  of  sentiment :  Deputation  of  Women, 
pleading  that  they  also  may  be  allowed  to  take  Pikes,  and  exercise 
in  the  Champ-de-Mars.     Why  not,  ye  Amazons,  if  it  be  in  you  ? 

'  Campan,  ii.  c.  19. 

2[Torn6  "  Bishop  "  of  the  Department  of  the  Cher,  and  deputy  for  that  depart- 
ment to  the  Legislative— a  most  blatant  adulator  of  Robespierre,  resigned  his  See 
1793,  died  1797.] 

''[April  sth  '92.] 

*  Moniteur,  du  7  Avril  1792  ;   Ueux  Anus,  vii.  iii. 


CONSTITUTION  WILL  NOT  MARCH    193 

Then  occasionally,  having  done  our  message  and  got  answer,  we 
'  defile  through  the  Hall,  singing  Qa-ira  ; '  or  rather  roll  and  whirl 
through  it,  'dancing  our  ronde  patriotique  the  while,' — our  new 
Carmagnole,  or  Pyrrhic  war-dance  and  liberty-dance.  Patriot 
Huguenin,  Ex-Advocate,  Ex-Carbineer,  Ex-Clerk  of  the  Barriers, 
comes  deputed,  with  Saint  Antoine  at  his  heels ;  denouncing 
Anti-patriotism,  Famine,  Forestalment  and  Man-eaters  ;  asks  an 
august  Legislative  :  "  Is  there  not  a  tocsin  in  your  hearts  against 
these  mangeurs  d'hommes  !  "  ^ 

But  above  all  things,  for  this  is  a  continual  business,  the  Legis- 
lative has  to  reprimand  the  King's  Ministers.  Of  his  Majesty's 
Ministers  we  have  said  hitherto,  and  say,  next  to  nothing.  Still 
more  spectral  these  !  Sorrowful ;  of  no  permanency  any  of  them, 
none  at  least  since  Montmorin  vanished  :  the  '  eldest  of  the  King's 
Council '  is  occasionally  not  ten  days  old.-^  Feuillant-Constitu- 
tional,  as  your  respectable  Cahier  de  Gerville,^  as  your  respectable 
unfortunate  Delessarts  ;■*  or  Royalist-Constitutional,  as  Montmorin 

^See  Moniteur,  Stances,  in  Hist.  Pari.  xiii.  109.  [Huguenin  had  been  an 
avocat  at  Nancy,  enlisted  in  the  carabineers,  deserted,  and  became  an  official  in 
the  Octroi  of  Paris.  He  became  president  of  the  Insurrectionary  Com7nune  on  Aug. 
9th— loth  '92,  was  accused  of  peculation  even  in  that  capacity  ;  became  an  army 
contractor  in  '93  and  was  again  accused  of  peculation.  Marat  and  Pache  spoke 
for  him,  but  after  Marat's  death  the  charge  was  revived.  He  died  1803  (Mortimer- 
Ternaux,  ii.  451,  sqq.).'\ 

^Dumouriez,  ii.  137.  [Montmorin  resigned  Oct.  31st  '91  and  was  replaced  by 
Delessart  [vid.  supr.,  note  ii.  170).  He  told  Morris  that  the  real  reason  he  resigned 
was  that  he  "  had  not  the  complete  confidence  of  their  Majesties — and  the  King 
never  answers  letters  "  (Morris,  i.  465,  470,  482),  but  he  remained  unofficial  adviser 
to  the  King  until  Aug.  loth.  Mallet  (i.  263,  sgq.)  shows  how  wide  was  the  diver- 
gence in  the  Feuillant  ministry  in  the  winter  of  '91 — 2,  Bertrand  leading  one  party 
and  Narbonne  the  other,  each  having  a  different  plan  for  getting  the  King  out  of 
Paris.] 

3  [Cahier  de  Gerville,  an  avocat  at  Paris,  chosen  Procureur-Substitut  of  the  Con- 
stitutional Municipality  (Aug.  '90),  Minister  of  Interior  Nov.  27th  '91,  quarrelled 
vigorously  with  Bertrand  {q.v.  i.  132,  281-7),  ^'ho  qualifies  him  as  a  '  blatant  but 
honest  Republican,'  of  ferociously  anticlerical  views.  He  resigned  in  March  '92, 
and  died  in  obscurity  soon  after.] 

■•[Delessart,  a  former  Mattre  des  Requetes  had  for  a  moment  been  Controller 
General  (Dec.  '90)  and  then  Minister  of  the  Interior.  He  took  the  Foreign  Office 
on  Montmorin's  resignation  and  resigned  the  Interior  in  Nov.  '91.  He  was  con- 
tinually denounced  (Sept.  3rd,  Dec.  3rd  '91,  Feb.  17th  '92)  as  every  Minister  was. 
Finally  he  was  sent  to  Orl<Jans,  March  loth  '92.  He  was  never  tried  (indeed  the 
Court  of  Orlt^ans  seldom  got  to  work  on  a  case  at  all),  and  no  evidence  was  put  in 
against  him  ;  and  he  remained  in  prison  till  the  Orleans  prisoners  were  sent  for 
"  trial  "  to  Paris  on  the  request  of  the  Cotnmuti.e  in  Aug.  '92.  He  was  massacred 
with  the  other  prisoners  at  Versailles,  Sept.  9th.] 
VOL.    II.  13 


194        THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION 

last  Friend  of  Necker  ;  or  Aristocrat,  as  Bertrand-Moleville  :  they 
flit  there  phantom-like,  in  the  huge  simmering  confusion ;  poor 
shadows,  dashed  in  the  racking  winds  ;  powerless,  without  mean- 
ing ; — whom  the  human  memory  need  not  charge  itself  with. 

But  how  often,  we  say,  are  these  poor  Majesty's  Ministers  sum- 
moned over ;  to  be  questioned,  tutored ;  nay  threatened,  almost 
bullied  !  They  answer  what,  with  adroitest  simulation  and  casuis- 
try, they  can :  of  which  a  poor  Legislative  knows  not  what  to  make. 
One  thing  only  is  clear.  That  Cimmerian  Europe  is  girdling  us  in  ; 
that  France  (not  actually  dead,  surely  ?)  cannot  march.  Have  a 
care,  ye  Ministers  !  Sharp  Guadet  transfixes  you  with  cross-ques- 
tions, with  sudden  Advocate-conclusions ;  the  sleeping  tempest 
that  is  in  Vergniaud  can  be  awakened.  Restless  Brissot  brings  up 
Reports,  Accusations,  endless  thin  Logic  ;  it  is  the  man's  highday 
even  now.^  Condorcet  redacts,  with  his  firm  pen,  our  '  Address 
of  the  Legislative  Assembly  to  the  French  Nation.'  ^  Fiery  Max 
Isnard,  who,  for  the  rest,  will  "  carry  not  Fire  and  Sword "  on 
those  Cimmerian  Enemies  "but  Liberty," — is  for  declaring  "that 
we  hold  Ministers  responsible ;  and  that  by  responsibility  we 
mean  death,  nous  entendons  la  morl."  ^ 

For  verily  it  grows  serious  :  the  time  presses,  and  traitors  there 
are.  Bertrand-Moleville  has  a  smooth  tongue,  the  known  Aristo- 
crat ;  gall  in  his  heart.  How  his  answers  and  explanations  flow 
ready  ;  Jesuitic,  plausible  to  the  ear !  But  perhaps  the  notablest 
is  this,  which  befell  once  when  Bertrand  had  done  answering  and 
was  withdrawn.  Scarcely  had  the  august  Assembly  begun  con- 
sidering what  was  to  be  done  with  him,  when  the  Hall  fills  with 
smoke.  Thick  sour  smoke  :  no  oratory,  only  wheezing  and  bark- 
ing ; — irremediable  ;  so  that  the  august  Assembly  has  to  adjourn  !  * 
A   miracle  ?     Typical  miracle  .''     One  knows  not :  only  this  one 

i["  Denunciation,"  said  Brissot  at  the  Jacobins,  April  25th  '92,  "  is  the  weapon 
of  the  people,  the  useful  and  necessary  weapon  ;  "  and  yet  Brissot  admitted  in  a  con- 
versation with  Dumont  that  in  Delessart's  case  it  had  been  merely  a  party  move 
(Dumont,  Souvenirs,  p.  377).] 

2  i6th  February  1792  (Choix  des  Rapports,  vii.  375-92). 

•^[Nov.  29th  '91.] 

■*  Courrier-de-Paris,  14  Janvier  1792  (Gorsas's  Newspaper),  in  Hist.  Pari.  xiii. 
83. 


THE  JACOBINS  195 

seems  to  know,  that  '  the  Keeper  of  the  Stoves  rvas  appointed  by 
Bertrand '  or  by  some  underUng  of  his  ! — O  fuhginous  confused 
Kingdom  of  Dis,  with  thy  Tantalus-Ixion  toils,  with  thy  angry 
Fire-floods,  and  Streams  named  of  Lamentation,  why  hast  thou 
not  thy  Lethe  too,  that  so  one  might  finish  ? 

CHAPTER  VIII 

THE  JACOBINS 

Nevertheless  let  not  Patriotism  despair.  Have  we  not,  in  Paris 
at  least,  a  virtuous  Petion,  a  wholly  Patriotic  Municipality  ?  Vir- 
tuous Petion,  ever  since  November,  is  Mayor  of  Paris :  in  our 
Municipality,  the  Public,  for  the  Public  is  now  admitted  too, 
may  behold  an  energetic  Danton  ;  further  an  epigrammatic  slow- 
sure  Manuel ;  ^  a  resolute  unrepentant  Billaud-Varennes,'-  of  Jesuit 
breeding  ;  Tallien  able-editor  ;  ^  and  nothing  but  Patriots,  better 
or  worse.  So  ran  the  November  Elections :  to  the  joy  of  most 
citizens  ;  nay  the  very  Court  supported  Petion  rather  than  Lafay- 
ette. And  so  Bailly  and  his  Feuillants,  long  waning  like  the 
Moon,  had  to  withdraw  then,  making  some  sorrowful  obeisance,* 

1  [Manuel,  born  at  Montargis  1751,  was  a  writer  of  some  elegance,  a  member  of 
the  Constitutional  Commune  and  Procureur  of  it  in  1791,  was  suspended  with 
Petion  by  the  King  for  the  insurrection  of  June  20th,  but  reinstated  by  the  Assembly  ; 
did  nothing  to  stop  the  massacres  of  September,  sat  for  Paris  in  the  Convention, 
and  utterly  ruined  himself  by  defending  the  King's  life  there  ;  guillotined  Nov.  14th 

1793.  He  was  a  strange  freak,  a  mixture  of  rabidity  and  tenderness.  His  last 
literary  work  was  the  publication,  in  1792,  of  Mirabeau's  Letters  to  Sophie 
(Mme  Monnier),  written  at  Vincennes.] 

2  [Jacques  Nicolas  Billaud-Varennes  (or  Billaud  de  Varenne)  was  born  at 
Rochelle  1756,  was  a  pupil  of  the  Oratorians,  studied  for  the  bar,  which  he  entered  at 
Paris  1785,  began  to  write  Radical  pamphlets  1791,  one  of  which,  Acc'pkalocratie, 
obtained  some  vogue  in  1791,  sat  in  the  Convention  for  Paris  among  the  most  violent 
Aloniagnards,  was  a  member  of  the  Comitii de  Salut  Public  Sept.  5th  1793 — July  31st 

1794,  was  ordered  to  be  transported  to  Cayenne  after  the  Insurrection  of  Germinal 
(April  ist  '95) ;  before  he  had  sailed  the  Insurrection  of  Prairial  broke  out,  and  this 
caused  him  to  be  indicted  at  the  Tribunal  of  the  Charente-Inf(lrieure,  for  having 
e.xcited  it ;  but  he  had  sailed  before  the  order  reached  him.  His  subsequent  career 
is  doubtful— according  to  one  tradition  he  escaped  from  Cayenne,  and  became,  under 
a  feigned  name,  secretary  to  the  so-called  'government'  of  Hayti — according  to 
another  he  remained  in  Cayenne  till  1816,  and  escaped  to  die  in  poverty  at  Port- 
au-Prince  18 19.  He  was  perhaps  the  most  rabid  and  inhuman  of  all  the  Terrorists 
and  undoubtedly  a  rival  of  Robespierre's,  to  whose  fall  he  contributed  in  July  '94.] 

•''[Tallien,  vid.  siipr.,  i.  373.] 

■*  Discours  de  Bailly,  R^ponse  de  Petion  (Moniteur  du  20  Nov.  1791).  [This 
refers  to  the  farewell  speech  of  Bailly  at  the  H6tel-de-  Ville  on  Nov.  I2th,  in  which 
he  pointed  out  the  vice  of  the  system  of  Sections.] 


196        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

into  extinction  ; — or  indeed  into  worse,  into  lurid  half-light, 
grimmed  by  the  shadow  of  that  Red  Flag  of  theirs,  and  bitter 
memory  of  the  Champ-de-Mars.  How  swift  is  the  progress  of 
things  and  men  !  Not  now  does  Lafayette,  as  on  that  Federation- 
day,  when  his  noon  was,  '  press  his  sword  firmly  on  the  Fatherland's 
Altar,'  and  swear  in  sight  of  France  :  ah  no  ;  he,  waning  and  setting 
ever  since  that  hour,  hangs  now,  disastrous,  on  the  edge  of  the 
horizon  ;  commanding  one  of  those  Three  moulting  Crane-flights 
of  Armies,  in  a  most  suspected,  unfruitful,  uncomfortable  manner. 

But,  at  worst,  cannot  Patriotism,  so  many  thousands  strong  in 
this  Metropolis  of  the  Universe,  help  itself.-*  Has  it  not  right- 
hands,  pikes .''  Hammering  of  Pikes,  which  was  not  to  be  pro- 
hibited by  Mayor  Bailly,  has  been  sanctioned  by  Mayor  Petion  ; 
sanctioned  by  Legislative  Assembly.  How  not,  when  the  King's 
so-called  Constitutional  Guard  '  was  making  cartridges  in  secret  ?  ' 
Changes  are  necessary  for  the  National  Guard  itself;  this  whole 
Feuillant- Aristocrat  Staif  of  the  Guard  must  be  disbanded.  Like- 
wise, citizens  without  uniform  may  surely  rank  in  the  Guard,  the 
pike  beside  the  musket,  in  such  a  time  :  the  '  active '  citizen  and 
the  passive  who  can  fight  for  us,  are  they  not  both  welcome  .'' — O 
my  Patriot  friends,  indubitably  Yes  !  ^  Nay  the  truth  is.  Patriotism 
throughout,  were  it  never  so  white- frilled,  logical,  respectable,  must 
either  lean  itself  heartily  on  Sansculottism,  the  black,  bottomless  ; 
or  else  vanish,  in  the  frightfullest  way,  to  Limbo !  Thus  some, 
with  upturned  nose,  will  altogether  sniff  and  disdain  Sansculot- 
tism ;  others  will  lean  heartily  on  it ;  nay  others  again  will  lean 
what  we  call  heartlessly  on  it :  three  sorts  ;  each  sort  with  a  destiny 
corresponding. 

In  such  point  of  view,  however,  have  we  not  for  the  present 
a  Volunteer  Ally,  stronger  than  all  the  rest ;  namely.  Hunger  } 
Hunger  ;  and  what  rushing  of  Panic  Terror  this  and  the  sum-total 
of  our  other  miseries  may  bring !     For  Sansculottism  grows  by 

'^{Vid.  supr.,  note ii.  147.  This  change  in  the  National  Guard  was  made  on  the 
eve  of  Aug.  loth,  in  order  to  render  the  defence  of  the  Tuileries  impossible.  The 
battalions,  formerly  numbered  according  to  the  old  districts,  were  now  reduced  to  the 
number  of  the  48  Sections  of  Paris,  each  with  two  pieces  of  cannon  in  accordance 
with  the  decree  of  Sept.  29th  '91  {see  Robiquet,  503).  The  old  staff  was  disbanded 
July  2nd.] 


THE  JACOBINS  197 

what  all  other  things  die  of.  Stupid  Peter  Bailie  almost  made 
an  epigram,  though  unconsciously,  and  with  the  Patriot  world 
laughing  not  at  it  but  at  him,  when  he  wrote :  '  Totd  va  hien  id, 
le  pain  manque,  All  goes  well  here,  food  is  not  to  be  had.'  ^ 

Neither,  if  you  knew  it,  is  Patriotism  without  her  Constitution 
that  can  march  ;  her  not  impotent  Parliament ;  or  call  it.  Ecumenic 
Council,  and  General-Assembly  of  the  Jean-Jacques  Churches : 
the  Mother-Society,  namely !  Mother-Society  with  her  three- 
hundred  full-grown  Daughters ;  with  what  we  can  call  little 
Grand-daughters  trying  to  walk,  in  every  village  of  France,  numer- 
able, as  Burke  thinks,  by  the  hundred  thousand.  This  is  the  true 
Constitution;  made  not  by  Twelve-Hundred  august  Senators, 
but  by  Nature  herself;  and  has  grown,  unconsciously,  out  of  the 
wants  and  the  efforts  of  these  Twenty-five  Millions  of  men.  They 
are  '  Lords  of  the  Articles,'  our  Jacobins ;  they  originate  debates 
for  the  Legislative ;  discuss  Peace  and  War ;  settle  beforehand 
what  the  Legislative  is  to  do.  Greatly  to  the  scandal  of  philo- 
sophical men,  and  of  most  Historians  ; — who  do  in  that  judge 
naturally,  and  yet  not  wisely.  A  Governing  Power  must  exist  : 
your  other  powers  here  are  simulacra ;  this  power  is  it. 

Great  is  the  Mother-Society :  she  has  had  the  honour  to  be 
denounced  by  Austrian  Kaunitz ;  -  and  is  all  the  dearer  to 
Patriotism.  By  fortune  and  valour  she  has  extinguished  Feuil- 
lantism  itself,  at  least  the  Feuillant  Club.  This  latter,  high  as 
it  once  carried  its  head,  she,  on  the  1 8th  of  February,  has  the 
satisfaction  to  see  shut,  extinct ;  Patriots  having  gone  thither, 
with  tumult,  to  hiss  it  out  of  pain.  The  Mother-Society  has 
enlarged  her  locality,  stretches  now  over  the  whole  nave  of  the 
Church.  Let  us  glance  in,  with  the  worthy  Toulongeon,  our 
old  Ex-Constituent  Friend,  who  happily  has  eyes  to  see.     '  The 

1  Barbaroux,  p.  94. 

2  Moniteur,  Stance  du  29  Mars  1792.  [This  refers  to  the  celebrated  note  of 
Kaunitz  to  the  French  Ministry,  read  by  Delessart  to  the  Assembly  on  March  1st 
(day  of  Leopold's  death),  in  which  he  warned  the  French  people  against  the  doctrines 
and  acts  of  the  Jacobin  Club  and  party.  It  was  an  injudicious  note,  insolently  con- 
ceived by  Kaunitz,  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  Kaunitz  became  in  his  old  age 
offensive  to  every  one  he  came  across.  It  seems  pretty  certain  that  Leopold  was 
ignorant  at  least  of  the  wording  of  it.  {See  Masson,  Affaires  Etrang^res,  133 ; 
Haiisser,  Deutsche  Geschichte  vora  Tod  Friedrichs  des  Grossen,  i.  336-7.)] 


198        THE  FEENCH  KEVOLUTION 

'  nave  of  the  Jacobins  Church,'  says  he,  '  is  changed  into  a  vast 
'  Circus,  the  seats  of  which  mount  up  circularly  like  an  amphi- 
'  theatre  to  the  very  groin  of  the  domed  roof  A  high  Pyramid 
'of  black   marble,  built   against  one  of  the   walls,   which   was 

*  formerly  a  funeral  monument,  has  alone  been  left  standing  :  it 
'  serves  now  as  back  to  the  Office-bearer's  Bureau.  Here  on  an 
'elevated  Platform  sit  President  and  Secretaries,  behind  and 
'above  them  the  white  Busts  of  Mirabeau,  of  Franklin,  and 
'  various  others,  nay  finally  of  Marat.  Facing  this  is  the  Tribune, 
'  raised  till  it  is  midway  between  floor  and  groin  of  the  dome,  so 

*  that  the  speaker's  voice  may  be  in  the  centre.  From  that  point 
'  thunder  the  voices  which  shake  all  Europe :  down  below,  in 
'  silence,  are  forging  the  thunderbolts  and  the  firebrands.  Pene- 
'trating  into  this  huge  circuit,  where  all  is  out  of  measure, 
'  gigantic,  the  mind  cannot  repress  some  movement  of  terror  and 
'  wonder ;  the  imagination  recalls  those  dread  temples  which 
'  Poetry,  of  old,  had  consecrated  to  the  Avenging  Deities.'  ^ 

Scenes  too  are  in  this  Jacobin  Amphitheatre, — had  History 
time  for  them.  Flags  of  the  '  Three  Free  Peoples  of  the  Uni- 
verse,' trinal  brotherly  flags  of  England,  America,  France,  have 
been  waved  here  in  concert ;  by  London  Deputation,  of  Whigs 
or  Wighs  and  their  Club,  on  this  hand,  and  by  young  French 
Citoyennes  on  that ;  beautiful  sweet-tongued  Female  Citizens, 
who  solemnly  send  over  salutation  and  brotherhood,  also  Tricolor 
stitched  by  their  own  needle,  and  finally  Ears  of  Wheat ;  while 
the  dome  rebellows  with  Vivenl  les  troli  peuples  litres  !  fi'om  all 
tliroats  : — a  most  dramatic  scene.  Demoiselle  Theroigne  recites, 
from  that  Tribune  in  mid  air,  her  persecutions  in  Austria  ;  comes 
leaning  on  the  arm  of  Joseph  Chenier,  Poet  Chenier,  to  demand 
Liberty  for   the  hapless  Swiss  of  Chriteau-Vieux.-     Be  of  hope, 

^Toulongeon,  ii.  124.     \^Vid.  supr.,  note  on  i.  390.] 

^D^bats  des  Jacobins  (Hist.  Pari.  xiii.  259,  etc.). 

[This  is  Marie-Joseph  Chenier  who  made  his  name  with  the  tragedy  of  '  Charles 
IX.,'  first  acted  in  Nov.  '89.  He  may  be  called  in  some  ways  the  professional 
poet  of  the  Revolution,  and  it  is  this  professionalism  which  detracts  from  his  fame 
as  compared  with  that  of  his  brother  Andre.  Though  he  wrote  the  '  Hymn  to 
Reason  '  for  the  Atheist  movement  of  '93,  and  the  '  Hymn  to  the  Supreme  Being ' 
for  the  new  Robespierrist  religion  of  '94,  he  really  seems  to  have  tried  to  save  his 


THE  JACOBINS  199 

ye  forty  Swiss ;  tugging  there,  in  the  Brest  waters ;  not 
forgotten  ! 

Deputy  Brissot  perorates  from  that  Tribune ;  Desmoulins,  our 
wicked  Camille,  interjecting  audibly  jfrom  below,  "Coquin!" 
Here,  though  oftener  in  the  Cordeliers,  reverberates  the  lion- 
voice  of  Danton  ;  grim  Billaud-Varennes  is  here  ;  Collot  d'Her- 
bois,  pleading  for  the  Forty  Swiss,  tearing  a  passion  to  rags. 
Apophthegmatic  Manuel  winds  up  in  this  pithy  way :  "  A 
Minister  must  perish  !  " — to  which  the  Amphitheatre  responds  : 
"  Toii^,  Tons,  All,  All ! "  But  the  Chief  Priest  and  Speaker  of 
this  place,  as  we  said,  is  Robespierre,  the  long-winded  incorrupt- 
ible man.  What  spirit  of  Patriotism  dwelt  in  men  in  those 
times,  this  one  fact,  it  seems  to  us,  will  evince :  that  fifteen 
hundred  human  creatures,  not  bound  to  it,  sat  quiet  under  the 
oratory  of  Robespierre ;  nay,  listened  nightly,  hour  after  hour, 
applausive  ;  and  gaped  as  for  the  word  of  life.  More  insupport- 
able individual,  one  would  say,  seldom  opened  his  mouth  in  any 
Tribune.  Acrid,  implacable-impotent ;  dull-drawling,  barren  as 
the  Harmattan-wind.  He  pleads,  in  endless  earnest-shallow 
speech,  against  immediate  War,  against  Woollen  Caps  or  Bonnets 
Rouges,  against  many  things  ;  and  is  the  Trismegistus  and  Dalai- 
Lama  of  Patriot  men.  Whom  nevertheless  a  shrill-voiced  little 
man,  yet  with  fine  eyes,  and  a  broad  beautifully  sloping  brow, 
rises  respectfully  to  controvert ;  he  is,  say  the  Newspaper  Re- 
porters, '  M.  Louvet,  Author  of  the  charming  Romance  of 
Faublas.'     Steady,   ye  Patriots !     Pull   not  ijet  two  ways ;   with 

brother  (who  was  a  moderate)  from  the  scaffold.  The  '  Chant  du  Depart  '  is  the 
most  famous  of  all  his  poems.  He  sat  in  the  Convention,  in  the  Council  of  500, 
and  in  the  tribunate,  dying  1811. 

His  elder  brother  Andr6,  whose  works  are  less  known  and  less  voluminous,  has 
been  recognised  by  modern  France  as  the  greater  poet  of  the  two.  Both  were 
born  at  Constantinople,  where  their  father  was  an  attachd  of  the  French  Legation. 
Andr6,  who  was  at  the  French  Embassy  in  England  in  1789,  was  a  prominent 
member  of  the  '  Club  of  1789,'  and  in  that  capacity  had  a  fierce  quarrel  with  his 
Radical  brother.  He  lived  in  retirement  after  Aug.  loth,  but  assisted  Malesherbes 
in  composing  the  King's  defence,  and  this  ultimately  led  to  his  arrest  and  execu- 
tion (after  a  long  imprisonment)  two  days  before  9th  Thermidor.  His  best  known 
poems  are  his  '  Dithyrambe  sur  le  Jeu  de  Paume,'  Ode  to  Charlotte  Corday,  and 
'  Jeune  Captive,'  the  last  written  in  prison :  but  he  was  also  a  considerable  prose 
writer  and  a  contributor  to  the  '  Journal  de  Paris.'  {See  Rev.  de  la  R6v.  xii.  513, 
sqq.)'\ 


200        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

a  France  rushing  panic-stricken  in  the  rural  districts,  and  a 
Cimmerian  Europe  storming  in  on  you  !  ^ 

CHAPTER  IX 

MINISTER  ROLAND 

About  the  vernal  equinox,  however,  one  unexpected  gleam  of 
hope  does  burst  forth  on  Patriotism :  the  appointment  of  a 
thoroughly  Patriot  Ministry.  This  also  his  Majesty,  among  his 
innumerable  experiments  of  wedding  fire  to  water,  will  try. 
Quod  bonmn  sit.  Madame  d'Udon's  Breakfasts  have  jingled 
with  a  new  significance ;  not  even  Genevese  Dumont  but  had 
a  word  in  it.  Finally,  on  the  15th  and  onwards  to  the  23d  day 
of  March  1792,  when  all  is  negotiated, — this  is  the  blessed  issue  ; 
this  Patriot  Ministry  ^  that  we  see. 

General  Dumouriez,  with  the  Foreign  Portfolio,^  shall  ply 
Kaunitz  and  the  Kaiser,  in  another  style  than  did  poor  Deles- 
sarts  ;  whom  indeed  we  have  sent  to  our  High  Court  of  Orleans 

1  [Camille  Uesmoulins  had  begun  occasionally  to  ridicule  Brissot  as  far  back  as 
Jan.  '92,  and  Camille  was  at  this  time  entirely  in  Robespierre's  interest.  On  May 
17th  '92  Robespierre,  whose  cue  it  was  to  be  always  a  little  in  front  of  the  leading 
Radicals,  and  to  combat  any  force  or  person  which  promised  any  sort  of  stable 
government,  started  a  paper  of  his  own  called  '  D^fenseur  de  la  Constitution,'  and 
its  third  number  contained  a  long  attack  on  Brissot,  Condorcet,  etc.  But  the 
Girondists  had  of  coiu-se  a  large  majority  in  the  jacobins,  and  this  was  the  real 
reason  why  Robespierre  denounced  them.  {Cf.  R6v.  Fr.  xxxv.  529  sqq.  and  Bir6, 
L6gende  des  Girondins,  202. )] 

2  [It  was  Vergniaud's  famous  speech  of  March  loth  which  terrified  the  Court 
into  choosing  a  Girondist  Ministry.  The  real  dates  are  March  17th — 24th.  The 
Court,  hoping  now  for  deliverance  from  abroad  only,  determined  to  give  the 
Radicals  rope  with  which  to  hang  themselves.  Dumouriez  however  persuaded  the 
King,  and  perhaps  to  some  extent  himself,  that  he  was  the  Minister  to  save  the 
Monarchy.  He  had  a  soldier's  hatred  of  disorder  ;  the  great  career  for  which  he 
had  longed  seemed  to  be  opening  to  him  (in  his  S4th  year) ;  and  he  was  indifferent 
whether  it  should  end  in  making  him  Marshal  of  France  in  a  Restored  Monarchy, 
or  Dictator  in  an  infant  and  disordered  Republic] 

^  [In  foreign  politics  Dumouriez  made  a  mistake  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  Nar- 
bonne :  he  imagined  he  could  confine  hostilities  to  a  war  with  Austria,  and  that  in 
Belgium  only  ;  whereas  his  party  meant  a  War  of  Opinion  with  Europe.  Hence 
his  negotiations  with  England  and  Prussia  came  to  nothing,  much  as  Narbonne's 
had  done.  Internally  Dumouriez  made  a  clean  sweep  of  the  whole  staff  of  the 
Foreign  Office — the  ablest  set  of  professional  diplomatists  in  Europe — and  brought 
in  no  one  of  ability  except  the  intriguing  Lidgeois,  Lebrun,  who  became  Foreign 
Minister  after  Aug.  loth.  Dumouriez  held  the  Foreign  Office  till  June  14th,  when  he 
took  over  the  War,  Office,  which  he  immediately  gave  up,  to  go  to  the  front.  (See 
Masson,  Affaires  Etrangeres,  146  sqq.)\ 


MINISTER  ROLAND  201 

for  his  sluggishness,  War-Minister  Narbonne  is  washed  away  by 
the  Time-flood  ;  poor  Chevalier  de  Grave/  chosen  by  the  Court, 
is  fast  washing  away :  then  shall  austere  Servan,^  able  Engineer- 
Officer,  mount  suddenly  to  the  War  Department.  Genevese 
Claviere  ^  sees  an  omen  realised  :  passing  the  finance  Hotel,  long 
years  ago,  as  a  poor  Genevese  exile,  it  was  borne  wondrously  on 
his  mind  that  he  was  to  be  Finance-Minister ;  and  now  he  is  it ; 
— and  his  poor  Wife,  given  up  by  the  Doctors,  rises  and  walks, 
not  the  victim  of  nerves  but  their  vanquisher.'*  And  above  all, 
our  Minister  of  the  Interior }  Roland  de  la  Platriere,  he  of 
Lyons !  So  have  the  Brissotins,  public  or  private  Opinion,  and 
Breakfasts  in  the  Place  Vendome,  decided  it.  Strict  Roland, 
compared  to  a  Quaker  endivianche,  or  Sunday  Quaker,  goes  to 
kiss  hands  at  the  Tuileries,  in  round  hat  and  sleek  hair,  his  shoes 
tied  with  mere  riband  or  ferrat.  The  Supreme  Usher  twitches 
Dumouriez  aside  :  "  Quoi,  Monsieur  !  No  buckles  to  his  shoes  ?  " 
— "Ah,  Monsieur,"  answers  Dumouriez,  glancing  towards  the 
ferrat :  "  All  is  lost.  Tout  est  perdu."  ^ 

And  so  our  fair  Roland  removes  from  her  upper-floor  in  the 
Rue  Saint-Jacques,  to  the  sumptuous  saloons  once  occupied  by 
Madame  Necker.^  Nay  still  earlier,  it  was  Calonne  that  did  all 
this  gilding ;    it  was  he   who    ground   these    lustres,   Venetian 

^[The  Marquis  de  Grave,  born  1755,  was  Marichal  de  Camp  in  1789,  succeeded 
Narbonne  on  March  loth,  resigned  the  War  Office  again  May  8th,  emigrated 
after  Aug.  loth,  returned  1804,  served  Empire  and  Restoration  and  died  1823.] 

2[Servan,  born  1741,  served  in  the  Engineers  before  1789,  held  high  command  in 
the  National  Guard  of  Paris  from  1789—92,  took  the  War  Office  May  9th— June  12th, 
and  again  Aug.  loth — Oct.  3rd  ;  commanded  in  the  Pyrenees  Oct.  '92 — May  '93,  was 
dismissed  and  imprisoned  till  after  Thermidor,  died  1808  :  was  a  considerable 
writer  on  tactics,  and  probably  the  author  of  the  scheme  for  the  defence  of  the 
Argonne  passes,  which  Carlyle  wrongly  attributes  to  Dumouriez  {vid.  infr. ,  ii.  297 
note).  He  was  as  closely  Hi  with  the  Rolands  as  any  one,  and  it  was  no  doubt 
a  conversation  of  his  with  Madame  Roland  about  the  possibility  of  establishing  a 
Republic  in  the  south  which  led  to  the  accusation  of  "  Federalism,"  so  often  hurled 
against  the  Gironde.  (Mme  Roland,  M6m.  p.  249.)  Morris  (i.  547)  reports  a 
similar  opinion  of  Servan's.] 

'[Claviere,  vid.  supr.,  i.  171  note.]  ^Dumont,  c.  20,  21. 

5  Madame  Roland,  ii.  80-115. 

8  [The  Hotel  to  which  Carlyle  here  refers  is  presumably  the  former  H&tel  of  the 
Conirole  GSn^ral,  now  the  Hotel  of  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior.  Mortimer- 
Ternaux  (iii.  247)  puts  it  in  the  Rue  Vivienne,  but  Bir6  (L^gende  46-52)  says  it 
was  in  the  Rue  Neuve  des  Petits  Champs  ;  Mme  Roland  removed  thither  not  from 
Rue  St.  Jacques,  but  from  the  Hotel  Britannique,  Rue  Gu6n(?gaud.] 


202        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

mirrors  ;  who  polished  this  inlaying,  this  veneering  and  or-moulu  ; 
and  made  it,  by  rubbing  of  the  proper  lamp,  an  Aladdin's  Palace  : 
— and  now  behold,  he  wanders  dim-flitting  over  Europe ;  half- 
drowned  in  the  Rhine-stream,  scarcely  saving  his  Papers  !  Vos 
nan  vohis. — The  fair  Roland,  equal  to  either  fortune,  has  her 
public  Dinner  on  Fridays,  the  Ministers  all  there  in  a  body :  she 
withdraws  to  her  desk  (the  cloth  once  removed),  and  seems  busy 
writing ;  nevertheless  loses  no  word :  if,  for  example.  Deputy 
Brissot  and  Minister  Claviere  get  too  hot  in  argument,  she,  not 
without  timidity,  yet  with  a  cunning  gracefulness,  will  interpose. 
Deputy  Brissot's  head,  they  say,  is  getting  giddy,  in  this  sudden 
height ;  as  feeble  heads  do. 

Envious  men  ^  insinuate  that  the  Wife  Roland  is  Minister,  and 
not  the  Husband :  it  is  happily  the  worst  they  have  to  charge 
her  with.  For  the  rest,  let  whose  head  soever  be  getting  giddy, 
it  is  not  this  brave  woman's.  Serene  and  queenly  here,  as  she 
was  of  old  in  her  own  hired  garret  of  the  Ursulines  Convent ! 
She  who  has  quietly  shelled  French-beans  for  her  dinner ;  being 
led  to  that,  as  a  young  maiden,  by  quiet  insight  and  computa- 
tion ;  and  knowing  what  that  was,  and  what  she  was :  such 
a  one  will  also  look  quietly  on  or-moulu  and  veneering,  not 
ignorant  of  these  either.  Calonne  did  the  veneering :  he  gave 
dinners  here,  old  Besenval  diplomatically  whispering  to  him ; 
and  was  great :  yet  Calonne  we  saw  at  last  '  walk  with  long 
strides.'  Necker  next :  and  where  now  is  Necker }  Us  also 
a  swift  change  has  brought  hither ;  a  swift  change  will  send  us 
hence.     Not  a  Palace  but  a  Caravansera  ! 

So  wags  and  wavers  this  unrestful  World,  day  after  day,  month 

1  ["Envious  men  "  were  quite  right  ;  Mme  Roland  was  practically  sole  Minister, 
not  of  the  Interior  only  but  of  France  ;  the  whole  Ministry  was  swayed  by  her  envy 
and  hatred  of  the  Queen — bitter  personal  hatred  of  woman  for  woman.  Roland 
seems  to  have  regarded  himself  solely  as  his  wife's  and  Brissot's  spy  on  the  King. 
"There  can  be  no  doubt,"  says  Von  Sybel  (i.  459),  "  of  the  disloyalty  with  which 
he,  in  his  capacity  of  Minister,  attacked  the  King's  conscience  in  its  most  sensitive 
place,  and  kindled  a  contest  for  life  and  death  between  King  and  Assembly." 
Louvet  admits  that  Madame  Roland  wrote  all  the  ministerial  circulars,  letters, 
speeches  and  reports  to  the  Assembly  ;  she  herself  admits  that  she  employed  the 
secret  service  rnoney  in  subsidising  the  Sentinellc  and  other  violent  Radical  prints. 
(See  Dauban,  Etude  sur  Mme  R.  cxi.-c-xiv.)] 


MINISTER  ROLAND  203 

after  month.  The  Streets  of  Paris,  and  all  cities,  roll  daily  their 
oscillatory  flood  of  men  ;  which  flood  does  nightly  disappear,  and 
lie  hidden  horizontal  in  beds  and  trucklebeds ;  and  awakes  on 
the  morrow  to  new  perpendicularity  and  movement.  Men  go 
their  roads,  foolish  or  wise  ; — Engineer  Goguelat  to  and  fro, 
bearing  Queen's  cipher.  A  Madame  de  Stael  is  busy ;  cannot 
clutch  her  Narbonne  from  the  Time-flood :  a  Princess  de  Lara- 
balle  is  busy ;  cannot  help  her  Queen.  Barnave,  seeing  the 
Feuillants  dispersed,  and  Coblentz  so  brisk,  begs  by  way  of  final 
recompense  to  kiss  her  Majesty's  hand  ;  "augurs  not  well  of  her 
new  course ; "  and  retires  home  to  Grenoble,  to  wed  an  heiress 
there.  The  Cafe  Valois  and  Meot  the  Restaurateur's  hear  daily 
gasconade  ;  loud  babble  of  Half-pay  Royalists,  with  or  without 
poniards.  Remnants  of  Aristocrat  saloons  call  the  new  Ministry 
Ministere  Sansculotte.  A  Louvet,  of  the  Romance  Faublas,  is  busy 
in  the  Jacobins.  A  Cazotte,  of  the  Romance  Diahle  Amoureux, 
is  busy  elsewhere :  better  wert  thou  quiet,  old  Cazotte ;  ^  it  is 
a  world,  this,  of  magic  become  real !  All  men  are  busy  ;  doing 
they  only  half  guess  what :— flinging  seeds,  of  tares  mostly,  into 
the  '  Seed-field  of  Time  : '  this,  by  and  by,  will  declare  wholly 
what. 

But  Social  Explosions  have  in  them  something  dread,  and  as 
it  were  mad  and  magical ;  which  indeed  Life  always  secretly 
has  :  thus  the  dumb  Earth  (says  Fable),  if  you  pull  her  mandrake- 
roots,  will  give  a  demonic  mad-making  moan.  These  Explosions 
and  Revolts  ripen,  break  forth  like  dumb  dread  Forces  of 
Nature  ;  and  yet  they  are  Men's  forces  ;  and  yet  we  are  part  of 
them :  the  Daemonic  that  is  in  man's  life  has  burst  out  on  us, 
will  sweep  us  too  away !— One  day  here  is  like  another,  and  yet 
it  is  not  like  but  different.  How  much  is  growing,  silently 
resistless,  at  all  moments  !  Thoughts  are  growing ;  forms  of 
Speech   are  growing,   and   Customs   and   even   Costumes ;    still 

1  [Cazotte  was  a  well  known  member  of  the  Sect  of  the  Illuminati,  and  was 
really  almost  out  of  his  mind.  He  was  at  this  time  engaged  in  writing  to  a  clerk 
of  Laporte's  various  schemes  for  the  King's  escape.  He  was  arrested  after  Aug. 
loth,  and  after  being  spared  by  Maillard  in  the  prison  massacres  owing  to  his 
daughter's  devotion  {vid.  infi:,  p.  290),  was  condemned  by  the  Tribunal  Criminel 
Extraordinaire  and  guillotined  Sept.  23rd.] 


204        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

more    visibly   are  actions   and    transactions  growing,   and    that 
doomed  Strife  of  France,  with  herself  and  with  the  whole  world. 

The  word  Liberty  is  never  named  now  except  in  conjunction 
with  another ;  Liberty  and  Equality.  In  like  manner,  what,  in  a 
reign  of  Liberty  and  Equality,  can  these  words,  '  Sir,'  '  Obedient 
Servant,'  '  Honour  to  be,'  and  such  like,  signify  ?  Tatters  and 
fibres  of  old  Feudality ;  which,  were  it  only  in  the  Grammatical 
province,  ought  to  be  rooted  out !  The  Mother-Society  has  long 
since  had  proposals  to  that  effect :  these  she  could  not  entertain  ; 
not,  at  the  moment.  Note  too  how  the  Jacobin  Brethren  are 
mounting  new  Symbolical  head-gear :  the  Woollen  Cap  or 
Night-cap,  bonnet  de  laine,  better  known  as  bonnet  rouge}  the 
colour  being  red.  A  thing  one  wears  not  only  by  way  of 
Phrygian  Cap-of-Liberty,  but  also  for  convenience'-sake,  and 
then  also  in  compliment  to  the  Lower-class  Patriots  and 
Bastille-Heroes ;  for  the  Red  Nightcap  combines  all  the  three 
properties.  Nay  cockades  themselves  begin  to  be  made  of  wool, 
of  tricolor  yarn :  the  riband-cockade,  as  a  symptom  of  Feuillant 
Upper-class  temper,  is  becoming  suspicious.     Signs  of  the  times. 

Still  more,  note  the  travail-throes  of  Europe  :  or  rather,  note 
the  birth  she  brings ;  for  the  successive  throes  and  shrieks,  of 
Austrian  and  Prussian  Alliance,  of  Kaunitz  Antijacobin  Despatch, 
of  French  Ambassadors  cast  out,  and  so  forth,  were  long  to  note. 
Dumouriez  corresponds  with  Kaunitz,  Metternich,^  or  Cobentzel, 
in  another  style  than  Delessarts  did.  Strict  becomes  stricter ; 
categorical  answer,  as  to  this  Coblentz  work  and  much  else,  shall 
be  given.  Failing  which  ?  Failing  which,  on  the  20th  day  of 
April  1 792,  King  and  Ministers  step  over  to  the  Salle  de  Manege  ; 
promulgate  how  the  matter  stands ;  and  poor  Louis,  '  with  tears 
in  his  eyes,'  proposes  that  the  Assembly  do  now  decree  War.^ 
After  due  eloquence,  War  is  decreed  that  night. 

1  [Bonnet  Rouge,  vid.  supr.,  i.  423  note.] 

^[Metternich  was  born  in  1773,  and  made  his  entrance  into  political  life  as  Master 
of  the  Ceremonies  at  the  Coronation  of  Francis  II.  ;  his  influence  on  politics  was 
as  yet  7^^7.] 

'[The  final  steps  towards  war  were  rapid  ;  i.e.,  Jan.  ist  '92,  the  &migr^  Princes 
and  Calonne  were  'decreed  accused'  of  high  treason;  14th,  the  Assembly  sum- 
moned Leopold  to  explain  his  intentions ;  25th,  it  repeated  the  same  summons  in 


PETION-NATIONAL-PIQUE  205 

War,  indeed !  Paris  came  all  crowding,  full  of  expectancy,  to 
the  morning,  and  still  more  to  the  evening,  session.  D' Orleans 
with  his  two  sons  is  there  ;  looks  on,  wide-eyed,  from  the  opposite 
gallery.^  Thou  canst  look,  O  Philippe :  it  is  a  War  big  with 
issues,  for  thee  and  for  all  men.  Cimmerian  Obscurantism  and 
this  thrice-glorious  Revolution  shall  wrestle  for  it,  then :  some 
Four-and-Twenty  years ;  in  immeasurable  Briareus  wrestle ; 
trampling  and  tearing  ;  before  they  can  come  to  any,  not  agree- 
ment, but  compromise,  and  approximate  ascertainment  each  of 
what  is  in  the  other. 

Let  our  Three  Generals  on  the  Frontiers  look  to  it,  therefore  ; 
and  poor  Chevalier  de  Grave,  the  War-Minister,  consider  what  he 
will  do.  What  is  in  the  three  Generals  and  Armies  we  may 
guess.  As  for  poor  Chevalier  de  Grave,  he,  in  this  whirl  of  things 
all  coming  to  a  press  and  pinch  upon  him,  loses  head,  and  merely 
whirls  with  them,  in  a  totally  distracted  manner  ;  signing  himself 
at  last,  '  De  Grave,  Mayor  of  Paris  ;  '  whereupon  he  demits,  re- 
turns over  the  Channel,  to  walk  in  Kensington  Gardens ;  '^  and 
austere  Servan,  the  able  Engineer-Officer,  is  elevated  in  his  stead.^ 
To  the  post  of  Honour  ?     To  that  of  Difficulty,  at  least. 

CHAPTER  X 

PETION-NATIONAL-PIQUE 
And  yet,  how,  on  dark  bottomless  Cataracts  there  plays  the  fool- 
ishest   fantastic-coloured   spray  and   shadow ;   hiding  the   Abyss 
under  vapoury  rainbows  !     Alongside  of  this  discussion  as  to  Aus- 

stronger  terms ;  March  ist,  came  the  outbiu-st  in  the  Assembly  on  the  reading 
ot  the  note  of  Kaunitz  ;  loth,  decree  of  accusation  against  Delessart ;  17th — 24th, 
reconstruction  of  Ministry,  and  much  more  offensive  tone  adopted  by  Dumouriez. 
The  new  Austrian  Sovereign  Francis  II.  at  once  entered  into  much  more  cordial 
relations  with  Frederick  William  than  Leopold  had  done,  and  the  Treaty  of  Berlin 
of  Feb.  7th  was  at  once  put  in  force.  Only  seven  votes  m  the  PVench  Assembly 
were  given  against  the  War,  which  was  decreed  on  April  20th  against  the  "  King 
of  Hungary  and  Bohemia"  (Francis's  chief  official  titles  before  he  was  elected 
Emperor).  Prussia  however  at  once  informed  Custine  (now  regularly  accredited 
to  Berlin)  that  she  considered  herself  at  war  with  France  ;  yet  France  never  ceased 
till  May  '94  to  work  on  the  entourage  of  Frederick  William  in  the  hope  of  breaking 
up  the  alliance  between  Prussia  and  Austria.] 

1  Deu.x  Amis,  vii.  146-66.  ^Dm^^ont,  c.  19,  21. 

3  [May  8th.] 


206        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

trian-Prussian  War,  there  goes  on  not  less  but  more  vehemently 
a  discussion,  Whether  the  Forty  or  Two-and-forty  Swiss  of  Cha- 
teau-Vieux  shall  be  liberated  from  the  Brest  Galleys  ?  And  then. 
Whether,  being  liberated,  they  shall  have  a  public  Festival,  or 
only  private  ones  ? 

Theroigne,  as  we  saw,  spoke ;  and  Collot  took  up  the  tale. 
Has  not  Bouille's  final  display  of  himself,  in  that  final  Night  of 
Spurs,  stamped  your  so-called  '  Revolt  of  Nanci '  into  a  '  Massacre 
of  Nanci,'  for  all  Patriot  judgments  ?  Hateful  is  that  massacre  ; 
hateful  the  Lafayette-Feuillant '  public  thanks  '  given  for  it !  For 
indeed.  Jacobin  Patriotism  and  dispersed  Feuillantism  are  now  at 
death-grips ;  and  do  fight  with  all  weapons,  even  with  scenic 
shows.  The  walls  of  Paris,  accordingly,  are  covered  with  Placard 
and  Counter- Placard,  on  the  subject  of  Forty  Swiss  blockheads. 
Journal  responds  to  Journal ;  Player  Collot  to  Poetaster  Roucher  ; 
Joseph  Chenier  the  Jacobin,  squire  of  Theroigne,  to  his  Brother 
Andre  the  Feuillant ;  Mayor  Petion  to  Dupont  de  Nemours  :  and 
for  the  space  of  two  months,  there  is  nowhere  peace  for  the 
thought  of  man, — till  this  thing  be  settled. 

Gloiia  in  excelsis  !  The  forty  Swiss  are  at  last  got  '  amnestied.' 
Rejoice  ye  Forty  ;  doff  your  greasy  wool  Bonnets,  which  shall 
become  Caps  of  Liberty.  The  Brest  Daughter-Society  welcomes 
you  from  on  board,  with  kisses  on  each  cheek :  your  iron  Hand- 
cuffs are  disputed  as  Relics  of  Saints ;  the  Brest  Society  indeed 
can  have  one  portion,  which  it  will  beat  into  Pikes,  a  sort  of 
Sacred  Pikes  ;  but  the  other  portion  must  belong  to  Paris,  and 
be  suspended  from  the  dome  there,  along  with  the  Flags  of  the 
Three  Free  Peoples  !  Such  a  goose  is  man ;  and  cackles  over 
plush-velvet  Grand  Monarques  and  woollen  Galley-slaves  ;  over 
everything  and  over  nothing, — and  will  cackle  with  his  whole 
soul,  merely  if  others  cackle  ! 

On  the  ninth  morning  of  April,  these  Forty  Swiss  blockheads 
arrive.  From  Versailles  ;  with  vivats  heaven-high  ;  with  the  af- 
fluence of  men  and  women.  To  the  Townhall  we  conduct  them  ; 
nay  to  the  Legislative  itself,  though  not  without  difficulty.  They 
are  harangued,  bedinnered,  begifted, — the  very  Court,  not  for 


PETION-NATIONAL-PIQUE  207 

conscience-sake,  contributing  something  ;  and  their  Public 
Festival  shall  be  next  Sunday.^  Next  Sunday  accordingly  it  is.^ 
They  are  mounted  into  a  'triumphal  Car  resembling  a  ship ; ' 
are  carted  over  Paris,  with  the  clang  of  cymbals  and  drums,  all 
mortals  assisting  applausive  ;  carted  to  the  Champ-de-Mars  and 
Fatherland's  Altar ;  and  finally  carted,  for  Time  always  brings 
deliverance, — into  invisibility  forevermore.-^ 

Whereupon  dispersed  Feuillantism,  or  that  Party  which  loves 
Liberty  yet  not  more  than  Monarchy,  will  likewise  have  its  Fes- 
tival :  Festival  of  Simonneau,  unfortunate  Mayor  of  Etarapes,^ 
who  died  for  the  Law  ;  most  surely  for  the  Law,  though  Jacobin- 
ism disputes  ;  being  trampled  down  with  his  Red  Flag  in  the 
riot  about  grains.  At  which  Festival  the  Public  again  assists, 
M??applausive :  not  we. 

On  the  whole,  Festivals  are  not  wanting ;  beautiful  rainbow- 
spray  when  all  is  now  rushing  treble-quick  towards  its  Niagara 
Fall.  National  Repasts  there  are ;  countenanced  by  Mayor 
Petion  ;  Saint- Antoine,  and  the  Strong  Ones  of  the  Halles  defil- 
ing through  Jacobin  Club,  "  their  felicity,"  according  to  Santerre, 
"not  perfect  otherwise  ;  "  singing  many-voiced  their  qa-ira,  danc- 
ing their  runde  patriotique.     Among  whom  one  is  glad  to  discern 

1  [April  15th.] 

"^  Newspapers  of  February,  March,  April  1792  ;  lambe  d'Andr6  Chenier  sur  la 
Fete  des  Suisses  ;  8ic.  &c.  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xiii.  xiv.). 

^[Vid.  note  su/>r.,  ii.  31.  A  report  on  the  case  of  these  convicts  had  already 
been  read  by  Maill6,  Dec.  22nd  '91,  which  recognised  that  they  had  been  rightly 
punished,  but  begged  a  pardon  for  them  :  this  was  not  carried.  Observe  then  that 
in  Dec.  '91  they  are  criminals,  in  March  '92  they  are  heroes  and  martyrs.  They 
were  now  presented  to  the  Municipality  by  Collot  (April  7th)  and  harangiied  by 
Petion  as  "soldiers  of  liberty,  for  whose  sake  they  had  been  martyrs."  The 
authorities  of  the  Department  of  the  Seme  protested  against  the  proposed /?/^,  and 
had  a  sharp  conflict  with  the  H6tel-dc-  l^illc  over  it,  but  in  vain.  The  only  other 
protest  came  in  the  splendid  satire  of  Andr^  Ch^nier's  (to  which  Carlyle  refers  in 
his  previous  note).  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  Swiss  Government  expressly  de- 
manded that  they  should  not  be  released.  Mortimer-Ternaux  well  begins  his 
History  of  the  Terror  by  the  contrast  between  the  success  of  this  Fete  de  la  Libertc 
and  the  Fete  de  la  Lot  mentioned  below  {ef.  Mortimer-Ternaux,  i.  51,  sqq.  ; 
Robiquet,  478).] 

*\^Vid.  siipr.,  ii.  168.  The  Assembly  had  already  voted  funeral  honours  to 
Simonneau,  March  i8th.  On  May  6th  a  petition  in  favour  of  a  Fete  in  his  honour 
was  presented,  and  the  Fete  de  la  Loi  was  fixed  for  June  3rd  in  spite  of  Robes- 
pierre's covert  opposition  in  his  newspaper.  Only  the  constituted  authorities 
attended,  and  the  v.hole  thing  v.as  a  dead  failure  {see  Mortimer-Ternaux,  i.  too, 
sqq.).-\ 


208        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Saint-Huruge,  expressly  '  in  white  hat,'  the  Samt-Christopher  of 
the  Carmagnole.  Nay  a  certain  Tambour,  or  National  Drummer, 
having  just  been  presented  with  a  little  daughter,  determines  to 
have  the  new  Frenchwoman  christened,  on  Fatherland's  Altar, 
then  and  there.  Repast  once  over,  he  accordingly  has  her 
christened  ;  ^  Fauchet  the  Te-Deura  Bishop  acting  in  chief, 
Thuriot  and  honourable  persons  standing  gossips :  by  the  name, 
Petion- National-Pique  !  ^  Does  this  remarkable  Citizeness,  now 
past  the  meridian  of  life,  still  walk  the  Earth  ?  Or  did  she  die 
perhaps  of  teething  ?     Universal  History  is  not  indifferent. 

CHAPTER  XI 

THE  HEREDITARY  REPRESENTATIVE 

And  yet  it  is  not  by  carmagnole-dances,  and  singing  of  qa-ira, 
that  the  work  can  be  done.  Duke  Brunswick  is  not  dancing 
carmagnoles,  but  has  his  drill-sergeants  busy. 

On  the  Frontiers,  our  Armies,  be  it  treason  or  not,  behave  in 
the  worst  way.  Troops  badly  commanded,  shall  we  say  ?  Or 
troops  intrinsically  bad  ?  Unappointed,  undisciplined,  mutinous  ; 
that,  in  a  thirty-years  peace,  have  never  seen  fire .''  In  any  case, 
Lafayette's  and  Rochambeau's  little  clutch,  which  they  made  at 
Austrian  Flanders,  has  prospered  as  badly  as  clutch  need  do : 
soldiers  starting  at  their  own  shadow ;  suddenly  shrieking,  "  On 
nous  trahit,"  and  flying  off  in  wild  panic,  at  or  before  the  first 
shot ;  ^ — managing  only  to  hang  some  two  or  three  prisoners  they 
had  picked  up,  and  massacre  their  own  Commander,  poor  Theo- 
bald Dillon,  driven  into  a  granary  by  them  in  the  Town  of  Lille.* 

1  [March  25th.] 

^Patriote  Fran9ais  (Brissot's  Newspaper),  in  Hist.  Pari.  xiii.  451.  [A  good 
parallel  to  Mdlle  P.  N.  Pique  is  Civilis-Victoire-Temappes-Dumouriez-Lebrun, 
4aughter  of  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  born  Nov.  nth  1792  (Masson,  Affaires 
Etrang^res,  278).  In  Rev.  de  la  R^v.  (i.  65)  the  names  of  several  children  baptised 
Petion  are  given,  and  even  '  Rrissot '  appears  (if  one  may  use  such  a  paradox)  as  a 
"Christian"  name.  It  may  be  remembered  that  several  English  girls,  born 
during  the  Crimean  war,  were  named  'Alma.'] 

3  [April  29th.] 

^[The  'clutch  at  Austrian  Flanders'  was  Dumouriez's  favourite  idea.  The 
Austrian  troops  were  very  few  in  number,  and  had  orders  to  remain  strictly  on  the 
defensive,  Francis  being  unwilling  to  move  in  earnest  till  his  election  to  the  Em- 


THE  HEREDITARY  REPRESENTATIVE  209 

And  poor  Gouvion :  he  who  sat  shiftless  in  that  Insurrection 
of  Women !  Gouvion  quitted  the  Legislative  Hall  and  Parlia- 
mentary duties,  in  disgust  and  despair,  when  those  Galley-slaves 
of  Chateau- Vieux  were  admitted  thei'e.  He  said,  "  Between  the 
Austrians  and  the  Jacobins  there  is  nothing  but  a  soldier's  death 
for  it ;  "  ^  and  so,  '  in  the  dark  stormy  night/  he  has  flung  himself 
into  the  throat  of  the  Austrian  cannon,^  and  perished  in  the 
skirmish  at  Maubeuge  on  the  ninth  of  June.  Whom  Legislative 
Patriotism  shall  mourn,  with  black  mort-cloths  and  melody  in 
the  Champ-de-Mars  :  many  a  Patriot  shiftier,  truer  none,  Lafay- 
ette himself  is  looking  altogether  dubious  ;  in  place  of  beating 
the  Austrians,  is  about  writing  to  denounce  the  Jacobins. 
Rochambeau,  all  disconsolate,  quits  the  service  :  there  remains 
only  Liickner,  the  babbling  old  Prussian  Grenadier. 

Without  Armies,  without  Generals !  And  the  Cimmerian 
Night  has  gathered  itself;  Brunswick  preparing  his  proclama- 
tion ;  just  about  to  march  !  ^  Let  a  Patriot  Ministry  and  Legis- 
lative say,  what  in  these  circumstances  it  will  do .''  Suppress 
internal  enemies,  for  one  thing,  answers  the  Patriot  Legislative  ; 
and  proposes,  on  the  24th  of  May,  its  Decree  for  the  Banishment 

pire  and  coronation  should  be  over.  The  movements  of  Catharine  (whose  troops 
entered  Poland  April  8th)  were  also  very  disquieting  to  the  Allies.  It  was  outside 
Tournay  that  the  sauTe  qui  pe2it  here  referred  to  took  place.  Dillon  had  advanced 
from  Lille  towards  Tournay  with  some  3,500  ;  while  his  men  were  breakfasting  on 
April  29th  the  Austrians,  in  about  equal  numbers,  appeared  in  sight.  Dillon 
ordered  a  prudent  retreat,  which  degenerated  into  a  rout  as  the  Austrians  followed, 
though  without  firing.  The  French  abandoned  their  guns  but  only  lost  two  men  ; 
on  arriving  in  Lille  they  called  in  the  mob,  who  assisted  them  in  massacring  Dillon. 
Biron  who  had  also  crossed  the  frontier  and  occupied  Qui^vrain,  was  obliged  to 
retreat  on  Valenciennes  with  his  troops  in  a  panic,  and  with  considerable  loss. 
(Von  Sybel,  i.  448,  sqq.)'\ 

^Toulongeon,  ii.  149.  2  [^ June  nth '92.] 

3 [Brunswick,  having  accepted  the  command  of  the  Allies,  swallowed  his  scruples 
and  prepared  (about  May  12th)  the  plan  of  campaign,  Hohenlohe  and  Bouill^ 
assisting  him.  The  attack  was  to  be  a  triple  one  :  (i.)  the  advance  of  the  Austrians 
upon  Lille;  (ii.)  the  main  attack  on  Champagne  from  the  Gate  of  Lorraine  (the 
straightest  road  to  Paris);  this  was  Brunswick's  own  task  with  42,000  Prussians, 
raised  by  Austrian,  Hessian  and  P^migr^  contingents  to  something  over  80,000 ; 
(iii.)  a  diversion  on  Alsace  by  Austria,  vid  the  Gate  of  Belfort.  The  smaller  Princes 
of  the  Empire,  on  whose  nominal  behalf  the  war  was  being  waged,  remained 
disgracefully  neutral.  Francis  was  elected  Emperor  July  5th,  and  crowned  July  14th. 
A  series  of  councils  of  war  was  held  by  the  allies  at  the  time  of  the  Coronation,  in 
which  they  openly  stated  that  they  expected  compensation  from  FVance  for  their 
trouble  {see  Sorel,  ii.  471  ;  Chuquet,  La  Premiere  Invasion  Prussienne,  cap.  iii.).] 
VOL.    II.  14 


210        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

of  Priests.  1  Collect  also  some  nucleus  of  determined  internal 
friends,  adds  War-Minister  Servan  ;  and  proposes,  on  the  7th  ^  of 
June,  his  Camp  of  Twenty-thousand.  Twenty-thousand  National 
Volunteers  ;  Five  out  of  each  Canton,  picked  Patriots,  for  Roland 
has  charge  of  the  Interior :  they  shall  assemble  here  in  Paris ;  ^ 
and  be  for  a  defence,  cunningly  devised,  against  foreign  Austrians 
and  domestic  Austrian  Committee  alike.  So  much  can  a  Patriot 
Ministry  and  Legislative  do. 

Reasonable  and  cunningly  devised  as  such  Camp  may,  to 
Servan  and  Patriotism,  appear,  it  appears  not  so  to  Feuillant- 
ism  ;  to  that  Feuillant- Aristocrat  Staff  of  the  Paris  Guard  ;  a  Staff, 
one  would  say  again,  which  will  need  to  be  dissolved.  These  men 
see,  in  this  proposed  Camp  of  Servan's,  an  offence  ;  and  even,  as 
they  pretend  to  say,  an  insult.  Petitions  there  come,  in  conse- 
quence, from  blue  Feuillants  in  epaulettes ;  ill  received.  Nay, 
in  the  end,  there  comes  one  Petition,  called  '  of  the  Eight-thou- 
sand National  Guards : '  so  many  names  are  on  it,  including 
women  and  children.  Which  famed  Petition  of  the  Eight-thou- 
sand is  indeed  received  :  and  the  Petitioners,  all  under  arms,  are 
admitted  to  the  honours  of  the  sitting, — if  honours  or  even  if 
sitting  there  be  ;  for  the  instant  their  bayonets  appear  at  the  one 
door,  the  Assembly  'adjourns,'  and  begins  to  flow  out  at  the 
other.4 

Also,  in  these  same  days,  it  is  lamentable  to  see  how  National 
Guards,  escorting  Fete-Dieu,  or  Corpus-Christi  ceremonial,  do  collar 
and  smite  down  any  Patriot  that  does  not  uncover  as  the  Hostie 
passes.  They  clap  their  bayonets  to  the  breast  of  Cattle-butcher 
Legendre,  a  known  Patriot  ever  since  the  Bastille  days  ;  and 
threaten  to  butcher  him ;  though  he  sat  quite  respectfully,  he 

1  [May  27th.  ]  2  [Carried  June  8th.  ] 

'[The  decree  for  the  camp  of  20,000,  to  be  chosen  from  the  Departments,  had 
ulterior  motives  in  it.  The  Gironde  were  beginning  to  feel  the  pressure  of  Paris, 
whose  mob  was  swayed  by  their  still  more  Radical  rivals  in  Club,  Assembly  and 
street :  the  decree  was  vetoed,  but  the  camp  became  a  fact  under  another  name  at 
Soissons  (which  is  near  enough  to  Paris)  (July  2nd).  The  King  sanctioned  this 
as  a  defence  against  the  Allies,  for  it  is  at  Soissons  that  the  two  great  roads  from 
North-East  and  East  (from  Maubeuge  and  Longwy)  meet.  [See  Chuquet,  p.  36.)] 
*  Moniteur,  Stance  du  10  Juin  1792. 


THE  HEREDITARY  REPRESENTATIVE  211 

says,  in  his  Gig,  at  a  distance  of  fifty  paces,  waiting  till  the  thing 
were  by.  Nay,  orthodox  females  were  shrieking  to  have  down 
the  Lanteme  on  him.^ 

To  such  height  has  Feuillantism  gone  in  this  Corps.  For  in- 
deed, are  not  their  Officers  creatures  of  the  chiet  Feuillant, 
Lafayette  .''  The  Court  too  has,  very  naturally,  been  tampering 
with  them ;  caressing  them,  ever  since  that  dissolution  of  the 
so-called  Constitutional  Guard.  Some  Battalions  are  altogether 
' petris,  kneaded  full '  of  Feuillantism,  mere  Aristocrats  at  bottom  : 
for  instance,  the  Battalion  of  the  FiUes-Saint-Thomas,  made  up  of 
your  Bankers,  Stockbrokers,  and  other  Full-purses  of  the  Rue 
Viviemie.  Our  worthy  old  Friend  Weber,  Queen's  Foster-brother 
Weber,  carries  a  musket  in  that  Battalion, — one  may  j  udge  with 
what  degree  of  Patriotic  intention. 

Heedless  of  all  which,  or  rather  heedful  of  all  which,  the 
Legislative,  backed  by  Patriot  France  and  the  feeling  of  Neces- 
sity, decrees  this  Camp  of  Twenty-thousand.  Decisive  though 
conditional  Banishment  of  malign  Priests  it  has  already  decreed. 

It  will  now  be  seen,  therefore,  Whether  the  Hereditary  Re- 
presentative is  for  us  or  against  us  ?  Whether  or  not,  to  all  our 
other  woes,  this  intolerablest  one  is  to  be  added ;  which  renders 
us  not  a  menaced  Nation  in  extreme  jeopardy  and  need,  but  a 
paralytic  Solecism  of  a  Nation  ;  sitting  wrapped  as  in  dead  cere- 
ments, of  a  Constitutional- Vesture  that  were  no  other  than  a 
winding-sheet ;  our  right  hand  glued  to  our  left  :  to  wait  there, 
writhing  and  wriggling,  unable  to  stir  from  the  spot,  till  in 
Prussian  rope  we  mount  to  the  gallows  }  Let  the  Hereditary 
Representative  consider  it  well :  The  Decree  of  Priests  ?  The 
Camp  of  Twenty-thousand } — By  Heaven,  he  answers.  Veto  ! 
Veto  ! — Strict  Roland  hands  in  his  Letter  to  the  Ki?ig  ;  ^  or  rather 
it  was  Madame's  Letter,  who  wrote  it  all  at  a  sitting  ;  one  of 
the  plainest-spoken  Letters  ever  handed-in  to  any  King.     This 

1  D6bats  des  Jacobins  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xiv.  429).  [Louis  Legendre,  born  at 
Versailles  1752,  a  well-to-do  master  butcher,  member  of  the  Cordeliers  district 
and  completely  under  the  influence  of  Uanton,  deputy  for  Paris  to  the  Conven- 
tion, afterwards  a  leader  in  Tliermidor,  which  event  he  regarded  as  avenging 
Danton  ;  died,  a  member  of  the  Council  of  500,  at  Paris  1797.J 

'^[June  loth.] 


212        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

plain-spoken  Letter  King  Louis  has  the  benefit  of  reading  over- 
night. He  reads,  inwardly  digests  ;  and  next  morning,  the 
whole  Patriot  Ministry  finds  itself  turned  out.  It  is  the  1 3th  of 
June  1792.1 

Dumouriez,  the  many-counselled,  he,  with  one  Duranthon, 
called  Minister  of  Justice,  does  indeed  linger  for  a  day  or  two  ; 
in  rather  suspicious  circumstances ;  speaks  with  the  Queen, 
almost  weeps  with  her :  ^  but  in  the  end,  he  too  sets  off  for  the 
Army  ;  leaving  what  Un-Patriot  or  Semi-Patriot  Ministry  and 
Ministries  can  now  accept  the  helm,  to  accept  it.  Name  them 
not ;  new  quick-changing  Phantasms,  which  shift  like  magic- 
lantern  figures  ;  more  spectral  than  ever  !  ^ 

Unhappy  Queen,  unhappy  Louis  !  The  two  Vetos  were  so 
natural :  are  not  the  Priests  martyrs  ;  also  friends  }  This  Camp 
of  Twenty-thousand,  could  it  be  other  than  of  stormfuUest  Sans- 
culottes }  Natural  ;  and  yet,  to  France,  unendurable.  Priests 
that  cooperate  with  Coblentz  must  go  elsewhither  with  their 
martyrdom :  stormful  Sansculottes,  these  and  no  other  kind  of 
creatures  will  drive  back  the  Austrians.  If  thou  prefer  the 
Austrians,  then  for  the  love  of  Heaven  go  join  them.  If  not, 
join  frankly  with  what  will  oppose  them  to  the  death.  Middle 
course  is  none. 

Or,  alas,  what  extreme  course  was  there  left  now  for  a  man  like 

1  Madame  Roland,  ii.  115.  [The  writer  frankly  admits  in  her  M^moires 
{353-4,  ed.  Dauban)  that  she  did  all  she  could  to  prevent  her  husband  and 
Clavi^re  putting  any  confidence  in  the  King.  This  letter  M.  Dauban  characterises 
as  a  "useless  violence  and  a  low  trick."  Mme  Roland  says,  in  her  vanity,  "I 
"wrote  it  all  at  one  stroke,  thought  and  action  being  the  same  with  me.  Pache 
"was  with  me  at  the  time,  and  said  '  it's  a  very  bold  thing  to  do.'  '  Yes,'  said  I, 
"  '  but  just  and  necessary,  and  what  does  the  rest  matter?"  "  Roland  went  to  the 
council  with  the  letter  in  his  pocket,  and  the  discussion  was  reopened  on  the  two 
vetos.  The  King  asked  each  of  his  ministers  to  put  his  opinion  in  writing. 
Roland  came  home,  and  sent  the  letter  to  the  King  as  his  opinion  (ibid.  358). 
She  does  not  add  that  Roland  also  communicated  the  letter  to  the  Assembly,  which 
was  of  course  a  distinct  breach  of  trust.] 

'^  [Dumouriez  was  by  this  time  supporting  the  King  in  his  hostility  to  the  rest 
of  the  Girondist  Ministry,  though  he  wished  the  decree  against  the  Priests  to  be 
sanctioned  ;  but  he  had  just  at  this  time  exchanged  the  foreign  for  the  War 
Office,  and  now  resigned  the  latter  also,  to  set  oft  for  the  army.  Lacoste  the 
Minister  of  Marine  alone  remained.  Dumouriez  in  his  M^moires  (ii.  275)  no  doubt 
lies  when  he  says  that  the  King  promised  him  to  sanction  the  two  decrees,  if  he 
would  stay  in  office.] 

•"[The  Lafayeltist  ministry  consisted  of  D'Ormesson,  Lajard,  Terrier  de  .VIonciel 
and  Chambonnas.] 


BLACK  BREECHES  213 

Louis  ?  Underhand  Royalists,  Ex-Minister  Bertrand-Moleville, 
Ex-Constituent  Malouet,  and  all  manner  of  unhelpful  individuals, 
advise  and  advise.  With  face  of  hope  turned  now  on  the  Legis- 
lative Assembly,  and  now  on  Austria  and  Coblentz,  and  round 
generally  on  the  Chapter  of  Chances,  an  ancient  Kingship  is  reel- 
ing and  spinning,  one  knows  not  whitherward,  on  the  flood  of  things. 

CHAPTER  XII 

PROCESSION  OF  THE  BLACK  BREECHES. 
But  is  there  a  thinking  man  in  France  who,  in  these  circum- 
stances, can  persuade  himself  that  the  Constitution  will  march  ? 
Brunswick  is  stirring ;  he,  in  few  days  now,  will  march.  Shall 
France  sit  still,  wrapped  in  dead  cerements  and  grave-clothes,  its 
right  hand  glued  to  its  left,  till  the  Brunswick  Saint-Bartholomew 
arrive  ;  till  France  be  as  Poland,  and  its  Rights  of  Man  become  a 
Prussian  Gibbet  ? 

Verily  it  is  a  moment  frightful  for  all  men.  National  Death ; 
or  else  some  preternatural  convulsive  outburst  of  National  Life  ; — 
that  same  doemonic  outburst  !  Patriots  whose  audacity  has  limits 
had,  in  truth,  better  retire  like  Barnave ;  court  private  felicity  at 
Grenoble.  Patriots  whose  audacity  has  no  limits  must  sink  down 
into  the  obscure ;  and,  daring  and  defying  all  things,  seek  salva- 
tion in  stratagem,  in  Plot  of  Insurrection.  Roland  and  young 
Barbaroux  have  spread  out  the  Map  of  France  before  them,  Bar- 
baroux  says  '  with  tears  : '  they  consider  what  Rivers,  what  Moun- 
tain-ranges are  in  it :  they  will  retire  behind  this  Loire-stream, 
defend  these  Auvergne  stone-labyrinths  ;  save  some  little  sacred 
Territory  of  the  Free  ;  die  at  least  in  their  last  ditch.  Lafayette 
indites  his  emphatic  Letter  to  the  Legislative  against  Jacobinism  ;  ^ 
which  emphatic  Letter  will  not  heal  the  unhealable. 

1  Moniteur,  Stance  du  i8  Juin  1792.  [Lafayette's  letter,  read  in  the  Assembly 
on  i8th,  had  some  effect ;  his  reputation  was  still  so  great  that  the  Right  made  a 
momentary  rally,  and  the  Assembly  voted  the  printing  and  circulation  of  the  letter  : 
on  the  next  day  the  formal  Veto  of  the  King  on  the  two  decrees  was  made  known, 
and  the  Radicals  replied  to  both  the  Veto  and  Lafayette  with  the  Insurrection  of 
June  20th.  Lafayette's  letter  must  have  been  concocted  with  the  King's  knowledge, 
as  on  the  same  day  the  new  (Lafayettist)  Ministry  was  constituted  \yhich  held 
office  till  July  loth,  and  provisionally  till  Aug.  ist  {see  Masson,  Affaires  Etrangeres, 
183 ;  Lafayette,  iii.  325  ;  Mortimer-Ternaux,  i.  126).] 


214        THE  FKENCH  EEVOLUTION 

Forward,  ye  Patriots  whose  audacity  has  no  limits  ;  it  is  you 
now  that  must  either  do  or  die  !  The  Sections  of  Paris  sit  in 
deep  counsel ;  send  out  Deputation  after  Deputation  to  the  SaUe 
de  Manege,  to  petition  and  denounce.  Great  is  their  ire  against 
tyrannous  Veto,  Austrian  Committee,  and  the  combined  Cimmerian 
Kings.  What  boots  it  ?  Legislative  Ustens  to  the  '  tocsin  in  our 
hearts  ; '  grants  us  honours  of  the  sitting,  sees  us  defile  with  jingle 
and  fanfaronade  ;  but  the  Camp  of  Twenty -thousand,  the  Priest- 
Decree,  be  vetoed  by  Majesty,  are  become  impossible  for  Legisla- 
tive. Fiery  Isnard  says,  "We  will  have  Equality,  should  we 
descend  for  it  to  the  tomb."  Vergniaud  utters,  hypothetically,  his 
stem  Ezekiel-visions  of  the  fate  of  Anti-national  Kings.  But  the 
question  is :  Will  hypothetic  prophecies,  will  jingle  and  fanfaronade 
demolish  the  Veto;  or  will  the  Veto,  secure  in  its  Tuileries  Chateau, 
remain  undemolishable  by  these  ?  Barbaroux,  dashing  away  his 
tears,  writes  to  the  Marseilles  Municipality,  that  they  must  send  him 
*  Six-hundred  men  who  know  how  to  die,  qui  savent  mourir.'  ^  No 
wet-eyed  message  this,  but  a  fire-eyed  one ; — which  will  be  obeyed ! 

Meanwhile  the  Twentieth  of  June  is  nigh,  anniversary  of  that 
world-famous  Oath  of  the  Tennis-Court :  on  which  day,  it  is  said, 
certain  citizens  have  in  view  to  plant  a  Mai  or  Tree  of  Liberty  in 
the  Tuileries  Terrace  of  the  Feuillants  ;  perhaps  also  to  petition 
the  Legislative  and  Hereditary  Representative  about  these  Vetos  ; 
• — with  such  demonstration,  jingle  and  evolution,  as  may  seem  pro- 
fitable and  practicable.  Sections  have  gone  singly,  and  jingled 
and  evolved  :  but  if  they  all  went,  or  great  part  of  them,  and  there 
planting  their  iVfaz  in  these  alarming  circumstances,  sounded  the 
tocsin  in  their  hearts  .'' 

Among  King's  Friends  there  can  be  but  one  opinion  as  to  such 
a  step :  among  Nation's  Friends  there  may  be  two.  On  the  one 
hand,  might  it  not  by  possibility  scare  away  these  unblessed 
Vetos  ?  Private  Patriots  and  even  Legislative  Deputies  may 
have  each  his  own  opinion,  or  own  no-opinion :  but  the  hardest 
task  falls  evidently  on  Mayor  Petion  and  the  Municipals,  at  once 

1  Barbaroux,  p.  40. 


BLACK  BREECHES  215 

Patriots  and  Guardians  of  the  Public  Tranquillity.  Hushing  the 
matter  down  with  the  one  hand  ;  tickling  it  up  with  the  other ! 
Mayor  Petion  and  Municipality  may  lean  this  way  ;  Department- 
Directory  with  Procureur-Syndic  Rcederer,^  having  a  Feuillant 
tendency,  may  lean  that.  On  the  whole,  each  man  must  act 
according  to  his  one  opinion  or  to  his  two  opinions  ;  and  all 
manner  of  influences,  official  representations  cross  one  another  in 
the  foolishest  way.  Perhaps  after  all,  the  Project,  desirable  and 
yet  not  desirable,  will  dissipate  itself,  being  run  athwart  by  so 
many  complexities ;  and  come  to  nothing  ? 

Not  so  ;  on  the  Twentieth  morning  of  June,  a  large  Tree  of 
Liberty,  Lombardy  Poplar  by  kind,  lies  visibly  tied  on  its  car,  in 
the  Suburb  Saint-Antoine.  Suburb  Saint-Marceau  too,  in  the 
uttermost  Southeast,  and  all  that  remote  Oriental  region.  Pike- 
men  and  Pikewomen,  National  Guards,  and  the  unarmed  curious 
are  gathering, — with  the  peaceablest  intentions  in  the  world.  A 
tricolor  Municipal  arrives ;  speaks.  Tush,  it  is  all  peaceable,  we 
tell  thee,  in  the  way  of  Law  :  are  not  Petitions  allowable,  and 
the  Patriotism  of  Mais  ?  The  tricolor  Municipal  returns  without 
effect :  your  Sansculottic  rills  continue  flowing,  combining  into 
brooks :  towards  noontide,  led  by  tall  Santerre  in  blue  uniform, 
by  tall  Saint-Huruge  in  white  hat,  it  moves  westward,  a  respect- 
able river,  or  complication  of  still-swelling  rivers. 

What  Processions  have  we  not  seen  :  Corpus-Christi  and  Legen- 
dre  waiting  in  his  Gig ;  Bones  of  Voltaire  with  bullock-chariots, 
and  goadsmen  in  Roman  Costume  ;  Feasts  of  Chjiteau-Vieux  and 

i[The  Departmental  authorities,  led  by  Roederer,  sent  on  19th  a  letter  to  the 
Municipality  urging  it  to  make  a  strong  proclamation  for  the  maintenance  of  order, 
and  compelled  Petion  to  double  the  Guards  at  the  Assembly  and  the  Tuileries. 
Early  on  20th  they  tried  to  move  Petion  to  further  steps,  but  in  vain  [vid.  infr., 
ii.  218).  As  the  day  went  on  the  Department  took  on  itself  the  functions  of  the 
Municipality  and  tried  to  call  out  the  respectable  sections  of  the  National  Guard. 
Finally  Roederer  rushed  to  the  Assembly,  and  implored  //  to  stop  the  Insurrection 
and  its  own  disgrace,  but  in  vain.     (Robiquet,  484  ;   Mortimer-Ternaux,  i.  158.) 

Roederer  was  a  former  judge  in  the  Parlement  of  Metz,  born  1754,  sat  in  the 
Constituent  from  Oct.  1789  and  contributed  much  to  the  organisation  of  the  new 
Administrative  System.  He  was  elected  Procureiir  of  the  Department  of  Seine  in 
Nov.  '91,  was  left  alone  after  Aug.  loth,  but  went  into  hiding  from  May  31st  '93 
until  after  Thermidor :  aided  Napoleon  in  the  Cojip  cTEtat  of  Brumaire,  and 
served  the  Empire,  dying  a  Peer  of  France,  1835.  He  left  an  interesting  '  Chronique 
de  Cinquante  Jours'  [i.e.,  June  20th — Aug.  loth  '92)  (Paris,  1832),  and  was  a  con- 
siderable contributor  to  the  (Moderate)  Journal  de  Paris.] 


216        THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION 

Simonneau ;  Gouvion  Funerals,  Rousseau  Sham-funeral,  and  the 
Baptism  of  Petion-National-Pike !  Nevertheless  this  Procession 
has  a  character  of  its  own.  Tricolor  ribands  streaming  aloft  from 
Pike-heads ;  ironshod  batons ;  and  emblems  not  a  few ;  among 
which  see  specially  these  two,  of  the  tragic  and  the  untragic  sort : 
a  Bull's  Heart  transfixed  with  iron,  bearing  this  epigraph,  '  Cceur 
d' Aristocrate,  Aristocrat's  heart ; '  and,  more  striking  still,  properly 
the  standard  of  the  host,  a  pair  of  old  Black  Breeches  (silk,  they 
say),  extended  on  cross-staff,  high  overhead,  with  these  memorable 
words : '  Trembles  tyrans,  voild  les  Sansculottes,  Tremble  tyrants,  here 
are  the  Sans-indispensables! '  Also,  the  Procession  trails  two  cannons. 

Scarfed  tricolor  Municipals  do  now  again  meet  it,  in  the  Quai 
Saint-Bernard ;  and  plead  earnestly,  having  called  halt.  Peace- 
able, ye  virtuous  tricolor  Municipals,  peaceable  are  we  as  the 
sucking  dove.  Behold  our  Tennis-Court  Mai.  Petition  is  legal ; 
and  as  for  arms,  did  not  an  august  Legislative  receive  the  so-called 
Eight-thousand  in  arms,  Feuillants  though  they  were  ?  Our  Pikes, 
are  they  not  of  National  iron  ?  Law  is  our  father  and  mother, 
whom  we  will  not  dishonour  ;  but  Patriotism  is  our  own  soul. 
Peaceable,  ye  virtuous  Municipals ; — and  on  the  whole,  limited 
as  to  time  !  Stop  we  cannot ;  march  ye  with  us. — The  Black 
Breeches  agitate  themselves,  impatient ;  the  cannon-wheels 
grumble :    the  many-footed   Host  tramps  on. 

How  it  reached  the  Salle  de  Manege,  like  an  ever-waxing 
river ;  got  admittance  after  debate ;  read  its  Address  ;  ^  and 
defiled,  dancing  and  ga-ira-iug,  led  by  tall  sonorous  Santerre  and 
tall  sonorous  Saint- Huruge :  how  it  flowed,  not  now  a  waxing 
river  but  a  shut  Caspian  lake,  round  all  Precincts  of  the  Tuileries  ; 
the  front  Patriot  squeezed  by  the  rearward  against  barred  iron 
Grates,  like  to  have  the  life  squeezed  out  of  him,  and  looking 
too  into  the  dread  throat  of  cannon,  for  National  Battalions  stand 

^  Li-30  P-M.  This  is  the  first  invasion  of  the  Hall  of  the  Legislature  by  men  in 
arms.  It  was  Vergniaud's  proposal  to  admit  them  ;  Ramond  combatted  it.  More 
fatal  example  of  weakness  could  not  have  been  given.  Sorel  well  compares 
it  to  the  scene  in  which  Louis  XIV.  entered  the  Hall  of  the  Parlement  of  Paris 
in  riding  dress,  and  suspended  its  political  functions.  He  whs  then  "  the  State ;  " 
now  the  vilest  scum  of  Paris  asserted  a  similar  claim,  and  performed  a  like  action. 
(Sorel,  ii,  486.)] 


BLACK  BREECHES  217 

ranked  within  :  how  tricolor  Municipals  ran  assiduous,  and  Royal- 
ists with  Tickets  of  Entry  ;  and  both  Majesties  sat  in  the  interior 
surrounded  by  men  in  black  :  all  this  the  human  mind  shall 
fancy  for  itself,  or  read  in  old  Newspapers,  and  Syndic  Rcederer's 
Chronicle  of  Fifty  Days,^ 

Our  Mai  is  planted  ;  if  not  in  the  Feuillants  Terrace,  whither 
is  no  ingate,  then  in  the  Garden  of  the  Capuchins,  as  near  as  we 
could  get.  National  Assembly  has  adjourned  till  the  Evening 
Session :  perhaps  this  shut  lake,  finding  no  ingate,  will  retire  to 
its  sources  again  ;  and  disappear  in  peace  ?  Alas,  not  yet :  rear- 
ward still  presses  on ;  rearward  knows  little  what  pressure  is  in 
the  front.  One  would  wish  at  all  events,  were  it  possible,  to  have 
a  word  with  his  Majesty  first ! 

The  shadows  fall  longer,  eastward ;  it  is  four  o'clock :  will  his 
Majesty  not  come  out  }  Hardly  he  !  In  that  case,  Commandant 
Santerre,  Cattle-butcher  Legendre,  Patriot  Huguenin  with  the 
tocsin  in  his  heart ;  they,  and  others  of  authority,  will  enter  in. 
Petition  and  request  to  wearied  uncertain  National  Guard ;  louder 
and  louder  petition ;  backed  by  the  rattle  of  our  two  cannons  ! 
The  reluctant  Grate  opens  :  endless  Sansculottic  multitudes  flood 
the  stairs ;  knock  at  the  wooden  guardian  of  your  privacy. 
Knocks,  in  such  case,  grow  strokes,  grow  smashings  :  the  wooden 
guardian  flies  in  shivers.  And  now  ensues  a  Scene  over  which  the 
world  has  long  wailed  ;  and  not  unjustly  ;  for  a  sorrier  spectacle, 
of  Incongruity  fronting  Incongruity,  and  as  it  were  recognising 
themselves  incongruous,  and  staring  stupidly  in  each  other's  face, 
the  world  seldom  saw. 

King  Louis,  his  door  being  beaten  on,  opens  it ;  stands  with 
free  bosom;  asking,  "What  do  you  want.''"  The  Sansculottic 
flood  recoils  awestruck ;  returns  however,  the  rear  pressing  on 
the  front,  with  cries  of,  "  Veto  !  Patriot  Ministers  !  Remove 
Veto ! " — which  things,  Louis  valiantly  answers,  this  is  not  the 
time  to  do,  nor  this  the  way  to  ask  him  to  do.  Honour  what 
virtue  is  in  a  man.  Louis  does  not  want  courage  ;  he  has  even 
the  higher  kind  called  moral -courage,  though  only  the  passive- 
1  Roederer,  &c.  &.c.  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xv.  98-194). 


218        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

half  of  that.  His  few  National  Grenadiers  shuffle  back  with  him, 
into  the  embrasure  of  a  window :  there  he  stands,  with  unim- 
peachable passivity,  amid  the  shouldering  and  the  braying  ;  a 
spectacle  to  men.  They  hand  him  a  red  Cap  of  Liberty ;  he 
sets  it  quietly  on  his  head,  forgets  it  there.  He  complains  of 
thirst ;  half-drunk  Rascality  offers  him  a  bottle,  he  drinks  of  it. 
"  Sire,  do  not  fear,"  says  one  of  his  Grenadiers.  "  Fear  ? " 
answers  Louis  :  "  feel  then,"  putting  the  man's  hand  on  his  heart. 
So  stands  Majesty  in  Red  woollen  Cap ;  black  Sansculottism 
weltering  round  him,  far  and  wide,  aimless,  with  inarticulate 
dissonance,  with  cries  of  "  Veto  !  Patriot  Ministers  !  " 

For  the  space  of  three  hours  or  more  !  The  National  Assembly 
is  adjourned ;  tricolor  Municipals  avail  almost  nothing :  Mayor 
Petion  tarries  absent ;  ^  Authority  is  none.  The  Queen  with  her 
Children  and  Sister  Elizabeth,  in  tears  and  terror  not  for  them- 
selves only,  are  sitting  behind  barricaded  tables  and  Grenadiers, 
in  an  inner  room.  The  Men  in  black  have  all  wisely  disappeared. 
Blind  lake  of  Sansculottism  welters  stagnant  through  the  King's 
Chateau,  for  the  space  of  three  hours. 

Nevertheless  all  things  do  end.  Vergniaud  arrives  with  Legis- 
lative Deputation,  the  Evening  Session  having  now  opened. 
Mayor  Petion  has  arrived  ;  is  haranguing,  '  lifted  on  the  shoulders 

1  [Petion  may  or  may  not  have  lost  his  head — he  had  not  much  to  lose — but  the 
probable  explanation  of  his  attitude  is  that  as  a  politician  he  favoured  the  Insurrec- 
tion, as  Maire  he  was  responsible  for  order  ;  it  was  just  possible  that  the  Insurrection 
might  not  succeed  ;  if  it  did  not  it  would  be  well  for  him  not  to  have  openly  favoured 
it.  He  was  not  present  in  the  Conseil-Gi^nt'ra!  oiihe  Municipality  on  the  i6th,  when 
the  first  step  was  taken  (by  Lazowski's  petition  for  leave  to  go  and  plant  a  Alai  on 
the  Terrace) ;  on  19th  he  received  the  representations  of  the  Department  with  vague 
words,  and  convoked  the  Commanders  of  the  battalions  of  the  National  Guard. 
Santerre  at  that  meeting  told  him  plainly  that  nothing  would  hinder  the  '  citizens ' 
from  '  marching.'  Thereupon  Petion  adopted  the  idea  of  legalising  the  Insurrection 
by  enrolling  the  petitioners  of  i6th  in  the  National  Guard,  but  early  on  20th  he 
forbade  them  to  advance  in  arms.  When  however  they  had  started,  Petion  got 
together  a  few  members  of  the  Municipality  at  the  H6tel-de-  Ville,  and  contrived  to 
keep  the  Commandant  General  of  the  National  Guard  (this,  by  rotation,  was  M.  de 
Ramainvilliers)  there  long  enough  to  prevent  his  rallying  the  respectable  Sections. 
Petion  then  retired,  became  invisible  till  5  P.M.,  and  did  not  get  into  the  King's 
presence  till  6  p.m.  When  he  did,  the  King  threw  the  blame  on  him,  and  rated 
him  sharply  :  whereon  he  went  to  the  Assembly  and  was  received  with  applause  ! 
He  had  the  impertinence  to  present  himself  at  the  Tuileries  next  day,  and  assure 
Louis  that  the  'Capital  was  quiet.'  'That  is  false,'  said  the  King,  'hold  your 
tongue,'  and  turned  his  back  on  him.  {See  Robiquet,  484,  sqq.  ;  Mortimer-Ternaux, 
i.  200,  sqq.)] 


BLACK  BREECHES  219 

of  two  Grenadiers.'  In  this  uneasy  attitude  and  in  others,  at 
various  places  without  and  within.  Mayor  Petion  harangues ; 
many  men  harangue ;  finally  Commandant  Santerre  defiles ;  passes 
out,  with  his  Sansculottism,  by  the  opposite  side  of  the  Chateau. 
Passing  through  the  room  where  the  Queen,  with  an  air  of 
dignity  and  sorrowful  resignation,  sat  among  the  tables  and 
Grenadiers,  a  woman  offers  her  too  a  Red  Cap ;  she  holds  it  in 
her  hand,  even  puts  it  on  the  little  Prince  Royal.  "  Madame," 
said  Santerre,  "this  people  loves  you  more  than  you  think."  ^ — 
About  eight  o'clock  the  Royal  Family  fall  into  each  other's  arms 
amid  'torrents  of  tears.'  Unhappy  Family!  Who  would  not 
weep  for  it,  were  there  not  a  whole  world  to  be  wept  for .'' 

Thus  has  the  Age  of  Chivalry  gone,  and  that  of  Hunger  come. 
Thus  does  all-needing  Sansculottism  look  in  the  face  of  its  Rot, 
Regulator,  King  or  Able-man ;  and  find  that  he  has  nothing  to 
give  it.  Thus  do  the  two  Parties,  brought  face  to  face  after  long 
centuries,  stare  stupidly  at  one  another.  This,  it  is  I ;  bid,  good 
Heaven,  is  thai  Thou  ? — and  depart,  not  knowing  what  to  make 
of  it.  And  yet.  Incongruities  having  recognised  themselves  to  be 
incongruous,  something  must  be  made  of  it.    The  Fates  know  what. 

This  is  the  world-famous  Twentieth  of  June,  more  worthy  to 
be  called  the  Procession  of  the  Black  Breeches.  With  which,  what 
we  had  to  say  of  this  First  French  biennial  Parliament,  and  its 
products  and  activities,  may  perhaps  fitly  enough  terminate.  ^ 

iToulongeon,  ii.  173;  Campan,  ii.  c.  20. 

2  [It  is  one  of  the  traditional  difficulties  of  French  Revolution  History  to  assign  to 
its  real  authors  the  origin  of  the  Insurrection  of  June  20th.  The  ordinary  view  is 
that  it  was  the  Girondists'  '  day,'  as  Aug.  loth  was  Danton's  '  day  : '  this  view  is 
however  based  upon  the  supposition  that  a  clear  line  can  already  be  drawn  between 
the  Girondists  and  the  Jacobins.  We  have  on  the  one  hand  the  clear  fact  that 
the  Gironde  approved  of  and  applauded  the  Insurrection  (probably  with  the  in- 
tention of  forcing  the  King  either  to  withdraw  his  Vetos,  and  recall  their  leaders 
to  office,  or  at  most  to  abdicate  in  favour  of  the  Dauphin)  ;  on  the  other  hand 
the  leaders  of  the  insurrection  were  all  either  Dantonists,  such  as  Legendre  and 
Santerre  (at  whose  brewery  the  chiefs  met  on  19th  to  plan  it),  or  the  offscourings 
of  society  such  as  Fournier,  Saint-Huruge,  Lazowski,  Rossignol,  etc.  It  is  quite 
certain  that  the  Insurrection  was  in  no  degree  spontaneous  [see  Mortimer- Ternaux, 
i.  130,  sqq.).  Malouet,  who  was  an  eye-witness,  writes  to  Mallet  du  Pan  that  he 
expects  a  renewal  of  it  almost  at  once  (Mallet,  i.  309),  and  he  mentions  the  proposal 
of  some  of  the  extreme  Radicals  to  call  a  '  National  Convention."  When  Lafayette 
got  the  news  of  it  he  resolved  to  go  to  Paris,  and  see  what  his  personal  popularity 
could  effect ;  Liickner,  who  gave  him  permission  to  go,  advised  him  not  to  go, 
"  or  the  Sansculottes  will  cut  off  your  head"  (Lafayette,  iii.  332-3).] 


220 


BOOK  VI 
THE  MARSEILLESE 

CHAPTER  I 

EXECUTIVE  THAT  DOES  NOT  ACT 

How  could  your  paralytic  National  Executive  be  put  '  in  action,' 
in  any  measure,  by  such  a  Twentieth  of  June  as  this  ?  Quite 
contrariwise :  ^  a  large  sympathy  for  Majesty  so  insulted  arises 
everywhere  ;  expresses  itself  in  Addresses,  Petitions,  '  Petition  of 
the  Twenty-thousand  inhabitants  of  Paris,'  and  such  like,  among 
all  Constitutional  persons  ;  a  decided  rallying  round  the  throne.^ 
Of  which  rallying  it  was  thought  King  Louis  might  have  made 
something.  However,  he  does  make  nothing  of  it,  or  attempt  to 
make  ;  for  indeed  his  views  are  lifted  beyond  domestic  sympathy 
and  rallying,  over  to  Coblentz  mainly.  Neither  in  itself  is  this 
same  sympathy  worth  much.  It  is  sympathy  of  men  who  believe 
still  that  the  Constitution  can  march.^  Wherefore  the  old  discord 
and  ferment,  of  Feuillant  sympathy  for  Royalty,  and  Jacobin 
sympathy  for  Fatherland,  acting  against  each  other  from  within  ; 
with  terror  of  Coblentz  and  Brunswick  acting  from  without : — this 

'  [The  Directory  of  the  Department  ordered  an  inquiry  into  the  origin  of  the 
Insurrection,  lo  be  held  by  the  Juge  de  Paix  of  the  Tuileries  Section.  Till  25th 
Roederer  carried  on  a  sharp  correspondence  with  Petion  on  the  subject,  and  at  last 
on  July  7th  the  Departmental  authorities  took  courage  to  suspend  Petion  and 
Manuel  from  their  functions.  This  order  the  Assembly  quashed  on  13th.  After 
that  the  Departmental  authorities  gave  up  the  struggle,  and  gradually  dissolved 
themselves  in  the  face  of  the  permanent  Anarchy.  Out  of  9  directors  8  resigned, 
out  of  36  councillors  17  {see  Schmidt,  Tableaux,  i.  74,  J</'/. ).] 

"[Loyal  addresses  to  the  King  had  come  in  ever  since  the  beginning  of  May, 
chiefly  through  the  Departmental  authorities.  This  'petition  of  20,000'  was 
presented  on  July  ist  by  Dupont  de  Nemours  and  Guillaume  :  not  actually  20,000 
names  are  appended,  but  all  the  most  distinguished  e.x-Constituents  signed  it. 
(Mortimer-Ternau.x,  ii.  7.)] 

^[The  Radicals  evidently  expected  an  attempt  to  carry  the  King  off  to  Lafayette's 
army,  for  on  July  2nd  Thuriot  moved  and  carried  the  disbandment  of  the  Staff  of 
the  National  Guard,  which  contained  a  good  many  old  officers  of  Lafayette's.] 


EXECUTIVE  THAT  DOES  NOT  ACT   221 

discord  and  ferment  must  hold  on  its  course,  till  a  catastrophe 
do  ripen  and  come.  One  would  think,  especially  as  Brunswick 
is  near  marching,  such  catastrophe  cannot  now  be  distant.  Busy, 
ye  Twenty-five  French  Millions ;  ye  foreign  Potentates,  minatory 
Emigrants,  German  drill-sergeants ;  each  do  what  his  hand 
findeth !  Thou,  O  Reader,  at  such  safe  distance,  wilt  see  what 
they  make  of  it  among  them. 

Consider,  therefore,  this  pitiable  Twentieth  of  June  as  a  futil- 
ity ;  no  catastrophe,  rather  a  catastasis,  or  heightening.  Do  not 
its  Black  Breeches  wave  there,  in  the  Historical  Imagination, 
like  a  melancholy  flag  of  distress ;  soliciting  help,  which  no 
mortal  can  give  ?  Soliciting  pity,  which  thou  wert  hard-hearted 
not  to  give  freely,  to  one  and  all !  Other  such  flags,  or  what 
are  called  Occurrences,  and  black  or  bright  symbolic  Phenomena 
will  flit  through  the  Historical  Imagination  ;  these,  one  after 
one,  let  us  note,  with  extreme  brevity. 

The  first  phenomenon  is  that  of  Lafayette  at  the  Bar  of  the 
Assembly  ;  after  a  week  and  day.  Promptly,  on  hearing  of  this 
scandalous  Twentieth  of  June,  Lafayette  has  quitted  his  Com- 
mand on  the  North  Frontier,  in  better  or  worse  order ;  and  got 
hither,  on  the  28th,  to  repress  the  Jacobins :  not  by  letter  now ; 
but  by  oral  Petition,  and  weight  of  character,  face  to  face.  The 
august  Assembly  finds  the  step  questionable  ;  invites  him  mean- 
while to  the  honours  of  the  sitting.  Other  honour,  or  advantage, 
there  unhappily  came  almost  none  ;  the  Galleries  all  growling  ; 
fiery  Isnard  glooming  ;  sharp  Guadet  not  wanting  in  sarcasms.^ 

And  out  of  doors,  when  the  sitting  is  over,  Sieur  Resson, 
keeper  of  the  Patriot  Cafe,  in  these  regions,  hears  in  the  street  a 
hurlyburly  ;  steps  forth  to  look,  he  and  his  Patriot  customers  : 
it    is    Lafayette's    carriage,    with    a   tumultuous    escort  of  blue 

iMoniteur,  Stance  du  28  Juin  1792.  [Lafayette  was  at  Bavay  when  he  got  the 
news  of  the  Insurrection  :  on  arriving  at  Paris  he  went  at  once  to  the  house  of  the 
Due  de  La  Rochefoucauld,  and  then  to  the  Assembly.  He  was  well  received,  and 
the  galleries  joined  in  the  applause  (Carlyle  is  wrong  there,  see  Mortimer-Ternaux, 
i.  285).  He  was  well  received  at  the  Tuileries  also,  though  not  warmly  :  he  got 
hold  of  some  of  his  old  Staff  officers,  but  admits  (Lafayette,  iii.  337)  that  he  found 
them  woefully  apathetic.  The  journey  therefore  proved  a  failure,  and  only  hastened 
the  catastrophe,  j 


222        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Grenadiers,  Cannoneers,  even  Officers  of  the  Line,  hurrahing 
and  capering  round  it.  They  make  a  pause  opposite  Sieur 
Resson's  door ;  wag  their  plumes  at  him ;  nay  shake  their  fists, 
bellowing  A  bus  les  Jacobins ;  but  happily  pass  on  without  on- 
slaught. They  pass  on,  to  plant  a  Mai  before  the  General's 
door,  and  bully  considerably.  All  which  the  Sieur  Resson  can- 
not but  report  with  sorrow,  that  night,  in  the  Mother-Society.^ 
But  what  no  Sieur  Resson  nor  Mother-Society  can  do  more  than 
guess  is  this.  That  a  council  of  rank  Feuillants,  your  unabolished 
Staff  of  the  Guard  and  who  else  has  status  and  weight,  is  in  these 
very  moments  privily  deliberating  at  the  General's  :  Can  we  not 
put  down  the  Jacobins  by  force  ?  Next  day,  a  Review  shall  be 
held,  in  the  Tuileries  Garden,  of  such  as  will  turn  out,  and  try. 
Alas,  says  Toulongeon,  hardly  a  hundred  turned  out.  Put  it  off 
till  tomorrow,  then,  to  give  better  warning.  On  the  morrow, 
which  is  Saturday,  there  turn  out  '  some  thirty ; '  and  depart 
shrugging  their  shoulders  !  ^  Lafayette  promptly  takes  carriage 
again  ;  returns  musing  on  many  things. 

The  dust  of  Paris  is  hardly  off  his  wheels,  the  summer  Sunday 
is  still  young,  when  Cordeliers  in  deputation  pluck  up  that  Mai  of 
his :  before  sunset.  Patriots  have  burned  him  in  effigy.  Louder 
doubt  and  louder  rises,  in  Section,  in  National  Assembly,  as  to 
the  legality  of  such  unbidden  Antijacobin  visit  on  the  part  of  a 
General :  doubt  swelling  and  spreading  all  over  France,  for  six 
weeks  or  so ;  with  endless  talk  about  usurping  soldiers,  about 
English  Monk,  nay  about  Cromwell :  O  thou  poor  Grandison- 
Cromwell ! — What  boots  it  ?  King  Louis  himself  looked  coldly 
on  the  enterprise  :  colossal  Hero  of  two  Worlds,  having  weighed 
himself  in  the  balance,  finds  that  he  is  become  a  gossamer 
Colossus,  only  some  thirty  turning  out. 

In  a  like  sense,  and  with  a  like  issue,  works  our  Department- 
Directory  here  at  Paris ;  who,  on  the  6th  of  July,^  take  upon 
them  to  suspend  Mayor  Petion  and  Procureur  Manuel  from  all 

*  D^bats  des  Jacobins  (Hist.  Pari.  xv.  235). 

2 Toulongeon,  ii.  180.     See  also  Dampmartin,  ii.  161. 

a  [July  7th.] 


EXECUTIVE  THAT  DOES  NOT  ACT    223 

civic  functions,  for  their  conduct,  replete,  as  is  alleged,^  with 
omissions  and  commissions,  on  that  delicate  Twentieth  of  June. 
Virtuous  Petion  sees  himself  a  kind  of  martyr,  or  pseudo-martyr, 
threatened  with  several  things ;  drawls  out  due  heroical  lamen- 
tation ;  to  which  Patriot  Paris  and  Patriot  Legislative  duly 
respond.  King  Louis  and  Mayor  Petion  have  already  had  an 
interview  on  that  business  of  the  Twentieth  ;  an  interview  and 
dialogue,  distinguished  by  frankness  on  both  sides ;  ^  ending  on 
King  Louis's  side  with  the  words  "  Taisez-vous,  Hold  your  peace." 

For  the  rest,  this  of  suspending  our  Mayor  does  seem  a  mis- 
timed measure.  By  ill  chance,  it  came  out  precisely  on  the  day 
of  that  famous  Baiser  de  I' amourette^  or  miraculous  reconciliatory 
Delilah-Kiss,  which  we  spoke  of  long  ago.^  Which  Delilah-Kiss 
was  thereby  quite  hindered  of  effect.  For  now  his  Majesty  has 
to  write,  almost  that  same  night,  asking  a  reconciled  Assembly 
for  advice  !  The  reconciled  Assembly  will  not  advise  ;  will  not 
interfere.  The  King  confirms  the  suspension ;  then  perhaps, 
but  not  till  then  will  the  Assembly  interfere,  the  noise  of  Patriot 
Paris  getting  loud.  Whereby  your  Delilah- Kiss,  such  was  the 
destiny  of  Parliament  First,  becomes  a  Philistine  Battle  ! 

Nay  there  goes  a  word  that  as  many  as  Thirty  of  our  chief 
Patriot  Senators  are  to  be  clapped  in  prison,  by  mittimus  and 
indictment  of  Feuillant  Justices,  Juges  de  Paix ;  who  here  in 
Paris  were  well  capable  of  such  a  thing.  It  was  but  in  May 
last  that  Juge-de-Paix  Lariviere,^  on  complaint  of  Bertrand-Mole- 
ville  touching  that  Austrian  Committee,  made  bold  to  launch  his 
mittimus  against  three  heads  of  the  Mountain,  Deputies  Bazire, 
Chabot,  Merlin,  the  Cordelier  Trio ;  summoning  them  to  appear 
before  him,  and  show  where  that  Austrian  Committee  was,  or 
else  suffer  the  consequences.     Which  mittimus  the  Trio,  on  their 

^[Dupont  de  Nemours,  who  took  the  lead  for  the  Directory  in  this  matter  [vid. 
supr.,  note  ii.  220),  had  already  fiercely  attacked  Petion  apropos  of  the  Fete  of 
Chateau-  Vieux.  An  inculpation  of  Santerre  by  name  accompanied  this  manifesto 
of  the  Directory.  (See  Lavergne,  Econ.  Fr.  410.)  Petitions  from  Sections  poured 
in  for  the  reinstatement  of  Petion  and  Manuel,  and  Petion  posted  a  ludicrous  pro- 
clamation in  favour  of  himself  on  the  walls  of  Paris.] 

2[June  2ist.]  ^  [Ji^ly  7^h.] 

•* [Baiser  I'Amourette,  vid.  supr.,  note  ii.  157.] 

^{Vid.  supr.,  note  ii.  85.] 


224        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

side,  made  bold  to  fling  in  the  fire  :  and  valiantly  pleaded  privi- 
lege of  Parliament.  So  that,  for  his  zeal  without  knowledge, 
poor  Justice  Lariviere  now  sits  in  the  prison  of  Orleans,  waiting 
trial  from  the  Haute  Cuur  there.  Whose  example,  may  it  not 
deter  other  rash  Justices ;  and  so  this  word  of  the  Thirty  arrest- 
ments continue  a  word  merely  ? 

But  on  the  whole,  though  Lafayette  weighed  so  light,  and 
has  had  his  Mai  plucked  up.  Official  Feuillantism  falters  not  a 
wliit ;  but  carries  its  head  high,  strong  in  the  letter  of  the  Law. 
Feuillants  all  of  these  men  ;  a  Feuillant  Directory  ;  founding  on 
high  character,  and  such  like ;  with  Duke  de  la  Rochefoucault 
for  President, — a  thing  which  may  prove  dangerous  for  him  ! 
Dim  now  is  the  once  bright  Anglomania  of  these  admired  Noble- 
men. Duke  de  Liancourt  offers,  out  of  Normandy,  where  he 
is  Lord- Lieutenant,  not  only  to  receive  his  Majesty,  thinking  of 
flight  thither,^  but  to  lend  him  money  to  enormous  amounts. 
Sire,  it  is  not  a  Revolt,  it  is  a  Revolution ;  and  truly  no  rose- 
water  one  !  Worthier  Noblemen  were  not  in  France  nor  in 
Europe  than  those  two  :  but  the  Time  is  crooked,  quick-shifting, 
perverse  ;  what  straightest  course  will  lead  to  any  goal,  in  it  ? 

Another  phasis  which  we  note,  in  these  early  July  days,  is  that 
of  certain  thin  streaks  of  Federate  National  Volunteei's  wending 
from  various  points  towards  Paris,  to  hold  a  new  Federation- 
Festival,  or  Feast  of  Pikes,  on  the  Fourteenth  there.  So  has 
the  National  Assembly  wished  it,  so  has  the  Nation  willed  it." 
In  this  way,  perhaps,  may  we  still  have  our  Patriot  Camp  in 
spite  of   Feto.       For    cannot  these   Federes,  having   celebrated 

^  [Aug.  4th — sth.  Montmorin,  Bertrand,  Clermont-Tonnerre,  Lally-Tollendal 
and  Malouet  urged  the  same  course.  The  King  seemed  to  yield,  and  then  at  the 
last  moment  withdrew  his  consent,  reserving  such  a  course  for  the  '  derniire  ex- 
tn'initt''  ("I  wonder  what  he  called  the  deniih-e  extrhnitt"  says  Bertrand,  ii.  138  : 
cf.  also  Morris  (i.  558),  who,  long  after,  gave  to  the  Duchesse  d'Angouleme  an 
account  of  the  plans  for  the  King's  escape  (t'/rf.  iiifr.,  note  ii.  244).] 

2  [This  decree  for  a  camp  of  new  battalions  of  Volunteers  at  Soissons  was  merely 
a  resuscitation  of  the  'Camp  of  20,000'  [yid.  supr.,  noteii.  210),  and  the  King  was  very 
ill  advised  to  sanction  it.  It  is  a  pity  that  Carlyle  does  not  here  mention  Vergniaud's 
great  speech  of  July  3rd,  his  finest  oratorical  effort,  and  the  most  open  denuncia- 
tion against  the  King  yet  uttered  m  the  Assembly.] 


EXECUTIVE  THAT  DOES  NOT  ACT    225 

their  Feast  of  Pikes,  march  on  to  Soissons ;  and,  there  being 
drilled  and  regimented,  rush  to  the  Frontiers,  or  whither  we 
like  ?     Thus  were  the  one   Veto  cunningly  eluded ! 

As  indeed  the  other  Veto,  about  Priests,  is  also  like  to  be 
eluded  ;  and  without  much  cunning.  For  Provincial  Assemblies, 
in  Calvados  as  one  instance,  are  proceeding,  on  their  own  strength, 
to  judge  and  banish  Antinational  Priests.  Or  still  worse,  with- 
out Provincial  Assembly,  a  desperate  People,  as  at  Bourdeaux, 
can  '  hang  two  of  them  on  the  Lanterne,'  on  the  way  towards 
judgment.  1  Pity  for  the  spoken  Veto,  when  it  cannot  become 
an  acted  one  ! 

It  is  true,  some  ghost  of  a  War-minister,  or  Home-minister, 
for  the  time  being,  ghost  whom  we  do  not  name,  does  write  to 
Municipalities  and  King's  Commanders,  that  they  shall,  by  all 
conceivable  methods,  obstruct  this  Federation,  and  even  turn 
back  the  Federes  by  force  of  arms :  a  message  which  scatters 
mere  doubt,  paralysis  and  confusion  ;  irritates  the  poor  Legis- 
lature ;  reduces  the  Federes,  as  we  see,  to  thin  streaks.  But 
being  questioned,  this  ghost  and  the  other  ghosts,  What  it  is 
then  that  they  propose  to  do  for  saving  the  country .'' — they 
answer.  That  they  cannot  tell ;  that  indeed  they,  for  their  part, 
have,  this  morning,  resigned  in  a  body  ;  and  do  now  merely 
respectfully  take  leave  of  the  helm  altogether.  With  which 
words  they  rapidly  walk  out  of  the  Hall,  sortent  hrusqnement  dc  In 
salle,  the  'Galleries  cheering  loudly,'  the  poor  Legislature  sitting 
'  for  a  good  while  in  silence  ! '  ^  Thus  do  Cabinet-ministers  them- 
selves, in  extreme  cases,  strike  work  ;  one  of  the  strangest  omens. 
Other  complete  Cabinet-ministry  there  will  not  be  ;  only  frag- 
ments, and  these  changeful,  which  never  get  completed  ;  spectral 
Apparitions  that  cannot  so  much  as  appear  !  King  Louis  writes 
that  he  now  views  this  Federation  Feast  with  approval ;  and 
will  himself  have  the  pleasure  to  take  part  in  the  same. 

1  Hist.  Pari.  xvi.  258. 

^Moniteur,  Stance  du  10  Juillet  1792.  [The  ministry  remained  provision- 
ally in  office  till  Aug.  ist  ;  when  an  attempt  was  made  to  govern  with  a  real 
Royalist  ministry  led  by  Bigot  de  Sainte-Croix ;  Terrier  de  Monciel  remained  in 
office.] 

VOL.    II.  15 


226        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

And  so  these  thin  streaks  of  Federes  wend  Paris- ward  through 
a  paralytic  France.  Thin  grim  streaks  ;  not  thick  joyful  ranks, 
as  of  old  to  the  first  Feast  of  Pikes !  No :  these  poor  Fede- 
rates march  now  towards  Austria  and  Austrian  Committee, 
towards  jeopardy  and  forlorn  hope  ;  men  of  hard  fortune  and 
temper,  not  rich  in  the  world's  goods.  Municipalities,  paralysed 
by  War-minister,  are  shy  of  affording  cash  ;  it  may  be,  your  poor 
Federates  cannot  arm  themselves,  cannot  march,  till  the  Daughter- 
Society  of  the  place  open  her  pocket,  and  subscribe.  There  will 
not  have  arrived,  at  the  set  day.  Three-thousand  of  them  in  all. 
And  yet,  thin  and  feeble  as  these  streaks  of  Federates  seem,  they 
are  the  only  thing  one  discerns  moving  with  any  clearness  of  aim, 
in  this  strange  scene.  Angry  buzz  and  simmer ;  uneasy  tossing 
and  moaning  of  a  huge  France,  all  enchanted,  spell-bound  by 
unmarching  Constitution,  into  frightful  conscious  and  unconscious 
Magnetic-sleep ;  which  frightful  Magnetic-sleep  must  now  issue 
soon  in  one  of  two  things :  Death  or  Madness  !  The  Federes 
carry  mostly  in  their  pocket  some  earnest  cry  and  Petition,  to 
have  the  '  National  Executive  put  in  action  ; '  or  as  a  step  towards 
that,  to  have  the  King's  Dechmnce,  King's  Forfeiture,  or  at  least 
his  Suspension,  pronounced.  They  shall  be  welcome  to  the 
Legislative,  to  the  Mother  of  Patriotism ;  and  Paris  will  provide 
for  their  lodging.^ 

Decheance,  indeed :  and,  what  next  ?  A  France  spell-free,  a 
Revolution  saved  ;  and  any  thing,  and  all  things  next !  so  answer 
grimly  Danton  and  the  unlimited  Patriots,  down  deep  in  their 
subterranean  region  of  Plot,  whither  they  have  now  dived.  De- 
cheance, answers  Brissot  with  the  limited  :  and  if  next  the  little 
Prince  Royal  were  crowned,  and  some  Regency  of  Girondins  and 

1  [From  the  date  of  the  great  speech  of  Vergniaud  (July  3rd)  there  was  hardly  a 
day  without  some  fierce  alarm  in  Paris.  The  suspension  of  Petion  and  Manuel 
(6th),  a  report  by  the  Ministers  on  the  State  of  the  Nation  (9th),  followed  by  a 
fierce  attack  of  Brissot  on  the  King,  led  to  the  declaration  of  the  nth  of  '  Patrie 
en  danger.'  Tallien  made  his  youthful  fame  as  an  agitator  in  these  businesses.. 
Besides  petitions  for  dt'chdauce,  the  F>'dc'rds  brought  petitions  for  the  renewal  en 
masse  of  the  Judicature,  and  for  the  accusation  of  Lafayette.  The  Conseil-Gthtdral 
of  the  Municipality  sat  in  permanence  from  i8th.  (See  Robiquet,  498,  Mortimer- 
Ternaux,  Bk.  v.,  vi.  passim.)  By  July  30th,  the  day  of  the  arrival  of  the  Marseillais, 
there  were  already  5,000  FMin's  in  Paris.] 


EXECUTIVE  THAT  DOES  NOT  ACT    227 

recalled  Patriot  Ministiy  set  over  him  ?  Alas,  poor  Brissot ;  look- 
ing, as  indeed  poor  man  does  always,  on  the  nearest  morrow  as 
his  peaceable  promised  land ;  deciding  what  must  reach  to  the 
world's  end,  yet  with  an  insight  that  reaches  not  beyond  his  own 
nose  !  Wiser  are  the  unlimited  subterranean  Patriots,  who  with 
light  for  the  hour  itself,  leave  the  rest  to  the  gods. 

Or  were  it  not,  as  we  now  stand,  the  probablest  issue  of  all, 
that  Brunswick,  in  Coblentz,  just  gathering  his  huge  limbs  towards 
him  to  rise,  might  arrive  first ;  and  stop  both  Dechcancc,  and  theo- 
rising on  it  ?  Brunswick  is  on  the  eve  of  marching  ;  with  Eighty- 
thousand,  they  say  ;  ^  fell  Prussians,  Hessians,  feller  Emigrants  : 
a  General  of  the  Great  Frederick,  with  such  an  Army.  And 
our  Armies .''  And  our  Generals  ?  As  for  Lafayette,  on  whose 
late  visit  a  Committee  is  sitting  and  all  France  is  jamng  and 
censuring,  he  seems  readier  to  fight  m  than  fight  Brunswick. 
Liickner  and  Lafayette  pretend  to  be  interchanging  corps,  and 
are  making  movements,  which  Patriotism  cannot  understand. 
This  only  is  very  clear,  that  their  corps  go  marching  and  shut- 
tling, in  the  interior  of  the  country ;  much  nearer  Paris  than 
formerly  !  Liickner  has  ordered  Dumouriez  down  to  him  ;  down 
from  Maulde,  and  the  Fortified  Camp  there.  Which  order  the 
many-counselled  Dumouriez,  with  the  Austrians  hanging  close 
on  hiiTQ,  he  busy  meanwhile  training  a  few  thousands  to  stand 
fire  and  be  soldiers,  declares  that,  come  of  it  what  will,  he  cannot 
obey.^  Will  a  poor  Legislative,  therefore,  sanction  Dumouriez  ; 
who  applies  to  it,  '  not  knowing  whether  there  is  any  War- 
ministry  ? '  Or  sanction  Liickner  and  these  Lafayette  move- 
ments ? 

The  poor  Legislative  knows  not  what  to  do.  It  decrees,  how- 
ever, that  the  Staff  of  the  Paris  Guard,  and  indeed  all  such  Staffs, 
for  they  are  Feuillants  mostly,  shall  be  broken  and  replaced.      It 

'[Brunswick's  best  chances  were  in  July,  but  (i.)  he  was  not  ready,  (ii.)  he  was 
thoroughly  determined  to  risk  nothing,  and  to  leave  no  strong  places  untaken  be- 
hind him  ;  this  was  the  law  of  warfare  of  his  youth,  and  he  would  not  deviate  from 
it.  But  what  was  wanted  was  an  immediate  dash  on  Paris.  The  French  army  was 
so  utterly  disorganised  that  nothing  could  have  stopped  him.  {See  Mortimer- 
Ternaux,  ii.  113.)] 

*  Dumouriez,  ii.  i.  5. 


228        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

decrees  earnestly  in  what  manner  one  can  declare  that  the  Countri/ 
is  in  Danger.  And  finally,  on  the  1 1th  of  July,  the  morrow  of  that 
day  when  the  Ministry  struck  work,  it  decrees  that  the  Country  he, 
with  all  despatch,  declared  in  Danger.^  Whereupon  let  the  King 
sanction  ;  let  the  Municipality  take  measures  :  if  such  Declaration 
will  do  service,  it  need  not  fail. 

In  Danger,  truly,  if  ever  Country  was  !  Arise,  O  Country  ;  or 
be  trodden  down  to  ignominious  ruin  !  Nay,  are  not  the  chances 
a  hundred  to  one  that  no  rising  of  the  Country  will  save  it ; 
Brunswick,  the  Emigrants,  and  Feudal  Europe  drawing  nigh  ? 

CHAPTER  II 

LET  US  MARCH 
But,  to  our  minds,  the  notablest  of  all  these  moving  phenomena 
is  that  of  Barbaroux's  '  Six-hundred  Marseillese  who  know  how  to 
die.'  2 

Prompt  to  the  request  of  Barbaroux,  the  Marseilles  Munici- 
pahty  has  got  these  men  together  :  on  the  fifth  morning  of  July, 
the  Townhall  says,  "  Marches,  ahattez  le  Tyran,  March,  strike  down 
the  Tyrant ; "  ^  and  they,  with  grim  appi-opriate  "  Marchons,"  are 
marching.  Long  journey,  doubtful  errand ;  Enjans  de  la  Pairie, 
may  a  good  genius  guide  you !  Their  own  wild  heart  and  what 
faith  it  has  will  guide  them  :  and  is  not  that  the  monition  of  some 
genius,  better  or  worse  ?     Five-hundred  and  Seventeen  able  men, 

1  [The  Proclamation  of  Patrie  en  danger  was  made  on  22nd,  with  great  pomp, 
and  a  black  flag  hoisted  on  the  Hotcl-de-  Ville.  All  this  was  the  work  of  the  Gironde ; 
but  their  hour  was  gone.  When  Brunswick's  proclamation  [vid.  infr.,  ii.  235)  was 
known  on  28th,  Dan  ton  resolved  to  overthrow  the  Monarchy  before  Brunswick  could 
arrive.  '  He  then,'  says  Mr.  Belloc,  '  put  off  the  conventions  {i.e.,  conventionalities 
'of  society),  which  he  respected  and  which  he  regretted  to  the  end  ;  he  went  back 
'  into  the  street,  he  headed  the  Insurrection,  destroyed  the  Monarchy  ;  for  twelve 
'  months  be  took  upon  himself  all  the  responsibility  of  errors  in  his  own  policy,  and 
'  of  crime  in  that  of  his  associates.'     (Danton,  p.  157.)] 

2  [Afarseilies  {vid.  supr.,  i.  158  and  ii.  167)  was  a  city  of  some  130,000  inhabitants, 
exclusive  of  the  floating  population  of  sailors  and  hangers  on  of  marine  trades.  It 
had  in  1789  an  old  democratic  constitution  under  '  consuls  ;  '  and  had  been  in  per- 
petual quarrel  with  the  agents  of  the  old  Government  {e.g.,  the  Intcndant  o{  Pro- 
vence, whose  seat  was  at  Aix).  It  had  never  really  settled  down  since  the  bread 
riots  of  1789,  and  its  Garde  Bourgeoise  had  become  rather  an  incendiary  than  an 
orderly  factor  in  its  history.] 

•'Dampmartin,  ii.  183. 


LET  US  MARCH  229 

with  Captains  of  fifties  and  tens ;  well  armed  all,  musket  on 
shoulder,  sabre  on  thigh  :  nay  they  drive  three  pieces  of  cannon  ; 
for  who  knows  what  obstacles  may  occur?  Municipalities  there 
are,  paralysed  by  War-minister ;  Commandants  with  orders  to 
stop  even  Federation  Volunteers :  good,  when  sound  arguments 
will  not  open  a  Towngate,  if  you  have  a  petard  to  shiver  it ! 
They  have  left  their  sunny  Phocean  City  and  Sea-haven,  with 
its  bustle  and  its  bloom  :  the  thronging  Course,  with  high-frondent 
Avenues,  pitchy  dockyards,  almond  and  olive  groves,  orange-trees 
on  house-tops,  and  white  glittering  bastides  that  crown  the  hills, 
are  all  behind  them.  They  wend  on  their  wild  way,  from  the 
extremity  of  French  land,  through  unknown  cities,  toward  an 
unknown  destiny  ;  with  a  purpose  that  they  know. 

Much  wondering  at  this  phenomenon,  and  how,  in  a  peaceable 
trading  City,  so  many  householders  or  hearthholders  do  severally 
fling  down  their  crafts  and  industrial  tools  ;  gird  themselves  with 
weapons  of  war,  and  set  out  on  a  journey  of  six-hundred  miles, 
to  '  strike  down  the  tyrant,' — you  search  in  all  Historical  Books, 
Pamphlets  and  Newspapers,  for  some  light  on  it :  unhappily  with- 
out effect.  Rumour  and  Terror  precede  this  march ;  which  still 
echo  on  you  ;  the  march  itself  an  unknown  thing.  Weber,  in  the 
backstairs  of  the  Tuileries,  has  understood  that  they  were  Forcats, 
Galley-slaves  and  mere  scoundrels,  these  Marseillese ;  that,  as 
they  marched  through  Lyons,  the  people  shut  their  shops  ; — also 
that  the  number  of  them  was  some  Four  Thousand.  Equally 
vague  is  Blanc  Gilli,  who  likewise  murmurs  about  Formats  and 
danger  of  plunder. ^     Formats  they  were  not ;  neither  was  there 

iSeeBarbaroux,  M^moires  (note  on  pp.  40-1).  [Blanc-Gilly  was  the  deputy  for  the 
Bouches-du-Rhone  ;  he  calls  them  a  '  horde  of  brigands  without  country.'  It  is 
Dampmartin  who,  in  the  passage  cited,  puts  them  at  4,000.  Mortimer-Ternaux  (ii. 
142-3)  proves  that  they  were  not  all  native  Marseillais  or  Frenchmen,  but  largely  the 
scum  of  discharged  prisoners  from  the  gaols  of  the  neighbouring  countries  of  Genoa, 
Piedmont,  Spain  and  the  Levant,  who  naturally  flocked  to  the  greatest  city  of  the 
Mediterranean,  as  in  the  16th  and  i7lh  centuries  they  had  flocked  to  Venice.  The 
name  of  no  single  man  among  the  Marseillais  Fiidt'rds  is  afterwards  found  among 
the  soldiers  of  France,  nor  in  any  register  except  those  of  the  common  prisons. 
They  took  27  days  to  traverse  France.  After  Aug.  loth  they  were  kept  in  Paris 
till  Feb.  '93,  when  some  of  them  demanded  leave  to  return  to  the  south,  which 
the  Convention  granted  (Aulard,  Recueil,  ii.  44) ;  but  a  proportion  of  them  re- 
mained as  a  permanent  nucleus  of  Maillard's  band  of  trained  assassins,] 


230        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

plunder  or  danger  of  it.  Men  of  regular  life,  or  of  the  best-filled 
purse,  they  could  hardly  be  ;  the  one  thing  needful  in  them  was 
that  they  'knew  how  to  die.'  Friend  Uampmartin  saw  them, 
with  his  own  eyes,  march  'gradually'  through  his  quarters  at 
Villefranche  in  the  Beaujolais :  but  saw  in  the  vaguest  manner ; 
being  indeed  preoccupied,  and  himself  minded  for  marching  just 
then — across  the  Rhine.  Deep  was  his  astonishment  to  think  of 
such  a  march,  without  appointment  or  arrangement,  station  or 
ration  ;  for  the  rest,  it  was  '  the  same  men  he  had  seen  formerly  ' 
in  the  troubles  of  the  South ;  '  perfectly  civil ; '  though  his 
soldiers  could  not  be  kept  from  talking  a  little  with  them.^ 

So  vague  are  all  these  ;  Monileur,  Hisloire  Parlementaire  are  as 
good  as  silent :  garrulous  History,  as  is  too  usual,  will  say  nothing 
where  you  most  wish  her  to  speak  !  If  enlightened  Curiosity  ever 
get  sight  of  the  Marseilles  Council-Books,  will  it  not  perhaps  ex- 
plore this  strangest  of  Municipal  procedures ;  and  feel  called  to 
fish  up  what  of  the  Biographies,  creditable  or  discreditable,  of 
these  Five-hundred  and  Seventeen,  the  stream  of  Time  has  not 
yet  irrevocably  swallowed  ? 

As  it  is,  these  Marseillese  remain  inarticulate,  undistinguish- 
able  in  feature  ;  a  blackbrowed  Mass,  full  of  grim  fire,  who  wend 
there,  in  the  hot  sultry  weather :  very  singular  to  contemplate. 
They  wend  ;  amid  the  infinitude  of  doubt  and  dim  peril ;  they  not 
doubtful :  Fate  and  Feudal  Europe,  having  decided,  come  girdling 
in  from  without ;  they,  having  also  decided,  do  march  within. 
Dusty  of  face,  with  frugal  refreshment,  they  plod  onwards ;  un- 
weariable,  not  to  be  turned  aside.  Such  march  will  become  famous. 
The  Thought,  which  works  voiceless  in  this  blackbrowed  mass,  an 
inspired  Tyrtaean  Colonel,  Rouget  de  Lille,  whom  the  Earth  still 
holds,2  has  translated  into  grim  melody  and  rhythm  ;  into  his  Hymn 

1  Danipmartin,  ubi  supra. 

2a.u.  1836.  [Rouget  dc  Lisle,  born  1760,  was  an  officer  in  the  Engineers; 
curiously  enough  he  was  suspended  from  his  Commission  by  Carnot  and  Prieur  at 
Huningue,  in  Aug.  '92,  for  refusing  to  recognise  the  Republic.  He  was  restored 
in  Oct.  '92,  suspended  again  Aug.  '93,  arrested  Sept. '93,  kept  in  prison  till  after 
Thermidor  and  died  in  the  year  in  which  Carlyle  wrote  this  note  (1836).  M.  Arthur 
Loth,  in  an  interesting  little  book  '  Le  Chant  de  la  Marseillaise,  son  veritable 
auteur,'  Paris,  1886,  suggests  that  Rouget  got  the  air  from  a  march  in  an  oratorio 
called  'Esther,'  written  by  one  Grisons,  choirmaster  at  Saint-Omer,  1787.] 


SOME  CONSOLATION  TO  MANKIND    231 

or  March  of  the  Mai'seillese  :  luckiest  musical-composition  ever 
promulgated.  The  sound  of  which  will  make  the  blood  tingle  in 
men's  veins  ;  and  whole  Armies  and  Assemblages  will  sing  it,  with 
eyes  weeping  and  burning,  with  heai-ts  defiant  of  Death,  Despot 
and  Devil. 

One  sees  well,  these  Marseillese  will  be  too  late  for  the  Federa- 
tion Feast.  1  In  fact,  it  is  not  Champ-de-Mars  Oaths  that  they  have 
in  view.  They  have  quite  another  feat  to  do  :  a  paralytic  National 
Executive  to  set  in  action.  They  must  '  strike  down  '  whatsoever 
'  Tyrant,'  or  Martyr- Faineant,  there  may  be  who  paralyses  it ; 
strike  and  be  struck ;  and  on  the  whole  prosper,  and  know  how 
to  die. 

CHAPTER  III 

SOME  CONSOLATION  TO  MANKIND 

Of  the  Federation  Feast  itself  we  shall  say  almost  nothing.  There 
are  Tents  pitched  in  the  Champ-de-Mars ;  tent  for  National  As- 
sembly ;  tent  for  Hereditary  Representative, — who  indeed  is 
there  too  early,  and  has  to  wait  long  in  it.  There  are  Eighty- 
three  symbolic  Departmental  Trees-of-Liberty ;  trees  and  mais 
enough :  beautifullest  of  all,  there  is  one  huge  viai,  hung  round 
with  effete  Scutcheons,  Emblazonries  and  Genealogy-books,  nay 
better  still,  with  Lawyers'-bags,  '  sacs  de  procedure  ; '  which  shall  be 
burnt.  The  Thirty  seat-rows  of  that  famed  Slope  are  again  full ;  we 
have  a  bright  Sun  ;  and  all  is  marching,  streamering  and  blaring  : 
but  what  avails  it  ?  Virtuous  Mayor  Petion,  whom  Feuillantism 
had  suspended,  was  reinstated  only  last  night,  by  Decree  of  the 
Assembly.  Men's  humour  is  of  the  sourest.  Men's  hats  have  on 
them,  written  in  chalk,  '  Vive  Petion  ;  'and  even,  '  Petion  or  Death, 
Petion  OH  la  Mori.'  ^ 

1  [The  intention  of  Barbaroux  had  been  to  get  the  Marseillais  to  march  straight 
on  the  Tuileries  on  the  30th  (the  night  of  their  arrival) ;  but  this,  as  well  as  a  previ- 
ous attack  by  the  mob,  designed  for  the  26th,  had  been  put  off,  as  the  conspirators 
believed  the  preparations  for  the  defence  of  the  Chateau  to  be  much  more  forward 
than  they  were.     {Vid.  infr.,  ii.  240;  Mortimer-Ternaux,  ii.  147.)] 

2 [A  year  later,  day  for  day,  it  was  "Petion  a  la  mort"  (Mortimer-Ternaux, 
''•  79)-] 


232        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Poor  Louis,  who  has  waited  till  five  o'clock  before  the  Assembly 
would  ai-rive,  swears  the  National  Oath  this  time,  with  a  quilted 
cuirass  under  his  waistcoat  which  will  turn  pistol-bullets.^  Madame 
de  Stael,  from  that  Royal  Tent,  stretches  out  the  neck  in  a  kind 
of  agony,  lest  the  waving  multitude  which  receive  him  may  not 
render  him  back  alive.  No  cry  of  Five  le  Roi  salutes  the  ear ; 
cries  only  of  Vive  Petion ;  Petioii  oii  la  Mart.  The  National 
Solemnity  is  as  it  were  huddled  by ;  each  cowering  off  almost 
before  the  evolutions  are  gone  through.  The  very  Mai  with  its 
Scutcheons  and  Lawyers'-bags  is  forgotten,  stands  unbumt ;  till 
'  certain  Patriot  Deputies,'  called  by  the  people,  set  a  torch  to  it, 
by  way  of  voluntary  after-piece.  Sadder  Feast  of  Pikes  no  man 
ever  saw.^ 

Mayor  Petion,  named  on  hats,  is  at  his  zenith  in  this  Federa- 
tion ;  Lafayette  again  is  close  upon  his  nadir.  Why  does  the 
stormbell  of  Saint- Roch  speak  out,  next  Saturday ;  why  do  the 
citizens  shut  their  shops  ?  "^  It  is  sections  defiling,  it  is  fear  of 
effervescence.  Legislative  Committee,  long  deliberating  on 
Lafayette  and  that  Anti-jacobin  visit  of  his,  reports,  this  day, 
that  there  is  '  not  ground  for  Accusation  ! '  *  Peace,  ye  Patriots, 
nevertheless  ;  and  let  that  tocsin  cease  :  the  Debate  is  not  finished, 
nor  the  Report  accepted ;  but  Brissot,  Isnard  and  the  Mountain 
will  sift  it,  and  resift  it,  perhaps  for  some  three  weeks  longer. 

So  many  bells,  stormbells  and  noises  do  ring  ; — scarcely  audible  ; 
one  drowning  the  other.  For  example :  in  this  same  Lafayette 
tocsin,  of  Saturday,  was  there  not  withal  some  faint  bob-minor, 
and  Deputation  of  Legislative,  ringing  the  Chevalier  Paul  Jones  to 

^  Campan,  ii.  c.  20  ;  De  Stael,  ii.  c.  7  and  54. 

^[The  Directors  of  the  Department  were  received  with  howls  of  execration  (for 
their  action  in  suspending  Petion)  ;  howls  which  were  indirectly  intended  for  the 
King.  Gr^goire,  preaching  ai  the  Fe/e,  openly  denounced  the  Queen  as  '  Cleopatra,' 
and  his  sermon  was  printed  by  order  of  the  Jacobin  Club.     (Rev.  de  la  R6v.  vi.  91.)] 

■'Moniteur,  StJance  du  21  Juillet  1792. 

*[Debry's  motion  to  decree  Lafayette  'accused'  (Aug.  8th)  was  rejected  by  a 
large  majority,  and  it  was  this  rejection  at  such  a  late  date  that  determined  the 
Jacobins  to  strike  at  once ;  no  decision  on  Lafayette's  case  had  been  arrived  at 
earlier,  though  it  had  formed  one  of  the  stock  subjects  of  debate  ever  since  his  visit 
to  Paris  and  a  report  had  been  presented  on  him  as  far  back  as  July  22nd  by  a 
committee,  to  which  Carlyle  here  refers.] 


SOME  CONSOLATION  TO  MANKIND     233 

his  long  rest ;  tocsin  or  dirge  now  all  one  to  him  !  Not  ten  days 
hence  Patriot  Brissot,  beshouted  this  day  by  the  Patriot  Galleries, 
shall  find  himself  begroaned  by  them,  on  account  of  his  limited 
Patriotism ;  nay  pelted  at  while  peroi-ating,  and  '  hit  with  two 
prunes.'  ^  It  is  a  distracted  empty-sounding  world ;  of  bob- 
minors  and  bob-majors,  of  triumph  and  terror,  of  rise  and  fall ! 

The  more  touching  is  this  other  Solemnity,  which  happens  on 
the  morrow  of  the  Lafayette  tocsin:  Proclamation  that  the  Counti-y 
is  in  Danger.  Not  till  the  present  Sunday  could  such  Solemnity 
be.  The  Legislative  decreed  it  almost  a  fortnight  ago ;  but 
Royalty  and  the  ghost  of  a  Ministry  held  back  as  they  could. 
Now  however,  on  this  Sunday,  22d  day  of  July  1792,  it  will  hold 
back  no  longer ;  and  the  Solemnity  in  very  deed  is.  Touching 
to  behold  !  Municipality  and  Mayor  have  on  their  scarfs  ;  cannon- 
salvo  booms  alarm  from  the  Pont-Neuf,  and  single-gun  at  intervals 
all  day.  Guards  are  mounted,  scarfed  Notabilities,  Halberdiers, 
and  a  Cavalcade ;  with  streamers,  emblematic  flags  ;  especially 
with  one  huge  Flag,  flapping  mournfully :  Citoyens,  la  Patrie  est 
en  Danger.  They  roll  through  the  streets,  with  stern-sounding 
music,  and  slow  rattle  of  hoofs ;  pausing  at  set  stations,  and 
with  doleful  blast  of  trumpet,  singing  out  through  Herald's 
throat,  what  the  Flag  says  to  the  eye :  "  Citizens,  our  Country 
is  in  Danger  !  " 

Is  there  a  man's  heart  that  hears  it  without  a  thrill  ?  The 
many-voiced  responsive  hum  or  bellow  of  these  multitudes  is  not 
of  triumph  ;  and  yet  it  is  a  sound  deeper  than  triumph.  But  when 
the  long  Cavalcade  and  Proclamation  ended  ;  and  our  huge  Flag 
was  fixed  on  the  Pont-Neuf,  another  like  it  on  the  H6tel-de-Ville, 
to  wave  there  till  better  days  ;  and  each  Municipal  sat  in  the 
centre  of  his  Section,  in  a  Tent  raised  in  some  open  square. 
Tents  surmounted  with  flags  of  Patrie  en  Danger,  and  topmost 
of  all  a  Pike  and  Bonnet  Rouge ;  and,  on  two  drums  in  front  of 
him,  there  lay  a  plank-table,  and  on  this  an  open  Book,  and  a 
Clerk  sat,  like  re  cording -angel,  ready  to  write  the  lists,  or  as  we 
say  to  enlist !     O,  then,  it  seems,  the  very  gods  might  have  looked 

1  Hist.  Pari.  xvi.  185. 


234        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

down  on  it.  Young  Patriotism,  Culottic  and  Sansculottic,  rushes 
forward  emulous  :  That  is  my  name  ;  name,  blood  and  life  is  all 
my  country's  ;  why  have  I  nothing  more  !  Youths  of  short  stature 
weep  that  they  are  below  size.  Old  men  come  forward,  a  son  in 
each  hand.  Mothers  themselves  will  grant  the  son  of  their 
travail ;  send  him,  though  with  tears.  And  the  multitude  bel- 
lows Vive  la  Patne,  far  reverberating.  And  fire  flashes  in  the 
eyes  of  men ; — and  at  eventide,^  your  Municipal  returns  to  the 
Townhall  followed  by  his  long  train  of  Volunteer  valour  ;  hands- 
in  his  List ;  says  proudly,  looking  round.  This  is  my  day's  harvest.^ 
They  will  march,  on  the  morrow,  to  Soissons  ;  small  bundle  hold- 
ing all  their  chattels. 

So,  with  Vive  la  Patrie,  Vive  la  Liberie,  stone  Paris  reverberates 
like  Ocean  in  his  caves  ;  day  after  day.  Municipals  enlisting  in 
tricolor  Tent  ;  the  Flag  flapping  on  Pont-Neuf  and  Townhall, 
Citoyeiis,  la  Patrie  est  en  Danger.  Some  Ten-thousand  fighters, 
without  discipline  but  full  of  heart,  are  on  march  in  few  days. 
The  like  is  doing  in  every  Town  of  France. — Consider,  therefore, 
whether  the  Country  will  want  defenders,  had  we  but  a  National 
Executive  ?  Let  the  Sections  and  Primary  Assemblies,  at  any 
rate,  become  Permanent !  They  do  become  Permanent,  and  sit 
continually  in  Paris,  and  over  France,  by  Legislative  Decree, 
dated  Wednesday  the  25th.2 

Mark  contrariwise  how,  in  these  very  hours,  dated  the  2.>th, 
Brunswick  '  shakes  himself,  s'ebranle,'  in  Coblentz ;  and  takes  the 

Tluly  nth.] 

'^  Tableau  de  la  R^v.  §  Patrie  en  danger.  [This  second  levy  of  Volunteers  pro- 
duced a  far  inferior  set  of  men  to  that  of  1791,  and  Morris's  strictures  might  indeed 
be  made  to  apply  to  them  [zdd.  supr.,  note  ii.  185).  Many  of  these  men  were  en- 
listed from  the  paid  battalions  of  the  National  Guard,  and  the  most  of  them  only 
took  service  in  order  to  get  the  premium,  and  under  the  influence  of  the  nascent 
terrorism  were,  or  affected  to  be,  rabid  Jacobins.  Two  hundred  and  fifty-six 
battalions  of  Volunteers  had  now  in  all  been  voted,  but  very  few  actually  came  to 
face  the  enemy  before  1793.  The  Legislative  voted  that  their  pay  was  to  be  in 
coin,  whereas  the  Regulars  were  paid  in  Assignats,  except  when  within  twenty 
leagues  of  the  frontier  (Aug.  igth  '92).  It  is  doubtful  if  a  large  levy  of  Volunteers 
would  have  been  at  this  time  of  any  use,  for  the  main  difficulty  was  to  provide  them 
with  arms  ;  hence  Carnot's  motion,  July  25th,  for  the  provision  of  pikes  ;  little  or 
nothing  had  been  done  to  remedy  this  deficiency  by  September,  while  the  "  Volun- 
teers of  '92"  continued  to  hang  about  Paris  and  pretend  to  dig  on  the  fortifica- 
tions.    (See  Carnot,  Corresp.  i.  151 ;  Chuquet,  cap.  ii.  and  infr.,  note  iii.  93.)] 

■'  Moniteur,  Stance  du  25  Juillet  1792. 


SOME  CONSOLATION  TO  MANKIND    235 

road  !  Shakes  himself  indeed  ;  one  spoken  word  becomes  such 
a  shaking.  Successive,  simultaneous  dir/  of  thirty-thousand 
muskets  shouldered;  prance  and  jingle  of  ten-thousand  horse- 
men, fanfaronading  Emigrants  ^  in  the  van ;  drum,  kettledrum  ; 
noise  of  weeping,  swearing ;  and  the  immeasurable  lumbering 
clank  of  baggage-wagons  and  camp-kettles  that  groan  into  motion  : 
all  this  is  Brunswick  shaking  himself;  not  without  all  this  does 
the  one  man  march,  'covering  a  space  of  forty  miles.'  Still  less 
without  his  Manifesto,  dated,  as  we  say,  the  25th  ;  a  State- 
Paper  worthy  of  attention  ! 

By  this  document,  it  would  seem  great  things  are  in  store 
for  France.^  The  universal  French  People  shall  now  have  per- 
mission to  rally  round  Brunswick  and  his  Emigrant  Seigneurs  ; 
tyranny  of  a  Jacobin  Faction  shall  oppress  them  no  more ;  but 
they  shall  return,  and  find  favour  with  their  own  good  King  ; 
who,  by  Royal  Declaration  (three  years  ago)  of  the  Twenty-third 
of  June,  said  that  he  would  himself  make  them  happy.  As  for 
National  Assembly,  and  other  Bodies  of  Men  invested  with 
some  temporary  shadow  of  authority,  they  are  charged  to  maintain 
the  King's  Cities  and  Strong  Places  intact,  till  Brmiswick  arrive 
to  take  delivery  of  them.  Indeed,  quick  submission  may  extenu- 
ate many  things  ;  but  to  this  end  it  must  be  quick.  Any  National 
Guard  or  other  unmilitary  person  found  resisting  in  arms  shall 

1  [The  Army  of  the  Amigrtfs,  which  followed  Brunswick,  called  itself  the  '  Army 
of  the  Centre  '  and  was  commanded  by  Broglie  and  Castries.  Brunswick  crossed  the 
frontier  on  Aug.  19th ;  the  Emigres  ten  days  later.  They  were  ill  armed  and  equipped 
(at  their  own  expense),  and  not  over  well  fed  (at  the  expense  of  the  Allies).  Breteuil, 
who  was  the  confidential  agent  of  the  King,  managed  to  get  Calonne,  who  was  the 
confidential  agent  of  the  Princes,  removed  ;  and  the  Allies  refused  to  recognise  Mon- 
sieur as  '  Regent  of  France.'  The  Prussians  even  refused  permission  to  the  Emigris 
to  visit  their  camp.  Many  stories  have  been  told  of  how  bitterly  the  Emigriis 
resented  the  idea  of  any  dismemberment  of  France,  and  of  the  keen  disappointment 
they  felt  at  the  treatment  they  received  from  the  Allies.] 

'^  [One  is  tempted  to  suspect  that  Brunswick  never  read  his  own  Manifesto.  He 
was  a  man  by  nature  mistrustful  of  himself,  and  he  never  had  his  heart  in  the  war : 
he  knew  the  force  that  France  might  command,  he  loathed  the  I^wigrcs,  yet  he 
allowed  this  manifesto  to  be  issued  in  a  strain  worthy  of  their  threats  rather  than  of 
his  own  prudence.  Mallet  du  Pan  had  reached  headquarters  on  June  12th,  but  no 
one  would  listen  to  him  [vid.  supr.,  ii.  173).  Mallet  learned,  early  in  July,  that  the 
manifesto  was  drawn  up  in  Paris,  and  inspired  both  by  Fersen  and  the  Queen 
(Mallet,  i.  326),  though  the  actual  words  of  it  were  written  by  Geoffroi  de  Limon, 
a  former  hitendant  of  Monsieur  (cf.  Chuquet,  La  Premiere  Invasion  Prussienne 
(Paris,  1887),  p.  148;  Forneron,  i.  344;  Fersen's  Journal,  ii.  332).] 


236        THE  FKENCH  REVOLUTION 

be  '  treated  as  a  traitor  ; '  that  is  to  say,  hanged  with  promptitude. 
For  the  rest,  if  Paris,  before  Brunswick  gets  thither,  offer  any 
insult  to  the  King ;  or,  for  example,  suffer  a  Faction  to  carry  the 
King  away  elsewhither ;  in  that  case,  Paris  shall  be  blasted 
asunder  with  cannon-shot  and  '  military  execution.'  Likewise 
all  other  Cities,  which  may  witness,  and  not  resist  to  the  utter- 
most, such  forced-march  of  his  Majesty,  shall  be  blasted  asunder  ; 
and  Paris  and  every  City  of  them,  starting-place,  course  and  goal 
of  said  sacrilegious  forced -march,  shall,  as  rubbish  and  smoking 
ruin,  lie  there  for  a  sign.  Such  vengeance  were  indeed  signal, 
'  an  insigne  vengeance  : ' — O  Brunswick,  what  words  thou  writest 
and  blusterest!  In  this  Paris,  as  in  old  Nineveh,  are  so  many 
score  thousands  that  know  not  the  right  hand  from  the  left,  and 
also  much  cattle.  Shall  the  very  milk-cows,  hard-living  cadgers'- 
asses,  and  poor  little  canary-birds  die  ? 

Nor  is  Royal  and  Imperial  Prussian-Austrian  Declaration 
wanting :  setting  forth,  in  the  amplest  manner,  their  Sanssouci- 
Schonbrunn  version  of  this  whole  French  Revolution,  since  the 
first  beginning  of  it ;  and  with  what  grief  these  high  heads  have 
seen  such  things  done  under  the  Sun.  However,  'as  some  small 
consolation  to  mankind,'  ^  they  do  now  despatch  Brunswick ; 
regardless  of  expense,  as  one  might  say,  or  of  sacrifices  on  their 
own  part ;  for  is  it  not  the  first  duty  to  console  men  ? 

Serene  Highnesses,  who  sit  there  protocolling  and  manifesto- 
ing,  and  consoling  mankind !  how  were  it  if,  for  once  in  the 
thousand  yeai's,  your  parchments,  formularies  and  reasons  of  state 
were  blown  to  the  four  winds  ;  and  Reality  Sans-indispensables 
stared  you,  even  you,  in  the  face  ;  and  Mankind  said  for  itself 
what  the  thing  was  that  would  console  it  ? — 

CHAPTER  IV 

SUBTERRANEAN 
But  judge  if  there  was  comfort  in  this  to  the  Sections  all  sitting 
permanent ;  deliberating  how  a  National  Executive  could  be  put 
in  action ! 

1  Annual  Register  (1792),  236. 


SUBTEREANEAN  237 

High  rises  the  response,  not  of  cackling  terror  but  of  crowing 
counter-defiance,  and  Five  la  Xatioii  ;  young  Valour  streaming 
towards  the  Frontiers ;  Patrie  en  Danger  mutely  beckoning  on 
the  Pont-Neuf.  Sections  are  busy,  in  their  permanent  Deep  ; 
and  down,  lower  still,  works  unlimited  Patriotism,  seeking 
salvation  in  plot.  Insurrection,  you  would  say,  becomes  once 
more  the  sacredest  of  duties  ?  Committee,  self-chosen,  is 
sitting  at  the  Sign  of  the  Golden  Sun ;  Journalist  Carra,  Camille 
Desmoulins,  Alsatian  Westermann  friend  of  Danton,  American 
Fournier  of  Martinique  ; — a  Committee  not  unknown  to  Mayor 
Petion,  who,  as  an  official  person,  must  sleep  with  one  eye  open. 
Not  unknown  to  Procureur  Manuel ;  least  of  all  to  Procureur-Sub- 
stitute  Danton  !  He,  wrapped  in  darkness,  being  also  official,  bears 
it  on  his  giant  shoulders  ;  cloudy  invisible  Atlas  of  the  whole. 

Much  is  invisible ;  the  very  Jacobins  have  their  reticences. 
Insurrection  is  to  be :  but  when  ?  This  only  we  can  discern, 
that  such  Federes  as  are  not  yet  gone  to  Soissons,  as  indeed  are 
not  inclined  to  go  yet,  "  for  reasons,"  says  the  Jacobin  President, 
"  which  it  may  be  interesting  not  to  state," — have  got  a  Central 
Committee  sitting  close  by,  under  the  roof  of  the  Mother- Society 
herself.  Also,  what  in  such  ferment  and  danger  of  effervescence 
is  surely  proper,  the  Forty-eight  Sections  have  got  their  Central 
Committee  ;  intended  '  for  prompt  communication.'  To  which 
Central  Committee  the  Municipality,  anxious  to  have  it  at  hand, 
could  not  refuse  an  Apartment  in  the  Hotel-de-Ville.^ 

Singular  City  !  For  overhead  of  all  this,  there  is  the  custom- 
ary baking  and  brewing  ;  Labour  hammers  and  grinds.  Frilled 
promenaders  saunter  under  the  trees ;  white-muslin  promen- 
aderess,  in   green  parasol,  leaning  on  your  arm.     Dogs  dance, 

1  [July  20th.  It  was  on  July  20th  that  the  Municipality,  in  answer  to  the  petition 
of  certain  Sections,  convoked,  "  Representatives  of  the  48  sections  "  at  the  Hotel-de- 
Ville,  to  draw  up  addresses.  This  Committee  does  not  seem  to  have  become  perma- 
nent till  Aug.  1st :  but  from  that  time  it  overrode  the  lawful  Municipality  in  every 
way.  Danton  was  not  a  member  of  it,  but  he  no  doubt  used  it,  e.t^.,  to  draw  up  the 
petition  of  Aug.  3rd  for  d^ch^ance.  The  sections  were  by  no  means  unanimous  : 
BibUothi-que,  Arsenal  and  Filles  Saint-Thomas  continually  protested  against  the 
whole  thing  :  and  protests  were  received  from  Sections  Mirabcau.  JanUn  des 
planies,  Henri  IV,  Roi  de  Sidle.  Quinze-Vingts  and  Mauconseil  were  the  most 
violent  against  the  Kmg.  It  was  a  resolution  of  the  former  on  5th  that  ultimately 
fixed  the  date  of  insurrection  for  the  evening  of  9th.  {Vid.  infr.,  ii.  243,  and 
Robiquet,  500,  sqq.)^ 


238         THE  FRENCH  DEVOLUTION 

and  shoeblacks  polish,  on  that  Pont-Neuf  itself,  where  Father- 
land is  in  danger.  So  much  goes  its  course  ;  and  yet  the  course 
of  all  things  is  nigh  altering  and  ending. 

Look  at  that  Tuileries  and  Tuileries  Garden.  Silent  all  as 
Sahara ;  none  entering  save  by  ticket !  They  shut  their  Gates, 
after  the  Day  of  the  Black  Breeches ;  a  thing  they  had  the 
liberty  to  do.  However,  the  National  Assembly  grumbled 
something  about  Terrace  of  the  Feuillants,  how  said  Terrace 
lay  contiguous  to  the  back-enti*ance  to  their  Salle,  and  was 
partly  National  Property ;  and  so  now  National  Justice  has 
stretched  a  Tricolor  Riband  athwart  it,  by  way  of  boundary- 
line  ;  respected  with  splenetic  strictness  by  all  Patriots.  It 
hangs  there  that  Tricolor  boundary-line ;  carries  '  satirical  in- 
scriptions on  cards,'  generally  in  verse  ;  and  all  beyond  this  is 
called  Cohlcnlz,  and  remains  vacant ;  silent  as  a  fateful  Golgotha  ; 
sunshine  and  umbrage  alternating  on  it  in  vain.  Fateful  Circuit  : 
what  hope  can  dwell  in  it  ?  Mysterious  Tickets  of  Entry 
introduce  themselves ;  speak  of  Insurrection  very  imminent. 
Rivarol's  Staff  of  Genius  had  better  purchase  blunderbusses ; 
Grenadier  bonnets,  red  Swiss  uniforms  may  be  useful.  Insurrec- 
tion will  come  ;  but  likewise  will  it  not  be  met .''  Staved  off, 
one  may  hope,  till  Brunswick  arrive  .'' 

But  consider  withal  if  the  Bourne-stones  and  Portable-chairs 
remain  silent ;  if  the  Hei'ald's  College  of  Bill-Stickers  sleep  ! 
Louvet's  Sentinel  warns  gratis  on  all  walls  ;  Sulleau  is  busy ; 
People' s-Fticnd  Marat  and  Kings-Friend  Royou  croak  and  counter- 
croak.  For  the  man  Marat,  though  long  hidden  since  that 
Champ-de-Mars  Massacre,  is  still  alive.  He  has  lain,  who  knows 
in  what  cellars ;  perhaps  in  Legendre's ;  fed  by  a  steak  of 
Legendre's  killing  :  but,  since  April,  the  bull-frog  voice  of  him 
sounds  again  ;  hoarsest  of  earthly  cries.  For  the  present,  black 
terror  haunts  him :  O  brave  Barbaroux,  wilt  thou  not  smuggle 
me  to   Marseilles,   'disguised  as  a  jockey.'''^     In   Palais- Royal 

iiBarbaroux,  p.  60.  [It  is  very  difficult  to  get  any  trustworthy  evidence  as  to 
the  tradition  so  industriously  propagated  by  Marat  himself  as  to  his  "hiding  in 
the  sewers."  Legendre  (quoted  by  Bougeart,  i.  287)  says  that  for  two  years  he 
continually  hid  in  his  (Legendre's)  cellars.     The  Oraison  Funebre  on  Marat  (Aug. 


SUBTERRANEAN  239 

and  all  public  places,  as  we  read,  there  is  sharp  activity ;  private 
individuals  haranguing  that  Valour  may  enlist ;  haranguing  that 
the  Executive  may  be  put  in  action.  Royalist  Journals  ought 
to  be  solemnly  burnt :  ai'gument  thereupon ;  debates,  which 
generally  end  in  single-stick,  coups  de  cannes.^  Or  think  of  this  ; 
the  hour  midnight ;  place  Salle  de  Manege ;  august  Assembly 
just  adjourning  ;  '  Citizens  of  both  sexes  enter  in  a  rush,  ex- 
claiming, Feiigeance  ;  theif  arc  poisoning  our  Brothers  ;  ' — baking 
brayed-glass  among  their  bread  at  Soissons  !  ^  Vergniaud  has  to 
speak  soothing  words.  How  Commissioners  are  already  sent  to 
investigate  this  brayed-glass,  and  do  what  is  needful  therein ; — 
till  the  rush  of  citizens  '  makes  profound  silence  ; '  and  goes 
home  to  its  bed. 

Such  is  Paris  ;  the  heart  of  a  France  like  to  it.  Preternatural 
suspicion,  doubt,  disquietude,  nameless  anticipation,  from  shore 
to  shore : — and  those  blackbrowed  Marseillese  marching,  dusty, 
unwearied,  through  the  midst  of  it ;  not  doubtful  they.  Marching 
to  the  grim  music  of  their  hearts,  they  consume  continually  the 
long  road,  these  three  weeks  and  more ;  heralded  by  Terror 
and  Rumour.     The  Brest  Federes  ^  arrive  on  the  26th  ;  through 

8th  '93)  says  that  he  took  refuge  from  Lafayette  underground  in  the  stonepits  of 
Montmartre.  The  engraver  Marquet,  the  renegade  priest  Jacques  Roux,  and  the 
family  of  Marat's  mistress  Simonne  Evrard  also  claimed  the  honour  of  sheltering  him 
in  '90—91  (Chevremont,  i.  288-9).  But  none  of  the  witnesses  quoted  by  Bougeart 
or  Chevremont  are  in  the  least  trustworthy,  and  practically  all  we  know  of  Marat's 
life  up  to  the  Aug.  loth  rests  upon  his  own  words  in  Ami  du  pen  pie.  And  it  is 
practically  certain  that  Marat  was  not  more  distinguished  even  as  an  agent  of 
murder,  than  he  was  as  a  liar.  As  for  the  passage  in  Barbaroux  here  referred  to, 
Barbaroux's  Memoirs  have  been  much  'cooked,'  but  there  is  nothing  improbable 
in  the  idea.  There  was  fighting  on  Aug.  loth  and  a  good  many  '  patriots  '  were 
hurt  badly.  Marat,  who  had  no  objection  to  bloodshed  in  the  case  of  others,  felt 
it  very  strongly  when  the  blood  might  be  his  own  :  but  he  was  almost  certainly  irj 
the  Town  Hall  on  the  night  of  9th — loth.     (See  Robiquet,  504-10.)] 

1  Newspapers,  Narratives,  and  Documents  (Hist.  Pari.  xv.  240 ;  xvi.  399). 

'^[The  church  of  Saint-Jean  des  Vignes  at  Soissons  had  been  used  as  a  bakehouse 
for  the  troops  in  camp  there  :  a  boy  broke  a  window  with  a  stone,  and  some  of  the 
glass  fell  from  the  window  into  some  dough,  and  was  found  there.  (See  Carnot, 
Corresp.  Gdn.  i.  11.)] 

^[The  Brest  Federh  did  not  arrive  all  at  once,  some  had  been  arriving  since 
July  14th  ;  they  were  despatched  distinctly  under  the  impression  that  they  were  to 
form  part  of  the  '  Camp  of  20,000'  (in  spite  of  the  Veto,  of  which  the  Departmental 
authorities  of  Finisterre  made  very  light).  Once  in  Paris  they  found  themselves 
under  influences  very  different  from  those  under  which  they  had  started.  (See  R^v. 
Fr.  xxxiii.  445.)] 


240        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

hurrahing  streets.  Determined  men  are  these  also,  bearing  or 
not  bearing  the  Sacred  Pikes  of  Chjxteau-Vieux ;  and  on  the 
whole  decidedly  disinclined  for  Soissons  as  yet.  Surely  the 
Marseillese  Brethren  do  draw  nigher  all  days. 

CHAPTER  V 

AT  DINNER 

It  was  a  bright  day  for  Charenton,  that  29th  of  the  month,  when 
the  Marseillese  Brethren  actually  came  in  sight.  Barbaroux, 
Santerre  and  Patriots  have  gone  out  to  meet  the  grim  Way- 
farers. Patriot  clasps  dusty  Patriot  to  his  bosom ;  there  is 
footwashing  and  refection :  '  dinner  of  twelve-hundred  covers  at 
the  Blue  Dial,  Cadran  Bleu ; '  and  deep  interior  consultation, 
that  one  wots  not  of.^  Consultation  indeed  Avhich  comes  to 
little ;  for  Santerre,  with  an  open  purse,  with  a  loud  voice,  has 
almost  no  head.  Here,  however,  we  repose  this  night :  on  the 
morrow  is  public  entry  into  Paris.- 

Of  which  public  entry  the  Day-Historians,  Diurnalists,  or 
Journalists,  as  they  call  themselves,  have  preserved  record  enough. 
How  Saint-Antoine  male  and  female,  and  Paris  generally,  gave 
brotherly  welcome,  with  bravo  and  hand- clapping,  in  crowded 
streets  ;  and  all  passed  in  the  peaceablest  manner ; — except  it 
might  be  our  Marseillese  pointed  out  here  and  there  a  riband- 
cockade,  and  beckoned  that  it  should  be  snatched  away,  and 
exchanged  for  a  wool  one  ;  which  was  done.  How  the  Mother- 
Society  in  a  body  has  come  as  far  as  the  Bastille-ground,  to 
embrace  you.  How  you  then  wend  onwards,  triumphant,  to  the 
Townhall,  to  be  embraced  by  Mayor  Petion ;  to  put  down  your 
muskets  in  the  Barracks  of  Nouvelle  France,  not  far  off ; — then 
towards  the  appointed  Tavern  in  the  Champs  Elysees,  to  enjoy 
a  frugal  Patriot  repast."* 

'  Deux  Amis,  viii.  go-ioi. 

2 [Barbaroux,  who  met  them,  had  drawn  up,  with  Bourdon,  Heron  and  Foamier, 
the  plan  of  an  immediate  advance  on  the  Tuileries.  This  was  deferred  for  the 
reasons  given  above  {vid.  stipr.,  note  ii.  231).] 

'Hist.  Pari.  xvi.  196.     See  Barbaroux,  pp.  51-5. 


AT  DINNER  241 

Of  all  which  the  indignant  Tuileries  may,  by  its  Tickets  of 
Entry,  have  warning.  Red  Swiss  look  doubly  sharp  to  their 
Chateau-Grates ; — though  surely  there  is  no  danger  ?  Blue 
Grenadiers  of  the  Filles-Saint-Thomas  Section  are  on  duty  there 
this  day :  men  of  Agio,  as  we  have  seen ;  with  stuffed  purses, 
riband-cockades  ;  among  whom  serves  Weber.  A  party  of  these 
latter,  with  Captains,  with  sundry  Feuillant  Notabilities,  Moreau 
de  Saint-Mery  of  the  three-thousand  orders,  and  others,  have 
been  dining,  much  more  respectably,  in  a  Tavern  hard  by.  They 
have  dined,  and  are  now  drinking  Loyal-Patriotic  toasts ;  while 
the  Marseillese,  Nationa  1-Pa.triotic  merely,  are  about  sitting 
do^vn  to  their  frugal  covers  of  delf  How  it  happened  remains 
to  this  day  undemonstrable  ;  but  the  external  fact  is,  certain  of 
these  Filles-Saint-Thomas  Grenadiers  do  issue  from  their  Tavern  ; 
perhaps  touched,  surely  not  yet  muddled  with  any  liquor  they 
have  had ; — issue  in  the  professed  intention  of  testifying  to 
the  Marseillese,  or  to  the  multitude  of  Paris  Patriots  who  stroll 
in  these  spaces,  That  they,  the  Filles-Saint-Thomas  men,^  if  well 
seen  into,  are  not  a  whit  less  Patriotic  than  any  other  class  of 
men  whatever. 

It  was  a  rash  errand !  For  how  can  the  strolling  multitude 
credit  such  a  thing  ;  or  do  other  indeed  than  hoot  at  it,  provok- 
ing and  provoked  ? — till  Grenadier  sabres  stir  in  the  scabbard, 
and  thereupon  a  sharp  shriek  arises :  "  A  nous,  Marseillais,  Help, 
Marseillese ! "  Quick  as  lightning,  for  the  frugal  repast  is  not 
yet  served,  that  Marseillese  Tavern  flings  itself  open :  by  door, 
by  window ;  running,  bounding,  vault  forth  the  Five-hundred 
and  Seventeen  undined  Patriots  ;  and,  sabre  flashing  from  thigh, 
are  on  the  scene  of  controversy.  Will  ye  parley,  ye  Grenadier 
Captains  and  Oflicial  Persons;  'with  faces  grown  suddenly 
pale,'  the  Deponents  say  }  ^  Advisabler  were  instant  moderately 
swift  retreat !    The  Filles-Saint-Thomas  men  retreat,  back  fore- 

^  [Mortimer-Ternaux  (ii.  151)  quotes  the  minutesof  the  Section- Assembly  of /"iV/M- 
St.  Thomas  to  the  effect  that  "  the  National  Guard  is  in  arms  and  will  not  lay  them 
"down  till  it  has  delivered  the  Capital  from  this  violent  horde,  who  menace  the 
"  citizens  in  their  persons  and  properties."] 

^Moniteur,  Stances  du  30,  du  31  Juillet  1792  (Hist.  Pari.  xvi.  197-210). 
VOL.    II.  16 


242        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

most ;  then,  alas,  face  foremost,  at  treble-quick  time ;  the 
Marseillese,  according  to  a  Deponent,  "  clearing  the  fences  and 
ditches  after  them,  like  lions :  Messieurs,  it  was  an  imposing 
spectacle." 

Thus  they  retreat,  the  Marseillese  following.  Swift  and 
swifter,  towards  the  Tuileries  :  where  the  Drawbridge  receives 
the  bulk  of  the  fugitives ;  and,  then  suddenly  drawn  up,  saves 
them ;  or  else  the  green  mud  of  the  Ditch  does  it.  The  bulk 
of  them  ;  not  all  ;  ah,  no  !  Moreau  de  Saint-Mery,  for  example, 
being  too  fat,  could  not  fly  fast ;  he  got  a  stroke,  flat-stroke 
only,  over  the  shoulder-blades,  and  fell  prone  ; — and  disappears 
there  from  the  History  of  the  Revolution.  Cuts  also  there 
were,  pricks  in  the  posterior  fleshy  parts  ;  much  rending  of 
skirts,  and  other  discrepant  waste.  But  poor  Sub-lieutenant 
Duhamel,  innocent  Change-broker,  what  a  lot  for  him !  He 
turned  on  his  pursuer,  or  pursuers,  with  a  pistol ;  he  fired  and 
missed ;  drew  a  second  pistol,  and  again  fired  and  missed ;  then 
ran :  unhappily  in  vain.  In  the  Rue  Saint-Florentin,  they 
clutched  him  ;  thrust  him  through,  in  red  rage  :  that  was  the 
end  of  the  New  Era,  and  of  all  Eras,  to  poor  Duhamel. 

Pacific  readers  can  fancy  what  sort  of  grace-before-meat  this 
was  to  frugal  Patriotism.  Also  how  the  Battalion  of  the  Filles- 
Saint-Thomas  '  drew  out  in  arms,'  luckily  without  further  result ; 
how  there  was  accusation  at  the  Bar  of  the  Assembly,  and 
counter-accusation  and  defence ;  Marseillese  challenging  the 
sentence  of  a  free  jury-court, — which  never  got  empanneled. 
We  ask  rather.  What  the  upshot  of  all  these  distracted  wildly 
accumulating  things  may,  by  probability,  be .''  Some  upshot ; 
and  the  time  draws  nigh  !  Busy  are  Central  Committees,  of 
Federes  at  the  Jacobins  Church,  of  Sections  at  the  Townhall ; 
Reunion  of  Carra,  Camille  and  Company  at  the  Golden  Sun. 
Busy ;  like  submarine  deities,  or  call  them  mud-gods,  working 
there  in  deep  murk  of  waters  ;  till  the  thing  be  ready. 

And  how  your  National  Assembly,  like  a  ship  water-logged, 
helmless,  lies  tumbling  ;  the  Galleries,  of  shrill  Women,  of 
Federes  with  sabres,  bellowing  down  on  it,  not  unfrightful ; — 


AT  DINNER  243 

and  waits  where  the  waves  of  chance  may  please  to  strand  it ; 
suspicious,  nay  on  the  Left-side,  conscious,  what  submarine 
Explosion  is  meanwhile  a-charging !  Petition  for  King's  For- 
feiture rises  often  there :  Petition  from  Paris  Section,  from  Pro- 
vincial Patriot  Towns  ;  '  from  Alen9on,  Brian^on,  and  the  Traders 
at  the  Fair  of  Beaucaire.'  Or  what  of  these  ?  On  the  .Srd  of 
August,  Mayor  Petion  and  the  Municipality  come  petitioning  for 
Forfeiture  :  they  openly,  in  their  tricolor  Municipal  scarfs.  For- 
feiture is  what  all  Patriots  now  want  and  expect.  All  Brissotins 
want  Forfeiture ;  with  the  little  Prince  Royal  for  King,  and  us 
for  Protector  over  him.  Emphatic  Federes  ask  the  Legislature  : 
"  Can  you  save  us,  or  not  ?  "  Forty-seven  Sections  ^  have  agreed 
to  Forfeiture  ;  only  that  of  the  Filles-Saint-Thomas  pretending 
to  disagree.-  Nay  Section  Mauconseil  declares  Forfeiture  to  be, 
properly  speaking,  come  ;  Mauconseil,  for  one,  '  does  from  this 
day,'  the  last  of  July,  '  cease  allegiance  to  Louis,'  and  take  minute 
of  the  same  before  all  men.  A  thing  blamed  aloud  ;  but  which 
will  be  praised  aloud  ;  and  the  name  Mauconseil,  of  Ill-counsel, 
be  thenceforth  changed  to  Bonconseil,  of  Good-counsel. 

President  Danton,  in  the  Cordeliers  Section,  does  another 
thing :  invites  all  Passive  Citizens  to  take  place  among  the 
Active  in  Section-business,  one  peril  threatening  all.  Thus  he, 
though  an  official  person  ;  cloudy  Atlas  of  the  whole.  Likewise 
he  manages  to  have  that  blackbrowed  Battalion  of  Marseillese 
shifted  to  new  Barracks,  in  his  own  region  of  the  remote  South- 
east. Sleek  Chaumette,  cruel  Billaud,  Deputy  Chabot  the  Dis- 
frocked, Huguenin  with  the  tocsin  in  his  heart,  will  welcome 
them  there.  Wherefore,  again  and  again  :  "  O  Legislators,  can 
you  save  us  or  not  ?  "  Poor  Legislators  ;  with  their  Legislature 
water-logged,  volcanic  Explosion  charging  under  it !  Forfeiture 
shall  be  debated  on  the  ninth  of  August ;  that  miserable  business 
of  Lafayette  may  be  expected  to  terminate  on  the  eighth. 

Or  will  the  humane  Reader  glance  into  the  Levee-day  of  Sun- 

1  [The  statement  that  '  47  sections  agreed  to  forfeiture '  rests  upon  Carra's 
Annales  Patriotiques  of  Aug.  29th.  For  the  protesting  sections,  vid.  supr,,  note 
ii.  237.] 

2 [July  31st.] 


244        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

day  the  fifth?  The  last  Levee!  Not  for  a  long  time,  'never,' 
says  Bertrand-Moleville,  had  a  Levee  been  so  brilliant,  at  least  so 
crowded.  A  sad  presaging  interest  sat  on  every  face  ;  Bertrand's 
own  eyes  were  filled  with  tears.  For,  indeed,  outside  of  that 
Tricolor  Riband  on  the  Feuillants  Terrace,  Legislature  is  de- 
bating, Sections  are  defiling,  all  Paris  is  astir  this  very  Sunday, 
demanding  Decheance.^  Here,  however,  within  the  riband,  a 
grand  proposal  is  on  foot,  for  the  hundredth  time,  of  carrying  his 
Majesty  to  Rouen  and  the  Castle  of  Gaillon.  Swiss  at  Courbevoye 
are  in  readiness  ;  much  is  ready  ;  Majesty  himself  seems  almost 
ready.  Nevertheless,  for  the  hundredth  time.  Majesty,  when 
near  the  point  of  action,  draws  back  ;  writes,  after  one  has  waited, 
palpitating,  an  endless  summer  day,  that  '  he  has  reason  to  believe 
the  Insurrection  is  not  so  ripe  as  you  suppose.'  Whereat  Bertrand- 
Moleville  breaks  forth  'into  extremity  at  once  of  spleen  and 
despair,  d'humeiir  et  de  desespoir.'  ^ 

CHAPTER  VI 

THE  STEEPLES  AT  MIDNIGHT 

For,  in  truth,  the  Insurrection  is  just  about  ripe.  Thursday  is 
the  ninth  of  the  month  August :  if  Forfeiture  be  not  pronounced 
by  the  Legislature  that  day,  we  must  pronounce  it  ourselves. 

iHist,  Pari.  xvi.  337-9. 

2  Bertrand-Moleville,  M^moires,  ii.  129.  [A  good  account  of  the  last  days  of  the 
Monarchy  is  given  by  Bigot  de  Sainte-Croix  in  his  '  Hist,  de  la  Conspiration  du  10 
Aout,'  which  was  printed  in  London,  Jan.  '93,  shortly  after  its  author's  escape. 
There  was  a  very  had  alarm  on  4th — 5th.  The  proposal  to  get  the  King  away  took 
definite  shape  and  was  rejected  on  6th  (the  day  on  which  Varlet's  petition  for  his 
deposition  was  presented  to  the  Assembly  and  well  received).  The  Swiss  were 
already  on  the  Paris  side  of  Courbevoie,  to  cover  the  King's  flight.  When  this  failed 
the  only  thmg  was  to  collect  some  sort  of  army  for  defence.  This  was  under- 
taken by  Terrier  de  Monciel  and  Br^mond.  Petion  however  had  done  everything 
he  could  to  hinder  the  defence,  e.g. ,  by  changing  the  National  Guard  at  the  Chdteaii 
each  day.  Morris  (i.  558)  tells  how  he  was  entrusted  by  the  King  with  the  task  of 
hiring  extra  defenders.  The  King  deposited  with  Morris  547,000  livr.  in  Assignats, 
with  which  Morris  bought  5,000  touis  d'or,  and  hired  a  certain  number  of  men,  pay- 
ment to  follow  on  action  only.  .\s  late  as  Aug.  ist  Morris  thinks  the  Radicals  will 
not  have  it  all  their  own  way,  for  he  writes  to  Jefferson  that  some  of  them  have 
made  their  plans  for  escape  to  America,  in  case  the  attack  fails.  Morris  went 
to  Court  on  9th,  and  found  nothing  remarkable  except  that  the  Royal  Family  had 
been  up  all  night,  expecting  to  be  murdered.  He  afterwards  spent  much  of  the 
King's  money  in  helping  compromised  Royalists  to  escape.] 


THE  STEEPLES  AT  MIDNIGHT      245 

Legislature  ?  A  poor  water-logged  Legislature  can  pronounce 
nothing.  On  Wednesday  the  eighth,  after  endless  oratory  once 
again,  they  cannot  even  pronounce  Accusation  against  Lafayette  ; 
but  absolve  him, — hear  it.  Patriotism  ! — by  a  majority  of  two  to 
one.i  Patriotism  hears  it ;  Patriotism,  hounded  on  by  Prussian 
Terror,  by  Preternatural  Suspicion,  roars  tumultuous  round  the 
Salle  de  Manege,  all  day ;  insults  many  leading  Deputies,  of  the 
absolvent  Right-side  ;  nay  chases  them,  collars  them  with  loud 
menace :  Deputy  Vaublanc,  and  others  of  the  like,  are  glad  to 
take  refuge  in  Guardhouses,  and  escape  by  the  back  window.'^ 
And  so,  next  day,  there  is  infinite  complaint ;  Letter  after  Letter 
from  insulted  Deputy  ;  mere  complaint,  debate  and  self-cancelling 
jargon  :  the  sun  of  Thursday  sets  like  the  others,  and  no  For- 
feiture pronounced.     Wherefore  in  fine.  To  your  tents,  O  Israel ! 

The  Mother-Society  ceases  speaking  ;  groups  cease  haranguing  : 
Patriots,  with  closed  lips  now,  '  take  one  another's  arm  ; '  walk  off, 
in  rows,  two  and  two,  at  a  brisk  business-pace  ;  and  vanish  afar 
in  the  obscure  places  of  the  East.^  Santerre  is  ready  ;  or  we  will 
make  him  ready.^  Forty-seven  of  the  Forty-eight  Sections  are 
ready  ;  nay,  Filles-Saint-Thomas  itself  turns  up  the  Jacobin  side 
of  it,  turns  down  the  Feuillant  side  of  it,  and  is  ready  too.  Let 
the  unlimited  Patriot  look  to  his  weapon,  be  it  pike,  be  it  fire- 
lock ;  and  the  Brest  brethren, — above  all,  the  blackbrowed 
Marseillese  prepare  themselves  for  the  extreme  hour !  Syndic 
Roederer  knows,  and  laments  or  not  as  the  issue  may  turn,^  that 

1  [By  406  to  224.  Brissot  spoke  furiously  against  him  :  all  those  who  had  voted 
for  his  acquittal  were  insulted  or  maltreated,  as  they  left  the  Hall.  {Cf.  Roederer, 
Chronique  de  Cinquante  Jours  (Paris,  1832),  p.  346,  sqq.)\ 

2  [Apparently  the  quotation  is  taken  from  the  passage  in  Deux  Amis  cited  below. 
Deux  Amis  (in  loc.  cit. )  says  it  was  Dumolard  and  Fournier  who  took  refuge  in  the 
guardhouse  :  Vaublanc  merely  remained  away  from  his  house,  being  warned  that 
he  would  not  be  safe  there.] 

'Deux  Amis,  viii.  129-88  (144). 

*  [Santerre  was  actually  nominated  Commander  of  the  National  Guard  by  the 
Commune  before  Mandat's  murder  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  ii.  225).] 

5  [There  is  no  evidence  to  warrant  this  accusation  against  Rcederer  :  it  is  evident 
from  his  book  that  he  was  a  timid  man  with  a  horror  of  bloodshed  and  a  devoted 
believer  in  sticking  to  the  letter  of  the  Constitution :  also  that  he  mistrusted  the 
King's  intentions  as  regards  the  advent  of  the  Allies  {cf.  Roederer,  bk.  iv.  caps. 
2-3)0 


246        THE  FKENCH  REVOLUTION 

'five-thousand  ball-cartridges,  within  these  few  days,  have  been 
distributed  to  Federes,  at  the  H6tel-de-Ville.'  ^ 

And  ye  likewise,  gallant  gentlemen,  defenders  of  Royalty, 
crowd  ye  on  your  side  to  the  Tuileries.'^  Not  to  a  Levee  :  no, 
to  a  Couchee  ;  where  much  will  be  put  to  bed.  Your  Tickets  of 
Entry  are  needful ;  needfuller  your  blunderbusses  ! — They  come 
and  crowd,  like  gallant  men  who  also  know  how  to  die  :  old 
Maille  the  Camp-Marshal  has  come,  his  eyes  gleaming  once 
again,  though  dimmed  by  the  rheum  of  almost  fourscore  years. 
Courage,  Brothers  !  We  have  a  thousand  red  Swiss  ;  men  stanch 
of  heart,  stedfast  as  the  granite  of  their  Alps.  National  Grena- 
diers are  at  least  friends  of  Order  ;  Commandant  Mandat  ^  breathes 
loyal  ardour,  will  "answer  for  it  on  his  head."  Mandat  will,  and 
his  Staff;  for  the  Staif,  though  there  stands  a  doom  and  Decree 
to  that  eflFect,  is  happily  never  yet  dissolved. 

Commandant  Mandat  has  corresponded  with  Mayor  Petion  ; 
carries  a  written  Order  from  him  these  three  days,  to  repel  force 
by  force.  A  squadron  on  the  Pont-Neuf  with  cannon  shall  turn 
back  these  Marseillese  coming  across  the  River :  a  squadron  at 
the  Townhall  shall  cut  Saint- Antoine  in  two,  'as  it  issues  from 
the  Arcade  Saint-Jean  ; '  drive  one  half  back  to  the  obscure  East, 
drive  the  other  half  forward  '  through  the  Wickets  of  the  Louvre.' 
Squadrons  not  a  few,  and  mounted  squadrons  ;  squadrons  in  the 
Palais- Royal,  in  the  Place  Vendome :  all  these  shall  charge,  at 

1  Roederer  a  la  Barre  (Stance  du  g  Aout,  in  Hist.  Pari.  .xvi.  393). 

'^  [The  total  number  of  defenders  collected  on  9th  at  the  Chateau  was  accord- 
ing to  Sainte-Croix  (p.  28)  from  1,500  to  1,800  ;  he  puts  the  Swiss  at  800,  but  they 
werereally  950  with  30  cartridges  each  (Mortimer-Ternau.x,  ii.  183-283).  But  it  is  pro- 
bable that  during  the  night  a  considerable  number  of  loyal  National  Guards  rallied  ; 
and  the  whole  defence  may  be  put  at  about  2,500.  Sainte-Croi.x  thinks  that  if  the  attack 
had  been  made  at  night,  it  would  have  been  easier  to  resist.  But  cartridges  were 
absolutely  lacking,  whereas,  ever  since  the  sth,  Panis,  a  member  of  the  Municipality, 
had  been  issuing  cartridges  to  the  Radical  Sections,  in  great  quantities,  with  Petion's 
sanction.] 

^  [Mandat  (a  former  Captain  in  the  Gardes  Ffatifaiscs)  had  just  succeeded  by 
rotation  to  the  Command  of  the  National  Guard,  and,  while  organising  the  defence 
of  the  Chateau,  he  had  also  to  defend  its  approaches,  and  assure  as  far  as  possible 
the  peace  of  the  city.  He  sent  orders  to  every  Section,  but  his  orders  were  simply 
laughed  at  by  those  Sections  which  were  at  the  call  of  the  leaders  of  the  Insurrec- 
tion. He  collected  about  900  horse  to  bar  the  approaches  to  the  Tuileries,  but 
found  they  were  not  really  much  to  be  depended  upon.  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  ii. 
331  and  236.)] 


THE  STEEPLES  AT  MIDNIGHT      247 

the  right  moment ;  sweep  this  street,  and  then  sweep  that.  Some 
new  Twentieth  of  June  we  shall  have  ;  only  still  more  ineffectual? 
Or  probably  the  Insurrection  will  not  dare  to  rise  at  all  ? 
Mandat's  Squadrons,  Horse-Gendarmerie  and  blue  Guards  march, 
clattering,  tramping ;  Mandat's  Cannoneers  rumble.  Under  cloud 
of  night ;  to  the  sound  of  his  ginerale,  which  begins  drumming 
when  men  should  go  to  bed.  It  is  the  9th  night  of  August  1 792. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Forty-eight  Sections  correspond  by 
swift  messengers  ;  are  choosing  each  their  '  three  Delegates  with 
full  powers.'  Syndic  Roederer,  Mayor  Petion  are  sent  for  to  the 
Tuileries  :  courageous  Legislators,  when  the  drum  beats  danger, 
should  repair  to  their  Salle.  Demoiselle  Theroigne  has  on  her 
grenadier-bonnet,  short-skirted  riding-habit ;  two  pistols  garnish 
her  small  waist,  and  sabre  hangs  in  baldric  by  her  side. 

Such  a  game  is  playing  in  this  Paris  Pandemonium,  or  City  of 
All  the  Devils  ! — And  yet  the  Night,  as  Mayor  Petion  walks  here 
in  the  Tuileries  Garden,  '  is  beautiful  and  calm ; '  Orion  and  the 
Pleiades  glitter  down  quite  serene.  Petion  has  come  forth,  the 
'  heat '  inside  was  so  oppressive.^  Indeed,  his  Majesty's  reception 
of  him  was  of  the  roughest ;  as  it  might  well  be.^  And  now  there 
is  no  outgate ;  Mandat's  blue  Squadrons  turn  you  back  at  every 
Grate  ;  nay  the  Filles-Saint-Thomas  Grenadiers  give  themselves 
liberties  of  tongue.  How  a  virtuous  Mayor  '  shall  pay  for  it,  if 
there  be  mischief,'  and  the  like  ;  though  others  again  are  full  of 
civility.  Surely  if  any  man  in  France  is  in  straits  this  night,  it  is 
Mayor  Petion  :  bound,  under  pain  of  death,  one  may  say,  to  smile 
dexterously  with  the  one  side  of  his  face,  and  weep  with  the 
other  ; — death  if  he  do  it  not  dexterously  enough  !  Not  till  four 
in  the  morning  does  a  National  Assembly,  hearing  of  his  plight, 
summon  him  over  '  to  give  account  of  Paris  ; '  of  which  he  knows 

1  Roederer,  Chronique  de  Cinquante  Jours  ;  Rdcit  de  Petion  ;  Townhall  Records, 
&c.  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xvi.  399-466). 

-[Petion  went  to  the  Chateau  at  11  P.M.  His  interview  with  the  King  was  con- 
fined to  two  sentences,  and  he  then  went  out.  At  the  gate  of  the  Chateau  he  found 
Mandat,  who  blamed  him  for  having  withheld  cartridges  from  the  loyal  Sections, 
while  distributing  them  to  the  Radical  Sections  and  Marselllais.  (Rev.  de  la  Re^v. 
iii,  ii.  2  ;  Roederer,  352.  )J 


248        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

nothing :  whereby,  however,  he  shall  get  home  to  bed,  and  only 
his  gilt  coach  be  left.  Scarcely  less  delicate  is  Syndic  Roederer's 
task  ;  who  must  wait  whether  he  will  lament  or  not,  till  he  see 
the  issue.^  Janus  Bifrons,  or  Mr.  Facing-both-ivays,  as  vernacular 
Bunyan  has  it !  They  walk  there,  in  the  meanwhile,  these  two 
Januses,  with  others  of  the  like  double  conformation  ;  and  '  talk 
of  indifferent  matters.' 

Roederer,  fi'om  time  to  time,  steps  in  ;  to  listen,  to  speak  ;  to 
send  for  the  Department-Directory  itself,  he  their  Procureur 
Syndic  not  seeing  how  to  act.  The  Apartments  are  all  crowded  ; 
some  seven-hundred  gentlemen  in  black  elbowing,  bustling ;  red 
Swiss  standing  like  rocks  ;  ghost,  or  partial-ghost  of  a  Ministry, 
with  Roederer  and  advisers,  hovering  round  their  Majesties  ;  old 
Marshal  Maille  kneeling  at  the  King's  feet  to  say.  He  and  these 
gallant  gentlemen  are  come  to  die  for  him.  List !  through  the 
placid  midnight  ;  clang  of  the  distant  stormbell  !  So,  in  very 
sooth  :  steeple  after  steeple  takes  up  the  wondrous  tale.  Black 
Courtiers  listen  at  the  windows,  opened  for  air  ;  discriminate  the 
steeple-bells  :  ^  this  is  the  tocsin  of  Saint- Roch  ;  that  again,  is  it 
not  Saint-Jacques,  named  de  la  Boiicherie  ?  Yes,  Messieurs  !  Or 
even  Saint-Germain  1' Auxerrois,  hear  ye  if  not  ?  The  same  metal 
that  rang  storm,  two  hundred  and  twenty  years  ago  ;  but  by  a 
Majesty's  order  then  ;  on  Saint  Bartholomew's  Eve  !  ^ — So  go 
the  steeple-bells ;  which  Courtiers  can  discriminate.  Nay,  me- 
seems,  there  is  the  Townhall  itself;  we  know  it  by  its  sound  ! 
Yes,  Friends,  that  is  the  Townhall  ;  discoursing  so,  to  the  Night. 
Miraculously  ;  by  miraculous  metal-tongue  and  man's-arm  :  Marat 
himself,  if  he  knew  it,  is  pulling  at  the  rope  there  !  Marat  is 
pulhng  ;  Robespierre  lies  deep,*  invisible  for  the  next  forty  hours  ; 

'  [Again  there  is  no  evidence  for  this  charge  against  Roederer  :  but  it  is  not  un- 
natural that  Carlyle  should  take  the  Syndic's  own  naive  confessions  of  hesitation 
for  a  desire  to  be  on  the  winning  side.] 

2  Roederer,  u6i  supra.  [He  says  it  was  at  about  12.45  A.M.  that  the  tocsins  were 
first  heard  (p.  356).] 

^August  24ih  1572.     [7-^?(/.  infr.,  note  on  p.  319.] 

•"  [Not  proved  :  the  charge  rests  upon  the  accusation  of  Vergniaud  in  his  speech 
of  April  loth  1793,  ^"d  has  been  repeated  by  Michaud  in  the  Biographic  Uni- 
verselle  :  Vergniaud's  words  are,  "  who  was  lying  prudently  hidden  in  a  cellar  ;  " 
but  Robespierre  was  almost  certainly  at  the  Town  Hall  for  some  part  of  the  night.] 


THE  STEEPLES  AT  MIDNIGHT      249 

and  some  men  have  heart,  and  some  have  as  good  as  none,  and 
not  even  frenzy  will  give  them  any. 

What  struggling  confusion,  as  the  issue  slowly  draws  on ;  and 
the  doubtful  Hour,  with  pain  and  blind  struggle,  brings  forth  its 
Certainty,  never  to  be  abolished ! — The  Full-power  Delegates, 
three  from  each  Section,  a  Hundred  and  forty-four  in  all,  got 
gathered  at  the  Townhall,  about  midnight.  Mandat's  Squadron, 
stationed  there,  did  not  hinder  their  entering :  are  they  not  the 
'  Central  Committee  of  the  Sections  '  who  sit  here  usually;  though 
in  greater  number  tonight  ?  They  are  there :  presided  by  Con- 
fusion, Irresolution,  and  the  Clack  of  Tongues.  Swift  Scouts  fly  ; 
Rumour  buzzes,  of  Black  Courtiers,  red  Swiss,  of  Mandat  and  his 
Squadrons  that  shall  charge.  Better  put  off  the  Insurrection? 
Yes,  put  it  off.  Ha,  hark  !  Saint-Antoine  booming  out  eloquent 
tocsin,  of  its  own  accord ! — Friends,  no :  ye  cannot  put  off  the 
Insurrection ;  but  must  put  it  on,  and  live  with  it,  or  die  with  it. 

Swift  now,  therefore  :  let  these  actual  Old  Municipals,  on  sight 
of  the  Full-powers,  and  mandate  of  the  Sovereign  elective  People, 
lay  down  their  functions  ;  and  this  New  Hundred  and  Forty-four 
take  them  up !  Will  ye  nill  ye,  worthy  Old  Municipals,  go  ye 
must.  Nay  is  it  not  a  happiness  for  many  a  Municipal  that  he 
can  wash  his  hands  of  such  a  business  ;  and  sit  there  paralysed, 
unaccountable,  till  the  Hour  do  bring  forth ;  or  even  go  home  to 
his  night's  rest  ?  ^  Two  only  of  the  Old,  or  at  most  three,  we 
retain :  Mayor  Petion,  for  the  present  walking  in  the  Tuileries  ; 
Procureur  Manuel ;  Procureuv-Substitute  Danton,  invisible  Atlas 
of  the  whole.  And  so,  with  our  Hundred  and  Forty-four,  among 
whom  are  a  Tocsin-Huguenin,  a  Billaud,  a  Chaumette ;  and 
Editor-Talliens,  and  Fabre  d' Eglantines,  vSergents,  Panises ;  and 
in  brief,  either  emergent  or  else  emerged  and  full-blown,  the 
entire  Flower  of  unlimited  Patriotism  :  have  we  not,  as  by  magic, 
made  a  New  Municipality ;  -  ready  to  act  in  the  unlimited  manner  ; 
and  declare  itself  roundly,  '  in  a  State  of  Insurrection  ! ' — First 

'  Section  Documents,  Townhall  Documents  (Hist.  Pari,  ubi  supra). 

'■^[As  late  as  9th  Danton  does  not  seem  to  have  been  sure  whether  or  no  to  trust 
Petion,  but  on  that  day  Petion  was  ■.\  arned  that  his  authority  and  that  of  the  Munici- 
pality were  to  be  altogether  superseded.     That  evening  fresh  Commissioners  were 


250        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

of  allj  then,  be  Commandant  Mandat  sent  for,  with  that  Mayor's- 
Order  of  his  ;  also  let  the  New  Municipals  visit  those  Squadrons 
that  were  to  charge ;  and  let  the  stormbell  ring  its  loudest ; — 
and,  on  the  whole.  Forward,  ye  Hundred  and  Forty- four  ;  retreat 
is  now  none  for  you  ! 

Reader,  fancy  not,  in  thy  languid  way,  that  Insurrection  is  easy. 
Insurrection  is  difficult :  each  individual  uncertain  even  of  his 
next  neighbour ;  totally  uncertain  of  his  distant  neighbours, 
what  strength  is  with  him,  what  strength  is  against  him ;  certain 
only  that,  in  case  of  failure,  his  individual  portion  is  the  gallows  ! 
Eight  hundred  thousand  heads,  and  in  each  of  them  a  separate 
estimate  of  these  uncertainties,  a  separate  theorem  of  action 
conformable  to  that :  out  of  so  many  uncertainties,  does  the 
certainty,  and  inevitable  net-result  never  to  be  abolished,  go  on, 
at  all  moments,  bodying  itself  forth  ; — leading  thee  also  towards 
civic-crowns  or  an  ignominious  noose. 

Could  the  Reader  take  an  Asmodeus'  Flight,  and  waving  open 
all  roofs  and  privacies,  look  down  from  the  Tower  of  Notre-Dame, 
what  a  Paris  were  it !  Of  treble-voice  whimperings  or  vehemence, 
of  bass-voice  growlings,  dubitations ;  Courage  screwing  itself 
to  desperate  defiance  ;  Cowardice  trembling  silent  within  barred 
doors  ; — and  all  round,  Dulness  calmly  snoring  ;  for  much  Dul- 
ness,  flung  on  its  mattresses,  always  sleeps,  O,  between  the 
clangour  of  these  high-storming  tocsins  and  that  snore  of  Dulness, 
what  a  gamut :  of  trepidation,  excitation,  desperation  ;  and  above 
it  mere  Doubt,  Danger,  Atropos  and  Nox ! 

named  by  the  more  Radical  Sections,  and  at  i  A.M.  these  began  to  arrive,  the 
National  Guard  making  no  opposition  to  their  entry.  Besides  those  mentioned  by 
Carlyle  we  may  add  Leonard  Bourdon,  Lhuillier,  Simon,  Marat,  Robespierre. 
Danton  looked  in  for  a  short  time  sometime  before  3  A.M.,  by  which  time  19 
Sections  in  all  were  represented,  and  Huguenin  took  the  chair,  with  Tallien  as 
secretary.  It  is  impossible  to  say  who  was  actually  not  there,  as  a  list  comprising 
over  300  names,  some  of  persons  certainly  not  present,  was  drawn  up  some  months 
afterwards  on  purpose  to  deceive  the  Convention.  It  is  this  list  which  is  given  in  the 
Hist.  Pari.  Twenty  Sections  at  least  sent  no  representatives  at  all.  The  Conseil- 
Gindral  of  the  old  Municipality  continued  to  sit  in  an  adjoining  room  till  about  7 
A.M.  ;  but  its  galleries  being  full  of  a  howling  mob,  it  gradually  dissolved  itself,  and 
at  7  A.M.  the  "  Commissioners  of  the  Municipality  of  the  United  Sections  with  full 
power  to  save  the  State,"  as  the  new  meeting  styled  itself,  took  its  place,  and  the  true 
'  Revolutionary  Commune''  was  born.  {See  Robiquet,  511 ;  Mortinier-Ternaux,  ii. 
241,  sqq.)'\ 


THE  STEEPLES  AT  MIDNIGHT      251 

Fighters  of  this  Section  draw  out ;  hear  that  the  next  Section 
does  not ;  and  thereupon  draw  in.  Saint- Antoine  on  this  side 
the  River  is  uncertain  of  Saint- Marceau  on  that.  Steady  only 
is  the  snore  of  Dulness,  are  the  Six-hundred  Marseillese  that 
know  how  to  die.  Mandat,  twice  summoned  to  the  Townhall, 
has  not  come.  Scouts  fly  incessant,  in  distracted  haste  ;  and  the 
many-whispering  voices  of  Rumour.  Theroigne  and  unofficial 
Patriots  flit,  dim-visible,  exploratoiy,  far  and  wide ;  like  Night- 
birds  on  the  wing.  Of  Nationals  some  Three-thousand  have 
followed  Mandat  and  his  generale ;  the  rest  follow  each  his  own 
theorem  of  the  uncertainties :  theorem,  that  one  should  march 
rather  with  Saint- Antoine :  innumerable  theorems,  that  in  such 
a  case  the  wholesomest  were  sleep.  And  so  the  drums  beat,  in 
mad  fits,  and  the  stormbells  peal.  Saint- Antoine  itself  does  but 
draw  out  and  draw  in  :  Commandant  Santerre,  over  there,  cannot 
believe  that  the  Marseillese  and  Saint-Marceau  will  march. 
Thou  laggard  sonorous  Beer-vat,  with  the  loud  voice  and  timber- 
head,  is  it  time  now  to  palter?  Alsatian  Westermann^  clutches 
him  by  the  throat  with  drawn  sabre :  whereupon  the  Timber- 
headed  believes.  In  this  manner  wanes  the  slow  night ;  amid 
fret,  uncertainty  and  tocsin ;  all  men's  humour  rising  to  the 
hysterical  pitch  ;  and  nothing  done. 

However,  Mandat,  on  the  third  summons,  does  come  ; — come, 
unguarded ;  astonished  to  find  the  Municipality  nen'.  They 
question  him  straitly  on  that  Mayor's-Order  to  resist  force  by 
force  ;  on  that  strategic  scheme  of  cutting  Saint- Antoine  in  two 
halves :  he  answers  what  he  can :  they  think  it  were  right  to 
send  this  strategic  National  Commandant  to  the  Abbaye  Prison, 
and  let  a  Court  of  Law  decide  on  him.  Alas,  a  Court  of  Law, 
not  Book-Law  but  primeval  Club-La w,  crowds  and  jostles  out  of 
doors ;  all  fretted  to  the  hysterical  pitch ;  cruel  as  Fear,  blind 

^[Westermann,  born  1751,  had  served  in  the  army  as  a  private  soldier,  and  was 
a  magistrate  {dchcvin)  of  Strasburg  in  1789.  He  came  to  Paris  in  May  '92,  and 
attached  himself  to  Danton,  who  gave  him  the  job  of  Aug.  loth,  nominally 
under,  but  really  to  direct  Santerre.  He  was  in  the  Army  of  the  North  from  Sept. 
'92— May  '93  ;  when,  after  a  temporary  arrest,  he  was  sent  to  command  in  La 
Vendue.  He  returned  to  Paris  in  the  early  winter,  was  deprived  of  his  command 
in  Jan.  '94,  and  executed  with  Danton  April  5th.] 


252        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

as  the  Night :  such  Court  of  Law,  and  no  other,  clutches  poor 
Mandat  from  his  constables ;  beats  him  down,  massacres  him, 
on  the  steps  of  the  Townhall.  Look  to  it,  ye  new  Municipals ; 
ye  People,  in  a  state  of  Insurrection  !  Blood  is  shed,  blood  must 
be  answered  for  ; — alas,  in  such  hysterical  humour,  more  blood  will 
flow  :  for  it  is  as  with  the  Tiger  in  that ;  he  has  only  to  begin.  ^ 

Seventeen  Individuals  have  been  seized  in  the  Champs  Elysees, 
by  exploratory  Patriotism  ;  they  flitting  dim-visible,  by  it  flitting 
dim-visible.  Ye  have  pistols,  rapiers,  ye  Seventeen .''  One  of 
those  accursed  '  false  Patrols ; '  that  go  marauding,  with  Anti- 
National  intent ;  seeking  what  they  can  spy,  what  they  can  spill  ! 
The  Seventeen  are  carried  to  the  nearest  Guardhouse ;  eleven 
of  them  escape  by  back  passages.  "  How  is  this  ?  "  Demoiselle 
Theroigne  appears  at  the  front  entrance,  with  sabre,  pistols  and 
a  train ;  denounces  treasonous  connivance ;  demands,  seizes,  the 
remaining  six,  that  the  justice  of  the  People  be  not  trifled  with. 
Of  which  six  two  more  escape  in  the  whirl  and  debate  of  the 
Club-Law  Court ;  the  last  unhappy  Four  are  massacred,  as 
Mandat  was :  Two  Ex-Bodyguards ;  one  dissipated  Abbe ;  one 
Royalist  Pamphleteer,  Sulleau,  known  to  us  by  name.  Able 
Editor,  and  wit  of  all  work.  Poor  Sulleau :  ^  his  Acts  of  the 
Apostles;  and  brisk  Placard- Journals  (for  he  was  an  able  man) 
come  to  Finis,  in  this  manner ;  and  questionable  jesting  issues 
suddenly  in  horrid  earnest !  Such  doings  usher-in  the  dawn 
of  the  Tenth  of  August   1792. 

Or  think  what  a  night  the  poor  National  Assembly  has  had :  ^ 

1  [The  exact  hour  of  Mandat's  murder  is  not  easy  to  determine,  but  it  must  have 
been  between  3  and  5  a.m.  Danton  probably  ordered  it  (see  Belloc's  Danton  167). 
When  the  news  of  his  murder  arrived  the  command  of  the  loyaHst  National  Guard 
was  given  to  M.  Tassin,  because  La  Chesnaye,  the  next  senior  officer,  was  of 
doubtful  loyalty  ;  Tassin  was  among  those  who  accompanied  the  King  to  the 
Assembly.  Directly  Mandat  was  dead  the  Commune  apprehended  Petion,  with 
his  own  consent,  and  kept  him  under  guard  at  the  Mairie  (see  Rev.  de  la  R^v.  iii. 
ii.  4;  Mortimer-Ternaux,  ii.  255,  sqq.).  Roederer  admits  that  it  was  he  who,  for 
reasons  of  Constitutional  legality,  advised  Mandat's  obeying  the  summons  to  go 
from  the  Chateau  (p.  360).] 

2  [Sulleau  fell  a  victim  to  Th^roigne's  personal  spite  :  he  had  incessantly  mocked 
her  in  the  Actes  des  Apotres.  The  most  distinguished  victim  massacred  separately 
at  this  time  was  Clermont-Tonnerre.] 

"'[There  were  about  150  members  of  the  Assembly  present  at  3.30  A.M.  ;  in- 
different matters  were  discussed  in  a  desultory  fashion  during  the  night  (Mortimer- 
Ternaux,  ii.  261) ;  little  notice  was  taken  of  the  occasional  reports  of  disturbance 
that  came  in.] 


THE  STEEPLES  AT  MIDNIGHT      253 

sitting  there,  '  in  great  paucity,'  attempting  to  debate  ; — quivering 
and  shivering ;  pointing  towards  all  the  thirty-two  azimuths  at 
once,  as  the  magnet-needle  does  when  thunderstorm  is  in  the 
air !  If  the  Insurrection  come  ?  If  it  come,  and  fail  ?  Alas, 
in  that  case,  may  not  black  Courtiers  with  blunderbusses,  red 
Swiss  with  bayonets  rush  over,  flushed  with  victory,  and  ask  us : 
Thou  undefinable,  waterlogged,  self-distractive,  self-destructive 
Legislative,  what  dost  thou  here  uns-unk  ? — or  figure  the  poor 
National  Guards,  bivouacking  in  '  temporary  tents '  there  ;  or 
standing  ranked,  shifting  from  leg  to  leg,  all  through  the  weary 
night ;  New  tricolor  Municipals  ordering  one  thing,  old  Mandat 
Captains  ordering  another,  Procureur  Manuel  has  ordered  the 
cannons  to  be  withdrawn  from  the  Pont-Neuf ;  none  ventured  to 
disobey  him.  It  seems  certain,  then,  the  old  Staff,  so  long 
doomed,  has  finally  been  dissolved,  in  these  hours ;  and  Mandat 
is  not  our  Commandant  now,  but  Santerre  ?  Yes,  friends : 
Santerre  henceforth, — surely  Mandat  no  more  !  The  Squadrons 
that  were  to  charge  see  nothing  certain,  except  that  they  are 
cold,  hungry,  worn  down  with  watching ;  that  it  were  sad  to 
slay  French  brothers  ;  sadder  to  be  slain  by  them.  Without  the 
Tuileries  Circuit,  and  within  it,  sour  uncertain  humour  sways 
these  men :  only  the  red  Swiss  stand  stedfast.  Them  their 
officers  refresh  now  with  a  slight  wetting  of  brandy ;  wherein 
the  Nationals,  too  far  gone  for  brandy,  refuse  to  participate. 

King  Louis  meanwhile  had  laid  him  down  for  a  little  sleep ; 
his  wig  when  he  reappeared  had  lost  the  powder  on  one  side.^ 
Old  Marshal  Maille  and  the  gentlemen  in  black  rise  always  in 
spirits  as  the  Insurrection  does  not  rise :  there  goes  a  witty  say- 
ing now,  "  Lc  tocsin  ne  rend  pas,"  ^  The  tocsin,  like  a  dry  milk-cow, 
does  not  yield.  For  the  rest,  could  not  one  proclaim  Martial 
Law  ?     Not  easily  ;    for  now,  it   seems.  Mayor  Petion  is  gone. 

1  Roederer,  ubi  supra. 

2  ['  Le  Tocsm  ne  rend  pas '  actually  appears  on  the  minutes  of  the  Commune 
(3  A.M.).  Not  till  7  were  the  leaders  actually  able  to  collect  a  really  large  force. 
Roederer  gives  the  date  of  the  mot  at  the  chateau  as  2.30,  reassuring  news  having 
been  brought  in  by  a  '  tall  man  dressed  in  grey  '  (p.  358).] 


254        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

On  the  other  hand,  our  Interim  Commandant,  poor  Mandat 
being  off 'to  the  Hotel-de-Ville,'  complains  that  so  many  Courtiers 
in  black  encumber  the  service,  are  an  ej'^esorrow  to  the  National 
Guards.  To  which  her  Majesty  answers  with  emphasis.  That 
they  will  obey,  all,  will  suffer  all,  that  they  are  sure  men  these. 

And  so  the  yellow  lamplight  dies  out  in  the  gray  of  morning, 
in  the  King's  Palace,  over  such  a  scene.  Scene  of  jostling, 
elbowing,  of  confusion,  and  indeed  conclusion,  for  the  thing  is 
about  to  end.  Roederer  and  spectral  Ministers  jostle  in  the 
press  ;  consult,  in  side-cabinets,  with  one  or  with  both  Majesties. 
Sister  Elizabeth  takes  the  Queen  to  the  window :  "  Sister,  see 
what  a  beautifiil  sunrise,"  right  over  the  Jacobins  Church  and 
that  quarter !  How  happy  if  the  tocsin  did  not  yield !  But 
Mandat  returns  not ;  Petion  is  gone :  much  hangs  wavering  in 
the  invisible  Balance.  About  five  o'clock,  there  rises  from  the 
Garden  a  kind  of  sound  ;  as  of  a  shout  which  had  become  a  howl, 
and  instead  of  Vive  le  Rot  were  ending  in  Vive  la  Nation.  "  Mon 
Dieu  ! "  ejaculates  a  spectral  Minister,  "  what  is  he  doing  down 
there  ? "  For  it  is  his  Majesty,  gone  down  with  old  Marshal 
Maille  to  review  the  troops ;  and  the  nearest  companies  of  them 
answer  so.  Her  Majesty  bursts  into  a  stream  of  tears.  Yet  on 
stepping  from  the  cabinet,  her  eyes  are  dry  and  calm,  her  look 
is  even  cheerful.  'The  Austrian  lip,  and  the  aquiline  nose, 
'  fuller  than  usual,  gave  to  her  countenance,'  says  Peltier,^  '  some- 
'  thing  of  majesty,  which  they  that  did  not  see  her  in  these 
'moments  cannot  well  have  an  idea  of  O  thou  Theresa's 
Daughter ! 

King  Louis  enters,  much  blown  with  the  fatigue  ;  but  for  the 
rest  Avith  his  old  air  of  indifference.-  Of  all  hopes  now,  surely 
the  joyfullest  were,  that  the  tocsin  did  not  yield. 

^  In  Toulongeon,  ii.  241. 

2 [That  is  on  returning  from  reviewing  the  defenders  at  about  6  A.M.  The 
Souvenirs  of  Le  Sourd,  one  of  the  loyal  National  Guards,  defending  the  Chateau, 
quoted  in  R6v.  Fr.  (xxxiii.  261,  sqq.),  fix  some  important  hours  for  us  {cf.  Mortinier- 
Ternaux,  ii.  285).] 


THE  SWISS  255 

CHAPTER  VII 

THE  SWISS 

Unhappy  Friends,  the  tocsin  does  yield,  has  yielded  !  Lo  ye,  how 
with  the  first  sunrays  its  Ocean-tide,  of  pikes  and  fusils,  flows  glit- 
tering from  the  far  East ; — imineasurable ;  born  of  the  Night ! 
They  march  there,  the  grim  host ;  Saint-Antoine  on  this  side  the 
River  ;  Saint-Marceau  on  that,  the  blackbrowed  Marseillese  in  the 
van.  With  hum,  and  grim  murmur,  far-heard  ;  like  the  Ocean- 
tide,  as  we  say :  drawn  up,  as  if  by  Luna  and  Influences,  from 
the  great  Deep  of  Waters,  they  roll  gleaming  on ;  no  King, 
Canute  or  Louis,  can  bid  them  roll  back.  Wide-eddying  side- 
currents,  of  onlookers,  roll  hither  and  thither,  unarmed,  not 
voiceless ;  they,  the  steel  host,  roll  on.  New-Commandant 
Santerre,  indeed,  has  taken  seat  at  the  Townhall ;  rests  there, 
in  his  halfway-house.  Alsatian  Westermann,  with  flashing 
sabre,  does  not  rest ;  nor  the  Sections,  nor  the  Marseillese,  nor 
Demoiselle  Theroigne ;  but  roll  continually  on. 

And  now,  where  are  Mandat's  Squadrons  that  were  to  charge  ? 
Not  a  Squadron  of  them  stirs  :  or  they  stir  in  the  wrong  direction, 
out  of  the  way ;  their  oflicers  glad  that  they  will  even  do  that. 
It  is  to  this  hour  uncertain  whether  the  Squadron  on  the  Pont- 
Neuf  made  the  shadow  of  resistance,  or  did  not  make  the  shadow : 
enough,  the  blackbrowed  Marseillese,  and  Saint-Marceau  follow- 
ing them,  do  cross  without  let ;  do  cross,  in  sure  hope  now  of 
Saint-Antoine  and  the  rest ;  do  billow  on,  toAvards  the  Tuileries, 
where  their  errand  is.  The  Tuileries,  at  sound  of  them,  rustles 
responsive :  the  red  Swiss  look  to  their  priming ;  Courtiers  in 
black  draw  their  blunderbusses,  rapiers,  poniards,  some  have  even 
fire-shovels ;  every  man  his  weapon  of  war. 

Judge  if,  in  these  circumstances,  Syndic  Roederer  felt  easy  !  ^ 

i[RcEderer  had  been  summoned  by  the  King  to  the  Chateau  at  ii  p.m.  on  the 
9th  ;  towards  4  A.M.  on  loth  he  made  the  suggestion  of  retiring  to  the  Assembly, 
which  was  rejected  with  horror  by  the  Queen  and  King.  Sainte-Croix  confirms  this 
(p.  46).  Roederer  admits  that  he  didn't  want  a  desperate  defence  of  the  Chateau 
by  the  uhra-Royalists,  who  were  gathered  there,  and  that  he  feared  that  it  might 
lead  to  reprisals  against  the  Assembly  (361,  392,  etc.).] 


256        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Will  the  kind  Heavens  open  no  middle-course  of  refuge  for  a 
poor  Syndic  who  halts  between  two  ?  If  indeed  his  Majesty 
would  consent  to  go  over  to  the  Assembly  !  His  Majesty,  above 
all  her  Maj  esty,  cannot  agree  to  that.  Did  her  Maj  esty  answer  the 
proposal  with  a  "  Fi  done  ;  "  did  she  say  even,  she  would  be  nailed 
to  the  walls  sooner  ?  Apparently  not.  It  is  written  also  that 
she  offered  the  King  a  pistol ;  saying,  Now  or  else  never  was  the 
time  to  show  himself.  Close  eye-witnesses  did  not  see  it,  nor 
do  we.  They  saw  only  that  she  was  queenlike,  quiet ;  that  she 
argued  not,  upbraided  not,  with  the  Inexorable  ;  but,  like  Caesar 
in  the  Capitol,  wrapped  her  mantle,  as  it  beseems  Queens  and 
Sons  of  Adam  to  do.  But  thou,  O  Louis  !  of  what  stuff  art  thou 
at  all }  Is  there  no  stroke  in  thee,  then,  for  Life  and  Crown .'' 
The  silliest  hunted  deer  dies  not  so.  Art  thou  the  languidest  of 
all  mortals  ;  or  the  mildest-minded  .''  Thou  art  the  worst-starred. 
The  tide  advances  ;  Syndic  Rcederer's  and  all  men's  straits  grow 
straiter  and  straiter.  Fremescent  clangour  comes  from  the  armed 
Nationals  in  the  Court ;  far  and  wide  is  the  infinite  hubbub  of 
tongues.  What  counsel .''  And  the  tide  is  now  nigh  !  Mes- 
sengers, forerunners  speak  hastily  through  the  outer  Grates ; 
hold  parley  sitting  astride  the  walls.  Syndic  Roederer  goes  out 
and  comes  in.  Cannoneers  ask  him  :  Are  we  to  fire  against  the 
people  ?  King's  Ministei's  ask  him :  Shall  the  King's  House  be 
forced  }  Syndic  Roederer  has  a  hard  game  to  play.  He  speaks 
to  the  Cannoneers  with  eloquence,  with  fervour ;  such  fervour  as 
a  man  can,  who  has  to  blow  hot  and  cold  in  one  breath.  Hot 
and  cold,  O  Roederer }  We,  for  our  part,  cannot  live  and  die ! 
The  Cannoneers,  by  way  of  answer,  fling  down  their  linstocks. — 
Think  of  this  answer,  O  King  Louis,  and  King's  Ministers ;  and 
take  a  poor  Syndic's  safe  middle-course,  towards  the  Salle  de 
Manege.  King  Louis  sits,  his  hands  leant  on  his  knees,  body 
bent  forward  ;  gazes  for  a  space  fixedly  on  Syndic  Roederer  ;  then 
answers,  looking  over  his  shoulder  to  the  Queen :  Marchons ! 
They  march  ;  King  Louis,  Queen,  Sister  Elizabeth,  the  two  royal 
children  and  governess  :  these,  with  Syndic  Roedei'er,  and  Officials 
of  the   Department ;  amid  a  double  rank  of  National  Guards. 


THE  SWISS  257 

The  men  with  blunderbusses,  the  steady  red  Swiss  gaze  mourn- 
fully, reproachfully ;  but  hear  only  these  words  from  Syndic 
Rcederer :  "  The  King  is  going  to  the  Assembly ;  make  way." 
It  has  struck  eight,  on  all  clocks,  some  minutes  ago :  ^  the  King 
has  left  the  Tuileries — forever. 

O  ye  stanch  Swiss,  ye  gallant  gentlemen  in  black,  for  what  a 
cause  are  ye  to  spend  and  be  spent !  Look  out  from  the  western 
windows,  ye  may  see  King  Louis  placidly  hold  on  his  way  ;  the 
poor  little  Prince  Royal  'sportfully  kicking  the  fallen  leaves.' 
Fremescent  multitude  on  the  Terrace  of  the  Feuillants  whirls 
parallel  to  him ;  one  man  in  it,  very  noisy,  with  a  long  pole : 
will  they  not  obstruct  the  outer  Staircase,  and  back  entrance  of 
the  Salle,  when  it  comes  to  that  ?  King's  Guards  can  go  no 
further  than  the  bottom  step  there.  Lo,  Deputation  of  Legis- 
lators come  out ;  he  of  the  long  pole  is  stilled  by  oratory ; 
Assembly's  Guards  join  themselves  to  King's  Guards,  and  all  may 
mount  in  this  case  of  necessity  ;  the  outer  Staircase  is  free,  or 
passable.  See,  Royalty  ascends  ;  a  blue  Grenadier  lifts  the  poor 
little  Prince  Royal  from  the  press ;  Royalty  has  entered  in. 
Royalty  has  vanished  forever  from  your  eyes."^ — And  ye  ?  Left 
standing  there,  amid  the  yawning  abysses,  and  earthquake  of 
Insurrection ;  without  course  ;  without  command :  if  ye  perish, 
it  must  be  as  more  than  martyrs,  as  martyrs  who  are  now  without 
a  cause !  The  black  Courtiers  disappear  mostly ;  thi-ough  such 
issues  as  they  can.     The  poor  Swiss  know  not  how  to  act :  one 

^  [7.30  is  probably  nearer  the  mark.  The  King  wanted  to  take  the  Gentlemen- 
Volunteers  with  him  to  the  Assembly,  but  Roederer  pointed  out  the  impossibility 
of  this.  A  good  number  of  them  escaped  by  the  back  doors,  when  the  King  had 
gone  (Mortimer-Ternau.x,  ii.  293).  Sainte-Croix  gives  the  King's  words,  '  Since  we 
are  going  to  the  Assembly,  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  done  here '  (p.  47).  It  is 
Rosderer  who  gives  the  simple  word  marchons  (369).  The  argument  which  really 
seems  to  have  decided  the  King  was  the  "  12  cannons,"  which  Roederer  kept  on 
assuring  him  were  pointed  against  the  Chateau.^ 

"[There  was  some  difficulty  in  getting  the  Royal  Family  safe  across  to  the 
Assembly,  especially  for  the  last  few  yards,  for  the  law  did  not  allow  the  National 
Guard  to  be  in  arms  "  in  its  precincts,"  nor  any  Municipal  officers  to  approach  it 
without  being  sent  for  :  but  this  difficulty  was  got  over  by  a  deputation  of  the 
Assembly  going  to  meet  the  King  (Mortimer-Ternau.x,  ii.  30c).  The  Assembly 
was  in  fact  alarmed  for  its  own  safety.  {See  a  letter  written  by  Guadet  on  14th 
and  quoted  in  Rev.  de  la  R6v.  xii.  439,  "if  the  mob  had  been  beaten  back  from 
the  Tuileries  it  would  have  fallen  upon  us.")  One  hundred  and  fifty  Swiss  accom- 
panied the  Roj^al  Family  {cf.  also  Roederer,  370  sqq.).'\ 
VOL.    II.  17 


258         THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

duty  only  is  clear  to  them,  that  of  standing  by  their  post ;  and 
they  will  perform  that. 

But  the  glittering  steel  tide  has  arrived  ;^  it  beats  now  against 
the  Chateau  barriers,  and  eastern  Courts ;  irresistible,  loud-surg- 
ing far  and  wide  ; — breaks  in,  fills  the  Court  of  the  Carrousel, 
blaekbrowed  Marseillese  in  the  van.  King  Louis  gone,  say  you  ; 
over  to  the  Assembly !  Well  and  good :  but  till  the  Assembly 
pronounce  Forfeiture  of  him,  what  boots  it .''  Our  post  is  in  that 
Chateau  or  stronghold  of  his ;  there  till  then  must  we  continue. 
Think,  ye  stanch  Swiss,  whether  it  were  good  that  grim  murder 
began,  and  brothers  blasted  one  another  in  pieces  for  a  stone 
edifice .'' — Poor  Swiss !  they  know  not  how  to  act :  from  the 
southern  windows,  some  fling  cartridges,  in  sign  of  brotherhood ; 
on  the  eastern  outer  staircase,  and  within  through  long  stairs  and 
corridors,  they  stand  firm-ranked,  peaceable  and  yet  refusing  to 
stir.  Westermann  speaks  to  them  in  Alsatian  German  ;  Marseil- 
lese plead,  in  hot  Proven9al  speech  and  pantomime  ;  stimning 
hubbub  pleads  and  threatens,  infinite,  around.  The  Swiss  stand 
fast,  peaceable  and  yet  immovable ;  red  granite  pier  in  that 
waste-flashing  sea  of  steel. 

Who  can  help  the  inevitable  issue ;  Marseillese  and  all  France 
on  this  side ;  granite  Swiss  on  that  .^  The  pantomime  grows 
hotter  and  hotter  ;  Marseillese  sabres  flourishing  by  way  of  action  ; 
the  Swiss  brow  also  clouding  itself,  the  Swiss  thumb  bringing  its 
firelock  to  the  cock.  And  hark  !  high  thundering  above  all  the 
din,  three  Marseillese  cannon  from  the  Carrousel,  pointed  by  a 
gunner  of  bad  aim,  come  rattling  over  the  roofs !  Ye  Swiss, 
therefore  :  Fire  !  ^  The  Swiss  fire  ;  by  volley,  by  platoon,  in  roll- 
ing-fire :  Marseillese  men  not  a  few,  and  '  a  tall  man  that  was 
louder  than  any,'  lie  silent,  smashed  upon  the  pavement ; — not  a 
few  Marseillese,  after  the  long  dusty  march,  have  made  halt  here. 

'[The  first  column  of  Insurgents  under  Westermann  and  Lefranc  reached  the 
Carrousel  by  the  Quai  du  Louvre  about  7.30-8.  The  Swiss  were  immediately  with- 
drawn into  the  vestibule,  and  the  few  National  Guards  left  outside  fraternised  with 
the  mob  and  tried  to  induce  the  Swiss  to  do  the  same  ;  over  750  Swiss  and  about 
100  loyal  National  Guards  remained  inside  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  ii.  310,  sqq.).~\ 

^[Two  principal  volleys  seem  to  have  been  fired  on  the  mob,  one  from  the 
staircase,  one  from  the  upper  windows  [cf.  Mortimer-Ternaux,  ii.  312).] 


THE  SWISS  259 

The  Carrousel  is  void ;  the  black  tide  recoiling  ;  '  fugitives  rush- 
ing as  far  as  Saint- Antoine  before  they  stop.'  The  Cannoneers 
without  linstock  have  squatted  invisible,  and  left  their  cannon  ; 
which  the  Swiss  seize. 

Think  what  a  volley  :  reverberating  dooraful  to  the  four  coi*nei*s 
of  Paris,  and  through  all  hearts ;  like  the  clang  of  Bellona's 
thongs !  The  blackbrowed  Marseillese,  rallying  on  the  instant, 
have  become  black  Demons  that  know  how  to  die.  Nor  is  Brest 
behindhand ;  nor  Alsatian  Westermann ;  Demoiselle  Theroigne 
is  Sibyl  Theroigne :  Vengeance,  Ficfoire  on  la  mort  I  From  all 
Patriot  artillery,  great  and  small ;  from  Feuillants  Terrace,  and 
all  terraces  and  places  of  the  wide-spread  Insurrectionary  sea, 
there  roars  responsive  a  red  blazing  whirlwind.  Blue  Nationals, 
ranked  in  the  Garden,  cannot  help  their  muskets  going  off  against 
Foreign  murderers.  For  there  is  a  sympathy  in  muskets,  in 
heaped  masses  of  men :  nay,  are  not  Mankind,  in  whole,  like 
tuned  strings,  and  a  cunning  infinite  concordance  and  unity  ;  you 
smite  one  string,  and  all  strings  will  begin  sounding, — in  soft 
sphere-melody,  in  deafening  screech  of  madness !  Mounted 
Gendarmerie  gallop  distracted ;  are  fired  on  merely  as  a  thing 
running ;  galloping  over  the  Pont  Royal,  or  one  knows  not 
whither.  The  brain  of  Paris,  brain-fevered  in  the  centre  of  it 
here,  has  gone  mad  ;  what  you  call,  taken  fire. 

Behold,  the  fire  slackens  not ;  nor  does  the  Swiss  rolling-fire 
slacken  from  within.  Nay  they  clutched  cannon,  as  we  saw  ;  and 
now,  from  the  other  side,  they  clutch  three  pieces  more ;  alas, 
cannon  without  linstock ;  nor  will  the  steel-and-flint  answer, 
though  they  try  it.^  Had  it  chanced  to  answer !  Patriot  on- 
lookers have  their  misgivings ;  one  strangest  Patriot  onlooker 
thinks  that  the  Swiss,  had  they  a  commander,  would  beat.  He 
is  a  man  not  unqualified  to  judge ;  the  name  of  him  Napoleon 
Buonaparte.-     And  onlookers,  and  Avomen,  stand  gazing,  and  the 

1  Deux  Amis,  viii.  179-80.  [Nor  had  they  cannon  balls  ;  according  to  Le  Sourd, 
they  charged  the  cannons  with  some  of  their  few  cartridges  [c/.  Mortimer-Ternaux, 
ii.  312).] 

'^See  Hist.  Pari.  xvii.  56;  Las  Cases,  etc.  [Las  Cases,  i.  i,  146,  says  "Il/ui 
aussi  timoin  du  10  Aoiit,  ou  les  assaillans  n't^taient  ni  plus  relev^s,  ni  plus  redou- 
tables."     Fournier  (Napoleon  ler,  Paris,   1891,  vol.   i.  p.  38)  says  that  there  is  no 


260        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

witty  Dr.  Moore  of  Glasgow  among  them,  on  the  other  side  of 
the  River  :  cannon  rush  rumbling  past  them  ;  pause  on  the  Pont 
Royal ;  belch  out  their  iron  entrails  there,  against  the  Tuileries  ; 
and  at  every  new  belch,  the  women  and  onlookers  '  shout  and 
clap  hands.'  ^  City  of  all  the  Devils !  In  remote  streets,  men 
are  drinking  breakfast-coffee  ;  following  their  affairs  ;  with  a  start 
now  and  then,  as  some  dull  echo  reverberates  a  note  louder. 
And  here  ?  Marseillese  fall  wounded ;  but  Barbaroux  has 
surgeons ;  Barbaroux  is  close  by,  managing,  though  underhand, 
and  under  cover.  Marseillese  fall  death-struck ;  bequeath  their 
firelock,  specify  in  which  pocket  are  the  cartridges ;  and  die 
murmuring,  "  Revenge  me.  Revenge  thy  country !  "  Brest 
Federe  Officers,  galloping  in  red  coats,  are  shot  as  Swiss.  Lo  you, 
the  Carrousel  has  burst  into  flame  ! — Paris  Pandemonium  !  Nay 
the  poor  City,  as  we  said,  is  in  fever-fit  and  convulsion :  such 
crisis  has  lasted  for  the  space  of  some  half  hour. 

But  what  is  this  that,  with  Legislative  Insignia,  ventures 
through  the  hubbub  and  death-hail,  from  the  back-entrance  of  the 
Manege  ?  Towards  the  Tuileries  and  Swiss  :  written  Order  from 
his  Majesty  to  cease  firing !  O  ye  hapless  Swiss,  why  was  there 
no  order  not  to  begin  it  ?  Gladly  would  the  Swiss  cease  firing : 
but  who  will  bid  mad  Insurrection  cease  firing .''  To  Insurrection 
you  cannot  speak  ;  neither  can  it,  hydraheaded,  hear.  The  dead 
and  dying,  by  the  hundred,  lie  all  around ;  are  borne  bleeding 
through  the  streets,  towards  help  ;  the  sight  of  them,  like  a  torch 
of  the  Furies,  kindling  Madness.  Patriot  Paris  roars  ;  as  the  bear 
bereaved  of  her  whelps.  On,  ye  Patriots  :  Vengeance  !  Victory  or 
death  !  There  are  men  seen,  who  rush  on,  armed  only  with 
walking-sticks. 2     Terror  and  Fury  rule  the  hour. 

proof  of  the  tradition  that  he  took  any  part  on  Aug.  loth,  or  that  he  "  parcourait 
les  cabarets  comme  orateur  populairc  "  (but  admits  the  existence  of  such  tradition). 
He  himself  used  afterwards  to  say,  '  Had  I  been  called  on,  I  should  have  defended 
the  King.'  Masson  et  Biagis  (Napoleon  Inconnu,  Paris,  1895,  ii.  405)  say  that  he 
was  in  Paris  on  private  business  at  the  actual  date,  but  on  the  point  of  quitting  it 
to  join  his  regiment.] 

>  Moore,  Journal  during  a  Residence  in  France  (Dublin,  1793),  i.  26  (42). 

2  Hist.  Pari,  t^di  supra;  Rapport  du  Capitaine  des  Canonniers,  Rapport  du 
Commandant,  &c.  (Ibid.  xvii.  300-18). 


THE  SWISS  261 

The  Swiss,  pressed  on  from  without,  paralysed  from  within, 
have  ceased  to  shoot ;  but  not  to  be  shot.  What  shall  they  do  ? 
Desperate  is  the  moment.  Shelter  or  instant  death :  yet  How, 
Where  ?  One  party  flies  out  by  the  Rue  de  I'Echelle  ;  is  destroyed 
utterly,  '  en  entier.'  A  second,  by  the  other  side,  throws  itself  into 
the  Garden  ;  '  hurrying  across  a  keen  fusillade  ; '  rushes  suppliant 
into  the  National  Assembly ;  finds  pity  and  refuge  in  the  back 
benches  there.  The  third,  and  largest,  darts  out  in  column,  three 
hundred  strong,  towards  the  Champs  ^lysees :  Ah,  could  we  but 
reach  Courbevoye,  where  other  Swiss  are  !  Wo  !  see,  in  such  fusil- 
lade the  column  '  soon  breaks  itself  by  diversity  of  opinion,'  into 
distracted  segments,  this  way  and  that ; — to  escape  in  holes,  to 
die  fighting  from  street  to  street.  The  firing  and  murdenng  will 
not  cease ;  not  yet  for  long.  The  red  Porters  of  Hotels  are  shot 
at,  be  they  Suisse  by  nature,  or  Suisse  only  in  name.  The  very 
Firemen,  who  pump  and  labour  on  that  smoking  Carrousel,  are 
shot  at :  why  should  the  Carrousel  not  burn .''  Some  Swiss  take 
refuge  in  private  houses ;  find  that  mercy  too  does  still  dwell  in 
the  heart  of  man.  The  brave  Marseillese  are  merciful,  late  so 
wroth ;  and  labour  to  save.  Journalist  Gorsas  pleads  hard  with 
infuriated  groups.  Clemence,  the  Wine-merchant,  stumbles  for- 
ward to  the  Bar  of  the  Assembly,  a  rescued  Swiss  in  his  hand ; 
tells  passionately  how  he  rescued  him  with  pain  and  peril,  how  he 
will  henceforth  support  him,  being  childless  himself;  and  falls 
a-swoon  romid  the  poor  Swiss's  neck :  amid  plaudits.  But  the 
most  are  butchered,  and  even  mangled.  Fifty  (some  say  Four- 
score) were  marched  as  prisoners,  by  National  Guards,  to  the 
Hotel-de-Ville :  the  ferocious  people  bursts  through  on  them,  in 
the  Place-de-Greve  ;  massacres  them  to  the  last  man.  '  0  Peuple, 
envy  of  the  universe  ! '     Peuple,  in  mad  Gaelic  effervescence  !  ^ 

i[It  seems  certain  that  the  King  beheved  he  had  given  orders  to  cease  the 
defence  when  he  left  the  Chateau  ;  but  Tassin  having  gone  with  him,  there  was  no 
one  to  transmit  orders.  This  order,  now  hastily  written  in  pencil,  and  handed  by 
the  King  to  M.  d'Hervilly,  was  by  the  latter  communicated  to  the  150  Swiss,  who 
had  accompanied  the  King  to  the  Assembly,  and  who  were  still  drawn  up  outside 
it ;  they  forthwith  discharged  their  pieces  in  the  air.  D'Hervilly  managed  to  get 
inside  the  Tuileries  and  communicated  the  order  to  the  rest  of  the  Swiss,  several 
of  whom  were  already  killed  or  wounded  :  those  who  were  not  drew  off  in  good 


262        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Surely  few  tilings  in  the  history  of  carnage  are  painfull  er.  What 
ineffaceable  red  streak,  flickering  so  sad  in  the  memory,  is  that, 
of  this  poor  column  of  red  Swiss  '  breaking  itself  in  the  confusion 
of  opinions  ; '  dispersing,  into  blackness  and  death  !  Honour  to 
you,  brave  men ;  honourable  pity,  through  long  times !  Not 
martyrs  were  ye ;  and  yet  almost  more.  He  was  no  King  of 
youi's,  this  Louis ;  and  he  forsook  you  like  a  King  of  shreds  and 
patches :  ye  were  but  sold  to  him  for  some  poor  sixpence  a-day  ^ 
yet  would  ye  work  for  your  wages,  keep  your  plighted  word.  The 
work  now  was  to  die  ;  and  ye  did  it.  Honour  to  you,  O  Kinsmen  ; 
and  may  the  old  Deutsch  Biederkeit  and  Tapferkeit,  and  Valour 
which  is  Worth  slxmI  Truth,  be  thej'^  Swiss,  be  they  Saxon,  fail  in  no 
age!  Not  bastards  ;  true-born  were  these  men  :  sons  of  the  men  of 
Sempach,  of  Murten,  who  knelt,  but  not  to  thee,  O  Burgundy  ! — 
Let  the  traveller,  as  he  passes  through  Lucerne,  turn  aside  to  look 
a  little  at  their  monumental  Lion  ;  ^  not  for  Thorwaldsen's  sake 
alone.  Hewn  out  of  living  rock,  the  Figure  rests  there,  by  the 
still  Lake-waters,  in  lullaby  of  distant-tinkling  rnnce-des-vaches,  the 
granite  Mountains  dumbly  keeping  watch  all  round  ;  and,  though 
inanimate,  speaks. 

order  into  the  garden.  As  soon  as  the  Insurgents  found  that  their  fire  was  not 
returned,  they  entered  the  palace  and  massacred  every  hving  thing  they  found 
there,  except  a  few  women  and  old  Marshal  Mailly. 

The  Tuileries  was  in  fact  not  taken  by  assault  at  all,  it  was  surrendered  by  the 
King's  order.  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  ii.  325.)  The  Swiss,  retreating  through  the 
garden  towards  the  Place  Louis  XV,  were  decimated  as  they  went  by  a  fire  from 
behind  the  trees  on  both  sides  :  they  made  a  last  stand  at  the  foot  of  Louis  XV. 's 
statue,  and  were  shot  down  either  there,  or  singly  m  flight  [ibid.  328).] 

1  [With  the  inscription  : — 

"  Helvetiorum  fidei  ac  virtuti 
Invictis  pax." 
On  the  nth  the  few  Swiss  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  Feuillants  Church  were 
sent  partly  to  the  Abbaye,  partly  to  the  Palais  Bourbon.     The  officers  were  after- 
wards massacred  at  the  Abbaye,  the  soldiers  escaped  and  some  of  them  subsequently 
took  service  in  the  French  army  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  iii.  8).] 


CONSTITUTION  BURST  IN  PIECES    263 


CHAPTER  VIII 

CONSTITUTION  BURST  IN  PIECES 
Thus  is  the  Tenth  of  August  won  and  lost.  Patriotism  reckons 
its  slain  by  the  thousand  on  thousand,  so  deadly  was  the  Swiss 
fire  from  these  windows  ;  but  will  finally  reduce  them  to  some 
Twelve-hundred.  1  No  child's-play  was  it ; — nor  is  it !  Till  two  in 
the  afternoon  the  massacring,  the  breaking  and  the  burning  has 
not  ended ;  nor  the  loose  Bedlam  shut  itself  again. 

How  deluges  of  frantic  Sansculottism  roared  through  all  pas- 
sages of  this  Tuileries,  ruthless  in  vengeance  ;  how  the  Valets  were 
butchered,  hewn  down ;  and  Dame  Campan  saw  the  Marseillese 
sabre  flash  over  her  head,  but  the  Blackbrowed  said,  "  Va-t-en,  Get 
thee  gone,"  and  flung  her  from  him  unstruck ;  how  in  the  cellars 
wine-bottles  were  broken,  wine-butts  were  staved-in  and  drunk  ; 
and,  upwards  to  the  very  garrets,  all  windows  tumbled  out  their 
precious  royal  furnitures  :  and,  with  gold  mirrors,  velvet  curtains, 
down  of  ript  feather-beds,  and  dead  bodies  of  men,  the  Tuileries 
was  like  no  Garden  of  the  Earth  : — all  this  let  him  who  has  a  taste 
for  it  see  amply  in  Mercier,  in  acrid  Montgaillard,  or  Beaulieu  -^  of 
the  Deux  Amis.  A  hundred  and  eighty  bodies  of  Swiss  lie  piled 
there  ;  naked,  unremoved  till  the  second  day.  Patriotism  has 
torn  their  red  coats  into  snips  ;  and  marches  with  them  at  the 

^[Mortimer-Ternaux,  ii.  494,  gives  the  number  of  killed  and  wounded  on  the 
side  of  the  mob  as  follows  : — 

Parisians  killed  50,  Marseillais  killed  22,  Brestois  killed  2    .     .     .     Total  74 

Parisians  wounded  34,  Marseillais  wounded  14,  j5;-«/i;w  wounded  5  ..53 
but  admits  that  the  wounded  are  not  easy  to  trace.  The  killed  are  traceable,  as 
the  Convention  gave  pensions  to  the  families  of  the  killed  and  to  those  severely 
wounded.  One  must  allow  something  for  people  who  had  no  one  to  claim  the 
pension  for  them,  and  so  Mortimer-'l'ernaux  will  accept  a  round  number  of  100 
killed  and  60  gravely  wounded.  If  these  figures  sound  small,  one  must  remember 
(i)  the  exceedingly  short  time  that  the  actual  fighting  lasted,  not  above  an  hour 
altogether,  and  not  half  an  hour  seriously,  (2)  that  almost  anything  was  cover 
from  musketry  in  those  days,  (3)  that  the  opposite  side  of  the  (  arnuisel  was 
covered  with  mean  wooden  sheds,  which  would  afford  capital  cover,  and  that  it 
was  from  this  shelter  that  the  mob  fired  most  of  the  time.] 

2  Campan,  ii.  c.  21.  [See  the  horrors  narrated  also  by  Mercier  (Nouveau  Paris, 
cap.  34),  the  roasting  the  limbs  and  entrails  of  the  Swiss  Guards,  the  bakmg  alive 
of  a  scullion— Mercier  claims  to  have  been  an  eye-witness.  The  quotation  from 
Mme  Campan  should  be  '  Live -tot,  coguine,  la  Nation  te  fait  grdce,'  not  '  Va- 
fen.'] 


264        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Pike's  point :  the  ghastly  bare  corpses  he  there,  under  the  sun 
and  under  the  stars  ;  the  curious  of  both  sexes  crowding  to  look. 
Which  let  not  us  do.  Above  a  hundred  carts,  heaped  with  Dead, 
fare  towards  the  Cemetery  of  Sainte-Madeleine ;  bewailed,  be- 
wept ;  for  all  had  kindred,  all  had  mothers,  if  not  here,  then  there. 
It  is  one  of  those  Carnage-fields,  such  as  you  read  of  by  the  name 
*  Glorious  Victory,'  brought  home  in  this  case  to  one's  own  door.i 

But  the  blackbrowed  Marseillese  have  struck  down  the  tyrant 
of  the  Chateau.  He  is  struck  down ;  low,  and  hardly  again  to 
rise.  What  a  moment  for  an  august  Legislative  was  that  when 
the  Hereditary  Representative  entered,  under  such  circumstances  ; 
and  the  Grenadier,  carrying  the  little  Prince  Royal  out  of  the 
press,  set  him  down  on  the  Assembly-table  !  A  moment, — which 
one  had  to  smooth-ofF  with  oratory  ;  waiting  what  the  next  would 
bring  !  Louis  said  few  words  :  "He  was  come  hither  to  prevent 
a  great  crime  ;  he  believed  himself  safer  nowhere  than  here." 
President  Vergniaud  answered  briefly,  in  vague  oratory  as  we  say, 
about  "defence  of  Constituted  Authorities, "  about  dying  at  our 
post.^  And  so  King  Louis  sat  him  down  ;  first  here,  then  there  ; 
for  a  difficulty  arose,  the  Constitution  not  permitting  us  to  debate 
while  the  King  is  present :  ^  finally  he  settles  himself  with  his 
Family  in  the  '  Loge  of  the  Logographe,'  in  the  Reporter's-Box 
of  a  Journalist ;  ^  which  is  beyond  the  enchanted  Constitutional 
Circuit,  separated  from  it  by  a  rail.  To  such  Lodge  of  the  Logo- 
graphe, measuring  some  ten  feet  square,  with  a  small  closet  at  the 
entrance  of  it  behind,  is  the  King  of  broad  France  now  Hmited : 
here  can  he  and  his  sit  pent,  under  the  eyes  of  the  world,  or  retire 
into  their  closet  at  intervals ;  for  the  space  of  sixteen  hours.^ 
Such  quite  peculiar  moment  has  the  Legislative  lived  to  see. 

1  [The  stables  were  burned,  and  a  good  many  other  parts  of  the  building  of  the 
Tuileries  were  seriously  injured.] 

'-Moniteur,  Stance  du  lo  Aoiit  1792. 

3  [Many  voices  were  raised  that  the  King  should  go  to  the  Bar  of  the  Assembly 
(where  petitioners  go)(Sainte-Croix,  72).  The  Constitution  (says  Mortimer-Ternaux, 
ii.  303)  was  always  most  invoked  when  it  was  going  to  be  most  shamelessly  violated.] 

■^[The  box  of  the  Logotachygraphe  or  Journal  Logographiquc,  edited  by  Le 
Hodey  :  it  was  directly  behind  the  President's  chair.] 

'[From  10  A.M.  on  loth  to  3  a.m.  on  nth  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  ii.  304).] 


CONSTITUTION  BURST  IN  PIECES    265 

But  also  what  a  moment  was  that  other,  few  minutes  later, 
when  the  three  Marseillese  cannon  went  off,  and  the  Swiss  I'oUing- 
fire  and  universal  thunder,  like  the  crack  of  Doom,  began  to  rattle  ! 
Honourable  Members  start  to  their  feet ;  stray  bullets  singing 
epicedium  even  here,  shivering  in  with  window-glass  and  jingle. 
"  No,  this  is  our  post ;  let  us  die  here  !  "  They  sit  therefore,  like 
stone  Legislators.  But  may  not  the  Loge  of  the  Logographe  be 
forced  from  behind  ?  Tear  down  the  railing  that  divides  it  from 
the  enchanted  Constitutional  Circuit !  Ushers  tear  and  tug  ;  his 
Majesty  himself  aiding  from  within :  the  railing  gives  way  ;  Ma- 
jesty and  Legislative  are  united  in  place,  unknown  Destiny  hover- 
ing over  both. 

Rattle,  and  again  rattle,  went  the  thunder ;  one  breathless 
wide-eyed  messenger  rushing  in  after  another :  King's  order  to 
the  Swiss  went  out.  It  was  a  fearful  thunder ;  but,  as  we  know, 
it  ended.  Breathless  messengers,  fugitive  Swiss,  denunciatory 
Patriots,  trepidation ;  finally  tripudiation ! — Before  four  o'clock 
much  has  come  and  gone. 

The  New  Municipals  have  come  and  gone  ;  with  Three  Flags, 
Liberie,  Egalite,  Patrie,  and  the  clang  of  vivats.  Vergniaud,^  he 
who  as  President  few  hours  ago  talked  of  dying  for  Constituted 
Authorities,  has  moved,  as  Committee-Reporter,  that  the  Heredi- 
taiy  Representative  be  suspended ;  that  a  National  Convention 

^[Vergniaud,  who  had  been  President  at  the  beginning  of  the  day,  had  tempor- 
arily left  the  chair  when  the  deputation  from  the  Commune  (under  Huguenin)  was 
received;  but  Vergniaud  it  was  who  made  the  motion  at  ii  A.M.  that  the  King 
should  be  suspended,  and  a  Governor  to  the  Prince  Royal  forthwith  nominated 
(this  shows  the  trend  of  the  Girondin  ideas).  At  i  P.M.  Guadet  moved  that  the 
old  Girondist  ministry  be  recalled,  and  the  Governor  of  the  Prince  Royal  elected 
on  the  spot ;  no  one  however  seemed  disposed  to  second  this  latter  part  of  the 
motion.  Gensonn6  succeeded  Guadet  in  the  President's  chair  shortly  after  i  P.M. 
Thus  note  that  the  three  Girondist  leaders  successively  presided  on  Aug.  \oth.  Yet 
the  movement  was  by  no  means  theirs.  They  were  not  unanimous  as  to  what  was 
to  follow.  Probably  most  of  their  party  who  sat  in  the  Legislative  would  have 
preferred  a  regency  for  Louis  XVIL  But  those  who  had  not  seats,  or  who  were 
not  yet  wholly  of  the  party  (especially  Rebecqui,  Barbaroux,  Carra,  Gorsas,  Louvet), 
were  of  a  different  opinion.  Some  of  them  had  even  been  among  the  leaders  of 
the  Insurrection  ;  and  they,  with  Brissot  as  their  spokesman  in  the  Legislative, 
would  have  nothing  short  of  a  Republic.  Once  the  Republic  was  decided  on,  the 
Gironde  closed  its  ranks,  and  tried  to  make  out  that  Aug.  loth  was  its  "day," 
and  actually  reproached  Danton,  Marat,  and  Robespierre  with  having  hidden 
themselves.  One  might  paradoxically  call  this  a  "gross  Girondin  calumny" 
against  Danton  {see  Birt?,  L^gende,  82  sqq.).'\ 


•266        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

do  forthwith  assemble  to  say  what  further !  An  able  Report ; 
which  the  President  must  have  had  ready  in  his  pocket  ?  A 
President^  in  such  cases,  must  have  much  ready,  and  yet  not 
ready;  and  Januslike  look  before  and  after. ^ 

King  Louis  listens  to  all ;  retires  about  midnight  '  to  three  little 
rooms  on  the  upper  floor  ; '  till  the  Luxembourg  be  prepared  for 
him,  and  '  the  safeguard  of  the  Nation.'  Safer  if  Brunswick  were 
once  here  !  Or,  alas,  not  so  safe  }  Ye  hapless  discrowned  heads  ! 
Crowds  came,  next  morning,  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  them,  in  their 
three  upper  rooms.^  Montgaillard  says  the  august  Captives  wore 
an  air  of  cheerfulness,  even  of  gaiety  ;  that  the  Queen  and  Princess 
Lamballe,  who  had  joined  her  overnight,  looked  out  of  the  opened 
window,  '  shook  powder  from  their  hair  on  the  people  below,  and 
laughed.'     He  is  an  acrid  distorted  man.^ 

For  the  rest,  one  may  guess  that  the  Legislative,  above  all  that 
the  New  Municipality  continues  busy.  Messengers,  Municipal  or 
Legislative,  and  swift  despatches  rush  off  to  all  corners  of  France  ; 
full  of  triumph,  blended  with  indignant  wail,  for  Twelve-hundred 
have  fallen.  France  sends  up  its  blended  shout  responsive  ;  the 
Tenth  of  August  shall  be  as  the  Fourteenth  of  July,  only  bloodier 
and  greater.  The  Court  has  conspired  .-*  Poor  Court :  the  Court 
has  been  vanquished ;  and  will  have  both  the  scath  to  bear  and 
the  scorn.     How  the  statues  of  Kings  do  now  all  fall  I     Bronze 

1  [Only  284  members  of  the  Assembly  were  present  when  the  suspension  of  the 
King  was  voted  ;  on  the  8th,  when  Lafayette  was  acquitted,  there  had  been  630  : 
but  in  the  interval  the  Cot^  Droit  and  Moderates  had  been  terrorised  into  hiding.] 

-  [The  Royal  Family  were  supplied  with  a  change  of  clothing  by  private  friends  ; 
and  the  Queen,  whose  watch  and  purse  had  been  stolen  as  she  walked  across  to 
the  Assembly,  borrowed  some  money  from  Mme  Auguie,  who  was  arrested  long 
afterwards  by  the  Coinit^  de  Sih-et^  Gd/tt'rale  for  having  lent  it,  and  committed 
suicide  on  her  arrest.  She  was  the  mother  of  Madame  Ney  (Mortimer-Ternaux, 
iii.  18).] 

•■^  Montgaillard,  ii.  135-167.  [The  Abb6  Montgaillard,  born  of  an  old  family  in 
Languedoc,  was  a.  proti!gi>  oi  the  excellent  Mgr.  Champion  de  Cic6  {Archbishop  of 
Bordeaux  and  Garde  des  Sceai/x  in  17S9).  He  emigrated  to  England  and  became 
a  friend  of  Burke,  returned  to  France  in  1799,  and  was  in  high  employment  under 
the  Empire.  His  book,  of  which  the  latest  edition  is  1827,  professes  to  be  a  History 
of  France  from  1789  to  1S25  (the  year  of  his  death),  and  extends  to  nine  volumes. 
His  judgments  on  the  early  part  of  the  reign  of  Louis  seem  sensible  and  moderate, 
but  he  is  fond  of  anecdotes.  Lameth  criticises  the  book  savagely  in  the  preface  to 
the  1828  edition  of  his  Hist,  de  r.\ss.  Constit.  (xxix.  sqq.).'\ 


CONSTITUTION  BURST  IN  PIECES    267 

Henri  himself,  though  he  wore  a  cockade  once,  jingles  down  from 
the  Pont  Neuf,  where  Patrie  floats  in  Danger.  Much  more  does 
Louis  Fourteenth,  from  the  Place  Vendome,  jingle  down ;  and  even 
breaks  in  falling.  The  curious  can  x'eraark,  written  on  his  horse's 
shoe  :  '  12  AoUt  I692  ; '  a  Centurj-  and  a  Day. 

The  tenth  of  August  was  Friday.  The  week  is  not  done, 
when  our  old  Patriot  Ministry'  is  recalled,  what  of  it  can  be 
got :  strict  Roland,  Genevese  Claviere  ;  add  heavy  Monge  the 
Mathematician,  once  a  stone-hewer  ;  and,  for  Minister  of  Justice, 
— Danton,  'led  hither,'  as  himself  says,  in  one  of  his  gigantic 
figures,  '  through  the  breach  of  Patriot  cannon  ! '  These,  under 
Legislative  Committees,  must  rule  the  wre«ck  as  they  can :  con- 
fusedly enough  ;  ^  with  an  old  Legislative  water-logged,  with 
a  new  Municipality  so  brisk.  But  National  Convention  will 
get  itself  together ;  and  then  !  Without  delay,  however,  let  a 
new  Jury-Court  and  Criminal  Tribunal  be  set  up  in  Paris,  to 
try  the  crimes  and  conspiracies  of  the  Tenth.  High  Court  of 
Orleans  '^  is  distant,  slow  :  the  blood  of  the  Twelve-hundred 
Patriots,  whatever  become  of  other  blood,  shall  be  inquired 
after.  Tremble,  ye  Criminals  and  Conspirators  ;  the  Minister 
of  Justice  is  Danton  !  Robespierre  too,  after  the  victory,  sits 
in  the  New  Municipality;  insurrectionary  'improvised  Munici- 
pality,' which  calls  itself  Council  General  of  the  Commune. 

For  three  days  now,  Louis  and  his  Family  have  heard  the 
Legislative  Debates  in  the  Lodge  of  the  Lugograp/ie ;  and  re- 
tired nightly  to  their  small  upper  rooms.  The  Luxembourg  and 
safeguard  of  the  Nation  could  not  be  got  ready :  nay,  it  seems 
the  Luxembourg  has  too  many  cellars  and  issues  ;  no  Munici- 
pality can  undertake  to  Avatch  it.  The  compact  Prison  of  the 
Temple,^  not  so    elegant   indeed,  were    much    safer.      To    the 

1  [Roland,  Interior;  Claviere,  Finance;  Servan,  War;  Monge,  Admiralty; 
I^ebrun,  Foreign  ;  Danton,  Justice.     They  were  elected  by  votes  of  the  Assembly.] 

'■^  [The  Orleans  Court  was  abolished  on  Sept.  26th ;  the  Trib.  Grim,  instituted 
Aug.  17th  (vid.  i'//r.,  ii.  281).] 

'  [The  proposal  to  send  the  Royal  Family  to  the  Tour  du  Temple  originated 
with  the  Commune.  This  ancient  building  dated  from  Philip  Augustus,  and  had 
become  National  property  on  the  abolition  of  Monastic  Orders.     The  King  and 


268        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Temple,  therefore!  On  Monday,  13th  day  of  August  1792,  in 
Mayor  Petion's  carriage,  Louis  and  his  sad  suspended  House- 
hold fare  thither ;  all  Paris  out  to  look  at  them.  As  they  pass 
through  the  Place  Vendome,  Louis  Fourteenth's  Statue  lies 
broken  on  the  ground.  Petion  is  afraid  the  Queen's  looks  may 
be  thought  scornful,  and  produce  provocation ;  she  casts  down 
her  eyes,  and  does  not  look  at  all.  The  'press  is  prodigious,' 
but  quiet :  here  and  there,  it  shouts  Five  la  Nation ;  but  for 
most  part  gazes  in  silence.  French  Royalty  vanishes  within  the 
gates  of  the  Temple  :  these  old  peaked  Towers,  like  peaked 
Extinguisher  or  Bonsoir,  do  cover  it  up ; — from  which  same  Towers, 
poor  Jacques  Molay  and  his  Templars  were  burnt  out,  by  French 
Royalty,  five  centuries  since.  Such  are  the  turns  of  Fate  below. 
Foreign  Ambassadors,  English  Lord  Gower  i  have  all  demanded 
passports ;  are  driving  indignantly  towai-ds  their  respective 
homes. 

So,  then,  the  Constitution  is  over }  Forever  and  a  day !  ^ 
Gone  is  that  wonder  of  the  Universe ;  First  biennial  Parliament, 
water-logged,  waits  only  till  the  Convention  come ;  and  will 
then  sink  to  endless  depths.  One  can  guess  the  silent  rage  of 
Old-Constituents,  Constitution-builders,  extinct  Feuillants,  men 
who  thought  the  Constitution  would  march  !  Lafayette  rises  to 
the  altitude  of  the  situation ;  at  the  head  of  his  Army.  Legis- 
lative Commissioners  are  posting  towards  him  and  it,  on  the 
Northern  Frontier,  to  congratulate  and  perorate :  he  orders  the 

Queen  were  at  first  confined  in  one  of  the  turrets  joining  the  Great  Tower,  but  at 
the  end  of  September  the  King,  and  at  the  end  of  October  the  rest  of  the  family 
were  moved  into  the  Great  Tower  itself.  The  King,  the  Dauphin  and  Cl^ry  his 
valet  lodged  on  the  second  storey  :  the  Queen,  Mme  Elisabeth  and  Mme  Royale 
on  the  third.  Five  Commissioners  of  the  Conimiaie,  among  whom  was  Simon, 
were  entrusted  with  the  Guard,  and  at  the  end  of  September  Hubert  was  added. 
The  Tower  of  the  Temple  was  demolished  by  Napoleon  in  i8ii.] 

1  [Lord  Gower  had  become  English  Minister  in  Paris  in  1790.  He  left  Paris  on 
Aug.  24th,  leaving  Mr.  Lindsay  behind  him  as  Charge  tf  Affaires.  He  died  as 
first  Duke  of  Sutherland,  1833.  On  Aug.  18th  he  writes,  "  the  Temple  is  the  only 
"building  in  which  the  Municipality  will  answer  for  the  security  of  the  Royal 
"  Family,  and  to  make  it  more  secure  they  are  digging  a  fosse  round  it."  (Gower's 
Despatches,  ed.  Browning  (Cambridge,  1885),  p.  207.)] 

^[On  Aug.  15th  a  decree  was  issued  by  the  Assembly  for  the  making  of  a  new- 
Great  Seal,  to  bear  a  figure  of  Liberty  armed  with  a  pike  and  crowned  with  a 
bonnet  rouge,  with  the  legend  Au  rwm  de  la  Nation  Franfaise."] 


CONSTITUTION  BURST  IN  PIECES    269 

Municipality  of  Sedan  to  arrest  these  Commissioners,  and  keep 
them  strictly  in  ward  as  Rebels,  till  he  say  further.  The  Sedan 
Municipals  obey. 

The  Sedan  Municipals  obey :  but  the  Soldiers  of  the  Lafayette 
Army  .''  The  Soldiers  of  the  Lafayette  Army  have,  as  all  Soldiers 
have,  a  kind  of  dim  feeling  that  they  themselves  are  Sansculottes 
in  buff  belts ;  that  the  victory  of  the  Tenth  of  August  is  also 
a  victory  for  them.  They  will  not  rise  and  follow  Lafayette  to 
Paris  ;  they  will  rise  and  send  him  thither  !  On  the  1 8th,  which 
is  but  next  Saturday,  Lafayette,  with  some  two  or  three  indignant 
Staff-officers,  one  of  whom  is  Old-Constituent  Alexandre  de 
Lameth,  having  first  put  his  Lines  in  what  order  he  could, — 
rides  swiftly  over  the  Marches  towards  Holland.  Rides,  alas, 
swiftly  into  the  claws  of  Austrians  !  He,  long  wavering,  tremb- 
ling on  the  verge  of  the  Horizon,  has  set,  in  Olmiitz  Dungeons ; 
this  History  knows  him  no  more.  Adieu,  thou  Hero  of  two 
Worlds  ;  thinnest,  but  compact  honour-worthy  man  !  Through 
long  rough  night  of  captivity,  through  other  tumults,  triumphs 
and  changes,  thou  wilt  swing  well,  'fast-anchored  to  the  Wash- 
ington Formula  ; '  ^  and  be  the  Hero  and  Perfect-character,  were 
it  only  of  one  idea.  The  Sedan  Municipals  repent  and  protest ; 
the  Soldiers  shout  Vive  la  Nation.  Dumouriez  Polymetis,  from 
his  Camp  at  Maulde,  sees  himself  made  Commander-in-Chief.^ 


'  [Lafayette,  on  getting  the  news  of  Aug.  loth,  convoked  the  authorities  of  the 
Department  of  the  Ardennes,  and  made  them  and  nearly  all  his  troops  renew  their 
oath  to  the  Constitution  :  Liickner  gave  some  sort  of  stammering  assent  to  the 
decrees  of  the  Legislative  ;  and  no  leading  commander  except  Lafayette  protested. 
He  on  the  19th,  when  it  had  become  evident  that  he  could  do  nothing,  crossed  the 
frontier  with  some  22  officers  in  the  hope  of  escaping  unrecognised  to  England,  and 
wrote  to  his  wife  to  join  him  in  America. 

When  taken  prisoner  he  made  a  calm  protest  that  he  repudiated  all  connection 
with  the  Amigrt^s.  He  was  handed  over  to  the  Prussians,  and  remained  in  a 
Prussian  prison  till  1795  :  then  to  the  Austrians  again,  who  kept  him  in  prison  at 
Olmiitz  until  1797,  when  he  was  released  at  Napoleon's  request.  Nothing  can 
possibly  excuse  the  treatment  accorded  by  the  Allies  to  Lafayette,  which  was  on  a 
par  with  some  of  the  worst  acts  of  the  French  Radicals.  He  bore  his  captivity  with 
the  utmost  heroism,  and  even  with  a  gaiety  and  good  humour  previously  unsus- 
pected in  him  (sec  Mortimer-Ternaux,  iii.  48,  70  ;  Lafayette,  iii.  392-401,  465).] 

2  [Not  officially  Commander-in-Chief,  but  Commander  of  the  Army  of  the  North, 
vice  Lafayette  ;  but  from  the  Aug.  loth  he  was  practically  Commander-in-Chief 
(see  Chuquet,  88-9).  It  was  probably  Couthon  who  persuaded  Dumouriez  to  adhere 
to  the  Aug.  loth  (see  Mortimer-Ternaux,  iii.  77).] 


270        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

And,  O  Brunswick !  what  sort  of  '  military  execution '  will 
Paris  merit  now  ?  Forward,  ye  well-drilled  exterminatory  men  ; 
with  your  artillery- wagons,  and  camp-kettles  jingling.  Forward, 
tall  chivalrous  King  of  Prussia ;  fanfaronading  Emigrants  and 
wargod  Broglie,  'for  some  consolation  to  mankind,'  which  verily 
is  not  without  need  of  some.  ^ 

^["Should  Brunswick  advance  rapidly,"  writes  Morris  Aug.  i8th,  "he  will  be 
"joined  by  great  numbers  ;  if  on  the  contrary  his  progress  is  slow,  it  is  probable 
"that  those  who  are  now  silent  from  fear  will  habituate  themselves  by  degrees  to 
"speak  favourably  of  the  present  government  .  .  .  and  foreign  powers  may  find  it 
"a  difficult  matter  to  shake  the  new  Republic  to  the  ground."] 


PART  III 
THE  GUILLOTINE 


3lflc  5»^fif>fit^-5U'*i>ftcI,  lie  waxtn  mir  immcr  ^uunbcv ; 

iBiflfui"  fuchte  beef)  uuv  rseter  am  (Sncc  fiiv  ftcfc. 
9BtUft  bu  5Biete  bffrciu,  fc  iraij'  e5  i^ielcn  5U  bicnen. 

aBic  gefd^rti^  bag  fc»,  unflrt  bu  eg  hiiiffn?     fflerfu^'g! 

©octl^e. 


273 


PART  III:  THE  GUILLOTINE 

BOOK  I 

SEPTEMBER 

CHAPTER  I 

THE  IMPROVISED  COMMUNE 

Ye  have  roused  her,  then,  ye  Emigrants  and  Despots  of  the 
world ;  France  is  roused !  Long  have  ye  been  lecturing  and 
tutoring  this  poor  Nation,  like  cruel  uncalled-for  pedagogues, 
shaking  over  her  your  ferulas  of  fire  and  steel :  it  is  long  that 
ye  have  pricked  and  filliped  and  affrighted  her,  there  as  she  sat 
helpless  in  her  dead  cerements  of  a  Constitution,  you  gathering 
in  on  her  from  all  lands,  with  your  armaments  and  plots,  your 
invadings  and  truculent  bullyings  ; — and  lo  now,  ye  have  pricked 
her  to  the  quick,  and  she  is  up,  and  her  blood  is  up.  The  dead 
cerements  are  rent  into  cobwebs,  and  she  fronts  you  in  that 
terrible  strength  of  Nature,  which  no  man  has  measured,  which 
goes  down  to  Madness  and  Tophet :  see  now  how  ye  will  deal 
with  her. 

This  month  of  September  1 792,  which  has  become  one  of  the 
memorable  months  of  History,  presents  itself  under  two  most 
diverse  aspects ;  all  of  black  on  the  one  side,  all  of  bright  on  the 
other.  Whatsoever  is  cruel  in  the  panic  frenzy  of  Twenty-five 
million  men,  whatsoever  is  great  in  the  simultaneous  death- 
defiance  of  Twenty-five  million  men,  stand  here  in  abrupt  con- 
trast, near  by  one  another.  As  indeed  is  usual  when  a  man,  how 
much  more  when  a  Nation  of  men,  is  hurled  suddenly  beyond 
the  limits.  For  Nature,  as  green  as  she  looks,  rests  everywhere 
on  dread  foundations,  were  we  further  down ;  and  Pan,  to  whose 

VOL.    II.  18 


274        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

music  the  Nymphs  dance,  has  a  cry  in  him  that  can  drive  all 
men  distracted. 

Very  frightful  it  is  when  a  Nation,  rending  asunder  its  Consti- 
tutions and  Regulations  which  were  grown  dead  cerements  for 
it,  becomes  /ra«*cendental ;  and  must  now  seek  its  wild  way 
through  the  New,  Chaotic, — where  Force  is  not  yet  distinguished 
into  Bidden  and  Forbidden,  but  Crime  and  Virtue  welter  un- 
separated, — in  that  Domain  of  what  is  called  the  Passions ;  of 
what  we  call  the  Miracles  and  the  Portents  !  It  is  thus  that,  for 
some  three  years  to  come,  we  are  to  contemplate  France,  in  this 
final  Third  Part  of  our  History.  Sansculottism  reigning  in  all  its 
grandeur  and  in  all  its  hideousness  :  the  Gospel  (God's- Message) 
of  Man's  Rights,  Man's  mights  or  strengths,  once  more  preached 
irrefragably  abroad  ;  along  with  this,  and  still  louder  for  the 
time,  the  fearfullest  Devil's-Message  of  Man's  weaknesses  and 
sins ; — and  all  on  such  a  scale,  and  under  such  aspect :  cloudy 
'  death-birth  of  a  world  : '  huge  smoke-cloud,  streaked  with  rays 
as  of  heaven  on  one  side  ;  girt  on  the  other  as  with  hell-fire ! 
History  tells  us  many  things :  but  for  the  last  thousand  years 
and  more,  what  thing  has  she  told  us  of  a  sort  like  this  }  Which 
therefore  let  us  two,  O  Reader,  dwell  on  willingly,  for  a  little  ; 
and  from  its  endless  significance  endeavour  to  extract  what  may, 
in  present  circumstances,  be  adapted  for  us. 

It  is  unfortunate,  though  very  natural,  that  the  history  of  this 
Period  has  so  generally  been  written  in  hysterics.  Exaggeration 
abounds,  execration,  wailing ;  and,  on  the  whole,  darkness.  But 
thus  too,  when  foul  old  Rome  had  to  be  swept  from  the  Earth, 
and  those  Northmen,  and  other  horrid  sons  of  Nature,  came  in, 
'swallowing  formulas,'  as  the  French  now  do,  foul  old  Rome 
screamed  execratively  her  loudest ;  so  that  the  true  shape  of 
many  things  is  lost  for  us.  Attila's  Huns  had  arms  of  such 
length  that  they  could  lift  a  stone  without  stooping.  Into  the 
body  of  the  poor  Tatars  execrative  Roman  History  intercalated 
an  alj)habetic  letter ;  and  so  they  continue  Tartars,  of  fell 
Tartarean  nature,  to  this  day.  Here,  in  like  manner,  search  as 
we  will  in  these  multiform  innumerable  French  Records,  darkness 


THE  IMPEOVISED  COMMUNE       275 

too  frequently  covers,  or  sheer  distraction  bewilders.  One  finds 
it  difficult  to  imagine  that  the  Sun  shone  in  this  September 
month,  as  he  does  in  others.  Nevertheless  it  is  an  indisputable 
fact  that  the  Sun  did  shine  ;  and  there  was  weather  and  work, 
— nay,  as  to  that,  very  bad  weather  for  harvest-work  !  An 
unlucky  Editor  may  do  his  utmost ;  and  after  all,  require 
allowances. 

He  had  been  a  wise  Frenchman,  who,  looking  close  at  hand 
on  this  waste  aspect  of  France  all  stirring  and  whirling,  in  ways 
new,  untried,  had  been  able  to  discern  where  the  cardinal  move- 
ment lay ;  which  tendency  it  was  that  had  the  rule  and  primary 
direction  of  it  then !  But  at  forty-four  years'  distance,  it  is  different. 
To  all  men  now,  two  cardinal  movements  or  grand  tendencies, 
in  the  September  whirl,  have  become  discernible  enough :  that 
stormful  effluence  towards  the  Frontiers ;  that  frantic  crowding 
towards  Townhouses  and  Council-halls  in  the  interior.  Wild 
France  dashes,  in  desperate  death-defiance,  towards  the  Frontiers, 
to  defend  itself  from  foreign  Despots  ;  crowds  towards  Townhalls 
and  Election  Committee-rooms,  to  defend  itself  from  domestic 
Aristocrats.  Let  the  Reader  conceive  well  these  two  cardinal 
movements  ;  and  what  side-currents  and  endless  vortexes  ^  might 
depend  on  these.  He  shall  judge,  too,  whether,  in  such  sudden 
wreckage  of  all  old  Authorities,  such  a  pair  of  cardinal  move- 
ments, half-frantic  in  themselves,  could  be  of  soft  nature  ?  As 
in  dry  Sahara,  when  the  winds  waken,  and  lift  and  winnow  the 
immensity  of  sand  !  The  air  itself  (Travellers  say)  is  a  dim  sand- 
air  ;  and  dim  looming  through  it,  the  wonderfullest  uncertain 
colonnades  of  Sand-Pillars  rush  whirling  from  this  side  and  from 
that,  like  so  many  mad  Spinning-Dervishes,  of  a  hundred  feet  in 
stature  ;  and  dance  their  huge  Desert-waltz  there  ! — 

Nevertheless,  in  all  human  movements,  were  they  but  a  day 
old,  there  is  order,  or  the  beginning  of  order.  Consider  two 
things  in  this  Sahara-waltz  of  the  French  Twenty-five  millions ; 
or  rather  one  thing,  and  one  hope  of  a   thing ;    the   Coimnune 


276        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

(Municipality)  of  Paris,  which  is  already  here  ;  the  National 
Convention,  which  shall  in  few  weeks  be  here.  The  Insurrec- 
tionary Commune,  which,  improvising  itself  on  the  eve  of  the 
Tenth  of  August,  worked  this  ever-memorable  Deliverance  by 
explosion,  must  needs  rule  over  it, — till  the  Convention  meet. 
This  Commune,  which  they  may  well  call  a  spontaneous  or 
'  improvised  '  Commune,  is,  for  the  present,  sovereign  of  France. 
The  Legislative,  deriving  its  authority  from  the  Old,  how  can  it 
now  have  authority  when  the  Old  is  exploded  by  insurrection  ? 
As  a  floating  piece  of  wreck,  certain  things,  persons  and  interests 
may  still  cleave  to  it :  volunteer  defenders,  riflemen  or  pikemen 
in  green  uniform,  or  red  nightcap  (of  bonnet  rouge),  defile  before 
it  daily,  just  on  the  wing  towards  Brunswick ;  with  the  brand- 
ishing of  arms  ;  always  with  some  touch  of  Leonidas-eloquence, 
often  with  a  fire  of  daring  that  threatens  to  outherod  Herod, — 
the  Galleries,  'especially  the  Ladies,  never  done  with  applaud- 
ing.' ^  Addresses  of  this  or  the  like  sort  can  be  received  and 
answered,  in  the  hearing  of  all  France  ;  the  Salle  de  Manege  is 
still  useful  as  a  place  of  proclamation.  For  which  use,  indeed, 
it  now  chiefly  serves.  Vergniaud  delivers  spirit-stirring  orations  ; 
but  always  with  a  prophetic  sense  only,  looking  towards  the  com- 
ing Convention.  "Let  our  memory  perish,"  cries  Vergniaud, 
"  but  let  France  be  free  !  " — whereupon  they  all  start  to  their 
feet,  shouting  responsive :  "  Yes,  yes,  perisse  notre  m&moire, 
puitrvu  que  la  France  .soit  libre!"-  Disfrocked  Chabot  adjures 
Heaven  that  at  least  we  may  "  have  done  with  Kings  ; "  and 
fast  as  powder  under  spark,  we  all  blaze  up  once  more, 
and  with  waved  hats  shout  and  swear :  "  Yes,  nous  le  jurons ; 
plus  de  rois !"  '^  All  which,  as  a  method  of  proclamation,  is 
very  convenient. 

For  the  rest,  that  our  busy  Brissots,  rigorous  Rolands,  men 
who  once  had  authority,  and  now  have  less  and  less ;  men  who 
love  law,  and  will  have  even  an  Explosion  explode  itself  as  far 
as  possible  according  to  rule,  do  find  this  state  of  matters  most 

1  Moore's  Journal,  i.  140.  ^  Hist.  Pari.  xvii.  467. 

^Ibid.  xvii.  437. 


THE  IMPROVISED  COMMUNE       277 

unofficial-unsatisfactory, — is  not  to  be  denied.  Complaints  are 
made  ;  attempts  are  made :  but  without  effect.  The  attempts 
even  recoil ;  and  must  be  desisted  from,  for  fear  of  worse :  the 
sceptre  has  departed  from  this  Legislative  once  and  always.  A 
poor  Legislative,  so  hard  was  fate,  had  let  itself  be  hand-gyved, 
nailed  to  the  rock  like  an  Andromeda,  and  could  only  wail  there 
to  the  Earth  and  Heavens  ;  miraculously  a  winged  Perseus  (or 
Improvised  Commune)  has  dawned  out  of  the  void  Blue,  and 
cut  her  loose  :  but  whether  now  is  it  she,  with  her  softness  and 
musical  speech,  or  is  it  he,  with  his  hardness  and  sharp  falchion 
and  aegis,  that  shall  have  casting  vote  ?  Melodious  agreement  of 
vote  ;  this  were  the  rule  !  But  if  otherwise,  and  votes  diverge, 
then  surely  Andromeda's  part  is  to  weep, — if  possible,  tears  of 
gratitude  alone. 

Be  content,  O  France,  with  this  Improvised  Commune,  such 
as  it  is  !  It  has  the  implements,  and  has  the  hands :  the  time 
is  not  long.  On  Sunday  the  twenty-sixth  of  August,  our 
Primary  Assemblies  shall  meet,  begin  electing  of  Electors  ;  on 
Sunday  the  second  of  September  (may  the  day  prove  lucky !) 
the  Electors  shall  begin  electing  Deputies  ;  and  so  an  all-healing 
National  Convention  will  come  together.  No  marc  d  argent,  or 
distinction  of  Active  and  Passive,  now  insults  the  French 
Patriot :  but  there  is  universal  suffrage,  unlimited  liberty  to 
choose.^  Old-Constituents,  Present-Legislators,  all  France  is 
eligible.  Nay,  it  may  be  said,  the  flower  of  all  the  Universe 
{de  I'  Univers)  is  eligible  ;  for  in  these  very  days  we,  by  act  of 
Assembly,  'naturalise'  the  chief  Foreign  Friends  of  Humanity: 
Priestley,  burnt  out  for  us  in  Birmingham ;  Klopstock,  a  genius 

'[Carlyle  rightly  discerns  what  a  misfortune  it  was  that  the  elections  to  the 
Convention  took  place  under  the  reign  of  Terror  caused  by  the  domiciliary  visits 
and  the  massacres  of  September.  The  calling  of  a  Convention  was  voted  on 
August  nth  :  though  several  motions  for  manhood  suffrage  without  restriction  were 
made,  the  Assembly  contented  itself  with  abolishing  the  property  qualification  for 
electors  and  elected,  but  maintained  the  age  limit  (25  years),  and  the  exclusion  of 
domestic  servants.  M.  Gustave  Bord  (Rev.  de  la  R^v.  i.  162  sijq.,  299  .f^^.)  cal- 
culates that,  out  of  7,580,000  primary  electors  on  the  new  Register,  only  630,000 
recorded  their  votes  :  of  the  secondary  electors  25  per  cent,  more  abstained  ;  so 
that  the  Convention  was  elected  (and  so  the  Republic  proclaimed)  by  some  6 per 
cent,  of  the  electors  of  France.  The  domiciliary  visits  were  voted  on  Aug.  28th,  to 
be  carried  out  by  30  commissioners  from  each  Section.] 


278        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

of  all  countries ;  Jeremy  Bentham,  useful  Jurisconsult ;  distin- 
guished Paine,  the  rebellious  Needleman  ; — some  of  whom  may 
be  chosen.^  As  is  most  fit ;  for  a  Convention  of  this  kind.  In 
a  word.  Seven-hundred  and  Forty-five  unshackled  sovereigns, 
admired  of  the  universe,  shall  replace  this  hapless  impotency  of 
a  Legislative, — out  of  which,  it  is  likely,  the  best  Members,  and 
the  Mountain  in  mass,  may  be  re-elected.  Roland  is  getting 
ready  the  Salle  des  Cent  Suisses,  as  preliminary  rendezvous  for 
them ;  in  that  void  Palace  of  the  Tuileries,  now  void  and 
National,  and  not  a  Palace,  but  a  Caravansera. 

As  for  the  Spontaneous  Commune,  one  may  say  that  there 
never  was  on  Earth  a  stranger  Town-Council. ^  Administration, 
not  of  a  great  City,  but  of  a  great  Kingdom  in  a  state  of  revolt 
and  frenzy,  this  is  the  task  that  has  fallen  to  it.  Enrolling, 
provisioning,  judging ;  devising,  deciding,  doing,  endeavouring 
to  do :  one  wonders  the  human  brain  did  not  give  way  under 
all  this,  and  reel.  But  happily  human  brains  have  such  a  talent 
of  taking  up  simply  what  they  can  carry,  and  ignoring  all  the 
rest;  leaving  all  the  rest,  as  if  it  were  not  there!  Whereby 
somewhat  is  verily  shifted  for  ;  and  much  shifts  for  itself.  This 
Improvised  Commune  walks  along,  nothing  doubting ;  promptly 
making  front,  without  fear  or  flurry,  at  what  moment  soever,  to 
the  wants  of  the  moment.  Were  the  world  on  fire,  one  impro- 
vised tricolor  Municipal  has  but  one  life  to  lose.  They  are  the 
elixir  and  chosen-men  of  Sansculottic  Patriotism ;  promoted  to 
the  forlorn-hope  ;  unspeakable  victory  or  a  high  gallows,  this  is 
their  meed.  They  sit  there,  in  the  Townhall,  these  astonishing 
tricolor  Municipals  ;  in  Council  General ;  in  Committee  of  watch- 
fulness (de  Surveillance,  which  will  even  become  de  Salul  Public, 
of  Public  Salvation),*^  or  what  other  Committees  and  Sub-com- 

'  [Add  Wilberforce,  Williams,  Gorani,  Clootz,  Campe,  Schiller,  Pestalozzi, 
Washington  and  Kosciusko.] 

2 [Now  six  commissioners,  instead  of  three,  from  each  Section;  the  Conseil- 
Giniral  included  288  members  in  all.] 

•*  [This  is  an  obvious  but  unfortunate  blunder :  there  never  was  any  connection 
between  the  Commune,  or  the  Comiti  de  Suyveillance  of  the  Commune,  and  the 
Committee  of  Public  Safety,  which  in  its  various  forms  was  always  a  Committee  of 
the  Legislative  body,  whether  of  the  "  Legislative  "  proper  or  the  Convention.     The 


THE  IMPROVISED  COMMUNE       279 

mittees  are  needful ; — managing  infinite  Correspondence  ;  passing 
infinite  Decrees  :  one  hears  of  a  Decree  being  '  the  ninety-eighth 
of  the  day.'  Ready  !  is  the  word.  They  carry  loaded  pistols  in 
their  pocket ;  also  some  improvised  luncheon  by  way  of  meal. 
Or  indeed,  by  and  by,  traileurs  contract  for  the  supply  of  repasts, 
to  be  eaten  on  the  spot, — too  lavishly,  as  it  was  afterwards 
grumbled.  Thus  they  :  girt  in  their  tricolor  sashes ;  Municipal 
note-paper  in  the  one  hand,  fire-arms  in  the  other.  They  have 
their  Agents  out  all  over  France  ;  speaking  in  townhouses, 
market-places,  highways  and  byways  ;  agitating,  urging  to  arm  ;  ^ 
all  hearts  tingling  to  hear.  Great  is  the  fire  of  Antiaristocrat 
eloquence  :  nay  some,  as  Bibliopolic  Momoro,  seem  to  hint  afar 
off  at  something  w^hich  smells  of  Agrarian  Law,  and  a  surgery  of 
the  overswoln  dropsical  strongbox  itself; — whereat  indeed  the 
bold  Bookseller  runs  risk  of  being  hanged,  and  Ex-Constituent 
Buzot  has  to  smuggle  him  off.^ 

first  foreshadow  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  was  a  Commission  of  twelve 
appointed  in  the  Legislative  Assembly,  March  6th  '92,  i.e.,  on  the  eve  of  the  war. 
Its  action  may  have  influenced  the  King  towards  taking  a  Girondist  ministry,  for 
during  that  ministry  it  did  not  sit  (March  24th — June  13th) ;  but  it  reappeared  on 
their  dismissal,  and  made  a  firm  grasp  at  the  executive  power.  From  August  3rd 
to  8th  it  was  busy  with  schemes  for  the  deposition  of  the  King,  and  the  substitution 
either  of  the  Dauphin  or  the  Republic.  On  Aug.  12th  it  became  the  Commission  of 
twenty-five,  and  Vergniaud,  Brissot,  Thuriot,  Condorcet,  Gensonn6  were  on  it.  It 
reappeared  in  Jan.  '93  when  the  title  of  ComM  de  defense  gdndrale  was  first  given 
to  it,  but  its  personnel  had  changed  and  Robespierre,  Sieyfes  and  Danton  were  on  it, 
as  well  as  the  leading  Girondists.  Its  too  great  size  and  the  comparative  publicity  of 
its  debates  led  to  Isnard's  motion  and  the  vote  of  April  6th  by  which  it  was  reduced 
to  9  members;  we  then  begin  to  know  it  as  the  'first  Co7nitt!  de  Saint  Public' 
(Aulard,  '  Recueil  des  Actes  et  Monuments  du  Comity  de  Salut  Public '  (Paris,  1889- 
91),  i.  xlvi.  ;  vid.  infr.,  iii.  34.)] 

i[The  first  Reprisentants  en  Mission  were  the  three  members  of  the  Legis- 
lative sent  to  the  Camp  at  Soissons,  July  31st  '92.  On  Aug.  12th  three  were  sent  to 
each  of  the  Armies.  The  principle  was  greatly  extended  when  (March  9th  '93) 
Convention  Commissioners  were  sent  to  each  Department  to  organise  the  levy  of 
300,000  men,  and  to  requisition  all  horses  not  employed  in  agriculture.  The 
actual  title  of  Kepn'seiUants  en  .Mission  was  given  by  decree  of  Convention  April  4th 
'93.  Five  days  later  it  was  decreed  that  there  should  always  be  three  with  each 
Army,  invested  with  unlimited  powers,  saving  appeal  to  the  Convention,  to  which 
they  were  to  report  daily.  Their  reports  were  in  practice  more  usually  sent  to  the 
Comiti  de  Salut  Public,  and  not  much  more  than  once  a  week.  Aulard's  '  Recueil ' 
is  full  of  their  correspondence.  Let  it  be  noted  that  the  Convention  by  this  move 
usurped  the  Executive  power,  threw  its  nominal  'ministers'  into  the  shade,  and 
showed  its  utter  contempt  for  the  principle  of  '  si!paratio?t  des  pouvoirs '  on  which 
the  Constituent,  following  the  teaching  of  Montesquieu  (Esprit  des  Lois,  xi.  5),  had 
so  much  insisted,     (l^id.  infr.,  iii.  74,  and  Aulard,  Recueil,  ii.  298,  etc.)] 

2  M6m.  de  Buzot  (Paris,  1823),  p.  88.  [The  passage  in  Buzot  is  vague,  and 
merely  says  that  he  prevented  two  Commissioners  from  being  hanged  at  Bernaie, 


280        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Governing  Persons,  were  they  never  so  insignificant  intrinsic- 
ally, have  for  most  part  plenty  of  Memoir-writers ;  and  the 
curious,  in  after-times,  can  learn  minutely  their  goings  out  and 
comings  in :  which,  as  men  always  love  to  know  their  fellow- 
men  in  singular  situations,  is  a  comfort,  of  its  kind.  Not  so 
with  these  Governing  Persons,  now  in  the  Townhall !  And  yet 
what  most  original  fellow-man,  of  the  Governing  sort,  high- 
chancellor,  king,  kaiser,  secretary  of  the  home  or  the  foreign 
department,  ever  showed  such  a  phasis  as  Clerk  Tallien,  Pro- 
cureur  Manuel,  future  Procureur  Chaumette,  here  in  this  Sand- 
waltz  of  the  Twenty-five  millions  now  do  ?  O  brother  mortals, 
— thou  Advocate  Panis,  friend  of  Danton,  kinsman  of  Santerre  ; 
Engraver  Sergent,  since  called  Agate  Sergent ;  thou  Huguenin, 
with  the  tocsin  in  thy  heart !  But,  as  Horace  says,  they  wanted 
the  sacred  memoir-writer  {sacro  vale) ;  and  we  know  them  not. 
Men  bragged  of  August  and  its  doings,  publishing  them  in  high 
places ;  but  of  this  September  none  now  or  afterwards  would 
brag.  The  September  v/orld  remains  dark,  fuliginous,  as  Lap- 
land witch-midnight ;— from  which,  indeed,  very  strange  shapes 
will  evolve  themselves. 

Understand  this,  however :  that  incorruptible  Robespierre  is 
not  wanting,  now  when  the  brunt  of  battle  is  past ;  in  a  stealthy 
way  the  seagreen  man  sits  there,  his  feline  eyes  excellent  in  the 
twilight.  Also  understand  this  other,  a  single  fact  worth  many : 
that  Marat  is  not  only  there,  but  has  a  seat  of  honour  assigned 
him,  a  tribune  particuliere.^  How  changed  for  Marat ;  lifted  from 
his  dark  cellar  into  this  luminous  '  peculiar  tribune  ! '  All  dogs 
have  their  day ;  even  rabid  dogs.  Sorrowful,  incurable  Philoc- 
tetes  Marat ;  without  wliom  Troy  cannot  be  taken  !     Hither,  as 

where  he  was  presiding  over  the  Electoral  Assembly,  '  for  preaching  on  the  property 
and  safety  of  persons  nearly  the  same  ideas  which  were  afterwards  made  into  laws.' 
From  Brissot  (in  a  Letter  a  ses  commettans,  p.  35)  we  learn  that  one  of  these 
persons  was  Momoro    'for  his  predictions  of  agrarian  law.'] 

'  [Marat  was  not,  as  Carlyle  seems  to  imply,  an  elected  member  of  the  Commune. 
He  was  merely  a  spectator  to  whom  the  Cimuimfie  assigned  a  particular  seat  in 
the  Gallery,  and  allowed  (quite  illegally)  to  speak.  One  might  speak  of  Iiim  as 
'  coopted '  in  the  same  way  as  a  man  not  elected  by  any  constituency  may  be 
coopted  by  a  Count)'  Council  as  an  'alderman,'  except  that  his  cooptation  was 
illegal,  if  indeed  anything  was  legal  or  illegal  in  France  at  the  time.  (See  Mor- 
timer-Ternaux,  iii.  89.)] 


THE  IMPROVISED  COMMUNE       281 

a  main  element  of  the  Governing  Power,  has  Marat  been  raised. 
Royalist  types,  for  we  have  *  suppressed '  innumerable  Durosoys, 
Royous,  and  even  clapt  them  in  prison, — Royalist  types  replace 
the  worn  types  often  snatched  from  a  People's-Friend  in  old  ill 
days.i  In  our  '  peculiar  tribune  '  we  write  and  redact :  Placards, 
of  due  monitory  terror ;  Amis-du-Peup/e  (now  under  the  name 
of  Journal  de  la  Republique)  ;  and  sit  obeyed  of  men.  '  Marat,' 
says  one,  ^is  the  conscience  of  the  H6tel-de-Ville.'  Keeper, 
as  some  call  it,  of  the  Sovereign's  Conscience  ;  which  surely, 
in  such  hands,  will  not  lie  hid  in  a  napkin ! 

Two  great  movements,  as  we  said,  agitate  this  distracted 
National  mind :  a  rushing  against  domestic  Traitors,  a  rushing 
against  foreign  Despots.  Mad  movements  both,  restrainable  by 
no  known  rule ;  strongest  passions  of  human  nature  driving 
them  on :  love,  hatred,  vengeful  sorrow,  braggart  Nationality 
also  vengeful, — and  pale  Panic  over  all !  Twelve-hundred  slain 
Patriots,  do  they  not,  from  their  dark  catacombs  there,  in 
Death's  dumb-show,  plead  (O  ye  Legislators)  for  vengeance  ? 
Such  was  the  destructive  rage  of  these  Aristocrats  on  the  ever- 
memorable  Tenth.  Nay,  apart  from  vengeance,  and  with  an 
eye  to  Public  Salvation  only,  are  there  not  still,  in  this  Paris 
(in  round  numbers)  '  Thirty-thousand  Aristocrats,'  of  the  most 
malignant  humour ;  driven  now  to  their  last  trump-card  ? — Be 
patient,  ye  Patriots :  our  New  High  Court,  '  Tribunal  of  the 
Seventeenth,'  sits  ;  each  Section  has  sent  Four  Jurymen  ;  and 
Dan  ton,  extinguishing  improper  judges,  improper  practices 
wheresoever  found,  is  '  the  same  man  you  have  known  at  the 
Cordeliers.'  With  such  a  Minister  of  Justice,  shall  not  Justice 
be  done  ? — Let  it  be  swift  then,  answers  universal  Patriotism ; 
swift  and  sure  !  ^ — 

1  [Marat  appeared  at  the  Louvre  [Impriinerie  Nationale)  with  some  friends, 
and  simply  stole  four  printing  presses  and  a  lot  of  type.  The  Director  of  the 
Imprimerie  (Anisson-Duperron)  complained  to  the  Assembly,  but  nothing  was 
done.  On  the  19th  the  Ai?ii  du  Pcuple  demanded  that  '  the  people  '  should  go  at 
once  and  massacre  the  Swiss  officers  in  prison  {ibid.  90-91).] 

2  [On  15th  Robespierre,  in  the  name  of  the  Conum/nc,  demanded  at  the  Bar  of  the 
Assembly  the  creation  of  an  E.xtraordinary  Criminal  Tribunal  to  judge  the  'crimes 
of  Aug.   loth.'     It  was  to  be  without  appeal,   'for  appeals,' said  he,  'secure  im- 


282        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

One  would  hope,  this  Tribunal  of  the  Seventeenth  is  swifter 
than  most.  Already  on  the  21st,  while  our  Court  is  but  four  days 
old,  Collenot  d' Angremont,  '  the  Royalist  enlister '  (crimp,  emhau- 
cheiir),  dies  by  torchlight.  For,  lo,  the  great  GiiUlotine,  wondrous 
to  behold,  now  stands  there  ;  the  Doctor's  Idea  has  become  Oak 
and  Iron  ;  the  huge  cyclopean  axe  '  falls  in  its  grooves  like  the 
ram  of  the  Pile-engine,'  swiftly  snuffing  out  the  light  of  men ! 
"  Mais  vous,  Gualches,  what  have  you  invented  ?  "  This  ? — Poor 
old  Laporte,  Intendant  of  the  Civil  List,  follows  next ;  ^  quietly, 
the  mild  old  man.  Then  Durosoy,^  Royalist  Placarder,  'cashier 
of  all  the  Antirevolutionists  of  the  interior  : '  he  went  rejoicing  ; 
said  that  a  Royalist  like  him  ought  to  die,  of  all  days,  on  this  day, 
the  25th  or  Saint  Louis's  Day.  All  these  have  been  tried,  cast, 
— the  Galleries  shouting  approval ;  and  handed  over  to  the  Real- 
ised Idea,  within  a  week.  Besides  those  whom  we  have  acquitted, 
the  Galleries  murmuring,  and  have  dismissed ;  or  even  have 
personally  guarded  back  to  Prison,^  as  the  Galleries  took  to  howl- 
ing, and  even  to  menacing  and  elbowing.^  Languid  this  Tribunal 
is  not. 

Nor  does  the  other  movement  slacken ;  the  rushing  against 
foreign  Despots.  Strong  forces  shall  meet  in  death-grip  ;  drilled 
Europe  against  mad  undrilled  France ;  and  singular  conclusions 

punity.'  This  then  was  decreed  on  17th,  and  sat  till  Nov.  29th  '92  (Mortimer- 
Ternaux,  iii.  35  ;  vid.  infr.,  iii.  32).  The  Court  was  composed  of  two  presidents, 
six  judges,  two  public  prosecutors,  one  hundred  and  ninety-two  jurymen,  elected  by 
the  48  sections  of  Paris.  The  accused  was  allowed  twelve  hours  to  examine  the 
evidence  against  him,  and  three  to  prepare  his  defence.  Robespierre  had  been 
elected  a  judge,  but  he  characteristically  refused.  {See  also  Berriat  de  Saint- 
Prix,  La  Justice  R^volutionnaire  a  Paris  (Paris,   1861),  p.  8.)] 

^[Aug.  28th.  Arnauld  de  La  Porte  (born  1737)  had  been  Intendant  at  Toulon, 
became  Intendant  of  the  Civil  List  in  1790,  and  a  confidential  adviser  of  the  King. 
His  accusation  now  was  that  he  had  burnt,  at  the  Sevres  porcelain  manufactory, 
the  King's  secret  correspondence  with  Austria ;  what  he  had  really  burned  was 
the  new  edition  of  Mme  de  la  Motte's  M^moires.] 

2[Durosoy  had  been  editor  of  the  Gazette  de  Paris,  Oct.  ist  '89 — Aug.  loth  '92. 
All  the  Royalist  newspapers  were  suppressed  and  their  presses  stolen  or  broken, 
an  admirable  example  of  the  way  in  which  the  Radicals  applied  the  doctrine  of 
Liberty  of  the  press.  ] 

'[Before  the  creation  of  the  Tribunal  the  ex-Ministers,  Montmorin,  Tarb6,  Ber- 
trand-Moleville,  Duportail,  Duport  du  Tertre,  with  Barnave  and  Alex.  Lameth,  had 
been  decreed  accused,  and  ordered  to  be  sent  to  Orleans.  Bertrand  succeeded  in 
escaping  by  hiding,  Lameth  was  with  Lafayette  ;  the  others  were  imprisoned.] 

*  Moore's  Journal,  i.  159-168. 


THE  IMPKO VISED  COMMUNE       283 

will  be  tried. — Conceive  therefore,  in  some  faint  degree,  the 
tumult  that  whirls  in  this  France,  in  this  Paris  !  Placards  from 
Section,  from  Commune,  from  Legislative,  from  the  individual 
Patriot,  flame  monitory  on  all  walls.  Flags  of  Danger  to  Father- 
land wave  at  the  H6tel-de-Ville ;  on  the  Pont  Neuf — over  the 
prostrate  Statues  of  Kings.  There  is  universal  enlisting,  urging 
to  enlist ;  there  is  tearful-boastful  leave-taking  ;  irregular  march- 
ing on  the  Great  Northeastern  Road.  Marseillese  sing  their  wild 
To  Arms,  in  chorus  ;  which  now  all  men,  all  women  and  children 
have  learnt,  and  sing  chorally,  in  Theatres,  Boulevards,  Streets ; 
and  the  heart  burns  in  every  bosom  :  Aux  amies  !  Marchon^  ! — 
Or  think  how  your  Aristocrats  are  skulking  into  covert ;  how 
Bertrand-  Moleville  lies  hidden  in  some  garret "  in  Aubry-le-boucher 
Street,  with  a  poor  surgeon  who  had  known  me  ! "  ^  Dame  de 
Stael  has  secreted  her  Narbonne,  not  knowing  what  in  the  world 
to  make  of  him.  The  Barriers  are  sometimes  open,  oftenest  shut ; 
no  passports  to  be  had  ;  ^  Townhall  Emissaries,  with  the  eyes  and 
claws  of  falcons,  flitting  watchful  on  all  points  of  your  horizon ! 
In  two  words  :  Tribunal  of  the  Seventeenth,  busy  under  howling 
Galleries  ;  Prussian  Brunswick,  '  over  a  space  of  forty  miles,'  with 
his  war-tumbrils,  and  sleeping  thunders,  and  Briarean  '  sixty-six 
thousand '  ^  right  hands, — coming,  coming  ! 

0  Heavens,  in  these  latter  days  of  August,  he  is  come  !  Duro- 
soy  was  not  yet  guillotined  when  news  had  come  that  the  Prussians 
were  harrying  and  ravaging  about  Metz  ;  ^  in  some  four  days  more, 
one  hears  that  Longwi,  our  first  strong-place  on  the  borders,  is 

1  [Bertrand,  ii.  171.  Fe  does  not  give  the  name  of  the  surgeon,  but  he  was  an 
'  honourable  man  who  had  known  me  from  childhood,  and  was  very  much  attached 
to  one  of  my  brothers  :  '  he  remained  with  this  host  till  Oct.  12th,  when  with  a 
passport,  which  Mme  de  Flahaut  contrived  to  procure  for  him  under  another  name, 
he  escaped  to  England  [ibid.  ii.  220  sqq.).'] 

2  [The  Barriers  were  shut  on  loth— 13th,  and  again  15th  and  i6th,  while  from 
17th — 29th  they  were  only  opened  to  those  with  passports  from  their  Section  Com- 
mittees, signed  at  the  Mairie  {i.e.,  by  the  Comite  de  Surveillance  of  the  Commune 
— the  very  men  who  were  afterwards  to  plan  the  massacres)  {see  Mortimer-Ternaux, 
iii-  133)-] 

^See  Toulongeon,  Hist,  de  F'rance,  ii.  c.  5.  [In  reality  81,000,  viz.,  42,000 
Prussians,  Hohenlohe's  division  14,000,  Clerfait's  division  15,000,  Hessians  5,530, 
^^wj^-rt/j  4,500  (Chuquet,  cap.  iii.  ;  vid.  iupr.,  ii.  209,  235,  notes).] 

^  [Aug.  19th.] 


284        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

fallen  *  in  fifteen  hours.'  ^  Quick,  therefore,  O  ye  improvised 
Municipals ;  quick,  and  ever  quicker ! — The  improvised  Municipals 
make  front  to  this  also.  Enrolment  urges  itself;  and  clothing, 
and  arming.  Our  very  officers  have  now  '  wool  epaulettes  ; '  for  it 
is  the  reign  of  Equality,  and  also  of  Necessity.  Neither  do  men 
now  monsieur  and  sir  one  another  ;  citoyefi  (citizen)  were  suitabler  ; 
we  even  say  Ihou,  as  '  the  free  peoples  of  Antiquity  did  : '  so  have 
Journals  and  the  Improvised  Commune  suggested ;  which  shall 
be  well.^ 

Infinitely  better,  meantime,  could  we  suggest,  where  arms  are 
to  be  found.  For  the  present,  our  Citoyens  chant  chorally  To  arms  ; 
and  have  no  arms  !  Arms  are  searched  for  ;  passionately  ;  there 
is  joy  over  any  musket.  Moreover,  entrenchments  shall  be  made 
round  Paris  :  ^  on  the  slopes  of  Montmartre  men  dig  and  shovel ; 
though  even  the  simple  suspect  this  to  be  desperate.  They  dig  ; 
Tricolor  sashes  speak  encouragement  and  well-speed-j/e.  Nay 
finally  '  twelve  Members  of  the  Legislative  go  daily,'  not  to  en- 
courage only,  but  to  bear  a  hand,  and  delve  :  it  was  decreed  with 
acclamation.  Arms  shall  either  be  provided  ;  or  else  the  ingenuity 
of  man  crack  itself,  and  become  fatuity.  Lean  Beaumarchais, 
thinking  to  serve  the  Fatherland,-  and  do  a  stroke  of  trade  in  the 
old  way,  has  commissioned  sixty-thousand  stand  of  good  arms  out 
of  Holland  :  would  to  Heaven,  for  Fatherland's  sake  and  his,  they 
were  come  !  Meanwhile  railings  are  torn  up ;  hammered  into 
pikes  ;  chains  themselves  shall  be  welded  together  into  pikes. 
The  very  coffins  of  the  dead  are  raised ;  for  melting  into  balls. 

i[Aug.  23rd.] 

-[It  is  from  the  procedure  of  the  Coinimine  on  Aug.  12th  and  13th  that  the  use 
of  Citoyen  for  Monsieur  dates.  The  use  of  Uan  1.  also  dates  from  the  same 
days,  but  when  the  new  Calendar  came  into  use  a  year  later,  the  new  style  was 
made  to  date  from  Sept.  22nd.] 

^[The  creation  of  a  camp  in  the  Northern  suburbs  of  the  city  was  actively  begun 
after  Aug.  12th,  as  it  seemed  to  be  a  revenge  on  the  King  for  vetoing  the  '  camp  of 
20,000.'  For  some  days  it  was  the  fashion  to  go  and  dig  on  Montmartre  and  Saint- 
Denis,  as  it  had  been  in  the  Champ-de-Mars  in  1790,  but  this  had  ceased  before 
Sept.  {see  Vergniaud's  speech  of  3rd,  quoted  in  Orators  of  Rev.,  vol.  ii.),  and  the 
camp  gradually  broke  up,  as  some  of  the  Volunteers  drifted  off  to  the  front.  A 
decree  of  Sept.  13th  ordered  paid  labour  to  be  used,  and  the  result  was  the  same 
as  at  the  relief  works  of  1788—91  ;  all  the  scum  of  Paris  drifted  thither,  and  strikes 
and  outrages  became  the  order  of  the  day.  It  cost  a  million  a  month,  and  was 
stopped  with  difficulty  by  the  Convention  Oct.  20th.] 


THE  IMPROVISED  COMMUNE       285 

All  Church-bells  must  down  into  the  furnace  to  make  cannon  ;  all 
Church-plate  into  the  mint  to  make  money.  Also  behold  the 
fair  swan-bevies  of  Citoyennes  that  have  alighted  in  Churches,  and 
sit  there  with  swan-neck, — sewing  tents  and  regimentals !  Nor 
are  Patriotic  Gifts  wanting,  from  those  that  have  aught  left ;  nor 
stingily  given  :  the  fair  Villaumes,  mother  and  daughter.  Milliners 
in  the  Rue  St.-Martin,  give  a  'silver  thimble,  and  a  coin  of  fifteen 
sous  (sevenpence  halfpenny),'  with  other  similar  effects  ;  and  offer, 
at  least  the  mother  does,  to  mount  guard.  Men  who  have  not 
even  a  thimble,  give  a  thimbleful, — were  it  but  of  invention.  One 
Citoyen  has  wrought  out  the  scheme  of  a  wooden  cannon  ;  which 
France  shall  exclusively  profit  by,  in  the  first  instance.  It  is  to 
be  made  of  staves,  by  the  coopers  ; — of  almost  boundless  calibre, 
but  uncertain  as  to  strength  !  Thus  they  :  hammering,  scheming, 
stitching,  founding,  with  all  their  heart  and  with  all  their  soul. 
Two  bells  only  are  to  remain  in  each  Parish, — for  tocsin  and  other 
purposes. 

But  mark  also,  precisely  while  the  Prussian  batteries  were 
playing  their  briskest  at  Longwi  in  the  Northeast,  and  our  das- 
tardly Lavergne  saw  nothing  for  it  but  surrender, — southwestward, 
in  remote,  patriarchal  La  Vendee,  that  sour  ferment  about  Non- 
juring  ^  Priests,  after  long  working,  is  ripe,  and  explodes  :  at  the 
wrong  moment  for  us  !  And  so  we  have  '  eight-thousand  Peasants 
at  Chatillon-sur-Sevre  '  who  will  not  be  balloted  for  soldiers  ;  will 
not  have  their  Curates  molested.  To  whom  Bonchamps,  Laroche- 
jaquelins,  and  Seigneurs  enough  of  a  Royalist  turn,  will  join 
themselves ;  with  Stofflets  and  Charettes ;  with  Heroes  and 
Chouan  Smugglers ;  and  the  loyal  warmth  of  a  simple  people, 
blown  into  flame  and  fury  by  theological  and  seignorial  bellows  ! 
So  that  there  shall  be  fighting  from  behind  ditches,  death-volleys 
bursting  out  of  thickets  and  ravines  of  rivers  ;  huts  bui'ning,  feet 
of  the  pitiful  women  hurrying  to  refuge  with  their  children  on 
their  back  ;  seed-fields  fallow,  whitened  with  human  bones ; — 
'  eighty-thousand,  of  all  ages,  ranks,  sexes,  flying  at  once  across 
the  Loire,'  with  wail  borne  far  on  the  winds :  and  m  brief,  for 
1  [See  Appendix  on  La  Vendue.] 


286        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

years  coming,  such  a  suite  of  scenes  as  glorious  war  has  not 
offered  in  these  late  ages,  not  since  our  Albigenses  and  Crusadings 
were  over, — save  indeed  some  chance  Palatinate,  or  so,  we  might 
have  to  '  burn,'  by  way  of  exception.  The  '  eight-thousand  at 
Chatillon  '  will  be  got  dispelled  for  the  moment ;  the  fire  scattered, 
not  extinguished.  To  the  dints  and  bruises  of  outward  battle 
there  is  to  be  added  henceforth  a  deadlier  internal  gangrene. 

This  rising  in  La  Vendee  reports  itself  at  Paris  on  Wednesday 
the  29th  of  August ; — ^just  as  we  had  got  our  Electors  elected  ; 
and,  in  spite  of  Brunswick  and  Longwi,  were  hoping  still  to  have 
a  National  Convention,  if  it  pleased  Heaven.  But  indeed  other- 
wise this  Wednesday  is  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  notablest 
Paris  had  yet  seen :  gloomy  tidings  come  successively,  like  Job's 
messengers ;  are  met  by  gloomy  answers.  Of  Sardinia  rising  to 
invade  the  Southeast,  and  Spain  threatening  the  South,  we  do 
not  speak.  But  are  not  the  Prussians  masters  of  Longwi  (treacher- 
ously yielded,  one  would  say) ;  and  preparing  to  besiege  Verdun  .''  ^ 
Clairfait  and  his  Austrians  are  encompassing  Thionville  ;  darken- 
ing the  North.  Not  Metzland  now,  but  the  Clermontais  is  getting 
harried  ;  flying  hulans  and  hussars  have  been  seen  on  the  Chalons 
Road,  almost  as  far  as  Sainte-Menehould.  Heart,  ye  Patriots  ;  if 
ye  lose  heart,  ye  lose  all ! 

It  is  not  without  a  dramatic  emotion  that  one  reads  in  the  Par- 
liamentary Debates  of  this  Wednesday  evening  'past  seven  o'clock,' 
the  scene  with  the  military  fugitives  from  Longwi.  Wayworn, 
dusty,  disheartened,  these  poor  men  enter  the  Legislative,  about 
sunset  or  after  ;  give  the  most  pathetic  detail  of  the  frightful  pass 
they  were  in  :  Prussians  billowing  round  by  the  myriad,  volcani- 
cally  spouting  fire  for  fifteen  hours :  we,  scattered  sparse  on  the 
ramparts,  hardly  a  cannoneer  to  two  guns  ;  our  dastard  Command- 

^  [Aug.  23rd.  Longwy  compares  favourably  with  Verdun  as  a  strong  place ;  it 
stands  on  an  elevated  plateau  looking  down  on  the  river  Chiers.  It  was  a  fine  for- 
tress, but  not  in  sufficient  repair  to  make  a  serious  resistance.  Lavergne  had  been 
as  unwilhng  to  talce  the  command  of  it  as  Beaurepaire  had  been  to  take  command 
of  Verdun.  But  he  was  anything  but  a  traitor,  and  his  sentiments  seem  to  have 
even  been  Republican  ;  it  is  utterly  false  that  he  kept  hidden  during  the  short  siege. 
If  he  surrendered  too  soon,  it  was  because  his  hands  were  forced  by  the  cowardice 
of  the  Municipality  of  Longwy,  which  kept  on  imploring  him  to  do  so  (.r^^Chuquet, 
La  Premiere  Invasion  Prussienne,  p.  175).] 


DANTON  287 

ant  Lavergne  nowhere  showing  face ;  the  priming  would  not  catch  ; 
there  was  no  powder  in  the  bombs, — what  could  we  do  ?  "  Mourir, 
Die  !  "  answer  prompt  voices ;  ^  and  the  dusty  fugitives  must  shrink 
elsewhither  for  comfort. — Yes,  Mourir,  that  is  now  the  word.  Be 
Longwi  a  proverb  and  a  hissing  among  French  strong-places :  let 
it  (says  the  Legislative)  be  obliterated  rather,  from  the  shamed 
face  of  the  Earth  ; — and  so  there  has  gone  forth  Decree,  that 
Longwi  shall,  were  the  Prussians  once  out  of  it,  'be  rased,'  and 
exist  only  as  ploughed  ground. 

Nor  are  the  Jacobins  milder ;  as  how  could  they,  the  flower  of 
Patriotism  .''  Poor  Dame  Lavergne,  wife  of  the  poor  Commandant, 
took  her  parasol  one  evening,  and  escorted  by  her  Father  came 
over  to  the  Hall  of  the  mighty  Mother ;  and  '  reads  a  memoir 
tending  to  justify  the  Commandant  of  Longwi.'  ^  Lnfarge,  Presi- 
dent, makes  answer  ;  "  Citoyenne,  the  Nation  will  judge  Lavergne  ; 
the  Jacobins  are  bound  to  tell  him  the  truth.  He  would  have 
ended  his  course  there  {termine  sa  carriere),  if  he  had  loved  the 
honour  of  his  country."  ^ 

CHAPTER  II 

DANTON 

But  better  than  rasing  of  Longwi,  or  rebuking  poor  dusty  soldiers 
or  soldiers'  wives,  Danton  had  come  over,  last  night,  and  de- 
manded a  Decree  to  search  for  arms,  since  they  were  not  yielded 
voluntarily.      Let  '  Domiciliary  visits,'  ^  with  rigour  of  authority, 

1  Hist.  Pari.  xvii.  148. 

2  [Lavergne  was  guillotined,  March  31st  1794.  ^'^  wife,  Victoire  Resnier,  was 
nearly  torn  in  pieces  by  the  Jacobins,  when  she  presented  the  mc'moire  here  referred 
to.  She  accompanied  him  to  prison,  and  when  he  was  condemned  by  the  Tribunal, 
cried  out  in  court  '■  II  faut  un  Roi,'  and  was  promptly  sent  to  execution  with  her 
husband  as  she  desired  (Chuquet,  189-91;  VVallon,  La  Terreur  (Paris,  i88i),ii.  227).] 

■*  Ibid.  xix.  300. 

••[The  decree  for  domiciliary  visits  was  demanded  by  the  Comiti  de  Surveil- 
lance of  the  Commune  (Panis,  Sergent,  Jourdeuil,  Duplain,  etc.),  i.e.,  by  the 
subsequent  organisers  of  the  massacres.  The  Assembly  was  already  inclined  to 
dispute  the  power  of  the  usurping  Commune,  and  so  it  was  made  to  appear  that 
only  a  search  for  arms  and  munitions  of  war  was  intended  ;  it  was  carried  out  by 
Commissioners  elected  in  each  Section.  The  number  of  arms  (2,000)  found  was  very 
small ;  the  real  object  was  the  arrest  of  persons.  Complaints  poured  in  to  the 
Assembly  as  to  the  way  in  which  the  Commissioners  had  executed  their  task  :  these 


288        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

be  made  to  this  end.  To  search  for  arms ;  for  horses, — Aristo- 
cratism  rolls  in  its  carriage,  while  Patriotism  cannot  trail  its 
cannon.  To  search  generally  for  munitions  of  war,  '  in  the 
houses  of  persons  suspect,' — and  even,  if  it  seem  proper,  to  seize 
and  imprison  the  suspect  persons  themselves  !  In  the  Prisons 
their  plots  will  be  harmless  ;  in  the  Prisons  they  will  be  as 
hostages  for  us,  and  not  without  use.  This  Decree  the  ener- 
getic Minister  of  Justice  demanded  last  night,  and  got ;  and 
this  same  night  it  is  to  be  executed ;  it  is  being  executed  at  the 
moment  when  these  dusty  soldiers  get  saluted  with  Mounr. 
Two-thousand  stand  of  arms,  as  they  count,  are  foraged  in  this 
way  ;  and  some  four-hundred  head  of  new  Prisoners ;  and,  on 
the  whole,  such  a  terror  and  damp  is  struck  through  the  Aris- 
tocrat heart,  as  all  but  Patriotism,  and  even  Patx'iotism  were  it 
out  of  this  agony,  might  pity.  Yes,  Messieurs !  if  Brunswick 
blast  Paris  to  ashes,  he  probably  will  blast  the  Prisons  of  Paris 
too :  pale  Terror,  if  we  have  got  it,  we  will  also  give  it,  and  the 
depth  of  horrors  that  lie  in  it ;  the  same  leaky  bottom,  in  these 
wild  waters,  bears  us  all. 

One  can  judge  what  stir  there  was  now  among  the  'thirty- 
thousand  Royalists  : '  how  the  Plotters,  or  the  accused  of  Plotting, 
shrank  each  closer  into  his  lurking-place, — like  Bertrand-Mole- 
ville,  looking  eager  towards  Longwi,  hoping  the  weather  would 
keep  fair.  Or  how  they  dressed  themselves  in  valet's  clothes, 
like  Narbonne,  and  '  got  to  England  as  Dr.  Bollman's  famulus  : '  ^ 
how  Dame  de  Stael  bestirred  herself,  pleading  with  Manuel  as 
a  Sister  in  Literature,  pleading  even  with  Clerk  Tallien ;  a  prey 
to    nameless    chagrins  !       Royalist    Peltier,    the    Pamphleteer, 

the  Assembly  received  favourably,  and  on  30th  actually  took  courage  to  pass  a 
decree  dissolving  the  usurping  Comntutie,  ordering  new  Municipal  elections,  and 
summoning  the  President  of  the  Commune  to  the  Bar.  He  presented  himself  on 
31st,  and  read  a  long  7niimoire  (drawn  up  by  Robespierre),  while  the  mob  howled 
outside.  For  a  whole  day  the  Assembly  stood  firm,  but  on  ist  Sept.  gave  way  and 
rescinded  its  decree  dissolving  the  Coinm-uiie.  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  iii.  140,  sqq.)\ 
^  De  Stael,  Considerations  sur  la  R6v.  ii.  67-81.  [Dr.  BoUman  was  a  Hanoverian 
gentleman,  who  procured  (some  time  between  Aug.  loth  and  30th)  a  passport,  under 
the  name  of  one  of  his  servants,  for  Narbonne  at  Mme  de  Stael's  request.  Subse- 
quently he  made  a  courageous  attempt  to  get  Lafayette  out  of  Olmiitz.  There  is 
a  long  letter  of  gratitude  from  Mme  de  Lafayette  to  him  in  Cloquet's  '  Souvenirs  sur 
la  vie  privfe  du  G6n6ral  Lafayette'  (Paris,  1836)  dated  from  Olmiitz  May  22nd  '96. 


DANTON  289 

gives  a  touching  Narrative  (not  deficient  in  height  of  colouring) 
of  the  terrors  of  that  night.  From  five  in  the  afternoon,  a  great 
city  is  struck  suddenly  silent ;  except  for  the  beating  of  drums, 
for  the  tramp  of  marching  feet ;  and  ever  and  anon  the  dread 
thunder  of  the  knocker  at  some  door,  a  Tricolor  Commissioner 
with  his  blue  Guards  (black- guards !)  arriving.  All  Streets  are 
vacant,  says  Peltier ;  beset  by  Guards  at  each  end :  all  Citizens 
are  ordered  to  be  within  doors.  On  the  River  float  sentinel 
barges,  lest  we  escape  by  water :  the  Barriers  hermetically 
closed.  Frightful !  The  Sun  shines ;  serenely  westering,  in 
smokeless  mackerel-sky ;  Paris  is  as  if  sleeping,  as  if  dead  : — 
Paris  is  holding  its  breath,  to  see  what  stroke  will  fall  on  it. 
Poor  Peltier !  Ads  of  Apostles,  and  all  jocundity  of  Leading- 
Articles,  are  gone  out,  and  it  is  become  bitter  earnest  instead  ; 
polished  satire  changed  now  into  coarse  pike-points  (hammered 
out  of  railing) ;  all  logic  reduced  to  this  one  primitive  thesis, 
An  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth  for  a  tooth  ! — Peltier,  dolefully  aware 
of  it,  ducks  low ;  escapes  unscathed  to  England  ;  to  urge  there 
the  inky  war  anew  ; — to  have  Trial  by  Jury,  in  due  season,  and 
deliverance  by  young  Whig  eloquence,  world-celebrated  for  a 
day.i 

Of  'thirty-thousand,'  naturally,  great  multitudes  were  left 
unmolested :  but,  as  we  said,  some  four-hundred,  designated  as 
'  persons  suspect,'  were  seized  ;  and  an  unspeakable  terror  fell  on 
all.     Wo  to  him  who  is  guilty  of  Plotting,  of  Anticivism,  Royalism, 

Mme  de  Stael  had  her  own  passports  all  right  for  Switzerland,  but  did  not  choose 
to  leave  her  friends  in  danger,  and  contrived  also  the  escape  of  Jaucourt  and  Lally- 
Tollendal  (Aug.  31st),  by  soliciting  Manuel,  of  whose  pity  she  speaks  well. 
Manuel  actually  sent  Tallien  to  escort  her  (Sept.  3rd)  to  the  barriers  of  Paris.] 

1  [The  Acfes  des  Apotres,  edited  by  Peltier,  Champcenetz,  Rivarol,  Sulleau,  Ber- 
gasse  and  Mirabeau  the  younger,  first  appeared  Nov.  2nd  1789,  and  continued  till 
Oct.  'gt.  It  is  original,  bitter  and  sometimes  rather  broad:  Radicals  and 
Constitutionalists  are  alike  abused  in  it,  and  even  the  King  is  not  spared.  Peltier 
escaped  to  England,  and  recommenced  journalism  with  Dernier  Tableau  de 
Paris  1792 — 3,  Correspondancc  Fra/iraise  ou  Tableau  de  r Europe,  published 
every  other  day  from  Nov.  ist  '93,  and  finally  L'Ambigu  published  three  times  a 
month,  i8g2 — 20.  It  was  this  newspaper  which  abused  Napoleon  so  fiercely.  Dur- 
ing the  interval  of  peace  1802—3  Peltier  was  brought  to  trial  for  a  libel  on  the  First 
Consul  (Feb.  21st  1803),  and  defended  by  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  James)  Mackintosh. 
He  was  found  guilty  but,  in  consequence  of  the  recommencement  of  the  war,  was 
never  brought  up  for  judgment.  He  died  in  Paris  1825.  (See  on  the  Actes, 
Tourneux,  ii.  548-9.)] 

VOL.    II.  19 


290        THE  FKENCH  REVOLUTION 

Feuillantisra ;  who,  guilty  or  not  guilty,  has  an  enemy  in  his 
Section  to  call  him  guilty  !  Poor  old  M.  de  Cazotte  ^  is  seized ; 
his  young  loved  Daughter  with  him,  refusing  to  quit  him.  Why, 
O  Cazotte,  wouldst  thou  quit  romancing  and  Diable  Amoureux, 
for  such  reality  as  this  ?  Poor  old  M.  De  Sombreuil,  he  of  the 
Invniides,  is  seized  ;  a  man  seen  askance  by  Patriotism  ever  since 
the  Bastille  days ; "  whom  also  a  fond  Daughter  will  not  quit. 
With  young  tears  hardly  suppressed,  and  old  wavering  weakness 
rousing  itself  once  more, — O  my  brothers,  O  my  sisters  ! 

The  famed  and  named  go ;  the  nameless,  if  they  have  an 
accuser.  Necklace  Lamotte's  Husband  is  in  these  Prisons  {she 
long  since  squelched  on  the  London  Pavements) ;  ^  but  gets 
delivered.  Gross  de  Morande,  of  the  Courtier  de  I' Europe,'^ 
hobbles  distractedly  to  and  fro  there :  but  they  let  him 
hobble  out ;  on  right  nimble  crutches  ; — his  hour  not  being  yet 
come.  Advocate  Maton  de  la  Varenne,^  very  weak  in  health, 
is  snatched  off  from  mother  and  kin ;  Tricolor  Rossignol  ^ 
(journeyman  goldsmith  and  scoundrel  lately,  a  risen  man  now) 
remembers  an  old  pleading  of  Maton's !  Jourgniac  de  Saint- 
Meard "  goes ;  the  brisk  frank  soldier :  he  was  in  the  Mutiny 
of  Nancy,  in  that  *  effervescent  Regiment  du  Roi,' — on  the  wrong 
side.     Saddest  of  all :    Abbe  Sicard  ^  goes  ;  a  Priest  who  could 

1  [Cazotte,  vid.  supr.,  ii.  203  ;  infr.,  ii.  306.]         ^ i^gonibreuil,  vid.  infr.,  ii.  306.] 

*  [Madame  de  la  Motte  committed  suicide  by  throwing  herself  out  of  a  window 
in  London,  1791.] 

■*  [Morande,  vid.  supr. ,  i.  73.  ] 

^  [Maton  de  la  Varenne,  born  1760,  an  advocate  and  man  of  letters,  escaped  the 
massacres,  died  1837.] 

8  [Rossignol  had  been  a  goldsmith's  apprentice  and  '  hero  of  the  Bastille  : '  became 
a  leading  Septemberer  and  General  in  Chief  of  the  Army  sent  against  La  Vendue, 
July  24th  '93;  once  suspended  by  the  Repn'senfant  Bourdon  (Aug.*  93),  he  was 
immediately  restored  by  the  Cotnitd  de  Salut  Public.  Many  complaints  of  his 
brutality  in  La  Vendue  reached  the  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  which  turned  a  deaf  ear, 
and  he  remained  in  various  posts  of  trust  in  the  west  till  May  '94.  After  Thermidor 
he  was  arrested,  and  finally  transported,  as  having  been  an  accomplice  of  Baboeuf's, 
1801.     {Vid.  infr.,  iii.  122.)] 

'  [Le  Chevalier  Jourgniac  de  Saint-Mdard,  born  1747,  a  jolly  bon  vivant  of  the 
Ancien  Regime,  and  author  of  '  Mon  Agonie  de  trente-huit  heures,'  descriptive  of 
the  massacres  at  the  Abbaye,  from  which  he  wonderfully  escaped,  died  in  poverty 
1825.] 

**[The  Abb6  Sicard  was  the  pupil  of  the  Abb^  de  I'Ep^e,  who  had  invented  the 
digital  method  of  teaching  the  deaf  and  duml^,  and  whose  school  the  Government 
endowed  in  the  Celestine  Convent.     When  I'Epi^e  died,  1790,  Sicard  succeeded  to 


DANTON  291 

not  take  the  Oath,  but  who  could  teach  the  Deaf  and  Dumb : 
in  his  Section  one  man,  he  says,  had  a  grudge  at  him  ;  one  man, 
at  the  fit  hour,  launches  an  arrest  against  him  ;  which  hits.  In 
the  Arsenal  quarter,  there  are  dumb  hearts  making  wail,  with 
signs,  with  wild  gestures  ;  he  their  miraculous  healer  and  speech- 
bringer  is  rapt  away. 

What  with  the  arrestments  on  this  night  of  the  Twenty-ninth, 
what  with  those  that  have  gone  on  more  or  less,  day  and  night, 
ever  since  the  Tenth,  one  may  fancy  what  the  Prisons  now  wei*e. 
Crowding  and  confusion ;  jostle,  hurry,  vehemence  and  terror  ! 
Of  the  poor  Queen's  Friends,  who  had  followed  her  to  the 
Temple,  and  been  committed  elsewhither  to  Prison,  some,  as 
Governess  de  Tourzelle,  are  to  be  let  go  :  one,  the  poor  Princess 
de  Lamballe,  is  not  let  go ;  but  waits  in  the  strong-rooms  of  La 
Force  there,  what  will  betide  further.  ^ 

Among  so  many  hundreds  whom  the  launched  arrest  hits,  who 
are  rolled  off  to  Townhall  or  Sectionhall,  to  preliminary  Houses 
of  Detention,  and  hurled  in  thither  as  into  cattle-pens,  we  must 
mention  one  other :  Caron  de  Beaumarchais,  Author  of  Figaro  ; 
vanquisher  of  Maupeou  Parlements  and  Goezman  helldogs  ;  once 
numbered  among  the  demigods  ;  and  now —  ?  We  left  him  in 
his  culminant  state ;  what  dreadful  decline  is  this,  when  we 
again  catch  a  glimpse  of  him  !     '  At  midnight '   (it  was  but  the 

the  school,  and  largely  improved  on  his  master's  method  of  teaching.  He  also 
escaped  as  by  a  miracle  from  the  massacres,  and  became  a  professor  at  the  Ecole 
Normale  in  1795.  Napoleon  replaced  him  at  the  head  of  the  deaf  and  dumb 
college,  and  he  died  1825.] 

^  [The  chief  prisons  of  Paris  just  before  the  Revolution  were  La  Force,  Concier- 
gcrie,  Chatelet :  part  of  the  Bicctre  was  also  used  as  a  prison  :  the  two  worst  old 
prisons  of  Paris  {For  Pliveque  and  Le  Petit  Chatelet)  had  been  demolished  early 
in  the  reign  of  Louis  XVI.,  and  the  Conciergerie  had  been  rendered  much  more 
sanitary.  Early  in  the  Revolution  the  Municipality  began  to  use  some  of  the  empty 
Convents  as  prisons,  the  chief  among  them  being  the  Abhaye  de  Saint-Germain  des 
Prds,  Saiiit-Lazare,  Sainte-Pda^ie.  At  the  date  of  the  September  massacres  there 
were  besides  these  the  Chambre  if.-lrret  at  the  Mairie,  the  Maison  Planchard  'aX. 
Picpus,  the  Hotel  Tatar u  in  Rue  de  Richelieu,  the  Convents  of  the  Filles  Anglaises , 
Madelonnettes,  Ber7uirdins,  Carnics,  Colltge  dii  P/essis  (in  College  l.ouis-le-grand), 
Saint-Firmin.  The  Ltixembiirg,  Cha?ttillv  and  Port  Libre  were  added  in  1793. 
The  only  ones  now  surviving  as  prisons  are  Saint-Lazare,  Saint-Pelagie  and  the 
Conciergerie.  The  Cannes  is  still  a  religious  house  {Institut  Catholique).  {See 
C.  A.  Dauban,  Les  Prisons  de  Paris  sous  la  R(5v.  (Paris,  1870.)] 


292        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

1 2th  of  August  yet),  '  the  servant,  in  his  shirt,'  with  wide-staring 
eyes,  enters  your  room  : — Monsieur,  rise  ;  all  the  people  are 
come  to  seek  you  ;  they  are  knocking,  like  to  break-in  the  door  ! 
*  And  they  were  in  fact  knocking  in  a  terrible  manner  (d'une 
'  fagon  terrible).  I  fling  on  my  coat,  forgetting  even  the  waist- 
*coat,  nothing  on  my  feet  but  slippers;  and  say  to  him' — And 
he,  alas,  answers  mere  negatory  incoherences,  panic  interjections. 
And  through  the  shutters  and  crevices,  in  front  or  rearward, 
the  dull  street-lamps  disclose  only  streetfuls  of  haggard  coun- 
tenances ;  clamorous,  bristling  with  pikes  :  and  you  rush  dis- 
tracted for  an  outlet,  finding  none  ; — and  have  to  take  refuge 
in  the  crockery-press,  down  stairs  ;  and  stand  there,  palpitating, 
in  that  imperfect  costume,  lights  dancing  past  your  key-hole, 
tramp  of  feet  overhead,  and  the  tumult  of  Satan,  '  for  four  hours 
and  more  ! '  And  old  ladies,  of  the  quarter,  started  up  (as  we 
hear  next  morning)  ;  rang  for  their  bonnes  and  cordial-drops, 
with  shrill  interjections :  and  old  gentlemen,  in  their  shirts, 
'  leapt  garden-walls  ; '  flying  while  none  pursued ;  one  of  whom 
unfortunately  broke  his  leg,^  Those  sixty-thousand  stand  of 
Dutch  Arms  (which  never  arrive),  and  the  bold  stroke  of  trade, 
have  turned  out  so  ill ! — 

Beaumarchais  escaped  for  this  time ;  but  not  for  the  next 
time,  ten  days  after.  On  the  evening  of  the  Twenty-ninth  he  is 
still  in  that  chaos  of  the  Prisons,  in  saddest  wrestling  condition ; 
unable  to  get  justice,  even  to  get  audience;  'Panis  scratching 
his  head  '  when  you  speak  to  him,  and  making  off.  Nevertheless 
let  the  lover  of  Figaro  know  that  Procureur  Manuel,  a  Brother 
in  Literature,  found  him,  and  delivered  him  once  more.  But 
how  the  lean  demigod,  now  shorn  of  his  splendour,  had  to  lurk 
in  barns,  to  roam  over  harrowed  fields,  panting  for  life  ;  and  to 
wait  under  eaves-drops,  and  sit  in  darkness  '  on  the  Boulevarde 
amid  paving-stones  and  boulders,'  longing  for  one  word  of  any 
Minister,  or  Minister's  Clei'k,  about  those  accursed  Dutch  muskets, 
and  getting  none, — with  heart  fuming  in  spleen,  and  terror,  and 
suppressed   canine-madness ;    alas,  how  the   swift  sharp  hound, 

1  Beaumarchais'  Narrative,  M6moires  sur  les  Prisons  (Paris,  1823),  i.  179-90. 


DUMOURIEZ  293 

once  fit  to  be  Diana's,  breaks  his  old  teeth  now,  gnawing  mere 
whinstones  ;  and  must '  fly  to  England  ; '  and,  returning  from  Eng- 
land, must  creep  into  the  corner,  and  lie  quiet,  toothless  (money- 
less),— all  this  let  the  lover  of  Figaro  fancy,  and  weep  for.  We 
here,  without  weeping,  not  without  sadness,  wave  the  withered 
tough  fellow-mortal  our  farewell.  His  Figaro  has  returned  to 
the  French  stage  ;  nay  is,  at  this  day,  sometimes  named  the  best 
piece  there.  And  indeed,  so  long  as  Man's  life  can  ground 
itself  only  on  artificiality  and  aridity ;  each  new  Revolt  and 
Change  of  Dynasty  turning  up  only  a  new  stratum  of  dry-rubbish, 
and  no  soil  yet  coming  to  view, — may  it  not  be  good  to  protest 
against  such  a  Life,  in  many  ways,  and  even  in  the  Figaro  way  } 

CHAPTER  in 

DUMOURIEZ 

Such  are  the  last  days  of  August  1792  ;  days  gloomy,  disastrous 
and  of  evil  omen.  What  will  become  of  this  poor  France  ?  Du- 
mouriez  rode  from  the  Camp  of  Maulde,  eastward  to  Sedan,  on 
Tuesday  last,  the  28th  of  the  month ;  reviewed  that  so-called 
Army  left  forlorn  there  by  Lafayette :  the  forlorn  soldiers 
gloomed  on  him  ;  were  heard  growling  on  him,  "  This  is  one  of 
them,  ce  b — e  la,  that  made  War  be  declared."  ^  Unpromising 
Army !  Recruits  flow  in,  filtering  through  Depot  after  Depot ; 
but  recruits  merely  :  in  want  of  all  ;  happy  if  they  have  so  much 
as  arms.  And  Longwi  has  fallen  basely ;  and  Brunswick,  and 
the  Prussian  King,  with  his  sixty-thousand,  will  beleaguer  Ver- 
dun ;  and  Clairfait  and  Austrians  press  deeper  in,  over  the 
Northern   marches :    '  a    hundred   and   fifty    thousand '    as    fear 

1  Dumouriez,  M^moires,  ii.  383.  [Dumouriez  had  always  intended  to  divert  the 
army  of  Brunswick  by  an  attempt  upon  Belgium,  hence  the  Army  of  the  North 
(formerly  Lafayette's)  was  the  strongest  (24,000).  Kellermann  had  just  replaced 
Liickner  in  command  of  the  Army  of  Metz.  But  the  fears  of  Paris  were  too  great 
to  allow  Dumouriez  to  take  the  oft'ensive,  and  Servan  was  probably  right  when  he 
ordered  the  junction  of  Kellermann  and  Dumouriez  in  the  Argonne.  The  order  for 
this  reached  Dumouriez  on  Aug.  31st.  On  Sept.  19th  the  junction  between  Keller- 
mann and  Dumouriez  was  effected.  The  French  army,  once  it  was  united  in  the 
Argonne,  was  in  a  fair  position,  rendered  stronger  by  the  rain,  but  its  tiank  had 
already  been  turned  once  (Sept.  12th)  and  more  than  one  retrograde  movement 
was  made.     ( Vid.  infr. ,  note  ii.  339. )] 


294        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

counts,  '  eighty-thousand '  as  the  returns  show,  do  hem  us  in ; 
Cimmerian  Europe  behind  them.  There  is  Castries-and-BrogUe 
chivalry ;  Royalist  foot  '  in  red  facing  and  nankeen  trousers ; ' 
breathing  death  and  the  gallows. 

And  lo,  finally  !  at  Verdun  i  on  Sunday  the  2d  of  September 
1792,  Brunswick  is  here.  With  his  King  and  sixty-thousand, 
glittering  over  the  heights,  from  beyond  the  winding  Meuse 
River,  he  looks  down  on  us,  on  our  '  high  citadel '  and  all  our 
confectionary-ovens  (for  we  are  celebrated  for  confectionary) ; 
has  sent  courteous  summons,  in  order  to  spare  the  effusion  of 
blood ! — Resist  him  to  the  death  ?  Every  day  of  retardation 
precious  .''  How,  O  General  Beaurepaire  (asks  the  amazed  Muni- 
cipality), shall  we  resist  liim  }  We,  the  Verdun  Municipals,  see 
no  resistance  possible.  Has  he  not  sixty-thousand,  and  artillery 
without  end  ?  Retardation,  Patriotism  is  good ;  but  so  likewise 
is  peaceable  baking  of  pastry,  and  sleeping  in  whole  skin. — 
Hapless  Beaurepaire  stretches  out  his  hands,  and  pleads  passion- 
ately, in  the  name  of  country,  honour,  of  Heaven  and  of  Earth  : 
to  no  purpose.  The  Municipals  have,  by  law,  the  power  of 
ordering  it ; — with  an  Army  officered  by  Royalism  or  Crypto- 
Royalism,  such  a  Law  seemed  needful :  and  they  order  it,  as 
pacific  Pastry-cooks,  not  as  heroic  Patriots  would, — To  surrender  ! 
Beaurepaire  strides  home,  with  long  steps :  his  valet,  entering 


1  [Verdun  is  not  such  a  strong  place  as  Longwy  :  it  is  commanded  by  hills  on 
two  sides,  and  no  one  expected  it  to  stand  a  long  siege.  It  is  however  a  much 
more  important  town  than  Longwy  except  from  the  military  point  of  view.  Beaure- 
paire, who  happened  to  be  the  senior  officer  in  garrison,  did  what  he  could,  though 
the  impression  created  by  the  fall  of  Longwy  was  much  against  him.  Brunswick 
was  however  really  unwilling  to  advance  upon  Verdun  with  Metz  and  Thionville 
untaken  behind  him,  and  waited  five  days  after  taking  Longwy  before  advancing 
on  Verdun,  the  first  summons  to  which  was  sent  on  Aug.  31st.  Beaurepaire's 
suicide  was  early  on  2nd  :  it  is  characteristic  of  the  Jacobins  that  this  was  considered 
a  noble  act  ;  to  my  mind  Lavergne's  course  was  far  more  honourable.  It  is  not 
true  that  Verdun  was  Royalist  or  crypto-Royalist  in  temper— so  little  was  this  the 
case  that  Louis  XVI.,  in  sketching  out  his  plan  of  flight  in  June  '91,  determined  to 
avoid  it :  but  its  populace  was  not  braver  than  that  of  other  Jacobin  towns,  and 
did  everything  possible  to  hinder  the  defence :  its  patriotism  manifested  itself 
chiefly  in  hissing  the  Princes  when  they  arrived  in  the  wake  of  the  Prussian  Army. 
On  April  25th  '94  a  number  of  young  girls  were  executed  in  Paris  for  having,  as 
was  alleged,  offered  bouquets  and  refreshments  to  the  King  of  Prussia  on  his 
entrance  into  Verdun.  The  story  that  they  did  so  has  been  proved  to  be  a  myth 
by  Chuquet,  as  well  as  by  Campardon  (Trib.  R6v.  i.  308-11).] 


DUMOUEIEZ  295 

the  room,  sees  him  *  writing  eagerly,'  and  withdraws.  His  valet 
hears  then,  in  few  minutes,  the  report  of  a  pistol :  Beaurepaire  is 
lying  dead  ;  his  eager  wi'iting  had  been  a  brief  suicidal  farewell. 
In  this  manner  died  Beaurepaire,  wept  of  France ;  buried  in  the 
Pantheon,  with  honourable  Pension  to  his  Widow,  and  for  Epitaph 
these  words.  He  chose  Death  rather  than  yield  to  Despots.  The 
Prussians,  descending  from  the  heights,  are  peaceable  masters  of 
Verdun.  1 

And  so  Brmiswick  advances,  from  stage  to  stage :  who  shall 
now  stay  him, — covering  forty  miles  of  country .''  Foragers  fly 
far ;  the  villages  of  the  Northeast  are  harried ;  your  Hessian 
forager  has  only  '  three  sous  a-day : '  the  very  Emigrants,  it  is 
said,  will  take  silver-plate, — by  way  of  revenge.  Clermont, 
Sainte-Menehould,  Varemies  especially,  ye  Towns  of  the  Night  of 
Spurs,  tremble  ye !  Procui'eur  Sausse  and  the  Magistracy  of 
Varennes  have  fled ;  brave  Boniface  Le  Blanc  of  the  Bras  d'Or  is 
to  the  woods :  Mrs.  Le  Blanc,  a  young  woman  fair  to  look  upon, 
with  her  young  infant,  has  to  live  in  greenwood,  like  a  beautiful 
Bessy  Bell  of  Song,  her  bower  thatched  with  rushes ; — catching 
premature  rheumatism.^  Clermont  may  ring  the  tocsin  now,  and 
illuminate  itself !  Clermont  lies  at  the  foot  of  its  Cow  (or  Vache, 
so  they  name  that  Mountain),  a  prey  to  the  Hessian  spoiler :  its 
fair  women,  fairer  than  most,  are  robbed ;  not  of  life,  or  what  is 
dearer,  yet  of  all  that  is  cheaper  and  portable ;  for  Necessity,  on 
three  half-pence  a-day,  has  no  law.  At  Sainte-Menehould  the 
enemy  has  been  expected  more  than  once, — our  Nationals 
all  turning  out  in  arms  ;  but  was  not  yet  seen.  Postmaster 
Drouet,  he  is  not  iia  the  woods,  but  minding  his  Election ;  and 
will  sit  in  the  Convention,  notable  King-taker,  and  bold  Old- 
Dragoon  as  he  is. 

Thus  on  the  Northeast  all  roams  and  runs  ;  and  on  a  set  day, 
the  date  of  which  is  irrecoverable  by  History,  Brunswick  'has 
engaged  to  dine  in  Paris,' — the  Powers  wilUng.  And  at  Paris, 
in  the  centre,  it  is  as  we  saw ;  and  in  La  Vendee  Southwest,  it  is 

i[Sept.  2nd.] 

2  Helen  Maria  Williams,  Letters  from  France  (London,  1791-1793),  iii.  96. 


296         THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

as  we  saw  ;  and  Sardinia  is  in  the  Southeast,  and  Spain  is  in  the 
South,  and  Clairfait  with  Austria  and  sieged  Thionville  is  in  the 
North  ; — and  all  France  leaps  distracted,  like  the  winnowed 
Sahara  waltzing  in  sand-colonnades !  More  desperate  posture  no 
country  ever  stood  in.  A  country,  one  would  say,  which  the 
Majesty  of  Prussia  (if  it  so  pleased  him)  might  partition  and  clip 
in  pieces,  like  a  Poland  ;  flinging  the  remainder  to  poor  Brother 
Louis, — with  directions  to  keep  it  quiet,  or  else  we  will  keep  it 
for  him. 

Or  perhaps  the  Upper  Powers,  minded  that  a  new  Chapter  in 
Universal  History  shall  begin  here  and  not  further  on,  may  have 
ordered  it  all  otherwise  ?  In  that  case,  Brunswick  will  not  dine 
in  Paris  on  the  set  day ;  nor,  indeed,  one  knows  not  when ! — 
Verily,  amid  this  wreckage,  where  poor  France  seems  grinding 
itself  down  to  dust  and  bottomless  ruin,  who  knows  what  miracu- 
lous salient-point  of  Deliverance  and  New-life  may  have  already 
come  into  existence  there  ;  and  be  already  working  there,  though 
as  yet  human  eye  discern  it  not !  On  the  night  of  that  same 
twenty-eighth  of  August,  the  unpromising  Review-day  in  Sedan, 
Dumouriez  assembles  a  Council  of  War  at  his  lodgings  there.  He 
spreads  out  the  map  of  this  forlorn  war-district ;  Prussians  here, 
Austrians  there  ;  triumphant  both,  with  broad  highway,  and  little 
hinderance,  all  the  way  to  Paris :  we  scattered,  helpless,  here 
and  there  :  what  to  advise  ?  The  Generals,  strangers  to  Dumouriez, 
look  blank  enough  ;  know  not  well  what  to  advise, — if  it  be  not 
retreating,  and  retreating  till  our  recruits  accumulate  ;  till  perhaps 
the  chapter  of  chances  turn  up  some  leaf  for  us ;  or  Paris,  at  all 
events,  be  sacked  at  the  latest  day  possible.  The  Many-coun- 
selled, who  '  has  not  closed  an  eye  for  three  nights,'  listens  with 
little  speech  to  these  long  cheerless  speeches ;  merely  watching 
the  speaker,  that  he  may  know  him ;  then  wishes  them  all  good- 
night ; — but  beckons  a  certain  young  Thouvenot,  the  fire  of  whose 
looks  had  pleased  him,  to  wait  a  moment.  Thouvenot  waits : 
Voila,  says  Polymetis,  pointing  to  the  map !  That  is  the  Forest 
of  Argonne,  that  long  strip  of  Rocky  Mountain  and  wild  Wood  ; 
forty  miles  long ;    with  but  five,  or  say  even  three  practicable 


SEPTEMBEK  IN  PARIS  297 

Passes  through  it :  this,  for  they  have  forgotten  it,  might  one  not 
still  seize,  though  Clairfait  sits  so  nigh  ?  Once  seized  ; — the 
Champagne  called  the  Hungry  (or  worse.  Champagne  Pouilleuse) 
on  their  side  of  it ;  the  fat  Three  Bishopricks,  and  willing  France, 
on  ours ;  and  the  Equinox-rains  not  far; — this  Argonne  "might 
be  the  Thermopylae  of  France  !  "  ^ 

0  brisk  Dumouriez  Polymetis  with  thy  teeming  head,  may  the 
gods  grant  it ! — Polymetis,  at  any  rate,  folds  his  map  together, 
and  flings  himself  on  bed ;  resolved  to  try,  on  the  morrow  morn- 
ing. With  astucity,  with  swiftness,  with  audacity !  One  had 
need  to  be  a  lion-fox,  and  have  luck  on  one's  side. 

CHAPTER  IV 

SEPTEMBER  IN  PARIS 

At  Paris,  by  lying  Rumour  which  proved  prophetic  and  veridical, 
the  fall  of  Verdun  was  known  some  hours  before  it  happened.  It 
is  Sunday  the  second  of  September ;  handiwork  hinders  not  the 
speculations  of  the  mind.  Verdun  gone  (though  some  still  deny 
it)  ;  the  Prussians  in  full  march,  with  gallows-ropes,  with  fire  and 
faggot !  Thirty-thousand  Aristocrats  within  our  own  walls  ;  and 
but  the  merest  quarter-tithe  of  them  yet  put  in  Prison !  Nay 
there  goes  a  word  that  even  these  will  revolt.  Sieur  Jean  Julien, 
wagoner  of  Vaugirard,'^  being  set  in  the  Pillory  last  Friday,  took 
all  at  once  to  crying.  That  he  would  be  well  revenged  ere  long ; 
that  the  King's  Friends  in  Prison  would  burst  out,  force  the 
Temple,  set  the  King  on  horseback,  and,  joined  by  the  un- 
imprisoned,  ride  roughshod  over  us  all.  This  the  unfortunate 
wagoner  of  Vaugirard  did  bawl,  at  the  top  of  his  lungs :  when 
snatched  off  to  the  townhall,  he  persisted  in  it,  still  bawling ; 
yesternight,  when  they  guillotined  him,  he  died  with  the  fi-oth 

1  Dumouriez,  ii.  391.  [Carlyle  here  accepts  Dumouriez's  own  account :  but  as 
a  matter  of  fact  he  till  the  last  moment  insisted  on  a  counter  stroke  in  Belgium, 
e.g.,  in  the  letters  to  Servan  of  23rd  and  29th,  but  on  31st  Servan  positively  ordered 
him  to  take  his  stand  in  the  Argonne  passes  {Grandpr^  and  Clermont),  and 
ordered  Kellermann  to  unite  with  him  there  {vid.  siipr.,  notes  on  ii.  201  and  293 
and  Von  Sybel,  ii.  122).] 

^  Moore,  i.  292. 


298        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

of  it  on  his  lips.^  For  a  man's  mind,  padlocked  to  the  Pillory, 
may  go  mad ;  and  all  men's  minds  may  go  mad,  and  '  believe 
him,'  as  the  frenetic  will  do,  '  because  it  is  impossible.' 

So  that  apparently  the  knot  of  the  crisis  and  last  agony  of 
France  is  come  ?  Make  front  to  this,  thou  Improvised  Commune, 
strong  Danton,  whatsoever  man  is  strong !  Readers  can  judge 
whether  the  Flag  of  Country  in  Danger  flapped  soothingly  or 
distractively  on  the  souls  of  men,  that  day. 

But  the  Improvised  Commune,  but  strong  Danton  is  not  want- 
ing, each  after  his  kind.  Huge  Placards  are  getting  plastered 
to  the  walls ;  at  two  o'clock  the  stormbell  shall  be  sounded,  the 
alarm-cannon  fired ;  all  Paris  shall  rush  to  the  Champ-de-Mars,- 
and  have  itself  enrolled.  Unarmed,  truly,  and  undrilled ;  but 
desperate,  in  the  strength  of  frenzy.  Haste,  ye  men ;  ye  very 
women,  offer  to  mount  guard  and  shoulder  the  brown  musket : 
weak  clucking-hens,  in  a  state  of  desperation,  will  fly  at  the 
muzzle  of  the  mastiff;  and  even  conquer  him, — by  vehemence 
of  character !  Terror  itself,  when  once  grown  transcendental, 
becomes  a  kind  of  courage  ;  as  frost  sufficiently  intense,  accord- 
ing to  Poet  Milton,  will  burn  J — Danton,  the  other  night,  in  the 
Legislative  Committee  of  General  Defence,  when  the  other 
Ministers  and  Legislators  had  all  opined,  said.  It  would  not  do 
to  quit  Paris,  and  fly  to  Saumur ;  that  they  must  abide  by  Paris ; 
and  take  such  attitude  as  would  put  their  enemies  in  ka.r,—Jaire 
peur  ;  a  word  of  his  which  has  been  often  repeated,  and  reprinted 
— in  italics.* 

At  two  of  the  clock,  Beaurepaire,  as  we  saw,  has  shot  himself 
at  Verdun  ;  and,  over  Europe,  mortals  are  going  in  for  afternoon 
sermon.  But  at  Paris,  all  steeples  are  clangouring  not  for 
sermon  ;  the  alarm-gun  booming  from  minute  to  minute  ;  Champ- 

1  Hist.  Pari.  xvii.  409. 

2  [This  convocation  at  the  Champ-de-Mars  was  proposed  by  Manuel  in  the 
Comntune  at  Danton's  instance  :  it  was  just  at  the  moment,  when  the  attention  of 
respectable  Paris  was  fixed  on  the  Champ-dc-Mars,  that  the  massacres  at  the 
prisons  began.] 

'^  ['  The  parching  air 
Burns  frore,  and  cold  performs  th'  effects  of  tire.'     (Paradise  Lost,  ii.  595.)] 
••Biographic  des  Ministres  (Bruxelles,  1826),  p.  96. 


SEPTEMBER  IN  PAEIS  299 

de-Mars  and  Fatherland's  Altar  boiling  with  desperate  terror- 
courage  :  what  a  miserere  going  up  to  Heaven  from  this  once 
Capital  of  the  Most  Christian  King !  The  Legislative  sits  in 
alternate  awe  and  effervescence ;  Vergniaud  proposing  that 
Twelve  shall  go  and  dig  personally  on  Montmartre ;  which  is 
decreed  by  acclaim. 

But  better  than  digging  personally  with  acclaim,  see  Danton 
enter ; — the  black  brows  clouded,  the  colossus-figure  tramping 
heavy ;  grim  energy  looking  from  all  features  of  the  rugged 
man !  Strong  is  that  grim  Son  of  France  and  Son  of  Earth ; 
a  Reality  and  not  a  Formula  he  too :  and  surely  now  if  ever, 
being  hurled  low  enough,  it  is  on  the  Earth  and  on  Realities  that 
he  rests.  "  Legislators  !  "  so  speaks  the  stentor-voice,  as  the 
Newspapers  yet  preserve  it  for  us,  "  it  is  not  the  alarm-cannon 
that  you  hear :  it  is  the  pas-de-charge  against  our  enemies.  To 
conquer  them,  to  hurl  them  back,  what  do  we  require  ?  //  nous 
faut  de  I'audace,  el  encore  de  I'audace  et  toujours  de  I'audace,  To 
dare,  and  again  to  dare,  and  without  end  to  dare  !  "  ^ — Right  so, 
thou  brawny  Titan ;  there  is  nothing  left  for  thee  but  that.  Old 
men,  who  heard  it,  will  still  tell  you  how  the  reverberating  voice 
made  all  hearts  swell,  in  that  moment ;  and  braced  them  to  the 
sticking-place ;  and  thrilled  abroad  over  France,  like  electric 
virtue,  as  a  word  spoken  in  season. 

But  the  Commune,  enrolling  in  the  Champ-de-Mars  ?  But  the 
Committee  of  Watchfulness,  become  now  Committee  of  Public 
Salvation  ^  ;  whose  conscience  is  Marat  ?  The  Commune  enrolling 
enrolls  many ;  provides  Tents  for  them  in  that  Mars'-Field,  that 
they  may  march  with  dawn  on  the  morrow  :  praise  to  this  part  of 
the  Commune !  To  Marat  and  the  Committee  of  Watchfulness 
not  praise  ; — not  even  blanae,  such  as  could  be  meted  out  in  these 
insufficient  dialects  of  ours ;  expressive  silence  rather !  Lone 
Marat,  the  man  forbid,  meditating  long  in  his  Cellars  of  refuge, 

1  Moniteur  in  Hist.  Pari.  xvii.  347.  [It  must  be  remembered  that  Danton 
spoke  as  a  minister  at  the  Bar  of  the  Assembly,  not  as  a  member.  The  speeches  of 
Danton  and  Vergniaud  (among  their  best  eftbrts)  are  given  in  Stephen's  Orators 
of  the  French  Revolution.] 

"^  [  Vid.  supr. ,  note  ii.  279.  ] 


300        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

on  his  Stylites  Pillar,  could  see  salvation  in  one  thing  only  :  in  the 
fall  of  'two-hundred  and  sixty  thousand  Aristocrat  heads.'  With 
so  many  score  of  Naples  Bi'avoes,  each  a  dirk  in  his  right-hand,  a 
muff  on  his  left,  he  would  traverse  France,  and  do  it.  But  the 
world  laughed,  mocking  the  severe-benevolence  of  a  People's- 
Friend  ;  and  his  idea  could  not  become  an  action,  but  only  a 
fixed-idea.  Lo,  now,  however,  he  has  come  down  from  his  Stylites 
Pillar,  to  a  Tribune particidiere  ;  here  now,  without  the  dirks,  with- 
out the  miiffl^  at  least,  were  it  not  grown  possible, — now  in  the 
knot  of  the  crisis,  when  salvation  or  destruction  hangs  in  the 
hour ! ^ 

The  Ice-Tower  of  Avignon  was  noised  of  sufficiently,  and  lives 
in  all  memories ;  but  the  authors  were  not  punished :  nay  we 
saw  Jourdan  Coupe-tete,  borne  on  men's  shoulders,  like  a  copper 
Portent,  'traversing  the  cities  of  the  South.' — What  phantasms, 
squalid-horrid,  shaking  their  dirk  and  muff,  may  dance  through 
the  brain  of  a  Marat,  in  this  dizzy  pealing  of  tocsin-miserere  and 
universal  frenzy,  seek  not  to  guess,  O  Reader !  Nor  what  the 
cruel  Billaud  '  in  his  short  brown  coat '  was  thinking  ;  nor  Sergent, 
not  yet  AgateSergent ;  nor  Panis  the  confidant  of  Danton  ; — nor, 
in  a  word,  how  gloomy  Orcus  does  breed  in  her  gloomy  womb, 
and  fashion  her  monsters  and  prodigies  of  Events,  which  thou 
seest  her  visibly  bear  !  Terror  is  on  these  streets  of  Paris  ;  terror 
and  rage,  tears  and  frenzy :  tocsin-miserere  pealing  through  the 
air  ;  fierce  desperation  rushing  to  battle  ;  mothers,  with  streaming 
eyes  and  wild  hearts,  sending  forth  their  sons  to  die.  '  Carriage- 
horses  are  seized  by  the  bridle,'  that  they  may  draw  cannon ; 
'the  traces  cut,  the  carriages  left  standing.'  In  such  tocsin- 
miserere,  and  murky  bewilderment  of  Frenzy,  are  not  Murder, 
Ate  and  all  Furies  near  at  hand  ?  On  slight  hint — who  knows 
on  how  slight  ? — may  not  Murder  come  ;  and,  with  her  snaky- 
sparkling  head,  illuminate  this  murk  ! 

How  it  was  and  went,  what  part  might  be  premeditated,  what 

'[There  is  no  issue  of  Afni  du  Peuple  between  Aug.  21st  (No.  681)  and  Sept. 
iSth  (No.  682),  which  is  sufficient  evidence  that  Marat  was  busy  elsewhere.  Bougeart 
(ii.  88)  ingeniously  quotes  the  one  passage  in  IVIarat  which  does  not  glorify  the 
massacres,  but  calls  them  an  "unfortunate  event."] 


SEPTEMBER  IN  PARIS  301 

was  improvised  and  accidental,  man  will  never  know,  till  the  great 
Day  of  Judgment  make  it  knowm.  But  with  a  Marat  for  keeper  of 
the  Sovereign's  Conscience — And  we  know  what  the  ultima  ratio 
of  Sovereigns,  when  they  are  driven  to  it,  is  !  In  this  Paris  there 
are  as  wicked  men,  say  a  hundred  or  more,  as  exist  in  all  the 
Earth :  to  be  hired,  and  set  on ;  to  set  on,  of  their  own  accord, 
unhired. — And  yet  we  will  remark  that  premeditation  itself  is  not 
performance,  is  not  surety  of  performance ;  that  it  is  perhaps,  at 
most,  surety  of  letting  whosoever  wills  perform.  From  the  purpose 
of  crime  to  the  act  of  crime  there  is  an  abyss  ;  wonderful  to  think 
of.  The  finger  lies  on  the  pistol ;  but  the  man  is  not  yet  a  mur- 
derer :  nay,  his  whole  nature  staggering  at  such  consummation,  is 
there  not  a  confused  pause  rather, — one  last  instant  of  possibility 
for  him  ?  Not  yet  a  murderer  ;  it  is  at  the  mercy  of  light  trifles 
whether  the  most  fixed  idea  may  not  yet  become  unfixed.  One 
slight  twitch  of  a  muscle,  the  death-flash  bursts  ;  and  he  is  it,  and 
will  for  Eternity  be  it ; — and  Earth  has  become  a  penal  Tartarus 
for  him  ;  his  horizon  girdled  now  not  with  golden  hope,  but  with 
red  flames  of  remorse  ;  voices  from  the  depths  of  Nature  sounding. 
Wo,  wo  on  him  ! 

Of  such  stuff  are  we  all  made ;  on  such  powder-mines  of 
bottomless  guilt  and  criminality, — '  if  God  restrained  not,'  as  is 
well  said, — does  the  purest  of  us  walk.  There  are  depths  in  man 
that  go  the  length  of  lowest  Hell,  as  there  are  heights  that  reach 
highest  Heaven  ; — for  are  not  both  Heaven  and  Hell  made  out  of 
him,  made  by  him,  everlasting  Miracle  and  Mystery  as  he  is  ? — 
But  looking  on  this  Champ-de-Mars,  with  its  tent-buildings  and 
frantic  enrolments ;  on  this  murky-simmering  Paris,  with  its 
crammed  Prisons  (supposed  about  to  burst),  with  its  tocsin-mise- 
rere, its  mothers'  tears,  and  soldiers'  farewell  shoutings, — the 
pious  soul  might  have  prayed,  that  day,  that  God's  grace  would 
restrain,  and  greatly  restrain  ;  lest  on  slight  best  or  hint.  Madness, 
Horror  and  Murder  rose,  and  this  Sabbathday  of  September  be- 
came a  Day  black  in  the  Annals  of  men. 

The  tocsin  is  pealing  its  loudest,  the  clocks  inaudibly  striking 


302        THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION 

Three,  when  poor  Abbe  Si  card,  with  some  thirty  other  Nonjurant 
Priests,  in  six  carriages,  fare  along  the  streets,  from  their  preUmi- 
nary  House  of  Detention  at  the  Townhall,^  westward  towards  the 
Prison  of  the  Abbaye.  Carriages  enough  stand  deserted  on  the 
streets ;  these  six  move  on, — through  angry  multitudes,  cursing 
as  they  move.  Accursed  Aristocrat  Tartuffes,  this  is  the  pass  ye 
have  brought  us  to  !  And  now  ye  will  break  the  Prisons,  and  set 
Capet  Veto  on  horseback  to  ride  over  us  ?  Out  upon  you.  Priests 
of  Beelzebub  and  Moloch  ;  of  Tartuffery,  Mammon  and  the  Prus- 
sian Gallows, — which  ye  name  Mother-Church  and  God  ! — Such 
reproaches  have  the  poor  Nonjurants  to  endure,  and  worse  ;  spoken 
in  on  them  by  frantic  Patriots,  who  mount  even  on  the  carriage- 
steps  ;  the  very  Guards  hardly  refraining.  Pull  up  your  carriage- 
blinds  ? — No !  answers  Patriotism,  clapping  its  horny  paw  on  the 
carriage-blind,  and  crushing  it  down  again.  Patience  in  oppression 
has  limits :  we  are  close  on  the  Abbaye,  it  has  lasted  long :  a 
poor  Nonjurant,  of  quicker  temper,  smites  the  horny  paw  with 
his  cane  ;  nay,  finding  solacement  in  it,  smites  the  unkempt  head, 
sharply  and  again  more  sharply,  twice  over, — seen  clearly  of  us 
and  of  the  world.  It  is  the  last  that  we  see  clearly.  Alas,  next 
moment,  the  carriages  are  locked  and  blocked  in  endless  raging 
tumults  ;  in  yells  deaf  to  the  cry  for  mercy,  which  answer  the  cry 
for  mercy  with  sabre-thrusts  through  the  heart.^  The  thirty 
Priests  are  torn  out,  are  massacred  about  the  Prison-Gate,  one 
after  one, — only  the  poor  Abbe  Sicard,  whom  one  Moton  a  watch- 
maker, knowing  him,  heroically  tried  to  save  and  secrete  in  the 
Prison,  escapes  to  tell ; — and  it  is  Night  and  Orcus,  and  Murder's 
snaky-sparkling  head  has  risen  in  the  murk  ! — 

From  Sunday  afternoon  (exclusive  of  intervals  and  pauses  not 
final)  till  Thursday  evening,  there  follow  consecutively  a  Hundred 

1  [There  is  a  confusion  here  between  the  Chambre  cTAi'Tet  aX  the  Mairic  (the 
official  residence  of  the  Maire)  and  the  Town  Hall,  which  had  no  cells  in  it.] 

2  F^lemh^si  (anagram  for  Mf^h^e  Fils),  La  V^rite  tout  entiere  sur  les  vrais 
Acteurs  de  la  journ^e  du  2  Septenibre  1792  (reprinted  in  Hist.  Pari,  xviii.  156-181), 
p.  167.  [This  was  first  printed  in  1794.  Mt%ce-Latouche,  born  1760,  had  been 
employed  abroad,  returned  to  Paris  in  1792,  was  in  touch  with  the  leaders  of 
the  Commune,  and  suspected  of  knowing  something  about  the  massacres.  He 
wrote  the  pamphlet  here  mentioned  to  clear  himself,  and  died  1826.] 


SEPTEMBER  IN  PARIS  303 

Hours.  Which  hundred  hours  are  to  be  reckoned  with  the  hours 
of  the  Bartholomew  Butchery,  of  the  Armagnac  Massacres,  Sicihan 
Vespers,  or  whatsoever  is  savagest  in  the  annals  of  this  world. 
Horrible  the  hour  when  man's  soul,  in  its  paroxysm,  spurns  asun- 
der the  barriers  and  rules  ;  and  shows  what  dens  and  depths  are  in 
it !  For  Night  and  Orcus,  as  we  say,  as  was  long  prophesied,  have 
burst  forth,  here  in  this  Paris,  from  their  subterranean  imprison- 
ment :  hideous,  dim-confused  ;  which  it  is  painful  to  look  on  ;  and 
yet  which  cannot,  and  indeed  which  should  not,  be  forgotten. 

The  Reader,  who  looks  earnestly  through  this  dim  Phantas- 
magory  of  the  Pit,  will  discern  few  fixed  certain  objects  ;  and  yet 
still  a  few.  He  will  observe,  in  this  Abbaye  Prison,  the  sudden 
massacre  of  the  Priests  being  once  over,  a  strange  Court  of  Justice, 
or  call  it  Court  of  Revenge  and  Wild-Justice,  swiftly  fashion  itself, 
and  take  seat  round  a  table,  with  the  Prison-Registers  spread  be- 
fore it ; — Stanislas  Maillard,  Bastille-hero,  famed  Leader  of  the 
Menads,  presiding.  O  Stanislas,  one  hoped  to  meet  thee  elsewhere 
than  here  ;  thou  shifty  Riding- Usher,  with  an  inkling  of  Law ! 
This  work  also  thou  hadst  to  do  ;  and  then — to  depart  forever  from 
our  eyes.  At  La  Force,  at  the  Chdtelet,  the  Conciergerie,  the  like 
Court  forms  itself,  with  the  like  accompaniments :  the  thing  that 
one  man  does,  other  men  can  do.  There  are  some  Seven  Prisons 
in  Paris,  full  of  Aristocrats  with  conspiracies  ; — nay  not  even  Bice- 
tre  and  Salpetriere  shall  escape,  with  their  Forgers  of  Assignats : 
and  there  are  seventy  times  seven  hundred  Patriot  hearts  in  a  state 
of  frenzy.  Scoundrel  hearts  also  there  are  ;  as  perfect,  say,  as  the 
Earth  holds, — if  such  are  needed.  To  whom,  in  this  mood,  law 
is  as  no-law  ;  and  killing,  by  what  name  soever  called,  is  but  work 
to  be  done.i 

1  [There  seem  to  have  been  on  the  average  about  fifteen  murderers  at  each 
prison  :  but  they  were  continually  reinforced  and  changed  ;  most  of  them  were 
probably  Marseillais,  but  at  the  Conciergerie  there  seem  to  have  been  some  old 
Gardes  Francaises.  In  all  cases  however  they  were  the  hired  and  paid  servants  of 
the  ComiW.  de  Surveillance  of  the  Ccimmune ;  a  certain  number  of  them  were 
brought  to  justice  in  1796,  and  transported.  To  represent  the  whole  population  of 
Paris  as  accomplices,  or  to  ascribe  it  to  a  'sudden  madness  of  the  people,'  is 
ludicrous.  The  t'lite  of  rascaldom  had  been  attracted  to  Paris  since  1789,  and 
the  I'life  of  that  i!lite  carefully  selected  by  Maillard  and  the  Comite  for  the  job. 
There  is  strong  evidence  that  the  actual  band  of  murderers  under  Maillard  was 


304        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

So  sit  these  sudden  Coui'ts  of  Wild-Justice,  with  the  Prison- 
Registers  before  them  ;  unwonted  wild  tumult  howling  all  round  ; 
the  Prisoners  in  dread  expectancy  within.  Swift :  a  name  is  called  ; 
bolts  jingle,  a  Prisoner  is  there.  A  few  questions  are  put ;  swiftly 
this  sudden  Jury  decides  :  Royalist  Plotter  or  not .''  Clearly  not ; 
in  that  case.  Let  the  Prisoner  be  enlarged  with  Five  la  Nation. 
Probably  yea  ;  then  still.  Let  the  Prisoner  be  enlarged,  but  without 
Five  la  Nation  ;  or  else  it  may  run.  Let  the  Prisoner  be  conducted 
to  La  Force.  ^  At  La  Force  again  their  formula  is,  Let  the  Pi'isoner 
be  conducted  to  the  Abbaye. — "  To  La  Force  then  !  "  Volunteer 
bailiffs  seize  the  doomed  man  ;  he  is  at  the  outer  gate  ;  *  enlarged,' 
or  '  conducted,'  not  into  La  Force,  but  into  a  howling  sea ;  forth, 
under  an  arch  of  wild  sabres,  axes  and  pikes  ;  and  sinks,  hewn 
asunder.  And  another  sinks,  and  another  ;  and  there  forms  itself 
a  piled  heap  of  corpses,  and  the  kennels  begin  to  run  red.  Fancy 
the  yells  of  these  men,  their  faces  of  sweat  and  blood  ;  the  cx'ueller 
shrieks  of  these  women,  for  there  are  women  too ;  and  a  fellow- 
mortal  hurled  naked  into  it  all !  Jourgniac  de  Saint- Meard  has 
seen  battle,  has  seen  an  effervescent  Regiment  du  Roi  in  mutiny  ; 
but  the  bravest  heart  may  quail  at  this.  The  Swiss  Prisoners, 
remnants  of  the  Tenth  of  August,  '  clasped  each  other  spasmodi- 
'  cally,  and  hung  back  ;  gray  veterans  crying  :  "  Mercy,  Messieurs  ; 
'ah,  mercy!"  But  there  was  no  mercy.  Suddenly,  however, 
'one  of  these  men  steps  forward.  He  had-on  a  blue  frock  coat ; 
'  he  seemed  about  thirty,  his  stature  was  above  common,  his  look 
'noble  and  martial.  "I  go  first,"  said  he,  "since  it  must  be  so  : 
'adieu!"  Then  dashing  his  hat  sharply  behind  him:  "Which 
'way.''"  cried  he  to  the  Brigands:  "Show  it  me,  then."  They 
'open  the  folding  gate  ;  he  is  announced  to  the  multitude.  He 
'  stands  a  moment  motionless  ;  then  plunges  forth  among  the  pikes, 
'  and  dies  of  a  thousand  wounds.'  ^ 

kept  on  foot  by  the  Commune  up  to  Oct.  nth  '93  (the  date  of  Maillard's  arrest) ; 
after  which  they  would  pass  some  into  Hanriot's  staff,  some  into  the  "  Revolution- 
ary Army  "  \see  Mortinier-Ternaux,  iii.  224  and  4S6).] 

i[Z,fl  Force  being  nearer  to  the  H6fel-de-Ville  than  the  Abbaye,  more  constant 
encouragement  would  be  given  to  the  murderers  there.  Hubert  and  Rossignol 
certainly  seem  to  have  visited  La  Force  [ibid.  iii.  265).] 

2F61emh6si,  La  V6rit6  tout  entifere  (7it  supra),  p.  173. 


SEPTEMBER  IN  PARIS  305 

Man  after  man  is  cut  down ;  the  sabres  need  sharpening,  the 
killers  refresh  themselves  from  wine-jugs.^  Onward  and  onward 
goes  the  butchery  ;  the  loud  yells  wearing  down  into  bass  growls. 
A  sombre-faced  shifting  multitude  looks  on  ;  in  dull  approval,  or 
dull  disapproval ;  in  dull  recognition  that  it  is  Necessity.  *  An 
Anglais  in  drab  greatcoat '  was  seen,  or  seemed  to  be  seen,  serv- 
ing liquor  from  his  own  dram-bottle  ; — for  what  purpose,  '  if  not 
set  on  by  Pitt,'  Satan  and  himself  know  best !  Witty  Dr.  Moore 
grew  sick  on  approaching,  and  turned  into  another  street.^ — Quick 
enough  goes  this  Jury-Court ;  and  rigorous.  The  brave  are  not 
spared,  nor  the  beautiful,  nor  the  weak.  Old  M.  de  Montmorin, 
the  Minister's  Brother,  was  acquitted  by  the  Tribunal  of  the 
Seventeenth  ;  and  conducted  back,  elbowed  by  howling  galleries  ; 
but  is  not  acquitted  here.  Princess  de  Lamballe  has  lain  down 
on  bed  :  "  Madame,  you  are  to  be  removed  to  the  Abbaye."  "  I 
do  not  wish  to  remove  ;  I  am  well  enough  here."  There  is  a 
need-be  for  removing.  She  will  arrange  her  dress  a  little,  then ; 
rude  voices  answer,  "  You  have  not  far  to  go."  She  too  is  led  to 
the  hell-gate  ;  a  manifest  Queen's-Friend.  She  shivers  back,  at 
the  sight  of  bloody  sabres  ;  but  there  is  no  return :  Onwards  ! 
That  fair  hind  head  is  cleft  with  the  axe ;  the  neck  is  severed. 
That  fair  body  is  cut  in  fragments  ;  with  indignities,  and  obscene 
horrors  of  moustachio  grands-l&vres,  which  human  nature  would 
fain  find  incredible, — which  shall  be  read  in  the  original  language 
only.3  She  was  beautiful,  she  was  good,  she  had  known  no  happi- 
ness. Young  hearts,  generation  after  generation,  will  think  with 
themselves :  O  worthy  of  worship,  thou  king-descended,  god-de- 
scended, and  poor  sister- woman !  why  was  not  I  there  ;  and  some 
Sword  Balmung  or  Thor's  Hammer  in  my  hand  ?  Her  head  is 
fixed  on  a  pike  ;  paraded  under  the  windows  of  the  Temple  ;  that 

1  [The  Committee  of  the  Section  of  Quaire  Natio7is  furnished  written  orders  on 
the  neighbouring  wine  shops  for  drink  for  the  murderers  {ibid.  iii.  259).] 

2 Moore's  Journal,  i.  185-195. 

'[The  contemporary  accounts  of  Madame  de  Lamballe's  murder  are  summed 
up  in  the  appendix  to  Lescure,  '  La  Princesse  de  Lamballe'  (Paris,  1864),  409  and 
599.  {See  also  note  vol.  i.  p.  41.)  The  story  is  wholly  unprintable  in  the  English 
language.] 

VOL.  II,  20 


306        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

a  still  more  hated,  a  Marie  Antoinette,  may  see.  One  Municipal, 
in  the  Temple  with  the  Royal  Prisoners  at  the  moment,  said, 
"Lookout."  Another  eagerly  whispered,  "Do  not  look."  The 
circuit  of  the  Temple  is  guarded,  in  these  hours,  by  a  long  stretched 
tricolor  riband  :  terror  enters,  and  the  clangour  of  infinite  tumult ; 
hitherto  not  regicide,  though  that  too  may  come. 

But  it  is  more  edifying  to  note  what  thrillings  of  affection, 
what  fragments  of  wild  virtues  turn  up  in  this  shaking  asunder 
of  man's  existence  ;  for  of  these  too  there  is  a  proportion.  Note 
old  Marquis  Cazotte  ^ :  he  is  doomed  to  die  ;  but  his  young 
Daughter  clasps  him  in  her  arms,  with  an  inspiration  of  eloquence, 
with  a  love  which  is  stronger  than  very  death :  the  heart  of  the 
killers  themselves  is  touched  by  it ;  the  old  man  is  spared.  Yet 
he  was  guilty,  if  plotting  for  his  King  is  guilt :  in  ten  days  more, 
a  Court  of  Law  condemned  him,  and  he  had  to  die  elsewhere ; 
bequeathing  his  Daughter  a  lock  of  his  old  gray  hair.  Or  note  old 
M.  de  Sombreuil,  who  also  had  a  Daughter  : — My  Father  is  not  an 
Aristocrat :  O  good  gentlemen,  I  will  swear  it,  and  testify  it,  and 
in  all  ways  prove  it ;  we  are  not ;  we  hate  Aristocrats  !  "  Wilt 
thou  drink  Aristocrats'  blood  ?  "  The  man  lifts  blood  (if  universal 
Rumour  can  be  credited) ;  ^  the  poor  maiden  does  drink.  "  This 
Sombreuil  is  innocent  then !  "  Yes,  indeed, — and  now  note, 
most  of  all,  how  the  bloody  pikes,  at  this  news,  do  rattle  to  the 
ground ;  and  the  tiger-yells  become  bursts  of  jubilee  over  a 
brother  saved  ;  and  the  old  man  and  his  daughter  are  clasped  to 
bloody  bosoms,  with  hot  tears  ;  and  borne  home  in  triumph  of 
Five  la  Nation,  the  killers  refusing  even  money !  Does  it  seem 
strange,  this  temper  of  theirs  .''  It  seems  very  certain,  well  proved 
by  Royalist  testimony  in  other  instances ;  ^  and  very  significant. 


^[Cazotte,  vid.  supr.,  ii.  203,  note.] 

^Dulaure,  Esquisses  hisioriques  des  principaux  ^v^nemens  de  la  Revolution,  ii. 
206  (cited  in  Montgaillard,  iii.  205).  [The  story  is  confirmed  by  a  letter  of  the 
lady's  son,  quoted  l)y  Granier  de  Cassagnac,  '  Histoire  des  Massacres  de  Septembre' 
(Paris,  i860),  ii.  26  ;  the  murderer  held  a  half-full  glass  of  wine  under  a  dripping 
wound  of  one  of  the  murdered  persons,  and  then  presented  it  to  Mdlle  de  .Sombreuil. 
She  married  afterwards  a  M.  Villelume  of  Avignon.  Sombreuil  was  executed  June 
loth  '94.] 

■'*  Bertrand-Moleville  (M6m.  particuliers,  ii.  213),  (&c.  &c. 


A  TRILOGY  307 


CHAPTER  V 

A  TRILOGY 

As  all  Delineation,  in  these  ages,  were  it  never  so  Epic, '  speak- 
ing itself  and  not  singing  itself,'  must  either  found  on  Belief  and 
provable  Fact,  or  have  no  foundation  at  all  (nor,  except  as 
floating  cobweb,  any  existence  at  all), — the  Reader  will  perhaps 
prefer  to  take  a  glance  with  the  very  eyes  of  eye-witnesses ;  and 
see,  in  that  way,  for  himself,  how  it  was.  Brave  Jourgniac, 
innocent  Abbe  Sicard,  judicious  Advocate  Maton,  these,  greatly 
compressing  themselves,  shall  speak,  each  an  instant.  Jourgniac's 
Agony  of  Thirty-eight  hours  went  through  '  above  a  hundred  edi- 
tions,' though  intrinsically  a  poor  work.  Some  portion  of  it  may 
here  go  through  above  the  hundred-and-first,  for  want  of  a  better.^ 

'  Totvards  seven  o'clock  '  (Sunday  night  at  the  Abbaye  ;  for  Jour- 
gniac goes  by  dates) :  '  We  saw  two  men  enter,  their  hands  bloody 
'  and  armed  with  sabres  ;  a  turnkey,  with  a  torch,  lighted  them  ; 
'  he  pointed  to  the  bed  of  the  unfortunate  Swiss,  Reding.  Reding 
'  spoke  with  a  dying  voice.  One  of  them  paused  ;  but  the  other 
'  cried,  Allans  done  ;  lifted  the  unfortunate  man ;  carried  him  out 
'  on  his  back  to  the  street.     He  was  massacred  there. 

'  We  all  looked  at  one  another  in  silence,  we  clasped  each 
'other's  hands.  Motionless,  with  fixed  eyes,  we  gazed  on  the 
'  pavement  of  our  prison  ;  on  which  lay  the  moonlight,  checkered 
'  with  the  triple  stancheons  of  our  windows.' 

'  Three  in  the  morning  :  They  were  breaking-in  one  of  the  prison- 
'  doors.  We  at  first  thought  they  were  coming  to  kill  us  in  our 
'  room  ;  but  heard,  by  voices  on  the  staircase,  that  it  was  a  room 
'  where  some  Prisoners  had  barricaded  themselves.  They  were 
'all  butchered  there,  as  we  shortly  gathered.' 

'  Ten  o'clock  :  The  Abbe  Lenfant  and  the  Abbe  de  Chapt-Rasti- 

^[ Jourgniac's  '  Mon  Agonie,'  etc.,  was  printed  by  Desenne  in  1792  :  before  his 
own  death  Jourgniac  boasted  of  possessing  58  editions  of  it,  and  there  were  twelve 
in  1792  alone. 

The  '  Relation  Historique  sur  les  journ^es  de  2  et  3  Septembre  1792,'  by  the  Abb^ 
Sicard,  was  published  by  A.  Bertrand,  Paris,  1806. 

'  Les  Crimes  de  Marat,  ou  ma  Resurrection,'  by  Maton  de  la  Varenne,  was  fiist 
published  by  Andr6  at  Paris  1795.     {See  Tourneux,  i.  290,  etc.)] 


308        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

*  gnac  appeared  in  the  pulpit  of  the  Chapel,  which  was  our  prison  ; 
'  they  had  entered  by  a  door  from  the  stairs.  They  said  to  us 
'  that  our  end  was  at  hand ;  that  we  must  compose  ourselves, 
'and  receive  their  last  blessing.  An  electric  movement,  not  to 
'be  defined,  threw  us  all  on  our  knees,  and  we  received  it. 
'These  two  whitehaired  old  men,  blessing  us  from  their  place 
'  above ;  death  hovering  over  our  heads,  on  all  hands  environing  us ; 
'  the  moment  is  never  to  be  forgotten.  Half  an  hour  after,  they 
'were  both  massacred,  and  we  heard  their  cries.' ^ — Thus  Jour- 
gniac  in  his  Agony  in  the  Abbaye. 

But  now  let  the  good  Maton  speak,  what  he,  over  in  La  Force, 
in  the  same  hours,  is  suffering  and  witnessing.  This  Resurrection 
by  him  is  greatly  the  best,  the  least  theatrical  of  these  Pamphlets  ; 
and  stands  testing  by  documents  : 

'Towards  seven  o'clock,'  on  Sunday  night,  'prisoners  were 
'called  frequently,  and  they  did  not  reappear.  Each  of  us 
'  reasoned,  in  his  own  way,  on  this  singularity :  but  our  ideas 
'became  calm,  as  we  persuaded  ourselves  that  the  Memorial  I 
'  had  drawn  up  for  the  National  Assembly  was  producing  effect.' 

'  At  one  in  the  morning,  the  grate  which  led  to  our  quarter 
'  opened  anew.  Four  men  in  uniform,  each  with  a  drawn  sabre 
'  and  blazing  torch,  came  up  to  our  corridor,  preceded  by  a  turn- 

*  key ;  and  entered  an  apartment  close  to  ours,  to  investigate  a 
'  box  there,  which  we  heard  them  break  up.  This  done,  they 
'  stept  into  the  gallery,  and  questioned  the  man  Cuissa,  to  know 
'  where  Lamotte '  (Necklace's  Widower)  '  was.  Lamotte,  they 
'  said,  had  some  months  ago,  under  pretext  of  a  treasure  he  knew 
'  of,  swindled  a  sum  of  three-hundred  livres  from  one  of  them, 
'  inviting  him  to  dinner  for  that  purpose.  The  wretched  Cuissa, 
'  now  in  their  hands,  who  indeed  lost  his  life  this  night,  answered 
'trembling,  That  he  remembered  the  fact  well,  but  could  not 
'  tell  what  was  become  of  Lamotte.  Determined  to  find  Lamotte 
'and  confront  him  with  Cuissa,  they  rummaged,  along  with  this 
'  latter,  through  various  other  apartments ;  but  without  effect,  for 

'  Jourgniac  Saint-M^ard,  Mon  Agonie  de  Trente-huit  heures  (reprinted  in  Hist. 
Pari,  xviii,  103-135). 


A  TEILOGY  309 

'  we  heard  them  say :  "  Come  search  among  the  corpses  then  ; 
'  for,  nom  de  Dieii !  we  must  find  where  he  is." 

'At  this  same  time,  I  heard  Louis  Bardy,  the  Abbe  Bardy's 
'  name  called  :  he  was  brought  out ;  and  directly  massacred,  as  1 
'  learnt.     He  had  been  accused,  along  with  his  concubine,  five  or 

*  six  years  before,  of  having  murdered  and  cut  in  pieces  his  own 
'  Brother,  Auditor  of  the  Chamhre  dcs  Comptes  of  Montpellier  ;  but 
'  had  by  his  subtlety,  his  dexterity,  nay  his  eloquence,  outwitted 
'the  judges,  and  escaped. 

'  One  may  fancy  what  terror  these  words,  "  Come  search  among 
'the  corpses  then,"  had  thrown  me  into.     I  saw  nothing  for  it 

*  now  but  resigning  myself  to  die.     I  wrote  my  last-will ;  con 

*  eluding  it  by  a  petition  and  adjuration,  that  the  paper  should 
'be  sent  to  its  address.  Scarcely  had  I  quitted  the  pen,  when 
'there  came  two  other  men  in  uniform  ;  one  of  them,  whose  arm 
'  and  sleeve  up  to  the  very  shoulder,  as  well  as  his  sabre,  were 
'  covered  with  blood,  said.  He  was  as  weary  as  a  hodman  that 
'  had  been  beating  plaster.' 

'  Baudin  de  la  Chenaye  was  called  ;  sixty  years  of  virtues  could 
'  not  save  him.  They  said,  A  I' Abhaye  :  he  passed  the  fatal  outer- 
'  gate ;  gave  a  cry  of  terror,  at  sight  of  the  heaped  corpses  ; 
'covered  his  eyes  with  his  hands,  and  died  of  innumerable 
'  wounds.  At  every  new  opening  of  the  grate,  I  thought  I  should 
'  hear  my  own  name  called,  and  see  Rossignol  enter.' 

'  I  flung  off  my  night-go^vn  and  cap  ;  I  put-on  a  coarse  unwashed 
'  shirt,  a  worn  frock  without  waistcoat,  an  old  round  hat ;  these 
'  things  I  had  sent  for,  some  days  ago,  in  the  fear  of  what  might 
' happen. 

'  The  rooms  of  this  corridor  had  been  all  emptied  but  ours.  We 
'  were  four  together ;  whom  they  seemed  to  have  forgotten  : 
'we  addressed  our  prayers  in  common  to  the  Eternal  to  be 
'delivered  from  this  peril.' 

'  Baptiste  the  turnkey  came  up  by  himself,  to  see  us.  I  took 
'  him  by  the  hands  ;  I  conjured  him  to  save  us  ;  promised  him  a 
'  hundred  louis,  if  he  would  conduct  me  home.  A  noise  coming 
'  from  the  grates  made  him  hastily  withdraw. 


310        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

'  It  was  the  noise  of  some  dozen  or  fifteen  men,  armed  to  the 
'  teeth  ;  as  we,  lying  flat  to  escape  being  seen,  could  see  fi'om  our 
'  windows.  "  Up  stairs  !  "  said  they  :  "  Let  not  one  remain."  I  took 
'  out  my  penknife  ;  I  considered  where  I  should  strike  myself,' — 
but  reflected  'that  the  blade  was  too  short,'  and  also  'on  religion.' 

Finally,  however,  between  seven  and  eight  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing, enter  four  men  with  bludgeons  and  sabres  ! — '  To  one  of  whom 
'  Gerard  my  comrade  whispered,  earnestly,  apart.  During  their 
'  colloquy  I  searched  everywhere  for  shoes,  that  I  might  lay  off 
'  the  Advocate  pumps  {pantoujies  de  Palais)  I  had  on,'  but  could 
find  none. — '  Constant,  called  le  Sauvage,  Gerard,  and  a  third 
'whose  name  escapes  me,  they  let  clear  off:  as  for  me,  four  sabres 
'were  crossed  over  my  breast,  and  they  led  me  down.  I  was 
'  brought  to  their  bar  ;  to  the  Personage  with  the  scarf,  who  sat 
'as  judge  there.  He  was  a  lame  man,  of  tall  lank  stature.  He 
'recognised  me  on  the  streets  and  spoke  to  me,  seven  months 
'  after.  I  have  been  assured  that  he  was  son  of  a  retired  attorney, 
'and  named  Chepy.  Crossing  the  Court  called  Des  Nouj-nces,  I 
'saw  Manuel  haranguing  in  tricolor  scarf.'  The  trial,  as  we  see, 
ends  in  acquittal  and  resurrection.^ 

Poor  Sicard,  from  the  violon  of  the  Abbaye,  shall  say  but  a  few 
words ;  true-looking,  though  tremulous.  Towards  three  in  the 
morning,  the  killers  bethink  them  of  this  little  violon  ;  and  knock 
from  the  court.  '  I  tapped  gently,  trembling  lest  the  murderers 
'might  hear,  on  the  opposite  door,  where  the  Section  Committee 
'  was  sitting  :  they  answered  gruffly,  that  they  had  no  key.  There 
'  were  three  of  us  in  this  violon  :  my  companions  thought  they 
'  perceived  a  kind  of  loft  overhead.  But  it  was  very  high  ;  only 
'one  of  us  could  reach  it  by  mounting  on  the  shoulders  of  both 
'the  others.  One  of  them  said  to  me,  that  my  life  was  usefuller 
'  than  theirs  :  I  resisted,  they  insisted :  no  denial !  I  fling  my- 
'  self  on  the  neck  of  these  two  deliverers ;  never  was  scene  more 
'  touching.  I  mount  on  the  shoulders  of  the  first,  then  on  those  of 
'  the  second,  finally  on  the  loft ;  and  address  to  my  two  comrades 
'the  expression  of  a  soul  overwhelmed  with  natural  emotions.' ^ 

1  Maton  de  la  Varenne,  Ma  Resurrection  (in  Hist.  Pari,  xviii.  135-156). 

2  Abb6  Sicard,  Relation  adress6e  k  un  de  ses  amis  (Hist.  Pari,  xviii.  98-103). 


A  TKILOGY  311 

The  two  generous  companions,  we  rejoice  to  findj  did  not 
perish.  But  it  is  time  that  Jourgniac  de  Saint-Meard  should 
speak  his  last  words,  and  end  this  singular  trilogy.  The  night 
had  become  day  ;  and  the  day  has  again  become  night.  Jourgniac, 
worn  down  with  uttermost  agitation,  was  fallen  asleep,  and  had 
a  cheering  dream  :  he  has  also  contrived  to  make  acquaintance 
with  one  of  the  volunteer  bailiffs,  and  spoken  in  native  Proven9al 
with  him.  On  Tuesday,  about  one  in  the  morning,  his  Agony  is 
reaching  its  crisis. 

'  By  the  glare  of  two  torches,  I  now  descried  the  terrible  tri- 
'  bunal,  where  lay  my  life  or  my  death.  The  President,  in  gray 
'coat,  with  a  sabre  at  his  side,  stood  leaning  with  his  hands 
'against  a  table,  on  which  were  papers,  an  inkstand,  tobacco- 
'  pipes  and  bottles.     Some  ten  persons  were  around,  seated  or 

*  standing ;  two  of  whom  had  jackets  and  aprons :  others  were 
'  sleeping  stretched  on  benches.  Two  men,  in  bloody  shirts, 
'  guarded  the  door  of  the  place  ;  an  old  turnkey  had  his  hand  on 

*  the  lock.  In  front  of  the  President  thi-ee  men  held  a  Prisoner, 
'  who  might  be  about  sixty '  (or  seventy :  he  was  old  Marshal 
Maille,^  of  the  Tuileries  and  August  Tenth).  '  They  stationed  me 
'  in  a  corner ;  my  guards  crossed  their  sabres  on  my  breast.  I 
'  looked  on  all  sides  for  my  Provencal :  two  National  Guards,  one 
'  of  them  drunk,  presented  some  appeal  from  the  Section  of  Croix 
'  Rouge  in  favour  of  the  Prisoner  ;  the  Man  in  Gray  answered  : 
'"They  are  useless,  these  appeals  for  traitors."  Then  the 
'  Prisoner  exclaimed :  "  It  is  frightful ;  your  judgment  is  a 
'murder."  The  President  answered:  "My  hands  are  washed  of 
'it;  take  M.  Maille  away."  They  drove  him  into  the  street; 
'  where,  through  the  opening  of  the  door,  I  saw  him  massacred. 

'  The  President  sat  down  to  write ;  registering,  I  suppose,  the 
'  name  of  this  one  whom  they  had  finished ;  then  I  heard  him 
'  say  :  "  Another,  A  nn  autre  !  " 

'  Behold  me  then  haled  before  this  swift  and  bloody  judgment- 
'  bar,  where  the  best  protection  was  to  have  no  protection,  and 

1  [Marshal  Mailly  was  not  killed  at  the  Abbaye — he  escaped  to  Picardy  and  was 
guillotined  by  Lebon  at  Arras  March  25ih  1794.] 


312        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

'  all  resources  of  ingenuity  became  null  if  they  were  not  founded 
'  on  truth.     Two  of  my  guards  held  me  each  by  a  hand,  the  third 

*  by  the  collar  of  my  coat.  "  Your  name,  your  profession  .-'  "  said 
'the  President.  "The  smallest  lie  ruins  you,"  added  one  of  the 
'  Judges. — "  My  name  is  Jourgniac  Saint-Meard  ;  I  have  served, 

*  as  an  officer,  twenty  years :  and  I  appear  at  your  tribunal  with 
'  the  assurance  of  an  innocent  man,  who  therefore  will  not  lie." — 
' "  We  shall  see  that,"  said  the  President :  "  Do  you  know  why 
'  you  are  arrested  ?  " — "  Yes  Monsieur  le  President ;  I  am  accused 
'  of  editing  the  Journal  De  la  Cour  et  de  la  P'ille.  But  I  hope  to 
'prove  the  falsity."  ' — 

But  no  ;  Jourgniac's  proof  of  the  falsity,  and  defence  generally, 
though  of  excellent  result  as  a  defence,  is  not  interesting  to  read. 
It  is  longwinded  ;  there  is  a  loose  theatricality  in  the  reporting  of 
it,  which  does  not  amount  to  unveracity,  yet  which  tends  that 
way.  We  shall  suppose  him  successful,  beyond  hope,  in  proving 
and  disproving ;  and  skip  largely, — to  the  catastrophe,  almost  at 
two  steps. 

' "  But  after  all,"  said  one  of  the  Judges,  "there  is  no  smoke 
'without  kindling;  tell  us  why  they  accuse  you  of  that." — "I 
'  was  about  to  do  so  "  ' — Jourgniac  does  so  ;  with  more  and  more 
success. 

'"Nay,"  continued  I,  "they  accuse  me  even  of  recruiting  for 
'  the  Emigrants  !  "  At  these  words  there  arose  a  general  murmur. 
'"O  Messieurs,  Messieurs,"  I  exclaimed,  raising  my  voice,  "it  is 
'  my  turn  to  speak  ;  I  beg  M.  le  President  to  have  the  kindness 
'to  maintain  it  for  me;  I  never  needed  it  more." — "True 
'enough,  true  enough,"  said  almost  all  the  Judges  with  a  laugh: 
' "  Silence  !  " 

'  While  they  were  examining  the  testimonials  I  had  produced, 
'  a  new  Prisoner  was  brought  in,  and  placed  before  the  President. 
'"It  was  one  Priest  more,"  they  said,  "whom  they  had  ferreted 
'  out  of  the  Chapelle."  After  very  few  questions  :  "  A  la  Force  !  " 
'  He  flung  his  breviaiy  on  the  table ;  was  hurled  forth,  and  mas- 
'  sacred.     I  reappeared  before  the  tribunal. 

'^"You  telljus  always,"  cried  one  of  the  Judges,  with  a  tone  of 


A  TRILOGY  313 

'  impatience,  "  that  you  are  not  this,  that  you  are  not  that ;  what 
'are  you  then?" — "I   was  an  open  Royahst." — There  arose  a 

*  general  murmur ;  which  was  miraculously  appeased  by  another 
'  of  the  men,  who  had  seemed  to  take  an  interest  in  me :  "  We 
'are  not  here  to  judge  opinions,"  said  he,  "but  to  judge  the 
'results  of  them,"  Could  Rousseau  and  Voltaire  both  in  one, 
'pleading  for  me,  have  said  better? — "Yes,  Messieurs,  '  cried  I, 
'  "  always  till  the  Tenth  of  August  I  was  an  open  Royalist.  Ever 
'  since  the  Tenth  of  August  that  cause  has  been  finished.  I  am  a 
'  Frenchman,  true  to  my  country.    I  was  always  a  man  of '  honour. ' ' ' 

' "  My  soldiers  never  distrusted  me.  Nay,  two  days  before  that 
'  business  of  Nanci,  when  their  suspicion  of  their  officers  was  at 
'  its  height,  they  chose  me  for  commander,  to  lead  them  to  Lune- 

*  ville,  to  get  back  the  prisoners  of  the  Regiment  Mestre-de-Camp, 
'and  seize  General  Malseigne."  Which  fact  there  is,  most 
luckily,  an  individual  present  who  by  a  certain  token  can  confirm. 

'  The  President,  this  cross-questioning  being  over,  took  off  his 
'  hat  and  said  :  "  I  see  nothing  to  suspect  in  this  man  :  I  am  for 
'granting  him  his  liberty.  Is  that  your  vote?"  To  which  all 
'the  Judges  answered  :  "  Oiii,  Out ;  it  is  just !  "  ' 

And  there  arose  vivats  within  doors  and  without ;  '  escort  of 
three,'  amid  shoutings  and  embracings  :  thus  Jourgniac  escaped 
from  jiu-y-trial  and  the  jaws  of  death. ^  Maton  and  Sicard  did, 
either  by  trial  and  no  bill  found,  lank  President  Chepy  finding 
'  absolutely  nothing ; '  or  else  by  evasion,  and  new  favour  of 
Moton  the  brave  watchmaker,  likewise  escape ;  and  were  era- 
braced  and  wept  over ;  weeping  in  return,  as  they  well  might. 

Thus  they  three,  in  wondrous  trilogy,  or  triple  soliloquy  : 
uttering  simultaneously,  through  the  dread  night-watches,  their 
Night-thoughts, — grown  audible  to  us  I  They  Three  are  become 
audible :  but  the  other  '  Thousand  and  Eighty-nine,  of  whom 
Two-hundred  and  two  were  Priests,'  who  also  had  Night-thoughts, 
remain  inaudible  ;  choked  forever  in  black  Death,  Heard  only 
of  President  Chepy  and  the  Man  in  Gray  ! — 

1  Mon  Agonie.  [ut  supra.  Hist.  ParL  xviii,  128). 


314        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

CHAPTER  VI 

THE  CIRCULAR 

But  the  Constituted  Authorities,  all  this  while  ?  The  Legislative 
Assembly  ;  the  Six  Ministers  ;  the  Townhall ;  Santerre  with  the 
National  Guard  ? — It  is  very  curious  to  think  what  a  City  is. 
Theatres,  to  the  number  of  some  twenty-three,  were  open  every 
night  during  these  prodigies ;  while  right-arras  here  grew  weary 
with  slaying,  right-arms  there  were  twiddledeeing  on  melodious 
catgut :  at  the  very  instant  when  Abbe  Sicard  was  clambering  up 
his  second  pair  of  shoulders,  three-men  high,  five  hundred  thou- 
sand human  individuals  were  lying  horizontal,  as  if  nothing  were 
amiss. 

As  for  the  poor  Legislative,  the  sceptre  had  departed  from  it. 
The  Legislative  did  send  Deputation  to  the  Prisons,  to  these 
Street-Courts  ;  and  poor  M.  Dusaulx  did  harangue  there  ;  but 
produced  no  conviction  whatsoever :  nay  at  last,  as  he  continued 
haranguing,  the  Street-Court  interposed,  not  without  threats  ; 
and  he  had  to  cease,  and  withdraw.  This  is  the  same  poor  worthy 
old  M.  Dusaulx  who  told,  or  indeed  almost  sang  (though  with 
cracked  voice),  the  Taking  of  the  Bastille,  to  our  satisfaction,  long 
since.  He  was  wont  to  announce  himself,  on  such  and  on  all 
occasions,  as  the  Translator  of  Juvenal.  "  Good  Citizens,  you  see 
before  you  a  man  who  loves  his  country,  who  is  the  Translator  of 
Juvenal,"  said  he  once. — "Juvenal?"  interrupts  Sansculottism  : 
"^Who  the  devil  is  Juvenal.''  One  of  your  sacres  Aristocrates  ? 
To  the  Lanterne  !  "  From  an  orator  of  this  kind,  conviction  was 
not  to  be  expected.  The  Legislative  had  much  ado  to  save  one 
of  its  own  Members,  or  Ex-Members,  Deputy  Jounneau,  who 
chanced  to  be  lying  in  arrest  for  mere  Parliamentary  delinquencies, 
in  these  Prisons.  As  for  poor  old  Dusaulx  and  Company,  they 
returned  to  the  Salle  de  Manege,  saying,  "  It  was  dark  ;  and  they 
could  not  see  well  what  was  going  on."  ^ 

Roland  Avrites   indignant    messages,   in    the   name  of  Order, 

'  Moniteur,  Debate  of  2d  September  1793. 


THE  CIRCULAR  315 

Humanity  and  the  Law ;  but  there  is  no  Force  at  his  disposal. 
Santerre's  National  Force  seems  lazy  to  rise :  though  he  made 
requisitions,  he  says, — which  always  dispersed  again.  Nay  did  not 
we,  with  Advocate  Maton's  eyes,  see  '  men  in  uniform '  too,  with 
their  '  sleeves  bloody  to  the  shoulder  ?  '  Petion  goes  in  tricolor 
scarf ;  speaks  '  the  austere  language  of  the  law  : '  the  killers  give 
up,  while  he  is  there  ;  when  his  back  is  turned,  recommence. 
Manuel  too  in  scarf  we,  with  Maton's  eyes,  transiently  saw  har- 
anguing, in  the  Court  called  of  Nurses,  Cour  des  Nourrices.  On 
the  other  hand,  cruel  Billaud,  likewise  in  scarf,  '  with  that  small 
puce  coat  and  black  wig  we  are  used  to  on  him,'  ^  audibly  delivers, 
'  standing  among  corpses,'  at  the  Abbaye,  a  short  but  ever-memor- 
able harangue,  reported  in  various  phraseology,  but  always  to  this 
purpose :  "  Brave  Citizens,  you  are  extirpating  the  Enemies  of 
Liberty  ;  you  are  at  your  duty.  A  grateful  Commune  and  Coun- 
try would  wish  to  recompense  you  adequately  ;  but  cannot,  for 
you  know  its  want  of  funds.  Whoever  shall  have  worked  (tra- 
vaillc)  in  a  Prison  shall  receive  a  draft  of  one  louis,  payable  by  our 
cashier.  Continue  your  work."  ^  The  Constituted  Authorities 
are  of  yesterday :  all  pulling  different  ways  :  there  is  properly  no 
Constituted  Authority,  but  every  man  is  his  own  King ;  and  all 
are  kinglets,  belligerent,  allied,  or  armed-neutral,  without  king 
over  them. 

'  O  everlasting  infamy,'  exclaims  Montgaillard,  '  that  Paris 
stood  looking  on  in  stupor  for  four  days,  and  did  not  interfere  ! ' 
Very  desirable  indeed  that  Paris  had  interfered ;  yet  not  un- 
natural that  it  stood  even  so,  looking  on  in  stupor.  Paris  is  in 
death-panic,  the  enemy  and  gibbets  at  its  door :  whosoever  in 
Paris  has  the  heart  to  front  death,  finds  it  more  pressing  to  do 
it  fighting  the  Prussians,  than  fighting  the  killers  of  Aristo- 
crats. Indignant  abhorrence,  as  in  Roland,  may  be  here  ;  gloomy 
sanction,  premeditation  or  not,  as  in  Marat  and  Committee  of 
Salvation,  may  be  there  ;  dull  disapproval,  dull  approval,  and 
acquiescence  in  Necessity  and  Destiny,  is  the  general  temper. 

1  M6h^e  Fils  {tit  sitprd,  in  Hist.  Pari.  .wiii.  p.  189). 

2  Montgaillard,  iii.  191. 


316        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

The  Sons  of  Darkness,  'two-hundred  or  so,'  risen  from  their 
lurking-places,  have  scope  to  do  their  work.  Urged  on  by  fever- 
frenzy  of  Patriotism,  and  the  madness  of  Terror; — urged  on  by 
lucre,  and  the  gold  louis  of  wages  ?  Nay,  not  lucre ;  for  the 
gold  watches,  rings,  money  of  the  Massacred,  are  punctually 
brought  to  the  Townhall,  by  Killers  sans-indispensables,  who 
higgle  afterwards  for  their  twenty  shillings  of  wages ;  and 
Sergent  sticking  an  uncommonly  fine  agate  on  his  finger  (fully 
'  meaning  to  account  for  it ')  becomes  //ga/e- Sergent.  But  the 
temper,  as  we  say,  is  dull  acquiescence.  Not  till  the  Patriotic 
or  Frenetic  part  of  the  work  is  finished  for  want  of  material ; 
and  Sons  of  Darkness,  bent  clearly  on  lucre  alone,  begin  wrench- 
ing watches  and  purses,  brooches  from  lathes'  necks,  "to  equip 
volunteers,"  in  daylight,  on  the  streets, — does  the  temper  from 
dull  grow  vehement ;  does  the  Constable  raise  his  truncheon, 
and  striking  heartily  (like  a  cattle-driver  in  earnest)  beat  the 
'course  of  things  '  ^  back  into  its  old  regulated  drove-roads.  The 
Garde-Meuhle  itself  was  surreptitiously  plundered,^  on  the  1 7th  of 
the  month,  to  Roland's  new  hon-or ;  who  anew  bestirs  himself, 
and  is,  as  Sieyes  says,  '  the  veto  of  scoundrels,'  Roland  veto  des 
coquins,'^ — 

^  [For  several  days  following  the  massacres  the  streets  of  Paris  were  given  up  to 
the  criminal  class  ;  every  respectable  person  was  plundered  of  his  valuables  in  open 
day  by  bands  of  thieves,  acting  under  pretext  of  confiscating  superfluities  for  the 
cause  of  National  defence  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  iv.  i,  si/i/.).] 

^[The  plunder  of  the  Garde-Meublc,  with  the  theft  of  the  crown  diamonds  there- 
from, remains  one  of  the  enigmas  of  history.  Two  views  are  put  forward,  one  that 
the  job  was  simply  the  work  of  expert  professional  thieves,  the  other  that  it  could 
not  have  been  accomplished  without  Danton's  connivance,.  The  latter  view  rests 
mainly  upon  Madame  Roland,  who  accuses  Fabre  d'Eglantine,  acting  under 
Danton's  orders.  It  is  suggested  by  M.  Drumont  (Rev.  de  la  R6v.  v.  169)  that 
money  was  needed  by  Danton  in  order  to  bribe  some  Prussian  diplomats  with  a 
view  to  purchasing  Brunswick's  retreat,  that  Panis  suggested  to  Danton  the  theft 
of  the  crown  diamonds,  and  that  Danton  (who  was  perfectly  unscrupulous  as 
to  means)  thought  they  could  not  be  used  for  a  more  patriotic  purpose.  There  is 
nothing  impossible  in  this  ;  but  as  a  great  many  thieves  and  receivers  were  brought 
to  trial,  and  as  the  trials  seem  to  have  been  fairly  conducted,  yet  no  evidence  im- 
plicating any  one  in  authority  obtained,  one  is  inclined  to  lean  to  the  former  view. 
Two  thieves  were  caught  red-handed  :  the  receivers  were  mostly  Jews,  and  several 
persons  were  actually  executed  for  the  theft.  In  their  anxiety  to  recover  some  at 
least  of  the  stolen  property,  Roland  and  Petion  entered  into  secret  relations  with 
some  very  questionable  characters.  The  last  Warden  of  the  Treasury  had  in- 
ventoried the  goods  as  worth  25  million  francs  ;  and  all  but  about  half  a  million's 
worth  were  stolen.] 

'  Helen  Maria  Williams,  iii.  27. 


THE  CIRCULAR  317 

This  is  the  September  Massacre,  otherwise  called  '  Severe 
Justice  of  the  People.'  These  are  the  Septemberers  [Septemhri- 
seur.i) ;  a  name  of  some  note  and  lucency, — but  lucency  of  the 
Nether-fire  sort ;  very  different  from  that  of  our  Bastille  Heroes, 
who  shone,  disputable  by  no  Friend  of  Freedom,  as  in  Heavenly 
light-radiance  :  to  such  phasis  of  the  business  have  we  advanced 
since  then !  The  numbei-s  massacred  are,  in  the  Historical 
fantasy,  '  between  two  and  three  thousand ; '  or  indeed  they  are 
'  upwards  of  six  thousand,'  for  Peltier  (in  vision)  saw  them  mas- 
sacring the  very  patients  of  the  Bicetre  Madhouse  'with  grape- 
shot  ; '  nay  finally  they  are  '  twelve  thousand '  and  odd  hundreds, 
— not  more  than  that.^  In  Arithmetical  ciphers,  and  Lists 
drawn  up  by  accurate  Advocate  Maton,  the  number,  including 
two-hundred  and  two  priests,  three  'persons  unknown,'  and 
'one  thief  killed  at  the  Bernardins,'  is,  as  above  hinted,  a 
Thousand  and  Eighty-niiie, — not  less  than  that.'^ 

A  thousand  and  eighty-nine  lie  dead,  '  two-hundred  and  sixty 
heaped  carcasses  on  the  Pont  au  Change  '  itself ; — among  which, 
Robespierre  pleading  afterwards  will  '  nearly  weep '  to  reflect 
that  there  was  said  to  be  one  slain  innocent.^  One  ;  not  two,  O 
thou  seagreen  Incorruptible  ?  If  so,  Themis  Sansculotte  must  be 
lucky  ;  for  she  was  brief! — In  the  dim  Registers  of  the  Townhall, 
which  are  preserved  to  this  day,  men  read,  with  a  certain  sick- 
ness of  heart,  items  and  entries  not  usual  in  Town  Books :  '  To 
'workers  employed  in  preserving  the  salubrity  of  the  air  in  the 
'  Prisons,  and  persons  who  presided  over  these  dangerous  opera- 
'  tions,'  so  much, — in  various  items,  nearly  seven  hundred  pounds 
sterling.  To  carters  employed  to  'the  Burying-grounds  of 
Clamart,  Montrouge  and  Vaugirard,'  at  so  much  a  journey,  per 

1  See  Hist.  Pari.  xvii.  421,  22. 

^[The  official  list  of  all  the  prisoners  killed  is  given  by  M.  Granier  de  Cassagnac 
(Hist,  des  Massacres  de  Septembre)  with  a  total  of  1458.  It  is  quite  a  mistake  to 
imagine  that  only  Royalists  were  killed,  or  only  Aristocrats,  or  even  only  grown  up 
people.  Mortimer-Ternaux  (iii.  297)  gives  a  list  of  43  boys,  all  in  the  humblest  ranks 
of  life,  mere  ordinary  criminals,  who  suffered  ;  these  range  from  12  to  17  years  of 
age.  At  the  Salpetriire  35  women  were  killed,  most  of  them  being  ravished  first 
[ibid.  iii.  316-7),  and  the  totals  at  the  different  prisons  are  according  to  him  1368, 
viz.,  at  the  Abbaye  171,  La  Force  169,  Chatelct  223,  Conciergcrie  328,  Bernardins 
73,  Carmes  120,  Saint-Firmiii  79,  Bicetre  170,  Salpetnh'e  35.] 

^  Moniteur  of  6th  November  (Debate  of  November  5th  1793). 


318        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

cart ;  this  also  is  an  entry.  Then  so  many  francs  and  odd  sous 
*  for  the  necessary  quantity  of  quick-lime  ! '  ^  Carts  go  along  the 
streets ;  full  of  stript  human  corpses,  thrown  pellmell ;  limbs 
sticking  up  : — seest  thou  that  cold  Hand  sticking-up,  tlirough 
the  heaped  embrace  of  brother  corpses,  in  its  yellow  paleness, 
in  its  cold  rigour ;  the  palm  opened  towards  Heaven,  as  if  in 
dumb  prayer,  in  expostulation  de  profimdis,  Take  pity  on  the 
Sons  of  Men !—  Mercier  saw  it,  as  he  walked  down  '  the  Rue 
Saint-Jacques  from  Montrouge,  on  the  morrow  of  the  Massacres  : ' 
but  not  a  Hand :  it  was  a  Foot, — which  he  reckons  still  more 
significant,  one  understands  not  well  why.  Or  was  it  as  the 
Foot  of  one  spurning  Heaven  ?  Rushing,  like  a  wild  diver,  in 
disgust  and  despair,  towards  the  depths  of  Annihilation  ?  Even 
there  shall  His  hand  find  thee,  and  His  right-hand  hold  thee, — 
surely  for  right  not  for  wrong,  for  good  not  evil !  *  I  saw  that 
'  Foot,'  says  Mercier ;  '  I  shall  know  it  again  at  the  great  Day  of 
'Judgment,  when  the  Eternal,  throned  on  his  thunders,  shall 
'judge  both  Kings  and  Septemberers.'  - 

That  a  shriek  of  inarticulate  horror  rose  over  this  thing,  not 
only  from  French  Aristocrats  and  Moderates,  but  from  all  Europe, 
and  has  prolonged  itself  to  the  present  day,  was  most  natural  and 
right.  The  thing  lay  done,  irrevocable ;  a  thing  to  be  counted 
beside  some  other  things,  which  lie  very  black  in  our  Earth's 
Annals,  yet  which  will  not  erase  therefrom.  For  man,  as  was 
remarked,  has  transcendentalisms  in  him ;  standing,  as  he  does, 
poor  creature,  every  way  '  in  the  confluence  of  Infinitudes ; '  a 
mystery  to  himself  and  othei's :  in  the  centre  of  two  Eternities, 
of  three  Immensities,— in  the  intersection  of  primeval  Light 
with  the  everlasting  Dark ! — Thus  have  there  been,  especially 
by  vehement  tempers  reduced  to  a  state  of  desperation,  very 
miserable  things  done.  Sicilian  Vespers,  and  '  eight  thousand 
slaughtered  in  two  hours,'  are  a  known  thing.^     Kings  themselves, 

1  Etat  des  sommes  payees  par  la  Commune  de  Paris  (Hist.  Pari,  xviii.  231). 

'^Mercier,  Nouveau  Paris,  vi.  21. 

^[Amari,  Storia  della  Guerra  del  Vespro  Siciliano  (Engl.  Trans.  (London, 
1850),  i.  177,  S(jq.),  gives  the  numbers  killed  at  the  first  outbreak,  March  31st  1282, 
as  2000 — but  the  massacres  continued  for  some  days.] 


THE  CIRCULAR  319 

not  in  desperation,  but  only  in  difficulty,  have  sat  hatching,  for 
year  and  day  (nay  De  Thou  says  for  seven  years),  their  Bartholo- 
mew Business ;  and  then,  at  the  right  moment,  also  on  an 
Autumn  Sunday,  this  very  Bell  (they  say  it  is  the  identical 
metal)  of  Saint-Germain  I'Auxerrois  was  set  a-pealing — with 
effect.^  Nay  the  same  black  bouldei'-stones  of  these  Paris  Prisons 
have  seen  Prison-massacres  before  now  ;  men  massacring  country- 
men. Burgundies  massacring  Armagnacs,  whom  they  had  sud- 
denly imprisoned,  till,  as  now,  there  were  piled  heaps  of  carcasses, 
and  the  streets  ran  red  ; — the  Mayor  Petion  of  the  time  speaking 
the  austere  language  of  the  law,  and  answered  by  the  Killers,  in 
old  French  (it  is  some  four  hundred  years  old) :  "  Maiigrd  bieu,^ 
Sire, — Sir,  God's  malison  on  your  'justice,'  your  'pity,'  your 
'  right  reason.'  Cursed  be  of  God  whoso  shall  have  pity  on  these 
false  traitorous  Armagnacs,  English ;  dogs  they  are  ;  they  have 
destroyed  us,  wasted  this  realm  of  France,  and  sold  it  to  the 
English."  2  And  so  they  slay,  and  fling  aside  the  slain,  to  the 
extent  of '  fifteen  hundred  and  eighteen,  among  whom  are  found 
'  four  Bishops  of  false  and  damnable  counsel,  and  tAvo  Presidents 
'  of  Parlement.'  ^  For  though  it  is  not  Satan's  world  this  that  we 
live  in,  Satan  always  has  his  place  in  it  (underground  properly)  ; 
and  from  time  to  time  bursts  up.  Well  may  mankind  shriek, 
inarticulately  anathematising  as  they  can.  There  are  actions  of 
such  emphasis  that  no  shrieking  can  be  too  emphatic  for  them. 
Shriek  ye  ;  acted  have  they. 

Shriek  who  might  in  this  France,  in  this  Paris  Legislative  or 
Paris  Townhall,  there  are  Ten  Men  who  do  not  shriek.  A  Cir- 
cular goes  out  from  the  Committee  of  Salut  Public,^  dated  3d  of 
September  1792;  directed  to  all  Townhalls  :  a  State-paper  too 
remarkable  to  be  overlooked.  '  A  part  of  the  ferocious  conspira- 
'  tors  detained  in  the  Prisons,'  it  says,  '  have  been  put  to  death 
'  by  the  People ;   and  we  cannot  doubt  but  the  whole  Nation, 

igth  to  13th  September  1572  (Dulaure,  Hist,  de  Paris,  iv.  289).  [The  massacre 
lasted  for  about  three  weeks  from  August  24th  1572.] 

^[Su  for  '  Maugrebleu '.]  s dulaure,  iii.  494. 

■'[The  Burgundiaii  massacre  of  the  Arnragnac  party  lasted  from  March  28th 
to  Aug.  2ist  1418.  Lavisse  et  Rambaud,  Hist.  G6n.  iii.  139-40,  admit  nearly 
10,000  victims.] 

'[Carlyle  means  the  ComiU  de  Surveillance.'\ 


320        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

'  driven  to  the  edge  of  ruin  by  such  endless  series  of  treasons, 
*  will  make  haste  to  adopt  this  means  of  public  salvation ;  and 
'  all  Frenchmen  will  cry  as  the  men  of  Paris  :  We  go  to  fight  the 
'  enemy ;  but  we  will  not  leave  robbers  behind  us,  to  butcher 
'our  wives  and  children.'  To  which  are  legibly  appended  these 
signatures  :  Panis  ;  Sergent ;  Marat,  Friend  of  the  People  ;  ^ 
with  Seven  others ; — carried  down  thereby,  in  a  strange  way,  to 
the  late  remembrance  of  Antiquarians.  We  remark,  however, 
that  their  Circular  rather  recoiled  on  themselves.  The  Town- 
halls  made  no  use  of  it ;  even  the  distracted  Sansculottes  made 
little  ;  they  only  howled  and  bellowed,  but  did  not  bite.  At 
Rheims  '  about  eight  persons '  were  killed ;  and  two  afterwards 
were  hanged  for  doing  it.  At  Lyons,  and  a  few  other  places, 
some  attempt  was  made ;  but  with  hardly  any  effect,  being 
quickly  put  down.^ 

Less  fortunate  were  the  Prisoners  of  Orleans ;  was  the  good 
Duke  de  La  Roche foucault.  He  journeying,  by  quick  stages, 
with  his  Mother  and  Wife,  towards  the  Waters  of  Forges,  or 
some  quieter  country,  was  arrested  at  Gisors ;  conducted  along 
the  streets,  amid  effervescing  multitudes,  and  killed  dead  '  by 
the  stroke  of  a  paving-stone  hurled  through  the  coach-window.' 
Killed  as  a  once  Liberal  now  Aristocrat ;  Protector  of  Priests, 
Suspender  of  virtuous  Petions,  and  most  unfortunate  Hot-grown- 
cold,  detestable  to  Patriotism.  He  dies  lamented  of  Europe ; 
his  blood  spattering  the  cheeks  of  his  old  Mother,  ninety-three 
years  old.^ 

1  Hist.  Pari.  xvii.  433. 

2  [The  Circular  was  issued  in  the  name  of  the  whole  Com7nune,  but  was  un- 
doubtedly only  the  work  of  its  signatories  or  even  of  some  of  its  signatories  (for 
forgery  is  quite  possible).  It  is  signed  by  Duplain,  Panis,  Sergent,  Lenfant,  Jour- 
deuil,  Marat,  Deforgues,  Duffort,  Cailly ;  and  was  sent  out  in  the  official  covers 
of  the  Ministry  of  Justice.  It  is  quite  possible  that  Marat  forged  the  whole  thing, 
signatures  and  all,  and  that  Fabre  d'Eglantine  or  Panis  gave  him  the  covers. 
Danton  never  officially  denied  responsibility  for  it  {see  note  at  end  of  chapter), 
but  the  evidence  is  strong  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  [See  Mortimer- Ternaux, 
303  si]q.)  The  Circular  invites  all  France  to  follow  the  example  of  Paris,  but  it  had 
no  great  effect :  there  were  a  few  small  massacres  at  Lyons,  Meaux,  Rheims,  Charle- 
ville,  Caen  (at  Rheims  two  priests  were  burnt  alive) ;  but  the  murderers  were  probably 
emissaries  from  Paris.] 

3  [La  Rochefoucauld  was  not  going  to  Forges  but  was  at  Forges,  when  he  was 
arrested  by  order  of  the  Assembly  (having  been  decreed  accused  together  with 


THE  CIRCULAR  321 

As  for  the  Orleans  Prisoners,  they  are  State  Criminals :  Royal- 
ist Ministers,  Delessarts,  Montmorins ;  ^  who  have  been  accumu- 
lating on  the  High  Court  of  Orleans,  ever  since  that  Tribunal 
was  set  up.  Whom  now  it  seems  good  that  we  should  get 
transferred  to  our  new  Paris  Court  of  the  Seventeenth  ;  which 
proceeds  far  quicker.^  Accordingly  hot  Fournier  from  Martinique, 
Fournier  rAmeiicain,  is  off,^  missioned  by  Constituted  Authority ; 
with  staunch  National  Guards,  with  Lazouski  the  Pole  ;  *  spar- 
ingly provided  with  road-money.  These,  through  bad  quarters, 
through  difficulties,  perils,  for  Authorities  cross  each  other  in 
this  time, — do  triumphantly  bring  off  the  Fifty  or  Fifty-three 
Orleans  Prisoners,  towards  Paris  ;  where  a  swifter  Court  of  the 
Seventeenth  will  do  justice  on  them.''  But  lo,  at  Paris,  in  the 
interim,  a  still  swifter  and  swiftest  Court  of  the  Second,  and  of 
September,  has  instituted  itself:  enter  not  Paris,  or  that  will 
judge  you  ! — What  shall  hot  Fournier  do  ?  It  was  his  duty,  as 
volunteer  Constable,  had  he  been  a  perfect  character,  to  guard 
those  men's  lives  never  so  Aristocratic,  at  the  expense  of  his 
own   valuable  life  never  so  Sansculottic,   till   some  Constituted 


Adrian  Duport,  Aug.  i8th,  for  his  courageous  action  on  June  20th).  Duport  was 
saved  by  Danton  (who  even  braved  Marat's  fury  to  save  him),  and  escaped  to 
Switzerland.  La  Rochefoucauld  was  being  conducted  back  to  Paris,  when  he 
was  massacred  at  Gisors.     (Mortimer-Ternaux,  iii.  347.)] 

1  [Montmorin  was  not  among  the  Orleans  prisoners  (vid.  note  supr.,  vol.  i.  p. 
99) ;  he  had  been  sent  straight  to  the  Addaye  Aug.  ist,  and  was  massacred  on  Sept. 
2nd.  Of  the  44  persons  massacred  at  Versailles  Delessart  and  Brissac  were  the 
most  distinguished.] 

2  [The  Court  of  Orleans  being  composed  of  jurors  elected  by  all  the  departments 
of  France,  was  of  course  less  bloody  than  the  Parisian  TribwialA 

^  [Claude  Fournier,  born  in  Auvergne,  a  rum  distiller  in  Martinique,  appears 
first  in  connection  with  the  Marseillais,  .^ug.  loth.  He  was  imprisoned  in  '93,  re- 
leased at  Thermidor,  but  transported  for  his  share  in  the  explosion  of  the  '  infernal 
machine'  under  the  Consulate.  He  returned  to  France  1815  and  died  in  abject 
poverty  1825.] 

*  [This  Claude  Lazowski  must  not  be  confused  with  his  brother,  who  was  the 
friend  of  the  Due  de  La  Rochefoucauld-Liancourt  and  of  Arthur  Young  {sec  Young, 
pp.  185-6).  Both  brothers  were  Polish  exiles,  whose  father  had  accompanied  King 
Stanislas  to  Lorraine.  Claude  Lazowski  came  to  Paris  from  Bordeaux,  and  made 
himself  a  name  as  a  captain  of  cannoneers  in  the  Section  Finisth-e  on  Aug.  loth. 
He  was  one  of  the  '  Committee  of  Insurrection  '  of  March  '93  at  the  Caft'  Corazza, 
and  died  of  drink  in  April  '93 ;  the  Convention  gave  him  a  magnificent  public 
funeral.] 

5  Hist.  Pari.  xvii.  434. 

VOL.    IL  21 


322        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Court  had  disposed  of  them.     But  he  was  an  imperfect  character 
and  Constable  ;  perhaps  one  of  the  more  imperfect. 

Hot  Fournier,  ordered  to  turn  thither  by  one  Authority,  to 
turn  thither  by  another  Authority,  is  in  a  perplexing  multiplicity 
of  orders  ;  but  finally  he  strikes  off  for  Versailles,  His  Prisoners 
fare  in  tumbrils,  or  open  carts,  himself  and  Guards  riding  and 
marching  around :  and  at  the  last  village,  the  worthy  Mayor  of 
Versailles  comes  to  meet  him,  anxious  that  the  arrival  and 
locking-up  were  well  over.  It  is  Sunday,  the  ninth  day  of  the 
month.  Lo,  on  entering  the  Avenue  of  Versailles,  what  multi- 
tudes, stirring,  swarming  in  the  September  sun,  under  the  dull- 
green  September  foliage ;  the  Four-rowed  Avenue  all  humming 
and  swarming,  as  if  the  Town  had  emptied  itself !  Our  tumbrils 
roll  heavily  through  the  living  sea ;  the  Guards  and  Fournier 
making  way  with  ever  more  difficulty  ;  the  Mayor  speaking  and 
gesturing  his  persuasivest ;  amid  the  inarticulate  growling  hum, 
which  growls  ever  the  deeper  even  by  hearing  itself  growl,  not 
without  sharp  yelpings  here  and  there  : — Would  to  God  we  were 
out  of  this  strait  place,  and  wind  and  separation  had  cooled  the 
heat,  which  seems  about  igniting  here  ! 

And  yet  if  the  wide  Avenue  is  too  strait,  what  will  the  Street  de 
Sunntendance  be,  at  leaving  of  the  same  .''  At  the  corner  of  Surin- 
tendance  Street,  the  compressed  yelpings  become  a  continuous 
yell :  savage  figures  spring  on  the  tumbril-shafts ;  first  spray  of 
an  endless  coming  tide !  The  Mayor  pleads,  pushes,  half- 
desperate  ;  is  pushed,  carried  off  in  men's  arms ;  the  savage  tide 
has  entrance,  has  mastery.  Amid  horrid  noise,  and  tumult  as  of 
fierce  wolves,  the  Prisoners  sink  massacred, — all  but  some  eleven, 
who  escaped  into  houses,  and  found  mercy.  The  Prisons,  and 
what  other  Prisoners  they  held,  were  with  difficulty  saved.  The 
stript  clothes  are  burnt  in  bonfire  ;  the  corpses  lie  heaped  in  the 
ditch  on  the   morrow  morning.^     All  France,  except  it  be  the 

1  Pitees  officielles  relatives  au  massacre  des  Prisonniers  a  Versailles  (in  Hist. 
Pari,  xviii.  236-249).  [On  Aug.  20th  a  deputation  from  the  Commune  came  to 
demand  leave  of  the  Assembly  to  "  fetch  "  the  Orleans  prisoners  to  Paris  ;  on  30th 
this  demand  was  repeated,  the  Assembly  ordered  them  to  be  sent  for,  and  Roland 
sent  to  Fournier  (who  had  already  started  on  behalf  of  the  Commune)  a  com- 
mission in  form.     The  Assembly  (foreseeing  the  result  if  they  came  to  Paris)  sent 


THE  CIRCULAR  323 

Ten  Men  of  the   Circular  and   their  people,  moans   and  rages, 
inarticulately  shrieking ;  all  Europe  rings. 

But  neither  did  Danton  shriek  ;  though,  as  Minister  of  Justice, 
it  was  more  his  part  to  do  so.  Brawny  Danton  is  in  the  breach, 
as  of  stormed  Cities  and  Nations  ;  amid  the  sweep  of  Tenth-of- 
August  cannon,  the  rustle  of  Prussian  gallows-ropes,  the  smiting 
of  September  sabres  ;  destruction  all  round  him,  and  the  rushing- 
down  of  worlds :  Minister  of  Justice  is  his  name  ;  but  Titan  of 
the  Forlorn  Hope,  and  Enfant  Perdu  of  the  Revolution,  is  his 
quality, — and  the  man  acts  according  to  that.  "  We  must  put 
our  enemies  in  fear !  "  Deep  fear,  is  it  not,  as  of  its  own  accord, 
falling  on  our  enemies  ?  The  Titan  of  the  Forlorn  Hope,  he  is 
not  the  man  that  would  swiftest  of  all  prevent  its  so  falling. 
Forward,  thou  lost  Titan  of  an  Enfant  Perdu  ;  thou  must  dare, 
and  again  dare,  and  without  end  dare  ;  there  is  nothing  left  for 
thee  but  that !  "  Que  mon  nam  soit  fletn,  Let  my  name  be 
blighted : "  what  am  I  ?  The  Cause  alone  is  great ;  and  shall 
live,  and  not  perish. — So,  on  the  whole,  here  too  is  a  Swallower 
of  Formulas  ;  of  still  wider  gulp  than  Mirabeau :  this  Danton, 
Mirabeau  of  the  Sansculottes.  In  the  September  days,  this 
Minister  was  not  heard  of  as  cooperating  with  strict  Roland  ;  his 
business  might  lie  elsewhei*e, — with  Brunswick  and  the  H6tel-de- 
Ville.  When  applied  to  by  an  official  person,  about  the  Orleans 
Prisoners,  and  the  risks  they  ran,  he  answered  gloomily,  twice 
over,  "  Are  not  these  men  guilty  ?  " — When  pressed,  he  '  answered 
in  a  terrible  voice,'  and  turned  his  back.^  A  thousand  slain  in 
the  Prisons  ;  horrible  if  you  will :  but  Brunswick  is  within  a  day's 
journey  of  us ;  and  there  are  Five-and-twenty  Millions  yet,  to 
slay  or  to  save.  Some  men  have  tasks, — frightfiiller  than  ours  ! 
It  seems  strange,  but  is  not  strange,  that  this  Minister  of  Moloch- 

on  the  3rd  directions  for  the  prisoners  to  be  diverted  to  Saumur.  Fournier  on  his 
own  responsibility  disobeyed  this,  and  took  them  to  Versailles,  where  the  trained  Paris 
murderers  met  and  finished  them.  Fournier  sent  in  an  account  of  his  expenses 
to  Roland,  and  got  them  paid  ;  he  had  also  handsomely  plundered  his  prisoners, 
especially  de  Brissac.  He  seems  to  have  had  a  large  escort  of  1,500  men,  but  ct 
course  made  no  attempt  to  protect  the  prisoners;  and  the, only  attempt  made 
was  by  Richaud,  the  Maire  of  Versailles.  (Masson,  Affaires  Etrangeres,  214  sqi/.  ; 
Carnot,  Corresp.  G^n.  i.  45;  Mortimer-Ternaux,  iii.  369,  590,  etc.)] 
^  Biographic  des  Ministres,  p.  97. 


324        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

Justice,  when  any  suppliant  for  a  friend's  life  got  access  to  him, 
was  found  to  have  human  compassion ;  and  yielded  and  granted 
'always ; '  'neither  did  one  personal  enemy  of  Danton  perish  in 
these  days.'  ^ 

To  shriek,  we  say,  when  certain  things  are  acted,  is  proper 
and  unavoidable.  Nevertheless,  articulate  speech,  not  shrieking, 
is  the  faculty  of  man :  when  speech  is  not  yet  possible,  let  there 
be,  with  the  shortest  delay,  at  least — silence.  Silence,  accord- 
ingly, in  this  forty-fourth  year  of  the  business,  and  eighteen 
hundred  and  thirty-sixth  of  an  'Era  called  Christian  as  Iticus  a 
non,'  is  the  thing  we  recommend  and  practise.  Nay,  instead  of 
shrieking  moi*e,  it  were  perhaps  edifying  to  remark,  on  the  other 
side,  what  a  singular  thing  Customs  (in  Latin,  Mores)  are ;  and 
how  fitly  the  Virtue,  Jir-tus  Manhood  or  Worth,  that  is  in  a  man, 
is  called  his  Moralitj/  or  Customarineas.  Fell  Slaughter,  one  of 
the  most  authentic  products  of  the  Pit  you  would  say,  once  give 
it  Customs,  becomes  War,  with  Laws  of  War ;  and  is  Customary 
and  Moral  enough  ;  and  red  individuals  carry  the  tools  of  it  girt 
round  their  haunches,  not  without  an  air  of  pride, — which  do 
thou  nowise  blame.  While,  see  !  so  long  as  it  is  but  dressed  in 
hodden  or  russet ;  and  Revolution,  less  frequent  than  War,  has 
not  yet  got  its  Laws  of  Revolution,  but  the  hodden  or  russet 
individuals  are  Uncustomary — -O  shrieking  beloved  brother  block- 
heads of  Mankind,  let  us  close  those  wide  mouths  of  ours  ;  let  us 
cease  shrieking,  and  begin  considering ! 

[The  Responsibility  for  the  Massacres. — To  attempt  to  ripportion  the  responsi- 
bility is  not  altogether  easy.  Granted  that  the  idea  originated  with  the  Comitd 
de  Surveillance  of  the  Commune,  every  one  in  authority  who  made  no  serious  effort 
to  stop  the  massacres  was  responsible  to  some  extent  for  their  continuance. 

Now  these  authorities  were :  i.  The  Assembly  ;  2.  The  Executive  Council, 
especially  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  (Roland)  and  the  Minister  of  Justice  (Danton) ; 
3.  The  Commune  and  the  Maire  of  Paris. 

I.  The  Massacre  at  the  Abbayc  began  about  2  p.m.  on  Sept.  2nd.  A  deputation 
from  the  Commune  arrived  at  8  p.m.  at  the  Assembly,  and  invited  the  Assembly  to 
deliberate  on  'the  wish  of  the  people  to  break  into  the  prisons."  The  Assembly 
sent  12  Commissioners  to  make  a  tour  of  the  prisons  and  see  what  was  going  on, 
and  before  11  p.m.  these  Commissioners  returned,  and,  by  the  mouth  of  Dusaulx, 
reported  that  they  had  been  unable  to  make  the  murderers  listen  to  them,  and 
"  could  not  see  much  because  of  the  darkness."    At  11  p.m.  the  Assembly  adjourned 

1  Biographic  des  Ministres,  p.  103. 


THE  CIRCULAR  325 

without  further  action,  leaving  a  small  number  of  members  to  represent  the  Siaiice 
pennanente  (which  had  lasted  since  Aug.  loth).  At  2.30  A.M.  on  3rd  four 
deputies  from  the  Commune  arrived  (Tallien  being  one),  and  reported  that  a  great 
number  of  scoundrels  had  been  killed  at  the  Abbaye,  Chdtelet  and  La  Force,  and 
that  no  National  Guards  could  be  spared  from  the  Barriers  to  interfere.  The 
Assembly  met  again  at  9  a.m.,  and  heard  this  report  read,  but  took  no  steps  or 
votes  on  it  at  all.  On  the  evening  of  3rd  its  Committee  of  twenty-one  reported, 
by  Gensonn6,  that  it  was  '  urgently  necessary  to  recall  the  people  of  the  Capital 
'  to  its  dignity,  character  and  duties,  and  to  order  the  Commune  to  take  steps  to 
'  assure  the  security  of  life  and  property.'  On  the  4th  a  copy  of  this  resolution  was 
sent  to  each  Section  of  Paris  :  no  notice  being  taken  of  this,  the  Committee  of 
twenty-one  tendered  its  resignation,  which  was  not  accepted.  It  is  thus  pretty 
evident  that  the  Assembly  did  notiiing  to  stop  the  massacres. 

2.  Roland,  a  merciful  man,  who  was  capable  on  occasions  of  displaying 
obstinacy  if  not  courage,  was  really  horrified  at  the  massacres ;  but  on  2nd  he  did 
nothing :  on  3rd  he  addressed  to  the  Assembly  his  famous  letter  (  ..."  it  is 
perhaps  necessary  to  draw  a  veil  over  the  events  of  yesterday  ...  I  know  that 
the  people,  terrible  in  its  vengeance,  yet  exercises  in  it  a  sort  of  justice  ...  it  is 
directing  its  fury  against  those  whom  it  believes  to  have  been  too  long  spared  by 
the  sword  of  the  law  ").  On  that  evening  Mme  Roland  gave  a  dinner  party,  at 
which  Clootz  openly  defended  the  massacres,  and  this  horrified  her.  On  4th 
Roland  wrote  letters  to  the  Assembly,  to  Petion  and  to  Santerre,  denouncing  the 
massacres  in  a  somewhat  lukewarm  manner,  but  asserting  that  he  was  powerless. 

Granted  that  Roland  was  powerless,  Danton  stands  at  the  bar  ;  not  for  the 
massacres  only,  but  for  the  circular  as  well.  Mme  Roland  (who,  owing  to  her 
personal  hatred  of  Danton,  is  as  good  as  no  witness  at  all)  believed  the  circular 
to  be  Danton's  work  ;  it  certainly  passed  through  his  office  and  was  the  work  of 
his  subordinates  Panis,  Sergent,  etc.,  but  Danton  notoriously  paid  no,  attention 
to  the  details  of  his  office,  and  hardly  ever  signed  papers.  M.  Aulard  (Etudes  sur 
la  R6v.,  Paris,  1893)  and  Mr.  Belloc  (Danton,  1899)  fight  hard  for  their  hero,  and  I 
think  that  the  stain  of  direct  complicity  in  the  massacres  and  the  circular  must 
be  wiped  from  Danton's  name.  But  neither  of  these  writers  nor  any  one  else  has 
been  able  to  acquit  Danton  of  cynical  indifference  to  the  events  of  these  days  ;  it 
seems  that  Danton  must  have  known  that  Marat,  Panis,  Sergent,  Robespierre, 
etc.,  were  planning  something  of  the  kind  ;  while  the  filling  of  the  prisons  with 
Suspects  on  28th  and  29th  was  a  consequence  of  the  domiciliary  visits,  which 
had  been  urged  by  Danton  {zid.  supr.,  287)  ;  several  of  his  personal  friends  were 
removed  from  prison  immediately  before  Sept.  2nd.  Danton's  only  defence  (and 
it  is  not  a  very  good  one  for  such  a  strong  man)  is  that  given  in  his  speech  of  Jan. 
2ist  1793,  '  No  human  power  could  have  stopped  the  massacres  when  they  were 
once  begun.'  It  is  true  of  course  that  the  new  government  was  totally  unorganised, 
and  that  he  was  trying  to  organise  it,  and  at  the  same  time  to  raise  troops  for  the 
defence  of  Paris  ;  but  such  government  as  there  was  resided  in  his  person  :  there 
was  an  armed  force  (the  National  Guard)  and  though  it  was  in  the  hands  of 
Santerre  and  the  Commune  he  should,  and  he  could  have  torn  it  from  their  hands, 
and  used  it  to  guard  the  prisons.  I  conclude  then  that  Danton  was  far  more  guilty 
than  Roland. 

3.  As  for  the  Cojmnune  and  the  Maire  (Petion)  they  did  absolutely  nothing  on 
Sunday,  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday  :  on  Thursday  (the  last  day  of  the  Paris 
massacres)  Petion  did  go  to  La  Force  and  actually  told  the  murderers  how  horrible 
he  thought  them,  bade  them  go  away,  and  then  went  away  himself :  when  he  was 
gone  they  began  again  ;  Petion  wrote  several  letters  to  Santerre  ordering  him  to 
employ  the  National  Guard,  but  Santerre  was  entirely  the  tool  of  the  Comity  de 
Surveillance.  With  this  last  body  then  the  final  responsibility  rests;  i.e.,  with 
Marat  (article  in  the  Ami  du  Feuple  Aug.  19th),  Robespierre  (who  on  31st 
demanded  the  arrest  of  Roland,  Brissot  and  thirty  leading  Girondists),  Manuel, 
Hubert,  BiUaud,  Panis,  Sergent.  No  written  orders  from  this  body — or  only  one 
to  a  gaoler  signed  '  Panis,  Sergent ' — are  e.\tant,  but  Mortimer-Ternaux  has  collected 
(in  his  xi.  book  and  his  notes  to  vol.  iii.)  abundant  evidence  that  verbal  orders  to 


326        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

admit  the  murderers  to  the  prisons  were  given  by  Panis,  Sergent,  Billaud  and 
Hubert.  Manuel  {Procui-eur- Syndic),  Billaud  and  Hubert  (his  two  Substitutes) 
were  present  in  person  at  several  of  the  prisons  ;  although  Manuel  was  seized  with 
horror  at  the  sight,  and  tried  to  stop  it,  Billaud  actually  arranged  on  the  spot  for 
payment  to  the  murderers,  which  seems  to  have  varied  from  20  to  5  fr.  per  man 
per  day  {see  Mortimer-Ternaux,  iii.  275,  528). 

Finally  we  may  note  that,  under  the  influence  of  emissaries  from  the  Comimine, 
some  of  the  sections  (notably  Louvre,  Luxemburg)  voted  the  extermination  of  the 
prisoners  [ibid.  iii.  476)  :  and  the  Conseil-Gen^ral  of  the  Com^nune  shut  its  eyes 
to  the  whole  matter,  consenting  to  vote  (evening  of  3rd)  12,000  fr.  as  payment  for 
the  work  in  the  Prisons.] 

CHAPTER  VII 

SEPTEMBER  IN  ARGONNE 

Plain,  at  any  rate,  is  one  thing  :  that  the^mr,  whatever  of  fear 
those  Aristocrat  enemies  might  need,  has  been  brought  about. 
The  matter  is  getting  serious  then  !  Sansculottism  too  has  become 
a  Fact,  and  seems  minded  to  assert  itself  as  such .''  This  huge 
mooncalf  of  Sansculottism,  staggering  about,  as  young  calves  do, 
is  not  mockable  only,  and  soft  like  another  calf;  but  terrible  too, 
if  you  prick  it ;  and,  through  its  hideous  nostrils,  blows  fire  ! — 
Aristocrats,  with  pale  panic  in  their  hearts,  fly  towards  covert ; 
and  a  light  rises  to  them  over  several  things ;  or  rather  a  con- 
fused transition  towards  light,  whereby  for  the  moment  darkness 
is  only  darker  than  ever.  But  what  will  become  of  this  France .'' 
Here  is  a  question!  France  is  dancing  its  desert- waltz, as  Sahara 
does  when  the  winds  waken ;  in  whirlblasts  twenty-five  millions 
in  number ;  waltzing  towards  Townhalls,  Aristocrat  Prisons  and 
Election  Committee-rooms  ;  towards  Brunswick  and  the  frontiers  ; 
— towards  a  New  Chapter  of  Universal  History  ;  if  indeed  it  be 
not  the  Finis,  and  winding-up  of  that ! 

In  Election  Committee-rooms  there  is  now  no  dubiety  ;  but 
the  work  goes  bravely  along.  The  Convention  is  getting  chosen, 
— really  in  a  decisive  spirit ;  in  the  Townhall  we  already  date 
Fird  year  of  the  Republic.  Some  Two-hundred  of  our  best 
Legislators  may  be  re-elected,  the  Mountain  bodily  :  Robespierre, 
with  Mayor  Petion,  Buzot,  Curate  Gregoire,  Rabaut,  some  three- 
score Old-Constituents  ;  though  we  once  had  only  '  thirty  voices.' 
All  these ;  and  along  with  them,  friends  long  known  to  Revolu- 


MAP   OF    EASTERN    FRONTIER 


SEPTEMBER  IN  ARGONNE  327 

tionary  fame  :  Camille  Desmoulins,  though  he  stutters  in  speech  ; 
Manuel,  Tallien  and  Company  ;  Journalists  Gorsas,  Carra,  Mercier, 
Louvet  of  Faiihlas  ;  Clootz  Speaker  of  Mankind  ;  Collot  d'Herbois, 
tearing  a  passion  to  rags  ;  Fabre  d'Eglantine,  speculative  Pam- 
phleteer ;  Legendre,  the  solid  Butcher ;  nay  Marat,  though  rural 
France  can  hardly  believe  it,  or  even  believe  that  there  is  a 
Marat,  except  in  print.  Of  Minister  Danton,  who  will  lay  down 
his  Ministry  for  a  Membership,  we  need  not  speak.  Paris  is 
fervent ;  nor  is  the  Country  wanting  to  itself^  Barbaroux, 
Rebecqui,  and  fervid  Patriots  are  coming  from  Marseilles.  Seven- 
hundred  and  forty-five  men  (or  indeed  forty-nine,  for  Avignon 
now  sends  Four)  are  gathering :  so  many  are  to  meet ;  not  so 
many  are  to  part ! 

Attorney  Carrier  ^  from  Aurillac,  Ex- Priest  Lebon  ^  from  Arras, 
these  shall  both  gain  a  name.  Mountainous  Auvergne  re-elects 
her  Romme  ;  '^  hardy  tiller  of  the  soil,  once  Mathematical  Pro- 
fessor ;  who,  unconscious,  carries  in  petto  a  remarkable  New 
Calendar,  with  Messidors,  Pluvioses,  and  such  like  ; — and  having 
given  it  well  forth,  shall  depart  by  the  death  they  call  Roman. 
Sieyes    Old-Constituent  comes ;    to   make   new  Constitutions  as 

*  [Robespierre  was  elected  first  deputy  for  Paris,  a  fact  which  already  marks 
his  enormous  importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  mob  ;  it  is  true  that  the  elections  took 
place  by  open  voting  of  the  secondary  electors,  in  the  Jacobins  Hall  under  Robes- 
pierre's presidency  and  that  all  electors  who  had  ever  been  members  of  anti- 
Revolutionary  Societies  were  excluded,  while  the  mob  in  the  galleries  terrorised  the 
rest  (m  the  art  of  excluding  enemies  Cromwell  was  a  clumsy  infant  compared  to 
these  men).  Robespierre,  Danton,  Collot,  Manuel,  Billaud,  Desmoulins,  Marat, 
Laignelot,  Lavicomterie,  Robert,  Fr^ron,  Robespierre  junior,  Egalit6  were  among 
the  24  deputies  who  represented  Paris.  The  next  most  Radical  deputation  was 
that  of  the  Pas-de-Calais,  which  sent  Robespierre  (who  however  chose  to  sit  for 
Paris),  Lebas,  Guffroy,  Maignet,  Paine,  Varlet,  besides  Carnot.  {See  Les  Con- 
ventionnels  par  J.  Guiffrey  (Paris,  1889),  p.  47.)] 

2 [J.  B.  Carrier,  born  1756  at  Yolay,  deputy  for  Cantal  to  the  Convention  :  he 
first  became  famous  on  March  loth  '93,  as  the  proposer  of  the  motion  to  create 
the  Revolutionary  Tribunal,  was  active  on  May  31st,  was  sent  to  Nantes  in  Oct. 
'93,  where  he  invented  the  system  of  Noyades  or  wholesale  drownings  ;  the 
Cotnitt'  de  Salut  Public  recalled  him  on  the  eve  of  Thermidor.  He  was  decreed 
accused  Sept.  23rd  '94,  and  after  a  long  trial  was  executed  December  i6th.] 

•■'[Lebon,  born  1765,  a  friend  of  Robespierre  at  Arras,  pupil  of  the  Oratorians, 
'  Constitutional  Cure,'  Mairc  of  Arras,  '  proconsul '  there  1793-4,  niember  of 
ComiU  de  Si'neU  Gindrale,  guillotined  at  Amiens  Oct.   1795.] 

**  [Gilbert  Romme,  born  at  Riom  1750,  deputy  for  Puy-de-Dome  to  Legislative 
and  Convention  ;  arrested  by  the  Girondins  at  Caen,  when  en  mission  there  in  June 
'93 ;  author  of  the  new  Calendar  ;  condemned  to  death  for  the  insurrection  of 
Prairial,  he  stabbed  himself  in  court  (June  20th  '95).] 


328        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

many  as  wanted :  for  the  rest,  peering  out  of  his  clear  cautious 
eyes,  he  will  cower  low  in  many  an  emergency,  and  find  silence 
safest.  Young  Saint-Just  ^  is  coming,  deputed  by  Aisne  m  the 
North  ;  more  like  a  Student  than  a  Senator  ;  not  four-and-twenty 
yet ;  who  has  written  Books  ;  a  youth  of  slight  stature,  with  mild 
mellow  voice,  enthusiast  olive-complexion  and  long  black  hair. 
Feraud,-  from  the  far  valley  D'Aure  in  the  folds  of  the  Pyrenees,  is 
coming  ;  an  ardent  Republican  ;  doomed  to  fame,  at  least  in  death. 
All  manner  of  Patriot  men  are  coming :  Teachers,  Husband- 
men, Priests  and  Ex-Priests,  Traders,  Doctors  ;  above  all,  Talkers, 
or  the  Attorney-species.  Man  midwives,  as  Levasseur  ^  of  the 
Sarthe,  are  not  wanting.     Nor  Artists :  gross  David,*  with  the 

1  [Louis  Antoine  de  Saint-Just  has  found  in  M.  Ernest  Hamel  (Histoire  de  St.  Just, 
Paris  1859)  an  apologist  of  such  ardour  that  one  would  be  tempted  to  believe  the 
book  to  be  a  satire,  did  not  the  same  writer's  '  Histoire  de  Robespierre  '  (1865 — 7)  ap- 
pear to  prove  his  sincerity.  Saint-Just  was  born  in  August  1767,  of  a  poor  family 
of  Xod/esse.  His  father  was  a  Cavalry  Officer,  and  he  was  brought  up  by  the 
Oratorians  at  Soissons.  He  had  the  ill  luck  at  the  age  of  19  to  be  confined  for  six 
months  at  Picpus,  for  stealing  from  his  widowed  mother's  house  various  objects  of 
value,  in  order  to  enjoy  a  sojourn  at  Paris  on  the  proceeds  {see  R6v.  Fr.  x.x.xii.  97, 
sf.).  He  published  a  bad  poem  in  1789,  and  was  introduced  to  C.  Desmoulins 
in  that  year  ;  commenced  his  Revolutionary  career  at  Bli^rancourt  with  a  flattering 
letter  to  Robespierre  ;  published  '  L'Esprit  de  la  Revolution  et  de  la  Constitution 
Francaises  '  ;  stood  for  the  Legislative,  but  was  not  of  legal  age  :  was  elected  to  the 
Convention,  and  took  a  large  part  in  all  the  most  violent  measures  from  Jan.  '93 
onwards  ;  contributed  more  than  any  one  to  bring  the  Girondins  to  the  scaffold  : 
became  a  member  of  Comiti!  de  Salut  Public^  July  loth  '93  :  went  with  Lebas  to 
the  Army  of  the  Rhine,  Oct.  17th,  and  established  a  fearful  tyranny  in  Strasburg  ; 
fought  bravely  in  the  lines  of  Weissemburg  ;  returned  to  Paris  at  the  beginning  of 
'94  :  took  the  lead  (and  perhaps  forced  Robespierre's  hand)  against  the  H^bertists 
and  Dantonists  (March— April  '94),  went  to  Army  of  North  April  29th — June  28th  ; 
executed  with  Robespierre,  loth  Thermidor.  Altogether  he  passes  tor  the  incarna- 
tion of  '  Virtue  and  Terror  : '  the  Virtue  has  often  been  questioned,  the  Terror 
never.     {Vid.  infr.,  iii.  167.)] 

^[Fi^raud  or  Ferraud,  born  1764,  sat  for  the  Hautes-Pyr^n^es  in  the  Convention  : 
attached  to  the  Girondin  party,  but  escaped  proscription,  because  he  was  absent 
en  mission  with  the  army  of  the  E.  Pyrenees  :  a  leader  of  the  Convention  on  the 
day  of  the  ist  Prairial,  he  was  massacred  by  the  mob  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  241)  while 
defending  the  President's  life.] 

^[Rene  Levasseur  (not  to  be  confounded  with  the  soldier  of  the  same  name), 
born  1747,  a  surgeon  and  administrator  of  the  district  of  Le  Mans,  deputy  for  the 
Sarthe  to  the  Convention,  Commissioner  to  the  Army  of  the  North,  July  21st  '93. 
Died  1834.  The  M^moires  published  in  his  name  in  1829  are  not  really  by  him, 
but  by  Achille  Roche  (7.7V.  infr.,  iii.  153).] 

^[Jacques  Louis  David  was  born  at  Paris  1748,  and  educated  for  a  painter  from 
his  childhood.  He  was  already  celebrated  when,  in  1774,  he  went  to  Rome,  where 
he  spent  six  ye.irs.  In  1780  he  returned  to  France  to  be  the  apostle  of  the  '  antique  ' 
as  opposed  to  the  inheritors  of  the  tradition  of  Watteau  and  Poussin.  He  became 
an  Academician  in  1783,  and  the  most  popular  artist  of  his  time.  He  sat  for  Paris 
in  the  Convention,  and  attached  himself  closely  to  Robespierre,  was  imprisoned 
for  a  short  time  after  Thermidor,  and  again  after  Prairial,  but  then  renounced 


SEPTEMBER  IN  ARGONNE  329 

swoln  cheek,  has  long  painted,  with  genius  in  a  state  of  con- 
vulsion ;  and  will  now  legislate.  The  swoln  cheek,  choking  his 
words  in  the  birth,  totally  disqualifies  him  as  an  orator ;  but  his 
pencil,  his  head,  his  gross  hot  heart,  with  genius  in  a  state  of 
convulsion,  will  be  there.  A  man  bodily  and  mentally  swoln- 
cheeked,  disproportionate  ;  flabby-large,  instead  of  great ;  weak 
withal  as  in  a  state  of  convulsion,  not  strong  in  a  state  of  com- 
posure :  so  let  him  play  his  part.  Nor  are  naturalised  Benefactors 
of  the  Species  forgotten :  Priestley,  elected  by  the  Orne  Depart- 
ment, but  declining ;  Paine  the  rebellious  Needleman,  by  the 
Pas-de-Calais,  who  accepts. 

Few  Nobles  come,  and  yet  not  none.  Paul-Fran9ois  Barras, 
'  noble  as  the  Barrases,  old  as  the  rocks  of  Provence ; '  he  is  one. 
The  reckless,  shipwrecked  man :  flung  ashore  on  the  coast  of  the 
Maldives  long  ago,  while  sailing  and  soldiering  as  Indian  Fighter  : 
flung  ashore  since  then,  as  hungry  Parisian  Pleasure-hunter  and 
Half-pay,  on  many  a  Circe  Island,  with  temporary  enchantment, 
temporary  conversion  into  beasthood  and  hoghood  ; — the  remote 
Var  Department  has  now  sent  him  hither.  A  man  of  heat  and 
haste ;  defective  in  utterance ;  defective  indeed  in  any  thing  to 
utter ;  yet  not  without  a  certain  rapidity  of  glance,  a  certain 
swift  transient  courage ;  who  in  these  times.  Fortune  favouring, 
may  go  far.  He  is  tall,  handsome  to  the  eye,  'only  the  com- 
*  plexion  a  little  yellow ; '  but  '  with  a  robe  of  purple,  with  a 
'scarlet  cloak  and  plume  of  tricolor,  on  occasions  of  solemnity,' 
the   man  will  look  well.^     Lepelletier  Saint-Fargeau,^  Old-Con- 

politics,  and  under  the  Empire  was  created  a  Baron  and  chief  Court  painter  to 
Napoleon.  He  was  exiled  under  the  second  Restoration,  and  died  at  Brussels 
1825.] 

1  Dictionnaire  des  hommes  marquans,  §  Barras.  [Barras  was  born  1755,  served 
in  the  American  war,  squandered  his  patrimony  and  looked  to  the  Revolution  to 
recoup  him.  He  came  to  Paris  in  1739,  and  took  part  in  the  Bastille  day  and  on 
Aug.  loth  ;  sat  for  the  Var  in  the  Convention,  went  en  mission  with  Fr(Jron  to 
Toulon  (where  he  probably  made  the  acquaintance  of  Napoleon) ;  a  potent  enemy 
of  Robespierre  in  Thermidor,  commanded  the  Sections  who  defended  the  Conven- 
tion on  that  day.  and  in  the  subsequent  insurrections  of  Germinal,  Prairial  and 
Vend(§miaire  :  on  the  last  occasion  picked  out  Napoleon  to  help  him  ;  became  a 
Director  and  made  an  immense  fortune  in  office ;  adhered  to  the  Coup  d' Etat  of 
Fructidor  and  to  that  of  Brumaire,  but  retired  to  Brussels  under  the  Empire  (his 
early  relations  with  Josephine  made  his  presence  at  Paris  awkward  for  Napoleon), 
and  returned  to  Paris  at  the  Restoration  ;  died  1829.] 

■■^[Lepelletier,  vid.  supr.,  i.  420;  infr.,  393.] 


330        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

stituent,  is  a  kind  of  noble,  and  of  enoi'mous  wealth  ;  he  too  has 
come  hither  :■ — to  have  the  Pain  of  Death  abolished  ?  Hapless 
Ex-Parlementeer !  Nay,  among  our  Sixty  Old-Constituents,  see 
Philippe  D'Orleans,  a  Prince  of  the  Blood  !  Not  now  D'Orldatis  : 
for.  Feudalism  being  swept  from  the  world,  he  demands  of  his 
worthy  friends  the  Electors  of  Paris,  to  have  a  new  name  of  their 
choosing ;  whereupon  Procureur  Manuel,  like  an  antithetic 
literary  man,  recommends  Equality,  Egalite.  A  Philippe  Egalite  ^ 
therefore  will  sit ;  seen  of  the  Earth  and  Heaven. 

Such  a  Convention  is  gathering  itself  together.  Mere  angry 
poultry  in  moulting  season ;  whom  Brunswick's  grenadiers  and 
cannoneers  will  give  short  account  of.  Would  the  weather,  as 
Bertrand  is  always  praying,  only  mend  a  little  !  - 

In  vain,  O  Bertrand  !  The  weather  will  not  mend  a  whit :  nay 
even  if  it  did  .''  Dumouriez  Polymetis,  though  Bertrand  knows  it 
not,  started  from  brief  slumber  at  Sedan,  on  that  morning  of  the 
2yth  of  August ;  with  stealthiness,  with  promptitude,  audacity. 
Some  three  mornings  after  that,  Brunswick,  opening  wide  eyes, 
perceives  the  Passes  of  the  Argonne  all  seized  ;  blocked  with  felled 
trees,  fortified  with  camps  ;  and  that  it  is  a  most  shifty  swift  Du- 
mouriez this,  who  has  outwitted  him  ! 

The  manoeuvre  may  cost  Brunswick  '  a  loss  of  three  weeks,'  very 
fatal  in  these  circumstances.  A  Mountain- wall  of  forty  miles  lying 
between  him  and  Paris :  which  he  should  have  preoccupied ; — 
which  how  now  to  get  possession  of?  Also  the  rain  it  raineth 
every  day  ;  and  we  are  in  a  hungry  Champagne  Pouilleuse,  a  land 
flowing  only  with  ditchwater.  How  to  cross  this  Mountain-wall 
of  the  Argonne  ;  or  what  in  the  world  to  do  with  it .'' — There  are 
marchings  and  wet  splashings  by  steep  paths,  with  sackerments 
and  guttural  interjections  ;  forcings  of  Argonne  Passes, — which  un- 
happily will  not  force.  Through  the  woods,  volleying  War  re- 
verberates, like  huge  gong-music,  or  Moloch's  kettledrum,  borne 

1  [The  name  Agalitd  was  given  in  an  official  permission  by  the  Commune  to 
'  Louis  Philippe  Joseph,  Prince  Francais,'  to  change  his  name  and  that  of  his 
descendants  for  the  future  to  iti^alitt!,  Sept.  15th  1792  {see  Moniteur,  Sept.  17th).] 

'^  Bertrand-Moleville,  M6moires,  ii.  225. 


SEPTEMBER  IN  ARGONNE  331 

by  the  echoes  ;  swoln  torrents  boil  angrily  round  the  foot  of  I'ocks, 
floating  pale  carcasses  of  men.  In  vain  !  Islettes  V^illage,  with 
its  church-steeple,  rises  intact  in  the  Mountain-pass,  between  the 
embosoming  heights  ;  your  forced  marchings  and  climbings  have 
become  forced  slidings,  and  tumblings  back.  From  the  hill-tops 
thou  seest  nothing  but  dumb  crags,  and  endless  wet  moaning 
woods ;  the  Clermont  Vache  (huge  Cow  that  she  is)  disclosing 
herself  1  at  intervals  ;  flinging  off  her  cloud-blanket,  and  soon 
taking  it  on  again,  drowned  in  the  pouring  Heaven.  The  Argonne 
Passes  will  not  force :  you  must  tikirt  the  Argonne :  go  round  by 
the  end  of  it. 

But  fancy  whether  the  Emigrant  Seigneurs  have  not  got  their 
brilliancy  dulled  a  little  ;  whether  that  '  Foot  Regiment  in  red- 
facings  with  nankeen  trousers '  could  be  in  field-day  order !  In 
place  of  gasconading,  a  sort  of  desperation,  and  hydrophobia  from 
excess  of  water,  is  threatening  to  supervene.  Young  Prince  de 
Ligne,  son  of  that  brave  literary  De  Ligne  the  Thundergod  of 
Dandies,  fell  backwards  ;  shot  dead  in  Gi*and-Pre,^  the  Northmost 
of  the  Passes  :  Brunswick  is  skirting  and  rounding,  laboriously,  by 
the  extremity  of  the  South.  Four  days  ;  days  of  a  rain  as  of  Noah, 
— without  fire,  without  food  !  For  fire  you  cut  down  green  trees, 
and  produce  smoke  ;  for  food  you  eat  green  grapes,  and  produce 
cholic,  pestilential  dysentery,  okiKovro  Se  kaoi  And  the  Peasants 
assassinate  us,  they  do  not  join  us  ;  shrill  women  cry  shame  on  us, 
threaten  to  draw  their  very  scissors  on  us  !  O  ye  hapless  dulled- 
bright  Seigneurs,  and  hydrophobic  splashed  Nankeens  ; — but  O, 
ten  times  more,  ye  poor  sac/cerme/ding  ghastly-visaged  Hessians  and 
Hulans,  fallen  on  your  backs  ;  who  had  no  call  to  die  there,  except 
compulsion  and  three-halfpence  a-day  !  Nor  has  Mrs.  Le  Blanc  of 
the  Goldeii  Arm  a  good  time  of  it,  in  her  bower  of  dripping  rushes. 

1  See  Helen  Maria  Williams,  Letters,  iii.  79-81. 

^[Sept.  14th.  This  was  Charles  Joseph  Emmanuel,  aged  33,  son  of  Charles 
Joseph  the  Austrian  Field-Marshal,  who  was  born  1735  of  an  ancient  Belgian 
family  ;  the  father  fought  in  the  Seven  Years'  War,  and  lived  a  great  deal  in  Paris 
before  the  Revolution  ;  he  wrote  numerous  works  in  French,  notably  the  '  Jotu"nal 
de  la  Guerre  de  Sept  Ans,'  '  Vie  du  Prince  Eugene,'  '  Essai  sur  les  Jardins,'  etc. 
Mme  de  Stael,  who  published  his  '  Lettres  et  Pens(5es,'  said  of  him  that  he  was 
the  only  foreigner  who  wrote  perfect  French.     He  died  in  Vienna  1814.] 


332        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Assassinating  Peasants  are  hanged  ;  Old-Constituent  Honourable 
Members,  though  of  venerable  age,  ride  in  carts  with  their  hands 
tied  :  these  are  the  woes  of  war. 

Thus  they  ;  sprawling  and  wriggling,  far  and  wide,  on  the  slopes 
and  passes  of  the  Argonne  ; — a  loss  to  Brunswick  of  five-and-twenty 
disastrous  days.  There  is  wriggling  and  struggling  ;  facing,  back- 
ing and  right-about  facing  ;  as  the  positions  shift,  and  the  Argonne 
gets  partly  rounded,  partly  forced : — but  still  Dumouriez,  force 
him,  round  him  as  you  will,  sticks  like  a  rooted  fixture  on  the 
ground ;  fixture  with  many  hinges  ;  wheeling  now  this  way,  now 
that ;  showing  always  new  front,  in  the  most  unexpected  manner  : 
nowise  consenting  to  take  himself  away.  Recruits  stream  up  on 
him :  full  of  heart ;  yet  rather  difficult  to  deal  with.  Behind 
Grand-Pre,  for  example,  Grand-Pre  which  is  on  the  wrong-side 
of  the  Argonne,  for  we  are  now  forced  and  rounded, — the  full 
heart,  in  one  of  those  wheelings  and  showings  of  new  front,  did 
as  it  were  overset  itself,  as  full  hearts  are  liable  to  do ;  and  there 
rose  a  shriek  of  sauve  qui  pent,  and  a  death-panic  which  had  nigh 
ruined  all  !  So  that  the  General  had  to  come  galloping ;  and, 
with  thunder-words,  with  gesture,  stroke  of  drawn  sword  even, 
check  and  rally,  and  bring  back  the  sense  of  shame  ;  ^ — nay  to 
seize  the  first  shriekers  and  ringleaders  ;  '  shave  their  heads  and 
eyebrows,'  and  pack  them  forth  into  the  world  as  a  sign.  Thus 
too  (for  really  the  rations  are  short,  and  wet  camping  with  hungry 
stomach  brings  bad  humour)  there  is  like  to  be  mutiny.  Where- 
upon again  Dumouriez  'arrives  at  the  head  of  their  line,  with  his 
'staff,  and  an  escort  of  a  hundred  hussars.  He  had  placed  some 
'  squadrons  behind  them,  the  artillery  in  front ;  he  said  to  them  : 
' "  As  for  you,  for  I  will  neither  call  you  citizens,  nor  soldiers,  nor 
'  my  men  {iii  mes  eiifans),  you  see  before  you  this  artillery,  behind 
'  you  this  cavalry.  You  have  dishonoured  yourselves  by  crimes. 
'If  you  amend,  and  grow  to  behave  like  this  brave  Army  which 
'  you  have  the  honour  of  belonging  to,  you  will  find  in  me  a  good 
'  father.  But  plunderers  and  assassins  I  do  not  suffer  here.  At 
'  the  smallest  mutiny  I  will  have  you  shivered  in  pieces  (hacker  en 
1  Dumouriez,  M^moires,  iii.  29. 


SEPTEMBER  IN  ARGONNE  338 

'pieces).  Seek  out  the  Scoundrels  that  are  among  you,  and  dis- 
'miss  them  yourselves  ;  I  hold  you  responsible  for  them."  '  ^ 

Patience,  O  Dumouriez !  This  uncertain  heap  of  shriekers, 
mutineers,  were  they  once  drilled  and  inured,  will  become  a 
phalanxed  mass  of  Fightei*s ;  and  wheel  and  whirl,  to  order, 
swiftly  like  the  wind  or  the  whirlwind  :  tanned  mustachio-figures  ; 
often  barefoot,  even  bare-backed ;  with  sinews  of  iron ;  who  re- 
quire only  bread  and  gunpowder :  very  Sons  of  Fire,  the  adroitest, 
hastiest,  hottest  ever  seen  perhaps  since  Attila's  time.^  They  may 
conquer  and  overrun  amazingly,  much  as  that  same  Attila  did  ; — 
whose  Attila's-Camp  and  Battlefield  thou  now  seest,  on  this  very 
ground  ;  ^  who,  after  sweeping  bare  the  world,  was,  with  difficulty, 
and  days  of  tough  fighting,  checked  here  by  Roman  .T.tius  and 
Fortune  ;  and  his  dust-cloud  made  to  vanish  in  the  East  again  ! — * 

Strangely  enough,  in  this  shrieking  Confusion  of  a  Soldiery, 
which  we  saw  long  since  fallen  all  suicidally  out  of  square,  in 
suicidal  collision, — at  Nanci,  or  on  the  streets  of  Metz,  where 
brave  Bouille  stood  with  drawn  sword  ;  and  which  has  collided 
and  ground  itself  to  pieces  worse  and  worse  ever  since,  down  now 
to  such  a  state :  in  this  shrieking  Confusion,  and  not  elsewhere, 
lies  the  first  germ  of  returning  Order  for  France  !  Round  which, 
we  say,  poor  France  nearly  all  ground  down  suicidally  likewise 
into  rubbish  and  Chaos,  will  be  glad  to  rally ;  to  begin  growing, 
and  new-shaping  her  inorganic  dust ;  very  slowly,  through  cen- 
turies, through  Napoleons,  Louis-Philippes,  and  other  the  like 
media  and  phases, — into  a  new,  infinitely  preferable  France,  we 
can  hope  ! — 

1  Dumouriez,  Memoires,  iii.  55.     [Oct.  7th.,  vid.  in/r.,  note  p.  345.] 

^  [In  estimating  the  causes  of  the  ultimate  success  of  France,  one  must  not  forget 
how  much  greater  was  the  intelligence  and  education  of  the  average  Frenchman 
than  that  of  the  average  German  ;  this  was  true  not  only  of  the  private  soldiers 
(whether  insubordinate  Volunteers,  or  orderly  units  of  the  old  Army),  but  also  of 
the  officers.  The  science  of  the  parade-ground  was  the  only  thing  known  to  the 
Prussian  Noble  :  the  French  Noble  was  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  a  highly  educated 
man,  as  education  then  went  :  and  even  the  non-commissioned  officers  of  the  old 
Army  were  probably  not  inlerior  to  the  Prussian  noble  in  their  knowledge  of  drill, 
and  superior  to  him  in  most  other  things  [see  Chuquet,  caps.  2  and  3/a«/w).] 

^  Helen  Maria  Williams,  iii.  32. 

^  [This  refers  to  the  so-called  battle  of  Chalons,  in  the  year  451.] 


334        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

These  wheelings  and  movements  in  the  region  of  the  Argonne, 
which  are  all  faithfully  described  by  Dumouriez  himself,  and  more 
interesting  to  us  than  Hoyle's  or  Philidor's  best  Game  of  Chess, 
let  us  nevertheless,  O  Reader,  entirely  omit ; — and  hasten  to  remark 
two  things  :  the  first  a  minute  private,  the  second  a  large  public 
thing.  Our  minute  private  thing  is  :  the  presence,  in  the  Prussian 
host,  in  that  war-game  of  the  Argonne,  of  a  certain  Man,  belonging 
to  the  sort  called  Immortal ;  who,  in  days  since  then,  is  becoming 
visible  more  and  more  in  that  character,  as  the  Transitory  more 
and  more  vanishes  :  for  from  of  old  it  was  remarked  that  when  the 
Gods  appear  among  men,  it  is  seldom  in  recognisable  shape  ;  thus 
Admetus's  neatherds  give  Apollo  a  draft  of  their  goatskin  whey- 
bottle  (well  if  they  do  not  give  him  strokes  with  their  oxrungs), 
not  dreaming  that  he  is  the  Sungod  !  This  man's  name  is  Johann 
Wolfgang  von  Goethe.  He  is  Herzog  Weimar's  Minister,  come  with 
the  small  contingent  of  Weimar ;  to  do  insignificant  unmilitary 
duty  here  ;  very  irrecognisable  to  nearly  all !  He  stands  at  present, 
with  drawn  bridle,  on  the  height  near  Sainte-Menehould,  making 
an  experiment  on  the  '  cannon-fever ; '  having  ridden  thither 
against  persuasion,  into  the  dance  and  firing  of  the  cannon-balls, 
with  a  scientific  desire  to  understand  what  that  same  cannon-fever 
may  be:  'The  sound  of  them,'  says  he,  'is  curious  enough;  as 
'  if  it  were  compounded  of  the  humming  of  tops,  the  gurgling  of 
'  water  and  the  whistle  of  birds.  By  degrees  you  get  a  very  un- 
'  common  sensation  ;  which  can  only  be  described  by  similitude. 
'  It  seems  as  if  you  were  in  some  place  extremely  hot,  and  at  the 
'  same  time  were  completely  penetrated  by  the  heat  of  it ;  so  that 
'  you  feel  as  if  you  and  this  element  you  are  in  were  perfectly  on 
'  a  par.  The  eyesight  loses  nothing  of  its  strength  or  distinctness  ; 
'  and  yet  it  is  as  if  all  things  had  got  a  kind  of  brown-red  colour, 
'  which  makes  the  situation  and  the  objects  still  more  impressive 
'on  you.'  1 

This  is  the  cannon-fever,  as  a  World- Poet  feels  it. — A  man  en- 
tirely irrecognisable  !     In  whose  irrecognisable  head,  meanwhile, 
there  verily  is  the  spiritual  counterpart  (and  call  it  complement) 
1  Goethe,  Campagne  in  Frankreich  (Werke,  xxx.  73). 


SEPTEMBER  IN  ARGONNE  335 

of  this  same  huge  Death-Birth  of  the  World  ;  which  now  effectu- 
ates itself,  outwardly  in  the  Argonne,  in  such  cannon-thunder ; 
inwardly,  in  the  irrecognisable  head,  quite  otherwise  than  by 
thunder !  Mark  that  man,  O  Reader,  as  the  memorablest  of  all 
the  memorable  in  this  Argonne  Campaign,  What  we  say  of  him 
is  not  dream,  nor  flourish  of  rhetoric,  but  scientific  historic  fact ; 
as  many  men,  now  at  this  distance,  see  or  begin  to  see. 

But  the  large  public  thing  we  had  to  remark  is  this :  That  the 
Twentieth  of  September  179^  was  a  raw  morning  covered  with 
mist ;  that  from  three  in  the  morning,  Sainte-Menehould,  and 
those  Villages  and  homesteads  we  know  of  old,  were  stirred  by 
the  rumble  of  artillery-wagons,  by  the  clatter  of  hoofs  and  many- 
footed  tramp  of  men  :  all  manner  of  military,  Patriot  and  Prussian, 
taking  up  positions,  on  the  Heights  of  La  Lune  and  other  Heights ; 
shifting  and  shoving, — seemingly  in  some  dread  chess-game  ; 
which  may  the  Heavens  turn  to  good  !  The  Miller  of  Valmy  has 
fled  dusty  under  ground ;  his  Mill,  were  it  never  so  windy,  will 
have  rest  to-day.  At  seven  in  the  morning  the  mist  clears  off: 
see  Kellermann,  Dumouriez'  second  in  command,  with  'eighteen 
pieces  of  cannon,'  and  deep-serried  ranks,  drawn  up  round  that 
same  silent  Windmill,  on  his  knoll  of  strength ;  Brunswick,  also 
with  serried  ranks  and  cannon,  glooming  over  to  him  fi-om  the 
Height  of  La  Lune  :  only  the  little  brook  and  its  little  dell  now 
parting  them.^ 

So  that  the  much-longed-for  has  come  at  last !  Instead  of 
hunger  and  dysentery,  we  shall  have  sharp  shot ;  and  then  ! — 
Dumouriez,  with  force  and  firm  front,  looks  on  fi*om  a  neighbouring 
height ;  can  help  only  with  his  wishes,  in  silence.  Lo,  the  eighteen 
pieces  do  bluster  and  bark,  responsive  to  the  bluster  of  La  Lune  ; 

i[The  numbers  at  Valmy  seem  to  have  been  fairly  equal,  about  30,000  on  each 
side  :  one  must  remember  that  the  other  passes  of  the  Argonne  had  to  be  held  too. 
It  was  a  mere  skirmish  and  cannonade,  the  French  losing  300,  the  Prussians  200, 
but  it  was  a  decisive  battle  for  all  that.  Kellermann  was  an  Alsatian  and  one  of 
the  simplest  and  most  honourable  of  the  Revolution  Generals  ;  he  was  born  1735  ; 
served  in  the  Seven  Years'  War  ;  Mardchal  de  Camp,  1788  ;  Lieut. -General, 
March  '92  ;  Conmiander  of  Army  of  Centre,  Aug.  22nd  '92,  vice  Liickner  ;  Com- 
mander of  theArmy  of  the  Alpsan'd  Italy,  May— Sept.  '93;  dismissedand  denounced, 
Sept.  '93  ;  escaped  with  difficulty  during  the  Terror  ;  was  one  of  the  first  batch  of 
Marshals  created  by  Napoleon  ;  Due  de  Valmy  1808  ;  died  1820.] 


336        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

and  thunder-clouds  mount  into  the  air ;  and  echoes  roar  through 
all  dells,  far  into  the  depths  of  Argonne  Wood  (deserted  now)  ; 
and  limbs  and  lives  of  men  fly  dissipated,  this  way  and  that.  Can 
Brunswick  make  an  impression  on  them  ?  The  duUed-bright 
Seigneurs  stand  biting  their  thumbs  ;  these  Sansculottes  seem 
7iot  to  fly  like  poultry  !  Towards  noontide  a  cannon-shot  blows 
Kellermann's  horse  from  under  him ;  there  bursts  a  powder-cart 
high  into  the  air,  with  knell  heard  over  all:  some  swagging 
and  swaying  observable  ; — Brunswick  will  try  !  "  Camarades," 
cries  Kellermann,  "  Vive  la  Patrie  !  Allans  vaincre  pour  elle, 
Come  let  us  conquer  for  her."  "  Live  the  Fatherland ! "  rings 
responsive  to  the  welkin,  like  rolling-fire  from  side  to  side : 
our  ranks  are  as  firm  as  rocks  ;  and  Brunswick  may  /across  the 
dell,  ineffectual ;  regain  his  old  position  on  La  Lune  ;  not  un- 
battered  by  the  way.  And  so,  for  the  length  of  a  September 
day, — with  bluster  and  bark  ;  with  bellow  far-echoing !  The 
cannonade  lasts  till  sunset ;  and  no  impression  made.  Till  an 
hour  after  sunset,  the  few  remaining  Clocks  of  the  District  striking 
Seven  ;  at  this  late  time  of  day  Brunswick  tries  again.  With  not 
a  whit  better  fortune !  He  is  met  by  rock-ranks,  by  shout  of 
Vive  la  Patrie ;  and  driven  back,  not  unbattered.  Whereupon 
he  ceases  ;  retires  '  to  the  Tavern  of  La  Lune ; '  and  sets  to 
raising  a  redoute  lest  he  be  attacked ! 

Verily  so,  ye  dulled-bright  Seigneurs,  make  of  it  what  ye  may. 
Ah,  and  France  does  not  rise  round  us  in  mass  ;  and  the  Peasants 
do  not  join  us,  but  assassinate  us :  neither  hanging  nor  any 
persuasion  will  induce  them !  They  have  lost  their  old  distin- 
guishing love  of  King,  and  King's-cloak, — I  fear,  altogether ; 
and  will  even  fight  to  be  rid  of  it :  that  seems  now  their  humour. 
Nor  does  Austria  prosper,  nor  the  siege  of  Thionville.  The  Thion- 
villers,  carrying  their  insolence  to  the  epigrammatic  pitch,  have 
put  a  Wooden  Horse  on  their  walls,  with  a  bundle  of  Hay  hung 
from  him,  and  this  Inscription  :  "  When  I  finish  my  hay,  you  will 
take  Thionville."  ^  To  such  height  has  the  frenzy  of  mankind 
risen. 

'  Hist.  Pari.  xix.  177. 


EXEUNT  337 

The  trenches  of  Thionville  may  shut ;  and  what  though  those 
of  Lille  open  ?  The  Earth  smiles  not  on  us,  nor  the  Heaven ; 
but  weeps  and  blears  itself,  in  sour  rain,  and  worse.  Our  very 
friends  insult  us  ;  we  are  wounded  in  the  house  of  our  friends : 
'  His  Majesty  of  Prussia  had  a  greatcoat,  when  the  rain  came ; 
'  and  (contrary  to  all  known  laws)  he  put  it  on,  though  our  two 
'  French  Princes,  the  hope  of  their  country,  had  none  ! '  To 
which  indeed,  as  Goethe  admits,  what  answer  could  be  made  ?  ^ 
— Cold  and  Hunger  and  AlFront,  Colic  and  Dysentery  and  Death  ; 
and  we  here,  cowering  redouted,  most  unredoubtable,  amid  the 
'tattered  corn-shocks  and  deformed  stubble,'  on  the  splashy 
Height  of  La  Lune,  round  the  mean  Tavern  de  la  Lune ! — 

This  is  the  Cannonade  of  Valmy  ;  wherein  the  World-Poet  ex- 
perimented on  the  cannon- fever ;  -  wherein  the  French  Sansculottes 
did  not  fly  like  poultry.  Precious  to  France  !  Every  soldier  did 
his  duty,  and  Alsatian  Kellermann  (how  preferable  to  old  Liickner 
the  dismissed !)  began  to  become  greater ;  and  Egalite  Fils, 
Equality  Junior,  a  light  gallant  Field-Officer,  distinguished  him- 
self by  intrepidity  : — it  is  the  same  intrepid  individual  who  now, 
as  Louis-Philippe,  without  the  Equality,  struggles,  under  sad 
circumstances,  to  be  called  King  of  the  French   for  a  season. 

CHAPTER  Vni 

EXEUNT 

But  this  Twentieth  of  September  is  otherwise  a  great  day.  For, 
observe,  while  Kellermann's  horse  was  flying  blown  from  under 
him  at  the  Mill  of  Valmy,  our  new  National  Deputies,  that  shall 
be  a  National  Convention,  are  hovering  and  gathering  about  the 
Hall  of  the  Hundred  Swiss :  with  intent  to  constitute  themselves ! 
On  the  morrow,  about  noontide,  Camus  the  Archivist  is  busy 
'  verifying  their  powers  ; '  several  hundreds  of  them  already  here. 

1  Goethe,  xxx.  49. 

^[Carlyle  omits  to  refer  to  Goethe's  hostile  comments  on  the  Revolution  in 
'  Der  Gross  Cophta'  (1791),  in  '  Der  Biirger-General '  (1793),  or  to  the  well-known 
passage  in  '  Hermann  und  Dorothea '  (Clio)  which  so  closely  resembles  Words- 
worth's famous  Sonnet.] 

VOL.  II.  22 


338        THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION 

Whereupon  the  Old  Legislative  comes  solemnly  over,  to  merge  its 
old  ashes  Phoenix-like  in  the  body  of  the  new  ; — and  so  forthwith, 
returning  all  solemnly  back  to  the  Salle  de  Manege,  there  sits  a 
National  Convention,  Seven-hundred  and  Forty -nine  complete,  or 
complete  enough  ;  presided  by  Petion  ; — which  proceeds  directly 
to  do  business.^  Read  that  reported  afternoon's-debate,  O  Reader  ; 
there  are  few  debates  like  it :  dull  reporting  Moniteur  itself  be- 
comes more  dramatic  than  a  very  Shakespeare.  For  epigrammatic 
Manuel  rises,  speaks  strange  things  ;  how  the  President  shall 
have  a  guard  of  honour,  and  lodge  in  the  Tuileries  : — rejected. 
And  Danton  rises  and  speaks  ;  and  Collot  d'Herbois  rises,  and 
Curate  Gregoire,  and  lame  Couthon  of  the  Mountain  rises ;  and 
in  rapid  Meliboean  stanzas,  only  a  few  lines  each,  they  propose 
motions  not  a  few  :  That  the  comer-stone  of  our  new  Constitution 
is,  Sovereignty  of  the  People ;  that  our  Constitution  shall  be 
accepted  by  the  People  or  be  null ;  further  that  the  People 
ought  to  be  avenged,  and  have  right  Judges ;  that  the  Imposts 
must  continue  till  new  order ;  that  Landed  and  other  Property 
be  sacred  forever  ;  finally  that  '  Royalty  from  this  day  is  abolished 
in  France : ' — Decreed  all,  before  four  o'clock  strike,  with  accla- 
mation of  the  world  !  ^  The  tree  was  all  so  ripe  ;  only  shake  it, 
and  there  fall  such  yellow  cartloads. 

And  so  over  in  the  Valmy  Region,  as  soon  as  the  news  come, 

'[Carlyle  makes  the  common  mistake  of  omitting  the  Session  of  20th,  at  which 
371  members  out  of  782  (not  749)  were  present ;  and  at  which  Ruhl,  as  eldest,  took 
the  chair.  Very  seldom  in  fact  were  half,  or  much  more  than  half,  the  members 
present,  except  at  great  crises  like  the  voting  on  the  King's  death.  The  great 
authority  on  the  composition  of  the  Convention  is  M.  Jules  Guiffrey,  '  Les  Conven- 
tionnels '  (Paris.  1889).  There  were  75  ex-Constituents,  183  ex-Legislators,  48 
"  Constitutional  Clergy  :  "  there  were  also  a  great  number  of  unknown  men,  who 
are  hardly  ever  heard  of  during  the  sessions.  The  Official  Reports  of  the  sittings 
and  acts  are  to  be  found  in  (i. )  Bulletin  de  la  Convention  Nationale  (which  began  in 
the  Legislative,  Sept.  5th,  and  went  down  to  Jan.  3rd  1795),  (''•)  Proc^s-Verbal  de  la 
Convention  Nationale,  which  exists  in  74  vols,  for  the  whole  period.  M.  Aulard 
says  that  both  these  are  extremely  mutilated,  and  that  the  latter  contains  barely 
one  fourth  of  the  Correspondence  of  the  Convention,  which  exists  in  the  Archives 
(Rec.  Introd.).  On  2tst  the  Session  was  held  in  the  Hall  of  the  Ceyrt-Suisses, 
whence  it  adjourned  to  the  MatUge,  where  it  sat  till  May  loth  1793,  at  which 
date  it  moved  into  the  Theatre  of  the  Tuileries  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  338).] 

2  Hist.  Pari.  xix.  19.  [To  Collot  belongs  the  honour  of  suggesting,  to  Gregoire 
the  honour  of  drafting  the  motion  that  '  Monarchy  is  abolished  in  France.'  Billaud 
then  proposed  that  all  acts  should  be  dated  from  the  year  L  of  the  Republic,  and 
a  new  Great  Seal  made.] 


EXEUNT  339 

what  stir  is  this,  audible,  visible  from  our  muddy  Heights  of  La 
Lune  ?  ^  Universal  shouting  of  the  French  on  their  opposite 
hillside  ;  caps  raised  on  bayonets  :  and  a  sound  as  of  Republique  : 
Five  la  Republique  borne  dubious  on  the  winds  ! — On  the  morrow 
morning,  so  to  speak,  Brunswick  slings  his  knapsacks  before  day,^ 
lights  any  fires  he  has ;  and  marches  without  tap  of  drum. 
Dumouriez  finds  ghastly  symptoms  in  that  camp  ;  '  latrines  full 
of  blood  ! '  ^  The  chivalrous  King  of  Prussia,  for  he,  as  we  saw, 
is  here  in  person,  may  long  rue  the  day ;  may  look  colder  than 
ever  on  these  dulled-bright  Seigneurs,  and  French  Princes  their 
Country's  hope  ; — and,  on  the  whole,  put  on  his  greatcoat  without 
ceremony,  happy  that  he  has  one.  They  retire,  all  retire  with 
convenient  despatch,  through  a  Champagne  trodden  into  a  quag- 
mire,* the  wild  weather  pouring  on  them :  Dumouriez,  through 
his  Kellermanns  and  Dillons,  pricking  them  a  little  in  the  hinder 
parts.  A  little,  not  much ;  now  pricking,  now  negotiating :  for 
Brunswick  has  his  eyes  opened ;  and  the  Majesty  of  Prussia  is  a 
repentant  Majesty.^ 

Nor  has  Austria  prospered,  nor  the  Wooden  Horse  of  Thion- 
ville  bitten  his  hay  ;  nor  Lille  City  surrendered  itself.  The  Lille 
trenches  opened,^  on  the  29th  of  the  month  ;  with  balls  and  shells, 

^  Williams,  iii.  71.  ^j^gept^  24th.] 

^  ist  October  1792  :  Dumouriez,  iii.  73.  *  [Sept.  30th.] 

^[Carlyle  begins  Brunswick's  retreat  too  soon.  Valmy  had  for  the  moment 
done  little  (except  morally)  for  the  French  ;  Dumouriez's  position  was  as  desperate 
as  ever.  The  negotiations  here  alluded  to  were  carried  on  through  Mannstein  and 
Lombard  (two  of  Frederick  William's  favourites),  before  the  retreat  began  (viz., 
Sept.  22nd — 28th).  Dumouriez  merely  intended  to  amuse  Brunswick,  while  his  own 
levies  were  being  drilled  ;  it  was  moreover  on  his  own  responsibility,  and  with  some 
fear  of  being  accused  of  treachery  by  the  Convention,  that  he  so  acted.  We  know 
that  Dumouriez  always  believed  in  a  Prussian  alliance,  and  Brunswick  in  a  French 
one  :  Frederick  William  therefore  honourably  declared  tjiat  he  was  ready  to  treat 
if  the  King  of  France  were  liberated  and  restored.  Lucchesini  arrived  in  the  Prussian 
Camp  Sept.  27th,  soon  discovered  that  Dumouriez  was  only  fooling,  and  began  in 
his  turn  to  fool  Dumouriez  in  order  to  secure  the  retreat,  the  necessity  for  which 
■was  simply  caused  by  the  wretched  condition  of  the  Prussian  army  :  on  30th 
Brunswick  gave  the  order  to  begin  the  retreat,  and  by  Oct.  6th  his  Army  was 
practically  safe.  Dumouriez  at  once  turned  his  thoughts  to  Belgium  again.  Verdun 
was  evacuated  Oct.  12th,  and  the  frontier  recrossed  Oct.  23rd.  The  Prussian 
troops  withdrew  to  Coblentz  with  their  eyes  ever  more  and  more  fixed  on  Poland, 
while  the  Ausirians  kept  theirs  fixed  on  French  Flanders.] 

*  [The  siege  of  Lille  really  began  on  Sept.  i6th  (though  the  trenches  were  not  open 
till  29th)  under  Duke  Albert  of  Saxe-Teschen.  The  garrison  was  a  small  one, 
about  4,000  regi.ilars  and  6,000  National  Guards,  but  there  was  plenty  ot  artillery. 


•340        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

and  redhot  balls  ;  as  if  not  trenches  but  Vesuvius  and  the  pit  had 
opened.  It  was  frightful,  say  all  eye-witnesses  ;  but  it  is  ineffec- 
tual. The  Lillers  have  risen  to  such  temper  ;  especially  after  these 
news  from  Argonne  and  the  East.  Not  a  Sans-indispensables  in 
Lille  that  would  surrender  for  a  King's  ransom.  Redhot  balls 
rain,  day  and  night ;  '  six-thousand,'  or  so,  and  bombs  '  filled 
internally  with  oil  of  turpentine  which  splashes  up  in  flame  ; ' — 
mainly  on  the  dwellings  of  the  Sansculottes  and  Poor  ;  the  streets 
of  the  Rich  being  spared.  But  the  Sansculottes  get  water-pails  ; 
form  quenching-regulations :  "The  ball  is  in  Peter's  house ! "  "The 
ball  is  in  John's ! "  They  divide  their  lodging  and  substance 
with  each  other  ;  shout  Vive  la  Republique  ;  and  faint  not  in  heart, 
A  ball  thunders  through  the  main  chamber  of  the  H6tel-de-Ville 
while  the  Commune  is  there  assembled :  "  We  are  in  permanence," 
says  one,  coldly,  proceeding  with  his  business ;  and  the  ball  remains 
permanent  too,  sticking  in  the  wall,  probably  to  this  day.^ 

The  Austrian  Archduchess  (Queen's  Sister)  will  herself  see  red 
artillery  fired  :  in  their  over-haste  to  satisfy  an  Archduchess, '  two 
mortars  explode  and  kill  thirty  persons.'  It  is  in  vain  ;  Lille, 
often  burning,  is  always  quenched  again ;  Lille  will  not  yield. 
The  very  boys  deftly  wrench  the  matches  out  of  fallen  bombs : 
'  a  man  clutches  a  rolling  ball  with  his  hat,  which  takes  fire  ; 
t  when  cool,  they  crown  it  with  a  bonnet  rouge.'  Memorable  also 
be  that  nimble  Barber,  who  when  the  bomb  burst  beside  him, 
snatched  up  a  sherd  of  it,  introduced  soap  and  lather  into  it, 
crying  "  Voila  mon  plat  a  barbe,  My  new  shaving-dish ! "  and 
shaved  'fourteen  people'  on  the  spot.  Bravo,  thou  nimble 
Shaver ;  worthy  to  shave  old  spectral  Redcloak,  and  find  treasures ! 
— On  the  eighth  day  of  this  desperate  siege,  the  sixth  day  of 
October,  Austria  finding  it  fruitless,  draws  off,  with  no  pleasurable 
consciousness ;  rapidly,  Dumouriez  tending  thitherward ;  and 
Lille  too,  black  with  ashes  and  smoulder,  but  jubilant  sky-high. 

The  Austrians  had  not  enough  men  to  form  a  regular  investment  of  the  city,  but 
they  burnt  a  good  number  of  buildings  with  their  shells.  The  retreat  of  Bruns- 
wick allowed  Dumouriez  to  reinforce  Lille  :  the  bombardment  lasted  in  a  desultory 
fashion  till  Oct.  sth.] 

1  Bombardement  de  Lille  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xx.  63-71). 


EXEUNT  341 

flings  its  gates  open.  The  Plat  a  barbe  became  fashionable  ;  '  no 
Patriot  of  an  elegant  turn/  says  Mercier  several  years  afterwards, 
'but  shaves  himself  out  of  the  splinter  of  a  Lille  bomb.'  ^ 

Quid  multa,  Why  many  words  ?  The  Invaders  are  in  flight ;  ^ 
Brunswick's  Host,  the  third  part  of  it  gone  to  death,  staggers 
disastrous  along  the  deep  highways  of  Champagne  ;  spreading 
out  also  into  '  the  fields  of  a  tough  spongy  red-coloured  clay  :' — 
'  like  Pharaoh  through  a  Red  Sea  of  mud,'  says  Goethe  ;  '  for 
'  here  also  lay  broken  chariots,  and  riders  and  foot  seemed  sink- 
*  ing  around.'  ^  On  the  eleventh  morning  of  October,  the  World- 
Poet,  struggling  Northwards  out  of  Verdun,  which  he  had  entered 
Southwards,  some  five  weeks  ago,  in  quite  other  order,  discerned 
the  following  Phenomenon  and  formed  part  of  it : 

'  Towards  three  in  the  morning,  without  having  had  any  sleep, 
'  we  were  about  mounting  our  carriage,  drawn  up  at  the  door ; 
'  when  an  insuperable  obstacle  disclosed  itself:  for  there  rolled  on 
'already,  between  the  pavement-stones  which  were  crushed  up 
'  into  a  ridge  on  each  side,  an  uninterrupted  column  of  sick- wagons 
'  through  the  Town,  and  all  was  trodden  as  into  a  morass.  While 
'  we  stood  waiting  what  could  be  made  of  it,  our  Landlord  the 
'  Knight  of  Saint-Louis  pressed  past  us,  without  salutation.'  He 
had  been  a  Calonne's  Notable  in  1787,  an  Emigrant  since;  had 
returned  to  his  home,  jubilant,  with  the  Prussians  ;  but  must  now 
forth  again  into  the  wide  world,  '  followed  by  a  servant  carrying 
a  little  bundle  on  his  stick.' 

^[I  have  in  my  possession  a  jug  of  Rowtnja'iciue,  with  a  picture  of  this  scene 
on  it,  and  the  inscription  Le  Barbicr  Maes,  rasaat  dans  tin  I'clat  d'obus.'\ 

'^[The  wretched  condition  of  the  Prussian  Army  is  well  exposed  in  Chuquet  (cap. 
iii.,  esp.  p.  io6  sqq.),  especially  the  utter  want  of  hospital  accommodation.  The 
whole  military  art  had  evaporated  in  manoeuvres,  parades  and  unnecessary  exer- 
cises. Frederick  the  Great  passed  among  these  consummate  generals  as  an  heroic 
blunderer  who  never  understood  the  art  of  war.  But  F"rederick  at  least  understood 
verpflegung,  and  would  never  have  left  his  Commissariat  in  the  state  in  which  Bruns- 
wick left  his.  There  were  700  bakers  but  there  was  no  bread,  there  were  32,000 
laundresses  [incredible,  but  Chuquet's  figures]  but  one  doubts  if  there  was  much 
washing.  Thousands  of  the  men  died  for  want  of  the  commonest  necessaries  of 
life.  Nor  was  this  all :  the  scientific  side  of  warfare  was  entirely  neglected  by  these 
scientific  warriors;  whereas  the  French  scientific  corps  (Engineers  and  Artillery) 
were  in  an  excellent  condition,  and  had  suffered  comparatively  little  by  emigration.  ] 

'Campagne  in  Frankreich,  p.  103. 


342        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

'  The  activity  of  our  alert  Lisieux  shone  eminent,  and  on  this 
'  occasion  too  brought  us  on  :  for  he  struck  into  a  small  gap  of  the 
'  wagon-row  ;  and  held  the  advancing  team  back  till  we,  with  our 
'six  and  our  four  horses,  got  intercalated;  after  which,  in  my 
'  light  little  coachlet,  I  could  bi*eathe  freer.  We  were  now  under 
'  way  ;  at  a  funeral  pace,  but  still  under  way.  The  day  broke  ; 
'  we  found  ourselves  at  the  outlet  of  the  Town,  in  a  tumult  and 
'turmoil  without  measure.  All  sorts  of  vehicles,  few  horsemen, 
'  innumerable  foot-people,  were  crossing  each  other  on  the  great 
'  esplanade  before  the  Gate.  We  turned  to  the  right,  with  our 
'  Column,  towards  Estain,  on  a  limited  highway,  with  ditches  at 
'  each  side.  Self-preservation,  in  so  monstrous  a  press,  knew  now 
'  no  pity,  no  respect  of  aught.  Not  far  before  us  there  fell  down 
'  a  horse  of  an  ammunition-wagon  ;  they  cut  the  traces,  and  let  it 
'lie.  And  now  as  the  three  others  could  not  bring  their  load 
'along,   they  cut  them  also   loose,  tumbled   the   heavy-packed 

*  vehicle  into  the  ditch ;  and  with  the  smallest  retardation,  we 
'  had  to  drive  on  right  over  the  horse,  which  was  just  about  to 
'  rise ;  and  I  saw  too  clearly  how  its  legs,  under  the  wheels, 
'went  crashing  and  quivering. 

'  Horse  and  foot  endeavoured  to  escape  from  the  narrow  labo- 
'  rious  highway  into  the  meadows :  but  these  too  were  rained  to 
'  ruin  ;  overflowed  by  full  ditches,  the  connexion  of  the  footpaths 
'  everywhere  interrupted.     Four  gentlemanlike,  handsome,  well- 

*  dressed  French  soldiers  waded  for  a  time  beside  our  carriage; 
'  wonderfully  clean  and  neat :  and  had  such  art  of  picking  their 
'steps,  that  their  foot-gear  testified  no  higher  than  the  ancle 
'  to  the  muddy  pilgrimage  these  good  people  found  themselves 
' engaged  in. 

'  That  under  such  circumstances  one  saw,  in  ditches,  in  mea- 
'  dows,  in  fields  and  crofts,  dead  horses  enough,  was  natural  to 
'  the  case  :  by  and  by,  however,  you  found  them  also  flayed,  the 
'  fleshy  parts  even  cut  away  ;  sad  token  of  the  universal  distress. 

'  Thus  we  fared  on  ;  every  moment  in  danger,  at  the  smallest 
'  stoppage  on  our  own  part,  of  being  ourselves  tumbled  overboard  ; 
'  under  which  circumstances,  truly,  the  careful  dexterity  of  our 


EXEUNT  343 

*  Lisieux  could  not  be  sufficiently  praised.  The  same  talent 
'  showed  itself  at  Estain ;  where  we  arrived  towards  noon  ;  and 

*  descried,  over  the  beautiful  well-built  little  Town,  through 
'streets  and  on  squares,  around  and  beside  us,  one  sense-conhis- 
'  ing  tumult :  the  mass  rolled  this  way  and  that ;  and,  all  strug- 
'  gling  forward,  each  hindered  the  other.  Unexpectedly  our 
'  carriage  drew  up  before  a  stately  house  in  the   marketplace  ; 

*  master  and  mistress  of  the  mansion  saluted  as  in  reverent  dis- 
'tance.'  Dexterous  Lisieux,  though  we  knew  it  not,  had  said  we 
were  the  King  of  Prussia's  Brother  ! 

'  But  now,  from  the  ground-floor  windows,  looking  over  the 
'  whole  marketplace,  we  had  the  endless  tumult  lying,  as  it  were, 
'palpable.  All  sorts  of  walkers,  soldiers  in  uniform,  marauders, 
'  stout  but  sorrowing  citizens  and  peasants,  women  and  children, 
'  crushed  and  jostled  each  other,  amid  vehicles  of  all  forms :  am- 
'  munition- wagons,  baggage-wagons  ;  carriages,  single,  double  and 
'  multiplex  ;  such  hundredfold  miscellany  of  teams,  requisitioned 

*  or  lawfully  owned,  making  way,  hitting  together,  hindering  each 
'other,  rolled  here  to  right  and  to  left.  Horned-cattle  too  were 
'  struggling  on ;  probably  herds  that  had  been  put  in  requisition. 
'  Riders  you  saw  few  ;  but  the  elegant  carriages  of  the  Emigrants 
'  many-coloured,  lackered,  gilt  and  silvered,  evidently  by  the  best 
'builders,  caught  your  eye.^ 

'  The  crisis  of  the  strait,  however,  arose  further  on  a  little ; 
'  where  the  crowded  marketplace  had  to  introduce  itself  into  a 
'street, — straight  indeed  and  good,  but  proportionably  far  too 
'  narrow.  I  have,  in  my  life,  seen  nothing  like  it :  the  aspect  of 
'  it  might  perhaps  be  compared  to  that  of  a  swoln  river  which  has 
'  been  raging  over  meadows  and  fields,  and  is  now  again  obliged 
'  to  press  itself  through  a  narrow  bridge,  and  flow  on  in  its  bounded 
'channel.  Down  the  long  street,  all  visible  from  our  windows, 
'  there  swelled  continually  the  strangest   tide :  a  high   double- 

*  seated  travelling  coach  towered  visible  over  the  flood  of  things. 
'  We  thought  of  the  fair  French- women  we  had  seen  in  the  morn- 
*ing.     It  was  not  they,  however;  it  was  Count  Haugwitz  ;  him 

^See  Hermann  und  Dorothea  (also  by  Goethe),  Buch  Kalliope. 


344        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

'you  could  look  at,  with  a  kind  of  sardonic  malice,  rocking  on- 
'  wards,  step  by  step,  there.'  ^ 

In  such  untriumphant  Procession  has  the  Brunswick  Manifesto 
issued  !  Nay  in  worse,  '  in  Negotiation  with  these  miscreants,' — 
the  first  news  of  which  produced  such  a  revulsion  in  the  Emigrant 
nature,  as  put  our  scientific  World-Poet  'in  fear  for  the  wits  of 
several.' 2  There  is  no  help:  they  must  fare  on,  these  poor  Emi- 
grants, angry  with  all  persons  and  things,  and  making  all  persons 
angry  in  the  hapless  course  they  struck  into.  Landlord  and  land- 
lady testify  to  you,  at  tahles-d'hote,  how  insupportable  these  French- 
men are  :  how,  in  spite  of  such  humiliation,  of  poverty  and  probable 
beggary,  there  is  ever  the  same  struggle  for  precedence,  the  same 
forwardness  and  want  of  discretion.  High  in  honour,  at  the  head 
of  the  table,  you  with  your  own  eyes  observe  not  a  Seigneur,  but 
the  automaton  of  a  Seigneur  fallen  into  dotage  ;  still  worshipped, 
reverently  waited  on  and  fed.  In  miscellaneous  seats  is  a  mis- 
cellany of  soldiers,  commissaries,  adventurers  ;  consuming  silently 
their  barbarian  victuals.  '  On  all  brows  is  to  be  read  a  hard  des- 
'  tiny ;  all  are  silent,  for  each  has  his  own  sufferings  to  bear,  and 
'  looks  forth  into  misery  without  bounds.'  One  hasty  wanderer, 
coming  in,  and  eating  without  ungraciousness  what  is  set  before 
him,  the  landlord  lets  off  almost  scot-free.  "  He  is,"  whispered 
the  landlord  to  me,  "  the  first  of  these  cursed  people  I  have  seen 
condescend  to  taste  our  German  black  bread."  ^ 

And  Dvimouriez  is  in  Paris ;  *  lauded  and  feasted,  paraded  in 
glittering  saloons,  floods  of  beauti  fullest  blonde-dresses  and  broad- 
cloth-coats flowing  past  him,  endless,  in  admiring  joy.  One  night, 
nevertheless,  in  the  splendour  of  one  such  scene,^  he  sees  himself 
suddenly  apostrophised  by  a  squalid  unjoyful  Figure,  who  has 
come  in  ?<«invited,  nay  despite  of  all  lackeys  ;  an  unjoyful  Figure  ! 

^  Campagne  in  Frankreich,  Goethe's  Werke  (Stuttgart,  1829),  xxx.  133-37. 

^Ibid.  152.  •''Ibid.  210-12. 

^[Oct.  nth — i8th.  Dumouriez  came  to  Paris  mainly  to  obtain  support  for  his 
views  on  the  invasion  of  Belgium.  Remember  that  he  always  wished  to  treat 
Belgium  fairly,  to  make  it  a  dependent  Republic,  and  bulwark  of  France.  But 
the  Montagne  insisted  on  incorporation  and  plundering,  especially  of  the  rich 
■Belgian  churches  {vid.   infr.,  p.  368).] 

5  [Oct.  i6th.] 


EXEUNT  345 

The  Figure  is  come  "  in  express  mission  from  the  Jacobins,"  to 
inquire  sharply,  better  then  than  later,  touching  certain  things : 
"  Shaven  eyebrows  of  Volunteer  Patriots,  for  instance  ?  "  ^  Also, 
"your  threats  of  shivering  in  pieces  ?  "  Also,  "why  you  have  not 
chased  Brunswick  hotly  enough  ?  "  Thus,  with  sharp  croak,  in- 
quires the  Figure. — "Ah,  c'est  voiis  qu'oti  appelle  Marat,  You  are 
he  they  call  Marat ! "  answers  the  General,  and  turns  coldly  on 
his  heel  - — "  Marat !  "  The  blonde-gowns  quiver  like  aspens  ;  the 
dress-coats  gather  round  ;  Actor  Talma  (for  it  is  his  house),  Actor 
Talma,  and  almost  the  very  chandelier-lights,  are  blue  :  till  this 
obscene  Spectrum,  swart  unearthly  Visual-Appearance,  vanish, 
back  into  its  native  Night.  ^ 

General  Dumouriez,  in  few  brief  days,  is  gone  again,  towards 
the  Netherlands ;  will  attack  the  Netherlands,  winter  though  it 
be.  And  General  Montesquiou,^  on  the  Southeast,  has  driven  in 
the  Sardinian  Majesty  ;  nay,  almost  without  a  shot  fired,  has  taken 
Savoy  from  him,  which  longs  to  become  a  piece  of  the  Republic. 
And  General  Custine,^  on  the  Northeast  [East],  has  dashed  forth  on 

^  [The  accusation  of  Marat  against  Uumouriez  was  that  he  had  deprived  of  their 
arms,  and  otherwise  maltreated  two  battalions  of  Parisian  Volunteers,  who  had  at 
Rethel,  on  Oct.  7th,  murdered,  at  the  instigation  of  their  commander  Palloy,  four 
deserters  from  the  Prussian  army,  under  pretence  of  their  being  Em!gn's.'\ 

2  Dumouriez,  iii.  115.  Marat's  account,  in  the  D^bats  des  Jacobins  and  Journal 
de  la  R6publique  (Hist.  Pari.  xix.  317-21),  agrees  to  the  turning  on  the  heel  ;  but 
strives  to  interpret  it  differently. 

"[Dumouriez  in  his  M^moires  does  not  say  where  this  scene  took  place.  Thiers 
(iii.  66)  says  at  Mdlle  Candeille's.  The  Hist.  Pari.,  giving  Marat's  account  of  the 
event  to  the  Jacobins,  is  probably  correct.  Talma  had  married  Julie  Carreau, 
and  lived  in  Rue  Chantereine.] 

■*  [Sept.  25th.  The  Marquis  de  Montesquiou,  a  respectable  soldier  of  the  Ancien 
Kifgime,  invaded  Savoy,  Sept.  21st,  and  took  Chambery.  He  was  well  received  ;  the 
Government  of  Turin  was  very  unpopular  in  Savoy,  and  a  nearly  unanimous  vote 
of  the  Commutes  of  Savoy  was  taken  in  favour  of  union  with  France,  seemingly 
without  pressure  (very  different  was  the  case  in  1859).  General  Anselme  at  the 
same  time,  Sept.  30th,  took  Nice,  but  his  troops  behaved  badly,  and  there  was  no 
enthusiasm  there  for  France.  .A.nselme  had  all  sorts  of  wild  ideas  of  invading  and 
revolutionising  Italy  at  once.  It  was  apropos  of  Savoy  that  the  question  first 
presented  itself  to  the  Convention  '  shall  we  e.xtend  the  limits  of  the  republic  ?  '  and 
'  if  so  how  far  ? '  On  Nov.  27th  the  incorporation  of  Savoy  with  France  was  voted, 
but  by  this  time  the  enthusiasm  there  had  subsided,  and  the  Savoyards  wished  to 
remain  independent ;  when  pressed  to  occupy  and  hold  down  the  country  by  force, 
Montesquiou  resigned  his  command  and  emigrated.  He  died  at  Paris  1820  ;  the 
decree  incorporating  Nice  was  carried  on  Jan.  31st  '93. J 

^  [It  was  a  misfortune  for  Germany  that  her  weakest  and  worst-governed  States 
were  those  which  fronted  on  France  ;  but  it  was  greatly  to  the  credit  of  the  patient 


346         THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Spires  and  its  Arsenal,  and  then  on  Electoral  Mentz,  not  uninvited, 
wherein  are  German  Democrats  and  no  shadow  of  an  Elector  now  : 
so  that  in  the  last  days  of  October,  Frau  Forster,  a  daughter  of 
Heyne's,  somewhat  democratic,  walking  out  of  the  Gate  of  Mentz 
with  her  Husband,  finds  French  Soldiers  playing  at  bowls  with 
cannon-balls  there.  Forster  trips  cheerfully  over  one  iron  bomb, 
with  "  Live  the  Republic !  "  A  black-bearded  National  Guard 
answers :  "  EUe  vivra  bien  sans  vous,  It  will  probably  live  inde- 
pendently of  you."  1 

diplomacy  of  the  old  French  Monarchy  that  these  States  had  learned  to  lean  upon 
France  rather  than  on  their  natural  head,  Austria.  The  Ecclesiastical  Electorates, 
Mainz,  Trier,  Koln,  the  Bishoprics  of  Speyer,  Worms  and  Basel  were  at  the  mercy 
of  any  French  army  ;  a  good  deal  of  loose  eleutheromaniac  gabble  was  talked  in 
the  so-called  '  cultivated  '  circles  of  these  principalities,  and  a  steady  propaganda  was 
kept  up  from  Strasburg.  Custine,  a  sort  of  inferior  Dumouriez,  i.e.,  an  adventurous 
noble,  who  had  failed  to  make  himself  a  career  under  the  Ancien  Rc'^inte,  though 
he  had  served  in  the  American  War,  and  represented  the  Noblesse  of  Metz  in  the 
States-General,  was  in  command  of  a  detachment  of  Liickner's  old  army  at 
Landau.  He  was  now  given  a  free  hand  for  an  attack  on  the  middle  Rhine. 
The  importance  of  his  'campaign'  (there  was  no  fighting,  for  there  was  no  re- 
sistance) is  that  he  taught  France  the  dangerous  lesson,  that  the  countries  which 
she  "liberated  from  their  tyrants  "  could  be  made  to  pay  heavily  for  the  privilege. 
.Speyer  surrendered  Sept.  30th,  Worms  Oct.  4th,  Ma\nz(vid.  infr.,  iii.  21)  Oct.  21st, 
Frankfort  ransomed  itself  Oct.  28th.  Custine  would  have  done  better  to  let 
Frankfort  alone,  and  push  north  to  clear  the  whole  left  bank  of  the  Rhine ;  as  it 
was  he  allowed  the  Prussians  to  occupy  Coblentz  while  he  was  setting  up  a  Re- 
public at  Mainz.] 

J  Johann  Georg  Forsters  Briefwechsel  (Leipzig,  1829),  i.  88. 


347 


BOOK  II 
REGICIDE 

CHAPTER  I 

THE  DELIBERATIVE 

France  therefore  has  done  two  things  very  completely :  she  has 
hurled  back  her  Cimmerian  Invaders  far  over  the  marches ;  and 
likewise  she  has  shattered  her  own  internal  Social  Constitution, 
even  to  the  minutest  fibre  of  it,  into  wreck  and  dissolution. 
Utterly  it  is  all  altered  :  from  King  down  to  Parish  Constable, 
all  Authorities,  Magistrates,  Judges,  persons  that  bore  rule,  have 
had,  on  the  sudden,  to  alter  themselves,  so  far  as  needful ;  or 
else,  on  the  sudden,  and  not  without  violence,  to  be  altered  ; 
a  Patriot  '  Executive  Council  of  Ministers,'  with  a  Patriot  Danton 
in  it,  and  then  a  whole  Nation  and  National  Convention,  have 
taken  care  of  that.  Not  a  Parish  Constable,  in  the  farthest 
hamlet,  who  has  said  De  par  le  Roi,  and  shown  loyalty,  but  must 
retire,  making  way  for  a  new  improved  Parish  Constable  who  can 
say  De  par  la  Republique. 

It  is  a  change  such  as  History  must  beg  her  readers  to  imagine, 
Mwdescribed.  An  instantaneous  change  of  the  whole  body-politic, 
the  soul-politic  being  all  changed ;  ^  such  a  change  as  few  bodies, 
politic  or  other,  can  experience  in  this  world.  Say,  perhaps, 
such  as  poor  Nymph  Semele's  body  did  experience,  when  she 
would  needs,  with  woman's  humour,  see  her  Olympian  Jove  as 
very  Jove  ; — and  so  stood,  poor  Nymph,  this  moment  Semele, 
next  moment  not  Semele,  but  Flame  and  a  Statue  of  red-hot 
Ashes !  France  has  looked  upon  Democracy ;  seen  it  face  to 
face. — The   Cimmerian  Invaders  will  rally,  in  humbler  temper, 

1  [Subsequent  French  History  seems  to  refute  the  notion  that  it  is  possible  to 
change  '  the  Soul-politic  '  of  a  people.] 


348        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

with  better  or  worse  luck :  the  wreck  and  dissolution  must  re- 
shape itself  into  a  social  arrangement  as  it  can  and  may.  But  as 
for  this  National  Convention,  which  is  to  settle  everything,  if 
it  do,  as  Deputy  Paine  and  France  generally  expects,  get 
all  finished  'in  a  few  months,'  we  shall  call  it  a  most  deft 
Convention. 

In  truth,  it  is  very  singular  to  see  how  this  mercurial  French 
People  plunges  suddenly  from  Five  le  Roi  to  Five  la  Republique  ; 
and  goes  simmering  and  dancing,  shaking  off  daily  (so  to  speak), 
and  trampling  into  the  dust,  its  old  social  garnitures,  ways  of 
thinking,  rules  of  existing ;  and  cheerfully  dances  towards  the 
Ruleless,  Unknown,  with  such  hope  in  its  heart,  and  nothing  but 
Freedom,  Equality  and  Brotherhood  in  its  mouth.  Is  it  two 
centuries,  or  is  it  only  two  years,  since  all  France  roared  simul- 
taneously to  the  welkin,  bursting  forth  into  sound  and  smoke  at 
its  Feast  of'  Pikes,  "  Live  the  Restorer  of  French  Liberty  ? " 
Three  short  years  ago  there  was  still  Versailles  and  an  Q£il-de- 
Boeuf:  now  there  is  that  watched  Circuit  of  the  Temple,  girt 
with  dragon-eyed  Municipals,  where,  as  in  its  final  limbo.  Royalty 
lies  extinct.  In  the  year  1789,  Constituent  Deputy  BaiTere 
'  wept,'  in  his  Break-of-Daij  Newspaper,  at  sight  of  a  reconciled 
King  Louis;  and  now  in  1792,  Convention  Deputy  Barrere, 
perfectly  tearless,  may  be  considering,  whether  the  reconciled 
King  Louis  shall  be  guillotined  or  not ! 

Old  garnitures  and  social  vestures  drop  off  (we  say)  so  fast, 
being  indeed  quite  decayed,  and  are  trodden  under  the  National 
dance.  And  the  new  vestures,  where  are  they  ;  the  new  modes 
and  rules  ?  Liberty,  Equality,  Fraternity  :  not  vestures,  but  the 
wish  for  vestures !  The  Nation  is  for  the  present,  figuratively 
speaking,  naked ;  it  has  no  rule  or  vesture  ;  but  is  naked, — a 
Sansculottic  Nation. 

So  far  therefore,  and  in  such  manner,  have  our  Patriot  Brissots, 
Guadets  triumphed.  Vergniaud's  Ezekiel-visions  of  the  fall  of 
thrones  and  crowns,  which  he  spake  hypothetically  and  pro- 
phetically in  the  Spring  of  the  year,  have  suddenly  come  to 
fulfilment  in  the  Autumn.     Our  eloquent  Patriots  of  the  Legis- 


THE  DELIBERATIVE  349 

lative,  like  strong  Conjurors,  by  the  word  of  their  mouth,  have 
swept  Royalism  with  its  old  modes  and  formulas  to  the  winds ; 
and  shall  now  govern  a  France  free  of  formulas.  Free  of 
formulas !  And  yet  man  lives  not  except  with  formulas  ;  with 
customs,  ways  of  doing  and  living  :  no  text  truer  than  this  ;  which 
will  hold  true  from  the  Tea-table  and  Tailor's  shopboard  up  to  the 
High  Senate-houses,  Solemn  Temples  ;  nay  through  all  provinces 
of  Mind  and  Imagination,  onwards  to  the  outmost  confines  of 
articulate  being, —  Uhi  homines  sunt  modi  sunt.  There  are  modes 
wherever  there  are  men.  It  is  the  deepest  law  of  man's  nature  ; 
whereby  man  is  a  craftsman  and  '  tool-using  animal  ; '  not  the 
slave  of  Impulse,  Chance  and  brute  Nature,  but  in  some  measure 
their  lord.  Twenty-five  millions  of  men,  suddenly  stript  bare  of 
their  inodi,  and  dancing  them  down  in  that  manner,  are  a  terrible 
thing  to  govern  ! 

Eloquent  Patriots  of  the  Legislative,  meanwhile,  have  precisely 
this  problem  to  solve.  Under  the  name  and  nickname  of '  states- 
men, hommes  d'&tat,'  of  '  moderate  men,  moderantins,'  of  Brissotins, 
Rolandins,  finally  of  Girondins,  they  shall  become  world-famous  in 
solving  it.  For  the  Twenty-five  millions  are  Gallic  effervescent 
too ; — filled  both  with  hope  of  the  unutterable,  of  universal 
Fraternity  and  Golden  Age  ;  and  with  terror  of  the  unutterable, 
Cimmerian  Europe  all  rallying  on  us.  It  is  a  problem  like  few. 
Truly,  if  man,  as  the  Philosophers  brag,  did  to  any  extent  look 
before  and  after,  what,  one  may  ask,  in  many  cases  would  become 
of  him  ?  What,  in  this  case,  would  become  of  these  Seven-hundred 
and  Forty-nine  men  ?  The  Convention,  seeing  clearly  before 
and  after,  were  a  paralysed  Convention.  Seeing  clearly  to  the 
length  of  its  own  nose,  it  is  not  paralysed. 

To  the  Convention  itself  neither  the  work  nor  the  method  of 
doing  it  is  doubtful :  To  make  the  Constitution ;  to  defend  the 
Republic  till  that  be  made.  Speedily  enough,  accordingly,  there 
has    been    a    '  Committee    of    the   Constitution '    got    together.^ 

1  [Oct.  nth.  The  Constitutional  Committee  (nominated  Oct.  nth)  comprised 
Sieyls,  Paine,  Brissot,  Petion,  Vergniaud,  Gensonn^,  Barere,  Danton,  Condorcet. 
The  first  draft  was  presented  on  Feb.  15th  '93,  Condorcet  being  the  reporter:  but 
by  that  time  the  Girondists  were  too  busy  fighting  for  their  power,  and  soon  for 


350        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Sieyes,  Old-Constituent,  Constitution-builder  by  trade  ;  Condorcet, 
fit  for  better  things ;  Deputy  Paine,  foreign  Benefactor  of  the 
Species,  with  that  '  red  carbuncled  face,  and  the  black  beaming 
eyes  ; '  Herault  de  Sechelles,^  Ex-Parlementeer,  one  of  the  hand- 
somest men  in  France :  these,  with  inferior  guild-brethren,  are 
girt  cheerfully  to  the  work  ;  will  once  more  '  make  the  Constitu- 
tion ; '  let  us  hope,  more  effectually  than  last  time.  For  that  the 
Constitution  can  be  made,  who  doubts, — unless  the  Gospel  of 
Jean  Jacques  came  into  the  world  in  vain  ?  True,  our  last  Con- 
stitution did  tumble  within  the  year,  so  lamentably.  But  what 
then ;  except  sort  the  rubbish  and  boulders,  and  build  them  up 
again  better  ?  '  Widen  your  basis,'  for  one  thing, — to  Universal 
Suffrage,  if  need  be ;  exclude  rotten  materials,  Royalism  and 
such  like,  for  another  thing.  And  in  brief,  huild,  O  unspeakable 
Sieyes  and  Company,  unwearied  !  Frequent  perilous  downrushing 
of  scaffolding  and  rubblework,  be  that  an  irritation,  no  discour- 
agement. Start  ye  always  again,  clearing  aside  the  wreck ;  if 
with  broken  limbs,  yet  with  whole  hearts  ;  and  build,  we  say,  in 
the  name  of  Heaven, — till  either  the  work  do  stand ;  or  else 
mankind  abandon  it,  and  the  Constitution-builders  be  paid  off, 
with  laughter  and  tears !  One  good  time,  in  the  course  of 
Eternity,  it  was  appointed  that  this  of  Social  Contract  too  should 
try  itself  out.  And  so  the  Committee  of  Constitution  shall  toil : 
with  hope  and  faith  ; — with  no  disturbance  from  any  reader  of 
these  pages. 

their  lives,  to  debate  much  on  Constitutional  questions  ;  the  debate  on  the  new 
'  Rights  of  man  '  dragged  on  till  May  3tst  :  during  it  Saint-Just  first  made  known 
some  of  his  remarkable  schemes  for  the  future  of  France  ;  perhaps  the  most 
interesting  point  raised  was  that  by  Rabaut-Pommier,  who  proposed  (May  15th  '93) 
that  when  a  city  exceeded  50,000  it  should  be  divided  into  more  than  one  Muni- 
cipality ;  this  of  course  'provoked  Paris  and  \.\\e  MoTifagne.'  The  Second  Con- 
stitutional Committee  was  nominated  on  June  2nd  (vid.  infr.,  iii.  82;  Mortimer- 
Ternaux,  vii.  210).] 

^  [Herault  de  S^chelles,  born  1759,  practised  as  an  avocat  before  the  Chatelet, 
was  a  favourite  of  the  <^ueen,  who  procured  for  him  the  post  of  Avocat-Ghiiral  at 
the  Chatelet ;  sat  for  Paris  in  the  Legislative,  for  Seine-et-Oise  in  the  Convention  ; 
attempted  a  defence  of  the  Convention  on  May  31st  '93  (demanding  Hanriot's 
arrest) ;  presided  at  the  Fi-te  of  Aug.  loth  '93,  and  aroused  the  jealousy  of 
Robespierre  ;  was  a  member  of  Cojniti!  de  Saint  Public,  July— Dec.  '93  ;  en  mission 
in  Alsace,  Sept.  '93  ;  denounced  as  an  ex-noble  in  Dec,  escaped  for  the  time  but 
fell  with  Danton,  April  '94;  executed  April  5th.  There  is  a  touch  of  Barere  in 
H^rault's  character.] 


THE  DELIBERATIVE  351 

To  make  the  Constitution,  then,  and  return  home  joyfully  in 
a  few  months  ;  this  is  the  prophecy  our  National  Convention 
gives  of  itself ;  by  this  scientific  program  shall  its  operations  and 
events  go  on.  But  from  the  best  scientific  program,  in  such 
a  case,  to  the  actual  fulfilment,  what  a  difference  !  Every  reunion 
of  men,  is  it  not,  as  we  often  say,  a  reunion  of  incalculable 
Influences  ;  every  unit  of  it  a  microcosm  of  Influences  ; —  of  which 
how  shall  Science  calculate  or  prophesy  ?  Science,  which  cannot, 
with  all  its  calculuses,  differential,  integral  and  of  variations, 
calculate  the  Problem  of  Three  gravitating  Bodies,  ought  to  hold 
her  peace  here,  and  say  only :  In  this  National  Convention  there 
are  Seven-hundred  and  Forty-nine  very  singular  Bodies,  that 
gravitate  and  do  much  else ; — who,  probably  in  an  amazing 
manner,  will  work  the  appointment  of  Heaven. 

Of  National  Assemblages,  Parliaments,  Congresses,  which  have 
long  sat ;  which  are  of  saturnine  temperament ;  above  all,  which 
are  not  *  dreadfully  in  earnest,'  something  may  be  computed  or 
conjectured  :  yet  even  these  are  a  kind  of  Mystery  in  progress, — 
whereby  accordingly  we  see  the  Journalist  Reporter  find  liveli- 
hood :  even  these  jolt  madly  out  of  the  ruts,  from  time  to  time. 
How  much  more  a  poor  National  Convention,  of  French  vehe- 
mence ;  urged  on  at  such  velocity  ;  without  routine,  without  rut, 
track  or  landmark  ;  and  dreadfully  in  earnest  every  man  of  them  ! 
It  is  a  Parliament  literally  such  as  there  was  never  elsewhere  in 
the  world.  Themselves  are  new,  unarranged ;  they  are  the 
Heart  and  presiding  centre  of  a  France  fallen  wholly  into  maddest 
disarrangement.  From  all  cities,  hamlets,  from  the  utmost  ends 
of  this  France  with  its  Twenty-five  million  vehement  souls, 
thick-streaming  influences  storm-in  on  that  same  Heart,  in  the 
Salle  de  Manege,  and  storm-out  again  :  such  fiery  venous-arterial 
circulation  is  the  function  of  that  Heart.  Seven-hundred  and 
Forty-nine  human  individuals,  we  say,  never  sat  together  on  our 
Earth  under  more  original  circumstances.  Common  individuals 
most  of  them,  or  not  far  from  common :  yet  in  virtue  of  the 
position  they  occupied,  so  notable.  How,  in  this  wild  piping  of 
the    whirlwind  of  human   passions,  with  death,   victory,   terror. 


352        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION 

valour,  and  all  height  and  all  depth  pealing  and  piping,  these 
men,  left  to  their  own  guidance,  will  speak  and  act  ? 

Readers  know  well  that  this  French  National  Convention 
(quite  contrary  to  its  own  Program)  became  the  astonishment 
and  horror  of  mankind ;  a  kind  of  Apocalyptic  Convention,  or 
black  Dream  become  real ;  concerning  which  History  seldom 
speaks  except  in  the  way  of  interjection :  how  it  covered  France 
with  wo,  delusion  and  delirium ;  and  fi'om  its  bosom  there  went 
forth  Death  on  the  pale  Horse.  To  hate  this  poor  National 
Convention  is  easy ;  to  praise  and  love  it  has  not  been  found 
impossible.  It  is,  as  we  say,  a  Parliament  in  the  most  original 
circumstances.  To  us,  in  these  pages,  be  it  as  a  fuliginous  fiery 
mystery,  where  Upper  has  met  Nether,  and  in  such  alternate 
glare  and  blackness  of  darkness  poor  bedazzled  mortals  know  not 
which  is  Upper,  which  is  Nether ;  but  rage  and  plunge  distrac- 
tedly, as  mortals  in  that  case  will  do.  A  Convention  which  has 
to  consume  itself,  suicidally  ;  and  become  dead  ashes — with 
its  World !  Behoves  us,  not  to  enter  exploratively  its  dim 
embroiled  deeps  ;  yet  to  stand  with  unwavering  eyes,  looking 
how  it  welters ;  what  notable  phases  and  occurrences  it  will 
successively  throw  up. 

One  general  superficial  circumstance  we  remark  with  praise : 
the  force  of  Politeness.  To  such  depth  has  the  sense  of  civili- 
sation penetrated  man's  life ;  no  Drouet,  no  Legendre,  in  the 
maddest  tug  of  war,  can  altogether  shake  it  off.  Debates  of 
Senates  dreadfully  in  earnest  are  seldom  given  frankly  to  the 
world ;  else  perhaps  they  would  surprise  it.  Did  not  the  Grand 
Monarque  himself  once  chase  his  Louvois  with  a  pair  of  brandished 
tongs  }  But  reading  long  volumes  of  these  Convention  Debates, 
all  in  a  foam  with  furious  earnestness,  earnest  many  times  to  the 
extent  of  life  and  death,  one  is  struck  rather  with  the  degree  of 
continence  they  manifest  in  speech  ;  and  how  in  such  wild  ebul- 
lition, there  is  still  a  kind  of  polite  rule  struggling  for  mastery, 
and  the  forms  of  social  life  never  altogether  disappear.  These 
men,  though  they  menace  with  clenched  right-hands,  do  not  clutch 


THE  DELIBERATIVE  353 

one  another  by  the  collar ;  they  draw  no  daggers,  except  for  ora- 
torical purposes,  and  this  not  often :  profane  swearing  is  almost 
unknown,  though  the  Reports  are  frank  enough  ;  we  find  only  one 
or  two  oaths,  oaths  by  Marat,  reported  in  all. 

For  the  rest,  that  there  is  '  effervescence  '  who  doubts  ?  ^  Effer- 
vescence enough  ;  Decrees  passed  by  acclamation  today,  repealed 
by  vociferation  tomorrow  ;  temper  fitful,  most  rotatory-change- 
ful, always  headlong  !  The  '  voice  of  the  orator  is  covered  with 
rumours  ; '  a  hundred  '  honourable  Members  rush  with  menaces 
towards  the  Left  side  of  the  Hall ; '  President  has  '  broken  three 
bells  in  succession,' — claps  on  his  hat,  as  signal  that  the  countiy 
is  near  ruined.  A  fiercely  effervescent  Old-Gallic  Assemblage  ! — 
Ah,  how  the  loud  sick  sounds  of  Debate,  and  of  Life,  which  is  a 
debate,  sink  silent  one  after  another :  so  loud  now,  and  in  a  little 
while  so  low  !  Brennus,  and  those  antique  Gael  Captains,  in  their 
way  to  Rome,  to  Galatia  and  such  places,  whither  they  were  in 
the  habit  of  marching  in  the  most  fiery  manner,  had  Debates  as 
effervescent,  doubt  it  not ;  though  no  Moniteiir  has  reported  them. 
They  scolded  in  Celtic  Welsh,  those  Brennuses  ;  neither  were  they 
Sansculotte ;  nay  rather  breeches  {braccce,  say  of  felt  or  rough- 
leather)  were  the  only  thing  they  had ;  being,  as  Livy  testifies, 
naked  down  to  the  haunches  : — and,  see,  it  is  the  same  sort  of  work 
and  of  men  still,  now  when  they  have  got  coats,  and  speak  nasally 
a  kind  of  broken  Latin  !  But,  on  the  whole,  does  not  Time  enve- 
lope this  present  National  Convention  ;  as  it  did  those  Brennuses, 
and  ancient  august  Senates  in  felt  breeches  ?  Time  surely  :  and 
also  Eternity.  Dim  dusk  of  Time, — or  noon  which  will  be  dusk  ; 
and  then  there  is  night,  and  silence  ;  and  Time  with  all  its  sick 
noises  is  swallowed  in  the  still  sea.  Pity  thy  brother,  O  son  of 
Adam  !  The  angriest  frothy  jargon  that  he  uttei's,  is  it  not  properly 
the  whimpering  of  an  infant  which  cannot  speak  what  ails  it,  but 


'  [There  was  no  proper  '  Right '  and  '  Left '  in  the  Convention  ;  the  names 
survived  from  the  arrangements  at  Versailles  ;  but  after  an  alteration  in  the  Hall 
of  the  Legislative  (Dec.  30th  '91)  the  nominal  Right  had  become  the  Left,  i.e.,  sat 
on  the  left  of  the  President's  chair.  In  the  Convention  the  Montagne  sat  at  the 
extreme  right  top  corner.  {See  Dulaure,  Physionomie  de  la  Convention,  quoted  in 
Bire,  L6gende  des  Girondins,  138-40.)] 

VOL.  II.  23 


354        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

is  in  distress  clearly,  in  the  inwards  of  it ;  and  so  must  squall  and 
whimper  continually,  till  its  Mother  take  it,  and  it  get — to  sleep  ! 

This  Convention  is  not  four  days  old,  and  the  melodious  Meli- 
bcean  stanzas  that  shook  down  Royalty  are  still  fresh  in  our  ear, 
when  tliere  bursts  out  a  new  diapason, — unhappily,  of  Discord, 
this  time.  For  speech  has  been  made  of  a  thing  difficult  to  speak 
of  well :  the  September  Massacres.  How  deal  with  these  Sep- 
tember Massacres  ;  with  the  Paris  Commune  that  presided  over 
them  .''  A  Paris  Commune  hateful-terrible  ;  before  which  the  poor 
effete  Legislative  had  to  quail,  and  sit  quiet.  And  now  if  a  young 
omnipotent  Convention  will  not  so  quail  and  sit,  what  steps  shall 
it  take  ?  ^  Have  a  Departmental  Guard  in  its  pay,  answer  the 
Girondins,  and  Friends  of  Order !  A  Guard  of  National  Volun- 
teers, missioned  from  all  the  Eighty-three  or  Eighty-five  Depart- 
ments, for  that  express  end ;  these  will  keep  Septemberers, 
tumultuous  Communes  in  a  due  state  of  submissiveness,  the  Con- 
vention in  a  due  state  of  sovereignty.  So  have  the  Friends  of 
Oi'der  answered,  sitting  in  Committee,  and  reporting ;  and  even 
a  Decree  has  been  passed  of  the  required  tenour.  Nay  certain 
Departments,  as  the  Var  or  Marseilles,  in  mere  expectation  and 
assurance  of  a  Decree,  have  their  contingent  of  Volunteers  already 
on  march ;  brave  Marseillese,  foremost  on  the  Tenth  of  August, 
will  not  be  hindmost  here  ;  '  fathers  gave  their  sons  a  musket  and 
twenty-five  louis,'  says  Barbaroux,  'and  bade  them  march.* 

Can  any  thing  be  properer  ?  A  Republic  that  will  found  itself 
on  justice  must  needs  investigate  September  Massacres ;  a  Con- 
vention calling  itself  National,  ought  it  not  to  be  guarded  by  a 
National  force .'' — Alas,  Readei',  it  seems  so  to  the  eye :  and  yet 
there  is  much  to  be  said  and  argued.     Thou  beholdest  here  the 

'  [It  is  quite  clear  that  tlie  Convention  was  no  more  able  than  the  Legislative 
had  been,  to  shake  off  the  yoke  of  the  Commune ;  and  that  all  the  efforts  to 
centralise  Government  against  it  were  powerless  until  the  creation  of  the  Comif,- 
de  Salut  Public  in  April  '93.  But  it  is  also  clear  that  during  the  first  8  months  of 
the  Convention  much  greater  efforts  were  made  to  shake  off  the  j'oke  than 
had  been  made  in  the  Legislative.  The  Conseil-Gi'/idral  of  the  Commune  also 
repudiated  the  acts  of  its  Comitc  de  Sur-oeillance,  and  ordered  new  elections  (by 
which  half  its  members  would  be  renewed)  to  take  place  at  once  (Morlimer- 
Ternaux,  iv.  18,  vid.  in/r.,  361).] 


THE  DELIBERATIVE  355 

small  beginning  of  a  Controversy,  which  mere  logic  will  not  settle. 
Two  small  well-springs,  September,  Departmental  Guard,  or  rather 
at  bottom  they  are  but  one  and  the  same  small  well-spring  ;  which 
will  swell  and  widen  into  waters  of  bitterness  ;  ^  all  maimer  of  sub- 
sidiary streams  and  brooks  of  bitterness  flowing  in,  from  this  side 
and  that ;  till  it  become  a  wide  river  of  bitterness,  of  rage  and 
separation, — which  can  subside  only  into  the  Catacombs.  This 
Departmental  Guard,  decreed  by  overwhelming  majorities,  and 
then  repealed  for  peace's  sake,  and  not  to  insult  Paris,  is  again 
decreed  more  than  once  ;  -  nay  it  is  partially  executed,  and  the 
very  men  that  are  to  be  of  it  are  seen  visibly  parading  the  Paris 
streets, — shouting  once,  being  overtaken  with  liquor :  "  A  has 
Marat,  Down  with  Marat !  "  ^  Nevertheless,  decreed  never  so 
often,  it  is  repealed  just  as  often  ;  and  continues,  for  some  seven 
months,  an  angry  noisy  Hypothesis  only :  a  fair  Possibility  strug- 
gling to  become  a  Reality,  but  which  shall  never  be  one  ;  which, 
after  endless  struggling,  shall,  in  February  next,  sink  into  sad  rest, 
— dragging  much  along  with  it.  So  singular  are  the  ways  of  men 
and  honourable  Members. 

But  on  this  fourth  day  of  the  Convention's  existence,  as  we  said, 

i[Note  Collot's  speech  at  the  Jacobins  (Nov.  5th) :  '  The  terrible  affair  of  Sept. 
'  2nd  is  the  great  article  in  the  creed  of  your  liberty  ;  without  it  the  Revolution  would 
'  never  have  been  accomplished.'  There  is  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  Club  as  a 
whole  set  itself  to  defend  and  even  glorify  the  massacres  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  iv.  341, 
sij(/.).  The  Gironde  continued  at  intervals  to  protest  against  the  massacres  (but 
£/.  infr.,  p.  372),  and  their  majority  in  the  Convention,  could  they  have  used  it, 
was  overwhelming.  Morris  (i.  603)  makes  this  acute  comment  on  the  position  of 
parties  (Oct.  24th) :  "  There  are  two  parties,  one  of  about  half  a  dozen,  the  other 
"of  some  fifteen  or  twenty  .  .  .  each  claims  the  merit  of  having  begotten  the 
"  young  Republic  on  the  body  of  the  Jacobin  Club  .  .  .  and  the  people  is  as  fond 
"  of  the  child  as  if  it  were  its  own."] 

2  [The  motion  was  made  by  Buzot,  Sept.  24th,  supported  by  Kersaint  and 
Lanjuinais ;  a  committee  of  six  was  appointed  to  report  on  it,  and  reported,  by 
Buzot,  Oct.  8th.  Robespierre  spoke  fiercely  against  the  motion,  and  on  15th  the 
Commune  presented  an  insolent  petition  against  it ;  without  the  question  being 
ever  actually  shelved,  the  Gironde  allowed  it  to  be  passed  over,  seeming  to  be 
content  to  hold  the  threat  of  the  Guard  over  the  heads  of  their  rivals.  On  Jan. 
nth  '93  it  was  brought  up  again,  but  again  dropped  (Mortimer-Ternau.x,  bk.  xvii. 
and  v.  393).] 

■'  Hist.  Pari.  \'x.  184.  [This  is  confirmed  by  the  Mojiitcur  of  Nov.  sth.  Legendre 
stated  (on  Nov.  4th)  that  on  the  previous  day  he  had  heard  bands  of  FMcris  go 
through  the  streets  shouting  a  song  with  the  burden  La  Tete  de  Marat,  Robes- 
pierre et  Danton  e.t  de  tous  ceiix  qui  les  d^fendent  (cf.  also  Moore's  Journal,  ii. 
340)0 


356        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

which  is  the  25th  of  September  17,92,  there  comes  Committee 
Report  on  that  Decree  of  the  Departmental  Guard,  and  speech  of 
repealing  it ;  there  come  denunciations  of  Anarchy,  of  a  Dictator- 
ship,— which  let  the  incorruptible  Robespierre  consider :  there 
come  denunciations  of  a  certain  Journal  de  la  Repiihlique,  once 
called  Ai}ii  du  Peuple ;  and  so  thereupon  there  comes,  visibly 
stepping  up,  visibly  standing  aloft  on  the  Tribune,  ready  to  speak, 
— the  Bodily  Spectrum  of  People's-Friend  Marat !  Shriek,  ye 
Seven-hundred  and  Forty-nine  ;  it  is  verily  Marat,  he  and  not 
another.  Marat  is  no  phantasm  of  the  brain,  or  mere  lying  impress 
of  Printer's  Types  ;  but  a  thing  material,  of  joint  and  sinew,  and 
a  certain  small  stature ;  ye  behold  him  there,  in  his  blackness,  in 
his  dingy  squalor,  a  living  fraction  of  Chaos  and  Old  Night ;  visibly 
incarnate,  desirous  to  speak.  "  It  appears,"  says  Marat  to  the 
shrieking  Assembly,  "that  a  great  many  persons  here  are  enemies 
of  mine." — "  All !  all !  "  shriek  hundreds  of  voices  :  enough  to 
drown  any  People's-Friend.  But  Marat  will  not  drown  :  he  speaks 
and  croaks  explanation  ;  croaks  with  such  reasonableness,  air  of 
sincerity,  that  repentant  pity  smothers  anger,  and  the  shrieks  sub- 
side, or  even  become  applauses.  For  this  Convention  is  unfortun- 
ately the  crankest  of  machines  :  it  shall  be  pointing  eastward  with 
stiff  violence,  this  moment ;  and  then  do  but  touch  some  spring 
dexterously,  the  whole  machine,  clattering  and  jerking  seven- 
hundred-fold,  will  whirl  with  huge  crash,  and,  next  moment,  is 
pointing  westward !  Thus  Marat,  absolved  and  applauded,  vic- 
torious in  this  turn  of  fence,  is,  as  the  Debate  goes  on,  prickt  at 
again  by  some  dexterous  Girondin  ;  and  then  the  shrieks  rise 
anew,  and  Decree  of  Accusation  is  on  the  point  of  passing ;  till 
the  dingy  People's-Friend  bobs  aloft  once  more  ;  croaks  once 
more  persuasive  stillness,  and  the  Decree  of  Accusation  sinks. 
Whereupon  he  draws  forth — a  Pistol ;  and  setting  it  to  his  Head, 
the  seat  of  such  thought  and  prophecy,  says  :  '  If  they  had  passed 
'their  Accusation  Decree,  he,  the  People's-Friend,  would  have 
'blown  his  brains  out.'  A  People's-Friend  has  that  faculty  in 
him.  For  the  rest,  as  to  this  of  the  two-hundred  and  sixty-thou- 
sand Aristocrat  Heads,  Marat  candidly  says,  "  C'est  la  mon  avis, 


THE  DELIBERATIVE  357 

Such  is  my  opinion."  Also  is  it  not  indisputable  :  "  No  power  on 
Earth  can  prevent  me  from  seeing  into  traitors,  and  umnasking 
them," — by  my  superior  originality  of  mind  ?  ^  An  honourable 
member  like  this  Friend  of  the  People  few  terrestrial  Parliaments 
have  had. 

We  observe,  however,  that  this  first  onslaught  by  the  Friends  of 
Order,  as  sharp  and  prompt  as  it  was,  has  failed.  For  neither  can 
Robespierre,  summoned  out  by  talk  of  Dictatorship,  and  greeted 
with  the  like  rumour  on  showing  himself^  be  thrown  into  Prison, 
into  Accusation ;  not  though  Barbaroux  openly  bear  testimony 
against  him,  and  sign  it  on  paper.  With  such  sanctified  meekness 
does  the  Incorruptible  lift  his  seagreen  cheek  to  the  smiter ;  lift 
his  thin  voice,  and  with  Jesuitic  dexterity  plead,  and  prosper  ;  ask- 
ing at  lastjiin  a  prosperous  manner :  "  But  what  witnesses  has  the 
Citoyen  Barbaroux  to  support  his  testimony  }  "  Moi !  "  cries  hot 
Rebecqui,  standing  up,  striking  his  breast  with  both  hands,  and 
answering  "  Me  !  "  '^  Nevertheless  the  Seagreen  pleads  again,  and 
makes  it  good :  the  long  hurlyburly,  '  personal  merely,'  while  so 
much  public  matter  lies  fallow,  has  ended  in  the  order  of  the  day. 
O  Friends  of  the  Gironde,  why  will  you  occupy  our  august  sessions 
with  mere  paltry  Personalities,  while  the  grand  Nationality  lies  in 
such  a  state  ? — The  Gironde  has  touched,  this  day,  on  the  foul 
black-spot  of  its  fair  Convention  Domain  ;  has  trodden  on  it,  and 

1  Moniteur  Newspaper,  No.  271,  28c,  294,  Ann6e  premiere  ;  Moore's  Journal, 
ii.  21,  157,  etc.  (which  however  may  perhaps,  as  in  similar  cases,  be  only  a  copy  of 
the  Newspaper).  [Both  Carlyle  and  Dr.  Moore  here  make  a  confusion  between  the 
Stances  of  Sept.  25th  and  Oct.  24th.  It  was  on  the  latter  occasion  that  the  incident 
of  the  "heads"  occurred.  Marat  himself  in  L Ami  dii  PeupU-  says  '200,000 
heads,'  without  mentioning  '  aristocrat.'  Carlyle  does  not  mention  the  able  speech 
of  25th,  in  which  Vergniaud  pointed  out  that  Robespierre  had,  on  Aug.  30th, 
denounced  to  the  Comm/i/ic  him  (Vergniaud),  Brissot,  Guadet,  Condorcet  and 
others  ;  to  this  Marat  replied,  but  as  usual  nothing  but  recrimination  came  of  the 
debate. 

I  have  failed  to  find  Carlyle's  authority  for  the  statement  that  Moore  often  copied 
the  Moniteur :  it  is  not  improbable,  but  in  some  cases  the  information  on  the 
journal  is  entered  on  the  day  of  the  events.  Carlyle  apparently  quotes  from  a 
Dublin  edition  (1799)  of  Dr.  Moore  :  the  British  Museum  contains  two  editions, 
London,  1793  and  1794.  Dr.  Moore  was  born  at  Stirling,  was  the  father  of  Sir 
John  Moore  the  soldier,  had  been  physician  to  the  English  ambassador  in  Paris, 
and  happened  to  be  in  Paris  again  Aug.— Dec. ,  1792  ;  died  at  Richmond  1829.] 

'^  Moniteur,  ut  supra:  Stance  du  25  Sept.  [It  was  not  Robespierre  that  asked 
the  question,  but  Panis  ;  there  is  no  mention  in  the  Moniteur  of  Rebecqui  striking 
his  breast,  etc.] 


358        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

yet  not  trodden  it  down.  Alas,  it  is  a  well-spring,  as  we  said,  this 
black-spot ;  ^  and  will  not  tread  down  ! 

CHAPTER  II 

THE  EXECUTIVE 

May  we  not  conjecture  therefore  that  round  this  grand  enterprise 
of  Making  the  Constitution,  there  will,  as  heretofore,  very  strange 
embroilments  gather,  and  questions  and  interests  complicate  them- 
selves ;  so  that  after  a  few  or  even  several  months,  the  Convention 
will  not  have  settled  everything  ?  Alas,  a  whole  tide  of  questions 
comes  rolling,  boiling ;  growing  ever  wider,  without  end  !  Among 
which,  apart  from  this  question  of  September  and  Anarchy,  let  us 
notice  three,  which  emerge  oftener  than  the  others,  and  promise 
to  become  Leading  Questions :  Of  the  Armies ;  of  the  Subsistences ; 
thirdly,  of  the  Dethroned  King. 

As  to  the  Armies,  Public  Defence  must  evidently  be  put  on  a 
proper  footing ;  for  Europe  seems  coalising  itself  again ;  one  is 
apprehensive  even  England  will  join  it.  Happily  Dumouriez  pros- 
pers in  the  North  ; — nay,  what  if  he  should  prove  too  prosperous, 
and  become  Liberticide,  Murderer  of  Freedom  ! — Dumovu-iez  pros- 
pers, through  this  winter  season  ;  yet  not  without  lamentable 
complaints.  Sleek  Pache,  the  Swiss  Schoolmaster,  he  that  sat 
frugal  in  his  Alley,  the  wonder  of  neighbours,  has  got  lately — 
whither  thinks  the  Reader  ?     To  be  Minister  of  War  !  ^     Madame 

'  [After  eight  days  of  these  fierce  personalities  the  Convention  contented  itself 
with  demanding  the  accounts  of  the  Comitt'  de  Sui-<eillancc  of  the  Commune  (Oct. 
loth).  Marat  adroitly  turned  the  flank  of  his  enemies  by  demanding  Roland's 
accounts  at  the  same  time :  both  demands  were  supported  by  the  financier 
Cambon,  who,  as  Chairman  of  the  Finance  Committee,  had  to  deal  with  a  frightful 
state  of  bankruptcy  (over  2  milliards  oi  Assignats  out,  and  only  24  millions  in  the 
treasury),  and  who  continually  strove  to  check  the  depredations,  individual  and 
collective,  of  the  members  of  the  Commune,  but  almost  in  vain  (^see  Mortimer- 
Ternaux,  iv.  250-260).] 

2  [Pache  [t'id.  supr.,  i.  376),  Minister  of  War  (Oct.  3rd  '92 — Feb.  4th  '93)  in  place 
of  Servan.  He  did  more  to  ruin  the  War  Office  than  any  one  else,  and  was  succeeded 
by  a  military  adventurer  Beurnonville,  who  however  was  at  least  not  the  tool  of 
Marat  and  Hubert.  On  Oct.  nth  Garat  succeeded  Danton  as  Minister  of  Justice. 
The  Executive  Council  met  in  the  King's  old  bedroom  in  the  Tuileries,  each  mmister 
presiding  for  a  week  in  turn.  Masson  (Affaires  Etrangeres,  257-275)  notices  how 
enormously  the  staff  of  all  departments  was  increased  in  order  to  find  places  for 
the  political  hangers  on  of  the  new  Government.     (Verily,  as  Hobbes  said,  "the 


THE  EXECUTIVE  359 

Roland,  struck  with  his  sleek  ways,  recommended  him  to  her 
husband  as  Clerk  ;  the  sleek  Clerk  had  no  need  of  salary,  being 
of  true  Patriotic  temper  ;  he  would  come  with  a  bit  of  bread  in 
his  pocket,  to  save  dinner  and  time  ;  and  munching  incidentally, 
do  three  men's  work  in  a  day  ;  punctual,  silent,  frugal, — the 
sleek  Tartuffe  that  he  was.  Wherefore  Roland,  in  the  late  Over- 
turn, recommended  him  to  be  War-Minister.  And  now,  it  would 
seem,  he  is  secretly  undermining  Roland  ;  playing  into  the  hands 
of  your  hotter  Jacobins  and  September  Commune  ;  and  cannot, 
like  strict  Roland,  be  the  Velo  des  Coquins  !  ^ 

How  the  sleek  Pache  might  mine  and  undermine,  one  knows 
not  well  ;  this  however  one  does  know  :  that  his  War-Office  has 
become  a  den  of  thieves  and  confusion,  such  as  all  men  shudder 
to  behold.  That  the  Citizen  Hassenfratz,'^  as  Head-Clerk,  sits 
there  in  bonnet  rouge,  in  rapine,  in  violence,  and  some  Mathe- 
matical calculation  ;  a  most  insolent,  red-nightcapped  man.  That 
Pache  munches  his  pocket-loaf,  amid  head-clerks  and  sub-clerks, 
and  has  spent  all  the  War-Estimates.  That  Furnishers  scour  in 
gigs,  over  all  districts  of  France,  and  drive  bargains.  And  lastly 
that  the  Army  gets  next  to  no  furniture :  no  shoes,  though  it 
is  winter  ;  no  clothes  ;  some  have  not  even  arms  ;  '  in  the  Army 
of  the  South,'  complains  an  honourable  Member,  *  there  are 
thirty-thousand  pairs  of  breeches  wanting,' — a  most  scandalous 
want. 

Roland's  strict  soul  is  sick  to  see  the  course  things  take  :  but 

favourites  of  a  King  are  few,  those  of  an  Assembly  are  many. ")  The  chief  business 
of  the  Executive  Council  however  was  Foreign  Affairs  (nominally  directed  by 
Lebrun),  and  Revolutionary  propaganda  (at  hrst  guided  by  Danton).  For  this 
last  purpose  the  secret  service  money  of  the  Foreign  Office  was  largely  appropri- 
ated, and  out  of  it  the  Marscillais  murderers  got  25,000  fr.  in  October.  Maillard 
got  300  fr.  a  month,  and  even  Marat  managed  to  anne.x  1,200  fr.  The  register  of 
the  sittings  of  the  Conseil  and  a  summary  of  its  minutes  are  given  in  Aulard's 
Recueil ;  they  are  anything  but  interestmg  :  all  the  real  business  of  the  E.xecutive 
being  done  in  the  various  Committees  of  the  Convention,  and  later  m  the  Comiti 
de  Saint  Public.  The  Convention  committees  were  21  in  number,  comprising  418 
members  ((^  Mortimer-Ternaux,  iv.  477).] 

1  Madame  Roland,  M^moires,  ii.  237,  &c. 

^  [Hassenfratz,  a  chemist  and  mining  engineer,  collaborator  of  Pache,  charged 
with  the  duty  of  furnishing  war  material,  afterwards  a  leader  in  the  Insurrections 
of  Germinal  and  Prairial,  imprisoned  for  the  latter,  amnestied  at  Brumaire,  became 
Professor  at  the  School  of  Mines,  died  1827.] 


360        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

what  can  he  do  ?  Keep  his  own  Department  strict  ;  rebuke,  and 
repress  wheresoever  possible  ;  at  lowest,  complain.  He  can  com- 
plain in  Letter  after  Letter,  to  a  National  Convention,  to  France, 
to  Posterity,  the  Universe  ;  grow  ever  more  querulous-indignant ; 
— till  at  last,  may  he  not  grow  wearisome  ?  For  is  not  this  con- 
tinual text  of  his,  at  bottom,  a  rather  barren  one  :  How  astonish- 
ing that  in  a  time  of  Revolt  and  abrogation  of  all  Law  but  Cannon 
Law,  there  should  be  such  Unlawfulness  ?  Intrepid  Veto-of- 
Scoundrels,  narrow-faithful,  respectable,  methodic  man,  work  thou 
in  that  manner,  since  happily  it  is  thy  manner,  and  wear  thyself 
away ;  though  ineffectual,  not  profitless  in  it — then  nor  now  ! — The 
brave  Dame  Roland,  bravest  of  all  French  women,  begins  to  have 
misgivings  :  The  figure  of  Danton  has  too  much  of  the  '  Sardana- 
palus  character,'  at  a  Republican  Rolandin  Dinner-table  :  Clootz, 
Speaker  of  Mankind,  proses  sad  stuff  about  a  Universal  Republic, 
or  union  of  all  Peoples  and  Kindreds  in  one  and  the  same  Fra- 
ternal Bond  ;  of  which  Bond,  how  it  is  to  be  tied,  one  unhappily 
sees  not. 

It  is  also  an  indisputable,  unaccountable  or  accountable  fact, 
that  Grains  are  becoming  scarcer  and  scarcer.  ^  Riots  for  grain, 
tumultuous  Assemblages  demanding  to  have  the  price  of  grain 
fixed,  abound  far  and  near.  The  Mayor  of  Paris  and  other  poor 
Mayors  are  like  to  have  their  difficulties.  Petion  was  reelected 
Mayor  of  Paris  ;  but  has  declined  ;  being  now  a  Convention  Legis- 
lator. Wise  surely  to  decline  :  for,  besides  this  of  Grains  and  all 
the  rest,  there  is  in  these  times  an  Improvised  Insurrectionaiy 
Commune  passing  into  an  Elected  legal  one ;  getting  their  ac- 
counts settled, — not  without  irritancy  !  Petion  has  declined : 
nevertheless  many  do  covet  and  canvass.  After  months  of  scru- 
tinising, balloting,  arguing  and  jargoning,  one  Doctor  Chambon 

i[The  harvest  of  1792  had  been  fairly  good,  but  the  agitations  of  July,  Aug., 
Sept.  had  led  to  fearful  bread  riots.  It  is  amusing  to  see  the  Montagnards  hurling 
against  poor  stupid  Roland  the  same  charges  of  accaparemeyit  that  they  had 
hurled  against  the  Ancien  Riignne.  It  must  also  be  remembered  that  '92  was  the 
first  harvest  during  the  war,  and  that  the  principle  of  requisition  for  the  armies, 
though  not  yet  legalised,  was  largely  practised  {see  Mortimer-Ternaux,  bk. 
xviii.).] 


THE  EXECUTIVE  361 

gets  the  post  of  honour ;  ^  who  will  not  long  keep  it  ;  but  be,  as 
we  shall  see,  literally  crushed  out  of  it.^ 

Think  also  if  the  private  Sansculotte  has  not  his  difficulties,  in 
a  time  of  dearth  !  Bread,  according  to  the  People's-Friend,  may 
be  some  '  six  sous  per  pound,  a  day's  wages  some  fifteen  ; '  and 
grim  winter  here.  How  the  Poor  Man  continues  living,  and  so 
seldom  starves  ;  by  miracle !  Happily,  in  these  days,  he  can 
enlist,  and  have  himself  shot  by  the  Austrians,  in  an  unusually 
satisfactory  manner  :  for  the  Rights  of  Man. — But  Commandant 
Santerre,  in  this  so  straitened  condition  of  the  flour-market,  and 
state  of  Equality  and  Liberty,  proposes,  through  the  Newspapers, 
two  remedies,  or  at  least  palliatives  :  First,  that  all  classes  of 
men  should  live  two  days  of  the  week  on  potatoes  ;  then  second, 
that  every  man  should  hang  his  dog.  Hereby,  as  the  Command- 
ant thinks,  the  saving,  which  indeed  he  computes  to  so  many 
sacks,  would  be  very  considerable.  CheerfuUer  form  of  inventive- 
stupidity  than  Commandant  Santerre's  dwells  in  no  human  soul. 
Inventive-stupidity,  imbedded  in  health,  courage  and  good-nature  : 
much  to  be  commended.  "  My  whole  strength,"  he  tells  the 
Convention  once,  "  is,  day  and  night,  at  the  service  of  my  fellow- 
Citizens  :  if  they  find  me  worthless,  they  will  dismiss  me  ;  I  will 
return,  and  brew  beer."  '^ 

^  [Nov.  30th.  The  Electoral  operations  for  choice  of  a  Maire  lasted  from  Oct. 
4th — Nov.  30th.  Many  candidates  were  proposed.  Petion  who  was  first  re-elected 
(by  over  13,000  out  of  14,000  votes  given  from  a  constituency  of  160,000)  refused. 
Then  d'Ormesson  (former  Controller-General)  was  actually  elected  by  the  respectable 
vote  against  Lhuillier,  the  Jacobins'  candidate  ;  but  he  too  refused.  Finally  Nicolas 
Chambon  was  elected  (by  8,000  against  3,000  of  Lhuillier) ;  this  was  the  last  triumph 
of  the  moderates  before  Thermidor.  C'hambon  had  been  head  physician  at  the 
SaLpetriere  ;  he  was  so  much  crushed  at  a  tumult  at  the  Theatre  de  la  Nation  a  few 
days  before  the  King  s  death,  on  the  occasion  of  the  representation  of  IJ Ami  des 
Lois,  that  he  resigned  his  ofhce  [vid.  infr. ,  385)  Feb.  ist  '93.  Pache  was  then  elected 
Maire  on  Feb.  14th,  and  held  office  till  May  loth  '94,  when  he  was  replaced  by 
Fleuriot-Lescot.  The  elections  for  the  Conseii-Gd'/u'ral  (Dec.  2nd)  were  far  less 
numerously  attended  :  the  votes  averaged  about  i  in  20  of  possible  voters  ;  only  28 
of  the  280  members  of  the  Insurrectionary  Commune  found  seats,  but  these  included 
all  the  principal  Radical  leaders,  Chaumette,  Hebert,  etc.  Chaumette  was  elected 
Procu}-i'ur-Syndicv/\xh  Real  and  Hebert  as  substitutes  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  v.  118-9). 
It  was  now  that  Chaumette  took  (instead  of  Pierre  Gaspard)  the  name  of 
Anaxagoras  "  who  was  hanged  for  his  republican  opmions. "  Republican  Athens 
however  was  not  the  place  likely  to  hang  Anaxagoras  ;  the  philosopher  was  con- 
demned for  impiety  to  the  gods,  but  saved  by  Pericles  and  died  B.C.  428.] 

'■^Dictionnaire  des  Hommes  Marquans,  §  Chambon. 

•*  Moniteur  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xx.  412). 


362        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Or  figure  what  con*espondences  a  poor  Roland,  Minister  of  the 
Interior,  must  have,  on  this  of  Grains  alone  !  Free-trade  in  Grain, 
impossibility  to  fix  the  Prices  of  Grain ;  on  the  other  hand,  clamour 
and  necessity  to  fix  them  :  Political  Economy  lecturing  from  the 
Home  Office,  with  demonstration  clear  as  Scripture  ; — ineffectual 
for  the  empty  National  Stomach.  The  Mayor  of  Chartres,  like  to 
be  eaten  himself,  cries  to  the  Convention  ;  the  Convention  sends 
honourable  Members  in  Deputation ;  who  endeavour  to  feed  the 
multitude  by  miraculous  spiritual  methods  ;  but  cannot.  The 
multitude,  in  spite  of  all  Eloquence,  come  bellowing  round ;  will 
have  the  Grain-Prices  fixed,  and  at  a  moderate  elevation  ;  or  else 
— the  honourable  Deputies  hanged  on  the  spot  !  The  honourable 
Deputies,  reporting  this  business,  admit  that,  on  the  edge  of  hon*id 
death,  they  did  fix,  or  affect  to  fix  the  Price  of  Grain  :  for  which, 
be  it  also  noted,  the  Convention,  a  Convention  that  will  not  be 
trifled  with,  sees  good  to  reprimand  them.^ 

But  as  to  the  origin  of  these  Grain- Riots,  is  it  not  most  prob- 
ably your  secret  Royalists  again  ?  Glimpses  of  Priests  were  dis- 
cernible in  this  of  Chartres, — to  the  eye  of  Patriotism.  Or  indeed 
may  not  '  the  root  of  it  all  lie  in  the  Temple  Prison,  in  the  heart 
of  a  perjured  King,'  well  as  we  guard  him  ?  ^  Unhappy  perjured 
King  ! — And  so  there  shall  be  Bakers'  Queues,  by  and  by,  more 
sharp-tempered  than  ever  :  on  every  Baker's  door-rabbet  an  iron 
ring,  and  coil  of  rope  ;  whereon,  with  firm  grip,  on  this  side  and 
that,  we  form  our  Queue  :  but  mischievous  deceitful  persons  cut 
the  rope,  and  our  Queue  becomes  a  ravelment ;  wherefore  the  coil 
must  be  made  of  iron  chain.^     Also  there  shall  be  Prices  of  Grain 

1  Hist.  Pari.  xx.  431-40.  [Nov.  28th.  The  deputies  sent  to  Chartres  were 
Lecointe-Puyraveau,  Maure  and  Biroteau  :  they  returned  to  report  their  ill  success 
to  the  Convention  Nov.  30th ;  they  avowed  that  they  signed  the  demands  of  the 
mob  at  peril  of  their  lives  {Monitcur,  Dec.  2nd).] 

-  Ibid.  XX.  409. 

■'  Mercier,  Nouveau  Paris.  {(Queues,  vid.  siipr. ,  i.  285.  Not  till  July  '93  can  I 
find  any  order  of  the  Comniune  regulating  Queues:  on  July  20th  there  is  an 
order  to  the  Committees  of  Sections  to  place  officers  at  the  doors  of  each  bakery, 
who  are  to  regulate  the  Queue,  and  report  each  evening  on  the  quantity  distributed. 
I  find  no  printed  tickets  entitling  the  citizens  to  so  much  bread  before  Dec.  12th 
'93  (order  of  Cofnmune),  and  no  vote  of  the  Convention  on  the  subject  before 
March  15th  '95,  which  gives  each  manual  labourer  i^  lb.  of  bread  a  day,  and  all 
others  of  whatever  age  and  sex  i  lb.] 


DISCROWNED  363 

well  fixed  ;  but  then  no  grain  purchasable  by  them  :  bread  not  to 
be  had  except  by  Ticket  from  the  Mayor,  few  ounces  per  mouth 
daily  ;  after  long  swaying,  with  firm  grip,  on  the  chain  of  the 
Queue.  And  Hunger  shall  stalk  direful  ;  and  Wrath  and  Sus- 
picion, whetted  to  the  Preternatural  pitch,  shall  stalk  ;  as  those 
other  preternatural  '  shapes  of  Gods  in  their  wrathfulness '  were 
discerned  stalking,  '  in  glare  and  gloom  of  that  fire-ocean,'  when 
Troy  Town  fell  !  ^  — 

CHAPTER  HI 
DISCROWNED 
But  the  question  more  pressing  than  all  on  the  Legislator,  as  yet, 
is  this  third  :  What  shall  be  done  with  King  Louis  ?  ^ 

King  Louis,  now  King  and  Majesty  to  his  own  family  alone,  in 
their  own  Prison  Apartment  alone,  has  been  Louis  Capet  and  the 
Traitor  Veto  with  the  rest  of  France.  Shut  in  his  Circuit  of  the 
Temple,  he  has  heard  and  seen  the  loud  whirl  of  things ;  yells 

^  ['  Apparent  dira;  facies,  inimicaque  Trojae 

'  Numina  magna  Deum. 

'  Turn  vero  omne  mihi  visum  considere  in  ignes 

'  Ilium,  et  ex  imo  verti  Neptunia  Troja.' 

—Virgil,  /Eneid,  ii.  622-5.] 
^[Carlyle  rather  fails  to  see  that  the  question  'what  to  do  with  the  King'  was 
inextricably  bound  up  with  the  question  of  the  War  ;  was  it  to  continue  as  a  war 
of  defence  merely,  or  as  a  war  of  propaganda,  or  a  war  of  conquest?  The  really 
strong  men,  like  Danton,  knew  that  there  must  be  a  limit  both  to  propaganda  and 
conquest,  that  the  republic  must  one  day  fix  its  limits,  and  negotiate  with  the 
surrounding  '  tyrants,'  it  might  be  from  within  a  girdle  of  daughter  republics,  it 
might  be  from  the  limits  of  old  Gaul  (Rhine,  Alps,  Pyrenees).  For  either  of  these 
at  present  a  continuance  of  the  war  was  necessary,  and  the  King's  death  was  the 
surest  means  of  engaging  the  Convention  to  continue  the  war.  Nothing  else  could 
'  steep  them  to  the  lips.'  With  the  baser  Moiitagnards  like  Collot,  it  was  simply  a 
question  of  their  life  or  his  ;  only  as  absolute  masters  of  France  were  they  safe  for 
an  houi-  from  the  vengeance,  not  only  of  the  .Allies  but  of  the  majority  of  Frenchmen. 
With  the  Gironde  it  was  different ;  they  never  desired  a  war  of  conquest,  but  they 
were  wedded  to  the  idea  of  propaganda,  and  failed  to  see  that  peace  was  impossible 
while  propaganda  continued.  We  know  now  that  to  have  sent  the  Royal  Family 
to  Spain  would  not  have  endangered  the  armed  Republic  at  the  moment ;  but  what 
would  have  happened  in  Oct.  '95,  when  the  discredited  Convention  stank  in  the 
nostrils  even  of  the  Paris  mob?  Had  the  King  been  alive  then,  and  promised  a 
constitution,  he  would  certainly  liave  been  restored.  A  most  interesting  letter  from 
Lacu^e  to  Bourgoing  (French  ambassador  in  Spain)  is  quoted  in  Carnot's  Corresp. 
(i.  321).  'The  mad  idea  of  republicanising  Europe  is  extinct'  (this  in  December 
'92)  '  or  never  existed  except  in  a  few  hot  heads  ...  if  we  are  oftered  a  solid  peace 
'  and  the  recognition  of  the  Republic,  if  Belgium  and  Li^ge  are  left  to  go  their  own 
'  way,  if  they  will  abandon  to  us  Nice,  Savoy  and  .Avignon,  I  am  sure  that  the 
'  Convention  will  treat  the  ex-King  well.'] 


364        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

of  September  Massacres,  Brunswick  war-thunders  dying  off  in 
disaster  and  discomfiture  ;  he  passive,  a  spectator  merely  ;  waiting 
whither  it  would  please  to  whirl  with  him.  From  the  neighbour- 
ing windows,  the  curious,  not  without  pity,  might  see  him  walk 
daily,  at  a  certain  hour,  in  the  Temple  Garden,  with  his  Queen, 
Sister  and  two  Children,  all  that  now  belongs  to  him  in  this 
Earth. ^  Quietly  he  walks  and  waits  ;  for  he  is  not  of  lively  feel- 
ings, and  is  of  a  devout  heart.  The  wearied  Irresolute  has,  at 
least,  no  need  of  resolving  now.  His  daily  meals,  lessons  to  his 
Son,  daily  walk  in  the  Garden,  daily  game  at  ombre  or  drafts,  fill 
up  the  day  :  the  morrow  will  provide  for  itself. 

The  morrow  indeed  ;  and  yet  How  ?  Louis  asks.  How  ? 
France,  with  perhaps  still  more  solicitude,  asks.  How  .''  A  King 
dethroned  by  insurrection  is  verily  not  easy  to  dispose  of.  Keep 
him  prisoner,  he  is  a  secret  centre  for  the  Disaffected,  for  endless 
plots,  attempts  and  hopes  of  theirs.  Banish  him,  he  is  an  open 
centre  for  them  ;  his  royal  war-standard,  with  what  of  divinity  it 
has,  unrolls  itself,  summoning  the  world.  Put  him  to  death  ? 
A  cruel  questionable  extremity  that  too  :  and  yet  the  likeliest 
in  these  extreme  circumstances,  of  insurrectionary  men,  whose 
own  life  and  death  lies  staked  :  accordingly  it  is  said,  from  the 
last  step  of  the  throne  to  the  first  of  the  scaffold  there  is  short 
distance. 

But,  on  the  whole,  we  will  remark  here  that  this  business  of 
Louis  looks  altogether  different  now,  as  seen  over  Seas  and  at  the 
distance  of  forty-four  years,  from  what  it  looked  then,  in  France, 
and  struggling  confused  all  round  one.  For  indeed  it  is  a  most 
lying  thing  that  same  Past  Tense  always :  so  beautiful,  sad, 
almost  Elysian-sacred,  '  in  the  moonlight  of  Memory,'  it  seems  ; 
and  seems  only.  For  observe,  always  one  most  important  ele- 
ment is  surreptitiously  (we  not  noticing  it)  withdrawn  from  the 
Past  Time  :  the  haggard  element  of  Fear  !  Not  there  does  Fear 
dwell,  nor  Uncertainty,  nor  Anxiety  ;  but  it  dwells  here  ;  haunt- 
ing  us,  tracking  us ;  running   like   an  accursed  ground-discord 

1  Moore,  i.  123  ;  ii.  224,  &c. 


DISCROWNED  365 

through  all  the  music-tones  of  our  Existence  ; — making  the 
Tense  a  mere  Present  one  !  Just  so  is  it  with  this  of  Louis. 
Why  smite  the  fallen  ?  asks  Magnanimity,  out  of  danger  now. 
He  is  fallen  so  low  this  once-high  man  ;  no  criminal  nor  traitor, 
how  far  from  it ;  but  the  unhappiest  of  Human  Solecisms  ;  whom 
if  abstract  Justice  had  to  pronounce  upon,  she  might  well  become 
concrete  Pity,  and  pronounce  only  sobs  and  dismissal ! 

So  argues  retrospective  Magnanimity :  but  Pusillanimity,  pre- 
sent, prospective  ?  Reader,  thou  hast  never  lived,  for  months, 
under  the  rustle  of  Prussian  gallows-ropes ;  never  wert  thou 
portion  of  a  National  Sahara-waltz,  Twenty-five  millions  running 
distracted  to  fight  Brunswick  !  Knights  Errant  themselves,  when 
they  conquered  Giants,  usually  slew  the  Giants  :  quarter  was  only 
for  other  Knights  Errant,  who  knew  courtesy  and  the  laws  of 
battle.  The  French  Nation,  in  simultaneous,  desperate  dead-pull, 
and  as  if  by  miracle  of  madness,  has  pulled  down  the  most  dread 
Goliath,  huge  with  the  growth  of  ten  centuries ;  and  cannot 
believe,  though  his  giant  bulk,  covering  acres,  lies  prostrate, 
bound  with  peg  and  packthread,  that  he  will  not  rise  again, 
man-devouring ;  that  the  victory  is  not  partly  a  dream.  Terror 
has  its  scepticism ;  miraculous  victory  its  rage  of  vengeance. 
Then  as  to  criminality,  is  the  prostrated  Giant,  who  will  devour 
us  if  he  rise,  an  innocent  Giant  ?  Curate  Gregoire,  who  indeed 
is  now  Constitutional  Bishop  Gregoire,  asserts,  in  the  heat  of 
eloquence,  that  Kingship  by  the  very  nature  of  it  is  a  crime 
capital ;  that  Kings'  Houses  are  as  wild-beasts'  dens.^  Lastly 
consider  this :  that  there  is  on  record  a  Trial  of  Charles  First ! 
This  printed  Tiial  of  Cliarles  First  is  sold  and  read  everywhere 
at  present :  ^ — Quelle  spectacle  !      Thus  did  the   English   People 

1  Moniteur,  S(^ance  du  21  Sept. ,  An  ler  (1792).  [During  a  debate  on  the  question 
of  what  was  to  be  preserved,  what  abandoned,  of  the  old  laws  (Sept.  21st)  at  tlie 
second  session  of  the  Convention,  Grt^goire  said  :  '  Certainly  no  one  will  ever 
'  propose  to  us  to  preserve  the  fatal  race  of  Kings ;  we  know  too  well  that  all 
'  dynasties  have  never  been  anything  but  voracious  races,  living  exclusively  on 
'  human  flesli.  .  .  .  Kings  are  in  the  spiritual  world  what  monsters  are  in  the 
■  physical ;  courts  are  the  workshops  of  crime  and  the  dens  of  tyrants  '  [Moniteur, 
Sept.  22nd,  in  loc.  cit.).'] 

2  Moore's  Journal,  ii.  165.  [Remember  that  Carlyle  in  his  Cromwell  (edition 
1871,  ii.  94)  goes  out  of  his  way  to  glorify  the  execution  of  Charles  as  "  the  most 


366        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

judge  their  Tyrant,  and  become  the  first  of  Free  Peoples :  which 
feat,  by  the  grace  of  Destiny,  may  not  France  now  rival  ?  Scep- 
ticism of  terror,  rage  of  miraculous  victory,  sublime  spectacle  to 
the  universe, — all  things  point  one  fatal  way. 

Such  leading  questions,  and  their  endless  incidental  ones, — of 
September  Anarchists  and  Departmental  Guard  ;  of  Grain- Riots, 
plaintive  Interior  Ministers  ;  of  Armies,  Hassenfratz  dilapidations  ; 
and  what  is  to  be  done  with  Louis, — beleaguer  and  embroil  this 
Convention  ;  which  would  so  gladly  make  the  Constitution  rather. 
All  which  questions  too,  as  we  often  urge  of  such  things,  are  in 
growth ;  they  grow  in  every  French  head ;  and  can  be  seen 
growing  also,  very  curiously,  in  this  mighty  welter  of  Parliamen- 
tary Debate,  of  Public  Business  which  the  Convention  has  to  do. 
A  question  emerges,  so  small  at  first ;  is  put  off,  submerged ;  but 
always  reemerges  bigger  than  before.  It  is  a  curious,  indeed  an 
indescribable  sort  of  growth  which  such  things  have. 

We  perceive,  however,  both  by  its  frequent  reemergence  and 
by  its  rapid  enlargement  of  bulk,  that  this  Question  of  King 
Louis  will  take  the  lead  of  all  the  rest.  And  truly,  in  that  case, 
it  will  take  the  lead  in  a  much  deeper  sense.  For  as  Aaron's 
Rod  swallowed  all  the  other  serpents !  so  will  the  Foremost 
Question,  whichever  may  get  foremost,  absorb  all  other  questions 
and  interests  ;  and  from  it  and  the  decision  of  it  will  they  all, 
so  to  speak,  be  horn,  or  new-born,  and  have  shape,  physiognomy 
and  destiny  corresponding.  It  was  appointed  of  Fate  that,  in 
this  wide- weltering,  strangely  growing,  monstrous  stupendous 
imbroglio  of  Convention  Business,  the  grand  First-Parent  of  all 
the  questions,  controversies,  measures  and  enterprises  which  were 
to  be  evolved  there  to  the  world's  astonishment,  should  be  this 
Question  of  King  Louis. 

daring  action  of  any  body  of  men  to  be  met  with  in  History  .  .  .  honour  to  the 
brave  who  dehver  us  from  phantom  dynasties  ...  a  thing  whereof  flunkyism, 
cant,  cloth-worship,  or  whatever  ugly  name  it  have,  has  gone  about  incurably  sick 
ever  since." 

The  E.xecutive  Council  saw  the  parallel  too,  and  subsidised  a  wretched  poetaster 
called  Lebrun,  for  an  ode  in  which  Charles  is  represented  as  dragging  Louis  down 
to  Hell  (Aulard,  Recueil,  i.  303).] 


THE  LOSER  PAYS  367 

CHAPTER  IV 

THE  LOSER  PAYS 

The  Sixth  of  November  1 792  was  a  great  day  for  the  Republic  : 
outwardly,  over  the  Frontiers ;  inwardly,  in  the  Salle  de  Manege. 

Outwardly  :  for  Dumouriez,  overrunning  the  Netherlands,  did, 
on  that  day,  come  in  contact  with  Saxe-Teschen  and  the  Austrians ; 
Dumouriez  wide-winged,  they  wide-winged ;  at  and  around  the 
village  of  Jemappes,  near  Mons.  And  fire-hail  is  whistling  far 
and  wide  there,  the  great  guns  playing,  and  the  small ;  so  many 
green  Heights  getting  fringed  and  maned  with  red  Fire.  And 
Dumouriez  is  swept  back  on  this  wing,  and  swept  back  on  that, 
and  is  like  to  be  swept  back  utterly  ;  when  he  rushes  up  in  person, 
the  prompt  Polymetis  ;  speaks  a  prompt  word  or  two ;  and  then, 
with  clear  tenor-pipe,  '  uplifts  the  Hymn  of  the  Marseillese, 
ento7ma  la  Marseillaise,'  ten-thousand  tenor  or  bass  pipes  joining  ; 
or  say,  some  Forty-thousand  in  all ;  for  every  heart  leaps  at  the 
sound  ;  and  so  with  rhythmic  march-melody,  waxing  ever  quicker, 
to  double  and  to  treble  quick,  they  rally,  they  advance,  they 
rush,  death-defying,  man-devouring ;  carry  batteries,  redoutes, 
whatsoever  is  to  be  carried ;  and,  like  the  fire-whirlwind,  sweep 
all  manner  of  Austrians  from  the  scene  of  action.  Thus,  through 
the  hands  of  Dumom'iez,  may  Rouget  de  Lille,^  in  figurative 
speech,  be  said  to  have  gained,  miraculously,  like  another  Orpheus, 
by  his  Marseillese  fiddle-strings  (Jidihus  canons'),  a  Victory  of 
Jemappes  ;  and  conquered  the  Low  Countries. 

Young  General  Egalite,  it  would  seem,  shone  brave  among  the 
bravest  on  this  occasion.  Doubtless  a  brave  Egalite  ; — whom 
however  does  not  Dumouriez  rather  talk  of  oftener  than  need 
were  ?  The  Mother-Society  has  her  own  thoughts.  As  for  the 
Elder  Egalite  he  flies  low  at  this  time  ;  appears  in  the  Convention 
for  some  half-hour  daily,  with  rubicund,  preoccupied  or  impassive 
quasi-contemptuous  countenance  ;  and  then  takes  himself  away.- 

'  [Sic  for  Lisle.] 

2  Moore,  ii.  148.  [Several  times  during  December  the  Girondists  proposed  to 
include  Egalite  in  the  general  proscription  of  the  Bourbons,  or  at  least  to  banish 


368        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

The  Netherlands  are  conquered,  at  least  overrun.  Jacobin  mis- 
sionaries, your  Prolys,  Pereiras,  follow  in  the  train  of  the  Armies  ; 
also  Convention  Commissioners,  melting  church-plate,  revolu- 
tionising and  remodelhng, — among  whom  Danton,  in  brief  space, 
does  immensities  of  business  ;  not  neglecting  his  own  wages  and 
trade  profits,  it  is  thought.  Hassenfratz  dilapidates  at  home  ; 
Dumouriez  grumbles  and  they  dilapidate  abroad :  within  the 
walls  there  is  sinning,  and  without  the  walls  there  is  sinning.^ 
But  in  the  Hall  of  the  Convention,  at  the  same  hour  with  this 
victory  of  Jemappes,  there  went  another  thing  forward  :  ^  Report, 
of  great  length,  from  the  proper  appointed  Committee,  on  the 
Crimes  of  Louis.  The  Galleries  listen  breathless ;  take  comfort, 
ye  Galleries  :  Deputy  Valaze,  Reporter  on  this  occasion,  thinks 
Louis  very  criminal ;  and  that,  if  convenient,  he  should  be  tried  ; 
— poor  Girondin  Valaze,  who  may  be  tried  himself,  one  day ! 
Comfortable  so  far.  Nay  here  comes  a  second  Committee-reporter, 
Deputy  Mailhe,  with  a  Legal  Argument,  very  prosy  to  read  now, 
very  refreshing  to  hear  then,  That,  by  the  Law  of  the  Country, 
Louis  Capet  was  only  called  Inviolable  by  a  figure  of  rhetoric  ; 
but  at  bottom  was  perfectly  violable,  triable  ;  that  he  can,  and 

him  from  France,  but  he  was  saved  by  the  Mo>ifai;nards :  on  Dec.  i6th  a  decree 
against  him  was  actually  carried,  but  rescinded  three  days  later,  and  the  question 
did  not  come  up  again  till  the  spring  of  '93.  This  gave  the  Girondins  a  chance  to 
accuse  the  Montagnards  of  '  Orlfenism  '  [see  JMortimer-Ternaux,  v.  362).] 

1  Dumouriez,  M^moires,  iii.  174.  [The  army  with  which  Dumouriez  overran 
Belgium  amounted  in  all  to  some  80,000  ;  the  Austrians  under  Saxe-Teschen  had 
not  quite  30,000  ;  their  advanced  post  was  at  Mons  ;  about  40.000  of  Dumouriez's 
troops  were  actually  engaged  at  Jemappes,  and  after  the  victory  the  revolutionising 
of  Belgium  began  from  Mons ;  an  elected  Provisional  Gove:  nment  was  set  up  :  on 
November  14th  Dumouriez  entered  Brussels ;  the  remnants  of  all  Belgian  parties 
which  had  risen  against  Joseph  II.  coale-^ced  and  began  to  form  a  National  Republic. 
Before  all  things  the  Belgians  dreaded  the  influx  of  French  Assignats,  and  this  was 
just  what  the  Convention  Commissioners,  who  followed  in  the  wake  of  Dumouriez, 
determined  to  force  on  them.  Before  Brussels  had  been  long  in  French  hands  the 
question  was  raised  both  there  and  in  Paris,  '  Why  should  not  Holland  be  treated 
in  the  same  way  ?  '  Paris  was  full  of  Dutch  exiles  of  the  year  'S7  ;  the  declaration 
that  the  Scheldt  was  open  to  all  commerce  (Nov.  19th),  with  its  accompaniment,  [vid. 
infr.  383)  was  practically  a  declaration  of  war  on  the  Stadtholder,  and  Dumouriez 
himself  was  full  of  ardour  to  overrun  Holland.  Two  things  prevented  it  for  a  time, 
first  the  unexpected  firmness  of  England,  and  secondly  the  suspicion  already  felt 
in  Paris  against  Dumouriez.  In  his  own  Mi^moires  (iii.  234)  Dumouriez  professed 
to  regard  the  refusal  of  the  Convention  to  allow  him  to  attack  Holland  as  a  favour- 
ing of  Custine  (whose  plan  was  rather  an  invasion  of  Germany)  at  his  expense.  But 
he  did  his  best  to  resist  the  shameless  plundering  of  Belgium,  which  ensued  at  the 
hands  of  the  Convention  Commissioners,  and  therebv  earned  their  lasting  hatred 
{vid.  infr.  386).]  -[Nov.  6th.] 


THE  LOSER  PAYS  369 

even  should  be  tried.  •  This  Question  of  Louis,  emerging  so 
often  as  an  angry  confused  possibiUty,  and  submerging  again, 
has  emerged  now  in  an  articulate  shape.  ^ 

Patriotism  growls  indignant  joy.  The  so-called  reign  of  Equality 
is  not  to  be  a  mere  name,  then,  but  a  thing  !  Try  Louis  Capet .'' 
scornfully  ejaculates  Patriotism  :  Mean  criminals  go  to  the  gallows 
for  a  purse  cut ;  and  this  chief  criminal,  guilty  of  a  France  cut ; 
of  a  France  slashed  asunder  with  Clotho-scissors  and  Civil  war ;  OAa-oInjCS- 
with  his  victims  '  twelve-hundred  on  the  Tenth  of  August  alone ' 
lying  low  in  the  Catacombs,  fattening  the  passes  of  Argonne 
Wood,  of  Valmy  and  far  Fields ;  he,  such  chief  criminal,  shall 
not  even  come  to  the  bar  ? — For,  alas,  O  Patriotism !  add  we,  it 
was  from  of  old  said,  Jlie  loser  pays  !  It  is  he  who  has  to  pay 
all  scores,  run  up  by  whomsoever ;  on  him  must  all  breakages 
and  charges  fall ;  and  the  twelve-hundred  on  the  Tenth  of 
August  are  not  rebel  traitors,  but  victims  and  martyrs :  such  is 
the  law  of  quarrel. 

Patriotism,  nothing  doubting,  watches  over  this  Question  of  the 
trial,  now  happily  emerged  in  an  articulate  shape  ;  and  will  see  it 
to  maturity,  if  the  gods  permit.  With  a  keen  solicitude  Patriotism 
watches  ;  getting  ever  keener,  at  every  new  difficulty,  as  Girondins 
and  false  brothers  interpose  delays ;  till  it  get  a  keenness  as  of 
fixed-idea,  and  will  have  this  Trial  and  no  earthly  thing  instead 
of  it, — if  Equahty  be  not  a  name.  Love  of  Equality  ;  then 
scepticism  of  terror,  rage  of  victory,  sublime  spectacle  to  the 
universe :   all  these  things  are  strong. 

But  indeed  this  Question  of  the  Trial,  is  it  not  to  all  persons  a 
most  grave  one ;  filling  with  dubiety  many  a  Legislative  head ! 
Regicide  .''  asks  the  Gironde  Respectabihty  :  ^  To  kill  a  king,  and 

'  [A  special  commission  of  24  persons  had  been  appointed,  on  Oct.  ist,  to  report 
on  the  papers  found  in  the  Tuileries  as  to  the  King's  actions.  It  was  as  reporters 
of  this  Committee  that  Valaz6  and  Mailhe  spoke.  Mailhe's  report  concluded  with 
an  open  threat  that  the  Queen  should  be  tried  too,  but  by  the  ordinary  tribunals, 
not  by  the  Convention.] 

-[The  Gironde,  it  is  to  be  feared,  saw  in  the  King's  trial  merely  an  opportunity 
for  a  display  of  eloquence  on  their  own  parts,  and  a  theatrical  parade  of  the  power  of 
the  Republic.  Many  of  them  probably  at  heart  wished  to  save  him,  but  as  the 
terror  e.xercised  over  the  Convention  by  the  Commune,  with  the  mob  at  their 
backs,  increased,  few  dared  to  vote  anythmg  but  death.] 

VOL.  II.  24 


370        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

become  the  horror  of  respectable  nations  and  persons  ?  But  then 
also,  to  save  a  king  ;  to  lose  one's  footing  with  the  decided  Patriot ; 
the  undecided  Patriot,  though  never  so  respectable,  being  mere 
hypothetic  froth  and  no  footing  ? — The  dilemma  presses  sore  ;  and 
between  the  horns  of  it  you  wriggle  round  and  round.  Decision 
is  nowhere,  save  in  the  Mother-Society  and  her  Sons.  These 
have  decided,  and  go  forward :  the  others  wriggle  roimd  uneasily 
within  their  dilemma-horns,  and  make  way  nowhither. 

CHAPTER  V 

STRETCHING  OF  FORMULAS 

But  how  this  Question  of  the  Trial  grew  laboriously,  through  the 
weeks  of  gestation,  now  that  it  has  been  articulated  or  conceived, 
were  superfluous  to  trace  here.  It  emerged  and  submerged  among 
the  infinite  of  questions  and  embroilments.  The  Veto  of  Scoun- 
drels writes  plaintive  Letters  as  to  Anarchy  ;  '  concealed  Royalists,' 
aided  by  Hunger,  produce  Riots  about  Grain.  Alas,  it  is  but  a 
week  ago,  these  Girondins  made  a  new  fierce  onslaught  on  the 
September  Massacres  ! 

For,  one  day,  among  the  last  of  October,  Robespierre,  being 
summoned  to  the  tribune  by  some  new  hint  of  that  old  calumny 
of  the  Dictatorship,  was  speaking  and  pleading  there,  with  more 
and  more  comfort  to  himself ;  ^  till  rising  high  in  heart,  he  cried 
out  valiantly  :  Is  there  any  man  here  that  dare  specifically  accuse 
me  ?  "  Moi !  "  exclaimed  one.  Pause  of  deep  silence  :  a  lean 
angry  little  Figure,  with  broad  bald  brow,  strode  swiftly  towards 
the  tribune,  taking  papers  from  its  pocket :  "  I  accuse  thee, 
Robespierre," — I,  Jean  Baptiste  Louvet !  The  Seagreen  became 
tallowgreen  ;  shrinking  to  a  corner  of  the  tribune  :  Danton  cried, 
"  Speak,  Robespierre,  there  are  many  good  citizens  that  listen  ;  " 
but  the  tongue  refused  its  office.  And  so  Louvet,  with  a  shrill 
tone,  read  and  recited  crime  after  crime :  dictatorial  temper, 
exclusive  popularity,  bullying  at  elections,  mob-retinue,  Septem- 
ber  Massacres ; — till    all    the    Convention   shrieked   again,   and 

i[Oct.  29th.] 


STRETCHING  OF  FORMULAS        371 

had  almost  indicted  the  Incorruptible  there  on  the  spot. 
Never  did  the  Incorruptible  run  such  a  risk.  Louvet,  to  his 
dying  day,  will  regret  that  the  Gironde  did  not  take  a  bolder 
attitude,  and  extinguish  him  there  and  then. 

Not  so,  however :  the  Incorruptible,  about  to  be  indicted  in 
this  sudden  manner,  could  not  be  refused  a  week  of  delay. 
That  week  he  is  not  idle ;  nor  is  the  Mother-Society  idle, — 
fierce-tremulous  for  her  chosen  son.  He  is  ready  at  the  day  with 
his  written  Speech  ;  smooth  as  a  Jesuit  Doctor's  ;  and  convinces 
some.  And  now .''  Why  now  lazy  Vergniaud  does  not  rise  with 
Demosthenic  thunder ;  poor  Louvet,  unprepared,  can  do  little 
or  nothing :  Barere  proposes  that  these  comparatively  despic- 
able '  personalities  '  be  dismissed  by  order  of  the  day  !  Order  of 
the  day  it  accordingly  is.  Barbaroux  cannot  even  get  a  hearing  ; 
not  though  he  rush  down  to  the  Bar,  and  demand  to  be  heard 
there  as  a  petitioner.^  The  Convention,  eager  for  public  busi- 
ness (with  that  first  articulate  emergence  of  the  Trial  just  coming 
on),  dismisses  these  comparative  miseres  and  despicabilities ; 
splenetic  Louvet  must  digest  his  spleen,  regretfully  forever : 
Robespierre,  dear  to  Patriotism,  is  dearer  for  the  dangers  he  has 
run.- 

This  is  the  second  grand  attempt  by  our  Girondin  Friends  of 
Order,  to  extinguish  that  black-spot  in  their  domain ;  and  we 
see  they  have  made  it  far  blacker  and  wider  than  before ! 
Anarchy,  September  Massacre :  it  is  a  thing  that  lies  hideous  in 

1  Louvet,  M^moires  (Paris,  1823),  p.  52 ;  Moniteur  (Stances,  29  Octobre,  5 
Novembre,  1792) ;  Moore,  ii.  178,  &c. 

-[Louvet's  attack  on  Robespierre  was  on  the  occasion  of  the  reading  of  Roland's 
"Report  on  the  State  of  the  Capital  since  Aug.  loth, "  a  report  which  gravely 
incriminated  Robespierre.  The  Gironde  was  taken  by  surprise  by  this  action  of 
their  enfant  terrible ;  it  was  a  great  tactical  mistake  to  allow  Robespierre  five 
days  to  prepare  his  defence,  which  he  delivered  Nov.  4th  ;  bad  speaker  and  debater 
as  he  was,  it  was  not  difficult  for  him  to  refute  much  of  Louvet's  frothy  rhetoric  ; 
he  proved,  e.s^.,  that  he  had  no  intimate  relations  with  Marat,  he  tentatively  defended 
the  September  massacre  ;  iie  showed  that  Louvet  was  really  attackmg  Pans  througli 
his  person.  Both  speeches  may  be  read  in  full  in  Stephens'  Orators,  and  with  them 
should  be  read  Danton's  excellent  short  speech  of  Oct.  29th,  making  for  peace  and 
union  of  parties.  Note  that  Louvet's  was  not  the  first  attack  on  Robespierre. 
On  Sept.  2Sth  Rebecqui  and  Lasource  had  both  said  much  the  same,  but  Louvet's 
was  an  elaborately  prepared  impeachment ;  note  also  that  Barere  here  commenced 
his  famous  career  of  '  weathercock'  (see  Mortimer-Ternaux,  iv.  298,  327).] 


372        THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION 

the  general  imagination ;  very  detestable  to  the  undecided 
Patriot,  of  Respectability :  a  thing  to  be  harped  on  as  often  as 
need  is.  Harp  on  it,  denounce  it,  trample  it,  ye  Girondin 
Patriots  : — and  yet  behold,  the  black-spot  will  not  trample  down  ; 
it  will  only,  as  we  say,  trample  blacker  and  wider :  fools,  it  is 
no  black-spot  of  the  surface,  but  a  well-spring  of  the  deep ! 
Consider  rightly,  it  is  the  Apex  of  the  everlasting  Abyss,  this 
black-spot,  looking  up  as  water  through  thin  ice  ; — say,  as  the 
region  of  Nether  Darkness  through  your  thin  film  of  Gironde 
Regulation  and  Respectability :  trample  it  not,  lest  the  film 
break,  and  then —  ! 

The  truth  is,  if  our  Gironde  Friends  had  an  understanding  of 
it,  where  were  French  Patriotism,  with  all  its  eloquence,  at  this 
moment,  had  not  that  same  great  Nether  Deep,  of  Bedlam, 
Fanaticism  and  Popular  wrath  and  madness,  risen  unfathomable 
on  the  Tenth  of  August  ?  French  Patriotism  were  an  eloquent 
Reminiscence ;  swinging  on  Prussian  gibbets.  Nay,  where,  in 
few  months,  were  it  still,  should  the  same  great  Nether  Deep 
subside  ? — Nay,  as  readers  of  Newspapers  pretend  to  recollect, 
this  hatefulness  of  the  September  Massacre  is  itself  partly  an 
after-thought :  readers  of  Newspapers  can  quote  Gorsas  and 
various  Brissotins  approving  of  the  September  Massacre,  at  the 
time  it  happened ;  and  calling  it  a  salutary  vengeance.^  So 
that  the  real  grief,  after  all,  were  not  so  much  righteous  horror, 
as  grief  that  one's  own  power  was  departing  ?  Unhappy 
Girondins  ! 

In  the  Jacobin  Society,  therefore,  the  decided  Patriot  com- 
plains that  here  are  men  who  with  their  private  ambitions  and 
animosities    will    ruiii    Liberty,    Equality  and   Brotherhood,    all 

1  See  Hist.  Pari.  xvii.  401 ;  newspapers  by  Gorsas  and  others  cited  iHcl.  428. 
[Gorsas,  CourrierdesD^partements,  No.  /^{cf.  also  No.  6).  'A  hundred  thousand 
'citizens,  or  rather  all  Paris,  went  to  the  prisons  which  were  encumbered  with 
'  brigands,  with  the  intention  of  sacrificing  them  all  to  the  public  safety  ;  but  the 
'innocent  were  saved,  only  the  conspirators  and  rascals  have  been  killed.'  Bir6 
(Legende  des  Girondins,  p.  127)  quotes  passages  in  the  same  strain  from  Louvet's 
Senfinelle,  the  Monitciir  (Sept.  6th),  Thermomi/ir-  du  jour  (Sept.  4th),  Feuille 
Villaoeoise  (Sept.  6th),  and  Carra's  Annalcs  Patriotiqiies.  Even  Condorcet  in 
Chronique  de  Paris  (Sept.  4th)  speaks  of  "  the  people  being  compelled  to  exercise 
this  vengeance."     (6/.  also  Mortiraer-Ternaux,  iv.  411,  sqq.y^ 


STRETCHING  OF  FORMULAS        373 

three :  they  check  the  spirit  of  Patriotism  ;  throw  stumbling- 
blocks  in  its  way ;  and  instead  of  pushing  on,  all  shoulders  at 
the  wheel,  will  stand  idle  there,  spitefully  clamouring  what  foul 
ruts  there  are,  what  rude  jolts  we  give  !  To  which  the  Jacobin 
Society  answers  with  angry  roar  ; — with  angry  shriek,  for  there 
are  Citoyennes  too,  thick  crowded  in  the  galleries  here.  Citoy- 
ennes  who  bring  their  seam  with  them,  or  their  knitting-needles  ; 
and  shriek  or  knit  as  the  case  needs  ;  famed  Tricuteuses,  Patriot 
Knitters ;  Mei-e  Duchesse,^  or  the  like  Deborah  and  Mother  of 
the  Faubourgs,  giving  the  key-note.  It  is  a  changed  Jacobin 
Society ;  and  a  still  changing.  Where  Mother  Duchess  now 
sits,  authentic  Duchesses  have  sat.  High-rouged  dames  went 
once  in  jewels  and  spangles ;  now,  instead  of  jewels,  you  may 
take  the  knitting-needles  and  leave  the  rouge :  the  rouge  will 
gradually  give  place  to  natural  brown,  clean  washed  or  even  un- 
washed :  and  Demoiselle  Theroigne  herself  get  scandalously 
fustigated.  Strange  enough ;  it  is  the  same  tribune  raised  in 
mid-air,  where  a  high  Mirabeau,  a  high  Barnave  and  Aristocrat 
Lameths  once  thundei*ed  ;  whom  gradually  your  Brissots,  Guadets, 
Vergniauds,  a  hotter  style  of  Patriots  in  bonnet  rouge,  did  displace  ; 
red  heat,  as  one  may  say,  superseding  light.  And  now  your 
Brissots  in  turn,  and  Brissotins,  Rolandins,  Girondins,  are  becom- 
ing supernumerary ;  must  desert  the  sittings,  or  be  expelled : 
the  light  of  the  Mighty  Mother  is  burning  not  red  but  blue  ! — 
Provincial  Daughter-Societies  loudly  disapprove  these  things  ; 
loudly  demand  the  swift  reinstatement  of  such  eloquent  Giron- 
dins, the  swift  'erasure  of  Marat,^  radiation  de  Marat.'  The 
Mother-Society,    so    far   as    natural   reason   can    predict,    seems 

i[I  cannot  find  any  satisfactory  account  of  this  woman,  whom  Mercier  in  the 
'  Nouveau  Paris '  calls  rarc/iidtickesse  (evidently  a  street  nickname).  She  was  a 
market  woman  of  great  stature  and  ferocity,  who  led  the  claque  in  the  galleries. 
There  were  several  publications  under  the  title  of  Mere  Duchesne,  and  eighteen 
consecutive  issues  were  printed  on  the  same  blue  paper  as  Pfere  Duchesne,  and 
signed  '  Pt^trouille  Mackefer,  Femme  du  Pere  Duchesne. '  The  first  of  these  was 
Feb.  20th  '91,  the  day  of  the  departure  of  Mesdames  Tantes  for  Rome  [see  Tourneux, 
Bibliographic  de  I'Hist.  de  Paris  pendant  la  Rt5v.  (Paris,  1890— 1900),  ii.  758-9).] 

-[Dec.  i6th.  This  refers  to  an  address  of  the  SociiU'  of  Chatellerault  (in 
Poitou),  in  which  the  demand  was  made  for  the  expulsion  of  Marat  and  Robes- 
pierre.    (Journal  des  D6bats  des  Jacobins,  No.  321,  Dec.  18th.)] 


374        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

ruining  herself.     Nevertheless  she  has  at  all  crises  seemed  so ; 
she  has  a  pretematural  life  in  her,  and  will  not  ruin. 

But,  in  a  fortnight  more,  this  great  Question  of  the  Trial, 
while  the  fit  Committee  is  assiduously  but  silently  working  on 
it,  receives  an  unexpected  stimulus.  Our  readers  remember 
poor  Louis's  turn  for  smith-work :  how,  in  old  happier  days,  a 
certain  Sieur  Gamain  of  Versailles  was  wont  to  come  over  and 
instruct  him  in  lock-making ; — often  scolding  him,  they  say,  for 
his  numbness.  By  whom,  nevertheless,  the  royal  Apprentice 
had  learned  something  of  that  craft.  Hapless  Apprentice ; 
perfidious  Master-Smith !  For  now,  on  this  20th  of  November 
1 792,  dingy.  Smith  Gamain  comes  over  to  the  Paris  Municipality 
over  to  Minister  Roland,  with  hints  that  he.  Smith  Gamain, 
knows  a  thing ;  that,  in  May  last,  when  traitorous  Correspond- 
ence was  so  brisk,  he  and  the  royal  Apprentice  fabricated  an 
'  Iron  Press,  Armoire  de  Fer,'  cunningly  inserting  the  same  in  a 
wall  of  the  royal  chamber  in  the  Tuileries  ;  invisible  under  the 
wainscot ;  where  doubtless  it  still  sticks !  Perfidious  Gamain, 
attended  by  the  proper  Authorities,  finds  the  wainscot  panel 
which  none  else  can  find ;  wrenches  it  up  ;  discloses  the  Iron 
Press, — full  of  Letters  and  Papers  !  Roland  clutches  them  out ; 
conveys  them  over  in  towels  to  the  fit  assiduous  Committee, 
which  sits  hard  by.  In  towels,  we  say,  and  without  notarial 
inventory  ;    an  oversight  on  the  part  of  Roland. 

Here,  however,  are  Letters  enough :  which  disclose  to  a  de- 
monstration the  Correspondence  of  a  traitorous  self-preserving 
Court ;  and  this  not  with  Traitors  only,  but  even  with  Patriots, 
so-called  !  Barnave's  treason,  of  Correspondence  with  the  Queen, 
and  friendly  advice  to  her,  ever  since  that  Varennes  Business,  is 
hereby  manifest :  how  happy  that  we  have  him,  this  Barnave, 
lying  safe  in  the  Prison  of  Grenoble,  since  September  last,  for 
he  had  long  been  suspect !  Talleyrand's  treason,  many  a  man's 
treason,  if  not  manifest  hereby,  is  next  to  it.  Mirabeau's  treason  : 
wherefore  his  Bust  in  the  Hall  of  the  C-onvention  '  is  veiled  with 
gauze,'   till   we  ascertain.     Alas,   it   is   too  ascertainable !     His 


STRETCHING  OF  FORMULAS        375 

Bust  in  the  Hall  of  the  Jacobins,  denounced  by  Robespierre 
from  the  tribune  in  mid-air,  is  not  veiled,  it  is  instantly  broken 
to  sherds ;  a  Patriot  mounting  swiftly  with  a  ladder,  and  shiver- 
ing it  down  on  the  floor  ; — it  and  others  ;  amid  shouts.^  Such  is 
their  recompense  and  amount  of  wages,  at  this  date :  on  the 
principle  of  supply  and  demand.  Smith  Gamain,  inadequately 
recompensed  for  the  present,  comes,  some  fifteen  months  after, 
with  a  humble  Petition ;  setting  forth  that  no  sooner  was  that 
important  Iron  Press  finished  off  by  him,  than  (as  he  now  be- 
thinks himself)  Louis  gave  him  a  large  glass  of  wine.  Which 
large  glass  of  wine  did  produce  in  the  stomach  of  Sieur  Gamain 
the  terriblest  effects,  evidently  tending  towards  death,  and  was 
then  brought  up  by  an  emetic  ;  but  has,  notwithstanding,  entirely 
ruined  the  constitution  of  Sieur  Gamain  ;  so  that  he  cannot  work 
for  his  family  (as  he  now  bethinks  himself).  The  recompense  of 
which  is  '  Pension  of  Twelve-hundred  francs,'  and  *  honourable 
mention.'  So  different  is  the  ratio  of  demand  and  supply  at 
different  times.^ 

Thus,  amid  obstructions  and  stimulating  furtherances,  has  the 
Question  of  the  Trial  to  grow  ;  emerging  and  submerging ;  fos- 
tered by  solicitous  Patriotism.  Of  the  Orations  that  were  spoken 
on  it,  of  the  painfully  devised  Forms  of  Process  for  managing  it, 
the  Law  Arguments  to  prove  it  lawful,  and  all  the  infinite  floods 
of  Juridical  and  other  ingenuity  and  oratory,  be  no  syllable  re- 
ported in  this  History.     Lawyer  ingenuity  is  good :   but  what 

^Journal  des  D^bats  des  Jacobins  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xxii.  296).  [The  papers  in 
the  Iron  Press  disclosed  the  venality,  or  suggested  venality,  of  every  leading 
Revolutionist  except  Robespierre:  in  particular  they  disclosed  the  'scheme'  of 
Mirabeau,  and  the  efforts  of  Bertrand  and  his  friends  to  imitate  it.  It  was 
evidently  a  common  belief  that  Roland  manipulated  the  papers  and  suppressed 
evidence  against  his  own  friends,  though  Lafayette  (M^m.  ii.  434)  is  not  a  good 
witness  to  that  effect.  Morris  (i.  592)  distinctly  says  that  '  nothing  about  Lafayette 
was  found,  which  did  not  breathe  the  purest  sentiments  of  freedom  ;  this  corre- 
spondence (Lafayette's)  therefore  is  kept  secret,  while  he  stands  accused  of  designs 
in  conjunction  with  the  King  to  enslave  his  country  '.  Roland  was  at  once  accused 
by  the  Jacobins  and  defended  himself  well  at  the  Bar  of  the  Convention,  Nov.  21st.] 

■^[Gamain  [vid.  supr.,  note  i.  40)  had  sent  a  report  to  the  Legislative  Assembly 
to  the  same  effect  after  the  return  of  the  King  from  Varennes.  It  was  not  till 
May  1794  that  the  Convention  accorded  Gamain  the  pension  here  referred  to,  but 
made  it  date  from  May  22nd  1792,  the  date  of  the  alleged  '  poisoning. '  Gamain 
died  1795- ] 


376         THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

can  it  profit  here  ?  If  the  truth  must  be  spoken,  O  august 
Senators,  the  only  Law  in  this  case  is  :  Fee  victis,  The  loser  pays ! 
Seldom  did  Robespierre  say  a  wiser  word  than  the  hint  he  gave 
to  that  effect,  in  his  oration.  That  it  was  needless  to  speak  of 
Law ;  that  here,  if  never  elsewhere,  our  Right  was  Might.  An 
oration  admired  almost  to  ecstasy,  by  the  Jacobin  Patriot :  ^  who 
shall  say  that  Robespierre  is  not  a  thorough-going  man  ;  bold  in 
Logic  at  least  ?  To  the  Uke  effect,  or  still  more  plainly,  spake 
young  Saint-Just,  the  black-haired,  mild-toned  youth.  Danton 
is  on  mission,  in  the  Netherlands,  during  this  preliminary  work. 
The  rest,  far  as  one  reads,  welter  amid  Law  of  Nations,  Social 
Contract,  Juristics,  Syllogistics  ;  to  us  barren  as  the  East  wind. 
In  fact,  what  can  be  more  unprofitable  than  the  sight  of  Seven- 
hundred  and  Forty-nine  ingenious  men  struggling  with  their 
whole  force  and  industry,  for  a  long  course  of  weeks,  to  do  at 
bottom  this :  To  stretch  out  the  old  Formula  and  Law  Phrase- 
ology, so  that  it  may  cover  the  new,  contradictory,  entirely  un- 
coverable  Thing  ?  Whereby  the  poor  Formula  does  but  crack, 
and  one's  honesty  along  with  it !  The  thing  that  is  palpably 
hoi,  burning,  wilt  thou  prove  it,  by  syllogism,  to  be  a  freezing- 
mixture  .^  This  of  stretching  out  Formulas  till  they  crack,  is, 
especially  in  times  of  swift  change,  one  of  the  sorrowfullest 
tasks  poor  Humanity  has. 

CHAPTER  VI 

AT  THE  BAR 

Meanwhile,  in  a  space  of  some  five  weeks,  we  have  got  to 
another  emerging  of  the  Trial,  and  a  more  practical  one  than 
ever. 

On  Tuesday,  eleventh  of  December,  the  King's  Trial  has 
emerged,  very  decidedly :  into  the  streets  of  Paris ;  in  the  shape 

1  [Dec.  3rd.  Robespierre's  speech  was  for  him  unusually  practical,  though  he 
felt  compelled  to  drag  in  his  wonted  references  to  Rousseau.  He  well  pointed  out 
that  '  this  is  not  a  trial,  nor  are  you  judges,  you  are  merely  statesmen  choosing  a 
'  particular  course  ;  you  are  making  too  much  fuss  about  it,  also  :  your  object  should 
'be  to  show  contempt  for  Kings.  Either  the  King  is  condemned  already,  or  the 
'  Republic  is  condemned  for  dethroning  him  '  {see  Stephens'  Orators  of  the  Fr. 
Rev.).] 


AT  THE  BAR  377 

of  that  green  Carriage  of  Mayor  Chambon,  within  which  sits  the 
King  himself,  with  attendants,  on  his  way  to  the  Convention 
Hall !  Attended,  in  that  green  carriage,  by  Mayors  Chambon, 
Procureurs  Chaumette ;  ^  and  outside  of  it  by  Commandants 
Santerre,  with  cannon,  cavalry  and  double  row  of  infantry ;  all 
Sections  under  arms,  strong  Patrols  scouring  all  streets ;  so  fares 
he,  slowly  through  the  dull  drizzling  weather :  and  about  two 
o'clock  we  behold  him,  '  in  walnut-coloured  greatcoat,  redingule 
noisette,'  descending  through  the  Place  Vendome,  towards  that 
Salle  de  Manege ;  to  be  indicted,  and  judicially  interrogated. 
The  mysterious  Temple  Circuit  has  given  up  its  secret ;  which 
now,  in  this  wabiut-coloured  coat,  men  behold  with  eyes.  The 
same  bodily  Louis  who  was  once  Louis  the  Desired,  fares  there  : 
hapless  King,  he  is  getting  now  towards  port ;  his  deplorable 
farings  and  voyagings  draw  to  a  close.  What  duty  remains 
to  him  henceforth,  that  of  placidly  enduring,  he  is  fit  to  do. 
The  singular  Procession  fares  on ;  in  silence,  says  Prudhomme, 
or  amid  growlings  of  the  Marseillese  Hyrmi ;  in  silence,  ushers 
itself  into  the  Hall  of  the  Convention,  Santerre  holding  Louis's 
arm  with  his  hand.  Louis  looks  round  him,  with  composed  air, 
to  see  what  kind  of  Convention  and  Parliament  it  is.  Much 
changed  indeed : — since  February  gone  two  years,  when  our 
Constituent,  then  busy,  spread  fleur-de-lys  velvet  for  us ;  and 
we  came  over  to  say  a  kind  word  here,  and  they  all  started  up 
swearing  Fidelity  ;  and  all  France  started  up  swearing,  and  made 
it  a  Feast  of  Pikes  ;  which  has  ended  in  this  !  Barrere,^  who 
once  '  wept '  looking  up  from  his  Editor's-Desk,  looks  down  now 
from  his  President's-Chair,  with  a  list  of  Fifty-seven  Questions ; 
and  says,  dry-eyed:  "Louis,  you  may  sit  down."  Louis  sits 
down :  it  is  the  very  seat,  they   say,  same  timber  and  stuffing, 

1  [And  Coulombeau,  Secretary  of  the  CoOT/«K«^.  The  dates  are  these  :  Nov.  6th, 
first  report  of  Committee  on  Louis'  '  crimes  ; '  Nov.  13th— 20th,  debate  whether  and 
how  he  shall  be  tried  ;  Dec.  3rd,  decree  that  he  shall  be  tried  by  the  Convention  ; 
Dec.  nth,  first  appearance  at  the  Bar;  Dec.  26th,  second  appearance  at  the  Bar, 
and  Deseze's  defence;  Jan.  15th,  i6th  to  17th,  19th,  the  voting.] 

2 [It  was  Barere  who  contributed  largely  to  seal  the  King's  fate,  by  proposing 
that  the  voting  should  be  open  and  not  by  ballot ;  it  was  Danton  who  carried  the 
rejection  of  Lanjuinais'  motion,  that  (as  by  the  old  French  law)  three-fourths  of  the 
votes  should  be  necessary  for  condemnation  to  death.] 


378        THE  FKENCH  REVOLUTION 

from  which  he  accepted  the  Constitution,  amid  dancing  and 
illumination,  autumn  gone  a  year.  So  much  woodwork  remains 
identical ;  so  much  else  is  not  identical.  Louis  sits  and  listens, 
with  a  composed  look  and  mind. 

Of  the  Fifty-seven  Questions  we  shall  not  give  so  much  as  one. 
They  are  questions  captiously  embracing  all  the  main  Documents 
seized  on  the  Tenth  of  August,  or  found  lately  in  the  Iron  Press ; 
embracing  all  the  main  incidents  of  the  Revolution  History  ; 
and  they  ask,  in  substance,  this :  Louis,  who  wert  King,  art  thou 
not  guilty  to  a  certain  extent,  by  act  and  written  document,  of 
trying  to  continue  King  ?  Neither  in  the  Answers  is  there  much 
notable.  Mere  quiet  negations,  for  most  part ;  an  accused  man 
standing  on  the  simple  basis  of  iVo  ;  I  do  not  recognise  that 
document ;  I  did  not  do  that  act ;  or  did  it  according  to  the  law 
that  then  was.  Whereupon  the  Fifty-seven  Questions,  and 
Documents  to  the  number  of  a  Hundred  and  Sixty-two,^  being 
exhausted  in  this  manner,  Barrere  finishes,  after  some  three 
hours,  with  his :  "  Louis,  I  invite  you  to  withdraw." 

Louis  withdraws,  under  Municipal  escort,  into  a  neighbouring 
Committee-room ;  having  first,  in  leaving  the  bar,  demanded  to 
have  Legal  Counsel.  He  declines  refreshment,  in  this  Committee- 
room  ;  then,  seeing  Chaumette  busy  with  a  small  loaf  which  a 
grenadier  had  divided  with  him,  says,  he  will  take  a  bit  of  bread. 
It  is  five  o'clock  ;  and  he  had  breakfasted  but  slightly,  in  a  morning 
of  such  drumming  and  alarm.  Chaumette  breaks  his  half-loaf: 
the  King  eats  of  the  crust ;  mounts  the  green  Carriage,  eating ; 
asks  now,  what  he  shall  do  with  the  crumb  ?  Chaumette's 
clerk  takes  it  from  him  ;  flings  it  out  into  the  street.    Louis  says, 

1  [The  heads  of  the  accusation  may  be  thus  summed  up  : — 
(i)  Participation  in  BouilM's  "  plots  against  the  Nation." 

(2)  Payment  of  wages  to  the  former  Body  Guards  after  they  had  emigrated. 

(3)  Favouring  of  emigration  generally. 

(4)  Buying  up  corn  in  order  to  create  a  famine. 

(5)  Project  of  reversing  the  Constitution  contrary  to  his  oath. 

Bertrand  wrote  from  London,  offering  proof  that  the  King  had  ordered  all  pay- 
ments to  Emigrt's  to  cease  since  July  '91  (Bertrand  ii.  364,  etc.).  Lally-ToUeiidal, 
Malouet,  and  Necker  also  wrote  and  published  defences  of  the  King ;  and  tried  to 
have  them  scattered  all  over  France. 

No  copy  of  the  indictment  was  given  to  the  King  before  his  first  interrogatory.] 


AT  THE  BAR  379 

It  is  pity  to  fling  out  bread,  in  a  time  of  dearth.  "  My  grand- 
mother," remarks  Chaumette,  "  used  to  say  to  me.  Little  boy, 
never  waste  a  crumb  of  bread  ;  you  cannot  make  one."  "  Mon- 
sieur Chaumette,"  answers  Louis,  "  your  grandmother  seems  to 
have  been  a  sensible  woman."  ^  Poor  innocent  mortal ;  so 
quietly  he  waits  the  drawing  of  the  lot ; — fit  to  do  this  at  least 
well ;  Passivity  alone,  without  Activity,  sufficing  for  it !  He 
talks  once  of  travelling  over  France  by  and  by,  to  have  a  geo- 
graphical and  topographical  view  of  it ;  ^  being  from  of  old  fond 
of  geography. — The  Temple  Circuit  again  receives  him,  closes  on 
him ;  gazing  Paris  may  retire  to  its  hearths  and  coffeehouses,  to 
its  clubs  and  theatres  :  the  daiTip  Darkness  has  sunk,  and  with 
it  the  drumming  and  patrolling  of  this  strange  Day. 

Louis  is  now  separated  from  his  Queen  and  Family  ;  ^  given  up 
to  his  simple  reflections  and  resources.  Dull  lie  these  stone 
walls  round  him ;  of  his  loved  ones  none  with  him.  '  In  this 
state  of  uncertainty,'  providing  for  the  worst,  he  writes  his  Will : 
a  Paper  which  can  still  be  read  ;  full  of  placidity,  simplicity, 
pious  sweetness.  The  Convention,  after  debate,  has  granted 
him  Legal  Counsel,  of  his  own  choosing.  Advocate  Target  feels 
himself  '  too  old,'  being  turned  of  fifty-four  ;  and  declines.*  He 
had  gained  great  honour  once,  defending  Rohan  the  Necklace- 
Cardinal  ;  but  will  gain  none  here.  Advocate  Tronchet,^  some 
ten  years  older,  does  not  decline.     Nay  behold,  good  old  Males- 

1  Prudhomnie's  Newspaper  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xxi.  314). 

^[Carlyle  has  mixed  up  the  events  of  the  two  drives  to  the  Convention  (those  of 
nth  and  26th). 

The  story  about  the  intended  journey  is  (i)  ludicrous  ;  the  King  evidently  had 
no  illusions  about  his  fate;  (2)  wrongly  quoted  from  the  R^v,  de  Paris  (No.  181), 
which  only  says  the  King  said  he  '  had  once  intended  to  make  such  a  journey  ' — a 
very  different  thing.] 

^[This  was  by  the  order  of  the  Commune,  and  was  fiercely  opposed  in  the  Con- 
vention, as  were  all  the  orders  of  the  Commune  for  the  cruel  treatment  of  and 
espionage  on  the  King.] 

■*  [Target  however  was  not  too  old  to  accept  a  judgeship  in  the  new  Rdgime 
(Forneron,  i.  88).] 

'[Tronchet,  born  1726,  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Paris  Bar  before  the  Revolution, 
sat  for  the  Tiers-Atat  of  Paris  in  the  States-General,  and  helped  to  organise  the 
New  Judicial  System;  sat  afterwards  in  the  Council  of  Ancients,  and,  after  18th 
Brumaire,  became  President  of  the  Cour  de  Cassation  ;  died  1806.] 


380        THE  FKENCH  EEVOLUTION 

herbes  steps  forward  voluntarily ;  to  the  last  of  his  fields,  the 
good  old  hero  !  He  is  gray  with  seventy  years  :  he  says,  "  I  was 
twice  called  to  the  Council  of  him  who  was  my  Master,  when  all 
the  world  coveted  that  honour ;  and  I  owe  him  the  same  service 
now,  when  it  has  become  one  which  many  reckon  dangerous." 
These  two,  with  a  younger  Deseze,^  whom  they  will  select  for 
pleading,  are  busy  over  that  Fifty-and-sevenfold  Indictment, 
over  the  Hundred  and  Sixty-two  Documents  ;  Louis  aiding  them 
as  he  can. 

A  great  Thing  is  now  therefore  in  open  progress ;  all  men,  in 
all  lands,  watching  it.  By  what  Forms  and  Methods  shall  the 
Convention  acquit  itself,  in  such  manner  that  there  rest  not  on  it 
even  the  suspicion  of  blame  .''  Difficult  that  will  be  !  The  Con- 
vention, really  much  at  a  loss,  discusses  and  deliberates.  All 
day  from  morning  to  night,  day  after  day,  the  Tribune  drones 
with  oratory  on  this  matter ;  one  must  stretch  the  old  Formula 
to  cover  the  new  Thing.  The  Patriots  of  the  Mountain,  whetted 
ever  keener,  clamour  for  despatch  above  all ;  the  only  good  Form 
will  be  a  swift  one.  Nevertheless  the  Convention  deliberates ; 
the  Tribune  drones, — drowned  indeed  in  tenor,  and  even  in 
treble,  from  time  to  time  ;  the  whole  Hall  shrilling  up  round  it 
into  pretty  frequent  wrath  and  provocation.  It  has  droned  and 
shrilled  wellnigh  a  fortnight,  before  we  can  decide,^  this  shrill- 
ness getting  ever  shriller.  That  on  Wednesday  26th  of  December, 
Louis  shall  appear  and  plead.  His  Advocates  complain  that  it  is 
fatally  soon  ;  which  they  well  might  as  Advocates  :  but  without 
remedy  ;  to  Patriotism  it  seems  endlessly  late. 

On  Wednesday  therefore,  at  the  cold  dark  hour  of  eight  in 
the  morning,  all  Senators  are  at  their  post.^  Indeed  they  warm 
the  cold  hour,  as  we  find,  by  a  violent  effervescence,  such  as  is 
too  common  now  ;  some  Louvet  or  Buzot  attacking  some  Tallien, 

1  [Deseze,  born  1748,  came  from  Bordeaux  and  made  a  great  name  at  the  Paris 
Bar.  He  returned  to  Bordeaux  after  the  King's  death,  was  arrested  there  for 
having  defended  Louis,  and  kept  in  prison  till  Thermidor ;  lived  in  seclusion  till 
the  Restoration,  when  he  became  President  of  the  Cour  de  Cassation  ;  died  1828. 
{See  letters  from  him  printed  in  Mortimer-Ternaux,  v.  567.)] 

2  [Dec.  15th.]  3  [Dec.  26th.  j 


AT  THE  BAR  381 

Chabot ;  and  so  the  whole  Mountain  effervescing  against  the 
whole  Gironde.  Scarcely  is  this  done,  at  nine,  when  Louis  and 
his  three  Advocates,  escorted  by  the  clang  of  arms  and  Santerre's 
National  force,  enter  the  Hall. 

Deseze  unfolds  his  papers ;  honourably  fulfilling  his  perilous 
office,  pleads  for  the  space  of  three  hours.  ^  An  honourable 
Pleading, '  composed  almost  overnight ; '  courageous  yet  discreet ; 
not  without  ingenuity,  and  soft  pathetic  eloquence :  Louis  fell 
on  his  neck,  when  they  had  withdrawn,  and  said  with  tears, 
"  Mon  pauvre  Deseze  ! "  Louis  himself,  before  withdrawing,  had 
added  a  few  words,  "perhaps  the  last  he  would  utter  to  them  : " 
how  it  pained  his  heart,  above  all  things,  to  be  held  guilty  of 
that  bloodshed  on  the  Tenth  of  August ;  or  of  ever  shedding  or 
wishing  to  shed  French  blood.  So  saying,  he  withdrew  from 
that  Hall ; — having  indeed  finished  his  work  there.  Many  are 
the  strange  errands  he  has  had  thither ;  but  this  strange  one  is 
the  last. 

And  now,  why  will  the  Convention  loiter  ?  Here  is  the 
Indictment  and  Evidence  ;  here  is  the  Pleading :  does  not  the 
rest  follow  of  itself.''  The  Mountain,  and  Patriotism  in  general, 
clamoxu-s  still  louder  for  despatch ;  for  Permanent-session,  till 
the  task  be  done.  Nevertheless  a  doubting,  apprehensive  Con- 
vention decides  that  it  will  still  deliberate  first ;  that  all  Mem- 
bers, who  desire  it,  shall  have  leave  to  speak. — To  your  desks, 
therefore,  ye  eloquent  Members  !  Down  with  your  thoughts, 
your  echoes  and  hearsays  of  thoughts  ;  now  is  the  time  to  show 
oneself;  France  and  the  Universe  listens  !  Members  are  not 
wanting :  Oration,  spoken  Pamphlet  follows  spoken  Pamphlet, 
with  what  eloquence  it  can :  President's  List  swells  ever  higher 
with  names  claiming  to  speak  ;  from  day  to  day,  all  days  and  all 
hours,  the  constant  Tribune  drones  ;  —shrill  Galleries  supplying, 

i[Morellet  (i.  406)  says  that  Deseze  took  a  day  and  two  nights  to  compose  his 
speech,  and  that  the  King  insisted  on  striking  out  many  pathetic  passages,  includ- 
ing the  peroration,  as  he  considered  it  beneath  his  dignity  to  bewail  his  misfortune. 
The  defence  (the  substance  of  which  may  be  read  in  Mortinier-Ternaux,  v.  282-9) 
ends  with  the  words,  "  Reflect  that  it  is  History  that  will  judge  you,  and  that 
hers  will  be  the  judgment  of  all  future  ages."] 


382        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

very  variably,  the  tenor  and  treble.  It  were  a  dull  tone 
otherwise. 

The  Patriots,  in  Mountain  and  Galleries,  or  taking  counsel 
nightly  in  Section-house,  in  Mother-Society,  amid  their  shrill 
Tricoteuses,  have  to  watch  lynx-eyed ;  to  give  voice  when  need- 
ful ;  occasionally  very  loud.  Deputy  Thuriot,  he  who  was  Advo- 
cate Thuriot,  who  was  Elector  Thuriot,  and  from  the  top  of  the 
Bastille  saw  Saint- Antoine  rising  like  the  ocean ;  this  Thuriot 
can  stretch  a  Formula  as  heartily  as  most  men.  Cruel  Billaud  is 
not  silent,  if  you  incite  him.  Nor  is  cruel  Jean- Bon  ^  silent ; 
a  kind  of  Jesuit  he  too ; — write  him  not,  as  the  Dictionaries  too 
often  do,  Jamhon,  which  signifies  mere  Ham  ! 

But,  on  the  whole,  let  no  man  conceive  it  possible  that  Louis 
is  not  guilty.  The  only  question  for  a  reasonable  man  is,  or 
was  :  Can  the  Convention  judge  Louis  .''  Or  must  it  be  the  whole 
People  ;  in  Primary  Assembly,  and  with  delay  }  Always  delay, 
ye  Girondins,^  false  hommes  d'itat !  so  bellows  Patriotism,  its 
patience  almost  failing. — But  indeed,  if  we  consider  it,  what  shall 
these  poor  Girondins  do  ?  Speak  their  conviction  that  Louis  is 
a  Prisoner  of  War ;  and  cannot  be  put  to  death  without  injustice, 
solecism,  peril  ?  Speak  such  conviction ;  and  lose  utterly  your 
footing  with  the  decided  Patriot !  Nay  properly  it  is  not  even 
a  conviction,  but  a  conjecture  and  dim  puzzle.  How  many  poor 
Girondins  are  sure  of  but  one  thing :  That  a  man  and  Girondin 

1  [Jean  Bon-Saint-Andr6,  born  at  Montauban  1749  (a  Protestant  pastor  before  the 
Revolution),  sat  for  the  Lot  in  the  Convention  ;  member  of  Cotniti'  de  Saint  Public, 
where  he  confined  himself  to  naval  matters ;  was  present  in  person  at  the  battle 
of  June  ist  '94,  hence  Canning's  famous  lines  on  him  in  the  Anti-Jacobin, 
' .   .  .   in  battles  much  delighting, 
'  He  fled  full  soon  on  the  first  of  June, 
'  But  he  bade  the  rest  keep  fighting.' 
He  seems  to  have  been  honest,  and  not  inefficient ;  but  the  task  of  reorganising 
the  Navy,  after  its  practical  destruction  by  the  Revolution,  was  hopeless.     The 
Directory  gave  him  a  Consular  appointment  at  Smyrna,  there  he  was  taken  prisoner 
by  the  Turks  ;  he  served  the  Empire  as  a  prefect,  and  died  1813.      His  letters  to 
the  ComiU  de  Salut  Public  (printed  in  Aulard's  Recueil)  strike  me  not  only  as 
more  honest,  but  as  more  free  both  from  bloodthirstiness  and  absurdity  than 
those  of  most  of  his  colleagues.] 

^[The  leading  Girondist  argument  in  favour  of  delay  was  the  certainty  ot  war 
with  England  and  Spain  if  Louis  were  executed — a  bad  argument  to  use  against 
the  Monta^ards.  (See  especially  Vergniaud's  speech  Dec.  31st,  and  Brissot's  Jan. 
ist.)] 


AT  THE  BAR  383 

ought  to  have  footing  somewhere,  and  to  stand  firmly  on  it ; 
keeping  well  with  the  Respectable  Classes !  This  is  what  con- 
viction and  assurance  of  faith  they  have.  They  must  wriggle 
painfully  between  their  dilemma-horns.^ 

Nor  is  France  idle,  nor  Europe.  It  is  a  Heart  this  Convention, 
as  we  said,  which  sends  out  influences,  and  receives  them.  A 
King's  Execution,  call  it  Martyrdom,  call  it  Punishment,  were  an 
influence  ! — Two  notable  influences  this  Convention  has  already 
sent  forth  over  all  Nations  ;  much  to  its  own  detriment.  On 
the  19th  of  November,  it  emitted  a  Decree,  and  has  since  con- 
firmed and  unfolded  the  details  of  it.  That  any  Nation  which 
might  see  good  to  shake  off"  the  fetters  of  Despotism  was  thereby, 
so  to  speak,  the  Sister  of  France,  and  should  have  help  and  coun- 
tenance. A  Decree  much  noised  of  by  Diplomatists,  Editors, 
International  Lawyers ;  such  a  Decree  as  no  living  Fetter  of 
Despotism,  nor  Person  in  Authority  anywhere,  can  approve  of! 
It  was  Deputy  Chambon  the  Girondin  who  propounded  this 
Decree  ; — at  bottom  perhaps  as  a  flourish  of  rhetoric.^ 

The  second  influence  we  speak  of  had  a  still  poorer  origin  :  in 
the  restless  loud-rattling  slightly-furnished  head  of  one  Jacob 
Dupont  from  the  Loire  country.  The  Convention  is  speculating 
on  a  plan  of  National  Education  :  Deputy  Dupont  in  his  speech 
says,  "  I  am  free  to  avow,  M.  le  President,  that  I  for  my  part  am 

^See  Extracts  from  their  Newspapers,  in  Hist.  Pari.  xxi.  1-38,  &c. 

^ [This  was  not  '  Chambon's'  (Carlyle  means  Cambon's)  decree  at  all.  When 
the  news  of  Jemappes  arrived  there  was  some  discussion  as  to  how  it  should  be 
celebrated  ;  and  this  decree,  the  substance  of  which  was  proposed  by  Ruhl,  sup- 
ported by  Brissot,  Barras,  Treilhard  and  Larevelliere,  was  the  outcome  of  it. 
The  words  were  finally  drafted  thus,  "  The  Convention,  in  the  name  of  the  French 
"  nation,  declares  that  it  will  grant  fraternity  and  succour  to  all  peoples  who  desire 
"their  liberty,  and  charges  its  P^xecutive  power  to  give  to  its  Generals  the  orders 
"  necessary  to  carry  such  succour  to  such  peoples,  and  to  defend  all  citizens  who 
"  have  been  or  shall  be  persecuted  for  liberty's  sake  "  (Nov.  19th). 

Such  a  decree  was  a  dead  letter  at  once  wherever  the  political  interests  of 
France  worked  against  it :  it  would  have  been  of  course  nothing  less  than  a  declara- 
tion of  war  against  all  the  Governments  of  the  World.  .\\.  once  however  one  tinds 
French  diplomatists  apologising  for  it  everywhere,  as  a  '  snatch  vote,'  carried  by  a 
few  fanatics.  Much  more  important  was  Cambon's  decree  of  Dec.  15th,  that, 
■wherever  French  arms  pi:iii'traled,\h*i  e.\\s\.\ng  government  should  be  overturned, 
and  the  people  convoked  in  primary  assemblies,  to  set  up  a  provisional  govern- 
ment under  the  protection  of  France.] 


384        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

an  Atheist,"  ^ — thinking  the  world  might  like  to  know  that.  The 
French  world  received  it  without  commentary  ;  or  with  no  audible 
commentary,  so  loud  was  France  otherwise.  The  Foreign  world 
received  it  with  confutation,  with  horror  and  astonishment  ;  ^  a 
most  miserable  influence  this  !  And  now  if  to  these  two  were 
added  a  third  influence  and  sent  pulsing  abroad  over  all  the 
Earth  :  that  of  Regicide  ? 

Foreign  Courts  interfere  in  this  Trial  of  Louis  ;  Spain,  Eng- 
land :  not  to  be  listened  to  ;  though  they  come,  as  it  were,  at 
least  Spain  comes,  with  the  olive-branch  in  one  hand,  and  the 
sword  without  scabbard  in  the  other.  But  at  home  too,  from  out 
of  this  circumambient  Paris  and  France,  what  influences  come 
thick-pulsing  !  Petitions  flow  in  ;  pleading  for  equal  justice,  in 
a  reign  of  so-called  Equality.  The  living  Patriot  pleads  ; — O  ye 
National  Deputies,  do  not  the  dead  Patriots  plead  ?  The  Twelve- 
hundred  that  lie  in  cold  obstruction,  do  not  they  plead ;  and 
petition,  in  Death's  dumb-show,  from  their  narrow  house  there, 
more  eloquently  than  speech  ?  Crippled  Patriots  hop  on  crutches 
round  the  Salle  de  Manege,  demanding  justice.  The  Wounded 
of  the  Tenth  of  August,  the  Widows  and  Orphans  of  the  Killed 
petition  in  a  body  ;  and  hop  and  defile,  eloquently  mute,  through 
the  Hall :  one  wounded  Patriot,  unable  to  hop,  is  borne  on  his 
bed  thither,  and  passes  shoulder-high,  in  the  horizontal  posture.^ 
The  Convention  Tribune,  which  has  paused  at  such  sight,  com- 
mences again, — droning  mere  Juristic  Oratory.  But  out  of  doors 
Paris  is  piping  ever  higher.  Bull-voiced  St.-Huruge  is  heard  ; 
and  the  hysteric  eloquence  of  Mother  Duchess  ;   '  Varlet,*  Apostle 

iMoniteur,  Stance  du  14  Dec.  1792.  [Jacob  Louis  Dupont  was  deputy  to 
Legislative  and  Convention  for  Indre-et-Loire,  and  must  be  carefully  distinguished 
from  the  great  economist,  Dupont  de  Nemours.] 

2  Mrs.  Hannah  More,  Letter  to  Jacob  Dupont  (London,  1793) ;  &c.  &c. 

5  Hist.  Pari.  xxii.  131  ;  Moore,  ik.c.  [From  Christmas  onwards  the  ferment  in 
Paris  was  very  dangerous.  The  Commune  ordered  all  churches  to  be  shut  on 
Christmas-eve.  Mortimer-Ternaux  (v.  420)  quotes  many  violent  motions  in  the 
various  Section  Committees,  which  prove  how  much  the  lives  of  the  Moderates 
were  in  danger.  The  Cummune  was  quite  prepared  to  raise  an  insurrection  if  the 
King  were  not  condemned.  Pache  played  mto  its  hands,  and  allowed  it  to  fetch 
thirty-two  pieces  of  cannon  from  Saint- Denis.] 

*  [This  Jean  Varlet,  a  former  clerk  in  the  post  office,  who  had  got  up  the  petition 
for  the  King's  deposition  on  Aug.  6th,  and  who  took  part  in  all  H6bertist  move- 
ments till  the  spring  of  '94,  nmst  not  be  confused  with  Charles  Varlet  who  was  one 


AT  THE  BAR  385 

of  Liberty,'  with  pike  and  red  cap,  flies  hastily,  carrying  his 
oratorical  folding-stool.  Justice  on  the  Traitor  !  cries  all  the 
Patriot  world.  Consider  also  this  other  cry,  heard  loud  on  the 
streets  :  "  Give  us  Bread,  or  else  kill  us  !  "  Bread  and  Equality  ; 
Justice  on  the  Traitor,  that  we  may  have  Bread  ! 

The  Limited  or  undecided  Patriot  is  set  against  the  Decided. 
Mayor  Chambon  heard  of  dreadful  rioting  at  the  Tkedfre  dc  la 
Nalioti  :  it  had  come  to  rioting,  and  even  to  fist-work,  between 
the  Decided  and  the  Undecided,  touching  a  new  Drama  called 
Ami  des  Lois  (Friend  of  the  Laws).'  One  of  the  poorest  Dramas 
ever  written  ;  but  which  had  didactic  applications  in  it  ;  where- 
fore powdered  wigs  of  Friends  of  Order  and  black  hair  of  Jacobin 
heads  are  flying  there ;  and  Mayor  Chambon  hastens  with  Santerre, 
in  hopes  to  quell  it.  Far  from  quelling  it,  our  poor  Mayor  gets 
so  '  squeezed,'  says  the  Report,  and  likewise  so  blamed  and  bullied, 
say  we, — that  he,  with  regret,  quits  the  brief  Mayoralty  altogether, 
'his  lungs  being  affected,'  This  miserable  Ami  des  Lois  is  de- 
bated of  in  the  Convention  itself ;  so  violent,  mutually-enraged, 
are  the  Limited  Patriots  and  the  Unlimited.- 

Between  which  two  classes,  are  not  Aristocrats  enougli,  and 
Crypto- Aristocrats,  busy  ?  Spies  running  over  from  London  with 
important  Packets  ;  spies  pretending  to  run  !  One  of  these  latter, 
Viard  was  the  name  of  him,  pretending  to  accuse  Roland,  and  even 
the  Wife  of  Roland  :  to  the  joy  of  Chabot  and  the  Mountain.  But 
the  Wife  of  Roland  came,  being  summoned,  on  the  instant,  to  the 
Convention  Hall  ;  came,  in  her  high  clearness  ;  and,  with  few 
clear  words,  dissipated  this  Viard  into  despicability  and  air  ;  all 


of  the  few  Moderates  who  sal  in  the  Convention  for  Pas-de-Calais,  and  who  had 
been  a  Colonel  of  Engineers  before  the  Revolution,  had  protested  against  June 
2nd  and  was  imprisoned  till  Thermidor.] 

i[Jan.  i2th,  1793.  h.s.ya.'s  i' A  mi  des  Lois  \ya.s,  'periormQddX  the  Theatre  de  la 
Nation  for  the  first  time  on  Jan.  2nd,  by  the  best  actors  of  the  Comedie  Fran(aise 
(not  yet  arrested),  and  was  suspended  by  the  order  of  the  Commune  on  nth. 
It  teemed  with  allusions  to  the  tyranny  of  the  Montagne,  which  were  rapturously 
taken  up  by  the  respectable  audience.  On  12th  there  was  a  great  riot  at  the 
theatre,  as  the  audience  called  for  the  same  play.  The  play  is  printed  in  Motand, 
■  Th^-itre  de  la  R(5volution  '  (Paris,  1877),  and  is  analysed  in  Uauban's  Paris  en  1793 
(p.  i6,  sqq.\     (For  Chambon's  accident  vid,  supr.,  361.)] 

-Ibid,  xxiii.  31,  48,  &c. 

VOL.    II.  5^5 


386         THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Friends  of  Order  applauding.  ^  So,  with  Theatre-riots,  and  '  Bread, 
or  else  kill  us  ; '  with  Rage,  Hunger,  preternatural  Suspicion,  does 
this  wild  Paris  pipe.  Roland  grows  ever  more  querulous,  in  his 
Messages  and  Letters  ;  rising  almost  to  the  hysterical  pitch. 
Marat,  whom  no  power  on  Earth  can  prevent  seeing  into  traitors 
and  Rolands,  takes  to  bed  for  three  days  ;  almost  dead,  the  in- 
valuable People's-Friend,  with  heartbreak,  with  fever  and  head- 
ache :  '  O  Peuple  bahillard,  si  tu  xavais  agir,  People  of  Babblers,  if 
'  thou  couldst  but  act  ! ' 

To  crown  all,  victorious  Dumouriez,  in  these  New-year's  days, 
is  arrived  in  Paris  ;  - — one  fears,  for  no  good.  He  pretends  to  be 
complaining  of  Minister  Pache,  and  Hassenfratz  dilapidations  ; 
to  be  concerting  measures  for  the  spring  Campaign  :  one  finds 
him  much  in  the  company  of  the  Girondins.  Plotting  with  them 
against  Jacobinism,  against  Equality,  and  the  Punishment  of 
Louis  ?  We  have  Letters  of  his  to  the  Convention  itself.  Will 
he  act  the  old  Lafayette  part,  this  new  victorious  General  ?  Let 
him  withdraw  again  ;  not  undenounced."^ 

And  still,  in  the  Convention  Tribune,  it  drones  continually, 
mere  Juristic  Eloquence,  and  Hypothesis  without  Action  ;  and 
there  are  still  fifties  on  the  President's  List.  Nay  these  Gironde 
Presidents  give  their  own  party  preference  :  we  suspect  they  play 
foul  with  the  List ;  men  of  the  Mountain  camiot  be  heard.  And 
still  it  drones,  all  through  December  into  January  and  a  New 
year  ;  and  there  is  no  end  !     Paris  pipes  round  it ;  multitudinous  ; 

1  Moniteur,  Stance  du  7  Ddc.  1792.  [Chabot  accused  Roland  and  Fauchet  of 
corresponding  with  the  Itmign's.  Viard  was  probably  a  tool  of  Roland's  enemies  ; 
Mme  Roland  interviewed  him,  discovered  as  much,  and  said  so  to  the  Convention. 
The  real  reason  of  the  bitter  hostility  to  the  Rolands  was  the  knowledge  that  they 
alone  had  seen  all  the  secret  papers  in  the  Tuileries.  {See  Dauban,  Elude  sur  Mme 
Roland,  civ.  sgq.)'] 

2  [Jan.  ist— 26th.] 

5  Dumouriez,  M^moires,  iii.  p.  304.  [Dumouriez  lost  all  popularity  by  this 
journey  to  Paris.  His  object  was  to  save  the  King,  and  to  get  the  decree  of  Dec. 
15th  (which  upset  all  his  wise  plans  for  pacifying  Belgium)  revoked  ;  perhaps  also 
to  throw  for  the  Dictatorship.  He  arrived  in  Paris  Jan.  ist,  and  remained  quite 
quiet  till  his  departure  on  26th.  The  first  open  attack  on  him  was  not  till  the  day 
after  his  departure  (by  Hassenfratz  at  the  Jacobins,  Journal  des  Dibats  des  Jac. , 
Nos.  346-7).  His  bolt  in  the  Revolution  was  shot,  and  he  returned  to  his  army  a 
thoroughly  distrusted  and  discontented  man.] 


THE  THREE  VOTINGS  387 

ever  higher,  to  the  note  of  the  whirlwind.  Paris  will  '  bring 
cannon  from  Saint-Denis  ; '  there  is  talk  of  '  shutting  the  Barriers/ 
— to  Roland's  horror. 

Whereupon,  behold,  the  Convention  Tribune  suddenly  ceases 
droning  :  we  cut  short,  be  on  the  List  who  likes ;  and  make  end. 
On  Tuesday  next,  the  Fifteenth  of  January  179.'',  it  shall  go  to 
the  Vote,  name  by  name  ;  and  one  way  or  other,  this  great  game 
play  itself  out ! 

CHAPTER  VII 

THE  THREE  VOTINGS  i 

Is  Louis  Capet  guilty  of  conspiring  against  Liberty  .''  Shall  our 
Sentence  be  itself  final,  or  need  ratifying  by  Appeal  to  the  People  } 
If  guilty,  what  Punishment  ?  This  is  the  form  agreed  to,  after 
uproar  and  '  several  hours  of  tumultuous  indecision  : '  these  are 
the  Three  successive  Questions,  whereon  the  Convention  shall 
now  pronounce.  Paris  floods  round  their  Hall ;  multitudinous, 
many-sounding.  Europe  and  all  Nations  listen  for  their  answer. 
Deputy  after  Deputy  shall  answer  to  his  name  :  Guilty  or  Not 
guilty  } 

As  to  the  Guilt  there  is,  as  above  hinted,  no  doubt  in  the  mind 
of  Patriot  men.  Overwhelming  majority  pronounces  Guilt ;  the 
unanimous  Convention  votes  for  Guilt,  only  some  feeble  twenty- 
eight  voting  not  Innocence,  but  refusing  to  vote  at  all.  Neither 
does  the  Second  Question  prove  doubtful,  whatever  the  Girondins 
might  calculate.  Would  not  Appeal  to  the  People  be  another 
name  for  civil  war  ?  ^  Majority  of  two  to  one  answers  that  there 
shall  be  no  Appeal  :  this  also  is  settled.      Loud  Pati-iotism,  now 

'  [Jan.  15th,  720  present,  683  voted  guilty. 

Jan.  15th,  717  present,  484  voted  against  appeal. 

Jan.  i6th-i7th,  721  present,  361  voted  death,  26  \oted  death  with  some  reserva- 
tion. 

Jan.  19th,  690  present,  380  voted  against  respite. 

Jan.  20th  (early  in  the  morning),  it  was  voted  to  carry  out  the  sentence  within 
24  hours.] 

"[The  Girondins  as  a  whole  were  inclined  to  '  appeal  to  the  people,'  but  the  weak- 
ness of  their  position  was  that  it  was  just  this  principle  of  the  Referendum  which 
they  were  anxious  to  oppose  on  other  matters.  Robespierre  was  strong  for  the 
Referendum  as  a  principle,  biu  against  this  particular  use  of  it.] 


388         THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

at  ten  o'clock,  may  hush  itself  for  the  night ;  and  retire  to  its 
bed  not  without  hope.  Tuesday  has  gone  well.  On  the  morrow 
comes.  What  Punishment  ?     On  the  morrow  is  the  tug  of  war. 

Consider  therefore  if,  on  this  Wednesday  morning,  there  is  an 
affluence  of  Patriotism  ;  if  Paris  stands  a-tiptoe,  and  all  Deputies 
are  at  their  post !  Seven-hundred  and  Forty-nine  honourable 
Deputies  ;  only  some  twenty  absent  on  mission,  Duchatel  and 
some  seven  others  absent  by  sickness.  Meanwhile  expectant 
Patriotism  and  Paris  standing  a-tiptoe,  have  need  of  patience. 
For  this  Wednesday  again  passes  in  debate  and  effervescence  ; 
Girondins  proposing  that  a  '  majority  of  three-fourths  '  shall  be 
required  ;  Patriots  fiercely  resisting  them.  Danton,  who  has  just 
got  back  from  mission  in  the  Netherlands,  does  obtain  '  order  of 
the  day '  on  this  Girondin  proposal  ;  nay  he  obtains  further  that 
we  decide  sans  dcsemparer,  in  Permanent-session,  till  we  have 
done. 

And  so,  finally,  at  eight  in  the  evening  this  Thii'd  stupendous 
Voting,  by  roll-call  or  appel  )iomiual,  does  begin. ^  What  Punish- 
ment ?  Girondins  undecided.  Patriots  decided,  men  afraid  of 
Royalty,  men  afraid  of  Anarchy,  must  answer  here  and  now. 
Infinite  Patriotism,  dusky  m  the  lamp-light,  floods  all  corridors, 
crowds  all  galleries  ;  sternly  waiting  to  hear.  Shrill-sounding 
Ushers  summon  you  by  Name  and  Department ;  you  must  I'ise  to 
the  Tribune,  and  say. 

Eye-witnesses  have  represented  this  scene  of  the  Third  Voting, 
and  of  the  votings  that  grew  out  of  it ;  a  scene  protracted,  like  to 
be  endless,  lasting,  with  few  brief  intervals,  from  Wednesday  till 
Sunday  morning, — as  one  of  the  strangest  seen  in  the  Revolution. 
Long  night  wears  itself  into  day,  morning's  paleness  is  spread  over 
all  faces  ;  and  again  the  wintry  shadows  sink,  and  the  dim  lamps 
are  lit :  but  through  day  and  night  and  the  vicissitudes  of  hours. 
Member  after  Member  is  mounting  continually  those  Tribune- 
steps  ;  pausing  aloft  there,  in  the  clearer  upper  light,  to  speak 
his  Fate-word  ;  then  diving  down  into  the  dusk  antl  tlirong  again. 

i[Jan.  i6lh— 17th.] 


THE  THREE  VOTINGS  389 

Like  Phantoms  in  the  hour  of  midnight  ;  most  spectral,  pande- 
monial !  Never  did  President  Vergniaud,^  or  any  terrestrial 
President,  superintend  the  like.  A  King's  Life,  and  so  much  else 
that  depends  thereon,  hangs  trembling  in  the  balance.  Man 
after  man  mounts  ;  the  buzz  hushes  itself  till  he  have  spoken : 
Death  ;  Banishment  ;  Imprisonment  till  the  Peace.  Many  say. 
Death  ;  with  what  cautious  well-studied  phrases  and  paragraphs 
they  could  devise,  of  explanation,  of  enforcement,  of  faint  recom- 
mendation to  mercy.  Many  too  say.  Banishment ;  something  short 
of  Death.  The  balance  trembles,  none  can  yet  guess  whitherward. 
Whereat  anxious  Patriotism  bellows  :  irrepressible  by  Ushers. 

The  poor  Girondins,  many  of  them,  under  such  fierce  bellowing 
of  Patriotism,  say  Death  ;  justifying,  moivvatit,  that  most  miserable 
word  of  theirs  by  some  brief  casuistry  and  Jesuitry.  Vergniaud 
himself  says.  Death  ;  justifying  by  Jesuitry.  Rich  Lepelletier 
Saint-Fargeau  had  been  of  the  Noblesse,  and  then  of  the  Patriot 
Left  side,  in  the  Constituent ;  and  had  argued  and  reported, 
there  and  elsewhere,  not  a  little,  against  Capital  Punishment : 
nevertheless  he  now  says.  Death  ;  a  word  which  may  cost  him 
dear.  Manuel  did  surely  rank  with  the  Decided  in  August  last ; 
but  he  has  been  sinking  and  backsliding  ever  since  September 
and  the  scenes  of  September.  In  this  Convention,  above  all,  no 
word  he  could  speak  would  find  favour ;  he  says  now,  Banishment ; 
and  in  mute  wrath  quits  the  place  forever,— much  hustled  in  the 
corridors.  Philippe  Egalite  votes,  in  his  soul  and  conscience, 
Death  :  at  the  sound  of  which  and  of  whom,  even  Patriotism 
shakes  its  head ;  and  there  runs  a  groan  and  shudder  through 
this  Hall  of  Doom.  Robespierre's  vote  cannot  be  doubtful ;  his 
speech  is  long.  Men  see  the  figure  of  shrill  Sieyes  ascend ; 
hardly  pausing,  passing  merely,  this  figure  says,  "  La  Mort  sans 
phrase,  Death  without  phrases  ; "  and  fares  onward  and  downward. 
Most  spectral,  pandemonial ! 

'  [Vergniaud  had  been  elected  President  on  Jan.  loth.  The  voting  was  by  de- 
putations, i.e.,  the  Deputation  of  the  Haute-Garonne  voted  first,  then  Gers,  then 
Gironde,  etc.  Every  deputy  had  to  make  his  way  to  the  Hall  through  a  howling 
inob  of  the  worst  scum  of  Paris.  The  Convention  was  no  more  really  free  than 
on  the  following  May  31st  and  June  2nd.     {See  Mortimer-Ternaux,  v.  41.)] 


390        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

And  yet  if  the  Reader  fancy  it  of  a  funereal,  sorrowful  or  even 
grave  character,  he  is  far  mistaken  :  'the  Ushers  in  the  Mountain 
quarter/  says  Mercier,  'had  become  as  Box-keepers  at  the  Opera;' 
opening  and  shutting  of  Galleries  for  privileged  persons,  for 
'  D'Orleans  Egalite's  mistresses,'  or  other  high-dizened  women 
of  condition,  rustling  with  laces  and  tricolor.  Gallant  Deputies 
pass  and  repass  thitherward,  treating  them  with  ices,  refreshments 
and  small-talk  ;  the  high-dizened  heads  beck  responsive ;  some 
have  their  card  and  pin,  pricking  down  the  Ayes  and  Noes,  as  at 
a  game  of  Rouge-et-Nuir.  Further  aloft  reigns  Mere  Duchesse 
with  her  unrouged  Amazons ;  she  cannot  be  prevented  making 
long  Hahas,  when  the  vote  is  not  La  Mart.  In  these  Galleries 
there  is  refection,  drinking  of  wine  and  brandy  '  as  in  open  tavern, 
en  pleine  tabagie.'  Betting  goes  on  in  all  coffeehouses  of  the 
neighbourhood.  But  within  doors,  fatigue,  impatience,  uttermost 
weariness  sits  now  on  all  visages ;  lighted  up  only  from  time  to 
time  by  turns  of  the  game.  Members  have  fallen  asleep  ;  Ushers 
come  and  awaken  them  to  vote  :  other  Members  calculate  whether 
they  shall  not  have  time  to  run  and  dine.  Figures  rise,  like 
phantoms,  pale  in  the  dusky  lamp-light ;  utter  from  this  Tribune, 
only  one  word:  Death.  'Tout  est  opliqiie,'  says  Mercier,  'The 
world  is  all  an  optical  shadow,'  ^  Deep  in  the  Thursday  night, 
when  the  Voting  is  done,  and  Secretaries  are  summing  it  up, 
sick  Duchatel,  more  spectral  than  another,  comes  borne  on  a 
chair,  wrapt  in  blankets,  in  '  nightgown  and  nightcap,'  to  vote 
for  Mercy :  one  vote  it  is  thought  may  turn  the  scale. 

Ah  no  !  In  profoundest  silence.  President  Vergniaud,  with  a 
voice  flill  of  soiTow,  has  to  say  :  "  I  declare,  in  the  name  of  the 
Convention,  that  the  punishment  it  pronounces  on  Louis  Capet 
is  that  of  Death."  ^  Death  by  a  small  majority  of  Fifty-three. 
Nay,  if  we  deduct  from  the  one  side,  and  add  to  the  other,  a 
certain  Twenty-six,  who  said  Death  but  coupled  some  faintest  in- 
effectual surmise  of  mercy  with  it,  the  majority  will  be  but  Otie.'-^ 

'  Mercier,  Nouveau  Paris,  vi.  156-9 ;  Montgaillard,  iii.  348-87 ;  Moore,  ii.  548. 
'■^[8  P.M.  17th.] 

■■'•[Several  absent  members,  among  whom  were  Collot,  Merlin,  Lasource,  Grt^- 
goire,  H^rault,  wrote  begging  thatitheir  votes  in  favour  of  death  might_be  recorded, 


THE  THREE  VOTINGS  391 

Death  is  the  sentence  :  but  its  execution  ?  It  is  not  executed 
yet !  Scarcely  is  the  vote  declared  when  Louis's  Three  Advocates 
enter ;  with  Protest  in  his  name^  with  demand  for  Delay,  for  Ap- 
peal to  the  People.  For  this  do  Deseze  and  Tronchet  plead,  with 
brief  eloquence  :  brave  old  Malesherbes  pleads  for  it  with  eloquent 
want  of  eloquence,  in  broken  sentences,  in  embarrassment  and 
sobs ;  that  brave  time-honoured  face,  with  its  gray  strength,  its 
broad  sagacity  and  honesty,  is  mastered  with  emotion,  melts  into 
dumb  tears.i — They  reject  the  Appeal  to  the  People  ;  that  having 
been  already  settled.  But  as  to  the  Delay,  what  they  call  Sursis, 
it  shall  be  considered  ;  shall  be  voted  for  tomorrow :  at  present 
we  adjourn.  Whereupon  Patriotism  'hisses  '  from  the  Mountain  : 
but  a  'tyrannical  majority '  has  so  decided,  and  adjourns. 

There  is  still  this  fouiih  Vote  then,  growls  indignant  Patriotism : 
— this  vote,  and  who  knows  what  other  votes,  and  adjournments 
of  voting ;  and  the  whole  matter  still  hovering  hypothetical ! 
And  at  every  new  vote  those  Jesuit  Girondins,  even  they  who 
v'oted  for  Death,  would  so  fain  find  a  loophole  !  Patriotism  must 
watch  and  rage.  Tyrannical  adjournments  there  have  been  ;  one, 
and  now  another  at  midnight  on  plea  of  fatigue, — all  Friday  - 
wasted  in  hesitation  and   higgling  ;  in  r^-counting  of  the  votes, 

though  Gr^goire  in  his  M6moires,  i.  411,  hypocritically  tried  to  excuse  himself  for 
this.  {See  Aulard,  Recueil  des  Actes  du  Comit^  de  Salut  Public  (Paris,  1889—91), 
i.  346,  409,  464.)  Carnot,  on  the  other  hand  (who  had  been  to  the  Pyrenees), 
seems  to  have  tried  to  delay  his  return,  in  order  if  possible  not  to  be  present  at 
the  trial.  He  was  unable  however  to  delay  it  long  enough,  returned  Jan.  12th, 
and  voted  death  :  he  says  (Corresp.  i.  349),  '  no  duty  ever  came  harder  to  him  than 
to  give  that  vote. ' 

Carlyle's  figures  are  right.  The  absolute  majority  of  the  Convention  on  that 
day  was  361.  Some  of  the  votes  are  interesting :  Vergniaud,  Guadet,  Gensonn6, 
Ducos,  Boyer-Fonfrede,  Petion,  Buzot,  Barbaroux,  Isnard,  Boileau,  Carra,  Re- 
becqui,  Lesage,  among  the  Girondin  leaders  voted  death.  Brissot  and  Louvet 
voted  death,  but  respite  till  the  new  Constitution  was  ratified ;  Valaz6  death,  but 
respite  till  the  fate  of  the  Royal  Family  was  settled.  Condorcet  the  gravest  penalty 
short  of  death  (.vj.  the  galleys).  So  much  for  the  legend  that  theGironde  tried  to 
save  the  King. 

The  only  man  who  tried  openly  to  save  him  was  Lanjuinais,  and  he,  because 
he  afterwards  with  equal  bravery  tried  to  save  the  Gironde,  has  had  the  misfortune 
to  be  classed  as  a  Girondin.  He  alone  openly  said  that  the  Convention  had  no 
power  to  judge  the  King,  alone  spoke  against  the  open  voting,  alone  inroked  the 
old  Fiench  law  of  three-fourths  majority.] 

^  Moniteur  (in  Hist.  Pari,  xxiii.  210).  See  Boissy  d'Anglas,  Vie  de  Malesherbes, 
ii.  139. 

■■i[i8th.] 


392        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

which  are  found  correct  as  they  stood  !  Patriotism  bays  fiercer 
than  ever ;  Patriotism,  by  long  watching,  has  become  red-eyed, 
ahnost  rabid. 

"Delay:  yes  or  no?"  men  do  vote  it  finally,  all  Saturday,  all 
day  and  night. ^  Men's  nerves  are  worn  out,  men's  hearts  are 
desperate ;  now  it  shall  end.  Vergniaud,  spite  of  the  baying, 
ventures  to  say  Yes,  Delay ;  though  he  had  voted  Death. 
Philippe  Egalite  says,  in  his  soul  and  conscience.  No.  The  next 
Member  mounting :  "  Since  Philippe  says  No,  I  for  my  part  say 
Yes,  moi  je  dh  Oui."  The  balance  still  trembles.  Till  finally,  at 
three  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning,  we  have :  No  Delay,  by  a 
majority  of  Seventy  ;  Death  within  four-and-twenty  hours  ! 

Garat,  Minister  of  Justice,  has  to  go  to  the  Temple  with  this 
stern  message :  he  ejaculates  repeatedly,  "  Quelle  commission 
a ff reuse,  What  a  frightful  function  !  "  -'  Louis  begs  for  a  Confessor  ; 
for  yet  three  days  of  life,  to  prepare  himself  to  die.  The  Con- 
fessor is  granted ;  the  three  days  and  all  respite  are  refused.-* 

There  is  no  deliverance,  then  ?  Thick  stone  walls  answer. 
None.  Has  King  Louis  no  friends  ?  Men  of  action,  of  courage 
grown  desperate,  in  this  his  extreme  need  ?  King  Louis's  friends 
are  feeble  and  far.  Not  even  a  voice  in  the  coffeehouses  rises  for 
him.  At  Meot  the  Restaurateur's  no  Captain  Dampmartin  now 
dines ;  or  sees  death-doing  whiskerandoes  on  furlough  exhibit 
daggers  of  improved  structure.  Meot's  gallant  Royalists  on 
furlough  are  far  across  the  marches  ;  they  are  wandering  distracted 
over  the  world :  or  their  bones  lie  whitening  Argonne  Wood. 
Only  some  weak  Priests  '  leave  Pamphlets  on  all  the  bourne- 
stones,'  this  night,  calling  for  a  rescue :  calling  for  the  pious 
women  to  rise ;  or  are  taken  distributing  Pamphlets,  and  sent 
to  prison."* 

Nay  there  is  one  death-doer,  of  the  ancient   Meot  sort,  who, 

^[igth.]  -Biographic  des  Ministres,  p.  157. 

"[In  refusing  the  respite  the  Convention  promised  to  take  care  of  the  King's 
family  :  "  the  Nation  a/wavs  s^reaf  ami  always  jttst  \i\\\  attend  to  the  fortune  of  the 
Family  in  question. "I 

'See  Prudhomme's  Newspaper,  Ri^volutions  de  Paris  (in  Hist.  Pari,  xxiii.  318). 


PLACE  DE  LA  REVOLUTION        393 

with  effort,  has  done  even  less  and  worse :  slain  a  Deputy,  and 
set  all  the  Patriotism  of  Paris  on  edge  !  It  was  five  on  Saturday 
evening  when  Lepelletier  St.  Fargeau,  having  given  his  vote.  No 
Delay,  ran  over  to  Fevrier's  in  the  Palais-Royal  to  snatch  a  morsel 
of  dinner.  He  had  dined,  and  was  paying.  A  thickset  man 
'  with  black  hair  and  blue  beard,'  in  a  loose  kind  of  frock,  stept 
up  to  him  ;  it  was,  as  Fevrier  and  the  bystanders  bethought  them, 
one  Paris  of  the  old  Kings-Guard.  "  Are  you  Lepelletier  ?  "  asks 
he. — "  Yes." — "  You  voted  in  the  King's  Business—  ?  " — "  I  voted 
Death.  ' — " Scelcrat,  take  that!"  cries  Pjiris,  flashing  out  a  sabre 
from  under  his  frock,  and  plunging  it  deep  in  Lepelletier's  side. 
Fevrier  clutches  him :  but  he  breaks  off ;  is  gone. 

The  voter  Lepelletier  lies  dead ;  he  has  expired  in  great  pain, 
at  one  in  the  morning  ; — two  hours  before  that  Vote  of  No  Delay 
was  fully  summed  up.  Guardsman  Pjiris  is  flying  over  France  ; 
cannot  be  taken ;  will  be  found  some  months  after,  selt-shot 
in  a  remote  inn.^— Robespierre  sees  reason  to  think  that  Prince 
d' Artois  himself  is  privately  in  Town ;  that  the  Convention  will 
be  butchered  in  the  lump.  Patriotism  sounds  mere  wail  and 
vengeance  :  Santerre  doubles  and  trebles  all  his  patrols.  Pity 
is  lost  in  rage  and  fear ;  the  Convention  has  I'efused  the  three 
days  of  life  and  all  respite, 

CHAPTER  VIII 

PLACE  DE  LA  REVOLUTION 

To  this  conclusion,  then,  hast  thou  come,  O  hapless  Louis !  The 
Son  of  Sixty  Kings  is  to  die  on  the  Scaffold  by  form  of  Law. 
Under  Sixty  Kings  this  same  form  of  Law,  form  of  Society,  has 
been  fashioning  itself  together,  these  thousand  years  ;  and  has 
become,  one  way  and  other,  a  most  strange  Machine.  Surely, 
if  needful,  it  is  also  frightful,  this  Machine  ;  dead,  blind ;  not 

1  Hist.  Pari,  .\xiii.  275,  318.  F^lix  Lepelletier,  Vie  de  Michel  Lepelletier  son 
Frere,  p.  61,  &c.  :  F^lix,  with  due  love  of  the  miraculous,  will  have  it  that  the  Sui- 
cide in  the  inn  was  not  Paris,  but  some  douhle-i^a/igcy  of  his.  [Lepelletier's  death 
was  at  6  p.m.  on  20th,  not  on  igth,  as  Carlyle  indicates  (Dauban,  Paris  en  1793, 
p.  27).     PAris  was  found  dead  at  Korges-les-Eau.\  on  30th.    (Aulard,  Recueil,  ii.  27.)] 


394        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

what  it  should  be  ;  which,  with  swift  stroke,  or  by  cold  slow 
torture,  has  wasted  the  lives  and  souls  of  innumerable  men. 
And  behold  now  a  King  himself,  or  say  rather  Kinghood  in  his 
person,  is  to  expire  here  in  cruel  tortures  ; — like  a  Phalaris  shut 
in  the  belly  of  his  own  red-heated  Brazen  Bull !  It  is  ever  so  ; 
and  thou  shouldst  know  it,  O  haughty  tyrannous  man :  injustice 
breeds  injustice  ;  curses  and  falsehoods  do  verily  return  '  always 
ho7ne,'  wide  as  they  may  wander.  Innocent  Louis  bears  the  sins 
of  many  generations  :  he  too  experiences  that  man's  tribunal  is 
not  in  this  Earth  ;  that  if  he  had  no  Higher  one,  it  were  not 
well  with  him. 

A  King  dying  by  such  violence  appeals  impressively  to  the 
imagination  ;  as  the  like  must  do,  and  ought  to  do.  And  yet  at 
bottom  it  is  not  the  King  dying,  but  the  man  !  Kingship  is  a  coat : 
the  grand  loss  is  of  the  skin.  The  man  from  whom  you  take  his 
Life,  to  him  can  the  whole  combined  world  do  more  ?  Lally 
went  on  his  hurdle  ;  his  mouth  filled  with  a  gag.  Miserablest 
mortals,  doomed  for  picking  pockets,  have  a  whole  five-act 
Tragedy  in  them,  in  that  dumb  pain,  as  they  go  to  the  gallows, 
unregarded  ;  they  consume  the  cup  of  trembling  down  to  the 
lees.  For  Kings  and  for  Beggars,  for  the  justly  doomed  and 
the  unjustly,  it  is  a  hard  thing  to  die.  Pity  them  all :  thy  utmost 
pity,  with  all  aids  and  appliances  and  throne-and-scaffold  contrasts, 
how  far  short  is  it  of  the  thing  pitied ! 

A  Confessor  has  come  ;  Abbe  Edgeworth,  of  Irish  extraction, 
whom  the  King  knew  by  good  report,  has  come  promptly  on 
this  solemn  mission.^  Leave  the  Earth  alone,  then,  thou  hap- 
less King ;  it  with  its  malice  will  go  its  way,  thou  also  canst  go 
thine.  A  hai-d  scene  yet  remains  :  the  parting  with  our  loved 
ones.  Kind  hearts,  environed  in  the  same  grim  peril  with  us ; 
to  be  left  here  !     Let  the  Reader  look  with  the  eyes  of  Valet 

'[Another  non-juring  priest,  Ren^  Legris-Duval,  offered  his  services,  but  was 
promptly  arrested  by  the  Commune.  lidgeworth  was  Mme  Elisabeth's  Con- 
fessor, and  was  well  known  to  the  King.  He  remained  in  Paris  till  the  death  of 
Mme  Elisabeth,  emigrated  and  died  at  Mittau  1807.  His  '  Dernieres  Heures 
de  Louis  XVI '  are  printed  by  MM.  Herville  and  Barriere  in  their  9th  volume, 
p.  loi  sqq.^ 


PLACE  DE  LA  REVOLUTION        395 

Clery,  through  these  glass-doors,  where  also  the   Municipality 
watches  ;  and  see  the  cruellest  of  scenes  : 

'  At  half-past  eight,  the  door  of  the  ante-room  opened :  the 
'  Queen  appeared  first,  leading  her  Son  by  the  hand ;  then 
'  Madame  Royale  and  Madame  Elizabeth  :  they  all  flung  them- 
'  selves  into  the  arms  of  the  King.  Silence  reigned  for  some 
'  minutes  ;  interrupted  only  by  sobs.  The  Queen  made  a  move- 
'  raent  to  lead  his  Majesty  towards  the  inner  room,  where  M. 
'  Edgeworth  was  waiting  unknown  to  them :  "  No,"  said  the 
'  King,  "  let  us  go  into  the  dining-room,  it  is  that  there  only 
'  I  can  see  you."  They  entered  there ;  I  shut  the  door  of  it, 
'  which  was  of  glass.  The  King  sat  down,  the  Queen  on  his  left 
'  haiad,  Madame  Elizabeth  on  his  right,  Madame  Royale  almost 
'  in  front ;  the  young  Prince  remained  standing  between  his 
'  Father's  legs.  They  all  leaned  towards  him,  and  often  held 
'  him  embraced.  This  scene  of  wo  lasted  an  hour  and  three 
'  quarters  ;  during  which  we  could  hear  nothing  ;  we  could  see 
'  only  that  always  when  the  King  spoke,  the  sobbings  of  the 
'  Princesses  redoubled,  continued  for  some  minutes  ;  and  that 
'then  the  King  began  again  to  speak.'  ^ — And  so  our  meetings 
and  our  partings  do  now  end  !  The  sorrows  we  gave  each  other  ; 
the  poor  joys  we  faithfully  shared,  and  all  our  lovings  and  our 
sufferings,  and  confused  toilings  under  the  earthly  Sun,  are 
over.  Thou  good  soul,  I  shall  never,  never  through  all  ages  of 
Time,  see  thee  any  more ! — Never  !  O  Reader,  knowest  thou 
that  hard  word  ? 

For  nearly  two  hours  this  agony  lasts  ;  then  they  tear  them- 
selves asunder.     "  Promise  that  you  will  see  us  on  the  morrow." 


1  Clary's  Narrative,  London  1798,  cited  in  Weber,  iii.  312.  [The  details  of  the 
King's  last  days  are  given  not  only  by  his  own  valet  Clery,  but  by  his  former  valet 
Hue,  who  got  them  direct  from  Malesherbes,  when  they  were  fellow-prisoners  at 
the  Abbaye.  Malesherbes  was  permitted  to  visit  the  King  frequently,  but  always 
searched  on  going  in  and  out  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  v.  348).  Clery  had  been  in  attend- 
ance on  the  King  since  Aug.  26th,  when  Hue  had  been  imprisoned.  Cl^ry  had 
been  formerly  valet  to  the  Dauphin.  His  Journal  Je  ce  qui  s'rsf  /-jssi'  a  la  tour 
du  Temple  pendant  la  captivitii  de  Louis  X\'I  was  editeii  by  the  Countess  of 
.Schomberg.  He  was  imprisoned  on  the  King's  death  till  Thermidor,  and  died 
at  Vienna  1809.  His  son  was  in  the  service  of  the  Kings  daughter  Mme  Royale 
when  she  became  Duchess  of  .\ngouleme.  ] 


396        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

He  promises : — Ah  yes,  yes  ;  yet  once ;  and  go  now,  ye  loved 
ones  ;  cry  to  God  for  yourselves  and  me  ! — It  was  a  hard  scene, 
but  it  is  over.  He  will  not  see  them  on  the  morrow.  The 
Queen,  in  passing  through  the  ante-room,  glanced  at  the  Cer- 
berus Municipals ;  and,  with  woman's  vehemence,  said  through 
her  tears,  "  Ions  etes  toii.s  dcs  scelerals." 

King  Louis  slept  sound,  till  five  in  the  morning,  when  Clery, 
as  he  had  been  ordered,  awoke  him.  Clery  dressed  his  hair ; 
while  this  went  forward,  Louis  took  a  ring  from  his  watch,  and 
kept  trying  it  on  his  finger ;  it  was  his  wedding-ring,  which  he 
is  now  to  return  to  the  Queen  as  a  mute  farewell.  At  half-past 
six,  he  took  the  Sacrament ;  and  continued  in  devotion,  and 
conference  with  Abbe  Edgeworth.  He  will  not  see  his  Family  : 
it  were  too  hard  to  bear. 

At  eight,  the  Municipals  enter  :  the  King  gives  them  his  Will, 
and  messages  and  effects  ;  which  they,  at  first,  brutally  refuse  ^ 
to  take  charge  of:  he  gives  them  a  roll  of  gold  pieces,  a  hundred 
and  twenty-five  louis  ;  these  are  to  be  returned  to  Malesherbes,- 
who  had  lent  them.  At  nine,  Santerre  says  the  hour  is  come. 
The  King  begs  yet  to  retire  for  three  minutes.  At  the  end  of 
three  minutes,  Santerre  again  says  the  hour  is  come.  '  Stamp- 
'  ing  on  the  ground  with  his  right-foot,  Louis  answers  :  "  Partons, 
'  Let  us  go."  ' — How  the  rolling  of  those  drums  comes  in,  through 
the  Temple  bastions  and  bulwarks,  on  the  heart  of  a  queenly 
wife  ;  soon  to  be  a  widow  !  He  is  gone,  then,  and  has  not  seen 
us }  A  Queen  weeps  bitterly ;  a  King's  Sister  and  Children. 
Over  all  these  Four  does  Death  also  hover :  all  shall  perish 
miserably  save  one ;  she,  as  Duchesse  d'Angouleme,  will  live, — 
not  happily. 

At  the   Temple  Gate   were   some   faint  cries,  perhaps   from 

'  [The  '  Municipal '  who  refused  was  Jacques  Roux,  one  of  the  two  '  Constitu- 
tional priests'  charged  to  accompany  Louis  to  the  scaffold  (Claude  Bernard  was 
the  other).  Roux  was  an  idolater  of  Marat  and  proposed  to  continue  L' Ami  du 
Feiiple  (for  his  own  profit)  after  his  hero's  death.  He  was  arrested  in  Aug.  '93 
and  committed  suicide.  Bernard  perished  with  Robespierre's  '  tail '  at  Thermidor. 
(Rev.  dela  R^v.  ix.  118.)] 

-  [They  were  not  returned  to  Malesherbes,  and  no  one  knows  what  became  of 
them  ;  at  Malesherbes'  trial  they  were  made  an  article  of  accusation  against  him. 
(Mortimer-Ternaux,  V.  491.)] 


PLACE  DE  LA  REVOLUTION        397 

voices  of  pitiful  women  :  "  Grace  !  Grace  !  "  Through  the  rest 
of  the  streets  there  is  silence  as  of  the  grave.  No  man  not 
armed  is  allowed  to  be  there  :  the  armed,  did  any  even  pity, 
dare  not  express  it,  each  man  overawed  by  all  his  neighbours.' 
All  windows  are  down,  none  seen  looking  through  them.  All 
shops  are  shut.  No  wheel-carriage  rolls,  this  morning,  in  these 
streets  but  one  only.  Eighty-thousand  armed  men  stand  ranked, 
like  armed  statues  of  men  ;  ^  cannons  bristle,  cannoneers  with 
match  burning,  but  no  word  or  movement :  it  is  as  a  city  en- 
chanted into  silence  and  stone  :  one  carriage  with  its  escort, 
slowly  rumbling,  is  the  only  sound.  Louis  reads,  in  his  Book 
of  Devotion,  the  Prayers  of  the  Dying :  clatter  of  this  death- 
march  falls  sharp  on  the  ear,  in  the  great  silence  :  but  the 
thought  would  fain  struggle  heavenward,  and  forget  the  Earth. 
As  the  clocks  strike  ten,  behold  the  Place  de  la  Revolution, 
once  Place  de  Louis  Quinze :  the  Guillotine,  mounted  near  the 
old  Pedestal  where  once  stood  the  Statue  of  that  Louis  !  ^  Far 
round,  all  bristles  with  cannons  and  armed  men :  spectators 
crowding   in   the  rear ;     D' Orleans   l^galite  there   in  cabriolet. 

'  [There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Baron  de  Batz  aimed  at  exciting  an  insurrection  in 
tlie  street  to  save  the  King;  it  was  hushed  up  by  the  Government,  and  the  only 
persons  known  to  have  had  a  hand  in  it  were  the  Marquis  de  Guiche  and  one 
Devaux  a  clerk  in  the  treasury,  secretary  to  Batz.  Canipardon  (in  Trib.  Rev.  i. 
364)  quotes  a  letter  from  the  Coinltc  de  Si'irctc  Gt'ncrale  to  Fouquier,  apropos  of 
the  trial  of  Devaux  (June  13th  '94),  alleging  that  Batz  (whose  hiding  place  they 
seek  to  discover)  was  one  of  the  four  persons  who  were  heard  on  the  Boulevard 
on  Jan.  21st  crying  -  /  nous^  ceiix  qui  veulctil  sauver  Ic  Rot.  If  the  conspiracy 
was  an  extensive  one,  it  left  little  trace,  and  evidently  few  of  the  conspirators 
turned  up  at  the  rendezvous.  Batz  afterwards  made  two  attempts  to  rescue  the 
Queen,  one  from  the  Temple,  the  other  from  the  Concicrgcric :  all  his  accomplices 
gradually  suffered  death,  but  he  could  never  be  caught.  He  belonged  to  one  of 
the  oldest  families  in  Beam,  and  one  of  his  ancestors  was  the  original  of  the 
immortal  D'Artagnan.  He  sat  in  the  States-CJeneral,  emigrated,  returned  in  hopes 
of  saving  the  King,  remained  in  Paris  always  evading  capture,  and  \\asthe  sotil  of 
every  plot  against  the  Government  down  to  Vendemiaire,  when  he  was  one  of  the 
Royalist  leaders.  Under  the  Empire  he  seems  to  have  lived  quietly.  He  died 
mart'chal  de  eamp,  1822.  {See  Le  Notre,  Jean  de  Batz  (Paris,  1896) ;  e/.  also  Robinet, 
Proces  des  Dantonistes,  316  sqq.)] 

^[Mortimer-Ternaux  (v.  449)  gives  an  account  of  the  adroit  way  in  which  Santerre 
had  disposed  of  the  armed  force,  so  that  no  battalion  of  the  National  Guard  was 
drawn  up  in  its  own  quarter  of  the  city.  The  place  of  honour  (round  the  scaffold) 
was  reserved  for  the  Marseillais  FiWrt's.] 

•"'  [That  pedestal  was  then  empty.  For  the  /"tvi'  of  Aug.  toth  '93  it  was 
surmounted  by  the  huge  statue  of  Liberty  which  Mme  Roland  apostrophised  at 
her  death  scene  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  118):  the  guillotine  stood  midway  between  the 
pedestal  and  the  gate  of  the  Champs  Elysees.] 


398        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Swift  messengers,  hoquetons,  speed  to  the  Townhall,  every  three 
minutes :  near  by  is  the  Convention  sitting, — vengeful  for  Le- 
pelletier.  Heedless  of  all,  Louis  reads  his  Prayers  of  the 
Dying ;  not  till  five  minutes  yet  has  he  finished ;  then  the 
Carriage  opens.  What  temper  he  is  in  ?  Ten  different  wit- 
nesses will  give  ten  different  accounts  of  it.  He  is  in  the 
collision  of  all  tempers  ;  arrived  now  at  the  black  Mahlstrom 
and  descent  of  Death  :  in  soitow,  in  indignation,  in  resignation 
struggling  to  be  resigned.  "  Take  care  of  M.  Edgeworth,"  he 
straitly  charges  the  Lieutenant  who  is  sitting  with  them :  then 
they  two  descend. 

The  drums  are  beating  :  "  Taises-vous,  Silence  !  "  he  cries  '  in 
a  terrible  voice,  d'uiie  voix  tenible.'  He  mounts  the  scaffold,  not 
without  delay  ;  he  is  in  puce  coat,  breeches  of  gray,  white  stock- 
ings. He  strips  off  the  coat ;  stands  disclosed  in  a  sleeve-waist- 
coat of  white  flannel.  The  Executioners  approach  to  bind  him  : 
he  spurns,  resists  :  Abbe  Edgeworth  has  to  remind  him  how  the 
Saviour,  in  whom  men  trust,  submitted  to  be  bound.  His  hands 
are  tied,  his  head  bare  ;  the  fatal  moment  is  come.  He  advances 
to  the  edge  of  the  Scaffold,  'his  face  very  red,'  and  says:  "French- 
men, I  die  innocent :  it  is  from  the  Scaffold  and  near  appearing 
before  God  that  I  tell  you  so.  I  pardon  my  enemies ;  I  desire 
that  France "  A  General  on  horseback,  Santerre  or  an- 
other, prances  out,  with  uplifted  hand  :  "  Tambours  !  "  The 
drums  drown  the  voice.  "  Executioners,  do  your  duty  !  "  The 
Executioners,  desperate  lest  themselves  be  murdered  (for  San- 
terre and  his  Armed  Ranks  will  strike,  if  they  do  not),  seize  the 
hapless  Louis :  six  of  them  desperate,  him  singly  desperate, 
struggling  thei*e  ;  and  bind  him  to  their  plank.  Abbe  Edge- 
worth,  stooping,  bespeaks  him  :  "  Son  of  Saint  Louis,  ascend  to 
Heaven."  The  Axe  clanks  down  ;  a  King's  Life  is  shorn  away. 
It  is  Monday  the  21st  of  January  179.^-  He  was  aged  Thirty- 
eight  years  four  months  and  twenty-eight  days.^ 

1  Newspapers,  Municipal  Records,  &c.  &c.  (in  Hist.  Pari,  xxiii.  298-349);  Deux 
Amis,  ix.  369-373;  Mercier,  Nouveau  Paris,  iii.  3-8.  [Deux  Amis  (in  /oc.  erf.)  say 
nothing  of  the  King  struggling  on  the  scaffold,  but  Morris,  writing  on  25th,  says 
'  the  e.KCCutioners  threw  him  down  and  were  in  such  haste  as  to  let  the  axe  fall 


PLACE  DE  LA  KEVOLUTION        390 

Executioner  Samson  shows  the  Head :  fierce  shout  of  Five  la 
Republique  rises,  and  swells ;  caps  raised  on  bayonets,  hats  wav- 
ing :  students  of  the  College  of  Four  Nations  take  it  up,  on  the 
far  Quais  ;  fling  it  over  Paris.  D'Orleans  drives  off  in  his  cabrio- 
let:  the  Townhall  Councillors  rub  their  hands,  saying,  "It  is 
done.  It  is  done.  "  There  is  dipping  of  handkerchiefs,  of  pike- 
points  in  the  blood.  Headsman  Samson,  though  he  afterwards 
denied  it,^  sells  locks  of  the  hair :  fractions  of  the  puce  coat 
are  long  after  worn  in  rings.'^ — And  so,  in  some  half-hour  it  is 
done ;  and  the  multitude  has  all  departed.  Pastry-cooks, 
cofFee-sellers,  milkmen  sing  out  their  trivial  quotidian  cries : 
the  world  wags  on,  as  if  this  were  a  common  day.  In  the 
coffeehouses  that  evening,  says  Prudhomme,  Patriot  shook  hands 
with  Patriot  in  a  more  cordial  manner  than  usual.  Not  till 
some  days  after,  according  to  Mercier,  did  public  men  see 
what  a  grave  thing  it  was. 

A  grave  thing  it  indisputably  is  ;  and  will  have  consequences. 
On  the  morrow  morning,  Roland,  so  long  steeped  to  the  lips  in 
disgust  and  chagrin,  sends  in  his  demission.^  His  accounts  lie 
all  ready,  correct  in  black-on-white  to  the  uttermost  farthing : 
these  he  wants  but  to  have  audited,  that  he  might  retire  to 
remote  obscurity,  to  the  country  and  his  books.  They  will 
never  be  audited,  those  accounts ;  he  will  never  get  retired 
thither.^ 

before  his  neck  was  properly  placed,  so  that  he  was  mangled  '  (ii.  31).  Morris 
adds  that  the  great  mass  of  the  people  mourned  the  King's  fate,  '  I  have  seen 
grief  such  as  for  the  untimely  death  of  a  beloved  parent. '  The  account  given  by 
Carlyle  tallies  very  closely  with  the  Rccit  Authentique  of  Rouy,  quoted  from 
Le  Magicicn  Kcpi/blicuin  by  Uauban  (Paris  en  1793,  p.  31  ->"'/'/•)•  Rouy  is  almost 
the  only  person  who  mentions  the  frantic  joy  and  dances  roimd  the  scaffold,  which 
are  illustrated  in  an  engraving  from  the  Hennin  collection  in  the  Bibl.  Nat.  repro- 
duced in  Dauban  (Paris  en  1793),  p.  35.  Sanson's  letter  to  the  Tkermomctre  du 
joitr,  Feb.  20th  (quoted  in  Mortimer-Ternaux,  v.  505),  bears  witness  to  the  King  s 
perfect  calmness,  and  refutes  Mercier's  story.] 

^His  Letter  in  the  Newspapers  (Hist.  Pari,  ubl  supra). 

'^Forster's  Briefwechsel,  i.  473. 

■'[Jan.  23rd,] 

^[Roland  had  prepared  his  report  on  the  state  of  Paris,  and  it  was  discussed 
Oct.  29th  (vid.  supr.,  ii.  371) ;  in  it  was  included  an  account  of  the  sums  demanded 
by  the  Commune  from  the  Treasury  (presumably  for  wages  of  Septemberers,  etc. ). 


400        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

It  was  on  Tuesday  that  Roland  demitted.  On  Thursday 
comes  Lepelletier  St.  Fargeau's  Funeral,^  and  passage  to  the 
Pantheon  of  Great  Men.  Notable  as  the  wild  pageant  of  a 
winter  day.  The  Body  is  borne  aloft,  half-bare  ;  the  winding- 
sheet  disclosing  the  death-wound  :  sabre  and  bloody  clothes 
parade  themselves ;  a  '  lugubrious  music '  wailing  harsh  juenice. 
Oak-crowns  shower  down  from  windows  ;  President  Vergniaud 
walks  there,  with  Convention,  with  Jacobin  Society,  and  all 
Patriots  of  every  colour,  all  mourning  brotherlike. 

Notable  also  for  another  thing,  this  Burial  of  Lepelletier :  it 
was  the  last  act  these  men  ever  did  with  concert !  All  Parties 
and  figures  of  Opinion,  that  agitate  this  distracted  France  and 
its  Convention,  now  stand,  as  it  were,  face  to  face,  and  dagger 
to  dagger ;  the  King's  life,  round  which  they  all  struck  and 
battled,  being  hurled  down.  Dumouriez,  conquering  Holland, 
growls  ominous  discontent,  at  the  head  of  Armies.  Men  say 
Dumouriez  will  have  a  King ;  that  young  D' Orleans  Egalite 
shall  be  his  King.  Deputy  Fauchet,  in  the  Journal  des  Amis, 
curses  his  day,  more  bitterly  than  Job  did ;  invokes  the  poni- 
ards of  Regicides,  of  '  Arras  Vipers '  or  Robespierres,  of  Pluto 
Dantons,  of  horrid  Butchers  Legendre  and  Simulacra  d'Herbois, 
to  send  him  swiftly  to  another  world  than  theirs.'^  This  is  Te- 
Deimi  Fauchet,  of  the  Bastille  Victory,  of  the  Cercle  Social. 
Sharp  was  the  death-hail  rattling  round  one's  Flag-of-truce,  on 
that  Bastille  day  :  but  it  was  soft  to  such  wreckage  of  high 
Hope  as  this  ;  one's  New  Golden  Era  going  down  in  leaden 
dross,  and  sulphurous  black  of  the  Everlasting  Darkness  ! 

At  home  this  Killing  of  a  King  has  divided  all  friends ;  and 
abroad  it  has  united  all  enemies.  Fraternity  of  Peoples,  Revolu- 
tionary Propagandism  ;  Atheism,  Regicide  ;  total  destruction  of 
social  order  in  this  world  !  All  Kings,  and  lovers  of  Kings,  and 
haters  of    Anarchy,    rank    in    coalition ;    as    in    a   war  for  life. 

This  report  was  printed  by  order  of  the  Convention,  but  Roland  could  never  get 
the  accompanying  accounts  of  his  own  office  discussed  or  audited.  He  theretore 
resigned.     {See  Mme  Roland,  321  siji/.)'] 

1  [Jan.  24th.] 

-  Hist    Pari,  ubi  supra. 


PLACE  DE  LA  REVOLUTION        401 

England  signifies  to  Citizen  Chauvelin,  the  Ambassador  or  rather 
Ambassador's-Cloak,  that  he  must  quit  the  country  in  eight  days. 
Ambassador' s-Cloak  and  Ambassador,  Chauvelin  and  Talleyrand, 
depart  accordingly.^  Talleyrand,  implicated  in  that  Iron  Press 
of  the  Tuileries,  thinks  it  safest  to  make  for  America. 

England  has  cast  out  the  Embassy  :  England  declares  war, — 
being  shocked  principally,  it  would  seem,  at  the  condition  of  the 
River  Scheldt.-  Spain  declares  war  ;  being  shocked  principally  at 
some  other  thing  ;  which  doubtless  the  Manifesto  indicates.^ 
Nay  we  find  it  was  not  England  that  declared  war  first,  or  Spain 
first ;    but   that    France    herself  declared   war    first  on   both  of 

'Annual  Register  of  1793,  pp.  114-28.  [The  attitude  of  England  is  of  the 
greatest  importance.  Burke's  '  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution '  had  appeared 
in  Oct.  '90.  Great  as  their  influence  was  in  England,  one  may  safely  say  it  was 
greater  on  the  Continent.  The  Court  of  the  Tuileries  agreed  with  the  Constituent 
Assembly  in  one  thing  only,  vis. ,  in  attributing  some  share  of  the  French  troubles 
to  the  machinations  of  England.  Nothing  could  be  more  false.  Pitt  was  too 
busy  with  schemes  of  economic  reform  to  interfere  in  France.  The  silly  intrigues 
of  Frederick  William  of  Prussia  in  the  East  of  Europe  had  greatly  strained  the 
Anglo-Prussian  alliance,  and  a  rapprochement  with  England  had  been  Leopold's 
first  success  for  Austria  ;  Pitt  looked  at  the  restoration  of  order  in  Belgium  (1791) 
with  great  satisfaction.  On  May  6th  '91  occurred  the  famous  rupture  between  Burke 
and  Fox.  After  Varennes  Pitt  steadily  refused  anything  more  than  polite  expres- 
sions of  interest  in  the  fate  of  the  King  ;  it  was  noticed  that  the  English  funds  had 
never  stood  so  high.  That  England  coveted  San  Domingo  and  other  French 
West  Indies  is  indubitable ;  but  the  best  way  to  get  them  was  to  sit  still.  When 
the  French  war  with  .\ustria  broke  out  in  April  '92,  England  contented  herself  with 
saying  "but  hands  off  Holland"  {vid.  supr.  146).  After  Aug.  loth  Lord  Gower 
was  recalled,  and  Pitt  put  in  a  strongly  worded  remonstrance  against  any  attempt 
on  the  King's  life.  The  September  massacres  excited  English  feeling  enor- 
mously. Dumouriez's  advance  after  Jemappes,  his  threats  on  Holland  together 
with  the  decrees  of  Nov.  19th  and  Dec.  15th,  made  war  probable  ;  Chauvelin  and 
Noel,  the  French  agents,  were  rude  and  incapable,  and  Maret,  though  much 
wiser,  found  English  feeling  growing  more  and  more  hostile.  A  spy  of  the 
Convention  called  Gorani  was  in  communication  with  many  Revolutionary  Societies 
in  England,  and  addresses  from  these,  fostered  by  him,  were  read  in  the  Convention 
Nov.  7th,  22nd,  29th,  and  thereupon  naturally  became  known  to  the  English 
Government.  On  Nov.  i6th  Auckland,  Minister  at  the  Hag^e,  announced  that 
Holland  might  rely  on  being  defended  by  England.  Parliament  met  on  Dec.  13th 
with  a  warlike  King's  Speech,  and  the  Opposition  amendment  to  the  address 
only  got  50  votes.  On  Dec.  31st  Chauvelin  was  refused  audience,  and  the  Alien 
Bill  rapidly  run  through  both  houses.  Chauvelin  was  dismissed  on  Jan.  24th, 
and  universal  mourning  was  worn  for  Louis  in  London.  On  Feb.  ist  Chauvelin 
departed,  and  on  Feb.  7th  France  declared  war  on  England  and  Holland.] 

-  [It  is  utterly  imtrue  to  say  that  England  was  ' '  principally  shocked  at  the  condi- 
tion of  the  River  Scheldt."  It  is  most  unlikely  that  such  a  freetrader  as  Pitt  would 
have  gone  to  war  to  defend  the  settlements  of  1648  and  1713,  which  closed  the 
Scheldt.  England  went  to  war  for  two  reasons:  (i.)  the  threatened  danger  to 
Holland,  (ii.)  the  feeling  (of  all  classes  of  the  English  people)  of  horror  at  the 
execution  of  Louis.] 

323rd  March  (ibid.  p.  161). 

VOL,  II.  26 


402        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

them ;  ^ — a  point  of  immense  Parliamentary  and  Journalistic 
interest  in  those  days,  but  which  has  become  of  no  interest 
whatever  m  these.  They  all  declare  war.  The  sword  is  drawn, 
the  scabbard  thrown  away.  It  is  even  as  Danton  said,  in  one  of 
his  ail-too  gigantic  figures :  "  The  coalised  Kings  threaten  us ; 
we  hurl  at  their  feet,  as  gage  of  battle,  the  Head  of  a  King."  " 

'  February  ist,  March  7th  (Moniteur  of  these  dates).  [Spain  was  powerless  at 
all  events,  and  the  Government  of  Charles  IV.  knew  it ;  it  had  remonstrated 
after  Varennes,  welcomed  the  Declaration  of  Pillnitz,  and  sent  a  few  pesetas  to  the 
Emigres ;  but  it  dreaded  above  all  being  forced  by  its  old  alliance  with  France 
into  a  war  with  England.  The  wicked  Godoy  became  minister  in  Oct.  '92,  yet  it 
is  greatly  to  the  honour  of  the  Spanish  Court  that  the  last  and  much  the  strongest 
protests  in  favour  of  Louis  came  from  Madrid.  Bourgoing  quitted  Madrid  Feb. 
23rd  ;  his  letters  should  be  read  in  Carnot's  Corresp.  (especially  vol.  i.  210,  232, 
246)  together  with  Carnot's  report  of  Jan.  12th  '93  [ibid.  p.  323).] 

'-'[Jan.  31SI.  Sweden  under  her  new  Regent,  anxious  to  reverse  the  policy  of 
Gustavus  III. ,  Switzerland  admirably  managed  by  Barth^lemy,  and  the  United 
States,  alone  remained  on  friendly  terms  with  the  French  Republic] 


END    OF    VOL.    It. 


THh   ABERDEEN    UNIVEKSITV    PRESS  LIMITED 


a 


o 


ft,:       •      ■ 

6-1            CM 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

CD               • 

00          tH 
CV  :          O 
O          > 

LIBRARY 

• 

/ 

rH 
b4 

Do    not  // 

1    ^ 

/ 

• 

re  move  // 

o 

■4^ 

the   card 

CO          pH 

cd        o 
Si       > 
o;      o 

from   this  \ 

Carlyle,  '] 
The F  ench 

Pocket.         %^ 

u 

Authc 

Title 

Acme   Library   Card   Pocket 

Under  Pat.  "  Ref.  Index  File." 
Made  Ijy  LIBRARY  BUREAU 

# 

