Mesmerism, Spiritualism, etc. (William B. Carpenter, 1877)
==========================================================
William B. Carpenter — The establishment's classic rebuttal — the physiologist's case against mesmerism and spiritualism. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (mesmerismspirit01carpgoog) — 1877 first edition.

Google 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 

^ 

Ya ' ^f> 

t 

MESMERISM, SPIRITUALISM 

I 

K 

MESMERISM, SPIRITUALISM, &C. 

HISTORICALL V a- SCIEXTIFICALL Y CONSIDERED 

BEING TWO LECTURES 
DELIVERED AT THE LONDON INSTITUTION 

WM\ IP^facc anb ^pfpenbix 

BY 

WILLIAM B. CARPENTER, CB. 

M.D. LL.D. F.R.S. F.G.S. V.P.L.S. 

CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCS 
REGISTRAR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDOIf 

ETC 

■ -'■'-'''o--' *,*--•'• *> ►♦'-JO •jJwj J 

• ' • • - t» ^ •»* - ^ • J o o J • -' ^ ^ o J a V w 

NEW YORK: 
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, 

72 FIFTH AVEKUE. 
1895. 

i3H 
561078 

• • i • •• * 

• • • • • • • 

• • • • • • 

• •• • • • • ••• ; • •• ••• r • 

r »* 

PREFACE. 

The recent direction of the public mind to the claims 
of what is called * Spiritualism/ partly by the discus- 
sion which took place in the Anthropological Section 
of the British Association at its Meeting in Glasgow, 
and partly by the Slade prosecution which followed, 
having led the Directors of the London Institution to 
invite me to deliver two Lectures on the subject, I con- 
sented to do so on the understanding that I should 
treat it purely in its Historical and Scientific aspects : 
my purpose being to show, first, the relation of what 
seems to me essentially an Epidemic Delusion, to Epi- 
demics, more or less similar, which have at different 
periods taken a strong — though transient — hold on 
the popular imagination ; and secondly, to point out 
how completely the evidence adduced by the upholders 
of the system fails to afford a scientific proof of the 
existence of any new Power or Agency capable of an- 
tagonising the action of the known Forces of Nature, 

vi PREFACE. 

In consequence of many representations made to 
me that these Lectures might be advantageously 
brought under the notice of a wider circle than that of 
their original auditors, I was led to prepare them for 
publication in Eraser's Magazine^ with the addition of 
passages which want of time prevented me from in- 
cluding in their oral delivery. And in now repro- 
ducing them in a separate form, with an Appendix 
of pikes JustificativeSy I have no other motive than a 
desire to do what I can to save from this new form 
of Epidemic Delusion some who are in danger of 
being smitten by its poison, and to afford to such as 
desire to keep themselves clear from it, a justification 
for their 'common sense' rejection of testimony 
pressed upon them by friends whose honesty they 
would not for a moment call in question. Among 
these pikes, there are none which seem to me of more 
value than the extracts I have given from the writ- 
ings (long out of print) of the late Mr. Braid ; whose 
experiments, which I repeatedly witnessed, not only 
contributed essentially to the elucidation of what is 
real in the phenomena of Mesmerism and the states 
allied to it, but furnished (by anticipation) the clue to 
the explanation of many of the curious psychical 
phenomena of hottest Spiritualism. 

In the discussion to which I have just referred, 
Mr. A. R. Wallace, speaking from the Chair of the 
Anthropological Section, addressed me in the follow- 

PRE FA CE. vii 

ing words : — * You expect us to believe what you say, 
*but you will not believe what we say.' And the 
same distinguished Naturalist has since publicly ac- 
cused me of * habitually giving only one side of the 
* question, and completely ignoring all facts which tell 
' against [my] theory.* — The reader of these Lectures 
will see that my whole aim is to discover, on the 
generally accepted principles of Testimony, what are 
facts ; and to discriminate between facts and the in- 
ferences drawn from them. I have no other * theory ' 
to support, than that of the constancy of the well- 
ascertained Laws of Nature ; and my contention is, 
that where apparent departures from them take place 
through Human instrumentality, we are justified in 
assuming in the first instance either fraudulent de- 
ception, or unintentional j^^-deception, or both com- 
bined, — until the absence of either shall have been 
proved by every conceivable test that the sagacity of 
sceptical experts can devise. 

The two different modes in which Spiritualists and 
their opponents view the same facts, according to their 
respective predispositions, is well brought out in cases 
of the so-called 'materialization.' — A party being 
assembled in a front drawing-room, the ' medium ' re- 
tires into a back room separated from it by curtains, 
and professes there to go into a trance. After a short 
interval, during which the lights are turned down so 
as to make * darkness visible,' a figure dressed in some 
strange guise enters between the curtains, and dis- 

viii PREFACE. 

m 

plays itself to the spectators as an ' embodied spirit.' 
Precluded from any direct interference with the per- 
formance, a sceptic among the company slyly puts 
some ink on his fingers, and, whilst this is still wet, 
grasps the * spirit-hand,* which he finds very like a 
mortal one. The * spirit * withdraws behind the cur- 
tains, after a short interval the lights are raised, 
and the * medium ' returns to the company in proprid 
persond. The sceptic then points out inkstains on 
one of the * medium's ' hands, and tells what he has 
done. 

These are the facts of the case. — Now, the * com- 
mon-sense ' interpretation of these facts is, that the 
* medium ' is a cheat, and the * embodied spirit ' a vul- 
gar ghost personated by him ; and until adequate 
proof shall have been given to the contrary, I main- 
tain that we are perfectly justified in holding to this 
interpretation, confirmed as it is by the exposure of 
the trick in every instance in which adequate means 
have been taken for its detection. 

But the explanation of his inked fingers given by 
the * medium ' is, that the impress made on the hand 
of the 'embodied spirit' has been transferred 'ac- 
cording to a well-known law of Spiritualism ' to his 
own ; and this assumption is regarded as more pro- 
bable, by such as have accepted the system, than 
that their pet * medium ' is a cheat, and their belief 
in him a delusion 1 

That such an assumption should not only gain 

PREFA CE. ix 

the acceptance of minds otherwise rational, but should 
be stoutly upheld by them with unquestioning faith, 
seems to me a striking exemplification of the strength 
of the hold which a * dominant idea* may gain, when 
once the protective safeguard of * common sense * has 
been weakly abandoned. And I would further de- 
duce from it the educational importance of that early 
Scientific training, of which a disciplined and trust- 
worthy judgment on such subjects is one of the most 
valuable resultants. For that training — which essen- 
tially consists in the formation of habits of accurate 
observation, and of correct reasoning upon the facts 
so learned — pervades the whole mind, and shapes its 
general forms of thought in a degree which is rarely (if 
ever) equalled by the direction of its powers at a later 
period of life to the culture of some limited field of 
scientific investigation. Any such specialization leaves 
the wide domain of thought which lies outside, un- 
touched by scientific influences ; and thus it happens 
that men who achieve high distinction in particular 
lines of scientific enquiry, may not only have no 
special competence for the pursuit of an enquiry of a 
totally different kind, but may be absolutely dis- 
qualified, by preformed tendencies, for its thorough 
and impartial prosecution. A remarkable case of this 
kind, incidentally noticed in the following pages (pp. 
7 and 69), I have elsewhere more fully discussed.^ 

* 'The Radiometer and its Lessons,' in the Nhieteenth Century for 
March 1877. 

CONTENTS. 

LECTURE I. 
Introduction — 

Epidemic Delusions generally • • • • I 

Mesmerism — 

Mesmer's own System 9 

Report of the French Academic Commission • . 11 

Mesmeric Somnambulism 13 

Mr. Braid's Hypnotism 16 

Miss Martineau's J 20 

Supposed Agency of * Silent Will ' . . • .22 

Influence of Expectancy 25 

Odylism — 

Von Reichenbach's Doctrine 29 

Explanation of Odylic Phenomena afforded by Mr. 
Braid's Experiments 33 

Electro-Biology— 

Phenomena of this state all referrible to Dominant 

Ideas 35 

Their relation to Spiritualistic Phenomena . . 40 

m COyTENTS, 

Pendule Explorateur — 

PAGB 

Chevreul's Investigations 41 

Supposed Odylic Agency disproved ... 43 

Ruttei^s Odometer 44 

Divining Rod— 

Supposed Discovery of Water-springs and Metallic 

veins 47 

Experiments of MM. Chevreul and Biot ... 48 

Dr. Beard's Test Experiment 49 

Mr. Dilke's Test Experiment 50 

Various Applications of Rhabdomancy . • -51 

Thought-Reading — 

Expression by Unconscious Muscular Action , , 53 

LECTURE II. , 

Introduction — 

Credibility of Testimony 56 

Common-sense Test 58 

Witch-persecutions 61 

Credibility of Scientific Testimony .... 66 

Snail Telegraph 68 

Mr. Crookes's Radiometer 69 

Mesmeric Clairvoyance — 

Investigation by French Academy of Medicine . 71 

Dr. Forbes's Examination of Alexis and Adolphe . yj 

Mr. Braid's Examination of Mdlle. Bernard . . 81 

Dr. Forbes's Detection of George Goble ... 85 

Detection of Mr. H ewes' ' Jack ' at Manchester . 87. 

Untrustworthiness of Professor Gregory's Testimony. 90 

Mental Travelling 93 

Dr. Forbes's Exposure of Miss Martineau's J • 95 

CONTENTS, 

Xlll 

Table-Turning and Table-Talking — 

Nature of the Movements .... 
Their Source, proved by Faraday's * Indicator' 

Spiritualism— 

Outbreak of the Epidemic . 
Explanation of the Rappings 
Mrs. Hay den in England . 
Higher Phenomena of Spiritualism 
Frauds of Professional Mediums 
Tricks of Non-professionals 
Self-Deception .... 
Fallacies of Memory . 
Influence of Expectancy 
Trustworthiness of Common Sense 
Possession by Dominant Ideas . 

PAGB 

97 
98 

lOI 

102 

103 

105 

108 

109 
no 
III 

112 

"5 

APPENDICES, 

A. Magic and Demoniacal Agency at the Christian Era . 117 

H. Flagellant Mania 119 

C Dancing Mania . 122 

A Animal Magnetism of Mesmer 124 

E. Academic Report on Mesmer's Pretensions . .125 

F, Extraordinary Muscular Energy producible by Mental 

Concentration . , * 128 

Cr. Examination of Mr. Lewis's Pretensions at Aber- 
deen 129 

2 

xiv CONTENTS. 

PAGB 

H, Mr. Braid's Disproof of Supposed Influence of 

Magnets on Mesmerised Subjects . . • 131 

/. Mr. Braid's Experiments on Subjective Sensations 134 
K* Ancient Use of the Pendule Explorateur . • • '39 

L, Table-talking and Planchette- writing . . • • 139 
Reproduction of Unremembered Ideas . . •143 

M^ Supposed Diabolic Manifestations • • • • 145 

N. Mrs. Norman Culver's Affidavit respecting the Sisters 

Fox 150 

O. Mr. A. R. Wallace's defence of Mrs. Hayden . .153 

P. Mr. Foster's Performances tested . . . • I54 

Q, Mr. Braid on the Influence of Suggestion and Ex- 
pectancy • • • • • • • 157 

MESMERISM, SPIRITUALISM, &c/ 

LECTURE I. 

The aphorism that 'History repeats itself* is in no 
case more true than in regard to the subject on which 
I am now to address you. For there has been a con- 
tinuity from the very earliest times of a belief, more 
or less general, in the existence of * occult * agencies 
capable of manifesting themselves in the production 
of mysterious phenomena of which ordinary expe- 
rience does not furnish the rationale. And while 
this very continuity is maintained by some to be an 
evidence of the real existence of such agencies, it will 
be my purpose to show you that it proves nothing 
more than the wide-spread diffusion, alike among 
minds of the highest and of the lowest culture, of 
certain tendencies to thought, which have either 
created ideal marvels possessing no foundation what- 

* The Lectures, as here presented, include several passages which 
were necessarily omitted in delivery. 

2 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

ever in fact, or have, by exaggeration and distortion, 
invested with a preternatural character occurrences 
which are perfectly capable of a natural explanation. 
Thus, to go no further back than the first century of 
the Christian era, we find the most wonderful narra- 
tions, alike in the writings of Pagan and of Christian 
historians, of the doings of the Eastern 'sorcerers' 
and Jewish 'exorcists* who had spread themselves 
over the Roman Empire.^ Among these, the Simon 
Magus slightly mentioned in the Book of Acts was 
one of the most conspicuous ; being recorded to have 
gained so great a repute for his * magic arts/ as to 
have been summoned to Rome by Nero to exhibit 
them before him ; and a Christian Father goes on to 
tell how, when Simon was borne- aloft through the 
air in a winged chariot, in the sight of the Emperor, 
the united prayers of the Apostles Peter and Paul, 
prevailing over the demoniacal agencies that sustained 
him, brought him precipitately to the ground. So, in 
our own day, not only are we seriously assured by a 
nobleman of high scientific attainments, that he him- 
self saw Mr. Home sailing in the ?ir (by moonlight) 
out of one window and in at another, at a height of 
seventy feet from the ground ; but eleven persons 
unite in declaring that Mrs. Guppy was not only 
conveyed through the air in a trance all the way from 
Highbury Park to Lamb's Conduit Street, but was 
brought by invisible agency into a room of which the 
doors and windows were closed and fastened, coming 
* plump down ' in a state of complete unconsciousness 

* Appendix A, 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 3 

and partial deshabille upon a table round which they 
were sitting in the dark, shoulder to shoulder. 

Of course, if you accept the testimony of these 
witnesses to the aerial flights of Mr. Home and Mrs. 
Gupp}*^, you can have no reason whatever for refusing 
credit to the historic evidence of the demoniacal ele- 
vation of Simon Magus, and the victory obtained 
over his demons by the two Apostles. And you are 
still more bound to accept the solemnly attested 
proofs recorded in the proceedings of our Law Courts 
within the last two hundred years, of the aerial trans- 
port of witches to attend their demoniacal festivities : 
the belief in Witchcraft being then accepted not only 
by the ignorant vulgar, but by some of the wisest 
men of the time, such as Lord Bacon and Sir Matthew 
Hale, Bishop Jewell and Richard Baxter, Sir Thomas 
Browne and Addison ; while the denial of it was con- 
sidered as virtual Atheism.' 

The general progress of Rationalism, however, as 
Mr. Lecky has well shown, has changed all this ; and 
to accept any of these marvels, we must place our- 
selves in the mental attitude of the narrator of Mrs. 
Guppy's flight ; who glories in being so completely 
unfettered by scientific prejudices, as to be free to 
swallow anything, however preposterous and impos^ 
sible in the estimation of scientific men, that his 
belief in ' spiritual ' agencies may lead him to expect 
as probable. 

If time permitted, it would be my endeavour to 
show you by a historical examination of these marvels, 
that there has been a long succession of epidemic 

I MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

Delusions, the form of which has changed from time 
to time, whilst their essential nature has remained the 
same throughout ; and that the condition which 
underlies them all is the subjection of the mind to a 
dominant idea. There is a constitutional tendency in 
many minds to be seized by some strange notion 
which takes entire possession of them ; so that all the 
actions of the individual thus ' possessed ' are results 
of its operation. This notion may be of a nature 
purely intellectual, or it may be one that strongly 
interests the feelings. It may be confined to a small 
group of individuals, or it may spread through vast 
multitudes. Such delusions are most tyrannous and 
most hable to spread, when connected with religious 
enthusiasm ; as we see in the flagellant and dancing 
manias of the Middle Ages ; ^ the supposed Demon- 
iacal possession that afterwards became common in 
the nunneries of France and Germany ; the ecstatic 
revelations of Catholic and Protestant visionaries ; 
the strange performances of the Convidsionnaires of 
St. M^dard, which have been since almost paralleled at 
Methodist * revivals ' and camp-meetings ; the preach- 
ing epidemic of Lutheran Sweden ; and many other 
outbreaks of a nature more or less similar. But it is 
characteristic of some of the later forms of these epi- 
demic delusions, that they have connected themselves 
rather with Science than with Religion. In fact, just 
as the performances of Eastern Magi took the strong- 
est hold of the Roman mind, when its faith in its old 
religious beliefs was shaken to its foundations, so did 

* Appendices^ B^ C, 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 5 

the grandiose pretensions of Mesmer, — who claimed 
the discovery of a new Force in Nature, as universal 
as Gravitation, and more mysterious in its effects than 
Electricity and Magnetism, — find the most ready 
welcome among the sceptical votaries of novelty who 
paved the way for the French Revolution. And this 
pseudo-scientific idea gave the general direction to 
the doctrines taught by Mesmer's successors ; until in 
the supposed ' Spiritualistic * manifestations a recur- 
rence to the religious form has taken place, which may 
(I think) be mainly traced to the emotional longing 
for some assurance of the continued existence of de- 
parted friends, and hence of our own future existence, 
which the intellectual loosening of time-honoured 
beliefs as to the Immortality of the Soul has brought 
into doubt with many. 

I must limit myself, however, to the later phase of 
this history; and shall endeavour to show you how 
completely the extravagant pretensions of Mesmerism 
and Odylism have been disproved by scientific inves- 
tigation: all that is genuine in their phenomena 
having been accounted for by well-ascertained 
Physiological principles ; while the evidence of their 
higher marvels has invariably broken down, when 
submitted to the searching tests imposed by the 
trained 'experts* whom I maintain to be alone 
qualified to pronounce judgment upon such matters. 

Nothing is more common than to hear it asserted 
that these are subjects which any person of ordinary 
intelligence can investigate for himself. But the 
Chemist and the Physicist would most assuredly 

6 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

demur to any such assumption in regard to a chemical 
or physical enquiry ; the Physiologist and Geologist 
would make the same protest against the judgment 
of unskilled persons in questions of physiology and 
geology. And a study of Mesmerism, Odylism, and 
Spiritualism extending over more than forty years, 
may be thought to justify me in contending that a 
knowledge of the physiology and pathology of the 
Human Organism — corporeal and mental — of the 
strange phenomena which are due to the Physical 
excitability of the Nervous System, of the yet stranger 
results, the possession of the Mind by dominant 
emotions or ideas, of its extraordinary tendency to 
self-deception in regard to matters in which the feel- 
ings are interested, of its liability to place undue con- 
fidence in persons having an interest in deceiving, and 
of the modes in which fallacies are best to be detected 
and frauds exposed, is an indispensable, qualification 
both for the discrimination of the genuine from the 
false, and for the reduction of the genuine to its true 
shape and proportions. 

I hold, further, not only that it is quite legitimate 
foi the enquirer to enter upon this study with that 
' prepossession ' in favour of the ascertained and uni- 
versally admitted Laws of Nature, which believers in 
Spiritualism make it a reproach against men of science 
that they entertain ; but that experience proves that 
a prepossession in favour of some ' occult ' agency is 
almost sure to lead the investigator to the too ready 
acceptance of evidence of its operation I would be 
among the last to affirm that there is not * much more 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 7 

in heaven and earth than is dreamt of in our philo- 
sophy ; * and would be as ready as anyone to welcome 
any addition to our real knowledge of the great 
Agencies of Nature. But my contention is that no 
new principle of action has any claim to scientific 
acceptance, save after an exhaustive enquiry as to the 
extent to which the phenomena can be accounted for, 
dther certainly or probably, by agencies already 
known ; an enquiry which only ' experts * in those 
departments of science which deal with such agencies 
are competent to carry out. The assumption of a 
new agency, and the interpretation of phenomena in 
accordance with it, is a method which has proved so de- 
ceptive as to be now universally abandoned by men 
of truly philosophical habits of thought ; being only 
practised by such as surrender their common sense to 
a * dominant idea,* and deem nothing incredible which 
accords with their * prepossession.' 

The recent history of Mr. Crooke's most admirable 
invention, the Radiometer, is pregnant with lessons 
on this point. When this was first exhibited to the 
admiring gaze of the large body of scientific men as- 
sembled at the soiree ot the Royal Society, there was 
probably no one who was not ready to believe with 
its inventor that the driving round of its vanes was 
effected by the direct mechanical agency of that mode 
of Radiant Force which we call Light ; and the 
eminent Physicists in whose judgment the greatest 
confidence was placed, seemed to have no doubt that 
this mechanical ag"ency was something outside Optics 
properly so called, and was, in fact, if not a new Force 

8 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

in Nature, a new modtis operandi of a Force previously 
known under another form. There was here, then, a 
perfect readiness to admit a novelty which seemed so 
unmistakably demonstrated, though transcending all 
previous experience. But after some little time the 
question was raised whether the effect was not really 
due to an intermediate action of that mode of Radiant 
force which we call Heat^ upon the attenuated vapour 
of which it was impossible entirely to get rid ; and the 
result of a most careful and elaborate experimental 
enquiry, in which nature has been put to the question 
in every conceivable mode, has been to make it (I 
believe) almost if not quite certain that the first view 
was incorrect, and that Heat is the real moving power, 
acting under peculiar conditions, but in no new mode. 
No examination of the phenomena of Spiritualism 
can give the least satisfaction to the mind trained in 
philosophical habits of thought, unless it shall have 
been, in its way, as searching and complete as this. 
And when scientific men are invited to dark s^ances^ 
or are admitted only under the condition that they 
shall merely look on and not enquire too closely, they 
feel that the matter is one with which they are entirely 
precluded from dealing. When, again, having seen 
what appears to them to present the character of a 
very transparent conjuring trick, they ask for a repe- 
tition of it under test conditions admitted to be fair, 
their usual experience is that they wait in vain (for 
hours it may be) for such repetition, and are then told 
that they have brought an * atmosphere of incredulity* 
with them, which prevents the manifestation. — Now 

Table-turning, spiritualism, 9 

I by no means affirm that the claims of Spirituah'sm 
are ^/jproved by these failures ; but I do contend that 
until the evidence advanced by believers in those 
claims has stood the test of the same sifting and cross- 
examination by sceptical experts, that would be ap- 
plied in the case of any other scientific enquiry, it has 
no claim upon general acceptance ; and I shall now 
proceed to justify that contention by an appeal to the 
history of previous enquiries of the like kind. 

MESMERISM. 

It was about the year 1772, that Mesmer, who had 
previously published a dissertation On the Injluence of 
the Planets on the Human Bodyy announced his dis- 
covery of a universal fluid, ' the immediate agent of 
all the phenomena of nature, in which life originates, 
and by which it is preserved ; ' and asserted that he 
had further discovered the power of regulating the 
operations of this fluid, to guide its current in healthy 
channels, and to obliterate by its means the tracks of 
disease. This power he in the first instance professed 
to guide by the use of magnets ; but having quarrelled 
with Father Hell, a professor of astronomy at Vienna, 
who had furnished him with the magnets with which 
he made his experiments, and who then claimed the 
discovery of their curative agency, Mesmer went on 
to assert that he could concentrate the power in, and 
liberate it from, any substance he pleased, could 
charge jars with it (as with electricity) and discharge 
them at his pleasure, and could cure by its means 

lo MESMERISM, ODYLTSM, 

the most intractable diseases.* Having created a 
great sensation in Bavaria and Switzerland by his 
mysterious manipulations, and by the novel efYects 
which they often produced, Mesmer returned to 
Vienna, and undertook to cure of complete blindness 
a celebrated singer Mdlle. Paradis, who had been for 
ten years unsuccessfully treated by the court physician. 
His claim to a partial success, however, which was in the 
first instance supported by his patient, seemed to have 
been afterwards so completely disproved by careful 
trials of her visual powers, that he found himself 
obliged to quit Vienna abruptly ; and he thence pro- 
ceeded to Paris, where he soon produced a great sen- 
sation. The state of French society at that time, as 
I have already remarked, was peculiarly favourable to 
his pretensions. A feverish excitability prevailed, 
which caused the public mind to be violently agitated 
by every question it took up. And Mesmer soon 
found it advantageous to challenge the Learned 
Societies of the capital to enter the lists against him ; 
the storm of opposition which he thus provoked 
having the effect of bringing over to his side a large 
number of devoted disciples and ardent partisans. 
He professed to distribute the magnetic fluid to his 
congregated patients, from a baquet or magnetic tub 
which he had impregnated with it, each individual 
holding a rod which proceeded from the baquet \ but 
when the case was particularly interesting, or likely 
to be particularly profitable, he took it in hand for 
personal magnetisation. All the surroundings were 

* Appendix D, 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, u 

such as to favour, in the hysterical subjects who con- 
stituted the great bulk of his patients, the nervous 
paroxysm termed the 'crisis,' which was at once re- 
cognised by medical men as only a modified form of 
what is commonly known as a ' hysteric fit ; ' and the 
influence of the * imitative ' tendency was strongly 
manifested just as in cases where such fits run through 
a school, nunnery, factor)'', or revivalist meeting, in 
which a number of suitable subjects are collectea 
together. And it was chiefly on account of the 
moral disorders to which Mesmer's proceedings 
seemed likely to give rise, that the French Govern- 
ment directed a Scientific Commission, including the 
most eminent savafts of the time — such as Lavoisier, 
Bailly, and Benjamin Franklin — to enquire into them. 
After careful investigation they came to the conclusion 
that there was no evidence whatever of any special 
agency proceeding from the baqnet ; for not only 
were they unable to detect the passage of any influence 
from it, that was appreciable, either by electric, mag- 
netic, or chemical tests, or by the evidence of any of 
their senses ; but on blindfolding those who seemed 
to be most susceptible to its supposed influence, all 
its ordinar}'- effects were produced when they were 
without any connection with it, but believed that it ex- 
isted. And so, when in a garden of which certain 
trees had been magnetised, the patients, either when 
blindfolded, or when ignorant which trees had been 
magnetised, would be thrown into a convulsive fit if 
they believed themselves to be near a magnetised tree. 

12 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

but were really at a distance from it ; whilst, con- 
versely, no effect would follow their close proximity to 
one of these trees, while they believed themselves to 
be at a distancefrom any of them. Further, the Com- 
missioners reported that, although some cures might 
be wrought by the Mesmeric treatment, it was not 
without danger, since the convulsions excited were 
often violent and exceedingly apt to spread, especially 
among men feeble in body and weak in mind, and 
almost universally among women ; and they dwelt 
strongly also on the moral dangers which, as their 
enquiries showed, attended these practices.* 

Now this Report, although referring to a form ol 
Mesmeric procedure which has long since passed into 
disrepute, really deals with what I hold to be an 
important principle of action, which, long vaguely 
recognised under the term * imagination,' now takes a 
definite rank in Physiological science ; — namely, that 
in individuals of that excitable nervous temperament 
which is known as * hysterical ' (a temperament by no 
means confined to women, but rare in healthy and 
vigorous men), the expectation of a ceitain result is 
often sufficient to evoke it. Of the influence of this 
'expectancy' in producing most remarkable changes 
in the bodily organism, either curative or morbid, the 
history of Medicine affords abundant and varied 
illustrations ; I shall presently show you that it can 
generate sensations of a great variety of kinds ; and 
I shall further prove that it operates no less remark- 
ably in calling forth movementSy which, not being 

' Appendix E, 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 13 

consciously directed by the person who executes 
them, have been attributed to hypothetical 'occult' 
agencies. 

I shall not trace the further history of Mesmer, or 
of the system advocated by himself; contenting my- 
self with one ludicrous example of the absurdity of 
his pretensions. When asked in his old age by one 
of his disciples, why he ordered his patients to bathe 
in river-water in preference to well-water, he replied 
that it was because river-water is exposed to the sun's 
rays ; and when further asked how these affected it in 
any other way than by the warmth they excited, he 
replied, " Dear doctor, the reason why all water ex- 
" posed to the rays of the sun is superior to ail other 
" water, is because it is magnetised — since twenty years 
*' ago / magnetised the sun I " 

In the hands of some of his pupils, however, 
Animal Magnetism, or Mesmerism (as it gradually 
came to be generally called), assumed an entirely 
new development. It was discovered by the Marquis 
de Puysegur, — a great landed proprietor, who appears 
to have practised the art most disinterestedly for the 
sole benefit of his tenantiy and poor neighbours, — 
that a state of profound insensibility might be induced 
by very simple methods in some individuals, and a 
state akin to somnambulism in others ; and this dis- 
covery was taken up and brought into vogue by 
numerous mesmerisers in France and Germany, 
while, during the long Continental war and for some 
time afterwards, it remained almost unknown in Eng- 
land. Attention seems to have been first drawn to it 

14 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

in this country by the publication of the account of a 
severe operation performed in 1829 by M. Cloquct, 
one of the most eminent surgeons of Paris, on a female 
patient who had been thrown by mesmerism into a 
state of somnambulism ; in which, though able to con- 
verse with those around her, she showed herself en- 
tirely insensible to pain, whilst of all that took place 
in it she had subsequently no recollection whatever. 
About twelve years afterwards, two amputations were 
performed in our country, one in Nottinghamshire, 
and the other in Leicestershire, upon mesmerised 
patients, who showed no other sign of consciousness 
than an almost inaudible moaning ; both of them ex- 
hibiting an uninterrupted placidity of countenance, 
and declaring, when brought back to their ordinary 
state, that they were utterly unaware of what had 
been done to them during their sleep. And not long 
afterwards, Dr. Esdaile, a surgeon in Calcutta, gave 
details of numerous most severe and tedious opera- 
tions performed by him, without the infliction of pain, 
upon natives in whom he had induced the mesmeric 
sleep ; the rank of Presidency Surgeon being conferred 
upon him by Lord Dalhousie (then Governor-General 
of India), 'in acknowledgment of the services he had 
" rendered to humanity." The results of minor experi- 
ments performed by various persons desirous of testing 
the reality of this state, were quite in harmony with 
these. Writing in 1845, Dr. Noble, of Manchester 
with whom I was early brought into association by 
Sir John Forbes in the pursuit of this enquiry,) said : 
" We have seen a needle thrust deeply under the 

TABLE-TURNINGy SPIRITUALISM. 15 

nail of a woman sleeping mesmerically, without its 
exciting a quiver ; we have seen pungent snuff in 
large quantities passed up the nostrils under the same 
circumstances, without any sneezing being produced 
until the patient was roused, many minutes afterwards: 
we have noticed an immunity from all shock when 
percussion caps have been discharged suddenly and 
loudly close to the ear; and we have observed a 
patient's little finger in the flame of a candle, and yet 
no indication of pain. In this latter case all idea of 
there having been courageous dissimulation was re- 
moved from our mind, in seeing the same patient 
evince both surprise and indignation at the treatment 
received ; as, from particular circumstances, a sub- 
stantial inconvenience was to result from the injury to 
the finger, which was by no means slight." ^ 

This 'mesmeric sleep* corresponds precisely in 
character with what is known in medicine as * hysteric 
coma ; * the insensibility being as profound, while it 
lasts, as in the coma of narcotic poisoning or pressure 
on the brain ; but coming on and passing off with such 
suddenness as to show that it is dependent upon some 
transient condition of the sensorium, which, with our 
present knowledge, we can pretty certainly assign to 
a reduction in the supply of blood caused by a sort of 
spasmodic contraction of the blood-vessels. That 
there is no adequate ground for regarding it as other- 
wise than realy appears further from the discovery 
made not long afterwards by Mr. Braid, a surgeon 
practising at Manchester, that he could induce it by a 

* British and Foreign Medical Review, April 1845. 

16 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

very simple method, which is not only even more 
effective than the * passes ' of the mesmeriser, but is 
moreover quite independent of any other will tnan 
that of the person who subjects himself to it. He 
found that this state (which he designated as Hypnot- 
ism) could be induced in a large proportion of indi- 
viduals of either sex, and of all ranks, ages, and 
temperaments, who determinately fix their gaze for 
several minutes consecutively on an object brought so 
near to their eyes, as to require a degree of conver- 
gence of their axes that is maintainable only by a 
strong effort.* 

The first state thus induced is usually one of 
profound comatose sleep ; the ' subject ' not being 
capable of being roused by sensory impressions of 
any ordinary kind, and bearing without the least 
indication of consciousness what would ordinarily pro- 
duce intolerable uneasiness or even severe pain. But 
after some little time, this state very commonly passes 
into one of somnambulism, which again corresponds 

* Mr. Braid's peculiar success in inducing this state seemed to 
depend partly upon his mode of working his method, and partly upon 
the * expectancy * of his subjects. Finding a bright object preferable, 
he usually employed his silver lancet-case, which he held in the first 
place at ordinary reading distance, rather above the plane of the eyes ; 
he then slowly approximated it towards the middle point, a little above 
the bridge of the nose, keeping his own eyes steadily fixed upon those 
of his * subject,' and watching carefully the direction of their axes. 
If he perceived their convergence to be at all relaxed, he withdrew the 
object until the axes were both again directed to it ; and then again 
approximated it as closely as was compatible with their continued 
convergence. When this could be maintained for a sufficient length, of 
time upon an object at no more than about three inches dis'.ance, the 
comatose state generally supervened. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 17 

closely on the one hand with natural, and on the 
other with mesmeric somnambulism. In fact, it has 
been by the study of the Somnambulism artificially 
induced by Mr. Braid's process, that the essential 
nature of this condition has been elucidated, and that 
a scientific rationale can now be given of a large pro- 
portion of the phenomena reported by Mesmerisers as 
having been presented by their somnambules. 

It has been claimed for certain Mesmeric som- 
nambules, however, that they occasionally possess an 
intelligence altogether superhuman as to things pre- 
sent, past, and future, which has received the designa- 
tion ' lucidity ; ' and it is contended that the testimony 
on which we accept the reality of phenomena which 
are conformable to our scientific experience, ought to 
satisfy us equally as to the genuineness of those 
designated as ' the higher,* which not only transcend, 
but absolutely contradict, what the mass of enlightened 
men would regard as universal experience. This 
contention, however, seems to me to rest upon an 
entirely incorrect appreciation of the probative force 
of evidence ; for, as I shall endeavour to prove to you 
in my succeeding lecture, the only secure basis for our 
belief on any subject, is the confirmation afforded to 
external testimony by our sense of the inherent pro- 
bability of the fact testified to ; so that, as has been 
well remarked, "evidence tendered in support of what 
" is new must correspond in strength with the degree 
•* of its incompatibility with doctrines generally admitted 
** as true ; and, where statements obviously contravene 
** all past experience and the universal consent of man- 

1 8 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

'* kind, any evidence is inadequate to the proof, which 
" is not complete, beyond suspicion, and absolutely in- 
** capable of being explained away." 

Putting aside for the present the discussion of 
these asserted mai'vels, I shall try to set before you 
briefly the essential characters which distinguish the 
state of Somnambulism (whether natural or induced), 
on the one hand from dreaming, and on the other 
from the ordinary waking condition. As in both 
these, the mind is in a state of activity ; but, as in 
dreaming, its activity is free from that controlling 
power of the will, by which it is directed in the waking 
state ; and is also removed from this last by the com- 
plete ignorance of all that has passed in it, which is 
manifested by the ' subject ' when called back to his 
waking self, — although the events of one access of this 
* second consciousness' may vividly present them- 
selves in the next, as if they had happened only just 
before. Again, instead of all the senses being shut 
up, as in ordinary dreaming sleep, some of them are 
not only awake, but preternaturally impressible ; so 
that the course of the somnambulist's thought may 
be completely directed by suggestions of any kind 
that can be conveyed from without through the sense- 
channels which still remain open. But further, while 
the mind of the ordinary dreamer can no more pro- 
duce movements in his body than impressions on his 
sense-organs can affect his mind, that of the Somnam- 
bulist retains full direction of his body (in so far, at 
least, as his senses serve to guide its movements) ; so 
that he acts his dreams as if they were his waking 

, TABLE-TURMNG, SPIRITUALISM. 19 

thoughts. The mesmerised or hypnotised Somnambule 
may, in fact, be characterised as a conscious automaton, 
which, by appropriate suggestions, may be made to 
think, feel, say, or do almost anything that its director 
wills it to think, feel, say, or do ; with this remarkable 
peculiarity, that its whole power seems concentrated 
upon the state of activity in which it is at each 
moment, so that every faculty it is capable of exerting 
may become extraordinarily intensified. Thus, while 
vision is usually suspended, the senses of hearing, 
smell, and touch, with the muscular sense, are often 
preternaturally acute ; in consequence, it would seem, 
of the undistracted concentration of the attention on 
their indications. I could give you many curious 
instances of this, which I have myself witnessed ; as 
also of the great exertion of muscular power by sub- 
jects of extremely feeble physique : ^ but as they are 
all obviously referrible to this one simple principle, I 
need not dwell on their details, preferring to narrate 
one which I did not myself witness, but which was 
reported to me on most trustworthy authority, of a 
remarkable manifestation of a power of imitative 
vocalisation that is ordinarily attainable only after 
long practice. When Jenny Lind was singing at 
Manchester, she was invited by Mr. Braid to hear the 
performances of one of his hypnotised subjects, an 
illiterate factory girl, who had an excellent voice and 
ear, but whose musical powers had received scarcely 
any cultivation. This girl in the hypnotic state 
followed the Swedish nightingale's songs in different 

* Appendix F, 

20 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

languages both instantaneously and correctly ; and 
when, in order to test her powers, Mdlle. Lind extem- 
porised a long and elaborate chromatic exercise, she 
imitated this with no less precision, though unable in 
her waking state even to attempt anything of the sort. 
" She caught the sounds so promptly," says Mr. Braid, 
" and gave both words and music so simultaneously 
" and correctly, that several persons present could not 
" discriminate whether there were two voices or only 
" one." 

Now I wish you to compare this case with another, 
which was reported about the same time upon what 
seemed equally unexceptionable testimony. When 
Miss Martineau first avowed her conversion to Mes- 
merism, the extraordinary performances of her servant 

J were much talked of; and among other marvels 

it was asserted that she could converse, when in her 
mesmeric state, in languages she had never learned, 
and of which she knew nothing when awake ; the 
particular fact being explicitly stated, that Lord 
Morpeth had tested this power and had found it real. 
You will readily perceive that supposing the testi- 
mony in this case to have been exactly the same as 
in the preceding, its probative force would have been 
\ ery different. For the first of them, though unprece- 
dented, presented no scientific improbability to those 
who were prepared by their careful study of the 
phenomena of Hypnotism, to believe that the power 
of imitative vocalisation, like any other, might be in- 
tensified by the concentration of the somnabule's 
whole attention upon the performance. But it seemed 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 21 

inconceivable that an uneducated servant girl could 
understand what was said to her in a language she 
had never learned ; still more, that slie should be able 
to reply in the same language. And the only rational 
explanation of the fact, if fact it was, short of a mira- 
cle, must have lain, either in her having learned the 
language long before and subsequently forgotten it, 
or in her being able by * thought-reading * (which is 
maintained by some, even at the present time, to be 
one of the attributes of the mesmeric state) to divine 
and express the answer expected by Lord Morpeth. 
But the marvel was entirely dissipated by the enqui- 
ries of Dr. Noble ; who, being very desirous of getting 
at the exact truth, first applied for information to a 
near relative of Miss Martineau, and was told by him 
that the report was not quite accurate, for that on 

Lord Morpeth putting a question to J in a foreiga 

language, J had replied appropriately in her own 

vernacular. Her comprehension of Lord Morpeth's 
question, however, appeared in itself sufficiently strange 
to be suggestive of some fallacy ; and having an op- 
portunity, not long afterwards, of asking Lord Mor- 
peth himself what was the real state of the case, 
Dr. Noble learned from himthat whenhe put a question 

to J in a foreign language, she imitated his speech 

after a fashion by an unmeaning articulation of sound. 
On the lesson which this case affords as to the 
credibility of testimony in regard to what are called 
tlie 'higher phenomena' of Mesmerism, I shall en- 
large in my succeeding lecture ; and at present I shall 
only remark that it was shown by careful comparison 

22 MESMERISAf, ODYLISM, 

between the phenomena displayed by the same indi- 
viduals, when * mesmerised ' in the ordinary way, and 
* hypnotised ' by Mr. Braid's process, that there was 
no other difference between the two states, than that 
arising from the special rapport between the mesme- 
riser and his * subject ' ; and that this was clearly expli- 
cable by the * expectancy ' under which the * subject * 
passed into the state of second consciousness. For 
Mr. Braid found himself able, by assuring his ' sub- 
jects ' during the induction of the coma that they 
would hear the voice of one particular person and no 
other, to establish this rapport with any person he 
might choose: the case being strictly analogous to 
the awaking of the telegraph-clerk by the clicking of 
his needles, of the doctor by his night-bell, or of the 
mother by her infant's cry, though all would sleep 
soundly through far louder noises to which they felt 
no call to attend. And thus, as was pointed out long 
since by Dr. Noble and myself, not only may the 
general reality of the Mesmeric Somnambulism be 
fully admitted, but a scientific rationale may be found 
for its supposed distinctive peculiarities, without the 
assumption of any special * magnetic' or 'mesmeric* 
agency. 

It is affirmed, however, that proof of this agency 
is furnished by the power of the * silent will ' of the 
Mesmeriser to induce the sleep in subjects who are 
not in the least aware that it is being exerted, and 
further, to direct from a distance the actions of the 
Somnambule. Doubtless, if satisfactory proof of this 
assertion could be furnished, it would go far to estab- 

TABLE-TURNING, b^PIRITUALISM, 23 

Iish the claim. But nothing is more difficult than to 
eliminate all sources of fallacy in this matter. For 
while it is admitted by Mesmerisers that the belief 
that the influence is being exerted is quite sufficient, 
in habitual somnambules, to induce the result, it is 
equally certain that such * sensitives ' are marvellously 
quick at guessing from slight intimations what is ex- 
pected to happen. And it has been repeatedly found 
that mesmerisers who had no hesitation in asserting 
that they could send particular * subjects ' to sleep, or 
could affect them in other ways, by an effort of silent 
will, have utterly failed to do so when these * subjects ' 
were carefully kept from any suspicion that such will 
was being exerted. Thus Dr. Noble has recorded the 
case of a friend of his own, who, believing himself 
able thus to influence a female servant whom he had 
repeatedly mesmerised, accepted with the full assur- 
ance of confident faith a proposal to make this 
experiment in Dr. Noble's house instead of his own. 
The girl, having been sent thither with a note, was 
told to sit down in Dr. Noble's consulting-room while 
the answer was being written ; her chair being clcse 
to a partially-open door, on the other side of which 
her master, whom she supposed to be elsewhere, had 
previously taken up his position. Although this gen- 
tleman had usually found two or three minutes 
sufficient to send the girl to sleep, when he was in his 
own drawing-room and she was in the kitchen, the two 
being separated by intervening walls and flooring, yet 
when he put forth his whole force for a quarter of an 
hour within two feet of her, with only a partially closed 

24 MESMERISM, ODYUSMy 

door between them, it was entirely without result; 
and no other reason for the failure could be assigned 
than her entire freedom from expectancy. So in 
another case, in which Mr. Lewis (accounted one of 
the most powerful Mesmerists of his time) undertook 
to direct the actions of his somnambule in the next 
room, according to a programme agreed on between 
himself and one set of witnesses, — whilst the actions 
actually performed were recorded and timed by 
another set, — there was found to be so complete a 
discordance between the programme * willed ' and the 
actions really executed, as entirely to negative the 
idea of any dependence of the latter upon the directing 
power of the mesmeriser.^ Mr. Lewis was 'challenged 
to this test-experiment by Professors of the University 
of Aberdeen, in consequence of his public assertion 
that he had repeatedly induced the mesmeric sleep, 
and had directed the operations of his somnambules, 
by the exertion of his * silent will * from a distance. 
His utter failure to produce either result, however, 
under the scrutiny of sceptical enquirers, obviously 
discredits all his previous statements ; except to such 
as (like Mr. A. R. Wallace, who has recently expressed 
his full faith in Mr. Lewis's self-asserted powers,) are 
ready to accept without question the slenderest evi- 
dence of the greatest marvels. Further, when chal- 
lenged to give proof before the same Committee, of 
the power he had publicly claimed of overcoming the 
force of gravity by raising a man from the ground and 
keeping him suspended in the air for a sliort time^ 

* Appendix G. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 25 

simply by holding his hand above the man*s head and 
willing the result, Mr, Lewis admitted " that he had 
'* no such power, and that he could only influence 
** a person lying on the ground so as to make him start 
** up, though others were' endeavouring to hold him 
" down." Now I would ask you to compare this dis- 
claimer, made to a body of sceptical Professors of 
Aberdeen, whose published report of it was never 
impugned by Mr. Lewis, with the assertion made to 
and accepted by Professor Gregory of Edinburgh : — 
" When Mr. Lewis stood on a chair, and tried to draw 
" Mr. H., without contact, from the ground, he gradu- 
" ally rose on tiptoe, making the most violent efforts to 
" rise, till he was fixed by cataleptic rigidity. Mr. Lewis 
"said, that had he been still more elevated above Mr. 
** H., he could have raised him from the floor without 
" contact, and held him thus suspended for a short time, 
** while some spectator should pass his hand under his feet, 
'* Although this was not done in my presence, yet the 
"attraction upwards was so strong, that/ see no reason 
" to doubt the statefnent made to me by Mr. Lewis and 
" others zuho saw //, that this experiment has been success- 
*^ fully performed'^ One is inclined to say of such 
pretenders, and of the believers in them, " These be 
thy gods, O Israel." 

A converse experiment performed by Dr. Elliotson 
himself, satisfied him that * expectancy ' would take 
the place of what he maintained to be the real Mes- 
meric influence. Having told one of his habitut^es that 
he would go into the next room and mesmerise her 

' Letters to a Candid Enquirer vn Animal Magnetism^ p. 352.- 

26 MESMERISM, ODVLISM, 

through the door, he retired, shut the door, performed 
no mesmeric passes, but tried to forget her, walked 
away from the door, busied himself with some- 
thing else, and even walked into a third room ; and 
on returning in less than ten minutes found the 
girl in her usual sleep-waking condition. The ex- 
treme susceptibility of many of these ' sensitive ' sub- 
jects further accounts for their being affected (without 
any intentional deceit) by physical impressions which 
are quite imperceptible to others : — such as slight 
differences in temperature, when two coins are pre- 
sented to them, of which one has been held in the 
hand of the mesmeriser ; or two wine-glasses of water, 
into one of which he has dipped his finger for a short 
time. But the 6e/ie/ that he has transmitted his 
influence in any mode is quite sufficient to produce the 
result ; as was shown in an amusing case recorded by 
M. Bertrand, whose treatise on Animal Magnetism 
(Paris, T826) is, by far, the most philosophical work 
extant on the subject. Having occasion to go a jour- 
ney of a hundred leagues, leaving a female somnam- 
bule under the treatment of one of his . friends, 
M. Bertrand sent him a magnetised letter, which he 
requested him to place on the stomach of the patient, 
who had been led to anticipate the expected results ; 
Mesmeric sleep, with the customary phenomena, super- 
vened. He then wrote another letter which he did 
not magnetise, and sent it to her in the same manner, 
and with the same intimation. She again fell into the 
Mesmeric sleep, which was attributed to the letter 
having been unintentionally impregnated by M. Ber- 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. ^7 

trand with the mesmeric fluid while he was writing it. 
Desiring to test, the matter still further, he* caused one 
of his friends to write a similar letter, imitating his 
handwriting so closely that those who received it 
should believe it to be his ; — the same effect was once 
more produced. 

And so it was with the large number of experi- 
ments that were made within my own knowledge 
during the twenty years' attention that I gave to this 
subject, with a view to test the Mesmeriser's power of 
inducing any of the phenomena of this state without 
the patient's consciousness. Successes, it is true, were 
not unfrequent ; but these almost invariably occurred 
when the experiments were made under conditions to 
which the parties had become habituated, as in the 
case of Dr. Noble's friend. For his performances were 
so continually being repeated to satisfy the curiosity 
of visitors, that Dr. Noble's call at his house would 
have been sufficient to excite, on the part of the 
'subject,' the expectancy that would have thrown 
her into the sleep. But when such expectancy was 
carefully guarded against, the result was so constantly 
negative, as — I will not say to disprove the existence 
of any special Mesmeric force, — but to neutralise com- 
pletely the affirmative value of the evidence adduced 
to prove it. For I think you must now agree with me, 
that, if ' expectancy * alone is competent to produce 
the results, as admitted by the most intelligent Mes- 
merisers, nothing but the most rigid exclusion of 
such expectancy can afford the least ground for the 
assumption of any other agency. And my own 

28 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

prolonged study of the subject further justifies me in 
taking the position, that it is only when the enquiry 
is directed, and its results recorded, by sceptical experts^ 
that such results have the least claim to scientific 
value. The disposition to overlook sources of fallacy, 
to magnify trivialities into marvels, to construct 
circumstantial ' myths ' (as in the case of Miss Marti- 
neau's J and Lord Morpeth) on the slightest foun- 
dation of fact, and to allow themselves to be imposed 
upon by cunning cheats, have been so constantly 
exhibited by even the most honest believers in the 
* occult ' power of Mesmerism, as — not only in my 
own opinion, but in that of my very able allies in this 
enquiry — to deprive the unconfirmed testimony of any 
number of such believers, in regard to matters lying 
beyond scientific experience, of all claim to acceptance. 
In fact, the positions taken in regard to Mesmerism 
by my friend Dr. Noble, as far back as 1 845,* and 
more fully developed by myself a few years later on 
the basis of Mr. Braid's experiments and of my own 
Physiological and Psychological studies,^ have, not only 
in our own judgment, but by the general verdict of 
the Medical and Scientific world, been fully confirmed 
by the subsequent course of events, the history of 
which I shall now proceed to sketch. 

* British and Foreign Medical Review^ vol. xix. 
' PHnciples of Human Physiology^ 4th edition, 1853 ; Quarterly 
Ueincw, October, 1853. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 29 

ODYLISM. 

It was asserted, about thirty years ago, by Baron 
von Reichenbach, — whose researches on the Chemistry 
of the Hydrocarbons constitute the foundation of our 
present knowledge of paraffin and its allied products 
of the distillation of coal, — that he had found certain 
' sensitive ' subjects so peculiarly affected by the neigh- 
bourhood of Magnets or Crystals, as to justify the 
assumption of a special polar force which he termed 
Odyle, allied to, but not identical with, Magnetism ; 
present in all material substances, though generally 
in a less degree than in magnets and crystals ; but 
called into energetic activity by any kind of physical 
or chemical change, and, therefore, especially abun- 
dant in the Human body. Of the existence of this 
Odylic force, which he identified with the * animal 
magnetism ' of Mesmer, he found what he maintained 
to be adequate evidence in the peculiar sensations and 
attractions experienced by his ' sensitives' when in the 
neighbourhood either of Magnets or Crystals, or of 
Human beings specially charged with it. After a 
magnet had been repeatedly drawn along the arm of 
one of these 'subjects,' she would feel a pricking, 
streaming, or shooting sensation ; she would smell 
odours proceeding from it ; or she would see a small 
volcano of flame issuing from its poles, when gazing 
at them, even in broad daylight. As in the Mesmeric 
sleep light is often seen by the somnambule to issue 
from the operator's fingers, so the Odylic light was 

30 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

discerned in the dark by Von Reichenbach's ' sensi- 
tives/ issuing not only from the hands, but from the 
head, eyes, and mouth of powerful generators of this 
force. One individual in particular was so peculiarly 
sensitive, that she saw (in the dark) sparks and flames 
issuing from ordinary nails and hooks in a wall. It 
was further affirmed that certain of these 'sensitives' 
found their hands so powerfully attracted by magnets 
or crystals, as to be irresistibly drawn towards them ; 
and thus that if the attracting object were forcibly 
drawn away, not only the hand, but the whole body 
of the sensitive was dragged after it. Another set of 
facts was adduced to prove the special relation of 
Odyle to terrestrial Magnetism, — namely, that many 
* sensitives * cannot sleep in beds which lie across the 
magnetic meridian ; a position at right angles to it 
being to some quite intolerable. 

Von Reichenbach's doctrine came before the British 
public under the authority of the late Dr. Gregory, 
then Professor of Chemistry in the University of 
Edinburgh ; who went so far as to affirm that " by a 
" laborious and beautiful investigation, Reichenbach 
'* had demonstrated the existence of a force, influence, 
" or imponderable fluid — whatever name be given to it — 
"which is distinct from all the known forces, influences, 
" or imponderable fluids, such as heat, light, electricity, 
" magnetism, and from the attractions, such as gravita- 
" tion, or chemical attraction." It at once became ap- 
parent, however, to experienced Physicians conversant 
with the proteiform manifestations of that excitable, 
nervous temperament, of which I have already had to 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 31 

speak, that all these sensations were of the kind 
which the Physiologist terms ' subjective ; ' the state 
of the Sensorium on which they immediately depend, 
being the resultant, not of physical impressions made 
by external agencies upon the Organs of Sense, but 
of Cerebral changes connected with the ideas with 
which the minds of the ' sensitives ' had come to be 
* possessed/ The very fact that no manifestation of 
the supposed force could be obtained except through 
a conscious Human organism, should have been quite 
sufficient to suggest to any philosophic investigator 
that he had to do, not with a new Physical Force, but 
with a peculiar phase of Physiological action, by no 
means unfamiliar to those who had previously studied 
the influence of the Mind upon the Body. As Mr. 
Braid justly remarked, " It unfortunately happens 
" that the only test of this alleged new Force is the 
** Human Nerve ; and not only so, but it is further ad- 
" mitted that its existence can only be demonstrated 
'* by certain impressions imparted to, or experienced 
" by, a comparatively small number of highly sensitive 
" and nervous subjects. But it is an undoubted fact 
** that with many individuals, and especially of the 
"highly nervous, and imaginative, and abstractive 
" classes, a strong direction of inward consciousness to 
" any part of the body, especially if attended with the 
" expectation or belief of something being about to 
" happen, is quite sufficient to change the physical action 
^^ of the party and to produce such impressions from this 
** cause alone, as Baron Reichenbach attributes to his fiew 
*^ force. Thus every variety of feeling may be excited 

32 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

" from an internal or mental cause — such as heat or 
'*cold, pricking, creeping, tingling, spasmodic twitching 
"of muscles, catalepsy, a feeling of attraction orrepul- 
" sion, sights of every form or hue, odours, tastes, and 
" sounds, in endless variety, and so on, according as ac- 
" cident or intention may have suggested. Moreover, 
" the oftener such impressions have been excited, the 
" more readily may they be reproduced, under similar 
"circumstances, through the laws of association and 
** habit. Such being the fact, it must consequently be 
" obvious to every intelligent and unprejudiced person, 
'' that no implicit reliance can be placed on the Human 
"Nerve, as a test of this new power in producing 
" effects from external impressions or influences ; since 
" precisely the same phenomena may arise from an 
" internal ox mental influence, when no external agency 
•* whatever is in operation." ^ 

The fact, which Von Reichenbach himself was 
honest enough to admit — that when a magnet was 
poised in a delicate balance, and the hand of a 'sensitive' 
was placed above or beneath it, the magnet was never 
drawn towards the hand — ought to have convinced 
him that the force which attracted the * sensitive's ' 
hand to the magnet has nothing in common with 
physical attractions, whose action is invariably recu- 
procal ; but that it was the product of her own con- 
viction that she mtist thus approximate it So 
* possessed ' was he, however, by his pseudo-scientific 
conception, that the true significance of this fact 
entirely escaped him ; and although he considered 
that he had taken adequate precautions to exclude 

* A striking illustration of this principle will be found in Appendix IL 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 33 

the conveyance of any suggestion of which his 
'sensitives' should be conscious, he never tried the 
one test which would have been the experimentum 
crucis in regard to all the supposed influences of 
Magnets, — that of using electro-magnets^ which could 
be * made' and 'unmade' by completing or breaking 
the electric circuit, without any indication being given 
to the 'sensitive' of this change of its conditions. 
And the same remark applies to the more recent 
statement of Lord Lindsay, as to Mr. Home's recog- 
nition of the position of a permanent magnet in a 
totally darkened room ; the value of this solitary fact, 
for which there are plenty of ways of accounting, 
never having been tested by the use of an Electro- 
magnet, whose active or passive condition should be 
entirely unknown, not only to Mr. Home, but to every 
person present. 

That 'sensitives' like Von Reichenbach's, in so f:ar 
as they are not intentional deceivers (which many 
hysterical subjects are constitutionally prone to be), 
can feel, see, or smell anything that they were led to 
believe that they would feel, see, or smell, was soon 
proved by the experimental enquiries of Mr. Braid, 
many of which I myself witnessed.* He found that 
not only in hysterical girls, but in many men and 
women *'of a highly concentrative and imaginative 
'* turn of mind," though otherwise in ordinary health, it 
was sufficient to fix the attention on any particular 
form of expectancy, — such as pricking, streaming, heat^ 
cold, or other feelings, in any part of the body over 

* Appendix I. 

34 MESMERISM, ODYL/SM, 

which a magnet was being drawn ; luminous emana- 
tions from the poles of a magnet in the dark, in some 
cades even in full daylight ; or the attraction of a 
magnet or crystal held within reach of the hand, — for 
that expectancy to be fully realised. And, conversely, 
the same sensations were equally produced when the 
subjects of them were led to believe that the same 
agency was being employed, although nothing what- 
ever was really done ; the same flames being seen 
when the magnet was concealed by shutting it in a 
box, or even when it was carried out of the room, 
without the knowledge of the subject ; and the attrac- 
tion of the magnet for the hand being entirely 
governed by the idea previously suggested, positive 
or negative results being thus obtained with either 
pole, as Mr. Braid might direct 

I had myself the opportunity of witnessing these 
'vigilant phenomena' (as Mr. Braid termed them, 
from their being presented by individuals not asleep, 
though in a state of abstraction) upon one of Mr. 
Braid's best * subjects,' a gentleman residing in 
Manchester, well known for his high intellectual 
culture, great general ability, and strict probity. 
He had such a remarkable power of voluntary ab- 
straction, as to be able at any time to induce in 
himself a state akin to profound Reverie (corre- 
sponding to what has been since most inappropriately 
called the * biological'), in which he became so com- 
pletely 'possessed' by any idea strongly enforced 
upon him, that his whole state of feeling and action 
was dominated by it. Thus it was sufficient for him 
to place his hand upon the table, and fix his attention 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 35 

upon it for half a minute, to be entirely unable to 
withdraw it, if assured in a determined tone that he 
could not do so. When his gaze had been steadily 
directed for a short time to the poles of a magnet, he 
could be brought to see flames issuing from them, of 
any form or colour that Mr. Braid chose to name. 
And when desired to place his hand upon one of the 
poles, and to fix his attention for a brief period upon 
it, the peremptory assurance that he could not detach 
it was sufficient to hold it there with such tenacity, 
that I saw Mr. Braid drag him round the room by 
the traction of the magnet which he held, in a way 
that reminded me of George Cruikshank's amus- 
ing illustration of the German fairy story of the 
Golden Goose. The attraction was dissolved by Mr. 
Braid's loud cheery * All right, man,' which brought 
the subject back to his normal condition, as suddenly 
as the attraction of a powerful Electro-magnet for a 
heavy mass of iron ceases when the circuit ic broken. 

ELECTRO-BIOLOGY. 

Similar experiments to the foregoing (which I first 
witnessed about thirty years ago) have been since 
repeated, over and over again, upon great numbers of 
persons, in whom a corresponding state can be induced 
by prolonged fixation of the vision on a small object 
held in the hand. It was in the year P850 that a new 
manifestation of the supposed 'occult' power first 
attracted public attention, through the exhibition of 
it by a couple of itinerant Americans, who styled 
5 

36 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

themselves 'professors' of a new art which they 
termed E /ec^ro-Bio/o£y y^ssGrting thsit by an influence 
of which the secret was only known to themselves, but 
which was partially derived from a little disk of zinc 
or copper held in the hand of the 'subject' and 
steadily gazed on by him, they could subjugate the 
most determined will, paralyse the strongest muscles, 
pervert the evidence of the senses, destroy the memory 
of even the most familiar things or of the most recent 
occurrences, induce obedience to any command, or 
make the individual believe himself transformed into 
anyone else ; — all this, and much more, being done 
while he was still wide awake. They soon attracted 
large assemblages to witness their performances ; and 
seldom failed to elicit some of the most remarkable 
phenomena from entire strangers to them, whose 
honesty could not be reasonably called in question. 
In place of a few peculiarly susceptible 'subjects ' not 
always to be met with, and open to suspicion on 
various grounds, those who took up this practice 
found in almost every circle some individuals in whom 
the 'biologicaF state could be self-induced by the 
steady direction of their eyes to one point, at the 
ordinary reading distance, for a period usually varying 
from about five to twenty minutes ; a much shorter 
time generally sufficing in cases in which the practice 
has been frequently repeated. In this condition, the 
whole course of thought is directed by external sug- 
gestions, the subject's own control over it being alto- 
gether suspended. Yet he differs from the somnam- 
bulist in being awake ; that is, he has generally the 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 37 

use of all his senses, and usually, though not always, 
preserves a distinct recollection of all that has taken 
place. There is, in fact, a gradational transition from 
the * biological ' to the * mesmeric ' state ; just as there 
is a passage from the state of profound reverie or 
'day-dreaming' to that of ordinary sleep. All its 
strange phenomena are referrible to one simple prin- 
ciple — the possession of the mind by a dominant ideciy 
from which, however absurd it may be, the subject 
cannot free himself by bringing it to the test of actual 
experience, because the suspension of his self-directing 
power prevents him from -correcting his ideational state 
by comparing it with external realities ; this suspen- 
sion being often as complete as it is in dreaming, so 
that, though the senses are awake, they cannot be 
turned to account. But it may exist in regard to one 
sense only, the impressions made on others being 
truly represented to the mind. Thus I have seen 
instances in which a 'biologised' subject could be 
made to believe himself to be tasting anything which 
the operator might assure him that he would taste — 
such as milk, coffee, wine, or porter — when drinking 
a glass of pure water, though he was instantly dis- 
abused by lookvig at the liquid ; whilst another would 
.f^^ milk or coffee, wine or porter, as he was directed, 
but would instantly set himself right when he tasted 
the liquid. Nothing can be more instructive than to 
experiment upon a subject who has no misgivings of 
this kind, but whose perceptions are altogether under 
the direction of the ideas impressed upon him. He 
may be made to exhibit all the manifestations of 

^g MESMERISM, ODVLISM, 

delight which would be called forth by the viands or 
liquors of which he may be most fond ; and these 
may be turned in a moment into expressions of the 
strongest disgust, by simply, giving the word which 
shall (ideally) change it into something he detests. 
Or if, when he believes himself to be drinking a cup 
of tea or cofifee, he be made to believe that it is very 
hot, nothing will induce him to take more than a sip 
at a time ; yet a moment afterwards he will be ready 
to swallow the whole in gulps, if assured that the 
liquid is quite cool. Tell him, again, that his seat is 
growing hot under him, and that he will not be able 
to remain long upon it, and he will fidget uneasily for 
some time, and at last start up with all the indica- 
tions of having found the heat no longer bearable. 
Whilst he is firmly grasping a stick in his hand, let 
him be assured that it will burn him if he continue to 
hold it, or that it is becoming so heavy that he can no 
longer sustain it ; and he will presently drop it with 
gestures conformable in each case to the idea. 

It may, of course, be said that what I have pre- 
sented to you as real phenomena are only simulated ; 
and as there would be nothing difficult in such 
simulation, the supposition is clearly admissible. But 
they are so perfectly conformable to the known prin- 
ciples of Mental action, that there is no justification 
for the suspicion of deceit, when they are presented 
by persons in whose good faith we have reasonable 
grounds of confidence. For everyone must be con- 
scious of occasional mistakes as to what he supposes 
himself to have seen or heard, which he can trace to 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 39 

a previous 'expectancy.' Of this I can ^\n^ you a 
very striking illustration in a case narrated by Dr. 
Tuke. A lady, whose mind had been a good deal 
occupied on the subject of drinking-fountains, was 
walking from Penryn to Falmouth, and thought she 
saw in the road a newly-erected fountain, with the 
inscription, * If any man thirst, let him come hither 
and drink.' Some time afterwards, on mentioning 
the fact with pleasure to the daughters of a gentleman 
whom she supposed to have erected it, she was 
greatly surprised to learn from them that no such 
drinking-fountain existed ; and on subsequently re- 
pairing to the spot, she found nothing but a few stones, 
which constituted the foundation on which her ex- 
pectant imagination had built an ideal superstructure. 
The same may be said with regard to the control 
exercised over the muscular movements of the Biolo- 
gised ' subject,' by the persuasion that he must or that 
he cannot perform a particular action. His hands 
being placed in contact With one another, he is 
assured that he cannot separate them ; and they re- 
main as if firmly glued together, in spite of all his 
apparent efforts to draw them apart. Or, a hand 
being held up before him, he is assured that he can- 
not succeed in striking it ; and not only does all his 
power seem inadequate to the performance of this 
simple action, but it actually is so, as long as he 
remains convinced of its entire impossibility. So I 
have seen a strong man chained down to his chair, 
prevented from stepping over a stick on the floor, or 
obliged to remain almost doubled upon himself in a 

40 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

stooping position, by the assurance that he could not 
move. On the other hand, an extraordinary power 
may be called forth in any set of muscles — as in 
Hypnotised subjects — by the assurance that the action 
to be performed by them may be executed with the 
greatest facility. This, again, is quite conformable to 
ordinary experience ; the assurance that we can per- 
form some feat of strength or dexterity, nerving us to 
the effort ; whilst our power is weakened by our own 
doubts of success, still more by the unfavourable im- 
pression produced by a confident prediction of failure. 
It is only needed for the mind to become completely 
* possessed ' by the one or the other conviction, for it 
to produce the bodily results of this kind which I have 
over and over again witnessed. 

Now the phenomena of the * Biological ' condition 
seem to me of peculiar significance, in relation to a 
large class of those which are claimed as manifesta- 
tions of a supposed ' Spiritual ' agency. When a num- 
ber of persons of that " concentrative and imaginative 
turn of mind " which predisposes them to this condi- 
tion, sit for a couple of hours (especially if in the dark) 
with the expectation of some extraordinary occur- 
rence, — such as the rising and floating in the air, either 
of the human body, or of chairs or tables, without any 
physical agency; the crawling of live lobsters over 
their persons ; the contact of the hands, the sound of 
the voices, or the visible luminous shapes/ of their 

* T put aside the question of fraud, to which recourse has doubtless 
often been had for the production of these phenomena ; being satisfied 
that they are often genuinely 'subjective.' 

TABLE-TURN INGy SPIRITUALISM, 41 

departed friends, — it is perfectly conformable to scien- 
tific probability that they should pass more or less 
completely (like Reichenbach's * sensitives ') into a 
state which is neither wakiilg nor sleeping, but between 
the two, in which they see, hear, or feel by touch, 
anything they have been led to expect will present 
itself. And the accordance of their testimony, in 
regard to such occurrences, is only such as is produced 
by the community of the * dominant idea ' with which 
they are all * possessed,' a community of which history 
furnishes any amount of strangely-varied examples. 
And thus it becomes obvious that the testimony of a 
single cool-headed sceptic, who asserts that nothing 
extraordinary has really occurred, should be accepted 
as more trustworthy than that of any number of be- 
lievers, who have, as it were, created the sensorial 
result by their anticipation of it. 

PENDULE EXPLORATEUR. 

I have now to show you that the like * expectancy * 
can also produce movements of various kinds through 
the instrumentality of the nervo-muscular apparatus, 
without the least consciousness on the part of its sub- 
ject of his being himself the instrument of their per- 
formance ; a physiological fact which is the key to the 
whole mystery of Table-turning and Table-talking. 
I very well remember the prevalence, in my school- 
boy days, of a belief that when a ring, a button, or 
any other small body, suspended by a string over the 
end of the finger, was brought near the outside or 

42 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

inside of a glass tumbler, it would strike the hour of 
the day against its surface ; and the experiment cer- 
tainly succeeded in the hands of several of my school- 
fellows, who tried it in all good faith, getting up in 
the middle of the night to test it, in entire ignorance — 
as they declared— of the real time. But, as was pointed 
out by M. Chevreul, who investigated this subject in 
a truly scientific spirit more than forty years ago,* it 
is impossible by any voluntary effort to keep the hand 
absolutely still for a length of time in the position 
required ; an involuntary tremulousness is always ob- 
servable in the suspended body ; and if the attention 
be fixed on it with the expectation that its vibrations 
will take a definite direction, they are very likely to 
do so. But their persistence in that direction is found 
to last only so long as they are guided by the sight 
of the operator ; the oscillations at once and entirely 
losing their constancy, if he closes or turns away his 
eyes. Thus it became obvious that, in the striking 
of the hour, the influence which determines the num- 
ber of strokes is really the knowledge or suspicion 
present to the mind of the operator, which involuntarily 
and unconsciously directs the action of his muscles ; 
and the same rationale was applied by M.#Chevreul 
to other cases in which this paidule explorateiir (the use 
of which can be traced back to a very remote date) 
has been appealed to for answers to questions of very 
diverse character.^ 

* See his fetter to M Ampere in the Reviic des Deux Mondes^ 
Mai, 1833. 

« Appendix JC. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 43 

When, however, 'Odyle* came to the front, and 
the world of curious but unscientific enquirers was 
again * possessed * by the idea of an unknown and 
mysterious agency, capable of manifesting itself in an 
unlimited variety of ways, the pendule explorateur was 
brought into vogue, under the name of Odometer^ by 
Dr. Herbert Mayo,^ who investigated its action with 
a great show of scientific precision ; starting, however, 
with the foregone conclusion that its oscillations were 
directed by the hypothetical * odyle,' and altogether 
ignoring the mental participation of the operator, 
whom he supposed to be as passive as a thermometer 
or a balance. By a series of elaborate experiments, 
he convinced himself that the direction and extent of 
the oscillations could be altered, either by a change 
in the nature of the substances placed beneath the 
* odometer,' or by the contact of the hand of a person 
of the opposite sex, or even of the other hand of the 
experimenter himself, with that from which it was sus- 
pended. And he gradually reduced his result to a 
series of definite laws, which he regarded as having 
the same constancy as those of Physics or Chemistry. 
Unfortunately, however, other experimenters, who 
worked out the enquiry with similar perseverance and 
good faith, arrived at such different results, that it 
soon came to be obvious that what Astronomical ob- 
servers call the * personal equation' of the individual 
has a very large share in determining them. A very 
intelligent medical friend of my own, then residing 
abroad, wrote me long letters full of the detailed 

* On the Truths contained in Popular Superstitions^ 185 1. 

44 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

results of his own enquiries, on which he was anxious 
for my opinion. My reply was simply, " Shut your 
" eyes, or turn them away ; let some one else watch the 
** oscillations under the conditions you have specified, 
" and record their results ; and you will find, if I do not 
" mistake, that they will then show an entire want of 
" the constancy you have hitherto observed." His next 
letter informed me that such proved to be the case ; 
so that he came entirely to agree with me as to tjie 
dependence of the previous uniformity of his results 
on his own * expectancy.' 

A curious variation of the * Odometer ' was intro- 
duced by Mr. Rutter, then manager of the gas-works 
at Brighton, under the name of ' Magnetometer ; ' 
which was simply a gallows-shaped frame, mounted 
on a solid base, and having a metallic ball suspended 
from its free extremity. When the finger was kept for 
a short time in contact with this frame, the ball began 
to oscillate, usually in some definite direction ; chang- 
ing that direction with any change of circumstances, 
after the manner of Dr. Mayo's * odometer.' To many 
persons, as to Mr. Rutter himself, it appeared impos- 
sible that these oscillations could have their origin in 
any movement of the operator ; but everyone who 
knew how difficult it is to prevent vibrations in the 
supporting frame-work of a Microscope or a Telescope, 
and who recognised in the construction of the ' Mag- 
netometer' exactly such an arrangement as enabled 
the smallest amount of imparted motion to produce 
the greatest sensible effect, was prepared to anticipate 
that the oscillations of the suspended ball would be 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 45 

as much maintained and guided by the * expectancy ' 
of the operator, as they are when it is hung directly 
from his own finger. Experiment soon proved this to 
be the case ; for it was found that the constancy of 
the vibrations entirely depended upon the operator's 
watching their direction, either by his own eyes or by 
those of some one else ; and further, that when such a 
change was made without his knowledge in the condi- 
tions of the experiment, as ought, theoretically, to 
alter the direction of the oscillations, no such alteration 
took place. 

A very amusing exposi of the mystery of the 
* Magnetometer* resulted from its application by Dr. 
Madden, a Homoeopathic physician at Brighton, to 
test the virtues of his * globules,' as to which he had, 
of course, some pre-formed conclusions of his own. 
The results of his first experiments entirely corre- 
sponded with his ideas of what they ought to be ; for 
when a globule of one medicine was taken into his 
disengaged hand, the suspended ball oscillated longi- 
tudinally ; and when this globule was changed for 
another of (supposed) opposite virtues, the direction of 
the oscillations became transverse. Another Homoeo- 
pathic physician, however, was going through a similar 
course of experiments ; and his results, while conform- 
able to his own notions of the virtues of the globules, 
were by no means accordant with those of Dr. Madden. 
The latter was thus led to re-investigate the matter 
with a precaution he had omitted in the first instance ; 
— namely, that the globules should be placed in his 
hand by another person, without any hint being given 

+6 MESMERISM, ODYLiSM, 

him of their nature. From the moment he began to 
work upon this plan, the whole aspect of the subject 
was changed ; globules that produced longitudinal 
oscillations at one time, gave transverse at another ; 
whilst globules of the most opposite lemedial virtues 
gave no sign of difference. And thus he was soon led 
to the conviction, which he avowed with a candour 
very creditable to him, that the system he had built 
up had no better foundation than his own * expect- 
ancy * of what the results of each experiment should 
be ; that anticipation expressing itself unconsciously 
in involuntary and imperceptible movements of his 
finger, which communicated a rhythmical vibration to 
the framework when the oscillations of the ball sus- 
pended from it were watched. 

Thus, by the investigations of scientific experts 
who were alive to the sources of fallacy which the in- 
troduction of the kuffian element always brings into 
play, the hypothesis of Odylic force was proved to be 
completely baseless ; the phenomena which were sup- 
posed to indicate its existence being traceable to the 
Physiological conditions of the Human organisms 
through whose instrumentality they were manifested. 
The principle that the state of * expectant attention ' 
is capable of giving rise either to sensations or to in- 
voluntary moveinentSy according to the nature of the 
expectancy, had been previously recognised in Physio- 
logical science, and was not invented for the occasion ; 
but the phenomena I have been describing to you are 
among its most * pregnant instances.' 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 47 

DIVINING ROD. 

The same principle furnishes what I believe to be 
the true scientific explanation of the supposed mys- 
tery of the Divining Rod, often used where water is 
scarce for the discovery of springs, and in mining dis- 
tricts for the detection of metallic veins. This rod is 
a forked twig, shaped like the letter Y, hazel being 
usually preferred ; and the diviner walks over the 
ground to be explored, firmly grasping its two prongs 
with his hands, in such a position that its stem points 
forwards. After a time the end of the stem points 
downwards, often, it is said, with a sort of writhing 
or struggling motion, especially when the fork is tightly 
grasped ; and sometimes it even turns backwards, so as 
to point towards, instead of away from, the body of the 
diviner. Now there is a very large body of apparently 
reliable testimony, that when the ground has been 
opened in situations thus indicated, either water- 
springs or metallic veins have been found beneath ; 
and it is quite certain that the existence of such a 
power is a matter of unquestioning faith on the part 
of large numbers of intelligent persons, who have wit- 
nessed what they believed to be its genuine manifes- 
tations.^ This subject, however, was carefully enquired 
into more than forty years ago by MM. Chevreul and 
Biot ; and their experimental conclusions anticipated 

' I have lately received a pamphlet from an Engineer in the United 
States, giving most circumstantial details of successes thus obtained 
virithin his own experience. 
6 

48 MESMERISM, ODYLJSM, 

those to which I was myself led, in ignorance of them, 
by Physiological reasoning. They found that the 
forked twig cannot be firmly grasped for a quarter of 
an horw or more in the regular position, without the 
induction of a state of muscular tension which at last 
discharges itself in movement ; and this acts on the 
prongs of the fork in such a manner, as to cause its 
stem to point either upwards or downwards or to one 
side. The occasion of this discharge, and the direc- 
tion of the movement, are greatly influenced — like the 
oscillations of bodies suspended from the finger — by 
the expectancy of the operator ; so that if he has any 
suspicion or surmise as to the * whereabouts ' of the 
object of his search, an involuntary and unconscious 
action of his muscles causes the point of the rod to 
dip over it. This was admitted even by Dr. H. Mayo, 
a believer in the existence of an * Od-force * governing 
the movements of the rod ; for he found that when 
his * diviner ' knew which way the fork was expected 
to move, it invariably answered his expectations ; whilst, 
when he had the man blindfolded, the results were 
uncertain and contradictory. Hence he came to the 
conclusion that several of those in whose hands the 
Divining Rod moves, set it in motion, and direct its 
motion (however unintentionally and unconsciously) 
by the pressure of their fingers, and by carrying their 
hands near-to or apart-from one another.^ 

Again, since not one individual in forty, in the 
localities in which the virtues of the Divining Rod are 
still held as an article of faith, is found to obtain any 

' On the Truths contained in Popular Superstitions ^ Letter I., p. 19. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 49 

results from its use, it becomes obvious that its move- 
ments must be due, not to any Physical agency 
directly affecting the rod, but to some influence ex- 
erted through its holder. y\nd that this influence is his 
expectation of the result, may, I think, be pretty con- 
fidently affirmed. For it has been clearly shown, by 
careful and repeated experiments, that, while the rod 
dips when the * diviner * knows or believes he is over 
a w^ater-spring or a metallic vein, the results are un- 
certain, contradictory, or simply negative, when he is 
blindfolded, so as not to be aware precisely where he 
is. The following is a striking case of this kind, that 
has been lately brought to my knowledge : — 

"A friend of mine (says Dr. Beard),* an aged 
clergyman, of thorough integrity and fairness, has for 
many years — the larger part of his natural life, I be- 
lieve — enjoyed the reputation of being especially 
skilled in the finding of places to dig wells, by means 
of a divining rod of witch hazel, or the fresh branches 
of apple or other trees. His fame has spread far ; and 
the accounts that are given by him and of him, are, to 
those who think human testimony worth anything, 
overwhelmingly convincing. He consented to allow 
me to experiment with him. I found that only a few 
moments were required to prove that his fancied gift 
was a delusion, and could be explained wholly by 
unconscious muscular motion, the result of expectancy 
and coincidence. In his own yard there was known 
to be a stream of water running through a small pipe 
a few feet below the surface. Marching over and near 

* Review of Medicine and Pharmacy (New York), Sept 1875. 

so MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

this, the rod continually pointed strongly downwards, 
and several times turned clear over. These places I 
marked, blindfolded him, marched him about until he 
knew not where he was, and took him over the same 
ground over and over again ; and although the rod 
went down a number of times, it did not once point to 
or near the places previously indicated." 

I very well remember having heard, some 35 years 
ago, from Mr. Dilke (the grandfather of the present 
Sir Charles) of an experiment of this kind which he 
had himself made upon a young Portuguese, who had 
come to him with a letter of introduction, describing 
the bearer of it as possessing a most remarkable 
power of finding, by means of the Divining Rod, 
metals concealed from view. Mr. Dilke's family being 
at a summer residence in the country, his plate had 
all been sent to his chambers in the Adelphi, where he 
was visited by the Portuguese youth ; to whom he 
said " Go about the room with your rod, and try if you 
can find any mass of metal." The youth did so ; and 
bis rod dipped over a large standing desk, in which 
Mr. D.*s plate had been temporarily lodged. Seeing, 
however, that there were circumstances which might 
reasonably suggest this guess, Mr. Dilke asked the 
youth if he was willing to allow his divining power to 
be tested under conditions which should exclude all 
such suggestion ; and having received a ready assent, 
he took his measures accordingly. Taking his plate- 
box down to his country residence, he secretly buried 
it just beneath the soil in a newly ploughed field ; 
selecting a spot which he could identify by cross- 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 51 

bearings of conspicuous trees, and getting a plough 
drawn again over its surface, so that the ridges and 
furrows should correspond precisely with those of the 
rest of the field. The young diviner was then sum- 
moned from London, and challenged to find beneath 
the soil of this field the very same plate which he had 
previously detected in Mr. Dilke's desk at the Adelphi; 
but having nothing whatever to guide him even to a 
guess, he was completely at fault. Mr. Dilke's im- 
pression was that he was not an impostor, but a sincere 
believer in his own power, as the ' dowsers ' of min- 
ing districts seem unquestionably to be. — The test of 
blindfolding the diviner, and then leading him about in 
different directions so as to put him completely at 
fault in regard to his locality, is one that can be very 
readily applied when the diviner is acting in good 
faith ; but, as I shall show you in the next lecture, it 
requires very special precautions to blindfold a person 
who is determined to see ; and in some of the cases 
which seem to have stood this test, it seems not im- 
probable that vision was not altogether precluded. 

An additional reason for attributing the action of 
the Divining Rod to the muscular movements called 
forth by a state of * expectancy * (perhaps not always 
consciously entertained) on the part of the performer, 
seems to me to be furnished by the diversity of the 
powers that have been attributed to it ; such as that 
of identifying murderers and indicating the direction 
of their flight, discovering the lost boundaries of lands, 
detecting the birth-place and parentage of foundlings, 
&c. The older writers do not in the least call in 

52 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

question the reality of the powers of the hazel fork ; 
but learnedly discuss whether they are due to natural 
or to diabolic agency. When, in the last century, the 
phenomena of Electricity and Magnetism became 
objects of scientific study, but had not yet been com- 
prehended under the grasp of law, it was natural that 
those of the Divining Rod should be referred to 
agencies so convenient, which seemed ready to account 
for anything otherwise unaccountable. But since Phy- 
sicists and Physiologists have come to agree that the 
moving power is furnished by nothing else than the 
muscles of the diviner, the only question that remains 
is — what calls forth its exercise } And the conclusive 
evidence I have given you, as to the dependence of 
the definite oscillations of suspended bodies on in- 
voluntary movements unconsciously determined by 
states of expectancy, clearly points to the conclusion 
that we have in the supposed mystery of the Divining 
Rod only another case of the same kind. It is well 
known that persons who are conversant with the 
Geological structure of a district, are often able to 
indicate with considerable certainty in what spot, and 
at what depth. Water will be found ; and men of less 
scientific knowledge, but of considerable practical ex- 
perience, frequently arrive at a true conclusion on this 
point, without being able to assign reasons for their 
opinions. Exactly the same may be said in regard 
to the mineral structure of a mining district; the 
course of a Metallic vein being often correctly indi- 
cated by the shrewd guess of an observant workman, 
where the scientific reasoning of the mining engineer 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 53 

altogether fails. It is an experience we are continually 
encountering in other walks of life, that particular 
persons are guided, — some apparently by an original, 
and others by an acquired intuition, — to conclusions 
for which they can give no adequate reasons, but 
which subsequent events prove to have been correct ; 
and I look upon the Divining Rod in its various ap- 
plications as only a peculiar method of giving expres- 
sion to results worked out by an Automatic process 
of this kind, even before they rise to distinct mental 
Consciousness. Various other methods of Divination 
that seem to be practised in perfectly good faith — 
such, for example, as the Bible and key test, used for 
the discovery of stolen property — are probably to be 
attributed to the same agency ; the Cerebral traces of 
past occurrences often supplying materials for the 
automatic evolution of a result (as they unquestion- 
ably do in dreams), when the occurrences themselves 
have been forgotten. 

THOUGHT-READING. 

Many of the cases of so-called * Thought-reading * 
are clearly of the same kind ; the communication 
being made by unconscious muscular action on the 
part of one person, and automatically interpreted by 
the other, — as in the following instance. Several 
persons being assembled, one of them leaves the room, 
and during his ^ absence some object is hidden. On 

* The experiment succeeds equally well, or perhaps better, with 
ladies. 

54 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

the absentee's re-entrance, two persons who know the 
hiding-place stand one on either side of him, and 
establish some personal contact with him ; one method 
being for each to place a finger on the shoulder next 
him, while another is for each to place a hand on his 
body, one on the front and the other on the back. 
He walks about the room between the two, and 
generally succeeds before long in finding the hidden 
object ; being led towards it (as careful observation 
and experiment have fully proved) by the involuntary 
muscular action of his unconscious guides, one or the 
other of them pressing more heavily when the object 
is on his side, and the finder as involuntarily turning 
towards that side. 

These and other curious results of recent enquiry, 
while strictly conformable to Physiological principles, 
greatly extend our knowledge of the modes in which 
states of Brain express themselves unconsciously and 
involuntarily in Muscular action ; and I dwell on them 
the more, because they seem to me to afford the key 
(as I shall explain in my second lecture) to some of 
these phenomena of Spiritualistic divination, which 
have been most perplexing to many who have come 
in contact with them, without being disposed to accept 
the spiritualistic interpretation of them. 

There seems no inherent improbability in the sup- 
position, that the power of intuitively interpreting the 
indications involuntarily furnished by expression of 
countenance, gesture, manner, &c., so as to divine 
what is passing in the mind of another person, may 
be greatly intensified in that state of concentration 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 55 

which has been already shown (p. 19), to produce a 
temporary exaltation of other faculties. There can 
be no question that this divining power is naturally 
possessed in a very remarkable degree by certain 
hidividuals ; and that it may be greatly improved by 
cultivation, — going in many instances far beyond what 
can have been learned by experience as to the meaning 
of the indications on which it rests. But I have not met 
with any cases, either in my own experience, or in 
the recorded experiments of such as have proved their 
competence to conduct them, of the exercise of this 
power without the intermediation of those expressional 
signs, which, as in the case I have just cited, are made 
and interpreted alike unconsciously. 

56 MESMERISM, ODYLISMy 

LECTURE II. 

Several years ago, an eminent Colonial Judge with 
whom I was discussing the subject on which I am now 
to address you, said to me, " According to the ordinary 
** rules of evidence, by which I am accustomed to be 
" guided in the administration of justice, I cannot refuse 
"credit to persons whose honesty and competence 
*' seem beyond doubt, in regard to facts which they de- 
" clare themselves to have witnessed ; and such is the 
'* character of a great body of testimony I have received 
" in regard to the phenomena of Spiritualism." In ar- 
guing this matter with my friend at the time, I took 
my stand upon the fact, well known not only to 
lawyers but to all men of large experience in affairs, 
that thoroughly honest and competent witnesses con- 
tinually differ extremely in their accounts of the very 
same transaction, according to their mental pre- 
possessions in regard to it ; and I gave him instances 
that had occurred within my own experience, in 
which a prepossession in favour of 'occult* agencies 
had given origin and currency to statements reported 
by witnesses whose good faith could not be called in 
question, which careful enquiry afterwards proved to 
have no real foundation in fact. 

Subsequent study, however, of the whole subject 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 57 

of the validity of Testimony, has led me not only to 
attach yet greater importance to what Metaphysicians 
call its 'subjective' element — that is, the state of mind 
of the witness who gives it ; but, further, to see that 
we must utterly fail to appreciate the true value of 
evidence, if we do not take the general experience of 
intelligent men, embodied in what we term * educated 
common sense,' as the basis of our estimate. In all 
ordinary legal procedures, the witnesses on each side 
depose to things which might have happened ; and in 
case of a * conflict of testimony,' the penetration of the 
presiding judge, and the good sense of the jury, are 
exerted in trying to find out what really did happen ; 
their search being guided partly by the relative con- 
fidence they place in the several witnesses, but partly 
by the general probabilities of the case. 

Now, it would be at once accepted as a guiding 
principle by any administrator of justice, that the 
more extraordinary any assertion — that is, the more 
widely it departs from ordinary experience — the 
stronger is the testimony needed to give it a claim on 
ouracceptance as truth ; so that while ordinary evidence 
may very properly be admitted as adequate proof 
of any ordinary occurrence, an extraordinary weight 
of evidence would be rightly required to establish the 
credibility of any statement that is in itself inherently 
improbable, the strength of the proof required being 
proportional to the improbability. And if a statement 
made by any witness in a Court of Justice should be 
completely in opposition to the universal experience of 
Mankind^ as embodied in those Laws of Nature which 

58 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

are accepted by all men of ordinary intelligence^ the 
judge and jury would most assuredly put that par- 
ticular statement ' out of court ' as a thing that could 
not have happened; whatever might be the value 
they would assign to the testimony of the same wit- 
ness as to ordinary matters. Thus if, in order to 
account for the signature of a will in London at a 
certain time, by a person who could be proved, beyond 
reasonable doubt, to have been in Edinburgh only an 
hour before, either a single witness, or any number of 
witnesses, were to affirm that the testator had been 
carried by ' the spirits ' through the air all the way 
from Edinburgh to London in that hour, I ask whether 
the 'common sense' of the whole Court would not 
revolt at such an assertion, as a thing not in rerum 
naturd. And yet there are at the present time 
numbers of educated men and women, who have so 
completely surrendered their 'common sense' to a 
dominant prepossession, as to maintain that any such 
monstrous fiction ought to be believed, even upon the 
evidence of a single witness, if that witness be one 
upon whose testimony we should rely in the ordinary 
affairs of life ! 

There is, indeed, no other test than that of * com- 
mon sense,' for distinguishing between the delusions 
of a Monomaniac, and the conclusions drawn by sane 
minds from the same data. There are many persons 
who are perfectly rational upon every subject but one ; 
and who, if put on their trial, will stand a searching 
cross-examination without betraying themselves, es- 
pecially if they know from previous experience what 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 59 

It is that they should endeavour to conceal. But a 
questioner who has received the right cue, and skil- 
fully follows it up, will generally succeed at last in 
extracting an answer which enables him to turn to 
the jury and say — " You see that whilst sane enough 
** in other matters, the patient upon this point is clearly 
*' mad." Yet the proof of such madness consists in 
nothing else than the absurd discordance between the 
fixed conviction entertained by the individual, and 
what is accepted by the world at large as indubitably 
true ; as, for example, when he declares himself to be 
one of the persons of the Trinity, or affirms (as in a 
case now before me) that he is a victim to the machi- 
nations of infernal powers, whom he overhears to be 
conspiring against him. We have no other basis than 
the dictates of 'common sense* for regarding such 
persons as the subjects of pitiable delusions, and have 
no other justification for treating them accordingly. 
Their convictions are perfectly true to themselves \ 
they maintain in all sincerity that it is only they who 
are sane, and that the rest of mankind must be mad 
not to see the matter in the same light ; and all this 
arises from their having allowed their minds to fall 
under subjection to some ' dominant idea,' which at 
last takes full possession of them. Thus, for example, 
a man suffering under incipient melancholia begins by 
taking gloomy views of everything that concerns him ; 
his affairs are all going to ruin ; his family and friends 
are alienated from him ; the world in general is ' going 
to the bad.' Under the influence of this morbid 
colouring, he takes more and more distorted views of 
7 

6o MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

the occurrences of his present life, and looks back 
with exaggerated reprobation at the errors of his past ; 
and in time, not only ideal misrepresentations of real 
occurrences, but ideal constructions having scarcely 
any or perhaps no basis in actual fact, take full pos- 
session of his mind, which credits only his own imagin- 
ings, and refuses to accept the corrections given by 
the assurances of those who surround him. So I 
have seen a woman who has had the misfortune to fix 
her affections upon a man who did not return them, 
first misinterpret ordinary civilities as expressions of 
devoted attachment, and then, by constantly dwelling 
upon her own feelings, mentally construct ideal 
representations of occurrences which she comes to be- 
lieve in as real ; not allowing herself to be undeceived, 
ev^n when the object of her attachment declares that 
the sayings and doings attributed to him are alto- 
gether imaginary. 

It is in this way that I account for what appear to 
me to be the strange delusions, which have laid hold 
at the present time of a number of persons who are 
not only perfectly sane and rational upon all other 
subjects, but may be eminently distinguished by intel- 
lectual ability. They first surrender themselves, 
without due enquiry, to a disposition to believe in 
' occult ' agencies ; and having so surrendered them- 
selves, they interpret everything in accordance with 
that belief. The best protection against such sur- 
render appears to me to be the early culture of those 
scientific habits of thought, which shape, when once 
established, the whole future intellectual course of the 
individual. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 6l 

The casv^ is not really altered by the participation 
of large numbers of persons in the same delusion ; in 
fact, the majority sometimes goes mad, the few who 
retain their ' common sense ' being the exceptions. 
Of this we have a notable instance in the Witch- 
persecutions of the seventeenth century, mainly insti- 
gated by King James I. and his Theological allies; who, 
because ' witchcraft ' and other * curious arts ' are con- 
demned both by the Mosaic law and by Apostolic 
authority, ' stirred up the people ' against those who 
were supposed to practise them, and branded every 
doubter as an atheist. 

The Witch-persecution carried on by James in 
Scotland, before his accession to the English throne, 
is believed to have caused the sacrifice of several 
thousand lives ; but in England, under the too cele- 
brated Witch Act, which was passed by Parliament 
under his influence, in the first year of his reign, it 
was far more terribly destructive. No fewer than 
seventy thousand persons are believed to have been 
executed for witchcraft between the years 1603 and 
1680 ; a number far larger than that of the sufferers 
in all the religious persecutions of the later Tudors. 

The * History of Human Error ' seems to me, in 
fact, to have no pages more full of instruction to such 
as can read them aright, than those which chronicle 
the trials for this offence, which were presided over by 
judges — like Sir Matthew Hale — of the highest re- 
pute for learning, uprightness, and humanity. Not 
only were the most trivial and ridiculous circumstances 
admitted as proofs of the charge, but the most 

62 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

monstrous assertions were accepted without the sh'ght- 
est question. Thus in 1663 a woman was hanged at 
Taunton, on the evidence of a hunter that a hare which 
had taken refuge from his pursuit in a bush, was found 
on the opposite side in the likeness of a witch, who, 
having assumed the form of the animal, took advantage 
of her hiding-place to resume her proper shape. And 
the proof of these marvels did not rest on the testi- 
mony of single witnesses. In 1658 a woman was 
hung at Chard Assizes for having bewitched a boy of 
twelve years old, who was seen to rise in the air, and 
pass some thirty yards over a garden wall ; while at 
another time he was found in a room with his hands 
flat against a beam at the top, and his body two or 
three feet above the floor — nine people at a time seeing 
him in this position. 

In 1677, however, an able work was published 
under the title of The Displaying of Supposed Witch- 
craft, in which the author, Webster, who had seen a 
great deal of witch-trials, maintained the opinion 
that the whole system of witchcraft was founded on 
natural phenomena, credulity, torture, imposture, or 
delusion ; and a reaction seems then to have begun in 
favour of ' common sense,* which was fostered by the 
Revolution of 1688. Though accusations continued 
to be made, the judicious conduct of Lord Chief 
Justice Holt, who presided over trials for this offence 
in various parts of the kingdom, generally caused the 
acquittal of the prisoners ; and when they were found 
guilty and condemned, the capital sentence was 
seldom carried out. The last witch-execution in 

TABLE-TURNLXGy SPIRITUALISM. 63 

Scotland, where the Theological prepossession longest 
maintained its hold over the public, was in 1722 ; and 
the Witch Act was repealed in 1736. The belief in 
witchcraft still survived, however, not only among the 
ignorant vulgar, but in the minds of some of the most 
enlightened men of the last century. We find Addi- 
son, in the earlier part of it, speaking of witchcraft as 
a thing that could not reasonably be called in ques- 
tion ; while, towards its close, Dr. Johnson maintained 
that as the non-existence of witches could not be 
proved, there was no sufficient ground for denying their 
diabolical powers. This is one of the cases, however, 
in which an enlightened * common sense * — the intel- 
ligent embodiment of the general experience of man- 
kind — is a much safer guide than logic. The belief in 
Witchcraft was not killed by discussion, but perished 
by neglect. The ' childish things ' believed in by our 
ancestors have been *put away' by the full-grown 
sense of the present generation ; the testimony in 
their favour, once unquestionably accepted as con- 
vincing, is no longer deemed worthy of being even 
considered ; and it is only amotig those of our here- 
ditarily uneducated population, whose general intel- 
ligence is about upon a par with that of a Hottentot 
or an Esquimaux, that ' cunning women ' are able to 
turn this lingering superstition to the purposes of 
gain. 

Of the rapid spread of the Witchcraft delusion in 
a population whose theological 'prepossession' fa- 
voured its development, and of its equally rapid 
decline when 'common sense* resumed its due ascen- 

64 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

dancy, no case was more remarkable than the 
Epidemic that spread through Puritan New England, 
just two hundred years ago. This was initiated by 
the trial and execution of a poor Irishman, who, being 
obnoxious as a papist, was accused of having be- 
witched two children who suffered from convulsive 
attacks. Dr. Cotton Mather, Fellow of Harvard Col- 
lege, received one of these children into his house ; 
and asserted the girl's possession by evil spirits 
as an indubitable fact, on the following grounds : — 
She would suddenly, in the presence of a number 
of spectators, fall into a trance, rise up, place herself 
in a riding attitude as if setting out for the Sabbath, 
and hold conversation with invisible beings. When 
under the influence of * hellish charms * she took plea- 
sure in reading or hearing * bad ' books, which she was 
permitted to do with perfect freedom. These books 
included the Prayer Book of the English Episco- 
pal Church, the writings of Quakers, and Popish 
productions. On the other hand, whenever the Bible 
was taken up, the devil threw her into the most fear- 
ful convulsions. It was upon such testimony that the 
unfortunate Irishman was convicted and executed ! 

The judicial persecution, once begun, soon raged 
with such severity that its victims were hung by half 
a dozen or more at a time ; one of them being a min- 
ister, who had provoked his judges by calling in 
question the very existence of witchcraft. The accu- 
sations became more and more numerous, and at last 
implicated people of the highest consideration, among 
them the wife of a minister who had been one of the 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 65 

most active promoters of these proceedings ; so that 
the authorities felt it necessary for their own safety at 
once to check the further progress of the infection. 
Judges and juries then found out that they had been 
' sadly deluded and mistaken/ only Dr. Cotton 
Mather's father (who was President of Harvard) and 
other Theologians still holding their ground ; and the 
release, by the Governor, of a hundred and fifty 
witches who were under arrest, and the stoppage of 
proceedings against two hundred more who were 
about to be arrested, came to be accepted in a short 
time with general approval, though vehemently pro- 
tested against by Cotton Mather in these remarkable 
terms : — " Fleshy people may burlesque these things ; 
" but when hundreds of the most solemn people, in a 
" country where they have as much mother-wit, cer- 
" tainly, as the rest of mankind, know them to be truCy 
" nothing but the froward spirit of Sadduceeism can 
" question them. I have not yet mentioned so much as 
" one thing that will not be justified, if it be required, 
" by the oaths of more considerate persons than any 
" that can ridicule these odd phenomena." 

Now this is precisely the position taken by the 
modern Spiritualists ; who revive under new forms 
the doctrines which were supposed to have faded 
away under the light of Modern Science. The 'hun- 
dreds of the most solemn people,* who are ready to 
justify their conviction of such wonders as Mr. 
Home's and Mrs. Guppy-Volckman's aerial flights, 
the elongation of the body of the former, or the 
bringing in of ice, flowers, and fruits by the minister- 

66 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

ing spirits of the latter, are equally bound to accept 
the testimony, given on oath and in solemn form of 
law, which satisfied able judges and honest juries two 
centuries ago, that tens of thousands of innocent 
people had entered into the guilty league with Satan, 
whose punishment was death here and everlasting 
damnation hereafter. The unbelieving Sadducees of 
the present time, on the other hand, can appeal to the 
same sad history, in justification of their refusal to 
admit the testimony of the votaries of a system which 
is to their minds quite as absurd and irrational as that 
of Witchcraft ; and of their disbelief in the reality of 
alleged occurrences which they deem it an insult to 
their common sense to be asked to credit For the 
faithful few, who two centuries ago rallied round the 
standard of Rationalism, in antagonism not only to 
the dead weight of ignorant prejudice, but to the 
active force of learning and authority, had no other 
defence of their position than the inhcre^it incredibility 
of the opposing testimony ; notwithstanding that this 
was clearly given (in many cases if not in all) in per- 
fect good faith, and often admitted as true even by 
the unfortunate victims it incriminated, who seem to 
have themselves participated in what every person of 
ordinary intelligence now admits to have been a piti- 
able delusion. 

But, it may be objected, the acceptance of this 
test would equally justify a disbelief in any of those 
marvels which are rightly esteemed the glories of 
Modern Science. Tell a man, for instance, to whom 
the fact is new, that the hand may be held without 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 67 

Injury in the stream of liquid iron issuing from the 
smelting furnace, or dipped and moved about in a 
bucket of the molten metal ; and he will probably re- 
ject your assertion as altogether incredible. Yet this 
statement, while apparently antagonistic to universal 
experience, can be shown to be really conformable to 
it. For the protection of the hand from being burned 
by the hot metal, when the intervention of a film of 
vapour has been secured by moistening its surface, is 
just what you may see every day in the rolling off of 
drops of fluid from a heated iron, in the application of 
the familiar test by which t' e laundress judges of 
the suitability of its temperature. 

Take, again, the case of the Electric Telegraph, 
and especially that of the Atlantic cable. If sub- 
marine telegraphy had not been led up to by progres- 
sive steps, the mass of mankind would have 
undoubtedly scoffed at the idea of " putting a girdle 
round the earth in twenty minutes'* ; and even after 
the first Atlantic cable had actually conveyed mes- 
sages of great importance, to the full satisfaction of 
those who sent them, there were obstinate sceptics 
who maintained that its asserted success must be a 
falsehood, as being opposed to ' common sense.' But 
every person sufficiently educated to understand the 
scientific principles of its construction, was perfectly 
prepared to accept it as a real success ; the speedy 
failure of the first cable, so far from justifying the 
original scepticism, only serving to show what the 
conditions were, by due observance of which perma- 
nent success might be assured. 

68 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

Compare this with another curious demand upon 
public credence — the 'panasilinic telegraph' — which 
was made by an ingenious hoaxer about the time that 
the success of land electric telegraphy first set the 
world to dream of uniting the New World with tKe Old 
by the like means. It was gravely announced that a 
French savant had discovered that \i two snails were 
brought for a time into mutual relation, such a sym- 
pathy would be established between them, that, how- 
ever widely they might be separated, the movements 
of each would correspond with those of the other ; so 
that if a couple of friends, one in New York and the 
other in Paris, wished to converse, they had only to 
provide themselves with an alphabet and figure dial, 
get a pair of sympathetic snails, and appoint a time 
for their conversation. The one who led off was to 
make his snail walk over the dial, and to stop him at 
the letter or figure he wished to indicate ; his friend's 
snail would do exactly the same, and thus the mes- 
sage would be gradually spelled out. — Now I per- 
fectly well remember that this ridiculous absurdity 
found many believers. My old friend Dr. Robert 
Chambers, ever on the watch for scientific novelties, 
gave currency to the statement in Chambers's Journal, 
without, however, committing himself to its truth. 
And I am sure that its very marvellousness had an 
attraction for those credulous subjects, who are ready 
to surrender their common sense to any pretender to 
occult powers, — the more readily, it often seems, in 
proportion to the extravagance of his claims. 

I might cite the Spectroscope and the Radiometer 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 69 

as additional cases, not merely of the readiness, but of 
the eagerness of Scientific men, to extend their know- 
ledge of the agencies of Nature in entirely new 
directions ; and to accept with implicit confidence, 
upon adequate evidence^ revelations in regard to mat- 
ters lying so completely beyond the domain covered 
by previous experience, as entirely to transcend, if 
not directly to violate it. Now this, in the first case, 
is because the whole of that wonderful fabric of Spec- 
trum-analysis, by which we are now enabled to study 
the chemical and physical constitution of every kind 
of Celestial object which the telescope can render visi- 
ble to us, has been built up, course by course, on the 
basis of one of our most familiar scientific experiences 
— rthe dark lines that cross the solar spectrum. So, 
Mr. Crookes's invention of the Radiometer was the 
culmination of a long series of experimental enquiries, 
the results of which could be demonstrated at any 
time and to any number of persons ; the fundamental 
fact of the vanes being driven round by radiant force 
being thus put beyond dispute. And while, as I 
stated to you in my previous lecture, what at first 
seemed the obvious interpretation of this fact — 
namely, that radiant force here acted in a manner 
altogether new to science, by direct mechanical im- 
pulse on the vanes — was almost universally accepted 
by even the most distinguished Physicists, further 
investigations of the most ingenious and elaborate 
nature have now conclusively proved that the action 
is really an indirect one, capable of being accounted 
for on previously understood principles. — I hold the 

JO MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

warning given by the history of this enquiry, in regard 
to the duty of the Scientific man to exhaust every 
possible mode of accounting for new and strange 
phenomena, before attributing it to any previously 
unknown agency, to be one of the most valuable les- 
sons afforded by Mr. Crookes*s discoveries. 

Now I maintain that it requires exactly the same 
kind of specially trained ability, to elicit the truth in 
regard to the phenomena we are now considering, as 
has been exerted in the researches made by the in- 
strumentality of the Spectroscope and the Radio- 
meter. And I cannot but believe that if Mr. Crookes 
had been prepared by a special training in the bodily 
and mental constitution, abnormal as well as normal, 
of the Human instruments of the Spiritualistic en- 
quiries, and had devoted to them the ability, skill, 
perseverance, and freedom from prepossession, which 
he has shown in his Physical investigations, he would 
have arrived at conclusions more akin to those of the 
great body of scientific men whom I believe to share 
my own convictions on this subject. 

So far are we from regarding Science as having 
unveiled all the mysteries of Nature, that we hold 
ourselves ready to accept any new agency, the evi- 
dence for which will stand the test of cross-examina- 
tion by skilled experts. But, in default of such 
evidence, we are fully justified by experience in re- 
garding it as more probable that the most honest 
witnesses have either been intentionally deceived or 
have deceived themselves, than that assertions in 
direct contradiction to all the * natural knowledge ' 
we possess should have any real justification in fact. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. ^^ 

In support of this position, I shall now show you 
that in every instance (so far as I am aware) in which 
a thorough investigation has been made into those 
' higher phenomena * of Mesmerism which are adduced 
in support of Spiritualism, the supposed proof has 
completely failed, generally by the detection of inten- 
tional fraud ; while as the unexplained marvels of the 
same kind which are still appealed to as valid proofs, 
rest on no better evidentiary foundation than seemed 
originally to be possessed by those which have en- 
tirely broken down, it may be fairly presumed that 
they too would be discredited by the like searching 
enquiry. 

It was in France that the pretensions of Mesmeric 
clairvoyance were first advanced ; and it was by the 
French Academy of Medicine, in which the mesmeric 
state had been previously discussed with reference to 
the performance of surgical operations, that this new 
and more extraordinary claim was first carefully 
sifted; in consequence of the offer made in 1837 by 
M. Burdin (himself a member of that Academy) of a 
prize of 3,000 francs to anyone who should be found 
capable of reading through opaque substances. The 
money was deposited in the hands of a notary for a 
period of two years, afterwards extended to three : 
the announcement was extensively published ; nume- 
rous cases were offered for examination ; every 
imaginable concession was made to the competitors, 
that was compatible with a thorough testing of the 
reality of the asserted power ; and 7tot one was found 
to stand the trial. 
8 

72 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

But not only was there complete and ignominious 
failure ; the fraudulent mode in which the previous 
successes had been obtained was detected in two of 
the three cases which were brought most prominently 
forward, and was made scarcely less evident in the 
third. 

The first case was presented by M. Houblier, a 
physician of Provence, who, after a long period of 
preparation, sent his clairvoyante Mile. Em^lie to 
Paris, to the care of a friend and mesmeriser, M. 
Frappart. This gentleman, before presenting her to 
the Commissioners, thought it as well to put her 
asserted power of reading with the back of her head 
to some preliminary trials ; and soon finding reason 
to suspect her good faith, he set a trap for her, into 
which (supposing him to be her friend) she unsus- 
pectingly fell. Very judiciously, however, he did not 
immediately expose her, but let her continue her per- 
formances ; bringing up M. Houblier from Provence 
to meet other persons interested in the enquiry, that 
they might see for themselves through the key-hole of 
the room in which Mile. Em^lie was supposed to be 
lying entranced in a mesmeric sleep, that she got up 
and examined, here and there, the pages of the book 
— purposely left in the room — in which her alleged 
clairvoyant power was to be tested. Of course. Mile. 
Emelie was never presented to the Commissioners of 
the Academy ; and M. Houblier confessed with grief 
and shame that he had not only himself been for 
four years the dupe of this mattresse femmey but that 
he had unconsciously helped her to impose upon 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. >3 

many most respectable persons in his own neigbour- 
hood. Now, all these, with M. Houblier himself, 
might be presumed to have been both competent and 
trustworthy witnesses ; so that if M. Burdin's prize 
had never been offered, this case would have been put 
on record (like others of which I shall presently tell 
you) as an unimpeachable attestation of the reality of 
clairvoyance. Again, the immediate detection of the 
fraud, not by a hostile sceptic, but by a friendly mes- 
meriser, shows how easily, under the influence of a 
' prepossession,* numbers of intelligent people may be 
led to surrender their * common sense * to the extent 
of believing, not only that the seat of vision may be 
transferred to the back of the head, but that a dis- 
tinct picture of a page of a book can be formed with- 
out any optical apparatus. The conduct of M. 
Frappart in the matter should serve as a lesson to 
honest Spiritualists at the present time ; who, when there 
is good ground to suspect trickery, would much better 
serve their own cause by helping to expose it, than by 
lending themselves to the defence of the trickster. 

Among the earliest claimants of the Burdin prize 
was a M. Pigeaire of Montpellier ; who affirmed that 
his daughter, a girl eleven years old, was able, when 
her eyes were completely blinded, to read with the 
points of her fingers, which then became her visual 
organs ; the sole condition he required being that she 
should be blinded by himself with a bandage of black 
velvet. Her power of reading in this condition was 
attested by peers, deputies, physicians, distinguished 
litterateurs (amongst others by George Sand) and 

74 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

newspaper editors, to whom it had been exhibited in 
Paris before she was presented to the Commission. 
But its members were nevertheless sceptical enough 
to require proof satisfactory to themselves, and de- 
sired to render the girl * temporarily blind * (to use her 
father's words) by their own method ; objecting that 
his velvet bandage might be so disarranged by the 
working of her facial muscles, as to allow her to see 
downwards beneath its lower edge, when the book 
was held in a suitable position. M. Pigeaire, how- 
ever, objecting to this test, the Commissioners having 
satisfied themselves of the opacity of the bandage, 
stipulated only that the book should not be put into 
the girl's hands, to be held by herself wherever she 
wished, but should be' placed opposite her eyes at any 
distance her father should desire. As he would not 
consent to this condition, the Commissioners, of 
course, declined to accept his daughter's performances 
as furnishing any valid evidence of clairvoyance. 
Though the bandage was opaque, the trick now be- 
came transparent ; yet it had taken in peers, deputies, 
and George Sand ; and only experts in such enquiries 
succeeded in discovering it 

The third case was brought forward by M. Teste, 
a well-known magnetiser of that date, who affirmed 
that every experienced mesmerist had witnessed the 
exercise of this faculty at least twenty times. Confi- 
dent in his position, he offered to submit his clair- 
voyante (a young girl) to the experimentum crucis — 
the reading of print or writing enclosed in opaque 
boxes ; stipulating only that the direction of the lines 

TABLE'TURNINGy SPIRITUALISM. 75 

should be previously indicated. Such a box was pre- 
pared and placed in the girl's hands, with the required 
indication. Being presently asked by M. Teste 
whether she would be able to read what was in the 
interior of the box, she answered Oui ; and on his ask- 
ing her how soon, she replied confidently dix minutes. 
She then turned the box about in her hands, and in 
doing so tore one of the bands that secured it. This 
being remarked upon, she made no further attempt of 
the same kind, but continued (as it appeared) to exert 
herself in fatiguing efforts to discern the concealed 
lines. Whole hours having thus passed, and M. 
Teste having asked his clairvoyante how many lines 
there were in the box, she answered deux. He then 
pressed her to read, and she announced that she saw 
the word nous^ and later the word sommes. As she 
then declared that she could read no more, the box 
was taken from her hands, and the girl was dis- 
missed ; and the box being then opened, the printed 
slip it contained was shown to M. Teste to have on it 
six lines of French poetry, in which neither of the 
words nous sommes occurred. 

Of course this failure does not disprove any of M. 
Teste's assertions, either in regard to the same girl 
under other conditions, or in regard to other alleged 
clairvoyantes ; but it fully justifies the allegation, that 
as this was a picked case, presented by himself, near 
the expiration of the third year during which M. Bur- 
din's prize was open, with unhesitating confidence in 
the girl's success, his other reported cases, of which 
not one rests upon better authority than his own, 

76 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

have not the least claim upon our acceptance. He 
seems to have been very easily satisfied ; and it is 
clear that if he was not a consenting party, he was 
not adequately on his guard against the possibility of 
a furtive peep being taken by his clairvoyante into the 
interior of the box while it was being turned about in 
her hands, — the method which Houdin avows himself 
to have practised in performing his * second sight * 
trick, and by which, as I shall presently tell you, one 
of our own most noted advocates of the ' transcen- 
dental ' was afterwards completely taken in. 

It was in 1844 that the clairvoyant Alexis came 
hither from Paris, with the reputation of extraordi- 
nary powers ; and though these had not been sub- 
mitted to the test of investigation by the French 
Academy of Medicine, it was confidently affirmed by 
the leading mesmerisers in this country, that there 
was nothing in the way of ' lucidity ' that this youth 
had not done and could not do. Not only had he 
divined the contents of sealed packets and thick 
wooden boxes, but he could give an exact account of 
the contents of any room in any house never before 
seen or heard of ; he had described occurrences taking 
place at a distance, which, to the great surprise of the 
questioners (who expected something very different), 
were afterwards found to have transpired exactly as 
he had stated ; he had revealed to persons anxious to 
recover important papers the unknown places of their 
lodgment ; in fact, if all was true that was affirmed of 
him, the power for which he could claim credit would 
have been little less than omniscience — if only it 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 77 

could have been commanded at will. But, by the 
admission of his best friends, it was extremely vari- 
able, coming in gushes or flashes ; while, as he was 
often unable to see clearly at first, and had an unfor- 
tunate habit of * thinking aloud,* he continually made 
a great many blunders before he arrived at anything 
like the truth. 

Having myself settled in the neighbourhood of 
London just as Alexis came over, and having found 
my friend Dr. Forbes (then editor of the British and 
Foreign Medical Review) extremely interested in the 
enquiry into the reality of his asserted clairvoyant 
powers, I accompanied Dr. F., time after time, to 
public and private stances at which these powers were 
exhibited^ though not adequately tested. So far from 
being at that time an opponent, I was much more 
nearly a believer ; the weight of testimony seemed 
too strong to be overborne ; and it was only after re- 
peated experience of the numerous sources of fallacy 
which the keen-sightedness of Dr. Forbes enabled 
him to discern, that I became, like him, a sceptic as 
to the reality of Alexis's reputed clairvoyance. My 
scepticism was increased by seeing how, whilst he was 
' thinking aloud ' (according to his friends) but * fish- 
ing * or * pumping ' (according to unbelievers), he was 
helped by the information he gleaned from the un- 
conscious promptings of his questioners. And my 
confidence in testimony was greatly weakened, by 
finding that extraordinary successes were reported to 
have been obtained in some cases which Dr. Forbes 
and I regarded as utter failures, as well as in others 

78 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

in which it was clear to us that no adequate precau- 
tions had been taken to prevent the use of ordinary 
vision. For we satisfied ourselves that when he was 
going to read or to play cards with his eyes bandaged, 
it was his habit so to manoeuvre, as to prevent the 
bandage from being drawn tight, — cela m'^touffe being 
his constant complaint, even when his nostrils were 
left perfectly free ; and that when he could not see 
under its lower edge at first, he worked the muscles 
of his face until he displaced it sufficiently for his 
purpose. And thus we came to the conclusion that 
no test of his 'lucidity' could be of any value, which 
did not involve the reading of print or writing en- 
closed in perfectly opaque boxes or other envelopes, 
without the assistance of any response to his guesses. 
A test-stance of this kind having been arranged by 
Dr. Forbes at his own house, the general result (as 
admitted by M. Marcillet, the mesmeriser who accom- 
panied Alexis) was utter failure ; the only note- 
worthy exception being in a case in which, having 
selected the thinnest of the paper envelopes, Alexis 
correctly stated that the word within it consisted of 
three letters, without, however, being able to name 
them. And the value of even this very slight success 
was afterwards completely neutralised by the disco- 
very, which I shall recount in connection with the 
case of the brother and successor of Alexis, that 
nothing else than ordinary vision was required to ob- 
tain it. 

As M. Maicillet could not dispute the fairness 
with which the investigation was conducted, he could 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 79 

offer no other explanation of Alexis's failure on this 
occasion, than the presence of an 'atmosphere of 
incredibility ' emanating from the persons of the 
sceptical doctors present. It may be shrewdly sus- 
pected, however, that Alexis recognised the presence 
of a maitre homme in clear-sightedness, and felt him- 
self foiled at every point by the keener intelligence of 
Dr. Forbes. For he and M. Marcillet forthwith left 
London for Paris, and never publicly reappeared in this 
country. 

His place, however, was taken after a year or two 
by his brother Adolphe, whose pDwers were highly 
vaunted by believers as even surpassing those of his 
predecessor. Again Dr. Forbes applied himself to the 
investigation ; and again I took every opportunity 
afforded me of witnessing their exercise. It was at a 
public stance at which I was myself present, though 
Dr. Forbes was not, that a circumstance occurred 
which made at the time considerable impression. 
Slips of writing-paper having been distributed, any 
person who wished to put Adolphe's power to the 
test was desired to write a word at the top of the slip, 
and then to fold it over and over several times, so that 
the writing should be covered both in front and be- 
hind by two or three layers of the paper. Having 
myself written PariSy I folded it up in the prescribed 
manner ; my friend Mr. Ottley wrote Toulon ; several 
other persons did the like ; and we satisfied ourselves, 
by holding up our folded slips between our eyes and 
the light, that the writing within was completely in- 
visible. Yet, taking one of them after another into his 

8o MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

hands, and making no attempt to unfold the papers 
(some of which, I think, were secured by seal or 
wafer), Adolphe named, without hesitation, the word 
written on each. Within a day or two, however, I 
learned from Mr. Ottley that his sister had discovered 
that she could read by her natural eyesight the writ- 
ing on his slip, which it was supposed could only be 
discovered by clairvoyant power ; and on trying her 
method upon my own slip, I found myself able to do 
the same. The secret consisted in holding the slip, 
not between the eye and the light, but in such a posi- 
tion that the light of the window or lamp should be 
reflected obliquely from its surface. And any of 
you will find that after a little practice, words written 
in a legible but not large hand can be thus read, 
though covered by three folds of ordinary writing- 
paper. This discovery fully accounts for various suc- 
cesses, as well of Alexis and Adolphe, as of other 
reputed clairvoyants ; and affcrds a further warning 
as to the scrupulous care required to exclude all 
possible sources of fallacy in conducting such trials. 

The conclusions drawn by Dr. Forbes from his 
critical examination of Adolphe's pretensions, tallied 
exactly with those to which he had been led by his 
previous search. All the instances of success could be 
fairly explained without crediting the performer with 
any extraordinary powers ; where, on the other hand, 
due care was taken to render the ordinary operation 
of the visual sense impossible, failure invariably re- 
sulted. Thus the claims of Adolphe, like those of 
Alexis, vanished into thin air at the wand of the ex* 

TABLE-rURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 8i 

• 

pert ; and, notwithstanding the great efforts made to 
rehabilitate his reputation, he soon found his stay in 
London no longer profitable, and went the way of his 
predecessor. Nothing, so far as I am aware, has ever 
been since heard of this par nobile fratrum ; certainly 
they never challenged the French Academy of Medi- 
cine to an investigation of their pretensions. 

Another case of this kind was tested a few years 
later by Mr. Braid. In 1852 M. Lassaigne and Mdlle. 
Prudence Bernard, who had gained a great reputation 
in London by their performances at Hungerford Hall, 
having come to Manchester, Mr. B. went, at the desire 
of a friend in Edinburgh, to test the lady's clairvoyant 
pretensions. The first part of the performance con- 
sisted of feats which might be readily explained by a 
system of collusion ; not being so remarkable as those 
which M. Robin and his female confederate accom- 
plished by means so siitiple, that the performer of 
them could scarcely refrain from laughing at the ease 
with which the public could be deceived. 

" But now arrived," continued Mr. Braid, '* the ex- 
periment which I considered by far the most interest- 
ing of all on the programme, — viz., playing at cards, 
and reading, when her eyes were to be so securely 
blindfolded that not a ray of light could reach them, 
in the common acceptation of the term. To effect 
this, folds of cotton wadding were placed across the 
forehead, eyes, and nose, and over the face as far as 
the point of the nose ; and then a white handkerchief 
folded several times, so as to be about 2\ inches wide, 
was bound round the head and eyes, so as to main- 

82 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

tain the cotton in its place. This done, M. Lassaigne 
triumphantly asked anyone to examine his subject, 
and say whether it was possible for her to see through 
all this apparatus. Some one having exclaimed 
' No,* the lady sat down at a table to challenge any 
one present to play a game at cards with her. Whilst 
they were making arrangements for the game, I was 
sufficiently clairvoyant, even without being mesme- 
rised, to observe the lady pensively lay her face 
upon her hands, so as to enable her very conveniently, 
and by mere accident no doubt, to give the proper twist 
and finish to the apparatus for excluding light from 
her eyes. I observed this manoeuvre by the lady 
twice, and called the attention of some friends to it, 
who can also testify to the fact. The clairvoyante 
now became very lively ; described the personal ap- 
pearance of her opponent, played dexterously, and 
beat him. She also did the same by another gentle- 
man who tried a round with her ; and with a third 
gentleman, a friend of my own, who, by my sugges- 
tion, had taken a new pack of cards with him, she 
proved her power of describing his personal appear- 
ance correctly, and playing well, but she lost on this 
occasion from having bad cards. 

" As the lady was now considered to have proved 
her clairvo)^ant powers to the satisfaction of all pre- 
sent, I stepped forward' and announced my desire to 
have the privilege of applying a test which would be 
far more satisfactory to my mind, because I had no con- 
fidence in the supposed efficacy of the blindfolding 
then in use for effectually accomplishing what it pro- 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 33 

fessed to do. I told the audience that I felt convinced 
that the patient was seeing through interstices be- 
tween the cotton and the face, near the side of the 
nose. My proposal for guarding against such a 
source of fallacy as this, was simply to place a thin 
sheet of brown cardboard under her chin and round 
her neck, so as to guard against the possibility of the 
deception which I suspected. This I intended to 
have accomplished by tying the sheet of pasteboard 
around her neck, proceeding from the bottom of the 
throat upwards in a conical form, after the fashion of 
the Elizabethan frill, extending considerably higher 
than the head, so as to prevent the possibility of her 
raising her hands or lowering her head sufficiently for 
seeing over it, without excitmg the attention of the 
audience. Indeed, whoever had had the opportunity 
of observing the clairvoyante, as I did, during this 
card scene, must have felt that he would be permit- 
ting an insult to be perpetrated upon himself and upon 
the whole audience, were he not to endeavour to ex- 
pose what appeared to me to be such an absurd farce. 
1 was aware that my test would be objected to, on the 
ground that she did not profess to read through card- 
board (although I must confess my surprise that a 
person who can see and read through stone or brick 
walls, should not be competent to penetrate through 
thin cardboard), so I, therefore, offered to remove 
that objection, by cutting out a piece of the card- 
board and covering the hole with the cotton wadding 
and folded handkerchief which she actually professed 
to see through; but, although the auoience were 

84 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

almost unanimous in their opinion that my proposed 
test was a fair one, and such as they wished to see 
tried, M. Lassaigne well knew that it was too certain 
and obvious a mode of testing to answer his purpose, 
and, therefore, under various pretexts, and in a most 
mde manner, he absolutely refused to try it I there- 
fore withdrew from the platform and left the room, feel- 
ing the force of the remark, — * Ex uno disce omnes! " ^ 

And so it always proves in the end with these 
sham marvels ; which, however specious they may 
appear at a distance, vanish under critical investiga- 
tion like the ^mirage of the desert on nearer approach. 
The real marvels of Science, on the other hand, not 
only stand the test of the most critical examination, 
but prove more marvellous the more thoroughly they 
are investigated. Reason, it has well been said, can 
guide where Imagination scarcely dares to follow. 
And those who desire to find a true spring at which 
to slack their thirst for knowledge, need only follow 
the guidance of the Spectroscope and the Radio- 
meter, to be led to wonders of which neither the 
* Poughkeepsie Seer,' the * Seeress of Prevorst,' nor 
any other of the reputed * prophets ' of Mesmerism or 
Spiritualism had ever dreamed. 

My anxiety to impress on you the lessons which (as 
it seems to me) such exposures ought to afford in re- 
gard to the object of our present enquiry, leads me to 
ask your further attention to two other cases ; in eacli 
of which a number of apparent successes of a most 
remarkable kind were obtained by what was subse- 

* See Braid on Magic, WU:hc/aft, Animal Magn tism. Hypnotism^ 
and Electro- Biology, 1852; p. 115. 

TABLE-TURNING] SPIRITUALISM. 85 

quently shown to have been an ingenious fraud, prac- 
tised upon the honest patron of the performer, who 
was (like M. Houblier) his unsuspecting dupe. 

In the course of his further search for clairvoyance y 
Dr. Forbes was requested by a legal gentleman whom 
he calls Mr. A. B., to witness the performances of a 
copying clerk in his employ, by name George Goble ; 
whom he stated to be capable, in a large proportion 
of cases, of reading printed words enclosed in opaque 
boxes, without either mistake or preliminary guessing. 
Being at that time in the country, I did not accom- 
pany Dr. Forbes in his repeated visits to Mr. A. B.'s 
chambers ; but I well remember his writing to me in 
some excitement after the first of them, that at last 
he seemed to have got hold of a genuine case of clair- 
voyance. He soon, however, recovered his equanimity 
and his scepticism ; and felt that he must make a much 
more thorough enquiry, before he could be justified in 
accepting the case as genuine. George's ' dodge ' con- 
sisted (as was subsequently proved) in furtively open- 
ing the box or other envelope, so as to get a peep at 
its contents, whilst sitting or lying face-downwards on 
a sofa ; and in managing to conceal his having done 
so, by tearing open the box at the moment he pro- 
claimed the word : his failures occurring when the box 
was so secured that he could not succeed in opening 
it, after manoeuvring (it might be) for half an hour or 
more. Finding that in every one of George's successes 
the envelope might have been opened, whilst all the 
cases in which the boxes had certainly not been opened 
were complete failures — a consideration which, though 

86 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

very obvious, seemed never to have suggested itself to 
the legal mind of George's patron — Dr. Forbes and 
Professor Sharpey (whom he had taken into council) 
devised a simple * counter-dodge,* by which it should 
be rendered impossible for George to open the box for 
the purpose of reading the contained word, without 
the detection of his trick. This entirely succeeded ; 
George was brought .upon his knees and confessed his 
roguery, but protested that it was his first offence. 
You would scarcely credit the fact if it had not been 
self-recorded, that George's patron still continued to 
believe in his clairvoyant power ; accepting his assur- 
ance that he had only had recourse to trickery when 
the genuine power failed him, and requesting Dr. 
Forbes to give him another trial. This Dr. F. con- 
sented to make, upon the sole condition that a small 
sealed box, containing a single word printed in large 
type, should be returned to him unopened w^ith the 
word written upon the outside of it. Some days 
elapsed before George's * lucidity ' recovered from the 
shock of the exposure ; but his master then informed 
Dr. F. that he had read the word IMPLEMENTS, or, as 
he spelled it, impelments, with great assurance of cor- 
rectness. This, however, proving altogether wrong, 
the box was left in Mr. A. B.'s hands for a further 
space of two months ; and no second guess having been 
then made, the real word was disclosed by Dr. F. to 

be OBJECTIONS. 

The history of this enquiry, as detailed by Dr. 
Forbes,^ brings into the strongest contrast the patient 

* Illusiiations of Modern Mesmerism from Personal Investigation, 
London (Churchill) 1845, Third Series, pp. 63-89. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 87 

and honest search for truth of the cautious sceptic, 
willing to be convinced if satisfactory evidence could 
be adduced, and the easy credulity of the enthusiastic 
disciple, who not only eagerly accepted a conclusion 
opposed to universal experience, without taking any 
adequate precautions against trickery, but held to that 
conclusion after the trick had been not only exposed 
but confessed. And here, again* we see how, but for 
the int;^rposition of a sceptical ' expert,' a case of sham 
clairvoyance would have been published to the world 
with the same unhesitating affirmation of its genuine- 
ness, as that which now claims credit for the exercise 
of ' Psychic Force ' in causing accordions to play, and 
heavy tables to turn round or even to rise in the air, 
without muscular agency.^ 

In the other case I have now to mention — that of 
Mr. Hewes' 'Jack,' publicly exhibited at Manchester 
about the same time that Alexis was performing in 
London — the proof of clainfoyafice, as shown in read- 
ing when the eyes had been effectually closed, seemed 
as complete as it was possible to obtain. Jack's eye- 
lids were bound down by surgeons of that town (who 
were assuredly not confederates) with strips of adhe- 
sive plaster, over which were placed folds of leather, 
which again were kept in place by other plasters ; the 
only condition made by Mr. Hewes being that the 
ridges of the eyebrows should not be covered, as it 
was there that Jack saw when ' lucid.' The results 
were truly surprising ; there was no guessing, no need 
of prompting, no failure ; * Jack ' read off, without the 

* See Serjeant Cox's letter in the Spectator^ Nov. 1 1, 1876^ 

88 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

least hesitation, everything that was presented to him. 
The local newspapers were full of this new wonder ; 
and nc documentary testimony in favour of clairvoy^ 
ance could possibly be more conclusive. But, as usual, 
the marvel would not stand the test of close examin- 
ation. A young Manchester surgeon, who had been 
experimenting upon himself, gave a public exhibition 
of his power of reading when his eyes had been * made 
up * in precisely the same manner as ' Jack's,' and by 
the same gentlemen ; the means he adopted being 
simply to work the muscles of his face, until he so far 
loosened the plasters as to obtain a crevice through 
which he could read by looking upwards. Mr. Hewes, 
who witnessed this performance, readily agreed that 
'Jack ' should be further tested ; and it was settled, en 
petite comite\ that after protecting his eyelashes with 
narrow strips of plaster, his eyelids should be covered 
with a thick coating of shoemaker's wax, leaving the 
superciliary ridges free. When this was done (not 
without considerable resistance on the part of * Jack,' 
only kept under by the influence of his patron) the 
clairvoyant power was completely annihilated ; but one 
thing * Jack' plainly saw, even with his eyes shut — 
that * his little game was up.' His patron, a gentle- 
man of independent fortune. Who had become an 
active propagandist of the belief he had honestly em- 
braced, returned all the money which had been received 
for 'Jack's' performances, and 'Jack ' withdrew into 
private life. 

Now I readily concede that neither the detection 
of * Jack ' and George Goble, nor the failure of Alexis 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUAIISM. 89 

and Adolphe under test-conditions, disproves the reality 
of clairvoyance', but my position is, that since the 
choicest examples of its manifestation are found to 
break down when thoroughly investigated, not one of 
the reported instances in which no such thorough in- 
vestigation has been made, has the least claim to be 
accepted as genuine. It must, I think, have become 
abundantly obvious to you, that until the existence of 
the clairvoyant power shall have been established be- 
yond question, by every test that the skill of the most 
wary and inveterate sceptic can devise, the scientific 
expert is fully justified in refusing to accept the 
testimony of any number of witnesses, however 
honest, but of no special intelligence in regard to the 
subject of the enquiry, as to particular instances of 
this power. George Goble's master would have re- 
counted the performances of his prot^g^ in perfect 
good faith, and would have been very angr}'- with 
anyone who should express a doubt either of his 
veracity or his competence. And not only Mr. 
Hewes, but a large body of lookers-on, would have 
stoutly contended for the impossibility of ' Jack ' 
having read with his eyes, when they had been care- 
fully covered by a surgeon with plasters and leather. 
But to me it seems the ' common sense ' view of the 
matter, that the fact of * Jack ' having read with his 
eyes covered, should have been accepted as a proof — 
not of his clairvoyance — but of his eyes not having 
been effectually covered ; and that the very fact of 
George Goble having found out the words in certain 
boxes which he might have opened, while he did not 

90 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

find out any in the boxes he could not open, should 
have been accepted as valid evidence — not of his 
clairvoyance — but of his having taken a furtive peep 
with his natural eyes into the unsecured boxes. And 
in each case, * common sense ' would have been justi- 
fied by the result. 

The ordinary rules of Evidence, as I have en- 
deavoured to show you, apply only to ordinary oc- 
currences. To establish the reality of such an extra- 
ordinary condition as clairvoyance, extraordinary 
evidence is required ; and it is the entire absence of 
this, which vitiates the whole body of testimony put 
forward -by Prof Gregory (Letters on Animal Magne- 
tism), doubtless in the most complete good faith, 
regarding the performances of Major Buckley's clair- 
voyantes \ whom he states to have collectively read 
the mottoes enclosed in 4^860 nut-shells (one of them 
consisting of 98 words), and upwards of 36,000 words 
on papers enclosed in boxes, one of these papers con- 
taining 371 words. Now, that Professor Gregory lent 
not only himself but the authority of his public posi- 
tion, with reprehensible facility, to the attestation of 
Major Buckley's statements, might be fairly antici- 
pated from his eager endorsement of Reichenbach's 
doctrines, and his credulous acceptance of Mr. 
Lewis's claims, of which I spoke in my previous lec- 
ture ; and the complete untrustworthiness of his 
statements in regard to clairvoyance becomes obvious 
to any sceptical reader of his * Letters.' For not 
only is there an entire absence of detail, in regard to 
the precautions taken to prevent the ingenious tricks. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 91 

to which (as all previous experience had indicated) 
the claimants to this power are accustomed to have 
recourse ; but the narrative of one of his cases shows 
such an easy credulity on the very face of it, as at 
once to deprive his other statements of the least claim 
to credence. I refer to that {Op. cit.y p. 364) in which 
folded papers or sealed envelopes were forwarded to 
the clairvoy antes y who returned them — the seals ap- 
parently unbroken — with a correct statement of the 
contained words. Now the unsealing of sealed let- 
ters, and the resealing them so as to conceal their 
having been opened, are practised on occasion in the 
Post-office of probably every Continental capital, if 
not in our own ; and, as some of you have probably 
seen in the public prints, the doings in this line of a 

* medium * who professed to be able to return answers 
under spiritual influence to c,'uestions contained in 
sealed letters, have lately been exposed in the Law- 
courts of New York ; the medium's own wife disclosing 
the manner in which the unsealing and resealing of 
these letters were effected. Common sense, it might 
have been thought, would dictate that if the contents 
of a sealed letter had been made known by a person 
in whose possession it had lain, that letter had been 
opened and resealed. Yet Prof Gregory prefers to 
believe that these letters had been read by clairvoy- 
a7ice\ and numbers of persons in various parts of 
the Union, including many of high social considera- 
tion, were found to have placed such confidence in the 

* spiritual ' pretensions of the New York swindler, as 
to submit to him questions of the most private 

92 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

nature, with fees that gave him an annual income of 
more than a thousand pounds ! 

It was to put the value of Professor Gregory's 
evidence in support of clairvoyance to the test, that 
his colleague. Dr. (afterwards Sir James) Simpson, 
offered a bank-note of large value, enclosed in a 
sealed box and placed in the hands of a public 
official in Edinburgh, as a prize to anyone who could 
read its number ; and I am informed by Sir Dominic 
Corrigan, M.P., that Sir Philip Crampton (Surgeon to 
the Queen in Ireland; did the Hke in Dublin. Though 
these rich prizes remained open to all comers for at 
least a year, none of Major Buckle/s one hundred 
and forty-eight clairvoyantes succeeded in establishing 
a claim to either of them ; in fact, I believe that not 
even a single attempt was made. And yet there are 
even now men of high scientific distinction, who 
adduce Professor Gregory's testimony on this subject 
as unimpeachable ! ^ 

Still more akin to the powers claimed for Spirit- 

* It was publicly suggested by Mr. Wallace at the Glasgow Meet- 
ing of the British Association, that the failure of the clairvoyantes in 
the case of Dr. Simpson's bank-note might be due to there having been 
really no note placed in the box. This suggestion I indignantly 
repudiated at the time, as an unworthy imputation upon the character of 
a public man whose honesty was above all suspicion. But I might 
have replied that if the fact had been so, some of Major Buckley's 148 
clairvoyantes ought to have found it out. Dr. Simpson informed me 
that Dr. Gregory, on being asked the reason of their complete absten- 
tion, could give no other account of it, than that the very offer of the 
leward, by introducing a selfish motive for the exercise of this power, 
prevented its access ; as if Alexis, Adolphe, and numerous other 
professors of the art of reading without eyes, had not been daily 
practising it for the purpose of pecuniary gain. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 93 

ualistic ' mediums/ is that form of alleged Mesmeric 
clairvoyance which consists in the vision of scenes or 
occurrences at a distance ; so that they are described 
exactly as they are at the time, and not according to 
the expectation of the questioners. Numerous cases 
of this kind have been very circumstantially recorded ; 
and I most freely admit that a body of thoroughl}'' 
>vell-attested and well-sifted evidence in their favour 
would present a strong claim to acceptance. Every 
one knows, hqwever, that plenty of marvels of the 
same class have been current as * ghost stories ; ' and 
that even some of what were regarded as the best 
attested of these, have faded out of the credit they 
once enjoyed, under the advancing light of a healthy 
rationalism. And while such as have a * transcen- 
dental ' turn of mind will accept the most wonderful 
story of clairvoyance at a distance with little or no 
hesitation, those of a more sceptical habit will admit 
none that has not been subjected to the test of a 
searching cross-examination ; thinking it more pro- 
bable that some latent fallacy is concealed beneath 
the ostensible facts, than that anything so marvellous 
should have really happened. 

My own attention was very early drawn to this 
subject by certain occurrences which fell under my 
immediate observation. A Mesmeric * somnambule ' 
said to be possessed of this power of * mental travelling ' 
being the subject of a stance at my own house, and 
being directed to describe what she saw in the rooms 
above, gave a correct and unhesitating reply as to the 
occupants of my nursery; whilst in regard to the 

94 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

very unusual contents of a store-room at the top of 
the house, she was entirely at fault, until I purposely 
prompted her by leading questions. The next day I 
found out that she had enjoyed ample previous op- 
portunities of information as to the points which she 
had described correctly ; whilst it soon came to my 
knowledge that a most circumstantial narrative was 
current in Bristol (where I then resided) of her extra- 
ordinary success in discerning in the store-room the 
very objects which she had entirely failed to see. 
Here, then, was a marked instance of two sources of 
fallacy in narratives of this description : first, the dis- 
position to attribute to * occult ' agencies what may 
be readily explained by natural causes ; and second, 
the * myth- making ' tendency — far more general than 
is commonly supposed — which, as I have already 
shown you, builds up the most elaborate construc- 
tions of fiction upon the slenderest foundation of 
fact. 

In my interviews with Alexis and Adolphe, also, 
both of whom were reputed to possess a very high 
degree of this power, I tested them as to the contents 
of my house, which they described in a vague and 
general way that would apply to almost any ordinary 
domicile. But both of them spoke of my drawing- 
room as having pictures on its walls, which was not 
then the fact ; and neither of them, though pressed as 
to something very conspicuous which they could not 
help seeing, gave the least hint of the presence of an 
organ with gilt pipes. Their failure with me does 
not, of course, invalidate any real successes they may 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. g>, 

have gained with others ; but my previous experience 
had led me to entertain grave doubts as to the reality 
of the reputed successes ; and these doubts were sub- 
sequently strengthened by the complete breakdown, 
under the persevering and sagacious enquiries prose- 
cuted by Dr. Forbes, of a most notable case which 
excited great public interest at that time. 

The wonderful performances of Miss Martineau's 
servant J., which she announced to the public in 1844, 
through the medium of the Athettmimy culminated in 
a detailed description — given by J. in the mesmeric 
sleep — of the particulars of the wreck of a vessel of 
which her cousin was one of the crew, as also of the 
previous loss of a boy overboard ; with which particu- 
lars it was positively affirmed by Miss Martineau, and 
believed by many on her authority, that the girl 
could not possibly have been previously informed, as 
her aunt had only brought the account to the house 
when the seance was nearly terminated. On being 
asked, says Miss M., two evenings afterwards, when 
again in the sleep, "whether she knew what she 
" related by seeing her aunt telling the people 
" below," J. replied " No ; I saw the place and the 
*' people themselves — like a vision." And Miss 
Martineau believed her. 

My sceptical friend, Dr. Forbes, however, would 
not pin his faith to hers ; and determined to institute, 
through a Medical friend on the spot, a more search- 
ing investigation than Miss Martineau had thought 
necessary. The result of this enquiry was to prove, 

unequivocally, that J.'s aunt had told the whole story 
10 

06 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

to her sister, in whose house Miss M. was residing 
about three hours before the stance ; and that, though 
J. was not then in the room, the circumstances were 
fully discussed in her presence before she was sum- 
moned to the mesmeric performance.* — Thus not only 
was J. completely discredited as a seer ; but the value 
of all testimony to such marvels was seriously 
lowered, when so honest and intelligent a witness as 
Harriet Martineau could be so completely led astray 
by her * prepossession,* as to put forth statements as 
facts, which were at once upset by the careful en- 
quiry which she ought to have made before commit- 
ting herself to them. 

It is the wise rule of our law, that no Evidence 
(save that of dying declarations) is admissible in 
Court, that \s not capable of being tested by cross- 
examination ; and no well-trained investigator will 
put forth a new discovery in Science, until he has 
verified it by * putting it to the question ' in every 
mode he can think of 

If, in the case I have just cited, the * common 
sense * view had been taken from the beginning, 
the correspondence of J.*s circumstantial narrative 
with the actual facts of the case, would have been 
accepted as proving — not that she had received them 
in Mesmeric vision — but that she had learned them 
through some ordinary channel ; and the truth of this 
conclusion would have at once become apparent, when 
the proper means were taken to verify it. The same 

* niu^tratioiis of Modem Mesmerism ^ pp. 91-IOI. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 97 

ground should (I contend) be taken in regard to all 
the marvels of this class which rest on the testimony 
of believers only. For no one of them is better at- 
tested than that which I have just cited ; and until 
the evidence in support of any case of clairvoyance 
can be shown to have been sifted in the same thorough 
manner, I maintain that it has no more claim on our 
acceptance, than has the specious ' opening ' of a case 
in a Court of Law, before it has been subjected to the 
hostile scrutiny of the counsel on the other side. 

TABLE-TURNING AND TABLE-TALKING. 

I need not detain you long with the scientific dis- 
cussion of the phenomena of Table-tnrnmg and Tables- 
talking \ since no facts have been established in re- 
gard to them, which are not susceptible of a very 
simple explanation. A number of persons seat them- 
selves round a table, and place their hands upon it, 
with a preconceived idea that the table will turn ; and 
after some time, it may be, during which the move- 
ment has been attentively waited for, the rotation 
begins. If the parties retain their seats, the turning 
only takes place as far as the length of their arms 
allows, but not unfrequently they all rise, feeling 
themselves obliged (as they assert) to follow \hQ table; 
and, from a walk, their pace may be accelerated to a 
run, until the table actually spins round so fast that 
they can no longer keep up with it And since this 
happens, not merely without consciousness on the 
part of the performers that they are exercising any 

98 MESMERISMy ODYLISM, 

force of their own, but for the most part under the 
full conviction that they do not ; — and, moreover, as 
tables thus move, which the performers declare them- 
selves unable to move to the same extent by any 
voluntary effort ; — it is not unnatural that they should 
conclude that some other force than their own Mus- 
cular action must have put it in motion. 

But the man of science, whether Physicist or Phy- 
siologist, cannot rest content without adequate proof 
of this conclusion ; and a test is very easily applied. 
You see here a little apparatus consisting of two 
pieces of board, two cedar pencils, two india-rubber 
bands, two pins, and a slender index-rod, which was 
devised by Faraday to ascertain whether the table 
ever moves round without a lateral pressure from the 
hands of the operators. For this 'indicator' is so 
constructed, that when the hands are placed upon 
it, instead of resting immediately on the table, any 
lateral pressure exerted by them makes the upper 
board roll upon the lower ; and the slightest move- 
ment of this kind is so magnified by the leverage of 
the index, as to show itself by a very decided motion 
of its point in the opposite direction. By this simple 
test, anyone may experimentally satisfy himself that 
the table never goes round unless the index of the 
* indicator * shows that lateral muscular pressure is 
being exerted in the direction of its movement ; and, 
conversely, that when such lateral pressure, as shown 
by the * indicator,* is being adequately exerted, the 
table moves round. The Physicist, therefore, has a 
right to assert, that, until a table shall be found to 
turn zvithotit lateral pressure of the hands laid upon 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 99 

the ' indicator,' as shown by the fixity of its index, 
there is no evidence whatever of the exertion of afiy 
other force than the Muscular action of the operators. 
And the Physiologist, who is familiar with the fact 
that every human being is continually putting forth a 
vast amount of muscular energy, of the exercise of 
which he is entirely unconscious, and who has also 
studied that unconscious influence of mental precon- 
ception of which I have already given you illustra- 
tions in the pcndule explorateur^ at once perceives that 
the absence of any consciousness of exertion on the 
part of the operators, affords no proof whatever that 
it is not being put forth ; while he is further well 
aware that involuntary muscular contractions are often 
far more powerful than any which the will can excite. 
The same explanation applies to the tilting of the 
table, which is made in response to questions asked 
of * the spirits ' by v/hich it is supposed to be in- 
fluenced. Nothing but a strange prepossession in 
favour of some 'occult' agency, can attribute such 
tilting to anything but the downward pressure of the 
hands laid upon it ; the hypothetic exertion of any 
other force being scientifically inadmissible, until it 
shall have been experimentally shown that the table 
tilts without being manually pressed down. An ' indi- 
cator ' might be easily constructed, which should test 
downward pressure, on the same principle that Fara- 
day's indicator tests lateral pressure ; but no one, so 
far as I am aware, has ever ventured to affirm that he 
has thus demonstrated the absence of muscular pres- 
sure, although I long since pointed out that only in 

loo MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

this manner could the matter be scientifically tested. 
Until such demonstrations shall have been given, the 
tilting — like the turning — of tables, may be unhesita- 
tingly attributed to the unconscious muscular action 
of the operators ; while the answers which are brought 
out by its instrumentality may be shown to be the ex- 
pressions, either (like the movements of the pendicle 
explorateur) of ideas actually present to the mind of 
one or other of the performers ; or (as often occurs in 
Somnambulism and other allied states) of past ideas 
which have left their traces in the brain, although they 
have dropped out of the conscious memory. 

That such is the nature of the responses ordinarily 
obtained by those who (in entire good faith) have 
practised this ' curious art ' in any of its varied forms 
— including planchette-writing — is shown by the 
analysis of a number of cases observed by myself 
and recorded by others.^ And there is this very 
curious indication of it : that when the ' table-talking * 
epidemic first spread in this country, a number of 
Low-church Clergymen, strongly imbued with the 
belief that it was a manifestation of Satanic agency, put 
to the tables a series of what they regarded as ' test ' 
questions, and got just the answers they expected.^ 

SPIRITUALISM. 

I now come to the existing phase of the Epidemic 
belief in the ' occult,' which, as I have already pointed 
out, differs from the preceding rather in its outward 
manifestations than in its essential nature. You have 

» Appendix L. * Appendix M, 

TABLE-'l'irRNING, SPIRITUALISM. loi 

all heard of the ghostly visitations, which, in the days 
of our ancestors, were re|?uied.to have disclosed by 
means of raps the places in wliieli- treasure had been 
hidden, or a murdered corpse had been/buried. Ghosts, 
however, like witchcraft, seem to have Iq^t ccedit with 
the present generation, until brought into^vogijie ^ain 
as * spirits ' by the Rochester rappings. A fajniiy^ ©f 
the name of Fox, including two girls aged respectively^ 
about nine and eleven years, went to inhabit a house at 
Hydesville (Rochester County, New York State), in 
which a murder was said to have been committed 
many years before. They had not resided in it long, 
when raps were heard in the girls' chamber ; some- 
times obviously issuing from their persons, but some- 
times apparently proceeding from other parts of the 
room. Curiosity was excited ; the neighbourhood 
flocked to witness the marvel ; no one could detect 
any movement on the part of either of the girls while 
the raps were sounding ; and no concealed instrument- 
ality could be discovered by careful search. The rap- 
pings soon began to show a certain coherence ; a code 
of signals was arranged, according to which one rap 
was to mean no^ three raps yes, and two raps doubtful 
or wait ; and communications having been thus opened 
with the rappers, visitors were enabled, through the 
medium of these two girls, to summon and interrogate 
the * spirits ' of their departed friends. Multitudes now 
flocked from all parts to witness the phenomena ; and 
the girls having gone to live with an elder married 
sister at Rochester-town, the alphabetical system was 
established at her suggestion ; which enabled the 

I02 MESMERISM, 0I>¥LISK 

* spirits ' to spell out their ^messages by rapping at the 
required letters, wheii'&itherlhe alphabet was repeated 
by the enquirer^ cfr'. th^ letters on an alphabet-card 
were successive!/- pointed to. The excitement con- 
tinuing to increase, a Committee of Investigation was 
appointed t>y a town-meeting. Every opportunity was 
giyen^for the enquiry ; but the committee was com- 
rpfetely baffled. The enquiry was taken up, however, 
-ty an eminent anatomist, Dr. Austin Flint, of New 
York ; who, having first convinced himself that the 
sounds issued from the legs or feet of the girls them- 
selves, notwithstanding their apparent stillness, sought 
for a physiological explanation of them ; and soon 
found one in the power which certain persons can 
acquire, of giving a jerking or snapping action to parti- 
cular tendons of either the knees, ankles, or toes, — 
a patient of his own being able thus to produce an 
exact imitation of the Rochester rappings. Dr. Austin 
Flint's explanation subsequently received full confir- 
mation from Professor Schiff, since of Florence, who 
not only himself acquired the power of producing the 
raps, by the repeated displacement of a tendon which 
slides through a sheath behind the external protube- 
rance of the ankle, but exhibited this acquirement to 
the French Academy of Medicine in April, 1859, 
baring his legs, and producing the raps without any 
apparent movement. And not more than six years 
ago, Mrs. Culver, a female relative of the Fox family, 
made a deposition before the magistrates of the town 
in which she resided ;^ stating that while visiting the 

» Appendix N, 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 103 

girls at Rochester many years before, she had be- 
come acquainted with the entire secret, which she 
fully disclosed ; and herself reproducing the raps in 
verification of her narrative. 

But the very rationality of this explanation caused 
it to be disbelieved by such as were anxious to be 
placed in communication with * the spirit world.' The 
fame of the Fox girlsspread through the United States ; 
they established themselves as * mediums' in New 
York ; and before long they were drawing a large 
income from the pockets of their credulous visitors. 

Under the fostering influence of pecuniary temp- 
tation, imitators of the Fox girls soon sprang up in 
various parts of the United States ; ' mediums ' 
became numerous ; and one of them, Mrs. Hayden, 
brought the contagion to this country, where the 
* spirit-rapping ' Epidemic rapidly spread. The manner 
in which, according to the experience of those who 
witnessed Mrs. Hayden's performances (subsequently 
confirmed by Mrs. Culver), the ' medium ' divined at 
what letters to make the raps, was veiy simple ; con- 
sisting merely in carefully watching the countenance 
or gestures of the questioner, who almost invariably 
gives, in some way or other, involuntary expression to 
his or her expectancy. Of this I could cite many 
proofs. An eminent scientific friend told me that 
having been at a party by one member of which after 
another Mrs. Hayden's powers were tested, he was 
at first greatly surprised at the accuracy of the replies 
he obtained regarding the name, date of death, and 

I04 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

place of death, of a deceased friend of whom he was 
thinking ; but that he soon obtained a clue, by observ- 
ing that her success varied with the demonstrativeness 
of the individual, and that she utterly failed with one 
of peculiarly imperturbable habit. He then made a 
fresh trial, with the fixed predetermination to withhold 
any manifestation of his expectancy ; and Mrs. Hay- 
den was completely bafifled. The secret was divined 
also by Professor Edward Forbes, who, by pausing on 
particular letters, made Mrs. Hayden spell * Lord 
Tomnoddy ' and other waggeries. And the most com- 
plete exposure of the trick was given by Mr. G. H. K. 
Lewes ; who caused Mrs. Hayden to rap out the most 
absurd replies to questions which he had previously 
written down and communicated to another member 
of the party ; finally obtaining, in answer to the ques- 
tion * Is Mrs. Hayden an impostor.? ' three unhesitat- 
ing raps at the letters Y, E, S.^ 

In the 'Report on Spiritualism of the Committee 
of the London Dialectical Society,' you will find that 
Dr. Edmunds, the chairman of that Committee, not 
only detected a well-known professional * medium ' in 
making the raps with her foot, but observed that she 
regulated her raps by intently watching the questioner, 
and that when she was prevented from doing this by 
the interposition of a screen, her raps were altogether 

* Mr. Wallace explains this result by assuming that the raps were 
caused by 'invisible beings,' who, reading what was in the questioner's 
mind, answered a fool according to his folly. Where the folly lies, the 
readers of Mr. Wallace's letter [Appendix O) will judge for themselves. 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 105 

meaningless. My own experiencewith other ^mediums' 
has been to exactly the same effect.^ 

Of the ' higher phenomena ' of Spiritualism — the 

* levitation ' of chairs and tables, and even of men and 
women; the 'elongation' of Mr. Home's body, his 
handling of heated bodies, and his heaping hot coals 
on the head of a bald gentleman without any discom- 
fort to him ; the untying of knots and change of coats ; 
the production of 'spiritual photographs ;' the bring- 
ing-in of fruits, flowers, or live lobsters, in dark stances ; 
and the like — I have left myself no time to speak. 
The very catalogue speaks, to any sober and unpre- 
possessed mind, of the extreme improbability that any 

* spiritual ' agents should so manifest their presence. 
And in regard to the spirit-writing by pens or pencils, 
I can only say that of the revelations given by its 
means, I have seen none that could claim any higher 
character than that of unmitigated * twaddle.' It is 
because the present generation knows little of the 
history of former Epidemics of this kind, and is there- 
fore not in a position to profit by the experience they 
have afforded, that I have rather dwelt in these lec- 

* Appendix P. — Much stress is laid by the Editor of the Spectator^ 
and by Mr. Wallace, upon a statement made by the late Professor De 
Morgan, that Mrs. Hayden's success was «<7^ interfered with by the inter- 
position of a screen. But 1 have it on the authority of an eminent Scientific 
colleague of Professor De Morgan's, who was repeatedly present at the 
spiritualistic siances held at his house, that the experiments were 
habitually conducted there in so loose a manner as to be altogether 
unsatisfactory ; frauds of the most transparent kind (which my friend him- 
self more than once exposed) being accepted as valid proofs ; and non- 
natural interpretations being always preferred, when natural explana- 
tions were obvious. 

io6 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

tures on the lessons of the past in regard to the credu 
bility of testimony on these subjects, than discussed 
the truth or falsehood of statements now in currency 
in regard to the recent doings of * the spirits.' It is 
not because I have not investigated Spiritualism for 
myself, that I refrain from bringing before you in 
detail the results of my own enquiries. At the out- 
break of the Epidemic I devoted to the examination 
of its pretensions an amount of time and attention 
which might have been far more profitably employed ; 
and I did not give up the enquiry until I had satis- 
fied myself, by long and careful study, that its char- 
acter was fundamentally the same with that of the 
epidemics I had previously witnessed, differing only 
in the particular form of its manifestations. I could not 
afford to sacrifice the time that might be much more 
profitably spent in adding to our stock of real know- 
ledge, in the (so-called) scientific investigation of such 
performances as those of the * Davenport Brothers ; * 
when I found that the investigation was to be so 
carried on, that I should be precluded from using 
either my eyes or my hands, the most important in- 
struments of scientific enquiry. I felt assured that 
these performances would turn out to be mere con- 
juring tricks : and that they really are so has been 
shown, not merely by Mr. Maskelyne's discovery of 
the secret, and his repetition of the performances as 
conjuring tricks, but by the recent public expos^ of the 
whole method, in Boston (N.E.), by one who formerly 
practised it for gain. So, again, in other cases in which 
I strongly suspected the supposed ' spiritualistic ' 

TABLE'TURNINGy SPIRITUALISM. 107 

manifestations to be intentional deceptions, and pro- 
posed their repetition under test-conditions admitted 
to be fair, I waited hour after hour for the manifesta- 
tions, the non-production of which was attributed to 
m}' * atmosphere of incredulity.' 

Thus, having accompanied a scientific friend to a 
Spiritualistic seatice, at which we saw a small light 
table dance up and down under the hands of a pro- 
fessional ' medium ' (Mrs. M.) as she moved across the 
room, I pointed out to my friend, who regarded this 
as an example of ' spiritual ' agency, that since the 

* medium ' wore a large crinoline which completely 
concealed her feet, it was quite possible for her to have 
lifted the table upon one foot, while moving across 
the room on the other — as any opera- dancer could do. 
My friend, candidly admitting the possibility of this 
explanation, subsequently invited me to a stance at his 
own house, with a non-professional * medium ; ' and 
asked me if I was satisfied with the * crinoline-guard ' 
of wire and paper which he had so placed round the 
legs of a small table, that the ' medium ' could not lift 
the table on her foot without breaking through the 

* guard.' I replied that I was perfectly satisfied ; and 
that if I should see the table dance up and down 
under his * medium's ' hands, in the same manner as 
under Mrs. M.'s, I should admit that it was a case for 
further investigation. During a seance of two hours, 
however, no other manifestation took place than *raps,' 
indicating the presence of * spirits ; ' the interposition 
of the * crinoline-guard ' apparently keeping them 
away from the table.* 

* Since the delivery of this Lecture, Mr. A. R. Wallace has pub* 
11 

io8 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

In regard to professional ' mediums ' who make 
their living by the exercise of their supposed gifts, I 
came to the conclusion that we have as m.uch right to 
assume fraud until the contrary shall have been proved, 
as we have in the case of a gipsy fortune-teller, who 
has managed to learn a good deal about the chief 
people of the country neighbourhood into which she 
comes, before she allows herself to be consulted, and 
then astonishes her credulous clients by the know- 
ledge of their affairs which she displays. I need not 
tell you how one after another of such pretenders has 
been detected in England. In Paris the frauds of a 

* spiritual ' Photographic establishment were brought 
into the law courts, and the persons concerned in them 
sentenced to severe punishment, a year or two ago. 
And in America, the ' Katie King* imposture, which 
had deluded some of the leading spiritualists in this 
country, as well as in the United States, was publicly 
exposed at about the same time. 

But, it is affirmed, such exposures prove nothing 
against the genuineness of any new manifestation. 
I quite admit this. But I affirm that to anyone ac- 
customed to weigh the value of evidence, the fact that 
the testimony in favour of a whole series of antecedent 
claims has been completely upset, seriously invali- 
dates (as I have shown in regard to Mesmeric clair- 
voya7ice) the trustworthiness of the testimony in favour 
of any new claimant to ' occult ' powers. Why should 

licly avowed himself to be the * scientific friend ' to whom I referred ; 
and has stated that on subsequent occasions the table did xisQ within the 

* crinoline guard.' Has it ever done so, I ask, in the presence of a 
sceptical expert ? 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM, 109 

I believe the testimony of any believer in the genuine- 
ness of D's performances, when he has been obliged 
to admit that he has been egregiously deceived in 
the cases of A, B, and C ? 

The case is not essentially different in regard to 
* mediums ' who do not practise for gain. For it is 
perfectly well known to those who have had adequate 
opportunities of observation, that there is a class of 
persons (especially, I am sorry to have to say, of the 
female sex) who have an extraordinary proclivity to 
deceit, even from a very early period of life ; and who 
enjoy nothing better than ' taking-in ' older and wiser 
people, even when doing so brings no special advan- 
tage to themselves.^ Every Medical practitioner of 
large experience has met with cases in which young 
ladies have imposed in this way, by feigning disease, 
not only upon their families, but upon their previous 
doctors ; the supposed patients sometimes undergoing 
very severe treatment for its cure. And when the 
new attendant has sagaciously found out the cheat, 
and has honestly exposed it to the parents, he is in 
general * morally ' kicked out of the house for his un- 
founded aspersion ; — not every one having the good 

^ Thus Mr. Braid gives {Magic, Witchcraft, ^c, p. 117) the case 
of a boy who got credit in his own town for clairvoyant power ; being 
able to read, play cards, &c., when the upper part of his face was 
covered with a mask of nine folds of silk stuffed with cotton-wool. 
Hundreds of respectable people were ready to attest the fact ; but when 
the precaution suggested by Mr. Braid — of guarding against interspaces 
near the nose — was put in practice, the trick was made apparent, as in 
the case of Madlle. Pigeaire (p. 74). Mr. Braid was requested not to 
make any public exposure of the cheat ; * * because the boy's father was 
" such a respectable man, being one of the Town-Council." * 

no MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

fortune of my old friend Dr. A. T. Thompson, who 
was sent for some years afterwards by a young married 
lady 'to attend her family, on account of the high 
opinion she had formed of his ability, as the only one 
of the many doctors formerly consulted about her, 
who had found out the real nature of her case. I 
could tell you the particulars, in my possession, of the 
detection of the imposture practised by one of the 
most noteworthy of these Lady-mediums, in the distri- 
bution of flowers which she averred to be brought-in 
by the * spirits ' in a dark siancCy fresh from the garden, 
and wet with the dew of heaven ; these flowers having 
really been previously collected in a basin upstairs, 
and watered out of a decanter standing by, — as was 
proved by the fact, that an inquisitive sceptic having 
furtively introduced into the water of the decanter a 
.small quantity of a nearly colourless salt (ferrocyanide 
of potassium), its presence in the * dew ' of the flowers 
was afterwards recognised by the appropriate chemical 
test (a per-salt of iron) which brought out * prussian 
blue.' 

In other instances, again, I have witnessed the most 
extraordinary .r^Z/'-deception : which, as in the Mes- 
meric performances, invested occurrences which could 
be readily accounted for on * natural ' principles, with 
a * supernatural ' character ; often through the omission 
of some essential fact, which is entirely ignored by the 
• narrator. Thus I was seriously informed, during the 
Table-turning epidemic, that a table had been moved 
round by the will of a gentleman sitting at a distance 
from it ; but it came out upon cross-examination, that 

TABLE-TURNINGy SPIRITUALISM, irj 

a number of hands were laid upon it in the usual way, 
and that after the performers had sat for some time in 
silent expectation, the operator called upon ' the spirit 
of Samson ' to move the table, which then obediently 
went round. — Sometimes the essential fact, under the 
influence of this proclivity, completely passes out of 
the mind of the narrator ; as in the instance of a lady, 
cited by Miss Cobbe in her paper on the * Fallacies of 
Memory,' who assured Miss C. that a table in her 
drawing-room had some years before correctly rapped 
out her age in the presence of several persons, none of 
whom were near the table \ the fact being impressed on 
her mind by her annoyance at the disclosure, which 
was so great that she sold the table ! Having assured 
Miss Cobbe that she could verify her statement by 
reference to notes made at the time, she subsequently 
corrected it, very honestly, by telling Miss C. tTiat she 
found that there were hands on the table. — So, I have 
been recently requested by a gentleman to go and see 
a light table made heavy at the will of a person stand- 
ing apart from it ; a table which could be ordinarily 
lifted on a single finger, requiring the strength of the 
hands to raise it when so commanded. Thinking that 
this might be a trick of the kind that Houdin played 
upon the ^Vrabs by means of an electro-magnet, I 
made some preliminary enquiries with a view to satisfy 
myself whether the phenomenon was to be thus ac- 
counted ibr ; and finding that it was not, I was about 
to go to witness it, when I received a letter from the 
brother of my correspondent, who told me that he 
thought I ought \o know the real conditions of the 

113 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

performance ; which were that, the hands of two of the 
operator's family being first laid upon the table, the 
table was upset and lay on the floor on its side ; and 
that then, their hands still pressing sideways upon the 
top of the table, it could be made light or heavy by 
the will of the operator at a distance, a single finger 
being able to raise it up in the once case, while the 
whole hand was required in the other. And thus, as 
in the case of * the spirit of Samson,' it became evi- 
dent that the will of the operator was exercised in 
regulating the pressure of the hands in contact with 
the table, there being no evidence whatever of any 
alteration in its actual weight. 

One potent source of this self-deception, I find in 
the state of expectancy that results from prolonged 
and repeated stances ; in which, by mere continued 
monotony of impression, the mind tends towards a 
state in which the will and discrimination are sus- 
pended, and the expected phenomenon (such as the 
rising of a table in the air) takes place subjectively^ — 
that is, in the belief of the person or persons who re- 
port it — without any objective reality. Of this mental 
condition an admirable description was given by Mr. 
Braid,^ on the basis of his own investigations, before 
* Spiritualism * became epidemic in this country ; its 
existence is not, therefore, a hypothesis invented ad hoc. 
Sceptical enquirers, like myself, are continually told : — 
" You must not form your negative conclusions from 
" one or two failures ; but you must persevere in your 
" enquiries until you get positive results.'* This is just 

> Appendix Q, 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 113 

like John Wesley's advice to a young preacher, who 
was lamenting his want of ' faith/ and asking his 
advice as to continuing in the ministry : — " Preach 
"faith till yow have it, and then you will preach it be- 
" cause you have it." Spiritualistic disciples are bidden 
to sit hour after hour, and day after day, until they 
pass into the state of mind in which they can be 
brought to believe anything they have been led to 
expect ; and thenceforth they rail at scientific 
sceptics for not abnegating their intellectual discrimi- 
nation, by submitting themselves to a process which 
dethrones their higher powers from their normal supre- 
macy, and leaves their imaginations free scope. 

I have thus endeavoured to set before you what a 
long sequence of experiences seems to me to teach in 
regard to this subject ; namely, that we should rather 
trust to the evidence of our sense^ than to that of pur 
senses. That the latter is liable to many fallacies, we 
are almost daily finding out. If we go to see the 
performances of a Conjuror, we see things which we 
know to be impossibilities ; and that knowledge 
makes us aware that they cannot really happen as 
they seem to happen. Thus every conjuror can pour 
out scores of glasses of different kinds of wine from a 
single bottle ; or can tumble a great pile of bouquets 
out of a single hat ; but we know that he must do 
this from some larger store, which he dexterously 
conceals from our view. So, the celebrated conjuror 
Bosco seemed even to those who were closely watching 
him within a very short distance, to convert a living 

114 MESMERISM, ODYLISM, 

hare into two living rabbits ; the movements by 
which he made the exchange from a bag behind him, 
being so extraordinarily rapid as to elude the obser- 
vation of the bystanders, whose attention he fixed 
(the great secret alike of conjurors and professional 
* mediums ') upon something else. And I conclude, 
therefore, as I began, with the affirmation that we 
have a right to reject the testimony of the most truth- 
ful and honest witnesses, as to asserted phenomena 
which are as much opposed to the * Laws of Nature * 
as the transport of a human being through the air, 
the conversion of an old woman into a hare (or vice 
versd\ or the change of a hare into two rabbits ; until 
the facts of the case shall have been so thoroughly 
sifted by the investigation of * sceptical experts ' as to 
present an irresistible claim on our belief. In every 
case within my knowledge, in which such investiga- 
tion has been made, its fallacies have become ap- 
parent ; and when, therefore, I receive narratives from 
persons quite credible in regard to ordinary matters, as 
to extraordinary occurrences which have taken place 
within their knowledge, I think myself justified in 
telling them plainly that their conviction cannot 
govern my belief, because both theory and experi- 
ence have led me to the conclusion that no amount of 
testimony is good for anything, which is given by 
persons ' possessed ' with a ' dominant idea * in regard 
to the subject of it, and which has not been tested by 
severe cross-examination. 

As I wrote twenty-three years ago : — '^ In all ages 
the possession of men's minds by dominant ideas has 

TABLE-TURNING, SPIRITUALISM. 115 

" been most complete, when these ideas have been relu 
^' gious aberrations. The origin of such aberrations has 
" uniformly lain in the preference given to the feelings 
*' over the judgment, in the inordinate indulgence of 
" emotional excitement without adequate control on 
" the part of the rational will. Those who are thus 
** affected place themselves beyond the pale of any ap- 
" peals to their reasoning faculty, and lead others into 
** the same position. They are no more to be argued 
** with, than are insane patients. They cannot accept 
" any proposition which they fancy to be in the least 
" inconsistent with their prepossessions ; and the evi- 
" dence of their own feelings is to them the highest 
" attainable truth." ^ 

Many of the victims of these delusions have be- 
come the subjects of actual Insanity ; which has been 
attributed by believers to * a spirit having entered in 
and taken possession.* What kind of spirits they are 
which thus take possession of credulous and excitable 
minds, I hope that 1 have now made sufficiently 
plain : they are Dominant Ideas, 

* Quarterly Review^ October 1853. — A sensible Clergyman has lately 
written in almost the same words, in regard to the * dominant ideas * 
by which his ultra-ritualistic brethren are at present possessed. ** I 
*' know well (says * Clericus/ Times, Dec. 29, 1876) that when men have 
** once committed themselves to a false principle or theory, it becomes a 
" monomania with them for a time ; and those who on all other points 
»< are reasonable and capable of forming just conclusions, become utterly 
•'blind and illogical, so that argument with them is hopeless." 

APPENDICES. 

APPENDIX A. 

MAGIC AND DEMONIACAL AGENCY AT THE CHRISTIAN ERA. 

" For many years before this time, and for many years 
after, impostors from the East, pretending to magical powers, 
had great influence over the Roman mind. All the Greek 
and Roman literature of the empire, from Horace to Lucian, 
abounds in proof of the prevalent credulity of this sceptical 
period. Unbelief, when it has become conscious of its 
weakness, is often glad to give its hand to superstition. The 
faith of educated Romans was utterly gone. We can hardly 
wonder, when the East was thrown open — the land of mys- 
tery — the fountain of the earliest migrations — the cradle of 
the earliest religions — that the imagination both of the 
populace and the aristocracy of Rome became fanatically 
excited, and that they greedily welcomed the most absurd 
and degrading superstitions. Not only was the metropolis 
of the empire crowded with hungry Greeks, but Syrian for- 
tune-tellers flocked into all the haunts of public amusement. 
Every part of the East contributed its share to the general 
superstition. The gods of Egypt and Phrygia found un- 
failing votaries. Before the close of the republic, the temples 
of Isis and Serapis had been more than once erected, des- 

Ii8 APPENDIX A. 

troyed and renewed. Josephus tells us that certain disgrace- 
ful priests of Isis were crucified at Rome by the second 
emperor ; but this punishment was only a momentary check 
to their sway over the Roman mind. The more remote dis- 
tricts of Asia Minor sent their itinerant soothsayers ; Syria 
sent her music and her medicines ; Chaldaea her Babylonian 
numbers and mathematical calculations. To these corrupters 
of the people of Romulus we must add one more Asiatic 
nation — the nation of the Israelites ; — and it is an instructive 
employment to observe that, while some members of the 
Jewish people were rising, by the Divine power, to the 
higliest position ever occupied by men on earth, others were 
sinking themselves, and others along with them, to the lowest 
and most contemptible degradation." — Conybeare and How- 
son's Life of St. Paul, vol. i. p. 158. 

The reputation of Simon Magus of Samaria stood so 
high in Rome, alike with the Senate and the people, that he 
was even adored as a god ; a statue being raised to him in 
the island of the Tiber, with the inscription, Simoni Deo 
Saiicto. Several of the early Christian Fathers who speak 
of this inscription, fully admit the reality of Simon's mira- 
culous powers, as shown in his making statues which walked 
at his command in the midst of a crowd thunderstmck with 
wonder and fright ; his remaining unhurt in the midst of the 
flames of a burning pile ; his changing stones into bread ; 
his making a scythe mow without hands, and the like: — some 
of them merely protesting against his being credited with 
the attribute of Divinity, whilst others affirm that it was only 
after having failed to obtain these powers from the Apostles 
by the offer of money, that he gained them by allying him- 
self with Demons. ApoUonius of Thyana was another cele- 
brated magician of the first century, who figures much in the 
writings of the early fathers as an opponent of the Christ- 
ians, to whom he did all the mischief he could by his 
diabolical arts ; in which these Fathers believed as firmly as 

APPENDIX B, 119 

they did in those of Simon Magus. There is a singular 
passage in TertuUian (Apologies, chap, xxiii.), which refers 
to magicians who could bring up phantoms, evoke the spirits 
of the dead, force the mouths of infants to utter oracles, and 
make chairs and tables prophesy by means of * circles ' or 
chains formed by the joined hands of several individuals — 
exactly after the manner of modern Spiritualists. If * the 
spirits ' are powerful enough, argues TertuUian, to do these 
things at the orders of others, what must they be able to 
effect when working with redoubled zeal on their own ac- 
count ? Against these he sets two Christian miracles which 
occurred within his own knowledge ; the first, of a corpse, 
at its own funeral, raising and clasping its hands in the usual 
attitude of supplication at the first word of the priest in 
prayer, and then replacing them at its sides when the prayer 
was over ; and the second, of a Christian corpse long dead 
and buried, which, on its grave being re-opened for the ad- 
mission of a recently defunct, courteously moved to one 
side to make room for the new-comer ! These statements, 
doubtless made in all honesty and good faith, curiously illus- 
trate that influence of * dominant ideas ' over an intellect 
powerful, subtle, and profound in many respects, but totally 
destitute of scientific discrimination, which it is the object 
of these Lectures to elucidate. 

APPENDIX B, 

FLAGELLANT MANIA. 

The private practice of individual flagellation, as an act 
of self-mortification, was common among religious communi- 
ties from an early period of Christianity ; but it was not until 
the thirteenth century, when a general belief prevailed that 

12 

I20 APPE^DIX B. 

the end of the world was at hand, that regular associations 
and fraternities were formed for its public perfv^rmance, and 
that the mania spread epidemically over a large part of 
Europe. Of the DeiJoti of Italy in the year 1260, we are 
told by a contemporary historian that " noble and ignoble, 
old and young, and even children of five years of age, 
marched through the streets with no covering but a scarf 
round the waist. They each carried a scourge of leathern 
thongs, which they applied to their limbs, amid sighs and 
tears, with such violence that the blood llowed from the 
wounds. Not only during the day, but even by night, and 
in the severest winter, they traversed the cities with burning 
torches and banners in thousands and tens of thousands, 
headed by their priests, and prostrated themselves before 
the altars. They proceeded in the same manner in the 
villages ; and the woods and mountains resounded with the 
voices of those whose cries were raised to God. The melan- 
choly chaunt of the -penitent alone was heard. Enemies 
were reconciled ; men and women vied with each other in 
splendid works of charity, as if they dreaded that Divine 
Omnipotence would pronounce on them the doom of anni- 
hilation." (Monachus Paduanus, in Hecker's Epidemics of 
the Middle Ages, translated by Dr. Babington for the Syden- 
ham Society, p. 36.) 

It was in the middle of the fourteenth century (1347-1350) 
that Europe was devastated by the Black Death, a most malig- 
nant form of the Oriental Plague, which is believed to have 
carried off one fourth of its entire population; and under 
the terror inspired by this visitation the flagellant Mania, 
which had previously almost entirely abated, broke out with 
new fury, apparently in many places at once ; and the ex- 
cesses of this fanaticism became even more violent than 
before. But though it prevailed over nearly the whole of 
Continental Europe, this Mania does not seem to have be- 
come epidemic m Britain. We are told by Stow that a band 

APPENDIX B, 121 

of Flagellants reached London in the reign of Edward III., 
their number consisting of 120 men and women. Each day, 
at an appointed hour, they assembled, ranged themselves in 
two lines, and paraded the streets scourging their naked 
shoulders and chanting a hymn. At a given signal, all with 
the exception of the last, threw themselves flat on the ground; 
and he who was last, as he passed by his companions, gave 
each a lash, and then also lay dow^n. The others followed 
in succession, till every individual in his or her turn had re- 
ceived a stroke from the whole brotherhood. The citizens 
of London gazed and marvelled, pitied and commended ; 
but they went no farther. Their faith was too weak, or their 
skins too delicate ; and they allowed the strangers to mono- 
polise all the merits of such a religious exercise. The mis- 
sionaries did not make a single convert, and were obliged to 
return without any other success than the conviction of 
having done their duty to an unbelieving generation. 

Though the practice was at first encouraged by the 
Church, the Flagellants subsequently fell under its ban as here- 
tical ; for they taught that many of its doctrines were false, 
and that faith and flagellation, with a belief in the Apostles' 
Creed, were alone necessary to salvation. The priests com- 
plained of their loss of influence ; the hierarchy took the alarm ; 
and the Pope prohibited throughout Christendom the con- 
tinuance of the flagellant pilgrimages under pain of excom- 
munication. The flagellants were then everywhere persecuted, 
and some of them were burned as heretics ; but it was long 
before the Mania was completely repressed. It broke out 
several times in the later part of the fourteenth century ; 
in the fifteenth it was deemed necessary in several parts of 
Germany to exterminate the flagellants with fire and sword ; 
yet as late as 17 10 their processions were still seen in Italy. 
Of the strength of this * possession,' it is scarcely possible to 
conceive a stronger instance than is presented by the depo- 

122 APPENDIX C 

sition of a citizen of Nordhiiusen, in 1446, that his wife, in 
the belief of perfcrming a Christian act, wanted to scourge 
her children as soon as they were baptised I 

APPENDIX a 

DANCING MANIA. 

" In the year 1374, assemblages of men and women were 
seen at Aix-la-Chapelle, who had come out of Germany, and 
who, united by one common delusion, exhibited to the public, 
both in the streets and in the churches, the following strange 
spectacle : — 'J'hey formed circles hand in hand, and appear- 
ing to have lost all control over their senses, continued 
dancing, regardless of the bystanders, for hours together, in 
wild delirium, until at length they fell to the ground in a state 
of exhaustion. They then complained of extreme oppres- 
sion, and groaned as if in the agonies of death, until they 
were swathed in clothes bound tightly round their waists.; 
upon which they again recovered, and remained free from 
complaint until the next attack. This practice of swathing 
was resorted to, on account of the tympany which followed 
these spasmodic ravings ; but the bystanders frequently re- 
lieved patients in a less artificial manner, by thumping and 
trampling upon the parts affected. While dancing they 
neither saw nor heard, being insensible to external impres- 
sions through the senses ; but were haunted by visions, their 
fancies conjuring up spirits, whose names they shrieked out; 
and some of them afterwards asserted that they felt as if 
they had been immersed in a stream of blood, which obliged 
them to leap so high. Others, during the paroxysm, saw 
the heavens open, and the Saviour enthroned with the Vir- 
gin Mary ; according as the religious notions of the age 
were strangely and variously reflected in their imaginations. 

APPENDIX C 123 

Where the disease was completely developed, the attack 
commenced with epileptic convulsions. Those affected fell 
to the ground senseless, panting and labouring for breath. 
They foamed at the mouth, and suddenly springing up began 
their dance amidst strange contortions. 

" A few months after this dancing malady had made its 
appearance at Aix-la-Chapelle, it broke out at Cologne, 
where the number of those possessed amounted to more 
than five hundred ; and about the same time at Metz, the 
streets of which place are said to have been filled with 
eleven hundred dancers. Peasants left their ploughs, me- 
chanics their workshops, housewives their domestic duties, 
to join the wild revels ; and this rich commercial city^ 
became the scene of the most ruinous disorder. 

**The St. Vitus's dance attacked people of all stations, 
especially those who led a sedentary life, such as shoemakers 
and tailors \ but even the most robust peasants abandoned 
their labours in their fields, as if they were possessed by 
evil spirits ; and those affected were seen assembling indis- 
criminately, from time to time, at certain appointed places, 
and, unless prevented by the lookers-on, continued to dance 
without intermission, until their very last breath was expen- 
ded. Their fury and extravagance of demeanour so com- 
pletely deprived them of their senses, that many of them 
dashed their brains out against the walls and corners of 
buildings, or rushed headlong into rapid rivers, where they 
found a watery grave. Roaring and foaming as they were, 
the bystanders could only succeed in restraining them by 
placing benches and chairs in their way, so that, by the 
high leaps they were thus tempted to take, their strength 
might be exhausted. As soon as this was the case, they fell, 
as it were, lifeless to the ground, and, by very slow degrees, 
recovered their strength. Many there were, who, even with 
all this exertion, had not expended the violence of the tem- 
pest which raged within them ; but awoke with newly re- 

124 APPENDIX D. 

vived powers, and again and again mixed with the crowd o£ 
dancers ; until at length the violent excitement of their dis- 
ordered nerves was allayed by the great involuntary exertion 
of their limbs ; and the mental disorder was calmed by the 
exhaustion of the body. The cure effected by these stormy 
attacks was in many cases so perfect, that some patients re- 
turned to the factory or the plough, as if nothing had hap- 
pened. Others, on the contrary, paid the penalty of their 
folly by so total a loss of power, that they could not regain 
their former health, even by the employment of the most 
strengthening remedies." — (Hecker's Epidemics of the Middle 
Ages^ pp. 87-104.) 

APPENDIX D. 

THE ' ANIMAL MAGNETISM ' OF MESMER. 

" Animal Magnetism is a fluid universally diffused ; it is 
the medium of a mutual influence between the heavenly 
bodies, the earth, and animated bodies ; it is everywhere 
continuous, so as to leave no void ; its subtlety admits of 
no comparison ; it is capable of receiving, propagating, 
communicating all the impressions of motion ; it is suscep- 
tible of flux and of reflux. The animal body experiences 
the effects of this agent ; by insinuating itself into the sub- 
stance of the nerves it affects them immediately. There are 
observed, particularly in the human body, properties ana- 
logous to those of the magnet ; and in it are discerned pro- 
perties equally different and opposite. The action and the 
virtues of animal magnetism may be communicated from 
one body to other bodies, animate and inanimate. This 
action takes place at a remote distance, without the aid of 
any intermediate body ; it is increased, reflected by mirrors; 
communicated, propagated, augmented by sound ; its virtues 

APPENDIX E. 

125 

may be accumulated, concentrated, transported. Although 
this fluid is universal, all animal bodies are not equally sus- 
ceptible of it ; there are even some, though a very small 
number, which have properties so opposite, that their very 
presence destroys all the effects of this fluid on other bodies. 
Animal Magnetism is capable of healing diseases of the 
nerves immediately, and others mediately. It perfects the 
action of medicines ; it excites and directs salutary crises in 
such a manner that the physician may render himself master 
of them ; by its means he knows the state of health of each 
individual, and judges with certainty of the origin, the nature, 
and the progress of the most complicated diseases ; he pre- 
vents their increase, and succeeds in healing them without 
at any time exposing his patient to dangerous effects or 
troublesome consequences; whatever be the age, the tem- 
perament, and the sex. In animal magnetism, nature pre- 
sents a universal method of healing and preserving man- 
kind." — (^Memoire sur la Decouverte du Magnetisme Animal^ 
par M. Mesmer. Paris, 1779, p. 74, et seq. — Ibid^ Avis du 
Lecteur^ P- ^O 

APPENDIX E. 

REPORT ON MESMER'S PRETENSIONS, BY THE COMMISSION 
APPOINTED BY THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES, PARIS, 

" The sick persons, arranged in great numbers and in 
several rows around the baquet, receiv£ the magnetism by 
all these means ; by the iron rods which convey to them that 
of the baquet ; by the cords wound round their bodies ; by 
the connection of the thumbs which communicate to them 
that of their neighbours ; by the sound of the pianoforte, or 
of an agreeable voice'diffusing the magnetism in the air ; by 

126 APPENDIX E, 

the finger and rod of the magnetiser moved before their 
faces, above or behind their heads, and on the diseased 
parts, always observing the direction of tlie poles ; by the 
eye of the magnetiser ; but above all by t!ie application of 
his hands and the pressure of his fingers on the hypochon- 
dria and on the regions of the abdomen ; an application 
often continued for a long time, sometimes for several hours. 
Meanwhile the patients, in their different conditions, present 
a varied picture. Some are calm, tranquil, and experience 
no effect ; others cough, spit, feel slight" pains, local or gene- 
ral heat, and have sweatings ; others again are agitated or 
tormented with convulsions. These convulsions are remark- 
able in regard to the number affected with them, and to 
their duration and force ; and are characterised by the pre- 
cipitous involuntary motions of all the limbs and of the 
whole body, by the constriction of the throat, by the violent 
heavings of the hypochondria and the epigastrium ; by the 
dimness and wandering of the eyes ; by piercing shrieks, 
tears, sobbing, and immoderate laughter. They are preceded 
or followed by a state of languor and reverie, a kind of 
depression, and even drowsiness. The smallest unforeseen 
noise occasions shudderings ; even a change of tone and 
measure in the airs played on the pianoforte influences the 
patients, a quicker motion agitating them more and renewing 
the vivacity of their convulsions. Nothing is more astonish- 
ing than the spectacle of these convulsions ; one who has 
not seen them can form no idea of them. The spectator is 
equally astonished at the profound repose of one part of the 
patients, and at the agitation of the rest ; at the various 
accidents which are repeated, and the sympathies which are 
estabUshed. Some patients devote their exclusive attention 
to each other, rushing towards one another, smiling, speak- 
ing with affection, and mutually soothing their crises. All 
are under the power of the magnetiser ; it matters not in 
what state of drowsiness they may be ; his voice, a look, a 

APPENDIX E, 127 

gesture brings them out of it." — (Report of the Commission 
of the French Academy of Sciences. ) 

The Commissioners further reported — " That this pre- 
tended agent certainly is not common Magnetism; for on ex- 
amining the baquet, the grand reservoir of this wonderful 
fluid, by means of a needle and electrometer, not the slightest 
indication of the presence either of common magnetism or of 
electricity was afforded,; that it is wholly inapprec'able by 
any of the senses, or by any mechanical or chemical process^ v 
that they tried it upon themselves and upon many others, 
without being able to perceive anything ; that on blindfold- 
ing those who seemed to be most susceptible to its influence, 
all its ordinary effects were produced when nothing was done 
to them, but when they imagined they were being magnet- 
ised, while none of its effects were produced when they were 
really magnetised, but imagined that nothing was being 
done 'y that, in like manner, when brought under a magnet- 
ised tree, nothing happened if the subjects of the experi- 
ment thought they were at a distance from the tree, while 
they were immediately thrown into convulsions if they 
believed they were near the tree, although really at a distance 
from it ; that, consequently the effects actually produced 
were produced purely by the imagination ; that these effects, 
though some cures might be wrought, were not without dan- 
ger, since the convulsions excited were often violent and 
exceedingly apt to spread, especially among men feeble in 
body and weak in mind, and almost universally among 
women ; and finally, that there were parts of the operation 
of magnetising which might readily be turned to vicious pur- 
poses, and that immoral practices had already actually grown 
out of them.' — (Jbid,) 

128 APPENDIX F. 

APPENDIX K 

EXTRAORDINARY MUSCULAR ENERGY PRODUCIBLE BY 

MENTAL CONCENTRATION. 

It is a well-known fact that when the whole energy is 
concentrated upon some Muscular effort, especially under the 
influence of an overpowering emotion, the body seems 
endowed with superhuman strength and agility, so as to be 
able to accomplish some extraordinary feat, at which the 
performer himself stands aghast when he contemplates it 
after his return to his sober senses. Thus an old cook-maid 
who heard an alarm of fire, seized an enormous box contain- 
ing the whole of her property, and ran down stairs with it as 
easily as she would have carried a dish of meat ; yet after 
the fire liad been extinguished, she could not lift it a hair's 
breadth from the ground, and two men were required to 
carry it upstairs again. — It was by the artificial induction of 
a like state of concentrated effort, coupled with the assurance 
of easy success, ('it will go up like a feather.') with which 
he had completely possessed his * subject^s ' mind, that Mr. 
Braid (in my presence) enabled a man so remarkable for the 
poverty of his physique^ that he had not for many years 
ventured to lift a weight of twenty pounds, to take up a 
weight of 28 lbs. upon his little finger, and swing it round 
his head, with the greatest apparent ease. Neither Mr. 
Braid nor his son, both of them powerful men, could do 
anything like this ; and I could not myself lift the same 
weight on my little finger to more than half my own height. 
Trickery in this case was obviously impossible ; since, if the 
'subject' had been trained to such feats, the effect of such 
training would have become visible in his muscular develop- 
ment 

APPENDIX G, 120 

APPENDIX G. 

EXAMINATION OF MR. LEWIS'S EXPERIMENTS ON MES- 
MERISM, AT THE MEDICAL SCHOOL OF THE UNIVERSITY 
AND king's college, ABERDEEN. 

The Committee consisted of three professors, two medical 
men, and a clergyman, who undertook the investigation at 
the earnest solicitation of the pupils in the Medical School. 
The experiments were conducted in a perfectly fair spirit, 
with every desire to do ample justice to the operator, and 
at the same time in such a manner as to guard against all 
obvious sources of fallacy. The * subjects ' were chosen by 
Mr. Lewis from amiong the students ; their susceptibility 
having been previously tested by him. Three of the Com- 
mittee remained in the Class-room where the 'subject' was 
seated, and recorded the time and description of the move- 
ments he performed ; whilst the other three went into an 
adjoining room with Mr. Lewis, to direct at successive inter- 
vals the various movements they wished him to excite by 
his silent will and bodily gestures, recording each direction 
with the time at which it was given. When the round of 
the experiments was finished, these three gentlemen returned 
into the Class-room, and both reports were then read aloud 
and compared. 

The following is the first act in the performance : — 

Exactly at three p.m. Mr. Lewis was desired by his com- 
mittee to *make Mr. M. lie on the floor with his face 

on the floor.' No other direction was given for Jive 
minutes; during which Mr. M. made fourteen movements, 
not one of which had been willed by Mr. Lewis, or bore the 
least resemblance to that which he did will 

I30 APPENDIX G. 

H, M. ^ Mj\ M's. Movements. 

3.1 J P.M. — Raised himself up in the chair and shook him- 

self. 

3.2 P.M. — Slipped down a little. Got up and sat down. 

Changed his seat. 

3.2^ P.M. — Rubbed his hand on his thigh, and his left arm 

with his right hand. 

3. 3 J P.M. — Stamped on the floor and moved his feet side- 
ways j then got up and changed his seat 
again. 

3.3§ P.M. — Folded arms. Put left hand behind. 

3.4^ P.M. — Rocked his body from side to side. 

The divergence was equally great in all the other experi- 
ments; so that the Committee unanimously agreed in the 
Report (to which Mr. Lewis could make no objection) that 
" these experiments afford no ground whatever for the 

" opinion that either Mr. L or any other person can in- 

" fluence another at a distance from him." Mr. Lewis being 
further challenged to prove his control over the influence of 
gravitation, by making Mr. M. stand on one leg, with the 
same side of his body and his foot pressed close to the 
wall, he utterly failed to do so. 

In accordance with an arrangement previously made, Mr. 
Lewis left the Class-room when this series of experiments 
had been brought to an end ; and the spectators were re- 
quested to remain quiet for a while, as another experiment 
was about to be tried — this being as to Mr. Lewis's asserted 
power of mesmerising from a distance. This power he was 
to exercise from his lodgings upon Mr. M., the subject of 
his previous experiments, at 4 hours 5 min. p.m. Instead, 
however, of passing into the mesmeric sleep, Mr. M. got up 
from his seat at 4 hours 5 min., came suddenly forward to a 
chair, sat upon it in a state of apparent excitement for half a 
minute, then rushed back, snatched his hat from the 
ground, and ran off" to Mr. L.'s lodgings, where, however. 

APPENDIX If, 131 

\t did not find Mr. L. Another gentleman, Mr. H , who 
had been previously acted on, seemed to suppose tl at he 
was again affected by Mr. L.'s manoeuvres ; for, after Mr. 
M. first got up, he bent down his head, and appeared to be 
in a state of great nervous excitement ; refusing to leave on 
being pressed to do so. He remained in this state for half 
an hour, and was at last induced to go away, in company of 
two students who took charge of him. Before he could be 
prevailed upon to go home, he also went to Mr. L.'s lodg- 
ings, feeling himself irresistibly drawn thither by Mr. L.'s 
silent will ; but it was ascertained that all this occurred 
without Mr. Lewis having directed his mind to him at all \ 
The supposed * attraction ' thus obviously existed only in 
the imaginations of the * subjects,' who had heard of Mr. 
Lewis's asserted power, and supposed that it was being 
exerted upon them. — Edinburgh Monthly fournal of Medical 
Science ,, February, 1852. 

APPENDIX H, 

SUPPOSED INFLUENCE OF MAGNETS ON MESMERISED SUB 
JECTS SHOWN TO BE DUE TO MENTAL SUGGESTION. 

« 

" When in London lately," says Mr. Braid, " I had the plea- 
sure of calling upon an eminent and excellent physician who 
is in the habit of using mesmerism in his practice, in suitable 
cases, just as he uses any other remedy. He spoke of the ex- 
traordinary effects which he had experienced from the use of 
magnets applied during the mesmeric state^ and kindly offered 
to illustrate the fact on a patient who liad been asleep all the 
time I was in the room, and in that -stage, during which I 
felt assured she could overhear every word of our conversa- 
tion. He told me, that when he put the magnet into her 
13 

152 APPENDIX IL 

hands, it would produce catalepsy of the hands and arms, 
and such was the result. He wafted the hands, and the 
catelepsy ceased. He said that a mere touch of a magnet 
on a limb would stiffen it, and such he proved to be the 
fact. 

" I now told him, that I had got a little instrument in my 
pocket, which, althougli far less than his, I felt assured 
would prove quite as powerful ; and I offered to prove this 
by operating on the same patient, whom I had never seen 
before, and who was in the mesmeric state when I entered 
the room. My instrument was about three inches long, the 
thickness of a quill, with a ring attached to the end of it I 
told him that when put into her hands, he would find it 
catalepsize both hands and arms as his had done ; and such 
was the result. Having reduced this by wafting, I took my 
instrument from her, and again returned it, in another posi- 
tion^ and told him it would now have the very reverse effect 
— that she would not be able to bold it, and that although I 
closed her hands on it, they would open, and that it would 
drop out of them ; and such was the case, to the great sur- 
prise of my worthy friend, who now desired to be informed 
ivhat I had done to the instrument to invest it with this neuu 
and opposite power. This I declined doing for the present ; 
but I promised to do so, when he had seen some further 
jjioofs of its remarkable powers. I now told him that a 
touch with it on either extremity would cause the extremity 
to rise and become cataleptic, and such was the result ; that 
a second touch on the same point would reduce the rigidity, 
and cause it to fall, and such again was proved to be the 
fact. After a variety of other experiments, every one of 
which proved precisely as I had predicted, she was aroused. 
I now applied the ring of my instniment on the third finger 
of the right hand, from which it was suspended, and told 
the doctor, that when it was so suspended, it would send 
her to sleep. To this he replied **' // never zailt,'^ but I again 

APPENDIX H. 133 

told him that I felt confident that it would send her* to 
sleep. We then were silent, and very speedily she was once 
more asleep. Having aroused her, I put the instrument on 
the second finger of her right hand, and told the doctor that 
it would be found she could not go to sleep, when it was 
placed there. He said he thought she would, and he sat 
steadily gazing at her, but I said firmly and confidently that 
she wculd not. After a considerable time the doctor asked 
her if she did not feel sleepy, to which she replied * not at 
all'; could you rise and walk? when she told him she 
could. I then requested her to look at the point of the 
fore-finger of her right hand, which I told the doctor would 
send her to sleep, and such was the result ; and, after being 
aroused, I desired her to keep a steady gaze at the nail of 
the thumb of the left hand, which would send her to sleep 
in like manner, and such proved to be the fact. 

" Having repaired to another room, I explained to the 
doctor the real nature and powers of my Httle and appa- 
rently magical instrument,— that it was nothing more than 
my portmanteati-key and ring \ and that what had imparted 
to it such apparently varied powers, was merely the predic- 
tions which the patient had overheard me make to him, act- 
ing upon her in the peculiar state of the nervous sleep, as 
irresistible impulses to be affected, according to the results 
she had heard me predict. Had I predicted that she would 
see any flame, or colour, or form, or substance, animate or 
inanimate, I know from experience that such would have 
been realised, and responded to by her ; and that, not from 
any desire on her part to impose upon others, but because 
she was self-deceived, the vividness of her imagination in 
that state, inducing her to believe as real, what were only 
the figments of fancy, suggested to her mind by the remarks 
of others. The power of suggestions of this sort also, in 
paralysing or energising muscular power, «is truly astound- 
ing ; and may all arise in perfect good faith with almost all 
patients who have passed into the second conscious statei 

134 APPENDIX L 

and with some, during the first conscious stage ; and with 
some weak-minded, or highly imaginative or credulous and 
concentrative people, even in the waking condition J* (Braid 
on The Poiver of the Mind over the Body^ 1846 ; p. 31.) 

APPENDIX L 

MR. braid's experiments ON SUBJECflVE SENSATIONS. 

" A lady, upwards of fifty-six years of age, in perfect 
health, and wide awake, having been taken into a dark 
closet, and desired to look at the poles of the powerful 
horse- shoe magnet of nine elements, and describe what she 
saw, declared, after looking a considerable time, that she 
saw nothing. However, after I told her to look attentively, 
and she would see fire come out of it, she speedily saw 
sparkSj and presently it seemed to her to burst forth, as she 
had witnessed an artificial representation of the volcano of 
Mount Vesuvius at some pubUc gardens. Without her 
knowledge, T closed down the lid of the trunk which con- 
tained the magnet, but still the same appearances, were de- 
scribed as visible. By putting leading questions, and asking 
her to describe what she saw from another part of the closet 
(where there was nothing but bare walls) she went on describ- 
ing various shades of most brilliant coruscations and flame, 
according to the leading questions 1 had put for the purpose 
of changing the fundamental ideas. On repeating the expe- 
riments, similar results were repeatedly realised by this 
patient. On taking this lady into the said closet after the 
mi%'aet K d been removed to another part of the house, she 
still perceived the same visible appearances of light and flame 
when there was nothing but the bare walls to produce them ; 
and, two weeks after the magnet was removed, when she 
went into the closet by herself, the mere association of ideas 
was sufficient to caus^ her to realise a visible representation 

APPENDIX I 135 

of the same light and flames. Indeed such had been the 
case with her on entering the closet ever since the few first 
times she saw the light and flames. In like manner when 
she was made to touch the poles of the magnet when wide 
awake, no manifestations of attraction took place between 
her hand and the magnet, but the moment the idea was 
suggested that she would be held fast by its powerful attrac- 
tion, so that she would be utterly unable to separate her 
hands from it, such result was realised ; and, on separating 
it, by the suggestion of a new idea, and causing her to touch 
the other pole in like manner, predicating that // would exert 
no attractive power for the fingers or hands, such negative 
effects were at once manifested. I know this lady was in- 
capable of trying to deceive myself, or others present ; but 
she was self-deceived and spell-bound by the predominance 
of a pre-conceived idea, and was not less surprised at the 
varying powers of the instrument than others who witnessed 
the results." (6^. cit.^ p. 19.) 

Other ' subjects ' taken by Mr. Braid into his dark closet, 
and unable to see anything in the first instance, when told 
to look steadily at a certain point (though there was no 
magnet there) and assured that they would see flame and 
light of various colours issuing from it, very soon declared 
that they saw them ; and in some of them the same sensa- 
tions could be called up in open daylight. — The following 
was an experiment made, with and without the magnet, 
upon the sensations of the general surface; the 'subject' 
being a young gentleman twenty- one years of age : — 

" I first operated on his right hand, by drawang a powerful 
horse-shoe magnet over the hand, without contact, whilst 
the armature was attached. He immediately observed a 
sensation of cold follow the course of the magnet. I re- 
versed the passes, and he felt it less cold^ but he felt no 
attraction between his hand and the magnet. I then re- 
moved the cross-bar, and tried the effect with both poles 

156 ■ APPENDIX L 

alternately, but still there was no change in the effect, and 
decidedly no proof of attraction between his hand and the 
magnet. In the afternoon of the same day I desired him to 
look aside, and hold his hat between his eyes and his hand, 
and observe the effects when I operated on him, whilst he 
could not see my proceedings. He very soon described a 
recurrence of the same sort of sensations as those he felt in 
the morning, but they speedily became more intense, and 
extended up the arm, producing rigidity of the member. In 
the course of two minutes this feeling attacked the other 
arm, and to some extent the whole body; and he was, 
moreover, seized with a fit of involuntary laughter, like that 
of hysteria, which continued for several minutes — in fact, 
until I put an end to the experiment. His first remark was, 
*Now this experiment clearly proves that there must be 
some intimate connection between mineral magnetism and 
mesmerism ; for I was most strangely affected, and could not 
possibly resist laughing during the extraordinary sensations 
with which my whole body was seized, as you drew the 
magnet over my hand and arm.' I replied that I drew a 
very different conclusion from the experiments, as / had 
never used the magnet at ally nor held it, nor anything else, 
near to him ; and that the whole proved the truth of my 
position as to the extraordinary power of the mind over the 
body." {Op. city p. 14.) 

Phenomena of the same kind were found to be produci- 
ble without the use of a magnet at all : — 

" Another interesting case of a married lady, I experi- 
mented with, in the presence of her husband, as follows. I 
requested her to place her hand on the table, with the palm 
upwards, so situated as to enable her to observe the process 
I was about to resort to. I had previously remarked, that by 
my drawing something slowly over the hand, without contact, 
whilst the patient concentrated her attention on the process, 
she would experience some peculiar sensations in conse- 

APPENDIX L 137 

quence. I took a pair of her scissors, and drew the bowl of 
the handle slowly from the wrist downwards. I had only- 
done so a few times, when she felt a creeping, chilly sensa- 
tion, which was immediately followed by a spasmodic 
twitching of the muscles, so as to toss the hand from the 
table, as the members of a prepared frog are agitated when 
galvanised. I next desired her to place her other hand on 
the table, in like manner, but placed so that by turning her 
head in the opposite direction she might not see what was 
being done, and to watch her sensations in that hand, and 
tell us the result. In about the same length of time similar 
phenomena were manifested as with the other hand, although 
in this instance / had done nothing 7vhatevcr^ and was not 
near her hand. I now desired her to watch what happened 
to her hand, when I predicated that she would feel it be- 
come cold, and the result was as predicted ; and vice versa, 
predicating that she would feel it become intensely hot, such 
was realised. When I desired her to think of the tip of her 
nose, the predicated result, either of heat or cold, was 
speedily realised in that part. 

" Another lady, twenty- eight years of age, being operated 
on in the same manner, whilst looking at my proceedings, in 
the course of half-a- minute, described the sensation as that 
of the blood rushing into the fingers ; and when the motion 
of my pencil-case was from below, upwards, the sensation 
was that of the current of blood being reversed, but less 
rapid in its motion. On resuming the downward direction, 
the original feeling occurred, still more powerfully than at 
first. This lady being requested now to look aside, whilst I 
operated, realised similar sensations, and that whilst / was 
doing nothing, 

" The husband of this lady, twenty-eight and a half years 
of age, came into the room shortly after the above experi- 
ment was finished. She was very desirous of my trying the 
effect upon him, as he was in perfect health. I requested 

138 APPENDIX L 

him to extend his right arm laterally, and let it rest on a 
chair with the palm upwards, to turn his head in the oppo- 
site direction so that he might not see what I was doing, 
and to concentrate his attention on the feelings which might 
arise during my process. In about half-a-minute he felt an 
aura like a breath of air passing along the hand ; in a little 
after a slight pricking, and presently a feeling passed along 
the arm, as far as the elbow, which he described as similar 
to that of being slightly electrified. All this while I had 
been doing nothings beyond watching what might be realised. 
I then desired him to tell me what he felt now — speaking in. 
such a tone of voice as was calculated to lead him to believe 
I was operating in some different manner. The result was 
that the former sensations ceased; but, when I requested 
him once more to tell me what he felt now, the former sen- 
sations recurred. I then whispered to his wife, but in a 
tone sufficiently loud to be heard by him, observe now, and 
you will find his fingers begin to draw, and his hand will be- 
come clenched — see how the little finger begins to move, 
and such was the case ; see the next one also going in like 
manner, and such effects followed; and finally, the entire 
hand closed firmly, with a very unpleasant drawing motion 
of the whole flexor-muscles of the fore-arm. I did nothing 
whatever to this patient until the fingers were nearly closed, 
when I touched the palm of his hand with the point of my 
finger, which caused it to close more rapidly and firmly. 
After it had remained so for a short time, I blew upon the 
hand, which dissipated the previously existing mental im- 
pression, and instantly the hand became relaxed. The high 
respectability and intelligence of this gentleman rendered 
his testimony very valuable ; and especially so, when he was 
not only wide awake, but had never been either mesmerised| 
hypnotised, or so tested before." {Op. cit., pp. 15-17.) 

r 

APPENDICES K, Z. 139 

'^' 

APPENDIX K. 

PKNDCLE EXPLORATEUR. 

We are told by Ammianiis Marcellinus (the last of the 
Roman Historians) that, in the reign of the Emperor Flavins 
Valens (4th century) a conspiracy was formed, including 
many persons of high rank, who devoted themselves to 
'curious arts,' among them the celebrated lamblicus, a 
mystic philosopher of the Alexandrian School ; their objects 
being to learn who would be the successor of the reigning 
Emperor, which piece of curiosity was held to be a capital 
crime. Of the magical procedure they employed, of which 
a full description was given by one of them named Hilarius 
when put on his trial, the oscillations of a suspended ring, 
that pointed to one letter after another of an alphabet cir- 
cularly disposed, constituted the essential part. The three 
letters 0FX) having been thus spelled-out, the conspirators 
made up -their minds that Theodosius w^as indicated j and 
although the principal members, of the conspiracy were after- 
w^ards put to death by the Emperor, the destiny of Theo- 
dosius was accomplished, for he ultimately became the 
successor of Valens. 

APPENDIX L. 

TABLE-TALKING AND PLANCHETTE-WRITING. 

*' Several years ago we were invited, with two medical 
friends, to a very select seance, to witness the performance 

of a lady, the Hon. Miss N , who was described to us 

as a peculiarly gifted * medium;' not merely being the 
vehicle of * spiritual ' revelations of the most elevating cha- 
racter, but fieing able to convince incredulous philosophers 

I40 APPENDIX L. 

like ourselves of the reality of her * spiritual ' gifts, by 
* physical ' manifestations of the most unmistakable kind. 

Unfortunately, however, the Hon. Miss N was not in 

great force on the occasion of our visit ; and nothing would 
go right It was suggested that she might be exhausted by 
a most successful performance which had taken place on 
the previous evening ; and that * the spirits ' should be asked 
whether she stood in need of refreshment. The question 
was put by our host (a wine-merchant, be it observed), who 
repeated the alphabet rapidly until he came to n, and then 
went on slowly ; the table tilted at p. The same process 
was repeated, until the letters successively indicated were 
p, o, R, T. But this was not enough. The spirits might 
prescribe either porl or porter \ and the alphabet was then 
repeated slowly from the be^^inning^ a prolonged pause being 
made at e; as the table did not tilt, a bumper of port was 
administered * as directed.' It did not, however, produce 
the expected effect. 

" On another occasion, we happened to be on a visit at a 
house at which two ladies were staying, who worked the 
flancheite on the original method (that of attaching to it a 
pointer, which indicated letters and figures on a card), and 
our long previous knowledge of whom placed them beyond 
all suspicion of anything but j"^^- deception. One of them 
was a firm believer in the reality of her intercourse with the 
spirit-world ; and her ' planchette ' was continually at work 
beneath her hands, its index pointing to successive letters 
and figures on the card before it, just as if it had been that 
'of a telegraph- dial acted on by galvanic communication. 
After having watched the operation for some time, and 
assured ourselves that the answers she obtained to the 
questions she put to her * spiritual ' visitants were just what 
her own simple and devout nature would suggest, we ad- 
dressed her thus : — * You believe that your replies are dic- 
tated to you by your " spiritual " friends, and that your hands 

APPENDIX L. 141 

are the passive vehicles of the " spiritual " agency by which 

* the planchette is directed in spelling them out We believe, 

* on the other hand, that the answers are the products of your 

* own Brain, and that the planchette is moved by your own 

* Muscles. Now we can test, by a very simple experiment, 

* whether yotir view or ours is the correct one. Will you be 

* kind enough to shut your eyes when you ask your question, 
' and to let us watch what the planchette spells out ? If " the 
' spirits " guide it, there is no reason why they should not do 

* so as well when your eyes are shut, as when they are open. 

* If the table is moved by your own hands, it will not give 

* definite replies except under the guidance of your own 

* vision.' To this appeal our friend replied that she could 
not think of making such an experiment, as * it would show 
a want of faith ; ' and all our arguments and persuasions 
could only bring her to the point of asking t/ie sfin'fs whtthGi 
she mig/it comply with our request. The reply was, * No.' 
She then, at our continued urgency, asked *Why not?' 
The reply was, *Want of faith.' Putting a still stronger 
pressure upon her, we induced her to ask, * Faith in what ? ' 
The reply was, * In God.' 

" Of course, any further appeal in that quarter would have 
been useless; and we consequently addressed ourselves to 
our other fair friend, whose high culture and great general 
intelligence had prepared her for our own rationalistic 
explanation of marvels which had seriously perplexed her. 
For having been engaged a short time before in promoting 
a public movement, which had brought her into contact 
with a number of persons who had previously been strangers 
to her, she had asked questions respecting them, which 
elicited replies that were in many instances such as she 
declared to be quite unexpected by herself, — specially tend- 
ing to inculpate some of her coadjutors as influenced by 
unworthy motives. After a little questioning, however, she 
admitted to us that she had previously entertained lurking 

142 APPEM)IX L. 

suspicions on this pointy which she had scarcely even acknow* 
ledged to herself^ far less made known to others ; and was 
much relieved when we pointed out that the planchette merely 
revealed A/hat was going on in the understratum of her ouftt 
mind. Her conversion to our view was complete, when, on 
her trying the working of the planchette with her eyes shut, 
its- pointer went astray aitogtiher" {Quarterly RezneWy Oct. 
1871, p. 315.) 

It is often cited as a proof that the performers are not 
expressing by involuntary muscular actions what is passing 
in their own minds, that the answers given by the tables 
are not known to any of themselves, though known to some 
other person in the room. Of this the following instance was 
recorded by Mr. Godfrey: — 

" I procured an alphabet on a board, such as is used in 
a National School \ this board 1 laid down on the floor at 
some little distance from the table, and I lay down on the 
ground beside it. I then requested one of the three persons 
at the table to command it to spell the Christian names of 

Mr. L , of B , by lifting up the leg next him as I 

pointed to the letters of the alphabet in succession. He did 
so, and I began to point, keeping the pointer about three 
seconds on each letter in succession (I must say, that neither 
of the three persons at the table had ever heard of Mr. 

I^ ; and B is 150 miles from this place). When I 

arrived at G, they said, that's it ; the table is lifting its leg. 
When I came to E, it rose again; and in this way it spelt 
George Peter, which was perfectly correct." ( '1 able-turning, 
the Devil's Modern Master -piece, p. 22.) Of course the 
person who influenced the movements of the table was 
guided by the indications afforded by Mr. Godfrey's own 
unconscious expression of his expectancy. 

So, again, the late Dr. Hare, an American Chemist and 
Physicist of some reputation, thought that he had obtained 
a precise experimental proof of the immortality of the soul {\) 
by means of an apparatus by which the answers communi- 

APPENDIX L. 143 

catcd through the * medium ' were spelled out by a hand 
pointing to an alphabet-dial which was hidden from her eyes. 
But it is clear from his narrative of the experiment, that her 
eyes were fixed upon the person to whom the expected 
answer was known, and that her movements were guided 
by the indications she received from his involuntary move- 
ments. 

REPRODUCTION OF UNREMEMBERED IDEAS. 

A * planchette,* made in Bath, which had been on a visit 
in various families for several months, having been asked 
where it was made, replied ' Bath \ ' although the questioners 
all thought it came from London, and disbelieved its state- 
ment, which was afterwards verified. The rational expla- 
nation of this obviously is, that the writing was guided by 
the cerebral memory (so to speak), instead of by the conscious 
memory ; just as in the case of the movements in acted 
dreams, by which articles long lost have been found again. 

The Rev. Mr. Dibdin, M.A. (in his Lecture on Table- 
Turning, published in 1853), states that he and a friend 
having directed the table to say, * How many years is it 
since her Majesty came to the throne?' the table struck 
sixteen, though no one present knew the date of her acces- 
sion ; and having directed it to * give the age of the Prince 
of Wales,' which was not known either to Mr. Dibdin or his 
friend, the table struck ela<en, and then raised the foot a 
little way. On referring to an Almanack, both these 
numbers were found to be correct. Further, the question 
being put (in the house of a tailor), ' How many men are at 
work in the shop below? ' the table replied by striking tkree^ 
and giving two gentle rises ; on which the employer, who 
was one of the party, said, * There are four men and tn'o 
boys, so three is a mistake ; ' but he afterwards remembered 
that one of the young men was out of town. 

** An eminent literary man, in whose veracity we have had 

14 

144 APPENDIX L. 

the fullest confidence, informed us that *the spirit of a 
friend, whose decease had taken place some months pre- 
viously, having announced itself in the usual way, and the j 
question having been put, 'When did I last see you in life?' 
the answer given was inconsistent with the recollection of 1 
the interrogator. . But, on his subsequently talking over the 
matter with his family, it was brought to his remembrance ' 
that he had seen his deceased friend on the occasion men- » 
tioned, and had spoken of it to them at the time, although 
he had afterwards quite forgotten the circumstance." — ' 
{Quarterly Revieiv, October 1871, p. 319.) 

Another instance, supplied by Mr. Dibdin (op, at.), 
affords yet more remarkable evidence to the sume effect ; 
especially as being related by a firm believer in the ' dia- 
bolical' origin of Table-talking: — A gentleman, who was at 
the time a believer in the ' spiritual * agency of his table, 
assured Mr. Dibdm that he had raised a good spirit instead 
of evil ones — that, namely, of Edward Young, the poet 
The ' spirit ' having been desired to prove this identity hy 
citing a line of his poetry, the table spelled out, * Man was 
not made to question, but adore.' * Is that in your " Night 
Thoughts " ? '' was then asked. * No.' * Where is it, then ? ' 
The reply was, 'job.' Not being familiar with Young's 
Poems, the questioner did not know what this meant ; but 
the next day he bought a bopy of them; and at the end of 
' Night Thoughts ' he found a paraphrase of the Book of 
Job, the last line of which is, * Man was not made to ques- 
tion, but adore.' Of course he was very much astonished ; 
but not long afterwards he came to Mr. Dibdin, and assured 
him that he had satisfied himself that the whole thing was a 
delusion, — numerous answers he had obtained being ob- 
viously the results of an influence unconsciously exerted on 
the table by those who had their hands upon it ; and when 
asked by Mr. Dibdin how he accounted for the dictation of 
tlie line by the spirit of Young, he very honestly confessed, 

I 

APPENDIX M, 145 

•Well, the fact is, I must tell you, that I had the book in 
my house all the time, although I bought another copy ; and 
/ found that I had read it brfore. My opinion is that it was 
a latent idea^ and that the table brought it out* (p. 7.) 

APPENDIX M. 

DIABOLICAL ORIGIN OF TABLE TURNING. 

In his Table-moving Tested, the Rev. N. S. Godfrey began 
by " tracing the existence of Satanic influence from the time 
of Moses to the time of Jesus ; connecting the * witch,' the 
* familiar spirit,' the spirit of Python, &c. with the Evil Spirit in 
its actual and separate existence : " and asserting without the 
least hesitation, that although *so long as the supernatural 
gifts of the Spirit remained among men, so long the evil 
spirits were cast out and their presence detected,' yet that 
when those miraculous powers were withdrawn, they could 
no longer be discerned, but have continued to exist to the 
present time, and make themselves known in these * latter 
times ' as the * wandering (seducing) spirits,' whose appear- 
ance was predicted by St. Paul (i Tim. iv. 10). That the 
answers to the * test questions ' were exactly contrary to Mr. 
Godfrey's ideas of truth, was in his judgment peculiarly 
convincing ; " for if indeed these tables do become possessed 
" by some of the * wandering spirits * at the command of the 
" Devil, it would be most impolitic, and quite at variance with 
" the subtlety of his character, to scare people at the very 
*' outset." The following answers, therefore, are obviously 
what Mr. G. expected : — 

" I spoke to the table, and said, * If you move by elec- 
tricity, stop.' It stopped instantly ! I commanded it to go 
on again, and said, while it was moving, ' If an evil spirit 

146 APPENDIX M. 

cause you to move, stop.* It moved round without stopping! 
I again said, * If there be any evil agency in this, stop.* It 
went on as before. I was now prepared with an experiment 
of a far more solemn character. I whispered to the school- 
master to bring a small Bible, and to lay it on the table when 
I should tell him. I then caused the table to revolve rapidly, 
and gave the signal. The Bible was gently laid on the table, 
and it instantly stopped. We were horror-struck. However, 
I determined to persevere. I had other books in succession 
laid on the table, to see whether the fact of a book lying 
upon it altered any of the conditions under which it revolved. 
It went round with them without making any difference. I 
then tried with the Bible four different times, and each time 
with the same result : // would not move so long as that pre- 
cious volume lay upon it, ... I now said, 'If there be a 
hell, I command you to knock on the floor with this leg (the 
one next me) twice.' It was motionless. * If there be not 
a hell, knock twice ; ' no answer. * If there be a devil, knock 
twice ; ' no motion. * If there be not a, devil, knock twice; ' 
to our horror, the leg slowly rose and knocked twice 1 ] then 
said, * In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, if there be no 
devil, knock twice ; ' it was motionless. This I tried four 
several times, and each time with the same result." (p. 24.) 
It is clear that Mr. Godfrey and his associates, if they 
had not distinctly anticipated these results, were iw)Xy prepared 
for them. Thus, although he assures his readers that, when 
the Bible was placed on the table, the emotion in the minds 
of all the parties was curiosity, and that, if they had a bias, 
it was against the table stopping, the very fact of the experi- 
ment being tried by a man imbued with his prepossessions 
on the subject of Evil Spirits, Witchcraft, &c., sufficiently 
indicates what his real state of mind was, although he may 
not have been himself aware of it. His involuntary mus- 
cular actions responded to this, although no voluntary move- 
ment would have done so, because he had not consciously 

APPENDIX M, 147 

accepteJ the Idea whose * physical basis ' had been shaping 
itself in the under-stratiim. The experience of everyone 
must have convinced him that there is often a contrariety 
between our beliefs as to our own states of mind, and t\\Q facts 
of that state as they afterwards come to ht self-revealed \.o us; 
and it is a very marked peculiarity of these movements, that 
they often express more truly what is buried (as it were) in 
the vaults of our storehouse, than what is displayed in the 
ware-rooms above. 

The Rev. E. Gillson, M.A., a Clergyman of Bath, fully 
partaking of his predecessor's convictions on the subject of 
Satanic Agency, and also in the excitement prevailing in 
many circles at that time on the subject of * Papal Aggres- 
sion,' gave the following inter alia as his experiences (Table- 
Talking: Satanic Wonders and Prophetic Signs ^ i^53) • — 

" I placed my hand upon the table, and put a vaiiety ot 
questions, all of which were instantly and correctly answered. 
Various ages were asked, and all correctly told. In reply to 
trifling questions, possessing no particular interest, the table 
answered by quietly lifting up the leg and rapping. But in 
answer to questions of a more exciting character, it would 
become violently agitated, and sometimes to such a degree 
that I can only describe the motion by the word frantic, I 
inquired, * Are you a departed spirit ? ' The answer was 

* Yes,' indicated by a rap. * Are you unhappy ? ' The table 
answered by a sort of writhing motion (!), which no natural 
power over it could imitate. It was then asked, * Shall you 
be for ever unhappy ? ' The same kind of writhing motion 
was returned. * Do you know Satan ? ' * Yes.' * Is he 
the Prince of Devils ? ' * Yes.' * Will he be bound ? ' * Yes.' 

* Will he be cast into the abyss ? ' * Yes.' ' Will you be 
cast in with him ?' * Yes.' *How long will it be before he 
is cast out ? ' He rapped ten, * Will wars and commotions 
intervene?' The table rocked and reeled backwards and 
forwards for a length of time, as if it intended a pantomimic 

148 APPENDIX M. 

acting of the prophet's predictions (Isaiah xxiv. 20). I 
then asked * Where are Satan's head- quarters? Are they in 
P^ngland ? ' There was a slight movement. * Are they in 
France ? ' A violent movement. * Are they in Spain ? ' 
Similar agitation. * Are they at Rome ? ' The table literally 
seemed frantic. At the close of these experiments, which 
occupied about two hoars, the invisible agent, in answer to 
some questions about himself, did not agree with what had 
been said before. I therefore asked, * Are you the same 
spirit that was in the table when we began ? ' * No.' * How 
many spirits have been in the table this evening?' 'Four.* 
This spirit informed us that he had been an infidel, and had 
embraced Popery about five years before his death. Amongst 
other questions, he was asked, ' Do you know the Pope ? ' 
The table was violently agitated. I asked, ' How long will 
Popery continue ? ' He rapped ten ; exactly coinciding with 
the other spirits' account of the binding of Satan. Many- 
questions were asked, and experiments tried, in order to as- 
certain whether the results would agree with Mr. Godfrey's ; 
and on every occasion they did, especially that of stopping 
tMe movement of the table with the Bible, As we proceeded 
with our questions, we found an indescribable facility in the 
conversation, from the extraordinary intelligence and ingenuity 
displayed in the table (I) E, g. — I inquired if many devils 
were posted in Bath. He replied by the most extraordinary 
and rapid knocking of the three feet in succession, round 
and round, for some time, as if to intimate that they were 
innumerable ! " ((9/. cit.^ pp. 4-8.) 

A third Clergyman, the Rev. R. W. Dibdin, M.A., while 
agreeing with his predecessors in the belief that the move- 
ments of the tables are the result of Satanic (or diabolic) 
agency, differed fr^m them in maintaining * that devils alone 
(not departed spirits) are the agents in these cases; and 
being lying spirits, it is quite credible tHat, for purposes of 
tlieir own, they might assume the names of departed men 

APPENDIX M, 149 

and women.' Of course he got the answers he expected on 
this hypoAesis. The following is his set of * test questions/ 
the answers to which — being entirely opposed to his own 
notions of truth — satisfied Mm, and were expected to satisfy 
his partners in the experiment, of the diabolical character of 
the respondent : — 

" * Are we justified by works ? ' * Yes/ — * By faith 
alone?' *No.'— 'Is the whole Bible true?' *No.'— 
* Were the miracles of the New Testament wrought by super- 
natural power? ' * No.' — * By some hidden law of Nature?' 
< Yes.' — ' Was Oliver Cromwell good ? ' ' No.' — ' Was 
Charles I. a good man ? ' ' Yes.' — * Is it right to pray to 
the Virgin?' * Yes.'— ' Is Christ God?' ' No.'— Us he 
a man ? ' * No.' — * Is he something between God and 
man, a sort of angel ? ' * Yes.' — * Is he in heaven ? ' * No.' 
— * Where is he ? ' It spelt slowly H E L L. — As the last 
letter was indicated, the girl drew her hands quickly off the 
table, much as a person would do who was drawing them off 
a hot iron. Her brother-in-law turned very pale, and took 
his hands off the table also." {Lecture on Table-turnings 

1853 ; P- 8.) 

The character, position, and obvious sincerity of the 
actors in these perfonr.ances place them beyond suspicion 
of intentional deception ; and the phenomena they narrate 
afford a singularly apposite illustration of the principle which 
I desire to enforce. But that such obvious products 
of the questioners' own mental states should have been 
accepted by men of education, occupying the position of re- 
ligious teachers in the National Church, as the lying re- 
sponses of evil spirits, sent expressly to delude them, can 
only be deemed — by such, at least, as are prepared to accept 
a scientific rationale of the phenomena — a pitiable instance 
of the readiness with which minds of a certain type may 
allow themselves to become * possessed ' by dominant ideas. 

} 

ISO APPENDIX N. 

APPENDIX N. 

MRS. culver's statement. 

"I am by marriage a connection of the Fox girls. 
Their brother married luy husband's sister. The girls 
have been a great deal at my house ; and for about two 
years I was a very sincere believer in the rappings ; but 
something which I saw when I was visiting the girls at 
Rochester made me suspect that they were deceiving. I 
resolved to satisfy myself in some way, and sometime 
afterwards I made a proposition to Catherine to assist her 
in producing the manifestations. I had a cousin visiting 
me from Michigan, who was going to consult the spirits ; and 
I told Catherine that if they intended going to Detroit, it 
would be a great thing for them to convince him. I also 
told her that if I could do anything to help her, I would do 
it cheerfully ; that I should probably be able to answer all 
the questions he would ask, and I would do it if she would 
show me how to make the raps. She said that as Margaretta 
was absent, she wanted somebody to help her ; and that if 
I would become a medium, she would explain it all to me. 
She said that when my cousin consulted the spirits, I must 
sit next to her, and touch her arm when the right letter was 
called. I did so, and was able to answer all the questions 
correctly. After I had helped her in this way a few times, 
she revealed to me the secret. The raps are produced by 
the toes. All the toes, are used. After nearly a wreck's 
practice with Catherine showing me how, I could produce 
them perfectly myself. 

" At first it was very hard work to do it. Catherine told 
me to warm my feet, or put them in warm water, and it 
would then be easier to rap. She said that she had some- 
times to warm her feet three or four times during the evening. 
I found that heating my feet did enable me to rap a great 

APPENDIX N. 151 

deal easier. I have sometimes produced 150 raps in suc- 
cession. I can rap with all the toes on both feet ; it is 
most difficult to rap with the great toe. Catherine told me 
how to manage to answer the questions. She said it was 
generally easy enough to answer right, if the one who asked 
the question called the alphabet. She said the reason why 
she asked people to write down several names on paper, and 
then point to them till the spirits rapped at the right one, 
was to give them a chance to watch the countenance and 
motions of the person, and that in that way they could 
nearly always guess right. She also explained how they 
held down and moved tables. (Mrs. Culver here gave some 
illustration of the tricks.) She told me that all I should have 
to do to make raps heard on the table, would be to put my 
foot on the bottom of the table when I rapped ; and that 
when I wished to make the raps sound distant on the wall 
I must make them louder, and direct my own eyes earnestly 
to the spot where I wished them to be heard. She said if I 
could put my foot to the bottom of the door, the raps would 
be heard on the top of the door. 

" Catherine told me that when her feet were held down 
by the Rochester Committee, the Dutch servant-girl rapped 
with her knuckles under the floor from the cellar. The girl 
was instructed to rap whenever she heard their voices calling 
the spirits. Catherine also showed me how they made the 
sounds of sawing and planing boards. When I was at 
Rochester last January, Margaretta told me that when 
people insisted on seeing her feet and toes, she could pro- 
duce a few raps with her knees and ankles. 

" Elizabeth Fish (Mr. Fish's daughter), who now lives 
with her father, was the first one who produced these 'raps. 
She accidentally discovered the way of making them by 
playing with her toes against the foot- board while in bed. 
Catherine told me that the reason why Elizabeth went west 
to live with her father, was because she was too conscientious 

152 APPENDIX N. 

to become a medium. The whole secret was revealed to 
me, witli the understanding that I should practise as a 
medium when the girls were away. Catherine said that 
whenever I practised, I had better have my little girl with 
me, and make folks believe that she was the medium ; 
* for,' she said, *they would never suspect so young a child 
of any tricks.' After I had obtained the entire secret, I 
plainly told Catherine that my only object was to find out 
how these tricks were done, and that I should never go any 
further in this imposition. She was very much frightened, 
and said she beheved I meant to tell of it and expose them, 
and if I did, she would swear it was a lie. She was so 
nervous and excited that 1 had to sleep with her that night. 
When she was instructing me how to be a medium, she told 
me how frightened they used to get in New York, for fear 
somebody would detect them ; and gave me the histoiy of 
all the tricks they played upon the people there. She said 
that once Margaretta spoke aloud, and that the whole party 
believed it was a spirit." 

(Signed) Mrs. Norman Culver. 

Certificate, 

" We hereby certify that Mrs. Culver is one of the most 
respectable and intelligent ladies in the town of Arcadia. 
We were present when she made the disclosures. We had 
heard the same from her before, and we cheerfully bear 
testimony that there cannot be the slightest doubt of the 
truth of the whole statement." 

(Signed) C. J. Pomeroy, M.D. 
Rev. D. S. Chase. 

APPENDIX O, 153 

APPENDIX O. 

LETTER FROM MR. A. R. WALLACE TO THE EDITOR 
OF THE * SPECTATOR/ DEC. 23, 1876. 

Sir, — In your comment on Mr. Lewes's letter you seem 
to imply, that the experiment described may prove imposture, 
but tliat Professor De Morgan's experiment was equally 
decisive against imposture. Will you allow me very briefly 
to point out that the alleged exposure proves nothing without 
assuming the very fact at issue — that Mrs. Hayden herself 
caused the raps following the indications given by the person 
who pointed to the letters of the alphabet? For let us 
assume, on the other hand, that the raps were, as alleged, 
caused by invisible beings, perhaps not superior in in- 
telligence to Mrs. Hayden, and equally liable to be affected 
by insult or impulse, and that these beings could read, more 
or less imperfectly^ the questioner's mind. Nonsense ques- 
tions were asked these intelligences, and absurd or contra- 
dictory answers were sought to be obtained by dwelling on 
certain letters. These absurd answers were obtained. Tl is 
is consistent with the supposition on two theories. Either 
the intelligence could read only the questioner's active 
desire for a certain answer while pointing to the letters, and 
accordingly gave that answer ; or, if it were able also to 
perceive the question (though less vivid in the questioner's 
mind at the moment), it might well adopt the human prin- 
ciples of answering what would be impertinent questions in 
the only way they deserved an answer. It is a fact within 
my ow^n knowledge, and it is well-known to all spiritualists, 
that both kinds of answers are obtained in private circles 
where any imposture is out of the question. Professor De 
Morgan's experiment on the other hand absolutely precluded 
imposture on Mrs. Hayden's part, since not only were the 
letters and pointer carefully concealed from her, but the 

154 APPENDIX P. 

answer, though correct, was in words which the Professor 
was not expecting. The one experiment was purely nega- 
tive and inconclusive, the other positive ; and I cannot 
understand how so logical a mind as that of Mr. G. H. 
Lewes can put the two results even in the category, much 
less allow the negative evidence to prevail. — I am, Sir, &c., 

Alfred R. Wallace. 

APPENDIX P, 

" We were requested by a lady who had known Mr. Foster 
in America, to accompany her and her son^n-law (an 
emment London Physician) on a visit to Mr. Foster, who 
had arrived in London only a few days previously. We 
were not introduced to him by name, and we do not think 
that he could have had any opportunity of knowing our 
person. Nevertheless, he not only answered, in a variety of 
modes, the questions we put to him respecting the time and 
cause of the death of several of our departed friends and 
relatives, whose names we had written down on slips of 
paper which had been folded-up and crumpled into pellets 
before being placed in his hands ; but he brought out names 
and dates correctly, in large red letters, on his bare arm, the 
redness being produced by the turgescence of the minute 
vessels of the skin, and passing away after a few minutes, 
like a blush. We must own to have been strongly impressed 
at the time by this performance ; but on subsequently think- | 

ing it over, we could see that Mr. Foster's divining power ' 

was probably derived from his liaving acquired the faculty , 

of interpreting the movements of the top of a pen or pencil, i 

though the point and what was written by it was hid from 
his sight, with the aid of an observing power sharpened by 
practice, which enabled him to guide his own movements 

APPENDIX P. 

155 

by the indications unconsciously given by ourselves of the 
answers we expected. For though we were fully armed with 
the knowledge which had been acquired of the source from 
which Mrs. Hayden drew her inspiration, and did our ut- 
most to repress every sign of anticipation, we came, on re- 
flection, to an assured conviction that Mr. Foster had been 
keen -sighted enough to detect such signs, notwithstanding 
our attempt to baffle him. For, having asked him the month 
of the death of a friend, whose'name had previously appeared 
in red letters on his arm, and the year of whose death had 
also been correctly indicated in another way, he desired us 
to take up the alphabet-card and to point to the successive 
letters. This we did, as 7ve believe^ with petidulum-like 
regularity ; nevertheless, distinct raps were heard at the 
letters j, u. When, however, on the next repetition, we 
came to L, M, N, Mr. Foster was obviously baffled. He 
directed us to try-back two or three times, and at last con- 
fessed that he could not certainly tell whether the month was 
fune ox July. The secret of this was, that we did not our- 
selves recollect, 

" Wishing to clear up the matter further, we called on Mr. 
Foster, revealed ourselves to him in proprid personct^ and 
asked him if he would object to meet a few scientific in- 
vestigators, who should be allowed to subject his powers to 
fair tests. As he professed his readiness to do so, we 
brought together such a meeting at our own house ; and 
previously to Mr. Foster's arrival, we explained to our 
friends the arrangements we proposed. One of these was, 
that one of the party should sit outside the * circle,' and 
should devote himself to observing and recording all that 
passed, without taking any part whatever in the performance. 
Another was, that instead of writing down names on slips of 
paper, whilst sitting at the table within Mr. Foster's view, we 
should write them at a side-table, with our backs turned to 
him. On explaining these arrangements to Mr. F^oster, he 

156 APPENDIX P. 

immediately said that the first could not be permitted, for 
that every person present must form part of the circle. To 
the second he made no objection. After handing him our 
slips of paper carefully folded-up^ we took our seats at the 
table, and waited for the announcement of spiritual visitors. 
The only one, however, who presented himself during an 
hour's seance^ was the spirit of our own old master, whose 
name Mr. Foster might very readily have learned previously, 
but about whom he could give no particulars whatever. 
Not one^qf the names written on the papers was revealed. 

" The patience of our friends being exhausted, they took 
their leave ; but as Mr. P'oster's carriage had been ordered 
for a later hour, we requested him to sit down again with 
the members of our own family. * Now,' we said, * that these 
incredulous philosophers are gone, perhaps the spirits will 
favour us with a visit' We purposely followed his lead, as 
on our first interview, and everything went on as successfully 
as on that occasion ; until, whilst the name of a relative we 
had recently lost was being spelled out on our alphabet-card, 
the raps suddenly ceased on the interposition of a large music- 
book, which was set-up at a preconcerted signal so as to hide 
the top as well as the bottom of our pointer from Mr. 
Foster's eyes. Nothing could more conclusively prove that 
Mr. Foster's knowledge was derived from observation of the 
movements of the pointer, although he could only see the 
portion of it not hidden by the card, which was so held as 
to conceal the lower part of it ; and nothing could be a 
better illustration of the principle of * unconscious ideo- 
motor action,' then the fact, that whilst we were most cart- 
fully abstaining from any pause or look from which he might 
derive guidance^ we had enabled him to divine the answer we 
expected. The trick by which the red letters were produced 
was discovered by the inquiries of our medical friends." — 
(Quarterly ReiieWy October 1871, p. 332.) 

APPENDIX Q. 1 57 

APPENDIX Q. 

MR. BRAID ON THE INFLUENCE OF SUGGESTION AND 

EXPECTANCY. 

" The most curious and important fact of all, however, is 
this, — that by engendering a state of mental concentration, 
by a simple act of sustained attention, fixed upon some unex- 
citing and empty thing, — * for poverty of object engenders 
abstraction,' — the faculties of the minds of some patients are 
thereby thrown out of gear, (/.<?., their ordinary relations are 
changed,) so that the higher faculties — reason, comparison, 
and will, become dethroned from their supremacy, and give 
place and power to imagination, (which now careers in un- 
bridled liberty,) easy credulity, and docility or passive 
obedience ; so that, even whilst apparently wide awake, and 
conscious of all around, they become susceptible of being in- 
fluenced and controlled entirely by the suggestions of others, 
upon whom their attention is fixed. In fact, such subjects, 
are in a sub-hypnotic condition, — in that intermediate state 
between sleeping and waking, when the mind becomes waver- 
ing, the attention off duty, or engrossed with a predominant 
idea, so that, in reality, the subjects are only half conscious of 
what is passing around j and their minds, therefore, become 
easily imposed upon by any suggestion, audibly expressed or 
visibly exhibited before them. Thus they may be made to 
perceive, and mistake for realities, whatever mental illusions 
or ideas are suggested to them. In common parlance they 
see dsidfeel as real, and they consider themselves irresistibly 
or involuntarily fixed^ or spell-bound^ or impelled to perform 
whatever may be said or signified by the other party upon whom 
their attention has become involuntarily and vividly riveted^ 
until a new idea has been suggested, by which the spell is 
broken, and the subject is left in a condition again to be 
subjugated and controlled by other suggestions of his tem- 

158 APPENDIX Q. 

porary fascinator. This is just similar to what we see occurring 
to anyone spontaneously engaged in deep abstraction, who 
is instantaneously aroused to consciousness of all around by 
a tap on the shoulder, or by a word sharply addressed to 
him. 

" It requires considerable tact to manage this, adroitly and 
successfully, with some patients ; for the will and belief of 
certain subjects can only be successfully subjugated and con- 
trolled by an earnest and energetic, and confident and 
authoritative manner, on the part of the operator ; such as 
by his insisting that such and such must be the case, according 
to his audible suggestions, or visible manoeuvres for influenc- 
ing the subjects through the power of sympathy and imita- 
tion. I have had ample evidence to convince me of the fact, 
that, in cases where these waking illusions and delusions 
could not be excited by giving the suggestions in an ap- 
parently doubting tone of voice, or with a hesitating manner, 
they became quite efficient for the purpose, the instant I 
assumed a commanding and confident tone of voice and 
deportment. By these means the Reason and Will become 
temporarily paralysed ; they lose their freedom of action, 
through the mind being so much engrossed by the suggested 
thought, as to allow every idea which has been vividly and 
energetically addressed to such individual, to assume all the 
force of present reality,— just as we know to occur spon- 
taneously, in case of monomania and delirium tremens.^^ (Sbe 
Braid On Magic, Witchcraft, Animal Magnetism, Hypnotism^ 
nnd Electro-Biology, 1852, pp. 65-67.) 

H 

D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS. 

YPNOTISM, MESMERISM, AND THE 
NEW WITCHCRAFT. By Ernest Hart, formerly Sur- 
geon to the West London Hospital, and Ophthalmic Surgeon 
to St. Mary's Hospital, London. With 20 Illustrations. i2mo. 
Cloth, $1.25. 

" Dr. Hart is not an enemy of the spiritual, but he gives ground to neither the 
supernatural nor the preternatural when he can help it. His state of mind is generally 
impartial." — Chicago Post. 

** Mr. Hart holds it as proved beyond all reasonable doubPthat the hypnotic con- 
dition is an admitted clinical fact, and declares that the practice of hypnotism, except 
by skilled physicianSj should be forbidden. He affirms its therapeutic uselessness, and 
condemns the practice because of (he possibilities of social mischiefs. . . . His per- 
sonal experiences in the ' New Witchcraft ' enable him to exercise a critical check on 
the wild theories and unsupported assertions of others." — Philadelphia Ledger. 

IK/JESMERISM, SPIRITUALISM, ETC, HIS- 

IVl TORICALLY AND SCIENTIFICALLY CONSID- 
ERED. By William B. Carpenter, M. D., F. R. S. i2mo. 
Cloth, $1.25. 

*' The reader of these lectures will see that my whole aim is to discover, 
on the generally accepted principles of testimony, what are facts ; and to 
discriminate between facts and the inferences drawn from them. I have no 
other ' theory ' to support than that of the constancy of the well-ascertained 
laws of Nature." — From the H^e/ace, 

p 

PRINCIPLES OF MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY. 

With their Application to the Training and Discipline of the 
Mind, and the Study of its Morbid Conditions. By William 
B. Carpenter, M. D., F. R. S. i2mo. Cloth, $3.00. 

*' Among the numerous eminent writers this country has produced none are more 
deserving of praise for having attempted to apply the results of physiological research 
to the explanation of the mutual relations of the mind and body tKan Dr. Carpenter." 
— London Lancet. 

N 

ATURE AND MAN: Essays, Scientific and 

Philosophical. By William B. Carpenter, M.D., F. R. S. 

With an Introductory Memoir by J. EsTLiN Carpenter, M. A., 

and a Portrait. i2mo. Cloth, $2.25. 

*' Few works could be mentioned that give a better general view of the change that 
has been wrought in men's conceptions of life and Nature. For this, if for nothing 
else, the collection would be valuable. But it will be welcomed also as a kind of 
biography of its audior, for the essays and the memoir support one another and are 
mutually illuminative." — Scotsman. 

** Mr. Estlin Carpenter's memoir of his father is just what such a memoir should be 
— a simple record of a life uneventful in itself, whose interest for us lies mainly in the 
nature of the intellectual task so early undertaken, so strenuously carried on, so 
ample and nobly accomplished, to which it was devoted." — London Spectator. 

New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenue. 

D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS. 

NEW EDITION OF PROF. HUXLEY'S ESSAYS. 

COLLECTED ESSA YS. By Thomas H. Huxley. 
New complete edition, with revisions, the Essays being grouped 
according to general subject. In nine volumes, a new Intro- 
duction accompanying each volume. i2mo. Cloth, $1.25 per 
volume. 

Vol. I.— METHt)D AND RESULTS. 

Vol. II.—DARWINIANA. 

Vou III.— SCIENCE AND EDUCATION. 

Vol. IV.— science AND HEBREW TRADITION. 

Vol. v.— SCIENCE AND CHRISTIAN TRADITION. 

Vol. VI.— HUME. 

Vol. VII.— MAN'S PLACE IN NATURE. 

Vol. VIII.— DISCOURSES, BIOLOGICAL AND GEOLOGICAL. 

Vol. IX.— EVOLUTION AND ETHICS, AND OTHER ESSAYS. 

** Mr. Huxley has covered a vast variety of topics during the last quarter of a 
century. It gives one an agreeable surprise to look over the tables of contents and 
note the immense territory which he has explored. To read these books carefully 
and studiously is to become thoroughly acquainted with the most advanced thought 
on a large number of topics." — New York Herald. 

" The series will be a welcome one. There are few writings on the more abstruse 
problems of science better adapted to reading by the general public, and in this form 
the books will be well in the reach of the investigator. . * . The revisions are the last 
expected to be made by the author, and his introductions are none of earlier date 
than a few months ago [1893I, so they may be considered his final and most authorita- 
tive utterances." — Chicago Times. 

" It was inevitable that his essays should be called for in a completed form, and they 
will be a source of delight and profit to all who read them. He has always commanded 
a hearing, and as a master of the literary style in writing scientific essays he is worthy 
of a place among the great English essayists of the day. This edition of his essays 
will be widely read, and gives his scientific work a permanent form." — Boston Herald. 

" A man whose brilliancy is so constant as that of Prof. Huxley will always com- 
mand readers ; and the utterances which are here collected are not the least in weight 
and luminous beauty of those with which the author has long delighted the reading 
world." — Philadelphia Press, 

" The connected arrangement of the essays which their reissue permits brings into 
fuller relief Mr. Huxley's masterly powers of exposition. Sweeping the subject-matter 
clear of all logomachies^ he lets the light of common day fall upon it. He shows that 
the place of hypothesis in science, as the starting |>oint of verification of the phenomena 
to be explained, b but an extension of the assumptions which underlie actions in every- 
day affairs ; and that the method of scientific investigation is only the method which 
rules the ordinary business of life." — London Chronicle. 

New York: D, APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenu©. 

D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS. 

EVOLUTION SERIES, NOS. i TO 17. 

Popular Lectures and Discussions before the Brooklyn Ethical Association, 

E 

VOLUTION IN SCIENCE, PHILOSOPHY, 

AND ART, With 3 Portraits. Large i2mo. Cloth, $2.00. 

CONTENTS. 

By WiL. 

Alfred Russ^l Wallace, By Edward D. 

Cope, Ph. D. 
Ernst Haeckel, By Thaddels B. 

Wakeman. 
The Scientific Method, By FKANas E. 

Abbott, Ph. D. 
Hirbert Spencer's Synthetic Philosophy, 

By Benjamin F. Underwood. 
Evolution 0/ Chemistry. By Robert G. 

Eccr.ES, M. D. 
Evolution 0/ Electric and Magnetic 

Physics, By Arthur E. Ken- 
nelly. 
Evolution of Botany. By Fred J. 

WULLING, Ph. G. 
Zoology as related to Evolution. By 

Rev. John C. Kimball. 

Form and Color in Nature. 

LiAM Potts. 
Optics as related to Evolution. By L. A. 

W. Alleman, M.D. 
Evolution of A rt. By John A. Taylor. 
Evolution of Architecture. By Rev. 

John W. Chadwick. 
Evolution pf Sculpture. By Prof. Thomas 

Davidson. 
Evolution of Painting. By Forrest P. 

Rundell. 
Evolution of Music. By Z. Sidney 

Sampson. 
Life as a Fine Art. By Lewis G. 

Janfs, M. D. 
The Doctrine of Evolution : its Scope and 

Influence. By Prof. John Fiske. 

" The addresses include some of the most important presentations and epitomes pub- 
lished in America. They are all upon important subjects, are prepared with great car<i, 
and are delivered for the most part by highly eminent authorities." — Public Opinion. 

M 

EVOLUTION SERIES, NOS. 18 TO 34. 
AN AND THE STATE, Studies in Applied 

Sociology. With Index. Large i2mo. Cloth, $2.00. 

CONTENTS. 

The Duty of a Public Spirit. By E. 

Benjamin Andrews, D. D., LL. D. 
The Study of Applied Sociology. By 

Robert G. Eccles, M. D. 
Representative Government. By Edwin 

D. Mead. 
Suffrage and the Ballot. By Daniel S. 

The Land Problem, By Prof. Otis T. 
Mason. 

The Problem of Ciiv Government. By 
Dr. Lewis G. Janes. 

Taxation and Revenue : The Free- 
Trade View. By Thomas G. 
Shearman. 

Taxation and Revenue : The Protec- 
tionist View, By Prof. George 
Gunton. 

The Monetary Problem. By William 

Potts. 
The Immigration Problem. By Z. Sid- 
ney Sampson. 
Evolution of the A fric- American. By 

Rev. Samuel J. Barrows. 
The Race Problem in the South. By 

Prof. Joseph Le Conte. 
Education and Citizenship. By Rev. 

John W. Chadwick. 
The Democratic Party. By Edward M. 

Shepard. 
The Republican Party. By Hon. Ros- 

well G. Horr. 
The Independent in Politics. By John 

A. Tayior. 
Moral Questions in Politics. By Rev. 

John C. Kimball. 

"These studies in applied sociology are exceptionally interesting in their field."—* 
Cincinnati Times-Star. 

"Will command the attention of the progressive student of politics." — Pittsburg 
Chronicle- Telegraph. 

Separate Lectures from either volume, lo cents each. 

N«w York : D. APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenue- 

D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS. 

New Volumes in the International Education Series, 

'pnUCATION FROM A NATIONAL STAND- 
•^-^ POINT. By Alfred Fouillee. Translated and edited, 
with a Preface, by W. J. Greenstreet, M. A., St. John's Col- 
lege, Cambridge ; Head Master of the Marling School, Stroud. 
i2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 

Fouill^'s work is a timely jmd valuable contribution to the discussions of some of 
the important educational questions that are at present claiming attention in both this 
country and Europe. 

(TYSEMTATIC SCIENCE TEACHING, A Man- 

♦^ ual of Inductive Elementary Work for all Instructors in Grcuied 

• 

and Ungraded Schools^ the Kindergarten^ and the Home, By 
Edward Gardnier Howe. i2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 

A thoroughly practical and reliable guide to elementary instruction in science has 
long been a desideratum, and this work, embodying the results of fourteen years of 
actual classroom tests, will satisfactorily meet such a demand. The volume gives a 
general outline of work for the first three years. 

T 

'HE ED UCA TION OF THE GREEK PEOPLE, 

and its Influence on Civilization. By Thomas Davidson. 
i2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 

"This work is not intended for scholars or specialists, but for that large bcdy of 
teachers throughout the country who are trying to do their duty, but are suffering from 
that want of enthusiasm which necessarily comes from being unable clearly to see the 
end and purpose of their labors, or to invest an^ end with sublime import. I have 
sought to show them that the end of their work is the redemption of humanity, an 
essential part of that process by which it is being gradually elevated to moral freedom, 
and to suggest to them the direction in which they ought to turn their chief efforts. If 
I can make even a few of them feel the consecration that comes from single-minded 
devotion to a great end, I shall hold that this book has accomplished its purpose." 
— A uthor's Pre/ace. 

T 

HE EVOLUTION OF THE MASSACHU- 
SETTS PUBLIC-SCHOOL SYSTEM. A Historical 
Sketch in Six Lectures. By George H. Martin, A. M., Super- 
visor of Public Schools, Boston, Massachusetts. i2mo. Cloth, 
$1.50. 

The public discussion that arose from Professor Martin's papers upon the topic 
treated in this work will make the complete collection of the essays of much interest to 
a large circle of readers. In the present volame the author aims to show the evolu- 
tionary character of the public-school history of the State, and to point out the lines 
along which the development has run and the relation throughout to the social environ- 
ment, and incidentally to illustrate the slow and irregular way by which the people 
under popular governments work out their own social and intellectual progress. 

New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenue. 

D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF PHI- 
1 LOSOPHY. By William T. Harris, LL. D., United States 
Commissioner of Education. Compiled and arranged by Mari- 
etta KiES. i2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 
" Philosophy as presented by Dr. Harris gives to the* student an interpretation and 
explanation of the phases of existence which render even the ordinary affairs of life in 
accordance with reason; and for the higher or spiritual phases of life his interpreta- 
tions have the power of a great illumination. Many of the students are apparently 
awakened to an interest in philosophy, not only as a subject to be taken as a pre- 
scribed study, but also as a subject of fruitful interest for future years and as a key 
which unlocks' many of the mysteries of other subjects pursued in a college course."— 
From the Compiler's Preface. 

A HISTOR Y OF PHILOSOPHY IN EPITOME, 

y^ By Albert Schwegler. Translated from the first edition 
of the original German by Julius H. Seelye. Revised from 
the ninth German edition, containing Important Additions 
and Modifications, with an Appendix, continuing the History 
in its more Prominent Lines of Development since the Time 
of Hegel, by Benjamin T. Smith. i2mo. Cloth, $2.00. 

" Schwegler's History of Philosophy is found in the hands of almost every student 
in the philosophical department of a German University, and is highly esteemed for its 
clearness, conciseness, and comprehensiveness. The present translation was under- 
taken widi the conviction that the work would not lose its interest or its value in an 
English dress, and with the hope that it might be of wider service in such a form to 
students of philosophy here. It was thought especially that a proper translation of 
this manual would supply a want for a suitable text-book on this branch of study, long 
felt by both teachers and students in our American colleges." — From the Preface. 

ryiOGRAPHICAL HISTORY OF PHILOSO- 

-D PHY, from its Origin in Greece down to the Present Day, 
By George Henry Lewes. Two volumes in one. 8vo. 
Cloth. $3.50. Also in 2 vols., small 8vo. Cloth, $4.00. 

" Philosophy was the great initiator of science. It rescued the nobler part of man 
fix)m the dominion of brutish apathy and helpless ignorance, nourished his mind with 
mighty impulses, exercised it in magnificent efforts, gave him the unslaked, unslakablo 
thirst for knowledge which has dignified his life, and enabled him to multiply tenfold 
his existence and his happiness. Having done this, its part is played. Our interest 
in it now is purely historical. The purport of this history is to show how and why the 
interest in philosophy has become purely historical." — From the Introduction. 

New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenue. 

D. APPLETON & CO/S PUBLICATIONS. 

MISCELLANEOUS WORKS OF HERBERT SPENCER. 

5 OCTAL STATICS. New and revised edition, in- 
cluding " The Man versus The State," a series of essays on 
political tendencies heretofore published separately. i2mo. 
420 pages. Cloth, $2.00. 

Contents. — Happiness as^ an Immediate Aim. — Unguided Expediency. — The 
Moral-Sense Doctrine. — What is Morality ? — The Evanescence [? Dimmution] of Evil. 
— Greatest Happiness must be sought indirectly. — Derivation of a First Principle. — 
Secondary Denvation of a First Principle.— -First Principle. — Application of the First 
Principle. — The Right of Property. — Socialism. — The Right of Property in Ideas. — 
The Rights of Women. — The Rights of Children.— Political Rights.— The Constitution 
of the State. — The Duty of the State. — The Limit of State-Duty. — The Regulation of 
Commerce. — Religious Establishments. •— Poor-Laws. — National Education. — Govern- 
ment Colonization. — Sanitary Supervision. — Currency, Postal Arrangements, etc. — 
General Considerations. — The New Toryism. — The Coming Slavery. — ^The Sins of 
Legislators. — ^The Great Political Superstition. 

" Mr. Spencer has thoroughly studied the issues which are behind the social and 
political life of our own time, not exactly those issues which are discussed in Parliament 
or in Congress, but the principles of all modem government, which are slowly chang- 
ing in response to the broader industrial and general development of human experience. 
One will obtain no suggestions out of this book for guidin^^ a political party or carrying 
a point in economics, but he will find the principles of sociology, as they pertain to the 
whole of life, better stated in these pages than he can find them expressed anywhere 
else. It is in this sense that this work is important and fresh and vitaHzing. it goes 
constantly to the foundation of things." — Boston Herald. 

T^DUCATION : Intellectual, Moral, and Physical. 

-^—^ i2mo. Paper, 50 cents ; cloth, $1.25. 

Contents: What Knowledge is of most Worth? — Intellectual Education. — Moral 
Education. — Physical Education. 

T 

'HE STUDY OF SOCIOLOGY. The fifth volume 

in the International Scientific Series. i2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 

Contents: Our Need of it. — Is there a Social Science ?— Nature of the Social 
Science. — Difficulties of the Social Science. — Objective Difficulties. — Subjective Difl5- 
culties. Intellectual. — Subjective Difficulties. Emotional. — The Educational Bias. — The 
Bias of Patriotism. — The Class Bias. — The Political Bias. — The Theological Bias.— 
Discipline. — Preparation in Biology. — Preparation in Psychology.— Conclusion. 

7^HE INADEQUACY OF ''NATURAL SELEC- 
TION." i2nio. Paper, 30 cents. 

This essay, in which Prof. Weismann's theories are criticised, is reprinted 
from the Contemporary Review^ and comprises a forcible presentation of 
Mr. Spencer's views upon the general subject indicated in the title. 

New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenua 

A 

D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS. 

JOURNEY IN OTHER WORLDS, A Ro^ 
manee of the Future, By John Jacob Astor. With 9 fulU 
page Illustrations by Dan Beard. i2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 

<( 

An interesting and cleverly devised book. . . . No lack of imagination. . . • 
Shows a skillful and wide acquaintance with scientific facts." — New York Herald. 

" The author speculates cleverly and daringly on the scientific advance of the earth, 
and he revels in the physical luxuriance of Jupiter; but he also lets his imagination 
travel through spiritual realms, and evidently delights in mystic speculation quite as 
much as in scientific investigation. If he is a follower of Jules Verne, he has not forgot- 
ten also to study the philosophers." — New York Tribune. 

" A beautiful example of typographical art and the bookmaker's skill. . . . To 
appreciate the story one must read it." — New York Commercial Advertiser. 

** The date of the events narrated in this book is supposed to be 2000 a. d. The 
inhabitants of North America have increased mightily in numbers and power and 
knowledge. It is an age of marvelous scientific attainments. Flying machines have 
long been in common use, and finally a new power is discovered called ' apergy,* 
the reverse of gravitation, by which people are able to fly off into space in any direc- 
tion, and at what speed they please." — New York Sun. 

"The scientific romance by John Jacob Astor is more than likely to secure a dis- 
tinct popular success, and achieve widespread vogue both as an amusing and interest- 
esting story, and a thoughtful endeavor to prophesy some of the triumphs which science 
is destined to win by the year 2000. The book has been written with a purpose, and 
that a higher one than the mere spinning of a highly imaginative yam. Mr. Astor has 
been engaged upon the book for over two years, and has brought to bear upon it a 
great deal of hard work in the way of scientific research, of which he has been very fond 
ever since he entered Harvard. It is admirably illustrated by Dan Beard." — Mail and 
Express. 

** Mr. Astor has himself almost all the qualities imaginable for making the science of 
astronomy popular. He knows the learned maps of the astrologers. He knows the 
work of Copernicus. He has made calculations and observations. He is enthusiastic, 
and the spectacular does not frighten him." — New York Times. 

" The work will remind the reader very much of Jules Verne in its general plan of 
using scientific facts and speculation as a skeleton on which to hang the romantic 
adventures of the central figures, who have all the daring ingenuity and luck of Mr. 
Verne's heroes. Mr. Astor uses history to point out what in his opinion science may 
be expected to accomplish. It is a romance with a purpose." — Chicago Jnter'Ocean. 

" The romance contains many new and striking developments of the possibilities 
of science hereafter to be explored, but the volume is intensely interesting, both as a 
product of imagination and an illustration of the ingenious and original application of 
science." — Rochester Herald. 

New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenue. 

A 

D. APPLETON & CO/S PUBLICATIONS. 

HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES 
NAVY, from 1775 to 1894. By Edgar Stanton Maclay, 
A. M. With Technical Revision by Lieut. Roy C. Smith, 
U. S. N. In two volumes. With numerous Maps, Diagrams, 
and Illustrations. 8vo. Cloth. $7.00. 

"The field is comparatively new, and Mr. Maclay has brought to his task patience, 
assiduity, and patriousni. ... Maps and plans, and a great number of illustrations, 
add value to the boolc, which is designed to be a permanent and useful contribution to 
historical literature." — New York Observer. 

" While the author has had the assistance of Lieut. Roy C. Smith, U. S. N., in 

f»reparing those parts of his work which are necessarily technical, he has wisely re- 
i-ained from confusing the general reader by an undue parade of technicalities. . ■ . 
The narrative proceeds in a clear, concise, and vigorous style, which very materially 
adds to the character of the work." — JSeiv York Journal oj Commerce. 

*• The author writes as one who has digged deep before he began to write at all. 
He thus appears as a master of his materiaL This book inspires immediate confidence 
as well as wterest." — New York TiMes, 

" A most conscientious narrative, from which wise statesmen may learn much for 
their guidance, and it certainly is one of absorbing interest." — New York Contmercial 
A dveriiser, 

" Mr. Maclay is specially qualiiied for the work he has undertaken. Nine years 
has he devoted to the task. The result of his labors possesses not only readableness 
but authority. . . . Mr. Maclay 's story may be truthfully characterized as a thrilline 
romance, which will interest every mind that is fed by tales of heroism, and will be read 
with patriotic pride by every true American. ** — Chicago Evening Post. 

" A more valuable and important work of history than this has not been issued from 
the press for many a day. It i; not only that this book tells a story never before told 
(for Cooper's works never professed to tell the whole story of our navy, even down to 
his own day), but that it is told with true historic sense, and with the finest critical acu- 
men." — New York Evangelist, 

*'' A work which is destined to fill a noticeable gap in our national 2saa!i%.^* — Phila- 
delphia Bulletin. 

*' No better excuse for this important work could be desired than that a navy with 
such a brilliant career on the whole as has the American navy is without a full and con- 
tinuous record of its achieveme:it. . . . The author has important new facts to tell, 
and he tells them in a clear and graceful literary siylc." — H arijord Post. 

** Mr. Maclay has deservedly won for himself an enviable place among our Amer- 
ican historians. . . . His rssearche^ have been exhaustive and his inquiries persistent, 
and he has used his wealth of material with a proper appreciation of historical value." 
-•-Boston Advertiser. 

" Like the average young American, this author has an enthusiastic appreciation of 
American valor on the high seas, and he reproduces graphic sketches of battle scenes 
and incidents in a way to insure for his book a hearty welcome on the part of those 
who keenly enjoy this s^rt of literature. . . . The illustrafiors of the old battle ships 
and the conflicts at sea, made memorable as lone as the history of the American 
Republic shall live, add much to the attractiveness of this book. . . . Professor Maclay 
has added a substantial work to historical American l.'terature." — Philadelphia Tele- 
graph. 

" It fills a place which has almost escaped the attention of historians. Mr. Maclay'a 
work .shows on every paee the minute care with which he worked up his theme. His 
style is precise and clear, and without any pretense of rhetorical embellishment." — 
New York Tribune. 

New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenue. 

STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES 

STANFORD AUXILIARY LIBRARY 

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004 

(415) 723-9201 
All books may be recalled after 7 days 

DATE DUE 

feS9 

r 

HjMii 

■■" 010 S"!- 

CS-fl 

Stanford Unirersity Libraries 
Stanford, California 

I B«tiinitlililMokMiorb«fondaUdM; 

^«
