The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism, Fraudulent and Genuine (Hereward Carrington, 1907)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1907 Herbert B. Turner & Co., Boston first edition (https://archive.org/details/physicalphenome03carrgoog). Carrington's field manual of physical mediumship — the Palladino investigator's complete account of fraudulent and genuine phenomena.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE PHYSICAL. PHENOMENA
OF SPmiTUALISM


• *


• • •


. • • • :

• * < •

» • »

• *

• • •


THE PHYSICAL. PHENOMENA
OF SPmiTUALISM


• ••


« • •


• •.•'•


• •


• •


^i

• •••


• •

• •
••
•
•


• • • • ••

• • • •

• •• • • •

•• •• •

• • • ••


•

• • •

• ■


••• :

• •

•


•
•


••• • • ,••
• • • • i •


•


••• • » ••


•
• • •


• • • • •
*•• • • •


•


••
• •


**• • • •

•«• ••• •


• • •

• • •


• • •
■ •


9 • * • 9 9 9


THE

PHYSICAL PHENOMENA

OF SPIRITUALISM


FRAITDUIiENT AND GKNTUINE

BBINO A BBIXF ACCOUNT OF THB MOST IMPORTANT HIBTOBICAL

pbsnoiixna; a CRrncnm or their evidential value,

AND A COMPLETE EXPOSITION OP THE MBTB-

OD6 EMPLOYED IN FRAUDULENTLY

EEFRODUCINO THE SAME


HEREWARD CARRINGTON

Member of the CouneU of the American Sodr
ety for Scientific Research ; Member of the
for Psychical Reeearch, London, «le.


iH • V • I bH •


BOSTON

[T B. TURNUR & CV
1907


Copyright, igoy
By Hbrbbrt B. Turner & Ca


« .


■ » . \ * • •


/ f 1


<P'J7 L_ ,


PUBU8HBD MARCH, I907


• •


• •


• •


• %


• «


• «


• • •
• •• .•


• ..:


COLONIAL PRESS
Slectrt^fpid mmd PrimUd by C, H. Simtuds 6* C#.

BMtom, U.S. A.


DEDICATED TO

0Us» f&elen nittmian


rHOiB ATiatlOV TO ALL THAT IB FBAUDULBlfT AMD WH08B

LOTK OF ALL THAT IB OBITimrB OnPIUD THS AUTHOB*8

■ F J O K I B TO rRBBBirr, WITH BQUAL FAimSB,

TBB FACTS Aim ABOUMmTS OOV-

TADTBD nr BOTH POBTIOMB

OF THI8 TOLUMB


/


PREFACE

One or two words of a prefatory nature are necessitated
by the publication of a book such as this. Many persons
will doubtless consider it an unnecessary attack upon spirit-
ualism and the spiritistic creed, but I beg to assure my
readers that such is by no means the case. It is because I
believe that such phenomena do occasionally occur, that I am
anxious to expose the fraud connected with the subject, —
since it is only by so doing that we can ever hope to reach
the genuine phenomena which are to be studied. ^ Caution "
is the most important factor in the investigation of aU psychic
and spiritualistic phenomena, and a knowledge of the fraudu-
lent methods employed by mediums is of prime importance
to the investigator of these problems.

The investigations of the Society for Psychical Research
(hereinafter referred to, in this book, as the S. P. R.) have
demonstrated the fact that supernormal phenomena do occur ;
but whether the '* physical phenomena " are to be considered
as sudi is a question that remains still undecided. Certain
it is that much fraud exists in the production of spurious
^ marvels " of the kind, and the chief object of this book is
to expose in full the methods that are employed in fraudu-
lently reproducing the genuine phmomena — if genuine
phenomena there be.

I have quoted extensively throughout from books on
sleight-of-hand, — since works of this character are not
read as a rule by the public — even thA interes* * 'ic;

and especially from a work er " m

Spirit Medium^ which contains
but which is now practically un
that a certain number of spirii

vll


viii Preface

for truth!) bought up and destroyed all the copies of this
book — together with the plates — so that, unless one should
be fortunate enough to possess a copy, it is unlikely that
the book will ever make its way into the investigator's hands,
and hence the contents be lost to the reading public forever.
I make this my excuse for quoting from the book at greater
length than is customary in such cases.

One word as to the arrangement of this book. Because it
is divided so sharply into two sections — " The Fraudulent "
and " The Grenuine " — I do not thereby intend to assert
dogmatically that all the phenomena mentioned in the first
part are fraudulent, nor that all the cases quoted in the
second part are genuine. My reason for dividing the book
in this manner is to make (so far as the evidence seems to
warrant) a tentative division of the phenomena into two
classes — without thereby committing myself to belief, for
or against, in either case — which question must be settled
by the actual facts, in any event. The division is merely
teniativef and made with the object of simplifying and clari-
fying the problem, which is, at best, highly complex.

I wish to hereby acknowledge my indebtedness to Professor
James H. Hyslop, to Miss Louise W. Kops, and to my
publisher, Mr. Herbert B. Turner, for much valuable assist-
ance in the prejiaration of this work*


i'.


Prktace \il

Glossabt ziu

PART I— The Fkalduixnt

I, The Pbtbical Phenouena up SpmrruAusy ... 3

II. The Slasb-Zui-lnbh Investigation .... IS

III. The Pbicholoot of Deception 48

IV. Table- TURMNo and Table -urriKa .64

V. Ram 77

VI. Slate- wMTiNo Testb 84

I 1. Methoius with a Single Slate (Prepared) 91

J2. MrruoDB \i'iTn A SiNuLF. iiLATE tl.'nt>reptired) . . 102

I 3. Hethodb with a Dovble Slate (Prepared) 118

§ 4. Methoim n-iTU a IXivblb Slate (Uoprepared) . 127

I S. MlBCELLANEOUS TcBTS 138

VII, RoPE-TTiNO Testb 143

VIII, "Spihit" Posts, Sacks, Handcuffs, Etc. . • . 108

IX. HoLDLTO Tests 186

X. MiBCELLANEouB PHYSICAL Testb 196

XI. Spirit -PBOTOGRAPBT 206

XII. The Paraffinb Mould Test 224

XIII. Matesialieation 230

XIV. Hater lAU nation (amtinued) 255

XV. Sealed- LETTER Reading 276

XVI. Hind-reading Perporuances 291

XVII. Trance, "Test Sbancbs," Etc 312

PART II.

XVIII. GeNZSAL OBBERVATIOHa

XIX.

XXI. Ta^ ^ or D.


/

4


X Contents

OHAPTSB PAOB

f 3. Elongation • • . . 394

I 4. The " Fire Tests " 399

XXII. Trance— The Case of BIrs. Pipbb 410

XXIII. Summary and Conclusion 415

Index • • . • . 419


Phyiiol PheDomepa


GLOSSARY

AuTOMATisii. Self-movccl. automatic. An " automatiam " fleneitJly
signifies a movement made without conscious thought and wul on tbe
part of the person by whom such movement is maAM.

Clairvoyance. Literally " Clear Seeing." It signifies the supposed
power, possessed by some [K^rsons. of viewing distant scenes as though
present in the body ; or of beholding objects invisible to the normal
eyesight.

Crystal -Gazing. Ttie act of looking into a crystal ^ass ball, or other
speculum, or reflecting surface, with the object of mducing hallucin^
tory pictures. The person doing so is called a seer or acryer. The
pictures, of course, exist in the mind and not in the crystal.

Levitatiox. a raising of objects from tlic ground by supposed supernor-
mal means.

pREMONrrioN. A supernormal indication of any kind of event still in the
future.

Parakinesis. The profluction of physical movements where the contact
observed is insufficient to account for them.

PoLTEROEiST. Literally. " Noisy Spirit." A house is said to be haunted
by a poltergeist when bells are run;;, furniture ui)sct, crockery broken,
etc., by no apparent, normal mc:iiis.

RETROCOGNmoN. Knowlc<ige of the past, supemormally acquired.

SuBUMiNAL. Of thoughts. focHngs, etc., lying beneath the ordinarr
threshold (limon) of conscioasncss, — as opi>osed to 8upralimiruif
lying above the threshold.

SuPERNORSiAL. Bcyond the level of ordinary experience. — supplanting
the word " sui^cmatural," which is held to be meaningless.

Telekinesis. The alleged supernormal movements of objects, not due
to any known force.

Telepathy. The communication of impressions of any kind from one
mind to another. indci>endcntly of the recognized channels of sense.

Tel-CBThesia. Perception at a distance. Practically the same as clair-
voyance.

Telurgy. a name for a h3rpothctical force or mode of action, concerned
with the conveyance of telepathic impressions, and perhaps * "* '^her
supernormal operation.


jdii


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


OBXAOfDIQ KnOVB Of EffDUBM OOBII8 • • 44

Obtaimin o Kmotb in Endubm Oosdb (angdhsr mtthaSi ... 46

TRICX-flLATlB AND SlATB HaNIFULATION 104

BoPB-niB, Sacks, and Handcuffs 104

BxLKASiNO Hand fbom tbx Finooi-hou> 188

BxLKASiNo Hand fbom thb Wr»p-bou> IQO

Db. Hodgson's Eztbrimnntal Pboiooraph 212

Imitation Spibit-pbotoorafh 214

Sratir-FBOTo—SHowiNO Masks of Manipulation .... 216

Aliaoxd Spibit-fhoto— OoNTAOfiNo Vabious Items of bmBasr 218

TUOK-BNTBLOPaS AND SSALBD-UnnB TBtTS 284


PAKT I


THE FRAUDULENT


THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA

OF SPIRITUALISM

CHAPTER I

THE FHTnCAI. PHENOMENA OF SPIEITVALIBM

At the outset of our discussion, it is necessary that the
terms used should be distinctly understood by the reader, and
I must begin by calling attention to the difference between
*^ spiritualism ^ and ** spiritism," — which terms are made
convertible in the minds of most persons. The word ^ spir-
itualism " is really a philosophic term, meaning the opposite
of materialism, and hence, strictly speaking, every one who
is not a materialist is a spiritualist — but not necessarily a
spiritist. The term *^ spiritism ^ means the conmiunication
of the living with the spirits of the departed — usually
throu^ an intermediary termed a ^medium." Thus, a
spiritist means one who believes that it is not only possible,
but that it is an actual fact, that we can get into communica-
tion with the spirits of the departed at stances, and at various
other times, spontaneously. As a matter of fact, however,
these distinctions are not preserved in the public mind, and
the word ** spiritualism " is used as synonymous with ** spirit-
ism.'' Hence, it is in this popular meaning of the term that
the word is used throughout this book — the expression,
•* Modem Spiritualism'' having become too deeply rooted
^in the language to be easily changed. It is accordingly
treated, throughout this book, as implying spiritism, when

8


4 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the term ^^ spiritualism " is used, — unless it is otherwise
stated.

Spiritualism, in the pure sense, has, of course, existed
from the very earliest times. A most interesting r&iune
of the beliefs of various ancient nations on this subject will
be found in Elba's FtUure Life in the Light of Ancient Wis-
dom and Modem Science.^ ^^ Modem Spiritualism," on
the other hand, did not come into existence until 1847, when
the ^* Rochester Knod^ings " startled the world, and founded
a new era in the world's religious thought. The antecedents
of spiritualism were, as Podmore clearly shows,' the so-called
** poltergeist " cases, on the one hand, and the early mes-
merists, with their " clairvoyant " and " ecstatic '* cases, on
the other. These " poltergeist " cases I have briefly referred
to on pp. 361-S ; while a full account and discussion of the
mesmeric side of the question will be found in Podmore's book,
above referred to, Moll's Hypnotisniy Braid's Hypnotism,
and many other works of a kindred nature, in which the
historic side of that question is thoroughly discussed.

It will now be seen that, if the definition of spiritualism
given above is the true one (and I think it may be con-
sidered so — one of the representative spiritualists writing:
^^ By spiritism is meant a connection, or intercourse with the
spiritual world "^), the theory and the philosophy of the
belief have nothing whatever to do with physical phenomena
— which, theoretically, belong to a different category alto-
gether. Physical phenomena take place in, and belong to,
the material world, and have nothing to do with communica-
tion with a spirit-world. Many persons, seeing unaccount-
able physical phenomena happening in their presence, are
apt to attribute these movements or phenomena to the action
of spirits — especially if iateUigence is connected with the
phenomena. They may or they may not be so caused, but
the point to bear in mind is that, whether the explanation

* V. also Howitt, History of ike Supematwrdl; Ennennoser, History of
Mapic; Thompson, Proofs of Life after Death, etc.

* Modem Spiritualism. 2 vow,

* SpiriHsnif by Edelweiss, p. 54.


The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualimi 6


of these phenomena be spiritistic or physical, or whether they
are ultimately shown to be nothing more than the results of
fraud, that would not in the least influence the evidence for
the existence of the spirit-world, — which evidence is obtained
from mental and other tests, and hence their disproof would
in no wise influence the central problem of spiritualism, —
whidi is, as stated, the possibility of communication with the
spirit-world, under certain circumstances and conditions. It
is important that these facts should be kept carefully in mind,
since it is necessary to impress upon the popular con-
sciousness the fact that, even should the whole of the physical
phenomena of spiritualism turn out to be nothing but fraud-
ulent, it would in no wise influence the real problem at issue;
the ^ real problem ^ yet remains, being altogether inde-
pendent of the evidence afforded by the physical phenomena.
It is evident, therefore, that I cannot discuss at any
length the ** real problems ^ connected with sjriritualism
— the scientific proof of life after death — in a volume
such as this. I have briefly discussed this evidence on
pp. 410-14, and there referred to those passages in other
books and publications where the evidence will be found yery
fully discussed. The object of the present volume is, of
coarse, to consider those physical phenomena which —
rightly or wrongly — have been attributed to spirit agency
by thousands of persons who have witnessed them: to con-
sider their character, the historical evidence in their favor,
as well as that which tends to show that all these phenomena
are the results of fraud, and are seldom or never genuine in
character ; and, finaDy, to show the actual methodi that are
employed by fraudulent mediums in producing the phenom-
ena by that means. I hope that, by describing the actual
methods in considerable detail, I shall, in some degree, fill
a gap in the history of the subject, which has too long
stood empty. My book differs from that of Mr. Podmore
in that he showed, in that work, how certain phenomena
might have been produced, on certain historical occasions;
whole I have confined ~ nost entirely, to showing how

^ r^ena ac e on a great number of


6 The Physical Phenomena of Spuitualism

occasions — from which the reader may, if he choose, draw
his own conclusions about the possibility of the historic phe-
nomena having been done in the manner described, or in some
very similar manner. I have undertaken to criticize, in some
detail, one or two of the most famous historical cases (pp. 19-
47), but have confined myself entirely to the description of
the fraudulent methods employed, a task for which I am, per-
haps, because of long training in these lines, entitled to dis-
cuss most fully. In the present volume, therefore, the prime
object has been, throughout, to give a clear and a detailed
descripticm of the methods employed by fraudulent mediums ;
and it is hoped that this part of the work will be of assistance
to the investigator by placing him on his guard against
the various methods by which the medium usually tricks his
unwary sitters.

Turning, now, for the moment, to the historical side of
this question, we find that there is scarcely a medium pro>
ducing physical phenomena who has not, at one time or an-
other, been exposed in the grossest kind of fraud, and that
the whole history of the subject — so far as the physical
phenomena are concerned — is bespattered with evidences of
fraud, and the worst " moral mud " and intellectual mire im-
aginable ! It presents an almost unbroken chain of evidence,
showing that fraud and nothing but fraud has been fTSLC-
tised throughout, by mediums ; and presenting scarcely any
evidence whatever that they are ever genuine, or did really
happen, as stated. Mr. Podmore's book, so often quoted,
may be referred to, in proof of these assertions. We find
that, in practically all cases that have been recorded, fraud
has afterward been proved to exist; or the nature of the
evidence is such as to strongly suggest that fraud was em-
ployed, — only undetected. Let us glance, very briefly, at
a few of the historical cases, by way of illustrating the
statements here made.

To go back to the historic cases of " clairvoyance," it is
certain that the evidence is, in almost all of these cases, most
defective, and that the experiments were conducted under con-
ditions which the average psychical researcher of to-day would


The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualinn 7

deem anything but ** good conditions ^ — the natural igno-
rance of the laws of conscious and unconscious suggestion
frequently discrediting the cases — as affording any evidence
for the supernormal. ** Burdin, a member of the Academy
(of Medicine) offered a prize of three thousand francs to
any one who could read without the use of the eyes. The
offer was open for two years and subsequently the time was
extended. C<xisidering the large number who had claimed
this power, few offered themsdves for examination; and
these either clearly failed to meet the test (being detected
in the manipulation of the bandage, and the like), or those
who had the somnambulists in charge refused to conform to
the conditions required by the examiners ; and so the price
was never awarded." *

Doctor Hodgson, a man who has done more than any
other in the detection and exposure of fraudulent mediums,
conclusively proved that it is almost an impossibility to
blindfold a shrewd person so that he cannot see a little from
under the bandage.* As this very limited amount of vision
was aU that was required, in the vast majority of cases, it
is certain that the evidence for these cases is slight indeed,
the testimony of the Seybert Commission going far to
prove the statements here made.'

Those mediums who undertook to read sealed letters, etc.,
have aU been detected in fraud at one time or another ; while
the great number of methods that could be employed, in
order to deceive the sitter, would render it next to impossible
for him to detect the method employed, — unless weD in-
formed of the possibilities of fraud in this particular field.
The medium who gained the greatest reputation in this line
was Charles H. Foster, a full account of whose life and
doings win be found in a book entitled The Salem Seer^ by
George C. Bartlett. Though the author of this book is evi-
dently a firm believer in the powers of Mr. Foster, it may
be said that the cases he narrates are very easy to explain

* Fad and FaUe in Pfuchology, p. 205.

* Journal 8. P. R., Vol. I., pp. 84-6.
■ Report, pp. 128-47.


8 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

as the result of trickery with one or two exceptions. The
accounts of stances held with Foster, printed in Owen's
Debatable Land, pp. 38&-390, 443-7, are again anything
but convincing, and cTearly show that, although Mr. Owen
was doubtless a clever man and a fine collector of evidence
for the supernormal, he was anything but a good ob-
server.

That Foster was an impostor there can be no doubt. A
careful perused of many of the reports of stances strongly
suggests this, in the first place; and when we read the
accoimts of the seances held with him by John W. Truesdell
there can remain no doubt in the average person's mind that
Foster was nothing more than a clever trickster. Mr. Trues-
dell was, in fact, enabled to see the actual method that Foster
employed, in reading his sitter's ballot, under his very nose,
and thus interestingly describes the process in his Spirittud"
isnif Bottom Facts, pp. 137-8 :

" I had noticed at each interview that Mr. Foster, who is
an inveterate smoker, had a great deal of trouble to keep
his cigar alight. Half a dozen times, during each sitting, he
would strike a match, and, holding it in a peculiar manner,
as if he was in the open air, where a strong wind was blow-
ing, would take a whiff or two, and then allow the cigar to
go out again. After carefully comparing notes with several
reliable persons, who had held stances with the same medium,
I came to the conclusion, deducted from their experience as
well as my own, that Mr. Foster invariably changed the bal-
lots, and that^ while the duplicate blanks lay upon the table
before his victims, and he was engaged in the troublesome
task of relighting his cigar, he was, at the same time, read-
ing, by the aid of the very match so carelessly employed, an
open ballot held in the palm of his right hand ! "

Mr. Truesdell then goes on to describe how, suspecting
the manner that Foster accomplished this test, he, at the next
sitting, suddenly seized the five ballots lying on the table
before him, and found every one of them to be a blank —
though they were, of course, supposed to be the ones cwi-
taining the questicms his sitter had written on the pellets.


The Physical PhencHnena of Spiritualism 9

That the ballots had been substituted was, therefore, clear.
Apparently, Foster then broke down and confessed the whole
trick,^ as Slade did at a later date (p. SS).

I have referred thus at length to the case of Foster be-
cause I do not remember having read an expos^ of this me-
dium's operations, outside of Truesdell's book — which is now
out of print and scarce. Moreover, the ^* ballot test '* is
<me very frequently employed by mediums to-day, and it is
as well to pcMnt out the fact that the medium who gained
the reputation of being the greatest medium in the world,
in this particular line, was a fraud ! Various other methods
of reading ballots, sealed letters, etc., will be found on
pp. 876-90.

There can be no doubt, then, that the history of spiritual-
ism is saturated with fraud, and that the vast majority of
the phenomena obtained through mediums are fraudulent in
character. A very fine r&um£ of the credulity on the one
hand, and knavish trickery on the other (so common a few
years ago), will be found in Mr. F. W. H. Myers's paper on
" Resolute Credulity," in Proceedings S. P. R., Vol. XI.,
pp. 213-84. There is also a very interesting article on
^* Spurious Mediumship " in Jotimal S. P. A., Vol. III., pp.
199-207. The net result of the investigations conducted by
the Society for Psychical Research was to produce the con-
viction that no results obtained through professional mediums
were to be trusted, so long as the conditions rendered fraud
possible; and, further, that practically all professional
mediums are frauds ! ^* There does not exist, and there never
has existed, a professional medium of any note who has not
been convicted of trickery or fraud," says J. N. Maskelyne.*
And, in case Mr. Maskelyne may be considered a preju-
diced witness in such matters, it may be stated that the Amer-
ican S. P. R. was unable to find any medium who could pro-
duce satisfactory phenomena under test
that ^ it is, in their opinion, inadviii
investigation in regard to profess
mediums, inasmuch as all the mate

> BoOom Fads, pp. 140-1. *Tks


10 The Physical Phenomena of Spuitualism

tended by them have been held under conditions whidi ren-
dered any scientific investigation impossible." ^ A very fine
letter on " Professional Mediumship " — which is of much
interest from the psychological point of view — will be found
in the Journal S. P. R., Vol. III., pp. 180-8. But the
most convincing testimony, in this direction, is that supplied
by the author of The Revelations of a Spirit Medium, —
who, after all the actual contact he must have had with
mediums, as one of therriy can write: '* Of all the mediimis
he (the author) has met, in eighteen years, and that means
a great many, in all phases, he has never met one that was
not sailing the very same description of craft as himself.
Every one; no exception" (p. 96). And on p. 822 occurs
the following sentence:

^^ . • . His own career and the fact that he has met no
other professional medium, male or female, in his long expe-
rience and extensive travels, who were not * crooked,' leads
him to the conclusion that, from the professional, you are
to expect nothing genuine."

Whether these statements are accepted as true or not, cer-
tain it is that the history of the physical phenomena of spir-
itualism bears them out to a remarkable degree. Especially
is this obvious whenever the mediums came into contact with
members of the S. P. R. ; when more exact conditions and
careful '^ tests " were insisted upon. It may almost be said
that the S. P. R. has never succeeded in obtaining evidence for
a single genuine physical phenomenon in its whole career,
while the number of fraudulent mediums it has unearthed is
amazing! They have been no more successful in their day
than the Seybert Commission was in its — and it is certainly
a suspicious fact that, so soon as strict and reliable ^^ tests ^'
are insisted upon, and no opportunity given the medium
to produce the phenomena by fraudulent means, the phe-
nomena altogether cease! The inadequacy of the tests upon
which the average spiritualist was wont to rely has now
clearly been proved; and, if no phenomena are ever forth-
coming, under conditions that would preclude the possibility

* Amer. Proceedings S, P. i?., p. 230.


The Physical PhencHnena of Spiritualiflm 11

of fraud, the physical phenomena of spiritualism must always
rest under the cloud of the blackest suspicion.

The newer evidence, indeed, is precisely on a par with the
dd, the same uncertainty being present. Let us take, for
example, the case of Eusapia Paladino.

I cannot now stop to consider at length the history of
the Paladino case — interesting as that case is, in more than
one respect: a very brief r&um6 must here suffice. (For a
detailed account of this medium's career, v. Podmore*s Mod-
em SpiriiuaUimj Vol. II., pp. 198-808, etc.) This medium,
^ Eusapia Paladino, has been investigated almost entirely by
European savants, — no Americans nor Englishmen having
had an opportunity to observe the phenomena occurring in
her presence, except in the '^ Cambridge Sittings,'* to be
menticmed presently. Outside of the S. P. R. investigations,
this medium's career has been one of almost uninterrupted
triumph. She succeeded in convincing the Continental sa-
vants who investigated her powers, that genuine phenomena
were produced in her presence, and I think I am right in
asserting that the majority of them still continue to think
so — despite the supposed exposure at Cambridge. The
majority of the reports are to be found in the Anrudes des
Sciences Psychiques; a review of M. Richet's " Notes,**
^ Experiences de Milan," and the '^ Milan Commission **
will be found in Proceedings S. P. R., Vol. IX., pp. 218-
26. The phenomena occurring in this mcdium*s presence
were most striking — mostly telekinetic phenomena of a re-
markable type, apparently — and baffled all those who wit-
nessed them ; nor could they, in any way, account for them
by fraud. So important did the S. P. R. and the Continental
scientists consider this case, indeed, that M. Richet invited
Professor Oliver J. Lodge, Mr. Myers, and Professor J.
Ochorowicz (the author of a very remarkable work on
Menial Suggestion, among others) to visit him at his own
house, on the He Roubaud, a small island in the Mediter-
ranean. On this lonely island, a new series of experiments
was conducted, the net result of which was to convince all
those present of the reality of the phenomena. A f uU Report


12 The Physical Phenomena of Spuitualism

of these sittings was afterward printed in the Journal
S. P. R.f Vol. VI., pp. S0&-60 ; and very extraordinary they
appear. Doctor Hodgson, however, ^^ returned to the
charge," and, in a very remarkable paper, published in the
Joumalt VoL VII., pp. S&-66, he pointed out what he con-
sidered many defects in the evidence, and asserted that the
whole of the phenomena were probably due to fraud and fraud
alone. His criticism of the Reports is detailed and, as stated,
very remarkable. It brought forth replies from the four in-
vestigators whose Reports were criticized' — Messrs. Myers,
Lodge, Richet, and Ochorowicz all replying in detail to
Doctor Hodgson's criticisms (pp. 66-79). The replies did
not convince Doctor Hodgson, however, who still contended
that fraud was practised, and that the Reports published
were not convincing. A discussion ensued, the outcome of
which was that Doctor Hodgson went to England, and there
took part in the famous ^^ Cambridge Sittings." In these.
Doctor Hodgson succeeded in discovering the manner in
which the medium was in the habit of releasing one of her
hands; and showed that — so far as that series of sittings
went, at any rate — fraud and trickery were practised, and
was thus enabled to account for all the phenomena then wit-
nessed. ^^Mr. and Mrs. Myers, Miss Johnson, Mrs. Sidg-
wick, and myself (Professor Sidgwick), as well as Doctor
Hodgson, unanimously adopted the conclusion that nothing
but trickery had been at work in the Cambridge series of
experiments." ^

The S. P. R. consequently decided to *^drop" Eusapia,
and to have nothing more to do with her. She. had been
detected in trickery, and, according to the standards of the
Society, that was enough to condemn her from future pub-
licity, so far as they were concerned. In one sense, this is
a very wise course to pursue, since the eyes of the scientific
world are centred on the S. P. R., and it is impossible for
them to make any exception to their high standards of evi-
dence, without damaging their reputation, as a scientific
society. On the other hand, this course was a very unfor-

» Journal, Vol. VIL, p. 169.


The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualiflm 13


tunate one, sinoe the Continental investigators, convinced that
the medium did not always practise fraud of the kind dis-
covered by Doctor Hodgson, continued their researches, and
(apparently) showed that phenomena were produced wh^i
trickery was not possible — at least trickery of the sort
Doctor Hodgson detected* So strong was this new evidence,
indeed, that Mr. Myers and Professor Lodge retracted their
former beliefs, and became more than ever convinced that
supernormal phenomena did occasionally happen in Eusa-
pia's presence, while perfectly willing to admit that fraud
had been practised at Cambridge, and would account for all
the phenomena there witnessed.^ The Continental observers
were also convinced anew that supernormal phenomena oc-
curred in Eusapia's presence.

A lengthy criticism of the Hodgson (Cambridge) sittings
is to be found in Doctor MaxwelPs Metapsychical Phenomena^
in which he states that Doctor Hodgson discovered nothing
that was not already known to the Continental taoafUs; but
that his ** explanation " had been found by them inadequate
to cover aU the facts. He criticizes the position of the S. P. R.
with some bitterness, and ends by asserting that, ^ My
testimony contradicts formally and explicitly the condusions
of the Cambridge investigators. Eusapia does not always
defraud; with us, she rarely defrauded" (p. 417). When
this book was reviewed for the Proceedingt^ Miss Johnson
added an editorial ^ Note,'* replying to some of Doctor Max-
well's criticisms, and pointed out that it was only after the me-
dium has refused to submit to any of the conditions proposed,
that they adopted the course they did (of allowing her '^ free
play," so to speak, and catching her in the act of producing
the phenomena fraudulently, — • rather than controlling her
so that their production was impossible), and this course was
pursued because of the fraud they felt was being prac-
tised.*

And thus the matter stands — one-half of the world con-
vinced that Eusapia is a fraud, and the other half convinced
that the phenomena witnessed in her presence are genuine!

> Javmal, VoL IX., p. 36. » Proceedings, Vol. XVIII., p. 601.


14 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualiflm

What the ultimate verdict will be it is hard to foresee, but
it is certain that the case, as it stands, is not convincing to
the scientific world, and fresh evidence must be forthcoming
if the case is ever to be decided in her favor. If Eusapia
possesses genuine mediumistic gifts, it ought only to be a
matter of time and suflSciently careful experimenting in order
to establish that fact.

It is unnecessary for me to consider the evidence for the
supernormal in the case of William Stainton Moses, — for
the reason that this survey work has already been done with
admirable care and discretion by Mr. Myers and Mr. Pod-
more, the one arguing for the genuineness of the phenom-
ena, the other against their reality — or at least against
any interpretation of them which would render it necessary
to suppose any supernormal powers at work.^

Briefly, the case is this: A minister, a teadier in one of
London's largest public schools, a gentleman of refinement
in every way, suddenly finds himself gifted with remarkable
qualities which he discovers are mediumistic in character, —
though he has never taken any interest in the subject hereto-
fore — except, indeed, to be rather annoyed and bored by it !
The phenomena occurring in his presence were, inter aUa,
telekinesis, '* apports," levitation, musical sounds, lights, —
in fact, practically the whole range of mediumistic phenom-
ena. If these phenomena were genuine, his is undoubtedly
the most remarkable case on record. Unfortimately, it can
now never be settled whether they were genuine or not, for
the reason that Mr. Moses shrank from all publicity in the
matter, allowing none to attend his s^nces but a few per-
sonal friends, and refusing to submit to any ^Hest con-
ditions,*' such as were imposed on public mediums. Certainly
Mr. Moses did not produce the phenomena in the usual

* See Proceedings S, P. R., Vol. IX., pp. 245-354, and Vol. XI., pp.
24-114; Studies %n Psychical Research, pp. 116-33; Podmore's Modern
Spiritualism, Vol. II., pp. 280-8; Journal S, P. R„ passim; Spirit Teach-
ings; Spirit Identity; Lilley's Modem Mystics and Modem Magic;
Human Personality, Vol. II., pp. 223-37, 540-1, 546-9, 551-4, 583-7. etc.
The case will be found diBCUSBea at great length in the above mentioned
works.


The Physical PhencHnena of Spiritualiflm 15

fraudulent manner — his social position, both public and
private, forbids our considering such a thing for a moment.
His object was certainly not notoriety, for the full accounts
of his stances were never published during his lifetime, but
were edited and published by Mr. Myers after his death. If
he had sought notoriety, he certainly would have publicly
proclaimed his mediiunship, and published an account of his
stances during his life ; and that is the only conceivable rea-
son for producing the phenomena by fraud — if they were
so produced. Mr. Moses' private character had always been
irreproachable and he was beloved by all who knew him.
There is, of course, the possibility that the sitters, and the
medium, too, were hallucinated at some of these s&inces ; but
then again the nature of the evidence prevents us from ac-
cepting this as the true explanation of phenomena that oc-
curred. The case is a most baffling one, and deserves the
reader's careful perusal. As Andrew Lang said, the choice
of beliefs is between ^ the moral and the physical miracle,"
and, like him, ^' I can accept neither " — I am content to
have no explanation at all. I cannot conceive that the phe-
nomena were fraudulently produced by Mr. Moses ; and, on
the other hand, I cannot conceive that the phenomena were
genuine! The value of the evidence in the case must be
estimated by each individual for himself; it proves nothing
to those who do not know Mr. Moses, or the phenomena,
for the simple reason that no ** test conditions " were ever
aUowed to be imposed upon the medium. Tliere the matter
stands.

I wish to add a few words to dear away, if possible, the
great misimderstandings that exist in the public mind as to
the relations of the S. P. R. and the Theosophical Society.
It must be understood that, although the present relations
of the two societies are anything but pleasant and friendly,
they were not always so by any means — quite the con-
trary. Colonel Olcott clearly shows in his Old Diary Leaves
that Mme. Blavatsky was at one time a sincere spiritualist
(or at least sincerely interested in the subject), and was in


16 The Physical PhencHnena of Spiritualism

close touch with the S. P. R. during its early progress. Mr*
Sinnetty Doctor Hartmaim, and others were, in fact, mem-
bers of the Society, and in hearty sympathy with its general
aims and methods. The first Report issued by the Society
was, if anything, most favorable in its tone, — rather assum-
ing the genuineness of the phenomena recorded — pointing
out the close relation and correspondence of these phenomena
with apparitions and other kindred phenomena which the
Society was investigating; and, while the Report was en-
tirely unbiassed one way or the other, it inclined to the atti-
tude of belief rather than to that of skepticism. This Report
was privately printed for circulation among members of the
Society, however, and is now quite out of print and unobtain-
able. The point I wish to make clear is that the initial atti-
tude of the Society toward the recorded phenomena was
that of scrupulous fairness and impartiality.

Their sincerity should be apparent from the very fact of
their sending Doctor Hodgson to India to investigate the
phenomena at first hand, for it is hardly likely that they
would have done so if they had thought the phenomena any-
thing but of the very greatest importance. Doctor Hodg-
son spent three months in India, investigating these reported
phenomena with the greatest care, at first hand, and it was
his entirely unfavorable and smashing Report that made the
S. P. R. change its attitude toward the phenomena, and pro-
claim its belief that they were nothing but cleverly devised
tricks, the supposed phenomena being produced by trickery
from start to finish. The detailed Report may be read in
full in Proceedings S. P. R., Vol. III., pp. 801-400. I would
refer my readers to that Report for all particulars. Natu-
rally, this caused a great stir in the ranks of the Theoso-
phists. Mr. Sinnett resigned from the S. P. R., and wrote a
pamphlet, The Occtdt World PJienomena and the Society for
Psychical Research^ in which he attacked the Report fiercely,
and was backed up by Mrs. Annie Besant, and other Theoso-
phists of less note. This called forth a reply from Doctor
Hodgson, in which he reviewed these criticisms, and, to the
mind of most persons (not Theosophists), literally tore them


The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism 17

to pieces. His paper, ^^ The Defence of the Theosophists,"
will be found in Proceedings S. P. A., Vol. IX., pp. 1S9-59.
This article was never answered satisfactorily by any Tbeoso-
phist, and there the S. P. R. let the matter drop, feeling
that any further evidence of fraud was unnecessary, and re-
fused to occupy itself any longer with phenomena that had
long ago been shown to be fraudulent.

I say the Society let the matter rest there. Other individ-
uals, however, continued to publish damning evidence, which
completed the story, so far as the phenomena were concerned.
This evidence will be found in The Religio-PhUosophical
Journal (Aug. 10 -Sept. 7, 1889); A Modem Priestess
of Isis^ by V. S. Solovyoff; I sis Very Much Unveiled^ by
Edmund Garrett, and other publications. These conclusively
prove to any sane mind, it seems to me, that the phenomena
obtained in Mme. Blavatsky's presence, in India, were fraud
and nothing but fraud.^

Now, the point I wish to impress particularly upon my
reader is this: That the S. P. R. has no quarrel whatever
with the Theosophical Society, except in regard to the phe-
nomena. The "philosophy of Theosophy,'* so to speak,
may be true or false — that is of no interest to the Society,
and it has never concerned itself with it. The attack of the
S. P. R. was levelled entirely against the phenomena observed,
and not at all against the philosophical system that Theos-
ophy taught ; and that is the fact which the public has never,
apparently, grasped. Tlie phenomena and the philosophy
must be kept strictly separate, and the man-in-the-street may
accept every word of the Society's Report as truth, and yet
continue to believe in the philosophy. To be sure, it would
be very illogical for him to do so, since the philosophy is,

* I suggested what seemed to me a possible explanation of some of the
" Mahatms Miracles " in a magazine devoted to the interests of the con-


Proceedings; when I had done so 1 saw that my (hypnotic) explanation
was not needed — simple trickery accounting for the whole or the ob-


served phenomena. I now bc^ to withdraw, oonseauently, the explana-
tion I thcro put forward, and to state that I no longer consider it the


18 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualimi

in a sense, inseparably bound up with the phenomena, and
dependent upon them; but, nevertheless, he would be quite
at liberty to believe it if he saw fit. The position of the
average person, who has carefully studied the evidence in
the case, will probably be well summed up in the following
quotation from Doctor Hodgson's paper, in Proceedings^
Vol. IX., above referred to, which deserves wider publicity.
It is:

'' In a final word I must remind my readers that I have
been dealing in this paper, as I have dealt throughout, with
the phenomena alleged by Madame Blavatsky in support of
the tenets which she preached, and not with those tenets
themselves. Of those streams of superhuman knowledge
I will only say that I prefer to tap them at least one
stage nearer their fountain-heads. I lay claim to no vast
erudition. But the sources which were good enough for
Mme. Blavatsky are good enough for me; and so IcHig as
Bohn*s Classical Library and Triibner's Oriental Library
are within reach of a modest purse, I shall prefer to draw
on these useful repertoires for my ideas of Platonic and
Buddhistic thought, — even though I should thus be obliged
to receive those ideas in a bald, old-fashioned shape, un-
spiced with fraudulent marvels, and uncorroborated by the
forged correspondence of fictitious Teachers of Truth."


CHAPTER n

THS 8LADS - ZOLLNSft INYESTIOATIOK

Ths whole history of modem spiritualism presents three,
and only three, cases of remarkable physical manifestations
such as cannot, very readily, be accounted for by fraud,
by one or the other of the devices and methods described
in this book. These three cases present many remarkable
phenomena, and it is necessary that they should be considered
in a work of this character at some length. I refer to the
accounts of phenomena published by Doctor Hare, Professor
ZoUner, and Sir William Crookes. Sir William Crookes's
experiments will be found noticed at some length on pp.
372-409. The exi>eriments of Doctor Hare I must also pass
over with a mere mention, and this for two reasons: first,
because of lack of space to consider them in the detail that
would be necessary ; and, second, because they are not really
worth this detailed examination. I agree with Doctor Hyslop
in his opinion that *^ Hare's experiments . . . were not so
good as Zollner's," ^ and with Mr. Podmore when he wrote,
^ Doctor Hare does not seem to have realized the possibility
of fraud . . . and the character of his book generally, con-
sisting as it does largely of dissertations on theology and
cosmology, founded on spirit revelations, is not such as to in-
spire confidence in his judgment.** • While, therefore, I do
not deny the value of the evidence collected and presented by
Professor Hare, it will be more profitable for us to examine
the more scientific and terse accounts of the phenomena wit-

> Bcrderiand of Pavchieal Researchy p. 237.
*8tudie9 in Piyehtcal Research, p. 49.

19


/


Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

by Professor Zollner. This I shall accordingly pro-
^ to do in some detail — since it is necessary that the chief
.^oric phenomena should receive a careful and critical ex-
amination, in the light of the fraud and possibihties of fraud
which this book lays bare.

ZoUner's accoimts of his stances will be found in his book^
Transcendental Physics (translated by C. C. Massey), in
which Professor Zollner, in addition to recording the phenom-
ena that occurred at the stances, attempted to demonstrate
his theory of " space of four dimensions." This theory he
adopted in order to explain the phenomena observed in the
presence of the medium, and it may be said frankly that that
is as likely a theory as any other, — provided the facts are
such, in reality, and not mere frauds. There is nothing
inherently impossible in the theory ; ^ the only thing lacking
is the evidence of its reality ! The question, then, before us
is, as usual, are the phenomena facts, or are they merely
the simulation of the facts they appear to be? That can only
be settled by a careful examination of the evidence in the case
since we cannot, unfortunately, repeat the phenomena at
this late date. We can only carefully study the records that
are left us, and see whether their perusal points to the fact
that the phenomena observed were genuine, or whether they
were merely clever tricks ; — the result of the medium having
deceived the investigator, and caused him to believe that the
phenomena really occurred, as reported. The medium, in
this case, was none other than '^ Dr." Henry Slade ; and we
must, accordingly, hastily glance at this medium's previous
history, in order to get a clue to the personality of the man
we are considering.

The career of Slside, outside of the Zollner sittings, was
indeed not creditable. A brief r^sumi of this medium's ex-
ploits will be found in Podmore's Modem Spiritualism^ Vol.
II., pp. 87-90. The Ray Lankester prosecution, which neces-
sitated Slade leaving England in a hurry, was a heavy blow
to his reputation. Mrs. Sidgwick, further, had ten stances
with Slade, the general net impression of which was to make

^ V. The Seven FoUUs of Science, by John Phin, pp. 117-25.


f


The Slade - ZoUner Investigatioii 21

her feel that ^ the phenomena are produced by tricks.'' ^
The investigations of the Seybert Conumssion were not only
unsatisfactory — being given under no real "test** condi-
tions,* — but the actual process of reading and answering
the messages were distinctly seen by the sitters on several
occasiims. ^ Every step in the process," says the Report^
pp. 11-12, ^ we have distinctly $een. In order to seize the
f ragmoit of pencil without awakening suspicion, while hold-
ing the slate under the table, the slate is constantly brought
out to see whether or not the spirits have written an answer.
By this manoeuvre a double end is attained : First, it creates
an atmosphere of expectation, and the sitters grow accus-
tomed to a good deal of motion in the medium's arm that
holds the slate ; and secondly, by these repeated motions, the
pencil (which, having be^i cut out from a slate pencil en-
closed in wood, is square, and does not roll about awk-
wardly) is moved by the successive jerks toward the hand
which hfdds the slate, and is gradually brought up to within
grasping distance. The forefinger is then passed over the
frame of the slate, and it and the thumb seize and hold the
pencil, and, under cover of some violent convulsive spasms,
the slate is turned over and the question read. At this point
it is that the medium shows his nerve; it is the critical in-
stant, the only one when his eyes are not fastened on his
sitters. On one occasion, when the question was written
somewhat illegibly in a back hand, with a very light stroke,
and close to the upper edge of the slate, the medium had
to look at it three several times before he could make it
out.

** After reading the question, it may be noticed that Doctor
Slade winks three or four times rapidly ; this may have been
partly to veil from his visitors the fact that he had been
looking intently downward, and partly through mental ab-
straction in devising an answer. He evidently breathes freer
when this crisis is past."

But the most conclusive evidence of fraud, in the case
of Doctor Slade, is probably that furnished by Truesdell,

* Proceedings, Vol. IV., p. 66. ^Report, pp. 66-9.


22 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

in his Spiritualism^ Bottom Facts. Here we read that the
author detected Slade producing ^^ telekinetic " phenomena
with his foot (p. 146); that he saw the movements of the
tendons in Slade*s wrists when he (Slade) was doing the
writing (p. 146) ; that, by purposely leaving a forged letter
in his overcoat pocket, he thereby deceived Slade — receiving
messages from the supposedly dead friends and relatives of
this non-existent person (p. 160-1 ) ; he tells how he discov-
ered a slate in the corner of the medium's stance-room con-
taining a message already written out, waiting for some
future sitter to receive it (p. 161) ! and how, finally, Slade
made a full confession to him, evidently stating, under bond-
of secrecy, just how all his manifestations were produced
(pp. 16&-7). This confession is most remarkable and
apparently little known, though it is not the only one that
Slade ever made. Mr. Pumess stated to the Seybert Com-
mission (p. 70), that when last he saw Slade in Boston, ^^he
eagerly beckoned me to come in, and, as I settled myself in
a chair, I said to him : * Well, and how are the old spirits
coming on?' Whereupon he laughed and replied, * Oh,
pshaw! you never believed in them, did you? ' "

Groing back to Truesdell's exposure of this medium, we
read that on several occasions Slade's foot was seen in the
act of producing movements of objects and other phenomena
under the table (pp. 286-9) ; and, at another time, of how
the writer shared his bed, and caught Slade in the act of
producing manifestations of various kinds — including
touches — with his feet ! When both his legs were held fast
to the bed, by means of his companion's legs being placed
across both of them, and his two hands held at the same time,
no phenomena of any sort followed !

In relation to the slate-writing phenomena, I cannot re-
frain from quoting the following passage, which is, to my
mind, one of the most amusing passages in the whole history
of the subject — though many funny things have happened
at the various exposures! Truesdell had entered Slade's
stance-room, and found it empty. In one comer he found,
however, a slate, upon which was a message already pre-


The Slade - ZoUner Investigation 23

pared, as before stated. Picking up this slate, the future
sitter wrote, under the first message, the words : ** Henry !
look out for this fellow — he is up to snuff! Alcinda."
(This was the name of Slade^s deceased wife.) Soon after
this the worthy doctor appeared, and the usual sdance was
given. Then came the climax ! After describing the prepa-
rations for slate^writing, etc., as usual, he goes on : ^ A mo-
ment later the table began to tremble violently, and Slade
appeared much agitated, when we distinctly heard the spirits
writing upon the slate ! The sound was unmistakable ; even
the crossings of the t's and the dottings of the i's could be
easily distinguished. This was the grandest victory of my
life! Inaudibly I exclaimed, * Eureka! Eureka!' After
years of fruitless search for proof of the immortality of man,
at last I had found it! There we were, face to face, as it
were, with our spirit friends, communicating with them as in
earth life, with the unimpeachable testimony of our eyes and
ears to establish the fact. At the conclusion of the writing,
the doctor raised the slate and turned it over in a triumphant
manner, when his eyes fell upon the two messages. He seemed
appalled ! Had a thunderbolt from heaven fallen at his feet,
he could not have been more astonished. For several minutes
he continued to gaze upon the slate in blank amazement —
then, suddenly turning to me, his countenance livid with
rage and excitement, he exclaimed, ^ What does this mean?
Who has been meddling with this slate? ' * Spirits,' I coolly
refdied. A moment later this manipulator of unseen forces
was as mellow as a ripe apple. PuUy and freely we conversed
tc^^ether for an hour or more upon the all-important subject
of my visit. If I had heretofore been suspicious of the doctor,
now every shsidow of doubt was expelled! The science of
spiritualism was more thoroughly discussed between us than
I had ever before heard it, — the doctor taking especial pains
to explain to me many of the mysterious methods adopted
by the spirits in order to reach those who are yet in the phys-
ical form. . . ." And so on, with delightful irony. Indeed,
the book is written with such a tremendous amount of veiled


24 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

sarcasm that many persons doubt if the author really believes
what he says, or not !

It will be seen from all the foregoing, therefore, that the
' previous career of Slade was anything but free from sus-
picion — actual fraud having been proved against him in
many instances. Such a record would naturally make us sus-
pect that such a medium would not be likely to produce gen-
uine phenomena — at least if there is the least possible loop-
hole left open by which trickery could be practised. In con-
sidering the Zollner stances, however, we must not let these
considerations warp our judgment, for two reasons: partly
because mediums who produce geauine phenomena on occa-
sion also cheat at times, if the phenomena fail to occur, —
as has now been abundantly proved; and partly because we
must consider every phenomenon that is presented for our
consideration, in the domain of psychical research, as though
it were an isolated phenomenon, independent from any that
have gone before, or any that are to follow after. Each
phenomenon must be judged on its own merit, that is; and,
in the Slade-Zollner investigation, we must accordingly set
aside all the previous testimony for or against Slade, and
examine the stances themselves as though they were the only
ones recorded. The extent to which the previous history
should influence our minds is this : that, if the opportunity of
fraud is shown to exist, and the only bar to the assumption
that the medium did produce the manifestation in that way
is the moral objection (as in the Moses case), then we must be
willing to set that consideration aside, as valueless, and as
constituting no valid evidence in favor of the genuineness
of the phenomena.

I must confine myself to a very brief r6sum£ of the experi-
ments mentioned in the book, and shall choose those which are
the most extraordinary, and apparently the hardest to ac-
count for by normal means. At least this will not bring
upon me the charge of being unfair, in my handling of the
case, for it may fairly be said that if the most extraordinary
phenomena can be accounted for and explained (as fraudu-


The Slade - Zollner Investigation 25

lent), then, surely, the more simple experiments of the same
order may well be explained in a similar manner.

The experiments with the slate need not detain us long.
Slade used the method of writing described on p. 104, beyond
a doubt — though he often used other methods too. The
tests described on p. 60, and elsewhere throughout the book,
are easily explainable by some one of the methods described
in this volume, and the evidence all goes to show that
Slade did actually use the methods described. Mr. Carl
Willmann, a manufacturer of magical apparatus at Ham-
burg, made a careful examination of Slade's double slate,
and found that the seals were not by any means in so perfect
a condition as has been supposed, and aroused strong sus-
picions that the seals had, in fact, been tampered with. He
found that while, to a superficial examination, the seals ap-
peared perfect, yet a closer examination showed the unmis-
takable evidences of finger-prints, and Mr. Willmann sug-
gests that the slates were opened by means of a thin, heated
wire, which was passed under the seals on the slates — the
seals being afterward replaced. The examination he was
enabled to make strongly suggested that this was, in fact,
the method used. An illustration of this process will be
found in The Old and the New Magic (p. xxvi), where many
valuable criticisms of these experiments are published, — to
some of which I shall have occasion to refer later.

The experiments with the compass are interesting, and,
while they are not difficult to explain as the result of trickery,
if we assume a certain amount of malobservation on the part
of 2K>llner (which we are entitled to assume, as we shall
presently see), they are the only ones that would seem to in-
dicate that Slade did, in reality, possess some supernormal
power. The experiment tried was the following:

"... Arrival at my dwelling, my friend asked whether
I had a compass at hand. I brought a celestial globe in the
stand, to which a compass was fixed, and placed it on the
table. At our request, Slade moved his hand JiorizcMitallj
across the closely fitted glass cover of the magnet case. Th
needle remained immoval)le, and I ccmcluded from this tha;


26 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

Slade had no magnet concealed beneath his skin. On a sec-
ond trial, which was made immediately afterward, in the
manner stated, the needle was violently agitated in a way
which could only be the result of strong magnetic power,''
(pp. 62-3). On p. 62 Zollner gives an account of some
experiments in which a knitting-needle was immediately mag-
netized when placed on a slate — the slate being held under
the table by Slade ^^ in the usual manner as for writing. "
(See also the account on p. 60.)

It is not hard to conceive that Slade had the opportunity
to exchange this needle for another which was magnetized,
at the time the slate was held beneath the table; nor tliat
Slade carried a magnet about with him after the first day of
such experiments (when he found out the sort of tests to
which Zollner intended to subject him), and that he found
an opportunity to use this magnet to good advantage dur-
ing the course of the experiment. It may be said, in fairness
to Slade, however, that this experiment Tnay have been per-
fectly free from fraud, since the same effects have been ob-
served elsewhere, apparently, where no professional medium
was concerned. Reichenbach obtained some very similar
results with his " sensitives ; " and there is a case recorded in
the Journal S. P. B., Vol. I., pp. 264-6, which would seem
to confirm the results obtained by Zollner. As, however,
these results have not been duplicated of late years (so far
as my information goes), and as it is not hard to account
for the experiments on the basis of trickery, as suggested,
we must at least hold our judgment in suspense and await
further details and further experiments before accepting
these results as in any way scientific facts.

The only other experiments described that have any sem-
blance to reality, and are not obviously conjuring tricks, are
the telekinetic phenomena and the cases of levitation men-
tioned on pp. 64, 66, and pp. 190-1, respectively. In the
first of these we are told that " a small note-table, fixed to
a door-post by a movable iron support, began suddenly to
move, and so violently that the chair standing in front of it
was thrown down with a great noise. These objects were


The Slade - ZoUner Investigation 27

behind Slade, and at least five feet from him. At the same
time and at the same distance, a bookcase, loaded with many
books, was violentiy agitated." If this phenomenon was not
genuine (which, in the light of the other tests, we are not
entitled to think), it is probable that the table and bookcase
were both moved bj a heavy black thread — that device so
often employed by conjurers to such good effect. The tridL,
as described, would certainly not prohibit this interpretation
of the facts observed, while the experiments described on p.
179, 184, and elsewhere, are obviously performed in this
manner, or by means of the medium's hand or the toes of his
foot. Truesdell ^ describes a stance in which he himself em-
ployed this device undetected, and with great success. As
to the "broken screen incident'* (p. 64), — where a strong
wooden screen was, apparently, wrenched apart in the middle
of a stance, with a " violent crack," falling in twa pieces,
the screws and other fastenings being wrenched from their
sockets, — I would ask : what proof have we that this tear-
ing apart was not done before the stance, and the two parts
merely tied together by means of a piece of thread, which
could be pulled off later, allowing the two halves of the screen
to fall apart as stated? There was plenty of time for Slade
to " fix " anything he liked before the seance, from all ac-
counts, and there is nothing in the reports which would forbid
our assuming that such an interpretation is the right one.

The levitation case is a little more convincing. It is not
recorded by Zollner, as it happens, being merely quoted
by him, in his book. Tie seance at which this levitation oc-
curred was one conducted by Herr Schmid (May, 1878).
The account reads : ** When I was sitting a little distance
from him (Slade), he likewise sitting, he stretched out his
arm and laid his hand on the back of my chair. All at once
I was raised, with the chair, swaying in the air about a foot
high, as if drawn up by a pulley, without any exertion what-
ever by Slade, who simply raised his hand, the chair follow-
ing it as if it were a magnet" (p. 190).

This ** test " was doubtless performed in the same manner

« Bottom Facts, pp. 197-8.


28 The Physical PhencMnena of Spiritualism

as it was on the occasion when Slade ^^ levitated " Professor
Fechner. As described, the events are certainly mystifying.
" However, when we carefully compare Professor Fechner's
account, we come to the conclusion that the whole proceeding
is no longer miraculous, but could be repeated by prestidigi-
tateurs. Fechner states that, at the request of Doctor Slade,
he himself (Professor Fechner), who was slim and slight,
took the place of Professor Braune. Doctor Slade turned
round to Professor Fechner and bore his chair upward in a
way which is not at all inexplicable by the methods of leger-
demain. Professor Fechner does not mention that he hovered
for some time in the air, but it is obvious that Doctor Slade
made the two professors change seats because he would
scarcely have had the strength to lift up Professor Braune." *
Of the phenomena mentioned many others hardly deserve
our detailed consideration. The case on pp. 184-6, in
which ZoUner held the mediimi's hands while certain phenom-
ena occurred, is certainly a mere variation of the " release '*
described on p. 189. The '* accordion test " (pp. 67-8) was
obviously worked as described on p. 200. (The difference in
the methods of observing and recording this test adopted by
iZollner and Crookes should be carefully noted. ) The streams
of water that appeared out of the atmosphere were obviously
produced by means of a small pocket syringe, dexterously
operated by the skilled hand of the medium. The malob-
servation present in these experiments is patent to any one
reading the reports carefully. The account of the table
that vanished from the room of its own accord, and afterward
' descended gracefully from the ceiling ("the hitherto in-
visible table with its legs turned upwards, very quickly float-
ing down in the air upon the top of the card-table"), thai
experiment I cannot explain, if it occurred as stated. I have
strong doubts whether such an event ever transpired, how-
ever, — either ZoUner experiencing a visual hallucination, or
malobservation and defects in recording have much to answer
for. Perhaps the explanation is to be found in a combination
of these two factors.

> The Old and the New Magic, pp. xxiv-zxv.


The Slade - ZoUner Investigation 29

In the cases in which coins were abstracted from sealed
boxes, the experiments are rendered absolutely inconclusive
by the fact that Slade had every opportunity to duplicate
these boxes, — having examined them before the crucial
seance Uxk place (pp. ISQ, 14fO-6). It is also conceivable that
Slade managed to open the sealed boxes themselves, abstract
the coins, and seal them up again, without detection, — as
actually happened in the case of the sealed slates (p. 25).
Slade might have pried up the edge of the seal with a sharp
penrknife, cut the string passing round the box under the
seal, opened the box, abstracted the coins, again closed the
box, pushed the cut end of the string under the seal, gummed
it in {dace, and replaced the seal by slightly melting the
under surface of the seal, thus pried up, with a heated knife
blade. The trickery could not be discovered, in such a case,
unless the seal were pried off, and the box opened. So long
as the box remained sealed, however, the trickery could never
be detected.

The impressions of naked feet, obtained on sooted paper,
placed on the floor under the table, could easily have been
done by Slade, and there are strong indications that they
were produced by him (pp. 67-8, 71, 181-2). It may be
true that the impression of the foot obtained was shorter
than that of Slade's foot, but this could have been produced,
as Zollner himself points out, '^ by not putting down the heel
and the fore part of the foot at the same time.** Slade
himself probably made the majority of the impressions in
this manner. Zollner asserts that he at once examined the
foot of the medium to see whether any soot or other marks
were left upon it that would indicate that Slade had done it
himself, and states that he found none. We must accept the
statement with extreme caution, however, that 2K>llner ai m
examined the medium's foot. It is highly improbable
he did so, in reality, and it is more than likely that f
had the opportunity to wipe off the telltale marks, and
place his feet in the socks and shoes (low cut) that he w>
The examples of malobservation to be retent^
will amply justify our doubting the accunur


30 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the report. In any erent, there was nothing to prevent Slade
from using celluloid impressions, which might have been
secreted about his person. Mr. Willmann, in his study of the
iZollner sittings, calls attention to the fact that the foot-
prints were made from feet whose stockings had been removed
but a few moments before, for they still showed the meshes
of the knitting which quickly disappear as soon as the skin
of the foot grows cold. ^^ Professor 2K>llner did not see such
trifles, and yet they are important, even if it were for the
mere purpose of determining whether the spirits wear stock-
ings made in Grermany or America ! "

ZoUner describes (pp. 102-9) a most remarkable test, in
which two wooden rings were apparently passed on to the leg
of a small table, — under conditions which would, from all
accounts, appear to be quite beyond the bounds of trickery.
The two rings had first passed through them a piece of cat-
gut, the ends of which were tied together and sealed. Medium
and sitter then sat quietly together for some time, when a
sound was heard from the small table, placed some distance
from the medium, and, upon examining the table, it was
found that the rings were encircling the leg — it being, ap-
parently, impossible for them to have been placed there by
any nonnal means, since they were no larger than the leg it-
self, and this central leg terminated at its lowest extremity
in a tripod, three small legs branching off in various direc-
tions in order to support the table, and the upper end
fastened to the table-top. Both ends of the leg on which the
rings appeared were thus much larger than the rings them-
selves, and we should have to suppose, either that the rings
were split in some manner, in order to get them on to the
table-leg (which we know was not the case, as the rings were
examined after they were on the table-leg and found to be
soimd), or the top of the table must have been taken off and
the rings slipped on the table-leg, and the table-top replaced.
That this could not have been done at the stance is evident.
Tlie catgut at the conclusion of the stance was, needless to
say, mmus the two rings.

This is a very remarkable manifestation, from any point'


The Slade - Zollner Investigation 31

of view whatsoever. I have carefullj read the report of this
phenomenon, and am convinced that it could have been man*
aged by adroit trickery. I venture to suggest the following
explanati<m of what transpired on that memorable occasion,
— it appearing to me that this theory of the phenomenon
is not contradicted by the account, as it stands.

Slade had the opportunity of examining the two rings
prior to the stance at which they were *^ miraculously " passed
on to the taUe-leg, as above described. He had exact dupli-
caie$ made of these rings, and, at some convenient moment,
exchanged these for the originals — all this transpiring
before the stance was held, and possibly at some earlier time
on the very day of the stance. Slade now unscrewed the top
of the small table, and passed on to the leg the two original
rings* He then fastened the top of the small table in place
again. These two rings he now tied together by means of a
piece of black silk thread, fastening both rings, thus secured,
to the table-leg, immediaiely wider the top of the table, —
so thaty unless the sitter should deliberately stoop down and
look under the table, they would be invisible to him. To the
thread fastening the two rings together was also attached
a long thread (several feet in length), this being coiled up
and attached to the table-leg in some manner, so as to be
readily grasped by the hand, and arranged so that it would
unwind, as pulled.

Zollner would now have fastened the two dupUcaie rings
together by means of the catgut, and Slade could either have
abstracted these rings in the process of fastening the catgut
ends together, or have substituted another piece of catgut,
without rings, at some time during the course of the experi-
ment — say, when he was entertaining Professor Zollner with
clairvoyant visions of lights, etc. (p. 109).

It may be presumed, since there is no evidence to the con-
trary, that Slade himself placed the tables in position. When
placing the smaller table in position, then, he secretly gained
possession of the silk thread, and carried one end of it with
him to his seat. The stance then proceeded as described. At
the proper moment, Slade pulled the thread with a quick


32 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

jerk, breaking the thread passing around the two rings (that
which fastened them together, and to the under side of the
table-top), and allowing them to fall down on to the table-leg
itself — into the position described. When all eyes were
turned in the direction of the table, Slade would have had
an opportunity to pull away the black thread, — thus con-
cealing the last traces of the modui operandi.

Such a version of this experiment is, I suggest, most prob-
ably the right one. Zollner apparently never thought of ex-
amining the under side of the small table just before the
seance, when the rings were in position. He never thought,
in all probability, that the two rings he placed upon the
catgut were other than his own two rings, as he did not exam-
ine these at that time, either. He assumed that they were the
same, because he never thought of there being any others.
Slade could easily have manipulated the rings so as to make
them disappear, at some time during the stance. He would
not have ventured to allow Zollner to place his own rings on
the catgut, and place the duplicates on the table-leg, as he
knew that the critical examination of the rings would come
after the stance, when the rings were in place, on the table-
leg, and then substitutes would have been easily detected. He
accordingly adopted the bolder plan of substituting the rings
earlier in the stance, as suggested — this enabling the real
rings to be found on the table-leg, and trusting to chance
that Professor Zollner would not make too careful an exam-
ination of the rings just before the stance. This bolder
method was successful, — the result being a brilliant success,
as shown. I offer this explanation of the phenomenon, be-
lieving that it may possibly be the correct interpretation of
the puzzling facts narrated.

There are one or two facts which would seem to bear out
this interpretation of the case, more or less indirectly. The
records do this for one thing, though I cannot go through
them all here, for such confirmatory proofs. There is, oi
course, the presvmption that any such a test as that described
could not be possible — the passage of matter through mat-
ter, '' apports " — being scientifically almost unthinkablei


The Slade - ZoUner Investigation 33

though not quite so. There is the evidence, too, that all such
cases have hitherto been unable to withstand too exact a
scrutiny, as illustrated in the case of the medium Haxby,
who came before the S. P. R. with an iron ring upon his arm,
apparently too small for it to have been placed there by any
normal means.^ A close investigation showed, however, that,
by etherizing the hand, and rendering the patient insensible
for the time being, the ring could be made to pass on or off
the medium's arm — though the committee did not feel jus-
tified in conducting the experiment. The history of the sub-
ject gives us no similar case of the successful passage of
rings, etc., on to legs or arms, human or otherwise, that can-
not be explained as the result of fraud.

There is one very clever " test " that is sometimes per-
formed, which would seem to show that something of this sort
ii accomplished. It is, however, nothing more than an in-
genious trick, and this might be a good time to explain its
ntodus operandi. The general effect of the illusion is this:
The mediiun requests some one to assist him in an experiment
in which he is going to attempt to pass ^' matter through
matter." As the test is one in which a confederate might
easily be employed, he is very careful to choose some person
who is well known, or whose character is above all suspicion.
If this were not so, the entire effect of the test would be lost
upon the investigators. Having secured his assistant, he
hands him, for examination, a solid steel ring, just large
enough to slip on and off the hand and arm easily. The ring
is perfectly solid, and may be examined by any one desirous
of doing so. When this part of the performance is finished,
the medium and his sitter then join or clasp their right hands
(as in handshaking), and the sitter is instructed not to release
the hand for a single instant. To ^^ make assurance doubly
nire,'* however, the hands are fastened together in any way
the sitters may desire ; the hands being tied together with tape,
e, g.f and the ends of this tape tied and the knots sealed. The
tape ccmnects the wrists and the hands of the medium and
his sitter^ and this tying may be made as secure as possible.

^ Proceed%ng$, Vol. III., pp. 460^.


34 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

A piece of thick cloth is now thrown over the two hands and
the lower part of the arms, — concealing them from view.
With his disengaged hand, the medium now takes the iron
ring and passes it up under the cloth, so as to bring it in con-
tact with his own arm. He holds it there for some time,
but ultimately snatches off the covering cloth, and reveals to
the eyes of the astonished audience the ring — now encircling
his own arm — in spite of the fact that the ties are still in
statu quOy and the sitter never let go his hold for an instant.
The ties and the ring may again be examined, if desired, be-
fore the hands are separated.

This is an exceedingly effective test, and has every appear-
ance of being genuine — indeed, it is hard to see where trick-
ery can come in, and for this reason is far better (because
far more under the control of the sitters) than such a test
as that of Zollner's, discussed above. The trick is one of the
simplest imaginable, however, and is performed in the follow-
ing manner.

The medium has provided himself with two rings exactly
alike ; one of these the audience is free to examine, the other
the medium is wearing on his right arm, under his coat.
When the two hands are clasped together, therefore, it is
a simple thing for the medium, imder cover of the enveloping
cloth, to slip the duplicate ring down his sleeve, and on to his
own hand, and that part of the ** miracle " is accomplished !
It remains only to explain what becomes of the first ring.
The cloth thrown over the arms is very thick and stiff, as
stated, and the inner side of this contains a double partition,
or sort of bag, into which the medium slips the duplicate
ring. The cloth may now be shown on both sides, without
disclosing the ring, and the medium makes away with it as
soon as possible, in order to avoid detection.

It will be observed that, in the above test, duplicate rings
are employed ; the first being in place before the experiment
commences ; and it seems to me that a very similar explana-
tion might suffice to explain that most puzzling of all TSSSl-
ner's " tests." The presence of the duplicate ring is cer-
tainly never suspected in this case, — even when the sitters


The Slade - Zollner Investigation 35

are inore than ordinarily acute; and, that being the case,
it is surely not too much to suppose that 2K>Uner may have
been deceived by some very similar method.

I come, lastly, to a consideration of the most famous of all
the 2iolhier tests — the rope-tying experiments, in which
knots were apparently tied in a cord, the two ends of which
were sealed together very securely. Professor Zollner plac-
ing his signet on the knots in each case. These were the
experiments that caused Professor Zollner to conceive his
theory of space of four dimensions in order to account
for the knots appearing in these cords. Without considering
the theory, however, let us at once turn to the experiments,
and see whether they are of a probable fraudulent or genuine
character.

Zdllner thus describes the preparations of the cords for
his famous experiments. He took a hempen cord, tied the
ends together in an ordinary knot, fixed this knot to a piece
of paper with wax, sealing the wax carefully, and cutting
off the paper round the seal. The ends of the cord were
thus securdy fastened to the card, besides being tied and
sealed themselves. The account goes on (p. 42) :

^ The above described sealing of two such strings, with
my own seal, was effected by myself in my apartments, on
the evening of December 16th, 1877, at nine o'clock, under
the eyes of several of my friends and colleagues, and not in
the presence of Mr. Slade. Two other strings of the same
quality and dimensions were sealed by William Weber with
hit seal, and in his own rooms, on the morning of the 17th
of December, at 10.80 a. m. With these four cords I went
to the neighboring dwelling of one of my friends. . . . The
sdance in question took place in my friend's sitting-room
immediately after my arrival. I myself selected one of the
four sealed cords, and, in order never to lose sight of it,
bef(Nre we sat down at the table, I hung it around my neck, —
the seal in front always within my sight. During the stance,
as previously stated, I constantly kept the seal — remaining
unaltered — before me on the table. Mr. Slade's hands re-
mained all the time in sight; with the left he often touched


36 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

his forehead, complaining of painful sensations. The por*
tion of the string hanging rested on my lap, — out of my
sight, it is true, — but Mr. Slade's hands always remained
visible to me. I particularly noticed that Mr. Slade's hands
were not withdrawn or changed in position. He himself
appeared to be perfectly passive, so that we cannot advance
the assertion of his having tied these knots by his conscious
will, but only that they, under these detailed circumstances,
were formed in his presence without visible contact, and in
a room illuminated by bright daylight."

Such is the record. It is certainly remarkable that, under
the conditions named, four knots were formed in the cord
before this stance was concluded — knots such as could not
possibly have been tied unless the ends of the cord were free.
The test is, apparently, so perfect that it would seem almost
impossible, to show that it contained flaws of such a character
as to render the evidence quite valueless, from a scientific
point of view. Such, however, is the case, as it now becomes
necessary to show.

The possible methods that might have been made use of
by Slade, in obtaining knots in this manner (or at least
imder very similar conditions), will be described in detail
presently. For the moment, I desire only to draw attention
to the imperfections in the report itself, and point out
the loopholes and possibilities of fraud that Professor Zoll-
ner overlooked, in drawing up his report. The actual ex-
planations (if such they are, indeed) will come later. Let us
pave the way for such explanations, then, by a consideration
of the report, — thereby showing where such possible
methods of trickery as those suggested might, perhaps, have
been practised. This critical work has been done in such an
excellent manner in the quotations that follow that I cannot
do better than to give them to the reader verbatim. This
I do accordingly; after which discussion we shall probably
be in a better condition to consider the methods that might
actually have been employed in these famous stances. First,
then, there is the most imi)ortant criticism made by Mrs.


The Slade - Zollner Investigation 37

Sidgwick,^ viz., that Zollner omitted mention of certain most
important events that had happened, and which formed, in a
way, the clue to the mystery. Thus :

*^ • • . In describing the stance on December 17, 1877,
when he obtained four knots in a string of which the ends
were tied and sealed together, he omits to mention that the
experiment had been tried and failed before. We learn this
was so, accidentally as it were, from his mentioning it in
another place and in another connection,' where he tells us
that it was a long time before the spirits understood what
kind of knot was required of them, and that, before they
did so, he obtained knots, but not such as he wanted — knots,
I infer, which could be made by ordinary beings without
undoing the string. Now this fact obviously affects the value
of the experiment, for it makes it possible that Doctor Slade
may have prepared a string similar to Professor Zollner's
at home, and brought it with him, and, notwithstanding
Professor Zollner's watchfulness, have changed it." Mrs.
SidgwidL suggests that the time when trickery was most
probably employed was at the period of arranging the ropes
on the table — a very good guess, as we shall presently see.
For the present, I am, however, concerned with an examina-
tion of the defective nature of the record, and not with sug-
gestions of how the feats were actually performed. Let us
proceed with our examination of the evidence, therefore,
considering only the character of the record, as such.

Besides the above defects in* the account, then, Professor
Hyslop has pointed out eleven possible sources of error, —
any one of which would have facilitated fraud, while, taken
together, and in conjunction with the previous criticisms,
they leave hardly a shred of respectable evidence for super-
normal phenomena in these famous ZoUner-Slade experi-
ments, which have been paraded before the skeptical world for
these twenty years. I quote Professor Hyslop's criticisms
at length, as they seem to me very fine indeed.

•* (1) We should note the disproportionate amount of

• Proceeding$ S. P. /?., Vol. IV.. p. G6.
> Abhandlungen, Vol. II., p. 1191.


38 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

detail in the description of the preparations for the experi-
ment and in the experiment itself. This is the natural habit
of the physicist, who either imagines that the preparation is
the main thing, or leaves to others the verification of his
work. But the point where he should have shown the most
care and the most minute description was during the per-
formance. (2) He does not say anything whatever about
the history of the other three cords which he took with him.
We should know where they were put during the performance,
and what became of them. (S) We are not told anything
to show that he had compared the cord with the knots in it
after the stance with the cord as taken to Slade. It ought
to have been accurately measured after the performance to
see if any difference between it, then and before, could be
detected. In other words, iZollner should have assumed the
possibility of substituting one cord for another, which he
thought he had excluded. (4) He does not tell us whether
he examined the paper afterward on which the wax seals
were pasted. Whether a substitute cord was possible or not,
this examination should have been made, as an evidential
precaution. (6) He says nothing about any careful exam-
ination of the seals to show that they were identical with
those he had put on the knotted end of the cord. (6) He
does not say a word about the amount of time employed in
the experiment or the tying of the * fourth dimension knots.'
... (7) He does not give any details that went on between
the time of sitting down at the table and the final tying of
the knots. Here was a crucial moment when the most minute
account of the experiment should have been made. (8) He
does not say when the account of the experiment was written.
To give it value, it should have been from notes made on the
occasion and written out immediately afterward. (9)
Though very careful to give the dates on which the cords
were prepared, no care is taken to tell us when or on what
dates the experiment was performed. (10) We are not told
whether Slade touched or examined the cord in his own hands
or not (11) No indicaticm is given regarding the chances


The Slade - ZoUner Investigation 39

that Slade may have had to examine the friend's cord and to
be prepared for a reproduction of ZoUner's." ^

In addition to all the foregoing objections, I would pmnt
out the following sources of error, and examples of mal-
observation which practically invalidate the exi)eriments, so
far as scientific proof is concerned. (1) The experiments
were seldom those asked for, but usually one planned by Slade,
or one that happened spontaneously. (Zollner admits this
on p. 110.) This would seem to indicate that the tests
planned by ZoUner were too difficult for Slade, and he had
to get out of the difficulty by i)erforming others. (2) In
speaking of the slate-tests, where writing was obtained on
slates placed on a table, and untouched by Slade, he says:
** They (the slates) were laid on or close to the comer of the
card-table" (p. 60), without sajring who placed them there.
If Slade placed the slates in that position — as he very likely
did — then it should certainly have been so stated, for it is
highly probable that the opportunity for fraud occurred
just at that moment. In all stances of the kind, in all ac-
counts of any supernormal phenomena, in which a profes-
sional medium is engaged, it is quite useless to state that
** the slates were placed on the table," etc. — without saying
who placed them there. In reading over accounts of slate-
writing stances, it is very seldom that we find it specificaUy
stated who performed each action, though this is the very
crux of the whole case. This same lack of observation of
important details is observed in Professor Wagner's Report
(p. 181). (S) Slade was often allowed to suggest the ex-
periments that were to be tried himself (p. 61). He would
doubtless have suggested tests for which he was amply pre-
pared. (4r) Slade frequently diverted the sitter's attention
from the real issue by turning aside either to try some other
experiment (p. 66), or by diverting the sitter's attention by
such devices as clairvoyant visions, etc. (p. 109). (6) The
sitters followed the direction of " the spirits," when told,
e. g.y to leave the slates on the table for four stances (p.
181), though this obviously is absurd, in the case of a me-

* Borderland of Psychical Research, pp. 235-7.


40 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

dium like Slade. It deprives the writing obtained ultimately
of all evidential value.

In addition to the foregoing objections, there are the very
grave ones made by the Seybert Commission, printed in their
Report, pp. 104-14. Finding their own evidence so nega-
tive, yet impressed, to a certain, ney^tent, with Zollner's book,
Transcendental Physics, the members of the commission were
uncertain what course to pursue with regard to this inves-
tigation, when they received a detailed account from one of
their number, Mr. George S. Fullerton, of personal inter-
views with the four professors who endorsed Slade's phenom-
ena — Zollner, Fechner, Scheibner, and Weber. This
account clearly shows that both Fechner and Scheibner were
partially blind at the time, and depended more on what Zoll-
ner told them was taking place than on what they could see
for themselves; while Weber was, in many ways, an incom-
petent witness of such phenomena. As to Zollner, the chief
narrator, it was foimd that he was of slightly unsound mind
(though all his associates admitted that this did not impair
his capacity as an investigator or observer) ; that he was bent
on proving his theory of space of four dimensions ; that he
was, in many ways, an incautious observer and believer ; and,
lastly, and by far the most important point of all, is the
fact that neither he nor any of his three colleagues knew any-
thing whatever of conjuring or the possibilities of deception.
With such a mass of evidence against him, it seems unneces-
sary to insist upon the fact that the testimony of such an
observer is practically valueless, so far as it is intended to
prove the supernormal character of facts such as these.

It may be replied to all this that we have the evidence of
Bellachini, court conjurer, that the phenomena observed in
Slade's presence were not due to trickery, or explainable by
any of the devices known to conjurers (pp. 218-4). This
evidence does not weigh very heavily against the more posi-
tive testimony, however, for several reasons. In the first
place, very little was known in those days of the tricks of
mediums, even by conjurers themselves. It is only of
late years that the information has leaked out and become


The Slade - Zollner Investigation 41

more or less public property. Then, too, we learn that
Bellachini was (at that time, at least) entirely ignorant of
the methods of fraudulent mediums.^ Many conjurers were
and are entirely ignorant of the methods employed by fraud-
ulent mediums, and, as Mr. Davey pointed out,* m this pat'
ticvlar branch of investigaiion they are often no more in-
formed than the ordinary person — or were, as this is not
true^ nowadays. We must remember, finally, that both
Robert Houdin and Harry Kellar were convinced that
the spiritualistic performances they witnessed were genuine,
though both, afterward, retracted their opinions and even
succeeded in duplicating the medium's performance by
fraudulent means ! Kellar's ^^ Open Letter," stating that he
could not account for the manifestations observed at a
stance (Eglinton being the medium), is to be found in
Psychic Notes, Calcutta, February 10th, 1882. Houdin's
statement is in Mahaima, Vol. I., No. 6, August, 1896.

It is hardly necessary to review, further, the historical evi-
dence in the case of Zollner, as it has already been shown to
be open to so many objections that further proof is unneces-
sary. I shall, accordingly, turn to the discussion of the
probable actual methods that Slade employed in procuring
the knots on the endless cord, and discuss, incidentally, several
diethods of obtaining such knots in ropes, which may be of
interest in the present connection.

I think we need have no hesitation in asserting that the
method Slade followed, in producing the knots in the cords
that were sealed by Zollner and brought by him to the stance,
was the following, which can be very easily done, pro-
vided the sitters are not too sharp-witted and acute, as we
are tolerably sure Zollner was not! We know that Slade
had the opportunity to examine the ropes before the stance,
since (although Zollner omitted to mention this fact in his
Transcendental Physics) the experiment had been previously
tried and had failed {v. p. 87). Slade, then, knew the char-
acter of the experiment that was to be tried, and had every

* V, Round the Wcdd with a Magician and a Juggler, p. 168.
> Proceedings 8. P. R., VoL IV., p. 411.


42 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

opportunity to examine the length, character, etc., of the
rope used for the experiment, and to duplicate it in the in-
terval. He had also, beyond doubt, the opportunity to have
made a duplicate seal^ — exeu;tly similar to Zollner's own, —
and to seal up the ends of the cords after having tied them in
the same manner as the original cords were tied. He now had
a duplicate set of cords, exactly similar to those of ZoU-
ner's. Just before the stance, Slade secreted in his right
sleeve one of these duplicate cords, so arranged that the
seal came just within his cuff, and could be readily reached
by the fingers of either hand at the opportune moment. On
this cord there were, of course, the four knots, already tied,
this having been done before the ends of the cord were
sealed.

Now, when the seal and ends of the cord were being ar-
ranged on the table, Slade extracted the duplicate seal from
his right sleeve, and placed it on the table, at the same mo*
ment covering the seal of the original cord with one of his
hands — " palming " it, in fact — so that we now have the
trick half-accomplished ; the seal having been exchanged for
that on Slade's own cord, and that being the one now in
sight, while the loop of the rope still visible was the original
of Professor ZoUner's — Slade's being still secreted in his
sleeve (see Fig. 1, p. 44). Slade now gathered up the cord
into a bundle, preparatory to handing it to ZoUner, and, at
the same time, he gradually pulled his right arm backward,
thereby extracting the duplicate cord which was hidden in
his sleeve, until this was all extracted, and in his hands. It
now became merely a question of secreting the original cord
of Professor ZoUner's, for it would have been impossible to
have distinguished the fact that there were two cords rolled
up together, the tangled mass rendering this quite im-
possible. Slade now had both cords in his hand, therefore,
and he let his hand sink below the surface of the table for the
fraction of a second, in handing the cord to Professor ZoU-
ner, allowing the original cord, in that instant, to drop into
his lap, where it was at once seized upon by the disengaged
hand and thrust into a convenient pocket. Zollner now had,


The Slade - Zollner Investigation 43

in his hands, the cord on which were the four knots, and the
trick was virtually done. Slade had to prevent Z5llner from
discovering this fact, however, and assisted Professor Zollner
in arranging the cord around his neck — a courtesy that
ZoUner doubtless gracefully accepted. Slade saw to it, in
this arrangement, that, while the seal rested on the table, in
full sight of all, the portion of the rope containing the knots
fell under the edge of the table — that part of the loop
which Zollner admits was not within his sight. It was on
this portion of the cord that the knots were found, it must
be remembered — also that four knots were formed, instead
of only one, as requested (p. 41). It is obvious that the
trick is now done — all that remained for Slade to do was to
triumphantly disclose the knots at the proper moment.

All that we have to assume, in order to accept this explana-
tion of the facts as the true one, is that there was a very
slight amount of malobservation and lack of memory present
on the part of the recorder of the stance, and, in view of the
evidence printed above, it will surely not be difficult to assume
that such was, in fact, the case. Whether the above explana-
tion of the facts is the true one or not, of course I cannot
say; but there is nothing in the evidence which would pro-
hibit us from thinking that such is the case, and I accord-
ingly offer this explanation to my readers as a possible way
out of the difficulty.

I shall now give one or two methods of obtaining knots in
cords by other means than those described above, but which
wiU be of especial interest to us as illustrating the possibili-
ties of fraud in this connection. The first of these ^^ tests "
is very similar to that of ZoUner's, except that the rope is,
in this case, geaUH to the table-top. The two ends of the rope
are laid on the table, and sealing-wax applied in the usual
manner. It may be sealed, if desired, as in Zollner's experi-
ment. The lights are now lowered for a few moments, at the
end of which period they are again turned up, and, lo and
behold! the rope contains two, three or more knots, though
the seals <m the table are undisturbed and unbroken. This


44 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

is a very clever test and is worked in practically the same
manner as the last one. The medium has, secreted up his
sleeve, a duplicate cord, and, when the two ends of the rope
are placed upon the table to be waxed over, he substitutes the
two ends of his own cord for those of his sitter, and these
are the ends that are sealed to the table^top. The loop of the
skeptic's cord is hanging down in full sight of the sitters
(the ends being concealed by the medium's hand, which is
holding the other rope to the table), while the rope contain-
ing the knots is quietly reposing in his sleeve. When the
lights are turned down, therefore, all the medium has to do
is to pull out the hidden cord from his sleeve, allowing it to
fall into its natural position, and hide the duplicate cord in his
pocket. The cord, seals, etc., may now be examined to the
sitters' hearts' content — since they have not, in reality, been
tampered with in any way.

There is a clever test, in which a number of knots are
obtained in a cord which has just been coiled up before the
sitters' eyes, — after having been examined and found to be
free from preparation. The medium takes the rope, coils
it up, gives the two ends of the rope to some sitter to knot
and seal in any manner he may see fit — he being allowed to
take the rope into his own possession in order to do this, if
desired. There is no trickery about the knotting and sealing
of the ends of the cord, since this is done altogether by the
sitters themselves ; and it would be impossible for the medium
to substitute another cord, in this instance, since the cord
may be marked in any way desired. The lights are lowered,
while the medium holds the rope in his hands, and, though
they are only extinguished for a few seconds^ nevertheless,
when the room is again illuminated, the cord is found to con-
tain a number of genuine knots, the seals still being intact,
and the rope the same one knotted by the sitters, as an
examination will show. This test is very mystifying, and is,
in many respects, far superior to the test that ZoUner wit-
nessed through the mediumship of Slade.

In this case, the trick consists almost entirely in the method
of coiling the rope. The cord is not exchanged, and the


^


•f c


f.


i t


Y'


■ii


The Slade - ZoUner Investigation 45

seals are not unfastened. It is not necessary. The medium
takes the cord in his right hand at a distance of about one
foot from the end, in the manner shown in Fig. II. The left
hand now takes up a loop of the rope in the manner shown
in Fig. III.9 and passes this over the hand as shown in Fig.
rV. He does this with every loop made, and it will now be
found that, at the conclusion of the coiling, when the end
of the rope is reached, if the original end, first held in the
hand, be passed through all the loops, as shown in Fig. Y., the
effect will be to tie as many knots in the rope as there were
loops made. The trick is already done, for all the medium
had to do, under cover of the darkness, was to pull out the
rope to its full extent — thereby knotting it — and coil
it up again as it was before. This might even be done under
the table in full light, if desired. The success depends al-
together on the air of ease and naturalness with which the
medium performs every action, and his impressing upon the
sitters that the important part of the test does not commence
until the sealing is begun, — when the experiment apparently
begins. In reality, that is where it ends, for the trick is
already done!

There is another ingenious test in which knots are obtained
in a cord that is attached to the wrists of two of the sitters —
being sealed on to them, if desired. Each end of the cord is
securely tied to the wrist of some sitter, and sealed. The two
sitters are now requested to stand up at some distance from
one another, while the lights are lowered. The rope is quite
long, in this case, and is coiled up in a heap, and placed be-
tween the sitters, on the floor of the sdance-room. When the
lights are again turned up, there are several knots on the
rope, though the sitters declare that the ends of the rope
have remained firmly fastened to their wrists throughout.

This **test" is worked in the following manner. When
the lights are extinguished, the medium picks up the coil of
rope, and holds it in his right hand. Going up to one of his
two sitters, he now slips it over his head^ and allows it to drop
to the floor, — all unknown to the sitter, as the medium has
taken special pains to see that the rope did not touch him


46 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

in Its passage to the floor (v. Fig. VI. )• The medium now
requests this sitter to change his position a few feet, and
guides him to some place where he wiU be free from the ropes.
It will now be seen that the whole body of one of the sitters has
passed through the loops of the rope, and there are, accord-
ingly, a number of knots formed in the rope — the number
depending on the number of coils made in it. As in all
other cases, the trick is done under the sitters' noses, and
in a manner which they would in no wise suspect.

There is a method of obtaining a knot in a short, single
piece of rope, which the medium merely tosses into the empty
cabinet with one hand. When picked up, however, some sec-
onds later, it is found to contain a knot loosely tied in the
middle of the cord. This is done in the following manner,
by the medium himself. The trick is performed in the act of
throwing the rope into the cabinet. The medium takes hold
of the rope near one of its ends, the rope passing across the
palm of the hand. The long end of the rope is allowed to
hang down, the short end being grasped between the thumb
and the finger of the hand. The hand and arm are now
given a kind of circular sweep, this causing the long or lower
portion of the rope to swing under, then over, the wrist, and
across the fingers of the hand. This end is then seized be-
tween the fingers and drawn through the loop just made;
at the same time the loop is dropped off the wrist as the rope
is tossed into the cabinet. This all becomes one quick action,
after a little practice — I myself have performed it in such
a manner that a close observer could scarcely detect the
action on my part, though knowing the secret of the trick,
and what to look for.

I conclude this chapter by giving a very clever test,
described by Robinson, in his Spirit Slate Writing, pp. 84-5,
in which a knot is made to diseLppear from the centre of a
piece of string, where it is tied, the ends of the string being
sealed together.

" A single knot is tied in the centre of a piece of string ;
now the ends are tied together and the knots sealed. The
lights are turned down ; on their again being turned up, the


^,_ - ■ ,


■%'


1^1


Fig. 6


V ■


The Slade - ZoUner Investigation 47

knot in the centre of the cord has disappeared. The mo-
ment there was darkness, the medium started to work, and
kept slipping the knot along the string until it joined the
rest at the top of the string, where there is not much fear
of its being seen. To further protect himself he uses the
following plan: He chews gum colored the same as the seal-
ing-wax used. Now, in the dark, when he has the single knot
up against the others, at the end of the string, he covers this
knot with part of the chewing gum, and blends it with the
sealing-wax.'^


CHAPTER in

THE FSYCHOLOOY OF DECEPTION

There is so much to be said in connection with this question
of the " psychology of deception," that the present chapter
will have to be merely a brief resum^ of the subject, indicating
the most important points to bear in mind relative to the par-
ticular phase of the subject we are considering — the psy-
chology of conjuring deceptions and fraudulent mediumistic
tricks. The object is to enable the reader to see, more easily,
how it is that the watchful observer is deceived into believing
that a thing is so, when in reality it is not, and vice versa;
and also to give an idea of the various methods employed by
the medium in order to accomplish his results.

I must first of all call the reader's attention to one or two
rules which every conjurer learns at the commencement of
his study, and which he learns to apply so constantly that
it becomes second nature to him. The first is : never let the
eyes rest on the hand that is performing the " sleight," but
always on the other hand, or on some object on the table or
elsewhere, as this will have a tendency to draw the eyes of
the audience to that point also. The sitters or audience
will always look at the point closely watched by the magician,
— their eyes have a tendency to follow his, and wherever
he looks, there will the onlooker look also. Needless to say,
the magician makes use of this fact, and many tricks and illu-
sions are dependent up<»i it for their successful accomplish-
ment. Whenever the magician or medium looks intently at
one hand, therefore, the other hand should be watched, as it
is a sure sign that that is the hand which is performing the

trick.

48


The Psychology of Deception 49

Another fundamental rule that is observed by all sleight-
of-hand performers is : never to let an audience know before-
hand what is to be done ; i. e,y the nature of the trick that it
is intended to perform. If the spectator knew what was
forthcoming, he would be on the lookout for movements of
the performer at certain critical times, — just at the periods
when close observation \& least wanted, — and would quite pos-
sibly detect the performer in the act of executing certain
movements which would show how the trick was performed.
But not knowing what is coming, the spectator is unable to
watch closely at the critical moment — not knowing what
that moment is — and so is unable to detect the trick, his at-
tention being diverted by the performer, just before this
movement is made, to some other object or movement.

The methods of diverting the spectator's attention are
various* There is the use of the eyes, as before shown. Then
there is the spoken word, the performer telling the onlookers
to observe some certain object or action, and the effect is to
cause them to watch it, as they are told. They follow the
line of least resistance. The combined effect upon the spec-
tator of the spoken word and the eyes together is generally
irresistible.

Another important factor is this. A performer should
always let any suggesticm, right or wrong, soak well into the
spectator's mind before attempting to change it. This is
for two reasons. In the first place, if the suggestion is cor-
rect, if, €• g.i the performer really does place an object in his
left hand, and it is shortly found to have vanished from that
hand, he is annoyed by hearing some one say that he was not
really sure it was there in the first place, as ^^ it was covered
up so quickly." If, on the other hand, the suggestion given
was a false one, if, e. g.^ the performer says he has placed
an object in his left hand, when, in reality, he has not done
so but has palmed it in the right, then it is still necessary to
allow a certain time-interval to elapse between the performing
of the action which apparently placed the object in the hand,
and the showing of the hand empty, for this reason. If the
hand into which the object is supposedly placed is immedi-


50 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

ately shown empty, the natural conclusion of the sitter is that
the object was not in reality placed there at all, but was re-
tained in the other hand, which would be the fact. If, how-
ever, the performer allowed some time to elapse, between the
action of placing the object in that hand (supposedly) and
the showing of the hand empty, he, meanwhile, keeping his
eyes fixed on the hand, suggesting to the sitters that the
object is there, and in every way acting as if it were there»
the idea will gradually gain a firm hold on the minds of the
spectators that the object is there, in reality, and they are
correspondingly surprised to find it ultimately vanished. It
is just such a knowledge of ^ the way people's minds work,"
as a friend onoe said to me, which enables the conjurer to
deceive the public ; and it is precisely the same cast of mind
that the medium possesses. He is, in fact, a good judge of
human nature.

Another fact that must be borne in mind is that, when
once a spectator has seen a movement made two or three
times in the same manner, he frequently " sees *• the per-
former make that movement on another occasicm, when the
performer had, in reality, only started to make the move-
ment, and suggested the rest. Thus, if the performer throws
a ball up into the air two or three times in succession, and
on the fourth occasion merely pretends to throw it up, really
retaining it in the other hand, the great majority of the
spectators will really ** see " the ball ascend into the air on
the fourth occasion, and will so state, on being asked. We
here depend upon association and habit.^

Professor Jastrow summed up this portion of the psychol-
ogy of deception very well when he said : *

" He (the conjurer) must dissociate the natural factors
of his habits, actually attending to one thing while seemingly
attending to another ; at the same time his eyes and his ges-
tures and his * patter ' misdirect the attention to what is
apparently the essential field of operation, but really only

* A very simOar illusion is mentioned by Professor Hyslop, v. Border^
land of PsyMoal Reaearchf pp. 228-9, in which pellets were apparently
placed in a box, really bein^ palmed in the medium's hand.

' Fad and Fable in Psychology, pp. 124-5.


The Psychology of Deception 51

a blind to distract attention away from the true scene of
action. The conjurer directs your attention to what he does
not do ; he does not do what he pretends to do ; and to what
he actually does, he is careful neither to appear to direct his
own attention nor to arouse yours."

Prof. Max Dess<Hr, in a very fine article on ^The
Psychology of Conjuring," writes as follows: ** By awaken-
ing interest in same unimportant detail, the conjurer con-
centrates that attention on some false point, or negatively,
diverts it from the main object, and we all know the senses
of an inattentive person are pretty dull. . . . When causing
the disappearance of some object, the conjurer counts one,
two, three; the object must really disappear before three,
not at three, because, the attention of the public being di-
verted to three, they do not notice what happens at one and
two. ... A specially successful method of diversion is
founded on the human craze for imitation. . . . The con-
jurer counts on this in many cases. He always looks in the
direction where he wants the attention of the public, and
does everything himself which he wants the public to do.
. . . If the trick is in the left hand, the conjurer turns
sharply to the person to his right, presuming correctly that
the spectators will make the same movement, and wiU not
notice what is going on in the left hand. . . . Every sharp,
short remark will, for a moment, at least, divert the eyes
from the hands and direct them to the mouth, according to
the above mentioned law of imitaticm."

The successful conjurer has carefully studied beforehand
every movement that is made, — every word that is spoken,
— during a conjuring performance, and has seen that these
all fit naturally into place, and help conceal the real workings
of the trick. The right and left hands must be trained to
operate independently, and without the need of looking at
either. Many conjurers practise doing two separate things
at the same time, one with either hand; and the ability to
do this is essential. Above all, the performer must be full
of conscious self-possession, and feel himself to be master


52 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

of the situation, no less than to feel the ability to cope
any emergencies that may arise.

Turning, now, to a consideration of the stance, we find
that many of these psychological rules still hold good, and
their operation enables the medium to perform many actions
which would otherwise be impossible. A certain suggestimi
is given to the sitters, and imagination and inference do the
rest. *^ Our conclusions as to what we see or hear are always
founded on a combination of observation and inference ; but
in daily life it is seldom necessary to distinguish between the
two elements, since, when the object and its mode of presenta-
tion are familiar, our inferences are generally correct. But
it is different when, owing to circumstances, such as a bad
light, we have to infer more in proportion to what we per-
ceive than usual; or when some one, e. g,, a conjurer or a
ventriloquist, is trying to deceive us by presenting one object
under the familiar aspect of another, and suggesting false
inferences. It is not uncommon to find people at stances
encouraging each other in the belief that they see, say, a
living human figure, when aU that they actually tee is some-
thing moving which is about the size of a human being; the
rest is inference." * How true these last remarks are is
demonstrated by the statement, made in The Revelations of
a Spirit Medium (p. 92), that an old wire mask frequently
used at materializing stances had been recognized ^ by dozens
of persons as fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, cousins,
sweethearts, wives, husbands, and various other relatives and
friends. None but the medium knew that it was only a fifty-
cent wire mask, hence none but the medium could enjoy the
humor of the occasion."

One of the most instructive incidents I know, in relation
to this question of the psychology of deception, is the one
given by Doctor Hodgson,^ — the case of the officer and the
Hindu juggler. In this case, a trick was performed before
an English officer and his wife, and Doctor Hodgson hap-
pened to overhear this officer telling some travellers of the

* Proceedings S, P, R., Vol. IV., p. 63.
» Proceedings S, P. R., Vol. IV., pp. 385-6.


The Psychology of Deception 53

experience at dinner that evening. ^* Referring to the move-
ments of the coins, he said that he had taken a coin from
his own pocket and placed it on the ground himself, yet that
this coin had indulged in the same freaks as the other coins.
His wife ventured to suggest that the juggler had taken the
coin and placed it on the ground, but the oflScer was emphatic
in repeating his statement, and appealed to me for confirma-
tion. He was, however, mistaken. I had watched the trans-
action with special curiosity, as I knew what was necessary
for the performance of the trick. The officer had apparently
intended to place the coin upon the ground himself, but as
he was doing so, the juggler leant slightly forward, dexter-
ously and in a most unobtrusive manner received the coin
from the fingers of the officer, as the latter was stooping
down, and laid it close to the others. If the juggler had not
thus taken the coin, but had aUowed the officer himself to
place it on the ground, the trick, as actually performed,
would have been frustrated.

^ Now I think it highly improbable that the movement of
the juggler entirely escaped the perception of the officer;
hi^hlj improbable, that is to say, that the officer was abso-
lutely unaware of the juggler's action at the moment of its
happening ; but I suppose that, although an impression was
made <m his consciousness, it was so slight as to be speedily
effaced by the officer's imaginatian of himself as stooping
and placing the coin upon the ground. The officer, I may
say, had obtained no insight into the modus operandi of the
trick, and his fundamental misrepresentation of the only
patent occurrence that might have given him a clue to its
performance debarred him completely from afterward, in
reflection, arriving at any explanation. Just similarly, many
an honest witness may have described himself as having
placed one^slate upon another at a sitting with a medium,
whereas' it was the medium who did so, and who possibly
effected at the same time one or two other operations alto-
gether unnoticed by the witness."

In reading through descriptions of slate-writing stances,
we veiy seldom find the statement made as to who placed the


54 The Physical Fhen(Hnena of Spiritualima

slates on the table, or under the table, etc., generally the
account reading *^ the slates were then placed on the table,"
without any qualifying statement as to who placed them
there. Accounts of this kind are absolutely worthless, from
an evidential standpoint. We must at once ask ourselves:
who placed the slates in that position? and if it was the
medium, — as it probably was in the vast majority of in-
stances, — then that test, in all probability, ceases to have
any evidential weight. Any one can read over a number of
accounts of slate-writing performances, and verify these
statements, if he chooses to do so. Frequently, the state-
ment is made that the sitter did actually place the slate on
the table, when in reality the medium did so. Thb error is
quite unconscious cm the sitter's part, of course, but the
account is falsified, nevertheless. Mistakes of this kind are
very common, the sitter thinking afterward that he (the
sitter) must have placed the slates on the table himself!

It will be seen from the above that there is a great differ-
ence between what actually transpired, at any given stance,
and what the accounts $ay transpired. The general public
cannot get that all-important fact too strongly rooted in
its mind: that the events which transpired at a stance
may not be reported accurately, so that the report of the
stance may be altogether wrong and erroneous, though the
sitters, and those who drew up the report, may have been
thoroughly honest in their belief that the report is accurate
in every respect. The effect of all this is very great indeed.
Many spiritualistic stances are quite inexplicable at described^
but the description is not a true report of what took place
at the stance in question. The facts are distorted. Conse-
quently, the person taking it upon himself to explain what
took place at the stance is called upon to explain a num-
ber of things which, in reality, never took place at all. We
must remember, in this connection, that a number of conjur-
ing tricks, as described^ would be quite impossible to explain
by any process of trickery. The description of the trick
was not correct.

Let me make this still clearer, and at the same time illus-


The Psychology of Deception 56

trate the difference between what apparently occurs, and
what actually happens, by the following example. A con-
jurer places a coin (say a quarter) in each hand, and closes
his hands. Another quarter is now placed upon the fingers
of each hand, so that there is now one quarter in each hand
and one quarter on the fingers of each. The magician
announces that, by simply opening and closing his hands, —
which are held at some distance from each other, — he will
thereby transfer one of the coins from one hand to the other,
so that there will be three coins in one of the hands, and omlj
one left in the other.

Now, if the sitter were writing out an account of what
happened, it would most certainly read as follows :

" The magician then tried the experiment, — of opening
and closing his hands rapidly, and causing the coin to be
transferred, as promised, — but failed in the attempt, the
coins from the back of each hand falling on to the table in
rather a clumsy manner. They were, however, again placed
upcm the backs of the magician's hands ; the movement was
repeated, and this time successfully. The coins disappeared
from the backs of both hands, in one of which was now found
three of the coins, while the other hand contained only one.'*

Such is precisely the description of the trick, as it would
be given by the average person, on seeing it, and it would
represent his honest opinion of what occurred ; as it stands,
it is quite inexplicable by trickery. Needless to say, the ac-
count is not a true statement of what actually occurred, as
the following explanation will make clear.

The first time the coins were dropped on to the table, the
movement was not so ^ clumsy " as might have been sup-
posed. It was, in fact, intentional, being the principal factor
in the accomplishment of the trick. What actually trans-
pired at that time was this. The magician, by a quick move-
ment, dropped both coins from one hand on to the table, at
the same time dexterously opening the other hand a trifle,
and allowing the second coin, on that hand, to fall into the
interior of the hand itself. Thus, while both hands are still
seen to be dosed, one is empty, and the other contains two


56 The Physical Fben(Hnena of Spiritualism

coins. It is obvious, therefore, that, when a coin is placed
upon each of the hands again, the magician has only to
repeat the opening and closing movement, and there will be
three coins in one of the hands, and only one in the other.

This trick illustrates, in a very simple and striking manner,
the possibility of reporting a fact in an entirely erroneous
manner, quite unconscious of the fact that this error in re-
porting has been committed. Just in this same manner, are
many slate-writing and other phenomena misreported, and
hence an explanation of the seance, as reported^ rendered
impossible. The trouble is that the ** report " does not really
report what actually occurred.

Thus, to revert to the famous Davey-Hodgson stances,
mentioned on pp. 87-90, it must be borne in mind that many
of the effects there witnessed would be absolutely inexplicable
by trickery, provided the accounts were accurate. Yet we
know that these slate-writing stances were the result of
fraud throughout. " Writing between the conjurer's own
slates, in a way quite inexplicable to the conjurer; writing
upon slates locked and carefully guarded by witnesses ; writ-
ing upon slates held by the witnesses firmly against the under
surface of the table; writing upon slates held by the wit-
nesses above the table; answers to questions written secretly
in locked slates ; correct quotations appearing upon guarded
slates from books chosen by the witnesses at random, and
sometimes mentally, the books not touched by the medium;
writing in different colors mentally chosen by the witnesses,
covering the whole side of one of their own slates ; messages
in languages unknown to the medium, including a message
in German, for which only a mental request had been
made, and a letter in Japanese, in a double slate locked
and sealed by the witness; the date of a coin placed by
the witness in a sealed envelope correctly written in a locked
slate upon the table, the envelope remaining intact; a word
written between slates screwed together and also corded and
sealed together, the word being chosen by the witness, after
the slates were fastened by himself, etc. And yet, though
* autographic ' fragments of pencil were ^ heard ' weav-


The Psychology of Deception 67

ing mysterious messages between and under and over slates,
and fragments of chalk were seen moving about under a
tumbler placed above the table in full view, none of the sit-
ters witnessed that best phenomenon, — Mr. Daoey writ'
mg.

Doctor Hodgson pointed out four factors that were opera-
tive in vitiating practically all reports of slate-writing phe-
nomena, these faults being found in practicaUy all the
reports examined. They were omissicm, substitution, trans-
position, and interpolation. He says : ^

^* Suppose that we are considering the testimony of the
witness to his own separate and complete examination of a
slate immediately previous to the apparent production of
writing. Then, according to what I have been saying, we
have, with a perfectly bana-fide witness, four possibilities to
consider, besides the one that his impression is correct. It
may actually be that no examination at all was made by the
witness (interpolation) ; it may be that, although made, the
examination was not made in the perfect manner now de-
scribed (substitution) ; it may be that the examination, al-
though faultless and made at the sitting, was not made on
the occasion alleged (transposition) ; or it may be that, al-
though the examination was made as described, and on the
occasion aUeged, events, perhaps unnoticed or regarded by
the witness as insignificant, intervened between the examina-
tion and the apparent production of the writing (omission)."

Many of my readers may feel somewhat insulted at this
accusation that they cannot detect such obvious trickery
when it exists, and that they are liable to make such mistakes
in recording a stance as those here mentioned. They may
comfort themselves with the thought, however, that it is no
disgrace to make mistakes and errors of this kind; for, as
Professor Jastrow pointed out : *

^ The matter is in some aspects as much a technical ac-
quisition as in the diagnosticating of a disease. It is not at
all to the discredit of any one's powers of observation or

> Proceedinff$ 8. P. R., Vol. IV., pp. 388-9.
*Fact and F<Me in Ptychohgy, p. 148.


58 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualisin

intellectual acumen to be deceived by the performances of
a conjurer; and the same holds true of the professional part
of mediumistic phenomena. Until this homely but salutary
truth is impressed with all its importance upon all intending
investigators, there is little hope of bringing about a proper
attitude toward these and kindred phenomena.''

It must be remembered that the observer, at a spiritualistic
stance, is not im a normal state of mind, but is in a condition
of more or less suppressed excitement, induced by the condi-
tions of the seance itself. It is only natural that it should be
so. There is a certain mysterious atmosphere about a stance
— and particularly a dark stance — calculated to disturb
the nerves of the most hardened. The darkness, the intense
expectancy that something will happen, we cannot say what,
the quiet, the playing upon the emotions — it is all calculated
to take the sitter out of his workaday world into another,
and, to just that extent, render him an uncritical judge of
what transpires, and incapable of detecting what fraud the
medium may be disposed to offer in the name of spiritualism.
Needless to say, therefore, this attitude of mind makes it easy
for the medium to entrap his sitters, and to impose upon
their credulity to a far greater extent than would be the case
were they in possession of their full critical faculties. To
just that extent, therefore, the medium has an advantage
over the conjurer, since, in the latter case, the spectators
already know that the effects they see are merely the result
of fraud, and come prepared to detect the trick. In the
case of the medium, on the other hand, the sitters are not
assured that the effects they see are the results of trickery ;
they may be the results of some genuine supernormal power.
The very possibility of the fact that it " may be '* the latter
puts them off their guard, to a certain degree, and so renders
the task of the medium so much the lighter.* Just as the ob-
server, of old, was awed by beholding some phenomenon, pro-
duced in the presence of the necromancer, so is the modem

* " A medium of experience can always outwit a looker-on, even more
than a conjurer, because a conjurer would not be aOowed to play the antics
which we can." — Confessions of a Medium, p. 139.


The Psychology of Deception 59

Investigator similarly awed by the production of phenomena
produced in the presence of a medium.

An example of the effect of this mental attitude is found
in the following passage, which is an account of a material-
izing stance, and what took place there. *^ We cannot doubt
that many a spiritualist has found his convictions confirmed
at some stance by displays of the most paltry impostures,
who would, had he attended the s&nce under the assurance
that he was about to witness a conjuring performance, have
detected the modus operandi instantly. I may give an in-
stance which came under my own observation. At a mate-
rialization siance given by Firman, at which I was present, a
supposed ^ spirit form ' appeared, draped in a semi-trans-
parent flowing robe, so transparent, in fact, that Firman's
bare arm was visible behind it, waving it to and fro. When
the figure retired to the cabinet, the door was closed upon a
portion of the robe. The door opened again slightly, and
the end of the robe was drawn into the cabinet. Most of
the sitters perceived this clearly, but one, a * believer,' averred
conscientiously that the fabric was not withdrawn, and that
he saw it slowly melt away." *

If these defects are to be found in the individual observer,
they are to be found more strongly developed in a crowd,
as such, whose opinion is always worth far less than the
opinion of each individual in that crowd. 6. Le Bon showed
this very clearly, in his remarkable work. The Crowd: A
Study of the Popular Mind. Here he says :

^A crowd, perpetually hovering on the borderland of
unconsciousness, readily yielding to all suggestions, having
all the violence of feeling pectdiar to beings who cannot ap-
peal to the influence of reason, deprived of all critical faculty,
cannot be otherwise than excessively credulous. The im-
probable does not exist for a crowd, and it is necessary to
bear this circumstance well in mind to understand the facility
with which are created and propagated the most improbable
legends and stories. ... It is not necessary that a crowd
should be numerous for the faculty of seeing what is taking

« ProeeedUigs S. P. R., Vol. IV., pp. 38^90.


60 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

place before its eyes to be destroyed, and for the real facts
to be replaced by hallucinations unrelated to them. As soon
as a few individuals are gathered together they constitute
a crowd, and, though they should be distinguished men of
learning, they assume all the characteristics of crowds with
regards to matters outside their specialty. The faculty of
observation and the critical spirit possessed by each of them
individually at once disappears. ... In the collective mind
the intellectual aptitude of the individuals, and in consequence
their individuality, are weakened. . . . The characteristics
of the reasoning of crowds are the association of dissimilar
things possessing a merely apparent connection between each
other, and the immediate generalization of particular cases.''
See also, in this connection, the chapter on *^ The Atmosphere
of Assemblies," on pp. 48-9 of Ptychic Studies^ by Franklin
Jc^nson.

These remarks will make it clear to us why many men of
science have been deceived by very simple tricks and fraudu-
lent devices, while investigating spiritualistic phenomena —
their scientific culture is no guarantee that they are any
more capable of detecting fraud than is the man-in-the-street,
— in fact their training has made them very much leas capa-
ble of detecting fraud than the average person, who comes
more in contact with the world, and is an acuter judge of
character and human nature. Unless the other qualifications
of a man of science entitle his judgment to especial respect
in this particular field, therefore, we should not give it any
greater weight than the opinions of any other investigator,
merely because he is a scientific man. As Mr. Podmore
pointed out, "... men of general culture and even men of
science are not speciaUy qualified to detect conjuring tricks.
... It is pertinent to point out that conjurers, even eminent
conjurers, have themselves admitted the genuineness of some
of these suspected manifestations." ^

I have insisted that the account of a spiritualistic seance
is generally valueless for the reason that lapse of memory
renders the after-account defective, just as malobservation

^ Modem Spiritualism, VoL II., p. 204.


The Psychology of Deception 61

renders the memory picture of the events erroneous. It may
be replied to this that the accounts of many stances are not
open to this double objection, for the reason that the after-
account was written from notes made at the time. I would
reply to this that these ^ notes " have been made in very few
instances, so few, indeed, as to be entirely omitted from con-
sideration, when taking into account the whole history of the
subject. But, even in these few cases, where notes were taken,
it is impossible to take notes of this character, while the phe-
nomena are in progress, and have them accurately represent
what is transpiring. Either the note-taker must take very
brief and ineffectual notes of the phenomena in progress,
which would be of very little assistance to him in drawing up
a detailed report of the stance, or the notes may be full, and
in that case, the note-taker must, necessarily, have missed
observing some of the phenomena, or some of the movements
of the medium in producing the phenomena, while taking
the notes ; and, in that case, too, the notes are of little assist-
ance in telling us what actually transpired at a given stance.
Professor Hyslop found what a difficult task it was, — this
attempting to take notes at a spiritualistic stance, — and
says:^

^ • • • I went prepared to take notes, which I did. But
I came to the conclusion that I could take but a very small
part of the notes necessary to give a clear and full account
of such performances. I moreover concluded also that five
minutes after the performance of any trick my memory was
not good enough to recall important facts which would be
necessary to tell the story rightly and fully to one who had
not observed it. But the most important conclusion was that
many things took place which I could not observe at all, as
the sequel showed to be true." How widely the actounts of
a trained and an untrained observer may differ, when describ-
ing the same event, may be seen by comparing the descrip-
tions of Sir William Crookes and Miss Florence Marryat,
e. g.^ of a certain materialization. Crookes's account is to be
found in his Reuarches^^J^}^ Majrryat's in her book. There

* Bordertandof PayMed Besearch, p. 226.


62 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

Is No Death. The. accounts are compared in Jourrud S. P. R^
Vol. XII., p. 268.

In addition to all the above methods of deception, there are,
of course, numerous others which the professional medium
employs in order to deceive his sitter. It would take too long
for me to enumerate all these here, but I must mention one
or two others that are in frequent use, for the reason that
they are of more or less general application. The first is
that the medium often assumes a certain ignorance of events
and languages, etc., so that when these events are given
through " the spirits,'* at a stance, they wiU have the appear-
ance of being supemormally imparted information. Many
mediums, again, have a smattering of several languages, but
will state, on being asked, that they know only English. The
reason for their doing this is that, when messages are written
on the slate, e. g.^ the sitter is all the more diunbfounded, for
the reason that he now has two *^ miracles " to explain, in-
stead of only one — the writing on the slates and the con-
tent of the message. The author of The Revelations of a
Spirit Medium asserts (p. 14) that this is very frequently
done by mediiuns.

If the sitters, at any given stance, are more than usually
acute and watchful, the medium is sure to notice this, and,
in all probability, the result will be a " blank stance," no
phenomena at all being forthcoming. The medium always
goes on the principle that it is far better to have a blank
stance than an exposure, and in this he is, of course, quite
right. An exposure is irredeemable, while a blank seance
may be attributed to bad conditions, indisposition, lack of
power, and what not. Mr. Davey wrote, in this connection:
** If the performer has any reason to think that any part of
his trick will be seen, he can take refuge in a blank stance;
nor would it generally be the case that if the trick were partly
performed the observance of strict conditions by the sitter
would result not merely in failure, but in exposure. ... I
have several times had to deal with this danger, and have
always been successful." The author of The Confessions of
a Medium stated that ^ it does good to have an occasional


The Psychology of Deception 63

failure ^ (p. 89), while we know that, in the case of Eglin-
ton, at any rate, the stance was continued, in spite of an
^ exhaustion of power " (so the medium stated), and the
spirits induced to continue the phenomena by means of a
double fee! ^The medium yielded without hesitation, and
^ the spirits ' ccmtinued to give excellent manifestations.** ^

It would be a thankless task to continue this chapter
further. The interested reader will find the subject of the
psychology of deception ably handled by Professor Norman
Triplett in The American Journal of Psychology^ XI., No.
4, Jufy, 1900, in an article entitled ^* The Psychology of
Conjuring Deceptions." The whole subject is there treated
in a very full and exhaustive manner.^ My object, in the
present chapter, is to show that the medium employs very
much the same devices and artifices in his production of
mediumistic phenomena, and to elucidate the problems: why
persons, otherwise acute and intelligent, should be so easily
deceived by such simple tricks and illusions. I trust the
reasons for this deception are now made a trifle more clear,
and that the reader will feel that, after all, he may have
been deceived by the simplest devices possible. As soon as
this possibility is realized, we may expect many more exposes
of fraudulent mediums than are now forthcoming.

> Proeeeding$ S. P. B., Vol. IV., p. 364

* See also Kdis: The Ptycholagy of SugguHon, etc.


CHAPTER IV

TABLE - TU&NINO AND TABLE - LIFTING

Probably no phenomena are more intimately connected,
in the public mind, with the spiritistic movement than those
of table-turning and table-lifting. The reason for this is
not, I think, hard to find. There can be no doubt that a
large part of the phenomena, at least, are genuine, however
we may choose to interpret them. I mean by this that the
table does, in very many cases, actually rise from ofi^ the
floor; and, whether the ultimate explanation be fraud, un-
conscious muscular action, electricity, spirits, or what not,
a large share of the public's attention is inevitably bound
to be directed toward phenomena that do actually occur^
since the vast bulk of these table-turning experiments have
been conducted in private home circles, where fraud was
practically excluded, to all appearances. Before we proceed
further, then, and in order to avoid misunderstanding, I
shall briefly describe the phenomena that are observed, and
state the explanations that are generally accepted by the sci-
entific world, by way of accounting for the phenomena which
it agrees to consider genuine.

A number of persons sit around a table, small or large,
as the case may be ; in the light or dark, as the case may be.
Each member of the circle places his hands gently on the
table-top, and leaves them there quietly for a longer or
shorter time, as may be necessary, before the phenomena
begin. After a time, the table is seen to tremble, quiver, and,
generally, it will move about the room, under the sitters*
hands, without any one apparently pushing it in the least ; in
fact, if the sitters are questioned, they will, almost invari-

64


Table-turning and Table-lifting 65

ably, state that the table is pulling and pushing them about
the room! In this belief the sitters are, in all probability,
perfectly honest. The feeling is exactly as if the table was
possessed with an intelligent force of its own, and had gotten
beyond the control of the sitters. Tlie facts (these phenom-
ena) science no longer doubts. That tables do act in the
manner described (apparently, at least), she no longer denies.
The sole difficulty lies in the interpretation of the facts ; in
the explanation that is given of the phenomena observed.^

It is not within the province of this book to study the his-
torical evidence — this will be found fully discussed by Mr.
Podmore, in his Modem Spirittuditnif Vol. II., pp. 1-21.
The whole subject is there treated in a very masterly fashion,
though one feels that the writer is, perhaps, at times, a little
prejudiced.^ As a typical example of what a table apparently
does, at s&mces of the kind, I quote the following account
of a s&mce (at which he himself was present), contributed
by Professor W. F. Barrett to the Proceedings S. P. il..
Vol. IV., pp. 25-42, the paper being entitled " On Some
Phenomena, Commonly Called Spiritualistic, Witnessed by
the Author." The account reads, in part, as follows:

^ . . . Whilst noticing these facts, I observed a frequent
uneasy movement of the entire table, and now it sidled about
in a most surprising manner. Lifting their hands completely
off the table, the sitters placed themselves back in their chairs
with their hands folded across their chests ; their feet were
in full view, and, under these conditions, and in obedience to
my request, the table raised the two legs nearest to me com-
pletely off the ground, some eight or ten inches, and thus
suspended itself for a few moments. Again a similar act
was performed on the other side. Next came a very unex-
pected occurrence. ViHiilst absolutely free from the contact
of every person, the table wiggled itself backward and for-

> " The Phenomena are genuine. The hypothesis which spiritualists en-
deavour to bufld on these phenomena is altogether another thing." — The
PhOasaphy of SjrirUualism, by F. R. Marvin, M. D., p. 24.

' I {Mrticularly had in mind Podmore's criticism of M. Gasparin's ex-
periments iStudtes in Psychical Research, p. 47) when writing this. His
emjectureB seem to me — in the face of the existing evidence — some-
what unwarranted.


66 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualiinn

ward, advancing toward the armchair in which I sat, and
ultimately completely imprisoning me in my seat. During
its progress, it was followed by Mr. L. and Miss I., but they
were at no time touching it, and occasionally were so distant
that I could perceive a free space all round the table whilst
it was still in motion. When thus imder my very nose, the
table rose repeatedly, and enabled me to be perfectly sure
by the evidence of touch that it was off the ground, and,
further, that no human being, consciously or unconsciously,
had any part in this movement. . . • Suddenly, only the
tips of our fingers being on the tiJble, the heavy loo table at
which we were sitting made a series of very violent prancing
movements (which I could not imitate afterward except by
using both hands and all my strength) ; the blows were so
heavy that I hurriedly stopped the performance, fearing for
the safety of the gas chandelier in the rocHn below " (pp.
84-6).

Now, in reading over the above account, it will be seen that
two facts stand out with special prominence. (1) That the
table moved without any contact whatever, at times when
none of the sitters' hands were upon the table at all ; and (S)
that the table appeared to possess a power or force of its
own, and even greater, in strength, than that possessed by
the sitters. The first of these points I shall reserve for con-
sideration later on; for the present I desire to centre our
attention upon the other consideration, viz,, that the table
appeared to possess a force independent of, and even exer-
cised in opposition to, the conscious intentions of the sitters
through whose agency the table moved at all. Further, this
force appeared to be equal to, or even greater than, any mus-
cular force that the sitters could themselves exercise.^

It was only natural, when these phenomena first appeared,
and when so little was known of subconscious muscular
action and the power of suggestion, that the readiest ex-
planation should have been the one accepted, and that
" spirits " should have been given the credit for such phe-
ncHnena, especially as spiritualism was just then coming into

* See Dodd's Spirit ManifetUaianB.


Table-turning and Table-lifting 67

prcHninence, and other phenomena of a like nature were
attributed to their agency. Some force was at work, that
was certain; and that force was frequently an intelligent
force ; of that fact there was no doubt either. The spiritistic
explanation was the one that would most naturally be adopted
by all persons who had no a priori objections to spirit, as
such. As the scientific world had such objections, they began
to search elsewhere for a cause, and were not long in finding
one that partially explained the facts observed, at any rate,
and without recourse to spirits, or even to anything super-
normal whatsoever.

The first step toward a scientific explanation of the ob-
served phenomena was taken by Professor Faraday, who
invented a little instrument which would register the imcon-
scious muscular actions of any person placing his or her
hands upon it. By means of this little instrument. Professor
Faraday was oiabled to show that all persons exercised a
more or less powerful ^ push and pull " action, they being
quite unconscious of such muscular exertion ; and Professor
Jastrow further conclusively proved, in a careful series of
experiments conducted some years ago, that not only is this
action present and operative in all normal individuals, but
that this push and pull corresponded invariably with the
ex]>ectation of the sitter, who had his hands on the board.^
Unless the evidence in the case renders this hypothesis un-
tenable, therefore, we must always assume that unconscious
muscular action is the true and sufficient explanation of the
phenomena of table-tipping, of ouija and planchette writing,
and all kindred phenomena.

Of course, such muscular action Is not by any means al-
ways unconscious. It may be perfectly conscious — inten-
tional fraud. That this has been practised very frequently,
in such cases, cannot be doubted. Thus, Truesdell tells us,
e.g^ that he detected one medium in the act of tipping a
table by observing the unnaturally white appearance of the
medium's finger-nails, ^ the unmistakable evidence that she
was bearing heavily on the opposite side of the table." ^ But

* Fad and Fabie in Psychology, pp. 307-36. > BoUom FacU, p 37.


68 The Physical Phencxnena of Spiritualism

I wish it to be understood that this muscular pressure, while
it may be conscious and fraudulent in many cases, is not
necessarily so, and, when the evidence in the case, or the
moral character of the medium, renders this assumption im-
possible or repulsive, it should not be urged, as ttnconscious
muscular action will perform precisely the same marvels,
without the knowledge of the medium, and this is the explana-
tion that should be adopted. As will presently be shown, the
real problem only begins when this is assiuned and granted !

There is a great deal of evidence that goes to show that
this unconscious muscular force is frequently stronger and
more powerful than the individual could consciously control
or summon. (Perhaps the fact that the vital functions of the
body are under the control of the ^^unconscious mind " may
be the explanation of this fact?) At all events, we know
that in moments of extreme fear or excitement, when the
conscious mind is largely in abeyance, many acts are per-
formed which would be quite impossible to the normal in-
dividual, being beyond his normal muscular ability. Car-
penter gives an example of very much the same thing in his
Mesmerism^ Spirittudism^ etc. (p. 128), stating that, ^^ Braid
(in my presence) enabled a man so remarkable for the pov-
erty of his physique, that he had not for many years ven-
tured to lift a weight of twenty pounds, to take up a weight
of twenty-eight pounds upon his Uttle finger, and swing it
around his head, with the greatest apparent ease. Neither
Mr. Braid nor his son, both of them powerful men, could do
anything like this; and I could not myself lift the same
weight on my little finger to more than half my own height.
Trickery in this case was obviously impossible, since, if the
subject had been trained to such feats, the effect of such train-
ing would have become visible in his muscular development."

Additional and very convincing evidence is afforded by a
careful study of the phenomena of " dowsing," t. e., the
movements of a forked twig or branch, in the hands of a
" dowser," when he walks over underground water, metals,
etc. Let us assume, for the sake of argument, that there is
** nothing in it " beyond the movement of the twig, which is


Table-turning and Table-lifting 09

iindoabted. Let us further assume that this movement of the
twig is due to the unconscious muscular action on the part of
the dowser.*

The interesting point is this: that the rod frequently
manifests a tremendous force, quite beyond the will or control
of the dowser, and frequently in direct opposition to his will
and belief. I quote a few cases by way of illustration. On
pp. 278-9, Proceedmgi S. P. 22., Professor Barrett gives a
number of cases (mentioned in his previous report, in Vol.
XIII.), of which the following are samples. Mr. Enys,
F. 6. S., who is an amateur dowser, states ^^ the rod broke off
short in front of my hands, and did so a second time in the
same place." Miss Grantham (daughter of Judge Grant-
ham), describing what occurred with the Rev. J. Blunt, an-
other amateur dowser, states : ** So strong was the impulse,
that we found unless Mr. B. relaxed his hold, the twig broke
off near his fingers." Lady Milbanke, also an amateur
dowser, had the same experience (p. 42). Similar cases
could be quoted ad libitum. The point is that none of these
persons, in the normal state, could consciously produce these
phenomena, by any muscular action on their part, and we
have no evidence that any of them were in an abnormal con-
dition when the experiments were progressing. They could
not voluntarily and consciously bend the twig in this manner,
and produce the phen(»nena observed. The obvious conclu-
sion to be drawn is that the body can unconsciously exercise
a far greater amount of energy than the conscious mind can
control ; as Professor Barrett says, ^ in hypnosis, somnam-
bulism, hysteria, etc., subjects can perform muscular feats
impossible to them in their normal, self-conscious state " (p.
878, Vol. XV.). If this fact be granted, the mystery of

' This k, in fact, the theory held by Professor Barrett, who contributed
to the Proceeitnpw S. P. R. two lengthy reports on the subject, in Vol.
XIII., pp. 2-282, and Vol. XV., pp. 130-383. respectively, — though the
evidence conclusively proved to bis mind that the faculty of dowsing
reaUy existed, being, probably, somewhat akin to clairvoyance in its char-
acter or essence. That, however, is in answer to the question. How did
the knowledge of when to (unconsciously) bend the twig enter the dowser's
mind? As before stated, the actual movement he considered due to un-
ooDscioos muscular actioQ.


70 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

table-tipping, ouija and planchette, vanish, whenever con-
tact is allowed, i. ^., whenever the sitters are allowed to place
their hands on the table, ever so lightly.^

Having now (I hope) established the fact that the move-
ments of a table, however violent and however much beyond
the control of the sitter, may be due solely to unconscious
muscular action, whenever contact is permitted, we pass to
consider another aspect of the problem.

The fact that the table moves so frequently in direct oppo-
sition to the will and expectation of the sitter or medium
would seem, at first sight, to disprove the arguments (above
referred to) of Jastrow and others, viz., that the table or
object always moves in the direction in which the sitter's
attention is focussed: in short, in the direction in which it
is expected to move. But, rightly considered, the facts do
not prove this, as can be readily shown.

That part of the mind which moves the table, in these ex-
periments, is the subconscious, the ** subliminal conscious-
ness," or at least one stratum of that consciousness. Now,
it has often been proved that the thoughts uppermost in the
conscious mind are not by any means those uppermost
in the subconscious mind — far from it. The two minds'
may be running in entirely opposite or different grooves.
Consequently, the conscious mind may be expecting one thing
— that the table will move to the right, let us say ; and, at
the same time the subconscious mind may be expecting the
very opposite — that the table will move to the left! The

* In this connection, I would refer the reader to the very interesting
account of the Japanese " possessions," given by Mr. Percival Lowell, in
his Occult Japan. He states that, in all cases of possession, a wand is
used, called the Gohei, held in the right hand, which is supposed to act
as a kind of intermediary between the man and the god. It is interesting
to note, in this connection, that the rod is always moved first before the
worshipper is consciously affected, and that the wand soon becomes
uncontrollable (like the divining rod), until it appears " as if the wand
shook the man, not the man it '* (p. 6). This is like the tail wagging the
dog I

^ Two minds. I have used this expression pro tem. for convenience —
not because I accept the Hudsonian '' two mind " theory in principle.
In writing this book, I have had to assume that a large portion of my
readers are unfamiliar with the theories held on these subjects, and have
chosen forcible language purposely, even though the finer psychological
distinctions are sacrificed thereby.


Table-turning and Table-lifting 71

table, of course, moves to the left, in accordance with the law ;
but, since the conscious mind did not direct the movement,
it is apparently in direct contradiction to the law, whereas
it is, in reality, in direct accordance with it. I am unaware
that this aspect of the problem has ever been worked out in
detail before.

Thus far Science is willing to go, but no further! She
is willing to admit that certain phenomena occur, which are
comprdiended within the above outlined theory. But when
she is confronted with phenomena requiring an explanation,
such, e. g.f as the levitation of a table without any contact
whatever, she refuses to consider them, calmly asserting
that they are impossible, and consequently do not occur at
all! This is hardly the scientific attitude in which to ap-
proach the subject, it is true; but it is the one adopted by
most scientific men, nevertheless. They explain all they can
of the {dienomena, and the remainder they assert do not
exist. Hhe position of the scientific world is summed up,
perhaps, by Professor Binet, when he says :

^ As for the table-turners, it has long been demcmstrated
and that, too, by the most exact researches, that they turn
simply from the impelling influence of the hands." ^

All this is very good and very logical, so far as it goes;
the trouble is that it does not go far enough. Granting
all the above to be correct, it can readily be shown, as I stated
before, that the real problem has only just begun. The
scientific explanation does not take into account, or attempt
to explain, any cases where the table has been raised off the
ground without contact, and there are very many instances
on record, one case being quoted above. How are such
phenomena to be explained? It is useless to deny them,
merely, as that does not satisfy any fair-minded man. Doc-
tor Carpenter attempted this method, and was mercilessly
flayed alive, so to speak, by Andrew Lang, in his Cock Lane
and Common Sense^ pp. S19-21. (See also his Historical
My9terie$9 pp. 186-8.)

But it will be obvious that the great unexpli

' AlUratumM of PersonalUy, p. 327.


72 The Physical Phencxnena of Spiritualism

still remains. To the scientifically minded psychical re-
searcher, the puzzling question is, not what moves the table,
but does the table give any information unknown to the
sitters? The interesting problem is not a physical but a
psychological one, so far as the proof of spiritualism goes,
that is. Many spiritualists are quite willing to admit that
the movements of the table can all be accounted for by un-
conscious muscular action, but the question is, does the table
(by raps, tilts, etc.) impart any information which was not
in the minds of the sitters, at the time of the experiments?
If so, then it is obvious that the explanations at present in
vogue do not explain, but that we must search further, if we
are to account rationally for the phenomena observed.

These remarks apply equally to all automatic phenomena;
to ouija and planchette writing, to regular automatic writing,
etc., as well as to table-tipping. Many persons have an idea
that the phenomena are " explained " if once it is shown
that the planchette or ouija board, or the table, is moved by
the unconscious muscular action on the part of the medium.
But it is evident to any one who thoroughly understands the
problem, that the difficulties only begin when all this is
granted. Granting that the board is pushed, or the table
tipped, etc., by unconscious (or conscious) muscular action
on the part of the medium, the real question at issue then
arises, riz., is the imparted information within the knowl-
edge of any of the sitters, or must it have been obtained in
some supernormal manner? That is the real question to be
solved.

It was necessary for me to go into this detail, when con-
sidering the phenomena of table-tipping, as these automatic
phenomena are much misunderstood by the public, and I have
chosen the phenomena of table-tipping to illustrate a general
principle, applicable alike to all automatic phenomena.
When once the real problem in the case is adequately under-
stood by the public, much of the hard feelings and misunder-
standings of the past will disappear.

It will thus be evident that there are two distinct problems
for us to consider, apart from the phenomena which science


Table-turning and Table-lifting 73

admits as genuine. (1) The alleged movements of objects
withcMit contact; and (ft) the evidence of knowledge pos-
sessed by ** the table/' unknown to the sitters, and apparently
supemormally acquired. I cannot stop to consider either
of these questions in this place, however, but will return to
them later on. On pp. 858-71, and pp. 410-14, respectively,
they wiU be found discussed at some length. In the present
chapter I shall accordingly dismiss that part of our inquiry
and turn to a consideration of the various methods in which
a table can be made to tilt, and even to be entirely levitated
from off the floor, by fraudulent means. The measures that
have been adopted to obtain this result, — the means em-
ployed in fraudulently producing the phenomena, — I shall
now discuss in detail.

Let us suppose a number of persons seated around a
table. The table rises up, first on one side and then on the
other, until, finally, all four legs are off the floor at the same
time. Occasionally, though not always, the sitters' hands
are now removed, and the table is seen to be suspended in
space, without visible support. How are these results accom-
plished? By very simple devices, in the majority of cases;
the actual means employed depending on the circumstances
of the case. The principal methods employed are the follow-
ing:

If the s&mce is held in the dark, or in semi-darkness,
of course the medium's task is easy enough. If he is work-
ing alone, without confederates, he has only to press heavily
on his side of the table, in order to cause an upward tilt on
the side opposite to him, or, he may place his feet under one
or both of the table-legs, and, by elevating hit legs, and at
the same time steadying the table with his hands, he can
cause the table to be ^ levitated " in a very remarkable man-
ner. By merely pushing the table about in various ways, an
endless variety of phenomena can be produced. By raising
the knees, the table can be levitated in much the ^me manner,
the table being steadied by the hands. If the medium has
a confederate, they work in pairs, the confederate being
placed at a point diametrically opposite the medium, so that


74 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the table is directly between them. The knees may then be
employed with tremendous eflFect. Another method that could
be employed in a dark stance is for the confederate to lift
up his side of the table with one knee, while the medium
raises his side by placing his head under the table, and lifting
it up with his neck and shoulders. His hands can be left on
the table, during this manceuvre, and held by members of the
circle on either side. This, when well executed, is a very
convincing " levitation." Of course mediiun and confederate
can reverse the roles, if desired.

All the above methods are primitive, however, and would
hardly be employed by any professional medium, as being
too obvious. The majority of mediums who profess to tip
tables employ more or less apparatus, the principal methods
employed being the following:

Suppose a small, light table is to be levitated. This the
medium does by placing his hands upon the top of it. The
table is now seen to follow the hands of the medium, and may
be lifted off the floor and swung about at will, adhering to
the medium's hands throughout. On removing his hands,
they and the table can at once be examined, but no sticky
material or other device is found to explain the mystery.
The secret is this. The medium wears a ring on one of his
fingers, a plain, gold band. In one side of this ring has been
cut a slit, extending about half-way across it. When the
medium's hands are first shown, this section is slipped around
to the back of the hand, but at all other times the slit side
is turned inward, toward the palm. In the centre of the table
is driven an extra stout pin, having a wide head, and all the
medium has to do, in order to successfully " levitate " the
table, is to slip the niche in his ring under the pin-head, on
the table, and, on lifting up his hand, it will be found that
the table adheres to it closely, and that the hand may be
moved or waved about in almost any direction, without the
table becoming detached. When the table is again placed
on the floor, the medium presses upward strongly with his
hands, thereby extracting the pin from the table, which may
then be examined. A twist of the ring on. the medium's


Table-turning and Table-lifting 75

finger, and his hands may be examined also, the pin having
been dropped on to the floor or elsewhere in the intervaL
This is a method much employed, and always with good
effect.

There is a variation of the above method sometimes em-
ployed, in which the pin is dispensed with. In its place the
medium employs a little rubber " sucker," to the centre of
which is firmly attached a short, broad-headed pin. The
medium slips the niche in his ring under the head of the pin,
as in the last instance, and the suction of the moistened
rubber cup will lift the table off the floor. This method is
the one that is sometimes employed in ^^ levitating " a bowl
of water.

When a large table is to be levitated, the medium gener-
ally employs an assistant. Both he and his confederate wear,
strapped to their wrists, under the shirt-cuffs, a stout leather
band, to which is bolted an iron rod, extending beyond the
leather cuff about an inch. When they take their places at
the table, both medium and confederate slip the projecting
portion of the iron rod under the table, and, as the hand
rests on the top of the same, it will be seen that a vice-like
grip can be obtained in this manner, and practicaUy any-
thing done with the table, so far as tilting and levitation
are concerned, without any fear of detection ; an examination
of the feet of all present may be allowed when the manifesta-
tions are at their height. Sometimes the table may be levi-
tated without the use of this piece of apparatus, the linen
cuffs of the medium and his confederate answering every
requirement.

Another method is for the medium and his assistant to
have cords or leather straps passed around their necks, to one
portion of which is attached a sharp hook. Of course the
strap is worn vmder the clothing. The hook is normally sus-
pended just above the bottom of the waistcoat, but when the
medium bends forward, this hook falls below the waistcoat,
and may be hooked to the under side of the tabic. By merely
straightening or standing up, the medium and his assistant


.76 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

can now cause the table to be ^* levitated " in a very fine
manner!^

There is a conjuring trick known as the *^ floating hat."
The effect of the trick is this : the performer borrows a hat,
and, placing his fingers (the tips only) lightly on the crown
of the hat, it is seen to adhere to them, and the hand may
be moved in any direction, the hat following them, ap-
parently drawn by some force of attraction. The secret is
this: the performer has a loop of black silk thread, about
three feet long, passed over his head, and hanging down in
front. The performer has only to secretly introduce the
borrowed hat inio this loop, and press the hat against it, and
he can move the hat in any direction he sees fit. Some such
device might doubtless be employed in the case of tables, a
loop of blackened catgut, e. g., being used for the purpose.

If the medium has full swing of the s^nce-room, he can
cause a table to rise and fioat in the air without touching it
at all. This is done by stretching two black threads across
the room, these passing under the table. The threads are in
the hands of assistants, who have only to raise the threads
in their hands in order to ^' levitate " the table. The medium
may freely pass his hands over and under the table, during
the levitation, thus showing that it is not suspended by any
normal means!

1 In Proceedings 8. P. B., Vol. X.. p. 23, Sir Oliver Lodge made the
remark that he would rather trust to his own powers of observation, in an
experiment of this kind, than any number of printed records, backed up
by any number of photographs. In this he was, I think, verv wise. On
p. 113 of Around the World with a Magician and a Jug^er will be found a
photograph of a table levitated by fraudulent means — it is impossible to
see how.


CHAPTER V


Inasmuch as raps were the first phenomena ever observed
in the history of modem spiritualism (being the first phe-
nomena produced through the agency of the first mediums,
the Fox sisters), their consideration becomes of great im-
portance to us, if only from this, historic, standpoint. At
this late date it is impossible to say whether the raps ob-
tained through the Fox sisters were genuine or not. In
many respects, it would appear from the evidence that the
raps were at first g^uine. As we shall see later on that
the evidence for genuine raps occurring in the presence of
certain individuals is practically overwhelming, and inas-
much, also, as this fact of the occurrence of raps is not, when
rightly considered, such an extraordinary phenomenon, I
do not believe that we shall go far wrong in thinking that
the raps observed in the presence of the Fox sisters were at
first genuine. If raps have ever occurred at all, I can see no
reason for believing that the raps, in this instance, were
fraudulently produced.

Be that as it may, however, we have positive evidence that
the raps observed in their presence when they became pro-
fessional mediums were fraudulently produced. This evi-
dence will be found in full in a book by R. B. Davenport,
entitled The Death Blow to Spiritudlism. In this work will
be found a lengthy historical and critical r^um^ of the phe-
nomena observed in the presence of these mediums, which I
cannot now even attempt to summarize. Here we find a sum-
mary of the famous report on the two mediums by the ** Buf-

n


78 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

f alo Doctors," — Drs. Austin Flint, Chas. A. Lee, and C. B.
Coventry. Their report is inconclusive, it is true, since fraud
was not directly proved; but, inasmuch as the rappings took
place only where fraud was possible, and altogether ceased
as soon as strict test-conditions were imposed, the phenomena
obviously prove nothing. An investigation fay several Har-
vard professors was also inconclusive in results (p. 147).
It must also be remembered that the investigations of the
Seybert Commission were entirely unsatisfactory.^ But the
real evidence of fraud was supplied by the mediimis them-
selves, both of them furnishing a written statement to the
effect that the rappings observed in their presence were due
to fraud (v. pp. 25-S8, and 5S-9), and stating that the raps
were produced by the joints of the toes and feet (p. 88).'
But, as before stated, the evidence counts for nothing, from
a scientific standpoint, and must be altogether left out of
accoimt. Whether raps occur or not is a questicm that can
be settled to-day, without referring back to the case of the
Fox sisters, which has no evidential value whatever. My
object, for the moment, is not to consider the historical cases,
and their evidential value, but to consider the raps themselves,
and the methods that can faie, and are, employed in fraudu-
lently reproducing them. To this aspect of the problem I
accordingly turn.

It is scarcely necessary to remark that, in cases where the
raps are obtained on the mediimi's own table, etc., the table
should be subjected to a thorough examination, since there
are tables made, called '* rapping-tables," which contain a
hidden mechanism for producing raps, this being under the
control of the medium.* So skilfully are these continuances
concealed, however, that it is practically useless to lil^mpt
to find them without taking the table to pieces, and^A far

^ See Report of the Seybert Commissian, pp. 32-48.

> It is only fair to these mediums to state that one — if not both —
recanted their " confessions " before dying (See Journal S, P. R., Vol. III.,
p. 360 ; Vol. IV., pp. 15-16). The statements of mediums of this char-
acter evidently cannot be relied upon — imless proof of the statements
made be forthcoming.

' A full description of the construction of one of these tables, with illus-
trations, etc., will be foimd on p. 101 of Hopkins's Magic, Stage lUusiona, etc


lUps 79

simpler method would be for the sitter to request raps on
other articles of furniture — chairs, walls, etc. Even here
we can have no guarantee that the chair is not a ** rapping-
chair," and that confederates of the medium are not busy
knocking on the floor, ceiling, and walls of the room, which
has, in fact, often been done. Raps in the home of the pro-
fessional medium can, in fact, be obtained in so many differ-
ent ways that they are of no evidential value whatever, and
I accordingly pass to a consideration of the methods em-
ployed by the medium to obtain raps in the sitter's own home,
where mechanism or preparation may be considered out of
the question, generally speaking.

One very simple method of obtaining raps is the following.
The medium places his boot-heel against the table-leg, press-
ing firmly. By gradually slipping the heel along the table
or chair leg, a sharp ** rap " will be the result. The medium
must exercise a certain amount of care to ensure his foot
slipping only the right distance, for otherwise several suc-
cessive raps would be produced, more than the medium wished
for, in fact! This degree of pressure cannot be explained,
but it can be very easily felt by any one making the experi-
ment for himself, and generally is acquired very easily. The
rap is located by the medium as occurring on the top of the
table, and is consequently heard there by the sitter! This
inability to locate sound correctly is a peculiar fact which I
have discussed at some length on p. 101, in the chapter on
*^ Slate-writing,'' and consequently shall not repeat the ar-
guments here.

Another method of producing raps is for the medium to
slightly moisten his fingers, and press them firmly on the
table-top. Now, by simply sliding his fingers very gently
and slightly over the table, distinct raps are produced, of a
very convincing character. The same method of precaution
is necessary here that applied in the last case.

StiD another method is for the medium to place his two
thumb-nails together, pressing them firmly against the wood
of the table. By slightly slipping one nail up or down, a


80 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

vibratory impulse is imparted to the table, which exactly
reproduces the genuine rap.

A very similar method is that of obtaining raps by a
gentle rubbing of clothing or linen, especially the shirt-cuffs.
Such raps as these may, of course, be obtained fay a medium
unconsciously, and in all good faith. Raps, more than any
other physical phenomena, perhaps, may be fraudulently
produced by a medium without that person being aware of
the fact. Leaning more or less heavily on a table (espcciaUy
if it be of light build) will induce a number of creaks and
sounds resembling raps, especiaUy if the medium says that
they are such!

I have already spoken of the method of obtaining raps by
means of the toe or knee joints, the method employed by the
Fox sisters.* r

Again, mediimis occasionally employ a little instrument
which will produce raps when a button is pressed on the
outside of the box in which it is kept. I have known a
medium who employed a very ingenious apparatus of this
kind, worked by electricity. The battery was in his pocket,
and the box was fitted with a clamp which enabled it to be
fastened to the under side of the table. Wires connected the
two. In a dim light the medium was now enabled to retire
some distance from the table, on which intelligent raps would
occur, nevertheless.

Mr. D. C. Cook describes a method somewhat similar to
the electric device spoken of above.* In this case, however,
the hammer of the apparatus strikes on the boot-heel, which
is made hollow, in order to form a sounding-box. By press-
ing the heel against the table-leg, very fine raps on its " sur-
face " can be obtained.

The following is a very ingenious method of obtaining
raps, for which I am indebted to Mr. Henry Hardin, who
published it in Mahatma, Vol. II., No. 10, April, 1899.

* M. Petrovo-Solovovo succeeded in producing raps in this manner
under better test conditions than the Fox sisters. He completely deceived
all his sitters (See Journal S. P. -R., Vol. VI., pp. 120-1). I have been im-
able to produce these raps myself, though I have repeatedly tried to do so.

^McSuUjna, Vol. IV., No. 10, April, 1901.


Baps 81


u


Have a piece of tubing a foot long and about the size
of a lead-pencil, fitted with a piston, which, on pulling a
black thread attached to the bottom of the tube, will rise out
at the top about two-thirds of its length, and, upon releasing
the pull on the thread, will sink into the tube again. This
piston should be, in reality, a long, heavy and sharp-pointed
needle. Now you have a little hammer made of lead, just the
shape of the rubber top on your lead-pencil. The bottom
of this should be hoUowed out and fitted with a small cork.
It is evident, now, that this hammer-head may easily be
stuck at will on the point of the needle-piston, thus forming
a ^ rapper.' The piston should be adjusted to the right
lcg» j^ist below the knee, under the pants, with the sharp end
up. It must be placed on the side next the left leg, and
the end. of tl^e black thread should come out through a small
hole in the seam and have a bent black pin attached to it.
To get the manifestations, you seat yourself at a table with
several friends, aU of whom join hands. Before doing this,
however, you reach under the table, and hook the bent pin on
the left leg of your trousers. Now, if this is the right length,
you can, by separating the knees, cause the long needle-
piston to force its way up throu^ the pants, and, if you
then press the little hammer-head, cork side down, on to the
needle-pointy you will have a spirit ready, when you move
your knees further apart, to rap loudly upon the under side
of the table. If your friends wish, at any time, to investi-
gate, you have only to pull off the little hammer-head, unhook
the thread from the left knee, and the needle-point will sink
down through the surface of your pant leg, and disappear ;
and you may get up and walk about with impunity while
they search for the ghosts."

Another method of producing raps is for the medium to
sit close to the table, so that his knee touches the table-leg.
Now, by pressing against the leg of the table with the knee,
and slipping it up or down very slightly, a variety of raps
may be produced. " Professor Manville " states that this
method is extensively employed.^ A very simple method is

* SpbrihuditHe Phenomena, etc., p. 9.


82 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

for the medium to tap the table-leg with his boot-heel. He
locates the sound on the table-top, and his sitters do the
same!

There is one further effect I must describe, before leaving
this section on the fraudulent production of raps. S(»ne
up-to-date spirits have conceived the original idea of com-
municating by means of the electric telegraph! They em-
ploy the Morse or some other system, and the messages are
ticked out in the regular manner, the instrument being safely
placed in a wooden box, and no human hand being near the
key at the time. The stance is conducted in full light, the
medium transcribing the message on to paper, as it is ticked
out by the instrument. The test is surely ingenious, and it is
highly effective.

Now for the explanation of this apparent marvel. It was
stated that the instrument was placed in a wooden box, and
about this there is no trickery. The lid of the box is hinged,
so that, when it is closed, the instrument is oitirely shut off,
and no human hands can touch the key without opening the
box. This is supposedly to prevent fraud, but it does, in
reality, render it possible, being one of the chief agencies in
the production of the ticks! To make this clear, a further
explanation is necessary.

The telegraph key is, of course, provided with a tension-
screw, enabling the key to be elevated or depressed at will.
Before the stance begins, the medium carefully adjusts the
key so that it will just touch the lid of the box, and so that,
if the lid of the box is " pressed home " from the outside,
the key will be depressed sufficiently to cause a click, pre-
cisely as if the key were pressed by the fingers. The hinges
are so adjusted that the box will just not close of its own
weight, a slight pressure being required to close the lid
tightly. For this reason the key is not pressed down by the
weight of the box-lid, and until the medium presses on the
lid with his fingers. This he does by allowing only the edge
of his palm to touch the box-lid, a slight downward pressure
being all that is required to force the lid down, and cause the
instrument to " click.*' The sitter's attention is absorbed


Raps 83

in the translation of the message by the medium, and his
writing it on paper. The transcription is merely to divert
attention.

The only objection to this ingenious piece of apparatus
was that a slight contact with the lid of the box in which the
instrument is enclosed was necessary. Various mediums con-
sequently set to work, trying to improve upon the old method
by obviating this necessity. Finally they succeeded — they
devised an instrument through which it is possible to obtain
messages without any contact with the box-lid at aU. This
was effected by concealing a powerful electro-magnet in the
table-top, the current being closed or broken, as desired, by
pressing upon a button cimcealed on the under side of the
table. The medium could press this button with his knee,
thus enabling him to display both hands on the table-top, and
disposing of the necessity of touching the lid of the box.


CHAPTER VI


SLATE - WBITINO TESTS


If we were to read carefully through the historical evi-
dence for the phenomena of slate-writing, we should find it
to consist in one long and practically unbroken series of
expos^ of fraud and trickery, with no real evidence worth
mentioning for the genuine manifestations of any supernor-
mal power, nor any indication of any force or agency what-
ever at work beyond the muscles of the medium.

In short, there is no good evidence, in the whole history
of spiritualism, for the occurrence of writing on slates by
other means than such as might have been produced fraudu-
lently by the medium; and I have gone carefully through
a vast bulk of spiritualistic literature before making this
statement. To any one who knows or realizes the innumer-
able methods that may be employed to trick the sitter, the
records that are in print are entirely inconclusive, with
hardly a single exception. The actual methods that are
employed, this book is intended to expose ; a very fine r^sum^
of the historical evidence will be found in Podmore's Modem
Spirittudigm^ especially p. 240 (Vol. I.), and pp. 204-S2
(Vol. II.). To this discussion I would refer my reader.
Also to the Report of the Seybert Commission, pp. 6, 8,
11-12, etc.

In the present book, I shall only touch upon the historical
evidence available in the case of two of the most famous slate-
writing mediums in history, partly as " sample cases," and
partly because the evidence is instructive in more senses than
one. For, if the two most prominent slate-writing mediums
that figure in the history of the subject are shown to be


Tests 85

frauds, it is at least highly probable that the cases of slate-
writing occurring in the presence of mediums of lesser note
were produced by the same means as they were in the pres-
ence of the more famous mediimis. I shall, therefore, con-
fine myself to a consideration of the cases of Slade and
Eglinton, surely two of the greatest slate-writing mediums
in the history of the subject. The evidence in the case of
Slade has been discussed on pp. 19-47, and in the present
chapter I shall, accordingly, confine mys^ to the phenomena
obtained through Eglinton's mediumship.

Though Eglinton was never caught (I believe), in any
case, in the act of fraudulently producing slate-writing
^ phenomena " (though he was detected in producing fraudu-
lent ** materializaticms "), his whole life-history is, neverthe-
less, clouded over with suspicions and doubts. In the early
days of his career, he collaborated with Mme. Blavatsky in
the production of a *' phenomenally produced" letter,^ which,
it was afterward ascertained, was fraudulently produced.'
Many other suspicious circumstances are to be noted in the
career of Eglinton, not the least of which is his persistent
refusal to meet Mr. Maskelyne, of London, or aUow him a
sitting.* I now turn to the more definite evidence obtained
by the S. P. R., a study of which is most interesting.

Typical stances occurring in the presence of this medium
will be found recorded in Proceedings^ Vol. IV., pp. 85-8;
Jounud^ Vol. L, pp. 899-400, and elsewhere. The first sys-
tematic effort to test the alleged powers of this medium, how-
ever, was made in 1886, when a very extensive series of sit-
tings was held by members of the S. P. R., principally,
the reports of which will be found in Journal^ Vol. II., pp.
S82-S84. While these sittings were striking in many re-
spects, they were, in reality, anything but convincing; so
much so that Mrs. Sidgwick, in summing up the evidence as
a whide, stated that she had ^ no hesitation in attributing the
performances to clever conjuring" (p. 882). This expres-

' For an aeoount of this see Psychic Notes, Calcutta, p. 60.

* See Proceedings S. P. R., Vol. III., pp. 254-6.

• The Supemaiwral t p. 196.


^ The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

sion of opinion naturally brought down upon her head, and
indeed upon the S. F. R. in general, a storm of criticism
from spiritualists and others who believed in the reality of
the phenomena occurring through Eglinton's mediumship.
But the phenomena were certainly anything but conclusive
in character. Podmore points out several defects in the evi-
dence in his Modem Spiritualism^ Vol. II., pp. ftHS.
Further doubt was thrown on the supernormal nature of
the phenomena by the publication in the Journal^ Vol. II.,
pp. 862-75, of a very fine paper by " Professor Hoffmann,"
on " How and What to Observe in Relation to Slate-writing
Phenomena," and several additional letters by Mrs. Sidg-
wick. But these sittings were ultimately shown to be entirely
devoid of any real evidential value by Doctor Hodgson,
who, in a magnificent series of articles, literally tore the
Reports to pieces, and showed just how fraud might possibly
have been practised in every single case.^ So that, although
no proof of fraud was obtained, the evidence to scientific
and cautious minds, for the supernormal, vanished.

But more definite evidence of fraud was forthcoming. In
Proceedings^ Vol. IV., pp. 888-80, will be found recorded
a series of sittings by Prof. CarviU Lewis, in one of
which the whole process of trickery was seen through. Pro-
fessor Lewis practically detecting the entire process by which
Eglinton obtained his information and produced the writing
on the slates. Prof. Carvill Lewis writes:

" Mr. Eglinton places the book on the table with the open
side toward him. His thumb is not visible, his whole hand
being under the table. I purposely do not look directly at
him, but busy myself with these notes. The moment I begin
writing, the manifestations begin. He breathes heavily,
sighs, moves, and rattles the slate, puts his right arm far
below the table, withdraws his body slightly forward, and
then looks downward intently in the direction of the slate.
I suddenly look up, and immediately he also looks up with a
very distressed expression of countenance. I look at my
notes and again he looks down intently, and for some time^

» See Journal, Vol. II., pp. 40».30, 461-7, 489-520.


Slate-writing Tests 87

apparently, at what he is holding beneath the table. From
the positicMi of his arm, I judge that by this time he has
lowered the slate to periiaps eight inches below the table,
even his elbow being sunk out of sight. He now jerks the
slate several times, breathing loudly. I look up again, when
he says that he is tired, and brings up the book and slate,
laying them on the table. . . ." And so on. The whole
performance was so obviously conjuring to a skilled observer
that the wonder is that it could ever have been thought any-
thing else.

The spiritualists still insisted, however, in spite of the
strong evidence to the contrary, that Eglinton's phenomena
were genuine, and chaUenged the skeptical world to bring
forward any other person, who, by the aid of trickery, could
duplicate Eglinton's stances, under the same conditions as
his were given. This was the strong position of the spiritu-
alists at that time : they could always challenge the skeptical
world to produce a conjurer who could duplicate the phe-
nomena observed, and, so long as this individual was not
forthcoming, there was at least a certain amount of rational-,
ity in their belief that the phenomena were genuine. The only
way to prove that they were in the wrong was to produce a
conjurer who, by unaided trickery, could exactly duplicate
the phenomena witnessed in Eglinton's presence.

Realizing that this was the only thing left for them to do,
the S. P. R. endeavored to find some one who could, in some
measure, duplicate the Eglinton stances by fraud. But me-
diumistic secrets were closely guarded in those days and the
Society had great difficulty in finding any one to undertake
the task. They were extremely fortunate, however, in ob-
taining the services of a young man, S. J. Davey by name,
who had come to the conclusion that the slate-writing per-
formances of Eglinton's were all trickery, and had succeeded
in duplicating most of his methods by sleight-of-hand means,
and adding several new efl^ects of his own. So far from Mr.
Davey being an unsympathetic critic at the commencement
of his investigations, he was, on the other hand, at first prac-
tically convinced of the reality of the phenomena he observed.


88 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

and a series of his sittings with Eglinton was recorded on
pp. 481-9 of the Journal^ Vol. II., which was written from
the standpoint of a virtual believer. At the time of their
pubUcation, however, Mr. Davey had been convinced for some
time that they were of no evidential value, and so stated
(p. 431 ). I cite this merely to show that Mr. Davey was
not by any means a prejudiced or partial investigator.

As stated, Mr. Davey had succeeded in dupUcating the
slate-writing performances of Eglinton to such a close de-
gree that he and Doctor Hodgson planned a daring line of
attack upon the position of the ** believers," which was cal-
culated to silence all opposition. Davey was to give a series
of test slate-writing stances free, members of the S. P. R.
and others being invited to be present and witness the phe-
nomena on the condition that they supplied the Society with
a written record of the stance, while Doctor Hodgson was
to be present for the purpose of taking notes. The majority
of the sitters did not, of course, know that the phenomena
were to be produced altogether by trickery. The object was
twofold: to illustrate in a practical manner the possibilities
of malobservation in seances of this character, and to show
the close parallel between these stances and those of Eglin-
ton, — the fraudulent and the supposedly genuine.

The plan worked to perfection. Not only did the sitters
fail to find out the trickery in the phenomena produced (and
even refuse to believe that it was trickery when they were
assured of the fact!) but they unconsciously afforded the
world an opportunity of obtaining possession of the most
valuable documents that have ever been forthcoming relative
to this subject of malobservation, lapse of memory, and the
psychology of fraud in general. The docum^its must be
read for any one to realize the extent to which these mis-
statements are made in all good faith. In fact, deliberate
mis-statements are made of facts that actually took place,
and it is frequently asserted that certain things happened
which did not take place at all. All these mistakes were such
only, and were not due to any conscious myth-making on the
part of the sitter. They merely illustrate, in a marvellous


Slate-writing Tests 89

degree, the possibilities of fallacy, in observing phenomena of
this character, and the extent to which undetected and even
unsuspected fraud may be carried. I have discussed this
aspect of the problem on pp. 48-63 ; for the present I wish
merely to call attention to the other aspect of this series of
sittings ; viz., that the phenomena occurring through Eglin-
ton's mediumship were so nearly duplicated that not one of
the sitters was enabled to distinguish the phenomena, and to
tell which was fraudulent and which genuine.

The net result of all this was to raise the strong presump-
tion that the phenomena observed in Eglinton's presence
were fraudulent also, and the Society was enabled to turn
about and say, ^^ If there is any difference in these stances,
show it to us, for otherwise we are surely entitled to assume
that the phenomena occurring in Eglinton's presence are
fraudulent also." The last prop of the spiritualists had been
effectually knocked away, so far as their defence of the slate-
writing phenomena went, for where was the evidence of the
genuine? Indeed there was no difference in the manifesta-
tions at all ; but, with inconceivable inconsistency, the spirit-
ualists placed the cart before the horse in their interpretation
of the Davey-Hodgson stances, and insisted that they showed,
not that Eglinton was a fraud, but that Davey was a medium
who would not admit the fact!! Could anything be more
irrational? The correspondence in the Society's Journal,
about this time, waxed fast and furious; the dispute was
bitter, and culminated in a challenge to Doctor Hodgson
to show, in detail, just how the phenomena were produced,
if they were nothing but fraud. It must be understood that,
in the early reports of these sittings,^ the actual methods
employed had not been stated, partly because it was not con-
sidered necessary, and partly because Mr. Davey objected
(very naturally) to having his methods made public in this
manner. So long as Mr. Davey lived, therefore, this revela-
tion was never made, but his death ended the chief objection
to the expose of the methods employed, and Doctor Hodgson
accordingly contributed to the Proceedings S, P. R. (Vol.

> Journal, Vol. HI., pp. 8-44; Proceedings, Vol. IV., pp. 381-496, etc.


90 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

VIII., pp. 253-SlO) a detailed exposition of the methods Mr.
Davey employed. It is most interesting reading, and forms
a chapter in the history of the psychology of deception
hardly less valuable than the original.

This complete expos^ was calculated to silence all reason-
able opposition, and, though several oioted spiritualists atill
continued to believe that both Eglinton and Davey were
mediums, the doubt in the minds of the vast majority van-
ished completely.*

I close this brief r6sum6 of the society's work and investi-
gations in slate-writing by stating that the only new cases
tiiey have recorded have both been obvious frauds. The

* It is curious to note, in this connection, that so acute a critic and
thinker as Doctor Maxwell should have entirely missed the point of the
Davey- Hodgson series of sittings; i, e,, their psychological import. On
p. 399 of his Metapsychical Phenomena ne accuses Doctor Plod^n of too
readily jumping at conclusions, and superficiality in reasonmg. Here
is his charge:

" I wonder how a man of Doctor Hodgson's intelligence could have
based his judgment upon such superficial observations as those of the
experimenters ne cites. Here are men, without doubt honorable and well
educated, who hold stances with the obiect of obtaining direct slate-
writing through Mr. Davey. Instead of taking the elementary precaution
of never abandoning their slates, they allow the medium to manipulate
them, permit him to leave the stance-room for a moment, consent to
fdlow other slates than their own to remain on the table at the same time
as those which are used for the experiment, and lastly, when they exam-
ine, only examine it on one side. (These were some of the cases of mal-
observation observed.) This is not malobservation, it is absence of ob-
servation. (See R. Hodgson: ' Mr. Davey^s Imitations by Conjuring
of Phenomena sometimes attributed to Spirit Agency; ' Proceedings, VI.
[evidently a misprint for VIII.l, 263.)"

That is precisely the easel it vxu absence of observation. But the
point was this: that this amount of absence of observation was possible,
and in fact actually the case, without the sitters knowing or recognizing
the fact, and writing their Reports in evident belief that they were correct
in their main outline, and that thev did not contain the errors and omia-
sions afterwards pointed out. Wnere the superficiality comes in it is
hard to see. Doctor Hodgson's main object in conducting these experi-
ments was to illustrate the possibilities of malobservation and lapse of
memory in such slate-writing performances, and to show, further, the
close parallel between the stances of Davey and those of Edinton. In
both of these objects he succeeded perfectly, and I cannot see how Doctor
Maxwell's charges are to be sustained for a moment, when the object of
the stances is made clear. Admitting that it was *' absence of observa-
tion " that was observed during these sittings, their object was to show that
just such absence of observation was possible^ all unknown to the sitter. In
this Doctor Hodgson succeeded admirably. Still, Doctor Maxwell had a
bone to pick with Doctor Hodmon over the Paladino case, and that may
have somewhat warped his judgment in the Davey sittings!


Slate-writing Tests 91

method of the one medium (*^ Pahna ") was actually exposed
in detail,^ while the methods of the famous ^* Bangs Sisters "
were also detected and exposed.^

I now turn to a consideration of the actual methods em-
ployed in producing slate-writing phenomena by fraudulent
means. I have dirided the methods into five sections, and
shall first consider the various


§ 1. Methods with a Single Slate (Prepared)

One of the commonest methods employed, both by con-
jurers and mediums, is what is known as the ^^ flap method."
In order to perform this experiment we need a specially pre-
pared slate, which is made as foUows. First, an ordinary
slate is procured, having a rather wider rim of wood than is
usually the case. Into this frame is fitted another piece of
slate, fitting loosely into it, so that it will fall out easily,
if the slate is turned upside down, ». ^., if the side contain-
ing this flap is turned downwards (v. Fig. VII., p. 104). One
side of this flap is left blank, while the other is covered with
cloth of a dark color, and exactly matching the table-cloth.
Now, when the flap is in place, it will be impossible to tell that
there is any false flap, so long as it is held there firmly by
the fingers, and, of course, no examination be allowed. And,
when the fiap is lying on the table, bottom side up, it will be
practically invisible, if the light be not over-abundant and it
is more or less quickly covered up with other slates, etc. The
slate is prepared by writing on the slate itself (not the flap)
and then covering this writing with the flap above mentioned.
The slate will now present the appearance of being clean on
both sides, and may be freely shown, cleaned with a sponge,
dried, etc., to show that there is no preparation! At some
convenient moment, the flap is dropped on to the table ; the

* Journal, Vol. XI., pp. g-11.

• Journal, Vol. X., Jpp. 6-16. By the Rev. Stanley L. Krebs; toUh an
Introductory Note by iL Hodgson.


92 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

slate, still being held written-side downward, is put into
" position," a piece of slate-pencil slipped underneath, the
sound of writing imitated (by one or other of the methods
to be hereafter described), and, at the proper moment, the
slate is turned over, and lo! the under side of the slate is
covered with writing. The slate may now be examined to
the heart's content, and nothing suspicious will be dis-
covered. The flap has by that time been disposed of, and
everything is secure.

Another method of '^ working " this slate is to write on
the f,ap itself^ leaving this on the table, written-side down,
until required. The slate itself is now, of course, unpre-
pared, and may be examined, cleaned, etc., by the investi-
gators. The slate is placed for a moment on the table (while
the medium breaks off a piece of slate-pencil, let us say),
and when it is again lifted up, the "flap is lifted xMh it. All
that has to be done, now, is to disclose the writing at the
proper moment, which will not be until the regular " for-
mula " for writing has been gone through. The slate, in this
instance, cannot be examined by the investigators after the
writing has been produced, and for that reason is, generally
speaking, an inferior method to that first described.

There is an ingenious variation of this flap method made
as follows. Instead of the slate flap there is a flap made of
slate-colored sUk^ fitting tightly over the slate, and kept in
place by pellets of wax at each corner. To one comer of
this flap is attached a cord. This cord passes up the sleeve,
across the back, and down the other sleeve, to the left hand,
constituting what is known to conjurers as the '* single pull."
Both sides of the slate can be freely shown ; the slate cleaned
and dried, and placed on the table, face downward. The
writing can now be produced at any moment required. This
is a very effective method indeed, for, by simply holding the
slate in the air, and in full view of every one, or by merely
waving the slate about, it instantly becomes covered with
writing! Moreover, the slate can be at once handed for ex-
amination, and will be found perfectly devoid of any kind of
trickery. The great drawback to this method is that the


Slate-writing Tests 93

slate cannot be examined in the first place, and for that
reason would not do for serious investigators, trained to
observe carefully, and who would demand ^ test condi-
tions." But, apart from the fact that the vast bulk of
persons who visit slate-writing mediums are not careful,
scientific investigators, this test can frequently be intro-
duced ^ impromptu,'* so to say, as follows. The medium
first attempts two or three experiments with unprepared
slates that are examined; after which the medium suddenly
picks up one of the slates, apparently at rand(»n, cleans
and dries it quickly, as though in disgust, shows, in a care-
less manner, that both surfaces are clean, holds the slate
in his hand, imitates the sound of writing, and in due time
(after adroitly pulling the flap up his sleeve by straight-
ening the arms), produces the slate covered with writing!
It is more than probable that, if the investigators had
examined all the other slates before the writing was pro-
duced, they will say in their reports that this one was exam-
ined also, especially as this slate was examined directly after
the writing took place, thus heightening the illusion of
having examined the slate both before and after.

Still another method is the following. A slate is shown
on both sides and carefully cleaned before the investigators.
Nevertheless it instantly becomes covered with writing, which
fills the whole side of the slate. In this method the supposed
^ slate '^ is no slate at all, but merely a hollow frame, in the
two short ends of which are inserted roUers or rods, which
revolve freely. Round these rollers is passed an endless
band of slate-colored silk, the ends of which are firmly glued
together. Where the cloth is joined there is inserted a little
stud or button; this catches in the frame of the slate when
it reaches one or the other end of it, and prevents it from
being pushed round too far. One side of the slate is now
covered with writing and laid on the table, written-side down.
When it is picked up, the upper side is first cleaned and dried,
and, in turning over the slate, to clean the other side, the
stud is rapidly pushed to. the other end of the slate, which
will, of course, bring the writing to the side of the slate


94 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

just cleaned, and leave the side to be cleaned clear of any
sign of writing. The message can now be produced when-
ever desired.

Before describing single trick-slates of other patterns, I
shall insert, just here, several methods of using the flap-
slate, that do, nevertheless, appear to the uninitiated to be
entirely distinct and different ** tests." This will serve as
an example of how the same trick, in the hands of an expert
operator, may assume various forms, apparently, and appear
to be separate and distinct tricks. The following will serve
as an example.

The medium requests his sitter to write a question on a
sheet of paper, fold it, and put it into his pocket. A slate
is then shown blank, and thoroughly cleaned on both sides.
The medium then takes the pellet of paper with the question
on it, places it under the slate, the sound of writing is heard,
and in a few minutes the slate is turned over, and the under
side is found to contain a correct and relevant answer to the
'question written on the paper. This Is a very favorite
method among mediums, and, in the hands of a cool man,
is sure to prove convincing.

It will at once be seen that there are two distinct parts to
this test — obtaining a knowledge of the contents of the
folded paper, and the writing of the answer thereto on the
slate. Owing to the fact that the medium cannot prepare
his answer to the question before he knows what that is, it
would appear impossible, at first sight, that he should be
enabled to use the flap method in this test, as I have said he
docs. That is the explanation, nevertheless.

The medium first obtains a knowledge of the contents of
the sitter's folded-up paper. This he does by any one of the
methods enumerated on pp. 276-90, and need not detain us
now. Supposing, then, that our medium has gained this in-
formation, the question is: how does he contrive to write an
answer thereto without the sitter seeing him do so, since the
slates are not concealed under the table in this test, but are
kept openly in the light? Well, that is where the medium's


Slate-writing Tests 95

cleverness comes in ; he does contrive to write the answer on
the slate, and this is how he does it.

The medium takes a slate-pencil in his hand, sajing, ** I
shall ask the spirits whether they will answer your question
at this sitting or not, and shall ask them to write their an-
swer to that question an this slate ; we shall then know how to
proceed." So saying, the medium takes pencil in hand and
writes on one side of the slate, apparently under spirit con-
trcif and then on the other side. The message is read, and
it says the conditicms are very favorable, and, no doubt, there
will be most satisfactory results. The medium then shows
the slate with both sides covered with writing, the questicm
asked an one side, and the answer thereto on the other. The
slate is now thoroughly cleaned on both sides, and placed on
the table. The paper containing the question is placed
under the slate, together with a bit of slate-pencil. Immedi-
ately the sound of writing is heard, and, on turning over the
slate, it is found to be covered with writing, forming a reply
to the question written on the sheet of paper. ^

But the reader is still in ignorance of the way in which
the reply to the sitter's question came to appear on the
slate. It was in this manner. On one side of the flap,
above menticmed, the medium writes, beforehand, a part of
the message that was apparently written under spirit control,
the answer of the spirits to the question as to whether the
sitting would be a success or not. This false flap is lying
cm the table, cloth side up, and hence invisible. What the
medium wrote (m the first side of the slate, then, was the
correct answer to the sitter's question, and not the first part
of his question to the spirits, as the sitter supposes. On
turning over the slate to write the answer on the reverse side,
the medium slips the false flap into position, and keeps it
there by pressing it firmly into place with his fingers. Now
when the question and answer are finished, and the medium
shows the slate to his sitter, it is obvious that both sides con-
tain nothing but the question and answer the medium wrote
openly, and these are now cleaned off^, leaving the slate ap-
parently free from writing of every description. But it will


96 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

be remembered that the answer to the sitter's question is
under the false flap, and, in order to cause this writing to
appear, all the medium has to do is to get rid of this false
flap, which he can very readily do by letting it fall into his
lap, e. g. The writing can now be produced whenever de-
sired, and the slate can also be examined, since the flap is no
longer in it. This is a very ingenious test, and will serve to
illustrate the cleverness of mediums in devising such methods,
and how helpless is the average person in the hands of such
sharpers !

The following is a very convincing test. The sitter is shown
a blank slate, both sides of which are thoroughly cleaned
before him. He places his signature on one corner of the
slate, which is then placed on the table, that side downward.
The medium and the sitter then join hands over the slate,
showing that the medium does not do the writing. Neverthe-
less, the slate being turned over, that side is found to be cov-
ered with writing. In this case, the medium certainly did not do
the writing on the slate during the stance, and the flap method
seems to be out of the question, since the writing appeared
on the same side upon which the initials were written, and
hence if this side was altogether taken away, the sitter's
initials would disappear also, while the flap could not have
been on the other side of the slate, since the writing appesured
on the same side of the slate as the initials were inscribed
upon. The flap method would thus seem to be out of the
question and impossible.

That www the method employed, nevertheless! The ex-
planation of the feat lies in the fact that or^ comer of the
flap is missing. The message is prepared beforehand by
the medium, and covered by the false flap, in the regular
way. Care is taken, of course, not to write on that part of
the slate which is exposed to view when the flap is in place.
If the flap is nicely bevelled, it will be practically invisible
at a little distance ; but the medium takes care not to let this
corner out of his hands for an instant. When the sitter is
requested to write his signature on the slate, the medium
holds it for him, and indicates, with his finger, the comer in


Slate-writing Tests 97

which the sitter is to place his signature. In reality, he
thereby hides the edge of the flap from the sitter, which
would be visible at so short a distance. All the medium has
to do now is to drop the flap into his lap, place the slate in
the centre of the table, and in due time turn it over, when
the writing is revealed.

A very wonderful test may be furnished by means of the
flap method as follows. A slip of paper and a pencil are
handed to one of the investigators, with a request that he
write on it a row of four figures. After he has done so, the
paper is handed to a second person, who writes a row of four
figures likewise, then to a third person, then to a fourth,
then to a fifth. The paper is then folded up and given to a
sixth pers(xi to place in his pocket, the medium never once
having seen the paper, or its written contents. While this
has been going on the medium has shown a slate, and thor-
oughly cleaned both sides. The slate is now wrapped in
newspaper and given to one of the investigators to hold.
All this can be done, if desired, before the paper is handed
round, thus precluding the idea that the slate is prepared
befordiand! There are no confederates required in this
experiment. However, no sooner has the gentleman holding
the slip of paper added up the five rows of figures and men-
taUy noted their total, than the newspaper containing the
slate is opened, and on the slate is found a row of figures
which is the sum total of the five rows of figures written on
the sheet of paper !

The explanation of this apparent marvel is simple enough.
The medium has two pieces of paper of exactly the same
ap]>earance. One of these is left blank, but on the other he
writes five rows of figures (any figures), adds them up and
notes the total. He now writes Hut total on the slate and
covers this side with a false flap, one side of which is, in this
case, covered with newspaper. This side is inward, however,
thus it outwardly presents the appearance of an ordinary
slate. The second piece of paper is now handed to the first
investigator, with the request that he write thereon a row
of four figures. After he has done so, it is handed to the


98 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

second, with like request ; then the third, etc., until five per-
sons have each written their row of figures. It does not in
the least matter what their figures were, as, in handing this
folded slip to the sixth person the medium has substituted
for it the paper containing his own five rows of figures, the
total of which he does know. The rest of the trick is obvious.
At the proper moment the slate is produced and the number
written thereon is found to tally with the total, as added up
by the investigator. The flap is not noticed, for, in opening
the pax;kage, the medium is careful to drop the flap sUde
side down, and, in this case, the reverse side is covered with
newspaper. The reason the medium asks for as many as
four or five rows of figures is that, if cmly one or two were
written down, these could be added up very eeusily and
quickly, and one of the investigators might have dcxie so
and noticed that the total was not that which was finally
announced. This is obviated where a large number of
figures are written down. The medium takes care to hurry
this part of the test as much as possible.

Having now detailed the principal methods of using the
trick flap-slate, I shall proceed to enumerate the other chief
methods of fraudulently producing writing upon a single
slate that has been prepared. There are very many methods
of producing writing in a simple manner, but I shall enu-
merate only those most used and best known.

One that is good is the following. Take a small
camePs hair brush and dip it in onion juice. With it write
on the slate whatever you desire, and when this is dry it is
practically invisible, and may even be examined without fear
of detection, if the light be not too brilliant. The medium
cleans the slate himself, in this case, and is careful to dab^
only lightly, the onion juice marks on the prepared side of
the slate. Further, the handkerchief with which the slate is
cleaned is not unprepared, but has been sprinkled over with
powdered chalk. This chalk adheres to the onion juice marks,
and the result is a written word not unlike a somewhat blurred
chalk mark. A variation of this trick, sometimes performed,
is this. The slate, having been shown free from writing, is


Slate-writing Tests 99

placed upon an easd. The medium now allows any one in
the audience to choose from a plate containing different
colored chalks the color he desires. The chalk is powdered,
rammed into a pistol, and fired at the slate. A word appears
written on the slate more or less legibly.

There is no trick or preparation about the pistol or chalk.
But the slate had been written on beforehand with glycerine,
and the chalk stidcs to this, when fired at the slate. It is a
clumsy trick, at best, and more resembles a conjuring trick
proper than a finished mediumistic performance!

Here is a much more effective method, and one very
largely used by mediums all over the country. A slate is
shown and cleaned on both sides with a sponge and water.
It can be thoroughly examined by the investigator, who
takes the slate into his own hands, and who does not let it
out of his hands once after it is cleaned. He may keep the
slate in his possession the entire sitting, put the piece of
pencil under the slate himself, and hold both the medium's
hands while the writing is taking place. It would appear
that tridcery is out of the question ; and yet trickery of the
most simple kind is practised, after all! The secret is this.
The medium writes whatever he wishes to appear (m the slate,
before the sitting, in acid. The best preparation is made by
dissolving a few small pieces of zinc in hydrochloric acid. A
camel's hair brush is used in applying it to the slate. When
this is dry it will appear exactly like slate-pencil writing.
But when it is wet it becomes invisible. The method of pro-
cedure now becomes plain. The medium takes the slate and
thoroughly wets both sides before any one is allowed to exam-
ine ii. If a rag is not then used to dry it, it will take some
time to dry, and may be freely examined in the interval. The
medium may explain the fact that the slate is handed for
examination wet by saying that it (the water) ^^ absorbs ad-
verse magnetic influences/' or any other such nonsense that
he may choose. A piece of slate-pencil is placed beneath the
slate, and the medium keeps his sitter entertained by ^^ clair-
voyant visions," or whatever he pleases until the slate dries.
The trick is then done. Though it may appear absurdly


100 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

simple, when thus explained (as indeed it is), the trick is,
nevertheless, one of the most effective slate tests I kndw, when
well performed.

A test very similar to that just described is the following.
The medium scratches on the slate whatever he wishes with a
sharp metal-pointed instrument. When dry, this will look
very like slate-pencil writing. When the slate is wet, it will,
however, be invisible. All that the medium has to do is to
wait until the slate dries, as in the last instance.

It may be well for me to insert here the principal methods
that are employed to imitate the sotund of writing on the
slate, for, of course, the sound of writing has very seldom
anything to do with the actual process of writing, that hav-
ing been done, as a rule, long before the sound of writing
took place at all. (In some few cases, however, the writing
is not done until after the sound of the writing has ceased,
and at a different time altogether.) It must be remembered
that the medium is being more closely observed, in all proba-
bility, at this time than at any other period throughout the
experiment, and for that reeuson he rarely if ever attempts
to perform anything at all at that particular period. He
has either written the message beforehand, or he waits until
the close scrutiny of the investigators is to some extent re-
laxed, which it probably will be as soon as they think the
writing already performed. This being the case, it is ob-
vious that the medium can never be detected in writing on
the slate, since the writing is done at another time; at the
time when the sound of writing is in progress he is as free
from deceit as any one in his circle! This is a most important
point to keep in mind.

The simplest method is for the medium to scratch on the
under surface of the slate he is holding with his finger-nail.
Hiis imitates the sound of writing almost exactly, and is the
method all but invariably employed, many mediums knowing
of none other. Another way is for the medium to scratch on
a duplicate slate, in his lap or elsewhere, with another pencil.
Still another method is for the unoccupied hand to rub two


Slate-writing Tests 101

slate-pencils together. This brings me to the very ingenious
method proposed by Truesdell, in his Spiritualiim, Bottom
Facti^ pp. 199-200. By the use of this piece of apparatus,
the sound of writing may be produced, though both hands
are visible and resting (xi the table.

The piece of apparatus consists of a little wedge-shaped
wooden clamp, somewhat resembling a large wooden ^^ V/'
only the base is somewhat flat, instead of coming to a point.
This clamp can be crowded on to the projecting flap of wood
on the under side of the table, where it will remain until re-
moved by force. This can be placed in position at any con-
venient moment. To the lower end of this clamp is attached
a slate-pencil. The medium then pushes another slate-pencil
through two little loops, made from sewing silk, which are
on his trousers, near his knee. All that the medium now has
to do, in order to produce the sound of writing, is to rub the
two pencils together, which can eeusily be done by a slight
movement of the knee, and the illusion is perfect. It is prac-
tically impossible to detect the fact that the sound of writing
comes from beneath the table, owing to the fact that the ears
are so readily deceived in such matters, which has been
abundantly proven on many occasions.^ It is quite impos-
sible for the ear to locate the sound, under the conditions
given, especially as the medium constantly calls the atten-
ticm of the sitters to the slate. I cannot stop to elaborate
this point, which is well known and recognized by psychol-
ogists. Detection is impossible, if the feat is neatly per-
formed; and the medium has only to remove the clamp, at
a convenient moment, to render everything secure. Truesdcll
states that Slade used this piece of apparatus frequently, a
statement I do not at all doubt.

There are doubtless other methods that can easily be de-
vised, and are, in fact, in use. But the above will give the
reader a general idea of the sort of thing he is to expect
from slate-writing mediums, and will perhaps assist him in
unmasking other methods that may be employed.

* See Fact and FMe in Psychology, p. 109; Sulley, Illusions; Parish,
Hallucinations and Illusions, etc.


102 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

§ £. Methods zcith a Single Slate (Unprepared)

In all the slate tests I have so far enumerated, the trick
has been performed with a trick-slate, and was possible be-
cause of its preparation. The spiritualist may, perhaps, have
objected to all my explanations, so far, as being inadequate
to cover many slate tests he has himself seen, in which the
investigator has brought to the sitting his own marked slate,
and never let this slate out of his hands for a single minute
until writing appeared thereon. I would reply to this that
I have not attempted to do so; my object so far has been to
explain those methods that are employed by the average
professional medium with slates of his own, or with slates
that he has had an opportunity of handling, if only for a
few moments before the sitting. In the present section I
propose to deal with those tests which are given with the
sitter's own marked and unprepared slate ; where the medium
has had (apparently, at least) no opportunity of manipu-
lating the slate before the writing is produced. In many
cases, as we shall presently see, it is not necessary.

It must be understood that all this refers only to single
slates, and not to double slates that have been tied and sealed
by the investigator prior to his visit to the medium. I shall
explain, later on, the principal methods that are employed
in fraudulently producing writing between locked and sealed
slates; and, in such cases, no matter what the appearances
may be, the slates always do leave the investigator's hands,
if only for a few seconds, before any writing is produced
on the slates. Says Mr. Wm. R. Robinson,^ " I wish to re-
mark that, if any person tells you he took two slates of his
own to a medium, thoroughly well tied and sealed, and that
the slates never left his (the skeptic's) hands, and that there
was writing obtained upon the interior surface of the slates
under those conditions, he was sadly mistaken, and failed to
keep track of everything that actually took place at the
time of the sitting." And this statement is repeated by all
those conjurers and mediums who actually produce the writ-

> Spirit Slate WriHng and Kindred Phenomena^ p. 22.


Slate-writing Tests 103

Ing and who know what actually takes place, and not only
what appean to do so. I quite admit that, in many cases,
the interval of time is far too small to allow of any manipu-
lation of the slates by the medium ; and that he is watched far
too closely to admit of any such open manipulation. But it
is not always necessary for the medium to have this time and
opportunity, as we shall presently see ! On pp. 136-8, I shall
explain a method of obtaining writing between the sitter's
own locked and thoroughly sealed slates (prepared by him
before going to the medium's house) in which the slates do
not leave the sitter's hands for more than two or three sec-
onds, and where the medium's eyes never once left those of the
sitter, and yet writing was obtained fraudulently between
the locked slates even under these conditions! And if this
is the case, if writing can be obtained under conditions ap-
parently so perfect, where the illusion is so complete (of
never having allowed the slate out of your hands for a single
instant), then I must insist upon the fact that human testi-
mony (especially of persons absolutely unacquainted with
conjuring devices and the tricks of mediums) is absolutely
valueless, so far as slate-writing performances go. There
are so many devices, so many methods of fraudulently pro-
ducing the writing, that the testimony of the average person
is of no value whatsoever in these cases. However keen an
observer a man may be there are always a dozen different
methods of fooling him, and of course any medium who
knows his business would never think of producing the writ-
ing twice in the tame way^ for the same sitter. He would
always change his method at the second sitting for one en-
tirely different, so that, in case his sitter had some idea of how
the writing might have been produced in the first case, and
goes with the intention of observing what would he suspicious
movements by the medium (which would be necessary were
his theory true, as it may be), he gets an entirely different
test that baffles him completely, and he goes away more mys-
tified than ever. It is by such means that the most ardent
converts are made.

But to return to slate-writing.


104 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

The sitter, we will suppose, has brought his own marked
slate, and is determined that it will not pass out of his direct
observation until writing has been produced upon it, or the
experiment has been given up as a failure. He consequently
watches narrowly every action of the medium, and is ready
to certify that none of any importance or significance escape
him. The medium takes the slate, examines it, says it will
do, and hands it back to the sitter, who is at liberty to again
clean it, should he so desire. A small piece of slate-pencil is
then broken oiF and placed upon the slate. The latter is now
placed beneath the table, and held there by the medium and
sitter jointly. £ax;h holds his end of the slate with one hand
only, the remaining hands being clasped above the table. In
this manner neither could let go his end of the slate without
the other being at once aware of the fact. Sometimes the
slate is held directly under the table and toward the middle,
but this is a very clumsy method, and is never seen nowadays.
The usual way of holding the slate is for the medium and
the sitter to press the slate against the under comer of the
table, so that the frame of the slate corresponds with the
angle of the table, with which it coincides. The slate is thus
directly under the comer of the table (v. Fig. VIII.). This
would be impossible with an ordinary table, because there is
a flange under it, which would effectually prevent it, and for
this reason we must use the hinged flap of a dining-room
table, or have one specially built for the purpose. In either
case no table-cloth is used, that being altogether dispensed
with. Each sitter supports the slate by placing his four
fingers under the slate, his thumb being above the table.

Now what apparently happens is this. The slate being held
as I have just described, the sound of writing is heard, and,
upon the slate being withdrawn, the under or the upper sur-
face of the slate is found to be covered with writing. The
slate was undoubtedly blank when the slate was placed be-
neath the table and the medium was held throughout as
described. Nevertheless the writing occurred, and this is how
it was done.

The medium had secreted, under the finger-nail of his first


Slate-writing Tests 105

finger, a minute fragment of slate-pencil ; and, when the slate
was in position, all he had to do was to extend this finger, and
to write on the under surface of the slate whatever he desired.
This becomes very easj after a little practice. The writing
is scrawling, but that makes no difference, the sitters are
glad to get it just the same. The message must be short,
too, as the radius through which the medium's fingers must
pass is limited. The long, even messages are not produced
in this way, but in a different manner, to be described pres-
ently. Great care must be exercised in order to prevent an
undue movement of the tendons of the wrist, the disregarding
of which precauti(xi has led to the exposure of more than
one medium.^

There is one other factor that must be taken into consid-
eration. When producing writing in this manner, it must
be remembered that the writing will be backwards^ so that,
when read, it will appear as if written from left to right in
the regular manner. This will take some time to learn —
more than the mere writing imder the table, which can be
acquired very easily. The best way to learn to do this
neatly and quickly is to stand in front of a large mirror with
your slate in your hand and watch your writing in the glass
as you go. Far less practice is required to become an expert
at this than would be imagined at first sight.

So far, I have mentioned only one method of producing
writing on the under side of the slate, that in which writing

> See Proceedings S. P. R., Vol. IV., p. 356. Prof. Carvill Lewie is de-
scribing a stance with the famous Eglinton. He says: " / dieUncUy saw
the movement of the central tendon in his wrist, corresponding to that made
by his middle finger in the act of writing. Each movement of the tendon
was simultaneously accompanied by the sound of a scratch on the slate."
Mr. Truesdell also says (Spiritualism, Bottom Facts, p. 146): " I could
plainly see the movements of the cords in the doctors (Doctor Slade's)
wrists, indicating to me that he was doing the writing, but I was not sure
of this fact, at the time, as he appeared to be very nervous, making many
strange, and, apparently, unnecessary movements." This method is said
to be the one most frequently employed by Doctor Slade, which I con-
sider highly probable, from a study of various accounts of sittings with
him. It will be observed that it is not absolutely necessary to hold the
slate under the table in order to perform this test — it is quite possible to
produce the writing while simply holding the slate in the air, being care-
ful to note that the under suriaoe of the slate is below the eye-level of the
sitteri.


106 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

is produced by means of a piece of slate-pencil, secreted
under the finger-nail. But there are other means of pro-
ducing the writing, which I must now mention. One method
is for the medium to have, concealed up his right sleeve, a
thimble, to which is firmly attached a small piece of slate-
pencil. Getting this into his right hand, the medium slips
the thimble over his first finger, and produces the writing
as before mentioned. All he has to do to dispose of the
apparatus is to let it fly up his right sleeve. This piece of
apparatus is ingenious, but always requires a certain amount
of manoeuvring both to conceal the device and to get rid of
it, when once used; and for this reason some clever person
hit upon the following idea, whereby the thimble is dispensed
with. A tiny piece of very hard slate-pencil is placed at the
tip of the right forefinger and over it is placed a piece of
flesh-colored court-plaster, this being firmly attached to the
finger. The plaster is then carefully blended to the finger
with aniline dye, so as to make it indistinguishable. After
the plaster has become hard and dry a small hole is made in
the court-plaster, allowing the point of the slate-pencil to
come through ; and this is what does the writing. Of course
the finger cannot be examined, in this case, and where an
examination is likely the former method had better be em-
ployed.

It only remains for me to explain how the writing ap-
peared, apparently, on the upper surface of the slate, when
it must always have been on the v/nder side that the writing
took place. The explanation is simply this: in withdraw-
ing the slate at the end of the test (or on some former occa-
sion, when the medium desired to see if " the spirits " had
yet written anjrthing), the medium adroitly turned (yoer the
slate, thus bringing the under surface to the top. When this
is not done, then another test had been given, and the writing
was on the upper surface of the slate before it was placed
beneath the table.

An exceedingly clever test is given by the author of The
Revelations of a Spirit Medium (pp. 147-61), as follows:

** Another phase of slate-writing that has puzzled and con^


Slate-writing Tests 107

verted many an inyestigator was the finger-writing or * mate-
rialization ' of a pencil on the finger of the medium. . . /'

(After describing the method of obtaining a knowledge
of the contents of paper pellets, as I have done on p. STQ, he
goes on:)

** After he had read all the pellets, he would come into the
room with the sitters and seat himself in the centre of the
circle with half a dozen clean slates on the floor at his right
and a pitcher of water on his left. Taking one of the slates
on his lap and holding it in place with his left hand, he
would offer his right hand for examination.

^^ When all were satisfied that his right hand and fingers
were perfectly clean and innocent of any apparatus, he would
close all the fingers but the index, and, after swinging it
about his head for a few seconds, he would bring the end of
his finger down on the slate and proceed to write a message
in answer to one of the pellets that had not been answered
during the earlier part of the stance. When the message
had been completed, he would give to some one of the sitters
the small bit of pencil, about the size of a pin-head, that
would be found clinging to the end of his finger. They were
in great demand, for had not the lucky possessor seen it
^ materialized ' from the air? Another examination of the
hand would be made, and another message written. This
would be repeated until all the pellets had been answered, and,
when there were those present who were mentioned in his note-
books (v, p. 814), a few * tests,' independent of the pellets,
would be given.

" This medium had been repeatedly tested by investigators,
but his trick was never detected. His fingers had been
washed with acids so frequently that the nails were almost
eaten off. He converted a great many to a belief in spirit-
ualism.

" His trick was simple enough, the trouble being all with
the investigators. They invariably searched in the wrong
place for the bits of pencil. There was no use in washing the
fingers of his right hand, for his pencils were not kept in
that hand.


108 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

•

^^ The pencils were made by pulverizing a slate-pencil and
mixing the powder thus obtained with ordinary mucilage,
forming a thick paste. This was cut into small squares,
about the size of a rice grain. These squares were allowed
to dry perfectly hard. He also kept a few of the pencils
made by simply breaking small bits off a piece of slate.
When he seated himself to give the writings he would deposit
about a dozen of the mucilage pencils on his left knee. His
pants were black, hence they were not visible; besides, the
slate was nearly all the time over the knee. They could not
fall off, for he held them a few seconds in his closed hand
before sticking them on his knee. This warmed them and
made them sticky, so that they stuck where he put them.
Four or five of the pencils not made with mucilage he put
into his mouth.

** In picking up a slate with his right hand, he stoops over
with his left hand on his knee. When he takes up his left
hand one of the pencils is sticking to his thumb. He grasps
the slate with his left hand, in such a way that the thumb is
across the frame on the uppermost side.

^^ He now offers his right hand for inspection, and, while
everybody's attention is attracted to it, he scrapes the piece
of pencil off his thumb on the slate. Both the pencil and the
slate being black, the pencil is not seen in the dim light.
All he needs do, now, is to place the index-finger of the right
hand on the pencil and proceed to write. But suppose he
drops the pencil and has no opportunity to get another from
his knee? He will simply do a little snorting and contorting
and drop one from his mouth and go on with the message.
The reason he does not put the mucilage pencils in his mouth
is because they would melt. The reason he does not use his
mouth altogether is because he is too liable to detection. In
order to add to the appearances of his act, he would usually
drink a gallon of water during the hour and a half that his
stance required.

" This man travelled all over the country on the one de-
ception and always had all the money he required. He is now
d^id, and his phase is being worked by others/


»»


Slate-writing Tests 109

We now come to a test often emplojed. A card is given
by the medium to the skeptic with the request that he (the
skeptic) write a question on it. When this is done, the
medium takes the card without looking at it, and holds it
against his forehead. After a short interval, he hands the
card back to the sitter, and on it, in writing, is found the
answer to the questicm. This clever test is performed in the
following manner. The medium has concealed about his per-
son a small flesh-colored piece of watch-spring, bent to fit
the end of his thumb. One end of this slips under the thumb-
nail, and the other is provided with a minute needle-point,
which catches in the flesh and holds the wire on securely.
To the outside curve of this spring is fastened a very small
piece of lead-pencil, and this does the writing. The modus
operandi should now be clear. As soon as the medium re-
ceives back the card, he glances at it, notices the question,
and decides what he shall answer. The card is now held to
the forehead, with the fingers toward the sitter, and the
thumb inward, and with the thumb he writes on the card,
after the manner of the slate-test explained on p. 105, in
which a thimble is used. This, well worked, is highly effect-
ive and delusory.

Here is another clever test. The medium cleans a slate and
immediately hands it to the sitter, who is at liberty to exam-
ine it and place his private mark upon it. The slate is then
placed upon the table, and medium and sitter join hands.
In a short time the slate is turned over and a spirit message
is found on the under side. The secret is this. A message
is written on the slate before the stance began, by the me-
dium. The slate is left on the table, written-side down.
When the proper time arrives, the medium picks up a sponge,
wet TBrith alcohol^ and dabs out the writing with this. When
the slate is wet^ the writing will now be invisible, but will
appear again as plainly as ever as soon as the slate dries.
AH the medium has to do, therefore, is to keep his sitter
engaged while the slate is drying.

Mr. William E. Robinson (who was, by the way, one-
time assistant to Professor Hermann), in his Spirit Slate


110 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

Writing and Kindred Phenomena^ pp. 4S-4, thus describes
an extremely ingenious method, which he once saw per-
formed:

" A friend of mine told me of a medium he once went to
see, who gave him a most remarkable test. He brought his
own slate, and, as he afterward said, there cotUd have been
no trick about it ! The medium took the slate for a moment,
and, with a pencil, covered the slate with writing on both
sides, just to see, so he said, if it would be good enough for
the test. He then cleaned off the slate on both sides, and
gave it back to my friend, requesting him to hold it close
against his breast, and then in a short time remove it, and
when he did so, he was thunderstruck to find writing on it
on the side nearest to him. This struck me as a most aston-
ishing proof of spirit-writing. I had a meeting with the
medium, who gave me the same test. It seemed strange to
me that he should want my slate to write on and wash it off
again, for the same reason as he gave my friend, and that
was to see ^ if it was good enough for the spirits to work
with.' I received a message on the slate, after it was washed,
and saw that there was none on there after it was cleaned and
handed to me. I went home puzzled, and experimented to
no avail. I had another sitting with the medium, but he did
not give me the same test ; ^ so I returned home again and
tried to fathom the mystery, and was eventually successful.
The trick was mainly in the pencil. It was pointed at both
ends. One end was a genuine slate-pencil, the other end was
a silver nitrate or caustic pencil. In writing on the slate, he
wrote the lines quite a little distance apart with the slate-pen-
cil; in between these lines he wrote with the caustic pencil,
the writing of which was invisible. The sponge the slate was
cleaned with was dipped in salt-water. That part of the
slate containing the writing done with the silver nitrate was
just lightly tapped with the sponge, the rest of the slate
was thoroughly cleaned. The salt water, when the slate be-
comes dry, brings out the silver nitrate white, like a slate-
pencil mark. I consider this trick as ingenious and clever

> See p. 103.


Slate-writing Tests / 111)

a one as it has been my good fortune to witness, and one
that caused me much mental effort to solve."

Should the reader now imagine that he is capable of un-
masking any slate trick he might see, here is one for him to
solve. The sitter brings his own marked slate, cleans it him-
self, and lets it thoroughly dry before handing it to the me-
dium. The latter now takes the slate with the tips of his
fingers, in one hand, and immediately holds it out, away from
his body, so that no contact is possible. Yet in a short time
the slate is returned to the sitter and writing is found on
the back of the slate. How did it get there?

For this test a piece of apparatus is required of which
the sitter has no knowledge. It consists of a long, narrow
strip of wood on one side of which is glued a series of letters
of cork or felt, and raised from the strip about an eighth
of an inch. These letters are in reverse, and are well rubbed
with chalk. To one end of this piece of apparatus is fast-
ened a cord, this passing up the left sleeve and terminating
in a loop, which is fastened to a button. The length of the
string is just sufficient to allow the strip of wood to hang
down behind a slate held in the same hand. The sponge is
washed with water containing alum, this causing the chalk
to stick to the slate more readily. When the slate was handed
to the medium he held it downward in his left hand, and
allowed the strip of wood to slip down behind it, when it was
pressed firmly against the surface of the slate, and then
pulled up into the sleeve again out of sight. The same idea
has been utilized in the case of a blotter, the slate being dried
on the pad. The blotter has the writing done on it with
chalk, thus doing away with the strip of wood.

Here is another test. A slate is cleaned and marked by
the sitter, and, by him, deposited on the floor, under the
sdance-table. The medium and sitter then join hands. Soon,
the sound of writing is heard, and, on picking up the slate,
one side of it is found covered with writing. As the acute
reader has doubtless guessed, the writing is done, in this case,
by the medium's toes. He wears low-cut slippers, which he can
easily slip on and off. The sock of his right foot is cut


112 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

away, so as to leave the toes bare. To the big toe is fastened
a piece of slate-pencil, and it is with this that the writing is
done. This feat may sound most difficult, but it can be
learned with comparative ease. The medium takes good care
that his sitter does not look under the table, during the
operation, by drawing him firmly up against the table, and
holding him there until the writing is effected. If an effort
is made to look under the table, the medium can easily detect
it and instantly slip his foot back into his slipper, when
nothing suspicious will be found.

A method sometimes adopted in a dark stance is the fol-
lowing. A slate being cleaned, and placed on the table, and
both the medium's hands well held, the lights are extin-
guished. Soon the sound of writing is heard, and, on again
lighting the gas, a message is found written on the slate.
In this case, the medium had a small piece of slate-pencil
secreted in his mouth, and, as soon as the lights were extin-
guished, the medium half -rose from his chair, bent over the
table, and wrote on the slate with the pencil held between
his teeth. But a still simpler way of performing this test
would be for the medium to effect the release of his hand,
after the manner described on p. 188, and do the writing
with his disengaged hand. But dark stances are so obviously
inconclusive in any test of this kind that it is hardly worth
our while considering them further.

Thus far, we have considered but one class or section of
tests with a single, unprepared slate ; there remains for our
review another whole series of tests, which arc, probably,
even more frequently employed by the professional medium
than any I have so far enumerated — I refer to methods of
stihstitutiofi; to methods, that is to say, in which the sitter's
slate is, at some convenient moment in the stance, changed
for another, containing written messages, which slate is,
perhaps, in turn, resubstituted for the original, at some later
period.

One of the simplest methods, which is also very effective,
is the following. The medium has a number of slates in
his arms — say four. He hands the investigator the top


Slate-writing Tests 113

one to dean. When he has done so, he hands it back to the
medium, who hands him another to clean, also from the top
of the pile, and in this manner he proceeds until he has
cleaned aU four slates. The medium then takes two of them,
and places them together, and the sitter is at liberty to bind
and seal these up as much as he desires. The two slates are
placed on the table, in full view, and are not once removed
or touched by the medium throughout the rest of the sitting.
Nevertheless, writing appears on the inner surface of the
slates, though the sitter may have taken them home to open
them. This test is performed as follows :

First of all, the medium wrote out the message he wished
to appear on one of the slates, and placed this slate beneath
several others on his table. The topmost ones of this pile
may be used for any other tests desired, the medium being
careful to pick up the four lowest for this test. Stand by
the side of your sitter, and a trifle behind him. Hand him
the top slate to clean, then the second, then the third, each
time placing the slate he returns you at the bottom of the
pile. While the third is being cleaned, however, you slip the
fourth slate (now the top one) to the bottom again, and when
he returns you the third slate hand him the top one (really
the first one over again) to clean. This he does. Now all
you have to do is to place the slate containing the writing
and cme other together, taking care that the written side is
inward, and the slates may be bound up together and sealed
to your sitter's heart's content. Instead of slipping the top
(xie to the bottom, sometimes another dodge is used. The
medium simply turns the three slates over by a twist of the
hand. This brings the prepared slate to the bottom and the
last slate cleaned to the top. This slate may be damp from
the recent cleaning, however, and, if this is the case, the
medium sponges over the slate himself — " to save time " —
really to disguise the fact that it is still wet from the last
cleaning. After it is wet, he thinks that the sitter might
prefer to clean it himself, however, and so hands it to him
with the remark : " Perhaps it would be more satisfactory
for you to clean it yourself, after all ! " I have described


114 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

this test as performed with two slates, and so reallj falling
under " class four,'* but it can be performed just as easily
with a single slate, and for that reason I have included it
in this section. The same remark applies to the other tests
I am about to enumerate.

The reader may object that he has received writing on
slates, every one of which was separately shown to be clean
and free from preparation, and in which case the foregoing
explanation would not hold good. That is very true, and I
shall now proceed to explain the methods that are employed
by the medium when this " turn over " trick is, for some
reason or other, not possible. One such method is the fol-
lowing:

The medium takes a pile of slates, cleans and dries each
slate separately, and shows it blank before placing it on the
floor. When all are cleaned, he selects two, apparently at
random, puts them face to face, has them tied and sealed, etc. ;
nevertheless the writing takes place as usual. The explana-
tion is this. The floor of the s^nce-room is covered with
thick carpet. In this carpet, and close to the medium's chair,
there is a slit^ large enough to admit of a slate being slipped
underneath and hence out of sight. It is on this slate that
the message is written. The other slates, when cleaned, the
medium piles on the floor, one of them being directly over
the slit in the carpet. On lifting the slates from the floor to
the tcJble, the medium takes care to slip the fingers of his
right hand through the slit and to withdraw the hidden slate
with the others. All being deposited on the table, the me-
dium selects this slate, and any other one, places these two
together, binds them securely, and the trick is done.

I shall now describe a most ingenious and much-used test
which is even more convincing than any of the exchange
methods so far enumerated. I shall first describe it as it
would appear to the sitter. The medium hands the investi-
gator two single slates devoid of trickery, which may be
examined and marked. The sitter then thoroughly cleans
both slates, after which he hands them to the medium, who
places them together on the top of the table. Medium and


Slate-writing Tests 115

sitter then join hands. The sound of writing is soon heard,
and, on taking the slates apart, one of them is found to be
completely covered with writing. This is one of the most
convincing tests I know.

The explanaticm, which is absurdly simple, is this :

To the under side of the medium's chair are attached four
pieces of wood, forming two grooves, such as are used for
sliding tills and small drawers. Into the under or bottom
groove is slipped a prepared slate, on which is the message
to be produced. In operating this system the sitter is given
a seat on one side of a small square table, the medium seat-
ing himself on the opposite side. When the medium receives
back the cleaned slates, one in either hand, he places his
hands beneath the table to draw his chair closer, apparently,
(and in fact he actually does this), but really to exchange
the slate he holds in his right hand for the slate under his
chair. This he does by sliding the slate into the top groove,
and withdrawing the slate in the under groove in the act of
bringing the hand up to the table again. This may sound
complicated, but, with a little practice, it can all be accom-
plished with one natural sweep of the hand. The trick is
now done, and it only remains for the medium to disclose the
writing at the proper time. Female mediums can substitute
a pocket in the dress for the two shelves described above.

Spirit pictures are generally produced on slates by this
method of substitution. In these cases, the method of pro-
cedure is much the same, save that the slate is covered with
faceSf some of which the sitter may recognize as friends or
relatives of his. The slate appears to be covered with a
white powder, and the faces appear as black lines on this
white surface, instead of white lines on the dark slate. If
I had not already stated that this test was effected by means
of an exchange of slates, I venture to think that my reader
would be particularly puzzled to account for these mysteri-
ous faces, as many as twenty or thirty of which sometimes
appear on a single slate held beneath the table for a few
seconds only.

The author of The Revelations of a Spirit Medium (who


116 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

can always be depended upon for the ^^ business " side of a
trick), thus describes the actual methods employed by me-
diums in producing these faces:

" Wash your slate clean, and, with a pencil, rub it all over
until it is white; then, with the ends of the fingers rub
lightly until the powder is evenly spread. Now cut from
newspaper or magazine the faces you desire to copy. You
must not cut out the face on the Unes, but cut out a piece
of the paper with the face on it, leaving a margin of about
an inch all round. Wet the side of the paper opposite the
picture with the tongue, being careful to wet it evenly. Lay
the paper on the slate, wet side down. Hold it firmly in
place, and, with a round-pointed pencil, trace over all the
hues of the face, putting a good pressure on the penciL
Now take ofi^ the paper, and, when the slate dries, you will
find an exact reproduction or copy of the face on your slate.
The picture is made from the powder on the slate adhering
to the wet paper wherever your pencil touches, and the sur-
face of the slate shows where the powder is removed, making
a black line through the white powder. Proceed as above
until you have all the faces you want on the slate ; slip it in
the slide on the bottom of your chair, and wait for a * sucker.'
The writer knows of one woman who is laying up something
for a ^ rainy day ' on this cme deception. She is called the
* picture-medium.'

^* It would astonish you, reader, to know what a large num-
ber of the faces are recognized as friends and relatives by
the people who receive them. The writer knows of at least
five people who have recognized Lydia Pinkham's newspaper
cut as relatives, after it had been transferred to the medium's
slate!" (pp. 145-7).

The following is a very audacious and, at the same time,
very effective test, that has been employed on several occa-
sions. A slate is handed for examination and cleaned on
both sides by the sitter. The slate is placed on a small table
which the medium shows is free from trickery and prepara-
tion by taking off the cloth. On the slate being turned over,
however, it is found covered with writing, though the medium


Slate-writing Tests 117

has not been near it in the interval. The principal part of
the trick is effected by the medium in the act of showing the
sitter that there is no deception! When the slate was laid
on the table the medium remarked : " To convince you there
is no trickery about the table, I will remove the cloth." Suit-
ing the action to the word, he does so, but immediately re-
places it, together with the slate. It is in this action, how-
ever, that the trick is performed. On the table-top is resting
another slate, containing the message ultimately received by
the sitter. Over this slate is placed the cloth. When the
medium picked up the cloth he also picked up with it the
under slate, this fact being concealed by the other (examined)
slate, which he has just placed upon it. In replacing the
cloth, he simply reversed the sides, laying the first slate on
the table, where it is now covered by the cloth, and the second
one is thus brought into view. ^* It is astonishing," says
Mr. Robinson, in commenting upon such tests as this one,
** how such barefaced and simple devices will deceive the
spectator. It is the boldness and air of conviction of his
assertions that carry a medium's test successfully through." *
Indeed this would appear to be so, when we read that Doctor
Slade had the impudence to carry a slate to the door with
him (to answer a knock from without, supposedly) and to
exchange the slate he carried for another, at that opportu-
nity !«

Finally, I must mention two methods of producing writing
on a single unprepared slate, which, though cumbersome,
have, nevertheless, been employed to good effect. A clean
slate is placed in the middle of the table ; the light is lowered,
and all the sitters place their hands on the slate. The sound
of writing is heard, and soon the slate is turned over, and, on
the under side, is found a written message. The secret is
this. The table has a double top, about a foot deep, and
within it is concealed a small boy. The top of the table is
fitted with a trap-door, known in conjuring parlance as " a
trap,'* and this the boy can open and do the writing on the

« Spirit suae Writing, etc., p. 31.

« See Trueedeirs Sjnritiudiam, Bottom Facts, p. 147.


118 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

under surface of the slate. To conceal the depth of the
table a table-cloth is used extending half -way to the floor
all the way round.

An improvement on this method is the following. The
small boy is done away with, and the top of the table,
though still double, is only about six inches deep. In this
case, the medium effects the release of his right hand (as
described on p. 188), places his hand under the table, opens
the trap, and does the writing himself. Or the person hold-
ing his right hand may be a confederate, and aUow him to
take his hand away and replace it at will. Needless to say,
the light must be extinguished for this test. The sitters
all place their hands on the slate to hold it down, and prevent
it frcMn being pushed upward by the writer's pencil, thus
disclosing the trick. Needless to say the medium asserts it is
to make more certain there is no trickery !

§ S. Methodi with a Double Slate (Prepared)

We now pass on to a consideration of those slate tests
that are given by the aid of the double or hinged slate. In
many ways these tests with double slates are the most won-
derful of all, for the reason that the writing is found between
locked and sealed slates, which the investigator has often
prepared at home, taking considerable time and no end of
pains to make sure that the medium could not possibly opei
the slates and produce the writing therein without detection ;
and the sitter is determined, moreover, that the slates shall
not pass out from under his observation during the entire
seance. Under such conditions, it would appear impossible
for the medium, not only to open the slates without leaving
the slightest signs of his having done so, but to write an
answer inside the slates, and all this without the sitter having
observed the least suspicious sign or movement on the part
of the medium ! Indeed, the feat, at first telling, does sound
a flat impossibility, and the average spiritist may, perhaps*
be forgiven for asserting that such a thing is an impossibil-
ity, or, at least, may demand specific proof that such a thing


Skte-writing Tests 119

can be accomplished. It shall be my endeavor to present such
specific proof in the present volume, and I trust that my
expos^ will at least have the effect of forcing the spiritist
to acknowledge that such things are possible.

I shall devote the present section, however, to an enumera-
tion of the various methods of producing writing between
the medium's own slates (which we may always safely assume
to be prepared), leaving for our later consideration those
tests that are performed with the sitter*s double slates; or
those that have been secured and sealed by him at home, and
that he knows are free from preparation of any kind.

The first double slate I shall describe is one that appears
to be two slates simply hinged together on one side, and
fastened on the other side by a padlock that passes through
holes in the frames of the slates. Apparently nothing could
be fairer, since the sitter is at liberty to examine the slates
as much as he pleases, provide his own padlock, and even his
own hinges, should he so desire! Yet, after this thorough
examination and cleaning, writing appears between the
slates, that are held but a few moments beneath the table.

The secret is mainly in the construction of the slates. The
false flap is used again, but in a somewhat different manner.
In this case, the flap is firmly held in position by a spring
catch, and in order to release the flap, the end of the frame-
work of this slate must be pulled or slid out about a quarter
of an inch. The lower slate is constructed upon similar lines,
as the flap must be clamped in place, in the lower slate, as
soon as it has fallen into it. The framework of both slates
therefore slips out, as I have described. In order to prevent
this from slipping out too soon, however, and thus disclosing
the secret of the trick, this framework is fastened by a catch,
which 18 connected with a screw in one of the hinges. This
screw stands a little higher than the rest, so as to be easily
found. The pressing of this screw undoes the catch, allow-
ing the framework of the slate to be removed. The false flap
now falls down into the lower slate, where it is clamped se-
curely, and all again made snug. In this test, both sides of
the slate can be shown covered with writing, one slate and


120 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the side of the flap nearest to it being prepared with the
message beforehand. It will readily be seen that this method
could be worked by the medium with great facility and quick-
ness, and without the smallest possible chance of detection.

Another pattern of double slate is the following. The
wooden frame (small end) of one slate is made to slide out
completely ; and to this loose end is attached the slate itself ,
sliding in and out of the other three sides as in a groove.
This loose end is also kept in place very much after the
method described in the last test. It is evident that the slates
can be locked, sealed, etc., as much as desired. All that it
is necessary for the medium to do is to release the catch,
slide the slate out in its frame, write on the lower slate, as
well as on the inside of the sliding slate (thus producing
writing on both sides of the slate when opened), slide the
slate back into place, when it will be caught and securely
held by the spring catch, and the trick is done. If a very
soft slate-pencil be used, there will be no sound of writing.
This is essential in some tests when the writing is not pro-
duced at the time supposed ; but, in this particular instance,
it does not in the least matter, since " the spirits " are sup-
posedly writing on the slates, in any case. While manipu-
lating the slates (if his sitter wishes to hold one end of them
under the table), the medium simply rests his end on his
knees, and proceeds to use his disengaged hand as I have
described.

In the following test the flap is again used, but in a dif-
ferent manner still. In this test, the slates are not real slate,
but are made of cardboard, or a sort of silicate slate stuff*
It is, consequently, more or less flexible. In this case, the
flap is blank on both sides, and fits snugly into the frame of
either slate when pressed home with the fingers. One side
of this flap and the inner side of one slate are now covered
with writing, and the flap pushed home, written side inward*
of course. The slate now has the appearance of being per-
fectly clean, and may be washed with a sponge, and even
given a cursory examination. The slates are now placed to*
gether, tied up, scaled, etc., but the writing appears as usuaL


Slate-writing Tests 121

It only remains for me to explain the manner of the release
of the flap. It is this. The medium pressed strongly down
in the middle of the slate, thus forcing the flap out of its
position and into the lower slate. It is then pressed home
firmly by the medium into the lower slate, before this latter
is handed for inspection.

Mr. Robinson gives the following ingenious test in his
Spirit Slate Writings etc., pp. 86-7. " Another test, which
was supposed to be convincing to skeptics, was one in which
a double slate was used; it was hinged and provided with a
lock in the wooden frame. The slates were examined, locked,
and the key given to the skeptic. The skeptic was allowed
to select, from a number of pieces of colored chalk, the color
that he desired the message to be written in. Upon the
slates being unlocked and opened, the writing is found in
the color sdected.

*^ While the slates are being examined, the medium seizes
a duplicate key which fits the lock. This key has a thimble
attached to it which fits the performer's right thumb; also
attached lengthwise to the key are several small colored pen-
cils or crayons of difi^erent lengths. When the slate has been
examined, it is placed under the top of the table, and held
in position by the thumb of the right hand, which is under-
neath, and the fingers above the table. During this manipu-
lation, the thimble is placed on the thumb, and the performer,
with the key attached to it, opens the slate, using his knee
to assist or support the slate. One part of the slate opens
downward, and rests on the knee, which holds it in position,
t. e.t at an incline, pressing it against the table-top. On this
part of the slate the writing is now done with the colored
crayon selected, which (colors) are usually red, blue, green,
and white. When the color of the crayon is selected, the per-
former turns the thimble round, bringing that color upward.
Although not easy to execute, it is, nevertheless, a most sur-
prising and effective test.

*• The above test was used by a medium very successfully
for years in England and France, and was only found out


122 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

Here is a clever test performed with a half-dozen slates.
After they have all been examined and cleaned by the sitter,
the medium places two of the slates together, and, after
holding them in this manner for some time, they are sepa-
rated, but no writing is found! The spirits have fedled!
But never mind, perhaps *^ the conditions are not good
enough," or " we have not given the spirits time enough,"
as the medium suggests. The two slates are again placed
together, accordingly, and medium and sitter again hold
them over the table. Again they are separated, but still no
writing is found! As if in despair, the medium picks up
another slate, shows both sides, and places it against the one
the sitter has in his hand. Now the two slates are separated
(after a brief period), and one of them is found covered
with writing.

In this test, we again have recourse to the false flap s6
frequently mentioned. The slate containing the flap is
among the others <hi the table. The first two slates given to
the sitter are all right, and on these no writing occurs. On
receiving these slates back, the medium substitutes the flap-
slate for one of those handed him, and holds this slate be-
neath the other, flap side down, the flap being still in place.
On separating the slates, again no writing is found. The
medium now takes up a third (unprepared) slate, and shows
both sides of it to the sitter. Meanwhile he has, however,
dropped the flap into his lap, leaving the right-hand slate
free from trickery, and with the written side down. This
right-hand slate he now places over the slate he has just
picked up, thus bringing the written surface inside, and be-
tween the two slates. I myself have utilized this test very
frequently, and can vouch for its complete efi^ectiveness.

There is another style of locked slate made which I shall
not stop to describe in detail. It is sold by all conjuring
depots, and I need only state here that the hinges are
" faked," the slate opening on this side, and being kept
fastened, ordinarily, by a spring catch, as before described.
It is really a variation of those mentioned on p. 119.

Another form of the double slate is known as the *^box-


Slate-writing Tests 123

slate.'' This is aa the same principle as the last mentioned,
except that, in this case, the frames of the slates project some
distance, forming a kind of box. There are hinges on one
side of this box, and the other side is fastened with a lock
and key, like any other box. The trick consists in the fact
that the staple, which is ** doctored," is capable of being
either removed or held firmly in place by a sliding bolt, as
the case may require. The author of The Revelations of a
Spirit Medium states (p. 181) that he has had a slate of
this character for years and that ^^ it has passed scores of
critical examinations at the hands of scientific and other in-
vestigators, and came through them all with its secret undis-
covered." So much for the value of examination of trick-
slates !

A clever variation is sometimes effected as follows. A ques-
tion is written on a sheet of paper, and this the sitter places
in his pocket. A blank piece of paper, which may be exam-
ined, is then placed between the slates, and these latter are
now held together over the centre of the table. In a short
time the slates are opened and an answer to the sitter's ques-
tion is found written on the piece of paper between the slates.
In this case the flap-slate is again used. The medium obtains
a knowledge of the sitter's question after the manner de-
scribed on p. S79, and, while the sitter is cleaning some
slates, the medium writes his answer and slips the paper thus
prepared between the surface of one slate and the false flap.
This slate is now picked up, with one other the sitter has
just cleaned, and a duplicate piece of paper is openly placed
between the slates. The medium now adroitly turns over
both slates, when the flap will fall into the lower slate, con-
cealing the blank piece of paper, and bringing to light the
one containing the answer to the sitter's question. The rest
is obvious.

When, however, the paper is marked^ and substitution is
impossible, another dodge is resorted to. The false flap is
done away with, and the medium writes his answer on a piece
of paper in sympathetic ink, which becomes visible througli
heat. The requisite heat is supplied as follows. The top of


124 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the medium's table is hollow, and in it is placed a spirit
(alcohol) lamp. The surface of the table consists in a
sheet of iron, to which is fastened, at the corners, a tightly
fitting cloth. When the lamp is lighted, naturally the metal
becomes hot, and this is communicated to the slate. This
method, well worked, is highly effective.

Here is another method of obtaining writing between
locked and sealed slates. The slate is, in this case, a trick-
slate, and is made as follows. One of the slates is made to
hinge or pivot in its frame ; i. ^., the frame itself remains
sealed, but the slate portion hinges out. This slate is placed
over a trap in the medium's table, and, at the proper mo-
ment, the slate is released by a spring catch. The slate then
falls down into the interior of the table, and the mediiun,
placing his hand within the table, is enabled to perform the
writing with the greatest ease. AU he has to do, now, is to
close the trap and the table, and the trick is done.

A very elaborate and ingenious method of obtaining writ-
ing on a specially prepared slate, by means of electricity, I
shall not now stop to consider. The explanation may be
found in Mr. Hopkins's Twentieth Century Magic, pp. 185-
148.

As a final method of using the flap-slate, I shall give the
following test. A book of poems is handed to one of the
investigators with the request that he insert, anywhere be-
tween its pages, a paper knife, in order to mark the place.
This is done. A slate is then shown blank and cleaned. The
person holding the book is now requested to open it and
read the first verse on each page. Immediately this is done,
the slates are opened, and the verses just read are found
copied between the slates. " There ! " you will say, " Your
silicate flap or acid writing will not work in this case, for
the writing is done after the book is opened and read, and
this is done only after the slates are fastened together."

The writing was done through the flap method, just the
same! How did the medium know where the book would be
opened? He did not care where it was opened, as the book


Slate-writing Tests 125

was especially made for him, and every page woi exactly
aUke, with the exception of the number !

It is possible, however, to do this trick with an ordinary
book that is unprepared, and I shall now describe a trick
I have frequently performed with an ordinary dictionary
which is examined before the writing takes place. I shall
first of all, however, describe this test as it appears to the
investigator, and afterward its modus operandi, as, in this
manner, the reader may form a clear idea of the tremendous
difference that exists, in reality, between what £u;tiuilly takes
place and what appears to happen.

The performer comes forward, and hands for examination
an ordinary dictionary. It is minutely inspected by the au-
dience, and found free from trickery in every way. While
this is being examined, the performer shows an ordinary
slate, both sides of which he thoroughly cleans with a wet
sponge, dries it, places it upon an easel, and covers it with
a borrowed pocket-handkerchief. He calls attention to the
fact that he does this before he commences his trick. Ten
slips of paper are now handed to ten members of the audi-
ence, with the request that they write on these slips any num-
ber from one to five hundred. This being done, the slips
are folded up, collected, and placed in a glass goblet, on the
table, in full view of all. Ten more slips are now given out
to ten other persons in the audience, with the request that
any number between one and fifty be written on these slips.
While these slips of paper are being folded and collected,
the performer borrows a gentleman's hat, and, upon the slips
being handed to him, he immediately drops the ten slips into
the hat, shaking them well up also, and has one, any one, of
audience is now allowed to select any one of the ten slips he
pleases, and retain it, without opening the paper. The other
nine slips are thrown away. The performer now takes the
first lot of ten slips from the goblet, and drops them into
the hat, shaking them well up also, and has one, any one, of
these chosen. The remaining nine are again thrown away,
and the hat returned to its owner. The performer now turns
to the gentleman holding the first slip (on which was written


126 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the number between one and five hundred), and asks him
to open his slip and to read aloud the number upon it. This
he does, and it proves to be (say) 887. The performer then
turns to the gentleman holding the dictionary, and asks him
to open it to page 887. He does so. The performer then
asks the second gentleman to open his slip (the one contain-
ing the number between one and fifty), and to tell the audi-
ence what it is. He asserts that it is (say) 17. The per-
former then turns to the gentleman holding the dictionary,
and asks him to count down the page (page 887), and note
the seventeenth word, but to note it mentally (not aloud),
and immediately shut up the book. He counts down the
column, notes the word, and closes the book. No sooner has
he done so, than the performer fires oflF a revolver, rushes
over to the slate, pulls aside the handkerchief, and discloses
the word " octopus." On turning to the gentleman holding
the dictionary, he admits that this is the seventeenth word
on the 887th page!

Nothing could be more mystifying than this trick, wdl
performed. There are no confederates in the audience;
everything is genuine, so far as they are concerned ; even the
slate is handed for a thorough examination as soon as the
trick is finished. There is not a second's interval between
the shutting of the book and the pulling aside of the hand-
kerchief, which discloses the word " octopus " to the aston-
ished audience. The account I have given is by no means
exaggerated, and I do not doubt that many accounts would
be far more at variance with the actual facts than is this
one. I have given this lengthy account because I think that
this kind of object-lesson in maldescription is highly useful,
and the only way to make the public appreciate the dis-
crepancies between the account (u given, and what actually
took place.

Now for the explanation. For this experiment, the triA
flap-slate is again used. The performer opens the diction-
ary to any page and decides what word he will use. In this
case, it was the word " octopus,'* this being the seventeenth
word on the 887th page. He now writes the word " odo-


Slate-writing Tests 127

pus** on the slate, and covers it with the false flap. The
performer has also prepared, before the performance, two
duplicate sets of papers, one lot of ten all containing the
figure 17; and a seccmd lot of ten, on every one of which
is written the figures S87. These papers are folded up,
secured together by a rubber band, and each placed in a
convenient pocket. The first lot of blank papers are now
handed round, and, when the sitters have finished writing
out their figures, they are folded, collected, and handed to
the medium, who, in the act of transferring them to the
glass, substitutes his duplicate pack of ten papers. The
same performance is gone through in the case of the second
bundle of ten ; in the act of transferring it from the right
hand to the left, it is palmed in the right hand, and the
previously concealed package in the left hand brought into
view. Thi. can be very easUy performed by any expert in
conjuring. In order to ensure that these packages shall
resemble his own as closely as possible, the performer has,
before the entertainment, folded them all into creases him-
self; and, when the time comes to refold the slips, nine
perscms out of every ten will fold them in the same creases
again! It is obvious that, no matter what pellet the audi-
ence may choose, the result cannot but be the same, and
result in the choice of the word previously written on the
slate by the performer. This has now only to be uncovered,
and the trick is dcme.

§ 4. Methods with a Double Slate (Unprepared)

We now come to those " tests " in which writing is ob-
tained between the skeptic's own marked slates, or those that
are free from trickery or preparation of any kind. To
many persons these tests are the most convincing of all, and
rightly so. There can be nothing more mysterious than this
fact of obtaining writing between slates that are locked and
sealed together, and which were, but a few moments before,
devoid of scratch or mark. Naturally, the methods are not
so numerous as in the previous cases, since the medium is


128 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

limited to one possible method of trickery, opening the slates
without detection, and doing the writing himself. At least
it would appear so to the average person; and because he
assumes this to be a fact, many of these tests appear to him
to be utterly beyond the bounds of trickery, and hence
genuine! That this reasoning is not in accord with actual
fact I shall now attempt to show.

The first method I shall describe is one that may be em-
ployed when you have two slates brought to you, the four
comers of which are screwed cmd otherwise fastened to-
gether. We will suppose that the skeptic has fastened the
two slates together at his home by screwing the comers to-
gether by means of four screws, covering the heads of these
screws with seaUng-wax, to make sure they are not ex-
tracted, or otherwise tampered with. Writing appears be-
tween the slates thus prepared, nevertheless.

In order to produce writing in the way I am now about
to describe, the medium must have time, opportunity, and a
certain amount of concealed apparatus, of which the sitter
knows nothing. The time factor we may leave out of ac-
count. It does not require very much time to produce the
writing, and what time is necessary will always be granted
by the sitter as one of the necessary " conditions." The
opportunity factor is more serious. It may be provided
for in two ways: either by turning the lights out cmd hav-
ing a dark seance, or by allowing the medium to take the
slates with him into another room. Of course this latter
move may not be known to the sitter ; the medium may even
give the slates to a confederate or an assistcmt to take in
for him. If this is possible, the rest is easy. But supposing
that the medium is obliged to work alone and has no oppor-
tunity of leaving the room; his best move in that case is
to insist upon a dark seance. The lights being extinguished,
the medium gets under the table altogether, taking the slates
with him. He may either work in the dark, or may have a
faint pocket-light which he produces and proceeds to work
by. If this is the case, the table-cloth is very thick and ab-


Skte-writing Tests 129

solutely opaque, so that no light may permeate through it.
In either case, the method of procedure is the same.

The medium produces the concealed apparatus, and gets
to work. The apparatus consists of (1) a little wedge-
shaped piece of very hard wood or metal, tapering to a
fine edge; and (2) a piece of umbrella wire about a foot
long. Through the small hole in one end of this wire has
been pushed a piece of slate pencil, and this has been glued
securely in place. With the wedge, the medium proceeds
to force apart the wooden frames of the slates, applying it
at a point half-way between the two ends of the long side,
where the " give " is greatest. When the wedge is forced
partly home, the frames of the slates, on this side, will be
separated sufficiently to allow the insertion of the slate-
pencil by means of the umbrella wire {v. Fig. IX., p. 104).
With this, the medium proceeds to write anything he pleases
on the slate; when this is done, he has only to withdraw the
wire and wedge, and secrete them about his person, and the
trick is done. This is a method that is much used, and al-
ways to good advemtage.

A description of another very ingenious method, worked
on altogether other principles, is the following, which I
quote from Wm. E. Robinson's Spirit Slate Writings etc.,
pp. itSt-S.

^^ Suppose two slates, tied together, are brought to the
medium. Both he and the stranger sit at a table. The
slates are held under the table, the medium grasping one
comer and the skeptic the opposite corner, each with one
hand, and the disengaged hands clasped together above the
table. After awhile the slates are laid on the table, the
string untied, the slates taken apart, but no writing is found.
The medium states it must have been because there was no
slate-pencil between them. So a small piece of pencil is
placed between the slates ; again they are tied with the cord
by the medium, and he again passes them under the table,
both persons holding the slates as before. Presently writing
is heard, and, upon the skeptic bringing the slates from
under the table, and imtying the cord himself, he finds one


130 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

of the slates covered with writing, although but shortly
before they were devoid of even a scratch.

^^ Here is the explanation. The medium does not pass the
slates under the table the first time, but drops them in his
lap, with the side on which the string is tied or knotted
downward, and really passes a set of his own for the skeptic
to hold, he (the medium) supporting his end bj pressing
against the table with his knee, which leaves his hand dis-
engaged. There is a slate-pencil, called the soapstone pen-
cil, which is softer than the ordinary. This is the one used
by the medium. He now covers the face of the slate which
is uppermost in his lap with writing, doing so very quietly
and without any noise. Now, as he brings the slates above
the table, he leaves his own in his lap and brings up the
skeptic's with the writing side down. The slates are untied
and taken apart and shown, devoid of writing upon the in-
side, which, he claims, was caused by not having any slate-
pencil inside {v. Fig. X., p. 104). The medium now places
the pencil upon the slate which was originally the upper one
(I.), and covers this with what was originally the bottom
slate (II.), which is covered with the writing inside on the
back or bottom of (the) slate (v. Fig. XI.). This manoeuvre
brings the slate on top with the writing upon its inside.
Nothing could be more simple and natural. The slates are
again tied together, and, in doing so, the slates are turned
over, bringing the slate containing the writing, still on the
inside, at the bottom instead of the top, and the string tied
or knotted above the top slate. Of course, when again sepa-
rated, the writing is found on the inside of the lower slate.
When the slates are passed under the table the second time,
the spectator himself is allowed to do this, and the medium,
with one of his finger-nails, while holding his end of the
slate, produces a scratching noise on the slate closely re-
sembling the tracing of a pencil. It is not really necessary
to pass the slates under the table the second time, but they
can be held above it if preferred."

There is a very clever test which is sometimes given with
two slates that are mthout frames. In this test, the sitter


Skte-writing Tests 131

writes his question on a piece of paper and this is placed
between the two frameless slates, which are then bound
firmly together. After a time the slates are taken apart,
but no writing is found upon them. The medium looks
surprised, examines the slates, and finally resolves to try
once again. Both slates are accordingly shown blank, the
paper again placed between them, and they are bound as
before. In a short while the slates are again separated, and,
while there is no writing on the slates themselves, there is
a message oa the paper on which the question was asked, in
what appears to be lead-pencil. This test is performed as
follows. When the slates are taken apart the first time, the
medium manages to catch sight of the question on the sitter's
paper and mentaUy frames his answer. To his right
thumb is attached a small piece of a pencil made of lamp-
black and mutt<m taUow. This is pressed together very
hard. With this concealed pencil the medium does the writ-
ing on the slate he is holding, somewhat after the manner
described on p. 109. He holds the slate in both hands, the
four fingers being toward the sitter, and his two thumbs
toward himself. With his right thumb, he writes on the
slate in reverse, t. ^., mirror-writing, this writing being, of
course, invisible against the black slate. It may, accord-
ingly, be shown to the sitter in a casual manner, after the
writing is on it. Now, when the paper is placed between the
slates, and these are pressed firmly together, the writing in
reverse is transferred to the paper, appearing on it as writ-
ing done in the regular manner. It will now be seen why the
slates are frameless. Of course, they may be tied, sealed,
etc., to your sitter's heart's content, after the second placing
together of the slates ; and the medium who knows his busi-
ness will insist upon this being done.

The following **test" I would especially recommend to
the reader as a most interesting psychological study, and as
illustrating the extreme audacity of the professional me-
dium. Taken all in all, it appeals to me as one of the
cleverest pieces of trickery — one of the most cunningly
devised deceptions — I have ever come across.


132 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

The eflFect of this test is as follows. The sitter is re-
quested to write a question on a piece of paper, in pen or
penpil, and to fold this paper up small, so that the medium
cannot possibly catch a glimpse at its contents. Meanwhile,
the medium has been cleaning two slates, which the sitter is
at liberty to examine both before and after the cleaning, if
he so chooses. The medium now places the paper pellet,
which he has just taken from his sitter's hand, against his
forehead, and holds it there for some time. He apparently
can get no " impressions," however, and asks the sitter to
place the paper pellet against hU own forehead and keep it
there for some time, being sure to keep his mind fixed on
the question he has written. The medium, meanwhile, sits
with closed eyes. He presently picks up one of the slates
on the table, and writes, in a slow, hesitating manner, upon
it. He states that the ** conditions " are not good, and that
he is not at all sure that he has written the correct answer
to the sitter's question. Then he reads aloud what he has
written. It is : " Dear Henry : The papers will never be
found. Andrew Smith." The sitter states that this message
has no particular meaning for him, not being in any way
an answer to the question he wrote on the paper pellet. The
medium looks worried ; says that ^^ the conditions are not
good," and proceeds to rub out what he has written on the
slate. At the same time, he asks his sitter to open his paper
and to make sure that he has written his question distinctly
and memorized it correctly. The sitter does so and asserts
that he has done this. The medium now suggests that ^ the
spirits might prefer to do their own writing," and so puts
the two slates together, and he and the sitter hold them
above the table, in full light. They are separated, but still
no writing appears on the slates! The medium now sug-
gests that perhaps it might help if the paper pellet were
placed between the slates, and this is accordingly done. The
slates are securely tied and sealed, and again hdd in fuD
light by medium and sitter, without the medium toudiiiig
them in the interval for a moment. Finally, the slates are
separated and on the inner surface is found the message:


Skte-writing Tests 133

*^Dear Creorge: Your business is sure to succeed beyond
your expectations. William Stem." This the sitter ac-
knowledges to be a correct and relevant answer to his ques-
tion.

Now for the explanation. The medium has, palmed in his
right hand, a duplicate paper pellet. When his sitter hands
him his pellet he deftly substitutes his own for that of the
sitter, and allows his right hand containing the sitter's pellet
to drop into his lap, while he holds to his forehead his own
duplicate, blank pellet. Meanwhile, he opens and reads the
sitter's pellet, holding it with his disengaged right hand —
an easy task. He now apparently returns the sitter's
pellet, really resubstituting the real pellet for the ^^ dummy,"
so that the sitter really receives back his own pellet, contain-
ing his question. If any reader thinks that this substitution,
without detection, is impossible, I can only assure them that
it is not, and not even difficult.^ The medium openly picks
up one of the slates, now, and writes on it the correct answer
to his sitter's question. This is, it will be remembered,
^Dear George: Your business is sure to succeed beyond
your expectations. William Stem." He tells the sitter, how-
ever, that he is not at all sure that he has written the correct
answer to his question, and pretends to read what he has
written on the slate, but, in reality, he makes up a reply,
and so reads aloud, ^ Dear Henry : The papers will never
be found. Andrew Smith." Naturally, the sitter asserts
that this is altogether wrong. The medium looks worried
and asks his sitter to open the pellet, and see if the writing
is plain, etc. The sitter does so, but, while he is occupied
in that act, the medium quietly turns over the slate in his
hand, thus bringing to the top the clean surface, and tum-

' I know of no one whose opinion I would value more, or who strikes
me as more competent to detect ordinary fraud ot this sort, than Professor
H^op. Yet, in describing a stance of this kind, and, probably, feeling
quite tvre that fraud was beine practised, he writes: "... the important
point to remark is the fact tnat / neither saw nor felt him exchange the
peOeiM, and yet I was watching him with all the care I knew how to exer-
cise. . . .** {Borderiand of Psychical Research, pp. 231-2). If this is the
case with Professor Hysloi), whose powers of observation are exceptionally
keen, of how much value is the testimony of the average individual, al>-
sdutely untrained in scientific observation?


134 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

ing the written-ui)on side to the table. He now pretends
to clean off the message he has just written, in reality clean-
ing only the blank side of the slate. Another blank slate is
now placed over this one, and, after awhile, separated, but
of course no writing is found. The medium then suggests
that the paper pellet be placed between the slates, and ad-
vances toward his sitter the completely blank slate in his
left hand. The sitter places upon this slate the pellet of
paper, and the medium now covers this slate with the other^
on the lower surface of which, it must be remembered, is the
correct answer to the sitter's question. The slates are now
firmly bound together, sealed, etc., and in due time they are
separated and the answer is found on the inside of one of
the slates. Simple as this test is, when once explained, I
can assure my readers that the illusion is perfect, and the
effect staggering and convincing.

When public performances, or " test stances," are given,
the medium has handed to him a number of locked emd sealed
slates. On these he is to obtain writing. He takes each pair
of slates in turn, holds them between his hands, and finally
hands them back to their various owners. On some of these
there is no reply, but on some are written correct and per-
tinent answers to the questions asked. Needless to say the
medium would not have obtained answers in any case if his
confederates had not been in the audience with slates pre-
viously prepared by himself. But public performances of
this kind are always the most obvious frauds.

I shall now describe a slate-test in which writing is ob-
tained between examined and marked slates that are lo
sealed and fastened together that it would be an utter im-
possibility for the medium to open the slates in the slighteit
degree. The slates are free from writing or preparatioo
of any kind when they are placed together, and they art
fast^ied by the sitter himself, after a small piece of chaft
has been placed between them. Let us suppose the siHier
begins by screwing the frames of the slates together in •c^
eral places, not only at the comers. This, therefore, pr
vents the medium proceeding as explained on p. 189. Bi


I


Slate-writing Tests 135

further, the skeptic proceeds to cover the heads of these
screws with sealing-wax; after which he proceeds to fasten
or gum the frames of the slates together all the way round
with strips of sticking-plaster, securing these in place and
finally sealing the frames together in several different places,
placing his signet on the seals. If he choose, he may glue the
wooden frames of the slates together, also. The operation
has probably occupied many minutes. Medium and sitter
now hold the slates beneath the table between them, for the
space of, perhaps, a minute. At the end of that time the
medium requests his sitter to take away the slates and open
them, or to open them there, as the case may be. The sitter
does so and is amazed to find a message on the inner surface
of one of the slates. It is very badly written, it is true,
but the sitter is, rightly enough, glad to get writing of any
kind under nich conditions.

At first sight, such a test would appear absolutely beyond
the bounds of any sort of trickery. I have stated that the
slates were free from writing, as well as from preparation
of any kind, when they were put together by the sitter, and
this is strictly the truth. The writing was produced after
the slates were placed together and sealed up as I have de-
scribed. But that is an impossibility? Not so, evidently,
since the writing is really there ! Then it must be genuine !
Thus reasons the skeptic, and, indeed, we can hardly blame
him for his belief.

The trick, in this case, is worked upon entirely different
lines from any test so far described. I have stated that a
piece of chalk (not slate-pencil) was placed between the
slates, and it is chiefly in the chalk that the trick lies. It is
not an ordinary piece of chalk, but is made of a compound
of powdered chalk, water, glue, and iron filings. These were
all blended together and allowed to become dry and hard.
This is the piece of " chalk " placed between the sitters'
slates.

Now, when the slates are placed under the table, the
m idium extracts, from his sleeve or elsewhere, a magnet,
9^d with this he traces a series of letters on the under side


136 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

of the bottom slate, in *^ mirror-writing." The iron filings
in the mixture will follow the magnet, and the chalk will
write on the slate in the regular manner. The medium
locates the piece of chalk in the first instance, by tipping
the slate at an angle, so that the chalk will run into one
comer. He first of all places the magnet in that corner and
drags the bit of chalk to the middle of the slate before pro-
ceeding to write out the message. The ingenuity of this test
will serve, I hope, to show the reader the extreme cunning of
the professional medium, and how useless it is for the
average individual, quite unacquainted with even the ordi-
nary methods of trickery or the elements of conjuring, to
hope to cope with the medium on his own ground, and even
to beat at his own game a man who, naturally crafty, has
made this particular branch of deception his life-study.

I shall now treat the reader to the method of obtaining
messages between two locked and sealed slates to which I
referred on p. 108.

I have quoted the passage just as it is given by the
author, for to change it would be to destroy its setting, and
hence its naivete and psychological significance. Accord-
ingly I quote the passage verbatim:

" No man ever received * independent slate-writing * be-
tween slates fastened together that he did not allow out of
his hands a few seconds. Scores of persons will tell you that
they have received writing under those conditions through
the mediumship of the writer; but the writer will tell yoa
how he fooled them, and how you can do so, if you see fit.

** In the first place you will rent a house with a cellar in
connection. Cut a trap-door one foot square through the
floor between the sills on which the floor is laid. Procure a
fur floor-mat with long hair. Cut a square out of the mat
and tack it to the floor of the trap-door. Tack the mat fait
to the floor, for some one may visit you who will want to rai«
it up. Explain the presence of the fur by saying it is «»
absorbent of * magnetic ' forces, through which you produce
the writing. Over the rug place a heavy pine table, aJbevt
four feet square; and over the table a heavy cover th


1


Slate-writing Tests 137

reaches the floor on aU sides. Put your assistant in the
cellar with a coal-oil stove, a teakettle of hot water, different
colored letter-wax and lead-pencils, a screw-driver, a pair
of nippers, a pair of scissors, and an assortment of wire
brads. You are now ready for business.

" When your * sitter ' comes in, you will notice his slates
(if he brings a pair), and see if they are secured in any way
that your man in the cellar cannot duplicate. If they are,
you can touch his slates with your finger and say to him
that you cannot use his slates on account of the * magnetism *
with which they are saturated ! He will know nothing about
^magnetic conditions' and will ask you what he is to do
about it.

** You will furnish him a pair of new slates with water
and cloths to clean them. You will also furnish him paper
to write his questions on, and the screws, wax, paper, and
mucilage to secure them with. He will write his question
and fasten the slates securely together.^

** You now conduct him to your * stance-room,' and invite
inspection of your table and surroundings. After the ex-
amination has been made, you will seat the sitter on one side
of the table, with his side and arm next it. If he desires to
keep hold of the slates, a signal agreed upon between your-
self and your assistant will cause the ^ spirit ' in the cellar
to open the trap-door, which opens downward, and to push
through the floor and into a position where the sitter can
grasp one end of it, a pair of dummy slates. This dummy
your assistant will continue to hold until the sitter has taken
hold of it after the following performance.

" Your assistant lets you know everything is ready by
touching your foot. You now reach and take the sitter's
slates and put them below the table, and under it, telling the
sitter to put his hand under, from his side, and hold them
with you. He puts his hand under, and gets hold of the
dummy slates held by your assistant.

^ Your assistant holds on until you have stood the slates

' It must be remembered that, in the vast majority of cases, the sitter's
own slates would be used — not those supplied by the medium. — H. C.


138 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

on end, leaning against the table-leg, and have got hold of
the dummy. He then takes the sitter's slates below, and
closes the trap. He proceeds to open them, read the ques-
tions, answer them, and refasten the slates.

** You will be entertaining your sitter by twitching and
jerking euid making clairvoyant and clairaudient guesses
for him.

"When your assistant touches your foot, you will knoir
that he is ready to make the exchange again, by which the
sitter will get hold of the slates he fastened. When you get
the signal, you give a snort and jump that jerks the end of
the slates from the sitter's hand. He is now given the end of
the slates held by your assistant, and you will allow the
assistant to take the dummy. After sitting a moment or
two longer, you will tell the sitter to take out his slates and
examine them if he chooses. Many times they do not open
the slates until they reach their homes. This, reader, is the
man who will declare that he furnished the slates and did
not allow them out of his hands a minute." ^

In the case of the test just given, it is not absolutely neces-
sary that you should have a cellar in connection. Some
mediums, in fact, perform this test in another manner, and
without its use. In these cases, the medium makes use of a
table with a drawer. The slates are placed in the drawer,
which can now be scaled, etc., by the skeptic. Writing ap-
pears on the slates, nevertheless. The back of the drawer is
missing, and this opening corresponds to a trap-door cut in
the wall of the room. An assistant is in the next room, who
reaches his hand through the trap and into the drawer, ex-
tracting therefrom the slates, and writing between them, as
in the last instance. A bureau may also be used in place of
the table, if desired.

§ 5. Miscellaneous Tests

The principal methods of obtaining writing upon slates
by fraudulent means have now been given, and it but remains

' Revelations of a Spirit Medium^ pp. 153-6.


Slate-writing Tests 139

for me to enumerate, in the present section, some tests of a
miscellaneous character, in which writing is obtained on
paper or other surfaces in an apparently supernormal man-
ner. I do not mean by this that I have, in the preceding
four sections, mentioned ofi the methods that could be, and
indeed are^ employed by mediums in obtaining writing by
fraudulent means, since that would be almost an impossi-
bility. Indeed, it is highly probable that this book will no
sooner have gone to press than I shall think of other methods
that I might have included in this volume, but the list is
obviously imending. This applies also to rope-tying and
other tricks of the kind most employed by mediums; no
sooner is one method exposed than the medium sets about de-
vising some new swindle by which he may delude his victim.
For this reason no book on this subject can ever hope to be
exhaustive; the most that can be done is to enumerate as
many methods as possible, and to hope that the methods
that are enumerated will give to the reader enough idea of
the kind of trickery that is practised so that it will be a
hard thing to deceive him with any similar devices in the
future.

The first test of the kind I shall mention is one in which
writing is obtained on a sheet of paper that has been placed
in a glass bottle or tube which is afterward hermetically
sealed. This reminds us of some of the old historical
^tests'' that were employed, this particular test being spoken
of, by the way, as one of the most convincing possible ! The
paper is devoid of writing when it is placed in the tube or
bottle, emd there is no trick about the latter, either, no slit
or opening by which the paper inside could be extracted and
another substituted. Writing appears on the paper never-
theless, despite the fact that the tube has been hermetically
sealed, and has obviously not been opened or tampered with
by the medium in the interval.

In this case, a piece of blank paper is placed in a thin
glass vial, which is then carefully sealed by the investigator.
The medium takes the vial, and places it on his table, in
fuU view of all. Soon, however, it is taken down and handed


140 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

to the sitter, who, on opening the bottle, finds the paper
covered with writing.

The writing was obtained in the simplest manner possible,
viz.t by the use of sympathetic ink. The paper is written
upon, before the seance opens, with a clean pen, dipped in a
highly diluted solution of sulphuric acid. The table is the
trick-table, described on p. 124, the alcohol-lamp being
alight under it. Under the influence of the heat, the writing
comes out black, like ink writing, and this, no matter how
careful has been the sealing! In some cases, it is not even
necessary to place the vial on the table, the heat of the hands
being all that is necessary in order to bring out the writing
clearly.

The same effect may be produced by washing out the
inside of the bottle with ammonia (the bottle must after-
ward be kept well corked), and by writing on the paper with
a weak solution of copper sulphate. In this case the writing
will appear blue. Mr. Robinson has pointed out, in his
Spirit Slate Writing (p. 11), that if blank cards are written
upon with a solution of iron sulphate, and these are inserted
into envelopes that have previously been moistened with a
solution of nut-galls, the hitherto invisible writing on the
cards will be developed and brought into visibility. Another
method would be a simple exchange of vials, where this is
possible.

A favorite test often employed by Charles H. Foster and
other mediums is that of obtaining writing on the arm, which
has just been shown bare and free from writing, scratch or
mark of any character. There are many ways of producing
writing cm the arm in this manner, the principal of which I
shall mention.

One method is to wet the forearm with salt water, and
allow it to become dry. This had better be done just before
the stance. Now, at some convenient moment, either when
your arm is below the table, or when you are standing behind
your sitter in the room, take a sharpened stick from your
pocket emd write the name required on your arm, pressing
heavily. Wait until the red lines have disappeared, when you


Slate-writing Tests 141

can draw up jour sleeve and show jour arm apparentlj
clean, and free from mark of anj character. It may even
be examined. When you desire the writing to appear, rub
briskly oiver the sjxyt on the arm that is prepared, and the
letters will come out in a dull, blood red. It is best to have
the fingers of the hand that does the rubbing slightlj
moistened.

Another waj is to write the name on jour arm in glycer-
ine. In this case, the sitter writes his question on a piece of
paper, which the medium then bums and rubs the ashes on
his arm. The ashes stick to the glycerine marks, causing
the writing to appear in black, smudgy handwriting, and
the spirits are supposed to have written !

Still another method is to have a long strip of wood, to
which are fastened letters cut from felt or cork, m reverse.
This strip of wood is pushed up the sleeve, and the arm
presses upon it heavily, the medium leaning on the table for
the purpose. The piece of wood is now secretly abstracted,
and hidden, and the medium has only to rub his arm briskly
with slightly moistened fingers in order to produce thereon
writing in a very good hand.^

Several mediums have created quite a sensation by intro-
ducing a new test, in which the up-to-date spirit writes, not
in long-hand, but on a typewriter ! The typewriter is shown,
apparently free from preparation, and a message is written
on it by the medium to show that it works like any other
typewriter. A piece of paper is placed between the rollers,
and the medium retires some distance from the machine.
The keys are now seen and heard to move of their own
accord and write on the paper any message the sitters pro-
pose. I myself have witnessed this test, and the effect is cer-
tainly most uncannj.

The whole secret consists in the fact that black silk cords

* It 18 conceivable, of course, that such a thing might take place in a
genuine manner — writing appearing on the arm in some inexplicable
way — b^r supernormal action. Such cases might be allied to the stigmata
observed in tne cases of certain saints; the bleeding patches obtained by
hypnotic sug^tion* etc.; but, imtil we have evidence for their reality,
such spcMsulatioiis are useless.


142 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

are attached to the under side of the typewriter keys, and
passed under a set of metal bars or pulleys. The threads are
carried back to the hand of an assistant behind the scenes,
who pulls the threads and so causes the keys to sink, coi^
respondingly, and the writing to progress. A detailed de-
scription of the mechanism of this typewriter test will be
found in Hopkins's Twentieth Century Magic^ pp. 6S-6.

There has recently come to my notice a simple device or
trick by means of which chalk marks may be apparently
** precipitated " on the palm of the hand, when held beneath
the table, the under side of which may be examined. The
performer, in this case, asks his sitter to thoroughly exam-
ine the under side of the table, which he does. He, the per-
former, then shows the palm of his hand free from mark or
preparation of any kind, the sleeves being rolled up to the
elbow. The performer then places his hand under the table,
and, in a few moments, brings it up, showing a distinct chalk
mark (m the palm of the hand. This is wiped off, and the
hand again held under the table, when the same thing hap-
pens. This may be repeated two or three times.

The explanation is this: The performer rubs over the
nails of his hand with sandpaper, just before the perform-
ance, and rubs powdered chalk into the nails thus rendered
rough and uneven. Now, by simply closing the finger on to
the palm, a distinct impression is left which may be wiped off
and reproduced by merely bending over each finger in turn.


CHAPTER Vn


KOFE - TYING TESTS


Ik all rope-tying tests the prime object of the medium
is, of course, to free himself in the shortest possible space of
time after the lights are turned out, and, at the same time,
in a manner which will not betray that fact to any one car-
ing to make an examination of the cords after the " release *'
is effected. With this in view the medium always endeavors
to obtain a certain amount of ^^ slack," as it is called, mean-
ing a certain amount of retained cord which can be let out
later on, and allow the cord to slacken up somewhat after the
tying is effected. This " slack " is obtained in a great vari-
ety of ways, of which I shall enumerate a few of the prin-
cipal, since it would be impossible to enumerate them all;
and, moreover, every medium has a more or less individual
method of obtaining this ^^ slack." The following will, how-
ever, give a general outline of the methods employed, which
must be worked out in detail by each person for himself.

If the hands are tied to the back rung of the chair, sit
well forward during this tying, so that, when you wish
^ slack," all you have to do is to sit back in the chair to
obtain all you need. When the wrists have been tied and are
being drawn down to the knees, to the chair-legs, or together
at the back, one twist of the hand, and the rope is wound
round the wrist iwice^ so that, when the time comes for the
release, all you have to do is to twist the wrist once round
in the reverse direction, and again you have all the slack
you can possibly use. If you fail to get in the twist, do not
let it disconcert you, and result in your being hopelessly

li8


144 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

tied. But, if they proceed to tie your hands to your knees,
sit up straight, thus compelling them to tie around the
fleshy part of your leg. All you have to do to obtain the
coveted slack is to lean forward and force your hands toward
your knees, where the leg is much smaller, and the slack is
yours to command. If they proceed to tie your hands to
either the front or back legs of the chair, and you do not
have an opportunity to twist on them, without their observ-
ing, which sometimes happens, sit very erect and shorten
your arms by not allowing them to entirely straighten and
by elevating your shoulders as in shrugging, thus making
the distance from the point on your wrist, where the rope
is tied, to the topmost rung about four inches. It will al-
ways be their endeavor to tie below the top rung around the
leg. By slipping down in your seat you ought to have all
the slack you can possibly make use of. If they are tying
behind you, turn the inside edges of your hands together^
and when they make the ends fast to the bottom rung, or
any point below the hands, sit up straight, drawing the
hands up just far enough to avoid it being observed, and
there will be plenty of slack. A fimdamentally important
point to remember in all ^^ rope ties " is that the rope should
never be of the soft cottony type, but always stiff, hard, and
more or less shiny. This slips very easily, and it will be
found almost impossible to tie you with this kind of cord so
that you cannot release yourself with a little effort and
ingenuity.

A very simple test tie with a piece of tape, braid, or rib-
bon is the following, which I explained in The Woman*$
Home Compamofiy for April, 1900 (p. 20). I quote from
the description there given.

" One or two gentlemen are now selected from the audi-
ence, who volunteer to come up and bind the ' medium's '
hands together. A piece of ribbon is given them for thii
purpose, about one and one-half inches wide and about one
yard long. The medium now holds out one of his handi
and allows the committee to securely tie the ribbon around
his wrist, fastening it by six or eight stout knots and finisk-


Rope-tying Tests 145

ing the operation by securely sealing these with wax. The
right hand is now tied in a similar manner, the knots being
sealed as before. The medium's two hands are now secure
behind him, about a foot apart, and in that condition he
takes his seat on the chair. . . •" (Various manifestations
then take place which are described. The knots and seals
are found intact, at the conclusion of the seance. Here is
the explanation.) ** The medium naturally wishes to use his
right hand, being the more serviceable of the two, and so
he offers the left hand to be bound first. This is done fairly
and squarely, and the knots are sealed. Now, when the right
hand comes to be tied up, it will be found that there is only
one end to tie with^ instead of two. Thus, every knot tied
in the tape will be a kind of * hitch ' around this single end,
and is really a slip-knot, capable of being slipped up and
down the piece of tape between the two wrists. If the hands
are kept about a foot apart, and the ribbon or tape kept
fairly taut during the operation of tying, no difficulty will
be experienced in slipping the knots to and fro on the ribbon.
This is hard to explain on paper, but will readily be under-
stood when tried. A little care must be exercised when the
sealing-wax is being applied. Impress your committee with
the fact that they must not drop any of the wax on your
wrists, and their desire to avoid this will nearly always cause
them to put the lightest possible dab on; also, you must
remember that this will probably be between the knots, and
hence of no consequence to you " (since they are not untied
at all).

The medium, if he knows his business, will always insist
upon his legs, arms, and body being securely tied, though
they may not have to be released at all in order that he may
produce the manifestations required. He will, none the less,
insist upon this tying being done with equal or even greater
care than his hands, etc., since this will serve to distract the
attention of the spectators from the real point at issue, and
at the same time make the performance appear all the more
wonderful to the uncritical observer.

It is not always that the spectators are invited to place a


146 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

signet upon the seals of the cord, the knots being simply
sealed securely. This is the case when the medium finds him-
self more or less hopelessly bound, and he has serious doubts
as to whether he will be enabled to release himself or not. If
so, well and good, but if not^ the medium adopts a very dar-
ing and, at the same time, a very ingenious method of get-
ting free. He deliberately breaks the seals, works the knots
loose, produces the manifestations required, replaces his
hands in the loops, draws them tight again, and covers the
knot with a portion of the chewing-gum he is chewing, blend-
ing it in with the sealing-wax. The gum is specifldly chosen,
being the same color as the sealing-wax.

If the wrists are to be tied together behind the back one
method of obtaining the necessary slack is as follows. Have
the left wrist tied securely, the two loose ends hanging down.
The right wrist is now placed over this and the two ends
passed round this wrist, tied, sealed, etc. The secret is that
in turning around, to place the hands behind the back, one
end of the cord is passed over the middle finger, this fact
being concealed by the covering right wrist (©. Fig. XH., p.
164). It will readily be seen that all that is required to ob-
tain the necessary slack is to bend down this finger, when the
rope is released. It can readily be twisted over the finger
again when desired. Mr. Wm. E. Robinson asserts that this
was the method employed by the Davenport brothers,^ but I
have great doubts if this was the case.

If there is no sealing, and the cord is not marked, the
medium simply cuts the cord, and hides it about his persoDi
bringing forward for examination a duplicate cord, which
he has had secreted in his clothes from the first. In this
case the tying can be as complicated as desired, many min-
utes being taken in the operation, while less than one minute
is required to not only effect the release of the mediiun, but
untie every one of the knots! Could a more convincing
proof of the power of the spirits be conceived!

There are two very difficult ties in which the hands are
tied to the knees of the medium by a series of apparently

' See Spirit Slate Writing and Kindred Phenomena, p. 88.


Rope-tying Tests 147

aolid knots. They are known to mediums as ^ the double-
header " and the *' great front twist," respectively. These
ties are very complicated, and would be difficult to give
here without diagrams and an extended explanation. That
I cannot now attempt. They will be found explained in
great detail in Mr. Truesdell's Bottom Facta Concerning the
Science of Spirituaiiimf pp. SS6-7 and 273-6 respectively.
A simpler variety of this ^ twist " will be found explained
in Mahatma, Vol. V., p. 8S, February, 190S.

Another test is the following, which I quote verbatim^ to
enable the reader to appreciate the manner in which medium-
istic stances are treated by conjurers. ** On a board the size
of a table eyelets are carefully arranged at measured dis-
tances apart and in such a manner that there are two for
each sitter whether lady or gentleman, one for the right
hand and one for the left. Beginning at any point in the
circle a piece of copper wire is passed around the arm of the
first sitter, through the eyelet of the board, around the other
wrist, through the other eyelet, and so on to the next sitter.
In this manner the wire is threaded through and through,
fastening each person to the board, and to the neighbor on
either side; in fact, to the entire circle. The company, in-
cluding the medium, being interlaced, the ends of the wire
are tied together, the joint covered first with paper, then
with wax, and they are sewed and tied as desired and any
seal is set on. Now the lights are extinguished and the
usual manifestations take place.

** Secret: The medium has on false shirt sleeves, so all he
has to do is to slip out his arms as soon as the lights are
extinguished, then go through the various manifestations,
replace his arms in the sleeves, and call for lights. Now all
can be examined and of course is found O. K. Then have
some one cut the wire." ^

For an extremely clever test I am indebted to Mr. Henry
Ridley Evans's Hours Ttith the Ghosts, from which I quote
the following:

** The spirit necktie is one of the best things in the whole

* Tricks in Magic, etc. By J. H. Burlingame, Vol. I., p. 34.


148 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

range of mediumistic marvels, and has never to my knowl-
edge been exposed. A rope is tied about the medium's neck
with the knots at the back, and the ends are drawn through
two holes in one side of the cabinet, and tied in a bow-knot
on the outside. The holes in the cabinet must be on a level
with the medium's neck, after he is seated. The curtains
of the cabinet are then closed, and the committee requested
to keep close watch on the bow-knot on the outside of the
cabinet. The assistant, in a short time, pulls back the cur-
tain from the cabinet on the side furthest from the medium,
and reveals a sheeted figure which writes messages and speaks
to the spectators. Other materializations take place. The
curtain is drawn. At this juncture the medium is heard
calling, ^ Quick, quick. Release me.' The assistant un-
fastens the bow-knot, the ends of the rope are quickly drawn
into the cabinet, and the medium comes forward, looking
somewhat exhausted, with the rope still tied about his neck.
The question resolves itself into two factors: either the
medium gets loose from the necktie and impersonates the
spirits, or the materializations are genuine.

** * Grets loose. But that is impossible,' exclaim the com-
mittee, * we watched the cord in the closest way.' The secret
of this surprising feat lies in a clever substitution. The
tie is genuine, but the medium, after the curtains of the cab-
inet are closed, cuts the cord with a sharp knife, just about
the region of the throat, and impersonates the ghosts, with
the aid of various wigs and disguises concealed about Imn.
Then he takes a second cord from his pocket, ties it about
his neck with the same number of knots as are in the original
rope, and twists the necktie around so that these knots will
appear at the back of his neck. Now he exclaims, ^ Quid^*
quick, unfasten the cord.' As soon as his assistant has un-
tied the simple bow-knot on the outside of the cabinet, the
medium quickly pulls the genuine rope into the cabinet and
conceals it in his pocket.

"When he presents himself to the spectators the rope
about his neck (presumed to be the original) is found to be
correctly tied and untampered with. Much of the effect de-


Rope-tying Tests 149

pends on the rapidity with which the medium conceak the
original cord and comes out of the cabinet. The author has
seen this trick performed in parlors, the holes being bored
in a door '' (pp. 166-60).

We must now consider, in detail, one very famous tic, made
so by Miss Annie Eva Fay ; I refer to the ** Cotton Bandage
Test." This tie, now forever associated with the name of
Miss Fay, is one of the most bafiling, one of the most ingen-
ious, as well as one of the simplest ties that can be imagined.
For the ba[iefit of those of my readers who may not have
had the opportunity of seeing Miss Fay perform her act,
and in order to make the explanation more easily intelligible,
I shall very briefly summarize a description of her seance,
which will doubtless prove of interest.

A OMnmittee is first of all chosen to come upon the stage
and examine the cabinet, the chair, the bandages, etc., and
to do the tying later on. Nothing of a suspicious nature
is found. The mediimi is firmly tied about each wrist with
a simple cotton bandage, about one and a half inches wide
by a half a yard in length. The committee usually ties these
bandages in a plain double square knot, drawing each knot
down tight, though they are not forced to do so. In order
to be certain that these knots are not untied, the committee
is allowed to sew these knots securely together with a needle
and thread, the cotton bandage rendering this quite possible.
Hie medium now places her hands behind her, and, so clasp-
ing them that her wrists are but six inches apart, politely
requests the more nervous of the two committeemen to tie
the ends of the bandage firmly together. After this has
been accomplished, the dangling extremities of the bandages
are cut off, and the last knot is sewed, if necessary, leaving
the medium firmly bound, with a short ligature between her
wrists. Another cotton bandage is passed about this liga-
ture and tied in several additional knots, which may also be
sewn through. The medium is now seated upon a stool in
the cabinet facing the audience, with her back to a wooden
stanchion, about six feet high, which has been firmly fastened
to the floor. The ends of the cotton bandage are secured to


150 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

a ring attached by a staple to the stanchion, at a point just
above the stool upon which she is seated. A cotton bandage
is then tied about the medium's neck, the ends of which are
fastened to a screw-eye affixed to the stanchion, in order
to secure her head firmly. Her feet are then fastened to-
gether by means of a cord passing around the ankles, the
long end of which is carried outside of the cabinet, to be held
by one of the committee. A tambourine, tin horn, and one
or two bells are now placed in the medium's lap, and the
curtain drawn. Instantly the bells are rung, the horn tooted,
the tambourine banged, etc., in the midst of which a voice
calls for ^^ light," when the cabinet is at once opened and
the medium is seen sitting inside, never having moved, ap-
parently. A hoop placed on the medium's lap is found over
her shoulders. A tambourine with a glass, partly fiUed with
water, standing upon it, is now placed on the medium's lap;
the curtains drawn, but within a few seconds the medium's
cry for " light " is heard ; the curtain is again withdrawn,
and the glass is found empty. This is most astonishing, for
it must be remembered that the medium's head is securely
tied to the stanchion at the back, and cannot be bent forward
one particle, while any assistance from her hands seems im-
possible. A member of the committee is now chosen, blind-
folded, and placed in the cabinet alongside the mediiun.
Sometimes he is allowed to place one hand on the medium's
head and the other on her knee. In spite of his pres^ice,
however, the usual manifestations occur, though the inves-
tigator has not felt the least perceptible movement on the
part of the medium.

After this, other tests are undertaken. A tambourine fli®
out of the cabinet at the aperture, to the amazement of all
beholders. A nail is driven into a board by some spirit car-
penter, who makes as much noise as if he were still in tk
flesh. After a number of such tests the performance clostf,
and the committee is invited to come forward and inspect
the knots, etc., and see that they have not been tampered with.
A careful examination is made, and the committee announces
that the threads are still unbroken, and that it would h«^*


Rope-tying Tests 151

been an utter impossibility for the medium to have untied the
knots, or to have produced the manifestations that had been
witnessed. In this they were partly right and partly wrong,
as we shall now see.

It will, I think, be generally acknowledged that all of the
marvels just enumerated could have been accomplished if the
mediimi had the free use of one hand : the bells could be rung,
the horn and the glass of water lifted to the mouth, the
tambourine thumped, the nail driven into the board, etc.
Everything thus depends upon the medium having a certain
amount of freedom with this hand, say the right. But it
may be objected that this freedom is impossible, since the
hands are securely tied and the knots sewn through, render-
ing it impossible for the medium to untie them without de-
tection. Further, the knots are frequently sealed and the
ends fastened together with pieces of sticking-plaster, etc.
I grant all that. It would be quite impossible for the me-
dium to release herself from this tie in the usual manner.
And herein consists the simplicity and the ingenuity of this
tie. In order to perform all the marvels I have enumerated,
it is not necessary for the meditum to release her hand at all!
Owing to the peculiar method of tying, the medium has all
the slack she requires without untying the hands or loosening
any of the ties or seals whatever. This can easily be shown
to be the case by means of a little calculation. Mr. John W.
Truesdell was the first to expose the method employed by
Miss Fay, if I am not mistaken, and from his Bottom Facts^
pp. 272-S, I quote the following :

" By the peculiar method in which the medium holds her
hands, while submitting to the tying process on the part of
the committee^ . . . the spirits secure, for their uses, a liga-
ture of knotted cloth between the hands, at least six inches
in length. The bandage attached to the centre, as before
mentioned, is usually tied in four or five double square knots,
allowing, at least, two inches play between the centre of the
ligature and the ring to which it is fastened. This ring is
two and a half inches in diameter, and is secured to the
Manchicm by a half-inch staple. The medium's left hand


152 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

adds six inches more, while the bandage on her wrist will
easily slip along her slender and delicate arm, at least half-
way to the elbow, all of which gives the ^ spirits ' a clear
leeway of not less than twenty inches from the stanchion.
The moment the curtain is closed, the medium (under spirit
influence) spreads her hands as far apart as possible, an
act which stretches the knotted ligature so that the bandage
about it will easily slip from the centre to either wrist;
then, throwing her lithe form, by a quick movement, to the
left, so that her hips will pass the stanchion without moring
her feet from the floor, the spirits are able, through the me-
dium, to reach whatever may have been placed upon her
lap."

I do not think further explanation of this performance
will be necessary.

For the sake of historical completeness, however, I should
like to state that Mr. Podmore has examined the existing
evidence for supernormal phenomena happening in the pres-
ence of this medium, and found it to be exceedingly weak and
defective in all cases except in the experiments conducted by
Sir William Crookcs.^ In this case the medium was seated
in a chair, *^ and two brass handles, wrapped in wet cloths,
were given her to hold, the circuit (electric) being thus cwn-
pleted. The index of the galvanometer remained practically
constant for some eight minutes, and during those eight
minutes, various articles, placed in the library at a consid-
erable distance from the medium, are reported to have been
moved, a hand was seen thrust through the curtain, a locked
desk was opened, and so on. At the end of the eight minutes
the index went to zero, and the medium was found in a faint-
ing condition." Mr. Podmore suggests that the mediant
previously provided herself with some " connecting substance
(pace Mr. Lang!) of a resistance approximately equal to
that of her body." As she had (probably) been previously
tested before in this manner, by Serjeant Cox,* she came


> Modem Spiritualism, Vol. II., pp. 85-6 and 157-8.
* Mechanism of Man, Vol. II., p. 446.


1^


Rope-tying Teats 153

to this sdance with a knowledge of the apparatus, and the
sort of test to which she was to be submitted.^

I have reserved for special and somewhat lengthy con-
sideration the method of tying employed by the Davenport
brothers — this for several reasons. I now turn to a con-
sideration of their performance, describing it in some detail.

The Davenport brothers were undoubtedly the mediums
who first brought rope-tying stances to the public atten-
tion. Their reputation was anything but spotless, as Mr.
Podmore shows.^ But, quite apart from such evidence as
Mr. Podmore has accimiulated, it is well known by the con-
juring fraternity that their performances were fraudulent.
Mr. Maskelyne detected the actual methods of the Daven-
port brothers by seeing, with his own eyes, the method of
their escape. This occurred owing to an accident, a curtain
falling at an inopportune moment. He afterward succeeded
in exactly duplicating, and even improving upon, their per-
formance.' Their methods were well known to the late Alex-
ander Hermann. By far the most convincing piece of evi-
dence of all, however, is the fact that the magician, Harry
Kellar, served in the capacity of assistant to the Davenport
brothers for a considerable time, and learned from them the
mysteries of rope-tying!* In the face of evidence of this
kind, I do not see how any intelligent person, who is in pos-
session of the facts of the case, can hesitate for one moment
in declaring the Davenport brothers clever tricksters.

In order to clear away any doubts in my readers' minds,
however; that the performance of the brothers Davenport
was trickery, and nothing but trickery, and partly because
of the great influence of these mediums on the history of the
subject, I give, herewith, a detailed description of the
methods employed by the Davenports, both for their dark
and light stances, and I shall use, for this purpose, the nar-
rative-description given by Houdin, in his Secrets of Stage

^ It must be remembered that the present Annie Eva Fay, who is giving
public (wrformanoes through the United States, is not the original m^ium
of that name — though I do not deny that they are of the same genus.

» Modem Smritualimn, Vol. II., p. 60. « The SwpemaJtwralt p. 190.

« Magie and ItM Prof aeon, p. 72.


154 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

Conjuring^ pp. 160-218. I quote from this account for two
reasons: first, because it is given by a trained observer and
conjurer, and I think it a good example of the differences
between " what actually occurred " and " what apparently
took place." Second, because it is so Uttle known. I do not
remember that Mr. Podmore, with all his exhaustive reading,
even mentioned this account in his Modem Spiritualism, and,
indeed, it is known to but few persons outside of the regular
conjuring fraternity, as it occurs in a work on stage magic
which would be unlikely to fall into the hands of any one
not especially interested in that branch of reading. The
account is intensely interesting, and is worth quoting at
length. For these reasons I have given considerable space
to this quotation, which, I feel sure, the reader will agree is
well occupied, when he comes to read the report.

The Performance of the Brothers Davenport

Part /. — The Cabinet, — We are in one of the smaller
rooms belonging to the Salle Herz, in the Rtbe de la Victoire,
a room which may accommodate some sixty persons. The
apartment is divided by a railing of a little more than a yard
high into two equal portions. On the one side of this divi-
sion are the seats allotted to the spectators, and on the other
the cabinet which is intended to be used for the performance.
This piece of furniture, which is of the slightest possible
construction, rests on trestles, and is of such a size as to
contain just three persons, seated or standing. To the sides
of the cabinet, on the inside, are hung divers musical instru-
ments, such as a violin, guitar, trumpet, tambourine, and belL
Three doors to be closed as occasion may require serve to
screen the mediums from the public view.

Before the commencement of the performance, several of
the spectators are invited to come within the railed-off por-
tion of the room, and to place themselves in a circle round
the cabinet, so as to bar all communication from without.

The first point is the binding of the two Americans. AD '
present agree in selecting, for the performance of this ddi-


Rope-tying Tests 155

eate task, a veteran naval officer, who is expert in knots of
everj description, and in whose skill every one appears to
liave the utmost confidence.

The ropes which are intended to be used are first tendered
for examination. We search the two young men as if we
were representatives of the police force, and having taken
every possible precaution against any trick or artifice, we
turn our attention to the actual tying.

The Americans step into the cabinet, and place themselves
on the seats to which they are to be tied. Our naval repre-
sentative takes a cord, marks it, to make sure that there is
no substitution ; he takes note of its precise length, and then,
by means of regular " sailors' knots," hitherto reputed in-
vincible, he ties up, first one brother, then the other. He
pinions their arms to their sides, ties their legs firmly to-
gether ; in fact, he so ties and lashes them to their seats and
to the cross-rails, that every one regards the defeat of the
Americans as a foregone conclusion; they must, beyond a
doubt, be driven to cry for quarter.

We have stated that the cabinet has three doors. In the
middle is cut, at about the height of a man's head, a lozenge-
shaped aperture. The side doors are first closed, simultane-
ously, and lastly the centre door, but, mirabUe dicttu, scarcely
has this last been closed, than we see appear, at the opening
above mentioned, the arms of the right-hand prisoner, —
still rosy with the friction of the famous " sailors' knots."
The surprise, the astonishment, nay, the stupefaction of
the spectators, are beyond description; they hesitate to be-
lieve the testimcMiy of their own eyes ; they f ugitively glance
around, each seeking to confirm his own impressions by those
of his neighbor; but all are in the same condition of be-
wilderment, and equally unable to afford the slightest guid-
ance. Finally, they give up the riddle as hopeless, and
render to the performers a well-earned tribute of applause.

A little later, and the three doors are opened. We see the
two brothers, with smiling countenances, step down from the
cabinet freed from their bonds, which they now carry in
their hands. More than ten minutes had been occupied in


156 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

tying them up; a single minute had sufficed for their re-
lease.

This first feat concluded, the young men again step into
the cabinet, and take their seats. The cords are laid in a
heap at their feet, and the doors closed. Two minutes later,
the doors are opened, and we find the mediums again in
bondage. They have tied themselves up in the darkness, and
their hands are found firmly secured behind their backs.
The tying is examined, and is declared to be as secure as
on the first occasion. It should here be repeated that, during
the whole of the sSance, sundry spectators keep constant
watch on all sides of the cabinet; that this latter is raised
cm trestles; and that the hall is kept sufficiently light to
enable any one to see without difficulty.

Now, however, still more astonishing phenomena are about
to take place. The doors are put to with the utmost pos-
sible quickness, but scarcely is the last one closed, than a
concerto of the most eccentric character becomes audible;
the violin strikes up under the touch of a vigorously handled
bow, the guitar is thrummed, the tambourine marks time, the
bell rings, the horn is vigorously blown, the whole forming
a discord of the most awful description. Occasionally a
variety of other noises, knocks, and heavy blows, is added to
the infernal concert. Suddenly there is dead silaice, and
an arm, bare to the shoulder, is seen to pass through a hole
in the door, ringing the bell with frantic energy.

At the very moment when the noise is most deafening, if
the doors of the cabinet are suddenly opened, the musical
instruments are seen in the place they originally occupied,
and the two brothers are motionless on their seats, and tied
up as before. As soon as the doors are closed, the hullaba-
loo begins again, but each time that the doors are opened,
the mediums are found, calm, motionless, and still firmly
tied. I have forgotten to mention that at each of the ** spir-
itualistic manifestations " the horn and the bell are flung
through the opening in the door and fall at the feet of the
spectators.

By way of check upon these tricksy spirits, it is requested


J


Rope-tying Tests 157

that some cme of the company, to be selected by the audience,
will take a seat in the cabinet between the two brothers. A
representative is selected accordingly; he places himself on
the seat in the centre, and in order to ensure his giving no
assifrtance to the mediums, one of his hands is tied to the
shoulder of one of the brothers, and his other hand upon the
knee of the other brother. This arrangement further en-
sures that there can be no movement on the part of the me-
diums without the knowledge of the person thus chosen. As
soon as the doors are closed, however, the witches' sab-
bath is again heard in the cabinet, the various musical
instruments appearing to vie with each other, which
shall make the most noise. An instant, and the hubbub
ceases; the doors are opened, and the unlucky visitor is seen
with his head wrapped in his own pocket-handkerchief, with
the tambourine by way of head-dress, while his cravat is
neatly tied around the neck of his right-hand neighbor, his
spectacles are on the nose of his left-hand neighbor, and his
watch, even, is found to have travelled from one pocket to
another. The representative of the public is freed from his
encumbrances, and is instantly surrounded and cross-ques-
tioned. He declares that all he felt was a slight tickling of
the nose, when, at the selfsame moment, he was covered with
his pocket-handkerchief, and robbed of his spectacles, and
can give no other explanation. Meanwhile, the wrists of the
mediums are still found firmly tied behind their backs. Flour
is produced, and a little is put, with a spoon, into each hand
of the mediums. No sooner is the door closed than the coat
of one of the prisoners is passed through the aperture. The
doors are instantly opened, the knots examined, the doors
again closed, and scarcely two minutes elapse before the two
brothers step out of the cabinet entirely freed from their
bonds; they come forward to the spectators and show that
their hands are still full of the flour which had been placed
therein. It should be stated that the young men are dressed
in black, and that not the slightest trace of flour is to be seen
on their garments.


158 The Phyincal Fhencmena of Spiritualism

Part II. — The Dark Stance. — The scenic arrangements
of this exhibition are of the simplest possible character.
The cabinet and its trestles are removed and put on one
side, and are replaced by a small table, on which are placed
two guitars and a tambourine, which we have already seen
employed in the first part of the performance.

These preparations, which are very deliberately made,
have given the two brothers time to take a little rest in an
adjoining room. They speedily return, and seat themselves
on two slightly made chairs, one on each side of the table.
Each places at his feet a coil of rope.

At their request, made through their interpreter, some
fourteen or fifteen members of the audience come and take
seats near the Americans, and, joining hands, form an im-
penetrable wall round them. Two gas-jets, one on each side
of the enclosed portion of the hall, are alone lighted. A
person is posted beside each of these burners, to turn the
light up or down as may be required.

At a signal given by one of the two brothers, the room is
placed in complete darkness for a space of about two min-
utes. A solemn silence prevails throughout the assembly)
so much are all present impressed by the weird singularity
of the scene. The privileged spectators who form the pro-
tective circle are so close to the mediums, that the least move-
ment on the part of the latter, the slightest rustle of their
garments, would be distinctly audible. Each lends an atten-
tive ear, and seeks to catch the slightest sound of a suspicious
character, but, in the very midst of this strained attention)
the light is suddenly turned up, and the two Americans are
seen securely tied; their legs, arms, and bodies are alike
covered with a network of cords binding them to the chairs
on which they were seated ; their wrists are pinioned behind
their backs, and lashed to the " stretchers *' of the chairs.
The chairs are likewise firmly tied to the table. Spectators
gather round, they examine the various knots, and are con-
strained to admit that they are honestly tied.

Again we are placed in darkness, and instantly the mtt-
sical instruments placed on the table are heard in mysterious


Rope-tying Tests 159

harmony. Suddenly, the gas is turned up, and, simultane-
ously with the appearance of the light, the concert ceases.
The instruments show no sign of having moved from their
places, and the mediums are tied up as before.

The spectators begin to experience an indescribable sensa-
tion of " all-over-ishness." There is very little applause ; a
performance of this kind is not calculated to produce a feel-
ing of exaltaticNi. On the contrary, it rather tends to make
one feel a kind of nervous depression. True believers regard
the phenomena in question as the genuine work of spirits,
and even the incredulous and the skeptical are forced to
admit that these pretended supernatural manifestations are,
to say the least, remarkably well executed. As yet, more-
over, we have by no means arrived at the most remarkable
phenomena of this mysterious performance.

In order to afford the company absolute certainty that
the ligatures are not unfastened, one of the spectators who
happens to be nearest is asked to apply some melted sealing-
wax to the knots which bind the wrists, and to impress a seal
thereon. Meanwhile, the guitars and the tambourine are
smeared with a phosphorescent liquid which renders them
distinguishable in the dark.

The moment that the room is again placed in darkness,
the guitars and the tambourine begin to move, and leave the
places they occupy, at the same time producing the most
lugubrious sounds. They are seen to rise in the air, and to
move about in luminous curves; then to take an erratic
course, and wander about the hall, flitting just over the
heads of the spectators. One guitar just ruffles this gentle-
man's hair, another brushes against that gentleman's coat;
and yet, though frequently moving in an abrupt and jerky
manner, neither of the instruments comes in actual contact
with either the spectators or the ceiling; at most, as they
pass close to your face, you feel a sudden draught, a puff of
wind that causes you instinctively to draw your head back,
for fear of receiving a blow. The situation is rather painful
than pleasant. One experiences a sort of indefinable feeling


160 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

of dread, which for the time being paralyzes the reflective
faculties.

In the middle of these eccentric evolutions the lights are
turned up, and the instruments are found resting on the laps
of the spectators. The seals of the knots are examined, and
are found to be unbroken.

A further precaution is now taken to guarantee the spec-
tators agamst any trickery, if they still entertain any doubt
on the subject. A sheet of paper is placed under the feet
of each of the mediums, and the outline of his boots is traced
with a pencil thereon. If by some mysterious means they
manage to get free from their bonds, and to leave their
seats, this sheet of paper will betray them. If it is shifted
but a quarter of an inch, trickery stands confessed. The
public appear to put complete faith in this test. In addi-
tion, a spectator is requested to take off his coat or overcoat,
and to lay it across his knees.

These arrangements being completed, the gas is extin-
guished, and during some few minutes of darkness, the gui-
tars again strike up their unearthly music, and recommence
their eccentric movements. But, even while these musical
wiU-o'-the-wisps are still hovering in space, one spectator
finds himself suddenly deprived of his hat, which is wafted
several yards away; another has his hair dishevelled by
mysterious fingers; a third feels his hand shaken by an in-
visible hand; the coat, above referred to, is whisked away
from its owner, while another spectator finds on his lap some
indistinguishable garment-like object. When the gas is re-
lighted, the two brothers are seen perfectly composed, still
bound, and apparently quite innocent of any concern with
what has just taken place. A rush is made to examine the
seals, they are found intact ; the sheet of paper is inspected,
the sole has not shifted by a hair's-breadth from the outline
traced around it. But the fact which puts a climax to tiie
general astonishment is, that one of the brothers, though still
tied up and the knots sealed, is wearing the spectator's miss-
ing coat, while the other has a hat on his head and a pair
of spectacles on his nose. These three articles belong to


Rope-tying Tests 161

three different spectators. The medium's own coat is found
in the hall on the lap of one of the spectators.

At this stage of the proceedings, the astonishment, indeed,
one might say the stupefaction, the bewilderment of the
audience reaches its utmost limit; spiritualistic manifesta-
tion or imposture, supernatural phenomenon or mere con-
juring tricks, the performance is perfect of its kind. Put-
ting aside for the moment reflection or investigation, we
simply make up our minds to pay the performers a well-
earned tribute of applause.

Explanation of the Artificet Whereby the Pretended Spirit-
ualietic Manifettatiant and the *' Inexplicable '* Phenom-
ena of the Brothers Davenport Are Produced,

Ordinary conjurers, as a rule, use special apparatus to
facilitate the execution of their marvels. The Davenports
have, strictly speaking, nothing but their " ropes.'* The
cabinet lends no assistance whatever in the actual execution
of the tricks. An ordinary screen and a couple of chairs
might, on emergency, be used in its stead. It serves, in
truth, simply to cover the manipulations of the mediums.
The musical instruments may be considered as mere acces-
sories.

The ropes used are of cotton fibre ; their make is the same
as that of the cords which are used to draw curtains back-
ward and forward, and they present therefore smooth sur-
faces, adapted to slip easily one upon another. In length
they are about ten feet.

When, at the outset of the performance, a certain number
of spectators are invited to step upon the platform, and to
surround the cabinet, they are requested to join hands, under
the pretext of establishing a magnetic circle around the
mediums. In reality, the object is to preclude the possi-
bility of individual attempts to solve the mystery. For the
same reason, the spectators in the front row are required to
join hands in like manner.

The two brothers place themselves on the seats of the


162 The Phyacal Phenomena of Spiritualism

cabinet, and each hands three ropes to the person selected to
secure him to his seat. At first sight it may be imagined
that this is a very easy matter, but in truth it is quite the
reverse. To begin with, upon what system will you proceed,
and where will you commence? You have in all probability
never before had occasion to bind a prisoner. Sometimes
the person appointed is of an easy-going disposition; he
thinks less of creating difficulties for his victim than of get-
ting his task well over ; he ties his man up ** anyhow," so to
speak. In such case everything is in favor of the success
of the trick. But very often, on the other hand, the medium
has to do with a keen and vigorous antagcmist, who takes a
serious view of the duty he has undertaken, and considers
his own reputation for smartness at stake. His first pro-
ceeding is to place the hands of the patient behind his back
and to fasten them there securely. He next brings the cord
to the front, thence back again; passes it under the arms,
and finishes ofi^ with a knot which he regards as invincible.
With the two remaining cords he surrounds the feet, the
thighs, and arms of the medium, and lashes these parts also
firmly to the seats of the cabinet. Vain precaution ! Every
knot, every form of ligature is necessarily capable of being
again untied.

While he is being tied up, the medium places himself in
any position which may be required of him; but with his
keen Yankee eye, he sees at once the kind of person with
whom he has to do. The easy-going representative he does
not trouble himself about; he lets such a person do just as
he pleases. But with the other kind of delegate he is keenly
on the watch, and strives silently to neutralize his hostile in-
tentions. If he finds himself being too tightly tied, he utters
a faint cry of pain, which, however, he makes believe at once
to repress. This little piece of acting nearly always suc-
ceeds; the rest of the ligatures are almost invariably tied
with a certain amount of forbearance. Or again, the me-
dium, without appearing to do so, expands various portions
of his frame, either by simply raising his shoulders, holding
the ajTOs away from the body, or lastly, by opposing a


Rope-tying Teats 163

secret resistance in the directicm in which the pressure is the
strongest*

When the tying up is complete, the first endeavor of the
medium is, by dint of a particular movement which it is
impossible to describe, to work up toward the shoulders the
cords which are round the forearms, so as to give these last
a little freedom. Next comes a process of pulling and strain-
ing; the wrists, drawn vigorously apart, operate as levers
straining against the loops through which they pass; and,
by persistent pulling, they stretch such parts of the cord
as may be susceptible of such extension. A quarter of an
inch, or little more, of play, will suffice for the deliverance
of one or the other hand. It should be stated, that by dint
of special practice, on the part of our mediums, the thumb
is made to lie flat in the hand, when the whole assumes a
cylindrical form of scarcely greater diameter than the wrist.

The first to get free of the four hands is passed through
the opening, and shows itself to the spectators, while the
three others still labor for the common deliverance. The
hands once free, the remaining cords and the knots are then
untied ; the teeth rendering valuable service in this particu-
lar.

Ira Davoiport ... is cleverer and more active than his
brother, and is almost invariably the first to release himself.
When this is so, he helps William. In any case, the first to
get free assists the other.

When the mediums bind themselves in their cabinet, the
mode of tying which they employ enables them to free them-
sdves and again secure themselves in an extremely small
space of time. . • .

To produce such arrangement they proceed as follows:
They take one of the cords by the middle, and form at that
point a bow or double loop. (To produce this knot, all that
is necessary is to wind the cord once round the fingers, and
through the ring thus formed to draw a small portion of the
cord on each side, in opposite directions. )

The reader will perceive that this is in fact a double slip-
knot, the loops of which may be diminished or increased in


164 The Physical Fhencmena of Spiritualism

size, according as the ends • • • are drawn tight or re-
leased (v. Fig. XIII., p. 164).

Leaving the two loops open as above, the performers pass
through two holes, bored purposely in the seat, the two ends
of the cord, which is long enough to be tied round their
feet, and attached to the cross-bar in front. With the two
other cords, they bind their thighs to the side rails, and
sometimes also the arms close to the body. This done, thej
pass their hands through the loops, which they then draw
tight by extending their legs slightly forward. Upon this
** dodge '* rests the whole pretended intervention of the spir-
its and the racket in which they indulge. In point of fact,
no sooner are the doors of the cabinet closed than the two
brothers draw back their legs a Uttle and slacken the knot,
thus enabUng themselves to draw out their hands and to
become free. The violin, the guitars, the tambourine, and
the bell are almost instantaneously set in motion, making a
row of the most hideous description, which is still further
enhanced by occasional kicks and thumps on the sides of the
cabinet itself. After a short interval the instruments are
restored to their original positions, the wrists are replaced
in their ligatures, the doors are flung open, and all appear
in due order as at first.

A representative selected bj the audience is requested, as
already described, to step upon the platform; he takes his
place in the cabinet upon the seat in the middle. One of his
hands is tied to Ira's shoulder, and the other to William's
knee. But is it not obvious that this precaution, which is
ostensibly taken against the two brothers, is really in their
favor? They have no need, in truth, to stir either knee or
shoulder in order to carry out their mischievous pranks ; aiul
the stranger, having his hands tied, has no control whatever
over their proceedings. He becomes a mere dummy; and
under such circumstances, there is not the least difficulty i<
removing his spectacles (if he wears any), his necktie, or hii
pocket-handkerchief, and in crowning him with the taiB-
bourine.

Placing flour in the hands of the two brothers does not A


Rope-tying Tests 165

1 interfere with their drawing them out of the slip-knot,
lie hands cmce free, they pour the flour into a pocket made
n purpose in their coats, wipe their hands on the inside of
le pocket, then pass them one after another through the
pening in the door, to show that they are free, and finally
idulge, as before, in their noisy concerto; after which, one
r the brothers takes from his side pocket a little paper bag
led with flour, pours some into the hands of his companicm
id into one of his own, replaces the empty bag in its hiding-
ace, and then gives his other hand its due proportion of
>ur. The doors are opened, and the two brothers, freed
'om their bonds, come forward to show the public that their
inds are still full of flour.

This little *^ flour test " terminated on one occasion in a
anner whidi was rather embarrassing to the mediums,
KHigh highly diverting to the spectators. The person
sputed to place flour in the hands of the mediums hit on
le cute idea of using snuff instead. The mediums saw noth-
g of the change, for at the moment in question, their hands
re held behind their backs. The two brothers reappeared
ith flour in their hands ! The trick which had been played
pon them was then explained, and there was a hearty laugh
1 round, except, indeed, on the part of the discomfited
idcsters.

The explanation of the Second portion, or Dark Stance^
ill be readily understood, inasmuch as the tricks still mainly
Mt OD the famous ** slip-knot " of which we have already
poken. The two brothers are seated on either side of a
ible, on which are laid the guitars and tambourines; they
ave at their feet a heap of cords; around them is formed
le magnetic circle of spe<ctators, each holding the hand of
is neighbor. The lights are turned down, and forthwith
le two brothers lash themselves to their chairs after the
lanner above described. . . • The only difi^erence lies in
le form of the seats used. Just as in the case of the cab-
et, they can at pleasure fasten or unfasten themselves,
id play the instruments which are on the table.
But, it may be asked, how do they manage when the knot


166 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

which attaches them is sealed? The reader will note (from
the description given above) that it is quite possible to put
wax on the middle of the knot, and even to seal the two por-
tions of the cord at this point firmly together, without the
movement of the ends A or B, or that of the loops themselves,
being at all interfered with. When the wrists are placed
in the loops, this portion of the knot is always upi)ermost
And, further, the interpreter takes good care to indicate
the precise point at which the seal is to be applied, adding
a request that the investigator will be careful not to allow
the melted wax to touch the wrists. This remark is sure to
induce an amount of reserve which is very favorable to the
success of the trick. Finally, it should be remarked, that
the cord being as thick as the little finger, the impression
of the seal cannot possibly extend beyond the point of junc-
tion of the two fixed portions.

We have, however, still sundry marvels to explain, viz^ the
fantastic evolutions of the guitars, the sheet of paper under
the feet, the coat taken off and replaced, etc.

The guitars and the tambourine are smeared with a phos-
phorescent liquid whose faint glimmer does not shine brightly
enough to reveal the outline of surrounding objects. The
company are therefore in total darkness. Ira frees himself
from his bonds, and, by the aid of a faculty which he has
acquired of seeing in the dark (nyctalopia) y he seizes one ct
the luminous guitars by the neck, steps forward with it M
close as possible to the circle of spectators, and waves it over
their heads, at the same time twanging the strings with the
third and fourth fingers. The absence of any other objei
wherewith to compare prevents the spectator forming any
decided judgment as to the distance of this vaguely luminom
body; indeed, I have myself known a guitar which was al-
most touching my head to appear to be several yards away.
Meanwhile, the other medium, having so sufficiently freed
himself from his bonds, holds up the other phosphoresced'
guitar and tambourine as high as he can, and with these twoj
instruments makes as much noise and as much movement
possible.


Rope-tying Tests 167

The trick of the outline of the feet marked on the sheet
of paper is very ingenious. Ira, after the above measure
of precauticm has been duly taken, quits his position on the
sheet of paper in order to approach the spectators, but when
he returns to his seat, takes care to turn over the sheet of
paper before placing his feet upon it ; and then, by means
of a pencil, which he takes from one of his pockets, he traces
another outline, which is taken to be the same which had been
loade by the public.

The '* coat " trick is worked as follows : Ira, freed from
his bonds, takes off his coat, throws it into the middle of the
hall, and catching up one which he has had placed on the
lap of a spectator in the front row, puts it on instead, then
replaces himself in his ligatures, and the trick is done.


CHAPTER Vra

SPIRIT POSTS, SACKS, HANDCUFFS, ETC.

I NOW pass on to consider, briefly, other varieties of ^' spirit
ties," in which other methods are employed, in securing the
medium, than merely tying him with ropes; but, inasmuch
as many of these partake more of the nature of conjuring
tricks than spiritualistic manifestations, properly speakingi
and are found described in the numerous books devoted to
magic, etc., I shall give only a slight r£sum6 of such metbodi
and devices, and shall refer my interested reader to the vari-
ous books from which I shall quote, for further inf ormatiQa
on this most interesting subject. As a book of this chA^
acter, however, would not be complete without some mentioi
of such fraudulent methods, and as many persons really di
believe that the medium or performer (as the case may be)
escapes from his bonds in some " supernatural " manner, i
will be necessary for me to describe some of the most fi^
quently used methods, and explain the manner of rdesit
from these ties, locks, handcuffs, etc.

The first of these that I shall describe is known to At
initiated as " the spiritualistic post test." The test is tli
A solid beam of wood is fastened to the floor in an upri|^
position, in any manner the committee may please, naikdp
screwed, etc., so as to make sure that the post is not remofn.
from its place, when once it has been fastened. A hole ii
now bored through the post (by one of the committee aboV
near the top, and a piece of ordinary rope (which may he
examined) is passed through this hole and fastened with ki
knot on each side. This prevents the rope from being dra^

168


Spirit Posts, Sacks, Handcuffs, etc. 169

1 either direction. The medium's hands are now securely
astened to the post by means of the loose ends of the rope,
nd the knots may be sealed as much as desired. A nail is
lien driven into the top of the post, and around this nail
which is only partly driven home) is passed a second rope,
fie two ends of which pass through small openings in the
ides of the cabinet, and are held by members of the com-
uttee. This ensures that the post does not move from the
oor during the course of the experiments. Apparently
othing could be fairer or more secure; nevertheless, mani-
estations take place as soon as the curtains are drawn;
wmediaiely they are drawn, in fact.
It is hardly necessary to state that it is the medium who
producing all the manifestations, and that he has escaped
rmn his bonds in spite of the elaborate precautions taken
> preclude that possibility. This is how the trick is per-
onned. Before the stance begins, the medium selects his
O0t, and in the centre of one end of this he bores a hole,
ito which he inserts a sharp chisel with a large, flat heady
isiead of a handle, which is missing. The hole is then
bsed, either with a plug of the same wood, or with a mix-
are of glue and sawdust. The post now presents the ap-
cftraace of any other piece of wood, and a close examination
1 necessary before it becomes evident that the post has been
impered with in any way. Now, when it comes to the bor-
ig of the hole, the medium knows how far down his hidden
hiael comes, and iiarig the bit, allowing the committee to
nish the oi)eration of boring the hole. He calculates to
lave the hole bored juit below the edge of his hidden chisel.
rhe rope is now passed through this opening and knotted.

There is no trickery about the tying and sealing of the
Bedium; that is genuine enough. The trick consists (as
isiial) in the methods employed to protect the unsuspecting
ublie against trickery ! The. medium states that the nail
I driven into the top of the post and the ropes passed about
k, ^ to demonstrate that the post does not stir from its posi-
ion, during the manifestaticms," but the real purpose of
bat manoeuvre, it will readily be seen, is to free the medium.


170 The Physical Phenomena of Spin

Thus: the nail strikes the flat iron head of the chisel, and
forces that down farther into the post, and, as the rope is
directly under the chisel, it is evident that the rope is cut
by the knife-edge of the chisel, which passes through it
The rope is severed ; and the medium has only to remove his
(now) freed hands to produce any manifestations he chooses.
After the manifestations are concluded, he merely has to
replace the two ends of the severed rope in the holes in the
" spirit post," and the trick is accomplished.

There is a very elaborate mechanical post used by some
mediums, which is exceedingly ingenious. In this case the
ropes are examined and passed through the hole in the post,
which already exists. The medium's hands are then bound
to the post, as in the last case. The manifestations follow
as usual.

The trick consists mainly in the post. It is hollow, and
inside it is a sliding iron weight, square, through which is
bored a hole corresponding to the holes in the post, when the
weight is raised to the highest point, inside the hollow tube. '
A rope may thus be passed through the post, and the weighty
and when this weight falls to the bottom of the post, it would
carry with it the rope, there thus being a sort of loop made
in the rope, and this is kept looped by the weight itself.
There is a catch at the top of the post which prevents the
weight from falling until the medium releases it by means
of a spring. There is also a spring catch at the foot of the
post, which keeps the weight securely in place, when once
it has fallen to the bottom, and is released only by pressure
upon a concealed spring.

The method of working the trick should now be plaiD<
The weight is drawn up to the top of the post and fastened
there before the seance, and the cord is, of course, passed
through it (the weight), when it is passed through the hofc
in the post. The medium now stands in front of the poit
for a moment, thus hiding it from the sitters, and at tfait
moment he presses the catch that releases the weight, which
falls to the bottom of the post, inside, carrying with it a cc^
tain loop of the rope. This fact is ccmcealed by the bodj


Spirit Posts, Sacks, Handcuffs, etc 171

of the medium, who stands in front of the post at that mo-
ment, for that express purpose. The weight is caught and
fastened by the catch at the foot of the post, thereby secur-
ing the ^* slack " of the rope. The medium is now tied to
the post and the knots sealed, etc. All the medium has to
do, in order to effect his release, is to press upon the hidden
spring, at the foot of the post, which allows the weight to
be drawn up, inside, by a mere extension of the hands. The
manifestations then take place. All he has to do in order to
retie himself is to replace his hands in the loops, and allow
the weight to sink to the bottom of the post, where it is
caught and secured by the spring catch. An examination
may now be made.

Sleight-of-hand performers have devoted a great deal of
time and trouble devising elaborate pieces of apparatus
which would render the escape of the performer possible, in
spite of the most elaborate tying and fastening and padlock-
ing of the performer to the board or couch to which he is
fastened. It may fairly be said that an escape from these
positions is much more wonderful than any of the ordinary
rope ties extant. In one of these illusions, the performer
is fastened to a previously examined board by hinged, iron
staples, these being padlocked down to the board and the
keys kept by members of the committee. The board is now
lifted, with the performer still upon it, and suspended at
some distance from the floor by four chains, one of which
is attached to each comer of the board. A curtain is now
drawn around the board and performer for a few seconds,
and, on being removed, the performer has vanished! The
audience could see under the board throughout the entire
performance, and the board is suspended in the centre of
the stage. I cannot now go into a detailed explanation of
this trick, as this would require considerable space and a
ntnnber of iUustrations to make it clear. It will be found
described in full in Hopkins's Magic ^ Stage Illusions^ etc.,
pp. 689-82.

Another illusion of very much the same character was
devised by Mr. Maskelyne, some years ago, which he called


172 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

** The Spiritualistic Couch." The performer is, in this case,
clamped down to a padded couch, which is raised from off
the stage by three solid legs, enabling the audience to see
under the couch during the manifestations. A short curtain
is now passed around the couch, hiding the performer, but
not reaching to the floor, and the medium's hands are passed
through small openings in the curtains, where they can be
observed by the audience during the entire manifestations.
No one can possibly approach the couch, which is surrounded
by members of the audience, and the medium obviously can-
not perform the marvels himself, since his hands are in full
view the entire time! Manifestations take place, neverthe-
less; and they are the result of trickery. The explanation
will be found in Burlingame's Tricks in Magic, Vol. III., pp.
11-14.

A very effective escape is from what is known as **The
Pillory." In this case the medium is handcuffed and fastened
to the pillory by passing his hands and neck through holeB
in the hinged board, which is then secured by means of a
padlock. The apparatus in this case is very ingenious and
very complicated. An explanation will be found on pp. 69-
61 of Shaw's New Ideas in Magic, etc.

I have referred to these tests for the reason that the es-
capes from these pieces of apparatus is so much more won-
derful than the ordinary rope-tying experiments that the
latter sink into comparative insignificance when compared
with them. The only reply that can be made to this is that
the above effects are performed with the aid of prepared
apparatus, and on a stage, and the medium produces hii
results in the middle of an unprepared room, surrounded by
skeptical investigators, and comes unprepared for the test
To this I reply that for the particular kinds of phenomena
that occur, no stage or special apparatus is necessary ; it is
just as easy to produce the phenomena there as in any other
place; and as to the last statement, how do you know that
the medium has come " all unprepared? " As a matter of
fact, this is probably not the case at all ; but even if he had,
the majority of mediumistic tricks require no preparar


Spirit Posts, Sacks, Handcuffs, etc. 173

tion at all, and so that objection is disposed of. The medium
has selected precisely those tricks that are producible sub-
ject to the conditions under which he must work. The re-
sults are inevitable.

I now pass on to consider ^* sack tests," i. ^., those tests
in which the medium is tied up in a sack, only his head pro-
jecting, or, in some cases, that too being inside, and the
mouth of the sack fastened with rope, tape, etc., the knots be-
ing tied by members of the audience and the knots sealed by
them also. The.medium is placed, still in the sack, inside his
cabinet, and the usual manifestations take place. These
tests are most convincing ; and it is stated that one of these,
the one I described on pp. 175-9, has converted as many
persons to spiritualism as any one test extant! When wc
come to it, however, we shall see what a simple piece of
trickery it is.

One method of performing the sack test is the following:
The medium is provided with ivoo sacks exactly alike. One
of these he conceals under his coat and trouser-leg, the
mouth-end of the sack being upward. The second sack is
brought forward and offered for examination. It is free
from trickery, and is finally handed back to the medium
with a statement to that effect. The medium then gets into
this sack, which is then gathered up about him, and over
his head. A ^* magnetized handkerchief " is tied around the
neck of the sack, " to keep in the influences." The manager
does this. The mouth of the sack is gathered together, tied
up tightly with rope or string, fastened with several knots,
and sealed. Just before the tying, however, a lady's hand-
kerchief and a gentleman's pocket-knife are borrowed and
dropped into the sack. The medium is now lifted into his
cabinet, and, in a few moments, the usual manifestations
begin. At the close of the stance the medium is found to
have been miraculously released from the sack, which is still
tied and sealed, however, and the articles* previously bor-
rowed are still inside the sack. A thorough examination
may be made, the only effect of which is to heighten the


174 The Physical Phenomena of Spin

When the medium gets into the sack, and it is ptdled up
about his head, the manager contrives to put his hands into
the sack, and gets hold of the top of the duplicate sack
(which the medium is wearing down his back, it must be
remembered), and pulls this sack up above the mouth of the
first sack, gathering it together, preparatory to tying. As
the joining of the two sacks would be visible, were they left
thus, the manager ties the ** magnetized handkerchief " over
the joining of the two sacks, thus effectually concealing it.
The borrowed articles are dropped into the first sack, the
one which passes down the medium's back, and it is this sack
that is tied up and sealed. The medium is then placed in
his cabinet. As soon as he is in it, and the door or curtain
safely closed, the medium slips out of the one sack altogether,
and pulls the sack out which is down his back. That sack
is now ready for inspection, and is the one finally shown.
All the medium has to do, now, is to conceal the second sack
about his person, and produce whatever manifestations he
desires.

Another and much better sack test is the following. A
sack is given for thorough examination, and may be marked,
thus showing that there is no substitution. The medium
then gets into the sack, which is gathered up over his head)
and securely tied with rope, the ends being fastened in a
number of knots, and securely sealed by the committee. The
medium is then placed (still in the sack, of course) in his
cabinet, and the usual manifestations ensue. At the conclu-
sion of the seance, the medium steps out from behind the
screen or cabinet, holding the sack in one hand, and the stiD
knotted rope in the other. Both are again subjected to a
thorough examination, without anything of a suspicious
nature being discovered.

There is no trickery about the sack or the rope, both of
which are perfectly genuine ; the trick lies in the tying of
the sack. As, however, the committee does this, it seems im-
possible that trickery could be employed, but it is, neverthe
less! The principal factor in the medium's escape consists
in a piece of apparatus which the committee never sees.


Spirit Posts, Sacks, Handcuffs, etc. 175

This is a little plug or bolster made of cloth, and stuffed
very tightly with a mixture of rags and straw, or some
similar mixture that will " give " very little. When the
mouth of the sack is being gathered together, the medium
extracts this little bolster, previously hidden, and inserts it
into the mouth of the sack, so that the loose folds of the sack
are tied around this bolster, which is enclosed within them.
The rope is now tied, sealed, etc. When the medium is
placed in his cabinet, therefore, all he has to do is to catch
hold of this bolster, and pull it forcibly into the sack, and he
can now thrust his hand and arm through the hole thus left
(the bolster is about the same size as the medium's wrist),
and remove the rope en maste^ without disturbing the seals,
or even the coils. The way is now clear for the medium,
who slips out of the sack, and the trick is done. I described
a method of working this sack test, in Mahatma, Vol. III.,
No. 7, January, 1900.

Magicians have invented a very clever sack test, in which
the medium is fastened in a sack, the mouth of which is
placed in a steel or brass band or collar, and this is fastened
by means of a padlock, the key of which is in the hands of
the committee. As, however, this test necessitates the em-
ployment of a regular stage, and consequently partakes
more of the nature of a conjuring trick than a mediumistic
s^nce, I shall not describe it here. A full explanation, with
diagrams, will be found in Mahatma^ Vol. VI., Nos. 7 and 8,
January and February, 1903.

I come now to the sack test referred to on p. 173, and
which is, in many respects, by far the cleverest of all. The
effect will first of all be described, and then the explanation
will be given, this course of procedure serving the double
purpose of best describing the trick, and forming, per se^
a miniature chapter in the psychology of deception.

A large sack, about six feet high, is brought forward,
and offered for examination. It is made of any light mate-
rial, and a narrow hem runs around the mouth of the sack,
through which runs a piece of tape. The tape may be exam-
ined, and, in fact, it may be altogether taken out and re-


176 The Physical Phenomena of Spuitualism

placed by other tape, if the sitters so desire. Nothing pecul-
iar is noted about the sack, with the exception of two small
slits or openings, about two inches in length, which are
buttonholed (worked), and to the existence of which the
medium calls attention. They are used in securing the
medium, as we shall presently see, and are not for any
purposes of deception at all. The examination of the sack
having been completed, the medium brings forward two
pieces of tape, each about a yard long, and these are
fastened around the medium's wrists, one around each, in the
following manner. The tape is bound twice around the
wrist, pulled tight, and secured by a series of knots, which
may be sealed as much as desired. It would be quite im-
possible for the medium to remove the tapes from his wrists
without signs being left on the tape, if, indeed, they could
be removed at all. The medium next gets into the sack,
which is drawn up (gathered by means of the threaded tape)
about his neck, his head being outside the sack. The sack
is gathered together tightly^ by means of the tape, so that
not even a finger can be inserted between the mouth of the
sack and the medium's neck. The ends of the tape are tied
together, in a number of knots, and these are sealed by the
committee. The medium now seats himself in a chair. It
will be remembered that, when the sack was gathered about
the neck, the tapes were not cut off, and there is conse-
quently about two feet of tape left over, at each of the ends.
These ends are passed about the bars at the back of the
chair, two or three times, tied in several knots, and the knots
sealed. So much for the fastening of the mouth of the
sack. The medium's hands have yet to be secured !

We must not forget the tapes that have been tied around
the medium's wrists. We now turn to these. The medium
passes the two loose ends of the tape which have been tied
around his right wrist through the afore-mentioned button-
hole on the right side, and the two ends hanging from his
left wrist through the buttonhole on his left side. The com-
mittee catch hold of these tapes, and secure them by tying
them about the back of the chair, and sealing the knots, as


Spirit Posts, Sacks, Handcuffs, etc* 177

before. The medium's hands are then tied firmly to the back
of the chair. If desired, the medium's legs and body may
also be secured to the chair with ropes. Apparently, no
tying could possibly be fairer or more secure, the operation
having taken a considerable time, as a rule. The curtains of
the cabinet ave drawn and the room darkened. And now,
notwithstanding all these test conditions, the usual mani-
festations take place; hands and faces are seen, musical in-
struments are played upon, and " full-form materializations "
walk from the cabinet ! After the seance is finished, an exam-
ination will show you that the medium's condition is the same
as before the seance began. Not a tape or seal has been
touched. Full forms have come from the cabinet, yet here
is the medium tightly tied up in the sack. It is not possible
that it was he!

This exceedingly clever test is worked as follows. The
sack is perfectly free from preparation with the exception
of one fact, which is apparently of such slight significance
that most persons would examine the very spot itself, with-
out seeing anything out of the way in it. It is this: the
hem around the mouth of the bag contains two seams, one
on each side, where the sack is sewn together. One of these
seams is ripped open, on the inside of the sack, thus leaving
a small opening, just large enough to enable the medium to
insert his finger and reach the draw-string. As the seam on
the other side is necessarily ripped open, on the outside, to
enable the tape to be threaded through it, the open seam is
not liable to arouse suspicion, even if it is noticed. It will
probably be taken as a matter of course — a part of the con-
struction of the bag. Some mediums, however, in order to
obviate even this small risk, sew up this slit with cotton, in
such a manner that, by catching hold of a large knot in the
end of the thread, and pulling, the seam is immediately un-
sewn. That is all the trickery there is about the bag.

In the tying of the medium's hands there is no trickery at
all, they being secured in a genuine and thorough manner.
AU the trickerjr takes place after the medium is placed in


178 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the sack. The method of procedure I must now explain a
little more in detail.

As soon as the medium is placed In the sack, and it is
being gathered up about him, he places his hands on the
mouth of the sack and assists the committeemen in pulling
it up about him ; the most natural thing in the world. What
he really does, however, is to catch hold of the hem of the
sack just over the seam^ which is now in his hand, and he sur-
reptitiously introduces the first finger of his right hand into
this open seam and catches hold of the tape which runs
roimd the mouth of the sack (v. Fig. XIV., p. 164). If the
thread is there, it may easily be broken. In any case, the
medium gets possession of the tape. Now, as the tape is be-
ing gathered together from the outside, by the committee,
the medium pulls down a certain amount of slack of the tape
inside the sack, and fastens it under a hook or button in his
clothes, to prevent it slipping, as he will presently have use
for his hands. It is obvious, now, that, when the medium
releases this slack, the mouth of the sack can be pulled open
sufficiently to allow the medium to escape therefrom, if he
were not fastened in any other manner. The first part of
the test is explained, at least.

When it comes to tying the hands, the medium resorts to
a very simple device. He passes a duplicate set of tapes
through the holes in the sack, and these are the tapes that
are so carefully tied and sealed to the chair! The ends of
these tapes, on the inside of the sack, are simply fastened
around pieces of wood, this serving the double purpose of
rendering the tapes more easily found and handled, and pre-
venting them from being drawn through the holes alto-
gether, which would expose the trick instantly. The me-
dium's hands are, of course, free all the time, being merely
impeded by the two pieces of tape tied around the wrists.

Before the medium is released from the sack, however, he
takes occasion to cut ofi^ several inches of the tapes around
his wrists, for otherwise these tapes would be much longer
than they would be if the tapes had really been passed
through the openings in the sack, for it must be remembered


Spirit Posts, Sacks, Handcuffs, etc* 179

that the tapes must be cut to enable the medium to emerge
from the sack. There are several other minor precautions to
be taken, but it is unnecessary to detail them here, as they
will readily be discovered by any one performing the trick.
Why the ropes do not in any way interfere with the mani-
festations is explained on p. 145.

Of late years, various mediums and magicians have de-
vised methods of escaping from handcuffs of all kinds, one
performer (Harry Houdini) having earned a tremendous
reputation by his sensational escapes from handcuffs of
every make and description, and by escaping from the cells
of various prisons. Many persons who have witnessed the
performance of Harry Houdini have doubtless thought that
all those who went upon the stage were confederates, and
only took up to the stage the special handcuffs of which the
performer had duplicate keys. Were that the case, it would
be a feeble trick indeed, and I may as well state, just here,
that the handcuffs brought upon the stage, in Harry
Houdini's act, are perfectly genuine, and the persons bring-
ing them, most probably, unknown to the pei^ormer. But,
if that is the case, how are the handcuffs opened? That is
the question we are now about to consider.

I must begin by stating that I do not know the exact
modui operandi of dU Houdini's handcuff acts. He doubt-
less employs very much the methods described below, but I
may frankly state that I am unable to explain his whole
•*act" in detail. However, it is hardly necessary to do
so, since a general Idea of the usual methods employed Is all
that is required in a book of this character.

There are many trick-handcuffs made, which the per-
former can employ in case no members of the audience
come forward with handcuffs of their own. The cuffs may
be ** faked " In various ways, and the performer may be pro-
rided with keys that fit the locks. One make of such trlck-
bandcuffs I described in MahatmOy Vol. III., No. lY., Octo-
!)er, 1899. I quote the explanation, as It stands, asking my
readers to bear in mind that it was written for a magazine


180 The Physical Phenomena of Spuitualism

devoted to the interests of professional conjurers and is
couched in the usual style of that magazine.

" The performer brings forward a pair of handcuffs, and
allows any one in the audience to examine them. A gentle-
man is then selected to come upon the platform, and fast^i
the magician's or ^ mediimi's ' hands together, by means of
the handcuffs. The cuffs are clasped round the wrists, and
the juncture scaled with strips of sticking-plaster (markedf
if desired) and sealing-wax. The cuffs are attached to
his hands with tape, and the knots sealed. The keyhole of
the lock is also sealed. If desired, the handcuffs can be fast-
ened to the hand itself by strips of sticking-plaster, but this
is rather unpleasant for the performer. He is now placed
in the cabinet, when the usual manifestations take place.

^^ The explanation of this feat is, as usual, simplicity it-
self. The trick relies to a great extent on the * bluff ' of
the performer, and drawing the attention of the audi^ce
to the cuffs and lock, when, in reahty, the trick is in the
chain^ and this accounts for profuse sealing, etc., going on
around the wrists, the point where one would naturally ex-
pect trickery. The links are all solid, with one exceptioOi
which is made after the style of the familiar key-ring, t.^.,
the ring with two openings opposite each other, and the ring
split round its outer circumference, so that the next link
will have to make a complete circle between these two halvci
to enter the ring (r. Fig. XV., p. 164). The opening is on
the inner side of the link, so that the next one effectually
covers the small slit when in place, and unless specially lifted.
As a further safeguard against detection, all the other linki
have a tiny groove cut in them, running around their c^^
cumfercnce, both outside and inside.

" The handcuffs may be offered for examinaticHi, but
special attention is called to the lock, sealing the keyhole^
etc. ; moreover, the faked link is exceedingly hard to opeSi
and when the performer requires to do so, he uses a smsB
iron wedge, for the purpose of opening the slit in the lint
This once effected, it is an easy matter to slip the link M
and off. The rest we leave to the reader."


Spirit Posts, Sacks, Handcuffs, etc. 181

In this test the medium does not actually release himself
from the handcuffs, it will be noticed. All that happens is
that certain manifestations take place, when the medium's
hands are securely handcuffed behind his back. If the cuffs
are actually unfastened, other measures are employed ; and,
since the cuffs are frequently unlocked, at the conclusion of
the s&ince, and indeed often found to be tnf^locked, one in
the other, it is obvious that the medium has actually opened
the handcuffs in some manner, and has not merely slipped
out of them. How they are unlocked is the mystery.

Several speculations were advanced as to the manner of
this release, in Mahatma, Vol. V., Nos. 11 and 12, and Vol.
VI., No. 1 (May, June, and July, 1902). It was stated that
a sharp blow, if delivered in precisely the right place, would
unfasten the lock if it were weak and of the ^^ spring " vari-
ety. A straight piece of metal was found sufficient to un-
lock several regulation irons. But for the vast majority,
leys were doubtless required, and it simply became a matter
of finding the right key for each make of lock, and unfasten-
ing the irons with it.

This would appear to the average person an unending
"task, if not a perfectly hopeless one. Such, however, is by
Ho means the case. There are only a few makes of hand-
cuffs, and it is an easy matter to produce keys that will fit
"the majority of locks brought forward. The principal keys
^re the Beau Gaant, Beau No. 2, Sing Sing, Bryns, Scotland
^ard, Trenton Nos. 1 and 2, Harper, Tower, and Little De-
"feective. The complete set, however, consists of forty-five
^Sifferent keys, and the performer who wishes to succeed
^very time will provide himself with the entire set. They
^^ay be bought from certain establishments for about $15.
^/^Tith these it will be possible to open almost any lock that
be brought upon the stage, though it must be remem-
lered that the mere possession of the keys is only a part of
'lie trick (I had almost said the smallest part), the principal
actor being the ability to recognize, almost immediately
he cuffn are taken in the hands, the key to try, in unlocking
lem, for it is obvious that the audience cannot be kept


182 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

waiting until the performer has tried all forty-five keys on
every one of the locks; the ability to conceal the keys, in
spite of the searching which is sometimes insisted upon ; the
ability to manipulate the keys and locks after the cuffs are
on the wrists; the capacity for averting defeat; above all
the manner in which the trick is presented, aU these factors
and many more figure in the presentation of the trick. But
I cannot go into the detail of working the cuffs now. I
shall merely mention a few methods of concealing the keys,
and of reaching and using them, since these facts are of
general interest in the investigation of spiritualistic phe-
nomena.

Of course, if no searching is to be done, the performer's
task is an easy one. His clothes will afford ample oppor-
tunity for the concealment of all the keys required. If the
medium is to be searched, he ties up all the keys in a strip
of flannel, they being all arranged in order, somewhat after
the manner of the familiar pocket-toilet outfits, each key
being inserted into its own proper pocket, in the flannel strip.
Knowing their order, the medium can procure any one he
pleases in the dark. This strip can be rolled up quite smaDi
and concealed either about the medium's person, after the
methods described on pp. 249-51, or hidden in the cabinet,
or in some chair or other article of furniture which the pe^
former can reach from the cabinet. The keys may also be
concealed in the drapery, etc. But, in many cases, even this
is not possible. Harry Houdini has been stripped entirely
nude and searched by the police, in some of his " tests,*' and
yet succeeded in escaping from the various handcuffs, man-
acles, etc., placed upon him, in that condition ! I am unabk
to say exactly how he accomplished this: but I am inclined
to think that he has some special make of skeleton-key mtiA
fits a number of different makes of locks, and that he ooo*
ceals this key in his mouth or in his hair. I am not sure)
however, that this is the true explanation. I merely offer it
by way of suggestion.

In the securing and manipulation of the keys consists Ae
real " hard work " of the trick. The teeth are very fre-


Spirit Posts, Sacks, Handcuffs, etc 183

quently used in inserting the key, and in turning^ it, when
once inserted. Or the key may be pushed into a crack in
the cabinet, and the cuffs opened by pressing them on to it,
and turning the hands and cuffs about the key. Again, the
key may be held between the knees, or a loop of catgut may
be passed under the foot, and around one end of the key,
and by pulling on the cord the key may be forced around,
and the cuffs opened. (It must be remembered that the
majority of handcuff-keys have a handle like a corkscrew,
and are not like regular keys). One of the simplest methods
of obtaining the key, however, is to have it fastened to one
comer of a handkerchief, the other end of which projects
slightly from the pocket, and is reachable by either the
fingers or the teeth.

But we have considered handcuffs at sufficient length, and
I now pass on to a consideration of the various other ties and
methods of securing the medium, being very brief, however,
as these are rarely or never seen offered as mediumistic feats
nowadays, being almost entirely limited to the stage. It
must be remembered that all these tests have been offered
as genuine spiritualistic phenomena, however, at one time or
am^er. For that reason, a brief mention of them becomes
necessary.

One such piece of apparatus is known as the ^^ spirit
collar." It consists of a steel or brass collar, which passes
aroond the medium's neck, and is secured to a post by means
of a chain and padlock. The committee do the locking, and
keep the key in their possession. The trick is in the collar,
one of the bolts of which is made to unscrew, the collar
coming apart at the hinges. This bolt is screwed down very
ti^^tly, so that the collar may be examined without fear of
detedioa. The medium uses a small wrench to unscrew the
bott.

Various boKs or staples are in use, these being fastened to
a board, and the medium tied to them with ropes, etc. It is
only necessary to give the bolt a twist to the right, when it
comes apart, and the medium is free to produce the usual
manifestations. At their conclusion, he replaces the half of


184 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the bolt attached to his wrist, gives it a half-turn to the
lefty and he is ready for any amount of examination.

Trick-cabinets are often employed; one of these, a very
ingenious affair, enables the medium to be locked within,
and the cabinet to be entirely covered with a closely woven
net, and yet the usual manifestations take place! The trick
consists in the fact that the bottom of the cabinet comes out,
and, as the wire netting is tacked to the bottom of the cabinet
all the way round on the outside^ it is obvious that the net-
ting would in no wise hinder this. Various other cabinets,
trunks, etc., have been invented, enabling the performer to
escape therefrom in a remarkably short space of time, while
the trunk or cabinet may be examined as minutely as desired
both before and after the test, without fear of its secret
being discovered.

Some mediums have also employed a specially constructed
wire cage, in which they are fastened, this cage being sub-
jected to the most minute examination desired. There are
several makes of cages in use, the one principally employed
enabling the medium to escape through an opening made by
unscrewing three or more of the bars on one side of the
cage.

Tests of the above nature always appeared to the writer
to be so obviously conjuring tricks that he found it hard to
conceive the view-point of one who found them anything else.
The elaborate precautions would inevitably suggest trickery
to any one who is at all familiar with the methods adopted
by conjurers in order to achieve their results. The fact that
no trickery is found, upon examination of the cabinet, cage,
etc., does not prove that none exists — far from it. If the
trick were so easily discoverable it would be very soon found
out, and the medium discredited. The more elaborate the
precautions, the more probable is it that fraud is practised.

This brings me to a final reflection. Instead of binding
the medium with ropes, tapes, etc., and sealing them so pro-
fusely, suggest that the medium employ, instead, a simple
piece of white thread, and see how quickly your offer is re-
jected ! The medium knows that a simple tie of that descrip-


Spirit Posts, Sacks, Handcuffs, eta 185

tion would be the hardest of all to escape from, without
leaving signs of his having tampered with the threads, and
would undoubtedly reject any such proposaL ^^ A word to
the wise!"


I


CHAPTER IX


'^HOLDIKO TEflTS"


Besides the many rope-ties, etc., described on pp. 14S-
85, there are numerous methods that have been devised for
controlling the medium, and it need hardly be said that that
person has found a way of escaping from every one of
them without detection! Many investigators were not coor
tent with tying the medium in his cabinet, or fastening and
padlocking him to his chair; they felt, very naturally, that,
however conclusive such tests might appear to be, it would
be far more conclusive to actually hold the medium with
their own hands, while the manifestations were taking place,
and accordingly demanded that these conditions be complied
with: that the medium permit himself to be actually held
by one or more of the sitters, during the course of the mani-
festations, and the medium, " to save his face," had to con-
sent. Of course, as soon as these tests came into general
use, the medium set to work to devise means of escaping
from these holds, so that he might, in reality, produce the
manifestations himself, as before, but still give to the sitter
in control of his person the impression that he was still hold-
ing the medium securely. The means adopted were many
and ingenious. I give the principal methods herewith,
though it must always be borne in mind that, in tests of this
character, " there are as many ways of escaping as there
are mediums," each medium preferring one or more methods
perfected by himself. The sketch given below can, there-
fore, only be general.

In the first place, it must be stated that the medium never

186


" Holding Tests '' 187

allows himself to be placed dbioluiely under control, t. ^.,
held in various places, by several sitters, at the same time,
as an escape from such control would be an obvious Impos-
sibility. He may state that such a handling of his person,
during the manifestations, would entirely ^^ upset the condi-
tions," as indeed it might if the phenomena were ever gen-
uine {v. pp. SS4-5). Certain " conditions " must be com-
plied with, and one of these is that the body of the medium
should not be placed under too close a supervision, but
should have a certain amount of freedom and space round
about it, which would be impossible if persons were directly
in contact with the medium's body. He offers, however, to
let the sitters hold his hands and feet, and even his head,
during the manifestations; and, as they can only be pro-
duced, one would think, by the agency of the medium's limbs,
this amount of control has always been considered satis-
factory. That it is not so can readily be seen. All that is
required, in the vast majority of cases, in order to produce
the manifestations, is the free use of the medium's right
hand: if he can succeed in releasing that, the rest will be
an easy task, and it does not matter how closely his feet,
and head, and remaining hand are held. The methods of
release I shall describe later. For the present it is neces-
sary to state that in the rarest cases only has this complete
control of the medium's body been practised, the vast ma-
jority of ** holding tests " only controlling the medium's
hands; and I shall accordingly describe these simpler con-
trol tests and the methods of release therefrom /!r«^ working
up, gradually, to the more complicated holds, where a
greater part of the mediiun's body is under careful observa-
tion. I begin by describing a simple device often employed
in " test circles," and explain the means employed by the
medium to release himself from the control of his right and
leit-hand neighbors.

Ill this test, the medium and sitters form a circle around
the table, all joining hands by placing their extended fingers
in contact with those of their right and left-hand neighbors ;
t. ^., each member of the circle places his or her two hands


188 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

on the table, palm side down, and crosses his own thumbs.
The extended little fingers of each hand are in contact with
the little fingers of the sitters to the right and left hand,
either holding or held by these sitters (v. Fig. XVI., p. 188).
A complete circle is thus formed, in which there is no break*
If the medium attempts to remove his finger, it will, appar-
ently, be felt by the person holding that finger, or held by it.
Thus trickery is impossible!

The medium frees his hand (say the right) in the follow-
ing manner. Soon after the lights are turned out (for of
course aU these tests take place in the dark, unless otherwise
stated), the medium is seized with a series of violent
** twitches," or " spasms," which convulse his body. He is
getting under control! The real object of these twitchesi
however, is to bring the medium's hands nearer together,
until they are almost superimposed, the one over the other.
Then, with an extra strong spasm, the medium jerks hii
hand away altogether, and it is free. This removal of the
finger is felt, of course, by the right-hand sitter, and he
would remark upon the fact were it not that he feels the
finger again under his own the instant it is withdrawn. Only
for the merest fraction of a second has he lost control of it ;
and now he feels it securely held again. No more twitchings
follow until the medium comes out of the trance, when con-
trol is again lost for a brief moment. When the lights are
again turned up, the medium is found to be securely held
as at first, while the manifestations have taken place as
usual.

As the acute reader will doubtless have guessed, the trick
consists in substituting the first finger of the outstretched
left hand the moment the right hand is withdrawn, and it
is this finger that the sitter so carefully guards for the re-
mainder of the seance {v. Fig. XVII., p. 188). It is reallj
amusing. The right hand is free to produce any manifesta-
tions it pleases, and when the seance is ready to close, the
medium is again " controlled," and the left finger is with-
drawn with a jerk, and the little finger of the right substi-
tuted. The trick is now done.


Fig. 1«

1

Fig. 17


(«


Holding Tests " 189


Another plan, and a yery satisfactory one, is the foUow-
ing, in which the sitter's two hands are held by the two hands
of the medium, while the manifestations take place. Medium
and sitter sit opposite one another, with their knees touch-
ing. The sitter now places his two hands on his knees,
palms downward, and they are covered by the two hands of
the medium. If he should remove either hand it is to be
supposed that the sitter would know it, and expose him.
The deception lies in the fact that the sitter does not get
both the medium's hands on his, but has only one, turned
so as to lie across both.

The medium accomplishes this, without detection, in the
following manner. He makes a series of downward passes
from the sitter's shoulders to his hands for some considerable
time. At the end of this period of stroking (which, the me-
dium asserts, is to induce *^ magnetic " currents), the medium
turns his left hand so that it will cover both the sitter's
hands, and allows it to rest lightly on them. The sitter now
thinks that he has both hands, and will so state on being
questioned. This is a test condition that gives general satis-
faction, for no one is supposed to be so stupid that he cannot
tell when a weight is removed from his hand. Yet he is !

A very clever release is the following. The medium seats
himself in a chair, and places his two hands on his own
knees, as the sitter did in the last test described. An investi-
gator sits on either side of him. The sitter who is on the
medium's right-hand side grasps his right wrist, while the
medium himself grasps the left-hand sitter's wrist (v. Fig.
XVm., p. 190). This forms a circle, in which the medium
is holding one sitter, with one of his own hands, and being
held by another, on the other side, so that that hand cannot
possibly be used to produce the manifestations, which ensue,
nevertheless. This is a most convincing test, when well man-
aged.

In order to release one hand (let us say the right) the
medium resorts to the following device. Just after the light
18 turned out, the medium requests the right to remove his
hand for a moment, in order to use his handkerchief. As


190 The Physical Phenomena of Spuitualism

80on as he has done so, he apparently replaces his hand
under the control of his right-hand sitter, but what he does
in reality is this. He slips forward both his feet and
crosses his knees, the left knee being on top. Then, when
he requests his right-hand sitter to again catch hold of his
wrist, he simply allows him to catch hold of his left wrist,
the same one which is holding the wrist of his left-hand neigh-
bor. His right hand is now free (v. Fig. XIX., p. 190).
The left-hand neighbor cannot tell that the hand has moved,
as indeed it has not. The right-hand sitter cannot tell that
any change has taken place in the position of the hands, as he
grasps a wrist, which the medium tells him is his right wrist,
and he believes him. As there is only one knee, the trick
cannot be discovered by either sitter feeling the other knee,
and thus inferring that the medium had removed one hand.

A test sometimes employed is the following, which is given
when the ^^ magnetic conditions " do not permit actual con-
tact with the medium during the manifestations; the real
reason is that the medium desires the free use of both hands,
probably. The medium undertakes to clap his two hands
together, throughout the manifestations, thus showing that
they have no part in their production. The trick consists
in clapping one hand against the cheek or forehead while
the other hand is busily engaged producing ^^ phenomena."

Some sitters will tell you that manifestations took place
in their presence when they knew that they held both the
sitter's hands, they being grasped by separate hands, and
held wide apart throughout the manifestations. This may
very well be the case, and the methods were purely fraudu-
lent, nevertheless! In order to produce a certain class of
manifestations, when the hands are held in this manner, the
medium provides himself with a long feather; this he con-
ceals under his coat, in such a way that the quill-end will be
readily accessible to his mouth. The hands are under con-
trol, and the sitter's eyes are bandaged, as this is one of
the manifestations that may be produced in the light, — pro-
vided the sitter is blindfolded. Of course other sitters must
not be present. At the end of a certain time (the waiting


" Holding Tests " 191

18 for effect), the medium grasps the feather in his teeth
and, with it, caresses the sitter's head and face, the touches
feeling like touches from tiny, soft fingers. This test is very
convincing.

Another clever test may now be given to the same sitter,
while the bandages are still cm. Request your sitter to place
both his hands upon your head. You now encircle his two
anns with your left arm, and press heavily upon his left arm
with the extended thumb and little finger of the left hand,
saying, at the same time, ^^You feel both my hands upon
your left arm? Keep close watch of me, that I do not take
away either of them ! " You will at once be able to remove
your right hand, and produce any manifestations desired.

When there is a large circle of sitters, the medium may
occasionally permit himself to be held as securely as the
skeptic may desire, in such a way that escape or movement
would be absolutely impossible, and this, while the unbroken
chain of sitters extends round the table. In this case, the
medium has present three confederates, who sit together.
The two sitting on the right and left hand of the central
confederate simply release their hold on his hands, and he
is free to wander about the room as much as desired, and
produce the most extraordinary manifestations. Once in
awhile, the medium may employ this artifice to silence all
doubting voices, allowing the most skeptical, on such occa-
sions, to hold him. Needless to say these s^nces must be
held in the dark.

There Is a dodge sometimes employed by mediums to re-
lease the feet ; or at least one foot. The medium and sitter
sit at a table, opposite one another, and the medium requests
the sitter to place his two feet on his (the medium's), and
control them in that manner. The medium has, over the
toes of his shoes, steel caps, made to fit exactly over the
shoe, and blacked to match them, ^lien the sitter places
his feet on the toes of the medium, the latter has merely to
withdraw his own feet, leaving the " caps " under the con-
trol of the sitter, and produce the manifestations desired.

When the medium undertakes to control the sitter's feet


192 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

instead, he simply places one foot across both the sitter's
feet, as in the above experiment with the hands, this being
very much easier, for the reason that the leather on the
shoes would effectually prevent any nicety of feeling, and
render the substitution an easy matter.

The method of releasing the hands employed by Eusapia
Paladino, and exposed by Doctor Hodgson, at the famous
" Cambridge Sittings '* (pp. 12-18), was simply a variation
of the test given on p. 190. The medium held one sitter's
hand, and was held by the other sitter, on the other side.
She merely withdrew one hand altogether, leaving her right-
hand sitter in charge of the same hand that was holding her
left-hand sitter's fingers. It was a clever piece of substitu-
tion. But the Paladino case I have discussed at some length
on pp. 11-14.

Magicians have invented a very clever little piece of ap-
paratus which enables the performer to produce manifesta-
tions while both his hands are in full view of the audience.
A smaU table is brought forward, on which is placed a bell,
tambourine, horn, slate, and the usual paraphernalia used
in such tests. The medium, or performer, then shows a
very large handkerchief, about a yard square, which may be
examined. This he holds in front of the table, in full view
of the sitters, and in the light, by its two upper corners, his
two hands thus being visible. His head and legs are, of
course, also visible. The manifestations ensue nevertheless,
— bells ring, the tambourine is thumped, raps, in answer to
questions are given, a message is foimd written on the slate,
etc., and, most convincing of all, the horn toots !

The trick consists in the use of a simple piece of appara-
tus of which the audience knows nothing. It is a jointed
steel rod, folding up to a couple of inches, or opening out
to a yard or more, as may be desired. To one end of this rod
is fastened a dummy wax hand (only the knuckles, they being
all that would be visible in any case). This the medium has
secreted about his person and only produces it under cover
of the handkerchief. Holding one end of the rod in his left
hand, he pulls out the rod to its fullest extent, the other ^d


" Holding Tests '* 193

of the handkerchief being secured to it by means of a bent
pin. When extended, this rod will now keep the handker-
chief taut, and the wax dummy will exactly resemble the
back of the medium's right hand, which is, of course, free
to produce the manifestations — ring the bell, rap, bang the
tambourine, write the message on the slate, etc.

The only thing to be explained is the manner in which the
horn is ^tooted." As the medium's mouth is all the time
visible, that would seem impossible to accomplish by trickery.
And so it would be! The horn may be tooted in either one
of two ways: either the performer's assistant toots another
horn behind the scenes, the performer depending on the illu-
sion of sound to pull him through ; or the horn is connected
to a rubber tube, which passes through the hollow table-leg,
and a hole in the stage, into the mouth of an assistant below
(r. p. 201).

It remains for me to describe the holding test made famous
by the Eddy brothers, and which has doubtless deceived as
many persons as any single test in the whole range of
spiritualistic phenomena. They converted many persons to
the belief, and they are two of the most important figures
in the history of American spiritualism. For this reason it
wiO be necessary for me to consider and describe their stance
somewhat in detail.

The Eddy brothers' sittings were always held in the light,
this being the convincing part to most persons, nor were
the sitters blindfolded or otherwise hampered; they were
free to make use of whatever powers of observation they
possessed. The ** cabinet " was erected in the corner of the
room in the following manner. A curtain was pinned or
otherwise fastened against the wall of the room, in the angle,
this curtain containing several slits sufficiently long to enable
ft hand and arm to be thrust through them. Sometimes, how-
ever, this curtain was dispensed with, as the manifestations
could be produced just as well without it. I shall accord-
ingly describe a stance where the curtain is not used. The
ftrrangements were simple. Three chairs were placed in the
corner of the room, side by side, two investigators and the


194 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

medium sitting on them. The medium does not occupy the
middle seat, however, as one might suppose, but the one to
the left of the sitters in the cabinet, and to the right of the
onlookers. The mediiun on the one side and the second sitter
on the other now grasp the middle sitter's arms with their
two hands, the right and left hand each taking a firm hold
on the sitter's arm at difi^erent points, so that if either hand
were removed, by either his right or his left hand neighbor,
he would feel it instantly, and give the alarm. He is even
requested to do this. A curtain is now pinned across the
three sitters, being fastened to each of their breasts by
means of pins, and attached just below the neck. This pre-
vents the audience from seeing the medium or sitters in the
cabinet from the neck down, though their heads are still vis-
ible. In the cabinet has previously been placed a table,
on which is a bell, horn, tambourine, slate, etc. This is all
the preparations that are required, and, as they are so simple,
the spectators think that no trickery can be possible imder
such circumstances. Of course the manifestations take place
as usual.

It will be seen that all the manifestations could be easily
explained, if only the medium had the free use of his right
hand, as all the instruments on the table would be within his
reach, to manipulate as he pleased, if only that hand were
free. The means employed to free that hand were many and
varied. Sometimes the medium would merely extend the first
and second fingers of his left hand, and, by degrees, trans-
fer the pressure from the right to the left hand fingers. In
this manner the right hand could be gradually released.
This manoeuvre, however, is always a risky one, and one lia-
ble to detection; and, as the sitter chosen for the middle
seat is usually one of the skeptical, this device is rarely
relied upon, but another and surer plan followed.

The medium has, concealed in his right hand, a piece of
sheet lead about two inches square. This he has palmed.
Now, when he places his right hand over the arm of the
sitter, he simply bends this piece of lead round the arm of
his victim, and he is then free to remove his hand at any


<(


Holding Tests" 195


time without fear of detection. The sitter cannot see what
goes on inside the cabinet, owing to the arrangement of the
curtain, and the weight of the lead gives him the impression
that the medium's hand is still holding his arm. The illu-
sion is almost perfect.

AlmostI In order to render the illusion quite perfect,
however, a further improvement was made. A spring clasp
was used, to each end of which was soldered a portion of a
hand, the thumb on one end and the four fingers on the
other. These were made of rubber, and, when the spring
clip was opened, and the fingers and thumb clasped on oppo-
site sides of the arm, the illusion was perfect.

And that is the whole secret of the marvellous Eddy
brothers' performance, or " stance ! " The whole trick is so
absurdly simple that it seems incredible that intelligent
people should have been deceived by it for an instant. The
medium produces whatever manifestations he desires; rings
bells, etc., and shows his own hands or stufi^ed gloves on the
end of his telescopic rod, as described on p. 196. If, by any
chance, the table has been placed beyond the medium's reach,
he can, nevertheless, obtain possession of any of the articles
thereon by the same means — the telescopic rod. The
methods of producing several hands of different sizes at the
lame moment (which many persons who attended the Eddy
brothers' s^nces will doubtless state they saw, and rightly)
are described on p. S48«


CHAPTER X

lOSCELLANEOnS PHYSICAL TESTS

We must now pass on to consider certain " physical tests ^
pure and simple, meaning by this, those tests in which cer-
tain intelligent phenomena take place, not discussed in the
chapters on table-turning, raps, etc., and consisting chiefly
in the playing of musical instruments, under conditions
which render it impossible (apparently) for the medium to
play the instruments or produce the witnessed phenomena
himself.

Before proceeding to do so, however, I must describe a
little piece of apparatus in very general use among mediums,
and one that may be used for many purposes. It is a little
rod made of steel, which slides or " telescopes *' together,
forming either a long, slender rod when folded up, looking
very like a slate-pencil (indeed, it may be disguised as
such), or into a thicker and more compact mass about two
inches in length. Both of these rods, when opened out,
measure about three feet. The rod is hollow (which fact is
taken advantage of in such tests as that described on p.
S48), and is provided with a hook at its small or distant
end, this being used to lift the musical instruments, convey
them from one place to another, etc.

Instead of this telescopic rod, some mediums employ a
little instrument known as the " lazy tongs." These are
made of steel, and are a number of rods, pivoted together
in the middle, so as to form a series of X's, — two comers
of which are fastened to two comers of the X's next to them,
so that the entire apparatus may shut up into a very small

196


Miscellaneous Physical Tests 197

space, or may be extended over a very large one. The two
end arms have, attached to them, a sort of grip or clasp,
which will hold any piece of apparatus it closes upon, when
the tongs are extended their full length.

These rods may be used for a variety of purposes, one of
the most obvious being the securing of objects beyond the
medium's reach, and the displaying of these articles in places
where the medium, tied as he is, could not possibly be. The
use of this little instrument in displaying ^^materialized
hands," etc., will be dealt with on pp. 245-8. Another
Tery obvious use to which the rod may be put is to produce
writing on the ceiling, etc., when the medium is " levitated,"
supposedly (v. p. S8d). This is a very old trick, and one
DOW well known.

One use to which this rod may be put is the floating of a
guitar or other musical instrument about the room, over the
litters' heads, in a dark stance. A guitar is frequently used
for tests of this character, and, when this is the case, the
guitar has, bored in its neck, a small hole, just large enough
to admit the end of the above-mentioned rod, when extended.
Inside the guitar, which is specially constructed, is a small
nnisie-box, which may be wound up, and set in motion by
[ merely releasing a catch spring. When the seance is in full
iwing, the medium gains possession of this guitar, inserts
the rod into the hole in the neck of the instrument, sets the
machinery going, and waves the guitar about over the sitters'
heads, when they will have presented to them the strange
phenomenon of a guitar floating in the air, and performing
a tune upon itself! It does not sound exactly as though the
music were produced on the strings ; but it is near enough
for the illusion to pass, under the circumstances. At any
rate^ the music has never been challenged, to my knowledge.

The guitar I have just described may be used for a vari-
ety of purposes, and I shall mention it again in the chapter
on ^materialization.*'

The author of The Revelations of a Spirit Medium de-
scribes the following very ingenious test, in which the me-
&na gets possession of, and plays upon a guitar, when both


Ids The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualisni

his hands are held by different persons, and where his hand-
ling of the instrument is consequently out of the question.
It is this :

^^ Place in your dining-room an oval table, and on it
place a guitar, tea-bell, and a tambourine frcmi which the
head has been cut. In your top vest pocket place a long
lead-pencil. Now, seat your sitters around the table, and
have them clasp each the other's hands, including your own.
Seat yourself so that the end of the neck of the guitar is
lying toward you and quite close to the edge of the taUe.
Have the tambourine close to your edge of the table, while
the bell can be placed anywhere. Make the room perfectly
dark, and begin operations by catching the edge of the tam-
bourine frame in your teeth, and by leaning well back, put it
over your head. It will settle down around your neck. Now
draw the neck of the guitar out over the edge of the table
and, by leaning forward, the tambourine about your neck will
hang down so as to allow you to get the neck of the guitar
through it a few inches. On straightening up, you will find
that the guitar will bind against the ring and your chest so
that it will rise from the table. It lay on its back on the table
and the strings must be on the side toward you. Now take
the pencil between your teeth and proceed to * thrum ' the
guitar. By moving it about, your sitters will think it is
moving around the room. In order to disguise your move-
ments, in causing the manifestations, you will find the jump-
ing and jerking tactics of all mediums to quite effectually
fill the bill" (pp. 313-14).

There are various music-boxes, too, which play or stop
at the performer's command, and some of these have been
imported into the seance-room, and the effects attributed to
spirit agency ! Doctor Monck had a music-box of the char-
acter described below, and it greatly .enhanced his reputation
until his exposure, when the whole affair, — the method of
working the trick, — was brought to light. I shall first of
all describe a music-box, devised by Mr. Maskelyne, of Lon-
don. In this case, the music-box is shown and suspended in
the middle of the room by placing it on a plate glass shelft


Miscellaneous Physical Tests 199

which is itself suspended by four chains or ribbons, one from
each comer. The music-box plays or stops at command.
The secret lies chiefly in the construction of the box. A
light shaft, delicately pivoted, is arranged so as to just in-
terfere with the fly-wheel, when the box is resting on any
flat surface. When, however, the box is tilted sUghtly for-
ward or backward, this shaft is displaced, and the fly-wheel
18 free, thus starting the music. The chains that support
the plate glass, on which the box rests, are under the con-
trol of an assistant, and he can accordingly raise or lower
the rear end of the glass by raising or lowering these chains
an almost imperceptible degree. This serves to start the
music-box, however, which is all that is required.

The test employed by Doctor Monck was of a different
character. He would place a music-box on the table, and
cover it with a cigar box, or other box, and the sitters were
at liberty to keep their hands upon this throughout the sit-
ting. Nevertheless the music-box played at command,
though the box and table could be examined, and the me-
diiun's hands were held.

This effect was produced by the aid of a second music-
box, playing the same airs as the first, and attached to the
leg of the medium, just above the bend of the knee, within
the trouser. When not in use the box rested beneath the
knee, but when required for action it was brought around
to the front of the leg, resting above the knee. The box
was so arranged that pressure on a stud at the top caused
it to play, the music immediately ceasing when such pressure
was removed. Of course the box on the top of the table is
silent throughout, the music being under the perfect control
of the medium.

The accordion test has been rendered famous chiefly be-
cause it was one of the phenomena produced in Sir William
Crookes's presence through the mediumship of D. D. Home.
I have discussed this test on pp. 374-7, giving my reasons for
thinking that the test was not produced by any such means
at those particular sittings. In the present chapter I shall


200 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

describe the various means that are employed to cause the
accordion to play by itself, when trickery U employed.

One method of working the trick is for the medium to take
hold of the accordion in his right hand (his left being held
by a sitter above the table) at the end opposite that on which
are the keys of the instnunent. The notes are now at the
end farthest away from him, in which position they are sup-
posed to be throughout the stance. The accordion plajrs
nevertheless, and, at the conclusion of the stance, it is
brought up in the same position in which it was placed under
the table. The trick is simple enough. In the act of plac-
ing the accordion under the table, the mediimi turned it end
for end, so that the end with the keys or notes is now in his
hand, and the strap end hanging downward. This lower end
the medium grasps between his knees, and, by flexing his
wrist strongly, he can play the instrument after a fashion,
which is all that is required. Before the accordion is brought
up again, the medium is careful to reverse the ends, so that
the end containing the notes again hangs downward, as at
first. A variation of working this trick is for the medium
to have concealed about him a loop of catgut, to which is
attached a small sharp hook. The loop is produced by the
medium, under cover of the table, and passed under the foot
The hook is now inserted into a small iron " eye '* in the
lower end of the accordion, and the medium may pull against
this in producing a certain number of notes from the in-
strument.

If the accordion is tied and sealed the medium can still
produce music therefrom, provided a dark seance be allowed.
He simply attaches a rubber tube to the air-hole or valve
and blows into the other end of this tube. His lungs take
the place of bellows.

There are mediums known as ** trumpet mediums,*' whose
specialty is the production of voices, etc., through a trumpet,
these voices often being recognized by sitters as character-
istic of their departed friends, as giving information pre-
viously unknown to them, etc. This latter aspect of the
problem I shall not stop to discuss now, but shall confine my-


Miscellaneous Physical Tests 201

self to the actual voices, and the various methods of produc-
ing them.

In the vast majority of cases, the trumpet talking is done
by the medium himself. If the seance is in the dark, the
medium's task is an easy one, he having only to wave the
trumpet about and imitate whatever voices he desires. By
attaching the trumpet to the end of the telescopic rod men-
tioned on p. 196, and moving this about, voices can be made
to appear in various parts of the room at will. Sometimes
the tnunpet is partly in sight, when the room is only par-
tially darkened, and yet the voices come. This is accom-
plished by a small piece of rubber tubing being attached to
the mouth of the horn, and the mediimi speaks into the other
end of this tube. The voice appears to issue from the horn.
At other times the medium employs a second trumpet, speak-
ing into that, and it is almost impossible to distinguish the
difference by locating the sound (v. p. 101, etc.). At other
times the medium consents to be held by two sitters while
the horn is doing the talking. When this is the case, the
medium generally has a confederate, who manipulates the
horn, does the talking, etc.

Sometimes these stances are given *^ in the light,'' ». e.^ in
dim twilight. In these cases, the horn is laid on the floor of
the room, and the voices issue therefrom as before. The
trick consists in the fact that a rubber tube connects the end
of the horn with a confederate's mouth, he being hidden in
the cellar below, and he it is who does the talking. When
the medium gives these s^nces in his own house, an elaborate
arrangement of s})eaking-tubes is employed, rendering a
magnificent test s^nce possible.

There are also horn tests in which an ordinary horn is
simply ^ tooted," but under conditions that render it impos-
sible, supposedly, for the medium to get at and manipulate
the horn. If the horn is out of reach, it may be secured by
means of the telescopic rod, spoken of at the commencement
of this chapter. Sounds may be produced in various parts of
the room, beyond the reach of the medium, by means of the
same instrument; the horn is fitted into the end of the rod.


202 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

and the medium blows through the hollow tube thus formed,
waving the rod about, all the time, in various directions.

The chief tests, however, are the following. The medium
is requested to fill his mouth with water, and to spit this
water out again at the conclusion of the stance, thus proving
that he did not do the ^* tooting.**

The methods of ^* getting around " this test, to use the
language employed by the professional mediimi, are numer-
ous. The medium may attach a miniature pair of bellows
to the horn, and may blow through it in that manner.
Again, he may place the horn in his nose, and blow through
it ; or the medium may attach a rubber ball to the horn, and
squeeze that, thus producing sounds of a more or less cer-
tain character. Lastly, the mediimi may simply swallow the
water, blow the horn in the regular manner, and, at the con-
clusion of the stance, refill his mouth from a bottle concealed
in one of his pockets.

An investigator once suspected the manner in which the
medium did this trick, and, just before the stance commenced,
he came forward, with a glass of mne^ which he insisted the
medium should hold in his mouth during the manifestations.
The medium agreed. The horn " tooted " its loudest, and,
at the conclusion of the stance, the medium ejected the wine
from his mouth, leaving the investigator to wonder what did
do the " tooting " on that particular occasion anyway ! The
medium had taken one of the tea-beUs, inverted it, held it
firmly by the handle between his knees, and emptied the wine
from his mouth into it. At the conclusion of the seance, he
had merely to take this wine into his mouth again, and —
voUh tout!

Magicians have invented various miniature ** spirit-cab-
inets " in which the usual manifestations take place on a
small scale. These cabinets are about three feet wide, by
three high, by one deep. The performer stands outside the
cabinet, and the manifestations take place within it — the
ringing of bells, the "tooting" of horns, etc. There are
two varieties of cabinet in use; one, a very simple one, in
which a black silk thread is stretched across the stage, from


Miscellaneous Physical Tests 203

side to side, the two ends being in the hands of assistants.
The bell, tambourine, etc., have small hooks attached to them,
and the performer is careful to place these hooks over the
thread in placing the instruments into the cabinet. The
slate, on which a message is apparently written, is a trick-
slate, the one described on pp. 91-2. A full account of the
method of working this cabinet will be found in Mahaifna^
VoL VII., No. 6 (December, 1908).

In the case of the other class of cabinet, there is a small
boy concealed behind it, he being on a shelf which is sup-
ported by fine wires, counter-weights being affixed to the
other end of these wires. As the cabinet itself has previously
been taken to pieces, and rests on a sheet of glass, supported
on the backs of two slight chairs, it seems impossible that
any one can be concealed behind it, without breaking the
glass. This trick involves quite a lot of stage mechanism,
and the full explanation cannot be attempted here. It will
be foimd in Hopkins's Magic ^ Stage lUtiswiu, etc., pp. 86-7.

One very clever trick remains to be described, for the
secret of which I am indebted to Mr. E. D. Lunt, of Boston.
It consists in turning the sitter's waistcoat inside out, while
the coat is still on his back, and while the sitter's hands are
tied securely together behind his back. No confederate is
employed, and there is no trick about the waistcoat. The
medium blindfolds the sitter, takes him into the cabinet with
him, and, in a very short space of time, brings him for-
ward with his vest turned inside out ! The sitter's hands are
examined and are found to be still firmly tied together be-
hind his back, and the knots sealed.

This test is performed in the following manner. The me-
dium steps behind the sitter and quickly unbuttons his coat
and vest (from the pockets of which all articles should pre-
viously have been removed, as " the spirits " are sometimes
rather rough on the clothes!). The medium now pulls the
coat backward over the arms and on to the hands, which are
tied together. The vest is next pulled down backward in
precisely the same manner as the coat, over which it now
haifgs. The entire coat is then pulled through the armhole


204 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

on the button side of the vest (the right), and is pulled up
the right arm, where it is left for a minute. The vest is now
on the left arm, with the buttonhole side nearest the left
shoulder. Now take hold of the lowest comer of the button
side of the vest (the right) and carry it round and through
the armhole on the hut\xmhole side of the vest, pulling it
through as far as it will go. Next take hold of the lowest
left-hand comer of the vest (the buttonhole side), and pull
that also through the same armhole, when it will be found
that the vest is really turned inside out. It is, however, still
on the left arm. The vest is pulled down to the wrists, and
the coat passed back through the armhole on the side nearest
to it, so as to bring the vest outside the coat as at first. All
that now remains to be done is to pull up the waistcoat over
the back of the sitter, then the coat, and the trick is done.
By practice, this can be done in a remarkably short time,
though the description may sound very complicated.

A brief mention should be made of the performance of
Mrs. Abbott, who accomplished feats apparently far beyond
her strength, such as lifting a man sitting on the top of a
billiard cue, while several other men were also attempting to
hold it down ; placing the tips of her fingers against the wall,
and a line of several strong men was unable to push her
against the wall ; placing herself in such a ^* condition "
that the strongest man in the audience could not lift her from
the floor, etc. The medium herself put the efi^ects down to a
sort of ** magnetism," but it was readily proved that they
were all dependent upon certain well-known laws of me-
chanics, she taking advantage of them for her performance.
I could explain her performance in detail, but refrain from
doing so, for the reason that expos& of her performance
have been published so frequently before. I refer the inter-
ested reader to a book entitled Lfdu Hurst: Revelations of
the Georgia Magnet; to pp. 167-66 of the Revelations of a
Spirit Medium; to pp. 274-88 of The Supematuralt by
L. A. Weatherly and J. N. Maskelyne; to Mr. Myers's
paper ** Resolute Credulity " in Proceedings S. P. i?.. Vol.
XI., pp. S19-S6 (containing expose of the performance,


Miscellaneous Physical Tests 205

and explanations thereof by Sir O. J. Lodge, Prof. James
H. Hyslop, Dr. R. Hodgson, the Rev. Solon Laner, etc.);
to Journal S. P. R., Yd. V., pp. 168-9, etc. Further criti-
cism is hardly necessary.


CHAPTER XI


spnurr - photoobaphy


The whole history of modem spiritualism has probably
contained no more bitter contests than have arisen over this
question of the possibility and the reality of ** spirit-photo-
graphs ; " of those photographs, that is, on which appear a
face, or a number of faces (as the case may be), of departed
friends or relatives of the sitter, on the same plate upon
which was taken the photograph of the flesh and blood sitter
himself. The individual merely sits and is taken just as in
any case, apparently; but, when the plate comes to be de-
veloped, lo and behold! upon it are observed one or more
*^ spirit " faces. The question is : how did those faces get
there? Are they the result of some trick in the printing or
developing of the plates ; or are they the real photographs
of genuine spirits, sufliciently materialized for the time being
to impress the sensitive plate of the photographer, though
invisible to the gross physical eye? The scientific and skep-
tical world holds to the former of these opinions ; the spirit-
ualistic world to the latter. It should be obvious that this
question cannot be settled by a priori considerations alone,
but must be settled by an appeal to facts. To these facts
I accordingly turn, reserving the theoretic discussion for a
later page.

That these spirit-photographs can be produced by trick-
ery no one doubts who is acquainted with the evidence and
the facts in the case. Granting that the medium is free to
manipulate the plates before, during, and after the stance,
or at any one of these times, it is well known that he is aBle
to produce exact reproductions of supposedly spirit forms

206


Spirit-photography 207

by purely fraudulent means. The question is, therefore,
are the conditions such as to preclude the possibility of any
substitution or manipulation of the plates by the medium?
If the conditions are not exact enough to preclude this, then
the evidence is obviously worthless, from the scientific point
of view, for the scientist would very naturally insist that
all fraud be excluded before he will consider the evidence for,
and the nature of, this astonishing fact, if fact it be. The
whole question is one of perfection of the conditions imposed.
The actual methods of trickery that are possible, the means
employed to trick the unwary, in this field, will presently be
detailed; for the moment, I wish to consider, very briefly,
the historical evidence in the case, and to see what support
is afforded the claims of the spiritualists by the past evidence
— this being simply an appeal to facts.

Groing back no further than the Report of the Seybert
Conunission, we find that this committee was unable to pro-
cure the services of any medium at that time who would give
seances for the production of spirit-photography under
conditions that were in any way satisfactory, or even that
did not point to obvious fraud, as the motive of the so-called
^* conditions " demanded. W. M. Keeler demanded, e, g.^ the
"exclusive use of the dark room and my own instnunent"
(p. 91), conditions which were, as Doctor Furness pointed
out, ^ simply silly." The conditions insisted upon were such
as to render fraud of the most transparent kind the simplest
thing in the world. No other mediums, however, volunteered
to give s&inces under any better conditions, and the matter
was accordingly dropped.

Cases of spirit-photographs being obtained under appar-
ently good ** test conditions '* continued to be printed in vari-
ous spiritualistic journals, however, though the character
of most of the evidence is exceedingly poor to any one going
through it with critical care, and in spite of the fact that
the investigations of the S. P. R. and many other individuals
failed to bring to light any conclusive, positive facts in sup-
port of the evidence there accumulated. The deadlock was
finally disposed of, and matters brought to a head, by the


208 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

publication, in The Arena (January, 1891)9 of an article
by Dr. A. R. Wallace, " Are There Objective Apparitions? "
which essay was afterward bound up in the later edition of
his Miracles and Modem Spiritualism, pp. S81-54. Doctor
Wallace contended that apparitions are occasionally object-
ive realities, and not invariably subjective hallucinations, and
appealed to five classes of facts to support him in his posi-
tion. These are: (1) The fact that these phantoms are
sometimes seen by two or more persons at the same time ; the
" collective hallucinations " of the psychical researcher.
(S) The fact that these phantoms, when thus seen by two
individuals, from different points of space, appear to differ
in the relation to the individual, just as a real figure would
differ. (8) The fact that dogs and other domestic animals
are often reported to act as if they were aware of the pres-
ence of a figure. (4) The fact that phantoms sometimes
(apparently, at least) produce real, physical effects in the
material world, thus proving their objective reality, apart
from the mind of the seer; and (6), the fact that these
apparitions, or phantoms, can be occasionally photographed.
We are not concerned at present with any aspect of the
problem, save that of the evidence for spirit-photography.
The real evidence presented in Doctor Wallace's book is cer-
tainly as inconclusive as possible, but Doctor Wallace, no
doubt, would assert that the cases cited are merely samples^
and are not intended to be convincing in themselves. Let
us admit all that. The question now became one of his-
toric research, of examination of cases, and a study of the
methods and records of the principal mediums, who were at
one time or another known to the spiritualistic world as
" mediums who could produce spirit-photographs."

Obviously this task was a very laborious one. It was,
nevertheless, undertaken by Mrs. Sidgwick, and the results
of her researches given to the world in the form of a mag-
nificent paper, ** On Spirit Photographs," published in Pro-
ceedings S. P. R., Vol. VII., pp. 268-89. In this article,
Mrs. Sidgwick examined the records of Mumler, Hudson,
Parkes, and Buguet (the four principal mediums engaged in


Spirit-photography 209

the production of spirit-photographs), and showed that the
evidence was not only absolutely inconclusive in all their
cases, but that gross and constant fraud had been charged
against every one of these mediums and conclusively proved
to exist. So far as the historical evidence went, then, pro-
fessional mediums certainly could not be said to establish
anything beyond a healthy doubt in the investigator's mind
that such phenomena were ever genuine. Mrs. Sidgwick
then offers some very sane and valuable remarks on the
recognition of friends, relatives, etc., in these photographs,
showing how difficult a thing it is to conclusively establish
the identity of any person on such evidence, and the nature
of the extreme uncertainty in these cases, owing to the pos-
sibilities of fraud, mistaken identity, etc. Finally, Mrs.
Sidgwick examined a number of cases in which spirit-photo-
graphs had been apparently produced on an ordinary plate,
when no professional medium had been employed. Her con-
clusion was that, either because of the nature of the spirit
face produced (this often being only a mere blur on the
plate), or the conditions of light, etc., under which the photo-
graph was taken, or because of lack of sufficient detail in the
description, or for other reasons it would be too tedious to
enter into here, the evidence was inconclusive, to that date,
and did not by any means prove spirit-photography to be a
reality, or even a plausible possibility. I would refer all in-
terested to the Report itself, since no mere summing up can
suffice to do it justice. I also refer them to Podmore's
Modem Spiritudlism^ Vol. II., pp. 117-26.

Of late years, one or two cases have been recorded which
require careful examination. Some of the most remarkable
of these cases are recorded in Dr. I. K. Funk's The Widow^s
Mite^ etc., pp. 451-84. I cannot now discuss these cases in
detail without the evidence being before the reader. The
cases are certainly most striking, though to my mind not
conclusive. They rest almost entirely on the reliability of the
witnesses, and, although there is not the slightest reason for
doubting their integrity, still, evidence of this character, so
long as the phyrical posttbUity is present, will never convince


210 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the scientific world, and rightly. It is the case of William
Stainton Moses over again!

The other case to which I refer is remarkable also, though
in a little different way. This case was published in Pro-
ceedings S. P. R.9 Vol. XlV.y pp. 234-9, and discussed at
great length in the Society's Journal (Vol. IX. ; also in Vol.
VII., pp. 165-71). In this case, the camera was exposed and
left for some considerable time in that manner, an ^* interior *'
being taken. When the plate came to be developed, it was
found to contain a figure seated in an empty chair, facing
the camera, and, to make matters more interesting, it was
afterward ascertained that this figure bore a resemblance

to Lord D , the owner of D Hall (the library of

which was being photographed), and that the Lord D-

had actually died on that day, unknown to the person taking
the photograph! The case, though most interesting, is sci-
entifically inconclusive, for the reason that the camera was
left unprotected for some time; and, though it was never
proved that any person had entered the room in the interval,
its possibility causes us to reject this case, on the grounds
of " Not proven."

There are few, probably, who would deny the scientific
possibility of such a thing as ^^ spirit-photography," on a
priori grounds alone. The cases of alleged materializaticHi,
the cases of apparitions, and kindred phenomena, cause us
to suspect that, some day, spirit-photography may be a pos-
sibility, if many of the alleged phenomena of psychical re-
search have any basis in fact at all. In any case it is no
good to deny the possibility of such phenomena, since the
phenomena, if real, can some day be proved to exist, and
thus settle all a priori speculations in the matter at once.
These are useless in work such as psychical research, in any
case (v. pp. 8S2-3, etc.). The recent cases of alleged
" thought-photography," though doubtless inconclusive, are
still interesting and suggestive enough to induce us to keep
an open mind in this direction, and not to be too dogmatic,
either for or against. While the historic evidence in the
case is certainly inconclusive, as stated, there is sufficient


Spirit-photography 211

evidence in it of the supernormal to warrant our continued
search in that direction, with the hope that, some day,
genuine phenomena may be obtained. With these remarks
I shall pass on to consider the methods that are employed by
the medium, in order to produce these photographs by
fraudulent means, and the tests that should be applied in
order to offset the medium's attempts at trickery and decep-
tion.

There are many ways in which spirit forms may be made
to appear on the sensitive plate, and I shall briefly describe
some of them. The following very excellent account of a
number of methods that are employed appeared in a maga-
zine a number of years ago, and is well worth quoting at
some length. It reads, in part, as follows:

^In order to give our readers some idea of the method
in which these frauds are practised, it will be necessary to
describe a part of the ordinary process of photography.
The most important preparation of the glass plate for the
negative is termed * sensitizing,' and is effected as follows : ^
The operator, holding the clean glass plate horizontally on
his left hand, carefully pours over it sufficient collodion, a
preparation of guncotton dissolved in a mixture of ether
and alcohol, to cover the whole surface, and leave thereon
a thin, transparent film, when poured off. When this coat-
ing has settled to a gummy consistency, it is placed on an
instrument called a * dipper ' — a species of hook made of
glass, porcelain, or rubber — and deposited in a bath, con-
taining a solution of nitrate of silver, where it is left for
perhaps two minutes. The bath is generally a vertical glass
vessel, flat-sided like a pocket-flask, but uncovered. The
plate is so placed in the bath that no portion of the collodion-
ized surface touches the sides of the vessel. When the plate
is lifted out of the dipper, its face is covered with a creamy,

' I have purposely preserved the ori^nal form of this paper Cthou^h,
of oourae, many of the methods the author describes are now obsolete),
for the reason that the older spirit -phot osraphers worked under just the
conditions described, and hence the description is probably accurate of
the conditions at tiuU Hme. The newer methods are exposed later on in
this ebapter.


212 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

opaque film, and it is then fully sensitized, that is, prepared
to receive impressions through the camera. This prepara-
tion must be completed in the dark room, inasmuch as the
plate is more or less sensitive from the moment of entering
the bath, and exposure to the light would ruin it. The en-
suing part of the process, including the placing of the plate
in the dark slide, and carrying it to the camera, focusing,
exposing, and returning the plate to the dark room, has been
witnessed by most people who have had a picture taken.

*^ After returning to the dark room, the operator takes
the plate from the slide, and pours over the surface, stiU
covered with the white, sensitive film, a solution of iron,
called, in photographic technology, the 'developer.' This
iron precipitates the silver ; here and there the creamy white
of the film fades away, the black shadows come forth, and
the picture grows out from the pallid surface, first in pale
shadows, which ultimately develop to strong reliefs of black
and white, like the shadows of a wizard's mirror. The plate
is liable to impressions from the moment in the nitrate of
silver bath, until the development of the picture is complete,
so that at any immediate stage of the negative-making proc-
ess, it is possible to produce * ghosts ' on the picture, as we
shall shortly explain. But even after the negative is made
there are large opportunities for ghost-manufacture during
the making of the positive, which is printed from the nega-
tive on albumenizcd paper, rendered sensitive to light by im-
mersion in a nitrate of silver solution. The sunlight, acting
through the glass negative on the sensitive paper, makes the
positive picture on the card photograph. There is consider-
able opportunity for humbug during the operation of * re-
touching ' the negative before printing. The term * retouch-
ing ' covers a multitude of means by which smoothness, clear-
ness, transparency of shadows, strength of color, etc., are
given to prints, freckles removed, boils eliminated, scars
obliterated, beauty bestowed, and the original of the por-
trait gracefully flattered to his heart's content. Further
description of the process will not be essential to our purpose
of showing that in the dark room, before exposure, in the


Db. Richard Kodomin
A " aplrit-phott^n^ph " whkh Dr. Flolcixin hn<l lakoii in or<Wr In slinw
that a face may be made lo appear civit jewelry, ux the rcHiill of fniixlii-
lent manipulation of the platefl. Spirit ualiiilN have fn'iiiii'ntly ttsserteil
this to be impossible — unless the "spirit" lie Kenitine. Ii will be ol>>
wrved that the face, in this instance, appears over the watch-chain.


1 ''


*< "■


-■ - t


Spirit-photography 213

opening during exposure, in the development of the negative,
in the retouching of the negative, and in printing of the
negative, fraud may be successfully practised by spirit-
mongers. . . . Now for the process of ghost-manufacture!
^ The plate upon which the negative has been made may
subsequently serve for scores of others, if carefully washed,
and in all photograph galleries numbers of old negatives are
washed out from time to time, and used afresh. The washing
must be very thorough, else the old impression will come out
faint and misty with the new one. It is consequently a com-
mon expression in photograph galleries, * Wash those plates
cleaner, old impressions are coming out.' Well, some eastern
photographer had at one time lying in his dark room an old
negative of a picture resembling a fair girl in her snowy
bridal dress, fleecy veil, and fresh orange blossoms, — at
least, we will so suppose. The dust of years had noiselessly
enveloped the old negative with its ashy molecules ; the bridal
dress had passed in fragments into the grimy bags of some
great rag-merchant, and the very memory of the wearer had
passed away like the fragrance of her bridal flowers, from
the musk-haunted atmosphere of fashionable society. So
there was no more use for the old negative, and they made
a boy wash it out. The glass was freed from dust and film,
and the shadowy presence that had dwelt there; and the
sunshine sparkled through it as through crystal. And it
came to pass ere long that a bearded man came to have his
picture taken; and when it was developed by the strange
magic of chemistry, behold the shadow picture had returned,
fainter indeed, but still lovely; and it floated in pale hght
behind the figure of the bearded stranger. Probably the
careless apprentice was scolded for his carelessness, and a
new plate procured ; but the strange picture haimted by the
gentle shadow, all in diaphanous robes of samite, and
^^eathed with ghostly flowers, was preserved by reason of
it« weird beauty. And one day the junior partner of the
6nn, while gazing at it, suddenly slapped his thigh, and cried
*^loud, * By G — d, Jim, let's go into the spirit-manuf actur-
^ business ! '


214 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

^^ By imperfect cleansing of the plates the most eerie
effects can be produced. About a year and a half ago a
poor Indiana photographer created a tremendous s^isation
by the production of spirit-photx)graph8 in this manner, his
success being in great part owing to the skill of a shrewd
retoucher in his employ, who utilized the shadows of dead
negatives in a truly admirable manner. The fellow might
have made a fortune, had not the trickery been exposed a

little too soon. The best of ^"s spirit-photographs

seem to have been made by various modifications of this proc-
ess, portions of the old negatives being thoroughly washed
out so as to admit of proper adjustment. The knave^g dupe
is deceived by being allowed to handle and examine the ap-
parently clean plate in the first instance, and afterward to
follow it through all its peregrinations. Whenever the ghost
impression is thus made, the spirit figure will appear behind
the sitter, unless, indeed, the old impression be so strong
as to affect the development of the new. In brief we may
say that all ghost impressions made before exposure, that is,
before the plate is exposed in the camera, will come out ap-
parently in the rear of the living figure ; and when the gbost
figure is created subsequent to exposure, the spectre wiD
seem to stand out in front of the person photographed. As

the spectres at 's lair almost invariably stand in front

of the sitter, we must conclude that the ghost impresiioo
is almost invariably made subsequent to exposure. Tlii is
not rendered any more likely, however, from the fact that

's patrons are requested to bring their own plites

with them, and mark them carefully; for we have alreidj
shown that the fraud may be practised in the dark room
after sensitizing, before exposure, after exposure, or dtniDg
exposure.

" By the old method above described, by which both «n
old and a new impression are together developed from tbe
same plate, it is far easier to make good ghost-pictaits. I
Both the imperfectly washed-out ghost figure, and the fresh "
impression are negative impressions, and produce good posi-
tives in printing. But the figure of a ghost impressed upon


Imitation npirit-photo. (ionp li
KktinK the process of R. N. Fostc
tcpaphs. Herpin may be wvn ]>
UM J. Clewt Wright, an well an •
tSfoti <Mt Foster, see Rtiigio-Fhihmpkiail Jn\


y


W. |-;.lli


. i.f CI


ioin,-". tiUf


invest


1 n-if.-. w


.. rlaii


1 111 lakes


irjt-plio


Drakp, Jo


•>t


l.T tivii.


[M-rsu


s 118S8).


For fu


Spirit-photography 215

the sensitive plate by another negative, will produce a posi-
tive in development, and a negative in printing; so that, in
the card photograph, the Uving picture would come out a
positive, and the ghost as a negative. This will account for
certain ghosts with black faces and white raiment, whose ac-
quaintance we had the good fortune to make. Taking these
things into consideration we must conclude that, when

produces ghosts subsequent to the preparation of

the plate for exposure, the secret of his art lies in the manu-
facture of ghosts from * transparent positives.' Thus the
ghosts become negatives in the new picture ; and both figures
will be printed as positives. The operation requires great
judgment in focusing.

^ While the plate is in the bath, impressions may be made
upon it which will remain unperceived until the exposure has
been made and the plate developed. A well-known photog-
rapher was not long since bothered considerably by finding
that every plate dipped into a certain nitrate of silver bath
in his dark room came out in developing with the letters * P.
Smith' across the face of the picture. It was finally dis-
covered that a ray of light, passing through a tiny crevice
U) the wall of the dark room, struck the side of the glass
bath on which the name of the maker was stamped in relief,
^d the letters were thus impressed on the face of the sensi-
^ve plate. With a glass bath, and a concealed light, won-
derful frauds in the spirit line can be practised, and, by
placing a transparent positive between the light and the
plate in the bath, splendid ghosts could be made, even while
the dupe is looking on in the belief that he cannot be fooled !
We might dilate at great length on this use of the bath, but
^t will not be necessary. After exposure, the plate may be
f^tumed to the bath for a short while without fear of injur-

^^g the impression, and the ghost figure then impressed upon
it,

** Another method is to hold up the sensitive plate (either
^fore or after operating) for one or two seconds before
^ jet of gaslight, in the dark room, or even before the
y^low-paned glass, as though to examine the coating of the


216 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

plate, holding between it and the window or gaslight an old
negative, transparent positive, or * magic lantern trans-
parency.' Two or three seconds will suffice for the clearest
of impressions; and the looker-on would probably never
dream of deception, supposing that the operator was exam-
ining the plate, ^ to see if it was all right.' According to
the distance between the two plates, the ghost figure will be
stronger or fainter. We witnessed last Thursday a splendid
operation of this kind at the Boston Gallery, in which two
seconds sufficed for the production of a ghost figure by gas-
light. By a clever device, the sensitive plate may be im-
pressed with the figure of a ghost while in the dark slide, on
the way to or from the operating-room, or even while in the
camera itself. Indeed, twenty different varieties of decep-
tions may be practised without exposure. A common artiftse
is to place a microscopic picture within the camera4x>z« lO
that, by means of a small magnifying lens, its image may
be thrown upon the plate. Spectral effects may also be pro-
duced by covering the back of a sensitive plate with pieea
of cut paper, and using artifices well known to retoudien.
. . . Extraordinary spectral effects, such as that of a man
shaking hands with his own ghost, cutting off his own head)
or followed by his own doppelganger^ may be produced by
* masking,' a process which it would take too long to describe
here. There is scarcely any conceivable absurdity in po^
traiture which may not be accomplished by the camera; and
the peculiarities of the business are so extraordinary, the
opportunities for humbug so excellent, and the methods and
modifications of methods whereby spirit-photographs maybe
manufactured so numerous, that it is hopeless for any pe^
son totally ignorant of photography to detect a fellow Kk*

in the act of fraud. Indeed, it often takes an expert

in photography to detect certain cases of deception. Were
we not limited by time and space in this article we could
readily fill forty columns with an account of the many arti-
fices practised by spirit-photographers."

In addition to the methods described so ably in the above
article, there are several others now widely employed;


Wijj photograph ahoWB niany intert«ting fealurt?s, Tlie penpral positin
— ' -;xtraordinary,but it beare marks of frauilulent maniiiulutio- ■ — ■


Spirit-photography 217

the chief of these being undoubtedly that known as ** double
exposure." In this method, a confederate of the medium's is
dressed up in the appropriate flowing robes that the spirits
are supposed to wear, and the photographer uncovers the lens
and ** takes " the sitter just as in any other case, the only
difference being that only about half the time-exposure is
given, so that this figure, when the plate is developed, will
appear dim, hazy, and indistinct, this hazy effect being some-
what heightened by taking the figure a little out of focus.
This plate is then put aside, undeveloped, and when the real
sitter arrives, his picture is taken on this same plate, the
time-exposure being that normally given. The effect of this
is to produce a photograph on which is visible, besides the
portrait of the sitter, a dim, semi-transparent figyre, which
stands behind the sitter of flesh and blood, and which cannot
be accounted for by any normal means ! If the figure should,
perchance, appear in front of the sitter, this has been accom-
plished by taking the sitter's photograph firsts on a clean
plate, and the spirit second, allowing a very short exposure,
^e general effect in both cases is very remarkable.

Still other methods that are sometimes employed are the
following: A picture or portrait is painted on the "back-
screen " with a solution of sulphate of quinine. When this
^ries, it will be quite invisible to the naked eye. When the
Photograph is taken, however, it will appear quite plainly
^^ the plate.

Sometimes very small pictures are taken on thin, trans-
Parent celluloid, and these are fastened against the front
^^1^ of the camera. When the photograph is taken in the
^^gular manner, these also appear on the plate.

Again, the spirit form can be printed first on the negative
^^d then the living sitter by a second printing ; or the spirit
^^01 be printed on the paper, and the sitter's portrait printed
^Ver it.

The above methods are not aU those that are employed by
^^audulent mediimis in producing this class of manifestation ;
*Oere are doubtless others of which I am ignorant ; but the
^l>ove will serve to show, at least, the varieties of fraud that


218 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

may be safely practised by mediums, in this line, and how
impossible it is for the average person to detect fraud, when
dealing with mediums who are experts. For example: the
sitter may bring his own marked plates to the sitting, see
them inserted in the camera, stand over the medium all the
time the plates are being developed in the dark room, and take
the plates home with him again, without any delay, and still
be most outrageously swindled and cheated, right under his
very eyes ! The tricks of this trade can only be detected by
an expert in photography, and one, too, who is thoroughly
familiar with all the varieties of fraud that are practised fay
mediums, and who is thoroughly familiar with human nature,
and the psychology of deception.

I shall conclude this section on spirit-photography by de-
scribing the methods practised by mediums to obtidn spirit
faces, and how it is that, when visiting a strange town, —
which the sitter has perhaps never entered before in his life,
— and visiting a spirit-photographer, portraits are obtained
of the sitter's dead friends and relatives — that moit
convincing of all tests !

All those mediums who enter this branch of ^spirituftl
work " make it their duty to provide themselves with smaU,
pocket hand-cameras, those which will take a very small
photo of an object when it is placed about one foot away
from the camera. At every possible or conceivable oppor-
tunity, the medium extracts this camera from his pocket, and
proceeds to copy the photograph of the person whose like-
ness he wishes to secure. These photographs can be pro-
cured either from the local photographer, or from an occa-
sional family album, etc. The medium obtains a large nuD-
ber of these, especially of all prominent spiritualists, who are
liable to have their photographs frequently taken for pub-
lication purposes. Needless to say, the medium maj visit
the prospective sitter and, if possible, obtain a photograph
(as well as much other useful information) in the guise of ft
newspaper reporter. By hook or crook, then, the medium
manages to obtain many of these photographs of spiritual-


S^rit-photography 219

isisj and their families, relations, and friends, both living and
dead. This information is used to good advantage by the
medium when he turns public medium (which he does not do
until later), and commences the business of the production
of spirit-photographs. By printing a number of the minia-
ture faces, obtained as described, on the negative, after one
or other of the methods described, in various portions of
the plate, the sitter will be surprised to see developed, to-
gether with his own portrait, distinct portraits of a number
of dead relatives and friends of his, the faces being clear
and easily recognizable! How this was accomplished is evi-
dent.

But how are we to explain those cases in which the sitter
has, let us say, mailed his photograph to a spirit-medium
living in a distant city, and who cannot be supposed to know
anything of this individual, his dead friends and relatives,
and who cannot be supposed to have any miniature photos
or other information in his possession that would enable him
to produce the spirit faces in the manner described? What
then? In that case, the medium applied to writes to the me-
dium living in the city where Mr. also resides, and

*8b if he has anything in the way of tests for Mr. ,

giving the name. Of course he has, and forwards them. He
gets one-half of the profits of the transaction for this, and
the sitter is convinced, or, in the language of the mediums,
nailed to the cross."

It must not be forgotten that there is a sort of brother-
hood among mediums throughout the country, enabling them
^ exchange information about sitters in this manner, to their
Mutual advantage and profit. As I have discussed this ques-
^on at some length on pp. 812-18, however, I shall devote
*^o more space to it now.

But suppose the sitter visits the medium in person, in some

^stant city, in which he is presumably unknown, and still

Stains recognizable faces on the plate, what then? In this

^^e, the spirit-photographer probably fails to procure any

definite, recognizable faces the first sitting — only vague

figures. He promises to try and do better next time, and


220 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

arranges to give another sitting later on. As, however, he
is *^ extremely busy/' just at that time, the sitting must be
by appointment.

Of course it is necessary for the medium to know his
sitter's name and address in order that an entry may be made
in his ^^ appointment book." Once in possession of the sit-
ter's identity, he may write to the sitter's home town, as
above explained, and obtain all necessary information and
material from the resident medium. He returns the material
by registered mail, and is now ^ primed " for the next ar-
rival of his sitter. The latter will now receive a number of
fine " tests."

If spirit faces are produced at the flnt sitting, it is prob-
ably due to the fact that the medium is already possessed
of a certain amount of information about his sitter before
the latter arrived at all. Almost all prominent spiritualists
are well known to the mediums throughout the country, and
are sure to receive fine " tests " wherever they go. The
Brotherhood keeps them all supplied with the latest informa-
tion.

It only remains to be said that I have been discussing)
throughout, recognizable portraits only, and not mere vague
figures, " guardian angels," etc., since these can always be
found ad libitum^ and present no scientific or convincing evi-
dence whatever.

In this chapter on " Spirit-photography," I shaD include
the descriptions and explanations of several miscellaneous
tests, closely akin to it in general character. I include in
this section, accordingly, explanations of the production of
spirit-pictures — water and oil-paintings, etc. — which are
produced without visible human agency. I mentioned several
of these methods in the chapter on slate-writing — the pro-
duction of faces on the sitter's slate — to which I refer the
reader. I give here, first, a very similar method of produc-
ing faces, scenes, etc., on plain white paper, before passing
on to the more complicated and wonderful tests.

The portrait is taken in the usual manner, and printed


Spiritrphotography 221

on what is known as ^ solio paper/' The photographer had

best do this for you, unless you are an expert with the camera.

After this is finished, it is bleached out with a solution of

bichloride of mercury, this leaving the paper apparently

perfectly blank. All that is now required in order to bring

out this picture as clear as it was before, is to press the paper

against a blotter that has been dampened with a solution of

^ hypo." This can be easily accompUshed without detection,

and the trick is done! It is highly probable that Mme.

Blavatsky used this method to tridc Colonel Olcott, and

others of the Theosophical Society.

Many spiritualists have been convinced by the production
of supposed " spirit-pictures " — of oil-paintings, e. g., pro-
duced without apparent human agency, and upon which the
oil is still wet ! The canvas is first shown blank — it is free
from mark or blemish of any kind. This is then taken into
the cabinet, and deposited there, alongside the medium. The
lights are now lowered, and, in a very few minutes, the lights
Afe again turned up, and a complete picture is found upon
the canvas, it being still wet, as stated. This proves that the
punting was only just completed, at all events. The medium
could not have produced the picture for three reasons : first,
b^use the time that elapsed was far too short to allow any
picture of the sort being painted; secondly, because the
P^ting was done in the dark; and thirdly, perhaps, be-
muse the medium cannot paint or draw in the least. For all
these reasons, therefore, it is obvious that the medium did
^ot produce the picture himself; and, since it was not he,
then who could have done it but the intelligences that work
through him — the spirits?

It was the medium who painted the picture, nevertheless,

or rather it was through his agency that the picture was

produced, and by normal means, too. If the stance was held

in the medium's own house, the canvas was merely substituted

for another one, exactly like it, upon which there was a

painting, just completed. The exchange was effected by

means of a trap-door, opening into the cabinet and it is

throuj^ this opening that the medium passes the blank can-


222 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

vas and receives the prepared one in return. If the canvas
is small, the exchange is made without resorting to the trap-
door method at all, the seat of the chair upon which the
medium sits being hollow, and containing the duplicate pic-
ture, for which the blank canvas is exchanged at the proper
moment. If, however, the stance is held in the sitter's own
house, and these methods are not possible, other means are
resorted to, as follows.

One method is for the medium to take an ordinary oil-
painting, as fresh as possible (so long as the oil is quite dry),
and over this lightly gum, around the edges, another piece of
blank canvas, seeing to it that it looks neat at the edges.
Now, as soon as the medium is alone in the cabinet, he care-
fully peels off this outside piece of canvas, secreting it about
his person, and exposing the under canvas (the one upon
which is the painting) to view. In order to produce the
impression of the painting still being wet, he quickly rubs
over the painting with poppy-oil, and there is your spirit
painting !

Another method of producing spirit-paintings is the fol-
lowing, which depends on chemical means to effect the result.
The oil-painting in this case is first varnished, and, after
this is thoroughly dry, it is covered with a solution of water
and " zinc white." The canvas will now have the appearance
of being blank, and may be inspected. All the medium has
to do, in order to restore the painting, is to wash over the
canvas with a wet sponge, when the painting will appear as
before.

Sometimes a circle is treated to the rare sight of seeing a
picture form or materialize before their eyes, when no human
hand is touching the canvas, the picture apparently forming
upon it of its own accord! This is a most astonishing test.
Here is the explanation.

A picture is made with concentrated solutions of sulpho-
cyanide of potassium, ferrocyanide of potassium, and tannin,
all of which will be invisible until brought out by the proper
reagent. This is a weak solution of tincture of iron, which
is thrown upon the canvas by means of an atomizer. The


Spiritrphotography 223

first then comes out red, the second blue, and the third black.
JBither the medium or a confederate creeps behind the canvas
during the s^nce, and thoroughly sprays over the back of
the picture, when it will develop, as stated. In order to
(M>ver the sound of the atomizer, a music-box is set going,
or the sitters are requested to sing *^ Nearer, My God, to
Thee"!


CHAPTER Xn


THE PARAFFINE MOULD TEST


There are few ^^ phases " of spiritualistic phenomena
that have caused more sensation, and few that are more con-
vincing, in a way, than the phenomena known as ^^ paraffine
mould tests." These phenomena were sufficiently strong to
convert Prof. William Denton to the spiritualistic belief, if
report speaks truly, and they have doubtless converted many
persons of lesser distinction also. It is to be presumed that
this book will be read by a number of persons who are not
accustomed to attend spiritualistic stances, or at least who
are not acquainted with all the phenomena that are witnessed
at these stances, so that it will be necessary for me, briefly,
to describe a s^nce of this character, and to state what
takes place, so as to make the subsequent explanations in-
telligible.

A common pail is weighed, and the weight recorded.
Into this pail is placed a certain amount of paraffine (about
four or five pounds), which has previously been melted, and
over this is poured a quantity of hot water, as hot as the
hand can bear without being burned, when the paraffine will
rise to the surface. Both the paraffine and the water have
been carefully weighed, and their weights recorded. The
pail is now lifted carefully, and placed in the cabinet, while
the sitters, including the medium, sit outside the cabinet,
forming a complete circle around it. The " cabinet," in this
case, is not the ordinary one, placed against the wall, but
consists of a kind of tent, made by fastening together four
slats of wood at their upper comers, thus forming a sort
of square, hollow box. Over this framework is thrown a

224


The Paraffine Mould Test 225

thick, opaque cloth, reaching to the floor — the general
effect being that of a table, the cloth of which reaches the
ground on all sides. The ^* table " has no solid top, how-
ever. One side of this curtain is raised, and the pail con-
taining the water and paraffine is placed within, on the floor,
and the curtain is again allowed to drop, effectually conceal-
ing the pail from the eyes of all present.

The lights are then lowered, and all take their places at
the table ; the medium, as stated, being one of the number.
The lights are not sufficiently low to prevent the sitters from
seeing the medium, whose outline may be distinguished by
all present.

After sitting thus for a few minutes, a sound is heard
from within the improvised cabinet, and this is taken to be
a signal to look under the curtain, and see what ^* the spirits "
have accomplished. This is accordingly done, when there
is found on the floor, and close beside the pail, a thin par-
affine mould of a human hand !

Let me break off just here to state how these moulds would

be produced normally. The first thing to do is to wash the

hands in very strong soapsuds. While the hands are still

wet, plunge one of them into the melted parafiine, and then

quickly withdraw it. Repeat this operation four or five

times, when a thin coating will cover the hand, showing its

precise form so perfectly that even the exact appearance of

the finger-nails can be readily recognized. To get this

mould off the hand, give it an upward cut at the wrist, when

it can be removed as easily as a loose glove, but will retain

its shape to perfection. Close the cleft at the wrist, and

cement the edges, by rapidly passing it over the blaze of a

lighted Uunp or candle, and afterwards smoothing it with

the finger. The mould is now perfect.

Of course, the majority of sitters do not know that the
moulds are obtained in this manner. They know that they
are obtained in some way, they do not know just how. But
even if they do know how the moulds can be obtained, it does
not alter their opinion of the phenomena at the stance, since,
in these cases, no living person has placed his or her hand


226 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

in the paraffine to produce the moulds, and these moulds are
formed about materialized (spirit) hands, it is believed. And,
indeed, it would appear so. The medium certainly had no
opportunity of producing the moulds by dipping his own
hands into the pail, since his hands can be seen throughout
the seance; moreover, the moulds are compared with his
hands at the conclusion of the stance, and are invariably
found to be entirely different in every respect. A child's or
a baby's hand is sometimes formed too, and found on the
floor when the curtain is raised, at the conclusion of the
sitting. As the medium did not produce the phenomena him-
self ; as none of the other members of the circle could have
done so without detection, and, as the manifestations are ob-
tained in any house, the conclusion is inevitable that the
moulds were not produced by normal agency, but by mate-
rialized spirit hands or feet!

Several typical stances, in which paraffine moulds of sup-
posed spirit hands and feet were obtained will be found in
Delanne's book, Evidence for a Future Life. On p. 126 i^
described a stance with Eglinton; on pp. 169-61 will be
found described a remarkable stance, in which the figure
materialized at the same time. Other accounts are given in
various parts of the book, but the impression one receives
in reading over these accounts is their utter lack of evidential
value. I cannot discuss this here, but will state that the
accounts altogether lack the elements that induce conviction
— to any one who knows the method by which the moulds are
actually obtained.

These moulds, being the productions of the spirit-worMi
supposedly, are highly prized by the believers, and are taken
home and framed by them, as are the spirit-pictures and
photographs. Reproductions of two such casts (the faces
of "Asoka" and "Lilly") are reproduced on p. 196 of
The Confessions of a Mediwm.

When once it is known how the moulds are obtained, it
merely becomes a question of how they are introduced into
the cabinet, since that is the only supernormal part about
it. That is done in a variety of ways. The casts are pre-


The Paraffine Mould Test 227

pared before the iiance by the medium, who oiliats the serv-
ices of a number of confederates to dip their hands or feet
into the paraffine, thus forming the moulds. These moulds
are carefully preserved in wadding until required for use.
Then, when the stance is about to commence, the medium, if
she be a woman, attaches the moulds to her stocking by
means of a small hook, her skirts effectually concealing these
hands whoi they (the skirts) are lowered. During the
fiance, the lig^t being dim, the medium has the opportunity
to loosen these moulds and to place them, one at a time, upon
the floor, within the cabinet. This can be easily accom-
plished without detection, and the trick is done.

If the medium be a man, he may have the moulds con-
cealed in the seat of his chair, which is hollow, this forming
a receptacle for the moulds that are to be later formed by
the ^ materialized " hands and feet

There is one fact which needs to be explained, and that is
the difference in the weight of the pail before and after the
experiment. This difference is very slight, it is true, but
helps to convince the skeptic. The weight of the pail and its
contents before the stance is exactly equal to the weight
of the pail, its contents, and the paraffine mouldy after the
latter is formed. This would seem to show that the paraffine
was taken from the pail for the formation of the hand, and
would disprove the theory that the mould was formed before
the s&ince, and introduced into the cabinet during its
progress.

This lessening in weight is very small indeed, as the mould
weighs but a trifling amount, but it must be taken into con-
nderation, if the experiment is to be considered ^^ scientific.''
In order to accomplish this lessening in weight, the medium
may extract a very small quantity of the water contained
in the pail, thus lessening the total weight at the final
*' weighing-in." Or he may wait for a small quantity of
water to evaporate, as it will very quickly. Or the scales
may be ** doctored " to weigh as the medium sees fit ; or a
confederate may be employed to deliberately give the wrong
figures; or the medium may have some very minute weight


228 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

that is attached to the pail, and removed in the act of taking
the pail from the scales (after the first weighing), and plac-
ing it in the cabinet. There are many ways that may be
employed to lessen the weight of the pail, so that, when
finally weighed, it will appear slightly less than at first; the
above will act as examples of possible methods.

It must not be forgotten, in this connection, however, that
this careful weighing has been resorted to in ^^ test stances ''
only, when scientific men were present, testing the phenom-
ena; and that, in the vast majority of cases, no such strict
precautions were taken, even when weighing is insisted upon ;
the sitters take the word of the husband of the mediiun
{e.g.) 9 without further investigation or inquiry. Moreover,
there are cases on record where the weight of the pail and its
contents has not decreased one particle, although several
hands and feet were materialized during the stance and
moulds formed around them! This would seem to conclu-
sively prove fraud, for how can the hands be produced, even
by spirits, without using up some of the paraffine, (which
they are supposed to use)? — while, if the hands were made
previously, and introduced into the cabinet during the mani-
festations by the medium, we can readily understand the
problem. D. D. Home gives an account of an exposure of
this kind, in his Lights and Shadows of Spiritualism^ pp.
436-7, when the paraffine was collected after the stance and
weighed. The result showed that the weight was exactly the
same as it was before the stance commenced ! As Home said)
" How is a narrative like the above to be disposed of? **

My readers will doubtless assert that the explanation of-
fered does not explain those cases where a materialized figure
walked from the cabinet, deliberately dipped its hands into
the pail, in full view, and left the moulds behind it, as a
tangible evidence of its existence and objectivity, after it.
had dematerialized. And, more wonderful still, moulds of
the spirit faces are often left. As all this happens in fuD
view of the audience, and as the moulds are certainly tiot
produced by the medium himself (as may be readily proved
by comparing the moulds and the medium's hands or face


1


i


The Paraffine Mould Test 229

after the sdance), how are these phenomena to be ex-
plained?

In a very simple manner. Let us say that several faces
are to be materialized, and moulds formed thereon. A
** spirit'* issues from the cabinet — the room being very
dimly lighted — and, leaning over the pail, dips his face into
the paraffine three or four times (at least three times is neces-
sary for the mould to retain its shape), and then into cold
water, after which the spirit peels off this mask and hands it
to one of the sitters, who finds it still wet and dripping. An-
other spirit issues from the cabinet and repeats the perform-
ance, the masks being apparently formed on the materialized
spirit face before the very eyes of the sitters. As these faces
are entirely unlike that of the medium, they are evidently
not hii. The conclusion arrived at by the sitter is that they
are genuine, and formed then and there on the faces of the
materialized spirits seen to issue from the cabinet.

The trick is worked as foUows. Before the seance, the
medium has prepared a number of casts from plaster of
paris moulds, these faces being aUowed to thoroughly dry
and harden before the stance. Now, when " the spirit '*
issiued from the cabinet, it had, fitted over its face, one of
these moulds. The spirit does not, in reality, dip its face
into the paraffine at all, but does dip it into the cold water.
The result of this is that the sitter gets the mould all wet
and dripping, and infers that the face has been dipped in
hoik pails, because it certainly has been dipped into the sec-
ond one. That is the whole secret, except the actual mate-
rialization of the spirit forms. That branch of the subject
I treat in the two following chapters.


4 «


CHAPTER Xm


ICATERIAUZATIOK


The character of the ordinary ** materializing s^nce '' is
probably well enough known to my readers to render any
long description of it unnecessary in a volume such as the
present. The medium is usually tied or otherwise fastened
in his cabinet, while the remainder of the spectators sit out-
side, in the stance-room, which is darkened more or less com-
pletely. After a certain time, hands and faces are seen in
various parts of the room, and even full, life-sized forms
issue from the cabinet, and walk about among the sitters.

That these figures are genuine and lifelike, and not mere
haUucinations, can frequently be proved to the sense of
touch, as the figures walk amongst the sitters, and speak to
them, delivering messages from the dead who have gone be-
fore, and in many ways proving that they are creatures of
real flesh and blood for the time being, as truly as any of
the sitters are. It is believed that the spirit is, in some way,
enabled to draw " vital power " from the sitters, and es-
pecially the medium, and utilize this power for the temporary
upbuilding of a more or less material form, resembling the
physical body of that person, when alive. After a time, this
power wanes, and the figure fades or " dematerializes," some-
times before the eyes of the sitters, leaving nothing behind
to show that there has been present a figure or a body,
which, but a short time before, gave evidence of being as
material and as incapable of ^^ dematerializing " as that of
any of the sitters. Needless to say, if this fact of material-
ization and dematerialization be a fact, it is one of the most
extraordinary, as well as one of the most important that


Materialization 231

science has ever discovered, and aae of the most difficult of
solution that the man of science will ever be caUed upon to
explain or solve.

It is hardly necessary to remark that I have spoken of
the phencnnena presented as they appear to the sitter, and
as spiritualists and mediums assert the phenomena actually
are produced; and I have not attempted to assert that gen-
uine materialization is not a fact. Whether or not such a
phenomenon ever occurs, and the scientific attitude toward
its a priori possibility, will be considered later in the discus-
sion* Certain it is that the history of modem spiritualism,
and especially the history of materialization, does not afford
us any valid grounds for assuming that this phenomenon is
ever genuine, or anything more than the clumsy reproduc-
tion, by fraud, of the phenomena genuine materialization
would be supposed to represent. For, with hardly an excep-
tion, all the professional mediums through whose agency
these manifestations are supposed to be obtained, have, at
one time or another, been found reproducing, or endeavoring
to reproduce, the phenomena by fraudulent means. For
those who wish confirmation of this statement, I would refer
to Podmore's Modem Spiritualism^ pp. 95-116 (Vol. II.),
Heme, Williams, Miss Cook, Miss Showers, Eglinton, Doctor
Monck, Miss Lottie Fowler, Miss Wood, Miss Fairlamb, Mrs.
Anderson, Mrs. MeUon, the Eddys — to quote only a few of
the names most widely known as materiah'zing mediums — all
these rest under a heavy cloud of suspicion, if there is no
proof that fraud was practised by them. The investigations
of members of the S. P. R. went to prove that fraud and
nothing but fraud was practised by all the mediums seen
by them, in their numerous investigations. In Mrs. Sidg-
wick's paper, ** Results of a Personal Investigation into the
Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism," ^ will be found much
valuable information in regard to the mediums investigated
at that time. The evidence in the cases of Miss Wood and
Miss Fairlamb was particularly damaging. (Miss Fairlamb
afterward became Mrs. MeUon, and it is by this name that

' Proceedinffs, Vol. IV., pp. 45-74.


232 The Physical Phenomena of Spjitnalism

she is best known to the spiritualistic world. I shall, accord-
u^gly* call her by that name in the discussion that follows.)
In fact the history of materializing mediums is so full of
exposes, and the evidence of fraud so overwhelming and so
constant, that, as the result of carefully considering the evi-
dence in the case, and the personal histories of the various
materializing mediums, William T. Stead (a spiritualist)
could only say, writing in 189S, " The phenomena of spir-
itualism, at least so far as relates to the materializing of
spirits, seems to be much less frequent in London at present
than they were some years ago. During these investigations
I have made great efforts to obtain the services of a trust-
worthy materiaUzing medium who has not at any time been
detected in fraud. There are three or four materializing
mediums who give stances in Lcmdon; but, whether from
misfortune or their own fault, their names have all been asso-
ciated at one time or another with the production of fraud-
ulent phenomena. I am not now speaking of what is said by
such opponents of spiritualistic phenomena as Doctor Weath-
erly and Mr. Maskelyne. I am speaking of what has been
communicated to me by fervent spiritualists, whom I have
consulted, in the hope that they might be able to furnish me
with the address of a trustworthy materializing medium.
The net result of my inquiries came to this : that, in the whole
of the United Kingdom, so far as was known to the spiritual-
ist community, there was only one person of undoubted mate-
rializing faculty and undoubted character who could almost
always secure the presence of phenomena, and who had never
been detected in a trick of any kind. ... I refer to Mrs.
Mellon, late of Newcastle-on-Tyne, whose success as a mate-
rializing medium is undoubted.** *

This rather dubious and unsatisfactory evidence must be
discounted, however, owing to two considerations. First, the
most unsatisfactory nature of the evidence brought to light
by Mrs. Sidgwick, in the paper previously referred to, in
which fraud was strongly suggested, though not actually
found ; and secondly, because Mrs. Mellon, of *^ undoubted

' More Qhost Stories, p. 54.


Materialization 233

character,^ was detected and caught red-handed, in produc-
ing the grossest fraud, in a circle in Sydney, Australia ; and,
though Mr. Stead and others tried to defend the medium in
Borderlandj and to show that the detection did not point to
fraud at all, it is most obvious to any one carefully study-
ing the evidence in the case that Mrs. Mellon did practise
fraud, while the evidence points to the fact that she was in
the habit of producing it constantly.

The whole story will be found in a book entitled, Spook-
lamd: A Record of Research and ExperimerU m the Much
Talked of Realm of Mystery^ etc., by T. Sheklcton Henry,
A. R. I. B. A. Here we read that, after a number of sit-
tings with Mrs. Mellon, in which spirits materialized and
were photographed, the sitters, believing that the so-called
spirits were none other than Mrs. Mellon herself in various
disguises, agreed to seize ^ the spirit," when it should mate-
rialize at the next stance, and hold fast to the figure, and
thus ascertain whether it was in truth a spirit form that
was held, or the body of Mrs. Mellon herself. Accordingly,
on the night of Friday, ISth of Octq|t»er, 1894, at a stance
held in Mrs. Mellon's house, Mr. Henry suddenly seized the
figure that issued from the cabinet, ^^ and found that I held
the form of Mrs. Mellon, and that she was on her knees,
and had a white material like muslin round her head and
shoulders. I can swear positively that when I seized the
form Mrs. Mellon was on her knees. She struggled, but I
held her firmly and called for the light to be turned up.
Some one struck matches, and then I saw that Mrs. Mellon
had a mask of black material over her face, and aforesaid
white drapery round her shoulders, her sleeves drawn up
above the elbows^ the skirt of her dress turned up, and her
feet bare. She was on her knees, and I held her in the posi-
tion in which I had caught her. The matches were blown
out, and I was assaulted by two or three men present, Mr.
Mellcm catching me by the throat and tearing oiF my necktie.
I never let go my hold on Mrs. Mellon, however, until the
gas in the back room was lit and turned full on, and every
one present had an opportunity of seeing Mrs. Mellon in


234 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the position and in the condition in which I had caught her.
I looked inside the cabinet, and saw, lying upon the floor
(inside the cabinet) a false beard. I caUed Mr. Roydhouse
over, and he picked up the beard, but it was snatched from
his hand. As soon as I relaxed my hold, Mrs. Mellon tore
the black mask from her face and the drapery from her
shoulders, and hid them under her petticoat. I then entered
the cabinet, and found on the floor a small black shawl,
some old muslin, Mrs. Mellon's shoes and stockings, and a
small black cotton bag about nine inches square, with black
tapes attached to it . . ." (pp. 60-1).*

The exposure, in the case of Mrs. MeUon, then, seems to
be about as complete as possible, and clearly shows that Mrs.
Mellon was in the habit of producing phenomena of the
kind constantly, and by the same means. And, if that is the
case, then Mr. Stead's ^^ unique " case vanishes, and the his-
tory of materialization, so far as professional mediums are

* My readers who are unfamiliar with the history of the subject roij
think that this is a most out-of-the-way and unique ocourrenoe. That is
not by any means the case; those who think so might consult a book en-
titled " The Vampires of Onset: Past and Present" containing numerous
accounts of such " grabbings " of the spirit by skeptical sitters, parts of
the book reading more like a description of a prise-fight than a spiritual-
istic sdancel I quote one case which is quite typical of a number:

'* Smash I Down came a black-jack on the head of a man who tried to
force open the cabinet, which, by this time, was found to be barricaded
by a heavy wooden partition and secured by means of a stout spring lock.
It resisted the unitea efforts of three men who tried to kick it down. The
two men who had been inside succeeded in drag^g out the woman and
stripped her of a cheap, cheese-cloth garment with an elastic neck-band
ana short sleeves of such a size as might be worn by a giri of sixteen.

" Whack I Smash came a stove-lifter down on the heaa of a curiously
disposed individual, while three or four sluggers in the employ of the es-
tablishment made a grand rush to cut off further investi^tion. The pan
who did the clubbing was seen to be Cowen, the husband of the medium,
and in his assaults he was joined by two other men, while the fourth con- j
tented himself with pullinc and hauling at the investi/pting party. In all,
a half-dozen blows with black-jacks and the stove-lifter were struck by
Cowen and his ' Healers ' ( !) and one of the visiting party was badly cut
on the neck, crown of the head, and over the right eye. The resistance
made by Cowen was savage and persistent, and not until Officer Hcnaey
of the 4th police division burst in the door and placed the * twisters' on
Cowen's wrists did he desist from showing fight " (p. 14). This, it must be
remembered, was at a spiritualistic stance, where, if ever, the most elevat-
ing of all the soul's aspirations are supposed to be centred. Can it b^
wondered at that, so long as this kind of thing goes on, spiritualisnitf
held in contempt by the public — whose sole Imowledge of it is derived
from newspaper accounts of such disgraceful occurrences as these?


Materialization 235

coocemed, is praciicaUy one unbroken line of fraud, and
this has been the more forcefully emphasized by the fact
that the newest cases investigated by the S. P. R. have
proved to be fraudulent.^ A review of the evidence pro-
cured by the Seybert Commission and the American Society
for Psychical Research,' confirms this opinion ; while the ab*
surdly uncritical attitude of many of the early investigators,
a fair sample of which may be found in Olcott's People of
the Other World (this being literally torn to pieces in a
review by D. D. Home, the medium, in his book. Lights and
Shadows of Spiritualism^ pp. SOl-28), may account for the
extraordinary nature of many of the narratives recorded,
and the lack of exposure in the early days of the subject.

There are, in the whole history of the subject, only two
cases that call for serious consideration (aside from those
mentioned on pp. SS7-8), these being the case of Miss
Cook, and the case detailed at great length by M. Aksakof
in his A Case of Partial Dematerialization of the Body of a
Medkum^ he, indeed, devoting a whole book to a consideration
of that case. The former of these I shall not stop to con-
sider in detail here. That will be found discussed in Pod-
more's Studies in Psychical Research^ p. 120, and in his
Modem Spiritualism^ Vol. II., pp. 97-9, and 153-5. As no
detailed criticism of the latter case has ever appeared in
print, so far as I am aware, it may be worth our while briefly
to examine this case, which seems to stand out the more
ibtmgly amid the fraud disclosed in the other cases which we
have just examined.

The famous stance, which, as stated, M. Aksakof con-
sidered sufficiently important to devote a whole book of
nearly two hundred pages to, relates the occurrences of a
atance that took place in Helsingfors, Finland, December 11,
mS. The medium, Mme. D'Esperance, was seated in a
diair, outside the cabinet, which was behind her, the sitters
being in front of her in a sort of horseshoe formation. The
Hf^ was very dim, so dim, in fact, that several of the sitters

» See Journal 8. P. R., Vol. XII., pp. 266-8 and 274-7.
» Amer. Froc. 8. P. R. (old Society), pp. 102-3.


236 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

asserted afterward that they could not see anything that
transpired, having to depend almost soldy on the sense of
touch, when they were called up to examine the medium, as
will be presently described. After some minor manifesta-
tions, the medium stated that the lower part of her body had
dematerialized, and that, whereas her head and the upper
portion of her trunk was visible and tangible, her lower
limbs, and the lower portion of her body had dematerialized
and could no longer be seen or felt! Needless to say, such
an astounding phenomenon caused considerable stir and
some amount of skepticism amid the sitters in the circle. But
the medium, to silence their doubts, invited them to come up
and ascertain for themselves, and see whether or not this was
the case. Several of the sitters availed themselves of this
offer, and while they could distinctly see the upper portion
of the medium's body in front of the chair on which she was
sitting, and while the medium could talk, drink water, etc.,
the lower portion of her body had apparently dematerialized,
being no longer visible, while the whole seat of the chair
could be distinctly felt by the sitters, who were allowed to
feel it with their hands. From the reports, there can be no
reasonable doubt that the upper portion of the medium's
body was really in front of the chair-back, nor can there
be any doubt that the lower portion of her body was absent,
and the legs not simply drawn back, e, g,y against the sides
of the chair. The evidence would thus appear to be fairly
conclusive, and it is only a detailed examination of the vari-
ous reports that reveals the possibility of fraud, which, I be-
lieve, was practised in this case, and the nature of which was
evident to me the moment I had read them.

The secret consisted (in all probability) in the following
fact. The bacTc of the chair was partially open, and oi
sufficient size to allow the medium to thrust her legs through*
as far as the hips, when the dress had been drawn up, and
spread over the seat of the chair. The medium would, there-
fore, be in a kneeling position behind the chair, with the
upper part of her body in front of the chair-back, and, of
course, visible to the investigators who made the examination.


Materialization 237

No oae thought of looking bdiind the chair» (this is stated
in the evidence), nor did any one, apparently, suspect the
manner in which the medium was producing the ^^ dematerial-
isation." The evidence is to my mind absurdly inconclusive,
and hardly worth amsideration at all, from the strictly evi-
dential standpoint. It is only because the case is made so
much of by many spiritualists that I have deemed it neces-
sary to consider it here at the length I have.^

It is possible, or, at least, conceivable that such a thing as
goiuine materialization exists as a fact in nature, though the
available testimony must render us extremely wary in accept-
ing evidence which would necessitate our accepting the phe-
nomena of materialization as genuine and proved beyond
doubt or caviL It is conceivable that the ethereal body,
described by many able writers on the subject,^ may, under
certain conditions, about which we at present know nothing,
become visible and manifest to us in some such manner as
by materialization, though, as stated, the lack of evidence
for such phenomena renders all such speculations premature.
Mr. Myers has beautifully worked out the scientific possi-
bilities in his Human Personality^ Vol. II., pp. 538-40;
pp. 544-9, etc. It is true that Doctor Maxwell has recorded '
•everal most remarkable phenomena (luminous) which seem
hard to account for by any process of trickery, phenoipena
strikingly similar to those recorded in Occtdi Science in
India, p. S67. It is also true that Professor Richet has
fQcently recorded a case of materialization, obtained under
apparent test conditions, that is most extraordinary,^ and
that Sir William Crookes has seen and felt hands material-
ised at s&mces with D. D. Home, which hands, Sir William
explicitly stated, were not drawn away forcibly, but melted,

* My detailed analysis of this ease, with diaizrams. will be found id the
^neeedingt of the American Society for Psychical Research, Vol. I., Part 1,
lUrdi,1907.

*8ee Elb6, FtOvre Life in the Light of Ancient Wisdom and Modem
Bdtmoe ; H. Frank, A Scientific DenumstraHon of the SovVe Existence and
Imimartaliiy; Delanne, Evidence for a Future Life; Myers, Human Per*
mujiUh/^ etc.

* MHapeyMoal Phenomena^ Dp. 15(M.

^ iiiMoIf of PeyMe Science, dctober, November, 1005.


238 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

as it were, in the hands of the sitter, when he continued to
hold them (all this in good light), which fact, I may add, is
confirmed by various other witnesses of the Home phenom-
ena.^ I do not deny any of these facts, or wish to depreciate
the character or value of the evidence for these remarkable
manifestations; I only insist that there is not enough evi-
dence of this character to warrant our speculating seriously
on the nature of these facts, unless we know that they are
facts. We need more positive evidence before speculation
becomes valid. And the whole history of the subject is so
besmirched with fraud that we should be particularly careful
in accepting data obtained through the professional material-
izing medium. One of the most remarkable cases I have ever
read is that related by the Yen. Archdeacon CoUey,^ where a
spirit was apparently seen to materialize from a cloud of
vapor, which, in turn, is seen to issue from the medium's side.
I know of no case which seems as remarkable as this one does,
or that conveys to the reader's mind the impression that the
facts narrated could not have been produced by fraud ; and
yet, Mr. J. N. Maskclyne, on October 8, 1906, at St.
Greorge's Hall| London, duplicated this phenomenon by
fraudulent meitos alone. If so much can be accomplished by
fraud we should certainly be most careful in accepting state-
ments, and even the evidences of our senses, in this field. We
should, at all events, be content to await further evidence
before finally believing that such phenomena as these are
other than frauds, or the results of trickery.

It is necessary that we should now turn to a consideration
of the actual methods that are employed by mediums to pro-
duce the phenomena of materialization by fraudulent means.
In order to render the subsequent explanations intelligible,
I shall first quote a typical description of a materialization
stance given by an eye-witness, from which description the
reader may form a good idea of what occurs, and the detailed

* See Hardinge, Modem American SpirUwdiem, p. 106 ; Dialectical Re-
port, p. 120: O^en, Debatabie Land, pp. 361-2, etc.
' Annate of Peychic Science, December, 1905, pp. 392-9.


Materialization 239

explanations that follow will be rendered more easily intelli-
gible than if I were to describe a series of phenomena, none
of which were familiar to the general reader.

^Everything now being in readiness, the medium seated
himself in a chair, after first bringing a tambourine, guitar,
tea-bell, tin trumpet, and a pair of castanets and depositing
them inside the cabinet. After being seated he proffered
some pieces of rope and stated that any one was at liberty
to bind his hands and feet, or secure him in any way he saw
fit, in order to preclude the possibility of his having the use
of any of his members during the continuance of the stance.
Again did the writer, in company with the only other skep-
tical gentleman in the company, exert all his ingenuity in
binding the medium so that he felt positively assured that
he would still be in the chair when the stance was closed.
After the tying was finished, the writer would have wagered
any amount that it was an utter impossibility for the medium
to free himself. . . . Medium and chair were now picked up
and deposited in the cabinet, and the curtains drawn.

*^ We had no more than reached our seats than the guitar
was seen gyrating around in space over the top of the cab-
inet, with no visible omtact with anything, w'rhe light had
been shaded until you could just distinguish the forms of the
sitters, without being able to discern their features. After
a few seconds, the guitar was joined by the tin tnunpet, and
out of it came a voice saying:

** * I am the spirit-father of Mr. B , and my name is

J B— ,' giving his name in full.

^ This test was instantly recognized by one of the gentle-
men, and there followed a commonplace message to his
daughter-in-law, the wife of Mr. B— — , who was present.
While this was transpiring, the guitar had disappeared into
the cabinet again. As soon as the speaking had ceased, and
the trumpet fallen to the floor, we were requested to examine
the condition of things in the cabinet. Again the skeptics
were permitted to do the investigating. We found the me-
dium in precisely the condition in which we had left him at
the beginning, it not appearing that he had stii'red.


240 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

** We had not reached our seats, which were distant about
eight feet from the cabinet, when the guitar again made its
appearance, and began playing an air of great beauty, the
entire instrument being visible, but the hands that created
the music upon it could not be seen. The music produced
was subdued, soft, and sweet, as though the strings were
being manipulated by very gentle, soft finger-tips. The
skeptics were now very much interested. Again the horn
joined the guitar, and when the latter had ceased its music,

announced that its name was W EJ ^ son of Mr. and

Mrs. £ . The horn was correct again, and, after

giving a message, in which he gave some instructions con-
cerning his pony, that the parents still kept, the horn fell
to the floor of the cabinet, and an examination disclosed
everything as we had last seen it. The medium appeared
to be in a trance or sleep, his eyes closed, teeth set, and
breathing heavily. We had just turned our backs on the
cabinet, after the examination, when a shapely white hand
protruded through the opening in the curtains. Before we
had seated ourselves there were two, three, four, all of
different sizes, and doing considerable finger-snapping, thus
doing away with the idea of rubber hands, stuffed gloves, etc.
Then came a bare foot at the bottom of the curtain, and,
in response to a request by one of the circle, the toes were
wiggled. No one was allowed to touch the hands or feet
that appeared, but it was evident to any one in possession of
his five senses that they were human hands and feet and not
rubber or wax, even did we not know that nothing of the
kind had been carried in by the medium. After a few mo-
ments of these manifestations, another examination of the
cabinet and medium was made, and everything found satis-
factory. Now, the tea-bell began ringing, and was soon
joined by the castanets and tambourine. Ever and anon one
or another of the instruments would swoop around above the
cabinet and disappear again. They seemed to be flying
about in all parts of the cabinet, and to be travelling with
great swiftness and force; and it appeared as though the
medium's eyes stood a very fair chance of being decorated


I


Materialization 241

in black! Another examination and everything found satis-
factory. The writer was wavering, and was most intensely
interested, to the great delight of his sister. The horn now
requested that the company sing ^ Sweet By and By.'
Whilst the company was singing, they were joined by the
horn in a deep and powerful voice, which claimed afterward
that it was, at the time, ^ John King,' the medium's main
control. After the song was finished, a rustling noise was
heard in the cabinet, and presently the curtains were agi-
tated, and slowly a face presented itself at the opening.
Fhunly, it was a face, but it was not recognized. Then other
faces appeared, but without recognition. Once more the
guitar strikes up its music, and, during its continuance, the
curtains open sufficiently to reveal to our astonished gaze
a form, draped from head to foot in a dazzling white robe,
in whidi there appeared to be a great many yards of mate-
rial used. The face, in this instance, was much plainer, and
in fact, was recognized by one of our number, who, however,
laid nothing until the form announced its name as Mrs.

E L 9 mother of the lady sitting next to our host.

The form spoke in a loud whisper, but no movement of the
lips was visible. It stood stock-still, and might have been
mistaken for a dummy were it not that the face was so abso-
hitdy identified by the lady it claimed as daughter, and the
full name it gave being entirely correct. The form remained
in sight for a period, of about twenty seconds, and, after it
had disappeared, the horn announced that the daughter car-
ried the mother's watch, and that it contained the photo of
her father. This the lady declared to be correct, and after
the stance exhibited the watch, with the photo inside, and
the name given by the spirit graven on the inside of the
back lid. The lady declared that she had never before met
the medium.

^ The props were being knocked from under the writer's
materialism in beautiful shape! Other forms now presented
themselves, and four of them recognized. One of the faces
was an exact likeness to an uncle of the writer's, and he w
almost paralyzed with astonishment, and ready to throw


242 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

his hands in surrender, when his sister, addressing the spirit,
said:

" * Uncle L ' (for she, too, had recognized the face), -^

* have you anything to say to brother? Tell him something i
to convince him.' The writer was just about to say that it
required no more evidence to ccmvince him of the possibility
of spirit return, when the apparition spoke, saying:

^^ ^ Indeed, I should be pleased to grant the lady's request, i
but not being the spirit I am taken for, I cannot do so. I j

am the spirit of S W » and the cousin of Mn. i

D .' I

^^ The lady named said she had never seen him in life, but ^
there was a resemblance to a photograph of him in the
family album. None of the forms or faces remained more
than from five to twenty seconds.

*^ Now, if this was the work of the medium, why did he not
take the opportunity presented of palming off one of his
dummies on one who had already accepted it as an uncle, and
make an absoUUe test of it, instead of denying that it was the
spirit supposed to be, and make an imcertain test of it? This
thought also struck the gentleman skeptic who assisted the
writer in the examinations.

" Occurring as it did, it certainly went far toward sustfidn-
ing the medium as honest, and having no part in the pres*
entation of the phenomena. Both skeptics were by this time
pretty well hors du combat. AU that was now required was
that some spirit friend or message present itself that could
be recognized, and the * turn was made.' The horn now
made itself heard again, and began announcing the names
of the spirits present. In all, about twenty were given, and
eleven of them recognized. Among them were four full
names of the author's deceased relatives, two of them giving
date of death, and the cause thereof, and sending messages
of love to members of the family not present, in each case,
giving the name of the one the message w€is for. My sister
informed me that she had never even heard of this particular
medium before that week, and this was the first visit of any


Materialization 243

mendber of the famfly to liiiii. The writer struck his arms
and capitulated !

** After another examination of the condition of things in
the cabinet which resulted satisfactorily, there was a regular
bedlam of noises begun, made by each one of the instruments
letting out on an erratic aerial excursion about the confines
of the cabinet. OccasionaUy, one or two of the instruments
would dart up out of the top of the cabinet, and, after
executing a few fantastic movements, go below and join the
general rumpus on the inside. It was, apparently, impos-
Ale for the medium, even were he free, to put the instru-
ments where they were seen; and besides this, the entire
instrument was visible, and it was impossible to detect any-
thing in connection with them, they seeming to float about
the atmosphere as a balloon. Certain it was that the guitar
could not perform on itself, and there was no human hand
naUe, to cause the vibration of the strings.

^ The only thing appearing strange, regarding the guitar,
wu that only one air was executed upon it. Immediately
the rumpus ceased, another inspection of the cabinet was
made, and everything found as it had been. The trumpet
now requested that a writing-tablet and pencil be placed in
the cabinet. This was done, and in a few minutes five mes-
sages of greeting, from * controls,' were handed out. One
Was in English, and signed by John King; another in
French, another in Grerman, another in Spanish, and the last
in Hebrew, which no one present could read. It was taken
next day, by the writer and others, to a Hebrew clothing
dealer, who read and interpreted it with ease, and stated that
it was elegantly written. The medium claimed to have no
bowledge of any language save English, and was unable to
speak that correctly, — which was a fact, for he did badly
mangle the language every time he spoke. While we were
waiting the thrusting out of the sixth sheet, the medium was
heard to moan and yawn and move uneasily. In the course
of a minute and a half, he called for light, and stepped out
of the cabinet, freed from the ropes that had bound him less
than two minutes before! An examination revealed the fact


244 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

that the medium had not only slid out of the ropes, but thai
every knot had been untied, and the ropes lay in a heap in
the corner. Think of it ! Something had untied the knots in
less than two minutes, that (to tie) had required ten minutes
of time of two men ! The instruments were handled and ex-
amined, and found to be perfectly innocent of any mechan*
ism not properly belonging to them, with the exception of a
small hole, about the eighth of an inch in diameter, bored
into the neck of the instrument, on the lower side and near
the body of the guitar. The medium explained that it was
for the purpose of attaching a music-holder to the instru-
ment, and, as he was stopping with our host for the eveningi
he soon brought the holder and put it in position. It an-
swered the purpose admirably, and satisfactorily explained
the presence of the hole."

In a stance such as the above, there are several factors
that must be taken into consideration, requiring an ex-
planation, they being independent and distinct from the
*^ materialization proper," which alone concerns us in tha
present chapter. The methods of obtaining the '* test in-
formation " about the sitter are explained on pp. 312-18;
the rope-tying manifestations I have explained in the chapter
devoted to that subject, pp. 148-67; the self -playing
guitar I have explained on p. 197 ; to the " messages " I
shall again recur on p. 317 ; so that in the present chapter
there remains for our consideration only the methods the me-
dium employs in fraudulently producing the materialized
hands, faces and forms. To this aspect of the problem I
accordingly turn. I shall first of all describe the methods of
obtaining the spirit hands and faces, leaving the more de-
tailed and the more wonderful " full-form materializations **
for later discussion.

It need hardly be stated that many of the ** materialized
hands " seen at stances are none other than the medium's
own. Under cover of the intense darkness that is always
called for when materializations of the kind are seen, the
medium releases himself from his bonds, and does his own
** spirit touches '' merely by walking about the room and


Materialization 245

touching one or other of the sitters, either with his bare
hand, or after donning a glove dipped in cold water, to give
a cold, clammy effect to the sitter experiencing the touch.
This is a device frequently employed. In many cases the
medium rubs over the surface of the glove with luminous
painty this giving the effect of a bright, shining hand, float-
ing in space, since the performer, if entirely dressed in black,
is quite invisible in the darkness. (Those of my readers who
doubt the fact that any figure dressed in this manner would
be absolutely invisible should witness the public performance
of an act known as " Black Art," in which the performer's
assistants walk freely about the stage, which is entirely
darkened, and produce the many marvellous effects witnessed.
The illusion is perfect^ and no one witnessing the perform-
ance, and not knowing how the effects are produced, can
detect the method of operation, no matter how closely he may
watch the stage.)

Some mediums make use of the damp kid glove, just de-
scribed, in a very clever manner. They stuff the glove, and
attach the back of the hand to the small end of the telescopic
rod, mentioned on p. 196. By moving the rod about in
various directions, touching the sitters with the glove, they
are enabled to produce the phenomenon of " spirit touches *'
at a great distance from themselves, and in places where it
would be impossible for them to reach, even were they free.
A still more astonishing phenomenon may be produced by
attaching the glove to the rod by means of a piece of stout
black silk thread, about a yard or so in length. Now, by
waving the rod about in various directions, the glove is
given a great range, and moves so rapidly, moreover, that
several sitters may feel the touch of the hand at the same
instant (practically), which would, of course, have the effect
of several hands all active at the same time. The hand may
or may not be made luminous, in this case, as desired.

Mr. J. H. W. Shaw describes a very effective variation of
the method just described in his Magic and Its Mysteries^
pp. 56-6. The effect, in this case, is this : after the medium
is securely tied in the chair, a luminous hand slowly mate-


246 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

rializes, only the tips of the fingers at first being visible, but
afterward the whole hand comes into view, until the arm up
to the elbow is seen. It now suddenly disappears and as
suddenly appears again, finally vanishing altogether.

The effect is produced, in this case, by the following
means. The medium has secreted about his person a glove
made of black material, the palm of which is coated with
limiinous paint, and the rest of the hand and arm is also
painted very lightly with it. To the elbow of this glove is
sewn a cylinder of thick, black cloth, of sufficient length to
completely cover the hand and arm when pulled over it. Be-
fore the stance begins the medium gives the glove a coat of
paint, as stated, pulls the cylinder up over the glove, and
secretes it about his person. At the proper time the medium
dons the glove, which is still invisible because of the covering
black-cloth cylinder. Slowly, the medium pulls this off
toward the shoulder, thereby disclosing the hand and
arm, the palm of which is turned to the sitters. Now, by
suddenly pulling the black cloth over the hand again, the
medium is enabled to produce the phenomenon of material-
ization and dematerialization as often as desired.

The famous (or rather infamous) Doctor Monck was in
the habit of producing a very remarkable manifestation, a
materialized spirit hand, that of a baby^ in partial light, and
when the medium was sitting at the table together with the
other sitters. Doctor Monck would sit at one end of the
table, when presently the table-cloth would be seen to move,
and from beneath the table would come the tiny hand, which,
after a few seconds' visibility, would suddenly dematerialize,
and a thorough search under the table would fail to reveal
the clue to the mystery. " Professor Hoffmann," in a Note
to his translation of Houdin's Secrets of Stage Conjuring^
gives (pp. 220-1) a description of this test and an exposi
of the manner in which the trick was performed. He says, in
part:

" A dummy hand of small size, with the fingers slightly
bent, is attached to a piece of broad elastic about three feet
in length. This in turn is fastened to a belt round the per-


Materializatioii* 247

former's waist, and thence passes down (say) his left trouser
leg, the hand reposing, when not wanted, within the gar-
ment, a few inches above the ankle. To the wrist of the
hand is appended a kind of elastic sleeve of five or six inches
in length. (In Monck's case, if we remember rightly, it con-
sisted of the upper portion of an ordinary sock.) The me-
dium, thus prepared, takes his seat at one side of a square
table, with an overhanging table-cover, allowing no one else
to be seated at the same side of the table. • . • Some one
present is requested to lower the gas. ' A little lower,
please. A little lower yet,' till, as a natural consequence, it
goes out altogether. * Dear me,' says the mediimi, ' I am
extremely sorry ! I did not intend you to turn it out. Pray
light it again!' This is done and it is ^gain lowered but
this time only to a dim twilight. Meanwhile, imder cover of
the momentary darkness, the medium has quietly crossed his
left foot over his right knee, pulled down the dummy hand,
slipped the sleeve portion over the toe of his left shoe, and,
with the foot masked by the table-cover, calmly bides his
time. Presently, on the right hand of the medium, some-
thing is seen to be moving under the table-cover, making
apparent efi^orts to come out. The medium, at the same
time, prepares the minds of the spectators by declaring that
he sees a hand floating about, that it has touched him, and
so on. Presently, he gradually draws his foot, still crossed
over the right knee, from under the table-cover, and allows
the hand to show itself just above the surface. . . . Doctor
Monck went so far as to ofi^er a set of ^ fairy bells ' to the
touch of the spirit hand, and, partly by scraping the hand
against the wires (or rather the wires against the hand),
and partly by a judicious use of his own fingers, produced
sounds which, though not particularly harmonious, passed
muster fairly enough as the production of a hand without a
body. The manifestation over, the performer has only to
place the left foot on the ground, and, with the other foot,
dislodge the dummy hand, which is forthwith spontaneously
drawn back by the elastic band beneath the sheltering


248 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

trouser. The gas being turned up» skeptical gentlemen may
search beneath the table, but in vain/'

When hands appear above the top of the cabinet, or other-
wise beyond the normal reach of the medium, it is either a
stuffed glove that is exhibited, or a glove that is attached
to the end of the medium's telescopic rod, and made to open
and close by the medium blowing through the hollow rod,
causing the glove to alternately fill out and relapse into
" flabby nothingness,'* according to the amount of air forced
into the rod and glove. In a dim light, this has a very good
effect. Then, again, the medium often makes use of simple
pieces of cardboard, painted black, upon each of which is
painted a hand in white. By exhibiting this hand at the top
of the cabinet, and at the same time snapping JUs Own fingers,
he can produce the effect of the hand itself causing this
sound, thus proving, not only its objective reality, but the
fact that it is made of flesh and blood! Several hands can
be made to appear in like manner, at the same time, the me-
dium attaching them to his rod, by means of a slot in the
end of it.

Some ingenious medium devised the following plan, faj
which the hand may be made to move, apparently, to open
and close, e. g*., or to snap the fingers. This proves to every
sitter conclusively that the hands are real, for what but real
hands can move in that manner? The secret consists in the
fact that the medium has painted on both sides of his black-
ened card a hand in white, these hands being painted in dif'
ferent postures. The medium simply slips the cardboard
into the slot in the end of his telescopic rod, as before de-
scribed, and exhibits, first one side and then the other of tb^
painted card. If the half-turn is made quickly enough, i^
is quite invisible to the sitters, and the effect of the turn is
to produce a complete illusion in the minds of the sitters that
the hand has itself moved before their eyes. If the sup-
posed card is painted to represent the fingers snapping, th^
medium snaps his own, and the spirit hand is supposed to
have produced the sound!

If the hands felt at a stance are unmistakably huinani


Materialization 249

then the sitter may rest assured that they are either those
of the medium, who has in some manner managed to release
himself from his holds or ties, or those of some confederate,
such confederates being frequently introduced in s^nces of
this character as will presently appear.

We now pass on to consider the methods that are employed
by the medium in order to produce ^^ full-form materializa-
tion,'* in which figures are seen to issue from the cabinet,
while the medium is securely tied and otherwise fastened to
his chair within it. These forms are almost invariably clothed
from head to foot in dazzling white garments, and the ques-
tion at once arises, where did the medium (supposing it to
be he, disguised, and parading about the s^nce-room) ob-
tain all the material and other portions of the make-up, since
he was thoroughly searched before he entered the cabinet,
and nothing of such a nature was found upon him? Even
granting that the medium was enabled to release himself in
some manner from the cords that tied him to his chair, and,
disguising himself, enter the seance-room and act the part of
some spirit, how did he obtain possession of the white drap-
ery and other material in which the spirit was clothed? The
fact that the medium was thoroughly searched just before
the stance, and no such ^^ properties *' found upon him, would
seem to show that it was not and could not be the medium ;
and any fraud on his part was consequently out of the ques-
tion. How mistaken this idea is we shall now see.

There are many ways in which clothes may be smuggled
into the cabinet by the medium, without the sitters being
aware of the fact, or suspect that any trickery is being prac-
tised upon them. One of the most ingenious devices is the
following, which has been used by mediums for many years
past, and which is still very largely employed. On p. 197
I described a self-playing guitar, the secret being that it
ccmtained a music-box, which, when wound up and set going,
would play a tune without necessitating any fingering of the
strings by the medium. That, however, is only half the
secret of the guitar, for, besides the music-box, the guitar
also contained a sliding panel, opening into a hollow com*


250 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualisni

partment in the interior, and in this compartment are placed
the robes and other paraphernalia employed by the medium
in dressing up as the spirit he purports to be. These robes
are made of a sort of fine netting, and are capable of being
compressed into a remarkably small space, the full costume of
an adult spirit folding into a space no larger than a good-
sized watch. Indeed, these robes are sometimes carried in
this manner instead of the guitar. The watch is a dummy,
is hollow, and is filled with the costumes for the evening's
seance! At other times this material is carried in a purse,
a letter, or in many other ways that will suggest themselves.
One method frequently employed is that of placing the mate-
rial in the hollow boot-heel. The heel of the shoe is made of
steel, being, in fact, a sort of hollowed out box, covered over
with leather, and blackened to imitate the regular shoe. Usu-
ally, however, the medium carries a series of netting masks in
this heel, these also folding up into a very small compass. If
the medium gives the seance in his own house, there are, of
course, many ways of gaining possession of the requisite
material, — hollow chair-seats, table-legs, etc., forming con-
venient receptacles for the robes and other paraphernalia
used in the seance.

Mr. Lunt, in his little book. Mysteries of the Siance^ has
described a method he has found used by female mediums
to evade the watchfulness of searchers, in cases where the
medium, as a test, is obliged to don the all-black clothes pro-
vided by the sitters. It is this:

^^ Some female mediums have a novel arrangement bj
which they can carry into the cabinet all the supplies they
want, in spite of the strictest search. For instance, one has
a black cloth belt made deep enough to hold a great variety
of stuff. This is worn around the waist next the skin, and
held in place by an elastic band. Over this Is the usual black
skirt, then the other clothing. When the committee of ladies
search her, she entirely disrobes down to this black skirt,
which she retains * for modesty's sake,' until the skirt pro-
vided by the committee is put on over it. Then the black
skirt is unhooked and taken off. This leaves her supposedly


Materialization 251

dothed only in the committee's clothing, which of course is
all dark. To satisfy them that all is right she lifts the last
skirt as high as possible, and shows the bare skin, and the
presence of the useful little belt is not suspected. The rest
of the clothing provided is donned, and the performance
goes on with the greatest success " (pp. 33-S). From the
description and remarks on p. 44 of Henry's Spookland^ it
appears to me highly probable that Mrs. Melon used some
such device as the above.

The modui operandi of the ordinary materializing stance
Aould now be pretty clearly defined in the sitter's mind.
The medium is not usually fastened in his cabinet; and if
he ii tied, or otherwise secured, he releases himself by one
or other of the methods before enumerated. Then he pro-
ceeds to dress himself up in the robes, etc., he has managed
to smuggle into the cabinet by one means or another, as de-
scribed. When the robes are properly adjusted, the medium
dons the wig, mask, etc., that is appropriate for the char-
acter he is to portray, and boldly walks into the room and
asserts that he it that individual ! ^ If his voice Is one that
is easily disguised, the medium makes bold to speak aloud;
otherwise the ** spirit " confines its conversation to loud whis-
pers. The more dramatic the play the better, of course, up
to a certain extent, though the medium who knows his busi-
ness will always remember that spirits should conduct them-
selves with becoming gravity. A certain amount of " the
actor " must enter into any medium who makes a success of
his profession. Darkness, the dramatic setting of the stance,
and suggestion can be depended upon to do the rest. I have
more fully elaborated this branch of the subject In my
chapter on the Psychology of Deception, and It Is not neces-
sary for me to consider It at any great length now. My
object for the moment Is to show how these forms are actu-
ally produced, and not their possible significance. I have

* In some cases, it is imporaible for the mediimi to escape — when, e, g,,
he is fastened in a cage provided by a committee. In that case, he frees
MmiMilf as much as possible, and shows a varietv of masks, robes, etc.,
through the cujtains, — these being attached to the end of his telescopic
rod and thrust between the bars of the cage and the cabinet curtains.
Some very effective figures can be created in this way.


252 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

described other methods of materialization, and other devices
on pp. 868-76.

It remains for me but to consider certain materialization
phenomena which we have not so far discussed, such, e. g.^
as the production of " spirit lights," " apports," etc. To
these I now turn. Spirit hghts may be produced In a variety
of ways, one of the simplest being the following, a method
very frequently employed.

The medium procures a bottle, or flask, holding about two
pints. Into this he drops the heads of about one hundred
parlor matches ("red-heads"), and over these Is poured
just enough water to cover them, and a httle more. The
flask Is now kept tightly corked for some time. When the
medium requires to produce his spirit lights, he brings forth
this bottle, and, while slightly shaking It, removes the stopper
a very little^ when the portion of the bottle that Is filled with
the fumes will present a very beautiful phosphorescent ap-
pearance. If a transparent wire mask be held before the
bottle, It will be greeted as a spirit face by the sitters, and
very likely recognized by one or more of them as a dead
relative! {v, p. 52). By simply moistening the fingers and
rolling a match between them, a very fine effect is produced,
though the light Is, of course, small. Spirit lights of dif-
ferent sizes and shapes are made by cutting out pieces of
cloth of the shape required, and pasting them on cardboard.
These are painted with luminous paint after the manner
described on p. 269. They are attached to the end of the
telescopic rod, so often spoken of throughout this book, and
moved about over the sitters' heads. The manner of pro-
ducing luminous hands, arms, and faces will be presently
described. The methods the medium will resort to are In-
numerable. It Is even asserted that some mediums have had
the hardihood to Introduce fireflies into the stance-room, as
a means of producing these effects ! j

Just recently, some Ingenious medium has devised
method by which It Is possible to produce luminous
apparently flashed out of the air, with ^' ' '


Materialization 253

ity and brilKancy. This clever test is performed as follows.
The names are cut out of tin-foil and pasted on a sheet of
dear glass, care being taken to connect each letter with the
next. When all is ready, a wire from a powerful battery
is connected with the beginning and terminal of the tin-foil,
and a brilliant flash wiU light up all the lines for an instant.
The battery may be concealed in a distant place, and two
fine wires in the sdance-room could be easily concealed. For
the secret of this clever test I am indebted to Mr. E. D. Lunt,
of Boston.

I now turn to a consideration of certain phenomena of
msterialization in which solid bodies, other than human be-
ings, are produced in the stance-room, they being generally
kft there ^ by the spirits " as a proof of their objective
reality. Li all these cases, the stance is a dark one, and
when the lights are turned up, certain objects are seen on
the table of the sdance-room which certainly were not there
before, and the conclusion drawn is that the spirits brought
them thither. The explanation generally offered is that the
spirits dematerialized the objects, wherever they happened
to be at the time, conveyed them in that semi-material, vapor-
ous condition into the s£ance-room, and again '^ integrated "
or materialized them there. This is the orthodox explanation
for phenomena that are technically known as ** apports."

Without now stopping to consider any a priori specula-
tions as to the scientific possibility or impossibility of such
a thing ; the mere historic evidence in the case would cer-
tainly seem to point to the conclusion that fraud and nothing
but fraud has been operative throughout, and is quite suffi-
cient to account for all the phenomena observed (save in the
case of W. S. Moses, perhajM, that stumbling-block to the
rationalistic psychical researcher), in the presence of pro-
fessional mediums. Only some mediums produced these phe-
nomena ; D. D. Home did not believe in them ! Some famous
uitorical cases are absurdly simple of explanation, as, e. g.^
'"aterialized Stone," described on pp. 129-88 of
^•fni. Bottom Facts. In fact all these


254 The Physical Phenomena of Spuitualism

cases sift themselves down to the one primary consideration :
could the medium, in spite of the searching, have introduced
into the stance-room, unseen by his sitters, the objects mate-
rialized? On thinking the matter over, it will become ap-
parent to my reader that this is, after all, the only question
involved, and, in the face of the damning historical evidence,
no less than because of the obvious simpUcity of smuggling
objects into the sdance-room undetected, it must be admitted
\that the proof that these phenomena have ever occurred in
|a genuine manner is so remote as to hardly be worth serious
{'consideration.

Take, e. g.^ the cases where Uve creatures, fresh flowers,
^ with the dew still on them," etc., have been imported into
the stance-room. If the stance is held in the medium's own
house, the objects may very well be slipped into the s^ance-
; room through some trap door or sliding panel, such as wiH
'presently be described in full. Or the flowers may be con-
jtained in the hollow seat of some empty chair, sofa, etc., the
'medium simply securing them, when required, and spraying
I them with water to imitate dew before placing them on the
i, table. At other times a confederate has the flowers hidden
J about his or her person. If the medium is not searched be-
fore the stance, his part is, of course, an easy one. Female
mediums produce this class of phenomena much more fre-
quently than males, their dress serving as a convenient hid-
ing-place for many of the " apports " that appear later on.
In any case, the flowers are obtained as fresh as possible,
sprayed with water, and placed in a black cloth bag until
wanted by the medium. It only remains to be said, in con-
nection with this phenomenon of flower-production, that the
flowers have frequently been traced by investigators to the
shop where they were purchased, and it was thus proved
beyond question that the medium had purchased them there
but a short time before the seance ! This fact failed to shake
the belief of " the faithful," however, who still continued to
believe in the mediimi's honesty, and to protest against such
methods of " persecution ! "


CHAPTER XIV
KATEBiAuzATiON (Continued)

I NOW turn to consider those cases of ^ full-form material-
ization/' in which the medium is seen^ securely bound, seated
in his cabinet, when the materialized figures are walking
about the room. I quote this description from The Revela-
turns of a Spirit Mediwm^ since it seems to me very fine in-
deed. The account reads, in part, as follows:

•* Reader, have you ever attended a * stance ' for * f uU-
fonn materialization?' Have you ever thou^t you had
met your dead relative's spirit at these ^ stances? '

^ If you have never had the pleasure of attending a stance
of this * phase ' you have missed a rare treat. The writer
has assisted at many a one and will relate to you some of
the wonderful phenomena occurring at them and the means
med to produce them. . . . There are hundreds of ' mate-
rializing mediums' doing business in this country, who are
swelling a good-sized bank account. Their business some^
times runs into the hundreds of dollars in a single week.
This ' phase ' of mediumship is considered by the spiritual-
ists as the highest possible attainable, and if you are a clever
' full-form medium ' your financial welfare is assured. • . .
Many and various are the methods employed by the different
* mediums' in producing this phase. It is in Boston^ N^ifw
York, and San Francisco that it is worked the finest. Th^
full-form sAincfs most often met with are very simply
worked, and easy of performance by the medium. You ar^
usually given a seat in a circle of diairs about the fr<mt of
a ^ cabinet ' made by hanging heavy curtains acroM tJi^ cf/r-


256 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

ner of the room. If you are a stranger or one who looks or
acts as though he would ' grab ' the ^ spirits,' you are
seated at the farthest point from the cabinet; or, if there
are two rows of seats, you will be given a seat in the back
row. . . . Many persons recognize their friends in some of
the ' make-ups ' of the medium. The writer has masqueraded
as a spirit scores of times and been recognized by three or
four different persons at the same stance as brother or father
and even mother!

^^ Very little apparatus is necessary to make several
changes in your appearance in the dim light that is fur-
nished you to investigate by. The one robe answers for
forty spirits, and, with two or three wigs and beards of
different shapes, the color amoimts to nothing, as it is so
dark you cannot distinguish red from any color save white;
a crown, a cap or two, a piece of chalk, and you can, by
changing your height by stooping, and getting on your
knees to represent children, produce quite an army of
spirits, each differing in appearance from any other.

'^ A large ^ spirit ' leading a child can be produced by the
medium stepping out and holding at arms' length a piece
of white robe cloth. She has no other white on the arm that
is supporting the child. Her dress being dark and the cur-
tain behind it dark, the arm is not seen and the child appears
separate and apart from the large * spirit.' Of course no
handling is allowed, and, for all you can see, the shape is
a child. The medium simulates child's talk and the child is
supposed to have spoken.

" When there are present a very particular lot of sitters
the medium allows the ladies to search her and takes off all
her white skirts. The manager loads up with the appara-
tus, and after the light has been turned down, he either passes
it inside as he sits in his chair, or the medium puts her hand
out from underneath and takes it from under his coat. If
he sit in an upholstered chair, there is no end to the appara-
tus she can lay her hands on. It is ready for her at any
time after the chair is in its place, whether her manager is
in it or not. Where an upholstered chair is used, the medium


Materializati(m 257

can have several different costumes. No one thinks of search-
ing the manager or chair.

** There are no such things as rubber spirits that are blown
up, although many hundreds of persons think there are.^
Ton frequently hear of spirits materializing from the floor,
and again disappearing through the floor outside the cab-
inet. In this deception you will notice the floor is covered
with a yery dark carpet. When the medium desires to make
her appearance through the floor she first puts on a glove
that reaches her shoulder, and one that is about the same
orior as the carpet, or darker. She now takes in her hand a
piece of the white netting that, when shaken out, is about
three yards long and one yard or forty-two inches wide.
This is easily concealed by the hand when it is rolled into
a ball. She now gets down on the floor inside the cabinet
with her head-gear on, and, crawling as far as the front of ^
the curtains will permit, thrusts out her arm as far as she
can reach in front of the cabinet and on the floor. Her hand
and arm cannot be seen. The white netting will show when
she turns her hand over, appearing a white spot. She begins
to shake it loose and the spot appears to grow. She con-
tinues to shake and release the netting, raising her hand all
the while, until it is about four feet high, when, with one big
flounce, she darts from the cabinet and, pulling the netting
about her, there is your spirit. If she desires to depart
through the flood, she gets partially into the cabinet, and,
getting hold of the netting so that she can dodge behind it,
she suddenly raises it above her head-gear and dodges be-
hind the curtains. She now allows the netting to drop to
the floor and slowly gathers it into her hand, when she so
suddenly takes it into the cabinet that, in the dim light, it
seems to fade into the air.

** There are several methods of materializing a spirit from
the floor, and the different ways will be given. The manner
just described is very effective, and, in the dimly lighted
room, is very well calculated to deceive. There are better

> This is a mistake. On p. 36 of his Tricks in Magic (Vol. I.). Mr. Bur-
fingame describes a method of producing spirit-materialization in this
manner. It is doubtless a method seldom or never used, however.


258 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

methods that will be described later on when writing of the
stances of more skilful mediums.

"The stance just described is the work of the ordinary
medium, one who is not at all clever, and who depends rather
upon the gullibility of her * sitters ' than the excellence of
her work to pull her through. She will get along and make
money though, even if her work is raw and bungling.

" The writer has often been amazed that the mediums put-
ting up this work should ever give a second stance in the
same city. However, he was not looking with an unpractised
eye or in ignorance of the methods and movements of the
medium, and of course could see many things that the in-
vestigator would not observe. After all, it is not always the
excellence of the work so much as the ignorance of the ob-
server that makes many things appear wonderful. Persons
who give this description of stance sometimes catch some
very nice * suckers.*

" What is meant is that some gentleman who is either
wealthy or earning a large salary will become interested, and,
finally convinced that ^ spirits ' do return and materialize,
will be a constant attendant at the stances of this particular
medium. When such a man is caught by the medium, plans
are laid to relieve him of his wealth, or a goodly portion of
it. The spirits give him to understand that they can work
much better when he is present, and that the Princess So-
and-so, his soul mate or afSnity, is always at the stances to
meet him. This afSnity princess is supplied with an elegant
costimie that will glitter with tinsel and gems. She will wear
a white crown (signifying purity) on the front of which
blazes a star, indicative of the advanced sphere in which she
exists in spirit life. This princess will conduct herself very
much like an ordinary mortal, in the private seances she
induces him to obtain from the medium, at twenty-five or
more dollars per seance, at which time he is always welcomed
with a royal kiss and embrace, and will sit on his lap a half-
hour at a time, telling him of the beauties of spirit life, and
the home they are to occupy together when he comes to her
side of life. These loving actions are not always confined


Materialization 259

to private s^ances^ but the writer has been present when a
gentleman met his royal spirit lover, and kisses and em-
braces were indulged in in the presence of a public circle
of as many as twenty persons. He would call her ^ pet,'
' darling,' ^ sweetheart,' and other endearing names, until
he made the writer most outrageously ^ tired.' Others were
'tired,' too, judging from the smothered exclamations heard
in various parts of the room.

^ When he has arrived at the kissing and embracing point,
he is ready to pluck. There are various ways of doing this.
He is given to understand by the spirit lover that her ^ me-
dium ' must have certain things that she will not herself pur-
chase, in order that * conditions ' be made more perfect, for
their communing together. No sooner is this left-handed
request made, than a check is written and the * spirit ' sees
to it that * her medium ' gets it. There are a great many
things, now, found necessary to secure better conditions, and
a great many checks written, ranging from ten to two or
three hundred dollars. When he has been bled until he will
stand it no longer, or has no more money, his princess tells
him she must return to her heavenly sphere again, not to
return for a number of years ; or he is sent to Europe on a
fool's errand, to find something or to take his place in her
family. If it is the latter, he is, no doubt, speedily shown
the door, and possibly kicked through it. The reader may
think that such a thing has never transpired, but it has.
The man, in this case, appeared a thorough gentleman, and
was certainly educated and intelligent enough to make con-
siderable money. He is now * broke.' . . . These love-affairs
between mortal and spirit have even gone on to a termination
in marriage, an account of which will be given later on. The
writer knows all the details of this case, as he was an ac-
quaintance of one of the * spirits ' who brought it about,
and also partook of the wedding supper that was given in
honor of the occasion, at the bridegroom's expense. . . .

** It sometimes happens that the victim discovers the game
that is being worked on him after he has been swindled out
of hundreds or perhaps thousands of dollars. Does he ever


1


260 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

prosecute the medium or attempt to recover any of the
money? Not one time in ten thousand. Why? Simply be-
cause he has a reputation to sustain. He is at the head of
a large business and it would not do at all to have his es-
capade become public property. He has the reputation of
being a brainy individual by hundreds of persons, and would
rather give up twice the amoimt he has been swindled out
of than to have his friends and business associates know what
an ass he has made of himself. . . .^

" The reader is aware that the only difficulty the material-
izing medium encounters is the getting into the cabinet of ]
the apparatus and costumes used. The manager and chair -,
method has been described, but there are others. One of j
them is to make a trap in the base or mopboard and stow
the apparatus behind it. ... A small trap can be made in j
the floor and your carpet so laid that you can turn back I
enough of it to get at the trap. These traps will be described ;
in detail later on.

^^ Another way is to have a small snare-dnmi in your cab- '

* Another method of fraudulently obtaining mone^ from a ^tter is to
persuade him that he possesses great '' mediumiBtio power " — whieh
should be developed. For these '* developing stances " the sitter, of course,
pays — all he can afford, in most cases.

" One of the most prolific sources of revenue for the dishonest medium/'
says Mr. Lunt {Mysteries of the Seance, p. 44), " is the * development '
scneme. Everywhere they go they find man^ persons who are easily
persuaded to believe that they possess mediumistic gifts of a high order.
In case some other medium has already told the person this — and it is
rarely you can find one who has not been told so by nearly all the mediums
he has consulted — it is not hard to convince him that, by proper develop-
ment, he can acquire wonderful powers as a psychic. . . . Consequently
he is indu(^ to take ' development ' sittings, which cost from fifty cents
to five dollars per sitting, according to his anxiety and ability to pay. . . .
He is kept on the string until he quits in disgust, or until the medium
leaves town." The fact is that the medium has all the way from ten to
five hundred or more persons developing at one time, in a certain town,
and keeps them all '' developing " until sims of dissatisfaction begin to
manifest themselves in a large number of the sitters. Then, aJl at once,
the sitters find that the medium has " skipped the town," — fled to pas-
tures new, — and there is not a trace of his whereabouts to be foimd any-
where I He has set up the developing business in another town after
first recommencing busmess as a medium, imder another name. The methods
that are often employed by mediums of this class will be found recorded
in The Revelationa of a Spirit Medium, pp. 214-16. The absurd directions
that are ^ven to the sitter will be found detailed in the Seybert Ck>m-
uuBBion'aKeport, pp. 124-7.


Materialization 261

inet for the use of your * drum boy control.' In it can be
kept all the laces and netting used by the medium.

^ A small table is sometimes placed in one comer of the
cabinet on which is kept slates and pencils, lead-pencils, writ-
in^f-tablets, and a pitcher of water. This table contains a
drawer that is locked, apparently, but the medium needs no
key, for he or she enters it from below. This drawer, it
IB needless to say, contains all the apparatus needed. This
table could also be very much in the way if you attempted
to * grab.'

^When the cabinet used is a closet, the most convenient
place for a trap is the door-framing. You can take off
the piece that makes the facing and hinge it so that it swings
open from the floor to the top of the door, thus getting rid
of a joint that may result in your detection.

^ Now you will be treated to a description of a s^nce
given by a male medium, and where you will get your
money's worth. The manifestations in this case are the work
of an artist in his line who is in the business for the money
he can get, and is doing his best to give satisfaction. The
medium is a member of the Brotherhood, and is sure to have
the freshest of everything. The writer will describe the
s^nce as though he were an investigator, and will assume
the personality of one who received just what he will de-
scribe as occurring to himself. Afterward it will be ex-
plained to you so that it will not puzzle you to account for
many things you have yourself witnessed or heard of others
experiencing.


.• • • •


M


I made my way to the * materializing stance,' at which
my friends hoped to materialize. I was admitted to the
stance-room and found about twenty persons already assem-
bled. I was seated in the front row of chairs. The cabinet
used was a closet about six feet long and four feet wide.
The ceiling of both the room and the cabinet was of wood.
After a thorough examination had been made of the cabinet
by all those who cared to do so, the sitters were rearranged
to suit the medium. There were present now thirty-five per-


262 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

sons. The stance-room was very large. The door had beea
taken off the closet that served as a cabinet, and in its stead
were hung heavy curtains. The floor of the room was car-
peted with a dark carpet, as was the cabinet. The light was
furnished by a lamp placed in a box that was fastened to
the wall some eight feet from the floor. This box had t
sliding lid in front, controlled by a cord passing into ik
cabinet. By this means the * spirits ' could regulate the lij^
to suit themselves, without any movement on tlie part of anj
of those in the seance-room being necessary. When ev^T^
thing was in readiness the medium entered the cabinet, seated
himself and was tied, and so secured to his chair that it was
impossible that he could have any use of himself. He was
most thoroughly secured to his chair, and his chair nailed
fast to the floor by passing leather straps over the rounds in
the side and nailing the ends to the floor. After it was shown
to the sitters that he was utterly helpless, the curtain was
drawn. The manager now placed an ordinary kitchen table
in front of the door of the cabinet, so that it stood away
from it about two feet. The table contained no drawer. Oa
the table was laid writing material, a guitar, and smaU belL
The manager seated himself close to one side of the cabinet
entrance, and started a large Swiss music-box. Before it
had finished the first air the lamp was shut entirely offf
making the room inky dark.

^* An illuminated hand and arm was now seen to come from
behind the curtain, and played an accompaniment to the
music-box on the guitar. We could see plainly the move-
ments of the hand, arm, and fingers, as it manipulated the
strings of the instrument. It did not appear necessary to
finger the strings on the keyboard, although the air was in
a key that made it impossible to tune the guitar so that an
accompaniment could be performed without fingering. How-
ever, but one band was visible, and it was picking the strings.
After the tune was finished, the hand left the instrument,
and moved out into the room to the front of the table, and
from the sound we knew it was writing on the tablet that
had been placed there. The arm was of bluish light and


Materialization 263

appeared to end just above the elbow, and to have no con-
necticm with the body. It finished writing and seemed to float
into the cabinet near the top.

^The light was opened and the manager requested those
liho had tied the medium to examine his condition and see
if the ropes had been tampered with. The examination was
made and it was evident that the fastenings were undisturbed.
The communication was read aloud to those present, and
eontained the following:

** * We are pleased to meet so many seekers after light and
troth here this evening, and, from the conditions, as we
•ense them, we will have a satisfactory and pleasant stance.
The way to obtain the best results is for each person to main-
tain a passive condition and take what we have to give. You
may rest assured that our best efforts will be put forth to
give you entire satisfaction. The Control.'

^ The writing was exactly on the ruled lines although
vritten in absolute darkness. The hand and arm, although
luminous, did not give out a particle of light. The arm had
been at least five feet from the cabinet opening and seven
feet from the medium. Surely, it was not he. The message
read, the light was again shut down and the music again
started.

*^Once more a hand appeared, and, floating out to the
table, again began writing. Of a sudden the hand disap-
peared, and, after a few seconds, I was astonished to feel a
hand thrusting a paper into my top coat pocket. Now
appeared two hands and they played an air on the guitar.
Now came three, then four hands were visible, bright as the
day. Two of them began writing again, and, when they had
finished, two more sitters were the recipients of sheets of
paper. Soon the light was opened for an inspection of the
cabinet, which was made, with the conclusion that the medium
had not moved. Those of us receiving communications were
afforded an opportunity to read them. We found them
nicely written, as before, and all contained * tests.' . . .

^ After the light went out again, more hands were seen;
the table was floated about, over the heads of the circle, as


261 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

was the music-box, which weighed at least fifty pounds. An-
other examination of the cabinet was made and everything
found satisfactory. This time the light was not put entirdy
out, but a very dim light was allowed.

** The music-box was again set playing, and, while yet it^
was playing the first tune, a tall figure, robed in creamy white, ;
with gleaming sparks in her hair, and on her head a sort of
crown, issued from the cabinet. She was recognized by a
gentleman present, a spiritualist, whose spirit guide she was,
and who addressed her as ^ my queen.' She stood a few sec-
onds behind the table and then stepped out in the open space
between the sitters and the table. The gentleman now arose
from his seat and, standing beside her, holding her hand,
conversed in a whisper with her for some seconds.

^* This was most assuredly a lady, if appearances go for
anything. Her hands were quite small, and were warm and
lifelike, as several, including myself, can testify, having
been permitted to shake hands with her. At last she started j
to the cabinet, and, as she went, appeared to grow shorter,
until, as she disappeared between the curtains, she was not
much taller than the table. The manager now explained that
the spirit had remained out rather too long and came near
dematerializing before she reached the cabinet. Now came
the spirit of a young man, dressed in a light suit of clothes,
who gave his name and said his mother was present. She
was, and had a few words of conversation with him when
he disappeared into the cabinet. The lady said that it was
unmistakably her son ; but there was something that was not
as he had been, but what it was she was unable to describe.

" The next spirit to present itself was my son Eddie. He
came out from the cabinet calling * Papa, papa.' The man-
ager asked *Who is your papa?' and he replied, * Mr.
(Smith).' All this time he stood between the table and the
cabinet, and only his head and shoulders could be seen. The
manager told him to step out where he could be seen, when
he came around to the front of the table.

** It was rather dark, but I could swear it was my son. He
was just the right size, with long flaxen hair and a very pa^


Materialization 265

fmce. He wore a light-colored waist and darker knee-
breeches and stockings, with a large black bow at his throat,
just as I remember seeing him last in health.

** While Eddie was stiU standing in front of the table a
large man came out and took him by the hand. Eddie spoke,
saying:

^ ' Must I go back, grandpa? ' The form turned toward
me, saying:

** ^ My son, this is a great pleasure to us, but we must not
long remain, as it is our first attempt at materializing/
He turned to go when the manager said to him :

**^If the gentleman is your son you ought to give him
joar name.'

** * The name of the child is Eddie, and my own is J. A.
Smith,' replied the form, as they vanished into the cabinet.

** The manager suggested that it would be well to examine
and see whether the medium had been out or not. The cab-
inet was examined and everything found satisfactory.

^ Spirit after spirit came from the cabinet, one or two at
a time for an hour ; some of them came to friends, and others
were * controls ' of the medium. Many of them were recog-
nised by different ones of the sitters in the room. I, for one,
could swear to the identity of my own son Eddie, while my
father was plainly recognizable. . . .

•* The room was again made dark. Suddenly there ap-
peared on the floor, in front of the table, a light about as
large as a baseball. It moved about in a circle of perhaps
a foot in diameter and grew larger. It soon lost the shape
of a ball and appeared to be a luminous cloud. Seemingly
we could see into and through it. In the course of thirty
leconds it had become as large as a six-year-old child ; still
there was no definite shape, only a fleecy cloud-like mass,
taming, twisting, and rolling. At the end of perhaps a
minute it was the size and shape of an adult person. The
face could not be seen, but light, luminous spots were visible
as though the hair and ears were decorated with gems. The
shape spoke and requested light. As the light was turned
''n the luminousness disappeared, and we beheld a beauti-


266 The Physical PheiKHnena of Spiritualism

ful young lady clothed in a dazzling white costume. Her
arms and shoulders were bare, and about her neck there was
a necklace of what appeared to be very brilliant diamonds.
Her feet were encased in white slippers, with straps across
the instep. In her ears and hair glistened and shimmered
beautiful diamonds. Her face and arms were as alabaster,
and altogether she was one of the most beautiful women I
had ever beheld. She was recognized by a lady and gentle-
man present as their daughter. They had met her here
before. They were from the East, and were wealthy. The
spirit requested that they come to her, which they did, and
were each kissed and embraced by it. They held a moment's
conversation with her and resumed their seats, when the lamp
was slowly turned down. As the light became dim the spirit
became luminous. The face and arms disappeared and the
body became as a cloud again, turning and twisting and
growing smaller until it was nothing but a small light spot
on the carpet, which of a sudden disappeared entirely.

^^ Immediately after this manifestation an examination of
the medium and cabinet was made, and it was certain the
medium had not been away from his chair. The light was
again turned out and the music-box started, when two bright
spots appeared on the carpet, one at either end of the table.
These went through the same process of development until,
when the light was turned on, there was another beautiful
female spirit at one end of the table, and a child of perhaps
eight years of age at the other. The child was recognized
by a lady present as her daughter, while the adult spirit was
recognized and rapturously greeted by a gentleman who sat
near me on my left, as his * darling angel guardian.' They
had quite a long conversation, in which they made use of
very endearing language, each to the other. I supposed it
was the gentleman's wife. . . •

" These spirits did not disappear as the first one had, but,
when the light had been turned off, the luminous shape re-
volved a few times, and on two occasions assumed the garb
and shape of men, and when the light was turned on again;
there stood the men with beards and men's forms. After


Materialization 267

•ome eig^t or ten of these materializations and dematerial-
izations, before our eyes, the last couple completely disap-
peared.

" The light was again turned down and a luminous shape
came from the cabinet, followed by others, until seven of
them stood on the floor. The light was turned up until we
ooald see the seven spirits. Five were females and two males.
They were of different sizes. The curtain at the door of
the cabinet was pulled aside and we could see the medium sit-
timg in the chair in which he was bound. The forms now filed
into the cabinet again, while the music-box played. After
they had disappeared the light was turned up, an investiga-
tion made of the cabinet, and the stance was over.

•* There, reader, is a truthful description of what can be
witnessed at the stances of mediums who are artists. None
of your bungling, amateur work here. The work of such
a medium is always satisfactory for the reason that if a
man feels sure that the medium is a fraud, he has been so
well entertained that he does not regret the money paid for
the opportunity to witness it. This is the class of medium
also, who frequently succeed in getting large sums of money
from wealthy persons they have converted to spiritualism.

** Did the writer not give you the true explanation of the
manner in which these things were produced, you would prob-
ably say it was conceived by a very fertile imagination. If
you believed that he saw these things you would perhaps
offer the preacher's explanation, by saying, ^ it is the work
of the devil ; ' or that of the scientist, by asserting that * it
is the mesmerist's power over your mind ; ' or * the operator
has discovered an odd force in nature ; ' or go off on a long
dissertation on hypnotism and fourth dimension of space
problems. However, it is not the work of the devil, neither
are there any but natural laws necessary to its production.

"The stence described actually occurred and was de-
scribed in writing by Mr. Smith in the language used, al-
though it was not printed, and the writer was one of those


268 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualisin

who assisted in its production. He will now proceed to ex-
plain this particular sdeince. . . .

^^ It will be remembered that the room and cabinet were
carpeted with a dark carpet, and that the ceilings were of
wood. The ceilings were decorated by being put on in
panels. The ceiling of the cabinet would not have been like
that of the room had the closet been a part of the architect's
plans of the house. It was not, but was made by the me-
dium. He simply built a lath and plaster partition from the
corner of a wide chimney to the wall, thus inclosing a space
of six by four feet. The panel in the ceiling of the closet
was twenty inches square. This panel was ^ doctored ' and
could be displaced, leaving an aperture large enough for
the * spooks ' to get through with perfect ease. A light
ladder which reached within three feet of the floor of the cab-
inet was hooked fast above and furnished the means of get-
ting down and up again. There were eight persons con-
nected with the seance described by Mr. Smith, seven up-
stairs and the medium in the cabinet. Of course it was not
necessary that the medium get out of his fastenings, and the
facts are that he did not. The table was placed across the
cabinet door, not to lay the instruments on, but to be very
much in the way should any one make a rush and ^ grab '
for the materialized forms. In case this occurred, the
* spooks ' above would close the light, making the room per-
fectly dark, and the manager would do his utmost to turn
the table on end, or side, with the legs out in the room. Be-
fore the * grabber ' could get the lay of things and get past
it, the spooks would have gone through the trap, closed it,
pulled up the ladder, and the * grabber ' would have found
the medium writhing and groaning and bleeding from the
mouth. The bleeding was for effect, and was caused by
sucking very hard on his teeth or girnis.

" The table also served a convenient purpose in the mate-
rialization and dematerialization through the floor. You
now know where the spooks came from, in this particular
house, and how they got in and out. Now let us see how they
managed the materializations, and the properties used to


Materialization 269

produce them. The trap and ladder were practically noise-
less in their operations, but the music-box made assurance
doubly sure that the least sound from the cabinet should not
be heard in the stance-room.

^When the box began its first air the trap-door was
opened and down the ladder came a young man dad in a
suit of black tights. He was entirely covered with black with
the exception of his right arm, which was bare to a point a
little more than half-way from the elbow to his shoulder.
The bare arm glowed with a luminous bluish light.

** This condition of things was brought about by powder-
ing his arm with pulverized luminous paint. If you are not
told the method of transforming the sticky paint to powder,
you will not be able to do it, and will conclude the writer
was romancing in this case. The most essential thing to
you will be to know where you can procure this paint. The
writer has been unable to procure it anywhere, except of
Devoe & Co., of New York City. It is put up in a package
resembling six-ounce jelly glasses, and you will get six of
them for five dollars. In order to reduce it to powder, thin
the contents of one of the glasses with one pint of turpentine.
When it is thoroughly cut and incorporated into the turpen-
tine, soak strips of muslin in it and hang them out to dry.
When thoroughly dry you can shake the powder from the
cloth. In order to powder one of your arms, gather one of
the cloths in your hands, and use it as a powder-puiF on
your arm. You will not be able to get all the paint out, but
the pieces will make luminous crowns, slippers, stars, and
luminous decorations for your robes. You will be under
the necessity of perfuming your robes each time they are
used, for the odor of the turpentine will always remain to a
greater or less degree. To illuminate a robe or costume
(the mediums always say ^ robe') you proceed the same as
in the powdering process, except that to the pint of paint
you will add a wine-glass full of Demar varnish, which will
prevent its falling or being shaken off as powder. You are
not to make the robe of muslin, but of white netting. Every
lady will know what netting is. It is the lightest, thinnest


270 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

material the writer ever saw sold in a dry goods store. Ten
yards of it can be put into the vest pocket. Do not scrimp
the material, but get as much of it into your robe as possible.

**When he of the luminous arm steps from the cabinet
into the dark room no part of him is visible save the arm.
He picked the strings of the instrument with the illuminated
hand and fingered \he keyboard with the other. He makes
a sound of writing on the tablet and tears off a leaf which
he conceals, and, drawing a long black stocking over the
luminous arm, places in the pocket of the sitter a com*
munication that had been written up-stairs in a good light.
This accounts for the even, beautiful writing, supposed to
have been done in the dark. He covers the luminous arm so
that any one so inclined could not locate it in order to ^ grab '
when he is near enough. By mounting the table, that lumi-
nous hand and arm can be made to show as though it was
floating about near the ceiling.

^^When four hands were visible there were two spooks
at' work with both arms illuminated. . . . You can readily
understand the forces that floated the music-box and table
above the heads of the sitters, and an explanation is usdess.

^^ When the first female spirit appeared it was, in reality,
a young woman, dressed in a gorgeous white costume without
paint, hence the light was turned up instead of down, in
order that she be visible. Rhinestones and Sumatra gems
being cheap, she was plentifully supplied with * diamonds,'
although many of those who are the queens or spirit guides
or * controls ' of wealthy spiritualistic fanatics wear real
diamonds, the gift of their wealthy charge, or ^king,' as
they usually call them.

^^ When she started for the cabinet she used her hands to
keep her robe from under her feet, and as she went stooped
lower and lower, until, as she disappeared in the cabinet, she
went on her hands and knees. This is what caused the ap-
pearance of * dematerialization.'

^^When Mr. Smith's son, Eddie, came from the cabinet,
he was represented by a boy of about eight years of age, the
son of one of the female * spooks ' up-stairs. He receives two


Materialization 271

dollars a night for his services, the same as the larger spooks.
He was powdered until he was very white, a blond wig put
over his own hair, and dressed as most boys are at the age
IVf r. Smith's son died. Mr. Smith recognized him by his
lize, his light ccmiplexion, and flaxen hair, and the fact that
he called him ^ papa,' and gave his correct name. His
father was ^ made up ' from the description given by the
medium, and acknowledged by Mr. Smith as correct. Of
course he knew his own name, for it was given him by the
slate-writer. . . .

** We now come to a part of the phenomena that all spir-
itualists who have witnessed it will swear by. What is re-
ferred to is the materializing and dematerializing of the
spirit from the floor and before your eyes. In this you see
first a small light, which grows larger and larger, until there
stands before you a fully formed female or male spirit, as
was described in Mr. Smith's experience.

^* In order to accomplish what he witnessed, the same
spook who had before been recognized by a gentleman as
' his queen,' prepared herself in the following way. Divest-
ing herself of all clothing she donned simply a long chemise
that reached her shoe tops. She drew on a pair of white
stockings, and over them a pair of white slippers. Into her
hair and ears she put rhinestone diamonds, and around her
neck a necklace of the same beautiful but valueless stones.
On each ear-lobe and around her neck were put small spots
of the luminous powder to represent the diamonds while it
was dark. Her face was powdered and her eyebrows and eye-
lashes darkened, while a dark line was drawn under each eye.
She now took a black mask that covered her head, and her
* robe ' in her hands, and went down to the cabinet. Arriv-
ing there, she put the black mask over her head, to prevent
the luminous diamonds being seen until the proper time. She
carried her robe in a black bag. Crawling from between
the curtains and under the table, she exposed on the floor
a small part of her robe. This she shook and moved about,
allowing it to escape from the bag until it was all out. She
was now from under the table and on her knees, and it was


272 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

time the head show on the fonn, so, getting close to the
robe, she threw off and under the table the black mask. The
shape was now the size of an adult; she adjusted the robe
to her person, and rapped for light. As a matter of course,
when any light was made the luminousness of the robe was
drowned, and she appeared in simply a white costume. The
necklace and ear-drops could now be seen, but when the light
was such as to reveal them, the luminous spots had disap-
peared, leaving the spectator to think the ones he now saw
were the ones he had seen in the dark. The process of de-
materialization will now be apparent, and a description will
only tire the reader. One small spook was all that was re-
quired, as he could be made to represent boy or girl as was
desired, by clothing him in the garments of either sex.

" At the close of the stance, the full force of * spooks '
came into the room. After disappearing, they shinned up
the ladder, drew it after them, closed the panel and the trap
in the floor above it, replaced the carpet and pushed over the
place a heavy bedstead from which they took the castors.
They now carried the ladder down-stairs and concealed it
in the coal-house as they went through it on their way home.
They will get their pay next day.

" Should ever so close an examination of the cabinet be
made, you would not find anything wrong. This particular
medium has taken investigators into the cellar beneath the
cabinet, and the room above it, scores of times, yet nothing
was discovered.

" You are not always to search for the trap in the ceiling,
nor yet in the floor. A trap is not possible in the ceiling
except a closet is used as ^ cabinet,' and the ceiling is of
wood. Where this condition of things does not exist, you
must search elsewhere. The floor is a very likely place when
it cannot be made in the ceiling. If you do not flnd it there,
examine the base or mopboard. If it is in the mopboard
you will flnd, upon examination, that there is a joint in it
near the comer of the cabinet, but you will flnd it solidly
nailed with about four nails each side of the joint. This


Materialization 273


appearance of extraordinary scdidity will be absolute proof
that it is not solid.

^ The nails are not what they appear, but are only pieces
about one-half inch in length, and do not even go through
the board. The piece is fastened on the other side with a
couple of bolts that hold it very firmly in place. There is
a corresponding opening in the mopboard in the next room,
although no attempt is made to so carefully conceal it, as
no one is ever admitted to it. Through this trap the
'spooks' enter the cabinet by crawling and wiggling. It
is not a very desirable trap, for the mopboard is scarcely
ever wide enough to permit of a trap that the spook could
get through in a hurry; besides, they must assume their
costumes after they get into the cabinet or tear them to
pieces. You can see how this would make it very inconve-
nient.

^If the room is wainscoted the spook will have all the
sea-room necessary in his trap, for it will extend from just
below the moulding on the top of the wainscoting to the
floor behind the strip of quarter-round. . . .

*^It is next to an impossibility to detect these traps by
examining in the cabinet. They were constructed to avoid
discovery, and no pains spared to make them so absolutely
perfect that not one chance in a million is taken. The proper
place to seek for traps is in the adjoining room, up-stairs, or
in the cellar. One is foolish to undertake to find a trap by
thumping the walls or floor; for, if you happen to thump
one, the medium who is smart enough to make use of a trap
is also sharp enough to make provision for its being thumped,
and your sounding method goes for naught.^ Bear in mind

* It must be remembered that it is occasionally possible for the medium
to do away with traps altogether, either by having a confederate in the


doors are locked, the key kept by a member of the audience, while the
keyhole is sealea, and strips of summed paper are also s^* ^^ross

the crack between the doors, seafinF ^ ^ ^^ together ^^

enter the room, in this ease, bv men doors

being so oonstructed that this ispoa ee fa

the end of ons door, through wbisii ^


274 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

that when you are examining the cabinet, you are seeking
at the very place that is prepared most effectually to with-
stand your investigaticms. . • . Do not forget the mamager
in your search. He or she is never searched, or never has
been up to date, which has been the cause of many a failure
to find the ^ properties ' of the medium when the stance was
given in a room and cabinet furnished by a stranger and
skeptic. Do not be deceived into a belief that all of the
sitters are strangers to the medium. There may be from
one to five persons present who pay their money the same
as yourself, and who may appear to be the most skeptical
of any one in the room. They will generally be the
recipients of some very elegant ^ tests,' and weep copiously
great grief -laden tears when they recognize the beloved
features of some relative.

^^They are the most careful of investigators, and, when
the medium's trap is located in the door- jamb, will pound
the walls, and insist on the carpet being taken up, when they
will get upon their hands and knees and make a most search-
ing examination of the floor. They are the closest and most
critical of investigators, but they are very careful to exam-
ine everjTwhere except where the defect %$ located. Because
one or two men seem to be making such a critical investiga-
tion, do not allow that fact to prevent you making one on
your own responsibility. Wait until they have finished and
then examine not only where they did, but more particularly
where they did not. Their examination is only for the pur-
pose of misleading others. Their * tests ' are received in a
way to cause those about them to think they admit them very
unwillingly, or because they were so undeniable that they
could do nothing else.

" A great many will probably deny that confederates are
ever employed. They are not, by mediums who are not
smooth enough to produce that which appears so wonderful
as to make a good business for them. The writer would ad-
vise those mediums who give such rank stances to employ a
few floor-workers (they are easily obtained), and see what
a difference it would make in the amount of business they


Materialization 275

will do. Giet good ones, those who know human nature, and
know when they have said all that is necessary. Most of
them are incline to say too much, thus causing the ordinary
man to suspect that they are confederates."


CHAPTER XV


S£AI«BD - LETTER READIKO


The methods of obtaining a knowledge of the ocmtents
of a sealed letter, or a folded piece of paper, containing
a written question, — " one that has never left the writer's
possession," — are so numerous and so ingenious that it is
small wonder that the public is deceived into believing that
the phenomena cannot, in many cases, be produced by fraud-
ulent means, since the same test need never be given twice
to the same sitter unless he is a frequent caller or attendant
at the seances, and this is one great reason for the medium's
success — the fact that the sitter goes prepared to detect the
medium in some certain act of fraud, which he suspects, as
the result, perhaps, of the last stance. When he arrives,
and receives the sought-for information, therefore, he finds
that the medium did not practise fraud of the kind suspected
at all, and consequently goes away more convinced than ever
of the genuine character of the phenomena observed, and the
medium's supernormal powers. I shall, in the present
chapter, endeavor to give a complete expos^ of the varied
methods and systems employed to find out the contents of
the sitter's paper or letter, beginning with the simplest
cases, and gradually working up to the most complex. Let
us first consider those cases where a question is written on
a piece of paper, which is then folded up, and in due time
the medium tells its contents to the sitter.

The simplest method of doing this is to make use of a
prepared pad. The medium hands to his sitter, or there is
handed to him by an assistant, a pad of paper, with the re-
quest that he (the sitter) shall write a question on the pady

S76


Sealed-letter Reading 277

tear ofF the sheet on which this question is written, and, after
carefuly folding it up, place it in his pocket. The pad
is meanwhile returned to the medium's table. In due course
of time the medium tells the sitter the contents of the paper
** which has never left his possession for an instant ! " In-
deedy that is the case, but the trick is very simply worked,
nevertheless.

The pad is previously prepared by placing a piece of
carbon-paper between two sheets, a certain distance from the
top. If the carbon sheet is placed (say) between the third
and fourth sheets of paper, it is not exposed to view when the
top sheet is torn from the pad, but the impression is left on
the fourth sheet of paper, nevertheless. The medium has
only to gain possession of the pad, and examine this sheet,
in order to find out the question written on the top sheet.
The rest is plain sailing.

But, you say, you have sometimes examined the pad, and
this carbon sheet has not been present? Very likely! The
same result may be produced by other means with far
greater safety, so why should it be? In these cases, the
medium has prepared the under side of one sheet of his pad
(say, the fourth) with a preparation of paraffine. This is
invisible against the paper, and the pad may be examined
without any chance of its secret being discovered. Some-
times soap is used, and answers the purpose equally as well.
When, now, the pad is written upon, the pencil causes the
paraffine or soap sheet to mark upon the one below it, these
marks corresponding to the writing upon the top sheet. The
page of the pad which receives the impression is detached and
sprinkled with soft black powder, when the writing comes
out clearly. Sometimes a sheet of glass is handed to the
sitter, instead of a pad, and he places the two or three
pieces of paper upon the glass to write the question. This
IS done to prove to the sitter that no prepared pad is used !
As a matter of fact, the bottom sheet, the one in contact with
the glass, is prepared in the manner described, and the im-
pression is taken on the glass instead of the sheet of paper,
just bekiw the one prepared. The result is the same as


278 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

before. Sometimes the medium simplj hands to his sitter
a pad and pencil, about either of which there is no trickery
or preparation. How is it done? The medium takes care
that the pencil is a very hard one, and that the paper of
the pad is very soft. The sitter is forced to press rather
hard, in order to obtain any impression on the top sheet,
and, when he does so, he unconsciously marks the second
sheet of the pad also.

We now come to another class of tests, in which the sitter
writes his question on his own piece of paper, which is after-
ward folded up and placed in his pocket, the medium telling
him the contents of the paper, nevertheless. The following
are some of the methods employed to produce this result.

The sitter, having written his question on a small slip of
paper, folds this latter up into a small compass, and is re-
quested by the medium to place it against his (own) fore
head and to concentrate his thoughts upon its contents. The
medium also sits with closed eyes. As, however, the medium
does not seem to ^^ see " very clearly on this occasion, he
requests the sitter to let him place \he pellet against his own
forehead for a few mcmients, in order to *^ get the impression
more clearly." The unsuspecting sitter hands over his pellet
to the medium, who (apparently) places it against his fore-
head and remains in that position for some time. At the
end of this period of " concentration," he hands back to the
sitter his pellet, who again holds it to his forehead, or places
it in his pocket. If the latter, he is more liable than not to
assert that he placed it in his pocket immediately upon writ-
ing out the question, and that it never left his hands for a
single instant! In due course of time, the medium tells his
sitter the contents of his paper, and probably gives him an
answer to the question it contained, possibly also displaying
such a marvellous familiarity with the sitter's affairs, in
that answer, that the sitter is altogether carried away by
it, and inclined to believe that the whole of the stance must
be genuine, because the information contained in the answer
could not have been known to the medium, even if he had, by
some means, succeeded in fraudulently opening the paper


Sealed-letter Reading 279

and reading its contents. How the medium acquired this de-
tailed information about his sitter, I shall explain presently
(pp. 81^18) ; for the present, I give merely the means
employed by the medium to secure a knowledge of the con*
tents of the written-upon paper.

The whole secret lies in the fact that the medium quietly
exchanged or iubsiiitUed one paper pellet for another, when
his sitter allowed him to place his (the sitter's) pellet against
his forehead. In one hand the medimn has palmed a dupli-
cate pellet, resembling as much as possible the one his sitter
wrote. In the act of transferring the pellet to his own fore-
head, the medium simply substitutes the one in his own hand
{v. Fig. XX., p. 284), and holds that one against his fore-
head, while, with his disengaged hand, which he allows to
drop beneath the surface of the table, he opens and reads the
pellet his sitter handed him. In handing the pellet back to the
sitter, the medium again substitutes the pellets, returning
to the sitter the one he originally had and wrote. The trick
IS now done, for the sitter has his own pellet back again, and
the medium is possessed of the information he. desired. This
is an old trick, but a method still in very general use.

A method that is sometimes used in public ^* test stances '*
is the following. The medium has written and sent up to
him a number of questions on separate slips of paper, and
these are all piled before him on the table. He picks up one
of these, puts it to his forehead, and, after more or less hesi-
tation, tells its contents. It is acknowledged as correct by
some member of the audience, and the medium immediately
opens the paper, and verifies the fact that he has given the
message correctly. The next pellet is picked up and the con-
tents read in like manner, until all the pellets have been read
in turn. This test is very convincing, when well performed.

The secret consists in the fact that the medium has a con-
federate in the audience, the contents of whose pellet he al-
ready knows. This pellet is marked, so that the medium
can distinguish it from all the others in the pile. He picks
up any pellet in the heap hut his confederate's, and holds it
against his fordiead. After a time, he reads aloud the con-


280 The Physical Phencxnena of Spiritualism

tents of the confederate's slip, which that person acknowl-
edges as correct. As soon as he has done so, the medium
opens the pellet^ ostensibly to ascertain if he has read its
contents correctly, — thereby gaining a knowledge of the
contents of thai pellet, which he reads as the contents of the
next one, and so on, throughout the entire pile, the medium
keeping ^^ one ahead " all the time and reading each ballot
in turn. If the letters are sealed, the same method may still
be used, the medium breaking the seals and opening the let-
ters, " to see if he is correct " — thereby ascertaining the
contents of that letter. I suggested a similar dodge, for
reading the numbers of watches, in Mahatma^ Vol. III., No.
7 (January, 1900).

I shall now describe a very popular test-reading of ballots,
one more frequently employed, perhaps, than any other.
All over the country there are mediums who are ^ving pub-
lic readings of folded papers, usually in connection with a
religious service. In such cases, the members of the audience
bring their questions with them already written out and
folded or sealed up, and these papers are collected and
placed in a basket on the table or ^^ altar '' in front of the
medium. After a certain length of time has elapsed in the
" invocation," or opening prayer, and other parts of the
service, the reading and answering of the paper pellets is
begun, and more or less successfully accomplished.

The contents of these slips of paper can be obtained in a
number of ways. Confederates can be employed for one
thing, and are certainly scattered about through the audience
in almost every public stance. These confederates receive
the most wonderful tests of all, for the simple reason that
they are paid to acknowledge as correct everjrthing the me-
dium says. Then again the medium frequently has the
opportunity to open and read these pellets in the very proc-
ess of manipulation, even assuming that the medium has had
no chance to handle or see them before. The task of open-
ing and reading pellets in this manner is not a very diffi-
cult feat, certainly not so hard as when a single sitter is
across the table from the medium, and watching him intently,


Sealed-letter Reading 281

since, in the fonner case, the medium has the added advan-
tage of distance, and is enabled to move about, make ges-
tures, divert attention, etc., in many ways that would be ccm-
sidered suspicious in a ** single sitting." Yet we know that
the ^^ single sitter " can be deceived by this very feat, and
the public performance becomes easier to comprehend in
consequence.

If the medium is working alone he is enabled to manipulate
the paper pellets so as to open and read them, in his move-
ments across and about the stage, distracting the attention
from the hand that is doing the work meanwhile by waving
the other arm, pointing with the fingers, quick remarks,
causing the audience to turn and look at some person by a
question addressed to him ; or he can manage to see what is
inside the folded papers while in the act of folding and
holding up to the forehead other papers, the disengaged
hand opening the pellets, and they being read by the medium
under the bandage which is so placed across his eyes that
downward sight is possible. It is impossible to describe the
actual process on paper, since it doubtless differs with each
medium, but the general plan must be much the same in all
cases.

By far the safer plan, however, and the one usually em-
ployed, is for the medium, or some of his or her assistants, to
have the opportunity of handling the pellets before the ^^ serv-
ice " begins, and so for the medium to be in full possession of
their contents before going on to the platform at all. The
pellets are gathered up by attendants, and placed in a basket
on the " altar." Before doing so, however, the pellets are
taken behind the scenes, opened and read, their disappear-
ance being unnoticed for the reason that duplicate pellets
are placed upon the ^* altar " in the basket, and the originals
resubstituted at an advantageous moment. It must be re-
membered that the interval of time occupied in holding the
religious service was not for nothing, but was profitably
employed by the medium and his or her assistants in open-
ing, reading, and resubstituting the pellets of paper gath-


282 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

ered in from the audience. In all these note-reading tests,
the same method is rarely used throughout and invariablj.
The methods are changed, in most cases, so soon as the one
used becomes known or even suspected.

Mr. Lunt gives an ingenious variation of this test in his
Mysteries of the Siance, pp. 8-9. In this case, the medium
has no confederate, but the ballots are collected and placed
on the table, as before. The medium now steps up to the
table and mixes the ballots, apparently in a careless way.
^^ While doing so she takes care to palm one or more. Some
skeptic in the audience is then requested to step up and see
if the ballots are all properly folded. While he is doing this,
she (the medium) manages to open and read the palmed
ones. Then, the platform being cleared, she ^ sees ' some
names or messages ^ written in the air,' perhaps (the ones
she has just read in the palmed ballots). Then she remarks,
* We will now try to find that ballot.' She steps up to the
table, and picks up the ballots one by one until a rap is
heard, asking with each, ^ Is this it? ' Of course it is easy,
while doing this, to drop the palmed ballots into the pile.
These she keeps watch of and finally picks up one, when
three loud raps are heard. Then the ballots are handed, still
folded, to some one in the audience to read out loud, so all
can hear. The ballot proves to be the one she ^ saw in the
air,' and then she is applauded."

One is never sure, in a public performance, how many con-
federates the medium has employed and stationed in various
parts of the hall. These confederates are told to acknowl-
edge, as true, whatever the medium states is within the pellet
or envelope, and these persons naturally receive the most
wonderful " tests." Their questions are sometimes brought
to the performance already tightly sealed in envelopes, and
they receive answers to their questions. None of the other
sitters do, however, who have brought questions sealed in this
manner, unless the conditions are fulfilled which would enable
the medium to gain knowledge of the contents of this letter.
The ways of doing this will be presently detailed.

There are various devices of a more or less complicated


Sealed-letter Reading 283

nature that enable the medium to gain a knowledge of the
contents of a paper that the sitter has written a question
upon. One of the most ingenious of these is a trick-table.
It has a hollow leg, which fits over a hole in the floor of the
room, and communicates with the room below. The top of
the table is covered with (1) a piece of thin silk, (2) a
piece of carbon-paper, the size of the top of the table, placed
over the silk, and (8) a very thin oilcloth covering, stretched
tightly over the top of the table. To one comer of the silk
is attached a thread, and this passes down to the room below,
through the hollow leg of the table.

When the sitter is seated at the table, the medium hands
him one sheet of paper and a pencil, with the request that
he (the sitter) write a question on the paper, and immedi-
ately fold it up and place it in his pocket. Meanwhile, the
medium leaves the room, ^* so that he shall not see what
the sitter is writing upon his piece of paper.'' The sitter
writes the question, as directed, and after folding up the
paper, places it in his pocket. No sooner has he done so,
however, than the medium returns to the room, and astonishes
the sitter by informing him of the contents of the paper in
his pocket!

As may be imagined, the trick is worked by means of the
table, and in this way. The sitter, having only one sheet of
paper in his hands, and having no solid substance against
irhich to press this, naturally places the paper on the table
emd writes his question in that manner. The pressure of
bhe pencil, pressing upon the carbon-sheet, makes a copy of
the question on the silk sheet underneath it, and the medium
bas only to pull the string attached to the corner of this silk
sheet, to pull it off the table and down into the room below.
rhere he is enabled to read the question, and, on going back
bo the stance-room, he can astonish his sitter by telling him
Pfhat is on the folded-up paper in his pocket. This is an
jxtremely effective test.

I now give a method that has probably been employed
nore frequently than any other in the whole range of tests
hat deal with sealed-letter reading. The medium hands his


284 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

sitter an envelope and a smaU card, requesting him to write
any question he likes on the card, and immediately seal up
the envelope in any way he sees fit. There is no trick about
the envelope or card, which may be the sitter's own, if de-
sired. The medium then takes the envelope and places it
against some article on his table where it can remain in full
view of the audience throughout the s^nce. The medium
does not touch the envelope after this, but he knows its con-
tents, nevertheless, and there has been no substitution, as
may be proved by an examination of the seals on the en-
velope.

Since the card is sealed in the envelope in this case, so that
it would be impossible to abstract it without detection, the
medium makes use of a simple device that renders the en-
velope temporarily transparent. In order to accomplish this
without detection, the medium makes use of a small sponge
wet xoith (dcohoU which is palmed in his right hand. As soon
as he receives the envelope in his hand, he wets the surface
with the concealed sponge, on the way to his table. This
renders the face of the envelope quite transparent for the
time being, and the medium is enabled to read what is written
on the enclosed card. Nothing will do to wet the paper but
alcohol. Nothing else will dry out quickly enough and leave
the paper unwrinklcd. Water will render the envelope trans-
parent, but will crinkle the paper, and will not dry out
quickly enough either. In order to hide the wet side of the
envelope while it is drying, the medium stands the envelope
against some object on his table with this side turned from
the spectators. He asserts that he does this, however, " so
that they may see the seals on the back of the envelope
throughout the stance."

Of course the medium has to make sure that his sitter
places the card in the envelope with the written side toward
the front or face of the envelope, and not toward the sealed
side or back. He accomplishes this by holding open the
envelope for his sitter to place the card in it, and naturally
holds it face downward (v. Fig. XXI., p. 284). The sitter,
in order to prevent the medium from reading what is written


s §

Fig. 20 f '8- 21

Pig 22. ■ -J

Fig. 23


• M


I!


i *


*i


»■

■


■t .

r


Sealed-letter Reading 285

upon the card, is therefore forced, from the nature of things,
to place it in the envelope written side downy and this brings
the writing against the face of the envelope. After the me-
dium has seen that the card is placed safely in the en-
velope in this position, he allows the sitter to do the rest of
the sealing, etc., himself, since the manner of the fastening
is of no further interest to him. A very fine way of working
this test is described in the Open Court Magazine for April,
1906.

There is another method of obtaining a knowledge of the
card that is placed in an envelope which is even simpler and
bolder than the last method; the only disadvantage is that
the envelope cannot be examined, in this case, as it could
in the last experiment. A card is written upon, as before,
and placed in the envelope, which is then scaled as securely
as the sitter may desire. The " clairvoyant faculties *' of
the medium enable him to discover the question on the card,
nevertheless. The envelope, in this case, is prepared by cut-
ting a slit in the face, and just below the opening of the en-
velope. This side is never shown to the sitter. When the
card is placed in the envelope (v. Fig. XXII., p. 284), the
medium pushes it into the opening and then out through
this slit into hie handy where it is palmed (v. Fig. XXIII.).
The envelope may then be sealed as much as desired. The
only objection to this method is the fact that the envelope
cannot be examined after the sitting; but the medium may
avert this difficulty by suggesting to* his sitter, in the first
place, that the envelope be sealed to the table, ^^ in order to
show,'' he explains, ** that the envelope is not substituted for
any other during the stance! " His real object is to conceal
the fact that the envelope has been ^* doctored," for, once
it has been sealed down in this manner, it cannot be removed
without destroying all traces of tampering with its face.

Sometimes the sitter, on opening the envelope containing
his question, is surprised to find an answer thereto written on
the inside of the same envelope as that in which his question
is placed. This is a very surprising test, and is worked as
follows. In the ordinary make of envelope, it will be found


286 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

that the under or bottom side is very frequently badly
gummed, and can be opened with very little trouble. This
side the medium proceeds to pry open with a fine penknife.
He separates the edges a trifle, at the bottom, and then
inserts a small lead-pencil into the opening thus made, and,
by rolling this carefully along toward the centre of the en-
velope, he is enabled to separate the flap without much diffi-
culty. On a small slip of paper the medium has prepared
a message written in reverse (mirror-writing), and with
copying pencil. This slip is then inserted into the envelope,
through the slit, and shaken into place. Now, the medium
rubs over the surface of the envelope, outside this slip, first
placing a piece of paper between the envelope and the
fingers, so that no mark is left. The writing is transferred
to the inside of the envelope, where it will appear as regu-
lar writing. The slip may now be withdrawn, the lower
flap of the envelope moistened and restuck, and the trick if
done.

The above method will illustrate a point that it is very im-
portant the investigator should keep in mind, which is that,
because an envelope is usually opened by raising the top
flap, it need not be so opened, but any one of the three
remaining sides may be opened just as well, and in fact,
frequently far more easily than the top flap, as the gum
is of an inferior quality. In sealing envelopes, therefore,
the other two seams should receive just as careful attention
as the two top seams, and be just as carefully sealed. It is
no ^^ test condition " at all to bring an envelope to the me-
dium which has only these scams securely sealed.

Great care must always be exercised that the envelope
handed the medium is really opaque, as it is astonishing to
find what thickness of paper may sometimes be seen through
by purely normal means, as the result of a careful examina-
tion. It might be possible to utilize the embryoscope, or
** egg-glass," to read through several thicknesses of paper.
A famous German scientist is said to have found that he
could, by its aid, read through eight layers of opaque paper.
It is possible that mediums make use of this device on ooca-


Sealed-letter Beading 287

on, in order to gain a knowledge of the oNitents of a given
tter.

A trick that is sometimes employed in order that the me-
ium may become possessed of the knowledge of what is
rittoi (m a certain slate, e.g.^ is the following. The
ledium makes use of a specially prepared table, in the top
F which there is a trap cut slightly smaller than the slate
e intends to use. The inside of the table is fitted with a
sries of mirrors that enable the medium to see the under
de of the trap-door from where he sits, without changing
is position. When the message is written on the slate, this
; placed on the table, just over the trap mentioned, and, of
nurse, written side down, and the medium then presses a
pring which releases the door and allows it to swing open,
ownward He is then enabled to read the message on the
ate, and the door is allowed to resume its former position,
Y releasing 'the pressure on the spring. The medium may
len proceed to give the information acquired in any man-
er he desires.

I now come to consider the methods that are employed by
le medium in order to gain a knowledge of the contents of
^.dUd letters, and I cannot do better than to quote the fol-
iwing passage from The Revelatiant of a Spirit Medium^
p. 178-7:

** If you intend to become a professional medium the most
gpreeable and remunerative phase is that of answering sealed
■tters. A few hints as to the manner in which others have
got to the frcmt ' in that phase may be of use to you.

*^ Sit down and write an article describing the wonderful
henomena you have witnessed at your own stances for phys-
tal manifestations. In this communication or article for pub-
cation by one of the spiritual journals, you will describe
oursdf as having been very skeptical previous to your hav-
ig visited your own stances, and witnessed the wonderful
roofs of spirit return. After describing the wonders of
our physiod s&mces, you will mention the fact that you
re a medium for answering sealed letters, and describe some
onderf ol tests you have received from yourself in that line !


288 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

Lay it on thick and be sure to get your name and street num-
ber incorporated into the article so that people will know
where to address you. Now sign any name but your own,
and mail it to one of the leading spiritual journals.

" If your article is well written, and you have described
the phenomena as unusually wonderful, besides giving them
to understand that you are now, through what is described in
your manuscript, a firm believer in spiritualism, your article
will surely be printed.

^^ As certainly as it is printed just so sure will you be
overwhelmed with letters of inquiry from all over the United
States. The letters will be asking information as to your
fee for answering sealed letters and the method they should
pursue in communicating with their spirit friends in that par-
ticular way. You will receive hundreds of letters to answer
at one dollar each. You will receive letters sealed in aD
manner of curious ways in order to prevent your opening
them. If you will exercise plenty of patience, no letter will
come to your hands so securely sealed that you cannot readily
open and replace it in its original condition so as to defy
detection.

" The writer knows of a medium who, at one time, received
a letter to answer that required him to earn his dollar before
he had it in shape to return to the writer without danger of
detection.

" This particular letter was enclosed in three opaque en-
velopes. The letter itself was folded to fit the smallest of
the three envelopes and the edges glued together. It was
now stitched with silk thread, red in the needle, and blue in
the bobbin or shuttle. It was put into the first envelope^
with two or three spots of glue on it, causing it to stick to
the envelope and the medium to swear. Not being content
to let this end their precautions, they now stitched through
envelope and sheet, and, after putting mucilage all over the
side on which the seams were, inserted it in the second en-
velope. This envelope was mucilaged and placed in the third
envelope, which was sealed with furniture glue, besides being
waxed with letter wax and stamped with some kind of die


Sealed-letter Reading 289

that the medium could not duplicate without going to more
expense than it would be worth.

** The medium succeeded in getting the letter out and back
again. How did he manage it?

** He began by prying the wax off the outside envelope
with a thin knife-blade. It came off in pieces from the size
of a pea to pieces as large as a five-cent nickel. He took
good care not to break the wax containing the impression
of the die ; the balance did not matter, for it could be melted
again. Now he got up steam in the teakettle, and, after
first dampening the seams, soon steamed off the outside en-
velope. When it came off it was put carefully to one side
to dry. The second envelope was disposed of in the same
manner. After examining the third envelope and finding he
could duplicate it, he steamed and cut it from the letter. He
now had a good hour's work to pick the silk thread from the
letter. It was finally accomplished, and the letter read and
c^opied. The letter was folded on the old creases, and taken to
the sewing-machine and stitched with red and blue silk in
the same needle-holes from which the thread had been taken.
He now got a duplicate for the envelope he had destroyed,
and, after gluing the sheet, it was inserted in the envelope.
It was necessary to put the thread back into this envelope by
hand, for the reason that it must be held between himself and
the light in order to see where the holes were, in the letter
inside. These could not have been seen with the envelope
under the machine-needle. You can imitate machine work
very nicely by hand. The last envelope was now folded over
it, after giving it a liberal coat of glue, so that it would be
impossible to do much investigating without destroying the
evidences, if any were left, of the medium's having tampered
with it. Now comes the fine work. The wax has left a stain
on the envelope which will guide you in putting back the
pieces of wax on which are the impressions of the die or
seal. Give them a good coat of glue, stick them in place,
being careful not to allow the glue to show beyond the edges
of the wax. Allow the pieces to dry on before replacing the
remainder of the wax. After they are fast, melt the re-


290 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

mainder of the wax in a vesael and pour it where it had been
before, being careful to make it cover all the stains and
marks made by it in the first instance. See to it that the
wax you have melted does not show a joint where it joins the
pieces that you glued on. This can be remedied by heating
a knife-blade, and holding it close to the wax until the two
edges melt together.

" This letter came from what is called a * Bundyite ' spir-
itualist, viz.f one who believes that all mediums are frauds,
and all phenomena fraudulent, until they have demonstrated
it differently to their own satisfaction. His questi(ms were
satisfactorily answered and quite a complimentary letter was
received by the medium. . • ."


CHAPTER XVI

MIND - EEADIKO PEEFOEMAKCES

Whethse the phenomena of thought-transference are
real facts in nature, whether such phencHnena exist in reality,
is a question I cannot stop to omsider now. The evidence
in the case will be found in full in the Proceedings of the
S. P. R., and I would refer the reader to those pages, leaving
him to draw his own conclusions from a study of the experi-
ments there recorded. I, for one, do not deny that thought-
transference really exists, and that, quite apart from
*^ muscle-reading,'' there is a faculty in man which enables
him, at certain times, to communicate directly with the con-
ftdoosness of another individual, without recourse to the
methods normally or usually employed. We know nothing
iU yet, however, of the laws that govern this sort of
Uiought-traosference or telepathy, and cannot command
tiie phenomena to appear at our beck and call, or sunmion
Ubem at will ; and consequently, any one who does so at once
■tamps himself as an impostor, or possibly, merely as a self-
dehided person. The only thing we know about telepathy
!• that — we know nothing about it ! When, therefore, public
tlerformers give nightly exhibitions of ^* thought-reading,''
"^dainroyance," and so on, it may be taken for granted that
kliese exhibitions are nothing more than clever conjuring
performances, the only amazing part of which is that the
|[Xiblie can be so gullible, and that the performers can display
Ito mndi ingenuity in devising new methods of trickery, so
*Ht, no sooner is one device made public, than they are ready
Kkh another method, entirely different from the first, and
ifernng to throw the investigator off the track, for the rea-


292 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

son that the method of operation is so different that any one
knowing the method of trickery in the first case wonki be
quite unable to explain the means employed in the second
instance. In the present chapter, therefore, I shall attempt
to give a detailed exposition of the various methods that
are employed in performing acts of this character, con-
sidering only the fraudulent side of the question, for the
reason that, in public performances, we may be sure that that
is all that is ever witnessed in the name of thought-transfer-
ence.

I have already mentioned in the chapter on sealed-letter
reading, and shall, further, in the chapter on fraudulent
trance-phenomena, enumerate a number of methods by which
a medium may come into possession of a large amount of
knowledge about his sitter, and I need not repeat any of the
evidence here. Test stances proper I shall not consider in
this connection, therefore, or any of the methods that are
employed, in obtaining information about prospective sit-
ters. The present chapter is devoted to a consideration of
the methods by which the thoughts of one individual are
apparently transferred to another, but by fraudulent means,
and generally on a public stage. The methods of doing this
are so numerous that it would be quite impossible to consider
them all in the present volume at any length, and I must
accordingly content myself with enumerating the principal
methods in use, and explaining the devices employed in
order to produce the desired result.

There is a species of mind-reading performance, made
popular some years ago by J. Randall Brown, Washington
Irving Bishop, Stuart Cumberland, and a few others, which
had great popularity for some time, and succeeded in mys-
tifying many thousands of persons. Their acts were, in the
main, very similar. A large blackboard was placed upon
an easel, on the stage, and the performer, after securing
a number of persons from the audience to assist him (these
were very rarely confederates, it may be observed in passing) «
would have himself securely blindfolded by the members of
the committee, and then step up to the blackboard, chalk


Mind-reading Performances 203

a hand. Grasping one of the committee men by the hand^
le would now proceed to trace on the board a number which
lad been previously chosen by some member of the committee,
lut which was unknown to the mind-reader. A bank-note
rould now be handed to some other member of the committee,
nd he, grasping the hand of the mind-reader, would con-
entrate his mind on the number of the note. The performer
rould then proceed to trace on the board, very slowly, the
umber of this note, which the assistant would certify was
orrect. In the same manner the mind-reader would tell the
ate of a coin, the number of a selected card, etc., the only
ondition required being that the person holding the hand of
he performer should concentrate his mind on the number
Uch the mind-reader was to write upon the board. Each
f the aboye-mentioned performers succeeded in opening a
afe, the combination of which they did not know, they
lerely holding the hand of the person who did know the
ombination; and (I believe) each of these gentlemen per-
oimed the spectacular feat of driving a hansom cab across
be city, when blindfolded, and having a sack over the
ead in addition, and finding a hidden article secreted in a
otel at the other end of the city. These feats were all most
larveDous, apparently, and it is small wonder that their
generation marvelled at the feats they performed.

Every item in their performance is explainable by muscle-
eading, however, and nothing but muscle-reading was opera-
ire in any of their performances or acts. The person hold-
Qg the performer's hand gave him the required information
fj means of slight, unconscious movements, which the per-
brmer interpreted, also more or less unconsciously. When
he performer's hand would move in the right direction, the
mreon holding his hand would have a tendency to push it,
difle, if the hand was moving in the wrong direction, the
instant would have a slight tendency to restrain the pcr-
brmer's hand, thereby showing him that he was moving in
be wrong direction. These twitches or movements, slight
• fhey were, were quite sufficient to guide the expert mind-
eader in his task, and enable him to successfully indicate


294 The Phyi^cal Phenomena of Spuritualism

the date of a coin, the number of a watch, or a bank-note,
etc. A detailed exposition of the manner of this guidance
will be found in H. J. Burlingame's Haw to Read People*t
Mkidst pp. 28-30. The opening of the safe was effected in
the same manner, the performer receiving delicate indica-
tions by means of slight unconscious muscular twitches, the
hand being guided throughout its difficult journey by the
hand of the person who knew the Combination and which
hand he was holding. Incredible as this statement may ap-
pear, it is, nevertheless, the actual truth, as may be verified
by any one caring to examine the evidence for himself.
Stuart Cumberland stated that this was so in his own case, in
his book, A Thought-Reader^s Tfumghts. A full exposition
of A. J. Brown's methods will be found in a little pamphlet
entitled The Art of Mind-Reading, while W. I. Bishop's
methods are explained on pp. 14-16 of Burlingame's Haw
to Read People*$ Minde, before referred to, and in other
publications.

The trick of driving through the crowded city in a cab
requires, perhaps, a little closer consideration. The eyes
were first of all bandaged carefully, and over the head was
thrown a sack or bag of thick, dark material. In the act of
adjusting the sack over the head, the mind-reader managed to
tilt up on to his eyebrows the bandages on his eyes, enabling
him to see beneath the wads of wool placed over each eye.
The front of the sack is " doctored *' by thinning the mate-
rial in a manner that will render it almost transparent, yet
which will not show that it has been tampered with from the
outside. The performer manages to get this part of the bag
before his eyes. By tilting his head backward, he can now
see fairly well, under the bandages and through the sack,
and it only requires the usual care to drive the cab safely
through the city. The hand is determined, meanwhile, by
the slight indications given by the person sitting next to the
driver, who is, in this case, the mind-reader. In this manner
they arrive at the house, and the finding of the lost article
then becomes an easy task for the skilled muscle-reader.

Before turning to an examination of the methods em*


-reading Performances 295

ployed by professional mind-readers of the present day,
let us consider a few of the devices that are employed in
order to convey information from the performer to his
assistant upon the stage, or elsewhere. These methods are
innumerable, and no doubt every performer has his own. I
shall mention a few of those of most general utility.

A slate is examined and cleaned. Any person in the audi-
ence is now requested to write several rows of figures, one
under the other, on this slate, and it is then placed, together
with the chalk, on a table, face downward. The assistant .
then comes upon the stage (or into the room), and, picking
up the piece of chalk, writes a row of figures on the blank
side of the slate, which proves to be the correct total to the
rows of figures written on the reverse side of the slate. The
performer, meanwhile, has not said a word, and has not been
near the assistant.

The secret lies in the fact that the performer watches the
person writing down the rows of figures on the slate, and
mentally adds as they are written. He stands with his
hands behind his back and under his coat-tails, and holds in
his hands a piece of chalk, one side of which is slightly flat-
tened. On this chalk, the performer writes the correct total
of the rows of figures, and places this piece of chalk on the
slate instead of the other, the substitution being made on
the way to the table. It will readily be seen that, as soon
as the assistant picks up the piece of chalk to write the an-
swer on the slate, he comes into possession of the correct
knowledge of the total of the rows of figures on the other
side of the slate.

A very similar device is sometimes used by professional
mind-readers to very good effect, generally as an ^* im-
promptu" test of the performer's powers. A message is
written on a piece of paper by some one, who is at liberty
to fold up this paper, and place it in his pocket, after having
first shown it to the performer. The performer's assistant,
meanwhile, is in some distant part of the city, and in igno-
rance of the test that is in progress. A note is written to
her^ requesting that she at once inform them of the contents


296 The Physical Phenomena of Spuritualism

of the note in the gentleman's pocket. The gentleman may
carry this note to the assistant himself, if he so desires, or
a messenger may be sent. There is no trick wording of the
letter, which may be written by the gentleman himself, if
he desires to do so. A fountain-pen is sent with the message,
in case the assistant has no writing materials. As soon as
this note is received, the assistant writes out the correct con-
tents of the letter in the gentleman's pocket.

The trick consists in the fact that the performer copies
out the letter which the gentleman has written on a very fine
piece of tissue-paper, and, after crumpling this up into a
ball, thrusts it into the cap of the fountain-pen, which, it
will be remembered, was sent along with the note. The assist-
ant abstracts this piece of paper, reads it, and is at once in-
formed of the contents of the letter in the gentleman's pocket
All she has to do is to copy this on to another piece of
paper.

If the performance is the regulation public exhibition, in
which the assistant remains on the stage, while the performer
goes down among the audience, the chief object, of course,
is for the performer to be able to communicate with the
assistant instantly, effectually, and in such a manner that
the audience will not suspect that any such communication
is being established. The older methods of doing this were
in the form of spoken " codes," the manner of putting the
question to the assistant at once conveying to him or her the
information required. Elaborate codes were devised and mem-
orized by the performer and his assistant, with this object
in view. I cannot stop to give any of these codes here, which
may be very easily imagined. The form of the question
would indicate the article touched by the performer. Such
simple questions as: "What article is this?" "What is
this ? " " What may this be ? " " What is here ? " " What
have I here? " " Can you see this? " " Do you know what
this is? " " Look at this." « Now, what is this? " " Tell
me this.'' "I want to know this." "Pray what is this?'*
"You know what this is?" "Quick. This article."
" Name this article? " " Say, what is this? " " This arti-


Mind-reading Performances 297

de? ** indicating the article to the assistant on the platform
irithout further delay. The group of questions quoted
shove are from Heller's ** code," used by him for a number
if years.*

Of late years, however, this code method has been almost
entirely given up, and the assistant on the stage gives the
required information, either without a word being spoken at
dl, or by the same question being asked each time. Obvi-
3fusly, therefore, no code could be employed in such cases,
ind the performer is forced into devising other methods by
Hrhich he can convey the required information to his assistant
upon the stage. These methods are numerous.

In some cases, the performer is connected with the stage
by means of an electric current, a third assistant frequently
being employed in these cases, he acting as intermediary be-
kween the performer and the assistant on the stage. The
performer passes amongst the audience, and is shown num-
bers on bills, dates on coins, etc., which the assistant on the
stage immediately names correctly.

The secret lies in the fact that the performer has, passed
op his legs and inside the trousers, copper wires, the ends of
which connect with metal plates on the soles of his shoes, and
so arranged that the circuit may be completed by pressing
together two wires, separated by a spring, which is directly
under the performer's waistcoat. He stands on the metal
rim of the carpet which runs down the aisle, and to the
other ends of which are attached wires, leading either to
the assistant directly, or to some third person who con-
veys the message to the assistant upon the stage by means
of signals. When the performer sees the date on tiie coin,
the number of the bank-note, etc., all he has to do is to
touch the two wires together a certain number of times, and
the signal is interpreted at the other end of the line. A code
is always employed to shorten and quicken the process.

>See Magic, Stage IttuHonB, pjp, 184-201; More Magic, by Pro-
lessor HoffmaDn, pp. 236-60; Magic and Its Profeeeore, pp. 67-70; Ma-
iatma. Vol. IV., No. 5, etc., for a further oonsideration of Heller's pei^
'ormanoes, and the methods of conveying information to the assistant
>7 various code signals.


298 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

If the signals are carried to another assistant behind the
scenes, that person communicates the results of the signals
to the assistant upon the stage by means of hand signals,
by a speaking-tube, by a hidden telephone (the receiver be-
ing hidden in the high back of the chair, close to the assist-
ant's ears), by means of a thread, this either passing directly
into the assistant's hand, or connected with a tapping instru-
ment hidden in her hair, by means of the assistant's foot
(the sole of the shoe being cut out entirely, and this opening
fitting over a hole in the stage, the assistant thus being en-
abled to touch the sole of the foot), or other methods.

In some of these tests, especially in those cases in which a
blackboard is used, the assistant may make use of another
device. She is seated on the stage, slightly to one side,
and with her back toward the board. She can tell almost
instantly the totals of rows of figures written on the board;
answer questions written thereon, etc.

The secret lies in the fact that the lady has hidden, either
in her glove, or fastened to an inner fold of her fan, a smaD
mirror, which is capable of reflecting the back portion of
the stage when held up to the forehead, as if in thought. The *
bandage is so arranged that the assistant can see beneath it)
and consequently the whole of the stage, when reflected in
the mirror. Card-sharpers make use of a variation of this
trick in order to swindle their opponents. They have a small
mirror concealed either in a ring, or the bowl of a pipc>
or make use of a small mirror attached to the under side of
the table. A detailed description of all these and many other
such methods will be found detailed in J. N. Maskelyne's book,
Sharps and Flats,

Some years ago, a great sensation was made by the pro-
duction of a mind-reading " act," which had every appea^
ance of being genuine. The eff^ect of the performance is
this. The performer passes amongst the audience, and has
a number of suggestions whispered into his ear by different
individuals. These suggestions are acts which the audience
wish the assistant upon the stage to do, such as ** Tear a
programme in halves," " Take a handkerchief out of a lady's


Mind-reading Performances 299

pocket,*' "Pull a certain gentleman's hair," "Turn up a
certain gentleman's trousers," etc.

After a number of suggestions of this character have been
idiispered into the performer's ear, he turns toward the
stage, and, without a word being spoken, the assistant comes
down fr(Hn the stage and performs every act suggested to
the performer, and in the order desired. The performer
and his assistant do not approach one another throughout the
whole " act," and until she has performed everything cor-
rectly.

This feat is accomplished in the following way. The per-
former and his assistant have first learned by heart a number
of performances of the kind likely to be requested by an
audience, in a prearranged order. When this is once done,
it is obvious that all the performer has to do is to induce his
sitters to choose these acts, one after another, in the order
learned previously, and the assistant can execute each in
turn without further assistance from the performer. This
may seem an impossible task to one not accustomed to the
methods employed by conjurers, in " forcing " choices of
this kind upon an audience. It is, however, a comparatively
easy task to an expert. He would go about it something
after this manner. Going up to some gentleman in the audi-
ence, he would say, "What shall the lady do for you, sir?
ShaU she pull your hair, turn up your trousers at the bottom,
or tie a tie in your handkerchief?" — these being the first
three items on the list, we will say. " Suppose she pull your
hair^" says the performer, as he moves away toward the
next victim. Unless the person is particularly unsuggest-
ible, he will acquiesce gracefully, and even feel he had a free
hand in choosing the act to be performed ! This may sound
Incredible, when placed in print in this cold-blooded manner,
but when properly presented, the eff^ect is extraordinarily
deceptive. If, however, the first person is particularly
strong-willed, and refuses to accept this suggestion, the per-
former lets him choose any of the other acts on the list,
merely taking mental notes of those persons who choose the
various acts, in their proper order. By judicious " forcing,"


300 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

then, the performer manages to get the entire list chosen by
members of his audience, he remembering tsho wished each
act to be performed.

All this time the band has been playing, but now it ceases,
and the assistant on the stage turns, faces the audience, and
steps down among them. The assistant in this act is sup-
posed to be hypnotized, and the performer accordingly con-
tinues to make mysterious ^* passes " over her, at some dis-
tance. These passes are to indicate the person who wished
the various movements on the part of the assistant. When
the assistant has advanced up the aisle of the theatre to the
row wherein sits the first victim, the performer gives the
signal by slightly lowering his hands. The assistant then
knows she is on the right row, and is at the same in-
stant told whether to turn to the right or the left by the
performer, who closes the fingers of the hand on the side to
which the assistant is to turn, the others remaining open.
The assistant then passes along the row of seats untO
she is in front of the right person, when the performer gives
another signal — drops one arm slightly, or opens the
fingers of the closed hand. The assistant then knows she ii
to perform the first act in the list, and upon this person^ i. e»,
the one in front of her. In a similar manner the entire list
is gone through, the performer leading his assistant to each
person in turn and she performing the acts in the pre-
arranged order. The " act '* is completed without a word
being spoken.

This trick is very similar, in principle, to the performance
of " The Svengalis," whose mind-reading performance lately
created quite a sensation, and whose act is worked an vaj
similar principles to that just given. The performer stcpi
down among the audience, while his assistant remains upon
the stage, with her back to the performer and the audi^oe;
Names of great personages are whispered into the profes-
sor's ear, and the assistant upon the stage at once repeats
the name aloud. A certain popular air from one of the
operas is then called for, or rather the name is whispered
into the ear of the performer, and the fiissistant, who sits il


Mind-reading Performances 301

front df an open piano, at once plays the air or sdection
called for. The name of any great composer, author, states-
man^ etc., is likewise at once given by the assistant upon the
stage, and without leaving it for an instant or once facing
the audience or the '* professor."

At first sight, it would appear that this performance must
be explained upon different lines from the last test, as, in
that case, the performer had the opportunity to direct the
assistant to the person in the audience, while here, she never
once leaves the stage, and, moreover, no prearranged code is
possible, the audience having free choice as to what they will
select. As a matter of fact, however, the main outlines of
the performances are the same, the differences being in de-
tail

The key to the performance lies partly in the fact that
there is a confederate hidden behind a screen, so situated
that he can see the actions of the performer, in the audience,
and also see the assistant upon the stage, or rather, jso that
she can see him ; partly in the fact that the signals are given
by the performer in a series of natural movements, and in-
terpreted by the assistant behind the screen. The assistant
upon the stage sees these movements, and knows what is go-
ing on in the audience. The information is communicated to
the assistant behind the screen, to be again interpreted, by
him, for the benefit of the young lady upon the stage. The
series of touches or movements is quite natural and unlikely
to be detected by the most shrewd observer.

Here is an illustration of how the figure system can be
worked. The famous personages, popular songs, and operas
are on numbered lists. Svengali, in the aisle, with his code
of signals, has all these numbers committed to memory.
When the spectator whispers, ^ Dickens," Svengali knows it
is (say) No. 4, and he signals accordingly. But how?

By touching his head, chin, and breast or that particular
part of his body designed in the signal code of the Svengali
Company. . . . Say the human head is used for this purpose.
Imagine the top of the head, right-hand side, as No. 1, the
rij^ ear as No. 2, the jaw as No. S, and the neck as the


302 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

cipher, the forehead No. 4} the nose No. 69 the chin No. 69
the top of the head on the left side as No. 7» the left ear No.
8, and the left side of the jaw No. 9. Thus you have the
code system by which operators can communicate volumes by
using a codified list of numbered words or sentences. If you
label the Lord's Prayer No. 4, and the Declaration of Inde-
pendence No. 5, you may instantly telegraph the mighty
literature through wireless space, — enough literature to save
all Europe from anarchy, — by two natural movements of
the hands. You can label your eyes, your movements, or even
your glances, making them take the places of the nine omnip-
otent numbers. Again: Glance upward to the right for
No. 1, straight upward for No. 2, and upward to the left
for No. 8 ; repeating, glance horizontally for Nos. 4, 5, and
6. Repeating the same again by glancing downward for 7,

8, and 9, and stroking the chin for the cipher. With your
back to the audience, you can telegraph in a similar way,
using your arm and elbow to make the necessary signals.
Let the right arm, hanging down, represent No. 1, the elbow
projecting from the side. No. S, the elbow raised. No. 8. Re-
peat with the left arm for Nos. 4, 5, and 6; with dther
hand placed naturally behind you on the small of the back,
above the belt, and over your shoulder for Nos. 7, 8, and

9, and on the back of your head for the cipher.
Another method of signalling information to the assistant

upon the stage, is by means of certain movements of the
fingers, they fingering the watch-chain, touching the buttons
of the coat and waistcoat, etc., in a series of natural move-
ments. The assistant is, in this case, blindfolded, and her
head enveloped in a sack ; but she is enabled to see all that
happens, nevertheless, by making use of the methods and de-
vices explained on p. 294. The sack is " doctored " by plac-
ing pieces of crape before the eyes, and the assistant is so
placed that she can see the performer either directly, or by
means of a small mirror, mentioned above. The performer
and his assistant have learned a code of signals, and it is
an easy matter to interpret them so soon as she can obtain
a view of the performer and his movements.


ind-reading Ferf ormanoes 903

III order to make dear this method of signalling, I give
a tentative description of the methods that might be em-
ployed in communicating numbers and letters, this serving
as a clue to the many methods that are worked in this manner,
and by some more or less similar means.

The signals would be about as follows. I begin with those
for the left hand.

Code A. The performer's right hand is playing with his
watch-chain. The left hand and arm are hanging down by
the side: ^ I am giving numbers." Left hand akimbo at hip ;
^ I am spelling something." Left hand at lapel of coat,
near top button : ^ I am giving abbreviations." If left hand
moves slightly, say three inches or so, while in any of these
positions : ^^ I am giving a color by its number." Shifting
your weight from one foot to the other, means : ^ I am start-
ing," or ** I am through."

This last sign is used in the following way: if the per-
former only kept his right hand at the watch-chain when
necessary, it might arouse suspicion, therefore the medium
must receive some signal when the performer commences sig-
nalling. That is done by standing with the legs a few inches
apart, and shifting the weight of the body from one leg to
the other, which gives a kind of swaying motion to the body
scarcely noticeable to the uninitiated, but enough for the
medium. When through giving signs, instead of always
moving the hand from the chain, suddenly, which would also
be suspicious, keep your hand there, but shift your weight
back to the other foot, meaning, ^^ All through ; " then, even
if you keep up the playing with the chain, the mediiun knows
that there is no further meaning to it.

Code B. Next we come to the signs of the right hand.
I shall first explain the ten figures: it is to be presumed
that the performer wears a dress coat with a low-cut vest
and carries his watch in his lower left-hand vest pocket, with
the staple in the second or middle buttonhole. It is advisable
to have the chain several inches longer than the usual length.
The chain itself has nothing to do with the signalling; it is
the right hand alone that must be watched by the medium.


304 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

and the portion of the vest on which the finger-tips rest, in-
dicates what number is meant.

For figure 1, pick up the chain at its middle, and place
finger-tips against the bottom of vest, directly in a perpen-
dicular line from the watch-pocket.

No. 2. Finger-tips at watch-pocket.

No. 8. Above watch-pocket near upper pocket. One, two,
and three are on the left side of the vest.

No. 4. At bottom of vest, where the two parts of vest
meet.

No. 5. At or near the staple.

Four, five, and six are in the centre of vest; for
** cipher " the sign is made by twisting the chain around the
right thumb, without the help of the fingers. The chain
should generally be held by its centre, when it will be easy to
reach the various portions of the vest. For one, four, and
seven, go as low down as the chain will permit, for three, sixy
and nine, as high as you can.

We now come to a description of the alphabet. I omit K
and Q at first. A is made just as figure one, B as two, C as
three, D as four, E as five, F as six, 6 as seven, H as
eight, and I as nine. Then we begin over again : J is one,
L is two, M is three, N is four, O is five, P is six, R is
seven, S is eight, T is nine, but for these letters J to T shake
the chain a little, while, in the former cases, A to I, the hand
is held almost quiet. Twirling the chain slightly will not give
a decided motion ; shaking the chain gives a decided up and
down motion to the hand, and is distinctly visible even at
fifty or sixty feet distant. Care must be taken that the
finger-tips remain near the places one, two, etc., and not mid-
way between any two numbers. Practise before a mirror, so
as not to get the habit of looking at the hand, and see that
the movements look careless, and not stifi^, jerky, or violent

The letters U and W are given the same as the cipher,
by twisting the chain around the thumb, describing a circle
with the hand; but in U, the circle is made at 4, 1, 2, and
5, that is, on the lower left side of the vest ; in W it is made
at 6, S, 69 or upper left of vest. The remaining letters,


Mind-reading Performances 305

K and Q, are given by twisting the chain around the iSrst
or index finger; this will make the circles go in the opposite
direction*

The remaining letters are given by a kind of whip move-
ment. Grip the chain tightly between the first and second
fingers and thumb, and make a stroke up and down, as if the
chain were a whip. This will give to the hand a kind of
violent up and down movement. If made in the centre of the
vest, and only once, it is a Y ; if twice in quick succession it
means Z. If at watch-pocket twice, 1-S, 1-^, it means X.

This alphabet should be thoroughly learned and diligently
practised, using small words to start. To show where one
word ends and the next one begins, drop the chain from the
right hand, remove the hand three or four inches, and then
pick it up again, at X, for the next word. Do not forget
to shift your weight at the beginning and end of the sen-
tence. If figures are mixed in with words, for example,
" house with three windows," drop your left hand at the end
of *^ house with," to the side, and make the three, then raise
it again to the hip, and spell the next word.

I next give a very clever test in which the assistant stands
in front of a blackboard, with chalk in her hands, and writes
upon the board whatever number, date, card, etc., is whis-
pered into the performer's ear, when he is amongst the audi-
ence, not a word being spoken throughout this test, and it is
obvious that there is no communication of any sort between
performer and assistant. The performer moves about freely
amongst the audience, the only condition required being that
absolute silence be maintained.

In this case, there exists a secret code very similar to that
last explained, the numbers, letters, etc., being given or
communicated in a very similar manner. The whole ques-
tion is that of communicating the information, and this is
done in a very ingenious manner. The assistant upon the
stage breathes deeply and regularly^ so that the performer
can see the movement of her shoulders from where he stands,
care being taken, however, not to overdo this part of the


306 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

performance, and render the movement noticeable to any
person in the audience. The performer starts his assistant
by making some slight noise or movement, and from that in-
stant the silent counting begins. It is for this reason that
** absolute silence " is requested, so as to render the signals
plainly distinguishable by the assistant upon the stage.
After she has counted up to a certain number, the number
required (i ^., after she has taken that number of breaths),
the performer interrupts her breathing, and the assistant
knows the number to place upon the board. The counting
then begins again, from the moment the sound of the chalk
ceases to mark the blackboard — the performer again intei^
rupting the breathing at the next number or letter, as the
case may be, by again making a slight sound or movement
This process is continued until the whole message is com-
municated, the assistant writing down each word or iSgare
in turn, no word being spoken throughout the entire per-
formance. If the lady upon the stage is so placed that she
can see the performer, a slight movement on his part, at
the required number, is all that is required. No noise will
then be necessary, this being an improvement in some re-
spects, though detracting from the general effect of the
trick, inasmuch as the assistant can see the performer.

There is a method of performing this act which is far
superior to that just described. The general method is the
same, but, instead of the breathing being necessary, the per-
former and his assistant have substituted a method of count-
ing mentally and together. It is a known fact that the beats
for common time are always the same in music; therefore,
with little practice, it is easy for two persons, starting on
a given signal, to count at the same time and rate, and*
when another signal is given, to stop, and of course they
will both have arrived at the same number. The performer
and his assistant count together, mentally, until they are
sure that they both count in exactly the same time, when
the hardest portion of this method will have been overcome.
The signals of when to stop and when to commence have
now to be learned, and these are, in this instance, very in-


Mind-reading Performances 307

genious. Suppose the date of a coin is to be transmitted.
It is generally understood that most coins begin with the
figure 1, and that much may be taken for granted. The per-
former stands up at the blackboard, his assistant being on
the opposite side of the stage, and awaits her replies. She
begins, " The first figure I see is a 1." From the instant
die has ceased speaking, both she and the performer begin
counting together. Suppose the next number is an 8. The
performer waits until he (and consequently his assistant)
has mentally counted eight breaths, before he marks upon
the board, when he writes the figure 1, as directed. The
assistant now knows that the next number is eight and so
states. Before marking down the 8, however, the performer
waits until they have both counted up to the next number
on the coin, say 9. After mentally counting nine, then, the
performer writes down the 8, previously given, and the assist-
anty hearing the sound of the chalk, knows the number next
in order, and so on indefinitely. Both performer and his
assistant keep just ^^ one ahead " throughout ; the sound of
the chalk on the blackboard being the signal for when to
stop and when to commence. As the performer and his
assistant both count quite rapidly, there is scarcely any
noticeable wait between the time the number is called out
by the assistant and the writing of that number on the board.
The performer may fill up the intervening time, in the case
of the longer intervals, by pretending to look at the coin and
ascertain whether the number given by his assistant is cor-
rect. In other cases a more or less elaborate circular sweep
of the arm will sufiice. A sharp tap on the board, or the
drawing of a line under the figures, will tell the assistant that
the date is now fully given and the counting may cease.

In case the number of a bank-note, e, g.^ is to be given,
instead of the date on a coin, the same plan is adopted
throughout, except, in this case, the assistant cannot take
for granted the fact that the first number is 1. The signal
to start is therefore given by the assistant^ who raises her
hand to her head, as if in thought, and from that moment,
both performer and assistant commence counting together.


308 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

When the required number has been reached, the performer
givee a sigh, or takes a quick step, or gives some other signal
to indicate that the first number has been reached. The
assistant accordingly announces it, and the performer waits
the proper time, before marking it on the board, as in tbe
other test, this giving to the assistant the $econd number, and
so on throughout, until the signal to ^ stop ** is given. Card
tests are frequently given by stacking the deck. Such testi
as the knight's tour of the chess board, etc., are pore feats
of memory, and need no code for their performance, the
moves all having been learned by heart long before, and
given in the regular order.

The mind-reading performance of the Baldwins has fre-
quently been exposed. A very good account of their enter-
tainment is given in Proceedings S. P. 12., VoL XI., pp.
S25-8, and the outlines of their method explained. A
slightly more detailed explanation of the actual modut ope-
randi I give herewith.

During the early part of the performance, a number of
slips of paper are distributed among the audience, with the
request that they write on them questions such as ^ Who stok
my watch?" They are then asked to fold them up and
place them in their pockets, and keep their minds on the
contents. They are also requested to sign their full name
on the slips. During the latter part of the performance,
Mrs. Baldwin is brought upon the stage, in a supposed
"hypnotic" state. She starts by saying: ** I have an im-
pression ; it comes from the centre of the house ; it is from
James Brown ; he wishes to know who stole his pocketbook."
Mr. Baldwin now asks for the slip, and Mrs. Baldwin either
describes, or gives the initials of the person who stole the
pocketbook, probably telling when it was stolen, and the
amount of money it contained. In this manner she answers
three or four questions, when she appears to be ^ chilled.'' A
piece of cloth is thrown over her, and she answers the rest
of the questions, and probably describes some recent murder.

The secret of this feat is as follows:

Amongst the audience are placed four or five confederates


Mind-reading Performances 309

who take slips of paper, but instead of writing questions,
they take copies of the questions that are written by those
around th^n, giving the row and the number of the seat;
and, if they cannot make out the name, they give a descrip-
tion of the writer's dress. These slips are passed to the at-
tendants when they collect the pencils and the small tablets
from which the slips are torn. They are taken to Mrs.
Baldwin, and a list is made of them with such answers as
they see fit. When possible, information of lost friends is
obtained. Additional information is obtained by taking into
confidence the manager or treasurer of the house. For in-
stance, if some person, when buying a ticket, tells the treas-
urer that he has lost some article, and that he is going to
ask Baldwin about it, the treasurer makes a note of this, and
also the seat the person buys. In her act, Mrs. Baldwin
uses this information. Marked change is frequently given
to persons buying seats, e. g.^ a dollar bill, the number of
which is known to the ticket agent, or a half-dollar, of which
he knows the year, etc. A note is made of the number of
the ticket to the purchaser of which this marked change is
given, and, later on in the performance, a gentleman sitting
in ^ C, S,'' is astonished to find that the medium has informed
him correctly when she stated that he had in his pocket a
dollar bill, the number of which was C776849S, and another
gentleman is equally surprised to be informed that he has
in his pocket a half-dollar, of the date of 186S! These are
given as ** spontaneous tests," and so appear all the more
remarkable.

Before Mrs. Baldwin goes on to the stage she conceals in
her dress the list of questions ; but she commits four or five
of them to memory, which she gives first. When these are
exhausted, she has the cloth thrown over her, which gives her
an opportunity to consult the list. For each performance,
one or two questions are worked up by the confederates, for
the star test of the evening. These usually relate to some
great local sensation, such as a murder, or a railroad acci-
dent. By this method it is obvious that a tremendous amount
of sensation can be produced, limited only by the skill of


310 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the performers. Still further information can be obtained
by having a lady and gentleman confederate make a sys-
tematic canvass of the towns where the performer intends
playing (v. pp. S12-18). It will hardly be necessary for me
to describe a performance of the Baldwins in any further de-
tail, as the actual working out of the tricks can be easily
imagined.

I shall conclude this chapter by briefly mentioning the
performance of ** The Fays," which has lately been causing
quite a sensaticm. Their performance is very similar to that
of the Baldwins, the pads being passed round in the same
manner, and the information being obtained in the same man-
ner, to a large extent, also. In their performance, however,
recourse is made to the prepared pads mentioned on p. 877)
a duplicate of the written question being taken on an under
sheet in the pad. Some persons receive answers to questions
written by themselves upon an envelope, progranune, etCy
which never leaves their possession, and, when this is the case^
the information has usually been obtained through the
ushers, or assistants, or through the confederates, as in the
last case. The Fays also employ a large ntunber of con-
federates, and very many of the most astonishing ^* tests''
are doubtless received and claimed by them. The majority
of the questions that are answered, however, are those which
were written on the pads that were handed round to the
audience by the assistants, and the pads afterward collected
by them. The part of the house from which each question
comes may be indicated by having the paper marked, or by
having the pads slightly different in color, etc. All these
slips of paper are collected, and opened and read in the
interval that elapses between Parts 1 and S of their po^"
formance. When Miss Fay comes on to the stage, therefore^
in Part 2, she has in her possession duplicates of all the
questions that were written on the pads, as well as mucl^
miscellaneous information about various sitters, scattered ii^
different parts of the house, as well as the sure tests afforded
by the confederates, who are instructed to acknowledge any-'
thing said to them by the meditun as true. When the thick


Mind-reading Performances 311

doth 18 thrown over her head, therefore, she gets out a minia-
:ure pocket-lamp, and, by its aid, proceeds to read and an-
iwer all the papers she has in her possession. It has been
itated (by Lamboume, a former assistant to the Fays) that
the messages were telephoned to Miss Fay from beneath the
stage. This may have been employed in some cases, but the
Tormer method is doubtless the one usually employed.

I cannot stop to consider these public performances at
gpreater length now. The methods of obtaining information
ire 80 numerous, and the codes employed so ingenious, that
it is practically impossible for the average person to detect
bhe fraud that is invariably practised, in exhibitions such as
these.


CHAPTER XVn

TKANCE, ** TEST STANCES," ETC.

The most mysterious factor in these ** test stances," in
which the medium either passes into trance, or receives clair-
voyant " impressions " in a more or less normal condition,
is the fact that the medium displays a knowledge of the
sitter and his affairs which could not have been learned by
any normal means (apparently), and which serve as the most
convincing evidence of the presence of the departed, since
a proof of identity is here established, which is missing in aD
the other phenomena (v. pp. 8S3-4). The medium states
certain facts about the sitter — his past life, etc. — and dis-
plays a general knowledge of his family and personal life
which must have been obtained either by a direct knowledge
of the facts, or in some supernormal way. Thus, at least,
thinks that sitter. Names of relatives long dead are given,
together with their personal description; statements of
the disease from which they died; personal characteristics,
etc., — it is all very convincing. So much so, indeed, that
the average sitter fails to distinguish the real evidence, and
goes away with his mind in a hopeless muddle, in which real
knowledge, general advice, warnings as to the future, and &
hundred other things are indescribably mixed! For our
present purposes, however, we shall discard such material as
might have been obtained by " fishing," remarks let drop by
the sitter, etc., and confine ourselves to a consideration of
the manner in which the real evidence is obtained, that which
is really good, " test evidence,*' and see whence the medium
derived this knowledge.

812


Trance, " Test Stances," etc. 315

The obvious way to obtain knowledge about any person>
to go and get it ! and the mediums have always proceeded on
that plan. Every avenue to knowledge, every way by which
the medium could obtain information about sitters, has
been turned to account. I quote the following passage
from Truesdell's Spiritfudismy Bottom FactSy pp. SIO-IS,
as giving a very good idea of the methods usually em-
ployed by mediums of this class, in acquiring their informa-
tion.

** The most feasible way of introducing yourself to a new
town is by means of a systematic canvass of the same, with
the ostensible purpose of disposing of some manner of mer-
chandise, such as books, patent medicines, and household
utensils. Do not disclose to any one your real business, or
your ultimate design. Keep your eyes and ears open, and
learn all you possibly can, both of the living and the dead,
among prominent spiritualists. Provide yourself with a
blank book suitable for the pocket, which contains an index.
Under the proper letter, record every name and date which
you imagine may be of future service. From these notes, you
will be able to prepare, at your leisure, such a history as will
materially assist you afterward. By the exercise of a little
shrewdness, you can soon learn, at the post-office and prin-
cipal news-rooms of the town, who are the greatest readers
of spiritual papers, while the local cemetery will furnish you
with desirable information concerning their friends who have
passed into spirit life. With the names and dates thus se-
cured, you will be able, in most instances, to make your brief
histories more complete by referring to the obituary no-
tices so plentifully to be found in the files of the local news-
papers.

** This preliminary work is called * planting a town.' The
larger the area planted, and the more thorough the work, the
more abundant the harvest. When you have carefully can-
vassed one town, according to these directions, p
another, and there repeat your labors. Never thir
ing upon the harvest until you have planted
towns, though double the number would be still


. The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualiam

^y any means, you can sustain yourself for a period sofi-
."^ cient to thoroughly plant from twelve to twenty large towni,
a good business is virtually ensured to you for life."


u


There is strength in unity ! " So thought the
too. While, in the early days, each medium doubtless had
to gather his own information, by his own efforts, in the
manner above described, it gradually dawned upon the me-
diums throughout the country that if they were to ^ combine
their forces," so to speak, t. e^ if they were to all contribute
to some general headquarters whatever information thej
had been enabled to gather in their travels through the
country, and if each medium covered different territory, thej
would soon have a tremendous fund of information about
spiritualists and persons in the habit of frequenting stances,
which any medium travelling through that section of the
country could use thenceforward. The idea was a brilliant
one, and accordingly a *^ brotherhood " of mediums was
formed, each member of the organization binding himself to
turn into the " public fund " whatever information he ob-
tained concerning sitters, their dead friends and relatives, etc.
As numbers of mediums were constantly travelling over aD
p^rts of the country, it will readily be seen that, in the
course of a few years, a great mass of information was ac-
' cumulated, which was arranged, printed, and circulated
among the mediums who had joined the Brotherhood. So
closely was this secret guarded from the public, however,
that it was in operation many years before any inkling was
had of such a publication being in existence. It was called
the ^^ Blue Book," and its present size and thoroughness may
be imagined when I state that the Blue Book contains about
seven thousand names devoted to Boston alone ! Other cities
are in proportion.^ Supplemental lists, giving the latest in-
formation, are issued from time to time. Those who are ex-
ceptionally credulous are marked ** dead easy ! '* I here-
with quote a typical page from one of these Blue Bookie re-
lating to Cincinnati, Ohio. (The names are altered, in order

* MystericB of the S4anc$f p. 4.


Trance, " Test Seances," etc 315

to prevent the identity of the person mentioned being dis-
covered.)

TOE CmCINNATI, OHIO

G. A. Anson^ Merchant

Spt. Dau. Elsie, died TG, age 14 mos., diphtheria, blonde,
blue eyes.

Spt. Moth. Eleanor Anson, died '67, consumption, age 56>
dark.

Spt. Path. Nathan E. Anson, died Tl, pneumonia, age
64, Ught.

Spt. Friend, Andy Nugent, schoolmates at Oberlin, O.

S. O. Atwoodi Shoe Dealer

Spt. Son, Albert E., ^74, lung fever, 19 years, blonde, only
child. His parents keep his books and clothing. He is al-
ways described as a student with book in hand. Good mark
for private sittings.

R. B. Barker, Rich

Spt. Dau. Alice E., age 19, pneumonia, ^79, upper front
teeth gold-filled. Extraordinarily long hair. Quite an art-
ist, and one of her landscapes hangs in the parlor in gilt.
and plush frame. Spirit painting of her in the sitting-room,
that is kept curtained. She is an artist in spirit world.
Supposed to have a son in spirit that had no earth life,
named Egbert O.

Spt. Son, Egbert O., never had earth existence; an in-
ventor in spirit life and supposed to work through Thos.
iSdison. Is especially interested in electrical work.

Spt. Fath. Robert B., died '69, paralysis. Manufacturer
of machinery, two fingers off left hand.

Spt. Mother, Sarah, died when he was a diild.

Spt. Broth. James and Samuel.

Spt. Aunt, Lucy Wilkinson, Mary Wilkinson, and Eliza
Shandrow.


316 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

Remarks. — A good mark for private stances at his home,
and will pay well. Dead gone on physical manifestations
and materialization. Will get up lots of stances. Agree
with everything he says and you are all right.

A. T. Baton

Spt. Son, Albert F., drowned under suspension bridge,
May, '87. Sends message of greeting to Aunt Mary and
Cousin Harry.

Spt. Father, A. O. Baton, died '84, railroad accident in
Illinois. Is looking for private papers supposed to haye
been left by him. Sends love to his wife Kate in Covington.

Now it can very readily be seen that, with such a fund of
information at his back, the mediiun can go into any town
fully armed with a wonderful lot of knowledge about pio-
spective sitters. It does not matter in the least whether he
has been there before or not; or whether he has ever seen
the sitter before, either. If he can only find out the idewtiif
of his sitter, the rest is *^ plain sailing." He procures thii
information in a variety of ways. In many cases, the sitter
gives his name himself, feeling that the medium and he are
perfect strangers, and consequently there can be no harm
in telling his name, as it would furnish the medium with
no more information about himself than the name itself would
supply. Fatal error ! As soon as the medium becomes aware
of the sitter's identity, he excuses himself for a few mo-
ments (to get slates, or what not), and consults his Bk^
Book, finding out what it has to say about this particular
person. Armed with this information, he is prepared to gi^
his sitter a most convincing '* test seance."

But suppose the sitter does not give his name to the me-
dium? There are many ways of finding this out that will
suggest themselves. The sitter's name may be marked inside
his hat; or letters may be in the pockets of his overcoat,—
left in the hall, — which the medium is careful to examine.
Or the information may be let drop in the conversation.
But there are safer ways than all these of finding out the


Trance, '' Test Stances/' etc 317

litter's identity, and that is to make sure of it before the
stance! The medium does this by disguising himself and
attending a number of stances given by some local medium,
in the capacity of onlooker, and notices carefully the sitters
present. After the stance, he goes up to the medium who
has ** provided the phenomena for that occasion," and re-
quests that the identity of the various sitters be made known
to him. If both mediums are in the Brotherhood, this is
aways done, and the medium goes away possessed of a large
fund of information about spiritualists in that section, since
the resident mediiun probably possesses a very good knowl-
edge of all the prominent believers in the locality. After
attending several of these stances, the medium is ready to
commence operations cm his own account; he doiFs his dis-
guise, and boldly advertises himself as ^ the world famous
so-and-so, just arrived in this part of the country, and for
a short time only will give a series of test stances," etc. As
the medium is now ** primed " for his sitters, they will receive
the most astonishing tests, and (that most convincing of all
tests, to the average person) will have their name told them
by the mediiun without their having mentioned it or spoken
a word, — they never having seen the medium before ! Pos-
sibly not, but that does not argue that the medium has never
seen them before.

Mediums will resort to any sort of trickery or device to
obtain the desired information about their sitters, present
or prospective. Truesdell, e. g.^ in his Spiritiudiim^ Bottom
FactSf pp. 817-8, says:

^ Never neglect an opportunity to gain information which
will aid you in your professional venture. When you are in-
vited out, as you are sure to be, to dine, always seek to draw
your host or hostess into a discussion in the course of which
you will be obliged to call for the family Bible, in order to
prove some statement made, and, while looking for the re-
quired passage, carefully note the records of birth and death
which are therein preserved. This will give you a point, and
such * points ' compose the chief stock in trade of every true
medium.''


318 The Physical Phencxtnena of Spiritualism

I am glad to be through with this part of my subject,
which grows revolting. The methods employed by fraudu-
lent mediums in obtaining their information about sitters,
arouse our disgust, at times, even though they may arouse a
sort of admiration at others — admiration for the ingenuity
of the means and methods devised, and amazement at the
effrontery which enables the medium to come before the
whole American public with the statement that this trans-
parent trickery constitutes real evidence of spirit return!
Nevertheless, these pseudo-mental manifestations are, after
all, by far the most convincing and the most sane phenomena
that spiritism presents. It has always been a great difficulty
for many of us to see wherein the evidence for a future life
came, in the purely physical manifestations, ever granting
that they were genuine. But, as they are, in the vast ma-
jority of cases, such transparent frauds, it is really hard
to see wherein the connection between these phenomena and
spiritualism comes in. Even were the movements of objects,
etc., genuine phenomena, it would point, merely, it seems to
me, to some new force operative in the physical world, and
have nothing whatever to do with " spirits." However, it
is impossible to foresee how the public mind will be affected
by phenomena of this character — far less the individual in
that public!


PART II
THE GENUINE


!4'

I


I*


ii]:


I.-. I
11


1'


CHAPTER XVin


GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS


We now turn to a consideration of certain phenomena
which have the appearance of being genuine in character,
and not the results of conscious and voluntary fraud. Be-
fore actually doing so, however, some few remarks of a
more or less general nature are necessary if we are to under-
stand the problem aright. I must begin by saying that the
scientific world, of late years, has been split into two factions
over the question of the validity of the study of certain phe-
nomena, which, for want of a better name, have been termed
** psychic." And, just here, I wish to remark that many if
not all of the misunderstandings would have disappeared if
the question were rightly considered, as a question of facts^
and not as a question of interpretation of facts. Most scien-
tific men refuse to investigate psychic phenomena for the
reason that they object to the interpretation of those phenom-
ena which the spiritist puts upon them, and do not seem to
realize that the facts, as such, exist, whatever interpretation
we choose to put upon them; that the question of whether
a table is raised off the floor without visible support, e. g.^ is
one that can be settled by purely scientific means, and is
quite independent of any question of " spiritual agencies,"
or any explanatory hypothesis whatever. The fact is one
that can be settled by direct experiment; the object is to
see whether the phenomenon exists in reality or not. It is
largely owing to the erroneous idea that the prevailing inter-
pretation of the phenomena must be accepted if the facts
themselves arc, and that the two are inseparable, that scien-

821


322 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

tific men have held aloof from the quesiioo until late jean,
and even now the savants are approaching the subject in
fear and trembling!

A tremendous amount of prejudice has existed in this fiddt
and against the investigation of the phenomena from the
very commencement of its study. Huxley,* TyndaD,* Fara-
day,' Haeckcl/ all showed themselves highly prejudiced
when it came to this subject; and, worse still, totally igno-
rant of the evidence that had been acciunulated by others.
Tiie type of mind still exists, and may be found in the writ-
ings of many scientists to-day. Dr. E. Hart is an example
of tiic newer school, his Hypnotisnij Mesmerism, and the New
Witchcraft being a most self-contradictory and absurd book
from start to finish. Professor Sidgwick of Cambridge,
Kngland« accused him of being ** totally ignorant of the sub-
jivt ho attacked," which was a fact. Snyder (r. New Concep-
tions in Science) and other writers occupy the same position.
It is not the province of this book to attack any writer, or
any sohiH)!, but merely to point out the fact that the major-
it v of critics of psychic phenomena, who have pronounced
against thoir investigation, were not fitted to pronounce judg-
ment u|Hni this branch of science, owing to their lack of
training in this particular field.

T\w quostion is« therefore, whether the phenomena occur,
aM ^tatix), or whether they do not. It is useless to deny them
olt*han«U and ii priori^ since we know far too little about the
uui\crso to say just what phenomena are possible and what
aiv not. In a gi'noral sense, doubtless, we all feel that there
in a vvrtain lin\it to the ** possible," and that, when it is as-
!»cl■t\^^ tl\at wrtain phenomena occur, which phenomena are
(H\v\M\d tho (hhuuIs of what we consider possible and rational,
thc>o phenomena did not reallv occur but that there must
haw Invn son\o mistake in the evidence or the record, which,
if \li*\vvvn\l, would have enabled us to explain the ph«ioni-

«Mia bv norn\al laws. It is onlv natural that each one of U8

* •

• l\M^^\U C^yHmiUtt ff^>r<, p. 278.

• (>i». *SJ.. ^v ,»3: Fnwnent^t o» Science, pp. 336-42.

• ti^>K^¥tt0. |A# /VttMrtr of Science.

• KUM4 <V tk* Caivvfw. p. 3QS.


General Considerations 323

should have this innate sense of the possible and the impos-
sible, but we should also remember that in each one of us
is this sense limited differently, so that what would be per-
fectly possible and even rational to one man, would be quite
impossible and the height of absurdity to another! And it
is just here that the spirit of toleration should be shown, in
investigations such as these, where so little is known that it
is certainly unsafe to dogmatize and assert, in too offhand
a manner, the limits of the possible. Unless we are omni-
idenU and know all the laws of nature, we cannot say what
is possible and what is not. What the masses think, in these
matters, is of no consequence, since we know that the crowd
is always behind the times in its knowledge and beliefs,^ so
that the whole question is merely one of factt^ which should
be capable of scientific proof or disproof; it is at least en-
titled to scientific investigation.'

As Professor Hyslop so forcibly stated,' ^^ the phenomena
cannot be laughed away," merely, since ** the phencHnena
exist whether they are investigated or not." ^ It is for sci-
ence to see whether they do exist, or whether they are merely
the results of fraud and trickery, or natural laws and causes,
or the combination of all of these. Needless to say, this is
a perfectly legitimate scientific problem, and should be con-
■idered as such.

At the same time I would insist, as strongly as my severest
eritic, that the standard of evidence should be kept very high
in this field, where trickery and fraud are so common, and
credulity so universal. The scientist has little in common
with many spiritualists, and rightly so. His temper of mind
it as different as possible. It is the object of the Society
For Psychical Research and psychical researchers generally
Id fill this gap, and to bridge over the space between the relig-
ions and scientific worlds. It is to make the question of the

* Tk€ Cfwod, p. 72-3.

■ In tids connection, see Proe. 8. P. R,, Vol. XVIIL, pp. 6-6; Mason,
fdepaOiy,p. 110; Evidence for a Future Life, p. 212; There ie No Death,
Jp. 51-2; Miradea and Modem SpirUualism, pp. 14, 15, 35; Hutcbinson,
%Mgm8, pp. 247, 250, 208, etc.

*8deneeand a Future Life, p. 364.

« DiaUetkdl CammiUee Report, p. 231.


324 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

survival of the soul one of icientiflc evidence, u e., cme that
can be settled by actual experiment, just as any other scien-
tific question can be settled by that means.^ It is useless to
say that this can never be so. Spiritualism can be made as
scientific and as legitimate a branch of investigation as any
other branch whatever ; it all depends on the spirit in which
the problem is attacked. No one, who has been saturated
with the scientific spirit to any degree, can fail to appreciate
that there are many objections to psychic phenomena, many
of these being objections to a future life. But it must be
acknowledged that these considerations would be valueless in
face of evidence which would prove this theorizing erroneous.
It is not, after all, a question of theory, but of fact. If the
facts go to prove a future life, or the reality of the phenom-
ena investigated, whatever their nature, it must be acknowl-
edged that theory would be helpless in face of the facts.
What the S. P. R. and investigators along these lines have
endeavored to do, therefore, is to place to one side the theo-
retical considerations entirely, and to devote themselves to a
study of the facts. If these are ever established, it most
be granted that the path is cut for a scientific inquiry into
psychical research phenomena.

It must be acknowledged, on the other hand, that psy-
chical research is as yet in a very crude and imperfect state,
and that next to nothing is known of the laws underlying
the phenomena observed. That is only to be expected, in
a science so new as this. It must be remembered that,
whereas all the other sciences had been preparing for the
great strides of the past century for two hundred and fifty
years, the science of psychical research has only just begun.
When that length of time shall have elapsed, and no results
are perceived, then it will be time enough to begin wondering
whether the investigation of psychical research phenomena
is waste of time or not ! Until that length of time shall have
elapsed, however, it is both useless and premature to specu-

1 This idea has, of course, more or leas influenced the thought of tliB
scientific world since the publication of Drummond's Natural Imw in Ai
SpirUual Waiid.


General Considerations 325

ate as to the ultimate outcome or utility of the phenomena
)b6ervedL

I wish to break off, just here, and consider this question
>f '* utility '' at some length, since it is the question most
frequently asked of all those interested in psychical research
problems in a serious way. It is asked: what is the use of
khese facts, these phenomena? Even granting that they
exist in reality, that they are real facts in nature, and not
the results, merely, of disordered imaginations or fraud
alone; still, of what use are the phenomena? What prac-
tical benefit can be derived from their study?

Were this question put to me I should reply, as I replied
several years ago, ^ propos to this very point: ^What is
the use of any scientific investigation, except to find out facts
generally unknown and unrecognized? Every new truth ac-
quired, every scrap of information gained by persistent
effort is of great importance in helping us to understand
and unravel the mysteries of the universe which surround
08 on every side ; and especially is this the case in our at-
tempts to understand that by which and through which every
phenomenon is known and understood — the human mind.** ^
The mere fact of asking the question shows a sordid, narrow
outlook, colored and influenced only by that which will mate-
rially and at once benefit the investigator himself, with no
thou^t for the welfare of the human race, present or future.
Of any idea of the use of work and effort not obviously con-
ducted for the benefit of the individual himself. A selfish
OQtlocA, truly! It is, moreover, a most unscientific outlook.
No matter whether the facts seem to indicate any useful
purpose or not, so long as they are facts science must inves-
tigate them, or itself cease to be scientific. Its duty is not
to interpret the facts discovered, but to establish their real-
^y. ** No matter where an unprejudiced search after truth
^Xay lead an investigator," says Doctor Ostwald,^ *^ if his
^rk is that of an hcmest scientist, it must and will finally
^m out to be for the benefit of mankind." Mr. W. M.

> Mdapk^Heal MagoMim, January-March, 1903, p. 196.

> IndvMiuiUff and ImmirtiiUy, p. 3*


326 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

Wilkinson, in a letter to Professor Faraday, asked tint
gentleman if Cui bono? *^Yias been introduced into sdenee
as a bar to inquiry, and if so, when? •* ^

It is useless to talk of the ^ use " of any scientific fact; tk
question is : is it a fact at all, or is it not? That, of ooone^
must be ascertained by experiment. But we know that there
are many facts that do actually exist, the use of whidi is
not plain to our limited understanding. As Mr« Lang so
cleverly remarked, in speaking of psychical research prob-
lems in general and apparitions in particular, ^ What is the
* use * of argon? Why are cockroaches 'permitted?'"

This last remark brings me to another consideration, the
objection that is frequently raised by the religious to the
study of these phenomena. '' These are hidden secrets," they
assert, '' which God does not intend us to fathom or know.
God did not intend that phenomena such as these should e?er
happen, in any such manner as to render it possible that they
should be subjected to scientific investigation, so-called, and
often subjected indeed to a materialistic interpretation. The
phenomena cannot exist, as stated; it would be against all
reason, no less than the evidence of Holy Writ! "

To my mind, at least, the answer to the whole objection
again sums itself up into the one question : Do the phenom-
ena really occur? That is the whole issue. If they reaDy
do occur, then God (if we grant that there is a God who
** permits " things) must let the phenomena occur, since
they really take place. If He did not permit them, then they
would not occur. Consequently, there would be nothing to
fear on that score. If, on the other hand, the phenomena
are proved to really exist, then God mtist permit them, for
otherwise their occurrence would be an impossibility. Again*
it is merely a question of evidence, of fact, which only actual
experiment can ever determine.

But these phenomena are immensely important from every
conceivable standpoint. I wish especially to draw attention
to the most important result of studying these phenomena -—
this research — the possibility of thereby proving a future

* Planchette, by Epes Sargent, p. 17.


Greneral Considerations 327

life. " If," says R. D. Owen,^ " if it should prove that
through the phenomena referred to we may reach some
knowledge of our next phase of life, it will be impossible
longer to deny the practical importance of studying them."
Or, as Professor Hyslop so well said,^ ^* If we should add to
telepathy a process involving clairvoyance, premonition, and
the existence of discamate spirits, we shall have extended our
knowledge of the cosmos far beyond all that physical science
has done. And yet this is called * pitifully little ! ' " Indeed,
what can there be of such vast moment to the human race as
the settlement of these problems? Flammarion says,^ "If
it" (psychical research) "helps us to know something of
the humfiufi soul, and affords us scientific demonstration of its
Kirvival, it will give humanity a progress superior to any she
has yet received by the gradual evolution of all the other
idences put together." For, indeed, as Myers so beautifully
remarked,^ "What other effort after knowledge is equally
worth our pains? What possibility lies before mankind of
equal magnitude with this possibility of demonstrating the
existence of an unseen world, and man's communication there-
with or existence therein?"

Finally, it must be remembered that, by the phenomena
of psychical research, and by those only, can a future life
of any sort ever be proved to exist, and so long as this
proof is not forthcoming, the scientific world will continue
its present attitude. It is hardly too much to say that in
psychical research phenomena lies the weal or woe, the ulti-
mate happy fate or disastrous destiny of the human race.

There is, again, an objection that is raised to the study
of psychical research phenomena that they induce certain
morbid or abnormal conditions in the medium, if not in the
aitter, and should not be studied in consequence. A typical
example of this attitude is to be found in a work entitled,
Spiritudlitm and Allied Causes and Conditions of Nervous
Derangement^ by Doctor Hammond. Another good ex-

> FooifdOs, p. 509.

* Enigmas of Psychical Research, p. 305.
■ The UnknovDrif p. vi.

* Science and a Future Life, p. 45.


328 The Physiad PhenonieQa of Spiiitualiam

ample is a little book entitled the PhSasophy of SprUud-
i«M, bj Dr. F. R. Marvin, which has a chapter on **Tlie
Pathology and Treatment of Mediomania,^ treating the
whole thing as a diseased condition of the nervous system, that
should be treated by the regular medical methfids in vogue!
As D. D. Lum said,^ '* The scientist would see in the young
man, not a medium to be developed, but a patient requiring
treatment." The same sort of statonents are to be found
in a feir books of later date, though there is very little that
has be«n said on this line of late, except, perhaps, the absuid
statements contained in The Great Psychological Crime.

\ow, if we come to inquire a little more closely into the
reasons for this attitude toward mediums, we find that it is
because they (the scientbts) have always assumed that any
characteristics that may appear out of the ordinary, in any
individual, are necessarily abnormal and signs of degener-
acy ; and it never appears to have occurred to them to ask
themselves the primary question, May not these conditions
and states be merely different from the ordinary, or may
they not be states illustrative of a higher plane in the evolu-
tionary process — representing conditions which are to be
the normal conditions in some life to come? May they not,
in fact) be in some measure supernormal instead of abnor-
nial, evolutionary instead of devolutionary? This was the
view that Myers adopted, as we know, and which he worked
out so beautifully and at such length in his Human Person-
dlity (Vol. II., p. 85, etc.). The whole confusion arose from
the fact that many scientists (Charcot, Janet, etc.) experi-
mented on hysterical and otherwise abnormal individuals,
and then they asserted that psychic phenomena were found
in hysterical and abnormal persons ! The cart was obviously
placed before the horse, though very many scientists seem
unable to grasp that fact. It was not the psychic phenomena
that induced the abnormal bodily condition, but the abnor-
mal bodily condition merely accompanied the psychic phe-
nomena, f . e,y the two sets of facts were coincidental^ but did
not depend upon one another. If these scientists had experi-

> The SjnrUual Delusion, p. 20.


General Consideratdons 329

mented on healthy persons, they would have found that psy-
chic phenomena occurred in their presence in the same man-
ner as in the cases where the medium was diseased or other-
wise abnormal. I discussed this question at considerable
length in my article in The Metaphytical Magazine (Janu-
ary-March, 190S, pp. 184-94), and quoted a statement of
Miss Groodrich-Freer's which I requote here : " In view of cer-
tain statements that are current as to the physical conditions
of crystal-gazing, I wish to say, as emphatically as possible,
that in my own case these experiments are neither the cause
nor the effect of any morbid ccmdition. I can say positively,
from frequent experience, that to attempt experiments when
mind and body are not entirely at case is absolute waste
of time. The very conditions which might make crystal-gaz-
ing a fatiguing and exhausting process, render it impossible.
I can with equal certainty disclaim, for myself, the allegation
that success in inducing hallucinations of this kind is due in
any way to an Stat nudadif. The four years during which
I have carried on experiments have been amongst the healthi-
est in my life." ^

Doctor Hodgson, in replying to certain criticisms in this
line, also said, i propos of Mrs. Piper: ^* I emphasized the
fact that Mrs. Piper's trances did not involve any personal
suffering by quoting a statement from Mrs. Piper herself
that she had never suffered any physical pain in connection
irith her trances, and that during the past two years, she
Iiad experienced better health than before since she was thir-
teen years old.'* '

All this goes to show that, though psychical phenomena
may accompany many abnormal states of the organism, they
are not inseparable from such states, but may, in fact, occur
through a perfectly normal organism. I cannot do better,
in this connection, than quote the remarks of Doctor Max-
Trelly where he says:

^ Those who have come under the refining influences of
education, instruction, or rank, are the most sensitive,

* See also Phantasms of the Living, 2 vols.

• Proceedings S. P. R., Vol. XIV., p. 396.


330 The Physical Phenomena of Sphritualism

* touchy ; ' but this sensitiveness ought not to be interpreted
as a sign of degeneracy. Certain contemporary savants con-
sider every deviation from the normal state as a blemish!
Such a way of thinking implies a veritable a priori judg-
ment, a begging of the question, which is detrimental to the
true development of scientific thought. The normal man is
only a mean term ; there are individuals who are inferior to
the mean, there are others who are superior to it. . • • The
nervous system of the imaginary average man is but an
abstraction ; in reality, the sensibility of the nervous system
of the different human individuals varies inunensely. A
negative variation will bring beings who are less sensitive,
less delicate than those of the average type ; a variation in
the positive sense will give individuals of a more sensitive
and more delicate type. To consider either as abnormal is
only grammatically true: the former is infra-normal, the
latter ntpra-normal. The first have not reached the average
level, and the second have passed it. . . . We might just as
reasonably insist that Europeans are in degeneration, because
they are more emotional and more sensitive to pain than ce^
tain savage tribes. • . . The attitude of certain learned
centres — it is with intention I do not say the most cultured
— is, to me, similar to that of ecclesiastical authorities in
the middle ages. . . . Their attitude prevents the most cul-
tured, the most capable mediums from allowing their psychic
faculties to become known. If these mediums speak of
visions, a douche would be recommended ! If they caused a
table to move without contact, the words hysteria and fraud
would be heard. Is it surprising they should hide their
gifts? Wc ought to consider mediums as precious beings,
as forerunners of the future type of our race. Why should
we only see degeneracy round us? Why should we not see
superior beings ahead of us, beacons, as it were, on the route
we have to follow? " ^ Andrew Lang has some very humor-
ous remarks to offer on this subject also: see his Dreams and
GhostSy and the Introduction to Thomas's Crystal Gasang*
p. xlv, etc.

* Metapsychical Phenomena, pp. 61, 394-6.


General Considerations 331

I cannot now stop to consider the objections that have been
raised to the study of spiritualism, from the religious stand-
point. I have stated my own position in this question on p.
S869 and those individuals who desire proof that the study
of spiritualism is not contrary to Biblical teachings I would
refer to the first 181 pages of Robert Dale Owen's Debatable
Land between This World and the Nexty which is virtually
a dedication to the clergy. Indeed, how any one who accepts
the miraculous element in the Gospels ^ can reject the modem
phenomena, or rather the theoretical possibility of the mod-
em phenomena, is beyond the comprehension of the present
writer. As Florence Marryat pointed out,* "From the
period when the Lord God walked in the Garden of Eden,
and the angels came to Abraham's tent, and pulled Lot out
of the doomed city; when the witch of Endor raised up
Samuel, and Balaam's ass spoke, and Ezckiel wrote that the
hair of his head stood up because a ^ spirit ' passed before
him, to the presence of Satan with Jesus in the desert, and
the reappearance of Moses and Elias, the resurrection of
Christ himself and his talking and eating with his disciples,
and the final account of John being caught up to Heaven
to receive the Revelations, aU is spirittLalism^ and nothing
dse. ... If it be impossible that the spirits of the departed
can communicate with men, the Bible must be simply a col-
lection of fabulous statements ; if it be wrong to speak with
spirits, all the men whose histories are therein related were
sinners, and the Almighty helped them to sin. ..." A
most rational account of the Old Testament miracles, ex-
plained from the spiritualist's standpoint, will be found on
pp. 119-43 of Hudson's Scientific Demonstration of a
Future Life^ and of the New Testament miracles in his Laxo
of Psychic PhenoTnena^ pp. 888-99.

But it is not my intention to enter the disputed field of
theological discussion in a book of this character, which is
intended to be devoted to the scientific side of the question
altogether, the examination of fact. Those of my readers

' F* The Miraculous Element in the Oospeis, by Dr. A. B. Bnioe.
• There Is No Death, p. 16.


332 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

who are interested in the theoretical and religious side of the
question may find many works in which it is discussed at
great length.

Philosophy is virtually useless when it comes to this ques-
tion of the survival of the soul — of ** life after death."
Whether the soul continues to exist apart from the physical
organism is not a question that can be settled by a priori
speculation, but by facts alone. The question before us is
not a philosophical question, but a scientific one. The posi-
tion of the scientific world is simply this : is there or is there
not any scientific evidence that thought and consciousness
continue to exist apart from brain-functioning? They are
not concerned with questions as to the nature of the soul, or
whether " reincarnation " or ** conditional immortality," or
what not, is the most rational fate of the soul; their ques-
tion is, has man a soul? And to those who at once reply
** yes,*' they say, if so, show me evidence of the fact, for
otherwise I have every reason to doubt that any such thing
as a ^^ soul " of a conscious sort exists. In this world, they
will say, the only knowledge of any mental or spiritual life
we know is invariably bound up with the nervous tissue, and,
apart from the functioning of such nervous tissue, we have
no knowledge of any mental or spiritual life existing. If it
does exist, where is the evidence for that fact? and if such
proof is not forthcoming, it is only natural to suppose that
the average scientist should continue in his present lines of
skepticism. If a future life is ever to be proved, therefore,
the proof must be scientific evidence, and not argument and
speculation. As Professor Hyslop remarked, ** Philosophy
is helpless and worthless for proving a future life."

It is to the credit of psychical researchers that they have
realized this fact, and attempted to meet science on its own
ground, by producing the required facts in the shape of
phenomena which, apparently at least, prove the existence
of a soul of some sort, active and alive apart from the phys-
ical organism. It must be pointed out that the earlier inves-
tigators in this field fully realized the difiiculties that must
be encountered, and the importance of factSj as such, quite


General Considerations 333

Murt from any theoretical deductions that were to be drawn
-om the facts.^ Crookes and other men of his type merely
worded the phenomena, without attempting to account for
lem. Crookes especially stated (p. 4) that he had seen
othing to convince him of the spiritual theory, though he
od seen many facts he could not explain by any of the
down laws in nature.

In any discussion on spiritualism, therefore, we must con-
ne ourselves to the real question at issue, and not be led off
ito various side issues, which, in reality, have no real bear-
ig on the case at all. The real question is simply this : are
iiere or are there not certain phenomena which would seem
i> suggest that a soul of some sort continues to exist after
he death of the physical body? This can be made a scien-
[fie problem, since we have made it one of evidence, of fact,
nd it can be discussed and settled as any other problem can.
Vhether certain material objects move or not, or whether
hey are conveyed through closed doors or not, is beside the
ase, and has nothing to do with the question at issue;
jid hence their proof or disproof can have no lasting
ofluence upon spiritualism or psychical research inquiry,
rhe real problems still remain open, unsolved.

Professor Hyslop summed up the whole question in his
Jcience and a FtUure Life (pp. 94-5), as follows:

^With philosophic and scientific speculations on the na-
ure of matter or spirit disqualified by the facts which show
hat consciousness appears to be a function of the organism,
rhatever the * nature ' of matter or spirit, the only resource
B to see whether there are phenomena that will render prob-
Jble or prove that consciousness survives as a fact, not as a
onsequence of some speculative theory about the * nature '
»f things ; for the * nature ' of things has to be determined
dentifically by the facts which show what it actually does,
lot by what we can imagine to be possible. Can, therefore,
my facts be shown that at least suggest the probability that
re survive death? "

That is the whole question in a nutshell. Spiritualism is

* F. Crookee's Researches in Spiritualism, pp. 4, 10, etc.


334 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

a psychological and not a physical problem, or should be
considered so. Even when genuine physical phenomena are
observed, the interest, from the spiritualist's standpoint, ii
the amount of intelligence connected with the manifestations;
the manifestations themselves falling into altogether another
category. They should be investigated, it is true, just as
any unexplained facts should be investigated; but they are
quite apart from the real problem of ^'spiritualism," and
have no real influence on the main problems concerned. It is
most important that this distinction should be kept clearly in
mind.

It is extraordinary that Professor Wallace takes the pre-
cisely inverse view of this, in this question, considering the
physical problems the important mies, and asserting that
^* the purely mental phenomena are generally of no use as
evidence to non-spiritualists, except in those few cases where
rigid tests can be applied; but they are so intimately con-
nected with the physical series, and often so interwoven with
them, that no one who has sufficient experience to satisfy him
of the reality of the former, fails to see that the latter form
part of the general system, and are dependent on the same
agencies." ^ This, it seems to me, is placing the cart fairly
before the horse. It is only fair to state, however, that this
was written before the evidence in the case of Mrs. Piper had
assumed its present proportions and character.

I wish to say a few words on the subject of the ** condi-
tions " that are imposed upon the sitters at all spiritualistic
meetings. It is hardly necessary to point out that the vast
bulk of these so-called " conditions " are merely imposed by
the medium in order to render possible the operation of cc^
tain tricks and fraudulent manipulations which more exact
scientific conditions would render impossible. If the medium
finds that he is unable to produce certain phenomena at cer-
tain times because he finds that the watch placed upon him
is too strict, he asserts that the conditions are not favorable?
and makes his sitters change places (allowing some sitter a
little less vigilant to sit next to him), or in other ways ar

* Mvrades and Modem SpirUualiem, p. 200.


Greneral Considerations 335

ranges the conditions of the stance to suit himself. The
alters cannot do otherwise than accept these conditions, as
ID phenomena at all will occur imless they are fulfilled,
rhere is no choice in the matter.

It must be pointed out, on the other hand, that, if genuine
phenomena ever occur at all, then it is not only probable, but
certain that they occur in accordance with laws of their own,
Rrhich laws the medium may be supposed to know more about
khan any one else, since the phenomena occur through him.
Just as it would be absurd for any one knowing nothing
of photography to insist that the photographer produce
photographs without the use of the dark room and developer,
just so is it absurd to lay down rules and laws in this work,
about which we know nothing certain. ^* Conditions " of
some kind are most certainly to be expected, and they must
be granted, whether these ** conditions ** are physical posi-
tions or altered mental states. The ^^ conditions " asked or
required must be granted, if we expect to receive any phe-
nomena at all.

It may be objected to this, however, that I thereby allow
the medium opportunity to cheat his sitters, and therefore
abandon the scientific attitude toward these phenomena. I
reply that I have by no means done so. I admit that certain
^ conditions " are very likely required, and should be granted
— up to the point when they cease to prohibit the practice
of fraud. The moment the " conditions " requested are such
that they render fraud possible, then they should cease to
be granted, or, if granted, the phenomena that transpire at
that stance ought to be considered as not produced under test
conditions, and hence of no scientific value. The whole ques-
tion is whether the imposed conditions are such as to render
fraud possible or not.

One other consideration. The fact that so much fraud
has been discovered, in the history of spiritualism, does not
imply that all the physical phenomena that have occurred in
the history of the subject, since its initiation, have been
fraudulent, but rather that there must, at the first, have been
some genuine manifestations to copy. Andrew Lang has


336 The Physical Phencnnena of Spiritualism

called attention to the extraordinary similarity and agree-
ment between the various psychic phenomena that occury in
various parts of the globe, and in the same part at different
periods of the world's history. This, in itself, is a most
striking fact. Of course fraudulent mediums can lean
tricks from one another, and it is not only probable but cer-
tain that the vast majority of modem occult phenomena
have been merely handed around in this manner from one
fraudulent medium to another. But it is hardly to be sup-
posed that savages, in various parts of the earth, should
also exchange this information on the latest methods of pro-
ducing certain manifestations! And the question at once
arises also, whom did the first mediums copy? There mij
be much fraud in modem spiritualism, in fact, I am disposed
to believe that fully 98 per cent, of the phenomena, boUi
mental and physical, are fraudulently produced, but a care-
ful study of the evidence, ccmtemporary and historic, has
convinced me that there must have been iotne genuine phe-
nomena at the commencement of this movement, in order that
the first mediums may have copied them by fraudulent meansi
and that a certain percentage of the phenomena occurring
to-day is genuine. As Mr. Lowell said,^ " A counterfeit
implies a genuine, and a shammer something to sham."

I emphasize this the more strongly because of the attitude
certain psychical researchers have assumed in this matter,
they having a tendency to assert that all the observed phe-
nomena must necessarily be fraudulent, because some are
proved to be so. A number of phenomena of a certain class
are proved to be fraudulently produced, and they conse-
quently assert that all the recorded phenomena of that class
must be fraudulently produced also! Now, although this
method is a very tempting one (I, myself, have felt the
temptation in the preparation of this volume, not to give
certain historic cases their due value, because so much has
been explained by fraud?) it seems to me that it is a very
unscientific and unfair one to pursue. I entirely disagree
with the method of attack by Mr. Podmore, on the Home

* Occult Japan, p. 89.


Geiend Considerations 337

stances, conducted by Sir William Crookes, for example. It
seems to me that Mr. Podmore has attacked the weak evi-
dence, the tests that are more or less easy to explain as con-
juring, and suggestive of trickery, and pointed out their
defects; and then, when he came to the phenomena that
could not be explained on his hypothesis, he calmly asserted
that they were due to hallucination! Why were not the
, simpler phenomena due to hallucination also, if that is the
case? It seems to me that Mr. Podmore has accepted just
as much of the Home stances as he cared to accept, and
asserted the rest did not occur at aU, which is to me a very
unscientific way of looking at the matter. If the phenom-
ena were genuine, on the other hand, it may very readily
be granted that the same laws and the same forces which
were operative to produce the more startling effects were
also operative in the production of the lesser. The differ-
ence would be one of degree only. I have so much admira-
tion for Mr. Podmore's general method of handling the sub-
ject, however, that I refrain from further comment of an
adverse character upon his work. We are all open to weak-
nesses and imperfections in our judgment of certain matters.
Mr. Podmore's weakness seems to me to be to over-generalize
from a limited number of facts.

After the above criticisms, I am glad to be able to quote
a passage from Mr. Podmore's Modem Spiritudlism (Vol.
I., p. 250), with which I heartily agree. It is :

** We may feel assured that, in one form or another, the
belief in such marvels, as it has revived again and again
in the past, will manifest itself again and again in the gen-
erations to come; and history shows that those who sneer
at such credulity without attempting to understand its causes
are perhaps themselves not the least likely to fall victims,
precisely because they do not understand." Therefore, our
first duty is to understand as much as possible in this line of
research, in order that we may not be led into believing any-
thing which is untrue; that is not, in fact, what it appears
to be. One of the most essential qualifications of any one
undertaking the investigation of psychical research phe-


338 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualiam

noroena (besides being possessed of an open and impartiil
mind, and what Professor Sidgwick so well called ^ibe
higher common sense**), is that he should be thoroug^j
familiar with all the modes and methods of trickery that are
in use, in order that he may detect the spurious, and appraise
the genuine; and it is the object of this book to enable him
to do that, and is not by any means an attempt to divert him
from the path of investigaticm, or to assert that spiritualism
is false from start to finish, and that no genuine phenomeos
are to be found by the impartial searcher after truth. Such
is by no means my belief. If I had to adhere to any creed
now in existence, that creed would be spiritism, beyond a
doubt. Even the author of The Revelatiam of a SpbrU
Medium^ a man who, for twenty years, produced the phe
nomena that converted hundreds to the belief, and who knows
the disgusting details of the frauds practised from A to Z,
stated (p. SSI) that he himself was ^^more spiritualist than
anything else," and advised his readers to go on investi-
gating, for, ^* you will find in the chaff that is so plentiful,
some good grains."

Rightly interpreted, modem spiritualism is nothing more
than the belief that a conscious soul of some sort continues
to exist after the death of the body, and that it is possible,
by certain means, at certain times, to get into communication
with that soul. The former of these two beliefs is held by
every one who is not a materialist ; while the second is simply
a question of evidence. It seems to be a most sane and rea-
sonable creed. The sanest summing-up of this question that
I have ever come across is to be found in a little pamphlet
entitled Spiritualism: the Argument in Briefs by Rev. Aus-
tin Phelps, and I cannot refrain from quoting this passage
here. It runs:

^* But the case which spiritualism as a religious system
presents to us concerns chiefly a residue of facts, after very
abundant deductions from its claims as a whole. Take the
crude mass of the phenomena alleged, and set aside a certain
proportion, large or small, as you please, to the account of
the rascality which the system somehow attracts to itself, fts


General ConsideratioiiB 330

Ube ship's bottom does bamades. Strike oiF another portion,
mm probably due to the honest exaggeration of credulous or
pirejudiced observers. Cancel another section, as explicable
hj * electric ' laws, or by principles of the animal economy,
and specially by laws of disease well known to science. Ig-
■ore, if you must, everything else that is purely physical, as
likely to be one day explained by physical laws yet to be
discovered. Eliminate something more for the incertitude of
psychological research, when pressed beyond the facts of the
general ccmsciousncss. After all these deductions, spiritual-
ism is apparently right in claiming that a residuum of fact
remains, which goes straight to the point of proving the
presence and activity of extra-human intelligence. For cme,
I must concede this, at least, as a plausible hypothesis^
(pp. «4-6).


CHAPTER XIX


KAPS^

Ths methods that are employed in fraudulently produc-
ing raps have been described on pp. 77-83, and for any
further detailed consideration of historical cases I refer my
reader to Mr. Podmore's Modem SpirituaUsm^ before men-
tioned. In a volume of this character, I cannot even attempt
to touch upon the evidence for rapping, as a genuine phe-
nomenon (that the historical cases afford), but must content
myself with quoting a few of the most remarkable cases on
record (or, at least, what appear to me to be the most re-
markable, for doubtless opinions differ as to the rdative
value of the respective cases), and stating my reasons f<^
believing that such phenomena do sometimes occur, how-
ever rare such genuine cases may be. I may begin by quot-
ing one or two cases that appear to me to be typical, and as
affording the best evidence that I have been able to find : and
it must be admitted that the evidence is at least imposing and
suggestive, if not absolutely convincing.

" On one occasion," writes Professor Barrett,* " when no
one else was in the room, and it was broad daylight as usual,
I asked my young friend the medium to put her hands
against the wall and see how far she could stretch her feet
back from the wall without tumbling down. This she did,

' I should like to say a few words in answer to the objection that it
would be undignified for spirits to waste their time rapping on tables, etc.
(1) It is simply a question of fact — not speculation — wnether they do
or not. (2) '* If Queen Victoria or Georee Washington wished to enter a
room, in this world, it was not considerea beneath their dignity to tap on
the door " (Savage, Can Tdepaihy Explain f pp. 30-1). (3) It is highly
probable — by analogy from the Piper case — that the spirit is unaware
it is manifesting in raps. That may be merely the phjrsical form in
which the thoughts are automatically registered.

» Proceedings 5. P. R., Vol. IV., p. 30.

940


Raps 341

and, whilst in this constrained condition, with the muscles of
the arms and legs all in tension, I asked for the knocks to
come. Immediately a brisk pattering of raps followed my
request. All the while the child remained quite motionless.
My reason for making this experiment was to test the late
Doctor Carpenter's muscular theory of the cause of the
sounds. Had Doctor Carpenter been present, I feel quite
sure he would have admitted that here, at any rate, that
theory fell through."

The next series of experiments are those of Sir William
Crookes. They will be found described in full in his book.
Researches in Spiriiudlismj to which I would refer the reader.
I might summarize one series of experiments, perhaps, as
follows. On a table was placed a tightly stretched mem-
brane, forming a sort of drumhead. The lower side of this
rested on the table, so that the apparatus really resembled a
tambourine more than anjrthing else. Now, without having
the apparatus explained to her in any way, a lady was
brought into the room, and requested to place her hands an
the table on which the drumhead rested, so that no contact
whatever was possible between the membrane and the hands
of the medium. But, to make assurance doubly sure. Sir
William placed his hands over those of the medium, in order
to detect any conscious or unconscious movement on her
part. (All this was in full light.) The account goes on:
** Presently percussive noises were heard on the parchment,
resembling the dropping of grains of sand on its surface.
At each percussion a fragment of graphite which I had
placed on the membrane was seen to be projected upward
about l-60th of an inch. . . . Sometimes the sounds were
as rapid as those from an induction coil, whilst at others they
were more than a second apart '* (p. 89).

,The description of the various kinds of raps noticed at
different times is most interesting. On p. 86 we read : *^ The
popular name of ^ raps ' conveys a very erroneous impression
of this class of phenomena. At different times, during my
experiments, I have heard delicate ticks, as with the point of
a pin, a cascade of sharp sounds as from an induction coil


342 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

in full work, detonations in the air, sharp metallic taps, a
cracking like that heard when a f rictional machine is at work,
sounds like scratching, the twittering as of a bird," etc

Again, on p. 87, Sir William writes:

** I have heard them (the raps) in a living tree, on a sheet
of glass, on a stretched iron wire, on a stretched membrane,
a tambourine, on the roof of a cab and on the floor of a
theatre. Moreover, actual contact is not always necessary;
I have heard these sounds proceeding from the floor, walk,
etc., when the medium's hands and feet were held, when she
was standing on a chair, when she was suspended in a swing
from the ceiling, when she was enclosed in a wire cage, and
when she had fallen fainting on a sofa. I have heard them
on a glass harmonicon, I have felt them on my own shoulder
and under my own hands. I have heard them on a sheet of
paper, held between the fingers by a piece of thread passed
through one comer. With a full knowledge of the numeroni
theories which have been started, chiefly in America, to ex-
plain these sounds, I have tested them in every way that I
could devise, until there has been no escape from the convic-
tion that they were true objective occurrences not produced
by trickery or mechanical means.*'

The next experiments I shall mention are those conducted
by Professor Maxwell, quoting them from his Metapsychicd
Phenomena. No one has made a closer study of raps and
telckinetic phenomena than the author of this work, and his
experiments have all been conducted recently^ thus disposing of
one very forcible objection to the older series of experiments.

I shall first quote some general observations of the author,
passing on to accounts of actual phenomena witnessed by
him. These seem to confirm the observations of Sir William
Crookes in a very striking manner, agreeing with them, in
many respects, in great detail. For this reason it would ce^
tainly appear that the phenomena observed by these gentle-
men were genuine ; otherwise the coincidence is most difficult
to explain.

" Raps may be given upon various articles, with or with-
out contact, and even at a certain distance from the medium*


Raps 343

I have observed some that burst forth as far as nme feet
away from the mediunl. ... I have heard them on cloth,
on the medium's or sitter's garments, etc. I have heard them
on pieces of paper placed on the stance-table, on books, on
the walls, on tambourines, on small wooden articles, and par-
ticularly on the planchette which was used for automatic
writing. I have also observed very curious raps with a writ-
ing mediiun, — when he wrote automatically, raps resounded
with extreme rapidity at the end of the pencil. I can affirm
that the pencil did not strike the table, for several times I
very carefully put my hand on the opposite end of the pencil,
and I was then able to verify that the sound was produced
at the point of the pencil, the pencil remaining all the time,
steadily and firmly, on the paper ; the raps resounded on the
wood of the table, and not on the paper. In this case, of
course, the medium held the pencil in his hand " (p. 79). . . .
** I have also heard formidable raps with the two young
girls (this reminds us of the Fox sisters), fourteen and fif-
teen years of age, who were called the Agen mediums. I ob-
served these mediums at their own home, and I also heard
them twice at Bordeaux, when on each occasion they re-
mained for nearly a month. The raps produced by them are
interesting, but they do not seem to me to be demonstrative.
• . . When the two girls were in bed, loud raps were heard
near their feet, seemingly given on the wood of the bed. We
were able to observe the apparent immobility of the children.
Raps were also given on the blankets ; the raps appeared to
be produced under our hands " (p. 76). I do not give this
case as a proof of the genuine nature of the raps, but as
showing the similar character of the raps, on this occa-
sion, to those of the Fox sisters many years before.
Such precise similarity of fraud seems to me to be improb-
able, while, if the phenomena should be proved to exist, as
actual facts in nature, this similarity would be highly in-
teresting and significant. One of the most striking cases I
have ever read, however, and one that converted me to sl
belief in the reality of the genuineness of these raps, is the
following, which I again quote from Doctor Maxwell's Meta-


344 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

psychical Phenomena^ p. 278. After giving an account of a
number of experiences with a psychic, by name M. Meurioe
(who is not, by the way, a professional medium, but a cul-
tured gentleman, and friend of Doctor Maxwell for many
years, and who takes, moreover, but slight interest in the
phenomena occurring through him), the passage goes on:
^^ Some of the messages given in this chapter were obtained
while out walking with the medium. On such occasions, M.
Meurice would put his hand on a walking-stick or on an um-
brella ; he preferred the latter. * The raps on the open
umbrella are extremely curious,' writes Doctor X. * We have
heard raps on the woodwork and on the silk at one and the
same time; it is easy to perceive that the shock actually
occurs in the wood, that the molecules of the latter are set
in motion. The same thing occurs with the silk; and here
observation is even more interesting still ; each rap looki like
a drop of some invisible liquid falling on the silk from a
respectable height. The stretched silk of the umbrellA is
quickly and slightly but surely dented in; sometimes the
force with which the raps are given is such as to shake the
umbrella. Nothing is more absorbing than the observation
of an apparent conversation — by means of the umbrella —
between the medium's personifications. Raps, imitating
a burst of laughter in response to the observer's remaib,
resound on the silk like the rapid play of strong but tin;
fingers. When raps on the umbrella are forthccmiing, U*
Meurice either holds the handle of the mnbrella, or some
one else docs, whilst he simply touches the handle very lightly
with his open palm. He never touches the silk.* "

To my mind this is practically convincing. At least I can
conceive no better evidence than this, recorded in the waj it
is, for phenomena of this kind, if we are to trust the observa-
tions of others at all. I do not say that this experiment
will convince all who read it ; it would be surprising indeed
if it did ; but, personally, I can see no reasonable loophok
by which a belief in this phenomenon is avoided in such an
experiment as the foregoing. Confidence in the recorder, of
course, is a very great factor, and though I have never met


Raps 345

either of the gentlemen whose records I quote, their style
and manner of recording the phenomena they observed)
causes me to have implicit confidence in their record, and to
feel that, if I had been there, I should have felt and believed
exactly as they did. That, after all, is the great test.

On p. 991 J Doctor Maxwell states that he has heard raps
occur simultaneously on the chair, the floor, and on a table
standing *^ a foot away " from the medium. And on pp.
309-10 is reported the following most interesting experiment :

** Then I tried an experiment. ... I bade M. Meurice
sit in an armchair and lie perfectly still. I placed his arm
at about one foot from the table and told him to fancy he
lifted his arm and struck the table, without, of course, mak-
ing the slightest movement.

" We obtained some excellent raps in this way. This is a
fine experiment, for it shows clearly the production of raps
by the viU — the direct, conscious, and personal will.

'^We tried three series of experiments: six raps in each
series were willed; we received four raps in each, that is to
say, 66 per cent, of success. The raps were loud, one was
dcMible. The medium nearly fainted after this experiment,
but came round quickly, though he has not been well since.

'^His sensations were: (1) absence of sensation in the
aim with which we were experimenting; (S) a kind of breeze
issuing from his shoulder. After willing the raps, he was
never sure of success, he did not feel the wood had been
touched. Sensibility appeared to be exteriorized."

A very interesting case has recently been reported in The
Annals of Psychical Science (September, 1905), by M. Hjal-
mar Wijk, under the title: " Karin: A Study of Spontane-
ous Rappings." The phenomena appear to be very well
substantiated in many ways, but here we read that :

^The various attempts made by Karin to influence the
phenomenon by her will seem to show that such influence,
when it took place, never could be exercised directly^ but only
by way of a subconscious mental state that lay beyond the
control of her will " (p. 166).

This is doubtless the usual method of control, in such cases.


346 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

The conscious mind seems to have direct control over the
phenomena only in the rarest cases. The directive mind is
the subconscious, and I venture to suggest that the analogy
between these phenomena and those of experimental thought-
transference is close. It is certainly suggestive. M. Wijk
has suggested a most ingenious method of bringing these
phcn(Hnena under control, which I cannot refrain from quot-
ing now. Realizing that the phenomena are practically al-
ways under the influence of the subconscious mind, and hence
removed from our direct control, in most cases, he goes on:

^^ The phenomena presented by mediums are, in general,
like the rapping in this case, the expression of an intelli-
gence that one may generally assume as having its root in
the medium's secondary consciousness. Should we not, by
means of hypnom^ be able to get at this secondary con-
sciousness through suggestion; transform it as we please,
and in that way subordinate the physical phenomena con-
nected with it to our will — produce them, stop them, or
modify them at pleasure? " (p. 160).

These quotations will doubtless be sufficient to show the
reader that raps do occasionally occur, under conditions that
render it practically impossible to account for them on any
theory of fraud. At least, the cases are strong and numer-
ous enough, it seems to me, to form a prima facie case for
investigation, which should accordingly be undertaken by a
body of men especially fitted for the task. It need scarcely
be pointed out that, if genuine raps do occur, it is a most
important fact for science, and the question should be defi-
nitely settled, if possible, one way or the other. Yet, strange
to say, the question of raps has been all but entirely over-
looked by all investigators in this field, even the S. P. R. hav-
ing ignored their study. Well may Mr. Bennett exclaim,
" Is there, through the whole series of the Proceedings and
Journals, the record of one single attempt to solve the prob-
lem of the * rap,' or even to settle the question whether the
rap is an abnormal fact or not? " ^

The Society would doubtless reply to this that the silence

^ Twenty Years of Psychical Reaearchf p. 48.


Raps 347

has been on enforced one, due to a scarcity of phenomena,
rather than to any unwillingness to investigate the phenom-
ena should they occur; and that is doubtless very largely
true. StiUy one feels that this question of raps has not re-
ceived the attention it deserves, as it is a most interesting
and a most important question to settle one way or the
other.

Before closing this chapter on raps, there are one or two
additional facts I should like to bring forward, as tending
to show that genuine raps do sometimes occur, however un-
controlled and sporadic these phenomena may be. The in-
dications are two in number, and I shall discuss them sepa-
rately. They are: (1) The distinct pectdiarky of the
iowndj which could not, apparently, be produced by any
fraudulent means; and (2) the intelligence displayed by the
rapSf — they frequently displaying a knowledge of facts
unknown to the sitters, or a peculiarity of their own, which
renders it highly improbable, if not quite impossible, that
they were produced, consciously or unconsciously, by the
medium or sitters themselves. Let me quote one or two cas^
by way of iUustration.

(1) Cases illustrating a distinct peculiarity of sound.

The first cases of this character I quote from JacoUiot's
Occult Science in India, p. 2S1. The author is describing a
stance held with a Hindu fakir, this taking place on the
veranda of M. Jacolliot's own house. He goes on :

" The fakir was already in position, with both hands ex-
tended toward an immense bronze vase full of water. Within
five minutes the vase commenced to rock to and fro on its
base, and approach the fakir gently and with a regular
motion. As the distance diminished, metallic sounds es-
caped from it, as if some one had struck it with a steel rod.
At certain times the blows were so numerous and quick that
they produced a sound similar to that made by a hail-storm
upon a metid roof.

" I asked Covindasamy if I could give directions, and he
consented without hesitation. The vase, which was still
under the performer's influence, advanced, receded, or stood


345 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

still, according to my request. At one time, at my command,
the blows changed into that of a continuous roll, like that
of a drum ; at another, on the contrary, they succeeded eadi
other with the slowness and regularity of the ticking of a
clock. I asked to have the blows struck every ten seconds,
and I compared them with the progress of the second-hand
upon the face of my watch. Then loud, sharp strokes were
heard, for a minute and two-thirds" (p. 2S1).

Again, on pp. 246-7, we read the following most interest-
ing account:

** * The Pitris have departed,' said the Hindu, * because
their means of terrestrial communication was broken.
Listen ! They are coming back again ! '

*^ As he uttered these words, he imposed his hands above
one of those immense copper platters inlaid with silver, such
as are used by wealthy natives for dice playing, and almost
immediately there ensued such a rapid and violent succession
of blows or knocks that it might have been taken for a hail-
shower upon a metal roof, and I thought I saw (the reader
will observe that I do not express myself positively in this
respect) a succession of phosphorescent lights (plain enou|^
to be visible in broad daylight) pass to and fro across the
platter in every direction. This phenomenon ceased or was
repeated at the fakir's pleasure.*'

The most convincing case that is given is, perhaps, the
following, however, for the reason that the raps occurred in
the absence of the fakir, when he had predicted they would
occur. At the seance it had been stated that raps would
occur in M. Jacolliot's own room, at a certain hour, he being
alone at the time. Accordingly:

^' As soon as it was dark, I examined all the different
rooms in the apartment, in the most careful manner, and
made sure that nobody was concealed in them. I then raised
the drawbridge, and thus cut off all communication from
the outside.

" At the hour named I thought I heard two blows struck
against the wall of my room. I walked toward the spot
from which the sound seemed to come, when my steps were


V

Raps dm

suddenly arrested by a sharp blow, which appeared to be
produced from the glass shade that protected the hanging-
lamp against gnats and night-butterflies. A few more
sounds were heard at unequal intervals in the cedar rafters
of the ceiling, and that was all. I walked toward the end of
the terrace. It was one of those silvery nights, unknown in
our more foggy lands. The vast flood of the sacred river
rolled silently along at the foot of the sleeping city; upon
one of those steps the outlines of a human form were dimly
profiled. It was the fakir of Trivanderam, praying for the
repose of his dead " (p. 2S9).

Now, one most interesting fact in connecticm with the
above description is this. This same peculiar ^* metallic
sound," produced through the agency of a Hindu fakir,
is also moitioned by another writer who visited India at an-
other time. The writer in this case is, too, a professional
conjurer, ^^ Baron Hartwig Seeman," an observer that cer-
tainly cannot be accused of lack of acuteness, or inability to
detect fraud, should such have existed. Yet, in ignorance
of the observations quoted above,^ he wrote : ^* Convinsamy
bad in the meantime risen, and stretched out his hands
toward the fountain, the sprays of which were diminishing.
Gradually the fakir stepped nearer, and the water ceased to
fall, but in the basin a metallic sound could be heard, similar
to the echo after striking a bar of metal. These sounds
gradually increased and became so numerous and rapid that
they resembled a shower of hail falling on a zinc roof." ^

(S) I now pass to a brief consideration of the second
characteristic of genuine raps, viz,^ their *' personality,"
their apparent knowledge, and individuality. I cannot stop
to quote cases of information given to the sitters by means of

> It would have been impossible for Seeman to have read Jacolliof s
iccoimt, as that was not published until 1884, and Seaman's trip was
cuade in 1872. Nor, on the contrary, would it have been possible
For Jaoolliot to have seen Seeman's account, for the reason tnat, al-
tliough the latter was written in 1872, it was not published until 1891,
BO that the two accounts are perfectly independent, and entirely corrobo-
cafte one another.

* Around the World with a Magician and a JuggUr, p. 64. Compare also
the account of Professor Crookes's experiments.


350 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

raps, since these may be found in great abundance through-
out spiritualistic literature. It need only be said here that
much information has repeatedly been given to the sitters
(by means of raps) that was not in the ccmscious mind of
any person present, and this, not only in the presence of
professional mediums, where fraud is always to be suspected,
but in the case of private mediums, and even in the famflj
home circle. I refer my reader to the remarks in the chap-
ters on ** Table-turning," and on " Trance," etc., for a
further consideration of this aspect of the problem; and,
for the present, I pass on to consider certain peculiarities
in the raps, which would seem to indicate that they are gov-
erned by an intelligence of some sort, and are not produced
by voluntary fraud.

Thus, Doctor Maxwell writes:^

** The sound of the usual rap, on a table, reminds you of
the tonality of an electric spark, while, of course, there are
many variations. In the first place, we must note that the
tonality of raps differs according to the object upon which
they resound. It is easy to recognize by the sound if the
raps are given on wood, paper, or cloth. . • . Their rhythm
is as varied as their tonality. . . . One of the most curious
facts revealed by the observation of raps is their relation
with what I call their personification. Each personified in-
dividuality manifests its presence by special raps. In a
series of experiments that have now lasted for more than two
years, I have had frequent opportunity of studying raps
personifying diverse entities. . . . Sometimes the raps imi-
tate a burst of laughter ; this coincides with cither an amos-
ing story related by one of the sitters, or with some mild
teasing. . . . Not only do the raps reveal themselves as the
productions of intelligent action, they also manifest intelli-
gence in response to any particular rhythm or code which
might be suggested."

Professor Barrett reported a very similar case in Proceed-
ings S. P. B., Vol. IV., pp. 84-6 :

^^ Curious ticking sounds again occurred ; these soon de-

* MeUjtpsychical Phenomena, pp. 81-3.


Raps 351

veloped into louder raps. . . . There was always a remark-
able intelligence and often a jocosity about the sounds, and
when a tune was played on the piano the raps kept time to it."

But the most remarkable thing about these raps remains
to be considered. Not only do the raps indicate that they
are governed by some intelligence, but the raps themselves
are distinct and personal in character, just as handwriting
or the touch of varied individuals on a typewriter or on an
electric keyboard, is different. Each individuality has his
awn particular kind of rap^ and whenever that individuality
manifests, that particular, recognizable rap is given. Thus,
Doctor Maxwell states that an individuality calling itself
** John " always manifests by short, sharp raps, ** like the
manipulation of the Morse telegraph ; " ** a group of four
individualities, who call themselves the ^ fairies,' manifest
their presence by raps resembling high, clear notes " (p. 81).
** Another entity personifies a man for whom I had the deep-
est affection; these raps are graver in character" (p. 82).
^ Light, precipitated raps, weak but abundant, are the sig-
nals of certain personifications which we might call mar- joys,
troublesome guests, whose unwelcome intervention spoils the
experience" {op. cit.).

These statements may be found confirmed in many of the
older works on spiritualism and psychic subjects, one of the
most remarkable cases being that given in The Great Am-
herst Mystery (pp. 138-4). The author (who, by the way,
supplies us with a copy of a sworn affidavit of the truth of
his story) writes:

^ I wish to state, most emphatically, that I could tell the
difference in the knocks made by each ghost (I retain the
author's language) just as well as if they had spoken. The
knocks made by Maggie were delicate and soft in sound, as
if made by a woman's hand, while those made by Bob Nickle
were loud and strong, denoting great strength and evidently
large hands. When he knocked with those terrible sledge-
hammer blows he certainly must have used a large rock or
some other heavy object, for such loud knocks were not pro-
duced by bare knuckles."


352 The Physical PhencHiiena of Spiritualism

Finally, I may state that the reason why I believe in raps
is that I, myself, have obtained them, no other person being
present at the time. These rappings have now practically
^ased, but for a period of four or five weeks, rappings would
begin in my room about the hour of ten o'clock, and continue
until I went to sleep, rather increasing in violence at the time
I went to bed. The next morning these raps had ceased,
and I would not hear one again until about ten or eleven the
next night. I could get no intelligence from these raps, it
is true, and, for that reason, I long hesitated to attribute
them to anything but creaks in the house or in the furni-
ture. Thcj did not sound like creaks, but like loud or soft
knocks upon woodwork, and as though made through thick
cloth, the noise being muffled in the queer manner that would
suggest. I was finally convinced that they were not merely
creaks by the following experience. One night, when the raps
were louder than usual, and were in fact keeping me awake,
I got out of bed and determined to find their origin. After
some search, I located them on my mantelpiece, about the
centre, slightly to the left. There the raps were taking
place, sure enough. I could feel the vibration in the wood,
but could see nothing, though the lights were full on. I
found the spot exactly, and it was a queer sensation to feel
the raps coming under the very spot I was intently watching,
my eyes only a few inches from the wood, and yet be unable
to perceive anything ! The raps, on this occasion, lasted a
few minutes, then gradually grew fainter and died away.
They did not return again that night.

On other occasions, raps have sounded in various parts of
the room, but it is hard to establish the fact that raps of
this character are not merely creaks in the house or furni-
ture, and I never paid much attention to them, after I found
that no answer was to be obtained to spoken or mental ques-
tions. They were very loud, on occasion, and, as before
stated, frequently kept me awake for some time at night
They had a nasty habit of commencing just as I was drop-
ping off to sleep, causing me to awake instantly, with a
queer, unexplainablc feeling of apprehension. This was, to


Raps 353

me, one of the most positive evidences that the raps were not
normally produced — the effect each rap would have on my
nervous system. This was not fear merely, for, in the first
place, I never felt any feeling akin to fear when the raps
were coming; and, in the second place, this feeling would
frequently come just before the rap would be heard. These
raps were distinctively objective, being heard by several per-
sons besides myself, on various occasions. I can produce
their corroborative testimony, if desired.

On one occasion, I placed a package of papers fastened
together with a rubber band, on the couch. Instantly, there
was a loud quick snap, as though the rubber band had been
lifted up and allowed to snap back again on to the papers.

On another occasion I was sitting for planchette-writing.
I can never obtain writing in this manner, though I have
sat by the hour together in an endeavor to procure it. One
evening, my eyes being too tired to permit me to work, I got
out the planchette, about eleven o'clock, and, placing both
hands on it, waited for results. I sat an hour, and nothing
had come but a few vague scratches to which I attributed no
significance. I sat another half -hour, — still no result. By
this time it was growing late, and I was growing impatient.
I, however, made up my mind that I would sit there until I
obtained writing or until something happened if that had to
be till daylight. It grew to be one o'clock, half -past one,
two o'clock, — still no writing! It was growing cold, and
I was about to give up the experiment in disgust, and turn
into bed, when there resounded on the planchette hoard itself
a number of quick, faint raps, precisely the same kind of
raps, I imagine, as those described on p. S4S. For a few
moments, and for a few moments only, it seemed to me that
I could perfectly control these raps, causing them to stop
and commence again just as I willed. The period of time
that I possessed this apparent power was so short, however,
that I may have been mistaken in this, the results being
merely coincidences. At all events the raps came clear and
distinct, for about a minute, and then suddenly ceased. I


354 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

have never tried the experiment again, dreading that long
wait, even in the cause of science!

One other fact is worth notice, though it has nothing to
do with raps, strictly speaking. During the time that the
raps were loudest and most frequent I felt a distinct pres-
ence in the room, or rather in the hallway. My flat is so
arranged that one has to pass the kitchen door in order to
reach the front sitting-room. The door leads off to the right,
a bedroom leading off to the left. This presence I dis-
tinctly felt, standing in the kitchen entrance — so strongly,
at times, that I frequently hesitated a moment before walk-
ing past the door. This feeling lasted about two weeks,
while the raps were at their loudest, and then suddenly dis-
appeared. It has not returned since. As I live alone, I
cannot say that this was not purely subjective, since no one
else experienced the sensation, except on one occasion. This
was under conditions that rendered any suggestion from me
out of the question, however, and is well worth recording. A
married couple occupy the flat on the same floor as mine.
I see very little of them, however, though I am on speaking
terms, and had naturally said nothing to them of my ghostly
visitors ; in fact, I do not think I had seen them at all since
the raps commenced.

One Sunday morning, I was sitting at my desk, working,
with the hall door open (it being hot), and I getting a

better " draught " in that manner. Mr. and Mrs.

came out in the hall, he to go ** down-town " on some
business matter, and she to see him down the stairs. I

said " good morning *' to both, and, after Mr. had

gone, Mrs. stepped just inside my door, to say a few

words. As she did so, she suddenly turned sharp round to
the right, and exclaimed, " Well, I thought some one was
standing there ; I felt some one there as plainly as possible."
This seemed to me a very interesting confirmation of mj
own feelings. The raps have now apparently ceased alto-
gether, and I may as well say that I am very well pleased
that they have !


Raps 355

What is the cause of these rappings? WeU, we do not
know ! The scientific world does not as jet believe that they
exist; and until it has been proved conclusively, and to the
satisfaction of all, that such phenomena really do exist,
doubtless but small progress wiU be made. Only when scien-
tific men are assured that the phenomena really do occur
will they undertake to examine them; and how they are to
become convinced of their occurrence until they become demo-
cratic enough to investigate them, is a problem yet to be
solved ! The scientific world must be assured of the existence
of the phenomena before it will condescend to investigate
them. The only way to prove their occurrence is to inves-
tigate them, and the scientific man will not investigate them
until it is proved to him that they exist! How this endless
chain is ever to be broken remains to be seen.

Meanwhile, some patient and fearless investigators have
blazed the path into the undiscovered country, and have re-
turned, telling us of the road we must foUow, and the pit-
falls we are to avoid, if we are to reach the same point in
our journey safely. Almost the only scientific man who has
made a careful study of raps (with the exception, perhaps,
of Sir William Crookes) is Doctor Maxwell, and it is to his
book that I must accordingly turn for what information we
may hope to find, bearing upcxi this important subject. His
instructions to experimenters are as follows :

*^ Contact of the hands is unnecessary when sitting for
raps. I have procured them quite easily with several me-
diums, without such contact.

^^ When we have succeeded in obtaining raps with contact,
one of the best ways of obtaining them without contact is to
let the hands rest for a certain time on the table, then to raise
them very slowly^ palms downward, and the fingers loosely
extended. Under such conditions, it seldom happens that
raps do not continue to be heard for at least a short time."
(This reminds us strongly of table-turning experiments, in
which the table continues to move, occasionally, after the
sitters' hands have all been removed.)

Doctor Maxwell suggests that the causal agency at work


356 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

in all these phenomena is a sort of nervous or vital force,
probably closely akin to Crookes's psychic force only, ap-
parently, more closely allied to the living or organic world
than Crookes conceived the psychic force to be. But I shall
let Doctor Maxwell state his theory in his own words. After
finding that ** all muscular movements, however slight, are
generally followed by a rap " (p. 8S), and that the intensity
of these raps does not vary either in proportion to the move-
ment made, or to the distance of the rap from the medium,
he goes on:

** I have noticed that, with mediums of decided power, it
was unnecessary to adopt any special method for the produc-
tion of raps, as they were forthcoming as soon as any sort
of movement with hands or feet was executed. With strong
mediums, it often suffices to move the hand above the table,
to shake the fingers, to gently press the foot upon the
ground, in order to determine the production of a rap. . . .
It seems as though the execution of a movement acted in the
nature of a determining cause : the accumulated energy then
receives a sort of stimulus, the equilibrium is disturbed by
the addition of the excess energy unemployed in the move-
ment, and a kind of explosive discharge of neuric force oc-
curs, causing the phenomenon of raps. This is, however^
only a working hypothesis. ... I think there is a close con-
nection between psychical phenomena and the nervous system.
What I have just said about the production of raps by the
simple contraction of a muscle under a voluntary nervous
influx is one of the reasons upon which I base my hypothesis.

" There are others. I have often questioned mediums
about their sensations when the raps were being produced.
They all acknowledged a feeling of fatigue, of depletion,
after a good sdance. This feeling is perceptible even to
observers themselves" (pp. 84-7).^

* Doctor Maxwell hae elaborated a very in&;enious " physio-phyBioloj-
ical " theory to account for raps and other physical phenomena, which it
would take too long to detail here. See his book. pp. 166-8, 384-5, etc
He conceives that the rap might be considered as " equivalent to
the noise of a spark " in an electrical discharge. Feelings of cold, appre-
hension, etc., are also recorded; and especially of a violent cramp in the
stomach. This last is very interesting in view of the fact that the feding


Raps 357

This statement receives additional confinnation because
of certain phenomena that have been observed in the case
of Mrs. Piper, many sitters also experiencing this feeling of
depression after a sitting ; and the more successful the sitting
has been, the greater is this subsequent depletion of the vital
forces. In Doctor Hodgson's own case, the effects were
most marked. Doctor Hodgson was, physically, a most pow-
erful and an exceptionally robust man; but, so great was
the vital drain, that he occasionally had to postpone a sit-
ting, because he had not sufficiently recuperated from the
effects of the last stance, and it was, in fact, chiefly on this
account that s^nces were held on alternate days, instead of
iaily, as they were for years. It was not Mrs. Piper's health
tliat was endangered, but Doctor Hodgson's! When con-
iidered in connection with the phenomena just quoted, and
the statement constantly made relative to the depletion of
ntal forces in materializing stances, etc., I think that the
above acts are of especial interest.

a preciselv paralleled in cases of poflseflsioD, etc., in Oriental countries. The
n Lowell's Occidt Japan, p. 91, we read: " The priest averred that at the
noment of possession he aXw&ys felt a violent i>unch in his stomach."
This confinnation seems to me to be very conclusive, since the sources of
he two records are so widely separated.


CHAPTER XX


TSLBKIKESIS


Though there are many ways in which objects may be
moved by fraudulent means, it is very doubtful whether these
methods would account for all the phenomena witnessed in
sporadic cases, of the poltergeist type, e. g.^ or whether we
have to search further for a cause. The most obvious
methods by which objects are generally conveyed from one
place to another is by carrying them there, and we must be
well assured that this has not been possible before we give
credence to any force unknown to science. When the objects
are actually seen to move or to fall from space (apparently)
we have several alternatives to choose from: the objects
may have been picked up and thrown by the medium or by
some other person present, consciously or unconsciously. Or
the movement may have been effected by means of a fine
thread or hair attached to the object, and pulled by the me-
dium. Or the medium may have moved it by means of the
telescopic rod, often spoken of before. Truesdell worked
the thread trick to good effect; so did Slade, and so did
Doctor M onck, and numbers of other mediums. The scien-
tific presumption, of course, is all against the existence of
any such phenomena, and a most suspicious fact, in this
connection, is that they are (and apparently always most
be) sporadic, and never under the control of the medium.
Whenever it has been asserted that these phenomena were
controllable, it has been found that there was some error in
the experiment which vitiated the result. One of the latest
and most instructive of such cases is that afforded by the
investigation of " Cheiro's " instrument to measure psychic
force. " Cheiro *' stated on pp. 168-62 of his Language of
the Hand that he had invented an instrument which would

858


Telekinesis ' 359

register ^ cerebral vibrations," and that by merely xoiUingf
the person so trying could move the indicator-needle, and
produce material evidence of the reality of thought ! An in-
vestigation by two S. P. R. members, however, showed that
the results were due to other, normal, causes.^

After all is said, however, I cannot feel that fraud can
account for all the phenomena that have been observed in
certain sporadic cases, or even in seances. Each person
must form his or her own opinion on a subject of this char-
acter, of course, and that will be influenced largely by the
amau/nt of evidence that has been examined by them — deal-
ing directly and indirectly with the subject. After going
through all the evidence I could readily lay my hands upon,
the distinct impression I received was that certain phenom-
ena of the class known as ^^ telekinetic " do sometimes take
place, and that there must be some force in the world as yet
unknown, and exercising at least a push-and-puU action (for
the evidence for the more complicated phenomena is de-
cidedly weaker, when it ought to be stronger) upon impon-
derable matter. To my mind, at least, it is by no means hard
to conceive the existence of such a force, which, if it were
governed by the same laws as all other physical forces, would
certainly not run counter to anjrthing science teaches to-day,
and the question of its actual existence becomes only a mat-
ter of experiment and proof.

Dr. William A. Hammond proved, by a series of experi-
ments, indeed, that certain electrical conditions of the body,
e. g.f would move objects without any contact on the part
of the medium, merely by approximating the hand to that ob-
ject.^ But in this case, as in all others, we must set aside
a priori considerations in discussing this question, which,
after all, is merely one of evidence. The question is not
whether some such force is rational or conceivable to us,
but whether the facts in the case compel us to accept some
such theory in order to explain them.

^Jaunud, Vol. VIII., pp. 24^60.

^SpirUualism and AUted Causes and Conditions of Nervous Derange
msnt, p. 115, etc.


860 The Physical Phen(»nena of Spiritualism

And here again^ the evidence will be valued very differ-
entiy by various persons reading the reports of the phenom-
ena. But I cannot too strongly point out and insist upon
the fact that, in considering the evidence for the super-
normal, the mind is more convinced by a great mass of evi-
dence than through any single case, no matter how perfect
the conditions may appear in that instance. So that, in
reading the cases I am about to cite, the reader must bear
this fact in mind, and remember that if he wishes to obtain
a real idea of the cumulative force of the evidence, he must
wade through all that is obtainable and be prepared to feel
that the single cases given in this or any other book are in-
sufficient to induce belief, in and of themselves.

The first case I quote from Doctor Maxwell's Metapsg-
chical Phenomena^ p. S23 : ^^ The mantelpiece is covered with
plush. On one comer there is a statuette in porcelain re-
sembling the Thorn; the child is seated on a chair, and is
pulling a thorn out of his foot; the statuette is five inches
high. M . Meurice told me he was going to make this statu-
ette move. I stood near him, with my hand on his back; I
stooped down and looked fixedly and narrowly at the statu-
ette during the whole operation. M. Meurice proceeded ex-
actly as in the preceding experiments, and when his hands
— joined together at the finger-tips — were at a distance of
six inches from the statuette, the latter swayed, bent slowly
forward, and fell over. I affirm most positively that there
was no hair or thread or normal link of any kind whatsoever
between the statuette and the medium's hands. I passed my
hand all round the statuette, before the movement, during
the movement, and after the movement ; I thus verified by
touch, what my eyes were witnessing.'* On the next page is
recorded an experiment in which a piece of sealing-wax fol-
lowed the fingers, in the same manner, and finally fell off on
to the floor.

Here, then, we have the record of certain phenomena which

are not attributable to any known force or agency, but

rather to some force as yet unrecognized by science. If this

. is a fact, it is a most important fact, and in itself answers


Telekinesis 361

the Ciii Bono f of the uninterested. It is true that this force
18 no proof of spiritism, as such ; but that does not matter in
the least. The interpretation may be what you like, the ques-
tion for science is: do the phenomena occur at all? They
are, at all events, phenomena that are only met with in the
investigation of psychical research problems, for without
their investigation, this force, if such it be, could never be
discovered. Neither Sir William Crookes nor any of the
scientific men who investigated these phenomena have been
inclined to attribute the power to spirit agency. The ques-
tion for them was always: Do the phenomena occur? And
the answer to this question they realized could only be settled
by observation and experiment, and not by a priori negation
of their possibility!

The experiments of Sir William Crookes are so well known
to all that it is not necessary for me to do more than refer
to them here. They have been quoted so often before that
they must be known, at least in outline, to all students of
this subject. The experiments were most carefully conducted
and seem to prove pretty conclusively that some force or
power was at work, beyond the mere muscles of the medium.
Doctor MaxweU has cited a number of very striking cases, in
his Metapsychical Phenomena. I have quoted one of these
above. Several remarkable instances will be found recorded
in Jacolliot's Occult Science in India (pp. 2S2, S42, 243,
etc). A large collection of such cases occurring elsewhere
than in a stance-room (which are always to be distrusted)
will be found in Mr. Myers's two papers, " On Alleged Move-
ments of Objects without Contact, Occurring Not in the Pres-
ence of a Paid Medium." *

These cases are very remarkable, and lead us naturally
into a consideration of the alleged ^* poltergeist " cases, of
which so many have been reported in the history of this
subject. The most striking and remarkable case of this
kind I know, is "The Great Amherst Mystery," which I
have quoted elsewhere. It is one of the most thrilling narra-
tives imaginable, though the author endeavored to keep

* Proceedingi, Vol. VIL, pp. 146-98, and pp. 383-94.


362 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

strictly to the truth, which is evidenced by the ** duly sworn "
statement, made before an attorney, *^ that the book was
truth, and contained nothing but the truth," as he, the
author, believed it to be. Several accounts of poltergeist
cases, in which bells were rimg, furniture upset and thrown
about, crockery broken, fires lighted, etc., by no apparent
cause, will be found in Vols. I. and II. of the Journal
S. P. R.9 the results of the investigations of the Society's
members. These are the new and well authenticated cases;
numbers of others will be found recorded in Mrs. Crowe's
Night Side of Nature^ Lang's Dreams and Ghosts^ etc.

Mr. Podmore summarized the evidence for these cases in
a very fine article in Proceedings, Vol. XII., pp. 45-116.*
In this paper, Mr. Podmore showed that a very large pro-
portion of the phenomena were the result of trickery, and
went on to argue that, this being the case, it was highly prob-
able that they were all due to trickery in consequence! I
must confess that, while I am heartily in sympathy with Ifr.
Podmore's general aims and methods in treating the ques-
tion, his logic docs not appeal to me in discussing some of
these poltergeist cases. After a careful study of the evi-
dence, the impression left upon the mind is that there is a
certain residuum of genuine phenomena, mostly telekinetic
in character, that have been imitated in certain cases and
added to in certain other cases; but the residuum is there
nevertheless. Of course it is impossible to argue the case
unless the evidence is all before one, and has been carefuDj
gone over, but, as stated, the general impression left on the
mind (at least on my mind, for one must always speak for
oneself in such matters) is that there was a certain amoant
of evidence for the supernormal, in these phenomena, tboagii
that evidence would not be convincing to any one per se. If
telekinetic phenomena should be proved to exist, in ahtft,
these phenomena would weightily support that evidence; tat
in themselves they are not conclusive, as proving the super
normal. The real evidence, therefore, must be obtameJ

' V. also his Modern Spiritualism, Vol. I., pp. 25-43; and his Shdin^
Psychical Research, pp. 134-62.


Telekinesis 363

from the more directiy experimental cases, such as those
previously quoted.

In stating that there Is a certain amount of evidence for
telekinetic and other supernormal phenomena in these cases,
I was not only governed by a consideration of the exactness
of the observations made, since these were frequently very
bad indeed, but by the actual character of the phenomena
themselves. Just as, in considering the question of '* raps,"
we found that there was a certain weight of evidence in
favor of their genuine character, simply because of some
peculiarity in the nature of the rilps, that would be hard, if
not impossible, to duplicate by fraudulent means; so here,
there are certain phenomena noticed which, if they actually
occurred^ as stated, would be quite impossible to explain by
any process of trickery. One of the most common of these
is the fact, often noted, that the objects seen in flight, do
not (very often) move as if thrown, but with a bIow^ gliding
movement. This has been frequently observed. Mr. Lang,
in his criticism of Podmore's Studies^^ pointed this out, and
severely criticized Mr. Podmore's method of dealing with
these cases. Mr. Podmore replied that he did not consider
his theory (that these were hallucinatory in character) as
satisfactory either, ^^ but I prefer it, as regards the cases
just quoted, to any other hitherto advanced."^ The con-
troversy between Messrs. Lang and Podmore still continues,
but for the present I must leave this branch of the subject
and consider several other characteristics of telekinetic and
poltergeist phenomena which seem to show that they are,
sometimes at least, genuine, and not merely the results of
fraud alone.

In the first place, there is (generally) the pathological
condition of the medium. In nearly all these cases, we read
that the medium was in some sense defective or morbid, either
as to the physical or the mental side of his make-up. Still,
this characteristic might not, after all, serve as proof
of the genuine character of the phenomena, as it might rea-

> Proceedings, Vol. XIII., pp. 604-9.
» Proeeedinge, Vol. XIV., p. 136.


364 The Physical Phen(xneiia of Spiritualism

sonably be urged that these characteristics, this abnormal
bodily and mental condition, predisposed the medium to pro-
duce the phenomena by fraudulent means, consciously or
unconsciously, simply because of the morbid state of mind
accompanying these conditions. These semi-hysterical states
would thus argue, not in favor of the phenomena, but
against them. Nevertheless, there are some cases which can-
not very well be explained in this way. Take, e. g.^ the fol-
lowing account of the medium's condition just before the oc-
currence of a burst of phenomena in the Aniherst Myttery
(pp. 87-8). ** After sitting on the edge of the bed for a mo-
ment, and gazing about the room with a vacant stare, she
started to her feet with a wild yell and said that she felt as
if she was about to burst to pieces. • • . While the family
stood looking at her, wondering what to do to relieve her,
for her entire body had now stooXLen^ and she was screanung
with pain and grinding her teeth as if in an epileptic fit, a
loud report, like one peal of thunder, without that terribk
rumbling, was heard in the room. They all, except Esther,
who was in bed, started instantly to their feet and stood
motionless, literally paralyzed with surprise."

It seems hard to believe that this state was feigned, or
was the result of any fraud whatever. Take, again, the fol-
lowing case, in which the distinctive factor is the peculiarity
of the phenomena observed. The Rev. R. A. Temple, when
visiting the Teed home (where the Amherst phenomena oc-
curred), stated that he saw, among other things, " a bu(M
of cold water become agitated and, to all appearances, boil,
when standing on the kitchen table *' (p. 64). This is a
almost unique occurrence. Not quite so, however, for I
find the same phenomenon recorded on p. 235 of Jacolliofi
Occult Science in India. We there read: " The fakir stood
motionless (with his hands extended over a vase full of eoU
water). The water began to be gently agitated. It looked
as though the surface was ruffled by a slight breeze. Placing
my hands on the edge of the vase, I experienced a slight feel-
ing of coolness, which apparently arose from the same cxast
• . . Gradually the motion of the waves became more vicdeoL


Telekinesis 365

They made their appearance in every direction, as though
the water were in a state of intense ebullition under the in-
fluence of a great heat. It soon rose higher than the fakir's
hands, and several waves rose to a height of one or two feet
from the surface. I asked Covindasamy to take his hands
away. Upon their removal, the motion of the water gradu-
aUy abated, without ceasing altogether, as in the case of boil-
ing water, from which the fire has been removed. On the
other hand, whenever he placed his hands in the former
position, the motion of the water was as great as ever."
This corroborative testimcmy from two such widely sepa-
rated sources as India and Nova Scotia seems to me to be
most interesting and suggestive.

Again, the character of certain sotmds heard, would seem to
indicate that some sort of hallucination, rather than actual
sounds were heard, judging from the description. Thus:
^ A trumpet was heard in the house all day. The sound came
from within the atmosphere — I can give no other descrip-
ticxi of its effect on our sense of hearing." ^ This closely
corresponds to the trumpet sounds frequently heard in the
stances of W. S. Moses; for we find that, in these stances,
Tery much the same phenomenon was observed. Says Mr.
C. T. Speer,* ** . . . We had a sound of which it is ex-
tremely difficult to offer an adequate description. The best
idea of it I can give is to ask the reader to imagine the soft
tone of a clarionet, gradually increasing in intensity imtil it
nralled the sound of a trumpet, and then, by degrees, dimin-
ishing to the original subdued note of the clarionet, until it
eventually died away in a long-drawn-out melancholy wail."
This account would certainly seem to suggest hallucina-
tkm. We know that these sounds are frequently hallucina-
tory in character, as is evidenced by the phenomena of
luaimted houses. Frequent illustrative cases could be given.
3 content myself by quoting one, which has the advantage
ml being observed by a scientific witness. Miss X. writes : ^

> The OreatAnihent Mystery, p. 123.

» SpirU Teachings, p. xv.

' JuUged Haundng of B Emm, p. 119.


366 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

**This morning's phenomenon is the most incomprehensible
I have yet known. I heard the banging sounds after we
were in bed last night. Early this morning, about 5.S0, I
was awakened by them. They continued for nearly an
hour. Then another sound began m the room. It might
have been a very little kitten jumping and poimcing, or even
a very large bird ; there was a fluttering noise, too. It was
close, exactly opposite the bed. Miss Moore woke up, and
we heard it going on till nearly eight o'clock. • • ." This
account would seem to indicate hallucination, at least in
part. The theory advanced by the Hon. John Harris to
account for the facts, in the face of the evidence, seems to
me perfectly absurd.*

Finally, there is the evidence afforded by certain impres-
sions and feelings of the medium, experienced when the phe
nomena are taking place. If the medium is honest, there is
no reason to neglect these subjective impressions; in fact,
they may prove to be of the very greatest use in ultimately
solving these problems. I shall give a few typical examples
of the sensations experienced by mediums, when phenomena
are occurring, leaving out of account all such dubious state-
ments as those made by professional mediums, etc.

These sensations are noticed by all ** dowsers," or, at least,
a very large number of them. I have mentioned this phe-
nomenon in the chapter on raps, and so shall not discuss it
at any length here. Doctor Maxwell gives several instances
in his book. " One of the most intelligent mediums I have
come across describes it as a sensation of cramp in the epigas-
tric region ; it seems to him, at times, as though he were on
the verge of fainting" (p. 119). Then again the "cold
breeze," so frequently spoken of in ghost stories, is very often
experienced in the stance-room. In the Moses case, these
breezes were very numerous. The feeling is recorded several
times in Occult Science in India. Reichenbach mentions it in
his Researches in Magnetism^ etc., p. 69 (though his results
could not, apparently, be duplicated by either the English

* Inferences from Haunted Houses and Haunted Men. By the Hon. John
Harris.


Telekinesis 367

or American S. P. R.).^ At all events, these phenomena,
whether objective or subjective, indicate some abnormal
bodily condition, and, because of that fact, point away from
fraud, pure and simple, as an explanation for aU the phe-
nomena recorded at s^nces. If this is once admitted, then
the study of the mental anl physical conditions of the me-
dium at a s^nce becomes a scientific duty, for there is evi-
dently something here to be investigated. If the scientific
world had come forward boldly, years ago, as it should have,
we might by now know something of the conditions then
manifested, instead of remaining in our present state of ig-
norance.

And this brings me to a consideration of how the phe-
nomena of telekinesis may conceivably be produced — grant-
ing that the phenomena are ever genuine at all. To those
who are convinced that such phenomena ever do occur in '
genuine manner, their explanation becomes both interesting
and scientifically important. Tentative theories as to the
modui operandi involved are advanced in several books that
have been published of late years. Let us for a moment
consider these.

Looked at from one point of view, indeed, there is noth-
ing so very wonderful in telekinetic phenomena, after alL
No actio in distans is necessitated or called for, and there is
no law of the physical world that would be violated by its
acceptance; it is only a question of whether it is a fact or
not. It is quite conceivable^ at least, that the nervous force
which actuates the body might, imder certain exceptional cir-
cumstances, extend beyond the periphery of the bodily
frame, and exert an influence over the external, material
world. Indeed, as Doctor Maxwell pointed out, ** it is not
even necessary to suppose that the nervous force acts be-
yond the limits of the body, if we admit that the experi-
menters create around them a sort of * magnetic field.' The
nervous force would reach a maximum of potentiality in the
experimenters or in the medium; the objects placed within
the field would have a different potentiality; according to

^See Proceedingi, Vol. I., pp. 230-7; American Proceedings, pp. 116-27.


370 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

nection with the superior or inferior nervous centres, con-
scious or unconscious. In this case, we could understand
how the energy appears to depend, to a certain extent, upon
the will of the sitters or the medium. We can even explain
that it should appear to manifest an independent will, if its
production were due to the activity of the nervous centres,
the action of which is independent of ordinary consciousness.
In that hypothesis, none of the sitters would recognize the
trace of their normal personality in the evolution of the
phenomena ; and this is what generally happens. Sometimes,
however, the medium or one of the sitters has the feeling,
more or less precise, that a phenomenon is about to take
place. ... In this case, the nervous energy, employed to
realize the phenomenon, would be in connection with the con-
scious nervous centres of the medium only, and she would
appear to the sitters to be subjected to an extraneous per-
sonal wilL . • • Such appears to me to be the genesis of the
personification, in the greater number of the cases observed
by me. There are others, however, where this explanation is
less satisfactory.** *

I conclude this theoretical discussion of the subject by
quoting a passage from a report of Sir Oliver Lodge. In
discussing telekinetic phenomena, and the fact that fre-
quently associated with the actual movement of an object,
there is a " sympathetic ** movement on the part of the
medium, though this movement has really nothing to do with
the actual movement, as can be proved by the senses of touch
and sight, he goes on:^

" The fact, just recorded, that the medium's body unde^
goes sympathetic or corresponding movements or twitches
is very instructive and interesting. Sometimes, when she
(the medium) is going to push a distant object, she will make
a little sudden push with her hand in this direction, and im-
mediately afterward the object moves. Once this was done
for my edification with constantly the same object, ws., a
bureau in a comer of the room* • . • When six or seven teA

> Meiapaychical Phenomena, pp. 166-7.
» JourncU, S. P. /?., Vol. VL, p. 333.


Telekinesis 371

away the time-interval (between the push and the movement
of the object) was something like two seconds. When the
accordion is being played, the fingers of the medium are
moving in a thoroughly appropriate manner, and the process
reminds one of the twitching of a dog's legs when he is sup-
posed to be dreaming that he is chasing a hare. It is as if
Eusapia were dreaming that she was fingering the instru-
ment, and dreaming it so vividly that the instrument was
actually played. It is as if a dog dreamt of the chase with
such energy that a distant hare were really captured and
killed, as by a phantom dog; and, fanciful as for the mo-
ment it may seem, and valueless as I must suppose such spec-
ulations are, I am, I confess, at present more than half -dis-
posed to look in some such direction for a clue to these
effects. In an idealistic interpretation of nature it has by
many philosophers been considered that thought is the real-
ity, and that material substratum is but a consequence of
thought. So, in a minor degree, it appears here ; it is as if,
let us say, the dream of the entranced person were vivid
enough to physically affect surroimding objects, and actually
produce objective results; to cause not only real and per-
manent movements of ordinary objects, but also temporary
fresh aggregations of material particles into extraordinary
objects; these aggregations being objective enough to be
felt, heard, seen, and probably even photographed, while
they last.''

With these profoundly interesting remarks, I close this
chapter, since I have discussed these theories at greater
length than is warranted in a book of this character. Those
of my readers who are interested in following up the theoret-
ical and speculative side of the question I would refer
to F. W. H. Myers's Human FenonaHty^ VoL 11., pp.


CHAPTER XXI

THE MEDIUlfSHIP OF D. D. HOMB

i. MUceUaneoui Phenomena

It has frequently been said that Home is the only profes-
sional mediuniy in the whole history of spiritualism, who has
noty at one time or another, been exposed in fraud. So far
as it is known, though Home was under far more careful and
prolonged scrutiny than any other medium, fraud was neyer
detected at any of Home's stances, nor was it even suspected
on any occasion. Even Mr. Podmore is bound to admit that
there is no evidence whatever against this medium on this
ground.^ Home always sat in the circle, side by side with
the other sitters, and never made use of a cabinet of anj
sort. He also had a great objection to darkness, and in-
sisted upon as much light as possible on all occasions. In
his Lights and Shadows of Spiritualism^ Home exposed many
of the tricks and frauds which were practised by mediiunSt
and a perusal of that book will convince the reader either
that Home craftily kept back a large number of the best
secrets, or else that he was unfamiliar with them. The eTi-
dence would seem to point to the latter conclusion. Home
stated that he did not believe in the passage of matter
through matter, a phenomenon that was never noted in his
presence,* — this reminding us of Stuart Cumberland's
statement that he did not believe in thought-transference!'
Home, on one occasion at least, offered to change his clothes
just before the stance to show that he had no hidden mechan-
ism in them.* This question of Home's character was very

» Modem Sjnritualism, Vol. II., p. 230.
' Lights and Shadows, p. 416.
» A Thought Reader's Thoughts, pp. 324-5.
* Dialectical Reportf p. 47.

378


I


The Mediumship of D, D, Home 373

carefully considered by Mr. Myers, and he took great pains
to ascertain in every way possible whether there was any evi-
dence against Home that would throw doubt upon his me-
diumship. He could find none, after a most thorough search.
All the letters that were written to Home by various per-
sonages, testifying to the genuine character of the phenom-
ena, and quoted by him in his own books on the subject, were
seen in the original by Mr. Myers, and foimd to be genuine
beyond a doubt. So far as he was enabled to ascertain, there
was not one iota of evidence against Home's character so
far as the records indicated.^

On the other hand, the internal evidence of the books and
narratives seems to afford good ground for supposing that
the phenomena were genuine, one reason being the fact that
the mediumistic power was developed in childhood, and, being
misunderstood by the family, who thought the young medium
was playing tricks, caused him to be turned out of the house,
to seek his own living. It is hardly likely that, if Home had
control over the phenomena, he would voluntarily have car-
lied them to this extent.

However, inasmuch as Home was a professional medium.
We must not let these considerations interfere with our judg-
ment of the phenomena, but must weigh the evidence pro
and con^ and judge each case on its own merit, treating the
case precisely as though we were dealing with a medium who
had been detected in fraud. The moral side of the question,
in other words, must not be allowed to enter into the ques-
Idoii at all, the evidence being judged solely on its face value.
Searing these facts in mind, therefore, we now turn to a
brief consideration of the evidence itself.

The experiments of Sir William Crookes with a spring
balance are, probably, too well known to the majority of my
x^eaders to require any detailed consideration. A board, one
end of which rested upon the table, the other end being sup-
ported by a spring balance, was in position, and Home
placed his hands on the board, at a point just over the table.

» Jaumd 8. P. «., Vol. IV., pp. 101-36, 249-52 ; Vol. VI., —
^mA, 34M.


374 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

It was easy to calculate just how much pressure would be
required at this point, in order to lower the spring balance
to a certain extent, and it could be easily seen, also, whether
Home was or was not exerting this amount of pressure with
his fingers. The movements of the balance clearly showed
that the pressure was far greater than Home could have
exerted by any normal means, even if he had been allowed
free play with his hands, and had not been watched, to see
that he did not exert this pressure. These experiments will
be found described in full in Crookes's Researches in Spir-
itudlismf pp. 84-42. I cannot attempt any detailed consid-
eration of them here. They apparently demonstrate the
existence of some force, which was enabled to move objects
in some supernormal manner, as in the case of this board,
or to produce raps (v. p. 856), or to levitate objects in the
air, without support, as in the case of the wooden lath, which
rose upright of its own accord, and stood upon the table.'
It is conceivable, of course, that some extension of this same
force was that which produced the ** levitations *' of the lue-
dium (v. p. 886).

I now turn to consider, briefly, the celebrated ^ accordion
test.*' It is reported that Home took the accordion by one
end — that furthest from the keys — and, holding it in this
manner beneath the table, the accordion commenced playing
on its own accord, the instrument being seen to open and
close, and the keys to fall, exactly as if some unseen hand
was fingering them. I have described several methods by
which this accordion test might be accomplished by fraud,
on p. 200, but I may say that a careful study of the
evidence in the Home case has convinced me that the ac-
cordion could not have been played by any such means in
these seances. It must be remembered, in the first place, that
these seances were held in the light ^^ and the keys were teen
to be at the end farthest from the medium's hand. Doctor
Savage describes a very similar experience of his own i^
which an accordion played in full light, in a similar manner,'

' Proceedings S, P. R., Vol. VI., p. 123.

• Researches f pp. 84-5.

' Psychics, Facts and Theories, p. 104L


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 375

and an incident of the same character is mentioned in Occtdi
Science m India, p. 248. The difference in the conditions
between the Crookes seances and those of ZoUner, e. g., may
be readily seen by any one reading the evidence in both cases.
One or two quotations from Sir William Crookes's writings
will make this clear. After describing the manner in which
the accordion was held, etcl, and the fact that music was ob-
tained even when all eyes were observing the movements of
the instrument, the account goes on :

** But the sequel was still more surprising, for Mr. Home
then removed his hand altogether from the accordion, . • •
and placed it in the hand of the person next to him. The
instrument then continued to play, no person touching it,
and no hand being near it. . . . The accordion was now
again taken without any visible touch from Mr. Home's
hand, which he removed from it entirely and placed upon
the table, where it was taken by the person next to him, and
seen, as now were both his hands, by all present. I and two of
the others present saw the accordion distinctly floating about
inside the cage with no visible support. ... I grasped Mr.
Home's arm, below the elbow, and gently slid my hand down
until I touched the top of the accordion. He was not mov-
ing a muscle. His other hand was on the table, visible to
all, and his feet were under the feet of those next to him." *

Still more marvellous is the following account, which is the
last I quote of the accordion tests. ^* The accordion was
held by Mr. Home in the usual position under the table.
Whilst it played Mrs. I. looked beneath and saw it play-
ing. Mr. Home removed his hand altogether from it, and
held both hands above the table. During this Mrs. I. said
she saw a luminous hand playing the accordion. . . .
The accordion, which had been left by Mr. Home imder the
table, now began to play and move about without any one
touching it. It dropped on to my foot, then dragged itself
away, playing all the time, and went to Mrs. I. It got on
to her knees.** *

> RueareheSy pp. 13-14.

" Proceedings 8. P. R,, Vol. VI., p. 118.


376 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

The tests conducted by Sir William Crookes were very
carefully carried out. Not only was the instrument held
by the end opposite the keys beneath the table, as in the
Zollner sittings, but the sitters were frequently allowed to
look beneath the table while the playing was in actual prog-
ress, and see the instrument opening and closing of its own
accord — all this in full light! But, to render the proof
still more assured, and at the same time to silence the voices
of those who proclaimed that hallucination could account for
the phenomena observed (which, on that hypothesis, did not
actually occur at all), Mr. Crookes devised a wire cage which
would enable the medium to place and hold the accordion in
it, but would effectually prevent any contact or communi-
cation with the instrument from without.

This cage was made circular in shape, and composed of
laths of wood, fastened together at the top and bottom, and
wire stretched around it in twenty-four roimds, each being
less than an inch from its neighbor ; i. e. the openings in the
cage were less than an inch apart. The height of this cage
was such that it could just slip under the dining-table,—
which was the one used for the experiment. If now the
hand holding the accordion was placed in the cage, no con-
tact with the instrument was possible except from the top.
Mr. Crookes provided for this by pushing the cage under
the table, so that only a small opening was left through
which the medium's wrist was passed between the edge of
the cage and the under edge of the table. The hand holding
the accordion was thus inside, and cut off from any outside
communication whatever. The wires passing around the cage
were now charged with electricity from a battery placed in
the next room.

Under these conditions the accordion was seen to open and
close, and to play tunes of its own accord, Home's hands and
feet being observed at the same time. On several occasions,
indeed, the medium's hand was removed altogether, and the
accordion was seen to be floating about inside the cage, open-
ing and closing by itself, " no person touching it and no


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 377

hand being near it." It is hard to see where fraudulent
manipulation could be possible, in a case like this.

Now, unless we are prepared to assert that Sir William
Crookes and the other sitters present all deliberately falsified,
in their narration of the events that took place at these
8&inces, what hypothesis are we to adopt to account for such
facts as the foregoing? I have read the criticisms of Mr.
£vans ^ and Mr. Podmore,^ and I can only say that, while
I consider this summing up very fine indeed, it is not con-
vincing to me, in that it seems to dwell too much on the sus-
picious and the insignificant, and omits from consideration
much of the strongest evidence, which seems to be hardly
a fair way of treating the reports. I have discussed this
at some length on p. 887, and omit further consideration of
the question here. Nothing has ever been proved against
Home, that much is certain; and the internal evidence of
the sittings (though it will doubtless be estimated vari-
ously by various individuals) certainly seems to suggest that
fraud alone would by no means account for all the phenomena
witnessed at the stances. One can quite appreciate Sir Will-
iam Crookes's attitude, when, writing in the Journal S. P. /{.,
Vol. IX., p. 824, he said :

** For nearly twenty-five years I have been attacked on
account of these experiments, and I have not replied. All
the attacks I have seen have been criticisms of one or two
isolated experiments or statements I made, with an entire
avoidance of the passages which would explain the former.
They have been written more with the object of showing I
was wrong and untrustworthy than with the object of get-
ting at the real truth. . . . When the * higher criticism * ap-
pears, in which all I have written on the subject is compared,
collated, and reviewed, I have no anxiety as to the result."

S. Levitation

No phenomena that occurred in the presence of Home have

attracted more universal attention than these of " levitation."

^ Hours with the Ghosts, pp. 95-104.

> Modem SpirUualim, Vol. II., pp. 143-6, 223-69.


378 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

Incredible as it may seem that a human being should be lifted
off the ground, and remain in that position for some time,
in opposition to the law of gravity, it is, nevertheless, one
of the best attested of all the phenomena occurring in Home's
presence, the quality and the quantity of the evidence being,
both good and abundant. How famous the case is may be
gauged from the fact that it is mentioned in Brewer*s Die-
tianary of Miracles^ p. 218. There is little thiit can be said
about these cases of a critical nature, being mostly confined
to a discussion of the theory of hallucination in this connec-
tion. This I shall discuss on pp. 886-98. I must first ot
all, however, give a description of a few of these levitations,
so that the reader may understand the nature of the prob-
lem before him, and appreciate the difficulties of advancing
any normal explanation as sufficient to account for the facts
observed.

The first account I quote is the famous report of the
Master of Lindsay, referred to in other passages throughout
this book, in connection with the Home phenomena. Jt ii
dated July 14, 1871, and reads as follows:


C(


I was sitting with Mr. Home and Lord Adare, and ft
cousin of his. During the sitting, Mr. Home went into a
trance, and in that state was carried out of the window in the
room next to where we were, and was brought in at our
window. The distance between the windows was about seven
feet six inches, and there was not the slightest foothold be-
tween them, nor was there more than a twelve-inch projec-
tion to each window, which served as a ledge to put flowers
on.

" We heard the window in the next room lifted up, and
almost immediately after we saw Home floating in the air
outside our window.

** The moon was shining into the room ; my back was to
the light, and I saw the shadow on the wall of the window-
sill, and Home's feet about six inches above it. He remained
in this position for a few seconds, then raised the window and
glided into the room, feet foremost, and sat down.


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 379

^ Lord Adare then went into the next room to look at the
window from which he had been carried. It was raised about
eighteen inches, and he expressed his wonder how Mr. Home
had been taken through so narrow an aperture.

'^ Home said, still entranced, ^ I will show you,' and then,
with his back to the window, he leaned back, and was shot out
of the aperture, head first, with the body rigid, and then
returned quite quietly.

^ The window is about seventy feet from the ground.^ I
very much doubt whether any skilful tight-rope dancer would
like to attempt a feat of this description, where the only
means of crossing would be by a perilous leap, or being
borne across in such a manner as I have described, placing
the question of the light aside.

" Lindsay."

Lord Adare confirmed the accuracy of this account, and
so did the third witness present. Captain Wynne, who wrote
a letter to that effect to Home, after the attack by Car-
penter, in which he asserted that the ^^ single honest skeptic "
present had not seen what the other two affirmed. . This
method — personal abuse of the witnesses of supernormal
events — was very frequently resorted to (and still is, for
that matter), and resulted, in this case, in merely strength-
ening the evidence for the genuineness of the phenomena
observed. Besides, there are many other witnesses for this
phenomenon of levitation. Mr. Jones, in his evidence before
the Dialectical Committee, stated : ^' I have seen Mr. Home's
levitations. I saw him rise and float horizontally across the
window. We all saw him clearly. He passed right across
just as a person might float upon the water. At my request
he was floated back again." ^ But the strongest evidence is,
no doubt, that furnished by Sir William Crookes, who
writes:*

'* On one occasion I witnessed a chair, with a lady sitting

> Eighty-five feet, according to his statement before the Dialectical
Commit ee, v, p. 214.
' Report, p. 212.
* B€9€arche$, p. 89.


380 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

on it, rise several inches from the ground. On another occa-
sion, to avoid the suspicion of this being in some way pe^
formed by herself, the lady knelt on the chair in such manner
that its four feet were visible to us. It then rose about three
inches, remained suspended for about ten seconds, and then
slowly descended. . . . The most striking cases of levitation
which I have witnessed have been with Mr. Home. On three
separate occasions I have seen him raised completely from
the floor of the room. Once sitting in an easy chair, once
kneeling on his chair, and once standing up. On each occa-
sion I had full opportunity of watching the occurrence as
it was taking place."

On another occasion Sir William wrote: ^^The best cases
of Home's levitation I witnessed were in my own house. On
one occasion he went to a clear part of the room, and, after
standing quietly for a minute, told us he was rising. I saw
him slowly rise up with a continuous gliding movement, and
remain about six inches off the ground for several seconds,
when he slowly descended. On this occasion no one moTed
from their places. On another occasion I was invited to come
to him, when he rose eighteen inches off the ground, and I
passed my hands under his feet, round him, and over his
head when he was in the air. On several occasions. Home
and the chair on which he was sitting at the table rose off
the ground. This was generally done very deliberately, and
Home sometimes then tucked up his feet on the seat of the
chair and held up his hands in full view of all of us. On
such occasions I have gone down and seen and felt aU four
legs were off the ground at the same time. Home's feet being
on the chair. Less frequently the levitating power extended
to those next to him. Once my wife was thus raised off the
ground in her chair." ^

Now, what are we to do with such facts as these? They
must either have occurred, as stated, or the narrators must
have been under some sort of influence, hypnotic or what not,
which induced in them the belief that the events occurred
as stated. It is useless for us to simply deny that the facts

> Journal S, P, R,, Vol. VI., p. 341-2.


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 381

took place, since that would be childish, no less than unscien-
tific and prejudiced. Here is a great mass of evidence to be
accounted for by some means, or we must admit that we
cannot account for it at all. It is not that there are so few
cases on record that they can be lightly overlooked or passed
by as the results of a disordered imagination. Crookes men-
tions several cases, quite as remarkable as those just given,
which I refrain from quoting, from lack of space. The Rev.
Minot Savage quotes a remarkable case that happened in
his own presence in the case of an American medium.^ Sev-
eral cases of levitation will also be found recorded in Occttlt
Science in India^ pp. Sd7-8, S57; Arownd the World unth a
Magician and a Juggler^ pp. 65-7; Baldwin's Secrets of
Mahatma Land ExpUdnedy p. 84, and various other works
on Eastern travel. As Mr. Lang pointed out, '^ This phe-
nomenon is constantly reported in the Bible, in the Lives of
the SainiSf by the Bollandists, in the experiences of the early
Irvingites, in witch trials, in lambUchus, and in savage and
European folk-lore." * Indeed, there is hardly a phenomenon
that is so frequently recorded as is this phenomenon of levi-
tation. And, ^^ when we find savage biraarks in Australia,
fakirs in India, saints in mediseval Europe, a gentleman's
butler in Ireland, boys in Somerset and Midlothian, a young
warrior in Zululand, Miss Nancy Wesley at Epworth, in
1716, and Mr. Daniel Home, in London, in 1856-70, all tri-
umphing over the law of gravitation, all fioating in the air,
how are we to explain the uniformity of stories palpably
ridiculous? "*

It is folly to say that any process of trickery could be em-
ployed that would produce the effects here described. If
human testimony is ever to count for anything at all, these
facts were established as thoroughly as any facts can well
be. There is nothing in these phenomena that suggest or
render possible any of the known processes by which this
levitation is produced by fraud. There are many of these

> Psychics, Facts, and Theories, p. 103; Can Tdepathy Exptainf pp.
59-60.

* Historical Mysteries, p. 177.

' Cock Lane and Common Sense, pp. 99-100.


382 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

methods, some of the devices that are in use on the stage
being extremely ingenious, and enabling the performer to
pass a solid wooden or iron hoop (which may be examined)
over and around the body of the " levitated '*. assistant, with-
out coming in contact with any support or suggesting any
such support as possibly existing; but the conditions under
which this act of levitation is performed are very different
from those under which Home was levitated, the differences
being as great as possible. Nor are the usual methods of
fraud possible either, since the light was always sufficient to
allow of the medium being distinctly seen, and the sitter
being allowed, frequently, to place his hands under and
around the medium, as stated in Sir William Crookes's re-
ports. If the stances were in the dark^ it would be an easj
matter to produce the illusion of levitation by fraudulent
means alone, a method of doing so being described by Pro-
fessor Hoffmann in The Secrets of Stage Canjuringy pp.
SS6-8. The account is amusing, and deserves quoting, be-
cause little is known to readers uninterested in the literature
of sleight-of-hand. It is, in part, as follows:

^^ A circle of persons is seated in a room in total darkness;
they are warned to expect something supematuraL They
wait in this unpleasant expectation until they perforce be-
come more or less nervous. They are kept in an attitude of
fixed attention, which, long maintained, tends to merge, as
the psychological student is well aware, into the hypnotic
or morbidly impressionable state. Every creak of a chair,
every sound, however minute, may be the outward and visible
sign of a message from another world. Under such cir-
cumstances, when the musical box spontaneously strikes up,
* Home, Sweet Home,' when the medium remarks, * I am leav-
ing the floor; don't notice me; talk of something else;' and
then a shadowy something, with an unmistakable perfume of
leather, passes over the heads of the assembled group, the
heel of a boot perhaps resting lightly on the head or
shoulder in its passage ; who is so skeptical as to doubt thai
the medium has really been levitated in the manner sug-
gested.'' Who so skeptical, indeed? Unless in truth he was


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 383

aware^ or was shrewd enough to suspect, that the medium,
under cover of the darkness, had quietly taken off his boots,
slipped them upon his hands, and gently moved them back-
ward and forward over the heads of the awe-stricken in-
vestigators?

^The process of reasoning is obvious. Here are the
medium's boots, floating in the air, on a level with our
faces. Where a man's boots are, there his feet must be ; and
if a man's feet are floating in the air, his whole body must
be floating also. Ergo^ we are henceforth prepared to make
affidavit that the medium did, at such and such a time, actu-
ally float about such and such a room in our presence."

If the medium has written on the ceiling with a piece of
chalk, as a proof that he was really '^ levitated," this was
done by simply inserting a piece of chalk in the end of his
telescopic rod, and writing on the ceiling with thai. The
differences between such a stance and the levitations ob-
served in the presence of Home are too obvious to be pointed
out in detaiL

If, then, we grant, on the strength of the existing evi-
dence, and for the sake of argument, that there may he such
a thing as genuine levitation; that, at certain times and
under certain circiunstances, a human body may be levi-
tated in the manner described, and the existing testimony
would certainly seem to indicate that this is indeed the case,
th^i it becomes the duty of the scientist to consider this
question, and to propose some hyi>othcsis which will explain
the facts. Needless to say, such explanations have never
been forthcoming, for the reason that the scientific world,
as such, does not accept the facts; but, if these are once
accepted, or considered possible, even, then their explana-
tion becomes of the greatest importance, no less than of
paramount interest.

Let us see if this phenomenon of levitation can be con-
ceived, as a scientific phenomenon. First, it must be remem-
bered that weight, as such, is not an inherent property of
matter, as many persons are in the habit of thinking, but
varies according to place and environment. A piece of iron.


384 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

e. g.f will weigh more at the pole than it will at the equator,
though the mass of the iron remains unchanged. This is
due to the fact that the distance from the earth's centre to
the mass of iron is less at the pole than at the equator, owing
to the fact that the equatorial diameter is greater than the
polar diameter. Consequently, the attractive force is less at
the equator than at the poles. Evidently, then, weight is not
an essential '^ property " of matter, but is attached to it in
various degrees, according to conditions. When we have
thoroughly grasped this, it becomes easier to conceive the
possibility of matter becoming imponderable; all that is
requisite is that sufficient force should be developed to coun-
terbalance terrestrial attraction.

^^ It has been observed ^ that bodies which rotate at their
axes, like the earth, develop centrifugal force, the effect of
which is to decrease their weight; therefore the weight of
a body is scientifically said to be the result of the attraction
of the earth's centre, ndnut the action exerted by centrifugal
force. This force is nU at the poles and greatest at the
equator. It has been calculated that if the earth turned
seventeen times more rapidly than its present rate of rota-
tion, ». e.f in one hour and twenty-four minutes, the centrif-
ugal force would be great enough to destroy gravitation^
so that a body placed at the equator would cease to have
weight. If we apply our knowledge of these mechanical
facts to material molecules, which, as we know, are ani-
mated by a double movement, of rotation and oscillation, it
is possible to imagine, in the case of each molecule, that the
movement of the rotation might become so rapid that the
centrifugal force developed would annul the force of gravi-
tation, and matter would then be imponderable."

The view I myself should be inclined to favor is that some
internal reptdsive force is generated within the body that
is levitated, which is, for the time being, sufficiently strong
to counteract the force of gravitation. It is possible that
this force is present and active at all times, in living bodies,
only it is so slight that it is never noticed under normal con-

^ Evidence far a Future Life, p. 232.


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 385

ditlonS) and only becomes operative under a peculiar com-
bination of circumstances, the causes of which we know
nothing about as yet. The analogy of electrical experi-
ments might be called into requisition ; the pith-ball experi-
ment, e. g,9 in which the ball is first attracted and then re-
pelled by the excited amber. Again, just as telepathy may
be operative at all times, but only merge into a conscious
hallucination under some exceptional emotional stress, so
may this force be always operative, but only develop to a
powerful enough extent to be noticed in the physical world,
when coinciding with other forces, or under a peculiar com-
bination of circumstances the nature of which we as yet
know nothing about.

Thus it may be that levitation, though it be in opposition
to ^' natural law,'' in one sense, yet may be in accordance
with that law in another; inasmuch as it is within the scope
of a larger law, which embraces both. Gravitation is the
universal law that holds good in all ordinary events of life,
and under all normal physical conditions; it is only when a
peculiar combination of circumstances, laws, and forces con-
centrate at one point, at the same moment, that the law of
gravitation is overcome and temporarily transcended. The
law of gravitation would be just as universal as ever, and
would be in no wise set aside by any ** supernatural " occur-
rence ; it would be simply that, owing to this peculiar com-
bination of forces, all acting at the same place, at the same
time, the force of gravitation might be, for the time, over-
come or transcended, so long as that combination of forces
held together and existed. The event would thus still be
enabled to take place, but it would not be in opposition to the
law of gravitaticm ; it might almost be said that it is in
accordance with it.

In somewhat the same way, I think it is quite possible to
imagine various '^ miracles " taking place, events which ap-
pear to be in direct opx>06ition to the laws of nature. Under
the usual circumstances and conditions, when the counter-
acting laws and forces are scattered, so to speak, and acting
separately instead of together, then the supposed law holds


386 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

good; but when, owing to some chance circumstances, or
the operation of the divine will (whichever we choose to be-
lieve), these laws and forces are centred and concentrated
upon one point, at the same instant, then they will cumula-
tively overcome the force that counteracts them, and a
^^ miracle " will have been accomplished. This I put forward
by way of suggestion only.

To one final reflection I would draw the reader's attention
before leaving this theoretical portion of the discussion. It
is that the power or force operative in the production of
levitation may be only an extetuion of the same force which
is frequently observed in the production of movements of
bodies under somewhat the same combination of circum-
stances which rendered levitation possible; those which exist
at the stance. It may be that the same nerve force which, in
parakinejtic phenomena, moves objects to a greater degree
than can be accounted for by the movements of the muscles
of the medium ; which, in telekinetic phenomena, moves ob-
jects at a distance without contact at all; may, under some
circumstances, levitate a body from the ground altogether,
instead of merely dragging it along the floor or table, etc,
as the case may be. That this is conceivable is certain, and
that it has a certain amount of evidence in its support is
established by the fact that the parakinetic phenomena are,
apparently, easier to obtain than the telekinetic phenomena;
and it is highly probable, to judge from the disparity in the
amount of the evidence, that the telekinetic phenomena are
more readily obtained than the phenomena of levitation.
So much for the purely theoretical side of the question, and
taking for granted, all this while, that the phenomena are
genuine and real ** phenomena," and not the result of some
hallucination.

Mr. Podmore and others, in discussing these occurrences,
incline to the belief that they did not really occur, as stated,
at all, but that they were the result of some species of hal-
lucination ; that the ultimate explanation is to be found in
the psychological rather than in the physical world ; in Mr.
Podmore's words : ** . . . the witnesses were to some extent


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 387

hallucinated. It is not necessary to suppose in such a case
a ' pure ' hallucinaticm, containing no elements derived from
actual sensation, if, indeed, a ^ pure ' hallucination, in this
sense, ever occurs. It may be conjectured that Home prob-
ably supplied certain material data, and guided the imagi-
nation of the percipients to complete the picture which he
suggested to them." ^

Mr. Podmore returns to this suggestion, and defends his
thesis at great length in his Modem Spirittudumy Vol. II.,
pp. 244-69, in the chapter, "Was There Hallucination?''
His arguments are in many ways strong, though, to my
mind, not convincing. Mr. Podmore's arguments receive a
certain amount of support from the evidences of hallucina-
tion in certain ^^ poltergeist cases " (in the Amherst Mys-
tery, e.g., voices — evidently of a hallucinatory character
— are heard in various parts of the house, p. 185) ; from
the fact that, in haunted houses, there are abundant evi-
dences of hallucinations, apart from the figures observed,
e. g.t when the door apparently opens, to admit the appari-
tion seen,^ or where the investigator is apparently pushed
by some unseen hand;' in various spiritualistic stances,
where the internal evidence points clearly to the fact that
there has been hallucination at work, e.g., when the
painter Tissot saw two figures, as well as the double of the
medium, Eglinton, at a s&mce,^ or when buzzing voices are
heard and flashes of light, evidently subjective, were seen;*^
in such cases as that reported by Prof. Harlow Gale,® or
when only one out of nine persons saw the phenomenon, as at
one of Home's stances ;'^ — all these and similar cases might
be quoted as instances of hallucinations that have occurred
at stances or under some such conditions as are present at a
spiritualistic stance. An appeal might be made to the per-

* Studies in Psychical Researcky p. 12L

' Lee, Examples of the SupenuUurcd, p. 26.

■ The Alleged Haunting of B House, p. 117.

* Evidence for a Future lAfe, p. 239.

* OcevU Science in India, pp. 257, 268.

* A Study in Spiritistic Halludnatioos,'' Proceedings 8. P. B., Vol.
XV., pp. 65-89.

' Dialectical Report, p. 210.


388 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

f ormances of the Hindu fakirs, whose feats are apparently
dependent upon hypnotic influence or some form of suggested
hallucinations, in order to accomplish the result. These anal-
ogies, and the support that such cases lend to the theory
advanced, have been pointed out and insisted upon by Mr.
Podmore, in his Apparttiofu and Thought Transference^ pp.
877-80, as well as in his Modem SpirituaUtm^ mentioned
above. The theory was advanced and strongly defended by
Professor Barrett, in an address before the British Associa-
tion, in a paper read at the Glasgow meeting, September,
1876. The vital parts of this paper, in so far as they relate
to the aspect of the problem here under discussion, will be
found reprinted in Proceedings S. P. £., Vol. I., pp. 888-44.
So far we have been considering the evidence in favor of
the hypothesis of hallucination, but there is much to be said
against such a theory — so much, perhaps, as to render that
hypothesis altogether untenable. We may agree with Mr.
Lang ^ that the same psychological conditions produced
alike the old and the new stories; that explains nothing
and merely pushes us back to the primary question : why do
these psychological conditions arise? That question Mr.
Lang is unable to answer, and it would appear from his later
writings that Mr. Lang has entirely discarded the hallucina-
tion theory, as, in his Historical Mysteries (pp. 185-7), he
ridicules the theory unmercifully, and tears the whole con-
struction down about the heads of its psychological archi-
tects ! It seems impossible to conceive that a whole company
of persons should be hypnotized or hallucinated at the same
instant, and made to see things that did not really happen;
or to imagine that they went over to the medium's chair and
placed their hands under the four legs, and around and
about the medium, as Sir William Crookes asserted that he
did, and that the other members of the circle merely imag-
ined that he, the investigator, was doing so, whereas there
was no basis of truth for any of these assertions! Various
persons will, of course, sum up the value of the evidence
differently, according to their outlook upon the world, and

' Cock Lane and Common Sense, p. 126.


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 389

these phenomena in particular ; but I myself cannot conceive
such a phenomenon taking place. We have no evidence
whatever for any similar conditions or cases in the records
of collective hallucinations or haunted houses, nor have we
any in the history of hypnotism. Imposed hypnotic hallu-
cinations are far more restricted in their scope than these,
and they cannot be imposed, moreover, until the subject has
first been hypnotized, and then only the subject so hypno-
tized sees the suggested hallucination, and not the surround-
ing onlookers or spectators. There is no known psycho-
logical parallel to which the advocates of the hallucination
theory may appeal, except to the cases before mentioned, of
the fakirs of India, where a crowd of spectators is appar-
ently hallucinated, and see phenomena that do not in reality
exist. If this evidence fails to give the necessary support,
then the defenders of this theory will be indeed hard put to
it to defend it. Let us, therefore, consider this question
of Indian magic in relation to the theory of hallucination
in some detail, and see how far the evidence supports the
theory of hallucination in the case of D. D. Home.

It would be a most interesting and pleasurable task to
consider this question of Indian magic in detail, but my
space forbids. Typical accounts of the phenomena observed
will be found recorded in many works of Eastern travel,
and they are dealt with more or less from the psychical re-
searcher's standpoint in such books as Occult Science in
IndiOj Occfdt Japan^ Howitt's History of the Supernatural
(2 vols.). Psychic Notes (published in Calcutta, for a time),
Baldwin's Secrets of Mahatma Land Explained^ Arownd
the World with a Magician and a Juggler^ Kellar's Up and
Down and Roundabout the Worlds etc. These last three
books deal very largely with the fraudulent side of the ques-
tion and contain some ex]x>s^ of the methods employed by
Indian conjurers. Although all these books (the last three)
were written by professional conjurors, they all contain the
statement that certain phenomena were witnessed which the
authors could not explain, and, so far as they could see,
were not due to any process of trickery. Mr. Kellar espe-


390 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

ciallj stated this in an article published in The North Amer-
ican Review^ for January, 1898. Doctor Hodgson, with his
wcmderf ul acumen and ability to detect fraud and misstate-
ment, severely criticized this article. His paper .on ^^ Indian
Magic and the Testimony of Conjurers " ^ should be read
by every one who is making a study of Eastern magic, or
who is inclined to place too much faith in the testimony of
conjurers that ^' such and such a phenomenon is not pro-
duced by fraudulent means."

In this article Doctor Hodgson explains the mango tree
trick, the colored sands trick, the snake charming trick, the
basket trick, the bowl of water trick, the dry sand trick, and
others which are the principal ones performed by every In-
dian fakir. (A detailed explanation of these tricks will also
be found in Mahaimc^ Vol. III., Nos. 7 and 8, January and
February, 1900.) These " phenomena '' are all shown to be
no more than clever tricks, and any one who claims that they
afford any evidence for the supernormal simply shows that he
is unacquainted with the methods employed to produce them.

But the most interesting part of Doctor Hodgson's paper
is his consideration of the alleged feats of levitation and the
famous rope-climbing exploit, both of which are probably
too well known to my readers to need describing here. The
nature of the former of these phenomena is explained by its
title; the second is the famous feat in which a rope is
thrown into the air by the performer, where it stays — sus-
pended by some unknown power — and gradually stiffens,
allowing a small boy, the fakir's assistant, to climb up it,
and finally to disappear in the clouds! Soon, the legs and
arms of the boy are seen to fall to the ground, then the head,
and finally the trunk falls to earth, all before the astonished
and horrified gaze of the onlookers. These pieces gradually
join themselves together, and re-form the boy's body, whole
as it was at first, and the boy goes on his way rejoicing!

Of the levitation, I shall not speak now, beyond stating
that it is recorded in several of the books mentioned, as
previously stated. The value of the testimony will be vari-

» Proceedings S, P. i2., Vol. IX., pp. 354-66.


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 391

ously estimated by individuals, partly according to their
preconceived ideas of the limits of the possibly, and partly
according to their familiarity with the evidence that has
been collected in various works on the subject. As I have
considered this subject of levitation elsewhere I shall dismiss
it for the time being, and turn to the feat that most par-
ticularly interests us in relation to this question of hallu-
cination and its possibilities.

It need hardly be pointed out, I imagine, that, if this feat
was ever witnessed by Europeans at all (i. e., if the whole
thing is not a myth) and certain individuals imagined they
actually witnessed it, the effect was the result of an hallu-
cination, and not the result of seeing what actually took
place. It need scarcely be said that the nature of the trick,
if trick it is (the suspension of the rope by some unknown
power ; the ascent of the boy into the clouds ; the tumbling
down to earth of the separate members; and, finally, the
joining together of these into a live form again) would for-
bid any such performance taking place in reality — except
on a stage, e. g.y when appropriate apparatus can be ar-
ranged to perform this feat, an illusion of this sort being
mentioned in MahatmOj Vol. HI., No. 6, November, 1899.
If such a performance was ever witnessed, therefore, it must
have been the result of some sort of hallucination, possibly
hypnotic, which the onlooker was experiencing at the time.
The question, therefore, narrows itself down to this : was the
onlooker hallucinated?

Several reported instances seemed to show conclusively
that such was the case, it being stated that (particularly in
one case which the writer quoted from his own experience)
the photographic plate of a camera revealed that nothing of
the sort had transpired. The person witnessing the per-
formance had actually seen it, as described, while the photo-
graphic plate, which cannot be hypnotized and so share in
the hallucination supposedly induced, showed that the per-
formance had not taken place at all. Such was the story,
at least, which reached a very large portion of the reading
public — so large, indeed, that this is the explanation that is


392 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

given of this illusion whenever it is mentioned, as if it were
a fact, past all questioning!

Doctor Hodgson, in criticizing these articles, pointed out
that the illustrations reproduced to back up the story (sup-
posedly photographs) were, in reality, woodctUs, and con-
sequently were not what they purported to be at all, and
served to throw a grave suspicion on the story in toto.
Later, it came to light that this story was concocted by its
author, and had no basis in fact whatever.^ Doctor Hodg-
son actually doubted if the phenomenon had ever been wit-
nessed at all, or even if any person thought he had witnessed
it, rather inclining to the belief that these stories were in-
variably made up ^' out of whole cloth," and had no real
basis in fact — even that the sitters were hallucinated, as it
is stated they were. Several cases have lately come to light,
however, particularly a recent and well-recorded one,^
which would seem to show that the stories have at least tome
basis of truth. I shall accordingly consider the cases as if
they actually existed, merely pointing out that such per-
formances are extremely rare, even if they exist at all. Doc-
tor Hodgson never witnessed the illusion, nor could he find
any one who had a first-hand account to offer him ; ^ even
Colonel Olcott," says Doctor Hodgson, " a faithful servant
of Mme. Blavatsky, . . . told me, after several years' res-
idence in India, he had never witnessed the rope-tying per-
formance." * At the same time Doctor Hodgson was willing
to admit that the story may have originated because of some
hypnotically induced hallucination, akin to those induced by
our Western hypnotists. The evidence, as it stands, is cer-
tainly inconclusive, in any case, and though there is a cer-
tain analogy between these performances and those of D. D.
Home, e. g., the inaccuracy in recording, the doubt sur-
rounding these phenomena can be said to offer no direct
support to the theory of hallucination in Home's case, which
must stand or fall on its own merits. It can derive no real

' Journal S. P. R., Vol. V.. pp. 847-86, 195.
* Journal S. P. «., Vol. XII.. pp. 30-1.
» Proceedinga S. P. R., Vol. IX., p. 363.


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 393

support from the performances of Oriental conjurers. On
the subject of Oriental magic generally I cannot do better
than to conclude this summary in the words of Doctor
Hodgson, to be found in the article so frequently referred
to already. In summing up the evidence for the supernor-
mal in these performances, he says:

** I conclude, therefore, that, in spite of the str(mg asser-
tions of a distinguished conjurer, we have before us no real
evidence to the manifestation by Indian jugglers or fakirs
of any marvels beyond the power of trickery to produce.
. . . The conjurer's mere assertion that certain marvels are
not explicable by trickery is worth jtut as much as the
savani^s mere assertion that they must be so explicable, —
just as much, and no more.

^^ There is no royal road to sound opinions on such mat-
ters generally ; there is nothing for it save to examine each
narrative on its own merits, and with close individual care,
the mind meanwhile prepared for either fate, whether to
prick some bubble of pretension into empty falsity, or to
discover beneath some unprcnnising envelope a germ of
inexplicable truth.*' *

We find, therefore, that this testimony in no wise lends
support to the theory of hallucination in the Home case,
but rather shows us how impossible such a theory is. And,
if the evidence cannot be strengthened in this direction, it
cannot find support in any other; for, as we have seen, no
other known facts are in any way similar to the phenomena
observed in Home's presence. I do not urge that the phe-
nomena are numerous enough or the reports conclusive
enough to warrant our accepting levitation as a fact in
nature, but we should certainly discourage any attempts to
assert that hallucination is enough to account for all that
was witnessed at Home's s^nces. What the real explana-
tion may be I do not pretend to know; I am only arguing
here against the tendency to explain, in too offhand a man-
ner, phenomena which have every appearance of being both
real and objective.

> Proceedings S. P. R., Vol. IX., p. 965-d.


394 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

§ 3. Elongation

Another of the marvellous feats witnessed in Home's pres-
ence was that of ^^ elongation," in which the medium's body
was, apparently, lengthened or drawn out a number of
inches, and quite beyond the limits of any normal extension
possible. This is one of the best attested, and at the same
time one of the most incredible phenomena witnessed in this
medium's presence, varied as those phenomena were. One or
two typical reports of this phenomenon are as follows:

^^ Mr. H. D. Jencken, of Norwood, England, communi-
cates, under the date of December, 1867, his experiences at
four stances, at which the body of D. D. Home was elon-
gated; and on all these occasions, Mr. J. used his utmost
endeavor to make certain of the fact. On two of them, he
had the amplest opportunity of examining Mr. Home, and
measured the actual elongation and shortening. At one, the
extension appeared to take place at the waist, and the cloth-
ing separated eight or ten inches. Mr. J., who is six feet,
hardly reached up to Home's shoulder. Walking to and
fro. Home especially called attention to the fact of his feet
being firmly planted on the ground. * He then grew shorter,'
says Mr. J., * until he only reached my shoulder, his waistcoat
overlapping at his hip. . • . Encouraging every mode of
testing the truth of this marvellous phenomenon, Mr. Home

made me hold his feet, whilst the Hon. Mr. placed

his hands on his head and shoulders. The elongation was
repeated three times. Twice, whilst he was standing, the

extension, measured on the wall by the Hon. Mr. ^

showed eight inches ; the extension at the waist, as measured
by Mr. , was six inches ; and the third time the elon-
gation occurred, Mr. Home was seated next to Mrs. ^

who placed her hand on his head, and her feet on his feet, bad
the utmost difficulty in keeping her position, as Mr. Home's
body grew higher and higher ; the extreme extension reached
being six inches.' " ^

Very much the same description of the phenomencm was

> PlancheUe, by Epes Sargent, p. 100-1.


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 395

given by the Master of Lindsay (the Earl of Crawford),
as follows:

**...! saw Mr. Home, in a trance, elongated eleven
inches. I measured him standing up against the wall, and
marked the place; not being satisfied with that, I put him
in the middle of the room, and placed a candle in front of
him, so as to throw a shadow on the wall, which I also
marked. When he awoke I measured him again in his nat-
ural size, both directly and by the shadow, and the results
were equal. I can swear that he was not off the ground or
standing on tiptoe, as I had full view of his feet, and more-
over, a gentleman present had one of his feet placed over
Home's insteps, one hand on his shoulder, and the other on
his side where the false ribs come near the hip-bone. • . •
The top of the hip-bone and the short ribs separate. In
Home, they are usually close together. There was no sepa-
ration of the vertebrae of the spine; nor were the elonga-
tions at all like those resulting from expanding the chest
with air; the shoulders did not move. Home looked as if
he was pulled up by the neck ; the muscles seemed in a state
of tension. He stood firmly in the middle of the room, and,
before the elongation commenced, I placed my foot on his
instep. I will swear he never moved his heels from the
ground.'* ^

It is true that there are several minor defects in the rec-
ords, as given above, which detract from the strength of the
evidence. Thus, it is hard to see how the Earl of Crawford
had a ** full view *' of the medium's feet, when we learn that
they were covered by the feet of another sitter; nothing is
said as to the amount of light admitted at these stances, and
it is very suspicious that the vertebras did not separate, when
the length of the elongation would seem to call for such
separation, if genuine. However, the defects in the report
seem to me to be such as would be made by any person
drawing up a report of unusual occurrences; minor inac-
curacies exist, but the central facts seem to have been care-
fully noted, and rather more than the usual care exercised

> DialecHcal Report, pp. 207-8, 218-4.


396 The Physical Phenomena of Spiri

against fraud. It is hard to consider seriously this phe-
nomencm as genuine; but, on the other hand, if we are to
keep an open mind, what right have we to dismiss the phe-
nomenon as impossible or inconceivable, merely because it is
not understandable? If we had been at the s&nce in ques-
tion, it is possible that our beUef would be as strong as those
who recorded the phenomena ; for the present, it would seem
best to hold our judgment in suspense, awaiting further
evidence.

A case of apparent elcMigation occurred in 1900; it was
investigated by Mr. Podmore, and a report of the case
printed in Journal S. P. K., Vol. X., pp. 104-9. In this
case the medium, Mr. Alfred Peters, stood in the comer of
the room, which was poorly Ughted, and, after being ^^ con-
trolled," began swaying backward and forward. Two sit-
ters stationed themselves one on either side of the medium,
placed their feet on his feet, and one hand on his hip (the
one nearest to them), the other hands grasping those of the
medium. Under these conditions, the medium was elongated.
^* Both my brother and I looked to see that we were still on
his feet, and that our hands were on his waist ; we were botb
conscious that the hands we had placed on the waist were
being carried up as the elongation gradually took place.
Keeping our eyes upon him we found that we had to stretch
our arms to their fullest extent (without rising from our
seats) to retain their position on the waist. On my attempt-
ing to arise from my chair, the * Indian ' requested me to
remain seated. At last a point was reached when I called to
my brother, * If he goes any higher I can't reach,' my arm
being stretched to its very fullest extent; at the same time
I was conscious, and so was my brother, that our feet were
still on the medium's feet. The * red Indian ' (who was con-
trolling) called to us then to observe his hands, one arm (the
hand and fingers being open and extended) being quite six
inches longer than the other; from our position, this was
difficult for my brother and me to see, but was quite apparent
to Mrs. S. . . . Again our attention was directed to the
fact that the shorter arm had been lengthened to match the


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 397

other. We had now arrived at the Umit of our powers of
extension, and, with a warning from the ^ Indian,' the me-
dium collapsed on to the floor.*'

When this case appeared (which is at least interesting, if
only to show that phenomena of the kind still occur), I sent
in a criticism of the case, suggesting three possible methods
of trickery by which the phenomenon might have been ac-
complished.^ I then said:

" (1) We are told . . . that he * appeared to be drawn
upward by his hands,' which were ^ stretched straight out
above his head.' Now are we sure that his hands could reach
nothing sufficiently substantial to enable him to raise his
body in this way? Of this we are told nothing definite. The
ceiling of the * bow window ' was lower by six inches than
that of the remainder of the room ; and there were curtains
separating them. On what were the curtains hung? On a
rod, as is usually the case? And if so, would this rod be
sufficiently substantial to sustain the medium's weight, as-
sisted, perhaps, by one or both feet? As for the hands seen
against the ceiling, they may have been the medium's shown
aUemately^ he, meanwhile, supporting himself with the other
hand. The objection to this hypothesis is that the medium's
feet were held, and on this basis they would necessarily have
to be free. When we read that the medium's * feet ' were
held, we must presume, in this case at least, that it was his
ihoes that were so held, and very insecurely at that. I would
suggest, therefore, either that the medium slipped out of his
shoes and left them under the careful supervision of their
guardians while he ^ elongated ' himself, as above described ;
or that dummy feet were substituted, whilst his own followed
the rest of his body, as they would under ordinary circum-
stances.

" (2) My second hypothesis is that dummy feet were sub-
stituted, or his shoes left under observation, as above de-
scribed, and that the medium mounted in some way by
means of his stocking feet. This would cause his body to
be elevated from the floor to the extent described and enable

> Jimnud S. P. R., Vol. X., pp. 238-40.


398 The Physical Phenomena of Sj^tualism

his arms to be seen against the celling, as they would reallj
be at that height from the ground floor. The questicm is,
on what did the medium find a foothold? We read (p. 108),
' the cmly chair near (D) I pushed away when the medium
began to sway backward and forward, fearing he would
knock himself against it.' On the other hand, the chairs
A and B were not moved during the whole phenomencxi —
*we none of us moved from our chairs during the whole
time.' " (These chairs were those on either side of the me-
dium, and I advanced the theory that the medium was en-
abled to place his feet on the rungs of the chairs). . . . *^ It
must be remembered that the attention of the investigators
seems to have been almost entirely concentrated on the me-
dium's arms and upper portion of his body; he, no doubt,
attracting attention thereto. . . . From their strained posi-
tion, observation must have been next to impossible.

^^ (8) My third hypothesis I admit to be exceedingly im-
probable, but it is, to my mind, more conceivable than a
genuine manifestation of the phenomenon of elongation. It
is that the medium employed dummy arms to display against
the background of the ceiling, and that some sliding mechan-
ism was attached to his body, which, being elevated, would
carry the investigator's hands along with it (his feet remain-
ing on the floor), and thus give the sensation of moving the
whole upper part of the medium's body. It will be observed
that only the medium's hands and arms were actually seen
to be at an unusual distance from the floor ; nothing is said
of the body being seen in its elevated position, it being
merely inferred from the sense of touch."

I think that Mr. Podmore's suggestion is more probable
than any of my own, however, it being that ^^ the elongation
was effected by some simple mechanism, such as steel stilts,
concealed in his boots and trousers." *

The evidence for this case, however, is distinctly inferior
to that in the case of Home, both with regard to quality
and quantity. It is hard to see how Home could have pro-
duced his own cases of elongation by trickery; the nearest

> Modem Spirihudim, Vol. II., pp. 261-2.


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 399

attempt to an explanation that has been offered is that by
Mr. Podmore, in a passage following that just quoted. He
there says : ^^ That Home used any such concealed apparatus
of the kind (just described) is, I think, improbable. The
evidence in his case, either from want of detail, length of
time between event and record, or the attendant circum-
stances, such as feebleness of illumination, is so defective
that it is easier to attribute the results recorded to illusion,
which Home may no doubt have eked out on occasion by
such devices as slipping his feet half out of his boots, and
standing on tiptoe, or supporting himself on some convenient
articles of furniture '' (p. 26S).

The question of Home's elongation is likely to go un-
solved until another mediimi shall arise who can duplicate
the phenomena under the same conditions. If such a medium
ever comes to light, it will be time to consider, seriously, this
phenomenon of elongation.


§ i. The " Fire Tests


ft


We now tium to consider another phase of the mediumship
exhibited through Home, and in some ways the most remark-
able, in others the most suspicious, of them all. I refer to
the so-called ** fire tests ; " to those cases, i . e.^ where it is
reported that the medium is enabled to take from the fire,
and handle with impunity, live coals ; to handle heated lamp-
chimneys without harm; to pass handkerchiefs through the
flame of a candle without in any way injuring the fabric; all
such feats as these may be classed under our general heading
of ** fire tests,'* whether they ultimately prove to be fraudu-
lent or genuine in character.

I shall begin by quoting some of the reports of these oc-
currences, written by different witnesses, reserving the crit-
ical considerations until later on. The first report of the
kind is that of the Master of Lindsay (the Earl of Craw-
ford), and is printed in the Report of the Dialectical Society ,
pp. 208-9. It reads, in part :

'**! have frequently seen Home, when in a trance, go to


400 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

the fire and take out large red-hot coals, and cany them
about in his hands, put them inside his shirt, etc Eight
times, I have myself held a red-hot coal in my hands with-
out injury, when it scorched my face on raising my hand.
Once, I wished to see if they really would bum, and I said
so, and touched the coal with the middle finger of my right
hand, and I got a blister as large as a sixpence ; I instantly
asked him to give me the coal, and I held the part that burnt
me in the middle of my hand, for three or four minutes, with-
out the least inconvenience.

^^ A few weeks ago, I was at a s^nce with eight others.
Of these, seven held a red-hot coal without pain, and the two
others could not bear the approach of it ; of the seven, f oar
were ladies/' Miss Douglas, one of the witnesses, in answer
to questions, stated that ^^ Mr. Home held the hot coals a
long time in his hand, till they were nearly black. He then
placed them between his shirt and coat, and they did not
singe either."

The other accounts I shall quote are from the records of
Sir William Crookes. One very notable stance took place on
the 9th of May, 1871. The room was lighted by a wood
fire as well as four candles, placed in various parts of the
room. Two of these candles were extinguished, leaving
the room still lighted by two and the wood fire. Home then
borrowed a cambric handkerchief, which he folded and
placed upon the open palm of his hand. On this he now
placed a piece of red-hot charcoal, which he had just e;!-
tracted from the fire, and fanned this charcoal with his
breath, until it became white hot. The handkerchief was
afterward found intact, all but a small hole, which had been
burnt in it. Sir William Crookes took the handkerchief
with him into the laboratory, and an analysis found that it
was in every way unprepared, chemically or otherwise.

The last account I quote verbatim, " Mr. Home again
went to the fire, and after stirring the hot coals about with
his hand, took out a red-hot piece nearly as big as an orange,
and putting it on his right hand, covered it over with his
left hand, &(b as to almost completely enclose it, and then


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 401

blew into the small furnace thus extemporized until the lump
of charcoal was nearly white-hot, and then drew my atten-
tion to the lambent flame which was flickering over the coal
and licking round his flngers; he fell on his knees, looked
up in a reverent manner, held up the coal in front, and said,
* Is not Grod good? Are not his laws wonderful? ' " *

Now, all this is very wonderful indeed. D. D. Home was
not alone in producing these phenomena; they were ob-
served in the presence of other mediums besides Home, but
never under such good ^^test conditions." It is impossible
to read the accounts without being impressed with the re-
markable character of the evidence, the quality and quantity
of which, in Home's case, could hardly be improved upon.
It is impossible, it seems to me, to dismiss this evidence on the
ground that it is mere fraud and nothing else. It is pos-
sible that the handkerchief in question might have been sub-
stituted for another that was in some way prepared to with-
stand the fire, after one of the methods to be mentioned
shortly. But we must bear in mind that Home also took
these coals into his open hands, and kept them there some
considerable time, blowing on the coals, rendering them white-
hot, and allowing the flames to lick round his fingers. In
order to explain these facts, we should have to assume either
that Home had some chemical substance on his hands, which
rendered them impervious to the infiuence of the heat; or
that Home had some ^^ non-conducting substance " in his
hands which protected them from the live coals.* Sir Will-
iam Crookes states there is no known substance that will pro-
tect the hands against such heat as that which must be as-
sumed in these cases, while Mr. Lang laughs at Mr. Pod-
more's ^ non-conducting substance.'' Mr. Podmore himself
suggested asbestos cloth, as being the ^ substance " in ques-
tion. It is conceivable that this might have been employed,
though highly improbable, one would think, because so easy
to detect. Even were we to grant the use of this substance,
still, how are we to account for the handkerchief test, on this

> Proceedings 8, P. R., Vol. VI., p. 103.
* Studies in Psychical Research, p. 121. *


402 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

principle, and, above all, how are we to account for thoee
cases in which the sitter himself took the red-hot coal into
his own hands, holding it there for some minutes? Either
these phenomena require some explanation other than fraud,
or the accounts are inaccurate to a degree one would be quite
unwarranted in assuming them to be. For many reasons,
I, at least, cannot believe this to be the case, and I conse-
quently prefer to hold my judgment in suspense, so far as
these phenomena go, and to offer no theory.

It is true that certain explanations of these phenomena
have been offered from time to time, in various books on
magic and kindred subjects. As the reader may be inclined
to form an opinicm of these phenomena different from my
own, and incline to the hypothesis that all these tests are
fraud, and nothing but fraud, if only the right explanation
of the phenomena were forthcoming, I herewith break off to
describe the principal devices that are used by mediums in
imitating these phenomena, since I do not deny that the vast
majority of the phenomena witnessed are produced by fraud-
ulent means.

There are preparations that may be applied to the hands
that will protect them from great heat for a considerable
time. One of these preparations is the following, which I
give on the authority of the author of The Revelations of a
Spirit Medium. " Dissolve one-half ounce of camphor in two
ounces of aqua vits; add one ounce of quicksilver, and one
ounce of liquid styrax, which is the product of the myrrh,
and which prevents the camphor from igniting. Shake and
mix well together. Bathe the inside of the hand and the
fingers in this preparation, allowing it to dry in, and you
can duplicate the performance with the lamp-chimney, and
hold your fingers in the blaze quite a while without any bad
effects" (p. 98).

If it is desired to hold a handkerchief over a flame, with-
out burning it, or to pass the hair through the fire without
singeing it, all that the medium has to do is to soak the hair
or the handkerchief in a solution made in the following
manner. Fill a teacup with water, and in this dissolve all


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 403

the salt the water will contain. In another cup, dissolve a
tablespoonful of soda in warm water. Now pour the two
solutions together, and mix them thoroughly. When this is
done, the hair, handkerchief, or whatever article it is pro*
posed to pass through the flame, is soaked in this mixture.
Allow each article to thoroughly dry. They may now be
passed through the fire iminjured.

It is said that articles soaked in alum water are fireproof,
to a certain extent. It has also been asserted that, by rub-
bing the soles of the feet with a preparation of salt water
and powdered red stone (the proportion being two ounces
of red stone to a cupful of brine) several steps may be taken
over red-hot iron, without injury, a fact that is interesting
in connection with the fire-walking phenomena, to be men-
tioned presently.

Although the above methods of trickery might explain
such phenomena as the ^^ handkerchief test,'' therefore, and
such minor tests as the handling of heated lamp-chimneys,
coals that are only partially heated, etc., it would not explain,
to my mind, the more extraordinary phenomena of the hand-
ling of red-hot coals in any such manner as Home was in the
habit of handling them; and certainly would not explain
the fact of how it came about that the sitters themselves were,
at times, enabled to handle the coals. It may be true, as Mr.
Podmore asserted was the case, that a coal which is white-
hot at one end may not be too hot at the other to handle with
the bare hands, which would seem to be corroborated by
^ Uncle Remus's " statement that the negroes sometimes
•*take up live pieces of coal to light their pipes withal;'*
still the facts are not explained by any of these tentative
theories, none of the explanations sufficing to explain the
facts, providing the records are accurate. The only other
explanation that I have been able to find is the following,
which I quote from Henry R. Evans's Hours mth the Ghosts^
pp. 106-7.*

^ Home's extraordinary feat of alternately cooling and
heating a liunp of coal taken from a blazing fire, as related

> This book now bears the title " The SpirU World Unmasked."


404 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

by Mr. H. D. Jencken and others, is easily explained. It is
a juggling trick. The coal is a piece of spongy platinum
which bears a close resemblance to a lump of half -burnt coal,
and is palmed in the hand, as a prestidigitateur conceals a
coin, a pack of cards, an egg, or a smaU lemon. The medium
or magician advances to the grate and pretends to take a
genuine lump of coal from the fire, but brings up instead, at
the tips of his fingers, the piece of platinum. In a secret
breast pocket of his coat he has a small reservoir of hydro-
gen, with a tube coming down the sleeve and terminating an
inch or so above the cuff. By means of certain mechanical
arrangements, to enable him to let on and off the gas at the
proper moment, he is able to accomplish the trick ; for when
a current of hydrogen is allowed to impinge upon a piece
of spongy platinum, the metal becomes incandescent, and as
soon as the current is arrested the platinum is restored to
its normal condition."

This explanation is certainly ingenious, but I do not see
how it can be made to explain these phenomena in the Home
stances. In the first place we must give so expert a chemist
as Sir William Crookes the credit for being able to distin-
guish between a live coal and a piece of incandescent plat-
inum — with the looks of both of which he was surely well
acquainted. Then, too, how is the smell, inseparable from
an experiment of this kind, to be accounted for? For we must
remember that the seances all took place in a private house.
Finally, how are we to explain the fact that the sitter, on
several occasions, held the live coal in his own hands .^ Did
Home have the audacity to hand his sitter the piece of plat-
inum too? And if so, how came it about that the sitter fdt
the heat of the coal with his cheek, at the time he w€is holding
it in his hands, and even raised a blister on his finger "the
size of a sixpence"? To my mind, the explanations do not
explain. What the ultimate explanation may be, or whether
the phenomena will ever be explained at all, I do not know;
I am merely protesting against the tendency to explain, too
readUy^ phenomena that are not understood, in the state of
our present-day knowledge, and the explanations of which


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 405

must not be forced, because ^^ an explanation of some kind
must be found " of the phenomena observed ! Better have
no explanation at all than to adopt a wrong one.

In considering these phenomena, it must be borne in mind
that those observed in the presence of D. D. Home are not
the only ones of the sort that have been recorded. Outside
of the phenomena produced in the presence of professional
mediums, outside of the phenomena of stances altogether,
there are many recorded cases in which individuals have been
enabled to handle and to walk over red-hot coals, without
visible injury, this performance being known, in the parts
of the world where it is practised, as the " fire-walk." In
order to show the close resemblance between these phenom-
ena, observed mostly in uncivilized countries, and such phe-
nomena as those observed in the presence of D. D. Home (at
least I presume this was the main motive?), Mr. Andrew
Lang collected and published in Proceedings S. P. A., VoL
XV., pp. 2-15, a collection of well attested cases of the fire-
walk, some of them being of quite recent date.

Here we find cases in which natives walk across beds of
blazing coals with bare feet, without receiving bums, or
even marks that would seem to indicate that the flesh had
in any way been subjected to great heat. It is asserted that
the heat is withstood by the natives on account of the ex-
treme toughness of the soles of their feet, they being hard-
ened by continued walking barefooted from childhood.
This explanation does not altogether cover the case, however,
as can readily be seen, when we take into consideration the
fact (1) that the stones or coals across which the natives
walk would presumably bum flesh, however hardened or
toughened (the heat, for instance, being great enough to
instantly cause a green branch of the ti the natives carried
with them to burst into flame, when thrown on to the coals
or heated stones — p. 5); and (S) because the natives who
wore European dress, shoes included, and even Europeans
themselves, have walked through the fire without in any way
being harmed, Colonel Gudgeon, British resident, Raro-


406 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

tonga, himself going through this ordeal, under the guidance
of the native priests.^

Similar cases of fire-walking are recorded in various other
books, and in other places. Mr. Lowell has seen cases in
Japan.^ A remarkable case will be found in William E.
Barton's Faith as Related to Healthy pp. 45-7. Several very
fine cases are reported in Journal S. P. R., VoL IX., pp.

* This 18 very interesting, and has often been observed in ordeals of this
character. Mr. Lowell, for instance, tells us, in his OccuU Japan, that be
witnessed the performance of walkmg uoon sharp swords — the edgies of
which he examined and found to be *' as snarp as one would care to handk
— from the hilt — and much sharper than he would care to handle in any
less legitimate manner." The native priests, nevertheless, walked up a
ladder of these swords, without cutting or even indenting the soles of their
feet. The explanation offered is that this " miracle " is due, partly to the
toughness of the soles of the feet f which may, perhaps, have been helped
along by some preparation rubbed into the soles), and partljr to the uct
that the priests were careful not to let the foot slip on tne laufenedge — a
large amount of pressure being reauired to cut the flesh, if the pressure be
applied gradually, and without allowing the knife-edge to slip along the
surface of the skm. This is the explanation offered in Shaw's Book of AdU,
in which a large number of these *' side show " tricks and devices are exposed.
That the completeness of such an explanation is questionaJble (so far as
it relates to the toughness of the soles of the feet) is proved by the fact that
Mr. Lowell's own 'boy " did the same thing in front of his very dyesl
" Asa, my house-boy, fired to emulation, suddenly pulled ofif his European
boots and socks, rolled up his European trousers, and presented himself
for a candidate for the climb. To my eye, the outlandishness of his dress,
amid the archaic costumes of the priests, gave him at once that unsuitable
appearance to the deed so consecrated to the supposed countryman who
volunteers at the circus. I should certainly have nad my doubts about the

f^nuineness of his inexperience had I not Imown him for mv own boy. . . .
o my surprise, and I think his own, he went as well as the best of them.
We watched him with some vanity and more concern, and were suddenly
electrified when, half-way up to the top, he turned, and, with a triumphant
smile, made, he too, the approved coryvhee kick high in the air. It brought
down the house, but not the boy, wno continu^ on successfully, till at
last he stepped out triumphantly at the top. He was obliged to abbreviate
the prayer, from not knowing it, and then ne too came down the regulation
back stairs " (p. 83).

The point to observe, in the above narrative, is that it is wrong to at-
tribute any part of the success of the performance to the toughness of the
soles of the feet existing in those persons undergoing the test. The ex-

Elanation must be found elsewhere — whether it be that offered by Mr.
owell or not. Doubtless the explanation of this test is a perfectly normal
one. My only reason for calling attention to it here is in order to show
that the toughness of the soles of the feet — always assumed by Europeans
as sufl^cient to explain anything of the kind recorded — frequently does
not exist, as, in tne fire tests, Europeans and persons having tender feet
are enabled to go through the test just as easily as the natives. This is also
true of the remarkable cases of boiling water tests, mentioned by Mr.
Lowell (pp. 43-6), which we cannot stop to consider now.
' Occult Japan, pp. 47-62.


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 407

S12-21. Professor Langley, of the Smithsonian Institute,
Washington, reported a very interesting case in Journal
S. P. A., Vol. X., pp. 116-Sl. Further cases and discussions
will be found in Journal, Vol. X., pp. 18«-4, 164-6, «60-3,
etc.

The net result of the discussion so far is this : that there
are evidences of a capacity by the body for resisting great
heat for a certain period, be the explanation of that fact
normal or supernormal. We have seen that the phenomena
observed in the presence of Home, on certain occasions, is
paralleled by certain other cases in which much the same
phenomena occurred, and which cannot, at least, be attrib-
uted to fraudulent manipulation of the coals, substitution of
" spongy platinimi,'' etc., as in the case of Home. The ex-
planation of these phenomena may ultimately prove to be a
purely normal one, though the evidence, in some cases, would
seem to point to a contrary conclusion. However, the ques-
tion of the interpretation and explanation of the facts does
not concern us now. Our chief and immediate concern is the
question whether such phenomena really occur at all, they
being of such a nature as to apparently sugge$t a super-
normal explanation ? If the phenomena are proved to exist,
then it will be time enough for us to search for the causes
and explanations of the phenomena. The evidence accumu-
lated in recent times, supplementing that obtained in the
presence of D. D. Home, certainly seems to show that these
phenomena really do exist, be their explanation what it may.

A word as to the possible explanation of such facts, should
they ever prove to be such. It has been proved, in recent
years, that a hypnotic subject can, by appropriate sugges-
tion, be made quite insensible to pain, and may even be
severely burnt and otherwise injured, without being in any
way aware of the fact. The skin is not injured to the same
extent that it would be, were the experiment conducted under
normal conditions, and the bums heal far more rapidly than
they would normally heal. Now, the fire-walkers are, as a
rule, in a state closely bordering on trance; the religious
ecstasy into which they have worked themselves being in


408 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism


many ways allied to that condition, as can readily be shown.
This, then, would partially, at least, account for the lack of
pain experienced at the time, and enable us to understand
how it is that the natives can walk through the ^* fiery furnace
i la mode " without experiencing the pain and suffering usu-
ally associated with bums or the proximity of extreme heat,
such as that which must doubtless be present, in many cases.
But, as Mr. Podmore points out,^ ^* the insensibility even to
severe pain which accompanies states of trance and ecstasy,
(while it) would no doubt account for the subjective immun-
ity of the devotees, (still) it will hardly explain why the skin
of the bare feet and legs was not scorched by the heat which,
in some cases, according to the observers, kindled green
leaves and melted solder on a thermometer case." That is
the crux. Why was not the flesh burnt, even though the
pain was not felt by the fire-walker? We must assume that
this mental condition would be such only, and could not affect
the conditions of, and injuries to, the bodily tissue. Yet,
even here, we might find a partial explanation, and without
going beyond the bounds or recognized limits of physiology
and psychology. The mental condition has much to do with
the speedy or slow recovery of the patient, far more than
most people know or would admit, until the facts are ex-
plained to them. The fact is that in bums generally it is
the cure that constitutes the complaint. It is the body's
feverish anxiety to repair the damage that causes all the
trouble. Even in the severest bums very little of us is ever
burnt up, but our own alarm that it may be induces our
consequent inflammation. Delbceuf showed this conclusively
upon one of his hypnotized patients. Faith, therefore, does
in very truth work the miracle. To a large extent the
mental condition can, in reality, affect the bodily conditions,
and the effects of the bums received.

It might be conceived, indeed, that the explanation lies
deeper than any that have so far been offered. It might be
conceived, it appears to me, that the " emanations " proceed-
ing from the human body, discovered by Reichenbach, and

> Modem SpirUualismf Vol. 11., p. 265.


The Mediumship of D. D. Home 409

established scientifically by De Rochas, Elmer Gates, and
others (if reports spesJc truly), might be sufficiently centred
and concentrated at one point to have the effect of resisting
the effects of heat, for some considerable period, — thereby
preventing it from reaching the skin of the person under-
going the trial. It would, in fact, act as a sort of protect-
ing surface or veil. I offer this suggestion for what it is
worth, as I have not noticed it advanced elsewhere, and, with
this si>eculative conclusion, I leave this branch of the dis*
cussion.


CHAPTER XXn

TRANCE THE CASE OF MS8. PIFEK

On p. 6, it was pointed out that the real problem of
spiritualism was whether or not it was possible to establish
any sort of communication with a spirit-world, thereby ob-
taining evidence of the soul's survival of bodily death, that
being, in fact, the real problem, the physical phenomena hav-
ing nothing to do with the question, strictly speaking. The
question before the scientific world is merely whether it is
possible, by some means or another, to isolate some individual
consciousness after death, so to speak, and to get into com-
munication with it. If that consciousness was then enabled
to give proofs of its identity, — to furnish proofs that it
was, in reality, the consciousness it claimed to be, — then we
should have scientifically demonstrated the existence of the
soul apart from the physical organism, from which it fol-
lows that it is possible for the soul to exist, because it actu-
ally does so ! It is useless to argue about the " possibility "
of the souPs existence, when we have facts at hand which will
cither prove or disprove it. The question should be treated
as purely an evidential one, the proof centring around the
fact of whether or not the soi-disant spirit is enabled to pro-
duce evidence, as a proof of its identity, which is convincing
to the scientific world. In order for a spirit to do this, it
would be necessary for it to show a knowledge of certain
facts and be possessed of certain information which that per-
son knew in real life, and which it might be supposed to
know still. If the communicating intelligence shows just this
knowledge, and demonstrates that it is possessed of the in-
formation that that person, alive, possessed ; and if this is

410


Trance — The Case of Mrs. Piper 411

given to the world through the medium, then we have very
good evidence that the intelligence is what it claims to be —
the spirit of the departed person. If it is not, where did
the medium obtain the knowledge of the facts which is
exhibited in the trance state?

A number of methods in which this knowledge can be
obtained by fraudulent means have already been given (pp.
SlS-lS), and that the vast majority of mediums employ
some such methods, and obtain their knowledge of sitters'
dead friends and relatives in the manner there suggested,
there can be no doubt. The majority of all ** test " and
" trance mediums '* are frauds, just as the mediums for phys-
ical manifestations are frauds. Mediums will combine to-
gether and exchange information about prospective and pres-
ent sitters, and furnish one another with all the information
they need, in order to dazzle the sitter with the number, the
exactitude, and the quality of the tests furnished. An aston-
ishing amount of information can be acquired in this manner,
and palmed off upon the sitter as genuine spirit evidence.
Before we can seriously consider the supernormal powers of
any trance medium, therefore, or the information that is im-
parted through her, we must first of all satisfy ourselves
that the medium is genuine, and not a mere fraud, and that
the messages are delivered in a genuine trance state, before
considering the internal value of the evidence. The question
of fraud must first of all be considered in such cases, and the
fact thoroughly demonstrated that it does not enter into the
question, before the messages can have any weight whatever.

In the case of Mrs. Piper, this question of fraud was con-
sidered most carefully in the early years of the Society's
investigations, and the more we study the case, the more are
we convinced that there cannot possibly be any system of
fraud that would account for it. Were all the mediums in
the United States to combine their information, for the ex-
clusive use of Mrs. Piper, and were she to conduct an elab-
orate system of private and paid inquiry herself, that would
not begin to account for many of the incidents that have
transpired at the Piper stances, or for the case as a whole.


412 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

The theory of fraud was carefully considered by Mr. Pod-
more,^ who concluded that fraud could not be stretched sufli-
ciently to cover the case. This was also the opinion of Mrs.
Henry Sidgwick,* Mr. Andrew Lang,' Prof. W. R. New-
bold,^ as well as of all those who have drawn up the reports
on Mrs. Piper's trances — Doctor Hodgson, Sir Oliver
Lodge, Dr. Walter Leaf, Prof. William James, Professor
Hyslop, Professor Sidgwick, Mrs. Sidgwick, Mr. Myers,
Professor Richet, etc. That so acute an investigator as
Doctor Hodgson — one so well acquainted with the tricks
and devices employed by fraudulent mediums — should be
convinced of this medium's honesty, is strong evidence in her
favor, if there were none other available. But the conditions
of the case rendered it quite impossible for the medium to
have obtained her information by fraudulent means, partly
because the watch kept upon her was too strict, and partly
because the medium was taken to England for purposes of
investigation by members of the S. P. R., and she had, per-
force, to live in the home of one or other of the investigators,
throughout her stay there. It is useless for me to attempt
any statement of the case here, however, my space being far
too limited ; interested readers I would refer to the Reports
themselves, and they can form their own opinions thereon.

Once the genuine nature of the trance state be granted,
and the fact that the messages that come through the
medium's mouth (automatic utterance), or hand (auto-
matic writing), are not the products of conscious fraud,
there is opened before us a problem the extent of which no
man can fathom. That does not necessarily mean that the
messages that are delivered in the trance state are spirit
messages — not by any means; they may be the result of
the activity of the secondary consciousness of the medium,
active, at the time, and passing itself off as a spirit — the
supernormal knowledge displayed being gained by means of
telepathy, clairvoyance, and such supernormal processes, and

" Proceedings S. P. R., Vol. XIV., pp. 60-78.

• Proceedingft S. P. -B., Vol. XV., pp. 16-38.
» Proceedings S. P. H., Vol. XV., pp. 39-52.

• Proceedings S. P. R., Vol. XIV., pp. 6-49.


Trance — The Case of Mrs. Piper 413

woven together by the medium's secondary consciousness to
personate a spirit. We know that this is frequently done, the
analogy of hypnotically induced personalities guiding us in
the investigation of these trance personalities. Whether we
have to seek beyond any such interpretation of the facts, and
be ultimately forced into an acceptance of some sort of spir-
itistic theory, as a working hypothesis, is too large a ques-
tion to be discussed here. In such books as Professor
Hyslop's Science and a Future Life and M. Sage's Mrs.
Piper and the Society for Psychical Research the problem
will be found discussed at length, though in a semi-popular
manner, suitable for readers who do not care to read through
the voluminous reports contained in the Society's Proceed-
ings. To those books and publications I would refer the
interested student for full particulars of this most marvellous
case.

The difficulties that are encountered in any investigation
such as this should be apparent. Even after the genuine
supernormal state has been granted, the problem only begins,
and the difficulties within the problem are such as to cause
many a man to halt and turn back. But it must be pointed
out that, whether spiritism be accepted or not, as the true
explanation of the present problem, there is no scientific
objection to the theory of spiritism, as such, as many per-
sons think. It must be remembered that, even in this life,
we only infer the presence of a consciousness, in any individ-
ual, by its outward manifestations, by bodily movements, or
by the marks made upon paper by the body in some of its
movements, and reinterpreted by us back into consciousness.
We never come into any actual contact with a consciousness,
throughout life, and we never can; we know it only by
inference from external bodily or vibratory movements.
Now, if those movements were to stop, at any time, we should
be justified in supposing that the consciousness was no
longer present, inasmuch as we no longer have evidence of
its existence. Yet, in many cases, we know that this would
be mistaken inference; as in trance, paralysis, and kindred
states and affections that render impossible the usual outward


414 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

manifestation of consciousness, the consdousness continues
to exist, though there is no evidence of its existence, and we
should theoretically be justified in asserting that the con-
sciousness was no longer active and alive. Now, at death,
this same cessation of the external evidences of consciousness
takes place, but we are not thereby entitled to assert that the
consciousness is obliterated any more than it was obliterated
in the cases above cited. It may have been simply with-
draum^ and this hypothesis would leave us free to believe in
the possibility of a omsciousness existing after the death of
the body, and it would then become merely a matter of evi-
dence as to whether it did so exist, or not. It would no
longer be a question of theory, but of fact. And that is the
standpoint of the psychical researcher, who throws theory
to the winds, and confines himself to the investigation of
fiictSy and to those alone. After the facts are established,
it will be time enough to theorize about them.


CHAPTER XXTTT


8I7MMABY AND CONCLUSIOK


The task I set myself is now complete, and it but remains
for me to summarize the results attained. We have seen that
the vast bulk of the physical phenomena of spiritualism are
certainly produced by fraudulent means and devices, and
that, so far as the professional medium is omcemed, at any
rate, we are to expect nothing genuine in the way of either
mental or j^ysical phenomena. It is best to rely entirely
on the results obtained through the services of non-prof es*
sional mediums, and even here we must assure ourselves that
the conditions of the experiment render fraud a physical im-
possibility, before we assume that the phenomena observed are
the result of any supernormal power or force. The methods
by which an expert can deceive his sitter are so numerous
that it is an utter impossibility for the average person to
detect the fraud practised upon him, for, if he could, me-
diumship of that character would soon be a thing of the past.
Before the real or genuine phenomena can be discovered and
brought to the attention of the scientific world, therefore,
this preliminary work of disposing of the fraudulent side of
the question must first be undertaken and systematically car-
ried out ; and it is with the hope that this book may help, in
some small degree, to make clear the characteristics of the
fraudulent phenomena, and to show the means by which they
are performed (thus placing the sitter on his guard, and
enabling him to distinguish the fraudulent from the gen-
uine), that the task of compiling it has been undertaken.

While sounding a timely warning, however, by thus call-
ing the public attention to the methods of trickery at present

415


416 The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

in vogue, I do not wish it to be understood that I ther^y
relegate the whole of the evidence for the supernormal to
the waste-basket. That is precisely what I do not wish to do
or lead others to do. It is because I believe that there do
exist certain phenomena, the ezplanaticms for which have not
yet been found, and which I think science should be induced
to systematically study, that I think it necessary to distin-
guish those phenomena from the fraudulent ^ marvels " so
commonly produced, and which are the only spiritualistic
phenomena with which the public is acquainted. When these
shall have been cleared away, and the weeding-out process
carried sufficiently far to enable us to see what are the ^* real
problems'' to be solved, then the real, systematic, scientific
study of psychic phenomena will have begun.

In the present book, I have, accordingly, tried to show
which phenomena are most probably genuine, and hence most
worthy of the initial study of the scientific world. Raps,
telekinetic phenomena, trance, apparitions, haunted houses,
telepathy, clairvoyance, premonitions, as well as hypnotic
phenomena, alterations of personality, subconscious mental
activity, all these phenomena can be investigated by scientists,
and should be investigated, since they have much evidence in
their favor (as real phenomena) and investigation along
these lines is much to be desired. It is to be hoped that the
scientific world will shortly realize its duty, in this respect,
and undertake the inquiry so long neglected.

I cannot claim that the present book is in any way ex-
haustive, since the subject is practically inexhaustible. New
methods of trickery will doubtless be invented by mediums,
from time to time ; but it is probable that the physical phe-
nomena of spiritualism will gradually die out, owing to
fewer and fewer believers in the reality of the phenomena,
and that in a short time there will be but few mediums who
can make a living at this " phase ** of the subject. So soon
as the trade ceases to be profitable, it is certain that the pro-
fessional medium will cease to exist, and then we may arrive
at that point when a scientific examination of genuine phe-
nomena can be undertaken. In short, psychical research will


Summary and Condusion 417

then itself become a science. It is the hope of the author
that — by clearing away many of the obstructions that exist,
in the shape of fraudulent phenomena — this book may help
to lay the foundations of such a science^


THE END.


INDEX


Abbott, Mn., Perfonnanoes of, 204.

Ability to detect fraud, 60.

Abnormality, Question of, 58, 327-30, 363-4.

Accordion test, Zollner's, 28; methods of plasring, by fraud, 199-200;

Crookes' experiments with Home, 374-7; case recorded by M. J.

Savaee, 374.
Aksakof, M., On a case of partial dematerialisation of a medium's body,

235-7.
Apports, Theories of, 253; inconclusive nature of evidence for, 253;

methods of obtaining by fraud, 254.
Attention, Distraction of, 49.

Baldwins, The, Their mind-reading performanoe, 308-10.

Bandage test. Inconclusive nature of, 7.

Bangs sisters, Exposure of, 91.

Barrett, Prof. W. F., On table-tumine, 65-6; on raps, 340-1, 350-1; on
the mediumship of D. D. Home, 388.

Bellachini, Evidence of, in favor of Slade, 40; why inconclusive, 40-1.

Bennett, E. T., On the neglect of the investigation of raps, 346.

Binet, Prof. A., On table-turning, 71.

Blank stances vs, exposure, 62.

Blavatsky, Mme., Once a spiritualist, 15; her method of obtaining spirit-
pictures, 221.

" Blue Book," Description of, 314-16.

Bolts, Trick, 183.

Braune, Prof., Levitated by Slade, 28.

Brotherhood of mediums, 314-16.

Cabinets, " Spirit," 184; examination of, 272-5; miniature, 202-3.

Cage test, 184.

Cheiro's instrument for measuring " psychic force," 358-9.

Clairvoyance, historical evidence tor, 6-7.

Clothes, Methods of concealing, in a guitar, 249-50; in a dummy watch,

250; in hollow boot-heel, 250; in hollow table and chair legpi, 250; in

a snare-drum, 260; in a table drawer, 261.
Collar, " Spirit," 183.

Colley, Archdeacon, On materialisation, 238.
Compass, Experiments with, 25-6.
Conditions required at stances, 187, 334-5.
Conjuring, Psychological rules of, 48, 49, 50.
Consciousness, Always inferred, 413-14.
Conviction, Only induced by mass of evidence, 360.
Cotton bandase test, 149-52.
Crawford, Ean of {see Lindsay, Master oO*

419


420 Index

Crookes, Sir Wniiam, On materialization, 237; on raps, 341-2; on Home's
phenomena, 377; his spring-balance test, 373-4; on levitation, 379-^
on the fire tests, 400-1.

Crowd, Psycholo^ of, 59-W.

Cui bono t Question of, 325-6.


Davenport brothers, History of, 153; deseription of the light stance, 154-7;

description of the dark stance, 158-61 ; explanation of the rope ties,

161-4; the flour test, 164-5; playing of musical instruments, 166;

outline of feet on paper trick, 166-7; coat test, 167.
Davey, S. J., On EgUnton, 87-8; duplicating Eglinton's B^anoes, 88-90.
Dematerialization {see Materialization).
Dcssoir, Prof. Max, On the psychology of conjuring, 51.
Development fraud, 260.
Direction of the movement of table, 70-1.
Dowsing, As an example of unconscious muscular action, 68-9; sensations

during, 366.


Eddy Brothers, Description of stance and cabinet, lOS-4; ezplaastion of

the stance, 194-5.
Eelinton's mediumship, 85-7, 89-90.
Electrical conditions of the body, 359.
Elongation, Case of D. D. Home, 394-5; nature of the evidence, 395-6,

399; criticism of the evidence, 399; recent case of, 396-7; criticism of,

397-8.
Envelopes, Imperfect sealing of, 286; opacity of, 286.
d'Esperance, Mme., Mediumship of, 235-7.
Examination of cabinets, 272-5; of trick-slates, 123.
Exposure ve, blank stances, 62.
Eyes, As distractors of attention, 48.


FacU, as opposed to their interpretation, 321-2, 323, 359, 361, 414.

Faraday, Prof., On table-turning, 67.

Fay, Annie Eva, 152-3 {see Cotton bandage test).

Fays, The, Their mind-reading performance, 310-11.

Fechner, Prof., On Slade, 28.

Fire tests, Cases of, 399-401; nature of the evidence in, 401-2, 403, 404,
405, 407: methods of duplicating by fraud, 402-4.

Fire walk. Phenomena of, 405-7; possible explanations of, 407-9.

Flammarion, Camille, On the importance of psychical research, 327.

Flournoy, Prof., On telekinesis, 368-9.

Force, Extent of, possessed by table, 66, 68.

Forms, Materialized, by means of robes and masks, 251; by impersonations
by the medium, 251.

Foster, Charles H., Mediumship of, 7-8; exposure of, 8; confession of, 9.

Fox sisters, 77; report of the *' Buffalo Doctors," 78; inconclusive nature
of the evidence, 78; Harvard professors on, 78; Seybert Commission
on, 78.

Fraud, Extent of, 6; ability to detect, 60.

Full-form materialization, Methods of producing by fraud, 256-7; ma-
terialization from the floor by fraudulent means, 257; description of
stance for, 261-7.

Funk, Dr. I. K., On spirit-photography, 209.


Index 421

Fumess. Dr., On Keeler's spirit-photographB, 207.
Future life, onl^ proved by psycnical research phenomena, 324, 327; no
a priori objections to, 413.

Genuine phenomena, ReMuum of, 336, 416.

Guitar, ^If-playing, 197; method of playing when both hands are held,
197-8.

Hallucination: In connection with poltergeist phenomena, 365; at W. S.

Moses' stances, 365; in haunted houses. 365-6; in the Home case:

Podmore on, 38i6-7; evidence supporting nis position, 387-8; evidence

opposed to it, 388-93.
Hammond, Dr., On electrical conditions of the body, 359.
Handcuffs. The trick chain link, 179-80; methods of loosening locks, 181;

keys, number and make of, 181; methods of disposing of the keys,

182; manipulation of the keys, 182-3.
Hands, materialized, methods of producing by fraud, 244-9.
Hare, Dr., Experiments of, 19.
Henry, T. S., On the exposure of Mrs. Bfellon, 233-4.
Hindu juggler incident, 53.
Hodgson, Dr. R., On bandaging the eyes, 7; on Eusapia Paladino, 12; on

the theosophical phenomena, 16, 18; on slate-writmg phenomena, 57;

on E^glinton, 86; on Mrs. Abbott, 205; on abnormsd conditions in

the trance state, 329; vitality sapped by sittings with Mrs. Piper,

357; on Indian magic, 390, 392-3; on Mrs. Piper, 412.
Holding tests, Satisfactory nature of, 186; amount of control allowed in,

187; fin^r hold, 187; release from, 188; hands held by the medium,

189; wnst hold, 189; release from, 190; clapping hands test, 190;

feather test, 190; encircled arms release, 191; confederates, 191;

foot release, 191-2; Paladino hold, 192; false hand and lumdkerchief

test, 192-;3.
Home, D. D., Never detected in fraud, 372; his character, 372-3 {see under

Levitation, Elongation, Fire tests, Accordion tests. Hallucinations;

also Crookes, Jencken, Podmore, etc.).
Horn, Methods of playing under test conditions, 201-2.
Hou(&i, Robert, Cm the Davenport brothers, 154-67.
Houdini, Harry, His handcuff act, 179, 182.
Hyslop, Prof. J. H., On Hare's experiments, 19; on Zdllner's experiments,

37-9; on Mrs. Abbott, 205; on importance of psychical research, 327;

on the real problems of psychical research, 333; on Mrs. Piper, 412.

Indian magic, 389-93; affords no evidence of hallucination theory in the

Home case, 393.
Inference and observation. Relation of, 52, 59.
Imperfect sealing of envelopes, 286.

Information concerning sitters. Methods of gathering, 313-18.
Interpretation of facts observed, 65, 321-2, 323.
InteUigence, possessed by table, 66, 72; hypothetical explanations of

369-70.

Jacolliot, M., On raps, 347-9.
James, Prof. William, On Mrs. Piper, 412.

Jastrow, Prof. Joseph, On the psychology of deception, 57-8; on un-
conscious muscular action, 67.
Jencken, H. D., On Home's elon^tion, 394.
Johnson, Miss Alice, On Eusapia Paladino, 13.


422 Index

Kellar, Hany, A pupQ of the Davenports, 153.

Knots in endlesB cords, 35-6; probable explanation of, 41-3; methods of

fraudulently obtaining, 43-7.
Keeler, W., Inoonolusive nature of his spiritrphotographs, 207.


Lang, Andrew, On the Question of the utility of psychical resrardi, 326;

on abnormalitv, 330: on poltergeists, 363; on hallucination in the

Home case, 388; on Home's fire tests, 401; on the fire walk, 405; on

Mrs. Piper, 412.
Langiey, Prof., On the fire walk, 407.

Languages, Foreign, supposedly unknown to the medium, 62.
Leaf, Dr. Walter, On Mrs. Piper, 412.
Levitation, Cases of, 377-80; mass of evidence in favor of, 381; methods

of fraudulently imitating, 382-3; theories of, 383-5; relation to tele-

kinetio phenomena, 386.
Lewis, Prof. Carvill, On Eglinton, 86.
Lights, " Spirit," methods of obtaining by fraud, 252-3.
Limits of the possible, 322-3, 393.
Lindsay, Master of. On Home's levitation, 378-9; on Home's elcmgatioQ,

395; on the fire tests, 399-400.
Lodge, Sir O. J., On Mn. Abbott, 205; on telekinesis, 368, 370-1; on Mrs.

Piper. 412.
Lowell, Percival, On sensadons experienced during possession, 357; on

the fire walk, 406.
Luminous paint, Methods of powdering, 269; methods of utilising, 269-70.

Maldesoription, Ebcamoles of, 54, 55-6, 56-7.

Maskelyne, J. N., On Mrs. Abbott, 204; on materialisation, 238; on the
Davenports, 153.

Materialism, as opposed to spiritualism, 3.

Materialization, Theory of, 230; scientific possibilitv of, 231, 237: history
of fraud in connection with, 231-2, 234; full-form (see Full-form
materialization) .

Materializing stance, Description of, 239-44, 261-7; methods of fraudu-
lently producing materialization from the floor, 271-2.

Matter through matter, Explanation of a supposed case of, 33-4.

Biaxwell, Dr., On Eusapia Paladino, 13; on the Davey-Hodgson stances,
90; on materialization, 237; on abnormality, 329-30; on raps, 342-4,
345; on the personality of raps, 350-1; theory of the nature of, 355-7;
on telekinetic phenomena, 360, 367-8, 369-70.

Mellon. Mrs.. Endorsed by Wm. T. Stead, 232: exposure of, 233-4.

Mind-reading performances, — telling the total of a row of figures on a
slate, 295; conve3ring information by means of a fountain-pen, 295-6;
code signals, 296-7; communicating by electricity, 297-8; by means
of a mirror, 298; silent codes: bv passes, 298-300; the Svengalis'
performance, 300-2; by finser and arm movements, 302-5; by deep
breathing, 305-6; by mental counting, 306-8; the Baldwins' perform-
ance, 308-10; the Fays' performance, 310-11.

Miracles, Scientific possibflity of, 385.

Morbidity, Question of, 58, 327-30, 363-4.

Moses, \v. S., lUsum^ of case, 14; paradoxical nature of evidence, 15.

Movement of objects without contact {see Telekinesis).

Muscle-reading, Distinct from mind-reading, 291; modus operandi of, 293-4.

Music-boxes, Trick, 198-9.

Myers, F. W. H., On materialization, 237; on the importance of psychical


Index 423

research, 327; on morbidity, 328; on telekineais, 968, 371; on Mrs.
Piper, 412.

Names, How found and given by a medium, 317«
Newbold, Prof. W., On Mrs. Piper, 412.
Note-taking at stances, 60-1.
Numbers on watches. How to tell, 280.

Objections to a future life, No a Tpiori. 413.

Observation and inference, Relation of, 52, 59.

Opacity of envelopes, 286.

Ostwald, Dr., On scientific methods, 325.

Ouija board, Explanation of movements of, 67, 70, 72.

Owen, R. D., On the importance of psychical research, 327.

Paintings, Oil (spirit), produced bv fraud, 221; trap-door method, 222:
hollow chair method, 222; duplicate canvas method, 222; chemical
method, 222; self-developing method, 222-3.

Paladino, Eusapia, Early mediumship of, 11; He Roubaud phenomena,
11-12; Dr. Hodgson's attack on, 12; Cambridge sittings with. 12;
detection of fraud in, 12; newer evidence, 13; Dr. Maxwell's defence
of, 13; inconclusiveness of the case, 13-14; method of holding her
hands and the release, 192.

Palma exposed. 91.

Paraffine mould test, described, 224-5; methods of producing the moulds,
225; apparent impossibility of obtaining by normal means, 226;
where the moulds are secreted, 227; how the moulds are introduced into
the cabinet, 227: methods of decreasing the weight of the paU, ^27-8;
moulds obtained over materialized faces, 229; explanation of, 229.

Patholo^cal states (aee Morbidity and Abnormality).

Peculiarity of sound, in raps, 347-9.

Personal experience, m obtaining raps, 352-4.

Personality of the raps, 349-51.

Peters, Alfred, Elongation of, 396-7.

Photographing Indian conjurors, 391-2.

Photography of supernormal events, 76.

Photography, Spirit («ee Spirit-photography).

Philosophy, Worthlessness of, for proving future life, 324, 332-3.

Pictures, Spirit, on slates, 115-6 {see Paintings).

Piper, Mrs., Question of abnormality of, 329; feeling of depression after
sitting, 357; impossibility of fraud in the case of, 411-2; alternative
theories of trance personalities, 412-3.

Planchette board, explanation of its movements, 67, 70, 72.

Planting a town, 31d.

Podmore, Frank, On Hare's experiments, 20; on table-tumii^, 65; on
the Davenports, 153; on the Home phenomena, 336-7, 377; on pol-
tergeists, 362-3; on Home's character, 372; on hallucination in the
Home case, 386-7; on Home's elongation, 398-9; on Home's fire tests,
401-2; on the fire walk, 408; on Mrs. Piper, 412.

Poltergeists, 362-7.

Possible, Limits of the, 322-3, 393.

Posts, Spirit, 168-71.

Power, Pretended exhaustion of, 63.

Precipitated chalk marks, 142.

Prejudice of scientific men, 322*


424 Index

PreparatioiiB of medium for stance. 172-^.
Professional mediums, Untrustworthy character of, 9-10.
Psychical research, Nature of the evidence in, 24; present crude oonditioo
of, 324.

Rape, Methods of obtaining by fraud, 79-82; sdentiGio poosibility of, 340;
possibility of controlling, 345-6, 353; sensations auring the produc-
tion of, 345; personal experience in obtaining, 352-4; poasmle ex-
I>lanation of, 355-7.

Rapping chairs, 79; tables, 78.

Real problems psychical research has to solve, 5, 332-3, 410-11, 414.

Religious objections to the study of pyschical research, considered, 326,
331.

Richet, Prof. Charles, On materialisation, 237; on Mrs. Piper, 412.

Rang passed onto arm test, 33-4.

Rope-climbing exploit, 390-2.

Rope-tyin^ methods : '* Slack," how to obtain, 143-4, 146; tape test, 144-5;
breakmg the seals method, 146; duplicate rope method, 146; false
sleeves method, 147; spirit necktie, 147-9; post tests: chjsel method,
168-70; hollow post method, 170-1; staples and swinging board test,
171; spiritualistic couch, 172; pillory, 172.

Rules for conjurers, 48, 49, 50.

Sack tests: Bfethod with a duplicate sack, 173-4: bolster method, 174-5;
method with a steel collar, 175; method witn sealed tapes, 175-9.

Savage, Minot J., On the accordion test, 374.

Scientific men. Prejudice of, 322.

Sealed-letter reading, 7-8; carbon sheet (pad) method, 276-7; paraffine
sheet method, 277; soaped sheet method, 277; sheet of glass method,
277; soft paper and hard pencil method, 278; exchange of pellets
method, 279; the " one ahead " trick, 279-80; numbers on watches,
how to tell, 280; sealed-letter reading: public stances, 280-2; by
means of trick-table, 283; alcohol and envelope test, 2S4; the slit
envelope method, 285; answer on the inside ot the envelope, 285-6:
imperfect sealing of envelopes, 286; opacity of envelopes, 286;
mirror table, 287; methods of opening sealed letters, 287-90.

Stonce, a producer of abnormal mental states, 58.

Searching medium: Methods of concealing clothes during the process of,
250-1, 256-7.

Seeman, " Baron " Hartwig, On raps, 349.

Sensations during the production of phenomena, 345, 356-7, 366-7.

Sidgwick, Prof. H., On Dr. Hart's criticisms of psychical research, 322;
on Mrs. Piper, 412.

Sidgwick, Mrs., Criticisms of Zdllner's experiments, 37; on Eglinton, 85;
on spirit-photography, 208-9; on Mrs. Mellon, 232; on Mrs. Piper, 412

Slade, Dr. Henry, Career of, 20-4; fraud committed by, detected by Sey-
bert Commission, 21; by J. W. Truesdell, 22, 23; confession of, 22, 2.3;
slate tests of, 25; Carl Willmann's testimony concerning, 25; experi-
ments with a compass, 25-6; telekinetic phenomena, 26-7; levitation.
27-8; coins in sealed boxes test, 29; impressions of naked feet, 29-30;
rings on table-leg, 30-1; probable explanation of, 31-2; knots in endless
cords, 35-6; probable explanation of, 41-3; defective nature of the
evidence, 36-41.

Slate-writing stances, Imperfections of evidence in, 54; Slate-writing tests.
MethocU of obtaining writing by fraud :
§ 1. With a single sUile {prepared).
Flap method, 91-2; another use for the flap, 92; silk flap, 92-3; endless


Index 425

band slate. 93; another way of working the flap-slate, 94-6; the
imperfect flap, 96-7; slate and pellet test, 97-8; onion juioe method,
98; colored chalks method, 99; acid writing method, 99; scratching
method^ 100; producing the sound of writing, 100-1.
§ 2. With a single slate {unprepared).

Medium invariably handles the slates. 102-3; difficulties of detecting
trickery. 103; the finger-nail methoa, 104-5; thimble method, 106;
prepared finger method, 106; the ** materialiaed " slate-pencil test,
106^; watcn-s{)ring and card method, 109; the alcohol test, 109;
the caustic pencil test, 110-11; strip of wood test. 111; writing with
the toes, 111-12; writing with the teeth, 112; methoa with a pile of
four slates, 112-13; same test — another method, 113-14; the slit
carpet test, 114; trick-chair method, 114-15; exchanoe by means of
the table-cloth, 116-17; hollow table and boy methoa, 117-18; hollow
table and trap-door method, 118.
§3. Methods with a double slate {prepared).

False flap and spring catch methoa, 119: the grooved-frame slate
test, 120; the cardboard slate test, 120-1; the key and thimble method,
121; the flap and transposition method, 122; the trick-hinge slate,
122; the box slate, 122-3; answer on the question-paper test. 123;
same test — when the paper is marked, 123-4; hinged slate ana trick
table method, 124; slate-writing by electricity, 124; slate and pre-

rared dictionary test, 124-5; method with an ordinary dictionary, 125-7.
4. Methods toith a douUe date (unprepared).
Wedge and umbrella wire test, 128-9; transposition and substitution
method, 129-30; frameless slates test, 130-1; pellets and slate sub-
stitution method, 132-4; public test stances, ld4; magnet and trick-
chalk method, 134-6; trap-door method, 136-8; table drawer method,
138; bureau method, 138.
f 5. Miscdlaneous tests.

Hermetically sealed vials, 139; writing obtained by heat, 140;
chemical methods, 140; exchanoe of vials, 140; blood writine on
the arm: pointed stick method, 140-1; glycerine and ashes method,
141; strip of wood method, 141; spirit-typewriter test, 141-2.

Soimd of writing, Difficulty in locating, 100; methods of imitating the
sound of wntinff by fraud, 100-1.

Spirit-photography, Problem of, 206; conditions excluding fraud in, 207;
Seybert Commission on, 207; A. R. Wallace on, 208; Mrs. Sidgwick
on, 208-9; inconclusive nature of the evidence for, 209-11; theo-
retical possibility of, 210; methods of obtaining by fraud: imper-
fect cleansing of the plates, 214; ^ass bath and concealed light
method, 215; exposure while examining plate, 215-16; microscopic
picture device, 216; by retouching, 216; double exposure, 217;
painting the back screen, 217; celluloid figures, 217; douole printing,
217; faces obtained on plates in a strange city, 218-20; pictures,
" spirit," obtained by fraud, 220-1.

Spiritism, Defined, 3.

Spiritualism, Defined, 3, 4; origins of. 4; not dependent upon physical
phenomena, 4-5; extent of fraud connected with, 6; as a creed,
rationality of, 338; summing-up of, 338-9.

Spring balance test (Crookes), 373-4.

Standard of evidence, 323-4.

Staples, Trick, 183.

Stead. William T., On Mrs. Mellon, 232.

" Suckers," Meaning of the term, 258; methods of " working,'' 258^.

Suggestion, a factor in the distraction of attention, 49.

Svengalis, The, Their mind-reading performance, 300-2,


426 Index

Table, Intelligenee poMMed hv, 66. 72.

Table-turaiiig, Description of the pnenomena. 64; Prof. Faraday's theory

of, 67; sdentiGic attitude toward, 71; by fraudulent means, 73-4.
Tdegraph, EUeotric, as a means of spirit commimication, 82^^.
Tekkinesis, Methods of fraudulently imitating the phenomena, 358;

probable reality of, 360; nature of, 367-71; related to levitation, 386.
Telepathy, Unknown nature of, 291; imposBU>ility of controlling, 291.
Tdeeoopio rod, 196-7; uses of, 197.
Theoflophy, 16-18.

Theoflophical Societv, Relations of, to S. P. R., 15-18.
1 bought photograpny, 210.
Thread tie, as a oonvmcing test, 184-5.
Trance mediums, Idaiority of, fraudulent, 411.
TrapKioors, 260-1, 272-3.
Trumpet oiediums, Biethoda of obtaining voices by fraud, 201.

Unconscious muscular action, 67, 68.

Utility of psychical research. Question of, 325.

Vest-turning trick, 203-4.

Voices, Independent (see Trumpet mediums).

Wallace, Dr. A. R., On spirit-photography, 208; on the relative importance

of mental and physical pnenomena, 334.
Water, Cases of agitation oi, 364-5.
Willmann, Cari, Cm the Slade phenomena, 26.
Wijk, H., On raps, 345^.
Wire cage test, 184.
