A Memoir of Jacques Cartier (James Phinney Baxter, 1906)
==========================================================
Baxter's Memoir of Jacques Cartier (1906) - the standard English collection of Cartier's 1534-42 St. Lawrence voyages, the founding documents of French Canada, newly translated with commentary.

JACQUES CARTIER

A MEMOIR OF

JACQUES CARTIER

SIEUR DE UMOILOU

HIS VOYAGES TO THE ST. LAWRENCE

A BIBLIOGRAPHY AND A FACSIMILE OF
THE MANUSCRIPT OF 1534
WITH ANNOTATIONS,

ETC.

BY

JAMES PHINNEY BAXTER, A. M., Litt. D.

AUTHOR or UR F1RD1NANDO GORGE* AMD HU PROVINCE
OP UA1NB ; THE PIONEER* OP NEW PRANCE IN

NEW ENGLAND J THE BRITISH INVASION <

PROM THE NORTH, BTC.

NEW YORK

DODD, MEAD & COMPANY

1906

C*r !7S~. /jr
3

- \

HARVARD

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY

V-_

Copyright, 1906, by
Dodd, Mead & Company

THE DtrnfNI FEU*

CONTENTS

FACS

PREFACE . i

MEMOIR. 7

VOYAGE OF 1534 . 73

VOYAGE OF 1535-6 .121

TO THE KING.125

CARTIER’S VOCABULARY OF THE LANGUAGE OF

THE NATIVES OF CANADA.210

VOYAGE OF 1540.217

VOYAGE OF ROBERVAL, 1542.233

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE, PILOT OF ROBERVAL 243

FACSIMILE OF MANUSCRIPT OF CARTIER’S FIRST

VOYAGE.261

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS.297

GENEALOGY OF CARTIER’S FAMILY . . 392

BIBLIOGRAPHY.393

ITINERARY OF CARTIER'S VOYAGES . .419

ANALYTICAL INDEX.427

vii

ILLUSTRATIONS

Pottnit of Cartier, from original in the Hdtel de Vi lie, St, Malo Frentispiea
The manor-house at Limoilou ..... Feeing 10
Landing in 1534 22

Plan of Hochelaga ...... ** 3 2

Chart of Cantino, 150*.60

Chart of Riccardiana, 1534-40.61

Chart of La Cosa, 1500.62

Chart of Portuguese, 1504 ....... 63

Chart of Reinel, 1 505.64

Chart of Waldseemfiller, 1507, showing America ... 65

Chart of Ruysch, 1508.66

Chart of Maggiolo, 1527 ....... 67

Chart of Ribeiro, 1529.68

Chart of Desliens, 1541.69

Facsimile of page of Manuscript No. 5589 . ** 136

Arrival at Stadacone, 1535 . Faring p»gt 146

Conference at Stadaconl, 1536 ** 174

Coast of Labrador.246

Coast of Newfoundland ....... 248

Coast of Cape Breton.249

The St. Lawrence, Saguenay, and Anticosti 253

Anticosti and entrance to the St. Lawrence .256

Coast of Maine.258

Facsimile of list of Cartier's crew.311—31 ^

La Ncmora Francis ...... Fmringfag* 320

Chart of Cartier’s routes, 1534, 1535, and 1536 “ 426

ix

PREFACE

I T is to be ever regretted that so much concerning
Jacques Cartier and his work has perished. Of
his first voyage of discovery English readers pos¬
sessed for nearly three centuries only a translation
from the Italian Ramusio’s work of 1556, made by
Jean Florio. This English translation was printed
in London in 1580. Sixty-four years passed after this
famous voyage before Cartier’s own countrymen
could read an account of it in their own tongue;
then, in 1598, appeared the edition of Raphael du
Petit Val. In 1600 appeared Hakluyt’s account of
the voyage, which was subsequently reprinted by
Pinkerton and Churchill in their collection of voy¬
ages, and this is the version heretofore known to
English readers. Lescarbot, in his “ Histoire de la
Nouvelle France,” Paris, 1612, gives a relation of
Carder’s voyages mingled with those of Champlain,
and this is the account best known to Frenchmen.

In 1867 an important discovery was made in the
Biblioth&que Implriale, Paris, of an ancient manu¬
script which proved to be a relation of Cartier’s first
voyage, differing considerably from the other ver¬
sions, and bearing evidence of being the original
account as related by the great discoverer himself.
This was printed literatim the same year by MM.
Michelant and Rami, and denominated the “ Rela-

PREFACE

tion Originate du Voyage de Jacques Cartier au
Canada, en 1534.”

My interest in French history, and especially in
that part of it relating to the North American con¬
tinent, having led me to a particular study of the
several accounts of Cartier’s voyage of 1534, I was
convinced that an English translation of the “ Rela¬
tion Originate ” should be made, and that the work
might be made as accurate as possible, I procured,
through the kind offices of Mr. Henry Vignaud,
our assistant secretary of legation at Paris, a photo¬
graphic copy of the original manuscript. The age
of this precious document cannot be questioned. It
is unmistakably an excellent example of the peculiar
handwriting of the early part of the sixteenth cen¬
tury, and although I wholly differ with some en¬
thusiastic writers, who, on the dawn of its discovery,
hailed it as the veritable production of Cartier’s pen, I
do not doubt that it is his own account of the voy¬
age, in part if not in whole. The marks of his per¬
sonality are frequently visible in the text; at one time
in the use of the personal pronoun; at another, in a
modest attempt to avoid obtrusiveness; and at all
times in the use of sea terms familiar among Ma-
louin seamen, which at least show it to be a personal
narrative. Note the use of the pronoun: “I named
this island Sainct Katherine”; “ I consider”; “I did
not see a cart-load of earth ”; “ I landed in many
places”; etc. Mentioning the naming of a harbor,
"It was named the haven Jacques Cartier.” Is not
this the natural expression of a modest man, who did
not care to make himself conspicuous ? Had it been
written by one of Cartier’s men, would he have dis-
2

PREFACE

missed the matter so summarily? Would he not
have added that it was so named in honor of the
captain ?

After translating the “Relation Originate” of
1534, it seemed to me best to translate the second and
most important of Cartier’s voyages.

In 1545 the account of Cartier’s second voyage
was published in Paris, under the title of the “Bref
R6cit,” and in 1556 it was translated into Italian and
published at Venice by Ramusio in his “ Navigationi
et Viaggi.”

In 1580 it was published in London in connection
with the first voyage, in a translation from Ramusio
by Jean Florio, as already mentioned, and also, in
1600, by Hakluyt. As in the case of the first voy¬
age, English readers have derived their knowledge
of the second from Hakluyt.

Of the “Bref R6cit,” published in 1545, during
Cartier’s life, but a single copy is known to be in
existence. This copy is in the British Museum, and
a reprint of it in French was made at Paris in 1863
by the Librairie Tross under the editorship of M.
d’Avezac.

Of this second voyage there exist three contem¬
porary manuscripts in the Biblioth&que Nationale,
numbered 5589, 5644, and 5653, which vary but
slightly from one another, of which that num¬
bered 5653 was probably used by the ancient
editor of the “ Bref R6cit.” A comparison of these
manuscripts with the “ Bref R6cit,” besides dis¬
crepancies in spelling, which we might expect in
copies made at a time when literal accuracy was
deemed less important than now, reveals numerous
3

PREFACE

curious errors and omissions. Not only are many
words which appear in the manuscripts found
wanting in the printed copy, but words have been
added by the editor, and, most surprising of all, two
entire chapters, the eleventh and twelfth, have been
wholly dropped out. Finding the “ Bref Recit ” so
inadequate for my purpose, I thought best to trans¬
late one of the three manuscripts, and selected that
numbered 5589, which in some respects I prefer to
either of the others, and this I have translated and
present to the reader in this volume.

The fragment of the account of the third voyage
I have taken from Hakluyt, it being the only version
known. The loss of that portion relating to Cartier's
experiences during the winter of 1541-2 will ever
be keenly regretted by historical students.

As a number of documents of historic value
relating to the subject have recently come to light,
but lie perdu to English readers in the ancient
French, it seemed necessary to translate them into
English. This, in order to make my work more
complete, I have done, and have added them to
the voyages, under the head of “ Collateral Docu¬
ments.” That we have any of this interesting
material relating to the early French history of
Canada is a matter of congratulation, when we con¬
sider the vicissitudes to which the archives of France
have been subjected. No longer ago than 1815, an
official, desiring a room for his secretary, cleared
out from their resting-place a vast collection of such
material and sent it to “Les 6pici£res de Versailles”, 1
and a successor, some years later, adopted this man's

1 Le Monitntr, quoted by Harruse.

4

PREFACE

criminal example and sold entire files by weight for
his private gain. It seems strange that the voyages
of Cartier have been translated only into Italian and
English. I was not aware of this until I began
to prepare a bibliography of the literature relating
to diem, but I found, upon application to the princi¬
pal libraries of Russia, Sweden, Germany, Holland,
and Spain, that they possessed only French versions.

In the course of my work the necessity of copious
annotations became evident to me. Cartier every¬
where speaks of the fauna and flora of the country
he had discovered, and notes differences in the tribes
he encountered, both in appearance and language.
A study, therefore, of the animal and plant life, as
well as of the ethnological and lingual peculiari¬
ties of the savage peoples, who are known to have
inhabited Canada in Cartier's time, became necessary,
and especially a study of the cartography of the
region covered by Cartier’s two voyages. There
has been much controversy over the route followed
by Cartier in these voyages, and many attempts
have been made to identify the places visited by
him. The most important work on this subject is
that of W. F. Ganong of Smith College, whose
cartographical studies of the regions visited by
Cartier cannot be too highly praised, and that of
Bishop Howley on Cartier’s route through the Gulf
of St. Lawrence and adjacent waters. While my
work in this regard has been independent of these
eminent authorities, being based on both carto¬
graphical and local study, I am happy to find myself
in agreement with them in so many particulars. To
both I am under obligations, especially to Mr.

“ 5

PREFACE

Ganong, who has shown a student’s interest in my
work.

In my study of Cartier’s route, I am under
very great obligation to Mr. W. T. Tidmarsh of
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, whose expert
knowledge and painstaking efforts in the solution of
difficult problems have been invaluable to me.

I have also to acknowledge favors from Mr.
Frank M. Chapman of the American Museum of
Natural History, New York; Mr. Walter Dean of
the Museum of Natural History, Cambridge; Mr.
Henry Vignaud of the American legation, Paris,
and Judge D. W. Prowse of Newfoundland, who
have given me valuable information. Above all,
am I indebted to Mr. Edward Denham for an index
to my work.

61 Deering Street,
Portland, Maine,
1905.

6

MEMOIR OF
JACQUES CARTIER

MEMOIR OF
JACQUES CARTIER

T HE early history of Canada, which, from what
has been preserved, we know to have been
full of romantic interest, has been strangely
neglected by the French, who do not seem to have
regarded the discoveries and adventures of their brave
countrymen, who so nobly strove to secure a mag¬
nificent domain for their fatherland, as of sufficient
importance to demand particular consideration. This
neglect has been observed and animadverted upon by
recent French writers, especially by M. d’Avezac,
who, reflecting upon the discoveries of Jacques Car¬
tier in the ever-memorable voyages which he made
to the St. Lawrence early in the sixteenth century,
complains that the first voyage of the Breton discov¬
erer has only been preserved to Frenchmen through
a translation from an alien tongue.

The history of Cartier’s native town is most pic¬
turesque. It dates its beginning in 507, when a pious
pilgrim by the name of Aaron, with a few enthusi¬
astic disciples, took up his residence upon the rock
which was subsequently called Roche d*Aaron, and
upon this rock founded the future noted seaport.
Twenty-one years later the Bishop of Castle Gwent,
who had earned by his piety the title of St. Malo, at
the head of a little band of Welsh pilgrims sought
refuge with Aaron’s people, from whom he received
a hospitable welcome. For him the settlement was
9

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

subsequently named. This is the tradition of the
beginning of the town. 1 From the first the colonists
sought their living in the sea; hence they became
the most skilful of seamen. In an age which fostered
strife and pillage the corsairs of St. Malo won fame
for their daring and hardihood, and, later, for their
skill and enterprise in exploring distant seas. Such
a community might logically be expected to give to
the world a great navigator like Jacques Cartier, and,
at the same time, to neglect the preservation of those
interesting details of his life which one more devoted
to letters might treasure.

It is unfortunate, however, that so little of Jacques
Cartier’s life has come down to us. Ransack as we
may the literature of discovery, the archives of his
native land, the records of St. Malo, where we might
reasonably hope to find much concerning him, since
it has the honor of being the place of his nativity and
subsequent abode, and we find only the merest frag¬
ments of information respecting him ; even the date
of his birth has been disputed. De Costa and others,
who have endeavored to sketch his life, have fixed it
in the year 1494, yet we have good reason to believe
that he was born three years earlier, namely, in 1491.
The proof of this is found in certain affidavits where¬
in his age is stated. Thus, on January 2d, 1548, he

1 Vide Les Malouini k Terre-Neuve, etc., Harvut, Rennes, 1893.
Chevalier, eulogiatically describing St. Malo, quotes Jules Janin as follows ;
“ Cet ilot de Saint Malo, Sis de 1 ’Ocean, est un veritable navire a I’ancrc,
bcrce par les temp£tes ; les arbrea ressemblent k dea mats qui attendent la
vague lointaine. L’air, le ciel, le nuage, le bruit, la nuit, le jour, tout rap-
pellc k Saint Malo, la vue du Matelot des lointainca rivages. Vie du
matelot, passion de la mer, amour de Forage, orgueil de 1 ’icuroe salee,
p&che et bataille, amour, abordage, Honneur k Saint Malo! Ce Vaisseau
eat assurl par une ancre etemelle qui touche au fond de la mer.*'

10

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

is declared to be fifty-six, on December 23 d, 1551,
sixty, and on June 6th, 1556, sixty-four years of age. 1
This would make the date of his birth prior to De¬
cember, 1491. Of his parentage there has also been
a difference of opinion; but we may conclude with
full assurance that he was the son of Jamet Cartier
and Geseline Jansart. 2 Of his youth nothing is known,
except that he began a seafaring life at an early period.
St. Malo was a prosperous seaport, and the interests
of its people were identified with maritime enterprise.
The sea which beat at their doors was a vast field,
as yet but imperfectly explored, upon whose rich
harvests their thoughts were ever centered; hence
the mariner’s calling was held in high esteem, and
he, who excelled in knowledge of the sea and skill
in seamanship, won the admiration and honor of his
townsfolk.

The birth of Cartier was nearly contemporaneous
with the discovery of Columbus, and by the time
he was old enough to stray to the wharves of the
old town, crowded with its picturesque frequenters
and outlandish merchandise, ships were fitting out
for long fishing voyages to the New-found-land, of
which stranger tales were recounted than even Breton
folklore could furnish. It was not strange, then,
that the mind of an active youth like Cartier should
revel in dreams of adventure, and that he should
look to the sea as the proper field in which to
exercise his ambition.

The first glimpse that we clearly have of him

1 Audiences de la Juridiction ordinaire de Saint Malo, 1547; ibid,
\W,ibid, 1556.

3 Vide Documents Nouveaux recueillis par F. Joflon des Longrais, Paris,
t888, pp. 8-10.

II

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

was on the 21st of August, 1510, when, though
hardly nineteen years of age, he stood as godfather
to fitienne Nottel, son of his sister Jehanne. 1 This
was the first of a series of baptisms in which he
took part, extending over a period of forty-five years,
and numbering at least fifty-three. In twenty-seven
of these he appeared as godfather. 2 3 The predilection,
so frequently exhibited for the services of Cartier in
this important sacrament, is evidence of the high es¬
teem in which he was held by the people of his
native town.

Though the curtain has never been lifted from
his early life, and is not likely to be, an acquaintance
with the life and activities of St. Malo at this period
leads us not only to the opinion that he received an
education, such as we know the youth of the town
who belonged to families in comfortable circum¬
stances were in the habit of receiving, commensurate,
it would seem, in this case with the requirements of
one who aspired to become a navigator, but also to
the further opinion that he took part in some of the
fishing voyages which were made to the far-away
shores of the New World, gaining thereby that skill
in navigation which he afterward so signally exhibited.
Among the distinguished families of St. Malo was
that of Jacques des Granches, high constable of the
town. This family was socially superior to that of
Cartier, yet we find him seeking in marriage the
hand of Catherine des Granches, apparently without
opposition on the part of her parents, which indicates

1 Vidt Documents Nouvetux recueillis par P. Joflon des Longnus, Pens,

1888, p. 8.

3 Rcgutret dc Petit civil de Stint Milo.

12

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

that he occupied a high position in the estimation
of his townsmen. He had now, at the age of twenty-
eight, won in the exacting school of experience the
title of master pilot, which was one of no mean dis¬
tinction, especially in a maritime community like
that of St. Malo.

Of the life of Cartier for some time after his mar¬
riage with Catherine des Granches, which, according
to the register, occurred May 2d, 1519, 1 we have no
knowledge. There is no doubt that he continued
to follow the sea, and, from his frequent mention
of Brazil, it is believed that he visited the then al¬
most unknown shores of South America; besides,
the baptism, on the 30th of July, 1528, of a “ Cath¬
erine de Brezil,” supposed to be a native of that
country, and for whom Catherine des Granches as-

2 Mai 1519.

1 Recurent la benediction nuptiale Jacques Cartier maistre
pillote es port de Saincte-Malo, fils de Jamet Cartier et de
Geseline J ansart, et Marie Katerine Des Granches, fille de
Messire Honore Des Granches, chevalier du Roy nostre
Sire et connestable de la ville et cyte de Sainct Malo.*

•It has been questioned whether this date in the register belongs to the
entry. Says Longrais (Documents Nouveaux, p. n): “ On indiquc con-
stamment 1519 comme date de ce manage, k cause de la mention * avril
1519’ mise en interligne du Registre des Manages un peu avant 1 * inscrip¬
tion de Jacques et de Catherine. II y a bien des chances cependant, pour
qu’i) s’agiase d’avril 1520. Car l’annee, commencant toujours k Piques k
Saint Malo messire Lancelot Ruffier, vicairc-cure qui enregistrait alors les
publications de mariage, ou celui qui a ajoutc cette date au Registre, n'a
pu inscrire • Avril 1519,* qu* a pardr du 24 avril jour de Piques de cette
annee, et s'il eftt eu en vue les six demiers jours de ce mois, nous lirions 1’an¬
notation ordinaire, aprh Piques. La date se refere plutot au premier jour
d'avril appartenant encore i 1519 suivant l’ancien style, mais k 1520, sui-
vant le notre. La publication de trois bans signalee au Registre par la marque
ordinaire 000 dut commencer ce jour meme ler avril 1520, dimanche des
Rameaux, et le mariage avoir lieu apres la Quasimodo/'

*3

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

sumed the responsibility of godmother, adds further
color to the belief. 1

Frenchmen were certainly not behind other nations
in maritime enterprise. It is claimed that they
visited Newfoundland, then supposed to be a part of
the eastern coast of Asia, as early as 1504, and we
have record of the Pensle of Dieppe making the voyage
to this far-off land in 1507, and, soon after this date,
of others from the same port; namely, the Bonne-
Aventure , the Sibille, the Michel , and the Marie-de-
Bonne-Nouvelle , 2 In 1524, while Francis I was engaged
in an exhausting struggle with the emperor, Charles
V, Verazzano made his famous voyage of discovery
to the New World in the interest of the French
king.® Three years later no less than eleven Nor¬
man ships are known to have visited St. Johns,
Newfoundland, and we cannot doubt that the unre¬
corded voyages to this region were much more

1 “ Lc penultime jour dud. moys (juillet 1528), fut baptizee Catherine
du Brazil & fut compere noble homme Guyon Jamyn, recteur de Sainct
Jagu & commere, Catherine des Granches & Franczoise Le Gobien fille de
I'aloui de Sainct Malo; & fut baptizee par Me Lancelot Ruffier, vicaire
cure dud f lieu, led, jour & an que dessur, P. Trublet.”

This girl is supposed to have been a little savage brought by Cartier from
Brazil. His frequent references to that country when speaking of the
maize, which he saw in Canada, and of the people, who, he says, held
their goods in common, "like the Brazilians,” his knowledge of the
Portuguese language, which he was called upon by the authorities of St.
Malo to exercise when an interpreter was required, coupled with the fact
that Francis 1 organized expeditions to visit Brazil in 1523-4, lend color to
the theory that he was familiar with that country. Vide Documents Nou-
veaux, Longrais, p. 15 rt wf./ Cronies de Joao III, cited by Harrissc,
Revue Critique, 1876, p. 20 ; Les Malouins i Terre Neuve, etc., Har-
vut, Rennes, 1893, p. 7.

* Vide Decouverte et Evolution Cartographique, Harrissc, Paris, 1900,
p. xxx.

* Vide Les Voyages de Giovanni Verrazano, Gravicr, Rouen, 1898.

*4

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

numerous than those whose records have been pre¬
served to us. 1 The numerous voyages made to the
New World by the French up to this time were all,
with the exception of that of Verazzano, private
ventures, most of them depending for reimbursement
upon fishing, walrus-hunting, and trading for furs
with the savages. The French king, had he been
ever so warmly interested in voyages of discovery,
was for a long time so deeply engaged in war that he
could not have given attention to such enterprises;
but an interval of peace following the treaty of
Cambrai, which was concluded in 1529, enabled him
to listen to stories of Western adventure, which,
since Verazzano's notable voyage, he had been
obliged to disregard. Spain, however, had been
pushing her discoveries in the New World, and fabu¬
lous stories were circulating throughout Europe of
the wealth of her American possessions. From the
frozen wastes of the Arctic Ocean to the desolate
shores of Terra del Fuego, Spain claimed, or expected
eventually to control, everything to be discovered in
the Western hemisphere. It is true that she recog¬
nized the line of demarcation fixed by the Pope 2
between her prospective possessions and those of

1 John Rut in 1527 saw in the harbor of St. John twelve French ves¬
sel*, end levenl similar instances are recorded. Voyages were often kept
secret from motives of prudence.

* The bull of Pope Alexander VI, dated May 4, 1493, gave Spain all
west and Portugal all east of a meridian one hundred degrees west of the
Azores and Cape de Verde Islands, which were assumed to be in the same
longitude. On June 7, 1494, by a convention at Tordesillas, it was
agreed to move the meridian line to a point three hundred and seventy
leagues west of the Cape de Verde Islands. Cf. Les Trois Mondes, Popel-
linicre, Paris, 1 $82; Examen Critique, Humboldt, vol. iii, p. 5a; the
Pope’s letter in Bibliotheca Americana Vetustissima, Harrisse, Paris, 1872,
and Sabin's Dictionary, vol. i. No. 745.

15

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

Portugal, but when in the fullness of time Portuguese
nationality had been merged in her own, the whole
Western world might be hers. She therefore re¬
garded with distaste any attempt on the part of any
European nation to trench upon her preserves.
France realized this, and, ambitious to share in the
advantages which might be derived from Western
discovery, Francis I was in a mood to listen to projects
of adventure in American waters.

It was now that Philippe Chabot, Sieur de Brion
and High Admiral of France, introduced to his
master Jacques Cartier, whom he knew as a skilful
pilot in foreign waters. It would be interesting to
have an account of Cartier’s audience with the
French king, but we may only imagine it. The
Breton pilot, who perhaps had been one of Veraz-
zano’s companions, unfolded to his regal listener the
fascinating theory, then held by cosmographers, of
a waterway to some of the rich ports of India by
the West, and painted the possibilities of success so
brightly that he won his sanction to conduct a search
for it. Cartier believed that he should find by some
one of the many openings in the coast in the vicinity
of Newfoundland, the long-expected route to the
interior of India, the theory being entertained at
this time, that Newfoundland was but a projection
of the eastern coast of Asia. In this, like so many
who followed him, he was in error.

Having enlisted the king in his project, and being
actively supported by the high admiral as well as by
the vice-admiral, the Sieur de Meilleraye, who per¬
sonally undertook to supervise the equipment of his
ships, it might reasonably be supposed that Cartier’s
16

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

course would be unobstructed; but such was not the
case. At the outset he encountered hostility from
those interested in maritime affairs. Some of his
opponents were engaged in fishing and trading adven¬
tures to the New Land, and did not care to invite
competition by having a knowledge of it made
public; and others felt that taking so many of the
most skilful mariners from the regular service would
create a dearth in the market. Therefore not only
were active efforts made to dissuade men from en¬
listing, but they were spirited away and kept beyond
Cartier’s reach. We therefore find him, on March
19th, 1533, complaining before the Allou^ 1 of these
acts of obstruction, and praying that the offenders
should be enjoined from further interference with the
contemplated voyage. Accordingly orders were issued
to arrest the ships of the offending parties, and not
to suffer their departure until Cartier’s crews had
been secured. This summary action had the desired
effect.*

It is unfortunate that we do not possess Cartier’s
commission from the king, as it might furnish us
with some light where obscurity now prevails. We
know, however, that he was given the sole com¬
mand of the expedition, the chief object of which
was to search for a Western waterway to India. In
accordance with this object, having secured the ser-

1 Alhuii literally, allowers. There it no English word which so
nearly describes this ancient official as " accorder.” He occupied the sec¬
ond place in a triumvirate, of which the first bore the ride of seneschal,
and the third lieutenant. He especially passed upon conflicting claims and
accounts, and adjusted and accorded what he adjudged to be right to the
claimants.

* Vide Documents Inedits sar Jacques Cartier, Rame, Paris, 1865, pp.
3 * 5 *

*7

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

vices of sixty men, who were solemnly sworn by the
vice-admiral to serve the king truly and faithfully
under their commander, on the 20th of April, 1534,
Cartier sailed from St. Malo with two ships of sixty
tons burden each on the voyage which was to make
his name immortal.

After an uneventful voyage of twenty days New¬
foundland was sighted, when the ships began to en¬
counter immense fields of ice, which compelled them
to seek shelter in a harbor upon which Cartier be¬
stowed the name of St. Catherine. Here, imprisoned
by the outgoing ice, he spent ten days in refitting
his ships, when he again set sail, continuing his
course northward.

The eyes of the voyagers were constantly indulged
with novelties. Islands of varied form passed in
panoramic view before them, sometimes clustered so
closely together that the waters separating them
seemed like slender rivulets, which would afford
passage only to the smallest skifis. Some of these
islands teemed with wild fowl, which circled about
the ships shrieking a mysterious welcome to the
daring voyagers, while others, unable to fly, scuttled
clumsily away at the approach of danger. They were
of many hues and of many kinds, some of strange
appearance and difficult to capture.

At one of these islands, which swarmed with
aquatic birds, and therefore gained the title of lie
aux Oiseaux, they loaded their boats with four or
five tons of the toothsome game, upon which they
feasted, salting a quantity for future use.

Nor were the birds the only novelty which they
beheld here; for as they gazed in wonder upon these
18

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

teeming shores, fringed with moving ice, a huge
form of swanlike whiteness flashed through the
water. This proved to be a bear, which had swum
from the mainland four leagues distant, to pay a
predatory visit to the feathered colony, but at an un¬
fortunate time for him, since he soon fell a victim
to his more cunning rivals.

It was on the 27th of May when the mouth of
the Golfe des Chateaux, adjoining the Strait of
Belle Isle, was entered, and here further progress
was arrested, for, as far as the eye could reach,
numberless ice-floes barred the way, filling the air
with strange sounds as they were crushed together
in their tumultuous course to the sea; hence Cartier
took shelter in an adjacent harbor, which he called
Rapont.

Leaving the Golfe des Chateaux, bestowing before
he sailed the name of St. Catherine upon a large
island therein, he passed through the Strait of
Belle Isle and skirted the coast westward, affixing
to the islands, harbors, and headlands as they passed
before him suggestive names; and on the 10th of
June entered a harbor, which, from a fancied re¬
semblance to a port familiar to him in France, he
named Port de Brest.

It was now the festival of St. Barnabas, and prepa¬
rations were made to do honor to that saint.
Strangely impressed must the hearts of the pious
voyagers have been on that June day in that far¬
away land, surrounded by objects which their im¬
aginations invested with supernatural attributes, as
they engaged in the mysterious service of the Church
of Rome.

19

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

Leaving the little haven of Brest after their spiritual
refreshment and a renewal of their stock of wood and
water, they proceeded toward the west, among islands
so abundant that they could not name them, and so
called them simply Toutes lies. On one of these
they encamped for the night and feasted on the eggs
of ducks and other birds, which they found in abun¬
dance, and the next day passed on, scattering the
names of favorite saints along the way. At Port St.
Servan they planted a cross, and at the river St. Jacques
their eyes were gladdened by the sight of a great ship
which proved to be from Rochelle 1 and manned by
their own countrymen.

The country about Blanc Sablon was rocky and
forbidding, the fitting home of ferocious beasts; in¬
deed, it presented such a picture of desolation that
Cartier thought of Cain, and that this spot of all
others might appropriately have been God's gift to
the wretched wanderer. The inhabitants, too, tall
and gross, and clothed with the skins of beasts, were
in harmony with their surroundings—ungovernable
and savage; hence it was concluded to turn south¬
ward and take a better look at lands which had been
descried in that direction.

The 14th of June, which was Sunday, was appro¬
priately devoted to religious services, and the next
morning they sailed southward, rounding on the north
of Newfoundland a headland which they named Cape
Double, when they were enveloped in thick fogs,
which shut all objects from view. The fog finally

1 This shows plainly that the Straits of Belle Isle were known to the
French fishermen. The ship from Rochelle had passed through the straits
and was found by Cartier in or near Shecatica Bay on the Labrador coast.

20

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

lifted, and on the morning of the 17th they passed
a group of small round islands, which reminded them
of a collection of dove-cotes ; hence they named them
Colombaires. Shrouded in fogs, baffled by contrary
winds and buffeted by tempestuous gales, they sighted
on the 24th, a day devoted to the festival of St. John
the Baptist, a headland which they named in honor
of the saint.

Cartier directed his course northwestwardly, but
shortly changed it toward the southwest, passing a
group of islands, several of which sprang precipitously
from the sea, where the wild fowl were as thick as
meadow-grass. To these islands Cartier applied the
name Margaux, after a species of birds found there,
of which his men took over a thousand. Soon an¬
other island, large and of paradisiacal beauty, opened
upon the voyagers’ view, adorned with magnificent
trees and blooming meads, fields of wild grain, and
peas as fine as any in Brittany, and seeming as if
planted by the hand of man, while all the air was
sweet with the odor of roses and blossoming grapes.
About the shores of shining sand which environed
this charming isle, as if to guard it from intrusion,
monsters of bovine grandeur, with gleaming tusks of
ivory, slept, or disported themselves in the adjacent
waters, and from sheltering thickets wild beasts ever
and anon peered furtively at them. Such was lie
de Brion in the time of Cartier.

Saints' days were numerous, and furnished the pious
Breton with names for the principal places of interest
which he discovered, and so he had another to be¬
stow upon the point of Grindstone Island, which he
called St. Pierre, and yet another for the bight be-
« 2I

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

tween Prince Edward Island and the New Brunswick
shore, which he named Golfe St. Lunaire. The
measureless forests of trees of every sort which met
his gaze, and which gave fragrance to the offshore
breezes, excited his admiration. In the Golfe St.
Lunaire they were of immense size, and, Cartier saw,
would be of inestimable value to the marine service
of France.

On July 4th a haven was entered and named St.
Martin, and on the 6th, which was Sunday, having
said mass, he took one of his boats and went to view
a headland which appeared in the distance, when he
was surprised by a host of savages in canoes, who,
with noisy demonstrations, swarmed about his boat
in such numbers that he thought it prudent to frighten
them away by firing a gun over their heads, which
produced the desired effect. Subsequently, however,
he made friends with the principal chief by bestow¬
ing upon his naked majesty the appropriate present
of a hat, which, like a French dandy’s of the time,
was red.

The wind being unfavorable, Cartier kept his vessel
moored in the harbor of St. Martin, and passed several
days exploring the waters beyond, where he found a
bay in which the heat was so oppressive that he ap¬
plied to it the title of Bay de Chaleur. The natives
whom he encountered here were friendly and dis¬
posed to traffic, being probably Micmacs, who found
here their summer fishing-grounds. Doubtless they
were familiar with the St. Lawrence, but they did
not reveal to him the entrance to that noble river, the
discovery of which would have gladdened his heart.

The adventurers were charmed with the country
22

70 YAGL OK CARTIER IN CANADA [July 3*1534*

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

which they here beheld; warmer than Spain and
surpassingly beautiful; bearing wild wheat barbed like
rye, with kernels like oats, peas in profusion, pale and
purple gooseberries, strawberries, raspberries, red
roses and other pleasant flowers, with meadows rich
with grass and broad lakes teeming with salmon—
indeed, another Eden.

Leaving Port St. Martin on the 12th, the ships
encountered heavy winds and were forced to return,
seeking refuge at the mouth of a little stream, where,
beset by thick fogs and heavy gales, one of the ships
came near being wrecked by the parting of her cable.
Here Cartier encountered a miserable tribe of savages,
of a different race from those hitherto seen, engaged
in taking mackerel in hempen nets. Although they
had no furs to give in return he made them presents,
which they received with almost delirious joy. At
this point Cartier for the first time introduces us to
the maize, which he denominates millet as large as
peas, and even chats of figs, as well as nuts, pears,
apples, and other fruits with which the country
abounded.

On the morning of July 24th, having reached
Gaspl, a cross thirty feet long was raised bearing a
shield adorned with fleurs-de-lis, and inscribed, “ Vive
le Roy de France.” Around the cross with joined
hands knelt the adventurers, regarded with astonished
wonder by the natives. Returning to the ships, they
were followed by the old chief with his three sons
and brother, who made Cartier understand by signs
that the country belonged to them. Luring them
on board his ship, Cartier seized two of the chiefs
sons, giving him to understand that he wished to take
23

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

them with him. To pacify them he made them
presents, and informed the chief that he would re¬
turn with his sons, and that the cross was to show
them the entrance to the harbor. The old chief
and his brother having returned to land and informed
the people of the matter, with touching eagerness
they paddled to the ship to bid their departing
friends good-by. The next day, with a good wind,
Cartier set sail, and on the 27th celebrated the fes¬
tival of St. Louis on a cape, which he named after
the saint. In crossing to the southerly shore of
Anticosti Cartier had almost stumbled upon the
discovery of the St. Lawrence.

Coasting the southerly shore of Anticosti and
passing Fox Point, Cartier caught a glimpse of the
Labrador coast to the north, which, owing to head
winds, he could not approach with his ships. He
therefore set out in boats to explore it, barely avoid¬
ing the loss of one of his boats, which struck upon
a rock. The boisterous weather, forerunner as he
knew of autumnal gales, furnished a strong argu¬
ment against a further prosecution of his search
westward, and, after consulting his principal mariners,
he determined to turn his ships homeward. He was
now in the strait between Anticosti and Labrador,
which he named the Strait of St. Pierre, and which
no doubt he imagined might conduct him to the
passage he so much desired to discover, but which
he could not follow up with safety. To abandon
his search was no doubt a bitter disappointment to
him, but, with a determination to return and explore
it at some future time, he prepared to return home,
and on the 15th of August, Assumption Day, having

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

held a solemn mass, he sailed from Blanc Sablon,
having westerly winds, which bore him and his
heroic companions prosperously to St. Malo, which
they reached on September 5th.

The glowing accounts of the new lands which
Cartier and his companions spread abroad were
listened to with eagerness. Even the blas£ Francis
heard the recital of the adventures of his bold sub¬
jects with sufficient interest to bestir himself to give
Cartier a new commission to continue his Western
explorations. Three ships were assigned him for
the purpose, the Grande Her mine y the Petite Her mine y
and the EmerilIon y the first being a tall ship of one
hundred and twenty-six tons burden, and the others
of sixty and forty tons respectively.

Cartier was fortunate in having the friendship of
the high and, especially, of the vice-admiral, as the
latter actively interested himself in forwarding the
preparations for the expedition, of which the king
appointed Cartier commander-in-chief. His demand
for men, however, was not responded to with alacrity.
It is probable that enlistments were discouraged, as
before, by those who supposed that their interests
might be unfavorably affected by the proposed voy¬
age, or by the withdrawal of so many able seamen
from their accustomed employment. His commission
was dated the last day of October, 1534, and we
find him before the Allou£ of St. Malo on the 8th
of the following February, asking for its official pub¬
lication by the court, which was done.

The fact that Cartier’s ships were equipped and
provisioned for fifteen months reveals to us plainly
the king’s intention. Cartier’s experience had taught
2 S

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

him that beyond finding a waterway to Indian ports
by the northwest, the acquisition of the New Land,
a portion of which he had beheld, would be of last¬
ing benefit to France; hence, in addition to con¬
tinuing his search for an opening to India, he proposed
to remain in the country for the winter in order to
prosecute more thoroughly its exploration. The two
natives, whom he had taken home with him, and
with whom he could now communicate in his own
tongue, would aid him in his intercourse with the
savage tribes which he might encounter, and enable
him to acquire a knowledge not only of the coast,
but of the interior of the country as well. His
views, we see, were adopted by the king.

On the 16th of May, 1535, the cathedral bell of
St. Malo summoned the people to the celebration of
Easter, an event this year of unusual interest, since
in it the company of adventurers, who were to brave
the perils of a voyage to the marvelous outlands of
the Occident, were to participate.

With awed hearts Cartier and his companions,
among whom were several noblemen and the two
Indians captured on the previous voyage, gathered at
the confessional and received the farewell benediction
of the bishop, many of them for the last time, and,
taking leave of friends, on the 19th they left the
frowning walls of St. Malo behind. Unlike his former
experience, Cartier encountered perils in his path at
the outset of his voyage. Storms gathered about
his ships and hindered their progress, and then a
furious tempest burst upon them and scattered them
abroad. It was not until July 7th that the Grande
Hermine reached Bird Island. On the 15th Cartier
26

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

entered the port of Blanc Sablon, the place appointed
for a rendezvous in case the ships were separated,
where, to his great joy, he was joined by the other
ships on the 26th.

Cartier at once set about getting everything ready
to prosecute explorations, and on the 29th, at day¬
break, his ships were under way. Continuing west¬
ward, scattering the names of saints along his path,
Cartier entered St. Peter’s Strait, where familiar ob¬
jects began to meet the eyes of the captive Indians
who accompanied him, and they eagerly pointed out
the way into Canada. They told him of the Sague¬
nay, from which came the precious red copper; of
the great river and the populous town upon its banks,
of which, perhaps, he heard for the first time. They
were again in their own country and Hearing their
kindred, whom they were anxious to greet and regale
with the wonders which they had beheld in France.
Cartier, however, before exploring the highway to
Canada, resolved to examine the coast to the north,
hoping to find in that direction the long-dreamcd-of
gateway to Cathay.

Passing harbor and headland, island, mountain,
meadow and forest, entering a river abounding with
sea-horses, but disappointed in his search, he resolved
to pursue the path to Hochelaga, and soon found
himself in the great river of Canada, since known as
the St. Lawrence. Passing up this noble waterway,
he turned aside to look into the forbidding gorges of
naked rock from which great trees sprang cloudward,
as vigorous and bright of verdure as if planted in the
richest meadows. Here he encountered four canoes
filled with savages engaged in fishing, who avoided
*7

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

their strange visitors until reassured by the voices of
Cartier's Indian captives.

Leaving the gloomy Saguenay Cartier continued
up the river, coming to an island whose shores were
frequented by adhothuys, marine monsters of marvelous
appearance, as white as snow without a stain, and with
heads like greyhounds. This island abounded with
the hazel, then loaded with unripe nuts; hence he
named it He aux Coudres.

The next day, which was the 7th of September,
Cartier, after hearing mass, left the Island of Filberts
and pursued his course up the river, again meeting
with natives, who fled at his approach until reassured
by hearing the call of Taignoagny and Dom Agaya,
his two captives, when they returned and supplied
the ships with eels and other fish, maize, and large
melons. On the 8 th twelve boats appeared, and with
them Donnacona, the lord of Canada, who, with six
of his men, visited one of the ships and examined it
with curiosity. To Taignoagny's and Dom Agayas
recital of the marvels which they had beheld in
France they listened with childish delight, and ex¬
pressed their satisfaction by kissing the arms of Cartier
and embracing him. This expression of good will
was returned by Cartier, who feasted them on bread
and wine.

As the season was advancing, Cartier began to think
of winter quarters for his ships, designing neverthe¬
less to explore the river to Hochelaga before winter
set in. He therefore left his ships at anchor near a
large island, and, taking the flood-tide, rowed up the
river in his boats looking for a safe harbor in which
to lay up his ships for the winter. Near Stadaconl
28

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

such a harbor was found, and, in honor of the day,
he bestowed upon it the title of St. Croix.

His intercourse with the natives of Stadaconl was
most agreeable. They not only warmly welcomed
the adventurers, but lavished upon them attentions
almost oppressive. Attracted by the beauty of the
island near which his ships were moored, Cartier
took his boats and went to examine it. This island
was large and beautiful, covered with wide-spreading
trees interlaced with grape-vines now loaded with
fruit. As though he deemed it too cheerful and in¬
spiriting to associate with a saint, he named it after
the jolly pagan deity, Bacchus, and, returning to his
ships, sailed on the 13th to the harbor of St. Croix,
which he entered the day following. Here he again
met Donnacona with Taignoagny and Dom Agaya,
who had joined their people and now displayed an
unwillingness to visit the ships. Cartier desired them
to accompany him to Hochelaga, to which they re¬
plied evasively.

Cartier at once set about planting buoys in the
harbor and making preparations to lay up his ships
for the season. On the 16th Dom Agaya and Taig¬
noagny, Cartier’s ci-devant captives, appeared with
about five hundred people, including women and
children. Taignoagny informed Cartier that Don¬
nacona desired him not to ascend the river, and
that the passage was dangerous. Cartier, however,
told him that he must obey the commands of
his king, and that if Taignoagny would fulfil his
promise to accompany him he would make him a
valuable present. To this the distrustful Indian paid
no heed and peremptorily declined to guide him to
29

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

Hochelaga. Evidently desirous, however, to maintain
friendship, Donnacona and his people appeared the
next day, and Taignoagny presented Cartier with a
young girl about ten years of age and two little boys
as a pledge of friendly alliance, the acceptance of
which would be a token that Cartier was not to go
to Hochelaga; to which the persistent Breton replied
that rather than relinquish the enterprise he would
return the children. Dom Agaya here interposed and
assured Cartier that the gift was altogether a pledge
of affection and confidence. After making presents
to the chiefs, Cartier, at the request of his former
captives, fired his cannon for the amusement of the
natives, which caused great astonishment and conster¬
nation among them.

Bent upon preventing Cartier from passing up the
river, probably from jealousy of the Hochelagans and
a desire to monopolize the strangers, the Stadeconeans
devised a ruse to intimidate Cartier. Suddenly three
demons appeared in a boat to the eyes of the aston¬
ished Frenchmen, emissaries of the Indian god
Cudouagni, and, shortly after, Cartier’s two captives
appeared from the wood with joined hands, uttering
cries to Jesus and Mary. Upon being interrogated
as to the cause of their distress, they informed Cartier
that the demons who had appeared came from
Cudouagni to warn him that he must not go to Ho¬
chelaga, and would perish in the attempt. At this
Cartier laughed and told them that his priests had
spoken with his God, and that he would find good
weather and be protected; upon which the two
Indians withdrew, and, after conferring with the
people, they all appeared and artfully expressed joy

30

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

to learn that their friends would have a prosperous
journey, but still refused to accompany them.

On the 19th of September Cartier set out for
Hochelaga with the Emerillon and two boats. En¬
chanting prospects met the eyes of the adventurers
at every turn. Magnificent trees in great variety
fringed the shores of the mighty river, their limbs
wreathed with sinuous vines thick with clusters of
purpling grapes, embowering with their bright leaf¬
age the rustic dwellings of the natives scattered along
the way, while the forest glades were melodious with
the songs of innumerable birds.

The people, whom they encountered as they went
on, welcomed them with joyous demonstrations of
friendship, bringing them presents of food and re¬
garding them with admiring awe. One man, in the
exuberance of his admiration, even presented Cartier
with two of his children, one of whom, a girl of
seven or eight years of age, he accepted.

On the 28 th 1 the adventurers, who had found the
river broadening as they ascended, entered a great lake,
which they discovered, upon crossing, offered no way
of egress. While searching for a passage in their
boats they encountered a hunting party, who wel¬
comed them in a most friendly manner, and one
mighty man, to show his good will, bore the doughty
navigator ashore in his arms as if he had been an
infant. Finding it impracticable to proceed farther
with the Emerillon , Cartier fitted out his boats, and,
loading them with all the provisions possible, con¬
tinued his journey with some of the gentlemen who
had accompanied him, and twenty-eight mariners.

1 In the Brcf Recit the date is the i8th v which is manifestly an error.

3 1

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

The party, consisting in all of thirty-five men, pro¬
ceeded up the river, being received everywhere by the
natives, whom they encountered, with hearty demon¬
strations of friendship, which Cartier recognized by
bestowing upon them various trifling articles, which
they prized highly. On the second day of October Car-
tier was met by the people of Hochelaga, who came
flocking to the shore to the number of more than
a thousand to welcome their strange visitors. Sep¬
arating into group, the men, women, and children
each by themselves, they danced upon the leafy banks
like fauns and dryads of antique fable, and then
showered upon their visitors presents of fish, and
bread made of maize.

Pleased with their generous reception Cartier landed
with his men, who were soon surrounded by the
wondering natives, by whom they were regarded with
admiring awe, the women bringing their infants to
touch them as though they were celestial visitants.
Cartier, deeply impressed with their simple kindness,
had the women seat themselves in order, and then
presented them with bright trinkets of tin. To some
of the men he gave knives,—precious treasures in
their sight,— and then retired to his boats for the
night, followed to the river’s brink by the impul¬
sive natives, who built bonfires along the shore and
danced and shouted the livelong night.

In the morning Cartier, after arraying himself be¬
comingly, proceeded on foot for a couple of leagues,
with a party of his companions, by a well-beaten
road bordered by splendid oaks then shedding their
nuts, when Hochelaga, reposing at the foot of a
fair mountain, burst upon his vision. About the
32

I

\

i

LA TERRA DE HOCHELAGA
NELL A NOVA FRaNCU

A. Putudelh Terra HodicUga,
g. StrAiU prmcipaJe.c>ie va allj. put,ta
C- Pi'msa

J> Cafa del Rtf A^endiaflJi

E. La Cone della tafa del ke. A il fuo

Ammo.

F. Vna delledieci ftrade del In CiUa

G. Vna idle cafcpniutc

H. Cone eon il fooco, doue ti cucuu.

I. ^aJOtiolfeaTe.S.bCini.iioueitpiio

anda? anorno-

K . L’oidinK»w», cheticnc le Quote della
onudclUCiui.dice lain inUiogo
di mure.

L. Tauoloui togiontiATuora Aslbcitu -

M 5piuio Jifuoraaleircuiio delUCiUi

N- TwiotecouiioiiU di dcmio vi* i! eir-
orcuilo della Citii

O Coindovdoue llannogti huonnni pet
JuIcQ id I a Ciud

p. Paranetto JoueftatinogiihuoTnint al¬
ia Jt rt>Ci

Q^tl »aeuo che i travnauudU, 6t lakra.
douce fordimciiuidieticnlctaiiole.

k Tndtim, A India mr,Of ptttti diefr&o di
loon ddU Cilta p \ cdevcli France,!

S Tranced cheen<rono nella Ciita, A: ehe
tocraao lamanoalti lndiani,checra-
uod: toon dtilaCiuaipptdioaUuo'
Co, A liAmocamx.

T Li S«U ch* va la'l Corridor

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

town stretched fields of maize, yellowing for the
harvest. The houses were long, composed of tim¬
ber, and divided into rooms with lofts above for
the storage of grain and other fruits. In “great
vessels like tuns’* was kept the fish which had been
smoked during the summer for winter’s use. Like
many other Indian tribes of North America, the
Hochelagans used no salt whatever in their food,
which comprised game and fish, maize, beans, peas,
pumpkins, cucumbers, and wild fruits.

Guided by some of the excited and joyous natives
to an open space in the center of the village, all the
people, young and old, at once hurried to look upon
the white-faced strangers, who seemed to have come
from another world. The women wept for joy at
their coming and held up their children to be
touched by them.

After a short time the men caused the women to
retire, and, placing the strangers in their midst, sat
down. Immediately after several women appeared
with mats, which they spread upon the ground for
their guests to sit upon, and then the king, Agou-
hanna, borne upon the shoulders of several of his
men, was brought and placed beside Cartier.

Though but about fifty years of age, the king was
paralyzed in his lower limbs, and, believing the
strangers to be superior beings, he removed from his
own brow the symbol of royalty, composed of porcu¬
pine quills, and placed it upon the head of Cartier, ex¬
hibiting his useless limbs, that haply they might be
restored to their pristine vigor. Soon all die sick and
disabled people of the village were brought to Cartier
to be healed.

33

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

Moved with pity at the sight, Cartier read to them
from the Gospel of St. John, made the sign of the
cross over the sick, and prayed devoutly that they
might come to a knowledge of the true faith and have
bestowed upon them grace to receive the sacrament
of baptism. Two hours were spent in reading the
passion of Christ to the astonished natives, to which
they listened with silent attention, looking up to
heaven and imitating the ceremonies which they be¬
held.

After the service, arranging the men, women, and
children in separate groups, Cartier made them
presents; to the men hatchets and knives, to the
women paternosters and other trifles, while among
the children he tossed little rings and pewter lambs
in the form of the Agnus Dei; then he caused his
trumpets to sound, which moved them to demon¬
strations of delight. As he took leave of these
simple folk, the women brought fish, vegetables,
and other food, which they pressed the strangers to
accept. These were declined, but an invitation to
ascend the mountain overlooking the village was
accepted. From this mountain Cartier and his com¬
panions looked out over a wide prospect glowing
with autumnal splendors, so grand that it inspired
him to call the mountain from which he beheld it
Mont Royal. As he gazed with admiring eyes over
the vast prospect spread about him, and strove with
strained vision to penetrate the great West, extend¬
ing he knew not whither, and teeming with mysteries
which thought could not compass, the most active
imagination would fail to realize that the little Indian
village at his feet would fade away, and in its place
34

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

would one day arise a mighty city pulsing with human
life, and musical with the hum of beneficent industry;
or that the great West beyond the reach of his vision
would teem with wealth and population far beyond
those of the France he deemed so grand and mighty,
and, yet more, that by that splendid pathway the India
of his dreams would at last be reached.

Leaving the village, which was surrounded with
palisades supporting a gallery supplied with stones
for defense, Cartier took leave of the natives, who
parted from him sorrowfully, and set out on his re¬
turn to St. Croix, which he reached on October i ith.
Here he found that during his absence his men had
erected a strong fort and made preparations for the
winter. Donnacona and his people expressed joy at
his safe return and invited him to visit Stadacond.
He found the dwellings there comfortable and well
stocked with provisions, and saw numerous scalps
taken by the Stadaconeans from their enemies, who
had made an incursion into their country from the
south and met with defeat.

The winter in the wilderness proved severe. Not
only were the adventurers constantly exposed to danger
from the natives, whose treachery they feared, but a
deadly disease threatened to destroy them ail. Litanies
and psalms, vows of pilgrimages, and the erection of
an image of the Virgin did not arrest its progress, and
one by one they languished and died; finally they
listened to the Indians, who were afflicted with the
same disease, and made a tea of the bark of a tree
called by them amedda , which relieved them and
stopped the ravages of the disease.

The balmy breath of spring was felt at last by the
35

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

weary adventurers. The ice in the river began to
break up and move toward the sea, buds began to
swell, and the voices of birds to chime in the woods.

The 3d of May, Holy-rood Day, came, and Car-
tier reared a cross and inscribed it with the royal
name and title, Franciscus primus , Dei gratia Fran -
corum rex regnat> and began to make preparations
for departure. Before sailing, Cartier managed to
secure the king, Donnacona, as well as his former
captives, Dom Agaya and Taignoagny, with several
others, and to imprison them on board his ship, to
the great consternation of the people, who came
about the ships and exhibited their grief by loud
cries. In vain they offered presents to Cartier,
hoping for the release of their king. All they could
obtain was a promise, that after visiting the King of
France he should return to them.

Cartier permitted Donnacona to converse with
his friends, which somewhat pacified them, and soon
after a canoe shot out from the shore and approached
the ship. It was loaded with provisions to cheer the
royal captive, and was propelled by four women, who
courageously undertook the duty of conveying to him
a parting gift, the men not daring to communicate
with the ships for fear of capture.

On the 5 th of May the ships drew out of the
harbor of St. Croix and dropped down to the Isle of
Filberts, where, owing to tempestuous weather. Car-
tier was delayed until the 16th. During this time a
party of Donnacona’s people, on their way home
from a hunting expedition to the Saguenay, appeared
and were greatly astonished to learn from Dom Agaya,
who was permitted to speak to them, that their king
3 6

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

was a captive on Cartier’s ship. Upon being assured
that he would return to them in twelve months they
were pacified, and, to cheer him in his captivity, gen¬
erously sent him a present of three bales of furs, the
fruit of their toilsome expedition, and, most precious
perhaps of all, a knife of red copper from the Sague¬
nay. Upon his captor also, as if to conciliate him,
they bestowed a present of wampum, which they so
highly prized, and, doubtless with many forebodings,
saw the ships depart, bearing to an unknown land
their king never to return.

Encountering tempestuous weather Cartier was
delayed, and it was not until the 19th of June that
he left Cape Race and pushed out into the Atlantic.
Although so early in the season, he saw several French
and English ships already on the coast of Newfound¬
land in search of fish.

On July 6th, 1536, Cartier ended his eventful voy¬
age at the port of St. Malo, which was suggestive to
him of Paradise at the end of the voyage of life.

A new dominion across the seas, a country of illimit¬
able extent, of inestimable wealth, the home of a
vast population which might be brought under the
sway of the Roman Church and made subservient to
French interest—such was the dream of enthusiasts,
who eagerly listened to the recital of Cartier’s ad¬
ventures. But the time was unpropitious for explor¬
ing the Western seas for paths to the wealthy cities
of the. Orient, or for founding costly colonies in new
lands. Francis was too busily occupied with affairs
at home to undertake enterprises abroad. Charles
V of Spain had invaded his kingdom and threatened
* 37

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

the stability of his throne. Nor was this all; Chabot,
Cartier’s once powerful patron, had lost his influence
with the king, and so the enthusiastic navigator and
his companions descanted upon the New Land, its
beauty and grandeur, its vegetable and mineral wealth,
its strange animals and savage men, without result.
Thus the years passed. Cartier, however, by the
skill and daring which he had exhibited in his
voyages to unknown lands, had won a position of
influence in his native town, in whose aflairs he was
often called upon to take part.

On June 15th, 1538, a truce was agreed upon be¬
tween the kings of France and Spain, which enabled
Francis I to turn his attention to the discoveries of
Cartier, which had excited wide-spread interest in
France, whose jealousy of Spain’s ever-growing mari¬
time power was quite as acute as it was in England.
Francis I hated and dreaded his Spanish rival. To the
Venetian ambassador he said: “ That I eagerly desire
to see the Turk powerful and ready for war, I cannot
deny; not on his own account, for he is an infidel, and
we are all Christians, but in order to cripple the power
of the emperor; to force him into great expense,
and to give all other governments security against an
enemy so great.” 1 Especially was Francis jealous
of Spain's threatened possession of the entire Western
hemisphere; for, not content with the better portion
of it assigned her by the Pope, she was reaching out
to clutch Portugal's share; hence he was eager to
get a foothold for France in the lands visited by
Cartier.

Why he ignored Verazzano’s discoveries and made

1 Vtdt History of Prance, Gnizot, rol. it, p. 129.

38

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

no attempt to possess the more genial region about
the mouth of the Hudson instead of the frigid shores
of the St. Lawrence, cannot be explained, unless he
felt that he would be more secure in the less acces¬
sible region, or was better acquainted and more
deeply impressed with the discoveries of Cartier. Be
that as it may, as soon as peace was assured we find
him warmly entering into schemes for colonizing
Canada. He had seen Donnacona and the other
natives brought by Cartier from Canada, and con¬
versed with them about the wonders of their far¬
away home in his own language, which Thevet avows
they spoke quite well—“assez bien.” 1 Upon these
men Cartier depended to facilitate his intercourse
with their countrymen, and believed that having been
instructed in the “ holy law ” they would more easily
induce the other people of those countries to believe
in one “holy faith,” a desideratum never to be lost
sight of. Unfortunately, when the prospect was open¬
ing for them to return to their home and friends, they
all died but one girl about ten years old. 2 What
caused their death is not stated, but probably con¬
sumption, a disease to which natives of high latitudes
are particularly predisposed when introduced to the
enervating luxuries of civilization. In spite of this
severe blow to his scheme of colonizing Canada,
the king, says Hakluyt, “resolved to send the sayd
Cartier thither again.”

1 Vide Cosmographie Universelle, Thevet, tome ii, p. 1013.

1 This was the little girl given by the chief of Achelaiy to Cartier when
on bis way to Hochelaga. It would seem probable that Carder took her
with him on his third voyage, as she would be the only medium of inter¬
course between him and the nadves. Nothing in the narradve, however,
indicates this.

39

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

At this time Jean Francis de la Rocque, Lord of
Roberval, whom Francis playfully denominated “ the
petty King of Vimeux,” was high in his esteem, and,
being a man of energy and influence, was available
for die undertaking. Emulous of the honors which
he might achieve thereby, Roberval entered warmly
into the scheme of planting a colony on the St. Law¬
rence, and was rewarded, not only with a royal grant
of the land discovered by Cartier, but with the sono¬
rous appellatives of 44 Lord of Norumbega, Viceroy
and Lieutenant-General of Canada, Hochelaga, Sag¬
uenay, Newfoundland, Belle Isle, Carpunt, Labrador,
the Great Bay and Baccalaos.” 1 He was also given
forty-five thousand livres and authority to enlist a
sufficient number of men for the enterprise. The
king’s intentions are set forth at large in his letters
patent, in which he constitutes his 44 Dear and well
beloved Jacques Cartier, Captain-General and Master
Pilot of the expedition,” 2 * * * * * 8 who, he says, 44 has dis¬
covered the large countries of Canada and Hochelaga,
making an end of Asia.”*

In accordance with the king’s authority, strenuous
efforts were made to enlist men for the new colony;
but this was found to be a difficult undertaking, and
the king’s expectation of colonizing Canada with

1 These titles are given on the authority of Charlevoix, Histoire de la

Nouvelle France, Paris, 1744, tome i, p. 32. Reference, however, to

the letters patent of January 15 th, 1540, from which he professes to quote,

and which are still preserved and can be identified as the same which he

says were to be found in the £tat Ordinaire des Guerres in the Chambre

des Comptes at Paris, does not bear out his statement.

* Vide Collateral Documents, pestes.

8 In the original, **Faisant un bout deFAzie du coste del’Occident.”
This was in accordance with the prevalent opinion that the coast of North
America was the eastern extremity of the Asiatic continent.

40

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

“ subjects of good intention ” was not fulfilled;
hence the prisons were resorted to, and malefactors
of various degrees of crime — treason, heresy, and
forgery only being excepted—were selected for Car¬
der's company. The evil gangs, chained together,
were escorted under guard to St. Malo, among them a
young girl of eighteen, innocent of crime, who,
affianced to a wretch, it is said, “ as hideous physically
as morally/ 1 walked beside him attached to his
chain. 1 Prosperous colonies are not made from such
material.

While preparations were being made for the ex¬
pedition Spain was not inactive. The Council of
the Indies was summoned, and spies were despatched
in haste to France to watch proceedings and report
them in detail. Spain's policy from the first was to
prevent other nations from getting a foothold in the
Western hemisphere. In England she possessed her¬
self of John Cabot's papers and destroyed a large
portion of the evidence of his great discoveries, and,
when Verazzano made his voyage along the Amer¬
ican coast, she hastened to set Estevan Gomez upon
his track to explore the same regions in her interests.
Francis well understood the Spanish king's feelings
with regard to his projects in the New World, and
when the subject was mentioned in his presence he
sarcastically remarked : “ I should like to see the
clause in our father Adam's will which bequeathed
to him this fine heritage."

From the reports sent to Madrid by the spy at St.

1 ** Une fiancee de 18 am, innoccnte, mom Mtcushe fsuatM css sur l*ex-
i grace do chef de 1’cacorte, se fait attacher k la chaine pour suivre un des
xrti e ra ti qui parait, il faut )e dire, aussi hideux au physique qu’au moral.**
Documents Nouveaox, Longrais, p. z8.

41

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

Malo, we learn that he managed to make the acquain¬
tance of Cartier and his father-in-law, and to learn
from them their plans. He reported that they were
to proceed to Canada with twenty-five hundred men,
where they were to settle and erect fortifications for
their protection. Thirteen vessels were to be equipped
with provisions for two years, all to be under the
command of Cartier. Some of these ships were to
be engaged in fishing. Vessels were also fitting out
at other ports. In Morlaix, Brest, and Quimper-Coren-
tin two ships and two galleons were being equipped
by gentlemen of the country, and at Harfieur and
Honfleur there were four galleons preparing to join
the thirteen ships from St. Malo. Fourteen or fifteen
ships and galleons owned by the Viscount of Dieppe
had sailed from that port for Malagueta and Brazil,
and five others were being fitted out for voyages to
the same region. This was startling news, and the
spy was ordered to get particulars concerning them.
What to do to prevent the French from establishing
themselves in the New World became a subject of
serious discussion by the Council of the Indies. The
king had already despatched a caravel to watch the
movements of the French ships, and the council ad¬
vised him to send another to the Cape de Verde
Islands to report whether the French had passed in
that direction instead of “ to the coast of the Bacal-
laos,” 1 and to raise five hundred men, with supplies
for a year, as a nucleus for a larger force, if it was
found necessary to fit out a fleet for offensive action.

1 The word Bacallaos, 10 frequently applied at tbii time to the fishing-
grounds on the Newfoundland and Labrador coasts, antedates Columbus,
and has given rise to much speculation regarding its origin. Peter Martyr
(De Orbe Novo, doc. iii, ch. vi) makes the word of Indian derivation,
and credits Cabot with its application to the region discovered by him;

4 *

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

In order, however, not to break the treaty of peace
with France, it was thought best to use dissimulation
by having the ships fitted out in the name of a dis¬
coverer or colonizer, so that the king could disavow
any participation in the destruction of the French
expedition in case it was destroyed by the Spanish
ships. This plan was submitted to the Cardinal of
Seville, who indorsed it, but advised that proper
papers should be given the ships, so that, if taken,
the crews would not be executed as spies. He, how¬
ever, gave it as his opinion that the French did not
intend to go to the Rio de la Plata, nor to settle a
colony beyond the Bacallaos, that is, in Canada, for
the purpose of harassing Spanish commerce, as the
king feared they intended doing, because the French
could ill afford to bring on another war with Spain;
and he concluded with the opinion that the project
was a mad one, as the whole land was barren and un¬
fruitful as far south as Florida. The king evidently
adopted the opinions of the cardinal, for when he
learned beyond peradventure from the captain of the
vessel sent to watch Cartier’s ships, and the report
of his ambassador in France, that the destination of
Cartier was toward Canada, he ceased making prepa¬
rations to interfere with him, saying that he and his
Either had lost two fleets on the coast of the Bacal¬
laos, where the inclement climate and stormy seas
would bring the French to a dismal end. 1

Brevoort (Verrazano the Navigator, pp. 6t, 137) says the word is of Ibe¬
rian origin ; while Kohl (Documentary History of Maine, vol. i, p. 188 ft
iff.) says that the name Ticrra de Bacallaos, meaning the stock-fish or cod¬
fish country, was first applied by the Portuguese to Newfoundland. The
word, he says, is of German origin. All writers are, however, in agreement
as to its derivation, viz., from the codfish.

1 Pidt Coleccion de Varies Documentos, Madrid, 1857, etc*, Bucking¬
ham Smith, pp. 103-118 ct putts.

43

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

While the Spanish government was engaged in
these discussions, Cartier was hurrying forward prepa¬
rations for his voyage. The task assigned him was
not an easy one. Forty-five thousand livres, it has
been said, were assigned Roberval for fitting out the
expedition. Of this sum he gave Cartier thirty
thousand, and subsequently thirteen hundred livres
more. The king had given him the Emerillon , and,
with the inadequate sum at his command, Cartier
was obliged to charter or purchase four ships and
equip the entire fleet. 1

Realizing the necessity of an early start, the king
had charged Roberval and Cartier to sail by the 15 th
of April. It would seem that the latter, with his
accustomed energy, promptly performed his part of
the task; for early in May, 1541, his ships were
riding at anchor in the port of St. Malo, ready to
depart. Roberval, however, who was to furnish the
guns and ammunition with some other necessary
supplies, was tardy, and Cartier, having peremptory
orders from the king, set sail on the 23d of May,
with the understanding that Roberval, who had com¬
missioned him with authority to act until his arrival,
should prepare at Honfleur such ships as were neces¬
sary to carry the munitions and other supplies, and
join him at Newfoundland.

From the moment that Cartier and his companions
lost sight of the gray bastions of St. Malo, they were
assailed by tempests, which so hindered their progress
that they ran short of water and were compelled to
deal out their cider and other beverages to the cattle,
goats, and swine which they carried, in order to pre-

1 Vide Document! In£diu, Ram 6, pp. 24-32 et pestt*.

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

vent them from perishing. At the end of a month,
having been separated by storms, they met together
at Rapont in Newfoundland, and there, dropping
anchor, waited in vain for Roberval; then, finding
the season slipping away, Cartier proceeded along
the coast, now so familiar to him, and on August
23d made the harbor of St. Croix.

As the ships appeared sailing across the harbor, the
Indians rushed to the shore, and, taking their canoes,
paddled to the ships to welcome their king and other
friends whom they supposed to be on board. To
their disappointment they received the tidings that
Donnacona was dead: Deeming it imprudent to in¬
form them of the death of their other friends, Cartier,
with Gallic tact, took refuge in romance and painted
them as lords enjoying the sweets of domestic felicity
in France.

The chief, Agona, whom Donnacona had left in
charge of his people, received the news of his king’s
decease with tranquillity, very much as an heir to the
French throne would have received similar tidings;
yet he was statesman enough to see that the removal
of the head of the government of Stadacon6 at the
caprice of every passing stranger would be .subversive
of order, and, though he placed his crown of tanned
leather upon Cartier’s head and his bracelets upon his
arms,—nay, endowed him with a royal present of
wampum, embraced him, and feasted at his ex¬
pense,—the savage, like the Christian, dissimulated,
though neither was deceived by the fair show of the
other.

Having found a suitable shelter for his ships at a
place which he named Charlesbourg Royal, about
+5

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

four leagues beyond the harbor of St. Croix, Cartier,
on September 2d, despatched two of his ships, under
the command of his brother-in-law and nephew, to
inform the king of the non-arrival of Roberval,
who, he feared, had met with disaster.

The country about the place selected by them for
settlement appeared to the adventurers like a scene
of enchantment. Immense trees—the oak, beech,
cedar, and, surpassing in virtue all others, the amedda
—raised their crowns of verdure to the clouds, while
from their mighty arms depended in inexhaustible
profusion clusters of grapes “ as black as mulberries.”
About them stretched fair meadows, the tall grass
waving in the breeze, and beyond, their eyes rested
on wide stretches of open ground covered with wild
hemp. When they stirred the soil its fertility sur¬
prised them. In eight days after planting seed
brought from France they saw the green shoots
appear which gave them assurance of future har¬
vests. On an elevation near the place where they
were erecting their fort, they discovered ledges of
black stone veined with shining minerals like gold
and silver, and, as they walked, ever and anon along
their way a stone sparkled in the sunlight like a
diamond.

Having appointed the Vicomte Beaupr6 to govern
during his absence, Cartier, on the 7th of September,
set out for Hochelaga with two boats, well manned,
to inspect the rapids to be passed in order to reach
Saguenay, that he might better understand how to
prosecute his explorations in the spring. On the way
he stopped to visit the chief who, on his former
voyage, presented to him his little daughter, being
46

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

desirous of making him his ally. To this end he
had brought from France a red cloak adorned with
bright buttons and bells, tin basins, knives and
hatchets—articles likely to delight the savage heart.
Having bestowed these gifts upon the happy poten¬
tate and left in his charge two French boys to
acquire the language of the people, Cartier pushed
on against the strong current, and on the nth
reached the first rapids, two leagues from which he
found a village, where he was hospitably entertained
and guides were furnished to accompany him.

Passing the first rapids in one of his boats doubly
manned, Cartier found it impracticable to proceed
farther in his boat, and set out on foot by a well-
beaten road to visit the second rapids, coming soon
to a village of friendly people, who, learning that he
desired to visit the rapids, sent four young men to
conduct him on the way. Opposite the second rapids
he found still another village, whose people received
him with the same kindness which he had already
experienced, and showed him by placing sticks at
intervals upon the ground, with small branches be¬
tween to represent the rapids, that there were still
other rapids to pass, and that the river was not navi¬
gable; whereupon Cartier concluded to return to the
place where he had left his boats.

Upon reaching it he found about four hundred
people gathered around the boats, to whom he made
small presents, and then set out on his return to
Charlesbourg Royal. In spite, however, of the
friendly demonstrations with which Cartier was re¬
ceived by the people whom he met, he distrusted
them, as it would seem with some reason. On the
47

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

way he called upon the chief with whom he had left
the French boys, but found that he had departed,
as Cartier subsequently learned, to plot with Agona
against him.

Arrived at Charlesbourg Royal, Cartier was dis¬
turbed to learn that the savages avoided the fort, and
ascertained from some of his men, who had visited
Stadacon6, that many people had collected there;
accordingly he put his fortress in order to repel an
attack, though it is doubtful if any was intended.

Of Cartier’s experiences during the winter no
account has been preserved. When spring came,
realizing the obstacles in the way of establishing
a settlement at Charlesbourg Royal, he resolved to
abandon the place and return to France. As he en¬
tered the harbor of St. Johns, Newfoundland, he
found, to his surprise, a fleet of twenty ships, French
and Portuguese, at anchor there, and among them
the tall ships of Roberval, three in number, and bear¬
ing two hundred persons, among whom were a num¬
ber of women. The viceroy had arrived on the 8th
of June, and was engaged in preparations to continue
the voyage, and in arbitrating disputes between the
French and Portuguese fishermen. He had sailed,
it is said, from Honfleur on the 2 2d of the preceding
August, though Hakluyt says from Rochelle on April
16th, 1542, nearly eight months later. This is with¬
out doubt correct, and points to the inference that,
meeting autumnal gales, he was beaten back to France
and did not resume his voyage until the opening of
spring. To him Cartier represented the country
which he had abandoned as being rich and fruitful,
and exhibited the supposed diamonds and gold which
48

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

he had found. The latter they tested by smelting
and found it to be genuine, but the diamonds they
had no means of testing.

Disregarding his superior’s orders to return with
him to the St. Lawrence, Cartier departed for France,
while Roberval continued his voyage without him
under the skilful pilotage of Jean Alphonse, and
late in July reached Charlesbourg Royal, about four
leagues west of the Isle of Orleans, where, landing
his stores and munitions, he began his proposed set¬
tlement, changing the name bestowed upon the place
by Cartier to Francy Roy. The name of the St.
Lawrence he also changed to Francy Prime, in honor
of the king.

Roberval, who had laid out his plans on a broad
scale, set about the task of laying the foundations of
the new settlement with marvelous energy, and
Francy Roy became at once the scene of busy activ¬
ity. The din of the ax, hammer, and trowel filled
the air, and fortress, tower, mill, and long courts of
buildings provided with halls, chambers, and kitchens
rose like magic before the curious eyes of the In¬
dians, who regarded the ceaseless activity of the
French with amazement.

On the 14th of September Roberval despatched
two of his ships to France, to inform the king of
his welfare and to obtain supplies for the colony.
D’Auxilhon, his trusty lieutenant, was in command of
these ships, and was charged to ascertain if the crystals
carried home by Cartier were genuine diamonds. Al¬
though we have no account of the return voyage of
these vessels, we know that d* Auxilhon arrived safely
in France, and four months after, on January 26th,
4 49

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

1542-3, received orders from the king to return to
Roberval.

In the meantime the colonists at Francy Roy were
passing a wretched winter; but the spirit of their
chief was equal to the occasion, and though famine,
disease, and mutiny diminished their number by fifty,
with a heart which never despaired, and a hand which
never slackened in the execution of a purpose, Ro¬
berval held the incongruous assemblage together,
and, when spring at last dawned, was ready to un¬
dertake a voyage of exploration. On the 5th of June,
1543, “after supper/' he embarked with a company
of seventy, and, early on the morning of the follow¬
ing day, set sail for the gloomy gorges of the Sague¬
nay. Thirty colonists were left behind under the
charge of de Royeze, one of his lieutenants, who had
orders to return with them to France by the 1st of
July unless he heard from his chief. A few days
after Roberval’s departure a number of his com¬
panions found their way back to Francy Roy. A
boat and eight men, among whom were several gen¬
tlemen, were lost, and on the 19th of June, less
than two weeks from their departure, five more men
joined the waiting colonists, bringing corn, of which
they were in sore need, and orders to postpone their
departure until the 22d of July. Unfortunately,
the account of Roberval's farther movements has
been lost to us. We may, however, be reasonably
certain that d'Auxilhon reached Roberval with sup¬
plies sometime in the summer of 1543, and it has
been thought that Jacques Cartier was despatched
early in the same year to conduct him back to
France, owing to war between the French and
50

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

Spanish kings, in which Roberval’s services were
required.

Reaching home after his severe experience in Can¬
ada, Cartier found his country in a turmoil. Francis I
was again at war with his inveterate rival, Charles V,
and had no time to listen to stories of new lands on
the other side of the globe, even if he might claim
them as having been discovered by one of his own
people. An empty advantage gained over his hated
antagonist, though it cost the lives of thousands of his
subjects, was of more importance, in his estimation,
than the acquisition of remote territory though many
times larger than the realm he ruled, and with re¬
sources perhaps as great as those of any portion of
the globe. Of the date of Cartier’s arrival at St. Malo
we have no record, but on the 2 ist of October, 1542, 1
about four months after he left Newfoundland on his
return voyage, he was present at one of his favorite
functions, a baptism. That he made a fourth voyage
to Canada to bring back Roberval, although no ac¬
count of such a voyage has been preserved, has been
thought to be probable by a report of an Admiralty
Commission appointed on the 3d of April, 1544, to
audit his accounts. This commission consisted of five
persons, who were ordered to convene at Rouen within
a week after their appointment. Roberval and Cartier
were summoned and appeared before them, and their
decision in favor of Cartier was rendered on the 21st
of June following. An allowance had been asked by
him on account of ships employed in the third
voyage, and an additional allowance on account of

1 £tat civil de Saint Malo : •* 2 1 Octobre 154.2, jour de Piquet,
jacquette fille Jacques Patris & Guillemette Maingart.”

5i

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

another vessel employed in a subsequent voyage. A
copy of the application made to the commission has
not been preserved, but the report makes it clear what
this subsequent voyage was for. It is as follows:

44 Et en ce qui est du tier navise mettres pour dix
sept mois qu’il a est6 audict voyage du diet Cartier,
et pour huict mois qu'il a est€ a retourner querir le
diet Roberval au diet Canada au p6ril de nauleaige
que les autres deux, se seront deux mil cinq cents
livres, et, pour les autres deux qui furent audict voi-
aige, six mois a cent livres le mois, sont douze cents
livres. ,,

This shows that the commissioners made an award
to Cartier on account of his third voyage, and also
an award on account of a ship used “for eight
months to fetch the said Roberval.”

Further proof that Cartier himself went with
d’Auxilhon on this fourth voyage to Canada appears
necessary. 1 The date of this voyage, however, has
been a subject of question. Ferland says that, “set¬
ting out in the autumn of 1543 for his fourth voyage,
Cartier would have wintered in Canada and would
have left it at the end of April or the beginning of
May, 1544.” Other writers have taken this view;
but it is hardly to be supposed that Cartier, with his
experiences of a Canadian winter and his knowledge
of the dangers attending autumnal navigation on these
far Northern waters, would have hazarded a voyage
to the St. Lawrence so late in the season. It is also
recorded that he was a witness in court at St. Malo,
February 17th, 1544, long before it would have been

1 Vid* The Voyages of the English Nation, etc., Hakluyt,
Edinburgh, 1889, rol. ii, p. 164.

52

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

possible, according to Ferland, for him to leave the
St. Lawrence, and, as the commission referred to was
appointed the 3d of April, before he and Roberval
could have returned to air their differences. Between
March 25th, 1543, and February 17th, 1544, at
which former date he is recorded as officiating at a
baptism at St. Malo, he is out of sight, and it is
possible that shortly after the former date he departed
on this fourth voyage, and that he returned eight
months later, namely, in the autumn of 1543.

Reference to the pardon and power of attorney of
d’Auxilhon shows that they were granted respectively
September 9th and nth, 1543, probably just be¬
fore his departure from Francy Roy. His ships
had not departed from France on the preceding
Christmas, and complaint is made that they were
prevented from departing on account of a mutiny
which delayed them. There is every reason then to
place the voyage of eight months between the early
spring and late autumn of 1543.

The action of the Admiralty Commission was
highly honorable to Cartier, and fully justified the con¬
fidence placed in him by the king. Roberval, while
brave and enterprising, appears to have been unfit for
the task assigned him. Had Cartier, when he met him
in the harbor of St. Johns, Newfoundland, returned
with him to Canada, it would have proved most dis¬
astrous to the enterprise; for we know, what Cartier
was doubtless aware of, that he had not sufficient sup¬
plies for the maintenance of them all in the country,
and that the lateness of the season when he reached
his destination would forbid planting with any pros¬
pect of a harvest for use during the coming winter,
S3

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

the severity of which he little realized, while Cartier
had twice experienced the terrors of a Canadian
winter. It was wise for him, therefore, under the
circumstances, to return to France. Hakluyt says
that " he and his company mooued as it seemeth with
ambition, because they would have all the glory of
the discouerie of those partes themselues, stole
priuily away the next night from us, and without
taking their leaues departed home for Bretaigne.” 1

As Cartier already enjoyed the glory of discovery,
this hardly seems a sufficient reason for his action, as
he had nothing whatever to gain by the course he
took, except the ill will of the powerful viceroy. We
may therefore reasonably conclude that Cartier clearly
understood the unfitness of the rash nobleman for so
difficult an undertaking as the colonization of Canada.
He had already wasted a year and squandered an im¬
mense sum in merely reaching Newfoundland, and
Cartier saw the necessity for cutting loose from an en¬
terprise fated to disaster, not only for his own sake, but
for the welfare of his men and the property intrusted
to him as well. Strange to say, what finally became
of the once famous Roberval is unknown. It has
been said that after serving in the war with Spain,
remembering his failure to accomplish the task as¬
signed him by Francis I of establishing a colony in
Canada, he resolved to make another attempt in order
to redeem his lost prestige, and that in 1549, Henry
II then being on the French throne, he undertook
with his brother another voyage, from which he never
returned, though Thevet, a witness none too reliable,

1 Vide The Voyagea of the Engliah Nation, etc., Hakluyt,
Edinburgh, 1889, vol. ii, p. 164.

54

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

avers that he was assassinated in Paris near the Church
of St. Innocents. 1

Whether Cartier wholly relinquished his profession
of a seaman we know not. There is a tradition,
wholly unsupported by evidence, that he made a fifth
voyage to Canada; but this is extremely improbable.
From his frequent appearance at St. Malo, it would
appear that he passed the remainder of his life in
domestic comfort, honored and respected by his
townsmen. He was in comfortable circumstances,
having a house in the town, pleasantly situated on
the Rue de Buhen, near the old de Buhen Manor,
and a residence of some pretension at Limoilou, a
few miles distant. The house is still preserved,
though it has lost much of its pristine importance.
It is of stone, plain and substantial in construction,
and stands in a courtyard surrounded by a stone wall.
It is approached by two gates, known as the Portes
Cartier, and the larger is surmounted by the Cartier
arms. Some have supposed that Cartier was en¬
nobled by Francis I, but this supposition is not sus¬
tained by suitable evidence. In an act of the Chapter
of St. Malo, September 29th, 1549, he is styled “Sieur
de Limoilou,” and on the 5th of February, 1550, in
the record of a baptism at which he officiated, he is
designated as the “ noble homme, Jacques Cartier.”
The title sieur and seigneur was often used by small
proprietors of estates, although they had never had
that title conferred upon them legally. With respect
to the designation “nobleman,” the Abb6 Faillon
says that it was only applied to men of noble rank;
but had Cartier been entitled to the term nobleman

1 Vt 4 e Cosmographie Univerwlle, Thevet, tome ii t p. 1014.

55

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

in this sense, it would certainly have appeared in
subsequent records.

That he was entitled to the term nobleman in its
true sense there can be no doubt, and so he was re¬
garded by his townsmen. To estimate the true char¬
acter of a man of whose life so few particulars have
been preserved is a difficult task. Certain promi¬
nent traits, however, may be unmistakably discerned
through the obscurity which hides so much of his
personality. The quality of bravery, which men so
much admire, he possessed in an eminent degree.
Calm, self-reliant, and steadfast amid the direst calam¬
ities he certainly was. When we behold him setting
forth with his clumsy little ships across the untracked
sea to explore the great gulf which washes the shores
of Labrador, so dangerous even now to navigation, he
seems at first only a rash adventurer; but when we
follow him and witness the skill with which he car¬
ried his ships through the perils of fog and tempest,
shoal and hidden reef, the courage with which he
penetrated a wild country for hundreds of miles, sur¬
rounded by savages often inimical to him, the cool¬
ness with which he bore the death of his men by
disease, which threatened the destruction of his whole
company, and his success in extricating himself from
seemingly unavoidable disaster, we can but place him
in the fore rank of the world’s heroic navigators.
Not the least striking trait of his character, and the
one which perhaps was its vital force, was his piety.
In all his undertakings he appears unquestionably
to have relied upon the support of an overruling
Providence. It is true that he kidnapped King Don-
nacona and a number of other savages, and told
56

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

Taignoagny, when he was sick, that his illness was
the result of the anger of Jesus because of his trea¬
cherous conduct; but, if we would do justice to the
man, we should not measure such acts by the ethical
standards of to-day. He lived at a time when many
good Christians regarded savages before conversion
as being outside the pale of salvation. De Maistre,
one of the most gentle and respected of Roman
Catholic writers, denominated them “ Branches
lopped from the Tree of Life,” and Mather prob¬
ably held a similar opinion when he called them
“wolves with men’s brains.” Cartier, however, had
a better reason for capturing a few savages; namely,
the success by their aid of a great enterprise, one Qf
the important results of which would be the Chris¬
tianization and consequent salvation of many of their
people. This he probably regarded an ample justi¬
fication of their capture, as no doubt he did the fiction
which he imposed upon Agona to account for Don-
nacona’s failure to return to Canada.

It is not improbable, too, that the reason which
he gave for Taignoagny’s illness he believed to be
a good one. Many of the most pious writers of the
past have recorded their faith in similar fictions; so
that while we wholly dissent from his ethics, we
may properly give him the benefit due to one who
lived in a time when reason was hardly allowed to
deal with questions involving man’s relations to God.

We have every reason to believe that Cartier
treated the savages whom he captured in a most
humane manner. In all his dealings with them
his actions are in striking contrast with those of his
Spanish contemporaries.

57

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

In his domestic and civil relations Cartier never ap¬
pears to disadvantage; indeed, he must have been a
very important figure in the life of St. Malo during
his residence there and at Limoilou. The frequent
recurrence of his name in the civil and ecclesiastical
records of the town shows this.

Certain it is that St. Malo will always derive
distinction from the memory of Cartier. For a
century she claimed, by right of his discovery of the
St. Lawrence and adjoining territory, unrestricted
privileges in the trade of the New Land, and when¬
ever the reigning monarch attempted to reward favor¬
ites by exclusive grants therein, the inhabitants vigor¬
ously protested against them, upon the ground that
they were infringements upon their ancient rights de¬
rived from the discoveries of their townsman; indeed,
when, a long time after Cartier’s death, his nephews
succeeded in obtaining a grant for exclusive trade in
Canada for a limited period of time to reimburse
them, his heirs, for money expended by him in his
voyages, and which had been acknowledged as a debt
due him by the judicial authority of the country,
the people of St. Malo caused it to be annulled
upon the same ground.

During the larger part of his life France was en¬
gaged in conflicts with Spain, and disturbed by reli¬
gious controversy. The fires of persecution raged
fiercely about him under Francis I and his successor,
and the cruelties which they caused to be inflicted
upon the victims of their mistaken zeal for religion
must often have caused him to long for the free
life of the wide sea and the joy of discovery, so keen
and so satisfying; for it is hardly to be supposed
5 «

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

that men generally approved of the cruelties inflicted
in the name of religion upon their fellows by those
in authority. It is not at all probable, however,
that he made any extended voyages after his return
with Roberval from Canada, the honor for the dis¬
covery of which seems to have been freely accorded
him by his countrymen, though not always by others.
That he is entitled to the honor, however, seems, with
our present cartographical knowledge, to be suscep¬
tible of proof.

It is hardly to be doubted that Portuguese and Bre¬
tons had penetrated the Gulf of St. Lawrence previous
to Cartier’s first voyage; indeed, there is good evi¬
dence that they had; 1 but there is none that they ever
came in sight of the St. Lawrence River. Peter Mar¬
tyr and Gdmara are authority for the statement that
Cortereal in the year 1500 entered the gulf and named
certain islands at its mouth; indeed, Ramusio claims
that he was the first " who attained that part of the
New World in the search for a shorter passage to
reach the Spice Islands.” 2 Cantino’s planisphere,
which is supposed to exhibit the discoveries of Cor¬
tereal, does not support this claim, as it shows no open¬
ing like the Gulf of St. Lawrence, nor of a river,
u Rio Nevado,” which that navigator is said to have

1 Cf\ Histoire de la Dccouverte de PAmerique, Gaffarel, Paris, 1892 j
Congres International des Americanistes, Nancy, 1875 (L’AmSrique et les
Portugais); Les Navigations Franfaises, Margry, Paris, 1867.

2 *' In the yeare a thouaande and five hundreth Gaspar Cortesreales
made a voyage thycher with two Caravelles; but founde not the streyght
or passage he sought. At his beinge there, he names the Ilandes that lye
in the mouth of the goulfe S>uadrado [the St. Lawrence] after his name,
Cortesreales, lyinge in the L [fifty] degrees or more.” Vidt The First
Three Books on America, Birmingham, 1885, p. 344. Cf. Historia ge¬
neral de las Indies, Gdmara, 15 5 2—3 ; Navigationi et Viaggi, Ramusio, 1556.

59

Costa rfet mor v^iano

Cantino— a.d. 1502
60

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

discovered. Such a river, however, is found on later
maps, the Riccardiana of 1534-40, and the Cabot
map of 1544, though not near the Gulf of St. Law¬
rence.

Riccardiana— a.d. 1534-40

There seems to be good reason to infer that Joio
Alvarez Fagundes was familiar with the gulf long
before Cartier’s first voyage. On the 13th of March,
1521, he was granted letters patent for lands discovered
by him, where he was to settle a colony. A number
61

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

of islands arc mentioned in this document, the names
of which appear on later charts and enable us to iden¬
tify the field of his exploits. 1 For many years after
Cabot's discovery the coast of Newfoundland was very
imperfectly represented in charts. It is known that

La Cost— a.d. 1500

Don Pedro de Ayala, the Spanish ambassador to the
court of Henry VII, sent to the Spanish king a map of
the first voyage of Cabot in 1497, and there is little

1 Pidt Decouverte et Evolution Cartographiqne, etc., Harrine,
Peril, 1900, pp. xxv, 86, 135, a 18.

62

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

doubt that it was followed by a map of the second voy¬
age. The knowledge thus obtained resulted in the
famous planisphere of Juan de la Cosa, made in 1500.
One might expect to find on this map something ap¬
proximating this island; but a continuous coast-line
extends north and south with no resemblance to the

true one, though it bears a score of names, seven being
the names of capes.

In the year 1500. Gaspar Cortereal made a fruitless
voyage to the same region, and again in 1501 visited
and explored the coast. Although he never returned,
the results of his discoveries fell into the hands of

63

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

Alberto Cantino, who in 1502 reproduced them in a
planisphere for the Duke of Ferrara. This map does
not disclose a coast-line unlike that of La Cosa; nor
does that of Canerio in 1503 nor the noted Portu¬
guese chart of 1504 reveal any change in the know¬
ledge of this region. In 1503 Richard King, an

Englishman, made a map of the northern part of the
continent with a Portuguese nomenclature, and in
1504 the German Kuntsman and the Italian Olive-
riana produced maps in which appear names still
familiar on modern maps of Newfoundland and vi-
64

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

cinity, as “ Ilha dc Frey Luis/* or Island of Brother
Louis, the name, perhaps, of a religious brother who
accompanied Cortereal, which now, after many cor¬
ruptions, is preserved in Cape Freels, “ Capo Raso ”
in Cape Race, and others. In 1505 Pedro Reinel

Wtldseemdller— a.d. 1507

produced his famous map; but all of these maps
foil to reveal an opening to the north of Newfound¬
land. Recently the first map bearing the name
America was discovered in the library of Prince
Waldburg-Wolfegg of WOrtemberg, drawn in 1507
5 65

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

by Martin Waldseemiiller, who was a professor in
the little College of St. Die in Lotharingia. This
map Waldseemttller printed on the college press, but
it plainly shows its prototype to have been the map
of Cantino. The map of Ruysch, published in 1508,
shows some addition to the knowledge of the region
displayed by Cantino and his successors, but still

preserves a continuous coast-line to the north. In
the map of Maggiolo in 1527, however, this line
is broken, which may indicate a knowledge of the
opening between Labrador and Newfoundland; still,
a glance at the map of Ribeiro of 1529 probably
shows the extent of the knowledge possessed by
Maggiolo, for on this map these openings are better
66

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

defined and show their boundaries joined with a
continuous coast-line both north and south. In
an examination of the cartography of the region
visited by Cartier we should not overlook the
notable map of Gaspar Viegas, which is especially
interesting to us, as it was published in 15 34, while

Cartier was pursuing his first voyage and before its
results were known. In this chart Newfoundland
appears with its familiar Cape Race —“ C. Rasso ” ;
west of which are several bays which are not difficult
to identify as St. Mary’s, Placentia, and Fortune. On
67

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

the north Viegas shows no opening, while south the
coast-line is continued westerly and ends in a bay
with a river entering it, entitled “ R. das poblas.”
This bay and river have been thought to represent
the gulf and river St. Lawrence. If this is so.

Viegas shows an almost absurd ignorance of the true
cartography of the region. The river das poblas is
but a short distance northwest of Cape Breton, and
would much better represent the Bay Chaleur. It is
possible that Viegas obtained his information respect-
68

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

ing this bay and river from old maps, or from state¬
ments of Portuguese fishermen, who had penetrated
the bay on the south. The map of Riccardiana of
about the same date indicates openings to the north
and south, but not continued far to the west. In
spite, however, of these maps, it is quite certain that

an opening north of Newfoundland was known be¬
fore Cartier’s visit to the region. It is probable that
Spanish and Portuguese cosmographers knew of such
a passage, but kept the coast-line closed in their
charts to deceive other nations who were studying
** 69

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

that part of the world. 1 Cartier himself seems to
have had a knowledge of this opening, perhaps ob¬
tained in some subsequent voyage to the coast, or
from fishermen who had been there; certainly, he
seems to have set out on his initial voyage of discovery
with the deliberate purpose of exploring this opening
to its extreme limit. He made the usual atterrage at
Bonavista, followed the coast up to the Strait of Belle
Isle, and, turning into it, pursued his course south-
westwardly with a confidence born of foreknowledge.
It seems strange that if Spanish and Portuguese cos-
mographers possessed a knowledge of an opening to
the great gulf north of Newfoundland they should
have failed so long to notice Cartier’s discoveries;
but they seem to have escaped their attention for
many years, and the first charts to represent them
were Desliens’ in 1541, Roze’s in 1542, the Har-
leyan in 1543, Cabot’s in 1544, and Descellier's in
1546. These were all made in France, except
Cabot’s, which was engraved at Antwerp. 2 It is
unfortunate that the map made by Jean de Clamorgan,
embodying the results of Cartier’s discoveries and
presented by him to Francis I, has been lost. This

1 Sir Humphrey Gilbert in hi* Discourse refers to this opinion prevalent
in his time, and says that the Spaniards and Portuguese were not disposed
to »*beate the bush, and other men catch the birds ; which thing they fore¬
seeing, have commanded that no pilot of theirs vpon paine of death, should
seeke to discouer to the Northwest, or plat out in any Sea card any thorow
passage that way by the Northwest.” Vidi The Voyages of the English
Nation, Hakluyt, Edinburgh, 1889, vol. i, p. 62.

3 The nomenclature of this map ascribed to Sebastian Cabot, but of
which it is doubtful if he was the author, is hardly recognizable as that of
Cartier, which shows that the maker or engraver was ignorant of the French
language. Thus Carder's C. Tiennot becomes C. de Tronot; Riviere de
Saguenay, Rio de S. Quentin; Stadacone, Estadas; Tntonaguy, Tutto-
nacr, etc.

7°

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

map was probably made in conformity with Cartiers
“ booke in manner of a sea chart/* referred to by
his nephew Jacques Notkel, which is also lost. From
what appears, however, in the study of the car¬
tography of the northern portion of the continent
previous to Cartier’s visit, we must conclude that he
merits the claim of his countrymen to the honor of
being the discoverer of the St. Lawrence River and
the country bordering upon it, still known by the
name he bestowed upon it of Canada.

The importance of Cartier's discoveries France
never realized. For years her hardy toilers of the
sea found their perilous way to those far Northern
waters to gather their harvest of walrus-tusks and
precious furs, and find shelter in the pleasant coves
along the coast to cure their fish and barter with the
wary savages, who, with good reason, had none too
much confidence in their pale-faced visitors; but
nearly three quarters of a century rolled away before
Champlain, a worthy successor of Cartier, took up
the work where his predecessor had left it. 1

In this brief and imperfect memoir of a man whose
name will not be forgotten, the sole endeavor has
been to gather all the particulars of his life at present
accessible, and to give them unembellished to the
reader, regretting always that the curtain of oblivion
has concealed so much from view. Of the manner
of his death, even, we have only a surmise. A plague
at the time was prevalent at St. Malo, and some one

1 Is the dedication of his voyage of 1632 Champlain expresses these
noble sentiments : “ La prise des fortresses, ni le gain des batailles, ni la
conqucte des pays ne sont rien en comparaison da la salut des ames et de la
gloire de Dieu ; et la conversion d*un infidele vaut micux que la conquete
d'un royaume.”

7 *

MEMOIR OF JACQUES CARTIER

has guessed that this was the cause of his death. It
may or may not have been.

This, however, we find, under date of September I,
1557, * n m *rgin of the old record of the town
registrar, where sometimes, but infrequently, the death
of a person whose loss had a public significance would
be noted by the recorder:

This said Wednesday about five o'clock in the morning
died Jacques Cartier. 1

Let us wish him what at the close of his second
great voyage he himself expressed his desire to attain
at the close of life's voyage: “ Paradis i la fin."

1 The following is a facsimile of the entry :

Ce diet mercredy au

matin environ

cinq hearts

deceda

Jacques

Cartier

FIRST VOYAGE
1534

FIRST VOYAGE OF
JACQUES CARTIER

A.D. I534

From Manuscript No. 5, Portefeuille LVII de Fontctte,
Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris

A FTER Sir Charles de Mouy, Knight, Lord of
Meilleraye, and Vice-Admiral of France, had
jL 1. taken the oaths and made the captain, masters,
and crews of the said ships swear to well and loyally
deport themselves in the service of the king under
the charge of the said Cartier, we departed from
the harbor and port of St. Malo with the said two
ships of the burden of about sixty tons each, the two
manned with sixty-one men, 1 the twentieth day of
April of the said year, one thousand five hundred
thirty-four, and with good weather navigated and
came to New Land* the tenth day of May, and made

1 Hakluyt says : •• We departed from the Port of S. Malo with two
ships of three score tun apiece burden and 61 well appointed men in
each one." Ramusio and Lescarbot both agree with Hakluyt. The
text, however, is definite on this point: both ships carried but sixty-one
men, which number included Cartier. This is confirmed by the follow¬
ing record under date of March 28, 1533 : •* Jacques Cartier, capitaine et
pilotc pour le Roy, ayant charge de voiaiger et aller aux Terre* Neu fives,
passer le destroict de la baye des Chasteaulx avecques deux navires equippez
de soixantc compsignons pour Pan present,*’ etc.

a “Terre Neuve,” or New Land, now Newfoundland, wu until of
late universally acknowledged to have been first discovered by John Cabot
in 1497, and this belief still prevails in spite of the scholarly arguments
brought against it by the learned French cartographer, Henry Harrisse,
who ascribes its discovery, in 1501, to Gas par Cortereal, who gave it his

75

FIRST VOYAGE

land at Cape Bonavista,* being in forty-eight
degrees and a half of latitude and in . . . de¬
grees of longitude. 9 And for the great quantity of
ice which was along this land it behooved us to
enter into a harbor named St. Catherine, 8 being to
the south-southwest of this cape about five leagues,
where we were for the space of ten days, biding our

name. Terra Corterealii. Says Harrisae (Decouverte et Evolution Carto-
graphiquc de Terre Neuve, p. xxi): “ Lea documents n'attestent la pre¬
sence d'aucun European a Terre Neuve avant Gas par Corte-Real. Dans
1'etat actuel de la question, l’historien impartial doit done en attribuer la
decouverte auz Portugais." On the other hand, English writers of equal
authority properly argue that the absence of documents accurately determin¬
ing the landfall of Cabot is not evidence enough to deprive that great navi¬
gator of the honor of a discovery which has been so long ascribed to him.
Vidt History of the Discovery of Maine, J. G. Kohl, Portland, 1869,
p. 133 // stq.; The Discovery of North America, Henry Harrisae, London,
1892, pp. 6-12} A History of Newfoundland, D. W. Prowse, Q.C.,
London, 1895, pp. 6-17 ; Presidential Address on Cabot’s Landfall, Pro¬
ceedings of the Royal Society of Canada, Ottawa, 1897; Fourth Centenary
of the Voyage of John Cabot in 1497, Markham, Geographical Journal,
June, 1897.

1 “ Cap de Bonne Viste," the Bonavista of to-day, and which some
writers claim to have been John Cabot's first landfall in 1497, and named
by him Prima Vista. The discovery is also accredited by other writers to
Gaspar Cortereal in 1501, and by him named Buonavista after one of the
principal islands of the Cape de Verde group, where he had been shortly
before its discovery. It was the objective point of early navigators to
this region, and their point of departure for home. For recent discussion
of the subject cf. A History of Newfoundland, D. W. Prowse, Q.C.,
London, 189$, p. 10 tt stq.; Decouverte et Evolution Cartographique de
Terre Neuve, Henry Harrisse, London, 1900, p. 21.

* In the several versions of this voyage the longitude is often wanting.
There was no exact method of calculating longitude at tins time, and maps
made long after Cartier's day show considerable variations in the longitude
of places. It is probable that, following French geographers, Cartier took
for his meridian the island of Ferro, the westernmost of the Canaries.

9 ** Saincte Katherine," now known as Catalina, the Spanish form ot
Catherine. St. Catherine’s Day occurred on the 30th of April, about ten
days before Cartier's arrival there. It seems, however, probiride that Car-
tier named it after this saint, although some doubt has been expressed on
this point. Cf the version of du Petit Val of 1598, where it is said,
“ Nous nommasmes S. Catherine."

76

FIRST VOYAGE

time and fitting out our boats. And the twenty-first
day of the said month of May we departed from the
said harbor with a west wind, and were borne to the
north a quarter northeast from Cape Bonavista as far
as to the Isle of Birds, 1 the which island was all sur¬
rounded and inclosed by a bank of ice, rent and
shattered in pieces. Notwithstanding the said bank,
our two boats went to the said island in order to
g et some of the birds, of which there is so great
a number that it is an incredible thing to one who
does not see it; for, notwithstanding that the said
island comprises about a league in circumference, it
may be so very full of them that it seems as if one had
stowed 2 them there. There are a hundred times more
of them round about it and in the air than within
the island, of which a part of these birds are large
as geese, black and white, and have a beak like a
crow, and are always in the sea, without ever being
able to fly in the air, forasmuch as they have little
wings like the half of one, wherewith they fly as
stoutly in the sea as the other birds do in the air, and
these birds are so fat that it is a marvelous thing. We
named these birds Apponatz ,* with which our two
boats were loaded in less than half an hour, as it

1 "L’isle dei Ouaiseaulx,” the I*le of Birds, one of the islands now
known as the Funk Islands. It was so denominated long before Cartier
visited it, being laid down on ReineFs map of 1504, "Dos Saues” ;
Miller’s, 1 jao, " Yhlas das anes M ; Verazzano's, 1529, "Ilia dos aves.”

8 In the edition of Raphael du Petit Val it is said of these birds that
they are so thick " q'ils y soyent expressemect apportez et presque comme
semez,” and by Hakluyt " that they seem to have been brought thither,
and sowed for die nonce.” The words here used are "qu’i semble que
on les ayt arimez.” The verb arrimer is a nautical term which signifies to
stow a cargo.

1 Hakluyt says, "We named them Apcratb” and du Petit Val,
‘They were called by those of the country, App*natb.” The latter

77

FIRST VOYAGE

were with stones, wherefore each of our ships salted
four or five butts of them, besides what we could eat
of them fresh. Besides these is another sort of birds
which go in the air and in the sea, that are smaller,
which they name Godez :/ which put into the said
island and stow themselves under the larger ones.
There was another sort of them bigger that are white,
which place themselves apart from the others in one

statement is without doubt correct. He alto says that they were larger
than pies, that is, jays or magpies, as Hakluyt translates the word. In
the manuscript the word is cuayi, or geese, which would better describe
their size. Cartier’s description indicates the great auk (Aka tmptnnu ),
which abounded in this region in his day but is now supposed to be extinct.
It is remarkable for its small wings, hardly more than rudimental, which
are set far back on the body, and, with the feet, propel it with great velo¬
city through the water. In summer the upper part of the body is black,
which in winter changes to white on the sides of the neck and throat. It
has been confounded by early navigators with the penguin. Thus Park-
hurst, writing to Hakluyt in 1578, says: •*These birds are also called
Penguins and cannot Hie, there is more meate in one of these then in a
goose ” ; and in the account of Sir Humphrey Gilbert’s voyage in 1583 it
is said: “ We had sight of an Island named Penguin, of a fowle there
breeding in abundance, almost incredible, which cannot Sic, their wings not
able to carry their body, being very large (not much lease than a goose)
and exceeding fat; which the Frenchmen used to take without difficulty
upon that Island, and to barrell them up with salt. But for fingering of
time we had made use there the like provision.” Pid* The Voyages of
the English Nation, Hakluyt, Edinburgh, 1889, pp. 303, 334; Key to
North American Birds, Coues, Boston, 1872, p. 338 ; Ornithological
Biography, J. J. Audubon, Edinburgh, 1838, vol. iv, p. 316 et seq. : and
Report of the National Museum, 1888, p. 494, by Lucas, who visited the
Funk Islands and rather supposed the Apponatz to be the razorbill, and the
grans Apponatz mentioned by Cartier farther on in his voyage to be the
great auk—a distinction it might seem almost too nice for the rough Breton
sailor to make.

1 The birds called by Cartier Gadez were doubtless murres (genus
Urid), and with them perhaps were razorbills (Aka tarda) and others.
I do not find that any of the early voyagers, Spanish, French, or English,
made any distinction between the murres and other birds associated with
them, except as they differed in size or color, or exhibited striking pecu¬
liarities of habit. The word g$di in the dictionary of Fleming and Tibbins
is defined as an ** oiseau de mer blanc et noir qui vole tres vite.”

78

FIRST VOYAGE

part of the island, and which are very bad to attack,
for they bite like dogs and are called Margaulx . 1
And notwithstanding the said island may be four¬
teen leagues from land, the bears 3 pass thither by
swimming from the mainland to eat of the said
birds, of which our men found one of them as
big as a cow, and as white as a swan, which leaped
into the sea before them. And the next day,
which is the day of Pentecost, in making our course
toward land, we met the said bear about midway,
which went toward land as fast as we could go under
sail; and we, having perceived him, gave chase with
our boats and took him by force; the flesh of which
was as good to eat as of a heifer of two years.

Wednesday, the 27th of the said month, we ar¬
rived at the entrance of Castle Bay, 8 and owing to the
contrariety of the wind and the great quantity of ice
that we found, it behooved us to enter into a harbor,

1 Margaulx . The birds here described were undoubtedly gannets
(Sula banana ), and to-day abound where their progenitors were despoiled
by Cartier's companions; nor have they changed their habits, but still
“ bite like dogs ” when their haunts are invaded by foes.

1 Ursus maritimus, one of the largest, strongest, and most ferocious of
its genus. It has been known to weigh fifteen hundred pounds, and was
often encountered by voyagers in this region.

1 ** Le baye Chasteaulx." It is clear that Cartier here indicates the
Strait of Belle Isle, the entrance to the Gulf of St. Lawrence. He had
sailed from St. Malo on the 20th of April, and, after a voyage of twenty
days, had made land at Cape Bonavista. About this there should be no ques¬
tion, for he gives the latitude with great accuracy, being within twelve
minutes of the exact location. This had been the objective point of pre¬
ceding navigators. From here, owing to the ice, he had made his way
south-southwest about five leagues to the present Catalina, where he remained
until the 21st of May, ten days, when he sailed north by east and came to
the islands so long known as the Bird Islands, and six days later reached the
Strait of Belle Isle, namely, on the 27th, where his progress was arrested
by the outflowing ice. It is well to note these points particularly in order
to definitely fix the starting-point of Cartier for his voyage toward the
Gulf of St. Lawrence.

79

FIRST VOYAGE

being in the neighborhood of the entrance named
Rapont, 1 where we were without the power of get¬
ting out of it until the ninth day of June, when we
departed to pass by the help of God beyond. The
said Rapont is in fifty-one and a half degrees of lati¬
tude.

DESCRIPTION OF THE LAND FROM CAPE ROUGE* TO
THE HARBOR OF BREST, BEING IN THE BAY

The land from Cape Rouge as far as Degrat,* which
is the point of entrance of the bay, bears from cape
to cape north-northeast and south-southwest; and all
this land is parted into islands adjacent and so near
one another that there are only little streams whereby

1 Rapont. Both Hakluyt and du Petit Val call this place Carpunt. It
is now known as Quirpon, but it will be found under the various names of
Karpunt, Kirpon, Carpoon, and Carpon. Writers differ as to the deriva-
don of the name. Bishop Howley thinks it to be a corruption of Cape
Arpon (English, Cape Harpoon), while Harrisse (Decouverte, p. 171)
says, “II y a beaucoup de petites localites en Bretagne du nom de Car-
pont," which would seem better to indicate the origin of the name.
Dionne, however, says (La Nouvelle France, Quebec, 1891, p* 6a):
“ C’est le mot Querquepont defigure, fort usite dans le vocabulaire dea
p&cheurs d’autrefois, ainsi que degrat, chafaud," etc. Carder's description
of the harbor, which is on an island off the northeastern extremity of New¬
foundland, is remarkably accurate, and agrees precisely with the modern
English sailing directions.

2 “ Cap Rouge." Hakluyt says Cape Razo, and du Petit Val, Cap
Rase. On early Italian charts it is called Capo Rosso (Red Cape), which
meaning it preserves in the Cape Rouge of to-day. It should be remarked,
to avoid confusion, that Cape Race on the same charts is denominated
Capo Raso and even Rasso.

8 Degrat, or, according to Hakluyt and others. Degrad, is without
doubt the high land on the eastern side, which is considerably higher than
Cape Bauld, which forms the northern extremity of Quirpon. The fol¬
lowing, taken from the Newfoundland sailing directions, confirms this view:
“ Kirpon Island forms the southeast point of entrance to the Strait of Belle
Isle. It is large, high and barren, and Cape Degrat on its eastern side in
the centre of the Island is visible in clear weather about 30 miles, being
upwards of 500 feet high." It was from this eminence that Cartier saw
the “two fair islands," i.e., the Funk Islands, near Cape Rouge. Compelled
80

FIRST VOYAGE

boats can go and pass among them, and because of
this there are several good harbors, of which the said
harbor of Rapont and that of Degrat are in one of
these islands, that which is the highest of all, from
the top of which one sees clearly the two fair islands
which are near Cape Rouge, whence they account it
twenty-five leagues. To the said harbor of Rapont
there are two entrances, one toward the east and the
other toward the south of the islands; but one must
give heed to the east side and point, for there are
shoals and shelving ground, and one should range
the western island at the distance of half a cable
or nearer as he will, and then get away on the
south toward Rapont. And one should give heed
to three shoals which are under water in the channel
toward the east island. There is a depth by the
channel three or four fathoms and good bottom; the
other entrance bears east-northeast and south toward
the west within a leap to the shore . 1

Setting out from the point of Degrat and entering
into the said bay, making west, a quarter northwest,
one doubles two islands which lie to larboard, one of
which is within three leagues of the said point and
the other about seven leagues from the first, which is

by wind tnd ice to seek shelter in the harbor of Quirpon, Cartier was
confined there for thirteen days, and here takes occasion to describe the
coast from Cape Rouge to his place of rcfnge. Our text differs in an
important point from that of Hakluyt, who says, "Going from the point
Degrad . . . there is some doubt of two Islands that are on the right side / 9
while in our text it is said that "one doubles two islands which lie to lar¬
board.’ * These islands Bishop Howley identifies as Big Sacred and Schooner
Island in Pistolet Bay. The term "faire Degrat,” invented by the early
fishermen on the Banks of Newfoundland, came to mean quitting a place on
the coast of that island for a better fishing-place, and is to be found in some
modern French dictionaries.

1 "A saultez k terre ” in the manuscript.

6 81

FIRST VOYAGE

flat and low ground, appearing to be the mainland.
I named this island St. Catherine , 1 to the northeast
of which there are dry shoals and bad bottom about
a quarter-league, wherefore one should give it room.
The said island is Castle Harbor , 8 bearing north-
northeast and south-southwest, and it is fifteen leagues
between them. And from the said Castle Harbor
to Hillock Harbor,* which is the north shore of
the said bay, bearing east-northeast and west-south¬
west, it is twelve leagues and a half between them.
And at two leagues from the said Hillock Harbor
is Whale Harbor/ opposite the which harbor, to

1 “ Saincte Katherine.’* Some writers have suggested that Cartier
inclined to this name because it was that of his wife. Stephens, Ganong, and
others suppose that the island now known as Belle Isle is the one indicated.
Cartier’s description, however, does not at all apply to Belle Isle, while it
most accurately applies to Schooner Island. Cf. Jacques Cartier, Hiram
B. Stephens, B.C.L., Montreal, 1890, p. 134; Jacques Cartier, Joseph
Pope, Ottawa, 1890, p. 32; Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada,
Montreal, 1894, p. 156.

3 ** L’hable des Chasteaulz ” still preserves its ancient name in Chateau
Bay, which was fitly applied to it on account of the remarkable form of its
basaltic cliffs, which give it a castellated appearance. Harrisse (Dccouverte,
p. 361) denominates it Baie d’Yorck.

3 « L’hable des Buttes.” Hakluyt says port of Gutte, and du Petit
Val, porte des Gouttes. A butte is a knoll or hill, and Cartier applied
this title to the place on account of the sand-hills which distinguish it.
It is now known as Greenish Harbor.

4 « L’hable de Balleine,” the port of Balances of Hakluyt and du
Petit Val. According to the manuscript the literal translation into English
would be Whale Harbor. Whatever may have been the name applied to
it by Cartier, it has exchanged it for that of Red Bay. Stephens says
this harbor is Baie Royal. After leaving Whale Harbor Cartier found
“ trante huyt brasses et font ttygnay. * ’ The latter word has attracted atten¬
tion. Bishop Howley derives it from teigncux, scabby or scruffy. Littre
gives tangae as the name of a gray sand found in the harbors and at the
mouths of rivers in Normandy. The word is no doubt derived from the
same root as our English tangle, an older form of which is tang t and
Norman-French tang**, the name of several kinds of coarse seaweeds;
hence I have translated the word taygnay, tangle-weed, which probably
conveys the author’s meaning.

82

FIRST VOYAGE

wit, a third part of the way across the said bay,
there are thirty-eight fathoms and bottom of tangle-
weed. From the said Whale Harbor as far as to
Blanc Sablon 1 it is twenty-five leagues to the said
west-southwest, and it is necessary to give heed to a
shoal that is above water, like a boat, to the south¬
east of the said Blanc Sablon. Three leagues beyond
Blanc Sablon is a berth where there is no point of
shelter from the south nor from the southeast. And
there are to the south-southwest of this berth two
islands, of which one is called Wood Island and
the other Bird Island , 8 where there is a great num¬
ber of Godez and of Richars ,* which have the beak and
feet red, and nest in holes underground like rabbits.
Having doubled a headland which is a league from
Blanc Sablon, there is a harbor and passage named

t "Blue Sablon/’ the name which it still preserves, owing to the
whiteness of its sandy shores when seen from the deck of a ship on a sunny
day. Cartier appears to have sailed from Quirpon to the harbor of Brest
without touching at the intervening places which he describes. The dis¬
tance between Whale Harbor and Blanc Sablon he does not give in the
manuscript, but Hakluyt gives it as fifteen and du Petit Vsl as twenty-five
leagues, both of which are excessive. The unsheltered berth which he men¬
tions three leagues from Blanc Sablon must be in Bradore Bay.

a "L’isle de Bouays” and "l’isle des Ouaiseaulx.” The first still
bears the title of Woody Island, but the latter is now known as Greenly
Island.

* Ricksn. The bird here so particularly described can be no other
than the puffin (Fratercuk arctua ), a bird of striking appearance, about
twelve inches long, with legs so placed that it is obliged to sit far back like
the aok. It flies with great swiftness, though its wings are short. The
upper part of the body is dusky, cheeks and breast white, neck ringed with
black, and legs and feet pink. Its most striking feature is its beak, which
is very broad at the base, with a sharp cutting edge, bluish gray near the
head and bright red to its obtuse point. It breeds in burrows which it ex¬
cavates with its strong beak to a depth of two feet or more. All the birds
mentioned by Cartier, except the great auk, still abound in the region visited
by him, and a number of specimens are in the possession of the writer,
having been obtained for him there.

«3

FIRST VOYAGE

the Islettes , 1 which is better than Blanc Sablon, and
there great fishing is done. From said place of the
Isles to a harbor named Brest , 2 by the said points of
the compass, it is ten leagues. This harbor is in fifty-
one degrees and fifty-five minutes of latitude and in
... of longitude. From the Islettes to the said
place there are islands, and the said Brest is among
islands; and, moreover, ranging the coast for more
than three leagues outward it is all islands for more
than twelve leagues distant from the said Brest, which
islands are low, and one sees the high lands over
them.

The tenth day of the said month of June we en¬
tered into the said harbor of Brest with our ships in
order to get water and wood. And we cleared and
passed out of the said bay; and the day of St. Bar¬
nabas , 2 after mass was heard, we went with our boats

1 “Let Islettes.'* This would seem to be Bradorc Bay. Harrisse
(Decouvate, p. 362) calls it Havre de Labradore.

* Brest. It is to be noted that Cartier left Quirpon on the 9th and
arrived at Brest the next day, which is a remarkably quick passage, and would
not have permitted him to visit the intermediate places which he describes.
Brest is now known as Old Fort, on account of a stone fortification having
been erected there in the latter part of the sixteenth century to protect the
French fishermen, who gathered there to pursue their laborious avocation.
Lewis Robinson (Dictionary of Commerce, London, 1638) says that “it
is computed that it contained two hundred houses and a thousand inhabi¬
tants in winter.** It was deserted by the French early in the seventeenth
century.

* “Sainct Barnabas." The l Ith of June was, according to an ancient
belief, a day in which storms were prevalent. Brand, quoting Festa Anglo
Romans, p. 72, says that it is the day “ when the sun seems to stand, and
begins to go back, being the longest day in the year,'* or, as an old prov¬
erb puts it,

Bamabjr Bright,

The longest day and shortest night.

So important a day in the calendar could hardly have been ignored by the
pious Bretons.

84

FIRST VOYAGE

beyond the said harbor toward the west, to discover
and see what harbors were there. We passed among
the islands, which are in so great number that it is
not possible to count them, which continue about ten
leagues beyond the said harbor. We lay in one of
these islands to pass the night, and found there in
great quantity the eggs of ducks and other birds which
nest in the islands. The said islands were named All
Islands . 1 The next day, the twelfth, we passed
beyond the said islands, and at the end of the bulk
of them we found a good harbor, which was named
St. Anthony.* And about a league or two beyond we
found a little stream very deep, which is on the west
to the southwest and between two highlands. It is a
good harbor, and a cross was planted at the said harbor
and named St. Servan . 1 To the southwest of the said
harbor and stream about a league there is an islet round
like an oven, surrounded by many other smaller islets,
which give knowledge of the said harbors. Ten leagues
farther is another good stream, still larger, where there
are many salmon. We named it the river St. James . 4
Being by it, we perceived a great ship which was from
Rochelle, [the captain of] which had passed the night
seeking the harbor of Brest, where he intended to go

l “Toatcj Islet.'* The numerous islands beyond Brest plainly identify
the locality. Cartier had left his ships at Brest and was now prosecuting
his explorations in boats.

* "Sainct Anthoine." The present Rocky Bay. Harrisse (Decouverte,
p. 362) has it "Grande baie d'Omar."

* "Sainct Servan." Professor Ganong, in a very interesting paper on
Cartier's route, decides that this is the present Lobster Bay. St. Servan is
the name of a town adjoining St. Malo. Vidt Transactions of the Royal
Society of Canada, 1887, vol. iv, p. 125.

* " La ripuiere Sainct Jacques." On various charts a little inlet, Baie
do petit Pene, appears as the river St. James. It is highly improbable that
Carder refers to this insignificant inlet, as he speaks of it as being large.

“ 8j

FIRST VOYAGE

to do his fishing and knew not where he was. We went
alongside with our boats and put into another harbor
a league more to the west than the said river St.
James, the which I deem one of the good harbors of
the world, and it was named Jacques Cartier Harbor . 1
If the land was as good as the harbors there are, it
would be an advantage; but it should not be named
the New Land, but fa land of] stones and rocks fright¬
ful and ill shaped, for in all the said north coast I did
not see a cart-load of earth, though I landed in many
places. Except at Blanc Sablon there is nothing but
moss and small stunted woods; in short, I deem rather
than otherwise, that it is the land that God gave to
Cain. There are people in the said land who are well
enough of body, but they are wild and savage folks.
They have their hair tied upon their heads in the
fashion of a fistful of hay trussed up, and a nail or some
other thing passed through it, and therein they stick
some feathers of birds. They clothe themselves with
skins of beasts, both men and women, but the women
are closer and tighter in their said skins, and girded
about the body. They paint themselves with certain
tawny colors. They have boats in which they go by
sea, which are made of the bark of birch-trees, where-

There can be little doubt that he referred to Shecatica Bay, which has the
appearance of being a large river when viewed from some points. The
manuscript says that from St. Servan to this river is ten (dix) leagues, while
Hakluyt and du Petit Val say two (dtux) leagues. Such a difference in
distance is calculated to cause confusion. Pope, accepting the shorter
distance as nearly correct, suggests that the St. James River may be “La
baie de Napetepe,” and Jacques Cartier Harbor “La baie de Mistanoque.”

1 “ L’liable Jacques Cartier.” In spite of the fact that students of the
cartography of this region have supposed this harbor to be Shecatica Bay,
we agree with Professor Ganong that the real Cartier Harbor can be no
other than Cumberland Bay, because it so much better answers the descrip¬
tion. It is to be regretted that it has lost its ancient title.

86

FIRST VOYAGE

with they fish a great many seals. Since having seen
them I am sure that this is not their abode, and that
they come from warmer lands in order to take the said
seals and other things for their living. 1

The thirteenth day we returned aboard with our said
boats in order to set sail, because the weather was good.
And Sunday, the 14th, we caused the mass to be sung,
and Monday, the 15 th, we got under way from the
said Brest and set our course toward the south in order

1 There has been considerable speculation regarding the ethnical relations
of these savages. Many, including an authority like Ferlsnd, have regarded
them as Eskimos, while other writers have agreed that they were, quoting
one of their number, some “tribunomade de la grande famiile algonquine.’*
Cartier in his explorations, meeting with tribes unlike one another in speech
and manners, noted these differences. In this case the trussing of the hair
and painting in tawny colors are points which tend to identify these Ashers
in Cumberland Bay with the Beothiks, or Red Indians, whose history forms
one of the most pathetic pages in the history of Newfoundland. They were
probably the same people seen by Cabot and described by him as painting
themselves with “red ochre,** three of whom he captured and carried to
England, where two years later they were seen by Fabian and mistaken for
Englishmen. Whitboum also alludes to their partiality for “red oaker,
which they use to cover their bodies,*' and says that they are “an ingenious
and subtill kind of people — so likewise are they tractable — when they
have been gently and politickly dealt withall.*' Other writers agree that
they were at first well disposed to Europeans, but owing to abuse withdrew
from their settlements and retaliated upon them when occasion offered. As
the English settlements grew in Newfoundland, it became almost a fixed
belief with the settlers that it was as necessary to exterminate the Red
Indians as it was wild beasts. Says Cartwright, who was an eye-witness
of what he relates : “On the part of the English fishers their conduct is
an inhumanity that sinks them far below the level of savages. The wan¬
tonness of their cruelties towards these poor wretches has frequently been
almost incredible.** Says Pilot: “ For a period of nearly two hundred
years this same kind of barbarity continued; and it was considered meri¬
torious to shoot a Red Indian. To go to * look for Indians * came to be
as much a phrase as to «look for partridges.' They were harassed from
post to post, from island to island; their hunting and fishing stations were
unscrupulously seized by the invading English. They were shot down
without the least provocation, or captured to be exposed as curiosities to
the rabble at fairs in the western towns of Christian England at two pence
apiece." Men even boated of the number of Indians they had shot, and

87

FIRST VOYAGE

to get knowledge of the land that we saw appearing
like two islands; but when we were in the midst of
the bay or thereabouts, we knew that it was the
mainland, from which was a great double cape, one
above the other, and therefore we named it Cape
Double. 1 In the midst of the bay we sounded a
hundred fathoms, and the bottom clear. It is across
from Brest to the said Cape Double about twenty
leagues, and at five or six leagues we sounded at forty
fathoms. We found the said land to be bearing north¬
east and southwest a quarter by north and by south.

The next day, the 16th of the said month, we
steered along the coast toward the southwest, a quarter
by south, about thirty-five leagues from Cape Double,
where we found lands with mountains very high and
forbidding, between which there was one appearing
to be like a barn, and for this we named the place
the Grange Mountains. 2 These high lands and moun-

scored the number on their gun-stocks. Of these people not one remains
to-day; all have perished. Vide Anspach’s History of Newfoundland,
London, 1827, p. 457 et seq.; History of Newfoundland, D. W. Prowse,
London, 188$, pp. 63-6$; Chapell’s Voyage to Newfoundland, London,
1818, pp. 169-197; Buchan’s Narrative in History of Newfoundland,
Rev. Charles Pedley, London, 1863, pp. 482-501; Whitbourn’s Discourse
and Discovery of Newfoundland, London, 1822, p. 2; Cours d’Histoirc,
Ferland, Quebec, 1882, p. 19 ; The Beothiks or Red Indians of New¬
foundland, Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada, 1891, pp. 123-
171; Journeys, Transacdons and Events on Coast of Labrador, George
Cartwright, Newark, 1792, vol. i, pp. 6-13, 71.

1 "Cap Double.” Carrier, having explored the Labrador coast,
returned to Brest, and on the fourteenth day of June left the coast of Lab¬
rador to explore the westerly shores of Newfoundland. When about ten
miles from the coast he descried the high lands beyond Point Rich, which
had the appearance of a double cape; hence the name. The weather
being thick and stormy, his distances were only estimates, and hence in¬
accurate. It is therefore necessary to confine our observations strictly to
the topographical descriptions which he gives.

* “ Les Monts de Granches.” Differences of opinion exist respecting

88

FIRST VOYAGE

tains are hacked and furrowed, and between them and
the sea are low lands. The said day before we had no
knowledge of any land for the fogs and the darkness
of the weather that prevailed, and toward evening a
fault in the land appeared to us like an entrance of a
river between the said Grange Mountains and a cape,
which lay to the south-southwest about three leagues
from us. The top of this cape is wholly lopped off,
and the base toward the sea is pointed, and therefore
we named it Pointed Cape. 1 At a league to the north
of it there is a flat island.

And because we wished to get sight of this en¬
trance to see if there was any good position and har¬
bor, we struck sail for to pass the night.

The next day, the 17th of the said month, we had
a gale of wind from the northeast, and got under reef
to stand onward with the mainsail, and made way,
sailing southwest thirty-seven leagues until Thursday
morning, when we were athwart a bay full of round

the reason for this name. Hakluyt, following Ramusio, who gives the
name Monti delle grange, calls them the Hut Mountains, because they ap¬
peared to Cartier like huts or bams. Several writers, among them Stephens
(p. 135), already cited, suggest that the name was bestowed upon them by
Cartier in honor of his wife, whose maiden name was Granches. They
were a pan of the ridge of mountains extending along the western coast of
Newfoundland back of Bay Ingornachoix. The *< fault ” mentioned was
doubtless Sand Bay.

1 *• Cap Pointu/* the Tete de Vache of the French, now Cow Head.
The island about a league to the north is now known as Stearing Island.
With the wind northeast Cartier got under way with reefed mainsail.
Being unacquainted with the coast, it is not probable that an experienced
navigator like Cartier would run his ship before the wind toward the south¬
west. The fact that he made sail under a reefed mainsail is against such a
supposition. In running before the wind he would have used the foresail
or foretopsail. The natural inference is that he lay to with the ship heading
off the shore and drifted slowly to leeward until Thursday morning, when
be saw through the fog and mist a bay foil of islands. This is the opinion
of a skilful navigator in this region.

89

FIRST VOYAGE

islands like dove-cotes, and therefore we gave them
the name of Dove-cotes, 1 and the bay, St. Julian;
from the which to a cape which lies to the south a
quarter from the southwest, which was named Cape
Royal, 2 it is seven leagues. And to the west-south¬
west of the said cape there is another cape, which
is much scarfed off at the base of it and round at
the top; to the north of which about a half-league
there is a low island. This cape was named Cape

1 " Coulonbiers,” that is. Dove-cotes. Hakluyt calls them “Islands of
Dove-houses,” and Lescarbot Isles Rameea. Cartier seems to have been
reminded of a cluster of islands to the west of St. Malo at the entrance
of the Arguenon. These islands were in the Bay St. Julian, and it is
necessary to identify this bay. Ganong and Harrisse, both excellent
authorities, suppose it to be Bonne Bay, while Pope and Howley, also well
versed in the cartography of the region, believe it to be the Bay of Islands,
south of Bonne Bay. Although, as frequently, there is a discrepancy in
Carrier’s distances, which is not to be wondered at considering the circum¬
stances, a careful study of the subject, fortified by the experience of one
familiar with the locality, and the fact that I find no other place which
answers Cartier’s description, leads me to the opinion that his St. Julian
can be no other than the Bay of Islands. Regarding the name bestowed
upon it, the Abbe Verreau remarks : “ II semble avoir eu une devotion
particuliere pour S. Julien, premier evique du Mans. Ce veritable thauma¬
turge etait reprisente dans undesvitraux peints que omaient la salle princi-
pale la maison de Limoilou.” Vide Jacques Carrier, Pope, p. 38 et ieq.;
Decouverte, Harrisse, p. 362; Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada,
1890, p. 136.

1 “Cap Royal.” The present Bluff Head. It is just seven leagues
from the Bay of Islands. It is the highest land between them and Porte k
Porte. Cartier, exploring with his boats, found over the low sands a deep
bay with islands therein, ** the which is toward the south of the said low
lands which form one side of the entrance and Cap Royal the other.”
Cap Royal therefore formed one side of the entrance to Porte k Porte and
could have been no other than Bluff Head. Bishop Howley supposes Cap
Royal to be Bear Head, or Cap l’Ours, said to be a corruption of Cap
Louis, and Ganong supposes it to be Cape Gregory. Cartier says,
“ Between these two capes there are low lands.” The lands between
Bear Head and Bluff Head are high lands, but between Bluff Head and
Cape St. George it is all low land! The first land to attract attention when
three or four miles off the Bay of Islands looking toward Porte k Porte is
Bluff Head.

90

FIRST VOYAGE

Delatte. 1 Between these two capes there are low lands,
above which there are some very high, where there
seem to be streams. At two leagues from Cape Royal
it is twenty fathoms in depth, and the greatest fishing
of big codfish that can be possible, of which codfish
we took in while waiting for our consort more than
a hundred in less than an hour.

The next day, the 18th day of the said month,
the weather was against us and the wind high,
and we turned back toward Cape Royal, thinking
to find a harbor. With our boats we went to ex¬
plore between the said Cape Royal and Cape De-
latte, and found that over the low lands there is a
great bay very deep, and islands 3 therein, the which

1 “Cap Delatte.’* Capo del Latte of Ramusio, Cap de Laict of du
Petit Val, and therefore translated by Hakluyt Cape of Milk. Abbe
Verreau suggest* that Uttt is a corruption of the Celtic laes t signifying
elevated, and says that it is not the only time, unfortunately, that a geo¬
graphical name has been completely changed, thanks to the foul dealing
( trshistn ) of translators ; but this is going too far afield in search of the
etymology of the name given this rocky cape by Cartier. He saw it
when it was churning milk-white, the waters driven upon it by a storm of
wind, and why should he not have given it the homely tide of Cap d f Lait,
or Cape Milk ? It is now known as Cape St. George. The following
are the reasons for this opinion : It is south-southwest from Bluff Head,
and there is an island about half a league to the north which, though high,
appears flat from the sea and lower than it is, owing to the much higher
land back of it. The headland opposite the island is round at the top and
falls away at the base, especially when viewed from the west. Bishop
Howley thinks Cap Delatte is Round Head, but this would bring the
island Cartier saw, which is Isle Rouge, or Red Island, now a French
fishing-station, to the southwest. An ingenious attempt to reconcile this
important discrepancy may be found in Transactions of the Royal Society
of Canada, 1894, p. 160 tt seq.; but if Round Head answered the descrip¬
tion, it is unlikely that a small rock resembling **a lion couchant” would
attract the attention of a practical seaman as forcibly as a prominent head¬
land extending miles into the sea like Cape St. George.

* Cartier went to explore with his boats, and, it would seem, discov¬
ered Porte i Porte Bay, Fox Island, which is well within the entrance, the
Fox Island River, and Three Guts. Why he “ held to sea for the night"
91

FIRST VOYAGE

is close toward the south of the said low lands, which
form one side of the entrance, and Cape Royal the
other. The said low lands make out into the sea more
than half a league, of flat country and bad ground,
and midway of the entrance is an island. The said
bay is in forty-eight and a half degrees of latitude
and in . . . degrees of longitude. This day we
found no harbor for to lay to, and stood to sea for the
night, the cape to west.

From the said day until the 24th day of the
said month, which is St. John’s Day, we had
storms and contrary wind and shut in so that we
could get no sight of land until the said St. John’s
Day, when we got sight of a headland which lay to
the southeast, which, in our estimation, lay to the
southwest of Cape Royal about thirty-five leagues.
And this day were fogs and foul weather, and we
could not approach the said land, and because it was
the day of my Lord St. John we named the cape
St. John. 1

The next day, the 25th day, was foul weather,
dark and windy, and we made her go to west-
northwest part of the day, and in the evening we

with to good a harbor at hand is not readily explained. It will be seen
that in the edition of du Petit Val it it said that having no port Cartier
withdrew to tea, “ aprei avoir tourn£ le Cap i l’Ouest," that is f Long
Point. The words emphasized are not in the manuscript, and are an
important addition, as they indicate that he went outside the bay which he
had explored.

1 “ Sainct Jehan.” This has generally been thought to be Cape
Anguille, or Eel Cape. Howley supposes that Cartier applied the name
Sainct Jehan to a cape some miles northeast of Cape Anguille, because of
the fact apparently that this cape on some old maps is so denominated.
This in itself would be hardly sufficient proof, as names in this region were
frequently moved from one place to another, the cape in question fur¬
nishing a curious example. The distances given by Cartier were estimated,
92

FIRST VOYAGE

put across until the larboard watch was set, and
then, by our reckoning, we were to the northwest a
quarter west from the aforesaid Cape St. John seven¬
teen leagues and a half. And when we were getting
under sail the wind was northwest, and we made her
go to the southwest fifteen leagues, and came to find
three islands, of which two of them were small and
upright like walls, so that it was not possible to climb
to the top, between which there is a little opening.
These islands are as full of birds as a field of grass,
which nest within these islands, of which the greatest
was full of Margaufx, which are white and bigger
than geese. And in the other there was likewise a
large number of them, and the next was full of
Godez, and below there were likewise the said Godez
and great Apponatz, which were like those of the
island of which mention was heretofore made. We
landed at the base of the smallest, and killed more
than a thousand Godez and Apponatz , and took in
our boats what we wanted of them. One could
have loaded there in an hour thirty of these boats.
We named these islands Margaulx Islands. 1 At five

and therefore it is not strange, as before remarked, that they are inaccurate.
Hakluyt and du Petit Val gire the distance as seven and a half leagues that
Cartier sailed to the northwest after leaving the cape, instead of seventeen
and a half as in the manuscript. Such discrepancies increase the difficulty
of identifying places mentioned by him.

1 •• Isles de Margaulx.” Unmistakably the Bird Rocks, Cartier’s de¬
scription being most exact. There are really only two rocks, but the sea
beating against one of them has bored a passage {firiikn) through it, so that
they appear like three separate rocks. They still swarm with gannets and
other birds as in Cartier's day, and the fiat top of one of them is reached
by a rude stairway, where the Canadian government maintains a light¬
house. Audubon visited the Bird Rocks, and thus describes them in his
Ornithological Biography (Edinburgh, 1838, vol. iv, p. 224): “The
top of the main rock is a quarter of a mile wide from north to south, but
narrow in the other direction. It stands in latitude 47 0 52The surf

93

FIRST VOYAGE

leagues from the said islands was another island to
the west of them, which is about two leagues long
and as many wide. We were laid to there for the
night to get water and firewood. This island is
ranged with sands and good bottom, and a passage
all about it toward six or seven fathoms. This said
island is the best land that we have seen, for an acre
of this land is better worth than all New Land. We
found it full of goodly trees, meadows, fields of wild
corn, 2 and with peas in flower as thick and as fair as
never I saw in Brittany, so that they seem to have
been sown there by husbandmen. There are in
plenty gooseberries, strawberries, and roses of Pro¬
vence, 2 parsley, and other goodly herbs of excellent
odor. There are about this island many great beasts,
like great oxen, which have two teeth in their chops,
like teeth of the elephant, that go in the sea, of
which there was one that was asleep on the land at
the edge of the water, and we went with our boats
with intent to take her, but directly we were near
her, she threw herself into the sea. 8 We saw there

beats its base with great violence unless after a long calm, and it is ex¬
tremely difficult to land upon it, and still more so to ascend to the top or
platform. The only point upon which a boat may be landed lies on the
south side, and the moment the boat strikes, it must be hauled dry on the
rocks. The whole surface of the upper platform is closely covered with
nests placed about two feet asunder, and in such regular order that a per¬
son may see between the lines which run north and south as if looking
along the furrows of a deeply ploughed field. The Labrador fishermen
kill thousands for bait."

1 Wild com. There can be little doubt that what Cartier saw was Uvularia
sessilifotia , which still grows in this region, and is popularly called wild oats.

3 Roses of Provence. According to Hakluyt, "damaske roses." The
rose of Provence is the cabbage-rose {Raja tentifolia ), but this could not
have been what Cartier saw; indeed, his rose of Provence was the Rasa
lucida , which flourishes there at the present time.

* This animal was the morse or walrus (Trithecbus res mar us). Popu-

94

FIRST VOYAGE

likewise bears and foxes. This island was named
Brion Island. 1 About these islands there are high
tides which set nearly southeast and northwest. I
presume rather than otherwise, by what I have seen,
that there may be another passage between New
Land and the land of the Bretons. 2 If so it were, it
would be a great shortening as well of the time as
of the way, if perfection be found in this voyage.
At four leagues from the said island there is a fine
cape which we named Cape Dauphin,* because it
is the beginning of good lands.

The 27th of the said month of June we ranged

larly these monsters, which so astonished the early voyagers to Northern
regions, were called sea-horses and sea-oxen, and expeditions were fitted
out at an early date from New England ports to take them — their skins
and oil, and especially their tusks, which were from twelve to eighteen
inches in length, being valuable. It is said that their hides were double
the thickness of bulls' hides, and that their ivory was of so fine a quality
that comb- and knife-makers paid for it double the price of ordinary ivory.
The indiscriminate slaughter of these valuable animals soon wrought their
destruction.

1 «* Ille de Bryon." So named for Cartier's patron, Philippe de Chabot,
Seigneur de Brion, Grand Admiral of France, a name which it still hap¬
pily bears, though sometimes distorted to Byron by those living in the vi¬
cinity, many of whom insist, as one did to the writer, that it was so named
for Lord Byron.

* 4 * Land of the Bretons." In other versions * 4 land of Brion,"
which is an error. From this it might appear that a southern passage be¬
tween the island of Cape Breton and Newfoundland was unknown at this
time, or Cartier, who must have been versed in the knowledge of the
region then extant, would not have made this remark. There is reason,
however, to believe that the Portuguese had explored these waters long
before Cartier’s visit. Vidt Decouverte, Harrisse (in which the author
quotes from Portuguese sources), vol. i, pp. xxv, 86, 135, 218, et passim,

* 44 Cap du Daulphin.” Neither Stephens nor Harrisse ventures an
attempt to designate this cape. The course taken by Cartier should have
brought him to the northern coast of Coffin's Island, and the cape which
he saw must have been North Cape. In describing his course along the
northern shore of Coffin's Island at a considerable distance therefrom, the
wind being strongly offshore so that he was unable to approach or land, he
noticed the hillocks of sand, which, although the shores have considerably

95

FIRST VOYAGE

the said land, which bears east-northeast and west-
southwest, and seems from afar as it were hillocks of
sand, because they are lands low and arenaceous.
We could neither go to nor land at them because
the wind came thence, and we ranged them that day
about fifteen leagues.

The next day we ranged this land about ten
leagues as far as a cape of red land, which is a shorn
cape, within which there is a breach which falls off
to the north and low country. There is a ridge and
pebbly beach 1 which is between the sea and a pond.
From this cape of land and pond to another cape
of land it is about four leagues. This makes the
land into a half-circle, and all ranged with sand
formed like a ditch, over which and beyond it there
are in like manner marshes and ponds as far as one
can see. And before arriving at the first cape there

changed since Cartier’s visit, are familiar to-day to those who skirt them,
and tend strongly to identify the locality of the cape which Cartier named
after the Dauphin, Duke Francis, who died shortly after, viz., in 1536.
North Cape is still called by the French inhabitants of the Magdalen Islands
Cap du Dauphin. The hillocks of sand which he observed on the 27th
are still prominent objects.

1 In the original "aillon et perroy,” These words have been a great
puzzle to students of the Relation Originale. They do not appear in other
versions. Sillon means a furrow as thrown up by the plow. Silloner
(videlltXftin loco) is to ridge, to groove; hence from the latter signification
the English silo, a pit. There is no word perroy , but there is perron and
perri. The former is an architectural term which would hardly apply to
the case. I have no doubt whatever that the word should be perri , which
I have translated ** pebbly beach,” for this is just what one sees to-day
bordering the ridge between the sea and the pond which Cartier describes.
Littre gives the meaning of perri as the ** rivage de la mer couvert dc
pierres.” Du Petit Val has “une petite plain” in place of these words,
and Hakluyt **a plaine field.” There is a secondary meaning which may
account for this mistranslation, viz., plowland, i.e., level land suitable for
cultivation. The use of the word by Cartier was suggested by the sillon
of St. Malo, the old causeway with which he had been familiar from
childhood.

FIRST VOYAGE

arc two little islands pretty near the land, and at five
leagues from the said second cape there is an island
to the southwest which is very high and sharp, which
by us was named Allezay. 1 The first cape was
named Cape St. Peter, 2 because we arrived there
the day of the said saint.

From the said Brion Island as far as to the said

1 "Allezay/* The Abbe Verreau supposes the name to have been
given this island in honor of Cartier's sister-in-law, Alizon des Granchet.
There is, however, a commune of Louviers named Alisay, which Cartier
may have had in mind. The attempts to identify this island have resulted
in widely different conclusions; thus, de Costa takes it to be a part of
Prince Edward's Island; Pope and Ganong recognize it as Deadman’s
Island, on the southwest coast of Amherst Island; Kohl thinks it is "near
the North Point of Prince Edward's Island Stephens that it is " Prince
Edward's Island, or it may be one of the Magdalen Islands"; and Bishop
Howley, Entry Island. Bishop Howley’s view appears quite as untenable
as that of de Costa, Kohl, or Stephens. It is incredible that a navigator
intent upon discovery could have sailed from North Cape without noticing
one of the prominent headlands, and then enter into a minute description
of a small red point at the head of Pleasant Bay. If Cartier passed be¬
tween Entry Island and Sandy Hook and entered Pleasant Bay by that
route, he would certainly have mentioned it. The two little islands near
the land must be Pierre de Gros Cap and the White Horse, now sub¬
merged, and as Deadman's Island bears about southwest from the cape
nearest to and opposite Pierre de Gros Cap and White Horse it can be no
other than Cartier's Allezay. Vide Transactions of the Royal Society of
Canada, 1887, p. 128; 1894, pp. 78, 166; 1900, p. 137; Jacques
Cartier, Joseph Pope, Ottawa, 1890, p. 44; Documentary History of
Maine, J. G. Kohl, Portland, 1869, vol. i, p. 326; Narrative and Critical
History of America, Justin Winsor, Boston, 1889, vol. iv, p. 49; Jacques
Cartier, Hiram B. Stephens, Montreal, 1890, p. 135.

* " Cap Sainct Pierre." The present Southwest Cape. The name
in this case, as in others, was doubtless applied to the entire headland as it
appeared from the sea, and not to any one particular feature. Bishop
Howley supposes this cape to be Red Cape and the pond mentioned to be
the Etang du Nord, popularly Tantanour; but the Etang du Nord is about
four miles north of Red Cape, with the highlands of Grindstone interven¬
ing, and could not possibly have come under Cartier's observation from
Red Cape had he visited it; nor is it a pond at all, but simply an indenta¬
tion of the land formed into a sort of basin by Gull Island, which may
once have been joined to Grindstone on the northeast. West Lake, how¬
ever, answers Cartier's description. The shore where Cartier landed was

7 97

FIRST VOYAGE

place there is a fair bottom of sand and sure depth,
which shallows as one approaches the land. Like¬
wise at five leagues from land there are twenty-five
fathoms, and at one league twelve fathoms; alongside
the land six fathoms, and everywhere fair bottom.
And because we would get more ample knowledge
of the said region we struck sails and brought to.

And the next day, preceding the last day of the said
month, the wind came to the south a quarter south¬
west, and we ran until Tuesday, the last day of the
said month, at sunrise, without having sight of any
land, save that in the evening, at sunsetting, we saw
land appearing like two islands, which lay to west-
southwest about nine or ten leagues. And this day
we made to the west until the next day at sunrise,
about forty leagues; and making way, we had know¬
ledge of the land, which had appeared to us like two
islands, that it was the mainland, which bore south-
southeast and north-northwest as fir as to a very fair
headland, named Cape Orleans. 1 All this is low,

very red ; so is Southwest Cape, while at Etang du Nord it is dark blue,
gray, and red. West Lake is divided from the sea by a ridge of sand and
pebbly shore, a si Hon et ferny, and the beach falls off to the north with a
low country. At Etang du Nord the land falls off to the south, while
toward the north the land is high and projects into the sea. The two
little islands Pierre de Gros Cap and White Horse would both have been
passed before reaching Southwest Cape, and but one before reaching Etang
du Nord. Entry Island is distant about four leagues from Southwest Cape
and brings the land into a half-circle. In Cartier's time it was most
likely connected with Sandy Hook.

1 ** Cap d’Orleans." We may assume that Cartier anchored his ships
on the night of the 28th of June in the vicinity of Cape St. Peter, and the
next morning departed, the wind south a quarter west. Sailing westward
in order to fetch clear of Amherst Island, he would have to stand out on a
course east by south, a quarter south for about ten miles. He would then
tack and steer west three quarters south, which, with moderate wind and
98

FIRST VOYAGE

level land, the fairest that it may be possible to see,
and full of goodly trees and meadows; but in it we
could not find a harbor, because it i$ low land and a
sunken country, and wholly ranged with sands. We
were there in several places with our boats, and,
among others, within a fair stream of little depth,
where we saw boats of savages who were crossing
the said stream, which was therefore named the
River of Boats. 1 And we had no other knowledge
of them, because the wind came from the sea, which
beat upon the shore, and it behooved us to withdraw
with our said boats to our ships. And we made her
go to the northeast until the next day at sunrise, the

the tide setting out of the gulf, as it always does at that time of the year,
would bring him by sunset into a position to see Campbell’s and Sylvester
Points, on the northerly shore of Prince Edward's Island. He roust have
approached the coast, for he discovered the next day that it was the main*
land, along which he sailed for forty leagues to Cap d’ Orleans, doubtless
the present Cape Kildare. The distance between the two points named,
which appear like two islands, and Cape Kildare is just about forty leagues,
which is additional proof of the correctness of the position here assumed. Pro*
fessor Ganong supposes the two capes which looked like islands to be Try on
and Turner. Cap d'Orleans he identifies as Cape Kildare. M. de Cases
combats this opinion in Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada, 1890,
p. 26 et seq. The length of dme taken by Cartier leads to the opinion that
after leaving the Magdalena he ran out of the wind. An old navigator in
thcae waters tells me that he baa often left the islands in the morning in the
months of June and July, and at a distance of seven or eight miles ran into
nearly a calm with occasional light breezes from the west and northwest,
which has caused him to take about the same time that Cartier took to sight
Prince Edward's Island.

1 «• Ripuiere des Barcqucs." Finding the land he had met an impediment
to his progress, his chief aim being a westerly passage, Cartier would fol¬
low the shore, hoping to find an opening in the coast which seemed to
promise the looked-for passage, and would naturally run into the Narrows
in Richmond Bay, which we may well identify as the Ripuiere des Barcqucs.
The extensive kitchen-middens in the vicinity attest the long occupation
of the region by the Indians. Some writers have supposed that the Bay of
Ifiramichi was the Ripuiere des Barcques, but this opinion cannot be sup¬
ported.

99

FIRST VOYAGE

first day of July, at which time came fogs and tem¬
pest, and we struck sails until about ten o’clock, when
it cleared up and we had sight of the said Cape
Orleans and of another, which lay from it about
seven leagues to the north, a quarter from the
northeast, which was named Savages’ Cape, 1 to the
northeast of which, about a half-league, there is a
shoal and bank of very dangerous stones. At this
cape we saw a man, who ran after our boats along
the shore, who made us many signs that we should
return toward the said cape; and we, seeing such
signs, gave orders to row toward him, and he, seeing
that we turned back, began to flee and ran away
ahead of us. We landed opposite him and put a
knife and girdle of wool on a rod for him, and then
we went away to our ships. This day we ranged
the said land nine or ten leagues, thinking to find a
harbor, which we could not, for, as I have hereto¬
fore said, it is low and sunken land. We landed there
this day in four places for to see the trees, which are
wonderfully fair and of excellent odor, and found
that they were cedars, yews, pines, white elms, ash,
willows, and many others to us unknown, all trees
without fruits. The lands where there are no woods
are very fair and all so full of peas, gooseberries, white
and red, strawberries, raspberries, and wild corn, like
rye, that it seems to have been sown and cultivated
there. This land is of the best temperature that it

1 ** Le Cap des Sauvages.” This would be North Point, and Cartier**
description of the locality after leaving it so exactly tallies with its appear¬
ance to-day as to leave no doubt that he was coasting along the northerly
shore of Prince Edward’s Island. The title “ Cap des Sauvages ’ * appears on
maps a century after Cartier’s visit to this region affixed to Point Escuminac,
west of North Point and distant therefrom about thirty miles.

ioo

FIRST VOYAGE

may be possible to see, and of great warmth, and
there are many turtle-doves, wood-pigeons, and other
birds; there is no lack but of harbors.

The next day, the second day of July, we sighted
land to the north of us, which held with that hitherto
wholly ranged, and we knew that this was a bay which
has about twenty leagues of depth and as many of
width. We named it Bay St. Leonarius. 1 We made
for the cape toward the north with our boats, and
found the country so sunken that at more than a
league from land there was only a fathom of water.
To the northeast of the said cape, about seven or
eight leagues, lay another headland, and between the
two there was a bay, in the manner of a triangle, 2
which was very deep, whereof the farthest that we
could see of it lay to the northeast of us, and was
wholly ranged with sands, a sunken country. At ten
leagues’ distance from land there is a depth of twenty
fa thorns.* From the said last cape as far as to the
said end and headland it is fifteen leagues. And we
being athwart the said cape descried other lands and

1 “ Sainct Limaire,’* or, according to the version of du Petit Val, “ St.
Lunaire.” L'Abbe Hospice Verreau, in his interesting notes on the Calen-
drier civil et ecclesiastique, remarks that««la fetede S. Lunaire—Leonarius—
eat marquee au ler Juillet, mais ellc pouvait etre renvoyee au 2 i cause de
Poctuve de la fete de S. Jean Baptiste si chere aux Malouins.” Vidt
Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada, 1890, p. 136. Lescarbot
says that St. limaire is Tregate. Doubling the Cap des Sauvages, Cartier
sailed along the coast, sighting the land of New Brunswick on the opposite
side of the Strait of Northumberland, the entrance to which he supposed
was a bay, and named it Sainct Limaire; then, crossing over toward the
New Brunswick coast, he made Escuminac, and, looking across in a
northerly direction, saw the headland opposite.

s This bay in the form of a triangle is unmistakably the present Miramichi.

* Cf \ Edition du Petit Val, which says: "Ce Golfe est enuironne de
sablons et lieux bas par dix liehes et n*y a plus de deux brasses de fond,*'
which seems the better statement.

7*

IOI

FIRST VOYAGE

a cape which lay to the north of us a quarter
northeast, all in sight. 1 That night there was bad
weather and a great wind, and it behooved us to heave
to under storm-sails until morning, the third day of
July, when the wind hauled to west, and we stood on
north to get sight of the said land, which was a high
land which lay to the north-northeast of us above the
low lands, between which low lands and the high
there was a great bay and opening, where there was
a depth of fifty-five fathoms in some places, and a width
of about fifteen leagues; and on account of the said
depth and beach and changing of lands we had hope
of there finding passage as there is at the passage of
the Castles. This bay 2 bears east-northeast and west-
southwest, and the land toward the south of the said
bay is as fair as good land, arable and full of as goodly
fields and meadows as we may have seen, and level as
a pond; and that toward the north is a high land,
with mountains all full of trees of tall growth, of many
sorts, and among others are many cedars and firs as
goodly as it may be possible to behold for to make
masts sufficient to mast ships of three hundred tons
and more; in which we did not see a single place
void of woods, save in two places of low lands, where
were very beautiful meadows and lakes. The mid¬
most of the said bay is in forty-seven degrees and a
half of latitude, and seventy-three degrees of longi¬
tude. The cape of the said south land was named

1 Ganong takes this to be Blackland Point, which, however, lies north,
magnetic.

* This bay was the present Bay Chaleur, or, as Hakluyt translates it,
“The Bay of Heat,*' so named by Cartier on account of the hot weather
he experienced there. He says that the extent of the bay was seen, "for
which we were dollans et masra” j that is, they were grievously dis-
appointed at not finding the open passage they were seeking to Cathay.

102

FIRST VOYAGE

Cape Hope, 1 for the hope that we had of there find¬
ing passage. And the fourth day of the said month,
the day of St. Martin, we ranged the said north land
in order to find a harbor, and entered into a little bay
and land berth all open to the south, where there is
no shelter from the said wind, and we named the
berth St. Martin 2 ; and we were within the said berth
from the fourth day even to the twelfth day of the
said July. And while we were in the said berth we
went on Monday, the 6th, after having heard mass,
with one of our boats to explore a cape and point of
land 8 which lay at seven or eight leagues to the west
of us, for to see how the said land trended; and we
being a half-league from said point perceived two
bands of savages in boats, which crossed from their
shore to the other, where they were more than forty
or fifty boats, and of which one of the said companies
of boats arrived at the said point, from which a great
number of people leaped and landed on shore, who
made a great noise, and made many signs that we should
go ashore, showing us skins upon sticks. And be¬
cause we had but a single boat we would not go there,
and rowed toward the other band, which was on the

1 •• Cap d'Esp&ance,” or Cape Hope, now Point Miscou. Cartier
gave it this name because of his hope of here finding the long-looked-for
passage to Cathay. Several other navigators applied this title to capes dis¬
covered by them under hopeful circumstances, as the Cape of Good Hope,
so named by Vasco da Gama; Cabo Spera, now corrupted to Point Spear;
and Bonne Esplrance on the coast of Labrador. Strangely enough, the
name has been corrupted to Cape Despair and moved from its original
position to the peninsula of Gasp6.

1 “Sainct Martin,’* now Port Daniel, denominated by Cartier "unc
coache de tcrre.’*

* Pkspebiac Point, which Cartier says he went to discover after hearing
mass on the 6th of July, which the Abbe Vcrretu points out was the F£tc
de la Transfiguration.

103

FIRST VOYAGE

sea. And they, seeing that we fled, equipped two of
their largest boats for to come after us, with which
were banded five others of those who came from the
sea, and they came until near our said boat, dancing
and making many signs of wanting our friendship,
saying to us in their language: “ Napou tou daman
asurtar,” and other words which we did not under¬
stand. 1 Because we had, as was said, only one of our
boats, we would not trust to their signs, and we made
signs to them that they should withdraw, which they
would not do, but rowed with such great fury that
they surrounded our said boat with their seven boats.
And because for the sign that we made them they
would not retire, we fired two volleys over them, and
then they fell to to return to the said point, and made
a marvelously great noise, after which they began to
return toward us as before; and they being very near
our said boat, we let go at them two fusees, which
passed among them, which astonished them greatly,
so much so that they betook themselves to flight in
very great haste and came after us no more. The
next day a part of the said savages came with nine
boats to the point and entrance of the berth where

1 ** Napou tou daman asurtar." Translated by Belleforest, ** We wish to
have your friendship/' but which Lescarbot tells ui was not the language of
the Indians seventy years later. We now know that during this period
devastating wars had changed the relations of the tribes which Cartier met.
These savages, there is reason to believe, were Micmacs, nomads by nature,
who pitched their rude wigwams wherever the waters promised sufficient
food to temporarily supply their wants. To them we owe the kitchen-
middens, which are everywhere found in this region, and which yield to the
searcher their rude implements of bone and chipped stone. Schoolcraft dif¬
fers from Belleforest. Vide History of the Indian Tribes of the United States,
Philadelphia, 1868, part vi, p. 52. He says “napou means man. It is there¬
fore reasonable to conclude that they were a party of Sheshatapoosh Indians,
whose language proves them to be kindred with the great Algonquin family."

104

FIRST VOYAGE

we were lying with our ships, and we, being adver¬
tised of their coming, went with our two boats to
the said point and entrance where they were, and
directly that they perceived us they set out to fly,
making us signs that they would come to traffic with
us, and showing us some skins of little value where¬
with they rig themselves out. We likewise made
them a sign that we did not wish them any ill, and
set two men to land for to go to them to carry them
knives and other iron wares, and a red hat to give to
their captain. And they seeing this, a part of them
went to land with the said skins and trafficked together,
and displayed a great and marvelous joy to get and
secure the said iron wares and other things, dancing
and performing many ceremonies, by throwing sea¬
water upon their heads with their hands, and giving
us all that they had, insomuch that they returned home
wholly naked, without having anything on them, and
made us signs that the next day they would return
with some other skins.

Thursday, the 8th 1 of the said month, because the
wind was not good to go out with our ships, we
fitted out our said boats in order to go and explore the
said bay, and ran that day within it about twenty-
five leagues. And the next day, in the morning, we
had fair weather and carried sail until about ten
o’clock in the morning, in which time we had
knowledge of the depth of the said bay, for which
we were disappointed and grieved, at the end of which
bay there were over the low lands very high moun¬
tainous lands. And seeing that there was no thorough-
fere we began to return, and making our way along

1 This should be the 9th, as Thursday fell on that date.

105

FIRST VOYAGE

the coast we saw the said savages on the shore of a
pond 1 and low lands where they were making many
fires and smokes. We went to the said place and
found that it had a sea entrance, which entered into
said pond, and we put our said boats to one side of
the said entrance. The said savages passed over with
one of their boats and fetched us some pieces of seals
all cooked, which they put upon pieces of wood and
then withdrew, making us a sign that they gave them
to us. We sent two men ashore with hatchets and
knives, paternosters, and other goods, for which they
showed great joy, and forthwith passed in a crowd
with their boats to the side where we were, with
skins and whatever they had in order to get of our
goods. And they were in number, of men, women,
and children as well, more than three hundred, of
which part of their women, who did not pass over,
danced and sung, standing in the sea up to their
knees. The other women, who had passed to the
other side where we were, came freely to us and
stroked our arms with their hands, and then raised
their joined hands to the sky, making many signs of
joy; and so much did they trust themselves with us
that at last we traded hand to hand with them for
all that they had, which were things of little value.
We conceive that these are people who would be easy
to convert, who go from one place to another, living
and taking fish in the time of fishing for victual.
Their land is more temperate in heat than the land
of Spain, and the most goodly that may be possible
to see, and as level as a pond. And there is not here any
little spot void of woods and made up of sand, which

1 Ganong places this pond at Tracadigash Point.

106

FIRST VOYAGE

may not be full of wild grain, which has an ear like
rye, and the kernel like oats, and peas as thick as
if one had sown and cultivated them; gooseberries,
white and red, strawberries, raspberries, and red
roses, and other herbs of sweet and powerful odor;
likewise there are many fair meadows and good
herbs, and ponds where there are plenty of salmon.
I judge more than otherwise that these people would
be easy to convert to our holy faith. They call a
hatchet in their tongue Cochy and a knife Bacart}
We named the said bay. Bay Chaleur.*

We, being sure that there was not any passage by
the said bay, hoisted sail and got under way from the
said berth St. Martin on Sunday, the twelfth day of
July, for to go to search and discover beyond the said
bay, and we made her go to the east along the coast,
which bears thus about eighteen leagues as far as to
Cape Pratto.* And there we found a marvelous
tide, little depth, and the sea very boisterous, and it

1 Cocky, Bsc an. These were savages of the same race which he had
recently met. Schoolcraft, however, says: «* These are not terms used to
designate a hatchet and a knife, neither in Mic Mac in the old Algonquin,
nor in the Wyandot .** Fide FTistory of the Indian Tribes of the United
States, Philadelphia, 1868, part i, p. 64.

* “ Baye de Chaleur.** Lescarbot criticizes the application of this title
to the bay. He says Jacques Cartier “dit qu*il fait plus chaut, qu*en
Hespagne: en quoy je ne le croiray point jusques a ce qu*il y ait Ait vn autre
voyage attendu le climat; mais il se peut faire que par accident il y faisoit
fort chaut quand il y fut, qui estoit au xnois dc Juillet.** The Indian name
was MomebactabUk, which is said to mean the Biggest Bay. Vidt Histoire
de la Nouvelle France, Paris, 1612, tome i, p. 213.

* “Cap de Pratto,** or, according to Belleforest (vide L*Histoire
Universelle du Monde, I Paris, 1577, p. 362), “Cap du pre.” One
cannot read this account without at once calling to mind the well-known
letters of John Rut and Albert de Prato, Canon of St. Paul, written seven
years before to Cardinal Wolsey (Purchas His Pilgrimes, London, 1625,
vol. iii, p. 809), describing his voyage to the New Land, which he had
just reached. Was this place named for de Prato, and, if so, was it

107

FIRST VOYAGE

behooved us to hug the land between the said cape
and an island, which is to the east of it about a league,
and there dropped anchor for the night. And the
next day, in the morning, we made sail in order to
try to range the said coast, which bears north-north¬
east; but there arose so much contrary wind that it
compelled us to put in where we had left, and we
were there the said day and night until the next day,
when we made sail and came off a stream, which is five
or six leagues from the said cape to the north. And
we being off this stream, the wind came against us
and thick fogs and obscurity, and compelled us to
enter into this stream on Tuesday, the 14th of the
said month, and we lay at the entrance until the 16th,
hoping to have good weather to go out. And the
said day, the 16th, which was Thursday, the wind
increased so much that one of our ships lost an anchor,
and it behooved us to enter seven or eight leagues
farther up this stream, in a good and safe harbor that
we had been to see with our boats.J And owing
to the evil weather, the storm and obscurity that it
caused, we were in this harbor and stream until the
25th day of the said month, without being able

known to Cartier ? These are curious questions which will probably never
be solved. The place is now known as White Head, and the « marvelous
tide*’ soil prevails there. It has been suggested that it was named by
Cartier after the French Chancellor du Pratt, but it seems more probable
that the name was attached to it before Cartier*s visit. Cartier*s place of
anchorage was between White Head and Bonaventure Island.

1 The present Gaspd Bay. His first anchorage was in the outer bay,
but the next day he proceeded op into the basin, where he remained for some
days. The word Gaspe, or “ Gachepe,** as Champlain has it, is said to be
a corruption of a word of Abnakian origin, Katsepioui, signifying separated,
and to refer to a rock in the vicinity of Cape Gaspe, which has been torn off
and separated from the land. Vide Chronicles of the St. Lawrence, J. M. Le
Moine, p. 9 ; Sketch of Gaspeua, Langelier, Quebec, 1884, for full account.

108

FIRST VOYAGE

to go out, during the which tim£ we saw a great
number of savages, who had come into the said stream
to fish for mackerel, of which there is great abun¬
dance ; and there were men, women, and children as
well, more than two hundred persons, who had about
forty boats, who, after having been a little on land
with them, came freely with their boats close along¬
side our ships. We gave them knives, paternosters
of glass, combs, and other articles of little worth, for
which they made many signs of joy, raising their
hands to the sky while singing and dancing in their
boats. These people can well be called savages, be¬
cause they are the poorest folks that there may be in
the world, for altogether they have not the value of
five sous, their boats and their fishing-nets excepted.
They are wholly naked, except a little skin with which
they cover their private parts, and some old skins of
beasts which they throw over them scarf-wise. 1
They are not by nature nor tongue like the first we
found. 2 They have their heads shorn close all about,
except a tuft on the top of the head, which they
leave long like a horse’s tail, which they tie and bind
upon their heads in a lump with thongs of leather.
They have no other lodgings but under their said

1 In the manuscript, “en escharpes”; in du Petit Val, "a la mode
des iEgyptiens.”

2 Cartier tells ua that these savages were unlike those he had previously
seen, but (hilt to describe them particularly, except as to the mode of
wearing their hair. He also tells us that they turned over their boats and
used them for shelter, reminding us of the description given in one of the
None voyages of the same custom practised by the Skraelings [vide Voy¬
ages of the Northmen to America, Boston, 1877, p. 102). Besides noticing
their scalp-lock, Cartier fortunately caught several words used by this, to him,
new race, which plainly indicate that these poor savages belonged to the
Huron-Iroquois family, whose seat of power was farther up the great river,
then unknown, but which he was destined to discover on a future voyage.

109

FIRST VOYAGE

boats, which they turn over before lying down on
the ground. Under these they eat their flesh almost
raw after being a little warmed on coals, and like¬
wise their fish. We went on Magdalen Day with
our boats to the place where they were on the
shore of the stream, and landed freely among them;
for which they showed great joy, and all the men
began to sing and dance in two or three bands, making
great signs of joy of our coming. But they had caused
all the young women to flee into the woods, save two
or three who remained, to whom we gave each a
comb, and to each a little tin bell, wherefore they
showed great joy, thanking the captain by stroking
his arms and breast with their hands. And seeing
what he had given to those who had remained, they
made those return who had fled to the woods, in order
to get from him as much as the others, who were
quite a score, who gathered about the said captain,
while stroking him with their hands, which is their
style of endearment; and he gave them each her little
tin bell of small value, and immediately they as¬
sembled together to chatter and sing a number of
songs. We found a great quantity of mackerel that
they had caught near the shore with the nets which
they have for fishing, which are of hemp that grows
in their country where they ordinarily abide; for
they only come to the sea in the season of fishing, as
far as I have learned and understood. Likewise there
grows a large millet like peas, the same as in Brazil,
which they eat in place of bread, of which they have
full plenty with them, which they name in their lan¬
guage Kagaige .* They likewise have plums, which

1 Ktgaige, or. According to du Petit Val and Hakluyt, Kaptige, which
HO

FIRST VOYAGE

they dry as we do for the winter, which they name
Honest a; figs, nuts, pears, apples, and other fruits,
and beans, which they call Sake; nuts, Daheya; figs,
Honnesta; apples, 1 . ... If one shows them any¬
thing of which they may not have and which they
do not know what it is, they shake their heads and
say, “ Nouda,” which is to say that there is not any
of it and they know not what it is. Of the things

the latter describes as «• Millet as big as Peason.” There can be no doubt
that this was maize, from the original Haitian name mahis or mahiz, the Zea
mays of linnseui, also known as bit f Indt, which name, Indian corn, we
have adopted. The origin of this useful article of food has been much
discussed, owing to the wide range of its growth, for the savages of the
Amazon, as well as those of the St. Lawrence, cultivated it for food. For
a long time it was held to be a native of India, but the opinion of an emi¬
nent French botanist that it is of American and not Oriental origin is now
generally accepted. Vide Geographic botanique raisonnle, A. de Candolle,
Paris, 1855, in loe; Natural and Moral History of the Indies, Acosta,
London, t88o, vol. i, p. 229 et seq.g Smith’s General History of Virginia,
Richmond, 1891, vol. i, p. 126; Chronological History of Plants, Pickering,
Boston, 1879, 610-65-68, 741, 859; Two Voyages to New England,
Josselyn, Boston, 1865, p. 59.

1 Cartier has been accused of employing fiction in this account of the
fruits used by the savages of Canada, especially those he denominates figs
and pears, and this accusation has tended to throw doubt on other statements
of his; yet be was a careful observer and truthful in his descriptions of
what he beheld. The apples and pears used by these far Northern tribes
were the fruit of the thorn, Cratcegus tomentosa, C. punctata ; the beans
called Sake the Pbajeolus vulgaris ,* the nuts called Daheya the butternut
and perhaps the acorn, Juglans cinerea and Quercus rubra and alba. It is
to be noticed that Cartier has here but one word for plums and figs, viz.,
Honesta , which would seem to indicate that the savages did not distinguish
between the fresh and dried fruit as Carder did. In his vocabulary,
however, he gives the word Abscenda for figs. There can be no doubt that
the plums he saw were the common Canada plum (Prunus Americana).
These plums were dried by the savages for after use. It b curious to note in
this connection that over seventy years later Champlain also speaks of a fruit
used by the nadves of Canada having « an interior which is very good and
almost like that of figs,” and describes the leaves of the shrub bearing it as
being **of the shape of those of the fig tree,” without doubt the May-
apple (Pedepbyllum peltatum ), which, says Gray, « is slighdyacid, mawkish,
eaten by jugs and boys.” Cf. Florula Bostoniensis, Bigelow, Boston,
1824, p. 21 5 et seq.

ill

FIRST VOYAGE

which they have they showed us by signs in what
manner it grows, and how they dress it. They
never eat a thing wherein there may be a taste of
salt. They are to a marvelous degree thieves of all
that they can steal.

The 24th day 1 of the said month we caused
a cross to be made thirty feet in height, which
was made before a number of them on the point at
the entrance of the said harbor, on the cross-bar of
which we put a shield embossed with three fleurs-
de-lis, and above where it was an inscription graven
in wood in letters of large form, “VIVE LE ROY
DE FRANCE.” And this cross we planted on the
said point before them, the which they beheld us
make and plant; and after it was raised in the air
we all fell on our knees, with hands joined, while
adoring it before them, and made them signs, look¬
ing up and showing them the sky, that by it was
our redemption, for which they showed much ad¬
miration, turning and beholding the cross.

We, being returned to our ships, saw the captain
clothed with an old black bear’s skin, in a boat with
three of his sons and his brother, who approached
not so close alongside as was customary, and made
to us a long harangue, showing us the said cross and
making the sign of the cross with two fingers, and
then showed us the country all about us, as if he
had wished to say that all the country was his, and
that we should not plant the said cross without his
leave. And after he had ended his said harangue, we
showed him a hatchet, feigning to deliver it to him
for his skin, to which he harkened, and little by little

1 Lescvbot haa it the 1 at of August, which is in evident error,

11 2

FIRST VOYAGE

drew near the side of our ship, thinking to have the
said hatchet. And one of our crew, being in our
boat, put his hand on his said boat, and suddenly he
with two or three of them leaped into their boat,
and made them come into our ship, at which they
were greatly astonished. And they, having entered,
were assured by the captain that they should not
have any harm, by showing them great signs of love,
and he made them drink and eat and make great
cheer, and then showed them by signs that the said
cross had been planted for to make a mark and bea¬
con in order to enter into the harbor, and that we
would return very soon and would bring them iron
wares and other things, and that we wished to carry
two of his sons with us, and then they should return
again to the said harbor. And we rigged his said
two sons with two shirts, and with liveries and red
caps, and to each one his chain of copper for the
neck, with which they were greatly contented and
delivered their old duds to those who were returning.
And then we gave to the three that we sent back, to
each one his hatchet and two knives, for which they
showed great joy; and they, being returned to the
land, told the news to the others. About noon of this
day six boats returned alongside, in each of which
there were five or six men, the which came for to
say adieu to the two that we had retained, and brought
them some fish and made us signs that they would
not throw down the said cross, while making many
harangues which we did not understand. 1

1 One hundred and thirty-nine years later Shea tells us that the
Recollet missionary, Christian Le Clercq, *« began his mission on the Bay
of Gaspe, where Cartier had planted the cross with the arms of France. 0
*' Here,’* he says, •« Le Clercq found a Micmac tribe to whom he gave
1 II 3

FIRST VOYAGE

The next day, the 25 th of the said month, the
wind came right and we got under way from the
harbor; and being out of the said stream, stood to
the east-northeast, because from the land of the said
stream the coast was ranged, making a bay in the
manner of a half-circle, by which we had views of
all the coast from our ships, and in making course
we came to fetch the said land, which bore southeast
and northwest, the position of which might be by
distance from the said stream about twenty leagues. 1
f~~ From Monday, the 27th, at sunset, we ranged the
said land, as was said, bearing southeast and north¬
west until Tuesday, when we saw another cape
where the land begins to fill off to the east, and we
ranged it fifteen leagues, and then the said land begins
to fall off again, but at three leagues from this cape
there is sounding of twenty-four fathoms of tangle-
weed. The whole of the said lands are level
lands and the most bare of woods that we have seen
and found, with fair meadows and fields marvelously
green. The said cape was named the Cape St. Louis,*

the name of Porte-Croix, because he found among them a remarkable
reverence for the cross, which they regarded as a talisman in all dangers and
perils *•; and he adds : “A venerable Indian named Quiondo, whose age
was estimated at one hundred and twenty, declared that he had seen the
first ship that touched at their country, and that the Indians of Mira-
michi did not receive the cross and its use from strangers but from their
ancestors. Other Micmac bands which had been converted by missionaries
did not adopt this custom, as they would have done had the missionaries
introduced it.*' Vid* First Establishment of the Faith in New France,
New York, 1881, p. 11 j Relation de la Gaspesie, pp. 172, 199, 266,
277. P. Lafitau states that the custom was unknown in his day, and doubts
the truth of the statement. Fide Mceurs des Sauvages Americaines, Paris,
1724, tome i, p. 439.

1 Lescarbot and du Petit Val say sixteen leagues.

2 *• Cap St. Loya.” “ S. Aluise,” Hakluyt, and «« S. Louys/' du
Petit Val. So named in honor of the royal saint, Louis IX of France,

“4

FIRST VOYAGE

for that the said day was the feast of the said saint,
and at forty and nine degrees and a quarter of lati¬
tude, and at seventy and three degrees and a half of
longitude.

Wednesday, in the morning, we were to the east
of the said cape and stood to the northwest for to
coast the land until about sundown. It bears toward
the south from the said Cape St. Louis as far as to
another cape named Cape Montmorency. 1 About
fifteen leagues to the said cape the land begins to fall
off again to the northwest. We wanted to sound
at three leagues or about from the said cape, and
could not find bottom there at one hundred and fifty
fathoms; we ranged the land about ten leagues up
to within the height of fifty degrees of latitude.

Saturday, the first day of August, at sunrising, we
had knowledge and sight of other lands which lay to
the north and to the northeast of us, as though they
were wonderfully high lands and hewn into moun¬
tains, between which and us there were low lands

canonized by Boniface VIII, a.d. i 297. The land nuking a half-circle was
that part of the mainland between Capea Gwpe and Crozier. Just where
Cap St. Loyi was located has been a subject of dispute, but there can be but
Kttle doubt that it was on the island of Anticosti, and is now known as East
Cape, while the other cape which Cartier saw was South Point. He was all
the time seeking a western passage, and, strangely it would seem, passed
across the wide opening to the St. Lawrence, which he was seeking, and
which on his second voyage he says was not before discovered. It is said by
those familiar with the locality that at times this opening appears closed by
a mirage of cliffs and low hills produced by the fogs which in summer drift
across it. This would account for Cartier’s failure to discover it. The
distances given are misleading. Fide M. de Cazes, who disputes this view
of the subject; Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada, 1890, p. 26;
Hid, 1887, p. 13$; Collections of the Maine Historical Society, vol. i,
p. 318.

1 “Cap de Memorancy.” So named in honor of the Duke of
Montmorency, then held in great honor by the French. This was probably
the present Table Head. The soundings in the vicinity are nearly correct.

ll 5

FIRST VOYAGE

where there were woods and streams. We ranged
the said lands as well one part as the other, passing
to the northwest for to see if it was a bay or pas¬
sage, until the fifth day of the said month. It is from
one land to the other about fifteen leagues, and the
middle in fifty degrees and a third of latitude. 1 We
sailed without ever being able to gain in it more than
about twenty-five leagues, owing to the hindrance
of strong winds and tides which were there, and were
as far as the narrowest part of it, where one sees the
land easily from one to the other, and there begins
to sheer off. And because we could only fell away
before the wind, we went toward land with our said
boats for to endeavor to go as far as to a cape of the
said south land which was the longest and outermost
that we could descry in the sea, whither it was about
^five leagues. 1 And we, being come to the said land,
found that there were rocks and clear bottom, such
as we had not found in all the places where we had
been toward the south from Cape St. John. And at
this hour it was ebb-tide there, which bore to west
against the wind, so that in pulling along the said
coast one of our boats touched upon a rock, which
was instantly listed over in a manner that it was need¬
ful for us all to jump out in order to put her afloat.
And after we had rowed along the said coast about
two hours, the tide began to make, which came from
the west against us so impetuously that it was not
possible for us to get ahead the length of a stone's
throw with thirteen oars, and it behooved us to leave
the said boats and a number of our crew to guard

1 The lend to the north wu the coast of Labrador.

2 The northwestern point of Anticosti, now known as North Point.

Ii6

FIRST VOYAGE

them and go by land, ten or twelve men, as far as to
the said cape, where we found the said land begin¬
ning to fell off toward the southwest. We, having
seen this, returned with our said boats and came to
our ships, which were under sail, hoping always to
get ahead, and which had fallen off more than four
leagues to the leeward of where we had left them.
And we, having arrived at the said ships, assembled all
the captains, pilots, masters, and mates in order to have
opinion and advice of what it was best to do; and
after having one after another say that, considering
the great sea winds which had begun, and that the
tides were strong, insomuch that they caused us
only to fell away, and that it was not possible to
get farther in this season, and also that the storms
began by this time in the New Land, and that we
were yet very fer away from home and knew not
the dangers that were between them, that it was quite
time to return home or to remain thereabout this
year, 1 and, moreover, that if a change of wind from the

l «'Veant” in the Relation Originate and apparently in the MS., though
there ia no well-defined final / in the MS., nor does the v begin with a down
stroke as in other cases upon the same page. Du Petit Val substitutes for
this and the word following, “tout le reste de l’annee,” translating literally
from Ramusio, “per tutto il resto dell’ anno.” Lescarbot follows Du Petit
Val, and Hakluyt ays, “or els stay there all the yeere.” The word may
be derived from vMtns, according to Roquefort in Glossaire de la Langue
romane; but the AbW Verreau, citing Dum6ril’s Dicdonnaire du Patois
normand, thinks the word should be imam, formed from hoc *nno, and I
adopt this reading. Dum£ril gives this example of the use of iusn in Old
French:

Dtt b dame; naie* paor

Je vow mettni en tel deator

On il at qoena <m*.

Chariot, foi que dot Sainte Jame,
V«u area ims* fame priae.

"7

And Roquefort:

FIRST VOYAGE

north caught us it might be necessary to remain
there—after taking which opinions we fully deter¬
mined to return home, and because on St. Peter’s Day
we entered into the said strait, we named it the
Strait St. Peter, l We have sounded it in several places,
and have found in some eightscore fathoms, and in
another a hundred, and nearer land seventy-five
ft thorns, and everywhere clear ground.

And from the said day until Wednesday we had
wind at will and blowing strongly, and we ranged
the said north land east-southeast and west-northwest,
for so it bears, save a bight and cape of low land
which trends more to the southeast, which is about
twenty-five leagues from the said strait; at which
place we saw smokes which the folks of the said land
made on the said cape. And forasmuch as the wind
drove toward the coast, we did not approach them;
and they, seeing that we did not approach them,
came with two boats, about twelve men, the which
came as freely aboard of our ships as if they had been
Frenchmen. They made us understand that they
came from the great bay, and that they belonged to
Captain Thiennot, who was on the said cape, making
us signs that they were returning back into their coun¬
try toward the place whither we came, and that the
ships were under way from the said bay, fully laden
with fish. We named the said cape Cape Thiennot.*
From this cape the land bears east-southeast and

1 The strait between Anticosti and Labrador was so named because they
entered it on the festival day of St. Peter in Chains. Stephens thinks it
was between Anticosti and Gaipe. Vide his Jacques Cartier, p. 137.

2 *« Cap Thiennot ” or •* Tiennot.” This would seem to be the present
Natashquan Point. Standing from here along the coast to the east-northeast,
he came to Newfoundland near “Cap Double.”

118

FIRST VOYAGE

west-northwest, and are all low lands, very fair, wholly
environed with sand, where there is a sea of reefs and
shoals for about a league, where the land begins to
fell away to the west and to the east-northeast, com¬
pletely ranged with islands, being at two or three
leagues 1 distance from land, in the region of which
there are dangerous shoals for more than four or five
leagues’ distance from land.

From the said Wednesday until Saturday we had
a strong wind from southwest, and we stood to the
east-northeast; and the said day we came to fetch the
land on the west of New Land between the Granges
and Cape Double. And then the wind came to the
east-northeast with wrath and fury, and we stood to
the north-northwest, and went to fetch the north
shore, which is, as before said, wholly ranged with
islands; and we being near the said land and islands,
the wind turned and came to the south, and we stood
into the said bay, and the next day, the 9th of
August, we came to Blanc Sablon. 1

END OP THE DISCOVERIES

And after that, to wit, the fifteenth day of August, the
day of the feast of the Assumption of Our Lady, we
parted together from the said harbor of Blanc Sab¬
lon after having mass, and with good weather we
came as fer as to mid-ocean between New Land and
Brittany, at which place we had to remain three
continuous days with a furious tempest of head winds,

1 ** Blanc Sablon.* 1 Cartier, following up the coait of Newfoundland,
came to this place, which he left two months before, having failed to find
the western passage which he had so diligently sought, and thence retracing
his course through the Strait of Belle Isle made his way home.

FIRST VOYAGE

the which, with the help of God, we suffered and
endured; and after that we had weather at will, so
that we arrived at the harbor of St. Malo, from which
we had departed, the fifth day of September in the
said year.

120

SECOND VOYAGE

SECOND VOYAGE

Made by the Command & Will
of the Most Christian King,

Francis first of this name.

For the

Accomplishment of the Discovery
of

The Western Lands,

Being under the climate & parallels of the Land &
Realm of the said Lord & by whom the discovery
was formerly begun.

This Voyage
made by
Jacques Cartier,
native of Saint Malo, de l’lsle
in Brittany,

Pilot of the said Lord,
in the year

One thousand five hundred thirty-six.

TO THE

MOST CHRISTIAN KING

C ONSIDERING, O my most redoubtable
prince, the great wealth & gifts of grace
which it has pleased God, the Creator, to
bestow upon his creatures, and, among others, to seat
and establish the sun, which is the light & enlight¬
enment of them all, & without which nothing could
fructify nor generate in region & place where it has
its motion & opposite declination & not like the other
planets. By which motion & declination all crea¬
tures existing upon the earth, in whatever region &
place they may be, have in, or can have in, the solar
year, which is 365 days and six hours, as much as
ocular sight of one another, not that it may be as cold
& hot in some places as in others through its rays &
reflections, nor the division of the days & nights of
the like uniformity: But it is sufficient that it is
of such sort & such condition that all the earth is
or can be inhabited in any zone, climate, or lati¬
tude that may be: And those with the waters, trees,
herbs, & all other creatures of whatever kind or
specie they may be, by the influence of this sun to
bear fruit & generate according to their natures, for
the life & nourishment of human creatures. And
if any may wish to say contrary to the above by al¬
leging the opinion of the wise philosophers of past
times, who have written & made a division of the
earth into five zones of which they have declared &
125

SECOND VOYAGE

affirmed three to be uninhabitable: That is to say the
torrid zone, which is between the two tropics or sol¬
stices by reason of the great heat & reflection of the sun
which passes through the zenith of the said zone, and
the two zones arctic & antarctic, by reason of the
great cold which is in them, because of the little
efflux that they have from the said sun 6c other rea¬
sons: I confess that they have written of the method
& firmly believe that they think it so, & that they
may find it by some natural reasons in the ground
they assume & from them wholly content them¬
selves, without adventuring or putting their persons
into the perils whereby they might be a little in the
way of investigating the experience of their opinion.
But I will say for my reply that the prince of these
philosophers has left among his writings a brief word
of great importance which declares that Experientia
est rerum magistra; by the light of which I have
dared to undertake to address to the view of your
royal majesty this discourse in the manner of a pro¬
logue to this my little work in following your royal
command. The simple sailors, at present not having
had so much fear of putting themselves to the ad¬
venture of these perils 6c dangers which they have
had & desiring to do you most humble service to the
increase of the very holy Christian faith, have known
the contrary of the said opinions of the philosophers
by true experience.

I have alleged the foregoing because I observe
the sun, which each day rises in the east 6c sets in
the west, making the tour 6c circuit of the earth,
giving light 6c warmth to all the world in twenty-
four hours, which is a natural day, without any inter-
126

SECOND VOYAGE

ruption of its motion 6c natural course. With the
example of which I think, with my simple under¬
standing 6c without other reason to declare it, that
it may please God, by his divine bounty, that all hu¬
man creatures, living 6c dwelling upon the globe of
the earth, as they have sight & knowledge of this
sun, may have had & have for the time to come
knowledge 6c belief in our most holy faith; because
at first this our holy faith was sowed & planted in
the holy land, which is in Asia to the east of our Eu¬
rope, 6c since in the progress of time brought & di¬
vulged even to us, & finally to the west of our said
Europe, after the example of the said sun bearing its
warmth 6c light from the east into the west as already
said. And we have likewise also seen our most holy
faith at several times, by occasion of wicked heretics
6c false lawmakers, eclipsed in some places 6c then
suddenly shine forth 6c show its clearness more plainly
than before. And now at present we again see how
the wicked lutherans from day to day strive to ob¬
scure it, 6c, finally, to totally extinguish it, if God
6c the truth suffer it, or may not give order through
mortal justice, such as is seen done each day in your
country 6c realm by the good order 6c police that
you have established therein. In like manner is also
seen how, contrary to these children of Satan, the
Christian princes 6c true pillars of the Church Catho¬
lic strive to augment 6c increase it, even as the
catholic King of Spain has done in the lands which
by his command have been discovered to the west
of his country 6c realms, the which were formerly
to us unknown, strangers 6c beyond our faith; as New
Spain, Lisabelle, terra firma, 6c other islands where
127

SECOND VOYAGE

have been found innumerable people, who have been
baptised 6c subdued to our most holy faith.
f And now in the present voyage made by your
royal command in the discovery of Western lands,
being under the climate 6c parallel of your country
6c realm, not before known to you nor to us, you
can behold 6c understand the goodness 6c fertility of
it, the innumerable quantity of people dwelling there,
the kindness 6c gentleness of them: And likewise
the fruitfulness of the great river which flows 6c
waters the midst of these your lands, which is the
greatest without comparison that is known to have
ever been seen; which things give to those who have
seen them sure hope of the friture increase of our
said most holy faith 6c of your seigniories 6c most
_christian name, as it may please you to see by this
present little book: In which are fully contained
all the things worthy of remembrance, which we have
seen 6c which have happened to us, as well in making
the said voyage as being 6c sojourning in your said
country 6c lands, the routes, dangers, 6c bearing of
the said lands.

128

SECOND VOYAGE OF
JACQUES CARTIER

A.D. 1535-6

From Manuscript No. 5589, Bibliotheque Nationals Paris

S UNDAY, the day and feast of Pentecost, the
sixteenth day of May, in the said year one
thousand five hundred thirty-five, by the com¬
mandment of the captain and good will of all, each
confessed himself, and we all received together our
Creator in the cathedral church of St. Malo, after
having received which we were presented in the
choir of the said church before the reverend father in
God, my Lord of St. Malo, who, in his episcopal
station, gave us his benediction. 1

And the Friday following, the nineteenth day of
May, there came a good and convenient wind, and
we got under way with the said three ships : to wit,
the Grande Hermine y of the burden of about one hun¬
dred and twenty-six tons, wherein was the said cap-

1 The Abbe Ferland and Stephens both tell us that this was Mgr. Denis
Briconnet; but this venerable prelate, some months before Carrier's depar¬
ture, had retired to Connery in Touraine, where he died December 18th,

1 $35, having occupied the episcopal seat of St. Malo for twenty-two
years. His nephew, Francois Bohier, who had been the coadjutor of his
uncle, succeeded him January 5th, 1534, and was therefore the bishop who
officiated at the final service in which the adventurers and their friends par¬
ticipated. Bishop Bohier was the grandson of Cardinal Briconnet, who
belonged to a noble family of Auvergne. He died in Paris in 1569. Vide
Repertoire General de Bio Biograph Bretonne, Kerviler, Rennes, 1890,
in i$e$.

9

129

SECOND VOYAGE

tain-general, and for master Thomas Fromont, Claude
du Pont Briand, 1 son of the Lord of Montreul and cup¬
bearer of Monseigneur the Dauphin, Charles de la
Pommeraye, and other gentlemen; in the second
ship, named the Petite Hermine, 2 of the burden of
about sixty tons, was Marc Jalobert, 8 captain under
the said Cartier, and Master Guillaume le Marie; and
in the third and smaller ship, named the Hemerillonf
of the burden of about forty tons, was the captain of
it, Guillaume le Breton, and Master Jacques Main-
gart. 5 And we navigated with good weather until
the twenty-sixth day of the said month of May, when
the weather turned about in rage and fury, which we
endured with contrary winds and thick weather as
much as ships which ever passed the said sea could
have without amendment; so that the twenty-fifth
day of June we all three lost each other through
the said foul weather and obscurity, without get-

1 The names of Claude du Pont Briand, Jehan GouioD, and Jehan Poullet
do not appear on the roll of Carriers companions preserved in the archives
of St. Malo. In the manuscript we have two other names, that of Cartier’s
servant, Charles Guyot, and Philippe Rougemont, who died of scurvy. The
St. Malo roll preserves the names of seventy-four, and adding the above five
names, we have seventy-nine out of the one hundred and ten of which the
company is said to have been composed. This number includes Cartier,
but not the two savages who accompanied him. If the number who accom¬
panied him is correctly stated, thirty-one names are lost.

2 The Little Hermine, i.e., the Little Weasel, was an old vessel and
bore previous to this voyage the name of Courlieu , or, in English, Curlew .

* Marc Jalobert was brother-in-law to Cartier, having married his wife’s
sister, AHzon des Granches.

4 *« Hemerillon.” So in the manuscript, but more properly Emeril-
lon; in English, Merlin; a small hawk known familiarly as the sparrow-
hawk.

8 Hakluyt gives the name «‘M. James Maringare.” The name of
Jehan Poullet, which appears in the Bref Recit, is wanting in all the three
manuscripts, and appears to have been interpolated by the editor in several
places. On the roll of Cartier’s men the name appears as Maingar.

130

SECOND VOYAGE

ting news from one another until at the New Land;
there, where we had appointed, we found all together.

And after we had lost each other, we with the
general's ship had been at sea with wholly contrary
winds until the seventh day of the month of July,
when we arrived at the said New Land and made
land at the Isle of Birds, which is fourteen leagues
from the mainland, which island is so very full of
birds that all the ships of France could easily load
there, without it being perceived that any had been
taken from them; and there we took two boat¬
loads of them for part of our victuals. This island
is by the elevation of the pole in forty-nine degrees
forty minutes. And the 8 th of the said month we
got under way from the said island, and with good
weather came to the harbor of Blanc Sablon, being
in Castle Bay; the fifteenth day of the said month,
which is the place where we purposed to repair,
at which place we were awaiting our companions
until the 26th of the said month, on which day
they arrived both together. And there we fitted
out and took water, wood, and other necessary things,
and got under way and made sail to pass out the
twenty-ninth day of the said month at the dawn of
day, and stood along the north coast, bearing east-
northeast and west-southwest, till about eight o'clock
in the evening, 1 when we struck sail off two islands
which stood farther out than the others, which we
named the Isles St. William, the which are about
twenty leagues beyond the harbor of Brest. The
whole of die said coast from the Castles as far as

1 Hakluyt says “ two hour* after sunset. ** The two islands called “Sainct
Guillaume” were probably Treble Hill and Great Mecattina or Murr Island.

* 3 *

SECOND VOYAGE

here bears east-northeast and west-southwest, ranged
with numerous islands and lands all hacked and stony,
without any soil or woods, save in some valleys.

The next day prior to the last day of the said
month we made her go west in order to have know¬
ledge of other islands which lay from us about twelve
leagues and a half, between which islands a berth is
made toward the north, all with islands and great
bays, appearing to have in it many good harbors, and
we named them the Isles St. Martha; 1 beyond which
about a league and a half in the sea there is a very
dangerous shoal, where there are four or five points,
which lie across the said bays in the route from east
and west of the said Isles St. William and other
islands which lie to the west-southwest of the Isles
St. Martha about seven leagues, which islands we
went to fetch the said day, about one hour after mid¬
day. And from the said day to the coming round
of the clock, we made her go about fifteen leagues
clear across from a cape of low islands, which we
named the Isles St. Germain, 1 to the south of which
cape about three leagues there is another very dan¬
gerous shoal. And likewise between the said Cape
St. Germain and St. Martha there is a bank about
two leagues off from the said islands, upon which
there are only four fathoms. And for the danger of
the said coast we struck sail, and did not stand on¬
ward the said night.

The next day, the last day of July, we made her
go along the said coast, which bears east and west,
1 “Saincte Marthe.” Probably Little Mecatdna Island and the small
peninsula opposite, which would look like an island from the seas. The
berth to the north is a little bay formed by the islands and peninsula, and
the other islands and dangerous shoals about seven leagues beyond St.

132

SECOND VOYAGE

a quarter southeast, which is all ranged with islands
and shoals, and a very dangerous coast, the which
continues from the said cape of the Isles St. Germain
as far as to the end of the islands, about seventeen
leagues and a half. 1 And at the end of the said islands
there is a very fair lowland, full of great and tall
trees, and the coast is wholly ranged with sands with¬
out having there any appearance of a harbor, as far
as to Cape Thiennot, which falls off to the north¬
west, which is about seven leagues from the said
islands, which cape we knew from the preceding
voyage. And therefore we made her go all night to
the west-northwest, until day, when the wind came
contrary and we had to seek a harbor where we might
put our ships, which is a good little harbor beyond
the said Cape Thiennot about seven leagues and a
half, and is between four islands going out into the
sea. We named it the harbor St. Nicholas, 2 and on
the nearest island planted a great cross of wood for a
mark. And you must bring the said cross to the
northeast, then go to fetch it and leave it to star¬
board, and you shall find a depth of six fathoms, to
lay within the said harbor toward four fathoms, and

Maltha were St. Mary'* Island and Boat Island, and the exposed rocks and
skoals thereabouts. We may identify the “cape of low islands” which he
named St. Germain with the Cape Whittle Islands.

1 The distance, seventeen and a half leagues from the Isles St. Germain,
quite nearly corresponds with the distance between Cape Whittle and Ke-
gashka Bay, the end of the rough coast. Beyond this extends the ** fair
lowland” seen by Cartier. This cape is still denominated on some charts
Cape Theirnot. It is unmistakably Natashquan Point (anUe, note 2 ,p. 118 ).
Stephens and others suppose Cartier’s Thiennot to be Mont Joli, but this
view cannot be reconciled with his account, which describes it as a cape of
low land, while Mont Joli, near by, is about a hundred feet in height.

1 “Sainct Nicholas.” The harbor “between four islands going out into
the sea,” which he says was seven and a half leagues beyond Thiennot, is
Mnshkoniatawee Bay. Cartier fairly well describes it.

** *33

SECOND VOYAGE

it is needful to give heed to two shoals which lie on
both sides a half-league out. All this said coast is
very dangerous and full of shoals; notwithstanding
that it seems to have in it several harbors, there are
only shoals and flats. We were in the said harbor
from the said day until Sunday, the eighth day of
August, 1 on which day we got under way and went
to fetch the land to the south of Cape Rabast, 8
which is distant from the said harbor about twenty
leagues, bearing north-northeast and south-southwest.
And the next day the wind became contrary, and
because we could not find any harbors on the said
coast, we stood toward the north beyond the former
harbor for about ten leagues, where we found a very
fair and large bay full of islands and good entrances,
and shelter from all the winds that can blow. And
for knowledge of this bay there is a great island like
a headland, which extends out farther than the
others, and on the land about two leagues there is a
mountain formed like a stack of grain. We named
the said bay the Bay St. Lawrence. 3

The thirteenth day of the said month we departed
from the said Bay St. Lawrence, and stood west, and
went to fetch a headland toward the south which
bears about a quarter southwest of the said St. Law¬
rence harbor near twenty-five leagues. 4 And by the
two savages whom we had taken the first voyage it

1 The date in the manuscript is correct, as Sunday fell on the 8th. The
BrefRecit has it VII—evidently a mistake in printing.

2 « Cap de Rabast.” The present Cow Point on Anticosti.

3 “ Sainct Laurens/* This was the present Pillage Bay, and the moun*
tain <* like a stack of grain ** is now known as Mount St. Genevieve. The
Bref R6cit says that Cartier departed from this place the lath.

4 This headland was the North Cape of Anticosti. The high lands
bearing east-northeast and south-southwest were Cape Magdalen and the

>34

SECOND VOYAGE

was told us that this was part of the land to the
south, and that this was an island, and that by the
south of it was the way to go to Honguedo, where
we had taken them the first voyage to Canada; 1 and
that at two days’ journey from the said cape and
island began the kingdom of Saguenay, on the land
toward the north stretching toward the said Canada.
Off the said cape about three leagues there is a depth
of a hundred fathoms or more, and it is not remem¬
bered that so many whales have ever been seen as we
saw that day off the said cape.

The day following, Our Lady Day of August, 8

mounuinous land in the vicinity. He sailed along what is now the Quebec
coast for some distance, when the wind changed to the west, and, steering
north, he fetched the high lands on the north side of the river near Cape
des Monts.

1 Canada. The origin of this Indian place-name has been the subject
of much curious speculation. Charlevoix, supposing the Spaniards to have
anticipated Cartier, says '* that seeing no signs of any mines there, they had
several times repeated the words Aca nad* t nothing there. This the Indians
subsequently repeated to the French, leading them to suppose Canada to be
the name of the country.” Gaffarel says that the Portuguese ascending the
St. Lawrence first gave it the name, from c*nel t “ a straight street, or one
bordered by a wall or traced in a desert or unknown place.” It is also claimed
that Rabelais used it before Cartier in his Les faits et diets du geant Gar-
gantua et de son fils Pantagruel, a work first published at Lyons in *533.
This work was, however, not finished until after Cartier's return from
Canada, and it is known that Rabelais knew of his discoveries. It is also
said to have been derived from the Spanish Cabo de Nada (Cape Nothing);
from the Montagnaia Hannata (Stranger); while Josselyn says that it was
••so called from Monsieur Cane, who had a patent of territory there.”
Caen, however, to whom Josselyn refers, was unborn when Cartier visited
Canada. All these derivations are baseless. There can be no doubt that
the word Canada is derived from cannata , or kannatd, which in Iroquois sig¬
nifies a collection of dwellings, in other words a settlement, and it is proba¬
ble that when the Indians were asked by the French the name of their
country, they replied, pointing to their dwellings, ••Cannata,” which their
interrogators applied in a broader sense than was intended.

3 “Jour nostredame,” i.e., the day of the Assumption of the Virgin.
This island is now known as Anticosti, a corruption of the Indian name,
variously written by old authors Natiscotec, Naticcousti, Natashkouch, etc.,

>35

SECOND VOYAGE

the 15th of the said month, we passed the strait the
night before, and the next day we had knowledge of
lands which lay to the south of us, which is a land
with marvelous high mountains, from which afore¬
said cape of the said island, which we have named
the Isle of the Assumption, and a cape of the said
high lands bearing east-northeast and west-southwest,
there is between them twenty-five leagues, and one
sees the lands to the north still higher than those
to the south for more than thirty leagues. We ranged
the said south lands from the said day till Tuesday
noon, when the wind came west, and we headed to
the north for to go to fetch the said high lands that
we saw; and we being there found the said lands level
and low toward the sea, and the mountains toward the
north above the said low lands, these lands bearing
east and west, a quarter southwest. And by the sav¬
ages that we had we were told that this was the be¬
ginning of the Saguenay, and inhabited land, and that
from it came the red copper which they called caig-
netdaze ;* There is between the lands of the south
and those of the north about thirty leagues and more
than two hundred fathoms of depth, and this have the
savages certified to us to be the way and beginning
of the great river 2 and way to Canada, which went

the latter, says Ferland (Cours d’Histoire, tome i, p. 22), being the
name ‘‘ maintenant donnl par les Montagnais, signifie ‘lieu ou Ton va
chercher Fours/ ** Jean Alphonse denominates it Isle de 1 * Ascension, per¬
haps inadvertently. Cf. The Voyages of the English Nation, Hakluyt, Edin¬
burgh, 1889, vol. ii, p. 158; Chronicles of the St. Lawrence, Le Moine,
p. iooj Histoire du Nouveau Monde, Leyde, 1640, p. 42.

1 Caignetdaze, or, according to Lescarbot, caquetdaxk, a word of Huron-
Iroquois origin. The savages probably meant to indicate to Carrier that the
red copper he so much prized came from the Lake Superior region.

2 "Silenne de Hochelaga” in the Bref Recit. Ramusio says Flume,
and Lescarbot Fleuve. This word has puzzled students and has been sup-

* 3 6

Pigc of Manuacript No. 5589

SECOND VOYAGE

always narrowing clear to Canada; and that one found
the water fresh in the said river, which goes so far that
never man might have been up to the end that they
had heard, and that other passage there was not save
by boats. And observing their talk, and that they
affirmed there was no other passage, the said captain
did not wish to pass beyond till he had seen the rest
and the coast toward the north, which he had omitted
to see from the Bay St. Lawrence in order to go to
see the land to the south to find out if it had any
passage.

HOW OUR. CAPTAIN CAUSED THE SHIPS TO RETURN BACK,
IN ORDER TO GAIN A KNOWLEDGE OF THE BAY ST.
LAWRENCE TO SEE IF THERE WAS ANY PASSAGE TOWARD
THE NORTH

Wednesday, the eighteenth day of August, the said
captain caused his ships to turn back 1 and put the
prow on the other tack. And we ranged the said
north coast, which bears northeast and southwest,
making a half-circle, which is a very high land, but
not so much so as that of the south; and we bore up
the Thursday following toward seven very high isl-

posed to be in the MSS. It is not, however, in this MS., and I am informed
by a correspondent who has examined all the MSS. that it is not in either of
them. He suggests that it was added by the ancient editor and is a cor¬
ruption of **great isles of Hochelaga,” written perhaps “grats illeies de
Hochelaga.”

1 Cartier had explored the northern shore of Andcosd, and, contrary to
what we might expect, instead of being elated at his discovery of the great
river, was so disappointed to learn from his savage guides that it ended in
fresh water that he neglected to follow up his discovery, and determined to
cross over and explore the Labrador shore, in the hope of finding in that
direction the much-desired passage to China. This was doubtless his sole
reason for a retrograde movement.

137

SECOND VOYAGE

ands, the which we named the Round Islands/ which
are about forty leagues from the south lands and stand
out into the sea three or four leagues, across from
which there is a beginning of lowlands, full of goodly
trees, which lands we ranged Friday with our boats,
off which there are several banks of sand for more than
two leagues into the sea, very dangerous, the which
are uncovered at low water, and at the end of these
low lands, which comprise about ten leagues, there is
a river of fresh water, running into the sea, so that for
more than a league from the land it was as fresh as
spring water. 2 We entered into the said river with
our boats, and found at the entrance of it only a
fathom and a half. There are in the said river many
fish, which have the shape of horses, which go to
the land by night, and by day to the sea, as it was
told us by our two men, and of these said fish we saw
a great number in the said river. 8

The next day, the twenty-first day of the said
month, in the morning at daybreak, we made sail
and stood along the said coast, 4 so far that we got a
knowledge of the rest of the said north coast, which
we had not seen, and of the Isle of the Assumption,
which we went for on departing from the said land;
and when we were certain that the said coast was
ranged, and that there was not any passage, we re¬
turned to our ships, which were at the said seven
islands, where there are good roadsteads with eighteen

1 ** Isles Rondes." The present Seven Islands.

8 This must have been the Trout River, which is fresh as it runs into
the sea as described. It cannot be the Moisie, as some authorities have sup*
posed, as this is a tidal river and salt for some distance from its mouth.

8 The walrus or morse {Triebecbus ro smarm). Vide note 3, p. 94, ante a.

* “Feismes voylle" and **feismea porter" in the manuscript.

138

SECOND VOYAGE

and twenty fathoms and sand, at which place we had
been, without power to go out nor to make sail be¬
cause of fogs and contrary winds which prevailed, up
to the twenty-fourth day of the said month, when we
set sail. And we were making way by sea until the
29th of the said month, when we arrived at a harbor
on the south coast, which is about eighty leagues
from the said seven islands, and is opposite three flat
islands which are in the midst of the river. 1 And
about midway from the said islands and the said harbor,
toward the north, there is a very great stream, which
is between high and low lands, which makes numer¬
ous banks in the sea for more than three leagues,
which is a very dangerous region and soundings at
two fathoms and less, and at the crest of these banks
you shall find twenty-five and thirty fathoms side by
side. All this north coast bears north-northeast and
south-southwest.

The harbor aforesaid where we lay, which is on the
south coast, is a tide-harbor and of little worth. We
named them the Isles St. John, 8 because we entered
therein the day of the decapitation of the said saint.
And, before arriving at the said harbor, there is an
island to the east of it about five leagues, where there
is not any passage between the land and it but by
boats. 3 The said harbor of the Isles St. John dries
up at all tides, and the water flows therein some two

1 This harbor on the south coast opposite three flat islands is the Bic,
from the French biesyut —paltry or mean.

1 “Sainct Jehan,” which Laverdiire identifies as the Bic Islands (cf.
Relations des j&uites, p. 19, and (Euvrea de Champlain, Laverdiere, Quebec,
1870, p. 68). The harbor opposite is Old Bic Harbor. The best anchorage
is in a little cove on the south aide of Bicquette Island, and is doubtless the
(me mentioned here.

3 This bland is Barnaby Island.

139

SECOND VOYAGE

fathoms. The best place to put ships is toward the
south of a little islet which is in the midst of the
said harbor alongside the said islet.

We got under way from the said harbor the first
day of September for to go toward Canada, and about
fifteen leagues from the said harbor to the west-south¬
west there are three islands in the midst of the said
river, across from which there is a river, very deep
and swift, which is the river and way to the kingdom
and land of the Saguenay, as has been told us by our
two men of the country of Canada. And this river
is between high mountains of naked rock, 1 without
having thereon but little earth, and notwithstanding
this a great number of trees and of many sorts grow
there, which grow on the said bare rocks as upon
good earth, so that we have seen a tree there sufficient
to mast a ship of thirty tons, as green as may be pos¬
sible to see, the which was upon a rock without
having thereon any taste of earth. And at the en¬
trance of this river we found four boats from Canada
which had come there to make fishery of sea-wolves
and other fish. And we being laid to in the said
river, two of the said boats came toward our ships,
which came in fear in such sort that one of them put
back and the other came so near that he could hear
one of our savages, who told his name and made his
acquaintance and caused them to come aboard with
confidence. 2

The next day, the second day of the said Septem-

1 This is the Saguenay. The name is from the Montagnais sskenip
(springing forth), and was suggested by the two rocky portals from which
is derived the present name of the port, Tadoussac. The three small islands
and shoals to the south are accurately described.

2 Cartier's Indians were taken from Gaspe, it will be remembered, and

140

SECOND VOYAGE

ber, we set out again from the said river for to make
our way toward Canada, and found the tide very
6 wift and dangerous, because toward the south of the
said river there are two islands, all about which for
more than three leagues there are only two or three
fathoms, strewn with great rocks like tuns and pipes,
and deceptive tides between the said islands, so that
we thought to lose our pinnace there, save for the
help of our boats, and at the edge of the said flats
there is a depth of thirty fathoms or more. Beyond
the said river of the Saguenay and the said islands,
about five leagues toward the southwest, there is an¬
other island 1 toward the north, on which there are
very high lands, off which we thought to cast an¬
chor to await the ebb, and at a bow-shot from land
we could not find the bottom at a hundred and twenty
fathoms, 8 so that we were constrained to return toward
the said island, where we lay with thirty-five fathoms
and good bottom. 8

The next day in the morning we made sail and
got under way to pass out, and had sight of a sort
of fish of which it is not in the memory of man to
have seen or heard. The said fish are as big as por¬
poises without having any relationship, and are pretty

have been supposed by some writers to have been Micmacs. The fact that
they were recognized and understood by the Indians of the Saguenay is strong
proof that they were Huron-Iroquois.

1 This is Hare Island. Ships going up the St. Lawrence anchor to the
•oath of Hare Island when the tide and wind are against them.

* Champlain speaks of the ** incredible depth ” of the Saguenay. At one
point, according to marine charts, there is a sounding of one hundred and
forty-six fathoms. The width of a considerable portion of the river is nearly
three miles, but near its mouth it narrows to less than two hundred and fifty
rods, causing it to terminate in an impetuous torrent.

s " Ou posasmes t trente cinq brasses et beau fondz” in the man¬
uscript. In the Bref Recit, « passames,” which is a misreading.

141

SECOND VOYAGE

well made in body, with a head of the style of a
greyhound, as white as snow, without having any spot;
and in the said river there is a very great number of
them that live in the sea and the fresh water. The
folks of the country call them adhothuys ;* and have
told us that they are very good to eat, and have affirmed
to us that there are none of them in all the said river
nor country but in this place.

The sixth day of the said month, with good wind,
we made her go up the said river about fifteen leagues,
and came to lay at an island, which is alongside the
north coast, which makes a little bay and land berth,
at the which there is an incalculable number of great
turtles, which are in the environs of this island. 2
Likewise a large fishery of adhothuys, heretofore
described, is made by those of the country in the
environs of the said island. There is as great a
current in the vicinity of the said island from flood
and ebb as before Bordeaux. This island comprises
about three leagues of length and two of breadth,
and has a very good and rich soil full of great and
fair trees of many sorts, and, among others, there are
many wild filberts which we found thickly loaded
with nuts as large and of better taste than ours, but a
little harder. And therefore we named it the Isle
of Filberts. 8

1 Adhothuys. The white while (Dtlphiuafterus Uncus'). It resembles
the narwhal, and, being without a dorsal fin and white, is a striking object
as it disports itself upon the surface of the icy waters which are its favorite
home. Cartier remarked its peculiar head, but errs in saying that it has no
kinship with the porpoise. It attains a length of about twelve feet and is
still found in the vicinity.

3 This was the snapping-turtle (Cbehnura serpen tins).

8 “L’ysle es Couldres.*’ Hakluyt says “Hand of Filberd*”; but it
might be more accurate to say Island of Hazelnuts, for it was so named be-
1+2

SECOND VOYAGE

The seventh day of the said month, the day of
Our Lady, 1 after having heard the mass, we departed
from the said island for to go up the said river, and
we came to fourteen islands which are distant from
the said Isle of Filberts from seven to eight leagues,
which is the beginning of the land and province of
Canada, of which there is a large one which has
about ten leagues of length and five of breadth, 2 in
which there are people dwelling who make great
fishing of all the fish which are in the said river,
according to their seasons, of which mention will
hereafter be made. We, being at anchor between
this great island 3 and the north shore, landed and
carried the two savages whom we had taken the
preceding voyage.

cause of the abundance of these nuts {Coryltn roitrata) which were found
growing there. The harbor in which Cartier dropped anchor for the night
lies on the north side of the island, and has been called Havre de Jacques
Cartier. It was considerably enlarged and changed in appearance by an
earthquake in 1663. The most elaborate account of the event is given by
Mere Marie de 1 * Incarnation, Choix des Lettres Historiques, pp. 299-399.

1 The day of Our Lady. This festival falls upon the 8th of September,
according to the present Roman calendar, but the Abbe Faillon informs us
that it was not always celebrated upon the 8th, but in Cartier’s time on the
7th. He says: “ On la trouve marquee au 7 de ce tnois dans plusieurs
snciens martyrologes auxquels on se conform sit encore en Bretagne au temps
de Jacques Carder.” In spite of the positive assertion of so excellent an au¬
thority, a careful examination of ancient martyrologies tends to disprove its
cor r ectness; hence it is reasonable to suppose that Cartier made an error
in the date. Cf. Proc. and Trans. Roy. Soc. Canada, Montreal, 1890,
p. 150, and Hist, de la Col. Fran^aise en Canada, Faillon, tome i, p. 13.

* The length of the island is overstated by at least three leagues. Of
coune Cartier could only estimate its size.

a The island upon which Cartier landed was the present Isle of Or¬
leans. It is twenty miles in length, six miles in greatest breadth, and has
as area of about sixty-nine square miles. It was first named by Cartier, as
we shall see, "L’ysle de Bacchus,” but afterward, to honor the Duke of
Orleans, he changed the name to the one it now bears. It has borne various
other names, as Minigo, Bscallaos, Isle des Sorciers, St. Laurent, and Isle
de Sainte Marie.

H3

SECOND VOYAGE

And we found a number of the people of the
country, who began to flee and would not approach
until our said two men began to speak and to tell
them that they were Taignoagny 1 and Dom Agaya,
and when they were known of them they began to
display great joy, dancing and practising many cere¬
monies ; and part of the chief of them came to our
boats to talk, who brought us store of eels and other
fish, with two or three loads of great millet, which is
the bread on which they live in the said land, and
many big melons. 2 And this day a number of boats
of the said country came to our ships loaded with
people, both men and women, to see and make our
said two men welcome, the which were extremely
well received by our captain, who feasted them with
what he could, and, to make their acquaintance,
gave them some little presents of small value, with
which they were much pleased.

The next day the lord of Canada, so called, Don-
nacona by name, and whom for lord they entitle
Agohanna, 8 came with twelve boats, accompanied by
a number of men, before our ships. Then he made
ten retire to the rear, and came with only two along¬
side of the said ships, accompanied by sixteen men.
And the said Agohanna began over against the small¬
est of our three ships to make a discourse and ora-

1 Lescarbot spells the name Taiguragni.

2 The great melons called by Champlain citromilles were pumpkins
(Cucurbita maxima). Other early writers, singularly enough, called them
melons. The “great millet ” was, of course, maize.

8 “Agohanna.** According to Ramusio, Agonna; the Bref Recit, Agou-
hanna; and Lescarbot, Agona. Theae people were Huron-Iroquois, and the
word is equivalent to sagame in Algonkin dialects. Vide Proc. Roy. Soc.
Canada, vol. ix, p. 85; ibid, vol. x, p. 41; and Bibliog. Algon. Lang.,
Pilling, pp. 6-9.

SECOND VOYAGE

tion after their fashion, working his body and limbs
in a wonderful manner, which is a ceremony of joy
and assurance. And when they had arrived at the
general’s ship, where were the said Taignoagny and
Dom Agaya his companion, the said lord spoke to
them, and they to him, and began to recount to him
what they had seen in France, and the good treat¬
ment that had been accorded them, at which the
said lord was very joyous, and prayed our captain to
reach him his arms for to kiss and coll them, which
is their manner of making welcome in the said land.
And then the said captain entered into the said boat
of the said Agohanna, and ordered bread and wine
to be brought for to make the said lord and his band
drink and eat, which was done; at which they were
very greatly contented, and, for the time, there was
no other present made to the said lord, awaiting place
and time. After which things were thus done, they
parted from one another, and took leave, and the
said Agohanna withdrew to his boats to retire and
go to his place. And the said captain likewise
caused our boats to be made ready to pass beyond,
and to go up the said river with the flood for to seek
a harbor and place of safety to put his vessels; and
we made up the said river about ten leagues, coast¬
ing the said island. And at the end of it we found
a sound of exceeding good and pleasant water, at
which place there is a little stream and harbor, with
a bar flooding from two to three fathoms, where we
found a place favorable to us for to put our said ships
in safety. We named the said place St. Croix, 1 be-

1 “Saincte Croix.’* Charlevoix says that this U the river Jacquea
Cartier, and Le Clereq coincides with this view. Lescarbot also, in his map,

lo *45

SECOND VOYAGE

cause we arrived there the said day. Near this place
there is a people of whom the said Donnacona is
lord, and there is his dwelling-place, which is called
Stadacon^, 1 which is as good land as it may be pos¬
sible to behold, and very fruitful, full of exceeding
fair trees of the nature and kinds of France, as oaks,
elms, ashes, nuts, plum-trees, maples, cedars, vines, 2
white thorns, which bear fruit as big as damson plums,
and other trees, under which grows as good hemp*
as that of France, which comes without sowing or
labor. After having visited the said place and found
it to be convenient, the said captain and the others

places the St. Croix some disunce above Quebec. These authors, however,
were in error, as there can be no doubt that Cartier*« St. Croix was the St.
Charles, which name it derived from the founder of the first mission of the
Recollets in New France, Charles des BoQes, Grand Vicar of Pontoiae.
The Indian name was Cabir Coubut, to designate its sinuosity. Champlain,
who saw the evidences of Cartier** occupation, confirms this, and is sustained
by Ferland, Sagard, and de la Pothcrie. Vide Hist, et Descript. Gen. de
la Nouvelle France, Charlevoix, Paris, 1744, tomc >> P> >8; Hist, de la
Amlrique, de la Potherie, Paris, 1722, tome i, p. 114; First Estab. Faith
in New France, Le Clercq, New York, 1881, vol, i, p. 54; Cours d’His-
toire, Ferland, Quebec, 1882, tome i, p. 26; Hist, de la Nouvelle France,
Lescarbot, Paris, 1866, tome i, map opposite p. 208; Hist, du Canada,
Sagard, Paris, 1866, tome iii, p. 788.

1 "Stadacone.” This is “wing**in the Huron-Iroquois, so called because
of the formation of the point between the St. Lawrence and St. Charles,
upon which it was situated. Just what portion of the modern Quebec com¬
prised its site cannot be precisely determined, but Ferland supposes it to have
been situated «*Dans Pespace compris entre la rue de la Fabrique et le
coteau de Sainte-Genevieve pres de la cote d*Abraham,** which, without
doubt, is approximately con-ect. Vide Cours d’Histoire, Ferland, Quebec,
1882, tome i, p. 27.

2 The names given by Cartier are as follows: “chesnes** (the Quercus
rubra and alba); « ormes *’ (the Ulmus Americana); •* fresnes ** (the Fraxi-
nus Americana); “noyers” (probably Juglans cinerea, squamos, and glabra );
“yfe” the ( Abies Canadensis); “cedrea** (the Thuya Occidentalis); “aubes-
pines,” the thorn-apple ( Crateegus tomentosa).

8 The hemp or "chanure** of Cartier is the Indian hemp ( Apocynum
cannabinum), a perennial herb used by the Indians of North America for
making cordage.

46

ARRIVAL OK 0AK1 IKK AI QUFHF.G |isu>

SECOND VOYAGE

withdrew into the boats for to return to the ships.
And as we were going out of the said river we found
before us one of the lords of the said people of
StadaconS, accompanied by a number of folks, men,
women and children as well, the which lord began
to make a discourse in the style and custom of the
country, which is of joy and confidence, and the
women danced and sang without ceasing, being up
to their knees in the water. Our captain, seeing
their love and good will, caused the boat to approach
where he was, and gave them some knives and little
paternosters of glass, whereat they showed a marvel¬
ous joy, so that we, having departed from among
them the distance of a league, or thereabouts, heard
them sing, dance, and make glad of our coming. 1

HOW OUR CAPTAIN RETURNED TO THE SHIPS, AND WENT
TO SEE THE ISLAND, THE NATURE AND EXTENT OP IT,
AND HOW HE CAUSED THE SAID SHIPS TO BE BROUGHT
TO THE RIVER ST. CROIX

After we had arrived at the said ships with our
boats and returned to the river St. Croix, the cap¬
tain gave order to prepare the said boats for to go
ashore at the said island, to see the trees, which

1 It has been reasoned that the two men Taignoagny and Dorn Agaya,
whom Cartier had captured at Gaspe on his former voyage* could not have
been known to the Indians of the St. Lawrence, as the narrative indicates*
and that even these names were not «« proper to these individuals prior to
their meeting with Jacques Cartier at Gaspe, but rather had reference to their
subsequent adventures, and were intended to indicate a marvelous event in
their lives, such for instance as one who had been to a foreign land inhabited
by white people, from whence he had returned in safety**; but this view is
wholly theoretical. If Taignoagny here speaks the truth, he belonged to
Donnacona’s people, and that they were in the habit of visiting Gaspe for
fishing is shown by Donnacona*s relation of the massacre of two hundred of
his tribe by the Toudamans while on their way there.

*47

SECOND VOYAGE

seemed very goodly to behold, and the nature of the
soil of this island. This was done, and we, being at
the said island, found it full of most goodly trees,
such as oaks, elms, pines, cedars, and other woods
like our own, and likewise we found therein a store
of vines, such as we had never before seen in all the
earth, and therefore we named it the Isle of Bacchus.
This island holds in length about twelve leagues, 1
and is a very goodly land and level, full of woods,
without having any tillage, except that there are a
few little houses where they carry on fishing, as
mention is heretofore made.

The next day we departed with our said ships for
to bring them to the said place of St. Croix, and there
we arrived the next day, the 14th of the said month,
and the said Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Dom Agaya
came before us with twenty-five boats loaded with
folks, who came from the same place from whence
we had departed, and went toward the said Stada-
con6, where their dwelling is, and all came to our
ships making many signs of joy, save the two men that
we had brought: to wit, Taignoagny and Dom Agaya,
who were wholly changed of purpose and resolution,
and would not enter into our said ships, notwith¬
standing that they were many times urged to it, from
which we had some distrust of them. The captain
asked them if they would go with him to Hoche-
laga as they had promised him, and they responded
yes, and that they had resolved to go there, and then
each one withdrew himself.

1 Cartier has previously estimated its length at about ten leagues.

It is about seven.

.48

SECOND VOYAGE

And the next day, the 15th of the said month, the
captain, accompanied by several of his men, went
ashore, for to cause buoys and marks to be planted
in order to more surely put the ships in safety.
At the place we found a great number of the people
of the country, and they presented themselves before
us, and among others the said Donnacona, our two
men and their band, who held themselves apart
under a point of land, which is on the border of
the said river, without any of them coming about
us, as the others, who were not of their band, did.
After the captain was notified that they were there,
he commanded a part of his men to go with him,
and they went toward them under the said point,
and found the said Donnacona, Taignoagny, Dom
Agaya, and many others of their band. And after
having saluted each other, the said Taignoagny came
forward to speak, and said to our captain that the said
lord Donnacona was grieved for that the said captain
and his men carried so many weapons of war, because
on their part they carried none, to which the said cap¬
tain replied that for his grief he would not leave off
bearing them, and that it was the custom of France,
and that he knew it well; but for all their words the
said captain and Donnacona did not leave off making
great cheer together. And we perceived that what
Taignoagny said came only from himself and his com¬
panion, for before departing from the said place, the
said Donnacona and the captain expressed a confidence
of a marvelous sort, wherefore all the people of the said
lord Donnacona burst out and made three cries to¬
gether at full voice, which was a horrible thing to
,OA *49

SECOND VOYAGE

hear, and so one took leave of the other, and we re¬
tired aboard for that day.

The next day, the 16th of the said month, we put
the two largest ships into the said harbor and river,
where there is at foil sea three fathoms, and at low
water a half-fathom ; and the pinnace was left in the
roadstead in order to bring it to Hochelaga. And as
soon as the said ships were in the said harbor and
safe, Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Dom Agaya, with
more than five hundred persons, men, women, and
children, found themselves before the said ships, and
the said lord entered with ten or twelve of the great¬
est personages of the country, who were feasted and
received according to their rank by our said captain
and others, and to them were given some small pres¬
ents, and it was told to our captain by Taignoagny
that the said lord was sorry that he was going to
Hochelaga, and that the said lord desired that only
he who spoke should go with him, as he had prom¬
ised, because the river was of no account. And to him
it was replied by the said captain that for all this he
would not give up going there if it were possible to
him, because he had commandment from the king,
his master, to go the farthest that he could ; but that
if the said Taignoagny would go thither as he had
promised, he would make him a present, with which
he would be contented, and great entertainment, and
that he would only go to see the said Hochelaga and
then return. To which the said Taignoagny re¬
sponded that he would not go there; whereupon
they retired to their houses.

And the next day, the 17th of the said month,

SECOND VOYAGE

the said Donnacona and the others came back as be¬
fore, and brought store of eels and other fish, of
which great fishing is made in the said river, as shall
be told hereafter. When they were arrived before
our said ships they began to sing and dance as was
the custom; and after they had done this, the said
Donnacona put ail his folks on one side, and made a
ring on the sand, and put our captain and his men
in it; and thereupon began a great harangue, hold-
ing a girl of about the age of ten years by one of his
hands, and then came to present her to our captain.
And suddenly all the folks of the said lord betook
themselves to making three cries in sign of joy and
alliance. Then he again presented two little boys of
lesser age, one after the other, at which they made
such cries and ceremonies as before. For which
present thus made by the said lord, he was thanked
by our captain. And then Taignoagny told the cap¬
tain that the girl was the own daughter of the sister
of the said lord Donnacona, and one of the boys,
brother of him who was speaking, and that they gave
them to him with the intent that he should not go
to Hochelaga; at which our captain replied to him
that if they had given them to him with this in¬
tent they might take them back, and that he would
not give up trying to go to the said Hochelaga for
anything, because he had commandment to do this.
Upon which words, Dom Agaya, companion of the
said Taignoagny, replied to the said captain that the
said lord had given him the said children through
good will and in token of confidence, and that he was
content to go with him to the said Hochelaga; at

151

SECOND VOYAGE

which the said Taignoagny and Dom Agaya had
high words; whereby we perceived that the said
Taignoagny was worthless, and that he devised by
treason and malice as much for this as other bad
turns that we had seen him do. And upon this the
said captain had the said children put into the ships,
and had two swords brought, a great basin of plain
brass, and a ewer for to wash hands, and made a
present of them to the said Donnacona, who was
greatly pleased therewith and thanked our captain.
And the said Donnacona commanded all of his folks
to sing and dance, and prayed the said captain to
have a piece of artillery fired off, because the said
Taignoagny and Dom Agaya had entertained him with
it, as he had never seen or heard thereof. To which
the captain responded that he wished him well, and
commanded that they should fire off a dozen fal¬
conets 1 with their bullets athwart the woods which
were next the said ships; with which they were all
so amazed that they thought that the sky had fallen
upon them, and betook themselves to whooping and
howling so mightily that it seemed that hell had
broken loose; and before they retired the said Taig¬
noagny had it spread abroad by go-betweens that the
crew of the pinnace, the which were in the road¬
stead, had killed two of their folks with artillery
shots; at which all withdrew themselves in so great
haste that it seemed as if we had wanted to kill
them. This was not found true, because during the
said day the said pinnace had not fired artillery.

1 The falconet was a small piece of ordnance with a bore about two
inches in diameter. In the reign of Henry II the weight of the shot was
established in France at fourteen ounces.

152

SECOND VOYAGE

HOW THE SAID DONNACONA, TAIGNOAGNY, AND OTHERS DE¬
VISED AN ARTIFICE, AND HAD THREE MEN DRESSED IN THE
GUISE OF DEVILS, FEIGNING TO HAVE COME FROM CUDOU-
AGNY, 1 THEIR GOD, FOR TO HINDER US FROM GOING TO
THE SAID HOCHELAGA

The next day, the 18th of the said month, thinking
always to hinder us from going to Hochelaga, they
devised a grand scheme which they effected thus.
They had three men attired in the style of three
devils, who had horns as long as one's arm and were
clothed with skins of dogs, black and white, and had
their frees painted as black as coal, and they caused
them to be put into one of their boats unknown to
us, and then came with their band near our ships as
they had been accustomed, who kept themselves in
the woods without appearing for about two hours,
waiting till the time and tide should come for the ar¬
rival of the said boat, at which time they all came forth,
and presented themselves before our said ships with¬
out approaching them as they were wont to do; and
the said Taignoagny began to salute our captain, who
asked him if he wanted to have the boat, whereupon
the said Taignoagny replied to him, not at that time,
but that presently he would enter into the said ships.
And suddenly came the said boat wherein were the
three men appearing to be three devils, having great
horns on their heads, and he in the midst made a
marvelous speech in coming, and they passed along
our ships with their said boat, without in any wise
turning their looks toward us, and went on striking
and running on shore with their said boat; and, all

1 « Cudouagny.” Lescarbot says Cudonagny, the Bref Recit Cudriagny,
and Hakluyt Cudruaigni. The word it Huron-Iroquois.

153

SECOND VOYAGE

at once, the said lord Donnacona and his people
seized the said boat and the said three men, the which
were let fell to the bottom of it like dead men, and
they carried the whole together into the woods, which
were distant from the said ships a stone's throw; and
not a single person remained before our said ships,
but all withdrew themselves. And they, having re¬
tired, began a declamation and discourse that we heard
from our ships, which lasted about a half-hour.
After which the said Taignoagny and Dom Agaya
marched from the said woods toward us, having their
hands joined, and their hats under their elbows, caus¬
ing great admiration. And the said Taignoagny be¬
gan to speak and cry out three times, “ Jesus ! Jesus!
Jesus!” raising his eyes toward heaven. Then Dom
Agaya began to say, “Jesus Maria! Jacques Car-
tier,” looting toward heaven like the other. The
captain, seeing their gestures and ceremonies, began
to ask what was the matter, and what it was new that
had happened, who responded that there were piteous
news, saying, “Nenny, est il bon.” And the said
captain demanded of them afresh what it was, and
they replied that their god, named Cudouagny, had
spoken at Hochelaga, and that the three men afore¬
said had come from him to announce to them the
tidings that there was so much ice and snow that they
would all die . 1 With which words we all took to
laughing and to tell them that their god Cudouagny

1 The question has been asked, “ Why should Cudouagny speak at Ho¬
chelaga and send his messengers therefrom to warn persons at Stadacone? ”
and the inference is that Hochelaga was ** in some special manner sacred to
him.” Vide Jacques Cartier, Pope, p. 85. This inference is unsatisfactory.
It would seem more reasonable to suppose that Cartier failed to grasp the
exact meaning of the savages.

154

SECOND VOYAGE

was but a fool, and that he knew not what he said,
and that they should say it to his messengers, and
that Jesus would guard them well from cold if they
would believe in him. And then the said Taignoagny
and his companion asked the said captain if he had
spoken to Jesus, and he replied that his priests had
spoken to him, and that he would make fair weather ; 1
whereupon they thanked the said captain very much,
and returned into the woods to tell the news to the
others, who came out of the said woods immediately,
feigning to be delighted with the said words thus
spoken by the said captain. And to show that they
were delighted with them, as soon as they were be¬
fore the ships they began with a common voice to
utter three shrieks and howls, which is their token
of joy, and betook themselves to dancing and sing¬
ing, as they had done from custom. But, for conclu¬
sion, the said Taignoagny and Dom Agaya told our
said captain that the said Donnacona would not that
any of them should go with him to Hochelaga if he
did not leave a hostage, who should abide ashore with
the said Donnacona. To which he replied to them
that if they had not decided to go there with good
courage they might remain, and that for them he
would not leave off making efforts to go there . 8

1 Thu direct declaration by Cartier indicates that he wu accompanied
by priests, and the burden of proof is in favor of this view. Besides his
frequent allusions to circumstances indicating their presence is the fact that
in the list of his companions appear two names with the prefix Dom. At
this time the title Dom indicated a priest not provided with a cure’s benefice;
in other words, a simple chaplain such as would have been most likely to
accompany adventurers into strange lands, not only to minister to their wants,
but also to study the condition of the people of these lands for future mis¬
sionary enterprises.

* The question naturally arises. Why did these savages so strenuously
oppose Cartier’s projected visit to Hochelaga? The most apparent reason
155

SECOND VOYAGE

HOW OUR CAPTAIN AND ALL THE GENTLEMEN, WITH FIFTY
SEAMEN, SET OUT FROM THE PROVINCE OF CANADA WITH
THE PINNACE AND THE TWO BOATS TO GO TO HOCHE-
LAGA, AND OF WHAT WAS SEEN MEANWHILE UPON THE
SAID RIVER

The next day, that is to say, the nineteenth day of the
said month of September, we got under way and
made sail with the pinnace and the two boats for to
go up the said river with the tide, where on both
sides of it we found the fairest and best lands to look
at that it may be possible to behold, as level as the
sea, full of the goodliest trees in the world, and so
many vines loaded with grapes along the said river
that it seems that they may rather have been planted
there by the hand of man than otherwise; but be¬
cause they are not cultivated nor pruned, the grapes
are not so big and sweet as ours . 1 Likewise we found
a great many houses on the bank of the said river,
the which are inhabited by people, who make great
fishing of all good fish, according to their seasons,
which people came to our ships with as great love
and familiarity as if we had been of the country,
bringing us much fish and whatever they had, in
order to get our merchandise, stretching their hands
to heaven and making many signs of joy. And we
being stationed about twenty-five leagues from Can¬
ada, in a place named Achelaiy , 8 which is a narrow-

is that they were influenced by selfish considerations. Coveting all the
benefits to be derived from the residence in their midst of the powerful
strangers who dispensed treasures to them such as they had never before be¬
held, they were not disposed to share them with others.

1 Without doubt the Vit is cor difolia.

2 •• Achelaiy.** Lescarbot says Achelaci; Ramusio, Ochelai; the Bref
Recit, Ochelay; Hakluyt, Hochelay and Hochelai; and Champlain says:

156

SECOND VOYAGE

ing of the said river, very swift and dangerous as
much from stones as from other things, there came
a number of boats alongside, and among others there
came a great lord of the country, the which made a
long discourse on approaching and coming alongside,
showing by evident signs with his hands and other
ceremonies that the said river a little farther up was
most dangerous, and warning us to be on our guard.
And this lord presented to the captain two of his
children as a gift, of which the captain took a girl
of the age of about eight to nine years, and refused a
boy of two or three years because he was too small.
The said captain entertained the said lord and his
band with whatever he could, and gave him some
small present; for which the said lord thanked the
said captain; then they went away to land, and after¬
ward the said lord and his wife came as far as Can¬
ada 1 to see their daughter, and brought some pres¬
ents to the captain. From the nineteenth day until
the twenty-eighth of the said month we were navi¬
gating up the said river without losing an hour’s
time any day, during which time we saw and found
as fine country and lands as one could desire, full,
as is said, of the finest trees in the world: to wit,

“What is now called St. Croix was then called Achelacy, at a narrow pass
where the river is very swift and dangerous on account of the rocks and other
things, and which can only be passed at flood-tide. Its distance from Quebec
and the river where Cartier wintered is fifteen leagues.” A recent Canadian
writer locates it at the mouth of the Richelieu, while Pope places it at Point
au Platon, thirty nautical miles above Quebec. VU Sr Jacques Cartier, Pope,
Ottawa, 1889, p. 77; (Euvres de Champlain, Laverdiere, p. 670, tome ii,
p. 188; Histoire de la Nouvelle France, Lescarbot, Paris, 1866, tome ii,
p. 310.

1 Canada was limited by Cartier to the region between the Isle of Bac¬
chus and Hochelaga. The Bref Recit says that these children were from
seven to eight years of age.

157

SECOND VOYAGE

oaks, elms, walnuts, pines, cedars, firs , 1 ash, birches,
willows, osiers, and, what are better, a great many
vines, the which had so great abundance of grapes
that the crew came aboard all loaded down with
them* There are likewise numberless cranes , 2 swans,
bustards, geese, ducks, larks, pheasants, partridge,
blackbirds, thrushes,turtle-dove$, goldfinches, canaries,

1 In the original, “pruches" arc the Abies alba , nigra, and balsamea;
“bricz," or rather “ boulx," must be the canoe birch {Betula papyracea);
and “ sandres," or willows, the Sa/ix discolor and alba.

2 “ Grues." The sand-hill crane {Gras Canadensis). The “signes "
of Cartier should be the trumpeter-swan ( Cygnus buccinator) spoken of by
Sagard {vide Histoire du Canada, Paris, 1866, tome iii, p. 673). He says:
“ Nos Hurons les appellent Horhey, mais il s'en trouve peu dans leur pais, e’est
principalement vers les Ebicerinys ou il s'en voit plus grande quantite dans
les terres & en Canada en quelques lacs.” The bird called « oultarde,” or
bustard, by Cartier was doubtless the brant-goose {Branta bernicla ), and was
so named by him on account of a supposed resemblance to the European
bird known to ornithologists as the otis. The “oyes,” or geese, were of
more than a single variety. Certainly the common Canada and snow goose
{Branta Canadensis and Anser hyper boreus) were in evidence, and probably
the white-fronted variety {Anser albifrons ). It may also be said of the
** Cannes," or ducks, that there were several varieties. Champlain speaks of
three kinds.

The “allouettes," or larks, were probably the Ant bus Ludovicianus, the
common brown variety; the “faisans," or pheasants, the Bonasa umbella;
the “perdrix," or partridges, the Tetrao Canadensis; the “merles," or
blackbirds, the Agel*us pbceuiceus , spoken of by Champlain; the “ mamas,’ #
or thrushes, the Merula migratoria, or American robin; the “teurtres," of
turtle-doves, the Columba Carolinensis; the “chardonnereulx," or gold¬
finches, the Spinus tristis; the •* serins,' 1 translated canaries, the Chrysomitris
tristis y or thistle-bird. Just what Cartier means by “ roussignolz," or
nightingales, is not so apparent. Probably he alludes to the whippoorwill
{Antrostomus vociferus) and perhaps the Cbordeiles Virginianus. The song of
the latter can hardly be called musical, nor can that of the European night¬
ingale except for a short season. Josselyn, in his Rarities (p. 46,) says there
are no nightingales in New England; but in his Voyages (p. 79) contra¬
dicts himself and says that there are “ nightingales painted with orient
coloun, black, white, bleu, yellow, green and scarlet, and sing sweetly."
Neither of the birds named {A. vociferus nor C. Virginianus) has any such
plumage as Josselyn describes. The “passes solitaires," or sparrows, arc
perhaps the Zonotricbia leucopbrys. Cf. Relations des Jesuites, tome i, pp. t o,
47; Histoire de la Nouvelle France, Charlevoix, Paris, 1744* tome i, p.

*58

SECOND VOYAGE

linnets, nightingales, and other birds, as in France,
and in great abundance. The said twenty-eighth day
of September we came into a great lake and shoal of
the said river, about five or six leagues broad and
twelve long, and navigated that day up the said lake
without finding shallowing nor deepening, and com¬
ing to one of the ends of the said lake, not any pas¬
sage or egress appeared to us; it seemed rather to be
completely closed, without any stream. And we found
at the said end but a fathom and a half, wherefore
it behooved us to lay to and heave out the anchor,
and go to seek passage with our boats. And we
found that there were four or five streams all flowing
from the said river into this lake and coming from
the said Hochelaga; but, by their flowing out so,
there are bars and passages made by the course of the
water, where there was then only a fathom in depth.
And the said bars being passed, there are four or five
fathoms, which was at the time of year of the lowest
waters, as we saw by the flow of the said waters
that they increased more than two fathoms by pike.

All these streams flow by and surround five or six
fair islands , 1 which form the head of the said lake;*
then they come together about fifteen leagues above

197 ft seq.s Dictionnaire de la Langue Huron, Sagard, Paris, 1632, in he*;
Nouveau 1 Voyages, Lahontan, A la Haye, 1703, tome ii, p. 44; Letters
to the Duchessede Lesdiguieres, Charlevoix, London, 1723, p. 88; Wood's
New England Prospect, p. 30; Histoire du Canada, Sagard, Paris, 1866,
tomciii, p. 668 et seq.; Histoire de la Amerique Sept., de la Potherie, Paris,
1722, tome i, pp. 20, 212, 308.

1 The present Sorel Islands, the streams being the channels between
them.

* Cartier does not name this lake, which was subsequently named Lac
d'Angoulesme—Thevet says in honor of his birthplace, but more likely for
Francis I, Comte d'Angouleme. Champlain entered it on the 29th of June,
1603, which was the festival of St. Peter and St. Paul, and gave it the name
159

SECOND VOYAGE

all into one. That day we went to one of them,
where we found five men, who were hunting wild
beasts, the which came as familiarly to our boats as
if they had seen us all their lives, without having
fear or apprehension; and our said boats having come
to land, one of these men took our captain in his
arms and carried him ashore as lightly as he would
have carried a child of five years, so large and strong
was this man. We found they had a great pile of wild
rats , 1 which live in the water, and are as large as
rabbits, and wonderfully good to eat, of which they
made a present to our captain, who gave them knives
and paternosters for recompense. We asked them
by signs if that was the way to Hochelaga; they
answered us yes, and that it was still three days 1
journey to go there.

HOW THE CAPTAIN HAD THE BOATS PITTED OUT POR TO
GO TO THE SAID HOCHELAGA, AND LEFT THE PINNACE,
OWING TO THE DIFFICULTY OF THE PASSAGE; AND HOW
WE CAME TO THE SAID HOCHELAGA, AND THE RECEP¬
TION THAT THE PEOPLE GAVE US AT OUR ARRIVAL

The next day our captain, seeing that it was not
possible then to be able to pass the said pinnace, had
the boats victualed and fitted out, and put in provi¬
sions for the longest time that he possibly could and
that the said boats could take in, and set out with

of Lac Sc. Pierre, which it still bears. The lake is about twenty-ieven miles
in length and seven in width. Vide Cosmographie Universelle, Thevet,
Paris, 1575, tome ii, p. 1011; CEuvres de Champlain, Laverdiere, p. 3z.

1 These rats, called by Carder “raz sauvages,” were muskrats (Ondatra
zihetbicus ), and their skins subsequently became an important source of
wealth to Carder’s successors. The Algonkin name is m—\k$utss$u > from
which we get the English musquash. There are several variedes. Vidt
Reladon de la Nouvelle France, Quebec, 1858, tome i, p. 18 et seq,

160

SECOND VOYAGE

them, accompanied by a part of the gentlemen,— to
wit, Claude du Pont Briand, grand cupbearer to
my lord the Dauphin, Charles de la Pommeraye,
Jehan Gouion, with twenty-eight mariners, includ¬
ing with them Marc Jalobert and Guillaume ie
Breton, having the charge under the said Cartier,—
for to go up the said river the farthest that it might
be possible for us. And we navigated with weather
at will until the second day of October , 1 when we
arrived at the said Hochelaga, which is about forty-
five leagues distant from the place where the said
pinnace was left, during which time and on the way
we found many folks of the country, the which
brought us fish and other victuals, dancing and show¬
ing great joy at our coming. And to attract and
hold them in amity with us, the said captain gave
them for recompense some knives, paternosters, and
other trivial goods, with which they were much con¬
tent. And we having arrived at the said Hochelaga,
more than a thousand persons presented themselves
before us, men, women, and children alike, the which
gave us as good reception as ever father did to child,
showing marvelous joy; for the men in one band
danced, the women on their side and the children on
the other, the which brought us store of fish and of
their bread made of coarse millet,* which they cast
into our said boats in a way that it seemed as if it
tumbled from the air. Seeing this, our said captain
landed with a number of his men, and as soon as
he was landed they gathered all about him, and about
all the others, giving them an unrestrained welcome.

1 Ramnsio and the Bref R6cit have it the nineteenth, which it an error.

s Maize or Indian com.

” 161

SECOND VOYAGE

And the women brought their children in their arms
to make them touch the said captain and others,
making a rejoicing which lasted more than half an
hour. And our captain, witnessing their liberality
and good will, caused all the women to be seated
and ranged in order, and gave them certain pater¬
nosters of tin and other trifling things, and to a part
of the men knives. Then he retired on board the
said boats to sup and pass the night, while these peo¬
ple remained on the shore of the said river nearest
the said boats all night, making fires and dancing,
crying all the time “ Aguyaze! ” which is their
expression of mirth and joy.

HOW THE CAPTAIN AND GENTLEMEN, WITH TWENTY-FIVE SEA¬
MEN, WELL ARMED AND IN GOOD ORDER, WENT TO THE
TOWN OF HOCHELAGA , 1 AND OF THE SITUATION OF THE
SAID PLACE

The next day, in the early morning, the captain
attired himself and had his men put in order to go to

1 «« Hochelaga." The exact spot where Cartier landed has never been
positively settled. The Bref Redt states that he landed two leagues from
the Indian town, which was a quarter of a league from the mountain which
he named Mont Royal. Hakluyt makes the latter distance a league. Faillon
thinks that Cartier ascended the river to the Lachine Rapidi; but it is diffi-
cult to find a sufficient reason for this view. It would seem more reason¬
able to infer from the account that he landed somewhere opposite Nun's
Island. From remains found some years ago Dawson locates the site of
Hochelaga in the space between Metcalf and Mansfield streets in one direc¬
tion and Burnside Place and Sherbrooke Street in the other. In Iroquois
the place known as Montreal is Tiohtiaki, which Faillon identified as the
Tutonaguy of Cartier's third voyage. The meaning of the word Hochelaga
is uncertain. Cuoq says that it means •* I la chaussee des Castors," i.e. t
*«at the Beavers' dam." Other significations have been given, but all are
unsatisfactory. Vide Histoire de la Colonie Canadienne, Faillon, vol. i,
p. 524; ibid, ii, p. 16 ; Canadian Naturalist, Dawson, vol. v, p. 430, vol.
vi, p. 362 ; Lexique de la League Iroquois, in Uco; and Voyages of the
English Nation, Hakluyt, Edinburgh, 1889, vol. ii, p. 123.

162

SECOND VOYAGE

see the town and habitation of the said people, and
a mountain that is adjacent to their said town,
whither the gentlemen and twenty mariners went
with the said captain, and left the rest for the guard
of the boats, and took three men of the said town of
Hochelaga to bring and conduct them to the said
place. And we, being on the road, found it as well
beaten as it might be possible to behold, and the
fairest and best land, all full of oaks as fine as there
may be in a forest of France, under the which all
the ground was covered with acorns. And we, hav¬
ing marched about a league and a half, found on the
way one of the chief lords of the said town of Hoche¬
laga, accompanied by a number of persons, the which
made us a sign that we should rest at the said place
near a fire that they had made by the said road, which
we did, and then the said lord began to make a dis¬
course and oration, as heretofore is said to be their
custom of showing joy and familiarity, this lord
thereby showing welcome to the said captain and his
company; the which captain gave him a couple of
hatchets and a couple of knives, with a cross and me¬
morial of the crucifixion, which he made him kiss,
and hung it on his neck, for which he rendered
thanks to the said captain. This done, we marched
farther on, and about a half-league from there we be¬
gan to find the land cultivated, and fair, large fields
frill of grain of their country, which is like Brazil
millet, as big or bigger than peas, on which they live
just as we do on wheat; and in the midst of these
fields is located and seated the town of Hochelaga,
near to and adjoining a mountain, which is cultivated
round about it and highly fertile, from the summit
163

SECOND VOYAGE

of which one sees a very great distance. We named
the said mountain Mont Royal. The said town is
quite round and inclosed with timbers in three rows
in the style of a pyramid, crossed at the top, having
the middle row in the style of a perpendicular line;
then ranged with timbers laid along, well joined and
tied in their manner, and is in height about two
pikes. There is in this town but one gate and en¬
trance, which fastens with bars, upon which and in
many places of the said inclosure there are kinds of
galleries and ladders to mount to them, which are
furnished with rocks and stones for the guard and
defense of it. There are within this town about fifty
long houses of about fifty paces or more each, and
twelve or fifteen paces wide, and all made of timbers
covered and garnished with great pieces of bark and
strips of the said timber, as broad as tables, well tied
artificially according to their manner. And within
these there are many lodgings and chambers, and in
the middle of these houses there is a great room on
the ground where they make their fire and live in
common; after that the men retire with their wives
and children to their said chambers. Likewise they
have granaries at the top of their houses where they
put their corn of which they make their bread, which
they call carraconny' and they make it in the man¬
ner following: they have mortars of wood as for
braying flax, and beat the said corn into powder with
pestles of wood; then they mix it into paste and make
round cakes of it, which they put on a broad stone
that is hot; then they cover it with hot stones, and so
bake their bread instead of in an oven. They make

1 Carraconny . Lescarbot baa it (Mrscami. The word is Huron-Iroquoi*.

164

SECOND VOYAGE

likewise many stews of the said corn, and beans and
peas, of which they have enough, and also of big cu¬
cumbers 1 and other fruits. They have also in their
houses great vessels like tuns, where they put then-
fish, namely, eels and others, the which they dry in
the smoke during the summer and live upon it in the
winter. And of this they make a great store, as we
have seen by experience. All their living is without
any taste of salt, and they lie on barks of trees stretched
upon the earth,with wretched coverings of skins from
which they make their clothing—namely, wolves,
beavers, martens, foxes, wild cats, deer, stags, and other
wild beasts; but the most part of them go almost en¬
tirely naked. The most precious thing that they have
in this world is esnogny ,* the which is white as snow,
and they take it in the same river from the corni-

1 *• Grosses concombres." Joaselyn and other writers speak of the
cucumber as being cultivated by the Indians. The cucumber now known
to us, to., the Cucumis sutivus, is a native of Asia and not indigenous to
North America. There is little doubt that the cucumber of Cartier was
the Cucurbit* verruca *, commonly known as the crook-necked squash.

* Esntgny, the wampum of the Abnakis. It was called by the Dutch
zce-wund, from stabwboun , •• scattered ** or **loose." Roger Williams
gives us the meaning of the word wampum. He says : ** The Indians are
ignorant of Europes Coyne: their own is of two sorts; one white which
they make of the stem or stocke of the Periwinde. The second is black
inclining to blue. Their white they call Wompam, (which signifies white):
their black, Suckauhoch (Sucki signifying blacke). 1 ' French writers some¬
times denominated it porcelain, the name given to the shell of the Cypr ** 9
owing to its resemblance to the enamel of Oriental pottery, then somewhat
rare. Fide Littre in he*. The New England Indians made their wampum
from various shells, as the Venus mercenuri*, Pyrul* curie* and cuuulicuUt*.
From these shells cylindrical pieces were cut, bored, and strung upon
sinews. From these were woven belts of various widths, which were used
for adornment and as a medium of exchange with Europeans. Vide A Key
into the Language of America, Roger Williams, London, 1643, pp. 144,
151 ; Wood’s New England's Prospect, Boston, 1865, p. 69 ; American
Naturalist, vol. xvii, pp. 467—479; and Indian Wampum Records, in Pop¬
ular Science Monthly for February, 1897.

SECOND VOYAGE

botz 1 in the manner which follows: When a man has
deserved death, or when they have taken any enemies
in war, they kill them, then cut them upon the but¬
tocks, thighs, and shoulders with great gashes; after¬
ward in the places where the said esnogny is they sink
the said body to the bottom of the water, and leave it
ten or twelve hours; then draw it up and find within
the said gashes and incisions the said cornibotz, of
which they make bead money and use it as we do gold
and silver, and hold it the most precious thing in the
world. It has the virtue of stanching blood from the
nostrils, because we have tried it. All the said peo¬
ple give themselves only to tillage and fishing for a
living ; for of the goods of this world they make no
account, because they have no knowledge of them,
and as they budge not from their country, and do not
go about like those of Canada and of the Saguenay.
Notwithstanding, the said Canadians are their subjects,
with eight or nine other peoples who are upon the
said river.

HOW WE ARRIVED AT THE SAID TOWN, AND OF THE RECEPTION
WHICH WAS MADE US THERE, AND HOW THE CAPTAIN MADE
THEM PRESENTS ; AND OTHER THINGS THAT THE SAID CAP¬
TAIN DID, AS SHALL BE SEEN IN THIS CHAPTER

When we had arrived near the town, a great num¬
ber of the inhabitants of it presented themselves be-

1 Cernibotx. The exact meaning of this word it still in doubt. It
has been suggested that it was a vulgar local term familiar to Cartier and de¬
rived from cornet t a word used by some old French writers to designate a
shell of the genus Yolutn, which, resembling the shell used by the Indians
in their esnogny, was the occasion of its application in this case. Happily,
a specimen of the shell used in the esnogny of the Hochelagans has been
unearthed, and is found to be the Unto ventricostu.

166

SECOND VOYAGE

fore us, who, after their fashion of doing, gave us a
good reception; and by our guides and conductors we
were brought to the middle of the town, where there
was a place between the houses the extent of a stone’s
throw or about in a square, who made us a sign that
we should stop at the said place, which we did. And
suddenly all the women and girls of the said town
assembled together, a part of whom were burdened
with children in their arms, and who came to us to
stroke our faces, arms, and other places upon our
bodies that they could touch; weeping with joy to
see us; giving us the best welcome that was possible
to them, and making signs to us that it might please us
to touch their said children. After the which things
the men made the women retire, and seated them¬
selves on the ground about us, as if we might wish to
play a mystery . 1 And, suddenly, a number of men
came again, who brought each a square mat in the
fashion of a carpet, and spread them out upon the
ground in the middle of the said place and made us
rest upon them. After which things were thus done
there was brought by nine or ten men the king and
lord of the country, whom they call in their lan¬
guage Agohanna , 1 who was seated upon a great skin
of a stag; and they came to set him down in the said
place upon the said mats beside our captain, making
us a sign that he was their king and lord. This Ago¬
hanna was about the age of fifty years, and was not
better appareled than the others, save that he had
about his head a kind of red band for his crown, made
of the quills of porcupines;* and this lord was wholly

1 That is, a mystery play. Such plays were then common in Europe.

1 Vide p. 144, note 3. * “Herisson”—doubtless the HystrixCenedensis.

167

SECOND VOYAGE

impotent and diseased in his limbs. After he had made
his sign of salutation to the said captain and to his
folks, making them evident signs that they should
make them very welcome, he showed his arms and
legs to the said captain, praying that he would touch
them, as though he would beg healing and health
from him; and then the captain began to stroke his
arms and legs with his hands; whereupon the said
Agohanna took the band and crown that he had upon
his head and gave it to our captain; and immediately
there were brought to the said captain many sick ones,
as blind, one-eyed, lame, impotent, and folks so very old
that the lids of their eyes hung down even upon their
cheeks, setting and laying them down nigh to our said
captain for him to touch them, so that it seemed as if
God had descended there in order to cure them.

Our said captain, seeing the misery and faith of this
said people, recited the Gospel of St. John: to wit,
the In principio , making the sign of the cross on the
poor sick ones, praying God that he might give them
knowledge of our holy faith and the passion of our
Saviour, and grace to receive Christianity and baptism.
Then our said captain took a prayer-book and read
full loudly, word by word, the passion of our Lord,
so that all the bystanders could hear it, while all these
poor people kept a great silence and were marvel¬
ously good hearers, looking up to heaven and making
the same ceremonies that they saw us make; after
which the captain made all the men range them¬
selves on one side, the women on another, and the
children another, and gave to the chiefs hatchets,
to the others knives, and to the women paternosters 1

1 These were rosaries of a cheap form. Hakluyt calls them beads,
168

SECOND VOYAGE

and other trifling articles; then he threw into the
midst of the place among the little children some
small rings and Agnus Dei 1 of tin, at which they
showed a marvelous joy. This done, the said cap¬
tain commanded the trumpets and other instruments
of music to sound, with which the said people were
greatly delighted; after which things we took leave
of them and withdrew. Seeing this, the women put
themselves before us for to stop us, and brought us of
their victuals, which they had prepared for us, as fish,
stews, beans, and other things, thinking to make us
eat and dine at the said place; and because their vict¬
uals were not to our taste and had no savor of salt,
we thanked them, making them a sign that we did
not need to eat.

After we had issued from the said town many men
and women came to conduct us upon the mountain
aforesaid, which was by us named Mont Royal, distant
from the said place some quarter of a league; and we,
being upon this mountain, had sight and observance
for more than thirty leagues round about it. Toward
the north of which is a range of mountains which
stretches east and west, and toward the south as well;
between which mountains the land is the fairest that
it may be possible to see, smooth, level, and till¬
able ; and in the middle of the said lands we saw the
said river 8 beyond the place where our boats were
left, where there is a waterfall , 8 the most impetuous

which they were; but they ahould not be confounded with the glass beads
which the Indiana subsequently received from the English, and which be¬
came one of their most coveted possessions.

1 The Agnus Dei, strictly speaking, is made of wax; these were small
tin lambs, an animal altogether strange to the savages and which must have
greatly excited their admiration.

3 This is the St. Lawrence. * The Lechine Rapids

169

SECOND VOYAGE

that it may be possible to see, and which it was impos¬
sible for us to pass. And we saw this river as far as
one could discern, grand, broad, and extensive, which
flowed toward the southwest and passed near three
fair, round mountains which we saw and estimated
that they were about fifteen leagues from us. And
we were told and shown by signs by our said three
men 1 of the country who had conducted us that there
were three such falls of water on the said river like
that where our said boats were, but we could not un¬
derstand what the distance was between the one and
the other. Then they showed us by signs that, the
said falls being passed, one could navigate more than
three moons 2 by the said river; and beyond they
showed us that along the said mountains, being toward
the north, there is a great stream, which descends from
the west like the said river . 8 We reckoned that this
is the stream which passes by the realm and province
of Saguenay, and, without having made them any re¬
quest or sign, they took the chain from the captain’s
whistle, which was of silver, and the haft of a poniard,
the which was of copper, yellow like gold, which
hung at the side of one of our mariners, and showed
that it came from above the said river , 4 and that

1 So in the original, though this is the first mention of the number of
those acting as guides.

3 In the manuscript apparently “Plus de trots lieues’ 1 —that is, leagues;
but there is no doubt that the term used by the Indians to denote months,
namely, fonts, or moons, was intended. Lescarbot and Ramusio both use
the word inntt.

3 This was the Ottawa.

* It has been said that the savages were playing upon the credulity of
the Frenchmen, and also that they were only attempting to show how the
silvery waters of the St. Lawrence flow side by side with the yellow waters
of the Ottawa without commingling ; but this is mere conjecture, and it
seems more reasonable to suppose that they wished to indicate that these
metals came somewhere from the west.

* 7 °

SECOND VOYAGE

there were Agojuda , 1 which is to say evil folks, the
which are armed even to the fingers, showing us the
style of their armor, which is of cords and of wood
laced and woven together, giving us to understand that
the said Agojuda carried on continual war against one
another; but by default of speech we could not learn
how far it was to the said country. Our captain
showed them some red copper,* which they call
caignetdaze , pointing them toward the said place, and
asking by signs if it came from there, and they began
to shake their heads, saying no, and showing that it
came from Saguenay, which is to the contrary of the
preceding. After which things thus seen and under¬
stood, we withdrew to our boats, which was not with¬
out being conducted by a great number of the said
people, of which part of them, when they saw our
folk weary, loaded them upon themselves, as upon
horses, and carried them. And we, having arrived at
our said boats, made sail to return to our pinnace, for
doubt that there might be some hindrance; which
departure was not made without great regret of the
said people, for as far as they could follow us down
the said river they would follow us, and we accom¬
plished so much that we arrived at our said pinnace
Monday, the fourth day of October.

1 “Agojuda.** Bref Recat, Agonionda. The people described by this
title of evil men were the same as those subsequently denominated Touda-
mans, and without doubt were Iroquois.

* This “red copper,** so called to distinguish it from la it cm, cuivre
jam*, or yellow copper, which was one of the most precious possessions of
the savages, probably came from the region of Lake Superior. Champlain
was told by an Algonkin, when he visited the site of Montreal, that toward
the north was a mine of pure copper, and he was shown bracelets made of
this metal which were obtained from the “good Iroquois,” as the Hurons
were called, fid* CEuvrcs de Champlain, Laverdi&re, p. 112, and Pre¬
historic Copper Implements, in New England Historic Genealogical Regis¬
ter for January, 1879.

SECOND VOYAGE

Tuesday, the fifth day of the said month, we made
sail, and got under way with our said pinnace and
boats in order to return to the province of Canada, to
the port of St. Croix, where our said ships were left;
and the seventh day we came to abreast of a stream
which comes from near the north going into the said
river, at a distance from which there are four little
islands full of trees. We named this stream the Whip
River ; 1 and because one of these islands projects
itself into the said river and one sees it from afar, the
captain had a fair great cross planted on the point of it,
and commanded to make ready the boats to go with
the tide into this river for to see the depth and nature
of it, which was done; and we rowed that day up the
said river, but because it was not found of any capa¬
bility nor depth we returned and got under way to
go down.

HOW WE ARRIVED AT THE HARBOR OF ST. CROIX, AND THE
ORDER IN WHICH WE FOUND OUR SHIPS, AND HOW THE
LORD OF THE COUNTRY CAME TO SEE OUR CAPTAIN, AND
HOW THE SAID CAPTAIN WENT TO SEE HIM, AND PART OF
THEIR CUSTOMS IN PARTICULAR

Monday, the eleventh day of October, we arrived at
the said harbor of St. Croix, where our ships were,

1 “La riviere da Fouez.” According to Hakluyt, Fouetz, or Whip
River, which well characterizes it. Lescarbot remarks that he thinks Car-
tier meant to say Foix,— that is, the River of Faith,— as he believed that it
would open the way to the land of his dreams, the golden Cathay. It bears
this name on Douval’s map of 1679. It was subsequently named Trois
Rivieres, owing to its division into three channels by islands near its mouth.
Father Le Jeune tells us that its Indian name was Metaberoudn, and it is
so named on the map of Creuxius, 1660. Cartier speaks of four islands at
its mouth, and Champlain of six, the present number. It is now known as
the St. Maurice.

172

SECOND VOYAGE

and found that the masters and mariners who had
been left had made a fort before the said ships all in¬
closed with large sticks of timber planted on end,
joining one another, and garnished all about with
artillery, and well in order to defend themselves
against all the country. And as soon as the lord of
the country was notified of our coming he came the
next day, the twelfth day of the said month, accom¬
panied by Taignoagny and Dom Agaya, with many
others, to see the said captain, and gave him a mar¬
velous welcome, feigning to be delighted at his com¬
ing, the which likewise gave them as good reception
albeit they had not deserved it. The said lord Don-
nacona prayed our captain to go the next day to see
Canada, which the said captain promised him. And
the next day, the thirteenth day of the said month,
the said captain, with his gentlemen, accompanied by
fifty companions well in order, went to see the said
Donnacona and his people, who was distant from the
place where our ships were a half-league; and their
abode is named Stadaconl. And we being arrived
at the same place, the inhabitants came to meet us
the distance of a stone’s throw or better from their
houses, and there they ranged and seated themselves
after their manner and style of doing—the men on
one side, and the women standing up on the other,
singing and dancing without ceasing. And after they
had done saluting among them and greeting one an¬
other, the said captain gave the men some knives and
other things of small value, and made all the women
and girls pass before him, and gave to each a ring of
tin, for which they thanked the said captain, who was
by the said Donnacona and Taignoagny brought to
*73

SECOND VOYAGE

sec their houses, which were well stored with pro¬
visions after their sort for passing their winter. And
the said captain was shown by the said Donnacona
the skins of five men’s heads stretched upon wood
like skins of parchment , 1 the which Donnacona told
us that they were from the Toudamans , 1 toward the
south, who made war continually against them; and
further it was told us that it was two years past that
the said Toudamans came to assail them within the
said river at an island 8 which is over against Sague¬
nay, where they were to pass the night, waiting to
go to Honguedo 4 to make war against them with
about two hundred persons, men, women, and chil¬
dren together, who were surprised while sleeping
within a fort that they had made, where the said
Toudamans put fire all about it, and as they came

1 The practice of scalping was common to most of the savage tribes of
North America. Some of the tribes on the Pacific coast carried away the
heads of their victims. Vide Contributions to American Ethnology, Wash*
ington, 1877, vol. i, p. 192; vol. iii, pp. 21, 129, z2i;(Euvres de Cham¬
plain, Laverdicre, p. 94; Relation de la Nouvelle France, vol. i, p. 13.

a “Toudamans.” Hakluyt, Toudamani; Bref Recit, Trudamans.
These were without doubt the ferocious Iroquois, who a few years later
destroyed Stadacone and Hochelaga and absorbed those of their inhabitants
who were spared. The meaning of the name Iroquois is uncertain. Char¬
levoix says that the name is from hire, “I have spoken,” a word with
which these Indians close all their speeches, and kerne, which when long
drawn out is a cry of sorrow, and when briefly uttered is an exclamadon of
joy. Hale, however, a most excellent authority, derives it from JerekwM,
meaning Tobacco People. Vide Histoire de la Nouvelle France, Charle¬
voix, Paris, 1744, tome i, p. 421; Iroquois Book of Rites, Hale, pp. 9-12,
51, 171; Mceurs des Sauvages, Lafitau, tome i, p. 32.

8 This island in the St. Lawrence, near Bic, is to-day known as He
au Massacre, which name was given it many years ago on account of the
discovery in a cave thereon of a large quantity of human bones. An ex¬
amination has proved these bones to be those of men, women, and children.
This has led to the belief that they were the relics of Donnacona’s people
and attest the truth of his story.

4 “ Honguedo.” The present Gaspe.

*74

SECOND VOYAGE

out killed them all except five who escaped, for the
which undoing they still greatly lamented, showing
us that they would have vengeance for it; after which
things we returned to our ships.

or THE MANNER OP LIVING OF THE PEOPLE OF THE SAID

LAND, AND OF CERTAIN CONDITIONS, BELIEF, AND MAN¬
NER OF MAKING WHAT THEY HAVE

The said people have not any belief in God which
may avail, for they believe in one whom they call
Cudouagny, and they say that he speaks frequently to
them and tells them what the weather should be.
They say also that when he is angry with them he
throws dirt in their eyes. They believe also that
when they depart they go to the stars, then go de¬
clining to the horizon like the said stars, then pass
into fair fields toward plains of beautiful trees, flowers,
and sumptuous fruits . 1 After they had given us to
understand these things we showed them their error
and said that their Cudouagny is an evil spirit who
abuses them, and said that there is only one God,

1 The conception* of deity and of the life after death by the savages
of North America were vague and fanciful in the extreme. They saw a
deity in almost every object of animate and in some objects of inanimate
nature; but they all believed in one supreme deity to whom all others
were subordinate. The deity of the Stadaconeans here spoken of was prob¬
ably their chief one, as it is not likely that they would have tried to im>
press their visitors, whom they without doubt regarded as beings of a
higher order than themselves, with the importance of one of their inferior
deities. The Stadaconeans* idea of heaven and its location in the region
of the setting sun was common to most tribes of North American Indians,
and was probably a relic of sun-worship. Cf. Journal Historique, Char¬
levoix, Paris, 1744, pp. 344*347; Algic Researches, Schoolcraft, New
York, 1839; Myths of the New World, Brinton, New York, 1896;
Mceurs des Sauvages, Lafitau, tome i, pp. 126-1x7, *45» Journal of Ameri¬
can Folk-Lore, 1891, pp. 193-213.

*75

SECOND VOYAGE

who is in heaven, who gives us all things necessary,
and is the creator of all things, and that in him only
should we believe, and that it was necessary to be
baptized or go to hell. And many other things of
our faith were shown them which they readily be¬
lieved, and called their Cudouagny, Agojuda , 1 so that
many times they prayed our captain to have them
baptized. And the said lord Taignoagny, Dom Agaya,
and all the people of their town, came there for the
purpose of being baptized; but because we knew not
their intention and sincerity, and that there was none
that could show them the faith there, excuse was
made to them, and it was told Taignoagny and Dom
Agaya that they should make them understand that
we should return another voyage, and would bring
priests and holy oil, giving them to understand for
excuse that one could not be baptized without the
said holy oil,* which they believed because they saw
several children baptized in Brittany, and of the prom¬
ise that the captain made them to return they were
very joyous and thanked him.

The said people live in almost a community of
goods, rather of the style of the Brazilians, and are
wholly clothed with skins of wild beasts and poorly
enough. In winter they are shod with stockings and
shoes, and in summer they go barefoot. They keep
the order of marriage, save that they take two or
three wives, and after the husband is dead the wives
never re-marry, but wear mourning for the said dead
all their lives, and besmear their faces with coal-dust

1 Evil or malicious.

3 The strongest Argument against the claim that Cartier was accom¬
panied by priests is here presented.

176

SECOND VOYAGE

and with grease as thick as the thickness of a knife;
and by that one knows that they are widows . 1 They
have another custom, very bad for their girls; for
after they are of age to marry they are all put into a
common house, abandoned to everybody who desires
them until they have found their match. And all
this we have seen by experience, for we have seen
the houses as full of the said girls as is a school of
boys in France . 2 And, moreover, gaming according
to their manner is held in the said houses, where they
stake all that they have, even to the covering of their
nature . 1 They do not any great work, and with little
pieces of wood about the size of a half-sword cultivate
their land whereon they raise their corn, which they
call zis , the which is as big as peas, of the same
grain in growth as in Brazil. Likewise they have a
great quantity of big melons , 4 cucumbers, and pump-

1 Schooler*ft bears testimony to the prevalence of the same custom
among some of the wild tribes of the West, and says that “when a family
bury a member or relative they black their faces and bodies.” Cartier’s
statement is amply supported by other writers, who testify to the almost
universal use of black as a sign of mourning among uncivilized as well as
civilized peoples. Vide Archives of Aboriginal Knowledge, Philadelphia,
i860, vol. iv, p. 55.

3 In this statement Cartier is also well supported by later writers on the
subject of courtship and marriage among the savages.

* The Indians were inveterate gamesters. Wood, writing of the Massa¬
chusetts Indians, says that they spent “ halfe their dayes in gaming and
lazing. They have two sorts of games, one called Puim, the other Hub¬
bub, not much unlike Cards and Dice:—They are so bewitched with these
two games, that they will lose sometimes all they have. Beaver, Moose-
skinnet. Kettles, Wampompeage, Mowhackies, Hatchets, Knives, all is
confiscate by those two games.’* Vide Wood's New England's Prospect,
Boston, 188$, p. 95 ft seq .

4 The melon (Cuatmis meld) is not indigenous to North America, and
has never been found growing wild. It is supposed to be a native of India
and to have found its way to western Europe through Persia. What were,
then, the “ groa melons " seen by Cartier and the “ Mush Mellons " which
Josselyn saw among the Indians of New England and declared to be 11 bet-

177

SECOND VOYAGE

kins , 1 peas and beans 2 of all colors, not of the kind of
ours. They have also an herb of which during the sum¬
mer they make great store for the winter, the which
they greatly esteem, and the men only use it in the
manner following. They have it dried in the sun and
carry it about their necks in a little beast’s skin in

ter than our English ** ? Champlain, who followed Cartier, does not speak
of melons seen by him, but mentions “ citrouilles,” which are probably
the melons of Cartier, and some variety of summer squash ( Cucurbit* p*/y-
morpba f), then unknown to Europe. Of one variety of this new vegetable
Roger Williams thus speaks: “ Askutasquash, their Vine apples, which the
English from them call Squashes, about the bignesse of Apples, of severall
colours, a sweet, light wholesome refreshing**; and William Wood: “Is-
quou ter squashes is their best bread, a fruite like a young Pumpion.’* Jos-
selyn applies the word melon to the squash. He says: «Squashes, but
more truly Squoutersquashes, a kind of Mellon, or rather Gourd, for they
sometime degenerate into Gourds; some of these are green, some yellow,
some longish, like a Gourd, others round like an Apple, all of them pleas¬
ant food boy led and buttered, and seasoned with spice; but the yellow
Squash called an Apple Squash because like an Apple, and about the big¬
ness of a Pome-water, is the best kind.'* The Indians of New England
cultivated the watermelon ( Cucurbita citrullus) ; but it seems improbable
that this was what Cartier alludes to. Cf. A Key into the Language of
America, London, 1643, P- *03; Chronological History of Plants, Picker¬
ing, Boston, 1879, part ii, pp. 747-749; New England's Prospect, Boston,
1865, p. 76; Historic of Travaile into Virginia, Strachey, London, 1849,
p. 119; New England*s Rarities, Josselyn, Boston, 1865, pp. 109, 147; His-
toire du Canada, Sagard, Paris, 1866, p. 707; Geogr. Bot. de Candolle,
vol. ii, pp. 899, 904; Two Voyages to New'England, Josselyn, Boston,
1865, pp. 60, 101.

1 “Courges.” Cartier uses this word, literally gourds, to describe
the pumpkin ( Cucurbita pcpe), with which he was unacquainted. Subse¬
quent writers denominate it the pompion and pumpion, from the French
pimpin. Its mention by Cartier proves beyond doubt that the pumpkin
was cultivated by the Indians before the advent of Europeans. It has been
claimed to be 1 native of the Levant and also of Astrakhan.

2 “Poix & febues” ( Latbyrus maritimus and Pbaseoius vuiguris).
Champlain denominates the beans which he saw as “ Febues du Bresil.**
Josselyn informs us that the Indians cultivated several kinds of beans. De¬
scribing them, he says: “They are variegated much, some being bigger a
great deal than others; some white, black, red, yellow, blue, spotted.”
Vide Two Voyages to New England, Josselyn, Boston, 1863, p. 60, and
Rarities, p. 108.

178

SECOND VOYAGE

place of a bag, with a horn of stone or wood; then
by and by they make powder of the said herb and
put it in one of the ends of the said horn, then put a
coal of fire thereon and suck at the other end so long
that they fill their bodies with smoke, insomuch that
it comes out by the mouth and nostrils as by a chim¬
ney funnel; and they say that it keeps them healthy
and warm, and they never go without having their
said things. We have tried the said smoke, which,
after being put into our mouths, seemed to be powder
of pepper put therein, it was so hot . 1 The women
of the said country work beyond comparison more
than the men, as well in fishing, of which they make
a great business, as in tilling and other things; and
men, women, and children alike are more hardened
to the cold than beasts, for with the greatest cold
that we may have seen, the which was extreme and
bitter, they came over the ice and snow every day to
our ships, the most part of them almost entirely
naked, which is an incredible thing to one who has
not seen it. They take during the said ice and snow
a great quantity of wild beasts, as deer, stags , 3 and

1 Carder doea not give us the Indian name for this herb; but it was
without doubt NicttidUd rustica, a wild tobacco, inferior in quality to Nice-
tiddd /aiscum, grown farther south. Josselyn gives an elaborate account of
it, and says that the Indians in New England called it Pnke. «* The yel¬
low henbane of Gerard's Herbal," says Professor Tuckerman. Wood de¬
scribes the pipes in which it was used, and calls it “ Colts-foote." Vidt
Two Voyages to New England, p. 61, and New England's Rarities, Jos¬
selyn, Boston, 1865, p. 103 et seq.i Wood's New England's Prospect,
p. 69, and vocabulary iu Uco; Chronological History of Plants, Pickering,
Boston, 1879, part ii, p. 742.

* ,# Dains and Cerfz,” called ** asquenoudo" and “aiounesta."
Probably the Cervus Vtrginiduus , or common red deer, and Raugifer
tdrdudus , or caribou. Sagard calls it the ** Asne Sauvage," or wild ass.
Lahontan speaks of three kinds: the elk or moose, the caribou, and the
“ hart," or red deer. The wapiti, or C. Ceuddcustj, probably existed in

*79

SECOND VOYAGE

bears , 1 of which they brought us but very little, be¬
cause they are stingy of their victuals. They eat their
flesh wholly raw, after having been dried by the
smoke, and likewise their fish. By what we have
seen and been able to learn of this said people it
seems to me that they might be easy to tame in such
fashion as one might desire. God by his divine
compassion bestow upon them his regard. Amen.

HOW THE SAID PEOPLE FROM DAY TO DAY FETCHED US
FISH AND WHATSOEVER THEY HAD TO OUR SHIPS, AND
HOW BY THE ADVICE OF TAIGNOAGNY AND DOM AGAYA
THE SAID PEOPLE QUIT COMING, AND HOW THERE WAS
SOME DISCORD BETWEEN US AND THEM

And from day to day the said people came to our
ships and fetched us store of eels and other fish in
order to get our goods, for which were given them
knives, awls, paternosters, and other trifling things,
with which they were much contented ; but we per¬
ceived that the two knaves whom we had brought
said and gave them to understand that what we gave
them was worth nothing, and that they should have

Canada in Cartier's time. Cf Pickering (Chron. Hist. Plants, part ii,
p. 875), who calls Cerfz C. rangiferinus; Histoire du Canada, Sagard,
Paris, 1866, tome iii, p. 681; New England’s Rarities, Josselyn, p. 55
et seq.s Nouveaux Voyages, Lahontan, t la Haye, 1703, p. 84 et seq.;
Description de I’Amerique, Denys, Paris, 1672, p. 27.

1 “Hours” (Urs*s Americans ), or common black bear. Bears are
spoken of by the early comers to America as fierce and numerous (New
England’s Prospect, p. 22). Wood says that they were “ most fierce in
Strawberry time,” and Josselyn (Rarities, p. 48) that ««they walk the
Country twenty, thirty, forty in company, making a hideous noise with
roaring, which you may hear a mile or two before they come so near to
endanger the Traveller.” Cf. Nouveaux Voyages, Lahontan, p. 86;
Histoire du Canada, Sagard, p. 682.

180

SECOND VOYAGE

as many hatchets as knives for that which they gave
us, notwithstanding that the captain had made them
many presents. And so they ceased not at all hours
to importune the said captain, who was advised by a
lord of the town of Hagonchenda 1 that he should be¬
ware of Donnacona and of the said two knaves, and
that they were Agojuda,* which is to say, traitors.
And he was also advised of it by some from the said
Canada, and we as well perceived their malice, because
they wished to take back the three children that the
said Donnacona had given to the said captain, and, in
fact, they made the largest of the girls flee from the
ship, after the which had thus fled the captain had
the others taken care of. And by the advice of the
said Taignoagny and Dom Agaya they withdrew and
abstained from coming with us four or five days, ex¬
cept some who came in great fear and dread.

HOW THE CAPTAIN, DOUBTING LEST THEY MEDITATED SOME
TREACHERY, HAD THE FORT STRENGTHENED, AND HOW
THEY CAME TO PARLEY WITH HIM, AND THE GIVING
BACK OF THE GIRL WHO HAD FLED AW^AY

Seeing the malice of them, doubting lest they might
meditate some treason and come with a mass of folks
upon us, the captain had the fort strengthened all
about with a great fosse, wide and deep, with entry
by drawbridge and reinforced with wooden pickets
opposite the first. And for the time to come fifty men
were ordered for the night watch in four watches,
and the trumpet sounding at each change of the said
watches, which was done according to the said order.

1 ** Hagonchenda.' ’ Lescarbot ha* Hagouchouda.

* ** Agojuda. 1 * Agoinda, according to Bref Recit.

•*a 181

SECOND VOYAGE

And thesaid Donnacona,Taignoagny,and Dom Agaya,
being advised of the said reinforcement and of the
good ward and watch that they made, were vexed at
being in the bad grace of the captain, and sent at
several times some of their folks, feigning that they
were elsewhere, in order to see if any one would do
them displeasure, of which no one took account and
not any sign was made or shown them. And then
came the said Donnacona, Taignoagny, Dom Agaya,
and others many times to speak to the said captain,
a stream between them, asking the said captain if he
was angry, and why he did not go to Canada to see
them. And the said captain replied to them that
they were but traitors and knaves, as had been re¬
ported to him and as he had perceived in many ways
—as by not having kept their promise to go to Ho-
chelaga, and by having taken back the girl that they
had given him, and other ill turns that he named to
them; but, for all this, that if they would be good
people and would forget their evil intention he would
pardon them, and that they might safely come on
board to make good cheer as heretofore. At which
words they thanked the said captain and promised
him that they would restore to him the girl that had
fled away within three days. And the fourth day of
November, Dom Agaya, accompanied by six other
men, came to our ships to tell the said captain that
the lord Donnacona was gone into the country to
search for the said girl, and that she would be brought
to him the next day by him; and, moreover, said
that Taignoagny was very sick, and that he prayed
the captain to send him a little salt 1 and bread, which

1 Silt. Taignoagny must have learned to use salt when in France, as
182

SECOND VOYAGE

the said captain did, who sent him word that it was
Jesus who was angry at him for the ill turns that
he had thought to play. And the next day the
said Donnacona, Taignoagny, Dom Agaya, and many
others came and brought the said girl again, present¬
ing her to the said captain, who took no notice of
them, and said that he wanted nothing of them, and
that they might carry her back. To which they re¬
plied, making their excuse that they had not coun¬
seled her to go away, but that she had gone away
because the cabin-boys had beaten her, as she had
told them, and they prayed the captain once more
to take her back, and they even brought her to the
ship. After which things the captain ordered bread
and wine brought and feasted them. Then they took
leave of one another. And after that they have come
and gone to our ships, as we to their abode, in as
great love as before.

OF THE GREATNESS OF DEPTH OF THE SAID RIVER, AND IN
GENERAL OF THE BEASTS, BIRDS, FISH, AND OTHER THINGS
THAT WE HAVE SEEN THERE, AND THE SITUATION OF THE
PLACES

The said river begins beyond the Isle of the Assump¬
tion abreast of the high mountains of Honguedo and

Cartier tells us that the natives of Canada did not use it in their food.
Schoolcraft and other writers also inform us that the use of salt was unknown
to many savage tribes in North America. Catlin (North American Indians,
London, 1841, vol. i, p. 124 et seq.) t speaking of Western savages whom
he visited, says that “none of these tribes use salt in any way, although
their country abounds in salt springs, and in many places the prairie may
be seen for miles together covered with an incrustation of salt as white as
the drifted snow/’ and he continues that he had encamped with Indians
near such places, but was “ unable to prevail upon them to use salt in any
quantity whatever/*

SECOND VOYAGE

of the seven islands, and the distance across is about
thirty-five or forty leagues, and midway there is a depth
of more than two hundred fathoms. The best, deepest,
and safest to navigate is on the side toward the south,
and toward the north, to wit, of the said seven islands,
there are on one side and the other, about seven leagues
distant from the said islands, two large streams , 1 2 which
descend from the mountains of Saguenay, which make
many very dangerous banks in the sea. At the entrance
of the said rivers we saw a great number of whales and
sea-horses.

Abreast of the said seven islands there is a little
stream 3 * which goes three or four leagues into the
land over marshes, in which there is a marvelous num¬
ber of all kinds of river birds. From the beginning
of the said river as far as to Hochelaga it is three
hundred leagues or more, and the beginning of it is
in the stream which comes from the Saguenay, which
issues from between high mountains and enters into
the said river before it arrives in the province of
Canada from the shore toward the north, and this
stream is very deep, narrow, and very dangerous to
navigate. After the said stream is the province of
Canada, where there are many peoples in uninclosed
villages. There are also in the limits of the said
Canada within the said river many islands both large
and small, and among others there is one of them
which comprises more than ten leagues in length,
which is full of fair trees and high, and also in it
there are many vines . 8 There is a passage on both

1 These are the rivers Moisie and St. Margaret.

2 This little stream is just inside Sand Point.

8 The Isle of Orleans, already mentioned.

j8 4

SECOND VOYAGE

sides of it; the best and surest is on the side toward
the south. And on the side of this island toward the
west is a forking of waters, 1 which is very good and
convenient for to put ships, where there is a strait of
the said river exceeding swift and deep, but it is only
about a third of a league in width; abreast of which
there is a double land of good height, wholly culti¬
vated, as goodly land as ever it may be possible to see,
and there is the town and dwelling-place of Donna-
cona and of our two men who had been taken the
first voyage, which dwelling-place is named Stada-
con6. And before arriving at the said place there are
four peopled dwelling-places, to wit, Ajoaste, Starna-
tan, Tailla (which is on a mountain), and Scitadin, 3
then the said place of Stadacond, under which high
land, toward the north, is the river and harbor of
St. Croix, where we stayed from the fifteenth day
of September until the sixth day of May, 1536,
at which place the ships remained dry, as was here¬
tofore said. Beyond the said place is the abode of the

1 In the origin*!, “ Vng afFoug d*eaues,** literally a forking of waters.
The word afftug used by Carder is afourcbt in modern French, and is
used by mariners to denote a method of anchoring a ship by extending
lines from opposite points. We have no English word to express this
method better than cross-anchorage, which quite well represents the mean¬
ing. The place so designated by Cartier is a small triangular indentation
in the shore, and is still used as a berth for vessels. I have preferred to
translate Cartier*s words literally rather than to use the word cross-anchor¬
age, which probably Cartier had in mind.

* There are differences in the spelling of these place-names: Scitadin
appearing in different versions Licadin, Stadin, Lidaten, and Satadin. The
people of Ajoaste were the Andastes mentioned by subsequent writers,
and spoke the Huron tongue. Andastoe, described as the Ajoaste of Car-
tier, is ** a country beyond the Neuter nation, one hundred and fifty
leagues S. E. S. from the Huron, in a straight line, or two hundred
leagues by the trails.** Vidt Relation de la Nouvelle France, 1648, p. 56;
Grand Voyage du Pays des Hurons, Sagard, p. 1x5. Cf. League of the
Iroquois, Morgan, New York, 1904, vol. i, p. 9, vol. ii, p. 187.

I *S

SECOND VOYAGE

people of Tequenonday 1 and of Achelaiy, the which
Tequenonday is upon a mountain and the other in a
level country. All the land on both sides of the said
river as far as to Hochelaga and beyond is as goodly
land and smooth as ever man looked upon. There
are some mountains as far from the said river as one
can see over the said lands, from which descend a
number of streams which enter into the said river.
All this said land is covered and full of woods of many
sorts, and many vines, except about peopled places,
which they have dug up in order to make their habi¬
tations and tillage. There is a great number of stags,
deer, bears, and other beasts. We have seen there the
tracks of a beast which has but two feet, which we have
followed a long distance over the sand and mud, which
has feet of the form and size of a palm and more.
There are many hares, rabbits, 2 martens, 3 foxes, 4
wolves, beavers, squirrels, 5 rats, which are marvel-

1 Tequenonday. These arc the Tequenonquiaye of Champlain. Sub¬
sequently a mission was established among these people called the St.
Joseph Mission. Vide CEuvres de Champlain, Laverdiere, pp. 516, 906,
and Histoire du Canada, Sagard, Paris, 1866, tome i, p. 200.

2 Cartier and Champlain both make a distinction between the rabbit
and the hare. The latter is the Lepus Americanus or Northern hare, and
has longer ears than the rabbit (L. sylvaticus ), besides being smaller and
differently marked. Cf. Histoire du Canada, Sagard, tome iii, p. 679.

8 “ Martres.” The Mustek Americanos, or pine-marten. Josselyn
(Voyages, p. 70) says that they were innumerable. Their skins were ex¬
ported in large quantities, and for a while were used as a currency between
the Indians and Europeans, the value of various furs being fixed at a certain
number of marten skins.

4 ** Regnardz.** Probably Cartier alludes to the Vulpes fichus , or
common red fox, though there were several varieties in Canada at this time,
but never numerous. Josselyn (Voyages, p. 66) speaks of the kind here
mentioned as “a great yellow Fox,** and says that there was “another
grey, who will climb up into Trees,** and that *• the Black Fox is of much
esteem.**

5 “ Loueres, byeures, escureux.** The wolf (Lupus occiientalis) was

186

SECOND VOYAGE

ously big, and other wild things. They clothe them¬
selves with the skins of these beasts, because they have
no other clothing. There is a great number of birds,
to wit, cranes, swans, bustards, wild geese, white and
gray, widgeons, ducks, 1 blackbirds, thrushes, turtle¬
doves, wood-pigeons, 2 goldfinches, canaries, linnets,
nightingales, swallows, and other birds, as in France.
Moreover, as mention is heretofore made in the pre¬
ceding chapters, the said river is more abundant in
fish of all sorts than may ever have been seen or heard
of in the memory of man; for from the beginning to
the end you will find in it, according to the seasons,
the most of all sorts and kinds of sea and fresh-water
fish. You will find as for as to the said Canada a great
many whales, sea-hogs, 8 sea-horses, 4 adhothuys, which

found everywhere in the vest forests of North America, and his fiir was
much prized by the savages. The colonists who followed Cartier found
him a dangerous pest and mercilessly sought his extermination. Josselyn
(Rarities, p. 49) speaks of two kinds and gives an interesting description of
them. The skin of the beaver (Castor Americans ) was greedily sought
and commanded a high price in Europe. Wood (New England’s Prospect,
p. 28) gives an entertaining account of his habits, and says that “ the wis¬
dom and understanding of this Beast will almost conclude him a reasonable
creature.” Of the squirrels he describes three kinds, viz., the gray (Sauna
Carolinensis ), the red (S.Hudsonius), and the flying (Sciuropterus vsiucella),
all of which were common to Canada.

1 “ Cannes, canardz.” Literally, ducks and drakes. Just why Cartier
uses these two words is not quite apparent. He must have seen more than
one variety of ducks, and perhaps wished to indicate besides the common
sea-duck the coot or scoter (Fulic* atra and (Zitmta American*). Hakluyt
has the word “ ducks” only, and Stephens gives us “plovers and ducks” as
the correct translation.

2 “Ramiers.” The common wild pigeon (Ectopistes migra tortus), which
the European colonists found in vast numbers when they first came to the
New World, but which is now nearly extinct. Vide Nouvcaux Voyages,
Lahontan, tome ii, p. 47; Wood’s New England’s Prospect, p. 31; Two
Voyages, Josselyn, p. 79.

2 Cartier’s “marcouyns,” or sea-hogs, were the Pboaena communis.

4 “Cheutulx de met.” Literally, sea-horses; another name for the
walrus (Tricbecbus rtsmarus).

SECOND VOYAGE

is a sort of fish which we have never seen nor heard
spoken of; they are as big as sea-hogs, white as
snow, and have a body and head like greyhounds; 1
the which keep between the sea and fresh water, which
begins between the stream of Saguenay and Canada.
Item, you will find in June, July, and August plenty
of mackerel, mullets, bass, sartres, 2 great eels, and other
fish. Their season having passed, you shall find there
smelts as good as in the river Seine. Then in the
spring there are plenty of lampreys and salmon.
Beyond the said Canada there is abundance of pike,
trout, carp, breams, and other fresh-water fish, and of
all these sorts of fish do the said people make great
fishing of each for their substance and victuals.

CHAPTER OP SOME INFORMATION WHICH THOSE OF THE
COUNTRY HAVE GIVEN US SINCE HAVING RETURNED FROM
HOCHELAGA

After having come back from Hochelaga with the
pinnace and the boats, we have conversed, gone, and
come with the people nearest our ships in kindness
and friendship, save that at times we had some dif¬
ferences with a few bad fellows, for which the
others were very sorry and angry. And we have

1 Fide ante*, p. 142, note 1.

2 “Sartres.** This word is obsolete. Godefroy (Diet, de l’ancienne Fran-
foise du IX au XV Siecle, Paris, 1892) speaks of it as the sargor or sarguc,
and quotes Lesearbot (tome iii, p. 798, ed. 1612, Tross), who says that
the sargor does not make war upon other fish, but feeds upon herbs like the
sheep. The term sartre seems to have been applied in the fifteenth century
to a large class of spiny fishes, now variously classified. What Cartier saw
was probably the fish known in Europe as the bergall or bergylt, and in the
United States as the blue-perch and chogset (Ctenelabrus adspersns). This
fish feeds upon small snails and other minute forms of life which it seeks
among weedy rocks and sea-grasses, which may account for Lesearbot*s
description.

SECOND VOYAGE

understood by the lord Donnacona 9 Taignoagny,
Dom Agaya, and others that the aforesaid stream is
named the Saguenay, and goes as far as to the said
Saguenay, 1 which is distant from the beginning more
than a league of way toward the west-northwest, and
that beyond, eight or nine days, it has no more than
depth for boats, but that the right and good way
and surest to the Saguenay is by the said river as far
as to Hochelaga, to a stream which descends from
the said Saguenay and enters into the said river, and
that from there they are a moon going thither.
And they have made us understand that the folks
are clothed and attired like us, and with cloth, and
that there are a great many towns and peoples, and
good folks, and that they have a great quantity of
gold and red copper, and that the whole of the land
from the said first stream as far as to Hochelaga
and Saguenay is an island, the which is encompassed
and surrounded by the said river and streams; and
that beyond the said Saguenay the said stream flows,
entering into two or three great lakes of water very
wide; then, that one finds a fresh-water sea of which
there is no mention of having seen the end, as they
have heard by those of the Saguenay;* for they have
told us that they have not been there. Moreover,
they have given us to understand that at the place
where we had left our boats when we went to
Hochelaga there is a stream that goes toward the

1 That U, as far as to the place where the country of Saguenay begins.

* Evidently Cartier did not get a clear idea from the natives relative to
the geography of the region; indeed, they probably did not have a clear
idea of it themselves: but the great fresh-water sea described was probably
Lake Ontario. Doubtless he misunderstood them with respect to the
clothing of the people, which is not surprising.

.89

SECOND VOYAGE

southwest, where, likewise, it takes a moon to go
from St. Croix with boats as far as to a land where
there is never ice nor snow; but that in this said
land there are continual wars one with another, and
that in this land there are oranges, almonds, nuts,
plums, and other sorts of fruits, and in great abun¬
dance. And it was told us that the men and resi¬
dents of the land were clad and arrayed with skins
as themselves. After having asked them if there
was any gold and copper there, they answered us
no. I esteem the said place to be, by their saying,
toward Florida by what they showed us by their
signs and tokens. 1

or A GREAT SICKNESS AND DEATH WHICH CAME TO THE
PEOPLE OF STADACON&, FROM WHICH, FOR HAVING CON¬
SORTED WITH THEM, WE HAVE BEEN CARRIED OFF BY IT,
INSOMUCH THAT THERE ARE DEAD OF OUR MEN EVEN TO
THE NUMBER OF TWENTY-FIVE

In the month of December we were advised that
the mortality had fallen upon the people of Stada-
con€ to such a degree that there were dead more
than fifty of them by their own confession. On
account of which we forbade them our fort and
from coming about us; but, notwithstanding having
driven them away, the sickness began among us in
a marvelous and most unknown manner, for some
lost substance, and their legs became large and swollen,

1 In spite of continual warfare among the different savage tribes, there
were many ways by which they could obtain a knowledge of the inhabi¬
tants and products of distant regions. Cartier was evidently right in his
conjecture that the country described was «* toward Florida.** It is quite
possible that the natives of Canada had intercourse at times, either directly
or indirectly, by the great waterways toward the southwest, with the tribes
in that direction.

190

SECOND VOYAGE

and their sinews shrank and grew black as coal, and
with some all besprinkled with spots of blood almost
purple. Then the said sickness mounted to the hips,
thighs, and shoulders, to the arms and to the neck,
and the mouth withal became so infected and the
gums so putrid that all the flesh fell away from
them, even to the roots of the teeth, which almost
all fell out. 1 And to such a degree did the said
sickness spread in our three ships that, by the middle
of February, of a hundred and ten men that we
were, there were not ten sound, so that one could
not help the other, which was a thing piteous to
behold, considering the place where we were; for
the folks of the country came every day before our
fort, who saw but few people up, and already there
were eight dead there and more than fifty in whom
one could not expect more life.

Our captain, seeing the misery and sickness so ac¬
tive, had everybody put to prayers and supplications,
and had an image in remembrance of the Virgin
Mary placed against a tree about a bow-shot distant
from our fort across the snow and ice, and ordered
that the Sunday ensuing they should say mass at the
said place, and that all those who could walk, the
sound as well as the sick, should go in procession,
singing the seven psalms of David, with the Litany,
while praying the said Virgin that it might please
her to pray her dear Child that he would have pity
upon us. The said mass having been said and chanted

1 There can be no doubt u to the nature of this disease, as Cartier ac¬
curately describes the scurvy (scorbutic us ), then but little understood. Les-
carbot says that the disease was known to Hippocrates, and dtes the
description of Olaus Magnus, who denominates it sorbet —literally, bad
habit; an apt title, since it is caused by careless exposure to cold, damp-
new, and impure air and water, as well as by long-continued use of salt
food. Fide Histoire de la Nouvelle France, Lescarbot, tome ii, p. 453
191

SECOND VOYAGE

before the said image, the captain bound himself a
pilgrim to Our Lady who causes herself to be prayed
to at Roquemado, 1 promising to go thither if God
should give him grace to return into France. This
day Philippe Rougemont, native of Amboise, passed
away, 2 at the age of about twenty years.

And because the sickness was unknown, the cap¬
tain had the body opened to see if one might get
some knowledge from it to preserve, if it were pos¬
sible, the rest. And it was found that the heart was
white and withered, surrounded with more than a pot
of water red as a date; the liver fair, but the lungs
wholly black and mortified; and all his blood was
shrunken above his heart; for when he was opened
there issued from above the heart a great abundance
of infected blood. Likewise the spleen toward the
spine was about two fingers' breadth a little broached
as if it had been rubbed on a rough stone. After this
was seen he was opened and one thigh cut into, the
which was very black outside, but within the flesh
was found fair enough. This done, he was buried
as well as one could. May God by his holy grace
forgive his soul and all trespasses! Amen.

And from day to day the said sickness continued
in such manner that many a time it was so that in all
the three ships there were not three sound men, so
that in one of the said ships there was not a man who
was able to go below deck to draw water any more
for himself than for the others; and presently there
were already many of them dead, whom it behooved

1 Roquemado. Leacarbot aaya Roquemadou, and explain!, “ poor mieux
dire I Roque amadou e'eat k dire dea amans. C’est vn bourg en Qucrd,
ou il y va force pelerini.*’ It i! the modern Rocamadour in the depart¬
ment of Lot, and is a market-town of about fifteen hundred inhabitant*.

2 “ Treipaua M is the word used by Cartier.

192

SECOND VOYAGE

us, through weakness, to put under the snow, for it
was not possible for us to open the earth for them,
which was frozen, we were so feeble and had so little
strength. And so were we in a marvelous fear of
the people of the country, that they might perceive
our misery and weakness; and in order to cover up
the said sickness, when they came near our fort, our
captain, whom God has always preserved, would come
forth straight before them with two or three men,
both sound and sick, whom he had come out after
him, and when he saw them outside the palisade he
made a pretense of wishing to beat them, crying and
throwing sticks after them, sending them aboard,
showing by signs to the said savages that he made
all his folks work in the ships, some to calk, others
to make bread and do other work, and that it was
not good that they should come to idle outside, which
they believed. And the said captain made the said
sick men beat and make a noise within the ships with
sticks and stones, feigning to calk. And at the time
we were so smitten with the said sickness that we had
almost lost hope of ever returning into France, if God
by his infinite goodness and mercy had not looked
upon us in pity and given knowledge of a remedy
against all sicknesses, the most excellent that was
ever seen or found upon the earth, as mention shall
be made in this chapter.

THE NUMBER OF DAYS THAT WE WERE IN THE HARBOR
OF ST. CROIX AND FROZEN IN THE ICE AND SNOW, AND
THE NUMBER OF THE MEN DECEASED AFTER THE BEGIN¬
NING OF THE SICKNESS UNTIL THE MIDDLE OF MARCH

From the middle of November until the fifteenth
day of April we were continually locked up in the

u i 93

SECOND VOYAGE

ice, the which was more than two fathoms in thick¬
ness, and over the land there was the height of four
feet of snow and more, so that it was higher than
the sides of our ships, the which lasted until the said
time, insomuch that our drinkables were all frozen
within the casks. And throughout our said ships,
as well as above, the ice upon the sides was four
inches in thickness, and all the said river was frozen,
inasmuch as the fresh water continued as far as above
Hochelaga, at which time there deceased among us
even to the number of twenty-five persons of the
chiefest and best companions that we had, who died
by the aforesaid sickness. And for a while there
were more than fifty of them in whom one could not
expect more life, and all the rest sick, so that not any
of them were exempt except three or four. But God,
by his holy grace, regarded us in pity, and sent us
the knowledge and the remedy for our cure and health
in the sort and manner which shall be related in
this chapter.

HOW BY THE GRACE OF GOD WE HAD KNOWLEDGE OF THE
KIND OF A TREE BY THE WHICH ALL THE SICK WERE
CURED AND RECOVERED HEALTH AFTER HAVING USED
OF IT, AND THE MANNER OF USING IT

One day our captain, seeing the sickness so violent
and his people so smitten with it, being gone outside
of the fort and walking by himself upon the ice, be¬
held a band of folks coming from Stadacon6, in the
which was Dorn Agaya, whom the captain had seen,
only ten or twelve days before, very sick with the
sickness which his people had; for he had one of his

194

SECOND VOYAGE

legs as big at the knee as a child of two years, and
all the sinews of it shrunken, his teeth lost and spoiled,
and his gums putrid and corrupted.

The captain, seeing the said Dom Agaya sound
and well, was glad, hoping to know from him how
he was cured, so as to give aid and succor to his
men. When they were arrived near the fort, the
captain asked him how he was cured of his sickness;
the which Dom Agaya responded that he was cured
by the juice and refuse of the leaves of a tree, and
that it was the only remedy for the sickness. The said
captain asked him if there was not some of it there¬
abouts, and if he would show him some of it in order
to cure his servant, who had taken the said sickness
in the said Canada while he abode with Donnacona
— not wanting to declare to him the number of the
crew who were sick. Then the said Dom Agaya
sent two women with the captain to fetch some of
it, who brought nine or ten branches of it, and showed
us how one should strip the bark and the leaves from
the said tree and put the whole to boil in water, then
to drink of it every other day and put the refuse on
the swollen and diseased legs, and that the said tree
would cure all the sick. They call the said tree in
their tongue amedda}

Soon after the captain had some of the beverage
made in order to have the sick drink of it, of whom

1 Amedda. Lescarbot says “ annedda,” and Hakluyt "ameda” and
•« banned*.” Some writers suppose this to have been the white spruce
(Piet* alba), and others the white pine {Pinus strobus ); but the P. alba is
a better anti-scorbutic. Cartier’s relation of the rapid recovery of his
men overstrains our credulity, and, as though he foresaw this, he throws
in the convenient suggestion, with which Pope sympathizes, that it was a
veritable miracle. Cf. Jacques Cartier, Pope, p. 876; Histoire de la
Nouvelle France, Lescarbot, tome ii, p. 451 et seq.

>95

SECOND VOYAGE

there were none of them who might wish to try the
said beverage except one or two who put themselves
to the venture of trying it. Shortly after they had
drunken of it they received benefit, which was found
to be a real and evident miracle; for all the sick, of
whatever they were infected, after having drunken
of it two or three times, recovered health and vigor,
so that such as there were of the said crew who had
the syphilis five or six years previous to the said sick¬
ness were by this medicine completely cured. After
this was seen and understood there was such strife
for the said medicine that they would have killed
themselves to see who first should have it; so that a
tree as big and as tall as any tree I ever saw was
used up in less than eight days, which had such effect
that if all the doctors of Lorraine and Montpellier
had been there, with all the drugs of Alexandria, they
could not have done so much in a year as the said
tree did in six days; for it profited us so much that
all those who would use it recovered health and
soundness, thanks to God.

HOW THE LORD DONNACONA, ACCOMPANIED BY TAIGNOAGNY
AND MANY OTHERS, DEPARTED FROM STADACON&, FEIGN¬
ING TO GO TO HUNT STAGS AND DEER, THE WHICH WERE
TWO MONTHS WITHOUT RETURNING, AND AT THEIR RE¬
TURN BROUGHT A GREAT NUMBER OF FOLKS WHOM WE
HAD NOT BEEN ACCUSTOMED TO SEE

During the time that the sickness and mortality
reigned in our ships, Donnacona, Taignoagny, and
many others went away, feigning to go to take stags
and deer, which they call in their language aiounesta
and asquenoudo , for the snows were great and the ice
196

SECOND VOYAGE

was already broken up in the channel of the river,
so that they were able to navigate by it. And we
were told by Dom Agaya and others that they would
be gone only about fifteen days, which we believed;
but they were two months without returning. On
account of which we had suspicion that they might
have gone to gather a great number of people to do
us displeasure because they saw us so enfeebled. Not¬
withstanding, we had put so good order to our affairs
that if all the strength of their land had been there
they could have done nothing but look at us. And
during the time that they were abroad many folks
came every day to our ships, as they had been accus¬
tomed, bringing us the fresh meat of stags and deer,
fresh fish of all sorts, which they sold us very dear,
or else they would have better liked to carry it away
again, because they had need of provisions at the
time, by reason of the winter which had been long.

HOW DONNACONA RETURNED TO STADACON& WITH A GREAT
NUMBER OF FOLKS, AND THE SAID DONNACONA FEIGNED
SICKNESS FOR FEAR OF COMING TO SEE THE CAPTAIN,
THINKING THAT THE SAID CAPTAIN WOULD GO TO SEE HIM

The twenty-first day of the said month of April
Dom Agaya came to the shore accompanied by many
men, who were good and strong and whom we had
not been accustomed to see, who told us that the lord
Donnacona would come the next day, and that he
would bring a store of stag’s meat and other venison.
And the next day, the twenty-second day of the said
month, came the said Donnacona, who brought in
his company a great number of folks to the said Stada-
.3* 197

SECOND VOYAGE

con6, for what occasion nor why we knew not; but
by a proverb they say he who guards himself from all
escapes from some, which to us was of necessity, for
we were so enfeebled, as much by sickness as by dead
men, that it was necessary to leave one of our ships
at the said place of St. Croix. The captain being
advised of their coming, and that they brought so
many men, and also that Dom Agaya came to speak
to the said captain without being willing to pass the
river that was between us and the said StadaconS, but
made objection to passing, which he was not accus¬
tomed to do, by reason of which we had suspicion
of treason. Seeing this, the captain sent his servant,
named Charles Guyot, who was loved more than any
other by the people of the whole country, in order to
see who was at the said place and what they were
doing; the said servant feigning to be gone to see the
said Donnacona because he had dwelt a long while
with him, who carried him some presents. And when
the said Donnacona was advised of his coming he
feigned sickness and went to bed, saying to the said
servant that he was very sick. Afterward the said
Charles went into the house of Taignoagny to see him,
where he found the houses everywhere so full of folks,
which he was not accustomed to see, that he could
not move about. And the said Taignoagny would not
permit that the said servant should go into the other
houses, but escorted him half-way toward the ships,
and said to him that if the said captain would do
him the favor of taking a lord of the country called
Agohanna, who had done him a displeasure, and carry
him into France, he would be obliged to him, and
would do all that the said captain might wish, and
198

SECOND VOYAGE

that he might return the next day to tell him the
answer.

When the captain was advised of the great number
of people who were at the said place, he knew not
to what end, he resolved to play them a trick and take
their lord Taignoagny, Dom Agaya, and some of the
principal ones, as he had fully determined to bring
the said lord Donnacona into France, in order to relate
and describe to the king what he had seen in the
Western country of the wonders of the world, for he
had testified to us of having been in the land of the
Saguenay, in which there is unlimited gold, rubies,
and other riches, and there are men there as white
as in France and appareled in woolen cloth. Further,
he told of having seen other countries, where the men
do not eat and have no fundament, and do not digest,
but only make eaupar la verge. Moreover, he told of
having been in another country of the Picquenyans,
and other countries where the people have only one
leg, and other marvels lengthy to recount. The said
lord is an ancient man, and never ceases going through
countries after knowledge, as well by rivers and
streams as by land. 1

After that the said servant had finished his mes¬
sage, and told the captain what the said Taignoagny
had ordered him, the said captain sent his servant
the next day to say to the said Taignoagny that he
should come to see him and tell him what he might,
and that he would give him good cheer and part of

1 This savage, who seems to hive been an extensive traveler, was
evidently describing the Lake Superior country, to which the river Sague¬
nay led, though not so directly as the Ottawa. His descriptions of strange
people were only such as have frequently adorned travelers' tales, and no
whit more remarkable.

199

SECOND VOYAGE

his wish. The said Taignoagny sent him word that
he would come the next day, and that he would bring
the lord Donnacona and him who had done him dis¬
pleasure; which he did not do, but was two days
without coming, during which time nobody came to
the ships from the said StadaconS, as had been the
custom, but fled from us as if we had wished to kill
them ; whereupon we perceived their knavery. And
because they were advised that those of Scitadin went
and came among us, and that we had abandoned to
them the bottom of the ship that we left , 1 in order
to have the old nails, they came from the said Sta-
dacon£ the third day ensuing to the other side of the
river, and the greatest part of them passed over in
little boats without difficulty; but the said Donna¬
cona would not pass over, and Taignoagny and Dom
Agaya were more than one hour parleying together
before they would pass over. But in the end they
passed over and came to speak to the said captain, and
the said Taignoagny prayed the said captain to be
willing to take and bring the said man into France,
which the said captain refused, saying that the king,
his master, had forbidden him from bringing either
man or woman into France, but rather two or three
little boys to learn the language, but that he would

1 The remains of this ship, the Petite Her mine, were discovered in
1843, in the river St. Charles, at the mouth of the rivulet known as the
Lai ret. These precious relics were found buried under five feet of mud,
and were divided into two portions, one of which was placed in the mu¬
seum of the Literary and Historical Society of Quebec, and destroyed by
fire in 1854. The other portion was sent to the museum at St. Malo,
where it now remains. For a particular account vide Le Canadien of
August 25, and the Quebec Gazette of August 30, 1843; Transactions of
the Quebec Literary and Historical Society for 1862; and Picturesque
Quebec, Le Moinc, Montreal, 1862, pp. 484-487.

200

SECOND VOYAGE

willingly carry him into the New Land, and that he
would put him on an island. These words the said
captain said to assure them, and to this end to bring
the lord Donnacona, who had remained on the other
side of the water, with which words the said Taig-
noagny was very happy, expecting never to return
into France, and he promised the said captain to come
back the next day, which was Holy-rood Day, and
bring the said lord Donnacona and all the people of
the said place.

HOW UPON HOLY-ROOD DAY THE CAPTAIN HAD A CROSS
PLANTED WITHIN OUR FORT, AND HOW THE,LORD DON¬
NACONA, TAIGNOAGNY, DOM AGAYA, AND THEIR BAND
CAME, AND OF THE TAKING OF THE SAID LORD

The third day of May, the day and festival of Holy-
rood, for the solemnity and festival the captain had
planted a fair cross of the height of about thirty-five
feet, under the cross-bar of which there was an es¬
cutcheon in wood with the arms of France. And
on it was written in Attic letters: ** Franciscus primus
Dei gratia Francorum rex regnat.” And this day
about noontime came a number of folks from Sta-
daconl, men, women, and children as well, who told
us that their lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, Dom
Agaya, and others, who were in his company, were
coming, for which we were glad, hoping to seize
them, who came about two hours after midday. And
when they had arrived before our ships our captain
only went to salute the said lord Donnacona, who
likewise gave him a great welcome, but always had
an eye toward the woods and a marvelous fear. Soon
201

SECOND VOYAGE

after Taignoagny arrived, who told the said lord Don-
nacona that he should not enter into the fort, where¬
upon fire was brought by one of their folks out of
the fort and lighted by the said lord. Our captain
prayed him to come and eat and drink in the ships,
as was the custom; and he likewise prayed the said
Taignoagny to do so, who said that they would very
soon come there, which they did, and entered into
the said fort. But our captain had previously been
advised by Dom Agaya that the said Taignoagny had
spoken ill and had told the said lord Donnacona that
he should not enter into the ships. Our said captain,
seeing this, came outside the picket where he was,
and saw that the women fled away by the advice of
the said Taignoagny, and that only the men remained,
who were in great number; and thereupon the said
captain ordered his men to take the said lord Don¬
nacona, Taignoagny, Dom Agaya, and two others of
the principal ones whom he pointed out, since they
made the others withdraw. Soon after the said lord
entered into the fort with the said captain, but all of
a sudden the said Taignoagny came to make him
come out.

Our captain, seeing that there was no other method,
began to cry that they should take them, at which
cry the men of the said captain sallied forth, who
took the said lord and those whom he had designed
to take. The said Canadians, seeing the said cap¬
tain, began to flee and run like sheep before the wolf,
some across the river, others among the woods, each
seeking his advantage. The said capture of the above
being effected, and all the others having withdrawn,
202

SECOND VOYAGE

the said lord and his companions were put in safe¬
keeping . 1

HOW THE CANADIANS CAME IN THE NIGHT BEFORE OUR
SHIPS TO SEEK THEIR FOLKS, DURING WHICH THEY
HOWLED AND CRIED LIKE WOLVES, AND THE PARLEYING
AND CONCLUSION WHICH THEY MADE THE NEXT DAY,
AND OF THE PRESENTS THAT THEY MADE TO OUR CAP¬
TAIN

The night being come, a great number of the peo¬
ple of the said Donnacona came opposite our ships,
the river between us, howling and screeching like
wolves all the night, crying without ceasing: Ago-
hanna thinking to speak to him, which the captain
would not permit at the time, nor in the morning
until about midday, wherefore they made us signs
that we had killed and hung them. And about the
hour of noon they returned afresh in as great num¬
ber as we had seen on the voyage at one view, keep¬
ing themselves hidden in the woods, save a few of
them, who cried and called the said Donnacona with
a high voice. Then the captain commanded to make
the said Donnacona mount aloft to speak to them.
And the said captain told him that he should have
good cheer, and that after having spoken to the King
of France his master, and recounted what he had
seen at the Saguenay and in other places, he should

1 The treachery practised upon these Indians we cannot adjust to pres¬
ent standards of equity. We must infer that he considered his intention to
treat them well, and in a short time return them to their country trans¬
formed into Christians capable of benefiting their countrymen, a sufficient
excuse for his conduct.

203

SECOND VOYAGE

return within ten or twelve moons, and that the king
would make him a great present; whereat the said
Donnacona was very glad, and in speaking to the
Others told it to them, who made three marvelous
cries in token of joy. And forthwith the said people
and Donnacona had between them many harangues
and discourses, which it is not possible to describe,
for want of understanding. Our captain told the
said Donnacona that they might safely come from
the other side in order to talk better together, and
that he would assure them, which the said Don¬
nacona told them; and upon this a boatful of the
chief people came aboard the said ships, who began
afresh to make many discourses, giving praise to the
said captain; and they made him a present of four-
and-twenty collars of esnogny, which is the greatest
treasure that they have in this world, for they esteem
it more than gold and silver.

After they had parleyed enough and chatted one
with another, and seen that there was no hope for
the said Donnacona to escape, and that it was neces¬
sary that he should go into France, he commanded
that they should fetch him provisions for to eat at
sea. Our captain made a present to the said Don¬
nacona of two frying-pans of brass, and of eight
hatchets and other trifling articles, such as knives and
paternosters, with which he was very happy in ap¬
pearance, and sent them to his wives and children.
Likewise the said captain gave to those who had
come to speak with the said Donnacona some small
presents, for which they greatly thanked the said
captain. At length they withdrew and went away
to their lodgings.

204

SECOND VOYAGE

HOW THE NEXT DAY, THE FIFTH DAY OF MAY, THE SAID

PEOPLE RETURNED TO SPEAK TO THEIR LORD, AND HOW

THERE CAME FOUR WOMEN ABOARD TO BRING HIM VICT¬
UALS

The next day, the fifth day of the said month, in
the early morning, the said people returned in great
number to speak to their lord, and sent a boat—
which they call in their language casnouy —in which
there were four women, without having any men in
it, for doubt that they had that we might retain
them, who brought store of victuals, to wit, great
millet (which is die corn on which they live), flesh,
fish, and other provisions after their manner, to whom,
after being come to the ships, the captain gave a good
recepdon, and Donnacona prayed the said captain
that he should tell the said women that within twelve
moons he would return, and that he would bring the
said Donnacona to Canada. This he said with the
object of contenting them, which the said captain
did, for which the said women made a great display
of joy, showing by signs and words to the said cap¬
tain that should he return and bring back the said
Donnacona, they would make him many presents.
Then each one of them gave to the said captain a
collar of esnogny, whereupon they went away to the
other side of the river, where all the people of the
said Stadaconi were, and withdrew, taking leave of
the said lord.

Saturday, the sixth day of the said month, we got
under way from the harbor of St. Croix, and came to
below the Isle of Orleans, about twelve leagues from
St. Croix, and on Sunday reached the Isle of Filberts,
205

SECOND VOYAGE

where we were until Monday, the sixteenth 1 of the
said month, leaving the waters to abate, the which
were too swift and dangerous for to fall down the said
river, and awaiting good weather—during which time
came many boats of the peoples, subjects to the said
Donnacona, who came from the river of Saguenay,
and when they were informed by Dom Agaya of the
taking of them and the style and manner of how
Donnacona was being carried into France, they were
much astonished, but did not cease to come along¬
side the ships to speak to the said Donnacona, who
told them that within twelve moons he would return,
and that he had good treatment with the captain and
crew; for which they all with one voice thanked the
said captain, and gave to the said Donnacona three
bundles of skins of beavers and sea-wolves, with a great
knife of red copper which came from the said Sague¬
nay, and other things. Likewise they gave to the said
captain a collar of esnogny, for which presents the
said captain caused to be given them ten or twelve
hatchets, with which they were greatly content and
happy, and thanked the said captain for them, then
went back. The passage is safer and better between
the north and the said island than toward the south,
because of the great number of shoals, banks, and rocks
which are there, and also because there is little depth.

The next day , 2 the sixteenth day of the said month
of May, we got under way from the said Isle of Fil¬
berts, and came to lie at an island which is about fifteen
leagues from the said Isle of Filberts, which is in size
about five leagues long. And we passed that day there
in order to spend the night, hoping the next day to pass

1 So in all the manuscript*, but should be the 15th. Ramusio and Lea*
carbot omit the day of the week.

2 That is, the 16th, which was Tuesday.

206

SECOND VOYAGE

the danger of the Saguenay, which was great. In the
evening we went to the said island, where we found
a great number of hares, of the which we got a quan¬
tity, and therefore we named it the Isle of Hares. 1
And that night the wind came contrary and in such
fury that it behooved us to put back to the Isle of
Filberts, from which we had set out, because there was
no other passage between the said islands; and there
we were until the twenty-first 3 day of the said month,
when the wind came good and we made so much of
our time that we passed as far as to Honguedo, be¬
tween the Isle of the Assumption and the said
Honguedo, which passage had not heretofore been
discovered. And we made her go as far as athwart
Cape Pratto, which is the beginning of the Bay
Chaleur. And because the wind was good and con¬
venient we stood on day and night, and the next day
fetched the waist of the Isle of Brion, which we wished
to do for to shorten our way. And the two lands are
bearing southeast and northwest a quarter east and
west, and it is fifty leagues between them. The said
island is in forty-seven degrees and a half of latitude.

Thursday, the twenty-sixth 8 day of the said month,
the day and feast of the Ascension of our Lord, we
crossed over to a land and ridge of low sands which
lie to the southwest of the said Isle of Brion about
eight leagues, above which there are large lands full
of trees, and there is an inclosed sea to which we did
not see any entrance nor opening for to enter into
the sea. 4 And Friday, the 27th, because the wind
changed toward the coast, we returned to the said Isle

1 *• L’ytle es Lievrea/* Hire Island, According to Hakluyt.

3 Lescarbot omits the date altogether.

* A perpetuation of former error, Thursday being 25th, Friday 26th.

* This was Grindstone Island, one of the Magdalena.

207

SECOND VOYAGE

of Brion, where we were until the ist of June, and
went to fetch a high land, which lay to the southeast
of the said island, which appeared to us to be an
island, 1 and ranged it about twenty-two leagues and
a half, making which way we had knowledge of three
other islands, 2 which lay toward the sands, and the
said sands appeared likewise to be an island, and the
said land, which is high and level land, to be the main¬
land felling off to the northwest. After the which
things were known we returned to the cape of the said
land, which forms itself into two or three capes won¬
drous high, and a great depth of water, 3 and the tide
so swift that more is not possible.

We named this cape Cape Lorraine, 4 which is
forty-six degrees and a half, to the south of which
cape there is a low land and seemingly some river
entrance, but there is no harbor of worth. Above
which lands toward the south lies another headland,
which we named Cape St. Paul, 5 which is in forty-
seven degrees and a quarter.

1 This was the high land east of Grosse Isle.

2 These islands were Coffin. Alright, and Entry.

3 This is the East Cape of the Magdalens, which has, when ap¬
proached from a certain direction, the appearance of being three islands;
hence they are frequently called by fishermen the Junks of Pork. Sailing
round the cape toward the southeast, Coffin, Alright, and Entry Island
“ toward the sands’* are plainly visible.

4 There is much confusion in Cartier’s account after leaving the Isle of
Brion. Bourinot and other writers suppose his «• Cap de Lorraine” to
have been North Cape on the Cape Breton shore; but this view cannot be
reconciled with the account. Hakluyt gives the latitude as forty-seven and
one half degrees, which is more nearly correct if Cartier's « f Cap de Lor¬
raine” was Cape Ray; but it was more likely Cheticamp, and the latitude
Cartier gives, namely, forty-six and one half degrees, is evidence of this.
It is probable that he was a few miles east-northeast of the northern extremity
of Cape Breton Island when he look his latitude.

8 The northern extremity of Cape Breton Island. Cartier probably
applied the name **Cap de Sainct Paul” to the headland comprising Cape
208

SECOND VOYAGE

Sunday, the fourth day of the said month, the day
and feast of Pentecost, we had knowledge of the coast
of the east-southeast of New Land, which was about
twenty-two leagues from the said cape, and because
the wind was contrary we made for a harbor, which we
named the harbor of St. Esprit, 1 until Tuesday, when
we got under way from the said harbor and ranged the
said coast as far as to the Isles St. Pierre, 3 making
which way, we found along the said coast many very
dangerous islands* and shoals, being in the course
east-southeast and west-northwest at two, three, and
four leagues into the sea. We were at the said Isles
St. Pierre, where we found a number of ships both
of France and Brittany, from the day of St. Barnabas,
the eleventh day of June, until the sixteenth day of
the said month, when we got under way from the said
Isles St. Pierre and came to Cape Race and entered
into a harbor named Rougnouse, 4 where we took wood
and water for to cross the sea, and left there one of
our boats. And we got under way from the said
harbor Monday, the nineteenth day of the said month,
and with good weather navigated in such sort by sea

St. Lawrence and North Cape. There is an evident error in faying “Above
which lands toward the s»utb” instead of toward the wrtb.

1 “Hablede Sainct Eaperit.’" Probably Le Poil Bay, possibly Conoir
Bay. An old mariner thoroughly acquainted with the coast thinks that a
stranger would be likely to seek shelter in the latter bay. Le Poil is, how-
ever, much the most conspicuous bay on this part of the Newfoundland
coast. That one sailing in die vicinity would most naturally seek it for safety
is the opinion of Mr. Hyndman, late of the Royal Navy, who some years
since made a survey of Le Poil for the British Admiralty.

1 This is the present St. Piene, which, with the adjoining island of
Miquelon, is still occupied by a colony loyal to France.

1 The Rameas and Penguin islands.

* ** Rougnouse,’* a name found variously spelled on maps since Car¬
der's time. It is now known as Renews, a corruption of the name used
by him.

<4

209

SECOND VOYAGE

that the sixth day of July, 1536, we reached the harbor
of St. Malo, by the grace of the Creator, whom we
pray, making an end of our navigation, to grant us his
grace, and Paradise at the end. Amen.

VOCABULARY
OF THE

NATIVES OF CANADA

The following is the language of the countries and
kingdoms of Hochelaga and Canada, otherwise called
by us New France.

First their numbers in counting.

1 = Segada.

2 = Tigneny.

3 “ Asche.

4 = Honnacon.

5 = Ouiscon.

6 = Indaic.

7 = Ayaga.

8 = Addegue.

9 = Madellon.
10 = Assen.

The following are names of parts of the human body.

The head,
The forehead,
The eyes,

210

Aggoursy.

Hetguenyascon.

Hegata.

SECOND VOYAGE

The ears,

The mouth,
The teeth,
The tongue,
The throat.
The chin,
The face.

The hair,

The arms.
The armpits,
The ribs,

The stomach,
The belly,
The thighs,
The knees.
The legs,

The feet,

Ahontascon.

Escahe.

Esgougay.

Osuache.

Agouhon.

Hebehin.

Hogouascon.

Aganiscon.

Aiayascon.

Hetnanda.

Aissonne.

Aggoascon.

Eschehenda.

Hetnegradascon.

Agochinegodascon.

Agouguenehonde.

Ohchidascon.

The hands,

Agnascon.

The fingers.

Agenoga.

The nails,

Agedascon.

The genital organ (man).

Agnascon.

The genital organ (woman

), Cnastaigne.

The heard,

The beard of the genital

Ostone.

organ,

Aggousson.

The testicles,

Xista.

A man,

Aguehan.

A woman,

Agruette.

A boy,

Addegesta.

A girl,

Agnyaquesta.

A little child,

Exiasta.

A dress,

Cabata.

A waistcoat,

Coja.

Socks,

Henondoua.

Shoes,

Atha.

Shirts,

Anigoua.

A hat,

Castona.

2 X 1

SECOND VOYAGE

They call their com,
Bread,

Water,

Flesh,

Fruits of bushes,

Little nuts,

Fish,

Plums,

Figs.

Grapes,

Nuts,

A hen,

A lamprey,

A salmon,

A whale,

An eel,

A squirrel,

A snake,

Turtles,

Olives,

They call wood,

Leaves of trees,

They call their God,
Give me a drink,

Give me breakfast,

Give me supper,

Let us go to bed,

Good day.

Let us play,

Come and speak to me,
Look at me.

Be quiet,

Let us go to the boat,
That is worthless,

Give me a knife,

A hatchet,

A bow,

An arrow,

Ozify.

Carraconny.

Ame.

Quahoachon.

Aesquesgoua.

Undegonaha.

Queion.

Honnesta.

Absconda.

Ozaha.

Quaheya.

Sahomgahoa.

Zysto.

Ondaccon.

Ainnehonne.

Esgneny.

Cajognen.

Undeguezy.

Heuleuzonne.

Houocohonda.

Conda.

Honga.

Cudouagny.
Quazahoa quea.
Quazahoa quascahoa.
Quazahoa quat frean.
Quasigno agnydahoa.

Aig>y- '

Quasigno caudy.
Asigni quadadia.
Quatgathoma.

Aista.

Quasigno casnouy.
Sahanty quahouquey.
Quazahoa aggoheda.
Addogne.

Ahena.

Quahetan.

212

SECOND VOYAGE

Some feathers,

Let us go to the chase,

A stag,

A deer,

A hare,

A dog,

Geese,

The road,

They call the seed of cu¬
cumbers and melons,
When they wish to say
to-morrow they say,
When they wish to say
good-by to any one
they say,

To sing,

To laugh,

To cry.

The sky,

The earth.

The sun,

The moon.

The stars,

The wind,

The sea,

Fresh water,

The waves of the sea,

An island,

A mountain,

Ice,

Snow,

Cold,

Warm,

My friend,

To run.

Fire,

Smoke,

The smoke hurts my eyes,

Heccon.

Quasigno donassent.
Aiounesta.
Asquenoudo.
Sourhamda.

Aggayo.

Sadeguenda.

Adde.

Casconda.

Achide.

H edgaguehanyga.

Theguehoaca.

Cahezem.

Agguenda.

Quenhia.

Damga.

Ysnay.

Assomaha.

Siguehoham.

Cahena.

Agongasy.

Arne.

Coda.

Cohena.

Ogacha.

Honnesca.

Canisa.

Athau.

Odayan.

Agniase.

Thodoathady.

Asista.

Quea.

Quea quanoague eguta.

213

SECOND VOYAGE

Such a one is dead, Camedane.

A house, Quanocha.

They call their beans, Sahe.

They call a town, Canada.

When they wish to speak

ill of some one they call Agojuda, which is to say
him, w wicked ” and " traitor.”

Villain, Aggousay.

They call the herb of
which they use in their
pipes during the win ter, Quiecta.

There aregreat rats in the
said country which are
as large as rabbits, the
which smell of musk.

and they call them.

Houtthe.

When a person is so old
that he cannot walk

they call him,

Agoudesta.

My father,

Addathy.

My mother,

Adanahoe.

My brother,

Addagnin.

My sister,

Addasene.

Great,

Estahezy.

Small,

Estahagza.

Big,

Houganda.

Hail,

Houcquehin.

When they wish to make
an exclamation they

say,

Aggondec.

My cousin.

Hegay.

My nephew,

Ynadin.

My wife.

Ysaa.

My child,

Aguo.

Note that their lord named Donnacona has been to
a land where they are, a moon going with their boats

214

SECOND VOYAGE

from Canada to the said land, in which there grows
much cinnamon and cloves. 1

They call the said cloves, Adhotathny.

Cinnamon, Canonotha. 2

The following additional words are to be found in
MS. No. 5644.

To dance.

Great porpoise,
Common grass,

To walk,

Whence came you ?
Give this to some one.
Keep this for me.
Where is he gone ?
Shut the door,

Go fetch some water.
Go fetch some one,
The evening.

The night.

The day.

Thegoaca.

Adguyensce.

Hanneda.

Quedaque.

Canada undagneny.

Taquenonde.

Sodanadega mesganiy.

Quanehoesnon.

Asnodyan.

Sagethemme.

Acnedascone.

Angau.

Auhena.

Adeyahon.

1 Donnacona was authority for this statement and claimed to know the
land of spices. It is possible that the savage, noticing the eagerness with
which the Frenchman inquired about the pungent bark and dried bud
which he displayed, amiably assented to an untruth; probably, however,
he misunderstood the nature of the things sought, and being acquainted
with the aromatic bark of the S*ss*fr*s ojfuinale, also precious to the Eu¬
ropean, and having seeds somewhat similar in appearance to the clove, he
unintentionally misled him.

* “Cannotha** in the Relation Originale.

THIRD VOYAGE
1540

THE THIRD VOYAGE OF
DISCOVERY
MADE BY

CAPTAIN JACQUES CARTIER,

> 54 °.

UNTO THE COUNTRIES OF CANADA,
HOCHELAGA, AND SAGUENAY

From Hakluyt

K ING FRANCIS I, having heard the report
of Captain Cartier, his pilot-general, in his
two former voyages of discovery, as well by
writing as by word of mouth, touching that which he
had found and seen in the Western parts discovered by
him in the parts of Canada and Hochelaga, and having
also seen and talked with the people which the said
Cartier had brought out of those countries, whereof
one was king of Canada, whose name was Donnacona,
and others, which after that they had been a long time
in France and Brittany were baptized at their own
desire and request, and died in the said country of
Brittany. 1 And albeit his Majesty was advertised by
the said Cartier of the death and decease of all the
people which were brought over by him (which were
ten in number), saving one little girl about ten years
old, 2 yet he resolved to send the said Cartier, his
pilot, thither again, with John Francis de la Rocque,

1 "Britain” in the original version.

* This was without doubt the daughter of the chief of Achelaiy. Antta ,
p. 156, note 2. The Indian village, it is believed, was situated at Point
Platon in the parish of Lotbiniere.

219

THIRD VOYAGE

Knight, Lord of Roberval, 1 whom he appointed his
lieutenant and governor in the countries of Canada
and Hochelaga, and the said Cartier captain-general
and leader of the ships, that they might discover more
than was done before in the former voyages, and at¬
tain, if it were possible, unto the knowledge of the
country of Saguenay, whereof the people brought by
Cartier, as is declared, made mention unto the king
that there were great riches and very good countries.
And the king caused a certain sum of money to be
delivered to furnish out the said voyage with five ships,
which thing was performed by the said Monsieur
Roberval and Cartier. After that they had agreed
together to rig the said five ships at St. Malo in
Brittany, where the two former voyages had been pre¬
pared and set forth. And the said Monsieur Roberval
sent Cartier thither for the same purpose. And after
that Cartier had caused the said five ships to be built
and furnished and set in good order. Monsieur Rober¬
val came down to St. Malo and found the ships fallen
down to the road, with their yards across, full ready
to depart and set sail, staying for nothing else but the
coming of the general and the payment of the fur¬
niture. And because Monsieur Roberval, the king's
lieutenant, had not as yet his artillery, powder and
munitions, and other things necessary come down,
which he had provided for the voyage, in the coun¬
tries of Champagne and Normandy, and because the
said things were very necessary, and that he was loath
to depart without them, he determined to depart from

1 Roberval was of Vimeux, which was a part of aocient Picardy, be¬
tween the Brcale and the Somme. He was a man of great influence, not
only there, but at court, where he was popularly known as “le petit roi
de Vimeux/'

220

THIRD VOYAGE

St. Malo to Rouen, and to prepare a ship or two at
Honfleur, whither he thought his things were come,
and that the said Cartier should depart with the five
ships which he had furnished and should go before;
considering also that the said Cartier had received
letters from the king, whereby he did expressly charge
him to depart and set sail immediately upon the sight
and receipt thereof, on pain of incurring his dis¬
pleasure, and to lay all the fault on him. And after
the conclusion of these things, and the said Monsieur
Roberval had taken muster and view of the gentle¬
men, soldiers, and mariners which were retained and
chosen for the performance of the said voyage, he gave
unto Captain Cartier full authority to depart and go
before, and to govern all things as if he had been
there in person, and himself departed to Honfleur to
make his further preparation. After these things thus
despatched, the wind coming fair, the foresaid five
ships set sail together, well frirnished and victualed
for two years, the 23d of May, 1540. 1 And we sailed
so long with contrary winds and continual torments,
which fell out by reason of our late departure, that
we were on the sea with our said five ships full three
months before we could arrive at the port and haven
of Canada, without ever having in all that time thirty
hours of good wind to serve us to keep our right
course; so that our five ships through those storms
lost company one of another, all save two that kept
together,—to wit, that wherein the captain was, and

1 Dionne (La Nouvelle Prance, Quebec, 1891, p. 2$ et stq.) «ayi that
Cartier sailed with only three vessels, and quotes Rame (Documents In£-
dits, p. 29) to sustain his view; but he evidently loses sight of the two ships
which Cartier sent back under the command of Marc Jalobert and Etienne
Nouel, which were employed six months going and returning.

THIRD VOYAGE

the other wherein went the Viscount of Beaupr6,—
until at length, at the end of one month, we met all
together at the haven of Carpunt 1 in Newfoundland.
But the length of time which we were in passing
between Brittany and Newfoundland was the cause
that we stood in great need of water, because of the
cattle, as well goats, hogs, as other beasts which we
carried for breed in the country, which we were
constrained to water with cider and other drink.
Now, therefore, because we were the space of three
months in sailing on the sea, and staying in New¬
foundland, waiting for Monsieur Roberval, and taking
in of fresh water and other things necessary, we ar¬
rived not before the haven of St. Croix in Canada
(where in the former voyage we had remained eight
months) until the twenty-third day of August. In
which place the people of the country came to our
ships, making show of joy for our arrival, and,
namely, he came thither which had the rule and
government of the country of Canada, named Ago¬
hanna, which was appointed king there by Donna-
cona, when in the former voyage we carried him into
France. And he came to the captain’s ship with six
or seven boats, and with many women and children.
And after the said Agohanna had inquired of the cap¬
tain where Donnacona and the rest were, the captain
answered him that Donnacona was dead in France,
and that his body rested in the earth, and that the
rest stayed there as great lords, and were married, and
would not return back into their country. The said
Agohanna made no show of anger at all these speeches,
and I think he took it so well because he remained

1 “Ripont” in Relation Originate. Antea , p. So, note t.

222

THIRD VOYAGE

lord and governor of the country by the death of
the said Donnacona. After which conference the
said Agohanna took a piece of tanned leather of a
yellow skin edged about with esnogny, which is their
riches and the thing which they esteem most precious,
as we esteem gold, which was upon his head instead
of a crown, and he put the same on the head of our
captain, and took from his wrists two bracelets of
esnogny, and put them upon the captain’s arms, coll¬
ing him about the neck, and showing unto him
great signs of joy — which was all dissimulation, as
afterward it well appeared. The captain took his
said crown of leather and put it again upon his head,
and gave him and his wives certain small presents,
signifying unto him that he had brought certain new
things, which afterward he would bestow upon him,
for which the said Agohanna thanked the captain.
And after that he had made him and his company
eat and drink, they departed and returned to the shore
with their boats. After which things the said cap*
tain went with two of his boats up the river, beyond
Canada and the port of St. Croix, to view a haven
and a small river, 1 which is about four leagues
higher; which he found better and more commodious
to ride in and lay his ships than the former. And
therefore he returned and caused all his ships to be
brought before the said river, and at a low water
he caused his ordnance to be planted to place his ships
in more safety, which he meant to keepand stay in the
country, which were three; which he did the day fol¬
lowing, and the rest remained in the road in the midst
of the river, in which place the victuals and other fur-

1 This is the Ctpc Rouge River.

223

THIRD VOYAGE

niturc were discharged which they had brought, from
the 26th of August until the 2d of September, what
time they departed to return for St. Malo, in which
ships he sent back Marc Jalobert, his brother-in-law,
and Steven NouSl, 1 his nephew, skilful and excellent
pilots, with letters unto the king, and to advertise him
what had been done and found, and how Monsieur de
Roberval was not yet come, and that he feared that
by occasion of contrary winds and tempests he was
driven back again into France.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE AFORESAID RIVER AND HAVEN

The said river is small, not past fifty paces broad, and
ships drawing three fathoms water may enter in at a
full sea; and at a low water there is nothing but a
channel of a foot deep or thereabout. On both sides
of the said river there are very good and fair grounds,
full of as fair and mighty trees as any be in the world,
and divers sorts, which are above ten fathoms higher
than the rest; and there is one kind of tree above
three fathoms about, which they in the country call
hanneda , which hath the most excellent virtue of all
the trees of the world, whereof I will make mention
hereafter. Moreover, there are great store of oaks,
the most excellent that ever I saw in my life, which
were so laden with mast that they cracked again. Be¬
sides this there are fairer arables, 1 cedars, beeches, and
other trees, than grow in France. And hard unto
this wood on the south side the ground is all covered
with vines, which we found laden with grapes as
black as mulberries; but they be not so kind as those

1 Etienne Nouel, ton of his sister Jehanne Cartier.

8 Arables. More properly, krabUt —the Aar i*ccb*rinuM t or sugar-maple.

224

THIRD VOYAGE

of France, because the vines be not tilled and because
they grow of their own accord. Moreover, there are
many whitethorns which bear leaves as big as oak-
leaves and fruit like unto medlars . 1 To be short, it
is as good a country to plow and manure as a man
should find or desire. We sowed seeds here of our
country, as cabbages, navews, lettuce, and others,
which grew and sprung up out of the ground in eight
days. The mouth of the river is toward the south,
and it windeth northward like unto a snake; and at
the mouth of it toward the east there is a high and
steep cliff, where we made a way in manner of a pair
of stairs, and aloft we made a fort to keep the nether
fort and the ships, and all things that might pass as well
by the great as by this small river . 2 Moreover, a man
may behold a great extension of ground apt for tillage,
straight and handsome, and somewhat inclining to¬
ward the south, as easy to be brought to tillage as I
would desire, and very well replenished with fair oaks
and other trees of great beauty, no thicker than the
forests of France. Here we set twenty men to work,
which in one day had labored about an acre and a
half of the said ground, and sowed it part with navews,
or small turnips, which at the end of eight days, as I
said before, sprang out of the earth. And upon that
high cliff we found a fair fountain very near the said

1 Medlar (the Mesfilus Germanua). Its fruit is small and brown,
similar to the thorn-apple, and is considered best when near the point of
decay; hence Shakspere in As You Like It, Act III, Scene ii:

“ Y« ’ll be rotten ere you be half ripe, and that ’■ the right riitue of the medlar,”

a The place selected by Cartier for his fort was at the mouth of the
Cape Rouge River, on the high point now called Redclyffe. Recent ex¬
cavations have disclosed a baker's oven, within which was the wood half
burned, as though, says Ferland, •• the fire had been suddenly extin¬
guished." Cf. Picturesque Quebec, Le Moine, Montreal, 1882, p. 399
el sef.

»s

225

THIRD VOYAGE

fort, adjoining whereunto we found good store of
stones, which we esteemed to be diamonds. On the
other side of the said mountain and at the foot thereof,
which is toward the great river, is all along a goodly
mine of the best iron in the world, and it reacheth
even hard unto our fort, and the sand which we
tread on is perfect refined mine, ready to be put into
the furnace. And on the water's side we found cer¬
tain leaves of fine gold as thick as a man's nail. And
westward of the said river there are, as hath been
said, many fair trees, and toward the water a goodly
meadow full of as fair and goodly grass as ever I saw
in any meadow in France; and between the said
meadow and the wood are great store of vines, and
beyond the said vines the land groweth full of hemp
which groweth of itself, which is as good as possibly
may be seen, and as strong. And at the end of the
said meadow within a hundred paces there is a rising
ground which is of a kind of slatestone, black and
thick, wherein are veins of mineral matter, which
show like gold and silver; and throughout all that
stone there are great grains of the said mine. And
in some places we have found stones like diamonds,
the most fair, polished, and excellently cut that it is
possible for a man to see; when the sun shineth upon
them, they glister as it were sparkles of fire . 1

HOW AFTER THE DEPARTURE OF THE TWO SHIPS WHICH
WERE SENT BACK INTO BRITTANY, AND THAT THE FORT
WAS BEGUN TO BE BUILDED, THE CAPTAIN PREPARED TWO
BOATS TO CO UP THE GREAT RIVER TO DISCOVER THE
PASSAGE OF THE THREE SAULTS OR FALLS OF THE RIVER

The said captain having despatched two ships to re¬
turn to carry news, according as he had in charge

1 These sparkling crystals are still to be seen where Cartier saw them,
226

THIRD VOYAGE

from the king, and that the fort was begun to be
builded for preservation of their victuals and other
things, determined with the Viscount of Beaupri, and
other gentlemen, masters, and pilots chosen for counsel,
to make a voyage with two boats furnished with men
and victuals to go as far as Hochelaga, of purpose to
view and understand the fashion of the saults of water,
which are to be passed to go to Saguenay, that he
might be the readier in the spring to pass farther, and
in the winter time to make all things needful in a readi¬
ness for their business. The foresaid boats being made
ready, the captain and Martin de Painpont,with other
gentlemen and the remnant of the mariners, departed
from the said place of Charlesbourg Royal the seventh
day of September in the year aforesaid 1540, 1 And
the Viscount of Beauprl stayed behind for the guard¬
ing and government of all things in the fort. And as
they went up the river the captain went to see the
lord of Hochelay, 2 which dwelleth between Canada
and Hochelaga,which in the former voyage had given
unto the said captain a little girl, and had oftentimes
informed him of the treasons which Taignoagny and
Dom Agaya (whom the captain in his former voyage
had carried into France) would have wrought against

and are a kind of quartz, or rock-crystal. Champlain clears up the mys¬
tery of Cartier’s application of the title « diamonds ” to these crystals by
the use of a phrase. On the map of Quebec he designates a place as
“ a gravelly shore where a quantity of diamonds are found better than those
of Alanson.” The diamonds of Alenin, which were precisely like the
crystals seen by Carder, though not the true diamond of Africa and Brazil,
were extensively used in jewelry, and were worn by the wealthy. It
seems probable that Cartier was deceived with respect to the “leaves of
fine gold ” which he says he found. That the gold which he exhibited to
Roberval, and which was tested, was genuine there can be little doubt.
Auriferous deposits are found in the Chaudiere district, Quebec, partly in
the form of drift and partly in quartz veins cutting slate.

1 1540. This date should be 1541.

* So in the narrative : the same as Achelaiy.

227

THIRD VOYAGE

him. In regard of which his courtesy the said captain
would not pass by without visiting of him, and to let
him understand that the captain thought himself be¬
holden unto him, he gave unto him two young boys,
and left them with him to learn their language, and
bestowed upon him a cloak of Paris red, which cloak
was set with yellow and white buttons of tin, and
small bells. And withal he gave him two basins of
latten 1 and certain hatchets and knives; whereat the
said lord seemed highly to rejoice, and thanked the
captain. This done, the captain and his company
departed from that place. And we sailed with so pros¬
perous a wind that we arrived the eleventh day of the
month at the first sault of water, which is two leagues
distant from the town of Tutonaguy. And after we
were arrived there we determined to go and pass as
far up as it was possible with one of the boats, and
that the other should stay there until it returned; and
we double-manned her to row up against the course
or stream of the said sault. And after we had passed
some part of the way from our other boat, we found
bad ground and great rocks and so great a current
that we could not possibly pass any farther with our
boat. And the captain resolved to go by land to see
the nature and fashion of the sault. And after that
we were come on shore we found hard by the water¬
side a way and beaten path going toward the said
saults, by which we took our way. And on the said
way, and soon after, we found an habitation of people
which made us great cheer and entertained us very

1 "Lftton.” A composition of two thirds copper ind one third zinc,
sometimes called ctttvre jaune by the French to distinguish it from (uwre
rouge, or pure copper.

228

THIRD VOYAGE

friendly. And after that he had signified unto them
that we were going toward the saults, and that we
desired to go to Saguenay, four young men went
along with us to show us the way, and they brought
us so far that we came to another village or habita¬
tion of good people, which dwell over against the
second sault, which came and brought us of their
victuals, as pottage and fish, and offered us of the
same. After that the captain had inquired of them,
as well by signs as words, how many more saults we
had to pass to go to Saguenay, and what distance and
way it was thither, this people showed us and gave
us to understand that we were at the second sault,
and that there was but one more to pass, that the
river was not navigable to go to Saguenay, and that
the said sault was but a third part farther than we had
traveled, showing us the same with certain little sticks,
which they laid upon the ground in a certain distance,
and afterward laid other small branches between both,
representing the saults. 1 And by the said mark, if
their saying be true, it can be but six leagues by land
to pass the said saults.

Hereafter folioweth the figure of the three saults.

After that we had been advertised by the said peo¬
ple of the things above-mentioned, both because the
day was far spent and we had neither drunk nor eaten

1 This mi a favorite method with the savages of conveying informa¬
tion. Champlain, when he visited the Saco Indians, says that “they
placed six pebbles at equal distances apart, giving me to understand by
this, that these marks were as many chiefs and tribes,** and Frobisher
mentions the use of sticks by a captive to inform his people of his captivity.
Vidt Voyages of the English Nation, etc., Hakluyt, vol. i, p. 156;
(Envies de Champlain, Laverdiere, p. 206.

*** 229

THIRD VOYAGE

the same day, we concluded to return unto our boats,
and we came thither, where we found great store of
people, to the number of four hundred persons or
thereabout, which seemed to give us very good enter¬
tainment and to rejoice of our coming. And there¬
fore our captain gave each of them certain small
trifles, as combs, brooches of tin and copper, and other
small toys, and unto the chief men every one his
little hatchet and hook, whereat they made certain
cries and ceremonies of joy. But a man must not
trust them for all their fair ceremonies and signs of
joy, for if they had thought they had been too strong
for us, then would they have done their best to have
killed us, as we understood afterward. This being
done, we returned with our boats and passed by the
dwelling of the lord of Hochelay, with whom the
captain had left the two youths as he came up the river,
thinking to have found him; but he could find no¬
body save one of his sons, who told the captain that
he was gone to Maisouna, as our boys also told us,
saying that it was two days since he departed. But
in truth he was gone to Canada to conclude with
Agohanna 1 what they should do against us. And when
we were arrived at our fort, we understood by our
people that the savages of the country came not any
more about our fort, as they were accustomed, to bring
us fish, and that they were in a wonderful doubt and
fear of us. 3 Wherefore our captain, having been

1 “Agona” in the narrative, a contraction common to the time.

* These savages, who had before received the French so kindly, could
not be expected to forget the treachery by which they had lost their king
and friends. Mather, alluding to a similar piece of treachery by an Eng¬
lish captain some lime before the arrival of the Pilgrim colony, declares
that it “laid the foundation of grievous annoyances to all the English cn-
230

THIRD VOYAGE

advertised, by some of our men which had been at
Stadaconl to visit them, that there was a wonderful
number of the country people assembled together,
caused all things in our fortress to be set in good
order, etc.

(The rest of this voyage is wanting.)

deavors of settlement!, especially in the northern parts of the land, for
several yean ensuing. The Indians would never forget or forgive this in¬
jury; but when the English afterwards came upon this coast, in their fish*
ing voyages, they were soil assaulted in a hostile manner, to the killing
and wounding of many poor men by the angry natives, in revenge of the
wrong that had been done them; and some intended Plantations were
hereby utterly nipt in the bud.” Vide Magnalia Christi Americana,
Mather, Hartford, 185$, p. 55.

231

VOYAGE OF
ROBERVAL

1542

THE VOYAGE OF
JOHN FRANCIS DE LA ROCQUE,
KNIGHT, LORD OF ROBERVAL,

TO THE COUNTRIES OF CANADA, SAGUENAY, AND
HOCHELAGA, WITH THREE TALL SHIPS AND TWO
HUNDRED PERSONS, BOTH MEN, WOMEN,

AND CHILDREN, BEGUN IN APRIL, 1542,

IN WHICH PARTS HE REMAINED
THE SAME SUMMER AND
ALL THE NEXT WINTER
From Hakluyt

S IR JOHN FRANCIS DE LA ROCQUE,
Knight, Lord of Roberval, appointed by the
king as his lieutenant-general in the countries
of Canada, Saguenay, and Hochelaga, furnished three
tall ships, chiefly at the king’s cost, and having in
his fleet two hundred persons, as well men as women,
accompanied with divers gentlemen of quality, as,
namely, with Monsieur Sainterre, 1 his lieutenant,
L’Espiney,his ensign, Captain Guinecourt, Monsieur de
Noir Fontaine,Dieu Lamont, Frete,La Brosse, Francis
de Mire, La Salle, and Royeze,and Jean Alphonse of
Saintonge, an excellent pilot, set sail from Rochelle,
the 16th of April, 1542.* The same day, about noon,

1 This wu Paul d’Auxilhon, Seigneur de St. Nectaire, which is a small
Tillage in the Puy-de-Dome.

* Dionne records it as his belief that Roberval sailed from Rochelle
three months after Cartier, and that, not thinking it prudent to attempt to
reach the St. Lawrence so late in the season, he made land at Cape Breton,
which he explored, and then set sail for France, which he reached about
Christmas, 1541. Here he met Jalobert and Nouel, who had been sent

235

VOYAGE OF ROBERVAL

we came athwart of Chef de Boys, where we were
enforced to stay the night following. On Monday,
the 17th of the said month, we departed from Chef
de Boys. The wind served us notably for a time, but
within a few days it came quite contrary, which hin¬
dered our journey for a long space, for we were sud¬
denly enforced to turn back and to seek harbor in
Belle Isle, on the coast of Brittany, 1 where we stayed
so long and had such contrary weather by the way that
we could not reach Newfoundland until the 7th of
June.

The 8 th of this month we entered into the road
of St. John, where we found seventeen ships of fishers.
While we made somewhat long abode here, Jacques
Cartier and his company, returning from Canada,
whither he was sent with five sails the year before,
arrived in the very same harbor. Who, after he had done
his duty to our general, told him that he had brought
certain diamonds and a quantity of gold ore which
was found in the country; which ore the Sunday next
ensuing was tried in a furnace and found to be good.

Furthermore, he informed the general that he could
not with his small company withstand the savages,

home by Cartier to obtain provisions and information concerning Rober-
val's failure to join him, and having revictnaled his ships again, sailed for
the St. Lawrence in the spring of 1542 as here recorded. This belief is
based upon the statement of Lescarbot that Roberval sailed in I $41 and
built a fort at Cape Breton. Charlevoix says: *'Roberval built a fort some
say on the St. Lawrence River, others on Cape Breton Island.** This is
improbable, for if it were true it is hardly possible that an act so important
would not be mentioned in the history of Roberval* s doings. Vidt His>
toire de la Nouvelle France, Lescarbot, Paris, 1866, tome ii, p. 391.
Cf. Lea Voyages de la Nouvelle France, Champlain, Paris, 1632, p. 294;
Premiere fitablisaement de la Foy, etc.. New York, 1881, tome i, p. 57;
Histoire et Description Gen&ale de la Nouvelle France, Charlevoix, Paris,
1744, tome i, p. 32.

1 This is Belleiale en Mer, on the coast of France, eight miles south of
Quiberon Point.

236

VOYAGE OF ROBERVAL

which went about daily to annoy him, and this was
the cause of his return into France. Nevertheless he
and his company commended the country to be very
rich and fruitful. But when our general, being fur¬
nished with sufficient forces, commanded him to go
back again with him, he and his company, moved as
it seems with ambition, because they would have all
the glory of the discovery of those parts themselves,
stole privily away the next night from us, and, with¬
out taking their leaves, departed home for Brittany.

We spent the greatest part of June in this harbor
of St. John, partly in furnishing ourselves with fresh
water, whereof we stood in very great need by the
way, and partly in composing and taking up a quar¬
rel between some of our countrymen and certain
Portugals. At length, about the last of the aforesaid
month, we departed hence and entered into the Grand
Bay, and passed by the Isle of Ascension, 1 and finally
arrived four leagues westward of the Isle of Orleans.
In this place we found a convenient harbor for our
shipping, where we cast anchor, went ashore with
our people, and chose out a convenient place to for¬
tify ourselves in, fit to command the main river, and
of strong situation against all invasion of enemies.
Thus toward the end of July we brought our victuals
and other munitions and provisions on shore, and
began to travail in fortifying ourselves.

OF THE FORT OF FRANCE ROY, AND THAT WHICH WAS
DONE THERE

Having described the beginning, the midst, and the
end of the voyage made by Monsieur Roberval in

1 The island of Anticosti.

*37

VOYAGE OF ROBERVAL

the countries of Canada, Hochelaga, Saguenay, and
other countries in the west parts, he sailed so far (as
is declared in other books) that he arrived in the
said country, accompanied with two hundred persons,
soldiers, mariners, and common people, with all fur¬
niture necessary for a fleet. The said general at his
first arrival built a fair fort, near and somewhat west¬
ward above Canada, 1 which is very beautiful to be¬
hold, and of great force, situated upon an high moun¬
tain, wherein there were two courts of buildings, a
great tower, and another of forty or fifty feet long,
wherein there were divers chambers, a hall, a kitchen,
houses of office, cellars high and low, and near unto
it were an oven, and mills, and a stove to warm men
in, and a well before the house. And the building
was situated upon the great river of Canada called
France Prime by Monsieur Roberval. There was also
at the foot of the mountain another lodging, part
whereof was a great tower of two stories high, two
courts of good building, where at the first all our
victuals and whatsoever was brought with us was sent
to be kept; and near unto that tower there is another
small river. In these two places, above and beneath,
all the meaner sort was lodged.

And in the month of August and in the beginning
of September every man was occupied in such work
as each one was able to do. But the 14th of September
our aforesaid general sent back into France two ships
which had brought his furniture, and he appointed
for admiral Monsieur de Sainterre, and the other cap¬
tain was Monsieur Guinecourt, to carry news unto the
king, and to come back again unto him the year next

1 Hochelaga, now Montreal, was the western limit of Carder's Canada.

238

VOYAGE OF ROBERVAL

ensuing, furnished with victuals and other things, as
it should please the king; and also to bring news out
of France how the king accepted certain diamonds
which were sent him and were found in this country.

After these two ships were departed, consideration
was had how they should do and how they might
pass out the winter in this place. First they took a
view of the victuals, and it was found that they fell out
short; and they were scanted so that in each mess
they had but two loaves, weighing a pound apiece,
and half a pound of beef. They ate bacon at dinner,
with half a pound of butter, and beef at supper, and
about two handfuls of beans without butter.

On the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday they did
eat dry cod, and sometimes they did eat it green at
dinner with butter, and they ate of porpoises and
beans at supper.

About that time the savages brought us great stores
of aloses, 1 which is a fish somewhat red like a salmon,
to get knives and other small trifles for them.

In the end many of our people fell sick of a cer¬
tain disease in their legs, reins, and stomach, so that
they seemed to be deprived of all their limbs, and
there died thereof about fifty.

Note that the ice began to break up in April.

Monsieur Roberval used very good justice, and pun¬
ished every man according to his offense. One, whose
name was Michael Gaillon, was hanged for his theft.
John of Nantes was laid in irons and kept prisoner
for his offense, and others also were put in irons, and
divers were whipped, as well men as women, by which
means they lived in quiet.

1 Aloset. The common shad.

2 39

VOYAGE OF ROBERVAL

THE MANNERS OE THE SAVAGES

To declare unto you the state of the savages. They
are people of a goodly stature and well made; they
are very white, but they are all naked, and if they
were appareled as the French are they would be as
white and as fair; but they paint themselves for fear
of heat and sunburning.

Instead of apparel they wear skins upon them like
mantles, and they have a small pair of breeches, where¬
with they cover their privities, as well men as women.
They have hosen and shoes of leather, excellently
made; and they have no shirts, neither cover they their
heads; but their hair is trussed up above the crown of
their heads and plaited or braided. Touching their
victuals, they eat good meat, but all unsalted, but they
dry it, and afterward they broil it, as well fish as flesh.
They have no certain dwelling-place, and they go
from place to place, as they think they may best find
food, as aloses in one place, and other fish, salmons,
sturgeons, mullets, surmullets, 1 bass, carps, eels, pin-
perneaux, 3 and other fresh-water fish, and store of

1 Mallets and surmullets. The fish designated by these titles with which
Cartier was familiar were those of the families Mvgilid* and MulliiUt ,—
namely, the Mugil capita and chela, and Mullui lurmuletui and barbatus ,—
and are not found in Canadian waters. His mullets and surmullets were
suckers of different varieties of the family Cataitamid which resemble
European mullets, but are greatly inferior to them as food-fish.

3 The pinperneau, or pimperneau, is spoken of in early works as an
«* agile fish*’ and “ the Sparus of the Latins,’* while in Glossaire de Salma
tt is designated as the “Spargus, poisson dit pimpernel.’* The pinperneau
mentioned by Cartier has never been recognized, but from the foregoing
quotations there is reason to infer that it was a representative of a family of
spiny fishes belonging to the genus Sparid ir, which in the sixteenth century
embraced many heterogeneous species, now variously classified. A careful
study of the fishes of this genus in Canadian waters points to the supposition
that the pinperneau of Cartier was the yellow perch (Perea fiaveictni), so fire-
240

VOYAGE OF ROBERVAL

porpoises. They feed also of stags, wild boars,
bugles, 1 porkespines, and store of other wild beasts;
and there is as great store of fowls as they can desire.

Touching their bread, they make very good, and
it is of great mill; and they live very well, for they
take care for nothing else.

They drink seal oil, but this at their great feasts.

They have a king in every country, and are won¬
derful obedient unto him; and they do to him honor
according to their manner and fashion. And when
they travel from place to place they carry all their
goods with them in their boats.

The women nurse the children with the breast,
and they sit continually, and are wrapped about the
bellies with skins of fur.

THE VOYAGE OF MONSIEUR ROBERVAL FROM HIS FORT IN
CANADA UNTO SAGUENAY, THE 5TH OF JUNE, 1543

Monsieur Roberval, the king’s lieutenant-general
in the countries of Canada, Saguenay, and Hochelaga,
departed toward the said province of Saguenay on the
Tuesday, the fifth day of June, 1543, after supper;
and he, with all his furniture, was embarked to make
the said voyage. But upon a certain occasion they

quently mentioned by the Jesuit* and other early writers as goldfish, and
which still abounds in regions visited by Cartier. As it is a common Euro-.
pean fish, the French were doubtless familiar with it. Jordan and Everman
(American Food and Game Fishes, New York, 1902, p. 366) speak of it
as attaining a weight of eight or nine pounds in European waters, and of
from three to four pounds in those of North America. As Cartier speaks of
*• eels, pinperneauz, and other fresh-water fish,” it would imply that his pin-
pernetux were not eels, as they are designated by some French authors,
notably in Menagier de Paris, tome ii, p. 191, where they are spoken of as
small eels.

1 Bugles. Buffaloes (Bum Americium). Porkespines ss porcupines.

VOYAGE OF ROBERVAL

lay in the road over against the place before men¬
tioned; but on the Wednesday, about six o’clock in
the morning, they set sail, and sailed against the
stream, in which voyage their whole furniture was
of eight barks, as well great as small, and to the
number of threescore and ten persons, with the afore¬
said general.

The general left behind him in the aforesaid place
and fort thirty persons to remain there until his re¬
turn from Saguenay, which he appointed to be the
first of July, or else they should return into France.
And he left there behind him but two barks to carry
the said thirty persons, and the furniture which was
there, while he stayed still in the country. And for
effectuating hereof he left as his lieutenant a gentle¬
man named Monsieur de Royeze, to whom he gave
commission, and charged all men to obey him and
to be at the commandment of the said lieutenant.
The victuals which were left for their maintenance
until the said first day of July were received by the
said Lieutenant Royeze.

On Thursday, the 14th of June,Monsieur L’Espiney,
La Brosse, Monsieur Frete, Monsieur Longeval, and
others returned from the general, from the voyage of
Saguenay.

And note that eight men and one bark were drowned
and lost, among whom were Monsieur de Noir Fon¬
taine and one named La Vasseur of Constance.

On Tuesday, the 19th of June aforesaid, there came
from the general Monsieur de Villeneuf, Talebot, and
three others, which brought sixscore pounds’ weight of
their corn, and letters to stay yet until Magdalen-tide,
which is the twenty-second day of July.

(The rest of this voyage is wanting.)

242

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

HERE FOLLOWETH THE COURSE FROM BELLE ISLE, CARPONT,
AND THE GRAND BAY, IN NEWFOUNDLAND, UP THE RIVER
OF CANADA, FOR THE SPACE OF TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY
LEAGUES, OBSERVED BY JEAN ALPHONSE OF SAINTONGE,
CHIEF PILOT TO MONSIEUR ROBERVAL, 154a

B ELLES ISLES 1 are in 51 degrees and

Belles Isles and Carpont are N.N.W. and S.S.E.
and they are ten leagues distant; Carpont is in
52 degrees; Carpont and Belle Isle 2 from the Grand
Bay are N.E. and S.W., and the distance from Belle
Isle to the Grand Bay is seven leagues. The midst of
the Grand Bay is in 52 degrees and a half, and on the
north side thereof there is a rock; half a league from
the isle, over against Carpont, toward the east, there
is a small flat island, and on the side toward the N.E.
there is a flat rock. And when thou comest out of
the harbor of Carpont thou must leave this rock on
the starboard side, and also on the larboard side there
are two or three small isles; and when thou comest
out of the N.E. side, ranging along the shore toward
the west, about two pikes* lengths in the midway,
there is a shoal which lieth on the starboard side;
and sail thou by the north coast, and leave two parts

1 So in Hakluyt, and refers to the group so called.

3 This no doubt refers to the island which None, in his Sailing Direc¬
tion* for the East Coast of North America, part i, says “should be
called the Northern Belle Isle, in order to distinguish it from those already
described*’; meaning the group at the entrance of the Strait of Belle Isle of
which he had spoken.

i«a

145

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

of the Grand Bay toward the south, because there is
a rock which runneth two or three leagues into the
sea. And when thou art come athwart the haven of
Buttes, run along the north shore about one league or

a half off, for the coast is without all danger. Belle
Isle, in the mouth of the Grand Bay, and the Isles of
Blanc Sablon, which are within the Grand Bay, near
unto the north shore, lie N.E., W., and S.W., and
the distance is thirty leagues. The Grand Bay at the

1 Thi« and the five succeeding coast outlines were made by Jean Alphonse
who accompanied Roberval on his voyage to the St. Lawrence in 1542)
and are interesting as being of so early a date.

246

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

entrance is but seven leagues broad from land to land,
until it come over against the Baydes Chateaux, and
from thenceforward it hath not past five leagues in
breadth; and against Blanc Sablon it is eight leagues
broad from land to land. And the land on the south
shore is all low land along the sea-coast; the north
shore is reasonable high land. Blanc Sablon is in
5 1 % degrees. The Isles of Blanc Sablon and the Isles
of the Demoiselle are N.E., W.S.W., and take a little
of the W.S.W., and they are distant thirty-six leagues.
These isles are in 50 deg. yi t> and there is a good
haven, and you may enter by a high cape which lieth
along toward the N.E., and within the distance of a
pike and a half, because of a rock which lieth on your
larboard side, and you may anchor in ten-fathom
water over against a little nook; and from the great
headland unto the place where thou dost anchor,
there is not above the length of two cables. And if
thou wouldst go out by the west side, thou must sail
near the isle by the starboard, and give room unto
the isle upon the larboard at the coming forth; and
when thou art not past a cable’s length out thou must
sail hard by the isles on the larboard side, by reason
of a sunken flat which lieth on the starboard, and thou
shah sail so on to the S.S.W. until thou come in sight
of a rock which shineth, which is about half a league
in the sea distant from the isles, and thou shah leave
it on the larboard (and from the Isles of the Demoi¬
selle unto Newfoundland the sea is not in breadth
above thirty-six leagues, because that Newfoundland,
even unto Cape Breton, runneth not but N.N.E. and
SAW.).

Between the Isles of the Demoiselle and the Isles
*47

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

of Blanc Sablon there be many isles and good harbors;
and on this coast there are falcons and hawks and
certain fowls which seem to be pheasants. 1 The Isles

Newfoundland

of the Demoiselle and Cape Thiennot are N.E. and
W.S.W. and take a little of the N.E. and S.W., and
they are distant eighteen leagues. Cape Thiennot is
in 50 deg. and %, and there the sea is broadest.

1 Pheasants. What is here mentioned is doubtless the ptarmigan
(Lsgepui mutm), which is still found in this region.

248

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

And it may be to the end of Newfoundland, which
is at the entrance of Cape Breton, seventy leagues,
which is the greatest breadth of the sea. And there
are six or seven isles between the Isles of the Demoi¬
selle 1 and Cape Thiennot.

Cape Thiennot hath in the sea, five or six leagues
distant from it, a sunken island, dangerous for ships.

1 Isles of the Demoiselle. So named from a romantic episode in which
the niece of Roberval was the heroine, according to Thevet (Cosmographie
Universelle, ch. vi, pp. Hr, xxiii). There were in the company of Rober-
val his niece Marguerite and a young gentleman who proved to be her
lover. Roberval, discovering their intimacy, was furious, and landed his
niece and her lover, with her nurse, Bastienne, on a wild island to perish.
Her uncle, however, left them guns and ammunition, together with pro¬
visions sufficient to sustain life a short time. A small hut was erected for
shelter, and the fight for existence began. The lover and nurse both died;
but Marguerite for nearly two years fought off the wild beasts, subsisting
upon the flesh of those she killed and such herbs and roots as she could
find, and sustained her spirit by prayer and faith in ultimate deliverance.
At last, a fishing-vessel passing the island, she was discovered and taken
back to France, where she lived ever after in the odor of sanctity. Such,
in brief, is the story of Thevet, which he relates in a somewhat altered
form in his Grande Insulaire. Marguerite of Navarre made use of this
story before Thevet in her Heptameron (Paris, 1559), undeT the title,
•* Extreme amour et austerite de femme en tcrrc estrange.” Her version
makes the heroine the wife of the man, who is placed on the island to die
249

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

The Cape Thiennot and the midst of the Isle of Ascen¬
sion are N.E. and S.S.W., and they are twenty-two
leagues distant; the midst of the Isle of Ascension
is in 49 deg. and % . The said isle lieth N.W. and
S.E.; the N.W. end is in 50 degrees of latitude, and
the S.E. end is in 48 degrees and a half, and it is about
twenty-five leagues long and four or five leagues
broad; and from the N.W. end of the isle unto the
firm land of the north side the sea is not above seven
leagues broad, but unto the firm land on the south
side are about fifteen leagues. Cape Thiennot and
the end of the Isle of Ascension toward the S.E. are
N.E. and S.W., and are distant thirty leagues.

The said Cape of Thiennot and the N.W. end of
the Isle of Ascension are east and west, and take a
little of the N.E. and S.W.,and they are distant thirty-
four leagues.

The Isle of Ascension is a goodly isle and a goodly
champion land, without any hills, standing all upon
white rocks and alabaster, all covered with trees unto
the sea-shore, and there are all sorts of trees as there
be in France, and there be wild beasts, as bears,
luserns, porkespicks. And from the S.E. end of the
Isle of Ascension unto the entrance of Cape Breton
is but fifty leagues. The N.W. end of the isle and
the Cape of Monts Notre Dame, which is on the
mainland toward the south, are N.E. and W.S.W.,
and the distance between them is fifteen leagues.

by Roberval because of treason. When rescued and restored to her friends,
she lircs a most holy and useful life, teaching the little daughters of the
noble ladies who thronged about her to read and write. This island has
been confounded with the Isle of Demons,—Isola de Demoni, I. do*
Demonios, Y. das Demonios, etc., of Gastaldi, Martines, Guerard, Mer¬
cator, and others,—which is much farther east and north.

250

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

The cape is in 49 degrees, which is a very high land.
The cape end of the Isle of Ascension toward the
S.E. are E. and W., and there is fifteen leagues’
distance between them.

The Bay of Molues 1 or Gaspl is in 48 degrees, and
the coast lieth north and south, and taketh a quarter
of the N.E. and S.W. unto the Bay of Heat; and
there are three isles, one great one and two small.
From the Bay of Heat until you pass the Monts Notre
Dame all the land is high and good ground, all
covered with trees. Ognedoc* is a good bay and
lieth N.N.W. and S.S.E., and it is a good harbor;
and you must sail along the shore on the north side,
by reason of the low point at the entrance thereof,
and, when you are passed the point, bring yourself to
an anchor in fifteen or twenty fathoms of water
toward the south shore; and here within this haven
are two rivers, one which goeth toward the N.W.
and the other to the S.W. And on this coast there is
great fishing for cods and other fish, where there is
more store than is in Newfoundland and better fish.
And here is great store of river fowl, as mallards, wild
geese, and others; and here are all sorts of trees,—
rose-trees, raspberries, filbert-trees, apple-trees, pear-
trees,—and it is hotter here in summer than in
France.

The Isle of Ascension and the Seven Isles which

1 The Bay of Molues or Gaspe. Thu name, meaning in English
Cod Bay, is now known as Mai Bay, and it is claimed that this is a cor¬
ruption of the original name. The same name also appears on the charts
of Lc Cordier, 1696, and Franquelin, 1699, on the southerly coast of
Newfoundland. On the northwesterly coast there is now a Mai Bay
north of Bonne Bay, which suggests a more natural origin of the name.

* Ognedoc. The same as Honguedo, or Gaspe.

251

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

lie on the north shore lie S.E. and W.N.W., and are
distant twenty-four leagues. The Cape of Ognedoc
and the Seven Isles are N.N.W. and S.S.E., and
are distant thirty-five leagues. The Cape of Monts
Notre Dame and the Seven Isles are north and
south, and the cut over from one to the other is
twenty-five leagues, and this is the breadth of this sea,
and from thence upward it beginneth to wax nar¬
rower and narrower. The Seven Isles are in 50
degrees and yi . The Seven Isles and the Point of
Ongear 1 lie N.E. andS.W., and the distance between
them is fifteen leagues, and between them are certain
small islands. And the Point of Ongear and the
Monts Notre Dame, which are on the south side of
the entrance of the river, are north and south, and the
cut over from the one to the other is ten leagues, and
this is here the breadth of the sea. The Point of
Ongear and the River of Caen 8 lie east and west, and
they are distant twelve leagues. And all the coast
from the Isle of Ascension hither is very good ground,
wherein grow all sorts of trees that are in France, and
some fruits. The Point of Ongear is in 49 degrees and
% . And the River of Caen and the Isle of Raquelle*
lie N.E. and S.W.,and they are distant twelve leagues.
The Isle of Raquelle is in 48 degrees and %. In
this River of Caen there is great store of fish; and
here the sea is not past eight leagues broad.

The Isle of Raquelle is a very low isle, which is
near unto the south shore, hard by a high cape, which

1 Point of Ongear. The present Point dea Mont*.

3 The River of Caen, now the Matane. The Cape dea Mont* Notre
Dame ia probably the present Mount Louia.

8 The Isle of Raquelle—in the Cosmographie of Alphonse, Raquelay
— ia doubtless Bic Island.

252

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

is called the Cape of Marble. 1 There is no danger
there at all, and between Raquelle and the Cape of
Marble ships may pass; and there is not from the isle
to the south shore above one league, and from the

isle unto the north shore about four leagues. The Isle
of Raquelle and the entrance of Saguenay are N.E.
and W.S.W., and are distant fourteen leagues, and
there are between them two small islands near the

1 The Cape of Marble. The highland of Bic.

253

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

north shore. The entrance of Saguenay is in 48 de¬
grees and l /$, and the entrance hath not past a quarter
of a league in breadth, and it is dangerous toward the
S.W., and two or three leagues within the entrance it
beginneth to wax wider and wider, and it seemeth to
be as it were an arm of the sea; and I think that the
same runneth into the Sea of Cathay, 1 for it sendeth
forth there a great current, and there doth run in that
place a terrible race or tide. And here the river
from the north shore to the south shore is not past
four leagues in breadth, and it is a dangerous passage
between both the lands, because there lie banks of
rocks in the river.

The Isle of Raquelle and the Isle of Hares lie N.E.
and S.W., and take a quarter of the east and west,
and they are distant eighteen leagues. The entrance
of Saguenay and the Isle of Lepures or Hares lie
N.N.E. and S.S.W., and are distant five leagues. The
entrance of Saguenay and the Isle of Raquelle are
N.N.W. and S.S.W., and are distant three leagues.
The Isle of Hares is in 48 and ^ of a degree. From
the Monts Notre Dame unto Canada and unto Hoche-

1 The Set of Cathay. Probably the Yellow Sea. The term Cathay
is said to have been introduced to Europe by Jean Plan Carpin and Ruis-
brook, a Bra bin tine monk, about the middle of the thirteenth century. The
limits of Cathay were indefinite, and comprised the present North China
and the desert steppes, which were supposed to be covered by populous
cities. Manchuria formed a part of it, and its people are still called
Khitans by Russians and Persians. According to Yule, China is a cor¬
ruption of the word Khitai. It was the objective point of early navigators
seeking the northern waters of America. Vide Cathay and the Way
Thither, Henry Yule, C.B., Lond., 1866, p. cxv et passim; The First
Three Boob on America, Eden, Birmingham, 1885, pp. 22-26, 59, 98,
tt passim; Disquisitio Geographies et Histories de Chataja, Muller, Bero-
lini, 1671, in he; Marco Polo, Yule, vol. i, p. 15; Atlas, Catalan,
Le Cordier, p. 6.

254

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

laga all the land on the south coast is fair, a low land
and goodly champaign, all covered with trees unto the
brink of the river. And the land on the north side is
higher, and in some places there are high mountains.
And from the Isle of Hares unto the Isle of Orleans
the river is not past four or five leagues broad. Be¬
tween the Isle of Hares and the high land on the north
side the sea is not past a league and a half broad, and
it is very deep, for it is above one hundred fathoms
deep in the midst. To the east of the Isle of Hares there
are two or three small isles and rocks. And from hence
to the Isle des Coudres or of Filberts, all is nothing
but isles and rocks on the south shore; and toward the
north the sea is fair and deep. The Isle of Hares
and the Isle of Filberts lie N.E., W., and S.W., and
they are distant twelve leagues. And you must always
run along the high land on the north shore, for on
the other shore there is nothing but rocks; and you
must pass by the side of the Isle of Filberts, and the
river there is not past a quarter of a league broad, and
you must sail in the midst of the channel, and in the
midst runneth the best passage either at a high or low
water, because the sea runneth there strongly, and
there are great dangers of rocks, and you had need of
good anchor and cable. The Isle of Filberts is a small
isle about one league long and half a league broad,
but they are all banks of sand. The Isle of Filberts
stands in 47 deg. and . The Isle of Filberts and
the Isle of Orleans lie N.E. and S.W., and they are
distant ten leagues, and thou must pass by the high
land on the north side about a quarter of a league, be¬
cause that in the midst of the river there is nothing
but shoals and rocks.

*55

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

And when thou shalt be over against a round cape
thou must take over to the south shore southwest and
a quarter toward the south, and thou shalt sail in five,
six, and seven fathoms; and there the River of Canada

Anticosti and entrance to the St. Lawrence

beginneth to be fresh and the salt water endeth. And
when thou shalt be athwart the point of the Isle of
Orldans, where the river beginneth to be fresh, thou
shalt sail in the midst of the river, and thou shalt leave
the isle on the starboard, which is on the right hand;

256

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

and here the river is not past a quarter of a league
broad, and hath twenty and thirty fathoms water.
And toward the south shore there is a ledge of isles
all covered with trees, and they end over against the
point of the Isle of Orleans. And the point of the
Isle of Orleans toward the N.E. is in 47 degrees and
one terce of a degree. And the Isle of Orleans is a
fair isle, all covered with trees even unto the river’s
side; and it is about five leagues long and a league
and a half broad. And on the north shore there is
another river, which falleth into the main river at the
end of the island; and ships may very well pass there.
From the midst of the isle unto Canada the river
runneth west, and from the place of Canada unto
France Roy the river turneth W.S.W., and from
the west end of the isle to Canada is but one league,
and unto France Roy four leagues. And when thou
art come to the end of the isle thou shah see a great
river which falleth fifteen or twenty fathoms down
from a rock, and maketh a terrible noise. 1 The fort
of France Roy is in 47 degrees and one-sixth part of
a degree.

The extension of all these lands, upon just occasion,
is called New France, for it is as good and as tem¬
perate as France, and in the same latitude. And the
reason wherefore it is colder in the winter is because
the fresh river is naturally more cold than the sea; and
it is also broad and deep; and in some places it is half
a league and above in breadth; and also because the
land is not tilled nor full of people; and it is all full
of woods, which is the cause of cold, because there is
not store of fire nor cattle. And the sun hath his

1 The Fall* of Montmorency.

257

*7

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

meridian as high as the meridian at Rochelle, and it
is noon here when the sun is at S.S.W. at Rochelle.
And here the north star by the compass standeth
N.N.E.; and when at Rochelle it is noon it is but
half an hour past nine at France Roy.

From the said place unto the ocean sea and the
coast of New France is not above fifty leagues’ distance,

and from the entrance of Norumbega unto Florida
are three hundred leagues; and from this place of
France Roy to Hochelaga are about eighty leagues,
and unto the Isle of Rasus thirty leagues. And I
doubt not but Norumbega entereth into the River of
Canada and unto the Sea of Saguenay. And from
the Fort of France Roy until a man come forth of
the Grand Bay is not above two hundred and thirty
leagues; and the course is N.E. and W.S.W., not
above 5 degrees and difference, and reckon sixteen
leagues and a half to a degree.

By the nature of the climate the lands toward
Hochelaga are still better and better, and more
258

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

fruitful; and this land is fit for figs and pears; and I
think that gold and silver will be found here, accord¬
ing as the people of the country say. These lands lie
over against Tartary, and I doubt not but they stretch
toward Asia, according to the roundness of the world.
And, therefore, it were good to have a small ship of
seventy tons to discover the coast of New France on
the back side of Florida; for 1 have been at a bay as
far as 42 degrees between Norumbega and Florida,
and I have not searched the end thereof, and I know
not whether it pass through. And in all these coun¬
tries there are oaks, and bortz, 1 ashes, elmz, arables,
trees of life, pines, prusse-trees, cedars, great walnut-
trees, and wild nuts, hazel-trees, wild pear-trees, wild
grapes, and there have been found red plums. And very
fitir corn groweth there, and peason grow of their own
accord, gooseberries and strawberries. And there are
goodly forests wherein men may hunt; and there
are great store of stags, deer, porkespicks, and the
savages say there be unicorns. Fowl there are in
abundance, as bustards, wild geese, cranes, turtle-doves,
ravens, crows, and many other birds. All things which
are sown there are not past two or three days in com¬
ing up out of the ground. I have told in one ear
of corn an hundred and twenty grains, like the corn
of France. And you need not to sow your wheat until
March, and it will be ripe in the midst of August.
The waters are better and perfecter than in France,
and if the country were tilled and replenished with
people it would be as hot as Rochelle. And the reason
why it snoweth oftener there than in France is because

1 Bortz = the birch; arables = maples; trees of life = arbor-vitar;
prusse-trees = spruces.

259

COURSE OF JEAN ALPHONSE

it raineth there but seldom; for the rain is converted
into snows. All things above mentioned are true.

Jean Alphonse 1 made this voyage with Monsieur
Roberval.

1 Jean Alphonse was a native of Saintonge, and has left several charts
showing his discoveries in the New World, as well as a cosmography, now
in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. After a seafaring life of forty-one
years he was killed in a naval battle with the Spaniards near Rochelle,
“vers 1557,” according to Dionne (La Nonvelle France, Quebec, 1891,
p. 70). At the end of the Coarse of Jean Alphonse is the following: ” There
is a pardon to be seen for the pardoning of Monsieur Saincterre, Lieutenant
of the said Monsieur de Roberval, given in Canada in the presence of the
said Jean Alphonse." In the edition of the Hakluyt Society of MCMIV,
vol. viii, pp. 275-283, the points of the compass are given in full, viz.:
«*north-northwest," “south-southeast," etc. The word “and" has also
been used in place of the character and several numerals spelled in full,

as “four or five leagues," instead of *'4 or 5 leagues." These are the
only changes from the original, except in the spelling of some words.

260

FACSIMILE OF MANUSCRIPT

OF

CARTIER’S FIRST VOYAGE

* 7 *

VT-tmipi**^ «■£ a

X r V%j<myW /cnvV ~*y ♦/' Afr*v*)Wtf X*. 0-«*^

V C»Mm* Vys* +l?-an( J*> Ci l)r»yl t ^Seiiy

^S* ^ ^ V« /Vrt^i/nV ^ imI,

fiy^***^ iw%Cvo>.^-jy£y^v* ,*jm' %?!&>**{ £r£*vg
^vVii^ V»~**4 cvrnmf- c^^vrt. »£% \>**J j)•*»**■'

{*+»+* Ck ^hW* L«y|RMV'l^nvi A^<!S^ i>^. H^ w r ( tfniy <

rf- w*J hvjmSt (£LfjZ r p»j~Jow»S}!^ *"•#* V-

Vvm? A^mA^WV^ayr

^ fci ww jT , %r yt»*st o««4mJ^ A ^».

WB- |^; 4 ^B» W » |M < W ' CwnH^^ffj Lkfy

\tjUfpf* ^*mp*rf* ^ K ^ . I

^■/ ^ tuw**- tvoj S«H^« ^ ^<^V

c^f-V*»*^ c^ye^Jv- ^HrwwA^ <pi‘ ;W /*Aw j > f
KOhOwh** * ^ ^**v ^ ***5r ^ n ^ rf " t > » 1 «f**mt#»» *V>ti u f-

L <» <»»»» A /*»^ A /C ^y^Jt

y/ / J^ 1 pL>

T~

^ IfWJv V*^* iS C*\S»

^ y r»^ow^ pM»A^

^icrfJy j‘^L rOm»m« o«ajmI

o^* &**r* <ti^ £- c^iim* ^vL, ro*£

A ^<*4 ^4m4*4 ^«mm^.\m4H ^%t ^- -j

pO«v«^ «U^tSV cC«*n~>/l* ( »

/v**£ **jyk*^

ijiw €>*-ff\>in> - -

**^* ')'" c f ^ji Nje/Kskf 1 ««m SA-*i* i

/tnf/wffl — — < - ^ v ' L^i.

r • 7 ***

f ** f j' f t 1 — /

Ufyw »» ..*** fy**m*~ r^rnn*•%«*•

S *>c* pWV****^-*^ fT*kw* s^*, £*€&**>%(

Of* r^ T*YT** p*»* «f» pv*w« tmu,j*S>

<h** ^rn

4 fJ\xmf +S ^ <£f**J 9 * m *' f*J **4 H"* ^
j£**> i>»» w ^' T* 1 P * 4 «**f(**C

j , fiCy<fit+ y>L* jv**J(}CV WH -f*»

iW f&f* ^m* f+ *« * # **£ *yA*r(- Vs> WXh\« f«uCU

'**++Clj f Ct <jW jJ+t &\£^«~*«** A.*jJ+ 4 Ci 0

r»ww^ $l{!***» ( **** *

<|r»f La^ 4i <OL~*6y+ ^HSHf^V cT ttVr

•**»* c7 **ff*”* * ** s ***‘£*j***( *£&»*> w

« ^iwvA^V

^^*^0 «£$

*^ ww *t%^r 4 ^ <t,, r

If ** «*£ NC^ ^

4 * JL ^

’*'** ^V* 4 * ^ToiiMJtimrti ^^4* 0*vtf . .. L*fn*y r ip ^mt+ty

+&»t j^p, ^ ***** a^m ^W (g^r

r,Tri> ll 1* # V«'^^^ 1*»U«|„M i-A«iyy^V si—yt+tojn+J

I^-* </~ /^.-^.S* w wfr/

c iKcrcxrS

^ V%** ir£j*.jY++~ijp *>4- Y +mv Ck, 'V^t^ihWS

0 ^Sn cp,<x**£ »^wgv t .V^W» *|HV

^\VOH%% r^IMN^ a *hA^ *rjf**£ 4WV^

*«*.*.> h+^*W<6 »- K+y+~£ OK »OhO /^im^

*», ^»ti«ttv ^>W»w > M » ^*y W / * »» V 4ny>

^|*W <S p o W^W* | 70 i«v y+jj*+ o»^*o

*jf mf* C»«jltO«i»

<f" 1 fiff |fI l^ 8l| ^ f la Attire Vic*
f«H^( J»tt^«« a« IjabU'be forcrp
a c^fa»»£ cm i-*W '

aL a^eweVirH^iKi icv %r f br* -V*

^ ^”K» *K* /?%<*>&** ^n> C*.G~,„ Jf^' C~*y ■*,«.

rlf A Jf-fc^. ^ r ~(~

""**■ ^ ?/^ V >* y-JiA-* t^VV j£}>

T c y* i*- i-r-w r-» ~ r **~A

-+ f-*//*’ r*v 7 -*^ c - -y /«• HSf 1 ^ l*~»

$Mf*^o*(l,tli,'\ n fc Ar ^.

J^ff'ZZ",

««*— --w, /;-y? ^ £*-a~\,+.+'/■. r.

>-fyty m ^ K^ #w\JL j *x.v-a i-x ^
Etr^r/i? ' c ~~rf~‘ e *f~« -trr* r —'

*7

u 4 j,f * 4S

*** f"* C ~f* ^ k*f~( (& a. S

Upt* V* f*~t f+~i } C~* L k^eh^

t /y^Vt**yF #*■{> o. v

^WW Gcafpf* *£ £~~ Aau*4c jyy ^

n«JW v^/K Vs»a ^o*uu/f jl r*~C£^ a^iw.

* l *T ^ 1 —V? Wy y-W V* wu»my^

£o~>^+~cc> T^c* ^,* >vw«fi«f c+Covt

£*"** tf^P /" Wf M* ^>ott*#« AmAw* A.L.^ r |

/*- -—*- . a-jt - w

‘ ^VV“ ^ T* » i wJ

'**<^>*fff «nW& W A ^»iN>v/

LU^ C ' , ^ r ^A-pV^HMwis ^

*Jjf£ ****>'fj£^*‘& *ys*ce»£*. l)' % p*'

Wyi» w mm i4 /»»«* y»^W^V /!hW pav^HO^s^

J£»r j^c yr Ji g A u. '*+■<*

c£ {p- 4 ~ h^

^Wtijr ,£W*W y^ yTr* « i^ ,

£»r- efPn*&«rt *4 f~"-~+y> r r+ *^"^~ r

fei. £> ^'i-»^ r ^>- 9 j- b-LL Vm

^ t ‘*>*^ £l

V X. /Cvi*- p<*v/vv Vr/i. /^»»«rf<y** ^*“ pA>

• Cv«fi[** i f fo~( '±~ ^ pL~

iBCim

^3 ™***»v‘

- v>~£ LvcxIJ*

**-

^4 LCo'H jp**

\j

A'

f ' ~Y‘-y *7

*ff* *f ,n ^ /wv^.%**** rOfbm

r+CCvy /kW (}«**

£fWf

"£tl

/"^fiCrU yF \>n^ rotJ^c ^

«^/hih* <x fK)«* /^J>^^ y^»

—ev-Rj,*^ <*,*• £ ^ /** K. 'jy*^ *# ^ 4 tv«^

'vjb**\* 7 i>4m* /mIj 4nr <C*-•»’ ■■■'■ > » rettn.** <l„
^®" tC ’ rf^e- (+~*~ *if •A>*~». / £~'~,''^.. £j;,,
f* C( ‘*'*j’*^'j$* 6 &- •f'r>~flr«y ft~~~~A{ }p\

oA 'Tj-f« 4 M

4 >V^A»rfnf |>A

^/^ W nf—-

?%- 4 ++o

^T'O

,/* hW

'^' t *~r~* ct-^* ytuM

<£'«»/■?•' 1*£ k-«j ** >Aw C£2_^

'■^•‘"■‘^tT*’ ^«y " I^ A* A~«, Aw

b'" 1 * ^ 6 G~6* y& *rU*^Hoy zfLp, ^

iW (£X»wns» T^JW /w fiyfcr .* V.^ ..,

j)«tflw /<vw« 7«vVvn*mi«

JL'}$WC*b*t9x£/tH9»fbe ^*M«VJ

/■ ^ if dAMyiuMw^

p*** ^ «*•■£ **

GaGC V*w /I
ly~Ut* ‘fc yt v f+ 4 VC

t 'ffr f«~* C» v ~*l>‘‘

Iny^s

|U /^ ^WJ^rmvw rf\y^>*^
|f ,V*.f+*£ VC^A f.-^'tryr L**

3f^ I"* f*~* ** j m \J'»'»»f'%\+ t ~Gy*~ *J r^C^y~(S 'yoj'pte-

jr ****W -|*n r»«f«htnM4 ^wwx m

£>**»+* •**> ^-’ r/

}j^V^ >!» • *» Y JL ff , y ^

y*On*yr*+J £+r%M ^t5/

^^ w ^^ 05 «ic/r«f jv_

,u&'-Ayac \jt**

&o-n~«-~t* \**y G+n lyxLL L, A<y*'**"”"~

^••^"' ♦"Ow rt nr « »■ Vn» A« w

'**"* /«*■•■'nnifg \i»» Ji 1 l y i iw Aif fu*^»A*

‘J*" •»**• «y**«»»y (gf yF <ww V^.

S= ~*ft^’ZJ ^"" <V *^ C /''^' y~* r«>t,

***^ ,f IhU- ^W /fv~^ oym,.*/^

> ^.|- l»-tc *-#- V.—yy^L^-.A.jy

JpVf i*W V«y *,..« -V,r«.^. V- r&fh~*’

*" 4C#4 ^ p ^3 ^- ,

'rr^' ^ •-*- - w IL-Jl-a-

i ^* ,,tt C^y>i^rv ""~*T"V^ „yv«»^/VV*^ -p k^Uf-

^ ^ 4 r «*$»<& p W* p ^ /I* '(£>£«iG>J&f

** YY**f~*- «^v 4 W*- A, v£p**|V*>^f. ^

*^* mt <h t*vupV

(S^~ «U&*- £>*eCy+\»** Cr*~~

Jp“ yiS»t^p ‘km ViSfc j,At^ \L *'*>&*’'

p»e ****** AQtCChi-j** «fiw 6 h, (g\ c*&**+, <—

A* /'VK*'* £*J~Ltp~-

ITKm* 7 «vw« X*AyL+ *fjC A 6 M ^

l ^ w ^ ^ r*> \w \j^wr

^* k “" &*** /*~f rN^fWS ^>ft*/y**v* fw»> /W *

^ x £✓ r j r FI

* **"•* fo&C*?y f l jC np «*<n/Ti* V

jp <j *»*- ~™ —

cfi-tX £*S*»¥* \t^n ^i-

^Srv^ Afpl**- £*&+* mpAwn^ ~

^ cv

vJT

( 7 ^ Jpp*>*tu+ ^/wy

*^“’ vs * w> r£«-“w**'^ /w £-*•***» 4 +-/&J **n f*~$*~>

^«*i) ■(&*>*$+'[ cfi*n. yJ/T** t'* v ***“">

d An<5*ww« y (r»~+*
o»*yU»,(^yy^ <vV*vff.Jf )«»lj; V iwiM ’

!>*»«** A* r UrU^t

«< p^oL*' r^“

fv ^' < J4 p- ^<*wjWn#/'*w- «V^W»* rer*£*~w A***^

>CMipw* i»».

<7 "7

Of*

£rr^

/ f"/^ <p Wj+*{* Y** „(_

1~%>ww v*>. ? f^ ,^Vs* F<wv

"*V^ l ~r> >Ae~ef~4 'S*r*t r .^ jl<J\,^
ALyct^ f<H^ ^ 4 v„ r _ ^

I’~~r~ ! * * C ~t c~ T**” ~‘+~ A &«*rt

" f‘C *- • ^'^•"-i-ArfftfZ

<£^- 3 £o~&~ p~ £y« y*>A»

^Vvv^ <|tHP >HCn* ^\ny

X-

f^T^^/Tyn. «u*

fin

< M»» Aw

°£J^mw* ^-r

+*++f^j^+*, T + / ^^>‘<*s.4C+- i-r»n Z^n ^yTI

t-mr^fvv (^ | ^ * l | jjcvmay,^ . . •>* • * £ r*

A" rp^a~» *■ C?v~f C va iyJ ^f-

f*~*$ r *"*’J'\C &><tfp *\f CTtoy /

77

’ 7 r

-^»v> / fw w »

__, . ” 7 ^ ^

i ' / ■ i Y" r cr * Vf /

\jj»(-JL*t~tJ' /f^lj- ,*.— f'X/‘

4 >|MWn^ Cv/yjt* VC_

*»£**& *(r /^nwrV

j,^SXo^ /V

c^‘‘

-' r " f iT ^ f ^ fWf

e t-<\HbtVHftVy 7^07 J$^-f-

v-j^f *-*£ ^VCni^rV£^»>

i -. ‘r?” /yv * w *"

ln>^ -* / ««y*>ip«uAr

A^*«^vI^!V* &m *>4 + 6 **jyv** ^y^ee ^c/T

+jj*** 6 & 4 t j ; \£Lr£>~ g * W * rr** oyy***^ ^yrU-»

r»i tt t w \iw» J^vunr /vh>^t%up«wJ rv/^K JL.^

>hvO-w6»^*>yvA» > j ) W ^rv&hi j)m~£ 6 + &Sr*i*

l&*( (>~j)*** rWiyW

^rwtik J—4x$^ jj£ i^nmifciiii JiwwW AnpMM^u
^ X +^ ' ot*** ^ }»Om> 4 & A >m’iW

fow^VwWI>w^l(jr ,,, ^ ,J

S^Mmv©^ 4 uJp>l++*»*y* ^v*fc 3 */***>W

-- / -

(£rv^> cv^ y£ /»*» /fey**

r *v *fc*> W /-*wv *yp a^Mv- p»fK> iw A—

/yx<>nm**~& j r *C^y> y*r^/^p**€*>+Cy Aw^W>

powrcc .yw'w^ ™wT~~

tinf*** 0 'fO**\e+oSL* f\4 j *—Q*f Am£iLv+ >
&+*** y> 9 f*** +£ 8 **~+*//» 2 j**** W»*^ £U» ^o«w

* A / 7 * r^p
^2- ct<vv*i*mAi*j ^xVv^

£ /ft©**

^ If ****

- # yy - - m Ijp***

*- *«#** ^A*** ^ yl»m~ 4*. //*>

*y«~» <j—>+ *e *£.»c^ f«~* 1-^%

c£*- r-^ b~v* r *v *.y» v~y

^uw^ Viyw*^*y^ <p»» |v.f t*9w»w d»|» ftyf

£ y *m*+ (ja^* X l’r*+Q~*+ji rn^yjfVWy

r*p *yf &* M***f '?*«> & C«* V,v/fy KmS

^ ++»£ xWmV-W JL*r>ins,**

C W C~*Gg *~r <^ ***** cvp V/«tt>

^ rvp^ ^ 4 nt J** ^**** £*u *4 y 4 «i**yp*+

y *« *?+*m** 6 f $*+Gfc+ ^ *—**.

jg^r"* **f^*^**? A^^»v &pi. /* Vy**" ^5^

y~cj+*{ f&Jjv** kSp- /++l *4

^ yojfUyf ***&* 4 \<1 y » pmn+J , -

rO*Y**J u Qn y&+ ^*m 1p*ff*f *f* /n*Or»J

^^vm» jjiAvo^

X* lau^c-matp >Wi^ c j^vs.f ^(X+4

/ *°* 4 *+»£•*»*+' v^y~* 4 »£N**tl

^T* 1 ^/ >M»WW C“* ^

^tr * 4 •* tf^~ /iJ WMim^ epm-f+xf** &J

\*ff~ (+***+£+> \o¥*^j imS^w £m«» An*£ pmvfi****' *+£
fytS* /-a yf wCy+^p******

^ yv ^ ^or-f \»i»y £• *+ £»*»* ^

V 1 *** JL

r <5 v

vT^ Y-*> m*.

*** *J wa WNv (p»r* S-v

^ p-*r J i* 4 **- —«+

•"jr*< -^'■s'-otw v o.

J) ***>&“ p^HV |f>^»v *r+-
At^m«v ^ a 0t t 4j p

^Cmpiv« lc%h£ < ?0*Mr ?uo|*ks Aii xrn^'

|t>hw *jm '|^</*' l ow /' 4 * , ^ W 4 " V"w*'*

*-*t* Vtftf rvi«reA«vtf <f* y'*% kjy^i ^Wft»i *W
.y^*-/*** 4 n«tv

|<Wf /W }r/pit | »*«■ n«*M» < m t «^ rOyhO ^T wwVt

«-»f> ytvo******rn OT * ffc *{ a~p~f ^ /«j

£&kL*iW x-*tt**«^cr* ^my ^^Vuinu ^cTCib,

^MtittHV V^ tHAN »«4 ^1-r^Tn nuu J ,-

*Vf%•*$+*■ ^ 4 *^^ ^VVVV ^>r»v^ 4 *iw yvjffW

/W X^ l"**' " + **

r **p 7 *$**

c-JL - tf i^^cbciutffcnj yyV % 0 \vr Jlft‘ l r ~~~~ /l

rvwjK. oCjU~e. e 4 \o*r 4 i^ <r{forHt* rorm^M. ~

/* 7 r^ ^tH>|»<« a~ f\syo£s> «j**—

9 6 ’ ,, T

^yyAK»i «Xww <# jju*

f±7?

l**ov***•**& V*^ -p*^f V#f*^yf- SCStfC op*/i
J+S** <?t £.*•Mfr

H>HWV«V «k/m \MftvUf tX 1t ”'y cA^*‘

fvomww £xU y-fJh

tff* <<r*w^ i » ww » imiVrtUfo*

^wf y **-p*r 4 *> sy^w»

pov+Oo** J^Oe** r tpZ f * ^yP* yC*r»** ^^

<*M^pr+~£ -|*»l /^*V

v%nr«^ <^tw <*£-»*

pO+U- *r^ -|ltu ’

Otuv^ (^■^**» ^A+Jfov g iff *u~nf js»eo+a&+*+f*.£
.(-^(v'i'H-d. Qf^ ( £+m.A>C-

^t\^A 4 jAn«tr .

<*j*j***Ws ijin /3**> ywwo i^ ^•* rM^ ^ £y,jTZ \oh^
^ ^ ^ >,/ ✓* ^ _ /VT * r- .

A __ /

*yp »r? q *i ^ y^S ys^v

.V* &* p&* fMr£&> **£ *?/Sv-

f><7tW) /^Mfc Nr >w*^ *!^ A *•*/-HyW

JL**i 'b‘ % ^T*

W jVW p^ftuu*% 4 fj

jp** ^*" r*-+'oj*'*^

'+^<*t r \f £4 *yTW'<A*~* ,t " a.

•frn <* *t*mV0*9 ^ 4 ~C^*£JT ^

NvA$y^ ^-<hM> r £ytrm^ Y^^b T *™* 9 i■

n*,*^ Nv ^jrwCr

4HCHW

e rC

jih.w "-rx r ~/y P g-i
>">«■***•' ! -y*+ ^-Jt

3 *v,w^ €^*

u

^-«t**» ^***7 a u /'

^ f - ^ r^twlw. ^ &e~« 4 >

ltf 2 r* >-«■

v^T“'* & f^Z-i •' n fp *{?**•

i"~ fr\*%» «h/' ClJ( 2 «r~+

»iV«^»Mr' f ~YVp***^
*'**“- ^ 4

S * p? *&*«> *p Jxpzr^J^

\.it,owfa»W *%/' Cl*Q*cp**> yi £r*y/£***£► *4
r.wi? ~nv^Uv O*-

J y**> %+*%***jCc*r 6 p* ^/ 7 § -

jpiwn^ C tX«•»*«[/ 4£vt%*vti Jl. junW-*

fc +* C*» -x>

GfC C&*^y ^H<tW ^**i—

?\<£.<^ < 9 *~* 07 O^y 2 U^_

v^> -^*vcC*^ 1 ? xS

Qh»**«-‘ < J»7^^***'*»*f -vl*>1*W *£ \S

- 4 ^* w ' r 7 ^ v *°^ r»A*- ^ovv^^Cjviy w&j

>- f^<*o

* (f «J2iV /* ^C^^cW' ^n- ^

^*wn\\

i ?" 4

*?*W (7 Cf «JC^ | nr » »" » \^ / Itw-' *“">-1

U ^' /f w'**^

* 9 *^%^»*&*v*. ^>17 p-?-£s-r

y«^/" - -/ y" i _^. _V?

|t>*****Se.

4 IMT

"I’ 1 “*-'/~»«H(^ VMf* •*S**«^C , , V

-- 'I~ff ^ -,~~c; -v cC^

- -i^* ^^V "'”'' 1 <**<?*-"*-
'Pi t'~~ A Y r •*■ '’™^r r yz~~~i%-
C*~J? n~J'?rf^aU!Zrr

»».' y^J /2 pzL 6 ^ els**
y 7 V* . I.vC^>

/ i'Ww A~w IV <|Hs*» ^V*vv- v<w\

cf- 4 g-

VA '

rj /-****•«

V’

^/*z.

c*r w^w^n.

^ (*fc*eu£4 for**** «V <4 H

r*CX^, Q*tL^~y

Jv**i%t*»M'n> r* <s ^^Ac-’ \W, <,«»*.,> i

«»r /V*>^ 4 ^ ^

t j > f i »»A»iw* .wiAervK*^ m-<VT n-f r•»\>t*A <1„, /3IUf~

tnor{~ ^^wwm> T *^Viy C jtf&JLj / , ' mm ^*~

C ' i r r * v 1 »; «^\»— y?S^.£.««~

*r ^* rr *-’" -k**? * 4 »> ~*j. / •’" *•

cr jLjr^* ^ -JL^, ?

’C"^' ^ r A-«H^

•'■*' ~~~ »*^—■ ~/Z‘J v s-&Jj,

j V« w>a p^p ]JL~^

fU f f - _-r* . i _\, irP

f-d.rtr** ,/jT IZT^T.

jc.cs~'c. j&zzgSzr~~ -“r^-

ci^X ^jV r-*"’-*——

V 2 -

**- v>H^_

^Jty ^ wCri '°

HS-t^&L

Cs -^7 /v 4 -»

rji^' (/

‘ fcw- (P~'£ 2 ?x ~~ , ~

~Jl?t

OHe~j

TT*»- £*

*Z&J

1 llZrrv- '*+*~ X *~ ** f ,

5§^o~Cyc*ei«G~r -7
^ l u t o - -p /-rt-p-ZT?*^’ C fN^^,tfG-w4fi-

***>Cy-J*d K-C piU^w4 /

£**~s 2 ^^ V*^ V-

(~***r~ trf f^Af VU~y*v~ pJbCfrt

r~~* jr”** *> rtjZu* c^jl, • w C«w /\&-

rv* ~>/^<sSS££r

c*CZ*>) Vr

,fiCt

t ''^tT~*' £ #- r- . ' ■

<^r |*—A 4 -* T I ” 1

r?*&*°~* /rv/ 7 ? z^/wn!- rv^f

■> **V ^*5 &"**•***! <* /**p* hhimv^ rstty/^sr «>-*.*

j++"f Nk- taRa *j»t^av' f?v***4 ,\J*+y^ fl*Mt.*<^>—.

&**+•£•*? efG* ?**/?****

***£*lZe*Cc&*t

Vf/ v9m^ smCf**-; <**A*»hv4im^

rfiw M w * «**ty-nvT^\>»^ «»'/ r ^y~A/ r '

^»W |n<t' (itmvy sSZ±*y?C!-‘ £**•

-Sv' />.vvr^s.°/^ s ?-ry»*»r

^ CvtifK* ^pC.,

****** ^-+ 9 **%^ j\t-/**+***** \>«S 1

gf/^U ^ ~™n-*~~«

/v*** gr ^ Sy ■*%**.£ *]**+■' yOc^W*****^^'^*^ ^

t*^**~* cf a. /l»T) fMMflj^9.M . /^\rW»»A 4

cf•‘"♦y^wdAgf e«*yl£*0

f ^\>n^' &-*£**>+' /£*\

f»»*^ 4%y **«4«,w -***<>i{ t^Lvvs?. \fZ***f/}*+*+

^ *y***ff*^ <r^*w *7 #**%*

r^v» ^ lw M «-* 4»*^ n» f»^»»»»HfrS

ywmS ce^w /^~w %S>

pv*wN»*^ <W^vCxS /Cm- »MVn*H^ -

Y"[j' y *^' x «***yJ?*^

J >

- ■*---- ^ -- ^ • £~JL^j

|»*W Aw/ ^** t ~ ~ *jc > ) f^CSt^T %

-*-*‘£Vvv N * y>£+f^^nf -*• twW ^**-r#*^*W*y

^ _ £vr *+*'** fc,~r*^ C**%ypj

'6 £+~V o/" /Vwj^ fc'* "£ m t>(f*<t> t\ J

‘ Vwm ^ / 2 cc«-' rt >^/ /SJ* 4 t*~ J * +f*++* / 7 m^

c t -i. 'srt+rf (**r*- *h*mL+J fJr*&r

*Jr*f f *7«/ |»«^]f»l^K ^ t\$b j*> +•*&+* c£+**&*>

V^?r »w/ < ***-££. tO-

C (+'*■* ' 4**y*rt»»—O* 4"f *\^*-*€L+^'

%*£>*-+*Lf £*Ut ' pfi**^**- «-► ****>

ry*pT~**+- \> t% ^' Qxyc* ^ 'xWv'^ n ^

-JLj&c' ( ~-* Z**j*+' ^

(w»m^mv*I <= ^f^L 6*+y+ ^imt^

/***

* T **t* Vny ,^ m>rP ® l2l»r*ft*vn? ^^w.

A\ & jT 7° <a_0_/

c9*" « **•-

Cr9*+0\

** /n^A^T^ S**%J^ «up *k»

V* 9 *" ^”*" ^ ^ *«r r^**’ <V c, «,^ t

P *f (Z^ <s^,^

^It’ W- r~rp** ^

-"y~^fr **'J-ri^c

' V 7 - ~~~.py # <W w^.

V* U Y7^

Gy

^V/*v®W ^9-j» iyo f^ZtJ

/+*mt> r£r*f £■ ***•- r * %% ' 4 ”"“"’

^9»y**vr<>*/>>

&**?/ l^wVn.^ c f /**▼•%,£ **A-^-.

cmfppc-' S»**C, ^ l*'sfr%i/**T/ r ~sC

\*~e W -«. •~n*fr jL/TZtfp **/&,. f~~ /o****-

I ***** •■"*”' c: - -*■ r»y "**f\+'y^’\ 9ce » . . f ’ f*y e/TSu.

/>L^ £»*»■• **<>

r **, trtgf. Cfl* r^ oZrs& ffo

Cff& ^fvneVK </^ £ *+*tX£*^ ~ A^tcfVX^r v—

«^t>w/^o» +*2* £?^*+Y rww y^ Hy*t^ii2^

iWSI* y»»»J

r***'

^ MTmv ^

*

, - , JSefc** —

V>**^. c 4h***fj rt^r -^VvW^^i^nv^

c /^ Vw- (*r r+> £\a tH#«tA^^Hy ^*^yC»

A v**£r-' ><h^W^ * SX^PwV^-

^ Clrm*X^ fp Mill r*(f «*+ >

£ "■■ « ■■■■ xfr? d^s

ETl R

r vS "*r ^ ^

'^’Y ^-^5 f^-* -»— ,, _.

cf >Y rC Cfotj ^u ou G

•'T~ t >^Yf*r<*~r, f"~~. ^.~*LS+

c *" '■*»**&£

-0 C.

‘^ e 3 y ‘ > ^ ‘** < * >

» -/

, , r cp-^Zf? , ‘1'” n> r^~}}~yr

w cr^" - ^ £► «■■ »-• ^^/iWm.. ^» w <» n^x.

ei: \p. V^A'*'

6*rr £»•£ «"~W c s^Z>y^t.i ,^C^2- <

***»r <—9~-5 ..

'* , '**f*- Jl*>sw ct<^c

f*"* yJ»J /" ,ttrt - <JC?£ / ■

«#*> **^~ J n™''*?f' c?*~ £*~^ /5^/~^7»vW^

a«y &/***+ CUywT

“ ^ 7 C ■fp*9&- y^~ (Zr

- ^

/twivf pJli^Miiwwf- *«• »»hI » f —■ 1 1^

>>- ^*~v\«»» w ^ MW _ <5r C ; J An</ 4 . t&£*£^f

~tS2 f * f G**>S)^ <->»£ ^ 3w • £ <rt f ~

<w»V<»^«I*v- /vVn-'

1*0^ ■'•Y < ^~*'

J ' . ..

»^S

vW****c#-

i*»tV v ‘

«■*” N&yV3W»*»«*«*v- . ¥

pL*~0 y^.^2 A&Sp*~l <K Arrr ^**4

■j*^’ eLjUi^ ipy 1 ***

<c 3 &~ *»*r «^*-’/«cw fy***

nJJ^v r 6 * 4 jorJ& i )f? v '~°

4f>r*£rJ !*% + »& Jl^rSry P^***^*^

«*V4j «*€&Jr) ip+tH&e**'

*C ijw»

j***f2*+- r*~fy* &"**& S^

'*•*** &y < ^ £+ *y + »gc' >4^ jU^

**** &*rtpHMT 1

Ir-\r

<S~i y^rne^

^°°P^ J^+ry ^ yd Qr ^wS ^Wp ynV ^

f*°* w %¥ "

(y* f* Nw h^h» piGo^ /v++**0£h+T3 G+i

^ 3 -^ (*Y fi < ft ii> ^«jy (>£p-£%-j ^—*

/****? *Atr fr ***> f»o5C CJ& l~~

«**% ^ w&~fU & u & i^r*~' * p ?k +*-
S /f *»*'

^ \w9**w- *N^W/wS^f£wy«~ir

jr°fPi

Vftm^ '<&*’'»«*

CH^cv- #^ ^ (£*1 /f»G> T? "**f r

***** +r+**p &rt«f ryt+*+ f*”f+*t

yRi^Vwj p#^*r ^ A ^ tWV J ^MJ* **/**}

mm it r bwiiL
fiy**** *•%•- r^y /*+<?&*\+pUp*~o> /twJ.

^*tw>mi A^vtr' ¥fcfit^

A j»«t^j «^Sbi> t«««/C^ ^ <»jyj 5 ^*

^ frr ^**^ w ^ ft vy *' /xS^whn

■y*(~''*&at&> A&n*- ^ __ o^FL _J

n fcl £ croyMi . a *x

A <i| mf^ * 5 W^$

^f5 yy^su «%*n^ ^w^-

^ Mf 2 - r^ rrh*

Am** fil <=*&**. CjJZS --- \

rr r ^ ^5 /r ~f ^ *a^^?

/V* ?~.&c L rr . J*iw»**.* 1-k

XVCU^f^UC^J * rfT?,^ »*V*

f # V**»*Hf‘ <jT1™+*£ *++yry po^i, zp|^

^ Q y^ 1 ^»nt^ ^1H%V<^>«»^W' /VI
GjO***±J*& 4 ^*”•f ^tT

^rvVv** ^ Jp-vo4i- ^ -~C**vv*>>.

^ vjr - ^

“Gxy s&y ,^<£+*m*r ■ A/?^ # **^r f p***>*+f &***'

*cf 7 *±%s &*—*sy£- *♦* t-s -&*»>£ jp^yySs^.

4/*W^i^»WC*

w»** ^ <L'i^f~ /**+**+S ^^*X G***y C^*^

r^-'*H^J, <?£pr*+~~ Vjy***-*

e ~^^ r ^**ft’YY^-~ (&*** '^* > ft*~y r '^ > db£*~

/7 ^^y»vvC«<K^ 4iwTjnv>^ rww^.

/y~*t*> ySr**A*y ^ V***'^

(jf'TCr' ^/*^4 A^^o^.Jy' *^1?icSj+f <?' V^SXc-

^>>cX -*o<n«_ / yrL«^

*f 0> * y j^* 9 ****.- iiwWHSv^v J^V^VH •*?-

^*,v<w ^7 r> \,wW^/'e-^y>«*^-# : * S ~fjff > ~7

^-(H^.^' |wi*A»iwc ^7 ^5^*' rw

c-j lT cy &*<**+ ^£>S a h*- cJ y ^C /er

r-^~fCy Ge&u tp-~) f v^ff***

^^OOY*. cf ~~ffZ■ 6—fr i‘j~‘\>~f

fy f6*~ <^C<- VfcL ^ ^*- 7 * «** -

^V) f~ f 7 ^ r°~> o> ( 7 ~^'(/~-* < Y ,, ’ r

p^r^p-’ ir£* *»jjfZ‘

w«w - ^2 0*y *f» !+***+>&%

femfr *+&*<>- f ~~ *» " * ^ 7 *^

cf Vifc 'V’-y.V- _^q <Z„.^ c-fr»~&*-

^^.,^-S rjr.j)*'*. CW #«-V. w « cffi^k.

llw-Jv-

~*'f y*f-

%***€ fenp. i m «i ii »i|» 4 ^ < / ^'S^/TLc(v'

r*<^^

^_OUS «/?W rtfir^nxi

" i ^f ' Jyft^\X \**Me' c ( r m

f***£yfn+,*fy C?4r &***-*»^

r?**fy f~~*- <5^^Sr cf^vJ^ *£*4^ cuy 1

*5** H

*~y* ^r

fL*&> \£p /£ /»*iw^^\ H ^^, fK a 5 y 2 t,

^ +~~~*L/+~rt; -Jfc& r <&j r « r f A^

cf € ^*~ (y >s: f^ > ***i. *^ wA t’ ^ - y v>—

l ^'CVv^ ^ -t

^ >t U» <>; ^f*p** K> *‘ ^ • '»»»

^ fey*? «**>

r< hw w .^ f\trC*{€ v*y» <^ P '»^-/»vi»h^ t ~

_/r .,-/>/">' l ^ ^ ^ J

** H^Vw^fc- r ^W»Zw (

r % 7 ^ *f/^f****'

duSl^9^^4iy *|iMK^tSv rr *?*- mKV\X

yVp^vw C f ^ !> ****1

r-f* +>^ /X^ /ww>

n«hvA m/ Vwf?»}vVf w - {fJ+vrc-Cvy ntf

c r ***^ */* e+Z™£f *r*£l*«

<32/\„*4- *~/2 ju ^y2rf fixity** (Cr (/^c—»

^pL^jx /&Z-jr^/

^7 y'pv^w j^S-

&><• £»fY4*c£*«n ivS» ^ g«*» 4 r' A '

#2

LI ! ^ r* **" J *~Y e * i( ~l
^ /2iCy iv-of £~* dJ/T** **—

/v-, /p^*,\ww^ 1^/ZLfA d-M*m T~&t V >^ . j i ■

WL vJU^ ~~~''2

/^ 2 f-

1/

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

TO THE

VOYAGES OF JACQUES CARTIER

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

TO THE

VOYAGES OF JACQUES CARTIER

These documents, which are of a most interesting
nature to all students of Cartierian literature, com¬
prise all that have thus far come to light relating to
the subject, and are for the first time translated into
English from the original French, excepting the two
letters of Jacques Nouel (No. 22), which are from
Hakluyt, and the five Spanish documents. Nos. 13
to 17 inclusive. Some of the passages in the French
documents, couched in the legal phraseology of the
time (even then antiquated), are extremely obscure,
and this obscurity has no doubt been much increased
by the difficulty of deciphering passages almost ille¬
gible. I trust, however, that no serious defects will
be found in my translations. The five documents
from the Spanish Archives, which were in part trans¬
lated into French some years ago, I had translated by
Mr. E. De Garmo from the original Spanish tran¬
scripts. They have been carefully compared by me
with these transcripts, and I have no hesitation in
pronouncing them superior to the French translation.
Those, however, who are acquainted with early Span¬
ish will, of course, prefer the original transcripts,
which are to be found in “ Coleccion de Varios Docu¬
ments para la Historia de la Florida y Tierras Adya-
centes,” tomo i, Madrid, 1857, pp. 103—119. The
volume containing them which belonged to the late
Francis Parkman is now in the Boston Athenaeum.

*99 J. P. B.

INDEX TO

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

HO.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Jacques Cartier's Complaint against Persons Ob¬
structing the Equipment o? his Ships, March

l 9y 1533 ...

Assembly of the Burgesses of St. Malo, Feb¬
ruary 8,1534 ..

Commission of Philippe de Chabot, October 31,

1534 .

Assembly of the Burgesses of St. Malo, March

3 1 * 1 535 .

Jehan Francois de la Rocque's Letters Patent
from Francis I, January 15, 1540 ....
Power granted to Jehan Francis de la Rocque
for the Equipment of his Expedition, Jan¬
uary 15, 1540.

Cartier's Presentation of the Mandate of the
King before the Accorder of St. Malo, Jan¬

uary 29, 1540.

8 Order for Delivery of Prisoners to Jehan Francois

de la Rocque, by Francis I, February 7, 1540

9 Power of Attorney to Paul d'Auxilhon, Feb¬

ruary 27, 1540.

10 Extract from the Parliament Registers, March 9,

1540 ./ ■

11 Jacques Cartier's Commission from Francis I,

October 17, 1540.. . . .

12 The Will of Jacques Cartier before his Depar¬

ture, May 19, 1541.

From the Spanish Archives:

13 French Corsairs, 1541.

14 Bacallaos and Cartier, 1541.

15 Florida and Bacallaos, 1541.

16 Bacallaos and Cartier, 1541.

17 French Corsairs, 1541.

300

302

3°3

3°4

305

3 f 5

3*3

326

3*7

33 *

335

339

344

347

348
35 °
354
357

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

1*0. PAOl

18 Commission to Paul d*Auxilhon, January 26,

1542 • - ; . 359

19 Order of the King to Audit the Accounts of

21 Power of Attorney to Paul d’Auxilhon,from Jehan

Francois de la Rocque, September 11, 1543 366

22 Letters of Cartier’s Grandnephew to John Growte,

accompanying One to his Cousin, June 19,

1587.•..367

23 Collation of Jacques Cartier’s Accounts by the

Royal Notaries, November 26, 1587 . . . 369

24 Commission to Etienne Chaton and Jacques

Nouel by Henry III, January 14, 1588 * . 376

25 Deliberation of the Burgesses of St. Malo re¬

specting the Interdiction of Trade with Can¬
ada, February 9, 1588.382

26 Declaration relative to the Interdiction of Trade

in Canada, March 11, 1588.383

27 Extract from the Register of Estates of Brittany

relative to Jaunaye and Nouel, Session of
Nantes, March 17, 1588.385

28 Decree of the Council of State in Conformity to

a Petition of the Malouins, May 5, 1588 . 386

29 Order of the King upon the Bill of Remon¬

strances of the Three Estates, July 19, 1588 . 387

30 Memorial of the Community of St. Malo, re¬

specting Restriction of Trade with Canada,
January 3, 1600.390

Genealogy of Cartier’s Family . . . v 39a

Bibliography of Jacques Cartier.393

Itinerary of Cartier’s Voyages.419

301

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

No. i

JACQUES CARTIER’S COMPLAINT AGAINST PERSONS OBSTRUCTING
THE EQUIPMENT OP HIS SHIPS

Thursday, the nineteenth day of March, the year 1533,
before Monsieur the Accorder, present Mr. ChristoOe Sal¬
mon, exercising the office of procurator, present monseigneur
in this town.

The said Thursday, before Monsieur the Accorder.
Upon the remonstrance, complaint and petition this day
made to this court by Mr. Jacques Cartier, captain and
pilot for the King, having charge to voyage and go unto
the Newlands, pass the strait of the bay of Chateaux with
two ships equipped with sixty men for the year present, that
although a part of the said ships have been delivered him to
make the said voyage, he cannot do it without having mari¬
ners and seamen, which he cannot find to bargain with and
hire to make the said voyage, owing to the difficulty that
some have caused and daily cause him, trying to hinder the
said voyage contrary to the pleasure and wifl of the King
our sovereign lord, and likewise several citizens and mer¬
chants of this town attempting to carry away and conduct
a number of ships of the said town to the said parts of New¬
lands for their particular profit, who have concealed and cause
to be concealed the said shipmasters, master mariners and sea¬
men, that by this means the undertaking and will of the said
lord are wholly frustrated, demanding and requiring forth¬
with some suitable remedy of justice to be provided thereon.

Therefore, after having been by the foregoing briefly in¬
formed, power and authority, commission and especial com¬
mand has been and is given to the sergeant-generals of this
said court, and to each one of them, at the instance and
solicitation of the said Cartier, and in the said name and au¬
thority of the said court, to make arrests upon all and each
302

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

one the ships of this port and harbor, and of all the juris¬
diction, whereby to prohibit and forbid all and each one
the citizens and shipmasters from causing them to remove
from this said port and harbor of this town from the places
where they now are, and not to cause them to voyage nor
make other navigation until first the said two ships of the
said Cartier and in said name be duly equipped with master
mariners and seamen in pursuance of the good pleasure
and will of the said lord, under penalty of five hundred
crowns for each one of the said ships, and fifty crowns pen¬
alty for each one of the said master mariners and seamen;
and, farther, to notify the said seamen, at the said instance
and solicitation, that they will be arrested and the arrest of
the said court from now placed and fixed upon their persons
in the said jurisdiction.

Done by the Court of St. Malo, the xxviiith day of
March, the year one thousand five hundred thirty-three;
and given in order to make known to the persons of whom
service is particularly required on the part of the said Car¬
rier, and likewise, if occasion is, with sound of trumpet and
public cry through this said town, at the cross-roads cus¬
tomary to make summonses, proclamations, and public cries.

No. 2

ASSEMBLY OF THE BURGESSES OF ST. MALO, FEBRUARY 8, 1534

Monday, the eighth day of February, the year one thou¬
sand five hundred thirty-four, at the Bay St Jehan, 1 before
my said lord the captain, monsieur the judge, M r Guil¬
laume Deschamps, M r Pierre Le Gobien, accorder of the
court of the said St. Malo.

1 The place of assembly of the people of St. Malo was so called. Says
P Abbe Verreau : •• • La baye saint Jehan * n'est pas autre chose qui Pab-
baye Saint-Jean. C’etait un ancien Edifice qui avait ete donne it * la noble
confrerie des Freres Blancs.' Cette association religieuse, compos ee des
principaux citoycns bourgeoise et marchands de Saint-Malo, avait ete erig£e
* en Phonneur de Dieu et de la glorieuse et benoiste Vierge Marie et par
especial de Monseigneur Sainct Jehan Baptiste/ ”

303

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

Present: Jehan Billard, procurator; Estienne Picot, Ju-
lien Cronier, Guillaume Poree, le Boys, Jacques Chenu,
Jehan Boulain, Devant Lapoupe, Guillaume Sainct Maurs,
Josselin Esverard, Pierres Guyheneuc, Jehan Maingard
Hupeau, Pierre Gosselin, Robin Boulain Vignecte, Jehan
Esverard, Fran9oys Gaillard, Estienne Odiepore, Fran9oys
Martin, Estienne Richomme, Guyon Desgranches, Robin
Gaultier le jeune, Guillaume Perrinet, M T Jacques Cartier,
Estienne Gilbert, Jacques Martinet, Martin Patrix, Jehan
Huschetel, Alain Patrix, Thomas Levrel, Yves Morel,
Guillaume Maingard, Guillaume Boulain, Jacques Main¬
gard, Julien Fertes, Guillaume Martin Lalande, Hamon
Gaultier, Bertran Picot, Charles Cheville, and several others
of the burgesses congregated and assembled as aforesaid.

By the said Cartier has been produced his mandate granted
him by Monseigneur the Admiral of Brittany; this has been
read under date of the last day of October, the year one
thousand five hundred thirty-four, and signed by Philippe
de Chabot and sealed.

It has been ordered that, in accordance with it, the text
of it be here placed, and that it be inserted in this paper,
just as it has been given to publish saving the right of others.

The text follows:

No. 3

COMMISSION OF PHILIPPE DE CHABOT, OCTOBER ji, 1534

Philippe de Chabot, Chevalier of the Order, Count of
Buzan9ais and of Charny, Baron of Aspremont, of Pagny and
of Mirebeau, Lord of Beaumont and of Fontaine Fra^aise,
Admiral of France, Brittany and Guyenne, Governor and
Lieutenant-General for the King in Bourgogne, also Lieu¬
tenant-General for Monseigneur the Dauphin, or govern¬
ment of Normandy, to the Captain and Master Pilot,
Jacques Cartier of St. Malo, greeting:

We have commissioned and deputed, commission and
depute you by the will and command of the King to con-

304 1

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

duct, direct and employ three ships, equipped and pro¬
visioned each for fifteen months for the accomplishment of -
the voyage to the lands by you already begun and dis¬
covered beyond the Newlands, and in this voyage to essay
to do and accomplish that which it has pleased the said lord
to command and order you, for the equipment of which you
shall purchase or charter at such reasonable price as you
shall think advisable with the judgment of men versed in
this knowledge, and according as you shall see and know
to be good for the well-being of the said voyage; the said
three ships you shall take, and hire the number of pilots,
masters and seamen as shall seem to you to be fitting and
necessary for the accomplishment of this voyage, with which
things to equip, trim and fit out, we have given and give
you power, commission and especial command with the
whole charge and superintendence of these ships, voyage
and navigation, as well to go as to return, we charge and
command all the said pilots, masters and seamen, and others
who shall be in the said ships, to obey and follow you for
the service of the King in this as above, as they would do
to ourselves, without any contradiction or refusal, and this
upon pains customary in such cases to those who are found
disobedient and acting contrary.

Given under our signature and armorial seal, the last day
of October, the year one thousand five hundred thirty-four.

So signed, Philippe Chabot,

and sealed en plat quart 1 with red wax.

On the margin, Collated with the original.

No. 4

ASSEMBLY OF THE BURGESSES OF ST. MALO, MARCH 31, 1535

Wednesday, the last day of March, after Easter, 2 one thou¬
sand five hundred thirty-five, at the Bay St. Jehan, before

1 Em plat quart. On certain instruments it was customary to use a
quarter-seal, which was a quarter of the great seal. In Scotland it was
called the testimonial of the great seal.

* “ Apres Piques” in the original. The year in France at this time
began at Easter; and as Easter did not fall every year on the same date, it

* .305

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

monseigneur the captain. Present: M. Jehan Le Juiff, lieu¬
tenant of M. the Constable of the said town of St. Malo;
Jehan Billard, procurator of the said burgesses; Jn. Cronier,
Jacques Chenu, Jehan Grout le jeune, Bertrand Beauboys,
Pierre May, Fran^ys Gaillard, Jehan Maingard Hupeau,
Jacques Martinet, Robin Boulain, Estienne Richomme,
Guillaume Boulain Villauroux, Pierres Hamelin, Guillaume
Maingard, Guillaume Pepin, Jehan Brisard lesne, Jehan
Boulain Belestre, Thomas de la Bouille, Robin Gaultier le
jeune, Thomas Maingard, Fran^oys Martin, Guillaume
Grout, Boullet Souchart,Yves Morel, Guillaume Le Breton
Bastille, Georges Boulain, Guillaume Sainct Maurs, Pierres
Gosselin, Jehan Grout lesne, Charles Cheville, Guillaume
Gaillard, Pierres Jonchee, Pierres Gaillard, Jehan de May,
Pierres Colin, and many others of the said burgesses as¬
sembled.

Whereupon it was shown by the said procurator touching
a proclamation which was yesterday made by Pierres Giraud,
sergeant, the said sergeant being present, who confessed to
have made the said proclamation which he has produced;
and has said one named Jehan Poulet present has caused
him to make it and no others, and which proclamation has
been ordered to be inserted in this paper; and the said
Bastille present, who has disavowed having caused the said
proclamation to be made; and the said Poulet present, who,
in virtue of the charge given him, has declared the said
Cartier to have caused the said proclamation to be made.

The said de la Bouille and Maingard present, who, with
the charge which Jacques Cartier has given the said Jehan
Poulet, have acknowledged the said proclamation, and not
otherwise.

And this Poulet has produced the roll and number of the
seamen that the said Cartier has taken for the said voyage,

was of variable length. In 1535 Euter fell on the 28th of Mtrch, and
the year began at that date; but the next year—1536—Easter fell on
April 16th, so that the year 1535 had three hundred and eighty-five days,
while the year 1536 had but three hundred and fifty days,— Easter the
next year falling on April 1st. In the Roman calendar January and February
were the first months, while in France they were the last.

306

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

and it has been placed in our hands to insert here below, and
this Poulet has protested against diminishing the number of
them from twenty-five to thirty and taking others at his
option.

The insertion of the said masters, seamen, mariners, and
pilots follows : l

1 Jacques Cartier, et pilote du Cour-

capne lieu 6

2 Thomas Fourmont, M* 6 Guill* Le Marie, M*

de la Nef 2 du Courlieu *

3 Guill* Le Breton Bas- y Laurent Boulain 7

tille, capne et pilote 8 Estienne Nouel 8

du Gallon 3 9 Pierre Esmery, diet

4 Jacq. Maingard, M* du Talbot

Galion 4 io Michel Herue 8

5 Marc Jalobert, capit n Estienne Reumevel l *

1 A facsimile of these words and the list of names following, taken from
the archives of St. Malo, appears at pages 311-314.

1 Thomas Fourmont was one of Cartier’s trusted companions. He was
of the parish of La Trinite de Routhan, near Rouen. He was married in
1518, <, apres Piques/* to Guillemette Patrix.

* Guillaume Le Breton Bastille, son of Guillaume Le Breton, Sieur de La
Bastille, and Guillemette Yvon. He was born January nth, 1508, and
married Robine Desnos. La Basdlle is near Limoilou. He died Febru¬
ary a6th, 1540, before Carder’s third voyage.

4 Jacques Maingard, son of Allain Maingard and Collette des Granchef,
born December 2zd, 1498. He married Gillette Eberard. The date of
his death does not appear.

6 Marc Jalobert, son of Bertrand Jalobert and Jchanne Maingard, mar¬
ried Alison or, according to Abbe Verreau, Alizon des Granches, sister of
the wife of Cartier, in 1 $28. He is known to have followed the sea until
1555. He left a numerous family.

6 Guillaume Le Marie. The dates of his birth and death are lost. His
wife’s name was Perrinc Ruel. One of his children, Jean, bom July
19th, 1528, attained eminence as canon of St. Malo.

7 Laurent Boulain. All that is known of him is that he had a daughter
Marie.

8 Estienne Nouel was the son of Jehan NouSl and Jehanne Carder, the
sister of Jacques. He was bom August zist, 1 $ 10.

9 Michel Herue, son of Michel, married, in 1540, Yvonne Grave. Of
his subsequent career history is silent.

10 Estienne Reumevel or, according to F. Juon des Longrtis, Pommerel.

3°7

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

12 Michel Audiepore 1

13 Briend Samboscq a

14 Richard Lebay 8

15 Lucas Jacq. S'Fammys 4

16 Frar^oys Guitault,

apoticaire 5

17 Georges Mabille 8

18 Guill* Sequart, char-

pentier *

19 Robin Le Fort

20 Sampson Ripault, barbier

21 Fran^oys Guillot

22

*3

24

*5

26

27

28

29

30

Guill* Esnault, char-
pentier

Jenan Dabin, char-
pentier

Jehan du Nort, char-
pender 8
Jullien Golet
Thomas Boulain 9
Michel Philipot 10
Jehan Hamel
Jehan Fleury 11
Guill* Guilbert

Hit wife in 1530 wit Fran^oise Maingard, and he left a numerous posterity.
The registers of St. Malo show that he was active in the life of the town.

1 Michel Audiepore, whose name is spelled in many fantastic ways, was,
according to Longrais, of Swiss origin. He married Perrine, daughter of
Marc Jalobert and Alizon des Granches. He was probably quite young when
he accompanied Cartier to Canada. In his later life he seems to have be¬
come a man of importance in St. Malo.

8 Briend Samboscq. His wife was Jocelinc Maingard. The records
of St. Malo have preserved nothing further concerning him. M. de La
Borderie has the name Bertrand Samboste.

3 Richard Lebay. Longrais reads the name Richard Cobaz, and allies
him to a family of people who were seafarers and ship-carpenters.

* Lucas Jacq. S r Faromys. Longrais reads this Lucas Saumur, and it has
also been read by others Lucas pere S r Faucamps. The registers of St.
Malo are silent regarding him.

6 Franfoys Guitault was not one of the apothecaries of St. Malo. He
does not appear to have been a resident of the town.

* Georges or Georget Mabille, according to Longrais, who says that he
belonged to a family distinguished from father to son as cordwainert.

7 Guillaume Sequart. Longrais says his family came from the other
side of the Ranee; but, among several of the name, fails to identify him.

8 Jehan du Nort. This name has been heretofore read Jehan Duucrt;
but Jehan du Nort was a carpenter of St. Malo at this time and married
Henriette Bertrc.

* Thomas Boulain. He was the son of Bernard Boulain, Sieur de La
Gastinaye, and Perrine Maingard; and married, in 1517, Jehanne Chenu.

10 Michel Philipot, son of Pierre Philipot. The registers show that he
married Jeanne Le Huchestel, allied to the des Granches.

Jehan Fleury. He is supposed to have been brother of Guillaume
Fleury, chaplain of St. Anthoine.

308

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

31 Colas Barbe 1

32 Laurens Gaiilot

33 Guill* Bochier 1

34 Michel Eon 8

35 Jehan Anthoine

36 Michel Maingard

37 Jehan Margen

38 Bertrand Apuril 4

39 Gilles Staffin

40 Geoffrey Olliuier

41 Guill* de Guerneze

42 Eustache Grossin

43 Guill* Alliecte 5

44 Jehan Davy *

45 Pierres Marquier, trompet

46 Guill* Legentilhomme

47 Raoullet Maingard

48 Fran^ys Duault

49 Heme Henry

50 Yuon Legal

51 Anthoine Aliecte 7

52 Jehan Colas

53 Jacq. Prinsault 8

54 Dom Guill* Le Breton *

55 Dom (Anthoine)

56 Philippe Thomas,

charpentier

57 Jacq. Duboys 10

58 Julien Plancouet 11

59 Jehan Go

1 Colas Barbe, a name common in St. Malo; but the registers are silent
regarding him.

* Guillaume Bochier or Biochet. Too many of this name appear in
the registers to enable us to identify this one.

8 Michel Eon. The registers record the birth of a son, September 18th,
1533, to Michel Eon and his wife, Hylaire Fergot.

* Bertrand Apuril. The name appears in the registers but once, namely.
May 13th, 1570,— when he was one of the commissioners who had charge
of the fetes to celebrate the entrance of Charles IX into the town of St. Malo.

6 Guillaume Alliecte or AJlierte belonged to a family of distinction in
St. Malo and its neighborhood, but we fail to identify him.

* Jehan Davy. His name appears in the registers on several occasions—
as selling a house in 1545 and as a furrier in 1 366. It is quite likely that
he made the venture with Carder to Canada to advance his interests as a
furrier. In the list the name is apparently Ravy.

1 Anthoine Aliecte or Alierte, probably a relative of Guillaume, and who
married Robine Le Breton; baptized April 16th, 1529, “apres Piques.”
Anthoine’s name in the list appears with but one /.

1 Jacques Prinsault. He married Julienne Le Bret, who was of a family
of some distinction.

9 Dom Guillaume Le Breton and Dom Anthoine were probably secular
priests or chaplains. Their names do not appear in the subsequent records.
The latter was not completed on the original list, and is here supplied.

10 Jacques Duboys, brother of Julienne who was the wife of Estienne
NouSl, nephew of Cartier.

u Julien Plancouet. His wife was Jehanne Reumevel, sister of Esdenne,
before named.

309

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

60 Jehan Legentilhomme 1

61 Michel Douquais,

charpentier

62 Jehan Aismery,

charpentier

63 Pierre Maingard

64 Lucas Clauier

65 Goulset Riou

66 Jehan Jacq. de Morbihan

67 Pierre Nyel 2

68 Legendre Estienne

Leblanc 8

69 Jehan Pierres

70 Jehan Coumyn 4

71 Anthoine Desgranches 8

72 Louys Douayren 6

73 Pierres Coupeaulx

74 Pierres Jonchee 7

1 Jehan Legentilhomme. All that the registers show of him is that he
married Jeanne Richomme in 1518.

3 Pierre Nyel. Longrais believes this to be Pierre Ruel, bom January
12th, 1509, whose parents were Guyon Ruel and Perrine Rouxel. If so,
he became allied to Cartier by marriage.

8 Legendre Estienne Leblanc, Sieur de Bournays, who married Perrine
Brisart, the date of which marriage does not appear, nor anything else re¬
lating to him but the appointment of guardians for his children, October
19th, l 542, he having died in Canada.

4 Jehan Coumyn. His marriage to Ollive Le Breton in 1516 is all that
is known of him.

5 Anthoine Desgranches, more properly des Granchea, was probably a
brother of Cartier's wife. As his name does not appear in the division of
the property of Catherine's father, Longrais doubts if Anthoine was her
brother.

• Louys Douayren was a man who led a stormy life, being frequently
exposed to the rigors of the law, according to the records of his time; and
the good people of St. Malo probably did not regret his departure for
Canada.

7 Pierres Jonch£e. Two of this name appear in the registers, which pre¬
vents us from identifying the companion of Cartier. Both were men of
considerable distinction. In the list of Cartier's men at least twelve were
related to him by blood or marriage.

310

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

FACSIMILE OF THE ROLL OF THE CREW OF JAC8UES CARTIER,
PRESERVED IN THE ARCHIVES OF ST. MALO
(a translation appears on packs 307-310)

-voHf tray''

sJ*& /./■£ SLjoj >^ w j vk -

4 ^ c 3 fu#JL —

^<v.- Q.«^-

A * l ,

/? o^£L

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

16

*7

20

22

a 5

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

18 *y r ^&e*Cr i

19

/ —

23 ^ YU ~1 S'thy

2 4 */fsf~J ^WU.

ft

u.<~

n

J&<rgr JZc

/ 7 T^ ^

ty/faz £4fy <—■—

3 ia

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

36

37

38 .

39

40

41

4 *

43

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

^<hiA

3*3

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

69

70

71

72

73

74

3H

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

No. 5

JEHAN FRANCOIS DE LA ROCQUE’S LETTERS PATENT FROM
FRANCIS I, JANUARY 15, 1540

Francis, by the grace of God King of France, to all those
who these present letters shall behold, greeting.

On account of the desire to learn and have knowledgeN^
of several countries, part of which are said to be inhabited
and others possessed by savage, and strange peoples living ^
without knowledge of God and without good use of reason,
we have heretofore at great expense and outlay sent to dis¬
cover into several of the said countries, by some good pilots
and others, our subjects of good understanding, knowledge
and experience, who from some of the said countries have
brought to us divers men, and likewise among other things
have made discovery of a great part of the lands of Canada
and Hochelaga, and other places circumjacent, the which
have been found, as has been reported to us, furnished with
many good commodities, and the peoples thereof well formed
in body and limb and well disposed in disposition and un¬
derstanding, of which have also been brought us others
having the appearance of good inclination. In considera¬
tion of which things we have considered and determined to K
again send into the said countries of Canada and Hochelaga
and others circumjacent, as well as into all transmarine and
maritime countries inhabited, not possessed nor granted by
any Christian princes, some goodly number of gentlemen,
our subjects, as well men of war as common people of each
sex, ana other craftsmen and mechanics, in order to enter
further into the said countries, and as far as into the land ot

Saguenay and all other countries aforesaid, for the purpose
of discoursing with the said strange peoples therein, if it
can be done, and to dwell in the said lands and countries, ,
/"there to construct and”" 5 ulld towns and forts, temples and
\churches for the communication of our Holy Catholic '
3*5 V

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

Faith* and Christian doctrine, to constitute and establish laws
“Tn our name, together with officers of justice to make them
live according to equity and order, and in the fear and love
of God, to the end that they may better conform to our
purpose, and do the things agreeable to God our Creator,
Saviour and Redeemer, and which may be to the sanctifica¬
tion of his holy name, and to the increase of our Christian
faith, and the growth of our mother the Holy Catholic
Church, of the which we are said to be and entitled the first
son; wherefore, to attain and finally to give better order and
despatch to the accomplishment of the said enterprise, and to
all things concerning it, and which depend upon it and might
happen, it may be requisite and needful to depute and con¬
stitute some excellent personage of great integrity and loy¬
alty to us, and who may be of good sense, virtue and bear¬
ing, to be chief and conductor of this enterprise, and to
whom may be given by us such power and authority as such
business requires, to use and generally to dispose of, in all
cases and affairs presenting themselves, as shall seem to be
most expedient and necessary, as we might do if we were
there in person.

We make known, that on account of the good and entire
confidence that we have by long experience in the person of
our loved and faithful Jehan Francois de la Rocque, Knight,
* Lord of Roberval, and of his sufficient sense, loyalty, and
other good and praiseworthy virtues, him, for these causes
and others us moving thereto, we have made, constituted,
ordered and established, do make, constitute, order and es¬
tablish by these present letters, lieutenant-general, chief leader
and captain of the said enterprise, together with all the ships
and sea-going vessels, and likewise of all the persons, as well
men of war and seamen as of others by us ordered, and who
will go there in the said enterprise, expedition and army
going on the said voyage, and have given and do give him
full power, rule and authority, and special mandate to choose,
select and take whatever shall seem to him to be proper
and fitting for the business of the said enterprise and expe¬
dition, for him to place and select captains, port ensigns,
316

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

masters of ships, pilots and other men of war and marine,
and these to distribute from ship to ship and place and re¬
place them together as shall seem good to him, to command
and order in our name all the said persons, and to order and
dispose of their service and the form of it, and to ordain, en¬
join and direct all things which he shall see to be good, use¬
ful and convenient, at all times, under our authority, power
and rule, and by imposition and infliction of mulcts and
penalties, as well corporal and civil as pecuniary, and as
well on sea as on land, in places and parts which shall be
reduced under our authority, and as well to order payments
of their wages and salaries, and to increase and reduce these,
and the sums which by our ordinance have been for this dis¬
tributed, to extend, equalize and let run, so that if it be pos¬
sible he may increase in men and equipment; and all those
above said we will to pledge faith and oath to well and loy¬
ally serve us under the charge and authority of our said
lieutenant-general, and whom likewise we will to understand
and cause to be understood both by him and his said clerk
and deputies concerning the despatch and purchase of the
munitions and necessary provisions for the said army, and
to the reception of these, in putting them into the said ships
and vessels, and to the allotment, distribution and account
of these, that there may not be in this any abuse by this
clerk, and the above said ships and vessels appareled and
equipped and furnished with men, victuals, artillery, and
otner necessaries.

We have given and give by these said presents, power,
authority, and special command to our said lieutenant-gen¬
eral to take, bring, and cause to depart from the ports and
harbors of our realm, countries, and seigniories subject to us,
and to pass and repass, to go and come into the said strange
countries, to land and enter into them and put them in our
hand, as much by way of amity or friendly agreements, if
that may be done, as by force of arms, strong hand, and all
other hostile means, to assail towns, castles, forts, and habi¬
tations, and to construct and build or have constructed and
built others in said countries, and to place inhabitants therein,

3*7

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

to create, constitute, establish, dismiss and displace captains,
justices, and generally all other officers that shall seem good
to him, in our name, and whatever shall seem to be neces¬
sary to him for the maintenance, conquest, and protection
of the said countries, and to attract the peoples of them to
the knowledge and love of God and to settle and hold these
in our obedience, to make laws, edicts, statutes, and ordi¬
nances, political and otherwise, them to increase or diminish,
cause to keep, observe, and maintain by all ways and means
seemly and reasonable, or other exemplary punishment, to re¬
mit and pardon misdeeds to those who shall require it, even
as he shall see to be good, provided at all times that it be
not in countries held, occupied, possessed, and ruled, or
being under the subjection and obedience of any princes or
potentates, our allies and confederates, and also of our very
/ dear and beloved brothers, the Emperor and the King of

l _Portugal, and finally to augment and promote the good will,

oourage and affection of those who shall serve us in the ex¬
ecution and despatch of the said enterprise and voyage, and
in like manner of those who shall remain in the said lands.

We have, out of regard and love, moreover, given and do
give by these presents to our said lieutenant hill power and
authority over these lands, that he shall have acquired for
us in this voyage, according as it shall seem to him to be
convenient, useful, and profitable to give, and by this to
make gift of them for their successors and assigns to hold,
possess, and enjoy through them in perpetuity, in all rights
of property, grounds, and seizin, and estates obtained by
gentlemen and other men of excellent virtue or industry in
fiefs and seigniories, being holden and holding of us and
giving us fealty and homage, by reason of forts and places
in the localities which our said lieutenant shall order, or
others our clerks or deputies in his name and in his absence
and at the charge of us, to serve in the defense, instruction,
and maintenance of the said countries, and with such num¬
ber of men as the said fiefs and seigniories shall be charged
by the said leases, and with others of less estate and condi¬
tion, to such charges of annual rentals as our said lieutenant
3*8

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

shall think proper to the lands by their leases, payable at
the places designed, and in way and manner as they shall
be ordered, of which charges and annual rentals we have
allowed and consented, do consent and allow them to be
acquitted and exempt for the first six years, if it seems good
to our said lieutenant, or other shorter time that he shall
see to be feasible, except all methods of the duty of service
for war, defense, maintenance, and development of the said
countries; and, moreover, in order to give greater ambition
and courage to the said gentlemen and others, who by war
and sea more diligently and loyally serve us, we will, promise,
and consent that on the return of him our said lieutenant, he
may yet give and divide with them who shall make the said
voyage with him, the third of all the gains and movable
property accruing from the said performed voyage, and also,
in return to him, another third, as well to partly supply, if it
seems to us good, the capital and expenses that may be nec¬
essary for the continuation of the said voyage the space ot
five years ensuing, as also to somewhat recompense him for
his labors and expenditures ; and, as to the other third, we
have reserved and do reserve this to ourselves, in order to
be employed as it shall please us in several other voyages
that we have hoped, and hope to make for the increase ot
our holy faith, or otherwise as shall be by us hereafter
ordered, and wherein we intend and will our receivers or
clerks to exercise diligence, approved by good and true in¬
ventory in the ports and harbors of the places in which our
said lieutenant or other individuals of the said army shall
make return, and therefore we desire the said army to be
accompanied by several of our subjects whom we wish to
profit in the said voyage; and to the end that the said
country may more fully be discovered, and that moreover they
may enter to make forts, habitations, and buildings in divers
places of them, we have abundantly given and do give all
power, rule, and authority to our said lieutenant to associate
with him in the said army all gentlemen, merchants, and
others, of whatsoever occupation, quality, or condition they
may be, who shall desire to go, or to send to the said voyage
319

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

and country men or ships equipped and furnished at their
own expense, and to join them to the said army under the
obedience of us and of our said lieutenant. Which doing,
a thing will be by them accomplished most pleasing to us,
and which we greatly desire, and of the gain and profit
accruing from the said voyage give them part and portion
of it, such rights to us and to others of the said army re¬
served as by our said lieutenant and them shall be agreed,
and for this to pass promissory letters, and upon such, by
them or their attorneys, which now as at the time we hold
to be acceptable, we accept, approve, and ratify the contents
of them as if they were made by us in our person; and for¬
asmuch as some under cover of our said army may under¬
take to enter into the passages and straits leading to the
said countries of Canada, Hochelaga, and Saguenay, and
others circumjacent, without in the meantime them joining
and associating under the obedience of our said lieutenant,
and to cause certain grievance, evil, or annoyance to the in¬
habitants of the said countries, which might be the means of
alienating and diverting them from the good will and love
which they might have borne us and our people who have
entered into the said country, we have forbidden and do
forbid all our subjects meddling with them to navigate by the
passages and straits aforesaid unless they be associated and
joined to our said army and under the obedience of our said
lieutenant, nevertheless permitting them other navigations
and entrances to lands not forbidden by us, to which going
and coming we will and enjoin them in case of encounter by
land or by sea, to give all comfort and aid, favor and succor,
and to render obedience to our lieutenant, or others his
clerks with the said army ; and if heretofore we have given
any letters or authority to any person contrary to the tenor
of his said letters, these we have at present as at the time
revoked and do revoke, cancel, and annul by these said
presents, except as much and for as long as our said lieu¬
tenant may wish to tolerate and suffer them ; and forasmuch
as for the purpose of the said voyage and settlement of the
said countries it may be needful to pass several letters and
320

I V R B. A D E " Va B ORADOR 1

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

contracts, we have herein approved and do approve, authen¬
ticated and do authenticate the signatures and seals of our
said lieutenant and other officers in this respect by him com¬
missioned and deputed; and considering that there may
happen to our said lieutenant some sore inconvenience of
sickness, and peradventure the death of the aforesaid, that it
will be necessary on his return to leave one or more our lieu¬
tenant or lieutenants, we will and intend that he may nomi¬
nate, create, constitute, and establish one or more of them by
will or otherwise, as shall seem to him good, having equal
and like power, authority, and special command, or part of it,
which we have given and do give him by these said presents.
And because we have not sufficient knowledge of said coun¬
tries and strange peoples, in order farther to specify the
power which we might desire, and it pleases us that the
specifications here above declared may in no wise derogate ^
from the general power which we have given and do give
by these said presents to our said lieutenant, which isgener-/'
ally to dispose, do and order all things whatsoever, foreseen
and unforeseen, concerning the said voyage and expedition
of him, as the occasions and necessities shall seem to him to
require, and as we ourselves would and could do if we were
there in person, and that all this by our said lieutenant shall
be done, declared, constituted, ordered, established, contracted,
achieved, and composed, as well by arms, friendship and con¬
federation as otherwise, in any sort and manner as may be or
can be by reason of the said enterprise and despatch of it,
as well by sea as by land, we have approved, agreed, and rati¬
fied, we do approve, agree, and ratify by these presents, and
we hold and will it to be held good and available as by us
done. We order and command, by these same presents, our
said well-beloved and trusty chancellor, and all our well-
beloved and trusty presidents and councilors of our sov¬
ereign court, lieutenants, generals, governors of our country,
admirals, vice-admirals, provosts, bailiffs, seneschals, and
others, our justices, officers, and subjects, as well ordinary as
extraordinary, or their lieutenants, and to each of them on his
own part, as to him shall belong, that our said lieutenant,

” 321

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

from whom we have this day taken and received by reason
of the said charge of our said lieutenant-general the oath in
such case provided, they make, suffer, and permit him hereby
to enjoy fully and peaceably use, and by this to cause all
these to obey and understand, and as it shall appertain in
the things touching and concerning our said lieutenant, and
to give him in every way possible counsel, comfort, succor,
aid, and prison, if custom is, because such is our pleasure ;
and because by these presents our said lieutenant will have
business in many and divers places, we will that by the du¬
plicate or facsimile of these, made under seal royal, evidence
may be adjusted, as by this present original. And to the
end that this may be a thing firm and stable forever, we have
caused our seal to be placed on these said presents.

Given at Fontainebleau, the fifteenth day of January, the
year of grace one thousand five hundred forty and of our
reign the twenty-seventh. Signed upon the fold of the said
letters by the King, the Cardinal de Tournon,and we present,

Bayard

(a sign manual), and on the fold toward the end is written
the following:

Jehan Francois de la Rocque, knight, lord of Roberval,
has given into the hands of monseigneur the chancellor the
oath due and required, by reason of the rank of lieutenant-
general, chief leader, and captain, of the things contained in
these presents, and with the said rank and charge has been
received by my said lord the chancellor, this day, the sixth
of February, the year one thousand five hundred forty, me
present. Signed, Sanson

(a sign manual), and sealed sur queue double 1 with yellow
wax. (Collated.)

From the Registers of the Court of Parliament of Rouen,
with which, following the decree given by the said court, the
ninth day of March, one thousand five hundred forty, on
the granting of a certain petition and letters patent to the

1 Sur queue double —that is, a seal pendent upon double bands.

322

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

King, presented to it by Jehan Francis de la Rocque, Lord
of Roberval, for the voyage ordered by the said lord to be
made into divers countries transmarine and maritime, as well
Canada, Hochelaga, and Saguenay, as others, have been re¬
gistered the letters of power given to the said de la Rocque,
and other letters aforesaid, by him presented at the end of
the execution of the said commission, have been extracted
the letters of commission of the said de la Rocque of the
form and tenor of the above transcripts.

Curzcau.

No. 6

POWER GRANTED TO JEHAN FRANCOIS DE LA ROCQUE FOR THE
EQUIPMENT OF HIS EXPEDITION, JANUARY « S , 1540

To all those who shall behold the present letters, Jehan
d’Estouteville, Knight, Lord of Villebon, Lagastine, Blanc-
ville, Boislandry, Pretigny, and Vientes, captain, bailiff of
Rouen, councilor of the King our Sire, gentleman in ordi¬
nary of his chamber, captain of fifty men of arms of the or¬
dinances of the King our said lord, and guard of the pro-
vostship of Paris, greeting.

We make known, that the year one thousand five hun¬
dred forty, Friday, the eighteenth day of February, we have
seen, held and read, word by word, the letters patent by
the King our said Lord, of which the tenor follows: Fran¬
cis, by the grace of God King of France, to all those who
shall behold these presents, greeting. As we have consti¬
tuted, ordered, and established, do constitute, order, and
establish, our lieutenant-general, chief and leader, our be¬
loved and trusty Jehan Francis de la Rocque, Knight, lord
of Roberval, in a certain army which we are presently to
send into divers countries, transmarine and maritime, for
the enlargement and increase of our holy Christian feith,
and Holy Mother Catholic Church, be it known that we
have given and do give to our said lieutenant full authority,
charge, commission, and special mandate to provide and
furnish of himself all things necessary to said army, and to

3 2 3

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

levy or cause to be levied in all parts, places, and precincts
of our realm as shall seem to him good, paying therefor
reasonably and as is meet, and to take men of war or arti¬
sans and others of divers conditions in order to carry them
with him on the said voyage, provided that this may be of
their good accord and will, and likewise also provisions,
victuals, arms, artillery, arquebuses, powder, saltpeter, pikes,
and other offensive and defensive weapons, and generally
all clothing, instruments, and other things suitable for the
equipment, despatch, and efficiency of this army; and be¬
cause it suits him to have performed many undertakings
and tasks in divers things, and in several places; we will
and intend that all artisans and mechanics and others of
whom he will have need, have to labor and work at his
certain order by his clerks or deputies, paying them when
the work is finished reasonably for it, and, also, all goods
are to be given and delivered them before all other per¬
sons, paying for them a just and reasonable price; and,
moreover, we have given and do give power and authority,
by these said presents, to take or cause to be taken and se¬
lected, such number and quantity of ships and vessels by
purchase, freight, or charter, and in the manner that he
shall understand to be necessary to him, paying therefor by
him or his clerks and deputies reasonable and sufficient hire
and price, after consulting men skilled therein; and, never¬
theless, we will and intend that of the said ships, boats,
vessels and mariners, who by him, his said clerks and dep¬
uties, shall have been selected and chosen, no one else
may draw them away, overbid them, or help himself to
them in any sort or manner whatsoever, under pain of pun¬
ishment as to the case belongs. All which things aforesaid,
conducted as well by him as by his clerks and deputies, we
will to be quitted and exempted from all rights of peage,
passage, subsidy, 1 and impost. So give we command by

1 Peage wait tax levied on foot-passengers through a country; passage,
a permission to pass over sea; and subsidy, a tax by the ruler on subjects for
urgent occasions.

3*4

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

these same presents to all our lieutenant-generals, governors
of our countries, admirals and vice-admirals, bailiffs, sene¬
schals, provosts, masters of cities, ports, passages, justices,
officers, as well ordinary as extraordinary, and others, our
subjects, their lieutenants, clerks, and deputies, who have
to make, recover and diligently conduct and execute the
above, each in right as to him shall belong, they giving all
counsel, favor and aid to our said lieutenant-general, his
men, clerks, and deputies, and by this to constrain, or cause
to be constrained, all those who therefor shall be subject
to be summarily constrained, openly without form of law,
as for our great and urgent affairs, notwithstanding protes¬
tations or appeals whatsoever, which we will to be deferred;
and because of these presents it will be good to have busi¬
ness in several and divers places, we will that by the dupli¬
cate of these, made under seal royal, testimony may be as
well adjusted as by this present original; and to the end
that it may be a thing firm and established forever, we have
caused our seal to be placed to these presents.

Given at Fontainebleau the fifteenth day of January, the
year of grace one thousand five hundred forty and of our
reign the twenty-seventh.

So signed on the fold in the name of the King, the Car¬
dinal de Tournon,* and you present,

Bayard,

and sealed in yellow wax sur queue double .

In witness whereof, to this present transcript or duplicate,
which has been collated with the original letters by Guillaume
Payen and Jehan Tionne, notaries of the King our said lord,
in his name ordered and established at the Chatelet of Paris,
we have caused to be placed and affixed the seal of the said
present in our name to and above the first named.

Payen. Tionne.

1 Francois de Tournon was born in 1489, and in 1507 waa made arch¬
bishop of Embrun, becoming successively archbishop of Bourges, of Auch,
and of Lyons. It was he who introduced the Jesuits into France. He died
in 1561.

1U

325

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

No. 7

CARTIER’S PRESENTATION OF THE MANDATE OF THE KING BEFORE
THE ACCORDER OF ST. MALO, JANUARY *9, 1540

Saturday, the twenty-ninth day of January, the year one
thousand five hundred forty, before Monseigneur the Ac-
corder,

The said day Master Jacques Cartier has produced a man¬
date of the King given at Fontainebleau the twelfth day of
December, signed by the King in his Council, de la Ches-
naye, and sealed, which has been read and given for publi¬
cation.

Tenor of the mandate produced by Jacques Cartier:

Francis, by the grace of God King of France, to the sene¬
schal of Rennes or his lieutenant and accorder of the said
place, health and greeting. Our dear and well-beloved
Jacques Cartier, captain-general and master pilot of all the
ships and other vessels which we directed to be sent to the
lands of Canada, Hochelaga, as far as Saguenay, forming an
end of the north coast of Asia, has informed and shown us,
that for the forwarding of the said enterprise it is requisite
and necessary to obtain a great number of naval pilots and
other masters duly experienced in the practice of navigation,
to conduct the said ships, to which end he has directed him
to covenant and agree with several persons experienced in
the said calling and sea service, who have been by certain of
our subjects, as well of the town of St Malo as other towns,
ports, and havens of the duchy of Brittany, injuriously and
maliciously diverted and dissuaded, whereby the said voyage,
imperiled by the said great delays, is deferred against our
will and intention; the said Cartier petitioning concerning
this our provision, agreeably thereto. Wherefore it is, that
this being considered, we order and empower you by these
presents, and each one of you upon this demand, that you
326

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

inquire diligently, secretly, and fully concerning the said
hindrances, malicious and injurious dissuasions, and other
(things), concerning their circumstances and connections,
which more fully shall be given you by writing and declara¬
tion, if need is, by the said Cartier, in order that the said
information be made and reported before those of the men
of our privy council, they seeing that which is of right to be
ordered by them. To accomplish this we give you power
and authority by these presents, order and command all our
justices, officers, and subjects that in doing this they obeyyou.

Given at Fontainebleau, the twelfth day of December, the
year of grace one thousand five hundred forty and of our
reign the twenty-sixth. So signed by the King in his Council,

DE LA ChESNAYE,

and sealed with yellow wax.

No. 8

ORDER FOR DELIVERY OF PRISONERS TO JEHAN FRANCOIS DE LA
ROCQUE, BY FRANCIS I, FEBRUARY 7, 1540

To all those who shall behold these present letters, Jehan
de Mareau, esquire, lieutenant in the ordnance, lord of
Sully, warder of the provostship of Orleans, greeting. We
make known that, the year of our Lord one thousand five
hundred and forty, the twelfth day of February, by Fran¬
cis Taupitre and Claude Marchant, clerks, sworn notaries
in the Chatelet of Orleans, have been seen, read, held, dili¬
gently and duly examined, several letters written on parch¬
ment, whole and entire in signature, seal, and handwriting,
whereof the tenor follows.

Francis, by the grace of God King of France, to all our
beloved and trusty presidents and councilors, the men hold¬
ing our courts of parliament of Paris, Toulouse, Bordeaux,
Rouen, and Dijon, and to all bailiffs, seneschals, provosts,
and others, our justices and officers, being under their re¬
quests and jurisdictions, or to their lieutenant-generals and
private persons, and to each one of them, as to him place
3*7

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

and trust shall belong, greeting. For the enlargement of
our Holy Christian Faith, and increase of our mother, the
Holy Church Catholic, and other good and just causes us
moving thereto, we have constituted, ordered, and estab¬
lished, do constitute, order, and establish, our beloved and
trusty Jehan Francis de la Rocque, lord of Roberval, our
lieutenant-general, chief and leader of a certain army, which
we will to send shortly, and by him to be brought into
divers transmarine and maritime countries, as well Canada,
Hochelaga, Saguenay, as other countries not possessed and
ruled by any Christian princes, in order to accomplish which,
according to our will and intention, and to supply the said
army fully, it is needful and necessary to our said lieutenant
to conduct and be assisted by a great number of men prac¬
tised in war, and in all other arts, crafts, and industry, and
likewise some people to settle there; and on account of
the long distance from the said country and the fear of
shipwreck and maritime risks, and others regretting to leave
their goods, relatives, and friends, fearing to make the said
voyage; and, peradventure, as a number who willingly
would make the said voyage might object to remain in the
said country after the return of our said lieutenant, by means
of which, through want of having a competent number of
men for service, and other volunteers to people the said
country, the undertaking of the said voyage could not be
accomplished so soon, and as we desire and as it is requisite
for the weal of the human creatures dwelling in the said
country without law and without knowledge of God and of
his holy faith, which we wish to increase and augment by
great zeal, a thing, if it were not accomplished, which would
cause us very great regret, considering the great benefit and
public weal which would proceed from the said enterprise,
and as we have enjoined and verbally commanded our said
lieutenant to diligently execute our said will and intention,
to depart and commence the said voyage by the fifteenth of
April next ensuing, at farthest, if it can be accomplished,
which may be made difficult if he be not in the said time
provided and seized of all things which may be necessary
328

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

for the execution and despatch of the said voyage: in con¬
sideration of these reasons which we have undertaken in
honor of God our Creator, desiring greatly and with all our
heart to do the thing which may be to him pleasing, per¬
mitting, if it is his good pleasure, the said voyage to come
to a good end, we desire to employ clemency in doing a
merciful and meritorious work toward some criminals and
malefactors, that by this they may recognize the Creator by
rendering him thanks, and amending their lives, we have
thought proper to have given and delivered to our said
lieutenant, his clerks and deputies, to the full number that
he shall advise of the said criminals and malefactors detained
in the jails and state prisons of our parliament, and of other
jurisdictions, and such as shall seem to him, his clerks or
deputies, to be useful and necessary to carry into the said
country, against whom always suit may have already been
made and perfected, and judgment of death given thereon,
and for this we order you and each of you in nis power and
jurisdiction, as by him and to him shall belong, that imme¬
diately you give and deliver for the above said purpose to
our said lieutenant, or his clerks and deputies, said criminals
and malefactors, such as they shall desire to choose and se¬
lect, condemned and judged as has been said, always except¬
ing the imprisoned criminals to whom we are not accustomed
to give pardon, and to deliver them to our new entries; and
we will and command the records of the said prisoners and
the causes of their imprisonment to be to our said lieutenant
and to his clerks and deputies shown and communicated by
the jailers and registrars, without any delay, refusal, or retard¬
ment, to the end that of those prisoners, of whatever estate,
quality, or condition they may be,they may make such choice,
election, or demand as they shall desire, and because there may
be found in our said realm, country, and seigniories some out¬
laws, fugitives, and other malefactors who may be absent, we
have given and do give to our said lieutenant full power and
authority to take and receive, or to cause them to be taken
and received, if it can be done, in order to carry or cause
them to be carried into the said country under the charges,
3*9

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

conditions, and clemency such as we use and will to be used
toward the said prisoners, with the condition, always, that all
the said clerks shall be held to furnish the cost and expense
of their provisions, and other things necessary to them, the
two first years, and of the fere of the ships which shall carry
them into the said transmarine and maritime countries, so as
to cause them to be brought in safety to the ports and
places from which our said army shall depart, and which cost
and expense these criminals shall negotiate and adjust with
our said lieutenant, or his clerks and deputies, to whom we
have given and do give power and authority to do this ; and
we expressly charge you with the above said prisoners, out¬
laws, and fugitives, whom our said lieutenant, his clerks and
deputies, shall have taken and chosen to carry on the said
voyage, to deliver or have delivered, suffered, delivered, and
ordered to be delivered, replevy and deliverance of their
goods taken and seized, by reason of the deeds and crimes
by them committed, and not confiscated, reserving always
to all the said prisoners banished and fugitives, and each of
them, the interests of plaintiffs and interested parties, penal¬
ties, forfeiture by you to us adjudged, and yet without de¬
laying for this to make deliverance of their persons into the
hands of our said lieutenant, his clerks or deputies, and con¬
sidering that the time is short for the departure of our said
army, the said prisoners and malefactors should employ
their relatives and friends to assist and aid them more
promptly to furnish and accomplish that which above is
shown them, the clemency of which we use, commuting the
penalty of death into an honest and useful voyage, with the
condition that when the said prisoners return home again
from the said voyage without express permission from us,
they shall be executed in the place in which they may have
been condemned, immediately and without hope of pardon;
reserving to us always hereafter to give them pardon for the
said voyage, after they shall have served in it according to
the duty which they shall have rendered to it, following the
report which we will to be made us by our said lieutenant,
or others, captains, gentlemen, and men of honor of the said
33 °

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

army; and in order to carry and cause to be carried and to
conduct the said persons into the places from which our said
army shall depart, we will and intend comfort, favor, and aid
to be given by all our justices, officers, and subjects to our
said lieutenant, his clerks or deputies, and prison, if need be,
the number of whom to carry and conduct into the said
ships we will to be known and received by our commissioners,
to enjoin or be enjoined, in order to receive the oath of those
who shall go on the said voyage, to the end that hereafter
they may be understood by us when it shall please us; and
of the number who shall be found by them, or, in their ab¬
sence, by our officers and judges of the places from which
our said army shall depart, we will our said lieutenant to be
acquitted and discharged, do acquit and discharge, and of all
that which by reason of them may be demanded of him ;
so we order, very expressly charge and command you by our
absolute power and royal authority, and to each of you as
right shall to him belong, which to accomplish and to do all
things without hindrance and delay, do ye obey and cause
to obey our said lieutenant, his clerks or deputies, and to
keep and observe these closely, imposing thereon perpetual
silence by all our attorney-generals and specials, present and
to come, because all the things aforesaid we will, intend, and
it pleases us so to be done, notwithstanding any opposition
or appeal whatsoever made or to be made, relieved or to re¬
lieve sentences and arrests which may be given against the
said criminals, ordinances, mandates, restrictions, or pro¬
hibitions, and letters to the contrary, to whom we have dero¬
gated and do derogate by these presents for this time only,
and for which we wish not to be delayed; and because by
these presents our said lieutenant, his clerks and deputies,
will have business in many and divers places, we will that by
the duplicate or copy of these, made under seal royal, evi¬
dence may be regulated as by this present original. Given
at Fontainebleau, the seventh day of February, the year one
thousand five hundred forty, and of our reign the twenty-
seventh. So signed in the name of the King in his Council,

Bayard,

33i

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

and sealed with yellow wax, sur queue simple , with the seal
apparent In witness whereof, we, by the relation of the
said notaries, have caused these presents to be sealed with
the royal seal, with the contracts of the said present colla¬
tion, which were made the year and day first named.

F. Taupitre. C. Marchant.

Endorsed, “ Duplicate of the power given by the King to
the Lord of Roberval.”

No. 9

POWER OF ATTORNEY TO PAUL D’AUXILHON, FEBRUARY * 7i 1540

To all those who shall behold these present letters,
Jehan d'Estoutville, Knight, Lord of Villebon, Lagastine,
Blancville, Boislandry, Pretigny, and Vientes, captain and
bailiff of Rouen, counselor of the King our Sire, gentleman
in ordinary of his chamber, captain of fifty men of arms of
the ordinances of the King our said lord, and established by
him in his Chatelet of Paris, was present in his person the
noble lord Messire Jehan Francis de la Rocque, Knight,
Lord of Roberval, lieutenant-general for the King our Sire in
a certain army ordered by the King our said lord, to be raised
and led, this present year, for the increase of our Holy Chris¬
tian Faith into divers transmarine and maritime countries,
not occupied, possessed, and ruled by any Christian princes,
as well into Canada, Hochelaga, Saguenay, as others, the
which knight, in virtue of the power given and granted
him by the King our said lord, has had named, appointed,
and deputed, and by these presents does name, appoint, and
depute, his attorney-generat and special, Paul d’Auxilhon,
nobleman, lord of Sainterre in the seneschalship of Car¬
cassonne, and living in the said place of Sainterre, to whom
he has given and does give by these said presents foil power,
dominion, authority, and special mandate, for and in his name
to be and to appear for him in judgment, and further to pre¬
sent himself in all courts, and before all judges to represent
his person, to excuse, examine his causes, and maintain jus¬
tice; to prosecute and defend, to plead for him or to under-
33i

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

take pleas, to carry them on and bring them to a conclusion;
in fine, to hold court and jurisdiction, and to accept the same,
if custom is, to take all oaths that the order of the law teaches
and prescribes, to ask and to accept all postponements; in
short, to take the care and burden of guaranty, to be joined
in all proceedings, to have made and to petition all post¬
ponements of causes, to select domicile, practise vigilance in
all places and oppose the obtaining of places in all cases and
to all ends; to make and to have made all citations and
indictments, to demand requests and decisions, present all
letters granted by the said constituent, or to grant and to
demand the granting of them; to have all arrests made, to
have and to bring to a conclusion all manner of complaints,
to produce and see witnesses sworn, to summon the oppo¬
nents of all complaints and sentences, to remove, prosecute,
or name in their place, if need be, and to substitute other
attorneys, one or several, that he or they may have the
power of the aforesaid or a part of them, and to revoke them
if it seems good to them, these presents remaining in their
force and virtue; and moreover, and especially of himself,
to appear by and before all judges, bailiffs, seneschals, prov¬
osts, justices, and officers of the King our said lord, being
within the jurisdiction of the seneschalship of Carcassonne,
Castres, justices and jurisdictions of Beziers, Narbonne,
Alby, Lymous, Allet, and the country of Sault, or their
lieutenant-generals, or private individuals, and to each of
them as the case and place shall require, and likewise to in¬
troduce and make known to them the contents of certain let¬
ters patent of the said Lord King, or the facsimile of the
said letters patent, given at Fontainebleau in the King's
name to the said constituent, and signed, Bayard, Monday,
the seventh of this present month of February, and sealed
sur queue simple with yellow wax, of which the facsimile of
the same has been delivered to the said d’Auxilhon in virtue
of the same and of these presents, to demand, release, take,
draw, and remove from prisons the persons who shall be
selected and chosen by tne said d’Auxilhon with the con¬
sent of those prisoners within the said seneschalship of
333

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

Carcassonne, and generally in all the ancient jurisdictions,
towns, and cities of the said seneschalship of Carcassonne, of
whatever state, quality, or condition that the said prisoners
may be, and with the aforesaid to take and receive the out¬
laws and fugitives of like condition, to manage, treat, and
arrange with the said prisoners, fugitives, and outlaws about
their expenses, transportation, conduct, and other things
necessary to them for the space of two years, according to
the price which the said d'Auxilhon shall see to be reason¬
able, having regard to the position and criminality of the
said prisoners, fugitives, and outlaws, all aforesaid, according
to and following the said letters patent of the said Lord King;
and besides to him, the said constituent, he gives power,
authority, and especial mandate to receive the amounts which
the said agreements shall exhibit, and to sign for acquittance
in the name of the said constituent, and of which prisoners
by him thus elected and chosen, the said d’Auxilhon at this
present time has promised he will be holden, and promises
by these presents to take and require good and sufficient
bail, duly certified, to have them brought and conducted
under good and safe guard, at their expense, from the places
where they shall be taken to the prisons of St. Malo de 1*1 sle
in Brittany, and this by the tenth day of the month of April
next to come into the hands of the said Lord of Roberval,
or his clerks and deputies for that purpose, and to render
or bring to them or to him to the said place the latest com¬
ers by the said agreements, within the said time, the names
and surnames of which prisoners, their former abodes, the
place and jurisdiction where they shall have been taken, the
bailiffs or others whom it shall concern, shall be written on
the back of these presents, and in this manner by this d’Aux¬
ilhon their discharge shall be given to the jailers of the pris¬
ons from which the said prisoners shall be taken; and after
having delivered the said prisoners to the said place of St.
Malo, as has been said, the said constituent has given power
to said d’Auxilhon to agree that the sureties, certificates, and
conductors for this given may be discharged, and the said con¬
stituent has also given to the said d’Auxilhon all power, direc-
334

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

tion, authority, and commission in that which concerns and
which may concern the case of the said prisoners alone, the
appurtenances and dependencies of them, that he has and
would have if he were present in person, although the case re¬
quires more especial mandate respecting the aforesaid condi¬
tions as well in virtue of the said present letters heretofore
declared, as the other two letters of power and authority given
at Fontainebleau the fifteenth of January, signed Bayard, and
sealed sur queue double with yellow wax; and likewise with
power to grant the said presents to visit, request, and de¬
mand the said prisoners by others as by him, unless the clerks
and deputies of the said d’Auxilhon may be able to enter
into terms with the which prisoners to draw them out of
the said prisons, and generally, moreover, to do all that has
been said, and which depends upon it, as much as, and as
the said lord constituent would do and could do if present
in his person, although it may be that the case requires more
especial mandate, promising the said lord constituent in
good faith under pledge and obligation of all and each his
goods, real and personal, present and to come, wheresoever
they may be, to hold at his good pleasure firm and stable
forever, all which by his said attorney shall be done, declared,
proved, and accomplished in that which is said and which de¬
pends upon it, and to pay the judge if it is customary. In
testimony of this, we, with the collation of the said notaries,
have caused the seal of the said provost of Paris to be placed
to these presents, which were made and passed the year one
thousand and five hundred forty. Sunday, the twenty-sev¬
enth day of February.

Montesse. Chenu.

No. io

EXTRACT FROM THE PARLIAMENT REGISTERS, MARCH 9, <54°

Extract from the registers of the court of parliament on the
petition presented on the part of Jehan Francois de la Rocque,
Knight, Lord of Roberval, lieutenant-general, chief and leader
of the army ordered by the King to be raised to send into
335

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

divers countries, transmarine and maritime, as well Canada,
Hochelaga,and Saguenay as others, for the enlargement of the
Christian faith, to which countries the King desires and intends
some places and forts to be built, and to be placed and left
there a number and quantity of persons, without which it
would be difficult to find men who would be willing to set¬
tle and remain there after the return of the said Roberval,
holding the same of Roberval by his said petition, and which,
in compliance with thecontentsof the letters patentbythe King
given at Fontainebleau theseventhdayof the month of Febru¬
ary last past, by which the said petitioner making appearance
by the duplicate, under the seal of the Chatelet of Paris,
declaring the original to have been sent to the parliaments
of Toulouse and Bordeaux, deliverance to be made to him,
or his clerks and deputies, of prisoners, appellants, or per¬
sons condemned to death, whom he shall require, and others
who voluntarily would go on the said voyage, whom it is
customary to deliver to the new entries of the King, and
state prisons and jails to be opened to the said petitioner and
to his said clerks, in order to speak to the said prisoners, to
choose and select them, and the records to be communicated
to him, referring also by his said petition to the granting of
other letters patent, given at Fontainebleau the fifteenth day
of January, also last past, the first containing the commission
and power given to said petitioner to the said rank of lieu¬
tenant-general, chief, leader, and captain of the said enter¬
prise, the others containing the power given to the said pe¬
titioner to provide and furnish all things necessary to the
said army, and to raise or cause it to be raised in all parts,
places, and precincts of this realm, as shall seem good to
him, paying reasonably for it, and as is proper, and also with
power to take men of war or artisans and others of divers
conditions to carry with him on the said voyage, providing
that it be with their good pleasure and will, and also
power to take provisions and victuals, arms, and other things
serving for the equipment, despatch, and efficiency of this
army, and that all artisans, mechanics, and others of whom
he shall have need, have to labor and work at his certain
command, by his clerks or deputies, paying them when the
336

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

work is finished reasonably for it, and all goods are to be
given and delivered them before all other persons, paying
for them a just and reasonable price, with power to take or
cause to be taken and selected such number of ships, boats,
and vessels, freight or charter, and of mariners, which the
said petitioner shall understand to be necessary to him, pay¬
ing for them reasonable hire and price, and sufficient in the
opinion of men skilled therein, and without any other being
able to draw away, overbid, or avail himself of the said ships,
vessels, and mariners, which by him or his said clerks shall
have been selected and chosen, upon such punishment as to
the case shall belong, and all things above said to be quitted and
exempt from all rights of peage, passage, subsidy, and impost.
The said petition examined by the court, the reply to it by
the attorney-general of the King, to whom by order of this
court the whole has been shown and communicated, the
duplicate of said letters given at Fontainebleau the seventh
day of February, the said letters of commission and others
of the said letters the fifteenth day of January, all in this
year one thousand, five hundred and forty.

It is declared that the said court, in regard and considera¬
tion of the contents of the said letters and petitions, and for
other just and reasonable causes and considerations thereto
it moving, them have granted and do grant, and, doing this,
have ordered and do order that the prisoners being in the prisons
of the said country of Normandy, together with the other male¬
factors and men of the character comprised in the said letters,
saving and excepting the prisoners who shall be held in cases and
crimes of heresy and high treason in the first degree, of coun¬
terfeiting money and other too monstrous cases and crimes,
shall be given and delivered to the said petitioner and to his
clerks and deputies, the officers of the King called as for
this to the places, showing previously being made by the said
clerks of the power that they have from the said Jehan
Francois de la Rocque,Lord of Roberval, and by leaving with
the registrars or keepers of the prisons, respectively, certifi¬
cation of the persons that they shall have taken therefrom,
and also with the charge to deliver by certificate and attes¬
tation to the proper judges of the places where the said pris-
" 337

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

oners shall be embarked, or to other commissioner deputed
thereto by the King, the names and surnames as well of the
said prisoners as or the outlaws, fugitives, and other male¬
factors, if any of them were taken by the said Lord of Rober-
val, or his clerks, or if any had been received by him in
order to make the said voyage, with the charges contained
in the said letters, and of which prisoners and other male¬
factors so delivered it is ordered that a list be made and
retained by the above said judges, who are ordered to give
and cause to be given obedience and assistance to the said
petitioner, and his said clerks and deputies, and to have this
permitted and complied with, so as to have the things con¬
tained in the three letters above mentioned given and de¬
livered to them, paying therefor reasonably, the whole ac¬
cording to the contents herein.!

Declared at Rouen, in the said court of parliament, the
ninth day of March, the year one thousand five hundred
forty. So signed, Surreau

(a sign manual).

Collation made with the original by me, notary and sec¬
retary of the King, the IHIth day of April, the year one
thousand five hundred forty, on Easter Sunday.

Ducodray.

1 Of these criminals there arrived at St. Malo, May 9th, 1541* eight
men and five women whose names have, strangely enough, escaped oblivion.
They were brought to the port in the Little Greyhound of Dieppe (Captain
Jacques Marcschal), and were taken to the place assigned them, fastened to
a chain, under the charge of Jailer Gaillart. They were as follows:
Lorans Bonhomme of Merville, age 25; Francois Gay of St. Leonard, age
about 27, and Mon dyne Boyspye, his affianced, age 18; Pierre Thomas of
Vauzelle, age 45 (Thomas was one of the guards, and was attached to the
chain because one of the prisoners, named Barbery, escaped from him);
Jehan de Lavau of Grenade, age 35; Cassette Chapu of Toulouse, age 40;
Bernard de Mirepoix of Roudes, age 30; Pierre le Canbegeur of 1 /IsJe-en-
Dodon; Antoinette de Parradis of Toulouse, age 25; Je hanne de la Veerie,
age 30, wife of Pierre de la Ferye of Toulouse; Mariette de la Tappye of
Muret, age 40; Pierres, from vicinity of Caatlenau, who had been condemned
to decapitation; Pierre Esteve de Montgaillard. Ail these had had various
experiences in life, and some had committed serious crimes. Francois Gay
and the young girl affianced to him have been mentioned in a previous note.

338

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

No. ii

JACQUES CARTIER’S COMMISSION FROM FRANCIS I,
OCTOBER «7, 1540

Francis, by the grace of God King of France, to all those
who these present letters shall behold, greeting. With the
desire to hear and have knowledge of several countries said
to be inhabited, and others to be possessed by savage peo¬
ples living without knowledge of God and without use of
reason, we have heretofore at great cost and outlay sent to
discover into the said countries several good pilots and
others, our subjects of good judgment, knowledge and ex¬
perience, who from those countries have brought us divers
men, whom we for a long time have kept in our kingdom,
having them instructed in the love and fear of God, and in
his holy law and Christian doctrine, with the intention of
having them go back into the said countries in the company
of a goodly number of our subjects of good intention, in
order the more easily to lead the other people of those
countries to believe in our holy faith.

And among others we have sent there our dear and well-
beloved Jacques Cartier, who has discovered the large coun¬
tries of Canada and Hochelaga, making an end of Asia, on
the western side, which country he found, as he reported to
us, furnished with many good commodities, and the people
thereof well formed in body and limbs, and well disposed in
spirit and understanding, of whom he likewise brought us a
certain number, whom we have for a long time supported
and instructed in our holy faith 1 with our said subjects, in

1 Donnacona, Dom Agaya, and Taignoagny were baptized, as appears
by the registry of St. Malo. Donnacona, being the so-called king of the
sarages, was doubtless named Francis for the King. The following is
a translation of the entry in the registry: "This day, Notre Dame, xxv th
of March, the year one thousand five hundred thirty-eight, were baptized
three savage men from the parts of Canada, taken in the said country by the
Honest man Jacques Cartier, captain for the King our Sire for the discovery
of the said lands. The first was named Charles by the venerable and dis-

339

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

consideration of which and seeing their good inclination, we
have considered and decided to send back the said Cartier
to the said country of Canada and Hochelaga, and as far as
the land of Saguenay, if we can reach there with a good
number of ships and of our said subjects of good intention
and of all conditions, arts and industries, in order to enter
further into the said countries to converse with the said peo¬
ples thereof, and, if necessary, live with them in order to ac¬
complish better our said intention, and to do a thing agree¬
able to God our Creator and Redeemer, and which may be
for the promoting of his holy and sacred name, and of our
mother the Holy Catholic Church, of which we are called and
named the first son.

Wherefore, it being necessary for the better order and
expedition of the said enterprise to appoint and establish a
captain-general and master pilot of the said ships, who may
have regard to the management thereof, and the people,
officers and soldiers, ordered and established there, be it
known, that we, with full confidence in the person of the
said Jacques Cartier, and in his judgment, ability, loyalty,
integrity, bravery, great diligence and valuable experience,
for these and other reasons thereto moving us, have made
and constituted, ordered and established, do make, consti¬
tute, order and establish him by these presents captain-gen¬
eral and master pilot of all the ships and other vessels or¬
dered by us to be used for this undertaking and expedition,
for the said position and charge of captain-general and
master pilot of those ships and vessels, to have, hold and
use by the said Jacques Cartier, with the honors, preroga¬
tives, preeminences, franchises, liberties, wages and benefits

creet master Charles de Champ-Girault, dean and canon of the said place,
principal sponsor; and secondary sponsor. Monsieur the Lieutenant Seigneur
de la Verderyej and godmother, Catherine Des Granges. And the second
was named Francis, the name of the King our Sire, by the honest man
Jacques Cartier, principal godfather; and secondary godfather. Master Pierre
Le Gobien; godmother, Madame the Lieutenant Seigneur de la Verderye.

The third was named -by Master Servan May-of the said

place; and secondary godfather, Jehan Nouel; and godmother, Guillemette
Maingard.”

340

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

such as by us shall be given him for this order, so for as it
shall please us, and we have and do give him power and
authority to employ, establish and appoint to the said ships
such lieutenants, masters, pilots and other necessary officers
for the government and management thereof, and in such
numbers, as he shall see and think needful and necessary
for the welfare of the said expedition.

So give we order by these said presents to our admiral or
vice-admiral, that having taken and received from the said
Jacques Cartier the proper and customary oath, they put
and install him, or have him put and installed in our name
in possession and seizin of the said position of captain-gen¬
eral and master pilot, and together with it, of the honors,
prerogatives, preeminences, franchises, liberties, wages and
benefits, such as by us shall be ordered him therefor, mak¬
ing, permitting and leaving him to enjoy and use freely and
peaceably and to be obeyed and listened to by all, and as it
shall be meet in the things touching and concerning the
said position and charge; and, moreover, to allow and per¬
mit him to take the little galleon, called rEmerillon y which
he now has of us, the which is already old and rotten, in
order to serve in repairing those of the ships which shall
have need of it, and which we wish to have taken by the
said Cartier and used for the purpose aforesaid, without
being obliged to render any other account of it nor of the
residue, and from which account and residue we have dis¬
charged and do discharge him by these presents, by which
we also command our provost of Paris, bailiffs of Rouen, of
Caen, of Orleans, of Blois and of Tours, seneschals of Maine,
of Anjou and Guienne, and all our other bailiffs, seneschals,
provosts and allowers and others, our justices and officers,
as well of our said realm as of our country of Brittany
united to it, with whom are any prisoners accused or con¬
victed of any crimes, whatsoever they may be, except the
crimes of heresy and high treason divine and human toward
us, and makers of false money, that they forthwith deliver,
render, and give into the hands of the said Cartier, or his
clerks and deputies bearing these presents, or the duplicate
34 1

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

of them, for our service in the said enterprise and expedi¬
tion, those of the said prisoners which he shall consider to
be fit and capable for service in this expedition, to the
number of fifty persons, and according to the choice that
the said Cartier shall make of them, those first judged
and condemned according to their demerits and the gravity
of their offenses; if they have been judged and not con¬
demned, and if satisfaction also previously decreed the
plaintiffs and parties concerned yet had not been made, for
which cause, however, we do not desire the delivery of their
persons into the hands of the said Cartier, if he finds them
fit for service, to be delayed nor kept back, but the said
satisfaction shall be taken upon their goods only, and which
delivery of the said prisoners, accused or prosecuted, we
wish to be made into the hands of the said Cartier for the
purpose aforesaid by our said justices and officers respec¬
tively and by each of them within their charge, authority
and jurisdiction, notwithstanding oppositions or appeals
whatsoever made or to be made, taken up or to be taken
up, and so that by these means the delivery in the manner
aforesaid may in no way be deferred; and in order that no
greater number of them be drawn than the said fifty, we
will that each delivery made by our said officers to the said
Cartier be written and attested in the margin of these pres¬
ents, and, moreover, that registry of them be made by them
and forthwith sent to our loved and loyal chancellor, in order
to make known the number and quality of those who shall
have been thus given and delivered. For such is our plea¬
sure. In witness whereof we have caused our seal to be
affixed to these said presents. Given at St. Pris, the seven¬
teenth day of October, the year of grace one thousand five
hundred and forty, and of our reign the twenty-sixth.

So signed on the fold by the King, Monseigneur the
Chancellor, and others present, de la Chesnaye,

and sealed upon the said fold h queue simple of yellow wax. 1

1 A queue simple or sur queue simple —that i* f a aeal appended
to a corner of the parchment.

342

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

To which letters are attached, under counter-seal, other
letters patent, of which the tenor follows:

Heniy, elder son of the King, Dauphin of Viennois,
Duke of Brittany, Count of Valentinois and of Diois, to our
loved and loyal people of our council and chancellery,
seneschals, allowers, lieutenants, and to all our other min¬
isters of justice and officers in our said country and duchy,
greeting. We command you that, following the contents
of the letters patent of the King our very honored lord and
father, given in this place of St. Pris, the seventeenth day
of this present month, to which these presents are attached
under the counter-seal of our chancellery, you have to
forthwith deliver, render and give into the hands of our
dear and well-beloved Jacques Cartier, captain-general and
pilot of all the ships, and other vessels, which the King our
lord and father sends into the country of Canada and Hoche-
laga and as far as to the land of the Saguenay, for the causes
fully declared in the said letters, or to his clerks and depu¬
ties bearing the said letters and these said presents, the
prisoners being before you accused or charged with any
crime whatsoever, except the crime of heresy and high trea¬
son divine and human, and makers of false money, whom
the said Cartier shall judge to be suitable, efficient and ca¬
pable to serve in the said voyage and enterprise, to the full
number of fifty persons and according to the choice that the
said Cartier shall make of them, those judged first and con¬
demned according to their demerits and the gravity of their
offenses, if they have been judged and condemned not and
satisfaction also previously decreed the plaintiffs and parties
interested, yet had not been made, without, however, de¬
laying for the said satisfaction the delivery of their persons
into the said hands of the said Cartier, if he finds them of
service, as is said, but to order this satisfaction be taken upon
their property only; and in order that there may not be
drawn of them a number greater than fifty, each one of you
respectively shall consult the margin of the said letters, to
see how many shall have been delivered to the said Cartier,
and 8hall have recorded and certified in the margin those
343

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

that you shall have delivered him; and nevertheless you
shall keep a registry of them, which you shall send to our
very dear and loyal chancellor of France, and of us, to show
the number and quality which shall so have been delivered,
the whole according to, and as is more at length contained
and declared in, the said letters of the King our said lord
and father, and which the said lord wills ana commands by
these.

Given at St. Pris, the twentieth day of October, the year
one thousand five hundred and forty.

So signed by Monseigneur the Dauphin and Duke,

ClaussI,

and sealed h queue with red wax.

No. 12

THE WILL OP JACQUES CARTIER BEFORE HIS DEPARTURE,

MAY 19, 1541

In right sworn before us notaries & received in the court
of St. Malo, subscribing, & by it were this day present
& personally appeared Jacques Cartier, captain & master
pilot of the King in the new lands, & Catherine Des
Granges, his wife, lord & lady of Limoilieu & citizens of
this town & city of St. Malo, of the one & the
other part. She, the said Catherine, at his request
competently, & to agree with that which follows to possess
& execute, authorized as well by her husband as by
Jacques Des Granges, lord of La Ville-es-eardz, her father,
upon this present, who bestows upon her his paternal
authority, to all of the contents of these presents, has
promised & affirmed by her oath & upon a general
hypothecation of all her property, present & future, by
this authority never to make revocation: & Jehanne
Cartier, sister of the said Cartier, also present, not to go to
the contrary in any manner; the which & each one above
named, respectively submitting themselves & have sub-
344

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

mitted themselves, with all severally their goods movable
& immovable, present & to come, to the power, right,
jurisdiction, authority, & obedience of our said court,
therein to furnish & to obey the law as to the contents of
these presents, appurtenances & appendages; the which
& each one, witnout any inducement or coercion, but
with their pure & free will, & as best pleased them, made
& make a contract together, one witn the other, as by
title of pure, mutual, & equal gift, of the form & manner
which follows: by the which they & each one between
themselves have given the one to the other, accepting re¬
ciprocally all of the usufruct, enjoyment, & revenue of the
houses, lands, appurtenances, inheritances, & things
hereditable whatsoever appertaining to them, whether by
purchase or otherwise in any manner & without any reserva¬
tion, in the village of Limoilieu, commonly called the house
of Limoilieu, situated & being in the parishes of Pasrame
& Saint Ydeuc, & each one, for the survivor to enjoy them
during his life only after the death of the first decedent has
happened, to acquit & maintain it in due & good repair,
while the survivor shall enjoy it, & without causing
alienation or waste of it in any manner whatever. More¬
over have the said husband & wife given for them, their
heirs & successors, the first decedent, the sum of a hundred
livres in money to be first taken & raised upon the richest
& principal rings & gold chains of their common
ownership, at the choice of the survivor, to the value of this
sum. Declared & agreed to between them in presence of
the said Jacques Des Granges, Jehanne Cartier, each one for
them, their heirs & successors, that if & in case that the
said death of the said Jacques Cartier should happen before
that of the said wife, in that case, during the life of the said
Catherine, that she shall enjoy the said place & lands of
Limoilieu, that she, Jehanne Cartier, or her heirs shall have
& enjoy during the said time, the usufhict, possession, &
revenue of a little house & garden behind, situated &
being in this said town of St. Malo next the walls of it in

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

the neighborhood of Buhen, adjoining on one side the street
of the said Buhen; on the other side & end to another
garden belonging to Jehanne Eberard, & the manor of Buhen
on one side. And if the death of the said Catherine
should first happen during the life of the said Cartier, that
he shall enjoy the same place & inheritance of Limoilieu,
that Jacques Des Granges, for him or his, shall have the
usufruct & revenue of the little house & garden being
in the said town, as is said, until the time of the death of
the said Cartier. And the death of the said survivor having
happened, all their heritage shall be parted & divided
among the heirs & successors of this husband & wife,
& each one as shall belong by right & custom. And
now, as at the time of the death of the first decedent, they
have willed & agreed, the one with the other, that the
survivor may take & seize the real, corporal, & actual
possession & enjoyment, without any manner or custom
of law, & themselves constituting one another, for the
survivor, to be the true possessor of the said title, for life
only, as aforesaid. And of this between themselves they
have promised good & due guaranty upon their said goods,
notwithstanding right & custom saying to the contrary;
the donor not to be held to guarantee the thing by him
given. And all the things & each one aforesaid the said
parties, & each one above named, & each one present,
for that which touches him, have known to be true, there¬
fore they have promised & sworn to hold & accomplish,
without power to go or do to the contrary, nor in any
manner whatever to have or cause delay therein, which they
have renounced. And therefore to do this we have, by
their consents & requests, adjudged & do adjudge them.

Given in testimony hereof, the seals of our said court
affixed to the contracts. And it was done & the agreement
taken in this said town of St. Malo, in the house & resi¬
dence of the said husband & wife, the nineteenth day of
May, MDXLI. So signed,

Jac. Cartier, G. Rehauld, F. Le Bret.

346

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

No. 13

French Corsairs 1

OPINION OF THE COUNCIL OF THE INDIES CONCERNING THE AFFAIRS
OF THE FLEET, THE DESIGNS OF THE FRENCH, AND THE PRE¬
CAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN IN THE INDIES IN CONSEQUENCE OF THEM

Having seen in the Council of the Indies the extracts
from the letter his Majesty wrote to the most reverend
Cardinal of Toledo, in reply to the report sent his Majesty
concerning the French corsairs said to have set out from
France, and the suspicion that was entertained in regard to
the fleet that the King 2 intended, as he announced, to send
out on voyages of discovery, in which his Majesty orders
the fleet to assemble to prevent these vessels; and after
having conferred a long time, in view of the difficulties in
the way of fitting out, this year, a fleet sufficient to resist
and attack that of France,—that at least one hundred and
fifty thousand ducats would be needed, and that nearly all
of this sum would have to be expended from his Majesty’s
treasury, since from the duties laid on merchants and
merchandise, he would be able to realize in advance not
more than from twelve to fifteen thousand ducats at most,
and that, too, on terms that were available only by reason
of their being taken at a high rate of interest; that for this
expense, the gold and silverbelonging to his Majesty, known
at present to be in Panama, having come from Peru, will
not be sufficient, and that in the other parts of the Indies
it is certain that there is none, because of its having been
used in payment of gold treasury warrants that have been
taken up: Voted, that the project of the fleet be over¬
ruled for this year, not omitting to take into account the
fact that the necessary things could be accomplished without
undue expense, if it should be decided to fit out a fleet in

1 This and the four following documents are translated front Coleccion
de Varioa Document©*, etc., Madrid, 1857, the originals being in the
Spanish Archives.

2 That is, the French king.

347

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

accordance with the foregoing plan. And, besides, it seemed
best that the equipment of the fleet be postponed, in view
of the fact that his Majesty made it known that he did not
wish war to break out through any act of his, but wished
the truce to be kept; and it seems that fitting out the fleet
was a demonstration of the contrary belief, since the King
of France proclaimed that he sent out only six ships, and,
by the commission given the captain, let it be known that
he was sending them only to the ports of the coast of Guinea,
which are within the trade convention of Malagueta, and
to Brazil, which is outside of his Majesty’s line of demarca¬
tion. Moreover, it is not to be believed that so small a
fleet would be sent to effect a landing on a coast already
held and colonized by his Majesty, since they would be lost
straightway. As for colonies being formed in the North
Sea, the French have nothing to gain from that; and, even
if they should gain a foothold, necessity would compel them
to relinquish it; indeed, corsairs which go on expeditions
do not go to anchor in port, but to prey upon the gold and
silver coming from the Indies, which is their profit; and,
as the sea is wide, they are able to seize and inflict damage,
going among the islands, or waiting by the capes as far as
the Azores, and for whatever may come up, unless the fleet
come upon them unexpectedly; and whenever it is known
that there is a quantity of his Majesty’s gold to transport,
a fleet can be sent to convoy it in safety.

No. 14

Bacallaos and Cartier

REPORT OP THE SPY SENT BY THE COUNCIL OF THE INDIES TO FRANCE
TO FIND OUT ABOUT THE FLEETS BEING FITTED OUT THERE

He says that at Crucique 1 two ships were being fitted
out, one of one hundred and thirty, the other of one hundred
and twenty tons burden, well equipped with arms and stores,
1 CroUic, a seaport at the mouth of the Loire and Vilaine, west of Nantes.

348

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

carrying one hundred and eighty men. Their objective
point could not be ascertained, but it was said to be a voyage
of adventure.

At Samalo de Lila, 1 on the coast of Brittany, there were
being fitted out, by order of the King of France, thirteen
vessels, well armed and equipped with all manner of sup¬
plies and munitions for more than two years. Of this fleet
Jacques Cartier had command, with whom, as well as with
his father-in-law, who fitted out the fleet, he had talked and
from them learned that they were going to colonize a land
called Canada; that to do this and build a fortress there they
were taking workmen and tools of all sorts, and were in great
haste. On the fleet it was said that it would set out about
the middle or the last of April of this year, and that more
than two thousand five hundred men would take part in the
expedition. This Jacques Cartier said that this fleet orig¬
inally contained certain ships that had been fitted out for
fishing in the Bacallaos.

In the port of Morlaes,® at Bresta, and at Quimpercor-
antin * there were two vessels and two galleons, very well
equipped and armed by gentlemen of the land. They said
they were bound for the coast of Brazil, mentioning also the
Rio de la Plata, and that they would set out before Palm
Sunday.

That at Anaflor* and at Conaflor® four very fine and
well-equipped galleons were being fitted out. It was said
for certain that they would join the thirteen other ships of
Samalo.

At Dieppe he learned that from that port there had set

i St. Milo de l’lsle.

3 Morliix, thirty-four miles northeast of Brest.

3 Quimper-Corentin, capital of the department of Finistere, situated on
the river Odet thirty-two miles south-southeast from Brest.

4 That is, Harfleur, which at this time was an important fortified sea¬
port. It has been supplanted by Havre, which is about three miles west-
southwest of it.

3 Honfleur, a similar mistake of the Spanish spy in getting the true name
of this place, which in Cartier’s time was an important seaport of Nor¬
mandy.

349

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

out fourteen or fifteen vessels and galleons for Malagueta
and Brazil, and that they also intended to go to the Rio de
la Plata. In the same town of Dieppe he saw being made
ready for sea five vessels of about one hundred ana thirty
tons—some said, to go with the fleet; others, that they were
going to Brazil and the Rio de la Plata; still others, that
they were going to discover certain lands and islands; he
could learn nothing definite.

It was said that the vessels that had set out from Dieppe,
and the five that were then fitting out, were equipped by a
very rich gentleman of that kingdom, trafficking by sea in
all the kingdoms thereabouts, whom they call the Viscount
of Dieppe. 1

This report having been heard, the spy was again ordered
to return to France and learn in the ports what had become
of these vessels,—whether they had set out, and with how
many men, munitions, and supplies; which way they were
going, what their purpose was, whether they had been armed,
and whether more vessels were being armed and equipped,
— and to bring back a complete report of everything.

No. 15

Florida and Bacallaos

RESOLUTIONS OF THE COUNCIL OF STATE AND OF THE INDIES, AT THE
REQUEST OF HIS MAJESTY, CONCERNING WHAT WAS PRESENTED
RELATING TO THE PURPOSE OF THE FLEET SENT OUT BY FRANCE

Having seen the extracts from the letter his Maj’esty
wrote to the most reverend Cardinal of Toledo, the report
from France, and that which was received here from the spy
that was sent, through Christobal de Haro, the copy of which

1 Jean d’Ango, by virtue of his importance as a ship-owner, was styled the
Viscount of Dieppe by his contemporaries, and later received the tide of
Sieur de la Riviere. He was noted for his wealth and his taste for art, and
stood high in the favor of Francis I and other members of the royal family.

350

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

was sent his Majesty, it is agreed, if what is said in this
report is true, that the first land whither they 1 went is
distant seven hundred and sixty leagues from Samalo in
Brittany, where the fleet was fitted out; that it can be no
other land than that which is entered by the coast of the
Bacallaos, a land which the Bretons claim to have discovered
long ago, since to that place it is exactly seven hundred and
sixty leagues, and there is no other land on the map that
will give the said seven hundred and sixty leagues, either on
this side of or beyond the coast which abuts upon Florida,
which is the discovery made by the Licentiate Ayllon and
Estephan Gomez, at present intrusted to the Adelantado
Soto. It is believed that this must be the truth, since by
adding the other seven hundred leagues, which they say
must be traversed, the Bahama Channel is reached, which is
the best position they could take, when war breaks out with
France, to inflict injury upon the vessels from the Indies,
since most of them come through the said Bahama Channel,
and not one could pass without being taken. This must be
their chief object in making settlements on this coast, since,
although the land is unproductive, this route is of the great¬
est importance for their purpose. If this is the case, it is
dear that they are going for the purpose of colonizing within
your Majesty’s line of demarcation.

Since there is no more certainty concerning their voyage
than what has been said, it seems best, in order to make
sure, to send two caravels—since the King ordered one to
be sent—on track of the fleet, so that if one is lost the other
may return with the news; and, also, to send another caravel
to the Cape Verde Islands to ascertain whether the fleet has
passed that way. Since some point out that it might be that
they have made their way to the Rio de la Plata, and to¬
ward the coast of the Maraflon * if by chance they should
be thrown that way; for the truth should be fully known.
This caravel can go and return quickly ; and, having learned
that they have not gone that way, it will be sure that they
have gone to the coast of the Bacallaos; and that until one
1 That is, the French. * The Amazon River.

35 *

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

of the caravels returns, or the French fleet is heard from in
other ways, no fleet be fitted out; but that, in August, the
vessels be made ready, which will not be necessary until
April, as well as five hundred fighting men for a year; that
the necessary preparation be made in case a fleet was to be
fitted out, since but small loss would be sustained should
these preparations not be needed; and that, at the same
time, the artillery, stores, and ships* tackle be put in
order.

Moreover, if it is pleasing to his Majesty that the fleet be
put in order, so that the place where the French have gone
may be definitely known, it seems that this should be done
with dissimulation, so that the French could not say that
through us war broke out and the truce was violated, as they
would very likely say when they learned that a fleet was
being fitted out. It seems also that we ought to secure
some person of authority, in whom are united the qualities
that a captain-general of this fleet must have, in order to
seek the conquest and discovery of this land; and stipulate
with him, and give him express orders, that he accustom
himself to make other agreements, so that the fleet be actually
maintained at his Majesty's expense; and proclamations be
made in the name of the discoverer and colonizer, and this
can be done with the requisite secrecy and dissimulation.

As to the fact that his Majesty wrote that he be informed
from what money this could be done, it seems that there is
at present no other money available except the gold and
silver that is in Panama, having come from Peru, and if it
is his Majesty's pleasure to use that, it is necessary to order
it to be brought at once, since, in accordance with his
Majesty's commands, the officials of that province have been
ordered not to send it until his Majesty’s fleet comes for it;
and if it should not be brought, it would cost a great deal
to borrow upon it the money at interest.

The other things which his Majesty ordered to be carried
out in the Indies, as well in the matter of fortresses as in
the rest, have been done as his Majesty directed.

This was sent to the Cardinal of Seville, and his reply his
35a

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

Majesty may see from the transcript of his letter which is
copied herewith.

COPY OP THE LETTER THE CARDINAL OF SEVILLE WROTE TO SAMANO

I have read two or three times the opinion upon which
the Councils of State and the Indies have determined,
with reference to the fleet which is said to be setting out
from France for the Indies; and after having carefully con¬
sidered the deliberations of their lordships, I see nothing
that can be added to or taken from them, except in regard
to the caravel or caravels which are to be despatched to bring
back intelligence. A clear title to sail should be given them,
so that, making their way into the midst of the French fleet,
they may not be regarded as spies and treated as enemies.
If this were the case, it would be impossible, except by great
chance, to avoid one of two things,—either they would be
lost, or we should have through them no definite news of
what was taking place; but as this must have been fully
considered at the time the caravels were despatched, we have
no need at this time to concern ourselves with this matter.
His Majesty might be reminded to look carefully into this
matter at the time when it shall be necessary. However,

I am persuaded, first, that the French are thinking neither
of the Rio de la Plata, nor the setting out from that coast
which extends from our boundary line to the strait; second,
that the journey which they say they made six hundred leagues
beyond Bacallaos, they are not making with the intention of
founding colonies and putting themselves in position to prey
upon our ships with ease, since this would be of no use to
them, except to break the truce between France and Spain ;
and, since tnis very thing is feared, all men ought reasonably
to hope that peace or the truce last a few years, in order to
make preparations for the great expenditures necessary for
victory in a redoubtable war. ^

It seems to me that this is nonsense. Their motive is I
that they think, from what they learn, that these provinces
are rich in gold and silver, and they hope to do as we have
done ; but, in my judgment, they are making a mistake;

93 353

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

for if there are no fisheries, this whole coast as far as Florida
is utterly unproductive. In consequence of which they
would be lost, or at best would make a short excursion, after
losing a few men and the greater part of all they took from
France.

Ask advice, I pray you, of the most reverend cardinal in
regard to what has seemed best to me, in order that the
courier, who is to take the reply to his Majesty, may not be
detained on my account.

Talavera, June io, 1541.

No. 16

Bacallaos and Cartier

EXTRACTS FROM A LETTER THE AMBASSADOR WROTE FROM LISBON
TO THE COMMANDANT MAJOR ABOUT SOLICITING THERE AN AR¬
MAMENT TO PREVENT THE SETTLEMENT OF THE FRENCH IN THE
BACALLAOS

I have received your Lordships letter of the 13th inst.,
and with it the report of the captain of a caravel sent
by his Majesty to the Bacallaos to find out what a French
captain, named Jacques Cartier, had done there. This
letter I at once showed to the King, and also to the Infante
Don Luis, and what the King had already replied concern¬
ing arming against the French, I sent his Majesty the 15th
inst. by one of my servants, whom I sent in company with
the Venetian and a Moor from Persia, who had come with
him from Sophia, who were traveling in company; but since
this will reach you earlier, I send you again herewith a copy
of the same letter.

The King, when I spoke to him again of this, told me
that the report and the extract from a letter written by his
ambassador in France, herewith inclosed, very nearly agreed;
and that, with reference to this matter, he had already told
354

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

me, that I might write them to his Majesty, the reasons
whence there was apparent to him the slight effect it would
have, on account of the expanse of the sea, for either his
Majesty or him to order fleets to be fitted out to prevent
the French from going on voyages of discovery. I replied
that up to the present time it would be a doubtful matter
to attack them, but that now it was known where the French
had set foot, and that they could not help being found; and
that although his Highness said that it was within his boun¬
dary lines, as he told me, and concerned him particularly,
that his Majesty, because of his great love for him, would
aid him with his fleet, so that conjointly the two fleets might
fidl upon the French and rout them utterly wherever they
found them; and that if this should once be done, not for a
long time—perhaps never—would the French fit out an¬
other fleet.

The King replied to me that where the French had gone
— to the Bacallaos—it was as cold as they say it is in the
latitude of Flanders, and that the sea is always so tempes¬
tuous that he says he lost two fleets there, and his father,
Don Manuel, the King, two others that he sent there; that
the French could not go to any place where they could do
less harm to his Majesty or to him; but that he would think
it over again and reply to me. He asked me for that report,
and I gave it to him.

I went over the same thing separately with the Infante,
Don Luis, and he made the same replies as the King, and
added that his brother, the King, had a great many neces¬
sary burdens to bear, both in the Indies and in other parts
of his kingdom; that he could not remedy these things;
and that there were many things that it was better to pre¬
tend not to see, than to interfere with, when they cannot be
prevented,—such as trying to prevent the French from
arming themselves and going on voyages of discovery; and
as for the river which the French had discovered, if they
could not reach the Southern Sea by it, it seemed to him
that what they could accomplish there would amount to
355

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

very little; it seemed to him, rather, that they would be lost.
I told him that I was of the contrary opinion; that once
established there, they would make discoveries all about
them; what was needed was not to allow the French to
make settlements either there or elsewhere, but to destroy
them utterly straightway. According to what they have
just said to me, I think that the reply of the King will be the
same as the former one; and I also think he would do so,
although the French should fall upon him here at Lisbon;
that he wishes to break with them openly, judging by what
he said in his Majesty’s letter. On one hand they show
here great weakness, on the other hand they wish to give
hence laws to the world; and certainly, if they should desire
it, since they have a great number of ships and materials to
equip them, they would be able to send from here in a very
few days a fleet that would be sufficient for this, without the
aid of his Majesty ; but they will not want to do it. I then
spoke to her Majesty, the Queen, upon the subject, and
since I saw how much her Highness thought of his Majesty
the Emperor, I hastened to say to her that what has been
done here in this matter I considered an act of great cowar¬
dice, since the King, her husband, said that where the French
had gone concerned him particularly; that, since he did not
wish to defend it, he hand over to his Majesty all this navi¬
gation ; that his Majesty would defend it as he had done the
rest of his possessions; and, in addition, other things to
make them ashamed of the injury they were doing in allow¬
ing this to be passed over in this way. Her Highness said
that she would tell this to the King, her husband, and work
for it with all her might; that she thought that this was not
given up purposely, but because they were aware of the little
good that could be accomplished in the matter. I will ad¬
vise his Majesty and your Lordship of the King’s reply;
and, since this servant of the most Christian Queen gave me
the opportunity, I thought best to send this to you in cipher
by him; and as he is a Fleming and, as Francisco de Guz¬
man and his wife tell me, very devoted to his Czsarian
Majesty, etc.

356

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

No. 17

French Corsairs

STATEMENT OF WHAT WAS AGREED UPON IN THE COUNCIL OF THE
INDIES IN REGARD TO THE FLEET TO BE FITTED OUT TO RESIST
THAT OF THE FRENCH WHICH IS SAID TO HAVE SET OUT FOR THE
INDIES ON A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY AND COLONIZATION

In the Council of the Indies, in presence of the most
reverend Cardinal of Seville, and of Count D’Orsons, Com¬
mandant Major of Leon, having seen what your Majesty
ordered written concerning the reply which the King of
France had given your Majesty’s ambassador and the most
serene King of Portugal in regard to the discovery of the
Indies, and, also, what the ambassador resident in Portugal
wrote, it was resolved as follows : That Christobal de Haro,
your Majesty’s agent, who is in Burgos, be again written to,
to the effect that, continuing the diligence which he had
previously shown in carrying out his Majesty’s commands,
he apply himself with the same diligence, or even greater,
if possible, to the instructions now given him anew, in order
that he may thoroughly acquaint himself with the prepara¬
tions, armaments and arrangements being made in these
ports for this purpose; whether the King of France, either
publicly or in secret, has given his subjects authority to
make discoveries in the Indies, and particularly whether
Jacques Cartier has this authority; whether certain ships
had already set sail; whether other vessels were fitted out,
their number and quality, the number of men that went in
them, and the route they took; that, in order better to know
the truth and the actual condition of this whole matter, he
should send straightway a trusty and capable man, and fur¬
nish him with everything necessary. We have his response
already at hand. In accordance with the information that
he will give, it will be understood how to provide for what¬
ever may be necessary in addition to what has already been
provided.

•3*

357

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

It was resolved to write to the officials of Seville, that
they straightway inform themselves as to what ships were in
the ports of Andalusia, either taking or awaiting cargoes, for
what ports each ship is destined and from what ports arrived,
and send a report of this, in order that at the proper time
those which are needed may be prevented from sailing and
seized; and that it may be brought about that no extravagant
expense be incurred, only what is necessary and unavoidable.

They will also be instructed to buy at once a very great
quantity of wheat and make biscuits, since in this matter
there is wont to be much delay, and nothing, or very little,
would be lost if they should not be needed for this purpose,
for there would be no lack of purchasers of them ; that the
same instructions be given them concerning the other sup¬
plies that are necessary for the said fleet; that the present
intention is to make provision for one thousand men at
arms. That your Majesty give explicit orders as to what
is pleasing to be done in this matter, so that there may be
no excess or shortcoming in what is to be provided, and that
until your Majesty's royal pleasure is known, or certain in¬
telligence had of what is being done in France, this limit be
observed. And that if the fleet is to be fitted out as your
Majesty orders, the chief thing is a good supply of weapons
and sufficient warlike stores, and that neither in the Casa de
Sevilla nor in the district is there a place from which suit¬
able supplies can be had and in sufficient quantity, and to
order them made anew is a great expense, and a greater
delay; this might be a reason for the precaution and expen¬
diture being of no avail. That your Majesty order to
provide what is most suitable to his royal service.

Moreover, it was agreed that the more quickly the one
who was to be captain of this fleet was named, the better it
would be. It was talked over in the Council what persons
would be qualified for this charge, since in other respects it
is different and more important than the other fleets that
have been fitted out for the Indies; and those at present
under consideration are the Marquis del Valle, Don Alonso
de Lugo, Adelantado of the Canaries, and Don Alvaro de
358

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

Bazan, and all of these are men of the sea, skilful navigators,
and servants of your Majesty; but it seems that the Mar¬
quis del Valle lacks no one of the qualities necessary for this
undertaking. However, your Majesty will nominate who¬
ever is pleasing. Since up to this time there has been no
conference with these men, and it might be that when your
Majesty’s nomination is made there might be some objection
to the nominee, and in returning to consult your Majesty
again there might be great delay, another one of the three
might be designated, or some one else more acceptable to
your Majesty.

The most important thing to provide for at present, it
seems, is that your Majesty ask the most serene King of
Portugal not to allow the French ships to take shelter in
any of the ports of his kingdom or in the Azores ; and that
if they should enter port they be treated as enemies of
your Majesty and his enemies too, since it is well known
that for no other purpose can they sail in that sea than to
do injury to your Majesty and his Highness; and that with
reference to this matter there should, on your Majesty’s
part, be shown the King of Portugal all the urgency the case
demands.

In addition, that your Majesty order from what funds this
fleet is to be raised, it being taken for granted that a tax is
to be laid; and, in the meantime, there will be found at in¬
terest sufficient funds to pay for it with the gold that will
come from the Indies for your Majesty.

No. 18

COMMISSION TO PAUL D’AUXILHON, JANUARY *6, 154*

Francis, by the Grace of God King of France

To our dear and well-beloved Paul d’Auxilhon, 1 lord of
Sainterre, lieutenant of the Lord of Roberval, health and
greeting. In order to assist, promote, and aid the said Lord
of Roberval with provisions and other things of which he
1 Spelled in the original Paul d’Ossillon.

359

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

has very great want and necessity, as we have understood,
in the lands of Canada, which he has recently gone to dis¬
cover, pursuing the power which he had from us, we having
considered and decided to send to him two of our vessels,
being on the coast of Brittany, which we have commanded
and ordered to be victualed and fitted out for this purpose;
in order to accomplish the conducting of which as far as to
Canada, it may be needful to commission and depute some
person for this, sufficient, capable, and experienced. We
make known to you, that we, confiding in your person and
in your good sense, experience, sufficiency, and diligence,
and considering that in order to be lieutenant of the said
Roberval, and that you have already made the said voyage,
you will know how to take the said charge, and to execute our
intention in this respect, as well and better than any other:

For these reasons we have you commissioned, ordered,
deputed, do commission, order, and depute, by these pres¬
ents, in order, after the said two ships shall have been vic¬
tualed, equipped, and ready to sail, to have them taken and
conducted to the said lands of Canada, the part where the
Lord of Roberval shall be, and we have given and do give
you hereby power, authority, and especial mandate to com¬
mand and order the mariners and others who shall be put
in the said two ships, what they shall have to do for our
service, whom we order to obey you, and to know what may
be best to do to make the said voyage in greater safety, as
we desire.

We command and also enjoin very expressly all master
pilots and mariners, our subjects, taking and making the
course to the new lands, that they have to accompany and
assist you during your said voyage, and to give you all
the aid, succor, and favor that they shall be able to, doing
this without any mistake, refusal, or opposition, upon pain
of disobeying and displeasing us, for so it pleases us to be
done. Given at St. Laurence, the XXVIth day of January,
the year of grace one thousand five hundred forty-two, and
of our reign the twenty-ninth, in the name of the King,

Bayard.

360

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

No. 19

ORDER OF THE KING TO AUDIT THE ACCOUNTS OF CARTIER AND
ROBERVAL, APRIL 3, 1543

Francis, by the grace of God King of France, to our well-
beloved and faithful counselor and lieutenant in the admir¬
alty of France, at the marble table of our palace at Rouen,
Master Robert Legoupil, health and greeting. In order to
see and understand the accounts of the receipts and expen¬
ditures which our dear and well-beloved Jacques Cartier,
our pilot, has made in the voyage by him lately accom¬
plished by our command into the country of Canada, and
of the moneys by him received for that service, as well from
us as from our late well-beloved and faithful cousin the lord
of Chateaubriand, we had heretofore commissioned and
deputed some commissioners, our officers, being near us and
in the suite of our person, which on account of other duties
and preoccupations that they have by their offices and pro¬
fessions, they have attended to and but little understood,
by means whereof the said accounts have not hitherto been
verified nor the true nature of the said receipts and expen¬
ditures of the said voyage known nor understood, to the
great concern and prejudice of us and the said Cartier, who
for this reason has very humbly prayed and requested us to
empower other commissioners to the effect as above.

We make known that we, fully confiding in your char¬
acter and judgment, integrity, loyalty, experience, and good
endeavor, have commissioned, ordained, and deputed, do
commission, ordain, and depute you, for and in the place of
the commissioners aforesaid, to assist with four good persons
of knowledge, loyalty, and experience, acquainted with the
expense of navigation, not suspected nor partial, by which
the said Cartier and the said Roberval shall agree before you
within eight days after the appointment of this present
reference is accomplished; and in default of agreement and
harmony by them, you shall take by your office (persons)

361

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

not suspected nor partial to either party, and with them
shall proceed to the auditing and examination of the accounts
of the said Cartier, said Roberval being called and present,
whom we will to be there summoned by the first proctor,
bailiff, or sergeant upon this requisition, if summons is
necessary; whether he appear there or not, it shall be pro¬
ceeded with by you and the said commissioners to the ex¬
ecution of this present commission, to hear also the difference
between the said Roberval and Cartier, as well upon the
fact of the said receipts and expenditures as others by them
respectively claimed, in order hereafter to give us advice,
and to the members of our privy council, as well, upon the
closing of the said accounts, and of that by which the said
Cartier at the end of them may be indebted to us upon the
judgment of the said difference between the said Lord of
Roberval and Cartier, and to return all to us faithfully
closed and sealed, or to the members of our said council, in
order, after considering it, we shall as well see what to do
by reason of this action. We have to you and to the said
four commissioners, who shall be by you chosen and elected
as aforesaid, given and do give power, authority, and com¬
mission, and special command, in discharging by this means
the four commissioners by us already deputed for the per¬
formance of their said commission by these said presents,
for such is our pleasure.

Given at Evreux, the third day of April, in the year of
grace one thousand five hundred forty-three, before Easter,
and of our reign the thirtieth. So signed by the King in
his Council, De Neasville,

and sealed with the great seal of yellow wax. 1

1 Seal* of different colors were used for distinctive purposes. Thus green,
signifying perpetuity, was espeeislly used by the king on edicts, privileges,
patents, and other very important instruments. The little seal of the chan,
cellery bore only the arms of the king and served to expedite acts of justice.
Yellow was used for ordinary despatches; red, for what concerned the
dauphin and Provence.

362

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

No. 20

PARDON GRANTED PAUL D’AUXILHON, SEPTEMBER 9, 1543

Jehan Francis de la Rocque, Knight, Lord of Robcrval,
Nogens, and Prax, lieutenant and captain-general in the
name of the King in the army, voyage, and expedition by
the said lord ordered to be made into the countries of New
France, 1 to all those who the present letters shall behold,
greeting. We have received the humble petition and re¬
quest presented to us on the part of our dear and well-
beloved Paul d’Auxilhon, Knight, Lord of Sainterre, and
one of those making the said voyage into the said countries
for the service of the said King, under our charge, stating :
“ That the year past you, 2 being in France to collect our
army, having constituted the said petitioner captain of one
of the ships named L* Anne , 3 being in the service of the
King, under your 4 charge to do what such service requires;
which doing, the said petitioner, pursuant to his authority,
which by a gentleman 5 belonging to the said ship you*

1 This document appears in Notes pour servir A PHistoire de Nouvelle

France, by Harrisse, a most eminent authority, but who has evidently mis¬
read a number of words. In fact, the transcription has been so carelessly
done as to make a lucid translation impracticable. In this case he reads
“ en ces pays de France neui a a tous ceulx,” etc. This would not be sense,
as the voyage was not to be made to any part of France, but to New France.
The word in the MS. is which makes sense. It is thought best to

note these errors in order to explain the reason for a divergence from the
French text of Mr. Harrisse’s very valuable transcripts, which are regarded
as authoritative.

2 Potts —that is, Roberval. To understand this we must bear in mind
that Robcrval is here quoting from the declaration of d* Auxilhon to him. As
Harrisse has it “nous," and does not punctuate nor place in quotation-
marks, it destroys the sense. We have taken the liberty to place quotation-
marks where the sense requires them.

* The author of Notes mistakes / for capital C. The name of the ship
was P Anne, and not Canne, as he has it.

4 ««y rc »» in t h e MS.—that is, “your” and not “our.”

5 In the MS., “ gentilhomme in the Notes, “yeune horamc. M

* •* Vous,” not “nous,” which destroys the meaning.

363

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

sent him on last Christmas day, being in the roadstead
of Laudevenec, 1 that he should not let a man leave his
ship without his permission, inasmuch as all belonging to
the crew of the ship of Captain Larticque,* or the greater
part of them, departed from you 8 without leave, and thus
the service of the King was a long while delayed. By rea¬
son of which this petitioner, desiring to prevent this, and
by his authority, seeing the same day in his said ship some
tired of the service of the said King and wishing to go
ashore, he forbade them to do it, even Guillaume Rogier, 4
boatswain of the said ship, and others, the which Rogier
began to mutter and incite one of his sailors, Laurens
Barbot, against the said petitioner, which Barbot, seeing
that this petitioner, as captain, wished to prevent them from
putting their will into execution, made an effort to lay hands
upon him, in such wise that he put his hand to his dagger
and would strike the said petitioner, his captain, with it, say¬
ing to him such words as these, drawing toward him: ‘ By
God's blood! you shall not kill the men *; wherefore, to
avoid and avert the imminent peril of death in which the said
petitioner was, he also put his hand to his dagger in order
to deliver a blow at the stomach of the said Barbot, whereof
he died. By reason of this a tumult sprang up in the said
ship, some of the said mariners crying, * To tne fusees and to
the pikes! * in such manner that upon this stroke, by means
of the said tumult, two other mariners were killed, but this
was not done by said petitioner; however, he suspects that
this may have been done by some soldiers, seeing the said
mariners stirred up to such fury, and that they had put
hand to sword on nis behalf. By reason of which the said

1 In the Note*, " Laudeneur’*; in the MS., "Laudevenec.** This it the
modem Lauderaeau, a seaport and manufacturing town in the department of
Finifitere, on a river of the same name twelve miles east-northeast of Brest.

2 In the Notes, "Capitaine Cartier*'; in the MS., "Cap** Larticque.”

8 This is "vous,” not "nous” as in Notes.

4 "Rogier** in MS.; "Roque** in Notes.

5 "Cannes 1 fer” in Notes, which is another misreading of l for C.
The correct reading is " lannes k feu,** a sort of fire-darts used at this time
in warfare, and which we translate ftuees.

36 +

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

petitioner greatly suspects that by a misunderstanding 1 by
men, not having active knowledge, however, of the said case,
as often happens, he was at last convicted of homicide, and
pursued for it with the rigor of the law.” *

And for this reason he has humbly requested us to grant
our letters of pardon and absolution, according to the power
and authority to us granted by the letters patent of the
King. Wherefore it is that we, these things being con¬
sidered, having regard to the common custom of France,
which is such that, in any legitimate defense whatsoever,
when such case happens, the King is requested to give
pardon and absolution for the conservation of the prerog¬
atives of law; likewise also considering that the said peti¬
tioner has done this out of zeal and worthy devotion in the
service of the King, and in order to avoid the imminent
peril which he saw in the aggression and rebellion aforesaid:

We, for these causes, and others us moving thereto, have
to the said petitioner and plaintiff given, conceded, granted,
and by these presents do give, concede, and grant, in the
name of the King, 3 letters of absolution and pardon, re¬
quiring all judges, bailiffs, seneschals, and accorders, and
other royal judges, to whom these said letters shall be pre¬
sented, to give confirmation of them to the said petitioner.
And, yet, as far as may be customary, and as our said
authority can be understood and permitted, we order and
command, in the name of the King, all our royal judges, of
whom the said confirmation may be required, that they
grant him as of lawful right, saving in other cases the right
of the said lord, and for the right of others everywhere, upon
pain of disobedience to the said lord: so we find it right to
do. Given, in testimony of verity, under our great seals.

1 In Notes, "per ong iceulx” instead of “par ung fkulx,” which makes
better sense.

* Here the quotation evidently ends and Roberval continues. In Notes
this is not evident, and the constant use of *• nous** for “vous” destroys
the meaning.

* “de par le Roy,” omitted in the Notes. These frequent errors
throw doubt on the verbal accuracy of other documents in this valuable
collection.

365

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

Done at Fort Francy roy, 1 upon Francy prime, this ninth
day of September, one thousand five hundred forty-three.

DE LA RoCQUB.

No. 21

POWER OF ATTORNEY TO PAUL D’AUXILHON, FROM JEHAN FRANCOIS
DE LA ROCgUE, SEPTEMBER n, 1543

Jehan Francis de la Rocque, Knight, Lord of Roberval,
lieutenant of the King in the voyage to the parts of Canada,
Hochelaga and other places toward Saguenay. To all those
who these present letters shall behold, greeting. We notify
you that we have established, ordered, and constituted, do
establish, order, and constitute, Paul d’Auxilhon, Knight,
Lord of Sainterre, our procurator-general and certain especial
messenger to transport himself to the place of Rochelle, or
elsewhere, in order to find two ships, having been in the
service of the King in the said country, one of them being
the King’s and the other ours, and, having found them or
one of tnem, to have them disarmed and put into better
service, that he shall even sell or pledge this our ship called
V Armey for such price as shall seem to him good, and all
artillery and other things being in the same, other artillery
and goods belonging to us being in the other ship of the
King, called the GaUion , and with the sums proceeding from
the said sales and pledges, to distribute them to the gentle¬
men, soldiers, and seamen returning in the said ships, as
shall seem to him good; and we give him authority more¬
over as to our lieutenant, to give to the said gentlemen,
soldiers, and mariners, having returned in the said ships,
their dismissals by writing signed by him, for their use and
service in time and place, as if by us in person they were
made, and generally to make announcement, procure, sell,

1 Ramusio and Hakluyt have read the title of RobcrvaP* colonial estab¬
lishment France Roy. Others have thought it to be Fran$oys or Franfois
Roy; yet in this important document there seems to be no doubt that it is
Francy roy. The word it repeated, too, in the same form in Francy
prime.

366

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

or pledge the aforesaid, as we would or could do if we were
there present in person, to bind by warranty the things sold
or pledged, our ship and our goods. In testimony of the
things aforesaid, we have signed this present, and caused to
be placed thereon the seal of our arms, the eleventh day of
September, one thousand five hundred forty-three.

J. la Rocque, by the command of my said lord.
Fouzet Cs.

No. 22

LETTERS OF CARTIER’S GRANDNEPHEW TO JOHN GROWTH, ACCOM¬
PANYING ONE TO HIS COUSIN, JUNE 19, 15*7

A letter written to M. John Growte, student in Paris, by
Jacques Noel 1 of Saint Malo, the nephew of Jacques Cartier,
touching the aforesaid discovery.

Master Growte, 8 your brother-in-law, Giles Walter,*
showed me this morning a map printed at Paris, dedicated to
one M. Hakluyt, an Englishman; wherein all the West
Indies, the kingdom of New Mexico, and the countries of
Canada, Hochelaga and Saguenay are contained. I hold
that the river of Canada which is described in that map is not
marked as it is in my book, which is agreeable to the book of
Jacques Cartier, and that the said chart does not mark or set
down the great lake, 4 which is above the sauts, according as
the savages have advertised us, which dwell at the said sauts.
In the aforesaid chart which you sent me hither, the great

1 Dionne, Harris se, and Longrais, all eminent authoritiet, ipell the name
of Carder*• grandnephew Nouel and Noel, and sometimes place a diaeresis
over the u in the former and omit it in the latter instance. It seems best,
therefore, not to attempt a uniformity of spelling, but to give the name as
it is found in different documents.

2 Jean Grout or Groote, Sieur de la Ruaudaye, was of Dutch extraction,
and was the son of Francois, Sieur de La-Ville-es-Nouveaux, and Guillemette
Colin.

* Guillaume Gauthier, Sieur de Lambestil. His wife FranfoUe was the
sister of Jean Grout, the student in Paris.

4 Lake Ontario is doubtless meant.

367

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

lake is placed too much toward the north. The sauts or falls
of the river stand in 44 degrees of latitude: it is not so hard
a matter to pass them as it is thought. The water falleth
not down from any high place; it is nothing else but that in
the midst of the river there is bad ground. It were best to
build boats above the sauts, and it is easy to march or
travel by land to the end of the three sauts; it is not above
five leagues’journey. I have been upon the top of a moun¬
tain, which is at the foot of the sauts, where I have seen
the said river beyond the said sauts, which showed unto us
to be broader than it was where we passed it. The people
of the country advertised us that there are ten days’ journey
from the sauts unto this great lake. We know not how
many leagues they make to a day’s journey. At this pres¬
ent I cannot write unto you more at large, because the mes¬
senger can stay no longer. Here, therefore, for the present,
I will end, saluting you with my hearty commendations,
praying God to give you your heart’s desire. From Saint
Malo, in haste, this 19th day of June, 1587.

Your loving friend, j ACQUES NoEl .

Cousin, I pray you do me so much pleasure as to send
me a book of the discovery of New Mexico, and one of
those new maps of the West Indies dedicated to M.
Hakluyt, the English gentleman, which you sent to your
brother-in-law, Giles Walter. 1 I will not fail to inform my¬
self, if there be any means to find out those descriptions
which Captain Cartier made after his two last voyages into
Canada.

Underneath the aforesaid imperfect relation that which fol¬
lows is written in another letter sent to M. John Growte,
student in Paris, from Jacques Noel of Saint Malo, the
grandnephew of Jacques Cartier.

I can write nothing else unto you of anything that I can
recover of the writings of Captain Jacques Cartier, my uncle,

1 For 1 copy of this map vide the new edition of Hakluyt’* Voyage*,
vol. viii, p. 27a, Glasgow, MCMIV.

368

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

deceased, although I have made search in all places that I
could possibly in this town ; saving of a certain book made
in manner of a sea chart, which was drawn by the hand of
my said uncle, which is in the possession of Master Cre-
meur, 1 which book is passing well marked and drawn for
all the river of Canada, whereof I am well assured, be¬
cause I myself have knowledge thereof as far as to the sauts,
where I have been. The height of which sauts is in 44
degrees. I found in the said chart, beyond the place where
the river is divided in twain, in the midst of both the branches
of the said river, somewhat nearest that arm which runneth
toward the northwest, these words following written in the
hand of Jacques Cartier.

“ By the people of Canada and Hochelaga it was said that
here is the land of Saguenay, which is rich and wealthy in
precious stones.”

And about an hundred leagues under the same I found
written these two lines following in the said card, inclining
toward the southwest. “ Here in this country are cinnamon
and cloves, which they call in their language, Canodeta.”

Touching the effect of my book whereof I spake unto
you, it is made after the manner of a sea chart, which I have
delivered to my two sons, Michael and John, which at this
present are in Canada. If at their return, which will be, God
willing, about Magdalene-tide, they have learned any new
thing worthy the writing, I will not fail to advertise you

thereof. Your loving fnend, j ACQUES No * L .

No. 23

COLLATION OF JACfiUES CARTIER’S ACCOUNTS BY THE ROYAL
NOTARIES, NOVEMBER s6, 1587

Collation made by us, Etienne Grave and Julien Le Sieu,
royal notaries of the court of Rennes established at Saint
Malo and Chateauneuf respectively, upon the originals ex-

1 This wu jean jocet, Sieor de Cremeur, then Constable of Saint-
Malo. He was not related to Carder in any way. Documents Nouveaux,
Longrais, p. 147.

369

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

hibited to us by Jacques Odievre, merchant, residing at the
said Saint Malo, one of the successors of the said deceased
Captain Cartier; and, moreover, the said Odievre has ex¬
hibited to us an account written on paper signed," Jac Car¬
tier,” containing seventy leaves of writing, the beginning of
which, as far as to the third leaf, verso, we have only with
the deduction, being on the last leaf of the said account,
inserted and forward, as follows, and no more, by reason of
the length of the said account.

To the end that by you, sir, Master Robert Legoupil,
councilor of the King our sire, and lieutenant in the admir¬
alty at the marble stone at Rouen, commissioner, by the
said lord ordered to examine and audit the accounts of the
receipts, disbursements, and expenses of Jacques Cartier,
captain and pilot by royal authority, on the voyage last
made by him to the land of Canada, and other places; to¬
gether to audit and understand the differences between the
Lord of Roberval and the said Cartier, four commissioners
being called in your company pursuant and according to
their commission, this Cartier is ready to answer and offers
to do according to the tenor of that commission, and ac¬
cording to the will of the said lord, that the substance and
manner of the said accounts may be thoroughly and com¬
pletely understood. And, first, deposes this Cartier and
charges himself to have been ordered by the said lord for
the execution of the said voyage forty-five thousand livres
tournois 1 being delivered to Jean Framjois de la Rocque,
Lord of Roberval, and to the said Cartier, for the execu¬
tion of the said voyage, to use and convert into things
necessary for such expedition, more fully named by verbal
agreement articled and specified on the part of the said lord
by Master Guillaume Prudhomme, Monsieur the General
of Normandy, and the said de la Rocque and Cartier, to
these presents attached, of which forty-five thousand livres

1 The livre tournois, or livre of Tours, occupied in the French coinage
the place of the franc of to-day, and was of about the same value; so that
the “ forty-five thousand livres tournois ** here spoken of amounted to some
what less than nine thousand dollars.

370

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

fifteen thousand remain in the hands of the said de ia Rocque,
with which he charges himself as appears by instruments
signed by the said de la Rocque, and Charles de Kermarec,
lord of the said place, and the said Cartier, under date of
the seventh day of May, the year one thousand five hun¬
dred forty-one, executed at Saint Malo, which instruments,
together with other papers, in case of the denial of the said
de la Rocque, it shall please you to examine and to allow to
the said harder his proofs and defenses, so that his right
will be seen to use the rest of the said sum, which is thirty
thousand livres, making two thirds of the forty-five thou¬
sand livres, which thirty thousand livres delivered to the
said Cartier by the hands of Master Jean Duval, the treas¬
urer of the exchequer of the said lord, for which sum the
said Cartier renders himself absolutely accountable, and pres¬
ently offers by clauses and particulars to show whether the
disposition of those sums has been faithfully proceeded with
by him; this, Cartier, protesting against revision and audit
previous to reply to what may be found ambiguous and
doubtful to prove, and promises, after verbal explanation,
by deeds, documents, and authentic instruments; praying
and requesting as to this, to have those seen, understood,
and received according as right and justice suppose the fact
for the said Cartier, even in things which otherwise could
not be understood, with which, the said Cartier charges him¬
self in proof, acknowledgment, and authentication, if more
ample proof be required. Moreover, the said Cartier
charges himself to have received from the said Lord of
Roberval the sum of thirteen hundred fifty livres tournois,
in six hundred ecus soleil, 1 which the said Lord of Rober¬
val took by loan of Francis Crosnier, citizen of Saint
Malo, which were used in part for the payments and disburse¬
ments of the said Cartier, and for which sum the said Lord of

1 •* £eu soleil.” This coin took its name from « triangular shield,
such as was borne by a man at arms, on its obverse side. On its face it
bore different devices. The ecu soleil bore the figure of the sun, and the
ecu de la couronne, a crown. According to this reckoning, the ecu soleil
represented two and a quarter livres—about forty-three cents.

37 1

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

Roberval has since given acknowledgment to the said Cros-
nier, Allouise Detiville, Sieur de Sunt Martin; and so the
said Cartier remains accountable for thirty-one thousand
three hundred and fifty livres.

The which debit known, it remains to audit and under¬
stand the reckoning of his credit, and this known to balance
it against the said debit and see which will come short.

But before proceeding farther, it remains to know and
fully understand the intention of the King, that in the
prosecution of the said voyage five ships should be fur¬
nished by the said Roberval and Cartier, as well for pur¬
chase of part as for charter of others, the whole carrying
four hundred tons burden, for which was ordered in general
eight thousand five hundred livres for all of the said ships
for the accomplishment of the said voyage, as it is stipulated
in full in the said verbal transaction agreed upon for the
said lord by Master Guillaume Prudhomme, and again
repeated and specified by the acquittance of the said Duval
at the time he took and delivered the said thirty thousand
livres to the said Cartier, and for more ample specification
of that which the said Cartier has done and employed for
the execution of all the said voyage, and this by the express
command, which must appear sufficient, of the said Lord
of Roberval, lieutenant tor the King in the said voyage;
the said Cartier declares, maintains, and affirms to have em¬
ployed, faithfully and better than for his own business, eight
thousand five hundred livres for the payment and repara¬
tion in genuine purchase of part of the said ships, and in
the settlement of freight and charter for the others, which
five ships he has himself furnished and paid for alone above
the said sum of thirty-one thousand three hundred fifty
livres that he had, carrying more than fifty tons burden be¬
yond the stipulation in the said verbal transaction and what
was commanded for the said ships by the said lord for the
execution of the said voyage, the whole by the command of
the said Roberval, as shall appear by express letters and
mandates from him, by reason whereof the said Cartier prays
372

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

that the said sum of eight thousand five hundred livres be
adjudged him in deduction and abatement of the said sum
of thirty thousand livres, and with which he is charged, re¬
gard being had to the duty that he has performed, likewise,
the said money of the King failing, that he had admitted
his own to hazard and great risks for the service of the said
lord, as will appear to you when he shall come to the point
of the third ship, which could not be paid as was the inten¬
tion of the said lord, but on account of the default of the
money, which the said de Roberval had, and was to bring
from day to day, in order to do that which might remain to
be done for this voyage, was Cartier by this compelled to
conduct the other two to his great hazard, even to loss of
right of charter, as is stipulated in full in the said article,
which the said Cartier places at the option and choice of
you, Messieurs, being for the said lord, at this present ac¬
counting, to deduct from it the said sum to him adjudged
by the said verbal transaction for the said five ships, which
is eight thousand five hundred livres, to which add that
which the said Cartier has expended for the freighting of
the Emerillon and repairing of the latter, which belonged to
the King, of the repairing of which it will appear to you by
inquest upon the fact by trustworthy men, which amounts
to the sum of a thousand livres, whereof the said Cartier
offers to make ample proof, and as to this charges himself
with proof sufficient to be fully understood that the expense
of the said two ships, the Ermine and the Emerillon , is four
thousand five hundred livres; and concerning the third ship
fitted out for seventeen months which it was in the said voy¬
age of the said Cartier, and for eight months that it was in
returning to the said Canada to fetch the said Roberval at
the risk of charter, as the other two, will be two thousand
five hundred livres; and for the other two, which were in
the said voyage, six months at a hundred livres per month
are twelve hundred livres; so that to this end will be eight
thousand two hundred livres; the said third ship remaining
acquired and proper to the said Cartier in retaining it, return
being made to the King at his appraisal with the repairing
373

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

of the said Emerillon , there will be found spent by the said
Cartier eight thousand seven hundred livres, that the said
Cartier prays to be allowed him in reduction of the charge
for which he is accountable, which is thirty-one thousand
three hundred fifty livres, and by thus deducting eight thou¬
sand seven hundred livres, but twenty-two thousand six hun¬
dred fifty livres will remain, for which the said Cartier is
accountable, and this he here deducts and places to account.

This present account has been by us, Robert Legoupil,
Esquire, licentiate in the law, lieutenant-general in the juris¬
diction of the Admiralty at the marble table in the ralace
of Rouen, of the high and mighty lord, Monseigneur the
Admiral of France, and commissioner of the King in this
affair, in the presence of Masters Robert Lelarge, Pierre
Caradas, advocate and procurator of the King, Jean Loue,
registrar of my said lord Admiral, Thomas Saldaigne,
Alvaro de la Tour, Francois Maillard, and Jean Noury, by
us called in pursuance of the commission to us directed and
sent by the King, have seen, heard, and proceeded to the
examination, auditing, casting, and calculating it conform¬
ably to the codes set down and written in the margin of
the said account and official report by us made and signed,
and by the above said officers and commissioners, it appears
according to the opinion and advice of the said commis¬
sioners, by the casting and calculation that they have made
of it, the said Cartier should have employed and expended
as well for ships, victuals, wages, goods, rentals, advances,
and other expenses by the said Cartier up to the rendi¬
tion of this account for the fitting out and despatch of the
said voyage, the sum of thirty-nine thousand nine hundred
eighty-eight livres four sols six deniers tournois.

The said Cartier charges himself with having received
from the King our sire, for the setting forth and under¬
taking of the said voyage, the sum of thirty thousand livres
tournois, by the hands of Master Jean Duval, treasurer of
the exchequer.

374

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

Moreover, he charges himself with having received by
the hands of the said de la Rocque, Lord of Roberval,
six hundred crowns soleii, valued at thirteen hundred fifty
livres.

So it appears that in allowing the said expenses and out¬
lays should be due to the said Cartier the remainder of his
said account for the undertaking of the said voyage, for
having laid out and promised to pay more than received, the
sum of eight thousand six hundred thirty-eight livres four
sols six deniers tournois, to the reservations and conditions
stipulated in the said codes and official report.

In witness whereof, we, lieutenant, officers and commis¬
sioners aforesaid, have signed and had these presents con¬
taining seventy leaves, sealed upon a cord passed across the
said account with the great seal of the said Admiralty, the
twenty-first day of June in the year of grace one thousand
five hundred forty-four.

Signed: R. Legoupil, R. Lelarge, P. Caradas, Thomas de
Saldaigne, Alvaro de la Tour, F. Maillard, Jean Noury,
J. Loue, and sealed with a seal of red wax pendant to
a silk cord crossing the said account.

Which above insertion, from the beginning of said account,
and deduction from it, we, the said notaries, have also faith¬
fully compared with the original, and the transcripts of the
letters and insertions here above contain fourteen leaves of
writing, without comprising that next following, where we
shall set our signatures, and the said fourteen leaves are
written by Sebastien Odievre, brother of the said Jacques,
and the originals of the said letters and accounts have re¬
mained with the said Jacques Odievre, and with his consent
the present transcript delivered to Captain Jacques Noel, of
the said Saint Malo, also one of the successors of the said
deceased Cartier, this requiring in order to serve him and
the said Jacques Odievre and their associates as well as of
right. Done at the said Saint Malo, by the said Etienne
Grave, the twenty-sixth day of November, the year one thou¬
sand five hundred eighty-seven, before noon. And the said
375

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

Jacques Odievre and Jacques Noel have signed. Witness
the royal seal here placed.

Signed: Jacques Noel, Jac. Odievre, E. Grave, notary
royal. Jn. Le Sieu, notary royal, and sealed.

No. 24

COMMISSION TO ETIENNE CHATON AND JACQUES NOUEL BY HENRY
III, JANUARY 14, 1588

Henry, by the grace of God King of France and Poland,
to our very dear and well-loved cousin, the Duke of Eper-
non, peer and admiral of France, governor and our lieuten¬
ant-general in Normandy, vice-admiral of Brittany, or his
lieutenant in the said admiralty, greeting.

Our dear and well-beloved Etienne Chaton, 1 Esquire,
Sieur de la Jaunaye, and Jacques Nouel, captains of marines
and master pilots of our city of Saint Malo de l'lle in
Brittany, nephews and heirs of Jacques Cartier, deceased, in
his life captain and grand pilot of marine, have represented
to us, in our council, that our late very dear lord and grand¬
father, considering the said deceased Cartier to have with
his care, labor and diligence, and very great expense, dis¬
covered the New Lands whither he might have voyaged, de¬
siring to people the said country discovered, by his letters
patent of the 20th of October, one thousand five hundred
and forty, despatched these provisional letters addressed to
the said deceased Cartier in order to make discovery of the
New Lands and country of Canada and other places adjacent,
at that time not known to be inhabited, nor discovered by
other nations, in order to carry and conduct there by sea
men and women, in order to people and increase the said
country, which task the said deceased Cartier would have
executed with all his ability as the said inhabitants bear evi-

1 Etienne Chaton, bora January 28, 1543, wai the son of Olivier Chaton,
Sieur de la Jaunaye, procurator, and Catherine Le Gobien, through whom
he was related to Cartier’s wife. His wife was Thomasse Maingard.

376

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

dcncc thereof; likewise building a fort there, and some other
places to accustom and subdue the savages of the said
country to the knowledge of God and of his faith Catholic,
apostolic, and Roman, under the authority and knowledge of
our said deceased lord and grandfather, to whom, for this
effect, and to favor the said discovery, and give means to the
said Cartier to support the necessary expense, had delivered
to him as much as forty thousand livres, which the said
Cartier employed, and having since rendered account before
commissioners for this deputed by our said lord and grand¬
father, at the end and closing of which is found to be due
him the sum of eight thousand six hundred thirty livres,
as appears by the documents hereto attached, but in pursu¬
ing the discovery of the said land and of the commodities
existing therein, after several voyages and long journeys, the
said Cartier having therein exposed his goods and means,
and those of his friends, and has deceased without any of his
heirs having drawn recompense of our said predecessors:

Nevertheless, that they may perpetuate the memory of
their said deceased uncle, as well as their own, and that their
labor and enterprise may not be imputed vain and illusory,
joined to the zeal and affection that they have for the welfare
of our service, having been from their youth bred to the
business of the sea, and in following the memorials of
Cartier, and the instructions that their deceased uncle has
left them, having commended to them in his last days the
execution and continuance of his undertaking, they are said
to have several times made the said voyage, continuing even
to the present, from year to year, to traffic there with the
said savages, as in the skins of buffaloes, buffalo calves,
martens, sables, and other sorts of peltries and merchandise
which are to be found there, having for some time brought
with them to the said place of Saint Malo some of the said
savages, and nourished them nearly a year in all gentleness
and friendship, and afterward carried them back into their
country to the precinct of Canada, in order to better facilitate
traffic and friendship with the said savages, by means of
which they are said to have since discovered certain mines
377

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

of copper at Cape Coujugon, 1 in the said country, from
which they are said to have brought us the evidence
after having made proof of it, having found and examined
some places and fortresses which might have been com¬
menced in divers parts and places of the said lands by the
command of our deceased lord and grandfather, being at
present in ruin by reason of not having been settled and
maintained, which is a very great loss and inconvenience,
for the country is said to be fine, large, and fertile, and pro¬
ducing fruit trees, vines, and other vegetable products suit¬
able for the nourishment of man, and very fitting for mak¬
ing trade and traffic therein beyond the profit that the said
mariners might be able to produce in time to this our realm:
Praying us, in consideration of the above, to cause some
money to be furnished them, as much for recompense of the
said sum due the said defunct, their uncle, as for labors and
services of the said defunct, in order to return to the said
country and lands of Canada, Coujugon, and other lands
adjacent, in order to build and construct, under our obser¬
vation, authority and obedience, some fortresses for the safety
and shelter of their persons and vessels and the preservation
of the said miners against the incursions which might be
made against them by our subjects and other nations, as they
say have been made against them the past year, three of their
pinnaces having been burned and another seized by force,
having deprived them of, and caused them to lose, their
traffic in the said last voyage, as they expect to let us know
about it hereafter, with the time and place of it; and the
necessity of our affairs could not permit the said payment,
and that of two thousand two hundred crowns due to the said
de la Jaunaye for his wages on account of his rank of captain
of the marine for the last twelve years, and without prejudice
to their due recompense and acknowledgment of the labors
of the said defunct Cartier, reserving the prosecution to a
more fitting time, it pleases us to accord to them and their
associates all the profit which shall proceed from the said

1 Coujugon, or, according to some readings, Conjugon. This place
has not been identified.

378

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

mines, and trade from the said peltries during the next
twelve years, with the power and warrant necessary for the
said voyage and discovery of the said lands of Canada, Cou-
jugon, and other adjacent places inhabited and not held
and possessed by other kings and princes, save the said
savages, permitting them to build at their expense, according
to their means, in the places and premises which shall be
needful for their refuge and safety in the preservation of
their vessels and ores, and at their risks and hazards, upon
condition always that the said trade may be in our name in¬
terdicted to all our other subjects, of whatsoever rank they
may be, and to all other strangers, upon pain of confiscation
of body and goods during the said twelve years next ensu¬
ing, if it be not by the wish of the said petitioners, and to the
effect of all the above, it pleases us to grant them every
year from our prisons the delivery of sixty persons, as well
men as women, of those who shall be condemned to death
or other corporal punishment, in order to carry them to the
said country of Canada to finish their lives, as well as by
work of the said mines and defense of the said places, as to
people the said country, as it is said to have been permitted
to the said defunct Cartier by our said deceased lord and
grandfather by his said commission.

We, having taken into consideration the said request and
had it considered in our council together with the duplicate
hereto attached, as of the said commission of the said defunct
Cartier, and the balance of his said account, with the order
of reception of the said de la Jaunaye into the rank of cap¬
tain of our marine, and wishing, as is very reasonable, to
achieve the result of the said discovery, since it was com¬
menced by our subjects, and under our said supervision and
authority, whereof the traces and vestiges of the said build¬
ings and forts which were begun still remain, we have, with
the advice and deliberation of the men of our council of state,
accorded and granted, do accord and grant, to the said peti¬
tioners, the same power which may have been given by our
said deceased lord and grandfather, and which is contained
in the letters of commission for this expedition, and of which
379

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

the copy is hereto attached, which we will and intend to take
effect under the names of the said petitioners as they have
been named and expressed, and as may be fully specified
herein; and in order to give more means to the said petition¬
ers to maintain the expense of the said discovery, we have
granted that they alone, and their factors and managers hav¬
ing power from them, may have all the trade and business
of the said country of Canada, Coujugon, and other adjacent
lands, in order to make their profit in it and enjoy it, as well
from what shall come from the said mines discovered, and to
be discovered, as from the traffic in the said peltries and other
merchandise, upon the condition of making our subjects ben¬
efit by it, and that during the said twelve years next ensuing,
so much of the profits and emoluments as they may be able
to draw from the said country during the said time, they may
not and should not be in our name, nor in others, compelled
to account for nor restore.

And to this end we have made and do make gift to them,
with the condition always of paying the accustomed duties
imposed upon the import of similar merchandise into our
realm, if any such are paid and due; and because there will be
need of men and women to people said country, we will, in
conformity with the letters patent of our deceased lord and
grandfather, that there be by our courts of parliament, pre¬
siding judges, and others, our judges, delivered in each year,
as many in number as sixty prisoners of those who shall be
judged and condemned to death or other corporal punish¬
ment, of whatever rank, quality, or condition, as they shall
find them to be necessary; and to the end that they may with
all safety labor in the said mines, we permit them, under our
observation and authority, to build and construct such forts,
buildings, and storehouses as they shall deem to be necessary
to the above end, and also for shelter, protection, and preser¬
vation of their vessels and ships, as well as of their mines
discovered and to be discovered; and to this end the said
petitioners are to cause these prisoners to embark in one or
more vessels, which they shall arm, victual, and equip with
soldiers and seamen to such number as they shall think
380

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

proper; these soldiers and prisoners which they shall carry
there to settle, hold subject and cause to live in the fear
of God, the Catholic, apostolic, and Roman religion, and to
follow our laws, statutes, and ordinances, and in the obedi¬
ence which to us is due, together to converse with and deal
by all ways of gentleness with the said savages, to draw, en¬
deavor to instruct and reduce them to the knowledge of God
and his Christian faith; to punish the disobedient and male¬
factors, who shall settle there, according to their demerits,
and generally to conduct all operations and projects of con¬
quest under our name and authority, by all due and lawful
means to bring the said country into our obedience; and in
order to do this, we have from this time retained and do re¬
tain the said de la Jaunaye and Nouel factors, negotiators,
and managers, bearing power hereby, during the said twelve
years, under our said favorable protection and special safe¬
guard, by making most express interdictions and prohibi¬
tions to all other subjects, and to all other nations, not
to give them any trouble and hindrance upon the building
of the said fortresses, nor to profit nor intermeddle in the
said traffic, as well in the said ores as peltries and other mer¬
chandise and commodities, which shall be found in the said
country, upon pain of confiscation of body and goods against
the offenders; unless during the said twelve years the said
petitioners, their heirs or agents, should be forbidden or
their present power revoked for any cause whatever; though
we will that it remain firm and stable without any one inter¬
vening therein; but should we desire hereafter to revoke
these presents, and to appoint there some other person*
than the said petitioners, before they relinquish the said
places and forts, we intend that they may previously be
reimbursed for that which r% due, both for the expense* of
the deceased Cartier and de la Jaunaye and for the erper,**
they may have been to for the execution of the said present
armament and ecvprr.er.t of vessels, bunding of for**, and
other expenses, that they shah* show to hare le/n rna/^ */,
the effect as above: ar-d we order a zA wr.ttAfA yoo a rA
our other judges and officers^ w.vvrr. shad concern, *//

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

the said (de la Jaunaye and Nouel) to enjoy our present
favor and, as above expressed, without suffering any hin¬
drance therein to be made or given them. On the con¬
trary, praying and requesting our very dear and well-beloved
brothers, cousins, allies, and confederates, kings and princes,
lords and potentates, not to permit their subjects to give to
the petitioners, their factors and managers, any trouble or
hindrance, the whole notwithstanding some grants, treaties,
passports, or commissions that might have been heretofore
granted by us, or which we may hereafter grant, to the
prejudice of these said presents, which we revoke by these
said presents; for such is our pleasure. And because the
said de la Jaunaye and Nouel, their factors and managers,
might have business in many and divers places by these
presents, we will that in the duplicate by them duly com¬
pared with the original by one of our beloved and faithful
notaries and secretaries, evidence may be adjusted as by the
present original. Given at Paris, the fourteenth day of Janu¬
ary, the year of grace one thousand five hundred eighty-
eight, and of our reign the fourteenth.

Signed by the King in his Council, Brullart,

and sealed.

No. 25

DELIBERATION OF THE BURGESSES OF SAINT MALO RESPECTING THE
INTERDICTION OF TRADE WITH CANADA THE NINTH DAY OF FEB¬
RUARY, THE YEAR 1588, AT THE BAY, BEFORE M. DE LA PERAN-
DlfcRE, LIEUTENANT

Upon the remonstrance of the procurator, having been in¬
formed by several of the burgesses and inhabitants that
Captain Jacques Nouel and others have obtained letters of
the King to trade to Canada, prohibiting it to all others for
certain years; a thing prejudicial to the generality of this
community; it has been resolved that the said letters shall
be opposed in the name of this community, in the court of
parliament of this country and elsewhere as need shall be;
and to accomplish this have consented that the said procura-
382

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

tor shall address a procurator at the court. For this pur-
pose, Charles Jonchee, mineur of the said town, shall deliver
funds to the procurator, which shall be allowed him on his
account.

Deliberation continued.

Feb. 27. Whereas, this assembly has been had because
of letters of the King, obtained by Captain Jaunaye and
Captain Jacques Nouel, touching Canada; and as the said
inhabitants have thought that any who handle the record
have interest in it, I have myself withdrawn from the report,
and for this Pierre Le Roy, notary royal, has been appointed
to report what was done.

No. 26

DECLARATION RELATIVE TO THE INTERDICTION OF TRADE IN .

CANADA, MARCH zi, 1588

Be it known, if the inhabitants of Saint Malo are well
grounded in pursuing the revocation of the said letters, and
principally the clause which carries interdiction of traffic and
trade in peltries, yet do not however intend to undertake
anything with the said mines nor things which they shall
discover hereafter;

And whereas the council may not be of opinion that we think
to have the said clause revoked carrying interdiction of traffic,
if some particular inhabitants of Saint Malo may be accept¬
able and favorable to enter into the premises and place of
said Jaunaye and Nouel, provided that they shall suffer and
permit liberty to all inhabitants in the said traffic and mines,
save for two or three first years, while the said Jaunaye and
Nouel may wish to restrain the said inhabitants and all
others from enjoying it for twelve years;

And whereas his Majesty might accord to the said particular
inhabitants the granting of their request they would be sub¬
ject to reimburse the said Jaunaye and Nouel their pretended
dues and wages and costs by them made and expended, re¬
gard being had to what they had given to understand and
3 8 3 1

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

to the contestations borne in the margin hereof; for if his
Majesty ordered that the said individuals and inhabitants
withdraw themselves from this proceeding, there would be
no merit therein;

Be it known if the said particular inhabitants having
obtained and set forward the business, come to know and
judge the said mine not worth the trouble of being further
pursuedj and discovered by them, this is a thing that they
may do, and remain free of it toward his Majesty, foras¬
much as his said Majesty does not give them any funds with¬
out the power hereafter to be inquired into.

It will be difficult for the inhabitants of Saint Malo to
obtain from his Majesty the revocation of the trade in
peltries granted to Jaunaye and Nouel, if they will not sub¬
ject themselves to the same charges and obligations in which
the aforesaid have bound themselves for the discovery of
mines and building of forts for the preservation of them,
because it shall always be said that the permission to the
above said Jaunaye and Nouel to have the traffic in peltries
prohibited to all others is like the interest and recompense
for infinite outlay and expenses that it will suit them to
make for the discovery of the said mines, to put them in
condition and prepare them in order to draw profit therefrom;

But if the said inhabitants should wish to subject them¬
selves to the like charges that the said Jaunaye and Nouel
have made, because the said letters are founded upon false
testimony, provided that Jaunaye is not the nephew and heir
of Jacques Cartier, or does not touch him by any parentage,
and as to Nouel, that although he may be his nephew ne
has several other coheirs, and that what Jaunaye pretends
to have done for the service of the King, whether in the tak¬
ing of Abraga, siege of Rochelle, and recovery of Belle-Isle
is most false, and that if he has commanded in one of the
six ships which were opposed by the inhabitants of Saint
Malo against the common depredations of the Rochellers,
the said service is due to said inhabitants and not to said
Jaunaye, who should be contented with being in the said ship
without doing any remarkable deed, these inhabitants shall
3 8 4

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

have the said letters revoked and render the traffic to the
said place of Canada free to all the town if it does not please
the King to permit it to all his subjects, and this being done,
more especially as the said Jaunaye has circumvented his
said Majesty in his remonstrances, as well for the effect
here above as that he has caused it to be believed that he
had continued the discovery commenced by the said Cartier,
and had made great and long voyages to Canada, where he
never was;

The said inhabitants shall not be held to pay to the said
Jaunaye the said wages of captain of marine, and no more
to the said Nouel as accomplice in the imposture of the said
Jaunaye and aiding in makingfalse statements inthe council of
the King; and in order to better facilitate the revocation of the
said clause, and to show the imposture of the said Jaunaye
and Nouel, it will be well that the said inhabitants take
power from the other heirs of the said Cartier to make clear
to his Majesty that the said Nouel is only the heir of the
said Cartier in a very small portion. 1

Resolved at Rennes, this nth of March, 1588.

Dourdin.

No. 27

EXTRACT FROM THE REGISTER OF ESTATES OF BRITTANY RELATIVE .
TO JAUNAYE AND NOUEL, SESSION OF NANTES, MARCH 17 , i$88

Upon the petition presented in the assembly of the estates
extraordinarily convoked by authority of the King in his
city of Nantes, by the procurator of the burgesses, peasants,

1 Upon the foregoing document* numbered 24, 25, and 26 there are
memoranda, probably made by the attorney of the people of St. Malo, to the
effect that Jaunaye wai neither the nephew nor heir of Cartier, and had
never been in Canada ; that Cartier wa* not the discoverer of the New
Land, and that he owed money to the people of St. Malo, which he had
promised to pay when hi* account* were adjusted ; that Nouel went to
Canada like other*, prompted by mercenary motives; that he did not sup¬
port the savages brought from there; that the alleged discovery of mines, the
ownership of boats burned, the fertility of the country, in fact, all the
statements of the two claimants were false.

38s

•5

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

and inhabitants of Saint Malo, called as one, Captain Jau-
naye and Jacques Nouei, under pretext of certain pretended
letters, which they claim to have obtained from his Majesty,
by which they pretend that all merchants of the said coun¬
try and others would be forbidden and prohibited from
trading or carrying on any commerce going or coming to
the country of Canada during the term of twelve years, and
that they only may have the power and authority to do this,
on account of, and in doing this, to cut off and prevent the
negotiation of ordinary commerce, which at all times is per¬
mitted to every one to the said country as to other foreign
nations, requiring the said procurator of Saint Malo, and
other procurators of the cities of the said country, who have
made the same petition to the said estates, to exercise power
therein; whereupon by the lords of the estates it has been
resolved and decreed, that those who have been deputed in
the assembly before the King shall represent before his
Majesty the consequence that it would be to the said coun¬
try if, for the profit of one individual, the said commerce to
the said country of Canada should not be free to every one,
and shall very humbly petition him to revoke the clause of
interdiction of trade and commerce carried by the said let¬
ters obtained by the said Jaunaye and Nouei; and to this
effect the said deputies shall obtain by it all the necessary
provisions to the contrary, for which shall be adjudged them
costs and reimbursements.

Done in the assembly of the estates, held at the Jacobins
of the said Nantes, the seventeenth day of March, one thou¬
sand five hundred eighty-eight.

Signed, F. G. P., Abbe of Villeneuve.

No. a8

DECREE OF THE COUNCIL OF STATE IN CONFORMITY TO A
PETITION OF THE MALOUINS, MAY 5, 15 SI

CONSIDERED By THE KING in his council the
petition presented to his Majesty by the commonality &
residents of the town of Saint Malo, tending to this, that
386

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

for the reasons contained therein, it may please his Majesty
to declare that by his letters patent granted to Etienne
Chaton, Sieur de la Jaunaye, & Jacques Noel, his said
Majesty has not intended to hinder commerce, trade &
free fishing in the towns of Canada, Coujugon, & other new
lands heretofore discovered, to all his subjects, & inasmuch
as need may be in this respect to revoke the said letters, & to
restrain & limit the prohibitions accorded to the said Chaton
& Noel for the lands which they may hereafter discover.

Copy of the decree of the said Council upon the petition of the
said Chaton & Noil of the 14th of January last; another
copy of letters patent obtained by them the said date & year .

THE KING IN HIS COUNCIL, in granting the said
petition, has declared & declares that by the said letters
patent his said Majesty has not intended to hinder the free¬
dom of trade & commerce of peltries & all other sorts of
merchandise to all his subjects in the said islands of Canada
& Coujugon, & of the customary fishing. Ordered that the
said subjects shall continue the said trade & fishing in all
freedom, as they have been accustomed, notwithstanding
the said letters & decree & other like letters which may
have been obtained by his said subjects, the which decree &
letters moreover, & for the lands which shall hereafter be
discovered by the said Chaton & Noel so much only shall
grow out of their full & entire effect.

Made by the said Council of State, held at Paris, the
fifth day of May, one thousand five hundred and eighty-
eight.

Signed, Forget.

Compared with the original by me, notary, secretary of
the King, Bardoul.

No. 29

ORDER OF THE KING UPON THE BILL OF REMONSTRANCES OF THE
THREE ESTATES, fULY 19, 15 SI

Henry, by the Grace of God King of France and Poland,
and to our beloved and faithful councilors, the men hold-

387

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

ing our court of parliament of Brittany, seneschals of the
said country or their lieutenants, provosts, masters of the
ports, guards, and all our other justices and officers that it
shall concern, greeting.

We have haul considered in our council the bill of remon¬
strances of our well-beloved the men of the three estates 1
of our country and duchy of Brittany, presented to us
by their deputies holding, among other things, that from
all time commerce and trade has been free to our subjects
of the said country with the savages and others, Newfound¬
land, country of Canada, Coujugon and other places, as well
in peltries and fish as in other commodities of whatsoever
kind they may be: Notwithstanding, Etienne Chaton, Sicur
de la Jaunaye, and Jacques Nouel, inhabitants of Saint Malo,
upon their testimony to have made some discoveries in the
said islands, have obtained from us letters patent from the
XIVth of January last, carrying interdiction to all others
from trading in the said country during the term of twelve
years, pretending by these means to obstruct the ancient and
accustomed liberty of the commerce of the said province
in general: requesting us very humbly to revoke the said
letters obtained by the said Chaton and Nouel, and to order
that, without having regard to them, it shall be permitted
to our subjects to trade in the said islands with the same
liberty as in the past.

We have also had shown that those of the great salt com¬
pany 2 wished to impose a rate on salt, and to fix a tax on
it, from whence it comes about that several companies of the
said country, and among others of the territory of Guerande,*
being compelled to give their commodities at the rate
of the said factor, receive infinite loss, not drawing the
twentieth part of their income, as they have been accustomed,
contrary to our intention, which has not been to interfere with

1 The three estates comprised the nobility, the clergy, and the common
people.

3 This company controlled a large portion of the salt industry of Brouage
and vicinity.

8 A walled town in the department of Loirc-Inferieure, and in Carrier'!
day of considerable importance, especially for defense.

3 »*

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

the liberty of selling nor buying by agreement, and at such
price as seems good to the merchants, by occasion of which
they cannot pay over fuages 1 and subsidies, thereby caus¬
ing great diminution of the duty imposed upon salt, which
is so much less that salt is given out at a mean price, re¬
questing us very humbly to rule them upon this appeal: we,
for these causes, with the advice of our council, desiring to
gratify the said estates in whatever shall be possible, and to
preserve them in their ancient liberties, in consideration of
the good service which they have performed for the preser¬
vation of the said country in our obedience, inclining to their
request, have revoked and do revoke the said letters of
interdiction obtained by the said de la Jaunaye and Nouel,
carrying prohibition to all others from trading to the said
places during the term of twelve yeare, without the grantees
assisting or prevailing in any manner to the prejudice of the
inhabitants of the province, making always exception and res¬
ervation in respect to the mines for which they have made
research and discovery, which interdictions and prohibitions
we have raised and removed, do raise and remove by our
full power and royal authority, have permitted and do per¬
mit to all our subjects to trade to the said islands with such
liberty as they have had in the past; and, moreover, we have
declared, and do declare, that by the gift by us heretofore
made to them of the great salt company, neither their factors,
nor managers, nor other persons may purchase salt in the
place of the said Guerande and other places of the said
province, unless by agreement which we command and en¬
join you to take in hand, that the said inhabitants of the
territory may not be restrained from selling or buying the
said salt at the price and rate which those of the said great
company design to make for it.

To whom to this end we make very express prohibition
not to trouble or hinder the said trade and voluntary
purchase, upon penalties which may happen to them,
which prohibition shall be made against them and all others
whom it shall concern, if need is, by our bailiff or first
1 Fuage was a tax imposed upon fireplaces: called in England hearth-money.

. 5 . 389

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

sergeant, upon this requisition, without demanding permis¬
sion placet visa y ne pareatis; moreover, letting the said men
of the three estates enjoy what is contained in these pres¬
ents fully and peaceably, ending and causing to end all
troubles and hindrances to the contrary, notwithstanding
oppositions or appellations whatsoever, for which and with¬
out prejudice to them we will by you to be deferred orders
of prohibition and letters to the contrary, because such is
our pleasure.

Given at Rouen the nineteenth day of July, the year of
grace one thousand five hundred and eighty-eight, and of
our reign the fifteenth.

Signed by the King in his Council, Potier,

and sealed with yellow wax a queue simple .

Compared with the original by me, notary, secretary of
the King, Bardoul.

No. 30

MEMORIAL OF THE COMMUNITY OF SAINT MALO, RESPECTING
RESTRICTION OF TRADE WITH CANADA, JANUARY 3, 1600

It is proper to have messieurs the deputies of the province
of Bnttany understand the commission obtained by Jean
Chauvin, 1 inhabitant of Honfleur, for the prohibition of the
trade which is made to the country of Canada, in order to
represent to his Majesty the consequence and the prejudice
which might result from it to the inhabitants of the province
of Brittany.

First. That the discovery of the said country of Canada
was made by Captain Jacques Cartier, inhabitant of Saint
Malo, province of Brittany, under the will and permission of
the defunct King Francis I, and the most part at his out¬
lay and expense, for which neither he nor his heirs have had
reimbursement.

1 Thu is an error, and should be Pierre Chauvin.

390

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

That since the inhabitants of Saint Malo and others of
the said province of Brittany have always continued this navi¬
gation and trade with the savage inhabitants of the said
country, and having done in such a way that by their in¬
dustry they have rendered the said savages tractable, gentle,
and familiar, in such wise that by long acquaintance which
they have with those with whom they consort each year by
means of commerce, some discovery can be made to the
satisfaction of his Majesty and the public welfare, which can
be expected by means of a man who has been by the said in¬
habitants of said Saint Malo left with the said savages in
order to enter with them into the country to observe their
habitations, and what best can be expected in the future, in
order to make a favorable report to his Majesty:

It being that the preparations for the voyage of the present
year are already made, the vessels freighted, and merchandise
bought; and that if it were so that his Majesty ordered
the traffic to be prohibited to those who from time imme¬
morial were accustomed to it, it would bring them very great
loss, which would not bring any advancement to the ser¬
vice of his Majesty, but instead, as there is a prospect of
advancement, and a sure access to said country of Canada,
it might be to set it back and put the said savages in dis¬
trust, being easy to fall into it, and seeing men with whom
they are not accustomed to trade:

Moreover, because the said Chauvin having understood
that there was no other easier means to make the business
his own than to obtain from his Majesty letters of interdic¬
tion to all others from trading to said country of Canada for
ten years, he has obtained the said letters under promise
that he has made to his Majesty to settle the country and
build fortresses, which he cannot do, the thing having been
tried by the said Captain Cartier; so the said Chauvin pre¬
tends to be sole trader to the said country to frustrate those
who at all times have traded there and who hope in a short
time to give good and sufficient proof of it to his Majesty
by means of the knowledge and access that they have to
the said country.

39 *

COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS

In consideration of which his Majesty shall be very
humbly prayed to order that the said inhabitants of the
country be peaceably left to enjoy their accustomed trade,
or at least until he may be more fully informed of what can
be expected, without denying the fruit of their labor to those
who have never yet gained anything from it.

Signed, Jban Gouverneur.

Deputed by the community of Saint Malo to make the
present memoir. 1

1 After the failure of Carder*» heira to control the trade of Canada, the
people of St. Malo pursued their traffic in a desultory way for a few years ;
but this document shows that their troubles were not at an end. Pierre
Chauvin, who had served the king in his need, was rewarded by a special
concession of privileges of the same nature as those granted Chaton and
Nouel. Again the Malotiins rallied to the defense of their indent rights.
The old arguments employed against Cartier's heirs were brought against
Chauvin, who, after fruitless efforts to establish profitable relations with the
New Land, died early in the year 1603.

In note on p. 84, Brest, on the coast of Labrador, is referred to. Atten¬
tion is called to an article respecting this indent place by Samuel Edward
Dawson, Litt.D., Laval., in Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada,
Second Series, 1905-1906, vol. xi, sec. 2.

392

FAMILY

» 8

H. irr J A CJ 2 $ ARTIER—1469

llUBBT

_ III. PIERRE CARTIER

- •' Michkllb Bbucallb

hi. Ithinne

Jacques. . **• J« n ;. MM

1/enfant dl AU"». M »7

Luca*.. - - P^"*. M3®

Bertheline GiUe *.

IV. ALLAIN CARTIER
III. JEH6 MacIb Goulxat

C FrBn^oiT^^rrT!.".77

Ill JAO IV * OILLES CARTIER

II. sth THOMASSE CARTIER—1473
Olivibb Jamtk

CathM

Guillem bttb Mabgobbllb

onrieiTr. rTTrr 777 . 7 .. "1589

Fnmfoii. 1593

Bernard. 1597

V. BERNARD CARTIER
Jbkakmb pe la Rub

viT"E tienne~(4)7~7. 777 .".". . . "163a

Marie Lenoir

■vii. Yron. 1656

i JaqueliiM. 1664

Marie. 1670

Julie. 1673

i VII. YVON CARTIER

i Olivb Vincekt

Mil. Yvon .. 1701

I Gillette.

1 Fran^oiae. 1703

Jean Joseph 1704

| Allain. 1707

Allain. 1709

; Guilkmette.1711

I Jehannc. 1715

:V 1 II. JEAN JOSEPH CARTIER
I FlANfOtIB ChEKIL

ix. Guillemette. . 1761

I . 176+

VIII. JEHANNE CARTIER

J BAN Lx GaLLAH

been thus far compiled.

(1) Eatablkbed at Saint-Briac

(s) EatabU a hed at Saint-Lunaire

(3) Eatabliabed at Pleurtuit

(4) Eatabliabed at Saint-Coulomb

BIBLIOGRAPHY

OF

JACQUES CARTIER

BIBLIOGRAPHY

OF

JACQUES CARTIER

1 545 Brief reoit, & | succincte narration, de la naui-

ga- I don faicte es ysles de Canada, Ho- | chelage & Sa¬
guenay & autres, auec | particulieres meurs, langaige, &
cerimonies des habitans d’icelles: fort | delectable a veoir. |

Figure of man holding scythe in right hand, and resting
his left hand on a scroll suspended from tree inscribed with
the letter R.

Avec priuilege. I On les uend a Paris au second pillier en
la grand | salle du Palais, & en la rue neufiie nostredame
i | l’enseigne de lescu de frsice, par Ponce Roffet diet | Fau-
cheur, & Anthoine | le Clerc freres. | 1545. |

Size, 6^x4.

Title, reverse , A Monseigneur le preuost de Paris, etc.,
1 1 .; + Au Roy, etc., 4 11 .; + text, 48 numbered leaves.

1556 Prima Relatione di Jacques | Cartier della Terra
Nuoua I detta la nuoua Francia, trouata neir anno. |
M.D.XXXIIII. |

Breve et succinta narratione della | nauigation fatta per
ordine de la Maesta Christianissima all’ isole di Cana- | da,
Hochelaga, Saguenai & altre, al presente dette la nuoua
Francia | con particolari costumi, & cerimonie de gli habi¬
tants |

S . 447: One plate entitled La terra de Hochelaga I
a Noua Francia. | Vide pp. 441-453 of Terzo volume |
delle Navigationi et Viaggi | raccolte gia da M. Gio. Battista
395

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

Ramusio ncl quale si contengono | Le Nauigationi al
Mondo Nuouo, alii Antichi incognito, fatte da Don Christo-
foro | Colombo Genouense . . . | Le Nauigationi fatte

dipoi alle dette Indie, poste nella parte verso Maestro I
Tramontana, dette hora la Nuoua Francia, scoperte al |
re christianiss, la prima volta da Bertoni & Normandi, | Et
dipoi da Giouanni da Verrazzano Fiorentino, | & dal Capi-
tano Jacques Cartier. | Si come dimostrano le diverse Re-
lationi, tradotte di lingua Spagnuola | & Francese nella
nostra, & raccolte in questo volume. | Con tauole di
Geographia, che dimostrano il si to di diverse I sole, Citta, &
Paesi. | Et Figure diuerse di Piante, & altre cose a noi in-
cognite. | Et con L’ In dice copiosissimo di tutte le cose piu
not abili in esso contenute. | Con Priuilegio del Sommo
Pontefice, & dello Illustriss. Senato Veneto. I In Venetia
nella stamperia di Giunti. | L’anno MDLVI. | Folio.

3 1559 Les | Voyages auantureux | di capitain | Ian Al-
fonce, | sainctongeois | Auec Priuilege | du Roy | —A
Poictiers, au Pelican, par Ian de Marnef.

End of 1 . 68 : Fin du present liure, compose & ordone
par Ian Alfonce pilote experimente es choses narrees en
ce liure, natif du pays de Xainctonge, pres la ville de Cognac.
Fait a la requeste de Vincent Aymard, marchant du pays de
Piedmont, escriuant pour lui Maugis Vumenot, marchant
d’Honfleur.

At end : Ce Liure ha este ainsi ordonne par Oliuier | Bis-
selin, homme tres-expert a la Mer. Et acheue d’imprimer
a la fin du mois d’Auril, en l’An mil cinq cens cinquante
neuf. 4 to

Title, 1 \.; au verso , Avis de Ian Marnef au Lecteur; +

1 p. for A l’ombre de Saingelais, signed Sc. de S. M.; +

2 pp. of verse; + Sonnet d* Alfonce, 1 p.; table, 2 pp.; text,
68 11. numbered au recto.

In some copies the date of printing is, "2 Mai,” and be¬
hind frontispiece the date of privilege, “ 7 Mars 1547/* The
“Avis of Jean Marnef” is au recto of second leaf, and au
verso of fourth leaf is the figure of the mariner’s compass.

396

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

4 ! 5^5 PP- 435 “ 44 ° : Prima relatione di Jacques | Carthier
della Terra nuoua I detta la nuoua Franda, trouata nell’
anno | M.D.XXXIII. |

pp. 441-453: Breve et succinta narratione della I naui-
gation fatta per ordine della Maesta Christianissima air isole
di Cana- | da, Hochelaga, Saguenai & altre, al presente
dette la nuoua Francia | con particolari costumi, & cerimonie
de gli habitand. |

11 In Vinegia nella stamperia deeli hercdi di Luc’antonio I
Giund nell’ Anno MDLXV. | ” Vide pp. 435-453 of
Terzo volume | della navigationi et viaggi | raccolta gia da
M. Gio. Battista Ramusio | nel auale si contengono J
... La prima | volta da Bertoni « Normandi, Et dipoi
da Giovanni da Verrazzano I Fiorendno, & dal Capitano
Jacques Carthier. 1 . . . — In Venetia nella stamperia de*
giund. | T anno M.D.LXV. | Folio.

5 1578 Les | Voyages Avan | tvreux dv Capitaine | IeanAl-

fonce,Sainctongeois | Contenant les Reigles & enseignemens
necessairesa | la bonne & seure Nauigation | Plus le moyen
de se gouuerner, tant enuers les Barbares qu' au -1 tres nations
d’vne chacune contree, les sortes de marchan | dises qui se
trouaent abondamment et icellcs; | Ensemble, ce qu* on
doit porter de petit prix pour troc- [ quer auec iceux, afin
d’en tirer grand profit. | —A Rouen, | chez Thomas Mallard,
libraire; pres le Palais, | deuant l’hostel de ville. | 1578. 4*?

Tide, 1 L; + text, 64 11 ., numbered; + 1 1 . for figure of
mariner’s compass, and ao 11 . for Tables de la declinaison,
not numbered: the verses omitted.

An edition entided, Les voyages aventureux de lean
Alfonse Sainctongeois, in 8vo, appeared in Paris in 1598,
and another with the same tide at Rochelle in 1605.

6 1580 AShorte and | briefe narration of the two | Nauiga-
tions and Discoueries | to the Northweast partes called |
Newe Fraunce: | First translated out of French into Italian,
by that famous | learned man Gio: Bapt: Ramutius, and now

397

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

turned | into English by John Florio: Worthy the tea- |
ding of all Venturers, Trauellers, | and Discouerers. | Im¬
printed at Lon- | don, by H. Bynneman, dwelling | in
Thames streate, neere unto | Baynardes Castell. | Anno
Domini. 1580.

Title, 1 1 .; To the Right Worshipful Edmond Bray Esquire,
etc., signed, I. Florio, 1 1 .

To all Gentlemen, Merchants, and Pilots. The first re¬
lation of James Carthier of the new land called New Frau nee,
newly discouered in the yeare of oure Lorde, 1534, 2 II.; A
shorte and briefe narration, etc., 78 numbered pages (p. 65
is wrongly numbered 95).

Here follows the names of the chiefest partes of man,
and other wordes necessarie to be knowen, 1 1.

Black-letter. Size, 7% x 5^.

7 1598 Discours | du | voyage | fait parlecapi- | tainejaques
Cartier | aux Terres-neufues de Canadas, No- J rembergue,
Hochelage, Labrador, & | pays adiacens, dite nouuelle
France, [ avec particulieres mceurs, langage, & | ceremonies
des habitans d'icelle. | [marque d’imprimeur avec la de¬
vise : Leo | duce | ] A Rouen, | de rimprimerie | de
Raphael du Petit Val, Libraire & Imprimeur | du Roy, a
TAnge Raphael. | M. D. XCVIII. | Avec Permission. |

8vo, 64 pp.

Title, 1 1 .; L’Imprimeur | aux Lectcurs. | Salut. | 1 1 .;
Sur | le voyage | de Canadas. | Par C. B. | 2 11 .; Ensuyt le
lan- | gage des pays et royau- | mes de Hochelage &
Canadas, au- | trement appelee par nous la nou- | uelle
France. | 3 11 .

Escutcheon Extraict du Privilege. | signed, “ Cavelier,”
1 I.; Discours | du voyage fait I par le capitaine Jacques |
Cartier en la terre—Neufue de Canadas | dite nouuelle
France, en l’an mil | cinq cens trente quatre. | 24 11 .

398

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

8 1598 Edict | contcnant 1 c pouvoir donne au | marquis de
Cottenmael ct de la Roche | pour la conqueste des terres
Canada, Labrador, isle de Sable, Noremberg et pays adia-
cents.— | Rouen, | Ralph, du Petit-Val, | 1598. |

V 8vo, 24 pp.

9 1600 Certaine Voyages | containing the Discouerie of the
Gulfe of Sainct Laur] ence to the West of Newfoundland,
and from | thence up the river of Canada, to Hochelaga, |
Saguenay, and other places: with a Description | of the tem¬
perature of the climate, the disposi- | tion of the people,
the nature, commodities, and | riches of the soile, and other
matters of speciall | moment. |

The first relation of Jaques Carthier of Saint Malo, ot
the New land called New France, newly discouered in the
yere of our Lord 1534.

A shorte and briefe narration of the Nauigation made by
the commandement of the King of France, to the Islands of
Canada, Hochelaga, Saguenay, and diuers others which now
are called New France, with the particular customes, and
manners of the inhabitants therein.

The third voyage of discouery made by Captaine Jaques
Cartier, 1540, unto the Countreys of Canada, Hochelaga,
and Saguenay.

The Voyage of John Francis de la Roche knight, lord of
Roberual, with three tall ships to the countries of Canada,
Hochelaga, and Saguenay, x 542.

pp. 201-242 in The | Third andLast | Volume of the Voy |
ages Navigations, Traf | fiques and Discoueries of the Eng¬
lish Nation, and in | some few places, where they have not
been, of strangers, per | formed within and before the time
of these hundred yceres, to all J parts of the Newfound
world of America, or the West Indies, from 73. | degrees
of Northerly to 57. of Southerly latitude | etc., etc., etc., I
Collected by Richard Hakluyt Preacher, and sometimes |
399

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

student of Christ-Church, in Oxford, | Imprinted at Lon¬
don by George Bishop, Raife | Newbene, and Robert
Barker | Anno Dom. 1600.

Black>ietter, folio.

10 1606 Prima relationel di Jacques Carthier | Della Terra
Nuoua detta la nuoua Francia, | trouata nell’ anno 1534. |

Breve, et sucdnta narrarione della | nauigatione fatta per
ordine della Maesta Christianissima all’ isole di | Canada,
Hochelaga, Saguenai, & altre, al presente det- | te la nuoua
Francia con particolari costumi, I & cerimonie di gli hab-
itanti. | Vide pp. 370-385 of t. iii.

Deile Navigationi et Viaggi | Raccolte da M. Gio.
Battista Ramusio. . .. | — In Venetia, | M.DCVI. Folio.

11 1609 Histoire | de la Nowelle | France | Contenant les
navigations, decouvertes, & Habi- I rations faites par les
Francois es Indes Occiden- | tales & Nouvelle-France souz
l’avoeu & autho- | rite de noz Rois Tres-Chretiens, & les
di verses | fortunes d’iceux en 1* execution de ces choses, | depuis
cent ans jusques a hui. | En quoy est comprise Y Histoire
Morale, Naturele, & Geo- | graphique de ladite province:
Avec les Tables & | Figures d’icelle. | Par Marc Lescarbot
Advocat en Parlement, | Temoin oculaire dVne partie des
choses id redtees. | Multa renascentur quae iam ceddere
cadentque. | A Paris | chez lean Milot, tenant sa boutique
sur les degrez | de la grand’salle du Palais. | M.DC.IX. |
Avec Privilege dv Roy. |

%* 8vo.

Title, 1 L; + dedicace a Henry IV, 1 l.; + a la Rdne,
1 I.; + au Dauphin, 1 1 .; + a la Reine Maiguerite, 1 leaf
and a half; + a la France, 4 leaves and a half; + 40 11 ., not
numbered, for sommaires, adresse au lecteur et privilege
dated 27 November, 1608; 4 - 888 pp. Charts: at p. 207,
plan of the port of Ganabara, Brazil; at p. 236, plan of
la terre newe, Grande Riviere de Canada, et cotes de POcean
400

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

en la Nowelle France; at p. 480, plan of Port Royal en la
Nowelle France. Par Marc Lescarbot, 1609. (Jan Swe-
linck, sculp.; J. Millot, excudit.) + 1 1 . for title of

12 1609 Les Muses | de la Nowelle | France. | A Monsei¬
gneur | le Chancellier. | Avia Pieridum peragro loca nulliuus
ante | Yrita solo . | A Paris | Chez lean Millot sur les
degrez de | la grand’salle du Palais. | M.DC.IX.—Avec
privelege du Roy |

8vo.

1 I. for title; + 2 11 . for epitre a Nicolas Brulart; + 66
pp. of text.

This is the first edition.

13 1609 NovaFrancia: | Orthe | Description | ofthatpartof |
New France, | which is one continent with | Virginia | De¬
scribed in the three late Voyages and Plantation made by |
Monsieur de Pourtrincourt, into the countries | called by
the Frenchmen La Cadie, | lying to the Southwest of |
Cape Breton | Together with an excellent generall Treatise
of all the commodities | of the said countries, and maners
of the naturall | inhabitants of the same I Translated out of
the French into English by | P. E. | Londini | impensis
Georgii Bishop, | 1609. |

4 * 0 .

Title, 1 1 .; + letter to Prince Henry, 1 1 .; + epistle to
the reader, 1 1.; + table, 6 11.; + 307 11. of text and a chart.

This is a paraphrase of Lescarbot’s work of the same date
made by Pierre Erondelle, a Protestant minister, for Hakluyt.
The name of Lescarbot is not mentioned in the work.

14 1611 Histoire | de la Nowelle- | France | Contenant les

navigations, decouvertes et habi- | tations faites par les
Francis es Indes Occiden- | tales et Nouvelle-France souz
l’avoeu et autho- | rite de noz Roys Tres-Chretiens, et les
* 401

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

diverses | fortunes d’iceux en rexecution de ces choses, |
depuis cent ans iusques ahui. | Enquoy est comprise l’Hb-
toire Morale, Natureie et Geo- | graphique de ladite pro¬
vince: avec les Tables. | et Figures d’icelle. | Par Marc
Lescarbot, Advocat en Parlement. | Temoin oculaire dVne
partie des choses ici red tees. 1 Mult a renascentur quae jam
cecidere cadentque. | —A Paris | Chez lean Millot, devant St.
Barthelemi aux trois I Coronnes: Et en sa boutique sur les
degrez de la | grand salle du Palais. | M.DC.XI. | Avec
privilege |

8 vo.

Title, 11.; 4 - 4 pp. Epitre au roi; 4 - 4 pp. Epitre a Messire
Pierre Jeannin; 4 - 8 pp. Epitreala France; 4 - 1 p. Epitreau
lecteur; 4 - 1 p. privelege, dated 2 Novembre 1608; 4 - text,
877 pp.; +14 pp., unnumbered, for sommaire; + 1 1. for

Les Mvses | de la Novveile- | France. | A Monsei¬
gneur | le Chancellier | Avia Pieridvm peragro loca nullius ,
ante Trita solo . A Paris | Chez lean Millot, devant S.
Barthelemy, aux trois | Coronnes: Et en sa boutique sur les
degrez de la I grand’Salle du Palais. | M.DC.XII. | Avec
priuilege dv Roy |

Title, 11.; 4 - 4 pp. Epitre au roi; 4 - 4pp. Epitre a Messire
Pierre Jeannin; 4 - 8 pp. Epitreala France; 4 - 1 p. Epitre au
lecteur; 4 * 1 p. privelege, dated 2 Novembre 1608; 4 - text,
877 pp.; + 14 11 ., not numbered, for sommaire; 4 - il.for
title of

Les Mvses | de la Nowelle- I France | A Monsei¬
gneur | le Chancellier | Avia Pieridvm peragro loca nullius
ante | Trita solo ... A Paris | Chez lean Millot,
devant S. Barthelemy, aux trois | Coronnes : Et en sa bou¬
tique sur les degrez de la | grand’salle du Palais |
M.DC.XII. Avec privelege dv Roy. )

4 pp. Epitre a Nicolas Brulart; 4 - 77 pp.; 4 - 4 illustra¬
tions as follows: Port Royal, the land inhabited by the
French in Florida, the Port of Ganabara, and Terre Neuve;

402

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

au verso of last leaf, table of 45 errata, beginning “ L’avteur
n'ayant pas este present au commencement de Timpression
quelques fautes sont survenues en icelle, telles qui s’ensuit.”

15 1613 Owing to the numerous errors in the edition of 1611,

Mil lot thought best to issue a new edition of the work, and
this he called the second edition, though it was really the third.
The title is the same as in the edition of the year before,
except that he adds after the Latin quotation the words,
“ Seconde Edition, revise, corrigee et augmentee par l*Au-
theur,” and also “ du Roy” after “ privelege.” The errata
are all corrected and the table omitted. The collation, except
date, is the same as the previous edition. This is the best
edition of the work, and was reprinted by Tross in 1866.
It was translated into German in 1614, under the title,

Lescarbot, Marc. | Nova Francia. | Grundliche His¬
tory I von Erfundung der Grossen Landschafft | Nova
Francia | oder New Frankreich genannt. | Aus einem zu
Parisz I gedruckten Franzdsischen Buch. | ... ins

Teutscn gebracht. | - Augspurg. | Chrysostomus Da-

bertzhi/er. | 1613. |

4to.

4 11. preliminary; + 86 pp. text.

16 1618 Histoire | de laNowelle- | France. | Contenant les
navigations, dccouvertes, & ha- | bitations faites par les Fran-
9018 cs Indes Occi- | dentales & Nouvelle-France, par com¬
mission | de nos Roys Tres-Chretiens, & les diverses | for¬
tunes d’iceux en Texecution de ces choses | depuis cent ans
jusques a hui. | En quoy est comprise Thistoire Morale,
Naturelle, & | Geographique des provinces cy decrites:
avec | les Tables & Figures necessaires. | Par Marc Lescar¬
bot Advocat en Parlement [ Temoin oculaire dVne partie
des choses ici recitees. | (Petite vignette.) —A Paris. | Chez
Adrian Perier, rue saint I Iacques, au Com pas d’or.
M.DC.XVIII. |

In-8.

403

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

Title, i L; + 3 11 . for Epitre au Roy; + 2 11 . for Epitre
au President Jeannin; + 4 II. for dedicate a la France;
+ 16 11. for sommaires; + 1 1. for avis au lecteur; + text,
pp. 1-970; + 1 1. for errata; + 1 1. for title of the

Muses | de la Nouvelle- | France | A Monseigneur | le
Chancellier. | Avia Pieridumperagro loca nullius anti \ ‘frita
solo | (Vignette.) A Paris | Chez Adrian Perier, rue saint |
lacques, au Compas d’or. | M.DC.XVIII. |

Text, pp. 3-76; 4 - the 4 charts of the edition of 1612.

17 1744 Histoire | et | Description Generale | de la | Nou¬
velle France | avec I Le Journal Historique | d’un voyage
fait par ordre du Roi j dans rAmerique Sep temtrionnale | Par
C. P. De Charlevoix, de la CompagnieJ de Jesus | Tome
Premiere | A Paris. | Chez. Didot, Librarie, Quai des
Augustins | a la Bible d’or. | M.DCC XLIV. | Avec ap¬
probation & Privelege du Roy |

6 vols. izmo.

Vol. i: title, 1 I.; + dedication, 2 II.; 4 - avertissement,
4 11 .; + text, 439 pp. Vide pp. 11-34.

The same in English, by John Gilmary Shea, in six vol¬
umes, 4to. New York. Francis P. Harper. 1900.

181812 A | General Collection | of the | Best and Most In¬
teresting | Voyages and Travels | in all parts of the World; |
many of which are now first translated into English. | Di¬
gested on a New Plan. | By John Pinkerton | Author of
Modern Geography, &c. &c. | London I Printed for Long¬
man, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, Paternoster-Row; |
and Cadell and Davies, in the Strand. | 1812. |

4to.

Vide The First Relation of Jaques Carthier of S. Malo,
of the New Land, called New France, newly discovered in
the year of Our Lord 1534.

404

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

pp. 629-640. A Short and Brief Narration of the Navi¬
gation made by the Commandment of the King of France,
to the Islands of Canada, Hochelaga, Saguenay, and Divers
others, which now are called New France; with the particu¬
lar customs and manners of the inhabitants therein.

pp. 641-664. The Third Voyage of Discovery made by
Captain James Cartier, 1540, unto the Countries of Canada,
Hochelaga, and Saguenay.

pp. 665-674.

19 1841 Archives | des Voyages | ou | Collection d’anciennes
relations | inedites ou tres-rares | de lettres, memoires;itinc-
raires et autres documents | relatifs a la Geographic et aux
voyages I suives | d’analyses d’anciens voyages et d’anec-
dotes relatives aux voyageurs j tirees des memoires du
temps | ouvrage | destine a servir de complement a tous les
recueils de voyages | Fran^ais et Etrangers. | Par H. Ter-
naux-Compans. | Paris, | Arthus Bertrand, Libraire-Edi-
teur, | Libraire de la Societe de Geographic, | Editeur des
Nouvelles Annales des Voyages, | Rue Hautefeuiile, 23. |

8vo. 1841. pp. 117-153, vol. i.

Vide Discours du Voyage fait par le capitaine Jaques
Cartier aux terres-neufues de Canadas, Norembergue,
Hochelage, Labrador, et pays adiacens, dites nouuelle
France, auec particulieres maeurs, langage, et ceremonies
des habitants d’icelle.—A Rouen, de rimprimerie de
Raphael du Petit-Val, libraire et imprimeur du roy, a Tange
Raphael. M.D.XCVIII.—Avec permission.

Seconde navigatione faicte par le commandement et vou-
loir du tres Chrestien Roy francoys premier de ce nom au
parachevement de la descouverture des terres occidantalles
estans soubz le climat et paralleles des terres et
royaulme du d. sire et | par luy precedantement ja com-
mancee9 a faire descouvrir. Icelle navigation faicte par

** 405

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

Jacques Cartier natif de sainct-Malo de Tisle en Bretagne,
pillote du d. sire. En Tan mil cinq cens trante six.

pp. 1-66, vol. ii. H. Ternaux-Compans.

20 1843 Voyages | de | Decouverte | au Canada, | entre les
annees 1534 et 154a, I par | Jacques Quartier, le Sieur de
Roberval, | Jean Alphonse de Xanctoigne, &c. | suivis |
de la description de Quebec et de ses environs en | 1608,
et de divers extraits relativement au lieu | de l’hivernement
de Jacques Quartier en 1535-36. | (Avec Gravures fac¬
simile.) | Reimprimes sur d’anciennes relations, et publics |
sous la direction | de la Societe Litteraire et Historique de
Quebec: | Imprime chez William Cowan et Fils. | 1843.

8vo, 130 pp.

Title, 1 1 .; + avertissement, 1 1 .; + half-title, Les 1 Trois
Voyages | de | Jacques Quartier | au Canada | en | 1534,
1535 et 1540 | 1 L; + discours, 77 pp.; Hh half-title, Le
Routier de Jean Alphonse de Xantoigne, etc., etc., 1 1 .; 4 * Le
Routier I etc.; + pp. 81-87; + half-title. Voyage du Sieur de
Roberval au Canada 1542. Le Voyage, etc., 1 L; + pp. 91-
96;4- half-title, Deux lettres de Jacques Noel,etc.; + pp.99-
101; + facsimile plan, Abitation de Quebec, Appendice,
pp. 103-119; + Appendice, Facsimile d’une carte dans les
voyages de Champlain Edition de 1613; Appendice, Carte
de Quebec; Appendice, Du lieu ou Jacques Quartier, etc.,
and table, pp. 121-130.

21 1846 Les | Navigateurs I Franyais | Histoire des Naviga¬
tions, Decouvertes | et Colonisations Francaises | Par Leon
Guerin | Auteur de 1 *Histoire Maritime et des Marins il-
lustres ae la France, | Paris, Belin-Leprieur et Morizot;
Editeurs | Rue Pavee-Saint Andre, des Arts. 5. | 1846.

8 vo.

Vide Jacques Cartier, Maitre Pilote et Capitaine General
des Vaisseaux and Expeditions Des Terres Neuves, De.
1534 a I 543 »PP- 55 *“ I0 3 -

406

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

22 1857 Voyageurs — Anriens ct Modernes. | Voyageurs
Modernes. | Seizieme,dix-septieme ct dix-huitieme siecles. |
Jacques Cartier, | Voyageur Frar^ais. | (1534-1542) | Por¬
trait of Jacques Cartier.—D’apres un dessin a la plume
conserve a la Bibliotheque Imperiale. |

The part relating to Cartier occupies 75 pages in Voy¬
ageurs Andens et Modernes ou Choix des Relations des
Voyages les plus interessantes et les plus instructives, de-
puis Ye dnquieme siecle avant Jesus-Christ jusqu* au dix-
neuvieme siede, avec biographies, notes et indications icon-
ographiques, par M. Edouard Charton, . . . tome

quatrieme . . . —Paris, aux Curcaux du Magasin

pittoresque, rue Jacob 30. 1857. 8vo.

23 1857 Saint-Malo | II lustre | par ses Marins | precede |
d’une Notice Historique sur cette ville | Depuis sa fondation
jusqu* a nosjours. | Par M. Charles Cunat, j Ancien Officier
de la Marine, Chevalier de la Legion-d’Honneur. I
Rennes, | Imprimere de F. Pealat, rue de Bordeaux. |
1857.1

8vo, 487 pp.

Vide pp. 59-73 for notice of Cartier.

24 1863 Bref RedtetSuccincte Narration | dela I Navigation
I faite en MDXXXV et MDXXXVI I par le capitaine |
Jacques Cartier | aux iles de | Canada | Hochelaga, Sague¬
nay | et autres | Reimpression figuree | de Tedition originale
rarissime de MDXLV | avec les variantes des manuscrits |
de la Bibliotheque Imperiale | Precedee | d’une breve et
succincte I Introduction I historique | par M. D'Avezac |
Paris | Liljraire Tross | Passage des deux Pavilions (Palais-
Royal), No. 8, 1863.

8vo, pp. i-xvi, 68.

Half-title, Relation Originale de Jacques Cartier, 1 l.; +
title, 1 L; + introduction, 16 11., i-xvi; + title in facsimile
and dedication, 1 L; + Au Roy, 4 11 .; + text and vocabu-

407

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

lary, 43 11 . (7 numbered twice, 8 omitted); 4 Notes, Vari-
antes. Corrections, et Additions, 20 11 .

25 1865 Voyage | de | Jaqves Cartier | av Canada I en 1534 |
Nouvelle edition, publieed’apresl edition dei598 | etd’apres
Ramusio. | Par M.H.Michelant. | a vec deux cartes. | Docu¬
ments Inedits | sur | Jaques Cartier et le Canada I com¬
muniques | Par M. Alfred Rame | Paris. | Librairie Tross |
5, Rue Neuvc-Des-Petits-Champs, 5. | 1865. |

8vo.

Half-title, Voyage | de | Jaqves Cartier | 1534: | au
ver5o y Imprimerie Jouast | Rue Saint Honore, 338. | A
Paris. | 1 1 .; + title, as above, 1 1 .; + reproduction of title
of 1598, Discovrs | dv. Voyage, etc. | 1 l .;4 LTmprimevr |
aux Lecteurs | Salvt | 1 L; + Svr | Le Voyage | de
Canadas, | Par C. B. | 2 11 .; 4 Ensvyt Le j Langage des
Pays, etc., 3 11 .; + escutcheon and Extraict du PriuiTege, 1
1 .; 4 * introduction, 4 11 ., pp. i-vii; + Discovrs, Dv Voyage,
2611., pp. 17-67;+ vocabulary, 211.; + 2 plans; + Appendice |
au j Voyage! de | Jacques Cartier] ; 4 -half-title, au verso t
Imprimerie Jouaust | Rue Saint Honore, 338 I A Paris. |
1 1 . Documents Inedits | Sur | Jaques Cartier | title, 1 1 .;
4 - subtitle, 1 l.; + half-title and text, 2611 ., numbered 4-53;
au verso, Imprime. Par Jouaust etc., etc.; j 4 * 1 1 ., announce¬
ments.

26 1866 Histoire | de la | Nouvelle-France | par Marc Les-
carbot | suivie des | Muses De La Nouvelle-France | Nou¬
velle Edition | Publiee par Edwin Tross | avec quatre
cartes Geographiques | Premier Volume | Paris | Librairie
Tross | 5, Rue Neuve-Des-Petits-Champs, 5. | 1866. |

Half-title, au verso , figure of anchor with rope and scroll,
bearing the words occvpa portvm, and below scroll,
iovavst ; 4 title, I 1 .; 4 title of 1612, 1 1 .; 4 au Roy, 2 U.;
4 A. Monseigneur Messire Pierre Jeannin, 2 11 .; 4 A
La France, 4 11 ., numbered to xviii; 4 Au Lectevr, 1 h; au
408

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

verso ,Extrait du Privilege du Roy, unnumbered; + text, 851
pp.; ending with Love Soit Diev (1) Isidor, Pelus, ad castum
scholasticism , Epist. 146, and colophon; 4- 14 pp. Som-
maires, unnumbered; + 1 1 ., title of Les Muses | de la
Nouvelle- | France | facsimile of edition of 1612 ; 4 - 2 11 ., A |
Monseigneur | Messire Nicolas | Brvlart Seignevr | num¬
bered to 6; + 77 pp. text; au verso of p. 83, Imprime
par D. Jouaust | Pour La Librairie Tross | A Paris. | All
the title-pages are alike except difference in number of
volume.

27 1867 Relation Originate | du Voyage de | Jacques Cartier |
au Canada | en 1534 | Documents inedits | sur | Jacques
Cartier et le Canada | (nouvelle serie) | publies par | H.
Michelant et A. Rame | Accompagnes de deux portraits de
Cartier et de deux vues de son Manoir | Circular portrait
wearing cap. Paris | Librairie Tross | 5, Rue Neuve-des-
Petits-Champs, 5 | 1867 |

8vo. pp. i-viii, 76, 54.

Frontispiece, Vue du Manoir de Jacques Cartier, 1 1 .; +
title as above, 1 1 .; + introduction, 4 11 ., i-vii;+ Voiage de
Jacques Cartier, 26 II., numbered 2-51; + Appendice, 5 11 .,
pp. 53-62; + 11. with design of open book above and crossed
keys below; + 1 1 ., half-title, Note sur le Manoir de Jacques
Cartier; au verso y Vue a vol d’oiseau du Manoir de
Cartier; -f title, Note I sur | le Manoir | de | Jacques
Cartier | par | M. Alfred Rame | Circular portrait without
cap. Paris | Librairie Tross | i867;+Note, 4 11 ., numbered
70-76; + half-title. Documents Inedits | sur | le Canada. |
+ title, Documents inedits I sur | le Canada | communiques
par | M. Alfred Rame | deuxieme serie | Escutcheon.
Paris | Librairie Tross | 1867 I + Documents Inedits | &c.
22 11 ., numbered 6-51; + Table des Documents, 2 11 ., num¬

bered 52-54; + colophon and imprint, Paris, imprimerie
Jouaust, j 338, rue Saint-Honore. | + 1 1 . of announce¬
ments.

409

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

a8 1868 Les grands coureurs d’aventures J Jacques Carder |
par | H. Emile Chevalier. | Paris | Lebigre-Duquesne,
libraire-editeur | rue Hautefeuille, 16 | tous droits re¬
serves. | 1868. |

i6mo, 314 pp.

Subtitle, “Jacques CartierDedicace, “A. M. le Dr
A. Guerin | Chirurgien de l’hopital Saint-Louis,” pp. 1-4,
and dated, “Paris, 2 Janvier 1866.” Avis “Au Lecteur”
[p. 5], date, “19 fevrier 1868.”

29 1868 Les | marins fran^ais | (Suite et complement de la
Jrance h'erol^ue) | Vies et recits dramatiques I d’apres les doc¬
uments origmaux | par | M.Bathild Bouniol. [ tome premier. |
Preface.—Hue Quieret.—Bethencourt.— | Jean de Vienne.
— Laudonniere. — | Villegagnon. — I Lery et Yves
d’Evreux.— I Pyrard.—Le capitaine Polain.—De Brue. |
—Cartier.—Champlain. | —les flibustiers. I Le chevalier
Paul. | -4-Sourdis.—Duquesne.-—Torbin. [ Paris | Am-
broise Bray, libraire editeur, | 20, rue Cassette, 20. | tous
droits reserves. | 1868. |

i6mo, 408 pp.

Subtitle, “Les j Marins Fnu^ais | Tome premier.”
Au versoy “Cambrai.—Imprimerie de Regnier, Farer.”
The portion relative to Cartier occupies pp. 206-223; it
has for half-title, “Jacques Cartier.”

30 1869 Documentary | History of the State of Maine j Ed¬
ited by [ William Willis | Vol. I I Containing a | History
of the Discovery of Maine | byl J. G. Kohl | with an ap¬
pendix | On the Voyages of the Cabots | By M. D’Avezac,
of Paris | etc., etc. Portland. | Bailey and Noyes | 1869. |

8vo.

Vide pp. 320-347. First Voyage of Jacques Cartier to
the Gulf and River of St. Lawrence, in 1534. Second
Voyage of Jacques Cartier, etc., etc. Third Voyage of
4 10

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

Jacques Cartier, etc., etc. Expeditions of Jean Francois de
la Roque de Roberval and Jacques Cartier to Canada in
1540 and 1543.

31 1869 (Extrait du cahier de septembre 1869, des Annales de
philosophie chretienne.) | Quels etaient les sauvages I que
rencontra Jacq. Cartier sur les rives du | Saint-Laurent ? [ [At
the end] N. O., ancien missionnaire. | Versailles.—Imp.
Beau, rue de l’Orangerie, 36 |

8vo, 7 pp.

31 1879 B. Murillo The Little Banner-Maker, | and the
Orphan of St. Malo. I J. C. | Tales of Youthful Genius. I
London: | Dean ana Son, i6oa, Fleet Street. Late of
Ludgate Hill. | 1879. |

8vo.

The Orphan of St. Malo, pp. 39-61.

33 1880 Revue de Bretagne et de Vendee. | Directeur:
Arthur de la Borderie [ . . . — Nantes, | place du
Commerce 4, 1880. |

8vo, 5 € serie, tome viii.

" Documents inedits | sur | Jacques Cartier et ses com-
pagnons | 1555.” Signed, “ Arthur de la Borderie.”—
Vide pp. 376-380.

34 1882 Cours D’Histoire I du Canada | Par | J. B. A.
Ferland, Pretre | Professor a Histoire a TUniversite, Laval. |
Premiere Partie. I 1534-1663. | Deuxieme Edition. | Que¬
bec | N. S. Haray, Libraire-fiditeur | 9 et 10, Rue Notre
Dame | 1882. |

pp. 17-45.

35 Jacques Cartier | Recherches sur sa person ne et sur sa
famille | par | H 1 * Harvut | Secretaire de la Maine de

411

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

Saint-Malo. | —Nantes | Imprimerie Vincent Forest et
Emile Grimaud | 4, Place du Commerce, 4 | 1884 |

8vo, 14 pp.

Au verso of title, “ Extrait de la Revue de la Bret ague
et de Vendee At bottom of p. 14, " Nantes.—Imp. Vin¬
cent Forest et Emile Grimaud, Place du Commerce, 4.”

36 Jacques Cartier and his successors. By Rev. Benjamin F.
DeCosta, D.D.

Narrative and Critical [ History of America, j Edited |
By Justin Winsor | Librarian of Harvard University | Cor¬
responding Secretary Massachusetts Historical Society. |
Vol. IV. | Boston and New York, I Houghton, Mifflin and
Company | The Riverside Press, Cambridge, j

pp. 47-80.

37 Memoires | et I Comptes Rendus. I dela | Sodete Royale 1
du | Canada | Pour l’Annee 1884. | Tome II, | Montreal |
Dawson Freres, Libraires-Editeurs. | 1885. |

Deux points d'histoire | Par Paul De Cazes | pp. 1-6.

38 1886 Collection Picard | Bibliotheque d'educarion nation-
ale | Les grands fran^ais. I Les Fransais | au | Canada |
(decouverte et colonisation) j par | Antoine Chalamet | pro-
fesseur d’histoire au lycee de Vanves | Avec onze gravures. |
Paris | librairie Picard-Bernheim et C ie | 11, rue Soufflot, n |
tous droits reserves. |

8vo, 199 pp.

Subtitle (1886), " Edition in -8° carte.—Serie II. | Bib¬
liotheque d'educarion narionale. | Les Fran 9a! s au Canada.” |
Au versoy picture ofl ndian fishing, with the following: “Indiens
pechant | sur le Saint-Laurent.” | Le premier voyage de
Jacques Cartier, p. 47 ; Le second voyage de Jacques Car¬
rier, p. 64; Suite du second voyage. Cartier a Hochelaga,
p. 80; Suite de second voyage. Retour a Sainte-Croix, p.

412

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

91; Le troisieme voyage de Cartier, p. 105; Portrait de
“ Jacques Cartier,” p. 16.

39 1888 Les Fran^ais au dela des Mere. | Lea | Decouvreure
Franks | du XIV e au XVI e Siecle. | Cotes de Guinee, | du
Bresii, | et de TAmerique du Nora, | par Paul Gaffarel. I
Ouvrage orne de 3 cartes anden nes et de 2 portraits. |
Paris, I Challamel et C", editeurs, Librairie Algerienne et
Coloniale, | 5 rue Jacob, et rue | de Furetenberg 2, | 1888. |

i2mo, xii, 285 pp.

Frontispiece: Portrait de Verrazzano; Extrait d’une map-
pemonde peinte pour le roi Henri II (la Guinee), 1 p.; Ex-
traite . . . (ut supra.—Le Bresii), p. 39; Extrait

. . . (ut supra.—Le Canada), p. 117; Portrait de

“ Jacques Cartier. | D’apres un anden dessin a la plume
conserve a la Bibliotheque nationale,” p. 119. Au verso of
subtitle: "Typographic Firmin-Didot, Mesnil (Eure).”
Videpp. 157-281.

40 1888 Jacques Cartier | Documents Nouveaux | Recueillis
par | F. Jouon des Longrais | Anden eleve de TEcole des
Chartes. ] [Reproduction de la signature de Cartier.]—
Paris | Alphonse Picard | libraire-editeur | 82, rue Bona¬
parte, 82 I 1888.|

8vo, 219 pp.

Title, 1 L; + subtitle, 1 1 .; + “Offert | a la | Sodete
royale | du Canada.” | 1 L; + text, 108 11 ., numbered
1-216; 4 - Table des Matieres, 2 11 .; + “ Imprime par |
Alphonse Le Roy | imprimeur Crevete | a Rennes ” | with
armorial design representing sunrise, 1 1.

41 1888 Jacques Cartier’s First Voyage. | By W. F. Ganong,

A.M. |

In Memoires | et I Comptes Rendus | de la | Sodete
Royale [ du | Canada | Pour TAnnce 1887 | Tome V. |

413

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

Montreal | DawsonFreres,Libraires-Editeurs | 1888. | pp.
121-136.

42 1889 The Cartography of the Gulf of St. Lawrence from
Cartier to Champlain | By W. F. Ganong, A.M. |

In Memoires | et | Comptes Rendus | de la | Societe
Royale | du [Canada | Pour l’Annee 1889 | Tome VII I
Montreal | Dawson Freres, Libraires-fiditeurs | 1890. |
pp. 17-58.

43 1889 N. E. Dionne | Jacques Cartier | ouvrage couronne
par son honneur le lieutenant- | Gouverneur de la Province
de Quebec. | Sunt munera lauri | Quebec | Imprimerie
Leger Brousseau | 9, rue Buade, 9 | 1889. |

i2mo.

Title, 1 1 .; + dedication, A Son Excellence, 1 1 .; + Ta¬
ble Sommaire, 4 11 .; *f text, 151 11 ., numbered 1-302; + Ap¬
pendices 11 ., 303-314; + Index Alphabetique and Errata,
9 11 ., 315-332; + Genealogie de Jacques (Jartier et de sa
Famille, tabulated, folding leaf.

44 1889 Jacques Cartier, | his Life and Voyages | by | Jo¬
seph Pope. |

8vo, 168 pp.

Au verso of title. Printed and bound by A. S. Woodburn,
Ottawa, Ontario. 1889, 1 1 .

Copyright, 1 1 .; + dedication, 1 1 .; + contents, 1 % 11 .;
+ preface, 1 1.; + chap, i, Introductory, 6 11 ., numbered
14-24; + chap, ii. The First Voyage, 15 11 ., 26-54; +
chap, iii. The Second Voyage, 19^ 11., 56—91; + chap, iv,
The Second Voyage (continued), 9^ 11., 93-110; + chap,
v. The Third Voyage, 8 11 ., 112-126; + chap, vi, Subse¬
quent Events in the Life of Jacques Cartier, 5 11 ., 128-135 *
+ Appendices, A to L, 11 11 ., 138-157; + Index of Names
and Places, 5 11 ., 160-168; and map, The Ancient Hoche-
laga, | from a drawing in Ramusio | facing p. 80.

4*4

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

45 1889 Discours | prononce lors de | L'inauguration du monu¬
ment | Cartier-Brebeuf | le 24 Juin 1889) Par M. Chauveau |
Commandeur de l’ordre de Pie IX, chevalier de Tordre
de Saint-Gregoire, | officier de 1 ’Instruction publique de
France, docteur es lettres et | en droit de l’Universitc Laval,
membre de la Societe Royale du Canada, membre associe de
TAca- | demie Royale de Belgique, membre de la | societe
d’Histoire Diplomatique, | membre correspondant de |
TAthenee Louisianais | etc., etc., etc. | Donnacona | Poesie
par le meme | Montreal | C. O. Beauchemin & Fils,
Libraires-Imprimcurs | 256 et 258, rue Saint-Paul | 1889 |

8vo, 26 pp.

46 1890 Premier Voyage | du I Jacques Cartier | au | Can¬
ada I Edition Canadienne du | Discours du | Voyage | fait
par le | Capitaine Jacques Cartier | publiee par | Raoul de
Tilly | Levis: | Imprimeriedu Travailleur de Levis | 1890 |

8vo, pp. i-vii, 71.

Title, 1 1.; 4 introduction, pp. i-vii; * 4 * title, Discours, etc.,
1598; 4 Extraict du Privilege, 1 1 .; 4 L'Imprimeur aux
Lectures, 1 1 ., numbered 3-4; 4 - Sur le Voyage, 2 11 .,
5-8; 4 - Ensuit les Noms, 1 L, 9; 4 - Ensuyt le L^ngage,
etc., 4 11 ., 10-14; 4 - Discours du Voyage, etc., 25 11 .,
17-67; 4 Notes, 2 11 ., 68-71.

47 1890 Jacques Cartier | Sa Vie et ses Voyages | par | Joseph
Pope. Traduit de 1 * Anglais | par I L. Philippe Sylvain |
(de la Bibliotheque du Parlement.) | Ottawa. | 1890 |

8vo, 172 pp.

Au verso of title, Enregistre conformement a l’Acte du
Parlement du Canada, en l’annee mil | huit cent quatre-
vingt-dix, par Joseph Pope, au bureau du ministre de l’Agri-
cul- | ture a Ottawa. | Imprime par A.S. Woodburn, | Otta¬
wa, Ontario. | + Dedicace, 1 1 .; 4 - Preface, 1 1 ., numbered
5-6; 4 Sommaires, 2 11 ., 7-9; 4 chap, i, Avant-propos,
11., 11-23; + c ^ a P- “> Le premier voyage, \6 l / 2 11 .,

415

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

24-55 J + chap. Le deuxieme voyage, 19J4 11 ., 56-94;
+ chap, iv, Le deuxieme voyage (suite), 10 11 ., 95-114; +
chap, v, Le troisieme voyage, %% 11 ., 115-131; + chap, vi,
Derniers Actes de la vie de Jacques Cartier, 5 11 ., 131-140;
+ Appendice, 11 11 ., 141-162; + Index alphabetique des
personnes et des lieux, 5 11 ., 163-172; et dessin a l'Anrien
Hochelaga, facing p. 84.

48 1890 Jacques Cartier | and his | Four Voyages to Canada |
An Essay | With Historical, Explanatory and Philological
Notes | By | Hiram B. Stevens, B.C.L. | Montreal I W.
Drysdale & Co., Publishers, | 232 St. James Street. [ No
date.

Tableofcontents, 2 pp., not numbered; + medal to Hiram
B. Stevens and autographs of Henry IV and Richard Hak¬
luyt, 1 p., not numbered; + preface, pp. i-xii; + text, pp.
1—132; + notes, pp. 133-163.

49 Jacques Cartier | ou | la Decouverte du Canada | Drame
Historique en quatre actes I un Prologue et un sixieme tab¬
leau (aa libitum) | mele de chant | par Fred. Heurlipes J
Prix: 40 centimes | ecusson | Paris I librairie Bleriot | Henn
Gautier, successeur | 55, quai des Grands-Augustins, 55 |

i2mo, 56 pp. No date.

At bottom of p. 56: “ Imp. Georges Jacob,—Orleans.'*

50 1891 N. E. Dionne | La | Nouvelle-France | de Cartier a
Champlain | 1540-1603 | Quebec | Typographic de C.
Darveau | 82 a 84, rue de la Montagne. | 1891. |

8vo, 395 pp.

Vide pp. 9-55.

51 Les points obscure des Voyages de Jacques Cartier. | Par
Paul De Cazes. | Jacques Cartier; Questions de calendrier
civil et ecclesiastique. | Par L'Abbe Hospice Verreau,
LLD.

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

In Memoirs J et | Comptes Rendus | de la | Societe
Royale | du | Canada | Pour I’Annee 1890 | Tome
VIII. | Montreal | Dawson Freres, Libraires-fediteurs. |
1891. | pp. 25-34 and map, p. 153; and pp. 113-152.

52 1892 Jacques Cartier; Questions de droit politique, de
legislation, et d’usages maritimes. | Par L’Abbe Hospice
Verreau, LLD |

In Memoirs | et | Comptes Rendus | de la | Societe
Royale | du | Canada | Pour l’Annee 1891 | Tome IX. I
Montreal | Dawson Freres, Libraires-fiditeurs. j 1892 ]
PP- 77 “ 83 .

53 1892 The | Results in Europe | of | Cartier’s Explora¬
tions, | 1542-1603. | by | Justin Winsor. I [Reprinted,
Seventy-five copies, from the Proceedings of the | Massa¬
chusetts Historical Society.] Cambridge: | John Wilson
and Son. | University Press. | 1892. |

8vo, 14 pp.

54 1893 The | Anticipations of Cartier’s Voyages, J 1492-
1534. | by | Justin Winsor. | [One Hundred Copies, pri¬
vately reprinted from the Proceedings of I the Massachu¬
setts Historical Society, January, 1893.] [ Cambridge,
U. S. A. | John Wilson and Son. | University Press. |

1893-1

8 vo, 19 pp.

Folding maps at end: American Sections of the
Maiollo Map, 1527, No. 1, No. 2.

55 1895 Cartier’s Course — a Last Word. | By the Right
Reverend M. F. Howley. | West Newfoundland. |

In Memoires | et | Comptes Rendus | de la | Societe
Royale | du | Canada | Pour l’Annce 1894 | Tome XII
Montreal | Dawson Freres, Libraires-fediteurs | 1895 |

pp. 151-182.

4 i 7

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES CARTIER

56 1897 Jacaues Cartier. Questions de Lois et Coutumes
man times. I Par M. L*Abbe Hospice Verreau, docteur es
lettres. |

In Memoires | et | Comptes Rendus | de la | Societe
Royale | du | Canada | SecondeSerie—Tome III | Seance
de Juin 1897 | en vente chez I John Durieet Fils, Ottawa:
La Cie Copp-Clark, Toronto | Bernard Quaritch, Londres,
Angleterre f 1897. | pp. 119-133.

57 1898 La Nouvelle France. | Par I Eugene Guenin. |
Tome 1. | Paris. | Librairie. Arthur Fourneau | 18. Rue
de la Sorbonne, 18. | 1898. |

Premier voyage de Jacques Cartier | a la Nouvelle-
France | pp. 11-33.

58 1900 Decouverte | et | Evolution Cartographique | de |
Terre-Neuve | et des | Pays Circonvoisins | 1497-1501-
1769 I Essais de Geographic Historique et Documentaire |

S ar | Henry Harrisse. | Paris | H. Welter, Editcur | 4
Lue Bernard- Palissy, 4 | London | Henry Stevens Sons
& Stiles | 39, Great Russell Street, W. C. | MDCCCC. |

4to, lxxii, 420 pp.

Numerous passages relating to Cartier; notably Premier
voyage | (with chart), p. 135; Second voyage | (with chart),
p. 137; Troisieme voyage, p. 171.

418

ITINERARY OF CARTIER’S VOYAGES

ITINERARY OF CARTIER’S VOYAGES

AFTER THE CALRHDRtU CIVIL IT RCCLCSIAmqVS OF THE AMR TU11AD

Voyage of 1534

April

May

20

Monday,

IO

Sunday,

tt

21

Thursday,

tt

*4

Sunday

or

or

25

Monday,

ft

9

Tuesday,

ft

10

Wednesday :

tt

11

Thursday,

it

12

Friday,

cc

13

Saturday,

tt

14

Sunday,

tt

15

Monday,

ft

16

Tuesday,

ft

17

Wednesday]

tt

18

Thursday,

ft

24

Wednesday

Cartier leaves St. Malo.

Arrives at Bona Vista.

Reaches Isle of Birds.

Enters the harbor of Quirpont.

Leaves Quirpont.

Enters the harbor of Brest.

St. Barnabas Day. Hears mass
and explores coast in boats.

Names St. Anthoine, Servan;
plants cross and names river
St. Jacques, and harbor,
Jacques Cartier.

Returns to ships.

Hears mass.

Sails toward north coast of
Newfoundland.

follows the west coast of New¬
foundland and names the
Monts des Granches.

Names the Colombiers, Bay St.
Julien, and Capes Royal and
Milk.

Stormy weather to 24th; explores
coast between Capes Royal
and Milk.

Festival of St. John the Baptist.
Names Cape St. John.

421

ITINERARY OF CARTIER’S VOYAGES

May 25

Thursday

Weather bad; sails toward the

&

&

west and southwest; dis¬

« 26

Friday,

covers Isles Margaux, Brion,
and Cape Dauphin.

June 27

Saturday,

Coasts toward west-southwest.

“ 28

Sunday,

Reaches Cape Rouge.

“ 29

Monday,

Festival of St. Peter. Names
Alezay and Cape St. Peter,
and continues course west-
southwest.

« 30

Tuesday,

Toward evening descries land
appearing like two islands.

July 1

Wednesday,

Names Capes Orleans and
Savages.

“ 2

Thursday,

Names Bay St. Leonarius

“ 3

Friday,

Continues northerly course and
names Cape Hope.

“ 4

Saturday,

Names Port St. Martin; remains
thereuntil 12th.

“ 5

Sunday,

“ 6

Monday,

Festival of the Transfiguration.
Hears mass and examines
coast.

“ 7

Tuesday,

Ships visited by savages.

“ 9

Thursday,

Penetrates Bay Chaleur.

“ 10

Friday

&

Continues explorations.

“ II

Saturday,

« I2

Sunday,

Leaves Port St. Martin and
makes Cape Pratto.

c «

Monday,

Seeks shelter of Cape owing to
storm.

“ 14

Tuesday,

Enters river farther north and
remains until 16th.

w 16

Thursday,

Sails up river and remains until
25th, on account of storm.

« 22

Wednesday,

Lands and meets savages.

« 24

Friday,

Plants a cross.

422

ITINERARY OF CARTIER’S VOYAGES

July 15

Saturday,

Sets sail with good wind toward

Anticosti.

« 27

Monday,

Approaches coast.

« 28

Tuesday,

Names Cape St. Louis.

« 29

Wednesday,

Names Cape Montmorency and

doubles East Cape of Anti¬
costi.

Aug. 1

Saturday,

St. Peter in chains. Enters

Strait St. Peter.

“ 5

Wednesday,

Names Cape Thiennot.

“ 8

Saturday,

Approaches west coast of New¬
foundland.

" 9

Sunday,

Arrives at Blanc Sablon, and

makes preparations to return
home.

“ *5

Saturday,

Festival of the Assumption.

Hears mass and sets sail for
France.

Sept. 5

Saturday,

Arrives at St. Malo.

May 16

« 26
June 25
July 7
“ 8

«

C<

26

29

ft

tt

3 o
3i

Second Voyage, 1535

Sunday, First, Pentecost. The crew commune
at Cathedral and receive Epis¬
copal benediction.

Wednesday, Departure from St. Malo.

Wednesday, Contrary winds.

Friday, Ships separated by storm.

Wednesday, Cartier reaches the Isle of Birds.

Thursday, Enters Strait of Belle Isle.

Thursday, Reaches the rendezvous at
Blanc Sablon.

Monday, Ships meet.

Thursday, Follows north coast an d names
Isles St. William.

Friday, names Isles St. Marthy.

Saturday, Names Cape St. Germain.

423

ITINERARY OF CARTIER'S VOYAGES

Aug. i Sunday, Contrary winds; enters St.

Nicholas Harbor.

Sunday, Sails toward the southern coast.

Monday, Contrary wind; turns toward

north and stops in Bay St.
Lawrence.

Friday, Leaves Bay St. Lawrence, ap¬
proaches Anticosti, and
doubles the western point.
Sunday, Festival of the Assumption.

Names Anticosti, Isle of the
Assumption.

Monday, Continues alone the coast.

Tuesday, Turns toward the north.

Thursday, Arrives at the Round Islands.

Friday, Ranges the coast with his boats.

Saturday, Sails west, but obliged to return

to the Round Islands owing
to head winds.

Tuesday, Leaves the Round Islands and

sets sail toward south.

Sunday, Martyrdom of St. John Baptist.

Reaches harbor of Isles St.
John.

Sept, i Wednesday, Quits the harbor and directs his

course toward the Saguenay.
“ 2 Thursday, Leaves the Saguenay and reaches

the Isle of Hares.

Monday, Arrives at the Isle of Filberts.
Wednesday, Our Lady’s Day. Hears mass.

Thursday, Donnacona visits Cartier.

Monday, Sails toward the River St.

Charles.

K 14 Tuesday, Exaltation of the Holy Cross.

Reaches entrance of St.
Charles River. 1

“ 15 Wednesday, Plants buoys to guide his ships,

1 Prom the narrative it would seem that Cartier had previously named the
place St. Croix, but the narrative having been written after the event, he
naturally used the name to designate it.

4*4

8

9

13

1 5

16

17

19

20

21

24

29

6

8

9

13

ITINERARY OF CARTIER’S VOYAGES

Sept. 16

Thursday,

Two ships are laid up for the
winter.

««

x 7

Friday,

Donnacona tries to dissuade
Cartier from going to Hoche-
laga.

«

18

Saturday,

Donnacona’s stratagem to de¬
ter Cartier from going to
Stadacone.

«

x 9

Sunday,

Cartier starts for Hochelaga
with his pinnace and two boats.

««

28

Tuesday,

Enters Lake St. Peter.

u

29

Wednesday,

Leaves his pinnace, and pro¬
ceeds with his boats.

Oct.

2

Saturday,

Arrives at Hochelaga.

it

3

Sunday,

Lands and visits town and
mountain, which he named
Mount Royal, and leaves
Sunday.

u

4

Monday,

Regains his pinnace.

u

5

Tuesday,

Takes his way back to Stada¬
cone.

u

7

Thursday,

Stops at Three Rivers and
plants cross upon an island.

tt

ii

Monday,

Arrives at St. Croix.

tt

12

Tuesday,

Donnacona visits Cartier.

tt

x 3

Wednesday,

Cartier and some of his men
visit Stadacone.

x 536

April 16

Sunday,

Easter Sunday, 1st day of the
year. The river clear of ice.

«

21

Friday,

Dom Agaya visits Cartier with
strange savages.

tt

22

Saturday,

Donnacona visits Cartier with
large number of savages.

tt

28

Friday,

Cartier sends Guyot to Stada¬
cone.

May

3

Wednesday,

Festival of the Holy Cross. A
cross planted. Carrier seizes
Donnacona.

4*5

ITINERARY OF CARTIER’S VOYAGES

May

5

Friday,

The people of Stadacone bring
provisions for Cartier's cap¬
tives.

sc

6

Saturday,

Cartier sails from River St.
Croix.

cc

7

Sunday,

Arrives at the Isle of Filberts.

cc

J 5

Monday,

Exchanges presents with the

cc

16

Tuesday,

SaV AgCOi

Leaves for the Isle of Hares,
but is forced to return to the
Isle of Filberts by storm.

cc

22

Monday,

Reaches Isle Brion.

cc

2 5

Thursday,

Festival of the Ascension.
Reaches a low, sandy island.

cc

26

Friday,

Returns to Isle Brion.

June

1

Thursday,

Names Capes Lorraine and St.
Paul.

cc

4

Sunday,

Fourth of Pentecost. Names
harbor St. Esprit.

cc

6

Tuesday,

Departs from the harbor of St.
Esprit.

St. Barnabas Day. At Isles St.
Pierre.

cc

11

Sunday,

cc

16

Friday,

Departs from Isles St. Pierre
and makes harbor at Roug-
nouse.

cc

*9

Monday,

Leaves Rougnouse and sails for
home.

July

6

Friday, Reaches St. Malo.

Third Voyage, 1541

May 23

Monday,

Cartier leaves St. Malo with five
ships.

Aug. 23

Tuesday,

Arrives before Stadacone.

CC

^5

Thursday,

Lands artillery.

Sept.

2

Friday,

Sends two of his ships home.

cc

7

Wednesday,

Sets out for Hochelaga.

cc

11

Sunday,

Arrives at Lachine Rapids.

426

<3»M«rre

INDEX

INDEX

Aaron, a pilgrim took up his residence on
Roche d'Aaron, 9

Assays, Stmt-Jean L\ place of assembly in
St. Mak>, 503 n
Asm alba, 158 n
Ann balsams, 158 n
Anas Canadensis, 146 n
Allis nigra, 158 n

Asiaoa, Jaunaye, at the taking of, 384
Asscomda, name giTen by the natires to figs,
in n

Aca nada, 135 n
“Accords*," 17 n
Acs* sachamnum, 114 n
Acnxlact, mv Adwlaiy
Ac* slaty, Village of, Cartier at, 156; its loca¬
tion, 157 n, 186; iw also under Hochelay
Achxlatt, Lord of, daughter of, did not die in
France, 119, 219 n; gave girl to Cartier, 227
Acorns, Cartier's reference to, nr n; abun¬
dant, 163

Acosta, Jose de, Natural and Moral History
of the Indies, cited, in n
Adam's will, and Francis I, 41
Adhotu uts, seen by Cartier, 28, 141-142,
187; described, 142 n, 187-188
Admiralty Commission, 51, 53
“Ajtoug," as used by Cartier, 185 n
“Ajtocg d’eaces," 185 n
“Aitourchs," the modem Affoug, 185 n;
defined, 185 n
Atrica, 227 n

Aox ur us phaniceus, the, 158 n
Aoros Dsi, the, given to natives, 169
A 00 hanna, defined, 144, 144 n, 167; con¬
tracted to Agona, 230 n
AoonANMA of Hocbelega, met Cartier, 33,167;

impotent and diseased, 33, 167-168
A00 hahna of Stadacond, successor of Don-
nacona, 45, 222; crowned Cartier, 45, 123;
inquired for Doom con a, 45, 22a; dissimu¬
lated, 45, 222-223; plotted with Ochday, 47,
230; deceived by Cartier, 57; Donna corn
desired Cartier to make a prisoner of, 198,200
Agona, a contraction of Agohanna, which see
Agomionda, mt Agojuda

Aoojcda evil folks, 171; same as Iroquois,
171 n; called Tou damans, 171 n
"AiouNxrrA," 179 n

Aismkrt, Jehan, charpenrier on Carrier's
second voyage, 310, 314
Ajoastx, an Indian village, 185; people of,
•poke the Hurts language, 183 n; same as
Andastoe, 185 n
Alabaster, 250
Alrt, 333

Alca impennis, same as Apposite, 78 n
Alca torda, same as razorbills, 78 n
AuNfsH, diamonds from, 227 n
Alexander VI, Pope, his Bull of demarca¬
tion, 15 n, 38
Alexandria, 196
Altowcx, Jean, jm Alphonse
AiOomtlN dialects, 107, 144 n
Auxctx, Anthoine, on Cartier's second
voyage, 309, 313; relative of Gu i llau me
ADiecte, but names spelled differently, 309 n;
married Robine Le Breton, 309 n
Ausat Commune, 97 n
Allrt, 333

Allkxat, Cartier at, 97, 277, 42a; same as
Dead man's Island, 97 n
Aluictx, Guillaume, 00 Cartier's second
voyage, 309, 313; same as Allierte, 309 n; of
a distinguished family in St. Malo, 309 n
Aluxrtx, m« ADiecte, Guillaume
All Islands, Carrier at, 85, 269
Allou 4 , the, Carrier complained before, 17;
explained, 17 n; published Carrier's second
commission, 25
"Allouxttxs," 158 n

A loses, savages brought them to Roberval,
139; same as shad, 239 n, 240
Almonds, 190

Alt hon* x, Jean, of Sain too ge, pilot for
Roberval, 49, 235, 245, 260, 396; course of,
245; left charts and a cosmography, 260 n;
death of, 260 n; charts of, 136 n, 246, 248,
249,253,256,258; Lei Voyages di,edition of
t J59 described, 396 ; edition of 1578 described,
397; edition of 1598 described, 397; later
edition described, 406

429

INDEX

Alright Island, 208 n

Amazon River, maize grown at, tn n; French
may have sailed for the, 351, 351 n
Ami otic, Rouge mont, a native of, 19a
“Ameda,” same aa “Amedda," 195 n
Amedda, given by Indians to cure disease
among Cartier's crew, 35, 46,195; described
195 n; cures Cartier's crew, 195-196
Ameuca, first map bearing the name of, 65;
first Three Books on, set Eden, Richard
American Museum of Natural, History, N.Y,, 6
American Naturalist, cited, 165 n
Amherst Island, 97 n, 98 n
Anaplor, ships fitting at, 4a, 349; ms also,
Harfleur

Andalusia, number of ships at, to be ascer¬
tained, 358

Andastes, the, spoke the Huron tongue, 185 n
Andastoe, tame as Ajoaste, 185 n
Anghiera, Pietro Martire de, m Martyn,
Peter

An go hanna, jet under Donnacona
AngoulIme, Francis, Count de, 159
Anjou, 341

Anne, L', Sainterre in command of, 363; to
be sold, 366

** Annedda,” same as “Amedda,” 195 n
Anser al bifrons, 158 n
Anser byperboreus, the, 158 n
Anspach, L. A, History of Newfoundland,
cited, 88

Anthoini, Dom, on Cartier's second voyage,
309,313; probably a priest, 309 n; Jehan, on
Cartier's second voyage, 309, 31a
Ahthus Ludovidanus, die, 158 n
Anticosti, Cartier at, 04, 137 □, 433; origin
of die name, 135 n; Roberral passed, 237,
137 n; Cartier named it Isle of the Assump¬
tion, 1350,136,424; mentioned, 1150,116 n,
118 n, 136 n, 253,256
Awtrostomus vodferus, the, 158 n
Antwerp, 70

Apocynum cannabinum, at Stadaconf, 146 n
Apples, 13, m, m n, 289, 290
Apple trees, 251

Apponatz, name given by Cartier to the birds
at Isle of Birds, 77, 164; same as the auk, 78
n; perhaps the “razorbill,” 78 n; at Mar-
gaidz Islands, 93,275
Apokath 1 77 n; m* also Apponatx
Apponath J

Arables, abundant, 259; same as maples,
259 n

“Apsis PAquxa,” explained, 305 n
Apuril, Bertrand, on Cartier's second voy-
age, 309, 313; one of the cominisstoaen in
charge of fetes when Charles IX visited St.
Milo, 309 n

Archives des Voyages, par H. Temaux-Cosn-
pans, 405

Arguenoh, the, 90 n
Arrimxr, signification of, 77 n
Arctic Ocean, 15
Artillery, the, 152,173,220
Ashes, ioo, 158, 259, 280
Ashes, “fresnes,” at Stadacoof, 146,146 n
Asia, Cartier supposed to have reached aa
end of, 40,40 n; Newfoundland supposed to
be a part of, 14 16; “our holy faith" first
planted in, 127; lands stretch towards, 259;
Saguenay called a part of, 326; Canada and
Hoc he lags an end of, 339
AsxCttasquaim, same as squashes, 178 n
“Ashe Sauvaoe,” 179 n
Ajpeemont, Baron of, icr Chabot, PhiSippe,
Sieur de Brion
“AsquENOUDo,” 179 n
Ass, wild, 179 n

Assembly of Burgesses at St. Mato, March

3*. *53S» 305-307

Astrakhan, pumpkins native of, 178 n
Atlas, 254 n

“Aubes-pines,” at Stadconf, 146 n
Auch, Toumao, archbishop of, 325 n
Audiences de la Jurisdiction Ordinaire dr
Saint Mato, cited, if

Addixpore, Michael, on Cartier's second
voyage, 308, 311; many ways of spefiing the
name, 308 n; note concerning, 308 n
Audubon, J. J., Ornithological Biography,
cited, 78 n, 93 n

Augo, Jean, wnt out ships, 350, 350 n; called
Viscount of Dieppe, 350, 350 n; account of,
35° n

Auk (Aka impennis),same as Cartier's “Ap-
paaatz,” 78 n; now extinct, 83 n
Auriferous deposits in Chaudfere, 227 n
Auxilhow, Paul d’, isr Sainterre, Lord of
Avezac, M. d', edited Bref Rfdt, 3; on Car-
tier’s voyage being preserved in an atom
tongue, 9

At a la, Don Pedro de, sent Cabot's map to
Spain, 62

Atllon, Licentiate, di sco v ere d Florida, 351
Atmabd, Vincent, 396

Azores, the, a boundary in the Pope's BuO,
15 n; French ships not to be allowed at, 359

“Bacak,” a knife, 107
Bacallaos, the, word antedates Columbus,
42 n; derivation of the word, 42 n; applied
by Cabot, 42 n; origin of tha word, 43 n;
Roberral Viceroy of, 40; French supposed
not to settle a colony beyond, 43 n; fo rmer
name of Isle of Orleans, 143 n; fleet fitted
for, 348, 349, 350; French tailed from St.

43 °

INDEX

Malo for, 351; discovered by the Bretons,
351; Spanish doubt that the French sailed
for, 351-351; French did not intend planting
colonies, but seeking treasure, 353; coast
unproductive, 353-354; report of captain of
captain of caravel sent to, 354; a cold country,
355; Portuguese lost two fleets there, 355;
French could not hum the Spanish by going
there, 355

Bahama Channel, French presumed to be
bound for, 351
Bate de lot Gomes, 68
Base de Mistanoque, La, 86 n
Base de Napetepe, La, 86 n
Bate de S. Cirio, 68
Baie du petit Pane, 85 n
Baie d’ Yorck, same as Castle Harbor, 81 n
Baie Royal, 81 n
Bailey and Noyes, 410
Balances, Port of, 81 n
BaesA, Colas, an Cartier's second voyage,
309, 31a; a common name in St. Milo, 309 n
Baebeby, escaped prisoner, 338 n
Baebot, Laurens, mutinied, 364
Bar do cl, 387, 390
Basks*, Robot, 400
Baenasy Island, 139 n
Bass, 188,140

BAtntmfE, nurae of Marguerite, 149 n
Bastille, Le Breton, ret Le Breton Bastile
Bataed, 3*», 315, 331,331, 335, 3«o
Bay Chaleur, Cartier at, 11,101,411; natives
at, as, 41a; same aa River das poblas, 68;
locality described, 10s; the hot weather
caused Cartier to give it the name, toa n, 107,
107 n, 151; name criticised by Lescarbot,
107 n; the Indian name, 107 n; begins at
Cape Pratto, 107

Bays Chasteaulx, Le, Cartier at, 75 n, 79,
10a, 131-131, 166; same as Strait of Belle
Isle, 79 n; situation of,147; Cartier tog 010,3011
Bay 1 des Isles, 358

Bate Saint Jehan, La, same as 1 'Abbaye
Saint-Jean, 303 n, 305
Bat Ingomachoix, 89 n
Bat of Castles, Cartier at, 131; other vessels
of the fleet arrive at, 131; coast at, 131-131;
ms also Baye Chasteaulux
Bat of Gaspd, Le Clercq at, I f 3 n
Bat of Heat, die, 10a n, 151; j« also Bay
Chaleur

Bat of Islands, same as Bay St. Julian, 90 n
Bat of Miramichi, not the Rim of Boats, 99
n; seen by Cartier, 101, ioi n; described,
lot n

Bat of Motuet, situation of, 151; same as
Gas pi, 251; English name of, 351 n; now
Mai Bay, 151 n

Bat St. Jehan, 303, 305
Bat St. Julian, Cartier at, 90,171,431; same
as Bay of Islands, 90 n

Bat St. Lawrence, Cartier gave this name to
Pillage Bay, 134, 413; Cartier determines to
explore it, 137

Bazan, Don Alvaro de, proposed captain of
the new fleet, 358
Beans, 111,178, 178 n, 189
Beaes in abundance, 79, 95, 186, 150; often
encountered by voyagers, 79 n; hunted by
Indians, 180; those of New England, 180 n
Beak's Head, not Cape Royal, 90 n
Beasts like oxen, 94; with two feet, 186
Beau boys, Bertrand, at the court in St. Malo,
306

Beadcbemin 8c Fils, 415
Beaumont, Lord of, m Chabot, PhiDippe,
Sieur de Brion

Beaut at. Viscount, oq board one of the ships,
111; to govern in Cartier's absence, 46,117
Beavtxs, skins of, valuable, 187 n; wisdom
of, 187 n; skins of, given to Donnaconi 00
his departure, 306
Beeches, 46, 114

Belestee, Jehan Boulain, at court in St.
Malo, 306

BxLLEroaEsr, Francis de, L'Histoire Um-
maelle du Monde, cited, 104 n, 107 n
Belle Isle, Roberta! viceroy of, 40; met St.
Catherine, 81 n; Roberval at, 136, 136 n;
same aa Belleiale en Mer, 136 n; situation of
* 45 . * 4 *

Bells, given to savages by Cartier, no, 189;
on coat given to natives, 118
Beothiks, die, 87, 88 n
Beun-Lemubue, 406
Breton?, 396,197
Bx strand, Artbers, 405
BeetsE, Henrietta, wife of Jehan du Nort,
30811

BtTHENCOVKT, 410
Bktula papyraoea, 158 n
Btxisas, 333

Bibliography of the Algonlrin Language, m
Pilling, James C.

BiruothEca Amdricana Vetiistitrima, set
Harriaae

BiRUOTHiquE du Parlement, Ottawa, 415
BisuothE^ue Impdriale, Paris, manuscript
of Cartier's first voyage discovered in the,
1; mentioned, 407

BirliothEqux Nabooale, has three manu¬
scripts of Cartier's second voyage, 3; men¬
tioned, 129,260, 413

Bic, Cartier at, 139; origin of name, 139 n;
near De au Massacre, 174 n; probably the
same as Isle of RaqueOe, 252 n

43 1

INDEX

Bic Harbor, 139
BiCQurrte Island, 139 n
Bigelow, Jacob, Florida Bostoniensis, cited,
in o

Bio Sacred Island, 81 n

Billabd, Jeban, procurator at St. Malo, 304,

306

Biochzt, it* Bochier
Bibchks, 158

Bibd Island, Cartier at, on second voyage, a6j
named by Cartier, 83, 268; now Greenly
Island, 83 n

Bibd Rocks, Cartier at, 93 n; described, 93 n;
formerly Isles de Margaulx, 93 n
Bibos, at Isle of Birds, 77,165; mentioned by
Cartier as still abundant, 83 n, 93, 94 n, 280
Bishop, George, 400, 401
Bison American us, the, 241 n
Bis Selin, Olierier, 396
Blackbiedi, 158, 158 n, 187
Black foxes, 186 n
B lackland Point, jot n
Blanc Sabkra, Cartier at, 10,25,83,119,267,
268, 296, 423; land of Cain; 20, 86, 270; in¬
habitants of, 20, 86; on second voyage Car¬
rier meets hii missing ships there, 26-27, >31#
423; compared to the Islettes, 83-84; m also,
Isles of Blanc Sablon
Blancvtllx, Lord of, 323, 332
Ble d'lNSz, same as make, 111 n
Bloib, 341
Bluz-pebch, 188 n

Blupp Head, the Cape Royal of Carrier, 90 n;
situation of, 90 n, 91 n
Boa as, 241
Boat Island, 133 n
Boats of the savages, 86-87, *7*

Boat* turned over for shelter, 109-110,109 n,
289

Bochieb, or Brocket, Guillaume, on Cartier's
second voyage, 309, 312; many of this name
on the registers, 309 n

Bobieb, Mgr. Francois, officiated at the mau
before Cartier sailed on his second voyage,
129

Boislandry, Lord of, 323, 332
Bonasa umbeDs, the, 158 n
Bo ha vista, Cartier at, 70, 76 n, 421
Bohaventuee Island, cm Maggiofo'i map,
67; Cartier near, 108 n
Bowhoumz, Lorans, with Roberval, 338 n
Boniface VUI, i i 5 n

Bouniol, M. Bsrthild, his Let Marins Fran-
faia cited, 410

Bonne-Adventure, the, 14
Bonne Bay, 90 n, 251 n
Bonne Espirance, 103
Bobdzaux, 142, 327, 336

Bobti, abundant, 259; same as the birds,
259 n

Boston Athenseum, 299
BoUes, Charles des, founder of first RecoBeti
Mission in New France, 146 n
Bovillx, Thomas de la, at court in St. Malo,
306

Bo u lain, Bernard, Sieur de La Gasrinaye,
father of Thomas Boulain, 308 n; married
Petrine Maingard, 308 n
Boulain, Georges, at court in St. Malo, 306
Boulain, Guillaume, at court in St. Malo,
304

Boulain, Jehan, at court in St. Malo, 304
Boulain, Laurent, cm Cartier's second voy¬
age, 307, 31:; little known of him, 307 n
Boulain, Marie, 307 n
Boulain, Robin, at the court in St. Malo, 306
Boulain, Thomas, on Cartier's second voy¬
age, 308, 312; family of, 308 n; married
Jehannc Chemi, 308 n
“Boulx,” 158 n

Bovacxa, Touraon, Archbishop of, 325 n
Bourgogne, men booed, 304
Bourinot, cited, 208 n
Boubnatb, Sieur de, i« Leblanc, Legendre
Enrienne

Bovs left with Ochelay to learn the language,
47,48,218, 230

Botspte, Mondyne, romantic story of, 249 n-
2500, 338 n

Beadoee Bay, 83 n, 84 n
Beano, John, Observation! on Rspular An¬
tiquities, died, 84
Brant a bernida, 158 n
Beanta Canadensis, 158 n
Brant-goose, 158 n
Brat, Ambroiae, 410
Brat, Edmond, 398

Brazil, probably visited by Cartier, 13;
Frauds I sent expedition to, 14 n, 41; has
same grain as Canada, 110, 163, 177, 289;
diamonds of, 217 n; ships bound for, 348,
349, 350; mentioned, 400, 413
Brazilians, Stadacooeans live similar to die,
176

Bread, millet used in place of, no, 241, 289;
made of make, 161 n; bow made at Hoche-
laga, 164-165; desired by Taignoagny, 182
Breams, 188
Breslx, 220 n

Brest, France, ships fitting at 42, 349; dis¬
tance from Landerneau, 364 n
Brest, Haven of (New France), Cartier at,
83 n, 84,840,268,421; now Old Fort, 840;
described, 84 n; Cartier left bis ships at, to
explore with boats, 85 n; ships from Rodbdlc
at, 85, 86, 270; Cartier sailed from, 87,270-

43 2

INDEX

171; distance from Cape Double, 88,171;
mentioned, 39a n

Bretaignx, Cartier returned to, 54; at alto
Brittany

Breton, Guillaume de, tailed with Cartier
on hit aecond voyage, 130; with Cartier on
trip to Hochelaga, 161

Barrows, penetrated the Gulf of St. Law.
rence, 59; did not come in tight of the St.
Lawrence River, 59; discovered Bacallaot,
351; Land of die, 95, 9$ n, 376
Bbivoort, J. C., Verraxano the Navigator,
cited, 43 n

BaiiiL, Catherine, baptised, 13, 14 n
Brief rfdt and sucdncte narration, set Car*
tier, Jacques
“Barax," 158 n

BaiNCOHWKT, Mgr. Denit, did not officiate at
die mast before Cartier started on second
voyage, 139 n

Banrrow, Myths of the New World, cited,

* 75 ®

Baton Island, Cartier at, 95, 307-308, 376,
433; why to named, 95 n; name sometimes
distorted, 95 n; s landmark, 97, 377; oppo¬
site Grindstone Island, 307 n; much con¬
fusion in Cartier's account after he left,
308 n

Barow, Phillippe de Chatbot, Seigneur de,
Brion Island named for, 95 n
Bar said letn£, Jehin, at court in St. Malo,
306

Barr ajn, tame as Brittany, 319 n
Bunts Museum, has a copy of the Bref
Rddtof 1545, 3

Butt ant, trees of, compared to those of New
France, 94, 376; Cartier at, 119, 396; Car*
tier a native of, 133; savages saw children
baptised in, 176; ships from, at Islet $t.
Pi er re, 309; savage died in, at9; ships fitted
in, 330; Cartier driven back to coast of, 336;
Chabot admiral of, 304; people of, thwart
Cartier, 336; Epernoa governor of, 376;
parliament at, 385, 387, 388; Cartier an in¬
habitant of, 390; mentioned, 334, 341, 349,
351, 360, 406

Brittany, Henry, Duke of, 343
BaoocHxt of tin and copper given to natives,
330

Brouage, 388 n
BaoussxAu, Ldger, 414
Brown, 404

Brulart, Nicolas, 401, 403, 409
Brullaet, 383

Boca an, Narrative of, cited, 88
Buffaloes, 341 a
Buffalo calves, 377
Buffalo skins, 377

Bugles, 341, 341 n
Buhxn, 346

Buonavista, 76 n; tee also Cape Bonavista
Buenside Place, Montreal, a boundary of the
ancient Hochelaga, 163 n
Bustards, 158, 158 n, 187, 359
Butts, haven of, 346
Butternuts, iii n

Buttons of tin on coat given to natives, 338
Buxancais, Count of, i« Chabot, Phillippe,
Sieur de Brion
“Btcueei," 186 n
Btnneman, H., 398

Bteon, Lord, Brion Island not named for
him, 95 n

Cabbage seeds sowed, 315
Carih Coubut, Indian name of St. Charles
River, 146 n

Cabo de bha venturi, 60
Cabo de boaviita, 61
Cabo del eapero, 68
Cabo de lic6tu, 60
Cabo del Latte, 90 n
Cabo de Marco, 68

Cabo de Nada, supposed derivation of Canada

■35 «

Cabo de Spalot, 68
Cabo de Tronot, 70 n

Cabo Rasso, same as Cape Race and Cape
Rouge, 80 n; mentioned, 65,67,68,80 n
Cabo Spera, now Point Spear, 103 n
Cabo Tiennot, 70 n
Cabo, stt Cape

Cabot, John, hit papers destroyed by Spain,
41; map of, sent to Spanish king, 6a; little
doubt that he prepared a second map, 63-63 »
landfall of, 76 □; Indiana aeen by, 87
Cabot, Sebastian, applied the name Bacal¬
ls o* to the fishing-grounds, 43 n; map of,
70,700

Cadell and Davis, 404
Cadie, La, 401
CaKn, M., 135 n
Caen, Bailiff of, 341

Caignetdaxx, from Saguenay, 136; defined,
136 n

Cain, the land God gave to, xo, 86, 370
Calendar, French and Roman, compared,
306 n

Calin dries, Civil et Ecdesiastique, stt
Verreau, L'Abbd Hospice
Cambrai, Tresty of, 15
Camnob, 65
Cambell's Point, 99 n
Canada, name bestowed by Cartier, 71, 135;
erroneous derivation of the word, 135 n;
true derivation, 135 n; word used by Rabe-

433

INDEX

lais, 135 n; the name of a town, 114; docu- from, 373; Deliberation of the Burgesaesof

ments relating to die history of, recently St. Milo concerning trade in, 38s, 383, 386;

found, 4; Cartier described the Indians and trade in, restricted to Nonet and Jauoayc,

natural history of, 5; romantic early history 381, 38a, 383, 384, 385-386; people of &L

of, 9; history of, neglected by the French, 9; Malo to trade in, 383, 387, 388; p roponed to

at St. Peter's Strait the Indians pointed the render traffic in, free, 385; people of St. Malo

way to, 17, 136, 369; Donna cons, lord of, oppose die monopoly of trade in, given to

28, 144, 214, 219; the king of France in- Jaunaye and Nougl, 385-386; Pierre Cbauvia

terested in the colonization of, 39, 219, 340; had unrestricted right to trade in, 390, 391;

Roberval Viceroy of, 40, 220, 235, 241» 3 1 ** mentioned, 395, 397,398, 399,400.405, 406*

33»» 336, 366; difficulty in getting colonists 407, 408, 412, 413

for, 40; Cartier master pilot of all vessels Canada goose, 158 n

sent to, 40,326,340,341,343,361,370; con- Canada, Islands of, 405

ricts to be sent, 41; number of men and ves- Canadian, Le, cited, 200 a

sels to be sent to, 42; declared a barren Canadian Naturalist, die, cited, 162 n

country, 43; Sainterrc's voyage to, 54; Car- Canadians, came to rescue their king, 2os
tier refuted to return to, with Roberval, 53; Canel, origin of Canada, 135 n
Roberval unfit to undertake the colonisation “Canaudz,” 187

of, 54; 00 evidence that Cartier made a fifth Canadies, birds seen by Cartier, 158, 158 n,

voyage to, 55; Cartier justified in regard to 187

story of Dotmacona's not returning to, 57, Canadies, the Islands, 35S

222; grant given to Cartier's heirs to trade Canbegeob, Pierre le, with Roberval, 338 n

in, 58, 376, 377, 378-379, 380; Cartier the Candolle, A. de, Geographic bocanique,

discoverer of, 59, 339, 376, 379, 390; the cited, 111 n, 178 n

importance of bis discoveries in, not realized Canedio, map of, 64

in France, 71; fruit of, iued by savages, 111 Can ju, 60

n; Cartier started toward, 140, 141; Cartier Cannata, defined, 135 n

meets boats from, 140; beginning of the “Cannes,” birds seen by Cartier, 187 n

land of, 143; Cartier twenty-five leagues "Cannes A rsa,” fire darts, fusees, 364 n

from, 156; the region of, as limited by Car- Canoe birch, 158 n

tier, 157,157 n, 184,238 n; Cartier returned Cantino, Alberto, used Cortereal's dit¬
to, 172; people from, adviced Cartier of the coveries, 63-64; bis map used by Waldace-
treachery of the savages, 181,182; described miillcr, 66

by Cartier, 184; animals of, 187-188; Cantino's, Alberto, planisphere, 59, 60

natives of, had intercourse with other tribes. Cap a 1 'Quest, 92 n

190 o; Cartier's crew took their illness from. Cap de Lakt, 91 n

195; Cartier promised to bring Donnacona Cap de Rabatt, 134 n

back to, 205; vocabulary of the language of, Cap de Sainct Paul, 208 n

210-215; spice grew in, 215; Cartier arrived Cap dlUpdrancc, Cartier at, 103 n; now

in, on his third voyage, 221, 222; king of, Point Misoou, 103 n

died in France, 222; HocheLay dwelt near. Cap des Sauvages, Cartier at, 100 n; now

227; Hocbelay went to, to plot against Car- North Cape, 100 n; name of a different lo-

tier, 230; Roberval in, 237-238, 373; cality on later maps, 100 n

Roberval built bis fort in western part of, 238; Cap dXait, 91 □; u* also Cape Milk

the western limit of, 238, 238 n; land from Cap du Pre, name given to Cape Pratto by

Monts Notre Dame to, a goodly champaign, Ballefocest, 107 n

254-255; direction of the river and distance Cap, Louis, 90 n

from Isle of Origins to, 257; Jehan Davy Cap 1 'Ours, not Cape Royal, 90 n

came to, in his interests as a furrier, 309 n; Cap Pointu, 89

Leblanc died in, 310 n; further discoveries Cape Anguille, 92

in, to be continued, 315; only Roberval Cape Arpon, 80 n

allowed to oontrol trade and settlement in, Cape Bauld, Bon

320, 323; discovered by Cartier, thought to Cape Bona vista, Cartier at, 76, 79 a, 263,
be an end of Asia, 339; fleet bound for, 349; 264; same as Cap de Bonne Viste, 76 •;

supplies to be sent to Roberval in, 360; on claimed as Cabot's landfall, 76 n; ds imod
map dedicated to Hakluyt, 367; Cartier's to have been discovered by Cortereal, 76 □;

receipts ud disbursements on going to, to be an objective point for navigators, 76 a, 79 n;

examined, 370; Cartier brought Roberval Cartier left, 77, 264

434

INDEX

C Arm Breton, Island of, on Riberio'*
map; 68, possibly neighborhood had
been explored, 95 n; North Cape not on the
■bore of, 108 n; not probable that Roberval
waa at, 135 n, 136 n; location erf, 247, *5°»
on Alphonse's map, 249; northeast of La
Cadif, 401
Cm Oorier, 115 n

Cart, Dauphin, Cartier at, 95, 277, 422; now
North Cape, 95 n; origin of name, 96 n
Cara de Bonne Vote, 76 n
Cam de Coujugon, 378, 379, 380, 386, 387,
388

Cam Degrat, Cartier at, 80, 80 n-8t n, 81;
location of, 80 n
Cam de la Ftancucane, 258
Cam Delatte, Cartier at, 90-91, 272-273;
origin of name, 91 n; now Cape St. George,
91 n

Cate de* Mont*, Cartier at, 135 n; situation
of, 250-251, 252; probably the pretent
Mount Louis, *52 n; mentioned, 251, 254
Cam Despair, 103

Cam de Verde Island*, Charles V to send a
spy ship to, 42,351; mentioned, I5n,76n
Cate Double, Cartier named, to, 88, 271;
locality of, 88 n, 272; Cartier near, n8 n,

Cam Precis, 65

Cam Gaspf, Cartier in outer bay near, 108 n,

115 a

Cam Gregory, not Cape Royal, 90 n
Cave Harpoon, 80 n
Cam Hennoao, 68

Cam Hope, why ao named by Cartier, 101-
103,103 n, 282,422; now Point Miscou, 103 n
Cam Kildare, probably the Cape Orleans of
Cartier, 99 n

Cam Lorraine, named by Cartier, 208, 426;
uncertainty of its present name, 208 n; prob¬
ably Cbeticamp, 208 n
Cate Magdalen, 134 n

Cam Milk, Cartier at, 9!, 421; why 10 named,
91 n; now Cape St. George, 91 n
Cam Montmorency, Cartier at, 115,292,421;
origin of the name, 1x5 n; now Table Head,
115 n

Cam North, Cartier at, 134,134 n
Cam Nothing, 135 n

Cam of Good Hope, named by da Gama,
103 n

Cam of Low Island*, Cartier at, 132, 133;
tame as Cspe Whittle Islands, 133 n
Cam of Marble, situation of, 252-253; die
highland of Bk, 253 n

Cam of Ognedoc, situ a (ion of, 252; now
Print du Monti, 252 n

Cam Orleans, Cartier there, 98, 98 n, 278,

422; country described, 98-99, 279; doubt¬
less Cape Kildare, 99 n; Cartier in sight of,
too

Cate Pratto, Cartier at, 107, 207, 287, 422;
tides at, 107-108, 108 n; called “Cap du
Pre," 107 n; a reminder of Rut and Prato,
107 n; pouibly already known to Cartier,
107 n-108 n; now White Head, 108 n; pos¬
sibly named for du Pratt, 108 n; Cartier**
anchorage, to8 n
Cate Rabast, 134

Cats Race, Cartier at on second voyage, 37,
209; same as Cape Freds and Capo Raso,
65,67, 80 n
Cate Ray, 208 n

Cafe Razo, same as Cape Rouge, 80 n
Cate Rouge, Cartier at, 80, 266, 422; other
names of, So n; locality of, described, 81 n
Cam Rouge River, Cartier made harbor at,
223; site of fort at, 225 n
Cafe Royal, Cartier at, 90,91,272,421; now
Bluff Head, 90 n; location of, 90 n, 91-92,
* 73»*74

Cafe St. Aluiae, 114 n
Cafe St. George, 90 n, 91 o; tame as Cape
Milk, 91 n

Cafe St. Germain, 132,423
Cafe St. John, Cartier at, 21, 92, n6, 274,
293, 421; location of, 92 n, 93, 274
Cam St. Lawrence, 208 11-209 n
Cafe St. Louis, Cartier at, 24, 114, 115, 292,
423; origin of the name, 114 n; now East
Cape, ti5n
Cafe St. Louys, 1140

Cafe St. Paul, named by Cartier, 208, 426;
probably its present site, 208 n
Cafe St. Peter, Cartier at, 97, 277, 422; now
Southwest Cape, 97 n; shore of, 97 n, 98 n;
Cartier anchored there, 98 n
Cafe Thiennot, different spellings of, 70 n;
Cartier at, 118, 133 0,295,423; now N*U*h.
quan Point, 118 n, 133 n; situation of, 248
248-249

Cafe Tryon, 99 n
Cafe Turner, 99 n

Cafe Whittle Islands, named by Cartier Isles
St. Garmain, 132, 133 n
Cafe, j« Cabo

Cafs, given to natives, 113, 291

Captain Thiennot, 118,295

Caput de boos Ventura, 65

Casa das, Pierre, 374, 375

Caecaisokne, 331, 333,334

Caadi, game of, same as Indian Prim, 177 n

Cauiou, 1790

Cakf, 188,240

Caefin, Jean Flan, introduced the term
Cathay, 254 n

435

INDEX

Carfont, Mr Car punt bear, 19, 79, 26 5; at Golfe de* Chateaux,

Caefoow, ume at Cartier'a Rapont, go n; Strait of Belle Iak, 19, 79, 79 n, 166; gave

ttt *l*o Carpunt latitude with great accuracy, 79 n; bit tfari-

Carpunt, Roberta] Viceroy of, 40, xxi; ing-poiot toward the Gulf of St Lawrence,

lame at Rapont, 80, us n; now Quirpou, 79 n; at Rapoot, Quirpont, 80, 80 n, St n,

8on; Cartier at, 80, 111; »ituition of, 145 *66, 411; from Cape Rouge to Degrat, So,

Cariaconnt, 164 166; named island St. Catherine, 82,

Cartier, Catherine, her name given to the Hillock Harbor, 8s, 167; Whale Harbor, Sa,

present Schooner Island, 81 n >67; Blanc Sabko, 83, 267-168; the Godex

Cartier, Jacques, much concerning him and and Richart, 83, 83 n; the Ldrttes, 83-84,

hi* work ia lost, 1, 10; first voyage preserred 168; Port de Brest, 19,84, >68,411; mas* as

by an alien tongue, 1, 9; early accounts of his festival of St. Barnabas, 19, 84, 169, 431;

first voyage, 1; manuscript of first voyage at AH Islands, 10, 85, 169; at St Anthony,

discovered and printed a* the “Relation Rocky Bay, 85,169, 411; planted a cross at

Originate," 1-2; marks of hit personality in St. Servan, 20, 85, 169, 411; at river Sc.

the text, 1; second voyage published as the Jacques, 10, 8$, 169-170; met a ship from

“ Bref Rddt,” 3; account of third voyage, 4; Rochelle, 20, 85, 270; made exploration* in

the account of his experience in the winter boats, 85 n; Jacques Cartier harbor, 86,170;

of 1541, lost, 4, 48; hit voyages translated calls it the land of Cain, 86,170; described

only into Italian and English, 5; hit narra- the natives, 86, 87 n, 170; departed south-

tives contain much concerning animal and ward from Brest, ao, 87, 88 n, 170-471;

plant life, and the savages, 5; much contro- named Cape Double, 20, 86, 271; at Grange

versy over the route he followed, 5; a native Mountains, 88-89, 272, 421; saw Pointed

of St. Milo, to, 406; date of his birth, lo-tt; Cape and Stearing Island, 89, 89 n, 172;

parentage, 11; nothing known of his youth, Coiombaires, Dove-cote* and Bay St. Julian,

11; his birth contemporaneous with Colum- 21, 90, 273; at Cape Royal, 90,173; at Cape

bus' discovery, 11; the first glimpse we have Delatte, 90-91,173; explorations in boat* 10

of him ia a* a godfather, ri-11; took part in Fox Island and Three Guta, 91 n, 173-274;

fifty-three baptisms, 12, 51, 55; his educa- St. John's day, 10,92,174; at Cape St. John,

tion, 12; probably obtained his skill in navi- 91,174,411; Cartier estimated his distances,

gation by taking part in fishing voyages, 11; 91 n-93 n; named and described the Isles

married Catherine det Granches, 11, 13, 13 de Margaulx, 11,93-94* * 75 > 422; attempted

n; question concerning the date of his mar- to capture a walrus, 94,176; described and

riage, 13; a master pilot, 13, 376; probably named Brion Island, It, 95, 95 n, 176, 41*,

visited the shores of South America, 13,14 n; named Cape St. Peter and ADesay Island;

acted as an interpreter, 14 ns introduced to *i, 97,277,42a; hia landing place, 970,98 a;
Francis I, 16; may have been a companion named Cape Orleans, 98,278,422; anchored
erf Veraxxano, 16; his theory of the route to at Cape St. P i erre, 98 n; at River of Boats,

India, 16; the king and admiral inter- 99,179; coasted the nort h er l y shore of Prince

ested; 16; de Millerayc to supervise the Edward’* Island, 99 n, 100 n; saw Savages'
equipment, 16; hostility of others who were Cape, 100, 179, 421; gave knife and girdle

interested in maritime affairs, 17, 302, 303; of wood to a savage, 100, 179; landed and

complained before the ADouf, 17, 15, 303, described the country, too, 179-280; named
304; other ships not permitted to depart till the bight bet w een Prince Edward a Island

he bad secured a crew, 17; the sole com- and New Brunswick, “Guile de Lunane,"

mander, 17; object of the expedition, 17; ix, 101, 101 n, 280, 422; at Mirmmichi, 101,

secured sixty men, 17-18, 130 n, 307-314; 101 n; sighted New Brunswick, 101 n;

sailed from St. Milo with two ships, 18, 75, sighted Black!and Point, 102, 102 n; at Bay

79 n, 163, 421; reached Cape Bonavista, Chaleur, 102 n, 281; disappointed at noc

Newfoundland, 18, 76, 79 n, 264, 421; used finding the passage to Cathay, 102 n; n a med

Ferro to calculate longitude, 76 n; reached Cape Hope, 101-103, 282, 422; at have* «f

and named the harbor of St. Catherine, t8, St. Martin, 12, 103, 107, 281, 422* «•

76, 76 n, 79 n, 264; imprisoned by ice, re- plored Pispebiac Point, 103 n, 281; met

fitted hi* ships, 18, 76-77, 264; left St. and traded with savages, 22, 103-105, 106,

Catherine, 77, 164; at Isle of Birds, 18, 77, 283-285; fired two fusees, 104, 283-214;

79 n, 164,421; named the Apponatx, 77, 165; gave red hat to savage, 105, 284; described

preserved birds, 78, *65; named Godex, 78, the locality, 11-23, 106-107, 2*6-287! «

165; named the Margaulx, 79* ** 5 ! * Cape Pratto, 107, 287, 422; posriblj a place

+36

INDEX

already known to Cartier, 107 n-108 n;
his place of anchorage, 108 n; at Gaspf, a),
108; met a miserable race of savages, 13,109,
l$8, 41a; savages described, 109, 188-189;
gave savage* combs and bells, 110, 189;
products of the country, no-in, 189-190;
a careful observer and truthful describer,
in n, 133 n, 177 n; raised a cross at Gaspd,
13,111,113,190,411;savage*objected, ill,
113, 190-191; two savages lured on board
Cartaer's ship, 13, M3, 140 n, 191; departed
from Gaapd, 14, 114,191-191, 4 * 3 ! « Cape
St. Louis, 14, 114, 115,191; almost stumbled
upon the discovery of the St. Lawrence, 14,
115 n, 119 n; the reason why be did dis¬
cover the river, 115 n; coasted along the
southerly dure of Anticosti, 14, 116, 413;
sighted the coast of Labrador, 34; off Cape
Montmoreocy, 115, 391, 413; sighted North
Point, it6, 166 n, 193; consulted his officer*
about continuing or discontinuing the voy¬
age, 14, 117, 194; decided to return home,
14-15, 117, 194; at Strait of St. Pierre, 14,
118, 194, 413; named Cape Thiennot, 118,

195, 413; sailed from Blanc Sablon, 15,119,

196, 413; bead winds, 119,196; reached St.

Malo, 15, iio, 196, 413; given a new com¬
mission, 15; his vessels, 15, 119-130, 305;
commission published, 15,304; equipped for
fifteen months, 15, 305; list of companion*,
307-314; attended Maas at Easter, 16, 119,
119 n, 413; sailed from St. Malo on his
second voyage, 16, 119-130, 413; his com¬
panions, 16, 130, 130 n, 307-314; had
savages with him, 16, 130 n, 134; ships
separated, 16,130; reached die Isle of Birds
id, 131,413; at Haven of Blanc Sablon, 131,
413; met missing ships, 16-17, 13*» 4*3;
prepared to prosecute explorations, 17,131;
sees familiar objects, 17; Indians told him
of copper at Saguenay, 17; at Isles St. Wil¬
liam, 131,413; at Isles St. Martha, 131, 413;
at Isles St. Germain, 131-133, 413; at Cape
Thiennot, 133; planted a cross at St. Nich¬
olas, and made harbor at St. Nicholas, 133—
134, 133 n, 414; at Pillage Bay, 134 n;
skirted the coast and doubled Cape dei
Monts, 134-135* *35 4 * 4 ! “«*»

pointed out the way to Canada, 17,134, 135
n, 136, 137; at Isle of Assumption, 135 n,
136,138,414; resolved to examine the coast,
17, 137* 137 n* 4*45 wnght a north west
passage, 137 n; at Round Islands, 138, 414;
at Trout River, 138,138 n; at Isles St. John,
> 39 * *39 a > 4 * 4 * Parted for Saguenay,
Canada, 140,141,414; met savages, 17,140;
at die Saguenay, 18, 140, 141; at Hare
bland, i4i,4i4;*eetadhothuyt,i8,141-141;

sees turtles, 141; at Isle aux Coudres, 18
141, 414; carried savages ashore, 18, 143,
144; received present of fish, melons, and
millet, x8, 144; visited by Donnacona, 18,
144-145, 414; sought a harbor for winter
quarters, 18-19, 145, 414; he visited Stad-
aconf, 19, 146; visited by people from Stad-
aconf, 147; at Isle of Bacchus, 19, 148;
planted buoys to guide his ships, 149, 414;
brought two of his ships to St. Croix, 19,
150, 415; Donnacona desired that Cartier
should not go to Hochelaga, 19, 150, 415;
received a present of two boys and a girl,
30, 151; gave swords and brass basin to
Donnacona, 151; artiUery fired to please the
natives, 30, 151; natives attempted to intim¬
idate him, 30, 153-154, 4*5; called Cudou-
agny a fool, 154-155; Donnacona desired him
to leave hostages, 155; had priests with him,
155 n, 176 n, 309 n; why the natives op¬
posed bis pang to Hochelaga, 155 n; started
for Hochelaga, 31, 156, 415; at Acbelaiy,
156; offered two children, but accepts only
one, 31, 39 n, 46, 157; navigated through a
fine country, 157; at Sorel Islands, 159 n;
enters Lake St. Peter or Lac d’Angoulecme,
159 n, 415; carried on shore by a native, 31,
160; left his pinnace and proceeded in a
small boat, 31, 160, 415; his companions,
161; at Hochelaga, 31, 161, 411, 415; hit
reception, 31, 161-161; landed, 161, 161 n,
415; passed the night in his boats, 161;
arrived at the town, 166; might play a
mystery, 167; met Agohanna, 167; crowned,
33, 168; the ill brought to him, 33, 168; read
the Gospel of St. John, 34,168; gave presents
to the natives, 34,168-169; wonded Mount
Royal, 34, 169, 415; had three guides, 170,
170 n; regains hit pinnace, 171, 415; set out
for Stadaconf, 171,415; at Wltip River, 171;
planted a cross upon an island, 171, 415;
arrived at St. Croix, 35,171,415; visit from
Donnacona, 35,173-174, 415; visited Stada-
conf, 35, 173, 415; explained the faith of the
natives, 175-176; described vegetable* of the
place, 177-179; speaks of tobacco but does
not name it, 178-179, 179 n; smoked, 179;
named the wild animals, 179-180; traded
with the natives, 180-181; lost two of the
girls, but kept the other one safe, 181;
natives ceased coming to the fort, 181;
feared treachery, 181; strengthened the fort
and set watches, 181; upbraided the natives,
181; Dom A gays with strange savages visit
Cartier, 181; excuse of Donnacona and
others, 181; Donnacona paid a visit, 183;
girl returned to, 183; feasted the natives, 183;
described the country, 183-188; bit affusion

437

INDEX

to foxes, 186 n; ducks sod sea-bogs, 187 n;
“Sartres,” 188 n; severe winter, 35, 190; his
company infested with scurry, 35, 190-191,
191 n; forbade natives entering the fort, 190;
the illness described, 190-191; of all the
crew not ten were sound, 191; erected an
image of the Virgin, made rows of pilgrim¬
ages, and said masses, 35, 191-191; had an
autopsy, 19a; illness increased, 35, 191-193;
dead buried only under the snow, 193; sot
ill himself, 193; feared the savages, 193;
length of time in the ice, 193-194; Dom
Agaya brings amedda, 35,195; the beverage
given to the ill, 195; suggestive of a miracle,
195 n; the crew are cured, 196; ships put in
order, 197; trade with natives, 197; Dom
Agaya with strangers visited Cartier, 197,
415; Donnacona, with strangers also came
to the ship, 197, 415; crew enfeebled, fear
treachery, 198, 100; Guyot sent to Sttda-
cond, 198,415; savages desired that Agohan¬
na be taken to France, 198; a plan to cap¬
ture Donnacona, 199, 103 n; natives cease
to visit Cartier, 100; Cartier refused to take
Agohanna, 100; ship abandoned, 106 n;
cross erected at St. Croix, 36, 101, 415;
Donnacona, Taignoagny and Dom Agaya
made prisoners, 36, 101-103, 415; inference
of the act, 203 n; these Indians in France,
339, 339 n; promised to bring Donnacona
back, 103; 104; received collars of esnogny,
104; the natives bring provisions to Cartier's
captives, 105, 416; departed from St. Croix
for Iale of Filberts, 36, 105-106, 416; at
Isle of Hares, 107, and returned to Isle of
Filberts, 107, 416; at Cape Pratto and Isle
of Brion, 207, 108, 416; off Grosse, Coffin,
Alright and Entry islands, 108,108 n; nam ed
Capes Lorraine and St. Paul, 108, 416;
much confusion in bis account of his route
after he left Isle of Brion, 108 n; named the
harbor of St. Esprit, 109, 416; at Isles St.
Pierre, 109, 416; met ships from Fiance, 37,
109; saw Rameas and Penguin islands, 109 n;
left Cape Race, 37,109; named Rougnouse,
109, 416; arrived at St. Male, 37, 110, 4*6;
met Francis I, 37, 219; king too busy to un¬
dertake enterprises abroad, 37-38; became
an influential citizen, 38; the king desired to
get a foothold in the New World, 38; his
discoveries of more interest than thase of
Verazxano, 38-39; Godfather to Dom Agaya,
340 n; all but one of the natives he carried
to France had died, and she probably acted
as interpreter, 39, 39 n, 119, 339; to go on a
voyage, 39, 119, 110, 339, 340; to
company Roberval, 40, 3165 master pilot to
Canada, 34* 341, 343 . 37°, 406; man¬

date produced by, 3x6-317; supposed to have
reached s part of Asia, 40, 40 n, 339; male¬
factors to be his companions, 41, 327, 334,
336, 338-341; a spy from Madrid nude his
acquaintance, 41-41, 349; to be the com¬
mander, 41, 349; his coqflniswon from ^
king, 339-341; Spanish opinion of his desti¬
nation, 43,353-354; had no easy task to pur¬
chase and equip the vessels, 44; buih five
ships, 110, 221, 221 n, 371; risked his own
when other money failed, 373; freighted the
EmeriUon, 373; amount spent, 374; set sail
without Roberval, 44, 111, 416; stormy
voyage, 44, 111; ships parted, ui-Ml; ar¬
rived at Rapont, 45, 211; waited for Rober¬
val and then proceeded to Stadacond, 45,
111; explained to the natives why Doswa-
cona did not return with him, 45, xai;
crowned by Agohanna, 113; both Christian
and Savage dissimulated, 45; landed
ordnance, 213,416; at Chariesfcourg Royal*
Cape Rouge River, 45-46, 113; 115 e; seat
Jalobert and Noufl back to St. Malo, 46,
221 n, 114,116,135 0-1360; found diamonds
and gold, 46, 48, 49, 226, 116 n, 117 n;
planted seeds, 46,225; site of hia feet, 215 n;
started on aa exploration tour, 46,117, 416;
date of his starting, 117 n, 416; revisited
Ochelay, and left two boys with, 47, 118,
230; at Tutonaguy, 218; at the first sault
(Lachine), 47, 218, 416; walked to second
rapids (sault), 47,119; four men to show the
way to Saguenay, 219; returned to first
rapid, 47, 119-230; finds Hochelay treach¬
erous, 47,130; put his fort in order, 48,131;
no account of this winter's experience extant,
4, 48; resolved to return to France, 48; met,
at St. Johns, French and Portuguese ships
and Roberval, 48, 53, 236; represented the
country as rich and fruitful, 48; showed
diamonds and gold to Roberval, 48-49,117 n,
136; refused to return with Roberval, but set
sail for France, 49, 237; what be called the
western limit of Canada, 238 n; is thought
to have made a fourth voyage to conduct
Roberval to France, 50-51, 52, 59; found hia
country in a turmoil, 51; date of hia arrival
after the third voyage not recorded, 51; made
a sea-chart, 71, 368-369; present at a bap¬
tism, 51, 53; reasons by which it is presumed
he made a fourth voyage, 51; differences with
Roberval, 51, 51,33; collation of his accounts,
369; his accounts audited,51, 361-362, 370;
allowance granted him on account of ships
furnished on the third voyage, 51, 52, 53,

370, 377; amount received from Roberval,

371. 371; amount* accounted for, 37s, 374-
375; and for a subsequent voyage, 52; date

INDEX

of fourth voyage uncertain, 5a; probable 398; but a single copy of first edition known
date of voyage, 53; action of Admiralty com- to be in existence, 3; three 000temporary

mission honorable to Cartier, 53; showed manuscripts of, 3; edition of 1863, 3, 407;

wisdom in returning at end of third voyage, cited, 31 n, 130 n, 1340,1360,1440,153 n,
53-54; understood RoberraTs unfitness for 156 n, 157 n, 161 n, 162 n, 1740,181 n
colonising Canada, 54; unknown when he Cartixe, Jacques, Relation Origin ale, pub-
ceased to be a seaman, 55; unsupported fished in Italian, 1, 395—396, 397, 400; in

tradition that he made a fifth voyage, 55, English, 1, 397-398, 399; in French, 1, 398,

59; probably passed the remainder of his 409; manuscript discovered and printed, 1-2;

fife in St. Malo, honored and respected, 55, age of manuscript unquestionable, a; cited,

58; bis house still standing, 55; described, 117 n, 2x5 n, 22a n, 399,404,407

55; mentioned in his will, 345; his arms on Carties, Jacques, nr De Cases, Paul; De

one of the Fortes Cartier, 55; that he was Costa, Benjamin F.; Dionne, N. E.; Ganong,

ennobled unsupported, 55-56; called "Sieur W. F.; Hamit, Henry; Pope, Joseph;
de Limotkni," and “noble hocnine Jacques Stevens, Hiram B.; Vernau, L'Abbd Hoa-
Cartier," 55, 344; his reason for kidnapping pice; Win sew, Justin

savages, 57; treated the savages well, 57; Cartixe, Jamet, father of Jacques Cartier,
his domestic and civil relations, 58; St, Malo 11, 13 n

derives distinction from his memory, 58; his Cartixe, Jehanne, sister of Jacques Cartier,
discovery of the St. Lawrence gave St Malo 12, 224 n, 344; mother of Etienne NouQ, 12,

unrestricted privileges, 58; hit heirs obtained 224 n; named in wiD of Jacques Cartier, 345

a grant for trading in place of money due Cartwright, George, Journeys, Transac-
him, 58,377; but they faO to hold control of tkms and Events on the Coast of Labrador,

the trade, 392 n; honored as the discoverer cited, 88

of Canada, 59; preceded by the Bretons and Castlx Bay, in Baye de* Chasteaulx
Portuguese in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, 59; Castlx Gwent, Bishop of, called St. Malo, 9;
previous knowledge of parts of the localities led refugees to Roche d'Aaron, 9
visited by, 61, 67, 69; be himself bad a pee- Castlx Harbor, Cartier at, 82, 267; called
riout knowledge of the tame, 70; followed Baie dTorek, 82 n; u* also, Castles, the
the old route, 70; Spanish and Portuguese Castumav, 338 n

tardy in noticing his discoveries, 70; Clamor- Castlx*, the, 82, 102, 281; tm also, Castle

gan's map of the voyages of, lost, 70-71,367, Harbor

368-369; sot the author of Cabot's map, 70 n; Castor Americanus, the, 187 n

merits the honor of being the discoverer of Casters, 333

the St. Lawrence River and Canada, 71,376, Catalina, Cartier at, 76, 79 0; formerly
390; Champlain his successor, 71; the dis- Saincte Katherine, 76 n
crepancy in hit distances is not to be won- Cathay, Cartier hoped to find the gateway
dered at, 90 n; failed to find the western pas- to, 27; the objective point of early navigators,

sage, 119 n; his descriptions of the country 172 n, 254 n; term introduced into Europe,

fairly true, lit n, 133 n, 177 n; sought a 254 n; limits of, indefinite, 254 s
north-west passage, 137 n; produced his Cathay and the Way Thither, sw Yule,
mandate, 304; his commission in full, 304- Henry, 254 n

305; caused proclamation to be made, 306; Cathat, Sea of, the Saguenay Sea runneth
related to Jalobert, 307 n; related to the into, 254; probably the Yellow Sea, 254 n
NouHs, 307 n, 309 n, 367,376; allied toRuel, Catun, George, North American Indians,
3 ion; st least twelve of his companions were cited, 183 n
related to him, 310 n; a portrait of, without a Catos on id*, the, 240 n

cap, 409; who were the savages he met, 411; Cattlx, carried to New Prance, 44, 222;

represented in fiction, 4x1; bis nephews drink cider, 44, 222
•ought a chart he made, 368; places settled Cavo de Lifarte, 62

by, in ruins, 378; possible cause of his death, Cavo de S. Jorge, 62

71-72; date of hb death, 72; hit character, Cavo de S. Lusia, 62

is, 56-58, m n; his wd, 344-346; men- Cavo de S. Voban, 62

tinned also, 378, 37* 384* 3 * 5 * 3 ** n . 39 »* Cavo de Yagiaterre, 62

397 , 39 »» 4 °J, 406 , 407 , 4 lo > 4*3 Caxxn, M. de, 99 n; cited, irj n

Cahtixr, Jacques, Bref R6dt, and Sue- Ckdasb, “ctdres," 46,100, 102, 158,224,259,

ancle Narration, pubbthed in Paris, 3, 395; 180

tt Italian, 3, 395-396; in English, 3, 397- “Cioaxa," at Stadacocuf, 146 n

439

INDEX

“Cert*," 179 0, 18c D
Cxavus Canadensis, 179 n
Cxavus rangiferinus, 179 n
Cxavus Virginianus, 179 n
Chabot, Philippe, Sieur de Brion, High
Admiral of France, introduced Cartier to the
king, 16; aupparted Cartier** project, 16;
lost hit influence, 38; Brion Island named for,
95 n; commission to, in full, 304-305; many
title* of, 304; signed mandate, 304
Chalamxt, Antoine, Collection Picard,
BibUothique d'Education nationale, de-
aoribed, 41a
Challamxl et Cie, 413
Chamber dei Comptei, Paria, 40 n
Champ-Girault, Charlea de, aponaor for
Donnacona, 339 n, 340 n
Champagne, Roberval's auppliea at, 110
Champlain, Samuel de, Lescarbot mingle,
hia voyages with thoae of Cartier, 1; took up
the work of Cartier, 71; described the
Saguenay, 141 n;hi* name for melon*, f44n;
described the St. Croix, 157 n; men done
three kinda of ducks, 158 n; at Lac d* An-
gouletme, 159 n; named Lac St. Pierre,
160 n; at Lake Superior, 171 n; reported six
island, at the mouth of the St. Maurice
River, 17s n; described beam, 178 n; on the
Tequenonquiaye, 186 n; mentioned, 410
hamplain, Sieur Samuel de, Voyage, de la
Nouvelle France, cited, 71 n, 108 n, lit n,
157 n, 186 n, 119 n, 236 n, 406; i« also,
Laver dike, L’Abb* C. H.

“Chanure," at Stadaconf, 146 n
Chapman, Franck M., 6
Chapxll, Voyage to Newfoundland, cited, 88
Chapu, Cassette, with Roberval, 338 n
‘Chardonnereulx," the, 158 n
Charles, name given to Dom Agaya, 339 n-
34 ° *»

Charles V, at war with Francis I, 14, 15;
invaded France, 37-38; hated by Frands I,
38; sent out vessels to watch French ships,
43; to fit out a fleet for offensive action, 42;
dissimulation necessary, 43
Charles IX, in St. Milo, 309 n
Charlzsiquro Royal, Cartier anchored
there on hia third voyage, 45; left for a voyage
of ezploration, 46, 227; returned to, 47;
savage, avoided the fort at, 48, 230; Cartier
embarked from, to return to France, 48;
Roberval arrived at, 49; name changed to
Francy Roy, 49; settlement begun at, 49;
Roberval departed from, 227
Charlesiovrc Royal, see also Francy Roy
Charlevoix, P. F. X. de, Histoire de lx
Nouvelle France, rited, 40 n, 135 n, 145 n,
174 n, 236 n; Journal Historique, ated, 175 a;

Letter, to the Duchess de Lisdigustre*,
ated, 1590
Charlottetown, 6

Chart drawn by Cartier, 71, 367,368-3(9
Charts, see Maps

Chartoh, Edouard, his Voyagcurt Andes*
et Modemea, described, 407
ChAteau Bay, 82 n
Chateaubriand, Lord, 361
Chatrauneup, 369

Chaton, Etienne, Lard of la Jaunaye, com¬
mission to, 376; master pilot, 376, 378, 379;
nephew of Cartier, 376; amount due to, 378;
account of, 376 n; permission given to, to
trade in Canada, 378,381,382,383,384,385,
386,387, 388; to be reimbursed by people ct
St. Male, 383 5 may not be a nephew of Car¬
rier, 384; at Siege of Rochelle, 384; posable
false pretensions of, 385; bis diima examin¬
ed by the Assembly at Nantes, 385-386, 386
-387; his letters limited, 387; hia letters
revoked, 388; claimed to have made dis¬
coveries, 388; his privileges similar to
Chauvin's, 392 n
Chaton, Olivier, 376 n
CHAUDiiax, 227 n

Cbauveau, M, Discours proooocd lor* de
Llnauguration du monument Carrier-
Brtbeuf, 415

Chauvin, Jean, see Chauvin, Pierre
Chauvih, Pierre, obtained letters to stop
others trading in Canada, 790, 391, 392 B ;
promised to do what Cartier could nor do,
391; died, 392 n
Cmilonura serpentina, 142 n
Chemu, Jacques, at court in Sc. Mala,

3«*>335 _

Chemu, Jehanne, married Thomas Boulaa,
308 n

Chesnatz, De La, 326, 327, 342
“Chesnes,** at Stadacoof, 146 n
Cheticamp, probably the same as Cape Lor¬
raine, 208 n

“Cheuaul* de mer,** 187 n
Chevalier, H. Emile, his let grands emmn
d’sventures, described, 410
CSeville, Charles, at court in St. Mala, 304,
306

China, Carrier sought a passage to, 137 n; a
corruption of Khitai, 254 n
Chogset, 188 n

Crordeiles Virginianus, the, 158 a
Christ Church, Oxford, 400
Chronicles of the Sl Lawrence, tee Le
Mouse, J. M.

Chrtsomitrjs tristis, the, 158 n
Cider given to cattle, 44, 222
Cinnamon, 215, 369

44O

INDEX

CiraouiLLXs, 144 n, 178 n
Clanoegan, Jean de, map of, gave result* of
Cartier** voyage, 70-71; referred to by
NouH, 71

Clauike, Lucas, oa Cartier's secood voyage,
3 ' 0 * 3 »+

Clauses, 344
Cimc Freres, Le, 395
Cloves, 215, *15 n, 369
Coal dust used to besmear the face, 176-177
Coat of red given to Ochelay, 47
Co sax, Richard, 30S n; j#s also Lebay,
Richard

“Cocht," a hatchet, 107
Cod Bay, same at Bay of Moluet or GaspE,
151 n

Codfish abundant at Cape Royal, 91; dried
and eaten by Roberval's colony, 239; at
Ognedoc, 251

Codfish Country same as Tierra de Bacal-
laos, 43 n

Coffin's Island, 95 n, 108 n
Cognac, 396

Colas, Jehan,on Cartier's second voyage, 309,

3*3

Cold, reason of the extreme, in Canada, *57-

* 5 *» *59

CoLxcaoN de Vino# Documentos, w Smith,
Buckingham

Colin, Gufllemette, mother of Jean Grout,
3670

Colin, Pierre, at court in St. MaJo, 306
Collation of Cartier's acoounts by the Royal
Notaries, 369

Collection Picard Bibliotbfcque d'Educa¬
tion nation ale, ttt Chalamet, Antoine
College of St. Die, 66
Colombaibes, the Dove-cotes, why so named,
21,9on; Cartier at, 21,90,272,421; locality
of, 90a

"CoiTS-rooTi,** same as wild tobacoo, 179 n
Coldhba Carolinensis, the, 158 n
Columbus, Christopher, his discovery con¬
temporaneous with birth of Cartier, 11;
m entioned, 396

Comes, given by Cartier to the savages, 109,
no, 230,088, 089

Commission to Chiton, and Noug, 376
Conafloi, vessels fining at, 42, 349, 349 n;
ire also Honfleur

"Concombbeb, grosses," at Hochelaga, 165 n
CoNcaks International des AmEricanistes,
cited, 59 si

COWJUGOW, SM Coujugon
CoMota Bay, possibly the same a* Harbor of
St. Esprit, 209 n

CoNTEiaunoMs to American Ethnology,
cited, 174 n

Coo exit of natives at Hochelaga, 164-165
Coot, 187 n

Coofeb, from Saguenay, 07, 37, 206; chains
of, given to Indians, 113,191; from the west,
shown to Cartier, 170, 170 a, 17*1 * 9 °;
bracelet of, shown to Champlain, 171 n; a
knife of, owned by Indians, 206; used in
making "Istoo," 128 o; brooches of, given
to natives, 230; mines of, at Cape de Cou-
377 " 37 ®

Cobdagb, made by Indians, 146 n
CoasiBBT, in Touraine, Briconnet died at,
129 n

Coin, wild, seen by Cartier, 94, 100, x8o;
abundant, 159; one ear of, large sire, 259
Coenibotz, meaning of, in doubt, 166; made
of Unio ventricosus, 166 n
Cobsaibs, French, Council of the Indies oa,
347; go only to prey upon commerce, 348
CorrxaiAL, Gasper, voyages to America, 59,
59 n, 63, 65; his discoveries on Canrino'a
map, 63-64; not the discoverer of New¬
foundland ,75 n; claimed, as the discoverer
of Cape Boaavuta, 76 n
Cobtlus roatrata, 143 n
Cosa, Juan de la, his planisphere, 6a, 63, 64;
map of, 62,63, 64

Cosmooeafreks, kept the knowledge of
coast lines secret, 69, 70, 70 n; long in notic¬
ing Cartier's discoveries, 70
Cosmo gilaph ix Univeraette, «* Thevet, AndrE
Cottekmasl, Marquis de, 399
Coubs, Elliott, Key to North American Birds,
cited, 78 n

Coujugon, m Cape Coujugoo
Coulonbibbs, tti Colombiers
Coumtn, Jehan, with Cartier on his second
voyage, 310, 314; married OUive Le Breton,
310 n

Council of the Indies, sent spies to France,
41, 42; discussed bow to prevent the French
horn establishing themselves in the New
World, 42

Coufeaulz, Pierre, oa Cartier's second voy-
*86,310,314
"CoumoEs," 178 n

Couelxeu, La,former name of Le Petite Her-
mine, 130 n; Jalobert the captain of, 307
Coots D"Histone, i« Ferland, J. B. A.

Cow Head, was Cartier's Pointed Cape, 89 n
Cowin, WDliam, 406

Cranes, seen by Cartier, 158, 158 n, 187;
many varieties of, 158 n, 187 n; same as
Ebicerinys, 158 n; abundant, 259
Cbatjhgus punctata, in n
Cbatjhgub tomentosa, 111 n, 146 n
Cbemeub, Jan Jocet, Sieur de, bad a chart
drawn by Carrier, 369; account of, 369 n

44*

INDEX

Ckeoxius, map or, 17} n
CftEViTi, 413

Criminals, recruited (or Roberval, 41, 327,

3 a 9» 33°. 333 > 334* 337. 33*. 34». 34*. 343»
379, 380; brought to St. Malo, 334, 338 n;
names of, 338 □

Caotstc, ships fitted at, 348 n
Cbonieb, Jn., at the court in St. Malo, 306
Ckoniek, Julian, at court in St. Malo, 304
Ckoiniie, Francois, 371, 371
Cftota, erected at Gaspf, 13, na, 190; to be
a landmark, 24, 113, 133, 171; natives ob¬
jected to, in, 113; savages reverenced the,
114; erected at St. Croix, 36, ioi, 415; at
St. Servan, 10, 85; at harbor of St. Nicholas,
133; on an island near Three Riven, 171,415
“Cboss-anchoraoe" 185 n

Ceown of porcupine quills placed on Car-
tier's head, 33, 167, 168; of tanned leather
placed on Cartier's head, 45,123
Caow Point, 134 n
Caows, 159

Cauciqux, ships fitted at, 348
Ctinolaebus adspersus, the, 188 n
Cucumiebs, at Hochelaga, 165; probably the
crook-necked squash, 165 n; those now
known are natives of Asia, 165 n
Cucumis melo, 177 n
Cocoms sativus, the, 165 n
Cucubeita citrullui, 178 n
CucuaatTA maxima, 1440
CucuaatTA pepo, 178 n
CucuarrA polymorphs, 178 n
CucuaatTA verrucosa, 165 n
Cudonagny, I$3 n; im also, Cudouagny
CuDOUAcm, Indian god, 30
Cudouagny, devils came from, 153, 153 n;
an Indian god, 154,175; at Hochelaga, 1540}
Cartier called him a fool, 154-155; called
Agojuda, evfl, 176
Cudriagnt, st* Cudouagny
Cudbuaioni, sn Cudouagny
Curvar jaune, 118 n
Curvax rouge, 118 n

Cunat, M. Charles, his Saint-Mslo Ulustrf,
described, 407

Cumberland Bay, same as Jacques Cartier
Harbor, 86 n; the Indians which Cartier met
87

Cuoq, cited, 161 n
Curlew, same as Courlieu, 130 n
CuaarMCT, marten skins used as. 186 n
Ctgnui buccinator, 158 n

Dabin, Jehan, charpentier, on Cartier's
second voyage, 308,31a
Daheta, the native's name for nuts, 111,111 n
“Daws," 179 a

Damson plums, 146
Dakvxau, C., 416
Dauvhw, Duke Frands, 96 □

D'Auxilhon, Paul, j tt Sainterre, Pan!
D'AuxQhon

D'Avxzac, M., Bref Rfdt et Sucdnete Nar¬
ration de la Navigation par le Jacques Car-
tier, described, 407; 00 the Voyages of dw
Cabots, 410

Davt, Jehan, on Cartier's second voyage, 304,
313; probsbly the same as Ravy, 309 a; a
furrier, 309 n

Dawson, Frfaes, 41s, 414, 417
Dawson, J. W., his location of Hocbelagm,
161 a

Dawson, Samuel Edward, cited, 39a n
Dat of Our Lady, date of celebration of fes¬
tival, 143 n

Dat of the Assumption of the Virgin, 135a
Deadman's Island, supposed to have been
AUezay, 97 n
Dean and Son, 411
Dean, Walter, 6
Dx Baux, 410

De Bxuz, Cares, Paul, Deux Pomes DIG*,
toire, dted, 411; Points Obscurs des Voy¬
ages de Jacques Cartier, described, 416-417
De Costa, Rev. Benjamin F n his opinion of
date of Cartier's birth, 10; his Jacques Car-
tier and his Successors, dted, 97 n, 41a
DAcouvxari et Evolution Cartographtque
de Terre-Neuve, im Harrisse, Henry
Deee, abundant, 179, 186, 159; Donnaccoa
went to hunt, 196
Dee a. Red, 179 n

De Gaemo, E., translated Spanish manu-
•cript.199

Deoxad, same as Degrat, 80 e
Deoeat, Cartier at, 80, 81, »66; location of,
80 n, 81,167

Dxmr, savage's conceptions of, 175 n
De La Rocqux, Francois, letters patent from
Francis I, 315, 311-313; re* also Robcrvnl,
Jean Francois, Lord of
Delthinattebcs leu css, 141 a
De Maistei, his opinion of Indiana, 57
Dz Neasville, 36a

Dents, Description de 1 'Anfrique, dted,
1 Son

Descelux*, Pierre, map of, 70
Deschamvs, Guillaume, Judge of Assembly
of Burgecses, 303

Desoeanches, Guyon, at court in St. Malo,

3 <H

Des Geanches, im also under Grancbes
Dxsuens, Nkola, map of, 69, 70
DtTmux, ADouise, 371
Diamonds, supposed to have been found, 46,

44*

INDEX

46-49, 226, 226 n, 117 o, 136; sent to die came to the ship, 101; told Cartier oI

king by Roberral, 139 Taignoagny's treachery, 202; made prisoner,

Dies, gaming with, tame at Indian Hubbub, 36, 101-103; told the native* how their

177 n ruler had been made pritoner, 36,106j dead,

Dictiokaxt of Commerce, ut Robinaon, 39, 119, in; probable caute of hit death,
Lewis 39; Cartier dared not tell be wai dead, 45,

Didot, 404 Cartier laid he wat a Lord and married

Dtxm, vessel from, to Newfoundland, 14; in France, 212; hit treaaoni expoted by
the Little Greyhound hailed from, 338 n; Hochelay or Achelaiy, 217; baptized, 339,

thipa tailed from for Malaguete and Brazil, 339 n; called Francii, 340

349-350 Doxmacona, visited Cartier’• ship, 18, 144,

Diem, Viscount of, tent vessel* to Mala- 148; Lord of Stsdacoof, 146, 148, 185; hit

gueta and Brazil, 41, 349-350; account of, people fiahed at Gasp*, 147 n; hit people

350 n promised to go to Hochelaga, 148; met

DljOM,327 Cartier, 149; objected to Cartier and hit

Dinamo x det Rameaux, in 1510,13 n mo carrying guns, 149; visit to Cartier, 150,

Diott, Count of, 343 151; did not wish Cartier to go to Hochelaga,

Diomkz, N. E-, hit Jacques Cartier, died, 19,150,153; gave a girl and two boyt to Car-

367; deadbed, 414; La Nourelle-France de tier, 151, 181, 183; a baiin and awordi given

Cartier i Cham plain, deacribed, 416; La to, 151; denied artillery fired, 151; hit artifice

Nouvelle France, cited, 80 n, 111 n, 160 n to prevent Cartier from going to Hochelaga,

Ditcouaaz of Discovery for a new Ptuage to >53-154, 415; desired that Cartier should
Cataia, ut Gilbert, Sir Humphrey leave a hostage, 155; why he opposed Car-

Ducovxxt of Maine, ut Kohl, J. G. tier's visit to Hochelaga, 155 n, 156 n; vitited

Disco vxet of North America, ut Hurine, Cartier after the latter returned from

Henry Hochelaga, 173,425; Cartier vitited him, 35,

DoctmiHTABT History of Maine, cited, 410; 173, 425; showed Cartier scalps, 174; hit

ut alto Kohl, J. G. people assailed by Tnidamant, 147 n, 174 n-

Docnmim letidit* tur Jacquet Cartier, iu 175, 174 n; Cartier told to beware of, 181;

Ran*. Alfred hit people did not come to the fort, 181;

DocuwtKT* Nouveaux, ut Longraia, F. made excuses, 182; Cartier called him and

JoOon det hit people knaves, 182; gone into the country,

Doss, signification of the term, 155 n 182; made peace with Cartier, 183; told Car-

Dom Agaya, Cartier captured, 23, 113; hit tier of the Saguenay, or Lake Ontario, 189,

friends hear hit voice, 18; landed on Isle de 189 n; Cartier's servant ill, who had been in

Orleans, 143; told the marvels be had teen, the country of, 195; feigned to go hunting,

si, 145; having returned to hit people, wat 196; came to Cartier's camp with venison,

unwilling to visit Cartier, 29, 148, 149; 197; suspected of treason, 198; Guyot sent

promiaed to go to Hochdaga, 148; unwilling to, 198; feigned illness, 198; Cartier deter-

ta go to Hochelaga, 29, 30; belonged to mined to capture him, 199; an extensive

Dosuucona's tribe, 147 n; visited Cartier, traveller, 199,199 0,214,215 n; to viritCar-

Ito; high words with Taignoagny, 151-152; tier, 201; hesitated about entering the fort,

puyed a part in the artifice to prevent Car- 202; made prisoner, 36,56-57,201-103,415;

tier's going to Hochdaga, 153, 154; could excuse for Cartier, 57, 103 n; addressed his

not go to Hochdaga unless Cartier left a people, 103-104; Cartier promised to bring

hostage, 155; visited Cartier after the latter's him back, 103-104, 105; received esoogny

return, 173; conducted Cartier to Stzdaconf, from his people, 104; sent presents to his

173-174; desired to be baptized, 176; ad- wife and children, 104; hit people bring him

vised the people not to visit Cartier, 180,181; provisions, 105; meets some of his people at

vitited Cartier, 181; Cartier called him a Isle of Filberts, 36-37, *06,416; fun brought

traitor, 181; made peace with Cartier, 183; to, 106; assented to a lie, 115 n; presented to

told Carrier of the Saguenay, 189, 189 n; Ol the king of France, 39, 219; baptized, 119,

of the pestilence, 194-195; weD, 195; brought 339 n-340 n; named Franpoii, 339 n; dead,

amedda to Cartier, 195; repotted that Don- 39, 57, 219; Carrier reported his death to

nacooi had gone hunting, 19?; vitited Car- his people, 45, m; his people disappointed,

tier with many strangers, 197, 415; peculiar 45; Agooa hit successor, 45,57, ill

behavior of, 198; Cartier determined to cap- D'Oasows, Count, 357
Roe, 199; parley with Taignoagny, mo; ** Dos Sadzs," same as Isle of Birds, 77 n

443

INDEX

Douatben, Lout*, 011 Cartier*"second voy¬
age, 310, 314; led a itormy life, 310 n
Douquais, Michel, on Cartier's eecond toj-
age, 310, 314
Doubdin, 385
Do oval's map, 17a n

Dovx-cotxs, Cotombaires, the, why ao named,
21,900; Cartier at, at, 90,17a, 421;locality
of, 90 n
D bakes, 187
Dkysdale & Co., 416

Duault, Franjoys, on Cartier’* teoond voy-
»g*> 3 <» 9 » 3*3

Du sort, Jacques, cm Cartier'• second voyage,
309, 314; brother-in-law erf Ettiense Nouti,
309 n; brother of Julienne Duboyi, 309 n
Demon, Julienne, married Ettieane Noud,
309 n

Ducks, *58, 187
Ducodbat, 338
Duquiint, 410
DuMiaiL, cited, 117 a
Duaii, John, 418
Duval, Jean, 371, 37 *, 374

East Cape, Cartier off, 208, 423; same as
“Junks of Pork," 208 n
Eastce, the beginning of the year in France,
305 n-306 n

Ebekard, Gillette, wife of Jacques Main-
gard, 307 n

Eikbabd, Jehanne, a neighbor of Cartier, 346
Ericerinys, same as cranes, 158 n
Ectokstxs migratorius, the, 187 n
"Ecu soleil," 371 n

Eden, Richard, First Three Books on
America, deed, 59 n, 254 n
Ekl Cape, 92 n

Exls, 28, 145, 180, t88, 240, 241 n
Elk, 179 n

Elms, “onnes," abundant, 146, 146 n, 157,

*59

Elms, white, too, 281

Embsum, Touroon, Francois de, archbishop
of, 3x5 n

Emxeillon, the, one of Cartier's ships, 25;
used on voyage to Hochdaga, 31; given to
Cartier, 44; called the HemeriBon, 130; the
English name of, 130 n; expenses for re¬
pairing and fitting, 373, 374; old and rotten,
341; to be used in repairing other ships, 341
“En xscharfis," compared, 109 n
England, 38,41

English ships at Newfoundland, 37
En plat quart, explained, 30$ n
Entry Island, supposed to be AHesay, 97 n;
situation of, 98 n, 208 n
Eon, Michel, on Cartier's second voyage, 309,

3x1; married Hylairc Fergot, 309 j had a
son, 309 n

Efeenon, Duke of, 376
Epiataxs de Verasafies, 4
Esaslxi, 224 n
Ermine, the, 373

Ekondkllx, Pierre, his “Description of New
France," described, 401
“Escuaxux," 186 n
Eskimos, 87 n

Esmekt, diet Talbot, Pierre, on Cartier's
second voyage, 307, 311
Esnault, Guillaume, charpentier, on Car¬
rier’s second voyage, 308, 311
Esnognt, same as wampum, 165 n; made
from Unao ventricosus, 166 n; given to Car¬
rier, 204, 205, 206; on crown and bracelets,
»*3

Eitadai, 70 n

Estxve, Pierre, with Roberval, 338 n
ErrotrrxviLLK, Jehan d*, 323, 332
Esveeaed, Jehan, at court in St. Malo, 304
Esvkeasd Tosselin, at court in St. Malo, 304
Etano du Nord, 97 n, 98 n
Etat dvil de Saint Mato, ta n
Etat Ordinaire det Guerres, Paris, 40 n
Evximan, American Food and Game Fish,
cited, 241 n
Evaxux,362

Examxn Critique, ut Humboldt, Alexander
von

Extrait du cahier des Annaks de Pbitoso-
phie Chxdrienne, cited, 411

Fabbi^ux, Rue de la, probably a boundary
of Stadaconl, 1460

Fagunbks, Joio Alvarex, familiar with the
Gulf of St. Lawrence, 61; letters patent
granted to, 61; field of him exploits easily
identified, 62

Faxllon, Abbe Michael Etienne, Hist, de la
Col. Francaiae en Canada, cited, 55, 143 n,
162 n

“Faibx Drgeat," meaning of the term, ti s
“Faisanb," the, 158 n
Falconets, fired by Cartier, 152; described,
152 n

Falcons, 248

Falls of Montmorency, 257
Fiast of Pentecost, 209
Feast of die Ascension, 207
"Fxrues," 178 n
"Frbues dd Bsxsil," 178 n
Feroot, Hylsire, married to Micbd Eon,
309 n

Ferland, J. B. A., Court dlustoife du
Canada, cited, 32, 53,88,1290,138 n, 14b n,
**5 “> 4* 1

444

INDEX

Febbaba, Duke of, 64
Fmo, Island of, probably used u die
meridian by Cartier, 76 n
Fkrt£s, Julien, at court in St. Malo, 304
Flirt, Pierre de la, 338 n
Fxsta Anglo-Romana, cited, 84
F8tx de la Transfiguration, 103 n
Fioa, 13, in, in 0,189,390
Ftuarr^raxu, 151
Fimsrtax, department of, 349, 364 n
Fibmin-Didot, 413
Fiat, ion, 158

Fiarr Thbxe Boost on Amxbica, it* Eden,
Richard

Flan, pr e fer r ed by Hochelogani, 33; eaten
nearly raw, no; preserved by smoking, 165,
180; abundant, 187
Fishbkkam, French, at St. Johns, 48
Fishbbman, Portuguese, at St. Johns, 48
Flamdxbs, dimate of, compared to BacaOaos,
355

Fleming, Charles, his Dictionnaire Anglais*
Franjaia, cited, 78 n

Ftxsn, eaten nearly raw by savages, no, 389
Fuoit, Guillaume, chaplain of St. An-
tboine, brother of Jehan Fleury, 308 n
Fudit, Jehan, on Cartier'■ second voyage,
308,31a; brother of Guillaume Fleury, 308 n
Fcoa 1 da, coast from Bacallaoa to, unpro¬
ductive, 43, 354; discovered by AyDan and
Gome*, 351; now under Soto, 351; men¬
tioned, 190,190 n, 358,159, 403
Flobio, Jean, published Cartier's first voy¬
age in English, i, 397-398; published Car-
tier's second voyage in English, 3, 397-398
Flobula Bostoniensia, ttt Bigelow, Jacob
Fontaine ■ lead, 311,325, 316, 3*7,331, 333,
335 * 33 ** 337

Fontaine, Franpaise, Lord of, mi Charbot,
PhiJKppe, Sieur de Brion
Foaxrr, Vincent, 413
Fobgkt, 3S7

Fobbing of waters, 18$, 185 n
Fontaine, de Noir, accompanied Roberval,
335; drowned, 341

Fobt at Charleibourg Royal, 48, 123-336,
337, 338; put in order, 331
Fotr at Ft-ancy Roy, 337, 366, 366 n
Fobt at St. Cboix erected by Cartier's men,
35» *73» 193; strengthened, 181; natives for¬
bidden to enter, 190; Donnacona luted into,
303

Fobtunx Bay, 67

Foobmont, Thomas, with Cartier on second
voyage, 307,311; note concerning, 307 n
Foubmkao, Arthur, 418
Fotnxr, 367

Fowc, abundant, 359; sea, 351

Foxes, abundant, 95, 186; Cartier alluded to
the red fox, 186 n; different species, 186 n

Fox Island, 91 n

Fox Island River, 91,91 n

Fox Point, 24.

FnANpAia au deli des Men, Let, mi Gaffard,
Paul, 413

Franck, the acquiaition of the New Land a
benefit to, 26; natives tell what they had seen
in, 37,145; the West to hum with an industry
beyond that of France, 3$; the king of, at
peace with Spain, 38; Spain dared Dot openly
oppose colonisation by, 43; Spanish ambas¬
sador sent to see why ships were fitting from,
4 «* 43 . 34 ®. 35 °. 357 . 35 8 5 Cartier •««** for,
49; Sainterre sent to, 49; Roberval to be
brought back to, 50; Cartier wise to return
to, 54; conflicts with Spain, 58; all the ships
of, could not carry all the birds from Isle
of Birds, 131; products of the new country
compared to, 146, 158-159, 163, 187, 114-
335, 336, 250, 353, 357, 259; weight of shot
in time of Henry II of, 152 n; bouses of
natives as full of girls as the schools of, 177;
because of the sickness of his crew, Cartier
feared he would not return to, 193; Cartier
determined to bring Donnacona to, 199;
Taignoagny did not expect to return to, lot;
Donnacona to apeak to the King of, 303;
necessary that Donnacona should go to, 304;
■hips from, at Isles St. Pierre, 209; Donna¬
cona had been long in, 119, 332; forests of,
compared to those of the New Land, 235;
Roberval's return to, 335 n; why Cartier
returned to, 236-137; Roberval sent ships
back to, 238; news to be brought from, 239;
why New France is colder and has more
snow than, 257, 259-160; presumed to be in¬
tending settlement! on Bahama Channel,
351; supposed to be preparing to interrupt
Spanish ships, 351, 353; seeking treasure,
not the founding of colonies, 353; end of the
year In, 306 n; intelligence from, to deter¬
mine the action of Spain, 358; mentioned,
354 . 3 **. 37 *. 3 * 7 , 399 . 4 *», 4*3

Fbancis I, Verraxano s voyage made in the
interests of, 14, 15; sent expedition to Brazil,
14 n; interested in further voyages of dis¬
covery, 15, 16; Cartier introduced to, 16,
319; enlisted in Cartier > enterprise, 16; gave
a new commit*ion to Cartier, 25, 339; the
intentions of, 25; too busy to tend out a
third expedition, 37; hi* kingdom invaded by
Charles V, 37-38; jealous of Spain's posses¬
sion* in the Western Hemisphere, 38; eager
to get a foothold in the New Land, 38; after
peace was declared entered into schemes for
co l o n iza t ion, 39, 339, 340; resolved to send

445

INDEX

Cartier on a third voyage, 39; why he ignored
Veraxzano's discoveries and was in te re s ted
in Cartier is unknown, 38-39; understood
the jealousy c A Spain, 41; desired to see
Adam's will, 41; again at war with Charles V,
51; not suitable evidence that he ennobled
Cartier, 55; persecution under, 38; received
map from Glamorgan, 70; heard Cartier's
report, 319; saw Donnacosu, 119; letters
patent from, to De La Rocque, 313; gave
Roboval chief control, 3x3,3x7; commission
to Cartier, 339; his name given to Donna-
cons, 339 n; the Spanish uncertain where
his ships are going, 347, 348; An go high in
his favor, 350 n; order to audit the accounts
of Carder and Roberval, 361; mentioned, 54,
1590,405

Francis, Dauphin of France, 96 n
Francois, name given to Donnacona, 339 n
Francois Roy, incorrect name for Francy
Roy, 366 n

Francy Prime, name given to the St. Law¬
rence by Roberval, 49, X38, 366, 366 n; ut
also St. Lawrence

Franct Roy, name given by Roberval to
Charlesbourg Royal, 49, 366, 366 n; colon¬
ists at, passed a wretched winter, 50; de
Royezc left in command at, 50; Sain tore
probably and Cartier possibly returned to,
50-51, 53; fort at, 237; Roberval at, 137-2381
situation of, 257, 258; i« also Charlesbourg
Royal, 49

Fbanquelin, map of, 251 n
Fratexcula arctics, 83 n
Fraxinus Americana, at Stadacond, 146 n
Frenchmen, early visited Newfoundland, 14,
ao, 37; their voyages private ventures, 15;
voyages kept secret, 15 n, 17; at St. Johns,
15 n; could not injure Spain by going to
Bacallaos, 355; their making settlements in
the Southern Sea a menace to Spain and
355-356

French ships, not to take shelter in Portu¬
guese waters, 359; to be treated as enemies
by the Portuguese, 359
Fatal* Blancs, Let, 303 n
Fresh-water sea described by Cartier was
Lake Ontario, 1890
"FatSNKs," at Stadacond, 146 n
Farrs, Monsieur, accompanied Roberval,
235; went to Saguenay, 242
Frislawda, 62
Frobisher, 229 n

Fromont, Thomas, master of the Grande
Hermine, 130

Fecit* used by the Savages, iio-m, m n
Foage, defined, 388 n
Fpuca atra, 187 n

Fume Islands, visited by Lucia, 7* «; mea
from Cape Degrat, 80 n, 81 n; the “two fas
islands," 80 n

Fcas, brought to St. Male, 377
Fusees, frighten the savages, 104, 283-284;
same as Cannes, 384 n

Gachev*, Champlain's spelling el Gupe,
108 n

GATTAtxL, Paul, Histoire de la Ddoovverse de
I'Amdrique, described, 413; deed, 59, 135 1
GagtIsia, sketch of, in Langdidr, J. C.
Gajllard, Fran^oys, at court in St. Malo, 304,
306

Gailiaro, Guillaume, at court in St. Malo,
306

Gajllard, Pierre, at court in St. Malo, jefi
Gaillart, jailor, had charge of c rimin als
which were to go with Roberval, 338 n
Gaillon, Michael, hanged for theft, 239
Gaillot, Laurent, on Cartier's second voy¬
age. 3°9» 3 1 *

Galuon, the, Guillaume Le Breton Baatitte,
matter of, 307; to transport stores to Rober¬
val, 366

Gama, Vasco da, 103 n
Gaming, among Indiana, 177, 177 n
Gahabara, 400, 402
□annex*, 93 n

GAMONG, William Francis, his studies m
cartography, 5, 6; his Cartography of the
Gulf of St. Lawrence, described, 414; bn
Jacques Cartier's first Voyage, described,
413; mentioned, 81,85,86,90,97,99, iaa, tod
Gasf*, Cartier raised a cross there, 23, 112,
290; two savages seised there, 23-24, 113,
140 n, 291; Cape Despair at, 103 n; Le
Clercq at, 113 n; Strait St. Peter at, 118 •;
visited by Donnacona's people for fishing,
146 n; Donnacona'* people en route far,
massacred, 174; same at Hoeguedo, 174 a,
251 n; situation of, 251; same as Bay el
Molues, 251, 251 n

Gasf* Bay, Cartier's first and second anchor¬
age in, 108,108 n; the origin and rigntficatim
of the name, 108 n; Champlain'* secBa^
108 n; Cartier taw savages at, 109; Harms-
Iroquois at, 109 n
Gastaldi, 250 n

Gaultier, Hamao, at oouit in Sc. Main, 304
Gauthier, Guillaume, showed map to N00&,
367; account of, 367 n
Gautier, Henri, 416

Gat, Francois, romantic story of, 249 0-250 a,

33 *

Geese, 158,158 0,251 259; wild, 187
GtocRAFHiE botanique nimofc, ns Cm*
doOe, A. de

446

INDEX

Gilbert, Etienne, at court in St. Mak>, 304
Glum, Sir Humphrey, 70 n, 78 a; Difr¬
ee urae of Discovery for a new passage to
Cataia, died, 70

Gikadd, Pierrei, proclamation of, 306
Girl given to Cartier, 31,219,217; in France,
39 n; probably acted at interpreter on hit
third voyage, 39 nj met her father, 46; fled to
her people, 18s; gone into the country, 182;
returned, 183; cabin-boy* had beaten her,
183; jm alto under Ochelay
Girls, their condition among savages, 177,
*77 **

GLoatAiai de Salins, cited, 240 n
Goats, brought by Cartier, 222
Goo, natives have no belief in, 175
Go pi, definition of die word, 78 n
Godefroy, Dictionnairc de l'andenne Fran-
potse, dted, 188 n

Gooxx, named by Cartier, 78, 83, 93, 264,
268, 275; were murres (XJria), 78 n
Go, Jehan, on Cartier's second voyage, 309,
3*4

Gold, found by Cartier, 46,48, 49, 199, 226;
copper, yellow like, 170; tested, 49, 227 n,
236; from the Indies, 347, 348, 359; in
Panama, only available in Spam, 352; sup¬
posed to be beyond Bacall tot, 353
Goldfinches, 158, 158 n, 187
Goldfish, 241 n

Go lit, Jullien, on Cartier's second voyage,
3<*8, 312

Golfs des Chiteaux, Cartier at, 19
Golfs St. Lunaire, 2a
Gomara, Franhsco Lopes, Histone gfnfral
de las Indies, dted, 59
Gowsz, Estevan, sent to expiate the regions
already explored by Veraxxano, 41; dis¬
covered Florida, 351

Goosererrjes, 23, 94, 259, 27ft, 286; red,
too, 107,280; white, too, 107, 280
Gosseuh, Pierre, at court in St. Malo, 304,

306

Go 01 on, Jehan, sailed with Cartier, 130 n;
with Carder on the trip to Hochelaga, 161
God Lsa Quadrado, 59 n
Good as, 178 n
Gouyrrneor, Jean, 391
Grain, wild, 107,286

G ranches V family name of Cartier's
Granges / wife, 89, 310 nj Michel Pnili
pot allied with, 308 n
Alison des, sister-in-law of Cartier, 97 n,

307 n; wife of Marc Jalobert, 130 n, 307 n,

308 n

Anthome, on second voyage of Cartier,
310, 314; brother-in-law of Cartier, 310 n,
Catherine des, daughter of Jacques, 12;

married Jacques Cartier, 13, 13 n, 344, 345*
346; godmother of Catherine de Brdxil,
13-14, 14 n; her name given to moun¬
tains in Newfoundland, 89 n; not related
to Antboine des Granches, 310 n; godmother
of Dons aeons, 340 n

Collette des, mother of Jacques Maingard,
3070

Jacques des, high constable, 12, 13 n; his
social position, 12, father of Catherine, 12,
344.34*

Marie Katerine des, i« Granches, Catherine
des

Granches, i« also under Des Granches
Grand Bay, Roberval in, 237; situation of
14$, 246, 258; described, 246-247
Grande bale d'Omar, 85 n; i« also St.
Anthony

Grande Heroine, the, Cartier's flag-ship, 25,
129-130; at Bird Island, 16; her burden, 129;
officers of, 130

Grange Mountains, seen by Cartier, 88-89,
272; named by Cartier for bis wife, 89 n;
locality of, 89 n; Cartier at, 119, 295
Grans Apponatx, 78 n
Grapes, pleanteous, 21, 46, 156, 158, 224,
259; not as sweet as those of France, 156
"Ghat* Aides de Hochelaga," 137 n
Gray*, Etienne, 369, 375, 376
Gray*, Yvonne, married Michel Henif, 307 n
Gravier, Juricn de la, bis Voyages de
Giovanni Verraxano, dted, 14 n
Gray, Asa, dted, 111
Great Bay, 40

"Great isles of Hochelaga," 137 n
Graat Mecattina, one of the Isles St. Wil¬
liam, 131 n

Great River of Csnada, the, Cartier at, 27;
fecundity of, 127; the greatest that has been
seen, 128; savages tell Cartier of, 136-137;
course of, 245, 399; called France Prime,
238; on map of Alphonse, 253; beginning of
fresh water in, 256; Norum begs enters the,
258; on map dedicated to Hakluyt, 367; on
Cartier's chart, 368; on a plan in Histoire de
la Nouvelle France, 400; >it also St. Law¬
rence

Greenish Harbor, the "Hable des Buttes"
of Cartier, 82 n

Greenly Island, same as “Isle des Ouaisc-
aulx," 83 n
Grenade, 338 n
Grimaud, Emile, 412
Grindstone Highlands, 97 n
Grindstone Island, Cartier called it St.
Pierre, 21; one of the Magdalena, 207 n
Groove, in Grout
"Gaos melon*," 177 n

+47

INDEX

Gkosse lilt, 108 n

Gkomin Eustache, on Cartier's second voy-
*8*> 309 . 3*3
Gaotrr, Francois, 367 n
Grout, Guillaume, at court in St. Malo, 306
Grout, Jean, letter to, from Jacques Noufl,
367; account of, 367 n

Grout, le jeune, Jehan, at court in St. Malo,
306

Gaotrr le*n£, Jehan, at court in St. Malo, 306
Growtb, John, im Grout, Jean
“Gnura," 158 n
GuIrard, 150 n

GutRtN, L600, Le* Navigateurs Franc ait,
described, 406

GuArin, Eugtne, La Nouvelle France ,c ited,
418

GutaiK, Dr. A., 410
Gu brands, 388, 389
Gaus Canadensis, 158 n
Gualtier le jeune, Robin, at court in St.
Malo, 304, 306

GuiRNEzi, Guillaume de, on Cartier's second

TO y»F» 3 °* 3*3

Guienne, 341

Guilhert, Guillaume, on Cartier's second
voyage, 308, 31a

Guilxot, Franfoys, on Cartier's second voy¬
age, 308, 31a
Guinea, 348, 413

Guinecourt, Captain, under Roberval, 135
Guinecourt, Monsieur, sent to France with
reports, 138

Guitault, Franfoys, apotkaire, on Cartier's
second voyage, 308, 31a; not of St. Malo,
308 n

Guizot, Francois Pierre Guillaume, History
of France, cited, 38 n
Gult, ttt also Golfe and Goulfe
Gull Island, 97 n
Gutenne, me nti on ed, 304
Guvheneuc, Pierres, at court in St. Malo, 304
Gutot, Charles, servant sailed with Cartier
an second voyage, 130 n; name not on manu¬
script list, 130 n; popular, 198; sent as a
messenger by Cartier, 198, 415
Guzman, Francisco, 336

“Haile de Balleine, L’," now Red Bay, 8a n
“Haile de Sainct Esperit,“ 109 n
“Hails de* Buttes, L',“ now Greenish Har¬
bor, 8a n

“Haile det Chasteaulx, L’,“ Cartier at, 8s;
same as Castle Harbor, 8a n, 10a
“Haile Jacques Cartier, L',“ 86 n
Haoonchenoa, Lord of, advises Cartier of
Donna con a's treachery, :8i
Haoouckouda, tame as Hagonchenda, 181 n

Hair, how the savages wore their, 86,106, 109,
170,188

Hakluyt, Richard, published an account of
Cartier's first voyage, I, 399; published an
account of Cartier's second voyage, 3, 399;
published an account of Cartier's third voy¬
age, 4, 399; error of, in regard to the depar¬
ture of Roberval, 48; map dedicated to, 367,
368; Letcarbot's Historic, paraphrased for
him, 401; Voyages of the English Nation,
cited, 39, ta, S4i7°n, 75^770,8011,81 n,
8z n, 83 n, 86 n, 89 n, 90 n, 91 n, 93 n, 94 a,
960, loan, non, 114n, 1170,1300,131 n,
1360,156 n, i6an, 168 n, 17m, 187 n, 195 a,
207 n, 208 n, 129 n, 235, 245 n, 260 n, 299 a,
366 n, 367 n, 416

Hale, Iroquois Book of Rites, riled, 174 n
Hamel, Jehan, on Cartier's second voyage,
308, 312

Hameun, Pierre, at court in St. Malo, 306
“Hanneda," same as amedda, 195 n, 234
Harbor of Rougnouae, Cartier named, 209
now Renews, 209 n

Harbor of St. Esprit, named by Cartier, 209,
426; probably Le Pod Bay, 209 n
Ha 2202 of White Sands, Cartier at, it I
Hardy, N. S., 411

Hare Island, Cartier at, 141 n, 207 n, 424,
426; situation of, 141 n, 254, 255
Hares, abundant, 186, 186 n
Hartleur, ships fitted at, 42, 349, 349 a;
called by the Spanish, Anaflor, 349
Hast, a red deer, 179 n
Harletan Map, the, 70
Haro, Christobal de, report of the spy,
through, 350-351; to further acquaint him¬
self with the designs of the French, 357
Haster, Francis P., 404
Harrises, Henry,his Bibliotheca American*
Vetustistima, cited, 4, 15 n; Dtemven* *t
Evolution Cartographique, cited, 14,62,75 n
760, Son, 85 n, 900,95 n, 418; Histocre de
Nouvelle France, cited, 363 n
Harvut, Henry, Jacques Cartier, Recherche*
sur la persoone et sur sa famille, died, 411;
Le* Malouins A Terre-Neuve, cited, to, 14 a
Hat, presented to a savage off St. Martin, 22
Haven, Jacques Cartier, 2
Haven of Brest, 131
Havre, 349 n

Havre de Jacques Cartier, 2,143 n
Havre de Labrador, 84
Hawks, 248
Hazel-trees, 28, 259

Heads, how dressed by savages, 86,106, 109,
270,188; prese r ved in place of scalps, 174 n
Heat of Rochelle, compand to New France,
*59

448

INDEX

Hearth -monet, 389 n

Hems billon, the, same u EmeriUon, which
mm, 130, <30 n

Hur, used for nets, no, 089; “chanure,”
described, 146, 146 n; abundant, 226
Hi»ir II of France, 54, 151 n, 413
Henkt HI of France, 376,387
Hanrar IV, 400,416
Hsxit VH, of England, 6a
Hkmit, Dauphin, 34^

Hemet, Herue, on Cartier '1 second voyage,

J° 9 > 3*3

Hemet, Prince, 401

Hestameeon, and die story of Marguerite,
*49

Hxaui, Michel, on Cartier’s second voyage,
307,311; note concerning, 307 n
Hxama of sweet and powerful odor, 107,187
Herb to smoke, 178, 179,179 n
“Herisson,” 167 n

Hxurupes, Fred., his Jacques Cartier cited,
416

Hi llock Harbor, Cartier at, 8a; now Greenish
Harbor, 8a n; distancr from Cattle Harbor,
8a, 167

Hippocrates, 191 n

Hxrroias de la Ddcouverte de l'Amirique,
sm Gaffarel, Paul

HttTOiar de la Nouvtlle France, set Charie-
vetz, P. F. X. de; mv Letcarbot, Marc
HtaroaiA gdndral de laa Indies, mv Gdmara,
Francisco Lopes

Hirroav of France, it* Guisot, Francois
Pierre Guillaume

HocaxLAOA, the path to, *7; Cartier deter¬
mined to visit, a8; Donnacona endeavored to
paevent Cartier’s visit to, 19-30, 150, 151,
41a, 4a;; ruse of the natives, 30, 153-155;
Cartier started for, 31, 46, 415; on the way
to, Cartier received the present of a little girl,
31, 39 n; people from, met Cartier, 31; first
seen by Cartier, 3a; described, 31-33;
Taignoagny and Dom Agaya promised to go
to, 14*; the pinnace to go to, 150; sacred to
Cudouagny, 154 n; why Donnacona opposed
Cartier's going to, 155 n; Cartier inquires its
distance, 160; Cartier reached, 161, 415; his
landing place not settled, 161 n; location of,
16a n, 163-164; supposed definition of the
word, 16a n; described by Cartier, 164-166;
destroyed by the Iroquois, 174 n; Cartier
angry because the natives broke their
promise to go with him to, 181; distance from
the begining of the river, 184, 189; the banks
ef the river goodly as far as, 186,154, 258;
fresh water in the river as far as, 194; Un-
gauge of, 210; Roberval to be governor of,
40, no, a 3 j, 141,318,33a, 336, 366; Cartier

sets out for second visit to, 127, 343,426; the
western limit of Cartier's Canada, 138 n;
now Montreal, 238 n; discovered by Cartier,
339, 340; an end of Asia, 339; a map dedi¬
cated to Hakluyt, 367; further discoveries
in, to be made, 315; only Roberval to navi¬
gate and settle in, 310, 323; Cartier master
pilot of vessels sent to, 316; people of, pointed
the way to Saguenay, 369; mentioned, 188,
219,217, 39 ?* 39 s * 399 * 4 ° 5 * 4 ° 7 » 4 > 4 * 4 «*
Hoch e la gams, Do on a cons'* people jealous of,
30; their method of preserving fish, 33; food
of, 165; dress of, 165; live by tillage and
fishing, 166; are not nomadic, 166; esnogny
of, 165,166 n
Hoch e lai, itt Achelaiy
Hochelat, Lord of, Cartier visited, 127, 230;
exposed Taignoagny and Dom Agaya, 227;
same as Achelaiy, 127 n; Cartier left boys
with, 228,230; Cartier gave presents to, 228;
treacherous, 130; it* also'Achelaiy
Hogs, brought by Cartier, 222
Holt-rood Day, Cartier erected a crow on,
201, 425

Honest a, the savage name lot plums and figs,
ill, 111 n

Honplkur, ships fitted at, 42, 349, 349 n;
Roberval prepared a ship at, 44, 221; Rober¬
val sailed from, 48; borne of Pierre Chauvin,
390; home of Maugii Vumenot, 396
Honguxdo, same as Canada, 135, 135 n;
Donnacona *s people going to, are maw acred,
174; same as Gaspf, 174 n; Cartier reached,
207; same as Ognedoc or Gasp*, 251 n
Homo v edo, Mountains of, 183
Hope, the word applied to various capes by
hopeful navigators, 103
Houghton, Mifflin and Company, 412
Howlet, Rev. M. F., his cartographical
studies, 5; his Cartier's Course, died, 80 n,
8t n, 82 n, 90 n, 92 n, 97 n, 417
‘‘Hours,” 180 n
Hubbub, an Indian game, 177 n
Hudson River, 39
Hue Qui6ret,4io

Humboldt, Alexander von, Examen Critique,
cited, 15 a

Hupeau, Jehan Maingard, at court in St.
Malo, 304, 306

HvaoN-Iaoquois, the, Cartier met at Gaspd,
109 n; savages taken by Cartier to France
belonged to this tribe, 141 a; savages at
Quebec belonged to this tribe, 144 n; their
name for cranes, 158 n
Huron Nation, the, distance from the Neuter
nation, 185 n
Burst, 404

Hoichctxl, Jehan, at oourt is St. Malo, 304

449

INDEX

Hut Mountain*, same ai Grange Mountain*,
89 n

Htndman, Mr., 109 n
Htitmz Canadensis, the, 167 n

Ice, impeded Cartier, 76; native* hunt on the,
179; about and over Cartier'* ahip*, 194;
break* up in April, 239
Ilk au Massacre, Donnacona'* people mas¬
sacred at, 174 n; bones found in a cave at,
174 n

Ili auz Coudres, Cartier at, 28
Ile aux Oiseaux, Cartier at, 18
Ile de Brion, Cartier at, 11
"Ilba de Frey Luis,” 65, 68
“Illa dos avei,” same as Isle of Birds, 77 n
“ Iixx de Bryon," 95 n
Lndei Ocd den tale*, 400, 401,403
India, Pathway to, t6, 35; Cartier’* theory of
the route to, 16; maize not a native of, in n;
mentioned, 396

Indian*, their God Cudouagni, 30,175; used
no salt, 33, 112, 165, 169, 183 n, 240; pre¬
served fish by smoking, 33, 165, 180; pre¬
disposed to consumption when introduced
to civilization, 39; when unconverted, con¬
sidered outside the pale of salvation, 57,87 n,
127; painted with red ochre, 87 n; hunted like
partridges, 87 n; nomadic, 106, 286, 240;
eat flesh and meat nearly raw, 110; used
millet in place of bread, 110, 289; fruit*
used by, no, ill, iti n; did not distinguish
between fresh and dried fruits, ill n; all
thieves, 112, 230, 290; made cordage, 146 n;
their conceptions of deity, after life, widow*
and girls, 177,177 n; marriage among, 1770;
manner of cultivating corn, 177 n; game¬
sters, 177, 177 n; endured extreme cold, 179;
women do the work, 179; clothing of, 187,
190, 240; prize the fur of wolves, 187 n;
clothed as Europeans, 189, 189 n; ignorant
of geography, 189 □; conveyed information
by pebbles and sticks, 229; imtrustworthy,
230, 230 n; never forgot or forgave, 231 n;
white, 240; naked, 240; food of ,140-241;
seen at Blanc Sablon, 20; seen at Paspebiac
Point, 22, 103-104, 107, 282; a chief at St.
Martin given a red hat, 22; those who were
fishing at Bay de Chaleur were probably
Micmacs, 21, 113 n; familiar with the St.
Lawrence, 22; a miserable tribe, 23; Cartier
seized two at Gasp<, *3-24* ” 3 . * 9*1

destined for future interpreters, *6,39,130 n,
135; attended mass at St. Malo, 26; at St.
Peter’s Stait they pointed the way to
Canada, 27, 134-135; Cartier met them fish-
ng in the Saguenay, 27-28, 140; landed by
Cartier, 143-144; those near Be aux Coudres

give Cartier fish and melons, 28; gave Carrier
amedda to cure disease, 35; presented to the
king of France, 39; leaned to speak French
quite well, 39; all but one died is France, 39,
39 n, 219; disappointed not to see Donna¬
cona return with Carrier, 43; Carrier doubled
their friendly demonstrations, 47; they
avoided the fort at Charles bourg Royal, 48,
230; amazed at the activity of the settlers, 49;
Cartier’s reason for kidnapping, 57; mil
treated by Cartier, 57; did not trust the
whites, 71; those at Cumberland Bay de¬
scribed, 86-87, 270; their different charac¬
teristics noticed by Cartier, 87 s, 109 a;
long occupied region of Richmond Bay, 99 a;
traded with Cartier, 104-105, 284; gave
Cartier pieces of cooked seal, 106, 2*5;
those at Gaspl described, 109; of the Huron-
Iroquois famhy, 109 □; given bells and cocabs,
110,289; objected 10 the cross at Gaapd, 112,
291; reverenced the cross, 114 n; called
Canada “Aca nsda," 135 n; told Cartier of
the Great River of fresh water, 136-137;
why they opposed Cartier's going to Hoche-
1*8*. 155 n-156 n; had intercourse with the
southwest, 190 n; baptized, 219, 339-339 n;
congregated at Stadaconf, 230-231; ward
by English, 230 n; annoyed Cartier, 236-237;
brought aloset to Roberval, 239; reported
unicorns in Canada, 259; to be co nv er ted,
315-316; Cartiers relatives continued to
trade with, 377; brought to St. Malo, 377.
390; facilitated traffic, 377; free trade with,
388; rendered tractable by traffic, 390-391;
a man from St. Malo left with them to ob¬
serve thetr habits, 391; who were those who
met Cartier, 411; i« also Mianac
Indian Tribes of the United States, History
of, wt Schoolcraft, Henry R.

Indies, gold and silver from the, 347, 348;

fleet to be fitted out for, 358
Indies, Council of the, concerning tbe French
fleet, 347,350; Seville's opinion of their reso¬
lutions, 353; statement of what was agreed
“poo, 357

Indies, Natural and Moral History of, ms
Acosta, Josd de

Indians, North American, sss Cadin, George
Infants, touched, 32, 167
Intoxication, savages use sticks and pebbles
to convey, 229,229 n
Ikon, 226

Iaoquois, a word in their language the origin
of the name Canada, 135 n
Iroquois, called also Trudamans, 171 m;
same as Tradamans, 1740; meaning of name
uncertain, 174 □; destroyed Stadacond and
Hochelsga, 174n; w alto under Trudamans

450

INDEX

Iiaiilu Inmla, 65
Island of Brother Louis, 65
Island of Pflberds, 141 n
Island of Filberts, Cartier at, a8, 36
Island of Hazlenuts, 141 n
Island of Saioct Katherine, a
Islands of Dove-houses, 90 n
“Is lx de ave*,“ 68
“Isle de bacaQaos,” 68
“Is lx de Bacchus,” a limitation of Canada,
ipn

Isle de Bouays, L\ named by Cartier, 83;
now Woody Island, 83 n
“Isle de Fomina,” 67
“Isle de la fortuna," 68
“Isle de la tormento,” 68
“Isle de la Trinidad,” 6a
“Isle del fuego,” 68
“Isle de los Acores," 6a
Isle de Orleans, Cartier at, 49,143; described,
143 n, 184-185; other names of, 143 n; Car-
tier returned to, 105; Roberta I passed, 137;
situation of, S55,156, 257; fresh water began
at, 256

Isle de Sable, 399

Isle de Sainte Marie, former name of Isle de
Orleans, 143 n
Isle dea Coudres, 255

Isles des Ouaiaeaulx, L', Cartier at, 77 n;
one of the Funk Islands, 77 n; named Bird
Island by Cartier, 83 ;now Greenly Island,83 n
Isle des Sorrier*, former name of Isle de
Orleans, 143 n
Isle-en-Dodon, L', 338 n
Isle of Ascension, Roberval passed, 237;
same as Anticosti, 137 n; situation of, 250,
251, 256; described, 250
Isle of Assumption, Cartier at, 135 n, 136,
414; Cartier returned to, 138; the river be¬
gins beyond, 183; situation of, 207; same as
Anticosti, 414

Isle of Bacchus, Cartier landed at, 148
Isle of Birds (“Lisle des Ouaiseauli”), 77,
264; Cartier at, on first voyage, 421; one of
the Funk Islands, 77 n; on earlier maps, 77 n;
Cartier at, on second voyage, 131, 423, 416;
described by Cartier, 131
Isle of Brion, i« Brion Island
Isle of Demons, not the locality of the story
of Marguerite Roberval, 250 n
Isle of Filberts, Cartier at, 142, 143 n, 424;
Cartier there 00 return awaiting good
weather, 205-206, 426; Donnscorn's people
at, 206; Cartier left and returned to, 206,
207; situation of, 255; described, 255
Isle of Hares, situation of, 254, 255; Cartier
at, 141 n, 207 n, 424,426
Isle of Lepurea, situation of, 254

Isle of Raquelle, situation of, 252, 253, 254;
described, 252; doubtless Bic Island, 252 n
Isle of Rasus, 258
Isle Rouge, 91 n
Isle S. Joan, 67

Isles of Blanc Sabkm, situation of, 246, 247;
birds at, 248; i« also Blanc Sablon
Isles de Margaulx, Cartier at, 21, 79, 93;
why so named, 21; described, 93 n; now
Bird Rocks, 93 n-94 n

Isles of the Demoiselle, situation of, 247,
248 ; described, 247; origin of the name, 149 n
Isles Ramdes, 90 n
Isles Rondes, 138

Isles St. Germain, Cartier at, 132,133; same
as Cape Whittle Islands, 133 n
Isle St. John, named by Cartier, 139, 424;
same as Bic Islands, 139 n
Isle St. Martha, Cartier at, 132, 423; prob¬
ably little Mecattina Island, 132 n
Isles St. Pierre, Cartier at, 209, 426; ship*
from France at, 209; its situation, 209 n, 249
Isles St. William (Sainct Guillaume), Car-
tier at, 131, 423; probably Treble Hill and
Murr Island, 131 n; situation of, 132
Is lettc t, the, 84, 84 n, 268
Isola de Demoni, 250 n
Iso LA do* Demonios, >50 n
IsquouTttsqu ashes, same as squashes, 178 n
Ivoar, 95 n

Jacobins, the, in Nantes, 386
Jacques Cartier Harbor, Cartier at. 2, 86,
270, 411; may have been La baie de Mis-
tinoque, 86 n; claimed as Sheet tics Bay,
86 n; same as Cumberland Bay, 86 □
Jalobert, Bertrand, father of Marc Jalobert,
307 n

Jalobert, Marc, master of the Petite Her-
mine and Courlieu, 130, 307, 307 n, 311;
brother-in-law of Cartier, 130 n, 224; with
Cartier on the trip to Hochelaga, 161; sent
back to St. Malo, 221 n, 224, 235 n; note
concerning, 307 n; his daughter married
Michel Audiepore, 308 n
Jalobert, Perrine, married Michel Audie¬
pore, 308 n
Jamtn, Guyon, 14 n

Jansaet, Geadxne, mother of Jacques Car-
tier, 11, 13 n

aunate. Lord of, JM Chiton, Etienne
eannin, Pierre, 401, 404, 408
Jeroewa, derivation of Iroquois, 174 n
Jesuits, called the yellow perch, goldfish,
241 n; introduced into France by Tournon,
3*5 n

JeU NX, Robin Gaultier le, at court in St. Malo,

304, 30*

45 1

INDEX

JflAO, Cronies de, 14 n
Jocrr, Jean, had a act chart made by Cartier,
369, 369 n

John of Nantei, put in irona, 139
JoNCHtz, Charier, to deliver fundi to the
procurator, 383

JoNCHit, Pierre, at court in St. Malo, 306;
on Cartier's second voyage, 310, 314; can't
be identified, 310 n

Jo a dan, American Food and Game Fishes,
cited, 141 n

Jossxltn, John, on the name Canada, 135 n;
speaks of the cucumber, 165 n; New Eng¬
land's Rarities, cited, 177 n, 178 n, 179 n,
180 n, 187 n; Two Voyages to New England,
cited, iti n, 158 n, 178 n, 179 n, 186 n
Jo (MUST, D., 408, 409

Joubnal of American Folk-Lore, cited, 175 n
Joubnets, Transactions and Events on
Coast of Labrador, *« Cartwright, George
Juglani dnerca, same as acorns or butter¬
nuts, 111 n; at Stadacond, 146 n
J11 clans, Glabra, at Stadacond, 146 n
Ju clans, Squamos, at Stadacond, 146 n
“Junks of Pork," name for East Cape, 108 n

Kannata, origin of word Canada, 135 n
Kaqaicz, 110,189
Kapaioe, same as Kagaige, 110 n
Kabpunt, same as Cartier's Repont, 80 n
KatsEpioui, the Abnakian name of Gaipd,
108 n

Kebmabcc, Charles de, 371
Kebvileb, his Rdpertoire Gdndral de Bio-
graph Bretonne, cited, 129 n
Khitai, the word corrupted into China, 154 n
Khitans, a name given to Manchurians, 2540
Kit to North American Birds, i« Coues,
Elliott

Kmc, Richard, map of, 64
Ribbon, same as Carrier's Rapont, 80 n
Kitchen-middens, at Richmond Bay, 99;
left by Mianacs, 104 n
Knipe of copper, 206

Kohl, J. G., his Discovery of Maine, cited,
43 * 76 , 97 » 4 ,D

Kvntsmann, Friedrick, map of, 64

La Bastille, Sieur de, 307 n
La Bobdebix, M. de, 308 n
Lab ba do a, French ships at, 20 n; coast of,
sighted by Cartier, 24, 88 n, 116 n; Cartier,
the Viceroy of, 40; Cartier set out to explore
the coast of, 56, 137 n; on Maggiolo's map,
66, 67; on Ribeiro's map, 68; fisherman
from, catch bait at Bird Rocks, 94 n; Bonne
Espdrance on the coast of, 103 n; mentioned,
118 n, 246, 392 n, 39a, 399,40J

La Bsomi, 235, 242

Lac n'ANoouLESMX, Cartier at, 159, 425;
Champlain at, 159 n; now Lac St. Pierre,
159 n-160 n

Lachine Rapids, the, 162 n, 169,426
Lac St. Pizaat, area of, 160 n; ms Lae
d'Angoulesme

Lapitau, P., Moeura des Sauvages, died, 114,
* 74 . *75

La Gastinaue, Sieur, sw Boulain, Bernard
Lagastinx, Lord of, 323, 332
Lagop us albus, 248 n
Laoopus rupestris, 248 n
Lahontan, Nouveaux Voyages, dted, 159,
179, l8o > >*7

Lake Ontario, desoibed by Carrier, 1S9 n;
on Hakluyt's map, 367 n
Lake Superior, copper from, 171 n; described
by Donnacona, 199 n
Lalande, Martin, 304
Lambestil, Sieur de, 367 n
Lamokt, Dieu, 235
Lampsets, 188
Laudebneau Harbor, 364
Laudebneau River, 364 n
Land of Brioo, 95
Land of the Bretons, 95, 95 n
Langxuxb, J. C n sketch of GagpdsU, dted.
108

Lapoupe, Devant, 304
Labes, 158, 158 n
LAancqtiE, Capt., 364
La Salle, 235
Lathtbus maririmut, 178 n
Latitude, given with accuracy by Carrier,
79 “

Laton, 228 n

La TaiNrrt de Routhan, parish of, 307 a
Laudonniebe, 410
Laval University, 411
La van, Jehan de, 338 n
La Vasscub, drowned, 242
LAVEBDtfcRE, L’AbW C. H., Oeuvre*
Champlain, dted, 1390,157 n, 160 n, 171
174 n, 186 n, 229 n

La-Ville-es-Nouvzaux, Sieur de, 367 n
Leath eb-cbown, 45, 223
Lzbat, Richard, 308, 308 n, 311
Leblanc, Legendre Esrienne, 310, 310 a, 314
Le Barr, F., 346
Le Beet, Julienne, 309 n
Le Bbeton, Guillaume, Sieur La Basrile, at
court in St. Malo, 306; with Cartier on
second voyage, 307, 309, 311; note concern¬
ing, 307 n; probably a priest, 309 n
La Bbeton, OUive, 310 n
Le Bbeton, Robin, 309 n
Le Cuicq, Christian, at Gaspd, 113; hia

452

* i

INDEX

Flnt Embhahroent of the Faith in New
France, cited, 113 n, 114 n, 145 n, 136 n
Lx Cokdiex, map of, 251, 254
Ln Fort, Robin, 308,312
Leg, people with one, 199
Legal, Yuon, 309, 313
Legxntilmomme, Guillaume, 309, 313
LxaumuioitMx, Jehan, 310, 310 n, 314
Lx Gorikm, Catherine, 376 n
Lx Goxicn, Fran ceo i*e, 14 n
Lx Gosixx, Pie r r e , 303, 340 n
Legoupil, Robert, 361, 370,374, 375
Ls Bocaxrrxi, Jeanne, 308
Lx Jsuxx, Fere Paul, 17s n
Ls Junr, M. Jehan, 306
Lklakck, Robert, 374, 375
Ls MajeS, Quill a uroe, 307, 307 a, 311
Ls Moms, J. M., hi* Chronicles of the St.
Lawrence, dted, 108 n, 136 n; hia Pictur¬
esque Quebec, dted, aoo n, 125 n
Lxoh, 357
Lx Poil Bay, 209 n
Larva, Americanus, 186 n
Lxrus aytraticus, 186 n
Ls Rot, Alpbonae, 413
Ls Rot, Pierre, 383
LIst, 410

LxecAsaor, Marc, mingles the voyages of
Cartier with tboee of Champlain, 1; 00
“caignetdase,” 136 n; on “foues,” 17a n;
on *'amedda," 195 n; hia Bistoire de la Nou-
velle France, described, 400, 401, 402, 403,
408; paraphrased, 401; dted, 1, 75, 90 n,
101 n, 104 n, 107 n, tii n, 114 n, 136 n,
*44 *45 ®> *53 »* * 5 * ■» *57 »» *8i n,

l88 n, (91 n, 106 n, 207 n, 236 n
LesdiguiSxes, Ducheue de, m under Char¬
levoix, F. F. X. de
Ls Srsu, Julien, 369, 37b
Lettuce, 225
L’Espimey, 235,242

Lsttxbi Patent from Fran da I to Roberval,
3 * 5 » 3 **» 3*3

Lsvamt, pumpkins a native of, 178 n
Lsvsxi, Thomas, 304
Lsxiqux de la Langue Iroquoii, dted, 162 n
Lissaisx de la Soadtd Gfographil, 405
Licadin, same aa Sdudin, 185 n
Lidatxm, same as Sdudin, 185 n
Ldsoilou, Cartier a resident of, 5$, 58, 344,
34J} bouse in, given to Cartier's wife, 346}
near La Bastille, 307 n
Lbmoilou, Maiaon die, 90 n
Li km no a, in n
Linnets, 158,187
Lisassua, 127
Lubom, 354

Lnru Greyhound, 338 n

Little Mecattina Island, 132, 132 n
Little Weasel, Ac, same as Petite Hermine,
130 n

Lrrral, M. P. E., bis Dktionnaire de U
Langue Fraftpaia, dted, 96 a, 165 n
Li vs at xs given to the natives, 113, 291
Livsx tournoia, in French coinage, 370 n
Loams Bay, 85 n
Logoluncos, 65
Loiss, the, 348 n
Loisx-lKviaisuRE, the, 388 n
Longsval, M ., 24s

Longitude, do early exact method for calcu¬
lating, 76 n
Longman,404
Long Point, 92 n

Longkais, F. Joiion dea, his Documents
Nouveaux Recue illis, it n, 12 n, 13 n, 41 n,
307 o, 308 n, 3100,367 n, 3690,413
Loeeainx, 196
Lot, Department of, 192 n
Lotharimcia, 64
Lout, Jean, 374, 375
Louesss, 186 n
Louis IX, of France, 114 n
Lowixss, Commune of, 97 n
Lucas, Frederick A., 78 n
Lugo, Capt., Don Alonso de, 358
Luis, the Infanto, 354, 355
Lupus, occidental:*, the, 186 n
Lusssns, 250

Lutkssans obscure the faith, 127
Ltmous, 333

Lyons, Toumon, the archbishop of, 325 n

Mabills, Georget, 308, 308 n, 312
Macssbsl, caught in nets, 23,289; abundant,
109, no, 188, 289
Madrid, 41

Magdalen Day, no, 2S9
Magdalen Islands, 96 n, 97 n, 99 n, 207 n,
208 n

Maggiolo, Viscount de, map of, 66,67
Magnus, Olaus, 191 n
Maillasd, Franpois, 374, 375
Maine, France, 341

Maine, U. S., map of the coast of, 258; Bit-
torical Society, 43 n, 760,97 n, 1150,410
Maingasd, Attain, 307 n
Maingasd, Franpois, 307 n
Maingasd, Guillaume, 304, 306
Maingasd, Guillemette, 51 n, 340 o
Maingasd, Jacques, 130,304,307, 31 1
Maingasd, Jehanne, 307 n
Maingasd, Joceline, 308 n
Maingasd, Michel, 309, 313
Maingasd, Ferrioe, 308 n
Maingasd, Pierre, 310, 314

INDEX

Maimgard, RaouUet, 309, 313
Maingakd, Thomas, 306, 376 o
Maingakt, Guiliemette, 51 a, 340 a
Mai so una, 130

Maui, described by Cartier, *3, no, in a*
given 10 Cartier, 18,144; bread made of, 32,
144} fields of, 33; origin of the name, in n;
same as BAe dlnde, ill n
Maiaguxta, 42, 348, 350
Mal Bay, *51 n
Malxtactom, jm Criminals
Mauaid, Thomas, 397
Malouins, ioi n, 385, 386, 387, 388, 390,
391 n

Malouins k Terre-Ncuve, Lea, m* Bar*
vut,H.

Manchuria, a part of Cathay, 254 n
Mans, the Bishop of, 90 n
Manuel, Don, 353
Man u is, the, 158 n
Mai* dedicated to Hakluyt, 367,368
Maps and map makers: Alphonse, Jean, 246,
148, 249, 153, 256, 258; Cabot, Sebastian,

61, 70, 70 n; Canerio, 64; Candno, Alberto,
59,60,64,66; Cartier, Jacques, 71,367,368-
369; Glamorgan, Jean de, 70; Cbsa, Juan,

62, 63, 64; Descellier, PieTre, 70; Deslient,
Nicholas, 69, 70; Franquelin, 251 n; Har-
leyan, the, 70; King Richard, 64; Kunts-
mann, F., 64; Le Cordier, 251 n; Maggiolo,
66, 67; Miller, 77; Oliveriana, 64; Portu¬
guese, 63, 64; Reinel, Pedro, 64, 65, 77;
Ribeiro, Diego, 66, 68; Riccardiana, 61, 69;
Roto, Jehan, 70; Ruysch, Johann, 66; Ver-
rarano, Giovanni, 77 n; Vkgas, Gasper, 67,
68; Waldseemiiller, Martin, 65, 66

Maples, 146, 224 n
Mara non River, 351, 351 n
Makcdant, Claud, 327, 33a
Marcoutns, 187

Mae descubierto por Yangkses, 62
Mareau, Jehan de, 327, 329
Mareschal, Jacques, 338 n
Maroxu, Jehan, 309, 313
Maeqaulx, Let, 79,79 n, 93, 265, 275
Margaulx Islands, 93, 275, 422
Maeort, Pierre, Navigations Franpais, cited,
59 ®

Marguerite, niece of Roberval, romantic
story of, 249 n

Marguerite of Navarre, Heptameron, cited,
249 n

Marguerite, Queen, 400
Marie-di-Bonne Nouvelle, the, 14
Marie de 1 Incarnation, Mire, Lettres His*
toriques, cited, 143 n
Marie, Guillaume de, 130
Marinoare, James, 130 n

Marins, Franpais, Les, tte Bouniol, M. B.
Markham, Geographical journal, cited, 7*
Marnep, Jan de, 396
MARquiaa, Pierre, 309, 313
Martens, 186,186 n, 250 n, 377
Martin, Franpoys, 304, 306
Martinet, Jacques, 304, 306
Maetres, 186 n

Martyr, Peter, on Cortereal, 59; his De
Or be Novo, cited, 42

Masts, goodly trees for, 22,102,140,224, a8t
-282

Matane River, 252 n

Mather, Cotton, bis opinion of Indiana, 97;
his Magnalia Christi Americana, died, 230 n,
231 n

Mat-apples, hi n
Mat, Jehan de, 306
Mat, Pierre, 306
Mat, Servan, 340 n
Medlers, 225, 225 n
Meillerate, Lord of, 75
Melons given to Cartier, 28, 144;
pumpkins, 144 n; described by Cartier, 177,
177 n, 178 n; native of India, 177 *>» “*
mentioned by Champlain, 178 n; name
given to squashes, 178 n
Memoirs et Comptes Rendus de la Socset#
Royale du Canada, 412, 413, 414, 417
Menagier de Paris, cited, 241 n
Mercator, 250 n
Merles, 158 n

Merlin, the English for EmeriBao, 130 n
Meruxa migratoria, 158 n
Merville, 338 n
Mespilus Gartnanica, 225 n
Metabxroutin, the, 172 n
Michel, the, 14

Michelant, M. H., published Oration Orig¬
ins, i-j, 409; his Voyage de Jacques Car¬
rier, 408

Micmacs, the, their fishing pound, 22, 103;
met Cartier, 22, 141 n; familiar with the St.
Lawrence, 22 ; remains of, at Patpebtac, 99 o,
104 n;language of, 107,141 n;met LeCVrcq,
1 13 n; reverenced the cross, II* 05 m al»
Indians

MiqtiELON, 209 n
Millards, 251
Miller, map of, 77
Millerate, Sieur de, 16
Millet, used for bread, l to, 144, 241, 189;
called Kagaige, no; sixe of, ill n, 163;
given to Cartier, 144; same as mattt> *44 ®*
same as Indian com, 161 s
Milot, Jean, 400,401,402, 403
Minigo, former name of Isle dXWeans, 143 n
Mi rani chi, the, 1140

454

INDEX

Mire, Fraud* de, 135
Mirepoix, Bernard, 338 n
Moisie, the, 138 n, 184 n
Momeractaraa k, aow Bay C h aleur, defined,
107 n

Mohileur, Le, cited, 4
Mo NT a on Aia Honnata, tuppoaed origin of the
name Canada, 1350
MoWTAONAia, the, 136 n
Monte he, 335
Montgaillard, 338 n
Monti delle grange, tame at Grange Moun¬
tain^ 88,89 n

Mom Joli, not Cape Tbiennot, 1330
Montmorency, Duke, 115 n
Montpellier, 196

Montreal, Indian name of, 161 n; Cham¬
plain shown copper at, 171 n; stt Hochelaga
Montrxul, Lord of, 130
Mont* de Granchet, Let, 88, 88 n, 411
Monument to Caxtio--Birtbeuf, 415
Moots, 179 n

Moot too at too, tame at muakratt, 160 n
Morel, Yres, 304, 306
Morrihan, Jehan Jacq. de, 310, 314
Morgan, League of the Iroquois, dted, 185
Morisot, 406
Morlaix, 4a, 349, 349 n
Moris, 94 n, 138 n; u* Walnit
Mount Louii, 15a n

Mount Royal, Cartier atcended, 34, 169;
dittance from place of landing, 16a n j named
by Cartier, 164, 4x5; dittance from Hoche¬
laga, 169; view from* 169-170; Jacques Nouiil
atcended, 368

Mount St. Genevieve, 134 n
Mout, Sir Charles de, 75,163
Mu Gil capita, the, 140 n
Muon, chelo, the, 140 n
Mugxud*, the, 340 a
Mulberries, 1x4

Muller, Ditquisitio Geographies, dted,

* 54 “

Mullets, 188, 140, 1400
Muuida, 140
Mullus barbatua, 140 n
Mullui turmuletut, 140 n
Muret, 338 n

Murillo, B-, his Orphan of St. Milo, dted,
4 "

Murrei, tame at the Codes of Cartier, 78 n
Mure Itland, 131 n

Muies de la NouveDe France, Let, 401, 403,
404,408-409

Muiukoniatawxx Bay, 133 n
Mdii Melioot, 177 n
Mu sc rati, 160 n, 314
Murela Americanut, 186 n

Nantxi, 348, 385, 386
Nantei, John of, 339
Nabronne, 333

Narrows, the, Richmond Bay, 99 n
Narwhals, 14a n
Natasheouch, 1350
Nataihquan Point, 118 n, 133 n
Naticcousti, 135 n
N ATI 1 ccrr ix, 135 n
Natives, m» Indiana
Navews, 335
Nxaiville, de, 36a
Nrrt used by Indians, 13, 110,189
Neuter nation, the, 185 n
Newberie, Ralph, 400
New Bnmtwick, aa, 101 n
New England Historic and Genealogical
Register, dted, 171 n
New England, Nightingales not in, 158 n
New Foundland, early rutted bjr the French,
si, 14, 150; supposed to be a part o( Asia,
14, 16; Cartier thought to find an opening
near, 16;Cartier at, 18, 51, n8n, 1190,4x1,
4x3; Cartier rounded the north coait of, 30,
88; fisherman at, 37; Roberval viceroy of,
40; called Ticn-a de BacaQaos, 43 n; Cartier
met Roberval at, 44,45, 53, 54, 336; French
and Portuguese ships at, 48; early names
still familiar, 64-65; early maps show no
opening north of, 65-66; coast line broken
on Maggiolo't map, 66; on Viegar's map,
67, 68; an opening at the north of, was early
known, 69, 70; discovered by Cabot, 75 n,
76 n; Cinereal's claim, 7 5 n; Indians of, 88 n;
Cartier explored the west shore of, 88 n;
southern passage unknown, 95 n; Cartier
met Beauprf at, aaa; situation of, 347, 349;
trade free with, 388; mentioned, 345, 351 n,
399; m Anipach, L. A.; ChapeD; Fcdky,
Charles; Prowse, D. W.

N ew Foundland Sailing Directions, dted, 80 n
New France, 146 n, aio, 357, 358, 395, 396,
397 * 398 . 399 * 4 *b 401, 405 ti . t J ,
New France, Description of, published 1609,
mi Erondelle, Pierre

New Land, 17, 58, 75, 86, 94, 95, H 7 » »**
119, 131, 363, 370, » 7 *» > 94 * > 95 * a 9 6 » 3 <»i
376 , 39 1 * 399
New Mexico, 367, 368
New Spain, 117

New World, 13,14* 13* 4*» 59 * 395 » 39 ** 4 «
Nicotiana ruitica, 179 n
Nicotian a tobacum, 179 n
Nightingales, uncertain to what bird Car-
tier alluded, 158, 158 n, 187; in New Eng¬
land, 158 n

Nobleman, as a tide, 55
Noel, m NouH

+55

INDEX

Nogxns, Lord of, 363

Noontime at Canada and Rochelle. 358

Norembeeg, 399

NoasMBEaquE, 158, a59, 398, 405

Nome, Sailing Direction*, cited, 145 n

Normandy, aao, 304, 337, 349 n, 376, 397

No sat Voyage*, 109 n

North America, the coaat of, thought to be
a part of Asia, 40 n

North Cape, tame as Cape Dauphin, 95 n,
96 n; Cartier at, 97 n, too; described, too,
100 n; Cap des Sauvages, 100 n; not Cape
Lorraine, 108 n; near Cap de St. Paul, 309 n
Northern Belle Isle, 245 n
Northmen, Voyages of, to America, cited,
109, 109 n

North Point, 97 n, 100 n, 116
North Sea, 348
Nort, Jehan du, 308,308 n, 31a
Norombeoa, 258,259, 398,405
Nouel, Etienne, 12, 221 n, 224, 235 n, 307,
307 n, 309, 311

Nouel, Jacques, 71, 299, 3*7, 3 ^. 3 * 9 > 37 S,
376, 381, 383, 383, 384, 3 »S. 3 * 6 . 387 , 388*
389, 392, 406

NouKl, Jehan, 307 n, 340 n
NouKl, Jehanne, 12
NouKl, John, 369
NouKl, Michael, 369
Novrt, Jean, 374, 375
Notes, 146 n

Nuts, 23, in, 146, 146 n, 190,289, 200

Nun's Island, 162 n

Ntel, Pierre, 310,310 n, 314

Oats, 46,146, 157,163, 214, 225,259
Oats, 94 n, 107, 286

Och elat, gave a gill to Cartier, 31,39 n , im
227; Cartier ririted him, 46; given a £3
mat, 47; two boys left with, 47, az g (

Odet River, 349
Odiepore, Estienne, 304
OdiKvre, Jacques, 370, 375, 376
OmfcvRE, Sebastian, 375
Oedemia Americana, 187 n
Ocneooc, 251, 251 n
Oil drank by natives, 241
Old Bic Harbor, 139 n
Old Fort, formally Brest, 84 n
OuvtaiANA, map of, 64
Oluuier, Geoffry, 309
Ondatra ribethicus, 160 n
O ranges, 190
Orient, the, 37
OrlIans, 327, 341
Ormes, 146 n
Osiers, ic8

Ossillon, Paul d', 359 n

Oris, the, 158 a
Ottawa River, 170 n, 199 n

OuLTARDt, 158 n

Our Lady Day, 119,133,19*. 339 4*4

Oxford, Christ Church in, 400
Otes, 158 n

Pagnt, Baron of, ut Cfaabot, PhiHpp
Painpont, Martin de, 227
Paint used by natives, 86, 87 n
Palm Sunday in 1320,13 n
Panama, 347, 352
Parch vest, 78 n
Parcman, Francis, 299
Parradis, Anthionette de, 338 n
Parsley, 94, 276
Partridges, 158,158 n
Pa t peilac Point, Cartier at, 22,103; savages
of, 103-105; locality of, described, 106-107
Pas ram t, 345
Passes solitaires, die, 158 n
Paternosters given to natives, 24, 106,109,
i6t, 168, 285, 288
Patsis, Jacques, 51 n
Patris, Jacquette, 51 n
Patrix, Alain, 304
Patxix, Gufflemette, 307 n
Patrix, Martin, 304
Paul, Le Chevalier, 4x0
Paten, Guillaume, 325
P 4 alat, F, 407
Pears, 23, in, 251, 259, 289
Peas, 23,94,100,107,110,178,258,280,286.
289

Peebles used to convey informstioe, 129 n
Pebblt beach, explained, 96
Pedlxt, Charles, his History of New Found-
land, dtcd, 88 n
Penguin Island, 78 n, 209 n
Penguins, 78
Penbee, the, 14
Pepin, Guillaume, 306
Perca flavescens, the, 240 a
Perch, 240 n
PxRoux, the, 158 n
Perier, Adrian, 403,404
Peres defined, 96 a
Perrinet, Guillaume, 304
Persia, 354
Peru, 347, 35*

Petit e Hermiae, the, with Carrier, 25, 130;
her burden, 25, 130; the master of, 130;
former name of, 130 a; abandoned, 200;
remains of,found, soon
Petit-Val, Raphael du, his Disoour* da
Voyages fait par Jacques Cartier, cited, 76,
77, 80 n, 82 n, 86 n, 91 n, 92 a, 93 a, 96 a,
101 n, 109 n, itoa, 114a, 117 n, 398,405

456

INDEX

Prajeolus Vulgaris, III B, 178 II
Pheasant i, 158, 148
Pmilipot, Michel, 308, 308 n,3ia
Phocjkna communis, die, 187 n
Picabd, Alphonse, 413
Picard-Beenneim et Cii, 41a
PlCAlDT, 120 D

Picea alba, 195 n

Picketing, Charles, his Chronological His¬
tory of Plants, dted, 111 n, 178 n, 179 n
Pi cor, Bertram, 304
Picot, Estienne, 304
PicnywnrANi, the, 199
Pidgeons, 187, 187 n
Piedmont, 396

Pierre de Grot Cap, 97 n, 98 n
Pierres, Jehan, 310, 314
Pierres, from Cattlenau, 338 n
Pike, 188

Pikes, a weapon, 364
Pillage Bay, 134,134 n
Pilling, James C., Bibliography of the
Algonquin Language, dted, 144 n
Pilot, dted, 87 n
Pine-marten, 186 n
Pines, too, 157,159, a8o
Pine, white, 195 n

Pinkerton, John, hit General Collection of
Voyages, dted, 404
Pinperneaux, 240,140 n, 041 n
Pinos strobut, the, 195 n
Piero let Bay, 81 n
Placentia Bay, 67
Plancoubt, Julien, 309, 314
Planispheres, mi under maps
Plat quart, en, explained, 305 n
Pleasant Bay, 97 n
Plovers, 187 n

Plums, 101-til, 146,146 a, 190, 158,189

Podophyllum peltatum, in n

Poil Bay, Le, 209 n

Point au Platon, 157 n

Point du Monts, 252 n

Pointed Cape, 89,89 n, 17a

Point Escuminac, 100 n, 101 n

Point Mitcou, 103 n

Point of Ongear, 152, 15a n

Point Platoo, 319 n

Point Rich, 88 n

Point Spear, 103 n

Poiz, 178 n

Polain, Le Capitaine, 410
Poland, 376, 387
Pome-water, 178 n
Pommerate, Charles de la, 130,161
Pommerel, Estknae, 307 n
Pompion, 178 n

Pont Briand, Claud, 130,130 n, 161

Poors, a me as tobacco, 179 n
Pope, Joreph, his Jacques Cartier, dted, 81 n,
8a n, 86 n, 90 n, 97 n, 157 n, 195 n, 414,415,
416

PopeluniAre, Jean, Sieur de la, his Les
Trots Mondes, dted, 15 n
Popular Science Monthly, dted, 165 n
Porcupines, 141,241 n, 150
Porcupine Quills, crown made of, 33, 167
Poree, Guillaume, 304
PORKESnCKB, I59

Porpoises, 215, 239, 241
Port Daniel, 103 n
Port de Brest, 19, so
Porte i Porte Bay, 91 n
Porte Croix, 1140
Portes Cartier, St. Malo, 55
Port Royal, 402

Port St. Serran, cross planted at, 20
Portugal, 15-16,15 n, 38, 318
Portugal, the King of, 354, 355, 356, 357,
359

Portuguese, named New Foundland, Bacsl-
laos, 43 n; disputed with the French at St.
Johns, 48, 237; in the Gulf of St. Lawrence,
59, 95 n; not in the St. Lawrence Rver, 59,
64, 135 n; claimed to hare named Canada,
* 35 °

Po-ra erie, 1590
PoTIER, 39O

Poul e tt e , Jehan, 130 n, 306, 307

POUTRINCOURT, 40I

Prato, Albert de, hit Toyage to America, 107 n
Pratto, Antoine du, 108 n
PatncNT, Lord of, 323, 332
Priests, probably with Cartier on hit second
reyage, 155 n, 176 n, 309 n
Prima Relation, in Cartier, Jacques
Prince Edward's Island, 6, 22, 97 n, 99 n
Pa ins ault, Jacques, 309, 313
Prisoners, in Criminals
Provence, 94,276

Prowse, D. W, his assistance, 6; his History
of New Foundland, dted, 76 n, 88 n
Pruches, i58n

Prudhomme, GuiUaumr, 370, 372
Prunos Americanus, 111 n
Peusse-trees, 259, 259 n
Ptarmigan, 248 n
Purmt, the, 83 n
Puim, to Indian game, 177 n
Pumpkins giren to Cartier, 144 n; cultivated
by the Indiana, 177,178 n; native of Levant,
178 n

Purchase, Samuel, his Pilgrimes, dted, 107 n
Fvt-de-D6me, 235 n
Ptrard, 410
Ptrula caric, 165 n

457

INDEX

Quaritch, Bernard, 418
Quarter-seal, the, explained, 305 n
Quartz, auppoaed to be diamonds, 227 o
Quebec, 135, 146, 157 n, 227 n, 406
Quebec, Abitatioo de, 406
Quebec Gazette, the,dted, 200 n
Quebec Literary and Historical Society,
Transaction* of, cited, 200 n, 406
Quebec, Province of, 414
Quercui alba, hi n
QuERCua rubra, m n, 146 n
Queue simple, 1, 390
Quibxron Point, 236 n
QuiIret, Hue, 410

Quimper-Coeentin, ships fitted at, 42, 349
Quiondo, saw the first ship which arrived at
Gaspf, 114 n

Quirpon, Cartier at, 80 n, 81 n, 222 n, 266,
267, 421; the Rapont of Cartier, 80 n; Car¬
rier sailed from Brest to, 83 n, 84 n, 421

Rabbits, 186, 186 n, 214

Rabelais, Francois, used the word Canada,

135 o

Ram±, Alfred, published Relation Original,
1-2, 408, 409; and Documents Infditi sur
Cartier, 17 n, 440,121 n
Rauzas Island, 109 n
Ramiers, 187 n

Ram uno, Giovanni Battista, published the
first voyage of Cartier, t, 395-396,400; pub¬
lished the second voyage of Cartier, 3, 397-
398; on France Roy, 366 n; used bv Miche-
lant, 408; cited, 59 n, 75 n, 89 n, 91 n, 117 n,

136 n, 144 n, 156 n, 161 □

Rance, die, 308 n
Ranciper taramdus, 179 n

Rapont, Cartier at, 19, 45,80, 266,267,411;
described by Cartier, 80 n, 81; Beauprf met
Cartier at, 222 n; now Quirpon, 80 n
Raquslat, same as Isle of Raquelle, 252 n
Raspberries, 23, 100, 107, 251, 280, 286
Rats, of large size, 186, 214; Cartier found a
pile of the skins, 160; the skins of, a source of
wealth, 160 n
Ravens, 259
Ravt, in Davy
Razorbills, 78 n
Raz sauvaget, 160 n

Recollects, the, named the St. Charles
River, 146
Red Bay, 82 n

Red Cape, same as Cape Rouge, 80 a; sup¬
posed to be Cape St. Peter, 97 n
Red Caps given to the natives, 105, 113, 291
Red Cloaks given to natives, 228
Red Copper knife, 206
Redcltppe, site of Cartier's fort, 225 n

Red foxes, 186 n
Red Indians, 87, 88 n
Red Island, 91 n

Red Ochre, used as paint by the Indiana, 87 a
Rees, 404

Reoistres de 1 'Ftat civil de St. Malo, 12 a,
jin

Regkardz, 186 n
Recnier, 410
Rebauld, G, 346
Reinel, Pedro, map of, 64, 65, 77 “
Relation de la Gaspfsie, m Le Ckrcq,
Christian

Relation de la NouveUe France, cited, 160a,
174 n, 185 a

Relation Original, i« Cartier, Jacques
Relations des Jesuits, cited, 139 n, 158 a
Renews, Cartier at, 209, 426; corruption of
Rougnouse, 209 n
Rennes, 369, 385

Report of the Spy sent by Spain to France,

34*

Reumevel, Eirienne, on Cartiers second
voyage, 307, 311; note concerning, 307 a;
related to Julien Plancouet, 309 a
Reumevel, Jehanne, 309 n
Revue Critique, cited, 14 a
Revue de Bretagne, cited, 411
Ribeiro, Diego, map of, 66, 68
Riccardiana, map of, 61, 69
Richars, 83,83 n, 268
Richelieu River, 157 n
Richmond Bay, the narrows, Cartier at, 99;
kitchen-middens near, 99 n
Richomme, Estienne, 304, 306
Ricmomme, Jeanne, 310
Ring* given to natives, 173
Rio de la Plata, the, 43, 349, 350, 351, 333
Rio de S. Quenain, 70 n
Rio Nevado, 59
Riou, Goulset, 310, 314
Ripault, Sampson, 308, 312
Ripoieke, des Barcques, 99 n
River of Boats, 99,99 n, 179
River of Caen, 252, 252 n
River of Canada, set Great River of Canada
and St. Lawrence River
River of Faith, the, 172 a
River St. Chariei, Cartier at, 28-29, 149-
146, 424; named by the RfcaUrcts, 148 B ;
Indian name, 146 n; Cartier tailed from, 428;
in also St. Ctoix

River St. Jacques, Carrier at, so, 85 n, 421;
ships from Rochelle at, 20, 86 a
River St. James, Carrier at, 85,85 n, 16 ,270;
was probably Shccatica Bay, 86 n; may have
been Baie de Napetepe, 86 a
Rmfcax daa Pobtas, 68

458

INDEX

Rivifcix de Noruebergue, 158

Rmtu de Saguenay, 70 n; m Saguenay
River

Rmfcaa du Foil, 171 n

Rivifcat du Fouez, La, 171, 171 n

Roberval, Jean Fran$oii de la Rocque, Lord
of, the “Petty King of Vimeux," 40, 120 n;
intereited in colonisation, 40; given a grant
of land with many titles, 40, 40 n, aao, 135,
041; assisted by the king, 40; in command,

316-317* 3 «* 3*3* 3 l8 . 33** 3351 muni

given him, 44, 370; extent of hit authority,
317, 3*8, 324, 366, 399; date set for his de¬
parture, 44, 235, 235 n, 236; Cartier sailed
before him, 44, 221 j did not meet Cartier at
Repont, 45; fears of hit disaster, 46; met
Cartier at St. Johns, 48, 236; date of his
departure, 48, 235, 236; Cartier disregarded
his orders, 49, 237; reached Charktbourg
Royal, 49, 237; named Francy Roy, 49;
called the river Francy Prime, 49; began a
settlement, 49, 237-238; sent Sainterre for
supplies, 49,238; ordered to return to France,
49-30; kept to his purpose through a hard
winter, 50; embarked to explore, 50, 241;
disaster followed, 50; accounts of his move¬
ments lost, 50; Sainterre probably arrived
with supplies, 50, 35^360; Cartier is pre¬
sumed to have carried him to France, 50, 52,
373; needed in France, 50-51, 53, 59; before
the Court, 51, 52, 53; brave but unfit to lead
a colony, 53; Cartier understood him, 54; his
end unknown, 54; said to have been assas¬
sinated, 54.55; Cartier to go with him, 219-
220 a man of influence, 120 n; his supplies not
ready, 220; at Honfleur, 221; Cartier sent to
inquire about, 224; Cartier showed gold to,
226, 227 n; ships furnished by and for him,
»35* 37*1 3995 companions, 235, 260;
prisoners assigned to, 327,329,330,333,334,
337 . 338 . 34 '. 34 ». 343 J «* l"“l « Cape
Breton, 235 n, 236 n; at Chef de Boys, 236;
at Belle Ue, 236; at New Foundland, 236;
examined diamonds and gold, 227 n, 236;
quarrel between his men and the Portuguese,
237; number with him, 238, 242; rations
short and people ill, 239; a good judge, 239;
left his niece on an island, 249 n-250 n; his
pilot, ifo; extract! from Registers concern¬
ing, 335; his accounts to be examined, 3(1,
362; pardon to Sainterre, 363; lettres patent,
315,322,323; power of attorney to Sainterre,
366; bit accounts disagreed with Cartier's,
52, 370, 371, 375; edict given him control,
399; account of his voyage, 399; mentioned,
406,410

RoaxavAL, Marguerite, romantic story of,
249 n, 250 n, 338 n

Rosin, American, 158 n
Robinson, Lewis, his Dictionary of Com¬
merce, cited, 84
Rocamadour, 192 n

Roche d'Aaron, foundation of St. Milo, 9;
refuge of Welsh pilgrims, 9
Rochelle, 20 n, 48, 85, 86, 86 n, 235, 259,
260 366, 384
Rochelle**, the, 384
Rockt Bay, 8j n

Rocqtix, John Francis de la, 219-210,399
Rornn, Ponce, 395
Rogue, Guillaume, 364
RoqiiEroRT, his Glossaire de la Langue
Romane, cited, 117
R OQU EM A DO, 191, 192 n
Rosa centifolio, 94 n
Rosa luddi, 94 n

Rosaries given to Hochelagins, 168
Roses, 11, 23; Cabbage, 94n; Damask, 94 n;
of Provence, 94, 94 n, 176; Red, 107, 287
Rose-trees, 251
Roudes, 338 n

Rouen, 54,210,111, 322, 317, 33 *t 33 *. 34 »*
361, 370, 374. 390
Rougemont, Phillippe, 130 n, 192
Rougnouse, Cartier at, 209,426; ttt Renews
Round Head, not Cape Delstte, 91 n
Round Islands, Cartier at, 138, 418; now
Seven Islands, 138 n
Roussignolx, 158 n
Roux el, Perrine, 310 n
Royal Society of Canada, Transaction of,
cited, 76 n, 81 n, 85 n, 88 n, 97 n, 101 n, 115 n
Royeze, Mons de, 50,135, 242
Roxb, Jehan, map of, 70
Ruaodaye, Sieur de la, 367 n; m» Grout, Jean
Rubies from Saguenay, 199
Rue de Buhen, St. Malo, 55
Ruel, Guycn, 310 n
Ruel, Fenine, 307 n
Ruel, Piene, 3100
Rumxi, Lancelot, 13 n, 14 n
Ruben Manor, 55

Rcisixoox introduced the word Cathay, 254 n
Rut, John, 15,107
Rutscn, Johann, map of, 66
Rte, 100, 107, 280, 286

Sabin, Joseph, Dictionary of Books Relating
to America, dted, 15 n
Sables, 377
Saco Indians, 229 n

Sagaed, Dictionnaire de la Langue Huron,
dted, 159 n; Grand Voyage du Pays des
Huron*, dted, 185 n; Histoire du Canada,
dted, 1460,158 n, 159 n, 178 n, 179 n, 180 n
i860

459

INDEX

Saguenay, derivation of the name, 140 n;
copper from, 27, 136, 170, 171, 190, 106;
Cartier at, 27, 1$, 46; Indiana at, 36, 199,
206; Roberval, Viceroy of, 40, *35,

366; beginning of the way to, 140, *17, 369;
silver from, 170,171; mountains and islands
of, 184, 189; people of, clothed, 189,190;
streams of, 189; to be described, *03; riches
of, 220; Cartier desired to visit, *19, 414;
Robcrval to explore, 315, 320,3*3, 318, 33a,
336, 340, 343; a part of Asia, 316; map of,
dedicated to Hakluyt, 367; mentioned, 395,
397, 399,400,405,407
Sago in at River, on Cabots map, 70 nj Car¬
rier at the mouth of rite, 1 40, 414; savages at,
141; described, 141 n, 253-154; beginning
of fresh water, 188; a highway, 189, 199 n;
Indians at, 206; dangerous, 207
Saouenat, Sea of the, on the map, 253,
empties into Ses of Cathay, 254; Nonunbega
on, a$8

Sake, natives'name for beans, 111, tti n
Saimct Guillaume, i« Isles St. William, 131
Saxnct Maurs, 304, 306
Saint Anthoine, France, 308 n
Saint Anthony, Cartier at, 85,169, 421; now
Rocky Bay and Base d'Omar, 85 n
Saint Barnabas Day, 19,84*109,269,421,416
St. Catherine, Harbor of, 18,76
St. Catherine, Island in Golfe det Chitraux,
19; named by Cartier, 82, 82 n, 267; now
Schooner Island, 82 n
St. Catheune's Day, 76 n
St. Caoix, Cartier at, 28-29, 35 * 45 * ‘ 45 " 1 4*,
147,148,150,172,222,412,425; cross erected
at, 36; Cartier departed from, 36,205,426;^
true site of, 145 n, 146 n, 157 n, 200 n;
Indian name of, 146 n; same as Achelacy,
157 n; situation of, 185, 189-190; length of
Cartier's stay at, 185, 193-194; ship left at,
198, 200; Carrier not there on his third voy¬
age, 222, 223; named by Cartier, 424 n; i«
River St. Charles.

Saints xax, Psul d'Aurilbae, Seigneur de St,
Nectaine, sent bich to Franee for supplies,
49, 238; ordered to return, 49-50, 360; sup¬
posed to have arrived, 50, 238-239; on Car¬
rier's fourth voyage, 52; pardon and power
of attorney, 53, 332, 363, 365, 366; as a
lieutenant, 235,359,360; to deliver criminals,
332,333,334; his commission, 359; captain of
L'Anae, 363; delay, 364; meeting of crew,
364; no) gudty of homicide, 365
St. Fammti, Lucas Jacq., 308,308 n, 311
St. John's Day, 92,274
St. Johns, N. F., 14,15 n, 28, 48,236,237
St. John the Baptist, Festival of, 21, 92,101
n, 421, 424

St. John the Baptist, headland, 21; mt Cape
Sc John

St. Joseyh Mission established, 186 a
St. Julian, 90 n
St. Lawrence, France, 360
St. Laurent Island, now Isle d'Orleans, 143 n
St. Lawrence, Gulf of, Cartier's tout*
through, 5; early visited by Europeans, 59,
59 n; not on Cantino'fc chart, 59; not near
Rio Nevado, 59; not noticed by Coca, 63;
known to Fagundaa, 61; an Viega's map,
68; Castle Bay at, 79 n; Cartier at, 79^ 399,
410; tft Gaaong, W. F.

St. Lawrence Harbor, same as PkEage Bay,
*34 a, *37

St. Lawrence River, natives famaUar with,
22; Cartier ignorant of his nearness to, 24,
115 n; Cartier in, 27; why did the king prefer
this to the Hudson ? 39; Roberval g r an ted
land on, 40; called Francy Prime, 49, 238;
Cartier would not return to, with Roberval,
49; Alphooae at, 49, S35 □, 236 n; third
voyage of Cartier to, 52, 53; a benefit to St.
Malo, 58; not known to Europeans, 59, 64,
135 n; on Viega's map, 68; discovery of,
due to Cartier, 71; maize at, ill □;fecundity
of, 128; greatest river ever seen, 128; dis¬
covery of, claimed by the Portuguese ,135 a;
Haze Island an anchorage in, 141 n; a
boundary of Stadaconf, 146 n; seen from
Mount Royal, 169 n; and the Ottawa, 1700;
00 map of Alphonse, 256; Indians fishing on,
412; see also Great River of Canada
St. Leonard, France, 338 n
St. Leonariui Bay, 101,101 n, 280, 422
St. Lwairs, 101, 101 n
St. Malo, a title given to the Bishop of
Gwent, 9

St. Malo, France, founded on the Roche
d'Aaron, 9; origin of name, 9-10; birthplace
of Cartier, 10, 406; description of, 10 n;
constable of, 12, 13 n; the sBouf of, 17, 25,
303,304; Cartier tailed from, on his first voy¬
age, 18, 75, 79 n, 263, 421; Cartier returned
to, at end of first voyage, 25, 120, 296, 4x3;
Easter of 1535 at, 26, 129; departure of Car-
tier on his second voyage, 26, 129, 423; ar¬
rival of Cartier at end of his Koood voyage,
37, 210,426; criminals gathered at» found
a colony, 41, 334, 338 n; spy from Spain at,
41-42, 43, 349 n; number of men and ships
sent from, 42,220, 349,349 n; Cartier tailrd
from, on his third voyage, 44, 221, 426; no
date recorded of Cartier's arrival at end trf
third voyage, 51 {Cartier a witness in court at,
52; the home of Cartier, 55, 344, 390; Cartier
an important man in, 58; derived dis tin ctio n
from Cartier, 58; had unrestricted trade in

460

INDEX

the New Land, 58, 386-387, 388; plague at,
71; Cartier died at, 7a; near St. Servan, 85 n;
ialaodi and the silltti of suggeated name! to
Cartier, 90 n, 96 n; bishop* of, 119 n; roll of
Cartier’* aew at, 130 n; piece of the Petite
Hermine in Museum of, 100; Roberval at,
aio; Jalobert and NouQ sent to, 114; As¬
sembly of Burgesses at, 303, 305; Barb6 a
common name in, 309 n; people of, thwart
Cartier, 316; savage* baptized in, 339 n,
340 n; Cartier'* houae in, 345-346; Cartier «
accounts settled at, 369-370; savages and
fur* brought to, 377; trade of, with Canada,
38a, 384, 387,388; people of, against Chau*
▼in, 390, 392; influence of people over the
savages, 390-391; mentioned, 306, 307 n,
308 n, 309 n, 310 n, 344, 346, 351,367, 368,
369, 370, 371, 375, 376, 388, 399, 406, 411
St. Malo, Archive* of, 307
St. Maiqaut River, 184 n
St. Martin** Day, 103, 28a
St. Martin'* Haven, as, 103,103 n, 107,182,
287,422

St. Mart's Bay, 67
St. Mart's Island, 133 n
St. Maurice River, 172 n
St. NectairX, Seigneur de, 235 n; jm also
Saintene, Paul d’Auxilhon
Sr. Nicholas Harbor, 133, 133 n, 434
Saixtokge, 245,260 n
St. Paul** Church, London, 107 n
St. Peter, Festival of, 118,294,422
St. Pris, 342, 343, 344
St. Servan, Canada, 85, 85 n, 86 n, 269, 421
St. Servan, France, 85 n
St. Ydeuce, 345
Saldaignx, Thomas de, 374, 375
Saux Alba, 158 n
Salts discolor, 158 n
Salmon, 23, 107, 188, 239, 240, 287
Salmon, Christofle, 302
Salt, not used by Indians, 33, 112, 165, 169,
183, 240, 290; wanted by Taignoagny, 182,
182 n; prairie intrusted with, 183 n; tax on,
388, 389; industry controlled by one com¬
pany, 388 n

Samal6 de Lila, 349, 351; ut also St. Malo

SAMsotcq, Briaad, 308, 311

Sambotte, Bertrand, 308 n

Sand Bay, 89 n

Sand-hill crane, 158 n

Sand Point, 184

“Sand ass,” 158 n

Sandt Hook, 97 n, 98 n

Sanson, 322

Saboom, tame as tames, 188 n
Sargue, 188 D

Saitres, abundant, 188; obsolete word, 1B8 a

Sassafras, 215 n
Satadin, j tt Scitadin
Sault, 333

Saumur, Lucas, i« St. Fammys
Savages, why Cartier so named the natives,
109, 288; ut Indians and Micmaca
Savages' Cape, 100, 101 n, 279, 4**5 DOW
North Cape, too n
Scalping, 174 n

Schoolcraft, Henry R., Algic Researches,
cited, 175 n; Archives of Aboriginal Knowl¬
edge, cited, ITT n; History of Indian Tribes,
cited, 104 n, 107 n
Schooner Island, 81 n, 82 n
Scitadin, 185, 185 n, 200
Set u softer us volu cells, 187 n
Sciurus Cardinensis, 187 n
Sciurus Hudsonius, 187 n
Scoter, 187 n

Scotland, great seal of, 305 n

Scurvt in Cartier’> crew, 35,191, 191 n

Sea-ducks, 187 n

Sea-hods, 187,188

Sea-horses, 27, 95, 138,184, 187

Seals, color* of, explained, 362 n

Sea-oxen, 95

Sea of Cathay, 254; ut Cathay
Sea of fresh water, probably Lake Ontario,
189, 1890
Sea-wolves, 140,206

Seeds from France, planted in Canada, 46,

»5

Seigneur, as a title, 55

Saqu art, Guillaume, 308, 308 n, 312

Serins, 158 n

Seven Islands, 138 n, 151-252,156
Seville, officials of, to send spy to St. Malo,
35 «

Seville, Cardinal of, 43,353,357
Shad, 139 n

Shakespeare, William, play, cited, 225 a
Shea, John G., his Le Clercq, cited, 113, 114;
hi* Charlevoix cited, 404
Snecatica Bay, 20 n, 86 n
Sherbeook Street, Montreal, a boundary of
Hochelaga, 161 n
Sh eshatapoosh Indiana, 104
Shirt* given to native*, 113, 291
Shoe* of the natives, 240
Shot, weight of, in time of Henry H, 152 n
Si bills, the, 14
Sieve, at a title, 55
Silenne de Hochelaga, 136
Sillon, explained, 96 n; et penny, 98 n
Silver, from the west, 170, 170 n; found by
Cartier, 46, 226; from the Indies, 347, 348;
at Panama, 352; beyond Bacallaot, 353
Skraelincs, 109 n

461

INDEX

f

Slatxstohx, 126

Smith, Buckingham, Colecdon de Docu¬
ments, cited, 43 n, 299, 347
Smith College, 5
Smith, John, inn

SNAFFMG'rURTLE, I4I n
Show, why much in Canada, *59
Snow-goose, 158 n

SociiTi Royal du Canada, 411,413,414,415,
4*7

Soil, fertility of the, 46,118
Somme, the, 210 n
Sophia, 354
Sorel Islands, 159 n
Soto, 351

Souchart, Boullet, 306
SoURDIS, 4IO
South America, 13, 14(1
Southern Sea, 355
South Point, 1150
Southwest Cape, 97 n, 98 n
Spain, pushed her discoveries, 15; her claims,
Ij, 16; and the Bull, 15; compared with the
New Land, 23; a truce with France, 38; the
policy of, 41; watched France, 41, 347, 351,
353, 357; tent a vessel to Cape de Verde, 41;
dared not openly to attack France, 43, 352,
353 * 355 * compared to New France, 106,
286; converted heathens, 127; waiting for
gold and silver from the west, 347, 35a
Spanish Archives, 299
Spa sous, 240 n
Spa rid*, the, 240 n
Sparrows, 158 n
Spabus of the Latins, the, 240 n
Spice Islands, the, 59
Spices, 41,42,43,114,215 n, 348-349* 35 °
Spinus tristis, 158 n
Spruce, white, 195 n
Squashes, 178 n
Squirrels, 186, 187 n
Squoutxrbquaihei, 178 n
StadaconI, distance from St. Croix, 28;
natives of, welcome the adventurers, 29;
described, 35; governed by Agona, 45;
called Eitadas, 70 n; seat of Do ana cons,
146; fertility of, 146; name defined, 146 n;
its locality now a part of Quebec, 146 n, 185;
people from, visited Cartier, I47; Cartier
visited, 173-174, 415; destroyed, 174 n; Al¬
ness of die people, 190; people from, at
Cartier's ship, 194; Donnacooa left, 196;
strangers at, 197-198; Guyot sent to, 198,
425; people of, did not come to the ships, 200;
Indians congregated at, 205, 230-231;
people of, bring provisions to Cartier's cap-
rives, 205, 426; Cartier did not visit it on his
third voyage, 222, 416

Stadaconxam, the, 30, 35, 175 n, 176, soj,
426

Stadin, same as Sdtadin, 185 n
Staptin, GDles, 309,313
Stags, 179,179 n, 186,196, 241,259
Stearmo Island, 89 S

Stephens, Hiram B, Jacques Cartier died,
82 n, 89 n, 95 n, 97 n, 118 n, 129 a, 133 n.+i*
Stevens, Henry, 418

Sticks used to convey information, 47, 229,
2290

Stock-fish country, 43 n
Stocking* worn by Indians, 176
S teach it, William, Histone and Travaile,
dted,178 n

Strait of BeBe Isle, Cartier pswed, 19, 70,
79 n, 119 n, 413; early known id fishermen
20 n; same as Castle Bay, 79 n; other names
of, 80 n; its bearing. So n; the entrance of,

MS •

Strait of Cbasteaulx, 30a; ut Bays de Cna*-
tesulx

Strait of Northumberland, 101 n

Strait St. Peter, 24, 27, 118, 118 n, 294, 423

Strawberries, 94, 100, 107, 259, 276, 2*4

Sturgeons, 240

SuCKAdHOCH, 165 n

Sugar-maples, 224 n

Sula bassana, 79 n

Sully, Lord of, 317

Sun, our holy faith follows the, 127

Sue queue double, explained, 322 n, 325 n

Sue queue simple, explained, 332, 333, 335,

J*

Surmullets, 240,240 n

SURREAU,338

Swallows, 187
Swans, 158,187
Stlvain, L. F., 415-416
Sylvester’s Point, 99 n

Table Head, 115 n
Tadoussac, 140 n

Taignoaont, capture a by Cartier, 23, 113;
his friends beard hit voice, 28; landed, 143;
met his relatives, 144; related the marvels be
bad seen, 28,145; belonged to Doonacona's
tribe, 147 n; unwilling to return to tbe ship,
29, 148, 149; evasive in regard to going *°
Hodbelaga, 19; refused to go, 29-30, 14*,
150; acted as interpreter, 149,150; deceitful,
149; quarreled with Dom Agaya, 151-ipi
reported that Cartier killed two natives, tpi
in the artifice to prevent Cartier going to
Hocbelaga, 153, 154, 155; asked Cartier »
leave a hostage, 155; met Cartier, 1735
guided Cartier to Stadaconf, 173; desired to
be baptised, 174; advised the natives not to

462

INDEX

visit the ship, (So, 181; a knave, 18a; asked
far bread and salt, 57, 18s; made peace with
Carder, 183; told of the Saguenay, 189;
feigned to have been hunting, 196; visited by
Guyot, 198; suspicious behavior, 198, *00;
asked Carder to take Agohanna to France,
199, zoo; to be captured, 199; parley with
Dorn Agaya, 100; did not expect to return to
France, 101; went to the ship, 101; advised
Donnacona not to enter the fort, 202; made
a prisoner, 36, 201; hia treachery exposed,
327,137 n; baptized, 339 n, 340 n; cause of
hia death, 39; Cartier dared not tell of hia
death, 45, ala

Taiguragni same as Taignoagny, 144 n
Tala visa, 354
Talbot, m* Esmery, Pierre
Talxiot, went to the Saguenay, 341
Taktamoub, 97 □

Tafptr, Marietta de la, with Roberval, 338 n
Tabtakt, 359

Taupitbe, Francois, 337, 333
Tax as on fireplaces, 389 n; on salt, 388
Tatgnat, defined, 83 n
TxquzMOMDAY, 185, i86, 186 n
Ternaux-Compans, H,, Archives des Voy¬
ages, cited, 405, 406
Terra-Firha, 137
Tbebk del Fuego, 15
Terre Neufue, 348
Terre Neuve, 75; ut New Foundland
Tit rao Canadensis, 158 n
Ttrt de Vache, 89 n
Tevbtres, the, 158 n

Thevet, Andrd, Cosmographie UniverseOe,
cited, 39 n, 54, 55,159, 160, 349; Grande
Insulaire, dtad, 149
Thistle-bird, the, 158 n
Thomas, Philippe, 309, 313
Thomas, Pierre, 338 n
Thorn, the, inn
Thorn-plums, 146 n
Three Estates, 387, 388, 388 n
Three Guts, the, 91 n
Three Rivers, 172, 171 n, 415
Thrushes, 158, 158 n, 187
Thuta OcddenuUs, 146 n
Tirrins, his Dicdonnaire, dtad, 78 n
TlD MARSH, w. T.

Tiennot, MV Cape Thiennot
Tierra de Bacall aos, defined, 43 n; mv
BacaHao*, and New Foundland
Tilly, Raoul de, Premier Voyage du Carder,
dtad, 415

Tin, bellf of, given to natives, no, 389;
brooches given to natives, 330; buttons, 328;
rings of, 173
Tiortiaxi, 161 n

Tionnk, Jehan, 335
Tobacco, 178, 179, 179 n » **4
Tobacco People, 174 n
Toledo, Cardinal of, 347, 350
Toni autre* ouvrages, explained, 324 »
Torrin, 410

Toroesillas, Convention of, 15 n
Toulouse, 337,336. 33 8 n
Tour, Alvaro de la, 374, 375
To U XA1NI, 129 n

Tournon, Cardinal, Franfois de, 323, 335,
3 * 5 “

Tours, 341
Tout** lales, 30,85 D
Tka cadi gash Point, 106 n
Tramontana, 396

Transactions of the Royal Society of
Canada, died, 391 n
Treble Hill, 131 n

Trees at North Cape, too; at Bay Chaleur,

103

Trees of Life, 159, 259 n
Treoate, 101 n

T rich echos rosm arus, 94 n, 138 n, 187 n
Trois Rivieres, crow planted near, 17a, 415 n
Trosi, Edwin, published a reprint of Brd
R6dt, 3,407; his edition of Lescarbot, 188 n
403, 408; and Relation Original, 409
Trout, 188
Trout River, 138 n
Truhlet, 14 n

Trudamans, the, 147,171 n, 174, 175 n
Trumpeter-swan, 158 n
Turk, the, Francis I, desired to tee him
powerful, 38
Turnip teed town, 335
Turtle-doves, 101, 158, 187,159, 380
Tutonagut, 70 n, 16a n, 238
Two fair Islands, 81 o

Ulmus Americana, 146 n
Unicorns, 159
Unio ventricotus, 166 n
Uria, 78 n

Ursus Americans, 180 n
Ussus meridmut, 79 n
Uvularia sassQifolia, 94 n

Valsntinois, Count of, 343
Valle, Marquis del, 358-359
Vanves, 412
Vauzelll, 338 n
Veerie, Jehsnne de la, 338 n
Vxneto, Senate, 396
Venus mercenaria, 165 n
Verazano, Giovanni, 14, 15, ifi, 38-39, 4 x
77 °» 39 ^* 397 » 4*3
Vebderte, Madam, 340 n

463

INDEX

Verdxrye, Modi, 340 n
Verreau, L’Abb^ Hoi pice, Calendrier Civil,
cited, 90, 91, 97, 103, 313, 416-417; Ques¬
tion 1 de Loii, a ted, 417, 418
Versailles, grocers of,use archives as waite-
P*P cr » 4

Viegas, Caspar, map of, 67,68} his ignorance
and authorities, 68-69
VixNNOisE, Dauphin of, 343
Vienne, Jean de, 4x0
Vientes, Lord of, 323, 33a
Vionaud, Henry, 2, 6
VlONECTE, R. B., 304
Vilaine, 348 n

Villauroux, Guillaume B., 306
Villeson, Lord of, 323, 332
Villigagnon, 4x0
VlLLE-ES-GARDZ, La, 344

Villxnxup, Mons, de, 242
Villeneuve, Abbf of, 386
VlMEUX, 220 n
Vine apples, 178 n
Vines, 146, 158, 186, 226
Virginia, 401
Vmt cor difolia, 156 n
Vocabulary of the natives, 210-215

VuLPES ful TUI, 186 n
VUHENOT, 396

Waldsurg-Woltxgg, Prince of, 65
WaldieemOllxr, Martin, map of, 65,66
Walnuts, 157

Walrus, 94,94 n, 138,187 n, 276
Walter, Giles, 367, 367 □, 368
Wampum, given to Cartier, 37; same as
Etnogny, 165 n; described, 165 n
Warm, the, 179 n
Watermelons, 178 n
Welter, H., 418
Western Lands, ta8

Western Passage, Cartier failed to find the,
119 n

West Indies, 367, 368
West Lake, 97 n, 98 n
Whale Harbor, Carrier at, 82, 83, 267; now
Red Bay, 82 n, 83 n
Whales, 142, 184, 187
Wheat, wild, 23
Whippoorwills, 158 n
Whit River, 172, 172 a, 425
Whitbourn, Richard, Discourse and Dis¬
covery of New Foundland, cited, 87, 88
White Brothers, the, 303 n
White Elms, 100,180
White Head, Carrier at, 108; rides at, 108 n

White Horse Island, 97 n, 98 n
White Thorns, 146, 225
Widgeons, 187

Widows among savages, 176-177, 177 n

Wild ass, the, 179 n

Wild com, 94

Wild geese, 187

Wild oati, 94

Will of Jacques Carrier, 344
Williams, Roger, Key to the Language of
America, cited, 165 n, 178 n
Wilui, William, Documentary History of
Maine, dted, 410
Willows, 100, 158, 158 n, 280
Winsor, Justin, Anticipations of Carrier's
Voyage, dted, 417} Narrative and Critical
History of America, dted, 97 n, 412; Result!
in Europe of Carrier's Explorations, dted,
4*7

WoLtxY, Cardinal, 107 n
Wolves, abundant, 186,186 n; fur of, pnRcd,
1870; a pest, 187 n
Wood bland, 83, 83 n, 268
Wood-pigeons, tot, 187, 187 a, 280
Wood William, New England's Prospect,
dted, 1590,1650,17711,178 a, 179 a, 180 n,
187 n

Woody Island, 83 n
WObtzmberg, 65
Wtan dot language, the, 107

Xajnctohge, 396, 406

Yale de Bacchus, L, 143 a
Year, the beginning of, in France, 305 a, 306 o
Yellow foxes, 186 n
Yellow henbane, 179 n
Yellow perch, 240 n
Yellow Sea, 2540
Yews, too, 280
Yrz, at Stadaeoef, 146 n
Yklai des sues, same as Isle of Birds, 77 ®
Yhlas das Demonios, 250 n
Ysle ea Couldrn, L\ 142 n
Ysles ea Lievrn, L\ 207 n
Yule, Henry, Cathay and the way to, dted
254 n; Marco Polo, dted, 254 n
Yvza, d'Evreux, 410
Y von, Guillemette, 307 n

Zea mays, in n

Zine used in making Laton, 228 n
Zis, bow cultivated, 177
Zonoteichia leucophrys, 158 n

464

*

3 2044 021 007

THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES.

Harvard Collaga Wldanar Library
Cambridge MA 02138 (SI 7) 495-2413
