Substance and Function, and Einstein's Theory of Relativity (Ernst Cassirer (William Curtis Swabey and Marie Collins Swabey, trans.), 1923)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/substanceandfunc033163mbp). The 1923 English edition: Cassirer's critical theory of concepts, with his essay on Einstein's relativity.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

TIGHT  BINDING  BOOK


?r

<  OU_160645>


Substance
and  Function


AND


Einstein's
Theory  of


COPYRIGHT  1923

BY

THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  COMPANY
CHICAGO


Copyright  1953  by
Dover  Publications  Inc.

This  book is  an  unabridged
reprint  of  the  volume  as  originally
published  in  1923.


Made  in  United  States  of  America


PREFACE

The  investigations  contained  in  this  volume  were  first  prompted
by  studies  in  the  philosophy  of  mathematics.  In  the  course  of  an
attempt  to  comprehend  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  mathematics
from  the  point  of  view  of  logic,  it  became  necessary  to  analyse  more
closely  the  function  of  the  concept  itself  and  to  trace  it  back  to  its
presuppositions.  Here,  however,  a  peculiar  difficulty  arose:  the
traditional  logic  of  the  concept,  in  its  well-known  features,  proved
inadequate  even  to  characterize  the  problems  to  which  the  theory
of  the  principles  of  mathematics  led.  It  became  increasingly  evident
that  exact  science  had  here  reached  questions  for  which  there  existed
no  precise  correlate  in  the  traditional  language  of  formal  logic.  The
content  of  mathematical  knowledge  pointed  back  to  a  fundamental
form  of  the  concept  not  clearly  defined  and  recognized  within  logic
itself.  In  particular,  investigations  concerning  the  concepts  of
the  series  and  of  the  limit,  the  special  results  of  which,  however,
could  not  be  included  in  the  general  exposition  of  this  book,  con-
firmed this  view  and  led  to  a  renewed  analysis  of  the  principles  of  the
construction  of  concepts  in  general.

The  problem  thus  defined  gained  more  general  meaning  when  it
became  clear  that  it  was  in  no  way  limited  to  the  field  of  mathe-
matics, but  extended  over  the  whole  field  of  exact  science.  The
systematic  structure  of  the  exact  sciences  assumes  different  forms
according  as  it  is  regarded  in  different  logical  perspectives.  Thus
an  attempt  had  to  be  made  to  advance  from  this  general  point  of  view
to%the  forms  of  conceptual  construction  of  the  special  disciplines, —
of  arithmetic,  geometry,  physics  and  chemistry.  It  did  not  accord
with  the  general  purpose  of  the  enquiry  to  collect  special  examples
from  the  particular  sciences  for  the  support  of  the  logical  theory,
but  it  was  necessary  to  make  an  attempt  to  trace  their  systematic
structures  as  wholes,  in  order  that  the  fundamental  unitary  relation
by  which  these  structures  are  held  together  might  be  revealed  more
distinctly.  I  did  not  conceal  from  myself  the  difficulty  of  carrying
out  such  a  plan;  I  finally  resolved  to  make  the  attempt  only  because
the  value  and  significance  of  the  preliminary  work  already  accom-
plished within  the  special  sciences  became  increasingly  evident  to  me.

iii


IV  PREFACE

Particularly  in  the  exact  sciences,  the  investigator  has  turned  from
the  special  problems  to  the  philosophical  foundations  with  ever
clearer  consciousness  and  energy.  Whatever  one  may  judge  in  detail
of  the  results  of  these  researches,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  logi-
cal problem  has  thereby  been  greatly  and  directly  advanced.  I
have,  therefore,  sought  to  base  the  following  exposition  upon  the
historical  development  of  science  itself  and  upon  the  systematic
presentation  of  its  content  by  the  great  scientists.  Although  we
cannot  consider  all  the  problems  that  arise  here,  nevertheless,  the
special  logical  point  of  view  which  they  represent  must  be  carried
through  and  verified  in  detail.  What  the  concept  is  and  means  in
its  general  function  can  only  be  shown  by  tracing  this  function
through  the  most  important  fields  of  scientific  investigation  and
representing  it  in  general  outline.

The  problem  receives  new  meaning  when  we  advance  from  purely
logical  considerations  to  the  conception  of  knowledge  of  reality.
The  original  opposition  of  thought  and  being  breaks  up  into  a  number
of  different  problems,  which  are,  nevertheless,  connected  and  held  in
intellectual  unity  by  their  common  point  of  departure.  Whenever,
in  the  history  of  philosophy,  the  question  as  to  the  relation  of  thought
and  being,  of  knowledge  and  reality,  has  been  raised,  it  has  been
dominated  from  the  first  by  certain  logical  presuppositions,  by  cer-
tain views  about  the  nature  of  the  concept  and  judgment.  Every
change  in  this  fundamental  view  indirectly  produces  a  complete
change  in  the  way  in  which  the  general  question  is  stated.  The
system  of  knowledge  tolerates  no  isolated  "formal"  determination
without  consequences  in  all  the  problems  and  solutions  of  knowledge.
The  conception,  therefore,  that  is  formed  of  the  fundamental  nature
of  the  concept  is  directly  significant  in  judging  the  questions  of  fact
which  are  generally  considered  under  "Criticism  of  Knowledge,"
("Erkenntniskritik")  or  "Metaphysics."  The  transformation  which
these  questions  undergo  when  regarded  from  the  general  point  of
view  that  is  gained  by  criticism  of  the  exact  sciences  and  the  new
direction  which  their  solution  takes,  Part  II  of  the  book  attempts  to
show.  Both  parts,  though  seemingly  separate  in  content,  are  united,
nevertheless,  in  a  philosophical  point  of  view;  both  attempt  to  repre-
sent a  single  problem  which  has  expanded  from  a  fixed  center,  drawing
ever  wider  and  more  concrete  fields  into  its  circle.

ERNST  CASSIRER.


TRANSLATORS'  PREFACE

It  was  thought  that  there  was  need  for  some  comprehensive  work
in  the  English  language  on  the  philosophy  of  the  exact  sciences
which  would  do  full  justice  to  the  newer  developments  in  mathe-
matical and  physical  speculation  while  showing  at  the  same  time
the  historical  connections  of  these  tendencies.  It  seemed  that  the
two  works  of  Professor  Ernst  Cassirer  herewith  presented  fulfilled
these  requirements  best  of  all.  The  reader  will  find  here  a  construc-
tive and  systematic  survey  of  the  whole  field  of  the  principles  of
the  exact  sciences  from  the  standpoint  of  a  logical  idealism,  \jjhich
is  historically  derived  from  Kant,  but  which  lacks  the  fatal  rigidity
of  the  latter' s  system.  As  Professor  Cassirer  develops  his  logical  or
critical  idealism  it  becomes  a  doctrine  of  creative  intelligence.  His
doctrine  is  neither  idealism,  pragmatism  nor  realism  as  these  terms
are  understood  in  our  English-speaking  philosophy;  it  is  rather  a
positivistic  and  non-static  rationalism,  which  seeks  to  preserve
the  spirit  which  unites  Plato,  Descartes,  Leibniz  and  Kant  and  to
show  how  this  spirit  reaches  its  fulfillment  in  the  modern  develop-
ment of  mathematical  and  physical  theory.

The  first  part  of  the  present  book,  Substanzbegriff  und  Funktions-
begriff  was  published  in  1910,  while  the  second  part,  which  we  have
called  the  Supplement,  Zur  Einstein? schcn  Relativitatstheorie,  ap-
peared in  1921.  The  intervening  period  was,  of  course,  one  of
immense  importance  for  the  philosophy  of  physics,  since  it  marked
the  development  of  the  new  and  revolutionary  theory  of  relativity.
In  ^accordance  with  the  fundamental  maxim  of  his  critical  method
Professor  Cassirer  based  his  analysis  in  1910  on  the  historical  state
of  science,  which  was  still  dominated  by  the  Newtonian  conceptions
of  space  and  time.  On  the  ground  of  the  same  maxim,  he  has  since
taken  account  of  the  new  theory  of  relativity  and  has,  with  good
logical  justification,  seen  in  the  latter  the  relative  completion  and
realization  of  the  historical  tendency  which  he  had  described  in  his
earlier  works.  Professor  Cassirer's  philosophy  may  be  regarded
as  a  fundamental  epistemological  "theory  of  relativity"  which  sets
forth  a  general  philosophical  standpoint  from  which  Einstein's  theory
is  seen  to  be  only  the  latest  and  most  radical  fulfillment  of  the  motives


vi  TRANSLATORS'  PREFACE

which  are  inherent  in  mathematical  and  physical  science  as  such.
While  Professor  Cassirer  has  had  his  fundamental  principles  confirmed
rather  than  disproved  by  this  recent  development,  his  discussion
in  Chapter  IV,  Section  VI,  of  Substance  and  Function  must  be  taken
in  connection  with  his  later  statements.

With  regard  to  the  translation,  the  translators  are  aware  that  a
good  deal  of  the  vigor  and  savor  of  the  original  has  escaped  in  the
process  of  substituting  correct  but  colorless  terms  for  the  more  vivid
language  of  the  original.  Accuracy  and  clarity  have  been  their
chief  aim.  They  alone  are  responsible  for  the  italicized  paragraph
headings,  which  were  inserted  because  it  was  thought  that  the  book
might  be  used  as  a  text  or  reference  work  in  connection  with  an
advanced  course  in  the  Theory  of  Knowledge  and  that  perhaps  these
guide-posts  might  help  the  student  in  finding  his  way  through  the
difficult  material.

Professor  Cassirer  himself  kindly  read  the  entire  work  in  manuscript
and,  in  a  friendly  letter,  states  that  "nach  der  Gesamteindruck  .  .  .
besteht  fur  mich  kein  Zweifel  dass  der  Sinn  des  Ganzen  richtig  getroffen
und  wiedergegeben  ist."  We  wish  herewith  to  express  our  hearty
thanks  to  Professor  Cassirer  for  permitting  us  to  translate  his  works
as  well  as  for  his  trouble  in  reading  the  manuscript  of  the  translation
and  for  his  courtesy  in  the  whole  transaction.

WILLIAM CURTIS SWABEY,
MARIE  COLLINS  SWABEY.


CONTENTS
PART  I

THE  CONCEPT  OF  THING  AND  THE  CONCEPT  OF  RELATION

CHAPTER  I

ON  THE  THEORY  OP  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS

I.  New  developments  in  logic. — The  concept  in  Aristotelian  logic. —
Purpose  and  nature  of  the  generic  concept. — The  problem  of
abstraction. — The  metaphysical  presuppositions  of  Aristotelian

logic. — The  concept  of  substance  in  logic  and  metaphysics 3

II.  The  psychological  criticism  of  the  concept  (Berkeley). — The  psy-
chology of  abstraction . — Mill's  analysis  of  mathematical  concepts.
— The  defect  of  the  psychological  theory  of  abstraction. — The
forms  of  series. — The  place  of  the  thing-concept  in  the  system
of  logical  relations 9

III.  The  negative  process  of  "abstraction." — The  mathematical  con-

cept and  its  " concrete  universality/' — The  criticism  of  the
theories  of  abstraction. — Objects  of  the  "first"  and  "second"
orders. — The  variety  of  objective  "intentions." — The  serial  form
and  the  members  of  the  series , 18

CHAPTER  II

THE  CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER

I.  The  sensationalistic  deduction  of  number.— Frege's  foundations  of
arithmetic. — The  system  of  arithmetic. — Number  and  presenta-
tion.— The  content  of  presentation  and  the  act  of  presentation. .  27
II.  The  logical  foundations  of  the  pure  concept  of  number  (Dedekind).
—The  logic  of  relations.— The  concept  of  progression.— Number
as  ordinal  number. — The  theories  of  Helmholtz  and  Kronecker. —

Criticism  of  the  nominalistic  deduction 35

[II.  Number  and  the  concept  of  class. — Russell's  theory  of  cardinal
numbers.— Criticism  of  "class  theories."— The  logical  definition
of  the  zero  and  of  unity.— The  presupposition  of  the  class  con-
cept.— The  generic  concept  and  the  relational  concept 44

IV.  Extension  of  the  concept  of  number. — Gauss'  theory  of  the  negative

and  imaginary  numbers. — The  irrational  numbers. — Dedekind's

vii


VlH  CONTENTS

explanation  of  the  irrational  numbers. — The  problem  of  the
transfmite  numbers. — The  concept  of  " power." — The  production
of  transfinite  numbers. — The  second  "principle  of  generation"  of
numbers  (Cantor) 54

CHAPTER  III

THE  CONCEPT OF SPACE  AND GEOMETRY

I.  Concept  and  form. — The  method  of  ancient  geometry. — The  con-
cept of  space  and  the  concept  of  number. — The  fundamental
principle  of  analytic  geometry. — The  infinitesimal  geometry. —

Magnitudes  and  functions 68

II.  Intuition  arid  thought  in  the  principles  of  the  geometry  of  posi-
tion.— Steiner  and  Poncelet. — The  concept  of  " correlation"  and
the  principle  of  continuity. — The  transference  of  relations  dis-
tinguished from  induction  and  analogy. — Projection  and  the
imaginary  in  geometry. — Metrical  and  protective  geometry,  and
quadrilateral  construction  of  Staudt. — Protective  metric  (Cayley
and  Klein. — The  concept  of  space  and  the  concept  of  order. —
Geometry  and  the  group  theory. — The  concepts  of  constancy
and  change  in  geometry 76

III.  Characteristic  (Kombinatorik)  as  pure  "doctrine  of  forms"  (Leib-

niz).— Geometry  as  pure  "doctrine  of  relations"  (Hilbert). — The
syntheses  of  generating  relations. — Grassmann's  Ausdehnungs-
lehre  and  its  logical  principles. — The  forms  of  calculus,  and  the
concept  of  the  Source 91

IV.  The problem  of  ruetageometry. — The attempt at  an  empirical

grounding  of  geometry  (Pasch). — Ideal  objects  in  empirical
geometry. — Veronese's  modification  of  empiricism. — Rationalism
and  empiricism. — Mathematical  space  and  sensuous  space. — Ob-
jections to  the  Kantian  theory  of  geometry. — Real  space  and
experiment. — The  conceptual  principles  of  pure  space. — Eu-
clidean space  and  the  other  forms  of  mathematical  space. —
Geometry  and  reality 100

CHAPTER  IV

THE CONCEPTS OP NATURAL SCIENCE

I.  The  constructive  concepts  and  the  concepts  of  nature. — The  con-
cept of  traditional  logic  and  the  scientific  ideal  of  pure  descrip-
tion.— The  apparent  logical  ideal  of  physics. — Is  this  the  true

ideal  of  physics? 112

II.  Numbering  and  measuring  as  presuppositions. — Mechanism  and  the
concept  of  motion. — The  "subject"  of  motion. — The  "limiting
concept"  and  its  significance  for  natural  science  (Karl  Pearson).
— P.  du  Bois-Reymond's  theory  of  the  limiting  concept. — The


CONTENTS  ix

problem  of  existence. — The  existence  of  the  limiting  point. —
Logical  idealism  on  the  problem  of  existence. — Consequences  of
the  confusion  of  truth  and  reality. — The  "idealization"  of  pres-
entations.— The  relation  of  the  ideal  and  reality 115

III.  The  problem  of  the  physical  method  and  its  history. — The  problem

of  knowledge  (Plato). — The  sceptical  theory  of  knowledge  (Pro-
tagoras, etc.). — The  concepts  of  nature  and  purpose  (Plato). —
Mathematics  and  teleology  (Plato,  Aristotle,  Kepler). — The
concept  of  hypothesis  (Kepler  and  Newton).— The  logical  and
ontological  "hypotheses." 130

IV.  Robert  Mayer's  methodology  of  natural  science. — Hypotheses  and

natural  laws. — The  presuppositions  of  physical  "measurement."
— The  physical  "fact"  and  the  physical  "theory." — Units  of
measurement. — The  verification  of  physical  hypotheses. — The
motive  of  serial  construction. — The  physical  concepts  of  series. .  139
V.  The  concept  of  substance  in  the  Ionian  philosophy  of  nature. — The
hypostatization  of  sensuous  qualities  (Anaxagoras). — The  hypos-
tatization  of  sensuous  qualities  (Aristotle). — Atomism  and  num-
ber.— The  impact  of  atoms. — The  postulate  of  continuity,  and  the
"simple"  atom  of  Boscovich  and  Fechner. — The  concept  of  the
atom  and  the  application  of  differential  equations. — The  changes
in  the  concept  of  the  atom. — The  concept  of  the  ether. — The
logical  form  of  the  concept  of  the  physical  object. — "Real"  and
"not  real'1  elements  in  the  concepts  of  the  physical  object. — The
concept  of  non-being. — Matter  and  idea  and  Galileo's  concept

of  inertia 161

VI.  The  concepts  of  space  and  time. — Newton's  concepts  of  absolute
space  and  absolute  time. — The  system  of  reference  of  pure
mechanics. — The  substitution  of  the  fixed  stars  for  absolute
space. — The  "intellectual  experiment"  and  the  law  of  inertia. —
Streintz's  concept  of  the  "fundamental  body." — The  theory  of
C.  Neumann:  the  body  alpha. — Space  and  time  as  mathematical
ideals. — Hertz's  system  of  mechanics. — Construction  and  con-
vention 170

VII.  The  concept  of  energy. — Energy  and  the  sense  qualities. — Energy
and  the  concept  of  number. — The  concept  of  the  measure  of
work. — The  formal  presuppositions  of  energism. — Rankine's  de-
ductions of  energetics. — Criticism  of  the  method  of  physical
"abstraction." — The  problem  of  abstraction  in  modern  logic. —
Energy  as  a  relational  concept. — Energetics  and  mechanics. —

Physics  as  a  science  of  qualities 187

VIII.  The  problem  of  the  construction  of  concepts  iri  chemistry. — The
chemistry  of  sensuous  qualities  and  Richter's  law  of  definite  pro-
portions.— Dalton's  law  of  multiple  proportions. — The  atom  as  a
relational  concept. — The  "regulative"  use  of  the  concept  of  the
atom. — The  concept  of  valency  and  the  theory  of  types. — Logical
aspects  of  the  concept  of  type. — The  chemical  concept  as  a  rela-


X  CONTENTS

tional  concept. — The  concept  of  the  "radical"  and  the  theories
of  "composite  radicals." — The  reconstruction  of  the  systematic
form  of  chemistry. — The  periodic  system  of  the  elements. —

Chemistry  and  mathematics 203

IX.  The  concept  of  natural  science  and  "reality." — Rickert's  theory
of  the  scientific  construction  of  concepts. — Criticism  of  Rickert's
theory. — Word-meanings  and  mathematical  concepts. — Rickert's
confusion  of  "meanings"  and  "presentations." — The  concept  as
the  expression  of  individual  relations. — The  problem  of  the  con-
stants of  natural  science. — Magnitudes  and  other  forms  of
relations 220

PART  II

THE  SYSTEM  OF  RELATIONAL  CONCEPTS  AND  THE  PROBLEM

OF  REALITY

CHAPTER  V

ON  THE  PROBLEM  OP  INDUCTION

I.  The  metaphysical  tendency  in  induction  and  deduction. — The
empirical  theory  of  judgment. — Mach's  "  though t-experiment." —
Criticism  of  Mach's  theory. — Locke's  theory  of  empirical  judg-
ment.— The  "element  of  eternity"  in  all  empirical  judgment. —
The  postulate  of  necessary  determinateness. — Judgments  of
perception  and  judgments  of  experience. — Experience  as  aggre-
gate and  as  system. — Discrete  and  continuous  "wholes." — In-
duction and  the  theory  of  invariants. — Induction  and  analogy. .  237
II.  Induction  and  analysis,  "compositive"  and  "resolutive"  methods.
— Experiment  as  the  means  of  analysis. — The  relation  of  "uni-
versal" and  "particular"  relations. — "Isolation"  and  "super-
position."— Laws  and  rules. — The  concept  of  the  "fundamental"
relation  and  the  relation  of  mathematical  necessity. — The  two

fundamental  types  of  knowledge 25°»

III.  The  problem  of  laws  of  nature. — Laws  and  constants. — The  general
form  of  experience. — The  concept  of  the  a  priori  and  the  "invari-
ants of  experience." 265

CHAPTER  VI

THE  CONCEPT  OP  REALITY

I.  The  separation  of  "subjective"  and  "objective"  reality. — The
development  of  the  concepts  of  objectivity  and  subjectivity. —
Changing  and  constant  elements  of  experience. — The  subjectivity
of  the  sensuous  qualities. — The  series  of  degrees  of  objectivity.
The  logical  gradations  of  the  contents  of  experience. — The  prob-


CONTENTS  A1

lem  of  transcendence. — The  meaning  of  judgment. — The  "tran-
scending" of  sensuous  experience. — The  concept  of  "  represen-
tation ." — Transformation  of  the  concept  of  representation  and
progress  to  the  "whole  of  experience." — Association  as  a  prin-
ciple of  explanation 271

II.  The  concept  of  objectivity  and  the  problem  of  space. — The  theory
of  projection  and  its  defects. — Concept  and  perception  distin-
guished (Helmholtz). — The  division  into  circles  of  objectivity. —
"Projection"  and  "selection." 286

III.  The  function  of  judgment;  permanence  and  repetition. — The  prob-

lem of  the  "transsubjective." — The  correlation  of  the  conscious-
ness of  the  ego  and  the  consciousness  of  the  object. — The  sepa-
ration of  thought  and  experience. — The  concept  of  the  object  in
critical  idealism. — The  objectivity  within  pure  mathematics. —
The  unity  of  the  physical  world 293

IV.  The  historical  transformation  of  the  "thing." — Helmholtz'  theory

of  signs. — The  logical  and  the  ontological  conceptions  of  rela-
tivity.— The  unity  of  the  scientific  views  of  the  world 302

CHAPTBB  VII

SUBJECTIVITY  AND OBJECTIVITY  OF  THE  RELATIONAL  CONCEPTS

I.  The  problem  of  the  subjectivity  and  objectivity  of  relational  con-
cepts.— The  universal  functions  of  rational  and  empirical  knowl-
edge.— The  reciprocal  relation  of  the  "form"  and  "matter"  of
knowledge. — The  existence  of  the  "eternal  truths." — The  con-
cept of  truth  of  modern  mathematics 309

II.  The  relational  concepts  and  the  activity  of  the  ego. — Constancy
and  change  in  knowledge. — The  independence  of  logical  truths  of
the  thinking  subject. — The  problem  of  pragmatism. — Truth  and
the  "practical." — The  critical  concept  of  truth. — The  reconcili-
ation of  permanence  and  change. — The  double  form  of  the
concept 314

CHAPTEB  VIII

ON  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  BELATION8

I.  Logical  relations  and  the  problem  of  self-consciousness. — Plato's
psychology  of  relations. — Aristotle's  Doctrine  of  the  Kotvovb —
"Thoughts  of  relation"  in  modern  psychology. — The  concept  of
substance. — The  doctrine  of  the  "form-quality"  in  modern  psy-
chology.— Ebbinghaus's  physiological  account  of  relations. —
Criticism  of  the  physiological  explanation  of  relational  concepts.  326
II.  Meinong's  theory  of  "founded  contents." — "Objects  of  a  higher
order." — The  conflict  between  empiricism  and  nativism. — The
psychology  of  the  idea  of  space. — The  psychology  of  thought. . .  337


Xll  CONTENTS

SUPPLEMENT

EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY  CONSIDERED  FROM  THE
EPISTEMOLOGICAL  STANDPOINT

I.  Concepts  of  measure  and  concepts  of  things 351

II.  The  empirical  and  conceptual  foundations  of  the  theory  of  rela-
tivity 367

III.  The  philosophical  concept  of  truth  and  the  theory  of  relativity. .  387

IV.  Matter,  ether  and  space 394

V.  The  concepts  of  space  and  time  of  critical  idealism  and  the  theory

of  relativity 409

VI.  Euclidean  and  non-Euclidean  geometry 430

VII.  The  theory  of  relativity  and  the  problem  of  reality 445

Bibliography 457

Index 461


PARTI

THE  CONCEPT  OF  THING  AND  THE  CONCEPT
OF  RELATION


CHAPTER  I
ON  THE  THEOKY  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS


New  developments  in  logic.  The  new  view  that  is  developing  in
contemporary  philosophy  regarding  the  foundations  of  theoretical
knowledge  is  manifested  perhaps  nowhere  as  clearly  as  in  the  trans-
formation of  the  chief  doctrines  of  formal  logic.  In  logic  alone,
philosophical  thought  seemed  to  have  gained  a  firm  foundation;  in
it  a  field  seemed  to  be  marked  off  that  was  assured  against  all  the
doubts  aroused  by  the  various  epistemological  standpoints  and  hy-
potheses. The  judgment  of  Kant  appeared  verified  and  confirmed
that  here  the  steady  and  secure  way  of  science  had  finally  been
reached.  The  further  consideration  that,  as  logic  since  the  time
of  Aristotle  had  not  had  to  retrace  a  single  step,  so  also  it  had  not
advanced  a  single  step,  seemed  from  this  point  of  view  a  confirmation
of  its  peculiar  certainty.  Undisturbed  by  the  continuous  trans-
formation of  all  material  knowledge,  it  alone  remained  constant  and
without  variation.

If  we  follow  the  evolution  of  science  within  the  last  decades  more
closely,  however,  a  different  picture  of  formal  logic  appears.  Every-
where it  is  occupied  with  new  questions  and  dominated  by  new
tendencies  of  thought.  The  work  of  centuries  in  the  formulation  of
fundamental  doctrines  seems  more  and  more  to  crumble  away;  while
on  the  other  hand,  great  new  groups  of  problems,  resulting  from  the
general  mathematical  theory  of  the  manifold,  now  press  to  the  fore-
ground. This  theory  appears  increasingly  as  the  common  goal
toward  which  the  various  logical  problems,  that  were  formerly
investigated  separately,  tend  and  through  which  they  receive  their
ideal  unity.  Logic  is  thereby  freed  from  its  isolation  and  again  led
to  concrete  tasks  and  achievements.  For  the  scope  of  the  modern
theory  of  the  manifold  is  not  limited  to  purely  mathematical  problems,
but  involves  a  general  view  which  influences  even  the  special  methods
of  the  natural  sciences  and  is  therein  verified.  But  the  systematic
connection  into  which  logic  is  thus  drawn  compels  renewed  criticism
of  its  presuppositions.  The  appearance  of  unconditional  certainty
disappears;  criticism  now  begins  to  be  applied  to  those  very  doctrines

3


4  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

that  have  persisted  unchanged  historically  in  the  face  of  profound
changes  in  the  ideal  of  knowledge.

The  concept  in  Aristotelian  logic.  The  Aristotelian  logic,  in  its
general  principles,  is  a  true  expression  and  mirror  of  the  Aristotelian
metaphysics.  Only  in  connection  with  the  belief  upon  which  the
latter  rests,  can  it  be  understood  in  its  peculiar  motives.  The  con-
ception of  the  nature  and  divisions  of  being  predetermines  the  con-
ception of  the  fundamental  forms  of  thought.  In  the  further
development  of  logic,  however,  its  connections  with  the  Aristotelian
ontology  in  its  special  form  begin  to  loosen;  still  its  connection  with
the  basic  doctrine  of  the  latter  persists,  and  clearly  reappears  at
definite  turning  points  of  historical  evolution.  Indeed,  the  basic
aignificance,  which  is  ascribed  to  the  theory  of  the  concept  in  the
structure  of  logic,  points  to  this  connection.  Modern  attempts  to
reform  logic  have  sought  in  this  regard  to  reverse  the  traditional
order  of  problems  by  placing  the  theory  of  the  judgment  before  the
theory  of  the  concept.  Fruitful  as  this  point  of  view  has  proved  to
be,  it  has,  nevertheless,  not  been  maintained  in  its  full  purity  against
the  systematic  tendency  which  dominated  the  old  arrangement.
The  intellectual  tendency  still  shaping  these  new  attempts  revealed
itself  in  that  features  crept  into  the  theory  of  judgment  itself,  which
could  only  be  understood  and  justified  by  the  traditional  theory  of
the  generic  concept  (Gattungsbegriff) .  The  primacy  of  the  concept,
which  they  sought  to  lay  aside,  was  once  more  implicitly  ac-
knowledged. The  actual  center  of  gravity  of  the  system  had  not
been  changed  but  merely  the  external  arrangement  of  its  elements.
Every  attempt  to  transform  logic  must  concentrate  above  all  upon
this  one  point:  all  criticism  of  formal  logic  is  comprised  in
criticism  of  the  general  doctrine  of  the  construction  of  concepts
(Begriffsbildung) .

Purpose  and  nature  of  the  generic  concept.  The  chief  features  of
this  doctrine  are  well-known  and  do  not  need  detailed  exposition.
Its  presuppositions  are  simple  and  clear;  and  they  agree  so  largely
with  the  fundamental  conceptions,  which  the  ordinary  view  of  the
world  consistently  uses  and  applies,  that  they  seem  to  offer  no  foot-
hold for  criticism.  Nothing  is  presupposed  save  the  existence  of
things  in  their  inexhaustible  multiplicity,  and  the  power  of  the  mind
to  select  from  this  wealth  of  particular  existences  those  features  that
are  common  to  several  of  them.  When  we  thus  collect  objects
characterized  by  possession  of  some  common  property  into  classes,


THEOBY  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS  u

and  when  we  repeat  this  process  upon  higher  levels,  there  gradually
arises  an  ever  firmer  order  and  division  of  being,  according  to  the
series  of  factual  similarities  running  through  the  particular  things.
The  essential  functions  of  thought,  in  this  connection,  are  merely
those  of  comparing  and  differentiating  a  sensuously  given  manifold.
Reflection,  which  passes  hither  and  thither  among  the  particular
objects  in  order  to  determine  the  essential  features  in  which  they
agree,  leads  of  itself  to  abstraction.  Abstraction  lays  hold  upon  and
raises  to  clear  consciousness  these  related  features, — pure,  by  them-
selves, freed  from  all  admixture  of  dissimilar  elements.  Thus  the
peculiar  merit  of  this  interpretation  seems  to  be  that  it  never  destroys
or  imperils  the  unity  of  the  ordinary  view  of  the  world.  The  concept
does  not  appear  as  something  foreign  to  sensuous  reality,  but  forms  a
part  of  this  reality;  it  is  a  selection  from  what  is  immediately  con-
tained in  it.  In  this  respect,  the  concepts  of  the  exact  mathematical
sciences  stand  upon  the  same  plane  as  the  concepts  of  the  descriptive
sciences,  which  are  merely  concerned  with  a  superficial  ordering  and
classification  of  what  is  given.  Just  as  we  form  the  concept  of  a  tree
by  selecting  from  the  totality  of  oaks,  beeches  and  birch  trees,  the
group  of  common  properties,  so,  in  exactly  the  same  way,  we  form
the  concept  of  a  plane  rectangular  figure  by  isolating  the  common
properties  which  are  found  in  the  square,  the  right  angle,  the
rhomboid,  the  rhombus,  the  symmetrical  and  asymmetrical  trapezium
and  trapezoid,  and  which  can  be  immediately  seen  and  pointed  out.1
The  well-known  guiding  principles  of  the  concept  follow  of  themselves
from  these  foundations.  Every  series  of  comparable  objects  has  a
supreme  generic  concept,  which  comprehends  within  itself  all  the
determinations  in  which  these  objects  agree,  while  on  the  other  hand,
within  this  supreme  genus,  the  sub-species  at  various  levels  are  defined
by  properties  belonging  only  to  a  part  of  the  elements.  In  the  same
way  that  we  ascend  from  the  species  to  the  higher  genus  by  abandon-
ing a  certain  characteristic,  thereby  drawing  a  larger  range  of  objects
into  the  circle,  so  by  a  reverse  process,  the  specification  of  the  genus
takes  place  through  the  progressive  addition  of  new  elements  of
content.  Hence,  if  we  call  the  number  of  properties  of  a  concept  the
magnitude  of  its  content*  this  magnitude  increases  as  we  descend  from

1  Cf.  e.g.,  Drobisch,  Neue  Darstellung  der  Logik,  Ed.  4,  Leipzig,  1875,  §16  ff.;
tfberweg,  System  der  Logik,  Bonn,  1857,  §51  ff.

2  Cf.  intension.  (Tr.)


6  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

the  higher  concepts  to  the  lower,  and  thus  diminishes  the  number  of
species  subordinate  to  the  concept;  while,  when  we  ascend  to  the
higher  genus,  this  content  will  diminish  as  the  number  of  species  is
increased.  This  increasing  extension  of  the  concept  corresponds  to  a
progressive  diminution  of  the  content;  so  that  finally,  the  most  general
concepts  we  can  reach  no  longer  possess  any  definite  content.  The
conceptual  pyramid,  which  we  form  in  this  way,  reaches  its  summit
in  the  abstract  representation  of  "something"  under  the  all-inclusive
being  of  which  every  possible  intellectual  content  falls,  but  which
at  the  same  time  is  totally  devoid  of  specific  meaning.

The  problem  of  abstraction.  At  this  point  in  the  traditional
logical  theory  of  the  concept  arise  the  first  doubts  concerning
its  universal  validity  and  applicability.  If  the  final  goal  of
this  method  of  forming  concepts  is  entirely  empty,  the  whole
process  leading  to  it  must  arouse  suspicion.  Such  an  outcome
is  unintelligible  if  the  individual  steps  have  fulfilled  the  require-
ments, which  we  are  accustomed  to  make  of  every  fruitful
and  concrete  process  of  construction  of  scientific  concepts.  What  we
demand  and  expect  of  a  scientific  concept,  first  of  all,  is  this:  that,
in  the  place  of  original  indefiniteness  and  ambiguity  of  ideas,  it  shall
institute  a  sharp  and  unambiguous  determination;  while,  in  this  case,
on  the  contrary,  the  sharp  lines  of  distinction  seem  the  more  effaced,
the  further  we  pursue  the  logical  process.  And  in  fact,  from  the
standpoint  of  formal  logic  itself,  a  new  problem  arises  here.  If  all
construction  of  concepts  consists  in  selecting  from  a  plurality  of
objects  before  us  only  the  similar  properties,  while  we  neglect  the
rest,  it  is  clear  that  through  this  sort  of  reduction  what  is  merely  a
part  has  taken  the  place  of  the  original  sensuous  whole.  This  part,
however,  claims  to  characterize  and  explain  the  whole.  The  concept
would  lose  all  value  if  it  meant  merely  the  neglect  of  the  particular
cases  from  which  it  starts,  and  the  annihilation  of  their  peculiarity.
The  act  of  negation,  on  the  contrary,  is  meant  to  be  the  expression
of  a  thoroughly  positive  process;  what  remains  is  not  to  be  merely  an
arbitrarily  chosen  part  but  an  "essential"  moment  by  which  the
whole  is  determined.  The  higher  concept  is  to  make  the  lower
intelligible  by  setting  forth  in  abstraction  the  ground  of  its  special
form.  The  traditional  rule,  however,  for  the  formation  of  the  generic
concept  contains  in  itself  no  guarantee  that  this  end  will  be  actually
achieved.  In  fact,  there  is  nothing  to  assure  us  that  the  common


THEOBY  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS  7

properties,  which  we  select  from  any  arbitrary  collection  of  objects,
include  the  truly  typical  features,  which  characterize  and
determine  the  total  structures  of  the  members  of  the  collection.
We  may  borrow  a  drastic  example  from  Lotze:  If  we  group  cherries
and  meat  together  under  the  attributes  red,  juicy  and  edible,  we  do
not  thereby  attain  a  valid  logical  concept  but  a  meaningless  combina-
tion of  words,  quite  useless  for  the  comprehension  of  the  particular
cases.  Thus  it  becomes  clear  that  the  general  formal  rule  in  itself
does  not  suffice;  that  on  the  contrary,  there  is  always  tacit  reference
to  another  intellectual  criterioa  to  supplement  it.

The  metaphysical  presuppositions  of  Aristotelian  logic.  In  the
system  of  Aristotle,  this  criterion  is  plainly  evident;  the  gaps  that
are  left  in  logic  are  filled  in  and  made  good  by  the  Aristotelian  meta-
physics. The  doctrine  of  the  concept  is  the  special  link  that  binds
the  two  fields  together.  For  Aristotle,  at  least,  the  concept  is  no
mere  subjective  schema  in  which  we  collect  the  common  elements  of
an  arbitrary  group  of  things.  The  selection  of  what  is  common
remains  an  empty  play  of  ideas  if  it  is  not  assumed  that  what  is  thus
gained  is,  at  the  same  time,  the  real  Form  which  guarantees  the  causal
and  teleological  connection  of  particular  things.  The  real  and  ulti-
mate similarities  of  things  are  also  the  creative  forces  from  which
they  spring  and  according  to  which  they  are  formed.  The  process
of  comparing  things  and  of  grouping  them  together  according  to
similar  properties,  as  it  is  expressed  first  of  all  in  language,  does  not
lead  to  what  is  indefinite,  but  if  rightly  conducted,  ends  in  the  dis-
covery of  the  real  essences  of  things.  Thought  only  isolates  the
specific  type;  this  latter  is  contained  as  an  active  factor  in  the  indi-
vidual concrete  reality  and  gives  the  general  pattern  to  the  manifold
special  forms.  The  biological  species  signifies  both  the  end  toward
which  the  living  individual  strives  and  the  immanent  force  by  which
its  evolution  is  guided.  The  logical  doctrine  of  the  construction  of
the  concept  and  of  definition  can  only  be  built  up  with  reference  to
these  fundamental  relations  of  the  real  The  determination  of  the
concept  according  to  its  next  higher  genus  and  its  specific  difference
reproduces  the  process  by  which  the  real  substance  successively
unfolds  itself  in  its  special  forms  of  being.  Thus  it  is  this  basic
conception  of  substance  to  which  the  purely  logical  theories  of  Aristotle
constantly  have  reference.  The  complete  system  of  scientific  defini-


8  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

tions  would  also  be  a  complete  expression  of  the  substantial  forces
which  control  reality.3

The  concept  of  substance  in  logic  and  metaphysics.  An  understand-
ing of  Aristotle's  logic  is  thus  conditioned  by  an  understanding  of  his
conception  of  being.  Aristotle  himself  clearly  distinguishes  the
various  sorts  and  meanings  of  being  from  each  other;  and  it  is  the
essential  problem  of  his  theory  of  the  categories  to  trace  through
and  make  clear  this  division  of  being  into  its  various  subspecies.
Thus  he  also  expressly  distinguishes  the  existence,  which  is  indicated
by  mere  relations  in  judgment,  from  existence  after  the  fashion  of  a
thing;  the  being  of  a  conceptual  synthesis,  from  that  of  a  concrete
subject.  In  all  these  quests  for  a  sharper  division,  however,  the
logical  primacy  of  the  concept  of  substance  is  not  questioned.  Only
in  given,  existing  substances  are  the  various  determinations  of  being
thinkable.  Only  in  a  fixed  thing-like  substratum,  which  must  first
be  given,  can  the  logical  and  grammatical  varieties  of  being  in  general
find  their  ground  and  real  application.  Quantity  and  quality,
space  and  time  determinations,  do  not  exist  in  and  for  themselves,
but  merely  as  properties  of  absolute  realities  which  exist  by  them-
selves. The  category  of  relation  especially  is  forced  into  a  dependent
and  subordinate  position  by  this  fundamental  metaphysical  doctrine
of  Aristotle.  Relation  is  not  independent  of  the  concept  of  real  being;
it  can  only  add  supplementary  and  external  modifications  to  the
latter,  such  as  do  not  affect  its  real  "nature."  In  this  way  the
Aristotelian  doctrine  of  the  formation  of  the  concept  came  to  have  a
characteristic  feature,  which  has  remained  in  spite  of  all  the  mani-
fold transformations  it  has  undergone.  The  fundamental  categorical
relation  of  the  thing  to  its  properties  remains  henceforth  the  guiding
point  of  view;  while  relational  determinations  are  only  considered  in
so  far  as  they  can  be  transformed,  by  some  sort  of  mediation,  into
properties  of  a  subject  or  of  a  plurality  of  subjects.  This  view  is  in
evidence  in  the  text-books  of  formal  logic  in  that  relations  or  con-
nections, as  a  rule,  are  considered  among  the  "non-essential"  proper-
ties of  a  concept,  and  thus  as  capable  of  being  left  out  of  its  defi-
nition without  fallacy.  Here  a  methodological  distinction  of  great

8  On  the  metaphysical  presuppositions  of  the  Aristotelian  logic,  c/.  espe-
cially, Prantl,  Geschichte der  Logik im  Abendlande,  I;  Trendelenburg,  Geschichte
der  Kategorienlehre;  H.  Maier,  Die  Syllogistik  des  Aristoteles,  II,  2,
Tubingen,  1900,  pp.  183  ff.


THEORY  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS  9

significance  appears.  The  two  chief  forms  of  logic,  which  are
especially  opposed  to  each  other  in  the  modern  scientific  develop-
ment, are  distinguished — as  will  become  clear — by  the  different
value  which  is  placed  upon  thing-concepts  and  relation-concepts.

ii

The  psychological  criticism  of  the  concept  (Berkeley}.  If  we  accept
this  general  criterion,  we  recognize  further  that  the  essential  pre-
supposition, upon  which  Aristotle  founded  his  logic,  has  survived  the
special  doctrines  of  the  peripatetic  metaphysics.  In  fact  the  whole
struggle  against  the  Aristotelian  "  concept  realism"  has  been  without
effect  upon  this  decisive  point.  The  conflict  between  nominalism
and  realism  concerned  only  the  question  of  the  metaphysical  reality
of  concepts,  while  the  question  as  to  their  valid  logical  definition  was
not  considered.  The  reality  of  "universals"  was  in  question.  But
what  was  beyond  all  doubt,  as  if  by  tacit  agreement  of  the  conflict-
ing parties,  was  just  this:  that  the  concept  was  to  be  conceived  as  a
universal  genus,  as  the  common  element  in  a  series  of  similar  or
resembling  particular  things.  Without  this  mutual  assumption,
all  conflict  as  to  whether  the  common  element  possessed  a  separate
factual  existence  or  could  only  be  pointed  out  as  a  sensuous  moment
in  the  individuals,  would  be  essentially  unintelligible.  Moreover,
the  psychological  criticism  of  the  "abstract"  concept,  radical  as  it
seems  at  first  sight,  introduces  no  real  change  here.  In  the  case  of
Berkeley,  we  can  follow  in  detail  how  his  skepticism  as  to  the  worth
and  fruitfulness  of  the  abstract  concept  implied,  at  the  same  time,  a
dogmatic  belief  in  the  ordinary  definition  of  the  concept.  That
the  true  scientific  concept,  that  in  particular  the  concepts  of  mathe-
matics and  physics,  might  have  another  purpose  to  fulfill  than  is
ascribed  to  them  in  this  scholastic  definition, — this  thought  was  not
comprehended.4  In  fact,  in  the  psychological  deduction  of  the
concept,  the  traditional  schema  is  not  so  much  changed  as  carried
over  to  another  field.  While  formerly  it  had  been  outer  things  that
were  compared  and  out  of  which  a  common  element  was  selected,
here  the  same  process  is  merely  transferred  to  presentations  as  psychi-
cal correlates  of  things.  The  process  is  only,  as  it  were,  removed  to
another  dimension,  in  that  it  is  taken  out  of  the  field  of  the  physical

4  For  greater  detail  cf.  my  Das  Erkennlnisproblem  in  der  Philosophic  und
Wissenschafl  der  neuern  Zeit,  Vol.  II,  Berlin,  1907,  pp.  219  ff.


10  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

into  that  of  the  psychical,  while  its  general  course  and  structure
remain  the  same.  When  several  composite  presentations  have  a
part  of  their  content  in  common,  there  arises  from  them,  according
to  the  well-known  psychological  laws  of  simultaneous  stimulation
and  fusion  of  the  similar,  a  content  in  which  merely  the  agreeing
determinations  are  retained  and  all  the  others  suppressed.6  In  this
way  no  new,  independent  and  special  structure  is  produced,  but  only
a  certain  division  of  presentations  already  given,  a  division  in  which
certain  moments  are  emphasized  by  a  one-sided  direction  of  atten-
tion, and  in  this  way  raised  more  sharply  out  of  their  surroundings.
To  the  "substantial  forms/'  which,  according  to  Aristotle,  represent
the  final  goal  of  this  comparing  activity,  there  correspond  certain
fundamental  elements,  which  run  through  the  whole  field  of  percep-
tion. And  it  is  now  asserted  still  more  emphatically  that  these
absolute  elements  alone,  existing  for  themselves,  constitute  the  real
kernel  of  what  is  given  and  "real."  Again  the  r61e  of  relation  is
limited  as  much  as  possible.  Hamilton,  with  all  his  recognition
of  the  Berkeleian  theory,  showed  the  characteristic  function  of  relat-
ing thought.  Against  him,  J.  Stuart  Mill  emphasizes  that  the  true
positive  being  of  every  relation  lies  only  in  the  individual  members
which  are  bound  together  by  it,  and  that  hence,  since  these  members
can  only  be  given  as  individuals,  there  can  be  no  talk  of  a  general
meaning  of  relation.6  The  concept  does  not  exist  save  as  a  part  of  a
concrete  presentation  and  burdened  with  all  the  attributes  of  presen-
tation. What  gives  it  the  appearance  of  independent  value  and
underived  psychological  character  is  merely  the  circumstance  that
our  attention,  being  limited  in  its  powers,  is  never  able  to  illumine
the  whole  of  the  presentation  and  must  of  necessity  be  narrowed  to  a
mere  selection  of  parts.  The  consciousness  of  the  concept  is  re-
solved for  psychological  analysis  into  consciousness  of  a  presentation
or  part  of  a  presentation,  which  is  associatively  connected  with  some
word  or  other  sensuous  sign.

The  psychology  of  abstraction.  The  "psychology  of  abstraction/'
according  to  this  view,  furnishes  the  real  key  to  the  logical
meaning  of  every  form  of  concept.  This  meaning  is  derived  from
the  simple  capacity  of  reproducing  any  given  content  of  presenta-
tion. Abstract  objects  arise  in  every  perceiving  being  in  whom  like

5  Cf.j  e.g.,  t)berweg,  op.  cit.,  §51.

6  Cf.  Mill,  An  Examination  of  Sir  William  Hamilton's  Philosophy,  London,

^ 31Q


THEOBY  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS  11

determinations  of  the  perceived  have  been  given  in  repeated  pre-
sentations.7 For  these  determinations  are  not  confined  to  the
particular  moment  of  perception,  but  leave  behind  them  certain
traces  of  their  existence  in  the  psycho-physical  subject.  Since  these
traces,  which  must  be  thought  of  as  unconscious  during  the  time
between  the  real  perception  and  the  recall,  are  again  aroused  by
newly  occurring  stimuli  of  a  similar  sort,  a  firm  connection  is
gradually  formed  between  the  similar  elements  of  successive  percep-
tions. That  which  differentiates  them  tends  more  and  more  to
disappear;  it  finally  forms  only  a  shadowy  background  on  which
the  constant  features  stand  out  the  more  clearly.  The  pro-
gressive solidification  of  these  features  that  agree,  their  fusion
into  a  unitary,  indivisible  whole,  constitutes  the  psychological  nature
of  the  concept,  which  is  consequently  in  origin  as  in  function  merely  a
totality  of  memory-residues,  which  have  been  left  in  us  by  percep-
tions of  real  things  and  processes.  The  reality  of  these  residues  is
shown  in  that  they  exert  a  special  and  independent  influence  upon
the  act  of  perception  itself,  in  so  far  as  every  newly  occurring  content
is  apprehended  and  transformed  according  to  them.  Thus  we  stand
here, — and  this  is  sometimes  emphasized  by  the  advocates  of  this
view  themselves, — at  a  point  of  view  closely  akin  to  that  of  medieval
"conceptualism;"  real  and  verbal  abstracta  can  only  be  taken  from
the  content  of  perception  because  they  are  already  contained  in  it  as
common  elements.  The  difference  between  the  ontological  and
psychological  views  is  merely  that  the  "things"  of  scholasticism  were
the  beings  copied  in  thought,  while  here  the  objects  are  meant  to  be
nothing  more  than  the  contents  of  perception.

Weighty  as  this  distinction  may  appear  from  the  standpoint  of
metaphysics,  the  meaning  and  content  of  the  logical  problem  are,
nevertheless,  not  affected  by  it.  If  we  remain  in  the  sphere  of  this
latter  problem,  we  find  here  a  common,  fundamental  belief  regarding
the  concept,  which  has  remained  apparently  unassailable  throughout
all  the  changes  of  the  question.  Yet  precisely  where  there  seems  no
conflict  of  opinion,  the  real  methodological  difficulty  begins.  Is  the
theory  of  the  concept,  as  here  developed,  an  adequate  and  faithful
picture  of  the  procedure  of  the  concrete  sciences?  Does  it  include
and  characterize  all  the  special  features  of  this  procedure;  and  is  i"
able  to  represent  them  in  all  their  mutual  connections  and  specific

7  Cf.  especially  B.  Erdmann,  Logik,  Ed.  2,  pp.  65  ff.,  88  ff.


12  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

characters?  With  regard  to  the  Aristotelian  theory,  at  least,  this
question  must  be  answered  negatively.  The  concepts,  which  are
Aristotle's  special  object  and  interest,  are  the  generic  concepts  of
the  descriptive  and  classifying  natural  sciences.  The  "form"  of  the
olive-tree,  the  horse,  the  lion,  is  to  be  ascertained  and  established.
Wherever  he  leaves  the  field  of  biological  thought,  his  theory  of  the
concept  at  once  ceases  to  develop  naturally  and  freely.  From  the
beginning,  the  concepts  of  geometry,  especially,  resist  reduction  to
the  customary  schema.  The  concept  of  the  point,  or  of  the  line,  or
of  the  surface  cannot  be  pointed  out  as  an  immediate  part  of  physi-
cally present  bodies  and  separated  from  them  by  simple  "abstraction."
Even  in  this  example,  which  is  the  simplest  offered  by  exact  science,
logical  technique  faces  a  new  problem.  Mathematical  concepts,
which  arise  through  genetic  definition,  through  the  intellectual
establishment  of  a  constructive  connection,  are  different  from  empiri-
cal concepts,  which  aim  merely  to  be  copies  of  certain  factual  charac-
teristics of  the  given  reality  of  things.  While  in  the  latter  case,  the
multiplicity  of  things  is  given  in  and  for  itself  and  is  only  drawn
together  for  the  sake  of  an  abbreviated  verbal  or  intellectual  expres-
sion, in  the  former  case  we  first  have  to  create  the  multiplicity  which
is  the  object  of  consideration,  by  producing  from  a  simple  act  of
construction  (Setzung),  by  progressive  synthesis,  a  systematic  con-
nection of  thought-constructions  (DenkgebUderi) .  There  appears
here  in  opposition  to  bare  "abstraction,"  an  act  of  thought  itself,  a
free  production  of  certain  relational  systems.  It  can  easily  be  under-
stood that  the  logical  theory  of  abstraction,  even  in  its  modern
forms,  has  frequently  attempted  to  obliterate  this  opposition,  for
it  is  at  this  point  that  questions  as  to  the  value  and  inner  unity  of  the
theory  of  abstraction  must  be  decided.  But  this  very  attempt
leads  at  once  to  a  transformation  and  disintegration  of  the  theory,
in  whose  favor  it  was  undertaken.  The  doctrine  of  abstraction
loses  either  its  universal  validity  or  the  specific  logical  character
that  originally  belonged  to  it.

Mill's  analysis  of  mathematical  concepts.  Thus  Mill,  for  instance,
in  order  to  maintain  the  unity  of  the  supreme  principle  of  experi-
ence, explains  mathematical  truths  and  concepts  as  also  mere  expres-
sions of  concrete  physical  matters  of  fact.  The  proposition  that
1  +  1  =  2  merely  describes  an  experience  which  has  been  forced
upon  us  by  the  process  of  joining  things  together.  In  another  sort


THEORY  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS 13

of  world  of  objects,  in  a  world,  for  example,  in  which  by  the  combina*
tion  of  two  things,  a  third  always  came  into  being  of  itself,  it  would
lose  significance  and  validity.  The  same  is  true  of  the  axioms
concerning  spatial  relations;  a  "round  square"  is  only  a  contra-
dictory concept  for  us  because  it  has  been  shown  in  experience
without  exception,  that  a  thing  loses  the  property  of  having  four
corners  the  moment  it  assumes  the  property  of  roundness,  so  that  the
beginning  of  one  impression  is  inseparably  connected  with  the  cessa-
tion of  the  other.  According  to  this  mode  of  explanation,  geometry
and  arithmetic  seem  again  resolved  into  mere  statements  concerning
certain  groups  of  presentations.  But  this  interpretation  fails  when
Mill  further  attempts  to  justify  the  value  and  peculiar  significance,
inherent  in  these  special  experiences  of  numbering  and  measuring,  in
the  whole  of  our  knowledge.  Here,  first  of  all,  reference  is  made  to
the  accuracy  and  trustworthiness  of  the  images,  which  we  retain  of
spatial  and  temporal  relations.  The  reproduced  presentation  is,
in  this  case,  similar  to  the  original  in  all  details,  as  a  varied  experience
has  shown;  the  image  that  the  geometrician  frames  corresponds
perfectly  to  the  original  impression.  In  this  way  it  can  be  conceived
that,  in  order  to  reach  new  geometrical  or  arithmetical  truths,  we  do
not  need  each  time  renewed  perceptions  of  physical  objects;  the
memory-image,  by  virtue  of  its  clarity  and  distinctness,  is  able  to
supplant  the  sensible  object  itself.  However,  this  explanation  is  at
once  crossed  by  another.  The  peculiar  "deductive"  certainty,
which  we  ascribe  to  mathematical  propositions,  is  now  traced  back  to
the  fact  that  in  these  propositions  we  are  never  concerned  with
statements,  about  concrete  facts,  but  only  with  relations  between
hypothetical  forms.  There  are  no  real  things  which  precisely  agree
with  the  definitions  of  geometry;  there  are  no  points  without  magni-
tude, no  perfectly  straight  lines,  no  circles  whose  radii  are  all  equal.
Moreover,  from  the  standpoint  of  our  experience,  not  only  the  actual
reality,  but  the  very  possibility  of  such  contents  must  be  denied;  it
is  at  least  excluded  by  the  physical  properties  of  our  planet,  if  not  by
those  of  the  universe.  But  psychical  existence  is  denied  no  less
than  physical  to  the  objects  of  geometrical  definitions.  For  in  our
mind  we  never  find  the  presentation  of  a  mathematical  point,  but
always  only  the  smallest  possible  sensible  extension;  also  we  never
"conceive"  a  line  without  breadth,  for  every  psychical  image  we  car


14  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

form  shows  us  only  lines  of  a  certain  breadth.8  It  is  evident  at  once
that  this  double  explanation  destroys  itself.  On  the  one  hand,
all  emphasis  is  laid  upon  the  similarity  between  mathematical  ideas
and  the  original  impressions;  on  the  other,  however,  it  is  seen  that
this  sort  of  similarity  does  not  and  cannot  exist,  at  least  for  those
forms  which  alone  are  defined  and  characterized  as  "concepts"
in  the  mathematical  sciences.  These  forms  cannot  be  attained  by  bare
selection  from  the  facts  of  nature  and  presentation,  for  they  possess  no
concrete  correlative  in  all  of  these  facts.  "Abstraction,"  as  it*  has
hitherto  been  understood,  does  not  change  the  constitution  of  con-
sciousness and  of  objective  reality,  but  merely  institutes  certain
limits  and  divisions  in  it;  it  merely  divides  the  parts  of  the  sense-
impression  but  adds  to  it  no  new  datum.  In  the  definitions  of  pure
mathematics,  however,  as  Mill's  own  explanations  show,  the  world  of
sensible  things  and  presentations  is  not  so  much  reproduced  as
transformed  and  supplanted  by  an  order  of  another  sort.  If  we
trace  the  method  of  this  transformation,  certain  forms  of  relation,
or  rather  an  ordered  system  of  strictly  differentiated  intellectual
functions,  are  revealed,  such  as  cannot  even  be  characterized,  much
less  justified,  by  the  simple  schema  of  "abstraction."  And  this
result  is  also  confirmed  if  we  turn  from  the  purely  mathematical
concepts  to  those  of  theoretical  physics.  For  in  their  origin  the
same  process  is  shown,  and  can  be  followed  in  detail,  of  the  trans-
formation of  the  concrete  sensuous  reality, — a  process  which  the
traditional  doctrine  cannot  justify.  These  concepts  of  physics  also
are  not  intended  merely  to  produce  copies  of  perceptions,  but  to
put  in  place  of  the  sensuous  manifold  another  manifold,  which  agrees
with  certain  theoretical  conditions.9

The  defect  of  the  psychological  theory  of  abstraction.  Neglecting  the
nature  of  abstract  concepts,  however,  we  find  that  the  naive  view  of
the  world,  to  which  the  traditional  logical  conception  especially
appeals  and  upon  which  it  rests,  conceals  within  itself  what  is  ulti-
mately the  same  problem.  The  concepts  of  the  manifold  species
and  genera  are  supposed  to  arise  for  us  by  the  gradual  predominance
of  the  similarities  of  things  over  their  differences,  i.e.,  the  similarities
alone,  by  virtue  of  their  many  appearances,  imprint  themselves  upon

8  Cf.  Mill,  A  System  of  Logic,  Ed.  7,  London,  1868,  Book  II,  Ch.  5,  and  Book
III,  Ch.  24.

•  Cf.  more  particularly  Ch.  IV.


THEORY  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS 15

the  mind,  while  the  individual  differences,  which  change  from  case
to  case,  fail  to  attain  like  fixity  and  permanence.  The  similarity  of
things,  however,  can  manifestly  only  be  effective  and  fruitful,  if  it  is
understood  and  judged  as  such.  That  the  "unconscious"  traces
left  in  us  by  an  earlier  perception  are  like  a  new  impression  in  point
of  fact,  is  irrelevant  to  the  process  implied  here  as  long  as  the  elements
are  not  recognized  as  similar.  By  this,  however,  an  act  of  identifica-
tion is  recognized  as  the  foundation  of  all  "abstraction."  A  charac-
teristic function  is  ascribed  to  thought,  namely,  to  relate  a  present
content  to  a  past  content  and  to  comprehend  the  two  as  in  some  re-
spect identical.  This  synthesis,  which  connects  and  binds  together
the  two  temporally  separated  conditions,  possesses  no  immediate
sensible  correlate  in  the  contents  compared.  According  to  the
manner  and  direction  in  which  the  synthesis  takes  place,  the  same
sensuous  material  can  be  apprehended  under  very  different  concep-
tual forms.  The  psychology  of  abstraction  first  of  all  has  to  postulate
that  perceptions  can  be  ordered  for  logical  consideration  into  "series
of  similars."  Without  a  process  of  arranging  in  series,  without
running  through  the  different  instances,  the  consciousness  of  their
generic  connection — and  consequently  of  the  abstract  object — could
never  arise.  This  transition  from  member  to  member,  however,
manifestly  presupposes  a  principle  according  to  which  it  takes  place,
and  by  which  the  form  of  dependence  between  each  member  and  the
succeeding  one,  is  determined.  Thus  from  this  point  of  view  also  it
appears  that  all  construction  of  concepts  is  connected  with  some
definite  form  of  construction  of  series.  We  say  that  a  sensuous
manifold  is  conceptually  apprehended  and  ordered,  when  its  members
do  not  stand  next  to  one  another  without  relation  but  proceed  from
a  definite  beginning,  according  to  a  fundamental  generating  rela-
tion, in  necessary  sequence.  It  is  the  identity  of  this  generating  rela-
tion, maintained  through  changes  in  the  particular  contents,  which
constitutes  the  specific  form  of  the  concept.  On  the  other  hand,
whether  from  the  retention  of  this  identity  of  relation  there  finally
evolves  an  abstract  object,  a  general  presentation  in  which  similar
features  are  united,  is  merely  a  psychological  side-issue  and  does  not
affect  the  logical  characterization  of  the  concept.  The  appearance
of  a  general  image  of  that  sort  may  be  excluded  by  the  nature  of  the
generating  relation,  without  the  definitive  moment  in  the  clear
deduction  of  each  element  from  the  preceding  being  thereby  removed.


16  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

In  this  connection,  the  real  weakness  of  the  theory  of  abstraction  is
apparent  in  the  one-sidedness  of  its  selection,  from  the  wealth  of
possible  principles  of  logical  order,  of  merely  the  principle  of  similar-
ity. In  truth,  it  will  be  seen  that  a  series  of  contents  in  its  conceptual
ordering  may  be  arranged  according  to  the  most  divergent  points  of
view;  but  only  provided  that  the  guiding  point  of  view  itself  is
maintained  unaltered  in  its  qualitative  peculiarity.  Thus  side  by
side  with  series  of  similars  in  whose  individual  members  a  common
element  uniformly  recurs,  we  may  place  series  in  which  between
each  member  and  the  succeeding  member  there  prevails  a  certain
degree  of  difference.  Thus  we  can  conceive  members  of  series
ordered  according  to  equality  or  inequality,  number  and  magnitude,
spatial  and  temporal  relations,  or  causal  dependence.  The  relation
of  necessity  thus  produced  is  in  each  case  decisive;  the  concept  is
merely  the  expression  and  husk  of  it,  and  is  not  the  generic  presenta-
tion, which  may  arise  incidentally  under  special  circumstances,  but
which  does  not  enter  as  an  effective  element  into  the  definition  of  the
concept.

The  forms  of  series.  Thus  analysis  of  the  theory  of  abstraction
leads  back  to  a  deeper  problem.  The  "comparison"  of  contents,  here
referred  to,  is  primarily  only  a  vague  and  ambiguous  expression,
which  hides  the  difficulty  of  the  problem.  In  truth,  very  different
categorical  functions  are  here  united  under  what  is  merely  a  collec-
tive name.  And  the  real  task  of  logical  theory  with  regard  to  any
definite  concept  consists  in  setting  forth  these  functions  in  their
essential  characteristics  and  in  developing  their  formal  aspects.  The
theory  of  abstraction  obscures  this  task  since  it  confuses  the  categori-
cal forms,  upon  which  rests  all  definiteness  of  the  content  of  percep-
tion, with  parts  of  this  very  content  itself.  And  yet  even  the  most
simple  psychological  reflection  shows  that  the  "likeness"  between
any  contents  is  not  itself  given  as  a  further  content;  that  similarity  or
dissimilarity  does  not  appear  as  a  special  element  of  sensation  side  by
side  with  colors  and  tones,  with  sensations  of  pressure  and  touch.
The  ordinary  schema  of  the  construction  of  concepts,  therefore,
calls  for  a  thorough-going  transformation,  even  in  its  outer  form;
for  in  it  the  qualities  of  things  and  the  pure  aspect  of  relation  are
placed  on  the  same  level  and  fused  without  distinction.  Once  this
identification  has  taken  place,  it  can  indeed  appear  as  if  the  work  of
thought  were  limited  to  selecting  from  a  series  of  perceptions  aa,  afy


THEORY OF THE FORMATION OF CONCEPTS  17

ay  .  .  .  .  the  common  element  a.  In  truth,  however,  the  con-
nection of  the  members  of  a  series  by  the  possession  of  a  common
"property"  is  only  a  special  example  of  logically  possible  connections
in  general.  The  connection  of  the  members  is  in  every  case  pro-
duced by  some  general  law  of  arrangement  through  which  a  thorough-
going rule  of  succession  is  established.  That  which  binds  the  elements
of  the  series  a,  &,  c,  .  .  .  .  together  is  not  itself  a  new  element,
that  was  factually  blended  with  them,  but  it  is  the  rule  of  progression,
which  remains  the  same,  no  matter  in  which  member  it  is  represented.
The  function  F(a,  6),  F(b,  c),  .  .  .  .  ,  which  determines  the
sort  of  dependence  between  the  successive  members,  is  obviously
not  to  be  pointed  out  as  itself  a  member  of  the  series,  which  exists
and  develops  according  to  it.  The  unity  of  the  conceptual  content
can  thus  be  "abstracted"  out  of  the  particular  elements  of  its  exten-
sion only  in  the  sense  that  it  is  in  connection  with  them  that  we
become  conscious  of  the  specific  rule,  according  to  which  they  are
related;  but  not  in  the  sense  that  we  construct  this  rule  out  of  them
through  either  bare  summation  or  neglect  of  parts.  What  lends
the  theory  of  abstraction  support  is  merely  the  circumstance  that
it  does  not  presuppose  the  contents,  out  of  which  the  concept  is  to
develop,  as  disconnected  particularities,  but  that  it  tacitly  thinks
them  in  the  form  of  an  ordered  manifold  from  the  first.  The  con-
cept, however,  is  not  deduced  thereby,  but  presupposed;  for  when
we  ascribe  to  a  manifold  an  order  and  connection  of  elements,  we
have  already  presupposed  the  concept,  if  not  in  its  complete  form,
yet  in  its  fundamental  function.

The  place  of  the  thing-concept  in  the  system  of  logical  relations.
There  are  two  different  lines  of  consideration  in  which  this  logical
presupposition  is  plainly  evident.  On  the  one  side,  it  is  the  category
of  the  whole  and  its  parts;  on  the  other,  the  category  of  the  thing  and
its  attributes,  of  which  application  is  made  in  the  customary  doctrine
of  the  origin  of  the  generic  concept.  That  objects  are  given  as
organizations  of  particular  attributes,  and  that  the  total  groups  of
such  attributes  are  divided  into  parts  and  sub-parts,  which  are
common  to  several  of  them,  is  here  taken  as  the  self-evident,  basic
principle.  In  truth,  however,  the  "given"  is  not  thereby  merely
described,  but  is  judged  and  shaped  according  to  a  certain  conceptual
contrast.  But  as  soon  as  this  is  recognized  it  must  become  evident
that  we  stand  here  before  a  mere  beginning  that  points  beyond


18  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

itself.  The  categorical  acts  (Akte),  which  we  characterize  by  the
concepts  of  the  whole  and  its  parts,  and  of  the  thing  and  its  attributes,
are  not  isolated  but  belong  to  a  system  of  logical  categories,  which
moreover  they  by  no  means  exhaust.  After  we  have  conceived  the
plan  of  this  system  in  a  general  logical  theory  of  relations,  we  can,
from  this  standpoint,  determine  its  details.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
not  possible  to  gain  a  view  of  all  possible  forms  of  connection  from  the
limited  standpoint  of  certain  relations  emphasized  in  the  naive  view
of  the  world.  The  category  of  the  thing  shows  itsfclf  unsuited  for
this  purpose  in  the  very  fact  that  we  have  in  pure  mathematics  a
field  of  knowledge,  in  which  things  and  their  properties  are  disre-
garded in  principle,  and  in  whose  fundamental  concepts  therefore,,
no  general  property  of  things  can  be  contained.

in

The  negative  process  of  "abstraction."  At  this  point,  a  new  and
more  general  difficulty  arises  to  threaten  the  traditional  logical
doctrine.  If  we  merely  follow  the  traditional  rule  for  passing  from
the  particular  to  the  universal,  we  reach  the  paradoxical  result  that
thought,  in  so  far  as  it  mounts  from  lower  to  higher  and  more  inclu-
sive concepts,  moves  in  mere  negations.  The  essential  act  here
presupposed  is  that  we  drop  certain  determinations,  which  we  had
hitherto  held;  that  we  abstract  from  them  and  exclude  them  from
consideration  as  irrelevant.  What  enables  the  mind  to  form  con-
cepts is  just  its  fortunate  gift  of  forgetfulness,  its  inability  to  grasp
the  individual  differences  everywhere  present  in  the  particular
cases.  If  all  the  memory  images,  which  remained  with  us  from
previous  experiences,  were  fully  determinate,  if  they  recalled  the
vanished  content  of  consciousness  in  its  full,  concrete  and  living
nature,  they  would  never  be  taken  as  completely  similar  to  the  new
impression  and  would  thus  not  blend  into  a  unity  with  the  latter.
Only  the  inexactness  of  reproduction,  which  never  retains  the  whole
of  the  earlier  impression  but  merely  its  hazy  outline,  renders  possible
this  unification  of  elements  that  are  in  themselves  dissimilar.  Thus
all  formation  of  con^jepts  begins  with  the  substitution  of  a  generalized
image  for  the  individual  sensuous  intuition,  and  in  place  of  the  actual
perception  the  substitution  of  its  imperfect  and  faded  remainder.10

10  C/.,  Sigwart,  Logik,  Ed.  2,  p.  50  f.,  also,  H.  Maier,  Psychologic  des
emotionalen  Denkens,  Tiibingen,  1908,  pp.  168  ff.


THEORY  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS 19

If  we  adhere  strictly  to  this  conception,  we  reach  the  strange  result
that  all  the  logical  labor  which  we  apply  to  a  given  sensuous  intuition
serves  only  to  separate  us  more  and  more  from  it.  Instead  of  reach-
ing a  deeper  comprehension  of  its  import  and  structure,  we  reach
only  a  superficial  schema  from  which  all  peculiar  traits  of  the  particu-
lar case  have  vanished.

The  mathematical  concept  and  its  "concrete  universality"  But  from
any  such  conclusion  we  are  once  more  safeguarded  by  considera-
tion of  that  science  in  which  conceptual  definiteness  and  clarity  have
reached  their  highest  level.  It  is  at  this  point,  indeed,  that  the
mathematical  concept  appears  most  sharply  distinguished  from  the
ontological  concept.  In  the  methodological  struggle  over  the  limits
of  mathematics  and  ontology,  which  took  place  in  the  philosophy  of
the  eighteenth  century,  this  relation  was  incidentally  given  happy
and  significant  expression.  In  his  criticism  of  the  logic  of  the
Wolffian  school,  Lambert  pointed  out  that  it  was  the  exclusive
merit  of  mathematical  "general  concepts"  not  to  cancel  the  deter-
minations of  the  special  cases,  but  in  all  strictness  fully  to  retain
them.  When  a  mathematician  makes  his  formula  more  general,
this  means  not  only  that  he  is  to  retain  all  the  more  special  cases,
but  also  be  able  to  deduce  them  from  the  universal  formula.  The
possibility  of  deduction  is  not  found  in  the  case  of  the  scholastic
concepts,  since  these,  according  to  the  traditional  formula,  are  formed
by  neglecting  the  particular,  and  hence  the  reproduction  of  the  par-
ticular moments  of  the  concept  seems  excluded.  Thus  abstraction
is  very  easy  for  the  "philosopher,"  but  on  the  other  hand,  the  deter-
mination of  the  particular  from  the  universal  so  much  the  more
difficult;  for  in  the  process  of  abstraction  he  leaves  behind  all  the
particularities  in  such  a  way  that  he  cannot  recover  them,  much
less  reckon  the  transformations  of  which  they  are  capable.11  This
simple  remark  contains,  in  fact,  the  germ  of  a  distinction  of  great
consequence.  The  ideal  of  a  scientific  concept  here  appears  in  opposi-
tion to  the  schematic  general  presentation  which  is  expressed  by  a
mere  word.  The  genuine  concept  does  not  disregard  the  peculiarities
and  particularities  which  it  holds  under  it,  but  seeks  to  show  the
necessity  of  the  occurrence  and  connection  of  just  these  particularities.

11  Lambert,  Anlage  zur  Architektonik  oder  Theorie  des  Einfachen  und  des
Ersten  inderphilosophischenundmathematischenErkenntnis,  Riga,  1771,  §193  ff.
C/.  my  Erkenntnisproblem  in  der  Philosophic  und  Wissenschaft  der  neuern
Zeit,  Vol.  II,  p.  422  f .


20  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

What  it  gives  is  a  universal  rule  for  the  connection  of  the  particulars
themselves.  Thus  we  can  proceed  from  a  general  mathematical
formula, — for  example,  from  the  formula  of  a  curve  of  the  second
order, — to  the  special  geometrical  forms  of  the  circle,  the  ellipse,
etc.,  by  considering  a  certain  parameter  which  occurs  in  them  and
permitting  it  to  vary  through  a  contiguous  series  of  magnitudes.
Here  the  more  universal  concept  shows  itself  also  the  more  rich  in
content;  whoever  has  it  can  deduce  from  it  all  the  mathematical
relations  which  concern  the  special  problems,  while,  on  the  other  hand,
he  takes  these  problems  not  as  isolated  but  as  in  continuous  con-
nection with  each  other,  thus  in  their  deeper  systematic  connections.
The  individual  case  is  not  excluded  from  consideration,  but  is  fixed
and  retained  as  a  perfectly  determinate  step  in  a  general  process  of
change.  It  is  evident  anew  that  the  characteristic  feature  of  the
concept  is  not  the  "universality"  of  a  presentation,  but  the  universal
validity  of  a  principle  of  serial  order.  We  do  not  isolate  any  abstract
part  whatever  from  the  manifold  before  us,  but  we  create  for  its
members  a  definite  relation  by  thinking  of  them  as  bound  together
by  an  inclusive  law.  And  the  further  we  proceed  in  this  and  the
more  firmly  this  connection  according  to  laws  is  established,  so  much
the  clearer  does  the  unambiguous  determination  of  the  particular
stand  forth.  Thus,  for  example,  the  intuition  of  our  Euclidian
three-dimensional  space  only  gains  in  clear  comprehension  when,  in
modern  geometry,  we  ascend  to  the  "higher"  forms  of  space;  for  in
this  way  the  total  axiomatic  structure  of  our  space  is  first  revealed  in
full  distinctness.

The  criticism  of  the  theories  of  abstraction.  Modern  expositions
of  logic  have  attempted  to  take  account  of  this  circumstance  by
opposing, — in  accordance  with  a  well-known  distinction  of  HegePs, —
the  abstract  universality  of  the  concept  to  the  concrete  universality
of  the  mathematical  formula.  Abstract  universality  belongs  to  the
genus  in  so  far  as,  considered  in  and  for  itself,  it  neglects  all  specific
differences;  concrete  universality,  on  the  contrary,  belongs  to  the
systematic  whole  (Gesamtbegriff)  which  takes  up  into  itself  the  pecu-
liarities of  all  the  species  and  develops  them  according  to  a  rule.
"When,  e.g.,  algebra  solves  the  problem  of  finding  two  whole  numbers,
whose  sum  is  equal  to  25,  and  of  which  one  is  divisible  by  2  and  the
other  by  3,  by  expressing  the  second  by  the  formula  6z  +  3,  in  which
z  can  only  have  the  values  0,  1,  2,  3,  and  from  which  of  itself  22-6z
follows  as  a  formula  of  the  first,  these  formulae  possess  concrete


THEORY  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS 21

universality.  They  are  universal  because  they  represent  the  law
which  determines  all  the  numbers  sought;  they  are  also  concrete
because,  when  z  is  given  the  four  above-mentioned  values,  the
numbers  sought  for  follow  from  these  formulae  as  species  of  them.
The  same  is  true  in  general  of  every  mathematical  function  of  one  or
more  variables.  Every  mathematical  function  represents  a  univer-
sal law,  which,  by  virtue  of  the  successive  values  which  the  variable
can  assume,  contains  within  itself  all  the  particular  cases  for  which  it
holds."12  If,  however,  this  is  once  recognized,  a  completely  new
field  of  investigation  is  opened  for  logic.  In  opposition  to  the  logic
of  the  generic  concept,  which,  as  we  saw,  represents  the  point  of  view
and  influence  of  the  concept  of  substance,  there  now  appears  the
logic  of  the  mathematical  concept  of  function.  However,  the  field  of
application  of  this  form  of  logic  is  not  confined  to  mathematics  alone.
On  the  contrary,  it  extends  over  into  the  field  of  the  knowledge  of
nature;  for  the  concept  of  function  constitutes  the  general  schema
and  model  according  to  which  the  modern  concept  of  nature  has  been
molded  in  its  progressive  historical  development.

Before  we  proceed  to  trace  the  construction  of  functional  concepts
in  science  itself  and  thus  to  verify  our  new  conception  of  the  concept
by  concrete  examples,  we  may  indicate  the  meaning  of  the  problem
by  citing  a  characteristic  turn  recently  taken  by  the  theory  of  ab-
straction. Everywhere  a  new  motive  is  apparent,  which,  if  systemati-
cally developed  and  carried  through,  will  raise  logical  questions  that
extend  beyond  the  traditional  point  of  view.  An  indication  of  this
motive  is  to  be  found  in  the  first  place  in  Lotze's  skeptical  comments
on  the  traditional  doctrine  of  abstraction.  As  he  explains,  the  real
practice  of  thought  in  the  formation  of  concepts  does  not  follow  the
course  prescribed  by  this  doctrine;  for  it  is  never  satisfied  to  advance
to  the  universal  concept  by  neglecting  the  particular  properties
without  retaining  an  equivalent  for  them.  When  we  form  the  concept
of  metal  by  connecting  gold,  silver,  copper  and  lead,  we  cannot  indeed
ascribe  to  the  abstract  object  that  thus  comes  into  being  the  particu-
lar color  of  gold,  or  the  particular  luster  of  silver,  or  the  weight  of
copper,  or  the  density  of  lead;  however,  it  would  be  no  less  inadmis-
sible if  we  simply  attempted  to  deny  all  these  particular  determina-
tions of  it.  For  the  idea  obviously  does  not  suffice  as  a  characteriza-
tion of  metal,  that  it  is  neither  red  nor  yellow,  neither  of  this  or  that

12  Drobisch,  Neue  Darstellung  der  Logik,  p.  22.


22  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

specific  weight,  neither  of  this  or  that  hardness  or  resisting  power;
but  the  positive  thought  must  be  added  that  it  is  colored  in  some  way
in  every  case,  that  it  is  of  some  degree  of  hardness,  density  and  luster.
And  analogously,  we  would  not  retain  the  general  concept  of  animal,
if  we  abandoned  in  it  all  thought  of  the  aspects  of  procreation,  of
movement  and  of  respiration,  because  there  is  no  form  of  procreation,
of  breathing,  etc.,  which  can  be  pointed  out  as  common  to  all  animals.
It  is  not,  therefore,  the  simple  neglect  of  the  "marks"  pip2,  qiQ2,
that  are  different  in  the  different  species,  which  is  the  rule  of  abstrac-
tion; but  always,  in  the  place  of  the  neglected  particular  determina-
tions, the  general  "marks"  P  and  Q  must  be  set  up,  the  particular
species  of  which  are  pip2  and  qiq2.  The  merely  negative  procedure,
on  the  contrary,  would  lead  in  the  end  to  the  denial  of  all  determina-
tion, so  that  our  thought  would  find  no  way  of  return  from  the  logical
"nothing"  which  the  concept  would  then  signify.13  We  see  here  how
Lotze,  on  the  basis  of  psychological  considerations,  approaches  the
problem  which  Lambert  had  clearly  and  definitely  formulated,  using
the  example  of  the  mathematical  concept.  If  we  carry  through  the
above  rule  to  the  end,  it  obliges  us  to  retain,  in  place  of  the  particu-
lar "marks"  which  are  neglected  in  the  formation  of  the  concept,
the  systematic  totality  (Inbegriff)  to  which  those  marks  belong  as
special  determinations.  We  can  abstract  from  the  particular  color
only  if  we  retain  the  total  series  of  colors  in  general  as  a  fundamental
schema,  with  respect  to  which  we  consider  the  concept  determined,
which  we  are  forming.  We  represent  this  systematic  totality
(Inbegriff)  when  we  substitute  for  the  constant  particular  "marks,"
variabk  terms,  such  as  stand  for  the  total  group  of  possible  values
which  the  different  "marks"  can  assume.  Thus  it  becomes  evident
that  the  falling  aside  of  the  particular  determinations  is  only  in
appearance  a  purely  negative  process.  In  truth,  what  seems  to  be
cancelled  in  this  way  is  maintained  in  another  form  and  under  a  differ-
ent logical  category.  As  long  as  we  believe  that  all  determinateness
consists  in  constant  "marks"  in  things  and  their  attributes,  every
process  of  logical  generalization  must  indeed  appear  an  impoverish-
ment of  the  conceptual  content.  But  precisely  to  the  extent  that
the  concept  is  freed  of  all  thing-like  being,  its  peculiar  functional
character  is  revealed.  Fixed  properties  are  replaced  by  universal
rules  that  permit  us  to  survey  a  total  series  of  possible  determinations

•'  Lotze,  Logik,  Ed.  2,  Leipzig,  1880,  p.  40  f.


THEORY OF THE FORMATION OF CONCEPTS  23

at  a  single  glance.  This  transformation,  this  change  into  a  new  form
of  logical  being,  constitutes  the  real  positive  achievement  of  abstrac-
tion. We  do  not  proceed  from  a  series  oai/3i,  aazfa,  aa303 ....
directly  to  their  common  constitutive  a,  but  replace  the  totality  of
individual  members  a  by  a  variable  expression  xr  the  totality  of
individual  members  ft  by  a  variable  expression  y.  In  this  way  we
unify  the  whole  system  in  the  expression  a  x  y  ...  which  can
be  changed  into  the  concrete  totality  (Allheit)  of  the  members  of  the
series  by  a  continuous  transformation,  and  which  therefore  perfectly
represents  the  structure  and  logical  divisions  of  the  concept.

Objects  of  the  "first"  and  "second"  orders.  This  turn  of  thought
can  be  traced  even  in  those  expositions  of  logic  that,  in  fundamental
tendency,  retain  the  traditional  theory  of  abstraction.  It  is  signifi-
cant of  this  tendency,  for  instance,  that  Erdmann,  after  completing
his  psychological  theory  of  the  concept,  finds  himself  forced  by  his
consideration  of  the  mathematical  manifold  to  the  introduction  of  a
new  point  of  view  and  a  new  terminology.  The  first  phase  of  every
construction  of  concepts,  he  now  teaches,  does  indeed  involve  the
separating  out  of  a  certain  universal  on  the  basis  of  the  uniformity
with  which  its  content  recurs  amid  varying  particulars;  but  this
uniformity  of  the  given,  though  perhaps  the  original,  is  not  the  sole
condition  which  enables  us  to  mark  off  the  objects  of  our  presentations.
In  the  progress  of  thought,  the  consciousness  of  uniformity  is  rather
supplemented  by  the  consciousness  of  necessary  connection;  and  this
supplementation  goes  so  far  that  ultimately  we  are  not  dependent
upon  number  of  repetitions  to  establish  a  concept.  "Wherever  in
developed  presentation  a  composite  object  is  found  in  our  perception,
which  takes  its  place  as  a  well-defined  member  of  a  series  of  presenta-
tions, such  as  a  new  shade  in  the  series  of  colors,  a  new  chemical
compound  in  a  series  of  known  compounds  of  similar  constitution,
there  a  single  occurrence  suffices  to  fix  it  in  its  definite  character  as  a
member  of  the  series,  even  in  case  we  never  perceive  it  again."14
In  contrast  to  objects  of  sense-perception,  which  we  can  designate  as
"objects  of  the  first  order,"  there  now  appear  "objects  of  the  second
order,"  whose  logical  character  is  determined  solely  by  the  form  of
connection  from  which  they  proceed.  In  general,  wherever  we  unify
the  objects  of  our  thought  into  a  single  object,  we  create  a  new
"object  of  the  second  order,"  whose  total  content  is  expressed  in  the

i*  B.  Erdmann,  Logik,  Ed.  2,  p.  158.  f.


24  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

relations  established  between  the  individual  elements  by  the  act  of
unification.  This  type  of  thought,  to  which  Erdmann  declares  he
was  led  by  the  problems  of  the  modern  theory  of  groups,  breaks
through  the  old  schema  of  the  formation  of  concepts;  for  instead  of
the  community  of  "marks/'  the  unification  of  elements  in  a  concept
is  decided  by  their  "connection  by  implication."  And  this  criterion,
here  only  introduced  by  way  of  supplement  and  as  a  secondary  aspect,
proves  on  closer  analysis  to  be  the  real  logical  prius;  for  we  have
already  seen  that  "abstraction"  remains  aimless  and  unmeaning  if  it
does  not  consider  the  elements  from  which  it  takes  the  concept  to
be  from  the  first  arranged  and  connected  by  a  certain  relation.

The  variety  of  objective  "intentions"  In  general,  as  the  purely
logical  aspect  of  the  concepts  of  relation  and  of  the  manifold  becomes
clearer,  a  greater  need  is  felt  for  a  new  psychological  foundation.  If
the  objects  with  which  pure  logic  deals  are  not  identical  with  the
individual  contents  of  perception,  but  possess  their  own  structure
and  "essence,"  then  the  question  must  arise  as  to  how  this  peculiar
"essence"  comes  to  our  consciousness  and  by  what  acts  it  is  grasped.
It  is  clear  that  the  mere  sensuous  experiences,  however  much  we
heap  them  up  and  however  much  we  complicate  them,  can  never
suffice  for  this  purpose.  For  sensuous  experience  is  concerned
exclusively  with  a  particular  object  or  with  a  plurality  of  such  objects;
no  summation  of  individual  cases  can  ever  produce  the  specific  unity
which  is  meant  in  the  concept.  The  theory  of  attention,  therefore,
as  the  truly  creative  faculty  in  the  formation  of  concepts,  loses  all
application  in  a  deeper  phenomenology  of  the  pure  thought  processes.
For  attention  only  separates  or  connects  elements  already  given  in
perception;  it  can  give  these  elements  no  new  meaning  and  invest
them  with  no  new  logical  function.  It  is  such  a  change  of  function,
however,  which  first  transforms  the  contents  of  perception  and  pres-
entation into  concepts  in  the  logical  sense.  From  the  standpoint  of
purely  descriptive  analysis  of  conscious  process  also,  it  is  something
different  when  I  grasp  this  or  that  particular  property  of  a  thing,
as  when  for  example  I  select  from  the  perceptual  complex  of  a  house
its  special  red  color,  than  when  I  contemplate  "the"  red  as  a  species.
There  is  a  difference  between  making  valid  mathematical  judgments
concerning  the  number  "four,"  thereby  placing  it  in  an  objective
connection  of  relations,  and  directing  consciousness  upon  a  con-
crete group  of  things  or  presentations  of  four  elements.  The  logical


THEORY  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  CONCEPTS 25

determination  of  "four"  (in  the  first  case)  is  given  by  its  place  in  an
ideal  and  therefore  timelessly  valid  whole  of  relations,  by  its  place  in
a  mathematically  defined  number-system;  but  sensuous  presentation,
w)iich  is  necessarily  limited  to  a  particular  'here'  and  'now/  is  unable
to  reproduce  this  form  of  determination.  Here  the  psychology  of
thought  strives  to  make  a  new  advance.  By  the  side  of  what  the
content  is  in  its  material,  sensuous  structure,  there  appears  what  it
means  in  the  system  of  knowledge;  and  thus,  its  meaning  develops
out  of  the  various  logical  "acts"  which  can  be  attached  to  the  content.
These  "acts,"  which  differentiate  the  sensuously  unitary  content  by
imprinting  upon  it  different  objectively  directed  "intentions,"  are
psychologically  completely  underived;  they  are  peculiar  forms  of
consciousness,  such  as  cannot  be  reduced  to  the  consciousness  of
sensation  or  perception.  If  we  are  still  to  speak  of  abstraction  as
that  to  which  the  concept  owes  its  being,  nevertheless  its  meaning  is
now  totally  different  from  that  of  the  customary  sensationalistic  doc-
trine; for  abstraction  is  no  longer  a  uniform  and  undifferentiated
attention  to  a  given  content,  but  the  intelligent  accomplishment  of
the  most  diversified  and  mutually  independent  acts  of  thought,  each
of  which  involves  a  particular  sort  of  meaning  of  the  content,  a
special  direction  of  objective  reference.15

The  serial  form  and  the  members  of  the  series.  Thus  the  circle  of
our  subject  is  complete,  since  we  are  led,  from  the  side  of  "subjective"
analysis,  from  the  pure  phenomenology  of  consciousness,  to  the  same
fundamental  distinction,  the  validity  of  which  has  been  shown  in  the
"objective"  logical  investigation.  While  the  empiristic  doctrine
regards  the  "similarity"  of  certain  contents  of  presentation  as  a  self-
evident  psychological  fact  which  it  applies  in  explaining  the  forma-
tion of  concepts,  it  is  justly  pointed  out  in  opposition  that  the
similarity  of  certain  elements  can  only  be  spoken  of  significantly  when
a  certain  "point  of  view"  has  been  established  from  which  the  ele-
ments can  be  designated  as  like  or  unlike.  This  identity  of  refer-
ence, of  point  of  view,  under  which  the  comparison  takes  place,  is,
however,  something  distinctive  and  new  as  regards  the  compared
contents  themselves.  The  difference  between  these  contents,  on  the
one  hand,  and  the  conceptual  "species,"  on  the  other,  by  which  we
unify  them,  is  an  irreducible  fact;  it  is  categorical  and  belongs  to  the

16  On  this  whole  subject  cf.  Husserl,  Logische  Untersuchungen,  Vol.  II,
No.  II,  Halle,  1901 :  Die  ideale  Einheit  der  Species  und  die  neuern  Abstractions-
theorien.


26  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

"form  of  consciousness."  In  fact,  it  is  a  new  expression  of  the
characteristic  contrast  between  the  member  of  the  series  and  the
farm  of  the  series.  The  content  of  the  concept  cannot  be  dissolved
into  the  elements  of  its  extension,  because  the  two  do  not  lie  on  the
same  plane  but  belong  in  principle  to  different  dimensions.  The
meaning  of  the  law  that  connects  the  individual  members  is  not  to
be  exhausted  by  the  enumeration  of  any  number  of  instances  of  the
law;  for  such  enumeration  lacks  the  generating  principle  that  enables
us  to  connect  the  individual  members  into  a  functional  whole.  If
I  know  the  relation  according  to  which  a  b  c  .  .  .  are  ordered,
I  can  deduce  them  by  reflection  and  isolate  them  as  objects  of  thought;
it  is  impossible,  on  the  other  hand,  to  discover  the  special  character
of  the  connecting  relation  from  the  mere  juxtaposition  of  o,  6,  c  in
presentation.  (C/.  above  pp.  16  ff.)  In  this  conception  there  is  no
danger  of  hypostasizing  the  pure  concept,  of  giving  it  an  independent
reality  along  with  the  particular  things.  The  serial  form  F(a,  5,  c .  .  . ) .
which  connects  the  members  of  a  manifold  obviously  cannot  be
thought  after  the  fashion  of  an  individual  a  or  6  or  c,  without  thereby
losing  its  peculiar  character.  Its  "being"  consists  exclusively  in
the  logical  determination  *by  which  it  is  clearly  differentiated  from
other  possible  serial  forms  <£,  ^  .  .  .  .;  and  this  determination
can  only  be  expressed  by  a  synthetic  act  of  definition,  and  not  by
a  simple  sensuous  intuition.

These  considerations  indicate  the  direction  of  the  following  inves-
tigation. The  totality  and  order  of  pure  "serial  forms"  lies  before
us  in  the  system  of  the  sciences,  especially  in  the  structure  of  exact
science.  Here,  therefore,  the  theory  finds  a  rich  and  fruitful  field,
which  can  be  investigated  with  respect  to  its  logical  import  inde-
pendently of  any  metaphysical  or  psychological  presuppositions  as
to  the  "nature"  of  the  concept.  This  independence  of  pure  logic,
however,  does  not  mean  its  isolation  within  the  system  of  philosophy.
Even  a  hasty  glance  at  the  evolution  of  "formal"  logic  would  show
how  the  dogmatic  inflexibility  of  the  traditional  forms  begins  to
yield.  And  the  new  form  that  is  beginning  to  take  shape,  is  also  a
form  for  a  new  content.  Psychology  and  criticism  of  knowledge,
the  problem  of  consciousness  and  the  problem  of  reality,  both  take
part  in  this  process.  For  in  fundamental  problems  there  are  no
absolute  divisions  and  limits;  every  transformation  of  the  genuinely
"formal"  concept  produces  a  new  interpretation  of  the  whole  field
that  is  characterized  and  ordered  by  it.


CHAPTER  II
THE  CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER


Among  the  fundamental  concepts  of  pure  science  the  concept  of
number  stands  in  the  first  place,  both  historically  and  systematically.
It  is  in  connection  with  it  that  consciousness  of  the  meaning  and  value
of  the  formation  of  concepts  first  develops.  In  the  thought  of
number  all  the  power  of  knowledge  seems  contained,  all  possibility
of  the  logical  determination  of  the  sensuous.  If  there  were  no
number,  nothing  could  be  understood  in  things,  either  in  themselves
or  in  their  relations  to  each  other.  This  Pythagorean  doctrine
remains  unchanged  in  its  real  import  through  all  the  changes  in
philosophical  thought.  The  claim  to  grasp  the  substance  of  things
in  number  has  indeed  been  gradually  withdrawn;  but  at  the  same
time  the  insight  has  been  deepened  and  clarified  that  in  number  is
rooted  the  substance  of  rational  knowledge.  Even  when  the  meta-
physical kernel  of  the  object  is  no  longer  seen  in  it,  the  concept  of
number  remains  the  first  and  truest  expression  of  rational  method
in  general.  In  it  are  directly  mirrored  the  differences  in  principle
between  the  fundamental  interpretations  of  knowledge.  Through
number  the  general  ideal  of  knowledge  gains  a  more  definite  form,
in  which  for  the  first  time  it  is  defined  with  full  clarity.

The  sensationalistic  deduction  of  number.  Thus  it  is  quite  intelligible
that  we  should  meet  upon  the  threshold  of  algebra  the  same  typical
opposition  that  was  traceable  in  the  field  of  logic.  If  we  accept  the
traditional  logical  view,  we  should  expect  to  find  certain  fundamental
properties  of  objects  revealed  in  the  numerical  concepts.  The
theory  of  abstraction  provides,  strictly  speaking,  for  no  other  point
of  view.  Just  as  objects  are  differentiated  according  to  size  and
form,  according  to  smell  and  taste,  so  also,  on  the  theory  of  abstrac-
tion, they  must  have  a  certain  property  which  gives  them  their
numerical  character.  The  concept  of  "two"  or  "three"  would  be
abstracted  from  a  plurality *of  objective  groups,  just  as  the  concept  of
a  certain  color  arises  from  the  comparison  of  colored  perceptual
things.  It  is  consistent,  from  this  standpoint,  to  regard  all  asser-

27


28  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

tions  concerning  numbers  and  numerical  relationships  as  expressive
of  certain  physical  properties  of  objects.  In  the  modern  develop-
ment of  empiricism,  this  latent  consequence  has  for  the  first  time  fully
come  to  light.  Thus,  according  to  J.  S.  Mill,  the  proposition  that
2  +  1  =  3  represents  no  mere  definition,  no  mere  fixation  of  the
meaning  which  we  are  to  connect  with  the  concepts  of  two  and  three,
but  it  reports  an  empirical  matter  of  fact  which  our  spatial  perception
has  hitherto  always  presented  in  the  same  way.  We  have  always
been  able  when  we  have  seen  three  things  before  us  in  a  certain
arrangement, — for  example,  in  the  form  Q%> — to  analyse  them  into
partial  groups  of  the  sort  00,  0.  Three  pebbles  do  not  make  the  same
impression  on  our  senses  when  they  lie  before  us  in  two  separate
piles  as  when  they  are  collected  into  a  single  pile.  Hence  the  asser-
tion, that  the  perception  that  arises  in  the  first  case  can  always  be
transformed  through  mere  spatial  re-arrangement  of  its  parts  into
the  second  perception,  is  no  mere  identical  proposition  that  says  noth-
ing, but  an  inductive  truth  learned  through  early  experience  and
which  has  since  been  continually  confirmed.  Such  truths  constitute
the  foundation  of  the  science  of  number.  The  appearance  of  ideality
that  attaches  to  this  science  must,  therefore,  disappear.  The  propo-
sitions of  arithmetic  lose  their  former  exceptional  position;  they
come  to  be  on  the  same  plane  as  other  physical  observations  that
we  have  made  concerning  separations  and  combinations  in  the  world
of  bodies.  For  how  can  there  be  significant  and  valid  judgments
that  have  no  reference  to  sensible  facts?  The  concept  of  ten  either
means  nothing  or  it  means  a  certain  uniform  total  impression  that  is
always  found  in  groups  of  ten  bodies,  ten  tones  or  ten  pulse-beats.
And  that  the  various  impressions  thus  gained  from  objects  form  a
system  among  themselves,  in  which  certain  constant  relations  prevail,
is  likewise  a  proposition  possessing  merely  empirical  certainty.  A
reality  of  another  sort,  a  new  physical  environment  into  which  we
were  thrust,  could  make  the  proposition  that  2X2  =  5  just  as
familiar  and  self-evident  to  us  as  it  now  seems  unintelligible  and
absurd.1

Frege's  foundations  of  arithmetic.  With  this  first  step  into  the
field  of  exact  scientific  problems,  we  can  already  see  very  clearly
what  real  meaning  and  importance  may  be  contained  in  what  appear

1  Cf.  Mill,  System  of  Logic,  Bk.  II,  Ch.  6;  An  Examination  of  Sir  William
Hamilton's  Philosophy,  pp.  67  ff.


THE CONCEPT  OP  NUMBER  29

to  be  purely  formal  logical  differences.  For,  however  we  may
judge  Mill's  theory  of  the  fundamental  arithmetical  principles,  we
must  recognize  that  it  follows  with  convincing  necessity  from  his
general  interpretation  of  the  concept.  So  much  the  more  significant
is  it  that  the  theory,  when  carried  through,  leads  to  a  direct  conflict
with  the  fact  of  scientific  arithmetic  itself.  Wherever  an  attempt  has
been  made  in  modern  mathematics  to  analyse  and  explain  the  fact
of  scientific  arithmetic,  the  logical  structure  of  pure  number  has  been
sharply  distinguished  from  Mill's  arithmetic  of  "pebbles  and  ginger-
bread nuts,"  thereby  guarding  against  a  possible  illusion.  Indeed,
if  Mill's  deduction  were  correct,  the  arithmetical  concepts  would  be
deprived  of  the  very  determinateness  which  constitutes  their  peculiar
value  and  import.  The  logical  differences  of  numbers  would  be
limited  and  restricted  to  whatever  psychological  power  of  differentia-
tion we  had  attained  in  the  apprehension  of  given  groups  of  objects.
The  absurdity  of  this  consequence  can,  however,  be  easily  seen.
The  number  753,684  is  just  as  definitely  and  clearly  differentiated
from  the  number  that  immediately  precedes  or  follows  it  as  three  is
from  two  or  four;  but  who  could  point  out  the  "impression"  which
differentiates  the  sensuous  intuitions  of  the  two  concrete  groups  from
each  other?  And  in  the  same  way  that  the  characteristic  content  of
the  numerical  concepts  is  lost  here,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  we  lose
the  scope  and  freedom  of  application  that  is  essential  to  it.  The
synthesis  of  numbering  can  only  take  place,  according  to  Mill,
where  the  combining  and  separating  instituted  by  it  can  actually  be
carried  out  with  physical  objects,  where  things  themselves  can  be
collected  and  separated  into  perceptible  spatial  groups.  The  vary-
ing images,  which  arise  in  us  from  the  different  groups,  constitute
the  real  and  indispensable  basis  of  all  assertions  concerning  numerical
relations.  Hence  beyond  the  field  of  spatial  sensuous  intuition,
wherein  these  actual  combinations  and  separations  alone  are  possible,
the  real  foundation  of  the  numerical  concepts  would  be  lacking.
But  in  truth,  we  speak  not  merely  of  the  number  of  seeds  in  a  pile,
but  of  the  number  of  categories,  of  the  number  of  Kepler's  laws,  or
of  the  number  of  factors  of  energy:  all  objects  which  cannot  be
arranged  side  by  side  and  separated  from  each  other  like  pebbles.
"It  would  indeed  be  strange,"  remarks  Frege,  in  his  drastic  and
pertinent  criticism  of  Mill's  doctrine,"  if  a  property  abstracted  from
outer  things  could  be  carried  over  without  change  of  meaning  to


30  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

experiences,  presentations  and  concepts.  It  would  be  precisely  as
if  one  were  to  speak  of  a  fusible  experience,  of  a  blue  presentation,
of  a  salty  concept  or  a  sticky  judgment.  It  is  absurd  that  what  is
by  nature  sensible  should  present  itself  in  connection  with  the  insen-
sible. When  we  see  a  blue  surface,  we  have  a  peculiar  impression
which  corresponds  to  the  word  blue;  and  this  we  recognize  again
when  we  look  at  another  blue  surface.  If  we  assume  that  in  the
same  way  in  looking  at  a  triangle  there  is  something  sensuous  which
corresponds  to  the  word  "three"  then  this  sensuous  element  must
also  be  found  in  three  concepts;  something  non-sensuous  would  have
something  sensuous  as  a  property.  It  can  be  granted  that  there  is  a
kind  of  sensuous  impression  corresponding  to  the  word  "triangular"
in  case  we  take  the  word  as  a  whole.  We  do  not  see  the  three  in  it
immediately,  but  we  see  something  to  which  an  intellectual  activity
can  attach,  which  leads  to  a  judgment  in  which  the  number  3
appears."2

The  system  of  arithmetic.  If  the  absurdities  inevitably  implied  in  the
sensationalistic  interpretation  of  number  do  not  come  to  light  directly
in  the  first  deduction,  the  reason  lies  in  the  fact  that  intellectual
activities,  processes  of  judgment,  are  not  entirely  excluded  but  are
tacitly  assumed.  According  to  this  theory,  only  the  first  truths  of
arithmetic,  only  the  most  elementary  formulae,  are  to  be  the  result
of  the  immediate  observation  of  physical  facts,  while  the  scientific
system  of  algebra  is  not  to  rest  upon  the  continually  renewed  influx
of  facts  of  perception,  but  upon  a  "generalization"  of  the  original
sensuous  facts.  But  this  conception  involves  all  the  riddles  which
the  theory  promised  to  solve.  When  we  attempt  to  give  such  a
conception  clear  and  definite  meaning,  we  find  that  it  directly  implies
a  plurality  of  different  intellectual  functions  which  partake  in  the
construction  of  number.  If  it  is  to  be  possible  to  carry  over  observa-
tions that  we  have  made  with  smaller  complexes  of  objects  progres-
sively to  larger  and  ever  larger  complexes,  and  to  determine  the
properties  of  the  latter  after  the  analogy  of  the  former,  we  must
assume  that  some  form  of  connection  and  dependence  exists  between
the  compared  cases,  by  virtue  of  which  the  one  can  be  deduced  from
the  other.  We  would  not  have  the  right  to  extend  any  determina-
tion, which  appears  to  us  in  any  individual  group,  to  groups  of  a

1  Frege,  Die  Grundlagen  der  Arithmetik.  Breslau,  1884,  p.  31  f .  For  the  whole
matter  cf.  especially  pp.  9  ff.,  27  ff.


THE CONCEPT  OP  NUMBER  31

larger  or  smaller  number  of  elements,  if  we  did  not  comprehend  them
all  as  similar  in  "nature."  This  similarity,  however,  means  nothing
more  than  that  they  are  connected  by  a  definite  rule,  such  as  permits
us  to  proceed  from  one  manifold  to  another  by  continued  identical
application  of  the  same  fundamental  relation.  In  fact,  without  the
assumption  of  such  a  connection  we  should  have  to  be  prepared  for
the  possibility  that  any  unity,  added  to  or  substracted  from  a  given
group,  would  alter  the  total  character  of  the  group  so  that  no  infer-
ence would  be  possible  from  the  relations  of  one  group  to  those  of
any  other.  The  new  unities  would  then  act  like  as  many  physical
conditions  or  forces,  which  could  completely  transform  the  whole
and  cancel  its  fundamental  characteristics.  No  generally  applicable
laws,  no  thorough-going  relation  would  bind  together  the  members  of
the  realm  of  number;  on  the  contrary,  every  arithmetical  proposition
would  have  to  be  specially  proved  by  observation  or  perception  for
every  individual  number.  The  sensualistic  theory  is  only  able  to
avoid  this  consequence  by  an  unnoticed  deviation  into  another  line
of  consideration.  The  demand  for  a  generalization  of  primitive
experiences  of  number  contains,  although  concealed,  that  very
function  of  the  universality  of  number  concepts,  which  was  to  have
been  set  aside  by  the  explanation.  The  road  to  a  purely  deductive
construction  of  the  realm  of  number  is  thereby  reopened;  for  this
the  insight  suffices,  that  the  same  intellectual  procedure,  which  is
indispensable  to  every  theory  in  proceeding  to  the  higher  arithmeti-
cal forms,  constitutes  the  necessary  and  adequate  foundation  for  the
determination  of  the  elements  themselves.  In  this  consequence,
which  the  sensualistic  theory  finally  admits  against  its  will,  is  offered
the  first  view  of  a  unified  methodical  deduction,  deriving  both  its
foundation  and  superstructure  from  a  common  principle.

Number  and  "presentation"  At  first,  however,  there  seems  to
be  another  way  to  establish  the  desired  relation  between  numerical
propositions  and  the  empirical  existence  of  things.  If  we  renounce
the  view  that  all  arithmetical  judgments  are  directed  upon  physical
things  and  dependent  upon  them  for  their  validity,  there  remains,
nevertheless,  another  class  of  realities,  in  which  we  now  seem  to  grasp
the  true  original  of  the  numerical  concepts.  Not  external  things,  but
"consciousness"  itself  in  its  peculiar  and  irreducible  mode  of  being,
is  the  source  of  these  concepts;  what  they  seek  to  encompass  and
represent  is  not  a  material  but  a  mental  being.  The  scope  and


32  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

universality  of  the  numerical  concepts  seems  here  to  be  explained.
Number,  as  presentation,  as  psychical  reality,  remains  free  from  all
the  limitations  that  had  to  be  placed  upon  it  as  long  as  it  was  taken
as  an  expression  of  particular  material  existences  and  their  relations.
We  can  recognize  how  here,  in  connection  with  a  special  problem,
the  same  intellectual  transformation  takes  place  that  we  met  earlier
in  the  field  of  general  logical  theory.  The  attempt  to  have  the
concept  copy  outer  reality  directly  is  abandoned;  but  in  place  of
this  outer  reality  there  appears  its  phenomenal  form  in  our  mind.
The  act  of  enumeration  does  not  give  the  relations  of  things  in
themselves,  but  only  the  way  in  which  they  are  reflected  in  the  com-
prehension of  our  ego.

However  much  this  transformation  may  advance  the  problem,
there  still  remains  an  element  which  it  shares  with  the  sensationalistic
deduction.  The  doctrine  of  number  here  again  fails  to  attain  an
independent  logical  foundation;  it  now  forms  an  appendix  to  psychol-
ogy, just  as  formerly  it  was  a  special  case  of  physics.  (C/.  above
p.  9  ff.).  For  psychology,  however,  "presentation"  means  in  the
last  analysis  nothing  else  than  a  definite  psychical  content,  which
arises  in  the  individual  subject  according  to  special  circumstances,
and  can  be  destroyed  again  in  the  same  way.  Such  a  content  is
different  in  different  individuals  and,  furthermore,  with  respect  to  the
same  subject,  once  it  has  disappeared,  never  returns  in  precisely
the  same  form.  Thus  what  is  here  given  is  always  only  a  temporally
limited  and  determined  reality,  not  a  state  which  can  be  retained  in
unchanging  logical  identity.  It  is  the  fulfillment  of  the  demand  for
this  latter,  however,  which  constitutes  all  the  meaning  and  value  of
the  pure  numerical  concepts.  The  proposition  that  7  +  5  =  12
reports  no  connection  of  presentational  experiences,  either  as  it  has
occurred  in  the  past  or  will  occur  in  the  future  in  thinking  individuals;
but  it  establishes  a  connection  which,  according  to  the  Platonic
expression,  binds  the  seven  and  the  five  in  themselves  with  the
twelve  in  itself.  The  object  upon  which  this  judgment  is  directed
has,  in  spite  of  its  ideality,  a  fixity  and  definiteness  which  sharply
differentiates  it  from  the  changing  contents  of  presentation.  The
psychological  image  of  two  may,  in  the  case  of  one  person,  be  con-
nected with  an  accompanying  spatial  presentation  and,  in  the  case
of  another,  be  without  it;  it  may  now  be  vividly  grasped,  now  dimly;
nevertheless,  the  arithmetical  meaning  of  two  is  not  affected  by  all


THE CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  33

these  differences.3  What  the  concept  "is"  and  means  can  only  be
ascertained  through  understanding  it  as  the  bearer  and  starting-point
of  certain  judgments,  as  a  totality  of  possible  relations.  Concepts  are
identical  when  they  can  be  substituted  for  each  other  -in  all  the
assertions  into  which  they  enter;  when  every  relation  which  holds  of
the  one  can  also  be  carried  over  to  the  other.  If  we  apply  this  crite-
rion, the  whole  difference  between  the  logical  meaning  of  the  concept
of  number  and  the  psychological  conception  of  presentation  is  at
once  revealed.  The  characteristic  relations  which  prevail  in  the
series  of  numbers  are  not  thinkable  as  properties  of  the  given  contents
of  presentation.  Of  a  presentation  it  is  meaningless  to  say  that  one
is  larger  or  smaller  than  another,  the  double  or  triple  of  it,  that  one
is  divisible  by  another,  etc.  And  no  less  does  the  postulate  of  an
infinity  of  numbers  exclude  any  such  conception,  for  all  the  "being"
of  a  presentation  is  exhausted  in  its  immediate  givenness,  in  its
actual  occurrence.  If  the  numbers  are  realities  in  individual  con-
sciousness, they  can  only  be  "given"  in  finite  groups,  i.e.,  realized  in
this  consciousness  as  particular  elements.

The  content  of  presentation  and  the  act  of  presentation.  Yet  in
establishing  this  opposition  between  the  pure  numerical  concepts
and  the  psychological  contents  of  presentation,  this  criticism  does
not  seem  to  have  grasped  the  field  of  psychical  being  in  its  full
significance  and  scope.  It  may  with  justice  be  objected  that  what
is  characteristic  of  number  cannot  be  pointed  out  in  any  particular
and  isolated  content  of  consciousness  only  because  there  is  here  a
universal  presupposition,  which  controls  and  guides  the  origin  and
formulation  of  contents  in  general.  The  act,  by  which  we  define  any
unity  and  the  synthesis  by  which  we  join  together  such  unities  into
new  forms,  constitute  the  only  condition  under  which  we  can  speak
of  a  manifold  of  elements  and  their  connection.  The  activity  of
differentiation  and  connection  alone,  not  any  particular  content
subsequently  resulting  from  it,  can  be  the  desired  psychological
correlate  of  the  numerical  concepts.  It  is  not  with  objects,  either
those  of  inner  or  outer  reality,  but  with  acts  of  apperception,  that
the  numerical  determination  is  connected,  and  to  which  it  goes  back
for  its  real  meaning.  The  "universality"  of  the  pure  numerical
concepts  can  thus  be  understood  and  grounded  from  a  new  stand-
point. Even  sensationalism  recognizes  this  universality ;  but  it  under-

3  Cf.  again  Frege,  op.  cit.,  p.  37.


34  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

stands  it,  according  to  its  fundamental  theory,  as  a  thing-like  "mark,"
which  is  uniformly  found  in  a  group  of  particular  objects.  "All
numbers,"  says  Mill,  "must  be  numbers  of  something:  there  are  no
such  things  as  numbers  in  the  abstract.  But  though  numbers  must
be  numbers  of  something,  they  may  be  numbers  of  anything.  Propo-
sitions, therefore,  concerning  numbers,  have  the  remarkable  peculiar-
ity that  they  are  propositions  concerning  all  things  whatever;  all
objects,  all  existences  of  every  kind,  known  to  our  experience. "4
The  mathematical  property  of  the  enumerability  of  things  is  thus
ascertained  here  in  the  same  manner  as  any  physical  property.  Just
as  we  learn  by  thorough-going  comparison  of  individual  cases  that
all  bodies  are  heavy,  so,  by  an  analogous  method,  we  discover  their
numerical  determinateness.  We  recognize,  however,  that  the  asser-
tion of  the  universality  of  number,  in  so  far  as  it  rests  upon  such  a
procedure  as  this,  has  in  truth  been  gained  surreptitiously;  for  noth-
ing assures  us  that  the  cases  beyond  our  experience  show  the  same
properties  as  those  actually  observed,  and  thus  fall  under  the  arith-
metical laws.  A  new  standpoint  regarding  the  foundation  of  number
is  first  reached  through  the  deeper  and  more  mature  psychological
deduction  of  the  numerical  concepts  from  the  fundamental  act  of
apperceptive  connection  and  separation  in  general.  From  this
standpoint,  number  is  to  be  called  universal  not  because  it  is  con-
tained as  a  fixed  property  in  every  individual,  but  because  it  repre-
sents a  constant  condition  of  judgment  concerning  every  individual
as  an  individual.  The  consciousness  of  this  universality  is  not  gained
by  running  through  an  indefinite  plurality  of  cases,  but  is  already
presupposed  in  the  apprehension  of  every  one  of  them;  for  the  arrange-
ment of  these  individuals  into  an  inclusive  whole  is  only  rendered
possible  by  the  fact  that  thought  is  in  a  position  to  recognize  and
maintain  a  rule,  in  conceptual  identity,  in  spite  of  all  differences  and
peculiarities  of  application.

In  this  attempted  deduction  also,  which  goes  back  from  the  finished
contents  of  presentation  to  the  acts  by  which  they  are  formed,  the
real  logical  problem  of  number  is  not  so  much  solved  as  rather  pushed
back  a  step.  For  whatever  constructive  value  we  ascribe  to  the
pure  acts  of  thought,  they  remain,  nevertheless,  in  their  purely
psychological  sense,  always  occurrences  which  come  and  go  in  time.
They  thus  belong  to  a  certain  individual  stream  of  consciousness  as

4  Mill,  A  System  of  Logic,  Bk.  II,  Ch.  6,  2.


THE  CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  35

it  runs  off  here  and  now  under  the  particular  conditions  of
the  moment.  Here,  however,  the  earlier  question  recurs.  In  the
arithmetical  judgments  it  is  not  the  relation  of  temporally  limited
realities  which  is  expressed  and  established;  here  thought  reaches
out  beyond  the  whole  field  of  thought-processes  to  a  realm  of  ideal
objects,  to  which  it  ascribes  a  permanent  and  unchanging  form.
It  is  by  virtue  of  this  fundamental  form  that  every  element  of  the
numerical  series  is  connected  with  every  other  according  to  a  fixed
systematic  rule.  But  a  psychological  analysis  of  the  acts  of  forming
presentations  cannot  disclose  how  one  is  connected  with  two,  or  two
with  three,  and  how  the  entire  logical  complex  of  propositions  con-
tained in  pure  arithmetic  arises  according  to  this  connection.  The
construction  and  objective  foundation  of  this  systematic  connection
belongs  to  a  totally  different  method.  (Cf.  below,  especially  Ch.
VIII.)  In  the  beginning,  indeed,  this  method  is  a  mere  postulate,
the  fulfillment  of  which  must  appear  entirely  problematical.  For
what  way  remains  of  grounding  a  concept,  if  we  are  to  regard  it
neither  as  a  copy  of  inner  nor  of  outer  being,  neither  of  the  psychical
or  the  physical?  This  question,  however,  which  constantly  presses
to  the  fore,  is  only  an  expression  of  a  certain  dogmatic  view  of  the
nature  and  function  of  the  concept.  The  system  of  arithmetical
concepts  and  propositions  is  not  to  be  estimated  in  terms  of  this
view;  but  considerations  of  formal  logic,  on  the  contrary,  find  a
limit  and  standard  in  this  system,  which  has  gradually  evolved  out
of  its  independent  and  immanent  presuppositions.

ii

The  logical  foundations  of  the  pure  concept  of  number.  (Dedekind.)
The  development  of  scientific  arithmetic  in  the  last  decades  is  charac-
terized by  the  increasing  demand  for  the  deduction  of  the  concept  of
number,  in  its  full  import,  from  purely  logical  premises.  The  science
of  space  seems  to  belong  to  intuition,  or  perhaps  even  to  empirical
perception.  On  the  other  hand,  the  thought  gains  acceptance  that
all  determinations  of  number  are  to  be  grounded,  without  any  appeal
to  sensible  objects  or  any  dependence  upon  concrete  measurable
magnitudes,  "by  a  finite  system  of  simple  steps  of  thought."  In
this  deduction  of  arithmetic  out  of  logic,  however,  the  latter  is  pre-
supposed in  a  new  form.  "If  we  trace  exactly,"  Dedekind  says  in


36  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

beginning  his  deduction  of  the  concept  of  number,  "what  we  do  in
counting  a  group  or  collection  of  things,  we  are  led  to  the  considera-
tion of  the  power  of  the  mind  to  relate  thing  to  thing,  to  let  one  thing
correspond  to  another  thing,  one  thing  copy  another,  a  capacity  in
general  without  which  thought  is  impossible.  Upon  this  one,  but
absolutely  inevitable,  foundation  the  whole  science  of  number  must

be  erected "6 The  starting-point  here  seems  to  be  the

traditional  logical  doctrine  of  a  plurality  of  things  and  the  power  of
the  mind  to  copy  them;  nevertheless  it  becomes  evident  with  deeper
understanding  that  the  old  terms  have  here  gained  a  new  import  and
meaning.  The  "things,"  which  are  spoken  of  in  the  further  deduc-
tion, are  not  assumed  as  independent  existences  present  anterior  to
any  relation,  but  they  gain  their  whole  being,  so  far  as  it  comes
within  the  scope  of  the  arithmetician,  first  in  and  with  the  relations
which  are  predicated  of  them.  Such  "things"  are  terms  of  relations,
and  as  such  can  never  be  "given"  in  isolation  but  only  in  ideal
community  with  each  other.  The  procedure  of  "copying"  has  also
undergone  a  characteristic  transformation.  For  we  are  no  longer
concerned  to  produce  a  conceptual  copy  of  outer  impressions,  such  as
shall  correspond  to  them  in  some  particular  feature;  for  copying
means  nothing  else  than  the  intellectual  arranging  by  which  we
bind  otherwise  totally  diverse  elements  into  a  systematic  unity.
Here  the  question  concerns  merely  the  unification  of  members  of  a
series  by  a  serial  principle,  not  their  agreement  in  some  factual  con-
stitutive part.  After  a  certain  starting-point  has  been  fixed  by  an
original  assumption,  all  further  elements  are  given  by  the  fact  that  a
relation  (R)  is  given,  which  in  continued  application  generates  all
the  members  of  the  complex.  Thus  arise  systems  and  groups  of
systems  in  strict  conceptual  division  without  its  being  necessary  that
one  element  be  connected  with  another  by  any  sort  of  factual  similar-
ity. The  "copying"  does  not  produce  a  new  thing,  but  a  new  neces-
sary order  among  operations  of  thought  and  objects  of  thought.

The  logic  of  relations.  In  his  work,  Was  sind  und  was  sollen  die
Zahlen,  Dedekind  has  shown  how  the  complete  construction  of  arith-
metic and  the  exhaustive  exposition  of  its  scientific  content  is  possible
on  the  basis  of  these  simple  principles.  We  shall  not  trace  the
mathematical  development  of  this  thought  in  its  details,  but  shall

6  Dedekind,  Was  sind  und  was  sollen  die  Zahlen?  Ed.  2,  Braunschweig,
1893,  p.  VIII.


THE CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  37

content  ourselves  merely  with  emphasizing  its  essential  tendency,
in  as  much  as  we  are  not  interested  in  the  concept  of  number  for  its
own  sake  but  only  as  an  example  of  the  structure  of  a  pure  "functional
concept."  The  presuppositions  of  the  deduction  of  the  concept  of
number  are  given  in  the  general  logic  of  relations.  If  we  consider
the  totality  of  possible  relations  according  to  which  a  series  of  intellec-
tual constructions  (Denksetzungen)  can  be  arranged,  there  emerge  in
the  first  place  certain  fundamental  formal  determinations,  such  as
uniformly  belong  to  certain  classes  of  relations  and  differentiate
them  from  other  classes  of  different  structure.  Thus  if  any  relation
between  two  members  a  and  b  is  given,  which  we  can  symbolically
represent  by  the  expression  a/26,  it  can  in  the  first  place  be  so  con-
stituted that  it  also  holds  in  the  same  way  between  b  and  a,  so  that
from  the  validity  of  aRb  follows  that  of  bRa.  In  this  case  we  call
the  relation  "symmetrical"  and  distinguish  it,  on  the  one  hand,  from
the  non-symmetrical  relations,  in  which  the  validity  of  aRb  indeed
permits  that  of  bRa  but  does  not  necessarily  imply  it,  and  on  the
other  hand,  from  the  asymmetrical  relations,  in  which  this  sort  of
reversal  is  not  possible,  in  which  therefore  aRb  and  bRa  cannot
exist  together.  A  relation,  furthermore,  is  called  transitive  when
from  the  fact  that  it  holds  of  each  pair  of  members  a  and  b,  b  and  c,
its  validity  follows  for  a  and  c.  It  is  said  to  be  non-transitive  when
this  extension  is  not  necessary,  and  intransitive  when  it  is  excluded
by  the  nature  of  the  relation  under  consideration.6  These  determina-
tions, which  have  far-reaching  application  in  the  calculus  of  rela-
tions, come  in  for  consideration  here  chiefly  in  so  far  as  upon  them
rests  the  more  exact  definition  of  what  we  are  to  understand  as  the
order  of  a  given  whole.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  naive  prejudice  to  regard  the
order  which  holds  between  the  members  of  a  manifold  as  something
self-evident,  as  if  it  were  immediately  given  through  the  bare  exist-
ence of  the  individual  members.  In  truth,  it  is  not  attached  to  the
elements  as  such  but  to  the  serial  relation  by  which  they  are  con-
nected, and  all  its  determinate  character  and  specific  peculiarity  are

6  Russell,  to  whom  these  distinctions  are  due,  illustrates  thorn  by  different
family  relationships;  the  relation  involved  in  " brothers  and  sisters"
(Geschwister)  is  symmetrical  and  transitive;  the  relation  "brother"  is  non-
symmetrical  and  transitive;  the  relation  "father"  asymmetrical  and  intransi-
tive, etc.  On  this  and  what  follows  see  Russell,  The  Principles  of  Mathematics,
I,  Cambridge,  1903;  cf.  also  my  essay  "Kant  und  die  moderne  Mathematik"
Kant  Studien  XII,  p.  1  ff.


38  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

derived  from  this  serial  relation.  Closer  investigation  shows  that.it
is  always  some  transitive  and  asymmetrical  relation  that  is  necessary
to  imprint  upon  the  members  of  a  whole  a  determinate  order.7

The  concept  of  progression.  If,  now,  we  consider  a  series  which  has
a  first  member,  and  for  which  a  certain  law  of  progress  has  been
established,  of  such  a  sort  that  to  every  member  there  belongs  an
immediate  successor  with  which  it  is  connected  by  an  unambiguous
transitive  and  asymmetrical  relation,  that  remains  throughout  the
whole  series,  then,  in  such  a  "progression,"  we  have  already  grasped
the  real  fundamental  type  with  which  arithmetic  is  concerned.  All
the  propositions  of  arithmetic,  all  the  operations  that  it  defines,  are
related  solely  to  the  general  properties  of  a  progression;  hence  they
are  never  directed  primarily  upon  "things"  but  upon  the  ordinal
relation,  which  prevails  between  the  elements  of  certain  systematic
wholes.  The  definitions  of  addition  and  subtraction,  multiplication
and  division,  the  explanation  of  positive  and  negative,  whole  and
fractional  numbers,  can  be  developed  purely  on  this  basis,  and  with-
out especially  going  back  to  the  relations  of  concrete  measurable
objects.  According  to  this  deduction,  the  whole  "certitude"
(Bestand)  of  numbers  rests  upon  the  relations,  which  they  show  within
themselves,  and  not  upon  any  relation  to  an  outer  objective  reality.
They  need  no  foreign  "basis"  (Substraf)  but  mutually  sustain  and
support  each  other  in  so  far  as  the  position  of  each  in  the  system  is
clearly  determined  by  the  others.  "When,"  says  Dedekind  in
definition,  "in  the  consideration  of  a  simple  infinite  system  N,
arranged  by  the  "copying"  (Abbildung)  <£,  we  totally  abstract  from
the  particular  properties  of  the  elements,  retain  merely  their  dis-
tinctness, and  attend  only  to  the  relations  in  which  they  are  placed
to  each  other  by  the  ordering  "copying"  </>,  then  these  elements  are
called  the  natural  numbers  or  the  ordinal  numbers  or  also  simply
numbers,  and  the  fundamental  element  1  is  called  the  fundamental
number  of  the  numerical  series  N.  With  reference  to  this  liberation
of  the  elements  from  every  other  content  (abstraction),  we  can
correctly  call  numbers  the  free  creation  of  the  human  mind.  The
relations  or  laws,  which  ....  in  all  ordered  simple  infinite
systems  are  always  the  same,  whatever  names  may  accidentally  be
given  to  the  individual  elements,  form  the  primary  object  of  the

7  For  more  exact  treatment  cf.  Russell,  op.  cit.,  Chs.  24  and  25.


THE  CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  39

science  of  number  or  arithmetic."8  From  a  logical  standpoint,  it  is
of  special  interest  that  here  the  concept  and  term  "abstraction"  is
obviously  applied  in  a  new  sense.  The  act  of  abstraction  is  not
directed  upon  the  separating  out  of  the  quality  of  a  thing,  but  its
aim  is  to  bring  to  consciousness  the  meaning  of  a  certain  relation
independently  of  all  particular  cases  of  application,  purely  in  itself.
The  function  of  "number"  is,  in  its  meaning,  independent  of  the
factual  diversity  of  the  objects  which  are  enumerated;  this  diversity
must  therefore  be  disregarded  when  we  are  concerned  merely  to
develop  the  determinate  character  of  this  function.  Here  abstrac-
tion has,  in  fact,  the  character  of  a  liberation;  it  means  logical  con-
centration on  the  relational  connection  as  such  with  rejection  of  all
psychological  circumstances,  that  may  force  themselves  into  the
subjective  stream  of  presentations,  but  which  form  no  actual  con-
stitutive aspect  of  this  connection.

Number  as  ordinal  number.  It  has  occasionally  been  objected  to
Dedekind's  deduction  that  according  to  it  there  remains  in  principle
no  distinguishing  content  for  number,  to  mark  its  peculiarity  as
opposed  to  other  serially  ordered  objects.  Since  in  the  determina-
tion of  its  concept  only  the  general  moment  of  "progression"  is
retained,  everything  that  is  here  said  of  number  is  valid  with  regard
to  every  progression  in  general;  it  is  thus  only  the  serial  form  itself
that  is  defined  and  not  what  enters  into  it  as  material.  If  the
ordinal  numbers  in  general  are  to  exist  then  they  must,  so  it  seems,
have  some  "inner"  nature  and  property;  they  must  be  distinguished
from  other  entities  by  some  absolute  "mark,"  in  the  same  way  that
points  are  different  from  instants,  or  tones  from  colors.9  But  this
objection  mistakes  the  real  aim  and  tendency  of  Dedekind's  deter-
minations. What  is  here  expressed  is  just  this:  that  there  is  a
system  of  ideal  objects  whose  whole  content  is  exhausted  in  their
mutual  relations.  The  "essence"  of  the  numbers  is  completely
expressed  in  their  positions.10  And  the  concept  of  position  must,

8Dedekind,  op.  cit.,  §6.— On  the  concept  of  "Ablrildung"  cf.  above.  On
the  definition  of  a  "simple  infinite  system"  cf.  Dedekind,  op.  dt.t  §5  and  §6.

•  Cf.  Russell,  op.  cit.,  §242.

10  On  the  deduction  of  number  as  pure  "serial  number,"  cf.  especially  the
exposition  of  G.  F.  Lipps  (Philosoph.  Studien,  ed.  by  Wundt,  Vol.  Ill),  and  also
the  latest  discussions  of  Natorp,  which  carry  through  these  thoughts  with
special  clarity  and  penetration.  (Die  logischen  Grundlagen  der  exakten  Wissen-
schaften,  Leipzig,  1910,  Chs.  Ill  and  IV.)


40  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

first  of  all,  be  grasped  in  its  greatest  logical  universality  and  scope.
The  distinctness  required  of  the  elements  rests  upon  purely  concep-
tual and  not  upon  perceptual  conditions.  The  intuition  of  pure  time,
upon  which  Kant  based  the  concept  of  number,  is  indeed  unnecessary
here.  True,  we  think  the  members  of  the  numerical  series  as  an
ordered  sequence;  but  this  sequence  contains  nothing  of  the  concrete
character  of  temporal  succession.  The  "three"  does  not  follow  the
"two"  as  lightning  the  thunder,  for  neither  of  them  possesses  any
sort  of  temporal  reality  but  a  merely  ideal  logical  constitution.  The
meaning  of  the  sequence  is  limited  to  the  fact  that  two  enters  as  a
premise  into  the  determination  of  three,  that  the  meaning  of  one
concept  can  only  be  explained  by  that  of  the  other.  The  lower
number  is  "presupposed"  by  the  higher  number;  but  this  does  not
imply  a  physical  or  a  psychological  earlier  and  later,  but  a  pure  rela-
tion of  systematic  conceptual  dependence.  What  characterizes
the  "later"  position  is  the  circumstance  that  it  issues  from  the
fundamental  unity  through  a  more  complex  application  of  the
generating  relation,  and  consequently  takes  up  the  elements  that
precede  it  as  logical  constitutive  parts  and  phases  into  itself.  Thus,
time  (if  we  understand  by  it  the  "concrete  form"  of  the  "inner  sense")
presupposes  number,  but  number  does  not,  conversely,  presuppose
time.  Arithmetic  can  be  defined  as  the  science  of  pure  time  only
when  we  remove  from  the  concept  of  time  (as  Hamilton  does,  for
instance),  all  special  determination  of  character,  and  merely  retain
the  moment  of  "order  in  progression."11  It  is  just  this  that  now
proves  to  be  the  merit  in  fundamental  method  of  the  science  of
number:  that  in  it  the  "what"  of  the  elements  of  a  certain  progres-
sive connection  is  disregarded  and  merely  the  "how"  of  this  connec-
tion is  taken  into  account.  Here  we  meet  for  the  first  time  a  general
procedure,  which  is  of  decisive  significance  in  the  whole  formation  of
mathematical  concepts.  Wherever  a  system  of  conditions  is  given
that  can  be  realized  in  different  contents,  there  we  can  hold  to  the
form  of  the  system  itself  as  an  invariant,  undisturbed  by  the  differ-
ence of  the  contents,  and  develop  its  laws  deductively.  In  this  way
we  produce  a  new  "objective"  form,  whose  structure  is  independent
of  all  arbitrariness;  but  it  would  be  uncritical  naivete  to  confuse  the

11  On  William  Hamilton's  definition  of  algebra  as  "science  of  pure  time  or
order  in  progression"  and  its  relation  to  the  Kantian  concept  of  time,  cf.  my
essay  "Kant  und  die  moderne  Mathematik,"  Kant  Studien,  Vol.  XII,  p.  34  f.


THE CONCEPT OF  NUMBER  41

object  which  thus  arises  with  sensuously  real  and  effective  things.
We  cannot  read  off  its  "properties"  empirically,  nor  do  we  need  to,
for  its  form  is  revealed  in  all  determinateness  as  soon  as  we  have
grasped  in  its  purity  the  relation  from  which  it  develops.

The  theories  of  Helmholtz  and  Kronecker.  Fundamental  as  is  the
conceptual  moment  of  order,  yet  it  does  not  exhaust  the  whole  con-
tent of  the  concept  of  number.  A  new  aspect  appears  as  soon  as
number,  which  has  hitherto  been  deduced  as  a  purely  logical  sequence
of  intellectual  constructs,  is  understood  and  applied  as  an  expres-
sion of  plurality.  This  transition  from  the  pure  ordinal  number  to
the  cardinal  number  is  made  with  general  agreement  by  the  various
ordinal  theories  of  arithmetic,  as  they  have  been  developed  by
Dedekind  and  in  particular  by  Helmholtz  and  Kronecker.  Given
any  finite  system,  we  can  relate  it  to  the  previously  developed  totality
of  numbers  in  a  clear  and  definite  way  by  letting  every  element  of
the  system  correspond  to  one  and  only  one  position  in  this  totality.
In  this  way  we  are  finally  able,  by  following  the  fixed  prescribed
order  .of  the  positions,  to  coordinate  the  last  member  of  the  system
with  a  certain  ordinal  number,  n.  This  act  of  coordination,  however,
which  concludes  the  process,  contains  in  itself  all  the  previous  phases;
for  since  the  progress  from  1  to  n  can  only  take  place  in  one  way,
the  number  which  we  reach  reproduces  the  total  operation  in  its
specific  character.  The  number  n,  which  was  primarily  gained  as  a
characteristic  of  the  last  element,  can  thus  be  regarded,  from  another
point  of  view,  as  a  character  of  the  total  system:  we  call  it  the
cardinal  number  of  the  system  considered,  and  now  say  of  the  latter
that  it  consists  of  n  elements.12  Here  it  is  presupposed  above  all
that  there  can  be  one  and  only  one  cardinal  number  of  a  given  group,
that  thus  the  "position"  we  finally  reach  is  independent  of  the  order
in  which  we  successively  regard  and  emphasize  the  members  of  the
group.  This  presupposition,  however,  as  Helmholtz  in  particular
has  shown,  can  be  proved  with  all  strictness  from  the  premises  of  the
ordinal  theory  without  the  assumption  of  any  new  postulate,  pro-
vided we  maintain  the  condition  that  the  manifold  considered  forms
a  finite  system.  The  definitions  of  the  fundamental  arithmetical
operations  can  also  be  transferred  without  difficulty  to  the  new  sort
of  number.  Thus  the  formation  of  the  sum  (a  +  b)  means,  with
regard  to  the  pure  ordinal  numbers,  that  starting  from  a,  we  "count

12  Cf.  especially,  Dedekind,  Was  sind  und  was  sollen  die  Zahlen,  §161,  p.  54.


42  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

on"  b  steps,  that  is,  that  we  determine  the  place  in  the  series  which
we  reach  when  we  coordinate  the  numbers  following  a,  member  for
member,  with  the  elements  of  the  series  1,  2,  3, ...  b.  This
explanation  remains  valid  without  modification  when  we  go  over
to  the  addition  of  the  cardinal  numbers;  it  is  evident  that  from  the
combination  of  the  elements  of  two  groups,  which  fall  under  the
cardinal  numbers  a  and  6,  there  results  a  new  group  C,  the  number  of
whose  members  is  given  by  the  number  (a  +  b)  in  the  previously
determined  meaning.  The  consideration  of  the  "cardinal  numbers"
thus  occasions  the  discovery  of  no  new  property  and  no  new  relation,
which  could  not  have  been  previously  deduced  from  the  bare  ele-
ment of  order.  The  only  advantage  is  that  the  formulae  developed
by  the  ordinal  theory  gain  a  wider  application,  since  they  can  hence-
forth be  read  in  two  different  languages.13

Even  though  no  actual  new  mathematical  content  is  produced
through  this  transition,  nevertheless  in  the  formation  of  the  cardinal
number  a  new  logical  function  is  unmistakably  at  work.  As  in  the
theory  of  the  ordinal  number  the  individual  steps  as  such  are  estab-
lished and  developed  in  definite  sequence,  so  here  the  necessity  is
felt  of  comprehending  the  series,  not  only  in  its  successive  elements,
but  as  an  ideal  whole.  The  preceding  moment  is  not  to  be  merely
set  aside  by  its  successor,  but  is  to  be  retained  in  its  entire  logical
import  in  the  latter,  so  that  the  final  step  of  the  procedure  contains
in  itself  at  once  all  the  preceding  steps  and  the  law  of  their  mutual
connection.  It  is  first  in  this  synthesis  that  the  bare  sequence  of  the
ordinal  numbers  is  developed  into  a  unitary,  self-inclosed  system,
in  which  no  member  exists  merely  for  itself  alone  but,  on  the  contrary,
represents  the  structure  and  formal  principle  of  the  whole  series.

Criticism  of  the  nominalistic  deduction.  If  once  these  two  funda-
mental logical  acts  at  the  basis  of  all  differentiation  and  connection  of
numbers  are  recognized,  then  no  further  special  presupposition  is
needed  to  determine  the  field  of  the  operations  of  arithmetic.  The
demand  is  therewith  realized  for  a  purely  rational  deduction,  which
renounces  all  dependence  on  the  empirical  relations  of  physical
objects.  Indeed  precisely  this  distinctive  character  has  been  fre-
quently misunderstood  in  estimating  the  "ordinal"  theory  of  number.
The  explanation  of  the  theory,  as  given  by  Helmholtz  for  example,

18  Cf.  Helmholtz,  Zdhlen  und  Messen.  erkenntnistheoretisch  betrachtet  (Philo-
*oph.  Aufstitze,  Ed.  Zeller  gewidmet,  Leipzig,  1887,  p.  33).


THE CONCEPT OF  NUMBER  43

leads  necessarily  to  the  view  that  first  of  all  concrete  groups  of  ob-
jects are  presupposed  as  given,  and  that  the  whole  work  of  thought  is
exhausted  in  introducing  a  diversity  of  symbols  corresponding  to
this  diversity  of  things.  However  "symbols"  are  nothing  them-
selves but  groups  of  perceptible  objects,  visibly  distinguishable  from
each  other  by  shape  and  position.  Hence  we  seem  to  be  able  to
abstract  from  the  immediate  properties  of  things  in  assertions  con-
cerning numerical  relations,  only  because  we  have  substituted  for
the  reality  of  things  their  sensible  "copies."  Thus  the  true  beginning
of  the  formation  of  numbers  would  be  not  an  abstraction  from  physi-
cal objects,  but  on  the  contrary  a  solidification  and  concentration  of
their  sensuous  import.  Every  such  interpretation,  which  different
mathematicians  have  seemed  to  approach  at  times  in  their  expositions
of  the  ordinal  theory  of  number,  contradicts  its  essential  and  deeper
logical  tendency.  The  symbols  produced  would  cease  to  be  symbols,
would  lose  their  characteristic  function,  if  they  were  judged  merely
according  to  what  they  sensuously  are,  and  not  according  to  what
they  intellectually  mean.  What  would  remain,  in  fact,  would  be
only  certain  "images,"  which  we  could  investigate  as  to  form  and
size,  position  and  color.  But  no  mathematical  "nominalism,"
however  extreme,  has  ever  actually  attempted  to  transform  the
import  of  valid  judgments  about  numbers  into  assertions  of  this
kind.  It  is  only  the  ambiguity  in  the  concept  of  symbol,  only  the
circumstance  that  under  it  can  be  understood,  now  the  bare  exist-
ence of  a  sensuous  content,  and  now  the  ideal  object  symbolized  by
the  latter,  which  makes  possible  this  reduction  to  the  nominalistic
schema.  Leibniz,  whose  entire  thought  was  concentrated  upon  the
idea  of  a  "universal  characteristic,"  clearly  pointed  out  in  opposition
to  the  formalistic  theories  of  his  time,  the  fact  which  is  essential  here.
The  "basis"  of  the  truth  lies,  as  he  says,  never  in  the  symbols  but  in
the  objective  relations  between  ideas.  If  it  were  otherwise,  we
would  have  to  distinguish  as  many  forms  of  truth  as  there  are  ways  of
symbolizing.  Among  modern  mathematicians,  Frege  especially  has
shown  in  penetrating,  detailed  criticism  that  the  arithmetic  of
symbols  is  only  able  to  keep  itself  in  existence  by  being  untrue  to
itself.  In  place  of  the  empty  symbols  the  meaning  of  the  arithmeti-
cal concepts  appears  unnoticed  in  the  course  of  the  argument.14

"  Frege,  Grundgeseize  der  Aritkmetik,  Vol.  II,  Jena,  1903,  pp.  69  ff.,  139,  etc.


44  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

In  the  theory  of  the  pure  ordinal  numbers  also,  the  nominalistic
interpretation  forms  only  an  outer  husk,  which  must  be  stripped  off
to  reach  the  real  kernel  of  the  logical  and  mathematical  thought.
On co  this  is  done,  what  we  retain  is  the  purely  rational  moment;  for
"order"  is  not  something  which  can  be  immediately  pointed  out  in
sense-impressions  but  is  rather  something  which  belongs  to  them  only
by  virtue  of  intellectual  relations.  Thug  the  theory  in  its  pure  form
does  not  require  the  assumption  of  a  group  of  physically  given,  partic-
ular things,  as  has  been  urged  against  it,15  The  manifolds  which  it
makes  fundamental  are,  not  empirically  present,  but  ideally  defined,
totalities,  which  are  progressively  constructed  from  an  assumed
beginning  according  to  a  constant  rule.  In  this  rule  also  are  rooted
all  genuinely  "formal"  properties,  such  as  distinguish  the  series  of
numbers  and  make  it  the  fundamental  type  of  a  conceptually  intel-
ligible connection  in  general.

in

Number  and  the  concept  of  class.  If,  however,  we  survey  the
actual  modern  development  of  the  principles  of  mathematics,  it
seems  as  if  the  previous  treatment  of  the  subject  had  overlooked  the
essential  moment  which  alone  completes  the  logical  characterization
of  number.  Wherever  the  attempt  has  been  made  to  resolve  the
concept  of  number  into  pure  "logical  constants,"  the  concept  of  class
has  been  regarded  as  a  necessary  and  sufficient  presupposition.
The  analysis  of  number  seems  completed  only  when  all  its  special
import  has  been  derived  from  the  general  function  of  the  concept.
But  according  to  the  dominant  logical  theory,  here  again,  the.forma-
tion  of  concepts  means  nothing  but  the  collection  of  objects  into
species  and  genera  by  virtue  of  subsumption  under  general  attributes.

Thus,  in  order  to  understand  the  concept  of  number,  everything
must  first  be  removed  from  it  which  does  not  fit  into  this  schema.
But  a  fundamental  difficulty  here  arises  for  the  theory.  If  we  are
considering  not  the  thought  of  number  in  general,  but  the  concept  of
this  or  that  determinate  number,  we  are  not  dealing  with  a  logically
universal  concept  but  with  an  individual  concept.  Our  concern  is
not  with  giving  a  species,  which  can  be  found  in  any  number  of
individual  examples,  but  with  the  determination  of  a  certain  definite

18  Cf.  Couturat,  De  I'Infini  mathematique,  Paris,  1896,  p.  318  ff.


THE CONCEPT OF  NUMBER  45

position  within  a  total  system.  There  is  only  one  "two,"  only  one
"four/7  and  both  of  them  possess  certain  mathematical  properties
and  characteristics  which  they  share  with  no  other  object.  If  the
reduction  of  the  concept  of  number  to  the  concept  of  class  is  to  be
possible  in  spite  of  this,  then  another  direction  must  be  taken.  To
determine  what  a  number  "is,"  according  to  its  pure  essence,  we
do  not  attempt  to  analyse  it  directly  into  simpler  constitutive  parts,
but  we  ask  primarily  what  the  equality  of  numbers  means.  As  soon
as  it  is  established  under  what  conditions  we  shall  regard  two  groups
as  of  the  same  numerical  value,  the  peculiarity  of  the  "mark,"  which
we  assume  to  be  identical  in  both,  is  thereby  indirectly  determined.
The  criterion  of  the  numerical  equality  of  two  groups,  however,  con-
sists in  that  a  certain  relation  can  be  given,  by  virtue  of  which  the
members  of  the  two  groups  can  be  mutually  coordinated  one  to  one.
By  virtue  of  this  process  of  coordination,  we  establish  among  the
infinitely  numerous  possible  classes  of  objects,  certain  connections  by
uniting  into  a  total  complex  those  groups  which  can  be  coordinated
in  this  way.  In  other  words,  we  unite  into  a  species  all  the  manifolds
for  which  there  exists  such  a  relation  of  "equivalence"  or  of  one  to
one  coordination;  while  we  regard  groups  in  which  this  condition  is
not  fulfilled  as  belonging  to  different  species.  When  this  has  been
done,  any  individual  group,  by  virtue  of  the  character  of  equivalence,
can  be  regarded  as  a  perfect  representative  of  the  whole  species:
For  since  it  can  be  shown  that  two  groups  which  are  equivalent  to  a
third  are  also  equivalent  to  each  other,  it  is  enough  to  prove  of  a
given  total  M  that  it  can  be  coordinated  member  for  member  with
any  group  of  the  whole  complex  in  order  to  establish  the  certainty
that  the  same  is  true  of  all  groups  of  the  complex  in  question.  Now
if  we  abstract  the  common  relation,  which  all  the  wholes  of  such  a
complex  have  to  each  other  and  consider  it  as  a  possible  object  of
thought,  we  gain  the  moment  which,  in  ordinary  language,  we  call
the  number  of  these  wholes.  "The  number  which  belongs  to  a
concept  F,"  says  Frege,  to  whom  we  owe  this  deduction  in  its  funda-
mental features,  "is  the  extension  of  the  concept:  numerically  equal
to  F."  We  grasp  the  number  of  a  concept  when  we  do  not  regard  the
objects  which  fall  under  it  merely  for  themselves  alone,  but  at  the
same  time  include  all  those  classes  whose  elements  stand  in  the  rela-
tion of  one  to  one  coordination  with  those  of  the  whole  under
consideration.


46  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

Russell's  theory  of  cardinal  numbers.  Thus  it  is  characteristic  of
this  conception  that  it  emphasizes  what  appears  in  the  ordinary  view
simply  as  the  criterion  of  numerical  equality  as  the  peculiar  consti-
tutive character,  upon  which  rests  the  whole  content  of  the  concept
of  number.  While  the  traditional  view  presupposes  the  individual
numbers  as  given,  as  known,  and  decides  on  the  basis  of  this
knowledge  as  to  their  equality  or  inequality,  here  the  reverse  process
holds.  Only  the  relation,  which  is  asserted  in  the  equation,  is  known;
while  the  elements  entering  into  this  relation  are  at  first  undetermined
and  are  only  de terminable  by  the  equation.  Frege  thus  describes
the  general  procedure,  "Our  purpose  is  to.  shape  the  content  of  a
judgment,  which  can  be  interpreted  as  an  equation,  in  such  a  manner
that  upon  each  side  of  this  equation  there  is  a  number.  We  thus
wish  .  .  .  .  to  reach  by  means  of  the  already  known  concept
of  equality  that  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  equal."  Here  a  methodologi-
cal tendency  is  clearly  defined,  which  is  fundamental  in  all  construc-
tion of  mathematical  concepts;  the  "construct7 '  is  to  gain  its  total
constitution  from  the  relations  in  which  it  stands.  (Cf.  above
p.  40  f.).  The  only  question  that  remains  is  whether,  in  the  relation
of  the  equivalence  of  classes,  we  really  grasp  a  relation  which  is
logically  simpler  than  the  totality  of  functions  which,  in  the  ordinal
theory,  leads  to  the  systematic  series  of  the  ordinal  numbers.  An
advance  in  analysis  would  necessarily  result  in  our  being  able  to
abstract  entirely  from  all  these  functions,  and  yet  accomplish  in  a  new
way  the  complete  construction  of  the  realm  of  number  and  its  laws.
It  is  upon  this  point,  therefore,  that  all  critical  investigation  must  be
concentrated:  Is  the  deduction  of  the  series  of  numbers  out  of  the
concept  of  class  really  successful,  or  does  this  deduction  move  in  a
circle  by  tacitly  presupposing  concepts  from  the  very  field  which  it
undertakes  to  deduce?16

The  theory,  which  has  here  been  developed,  although  in  sharp
conflict  with  the  empirical  interpretation  of  the  nature  of  number,

18  The  problem,  which  is  involved  here,  has  been  discussed  in  lively  fashion
in  the  modern  logico-mathematical  literature;  for  positive  exposition  of  the
theory  cf.  especially  the  writings  of  Frege,  Russell  and  Peano;  for  criticism  cf.
B.  Kerry,  Ober  Anschauung  und  ihre  psychische  Verarbeitung,  Vierteljahrsschr.
f.  wissensch.  Philos.  XI,  287  ff .  Husseri,  Philosophic  der  Arithmetik,  I,  Halle,
1891,  p.  129  ff. ;  Jonas  Cohn,  Voraussetzungen  und  Ziele  des  Erkennens,  Leipzig,
1908,  p.  158  ff.


THE  CONCEPT OF  NUMBER  47

agrees  with  it  in  one  formal  characteristic:  it  also  understands  number
as  a  "common  property"  of  certain  contents  and  groups  of  contents.
The  basis  of  numerical  assertions,  however,  as  is  especially  empha-
sized, is  not  to  be  sought  in  sensuous  physical  things  themselves  but
wholly  in  the  concepts  of  things.  Every  judgment  about  numerical
relations  ascribes  certain  attributes,  not  to  objects,  but  to  their  con-
cepts, by  which  they  are  divided  into  classes  with  peculiar  properties.
"When  I  say:  Venus  has  0  moons,  there  is  in  fact  no  moon  or  aggre-
gate of  moons  there  of  which  anything  could  be  said;  but  a  property
is  thereby  ascribed  to  the  concept  'moon  of  Venus/  namely,  that  of
including  nothing  under  itself.  When  I  say :  the  coach  of  the  emperor
is  drawn  by  four  horses,  I  thereby  ascribe  the  number  four  to  the
concept  'horse  that  draws  the  coach  of  the  emperor/  "  This  fact
alone  explains  the  universal  applicability  of  numerical  assertions,
which  equally  covers  the  material  and  the  immaterial,  outer  and
inner  phenomena,  things  as  well  as  experiences  and  deeds.  This
apparent  diversity  of  the  field  of  what  can  be  numbered  proves  upon
closer  consideration  to  be  strict  uniformity;  for  the  enumeration  never
concerns  the  heterogeneous  contents  themselves  but  the  concepts
under  which  they  are  comprehended,  and  thus  is  always  concerned
with  the  same  logical  nature.  The  previous  exposition  has  shown
how  this  can  be  more  precisely  understood;  a  certain  numerical
determination  is  to  be  ascribed  to  concepts  when  they  are  collected
into  classes  with  other  concepts  with  which  they  stand  in  the  relation
of  possible  one  to  one  coordination  of  their  elements  in  extension.

Criticism  of  "Class  theories"  Against  this  explanation,  however,
one  objection  necessarily  arises.  The  theory,  which  is  here  defended,
is  by  no  means  concerned  to  excogitate  the  concept  of  number
arbitrarily,  but  to  indicate  the  real  function  which  number  possesses
in  the  actual  whole  of  knowledge.  Precisely  this  is  emphasized  in
opposition  to  the  interpretation  which  proceeds  from  the  ordinal
numbers,  that  the  "logical"  properties  of  number  here  deduced  are
the  very  ones  that  are  definitive  and  essential  in  its  "use  in  daily
life."  A  natural  deduction,  such  as  shall  do  justice  to  the  concrete
applications  of  number,  is  to  be  opposed  to  the  technical  deduction,
which  merely  keeps  in  view  the  purposes  of  scientific  arithmetic.
But  a  closer  examination  shows  that  this  goal  is  not  attained;  for
what  is  logically  deduced  here  is  in  no  way  identical  with  the  real
meaning  that  we  connect  with  numerical  judgments  in  actual  knowl-


48  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

edge. If  we  limit  ourselves  merely  to  the  previous  postulates,  we  are
indeed  enabled  by  means  of  them  to  place  different  groups  of  elements
together  and  to  regard  them  as  similar  from  a  certain  point  of  view;
but  no  sufficient  determination  is  thereby  gained  of  their  "number"
in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word. Our  thought  could  run  through
any  number  of  "equivalent" groups  and  consider  their  mutual
relations  without  any  characteristic  consciousness  of  the  pure  numeri-
cal concepts  resulting  from  the  process. The  specific  meaning  of
"four"  or  "seven"  could  never  result  from  the  bare  placing  together
of  any  number  of  groups  of  "four"  or  "seven"  elements;  the  individual
groups  must  first  be  determined  as  ordered  sequences  of  elements,
thus  as  numbers  in  the  sense  of  the  ordinal  theory. The  "how  many"
of  the  elements,  in  the  ordinary  sense,  can  be  changed  by  no  logical
transformation  into  a  bare  assertion  concerning  "just  as  many;"
that  remains  an  independent  problem  of  knowledge. Considera-
tion of  this  problem,  however,  leads  back  to  a  deeper  opposition  in
method  between  the  two  interpretations  of  number. It  is  a  funda-
mental characteristic  of  the  ordinal  theory  that  in  it  the  individual
number  never  means  anything  by  itself  alone,  that  a  fixed  value  is
only  ascribed  to  it  by  its  position  in  a  total  system. The  definition
of  the  individual  number  determines  at  once  and  directly  the  relation
in  which  it  stands  to  the  other  members  of  the  field;  and  this  relation
cannot  be  eliminated  without  losing  the  entire  content  of  the  particu-
lar numerical  concept. In  the  general  deduction  of  cardinal  numbers,
which  we  are  considering,  this  connection  is  eliminated. It  is  also
necessary  that  this  deduction  erect  and  logically  derive  a  fixed
principle  of  arrangement  of  the  individual  numbers;  however  the
meaning  of  the  elements  is  to  be  established  before  this  arrangement
and  independently  of  it. The  members  are  determined  as  the
common  properties  of  certain  classes  before  anything  whatever  has
been  established  as  to  their  relation  of  sequence. Yet,  in  truth,  it
is  precisely  in  the  element  here  at  first  excluded  that  the  peculiar
numerical  character  is  rooted. The  conceptual  construction  at  the
basis  of  number  does  not  tend  to  abstract  similarities,  as  must  be  the
case  according  to  the  traditional  doctrine  of  abstraction,  but  to  sepa-
rate out  and  maintain  diversity. The  consideration  of  groups,  which
can  be  mutually  coordinated  member  for  member,  can  only  lead  to
the  separating  out  of  the  identical  "mark"  in  them;  but  this  "mark"
is  in  itself  not  yet  "number"  but  is  merely  a  logical  property  not


THE CONCEPT OF  NUMBER  49

further  defined.  Such  a  property  only  becomes  number  when  it
separates  itself  from  other  "marks"  of  the  same  logical  character  by
appearing  in  a  relation  to  them  of  "earlier"  or  "later,"  or  "more"
or  "less."  Those  very  thinkers,  who  have  carried  through  the
explanation  of  number  by  equivalent  classes  most  strictly  and  con-
sistently, emphasize  therefore  that  this  explanation  is  irrelevant  to
the  methods  of  pure  mathematics.  What  the  mathematician  con-
siders in  number  are  merely  the  properties  on  which  rest  the  order  of
the  positions.  Number  in  itself  may  be  what  it  will;  for  analysis
and  algebra  it  only  comes  into  consideration  in  so  far  as  it  can  be
purely  and  completely  developed  in  the  form  of  a  "progression."17
Strictly  speaking,  once  this  is  admitted,  the  dispute  as  to  the  method-
ological precedence  of  the  ordinal  number  is  over.  For  where  can
more  certain  information  be  gained  as  to  the  "nature"  of  number,
in  the  sense  of  the  criticism  of  knowledge,  than  in  its  most  general
scientific  use?

The  appeal  to  the  meaning  attached  to  the  concept  of  number  in
pre-scientific  thought  also  does  not  withstand  criticism.  Psychologi-
cal analysis  at  least  offers  no  support  to  the  theory.  All  reflection  on
the  actual  state  of  thought,  on  the  contrary,  shows  clearly  the  inner
difference  between  the  thought  of  equivalence  and  that  of  number.
If  number  were  what  it  alone  should  be  according  to  this  deduction,
then  it  would  be  a  peculiarly  complicated  and  difficult  task  to  point
out  the  process  by  which  such  a  concept  would  arise  and  be  main-
tained in  consciousness.  For  number  means  here  a  relation  between
two  classes  wholly  heterogeneous  in  content,  which  are  connected  by
no  further  moment  than  the  mere  possibility  of  mutual  coordination.
But  what  intellectual  motive  would  there  be  in  general  to  relate  such
dissimilar  groups  with  each  other;  what  meaning  would  there  be,
for  example,  in  placing  the  class  of  moons  of  Jupiter  beside  that  of
seasons  of  the  year,  the  group  of  pins  in  nine-pins  beside  that  of  the
muses!  Such  a  comparison  is  intelligible  after  the  numerical  value
of  these  classes  and  an  indirect  agreement  between  them  has  been
established  in  another  way;  but  here,  on  the  other  hand,  where  this
value  is  not  presupposed  but  is  to  be  gained  from  the  comparison,  the
comparison  itself  lacks  any  fixed  guide  or  standard.  It  has  been
urged  against  the  theory  of  equivalence  that  it  leads  to  an  "extreme
relativism"  in  so  far  as  the  determination  of  number  is  to  be  a

17  Cf.  Russell,  op.  cit.,  §230. On  the  concept  of  progression,  cf.  above  p.  49.


50  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

property,  which  does  not  belong  to  a  group  in  itself,  but  merely  in
relation  to  other  groups.  This  charge  is  at  least  ambiguous;  for  the
concept  of  number  can,  in  fact,  be  nothing  in  any  form  of  deduction
but  a  pure  relational  concept.  Only  here  the  field  and  thus  the
logical  place  of  the  relation  is  shifted;  for  while  we  are  concerned  in
the  ordinal  theory  with  ideal  constructions,  which  are  mutually  related
to  each  other,  here  each  individual  construction  is  deduced  from  the
relation  of  given  "classes."

The  logical  definition  of  the  zero  and  of  unity.  The  presuppositions,
that  are  assumed  here,  come  to  light  very  clearly  as  soon  as  we  pro-
ceed to  give  a  strictly  logical  definition  of  the  individual  numerical
values  from  this  point  of  view,  and  to  determine  the  conditions  under
which  we  are  to  regard  two  of  these  numerical  values  as  immediately
successive.  In  fact,  in  the  explanation  of  null  there  appear  grave
difficulties;  for  there  is  obviously  no  meaning  in  still  speaking  of  the
mutual  one  to  one  coordination  of  the  members  of  different  classes  in
the  case  in  which  these  classes  by  definition  contain  no  members.
But,  even  if  this  difficulty  could  be  removed  by  complicated  logical
transformations  of  the  concept  of  equivalence,18  the  circle  in  the
explanation  again  becomes  clear  as  soon  as  we  advance  to  the  defini-
tion of  "one."  What  it  means  to  apprehend  an  object  as  "one"  is
here  assumed  to  be  known  from  the  very  beginning;  for  the  numerical
equality  of  two  classes  is  known  solely  by  the  fact  that  we  coordinate
with  each  element  of  the  first  class  one  and  only  one  of  the  second.
This  remark,  simple  and  even  trivial  as  it  seems,  has  been  frequently
controverted.  It  has  been  objected  that  it  is  something  different
whether  I  take  the  number  one  in  its  strictly  mathematical  meaning
or  merely  in  the  vague  sense  represented  by  the  indefinite  article:
it  is  merely  this  last  sense,  which  is  presupposed,  when  I  am  requested
to  take  any  member  of  a  class  u  and  relate  it  to  a  member  of  a  class
v.  "That  every  individual  or  every  member  of  a  class  is,  in  a  certain
sense,  one,"  says  Russell,  e.g.  "is  naturally  incontestable,  but  it
does  not  follow  from  this  that  the  concept  of  "one"  is  presupposed,
when  we  speak  of  an  individual.  We  can  rather  conversely  regard
the  concept  of  the  individual  as  the  fundamental  concept,  from

18  Cf.  on  this  point:  Frege,  Grundlagen  der  Arithmetik,  p.  82  ff.;  Russell,
p.  113,  along  with  the  criticism  of  Kerry,  Vierteljahrsschr.  /.  wiss.  Philos.  XI,
p.  287  ff.,  and  also  of  Poincare*,  Science  et  Methode,  Paris,  1908,  Bk.  II.— For
criticism  of  Frege,  cf.  Natorp,  op.  cit.,  p.  112  ff.


THE CONCEPT OF  NUMBEK  51

which  the  concept  of  one  is  derived."  From  this  point  of  view,  the
meaning  of  the  assertion  that  a  class  u  possesses  "one"  member
(in  the  arithmetical  sense)  is  determined  by  the  fact  that  this  class  is
not  null  and  that  if  x  and  y  are  u's,  then  x  is  identical  with  y.  A
similar  determination  is  then  to  fix  the  meaning  of  the  concept  of
mutual  one  to  one  correlation  between  terms:  R  is  such  a  relation
that  in  the  case  that  x  and  x'  have  the  relation  R  to  y,  and  x  possesses
the  relation  R  to  y  and  ?/',  x  and  x'  and  also  y  and  y'  are  identical.19
It  is,  nevertheless,  easy  to  see  that  here  the  logical  function  of  number
is  not  so  much  deduced  as  rather  described  by  a  technical  circumlocu-
tion. In  order  to  understand  the  explanations  given  here,  it  is  at
least  necessary  that  we  comprehend  a  term  x  as  identical  with  itself,
while  at  the  same  time  we  relate  it  to  another  term  y  and  judge  the
former  as  agreeing  with  or  differing  from  the  latter,  according  to
special  circumstances.  Now  if  we  take  this  process  of  positing
(Setzung)  and  differentiation  as  a  basis,  we  have  done  nothing  but
presuppose  number  in  the  sense  of  the  ordinal  theory.  Thus,  e.g.r
the  class  of  two  objects  is  defined  by  Russell  by  the  conditions,  that
it  in  general  possesses  terms  and  that,  if  x  is  one  of  its  terms,  there  is
another  term  of  the  class,  y,  which  is  different  from  x;  while  further,
if  x,  y  are  different  terms  of  the  class  u,  and  z  is  different  from  x
and  y,  every  class  that  belongs  to  z  is  also  different  from  u.  We  see
how  here  in  order  to  complete  the  explanation,  the  elements  x,  y,  z,
are  produced  in  progressive  differentiation  and  must,  therefore,
be  indirectly  distinguished  as  first,  second,  third  ....
members.

In  general,  in  order  to  bring  the  different  numbers  into  the  form  of  a
definitely  ordered  "progression"  (and  it  is  upon  this  form  their
meaning  and  scientific  use  primarily  rest),  we  must  have  a  principle
that  enables  us,  when  any  number  n  is  given,  to  define  the  succeeding
number.  This  relation  between  two  numbers  "being  neighbors"
is  now  determined,  according  to  the  theory,  by  comparing  the  corre-
sponding classes  u  and  v,  with  each  other,  by  coordinating  their
elements  member  for  member.  If  it  is  found  here  that  in  class  (v)
a  member  remains,  which  possesses  no  corresponding  member  in  the
other  (u),  then  we  designate  v  in  relation  to  u  as  the  "next  higher"
class.  Here  also  it  is  postulated  that  we  first  grasp  as  a  whole  the
part  of  vy  which  can  be  coordinated  member  for  member  with  u,

19  C/.  Russell,  §124-126,  §496. Frege,  Grundlagen,  p.  40  ff.


52  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

in  order  to  grasp  the  member  that  remains  unconnected  in  this  form
of  connection,  as  a  "second."  Thus  here  the  progress  from  unity
to  what  next  follows  it  is  founded  on  the  same  intellectual  synthesis
in  principle  as  that  upon  which  it  rests  in  the  theory  of  the  ordinal
number;  and  the  only  difference  in  method  consists  in  that  these
syntheses  appear,  in  the  ordinal  theory,  as  free  constructions  while
here  they  depend  upon  given  classes  of  elements.20

The  presupposition  of  the  class  concept.  It  follows,  however,  from  a
final  decisive  consideration  that  the  logical  order  of  concepts  is
inverted  in  this  interpretation.  The  determination  of  number  by  the
equivalence  of  classes  presupposes  that  these  classes  themselves  are
given  as  a  plurality.  The  concept  of  the  "similarity"  of  classes,  on
which  the  meaning  of  the  cardinal  numbers  is  to  be  based,  requires
at  least  the  consideration  of  two  wholes  connected  by  a  certain  rela-
tion. It  has  been  emphasized  that,  for  the  establishment  of  this  one
to  one  relation,  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  members  of  the  two  mani-
folds be  previously  numbered  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  general
law  is  satisfied  if  any  element  of  the  first  manifold  is  placed  in  con-
nection with  any  element  of  the  second.  But  even  if  we  give  up,  in
accordance  with  this  point  of  view,  the  prior  enumeration  of  the
individual  classes  which  we  compare,  nevertheless  the  circumstance
remains  that  we  must  oppose  the  classes  as  wholes  to  each  other,  and
thereby  understand  them  as  "two"  different  units.  It  may  be
objected  that  this  difference  is  immediately  given  by  the  purely
logical  difference  of  the  class  concepts,  and  thus  neither  needs  nor  is
capable  of  any  further  deduction.  We  would  therewith  be  led  from
the  classes  themselves  back  to  the  generating  relations,  upon  which
they  rest  and  to  which  they  owe  their  definition  and  character.  The

20  In  order  to  explain  the  relation,  in  which  two  neighboring  members  of  the
series  of  natural  numbers  stand  to  each  other,  Frege,  for  example,  starts  from
the  proposition:  "there  is  a  concept  F  and  an  object  x  falling  under  it  of  such
a  sort  that  the  number  which  belongs  to  the  concept  F  is  n,  and  the  number
which  belongs  to  the  concept  falling  under  F  but  not  a;  is  m ;"  this  is  explained
as  equivalent  to  the  proposition  that  n  is  the  immediate  successor  of  m  in  the
natural  number  series.  Op.  cit.,  p.  89.  Thus  here  a  distinction  is  drawn
within  the  totality  F  in  which  a  single  member  x  is  selected  and  opposed  to  the
others:  all  these  others  are  then  used  in  the  definition  of  the  neighboring  "just
lower"  number.  We  thus  have  here  also  only  a  circumlocution  of  the  "  popu-
lar'1 view,  according  to  which  each  member  of  the  series  of  numbers  is  dis-
tinguished from  its  neighbors  by  the  addition  or  absence  of  a  "  unity. "


THE  CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  53

difference  in  the  systematic  wholes  reduces  to  the  difference  in  the
conceptual  law,  from  which  they  have  proceeded.  From  this  point,
however,  it  is  evident  that  the  system  of  the  numbers  as  pure  ordinal
numbers  can  be  derived  immediately  and  without  the  circuitous  route
through  the  concept  of  class;  since  for  this  we  need  assume  nothing  but
the  possibility  of  differentiating  a  sequence  of  pure  thought  construc-
tions by  different  relations  to  a  certain  fundamental  element,  which
serves  as  a  starting-point.  The  theory  of  the  ordinal  number  thus
represents  the  essential  minimum,  which  no  logical  deduction  of
number  can  avoid;  at  the  same  time,  the  consideration  of  equivalent
classes  is  of  the  greatest  significance  for  the  application  of  this  concept,
yet  does  not  belong  to  its  original  content.

The  generic  concept  and  the  relational  concept.  Thus  the  conflict  of
mathematical  theories  here  again  combines  with  the  general  questions
of  logical  principle  that  were  our  starting-point.  In  the  different
interpretations  of  the  concept  of  number,  there  is  repeated  the
general  conflict  between  the  logic  of  the  generic  concept  and  the
logic  of  the  relational  concept.  If  the  attempt  to  derive  the  concept
of  number  from  that  of  class  were  successful,  the  traditional  form  of
logic  would  gain  a  new  source  of  confirmation.  The  ordering  of
individuals  into  the  heirarchy  of  species  would  be,  now  as  before,
the  true  goal  of  all  knowledge,  empirical  as  well  as  exact.  In  the
attempts  to  ground  the  logical  theory  of  the  cardinal  numbers,  this
connection  has  occasionally  come  clearly  into  view.  According  to
Russell,  if  I  grasp  the  thought  "two  men"  I  have  thereby  formed
the  logical  product  of  the  concepts  "man"  and  the  concept  "couple;"
and  the  proposition  that  there  are  two  men  says  only  that  a  complex
is  given  which  simultaneously  belongs  to  the  class  "man"  and  the
class  "couple."21  It  becomes  evident  at  this  point  that  the  theory
has  not  carried  through  the  fundamental  critical  ideas  from  which
it  started.  Frege  and  Russell  regard  as  the  decisive  merit  of  their
doctrine,  that  in  it  number  does  not  appear  as  a  property  of  physical
things  but  as  an  assertion  concerning  certain  properties  of  classes;
that  in  it  therefore  objects  as  such  do  not  form  the  basis  of  numerical
judgments  but  rather  the  concepts  of  these  objects.  (Cf.  above  p.
29  ff.)  It  is  incontestable  that,  compared  with  the  sensationalistic
interpretation,  an  extraordinary  liberation  of  thought  and  increase
of  depth  is  gained  by  this  transformation.  Nevertheless  it  does  not

»  Cf.  Russell,  op.  cit.t  §111.


54  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

suffice  to  emphasize  the  purely  conceptual  character  of  numerical
assertions  as  long  as  thing-concepts  and  functional  concepts  are
placed  on  the  same  plane.  Number  appears,  according  to  this  view,
not  as  the  expression  of  the  fundamental  condition  which  first  renders
possible  every  plurality,  but  as  a  "mark,"  that  belongs  to  the  given
plurality  of  classes  and  can  be  separated  from  the  latter  by  compari-
son. Thus  the  fundamental  deficiency  of  the  whole  doctrine  of
abstraction  is  repeated :  an  attempt  is  made  to  view  what  guides
and  controls  the  formation  of  concepts,  i.e.,  a  purely  "categorical"
point  of  view,  as,  in  some  way,  a  constitutive  part  of  the  compared
objects.  (Cf.  above  p.  24  ff.)  The  theory  finally  shows  itself  to  be  a
subtle  and  extended  attempt  to  deal,  by  means  of  the  general  schema
of  the  generic  concept,  with  a  problem  which  belongs  in  its  mean-
ing and  scope  to  a  new  field  and  presupposes  another  concept  of
knowledge.22

IV

Extension  of  the  concept  of  number.  The  previous  attempts  to  estab-
lish the  character  of  number  and  the  principle  of  its  formation,  how-
ever, have  not  grasped  the  question  in  that  universality  and  breadth,
which  it  has  gained  in  the  development  of  modern  mathematics.  It
is  to  number  in  its  most  primitive  form  and  meaning  that  the

22  Indeed  not  merely  logical  views  but  also  more  special  mathematical
reasons  led  to  the  explanation  of  number  through  the  equivalence  of  classes.
Only  on  this  foundation  did  it  seem  possible  to  produce  a  theory,  which  would
not  be  limited  from  the  very  beginning  to  the  finite  numbers,  but  would  include
and  characterize  the  ' 'finite1'  and  "infinite"  numbers  in  a  single  deduction.
The  aspect  of  mutual  one  to  one  coordination  of  groups  seemed  of  fundamental
significance,  for  it  remained  when  one  abstracted  from  the  finitude  and  there-
with the  enumerability  of  the  groups, — according  to  the  ordinary  interpreta-
tion of  enumeration  as  the  successive  advance  from  unity  to  unity.  Fruit-
ful as  the  general  point  of  view  of  "power"  (Mdchtigkeit),  which  arises  in  this
connection,  has  shown  itself  to  be,  it  has  nevertheless  in  no  way  been  proved
to  be  identical  with  the  concept  of  number.  The  purely  mathematical  sig-
nificance of  the  concept  of  "power"  is  obviously  unaffected  by  whether  we
regard  it  as  the  original  principle  of  number  or  as  only  a  derived  result  that
presupposes  another  explanation  of  number.  The  properties,  which  are
common  to  the  finite  and  transfinite  numbers,  by  no  means  contain  as  such
the  essential  element  for  the  construction  of  number  in  general:  the
"summum  genus"  in  the  sense  of  the  logic  of  the  generic  concept  is  here  also
not  identical  with  the  conceptual  origin  of  knowledge.  (On  the  problem  of  the
transfinites,  cf.  below  p.  80  ff.)


THE CONCEPT OF NUMBER  55

attempted  deduction  of  the  class  theory  as  well  as  that  of  the  ordinal
theory  applies.  In  principle,  the  standpoint  of  the  Pythagoreans  is
not  yet  left  behind;  number,  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  whole
number,  still  forms  the  only  real  problem.  The  scientific  system  of
arithmetic,  however,  is  first  completed  in  the  extensions,  which  the
concept  of  number  undergoes  through  the  introduction  of  the  opposi-
tions of  positive  and  negative,  whole  and  fractional,  rational  and
irrational  numbers.  Are  these  extensions,  as  prominent  mathemati-
cians have  asserted,  merely  technical  transformations,  which  can  only
be  explained  and  justified  as  applications,  or  are  they  expressions  of
the  same  logical  function  that « characterizes  the  first  institution
of  numbers?

Gauss1  theory  of  the  negative  and  imaginary  numbers.  The  difficul-
ties encountered  in  the  introduction  of  every  new  type  of  number,
— of  the  negatives  and  the  irrationals  as  well  as  of  the  imagiiiaries, —
are  easily  explained  if  we  consider  that,  in  all  these  transformations,
the  real  basis  of  numerical  assertions  seems  more  and  more  to  disap-
pear. Enumeration,  in  its  most  fundamental  sense,  could  be  imme-
diately shown  to  be  "real"  by  means  of  sensible  objects  and  therefore
valid.  The  meaning  of  "two"  or  "four"  forms,  as  it  seems,  no  serious
problem,  for  the  empirical  world  of  things  everywhere  offers  us  groups
of  two  and  four  things.  With  the  first  generalization  and  extension
of  the  concept  of  number,  however,  this  reference  to  things,  upon
which  the  naive  interpretation  especially  rests,  disappears.  The
concept  and  designation  of  the  "imaginary"  number  is  the  expression
of  a  thought,  that  is  effective  in  principle  in  each  of  the  new  types  of
number  and  gives  them  their  characteristic  stamp.  Judgments
and  assertions  concerning  the  "unreal"  here  lay  claim  to  a  definite,
indispensable  cognitive  value.  This  connection  and  the  general
principle,  to  which  all  the  different  methods  of  the  extension  of
number  go  back,  is  stated  by  Gauss  with  complete  clarity  and  dis-
tinctness in  a  passage  in  which  he  sets  himself  the  task  of  grounding
the  true  "metaphysics  of  the  imaginary."  "Positive  and  negative
numbers,"  it  is  here  stated,  "can  only  find  application  where  what  is
enumerated  has  an  opposite,  to  be  united  with  which  is  identical  to
annihilation.  In  strictness,  this  presupposition  is  only  realized  where
not  substances  (things  conceivable  by  themselves)  but  relations
between  two  objects  are  enuinerated.  It  is  thereby,  postulated  that
these  objects  are  nrdrrc.fi  in  inmn  wny  intn  a  series^  e&,  A,  IL


56  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

C,  D, . . .  and  that  the  relation  of  A  to  B  can  be  regarded  as  the
same  as  that  of  B  to  C,  Now  in  this  case  nothing  more  belongs  to
the  concept  of  opposition  than  the  reversal  of  the  relation;  thus,  if
the  relation  (and  thus  the  transition)  between  A  and  B  is  represented
by  +  l,the  relation  of  B  to  A  is  represented  by  —  1.  In  so  far  as  such
a  series  is  unlimited,  in  both  directions,  every  real  whole  number  repre-
sents the  relation  of  any  member  arbitrarily  chosen  as  a  beginning  to
some  definite  member  of  the  series."  The  deduction  of  imaginary
numbers  rests,  further,  upon  the  fact  that  the  objects  we  are  inves-
tigating are  no  longer  regarded  as  ordered  in  a  single  series,  but  as
requiring  for  their  arrangement  consideration  of  a  series  of  series,  and
thus  the  introduction  of  a  new  unity  (+  i,  —  i).  Here,  if  we  abstract
from  all  details  of  the  deduction,  the  dominating  logical  view  stands
out  clearly.  The  meaning  of  the  generalized  concepts  of  number
cannot  be  grasped  as  long  as  we  try  to  indicate  what  they  mean  with
regard  to  substances,  with  regard  to  objects  conceivable  in  themselves.
But  the  meaning  at  once  becomes  intelligible  when  we  regard  the
concepts  as  expressing  pure  relations  through  which  the  connections
in  a  constructively  produced  series  are  governed.  A  negative  sub-
stance, which  would  be  at  once  being  and  not-being,  would  be  a  contrar
dictio  in  adjecto;  a  negative  relation  is  only  the  necessary  logical
correlate  of  the  concept  of  relation  in  general,  for  every  relation  of  A
to  B  can  also  be  represented  and  expressed  as  a  relation  of  B  to  A.
If  we  consider,  therefore,  the  generating  relation  (R),  on  which  rests
the  transition  from  a  member  of  the  series  of  numbers  to  that  imme-
diately following,  we  thereby  postulate  also  a  relation  of  the  follow-
ing member  to  the  preceding,  and  thus  define  a  second  direction  of
progress,  which  we  can  understand  as  the  converse  of  the  first,  or  as  the
inverse  relation  (ft).  The  positive  and  negative  numbers  (+a,  —  a)
now  appear  merely  as  expressions  of  progress  (Fortgang)  in  these
two  directions  of  the  relations  (Ra,  ft*).  From  this  fundamental
conception,  all  the  operations  of  calculation  within  the  thus  extended
field  of  numbers  can  be  deduced,  for  all  these  operations  are  founded
on  the  character  of  pure  number  as  relational  number  and  express
this  with  increasing  clarity.23

The  irrational  numbers. Once  more  we  shall  not  trace  the  develop-
ment in  all  its  particular  phases  but  shall  merely  study  typical

29  Cf.  here  especially  the  penetrating  exposition  and  proof  of  this  connection
given  by  Natorp,  op.  cit.,  Chs.  Ill  and  IV.


THE  CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  57

examples  in  which  the  logical  tendency  of  the  thought  is  most  clearly
expressed.  The  new  principle  is  verified,  above  all,  in  the  deduction
of  the  irrational  numbers.  There  seem  at  first  two  ways  in  which  a
deduction  of  the  irrationals  can  be  attempted.  We  could  start  either
from  the  relations  between  given  geometrical  extensions  or  from  the
postulate  of  the  solubility  of  certain  algebraic  equations.  The  first
method,  which  was  almost  exclusively  accepted  up  to  the  time  of
Weierstrass  and  Dedekind,  bases  the  new  number  upon  space  and
thus  upon  relations  found  between  measurable  objects.  Here  again
it  seems  to  be  experiences  of  physical-spatial  objects  which  control
the  process  of  the  formation  of  mathematical  concepts  and  prescribe
its  direction.  Nevertheless  it  becomes  evident  that  at  least  the  appeal
to  the  relations  of  concrete  empirical  things  must  fail  at  this  point.
The  relative  magnitudes  of  things  are  known  to  us  only  through
observation,  and  thus  only  within  the  limits  imposed  by  the  personal
equation  (Beobachtungsfehkr).  To  demand  an  absolutely  exact
determination  in  this  field  is  to  mistake  the  nature  of  the  question
itself.  Thus  the  ordinary  system  of  fractional  numbers  is  obviously
an  intellectual  instrument  adequate  in  every  respect  to  accomplish
all  the  tasks  that  can  arise  in  this  field.  For  within  this  system  there
is  no  smallest  difference,  for  between  any  two  elements,  however  near,
there  can  always  be  given  a  new  element  belonging  to  the  system;
thus  a  conceptual  differentiation  is  offered  here,  which  is  never
reached  in  the  observable  relations  of  things,  to  say  nothing  of  being
surpassed.  The  determinations  of  size,  to  which  we  are  led  by  exter-
nal experience,  can  thus  never  force  us  to  the  concept  of  the  irrational
in  its  strict  mathematical  significance.  On  the  contrary,  this  con-
cept must  arise  and  be  grounded  from  within  the  circle  of  the  postu-
lates, upon  which  rests  the  systematic  connection  of  mathematical
cognitions.  In  any  case,  not  the  bodies  of  physical  reality  but  the
purely  ideal  extensions  of  geometry  can  afford  the  desired  basis  for
the  derivation  of  the  irrationals.  The  new  problem  does  not  develop
out  of  the  apprehension  of  given,  factually  presented  magnitudes,
but  out  of  the  laws  of  certain  geometrical  constructions.  Once  this
is  recognized,  the  further  demand  must  arise  that  the  construction,
indispensable  in  any  attempted  deduction,  shall  proceed  and  justify
itself  from  the  fundamental  principle  of  number  itself .  The  shifting
of  the  question  from  number  to  space  would  destroy  the  unity  and
completeness  of  the  system  of  algebra  itself.


58  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

The  ordinary  algebraical  method,  which  introduces  the  irrational
values  as  the  solutions  of  certain  equations  is  indeed  inadequate,  for
it  confuses  the  erection  of  a  postulate  with  its  fulfillment.  For  even
if  We  abstract  from  the  fact  that  there  are  infinitely  many  irrational
values  such  as  cannot  be  represented  as  the  roots  of  algebraical
equations,  in  any  case,  such  an  explanation  does  not  decide  whether
the  object  produced  by  them'  is  definitely  determined  or  whether
there  are  several  different  values  which  satisfy  the  stated  conditions.
An  adequate  definition  must  not  characterize  the  ideal  object  upon
which  it  is  directed  merely  by  some  particular  "mark"  that  belongs
to  it,  but  must  comprehend  and  determine  it  in  its  full  characteristic
individuality,  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  all  others.  This
individuality,  however,  is  completely  determined  for  any  numerical
value  when  its  position  in  the  total  system  is  given  with  its  deduction,
and  its  relation  thus  determined  to  all  the  other  known  members  of
the  realm  of  number.  From  the  first,  this  relative  position  includes
within  it  all  other  properties  that  can  ever  be  ascribed  to  the  indi-
vidual numbers,  for  all  these  properties  follow  from  it  and  are  based
on  it.

Dedekind's  explanation  of  the  irrational  numbers.  This  guiding
thought  appears  in  its  purest  form  in  Dedekind's  well-known  explana-
tion of  the  irrational  numbers  as  "cuts."  If  we  first  take  as  given  the
totality  of  rational  fractions,  a  fraction  being  defined  as  a  proportion
(Verhdltniszahl)  and  derived  without  appeal  to  measurable  and
divisible  magnitudes  from  the  consideration  of  the  pure  ordinal
relations,24  then  every  individual  element  a,  which  we  can  select
from  this  totality,  divides  the  totality  itself  into  two  classes  21
and  S3.  The  first  of  these  classes  includes  all  numbers  which  are
smaller  than  a  (i.e.,  which  precede  a  in  the  systematic  order  of
the  whole);  the  second,  all  numbers  which  are  "larger"  than  a  (i.e.
which  follow  a).  If,  however,  the  designation  of  any  individual
fraction  implicitly  involves  such  a  division  of  the  total  system,
the  converse  of  this  proposition  does  not  hold;  for  not  every  strictly
defined,  unambiguous  division,  that  can  be  made  intellectually,
corresponds  to  a  definite  rational  number.  For  example,  if  we
consider  any  positive  whole  number  D,  which  however  is  not  the
square  of  a  whole  number,  then  it  will  always  lie  between  two  squares
so  that  a  positive  whole  number  A  can  be  pointed  out  such  that

»4  More  particularly  c/.,  e.g.,  Russell,  op.  cit.,  §144  ff.,  §230.


THE CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  59

+  I)2.  If  now  we  unite  all  the  numbers  whoso  squares
are  smaller  than  D  into  a  class  81,  while  we  think  of  all  tho
numbers  whose  squares  are  greater  than  D  as  united  in  a  class
SB,  then  any  possible  rational  value  belongs  to  one  of  these  classes,
so  that  the  division  here  made  completely  exhausts  the  system  of
rational  numbers.  Nevertheless,  there  is  evidently  no  element  in
this  system,  which  produces  this  separation,  and  which  would  thus
be  greater  than  all  the  numbers  of  the  class  31,  and  smaller
than  all  numbers  of  the  class  33.  We  havo  thus  by  means  of  a
conceptual  rule  (by  the  side  of  which  any  number  of  others  could  be
placed)  reached  an  entirely  sharp  and  clear  relation  between  classes
of  numbers,  which  is  nevertheless  represented  by  no  individual
numerical  value  in  the  manifold  as  hitherto  defined.  It  is  this  cir-
cumstance which  now  occasions  the  introduction  of  a  new  "irrational"
element;  an  element  which  has  no  other  function  and  meaning  than
to  represent  conceptually  this  determinatencss  of  division  itself.
The  new  number,  in  this  form  of  derivation,  is  thus  not  arbitrarily
conceived,  nor  is  it  introduced  as  a  mere  "symbol;"  but  it  appears  as
tho  expression  of  a  complex  whole  of  relations,  which  were  first
deduced  with  strict  logic.  It  represents,  from  the  beginning,  a
definite  logical  system  of  relations  and  into  such  can  be  again  resolved.
The  objection  has  frequently  been  raised  against  Dodekind's
deduction,  both  from  the  side  of  philosophy  and  from  that  of  mathe-
matics, that  it  involves  an  indemonstrable  assumption.  The  exist-
ence of  one  and  only  one  numerical  element,  in  every  case  of  complete
division  of  the  system  of  rational  numbers,  is  not  proved  but  merely
asserted  on  the  ground  of  a  general  postulate.  In  fact,  Dedekind's
exposition  suggests  this  consideration  in  so  far  as  it  takes  its  start
from  geometrical  analogies,  with  the  purpose  of  clarifying  the  funda-
mental thought.  The  continuity  of  the  straight  line,  it  is  explained,
is  expressed  by  the  fact  that  when  all  the  points  of  a  straight  line  are
divided  into  two  classes,  in  such  a  manner  that  every  point  of  the
first  class  lies  to  the  left  of  every  point  of  the  second  class,  there  exists
one  and  only  one  point  of  the  straight  line  which  produces  this  division
of  all  the  points,  this  cutting  of  the  line  into  two  pieces.25  The
assumption  of  this  property  of  a  line  is  characterized  by  Dedekind
himself  as  an  axiom,  by  which  we  first  recognize  the  continuity  of  the

26  Dedekind,  Stetigkeit  und  irrationale  Zahlen,  Ed.  2,  Braunschweig,  1892,
p.9ff.


60  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

line,  by  which  we  read  continuity  into  it.  "If,  in  general,  space  has  a
real  existence,  then  it  is  not  necessarily  continuous;  innumerably
many  of  its  properties  would  remain  the  same  even  if  it  were  dis-
continuous. And  even  if  we  were  sure  that  space  were  discontinuous,
there  would  be  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  making  it  continuous  by
intellectually  filling  in  its  holes,  if  we  chose  to  do  so;  this  filling  in,
however,  would  consist  in  the  creation  of  new  individual  points  and
would  be  done  according  to  the  above  principle."26  Such  an  opposi-
tion of  "ideal"  and  "real"  can  indeed  occasion  the  thought  that  no
conceptual  determination,  which  forces  itself  upon  us  in  understanding
the  realm  of  number,  need  thereby  involve  a  determination  of  being.
The  advance  from  an  ideal  systematic  connection  to  the  existence
of  a  new  element  seems  to  involve  a  /xerd/focrts  els  &\\o  ykvos.  In
truth,  however,  our  concern  here  is  not  with  an  unjustified  transition,
for  in  the  realm  of  number,  at  least,  the  whole  dualistic  separation
of  ideal  and  real  being,  of  "essence"  and  "existence,"  is  irrelevant.
Even  if,  in  the  case  of  space,  such  a  separation  between  the  product  of
free  geometrical  construction  and  what  space  "is"  in  the  nature  of
things  can  possibly  be  maintained,  nevertheless  in  the  field  of  pure
number  it  loses  all  meaning.  No  number  (the  whole  numbers  as
little  as  the  fractional  and  irrational  numbers)  "is"  anything  other
than  it  is  made  in  certain  conceptual  definitions.  The  assumption
that  wherever  there  is  a  complete  division  or  "cut"  (Schnitte)  of  the
rational  number  system  there  "exists"  one  and  only  one  number,
which  corresponds  to  it,  thus  implies  no  questionable  meaning.
What  is  here  determined  with  absolute  definiteness  is  primarily
the  division  itself.  When  the  rational  system  is  divided  into  two
classes  21  and  S3  by  any  sort  of  conceptual  rule,  we  can  decide
with  absolute  certainty  regarding  any  of  its  elements  whether  it
belongs  to  one  or  the  other  class;  and  further  show  that  this  alterna-
tive leaves  no  member  out  of  account,  i.e.}  that  the  resulting  division
is  complete  and  exhaustive.  The  "cut"  as  such  has  thus  indubitable
logical  "reality,"  which  does  not  have  to  be  conferred  upon  it  by  a
postulate.  Furthermore,  the  order  in  which  the  different  "cuts"
follow  each  other  is  not  arbitrary  but  is  definitely  prescribed  for
them  by  their  original  concept.  We  call  the  first  of  the  two  "cuts"
(2(,  S3)  larger  than  the  second  (21,  S3)  when  an  element  a  can  be
indicated  that  belongs  to  class  21  of  the  first  division  and  class

»  Idem,  p.  12.


THE CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  61

S3  of  the  second.  Thus  a  fixed  and  universal  criterion  exists  for
determining  the  serial  order  of  the  individual  "cuts."  Thereby
the  forms  thus  produced  receive  the  character  of  pure  number.
For  number,  in  its  original  meaning,  possesses  no  specific  character
but  is  merely  the  most  general  expression  of  the  form  of  order  and
series  in  general;  thus  wherever  such  a  form  exists  the  concept  of
number  finds  application.  The  "cuts'*  may  be  said  to  "be"  numbers,
since  they  form  among  themselves  a  strictly  ordered  manifold  in
which  the  relative  position  of  the  elements  is  determined  according  to
a  conceptual  rule.

Thus  in  the  creation  of  the  new  irrational  elements,  we  are  not
concerned  with  the  notion  that  somehow  "between"  the  known
members  of  the  system  of  rational  numbers  the  being  of  other  elements
is  supposed  or  assumed.  This  way  of  stating  the  question  is,  in
fact,  in  itself  meaningless  and  unintelligible.  But  we  are  concerned
with  the  fact  that  there  arises,  on  the  basis  of  the  originally  given
totality,  another  more  complex  system  of  serially  arranged  deter-
minations. This  system  includes  the  previous  totality  and  takes  it
up  into  itself;  for  the  characteristic  mark  of  succession  which  belongs
to  the  "cuts"  holds  directly  of  the  rational  numbers  themselves,
which  can  all  be  understood  and  represented  as  "cuts."  Thus  here
an  inclusive  point  of  view  is  found  from  which  the  relative  position
of  all  members  of  the  old,  as  well  as  of  the  new  system,  is  determined.
We  see  how  the  fundamental  thought  of  the  ordinal  theory  of  number
is  here  verified.  The  notion  must  be  given  up  that  number  arises
from  the  successive  addition  of  unities  and  that  its  true  conceptual
nature  is  based  on  this  operation.  Such  a  process  contains  indeed
one  principle  from  which  ordered  wholes  result,  but  in  no  way  contains
the  only  principle  for  the  production  of  such  wholes.  The  introduc-
tion of  the  irrationals  is  ultimately  nothing  but  the  general  expres-
sion of  this  thought:  it  gives  to  number  the  whole  freedom  and  scope
of  a  method  for  the  production  of  order  in  general,  by  virtue  of  which
members  can  be  posited  and  developed  in  ordered  sequence,  without
limiting  it  to  any  special  relation.  The  conceptual  "being"  of  the
individual  number  disappears  gradually  and  plainly  in  its  peculiar
conceptual  "function."  On  the  ordinary  interpretation,  with  which
Dedekind's  deduction  is  at  first  connected,  although  a  certain  number,
given  and  at  hand,  produces  a  definite  "cut"  in  a  system,  none  the  less
the  process  is  finally  reversed,  for  this  production  comes  to  be  the


62  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

necessary  and  sufficient  condition  of  our  speaking  of  the  existence  of  a
number  at  all.  The  element  cannot  be  separated  from  the  relational
complex,  for  it  means  nothing  in  itself  aside  from  this  complex,  which
it  brings  to  expression,  as  it  were,  in  concentrated  form.

The  problem  of  the  transfinite  numbers.  The  general  thought,  on
which  the  formation  of  number  rests,  takes  a  new  turn  when  we  pass
from  the  field  of  finite  number  to  that  of  transfinite  number.  Here
specifically  philosophical  problems  accumulate;  for  the  concept  of  the
infinite,  which  is  here  the  center  of  discussion,  has  always  belonged
no  less  to  the  domain  of  metaphysics  than  to  that  of  mathematics.
Thus,  when  Cantor,  in  the  course  of  his  decisive  investigations,
created  the  system  of  transfinite  numbers,  he  conjured  up  again  all
the  scholastic  oppositions  of  the  potential  and  actual  infinite,  of  the
infinite  and  the  indefinite.27  We  seem  here  finally  to  be  forced  from
the  question  of  the  pure  meaning  of  the  concept  for  knowledge  to
the  problem  of  absolute  being  and  its  properties.  The  concept  of
the  infinite  seems  to  mark  out  the  limits  of  logic  and  the  point  at
which  it  comes  in  contact  with  another  field  that  lies  outside  of  its
sphere.

The  concept  'of  "power."  Nevertheless  the  problems,  which  lead
to  the  creation  of  the  realm  of  transfinite  numbers,  issue  with  absolute
necessity  from  purely  mathematical  presuppositions.  They  arise  as
soon  as  we  generalize  the  fundamental  concept  of  "equivalence,"
which  from  the  first  forms  the  criterion  for  the  numerical  equality  of
finite  groups,  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  applicable  to  infinite  wholes.
Two  wholes, — whether  the  number  of  their  elements  is  limited  or
unlimited, — are  equivalent  or  of  the  same  "power"  (Mdchtigkeit),
when  their  members  can  be  mutually  coordinated  one  to  one.  The
application  of  this  criterion  can  manifestly  not  proceed,  in  the  case
of  infinite  groups,  by  coordinating  the  elements  individually  with
each  other  but  rather  presupposes  that  a  general  rule  can  be  given,
by  which  a  complete  correlation  is  established  that  can  be  surveyed  at
a  glance.  Thus  we  are  sure  that  for  every  even  number  2n  there
corresponds  an  odd  number,  2n  +  lf  and  that,  if  we  let  n  assume  all
the  possible  values  of  whole  numbers,  the  two  groups,  of  even  and
odd  numbers,  are  exhaustively  correlated  in  a  one  to  one  manner.
The  concept  of  "power,"  which  is  thus  introduced,  first  gains  a

97  Cf.  especially  Cantor,  Zur  Lehre  vom  Transfiniten.  Gesammelte  Abhandl.
aus  der  Zeitschr.  f.  Philosophic  u.  philos.  Kritik.  Halle  a.  S.  J890.


THE CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  63

specifically  mathematical  interest  when  it  is  seen  that  it  is  itself
capable  of  differences  and  degrees.  If  we  say  that  all  wholes  whose
elements  can  be  coordinated  in  one  to  one  fashion  with  the  series  of
natural  numbers  belong  to  the  first  "power,"  then  the  question  arises
whether  the  totality  of  possible  manifolds  is  exhausted  in  them  or
whether  there  are  groups  of  another  character,  as  regards  the  specified
property.  The  latter  is  the  case,  in  fact,  as  can  be  proved.  For,
while  the  advance  from  the  positive  whole  numbers  to  the  totality  of
rational  numbers  produces  no  change  in  "power,"  and  the  same  is
true  when  we  go  from  the  system  of  rational  numbers  to  the  system  of
algebraic  numbers,  nevertheless,  the  system  assumes  a  new  character
when  we  add  the  totality  of  transcendental  numbers  to  it  and  thus
extend  it  to  the  group  of  real  numbers  in  general.  This  manifold
thus  represents  a  new  level,  which  rises  above  the  former  level;  for,
on  the  one  hand,  it  includes  systems  of  the  first  "power"  within  itself,
while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  goes  beyond  them,  since  when  we  attempt
to  coordinate  its  elements  with  those  of  the  series  of  natural  numbers
there  always  remains  an  infinity  of  unconnected  elements.28  The
introduction  of  the  transfinite  numbers  on  and  «o  is  merely  to  main-
tain this  characteristic  difference.  The  new  number  here  means
nothing  €-lse  than  a  new  point  of  view,  according  to  which  infinite
systems  can  be  arranged.  A  more  complex  group  of  distinguishing
characteristics  results  when  we  place  along  side  of  the  transfinite
cardinal  numbers,  which  are  limited  to  giving  the  "powers"  of
infinite  groups,  the  coordinate  system  of  ordinal  numbers,  which
arises  when  we  no  longer  compare  the  groups  in  question  merely  with
regard  to  the  number  of  their  elements,  but  also  with  regard  to  the
position  of  the  elements  in  the  system.  We  ascribe  to  the  well-
ordered  groups29  M  and  N  the  same  ordinal  number  or  the  same
"type  of  order"  when  the  elements  of  both  can  be  mutually  co-
ordinated one  to  one  with  each  other,  the  sequence  which  holds  for
both  being  retained.  Thus  if  E  and  F  are  elements  of  M,  and  Ei
and  F!  are  the  corresponding  elements  of  N,  the  relative  position  of

"  For  more  detailed  exposition,  cf.  my  essay,  "Kant  und  die  moderne
Mathematik"  (Kont-Studien  XII,  21  ff.);  for  ail  particulars,  the  literature
there  cited  should  be  consulted  as  well  as  Cantor's  presentation  in  the
Mathemat.  Annalen.

*«  For  the  definition  of  "well-ordered  groups,"  cf.  Cantor,  Grundlagen  emer
allgemeinen  MannigfaUigkeitslehre,  §2.  _


64  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

E  and  F  in  the  succession  of  the  first  group  is  in  agreement  with  the
relative  position  of  EI  and  FI  in  the  succession  of  the  second.  In
other  words,  if  E  precedes  F  in  the  first  group,  then  EI  must  precede
FI  in  the  second  group.30  Thus,  while  in  the  comparison  of  the
"powers"  of  two  manifolds  use  can  be  made  of  any  possible  arrange-
ment of  their  members,  in  establishing  their  "type  of  order "  we  are
bound  to  a  certain  prescribed  kind  of  succession.  If  now  we  say
that  all  series,  that  can  be  correlated  in  one  to  one  fashion  according
to  this  condition  with  the  sequence  of  natural  numbers,  belong  to  the
"type  of  order"  o>,  then  we  can,  by  adding  to  such  series  in  their
totality  1,  2  or  3  members,  form  series  of  the  types  co  +  1,  o>  +  #,
oj  +  8;  and  furthermore  by  uniting  two  or  more  systems  of  the
type  w  we  can  create  the  type  of  order  #co,  &o,  .  .  .  no?,  so  that
by  further  application  of  this  procedure,  we  can  go  on  to  the  produc-
tion of  types  w2,  w3  .  .  .  w7?,  or  indeed  to  cow,  ww^  etc.  And  these
are  by  no  means  introduced  here  as  mere  arbitrary  symbols  but
are  signs  of  conceptual  determinations  and  differences,  that  are
actually  given  and  can  be  definitely  pointed  out  in  the  field  of  infinite
groups.  The  form  of  enumeration  also  is  only  an  expression  of  a
necessary  logical  differentiation,  which  first  gains  clear  and  adequate
interpretation  in  this  form.

The  production  of  trans  finite  numbers.  In  this  type  of  deduction,
the  metaphysical  problems  of  the  actual  infinite  fall  completely  into
the  background.  It  has  been  rightly  emphasized31  that  our  concern
with  the  new  forms  of  number  is  not  so  much  with  "infinite  numbers"
as  with  "numbers  of  something  infinite;"  that  is,  with  mathematical
expressions,  which  we  create  in  order  to  grasp  certain  distinctive
characteristics  of  infinite  totalities.  The  conflicts  that  result  from
the  connection  of  the  concepts  "infinity"  and  "reality"  are  not
involved  here,  where  we  move  entirely  in  the  realm  of  ideal  con-
structions. These  conflicts  may  be  represented  in  two-fold  form,
according  as  they  are  regarded  from  the  side  of  the  object  or  from
that  of  the  subject,  from  that  of  the  world  or  of  the  activity  of  the
knowing  ego.  From  the  first  point  of  view,  the  impossibility  of  the
actual  infinite  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  objects,  upon  which  the
act  of  enumeration  is  directed  and  which,  as  it  seems,  it  must  pre-

80  Cantor,  op.  cit.,  §2,  p.  5.

81  S.  Kerry,  System  einer  Theorie  der  Grenzbegriffe,  Leipzig  und  Wien,  1890,
p.  68  f.


THE CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  65

suppose,  can  only  be  given  in  finite  numbers.  No  matter  what
breadth  and  scope  we  may  ascribe  to  abstract  number,  whatever  is
counted  must  always  be  thought  as  enclosed  within  certain  limits,
for  it  is  not  accessible  to  us  otherwise  than  by  experience,  which
advances  from  individual  to  individual.  Viewed  from  the  other
point  of  view,  it  is  the  psychological  synthesis  of  the  act  of  enumera-
tion, which  would  exclude  the  actual  infinite;  no  "finite  understanding"
can  actually  survey  an  unlimited  number  of  unities  and  add  them
successively  to  each  other.  But  both  objections  are  unjustified  with
reference  to  the  "transfinite,"  when  we  limit  the  latter  to  its  strictly
mathematical  meaning.  The  "material"  of  enumeration  at  our
disposal  is  unlimited,  for  it  is  not  of  an  empirical  but  of  a  logico-
conceptual  nature.  It  is  not  assertions  concerning  things  that  are  to
be  collected,  but  judgments  concerning  numbers  and  numerical  con-
cepts; thus  the  "material,"  which  is  presupposed,  is  not  to  be  thought
of  as  outwardly  given  but  as  arising  by  free  construction.  Just  as
little  is  there  demand  for  the  psychological  processes  of  particular,
isolated  acts  of  presentation  and  their  subsequent  summation.  The
concept  of  the  transfinite  implies  rather  the  opposite  thought:  it
represents  the  independence  of  the  purely  logical  import  of  number
from  "enumeration"  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word.  Even  in  the
grounding  of  the  irrational  numbers,  we  could  not  avoid  considering
infinite  classes  of  numbers,  such  as  could  be  represented  and  surveyed
in  the  totality  of  their  elements  only  by  a  general  conceptual  rule
and  could  not  be  counted  off  member  for  member.  The  new  cate-
gory of  number  gives  this  fundamental  distinction  its  most  general
significance.  Cantor  expressly  distinguishes  the  "logical  function,"
on  which  the  transfinite  is  based,  from  the  process  of  successive
construction  and  synthesis  of  unities.  The  number  o>  is  not  the
result  of  such  a  perpetually  renewed  addition  of  particular  elements,
but  is  meant  to  be  merely  an  expression  for  the  fact  that  the  whole
unlimited  system  of  the  natural  numbers,  in  which  there  is  no  "last
member,"  "is  given  in  its  natural  succession  according  to  its  law."
"It  is  indeed  permissible  to  think  of  the  newly  created  number  o>
as  the  limit  toward  which  the  numbers  1,  2,  3,  4,  ...  v  .  .  .  tend,  if
we  thereby  understand  nothing  else  than  that  <o  is  to  be  the  first
whole  number  that  follows  upon  all  the  numbers  v;  that  is,  is  to  be
called  greater  than  any  of  the  numbers  v  .  .  .  The  logical  func-
tion, which  gives  us  o>  is  obviously  different  from  the  first  principle  of


DO  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

generation;  I  call  it  the  second  principle  of  generation  of  real  whole
numbers  and  define  the  same  more  closely  thus:  when  any  definite
succession  of  defined  real  whole  numbers  is  given,  among  which  there
exists  no  one  that  is  largest,  a  new  number  is  produced,  on  the  basis
of  this  second  generating  principle,  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  limit
of  those  numbers,  i.e.,  as  the  first  number  greater  than  all  of  them."32
The  second  "principle  of  generation"  of  number  (Cantor).  This
"second  principle  of  generation"  is  ultimately  only  permissible  and
fruitful  because  it  does  not  represent  an  absolutely  new  procedure,
but  merely  carries  further  the  tendency  of  thought  that  is  unavoid-
able in  any  logical  basing  of  number.  Consideration  of  the  properties
of  external  things,  such  as  those  of  particular  psychical  contents  and
acts  of  presentation,  proved  them  to  be  incapable  not  only  of  con-
structing the  series  of  the  "natural"  numbers  in  their  lawful  order
but  of  rendering  them  intelligible.  Even  here  it  was  not  the  bare
addition  of  unity  to  unity,  which  controlled  the  formation  of  concepts;
it  rather  appeared  that  the  individual  members  of  the  series  of
numbers  could  only  be  deduced  in  their  total  extent  by  considering
one  and  the  same  generating  relation,  hold  to  be  identical  in  content
through  all  variations  in  particular  application.  It  is  this  same
thought,  which  now  attains  sharper  formulation.  Just  as  the  endless
multiplicity  of  natural  numbers  is  ultimately  posited  by  one  concept,
i.e.,  according  to  a  universal  principle,  so  its  content  can  be  drawn
together  again  in  a  single  concept.  For  mathematical  thought,  the
fundamental  relation,  that  includes  within  itself  all  the  members  that
proceed  from  it,  becomes  itself  a  new  element,  a  kind  of  fundamental
unity,  from  which  a  new  form  of  number-construction  takes  its  start.
The  whole  endless  totality  of  natural  numbers,  in  so  far  as  it  is  "given
by  a  law,"  i.e.,  in  so  far  as  it  is  to  be  treated  as  a  unity,  becomes  the
starting-point  for  a  new  construction.  From  the  first  order  there
arise  other  and  more  complex  orders,  which  use  the  former  as  material
basis.  Once  more  we  see  the  liberation  of  the  concept  of  number  from
the  concept  of  collective  unity.  To  seek  to  understand  and  represent
the  "number"  w  as  an  aggregate  of  individual  unities  would  be  non-
sensical, and  would  negate  its  essential  concept.  On  the  other  hand,
the  ordinal  view  is  verified  here:  for  in  the  concept  of  a  new  construc-
tion following  upon  all  elements  of  the  series  of  natural  numbers,

11  Cantor,  Grundlagen,  §11,  p.  33.


THE CONCEPT  OF  NUMBER  67

there  is  no  contradiction,  as  long  as  it  is  remembered  that  this  totality
is  to  be  logically  surveyed  and  exhausted  in  a  single  concept.

The  problem  of  the  infinity  of  time  can  also  be  left  out  of  con-
sideration at  first.  For  the  meaning  of  "succession"  in  a  series  is
independent  of  the  concrete  temporal  succession.  Thus  three  does
not  follow  upon  two  in  the  sense  of  a  succession  of  events,  but  the
relation  merely  points  out  the  logical  circumstance  that  the  definition
of  three  "presupposes"  that  of  two;  the  same  holds  in  a  still  stricter
sense  for  the  relation  between  the  transfinite  and  the  finite  numbers.
That  the  number  o>  is  "after"  all  the  finite  numbers  of  the  series  of
natural  numbers,  means  ultimately  merely  this  same  sort  of  concep-
tual dependence  in  the  order- of  grounding.  The  judgments,  into
which  the  transfinite  enters,  prove  to  be  complex  assertions,  which  are
reduced  by  analysis  to  relative  determinations  of  infinite  systems
of  "natural"  numbers.  In  this  sense,  a  thorough-going  conceptual
continuity  prevails  between  the  two  fields.  The  new  constructions
are  "numbers"  in  so  far  as  they  possess  in  themselves  a  prescribed
serial  form,  and  hence  obey  certain  laws  of  connection  for  purposes  of
calculation,  which  are  analogous  to  those  of  the  finite  numbers,
though  they  do  not  agree  with  them  in  all  points.33

Thus  the  new  forms  of  negative,  irrational  and  transfinite  numbers
are  not  added  to  the  number  system  from  without  but  grow  out  of
the  continuous  unfolding  of  the  fundamental  logical  function  that
was  effective  in  the  first  beginnings  of  the  system.  A  new  direction
in  principle  comes  in,  however,  as  soon  as  we  advance  from  the
complete  and  closed  system  of  the  real  numbers  to  the  more  complex
number  systems.  According  to  the  "metaphysics  of  the  imaginary,"
which  Gauss  founded  and  developed,  we  are  no  longer  concerned
here  with  the  establishment  of  the  most  general  laws  of  the  order  of  a
single  series,  but  rather  with  the  unification  of  a  plurality  of  series,  of
which  each  one  is  given  by  a  definite  generating  relation.  With  this
transition  to  a  multidimensional  manifold,  there  appear  logical
problems,  which  find  their  complete  formulation  beyond  the  limits  of
the  pure  doctrine  of  numbers  in  the  field  of  general  geometry.

33  For  the  arithmetic  of  the  transfinite,  cf.  more  particularly  Russell,  op.
cit.,  §286,  §294.


CHAPTER  III
THE  CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY


The  logical  transformations  of  the  concept  of  number  are
dominated  by  a  general  motive,  which  constantly  gains  more  definite
expression.  The  meaning  of  number  is  first  grasped  completely
when  thought  has  freed  itself  from  seeking  in  concrete  experience  a
correlative  for  each  of  its  constructions.  In  its  most  general  mean-
ing, number  reveals  itself  as  a  complex  intellectual  determination,
which  possesses  no  immediate  sensible  copy  in  the  properties  of  the
physical  object.  Necessary  as  it  is  in  modern  analysis  and  algebra
to  carry  through  this  development,  still  it  might  appear  that  it  repre-
sents only  a  technical  detour  of  thought  and  not  the  original  and
natural  principle  of  the  scientific  construction  of  concepts.  This
principle  seems  only  to  come  to  light  in  its  purity  where  thought  does
not,  as  in  the  realm  of  number,  act  exclusively  according  to  self-
created  laws  but  finds  its  value  and  support  in  intuition.  Precisely
here  then  lies  the  critical  decision  for  every  logical  theory  of  the
concept.  A  conceptual  construction  may  be  spun  out  ever  so  subtly
and  consistently  from  presuppositions;  nevertheless  it  seems  empty
and  meaningless  so  long  as  it  does  not  deepen  and  enrich  our  intuition.
But  if  we  adhere  to  the  criterion  of  intuition,  the  opposition  of  the
logical  theories  to  each  other  appears  in  a  new  light.  The  model,
which  theory  must  follow,  lies  henceforth  not  exclusively  in  algebra
but,  in  purer  form,  in  geometry.  Not  number,  but  the  concepts  of
space,  because  of  their  immediate  relation  to  concrete  reality,  must
serve  as  the  type.

Concept  and  form.  In  the  historical  beginnings  of  logic  this  fact  is
most  evident.  Concept  and/orm  are  synonyms;  they  unite  without
distinction  in  the  meaning  of  eidos*  The  sensuous  manifold  is  ordered
and  divided  by  certain  spatial  forms,  which  appear  in  it  and  run
through  all  diversity  as  permanent  features.  In  these  forms  we
possess  the  fixed  schema  by  which  we  grasp  in  the  flux  of  sensible
things  a  system  of  unchanging  determinations,  a  realm  of  "eternal
being."  Thus  the  geometrical  form  becomes  at  once  the  expression

68


THE  CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  69

and  the  confirmation  of  the  logical  type.  The  principle  of  the  logic
of  the  generic  concept  is  confirmed  from  a  new  angle;  and  this  time  it
is  neither  the  popular  view  of  the  world  nor  the  grammatical  struc-
ture of  language,  but  the  structure  of  a  fundamental  mathematical
science  upon  which  it  rests.  Just  as  we  recognize  as  identical  the
outline  of  the  visible  form  in  whatever  sensuous  material  or  size  it
may  appear,  so  in  general  we  are  able  to  grasp  the  highest  genera,  to
which  existence  owes  its  uniform  structure  and  the  constant  recur-
rence of  its  definite  features.

The  method  of  ancient  geometry.  These  relations  have  not  been
exclusively  significant  with  regard  to  logical  problems;  they  have  also
been  decisive  in  the  scientific  evolution  of  geometry.  The  synthetic
geometry  of  antiquity  is  dominated  by  the  same  fundamental  view
that  is  given  general  expression  in  formal  logic.  The  genera  of
existence  can  only  be  clearly  grasped  when  they  are  strictly  dis-
tinguished from  each  other  and  limited  to  a  fixed  circle  of  content.
Thus  also  each  geometrical  form  possesses  an  isolated  and  unchanging
character.  The  proof  at  first  is  not  directed  so  much  upon  the
unity  of  the  forms  as  upon  their  strict  differentiation.  The  view,
indeed,  that  the  problem  of  change  was  in  general  alien  to  the  mathe-
matical spirit  of  the  Greeks  has  been  more  and  more  completely
refuted  by  investigation  of  the  historical  sources.  Not  only  did  they
grasp  the  concept  of  number,  including  that  of  the  irrational,  in  all
sharpness,  but  the  Ephodion  of  Archimedes  also  shows  with  great
clarity  how  completely  Greek  thought,  where  it  advanced  freely  in
methodic  discovery,  was  penetrated  by  the  concept  of  continuity
and  thus  anticipated  the  procedure  of  the  analysis  of  the  infinite
itself.1  But  precisely  when  we  realize  this,  the  difference  that
remained  between  the  method  of  discovery  and  that  of  scientific
exposition  becomes  the  more  manifest.  The  scientific  exposition  is
influenced  by  certain  logical  theories,  from  which  it  cannot  entirely
free  itself.  As  circle  and  ellipse,  ellipse  and  parabola  do  not  belong
to  the  same  visible  type,  it  seems  that  they  cannot,  in  a  strict  sense,
fall  under  the  unity  of  a  concept.  However  much  the  geometrical
judgments,  which  we  can  make  about  the  two  fields,  meet  and  corre-
spond in  content,  nevertheless  there  is  here  only  a  secondary  similar-

*  Cf.  the  exposition  of  Max  Simon,  Geschichte  der  Mathematik  im  Alter  turn  in
Verbindung  mil  antiker  Kulturgeschichte,  Berlin,  1909,  especially  pp.  256,
274  ff.,  373.


70  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

ity  and  not  an  original  logical  identity.  The  proofs  of  the  two  types
of  assertion  are  in  each  case  strictly  separate;  they  gain  their  validity
and  necessity  only  because  they  are  individually  derived  from  the
concept  in  question  and  its  specific  structure.  Every  difference  in
the  arrangement  of  the  given  and  sought  lines  of  a  problem  presents  a
new  problem  in  regard  to  the  proof;  to  every  difference  in  the  total
sensuous  appearance  of  a  figure  corresponds  a  difference  in  interpreta-
tion and  deduction.  A  problem,  which  modern  synthetic  geometry
solves  by  a  single  construction,  was  analysed  by  Apollonius  into  more
than  eighty  cases,  differing  only  in  position.2  The  unity  of  the
constructive  principles  of  geometry  is  hidden  by  the  specialization  of
its  particular  forms  of  which  each  is  conceived  as  irreducible.

The  concept  of  space  and  the  concept  of  number.  The  transformation
of  geometry  in  modern  times  begins  with  an  insight  into  the  philo-
sophical defect  of  this  procedure.  It  was  not  by  chance  that  the  new
form  of  geometry,  although  anticipated,  especially  by  Fermat,
first  gained  definitive  formulation  through  Descartes.  The  reform
of  geometry  could  only  be  carried  out  after  a  new  ideal  of  method  had
been  clearly  conceived.  The  method  of  Descartes  is  everywhere
directed  toward  establishing  a  definite  order  and  connection  among
all  particular  expressions  of  thought.  It  is  not  the  content  of  a  given
thought  that  determines  its  pure  cognitive  value,  but  the  necessity  by
which  it  is  deduced  from  ultimate  first  principles  in  unbroken
sequence.  The  first  rule  of  all  rational  knowledge  is  then  that
cognitions  be  so  arranged  that  they  form  a  single  self-contained  series
within  which  there  are  no  unmediated  transitions.  No  member  can
be  introduced  as  an  entirely  new  element,  but  each  must  issue  step  by
step  from  the  earlier  members  according  to  a  certain  rule.  What-
ever can  be  an  object  of  human  knowledge  is  necessarily  subject  to
this  condition  of  continuous  connection,  so  that  there  can  be  no
question,  however  remote,  which  we  are  not  able  to  master  fully  by
this  methodical  progress  from  step  to  step.  This  simple  thought,
on  which  the  Discours  de  la  Methode  is  founded,  at  once  demands
and  conditions  a  new  conception  of  geometry.  Geometrical  knowl-
edge in  the  strict  sense  is  not  found  where  the  particulars  are  studied

2  See  Reye,  Die  synthetische  Geometric  im  Altertum  und  in  der  Neuzeit
(Jahresberichte  der  Deulschen  Mathematik. — Vereinigung.  XI.  (1902)  p.  343  ff.
Cf.  also  my  work,  Leibniz9  System  in  seinen  wissensch.  Grundlagen,  Marburg,
1902,  p.  220  ff.


THE  CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  71

as  isolated  objects,  but  only  where  the  totality  of  these  objects  can
be  constructively  generated  according  to  a  given  process.  Ordinary
synthetic  geometry  violates  this  postulate;  for  its  object  is  the  isolated
spatial  form  whose  properties  it  grasps  in  immediate  sensuous  intui-
tion but  whose  systematic  connection  with  other  forms  it  can  never
completely  represent.  At  this  point,  we  are  led  with  inner  philosophi-
cal necessity  to  the  thought  of  the  completion  of  the  concept  of  space
through  the  concept  of  number.  The  notebook  of  Descartes,  which
reveals  the  development  of  his  fundamental  thought,  contains  a
characteristic  expression  of  this:  "The  sciences  in  their  present
condition  are  masked  and  will  only  appear  in  full  beauty  when  we
remove  their  masks;  whoever  surveys  the  chain  of  the  sciences  will
find  them  no  more  difficult  to  hold  in  mind  than  the  series  of
numbers."3  This  is  the  goal  of  the  philosophical  method:  to  con-
ceive all  its  objects  with  the  same  strictness  of  systematic  connection
as  the  system  of  numbers.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  exact  sciences
in  the  time  of  Descartes,  this  is  the  only  manifold  which  is  built  up
from  a  self-created  beginning  according  to  immanent  laws,  and  thus
can  conceal  within  itself  no  question  in  principle  insoluble  for  thought.
The  demand  that  spatial  forms  be  represented  as  forms  of  number  and
be  wholly  expressed  in  the  latter,  may  appear  strange  when  regarded
from  the  standpoint  of  the  Cartesian  ontology;  for  in  this,  "extension"
signifies  the  true  substance  of  the  External  objects  and  is  thus  an
original  and  irreducible  condition  of  being.  But  here  the  analysis
of  being  must  be  subordinated  to  the  analysis  of  knowledge.  We
can  only  bring  space  to  exact  intelligibility  by  giving  it  the  same
logical  character  as  hitherto  belonged  only  to  number.  Number
is  not  understood  here  as  a  mere  technical  instrument  of  measure-
ment. Its  deeper  value  consists  in  that  in  it  alone  is  completely
fulfilled  the  supreme  methodological  postulate,  which  first  makes
knowledge  knowledge.  The  conversion  of  spatial  concepts  into
numerical  concepts  thus  raises  all  geometrical  enquiry  to  a  new
intellectual  level.  The  substantial  form-concepts  of  ancient  geome-
try, which  remain  opposed  to  each  other  in  bare  isolation,  are  changed
by  this  into  pure  "serial  concepts"  which  can  be  generated  out  of
each  other  by  a  certain  fundamental  principle.  The  scientific
discovery  of  analytic  geometry  rests,  in  fact,  upon  a  true  philosophi-
cal "revolution."  Traditional  logic  seems  impregnable  as  long  as
» Descartes,  Oeuvres  incites,  pub.  by  Foucher  de  Careil,  Paris,  1859,  p.  4.


72  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

ancient  synthetic  geometry  is  at  its  side  as  an  immediate  confirmation
and  embodiment  of  its  principles;  the  extension  of  geometry  first
makes  room  for  a  new  logic  of  manifolds  that  extends  beyond  the
limits  of  the  syllogism.

The  fundamental  principle  of  analytic  geometry.  This  connection
appears  even  more  clearly  when  we  consider  the  special  develop-
ment which  analytic  geometry  received  from  Descartes.  Here  it
appears  that  the  apparently  individual  form  of  exposition  contains
features  of  universal  significance  which,  in  another  guise,  run  through
the  whole  philosophical  history  of  geometry.  The  fundamental
concept  upon  which  Descartes  founds  his  considerations  is  the  concept
of  movement.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  older  interpretation,  there
is  a  problem  even  in  this.  For  only  the  individual  figure,  which
stands  before  us  in  fixed,  closed  limits,  seems  accessible  to  exact
intellectual  treatment,  while  the  transition  from  one  form  into
another  seems  to  force  us  back  into  the  chaos  of  mere  perception,
into  the  sensuous  realm  of  "becoming."  It  might  at  first  appear
that  recognition  of  the  concept  of  motion  introduced  a  not  entirely
rational  element  into  the  Cartesian  geometry,  contrary  to  its  real
tendency.  Motion  leads  at  once  to  the  question  of  the  moving
"subject;"  but  does  not  this  subject  presuppose  a  material  body,
thus  a  purely  empirical  element?  This  doubt  vanishes,  however,
when  we  analyse  in  detail  the  function  here  ascribed  to  the  concept  of
motion.  The  various  forms  of  plane  curves  arise  by  our  prescribing
to  a  given  point,  which  we  make  a  fundamental  element,  various
kinds  of  movement  relative  to  a  vertical  and  a  horizontal  axis.  From
the  unification  of  these  types  of  movement  must  be  completely
deduced  the  characteristics  of  lines  generated  in  this  way  as
"paths"  of  points.  Here,  as  we  see,  movement  does  not  signify
a  concrete,  but  merely  an  ideal  process;  it  is  an  expression  of  the
synthesis  by  which  the  successive  manifold  of  positions,  that  are
connected  by  any  law,  are  brought  into  the  unity  of  a  spatial  form.
Here  the  concept  of  motion,  as  previously  the  concept  of  number,
serves  simply  as  an  example  of  the  general  concept  of  series.  The
individual  point  of  the  plane  is  first  determined  by  its  distance  from
two  fixed  lines,  and  gains  hereby  its  fixed  systematic  place  within  the
totality  of  possible  positions.  These  point-individualities,  which  are
characterized  by  definite  numerical  values,  do  not  merely  stand  next
to  each  other  but  are  differently  related,  according  to  various  complex


THE CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  73

rules  of  arrangement,  and  are  thus  brought  to  unified  forms.  The
representation  of  the  "movement"  of  the  points  is  only  the  sensuous
symbol  of  this  logical  act  of  arrangement.  The  intuitive  geometri-
cal line  is  thus  resolved  into  a  pure  succession  of  numerical  values,
connected  with  each  other  by  a  certain  arithmetical  rule.  All  the
sensible  properties  by  which  we  distinguish  one  line  from  another,
as  for  example,  constancy  or  change  in  direction  and  curvature,  must,
in  so  far  as  they  can  be  given  exact  conceptual  expression,  be  expres-
sible as  peculiarities  of  these  series  of  values.  The  concept  of  motion
thus  does  not  serve  the  purpose  of  pictorial  representation  but  rather
that  of  progressive  rationalization;  the  given  form  is  destroyed  that
it  may  rise  anew  from  an  arithmetical  serial  law.  How  strictly  this
general  postulate  is  maintained  is  seen  in  characteristic  fashion  in
Descartes'  exposition,  for  it  is  this  postulate  that  defines  and  limits
the  field  of  geometry  itself.  "Transcendental"  curves  are  excluded
because  in  their  case, — with  the  technical  means  at  Descartes'
disposal, — the  postulated  deduction  from  the  relations  of  purely
numerical  rules,  seems  impossible.  These  curves,  which  in  their
intuitive  construction  have  no  exceptional  position,  are  ruled  out  of
geometry  because  they  can  not  be  brought  under  the  new  definition
of  the  geometrical  concept,  by  which  the  concept  is  ultimately
reduced  to  a  system  of  elementary  operations  of  calculation.

The  infinitesimal  geometry.  Here,  however,  appear  the  limits  of
Cartesian  geometry,  which  had  to  be  transcended  in  later  historical
development.  A  new  ideal  of  knowledge  was  affirmed;  but  this
ideal  was  not  able  to  include  all  the  scientific  questions  that  had
hitherto  been  united  under  the  name  of  geometry.  Rigor  of  concep-
tual construction  had  to  be  purchased  through  the  exclusion  of
important  and  far-reaching  fields.  The  path  of  logical  progress  was
thus  clearly  prescribed.  The  resolution  of  spatial  concepts  into
serial  concepts  remained  the  guiding  standpoint;  but  the  system  of
serial  concepts  had  to  be  deepened  and  refined  so  that  not  merely  a
narrow  selection  but  the  whole  field  of  possible  spatial  forms  could  be
surveyed  and  mastered.  Because  of  this  demand,  Cartesian  geome-
try develops  with  inner  necessity  into  infinitesimal  geometry.  Here
in  infinitesimal  geometry  first  appears  in  more  perfect  form  the
new  conceptual  construction  which  can  be  recognized  in  its  general
outlines  in  analytic  geometry.  The  procedure  here  also  starts  from
a  fundamental  series  Xi  x2  ...  xn,  which  is  coordinated,  ac-


74  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

cording  to  a  definite  rule,  with  another  series  of  values  yi  y2
...  yn.  But  this  coordination  is  no  longer  limited  to  the
ordinary  algebraic  procedures,  to  the  addition  and  subtraction,
multiplication  and  division  of  numbers  or  groups  of  numbers,  but
includes  all  possible  forms  of  the  dependency  of  magnitudes  accord-
ing to  law.  The  concept  of  number  is  fulfilled  in  the  general  concept
of  function,  which  permeates  it;  and  their  cooperation  first  enables
us  to  develop  the  whole  content  of  geometry  in  logical  perfection.
In  the  advance  to  differential  geometry  there  appears,  however,  a
new  decisive  moment.  It  is  an  infinite  manifold  of  coordinations  from
whose  unification  the  curve  first  results  as  a  conceptual  whole.  The
method  of  infinitestimal  analysis  first  clearly  shows  that  this  infinity
of  determinations  does  not  destroy  all  determinateness,  but  that  it  is
possible  rather  to  unify  the  determinations  again  in  a  geometrical
conception.  As  in  analytic  geometry  the  individual  point  of  the
plane  is  essentially  determined  by  the  numerical  values  of  its  co-
ordinates x  and  y,  so,  by  the  differential  equation  f(x,  y,  y')  =  0,
to  every  point  thus  given  is  coordinated  a  certain  direction  of  move-
ment, and  the  problem  consists  in  reconstructing  from  the  system  of
these  directions  the  whole  of  a  given  curve  with  all  peculiarities  of
its  geometrical  course.  The  integration  of  the  equation  signifies
only  the  synthesis  of  these  infinitely  numerous  determinations  of
direction  into  a  unitary  and  connected  structure.  In  the  same  way,
a  differential  equation  of  the  second  order  f(x,  y,  y/  y")  =  0  co-
ordinates to  each  point  and  its  direction  of  movement  a  certain
radius  of  curvature,  whereby  the  problem  arises  of  deducing  the
form  of  the  curve  as  a  whole  from  the  totality  of  values  of  curvature
thus  gained.4  The  elements,  which  are  here  indicated  geometrically
by  the  concept  of  direction  and  curvature,  are  in  their  most  general
expression  obviously  nothing  else  than  simple  serial  principles,  which
we  comprehend  in  their  totality  and  in  their  transformation  accord-
ing to  law.

If  we  consider,  in  the  sense  of  infinitesimal  analysis,  the  space
measured  by  a  moving  body  as  represented  by  the  integral  of  its
velocities,  the  process  that  we  apply  consists  in  reading  into  every
moment  of  the  actually  progressing  movement  a  certain  law  of
progress,  by  which  the  transition  to  the  following  points  of  space

4  Compare,  F.  Klein,  Einleitung  in  die  hohere  Geometric,  Autographierte
Vorlesung,  Gottingen,  1893,  I,  143  ff.


THE CONCEPT OP SPACE AND GEOMETRY  75

is  to  be  exactly  determined.  The  "velocity/*  which  a  body  possesses
at  a  given  point  of  its  path  at  a  given  moment  of  time,  can  only  be
conceived  and  represented  by  the  comparison  and  reciprocal  rela-
tion of  a  series  of  space  values  and  time  values.  Logically  considered,
velocity  is  no  absolute  property  of  the  moving  thing  but  merely  an
expression  of  this  i  eciprocal  relation  of  dependence.  We  assume  that
the  body,  if  at  a  given  point  all  outer  influence  upon  it  ceased,  would
move  forward  uniformly  in  a  definite  way,  that  is,  that  after  a  certain
time  ti  had  elapsed  the  distance  Si  would  have  been  traversed,  after
the  time  t2  =  2ti  had  elapsed  the  distance  2«i  would  have  been
traversed,  etc.  In  all  this  we  are  not  concerned  with  indicating  the
real  movement  of  the  body  by  giving  the  particular  places  through
which  it  passes,  but  with  construing  its  path  purely  ideally  according
to  the  various  laws  of  the  possible  coordination  of  points  of  space  and
points  of  time.  The  individual  values  within  the  various  series  are
never  factual,  for  the  uniformity  of  movement  is  never  actually
realized;  nevertheless,  thought  necessarily  uses  these  hypothetical
values  and  series  of  values  in  order  to  render  the  complex  whole,
i.e.,  the  real  path,  completely  intelligible.  The  same  holds  true  of
the  procedure  used  in  the  analysis  of  the  infinite  in  geometry.  The
curve  is  here  also  conceived  as  a  certain  order  of  points; but  this  order,
which,  as  immediately  given,  is  a  highly  involved  serial  form,  is
conceptually  analysed  as  a  manifold  of  simpler  laws  of  serial  order,
that  mutually  determine  each  other.  The  concrete  form  is  analysed
into  a  system  of  virtual  grounds  of  determination,  which  are  assumed
to  be  different  from  point  to  point.  The  geometrical  form,  which,
from  the  standpoint  of  direct  intuition  and  that  of  elementary  syn-
thetic geometry,  seems  to  be  something  absolutely  known  and  imme-
diately comprehensible,  appears  here  as  a  mediated  result.  The
form  is  as  if  resolved  into  manifold  strata  of  relations,  which  are
superimposed  upon  each  other  and  which,  by  the  definite  type  of
dependence  among  them,  finally  determine  a  single  whole.

Magnitudes  and  functions.  Herewith,  however,  is  revealed  a  prob-
lem of  comprehensive  significance.  The  construction  of  curves  out  of
the  totality  of  their  tangents,  as  shown  in  infinitesimal  geometry,  is
only  an  example  of  a  procedure  of  more  general  applicability.  All
mathematical  conceptual  construction  sets  itself  a  double  task,  in
fact,  the  task  of  the  analysis  of  a  certain  relational  complex  into
elementary  types  of  relation  and  the  synthesis  of  these  simpler  types


76  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

and  laws  of  construction  into  relations  of  higher  orders.  The  analysis
of  the  infinite  is  logically  a  first  and  complete  expression  of  this
intellectual  tendency.  For  even  here  mathematical  investigation
advances  beyond  the  mere  consideration  of  magnitudes  and  turns  to
a  general  theory  of  functions.  The  "elements"  here  joined  into  new
unities  are  themselves  not  extensive  magnitudes  which  are  combined
as  "parts"  of  a  whole,  but  are  forms  of  function  which  reciprocally
determine  each  other  and  unite  into  a  system  of  dependencies.  How-
ever, before  we  can  follow  this  development,  which  gives  mathematics
its  peculiar  character,  we  must  turn  back  to  the  special  problems  of
geometry;  for  in  the  philosophical  struggles  concerning  the  geometri-
cal methods,  there  clearly  appear  the  beginnings  of  a  new  and  univer-
sal formulation  of  the  logical  question.

ii

Intuition  and  thought  in  the  principles  of  the  geometry  of  position.
Modern  geometry  first  attains  a  strictly  logical  construction  of  its
field  and  true  freedom  and  universality  of  method  in  advancing  from
the  geometry  of  measure  to  the  geometry  of  position.  In  relation
to  the  analytic  geometry  of  Descartes,  this  step  seems  to  signify  a
reaction.  Intuition  again  asserts  its  claim  as  in  ancient  synthetic
geometry.  It  is  not  when  we  limit  intuition  as  much  as  possible  and
seek  to  replace  it  by  mere  operations  of  calculation,  that  a
truly  logical  and  strictly  deductive  construction  of  the  science
of  space  results,  but  when  we  restore  intuition  to  its  full
scope  and  independence.  Thus  the  development  leads  back
from  the  abstract  concept  of  number  to  the  pure  concept  of
form.  That  in  this  there  lies  a  new  motive,  in  the  philosophical
sense,  Descartes  himself  discovered  and  asserted.  He  saw  in
the  methods  of  Desargues,  which  contained  the  first  approach
to  a  projective  treatment  and  conception  of  spatial  forms,  an  in-
dication of  a  general  "metaphysics  of  geometry."5  If  we  follow
this  "metaphysics"  further,  it  seems  in  immediate  conflict  with  his
own  tendencies  and  deductions.  In  fact,  the  new  interpretation
could  be  carried  through  only  by  a  stubborn  struggle  against  the
supremacy  of  the  analytic  methods.  Criticism  of  these  methods

*  See  Descartes'  letter  to  Mersenne  of  Jan.  9,  1639,  Correspondence,  ed.
Adam-Tannery,  II,  490.


THE  CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  77

begins  with  Leibniz  and  is  brought  to  a  first  conclusion  with  his
founding  the  analysis  of  position.  It  is  charged  that  analysis  is  not
able  to  establish  the  universal  principle  of  order,  upon  which  it
prides  itself,  within  the  field  to  be  ordered,  but  that  it  is  obliged  to
have  recourse  to  a  point  of  view  external  to  the  object  considered.
The  reference  of  a  spatial  figure  to  arbitrarily  chosen  coordinates
introduces  an  element  of  subjective  caprice  into  the  determination;
the  conceptual  character  of  the  form  is  not  established  on  the  basis  of
properties  purely  within  itself,  but  is  expressed  by  an  accidental
relation,  which  may  be  different  according  to  the  choice  of  the
assumed  system  of  reference.  Whether  from  among  all  the  various
equations  which  can  be  applied,  according  to  this  process,  in  the
expression  of  a  spatial  figure,  the  relatively  simplest  is  chosen  depends
upon  the  individual  skill  of  the  calculator,  and  thus  upon  an  element
which  the  strict  progress  of  method  seeks  to  exclude.  If  this  defect
is  to  be  avoided,  a  procedure  must  be  found  which  is  equal  to  the
analytic  methods  in  conceptual  rigor  but  which  accomplishes  the
rationalization  wholly  within  the  field  of  geometry  and  of  pure  space.
The  fundamental  spatial  forms  are  to  be  grasped  as  they  are  "in
themselves"  and  understood  in  their  own  laws  without  translation
into  abstract  numerical  relations.6

Steiner  and  Poncelet.  Nevertheless  from  this  standpoint, — and
this  is  philosophically  characteristic  and  significant, — there  is  no
possibility  of  return  to  the  point  of  view  of  ancient  elementary
geometry.  The  reversion  to  the  intuitive  aspect  of  the  figure  pro-
duces only  an  apparent  connecting  link;  for  the  content  itself,  that
is  now  understood  under  geometrical  "intuition,"  has  been  deepened
and  transformed.  If,  in  order  to  gain  a  fixed  criterion  in  the  philo-
sophical conflict  of  opinion,  we  enquire  of  the  scientific  founders  of
modern  geometry  concerning  the  meaning  they  attach  to  the  concept
and  term  "intuition,"  there  appears  at  first  a  peculiarly  conflicting
result.  On  the  one  hand,  Jakob  Steiner,  following  his  teacher  and
model  Pestalozzi,  is  never  tired  of  praising  the  logical  justification  and
fruitfulness  of  pure  intuition.  Steiner  and  his  disciples  see  the
defect  of  ordinary  synthetic  geometry  in  that  it  teaches  us  to  use
intuition  only  in  a  limited  sense,  and  not  in  the  whole  freedom  and

•  For  further  particulars  regarding  Leibniz7  sketch  of  " Analysis  situs"  cf.
Leibniz1  System  in  «.  wiss.  Grundlagen,  Ch.  III.


78  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

scope  of  its  meaning.7  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  chief  work  of
Poncelet  we  find  the  opposite  logical  tendency  expressed.  The
value  of  the  new  method  is  found  in  that  through  it  geometrical
deduction  can  proceed  entirely  unhindered,  in  that,  without  being
narrowed  to  the  limits  of  possible  sensuous  representation,  it
especially  takes  account  of  imaginary  and  infinitely  distant  elements
that  possess  no  individual  geometrical  *  Existence,"  and  thus  first
attains  completeness  of  rational  deduction.  The  opposition  here  in
the  formulations  of  the  thought  is  removed  sis  soon  as  we
follow  the  exposition  on  both  sides  more  closely.  In  the  case  where
the  geometry  of  position  is  founded  purely  on  intuition,  the  meaning
is  not  that  of  adherence  to  the  sensuously  given  figure  but  is  the
free  constructive  generation  of  figures  according  to  a  definite  unitary
principle.  The  various  sensuously  possible  cases  of  a  figure  are  not,
as  in  Greek  geometry,  individually  conceived  and  investigated,
but  all  interest  is  concentrated  on  the  manner  in  which  they  mutually
proceed  from  each  other.  In  so  far  as  an  individual  form  is  con-
sidered, it  never  stands  for  itself  alone  but  as  a  symbol  of  the  system
to  which  it  belongs  and  as  an  expression  for  the  totality  of  forms
into  which  it  can  be  transformed  under  certain  rules  of  transforma-
tion. Thus  "intuition"  is  never  concerned  with  the  particular
figure  with  its  accidental  content,  but  is,  according  to  Jakob  Steiner,
directed  to  the  mediation  of  the  dependency  of  geometrical
forms  upon  each  other.8  The  particular  terms  are  here  also  subor-

7  Cf.,  for  example,  B.  Reye,  Die  synthetische  Geometric  im  Altertum  und  in
der  Neuzeit,  Op.  cit.,  p.  347.

8  Cf.  the  preface  to  J.  Steiner's  work: Sy sternal.  EntwiMung  der  Abh&ngig-
keit  geometrischer  Gestalten  voneinander,  Berlin,  1832:  "The  present  work  seeks
to  reveal  the  organization  by  which  different  kinds  of  phenomena  are  bound
together  in  the  spatial  world. There  are  a  small  number  of  simple  funda-
mental relations,  wherein  the  schema  is  expressed  from  which  the  remaining
propositions  develop  logically  and  without  any  difficulty. Through  proper
appropriation  of  a  few  fundamental  relations,  we  master  the  whole  subject;
order  comes  out  of  chaos,  and  we  see  how  all  the  parts  naturally  fit  together,
forming  into  series  in  the  most  perfect  order,  and  the  allied  parts  united  into
well-defined  groups. In  this  way  we  succeed,  as  it  were,  in  gaming  posses-
sion of  the  elements  from  which  nature  starts,  by  which,  with  the  greatest
possible  economy  and  in  the  simplest  way,  innumerable  properties  can  be
ascribed  to  figures. In  this,  neither  the  synthetic  nor  the  analytic  method
constitutes  the  essence  of  the  matter,  which  consists  in  the  discovery  of  the
dependency  of  forms  on  each  other  and  the  manner  in  which  their  properties
are  continued  from  the  simpler  figures  to  the  more  complex."


THE  CONCEPT  OP  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  79

dinated  to  the  systematic  relation  that  unites  them.  The  deduction
itself  of  the  fundamental  forms  expresses  this  in  so  far  as,  for  example,
the  particular  straight  line  is  not  defined  in  itself,  but  as  an  element
in  a  pencil  of  rays,  or  the  particular  plane  as  an  element  in  a  sheaf  of
rays.  In  general,  we  see  that  the  fundamental  methodological
standpoint,  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  analytic  geometry,  is  not
set  aside  here  but  retained  and  brought  to  a  new  fruitful  application
in  the  field  of  the  spatial  itself.  The  motive  of  number  is  excluded;
but  the  general  motive  of  series  stands  forth  the  more  clearly.  We
saw  how,  with  Descartes,  number  was  not  characterized  as  the
fundamental  principle  because  of  its  own  content,  but  was  only
retained  because  it  represented  the  purest  and  most  perfect  type
of  a  logically  ordered  manifold  in  general.  Strictness  of  deductive
connection  seemed  only  able  to  be  carried  over  to  space  by  the
mediation  of  number.  (C/.  above  p.  71  f .)  We  can  understand  that
henceforth  there  must  arise  a  new,  important  task  continuous  with
the  achievements  of  analytic  *  geometry .  The  construction  of  the
spatial  forms  from  original  fundamental  relations  remains  as  an  in-
violable postulate,  but  this  postulate  must  now  be  satisfied  by
purely  geometrical  means  and  without  the  introduction  of  the
concepts  of  measure  and  of  number.

The  concept  of  "correlation"  and  the  principle  of  continuity.  The
evolution,  which  begins  here,  is  characterized  and  guided  in  detail
by  logical  views.  This  is  especially  manifest  in  the  case  of  Poncelet
who,  in  the  conflict  in  which  he  engaged  regarding  the  principles  of
his  discipline,  refers  with  increasing  definitcness  to  the  philosophical
foundations.  In  opposition  to  the  criticism  which  the  Parisian
Academy,  especially  Cauchy,  made  on  the  philosophical  presupposi-
tions of  his  work,  Poncelet  urges  with  emphasis  that  in  these  pre-
suppositions we  are  not  dealing  with  a  secondary  matter,  but  with
the  real  root  of  the  new  view.  He  appropriates  the  words  of  Newton
that  in  geometry  the  method  of  discovery  means  everything,  so  that
when  this  is  once  found  and  established,  results  occur  of  themselves
as  the  fruit  of  the  method.9  The  theory  of  the  projective  properties
is  to  be  no  mere  material  extension  of  the  field  of  geometry,  but  is  to

9Cf.  Poncelet,  TraiU  des  proprUUs  projectives  des  figures,  2nd  edition,  Paris,
1865, 1,  p.  365;  II,  p.  357.


80  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

introduce  a  new  principle  of  investigation  and  discovery.10  The
first  and  necessary  step  is  to  free  geometrical  thought  from  the
narrowness  of  the  sensuous  view  with  its  close  adherence  to  the  particu-
larities of  the  directly  given,  individual  figure.  Descartes  charged
ancient  mathematics  with  not  being  able  to  sharpen  the  intellect
without  tiring  the  imagination  by  close  dependence  on  the  sensuous
form,  and  Poncelet  maintains  this  challenge  throughout.  The  true
synthetic  method  cannot  revert  to  this  procedure.  It  can  only  show
itself  equal  in  value  to  the  analytic  method,  if  it  equals  it  in  scope  and
universality,  but  at  the  same  time  gains  this  universality  of  view
from  purely  geometrical  assumptions.  This  double  task  is  fulfilled
as  soon  as  we  regard  the  particular  form  we  are  studying  not  as
itself  the  concrete  object  of  investigation  but  merely  as  a  starting-
point,  from  which  to  deduce  by  a  certain  rule  of  variation  a  whole
system  of  possible  forms.  The  fundamental  relations,  which  charac-
terize this  system,  and  which  must  be  equally  satisfied  in  each  particu-
lar form,  constitute  in  their  totality  the  true  geometrical  object.
What  the  geometrician  considers  is  not  so  much  the  properties  of  a
given  figure  as  the  net-work  of  correlations  in  which  it  stands  with
other  allied  structures.  We  say  that  a  definite  spatial  form  is  correla-
tive to  another  when  it  is  deducible  from  the  latter  by  a  continuous
transformation  of  one  or  more  of  its  elements  of  position:  yet  in  which
the  assumption  holds  that  certain  fundamental  spatial  relations,
which  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  general  conditions  of  the  system,
remain  unchanged.  The  force  and  conclusiveness  of  geometrical
proof  always  rests  then  in  the  invariants  of  the  system,  not  in  what  is
peculiar  to  the  individual  members  as  such.  It  is  this  interpretation,
which  Poncelet  characterizes  philosophically  by  the  expression
principle  of  continuity,  and  which  he  formulates  more  precisely  as  the
principle  of  the  permanence  of  mathematical  relations.  The  only
postulate  that  is  involved  can  be  formulated  by  saying  that  it  is

11  "La  doctrine  des  proprie'te's  projectives,  celle  de  la  perspective-relief,  le
principe  ou  la  loi  de  continuity  enfin  la  th^orie  des  polaires  r^ciproques  et  la
th^orie  des  transversales  6tendue  aux  lignes  et  surfaces  courbes,  ne  forment
pas  simplement  des  classes  plus  ou  moins  6tendues  de  problemes  et  de  theo-
r&mes,  mais  constituent  proprement,  pour  la  G6om6trie  pure  des  principes,  des
me'thodes  d' investigation  et  d'invention,  des  moyens  d'extension  et  d'expo-
sition,  dans  le  genre  de  ceux  qu'on  a  nomine"  principes  d'exhaustion,  me"thode
des  infiniment  petits,  etc."  Op.  cit.j  p.  5.


THE CONCEPT OF SPACE  AND GEOMETRY  81

possible  to  maintain  the  validity  of  certain  relations,  denned  once
for  all,  in  spite  of  a  change  in  the  content  of  the  particular  terms,
i.e.,  of  the  particular  relata.  We  thus  begin  by  considering  the  figure
in  a  general  connection  (Lage),  and  do  not  analyse  it  in  the  beginning
into  all  its  individual  parts,  but  permit  changes  of  them  within  a
certain  sphere  defined  by  the  conditions  of  the  system.  If  these
changes  proceed  continuously  from  a  definite  starting-point,  the
systematic  properties  we  have  discovered  in  a  figure  will  be  trans-
ferable to  each  successive  "phase,"  so  that  finally  determinations,
which  are  found  in  an  individual  case,  can  be  progressively  extended
to  all  the  successive  members.

The  transference  of  relations  distinguished  from  induction  and
analogy.  There  is  clearly  manifest  in  these  elucidations  of  Poncelet
a  tendency  toward  an  exact  and  universal  expression  of  the  new
thought.  Above  all,  he  is  concerned  to  guard  the  transference  of
relations,  which  he  assumes  as  basic,  from  any  confusion  with  merely
analogical  or  inductive  inference.  Induction  proceeds  from  the
particular  to  the  universal ;  it  attempts  to  unite  hypothetically  into  a
whole  a  plurality  of  individual  facts  observed  as  particulars  without
necessary  connection.  Here,  however,  the  law  of  connection  is  not
subsequently  disclosed,  but  forms  the  original  basis  by  virtue  of
which  the  individual  case  can  be  determined  in  its  meaning.  The
conditions  of  the  whole  system  are  predetermined,  and  all  specializa-
tion can  only  be  reached  by  adding  a  new  factor  as  a  limiting  deter-
mination while  maintaining  these  conditions.  From  the  beginning,
we  do  not  consider  the  metrical  and  projective  relations  in  the  manner
in  which  they  are  embodied  in  any  particular  figure,  but  take  them
with  a  certain  breadth  and  indefiniteness,  which  gives  them  room  for
development.11  It  may  seem  at  first  surprising  and  paradoxical
that  this  indefiniteness  of  the  starting-point  is  held  to  be  the  ground
of  the  fruitfulness  of  the  new  procedure  and  of  its  superiority  over
the  ancient  methods.  However,  it  soon  appears  that  the  expression
of  the  thought  here  suffers  from  the  ambiguity  of  the  traditional
logical  terminology,  in  which  concept  and  image  are  not  strictly
distinguished,  and  in  which  the  identical  and  clearly  defined  meaning
of  a  conceptual  rule  always  threatens  to  dissolve  into  an  abstract
and  schematic  generic  image.  What  appears  as  indefiniteness  from
the  standpoint  of  image,  because  it  neglects  the  individual  features

11  TraiUdes  proprittes  projectives,  p.  XIII  f.,  XXI  f.


82  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

of  the  picture  (Bild),  appears  from  the  standpoint  of  the  concept  as
the  basis  of  all  exact  determination  since  in  it  is  contained  the  univer-
sal rule  for  the  construction  of  the  individual.  Between  the  "univer-
sal" and  "particular"  there  subsists  the  relation  which  characterizes
all  true  mathematical  construction  of  concepts;  the  general  case
does  not  absolutely  neglect  the  particular  determinations,  but  it
reveals  the  capacity  to  evolve  the  particulars  in  their  concrete  totality
entirely  from  a  principle.  (See  above  p.  18  f .)  As  Poncelet  empha-
sizes, it  is  never  the  mere  properties  of  the  particular  kind  but  the
properties  of  the  genus,  from  which  the  projective  treatment  of  a
figure  takes  its  start;  the  "genus,"  however,  here  signifies  merely  a
connection  of  conditions  by  which  everything  individual  is  ordered,
not  a  separated  whole  of  attributes  which  uniformly  recur  in  the
individuals.  The  inference  proceeds  from  the  properties  of  the
connection  to  those  of  the  objects  connected,  from  the  serial  princi-
ples to  the  members  of  the  series.

Projection  and  the  imaginary  in  geometry.  The  peculiarity  of  the
method  appears  most  clearly  in  its  fundamental  procedure.  The
most  important  form  of  correlation,  by  which  different  figures  are
connected,  is  found  in  the  procedure  of  projection.  The  essential
problem  consists  in  separating  out  those  "metrical"  and  "descriptive"
elements  of  a  figure  which  persist  unchanged  in  its  projection.  All
the  forms,  that  can  issue  in  this  way  from  each  other,  are  considered
as  an  indivisible  unity;  they  are,  in  the  sense  of  the  pure  geometry  of
position,  only  different  expressions  of  one  and  the  same  concept.
Here  it  is  immediately  evident  that  to  belong  to  a  concept  does  not
depend  on  any  generic  similarities  of  the  particulars,  but  merely
presupposes  a  certain  principle  of  transformation,  which  is  main-
tained as  identical.  The  forms,  which  we  unite  in  this  way  into  a
"group,"  can  belong  to  totally  different  "types"  in  their  sensuous
intuitive  structure;  indeed,  they  can  be  deprived  of  any  reference  to
such  a  type  in  so  far  as  there  is  no  geometrical  existence,  in  the
sense  of  direct  intuition,  corresponding  to  them.  The  new  criterion
of  the  geometrical  construction  of  concepts  is  shown  here  in  its
general  significance;  for  it  is  this  criterion  upon  which  the  admission
of  the  imaginary  into  geometry  ultimately  rests.  In  general,  accord-
ing to  Poncelet,  three  different  forms  of  the  procedure  of  "correla-
tion" can  be  distinguished.  We  can  transform  a  certain  figure,
which  we  choose  as  a  starting-point,  into  another  by  retaining  all


THE  CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  83

its  parts  as  well  as  their  mutual  arrangements,  so  that  the  difference
consists  exclusively  in  the  absolute  magnitude  of  the  parts.  In  this
case,  we  can  speak  of  a  direct  correlation,  while  in  the  case  in  which
the  order  of  the  individual  parts  is  exchanged  or  reversed  in  the
deduced  figure,  we  can  speak  only  of  an  "indirect"  correlation.
Finally, — and  this  is  methodologically  the  most  interesting  and
important  case — the  transformation  can  proceed  in  such  a  manner
that  certain  elements,  which  could  be  indicated  in  the  original  form
as  real  parts,  entirely  disappear  in  the  course  of  the  process.  If  we
consider,  for  example,  a  circle  and  a  straight  line  that  intersects  it,
then  we  can  transform  this  geometrical  system  by  continuous  dis-
placements in  such  a  manner  that  the  straight  line  finally  falls  wholly
outside  of  the  circle,  so  that  the  intersections  and  the  directions  of
the  radii  corresponding  to  them  are  to  be  expressed  by  imaginary
values.  The  coordination  of  the  deduced  figure  with  the  original
figure  no  longer  connects  elements  that  are  actually  present  and
observable,  but  merely  intellectual  elements;  it  has  resolved  itself
into  a  purely  ideal  correlation.

But  it  is  precisely  these  ideal  correlations  that  cannot  be  spared  if
geometry  is  to  be  given  a  unitary  and  self-contained  form.  The
defect  of  the  ancient  methods  consists  in  that  they  neglect  this  funda-
mental logical  instrument,  and  thus  consider  only  magnitudes  of  an
absolute  and  quasi-physical  existence.  The  new  view  is  obliged  to
break  with  this  procedure,  since  from  the  beginning  it  defines  as  the
real  object  of  geometrical  investigation  not  the  individual  form  in
its  sensuous  existence,  but  the  various  species  of  dependency  that  can
subsist  between  forms.  (Cf.  p.  77.)  From  this  point  of  view,  real
and  imaginary  elements  are  essentially  similar;  for  the  latter  also  are
the  expression  of  perfectly  valid  and  true  geometrical  relations.  That
under  definite  conditions  certain  elements  of  a  figure  disappear  and
cease  to  exist,  this  is  in  itself  no  merely  negative  knowledge  but
contains  a  fruitful  and  thoroughly  positive  geometrical  insight.
Further,  the  imaginary  intermediate  members  always  serve  to  make
possible  insight  into  the  connection  of  real  geometrical  forms,  which
without  this  mediation  would  stand  opposed  as  heterogeneous  and
unrelated.  It  is  this  ideal  force  of  logical  connection,  that  secures
them  full  right  to  "being"  in  a  logico-geometrical  sense.  The
imaginary  subsists,  in  so  far  as  it  fulfills  a  logically  indispensable  func-
tion in  the  system  of  geometrical  propositions.  The  only  "reality,"
which  we  can  intelligibly  expect  and  demand  of  it  consists  in  the  truth


84  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

it  contains,  in  its  relation  to  the  valid  propositions  and  judgments
which  it  brings  to  expression.  Here  in  the  realm  of  geometry  is
repeated  the  same  process  that  we  are  able  to  follow  in  the  realm  of
number;  from  the  retention  of  definite  relations  arise  new  "elements,"
essentially  similar  and  equal  to  the  earlier,  since  these  also  have  no
deeper  or  firmer  basis  than  consists  in  the  truth  of  relations.  (Cf.
above  p.  60  ff.)

If  we  consider  a  simple  example  from  ordinary  geometry,  viz.,
of  two  circles  in  a  plane,  then  in  the  case  in  which  they  intersect,
there  is  given  in  the  straight  line,  that  connects  their  two  points  of
intersection,  a  new  structure  of  definite  properties.  The  points  of
this  straight  line,  which  we  call  the  "common  chord"  of  the  two
circles,  are  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  the  tangents  drawn  from
them  to  the  circle  are  equal  to  each  other.  The  geometrical  rela-
tion thus  established  can  also  be  traced  and  expressed  in  the  case  in
which  the  circles  no  longer  intersect,  but  fall  completely  outside  of
each  other.  In  this  case,  also,  there  always  exists  a  straight  line, —
the  so-called  "radical  axis"  of  the  two  circles, — which  satisfies  the
essential  condition  previously  mentioned,  and  in  this  sense  can  be
called  the  ideal  common  chord  of  the  two  circles,  which  contains  their
two  "imaginary"  points  of  intersection.  Thus  a  certain  intuitive
element  is  expressed  here  and  completely  replaced  by  certain  con-
ceptual properties  belonging  to  it;  and  this  logical  determination  is
also  retained  after  the  substratum,  in  connection  with  which  it  was
first  discovered,  has  disappeared.  We  proceed  from  the  persistence
of  the  relation  and  create  by  definition  in  the  imaginary  "points"
the  "subjects,"  of  which  the  relation  is  predicated.  The  fruitfulness
of  this  procedure  is  seen  in  that  a  systematic  connection  between
forms  is  thereby  established,  such  as  permits  us  to  carry  over  proposi-
tions, which  are  discovered  and  proved  in  connection  with  one
form,  to  another  in  connection  with  which  they  were  not  immediately
obvious.12  Along  with  the  particular  relations  of  content,  there  are

11  Thus,  e.g.,  if  any  three  circles  in  a  plane  are  given,  and  we  construct  for
each  two  of  them  the  "radical  axes/'  it  can  eaaily  be  shown  that  the  three
lines  so  arising  intersect  in  one  point;  from  this  it  results  further  that  the
same  also  holds,  in  the  special  case  of  three  common  chords  of  really  inter-
secting circles,  etc.  The  real  properties  of  real  common  chords  are  thus  dis-
covered and  grounded  by  reference  to  the  "ideal"  chords.  Cf.  Chasles,
Aperfu  historique  sur  Vorigine  el  le  developpement  des  methodes  en  Geometrie,
2nd.  ed.,  Paris,  1875,  p.  205  ff.;  also  Hankel,  Die  Elemente  der  projektivischen
Geometric,  Leipzig,  1875,  p.  7  ff.


THE CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETKY  85

above  all  certain  universal  formal  determinations  by  which  the  "un-
real" elements,  which  geometry  produces,  are  connected  with  the
"real"  points.  The  principle  of  the  "permanence  of  formal  laws,"
even  before  it  was  used  in  algebra  as  the  justification  of  the  general-
ized concepts  of  number,  was  introduced  and  founded  by  Poncelet  from
a  purely  geometrical  standpoint.  The  infinitely  distant  point  in
which,  according  to  the  projective  theory  of  space,  two  parallels
intersect,  and  the  infinitely  distant  straight  line  in  which  two  parallel
planes  intersect,  are  logically  justified  conceptual  constructions,  not
only  because  they  represent  concentrated  assertions  about  definite
relations  of  position,  but  because  these  new  constructions  are  com-
pletely subjected  to  the  geometrical  axioms,  as  can  be  shown,  in  so
far  as  they  do  not  refer  to  relations  of  measure.  Here  a  higher  point
of  view  is  found,  which  is  equally  just  to  the  "real"  and  "unreal"
points.  The  new  elements,  Poncelet  says  with  distinctness,  are
paradoxical  in  their  object  but  they  are  nevertheless  thoroughly
logical  in  their  structure,  in  so  far  as  they  lead  to  strict  and  incon-
testable truths.13

Metrical  and  projective  geometry,  and  the  quadrilateral  construction
of  Staudt.  The  development  of  projective  geometry,  which  cannot  be
followed  here  in  detail,  has  thus  brought  the  philosophical  principles
upon  which  it  is  founded  to  more  and  more  explicit  expression.  To
the  extent  that  the  geometry  of  position  is  built  up  from  independent
assumptions,  the  general  logical  character  and  meaning  of  the  new
method  becomes  evident.  The  constructive  process,  by  which  we
generate  in  strict  deduction  the  whole  of  projective  space  from  the
simple  concepts  of  the  point  and  the  straight  line,  begins  with  the
consideration  of  harmonic  pairs  of  points.  Thus  in  the  first  phase  of
projective  geometry,  the  harmonic  position  of  four  points  on  a  straight
line  is  at  first  introduced  exclusively  by  means  of  the  concept  of  the
double  proportion:  the  points  a,  fr,  c,  d  form  a  harmonic  sequence
when  the  relation  of  the  distances  a  b  to  b  c  is  the  same  as  that  of  the

11  For  the  whole  matter,  compare  Poncelet,  Considerations  philosophiques  et
techniques  sur  le  principe  de  continuity  dans  les  lois  geometriques,  section  III.
(Applications  d' Analyse  et  de  Geometrie,  Paris  1864,  p.  336  ff .),  as  well  as  Traite
des  proprietes  projectives  I,  p.  XI  ff .,  66  ff .  For  the  designation  of  the  principle
of  continuity  as  the  "permanence  of  geometrical  relations,  "c/.  Applic.  p.  319;
Traite  II,  357;  the  same  thought  is  expressed  by  Chasles  in  his  "Principe  des
relations  contingentes"  with  another  turn  of  expression.  (Apergu  historique
p.204ff.,357ff.,368ff.)


86  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

distances  a  d  to  c  d.  This  explanation  obviously  presupposes  the
measurement  and  comparison  of  certain  distances,  and  is  thus  in
essence  of  purely  metrical  nature;  that  it  is,  nevertheless,  made  the
basis  of  the  geometry  of  position  rests  on  the  fact  that  it  represents  a
metrical  relation,  which  remains  unchanged  in  every  projective
transformation  of  a  given  figure.  The  concept  of  measure  is  here
not  excluded,  but  is  taken  up  into  the  foundations  as  an  underived
element.  Projective  geometry  only  gains  an  independent  and  strictly
unified  exposition  when  this  last  limit  is  also  set  aside,  when  the
determination,  which  is  characterized  metrically  as  the  double  pro-
portion, is  derived  in  a  purely  descriptive  way.  The  decisive  method
for  this  is  given  in  the  known  quadrilateral  construction  of  Staudt.
We  determine  the  fourth  harmonic  point  d  to  three  given  co-linear
points  a  b  c  by  constructing  a  quadrilateral  of  such  a  sort  that  two
opposite  sides  pass  through  a,  the  diagonal  through  6,  and  the  two
other  opposite  sides  through  c;  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  second
diagonal  of  the  quadrilateral  with  the  straight  line  a  b  c  is  the  desired
point  d,  which  is  definitely  determined  by  this  method,  since  it  can
be  proved  that  the  construction  indicated  always  gives  the  same
result  no  matter  what  quadrilateral  is  taken  as  a  basis,  so  long  as  it
satisfies  the  conditions.14  Thus  without  any  application  of  metrical
concepts,  a  fundamental  relation  of  position  is  established  by  a  proce-
dure which  uses  merely  the  drawing  of  straight  lines.  The  logical
ideal  of  a  purely  projective  construction  of  geometry  is  thus  reduced
to  a  simpler  requirement;  it- would  be  fulfilled  by  showing  the  possibil-
ity of  deducing  all  the  points  of  space  in  determinate  order  as  members
of  a  systematic  totality,  by  means  merely  of  this  fundamental  rela-
tion and  its  repeated  application.

Projective  metric  (Cayley  and  Klein).  The  demonstration  of  this
is  furnished  in  the  formulation  which  projective  geometry  lias  gained
through  Cayley  and  Klein.  We  here  gain  a  general  procedure  that
enables  us  to  coordinate  all  the  points  of  space  that  can  be  generated
from  a  given  starting-point  by  progressive  harmonic  constructions,
with  certain  numerical  values,  and  thus  to  give  them  a  fixed  position
within  a  general  serial  order.  If  we  start  with  three  points  a,  5,  c,
in  a  straight  line  to  which  we  coordinate  the  values  0,  !,<*>  then  by
means  of  the  Staudtian  quadrilateral  construction,  we  can  find  their

14  C/.  Staudt,  Geometric  der  Lage,  Niirnberg  1847,  J8,  p.  43  ff.;  Reye,  Die
Geometric  der  Lage,  4th.  ed.,  Leipzig  1899,  I,  p.  5.


THE  CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  87

fourth  harmonic  point  to  which  we  let  the  number  2  correspond,  and
we  can  further  determine  a  new  point,  which  forms  with  the  points
jf,  #,°°  a  harmonic  fourth,  and  give  this  the  value  3,  until  finally  by
virtue  of  this  method  we  gain  an  infinite  manifold  of  simple  deter-
minations of  position,  to  each  of  which  a  whole  number  is  coordinated.
This  manifold  can  be  further  completed  by  becoming  a  universally
"dense"  group  in  which  every  element  corresponds  to  a  definite
rational  positive  or  negative  number.  The  transition  to  the  point-
continuum  takes  place  on  the  basis  of  a  further  intellectual  postulate,
which  is  analogous  to  the  postulate  by  which  Dedekind  in  his  theory
introduces  the  irrational  numbers  as  "cuts"  (Schnitte).  We  thus
gain  a  complete  scale  on  the  basis  of  which  a  unified  projective
metric  can  be  evolved  in  which  the  elementary  operations,  such  as
addition  and  subtraction,  multiplication  and  division  of  distances,
are  defined  purely  geometrically.  Also  the  advance  to  structures  of
higher  dimensions  offers  no  difficulty  in  principle;  it  results  when  we
take  into  consideration,  instead  of  the  points  of  one  straight  line,
those  of  two  or  more  straight  lines.16

The  concept  of  space  and  the  concept  of  order.  The  working  out  of
this  thought  is  chiefly  of  technical  mathematical  interest;  but  a  general
philosophical  result,  anticipated  from  the  beginning  of  modern
geometry,  also  is  evident  here.  The  inclusion  of  the  spatial
concepts  in  the  schema  of  the  pure  serial  concepts  is  here  finally
accomplished.  The  designation  of  the  individual  points  of  space  by
corresponding  numbers  might  indeed  at  first  cause  the  illusion  that
concepts  of  magnitude,  of  length  and  distance,  are  applied  in  this
deduction.  In  truth,  however,  number  is  only  used  here  in  its  most
general  logical  meaning:  not  as  an  expression  of  the  measurement
and  comparison  of  magnitudes  but  as  the  expression  of  an  ordered
sequence.  We  are  not  concerned  with  the  addition  or  division  of
distances  and  angles,  but  only  with  the  differentiation  and  gradation
of  the  members  of  a  certain  series,  the  elements  of  which  are  defined
as  pure  determinations  of  position.  Here  we  find  verification  of  the
fact  that,  in  our  general  logical  deductions,  number  was  evolved  as

18  For  all  particulars  regarding  this  method,  of  which  only  the  principle  can
be  suggested  here,  cf.  F.  Klein,  Vorlesungen  uber  Nicht-Euklidische  Geometric,
2nd.  impression,  Gottingen  1893,  p.  315  ff.,  338  flf. ;  as  well  as  Math.  Annalen,  IV,
p.  573  ff.  On  projective  metric,  see  also  Weber- Wellstein,  Encyklop&die  der
Blementar-Mathematik,  Vol.  II,  §18.


88  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

pure  ordinal  number  and  kept  free  from  all  connection  with  measur-
able magnitudes.  The  demand,  which  Descartes  made,  is  thus
satisfied  in  a  new  way.  The  order  of  points  of  space  is  conceived  in
the  same  manner  as  that  of  numbers.  True,  the  two  fields  remain
strictly  separated  in  essence;  the  "essence"  of  the  figure  cannot  be
immediately  reduced  to  that  of  number.  But  precisely  in  this
relative  independence  of  the  elements,  as  in  the  independence  of  their
fundamental  relation,  is  manifest  the  connection  in  general  deduc-
tive method.  As  in  the  case  of  number  we  start  from  an  original
unit  (urspriingliche  Einheitssetzung)  from  which,  by  a  certain  generat-
ing relation,  the  totality  of  the  members  is  evolved  in  fixed  order,  so
here  we  first  postulate  a  plurality  of  points  and  a  certain  relation  of
position  between  them,  and  in  this  beginning  a  principle  is  dis-
covered from  the  various  applications  of  which  issue  the  totality  of
possible  spatial  constructions.  In  this  connection,  projective  geome-
try has  with  justice  been  said  to  be  the  universal  "a  priori1'  science
of  space,  which  is  to  be  placed  beside  arithmetic  in  deductive  rigor  and
purity.16  Space  is  here  deduced  merely  in  its  most  general  form  as
the  "possibility  of  coexistence' '  in  general,  while  no  decision  is  made
concerning  its  special  axiomatic  structure,  in  particular  concerning
the  validity  of  the  axiom  of  parallels.  Rather  it  can  be  shown  that
by  the  addition  of  special  completing  conditions,  the  general  projec-
tive determination,  that  is  here  evolved,  can  be  successively  related
to  the  different  theories  of  parallels  and  thus  carried  into  the  special
"parabolic,"  "elliptical"  or  "hyperbolic"  determinations.17

Geometry  and  the  group  theory.  Thus  in  contrast  to  the  multiplicity
of  geometrical  methods,  the  single  form  of  the  geometrical  concept
stands  out  with  increasing  clarity.  Its  logical  character  persists
through  all  change  in  particular  application.  This  character  can  be
brought  to  mind  by  considering  the  most  general  interpretation  which
the  modern  concept  of  geometry  has  attained.  The  addition  of
geometry  to  the  theory  of  groups  forms  the  final  and  decisive  step
for  the  whole  interpretation.  The  very  definition  of  "group"
contains  a  new  and  important  logical  aspect,  in  so  far  as  through  it
is  brought  to  intellectual  unity,  not  so  much  a  whole  of  individual
elements  or  structures,  as  a  system  of  operations.  A  totality
of  operations  forms  a  group,  when  with  any  two  operations  their

18  C/.  Russell,  The  Foundations  of  Geometry,  Cambridge  1897,  p.  118.
»7  C/.  F.  Klein,  Mathem.  Annalen  IV,  575  ff.


THE CONCEPT  OF SPACE AND  GEOMETRY  89

combination  is  also  found  in  the  group,  so  that  the  successive  appli-
cation of  different  transformations  belonging  to  the  totality  leads
only  to  the  operations  originally  contained  in  it.  In  this  sense,  a
group  is  formed  by  all  the  geometrical  transformations  which  result
when  we  permit  the  elements  any  movements  whatever  hi  ordinary
three-dimensional  space;  for  the  result  of  two  successive  movements
can  here  always  be  represented  by  a  single  movement.18  In  this
concept  of  the  group,  a  general  principle  of  classification  is  gained  by
which  the  different  possible  kinds  of  geometry  can  be  unified  under  a
single  point  of  view  and  their  systematic  connection  surveyed.  If  we
raise  the  question  as  to  what  in  general  is  to  be  understood  as  a
"geometrical"  property,  we  find  that  we  consider  as  geometrical  only
such  properties  as  remain  unaffected  by  certain  spatial  trans-
formations. The  propositions,  which  geometry  evolves  about  a
certain  structure,  persist  unchanged  when  we  vary  the  absolute
position  of  this  structure  in  space,  when  we  increase  or  decrease  the
absolute  magnitude  of  its  parts  proportionately,  or  when  finally  we
reverse  the  arrangement  of  the  individual  parts,  as  when  we  sub-
stitute for  the  original  figure  another,  which  is  related  to  it  as  its
image  hi  a  mirror.  The  thought  of  independence  from  all  these  trans-
formations must  be  added  to  the  intuition  of  the  individual  form,  that
serves  as  a  starting-point,  to  give  this  form  true  universality  and
therewith  true  geometrical  character.  "Geometry  is  distinguished
from  topography  by  the  fact  that  only  such  properties  of  space  are
called  geometrical  as  remain  unchanged  in  a  certain  group  of  opera-
tions." If  we  adhere  to  this  explanation,  we  gain  a  view  of  very
diverse  possibilities  for  the  construction  of  geometrica)  systems,  all
equally  justified  logically.  For  as  we  are  not  bound  in  the  choice  of
the  group  of  transformations,  which  we  take  as  the  basis  of  our
investigation,  but  can  rather  broaden  this  group  by  the  addition  of
new  conditions,  a  way  is  opened  by  which  we  can  go  from  one
form  of  geometry  to  another  by  changing  the  fundamental  system  to
which  all  assertions  are  related.  For  instance,  if  we  take  the  ordinary
metrical  geometry  as  characterized  by  the  appropriate  group  of
spatial  transformations  (i.e.,  by  the  specific  operations  of  movement,
of  similarity-transformation  and  of  'mirroring7  (Spiegelung)} ,  we
can  broaden  it  to  protective  geometry  by  adding  the  system  of  all
protective  transformations  to  this  group,  and  considering  the  con-

18  Cf.  F.  Klein,  Einleitung  in  die  hohere  Geometric  II,  p.  1  ff.


90  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

stant  properties  in  this  broadened  sphere  of  transformations.  As
F.  Klein  lias  shown  in  detail,  the  most  diverse  kinds  of  geometry  can
be  methodically  grounded  and  similarly  deduced,  by  proceeding
from  a  given  group  to  a  more  inclusive  system  by  means  of  a  definite
rule.  In  general,  in  each  of  these  geometries  where  a  manifold  con-
taining a  transformation-group  is  given,  the  problem  is  to  develop
the  invariant-theory  applicable  to  the  group.19

The  concepts  of  constancy  and  change  in  geometry.  This  universal
procedure  throws  a  bright  light  on  the  essential  relation  of  the  con-
cepts* of  constancy  and  change  in  the  foundations  of  geometry.  We
saw  how  from  the  beginnings  of  Greek  mathematics,  the  philosophical
question  constantly  reverts  to  this  relation.  If  geometry  were
defined,  in  Platonic  language,  as  what  possesses  "eternal  being/'
if  it  were  true  that  exact  proof  were  only  possible  of  that  which  always
maintains  itself  in  the  same  form,  then  change  could  be  tolerated  as
an  auxiliary  concept,  but  could  not  be  used  as  an  independent  logical
principle.  The  field  of  becoming  marked  out  a  region  within  which
pure  mathematical  thought  possessed  no  force  and  which  thus  seemed
given  over  to  the  indeterminateness  of  sensuous  perception.  This
emphasis  on  permanence,  which  was  intended  to  exclude  all  sensuous
elements  from  the  foundations  of  pure  mathematical  knowledge,
finally  proved  to  work  within  geometry  in  the  opposite  direction.
The  requisite  rigid  constancy  of  the  intuitive  spatial  form  narrowed
the  freedom  of  geometrical  deduction;  thought  remained  entangled
in  the  particular  figure  instead  of  directing  itself  to  the  ultimate
grounds  of  the  connection  of  figures  according  to  law.  A  new
development  begins  only  after  the  concept  of  change  has  been
critically  tested  and  confirmed  by  analysis.  This  development
reaches  its  systematic  conclusion  in  the  theory  of  groups;  for  here
change  is  recognized  as  a  fundamental  concept,  while,  on  the  other
hand,  fixed  logical  limits  are  given  it.  The  Platonic  explanation  is
now  confirmed  in  a  new  sense.  Geometry,  as  the  theory  of
invariants,  treats  of  certain  unchangeable  relations;  but  this  un-
changeableness  cannot  be  defined  unless  we  understand,  as  its  ideal
background,  certain  fundamental  changes  in  opposition  to  which  it
gains  its  validity.  The  unchanging  geometrical  properties  are  not

J9For  all  particulars,  we  must  rc'er  again  to  F.  Klein's  "Erlanger  Pro-
gramm"  of  1872,  V ergleichende  Betrcchtungem  uber  neuere  geometrische  For-
tehungen  (reprinted  Math.  Annalen  43,  1893,  p.  63  ff.)


THE  CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  91

such  in  and  for  themselves,  but  only  in  relation  to  a  system  of  possible
transformations  that  we  implicitly  assume.  Constancy  and  change
thus  appear  as  thoroughly  correlative  moments,  definable  only
through  each  other.  The  geometrical  "concept"  gains  its  identical
and  determinate  meaning  only  by  indicating  the  definite  group  of
changes  with  reference  to  which  it  is  conceived.  The  permanence
here  in  question  denotes  no  absolute  property  of  given  objects,  but  is
valid  only  relative  to  a  certain  intellectual  operation,  chosen  as  a
system  of  reference.  Here  already  a  change  appears  in  the  meaning
of  the  general  category  of  substantiality,  that  must  constantly  grow
clearer  in  the  course  of  the  enquiry.  Permanence  is  not  related  to
the  duration  of  things  and  their  properties,  but  signifies  the  relative
independence  of  certain  members  of  a  functional  connection,  which
prove  in  comparison  with  others  to  be  independent  moments.

in

The  evolution  of  modern  mathematics  has  approached  the  ideal,
which  Leibniz  established  for  it,  with  growing  consciousness  and
success.  Within  pure  geometry,  this  is  shown  most  clearly  in  the
development  of  the  general  concept  of  space.  The  reduction  of
metrical  relations  to  projective  realizes  the  thought  of  Leibniz  that,
before  space  is  defined  as  a  quantum,  it  must  be  grasped  in  its  original
qualitative  peculiarity  as  an  "order  of  coexistence"  (ordre  des  coexist-
ences possibles).  The  chain  of  harmonic  constructions,  by  which
the  points  of  projective  space  are  generated,  provides  the  structure
of  this  order,  which  owes  its  value  and  intelligibility  to  the  fact  that
it  is  not  sensuously  presented  but  is  constructed  by  thought  through
a  succession  of  relational  structures.20  We  can  still  take  the  elemen-

20  It  is  of  historical  interest  that  the  logical  problem  of  a  metrical  geometry
based  on  pure  projective  relations  was,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  grasped  by  Leibniz.
Against  Leibniz's  definitions  of  space  as  an  order  of  coexistence  and  time  as
an  order  of  succession,  Clarke,  who  advocated  Newton's  theory  of  absolute
space  and  absolute  time,  raised  the  objection  that  they  did  not  touch  the
essential  import  of  the  two  concepts.  Space  and  time  are  first  of  all  quantities,
which  position  and  order  are  not.  Leibniz  replied  that  also  within  pure  deter-
minations of  order,  determinations  of  magnitude  are  possible,  in  so  far  as  a
preceding  member  is  distinguished  from  a  succeeding  member  and  the  "dis-
tance' '  between  them  can  be  conceptually  defined.  ' '  Relative  things  have  their
magnitudes  just  as  well  as  absolute  things;  thus,  e.g.,  in  mathematics,  relations
or  proportions  have  magnitudes,  which  are  measured  by  their  logarithms;


92  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

tary  contents  of  geometry:  the  point,  the  straight  line  and  the  plane,
from  intuition ;  but  all  that  refers  to  the  connection  of  these  contents
must  be  deduced  and  understood  conceptually.  In  this  sense,
modern  geometry  seeks  to  free  a  relation,  such  as  the  general  rela-
tion of  "between,"  which  at  first  seems  to  possess  an  irreducible
sensuous  existence,  from  this  restriction  and  to  raise  it  to  free  logical
application.  The  meaning  of  this  relation  must  be  determined  by
definite  axioms  of  connection  in  abstraction  from  the  changing
sensuous  material  of  its  presentation;  for  from  these  axioms  alone  is
gained  the  meaning  in  which  it  enters  into  mathematical  deduction.
By  this  extension,  we  can  make  the  concept  of  "between"  independ-
ent of  its  original  perceptual  content  and  apply  it  to  series  in  which
the  relation  of  "between"  possesses  no  immediate  intuitive  correlate.21
Characteristic  (Kombinatorik)  as  pure  "doctrine  of  forms"  (Leibniz).
This  interpretation,  however,  advances  still  further  when  it  attempts
to  subsume  the  specific  order  of  spatial  externality  under  a  universal
system  of  possible  orders  in  general.  Again  we  are  led  to  the  Leib-
nizian  conception  of  mathematics.  According  to  this  conception,
mathematics  is  not  the  general  science  of  magnitude  but  of  form,  not
the  science  of  quantity  but  of  quality.  Characteristic  (Kombina-
torik)  thereby  becomes  the  fundamental  science;  we  do  not  compre-
hend under  it  the  doctrine  of  the  number  of  combinations  of  given
elements,  but  the  universal  exposition  of  possible  forms  of  connection
in  general  and  their  mutual  dependency.22  Wherever  a  definite
form  of  connection  is  given,  which  we  can  express  in  certain  rules  and
axioms,  there  an  identical  "object"  is  defined  in  the  mathematical

nevertheless  they  are  and  remain  relations."  Leibniz,  Hauptschriften  zur
Grundlegung  der  Philosophic,  I,  Philos.  Bibl.  107,  p.  189  f.  We  see  here  a
reference  to  a  question,  which  has  been  repeated  in  the  modern  grounding  of
projective  metrical  geometry :  for  in  the  latter,  in  fact,  the  "distance"  between
two  points  is  defined  and  measured  by  the  logarithm  of  a  certain  double-
relation.  Cf.  Klein,  Vorlesungen  uber  Nicht-Euklidische  Geometric,  p.  65  ff.

11  More  especially  see  Pasch,  Vorles.  uber  neuere  Geometric,  §1  and  9.

M  "Hinc  etiam  prodit  ignorata  hactenus  vel  neglecta  subordinatio  Algebrae
ad  artem  Combinatoriain,  seu  Algebrae  Speciosae  ad  Speciosam  generalem,  seu
scientiae  de  formulis  quantitatem  significantibus  ad  doctrinam  de  formulis,
seu  ordinis  similitudinis  relationis,  etc.,  expressionibus  in  universum,  vel
scientiae  generalis  de  quantitate  ad  scientiam  generalem  de  qualitate,  ut  adeo
speciosa  nostra  Mathematica  nihil  aliud  sit  quam  specimen  illustre  Artis
Combinatoriae  seu  speciosae  generalis.  Leibniz,  Math.  Schriften,  Gerhardt,
VII,  61.


THE CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  93

sense.  The  relational  structure  as  such,  not  the  absolute  property
of  the  elements,  constitutes  the  real  object  of  mathematical  investiga-
tion. Two  complexes  of  judgments,  of  which  the  one  deals  with
straight  lines  and  planes,  the  other  with  the  circles  and  spheres  of  a
certain  group  of  spheres,  are  regarded  as  equivalent  to  each  other  on
this  view,  in  so  far  as  they  include  in  themselves  the  same  content  of
conceptual  dependencies  along  with  a  mere  change  of  the  intuitive
"subjects,"  of  which  the  dependencies  are  predicated.  In  this
sense,  the  "points"  with  which  ordinary  Euclidian  geometry  deals
can  be  changed  into  spheres  and  circles,  into  inverse  point-pairs  of  a
hyperbolic  or  elliptical  group  of  spheres,  or  into  mere  number-trios
without  specific  geometrical  meaning,  without  any  change  being
produced  in  the  deductive  connection  of  the  individual  propositions,
which  we  have  evolved  for  these  points.23  This  deductive  connection
constitutes  a  distinct  formal  determination,  which  can  be  separated
from  its  material  foundation  and  established  for  itself  ii>  its  systematic
character.  The  particular  elements  in  this  mathematical  construc-
tion are  not  viewed  according  to  what  they  are  in  and  for  themselves,
but  simply  as  examples  of  a  certain  universal  form  of  order  and
connection;  mathematics  at  least  recognizes  in  them  no  other  "being"
than  that  belonging  to  them  by  participation  in  this  form.  For  it  is
only  this  being  that  enters  into  proof,  into  the  process  of  inference,
and  is  thus  accessible  to  the  full  certainty,  that  mathematics
gives  its  objects.

Geometry  as  pure  "doctrine  of  relations"  (Hilbert).  This  interpreta-
tion of  the  methods  of  pure  mathematics  receives  its  clearest  expres-
sion in  the  procedure  which  Hilbert  has  applied  in  the  exposition  and
deduction  of  the  geometrical  axioms.  In  contrast  to  the  Euclidian
definitions,  which  take  the  concepts  of  the  point  or  the  straight  line
as  immediate  data  of  intuition,  from  which  fixed  content  they  proceed,
the  nature  of  the  original  geometrical  objects  is  here  exclusively
defined  by  the  conditions  to  which  they  are  subordinated.  The  begin-
ning consists  of  a  certain  group  of  axioms,  which  we  assume,  and  their
compatibility  has  to  be  proved.  From  these  rules  of  connection,
that  we  have  taken  as  a  basis,  follow  all  the  properties  of  the  elements.
The  point  and  the  straight  line  signify  nothing  but  structures  which
stand  in  certain  relations  with  others  of  their  kind,  as  these  relations

18  Cf.  the  very  instructive  examples  and  explanation  given  by  Wellstein,
Encyklopddie  derElem.  Mathematik.,  Vol.  II,  Bk.  I,  2nd.  sect.


94  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

are  defined  by  certain  groups  of  axioms.  Only  this  systematic
"complexion"  of  the  elements,  and  not  their  particular  characters,
is  taken  here  as  the  expression  of  their  essence.  In  this  sense,
Hilbert's  geometry  has  been  correctly  called  a  pure  theory  of  rela-
tions.24 In  this,  however,  it  forms  the  conclusion  to  a  tendency  of
thought,  which  we  can  trace  in  its  purely  logical  aspects  from  the
first  beginnings  of  mathematics.  At  first,  it  might  seem  a  circle  to
define  the  content  of  the  geometrical  concepts  exclusively  by  their
axioms:  for  do  not  the  axioms  themselves  presuppose  certain  concepts
in  their  formulation?  This  difficulty  is  disposed  of  when  we  clearly
distinguish  the  psychological  beginning  from  the  logical  ground.  It
is  true  that,  in  the  psychological  sense,  we  can  only  present  the
meaning  of  a  certain  relation  to  ourselves  in  connection  with  some
given  terms,  that  serve  as  its  "foundations."  But  these  terms,  which
we  owe  to  sensuous  intuition,  have  no  absolute,  but  rather  a  change-
able existence.  We  take  them  only  as  hypothetical  starting-points;
but  we  look  for  all  closer  determination  from  their  successive  inser-
tion into  various  relational  complexes.  It  is  by  this  intellectual  proc-
ess that  the  provisional  content  first  becomes  a  fixed  logical  object.
The  law  of  connection,  therefore,  signifies  the  real  Trp6rpov  TV
<pb<r€ij  while  the  elements  in  their  apparent  absoluteness  signify
only  a  irpbrepov  irpfa  lipas.  Intuition  seems  to  grasp  the  content  as
an  isolated  self-contained  existence;  but  as  soon  as  we  go  on  to  charac-
terize this  existence  in  judgment,  it  resolves  into  a  web  of  related
structures  which  reciprocally  support  each  other.  Concept  and
judgment  know  the  individual  only  as  a  member,  as  a  point  in  a
systematic  manifold;  here  as  in  arithmetic,  the  manifold,  as  opposed
to  all  particular  structures,  appears  as  the  real  logical  prius.  (Cf.
above  p.  68).  The  determination  of  the  individuality  of  the
elements  is  not  the  beginning  but  the  end  of  the  conceptual  develop-
ment; it  is  the  logical  goal,  which  we  approach  by  the  progressive
connection  of  universal  relations.  The  procedure  of  mathematics
here  points  to  the  analogous  procedure  of  theoretical  natural  science,
for  which  it  contains  the  key  and  the  justification.  (Cf.  Ch.  V.)

The  syntheses  of  generating  relations.  From  this  point  of  view,  we
can  understand  how  the  center  of  gravity  of  the  mathematical  system
has  moved  in  a  definite  direction  in  its  historical  development.
The  circle  of  objects  to  which  mathematics  is  applicable  is  extended;

14  Wellstein,  op.  cit.,  p.  115.


THE CONCEPT  OF SPACE  AND GEOMETRY  95

finally  it  becomes  clear  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  method  is  bound
and  limited  by  no  particular  class  of  objects.  The  "mathesis  univer-
salis,"  in  the  philosophical  sense,  which  it  had  for  Descartes,  was  to
form  the  fundamental  instrument  for  all  problems  relating  to  order
and  measure.  Leibniz  replaced  this  mere  conjunction  of  two  aspects
by  a  relation  of  logical  subordination;  the  doctrine  of  the  different
possible  types  of  connection  and  arrangement  was  made  the  pre-
supposition of  the  science  of  measurable  and  divisible  magnitudes.26
Modern  mathematics  clarifies  this  conception.  The  development  of
protective  geometry  realizes  the  idecil  of  mathematical  exposition
independently  of  the  instrumentalities  of  measure  and  the  compari-
son of  magnitudes.  Metrical  geometry  itself  is  deduced  from  purely
qualitative  relations,  that  merely  concern  the  relative  position  of  the
points  of  space.  The  extension  of  mathematics  beyond  traditional
bounds  is  still  more  striking  in  the  case  of  the  theory  of  groups;
there  the  immediate  object  is  not  determinations  of  magnitude  or
position,  but  a  system  of  operations,  which  are  investigated  in  their
mutual  dependency.  In  the  theory  of  groups,  for  the  first  time  the
supreme  and  universal  principle  is  reached,  from  which  the  total
field  of  mathematics  can  be  surveyed  as  a  unity.  In  its  general
meaning,  the  task  of  mathematics  does  not  consist  in  comparing,
dividing  or  compounding  given  magnitudes,  but  rather  in  isolating
the  generating  relations  themselves,  upon  which  all  possible  deter-
mination of  magnitude  rests,  and  in  determining  the  mutual  connec-
tion of  these  relations.  The  elements  and  all  their  derivatives  appear
as  the  result  of  certain  original  rules  of  connection,  which  are  to  be
examined  in  their  specific  structure  as  well  as  in  the  character  that
results  from  their  composition  and  interpenetration.  The  various
forms  of  calculus  of  modern  mathematics,  Grassmann's  Ausdeh-
nungskhre,  Hamilton's  theory  of  quaternions,  the  projective  calculus
of  distances,  are  only  different  examples  of  this  logically  universal

J5C/.  above  p.  121,  note 2; also  Leibniz '  Hauptschriften  (Phil.  Bibl.  Vol.  107),
Leipzig,  1904,  p.  5,  p.  50,  p.  62.  For  the  modern  interpretation,  see  Russell,
Principles  of  Mathematics,  p.  158  and  419:  "Quantity,  in  fact,  though  philoso-
phers appear  still  to  regard  it  as  very  essential  to  Mathematics,  does  not  occur
in  pure  Mathematics,  and  does  occur  in  many  cases  not  at  present  amenable
to  mathematical  treatment.  The  notion  which  does  occupy  the  place  tradi-
tionally assigned  to  quantity  is  order."  Cf.  Qregor  Itelson's  definition  of
mathematics  as  the  science  of  ordered  objects.  (Revue  de  Mttaphysique,
XII,  1904.)


96  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

procedure.  The  methodological  merit  of  all  these  procedures  con-
sists precisely  in  that  the  "Calculus"  here  achieves  completely  free
and  independent  activity  (Betdtigung) ,  in  that  it  no  longer  remains
limited  to  the  compounding  of  quantities,  but  is  directly  applied  to  the
synthesis  of  relations.

We  were  able  to  trace  this  synthesis  as  the  real  goal  of  mathematical
operations  in  the  field  of  magnitude  itself  in  the  development  of  the
analysis  of  the  infinite.  (Cf.  above  p.  73  f.)  Now,  however,  the
sphere  of  consideration  is  widened;  for  any  arbitrarily  chosen  ele-
ment can  serve  as  a  foundation  in  so  far  as  a  new  structure  can  be
made  to  issue  from  it  by  repeated  application  of  a  certain  defined
relation.  It  is  merely  this  possibility  of  determination,  which  is
retained  in  the  calculus  and  constitutes  its  necessary  and  sufficient
condition.  The  certainty  of  the  deductive  structure  is  bound  to  no
particular  clement.  We  can  deal  with  products  of  points  or  of
vectors,  as  in  Grassmann's  geometrical  characteristic  and  in  the
theory  of  quaternions;  we  can  have  points  characterized  not  only  by
their  different  positions  in  space,  but  by  different  mass-values,  as  in
Mobius'  barycentric  calculus ;  we  can  compound  distances  or  triangu-
lar surfaces,  forces  or  pairs  of  forces  in  any  way  with  each  other  and
establish  the  result  by  calculation.26  In  all  these  cases,  we  are  not
concerned  in  analyzing  a  given  "whole"  into  parts  similar  to  it,  or  in
compounding  it  again  out  of  these,  but  the  general  problem  is  to
combine  any  conditions  of  progression  in  a  series  in  general  into  a
unified  result.  If  an  initial  element  is  defined  and  a  principle  given
by  moans  of  which  we  can  reach  a  manifold  of  other  elements  by  a
regular  progression,  then  the  combination  of  several  such  principles
will  be  an  operation,  which  can  be  reduced  to  fixed  systematic  rules.
Wherever  such  a  transition  from  simple  to  complex  series  is  possible,
there  a  new  field  for  deductive  mathematical  treatment  is  defined.

Grassnianns  Ausdehnungslehre  and  its  logical  principles.  It  seems
to  have  been  this  general  thought,  as  it  evolved  in  strict  sequence  from
the  philosophical  ideal  of  Descartes  and  Leibniz  of  "mathesis  univer-
salis,"  which  led  also  to  one  of  the  most  weighty  and  fruitful  con-
ceptions of  modern  mathematics,  viz.,  to  Hermann  Grassmann's
Ausdehnungslrhre.  The  general  considerations,  which  Grassmann

16  Cf.  more  particularly  regarding  these  methods  of  calculation,  Whitehead,
Universal  Algebra  I,  Cambridge,  1898,  as  well  as  H.  Hankel,  Theorie  der  fcom-
plexen  Zahlcnsysteme^  Leipzig,  1867.


THE CONCEPT OF SPACE AND GEOMETRY  97

prefaced  to  his  work,  if  regarded  as  mathematical  definitions,  might
occasionally  seem  unsatisfactory  and  obscure;  nevertheless,  they
signify  a  clear  methodological  project,  whose  significance  is  explained
and  confirmed  by  the  further  development  of  the  problems.27  The
goal,  which  Grassmann  set  himself,  was  to  raise  the  science  of  space
to  the  rank  of  a  universal  science  of  form.  The  character  of  a  pure
science  of  form  is  defined  by  the  fact  that  in  it  proof  does  not  go
beyond  thought  itself  into  another  sphere,  but  remains  entirely  in  the
combination  of  different  acts  of  thought.  This  postulate  is  fulfilled
in  the  science  of  numbers;  for  all  details  in  the  field  of  number  can  be
entirely  deduced  from  the  system  of  ordered  postulations,  to  which
the  number  series  itself  owes  its  being.  But  as  "immediate"  a
"beginning"  must  now  be  gained  for  geometry  as  is  already  given  and
assured  within  arithmetic.28  For  this  purpose,  we  must  here  also
go  back  from  the  given  extensive  manifold  to  its  simple  "manner  of
generation,"  by  virtue  of  which  the  manifold  is  first  surveyed  and
grasped.  In  the  ordinary  account  of  the  geometrical  elements,  we
are  accustomed  to  speak  of  the  generation  of  the  line  out  of  the  point,
of  the  surface  out  of  the  line;  but  what  is  here  meant  as  a  mere  picture,
must  receive  a  strictly  conceptual  interpretation  in  order  to  serve
as  the  starting-point  of  the  new  science.  The  intuitive  spatial
relations  may  offer  the  first  occasion  for  grasping  pure  conceptual
relations;  but  they  do  not  exhaust  the  real  content  of  the  latter.
Instead  of  the  point  (i.e.,  the  particular  place),  we  now  assume  the
element,  by  which  is  meant  only  a  pure  particular  grasped  as  different
from  other  particulars.  A  specific  content  is  thus  not  yet  assumed:
"there  can  be  no  thought  here  as  to  what  sort  of  particular  this  really
is — for  it  is  the  particular  absolutely,  without  any  real  content;  nor
can  there  be  question  as  to  in  what  relation  one  particular  differs
from  another, — for  the  particular  is  defined  as  different  absolutely,
without  the  assumption  of  any  real  content  with  reference  to  which  it
is  different."29  In  the  same  way,  we  expressly  abstract  from  all
special  characters  of  the  changes,  which  we  think  of  the  fundamental
element  as  undergoing,  and  merely  retain  the  abstract  thought  of  an

17  Cf.  especially  V.  Schlegel,  Die  Grassmannsche  Ausdehnungslehre. Ztschr.
f.  Mathem.  u.  Physik,  Vol.  41,  1896.

28  Grassmann,  Die  lineale  Ausdehnungslehre:  ein  neuer  Zweig  der  Mathematik
(1844). Ges.  mathemat.  u.  physikal.  Werke,  Leipzig  1894,  I,  p.  10,  p.  22.

29  Ausdehnungslehre,  op.  cit.,  p.  47.


98  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

original  beginning,  from  which  there  issues  by  continuous  repetition
of  one  operation  a  multiplicity  of  members.  Thus  if  the  concrete
working  out  of  Grassmann's  A  usdehnungslehre  is  primarily  concerned
with  definite  kinds  of  transformation,  nevertheless,  the  total  scheme
from  the  beginning  reaches  further.  Here  we  are  occupied  only  with
that  aspect,  which  stands  out  as  the  most  general  function  of  the
mathematical  concept:  with  giving  some  qualitatively  definite  and
unitary  rule  that  determines  the  form  of  the  transition  between  the
members  of  a  series.  "The  Different  must  evolve  according  to  a
law,  if  the  result  is  to  be  definite.  The  simple  form  of  extension  is
thus  that  which  arises  by  a  transformation  of  the  generating  element
according  to  one  law;  the  totality  of  the  elements,  which  can  be  gener-
ated according  to  the  same  law,  we  call  a  system  or  a  field/'30  Simi-
larly, there  arise  systems  on  higher  planes  when  we  combine  different
transformations  in  such  a  way,  that  first  a  manifold  evolves  by  a
certain  transformation  from  the  initial  element,  and  then  the  totality
of  its  members  is  subjected  to  a  new  transformation.  In  as  much  as
the  fields,  which  we  consider,  are  not  given  us  from  elsewhere,  but
are  merely  known  and  defined  by  the  rule  of  their  construction,  it  is
clear  that  this  rule  must  suffice  to  represent  exhaustively  all  their
properties.

Those  general  considerations  gain  a  more  precise  mathematical
meaning,  when  Grassmann  goes  on  to  develop  the  various  possible
forms  of  connection  in  detail  and  to  limit  them  from  each  other  by
the  formal  conditions  to  which  they  are  subjected.  There  results  a
developed  doctrine  of  the  "addition"  and  "subtraction"  of  similar
or  dissimilar  transformations,  a  theory  of  external  and  internal
multiplication  of  distances  and  points,  etc.  All  these  operations
agree  with  the  algebraic  procedures  of  the  same  names  merely  in
certain  formal  peculiarities,  such  as  subjection  to  the  associative  or
the  distributive  law;  but  in  and  for  themselves  they  represent  entirely
independent  processes,  by  which  a  new  structure  can  be  definitely
determined  from  any  given  elements.  We  advance  from  the  rela-
tively simple  forms  of  "generation/'  which  we  have  established  by
definition,  to  ever  more  complex  ways  of  constructing  a  manifold  out
of  certain  fundamental  relations.  If  an  initial  member  a0  is  assumed
and  a  plurality  of  operations  Ri  R2  Rs  •  •  •  •  indicated  at  the
same  time,  which  successively  transform  it  into  the  different  values

80  Ausdehnungslehre,  p.  28.


THE CONCEPT OF SPACE AND GEOMETRY  99

«i  az  «3,  ai  at  CL$  etc.,  then  the  result  of  the  compounding  of  those
operations  and  the  various  possible  types  of  this  compounding  is
deductively  determined.  The  considerations  by  which  (Irassmaim
introduces  his  work  thus  create  a  general  logical  schema  under
which  the  various  forms  of  calculus,  which  have  evolved  independ-
ently of  the  Ausdehnungdchre,  can  also  be  subsumed;  for  they  only
show  from  a  new  angle  that  the  real  elements  of  mathematical
calculus  are  not  magnitudes  but  relations.

The  forms  of  calculus,  and  the  concept  of  the  Source.  If  we  survey
the  whole  of  these  developments,  we  recognize  at  once  how  the
fundamental  thought  of  logical  idealism  has  been  progressively
confirmed  and  deepened  in  them.  More  and  more  the  tendency  of
modern  mathematics  is  to  subordinate  the  "given"  elements  as  such
and  to  allow  them  no  influence  on  the  general  form  of  proof.  Every
concept  and  every  proposition,  which  is  used  in  a  real  proof  and  is
not  merely  related  to  pictorial  representation,  must  be  fully  grounded
and  understood  in  the  laws  of  constructive  connection.  The  logic
of  mathematics,  as  Grassmann  understands  it,  is,  in  fact,  in  a  strict
sense  "logic  of  the  source"  (Logik  des  Ursprungs).  Cohen's  Logik
der  reinen  Erkenntnis  developed  its  fundamental  thought  of  the
Source  in  connection  with  the  principles  of  the  infinitesimal  calculus.31
Here,  in  fact,  is  the  first  and  most  striking  example  of  the  general
point  of  view,  which  leads  from  the  concept  of  magnitude  to  the
concept  of  function,  from  "quantity"  to  "quality"  as  the  real  founda-
tion. In  advancing  to  the  other  fields  of  modern  mathematics,  the
logical  principle  here  established  gains  new  confirmation.  However
different  these  fields  may  be  in  content,  in  structure  they  all  point
back  to  the  fundamental  concept  of  the  Source.  The  postulate  of
this  concept  is  fulfilled  wherever  the  members  of  a  manifold  are
deduced  from  a  definite  serial  principle  and  exhaustively  represented
by  it.  The  most  diverse  forms  of  "calculus,"  in  so  far  as  ihoy  satisfy
this  condition,  belong  to  one  logical  type,  as  alto  they  agree  in  th'»ir
fruitfulness  for  the  problems  of  mathematical  natural  science.  Thus
Mobius  applied  his  universal  calculus  to  a  strictly  rational  construc-
tion of  statics,  while  Maxwell  evolved  the  elements  of  mechanics
from  the  fundamental  concepts  of  vector  analysis.32  The  systematic

81  Cohen,  Logik  der*reinen  Erkenntnis,  especially  p.  102  IT.
"Mobius,  Lehrbuch  der  Ktatik  (T.  1, 1837);  cf.  especially  Hankel,  Theorie
der  komplexen  Zahlentysteme,  VII;  Maxwell,  Matter  and  Motion.


100  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

connection  of  operations,  once  deduced,  remains  unchanged  when  we
substitute  forces  for  straight  lines,  pairs  of  forces  for  certain  distance-
products,  and  thus  relate  every  geometrical  proposition  directly  to  a
mechanical  proposition.  The  subordination  of  the  infinitesimal
analysis  to  the  more  inclusive  system  of  "analysis  of  relations"  as
such  serves  also  to  fix  and  limit  its  own  problem.  In  spite  of  the
protests  of  idealistic  logic,  the  concept  of  the  "infinitely  small"  has
continually  led  to  the  misunderstanding  that  here  magnitudes  are
not  understood  from  their  conceptual  principle,  but  rather  compounded
from  their  disappearing  parts.  Thereby,  however,  the  real  question
is  mistaken  and  displaced;  for  we  are  not  concerned  with  pointing
out  the  ultimate  substantial  constitution  of  magnitudes,  but  merely
with  finding  a  new  logical  point  of  view  for  their  determination.  This
point  of  view  comes  out  sharply,  however,  when  we  place  the  other
possible  forms  of  mathematical  "determination"  by  the  side  of  the
procedure  of  the  infinitesimal  calculus.  For  example,  it  would  be
nonsense  to  ascribe  the  ordinary  "arithmetical"  meaning  to  opera-
tions in  the  barycentric  calculus,  such  as  when  simple  points  are
added  or  the  sum  of  two  distances  with  direction  is  represented  by
the  diagonal  of  the  parallelogram  constructed  out  of  them, — or
when  we  speak  of  the  product  of  two  or  three  points  or  of  the  product
of  a  point  and  a  distance.  The  relation  of  the  "whole"  to  its  com-
ponent "parts"  is  here  excluded  and  replaced  by  the  general  relation
of  the  conditioned  to  the  individual  moments,  which  conceptually
constitute  it.  The  distinction,  clearly  emphasized  by  Leibniz,  is
unavoidable:  in  contrast  to  the  "analysis  into  parts/'  there  appears
everywhere  the  "resolution  into  concepts,"  which  as  the  univer-
sal instrument  guarantees  the  certainty  and  the  progress  of  pure
deduction.

IV

The  problem  of  metageometry.  The  extension,  which  the  system  of
Euclidean  geometry  has  undergone  through  metageometrical  investi-
gations and  speculations,  falls  in  point  of  content  outside  of  the  sphere
of  our  enquiry.  For  we  are  not  concerned  with  presenting  the  results
of  mathematics,  significant  and  fruitful  as  they  may  be  from  the
standpoint  of  the  critique  of  cognition,  but  merely  with  determining
the  principle  of  the  mathematical  construction  of  concepts.  But
even  from  this  limited  point  of  view,  we  cannot  avoid  taking  up  the


THE  CONCEPT  OP  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY 101

problem  of  metageometry;  for  it  is  the  special  distinction  of  this
problem  that  it  has  not  merely  transformed  the  content  of  mathemati-
cal knowledge,  but  also  the  interpretation  of  its  basis  and  soiircc.
The  question  necessarily  arises  as  to  whether  the  view,  which  has
previously  been  gained  of  the  mathematical  concept,  can  be  main-
tained in  the  face  of  the  new  problems  arising  in  this  connection.
That  there  ishere  a  justified  extension  of  the  original  field  of  geometry
is  now  beyond  question  with  philosophers  as  with  mathematicians;
so  much  the  more  necessary  is  it  to  discover  whether  the  new  con-
tent breaks  through  the  logical  form  of  geometry  or  confirms  it.

The  attempt  at  an  empirical  grounding  of  geometry  (Pasch).  The
answer  of  mathematics  itself  seemed  for  a  time  definitive;  in  general
it  was  the  empirical  character  of  the  geometrical  concepts,  that  was
deduced  from  the  metageometrical  researches.  Veronese's  Fonda-
menti  di  geometria,  the  first  complete  historical  survey  of  all
critical  attempts  to  reform  the  theory  of  the  principles  of
geometry,  affirms  as  a  common  conviction  of  scientific  investi-
gators, that  at  least  the  ordinary  geometry  of  tridimensional
space  is  founded  merely  on  experience.33  If  we  examine  the  motives
and  reasons  more  closely,  which  have  led  individual  investigators  to
this  decision,  we  soon  recognize  that  the  agreement  of  interpretation
is  only  apparent.  It  is  as  if  geometry,  on  entering  the  field  of  philo-
sophical speculation,  had  lost  its  characteristic  privilege  of  applying  its
concepts  in  a  strictly  unambiguous  sense.  The  whole  indefiniteness
belonging  to  the  concept  of  experience  in  popular  usage  at  once
comes  to  light.  An  empirical  grounding  of  the  mathematical  con-
cepts would  only  be  given,  in  the  strict  sense,  where  proof  was
adduced  that  their  entire  content  was  rooted  in  concrete  perceptions,
and  deducible  from  them.  Thus  the  one  consistent  empiristic  system
of  mathematics  has  been  constructed  by  Pasch,  in  so  far  as  he
attempts  to  introduce  the  elementary  structures,  such  as  the  point
and  the  straight  line,  not  in  exact  conceptual  form  but  merely  in  the
meaning  which  they  can  possess  for  sensation.  The  fruitful  applica-
tion, which  geometry  continually  receives  in  natural  science  and  in
practical  life,  Pasch  explains,  can  only  rest  on  the  fact  that  its  con-
cepts originally  correspond  exactly  to  the  actual  objects  of  observa-
tion. Only  secondarily  is  this  original  content  overlaid  with  a  net-

88  Veronese,  Grundzuge  der  Geometric  von  mehreren  Dimensionen  und  mehreren
Arten  geradliniger  Einheiten,  German  ed.,  Leipzig,  1894,  p.  VIII,  Note  1.


102  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

work  of  technical  abstractions,  by  which  indeed  its  theoretical  con-
struction is  furthered,  but  nothing  is  added  to  the  fundamental
truth  of  its  propositions.  If  we  abandon  these  abstractions,  if  we
turn  resolutely  back  to  the  real  psychological  beginnings,  geometry
retains  the  character  of  a  natural  science  and  is  only  distinguished
from  the  other  natural  sciences  by  the  fact  that  it  only  needs  to
take  a  very  limited  number  of  concepts  and  laws  directly  from  experi-
ence, and  gains  all  the  rest  by  the  development  of  this  once  assumed
material  The  "point,"  according  to  this  conception,  is  nothing  but  a
material  body,  which  proves  to  be  not  further  divisible  within  the
given  limits  of  observation,  whilo  distance  is  compounded  out  of  a
finite  number  of  such  points.  The  validity  of  the  geometrical  princi-
ples is  accordingly  subject  to  certain  limitations,  which  are  demanded
by  the  nature  of  the  geometrical  objects  as  mere  objects  of  percep-
tion. Thus  to  the  proposition,  that  between  two  points  we  can
draw  one  and  only  one  straight  line,  the  reservation  is  to  be  added
that  the  points  considered  must  not  be  too  close  to  each  other.  The
theorem,  that  between  two  given  points  a  third  can  always  be
inserted,  remains  in  force  only  for  these  cases,  while  it  loses  its  validity
when  we  go  beyond  certain  limits,  which  cannot  indeed  be  clearly
assigned.34

Ideal  objects  in  empirical  geometry.  All  these  developments  are
consistent  with  the  chosen  starting-point;  but  it  soon  appears
impossible  to  reach  the  structure  of  the  total  historical  system  of
scientific  geometry  from  it.  In  order  to  give  the  proofs  true  rigor
and  universality,  we  are  forced  from  the  assumption  of  "real"  points,
that  represent  actual  objects  of  observation,  to  the  assumption  of
"unreal"  structures,  which  are  ultimately  nothing  but  a  result  of
those  ideal  constructions,  that  we  originally  sought  to  exclude.  The
concepts  of  perfectly  determinate  points,  straight  lines  and  planes
are  used  also,  and  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  definitions  of  those  elements
in  which  the  geometrical  idea  is  only  imperfectly  and  approximately
realized.  Every  geometry  of  approximation  is  obliged  to  operate
with  presuppositions  taken  from  "pure"  geometry;  it  cannot  serve
for  the  deduction  of  methods,  of  which  it  is  rather  only  a  special
application.™

34  Pasch,  Vorlesungen  uber  neuere  Geometric,  p.  17  f.

36  Cf.  the  criticism  of  Pasch's  system  by  Veronese,  p.  655  ff.,  and  by  Well-
stein,  op.  cit.,  p.  128  f.


THE  CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  103

Veronese9 s  modification  of  empiricism.  The  search  for  an  empirical
foundation  of  geometry  is  thus  led  into  a  new  path.  Veronese,  who
at  first  approves  the  search,  gives  the  thought  a  new  turn,  when  he
urges  that  geometrical  "possibility"  is  not  to  be  based  merely  on
direct  external  observation,  but  also  on  "mental  facts."  The  geomet-
rical axioms  are  not  copies  of  the  real  relations  of  sense  perception,
but  they  are  postulates  by  which  we  read  exact  assertions  into
inexact  intuition.  The  raw  material  of  sense  impressions  must  be
worked  over  by  our  mind  before  it  can  be  useful  as  a  starting-point
for  mathematical  considerations;  and  it  is  this  "subjective"  element
which  in  pure  mathematics,  geometry  and  rational  mechanics  assprts
its  superiority  over  the  "objective"  element.  Although  geometry
is  defined  here  also  as  an  exact  experimental  science,  nevertheless,
the  logical  r61e  of  experience  has  become  entirely  different.  We
start  from  "empirical  considerations/'  from  certain  facts  of  sensuous
intuition;  but  these  facts  serve,  in  Platonic  language,  only  as  the
"spring-board"  from  which  we  ascend  to  the  conception  of  universal
systems  of  .conditions  with  no  sensuous  correlate.  The  sensuous
contents  form  indeed  the  first  occasion,  but  express  neither  the  limit
nor  the  real  meaning  of  the  mathematical  construction  of  concepts.
They  serve  as  the  first  incentive,  but  as  such  do  not  enter  into  the
system  of  deductive  proof,  which  is  to  be  formed  in  strict  independ-
ence. But  in  establishing  this,  the  issue  is  already  decided  from  the
standpoint  of  the  critique  of  knowledge;  for  such  critique  does  not
ask  as  to  the  origin  of  concepts,  but  only  what  they  mean  and  are
worth  as  elements  of  scientific  proof.

Rationalism  and  empiricism.  Thus  we  are  obliged  ultimately  to
appeal  to  a  specific  function  of  the  intellect  in  the  deduction  of  the
geometries  of  more  than  three  dimensions.  In  the  system  of  Pasch,
as  Veronese  remarks,  multiple-dimensional  geometry  is  not  excluded
a  posteriori  but  a  priori,  i.e.,  not  factually  but  methodically.  For  the
data  of  observation  negate  every  attempt  to  enter  a  field,  which  lies
beyond  the  possibilities  of  our  spatial  intuition.  For  this  always
demands  a  pure  act  of  construction,  a  possible  "intellectual  activity"
in  which  we  go  beyond  the  given,  and  in  which  the  generated  element
is  determined  from  the  beginning  by  the  fact  that  we  subject  it  to
certain  general  laws  of  relation.  As  the  axioms,  propositions  and
proofs  of  geometry  cannot  contain  any  undefined  element  of  intui-
tion, when  we  abandon  intuition  in  general,  there  must  at  least  remain


104  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

a  purely  hypothetical  connection  of  abstract  truths,  which  is  acces-
sible to  intellectual  investigation.  "If  we  are  called,"  Veronese
adds,  "Rationalists  or  Idealists  because  of  these  ideas,  we  accept  the
title  in  distinction  from  those  who  would  uj  Justifiably  deny  the
greatest  possible  logical  freedom  to  the  mathematical  and  geometri-
cal intellect,  and  who  would  enquire  whether  each  new  hypothesis
possesses  a  possible  perceptual  representation,  e.g.,  in  geometry  a
purely  external  perceptual  representation.  We  accept  the  title,
however,  only  under  the  condition  that  no  really  philosophical  mean-
ing be  attached  to  it."  The  "really  philosophical"  meaning,  that  is
here  guarded  against,  is, — as  the  reference  to  P.  du  Bois-Reymond
shows,3** — only  the  hypostatization  of  mathematical  ideals  into  a
sort  of  absolute  existences;  their  purely  intellectual  value  as
hypotheses  is  not  being  thereby  affected.37

Mathematical  space  and  sensuous  space.  The  logical  freedom  here
sought  for  geometrical  concepts  cannot,  however,  merely  relate  to
those  that  apply  to  more  than  three-dimensional  spaces;  in  so  far
as  a  true  unity  of  principles  is  sought,  it  must  be  recognized  in  the
methods  of  ordinary  Euclidean  geometry.  If  the  "point"  of  this
geometry  were  only  the  image  of  an  object  existing  outside  of  thought,
"because  there  are  outer  objects  which  directly  (!)  present  or  arouse
in  us  the  perception  of  a  point  without  which  there  are  no  real  so-called
points,"88  the  continuity  of  the  system  of  geometry  would  be  broken;
for  what  conceptual  analogy  and  affinity  subsists  between  elements,
which  are  copies  of  presented  things  and  elements  that  entirely  result
from  "intellectual  activities"?  And  conversely,  if  those  intellectual
procedures  suffice  to  constitute  the  element  of  an  n-dimensional
manifold,  what  difficulty  is  there  in  gaining  the  element  in  the  special
case  of  three  dimensions?  In  fact,  it  is  precisely  when  we  compare
Euclidean  space  with  other  possible  "forms  of  space"  that  its  peculiar
conceptual  character  stands  forth  sharply.  If  from  the  standpoint  of
metageometry,  Euclidean  geometry  appears  as  a  mere  beginning,  as
given  material  for  further  developments,  nevertheless,  from  the  stand-
point of  the  critique  of  knowledge,  it  represents  the  end  of  a  compli-
cated series  of  intellectual  operations.  The  psychological  investiga-
tion of  the  origin  of  the  idea  of  space  (including  those  which  were

88  Cf.  more  particularly  Ch.  IV,  p.  162  ff.

87  Veronese,  op.  cit.,  p.  VIII  ff.,  XIII  ff.,  p.  658,  687,  etc.

88  Veronese,  op.  cit.,  p.  VII.  cf.  p.  225  f.


THE  CONCEPT  OF  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  105

undertaken  with  a  purely  sensationalistic  tendency)  have  indirectly
confirmed  and  clarified  this.  They  show  unmistakably  that  the
space  of  our  sense  perception  is  not  identical  with  the  space  of  our
geometry,  but  is  distinguished  from  it  in  exactly  the  decisive  con-
stitutive properties.  For  sensuous  apprehension,  every  difference
of  place  is  necessarily  connected  with  an  opposition  in  the  content  of
sensation.  "Above"  and  "below,"  "right"  and  "left"  are  here  not
equivalent  directions,  which  can  be  exchanged  with  each  other  with-
out change,  but  they  remain  qualitatively  distinct  and  irreducible
determinations,  since  totally  different  groups  of  organic  sensations
correspond  to  them.  In  geometrical  space,  on  the  contrary,  all
these  oppositions  are  cancelled.  For  the  element  as  such  possesses
no  specific  content,  but  all  its  meaning  comes  from  the  relative
position  it  occupies  in  the  total  system.  The  principle  of  the
absolute  homogeneity  of  spatial  points  denies  all  differences,  like  the
difference  of  above  and  below,  which  merely  concern  the  relation  of
outer  things  to  our  bodies,  and  thus  to  a  particular,  empirically  given
object.39  Points  are  what  they  are  only  as  starting-points  of  possible1
constructions,  in  which  the  postulate  holds  that  the  identity  of  these
constructions  can  be  recognized  and  retained  through  all  diversity
of  the  initial  elements.  The  further  moments  of  geometrical  space,
such  as  its  continuity  and  infinity,  rest  upon  a  similar  foundation;
they  are  in  no  way  given  in  spatial  sensations,  but  rest  upon  ideal
completions,  which  we  assume  in  them.  The  appearance  that
the  continuity  of  space  is  a  sensuously  phenomenal  property  has  been
definitely  set  aside  by  the  deeper  mathematical  analysis  of  the  con-
tinuum, which  has  been  carried  out  through  the  modern  theory  of  the
manifold.  The  concept  of  the  continuum  used  by  the  mathematician
in  his  deductions  is  in  no  way  to  be  gained  from  the  indefinite  image
of  space,  that  is  offered  us  by  sensuous  intuition.  This  image  can
never  represent  precisely  the  ultimate  deciding  difference  by  which
continuous  manifolds  are  distinguished  from  other  infinite  totalities;
no  sensuous  power  of  discrimination,  however  sharp,  can  discover  any
difference  between  a  continuous  and  a  discrete  manifold  in  so  far  as

89  Concerning  the  differentiation  of  "homogeneous"  geometrical  space  from
inhomogeneous  and  "anisotropic"  physiological  space,  cf.  more  particularly
Mach,  Erkenntnis  u.  Irrtum,  Leipzig,  1905,  p.  331  ff.  Cf.  especially  the  exposi-
tion of  Stumpf,  Zur  Einteilung  der  Wissenschaften  (AbhandL  der  Berliner
Akademie  d.  Wiss.,  1906,  p.  71  ff.) .


106  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

the  elements  of  the  latter  are  "everywhere  dense,"  i.e.,  where  between
any  two  members,  however  close  we  may  choose  them,  another
member  can  be  discovered  belonging  to  the  assemblage  itself.40  Just
as  the  field  of  rational  numbers  is  broadened  by  gradual  steps  of
thought  into  the  continuous  totality  of  real  numbers,  so  by  a  series  of
intellectual  transformations,  does  the  space  of  sense  pass  into  the
infinite*,  continuous,  homogeneous  and  conceptual  space  of  geometry.

Objections  to  the  Kantian  theory  of  geometry.  It  is  thus  a  strange
anomaly,  when  from  the  possibility  of  metageometry  the  empirical
character  of  Euclidean  space  is  inferred.  Euclidean  geometry  does
not  cease  to  be  a  purely  rational  system  of  conditions  and  conse-
quences, when  it  is  shown  that  along  with  it  other  systems  can  be
thought,  which  are  capable  of  the  same  logical  strictness  of  connec-
tion. It  is  to  be  noted  that  two  opposite  objections,  based  upon  the
same  premises  which  are  taken  from  metageometry,  have  been
expressed  against  the  Kantian  theory  of  geometry.  On  the  one
hand,  the  pure  apriority  of  space  is  contested  on  the  basis  of  these
premises,  while  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  objected  that  in  Kant's
own  exposition,  the  a  priori  freedom  of  the  mathematical  concept
and  its  possible  separation  from  all  sensuous  representation  is  not
satisfactorily  expressed.  Kant's  view  that  the  axioms  were  "given"
in  "pure  intuition"  can  only  be  explained  "by  that  residuum  of
sensualism  which  still  attached  to  the  Kantian  idealism."41  Of  these
two  opposed  objections,  only  the  last  possesses  an  entirely  clear
and  consistent  meaning.  Not  the  empirical  but  the  logical  character
of  the  fundamental  concepts  is  confirmed  and  illumined  in  a  new  way
by  the  modern  extension  of  the  field  of  mathematics.  The  r61e,
which  we  can  still  ascribe  to  experience,  does  not  lie  in  founding  the
particular  systems,  but  in  the  selection  that  we  have  to  make  among
them.  It  is  reasoned  that,  as  all  the  systems  are  equally  valid  in
logical  structure,  we  need  a  principle  that  guides  us  in  their  applica-
tion. This  principle  can  be  sought  only  in  reality,  since  we  are  not
here  concerned  with  mere  possibilities,  but  with  the  concept  and  the
problem  of  the  real  itself;  ip  short,  it  can  be  sought  only  in  observa-
tion and  scientific  experiment.  Experience  thus  never  serves  as  a

40  For  explanation  and  examples,  cf.  especially  Huntington,  "The  Contin-
uum as  a  type  of  order/'  Annals  of  Mathematics,  2  ser.,  VI  and  VII;  compare
ray  "Kant  und  die  moderne  Mathematik,"  Kant  Studien,  XII,  15  ff.

41  Wellstein,  op.  cit..  p.  146.


THE CONCEPT OF SPACE AND GEOMETRY  107

proof  or  even  as  a  support  of  the  mathematical  system  of  conditions,
for  such  a  system  must  rest  purely  in  itself;  but  it  points  the  way  from
the  truth  of  concepts  to  their  reality.  Observation  closes  the  gap
left  by  purely  logical  determination ;  it  leads  from  the  many  forms  of
geometrical  space  to  the  one  space  of  the  physical  object.

Real  space  and  experiment.  This  connection  leads,  however,
beyond  the  bounds  of  pure  mathematics  and  results  in  a  problem,
which  can  only  be  adequately  solved  by  a  critical  analysis  of  the
procedure  of  physics.  The  question  of  the  method  and  value  of  the
physical  experiment  itself  now  becomes  of  central  importance.  If
one  looks  to  experiment  for  the  confirmation  or  refutation  of  a  certain
system  of  mathematical  hypotheses,  experiment  is  essentially  under-
stood in  the  Baconian  sense  of  the  "experimentum  crucis'1  Experi-
ence and  hypotheses  belong  accordingly  to  separate  fields;  each  exists
for  itself  and  can  function  by  itself.  "Pure"  experience,  which  is
conceived  as  separated  from  any  conceptual  presupposition,  is
appealed  to  as  a  criterion  of  the  value  or  lack  of  value  of  a  certain
theoretical  assumption.  The  critical  analysis  of  the  concept  of
experience  shows,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  separation  here  assumed
involves  an  inner  contradiction.  Abstract  theory  never  stands  on
one  side,  while  on  the  other  side  stands  the  material  of  observation  as
it  is  in  itself  and  without  any  conceptual  interpretation.  Rather
this  material,  if  we  are  to  ascribe  to  it  any  definite  character  at  all,
must  always  bear  the  marks  of  some  sort  of  conceptual  shaping.
We  can  never  oppose  to  the  concepts,  which  are  to  be  tested,  the
empirical  data  as  naked  "facia";  but  ultimately  it  is  always  a  certain
logical  system  of  connection  of  the  empirical,  which  is  measured  by  a
similar  system  and  thus  judged.42  But  if  the  measuring  experiment
is  always  bound  in  this  way  to  a  system  of  presuppositions,  which
include  both  purely  geometrical  assumptions  concerning  space  and
concrete  physical  assumptions  concerning  the  relations  of  bodies,
then  it  is  clear  that  we  can  expect  no  clear  decision  from  it  with  regard
to  the  conflict  of  geometrical  systems.  Wherever  a  value  gained  by
experiment  contradicts  the  value  demanded  by  deductive  theory,
the  alternative  is  left  open  to  us  whether  we  shall  restore  the  agree-
ment of  concept  and  observation  by  changing  the  mathematical  part
or  the  physical  part  of  our  abstract  hypothesis.  And  thought  would
undoubtedly  avail  itself  of  this  latter  procedure.  The  possible

42  Cf.  here  the  detailed  grounding  in  Ch.  IV,  especially  Sect.  IV.


108  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

variation  of  the  conditions  follows  certain  rules  and  is  bound  to  a
certain  sequence.  Before  we  would  proceed  on  the  basis  of  the
results  of  astronomical  measurements,  to  change  from  the  geometry
of  Euclid  to  the  geometry  of  Lobatschefski,  we  would  first  have  to
investigate  as  to  whether  we  could  take  account  of  the  new  result
by  an  altered  conception  of  the  system  of  physical  laws,  for  example,
by  revising  the  assumption  of  the  strictly  rectilinear  propagation  of
light.  This  state  of  affairs  has  been  continually  emphasized  from
the  philosophical  side  in  the  controversies  about  the  principles  of
geometry;  but  it  seems  that  it  was  first  through  the  expositions  of
Poincar6,  which  were  decisive  in  this  connection,  that  it  became
clear  and  gained  wide  recognition  within  mathematics.  As  Poincar4
justly  emphasizes,  all  our  experiences  are  related  only  to  the  relations
of  bodies  to  each  other  and  their  physical  interactions,  but  never  to
the  relation  of  bodies  to  pure  geometrical  space,  or  the  parts  of  this
space  to  each  other.  It  is  thus  vain  to  expect  instructions  about  the
"essence"  of  space  from  a  procedure  which,  according  to  its  whole
tendency  and  disposition,  is  directed  upon  entirely  different  questions.
Since  the  objects  with  which  experience  deals  are  of  an  entirely  differ-
ent sort  from  the  objects  of  which  the  assertions  of  geometry  hold,
since  the  investigation  of  material  things  never  directly  touches  the
ideal  circle  or  straight  line,  we  never  gain  in  this  way  a  decision
among  the  different  systems  of  geometry.43

The  conceptual  principles  of  pure  space.  Thus,  if  the  choice  between
the  various  systems  is  not  to  be  surrendered  entirely  to  subjective
caprice,  we  must  face  the  problem  of  discovering  a  rational  criterion
of  difference.  Logical  consistency,  such  as  belongs  to  all  these
systems,  is  merely  a  negative  condition,  which  they  all  share  among
themselves.  But  within  the  group  thus  established  the  differences  in
fundamental  structure  and  in  relative  simplicity  of  structure  are  not
extinguished.  While  from  the  standpoint  of  the  principles  of  identity
and  contradiction,  the  thought  of  the  heterogeneity  of  space  may  be
equivalent  to  that  of  homogeneity,  nevertheless,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  within  the  rational  system  of  knowledge  the  concept  of
uniformity,  in  the  most  diverse  fields,  always  precedes  that  of  non-
uniformity.  The  non-uniform  is  always  gained  from  the  uniform
in  the  process  of  constructive  synthesis  by  the  addition  of  a  new
condition,  and  thus  represents  a  more  complex  intellectual  structure.

u  Cf.  Poincar6,  La  Science  et  VHypothese,  Chs.  3-5.


THE CONCEPT OF SPACE AND GEOMETRY  109

The  form  of  Euclidean  space  is  thus  in  fact  "simpler"  than  any  other
form  of  space,  in  the  same  sense  that  within  algebra  a  polynomial
of  the  first  degree  is  simpler  than  a  polynomial xof  the  second  degree.44
In  the  order  of  knowledge,  at  least,  there  is  here  a  necessary  and
definite  sequence;  but  it  is  this  order  of  knowledge  by  which,  in  the
critique  of  cognition,  we  determine  the  order  of  objects.  The  differ-
ences between  Euclidean  space  and  the  space  represented  in  the
hypothesis  of  Lobatschefski  or  of  Riemann  first  become  manifest
when  we  compare  parts  of  these  spaces,  which  transcend  a  certain
magnitude,  with  each  other.  If  we  limit  ourselves,  on  the  contrary,
to  the  generating  element  of  all  these  spaces,  the  difference  disap-
pears. The  Euclidean  standard  holds  without  modification  for
measurements  in  infinitesimals,  which  thus  proves  it  in  principle
really  fundamental.  It  represents  the  first  and  fundamental  schema
with  which  all  other  constructions  are  connected  and  from  which  they
are  distinguished.  The  uniformity  of  Euclidean  space  is  really  only
an  expression  of  the  fact  that  it  is  conceived  merely  as  a  pure  rela-
tional and  constructive  space  and  that  all  further  determination  of
content,  which  might  lead  to  a  difference  in  absolute  magnitude  and  in
absolute  direction,  is  eliminated  from  it.45  In  so  far  as  absolute
determinations  of  magnitude  as  such  are  permissible  in  pure  geometry,
they  always  rest  on  a  universal  system  of  relations,  which  have  been
previously  developed  independently  and  which  is  only  more  closely
determined  in  details  by  the  addition  of  particular  conditions.

Euclidean  space  and  the  other  forms  of  mathematical  space.  Thus
Euclidean  space  remains,  indeed,  a  conceptual  hypothesis  in  a  system
of  possible  hypotheses;  but  within  this  system,  nevertheless,  it
possesses  a  peculiar  advantage  in  value  and  significance.  From  a
system  of  pure  logico-mathematical  forms,  we  select  a  manifold
that  corresponds  to  certain  rational  postulates,  and  attempt  with  the
help  of  this  manifold  to  render  the  character  of  the  real  intelligible.
We  do  not  thereby  exclude  that,  along  with  the  fundamental  system,
the  more  complex  systems  also  possess  a  certain  sphere  of  application
in  which  they  also  gain  concrete  significance.  In  the  first  place,

44  Cf.  Poincare*,  op.  cit.,  p.  61.

«C/.,  e.g.,  Grassmann,  Ausdehnungslehre  of  1844,  §22:  "The  simplicity
of  space  is  expressed  in  the  principle:  space  has  the  same  properties  in  all
places  and  in  all  directions,  that  is,  in  all  places  and  in  all  directions,  the
same  constructions  can  be  produced."


110  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

the  results  of  those  systems  are  often  themselves  capable  of  an  inter-
pretation and  translation  which  brings  them,  at  least  indirectly,  to
intuitive  representation.  As  Beltrami  has  shown,  the  relations  of
Lobatschefskian  geometry  find  their  exact  correlate  and  copy  in  the
geometry  of  pseudo-spherical  surfaces,  itself  a  particular  section
of  ordinary  Euclidean  geometry;  while  the  "elliptical  geometry"  of
planes,  as  developed  by  Riemann,  corresponds  to  the  geometry  of
spherical  surfaces  within  the  Euclidean  space  of  three  dimensions.
And  also,  when  we  go  over  to  systems  of  higher  dimensions,  this
possibility  of  referring  back  does  not  cease.  We  can  again  select
within  our  intuitive  space  itself  structures  that  are  subject  in  all
their  reciprocal  relations  to  the  abstract  rules,  which  are  deduced  and
proved  for  any  manifold  of  more  than  three  dimensions.  Thus  the
manifold  of  all  spheres  forms  a  linear  manifold  of  four  dimensions,
the  form  of  which  can  be  investigated  and  established  in  universal
geometry.46  But  even  where  we  lack  this  reduction  to  known  spa-
tial relations  and  problems,  the  possibility  is  not  excluded  of  inter-
preting the  propositions  of  non-Euclidean  geometry  so  that  a  definite
concrete  "meaning"  corresponds  to  them.  For  all  these  propositions
only  express  a  system  of  relations,  while  they  make  no  final  deter-
mination of  the  character  of  the  individual  members,  which  enter  into
these  relations.  The  points,  with  which  they  are  concerned,  are  not
independent  things,  to  which  in  and  for  themselves  certain  properties
are  ascribed,  but  they  are  merely  the  assumed  termini  of  the  relation
itself  and  gain  through  it  all  their  character.  (Cf.  above  p.  94  ff.)
Hence,  where  any  system  is  found  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of
connection  of  any  of  these  general  theories  of  relation,  a  field  of
application  for  the  abstract  propositions  is  indicated  and  defined,  no
matter  whether  the  qualitative  character  of  the  elements  of  the
system  can  be  pointed  out  or  whether  it  can  be  intuitively  represented
in  space.  In  so  far  as  physics  offers  us  systems,  which  require  a
plurality  of  means  of  determination  for  their  complete  exposition,
we  can  speak  of  a  manifold  of  several  "dimensions,"  to  be  judged  and
treated  according  to  the  previously  evolved  deductive  laws  of  these
manifolds,  regardless  of  whether  or  not  these  means  of  determina-
tion permit  a  spatial  interpretation.

Geometry  and  reality. In  any  case,  the  result  is  that  the  purely
rational  form  of  the  geometrical  construction  of  concepts,  as  the

46  Cf.  more  particularly  Wellstein,  op.  cit.,  p.  102.


THE CONCEPT  OF SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  111

latter  has  been  gradually  established,  is  not  threatened  by  the
metageometrical  considerations  but  is  rather  confirmed.  Even  if
one  heeds  all  the  doubts  that  may  be  awakened  through  these
considerations,  still  these  doubts  never  concern  the  real  ground  of
the  concepts,  but  only  the  possibility  of  their  empirical  application.
That  experience  in  its  present  scientific  form  gives  no  occasion  to  go
beyond  Euclidean  space  is  expressly  admitted  even  by  the  most
radical  empiristic  critics.47  From  the  standpoint  of  our  present
knowledge,  they  also  conclude,  we  are  justified  in  the  judgment  that
physical  space  "is  to  be  regarded  as  positively  Euclidean."  Only
we  must  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  in  a  distant  future  perhaps
changes  will  take  place  here  also.  If  any  firmly  established  observa-
tions appear,  which  disagree  with  our  previous  theoretical  system  of
nature,  and  which  cannot  be  brought  into  harmony  with  it  even  by
far-reaching  changes  in  the  physical  foundations  of  the  system,
then,  all  conceptual  changes  within  the  narrower  circle  having  been
tried  in  vain,  the  query  may  arise  whether  the  lost  unity  is  not  to  be
reestablished  by  a  change  in  the  "form  of  space"  itself.  But  even  if
we  take  into  account  such  possibilities,  the  proposition  would  only  be
thereby  strengthened  that,  as  soon  as  we  enter  the  field  of  the  deter-
mination of  reality,  no  assertion,  however  indubitable  it  may  appear,
can  lay  claim  to  absolute  certainty.  It  is  only  the  pure  system  of  con-
ditions, which  mathematics  erects,  that  is  absolutely  valid,  while  the
assertion,  that  there  are  existences  corresponding  to  these  conditions
in  all  respects,  possesses  only  relative  and  thus  problematic  meaning.
The  system  of  universal  geometry  shows  that  this  sphere  of  problems
does  not  affect  the  logical  character  of  mathematical  knowledge  as
such.  It  shows  that  the  pure  concept  on  its  side  is  prepared  and
fitted  for  all  conceivable  changes  in  the  empirical  character  of  percep-
tions; the  universal  serial  form  is  the  means  by  which  every  order
of  the  empirical  is  to  be  understood  and  logically  mastered.

4TEnriques,  Problemi  della  Scienza,  Bologna,  1906,  p.  293  ff. (See  Ch.  VI
of  the  Supplement  on  Einstein's  theory  of  relativity. Tr.)


CHAPTER  IV
THE  CONCEPTS  OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE


The  constructive  concepts  and  the  concepts  of  nature.  The  logical
nature  of  the  pure  functional  concept  finds  its  clearest  expression  and
most  perfect  example  in  the  system  of  mathematics.  Here  a  field
of  free  and  universal  activity  is  disclosed,  in  which  thought  transcends
all  limits  of  the  "given."  The  objects,  which  we  consider  and  into
whose  objective  nature  we  seek  to  penetrate,  have  only  an  ideal
being;  all  the  properties,  which  we  can  predicate  of  them,  flow  exclu-
sively from  the  law  of  their  original  construction.  But  precisely
here,  where  the  productivity  of  thought  unfolds  most  purely,  its
characteristic  limit  seems  to  come  to  light.  The  constructive  con-
cepts (Konstruktionsbegriffe)  of  mathematics  may  be  fruitful  and
indispensable  in  their  narrow  field;  but  they  seem  to  lack  an  essential
element  for  serving  as  an  example  for  the  whole  circle  of  logical
problems,  as  typical  of  the  properties  of  the  concept  in  general.  For
however  much  logic  limits  itself  to  the  "formal,"  its  connection
with  the  problems  of  being  is  never  broken.  It  is  the  structure
of  being  with  which  the  concept  and  the  logically  valid  judgment
and  inference  are  concerned.  The  Aristotelian  conception  and
foundation  of  the  syllogism  assume  this  at  all  points:  ontology  gives
the  basic  plan  for  the  construction  of  logic.  (Cf.  above  p.  4  ff.)
If  this,  however,  is  the  case,  mathematics  can  no  longer  serve  as  the
type  and  model,  for  since  it  remains  strictly  within  the  field  of  its
self-created  structures,  it  has  in  principle  no  concern  with  being.  The
difference  between  the  "generic  concept"  in  the  sense  of  traditional
logic  and  the  constructive  mathematical  concept  may  be  freely
granted;  but  one  might  be  tempted  to  explain  this  difference  by  the
fact  that  within  mathematics  the  final  and  conclusive  function  of  the
concept  is  not  sought,  and  is  accordingly  not  found.  The  voluntary
limitation,  which  we  assume  in  it,  is  justified;  but  it  would  be  a
failure  in  method,  if  we  were  to  attempt  to  solve  all  logical
problems  from  the  narrow  standpoint  that  we  have  here  defined  for
ourselves.  The  decision  as  to  the  direction  of  logic  cannot  be  gained

112


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  113

by  a  type  of  consideration  which  remains  one-sidedly  in  the  ideal.
Rather  it  is  the  genuine  concepts  of  being,  the  assertions  concerning
things  and  their  real  properties,  which  must  constitute  the  true
standard.  The  question  as  to  the  meaning  and  function  of  the  con-
cept gains  its  final  and  definitive  formulation  only  in  the  concepts  of
nature.

The  concept  of  traditional  logic  and  the  scientific  ideal  of  pure  descrip-
tion. If  we  proceed,  however,  from  this  conception  of  the  problem,
the  solution  seems  to  turn  at  once  in  favor  of  the  traditional  logical
view.  The  concepts  of  nature  know  and  can  know  no  other  task
than  to  copy  the  given  facts  of  perception,  and  to  reproduce  their
content  in  abbreviated  form.  Here  truth  and  certainty  of  judgment
rest  only  on  observation;  there  remains  no  creative  freedom  and
arbitrariness  of  thought,  but  the  character  of  the  concept  is  from  the
beginning  prescribed  by  the  character  of  the  material.  The  more
we  free  ourselves  from  our  own  constructions,  from  the  "idols"
of  the  mind,  the  more  purely  is  the  image  of  outer  reality  presented
to  us.  It  is  passive  surrender  to  the  object,  which  here  seems  to
secure  to  the  concept  its  force  and  effectiveness.  We  thus  stand
again  wholly  within  the  general  view,  that  has  found  its  logical  expres-
sion in  the  theory  of  abstraction.  The  concept  is  only  the  copy  of  the
given ;  it  only  signifies  certain  features,  which  are  present  and  can  be
indicated  in  the  perception  as  such.  (Cf.  above  p.  5.)  The  concep-
tion of  the  meaning  and  task  of  natural  science  also  corresponds
completely  to  this  view.  The  whole  meaning  and  certainty  of  the
concept  as  found  in  natural  science  depends  accordingly  on  the
condition,  that  it  contain  no  element  which  does  not  possess  its
precise  correlate  in  the  world  of  reality.  In  order  to  represent  ade-
quately a  certain  group  of  phenomena,  theory  may  indeed  assume  and
apply  certain  hypothetical  elements;  but  in  this  case,  also,  the  postu-
late holds  that  these  elements  must  at  least  be  validated  in  a  possibk
perception.  An  hypothesis  signifies  only  a  gap  in  our  knowledge;
it  means  the  assumption  of  certain  data  of  sensation,  that  have
hitherto  been  accessible  to  us  in  no  direct  experience,  but  which  are
nevertheless  regarded  as  thoroughly  homogeneous  in  their  properties
with  the  really  perceived  elements.  Perfect  knowledge  could
abandon  this  asylum  ignorantiae:  for  it,  reality  would  be  clearly  and
completely  given  as  a  whole  in  actual  perception.


114  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

The  apparent  logical  ideal  of  physics.  The  whole  modern  philoso-
phy of  physics  appears  at  first  glance  merely  as  the  increasingly  rigor-
ous and  consistent  working-out  of  this  view.  In  this  view  alone,  does
the  possibility  seem  given  of  sharply  separating  experience  and
speculative  philosophy  of  nature;  and  in  it  there  seems  to  be  indi-
cated a  necessary  condition,  by  which  the  scientific  concept  of  physics
is  first  defined  and  completed.  In  opposition  to  the  metaphysical
ideal  of  the  explanation  of  nature,  there  now  appears  the  more  modest
task  of  describing  the  real  completely  and  clearly.  We  no  longer
reach  beyond  the  field  of  the  sensible  in  order  to  discover  the  inex-
perienceable,  absolute  causes  and  forces,  upon  which  rest  the  multi-
plicity and  change  of  our  world  of  perception.  The  content  of
physics  is  rather  constituted  merely  by  the  phenomena  in  the  form  in
which  they  are  immediately  accessible  to  us.  Colors  and  tones,
smell  and  taste  sensations,  sensuous  muscle-feelings  and  perceptions
of  pressure  and  contact  are  the  only  material  out  of  which  the  world
of  the  physicist  is  constructed.  What  this  world  seems  to  contain  in
addition,  what  is  added  in  concepts,  as  atom  or  molecule,  ether  or
energy,  is  in  truth  no  fundamentally  new  element,  but  only  a  peculiar
guise  in  which  the  data  of  sense  appear.  Complete  logical
analysis  reduces  these  concepts  to  their  significance,  when  it
recognizes  them  as  symbols  for  certain  impressions  and  complexes  of
impressions.  The  unity  of  the  physical  method  seems  thereby  to
be  secured  for  the  first  time;  for  now  it  is  no  longer  compounded  from
heterogeneous  elements,  but  in  the  general  concept  of  sensation  the
common  denominator  is  fixed,  to  which  all  assertions  concerning  real-
ity must  be  ultimately  reducible.  Whatever  resists  this  reduction
thereby  shows  itself  to  be  a  factor  arbitrarily  introduced,  which
must  disappear  in  the  final  result.  The  goal  of  this  philosophy  of
physics  would  be  reached,  if  we  resolved  every  concept,  which  enters
into  physical  theory,  into  a  sum  of  perceptions,  and  replaced  it  by
this  sum;  that  is,  if  we  retraced  the  path  from  the  intellectual  abbre-
viation (which  is  what  all  concepts  reveal  themselves  to  be)  to  the
concrete  fullness  of  the  empirical  facts.  The  exclusion  of  all  ele-
ments, which  possess  no  direct  sensuous  correlate  in  the  world  of
perceptible  things  and  processes,  would  be,  accordingly,  the  true
logical  ideal  of  physics.

Is  this  the  true  ideal  of  physics?  However  we  may  judge  concern-
ing the  justification  of  this  ideal,  its  very  conception  contains  an


THE CONCEPTS  OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  115

ambiguity,  which  must  first  be  set  aside.  The  description  of  the
actual  status  of  physical  theories  is  confused  with  a  general  demand
that  is  made  of  these  theories.  Which  of  the  two  elements  is  the
original  and  determining  one?  Is  it  merely  the  actual  procedure  of
science  itself  that  is  here  brought  to  its  simplest  and  shortest  expres-
sion, or,  on  the  contrary,  is  this  procedure  measured  by  a  general
theory  of  knowledge  and  of  reality,  which  decides  concerning  its
value?  In  the  latter  case,  whatever  the  final  result  might  be,  the
method  of  consideration  would  not  be  changed  in  principle.  Again
it  would  be  a  certain  metaphysics  of  knowledge  which  sought  to
point  out  the  way  to  physics.  The  answer  to  this  question  can  only
be  won  by  following  the  course  of  physical  investigation  itself  and
considering  the  function  of  the  concept  that  is  involved  directly  in
its  procedure.  The  same  impartiality,  that  is  demanded  by  the
positivistic  critic  with  regard  to  the  facts  of  sense  perception,  must
also  be  demanded  with  respect  to  the  more  complex  facts  of  knowl-
edge. Here  also  the  first  task  is  to  grasp  the  "factual  side"  of
scientific  theory  in  its  purity,  before  we  decide  as  to  the  value  or
lack  of  value  of  the  view  of  reality  which  it  contains.  Is  this  theory,
as  it  is  historically  presented,  really  only  a  collection  of  observations
strung  together  as  if  on  a  thread,  or  does  it  contain  elements,  which
belong  to  another  logical  type  and  therefore  demand  another
foundation?

ii

Numbering  and  measuring  as  presuppositions.  The  first  and  most
striking  characteristic  which  forces  itself  upon  us  with  regard
to  any  scientific  theory,  involves  a  peculiar  difficulty  when  we
consider  it  from  the  standpoint  of  th^  general  logical  demand  for
description  of  the  given.  The  theories  of  physics  gain  their  definite-
ness  from  the  mathematical  form  in  which  they  are  expressed.
The  function  of  numbering  and  measuring  is  indispensable  even  in
order  to  produce  the  raw  material  of  "facts,"  that  are  to  be  repro-
duced and  unified  in  theory.  To  abstract  from  this  function  means
to  destroy  the  certainty  and  clarity  of  the  facts  themselves.  How-
ever self-evident,  indeed  trivial,  this  connection  may  seem,  it  is
highly  paradoxical  in  principle  when  we  look  back  over  our  general
estimate  of  the  principle  of  mathematical  conceptual  construction.
It  has  become  increasingly  clear  that  all  content  belonging  to  the


116  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

mathematical  concept  rests  on  a  pure  construction.  The  given  of
intuition  forms  merely  the  psychological  starting-point;  it  is  first
known  mathematically  when  it  is  subjected  to  a  transformation,  by
which  it  is  changed  into  another  type  of  manifold,  which  we  can  pro-
duce and  master  according  to  rational  laws.  Every  such  transforma-
tion, however,  must  obviously  be  abandoned  where  we  are  merely
concerned  with  grasping  the  given  as  given  in  its  specific  individual
structure  and  properties.  For  the  purposes  of  knowledge  of  nature,
in  the  positivistic  sense  of  the  word,  the  mathematical  concept  is  not
so  much  a  justified  and  necessary  instrument  to  be  applied  along
with  experiment  and  observation  as  a  constant  danger.  Does  it
not  falsify  the  immediate  existence,  revealed  to  us  in  sensation,  to
subject  this  existence  to  the  schema  of  our  mathematical  concepts,
and  thus  to  let  the  empirical  determinateness  of  being  disappear  into
the  freedom  and  caprice  of  thought?

And  yet  this  danger,  however  clearly  it  may  be  envisaged,  is  never  to
be  avoided  or  set  aside.  No  matter  how  penetratingly  the  physicist
may  portray  it  as  empirical  philosopher,  he  directly  falls  into  it
again  as  soon  as  he  sets  to  work  as  scientific  investigator.  There  is
no  exact  establishment  of  a  time-space  fact,  which  does  not  involve
the  application  of  certain  numbers  and  measures.  One  might  over-
look the  difficulty  in  this,  if  it  were  merely  a  matter  of  the  elementary
concepts  and  structures  of  mathematics.  Although  the  first  of
Kepler's  laws  of  planetary  motion  makes  use  of  the  purely  geometrical
definition  of  the  ellipse  as  a  conic  section,  and  the  third  of  the  arith-
metical concepts  of  the  square  and  the  cube,  at  first  no  epistemological
problem  might  be  seen  in  this;  to  the  naive  comprehension,  number
and  form  themselves  appear  as  a  sort  of  physical  property,  inhering
in  things  precisely  as  do  their  color  or  their  lustre  and  hardness.
(Cf.  above  p.  28.)  The  more  this  appearance  is  destroyed  in  the
advance  of  mathematical  conceptual  construction,  the  more  strikingly
the  general  question  is  thrown  into  relief.  For  it  is  precisely  the
complex  mathematical  concepts,  such  as  possess  no  possibility  of
direct  sensuous  realization,  that  are  continually  used  in  the  construc-
tion of  mechanics  and  physics.  Conceptions,  which  are  completely
alien  to  intuition  in  their  origin  and  logical  properties,  and  transcend
it  in  principle,  lead  to  fruitful  applications  within  intuition  itself.
This  relation  finds  its  most  pregnant  expression  in  the  analysis  of  the
infinite,  yet  is  not  limited  to  the  latter.  Even  so  abstract  an  intel-


THE  CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  117

lectual  creation  as  the  system  of  complex  numbers  offers  a  new
example  of  this  connection;  Kummer,  for  instance,  has  developed
the  thought  that  the  relations,  which  prevail  within  this  system,
possess  their  concrete  substratum  in  the  relations  of  chemical  combina-
tion. "Chemical  combination  corresponds  to  the  multiplication  of  the
complex  numbers;  the  elements,  or  more  exactly  the  atomic  weights
of  the  same,  correspond  to  the  prime  factors;  and  the  chemical
formulae  for  the  analysis  of  bodies  are  exactly  the  same  as  the
formulae  for  the  analysis  of  numbers.  Even  the  ideal  numbers  of
our  theory  are  found  in  chemistry,  perhaps  only  too  often,  as  hypo-
thetical radicals,  which  have  hitherto  not  been  analysed,  but  which,

like  the  ideal  numbers,  have  their  reality  in  compounds

The  analogies  here  indicated  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  mere  play  of
wit,  but  have  their  justification  in  the  fact  that  chemistry,  as  well
as  the  part  of  the  number  theory  here  considered,  have  both  the
same  fundamental  concept  as  their  principle,  namely,  that  of  com-
position, although  in  different  spheres  of  being."1  The  real  problem
is,  however,  precisely  this  transference  of  structures,  whose  whole
content  is  rooted  in  a  connection  of  purely  ideal  constructions,  to
the  sphere  of  concrete  factual  being.  Even  here  it  appears  that  it  is
upon  a  peculiar  interweaving  of  "real"  and  "not-real"  elements,
that  every  scientific  theory  rests.  As  soon  as  we  take  one  step
beyond  the  first  na'ive  observation  of  isolated  facts,  as  soon  as  we
ask  about  the  connection  and  law  of  the  real,  we  have  transcended  the
strict  limits  prescribed  by  the  positivistic  demand.  In  order  even  to
indicate  this  connection  and  law  clearly  and  adequately,  we  must  go
back  to  a  system  that  develops  only  universal  hypothetical  connec-
tions of  grounds  and  consequences,  and  which  renounces  in  principle
the  "reality"  of  its  elements.  That  form  of  knowledge,  whose  task
is  to  describe  the  real  and  lay  bare  its  finest  threads,  begins  by
turning  aside  from  this  very  reality  and  substituting  for  it  the
symbols  of  number  and  magnitude.

Mechanism  and  the  concept  of  motion.  The  first  phase  of  the
scientific  theory  of  nature  clearly  expresses  this.  The  exact
concept  of  nature  is  rooted  in  the  thought  of  mechanism,  and
can  only  be  reached  on  the  basis  of  this  thought.  The  explanation
of  nature,  in  its  later  development,  may  attempt  to  free  itself  from

»  Crelle's  Journal,  Vol .  35,  p.  360.  Cited  by  Hankel,  Theorie  der  komplexen
Zahlensysteme,  p.  104.


118  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

this  first  schema  and  to  replace  it  by  one  broader  and  more  universal;
nevertheless,  motion  and  its  laws  remain  the  real  problem  in  connec-
tion with  which  knowledge  first  becomes  clear  regarding  itself  and
its  task.  Reality  is  perfectly  understood  as  soon  as  it  is  reduced
to  a  system  of  motions.  This  reduction,  however,  can  never  be
accomplished  as  long  as  consideration  remains  in  the  sphere  of  mere
data  of  perception.  Motion,  in  the  universal  scientific  sense,  is
nothing  but  a  certain  relation  into  which  space  and  time  enter.
Space  and  time  themselves,  however,  are  assumed  as  members  of
this  relation  not  in  their  immediate,  psychological  and  "phenomenal"
properties,  but  in  their  strict  mathematical  meaning.  As  long  as  we
understand  by  space  nothing  else  than  a  sum  of  various  visual  and
tactual  impressions,  qualitatively  different  from  each  other  according
to  the  special  physiological  conditions  under  which  they  come  into
existence,  no  "motion"  is  possible  in  it  in  the  sense  of  exact  physics.
This  latter  demands  the  continuous  and  homogeneous  space  of  pure
geometry  as  a  foundation;  continuity  and  uniformity,  however,
never  belong  to  the  coexistence  of  the  sensuous  impression  itself,
but  only  to  those  forms  of  manifold,  into  which  we  constructively
transform  it  by  certain  intellectual  postulates.  (Cf.  above  p.  105.)
Thus,  from  the  beginning,  motion  itself  is  also  drawn  into  this  circle
of  purely  conceptual  determinations.  It  is  only  in  appearance  that
it  forms  a  direct  fact  of  perception,  indeed  the  fundamental  fact,
which  all  outer  observation  first  presents  us.  Perhaps  the  change  of
sensations,  i.e.,  the  qualitative  difference  of  successive  presentations
may  be  conceived  in  this  way;  but  this  aspect  alone  is  in  no  sense
sufficient  to  ground  the  strict  concept  of  motion,  that  is  needed  by
mechanics.  Here  unity  is  demanded  along  with  diversity,  identity
along  with  change;  and  this  identity  is  never  provided  by  mere  obser-
vation, but  involves  a  characteristic  function  of  thought.  The
individual  positions  of  Mars,  which  Kepler  took  as  a  bpsis,  following
the  observations  of  Tycho  de  Brahe,  do  not  in  themselves  aione
contain  the  thought  of  the  orbit  of  Mars;  and  all  heaping  up  of  partic-
ular positions  could  not  lead  to  this  thought,  if  there  were  not  active
from  the  beginning  ideal  presuppositions  through  which  the  gaps  of
actual  perception  are  supplemented.  What  sensation  offers  is  and
remains  a  plurality  of  luminous  points  in  the  heavens;  it  is  only  the
pure  mathematical  concept  of  the  ellipse,  which  has  to  have  been
previously  conceived,  which  transforms  this  discrete  aggregate  into


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  119

a  continuous  system.  Every  assertion  concerning  the  unitary  path
of  a  moving  body  involves  the  assumption  of  an  infinity  of  possible
places;  however,  the  infinite  obviously  cannot  be  perceived  as  such,
but  first  arises  in  intellectual  synthesis  and  in  the  anticipation  of  a
universal  law.  Motion  is  gained  as  a  scientific  fact  only  after  we
produce  by  this  law  a  determination  that  includes  the  totality  of  the
space  and  time  points,  which  can  be  constructively  generated,  in  so
far  as  this  determination  coordinates  to  every  moment  of  continuous
time  one  and  only  one  position  of  the  body  in  space.

Thus,  from  a  new  angle  it  is  revealed  that  even  the  first  approach
to  mechanics  depends  upon  presuppositions,  which  go  beyond  possible
sensuous  experience.  The  well-known  definition  of  Kirchoff,  which
defined  the  task  of  mechanics  as  the  complete  and  unambiguous
description  of  the  movements  taking  place  in  nature,  may  be  entirely
justified  in  the  meaning  which  its  author  connected  with  it,  yet
without  the  philosophical  consequences  that  are  ordinarily  drawn
from  it  being  thereby  justified.  Kirchoff  himself  leaves  no  doubt
that  the  "description,"  at  which  he  aimed,  has  the  exact  mathemati-
cal equations  of  motion  as  a  presupposition,  and  in  them  is  involved
the  concepts  of  the  material  point,  of  uniform  and  variable  velocity
as  well  as  uniform  acceleration.  All  these  concepts  may  justifiably
serve  the  mathematical  physicist  as  fixed  and  immediate  data;
but  they  are  in  no  way  such  for  the  epistemologist.  For  the  latter,  a
"nature"  exists  in  which  movements  are  found  as  describable  objects
only  as  a  result  of  a  thorough  intellectual  transformation  of  the  given.
This  mathematical  transformation,  which  the  physicist  assumes  to
have  taken  place,  constitutes  the  real  and  original  problem.  If  the
thought  of  the  continuity  and  uniformity  of  space,  as  well  as  the
exact  concepts  of  velocity  and  acceleration,  are  grasped  and  grounded,
then  with  the  help  of  this  logical  material  the  totality  of  possible
phenomena  of  motion  can  be  completely  surveyed  and  mastered  in
its  form; but  the  question  arises  all  the  more  urgently  as  to  the  intel-
lectual means  by  which  this  result  is  reached.

The  "subject"  of  motion.  This  ideal  dependence  stands  out  most
sharply  when  we  pass  from  the  process  of  movement  to  the
subject  of  movement.  Again  it  seems  as  if  this  subject  could  be
directly  pointed  out  in  perception;  it  is  body,  it  is  a  complex  of
tangible  and  visible  qualities,  to  which  motion  is  ascribed  as  a
property.  Even  at  this  point,  however,  sharper  conceptual  analysis


120  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

meets  peculiar  difficulties.  In  order  to  serve  as  the  subject  of  move-
ment, the  empirical  body  must  be  definitely  determined,  distinguished
and  limited  from  all  other  structures.  As  long  as  it  is  not  enclosed  in
fixed  and  unchanging  limits,  by  which  it  is  separated  from  its  sur-
roundings and  recognized  as  a  whole  of  individual  form, — so  long  it  is
unable  to  furnish  a  constant  point  of  reference  for  change.  Yet  the
bodies  of  our  world  of  perception  never  satisfy  this  condition.  They
owe  their  determinateness  merely  to  a  first  and  superficial  unifica-
tion, wherewith  we  unite  into  a  whole  parts  of  space  that  seem  to
possess  approximately  the  same  sensuous  properties.  Where  such  a
unity  begins  and  ends  can  never  be  determined  with  absolute  exacti-
tude; a  keener  faculty  of  sensuous  discrimination  would  show  us,
at  the  point  where  two  different  bodies  seem  to  be  in  contact,  a  con-
stant reciprocal  exchange  of  parts  and  thus  a  continuous  movement
of  the  limiting  surfaces.  Only  when  we  ascribe  a  strict  geometrical
form  to  the  body  and  thus  raise  it  from  the  sphere  of  the  merely
perceptible  to  the  determinateness  of  the  concept,  does  it  attain  that
identity,  which  makes  it  useful  as  the  "bearer"  of  motion.  And
as  exact  limitation  of  the  body  is  required  with  respect  to  all  elements
of  its  outer  surroundings,  so  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  to  be  demanded
that  it  represent  a  strict  unity  in  itself.  As  soon  as  we  think  of  its
individual  parts  as  movable  with  relation  to  each  other,  the  supreme
condition  of  the  definiteness  of  the  point  of  reference  is  again  aban-
doned; in  place  of  the  one  movement  have  been  substituted  as  many
different  movements  as  there  are  independently  moving  particles.
Thus  a  system  must  be  taken  as  a  basis,  which  is  closed  off  from  the
outside  and  also  is  in  itself  incapable  of  further  differentiation  and
disintegration  into  a  plurality  of  independently  moving  subjects.
The  "rigid"  body  of  pure  geometry  has  to  be  substituted  for  the
perceptible  body  and  its  limitless  changeability,  if  the  grounding  of
the  exact  theory  of  motion  is  to  be  accomplished.

The  "limiting  concept"  and  its  significance  for  natural  science.
(Karl  Pearson).  In  fact,  the  necessity  of  such  a  transformation  of
the  problem  is  recognized  and  emphasized  by  the  adherents  of  the
theory  of  "description"  themselves.  It  is  Karl  Pearson  above  all,
who  has  described  this  process  with  clearness  and  emphasis  in  his
work,  The  Grammar  of  Science.  As  he  explains,  it  is  never  the
contents  of  perceptions  as  such  that  we  can  use  as  foundations  for
the  judgments  of  pure  mechanics,  as  points  of  application  in  the


THE CONCEPTS  OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  121

expression  of  the  laws  of  motion.  Rather,  all  these  laws  can  only
be  asserted  with  meaning  of  the  ideal  limiting  structures  which  we
conceptually  substitute  for  the  empirical  data  of  sense-perception.
Motion  is  a  predicate  that  is  never  immediately  applicable  to  the
"things"  of  the  surrounding  sense-world,  but  holds  solely  of  that  other
class  of  objects,  which  the  mathematician  substitutes  for  them  in  his
free  construction.  Motion  is  not  a  fact  of  sensation,  but  of  thought;
not  of  "perception"  but  of  "conception."  "Startling  as  it  may,
when  first  stated,  appear,  it  is  nevertheless  true  that  the  mind  strug-
gles in  vain  to  clearly  realize  the  motion  of  anything  which  is  neither
a  geometrical  point  nor  a  body  bounded  by  continuous  surfaces;
the  mind  absolutely  rebels  against  the  notion  of  anything  moving
but  these  conceptual  creations,  which  are  limits  unrealizable,  as  we
have  seen,  in  the  field  of  perception."  Groups  of  sensuous  impres-
sions can  change,  can  lose  old  parts  and  gain  new,  can  form  into  new
groups;  but  these  changes  in  no  way  signify  the  real  object  of
mechanics.  "It  is  in  the  field  of  conception  solely  that  we  can
properly  talk  of  the  motion  of  bodies;  it  is  there,  and  there  only,  that
geometrical  forms  change  their  position  in  absolute  time — that  is,
move."  The  contradictions,  in  which  mechanics  often  becomes
involved  and  which  have  come  to  light  especially  in  the  attempts  to
apply  the  general  mechanical  laws  to  the  movements  of  the  ether,
can  be  explained  for  the  greater  part  by  the  fact,  that  the  two  spheres
of  knowledge  here  opposed  have  not  been  sharply  and  definitely
separated  from  each  other.  These  contradictions  disappear  as  soon
as  we  learn  not  to  confuse  immediately  sensuous  with  conceptual
elements,  as  soon  as  we  give  up  trying  to  conceive  an  intellectual
construction  for  the  establishment  of  a  scientific  order  of  phenomena,
as  itself  a  particular  phenomenal  existence.  What  we  can  alone
accomplish  in  physics  is  the  construction  of  a  world  of  geometrical
forms;  yet  these,  in  the  multiplicity  of  movements  we  ascribe  to
them,  reproduce  and  represent  with  wonderful  exactness  the  complex
phases  of  our  sensuous  experience.  As  soon  as  we  read  this  whole
thought-world  directly  into  the  sense-world  again,  as  soon  as  we
transform  its  logical  assumptions  directly  into  parts  of  reality,  which
would  thus  be  apprehended  by  sensation,  we  fall  once  more  into  all
the  antinomies  that  necessarily  inhere  in  every  type  of  dogmatism,
physical  as  well  as  metaphysical.2  All  this  exposition  of  Pearson's

*  Cf.  Pearson,  The  Grammar  of  Science,  Second  edition,  London  1900,  p.
198  ff.,  p.  239  ff.,  282,  325  etc.


122  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

is  admirable;  but  we  ask  in  vain  how,  on  these  assumptions,  mechanics
can  still  be  conceived  as  purely  descriptive  science.  Can  it  be  called
a  description  of  perceptual  contents  to  substitute  in  place  of  them  a
system  of  geometrical  ideals,  such  as  are  necessarily  foreign  to  the
world  of  our  perceptions?  If  the  task  of  a  true  "objective"  descrip-
tion is  to  conceive  the  given  as  faithfully  as  possible,  neither  adding
nor  subtracting  anything:  then,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  precisely  that
sort  of  transformation  of  the  initial  experience,  which  constitutes
the  character  and  value  of  the  intellectual  procedure  of  physics.
Instead  of  a  mere  passive  reproduction,  we  see  before  us  an  active
process,  which  transports  what  is  at  first  given  into  a  new  logical
sphere.  It  would  be  a  strange  way  of  describing  what  is  presented,
if  for  this  purpose  we  concerned  ourselves  with  bare  concepts,  which
can  themselves  in  no  way  be  "presented."

P.  du  Bois-Reymond's  theory  of  the  limiting  concept.  The  question
as  to  the  character  of  the  fundamental  concepts  of  natural  science
merges  here  into  a  more  general  problem.  We  saw  how  the  first  step
in  the  formation  of  these  scientific  concepts  was  to  introduce,  in
place  of  the  members  of  a  certain  sensuous  manifold,  the  ideal
limit  of  this  manifold.  The  justification  of  such  construction  of  a
limit  cannot  be  perfectly  demonstrated  by  natural  science,  as  long  as
it  remains  purely  within  its  sphere;  yet  the  construction  rests  on
general  logical  principles.  The  advantage  to  be  gained  from  this
reduction  of  the  question,  however,  is  slight  as  long  as  logic  and
epistemology  themselves  have  not  reached  clarity  on  this  point.
Here  more  than  anywhere  else  they  both  seem  entangled  in  insoluble
difficulties;  and  the  only  way  out  for  clear  thought  seems  to  be  not
so  much  in  resolving  the  antinomies,  which  appear  at  this  point,
as  rather  in  understanding  and  recognizing  them  in  their  insolubility.
In  fact,  this  decision  is  expressly  represented  by  a  noted  mathemati-
cian in  more  recent  times.  According  to  him,  the  consideration  of
the  concept  of  the  mathematical  limit  leads  back  to  a  fundamental
metaphysical  problem,  which,  like  all  problems  of  this  species,  is  not
to  be  solved  according  to  strict  objective  criteria,  but  according  to  the
subjective  inclination  of  the  individual  investigator.  The  "general
theory  of  functions,"  as  Paul  du  Bois-Reymond  develops  it,  illumines
this  dualism  on  all  sides;  but  disclaims  from  the  beginning  any
attempt  to  remove  it.  When  we  raise  the  question  whether  there
exists  an  exact  limit  to  a  definite  given  sequence  of  presentations,  as


THE CONCEPTS  OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  123

for  example  to  the  figures  of  a  decimal  fraction,  such  that  the  limit
possesses  the  same  existence  as  the  members  of  the  sequence  them-
selves, the  answer  we  give  cannot  be  clearly  determined  by  logical
and  mathematical  considerations  alone.  The  simple  mathematical
problem  leads  us  into  the  conflict  of  two  general  views  of  the  world,
which  stand  irreconcilably  opposed.  We  must  choose  between  these
two  views  of  the  world:  either  with  empiricism  we  must  assume  as
existent  only  what  can  be  pointed  out  as  an  individual  in  the  real
presentation,  or  with  idealism,  affirm  the  existence  of  structures,
which  constitute  the  intellectual  conclusion  of  certain  series  of
presentations,  but  which  can  never  themselves  be  directly  presented.
The  mathematician  is  not  in  a  position  to  grant  the  victory  to
either  one  of  these  fundamental  views;  all  that  he  can  and  must  do,
in  order  to  bring  clarity  into  the  foundations  of  analysis,  is  to  follow
them  to  their  ultimate  intellectual  roots.  The  solution  of  the  riddle  is
that  it  remains  and  will  remain  a  riddle.  "The  most  persistent
observation  of  our  thought-process,"  says  du  Bois-Reymond,  "and
of  its  relations  to  perception  does  not  go  beyond  showing  that  there
are  two  completely  different  interpretations,  that  have  equal  claim
to  serve  as  the  foundations  of  exact  science,  because  no  absurd
consequence  of  them  is  found,  at  least  as  long  as  we  are  concerned

with  pure  mathematics However,  it  remains  a  very

strange  phenomenon  that,  after  the  removal  of  everything  which
might  conceal  the  truth  and  when  at  last  one  might  expect  to
behold  its  image  clearly  and  definitely,  it  appears  before  us  in  double
form.  He,  who  first  noticed  through  a  transparent  crystal  the
double  image  of  a  single  object,  could  not  have  showed  it  to  his
friends  more  moved,  than  I  today,  at  the  end  of  most  careful  and
eager  reflection,  am  forced  to  develop  before  the  reader  the  double
interpretation  of  the  foundations  of  our  science."3

The  problem  of  existence.  It  is,  in  fact,  worth  while  to  seek  out  the
origin  of  this  peculiar  result;  for  here  we  stand  at  a  point,  which
represents  the  decisive  turning-point  of  all  critique  of  knowledge.
The  old  question  as  to  the  relation  of  concept  and  existence,  of  idea
and  reality,  here  meets  us  once  more  in  a  characteristic  and  original
form.  Indeed  the  suspicion  must  at  once  arise  as  to  whether  the
opposition  found  here  between  "empiricism"  and  "idealism"  repre-

1  Paul  du  Bois-Reymond,  Die  allgemeine  Funktionstheorie,  Tubingen  1882,
p.  2f.


124  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

sents  a  complete  disjunction,  whether  it  contains  within  itself  all
possible  manners  of  thinking.  In  this  case  only,  would  the  antinomy
be  insoluble;  while  if  it  could  be  shown  that  there  are  problems  wholly
removed  from  the  opposition,  which  here  serves  as  a  starting-point,
and  which  are  thus  wholly  independent  of  its  solution  in  their  logical
structure  and  validity,  the  antinomy  would  lose  its  sharpness.  In
truth,  it  appears  even  in  the  first  arguments  of  du  Bois-Reymond,
that  it  is  not  the  mathematician  but  the  philosopher  and  psychologist,
who  is  speaking  here.  What  in  the  world  could  "the  persistent
observation  of  our  thought-process  and  its  relations  to  perception"
contribute  to  the  solution  of  any  particular,  specifically  mathematical
problem?  Pure  mathematics  is  precisely  characterized  by  the  fact
that  it  abstracts  completely  from  all  such  investigation  of  the  thought-
process  and  its  subjective  conditions,  and  merely  directs  itself  upon
the  objects  of  thought  as  such  and  their  objective  logical  connection.
The  manner,  in  which  the  concept  of  existence  alone  appears  within
mathematics,  confirms  this  exclusive  direction  of  interest.  The
student  of  algebra,  who  speaks  of  the  "existence"  of  the  numbers  e
and  TT,  undoubtedly  intends  to  signify  no  fact  of  outer  physical
reality;  but  just  as  little  is  it  the  presence  of  certain  contents  of
presentation  in  any  perceiving  and  thinking  subjects,  that  is  to  be
thereby  affirmed.  If  this  were  the  meaning  of  the  assertion,  the
mathematical  standpoint  would  lack  any  means  of  testing  and
verifying  it;  for  only  experiment  and  generalizing  induction  warrant
us  in  making  a  decision  concerning  real  events  in  the  psychic  life  of
individuals.  The  existence  of  the  number  e  means  nothing  else  than
that,  within  the  ideal  number  system,  one  and  only  one  position  is
determined  definitely  and  with  objective  necessity  by  the  scries,
which  we  apply  in  its  definition.  If  we  assume  the  general  rule
1  +  \  +  12  +  r23  +  ...  (in  inf.),  then  by  it  the  systun  of  rational
numbers  is  analysed  into  two  strictly  divided  classes,  of  which  one
contains  all  elements,  that  are  ever  exceeded  by  the  series  when  it  is
carried  far  enough,  while  the  other  contains  all  those  elements,  with
which  this  is  not  the  case.  By  virtue  of  this  complete  division,  which
it  effects  in  the  field  of  rational  numbers,  the  series  gains  a  definite
relation  to  the  members  of  this  field,  since  it  stands  to  them  in  the
relation  of  "before"  and  "after,"  and  thus  of  "smaller"  and  "greater."
The  validity  of  all  those  relations  alone  justifies  us  in  speaking  of  a
"number"  e,  and  constitutes  the  entire  "being,"  the  complete  and


THE  CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  125

self-contained  existence  of  this  number.  (C/.  above  p.  61  f.)  The,
determination,  which  arises  in  this  way,  is,  although  purely  ideal,
nevertheless  in  principle  of  no  other  sort  than  the  whole  numbers  and
fractions:  since  the  value  of  e  is  just  as  strictly  and  sharply  dis-
tinguished from  that  of  any  other  number,  however  near  e  it  may
lie,  as  the  value  of  1  is  distinguished  from  the  value  of  1,000.  Here
we  do  not  appeal  in  any  way  to  the  faculty  of  separating  presentations
and  similar  particular  contents  of  perception  in  consciousness;  we
are  concerned  on  both  sides  with  pure  concepts,  which  are  sufficiently
divided  from  each  other  by  the  logical  conditions,  which  their  defini-
tion imposes  upon  them.

The  existence  of  the  limiting  point.  It  appears,  indeed,  to  be  other-
wise when  we  turn  from  the  algebraic  meaning  of  limit  to  its  geomet-
rical meaning.  The  existence  of  a  point  seems  to  be  verifiable,  in
fact,  only  by  a  procedure,  which  allows  us  to  point  it  out  in  intuition
and  to  distinguish  it  from  other  positions.  Here,  however,  certain
limits  to  further  advance  are  felt,  on  the  basis  of  the  psychological
principle  of  the  threshold  of  discrimination.  If  we  remain  at  the
standpoint  of  the  "empiricist,"  if  we  hold  to  the  belief  that  we  are
only  justified  in  assuming  a  particular  "thing,"  where  there  is  a
particular  presentation  for  its  representation  at  our  command,  then
we  see  that,  according  to  this  assumption,  the  existence  of  a  limiting
point  for  any  definite  converging  sequence  of  points  can  never  be
proved  from  the  consideration  of  the  sequence  itself.  For  example,
if  we  think  of  the  individual  numbers  of  a  convergent  series  as  repre-
sented by  points  on  the  abscissa,  then  all  these  points,  as  we  advance
further  in  the  series,  will  move  nearer  and  nearer  to  each  other,  until
finally  our  intuition  is  unable  further  to  separate  them.  After  a
certain  member,  the  terms  become  indistinguishable  and  flow  into
each  other;  we  are,  accordingly,  not  in  a  position  to  decide  finally
whether  that  point,  which  corresponds  to  the  algebraic  limit  of  the
series,  exists  as  a  particular  geometrical  individual,  or  whether  only
those  positions  possess  reality,  which  are  algebraically  expressed
by  the  members  of  the  series  itself.  "We  demand,  in  fact,  what  is
impossible,"  remarks  du  Bois-Reymond,  "if  we  demand  that  the
sequence  of  points  abstracted  from  the  given  points  shall  determine  a
point  not  belonging  to  the  given  points.  I  hold  this  to  be  so  incon-
ceivable that  I  affirm,  that  no  intellectual  labor  will  extort  from  a
brain  such  a  proof  for  the  existence  of  tfap  limiting  point,  even  if  it


126  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

united  Newton's  gift  of  divination,  Euler's  clarity  and  the  crushing
power  of  the  intellect  of  Gauss/'4

Logical  idealism  on  the  problem  of  existence.  It  is  entirely  correct
that  all  these  powers  would  not  suffice  to  produce  the  desired  proof;
for  with  the  mere  question  under  investigation  we  have  already  set
ourselves  outside  the  field  of  pure  mathematics.  To  "prove*7  the
existence  of  points,  in  the  sense  in  which  existence  is  here  taken,  will
never  be  attempted  by  anyone  who  has  ever  made  fully  clear  to
himself  even  the  critical  refutations  of  the  ontological  argument.
The  deeper  ground  of  all  the  misunderstandings  and  contradictions,
however,  lies  here  also  in  the  indefiniteness  and  ambiguity,  in  which
the  concept  of  being  is  understood.  The  "being"  of  the  geometrical
point  is  not  different  in  principle  from  that  of  the  pure  numbers,
and  belongs  to  no  other  logical  sphere.  The  construction  of  the
geometrical  manifold  takes  place,  it  was  seen,  according  to  laws
thoroughly  analogous  to  those  of  the  systematic  development  of  the
system  of  numbers.  Here  as  there  we  start  from  an  ideal  postula-
tion  of  unity,  and  here  as  there  intellectual  progress  consists  in  our
taking  up  into  the  system  all  elements,  that  are  connected  with  the
original  by  an  unambiguous  conceptual  relation  or  a  chain  of  such
relations.  We  saw  how  the  paradoxes  of  imaginary  and  infinitely
distant  points  were  solved  from  this  standpoint :  little  as  these  points
could  claim  for  themselves  any  sort  of  mysterious  "reality"  in  space,
they  proved  themselves,  on  the  other  hand,  an  expression  of  valid
spatial  relations.6  Their  being  is  exhausted  in  their  geometrical
meaning  and  necessity.  (Cf.  above  p.  83  ff.).  It  is  this  necessity
which  the  true  "idealism"  can  alone  demand  and  claim  for  the  struc-
tures of  pure  mathematics.  On  the  other  hand,  the  idealist  in  the
sense  of  du  Bois-Reymond,  goes  far  beyond  such  a  demand.  "The
fundamental  view  of  the  idealistic  system,"  we  read  htre,  "is  thus
the  real  existence  not  only  of  that  which  is  presented,  but  of  the

intuitions  necessarily  following  from  the  presentations

The  idealist  believes  in  some  sort  of  existence  (Vorhandensein)
of  unpresentable,  verbal  conclusions  of  sequences  of  presentations,
generated  by  our  thought  process."6  Here  speaks  an  "idealist,"

4  Allgemeine  Funktionenlheorie,  p.  66  f.

6  Cf.  Kerry's  pertinent  criticism  of  the  doctrine  of  P.  du  Bois-Reymond,
System  einer  Theorie  der  Grenzbegriffe,  Lpz.  and  Wien,  1900,  p.  175  ff.

6  Allgemeine  Funktionenlheorie,  p.  87.  Cf.  du  Bois-Reymond's  work,
Cbcr  die  Grundlagen  der  Erkenntnis  in  den  exakten  Wissenschaften,  Tubingen,
1800,  p.  91.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  127

who  has  permitted  his  conception  to  be  perverted  by  his  opponent
the  "empiricist,"  as  we  can  easily  see,  when  as  here  he  only  recognizes
the  existent  (Vorhanderi)  as  true.  The  whole  antinomy  unfolded
in  the  Allgemeine  Funktionentheorie  disappears  as  soon  as  we  destroy
this  confusion  of  truth  and  reality,  which  is  common  to  the  advocates
of  both  these.

Consequences  of  the  confusion  of  truth  and  reality.  The  consequences
of  this  confusion  appear  even  more  sharply  in  the  interpretation  of
the  fundamental  concepts  of  natural  science  than  in  the  purely
mathematical  discussion.  These  concepts  are  drawn  into  the  same
conflict;  they  also  continually  go  beyond  the  given,  but  this  unavoid-
able process  cannot  be  critically  justified  and  grounded.  We  cannot
abandon  the  concepts  of  the  absolutely  rigid  body,  of  the  atom  or  of
force  at  a  distance,  although,  on  the  other  hand,  we  must  give  up  all
hope  of  finding  a  direct  verification  of  them  in  any  part  of  the  outer
world  of  perception.  The  consciousness  of  the  limits  set  to  all  our
knowing  by  its  nature  and  essence  is  felt  increasingly  here.  Ever
anew  we  find  ourselves  led  to  unpresentable  elements,  which  lie
behind  the  known  and  accessible  world  of  sensuous  appearance,  and
ever  again  it  appears,  when  we  attempt  to  grasp  and  analyse  them,
that  no  intelligible  meaning  can  be  gained.  "Our  thought  is  as  if
paralyzed,  and  makes  no  progress. "  The  organ  for  reality  is  and
remains  denied  to  us.  "We  are  enclosed  in  the  box  of  our  perceptions
and  for  what  is  beyond  them  born  blind.  We  cannot  have  a  glim-
mer of  light,  for  a  glimmer  is  already  light:  but  what  corresponds
in  the  real  to  light?"7  This  radical  scepticism,  in  which  the  expo-
sition of  the  foundations  of  exact  knowledge  here  results,  is  a
consistent  and  significant  consequence.  On  the  basis  of  this
view,  in  fact,  we  possess  no  "organ"  for  the  real;  for  the  necessary
concepts,  which  form  the  real  organs  for  the  logical  interpretation
and  mastery  of  the  manifold  of  sensations,  are  transformed  into
mysterious  realities  behind  the  phenomena.

The  "idealization"  of  presentations.  If  this  transformation  is  once
understood,  however,  the  mist  is  again  dispelled,  which  threatened
to  settle  more  thickly  around  the  image  of  scientific  reality.  Indeed,
this  image  arises  first  through  a  process  of  idealization,  in  which  the
indefinite  data  of  sensation  are  supplanted  by  their  strict  conceptual

7  P.  du  Bois-Reymond.  Ober  die  Grundlagen  der  Erkenntnis  in  den  exdkten
Wissenschaften,  Abschn.  VIII.


128  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

limits.  But  the  assertion  of  the  objective  validity  of  this  process  is
not  the  same  as  the  assertion  of  a  new  class  of  objects.  "Our  field  of
thought,"  affirms  du  Bois-Reymond's  "idealist,"  "contains  not
only  the  mosaic  of  the  perceptible  and  the  images  and  concepts
deduced  from  it  by  the  process  of  thought,  thus  by  transformation
and  combination,  but  there  dwells  within  us  the  indestructible
conviction  ....  of  the  presence  of  certain  things  outside
the  system  of  presentations."8  This  proposition  is  undoubtedly
correct,  in  so  far  as  by  "system  of  presentations"  nothing  else  is
understood  than  the  mass  of  given  perceptions,  than  the  system  of
colors  and  tones,  of  tastes  and  odors,  of  pressure  and  contact  sensa-
tions. But  the  completion  of  this  "mosaic  of  the  perceptible"  cannot
take  place  by  our  simply  inserting  new  "insensible"  things  into  this
first  empirical  reality;  for  the  parts  of  the  mosaic  would  thereby,
indeed,  be  moved  together  more  closely  and  densely,  but  in  spite  of
this,  no  new  form  of  connection,  no  deeper  relation  would  be  gained.
The  aggregate  of  sensuous  things  must  be  related  to  a  system  of
necessary  concepts  and  laws,  and  brought  to  unity  in  this  relation.
This  process  of  thought,  however,  demands  really  more  than  the  mere
combination  and  transformation  of  parts  of  presentations;  it  pre-
supposes an  independent  and  constructive  activity,  as  is  most  clearly
manifest  in  the  creation  of  limiting  structures.  The  "empiricist"
also  must  accept  this  form  of  idealization; for,  without  it,  the  world  of
perception  would  not  be  merely  a  mosaic  but  a  true  chaos.  It  is  a
mere  misunderstanding  when  he  affirms  that  he  does  not  recognize
that  the  absolutely  straight  line  and  the  absolutely  exact  plane  exist,
but  only  more  or  less  straight  lines,  more  or  less  exact  planes.  For
this  very  discrimination  of  different  stages  of  exactitude  presupposes
comparison  with  the  exact  idea,  whose  fundamental  function  is  thus
here  throughout  confirmed.  The  "being"  of  the  idea,  however,
consists  in  this  function  and  needs  no  other  support  and  no  other
proof.  Also  the  ideal  concepts  of  natural  science  affirm  nothing
regarding  a  new  realm  of  separate  absolute  objects,  but  they  would
only  establish  the  inevitable,  logical  lines  of  direction,  by  which
alone  complete  orientation  is  gained  within  the  manifold  of
phenomena.  They  only  go  beyond  the  given,  in  order  to  grasp  the
more  sharply  the  systematic  structural  relations  of  the  given.

8  Allgemdne  Funktionentheorie,  p.  110  f.


THE CONCEPTS OP NATURAL SCIENCE  129

As  soon  as  the  empiricist,  along  with  du  Bois-Roymond,  character-
izes idealization  as  throughout  justifiable,  and  explains  that  he  only
refuses  to  accept  the  ideal  itself,  all  conflict  is  removed  in  principle.9
For  the  existence  of  the  ideal,  which  can  alone  he  critically  affirmed
and  advocated,  means  nothing  more  than  the  objective  logical  neces-
sity of  idealization.  That  we  are  not  here  concerned  with  such  a
necessity,  not  with  an  arbitrary  play  of  phantasy,  becomes  clearer
the  more  deeply  the  concept  of  the  object  is  analysed  into  its  condi-
tions. It  is  vain  to  interpret  the  ideal  limits,  ascribed  to  certain
sequences  on  the  basis  of  conceptual  criteria,  as  mere  verbal  conclu-
sions with  no  real  or  logical  meaning  corresponding  to  them.  "The
perfect,"  it  is  affirmed,  "can  in  no  way  be  grasped  as  a  pictorial
presentation.  Nevertheless,  as  it  enters  our  thought  and  finds
application  there,  ....  and  as  our  thought  consists  in  the
succession  of  presentations,  so  it  must  be  somehow  a  presentation,
and  it  is,  namely, — as  a  word.  The  sequence  of  objective  presenta-
tions of  what  is  exact  have,  therefore,  as  their  conclusion,  a  word  for
something  that  cannot  be  presented.7'10  This  nominalism,  however,
fails  in  the  explanation  of  the  concept  of  limit,  as  it  has  already  failed
in  the  explanation  of  the  pure  numbers.  (Cf.  above  p.  43  fT.)  For
here  precisely  the  characteristic  meaning  and  the  real  function  of  the
concept  of  limit  is  obviously  excluded.  Between  the  limit  and  the
members  of  the  series,  certain  relations  hold,  which  are  mathe-
matically fixed  and  cannot  be  arbitrarily  changed.  The  "number"
e  stands  in  certain  numerical  relations  to  the  other  numbers,  that  are
gained  from  the  partial  sums  of  the  defining  series;  it  takes  its  place
with  them  in  a  series,  in  which  the  position  of  each  element,  its
earlier  and  later,  is  unalterably  ascribed.  Is  there  any  meaning  in
asserting  that  there  are  such  relations  of  order  in  the  sequence,  in
the  greater  and  smaller  of  elements,  where  one  is  taken  as  an  actual,
psychologically  significant  image,  while  its  correlate  is  made  to  consist
of  a  mere  sound?  There  can  only  be  valid  mathematical  relations
between  ideas  and  ideas,  not  between  ideas  and  words.

The  relation  of  the  ideal  and  reality.  From  this  connection  with  the
logic  of  mathematics,  we  can  explain  and  understand  better  why  any
attempt  to  interpret  the  concepts  of  natural  science  as  mere  aggre-

9  Allgemeine  Funktionentheorie,  p.  118.

10Grundlagen  der  Erkenntnis,  p.  80;  cf.  Allgemeine  Funldionentheorie,
p.  95.


130  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

gates  of  facts  of  perception  must  necessarily  fail.  No  scientific
theory  is  directly  related  to  these  facts,  but  is  related  to  the  ideal  limits,
which  we  substitute  for  them  intellectually.  We  investigate  the
impact  of  bodies  by  regarding  the  mdsses,  which  affect  each  other,
as  perfectly  elastic  or  inelastic ;  we  establish  the  law  of  the  propagation
of  pressure  in  fluids  by  grasping  the  concept  of  a  condition  of  perfect
fluidity;  we  investigate  the  relations  between  the  pressure,  tempera-
ture and  volume  of  gas  by  proceeding  from  an  "ideal"  gas  and  com-
paring a  hypothetically  evolved  model  to  the  direct  data  of  sensation.
"Such  extrapolations/7  says  so  convinced  a  "positivist"  as  Wilhelm
Ostwald,  "are  a  procedure  very  generally  applied  in  science;  and  a
very  large  part  of  the  laws  of  nature,  especially  all  quantitative  laws,
i.e.,  such  as  express  a  relation  between  measurable  values,  only  hold
exactly  for  the  ideal  case.  We  thus  stand  before  the  fact  that  many
and  among  them  the  most  important  laws  of  nature  are  asserted  and
hold  of  conditions,  which  in  reality  in  general  are  never  found."11
The  problem  here  raised  reaches  further  than  appears  in  this  initial
formulation.  If  the  procedure  of  natural  science  only  consisted  in
substituting  the  ideal  limiting  cases  for  the  directly  observable
phenomena,  then  we  could  attempt  to  do  justice  to  this  method  by  a
simple  extension  of  the  positivistic  schema.  For  the  objects  with
which  the  theoretical  consideration  of  nature  is  concerned,  although
they  fall  beyond  the  real  field  of  empirical  perception,  seem  to
lie  on  the  same  line  with  the  members  of  this  field;  and  the  laws,  that
we  assert,  do  not  seem  to  represent  a  transformation  so  much  as  a
mere  extension  of  certain  perceptible  relations.  Yet,  in  sooth,  the
relation  between  the  theoretical  and  factual  elements  at  the  basis  of
physics  cannot  be  described  in  this  simple  way.  It  is  a  much  more
complex  relation,  it  is  a  peculiar  interweaving  and  mutual  interpene-
tration  of  these  two  elements,  that  prevails  in  the  actual  structure  of
science  and  calls  for  clearer  expression  logically  of  the  relation
between  principle  and  fact.

in

The  problem  of  the  physical  method  and  its  history.  In  epistemologi-
cal  discussion  of  the  foundations  of  natural  science,  we  often  meet  the
view  that  the  ideal  of  pure  description  of  the  facts  is  a  specifically
modern  achievement.  It  is  thought  that  here  for  the  first  time

11  Ostwald,  Grundriss  der  Natur philosophic  (Reclam),  p.  55.


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  131

physics  has  reached  true  clarity  regarding  its  proper  goal  and  intel-
lectual instruments;  while  before,  in  spite  of  all  the  wealth  of  results,
the  way  to  these  results  remained  in  darkness.  The  separation  of
"physics"  and  "metaphysics/7  the  exclusion  in  principle  of  all  factors
which  cannot  be  empirically  confirmed,  is  thought  to  be  the  decisive
product  of  the  critically  philosophical  and  most  modern  research.
This  view,  however,  signifies  a  misapprehension  of  the  continuous
course  by  which  physics  has  reached  its  present  form.  From  the
first  scientific  beginnings  of  physics,  the  problem  of  method  has
been  continually  and  vitally  important,  and  it  was  only  in  struggling
with  this  problem  that  physics  gained  full  mastery  over  its  field  of
facts.  Reflection  and  productive  scientific  work  have  never  been
strictly  separated  here,  but  have  mutually  assisted  and  illumined
each  other.  And  the  further  back  one  follows  this  reflection,  the
more  clearly  is  a  fundamental  opposition  of  viewpoints  discoverable
in  it.  This  opposition  persists  in  the  modern  expositions  unweakened ;
but  it  gains  full  sharpness  and  definiteness,  when  we  trace  it  back  to
its  general  systematic  and  historical  sources.

The  problem  of  knowledge.  (Plato.)  As  modern  investigation
has  more  and  more  destroyed  the  prejudice  that  the  scientific  use  of
experiment  was  unknown  to  the  Greeks,  so  we  can  also  indubitably
recognize  in  ancient  philosophy  the  theoretical  controversy  over  the
principles  of  empirical  knowledge.  The  conflict,  that  begins  here,
affects  the  whole  speculative  view.  It  is  expressed  in  an  incompar-
able and  unforgettable  picture  in  the  Platonic  metaphor  of  the
cave.  For  the  human  mind,  there  are  two  types  of  consideration
and  judgment  regarding  the  phenomena  of  the  world  of  sense,  phe-
nomena which  pass  across  the  mind  like  shadows.  The  one  is  satisfied
merely  with  grasping  the  sequence  of  the  shadows,  with  fixing  their
before  and  after,  their  earlier  and  later.  Custom  and  practice
gradually  enable  us  to  distinguish  certain  uniformities  in  the  sequence
of  phenomena,  and  to  recognize  certain  connections  between  them  as
uniformly  recurrent,  without  the  grounds  of  this  connection  being
intelligible  to  us.  Common  understanding  and  the  view  of  the
world  based  upon  it  do  not  need  these  reasons;  for  both  it  is  sufficient
if  they  are  able  to  predict  one  phenomenon  from  another  by  means  of
the  empirical  routine  which  they  have  made  their  own,  and  to  draw
the  phenomenon  into  the  circle  of  practical  calculation.  Philosophi-
cal insight,  however,  begins  with  a  withdrawal  from  every  such


132  SUBSTANCE  AXD FUNCTION

manner  of  consideration;  it  presupposes  the  "turning"  of  the  soul
to  another  ideal  of  knowledge.  Not  the  phenomena  in  their  bare
succession,  but  the  eternal  and  unchanging  rational  grounds,  from
which  they  proceed,  are  the  unique  object  of  knowledge.  To  grasp
these  rational  grounds,  this  realm  of  \6yoi  in  the  phenomena  them-
selves was,  indeed,  according  to  Plato,  denied  to  thought.  Whoever,
in  the  field  of  mathematics,  had  once  grasped  the  nature  of  insight
into  the  necessary,  only  turned  back  under  compulsion  to  the  con-
sideration of  a  field  in  which,  owing  to  the  flowing  and  indefinite
character  of  the  objects,  the  same  rigor  of  connection  could  never  be
reached.  In  this  sense,  empirical  knowledge  of  the  sequence  of
phenomena  is  not  the  completion  and  fulfillment  of  the  pure  knowl-
edge of  ideas,  but  only  serves  as  a  dark  background,  against  which
the  clarity  of  purely  conceptual  investigation  and  knowledge  stands
out  the  more  strongly.

The  sceptical  theory  of  knowledge.  (Protagoras,  etc.)  Furthermore,
it  is  highly  probable  that  this  opposition  signifies  no  intellectual
construction  (of  Plato's),  but  that  it  represents  with  radical  sharp-
ness a  concrete  historical  opposition,  which  was  already  developed
at  the  time  of  Plato.12  In  any  case,  the  whole  later  development  of
scientific  investigation  in  antiquity  is  dominated  by  this  Platonic
distinction.  It  is  everywhere  echoed  in  the  controversy  between  the
"empirical"  and  the  "rational"  physicians,  that  runs  through  Greek
medicine.  But  the  more  investigation  was  applied  to  the  discovery
and  establishment  of  individual  facts,  the  more  the  value  and  order
of  knowledge  was  changed.  Scientific  empiricism  expressed  itself  in
the  sceptical  theory  of  knowledge,  and  affirmed  as  its  positive  signifi-
cance arid  distinction  the  very  feature,  which  Plato  regarded  as  the
lasting  defect  of  alt  empirical  knowledge.  It  is,  indeed,  not  given  to
knowledge  to  comprehend  the  essence  of  things  from  a  universal
principle  of  reason.  •  What  remains  for  us  is  only  the  observation  of
the  customary  sequence  of  phenomena,  which  enables  us  to  use  one
phenomenon  as  the  sign  of  another.  The  task  of  science  is  fulfilled
in  grouping  and  sifting  such  signs,  each  one  of  which  awakens  in  us  a
certain  memory,  and  thus  directs  our  expectation  of  the  future  into
fixed  paths.  The  real  causes  of  occurrences  remain  unknown  to  us;
but  we  do  not  need  to  know  them,  as  the  real  and  final  goal  of  all

12  Cf.  Natorp,  Forschungen  zur  Geschichte  dcs  Erkenntnisproblems  im  Alter-
tum,  Berlin  1884,  p.  146  ff.


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  133

theory  lies  in  the  practical  consequences  of  our  action.  These
consequences  remain  essentially  the  same,  whether  we  logically
comprehend  how  one  event  issues  from  another,  or  merely  accept  the
fact  of  a  certain  empirical  coexistence  or  succession,  and  rest  in  it.

The  concepts  of  nature  and  purpose.  (Plato.)  We  recognize,
however,  in  the  case  of  Plato,  that  the  division  he  draws  between
rational  and  empirical  knowledge,13  produces  no  complete  disjunc-
tion of  the  entire  field  of  knowledge.  Empirical  knowledge,  which
is  satisfied  with  the  sequence  of  "shadows,"  is  sharply  characterized;
but  there  remains  an  indefiniteness  in  the  characterization  of  itg
ideal  counterpart.  This  fact  is  the  more  significant  since  it  has
constantly  recurred  in  the  historical  development  of  the  problem.
The  real  balance  and  division  of  the  matter  is  rendered  obscure  as
long  as  one  member  is  exactly  defined,  while  the  other  falls  into  two
different  meanings,  between  which  opinion  varies.  At  first,  Plato
opposes  to  the  bare  sequence  of  phenomena,  insight  into  their  ideo-
logical connection.  We  do  not  possess  true  knowledge  of  natural
processes  as,  long  as  we  simply  permit  them  to  run  off  before  us  as
before  an  indifferent  spectator,  but  we  first  have  true  knowledge
when  we  survey  the  total  movement  of  the  process  as  a  purposively
ordered  whole.  We  must  understand  how  one  element  demands
another;  how  all  the  threads  are  mutually  interwoven  finally  into
one  web,  to  form  a  single  order  of  the  phenomena  of  nature.  The
ethical  idealism  of  Socrates  lives  in  this  view  of  nature.  As  little  as
the  continuance  of  Socrates  in  prison  can  be  explained  by  describing
the  position  and  relation  of  his  muscles  and  cords,  without  con-
sidering the  ethical  reasons  that  determined  him  to  obey  the  law, —
just  as  little  can  an  individual  event  be  truly  understood,  as  long  as
its  place  in  the  total  plan  of  reality  is  not  clearly  distinguished.
For  example,  if  we  attempt  to  explain  the  fact  that  the  earth  moves
Freely  in  the  center  of  the  universe,  no  sensuous  connection,  no
mechanical  vortex  of  bodies  or  any  other  cause  of  the  same  sort,  can
satisfy  us;  but  "the  good  and  right"  alone  is  to  be  pointed  out  as  the
ultimate  and  decisive  basis  of  the  fact.14  Sensuous  being  must  be
reduced  to  its  ideal  reasons;  the  conclusion  of  the  world  of  ideas  is
the  Idea  of  the  Good,  into  which  all  concepts  ultimately  merge.
Another  view,  however,  is  found  in  Plato  opposed  to  this  deduction

18  Cf.  especially  Republic,  509  D  ff .
"  Cf.  Phaedo  99  f .,  109.


134  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

of  natural  phenomena  out  of  purposes.  It  is  rooted  in  Plato's
interpretation  of  mathematics,  which  is  for  him  the  "mediator"
between  the  ideas  and  the  things  of  sense.  The  transformation  of
empirical  connections  into  ideal  ones  cannot  take  place  without  this
middle  term.  The  first  and  necessary  step  throughout  is  to  trans-
form the  sensuous  indefinite,  which  as  such  cannot  be  grasped  and
enclosed  in  fixed  limits,  into  something  that  is  quantitatively  definite,
that  can  be  mastered  by  measure  and  number.  It  is  especially  the
later  Platonic  dialogues,  as  for  example  the  Philebus,  which  most
clearly  developed  this  postulate.  The  chaos  of  sense  perception
must  be  confined  in  strict  limits,  by  applying  the  pure  concepts  of
quantity,  before  it  can  become  an  object  of  knowledge.  We  cannot
rest  with  the  indefinite  "more"  or  "less,"  with  the  "stronger"  or
"weaker,"  which  we  think  we  discern  in  sensation,  but  we  must
strive  throughout  for  exact  measurement  of  being  and  process.  In
this  measurement,  being  is  grasped  and  explained.15  Thus  we
stand  before  a  new  ideal  of  knowledge,  one  which  Plato  himself
recognized  as  in  immediate  harmony  with  his  teleological  thought,
and  combining  with  it  in  a  unified  view.  Being  is  a  cosmos,  a  pur-
posively  ordered  whole,  only  in  so  far  as  its  structure  is  characterized
by  strict  mathematical  laws.  The  mathematical  order  is  at  once
the  condition  and  the  basis  of  the  existence  of  reality;  it  is  the  nu-
merical determinateness  of  the  universe,  that  secures  its  inner  self-
preservation.

Mathematics  and  teleology.  (Plato,  Aristotle,  Kepler.)  In  Aristotle
the  two  lines  of  thought  have  already  separated,  which  were  insepar-
ably connected  for  Plato.  The  mathematical  motive  recedes  into
the  background;  and  thus  only  teleology,  the  doctrine  of  final  causes,
remains  as  a  conceptual  foundation  of  physics.  The  outer  process
and  its  quantitative  order  according  to  law  merely  mirrors  the
dynamic  process,  by  which  the  absolute  substances  maintain  and
develop  themselves.  The  empirical-physical  relation  of  bodies
results  ultimately  from  their  essence,  from  the  immanent  purpose
given  them  by  their  nature,  and  which  they  progressively  strive  to
fulfill.  Thus  the  elements  are  arranged  in  the  cosmos  according  to
the  degree  of  their  affinity,  while  those  that  agree  with  each  other  in
any  quality  lie  next  each  other;  thus  each  body  retains  a  tendency
to  its  "natural  place,"  prescribed  to  it  by  its  property,  even  after  it

»  Of.  Philebus  16,  24  f.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  135

has  been  forcibly  deprived  of  this  place.  Here  the  true,  inner  causes
of  every  physical  connection  are  revealed;  while  the  mathematical
mode  of  consideration,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  attain  to  the
causes  but  only  to  the  quantities  of  being,  and  is  limited  to  the
"accidents"  and  their  sphere.  Thus  a  new  opposition  becomes
henceforth  effective  in  history.  The  unity  of  the  teleological  and
the  mathematical  methods  of  consideration,  which  still  existed  in
Plato's  system  of  nature,  is  destroyed,  and  its  place  is  taken  by  a
relation  of  superordination  and  subordination.  The  line  of  division
has  moved;  now  not  only  is  the  sensuous  observation  of  contingent,
empirical  uniformities  excluded  from  the  highest  ideal  knowledge  of
the  supreme  causes,  but  also  the  exact  representation  of  the  processes
in  pure  concepts  of  magnitude  is  excluded  from  this  ideal  knowledge.
Here  the  opposition  between  the  empirical  and  the  speculative  views
of  nature  is  first  sharply  defined.  In  modern  times,  mathematical
physics  first  seeks  to  prove  its  claims  and  independence  by  going
back  from  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle  to  that  of  Plato.  Above  all,
it  is  Kepler  of  whom  this  reversion  is  characteristic. 1<J  With  energy
and  clearness  he  repudiates  a  conception  that  would  reduce  the
mathematician  to  a  mere  calculator  and  exclude  him  from  the
community  of  philosophers  and  the  right  to  decide  as  to  the  total
structure  of  the  universe.  Absolute  substances  and  their  inner
forces  are  indeed  unknown  to  the  mathematical  physicist  and  must
remain  so,  in  so  far  as  he  simply  pursues  his  own  task,  free  from  all
extraneous  problems;  but  his  abstraction  from  this  problem  in  no
way  signifies  his  persistence  in  the  ordinary  empirical  method,  which
is  satisfied  with  the  mere  collection  of  individual  facts.  The  mathe-
matical hypothesis  establishes  an  ideal  connection  among  these  facts;
it  creates  a  new  unity  to  be  tested  and  verified  by  thought,  but  which
cannot  be  directly  given  by  sensation.  Thus  the  true  hypothesis
limits  the  field  of  mathematical  physics  to  two  different  directions.
It  expands  immediate  experience  into  theory  by  filling  up  the  gaps
left  by  direct  observation,  and  by  substituting  a  continuous  connec-
tion of  intellectual  consequences  for  isolated  sense-data.  On  the
other  hand,  it  limits  itself  to  representing  this  system  of  conse-
quences merely  as  a  system  and  dependence  of  magnitudes.  At

18  The  more  exact  evidence  for  the  following  historical  exposition  is  given
in  my  work  Das  Erkenntnisproblem  in  der  Philosophic  u.  Wissenschaft  der
neuen  Zeit,  I  258  ff .,  308  ff.,  II  322  ff.


136  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

the  same  time,  the  mathematical  expression  of  the  hypothesis,  its
algebraic-geometrical  form,  is  the  whole  of  its  meaning.  In  defend-
ing the  legitimacy  of  hypothesis,  Kepler  places  its  characteristic
function  elsewhere  than  does  the  ordinary  speculative  philosophy
of  nature.  He  is  not  concerned  with  a  transition  from  the  mathe-
matically characterized  phenomenon  to  its  absolute  causes,  but  with
a  transition  to  a  quantitative  "understanding"  of  reality  from  the
first  facts  of  perception  (before  they  have  been  conceptually  worked
over).  The  scientific  physicist  can  simply  leave  alone  the  ques-
tion as  to  the  ultimate  "forces,"  which  shape  being;  yet  all  the  more
he  must  seek  to  advance  from  a  mere  collection  of  observations  to  a
universal  "statics  of  the  universe,"  to  a  mastery  of  the  all-inclusive
harmonious  order  prevailing  in  it.  This  order  is  not  directly  seized
and  understood  by  the  senses,  but  only  by  the  mathematical  intellect.
According  to  this  view,  the  legitimate  function  of  the  concept  does
not  consist  in  revealing  a  path  to  a  new  non-sensuous  reality;  but  it
plays  its  role  in  the  conception  of  reality  of  mathematical  empiricism
(Empirie),  and  gives  it  definite  logical  form.

The  concept  of  hypothesis.  (Kepler  and  Newton.)  Physics,  how-
ever, did  not  reach  this  conception  of  its  problem  without  vacil-
lation and  difficulty.  The  particular  historical  conditions,  under
which  modern  natural  science  developed,  forced  the  negative  rather
than  the  positive  part  of  the  new  task  into  the  center  of  considera-
tion. First  of  all,  the  theory  had  to  ward  off  metaphysical  claims;
and  this  warding  off  could  only  be  accomplished  by  bringing  to  light
the  empirical  foundations  of  exact  science.  The  logical  factors,  on
the  other  hand,  remained  in  the  background  as  long  as  all  philosophi-
cal power  was  concentrated  upon  protecting  pure  experience^  from
the  incursions  of  metaphysics.  From  this,  one  understands  the
fundamental  change  in  view  between  Kepler  and  Ner.vton.  Kepler,
although  he  strongly  defends  the  claims  of  empirical  investigation
against  the  metaphysics  of  substantial  forms,  nevertheless  reverts
to  the  mathematical  teleology  of  Plato  in  his  final  conception  of  the
world.  The  mathematical  ideas  are  the  eternal  patterns  and  "arche-
types," according  to  which  the  divine  architect  ordered  the  cosmos.
Thus  the  more  deeply  we  penetrate  into  the  exact  structure  and  exact
presuppositions  of  physics,  the  more  danger  there  is  that  the  strict
line  of  division  between  experience  and  speculation  will  again  be
effaced.  Newton's  regulae  philosophandi  seek  especially  to  meet


THE  CONCEPTS  OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  137

this  danger.  Induction  is  very  definitely  characterized  as  the  only
source  of  certainty  in  physical  matters.  Observation  and  scientific
investigation  teach  us  that  those  properties,  which  can  neither  be
increased  nor  diminished  and  which  are  common  to  all  bodies,  con-
stitute in  their  totality  the  essence  of  body.  This  expression  can
thus  signify  nothing  more  than  an  empirical  generalization  of  certain
facts  of  perception.  In  this  sense,  but  only  in  this  sense,  we  can
conceive  weight  as  an  "essential"  property  of  matter;  Lc.,  we  can
grasp  it  as  such  only  in  so  far  as  we  know  of  no  experiment  which
might  occasion  us  to  doubt  its  universal  empirical  presence.  The
question  as  to  the  cause  of  the  reciprocal  attraction  of  cosmic  masses
cannot  occupy  the  real  physicist  as  such  and  lure  him  to  speculative
hypotheses;  for  attraction  is  to  him  nothing  but  a  certain  numerical
value,  which  contains  the  measure  of  the  acceleration  which  a  body
undergoes  at  each  point  of  its  path.  The  law  of  the  change  of  this
value  from  point  to  point  contains  the  answer  to  all  questions,  that
can  be  raised  with  scientific  justification  regarding  the  "nature"  of
weight.  It  is  Newton's  first  disciples  and  pupils,  who  generalize
these  explanations  and  extend  them  to  the  whole  field  of  natural
science.  The  demand  for  a  physics  without  hypotheses  first  appears
distinctly  with  them,  and  the  technical  expression  of  "description  of
phenomena"  is  first  formulated  here.  It  is  now  recognized  as  a
fundamental  failure  in  method  to  attempt  to  form  physical  explana-
tions on  the  model  of  logical  definitions;  we  make  such  a  failure  if,
instead  of  proceeding  from  the  observation  and  collection  of  indi-
vidual cases,  we  proceed  from  the  hierarchy  of  concepts  and  species.
Definitions,  which  claim  to  discover  the  ground  and  essence  of  any
natural  process,  must  be  excluded  from  physics;  they  form  no  instru-
ment of  knowledge,  but  merely  hinder  the  unprejudiced  under-
standing of  phenomena,  on  which  depends  the  whole  value  of  physics
as  a  science.

The  logical  and  ontological  "hypotheses."  Further  development,
however,  even  within  the  Newtonian  school,  showed  very  clearly
what  was  problematical  in  this  apparently  final  conclusion  of
methodology.  If  physics  should  be  forbidden  the  use  of  hypothesis
in  every  sense,  then  all  elements  would  have  to  be  removed,  which
had  no  immediate  correlate  in  the  field  of  perception.  But  the
realization  of  this  demand  would  mean  nothing  less  than  the  destruc-
tion of  the  Newtonian  mechanics  and  its  systematic  conception.


138  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

The  concepts  of  absolute  space  and  absolute  time,  which  Newton
takes  as  the  starting-point  of  his  deduction,  lose  every  legitimate
meaning  when  measured  with  the  logical  criteria,  which  Newton's
methodology  alone  permits.  And,  nevertheless,  it  is  precisely  on
these  concepts  that  the  possibility  of  distinguishing  between  real
and  apparent  motion  rests,  and  thus  the  very  concept  of  physical
reality  itself.  This  antinomy  is  insoluble  within  the  limits  of  the
Newtonian  system;  its  deeper  ground  lies  in  the  indefiniteness  with
which  the  concept  of  the  hypothesis  is  here  interpreted.  Aristotle
and  Descartes,  the  metaphysics  of  substantial  causes  and  the  first,
although  imperfect,  plan  of  a  complete  mechanical  explanation  of  the
world  are  here  alike  condemned.  There  is  a  lack  of  certainty  in
distinguishing  the  assumption  of  some  sort  of  "dark  qualities'7  of
things  from  the  fundamental  theoretical  thought,  which  is  assumed  as
a  basis  for  defining  and  limiting  the  problem  and  empirical  field  of
physics.  And  this  same  ambiguity  remains  to  some  extent  in  modern
discussion,  in  spite  of  all  attempts  at  sharper  epistemological  defini-
tion of  the  problem.  The  most  striking  expression  of  such  ambigu-
ity is  in  the  concept  of  description  itself.  For  this  term  serves  to
unite  investigators,  who  merely  agree  with  each  other  in  opposing
speculative  metaphysics,  but  who  entirely  disagree  in  their  positive
interpretations  of  the  logical  structure  of  physics.  Such  an  investiga-
tor as  Duhem,  for  instance,  forcibly  and  clearly  develops  the  idea
that  every  mere  establishment  of  a  physical  fact  involves  certain
theoretical  presuppositions  and  thus  a  system  of  physical  hypotheses,
stands  here  directly  on  the  side  of  an  "empiricism,"  which
rests  upon  a  misapprehension  of  this  fundamental  double  relation.
Thus  the  difficulty  involved  in  its  historical  development  still
persists  undiminished  in  physics.  The  necessary  and  warranted
struggle  against  ontology  leads  to  an  obscuring  of  the  simple  logical
facts.  Philosophical  criticism  must  seek  here  for  a  strict  separation
of  these  two  materially  heterogeneous  questions,  long  inseparably
connected  in  history.  The  relation  of  physics  and  logic  is  still
always  described  by  distinguished  scientific  investigators  as  if  we
still  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  conflict  between  Newton  and  Wolff,
which  stamped  its  form  on  the  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century.
This  dispute,  however,  may  be  regarded  as  settled;  for  logic,  in  its
new,  critical  form,  has  given  up  metaphysical  claims.  From  this
new  standpoint,  however,  it  is  clear  that  the  "phenomenalism"  of  a


THE CONCEPTS OP  NATURAL  SCIENCE  139

Newton  is  not  on  the  same  plane  intellectually  with  that  developed
and  advocated  by  ancient  scepticism.  The  problem  arises  to  inves-
tigate the  fundamental  differences  of  these  two  views,  which  both
agree  in  limiting  physics  to  the  field  of  "phenomena."  The  concept
of  the  phenomenon  itself  differs,  according  as  it  is  applied  to  an
indefinite  object  of  sense  perception  or  to  the  theoretically  con-
structed object  of  mathematical  physics;  and  it  is  precisely  the
conditions  of  this  construction  which  give  rise  ever  anew  to  the
epistemological  question.

IV

Robert  Mayer's  methodology  of  natural  science.  The  discoverer  of
the  fundamental  law  of  modern  natural  science  agrees  entirely
in  his  methodological  views  with  the  series  of  great  investigators
that  starts  with  the  Renaissance.  Robert  Mayer  begins  with  the
same  theoretical  definition  of  the  problem  of  physics  as  is  found  in
Galileo  and  Newton  in  the  most  diverse  applications.  The  logical
continuity  appears  unbroken,  in  all  the  material  remodeling  of
physics  introduced  with  the  principle  of  energy.  "The  most  impor-
tant, not  to  say  the  only,  rule  for  the  true  investigation  of  nature  is
this:  to  remain  persuaded  that  it  is  our  task  to  learn  to  know  the
phenomena  before  we  seek  explanations  or  ask  about  higher  causes.
Once  a  fact  is  known  on  all  sides,  it  is  thereby  explained  and  the
work  of  science  is  ended.  This  assertion  may  be  pronounced  by
some  as  trivial,  or  combated  by  others  with  ever  so  many  reasons;
yet  certain  it  is,  not  only  that  this  rule  has  been  too  often  neglected
down  to  the  most  recent  times,  but  that  all  speculative  attempts,
even  of  the  most  brilliant  intellects,  to  raise  themselves  above  facts
instead  of  taking  possession  of  them,  have  up  till  now  borne  only
barren  fruit."17  This  is  precisely  such  language  as  Kepler  used
against  the  alchemists  and  mystics  of  his  time,  or  as  Galileo  used
against  the  Peripatetic  philosophy  of  the  school.  The  question  as
to  how  heat  arises  from  diminishing  motion  or  how  heat  is  again
changed  into  motion,  is  declined  by  Robert  Mayer,  just  as  Galileo
avoided  the  question  as  to  the  cause  of  weight.  "I  do  not  know  what
heat,  electricity  etc.  are  in  their  inner  essence — just  as  little  as  I  know
the  inner  essence  of  a  material  substance  or  of  any  thing  in  general;

17  Robert  Mayer,  Bemerkungvn  uber  das  mechanische  A  equivalent  der  Warme,
(Mechanik  der  Warme,  ed.  by  von  Weyrauch,  3rd  ed.,  Stuttgart  1893,  p.  236).


140  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

I  know  this,  however,  that  I  see  the  connection  of  many  phenomena
much  more  clearly  than  has  hitherto  been  seen,  and  that  I  can  give
a  clear  and  good  notion  of  what  a  force  is."  This,  however,  is  all
that  can  be  required  of  an  empirical  investigation.  "The  sharp
definition  of  the  natural  limits  of  human  investigation  is  a  task
of  practical  value  for  science,  while  the  attempt  to  penetrate  the
depths  of  the  world-order  by  hypotheses  is  a  counterpart  of  the
efforts  of  adepts."  In  the  light  of  this  conception,  only  numbers,
only  the  quantitative  determinations  of  being  and  process  ultimately
remain  as  the  firm  possession  of  investigation.  A  fact  is  understood
when  it  is  measured:  "a  single  number  has  more  true  and  permanent
value  than  a  costly  library  of  hypotheses."18

Hypotheses  and  natural  laws.  Here  a  new  problem  of  permanent
significance  is  indicated,  along  with  the  rejection  of  the  false  problem.
A  problem  is  held  to  be  explained,  when  it  is  known  (bekannt)  perfectly
and  on  all  sides.  This  definition  must,  indeed,  be  accepted  without
limitation;  but  back  of  it  arises  the  further  question,  as  to  under
what  conditions  a  phenomenon  is  to  be  taken  as  known  in  the  sense
of  physics.  The  "knowledge"  of  a  phenomenon,  which  exact  science
brings  about,  is  obviously  not  the  same  thing  as  the  bare  sensuous
cognizance  of  an  isolated  fact.  A  process  is  first  known,  when  it  is
added  to  the  totality  of  physical  knowledge  without  contradiction;
when  its  relation  to  cognate  groups  of  phenomena  is  clearly  estab-
lished, and  finally  to  the  totality  of  facts  of  experience  in  general.
Every  assertorical  affirmation  of  a  reality,  at  the  same  time,  implies
an  assertion  concerning  certain  relations  of  law,  i.e.,  implies  the
validity  of  universal  rules  of  connection.  When  the  phenomenon
is  brought  to  a  fixed  numerical  expression,  this  logical  relativity
becomes  most  evident.  The  constant  numerical  values,  by  which
we  characterize  a  physical  object  or  a  physical  event,  indicate  nothing
but  its  introduction  into  a  universal  serial  connection.  The  indi-
vidual constants  mean  nothing  in  themselves;  their  meaning  is  first
established  by  comparison  with  and  differentiation  from  other  values.
Thereby,  however,  reference  is  made  to  certain  logical  presuppositions
which  lie  at  the  basis  of  all  physical  enumeration  and  measurement, —
and  these  presuppositions  form  the  real  "hypotheses,"  that  can  no
longer  be  contested  by  scientific  phenomenalism.  The  "true  hypoth-

18  See  Mayer's  letter  to  Griesinger  (Khinere  Schriflen  u.  Briefe,  ed.  by
Weyrauch,  Stuttgart  1893,  p.  180,  226  etc.)


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  141

esis"  signifies  nothing  but  a  principle  and  means  of  measurement.
It  is  not  introduced  after  the  phenomena  are  already  known  and
ordered  as  magnitudes,  in  order  to  add  a  conjecture  as  to  their
absolute  causes  by  way  of  supplement,  but  it  serves  to  make  possible
this  very  order.  It  does  not  go  beyond  the  realm  of  the  factual,  in
order  to  reach  a  transcendent  beyond,  but  it  points  the  way  by  which
we  advance  from  the  sensuous  manifold  of  sensations  to  the  intellec-
tual manifold  of  measure  and  number.

The  presuppositions  of  physical  "measurement"  Ostwald,  in  his
polemic  against  the  use  of  hypotheses,  has  laid  great  emphasis  on
the  difference  between  the  hypothesis  as  &  formula  and  the  hypothesis
as  a  picture.  Formulae  contain  merely  algebraic  expressions;  they
only  express  relations  between  magnitudes,  which  are  capable  of
direct  measurement  and  thereby  of  immediate  verification  by  obser-
vation. In  the  case  of  physical  pictures  (Bildern),  on  the  contrary,
all  such  means  of  verification  are  lacking.  Often,  indeed,  these
pictures  themselves  appear  in  the  guise  of  mathematical  exposition,
so  that  the  given  criterion  of  differentiation  seems,  at  first  glance,
insufficient.  But  in  every  case  there  is  a  simple  logical  procedure,
which  always  leads  to  a  clear  discrimination.  "When  every  magni-
tude appearing  in  the  formula  is  itself  measurable,  then  we  are  con-
cerned with  a  lasting  formula  or  with  a  law  of  nature;  ....
if,  on  the  contrary,  magnitudes,  which  are  not  measurable,  appear
in  the  formula,  then  we  are  concerned  with  a  hypothesis  in  mathe-
matical form,  and  the  worm  is  in  the  fruit."19  While  this  postulate
of  measurability  is  justified,  it  is  erroneous  to  regard  measurement
itself  as  a  purely  empirical  procedure,  which  could  be  carried  out  by
mere  perception  and  its  means.  The  answer  given  here  signifies
only  the  repetition  of  the  real  question;  for  the  numbered  and  meas-
ured phenomenon  is  not  a  self-evident,  immediately  certain  and
given  starting-point,  but  the  result  of  certain  conceptual  operations,
which  must  be  traced  in  detail.  In  fact,  it  soon  appears  that  the
bare  attempt  to  measure  implies  postulates  that  are  never  fulfilled
in  the  field  of  sense-impressions.  We  never  measure  sensations  as
such,  but  only  the  objects  to  which  we  relate  them.  Even  if  we
grant  to  psychophysics  the  measurability  of  sensation,  this  insight
remains  unaffected;  for  even  granting  this  assumption,  it  is  clear
that  the  physicist  at  least  never  deals  with  colors  or  tones  as  sensuous

19  Ostwald,  Vorlesungen  uber  Naturphilosophie,  Leipzig  1902,  p.  213  f.


142  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

experiences  and  contents,  but  solely  with  vibrations;  that  he  has  noth-
ing to  do  with  sensations  of  warmth  or  contact,  but  only  with
temperature  and  pressure.  None  of  these  concepts,  however,  can
be  understood  as  a  simple  copy  of  the  facts  of  perception.  If  we
consider  the  factors  involved  in  the  measurement  of  motion,  the
general  solution  is  already  given;  for  it  is  evident  that  the  physical
definition  of  motion  cannot  be  established  without  substituting
the  geometrical  body  for  the  sensuous  body,  without  substituting
the  "intelligible"  continuous  extension  of  the  mathematician  for
sensuous  extension.  Before  we  can  speak  of  motion  and  its  exact
measurement  in  the  strict  sense,  we  must  go  from  the  contents  of
perception  to  their  conceptual  limits.  (Cf.  above  p.  119  ff.)  It  is
no  less  a  pure  conceptual  construction,  when  we  ascribe  a  determinate
velocity  to  a  non-uniformly  moving  body  at  each  point  of  its  path;
such  a  construction  presupposes  for  its  explanation  nothing  less
than  the  whole  logical  theory  of  infinitesimal  analysis.  But  even
where  we  seem  to  stand  closer  to  direct  sensation,  where  we  seem
guided  by  no  other  interest  than  to  arrange  its  differences  as  pre-
sented us,  into  a  fixed  scale,  even  here  theoretical  elements  are  requi-
site and  clearly  appear.  It  is  a  long  way  from  the  immediate  sensa-
tion of  heat  to  the  exact  concept  of  temperature.  The  indefinite
stronger  and  weaker  of  the  impression  offers  no  foothold  for  gaining
fixed  numerical  values.  In  order  even  to  establish  the  schema  of
measurement,  we  are  obliged  to  pass  from  the  subjective  perception
to  an  objective  functional  correlation  between  heat  and  extension.
If  we  give  to  a  certain  volume  of  mercury  the  value  of  0  degrees,
and  to  another  volume  of  mercury  the  value  of  100  degrees,  then  in
order  to  divide  the  distance  between  the  two  points  thus  signified
into  further  divisions  and  subdivisions,  we  must  make  the  assump-
tion that  the  differences  of  temperature  are  directly  proportional  to
the  volume  of  the  mercury.  This  assumption  is  primarily  nothing
but  an  hypothesis  suggested  by  empirical  observation,  but  is  in  no
way  absolutely  forced  upon  us  by  it  alone.  If  we  go  from  solid
bodies  to  fluid,  from  the  mercury  thermometer  to  the  water  thermom-
eter, then,  for  purposes  of  measurement,  the  simple  formula  of
proportionality  must  be  replaced  by  a  more  complex  formula,  accord-
ing to  which  the  correlation  between  temperature  values  and  volume
values  is  established.20  In  this  example,  we  see  how  the  simple

10  Cf.  the  pertinent  exposition  of  G.  Milhaud,  Le  Rationnel,  Paris  1898,  p.
47  ff.


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  143

quantitative  determination  of  a  physical  fact  draws  it  into  a  network
of  theoretical  presuppositions,  outside  of  which  the  very  question  as
to  the  measurability  of  the  process  could  not  be  raised.

The  physical  "fact"  and  the  physical  "theory"  This  epistemologi-
cal  insight  has  been  increasingly  clarified  by  the  philosophical  work
of  the  physical  investigators  themselves.  It  is  Duhem  above  all,
who  has  brought  the  mutual  relation  between  physical  fact  and
physical  theory  to  its  simplest  and  clearest  expression.  He  gives  a
convincing  and  living  portrayal  of  the  contrast  between  the  naive
sensuous  observation,  which  remains  merely  in  the  field  of  the  con-
crete facts  of  perception,  and  the  scientifically  guided  and  controlled
experiment.  Let  us  follow  in  thought  the  course  of  an  experimental
investigation;  imagine  ourselves,  for  instance,  placed  in  the  laboratory
where  Regnault  carried  out  his  well-known  attempt  to  test  the  law
of  Mariotte;  then,  indeed,  we  see  at  first  a  sum  of  direct  observations,
which  we  can  simply  repeat.  But  the  enumeration  of  these  observa-
tions in  no  way  constitutes  the  kernel  and  essential  meaning  of
Regnault's  results.  What  the  physical  investigator  objectively  sees
before  him  are  certain  conditions  and  changes  in  his  instruments
of  measurement.  But  the  judgments  he  makes  are  not  related
to  these  instruments,  but  to  the  objects,  which  are  measured
by  them.  It  is  not  the  height  of  a  certain  column  of  mercury
that  is  reported,  but  a  value  of  "temperature"  that  is  estab-
lished; it  is  not  a  change  which  takes  place  in  the  manom-
eter, but  a  variation  in  the  pressure,  under  which  the  observed
gas  stands,  that  is  noted.  The  peculiar  and  characteristic  function
of  the  scientific  concept  is  found  in  this  transition  from  what  is  directly
offered  in  the  perception  of  the  individual  element,  to  the  form,  which
the  elements  gain  finally  in  the  physical  statement.  The  value  of
the  volume  which  a  gas  assumes,  the  value  of  the  pressure  it  is  under,
and  the  degree  of  its  temperature,  are  none  of  them  concrete  objects
and  properties,  such  as  we  could  coordinate  with  colors  and  tones;
but  they  are  "abstract  symbols/7  which  merely  connect  the  physical
theory  again  with  the  actually  observed  facts.  The  apparatus,
by  which  the  volume  of  a  gas  is  established,  presupposes  not  only
the  principles  of  arithmetic  and  geometry,  but  also  the  abstract
principles  of  general  mechanics  and  celestial  mechanics;  the  exact
definition  of  pressure  requires,  for  its  complete  understanding,
insight  into  the  deepest  and  most  difficult  theories  of  hydrostatics,


144  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

of  electricity,  etc.  Between  the  phenomena  actually  observed  in
the  course  of  an  experiment,  and  the  final  result  of  this  experiment
as  the  physicist  formulates  it,  there  lies  extremely  complex  intellec-
tual labor;  and  it  is  through  this,  that  a  report  regarding  a  single
instance  of  a  process  is  made  over  into  a  judgment  concerning  a  law
of  nature.  This  dependence  of  every  practical  measurement  on
certain  fundamental  assumptions,  which  are  taken  as  universally
valid,  appears  still  more  clearly  when  we  consider,  that  the  real  out-
come of  an  investigation  never  comes  directly  to  light,  but  can  only
be  ascertained  through  a  critical  discussion  directed  upon  the  exclu-
sion of  the  "error  of  observation."  In  truth,  no  physicist  experi-
ments and  measures  with  the  particular  instrument  that  he  has
sensibly  before  his  eyes;  but  he  substitutes  for  it  an  ideal  instrument
in  thought,  from  which  all  accidental  defects  such  as  necessarily
belong  to  the  particular  instrument,  are  excluded.  For  example,  if
we  measure  the  intensity  of  an  electric  current  by  a  tangent-compass,
then  the  observations,  which  we  make  first  with  a  concrete  apparatus,
must  be  related  and  carried  over  to  a  general  geometrical  model,
before  they  are  physically  applicable.  We  substitute  for  a  copper
wire  of  a  definite  strength  a  strictly  geometrical  circle  without
breadth;  in  place  of  the  steel  of  the  magnetic  needle,  which  has  a
certain  magnitude  and  form,  we  substitute  an  infinitely  small,
horizontal  magnetic  axis,  which  can  be  moved  without  friction
around  a  vertical  axis ;  and  it  is  the  totality  of  these  transformations,
which  permits  us  to  carry  the  observed  deflection  of  the  magnetic
needle  into  the  general  theoretical  formula  of  the  strength  of  the
current,  and  thus  to  determine  the  value  of  the  latter.  The  correc-
tions, which  we  make  and  must  necessarily  make  with  the  use  of
every  physical  instrument,  are  themselves  a  work  of  mathematical
theory;  to  exclude  these  latter,  is  to  deprive  the  observation  itself  of
its  meaning  and  value.21

Units  of  measurement.  This  connection  appears  from  a  new  angle,
when  we  realize  that  every  concrete  measurement  requires  the  estab-
lishment of  certain  units,  which  it  assumes  as  constant.  This
constancy,  however,  is  never  a  property  that  belongs  to  the  percep-
tible as  such,  but  is  first  conferred  upon  the  latter  on  the  basis  of

21  Cf.  the  excellent  exposition  of  Duhem,  in  which  this  connection  is  ex-
plained in  its  particulars  and  illuminated  on  all  sides.  (La  Thcorie  Physique,
son  objet  et  sa  structure,  Paris  1906.)


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  145

intellectual  postulates  and  definitions.  The  necessity  of  such  pos-
tulates is  seen  especially  in  the  fundamental  physical  problem  of
measurement,  viz.,  in  the  problem  of  the  measurement  of  time.  From
the  beginning,  the  measurement  of  time  must  forego  all  sensuous
helps,  such  as  seem  to  stand  at  the  disposal  of  the  measurement  of
space.  We  cannot  move  one  stretch  of  time  to  the  place  of  another,
and  compare  them  in  direct  intuition,  for  precisely  the  characteristic
element  of  time  is  that  two  parts  of  it  are  never  given  at  once.  Tims
there  only  remains  a  conceptual  arrangement  made  possible  by  re-
course to  the  phenomena  of  movement.  For  abstract  mechanics,
those  times  are  said  to  be  equal,  in  which  a  material  point  left  to
itself  traverses  equal  distances.  Hero  again  we  find  the  concept  of
the  mass-point,  and  thus  a  purely  ideal  concept  of  a  limit;  and  once
more  it  is  the  hypothetical  assumption  of  a  universal  principle,
which  first  makes  possible  the  unit  of  measure.  The  law  of  inertia
enters  as  a  conceptual  element  into  the  explanation  of  the  unit  of
time.  We  might  attempt  to  eliminate  this  dependence  by  going
over  from  rational  mechanics  to  its  empirical  applications,  and  seek-
ing to  establish  a  strictly  uniform  motion  in  the  field  of  the  concrete
phenomena.  The  daily  revolution  of  the  earth,  as  it  seems,  offers  the
required  uniformity  in  all  the  perfection  that  could  ever  be  taken
into  account  for  purposes  of  measurement.  The  unit  here  would  be
directly  given  us  by  the  interval,  which  lies  between  two  successive
culminations  of  the  same  star.  More  exact  consideration,  however,
renders  apparent  the  difference,  which  always  remains  between  the
ideal  and  empirical  measure  of  time.  The  inequality  of  the  stellar
days  is  what  is  rather  demanded  now,  on  the  basis  of  theoretical
considerations,  and  is  confirmed  by  empirical  reasons.  The  friction,
which  arises  from  the  continuous  change  of  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the
tides,  produces  a  gradual  diminution  of  the  velocity  of  the  rotation
of  the  earth,  and  thus  a  lengthening  of  the  stellar  day.  The  desired
exact  measure  again  eludes  us,  and  we  are  forced  to  more  remote
intellectual  assumptions.  All  of  these  gain  their  meaning  only  by
relation  to  some  physical  law,  which  we  tacitly  assume  with  them.
Thus  the  time,  in  which  the  emanation  of  radium  loses  its  radio-
activity, has  recently  been  proposed  as  an  exact  unit  of  measurement;
in  this,  the  law  of  exponents,  in  accordance  with  which  the  diminution
of  effect  takes  place,  serves  as  a  foundation.  It  is  analogous  to  this,
that  the  principles  and  theories  of  optics  are  presupposed  in  order  to


146  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

introduce  the  wave-lengths  of  certain  rays  of  light  as  the  foundation
of  the  measurement  of  distance.  What  guides  us  in  the  choice  of
units  is  thus  always  the  attempt  to  establish  certain  laws  as  universal.
We  assume  the  empirically  entirely  "equal"  stellar  days  to  be  unequal,
in  order  to  maintain  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy.
The  real  constants  are  thus  fundamentally,  it  has  been  justly  urged,
not  the  material  measuring  rods  and  units  of  measurement,  but  these
very  laws,  to  which  they  are  related  and  according  to  whose  model
they  are  constructed.22

The  verification  of  physical  hypotheses.  The  naive  view,  that
measurements  inhere  in  physical  things  and  processes  like  sensuous
properties,  and  only  need  to  be  read  off  from  them,  is  more  and  more
superseded  with  the  advance  of  theoretical  physics.  Nevertheless,
the  relation  of  law  and  fact  is  thereby  altered.  For  the  explanation,
that  we  reach  laws  by  comparing  and  measuring  individual  facts,  is
now  revealed  as  a  logical  circle.  The  law  can  only  arise  from
measurement,  because  we  have  assumed  the  law  in  hypothetical
form  in  measurement  itself.  Paradoxical  as  this  reciprocal  relation
may  appear,  it  exactly  expresses  the  central  logical  problem  of
physics.  The  intellectual  anticipation  of  the  law  is  not  contradictory,
because  such  anticipation  does  not  occur  in  the  form  of  a  dogmatic
assertion,  but  merely  as  an  initial  intellectual  assumption;  because
it  does  not  involve  a  final  answer,  but  merely  a  question.  The
value  and  correctness  of  this  assumption  are  first  shown  when  the
totality  of  experiences  are  connected  into  an  unbroken  unity  on  the
basis  of  it.  The  correctness  of  the  assumption,  on  the  other  hand,
cannot  indeed  be  assured  by  our  verifying  every  hypothesis  and
every  theoretical  construction  directly  in  an  individual  experience,  in
a  particular  sensuous  impression.  The  validity  of  the  physical
concept  does  not  rest  upon  its  content  of  real  elements  of  existence,
such  as  can  be  directly  pointed  out,  but  upon  the  strictness  of  con-
nection, which  it  makes  possible.  In  this  fundamental  character,
it  constitutes  the  extension  and  continuation  of  the  mathematical
concept.  (Cf.  above  p.  83  f.)  Thus  the  individual  concept  can

21  C/.  Henri  Poincare,  La  mesure  du  temps,  Revue  de  Metaphysique  et  de
Morale  VI,  1898.  Concerning  the  theoretical  presuppositions  of  the  determina-
tion of  units  of  measurement,  cf.  especially  Lucien  Poincare*,  La  Physique
moderne,  dtsch.  v.  BraAn,  Lpz.  1908;  and  also  Wilbois,  L'Esprit  positif,  Revue  de
Metaph.  IX  (1901).


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  147

never  be  measured  and  confirmed  by  experience  for  itself  alone,  but
it  gains  this  confirmation  always  only  as  a  member  of  a  theoretical
complex.  Its  "truth"  is  primarily  revealed  in  the  consequences  it
leads  to;  in  the  connection  and  systematic  completeness  of  the
explanations,  which  it  makes  possible.  Here  each  element  needs
the  other  for  its  support  and  confirmation;  no  element  can  be  sepa-
rated from  the  total  organism  and  be  represented  and  proved  in
this  isolation.  We  do  not  have  physical  concepts  and  physical
facts  in  pure  separation,  so  that  we  could  select  a  member  of  the
first  sphere  and  enquire  whether  it  possessed  a  copy  in  the  second;
but  we  possess  the  "facts"  only  by  virtue  of  the  totality  of  concepts,
just  as,  on  the  other  hand,  we  conceive  the  concepts  only  with  refer-
ence to  the  totality  of  possible  experience.  It  is  the  fundamental
error  of  Baconian  empiricism  that  it  does  not  grasp  this  correlation;
that  it  conceives  the  "facta"  as  isolated  entities  existing  for  them-
selves, which  our  thought  has  only  to  copy  as  faithfully  as  possible.
Here  the  function  of  the  concept  only  extends  to  the  subsequent
inclusion  and  representation  of  the  empirical  material;  but  not  to
the  testing  and  proving  of  this  material.23  Although  this  conception
has  been  obstinately  maintained  within  the  epistemology  of  natural
science,  nevertheless  there  are  many  signs  that  physics  itself  in  its
modern  form  has  definitely  overcome  it.  Those  thinkers,  also,  who
urge  strongly  that  experience  in  its  totality  forms  the  highest  and
ultimate  authority  for  all  physical  theory,  repudiate  the  naive
Baconian  thought  of  the  "experimentum  crucis."  "Pure"  experi-
ence, in  the  sense  of  a  mere  inductive  collection  of  isolated  observa-
tions, can  never  furnish  the  fundamental  scaffolding  of  physics;
for  it  is  denied  the  power  of  giving  mathematical  form.  The  intellec-
tual work  of  understanding,  which  connects  the  bare  fact  systemati-
cally with  the  totality  of  phenomena,  only  begins  when  the  fact  is
represented  and  replaced  by  a  mathematical  symbol.24

The  motive  of  serial  construction.  Yet  if  we  conceive  the  final
result  of  the  analysis  of  physical  theory  in  this  fashion,  there  remains  a
paradox.  Of  what  value  is  all  the  intellectual  labor  of  physics,  if  we
must  ultimately  recognize  that  all  the  complication  of  investigation
and  its  methods  simply  removes  us  more  and  more  from  the  concrete
fact  of  intuition  in  its  sensuous  immediacy?  Is  all  this  expenditure  of

18  Cf.  more  particularly  Erkenntnisproblem  11,  125  ff.
24  Cf.  in  particular  Duhem,  La  Thtorie  Physique,  p.  308  ff .


148  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

scientific  means  worth  while,  when  the  final  outcome  is  and  can  be
nothing  but  the  transformation  of  facts  into  symbols?  The  reproach
raised  by  modern  physics,  in  its  inception,  against  scholasticism,
that  scholasticism  replaced  the  consideration  of  facts  by  that  of
names,  now  threatens  to  fall  upon  physics  itself.  Nothing  but  a
new  nomenclature  seems  to  be  gained,  by  which  we  are  more  and
more  alienated  from  the  true  reality  of  sensation.  In  fact,  this
consequence  has  occasionally  been  pointed  out:  the  necessity,  to
which  physical  theory  tends,  has  been  opposed  to  the  evidence  and
truth,  which  comes  to  consciousness  in  the  experience  of  individual
facts.  This  separation,  however,  rests  upon  a  false  abstraction;  it  is
based  in  the  attempt  to  isolate  two  moments  from  each  other,  which
are  inseparably  connected  together  by  the  very  presuppositions  of
the  formation  of  concepts.  It  has  been  shown,  in  opposition  to  the
traditional  logical  doctrine,  that  the  course  of  the  mathematical
construction  of  concepts  is  defined  by  the  procedure  of  the  construction
of  series.  We  have  not  been  concerned  with  separating  out  the
common  element  from  a  plurality  of  similar  impressions,  but  with
establishing  a  principle  by  which  their  diversity  should  appear.
The  unity  of  the  concept  has  not  been  found  in  a  fixed  group  of
properties,  but  in  the  rule,  which  represents  the  mere  diversity  as  a
sequence  of  elements  according  to  law.  (Cf.  above  14  ff.)  A  con-
sideration of  the  fundamental  physical  concepts  has  confirmed  and
broadened  this  view.  All  these  concepts  appear  to  be  so  many
means  of  grasping  the  "given"  in  series,  and  of  assigning  it  a  fixed
place  within  these  series.  Scientific  investigation  accomplishes  this
last  definitely;  but  in  order  for  it  to  be  possible,  the  serial  principles
themselves,  according  to  which  the  comparison  and  arrangement  of
the  elements  takes  place,  must  be  theoretically  established.  The
individual  thing  is  nothing  for  the  physicist  but  a  system  of  physical
constants;  outside  of  these  constants,  he  possesses  no  means  or
possibility  of  characterizing  the  particularity  of  an  object.  In  order
to  distinguish  an  object  from  other  objects,  and  to  subsume  it  under
a  fixed  conceptual  class,  we  must  ascribe  to  it  a  definite  volume  and  a
definite  mass,  a  definite  specific  gravity,  a  definite  capacity  for  heat,  a
definite  electricity,  etc.  The  measurements,  which  are  necessary  for
this,  however,  presuppose  that  the  aspect,  with  respect  to  which  the
comparison  is  made,  has  been  previously  conceived  with  conceptual
rigor  and  exactitude.  This  aspect  is  never  given  in  the  original


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  149

impression,  but  has  to  be  worked  out  theoretically,  in  order  to  be
then  applied  to  the  manifold  of  perception.  The  physical  analysis  of
the  object  into  the  totality  of  its  numerical  constants  is  thus  in  no
sense  the  same  as  the  breaking-up  of  a  sensuous  thing  into  the  group  of
its  sensuous  properties;  but  new  and  specific  categories  of  judgment
must  be  introdiiced,  in  order  to  carry  out  this  analysis.  In  this
judgment,  the  concrete  impression  first  changes  into  the  physically
determinate  object.  The  sensuous  quality  of  a  thing  becomes  a
physical  object,  when  it  is  transformed  into  a  serial  determination.
The  "thing"  now  changes  from  a  sum  of  properties  into  a  mathemati-
cal system  of  values,  which  are  established  with  reference  to  some
scale  of  comparison.  Each  of  the  different  physical  concepts  defines
such  a  scale,  and  thereby  renders  possible  an  increasingly  intimate
connection  and  arrangement  of  the  elements  of  the  given.  The  chaos
of  impressions  becomes  a  system  of  numbers ;  but  these  numbers  first
gain  their  denomination,  and  thus  their  specific  meaning,  from  the
system  of  concepts,  which  are  theoretically  established  as  universal
standards  of  measurement.  In  this  logical  connection,  we  first
see  the  "objective"  value  in  the  transformation  of  the  impression
into  the  mathematical  "symbol."  It  is  true  that,  in  the  symbolic
designation,  the  particular  property  of  the  sensuous  impression  is
lost;  but  all  that  distinguishes  it  as  a  member  of  a  system  is  retained
and  brought  out.  The  symbol  possesses  its  adequate  correlate  in  the
connection  according  to  law,  that  subsists  between  the  individual
members,  and  not  in  any  constitutive  part  of  the  perception;  yet  it  is
this  connection  that  gradually  reveals  itself  to  be  the  real  kernel  of
the  thought  of  empirical  "reality."

The  physical  concepts  of  series.  The  relation,  that  is  fundamental
here,  can  be  illumined  from  another  standpoint  by  connecting  it
with  the  ordinary  psychological  theory  of  the  concept.  In  the
language  of  this  theory,  the  problem  of  the  concept  resolves  into  the
problem  of  "apperceptive  connection."  The  newly  appearing  im-
pression is  first  grasped  as  an  individual,  and  first  gains  conceptual
comprehension  through  the  apperceptive  interpretation  and  arrange-
ment that  it  undergoes.  If  this  reference  of  the  individual  to  the
totality  of  experience  were  lacking,  the  "unity  of  consciousness"
itself  would  be  destroyed, — the  impression  would  no  longer  belong
to  "our"  world  of  reality.  In  the  sense  of  this  conception,  we  can
characterize  the  various  physical  concepts  of  measurement  evolved
by  scientific  theory  as  the  real  and  necessary  apperceptive  concepts


150  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

for  all  empirical  knowledge  in  general.  Without  them,  indeed,  it
has  been  shown  there  is  no  arrangement  of  the  factual  in  series,  and
thus  no  thorough  reciprocal  determination  among  its  individual
members.  We  would  only  possess  the  fact  as  an  individual  subject,
without  being  able  to  give  any  predicate  for  determining  it  more
closely.  It  is  only  when  we  bring  the  given  under  some  norm  of
measurement,  that  it  gains  fixed  shape  and  form,  and  assumes  clearly
defined  physical  "properties."  Even  before  its  individual  value  has
been  empirically  established  within  each  of  the  possible  comparative
series,  the  fact  is  recognized,  that  it  necessarily  belongs  to  some  of
these  series,  and  an  anticipatory  schema  is  therewith  produced  for
its  closer  determination.  The  preliminary  deductive  work  furnishes
a  survey  of  the  possible  kinds  of  exact  correlation;  while  experience
determines  which  of  the  possible  types  of  connection  is  applicable
to  the  case  in  hand.  Scientific  experiment  always  finds  several
ways  before  it,  which  theory  has  prepared,  and  between  which  a
selection  must  be  made.  Thus  no  content  of  experience  can  ever
appear  as  something  absolutely  strange;  for  even  in  making  it  a
content  of  our  thought,  in  setting  it  in  spatial  and  temporal  relations
with  other  contents,  we  have  thereby  impressed  it  with  the  seal  of
our  universal  concepts  of  connection,  in  particular  those  of  mathe-
matical relations.  The  material  of  perception  is  not  merely  subse-
quently moulded  into  some  conceptual  form;  but  the  thought  of  this
form  constitutes  the  necessary  presupposition  of  being  able  to  predi-
cate any  character  of  the  matter  itself,  indeed,  of  being  able  to  assert
any  concrete  determination  and  predicates  of  it.  Now  it  can  no
longer  seem  strange,  that  scientific  physics,  also,  the  further  it  seeks
to  penetrate  into  the  "being"  of  its  object  only  strikes  new  strata
of  numbers,  as  it  were.  It  discovers  no  absolute  metaphysical
qualities;  but  it  seeks  to  express  the  properties  of  the  body  or  of  the
process  it  is  investigating  by  taking  up  into  its  determination  new
"parameters."  Such  a  parameter  is  the  mass,  which  we  ascribe  to
an  individual  body  in  order  to  render  rationally  intelligible  the
totality  of  its  possible  changes  and  its  relations  with  respect  to  exter-
nal impulses  to  motion,  or  the  amount  of  energy,  which  we  regard  as
characteristic  of  the  momentary  condition  of  a  given  physical  system.
The  same  holds  of  all  the  different  magnitudes,  by  which  physics
and  chemistry  progressively  determine  the  bodies  of  the  real  world.28

18  C/.  the  striking  developments  of  G.  F.  Lipps,  Mytheribildung  und  Erkennt-
ms,  Lpz.  1907,  p.  211  ff.


THE CONCEPTS OP NATURAL SCIENCE  151

The  more  deeply  we  enter  into  this  procedure,  the  more  clear  becomes
the  character  of  the  scientific  concept  of  the  thing  and  its  difference
from  the  metaphysical  concept  of  substance.  Natural  science  in
its  development  has  everywhere  used  the  form  of  this  latter;  yet  in  its
progress  it  has  filled  this  form  with  a  new  content,  and  raised  it  to  a
new  level  of  confirmation.


The  concept  of  substance  in  the  Ionian  philosophy  of  nature.  The
logical  conception  of  substance  stands  at  the  pinnacle  of  the  scientific
view  of  the  world  in  general;  it  is  the  concept  of  substance,  which
historically  marks  the  line  of  distinction  between  investigation  and
myth.  Philosophy  has  its  own  origin  in  this  achievement.  The
attempt  to  deduce  the  multiplicity  of  sensuous  reality  from  a  single
ultimate  substance  contains  a  universal  postulate  which,  however
imperfectly  it  may  be  fulfilled  at  first,  nevertheless  is  the  character-
istic expression  of  a  new  mode  of  thought  and  a  new  question.  For
the  first  time,  being  is  conceived  as  an  ordered  whole,  not  guided  by
alien  caprice  but  containing  within  itself  its  principle  of  being.
At  first,  however,  this  new  conception  seeks  its  confirmation  only  in
the  sphere  of  sensuous  things,  as  they  alone  seem  to  constitute  the
fixed  positive  content  of  reality.  The  conceptual  and  critical  work
of  investigation  not  having  yet  been  conceived  or  begun,  percep-
tion offered  the  only  fixed  limit  separating  reality  from  myth-
ological and  poetic  fantasy.  Thus  it  is  some  empirically  given,
particular  material,  which  constitutes  the  meaning  of  "substance."
But  even  within  the  Ionic  philosophy  of  nature,  tendencies  begin  to
arise  that  transcend  this  conception.  Anaximander's  principle
of  the  &7T€tpov  already  rises  in  logical  freedom  above  the  sphere
of  immediately  perceptible  reality.  It  contains  indication  of  the
thought  that  what  constitutes  the  origin  of  sensuous  being  cannot
have  the  same  properties  that  it  has.  It  cannot  be  clothed  with
any  particular  material  quality,  for  all  particular  qualities  must
develop  out  of  it.  It  thus  becomes  a  being  without  definite,  sensuous,
differentiating  properties,  in  whose  homogeneous  structure  the  oppo-
sitions of  the  warm  and  the  cold,  the  wet  and  the  dry  still  lie  together
unseparated.  The  realm  of  the  material  in  general  is  not  abandoned;
it  is  rather  precisely  the  pure  abstraction  of  matter  itself  that  first
gains  clear  expression  in  the  infinite  and  indeterminate  substance
of  Anaximander.


152  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

The  hypostatization  of  sensuous  qualities.  (Anaxagoras.)  The
problem  of  the  particular  qualities  and  properties,  however,  is  not
answered  in  this  first  attempted  solution,  but  is  rather  raised  for  the
first  time.  While  the  opposites  are  to  evolve  by  "separating  out"
from  the  homogeneous  ultimate  principle,  the  manner  and  occasion  of
their  differentiation  remains  at  first  wholly  obscure.  The  question
involved  in  this  gives  the  motive  to  the  further  development  of  the
speculative  philosophy  of  nature.  The  unity,  assumed  by  Anaxi-
mander  in  his  principle  of  the  infinite,  represents  merely  a  logical
anticipation,  which  lacks  exact  foundation.  In  order  to  reach  clarity
on  this  point,  thought  must  apparently  take  the  opposite  course.
The  true  infinity  of  the  ultimate  substance  is  found  not  so  much  in
its  homogeneous  and  undifferentiated  structure,  as  rather  in  the
unlimited  fullness  and  multiplicity  of  qualitative  differences  con-
cealed within  it.  It  is  the  cosmology  of  Anaxagoras,  which  draws
out  this  tendency  to  its  conclusion.  With  Anaxagoras,  not  only  is  a
universal  principle  of  motion  first  established,  but  also  the  physical
explanation  of  the  particular  qualities  enters  on  a  new  phase.  It  is
vain  to  seek  to  deduce  the  particular  from  the  universal,  if  the  former
is  not  already  contained  in  the  latter  in  some  form.  Thus  the  mani-
fold, apparent  properties  of  bodies,  of  whose  existence  and  differences
the  senses  inform  us,  point  back  to  permanent  and  absolute  properties
of  matter  as  their  real  origin.  The  wet  and  the  dry,  the  bright  and
the  dark,  the  warm  and  the  cold,  the  thick  and  the  thin  are  all
fundamental  properties  of  things;  and  on  the  manner  and  quantita-
tive proportion  in  which  these  properties  are  mixed  with  each  other,
rest  all  the  differences  and  contrasts  between  the  composite  sensuous
substances,  such  as  air  and  water,  ether  and  earth.  All  the  elemen-
tary properties  enter  in  their  totality  into  every  composition,  and  are
to  be  thought  of  as  always  contained  in  even  the  smallest  material
part,  however  far  we  pursue  the  analysis.  What  gives  the  particular
substances  their  distinguishing  form  is  not  that  they  contain  any  one
of  the  qualitative  elements  in  isolation,  but  that  one  of  them  pre-
dominates in  the  composition,  so  that  in  ordinary  popular  considera-
tion the  remaining  factors  can  be  practically  left  out  of  account,
although  they  are  really  never  lacking.  In  this  sense,  "all  is  in  all;"
every  particle,  however  small,  even  every  physical  point,  represents  a
totality  of  infinitely  many  qualities,  which  interpenetrate  in  it.  The
detailed  working-out  of  this  theory  is  merely  of  historical  interest;


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  153

but  even  aside  from  this,  it  contains  an  element  of  typical  meaning,
which  has  frequently  come  to  light  in  the  advance  of  physics.  The
analysis  of  Anaxagoras  aims  to  go  back  of  the  concrete  sensuous
object,  as  it  is  first  offered  in  intuition,  to  its  conceptual  principles;
but  it  defines  the  content  of  these  principles  in  expressions,  which
are  throughout  taken  from  sensuous  perception.  Properties  and
oppositions  of  sensation  arc  immediately  transformed  into  substantial
causes,  which  exist  in  themselves  and  can  operate  for  themselves,
although  only  in  connection  with  other  causes  of  the  same  sort.
The  varied  multiplicity  of  sensible  qualities  is  thus  retained;  indeed,
it  is  consciously  increased  to  infinity.  To  each  of  these  properties,
which  seem  in  appearance  to  go  hither  and  thither,  to  appear  and
disappear,  there  corresponds  in  truth  an  unchanging  and  substantial
being.  For  any  sensuous  property  to  arise  newly  in  a  subject  or  to
disappear  is  a  mere  deception,  with  which  we  are  misled  by  a  super-
ficial consideration  of  things;  on  the  contrary,  each  of  these  properties
persists  and  is  only  temporarily,  as  it  were,  concealed  from  view  by
others,  whiph  seem  to  take  its  place.  Here  we  have,  in  fact,  the
characteristic  attempt  to  construe  the  permanent  being,  which
thought  demands,  without  going  beyond  the  sphere  of  the  "given."
It  is  no  longer,  as  in  the  Ionic  philosophy  of  nature,  a  particular
empirical  material  like  air  or  water,  that  represents  the  permanent
existence  of  things;  but  this  function  is  transferred  to  the  totality  of
properties,  from  which  each  body  results,  and  which  can  be  discovered
in  it  by  perception.  The  hypostatization  of  these  properties  leaves
their  nature  unchanged;  it  is  true  they  gain  thereby  a  changed
metaphysical  significance,  but  in  principle  they  do  not  go  beyond  the
character  of  the  sensuous.

The  hypostatization  of  sensuous  qualities.  (Aristotle.)  Aristotelian
physics  also  represents  no  intrinsic  change  in  this  respect.  The
fundamental  qualities  are  here  reduced  again  to  a  small  number;
instead  of  the  infinitely  numerous  "germs"  of  things,  there  are  merely
the  properties  of  warm  and  cold,  wet  and  dry,  from  the  combination
of  which  are  to  arise  the  four  elements:  water  and  earth,  air  and
fire.  The  nature  of  these  elements  determines  the  peculiarity  of  the
motions  they  undergo,  and  thereby  the  total  plan  and  order  of  the
cosmos.  Thus  the  structure  of  this  physics  also  rests  upon  the  same
procedure  of  converting  the  relative  properties  of  sensations  into
absolute  properties  of  things.  The  view  at  the  basis  of  this  comes
out  with  especial  force  and  distinctness  in  its  historical  consequences.


154  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

The  whole  of  natural  science,  especially  the  whole  of  chemistry  and
alchemy  of  the  middle  ages,  is  first  intelligible,  when  considered  in
connection  with  the  logical  presuppositions  of  the  Aristotelian  system.
The  elevation  of  qualities  into  separate  essences,  which  are  different
from  the  being  of  the  body,  and  therewith  at  least  in  principle  trans-
ferable from  one  body  to  another,  is  here  the  dominant  view.  The
properties,  which  are  common  to  a  class  of  things,  and  which  thus
furnish  the  foundation  for  the  construction  of  a  certain  generic
concept,  are  separated  off  as  physical  parts  and  raised  to  independent
existence.  The  solid  bodies  are  distinguished  from  the  fluid  and
volatile  bodies  by  the  presence  of  a  certain  absolute  and  separable
property,  that  is  immanent  in  them;  transition  to  another  state  of
aggregation  means  the  loss  of  this  quality  and  the  assumption  of  a
new  substantial  nature.  Thus  mercury,  for  example,  can  be  changed
into  gold,  if  we  successively  remove  from  it  the  two  "elements,"
on  which  its  fluidity  and  volatility  rest,  and  substitute  other  proper-
ties for  them.  In  order  to  transform  any  body  into  another,  in
general  it  is  sufficient  to  master  the  different  "natures,"  in  such  a
way  that  one  is  in  a  position  to  imprint  them  successively  on  matter.
The  transmutation  of  metals  into  each  other  is  conceived  and  repre-
sented according  to  this  fundamental  view.  We  take  from  the  partic-
ular body  its  particular  properties,  which  are  conceived  as  so  many
independent  substances  in  it;  for  example,  we  separate  from  tin  its
creaking,  its  fusibility  and  its  softness,  in  order  to  make  it  approach
silver,  from  which  it  is  at  first  separated  by  all  these  properties.
The  whole  view,  on  which  this  conception  of  nature  rests,  appears
clearly  even  in  modern  times  in  the  physics  of  Bacon.  Bacon's
theory  of  forms  goes  back  to  the  axiom,  that  what  constitutes  the
generic  common  element  of  a  group  of  bodies  must  be  somehow
present  in  them  as  a  separable  part.  The  form  of  heat  exists  as  a
peculiar  somewhat,  that  is  present  in  all  warm  things,  and  by  its
presence  calls  forth  certain  effects  in  them.  The  task  of  physics  is
exhausted  in  reducing  the  complex  sensuous  thing  to  a  bundle  of
abstract  and  simple  qualities,  and  explaining  it  from  them.  The
hypothesis  of  a  heat  substance,  like  the  assumption  of  a  special
electric  or  magnetic  fluid,  shows  how  slowly  this  conception  has  been
replaced  also  in  modern  science.28  Especially  in  the  concepts  of

18  Cf.  the  excellent  presentation  by  E.  Meyerson,  Identity  et  Rtalite,  Paris,
1908,  p.  300  ff . ;  also  Berthelot,  Lea  origines  se  I'Akhimie,  Paris,  1885,  p,  206  8.,
279  ff.,  etc.


THE  CONCEPTS OP  NATURAL  SCIENCE  155

chemistry  it  reappears  in  diverse  forms.  Every  element  of  the  older
chemistry  is  at  once  a  bearer  and  a  type  of  a  certain  striking  property.
Thus  sulphur  is  the  expression  of  the  combustibility  of  bodies;  salt,
the  expression  of  their  solubility;  while  mercury  comprehends  and
expresses  the  totality  of  metallic  properties.  It  is  always  certain
reactions  according  to  law,  for  which  a  substantial  substrate  is  directly
assumed.  The  property  of  combustibility,  which  we  seem  to  perceive
sensuously  in  a  number  of  bodies,  is  transformed  by  the  assumption
of  phlogiston  into  a  particular  substance,  that  is  mixed  with  bodies;
and  from  this  assumption,  the  whole  structure  of  chemistry  before
Lavoisier  follows  with  inner  necessity.

Atomism  and  number.  Along  with  the  development  we  have
traced  here  in  its  general  features,  there  exists  from  the  first  another
fundamental  view  of  physical  being  and  process.  Ancient  science
gave  a  perfect  expression  to  this  view  in  the  system  of  atomism.
Atomism,  through  the  mediation  of  the  Eleatic  system,  goes  back
in  its  historical  presuppositions  to  the  fundamental  concept  of  the
Pythagorean  doctrine.  The  concept  of  empty  space,  from  which
Democritus  starts,  is  directly  taken  from  the  icevbv  of  the  Pythago-
reans. Here  we  face  a  change  in  the  direction  of  thought.  Being  is
no  longer  sought  directly  in  the  sensuous  perceptible  qualities,  nor  in
what  corresponds  to  them  as  an  absolute  correlate  and  counterpart;
but  being  is  resolved  into  the  pure  concept  of  number.  On  number,
rests  all  the  connection  and  inner  harmony  of  things;  precisely  for
that  reason  number  is  to  be  characterized  as  the  substance  of  things;
for  it  alone  gives  them  a  definite,  knowable  character.  The  mystical
exaggeration,  with  which  this  thought  was  first  grasped,  gradually
ceases  with  the  advance  of  Greek  science,  till  it  finally  yields  to  a
purely  methodological  and  rational  explanation.  This  change  is
completed  in  the  atomistic  system;  what  was  an  abstract  postulate
for  the  Pythagorean,  is  here  embodied  in  a  concrete  construction  of
mechanics.  The  sensuous  properties  of  things  are  banished  from
the  scientific  picture  of  the  universe;  it  is  only  according  to
"opinion,"  only  according  to  the  untested  "subjective"  view,  that
there  is  a  sweet  and  a  better,  a  colored  and  a  colorless,  a  warm  and  a
cold.  For  the  representation  of  objective  reality,  on  the  contrary,
all  these  properties  are  to  be  cast  aside,  for  no  one  of  them  is  capable
of  exact  quantitative  determination,  and  thus  of  a  truly  unambigu-
ous definition.  Thus  only  those  properties  of  things,  that  are  deter-


156  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

minable  in  the  sense  of  pure  mathematics,  remain  as  the  "real"
properties.  The  abstract  number-schema  of  the  Pythagoreans  is
now,  however,  supplemented  by  a  new  element,  which  enables  it  to
develop  to  its  full  effect.  In  order  to  advance  from  number  to  mate-
rial physical  existence,  it  is  necessary  to  have  the  mediation  of  the
concept  of  space.  Space,  however,  is  here  taken  in  a  sense  that  makes
it  the  pure  image  of  number.  It  represents  all  the  properties,  and
fulfills  all  the  conditions  of  number.  Its  characteristic  feature,
accordingly,  is  the  absolute  uniformity  of  its  parts;  all  inner  differ-
ences are  resolved  into  mere  differences  of  position.  The  differences
existing  in  the  immediate  space  of  perception  are  wholly  removed,
so  that  each  particular  point  represents  merely  an  equivalent  starting-
point  for  geometrical  relations  and  constructions.  Now  if  the  real
is  determined  from  this  point  of  view,  nothing  remains  of  it  but
what  makes  it  a  numerical  order,  a  quantitative  whole.  Precisely
in  this  is  rooted  the  meaning  and  justification  of  the  concept  of  the
atom.  The  world  of  atoms  is  nothing  but  the  abstract  representation
of  physical  reality,  in  so  far  as  nothing  is  retained  in  this  but  pure
determinations  of  magnitude.  It  was  in  this  sense  that  Galileo,
at  the  threshold  of  modern  physics,  understood  and  founded  atomism.
He  explains,  that  in  the  concept  of  matter  nothing  else  is  fundamental
save  its  conception  as  of  this  or  that  form,  as  in  this  or  that  place,
as  large  or  small,  as  in  motion  or  rest.  From  all  other  properties,  on
the  other  hand,  we  can  abstract  without  thereby  destroying  the
thought  of  matter  itself.  No  logical  necessity  forces  us  to  conceive
matter  as  either  white  or  red,  sweet  or  bitter,  pleasant  or  evil-smell-
ing: rather  all  these  characterizations  are  mere  names  to  which  (since
they  cannot  be  reduced  to  exact  numerical  values)  there  corresponds
no  fixed,  objective  correlate.  The  substance  of  the  physical  body
is  exhausted  in  the  totality  of  properties,  which  arithmetic  and  geome-
try and  the  pure  theory  of  motion  (which  goes  back  to  them  both)
can  discover  and  establish  in  it.

The  impact  of  atoms.  However,  with  this  acceptance  of  atomism,
the  problem  is  only  raised  in  general  terms,  but  is  in  no  way  solved
completely.  For  the  atom  signifies  no  fixed  physical  fact,  but  a
logical  postulate;  it  is  thus  itself  not  unchanging,  but  rather  a  vari-
able expression.  It  is  interesting  to  trace  how,  in  the  transformations
which  the  concept  of  the  atom  undergoes  in  the  course  of  time,  the
intellectual  motive,  to  which  it  owes  its  origin,  continually  works


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  157

out  with  greater  clarity.  In  the  atom  of  Democritus,  the  dissolution
of  sensuous  determinations  is  not  fully  carried  through.  If  we  take
the  well-known  report  of  Aristotle  as  our  authority,  the  atoms  are
distinguished,  according  to  Democritus,  not  only  in  thoir  position  in
place,  but  also  in  their  magnitude  and  form;  they  possess  different
extension  and  different  form,  although  no  reason  for  this  difference
is  shown.  Yet  to  the  extent  that  the  dynamical  interaction  of  the
atoms  becomes  a  real  problem,  the  logical  necessity  appears  above
all  of  endowing  each  atom  with  an  absolute  hardness,  by  means  of
which  it  excludes  all  others  from  its  position  in  space.  The  opposition
of  the  hard  and  the  soft,  like  that  of  the  light  and  the  heavy,  is  thus
again  taken  up  directly  into  the  objective  consideration  of  nature;  a
residuum  of  the  sensible  properties  of  body  is  retained  and  put  on
a  level  with  the  determinations  discerned  by  mathematical  thought.
The  consequences  of  this  dualism  soon  become  clear  in  the  develop-
ment of  the  doctrine.  They  concentrate  into  a  real  antinomy,  when
we  consider  the  relation  that  results  between  the  physical  concept  of
being  and  the  physical  law  of  process.  This  law,  if  we  merely  consider
its  applications  to  mechanics,  demands  that  the  sum  of  energy  remain
unchanged  in  every  transference  of  motion  from  one  body  to  another.
Yet  if  we  attempt  to  apply  this  point  of  view  to  the  impact  of  atoms,
a  peculiar  difficulty  results.  If  we  consider  the  atoms  as  perfectly  hard
bodies,  then  their  properties  and  modes  of  action  are  to  be  deter-
mined according  to  the  relations  we  can  directly  observe  empirically
in  inelastic  masses;  however,  with  every  collision  of  wholly  or  par-
tially inelastic  bodies,  there  appears  a  certain  loss  of  energy.  In
order  to  remove  this  contradiction  of  the  law  of  the  conservation  of
energy,  the  theory  must  assume  that  a  portion  of  the  energy  has
gone  from  the  masses  to  their  parts,  that  "molar"  energy  has  been
changed  into  ' 'molecular. "  But  this  explanation  is  obviously  not
available  for  the  atoms  themselves,  since  these,  according  to  their
conception,  are  simple  subjects  of  motion,  and  lack  all  possibility  of
being  further  analysed  into  parts  and  subparts.

The  postulate  of  continuity,  and  the  "simpk"  atom  of  Boscovich  and
Fechner.  Kinetic  atomism  has  sought  in  various  ways  to  remove  this
contradiction  in  its  foundations,  without  ever  having  fully
succeeded.27  And  a  second  problem  no  less  difficult  results,  when

17  For  criticism  of  the  attempted  solution  of  Secchi,  according  to  which  the
lose  of  energy,  that  must  occur  in  the  impact  of  absolutely  hard  bodies,  is


158  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

we  compare  the  mechanics  of  the  atoms  with  the  demands  which
result  from  the  postulate  of  the  continuity  of  process.  The  change
of  velocity,  which  two  absolutely  hard  bodies  undergo  in  the  moment
of  their  impact,  can  only  consist  in  a  sudden  transition,  in  a  jump  from
one  magnitude  to  another,  that  is  separated  from  it  by  a  fixed,
finite  amount.  If  a  slowly  moving  body  is  overtaken  by  a  more
rapidly  moving  one,  and  they  both  advance  after  the  impact  with  a
common  velocity,  which  is  determined  by  the  law  of  the  conservation
of  the  algebraic  sum  of  their  motions,  then  this  result  can  only  be
expressed  by  our  ascribing  to  the  one  body  an  abrupt  loss,  to  the
other  an  abrupt  increase  in  velocity.  This  assumption,  however,
leads  to  the  discovery,  that  we  can  establish  no  definite  value  for  the
velocity  of  the  two  masses  at  the  moment  of  impact,  and  that  a  gap
remains  in  the  mathematical  determination  of  the  whole  process.28
The  advocates  of  extended  atoms  have  occasionally  replied  to  objec-
tions of  this  sort,  that  a  false  standard  is  applied  here  to  the  hypo-
thetical structure  on  which  mechanics  should  rest.  The  contradic-
tion merely  comes  from  the  fact,  that  the  atoms,  which  are  meant
to  be  nothing  but  rational  constructions  of  thought,  have  certain
properties  ascribed  to  them,  which  properties  are  only  deduced  from
analogy  with  the  sensuous  bodies  of  our  world  of  perception.  This
very  analogy,  however,  is  to  be  abandoned  from  the  standpoint  of
the  theory  of  knowledge.  The  norm  for  the  formation  of  the  con-
tent of  the  atom,  is  not  the  behaviour  of  the  empirical  bodies  of
our  environment,  but  the  universal  laws  and  principles  of  mechanics.
Thus  we  are  not  directed  for  this  norm  to  a  mere  vague  comparison
with  directly  observable  phenomena,  but  we  determine  the  conditions
to  be  satisfied  by  the  "real"  "subject"  of  motion,  on  the  basis  of
conceptual  postulates.  Thus  we  need  not  ask  whether  it  is  possible
or  impossible  for  absolutely  rigid  bodies  in  impact  to  satisfy  the
law  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  but  conversely  we  assume  the
validity  of  this  law  as  an  axiom,  to  which  we  are  bound  in  the  theoreti-
cal construction  of  the  atoms  and  their  movements.  The  compati-

counterbalanced  by  a  part  of  the  rotary  movement  of  the  atoms  being  trans-
formed into  progressive  movement,  cf.  Stallo,  The  Concepts  and  Theories  of
Modern  Physics,  German  edition,  Lpz.  1901,  p.  34  ff.;  For  general  criticism  of
the  concept  of  the  atom,  cf.  especially  Otto  Buek,  Die  Atomistik  und  Faraday s
Begriff  der  M aterie,  Berlin,  1905.

"  Cf.  more  particularly,  Erkenntnisproblem,  II,  394  ff .


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  159

bility  of  this  construction  with  the  other  assumptions  of  rational
mechanics  is  the  rule  that  alone  can  guide  us,  and  not  the  similarity
of  atomic  motions  with  any  processes  of  known  physical  reality.29
This  reply  is,  in  principle,  thoroughly  satisfactory;  yet  when  we  think
it  through,  we  find  ourselves  forced  also  from  the  logical  side  to
that  transformation  of  the  concept  of  the  atom,  which  natural
science  since  Boscovich  has  carried  out.  In  place  of  the  extended
but  indivisible  particle,  there  now  appears  the  absolutely  simple
point  of  force.  We  see  how  the  reduction  of  the  sensible  properties,
which  was  already  characteristic  of  Democritus,  has  here  advanced
another  step.  The  magnitude  and  form  of  the  atoms  have  now
disappeared;  what  differentiates  them  is  merely  the  position,  that
they  mutually  determine  for  each  other  in  the  system  of  dynamic
actions  and  reactions.  The  negation  of  extension  is  joined  to  the
negation  of  the  sensuous  qualities;  therewith  there  is  the  negation
of  every  determination  of  content  in  general,  by  which  one  empiri-
cal "thing"  is  distinguished  from  another.  All  independent,  self-
existent  attributes  are  now  completely  effaced;  what  remains  is
merely  the  relation  of  a  dynamic  coexistence  in  the  law  of  the  recip-
rocal attraction  and  repulsion  of  the  points  of  force.  Boscovich
urges  energetically,  and  Fechner  after  him,  that  force  itself,  as  it  is
here  understood,  resolves  into  the  concept  of  law  and  that  it  is
meant  to  be  merely  the  expression  of  a  functional  dependence  of
magnitudes.  The  atom,  which  in  its  origin  goes  back  to  the  pure
concept  of  number,  here  reverts  to  its  origin  after  manifold  trans-
formations; it  signifies  nothing  but  the  member  of  a  systematic
manifold  in  general.  All  content,  that  can  be  ascribed  to  it,  springs
from  the  relations  of  which  it  is  the  intellectual  center.

The  concept  of  the  atom  and  the  application  of  differential  equations.
The  scientific  development,  which  the  concept  of  the  atom  has
undergone  in  the  most  recent  modern  physics,  confirms  this  view
throughout.  In  the  conflict  between  atomism  and  energism,  Boltz-
maim  has  sought  to  deduce  the  necessity  of  the  atomic  hypothesis
from  the  fundamental  method  of  theoretical  natural  science,  from
the  procedure  of  applying  differential  equations.  If  we  do  not
deceive  ourselves  concerning  the  meaning  of  a  differential  equation, —
he  explains, — we  cannot  doubt  that  the  scheme  of  the  world,  that  is
assumed  with  it,  is  in  essence  and  structure  atomistic.  "On  closer

89  See  Lasswitz,  Gesckichte  der  Atomistik,  II,  380  ff.


160  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

inspection,  a  differential  equation  is  only  the  expression  of  the  fact\t
that  we  have  first  to  conceive  a  finite  number;  this  is  the  first  condi-v
tion,  then  this  number  must  increase  until  its  further  increase  is  no
longer  of  influence.  What  use  is  it  to  suppress  the  demand  for
conceiving  a  great  number  of  individuals,  when  in  the  explanation  of
the  differential  equation  tho  value  expressed  by  the  same  has  been
defined  by  that  demand?"  Thus  he,  who  believes  he  can  free  himself
from  atomism  by  differential  equations,  does  not  see  the  wood  for  the
trees.30  This  type  of  explanation  is  of  high  interest  from  the  stand-
point of  the  critique  of  knowledge;  for  the  necessity  of  the  atom  is
here  meant  to  be  deduced  not  from  the  facts  of  the  empirical  con-
sideration of  nature,  but  from  the  conditions  of  the  method  of  exact
physics.  If,  however,  this  is  the  case,  then  it  is  clear  indeed  that
the  "existence"  assured  to  the  atom  in  this  way  can  be  no  other  than
belongs  in  general  to  the  pure  mathematical  concepts.  Thus  Boltz-
mann  expressly  guards  against  the  assumption  that  the  absolute
existence  of  the  atoms  is  to  be  proved  by  his  deduction;  they  are  only
to  be  understood  and  applied  as  images  for  the  exact  representation
of  phenomena.31  Precisely  in  this  assumption,  however,  the  necessity
finally  appears  of  going  from  the  extensive  corpuscle  to  the  simple
mass-point,  if  the  "image"  is  to  gain  its  full  sharpness  and  exactitude.
The  procedure  of  the  infinitesimal  calculus,  to  which  Boltzmann
appeals,  itself  urges  this  transition.  If  we  start  with  the  presentation
of  certain  finite  magnitudes,  and  then  permit  the  latter  to  diminish
continuously  in  order  to  gain  a  point  of  application  for  the  differen-
tial equation,  this  process  only  reaches  its  mathematical  conclusion
if  we  permit  the  magnitudes  under  consideration  to  converge  toward
the  limiting  value  null;  while,  according  to  atomism,  a  constant
value  could  always  be  given,  beyond  which  the  ideal  procedure
could  not  go  without  involving  itself  in  contradictions  with  the
reality  of  phenomena.  As  long  as  we  remain  with  magnitudes  of  a
certain  extension,  we  reach  no  definite  logical  determination,  no
matter  how  small  we  may  choose  these  magnitudes.  Along  with
whatever  physical  divisibility  one  may  assume,  there  always  remains

80  Boltzmann, Vber die Unentbehrlichkeit der Atomistik, Annalen der
Physik  und  Chemie  N.  F.  Vol.  60,  p.  231  ff. (Popul&re  Schriften,  Lpz.  1905,
p.  141  ff.)

81  Cf.  Boltzmann,  Bin  Wort  der  Mathematik  an  die  Energetik  (Pop.  Schriften
p.  129  ff.)


THE  CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  161

the  intellectual  possibility  of  analysing  the  body  further,  and  of
ascribing  different  velocities  to  the  many,  distinguishable  sub-
groups. It  is  only  when  we  advance  to  the  material  point,  that  this
indefiniteness  is  done  away  with,  and  a  fixed  subject  of  motion  pro-
duced. (Cf.  above  p.  119  ff).

The  changes  in  the  concept  of  the  atom.  It  has  been  urged  from  the
side  of  energism  against  Boltzmann,  that  the  concept  of  the  material
point,  as  it  is  assumed  by  mechanics,  does  not  develop  out  of  that  of
body  by  our  abstracting  from  extension  practically  or  entirely,  but
by  our  abstracting  from  rotary  movement.  "If  we  have  to  consider
other  than  purely  forward  movements,  we  analyse  the  body  into
parts,  which  ....  have  absolutely  nothing  to  do  with  atoms,
into  elements  of  volume,  by  which  we  can  approach  the  material
point  that  only  moves  forward,  to  any  degree  of  approximation."32
Here  an  important  logical  moment  is  indicated;  the  simplicity  of  the
point  is  assumed  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  of  movement.  The
assumption  of  the  simple,  not  further  reducible  body  is  only  a
methodological  device  to  advance  to  the  abstraction  of  simple  move-
ment. In  this  sense  the  "atom,"  according  to  its  fundamental
physical  meaning,  is  not  defined  and  postulated  as  a  part  of  matter,
but  as  a  subject  of  possible  changes.  It  is  only  considered  as  an
intellectual  point  of  application  for  possible  relations.  We  analyse
complex  movements  into  elementary  processes,  for  which  latter  we
then  introduce  the  atoms  as  hypothetical  substrata.  Thus  we  are
not  primarily  concerned  with  separating  put  the  ultimate  elements  of
things,  but  with  the  establishment  of  certain  simple,  fundamental
processes,  from  which  the  variety  of  processes  can  be  deduced.  Thus
we  understand  how  the  atom,  in  its  modern  physical  application,
loses  the  aspect  of  materiality  more  and  more;  how  it  is  resolved  into
vortex  movements  in  the  ether,  which,  however,  in  accordance  with
their  character  fulfill  the  conditions  of  indestructibility  and  physical
indivisibility.  The  postulate  of  identity,  which  is  of  course  inevitable,
is  here  satisfied  not  by  any  kind  of  material  substratum,  but  by
permanent  forms  of  motion.  It  appears  that,  iii  general,  as  soon  as
any  sort  of  physical  process,  which  hitherto  passed  as  simple,  is
regarded  from  a  new  point  of  view,  by  which  it  appears  as  the  result
of  a  plurality  of  conditions,  the  substratum,  which  we  took  as  its

82  Cf.  Helm,  Die  Energetik  und  ihre  geschichtl.  Entwicklung,  Leipzig,  1898,
p.  215.


162  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

basis,  at  once  divides.  Thus  when  inertia  no  loftger  appears  as  an
absolute  property  of  bodies,  but  a  way  is  offered  to  deduce  it  from  the
laws  of  electrodynamics,  the  hitherto  material  atom  breaks  up  and
resolves  into  a  system  of  electrons.  But  the  new  unity  gained  in
this  manner  can  itself  only  be  conceived  as  relative,  and  as  thus
in  principle  changeable.  Sharper  analysis  of  physical  relations
leads  constantly  to  new  determinations  and  differentiations  within
their  subject.  Thus  we  can  say  that  the  content  of  the  concept  of
the  atom  may  be  regarded  as  changeable,  while  the  function,  which
belongs  to  it,  of  defining  the  condition  of  knowledge  at  any  given  time
and  of  bringing  it  to  its  most  pregnant  intellectual  expression,
remains  unchanged.  Only  the  point  of  application  changes;  but  the
procedure  of  postulating  a  unity  remains  constant.  The  "simplicity"
of  the  atoms  is  fundamentally  a  purely  logical  predicate;  it  is  deter-
mined with  reference  to  the  intellectual  analysis  of  the  phenomena  of
nature,  and  not  by  reference  to  our  sensuous  capacity  of  discrimina-
tion or  with  regard  to  technical-physical  means  of  analysis.  Every
advance  of  analysis,  every  process  of  bringing  a  great  field  into  a
new  connection,  (which  is  especially  possible  in  modern  physics  on
the  basis  of  phenomena  of  radio-activity)  changes  our  view  of  the
"constitution"  of  matter  and  of  the  elements  out  of  which  it  is
built  up.  The  new  unity,  which  we  define,  is  always  only  the  expres-
sion of  the  relatively  highest  and  most  comprehensive  standpoint  of
judgment,  by  which  we  grasp  the  totality  of  physical  things  and
processes  in  general.

The  concept  of  the  ether.  An  analogous  development  is  presented,
when  we  proceed  from  the  concept  of  matter  to  the  second  principal
concept  of  natural  science,  the  concept  of  the  ether.  The  difficulties,
that  arise  here  at  first,  spring  from  the  fact  that,  in  order  to  give  this
concept  a  definite  content  we  have  to  utilize  certain  properties
originally  won  through  comparison  with  the  objects  of  sense  percep-
tion. Ether  accordingly  appears  as  a  perfect  fluid,  which,  however,
possesses  certain  properties  of  perfectly  elastic  bodies.  At  first  no
fully  unified  picture  results  from  the  combination  of  these  two  aspects;
the  limiting  case  itself  presents  a  different  appearance,  according  as
we  approach  it  from  one  or  the  other  direction,  according  as  we  seek
to  reach  it  through  progressive  idealization  from  different  empirical
starting-points.  The  conflict,  that  .develops  here,  finds  its  solution
in  principle  only  when  we  resolve  to  abandon  all  direct  sensuous


THE CONCEPTS OP  NATURAL  SCIENCE  163

representation  of  the  ether,  and  to  use  it  merely  as  a  conceptual
symbol  of  certain  physical  relations.33  We  discover  a  physical
phenomenon,  as  for  example,  a  certain  effect  of  light  at  a  certain
point  of  space,  while  we  are  obliged  to  locate  its  "cause"  at  a  point  of
space  remote  from  it.  In  order  to  establish  a  continuous  connection
between  these  two  conditions,  we  postulate  a  medium  for  them  by
conceiving  the  space  between  them  continuously  filled  with  certain
qualities,  which  can  be  expressed  by  pure  numerical  values.  The
totality  of  such  numerical  determinations  is  really  the  fundamental
conception  which  we  express  in  the  thought  of  the  ether.  The
unitary  and  strictly  homogeneous  space  is  progressively  differentiated
through  our  inscribing  upon  it,  as  it  were,  a  web  of  numbers.  This
gradation  of  the  individual  positions  and  their  arrangement  into
different  mathematical-physical  series  is  what  gives  them  a  new
content.  "Empty"  space,  which  only  represents  one  principle  of
arrangement,  is  now  in  a  certain  sense  covered  over  with  a  wealth
of  other  determinations;  these,  however,  are  all  held  together  by  the
fact  that  certain  functional  dependencies  subsist  between  them.
All  that  physics  teaches  of  the  "being"  of  the  ether  can,  in  fact,  be
ultimately  reduced  to  judgments  about  such  connections.  When,
according  to  the  electro-magnetic  theory  of  light,  the  identity  is
affirmed  of  the  ether  of  light  with  that  ether  in  which  electro-magnetic
effects  are  propagated,  this  is  because  the  equations,  to  which  we  are
led  in  the  investigation  of  light  vibrations,  are  identical  in  their
form  with  those,  which  result  for  dielectric  polarization,  and  because
further  the  numerical  constants,  especially  the  constants  for  the
velocity  of  propagation,  mutually  agree.34  The  assumption  of  the
same  substratum  is  here  also  only  another  expression  of  the  thorough-
going analogy  of  the  mathematical  relations:  for  the  connections,
that  subsist  between  the  values  of  the  optical  and  electrical  constants.
The  more  inclusively  and  consciously  physics  makes  use  of  the  con-
cept of  the  ether,  the  more  clearly  it  appears  that  the  object  thus
signified  cannot  be  understood  as  an  isolated,  individual  thing  of
perception,  but  only  as  a  unification  and  concentration  of  objectively
valid,  measurable  relations.

88  C/.,  e.g.,  Pearson,  The  Grammar  of  Science,  p.  178  ff.,  262  ff.
84  See  Henri  Poincare*,  Elektrizitat  und  Optik,  German  trans.,  Berlin,  1891,
p.  159  ff.


164  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

The  logical  form  of  the  concept  of  the  physical  object.  Now  if  we
again  survey  the  changes,  which  the  scientific  concept  of  substance
has  undergone  from  its  first  speculative  beginnings,  the  unitary
goal  of  its  tendencies  stands  out  clearly.  True,  it  must  appear  as  a
genuine  impoverishment  of  reality  that  all  existential  qualities  of
the  object  are  gradually  stripped  off;  that  the  object  loses  not  only
its  color,  its  taste,  its  smell,  but  gradually  also  its  form  and  extension
and  shrinks  to  a  mere  "point."85  The  "bit  of  wax,"  which  Descartes
took  as  the  basis  of  his  well-known  analysis  of  the  concept  of  the
object,  changed  from  a  fixed,  warm,  bright,  odorous  thing  into  a
mere  geometrical  figure  of  certain  outlines  and  dimensions.  And
even  with  this  reduction,  the  intellectual  process  did  not  stop;  it  did
not  come  to  rest  until  extension  itself  had  been  dissolved  into  the  mere
appearance  of  simple  and  indivisible  centres  of  force.  This  progres-
sive transformation  must  appear  unintelligible,  if  we  place  the  goal
of  natural  science  in  gaining  the  most  perfect  possible  copy  of  outer
reality.  Every  new  theoretical  conception,  that  science  introduces,
would  then  separate  science  further  from  its  real  task;  owing  to  this
peculiar  method,  empirical  existence,  which  should  be  retained
and  verified  unfalsified,  would  on  the  contrary  threaten  to  vanish
away.  Here,  in  fact,  no  reconciliation  is  possible;  the  exactitude
and  perfect  rational  intelligibility  of  scientific  connections  are  only
purchased  with  a  loss  of  immediate  thing-like  reality.  This  recipro-
cal relation  between  reality  and  the  concepts  of  science,  however,
furnishes  the  real  solution  of  the  problem.  It  is  only  owing  to  the
fact  that  science  abandons  the  attempt  to  give  a  direct,  sensuous
copy  of  reality,  that  science  is  able  to  represent  this  reality  as  a
necessary  connection  of  grounds  and  consequents.  It  is  only

16  <?/.,  e.g.  the  description  of  the  "electron,"  thus  of  the  fundamental  element
of  "matter,"  by  Lucien  Poincar6,  La  Physique  moderne,  p.  249:  "Thus  the  elec-
tron must  be  regarded  as  a  simple  electric  charge  without  matter.  Our  first
investigations  caused  us  to  ascribe  to  it  a  mass  one  thousand  times  less  than
that  of  an  atom  of  hydrogen;  a  more  careful  study  now  shows  us  that  his
mass  was  only  a  fiction ;  the  electro-magnetic  phenomena,  which  occur  when
we  set  the  electron  in  motion,  or  permit  its  velocity  to  vary,  resemble  inertia
to  a  certain  extent,  and  this  inertia  depending  on  its  charge,  led  us  astray.
The  electron  is  thus  simply  a  definite  small  volume  at  a  point  of  the  ether,  which
possesses  special  properties,  and  this  point  is  propagated  with  a  velocity,  which
cannot  exceed  the  velocity  of  light."  Cf.  also  E.  Meyerson,  IdentitS  el  Realite,
p.  228  ff .


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  165

through  going  beyond  the  circle  of  the  given,  that  science  creates
the  intellectual  means  of  representing  the  given  according  to  laws.
For  the  elements,  at  the  basis  of  the  order  of  perceptions  according  to
law,  are  never  found  as  constituent  parts  in  the  perceptions.  If  the
significance  of  natural  science  consisted  simply  in  reproducing  the
reality  that  is  given  in  concrete  sensations,  then  it  would  indeed  be  a
vain  and  useless  work;  for  what  copy,  however  perfect,  could  equal
the  original  in  exactness  and  certainty?  Knowledge  has  no  need
for  such  a  duplication,  which  would  still  leave  the  logical  form  of  the
perceptions  unchanged.  Instead  of  imagining  behind  the  world  of
perceptions  a  new  existence  built  up  out  of  the  materials  of  sensation,
it  traces  the  universal  intellectual  schemata,  in  which  the  relations
and  connections  of  perceptions  can  be  perfectly  represented.  Atom
and  ether,  mass  and  force  are  nothing  but  examples  of  such  schemata,
and  fulfill  their  purpose  so  much  the  better^  the  less  they  contain  of
direct  perceptual  content.

"Real"  and  "not  real"  elements  in  the  concepts  of  the  physical  object.
Thus  we  have  two  separate  fields,  two  different  dimensions  as  it
were,  of  the  concept;  opposed  to  the  concepts  that  represent  an
existence,  are  the  concepts  that  merely  express  a  possible  form  of
connection.  Yet  there  is  no  metaphysical  dualism  here;  for  although
there  is  no  direct  similarity  between  the  members  of  the  two  fields,
they  reciprocally  refer  to  each  other.  The  concepts  of  order  of
mathematical  physics  have  no  other  meaning  and  function  than  to
serve  as  a  complete  intellectual  survey  of  the  relations  of  empirical
being.  If  this  connection  with  empirical  being  is  destroyed,  a
double  antinomy  arises.  Behind  the  world  of  our  experience  arises
a  realm  of  absolute  substances,  which  are  themselves  a  kind  of  thing,
yet  which  remain  inaccessible  to  all  the  intellectual  means  for  grasping
the  things  of  experience.  The  "genuinely  real"  of  physics,  the
system  of  atoms  and  forces  acting  at  a  distance,  remains  in  principle
unintelligible.  There  presses  upon  us  the  inevitable  idea  of  some-
thing existing  eternally  beyond  presentation,  something  which,
since  we  cannot  reach  into  this  "extra-phenomenal  beyond,"  we
can  never  attain.  Thus  the  world  of  immediate  experience  pales
into  a  shadow;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  that  for  which  we  exchange  it
remains  before  us  as  an  eternally  incomprehensible  riddle.  "The
manifold  forms  of  the  absolute  are  not  windows  in  our  system  of
presentations,  that  afford  a  view  into  the  extra-phenomenal  world;


166  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

they  only  show  how  impenetrable  are  the  walls  of  our  intra-phenome-
nal  prison."  Physics  itself,  in  its  continuous  and  necessary  progress,
loads  to  a  field  permanently  closed  to  research :  to  a  "terra  nunc  et  in
aeternum  incognita"™  On  the  other  side  of  the  question,  it  is  unin-
telligible how,  with  our  physical  concepts  formed  through  transcend-
ing the  "system  of  presentations,"  we  could  ever  return  to  exactly
this  system,  or  how  we  could  hope  to  master  it  on  the  basis  of  concepts
produced  in  conscious  contradiction  to  its  real  content.  All  these
doubts  are  resolved,  however,  as  soon  as  we  consider  the  physical
concepts  no  longer  for  themselves  but,  as  it  were,  in  their  natural
genealogy,  in  connection  with  the  mathematical  concepts.  In
fact,  the  physical  concepts  only  carry  forward  the  process  that  is
begun  in  the  mathematical  concepts,  and  which  here  gains  full
clarity.  The  meaning  of  the  mathematical  concept  cannot  be
comprehended,  as  long  as  we  seek  any  sort  of  presentational  correlate
for  it  in  the  given;  the  meaning  only  appears  when  we  recognize  the
concept  as  the  expression  of  a  pure  relation,  upon  which  rests  the  unity
and  continuous  connection  of  the  members  of  a  manifold.  The
function  of  the  physical  concept  also  is  first  evident  in  this  interpre-
tation. The  more  it  disclaims  every  independent  perceptible  con-
tent and  everything  pictorial,  the  more  clearly  its  logical  and  syste-
matic function  is  shown.  (Cf.  above  p.  147  ff.)  All  that  the  "thing"
of  the  popular  view  of  the  world  loses  in  properties,  it  gains  in  rela-
tions; for  it  no  longer  remains  isolated  and  dependent  on  itself  alone,
but  is  connected  inseparably  by  logical  threads  with  the  totality  of
experience.  Each  particular  concept  is,  as  it  were,  one  of  these
threads,  on  which  we  string  real  experiences  and  connect  them  with
future  possible  experiences.  The  objects  of  physics:  matter  and
force,  atom  and  ether  can  no  longer  be  misunderstood  as  so  many
new  realities  for  investigation,  and  realities  whose  inner  essence  is  to
be  penetrated, — when  once  they  are  recognized  as  instruments  pro-
duced by  thought  for  the  purpose  of  comprehending  the  confusion  of
phenomena  as  an  ordered  and  measurable  whole.  Thus  there  is
only  one  reality,  which  is  given  to  us,  hut  it  comes  to  conscious-
ness in  different  ways;  thus  at  one  time  we  consider  it  in  its  sensuously
intuitive  character  but  in  its  sensuous  isolation,  while  from  the
standpoint  of  science  we  merely  retain  those  elements  in  it,  which  are
at  the  basis  of  its  intellectual  connection  and  "harmony."

"  Cf.  P.  du  Bois-Reymond,  Uber  die  Grundlagen  der  Erkenntnis  in  den  exak-
(en  Wissenschaften,  p,  112  ff. (Cf.  above  p.  122  ff.)


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  167

The  concept  of  non-being.  In  the  history  of  physics,  we  can  see
how  this  characteristic  interpenetration  of  the  sensuous  by  the  intel-
lectual has  been  expressed  with  growing  consciousness  as  a  logical
insight  by  the  great  empirical  investigators  also.  Democritus,  who
first  created  the  universal  schema  of  the  scientific  conception  of
nature,  also  grasped  the  philosophical  problem  latent  in  it.  Motion
requires  the  void  for  its  representation;  empty  space  itself,  however,  is
no  sensuous  "given,"  no  thing-like  reality.  Thus  it  is  impossible  to
relate  scientific  thought  merely  to  being,  as  the  Eleatic  idealism  had
attempted;  non-being  is  just  as  necessary  and  unavoidable  a  concept.
Without  this  concept,  intellectual  mastery  of  empirical  reality  is  not
to  be  attained.  The  Eleatics  in  their  denial  of  non-being  not  only
robbed  thought  of  one  of  its  fundamental  instruments,  but  they
destroyed  the  phenomena  themselves  by  giving  up  the  possibility  of
understanding  them  in  their  multiplicity  and  mutability.  The
thought  of  non-being  is  thus  no  dialectical  construction;  but,  on  the
contrary,  it  is  taken  as  the  sole  means  of  protecting  physics  from  the
extravagances  of  a  speculative  idealism.  Even  when  the  facts  them-
selves are  regarded  as  the  supreme  standard  for  all  intellectual  con-
ceptions, and  when  no  other  purpose  of  the  concept  is  recognized  than
that  of  rendering  the  fact  of  motion,  and  thus  of  nature,  intelligible,
even  so  it  has  to  be  granted  that  in  this  fact  a  moment  is  involved,
which  is  absent  from  direct  intuition.  Empty  space  is  necessary
for  the  phenomenon,  even  though  it  does  not  have  the  same  sensuous
form  of  existence  as  the  concrete,  particular  phenomenon.  In  the
conception  of  the  real,  this  sensuous  "nothing"  has  the  same  place  and
same  inviolable  validity  as  the  "something:"  ^  jud\Xoi>  rd  5lv  $
r6  /ii/Scp.37  The  being,  that  belongs  to  the  scientific  principle  in
contrast  to  any  concrete  thing,  gains  clear  definition  here  historically
for  the  first  time.38  The  physical  concept  is  defined  through  a

87  Cf.  Aristoleles  de  generatione  et  corruptione  A  8,325  a:  biois y&p  T&V

b  fo  4£  d^A-yx^s  &>  flvat  ical  &Kivrjrov.  r6  plv  ybv  Ktvbv  ofoc  6v,
TJvat  £'O£IK  &v  Sbvatrdai  /zi)  &>ro$  KCVOV  Kcx<dpurv.tvov  .  .  .  kx.  jj.fr  ovv  roirrw  rdv
€$  ri)v  ulirdrjcriv  ical  irapt56vres  extorty  cos  T
irav  tlvaL  tpaxri  nal  Aireipov  tvuoi  .  .  .  ^e&K
drives  irpfo  rfy  alodyoiv  b^oKoyovntva  Xeyovres  oitc  &vcu,pv}ffov<rLv  oDre  ytPffftv  oOre
<pdop&.v  o&re  n'wrjoiv  ical  rb  7rXpt?os  r&v  forw.  6/uoXo'yi)erors  5^  ravrcn  iJ.kv  rolt
<f>aivoiJikvois,  rots  6k  r6  Iv  KaTauTKcvA.£ov<rip  w$  o(nc  &i>  K\.vr\aiv  ovvotv  Hvev  KCVOV,  r6  re
Kffotf  HJ)  6v  teal  TOU  &VTOS  obdkv  /LIT)  &v  tpqaiv  eli/ort.  r6  y&p  nvpU*)*  6v  TretytirX^pcs  &v.

88  For  the  historical  and  systematic  significance  of  the  concept  of  the  ^  to,
see  Cohen,  Platons  Ideenlehre  und  die  Mathematik,  Marburg  1879;  Logik  der
reinen  Erkenntnis,  p.  70  etc.


168  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

double  opposition:  an  opposition,  on  the  one  hand,  to  metaphysical
speculation,  and,  on  the  other,  to  unmethodical  sensuous  perception.
Geometrical  space  serves  here  as  an  example  and  type  of  a  pure
relational  concept.  Since  it  connects  the  atoms  in  a  unity  and
renders  possible  motion  and  interaction  among  them,  it  can  serve  in
general  as  a  symbol  of  those  principles,  on  which  the  connection  of
the  real  and  given  rests,  without  these  principles  themselves  forming
part  of  the  intuitive  reality.  The  senses  are  entangled  in  the  "con-
ventional" and  subjective  opposition  of  the  warm  and  the  cold,  the
sweet  and  the  bitter;  they  do  not  exhaust  the  whole  of  objectivity.
For  this  whole  is  completed  only  in  the  mathematical  functional
dependencies,  which  are  inaccessible  to  the  senses,  since  these  are
limited  to  the  individual.

Matter  and  idea  and  Galiko's  concept  of  inertia.  The  physics  of
modern  times  has  retained  these  principles  unchanged;  thus  Galileo,
as  an  experimental  investigator,  directly  joins  on  to  Archimedes,
while,  in  his  philosophical  view,  he  goes  back  to  Democritus.  Like
Democritus,  he  describes  and  completes  the  conception  of  nature  by
the  conception  of  necessity;  only  "the  true  and  necessary  things,
which  could  not  be  otherwise, "  belong  in  the  sphere  of  scientific
investigation.  The  concept  of  truth,  however,  remains  for  him  also
distinct  from  the  concept  of  reality.  Just  as  the  propositions  of
Archimedes  concerning  the  spiral  remain  true,  even  in  case  there  is  no
body  in  nature  with  a  spiral  movement,  so  in  the  same  way  in  found-
ing dynamics  we  can  proceed  from  the  presupposition  of  a  uniformly
accelerated  movement  towards  a  definite  point,  and  conceptually
deduce  all  the  resulting  consequences.  If  empirical  observation
agrees  with  these  consequences,  so  that  in  the  movement  of  a  body
with  weight  the  same  relations  are  found,  which  the  theory  evolved
from  hypothetical  assumptions,  then  without  danger  of  error  we  can
regard  the  conditions,  at  first  established  purely  intellectually,  as
realized  in  nature.  But  even  if  the  latter  were  not  the  case,  our
propositions  would  lose  nothing  of  their  validity,  since  in  and  for
themselves  they  contain  no  assertions  about  existence,  but  only
connect  certain  ideal  consequences  to  certain  ideal  premises.  This
general  thought  gains  significant  application  in  Galileo's  exposition
and  defence  of  his  supreme  dynamic  principle.  For  him  the  law  of
inertia  has  throughout  the  character  of  a  mathematical  principle,
and  even  if  its  consequences  are  applicable  to  relations  of  outer


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  169

reality,  they  nevertheless  in  no  way  signify  a  direct  copy  of  any
empirically  given  fact. The  conditions,  of  which  it  speaks,  are
actually  never  realized;  they  are  only  gained  by  means  of  the  "resolu-
tive  method." Thus,  at  one  point  in  the  "Dialogue  concerning  the
two  Systems  of  the  World,"  when  Simplicio  is  ready  to  grant  the
unlimited  persistence  of  the  motion  of  a  body  left  to  itself  on  a
horizontal  plane,  in  so  far  as  the  body  itself  is  of  sufficiently  lasting
material,  Salviati-Galilei  points  out  to  him  that  this  assumption  is
without  significance  for  the  real  meaning  of  the  principle  of  inertia;
the  material  constitution  of  the  particular  body  is  merely  an  acciden-
tal and  external  circumstance,  which  is  in  no  way  used  in  the  deduction
and  proof  of  the  principle. Inertia  is  for  Galileo, — as  empty  space
was  for  Democritus, — a  postulate  that  we  cannot  do  without  in  the
scientific  exposition  of  phenomena,  but  which  is  not  itself  a  concrete
sensible  process  of  external  reality. It  denotes  an  idea,  conceived
for  the  purpose  of  ordering  the  phenomena,  yet  not  standing  on  the
same  plane  methodologically  with  these  phenomena. Hence  this
motion  needs  no  real,  but  only  a  conceived  substratum;  the  real
subjects  for  the  exact  expression  of  the  principle  arc  the  "material
points"  of  mechanics,  not  the  empirical  bodies  of  our  world  of  per-
ception. We  see  how  modern  science  has  here  retained  the  funda-
mental thought  of  Democritus  only  in  order,  in  a  certain  sense,  to
pass  beyond  it;  for  what  was  there  developed  for  the  concept  of  the
void,  is  here  carried  over  to  the  concept  of  matter,  to  the  7ra/z7rX?}p€<rs
&v. Matter  also  in  the  sense  of  pure  physics  is  no  object  of  percep-
tion, but  rather  of  construction. The  fixed  outlines  and  geometrical
definiteness  we  have  to  give  it  are  only  possible  because  we  go  beyond
the  field  of  sensations  to  their  ideal  limits. The  matter,  with  which
exact  science  is  alone  concerned,  never  exists  then  as  a  "perception,"
but  always  only  as  a  "conception." "When  we  consider  space  as
objective  and  matter  as  that  which  occupies  it,"  says  a  modern
physicist  of  strictly  "empiristic"  tendency,  "we  are  forming  a  con-
struct largely  based  on  geometrical  symbols. We  are  projecting  the
form  and  volume  of  conception  into  perception,  and  so  accustomed
have  we  got  to  this  conceptual  element  in  the  construct,  that  we
confuse  it  with  a  reality  of  perception  itself. It  is  the  conceptual
volume  or  form  which  occupies  space,  and  it  is  this  form,  and  not  the
sense-impressions,  which  we  conceive  to  move."89 Thus  the  con-

89  Pearson,  The  Grammar  of  Science,  p.  250  f.


170  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

cept  of  matter  follows  the  same  law  that  is  universally  characteristic
of  the  logical  development  of  scientific  principles.  The  sensuous
properties  no  'longer  constitute  any  essential  part  of  its  meaning.
Even  the  element  of  "weight,"  which  at  first  seems  an  inseparable
part,  is  subordinated  arid  excluded  in  the  transition  from  the  concept
of  matter  to  the  pure  concept  of  mass.  From  mass,  we  attain  to  a
mere  mass-point,  which  is  distinguished  by  a  certain  numerical
value,  by  a  certain  coefficient.  Matter  itself  becomes  idea,  being
increasingly  limited  to  ideal  conceptions,  that  are  produced  and
confirmed  by  mathematics.

VI

The  concepts  of  space  and  time.  The  structure  of  pure  mechanics
can  logically  be  derived  in  different  ways,  according  to  the  kind  and
number  of  fundamental  concepts  from  which  one  starts.  While
the  classical  mechanics,  that  reaches  a  first  conclusion  in  Newton's
Principia,  is  built  upon  the  concepts  of  space  and  time,  mass  and
force,  in  modern  expositions  the  concept  of  energy  appears  in  place
of  this  last  concept.  The  Prinzipien  der  Mechanik  of  Heinrich  Hertz
have  finally  developed  a  new  view;  they  rest  merely  on  the  establish-
ment of  three  independent  concepts:  space,  time  and  mass,  and
from  these  it  is  sought  to  deduce  the  totality  of  the  phenomena  of
motion  as  an  intelligible  whole  governed  by  law,  through  introducing
invisible  masses  along  with  the  sensuously  perceptible  masses.
Even  in  this  plurality  of  possible  starting-points,  it  is  evident  that
the  "picture"  that  we  form  of  the  reality  of  nature  is  not  dependent
on  the  data  of  sense  perception  alone,  but  upon  the  intellectual
views  and  postulates  that  we  bring  to  it.  Among  them,  it  is  espe-
cially space  and  time,  that  uniformly  recur  in  the  different  systems
and  thus  form  the  unchanging  part,  the  real  invariant,  for  every
theoretical  founding  of  physics.  Owing  to  this  unchangeableness
of  space  and  time,  both  concepts  seem  at  first  glance  to  be  of  sensuous
content;  since  sensation  never  appears  outside  these  forms  and,
conversely,  since  these  forms  are  never  given  separated  from  sensation,
the  psychological  unity  and  interpenetration  of  the  two  moments
leads  at  once  to  their  logical  identification.  The  very  beginning  of
theoretical  physics  with  Newton,  however,  destroys  this  apparent
unity.  It  is  emphasized  here  that  space  and  time  are  something
different  when  we  grasp  them  after  the  fashion  of  immediate  sensa-


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  171

tion,  and  when  we  grasp  them  after  the  fashion  of  mathematical
concepts.  And  it  is  merely  in  the  latter  interpretation  that  their
truth  is  affirmed.  Absolute,  motionless  space  and  absolute,  uni-
formly-flowing time  are  the  true  reality,  while  the  relative  space  and
the  relative  time  offered  us  by  outer  and  inner  observation  signify
only  sensuous,  and  thus  inexact,  measures  for  empirical  movements.
It  is  the  task  of  physical  investigation  to  advance  from  these  sensuous
measures,  which  are  satisfactory  for  practical  purposes,  to  the
realities  indicated  and  expressed  through  them.  If  there  is  objective
knowledge  of  nature,  it  must  present  the  time-space  order  of  the
cosmos  not  only  as  it  appears  to  a  sentient  individual  from  his  relative
standpoint,  but  also  as  it  is  in  itself  in  absolutely  universal  form.
The  pure  concept  alone  gives  this  universality  and  necessity,  because
it  abstracts  from  all  the  differences,  which  are  based  on  the  physiologi-
cal constitution  and  the  particular  position  of  the  individual  subject.

Newton's  concepts  of  absolute  space  and  absolute  time.  From  the
epistemological  point  of  view,  the  first  scientific  determination  of  the
problem  of  objectivity  in  general  is  in  the  definition  of  space  and  time,
and  in  the  opposition  of  the  sensuous  and  the  mathematical  meanings
of  the  two  concepts.  This  problem  cannot  yet  be  surveyed  in  its
whole  extent;  but  the  decisive  preliminary  consideration  is  reached
here.40  It  is  clear  that  the  philosophical  oppositions  in  the  funda-
mental conception  of  physics  are  expressed  more  strongly  in  this
question  than  in  any  other.  The  struggle  over  principles  has  con-
stantly referred  back  to  the  Newtonian  theory  of  space  and  time  in
order  to  decide  the  general  problem  of  the  foundation  of  physics.
What  do  the  concepts  of  absolute  space  and  absolute  time  mean,
if  experience  can  never  give  us  true  examples  of  these  concepts?
Can  a  conception  claim  any  sort  of  physical  significance,  when  on
principle  we  have  to  refuse  to  apply  it  definitely  to  the  reality  acces-
sible to  us?  It  must  appear  as  a  barren  intellectual  game  that  we
develop  laws  for  absolute  movements  in  pure  mechanics,  so  long  as
we  have  no  infallible  mark  for  deciding  regarding  the  absolute  or
relative  character  of  an  actual  movement.  The  abstract  rule  in
itself  means  nothing,  if  the  conditions  are  not  also  known  for  its
concrete  application,  by  which  we  can  subsume  empirical  cases
under  it.  A  contradiction  remains  here,  however,  in  the  Newtonian
formulation.  The  laws  of  natural  science,  which  are  to  be  especially

40  For  the  problem  of  "objectivity,"  see  more  particularly  Chs.  VI  and  VII.


172  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

understood  as  inductions  from  given  facts,  are  ultimately  related  to
objects,  which  (like  absolute  space  and  absolute  time)  belong  to
another  world  than  that  of  experience,  and  are  conceived  as  the
eternal  attributes  of  the  infinite  divine  substance.  This  metaphysical
determination  recedes  into  the  background  in  the  further  develop-
ment of  natural  science;  but  the  logical  opposition,  on  which  it  is
based,  is  not  thereby  removed.  The  question  continually  arises,
whether  in  the  foundation  of  mechanics  we  have  to  assume  only  such
concepts  as  are  directly  borrowed  from  the  empirical  bodies  and  their
perceptible  relations,  or  whether  we  must  transcend  the  sphere  of
empirical  existence  in  any  direction  in  order  to  conceive  the  laws  of
this  existence  as  a  perfect,  closed  unity.

The  system  of  reference  of  pure  mechanics.  Henceforth  the  real
difficulty  is  concentrated  in  this  problem.  The  epistemological
discussion  of  the  mechanical  concepts  has  failed  to  mark  this  diffi-
culty with  sufficient  sharpness;  following  the  course  of  history,  it
has  placed  the  opposition  of  the  "absolute"  and  "relative"  in  the
center  of  consideration.  But  this  opposition,  which  comes  from  the
field  of  ontology,  does  not  give  adequate  expression  to  the  method-
ological questions  pressing  for  solution.  It  is  easy  to  see,  of  course,
that  "absolute"  space  and  "absolute"  time,  if  they  are  to  be  regarded
with  Newton  as  mathematical  conceptions,  do  not  exclude  every
sort  of  relation.  Precisely  this,  in  fact,  is  the  essential  character  of
all  mathematical  constructions,  that  no  one  of  them  means  anything
in  itself  alone,  but  that  each  individual  is  to  be  understood  only  in
thorough-going  connection  with  all  the  others.  Thus  it  is  nonsensical
to  seek  to  conceive  a  "place"  without  at  the  same  time  relating  it  to
another  distinguished  from  it,  or  to  seek  to  establish  a  moment  of
time  without  regarding  it  as  a  point  in  an  ordered  manifold.  The
"here"  gains  its  meaning  only  with  reference  to  a  "there,"  the  "now"
only  with  reference  to  an  earlier  or  later  contrasted  with  it.  No
physical  determination,  which  we  subsequently  take  up  into  our
concepts  of  space  and  time,  can  impugn  this  fundamental  logical
character.  They  are  and  remain  systems  of  relations  in  the  sense  that
every  particular  construction  in  them  denotes  always  only  an  indi-
vidual position,  that  gains  its  full  meaning  only  through  its  connec-
tions with  the  totality  of  serial  members.  Moreover,  the  conception
of  absolute  motion  only  apparently  contradicts  this  postulate.
No  physical  thinker  has  ever  interpreted  this  concept  as  excluding


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  173

regard  for  any  system  of  reference  at  all.  The  conflict  is  only  with
regard  to  the  kind  of  system  of  reference,  only  with  regard  to  whether
it  is  to  be  taken  as  material  or  as  immaterial,  as  empirically  given
or  as  an  ideal  construction.  The  postulate  of  absolute  motion  does
not  mean  the  exclusion  of  any  correlate,  but  rather  contains  an
assumption  as  to  the  nature  of  this  correlate,  which  is  here  determined
as  "pure"  space  separated  from  all  material  content.  Thereby
the  problem  first  loses  its  vague  dialectical  form  and  gains  a  definite
physical  meaning.  The  "relativity/7  that  is  inseparably  connected
with  any  scientific  construction  in  general,  can  be  left  entirely  out
of  account;  for  it  constitutes  the  general  and  self-evident  presupposi-
tion, which  is  without  significance  for  the  solution  of  any  special
question.  But  it  is  such  special  questions,  which  are  here  to  be
decided.  It  is  above  all  necessary  to  become  clear  as  to  whether
space  and  time,  in  the  sense  in  which  physics  takes  them,  are  only
aggregates  of  sensuous  impressions,  or  whether  they  are  independent
intellectual  "forms/7  as  to  whether  the  system,  to  which  the  funda-
mental equations  of  the  Newtonian  mechanics  refer,  can  be  pointed
out  as  an  empirical  body,  or  whether  it  possesses  an  "intellectual"
being.  As  soon  as  we  decide  in  favor  of  the  latter  view,  the  further
problem  arises  of  mediating  between  the  ideal  beginnings  of  physics
and  its  real  results.  The  sensuous  and  intellectual  elements  stand
at  first  in  abstract  opposition  and  require  unification  under  a  general
point  of  view  to  determine  their  part  in  the  unitary  concept  of
objectivity.

The  substitution  of  the  fixed  stars  for  absolute  space.  At  first  glance,
it  might  seem  that  the  answer  to  these  questions  required  the  media-
tion of  no  complicated,  logical  terms.  The  answer  that  empiricism
has  ready  avoids  all  difficulties  by  resolving  the  problems  into  mere
illusions.  The  principle  of  inertia  would  indeed  be  meaningless  if
we  did  not  tacitly  conceive  it  with  reference  to  some  system  of  co-
ordinates, in  connection  with  which  the  persistence  of  uniform  motion
in  a  straight  line  could  be  pointed  out.  But  this  unavoidable  sub-
stratum we  do  not  need  to  establish  by  wearisome  conceptual  deduc-
tion, since  experience  of  itself  definitely  presses  it  upon  us.  The
fixed  stars  offer  us  a  system  of  reference,  in  connection  with  which
the  phenomenon  of  movement  according  to  inertia  can  always  be
demonstrated  with  the  exactitude  of  which  empirical  judgments  in
general  are  capable.  It  is  a  mistaken  desire  to  ask  more  than  this;


174  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

it  is  idle  to  seek  to  gain  a  notion  as  to  what  form  the  law  of  inertia
would  assume  if  we  excluded  reference  to  the  fixed  stars  and  replaced
them  by  another  system.  What  laws  of  motion  would  hold  if  the
fixed  stars  did  not  exist,  or  if  we  lost  the  power  of  orientating  our
observations  on  them,  we  lack  all  possibility  of  judging,  because  we
are  here  concerned  with  a  case  which  is  never  realized  in  actual  experi-
ence. The  world  is  not  given  to  us  twice:  once  in  reality  and  once  in
thought;  but  we  must  take  it  as  it  is  offered  in  sensuous  perception,
without  enquiring  how  it  would  appear  to  us  under  other  conditions,
which  we  logically  imagine.41  In  this  solution  of  the  problem
offered  by  Mach,  the  consequence  of  the  empiristic  view  is  drawn  with
great  energy.  According  to  this  view,  every  scientifically  valid
judgment  gains  its  meaning  only  as  an  assertion  concerning  a  con-
crete, factually  present  existence.  Thought  can  merely  follow  the
indications  of  sensation,  which  reveal  this  being  to  us,  but  it  can  in
no  place  go  beyond  them  and  take  into  account  merely  possible,
hitherto  not  given  cases.  But  as  has  already  appeared  on*  all  sides,
this  inference,  though  unavoidable  from  the  presupposition  assumed,
contradicts  the  known  fact  of  scientific  procedure  itself.  The  funda-
mental theoretical  laws  of  physics  throughout  speak  of  cases  that  are
never  given  in  experience  nor  can  be  given  in  it ;  for  in  the  formula  of
the  law  the  real  object  of  perception  is  replaced  by  its  ideal  limit.
(Cf.  above  p.  129  f .)  The  insight  gained  through  them  never  issues
from  consideration  of  the  real  alone,  but  from  the  possible  conditions
and  circumstances;  it  includes  not  only  the  actual,  but  also  the
"virtual"  process.  This  is  very  clearly  expressed  in  the  principle  of
virtual  velocities,  which,  since  Lagrange,  forms  the  real  foundation
of  analytic  mechanics.  The  movements  of  a  material  system,  as  here
considered,  do  not  need  to  be  able  to  be  actually  carried  out;  their
"possibility"  means  merely  that  we  can  intellectually  formulate
them  without  thereby  being  brought  into  contradiction  with  the
conditions  of  the  system.  The  further  development  of  the  principle
in  physics  has  allowed  this  methodological  aspect  to  appear  with
increasing  distinctness.  In  the  development  of  modern  thermo-
dynamics, the  principle  of  virtual  changes  is  freed  from  its  initial
limitation  to  mechanical  processes  and  is  transformed  into  a  universal
principle,  that  includes  all  the  fields  of  physics  equally.  By  a
virtual  change  of  a  system  is  now  understood  not  only  an  infinitesimal

41  Cf.  Mach,  Die  Mechanik  in  ihrer  Entwicklung;  Die  Geschichte  und  die
Wurzel  des  Satzes  von  der  Erhaltung  der  Arbeit,  p.  47  ff.


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  175

spatial  displacement  of  its  individual  parts,  but  also  an  infinitely
small  increase  or  decrease  of  temperature,  an  infinitely  small  change  in
the  distribution  of  electricity  on  the  surface  of  a  conducting  body; —
in  short,  any  elementary  increase  or  decrease  of  one  of  the  variable
magnitudes  that  characterize  the  total  state  of  the  system,  in  so  far
as  it  is  in  accord  with  the  general  conditions  which  the  system  has
to  satisfy.  Whether  the  transformation  involved  can  be  physically
carried  out  is  here  of  no  importance;  for  the  truth  of  our  theoretical
deductions  is  entirely  independent  of  this  possibility  of  an  immediate
realization  of  our  intellectual  operations.  "If  in  the  course  of  the
deductions,"  Duhem  remarks,  "the  magnitudes,  to  which  the  theory
refers,  are  subjected  to  certain  algebraic  transformations,  then  we
need  not  ask  whether  these  calculations  have  a  physical  meaning,
whether  the  particular  methods  of  measurement  can  be  directly
translated  into  the  language  of  concrete  intuition,  and  correspond
in  this  translation  to  real  or  possible  facts.  To  raise  any  such  ques-
tion is  rather  to  form  a  totally  erroneous  conception  of  the  nature  of  a
physical  theory. "42  The  discovery  and  first  formulation  of  the
principle  of  inertia  thoroughly  confirms  this  conception.  Galileo,
at  least,  leaves  no  doubt  that  the  principle,  in  the  sense  that  he  takes
it,  has  not  arisen  from  the  consideration  of  a  particular  class  of
empirically  real  movements.  He  certainly  would  have  made  the
same  answer  to  the  objection,  that  the  truth  of  the  law  of  inertia
presupposes  the  permanent  existence  of  the  fixed  stars,  that  he  made
to  Simplicio  in  a  similar  case:  viz.,  that  the  reality  of  the  fixed  stars
belongs,  like  that  of  the  moving  body  itself,  only  to  the  "accidental
and  external"  conditions  of  the  investigation  on  which  its  real
theoretical  decision  does  not  depend.  Into  that  "mente  concipio"
with  which  Galileo  begins  his  general  exposition,  the  existence  of  the
fixed  stars  does  not  enter.  The  concept  of  uniform  motion  in  a
straight  line  is  here  introduced  purely  in  an  abstract  phoronomic
sense;  it  is  not  related  to  any  material  bodies,  but  merely  to  the
ideal  schemata  offered  by  geometry  and  arithmetic.  Whether  the
laws,  which  we  deduce  from  such  ideal  conceptions,  are  applicable  to
the  world  of  perception  must  be  ultimately  decided  by  experiment;
the  logical  and  mathematical  meaning  of  the  hypothetical  laws  is
independent  of  this  form  of  verification  in  the  actually  given.43

4J  C/.  Duhem,  Involution  de  la  Mtcanique,  Paris  1903,  p.  211  ff .
48  C/.  above  p.  123  ff.;  OD  the  whole  matter  cf.  now  especially  Natorp's
exposition,  op.  cit.  p.  356  ff .


176  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

The  "intellectual  experiment11  and  the  law  of  inertia.  In  order  to
justify  logically  the  deduction  here  actiially  made  by  Galileo,  we
need  ultimately  only  to  appeal  to  Mach  himself.  In  Mach's  develop-
ment of  the  general  methods  of  physics,  the  "intellectual  experiment"
takes  an  important  place.  He  emphasizes  that  all  really  fruitful
physical  investigations  have  intellectual  experiments  as  their  neces-
sary condition.  We  must  anticipate  (at  least  in  its  general  features)
the  consequence  which  a  definite  arrangement  of  the  experiment
promises;  we  must  compare  the  possible  determining  factors  with
each  other  and  intellectually  vary  them,  in  order  to  give  the  obser-
vation itself  a  definite  direction.  It  is  this  procedure  of  intel-
lectual variation  of  the  determining  factors  for  a  certain  result
which  first  gives  us  an  entirely  clear  survey  of  the  field  of  facts.
Here  the  meaning  of  each  individual  moment  is  first  made  clear;
here  the  perception  is  first  analysed  into  an  ordered  complex,  in
which  we  clearly  grasp  the  significance  of  each  part  in  the  structure
of  the  whole.  The  essential  features,  on  which  its  action  according
to  law  depends,  are  separated  from  the  accidental,  which  can  vary
arbitrarily  without  thereby  affecting  our  real  physical  deduction.44
We  need  only  apply  all  these  considerations  to  the  discovery  and
expression  of  the  principle  of  inertia  in  order  to  recognize  that  the
real  validity  of  this  principle  is  not  bound  to  any  definite  material
system  of  reference.  Even  if  we  had  found  the  law  at  first  verified
with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars,  there  would  be  nothing  to  hinder  us
from  freeing  it  from  this  condition,  by  calling  to  mind  that  we  can
allow  the  original  substratum  to  vary  arbitrarily  without  the  meaning
and  content  of  the  law  itself  being  thereby  affected.  For  the  assump-
tion on  which  Mach's  initial  objection  rests,  viz.,  that  thought  must
never  look  beyond  the  circle  of  given  facts,  is  now  abandoned.
The  method  of  the  "intellectual  experiment"  involves  a  characteristic
activity  of  thought,  by  which  we  go  from  the  real  to  the  possible
cases  and  also  undertake  to  determine  them.  In  fact,  the  logical
meaning  of  the  law  of  inertia  would  obviously  remain  unchanged
even  if,  in  the  course  of  experience,  reasons  were  found  for  us  to
ascribe  certain  movements  to  the  fixed  stars  themselves.  The
principles  of  pure  mechanics  would  lose  none  of  their  validity  by  this
insight,  but  would  be  completely  maintained  in  the  new  system  of

44  Cf.  Mach,  Erkenntnis  und  Irrtum,  Leipzig  1905,  "  Uber  Gedanken-experi-
mente,"  p.  180  ff.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  177

orientation,  which  we  would  then  have  to  seek.  Such  a  transference
would  be  impossible  even  in  thought,  if  these  principles  merely
reproduced  the  relations  of  moving  bodies  relative  to  a  particular
empirical  system  of  reference.  Mach  himself  must,  according  to  his
whole  assumption,  regard  the  fixed  stars  not  as  an  clement,  which
enters  into  the  conceptual  formulation  of  the  law  of  inertia,  but  must
conceive  them  as  one  of  the  causal  factors  on  which  the  law  of  inertia
is  dependent.45  In  a  formula  that  merely  expresses  the  relation  and
interaction  of  definite  physical  objects,  the  one  of  the  two  factors  can
obviously  not  be  replaced  by  another  without  the  relation  itself  thus
gaining  an  entirely  new  form.  If  the  truth  of  the  law  of  inertia  de-
pended on  the  fixed  stars  as  these  definite  physical  individuals,
then  it  would  be  logically  unintelligible  that  we  could  ever  think  of
dropping  this  connection  and  going  over  to  another  system  of  refer-
ence. The  principle  of  inertia  would  in  this  case  not  be  so  much  a
universal  principle  of  the  phenomena  of  motion  in  general,  as  rather
an  assertion  concerning  definite  properties  and  "reactions"  of  a
given  empirical  system  of  objects; — and  how  could  we  expect  that  the
physical  properties  found  in  a  concrete  individual  thing  could  be
separated  from  their  real  "subject"  and  transferred  to  another?
In  any  case,  we  see  in  this  example  that  empiricism  and  empirical
method  (Empirie)  are  different.  The  only  meaning  that  the
principle  of  inertia  could  have,  according  to  the  ernpiristic  assump-
tions, is  one  that  corresponds  in  no  way  to  the  meaning  and  function
it  has  actually  fulfilled  in  scientific  mechanics  from  the  beginning.
The  logical  principle  of  mechanics  is  not  grasped  and  explained  here,
but  is  rather  abandoned.

Streintz's  concept  of  the  "fundamental  body.1'  The  same  objection  in
principle  can  be  made  to  every  attempt  to  give  the  law  of  inertia  a

45  "A  free  body,  affected  by  a  momentary  pair  of  forces,  moves  in  such  a
fashion  that  its  central  ellipsoid,  if  its*  center  is  fixed,  rotates  without  sliding
on  the  tangential  plane  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  pair  of  forces.  This  is  a
motion  in  consequence  of  inertia.  In  this,  the  body  makes  the  strangest  turns
with  reference  to  the  heavenly  bodies.  Is  it  believed  now  that  these  bodies,
without  which  the  conceived  motion  cannot  be  described,  are  without  influence
on  it?  Does  what  one  must  name  explicitly  or  tacitly,  if  one  is  to  describe
a  phenomenon,  not  belong  to  the  essential  conditions,  to  the  causal  nexus  of
the  same?  The  remote  heavenly  bodies  in  our  example  have  no  influence  on
acceleration,  but  have  influence  on  velocity."  (Mach,  Erhaltung  der  Arbeit,
p.  49.)


178  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

fixed  basis  by  pointing  out  its  system  of  reference  as  somehow  present
in  the  reality  of  things.  Streintz  has  attempted  to  define  as  this
system  of  reference  any  arbitrary,  empirically  given  body  in  so  far
as  it  satisfies  the  double  condition  of  not  revolving  and  not  being
subjected  to  the  influence  of  outer  forces.  The  absence  of  rotation
can  be  definitely  indicated  by  certain  instruments  of  measurement,
designated  by  Streintz  by  the  name  of  "gyroscopic  compass;"  every
"absolute"  rotation  of  a  body  brings  about  some  physical  effects,
that  can  be  directly  perceived  and  measured.  A  similarly  immediate
and  positive  decision  is  never  possible  with  regard  to  the  second
aspect,  the  absence  of  external  forces:  here  we  must  simply  be  content
with  the  fact  that,  as  often  as  a  variation  from  motion  in  a  straight
line  or  from  uniform  velocity  has  been  observed  in  the  movement
of  a  point  in  a  constant  direction  relative  to  a  body,  we  have  hitherto
always  succeeded  in  indicating  some  external  bodies,  which  appear  as
the  causes  of  this  variation  by  virtue  of  their  relative  position  to  the
moving  point  itself  or  to  the  assumed  system  of  reference.  If,  now,
we  characterize  the  body  defined  by  the  two  conditions  indicated:  by
the  absence  of  rotation  and  by  perfect  independence  of  all  surround-
ing masses,  as  the  fundamental  body  (FK),  then  we  have  in  such  a
body  a  suitable  system  with  reference  to  which  the  dynamic  differen-
tial equations  at  the  basis  of  physics  are  satisfied.  These  equations,
which  in  the  manner  that  they  are  ordinarily  formulated  are  logically
indefinite,  thus  gain  a  fixed  and  definite  meaning.  The  principle  of
inertia,  in  particular,  can  now  be  expressed  in  the  form,  that  every
point  left  to  itself  moves  in  a  straight  line  and  with  constant  velocity
with  reference  to  this  fundamental  body.46  This  attempted  deduc-
tion, it  can  be  easily  shown,  rests  however  on  a  conversion  of  the  real
logical  and  historical  relation.  If  Streintz's  explanation  were  true,
•the  mechanical  principles  would  be  merely  inductions,  which  we  have
verified  in  particular  bodies  with  definite  physical  properties,  and
which  we  have  then  taken  as  probably  true  for  all  bodies  of  the  same
sort.  The  claim  to  strict  universality  made  by  these  principles
would  then  be  entirely  unintelligible.  It  could  not  be  understood
by  what  right  we  opposed  them  to  the  observed  facts  as  postulates
predetermining  the  direction  of  our  explanation,  instead  of  trans-
forming the  principles  (which  have,  indeed,  only  been  gained  by

48  Cf.  the  more  particular  exposition  by  Streintz,  Die  physikalischen  Grund-
lagen  der  Mechanik,  Leipzig  1883,  p.  13  ff .,  22  ff .


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  179

definite  observations),  as  soon  as  they  failed  to  agree  with  the  now
experiences.  But  even  if  we  abstract  from  this,  the  consideration
would  be  decisive,  that  the  fundamental  body  and  the  fundamental
system  of  coordinates  could  never  be  discovered  as  empirical  facts,
if  the  meaning  of  both  had  not  been  previously  established  in  ideal
construction.  The  seemingly  pure  inductions,  which  Streintz  makes
the  basis  of  his  explanation,  are  already  guided  and  dominated  by  the
fundamental  conceptions  of  analytic  mechanics.  It  is  only  on  the
assumption  of  these  conceptions  that  the  meaning  of  the  two  aspects
determining  the  fundamental  body  can  be  understood:  the  absence
of  rotation  and  the  independence  of  external  forces  are  the  empirical
criteria  by  which  we  recognize  whether  a  definite  given  body  satisfies
the  presuppositions  of  the  theory,  which  we  have  previously  devel-
oped independently.  The  property  (Merkmal),  by  which  we  estab-
lish whether  an  individual  case  can  be  subsumed  under  a  definite
law,  is  logically  strictly  separated  from  the  conditions,  on  which  the
validity  of  the  law  itself  rests.  The  idea  of  inertia  did  not  arise  from
observations  of  definite  bodies,  from  which  we  were  able,  as  it  were,
to  read  off  sensuously  the  property  of  their  being  under  no  external
influence;  but  it  can  only  be  explained  conversely,  on  the  basis  of
the  idea  that  we  seek  for  bodies  of  this  sort  and  give  them  a  special
place  in  the  structure  of  our  empirical  reality.  Thus  the  attempt  of
Streintz,  in  so  far  as  it  is  meant  to  be  a  true  founding  of  mechanics,
involves  a  circle;  for  in  the  experiments  and  empirical  propositions,
which  form  the  basis  of  it,  there  is  already  a  tacit  recognition  of  the
principles  which  are  to  be  deduced.  Analytic  mechanics,  as  history-
shows,  has  come  into  existence  without  these  experiments,  while
conversely  the  mere  conception  of  these  experiments  could  only  arise
on  the  basis  of  this  mechanics.47

The  theory  of  C.  Neumann:  the  body  alpha.  Thus,  if  we  still
demand  the  connection  of  the  law  of  inertia  with  some  material  system
of  reference,  and  if  we  would  also  explain  the  rational  structure  of
mechanics,  there  remains  finally  only  one  escape,  viz.,  of  assuming  an
unknown  body  not  given  in  experience,  and  of  explaining  the  funda-
mental dynamic  equations  with  reference  to  it.  The  working  out  of
this  thought  was  first  attempted  by  C.  Neumann  in  his  work  on  the
principles  of  the  Galileo-Newtonian  theory,  in  which,  along  with  the

47  C/.  especially  the  criticism  of  Streintz'  attempt  by  Hufler,  Studien  zur
gegenw.  Philosophic  der  Mechanik,  Leipzig  1900,  p.  136  f .


180  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

explanation  of  the  fundamental  physical  problem,  the  methodolog-
ical question  also  was  clearly  expressed.  According  to  Neumann,
the  principle  of  Galileo  can  only  be  grasped  in  its  conceptual  meaning
through  the  assumption  of  a  definite  existential  background.  Only
in  a  world  in  which  there  exists  at  an  unknown  point  of  space  an
absolutely  rigid  body,  unchanging  in  its  form  and  dimensions  to  all
time,  are  the  propositions  of  our  mechanics  intelligible.  "The
saying  of  Galileo,  that  a  material  point  left  to  itself  moves  in  a  straight
line,  appears  as  a  proposition  without  content,  as  a  proposition
hanging  in  the  air,  which  needs  a  definite  background  in  order  to  be
understood.  Some  special  body  in  the  cosmos  must  be  given  as  a
basis  of  judgment,  as  that  object  with  reference  to  which  all  move-
ments are  to  be  estimated ; — only  then  are  we  in  a  position  to  connect
a  definite  content  with  those  words.  What  body  is  it,  to  which  ye
can  give  this  special  position?  Unfortunately  neither  Galileo  nor
Newton  have  given  us  a  definite  answer  to  this  question.  But  when
we  attentively  examine  the  theoretical  structure  founded  by  them
and  expanded  continuously  up  to  the  present  time,  its  foundations
can  no  longer  be  concealed  from  us.  We  easily  recognize  that  all
the  motions  present  in  the  universe  or  conceivable  are  to  be  related
to  one  and  the  same  body.  Where  this  body  is  found,  what  reasons
are  to  be  given  for  granting  a  single  body  so  prominent,  as  it  were  sov-
ereign, a  position, — to  this,  at  all  events,  we  gain  no  answer."48  We
should  not  expect  to  find  within  physics  the  proof  establishing  the
existence  of  this  unique  body,  which  is  called  by  Neumann  the  "body
alpha."  For  the  proof  is,  in  fact,  of  purely  ontological  nature;  the
postulate  of  a  unitary  logical  point  of  reference  is  made  into  an  asser-
tion of  an  empirically  unknowable  existence.  And  to  this  existence,
although  it  is  to  be  of  material  nature,  are  ascribed  all  those  predicates
usually  employed  by  the  ontological  argument:  it  is  unchanging,
eternal  and  indestructible.  While,  on  the  one  hand,  a  being  with
absolute  properties  is  deduced  here  from  mere  thought,  on  the  other
hand,  the  converse  feature  appears,  viz.,  that  the  conceivability  of  our
ideal  conceptions  is  made  dependent  on  definite  properties  of  being.
If  we  conceive  the  body  alpha  annihilated  by  any  force  of  nature,  the
propositions  of  mechanics  would  necessarily  cease  not  only  to  be
applicable,  but  even  to  be  intelligible.  The  concept  of  the  strict  con-

48  Carl  Neumann, Vber  die  Prinzipien  der  Galilei-Newtonschen  Theorie,
Leipzig  1870,  p.  14  f.


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  181

stancy  of  direction,  the  concept  of  uniform  motion  of  definite  velocity,
such  as  mathematical  theory  offers  us,  would  nt  one  stroke  be
deprived  of  all  meaning.  Thus  not  only  definite  physical  consequences
but  also  the  most  noteworthy  logical  consequences  would  be  con-
nected with  a  process  in  the  outer  world ;  thus  it  would  depend  on  the
being  or  not-being  of  an  actual  spatial  thing  whether  our  fundamental
mathematical  hypotheses  had  any  meaning  in  them.  But  how  could
we  ever  make  a  rational  judgment  regarding  a  physical  reality,  if  the
meaning  of  these  universal  mathematical  predicates  were  not  already
established?  To  all  these  questions,  only  one  answer  could  ultimately
be  given  by  the  advocates  of  the  body  alpha.  It  is  not  the  existence
of  the  body  alpha,  they  could  answer,  but  the  assumption  of  this  exist-
ence, on  which  the  validity  of  our  mechanical  concepts  depends.
This  assumption  can  never  be  taken  from  us;  it  is  a  pure  postulate  of
our  scientific  thought,  which  herein  obeys  only  its  own  norms  and
rules.  Such  an  answer,  however,  places  the  problem  on  an  entirely
new  basis.  If  it  is  in  our  power  to  deal  with  ideal  assumptions,
then  we  do  not  understand  why  this  procedure  should  be  limited  to
the  assumption  of  physical  things.  Instead  of  the  body  alpha,  we
could  then  assume  (in  logically  the  only  unobjectionable  and  intelli-
gible manner)  pure  space  itself,  and  grant  it  definite  properties  and
relations.  Here  also  we  have  moved  in  a  circle;  thought  by  its
inner  necessity  has  led  us  back  to  that  very  starting-point  at  which
the  first  doubt  and  suspicion  arose  regarding  the  formulation  of
mechanical  principles.

Space  and  time  as  mathematical  ideals.  We  first  escape  the  dilemma
when  we  resolve  to  place  our  intellectual  postulates  in  full  clarity  at
the  beginning,  instead  of  somehow  introducing  them  in  a  concealed
form  in  the  course  of  the  deduction.  The  absolute  space  and  the  ab-
solute time  of  mechanics  involve  the  problem  of  existence  just  as  little
as  does  the  pure  number  of  arithmetic  or  the  pure  straight  line  of
geometry.  Absolute  space  and  time  arise  in  the  sure  and  continuous
development  of  these  concepts;  Galileo  emphasized  most  sharply
that  the  general  theory  of  motion  signified  not  a  branch  of  applied  but
of  pure  mathematics.  The  phoronomical  concepts  of  uniform  and  of
uniformly  accelerated  motion  contain  nothing  originally  of  the  sensu-
ous properties  of  material  bodies,  but  merely  define  a  certain  relation
between  the  spatial  and  temporal  magnitudes  that  are  generated  and
related  to  each  other  according  to  an  ideal  principle  of  construction.


182  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

Thus,  in  the  expression  of  the  principle  of  inertia,  we  can  rely  at  first
merely  on  a  conceptual,  system  of  reference,  to  which  we  ascribe  all
the  determinations  required.  By  means  of  conceptual  definitions,
we  create  a  spatial  "inertial  system"  and  an  "inertial  time-scale,"
and  take  both  as  a  basis  for  all  further  consideration  of  the  phenomena
of  motion  and  their  reciprocal  relations.49  Thus  there  is  no  hypo-
statization  of  absolute  space  and  absolute  time  into  transcendent
things;  but  at  the  same  time  both  remain  as  pure  functions,  by  means
of  which  an  exact  knowledge  of  empirical  reality  is  possible.50  The
fixity,  that  we  must  ascribe  to  the  original  and  unitary  system  of
reference,  is  not  a  sensuous  but  a  logical  property;  it  means  that  we
have  established  it  as  a  concept,  in  order  to  regard  it  as  identical  and
unchanging  through  all  the  transformations  of  calculation.  The
ideal  system  of  axes,  to  which  we  look,  satisfies  the  fundamental
postulate,  which  requires  independence  of  all  outer  forces  for  the
"fundamental  system  of  coordinates:"  for  how  could  forces  affect
lines,  pure  geometrical  forms?  While  considering  these  lines  in  our
intellectual  abstraction  as  absolutely  constant,  we  evolve  from  them
a  general  schema  for  possible  spatial  changes  in  general.  Only
experience  can  ultimately  decide  whether  this  schema  is  applicable
to  the  reality  of  physical  things  and  processes.  Here  also  it  is
never  possible  to  isolate  the  fundamental  hypotheses  and  to  point
them  out  as  valid  individually  in  concrete  perceptions;  but  we  can
always  only  justify  them  indirectly  in  the  total  system  of  connection
that  they  effect  among  phenomena.  (Cf.  above  p.  146  ff.)  We  de-
velop the  determination  of  the  "inertial  system"  and  the  mathemati-
cal consequences  connected  with  it  purely  in  theory.  In  so  far  as
any  empirically  given  body  seems  to  conform  to  these  determinations,
we  ascribe  "absolute"  rest  and  absolute  fixity  to  it  also;  i.e.,  we
affirm  that  a  material  point  left  to  itself  must  move  uniformly  in  a
straight  line  with  reference  to  that  body.  But  at  the  same  time,
we  know  that  this  postulate  is  never  exactly  fulfilled  ii*  experience,
but  always  only  with  a  certain  approximation.  But  just  as  there  is

49  Cf.  more  particularly  regarding  the  mathematical  construction  of  the
" inertial  system,"  Ludwig  Lange,  Die  geschichtliche  Entwicklung  des  Bewe-
gungsbegriffs,  \Vundt 's  Philos.  Studien  III,  (1886),  p.  390  ff.,  677  ff.

60  See  Erkenntnisproblem  II,  344,  356  f.,  559;  cf.  now  especially  the  excellent
treatment  of  Edm.  Konig,  Kant  und  die  Naturwissenschaft,  Braunschweig  1907,
p.  129  ff.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  183

no  real  straight  line,  that  realizes  all  the  properties  of  the  pure  geomet-
rical concept,  just  so  there  is  no  real  body,  that  conforms  to  the
mechanical  definition  of  the  inertial  system  in  all  respects.  Thus
the  possibility  always  remains  open  of  establishing,  by  the  choice  of
a  new  point  of  reference,  a  closer  and  more  exact  agreement  between
the  system  of  observations  and  the  system  of  deductions.  This
relativity  is  indeed  unavoidable;  for  it  lies  in  the  very  concept  of  the
object  of  experience.  It  is  the  expression  of  the  necessary  difference,
that  remains  between  the  exact  conceptual  laws  we  formulate  and
their  empirical  realization.  That  any  system  of  given  bodies  is  at
rest  (for  example,  the  system  of  the  fixed  stars)  does  not  signify  a
fact  that  can  be  directly  established  by  perception  or  measurement,
but  means  that  a  paradigm  is  found  here  in  the  world  of  bodies  for
certain  principles  of  pure  mechanics,  in  which  they  can  be,  as  it
were,  visibly  demonstrated  and  represented.  The  fixed  stars  stand
in  relations  with  the  moving  bodies  of  the  real  world,  which  relations
are  entirely  according  to  the  system  of  these  propositions  and  find
their  complete  expression  in  it.  The  individual  material  point  of
attachment,  to  which  we  connect  our  equations  of  motion,  may
change;  yet  the  fundamental  relation  to  a  definite  system  of  laws  of
mechanics  and  physics  remains  constant.  Analogously,  we  substitute
a  more  exact  measure  of  time  for  the  not  wholly  exact  measure,  which
the  stellar  day  affords,  by  taking  our  stand  on  the  law  of  the  con-
servation of  energy  and  on  the  law  of  gravitation.  That  unit  of  time
is  taken  as  "absolutely"  exact,  whose  application  enables  us,  on  the
one  hand,  to  avoid  contradiction  of  the  theoretical  demands  of  the
principle  of  energy,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  avoid  conflict  between
the  secular  acceleration  of  the  moon  as  actually  observed,  and  as
calculated  according  to  the  Newtonian  law.51  Thus  there  is  still  a
relation  to  the  physical  concepts  of  absolute  space  and  absolute
time.  The  meaning  of  these  concepts  does  not  consist  in  their
stripping  off  every  relation,  but  in  their  removing  the  necessarily
assumed  point  of  reference  from  the  material  into  the  ideal.  The
system,  in  which  we  seek  our  intellectual  orientation,  is  no  individual
perceptible  body,  but  a  system  of  theoretical  and  empirical  rules  on
which  the  concrete  totality  of  phenomena  is  conceived  to  be  dependent.
Hertz's  system  of  mechanics.  This  meaning  of  the  concepts  of
absolute  space  and  absolute  time  was  established  in  its  general  fea-

61  PoincarS,  La  mesure  du  temps  (cf.  above,  p.  145  f.).


184  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

tures  by  Leibniz.  For  him,  both  concepts  were  only  another  expres-
sion of  the  thorough-going  spatial  and  temporal  determinateness,
which  we  demand  for  all  being  and  process.  This  determinateness
must  be  demanded,  even  if  there  is  in  the  cosmos  no  strictly  uniform
course  of  any  actual  process  of  nature,  or  any  fixed  or  immovable
body.  Theoretically  it  can  always  be  gained;  for  we  can  always
relate  the  non-uniform  movements,  whose  law  we  know,  to  certain
conceived  uniform  movements,  and  on  the  basis  of  this  procedure
calculate  in  advance  the  consequence  of  the  connection  of  different
movements.62  The  relation  between  theory  and  experience  assumed
here  has  found  its  clearest  expression  in  modern  times  in  the  system
of  mechanics  of  Heinrich  Hertz.  Hertz  in  his  exposition  takes  space
and  time  at  first  merely  in  the  sense  in  which  they  are  offered  to
"inner  intuition. "  The  assertions,  that  are  made  of  them,  are
"judgments  a  priori  in  the  sense  of  Kant;"  any  appeal  to  the  experi-
ence of  sensuously  perceptible  bodies  is  foreign  to  them.  It  is
only  in  the  second  book,  where  the  transition  is  made  from  geometry
and  kinematics  to  the  mechanics  of  material  systems,  that  times,
spaces  and  masses  are  conceived  as  signs  of  outer  empirical  objects;
the  properties  of  these  empirical  objects,  however,  cannot  contra-
dict the  properties,  which  we  have  previously  ascribed  to  these
magnitudes  as  forms  of  our  inner  intuition  or  by  definition.  "Our
assertions  concerning  the  relations  of  times,  spaces  and  masses
should  thus  no  longer  satisfy  merely  the  claims  of  our  intellect,  but
at  the  same  time  they  should  correspond  to  all  possible,  especially  to
future,  experiences.  These  assertions  thus  rest  not  only  on  the  laws
of  our  intuition  and  our  thought,  but  on  previous  experience  besides."
By  taking  fixed  units  of  measurement  as  a  basis,  especially  within  this
field,  and  comparing  the  empirical  spaces,  times  and  masses  with
each  other  in  accordance  to  them,  we  gain  a  general  principle  of
coordination  by  means  of  which  we  allow  certain  mathematical
symbols  definitely  to  correspond  to  the  concrete  sensations  and
perceptions,  and  thereby  translate  the  given  impressions  into  the
symbolic  language  of  our  inner  intellectual  images.  The  indefinite-
ness,  that  necessarily  belongs  to  these  ultimate  units  of  measurement,
is  not  indefiniteness  of  our  images,  and  not  of  our  laws  of  transforma-
tion and  correlation,  but  it  is  the  indefiniteness  of  the  very  outer
experience  to  be  copied.  "We  mean  to  say  that  by  our  senses  we  can

M  Leibniz,  Nouveaux  Essaia,  Bk.  II,  Ch.  14.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  185

determine  no  time  more  exactly  than  can  be  measured  with  the  help
of  the  best  chronometer,  no  position  more  exactly  than  can  be
referred  to  the  coordinate  system  of  the  remote  fixed  stars,  and  no
mass  more  exactly  than  is  done  by  the  best  scales."53  Thus,  while
a  perfect  definiteness  of  all  elements  can  be  gained  with  the  struc-
tures we  generate  from  the  laws  of  intuition  and  thought,  in  the  field
of  empirical  phenomena  this  is  merely  postulated.  We  measure  the
"reality"  of  our  experiences  by  the  "truth"  of  our  abstract  dynamic
concepts  and  principles.  The  order  of  the  world  which  we  construe
on  the  presupposition  of  the  motionlessness  of  the  fixed  stars,  is
for  us  the  true  order  of  things,  in  so  far  as  all  actually  observable
motions  with  reference  to  this  system  have  always  hitherto  corre-
sponded with  the  greatest  approximation  to  the  axioms,  by  which
mechanics  characterizes  the  concept  of  "absolute  movement."  If
this  condition  should  no  longer  be  fulfilled  (and  we  must  consider
this  in  our  calculations  and  assumptions  as  a  possible  case),  still
these  axioms,  the  ideal  according  to  which  the  construction  has
taken  place,  would  be  wholly  unaffected  in  meaning;  its  empirical
realization  would  only  be  shifted  to  another  place.

Thus  absolute  space, — if  we  mean  by  it  not  the  abstract  space  of
mechanics  but  the  definite  order  of  the  world  of  bodies, — is  at  all
events  never  finally  given,  but  is  always  only  sought.  But  in  this,
there  is  no  lessening  of  its  objective  meaning  for  our  knowledge;
for,  as  a  sharper  analysis  shows,  relative  space  also  signifies  no  given
fact  in  the  sense  of  a  dogmatic  "positivism."  Also  when  we  con-
sider any  corporeal  masses  in  their  mutual  positions  and  their  relative
distances,  we  have  already  gone  beyond  the  limit  of  sensuous  impres-
sions. When  we  speak  of  "distance,"  we  mean  by  this,  strictly
speaking,  no  relation  between  sensuous  bodies,  since  these  bodies
might  have  very  different  distances  from  each  other  according  as  we
took  one  point  or  another  of  their  volume  as  a  starting-point  for
measurement.  In  order  to  gain  an  exact  geometrical  meaning,  we
must  substitute  a  relation  between  points  for  a  relation  between
bodies,  by  considering  the  total  mass  of  the  body  reduced  to  the
center  of  gravity.  We  are  thus  obliged  to  have  the  direct  empirical
intuition  transformed  by  means  of  the  pure  geometrical  limiting
concepts,  in  order  to  make  a  completely  exact  assertion  regarding  the
relative  position  of  two  material  systems.  The  positivistic  scruples

68  Heinrich  Hertz,  Die  Prinzipien  der  Mechanik,  p.  53  ff.,  p.  157  ff.


186  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

against  the  "pure"  space  and  the  "pure"  time  of  mechanics  thus
prove  nothing  because  they  would  prove  too  much;  logically  thought
out,  they  would  also  have  to  forbid  every  representation  of  physically
given  bodies  in  a  geometrical  system  in  which  there  are  fixed  positions
and  distances.  The  physical  space  of  bodies  is  no  isolated  essence,
but  is  only  possible  by  virtue  of  the  geometrical  space  of  lines  and
distances.  This  relation  was  also  expressed  by  Leibniz  in  an  espe-
cially striking  and  pregnant  saying.  It  is  indeed  true,  as  he  explains,
that  more  is  posited  in  the  concept  of  body  than  in  the  concept  of
mere  space;  but  it  does  not  follow  from  this  that  the  extension,  which
we  perceive  in  bodies,  differs  from  the  ideal  extension  of  geometry  in
any  properties.  Number  also  is  something  different  from  the  totality
of  counted  things,  yet  plurality  as  such  has  one  and  the  same  mean-
ing, whether  we  define  it  in  purely  conceptual  terms  or  represent  it  in
some  concrete  example.  "In  the  same  sense,  we  can  also  say  that  we
do  not  have  to  conceive  two  sorts  of  extension,  the  abstract  of  space
and  the  concrete  of  bodies,  for  the  concrete  receives  its  properties
only  through  the  abstract."54  We  inscribe  the  data  of  experience  in
our  constructive  schema,  and  thus  gain  a  picture  of  physical  reality;
but  this  picture  always  remains  a  plan,  not  a  copy,  and  is  thus  always
capable  of  change,  although  its  main  features  remain  constant  in  the
concepts  of  geometry  and  phoronomy.

Construction  and  convention.  It  seems,  indeed,  that  an  element  of
arbitrariness  is  admitted  into  our  scientific  reflection,  when  we  thus
ground  our  assertion  concerning  reality  in  previous  constructions.
This  conclusion  is  actually  drawn,  when  the  concepts  of  the  "inertial
system"  and  the  "inertial  time-scale"  are  described  as  mere  con-
ventions, which  we  introduce  in  order  to  survey  the  facts  more  easily,
but  which  have  no  immediate  objective  correlate  in  empirical  fact.66
Poincare*,  in  an  investigation  of  the  conditions  of  time  measurement,
has  deduced  the  general  consequences  very  decisively.  When  we
take  any  natural  phenomenon  as  absolutely  uniform,  and  measure
all  others  by  it,  we  are  never  absolutely  determined  in  our  choice
from  without;  no  measure  of  time  is  truer  than  any  other,  but  the  only
proof  we  can  give  for  any  is  merely  that  it  is  more  convenient.
The  question  raised  here  is  open  to  no  final  answer  so  far  as  our

64  Sec  Leibniz,  Nouveaux  Essais,  Bk.  II,  Ch.  4.

**  C/.  Ludwig  Lange,  op.  dt.\  also  Das  Inertialsystem  vor  dem  Forum  der
Nalurjorschung,  Philos.  Studien,  Vol.  II.


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  187

previous  investigation  is  concerned;  for  it  reaches  over  from  the
field  of  science  into  a  methodologically  alien  field.  Science  has  no
higher  criterion  than  truth;  and  can  have  no  other  than  unity  and
completeness  in  the  systematic  construction  of  experience.  Every
other  conception  of  the  object  lies  outside  its  field;  it  must  "tran-
scend" itself  even  to  be  able  to  conceive  the  problem  of  another
sort  of  objectivity.  The  distinction  between  an  "absolute"  truth  of
being  and  a  "relative"  truth  of  scientific  knowledge,  the  separation
between  what  is  necessary  from  the  standpoint  of  our  concepts  and
what  is  necessary  in  itself  from  the  nature  of  the  facts,  signifies  a
metaphysical  assumption,  that  must  be  tested  in  its  right  and  validity
before  it  can  be  used  as  a  standard.  The  characterization  of  the
ideal  conceptual  creations  as  "conventions"  has  thus  at  first  only  one
intelligible  meaning;  it  involves  the  recognition  that  thought  does
not  proceed  merely  receptively  and  imitatively  in  them,  but  develops
a  characteristic  and  original  spontaneity  (Selbsttdtip*  sit).  Yet  this
spontaneity  is  not  unlimited  and  unrestrained;  it  is  connected,
although  not  with  the  individual  perception,  with  the  system  of
perceptions  in  their  order  and  connection.  It  is  true  this  order  is
never  to  be  established  in  a  single  system  of  concepts,  which  excludes
any  choice,  but  it  always  leaves  room  for  different  possibilities  of
exposition;  in  so  far  as  our  intellectual  construction  is  extended  and
takes  up  new  elements  into  itself,  it  appears  that  it  does  not  proceed
according  to  caprice,  but  follows  a  certain  law  of  progress.  This
law  is  the  ultimate  criterion  of  "objectivity;"  for  it  shows  us  that
the  world-system  of  physics  more  and  more  excludes  all  the  accidents
of  judgment,  such  as  seem  unavoidable  from  the  standpoint  of  the
individual  observer,  and  discovers  in  their  place  that  necessity  that
is  universally  the  kernel  of  the  concept  of  the  object.56

VII

The  concept  of  energy.  Necessary  as  are  space  and  time  in  the
construction  of  empirical  reality,  they  are  after  all  only  the  universal
forms  in  which  it  is  represented.  They  are  the  fundamental  orders,
in  which  the  real  is  arranged,  but  they  do  not  determine  the  concept
of  the  real  itself.  A  new  principle  is  needed  to  fill  these  empty  forms
with  concrete  content.  This  principle  has  been  conceived  in  different

58  C/.  later  Chs.  VI  and  VII.


188  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

ways,  from  Democritus'  concept  of  matter  opposed  to  empty  space  as
the  Tra/xTrX^pes  5i>,  until  its  final  logical  definition  in  the  modern
conception  of  energy.  Here,  for  the  first  time,  we  seem  to  have  the
ground  of  reality  under  our  feet.  Here  we  have  a  being  that  fulfills
all  the  conditions  of  true  and  independent  existence,  since  it  is
indestructible  and  eternal.  Along  with  all  physical  reasons,  energism
claims  an  epistemological  advantage.  The  atom  and  matter,  which
constitute  the  real  type  of  objective  reality  for  the  older  natural
science,  are  reduced  to  mere  abstractions  through  the  closer  analysis
of  the  data  and  conditions  of  our  knowledge.  They  are  conceptual
limits,  to  which  we  attach  our  impressions,  but  they  can  never  be
compared  in  real  meaning  with  the  immediate  sensation  itself.  In
energy,  we  grasp  the  real  because  it  is  the  effective.  Here  no  mere
symbol  comes  between  us  and  the  physical  thing;  here  we  are  no
longer  in  the  realm  of  mere  thought,  but  in  the  realm  of  being.  And
in  order  to  grasp  this  ultimate  being,  we  need  no  circuitous  route
through  complicated  mathematical  hypotheses,  since  it  is  directly
revealed  unsought  in  perception  itself.  What  we  sense  is  not  the
doubtful  and  in  itself  entirely  indefinite  matter,  that  we  assume  as  the
"bearer"  of  sensuous  properties;  but  it  is  the  concrete  effect,  which  is
worked  on  us  by  outer  things.  "What  we  see  is  nothing  but  radiat-
ing energy,  which  effects  chemical  changes  in  the  retina  of  our  eye,
that  are  felt  as  light.  When  we  touch  a  solid  body,  we  feel  the
mechanical  work  that  is  involved  in  the  compression  of  our  finger-
tips and  also  in  the  compression  of  the  body  touched.  Smell  and
taste  rest  on  chemical  activities  in  the  organs  of  the  nose  and  mouth.
Everywhere  energies  and  activities  are  what  inform  us  as  to  how  the
outer  world  is  arranged  and  what  properties  it  has;  and,  from  this
standpoint,  the  totality  of  nature  appears  to  us  as  a  division  of
spatially  and  temporally  changeable  energies  in  space  and  time,  of
which  we  gain  knowledge  to  the  extent  that  these  energies  go  over  to
our  body,  in  particular  to  the  sense  organs  constituted  for  receiving
definite  energies."67  The  "thing"  as  a  passive  and  indifferent
substratum  of  properties  is  now  set  aside.  The  object  is  what  it
appears  to  be:  a  sum  of  actual  and  possible  ways  of  acting.  In  this
doctrine,  a  determination  of  purely  philosophical  reflection  is
admitted  into  the  foundations  of  scientific  thought;  but  the  function
of  reflection  is  thereby  limited  and  exhausted.  Henceforth  all

57  Ostwald,  Vorles.  uber  Naturphilosophie,  p.  159  f.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  189

merely  speculative  points  of  view  can  be  strictly  excluded,  and  consid-
eration limited  to  the  reproduction  of  the  empirical  facts.  In  the
accomplishment  of  this  task,  the  primal  reality  itself  without  abstract
or  conceptual  husk  becomes  increasingly  clear.

Energy  and  the  sense  qualities.  There  is  one  doubt  that  must  be
felt  with  regard  to  this  conception.  Whatever  physical  advantages
the  concept  of  energy  may  have  over  that  of  matter  and  the  atom,
logically  at  least,  both  stand  on  the  same  plane  and  belong  to  the
same  sphere  of  consideration.  This  is  shown  negatively  in  the  similar
difference  of  both  from  the  sensuously  given.  The  notion  that  "ener-
gies" can  be  seen  or  heard  is  obviously  no  less  naive  than  the  notion
that  the  "matter"  of  theoretical  physics  can  be  directly  touched  and
grasped  with  the  hands.  What  is  given  us  are  qualitative  differences
of  sensation :  of  warm  and  cold,  light  and  dark,  sweet  and  bitter,  but
not  numerical  differences  of  quantities  of  work.  When  we  refer
sensations  to  such  magnitudes  and  their  mutual  relations,  we  have
brought  about  just  such  a  translation  into  a  foreign  language  as
energism  criticizes  in  the  mechanical  view  of  the  world.  To  measure
a  perception  means  to  change  it  into  another  form  of  being  and  to
approach  it  with  definite  theoretical  assumptions  of  judgment.
(Cf.  p.  141  ff.)  The  advantage,  which  energism  might  claim  over
mechanism,  could  never  consist  in  that  it  did  without  these  presup-
positions, but  rather  in  that  it  understood  them  more  clearly  in  their
logical  character.  It  could  not  be  a  matter  of  entirely  excluding
"hypotheses,"  but  only  of  not  making  them  into  absolute  properties
of  things  as  is  done  by  dogmatic  materialism.

Energy  and  the  concept  of  number.  If  we  conceive  the  problem  in
this  way,  it  is  seen  that  energism  contains  a  motive  from  the  beginning,
which  protects  it  more  than  any  other  physical  view  from  the  danger  of
an  immediate  hypostatization  of  abstract  principles.  Its  fundamen-
tal thought,  from  an  epistemological  point  of  view,  does  not  go  back
primarily  to  the  concept  of  space,  but  to  that  of  number.  It  is  to
numerical  values  and  relations  that  the  theoretical  and  experimental
inquiry  are  alike  directed,  and  in  them  consists  the  real  kernel  of
the  fundamental  law.  Number,  however,  can  not  be  misunderstood
as  substance,  unless  we  are  to  revert  to  the  mysticism  of  Pythago-
reanism,  but  it  signifies  merely  a  general  point  of  view,  by  which  we
make  the  sensuous  manifold  unitary  and  uniform  in  conception.
The  evolution  of  the  conception  of  energy  offers  a  concrete  physical


190  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

example  for  this  general  process  of  knowledge.  We  saw  that  the
first  step  in  the  mathematical  objectification  of  the  given  was  to
conceive  it  under  certain  serial  concepts.  The  given  only  becomes
an  object  of  knowledge  when  it  is  "established"  in  this  sense,  by  as-
cribing to  it  a  definite  place  in  a  manifold,  ordered  and  graded  accord-
ing to  some  point  of  view.  But  the  real  task  of  knowledge  of  nature
is  not  thereby  exhausted;  in  fact,  in  principle  it  is  not  yet  begun.
The  insertion  of  the  sensuous  manifold  into  series  of  purely  mathe-
matical structure  remains  inadequate,  as  long  as  these  series  are
separated  from  each  other.  As  long  as  this  is  the  case,  the  "thing"
of  popular  experience  is  not  yet  wholly  grasped  in  its  logical  meaning.
It  is  not  enough  for  us  to  express  the  individual  physical  and  chemical
properties  in  a  pure  numerical  value,  and  to  represent  the  object  as
a  totality  of  such  "parameters."  For  the  object  means  more  than  a
mere  sum  of  properties;  it  means  the  unity  of  the  properties,  and
thus  their  reciprocal  dependency.  If  this  postulate  is  to  find  its
adequate  expression  in  science,  we  must  seek  a  principle,  which
enables  us  to  connect  the  different  series,  in  which  we  have  first
arranged  the  content  of  the  given,  among  themselves  by  a  unitary
law.  Heat,  motion,  electricity,  chemical  attraction  mean  at  first  only
certain  abstract  types,  to  which  we  relate  the  whole  of  our  percep-
tions. In  order  to  advance  from  them  to  a  representation  of  the
real  process,  a  thorough  mediation  is  needed,  so  that  all  these  differ-
ent fields  again  becomes  members  of  an  inclusive  system.

The  concept  of  the  measure  of  work.  From  this  point,  the  general
meaning  of  the  conception  of  energism  can  be  surveyed.  The
structure  of  mathematical  physics  is  in  principle  complete  when  we
have  arranged  the  members  of  the  individual  series  according  to  an
exact  numerical  scale,  and  when  we  discover  a  constant  numerical
relation  governing  the  transition  from  one  series  to  the  others.  Only
when  this  is  done  is  the  way  determined  from  one  member  to  any
other,  and  prescribed  by  fixed  rules  of  deduction,  no  matter  what  the
series.  Only  then  it  becomes  clear  how  all  the  threads  of  the  mathe-
matical system  of  phenomena  are  connected  on  all  sides,  so  that  no
element  remains  without  connection.  This  relation  was  first  estab-
lished empirically  in  the  case  of  the  equivalence  of  motion  and  heat;
but,  once  discovered,  it  was  extended  beyond  this  starting-point.
The  conception  was  soon  extended  as  a  universal  postulate  to  the
totality  of  possible  physical  manifolds  in  general.  The  law  of  energy


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  191

directs  us  to  coordinate  every  member  of  a  manifold  with  one  and
only  one  member  of  any  other  manifold,  in  so  far  as  to  any  quantum
of  motion  there  corresponds  one  quantum  of  heat,  to  any  quantum  of
electricity,  one  quantum  of  chemical  attraction,  etc.  In  the  concept  of
work,  all  these  determinations  of  magnitude  are  related  to  a  common
denominator.  If  such  a  connection  is  once  established,  then  every
numerical  difference  that  we  find  within  one  series  can  be  completely
expressed  and  reproduced  in  the  appropriate  values  of  any  other
series.  The  unit  of  comparison,  which  we  take  as  a  basis,  can  arbi-
trarily vary  without  the  result  being  affected.  If  two  elements
of  any  field  are  equal  when  the  same  amount  of  work  corresponds  to
them  in  any  series  of  physical  qualities,  then  this  equality  must  be
maintained,  even  when  we  go  over  to  any  other  series  for  the  purpose
of  their  numerical  comparison.  In  this  postulate,  the  essential
content  of  the  principle  of  conservation  is  already  exhausted;  for
any  quantity  of  work,  which  arose  "from  nothing,"  would  violate
the  principle  of  the  mutual  one  to  one  coordination  of  all  series.  If
we  wish  to  represent  the  system  schematically,  we  have  here  a  number
of  series  A,  B,  C,  of  which  the  members  ai  a2  a3  . . .  an,  bi  b2  b3 . . .  bn,
Ci  c2  c3  . . .  3n,  stand  in  a  definite  physical  relation  of  exchangeability,
such  that  a  ay  member  of  A  can  be  replaced  by  a  definite  member  of
B  or  C  without  the  capacity  of  work  of  the  physical  system  in  which
this  substitution  is  assumed  being  thereby  changed.  We  briefly
represent  this  relation  of  possible  substitution  not  by  always  coordinat-
ing each  individual  member  with  the  multitude  of  corresponding
equivalents,  but  by  ascribing  to  it  once  for  all  a  certain  value  of
energy,  which  draws  all  these  coordinations  into  a  single  pregnant  ex-
pression. We  do  not  compare  the  different  systems  with  each  other
directly,  but  create  for  this  purpose  a  common  series,  to  which  they
are  all  equally  related.  It  is  chiefly  owing  to  technical  circumstances
that  we  traditionally  choose  mechanical  work  as  this  common  series,
since  the  transformation  of  the  different  "types  of  energy"  into  this
form  is  relatively  easy  and  exactly  measurable.  In  itself,  however,
any  arbitrary  series  could  be  taken  as  the  basis  for  expressing  the
totality  of  possible  relations.  In  any  case,  it  appears  that  energy  in
this  form  of  deduction  is  never  a  new  thing,  but  is  a  unitary  system  of
reference  on  which  we  base  measurement.  All  that  can  be  said  of  it
on  scientific  grounds  is  exhausted  in  the  quantitative  relations  of
equivalence,  that  prevail  between  the  different  fields  of  physics.


192  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

Energy  does  not  appear  as  a  new  objective  somewhat,  alongside  of
the  already  known  physical  contents,  such  as  light  and  heat,  electri-
city and  magnetism;  but  it  signifies  merely  an  objective  correlation
according  to  law,  in  which  all  these  contents  stand.  Its  real  meaning
and  function  consists  in  the  equation  it  permits  us  to  establish
between  the  diverse  groups  of  processes.  If  we  clothed  the  principle
itself,  which  demands  the  definite  quantitative  correlation  of  the
totality  of  phenomena,  in  the  form  of  a  particular  thing,  even  in  the
form  of  "the"  thing,  the  all-inclusive  substance,  we  should  create  the
same  dogmatic  confusion,  that  energism  charges  against  materialism.
Science  at  least  knows  nothing  of  such  a  transformation  into  sub-
stance, and  cannot  understand  it.  The  identity  science  seeks,  and  to
which  it  connects  the  chaotic  individual  phenomena,  has  always  the
form  of  a  supreme  mathematical  law;  not,  however,  of  an  all-inclusive
and  thus  ultimately  propertyless  and  indeterminate  object.  Con-
ceived as  a  particular  thing,  energy  would  be  a  somewhat,  which  was
at  once  motion  and  heat,  magnetism  and  electricity,  and  yet  also
nothing  of  all  these.  As  a  principle,  it  signifies  nothing  but  an  intel-
lectual point  of  view,  from  which  all  these  phenomena  can  be  meas-
ured, and  thus  brought  into  one  system  in  spite  of  all  sensuous
diversity.

The  formal  presuppositions  of  energism.  At  this  point,  in  the
midst  of  the  controversial  questions  of  contemporary  philosophy  of
nature,  we  are  led  to  make  a  general  logical  remark.  Paradoxical
as  it  may  appear,  here  where  consideration  seems  wholly  given
over  to  the  facts,  the  effect  of  general  logical  theories  is  evident.
Whether  we  conceive  energy  as  a  substance,  or  as  the  expression  of  a
causal  relation,  depends  finally  on  our  general  idea  of  the  nature  of
the  scientific  construction  of  concepts  in  general.  However  frankly
the  physical  investigator  intends  to  stand  face  to  face  with  nature
itself,  it  can  nevertheless  be  shown  that  in  the  construction  of
energism  motives  have  been  at  work,  which  have  their  real  origin  in
definite  "formal"  convictions.  At  this  point,  we  recognize  anew
how  deeply  the  problems  of  "form"  penetrate  into  those  of  "matter,"
and  how  lasting  is  their  influence.  Two  different  views  were  opposed
to  each  other  in  the  problem  of  the  concept.  The  one,  that  has
remained  dominant  in  traditional  logic,  bases  the  concept  on  the
procedure  of  abstraction,  i.e.,  on  the  separating  out  of  an  identical  or
similar  part  from  a  plurality  of  similar  perceptions.  The  content


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  193

thus  gained  is,  strictly  speaking,  of  the  same  property  and  nature
as  the  object  from  which  it  is  abstracted;  it  represents  a  property
that  in  general  is  not  isolated,  yet  which  can  always  be  pointed  out
as  a  constitutive  part  in  these  objects,  and  therefore  possesses  a
concrete  existence.  The  concept  is  accordingly  the  "presentation
of  the  common;"  it  is  the  unification  of  those  individual  features,
that  belong  uniformly  to  definite  classes  of  objects.  Opposed  to
this  conception,  however,  is  another  that  is  founded  above  all  on  the
analysis  of  the  mathematical  concepts.  In  this  concept,  we  do  not
attempt  to  separate  th°,  given  by  comparison  into  classes  whose  indi-
vidual examples  all  agree  in  certain  properties,  but  to  construct  the
given  from  a  postulate  of  unity  by  a  process  according  to  law.  Here
it  is  not  so  much  the  particular  parts  of  the  given,  that  are  isolated,
but  rather  the  connections  and  relations  on  which  its  organization
rests;  these  are  investigated  in  their  characteristic  relational  stnicture.
(Cf.  above  esp.  p.  14  ff.  and  81  ff.)  The  meaning  of  this  opposition
in  views  of  the  concept  now  appears  from  a  new  angle;  it  is  this
opposition,  that  is  noticeable  in  modern  discussion  as  to  the  formula-
tion of  the  •  principle  of  energy.  Rankine,  who  first  created  the
name  and  concept  of  a  general  "energetics/7  proceeds  from  purely
methodological  considerations  in  his  treatise  devoted  to  the  first
establishment  of  the  new  conception.  Physics,  as  he  explains,  is
characteristically  separated  from  the  purely  abstract  sciences,  such
as  geometry,  by  the  fact  that  the  definitions  fundamental  in  the
development  of  an  abstract  science  do  not  necessarily  correspond  to
any  existing  things,  and  the  theorems  deduced  from  them  need  not
necessarily  be  laws  of  real  processes  and  phenomena,  while  the  true
scientific  concept  is  to  be  nothing  but  the  designation  of  certain
properties  common  to  a  class  of  real  objects.  There  is,  in  general,  a
two-fold  way  to  separate  out  such  properties.  We  can,  by  a  pure
"abstractive"  method,  separate  from  a  group  of  given  things  or
phenomena  that  group  of  determinations  which  is  common  to  all
members  of  the  class,  and  which  belongs  to  them  directly  in  their
sensuous  appearance;  or  we  can  go  behind  the  phenomena  to  certain
hypotheses  for  the  explanation  of  the  field  of  physical  facts  in  question.
Only  the  first  procedure  strictly  corresponds  to  the  demands  of
scientific  and  philosophic  criticism.  For  only  here  are  we  sure  that
we  do  not  falsify  the  observations  by  arbitrary  interpretation;  only
here  do  we  remain  purely  in  the  field  of  the  facts  themselves,  for


194  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

while  we  divide  the  facts  into  definite  classes,  we  add  no  foreign
feature  to  them.  It  is  an  advantage  in  principle  of  the  new  science
of  energetics,  that  from  the  beginning  it  uses  merely  this  abstractive
procedure.  It  does  not  refer  the  phenomenon  of  heat  to  molecular
movements,  the  phenomenon  of  magnetism  to  any  hypothetical
fluid,  but  it  grasps  both  merely  in  the  simple  form  in  which  they  are
offered  to  perception.  "Instead  of  compounding  the  different  classes
of  physical  processes  in  some  obscure  way  out  of  motions  and  forces,
we  would  merely  separate  out  those  properties,  that  these  classes
have  in  common,  and  in  this  way  define  more  inclusive  classes,  which
we  represent  by  appropriate  terms.  In  this  way,  we  finally  reach  a
group  of  principles  applicable  to  all  physical  phenomena  in  general,
and  which,  since  they  are  merely  inductively  derived  from  the  facts
themselves,  are  free  from  that  uncertainty,  which  always  attaches
even  to  such  mechanical  hypotheses  whose  consequences  seem  com-
pletely confirmed  by  experience."

Rankine's  deduction  of  energetics.  The  first  result  gained  from  this
mode  of  investigation  is  the  general  concept  of  energy.  It  signifies
nothing  else  than  the  capacity  to  bring  forth  changes;  and  this
capacity  is  the  most  universal  determination  that  we  can  distinguish
in  the  bodies  of  our  world  of  perception,  and  without  it  they  would
cease  to  be  physical  phenomena  for  us.  If  we  discover  definite
universal  laws  concerning  this  property,  then,  allowing  for  particular
circumstances,  they  must  be  applicable  to  every  branch  of  physics  in
general,  and  must  represent  a  system  of  rules,  which  every  natural
process  as  such  obeys.68  The  way  in  which  Rankine  establishes
and  proves  these  rules  concerns  merely  the  historical  development  of
physics;59  but  the  logical  form  he  chooses  for  his  thoughts  is  of  the
most  general  philosophical  interest.  The  laws  of  energy,  we  see,
owe  their  universality  to  the  circumstance  that  the  property  of
things,  which  we  have  called  energy,  is  spread  throughout  the  physi-
cal universe,  and  somehow  attaches  to  every  body  as  such.  No  part
of  reality  can  escape  these  laws,  because  each  part  is  known  as  real
only  by  this  distinguishing  property.  This  form  of  deduction

58  Rankine,  Outlines  of  the  Science  of  Energetics,  Proceedings  of  the  Philo-
sophical Society  of  Glasgow.  Vol.  Ill,  London  and  Glasgow,  1855,  p.  381  ff.

69  Cf.  especially  on  Rankine,  Helm,  Die  Energetikr  p.  110  ff.,  also  A.  Rey,
La  Thtorie  de  la  Physique  chez  les  Physiciens  contemporains.  Paris  1907,  p.
49  ff.


THE CONCEPTS  OP  NATURAL  SCIENCE  195

already  determines  the  general  intellectual  category,  under  which
energy  is  conceived  here.  It  stands  in  principle  on  the  same  plane
with  the  perceptible  things,  whose  essential  being  it  constitutes.
Energy  is,  as  it  were,  concrete  substantiality  itself,  the  one  indestruct-
ible and  eternal  being.

Criticism  of  the  method  of  physical  "abstraction"  From  the  stand-
point of  epistemology,  the  gap  to  be  pointed  out  is  not  so  much  in
Rankine's  physics  as  in  his  theory  of  method.  According  to  Rankine,
the  most  general  property  by  which  the  objects  of  physical  reality
are  distinguished,  is  the  capacity  to  produce  and  to  receive  effects.
Things  first  gain  their  real  objective  character,  when  they  arc  con-
ceived as  members  of  actual  or  possible  causal  relations.  The
unprejudiced,  "abstractive"  analysis,  which  Rankine  regards  as
the  ideal  of  true  science,  shows  with  certainty  that  causality  is  no
property  that  can  be  pointed  out  as  an  immediate  part  of  perceptions.
Both  rationalistic  and  empiristic  criticism  agree  at  least  in  one
conclusion,  that  there  are  no  direct  impressions  corresponding  to  the
concepts  cause  and  effect.  Thus,  if  abstraction,  as  here  understood,
is  only  a  division  and  grouping  of  the  material  of  perception,  it  is
clear  that  precisely  that  aspect  must  escape  it,  on  which  the  concept
of  energy  is  founded.  And  even  if  we  grant  the  "powor  of  producing
effects"  to  be  a  quality  inhering  in  bodies  just  as  does  any  other
sensuous  property,  such  as  their  color  or  odor,  even  so  the  real
problem  would  not  yet  be  solved.  In  the  construction  of  energetics,
we  are  not  concerned  as  to  whether  this  power  of  producing  effects
can  in  general  be  shown  to  exist,  but  with  the  fact  that  it  can  be
exactly  measured.  But  as  soon  as  we  enquire  as  to  the  methods  by
which  this  numerical  determination  is  made  possible,  we  are  referred
to  a  system  of  intellectual  conceptions  and  conditions,  which  has  no
sufficient  basis  in  the  purely  abstractive  procedure,  as  has  been  shown
on  all  hands.  The  mathematical  foundation  of  energetics  already
involves  all  those  methods  of  "construction  of  series,"  which  can
never  be  adequately  grounded  from  the  ordinary  standpoint  of
abstraction.

The  problem  of  abstraction  in  modern  logic.  Modern  logic,  at  any
rate,  has  substituted  for  the  old  principle  of  abstraction  a  new  one,
which  may  be  introduced  here.  In  this  new  principle  of  abstrac-
tion, the  procedure  is  not  from  things  and  their  common  properties,
but  from  relations  between  concepts.  If  we  define  a  symmetrical  and


196  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

transitive  relation  R  for  a  number  of  members  a,  b,  c, . . .  (so  that  from
the  relations  aRb  and  bRc,  the  relations  bRa,  cRb  and  aRc  follow),60
then  the  connection  produced  in  this  way  can  also  always  be  expressed
by  introducing  a  new  identity  x,  which  stands  in  a  definite  relation  R'
to  every  member  of  our  original  series.  Instead  of  comparing  the
members  directly  with  each  other  in  their  possible  relations,  the  pos-
sible relations  between  the  serial  members  can  now  be  represented  by
establishing  the  relation  of  each  to  this  x,  and  thus  forming  the  rela-
tions aR'x,  bR'x,  cR'x.  The  relation  R'  is  here  an  asymmetrical,
many-one  relation,  so  that  the  members  a,  b,  c  can  stand  in  the
relation  mentioned  to  no  other  term  than  x,  while  xy  on  the  contrary,
can  stand  in  the  corresponding  relation  R'  with  several  members.61
We  have  an  example  of  this  procedure  in  the  relation  between  series,
which  we  call  their  "similarity."  Two  series  s  and  sf  are  said  to  be
similar  to  each  other  in  the  ordinal  sense,  when  there  subsists  between
them  a  definite,  reciprocal  relation  of  such  a  sort  that  to  every  member
of  s  one  member  of  s'  corresponds  (and  conversely),  and  when,
if  in  the  series  s,  a  member  x  precedes  a  member  y,  the  correlate  of
x  in  s'(x')  precedes  the  correlate  of  y(y').  Here  we  have  a  symmet-
rical and  transitive  relation,  by  which  a  plurality  of  series  s,  s',
s"  . .  .s(n)  etc.  can  be  connected.  On  the  basis  of  this  relation,  we
can  now  produce,  by  the  principle  of  abstraction,  a  new  concept
which  we  call  the  common  "type  of  order"  of  all  these  series.  To
all  the  series  bound  together  in  this  manner,  we  ascribe  one  and  the
same  conceptual  property.  We  replace  the  system  of  coordinations
by  the  assumption  of  an  identical  property,  which  belongs  to  all
the  series  uniformly.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  we  do  not  claim  to
have  discovered  a  new  self-existent  thing;  our  claim  is  only  that  a
common  ideal  point  of  reference  is  thereby  produced,  with  reference
to  which  we  can  make  our  assertions  regarding  the  relations  of  the
given  series  more  pregnant,  and  bring  them  to  a  single,  concentrated
judgment.  If  we  now  apply  this  result  to  the  physical  construction
of  concepts,  an  essential  feature  of  the  modern  concept  of  energy  is
clearly  revealed.  Here  also  we  start  from  the  establishment  of
certain  dependencies  between  empirically  physical  series.  We  dis-

80  For  the  concept  of  the  transitive  and  symmetrical  relation  see  above,
Ch.  II.

91  C/.  more  particularly  Russell,  Principles  of  Mathematics t  p.  166,  219  ff.
etc.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  197

cover  that  the  manifolds,  which  at  first  seem  to  stand  side  by  side
isolated  and  independent,  are  connected  with  each  other  by  a  rela-
tion of  "equivalence/'  by  virtue  of  which  there  corresponds  to  a  value
in  one  series  one  and  only  one  value  of  the  other.  We  extend  this
connection  by  taking  more  and  more  fields  of  physical  process  into
account,  until  finally  on  the  ground  of  observation  and  general
deductive  reasons  we  draw  the  conclusion,  that  whenever  any
arbitrary  groups  of  physical  phenomena  are  given,  definite  relations  of
equivalence  must  prevail  between  them.  Here  is  given  a  thorough-
going transitive  and  symmetrical  relation  between  physical  con-
tents;62 and  it  is  the  validity  of  this  universally  applicable  relation,
which  leads  us  to  introduce  a  new  being  by  coordinating  a  certain
work-value,  a  certain  quantity  of  energy,  to  every  individual  member
of  the  compared  series.  This  being,  however,  would  obviously  lose
all  meaning,  if  we  wished  to  separate  it  from  the  whole  system  of
judgments,  in  which  it  has  arisen.  The  being,  posited  in  it,  is  not
that  of  an  isolated  sensuous  property  to  be  perceived  for  itself,
but  it  is  the  "being"  of  certain  laws  of  connection.  At  this  point,  we
recognize  anew  what  deep,  actual  oppositions  may  be  concealed
behind  the  differences  regarding  the  logical  schema.  If  we  follow
the  traditional  doctrine  of  abstraction,  then  we  are  almost  neces-
sarily forced  to  a  substantial  interpretation  of  energy,  as  the  example
of  Rankine  shows;  while  the  functional  theory  of  the  concept  finds
its  natural  correlate  in  a  functional  determination  of  the  supreme
physical  "reality."  In  the  one  case,  consideration  ends  in  the
assumption  of  a  property  common  to  all  bodies,  and,  in  the  other  case
in  the  creation  of  a  highest  common  standard  of  measurement  for
all  changes  in  general.

Energy  as  a  relational  concept.  Some  of  the  representatives  of
energism  have  already  made  the  latter  logical  interpretation.  Here
we  must  remember  above  all  Robert  Mayer,  who  also  determined  the
general  theoretical  position  of  the  new  concept,  which  he  introduced.
The  transformation  of  force  into  motion,  of  motion  into  heat,  meant
for  him,  as  he  emphasizes,  nothing  but  the  establishment  of  the  fact
that  certain  quantitative  relations  are  found  between  two  different
groups  of  phenomena.  "How  heat  arises  from  disappearing  motion

82  If  we  denote  the  relation  of  equivalence  by  A,  then  from  aAb,  b Aa  evi-
dently follows,  as  on  the  other  hand  the  validity  of  aAb  and  bAc  also  involves
that  of  aAc;  thus  the  condition  of  symmetry  and  transitivity  is  fulfilled.


198  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

or,  in  my  manner  of  speaking,  how  motion  is  transformed  into  heat :
to  demand  an  answer  to  this  is  to  demand  too  much  of  the  human
mind.  How  disappearing  O  and  H  give  water,  why  a  material  of
other  properties  does  not  result,  would  trouble  no  chemist.  But
whether  he  does  not  come  closer  to  the  laws,  to  which  his  objects,
the  materials,  are  subjected,  when  he  understands  that  the  resulting
amount  of  water  can  be  precisely  determined  from  the  disappearing
amounts  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  than  when  he  is  conscious  of  no
such  connection, — this  cannot  be  questioned."63  "In  the  sense  of  its
founder,"  Helm  justly  remarks  here,  "energetics  is  a  pure  'system
of  relations/  and  is  not  to  establish  a  new  absolute  in  the  world.
//  changes  occur,  then  this  definite  mathematical  relation  subsists
between  them, — that  is  the  formula  of  energetics;  and  certainly  it  is
also  the  only  formula  of  all  true  knowledge  of  nature."  "As  often
as  the  spirit  of  investigation  has  rested  in  the  bed  of  sloth  of  an
absolute,  it  has  been  undone.  It  may  be  a  comfortable  dream
that  our  questions  can  find  their  answer  in  the  atoms,  but  yet  it  is
a  dream.  And  it  would  be  no  less  a  dream,  if  we  saw  an  absolute  in
energy,  and  not  rather  the  temporarily  most  adequate  expression  of
quantitative  relations  among  the  phenomena  of  nature."64  Thus
energy,  like  the  atom,  is  more  and  more  divested  of  all  sensuous  mean-
ing with  the  advance  of  knowledge.  (Cf.  above  p.  217  ff.)  This
development  appears  most  clearly  in  the  concept  of  potential  energy,
which  even  in  its  general  name  points  to  a  peculiar  logical  problem.
As  Heinrich  Hertz  has  emphasized,  there  is  a  peculiar  difficulty  in
the  assumption,  that  the  alleged  substantial  energy  should  exist  in
such  diverse  forms  of  existence  as  the  kinetic  and  the  potential
form.  Potential  energy,  as  it  is  ordinarily  conceived,  contradicts
every  definition  that  ascribes  to  it  the  properties  of  a  substance;  for
the  quantity  of  a  substance  must  necessarily  be  a  positive  magnitude,
while  the  totality  of  potential  energy  in  a  system  is  under  some
circumstances  to  be  expressed  by  a  negative  value.68  Such  a  relation
can,  in  fact,  according  to  Gauss'  theory  of  negatives,  only  be  explained

M  Mayer  to  Griesinger  (Kleiner e  Schriften  und  Brief e,  p.  187).

64  Helm,  Die  Energetik,  p.  20,  562.  The  same  definition  of  energy  as  a
mere  "causal  standard  of  measurement "  (Kausalmass)  is  given  by  H.  Driesch,
Naturbcgriffe  und  Natururteile.  Berlin,  1904  (Abh.  zur  Didaktik  u.  Philos.  der
Naturwiss.,  Heft  2).

96  See  H.  Hertz,  Die  Prinzipien  der  Mechanik,  p.  26.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  199

where  that  which  is  counted  has  an  opposite,  i.e.,  "where  not  sub-
stances (objects  conceivable  in  themselves)  but  relations  between
two  objects  are  counted."  (Cf.  above  p.  56.)

Energetics  and  mechanics.  Even  where  energy  is  at  first  intro-
duced as  a  unitary  and  indestructible  object,  as  in  the  case  of  Robert
Mayer,  this  very  category  of  object  gradually  assumes  a  new  mean-
ing; this  new  meaning  is  for  the  purpose  of  doing  justice  to  the  new
content,  which  appears  in  a  double  form  of  existence.  "The  eleva-
tion of  a  kilogram  to  a  height  of  5  meters,"  says  Robert  Mayer,
"and  the  movement  of  such  a  weight  with  a  velocity  of  10  meters
per  second,  are  one  and  the  same  object;  such  a  motion  can  be  trans-
formed again  into  the  elevation  of  a  weight,  but  then  naturally
ceases  to  be  motion,  just  as  the  elevation  of  a  weight  is  no  longer
elevation  of  a  weight,  when  it  is  transformed  into  motion."66  If
mere  elevation  above  a  certain  level  (thus  a  mere  state)  is  here
assumed  to  be  identical  with  the  fall  over  a  certain  distance  (thus
with  a  temporal  process) ,  then  it  is  clearly  evident  that  no  immediate
substantial  standard  is  applied  to  both,  and  that  they  arc  not  compared
with  each  other  according  to  any  similarity  of  factual  property,  but
merely  as  abstract  measuring  values.  The  two  are  the  "same"  not
because  they  share  any  objective  property,  but  because  they  can  occur
as  members  of  the  same  causal  equation,  and  thus  can  be  substituted
for  each  other  from  the  standpoint  of  pure  magnitude.  We  begin
with  the  discovery  of  an  exact  numerical  relation,  and  posit  that  new
"object"  we  call  energy  as  an  expression  of  this  relation.  Here  a
radically  new  turn  is  taken,  in  opposition  to  atomism.  The  real
advantage  of  energism  over  the  "mechanical"  hypotheses,  as  ordinar-
ily understood  by  its  adherents,  is  that  it  keeps  closer  to  the  given
facts  of  perception,  in  so  far  as  it  permits  us  to  relate  two  qualitatively
different  fields  of  natural  phenomena,  without  previously  having
reduced  them  to  processes  of  movement,  and  thus  having  divested
them  of  their  specific  character.  The  processes  remain  unaffected
in  their  specific  character,  as  all  our  assertions  are  merely  directed  to
their  causal  connection.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  precisely  this
exclusive  reference  to  the  numerical  rule  of  relation  involves  a  new
intellectual  moment.  The  atom,  even  while  its  purely  conceptual
meaning  gradually  becomes  more  pronounced,  always  appears  as  the
analogue,  as  it  were,  the  reduced  model  of  the  empirical,  sensuous

68  Mayer,  Kleinere  Schriflen  und  Briefe,  p.  178.


200  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

body,  while  energy  belongs  to  another  field  in  its  origin.  Energy  is
'able  to  institute  an  order  among  the  totality  of  phenomena,  because
it  itself  is  on  the  same  plane  with  no  one  of  them;  because,  lacking
all  concrete  existence,  energy  only  expresses  a  pure  relation  of  mutual
dependency.

From  the  epistemological  standpoint,  the  claim,  which  energism
makes  to  understand  the  different  groups  of  physical  processes  in
their  specific  character  (instead  of  transforming  them  into  mechani-
cal processes  and  thereby  extinguishing  their  individual  features)  is
one  that  now  seems  limited  although  justified  within  a  certain  sphere.
In  fact,  the  general  logical  possibility  appears  here  of  our  shaping
nature  into  a  system,  without  our  being  obliged  to  require  represen-
tation of  this  system  in  a  unitary,  intuitive  picture,  such  as  is  offered
by  mechanism.  But  it  is  an  error  to  see  in  this  tendency  to  a  "quali-
tative" physics  a  reversion  to  the  general  Aristotelian  view  of  the
world.  "We  are  forced,"  says  a  prominent,  modern  advocate  of
energism,  "to  take  up  into  our  physics  other  features  than  the  purely
quantitative  elements,  of  which  the  geometrician  treats,  and  thus  to
agree  that  matter  has  qualities;  we  must  face  the  danger  that  we  shall
be  accused  of  a  reversion  to  the  occult  faculties  of  scholasticism,  of
recognizing  the  quality,  by  which  a  body  is  warm  or  bright,  electrical
or  magnetic,  as  an  original  and  not  further  reducible  property  in  it;
in  other  words,  we  must  abandon  all  the  attempts  that  have  con-
tinually been  made  since  the  time  of  Descartes,  and  connect  our
theories  again  with  the  essential  concepts  of  the  peripatetic  physics."
But  the  further  working  out  of  the  thought  destroys  the  appearance
of  a  deeper  connection.  The  qualities  of  Aristotle  are  something
entirely  different  from  the  qualities  of  modern  physics;  for  while  the
former  signify  only  hypostasi^d  sensuous  properties,  the  latter  have
already  passed  through  the  whole  conceptual  system  of  mathematics,
and  have  thereby  received  a  new  logical  form  and  character.  What
energism  abandons  is  only  the  "explanation"  of  the  particular  quali-
ties out  of  certain  mechanical  motions;  what  it  retains,  on  the  other
hand,  and  what  is  the  condition  of  its  existence,  is  the  expression  of
quality  in  a  definite  number  which  fully  represents  and  replaces  it  in
our  consideration.  The  question  whether  heat  is  motion  can  remain
in  the  background,  as  long  as  the  indefinite  sensations  of  warmer  and
colder  are  replaced  at  the  same  time,  by  the  concept  of  an  exact
degree  of  temperature  and  objectified  in  it.  What  is  here  retained  of


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  201

quality  is  not  its  sensuous  property,  but  merely  the  peculiarity  of
its  mathematical  serial  form.  Duhem,  whose  judgment  regarding
the  connection  between  the  energistic  and  the  peripatetic  physics
was  just  cited,67  says  we  can  develop  a  theory  of  heat  and  can  define
the  expression  "quantity  of  heat"  without  borrowing  anything  from
the  specific  perceptions  of  cold  and  warm.68  In  the  schema  of
theoretical  physics,  the  definite  empirical  system  under  investiga-
tion is  replaced  by  a  system  of  numerical  values,  which  express  its
various  quantitative  elements.  (Cf.  above  p.  150  f.)  Energism
shows  that  this  form  of  numerical  order  is  not  necessarily  connected
without  analyzing  the  things  and  processes  into  their  ultimate
intuitive  parts,  and  recompounding  them  from  the  latter.  The
general  problem  of  mathematical  determination  can  be  worked  out
without  any  necessity  for  this  sort  of  concrete  composition  of  a
whole  out  of  its  parts.

Physics  as  a  science  of  qualities.  In  this  conception,  however,
physics  only  completes  and  applies  a  thought  already  recognized  in  the
general  doctrine  of  the  principles  of  mathematics.  There  is,  and
can  be,  a  "physics  of  qualities,"  because  and  in  so  far  as  there  is  a
mathematics  of  qualities.  The  gradual  development  of  this  latter
can  already  be  traced  in  its  general  features.  There  is  a  continuous
development  beginning  with  Leibniz,  who  first  saw  the  essence  of
mathematics  in  a  doctrine  of  the  possible  forms  of  deductive  con-
nection in  general,  and  who  therefore  demanded  the  completion  of
ordinary  algebra  (as  the  science  of  quantity)  by  a  general  science  of
quality  (Scientia  generalis  de  qualitate),  up  to  modern  projective
geometry  and  the  theory  of  groups.  In  this  whole  development,  it
clearly  appears  that  there  are  wide  and  fruitful  fields  perfectly
accessible  to  mathematical  determination  without  their  objects
being  extensive  magnitudes  which  have  arisen  by  the  repeated  additive
positing  of  one  and  the  same  unity.  The  projective  theory  of  dis-
tances shows  how  it  is  possible  to  place  the  elements  of  a  spatial
manifold  in  exact  correlation  to  fixed  numerical  values,  and  to  imprint
a  definite  order  upon  them  by  virtue  of  this  correlation,  without
applying  the  ordinary  metrical  concept  of  distance.  (Cf.  above  p.
84  ff.)  This  thought  is  carried  over  by  universal  energetics  to  the

«7  Duhem,  Ltvolution  de  la  Mtcanique,  p.  197  f .,  as  also  H.  Driesch,  Naturbe-
griffe  und  Natururteile,  p.  51  ff.
««  Duhem,  op.  cit.,  p.  233  f .


202  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

totality  of  physical  manifolds.  It  is  sufficient  for  the  numerical
formulation  of  processes  if  a  definite  scale  of  comparison  is  provided
for  the  individual  qualities,  and  if,  further,  the  values  within  these
different  scales  arc  reciprocally  coordinated  with  each  other  by  an
objective  law.  This  connection,  however,  can  be  established  and
retained  independently  of  any  mechanical  interpretation  of  the
particular  groups  of  phenomena.  The  objection  frequently  raised
against  energism,  that  it  destroys  the  homogeneity  of  process  since
in  it  nature  falls  into  separate  classes  of  phenomena,  is  not  conclusive.
If  we  take  the  mathematical  general  concept  as  the  starting-point  and
standard  of  judgment,  not  only  such  contents  are  "like,"  which
share  some  intuitive  property  that  can  be  given  for  itself,  but  all
structures  are  "like,"  which  can  be  deduced  from  each  other  by  a
fixed  conceptual  rule.  (Cf.  above  especially  p.  81  ff.)  Here,
however,  this  criterion  is  satisfied;  the  connection  of  concepts  pro-
duced by  the  equivalence  between  the  different  series  gives  a  no  less
definite  logical  connection  than  reduction  to  a  common  mechanical
model.  The  intellectual  postulate  of  homogeneity  is  just  as  effective
in  the  energistic  as  in  the  mechanistic  conception  of  the  natural
processes;  the  difference  only  consists  in  that,  in  the  one  case,  its
realization  is  based  purely  on  the  concept  of  number,  while,  in  the
other  case,  it  also  requires  the  concept  of  space.  The  conflict  between
these  two  conceptions  can  ultimately  only  be  decided  by  the  history
of  physics  itself;  for  only  history  can  show  which  of  the  two  views
can  finally  be  most  adequate  to  the  concrete  tasks  and  problems.
Abstracting  from  this,  however,  energism  is  in  any  case  of  preemi-
nent epistemological  interest  in  so  far  as  the  attempt  is  made  to
establish  the  minimum  of  conditions,  under  which  we  can  still  speak
of  a  "measurability"  of  phenomena  in  general.69  Only  those  princi-

fljl  It  Jn.3  been  objected  occasionally  to  the  logical  possibility  of  the  goal
thai  general  energetics  sets  itself,  that  every  measurement  of  things  and
processes  involves  the  presupposition  that  they  are  compounded  out  of  homo-
genous parts,  and  can  thus  be  represented  by  repeated  addition  of  the  same
unit .  Every  measure  would  thus  necessarily  be  a  determination  of  extension;
reff -rence  to  a  unit  of  measurement  would  thus  already  contain  the  transforma-
tion of  all  qualitative  differences  into  extensive  distances,  and  thus  reduction
to  a  spatial  and  mechanical  scheme.  (Cf.  Rey,  La  Theorie  de  la  Physique
chez  les  Physicicns  contemporains,  p.  264,  2c86,  etc.)  Here,  however,  the  concept
of  "measure"  is  obviously  taken  too  narrowly.  If  we  understand  under  the
"measurement"  of  a  manifold  only  its  mathematical  determination  in  general,


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  203

pies  and  rules  are  truly  general,  on  which  rests  the  numerical  deter-
mination of  any  particular  process  whatever  and  its  numerical
comparison  with  any  other  process.  The  comparison  itself,  however,
does  not  presuppose  that  we  have  already  discovered  any  unity  of
"essence," — for  example,  between  heat  and  motion;  but,  on  the  con-
trary, mathematical  physics  begins  by  establishing  an  exact  numerical
relation,  on  tho  basis  of  which  it  also  maintains  the  homogeneity  of
such  processes  a,j  can  in  no  way  be  sensuously  reduced  to  each  other.
That  the  different  forms  of  energy  "in  themselves"  are  of  kinetic
nature  is  a  proposition  that  the  theory  of  knowledge  cannot  defend,
for  the  latter  is  merely  directed  on  the  fundamental  aspects  of  know-
ing, not  on  those  of  absolute  being.  The  demands  of  the  theory  of
knowledge  are  rather  satisfied  when  a  way  is  shown  for  relating  every
physical  process  to  values  of  mechanical  work,  and  thus  for  producing
a  complex  of  coordinations,  in  which  each  individual  process  has  its
definite  place.  A  representation  of  the  processes  of  nature  absolutely
without  hypotheses  cannot,  indeed,  be  gained  in  this  way;  for  trans-
lation into  the  language  of  the  abstract  numerical  concepts,  no  less
than  translation  into  the  language  of  spatial  concepts,  involves  a
theoretical  transformation  of  the  empirical  material  of  perception.
But  it  is  of  logical  value  to  separate  the  general  presuppositions
strictly  from  the  particular  assumptions;  and  to  separate  the  "meta-
physical," because  mathematical,  principles  of  knowledge  of  nature
from  those  special  hypotheses,  which  serve  only  in  the  treatment  of  a
particular  field.

VIII

The  problem  of  the  construction  of  concepts  in  chemistry.  The  exposi-
tion of  the  conceptual  construction  of  exact  natural  science  is  incom-
plete on  the  logical  side  as  long  as  it  does  not  take  into  consideration
the  fundamental  concepts  of  chemistry.  The  epistemological  inter-
est of  these  fundamental  concepts  rests  above  all  on  the  intermediate
position  which  they  occupy.  Chemistry  seems  to  begin  with  the
purely  empirical  description  of  the  particular  substances  and  their
composition;  but  the  further  it  advances,  the  more  it  also  tends

t.e.,the  correlation  of  its  elements  with  the  particular  members  of  the  series
of  numbers,  then  mathematics  itself  shows  that  such  a  correlation  is  also
possible  where  the  objects  of  the  group  in  question  are  not  compounded  out
of  spatial  parts.


204  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

toward  constructive  concepts.  In  physical  chemistry,  this  goal  in
fact  is  reached;  a  leading  representative  of  this  discipline  is  able
to  give  as  the  connecting  feature  of  physics  and  chemistry,  that  both
create  the  systems,  which  they  investigate,  on  the  basis  of  the  empiri-
cal data.70  In  so  far  as  chemistry  has  reached  this  modern  form,
it  stands  on  no  other  ground  logically  than  physics  itself.  Its  funda-
mental laws,  as  for  example  the  law  of  phases  (Phasenregel)  of  Gibbs
or  the  law  of  chemical  masses  (Masseniuirkung),  belong  to  the  same
purely  mathematical  type  as  the  propositions  of  theoretical  physics.
It  is,  however,  of  special  interest  to  trace  the  way  in  which  the  ideal,
which  was  realized  in  theoretical  physics  from  its  first  beginnings
in  Galileo  and  Newton,  has  only  been  gradually  reached  in  chemistry.
The  limits  of  purely  empirical  and  of  rational  knowledge  stand  out
very  clearly  in  the  constant  shifting,  which  they  undergo  in  the
progress  of  chemical  knowledge.  The  intermediate  terms  and  con-
ditions of  exact  understanding  are  brought  into  sharp  relief.  The
power  of  scientific  moulding  is  especially  striking  with  the  more
stubborn  material,  with  which  chemistry  works.  Ultimately  physice
is  only  apparently  concerned  with  thing-concepts;  for  its  goal  and
real  field  is  that  of  pure  law  concepts.  Chemistry  places  the  problem
of  the  individual  thing  decisively  in  the  foreground.  Here  the
particular  materials  of  empirical  reality  and  their  particular  proper-
ties are  the  object  of  the  enquiry.  But  the  "concept,"  in  the  specific
meaning  it  has  in  mathematics  and  physics,  is  not  available  for  this
new  problem.  For  it  is  only  the  symbol  of  a  certain  form  of  connec-
tion, that  has  more  and  more  lost  all  material  content;  it  only  signifies
a  type  of  possible  arrangement,  not  the  "what"  of  the  elements  ar-
ranged. Are  we  here  concerned  with  a  gap  that  is  to  be  filled  out  by
new  determinations  belonging  to  the  same  logical  direction  of  thought,
or  must  we  recognize  and  introduce  at  this  point  a  form  of  knowledge
different  in  principle?

The  chemistry  of  sensuous  qualities  and  Bidder's  law  of  definite
proportions.  This  question  can  only  be  answered  if  we  follow  the
concrete  historical  development  of  chemical  doctrines  themselves, —
not  grasping  the  vast  wealth  of  their  content  in  detail,  but  laying  bare
the  great  logical  lines  of  direction  of  their  advance.  In  fact,  a  few
general  characteristics  soon  appear  of  themselves,  according  to  which
the  development  can  be  divided  and  surveyed  in  all  its  diversity.

70  Xernst,  Die  Ziele  der  physikalischen  Chemie.  Gottingen  1896.


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  205

The  older  form  of  the  chemical  doctrine  of  elements,  which  pre-
dominated up  to  the  time  of  Lavoisier,  and  which  found  its  last
characteristic  expression  in  the  theory  of  phlogiston,  conceives  the
element  as  a  generic  property  belonging  to  all  the  members  of  a
definite  group  and  determining  their  perceptible  type.  Here  the
elements  are  only  the  hypostatizations  of  the  especially  striking
sensuous  qualities.  Thus  sulphur  by  its  presence  confers  on  any
body  the  property  of  combustibility,  salt  the  property  of  solubility,
while  mercury  is  the  bearer  of  the  metallic  properties,  which  are
found  empirically  in  any  material.71  This  conception  is  only  tran-
scended in  principle  when  along  with  the  task  of  dividing  bodies  into
classes  according  to  their  generic  properties  is  added  the  other  task
of  gaining  exact  quantitative  proportions  concerning  their  mutual
relation.  The  demand  for  strict  numerical  determination  here  also
forms  the  decisive  turning  point.  The  law  of  the  definite  proportions,
in  which  the  different  elements  are  connected  with  each  other,  con-
stitutes the  starting-point  of  modern  chemical  theory.  It  is  interest-
ing that  this  law  is  at  first  conceived  entirely  independently  of  any
conception  of  the  constitution  of  matter,  and  in  particular  inde-
pendently of  the  atomic  hypothesis.  In  the  original,  still  incomplete
form,  in  which  it  was  first  asserted  by  J.  D.  Richter,  it  signifies
primarily  nothing  but  the  validity  of  certain  harmonic  relations,  that
prevail  between  different  series  of  bodies.  If  we  consider  a  series  of
acids  AI  A2  A3  ...  and  a  series  of  bases  BI  B2  B3,  there  prevails
between  the  two  a  certain  relation,  which  is  expressed  by  saying,  that
we  coordinate  with  each  member  of  the  first  series  a  definite  number
minims  . . . ,  while  we  let  correspond  to  the  members  of  the  second
series  other  constant  numerical  values  ni^ns,  to  be  gained  by
observation.  The  manner,  in  which  an  element  of  the  first  series
combines  with  an  element  of  the  second,  is  definitely  determined  by
these  numbers;  the  two  weights,  according  to  which  an  acid  Ap
combines  with  any  base  Bq,  are  related  according  to  the  correspond-
ing numerical  values  mp  and  nq.  Richter  seeks  to  prove  in  detail
that  the  series  of  weights  of  the  bases  forms  an  arithmetical  series,
and  that  of  the  acids  a  geometrical  series;  and  that  a  law  is  thus
found  here,  which  is  assumed  to  be  analogous  to  that  of  the  distances

71  See  Ostwald,  Leitlinien  der  Chenvie,  p.  4  ff ;  cf.  also  Meyerson,  IdentM  et
p.  213  ff.


206  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

of  the  planets  from  the  sun.72  This  conception  has  not  proved  to
be  satisfactory  empirically;  but  it  is  nevertheless  characteristic
and  significant  in  its  general  tendency.  It  is,  as  we  see,  the  general
Pythagorean  doctrine  of  the  "harmony"  of  the  cosmos,  which  here
is  present  at  the  cradle  of  modern  chemistry,  as  it  is  also  at  the  cradle
of  modern  physics.  In  this  connection,  Richter  is  to  be  compared
with  Kepler,  that  is,  if  we  consider  not  his  whole  achievements  but
merely  his  intellectual  tendency,  for  with  Kepler  he  shares  the
conception  of  the  thorough-going  numerical  arrangement  of  the
universe,  which  is  continued  in  all  particular  fields  of  phenomena.

Dalton's  law  of  multiple  proportions.  The  interpretation  of  the  law
of  constant  combination-numbers  by  its  real  scientific  founder  adds  a
new  concrete  feature  to  this  general  view.  Here  it  is  actually  at
first  only  asserted,  that  there  is  a  characteristic  equivalence-number
for  each  element,  and  that,  when  two  or  more  elements  enter  into  a
combination,  their  masses  are  related  as  whole  multiples  of  these
numbers.  But  this  rule  of  "multiple  proportion"  is  combined  by
Dal  ton  with  a  certain  interpretation,  and  enters  only  in  this  form  into
the  system  of  chemical  doctrines.  The  concept  of  combination-
weight  is  transformed  into  that  of  atomic  weight.  The  law  of  multi-
ple proportions  means,  that  the  atoms  of  different  simple  bodies  are
different  in  their  masses,  while  within  the  same  chemical  genus  the
atom  is  always  unchangeably  one  and  the  same  constant  mass,  and
thus  the  mass  suffices  to  characterize  a  given  simple  material  in  its
specific  character.  In  place  of  the  empirically  gained  proportion-
numbers  of  the  individual  bodies,  assertions  appear  regarding  an
essential  property  of  their  ultimate  constitutive  parts.  Since,
however,  all  our  knowledge  only  concerns  the  relations,  according  to
which  the  elements  enter  into  combinations,  no  definite  determination
is  possible  of  the  absolute  values  of  the  atomic  weights.  If  we  take
the  atomic  weight  of  hydrogen  as  a  unit  of  comparison,  then  we  can,
without  contradicting  the  known  facts  of  composition,  determine  that
of  oxygen  by  the  value  O  =  8  instead  of  O  =  16,  whereby  we  would

72  For  the  following  data  from  the  history  of  chemistry,  c/.,  besides  the  well-
known  general  historical  works,  especially  Wurtz,  La  Theorie  atomique,  Paris
1879;  Duhem,  Le  Mixte  et  la  combinaison  chimique,  Paris  1U02;  Lothar  Meyer,
Die  modernen  Theorien  der  Chemie,  5th  ed.,  Breslau  384;  Ladenburg,  Voitrdge
uber  die  Entwicklungsgeschichte  der  Chemie,  3rd.  ed.,  Braunschweig  1902.—
On  Richtcr,  see  espec.  Duhem,  p.  69  ff.,  Ladenburg,  p.  53  ff .


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  207

have  to  double  the  number  of  atoms  of  oxygen  in  all  our  formulae;
we  could  successively  take  the  values  S  =  8,  16,  32  . . .  as  the  atomic
weight  of  sulphur,  in  so  far  as  we  formed  the  chemical  formulae  in
agreement  with  one  of  these  assumptions,  and  thus,  for  example,
characterize  sulphide  of  hydrogen  according  to  our  choice  by  the
expression  HS2  or  HS  or  H2S.  The  decision  between  all  these
possible  determinations  is  made  on  the  basis  of  several  criteria,
which  are  only  gradually  worked  out  in  the  history  of  chemistry.
One  of  the  most  important  criteria  is  the  rule  of  Avogadro,  according
to  which  similar  quantities  of  molecules  of  different  combinations
occupy  the  same  volume  as  perfect  gases  under  the  same  conditions
of  pressure  and  temperature.  Along  with  the  determination  of
atomic  weights  from  the  density  of  vapors,  which  is  hereby  made
possible,  there  is  their  determination  from  heat  capacity,  which  rests
on  the  law  of  Dulong-Petit ;  and  also  the  determination  on  the  basis
of  isomorphism,  resting  on  the  law  of  Mitscherlich,  that  the  same
crystal  form  having  different  combinations,  indicates  an  equal  number
of  atoms  connected  in  the  same  way.  It  is  only  the  totality  of  all
these  different  points  of  view,  mutually  confirming  and  correcting
each  other,  that  finally  after  many  experiments  gives  a  unitary
table  of  atomic  weights,  and  thus  lays  the  basis  of  a  definite  system
of  chemical  formulae.73

The  atom  as  a  relational  concept.  The  development  here  completed
offers  a  general  logical  problem,  if  we  abstract  from  all  details.  If
we  asked  merely  the  individual  investigators  who  cooperated,  it
would  seem  to  possess  only  one  perfectly  definite  and  clear  meaning
for  them  all.  The  objective  existence  of  the  different  types  of  atoms
is  presupposed;  it  is  only  necessary  to  discover  their  properties,  and
to  define  them  more  exactly.  The  further  we  advance  and  the
more  diverse  groups  of  phenomena  we  consider,  so  much  the  more
definitely  the  wealth  of  these  properties  appears.  The  substantial
"inwardness"  of  the  atom  is  revealed  and  takes  on  fixed  and  tangible
form  for  us.  We  trace,  especially  in  the  involved  chemical  constitu-
tion-formula, how  the  atoms  are  situated  relatively  to  each  other,  and
how  they  are  mutually  connected  in  the  unified  structure  of  the
molecule.  We  see  how  in  their  combination  they  generate,  by  their
number  and  relative  position,  a  certain  structural  outline,  such  as  is

73  Cf.  more  particularly  esp.  Lotbar  Meyer,  Bk.  I,  Pt.  II-IV;  Ostwald.
Grundriss  der  allgemeinen  Chemie,  4th  ed.,  Lpz.  1909.


208  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

expressed,  e.g.,  in  the  forms  of  crystals.  If  we  look  into  the  closer
empirical  grounding  of  these  assertions,  however,  the  general  picture
soon  changes.  It  becomes  clear  that  the  atom  is  never  the  given
starting-point,  but  always  only  the  goal  of  our  scientific  statements.
The  wealth  of  content  it  gains  in  the  progress  of  scientific  investiga-
tion never  belongs  to  it  fundamentally,  but  is  related  to  another
kind  of  empirical  "subject."  As  we  apparently  investigate  the
atom  itself  in  its  manifold  determinations,  we  at  the  same  time
place  these  different  groups  of  circumstances  in  a  new  relation  to
each  other.  We  speak  of  the  number  of  atoms  contained  in  a
definite  volume  of  a  gaseous  substance,  and  thereby  express  a  relation,
that,  according  to  the  law  of  Gay  Lussac,  subsists  between  the
numerical  value  of  the  density  of  the  gas  and  the  value  of  its  com-
bination-weight. We  ascribe  to  the  atom  of  all  simple  bodies  the
same  heat-capacity  and  thereby  express  the  fact  that,  if  we  arrange
combination-weights  of  the  chemical  elements  in  a  series  a  a'  a".  .an,
and  the  values  of  their  specific  heats  in  another  scries  b  b'  b"  . .  bn,
then  there  is  a  definite  correlation  between  these  two  series,  in
so  far  as  the  products  ab,  a'  b',  a"  b"  etc.  possess  the  same  constant
value.  The  characteristic  logical  function  of  the  concept  of  the
atom  appears  clearly  in  these  examples; — we  may  abstract  from  all
metaphysical  assertions  regarding  the  existence  of  atoms.  The  atom
functions  here  as  the  conceived  unitary  center  of  a  system  of  coordi-
nates, in  which  we  conceive  all  assertions  concerning  the  various
groups  of  chemical  properties  arranged.  The  diverse  and  originally
heterogeneous  manifolds  of  determinations  gain  a  fixed  connection
when  we  relate  them  to  this  common  center.  The  particular
property  is  only  apparently  connected  with  the  atom  as  its  absolute
"bearer,"  in  order  that  the  system  of  relations  can  be  perfected.  In
truth,  we  are  concerned  not  so  much  with  relating  the  diverse  series  to
the  atom,  as  rather  with  relating  them  reciprocally  to  each  other  through
the  mediation  of  the  concept  of  the  atom.  Here  again  appears  the
same  intellectual  process,  that  we  previously  met;  the  complicated
relations  between  certain  systems  are  not  expressed  by  our  comparing
each  system  individually  with  all  the  others,  but  by  putting  them
all  in  relation  to  one  and  the  same  identical  term.  (Cf.  above  p.
196  ff.)  The  attempt  to  determine  exactly  the  atomic  weight  of  the
individual  elements  compels  us  to  appeal  constantly  to  new  fields
of  chemico-physical  phenomena  as  criteria.  To  the  extent  that  this


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  209

determination  advances,  the  circle  of  empirical  relations  is  extended.
If  we  conceive  this  progress  completed,  then  in  the  "absolute"
atomic  weights  all  possible  relations  would  be  expressed,  that  the
particular  series  could  enter  into  among  themselves.  The  real
positive  outcome  of  chemical  knowledge  here  is  in  the  systematic
analysis  of  these  relations.  The  originally  confused  factual  material
is  organized;  it  is  no  longer  unrelated,  but  is  arranged  around  a
fixed  central  point.  When  we  ascribe  to  one  and  the  same  subject
the  observations  on  vapor  density,  on  heat  capacity,  on  isomorphism
etc.,  they  thereby  enter  into  true  conceptual  relation.  But,  indeed,  it
is  not  the  only  logical  value  of  this  "subject,"  that  it  describes  and
unifies  previous  observations.  This  unification  is  rather  directly
productive;  it  produces  a  general  schema  for  future  observations,
and  indicates  a  definite  direction  for  these.  The  progress  of  science
would  be  slow,  its  exposition  unwieldy  and  tiresome,  if,  on  approach-
ing a  new  field  of  facts,  it  had  every  time  explicitly  to  repeat  the
wealth  of  previously  gained  material  and  to  present  it  in  all  details.
While  the  concept  of  the  atom  concentrates  all  these  features,  it
retains  their  essential  content;  on  the  other  hand,  it  leaves  all
the  forces  of  thought  free  to  grasp  the  new  empirical  content.  The
totality  of  what  is  empirically  known  is  condensed,  as  it  were,  to
a  single  point,  and  from  this  point  issue  the  different  lines  of  direc-
tion, in  accordance  with  which  our  knowledge  advances  into  the
unknown.  Those  manifolds  already  discovered  and  defined  accord-
ing to  law  function  as  a  fixed  logical  unity  in  opposition  to  those
manifolds  newly  to  be  discovered;  and  it  is  this  unity  of  the  funda-
mental point  of  connection,  which  renders  possible  our  assumption  of
an  ultimate  identical  subject  for  the  totality  of  possible  properties.

The  "regulative"  use  of  the  concept  of  the  atom.  The  meaning,
belonging  to  the  general  concept  of  substance  within  the  actual
processes  of  experience,  is  clearly  evident  in  this  example.  Empirical
knowledge  cannot  avoid  the  concept  of  substance,  although  genuine
philosophical  progress  in  such  knowledge  is  in  understanding  and
evaluating  it  as  a  concept.  True,  the  direct,  living  work  of  investi-
gation has  another  standpoint  from  the  beginning,  and  grasps  the
problem  as  if  from  another  side  than  that  of  epistemological  reflec-
tion. Investigation  finds  its  interest  in  the  new  fields  of  facts  to  be
mastered,  while  it  can  take  known  facts  as  a  given  condition  needing
no  further  analysis.  The  totality  of  the  "factual"  in  this  sense  is


210  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

fixed;  it  is  the  permanent  substratum,  which  gives  the  fundamental
mould  for  all  further  observations.  What  has  already  been  reached
at  any  point,  what  has  been  won,  must  be  taken  by  the  investiga-
tion as  something  assured  and  given;  for  only  thus  is  it  possible  to
move  the  field  of  the  problematical  to  another  point,  and  to  push  it
further  on,  so  that  new  questions  are  always  coming  in  for  considera-
tion. Thus  the  passive  fixity,  established  by  science  at  certain
points,  is  an  element  in  its  own  activity.  In  fact,  it  is  justified  and
unavoidable,  that  science  should  condense  a  wealth  of  empirical
relations  into  a  single  expression,  into  the  assumption  of  a  particular
thing-like  "bearer."  The  critical  self-characterization  of  thought,
however,  must  analyze  this  product  once  more  into  its  particular
factors,  although  it  conceives  this  product  as  necessary  for  certain
purposes  of  knowledge.  This  is  done  because  critical  thought  is  not
directed  forwards  on  the  gaining  of  new  objective  experiences,  but
backwards  on  the  origin  and  foundations  of  knowledge.  The  two
tendencies  of  thought  here  referred  to  can  never  be  directly  united;
the  conditions  of  scientific  production  are  different  from  those  of
critical  reflection.  We  cannot  use  functions  in  the  construction  of
empirical  reality  and  at  the  same  time  consider  and  describe  them.
Nevertheless,  the  two  standpoints,  and  therewith  the  constant
alteration  of  standpoints,  are  desirable,  in  order  to  judge  knowledge
as  a  whole  in  the  motives  of  its  advance,  and  in  the  permanent  logical
conditions  of  its  existence.  The  peculiar  character  of  knowledge
rests  on  the  tension  and  opposition  remaining  between  these  stand-
points. In  the  light  of  this,  it  can  be  understood  that  the  chemical
concept  of  the  atom  also  shows  a  different  form,  according  to  the
way  we  approach  it.  To  the  first  nai've  consideration,  the  atom
appears  as  a  fixed  substantial  kernel,  from  which  different  properties
can  be  successively  distinguished  and  separated  out,  while,  con-
versely, from  the  standpoint  of  the  critique  of  knowledge,  precisely
those  "properties"  and  their  mutual  relations  form  the  real  empirical
data,  for  which  the  concept  of  the  atom  is  created.  The  given  factual
material  is  united  in  a  single  focus  with  that  which  is  conceptually
anticipated,  and  by  virtue  of  a  natural  illusion  this  focus  appears  as
a  real,  unitary  object,  instead  of  a  mere  "virtual"  point.  Thus  the
atom  of  chemistry  is  an  "Idea,"  in  the  strict  meaning  Kant  gave
this  term, — in  so  far  as  it  possesses  "a  most  admirable  and  indispen-
sably necessary  regulative  use,  in  directing  the  understanding  to  a


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  211

certain  aim,  towards  which  all  the  lines  of  its  rules  converge  and
which,  though  it  is  an  idea  only  (focus  imaginarius),  that  is,  a  point
from  which,  as  lying  completely  outside  the  limits  of  possible  experi-
ence, the  concepts  of  the  understanding  do  not  in  reality  proceed,
serves  nevertheless  to  impart  to  them  the  greatest  unity  and  the
greatest  extension."74  This  function  remains  as  a  permanent  charac-
teristic of  the  concept  of  the  atom,  although  its  content  may
completely  change;  thus  e.gr.,  the  atom  of  matter  becomes  the  atom  of
electricity,  the  electron.  Precisely  this  sort  of  change  shows  that
what  is  essential  in  the  concept  does  not  consist  in  any  material
properties,  but  that  it  is  a  formal  concept,  that  can  be  filled  with
manifold  concrete  content  according  to  the  state  of  our  experience.

*  *  *  *  *

The  concept  of  valency  and  the  theory  of  types.  The  second  impor-
tant step  in  the  construction  of  chemical  concepts,  after  the  concep-
tion of  the  atom,  and  after  the  value  of  the  atomic  weights  of  the
individual  elements  has  in  general  been  established,  is  to  connect
according  to  conceptual  standpoints  the  various,  originally  separate
determinations  thus  gained,  and  to  collect  them  into  classes  of
definite  character.  The  empirical  facts  leading  to  such  relative
distinctions  and  combinations  within  the  total  system  are  given  in
the  relations  of  chemical  substitution.  If  we  trace  how  the  atoms  of
various  simple  materials  replace  each  other  in  combinations,  and
how  they  can  be  reciprocally  substituted  for  each  other,  certain  fun-
damental rules  result  governing  this  form  of  relation.  The  form  of
substitution  can  be  determined  once  for  all  and  expressed  by  certain
numerical  values,  which  we  attach  to  each  element  along  with  the
numerical  value  of  its  combination  weight.  If  we  take  the  atom  of
hydrogen  as  unity,  it  appears,  for  example,  that  an  atom  of  chlorine
can  in  certain  combinations  replace  an  atom  of  hydrogen,  while  an
atom  of  oxygen  always  replaces  two,  an  atom  of  nitrogen  three,  an
atom  of  carbon  four  atoms  of  hydrogen.  Thus  a  new  point  of  view
is  achieved  for  the  correlation  of  the  individual  elements,  and  a  new
characteristic  constant  for  each  simple  material.  The  "valency"
of  the  elements  is  the  expression  of  a  definite  property  in  them,  that
belongs  to  them  independently  of  their  chemical  affinity.  Now  if  we
arrange  the  chemical  combinations  according  to  this  new  principle,

74  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,  2nd.  ed.,  p.  672. Miiller's  trans,  p.  518.


212  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

they  are  divided  into  various  types,  in  which  the  members  belong-
ing to  the  same  type  are  characterized  by  the  fact  that  they  can
all  be  produced  from  a  certain  form  by  progressive  substitutions,
which  take  place  according  to  the  rules  of  the  valency  of  the  partic-
ular atoms.

Logical  aspects  of  the  concept  of  type.  The  concept  of  the  "type"
here  comes  in  for  consideration  not  in  its  significance  for  the  special
problems  of  chemistry,  but  as  a  paradigm  of  certain  logical  relations.
In  fact,  it  displays  most  distinctly  a  characteristic  feature  already
established  in  general  by  the  analysis  of  the  exact  scientific  concept.
The  chemical  concept  of  type  is  also  not  formed  on  the  pattern  of  the
generic  concept,  but  on  that  of  the  serial  concept.  The  different
combinations,  belonging  under  a  type,  are  not  so  conceived  because
of  the  external  similarity  of  their  sensuous  properties,  or  because  of
the  direct  agreement  in  their  chemical  functions.  They  belong
together  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  changed  into  each  other  by  means  of
the  relation,  which  subsists  between  the  valency  of  the  individual
atoms,  while  the  remote  members  of  the  series  need  no  further  analogy
than  is  established  by  this  law  of  derivation  itself.  In  the  history  of
chemistry,  the  concept  of  type  was  only  gradually  separated  from
the  concept  of  chemical  analogy.75  The  first  step  in  this  separation
is  found  in  the  relation  of  substitution  itself,  since  here  elements,
which  seem  entirely  different  from  each  other  in  their  nature  and
properties,  can  replace  each  other.  The  conception  of  substi-
tution, as  formulated  by  Dumas,  was  at  first  rejected  by  Berzelius
as  paradoxical  and  inconsistent  from  this  point  of  view;  chlorine
cannot  take  the  place  of  hydrogen  in  any  combination,  as  the  former
(according  to  the  theory  of  electro-chemical  dualism,  which  Berzelius
advocated,)  is  negatively  electric,  while  hydrogen  possesses  positive
electricity.  The  more,  however,  the  theory  of  substitution  made
its  way,  the  more  the  converse  view  gained  acceptance,  viz.,  that
entirely  dissimilar  materials  can  replace  each  other  in  certain  com-
binations, without  altering  the  nature  of  the  combination.  The
consequences  of  this  view  appear  even  more  sharply,  when  not  only
the  elements,  which  can  be  substituted  for  each  other,  are  contrasted
individually,  but  the  whole  group  of  materials,  that  can  issue  from
repeated  substitutions,  is  considered.  Here  also  the  demand  for

78  Cf.  more  particularly  esp.  Duhem,  Le  Mixte,  p.  97  ff.,  Wurtz,  op.  cit.t
p. 189  ff.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  213

analogy  was  at  first  upheld,  until  further  investigations  showed  that
the  series,  which  arise  in  this  way,  can  contain  members  completely
different  from  each  other  in  all  their  perceptible  properties  and  in
their  essential  chemical  determinations.  To  the  "chemical  type"
of  Dumas,  for  which  he  demanded  similar  fundamental  properties
in  all  members,  there  is  now  opposed  the  "molecular  type"  of
Regnault,  which  includes  materials  of  very  different  properties,  and
considers  these  materials  as  issuing  from  each  other  by  substitution.
The  conditions,  on  which  the  unity  of  the  type  rests,  thus  correspond
throughout  to  those  that  we  found  realized  in  the  field  of  the  con-
struction of  mathematical  concepts.  Then  there  were  geometrical
systems  and  groups  of  systems,  whose  elements  were  not  connected
by  any  intuitive  feature  common  to  them,  but  merely  by  the  definite
rule  of  relation,  which  prevailed  from  member  to  member;  and  the
same  is  true  here.  The  "valency"  of  the  particular  elements  estab-
lishes among  them  such  a  relation  as  produces  in  its  continued
application  definite  systems  of  characteristic  serial  types.  The
variation  according  to  law  of  this  "parameter"  generates  and  founds
the  form  of  the  concept,  which  accordingly  does  not  rest  on  a  simi-
larity in  the  content  of  what  is  connected,  but  on  the  type  of
connection.  4

The  chemical  concept  as  a  relational  concept.  The  chemical  concept
is  indeed  distinguished  from  the  mathematical,  in  that  the  relation  by
which  we  proceed  from  one  member  to  another  is  established  by
mathematics  purely  constructively,  while  the  relation  of  equivalence,
on  the  other  hand,  is  discovered  as  an  empirical  relation  between  the
various  elements.  However,  if  we  abstract  from  this  difference  of
origin,  we  recognize  that,  once  the  decisive  property  for  comparison
is  gained,  the  further  conceptual  construction  on  both  sides  takes
exactly  the  same  direction.  Here,  once  a  general  principle  of  co-
ordination has  been  defined,  our  concern  is  with  carrying  this  principle
through  the  whole  manifold  of  materials  given  by  observation,  and
thus  with  shaping  the  latter  aggregate  into  a  system,  within  which
we  grasp  the  reciprocal  action  and  interdependence  of  the  particular
members  according  to  fixed  rules.  In  this  regard,  the  theory  of  types
constitutes  the  first  approach  to  chemical  deduction,  since  it  shows  us
how,  from  certain  starting-points,  to  construct  the  manifold  of  bodies
by  adherence  to  a  few  general  principles,  and  how  to  group  them
around  fixed  central  points.  The  sensuously  heterogeneous  now


214  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

becomes  homogeneous,  when  we  organize  it  into  certain  numerical
relations.  It  is  the  numerical  and  relational  aspect,  which  is  here
again  decisive ;  for  it  constitutes  the  genuinely  characteristic  property
of  the  scientific  interpretation  of  the  chemical  concepts.  The  " val-
ency/' ascribed  to  the  particular  atoms,  must  at  first  appear  as  a  real
qualitas  occulta,  if  it  is  conceived  as  a  substantial  quality  in  them.
We  do  not  know  the  peculiar  property  of  the  atom  of  chlorine,  by
which  it  can  only  be  combined  with  one  atom  of  hydrogen;  we  do
not  know  by  what  force  the  atom  of  oxygen  combines  with  two  atoms
of  hydrogen,  and  the  atom  of  carbon  with  four  of  hydrogen.  And
this  riddle  is  not  solved  when,  in  explanation  of  the  different  relative
valencies,  reference  is  made  to  the  states  of  motion  of  the  individual
atoms, — which  states  are  supposed  to  agree  or  to  be  opposed  to  each
other  in  such  a  way  that  they  can  only  combine  with  each  other  in  an
entirely  definite  relation.78  For  here  something  absolutely  unknown,
and  empirically  undemonstrable  is  substituted  for  the  relations  of
substitution,  which  are  alone  known.  What  distinguished  the  con-
cept of  valency  from  all  scholastic  qualities  is  the  intellectual  renun-
ciation, which  it  implies.  It  does  not  seek  to  penetrate  into  the
substantial  nature  of  the  connection  of  atom  and  atom,  but  merely  to
represent  the  facts  of  this  coimection  according  to  universal  quan-
titative principles  of  order.  The  chemical  constitution-formula  at
first  seems  to  offer  a  direct  intuitive  picture  of  the  serial  order  and
position  of  the  atoms  among  themselves ;  but  what  it  finally  achieves
is  not  such  a  knowledge  of  the  ultimate,  absolute  elements  of  reality,
as  rather  a  general  analysis  of  the  bodies  and  materials  of  experi-
ence. The  formula  of  a  definite  compound  does  not  teach  us  to
know  it  merely  in  its  composition,  but  inserts  it  into  various  typical
series,  and  thus  refers  to  the  totality  of  such  structures,  that  can
arise  by  substitution  out  of  a  given  combination.  The  individual
member  becomes  the  representative  of  the  whole  group  to  which  it
belongs,  and  it  can  issue  from  the  group  by  variation  according  to
law  of  certain  fundamental  parts.  Since  the  constitution-formula
represents  this  connection,  this  formula  is  indeed  the  real  scientific
expression  of  the  empirical  reality  of  the  body;  for  it  means  nothing
else  than  the  thorough-going  objective  connection,  in  which  an
individual  " thing"  or  particular  event  stands  with  the  totality  of  real
and  possible  experiences.  (C/.  here  esp.  Ch.  VI.)

7<J  Cf.  Wurtz,  La  Thtorie  atomique,  p.  175.


THE CONCEPTS OF NATURAL SCIENCE  215

The  concept  of  the  "radical"  and  the  theories  of  "composite  radicals."
The  conception  of  substitution  becomes  especially  significant,  when
it  is  applied  not  merely  to  the  individual  atom  but  to  whole  groups  of
atoms.  The  theory  of  the  "composite  radical"  now  arises  and
becomes  the  real  foundation  of  organic  chemistry.  Here,  according
to  the  definition  of  Liebig,  the  radical  is  considered  as  a  constant
part  in  a  series  of  compounds,  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  replaced  in  the
latter  by  other  simple  bodies,  or  in  so  far  as  in  its  combination  with  a
simple  body  this  body  can  be  excluded  and  replaced  by  equivalents
of  other  simple  bodies.  Regarding  the  manner  in  which  the  radicals
* 'exist"  in  compounds,  there  is  disagreement  at  first.  In  the  "kernel
theory"  of  Laurent,  the  relation  is  at  first  conceived  and  described  in
a  thoroughly  realistic  sense.  The  kernels  are  as  such  present  in  a
plurality  of  bodies,  which  arise  from  them  by  their  combination  with
other  atoms;  they  preexist  with  respect  to  the  more  complex  struc-
tures. In  the  further  development  of  the  theory,  this  view  is  more
and  more  superseded.  When  Gerhardt,  in  particular,  shows  that  it
is  possible  to  assume  two  radicals  in  a  compound,  then  the  conception
of  the  real  existence  of  isolated  groups  is  destroyed.  Since  the
formulae  of  chemistry  are  only  meant  to  express  by  equations  certain
relations  of  structure  and  reaction,  since  they  are  not  intended  to
represent  what  bodies  are  in  and  for  themselves,  but  only  what  they
were  or  could  become,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  us,  it  is  now  urged,
from  erecting  several  rational  formulae  for  one  and  the  same  body,
according  as  we  wish  to  express  its  connection  with  one  or  another
group  of  compounds.  The  conflict  concerning  the  nature  and
absolute  properties  of  the  radical  is  thus  resolved ;  for  the  radicals  now
appear  as  the  result  of  certain  ideal  analyses,  which  we  make,  and
which  give  different  results,  according  to  the  standpoint  of  comparison
taken  as  a  basis.  The  radical  now  possesses  no  independent  reality,
but  is  meant  to  express  what  Gerhardt  calls  "the  relations,  by  which
elements  or  groups  of  atoms  replace  each  other."77  We  thus  stand
at  the  beginning  of  a  conception,  which  in  general  abandons  the
questions  as  to  whether  and  how  the  elements  continue  to  exist  in
the  compounds  into  which  they  enter,  in  order  instead  to  discover
and  represent,  according  to  general  rules,  merely  the  measurable
relations,  that  subsist  between  the  initial  and  final  conditions  of  a

77  Gerhardt,  Traiti  de  Chimie  organique;  cited  by  Ladenburg,  op.  cit.
p.  235.  (C/.p.  194  ff.)


216  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

process  of  chemical  transformation.  As  soon  as  this  phase  is  reached,
however,  chemistry  takes  its  place  in  the  general  plan  of  energetics,78
and  thus  passes  from  the  circle  of  empirical  descriptive  sciences  into
that  of  mathematical  science.


The  reconstruction  of  the  systematic  form  of  chemistry.  However,
before  this  subordination  of  chemistry  to  a  more  general  scientific
problem  occurs,  certain  standpoints  and  tendencies  appear  within  it,
which  point  to  this  reconstruction  in  systematic  form.  The  first
phase  of  the  determination  of  the  material  manifold  is  marked  by
the  fact  that  every  element  is  characterized  by  its  atomic  weight.
Thus  every  simple  body  gains,  in  the  expression- of  Leibniz,  a  definite
"characteristic  number;"  and  this  number  is  taken  implicitly  as
what  brings  the  wealth  of  its  empirical  properties  conceptually  to
complete  expression.  This  representation  of  the  material  manifold
in  a  manifold  of  numbers  already  indicates  a  new  problem.  As  the
real  methodological  advantage  of  the  field  of  number  is  that  each
member  in  it  is  deduced  and  constructively  developed  from  an  initial
structure  according  to  unified  rules,  this  demand  henceforth  is
extended  to  all  physical  and  chemical  determinations,  such  as  are
known  to  be  dependent  on  certain  numerical  values.  They  must  no
longer  be  conceived  as  a  lawless  aggregate;  but  it  must  be  possible  to
represent  them  in  their  sequence  and  gradual  transformation  by  an
exact  law.

The  periodic  system  of  the  elements.  This  general  demand  has  its
first  fulfillment  in  the  establishment  of  the  periodic  system  of  the
elements.  The  various  properties  of  simple  bodies,  their  hardness
and  malleability,  their  fusibility  and  volatility,  their  conductibility
for  heat  and  electricity,  etc.,  now  appear  as  periodic  functions  of  their
atomic  weights.  If  we  conceive  all  the  elements  arranged  in  a
series,  we  find  that,  in  advancing  in  the  series,  the  properties  of  the
various  elements  change  from  member  to  member,  but  that  after
going  over  a  certain  period,  the  same  properties  recur.  The  place  of
an  element  in  this  fundamental  systematic  series  determines  in  detail
its  physico-chemical  " nature."  One  of  the  founders  of  the  periodic

78  On  the  "energetic"  conception  and  treatment  of  chemistry,  see  esp.
Ostwald,  Elemente  und  Verbindungen,  Faraday-Vorleaung,  Leipzig,  1904;  also-
Duhem,  Le  Mixle,  Chs.  IX  and  X.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  217

system,  Lothar  Meyer,  has  clearly  characterized  the  new  principle
involved  in  it.  "Matter"  is  here  removed  from  the  field  of  scientific
constants  into  the  field  of  variables.  "Up  till  now  there  have  been
introduced  into  the  calculations  of  physics  as  variable  magnitudes,
on  which  phenomena  depend,  place  and  time  in  particular,  and,
under  certain  circumstances,  heat,  temperature,  electricity,  and  a
few  other  magnitudes;  matter  appeared,  as  expressed  in  magnitude
and  number,  only  as  mass  in  the  equations;  its  quality  was  only
considered  in  that  the  constants  for  each  kind  of  matter  had  a  differ-
ent value  in  the  differential  equations.  To  treat  these  magnitudes,
which  are  dependent  on  the  material  nature  of  the  substances,  as
variables  was  hitherto  not  customary;  ;but  ttis  advance  has  now
been  made.  The  influence  of  the  nature  of  matter  had  previously
been  considered  in  physical  phenomena  by  determining  the  physical
constants  for  the  most  various  substances.  But  this  material  nature
always  remained  something  qualitative;  the  possibility  was  lacking
of  introducing  this  fundamental  variable  expressed  in  number  and
measure  into  the  calculations.  An  approach  to  such  an  introduction,
although  a  very  primitive  one,  has  now  been  made  by  proving  that
the  numerical  value  of  the  atomic  weight  is  the  variable,  by  which
the  substantial  nature  and  the  properties  dependent  on  it  are  deter-
mined."79 The  qualitative  nature  of  the  particular  material  is
made  mathematically  conceivable  by  discovering  a  point  of  view  from
which  the  material  can  be  arranged  in  series  with  a  definite  law  of
progression.  The  significance  of  this  point  of  view  appears  especially
in  that  now  members  of  the  manifold,  that  were  hitherto  unknown
empirically,  can  be  demanded  and  predicted  on  the  basis  of  the
general  systematic  principle,  and  that  advancing  experience  confirms
this  demand.

Chemistry  and  mathematics.  The  deductive  element,  that  enters
into  chemistry,  can  be  understood  in  its  peculiar  quality  most  clearly,
when  we  compare  it  with  the  ideal  of  deduction  developed,  on  the
one  hand,  in  the  speculative  and  metaphysical  view  of  nature,  and
on  the  other  hand,  in  mathematical  physics.  If  we  abstract  from
the  part  played  by  the  problem  of  matter  in  the  philosophy  of  nature,
the  problem  of  matter  has  repeatedly  had  an  important  epistemolog-
ical  r61e  in  the  history  of  philosophy.  Thus  Locke,  for  instance,
develops  his  whole  view  of  the  problems  and  limits  of  scientific

79  Lothar  Meyer,  op.  dt.t  p.  176.


218  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

investigation  in  connection  with  the  example  of  chemical  knowledge
of  the  fundamental  elements  and  their  properties.  For  him,  genuine
knowledge  is  only  attainable  where  it  is  possible  to  gain  universal
insights  into  necessary  connections.  We  can  speak  of  genuine  knowl-
edge, in  the  strict  sense,  only  where  all  the  properties  of  the  object
are  certain  and  perfectly  intelligible  from  its  original  nature,  thus
where  it  is  possible  from  acquaintance  with  an  object  to  conclude
directly  and  to  determine  a  priori  all  its  properties.  This  postulate,
however,  which  is  fulfilled  in  all  our  "intuitive"  judgments  regarding
mathematical  relations,  is  not  satisfied  in  our  scientific  knowledge
of  nature.  Here,  where  we  are  merely  concerned  with  the  collec-
tion and  description  of  various  facts  of  perception,  it  remains  forever
impossible  to  establish  that  dependence  of  the  individual  members  on
each  other,  by  which  alone  they  could  become  a  rationally  connected
whole.  No  matter  how  many  properties  of  a  substance  we  may  dis-
cover by  observation  and  investigation,  the  question  as  to  their  inner
connection  is  not  advanced  a  step.  If  we  collect  ever  so  many
properties  of  gold,  its  malleability,  its  hardness,  its  non-combusti-
bility, etc.,  still  we  cannot  discover  from  them  one  single  new  deter-
mination, and  we  can  never  understand  the  form  of  connection,  by
which  definite  properties  of  one  kind  always  correspond  to  other
definite  properties  of  another  kind.  Such  an  insight,  as  would  make
our  knowledge  of  nature  a  genuine  science  like  mathematics,  would
only  be  possible  if,  instead  of  merely  collecting  observations  concern-
ing the  empirical  coexistence  or  empirical  incompatibility  of  proper-
ties, we  could  grasp  the  problem  "at  the  other  end;"  if  we  could  start
from  some  sort  of  determination  of  the  essence  of  gold,  to  deduce  from
it  the  totality  of  secondary  properties.80  Modern  science  has  in  part
fulfilled  the  ideal,  which  Locke  here  abandons;  but  it  had  first  to
give  this  ideal  a  new  meaning.  Modern  science  agrees  with  Locke,
that  the  deduction  of  the  particular  properties  of  a  material  from
its  "substantial  essence"  transcends  the  problems  of  exact  and  empiri-
cal knowledge;  but  it  does  not  thereby  disclaim  all  conceptual  con-
nection of  the  empirical  data  themselves.  Science  today  collects  the
plurality  of  elements  into  a  fundamental  series,  whose  members
succeed  each  other  according  to  a  definite  principle,  and  then  de-
termine the  individual  properties  of  bodies  as  functions  of  their
position  in  this  series.  How  from  the  assumed  fundamental  property,

80  Locke,  Essay  on  Human  Understanding,  Bk.  IV,  Ch.  6.


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  219

the  further  properties  follow,  how,  from  a  definite  atomic  weight,
there  results  a  definite  malleability  and  hardness,  fusibility  and
volatility,  remains  indeed  unanswered;  nevertheless,  the  fact  of  this
dependence  itself  is  used  in  the  attempt  to  calculate  and  predict
certain  special  properties  on  the  basis  of  certain  special  data.  The
functional  connection  thus  established  contains,  indeed,  less  than
metaphysical  insight  into  ultimate  essences,  but  at  the  same  time  it
offers  more  than  a  mere  empirical  collection  of  disconnected  particu-
lars. The  order  of  elements,  that  now  arises,  offers  at  least  an
analogue  of  mathematics,  and  thereby  an  analogue  of  exact  and  "intui-
tive" knowledge.  We  penetrate  no  deeper  into  the  absolute  being
of  bodies  by  this  means;  but  we  grasp  the  rules  of  their  systematic
connection  more  definitely.  (Cf.  above  p.  207  ff.)  Yet  at  the  same
time,  this  solution  leads  to  a  new  problem.  There  arises  the  problem
of  allowing  the  atomic  weights,  that  were  first  introduced  as  discrete
values,  to  proceed  from  each  other  by  continuous  transformation,
and  of  determining  the  law  according  to  which,  in  such  a  variation,
the  dependent  properties  must  change.  If  we  regard  this  problem
as  solved,  then  we  would  have  logically  entered  a  new  form  of  con-
ceptual construction;  instead  of  a  number  of  rules  concerning  the
concomitant  appearance  of  properties,  we  would  have  henceforth  a
unitary,  mathematically  representable  law  of  causal  dependence  be-
tween the  variations  of  different  magnitudes.  The  atomic  weights,  by
which  we  express  the  special  character  of  the  elements,  would  no  longer
stand  next  to  each  other  aj  rigid,  given  values,  but  could  be  traced  in
their  origin  out  of  each  other.  The  chemical  concept  would  have
become  the  physical  concept.  The  latest  phase  of  natural  science,
which  has  resulted  from  consideration  of  the  phenomena  of  radio-
activity, seems  to  attest  such  a  change  directly;  for  here  science
assumes  a  continuous  transformation  of  the  elements  into  each  other,
and  for  it  the  particular  material  with  its  sensuous  definiteness  is
only  a  transition-point  in  a  dynamic  process.  When  the  chemical
atom  is  resolved  into  a  system  of  electrons,  it  loses  the  absolute  fixity
and  immutability  previously  ascribed  to  it,  and  appears  as  a  mere
relative  resting-point — as  a  cross-section,  which  thought  makes  in  the
continuous  flow  of  process.  However  we  may  judge  of  the  positive
truth  of  such  assumptions,  at  any  rate,  they  show  very  distinctly
the  way  in  which  the  scientific  concept  advances.  Chemical  research
begins  with  a  plurality  of  actual  observations,  which  at  first  stand


220  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

unconnected  side  by  side;  and  these  it  defines  in  fixed  determinations
of  number  and  measure.  These  numerical  values  gained  through
observation  are  soon  arranged  into  series;  the  series  proceed  according
to  a  rule,  and  the  later  members  can  be  determined  from  the  preced-
ing. As,  however,  empirical  manifolds  are  transformed  into  rational
in  this  way,  there  arises  the  problem  of  reducing  the  laws  of  struc-
tural relations  to  a  deeper-lying  causal  law  of  process,  and  of  com-
pletely grounding  the  former  in  the  latter.  In  this  progressive
mastery  of  the  empirical  material,  the  peculiarity  of  the  logical  proc-
ess is  revealed;  through  it,  the  concept,  while  obeying  the  facts,  at
the  same  time  gains  intellectual  dominance  over  the  facts.

IX

The  concept  of  natural  science  and  "reality."  The  real  methodologi-
cal interest  of  the  construction  of  the  concepts  of  chemistry  lies  in
the  fact  that  in  it  the  relation  of  the  universal  to  the-  particular
is  set  in  a  new  light.  The  consideration  of  the  physical  concepts  and
methods  allows  only  one  side  of  this  fundamental  relation  to  appear
clearly.  The  goal  of  theoretical  physics  is  and  remains  the  universal
laws  of  process.  The  particular  cases,  in  so  far  as  they  are  taken  into
account,  serve  only  as  paradigms,  in  which  these  laws  are  represented
and  illustrated.  The  further  this  scientific  problem  is  followed,  the
sharper  the  separation  becomes  between  the  system  of  our  concepts
and  the  system  of  the  real.  For  all  "reality"  is  offered  to  us  in
individual  shape  and  form,  and  thus  in  a  vast  manifold  of  particular
features,  while  all  conception,  according  to  its  function,  turns  aside
from  this  concrete  totality  of  particular  features.  Here  is  again  re-
vealed the  antinomy  that  found  its  first  striking  expression  in  the
system  of  Aristotle.  All  knowledge  seeks  to  be  knowledge  of  the
universal,  and  is  only  fulfilled  in  this  goal;  while  true  and  original
being  does  not  belong  to  the  universal,  but  to  the  individual  sub-
stances in  the  dynamic  succession  of  their  realization.  The  historical
struggles,  that  took  place  regarding  the  Aristotelian  system  during
the  middle  ages  and  far  down  into  modern  times,  are  for  the  most
part  to  be  explained  from  this  point  of  view.  The  conflict  of  "nomi-
nalism" and  "realism"  represents  only  a  further  development  of  the
problem,  already  latent  in  the  first  beginnings  of  the  Aristotelian
metaphysics  and  theory  of  knowledge.


THE CONCEPTS  OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  221

RickerVs  theory  of  the  scientific  construction  of  concepts.  In  con-
temporary philosophy,  the  opposition  here  referred  to  finds  its
sharpest  formulation  in  Rickert's  theory  of  the  scientific  construction
of  concepts.  The  direction  of  thought  upon  the  "concept,"  and  its
direction  upon  the  real,  mutually  exclude  each  other.  For  to  the
extent  that  the  concept  progressively  fulfills  its  task,  the  field  of
perceptible  facts  recedes.  The  simplification,  which  conception
undertakes  with  regard  to  the  intensive  and  extensive  manifold  of
things,  means  a  continuous  impoverishment  of  its  significance  for
reality.  The  final  goal  of  the  material  sciences  and  of  all  other
natural  sciences  is  to  remove  empirical  intuition  from  the  content  of
their  concepts.  Science  does  not  bridge  the  gap  between  "thoughts"
and  "facts,"  but  it  is  science,  which  first  creates  this  gap  and
constantly  increases  it.  "Whatever  the  content  of  the  concept  may
be,  it  stands  in  the  most  decided  opposition  to  the  empirical  world  of
the  intuitive The  individual  in  the  strict  sense  dis-
appears even  in  the  most  primitive  construction  of  concepts,  and
natural  science  finally  comes  to  the  view,  that  all  reality  is  always
and  everywhere  the  same,  and  thus  contains  absolutely  nothing

individual But  this  is  universally  not  the  case;  and  as

soon  as  we  only  consider  that  every  bit  of  reality  in  its  intuitive  form
is  different  from  every  other,  and  further  that  the  particular,  the
intuitive  and  the  individual,  is  the  only  reality  that  we  know,  then
the  significance  of  the  fact,  that  all  conceptual  construction  annuls
the  individuality  of  reality,  must  come  to  mind.  If  nothing  individ-
ual and  intuitive  enters  into  the  content  of  scientific  concepts,  it
follows  that  nothing  real  enters  into  them.  The  gap  between  the
concepts  and  the  ;^dividuals,  which  is  produced  by  natural  science,
is  thus  a  gap  bex,  JL  concepts  and  reality  in  general."81

Criticism  of  Rickert's  theory.  If  this  logical  consequence  is  justified,
then  scientific  investigation  has  hitherto  been  entangled  in  a  strange
self-deception  regarding  its  goal.  For  all  the  great  exact  and  empiri-
cal investigators  believed,  and  still  believe,  that  the  task  of  their
science  is  to  permeate  the  real  more  and  more  with  knowledge,  and
to  raise  it  to  more  definite  intuition.  In  place  of  an  accidental  and
fragmentary  consideration  of  things,  which  is  different  for  each
individual  observer,  a  more  perfect  survey  of  them  should  be  gained;

81  Rickert,  Die  Grenzen  der  naturmssenschaftlichen  Begriffsbildung,  T&bin-
gen  und  Leipzig  1902,  p.  235  ff .


222  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

and  in  place  of  the  narrow  naive  picture  of  the  world,  a  more  compre-
hensive insight  should  be  achieved,  such  as  to  reveal  to  us  the  finer
structural  relations  of  the  real,  while  permitting  us  to  trace  them  in
detail.  But  how  can  this  demand  be  satisfied,  if  the  logical  instru-
ment of  investigation,  the  scientific  concept,  is  in  direct  conflict  with
it?  We  must  now  recognize,  that  what  ought  to  sharpen  our  appre-
hension of  the  details  of  empirical  intuition,  dulls  it;  that  what  seems
to  confirm  and  extend  our  knowledge  of  facts,  rather  separates  us
further  and  further  from  the  real  kernel  of  the  ' "factual."  The  con-
ceptual understanding  of  reality  amounts  to  the  annihilation  of  its
characteristic  import.  Peculiar  as  this  result  may  seem,  it  follows
necessarily  from  the  premises  of  Rickert's  theory.  If  the  concept  is,
what  the  dominant  logical  doctrine  holds  it  to  be,  nothing  but  a
"presentation  of  what  is  common, "  then  it  is  incapable  of  grasping
the  particular  as  particular.  Its  function  then  is  not  essentially
different  from  that  of  the  ward,  with  which  it  is  placed  on  a  level  by
Rickert,  who  in  this  follows  Sigwart.  As  Sigwart  explains,  all  that  is
presented  either  exists  individually  or  in  abstraction  from  the  con-
ditions of  its  individual  existence,  and  in  this  case  it  is  called  univer-
sal, in  so  far  as  what  is  presented,  as  inwardly  present,  can  be
thought  of  as  existing  in  any  group  of  individual  things  or  cases.  The
expression  for  this  inwardly  present  meaning  of  what  is  presented  is
the  word  as  such.  For  instance,  there  is  no  entirely  definite  intui-
tive content  corresponding  to  the  word  "bird,"  but  rather  only  a
certain  vague  outline  of  form  along  with  a  vague  presentation  of
wing  movement,  so  that  a  child  may  call  a  flying  beetle  or  butterfly  a
bird;  the  same  is  originally  true  of  all  our  universal  presentations.
They  are  only  possible  because  we  have,  along  with  the  concrete  and
complete  sense  perceptions,  also  less  perfect  and  definite  contents  of
consciousness.  The  indefiniteness  of  the  memory-images  of  our
actual  sensations  involves  that,  along  with  the  vivid  and  immediately
present,  sensuous  intuitions  in  the  real  process  of  consciousness,
pale  residua  of  them  are  always  found,  which  retain  only  one  or
another  feature  of  them;  and  it  is  these  latter,  which  contain  the  real
psychological  material  for  the  construction  of  the  universal  presenta-
tion. From  this  indefiniteness  results  the  capacity  of  the  presenta-
tion to  be  applied  to  what  is  different,  not  merely  in  space  and  time
but  in  content:  "the  more  indefinite,  the  easier  the  application."
The  apparent  variety  of  the  conceptual  function,  its  ability  to  intro-


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  223

duce  constantly  new  and  more  remote  elements  for  comparison,
thus  rests  rather  on  the  poverty  of  the  psychological  substratum.
The  scientific  concept  arises  in  the  same  way  and  under  the  same
conditions.  It  differs  from  the  naive  concepts  of  language  and  the
popular  view  of  the  world  merely  in  that  the  procedure,  that  is  there
unconsciously  effective,  is  here  practised  with  critical  awareness.
The  methods  of  natural  abstraction,  when  left  to  themselves,  are  very
involved,  and  never  attain  a  complete,  definite  result;  the  achieve-
ment of  science  is  to  remove  this  ambiguity  by  establishing  by  uni-
versal definition  certain  rules  for  the  selection  of  the  perceptual
material.  The  various  abstract  forms  thus  gain  an  exact  delimita-
tion with  respect  to  each  other,  since  each  of  them  comprehends  a
single  group  of  properties.  The  essence  of  the  concept  is  found  in
this  constancy  and  all-round  differentiation  of  the  presentational
content,  signified  by  a  definite  word.82  But  remoteness  from  the
living  intuition  of  the  particular  facts  is  even  greater  than  before.
For  in  the  case  of  the  word-meanings,  the  concrete  presentation  of
the  content  they  are  to  signify  still  stands  in  the  background  of
consciousness,  although  it  need  not  be  explicitly  clear;  while  in  the
case  of  the  scientific  concept,  the  purer  it  is,  the  more  it  frees  itself
from  this  final  residuum  of  intuition.  The  scientific  concept  thus
becomes  a  whole  that  can  be  completely  surveyed  and  mastered  by
thought,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  fail  to  grasp  and  reproduce
reality,  which  is  always  present  only  in  individual  form.

Ward-meanings  and  mathematical  concepts.  What  first  strikes  us  in
this  deduction  is  that  it  separates  the  scientific  concept  from  the
connection,  in  which  it  logically  arises,  and  from  which  it  continues
to  draw  its  real  force.  The  exact  scientific  concepts  only  continue  an
intellectual  process  already  effective  in  pure  mathematical  knowledge.
Criticism  of  popular  word-meanings  does  not  affect  these  concepts,
for  from  the  beginning  they  stand  on  other  ground  and  are  rooted
in  entirely  different  presuppositions.  The  theoretical  concepts  of
natural  science  are  in  no  sense  merely  purified  and  idealized  word-
meanings;  all  of  them  have  an  element  totally  foreign  to  the  word  as
such.  As  we  have  seen,  they  always  contain  reference  to  an  exact
serial  principle,  that  enables  us  to  connect  the  manifold  of  intuition
in  a  definite  way,  and  to  run  through  it  according  to  a  prescribed  law.

«  See  Sigwart,  Logik,*  I,  45  ff .,  I,  325,  etc.  Cf.  Rickert,  op.  tit.,  p.  32  ff .,  47  ff.
(See  also  Ch.  I.)


224  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION


the  "concept"  in  this  sense,  the  antinomy  on  which  Rickert
founds  his  argument  does  not  arise.  Here  no  insuperable  gap  can
arise  between  the  "universal"  and  the  "particular,"  for  the  univer-
sal itself  has  no  other  meaning  and  puipose  than  to  represent  and
to  render  possible  the  connection  and  order  of  the  particular  itself.
If  we  regard  the  particular  as  a  serial  member  and  the  universal  as  a
serial  principle  ,  it  is  at  once  clear  that  the  two  moments,  without
going  over  into  each  other  and  in  any  way  being  confused,  still
refer  throughout  in  their  function  to  each  other.  It  is  not  evident
that  any  concrete  content  must  lose  its  particularity  and  intuitive
character  as  soon  as  it  is  placed  with  other  similar  contents  in  various
serial  connections,  and  is  in  so  far  "conceptually"  shaped.  Rather
the  opposite  is  the  case;  the  further  this  shaping  proceeds,  and  the
more  systems  of  relations  the  particular  enters  into,  the  more  clearly
its  peculiar  character  is  revealed.  Every  new  standpoint  (and  the
concept  is  nothing  but  such  a  standpoint)  permits  a  new  aspect,  a
new  specific  property,  to  become  manifest.  Here  logic  again  unites
with  the  view  of  concrete  science.  In  fact,  every  true  scientific
concept  proves  its  fruitf  illness  just  by  pointing  the  way  to  hitherto
unknown  fields  of  "facts."  In  turning  aside  from  the  particular
material  of  intuition,  the  scientific  concept  does  not  lose  sight  of  it
completely,  but  always  shows  us  a  direction  which,  if  followed  further,
teaches  us  new  peculiarities  in  the  manifold  of  intuition.  Thus  if  the
chemical  "concept"  of  a  certain  body  is  given  by  its  constitution-
formula,  in  which  it  is  grasped  as  a  particular  material  in  its  character-
istic structure,  it  is  at  the  same  time  brought  under  the  various
chemical  "types,"  and  is  thus  set  in  a  definite  relation  to  the  totality
of  remaining  bodies.  The  ordinary  chemical  formula  only  gives  us
the  composition  in  general,  but  not  the  type  of  construction  of  the
individual  elements;  here  it  is  enriched  by  a  wealth  of  new  relations.
The  general  rule  now  in  our  possession  enables  us  to  trace  how  and
according  to  what  law  the  given  material  is  transformed  into  another;
the  rule  involves  not  only  the  form  of  the  existence  of  the  material
at  a  definite  moment,  but  the  totality  of  its  possible  spatial  and
temporal  phases.  The  further  the  chemical  construction  of  concepts
proceeds,  the  more  sharply  the  particulars  can  be  distinguished.
Materials,  which  were  called  similar,  because  "isomeric,"  from  the
standpoint  of  the  undeveloped  concept,  are  clearly  separated  and
distinctly  defined  in  character,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  developed


THE CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  225

concept.  Thus  we  never  meet  here  the  vague  "universality"  of
popular  word-meanings.  The  particular  serial  member,  whose  place
in  the  system  is  to  be  determined,  can  be  retained  throughout;  never-
theless, its  relation  with  other  members  of  a  group  possesses  a  sharply
defined  meaning,  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  other  forms  of
relation.  The  individual  in  its  peculiarity  is  threatened  only  by  the
universality  of  the  blurred  generic  image,  while  the  universality  of  a
definite  law  of  relation  confirms  this  peculiarity  and  makes  it  known
on  all  sides.

Richer fs  confusion  of  "meanings"  and  "presentations."  Thus
Rickert 's  criticism  ultimately  concerns  only  a  form  of  the  concept
that  he  himself  recognizes  as  unsatisfactory.  This  form  of  concep-
tual construction  comes  under  the  "theory  of  subsumption,"83
which  is  nevertheless  rejected  as  far  as  the  foundation  of  the  exact
concepts  is  concerned.  If  we  recognize,  with  Rickert,  that  all  the
thing-concepts  of  natural  science  have  a  tendency  to  be  transformed
more  and  more  into  relation-concepts,  it  is  thereby  implicitly  admitted
that  the  real  logical  value  of  the  concept  is  not  connected  with  the
form  of  abstract  "universality/'  "A  science  can  only  be  valuable
with  regard  to  knowledge  of  the  whole  of  the  corporeal  world,"
Rickert  says,  "if  it  has  before  it  in  the  first  beginnings  of  the  con-
struction of  its  concepts  the  final  goal  of  all  natural  science,  insight
into  the  necessity  of  things  according  to  natural  law.  If  a  science
has  this  goal  before  it,  it  will  always  seek  to  abandon  the  purely
classificatory  construction  of  concepts  as  soon  as  possible;  i.e.,  it  will
never  be  satisfied  with  concepts,  that  are  mere  complexes  of  properties,
but  any  collection  of  such  elements  into  a  concept  occurs  only  on
the  assumption,  that  the  elements  either  stand  directly  in  a  necessary
connection  according  to  natural  law  (i.e.,  unconditionally  universal
connection),  or  at  least  represent  the  preliminary  stages  of  such
concepts,  in  which  a  necessary  connection  according  to  natural
law  is  expressed.  The  relation  of  the  world  of  meanings  to  the  world
of  perceptions  assuredly  constitutes  our  knowledge,  as  least  in  so  far
as  we  are  concerned  with  knowledge  in  the  sense  of  the  natural
sciences;  but  for  that  very  reason  the  meanings  cannot  be  presenta-
tions, but  must  be  judgments  in  their  logical  value,  and  must  either

83  Cf.  the  pertinent  critical  remarks  of  M.  Frischeisen-Kohler,  Die  Grenzen
der  naturwissenshaftlichenBegriffsbildung,  Arch.  f.  system.  Philosophic,  XII,
(1906),  p.  225  ff.


226  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

contain  laws  or  prepare  the  way  for  them."84  In  connection  with
this  clear  explanation,  the  critical  point  in  Rickert's  theory  can  soon
be  pointed  out;  the  center  of  the  problem  is  falsely  shifted  from  the
necessity  of  conceptual  "meanings"  to  the  universality  of  the  generic
presentations.  Only  of  "presentations"  can  it  be  said,  that  the
more  general  they  become  the  more  they  lose  their  intuitive  sharpness
and  clarity,  until  they  are  finally  reduced  to  mere  schemas  without
significance  for  reality.  Judgments,  on  the  contrary,  determine  the
individual  the  more  exactly  the  wider  the  sphere  of  comparison
and  correlation  to  which  they  relate  it.  Increase  of  extension
is  here  parallel  with  determination  of  the  content.  (See  above  Ch.  I.)
The  universality  of  a  judgment  does  not  signify  the  quantity  of  the
judgment,  but  the  quality  of  the  judgmental  connection,  so  that
judgments  concerning  individuals  can  be  completely  universal.
The  proposition  S  is  P,  in  this  case,  does  not  signify  that  the  property
P  is  uniformly  contained  in  a  plurality  of  subjects,  but  that  it  belongs
to  this  particular  subject  unconditionally  and  with  objective  necessity.
When  we  conceive  the  given  of  sensation  as  made  necessary  by  scien-
tific laws,  we  thereby  change  nothing  in  its  material  content,  but  merely
represent  it  from  a  new  standpoint.  A  whole  "individual"  thing
does  not  pass  over  into  a  whole  "universal"  thing;  but  a  relatively
loose  aggregate  of  empirical  determinations  is  united  into  a  system  of
objectively  valid  connections.  A  peculiar  kind  of  object  is  not
produced,  but  the  very  same  empirical  reality  is  given  a  new  categori-
cal form.  The  transition  to  "universality"  is  thus  a  secondary
aspect,  which  does  not  concern  the  real  tendency  of  the  construction
of  concepts.  In  so  far  as  it  enters,  the  transition  to  "universality"
is  only  a  symptom  and  expression  of  that  transition  to  necessity,
which  is  posited  and  demanded  by  the  problem  of  scientific  knowledge
itself.85

84  Op.  cit.,  p.  71,  73.

88 1  find  an  indirect  confirmation  of  this  view  in  the  latest  exposition  of  the
theory  of  Rickert,  which  is  contained  in  the  writing  of  Sergius  Hessen,  "Indi-
viduelle  Kausalit&t"  (Erg&nzungshefte  der  Kantstudien,  Nr.  15,  Berlin  1909).
In  order  to  reveal  clearly  the  opposition  between  the  scientific  and  the  histori-
cal construction  of  concepts,  Hessen  distinguishes  two  different  forms  of
causality.  The  causality,  which  natural  science  affirms  and  makes  the  basis
of  its  explanations,  can  be  reduced  to  the  idea  of  universal  lawfulness.  Ac-
cording to  this  view,  to  conceive  an  event  causally  means  to  subsume  it  under
general  laws;  what  is  known  in  this  way  is  thus  never  grasped  in  its  absolutely


THE CONCEPTS  OP  NATURAL  SCIENCE  227


The  concept  as  the  expression  of  individual  relations.  True,  in  one
respect  the  separation  between  the  scientific  concept  and  the  "reality"
given  us  in  sensuous  impressions  remains.  None  of  the  fundamental
concepts  of  natural  science  can  be  pointed  out  as  parts  of  sensuous
perceptions,  and  thus  verified  by  an  immediately  corresponding
impression.  It  has  become  increasingly  evident  that,  the  more
scientific  thought  extends  its  dominion,  the  more  it  is  forced  to
intellectual  conceptions  that  possess  no  analogue  in  the  field  of

unique  and  unrepeatable  character,  but  only  as  an  example  of  a  general  con-
cept. The  conterit  of  the  idea  of  causality  in  general  is,  however,  not  ex-
hausted by  this  one-sided  scientific  schema.  For  causality  ultimately  signifies
nothing  else  than  the  " necessity  in  the  temporal  sequence  of  the  parts  of
reality;1'  we  must  postulate  such  a  necessity  also  where  we  are  concerned  with
the  succession  of  purely  individual  events,  which  can  thus  never  recur  in
precisely  the  same  way.  The  specifically  "historical  causality"  is  founded
on  the  application  of  this  point  of  View;  its  concept  arises,  as  soon  as  we  insert
the  idea  of  necessity  and  determinateness  into  a  unique,  temporally  deter-
mined process,  without  attempting  to  conceive  it  as  a  special  case  of  universal
laws .  (Cf.  Hessen  op.  cit.  esp .  p .  32  ff .,  p .  73  ft".,  etc .)  Here  it  appears  that  there
is  an  inclusive  unity  for  the  scientific  and  the  historical  "concept,"  from  which
both  are  deduced;  and  this  unity  is  constituted  by  the  idea  of  necessity.
Hessen  himself  ascribed  this  necessity  at  first  to  the  "objective  reality,"
which  as  such  is  to  be  conceived  as  free  in  principle  from  every  form  of  concep-
tual interpretation,  whether  in  the  direction  of  the  scientific  or  the  historical
concepts.  A  more,  exact  epistemological  analysis  shows,  however,  that  this
reality  is  not  taken  in  the  sense  of  an  absolute  metaphysical  existence,  but
as  a  regulative  idea,  which  guides  our  diverse,  methodically  separate  concep-
tions toward  a  common  goal.  (Cf.  esp.  p.  88  ff.)  In  other  words,  it  thus
appears  that  the  methodological  distinction  of  the  "universal"  concepts  of
natural  science  from  the  "individual"  concepts  of  history  does  not  exclude  a
connection  between  the  two,  but  rather  requires  it;  what  is  logically  distinct
from  the  standpoint  of  "universality"  tends  to  coincide,  when  we  exchange
this  standpoint  with  that  of  necessity.

If  we  hold  to  the  latter  thought  as  the  truly  original  and  decisive  idea,  it  is
further  clear  that  the  distinction  in  degree  of  "universality"  can  never  become
an  unconditional  opposition.  In  so  far  as  we  apply  the  idea  of  necessit}  to  a
particular  temporal  occurrence,  thus  in  so  far  as  we  assert  that  this  individual
A  necessarily  demands  and  draws  after  it  this  individual  B,  we  implicitly
assume  an  element  of  universality  even  in  this  establishment  of  a  unique  state  of
affairs.  For  in  this  judgment,  the  case  is  excluded  of  the  total  complex  A  ever
recurring  in  precisely  the  same  character;  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  asserted
that,  if  A  were  repeated  in  this  fashion,  then  B  and  only  B  would  be  demanded
as  real.  Whoever  sees  more  in  history  than  a  mere  positivistic  "descrip-
tion" of  the  sequence  of  various  events,  whoever  grants  it  a  particular  form  of


228  SUBSTANCE AtfD FUNCTION

concrete  sensations.  Not  only  the  hypothetical  concepts,  like  the
atom  and  the  ether,  but  purely  empirical  concepts,  like  matter  and
motion,  show  that  scientific  investigation  along  with  the  "given"
elements  of  perception  cannot  do  without  the  purely  ideal  limiting
concepts  not  given  in  direct  experience;  along  with  the  "real,"  scientific
investigation  must  have  the  "not-real."  (See  above  p.  120  ff.)
Nevertheless  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  assume  that  exact  science,
owing  to  this  characteristic  feature  of  its  concepts,  withdraws

causal  judgment,  has  already  recognized  in  history  this  form  of  the
*  'universal."  The  universality  does  not  belong  to  the  categorical  but  to  the
hypothetical  part  of  the  assertion ;  the  form  of  connection  of  A  and  B  is  ideally
projected  into  universality,  although  the  particular  elements  possess  only  a
unique  reality.  The  historical  concept,  which  seeks  to  grasp  this  reality,
indirectly  refers  to  the  universal  form  of  necessity,  just  as,  on  the  other  hand,
the  exact  concept  of  natural  science,  which  is  meant  in  the  first  place  to  be  an
expression  of  a  universal  connection,  seeks  verification  and  application  in  the
temporally  limited  particular  case.  Only,  in  the  two,  the  direction  of  the
reference  of  the  "particular"  to  the  "universal"  is  different,  while  the  correla-
tion of  the  two  moments  is  seen  to  be  necessary  in  both  cases.

Thus  we  are  not  concerned  here  with  an  opposition  between  the  "  con-
cept" and  absolute  "reality,"  but  with  a  distinction  wholly  within  the
system  of  concepts.  Hessen  himself  emphasizes  this  fact,  and  therewith  the
conceptual  character  also  belonging  to  history.  "The  opposite  opinion,  which
makes  history  a  perceptual  science  and  connects  it  with  reality,  is  guilty  of
an  historical  concept-realism  as  dangerous  as  that  of  natural  science."  The
historical  concepts  are  "in  general  products  of  a  more  or  less  intense  abstrac-
tion," and  are  thus  as  little  perceptual  as  the  concepts  of  the  natural  sciences.
"As  an  individualizing  science  of  civilization,  history  implies  a  removal  from
reality;  it  stands  in  principle  as  close  to  reality  as  the  natural  sciences;  it  also
works  with  concepts,  and  indeed — with  individual  concepts.  This  must  be
especially  emphasized  against  historical  concept-realism"  (p.  27  ff.).  Here
it  appears  from  another  angle,  that  the  separation  of  the  concepts  of  natural
science  from  those  of  history,  presupposes  a  certain  connection  between  the
two.  The  conceptual  function  as  such  must  be  understood  and  derived  in
its  unitary  form  before  the  differentiation  into  various  types  of  concepts  can
begin.  This  fundamental  form,  however,  is  not  found  in  the  generic  con-
cept, but  in  the  serial  concept,  which  is  unavoidable  for  any  sort  of
"shaping"  of  the  perceptually  given.  An  essential  task  of  the  historical  con-
cepts is  the  insertion  of  the  individual  into  an  inclusive  systematic  connection,
such  as  has  constantly  established  itself  more  distinctly  as  the  real  goal  of  the
scientific  construction  of  concepts.  This  '' insertion"  can  occur  under  differ-
ent points  of  view  and  according  to  different  motives ;  nevertheless  it  has  com-
mon logical  features,  which  can  be  defined  and  isolated  as  the  essence  of
"the"  concept.


THE  CONCEPTS OF  NATURAL SCIENCE  229

more  and  more  from  the  tasks  offered  by  concrete  empirical
existence.  Precisely  in  this  apparent  turning  away  from  the  reality
of  things,  science  is  directed  upon  them  in  a  new  way.  For  those
very  concepts,  that  have  no  direct  intuitive  content,  have  a  neces-
sary "function  in  the  shaping  and  construction  of  intuitive  reality.
The  determinations  expressed  by  the  scientific  concepts  are  not
perceptible  properties  of  the  empirical  objects,  like  their  color  or
taste;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  relations  of  these  empirical
objects.  The  judgments  thus  formed,  although  they  cannot  be
resolved  in  their  content  into  mere  aggregates  of  sense  impressions,
are  nevertheless  related  in  their  use  to  the  totality  of  these  impres-
sions, to  which  they  seek  to  give  systematic  form.  The  methodologi-
cal opposition  thus  never  becomes  metaphysical;  for  thought  only
separates  itself  from  intuition  in  order  to  return  to  it  with  new  inde-
pendent instruments,  thereby  to  enrich  it  in  itself.  Every  relation,
which  theory  has  discovered  and  given  mathematical  form,  indicates
a  new  way  from  the  given  to  the  not  yet  given,  from  real  to  "possible"
experience.  It  is  thus  true  indeed  that  the  relational  concepts  of
natural  science  have  no  immediate  copy  in  the  individual  things;
but  what  they  lack  is  not  so  much  the  element  of  individuality  as
rather  the  thing-like  character.  They  render  insight  into  relations
possible,  and  guarantee  it,  although  they  themselves  can  never  be
perceived  after  the  fashion  of  isolated  objects.  Thus  energy,  for
example,  does  not  signify  a  homogeneous  thing,  in  which  all  inner
differences  of  the  different  types  of  energy  are  cancelled,  but  it  is  a
unitary  principle  of  connection,  that  as  such  can  only  be  verified  in
the  qualitatively  different.  Identity  of  serial  form  is  concealed
behind  every  assumption  of  identical  objects  in  natural  science;  and
such  identity  is  only  found  in  the  manifold  of  serial  members,  which
must  be  retained  as  such.  There  is  thus  no  contradiction  between
the  universal  validity  of  principles  and  the  particular  existence  of
things,  because  there  is  ultimately  no  rivalry  between  the  two.  They
belong  to  different  logical  dimensions;  thus  neither  can  seek  directly
to  take  the  place  of  the  other.

The  problem  of  the  constants  of  natural  science.  The  problem  gains
sharper  conception,  when  we  bring  it  back  to  the  field  of  mathe-
matics.86 Reference  has  justly  been  made,  in  opposition  to  Rickert's

86  The  * 'concrete  universality"  of  the  mathematical  concepts  (c/.  above
Ch.  I.)  has  also  incidentally  been  recognized  and  emohasized  from  the


230  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

theory,  to  the  significant  rdle  due  to  the  establishment  of  certain
facts  of  magnitude,  to  the  establishment  of  certain  numerical  con-
stants in  the  structure  of  natural  science.87  It  is  only  when  the  values
of  these  constants  are  inserted  in  the  formulae  of  these  general  laws,
that  the  manifold  of  experiences  gains  that  fixed  and  definite  struc-
ture, that  makes  it  "nature."  The  scientific  construction  of  reality
is  only  completed  when  there  are  fcmnd,  along  with  the  general
causal  equations,  definite,  empirically  established,  quantitative
values  for  particular  groups  of  processes:  as,  for  example,  when  the
general  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  is  supplemented  by
giving  the  fixed  equivalence-numbers,  in  accordance  with  which  the
exchange  of  energy  takes  place  between  two  different  fields.  As
Robert  Mayer  has  said,  these  numbers  are  the  desired  foundation  of
an  exact  investigation  of  nature.88  The  definite  number  breaks
through  the  traditional  logical  schema,  which  recognizes  the  concept
only  as  a  generic  concept  and  as  comprehending  a  plurality  of
examples  under  it.  The  "two"  or  the  "four"  does  not  exist  as  a

standpoint  of  Rickert.  "The  gap  for  conceptual  knowledge  between  the  uni-
versal and  the  particular/1  says  Lask  in  his  work,  Fichtes  Idealismus  und
die  Geschichte,  "and  the  consequent  irrationality  is  bridged  in  the  mathemati-
cal view  through  the  possibility  of  construction.  The  individual  cases  real-
izing the  mathematical  concept  can  be  generated  by  the  concept  itself.  From
the  concept  of  the  circle,  we  can  attain  by  construction  the  mathematical
individuality  of  the  particular  circle,  and  thus  go  from  the  universal  to  the
individual  in  its  individuality In  mathematics,  also,  the  intui-
tive object  is  an  individual,  concrete  and  given  object;  but  it  is  given  a  priori,
not  a  posteriori  like  the  material  of  sensation  it  is  a  logical  unique!  something
individual,  but  at  the  same  time  capable  of  being  construed  a  priori"  (p.  40  f .).
We  see  here  also  that  Rickert 's  criticism  would  have  taken  another  form
if  he  had  conceived  the  concepts  of  natural  science  decisively  and  from  the
beginning  as  products  of  constructive  mathematical  procedure,  rather  than
as  results  of  "abstractive"  procedure.  The  insight  once  gained  for  mathe-
matics would  have  had  to  be  transferred  to  physics;  for  precisely  here  lies  the
real  problem—that  mathematics  is  no  "logical  unique/'  but  that  it  progres-
sively provides  the  "special"  natural  sciences  with  its  own  characteristic  form
of  concept .  The  form  of  mathematical '  'deduction"  is  already  contained  in  the
form  of  physical  "induction,"  by  which  we  grasp  the  empirically  real,  and  thus
the  same  methodic  mastery  of  the  particularly  the  universal  is  achieved.
(C/.  esp.  Ch.  5.)

87  C/. Riehl, Logik  und  Erkenntnistheorie (Die  Kultur  der  Gegenwart,
I,  6,  p.  101  f.);  c/.  esp.  Frischeisen- Kohler,  op.  cit.  p.  255.

88  R.  Mayer,  Bemerkungen tiber  das  mechanische Aquivalent  der  Wdrme
(1851)  (Die  Mechanik  der  Warme,  p.  237).


THE  CONCEPTS  OP  NATURAL  SCIENCE  231

genus,  that  is  realized  in  all  concrete  twos  or  fours  of  objects,  but  it  is
a  fixed  member  in  the  series  of  unities  and  occurs  only  once,  although
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  possesses  no  sensuous,  but  a  purely
conceptual  "being."  (See  Ch.  II.)  On  the  one  hand,  it  appears
that  the  scientific  concept  is  in  no  way  denied  the  establishment  of
the  individual;  although,  on  the  other  hand,  it  never  grasps  the
individual  as  isolated,  but  only  as  a  particular  element  in  an  ordered
manifold.  Instead  of  ascending  to  abstract  and  empty  genera  of
being  and  process,  investigation  seeks  to  connect  the  empirical
constants,  which  it  discovers  and  which  are  represented  by  definite
number-individualities,  into  series  according  to  necessary  laws.89
The  essential  object  of  scientific  consideration  is  the  "structural
relations,"  along  with  the  laws  of  causal  dependence.  These  struc-
tural relations  are  finally  reduced  to  definite  numbers,  as  the  example
of  chemical  knowledge  shows,  and  the  attempt  is  made  to  understand
these  numbers  as  an  ordered  sequence.  Theory  considers  and
defines  the  possible  forms  of  serial  connection  in  general,  while
experience  shows  the  definite  place,  taken  by  an  empirical  "real"
being  or  an  empirically  real  process  in  this  connection.  In  the
developed  scientific  conception  of  the  world,  the  two  elements  are
inseparably  united.  The  universality  of  the  functional  rule  is  only
represented  in  the  particular  numerical  constants,  and  the  particu-
larity of  the  numerical  constants  is  only  represented  in  the  universal-
ity of  a  law  mutually  connecting  them.  This  reciprocal  relation  is
also  repeated  and  confirmed  within  the  special  sciences.  No  natural
science  renounces  the  establishment  of  particular  facts;  nor  can  it
establish  them  without  the  decisive  concurrence  of  the  idea  of  law.
Even  those  who  start  from  the  opposition  of  the  historical  concept  of
the  individual  and  the  scientific  generic  concept  have  to  agree  ex-
pressly, that  this  intellectual  division  corresponds  to  no  real  separa-
tion in  the  sciences  themselves.  Everywhere  the  two  motives
interpenetrate;  and  it  is  only  by  the  dominance  of  one  or  the  other
that  the  position  of  a  particular  science  in  the  general  system  of
knowledge  can  be  ascertained.  But  if  this  is  the  case,  then  it  is
questionable  by  what  right  we  can  characterize  a  type  of  problem
and  the  treatment  of  it  by  the  name  of  one  science,  when  the  problem

89  Cf.  here  especially  A.  Gorland,  Aristoteles  und  Kant  bezuglich  der  Idee
der  theoretischen  Erkenntnis  untersucht.  Giessen,  1909.  (Philos.  Arbeiten  hrg.
von  Cohen  u.  Natorp  II,  2),  p.  433  ff .


232  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

is  shared  by  the  most  various  disciplines.  If  we  collect  under  the
generic  concept  of  the  "historical"  all  those  scientific  procedures,
which  are  directed  on  the  gaining  of  pure  "facts,"  even  so  it  is  by
no  means  shown  that  the  concept  thus  produced  represents  a  true
methodological  unity.  For  the  establishment  of  facts  occurs  in  the
different  special  sciences  under  very  different  conditions.  The
general  theory  of  the  special  discipline  is  always  necessarily  pre-
supposed, and  also  gives  the  judgment  of  fact  its  definite  form.  Thus
every  astronomical  "factum"  involves  in  its  formulation  the  whole
conceptual  apparatus  of  celestial  mechanics,  and  further  the  funda-
mental doctrines  of  optics,  in  fact  all  the  essential  parts  of  theoretical
physics.  (See  above  p.  142  ff.)  The  "historical"  part  of  each
science  is  methodologically  connected  with  its  "theoretical"  part  by
a  genuine  inner  dependence,  while  between  the  descriptive  parts  of
two  different  disciplines,  on  the  other  hand,  there  subsists  only  a
loose  connection.  The  unity  here  is  not  one  of  principle,  but  is
merely  classificatory.  The  procedure,  by  which  astronomy  gains  its
facts,  is  conceptually  connected  with  the  procedure,  by  which  it
constructs  its  general  theoretical  conceptions;  but  it  is  sharply  and
definitely  distinguished  from  the  way  in  which,  for  example,  biology
determines  and  selects  its  empirical  material.  Here  also  it  proves  to
be  impossible  to  divide  our  knowledge  in  such  a  way  that,  on  the
one  side,  there  should  be  purely  the  universal,  and  on  the  other  side,
purely  the  particular.  Only  the  relations  of  the  two  moments,  only
the  function  fulfilled  by  the  universal  in  connection  with  the  particular,
gives  a  true  ground  of  division.

Magnitudes  and  other  farms  of  relations.  That  this  function  is
completed  in  none  of  its  activities,  that  beyond  every  solution  a  new
problem  arises,  is  indeed  indubitable.  Here,  in  fact,  the  "individual"
reality  shows  its  fundamental  character  of  inexhaustibility.  But  it
is  the  characteristic  merit  of  the  true  scientific  relational  concepts,
that  they  attempt  this  task  in  spite  of  the  impossibility  in  principle
of  its  completion.  Each  new  construction,  since  it  is  connected
with  the  preceding,  forms  a  new  step  in  the  determination  of  being
and  process.  The  individual,  as  an  infinitely  distant  point,  deter-
mines the  direction  of  knowledge.  This  last  and  highest  goal  points
indeed  beyond  the  circle  of  scientific  concepts  and  methods.  The
"individual"  of  natural  science  includes  and  exhausts  neither  the
individual  of  aesthetic  consideration  nor  the  ethical  personalities,


THE  CONCEPTS  OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  233

which  are  the  subjects  of  history.  For  all  particularity  in  natural
science  reduces  to  the  discovery  of  definite  magnitudes  and  relations
of  magnitudes,  while  the  peculiarity  and  value  of  the  object  of
artistic  consideration  and  of  ethical  judgment  lies. outside  its  field  of
vision.  But  this  delimitation  of  the  different  methods  of  judging
produces  no  dualistic  opposition  between  them.  The  concept  of
natural  science  does  not  deny  the  object  of  ethics  and  aesthetics,
although  it  cannot  construct  this  object  with  the  means  at  its  disposal;
it  does  not  falsify  intuition,  although  it  consciously  regards  intuition
from  one  dominant  standpoint,  and  selects  one  particular  form  of  deter-
mination. The  other  types  of  consideration,  which  go  beyond  natural
science,  are  not  in  contradiction  with  it,  but  in  a  relation  of  intellect-
ual supplementation.  They  also  do  not  approach  the  individual  as
a  separated  and  isolated  element,  but  they  produce  new  and  signifi-
cant points  of  connection.  It  is  a  new  teleological  order  of  the  real,
that  is  added  to  the  mere  quantitative  order,  and  in  which  the  individ-
ual first  gains  its  full  meaning.  Logically  speaking,  the  individual
is  taken  up  and  shaped  by  different  forms  of  relation.  The  con-
flict of  the  "universal"  and  the  "particular"  resolves  into  a  system  of
complementary  conditions,  such  as  only  in  their  totality  and  co-
operation can  grasp  the  problem  of  the  real.


PART  II

THE  SYSTEM  OF  RELATIONAL  CONCEPTS
AND  THE  PROBLEM  OF  REALITY


CHAPTER  V
ON  THE  PROBLEM  OP  INDUCTION


The  metaphysical  tendency  in  induction  and  deduction.  The  real
result  of  the  methodological  analysis  of  scientific  knowledge  is  to
deprive  the  opposition  of  the  universal  and  the  particular  of  its
metaphysical  character.  The  law  and  the  fact  appear  no  longer  as
two  eternally  sundered  poles  of  knowledge;  but  they  stand  in  living,
functional  connection,  related  to  each  other  as  means  and  end.
There  is  no  empirical  law,  which  is  not  concerned  with  the  connection
of  the  given  and  with  inferring  not-given  groups  of  facts;  as,  on  the
other  hand,  each  "fact"  is  established  with  reference  to  a  hypotheti-
cal law,  and  receives  its  definite  character  through  this  reference.
Empirical  natural  science,  since  it  first  entered  "the  sure  course  of  a
science/'  h$s  itself  taken  no  considerable  part  in  the  struggle  of  the
philosophical  parties  concerning  the  rights  of  "induction"  and
"deduction."  When  empirical  science  examines  its  own  procedure,
it  has  to  recognize  that  there  is  in  this  struggle  a  false  and  technical
separation  of  ways  of  knowing  that  are  alike  indispensable  to  its
very  existence.  The  motive  peculiar  to  all  metaphysics  of  knowledge
is  here  revealed.  What  appears  and  acts  in  the  process  of  knowledge
as  an  inseparable  unity  of  conditions  is  hypostatized  on  the  meta-
physical view  into  a  conflict  of  things.  Permanence  and  change,
being  and  becoming,  unity  and  plurality,  all  of  which  signify  only
partial  aspects  of  certain  fundamental  ways  of  knowing,  appear  in
unconditional  opposition.  Thus  in  the  philosophy  of  nature,  there  is
a  metaphysics  of  the  particular  along  with  the  metaphysics  of  the
universal.  While  in  this  latter,  concepts  expressing  the  necessary
connection  of  experiences  are  raised  to  independent  realities,  in  the
former,  the  simple  sensation  in  its  individual  character  is  made  the
bearer  and  content  of  true  reality.  The  real  content  of  existence,
which  resists  every  analysis,  is  sought  only  in  the  isolated  impres-
sions and  their  qualitative  properties.  Advancing  intellectual
insight  serves  only  to  bring  out  more  clearly  this  fundamental  exist-
ence, and  to  resolve  all  assertions  regarding  being  into  it  more

completely.

237


238  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

The  empirical  theory  of  judgment.  If  this  demand  is  to  be  satisfied,
the  motive  of  particularization  must  be  sharply  and  clearly  carried
through.  All  our  judgments  can  mean  nothing  else  than  the  estab-
lishment of  a  state  of  fact,  given  here  and  now,  and  conceived  merely
in  its  spatial  and  temporal  particularity.  An  assertion  reaching
beyond  this  would  fall  into  the  field  of  mere  fiction.  The  validity
claimed  by  any  true  judgment  must  be  strictly  limited  to  the  moment
of  making  the  judgment;  for  as  the  perception,  as  a  real  process,  does
not  go  beyond  this  instant  of  time,  so  the  concept  must  recognize
these  natural  limits,  if  it  is  not  to  lose  its  definite  character.  Present
and  past  sensations  constitute  the  kernel  of  all  our  judgments,  both
the  rational  judgments  and  judgments  of  fact.  Indeed  the  element
of  past  sensations  already  threatens  to  break  through  the  general
schema;  for  the  past  does  not  "exist"  for  consciousness  in  the  same
sense  as  that  in  which  the  concept  of  reality  is  here  taken.  When  we
compare  a  temporally  present  impression  with  others,  that  have
occupied  consciousness  at  an  earlier  point  of  time,  we  have  already
taken  the  first  step  from  the  "given"  into  the  "not-given."  This
step  may  be  taken  without  danger,  in  so  far  as  it  is  assumed,  that  the
remembered  perception  is  like  the  actual  one  in  all  essential  parts.
The  past  is  conceived  as  present,  in  spite  of  its  temporal  remoteness,
and  with  all  the  definiteness  of  the  immediate  impression.  Judg-
ment rests  solely  on  the  comparison  of  actual  and  reproduced  con-
tents of  perception.

Mack's  "thought-experiment."  Consistent  "empiricism"  is  obliged
to  extend  this  consequence  to  all  fields  of  knowledge.  Mathematics
and  physics,  physics  and  biology  are,  from  this  point  of  view,  equiva-
lent; for  it  is  not  the  analysis  of  the  object,  but  the  psychological
analysis  of  the  act  of  judgment,  which  has  led  to  this  explanation.
The  form  of  judgment  must  be  the  same  everywhere,  because  the
presentational  material,  on  which  its  form  exclusively  rests,  is  always
the  same  for  the  different  disciplines  of  knowledge.  The  method  of
observation  and  of  investigation  is  independent  of  whether  we
experiment  with  things  themselves,  or  with  our  presentations  and
memories  of  things.  We  may  cite  an  instance  from  Mach.  If,
for  example,  the  geometrical  problem  is  proposed  of  inscribing  a
square  in  a  right-angled  triangle,  having  the  two  sides  a  and  6,  and  the
hypotenuse  c,  while  one  corner  of  the  square  is  to  coincide  with  the
right  angle,  and  the  three  other  corners  are  to  lie  on  the  sides'  a,  b


ON THE PROBLEM OF INDUCTION  239

and  c;  then  thought  must  submit  the  given  conditions  to  an  investiga-
tion, in  order  to  find  a  solution  of  the  problem.  Now  if  we  conceive
an  arbitrary  distance  to  be  measured  off  from  the  vertex  of  the  right
angle  on  one  of  the  two  legs,  and  the  corresponding  square  to  be
constructed,  then  the  corner  of  this  square  will  not  in  general  fall
on  the  hypotenuse,  but  to  the  right  or  left  of  it,  outside  or  inside  the
surface  of  the  triangle.  Between  these  two  possible  cases,  as  is
further  shown,  there  is  a  continuous  transition,  since  by  continually
increasing  the  originally  chosen  distance,  we  can  move  its  end-point
from  within  the  triangle  to  a  position  outside  the  triangle.  Experi-
ence directly  shows  that  this  movement  cannot  take  place  except  by
crossing  the  hypotenuse  once,  as  the  line  which  divides  the  two  parts
of  the  plane  of  the  triangle,  and  thus  marking  a  point  on  it,  which
represents  the  point  demanded  by  the  problem.  "Such  a  tentative
(tatonnierende)  division  of  the  field  of  presentations,  in  which  we
have  to  seek  the  solution  of  the  problem,  naturally  precedes  its
perfect  solution.  Popular  thought  may  be  satisfied  with  a  practically
sufficient,  approximate  solution.  Science  demands  the  most  general,
shortest  and  most  comprehensible  solution.  We  obtain  this,  when
we  remember  that  all  inscribed  squares  have  the  line  which  bisects
the  angle  at  the  intersection  of  a  and  b  in  common  as  a  diagonal.
Consequently  if  we  draw  this  bisecting  line  from  this  known  point,  we
can  complete  the  required  square  from  its  point  of  intersection  with  c.
Simple  as  this  purposely  chosen  ....  example  is,  it  brings
out  clearly  what  is  essential  in  all  solution  of  problems,  experimen-
tation with  thoughts,  with  memories "1

Criticism  of  Mack's  theory.  However,  even  this  example  reveals  a
latent  presupposition  at  the  basis  of  the  whole  argument.  "Memory"
in  the  strict  psychological  sense  can  produce  no  new  content;  it  can
only  repeat  what  has  been  offered  by  sensuous  presentation.  It  can
thus  recall  into  consciousness  those  cases,  that  have  been  intuitively
presented  to  us,  but  it  is  incomprehensible  how  it  can  venture  any
assertion  regarding  a  whole  group  of  forms,  without  having  run
through  the  particular  examples  individually.  Yet  this  latter
possibility  is  excluded  by  the  nature  of  the  problem  in  the  case
mentioned;  the  number  of  possible  squares  is  infinite,  and  is  thus
absolutely  inexhaustible  for  concrete  sensuous  imagination.  The
judgment  of  memory  as  such  can  never  survey  an  infinite  group  of

1  Mach,  Erkenntnis  und  Irrtum,  p.  39  f.


240  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

possible  cases,  but  only  a  limited  number  of  actual  cases.  However
many  points  of  the  line  bisecting  the  angle  we  may  have  investigated,
we  can  never  decide  whether  the  next  point  that  we  select  will
show  the  same  characteristics  as  those  previously  observed,  if  we
commit  ourselves  solely  to  the  described  method  of  experimentation
with  presentations  and  memories.  From  this  point  of  view,  there  is
nothing  to  hinder  the  assumption  that  in  further  advance  there  might
be  found  points  of  the  line  bisecting  the  angle,  which  do  not  satisfy
the  assumed  condition;  or  that  conversely,  there  are  points  that  fulfill
the  condition  without  belonging  to  this  line.  The  solution  first
gains  the  character  of  necessity  and  determinateness,  when  we  go
back  from  the  particular  example  to  the  process  of  construction,
in  which  the  bisecting  line  arises  and  it  gains  its  mathematical  prop-
erties. In  becoming  aware  of  this  unitary  rule  of  construction,  we
thereby  grasp  the  totality  of  determinations  of  the  complete  struc-
ture; for  these  determinations  arise  only  by  virtue  of  the  generating
law  and  can  be  deduced  from  it  in  all  strictness.  We  do  not  proceed
here  from  a  plurality  of  particular  cases  to  the  connecting  law,  but
from  the  unity  of  the  geometrical  procedure  to  the  particularities  of
application.  Only  in  this  way  is  a  relation  posited,  that  affirms  not
only  the  present  presentation,  as  it  is  found  in  consciousness,  but  a
permanent  ideal  connection.  A  presupposition  is  established  which
is  meant  to  hold  not  of  this  or  that  individual  triangle  with  its
particular  properties,  but  of  "the  triangle"  absolutely.  It  is  no
matter  whether  this  claim  can  be  finally  justified;  certainly  as  a
mere  psychological  phenomenon,  it  breaks  through  the  scheme  of
knowledge  of  the  consistent  sensationalistic  view.

Thus  those  thinkers,  who  proclaim  the  postulate  of  "radical
empiricism"  most  decidedly  within  psychology,  are  obliged  even
from  this  standpoint  to  recognize  the  logical  and  methodological
difference  here.  The  unprejudiced  verdict  of  "pure  experience"  is
opposed  on  this  point  to  the  dogmatic  deductions  of  sensationalism.
Unprejudiced  analysis  of  the  facts  of  knowledge  shows  clearly  that  to
reduce  mathematical  and  logical  relations  to  assertions  regarding
the  frequent  empirical  coexistence  of  particular  presentations  is  a
vain  endeavor.  Mathematical  and  logical  relations  do  not  report
whether  and  how  often  certain  empirical  contents  have  been  found
in  existence  in  space  and  time,  but  rather  establish  a  necessary  con-
nection between  ideal  structures,  the  validity  of  which  is  to  remain


ON  THE  PBOBLEM  OF  INDUCTION  241

unaffected  by  all  changes  in  the  world  of  existing  sensuous  objects.
To  interpret  a  logical  or  mathematical  proposition  as  a  mere  repro-
duction of  particular,  actual  "impressions"  and  their  empirical
relations,  is  to  falsify  the  real  meaning  of  the  proposition  in  the
attempt  to  discover  its  origin;  such  an  interpretation  ascribes  to  the
proposition  a  sense,  which,  by  the  nature  of  the  subject  to  which  it
refers,  it  neither  does  nor  can  possess.  No  metaphysical  construction
can  set  aside  the  psychological  and  logical  phenomenon  of  this  differ-
ence; "relations  between  ideas"  are  separated  in  principle  from  purely
factual  determinations  of  the  coexistence  and  sequence  of  particular
empirical  properties.2

Locke's  theory  of  empirical  judgment.  The  more  sharply  this
separation  is  carried  through,  the  more  strongly,  on  the  other  hand,
the  character  of  the  empirical  judgment  is  revealed.  The  character
of  this  latter  seems  to  consist  in  nothing  else  than  a  conscious  limita-
tion of  the  validity  of  the  judgmental  connection  to  the  temporal
moment  of  making  the  judgment.  In  this  sense,  the  relation  of  the
two  kinds  of  truths  was  already  grasped  by  Locke.  According  to
him,  the  validity  of  mathematical  knowledge  rests  on  the  principle
of  the  immutability  of  the  same  relations  between  the  same  intel-
lectual objects.  What  is  proved  of  one  triangle  can  be  carried  over
without  further  mediation  to  all  triangles;  for  a  particular  intuitive
presentation  of  the  triangle  does  not  stand  for  itself  in  the  proof,
but  is  only  meant  to  be  an  accidentally  selected  sensuous  image  for  a
universal  and  permanent  relation.  This  insight  is  denied  in  all
the  judgments,  which  go  beyond  the  field  of  our  intellectual  presenta-
tions to  the  existence  of  things.  External  things  manifest  themselves
to  consciousness  in  no  other  way  than  in  the  sensuous  impressions
they  arouse  in  us;  their  certainty  can  thus  be  of  no  other  kind  than
that  of  these  impressions  themselves.  The  existence  of  sensation
reaches  no  further  than  its  immediate  presence.  Once  this  is  removed
we  lose  our  only  criterion  for  the  existence  of  things  and  the  basis  of
all  assertions  regarding  the  more  exact  properties  of  this  existence
is  taken  from  us.  Consequently,  judgments  concerning  the  exist-
ence of  things  have  only  relative  and  limited  truth;  for,  however

8  Genuine  psychological  ''empiricism"  maintains  this  separation  through-
out; this  is  brought  out  with  especial  clarity  by  James  in  his  polemic  against
Spencer  and  Mill  on  this  point.  (The  Principles  of  Psychology,  London  1901,
esp.  Vol  II,  645,  654,  661,  etc.)


242  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

convincing  and  evident  they  may  seem  as  long  as  the  direct  sensation
is  given,  we  have  no  assurance  that  the  momentary  witness  of
sensation  will  ever  be  repeated  in  exactly  the  same  way.  Accordingly
there  is  necessary  knowledge  only  of  such  objects  as,  like  the  objects
of  pure  mathematics,  renounce  all  concrete  reality;  while  at  the  very
moment  this  reality  is  taken  into  account,  the  character  of  knowledge
is  completely  changed.

The  "element  of  eternity"  in  all  empirical  judgment.  Although  this
distinction  is  illuminating  from  the  abstract  standpoint  of  theory  of
knowledge,  it  offers  a  difficult  problem  when  we  consider  it  in  con-
nection with  the  concrete  procedure  of  natural  science.  Locke's
account,  which  has  been  frequently  repeated  since  with  slight  varia-
tions, might  appear  as  a  correct  account  of  what  the  purely  empirical
and  inductive  propositions  of  natural  science  ought  to  be;  but  it
certainly  does  not  touch  what  they  are  in  reality.  No  judgment  of
natural  science  is  limited  to  establishing  what  sensuous  impressions
are  found  in  the  consciousness  of  an  individual  observer  at  a  definite,
strictly  limited  point  of  time.  If  there  are  judgments  that  speak  of
this,  they  are  the  narrative  judgments  of  psychology,  and  not  the
theoretical  and  descriptive  judgments  of  general  natural  science.
As  the  mathematician,  who  treats  of  the  relations  between  geometri-
cal forms  or  between  pure  numbers,  permits  nothing  in  his  state-
ments regarding  the  properties  of  the  particular  presentations,  in
which  he  sensuously  represents  these  relations,  so  also  the  investiga^
tor,  who  gives  out  the  results  of  an  experimental  research,  constantly
goes  beyond  a  simple  report  of  his  particular  perceptual  experiences.
What  he  establishes  is  not  the  sequence  and  play  of  certain  sense
impressions,  that  have  occurred  in  him  and  again  disappeared  into
nothing,  but  the  constant  "properties"  of  constant  things  and  proc-
esses. In  this  advance  from  the  mere  process  of  sensation  to  definite
"objective"  assertions,  the  metaphysical  concept  of  "transcendence"
is  indeed  wholly  absent.  The  change,  that  makes  possible  the  judg-
ment of  natural  science,  only  transforms  the  data  of  sense  into  a  new
mode  of  being  in  so  far  as  it  imprints  upon  sense-data  a  new  form
of  knowledge.  This  element  of  knowledge  can  be  separated  out  and
retained  independently  of  all  further  metaphysical  assertions  that
may  be  added.  It  is,  first  of  all,  a  new  sort  of  temporal  validity,
which  is  now  ascribed  to  the  judgment.  Even  the  simplest  judgment
concerning  any  empirical  matter  of  fact  ascribes  to  the  latter  an


ON THE PROBLEM OF INDUCTION  243

existence  and  a  permanence,  which  the  fleeting  sense-experience  as
such  cannot  establish.  The  proposition,  that  sulphur  melts  at  a
definite  temperature,  that  water  freezes  at  a  definite  temperature,
means  even  in  its  simplest  terms,  and  abstracting  from  the  various
theoretical  assumptions  contained  in  the  mere  concept  of  "tempera-
ture/' something  that  is  to  be  limited  to  no  isolated  temporal  moment.
It  asserts  that,  as  often  as  the  conditions  embraced  by  the  subject
concept  are  realized,  the  consequences  expressed  in  the  predicate
concept  will  be  always  and  necessarily  connected  with  them.  For
thought,  the  moment  of  immediate  perception  is  extended  to  the
whole  course  of  time,  which  is  surveyed  in  its  totality  at  one  glance.
It  is  this  logical  function,  which  gives  each  experiment  its  peculiar
significance  as  proof.  Each  scientific  conclusion  based  on  an  experi-
ment rests  on  the  latent  assumption,  that  what  is  found  to  be  valid
here  and  now,  remains  valid  for  all  places  and  all  tunes,  in  so  far  as  the
conditions  of  investigation  are  unchanged.  Only  through  this
principle  are  the  "subjective"  facts  of  sense-perception  changed  into
the  "objective"  facts  of  scientific  judgment.  From  a  new  side,  it  is
seen  how  far,  as  Goethe  said,  all  that  is  factual  is  already  theory;
for  it  is  only  the  thought  of  the  necessary  determinatenesy  of  phe-
nomena, that  leads  us  to  arrest  a  single  transitory  observation,  and
establish  it  as  a  fact.

The  postulate  of  necessary  determinateness.  Even  investigators,
who  think  they  stand  exclusively  on  the  ground  of  empirical  "facts"
and  who  repudiate  all  independence  of  the  intellect  with  respect  to
the  data  of  immediate  perception,  have  expressly  attested  to  this
intellectual  function.  In  spite  of  all  supposed  scepticism  this  one
conviction  is  occasionally  expressed.  "The  relations  between  differ-
ent phenomena,"  says  Ostwald,  "which  have  once  been  known,
remain  as  indestructible  parts  of  all  future  science.  It  can,  and
indeed  often, does,  happen  that  the  form  in  which  such  relations
were  first  expressed  is  seen  to  be  imperfect;  it  is  seen  that  the  rela-
tions are  not  to  be  maintained  as  wholly  universal,  but  are  subject  to
other  influences,  which  alter  them,  of  which  no  thought  could  be  taken
at  their  discovery  and  first  formulation,  since  they  were  then
unknown.  But  however  science  may  be  transformed,  a  definite
indestructible  residuum  of  that  first  knowledge  remains,  and  a  truth
once  gained  by  science  has  an  eternal  life  in  this  sense,  t'.e.,  it  exists  as
long  as  human  science  will  exist."3  This  element  of  "eternity"  is

8  Ostwald,  Grundriss  der  Naturphilosophie,  p.  15.


244  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

also  characteristic  of  empirical  judgments  concerning  facts.  No
connection  between  observations,  once  it  has  been  established  objec-
tively, can  be  absolutely  annulled  in  the  further  course  of  investiga-
tion. The  new  facts,  which  we  discover,  do  not  displace  the  earlier
experiences  in  every  sense,  but  only  add  to  them  a  definite  concep-
tual determination.  And  this  change  really  affects  not  so  much  the
judgmental  connection,  as  rather  the  subject  to  which  it  refers.
For  example,  if  we  conceive  a  certain  material  as  determined  by  the
scheme  of  its  physical  and  chemical  properties,  then  no  matter  what
contrary  instances  may  arise  in  the  course  of  advancing  observation,
or  what  change  may  appear  in  its  action,  the  previously  affirmed
connection  in  the  determinations  of  the  material  is  in  no  way  set
aside.  If  the  empirical  judgment  were  bound  to  a  single  moment  of
time,  then  a  simple  relation  of  annihilation  and  re-creation  would
prevail  here;  the  later  moment  would  set  aside  the  earlier,  and
with  it  all  the  "truths,"  which  were  indeed  only  established  and
asserted  of  the  earlier.  Just  as,  in  the  real  course  of  phenomena,
the  later  moment  replaces  the  earlier,  so  also  it  would  involve  an
inner  change  in  the  empirical  laws  of  the  thing.  But  in  truth,  each
body  has  an  identical  structure  and  character,  which  we  ascribe  to
it  once  for  all.  We  never  express  divergent  results  by  assuming
that  one  and  the  same  body  has  changed  in  its  fundamental  proper-
ties, but  by  calling  the  identity  of  the  observed  object  into  question.
What  we  now  see  standing  before  us  is  not  the  same  empirical  object,
as  was  previously  offered;  but  we  consider  it  as  modified  by  certain
conditions,  that  are  to  be  discovered  and  established.  Thus  the
truth  of  the  earlier  judgment  "S  is  P"  is  not  invalidated  by  its  opposite
"S  is  not  P,"  but,  while  maintaining  the  first  proposition,  we  trace  the
transformation,  which  the  judgment  must  undergo,  when  S  passes
into  S'.  The  advance  of  observation  thus  involves  a  continuous
advance  in  analysis;  it  distinguishes  with  increasing  exactness  cases
which  on  first  vague  consideration  appear  wholly  similar  and  reveals
the  characteristic  differences  of  each  individual  case.  If  we  conceive
this  work  of  analysis  as  complete  and  a  wholly  determinate  subject
therewith  gained,  then  the  detenninateness  of  this  subject  will  also
involve  in  it  the  determinateness  and  necessity  of  the  judgmental
connection.  The  element  of  uncertainty,  contained  by  the  empirical
judgment  in  contrast  to  the  rational,  thus  concerns  only  the  sub-
sumption  of  the  given  under  an  ideal  case.  The  question  is  not


ON THE PKOBLEM OP  INDUCTION  245

whether  to  a  strictly  defined  content  a  the  predicate  b  belongs  or
not,  but  whether  a  given  content  satisfies  all  the  conditions  of  the
concept  a,  or  is  to  be  determined  by  a  different  concept  a'.  The
problem  is  not  whether  a  is  truly  6,  but  whether  xy  which  is  offered
by  mere  perception,  is  truly  a.  Here  lies  the  real  superiority  of  the
mathematical  construction  of  concepts;  for  the  objects  of  mathemati-
cal construction  are  only  what  our  ideal  construction  makes  them,
while  every  empirical  content  conceals  unknown  determinations  in
itself,  and  therefore  we  can  never  decide  with  full  certainty  under
which  of  our  previously  developed  hypothetical  concepts  it  is  to  be
brought.

Judgments  of  perception  and  judgments  of  experience.  Locke's
analysis  of  the  empirical  judgment  is  thus  seen  to  be  intrinsically
inadequate;  for  it  conceals  that  element  of  necessary  connection,
which  is  also  characteristic  of  assertions  concerning  facts,  and  which
gives  them  their  real  meaning.  For  Kant,  this  necessity  was  the
real  fundamental  problem;  yet  in  first  introducing  his  critical  ques-
tion, he  still  appears  dependent  in  one  point  upon  Locke.  The  dis-
tinction between  judgments  of  perception  and  judgments  of  experi-
ence, to  which  Kant  appeals,  has  not  so  much  a  direct,  systematic,
as  a  didactic  meaning;  it  joins  on  to  the  sensualistic  conception  of
judgment,  so  as  to  gain  from  it  a  new  meaning  and  a  deeper  interpre-
tation. Empirical  judgments,  in  so  far  as  they  have  objective  valid-
ity, are  to  be  called  judgments  of  experience;  while  those,  that  are
only  subjectively  valid,  are  to  be  called  judgments  of  perception.
The  latter  concept  thus  includes  everything  that  dogmatic  empiricism
regards  as  the  genuine  mark  and  character  of  experience.  The
"judgment  of  perception"  at  least  is  nothing  else,  and  is  intended  to
be  nothing  else,  than  a  report  concerning  a  momentary  and  individual
experience;  it  does  not  connect  subject  and  predicate  according  to
any  standpoint  of  intellectual  dependence  and  coherence,  but  only
takes  them  as  they  are  accidentally  found  together  in  an  individual
consciousness,  according  to  the  "subjective"  rules  of  association.
In  the  judgment  of  perception,  we  only  establish  the  coexistence  of
two  contents,  without  setting  them  in  any  relation  of  mutual  depend-
ence. The  further  the  Kantian  distinction  proceeds,  however,  the
more  it  appears  that  the  judgment  of  perception  is  only  meant  to
be  a  methodologically  constructed  limiting-case,  to  throw  light  upon
the  newly  gained  concept  of  scientific  objectivity  by  force  of  con-


246  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

trast;  but  that  the  distinction  carries  with  it  no  real  separation  of
judgments  into  two  heterogeneous  classes.  Every  judgment  claims
a  certain  measure  of  objectivity  within  its  self-chosen  narrower
sphere,  no  matter  how  limited  its  subject-concept.  It  is  never
satisfied  with  establishing  a  mere  coexistence  of  presentations,  but  it
erects  a  functional  coordination  between  them,  so  that  whenever
the  one  content  is  given,  the  other  is  taken  as  required.  The  "is"
of  the  copula  is  the  expression  of  this  connection,  and  thus  enters  as  a
necessary  factor  into  every  assertion  regarding  an  individual,  empiri-
cal object.  The  proposition,  that  body  is  heavy,  does  not  mean
that,  as  often  as  I  have  hitherto  lifted  a  body,  certain  touch  and
pressure  sensations  have  been  felt,  but  it  is  meant  to  establish  a
connection,  based  in  the  object  and  independent  of  the  condition  of
this  or  that  sensing  individual.  Even  the  individual  "a  posteriori11
judgment  always  contains  an  "a  priori"  element  in  the  necessity  of
the  connection,  which  it  affirms.4  In  the  final  conception  of  the
system  of  experience,  the  instrumental  concept  of  the  mere  judg-
ment of  perception  is  transcended  and  excluded.  Indeed  the  indi-
vidual as  individual  can  be  the  object  of  a  scientific  statement;  hence
a  state  of  being,  which  is  given  here  and  now,  constitutes  the  con-
tent of  judgment.  But  in  this  case  also,  we  do  not  step  outside  the
field  of  objective  necessity  into  that  of  mere  "contingency;"  on  the
contrary,  we  seek  to  conceive  the  particular  itself  as  necessary,  by
giving  it  a  fixed  place  within  the  causal  process  ruled  by  exact  laws.
The  sphere  of  the  necessary  is  narrowed  until  it  is  adequate  for
closer  determination  of  the  apparently  "contingent."  For  example,
we  determine  the  astronomical  position  of  the  heavenly  bodies  for  a
given  point  of  time  in  this  sense,  by  taking  as  a  basis  the  universal
relations  offered  by  the  principles  of  mechanics,  as  well  a#  by  the  law
of  gravitation.  The  real  goal  of  "induction"  is  not  the  absolutely
isolated,  temporal  fact  (Setzung)  as  such,  but  the  subordination  of
this  fact  to  the  whole  process  of  nature.

Experience  as  aggregate  and  as  system.  The  "secret  of  induction,"
often  referred  to,  does  not  begin  where  we  draw  a  conclusion  from
several  observations  regarding  all  the  cases,  but  is  already  fully
contained  in  the  establishment  of  any  individual  case.  The  solution
of  the  problem  of  induction  can  only  be  sought  in  this  broadening  of
its  import.  In  fact,  it  cannot  be  understood  how  the  mere  repetition

4  Cf.  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,  2nd  ed.,  p.  141  f .


ON  THE PROBLEM OF  INDUCTION  247

and  arrangement  of  particular  observations  should  lend  the  particu-
lar a  new  logical  value.  The  mere  accumulation  of  elements  cannot
entirely  change  their  conceptual  meaning;  it  can  only  render  more
distinct  the  determinations  already  contained  in  the  elements.  There
must  be  a  factor  concealed  in  the  individual  case,  that  raises  it
out  of  its  limitation  and  isolation.  The  function,  that  constitutes
the  real  kernel  of  inductive  procedure,  is  that  by  means  of  which  we
trace  an  empirical  content  beyond  its  given  temporal  limits  and
retain  it  in  its  determinate  character  for  all  points  of  the  time  series.
The  relation,  which  only  manifests  itself  at  first  for  a  single,  indivis-
ible moment,  grows  until  in  some  way  it  determines  the  totality  of
future  points  of  time.  Thus  each  individual  judgment  involves  an
element  of  infinity,  in  so  far  as  its  content  is  transferred  to  the  totality
of  times,  and  is  continued  through  this  totality  as  if  by  constant,
identical  re-creation.  The  permanent  empirical  object  along  with
its  constant  empirical  properties  is,  in  mathematical  language,
always  the  integral  of  the  momentary  properties,  of  which  the  indi-
vidual enquiry  gives  evidence.  But  the  logical  process  of  integration
would  not  be  possible,  if  there  were  not  a  reference  to  the  whole
already  in  the  element,  i.e.,  if  the  varying  content  of  experience,  no
matter  how  scattered  and  detached  it  may  appear,  did  not  always
involve  reference  to  its  permanent  laws  (gesefzliche  Form).  It  is
through  this  reference  that  our  limited,  spatio-temporal  circle  of
experience,  which  is  all  we  have,  becomes  the  test  and  image  of  the
system  of  reality  in  general.  It  is  only  by  conceiving  all  phenomena
as  connected  by  necessary  relations,  that  we  can  use  any  individual
phase  as  a  representation  and  symbol  of  the  total  process  and  of  its
universal  rules.  It  is  this  symbolic  meaning,  which  every  inductive
inference  claims  for  itself;  the  particular  determination  offered  by  the
sensuous  impression  becomes  a  norm,  that  has  to  be  retained  as  a
permanent  feature  in  the  intellectual  structure  of  empirical  reality.
Each  particular  experience,  that  has  been  established  according  to
the  objective  methods  and  criteria  of  science,  claims  to  be  absolute;
what  methodically  tested  experiment  has  once  shown,  can  never  be
entirely  logically  annulled.  The  task  of  induction  is  to  unify  these
various  assertions,  which  frequently  seem  to  cross  and  contradict
each  other,  by  indicating  a  definite  sphere  of  validity  for  each  of
them.  What,  to  the  ordinary  sensuous  view,  is  an  identical  group  of
conditions  connected  now  with  one,  now  with  another  circum-


248  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

stance,  is  here  separated  into  definitely  distinguished,  particular
cases;  these  cases  vary  in  some  theoretically-discoverable  circum-
stance, and  their  variation  is  thus  conceived  as  necessary.

Discrete  and  continuous  "wholes."  In  the  relation  of  the  inductive
individual  case  to  the  totality  of  scientific  experience,  a  characteris-
tic recurs,  which  can  always  be  established  where  the  problem  is  to
define  a  "whole,"  that  is  not  merely  the  sum  of  its  parts,  but  is  a
systematic  totality  arising  from  their  relations.  Logic  traditionally
distinguishes  between  "discrete"  and  "continuous"  wholes.  In  the
first,  the  parts  precede  the  whole,  and,  independently  of  the  con-
nection into  which  they  subsequently  enter,  are  possible  and  dis-
tinguishable as  independent  pieces.  The  "element"  of  the  continuum,
on  the  contrary,  is  opposed  to  any  such  separation;  it  gains  its  content
only  from  relations  to  the  totality  of  the  system,  to  which  it  belongs,
and  apart  from  it  loses  all  meaning.  Thus  a  line  can  be  defined  as  an
infinite  manifold  of  points;  but  this  definition  is  only  possible,
because  the  "point"  itself  has  been  previously  conceived  as  the  expres-
sion of  a  pure  relation  of  position,  and  thus  the  relation  of  spatial
"coexistence"  with  other  similar  elements  is  contained  in  it.  In  the
same  sense,  it  can  be  said  that  the  law  of  experience  only  "results"
from  the  particular  cases  because  it  is  already  tacitly  assumed  in
them.  The  individual  empirical  judgment  contains  within  it,  as  an
undeveloped  demand,  the  thought  of  the  thorough-going  deter-
minateness  of  natural  processes  as  a  final  result  of  the  completed
system  of  experience.  Every  assertion  regarding  a  mere  coexistence
of  empirical  determinations  points  to  the  thought  that  these  deter-
minations are  somehow  grounded  in  each  other,  although  the  form  of
this  dependence  is  not  directly  known,  but  is  only  to  be  gamed  pro-
gressively. Just  as  the  relational  character  of  position  and  distance
inheres  in  the  individual  point,  so  the  character  of  a  universal  law
inheres  in  the  individual  experience.  The  individual  cannot  be
experienced  save  in  connection  with  other  spatial  and  temporal,
near  or  remote  elements;  and  this  kind  of  connection  presupposes  a
system  of  spatial  and  temporal  positions,  as  well  as  a  unitary  whole
of  causal  coordinations.  The  fact  a  is  only  accessible  to  us  in  a
functional  form  as  f  (a),  <J>  (/3),  $  (7),  in  which  f,  <£,  ^,  represent  the
different  forms  of  spatial-temporal  and  causal  connection.  The
logical  act  of  "integration,"  which  enters  into  in  every  truly  induc-
tive judgment,  thus  contains  no  paradox  and  no  inner  difficulty;  the


ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION  249

advance  from  the  individual  to  the  whole,  involved  here,  is  possible
because  the  reference  to  the  whole  is  from  the  first  not  excluded  but
retained,  and  only  needs  to  be  brought  separately  into  conceptual
prominence.

Induction  and  the  theory  of  invariants.  The  tendency  to  something
unchanging,  to  something  permanent  in  the  coming  and  going  of
sensuous  phenomena,  is  thus  characteristic  of  inductive  thought  no
less  than  of  mathematical  thought.  The  two  do  not  differ  in  their
goal,  but  in  their  means  for  reaching  this  goal.  It  is  possible  to
trace  in  the  development  of  geometrical  methods  how  the  manifold
tendencies  of  modern  geometrical  thought  can  be  unified,  in  so  far
as  they  are  brought  under  the  general  standpoint  of  the  "theory  of
invariants"  and  characterized  by  it.  Each  special  form  of  geometry
is  then  coordinated  with  a  definite  group  of  transformations  as  its
appropriate  theory  of  invariants,  and  these  can  be  strictly  defined
and  set  over  against  each  other.  The  conceptions  of  constancy  and
change  are  seen  to  be  mutually  conditioned  by  each  other;  the
permanent  connections  affirmed  by  geometry  can  only  be  formulated
with  reference  to  possible  changes.  (See  above  p.  88  ff.)  This
fundamental  logical  relation  now  appears  in  a  new  light.  Each
assertion  concerning  an  empirical  connection  of  elements  is  meant  to
be  valid  independently  of  any  absolute  point  of  space  or  tune.
Maxwell  incidentally  gives  the  general  "causal  law"  a  turn  that
expresses  this  demand.  The  proposition,  that  like  causes  always
bring  forth  like  effects,  he  explains,  has  no  sharply  defined  meaning,
until  we  establish  what  is  to  be  understood  by  like  causes  and  like
effects.  As  each  occurrence  only  takes  place  once,  and  is  thus  fully
individualized  by  the  time  of  its  occurrence  and  distinguished  from
all  others,  the  likeness  here  in  question  cannot  be  meant  in  the  sense  of
absolute  identity,  but  only  relatively  to  a  definite  point  of  view,
such  as  needs  to  be  expressly  isolated  and  formulated.  The  real
kernel  of  the  causal  principle  lies  in  the  assertion  that,  when  the
causes  are  merely  distinguished  from  each  other  with  reference  to
absolute  space  and  absolute  time,  the  same  is  true  of  the  effects:
"the  difference  between  two  occurrences  does  not  depend  on  the
pure  differences  of  the  times  or  places,  in  and  at  which  they  take
place,  but  only  on  differences  in  the  nature,  configuration  or  move-
ment of  the  bodies  involved."6  Here  it  becomes  clear,  that  the

8  Maxwell,  Matter  and  Motion,  Art.  XIX.


250  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

content,  on  which  the  physical  judgment  is  directed,  is  at  first  sub-
jected in  thought  to  a  certain  change,  and  the  judgment  separates
out  those  moments  unaffected  by  this  change,  that  can  be  constantly
affirmed.  Just  as  we  characterize  as  the  geometrical  properties  of  a
certain  form  all  those  properties,  that  belong  to  it  independently
of  its  absolute  position  in  space  and  of  the  absolute  magnitude  of
its  parts,  so  here  an  analogous  mode  of  consideration  is  applied
with  regard  to  time.  A  functional  relation  f  (a,  b),  that  is  only
directly  established  for  one  point  of  time  t0,  or  for  a  plurality  of
discrete  times  ti,  t2,  t3  . . .,  is  freed  from  this  limitation  and  removed
from  dependency  on  any  individual  moment  of  observation.  So
far  as  the  remaining  conditions  are  unchanged,  any  arbitrary  moment
of  time  may  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  that  first  given  to  us,  so  that
the  present  moment  involves  a  decision  for  the  past  and  the  future.
Thus  fill  experience  is  directed  on  gaining  certain  "invariant"  rela-
tions, and  first  in  these  reaches  its  real  conclusion.  The  conception
of  the  empirical  natural  object  originates  and  is  grounded  in  this
procedure;  for  it  belongs  to  the  concept  of  this  object,  that  it  remains
"identical  with  itself"  in  the  flow  of  time.  We  must  indeed  con-
ceive each  natural  object  as  subject  in  principle  to  certain  physical
changes,  called  forth  by  external  forces;  but  the  reaction  to  these
forces  could  not  be  represented  in  the  form  of  law,  if  we  were  not
able  to  recognize  the  object  as  logically  permanent  and  provided  with
the  same  properties.  In  the  midst  of  the  temporal  chaos  of  sensa-
tions, we  produce  fixed  connections  and  coordinations  by  abstracting
from  time;  and  it  is  these  fixed  connections,  which  constitute  the
fundamental  frame-work  of  empirical  factuality.

Induction  and  analogy.  Thus  it  is  always  a  function  of  judgment,
that  assures  us  of  the  permanence  of  empirical  being.  This  fact
finds  its  expression  not  only  in  the  inductions  of  mathematical
physics,  but  also  is  clearly  shown  within  descriptive  natural  science.
Deeper  analysis  reveals  here  also  how  far  the  apparently  purely
receptive  classification  of  particulars  is  dominated  by  ideal  pre-
suppositions, referring  to  the  structure  of  the  whole.  Claude
Bernard  especially  has  thrown  light  on  this  reciprocal  relation
of  idea  and  observation  for  physiology  and  the  whole  field  of
"experimental  medicine."  The  order  of  the  "real"  and  factual
cannot  be  discovered  without  an  ideal  standpoint  of  comparison,
without  a  conceptual  anticipation  of  a  possible  order.  Although  it


ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION  251

is  to  experience  that  we  owe  the  definitive  establishment  of  this  order,
beyond  doubt,  yet  though  there  again  must  work  out  the  scheme  of
experience  beforehand.  The  induction  of  the  descriptive  sciences
is  thus  always  a  "provisional  deduction."  "We  can,  if  we  will,  call
the  tentative  thought  of  the  experimental  investigator  inductive,
while  we  characterize  the  apodictic  assertions  of  the  mathematician
as  deduction;  but  this  is  only  a  difference  affecting  the  certainty  or
uncertainty  of  the  starting-point  of  our  inferences,  and  not  the
manner  in  which  these  inferences  themselves  proceed."  The  prin-
ciple of  inference  remains  the  same  in  the  two  cases,  although  its
course  may  run'  in  two  directions:  "there  is  for  the  mind  only
one  way  of  concluding,  as  there  is  for  the  body  only  one  way
of  going."5  This  unity  of  principle  is  especially  clear  in  those
limiting  fields,  where  mathematical  thought  comes  in  contact,  as  it
were,  with  experimental  investigation.  We  saw  how  the  progress  of
geometrical  thought  tends  more  and  more  to  allow  the  subordination
of  the  particular  intuitive  figures  in  the  proof.  The  real  object  of
geometrical  interest  is  seen  to  be  only  the  relational  connection
between  the  elements  as  such,  and  not  the  individual  properties  of
these  elements.  Manifolds,  which  are  absolutely  dissimilar  for
intuition,  can  be  brought  to  unity  in  so  far  as  they  offer  examples
and  expressions  of  the  same  rules  of  connection.  The  conceptual
construction  of  exact  physics  proves  to  be  dominated  by  a  corre-
sponding logical  procedure.  Hitherto  the  analogical  inference  has
been  considered  an  essential  part  of  the  method  of  physics,  and
especially  of  the  inductive  procedure;  no  less  a  thinker  than  Kepler
commends  it  as  his  truest  guide  and  preceptor,  from  which  no  secret
of  nature  is  concealed.7  But  the  scientific  value  of  analogy  remains
incomprehensible,  as  long  as  one  merely  bases  it  on  a  sensuous  simi-
larity between  the  individual  cases.  Indeed  the  precise  task  of
theoretical  physics,  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  the  naive  view,
Is  to  separate  cases,  that  appear  in  direct  perception  as  similar
and  analogous,  by  penetrating  analytically  further  into  the  conditions

6  Claude  Bernard,  Introduction  d  I'ttude  de  la  medicine  exptrimentale,  Paris,
1865,  esp.  p.  83  ff.

7  Kepler,  Paralipomena  in  Vitellionem,  Ch.  IV,  4  (Op.  II,  187). On  the
concept  of  analogy,  cf,  Mach,  Erkenntnis  und  Irrtum,  p.  218  ff .


252  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

of  their  origin.8  The  genuine  and  truly  fruitful  analogy  is  not  based
on  a  sensuous  agreement  of  properties,  but  on  a  conceptual  agreement
in  relational  structure.  When  we  consider  electricity  and  light  as
phenomena  of  the  same  sort,  in  the  electro-magnetic  theory  of  light,
this  assertion  is  not  based  on  an  agreement  capable  of  being  grasped
by  perception,  but  on  the  form  of  the  equations,  which  we  establish  in
both  as  a  quantitative  expression  of  the  phenomena,  as  well  as  on
the  relations  between  the  numerical  constants  characteristic  of  the
two  fields.  (See  above  p.  163).  The  comparison  thus  does  not  rest
on  a  mere  indefinite  similarity,  but  upon  a  true  identity  in  the  mathe-
m?+icpl  system  of  conditions;  as  in  pure  mathematics,  this  identity
is  isolated  as  a  logical  "invariant"  and  considered  for  itself.  Thus
"analogy,"  which  at  first  seems  concerned  with  the  sensuous  particu-
lar, goes  over  more  and  more  into  mathematical  "harmony;"  the
doctrine  of  Kepler  offers  the  classical  example  of  this.  "Analogy"
passes  into  a  view  of  the  unitary  quantitative  structural  laws  which,
according  to  the  assumptions  of  exact  physics,  rule  the  whole  of
being,  and  thus  unify  what  is  most  diverse.

ii

Induction  -  and  analysis,  "compositive"  and  "resolutive"  methods.
The  first  result  claimed  by  the  inductive  "concept,"  in  the  strict

8  Here  is  an  example  from  Duhem,  La  Thtorie  Physique,  p.  32  f :  "La  Phy-
sique expe'rimentale  nous  fournit  les  lois  toutes  ensemble  et,  pour  ainsi  dire,  sur
un  m&ne  plan.  .  .  .  Bien  souvent,  ce  sont  des  causes  tout  accidentelles,
des  analogies  toutes  superficielles  qui  ont  conduit  des  observateurs  a  rappro-
cher,  dans  leurs  recherches,  une  loi  (Tune  autre  loi.  Newton  a  fixe*  dans  un
m&ne  ouvrage  les  lois  de  la  dispersion  de  lumiere  qui  traverse  un  prisme  et  les
lois  des  teintes  dont  se  pare  une  bulle  de  savon  simplement  parce  que  des
couleurs  e*clatantes  signalent  aux  yeux  ces  deux  sortes  de  ph6nomenes.  La
the"orie,  au  contraire,  en  de*veloppant  les  ramifications  nombreuses  du  raisonne-
ment  de*ductif  qui  relie  les  principes  aux  lois  expe*rimentales,  e*tablit  parmi
celles-ci  un  ordre  et  une  classification;  il  en  est  qu'elle  re*unit,  e"troitement
senses,  dans  un  m&ne  groupe;  il  en  est  qu'elle  se'pare  les  unes  des  autres  et
qu'elle  place  en  deux  groupes  extr&nement  e*loigne*s.  .  .  .  Ainsi,  pres  des
lois  qui  re*gissent  le  spectre  fourni  par  un  prisme,  elle  range  les  lois  auxquelles
ob<5issent  les  couleurs  de  l'arc-en-ciel;  mais  les  lois  selon  lesquelles  se  succddent
les  teintes  des  anneaux  de  Newton  vont,  en  une  autre  region,  rejoindre  les
lois  des  f  ranges  de*couvertes  par  Young  et  par  Fresnel.  .  .  .  Les  lois  de
tous  ces  phe*nomenes  que  leurs  e*clatantes  couleurs  confondaient  les  uns  avec
les  autres  aux  yeux  du  simple  observateur,  sont,  par  les  soins  du  the*oricien,
classics  et  ordonnc*cs."


ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION  253

sense  of  this  word,  is  that  it  transforms  the  manifold  of  observations,
which  at  first  appears  as  a  mere  unrelated  coexistence  of  particular
elements,  into  some  fixed  serial  form.  We  can  realize  the  meaning
of  this  task  by  referring  to  certain  elementary  problems  of  arithmetic,
which  form  an  exact  example  and  analogue  of  the  logical  relation  here
involved.  If  any  sequence  of  numbers  is  given,  which  are  connected
according  to  a  definite  rule  at  first  unknown,  then  in  order  to  discover
this  rule,  the  given  sequence  must  be  resolved  into  a  complex  of  series,
that  obey  relatively  simpler  laws.  If  we  have  before  us,  for  example,
the  sequence  of  fourth  powers  1, 16, 81, 256, 625, . . . ,  then  we  can  estab-
lish the  relation  connecting  the  particular  serial  members,  by  finding
first  the  differences  between  them,  and  further  the  differences  between
these  differences  etc.,  until  we  finally  reach  a  simple  arithmetical
series  with  a  constant  difference  between  its  individual  members.
Thus  we  are  led  back  to  a  completely  known  serial  type,  and  the  way
is  indicated,  by  which  from  this  fundamental  form  we  can  again
reach  the  given  series  through  continually  more  complicated  steps.
This  given  series  is  now  plainly  revealed  to  us  in  the  conditions  of
its  structure,  and  in  all  the  particular  phases  of  its  construction;
by  reducing  it  to  the  stages  of  its  construction,  the  series  becomes,
as  it  were,  transparent,  and  shows  the  same  character  of  necessity
in  its  advance  from  member  to  member,  as  was  shown  by  the  primi-
tive series.  The  same  "resolutive"  method,  that  is  here  used  in  the
field  of  numbers,  is  characteristic  of  the  true  scientific  inductive
inference.  The  given  fact,  as  offered  by  immediate  observation,
appears  at  first  to  thought  as  if  impenetrable.  It  can  be  simply
established,  but  not  determined  according  to  its  simple  beginnings,
i.e.,  not  deduced  from  identical  rules  of  progress.  But  genuine,
theoretically  guided  induction  is  never  satisfied  merely  with  estab-
lishing facts  as  given.  It  replaces  the  factual  coexistence  of  sensuous
data  by  another  kind  of  connection,  which  indeed  seems  poorer  in
elements,  when  considered  purely  materially,  but  which  can  be  more
clearly  surveyed  according  to  the  principle  of  its  construction.
Every  experiment  we  institute,  and  on  which  we  base  our  inductive
inferences,  works  in  this  direction.  The  real  object  of  scientific
investigation  is  never  the  raw  material  of  sensuous  perception;  in
place  of  this,  science  substitutes  a  system  of  conditions  constructed
and  defined  by  itself.


254  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

Experiment  as  the  means  of  analysis.  Strictly  speaking,  the
experiment  never  concerns  the  real  case,  as  it  lies  before  us  here  and
now  in  all  the  wealth  of  its  particular  determinations,  but  the  experi-
ment rather  concerns  an  ideal  case,  which  we  substitute  for  it.  The
real  beginnings  of  scientific  induction  furnish  the  classical  example
of  this.  Galileo  did  not  discover  the  law  of  falling  bodies  by  collect-
ing arbitrary  observations  of  sensuously  real  bodies,  but  by  denning
hypothetically  the  concept  of  uniform  acceleration  and  taking  it  as  a
conceptual  measure  of  the  facts.9  This  concept  provides  for  the
given  time-values  a  series  of  space-values,  such  as  proceed  according
to  a  fixed  rule,  that  can  be  grasped  once  for  all.  Henceforth  we
must  attempt  to  advance  to  the  actual  process  of  reality  by  a  progres-
sive consideration  of  the  complex  determinations,  that  were  originally
excluded:  as,  for  example,  the  variation  of  acceleration  according  to
the  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  earth,  retardation  by  the  resist-
ance of  the  air,  etc.  As  in  the  arithmetical  example,  we  advance  from
the  simple  series,  in  which  the  differences  between  the  members  are
constant,  to  series  of  the  second,  third  and  fourth  order;  so  we  analyse
the  real  into  various  orders  of  relations,  connected  according  to  law
and  progressively  conditioning  each  other.  The  sensuous  appear-
ance of  simplicity  in  the  phenomenon  yields  to  a  strictly  conceptual
system  of  superior  and  subordinate  relations.  However,  as  opposed
to  the  mathematical  concept,  there  is  the  characteristic  difference
that,  while  in  mathematics  the  construction  reaches  a  fixed  end,  in
experience  it  is  in  principle  incapable  of  completion.  But  no  matter
how  many  "strata"  of  relations  we  may  superimpose  on  each  other,
and  however  close  we  may  come  to  all  particular  circumstances  of
the  real  process,  nevertheless  there  is  always  the  possibility  that
some  cooperative  factor  in  the  total  result  has  not  been  calculated,
and  will  only  be  discovered  with  the  further  progress  of  experimental
analysis.  Each  result  established  has  thus  only  the  relative  value  of
a  preliminary  determination;  and  as  such  only  holds  what  is  gained
in  order  to  use  it  as  a  starting-point  for  new  determinations.  The
uncertainty,  that  seems  to  remain,  does  not  affect  the  relations  within
the  particular  series,  but  only  appears  where  the  whole  theoretical
construction  is  compared  with  the  actual  observations.  A  contra-
diction here  would  not  be  resolved  by  our  giving  up  the  principles  of

9  Cf.  more  particularly  Erkenntnisproblem  I,  294;  also  Honigswald,  Beitrdge
zur  Erkenntnistheorie  u.  Methodenlehre,  Leipzig,  1906.


ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION  255

the  earlier  investigations,  but  by  our  adding  to  these  investigations
new  factors,  such  as  correct  the  first  result  yet  enable  us  to  retain
it  in  a  new  meaning.  In  so  far  as  we  abstract  from  subjective  errors
of  observation,  the  truth  of  the  individual  determinations  remains
in  general  unaffected.  What  is  always  being  questioned  anew  is
only  the  sufficiency  of  these  determinations  for  explaining  the  com-
plicated factual  relations  of  reality.  But  the  inductive  concept
proves,  precisely  by  the  fact  that  it  leaves  this  question  open,  that
its  direction  does  not  lead  away  from  reality,  but  more  closely  to  it.
The  "universal  relations,"  which  are  at  first  brought  out,  do  not
indeed  contain  the  special  properties  in  themselves,  but  neither  do
they  deny  them.  They  rather  leave  room  for  them  from  the  begin-
ning, and  anticipate  their  future  possible  determination.  Galileo's
law  of  falling  bodies  needs  no  correction  of  its  content,  in  order  to
represent  the  phenomenon  of  falling  in  the  case  of  a  definite  resist-
ance of  air,  but  merely  requires  a  conceptual  extension  already
admitted  and  foreseen  in  principle.

The  relation  of  "universal"  and  "particular"  relations.  In  this
sense,  the  "concept"  of  natural  science  in  no  way  abstracts  from  the
particular,  but  brings  out  the  particular  all  the  more  sharply.  Each
universal  relation,  that  it  establishes,  has  a  tendency  to  connect  itself
with  other  relations,  and  by  this  combination  to  become  more  and
more  useful  in  the  mastery  of  the  individual.  Each  of  the  fundamen-
tal series,  from  which  a  more  complex  law  is  built,  signifies  in  itself
indeed  only  a  certain  sphere  of  conditions.  However,  it  cannot  be
said,  that  these  conditions  are  only  partially  or  inexactly  fulfilled  by
the  concrete  process,  which  results  from  their  totality;  rather  they
must  all  be  fulfilled  perfectly  and  without  limitation,  if  the  given
case  is  to  be  possible.  Thus  the  subsequent  addition  of  a  new  stand-
point, which  places  the  phenomenon  under  consideration  in  relation
to  a  new  circle  of  facts,  changes  nothing  in  the  meaning  and  value
of  the  earlier  determinations.  Only  one  thing  is  demanded,  viz.,
that  the  relations  progressively  established  in  this  way  shall  be  com-
patible with  each  other.  And  this  compatibility  is  assured  in  prin-
ciple by  the  fact,  that  the  determination  of  the  particular  case  takes
place  on  the  basis  of  the  determination  of  the  general  case,  and
tacitly  assumes  the  validity  of  the  latter.  If  we  conceive  a  particular
process  as  a  synthesis  of  various  laws,  the  question  as  to  how  the
particular  can  "participate"  in  the  universal  ceases  to  be  a  metaphys-


256  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

ical  problem;  for  the  universal  is  no  longer  something  substantially
present,  which  somehow  enters  as  a  factual  part  into  the  individual,
but  it  is  a  logical  moment,  implicitly  assumed  in  a  more  inclusive
system  of  relations.  We  determine  a  particular  natural  occur-
rence A,  by  inserting  it  into  various  functional  connections  f  (A,  B,
C  ...),</>  (A,  B',  C'  ...)<£  (A,  B",  C"  . . .)  etc.,  and  conceive  it  as
subordinated  to  the  rules  of  all  these  connections.  The  "participa-
tion" of  the  individual  in  the  universal  thus  appears  no  more  of  a
riddle  than  the  logical  fact  that,  in  general,  various  conditions  can
be  united  intellectually  into  a  unitary  result,  in  which  each  is  fully
retained.  The  question  now  is  not  how  the  individual  in  its  "sub-
stance" issues  from  the  universal  and  is  separated  from  it,  but  how  it
is  possible  for  knowledge  to  bring  the  rules  of  universal  connections
into  relation,  and  to  determine  them  reciprocally  by  each  other,  so
that  conceptual  insight  into  the  particular  relations  of  physical
reality  results.  (Cf.  above  p.  226  ff.)

"Isolation11  and  "superposition.11  The  real  problem  of  induction
lies  here,  as  is  shown  in  many  places  in  the  theory  of  knowledge  of
modern  natural  science.  The  two  tendencies  of  scientific  thought,
which  Galileo  contrasted  as  the  "resolutive"  and  the  "compositive"
methods,  are  sometimes  distinguished  in  modern  discussion  as  the
principles  of  "isolation"  and  of  "superposition."10  The  first  goal
of  experimental  enquiry  is  to  gain  a  pure  phenomenon,  that  is,  to
free  the  phenomenon  under  consideration  from  all  accidental  circum-
stances. While  reality  presents  us  a  mixture  of  heterogeneous  circum-
stances seemingly  inseparably  interwoven  and  confused,  thought  de-
mands the  separate  consideration  of  each  particular  moment  and  the
exact  determination  of  the  part  it  plays  in  the  structure  of  the  whole.
But  this  goal  can  be  achieved  only  through  a  technical  separation  of
what  is  factually  connected,  only  by  establishing  special  conditions,
which  enable  us  to  trace  the  individual  factors  for  themselves  in  their
action.  It  is  only  when  this  separation  is  strictly  carried  through,
that  the  constructive  unification  is  seen  in  its  clarity  and  sharpness.
The  complete  picture  of  the  total  process  arises  when  we  connect  the
partial  system  and  place  them  as  it  were  upon  each  other.  This
picture  of  the  total  process  appears  not  merely  as  a  unitary  intuition,
but  as  a  differentiated  conceptual  whole,  in  which  the  type  of  de-

10  See  Volkrnann,  Erkenntnistheoretische  Grundzuge  der  Naturwissenschaft,
Leipzig,  1896.


ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION  257

pendency  between  the  individual  elements  is  exactly  defined.  If
the  problem  of  physical  induction  is  conceived  in  this  way,  it  appears
anew  that  the  mathematical  point  of  view  is  not  so  much  the  opposite
as  the  necessary  correlate  of  inductive  conceptual  construction.  For
that  very  synthesis  of  relations,  which  is  required  and  which  forms
an  essential  part  of  experimental  enquiry,  has  its  ultimate  abstract
foundation  and  the  guarantee  of  its  general  validity  in  the  system  of
mathematics.  AS  we  have  seen,  the  object  of  mathematics  in  the
full  universality  of  its  concept  is  not  the  compounding  of  magnitudes,
but  the  connection  and  reciprocal  determination  of  relations.  (See
above  p.  95  ff.)  Thus  the  two  scientific  tendencies  here  have  a
point  in  common.  Though  experiment  is  necessary  to  analyse  an
originally  undifferentiated  perceptual  whole  into  its  particular
constitutive  elements,  on  the  other  hand,  to  mathematical  theory
belongs  the  determination  of  the  form  by  which  these  elements  are
combined  into  a  unity  of  law.  The  system  of  "possible"  relational
syntheses  already  developed  in  mathematics  affords  the  fundamental
schema  for  the  connections,  which  thought  seeks  in  the  material  of
the  real.  As  to  which  of  the  possible  relational  connections  are
actually  realized  in  experience,  experiment,  in  its  result,  gives  its
answer.  But  this  answer  can  only  be  given  when  the  question  has
previously  been  clearly  stated;  and  this  process  of  stating  the  ques-
tion goes  back  to  conceptions,  which  analyse  immediate  intuition
according  to  conceptual  standpoints.  If  the  real  is  represented  as
the  result  of  the  interpenetration  of  elementary  series  of  dependencies,
then  in  principle  it  has  gained  the  form  of  a  mathematically  deter-
minable  structure.11

11  As  I  subsequently  discover,  this  relation  has  received  new  confirmation
and  an  unusually  clear  presentation  from  a  modern  physicist.  Bouasse,
Physique  generate,  in  the  collective  volume  De  la  Methode  dans  les  sciences,
Paris  1909:  "La  physique  ne  separe  pas  l'<5tude  des  formes  de  l'6tude  des/aite;
la  deduction  pre*voit  les  faits  que  1 'experience  confinne."  "Qu'est-ce  done
qu'expliquei  f  C'est  tout  uniquement  faire  rentrer  un  fait  dans  une  forme.  Le
fait  est  explique'  lorsqu'il  apparaft  identique  a  un  des  phe*nomenes  qu'engendre
un  des  ces  sorites  indefinis  que  nous  appelons  theories  ou  formes.  ...  La
physique  n'est  done  pas  mathe*matique,  parcc  qu'on  y  trouve  des  algorithmea
algebriques;  toute  experience  devant,  en  definitive,  cntrer  dans  une  forme,
toute  forme  se  d6veloppant  naturellement  sous  les  symboles  math6matiques,
toute  physique  est  mathe*matique  (op.  cit.  p.  76  f.,  91,  100).


258  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

Thus  when  the  principle  of  "isolation"  and  "superposition"  is
explained  by  the  fact  that  all  reality  represents  only  the  sum  of  the
manifestations  of  particular  laws  of  nature,  and  is  to  be  conceived
as  having  issued  from  these  laws,  the  real  epistemological  meaning  of
the  thought  is  concealed.12  We  cannot  be  concerned  here  with  the
origin  of  things,  but  only  with  the  origin  and  character  of  our  insight
into  things.  The  "real,"  as  it  is  grasped  in  the  sensuous  impression,
is  not  in  and  for  itself  a  "sum"  of  various  elements,  but  first  appears
to  us  as  an  absolutely  simple  and  unanalysed  whole.  This  original
"simplicity"  of  intuition  is  only  transformed  into  a  manifold  by  the
logically  analytic  work  of  the  concept.  The  concept  is  here  just  as
much  a  source  of  plurality  as  it  elsewhere  appears  to  be  a  source  of
unity.  Since  we  conceive  a  particular  process  as  successively  intro-
duced into  different  systems,  whose  general  structure  can  be  mathe-
matically deduced,  we  thereby  increase  its  determinateness,  in  so
far  as  we  define  its  position  in  the  general  plan  of  our  thought  with
increasing  exactness.  The  advance  of  experiment  goes  hand  in  hand
with  the  advancing  universality  of  the  fundamental  laws,  by  which
we  explain  and  construct  empirical  reality.

Laws  and  rules.  The  methodic  difference  has  occasionally  been
indicated,  which  subsists  between  the  mere  "rules"  of  nature  and
the  truly  universal  "laws"  of  nature.  The  inductions  of  Kepler  on
planetary  motion  express  only  generalized  "rules"  of  process,  while
the  fundamental  law,  on  which  they  rest,  was  first  formulated  in
Newton's  theory  of  gravitation.13  In  Newton's  theory  we  find  the
ellipse  not  merely  as  a  real  form  of  the  orbit  of  Mars,  but  we  survey
at  a  glance  the  whole  of  "possible"  orbits.  The  Newtonian  concept
of  a  centripetal  force,  that  diminishes  according  to  the  square  of  the
distance,  leads  to  a  perfect  disjunction  of  the  empirical  cases  in
general.  The  transition  between  these  cases  is  henceforth  exactly
predetermined ;  the  magnitude  of  the  initial  velocity  of  a  moving  body
decides  (independently  of  the  direction  of  this  velocity)  whether  the
form  of  its  path  is  to  be  an  ellipse  or  a  hyperbola  or  a  parabola.
Thus  the  "law"  of  gravitation  contains  in  itself  the  field  of  facts,
which  it  rules,  and  ascribes  strict  division  to  its  field;  while  the  merely
empirical  rule  of  planetary  motion  allows  the  particular  cases  to
stand  in  loose  conjunction  without  sharp  delimitation.  In  the

12  SeeVolkmann,  op.  cit.,  p.  89.
18  See  Volkmann,  op.  rit.,  p.  59.


ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION

actual  progress  of  science,  however,  the  two  views  thus  logically
distinguishable  are  never  strictly  separated,  but  blend  imperceptibly
into  each  other.  The  "rule"  already  contains  a  tendency  to  raise
itself  to  the  form  of  law;  while  on  the  other  hand,  the  conceptual  per-
fection, which  the  law  achieves,  remains  a  mere  provisional  assump-
tion, since  it  always  contains  a  hypothetical  element.  Here  we  face
the  apparent  circle,  that  everywhere  confronts  us  in  the  relation  of
law  and  fact.  If  we  conceive  the  motion  of  the  planets  to  be  deter-
mined by  gravitational  forces,  which  work  in  the  inverse  square  of
the  distance,  then  it  is  evident  that  the  form  of  a  conic  section  is
necessary  for  their  path;  however,  it  cannot  be  established  that  this
determination  "really"  holds  with  regard  to  the  kind  and  magnitude
of  attraction  except  through  this  methodic  necessity  just  referred
to,  i.e.,  by  the  power  of  this  assumption  to  unify  observations  and  to
give  them  definite  meaning.  (Cf.  above  p.  146  ff.)  If  experience
forced  us  to  forego  this  assumption  hereafter  by  adducing  new  mate-
rial, then  the  pure  concept  as  such  could  not  prevent  it;  but  in  this
case  also,  the  form  of  the  empirical  concept  would  by  no  means  be
submerged,  along  with  its  particular  content.  We  require  the  same
intellectual  limit  for  the  new  field,  that  is  revealed,  and  seek  to  estab-
lish this  limit  in  a  new  law,  to  which  the  earlier  is  subordinated.  The
changed  material  conditions  a  changed  manner  of  connection,  while
the  general  function  of  this  connection,  viz.y  the  deduction  of  the
particulars  from  a  supreme  serial  principle,  remains  the  same.

This  very  function,  and  not  its  temporary  and  varying  concrete
expression  in  particular  theorems,  is  assumed  in  the  concept  of
experience  itself;  and  thus  belongs  to  the  real  "conditions  of  its
possibility."  When  any  series  of  observations  ai  a2  a3 . . .  an  is  given,
a  double  problem  is  forthwith  offered  for  consideration.  On  the
one  hand,  we  can  seek  to  enrich  the  material  of  this  series  by  inter-
polation and  extrapolation,  by  inserting  between  the  given  members
hypothetical  intermediate  members,  or  by  tracing  the  series  beyond
its  original  limits.  On  the  other  hand,  our  concern  is  to  unite  the
manifold  of  members  into  an  ultimate  identity,  by  providing  a  rule,
by  which  the  transition  from  ai  to  a  2,  from  a  2  to  as  etc.  is  determined
and  subjected  to  a  fixed  principle.  If  we  may  call  the  first  procedure
preeminently  that  of  "induction"  and  the  second  that  of  "deduction,"
then  it  is  evident  that  the  two  mutually  cooperate  and  condition  each
other.  The  completion  of  the  series  by  the  introduction  of  new


260  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

individual  members  always  follows  the  direction  of  a  unitary  law  of
deduction,  which  hovers  as  a  problem  before  thought.  The  selec-
tion and  sifting  of  the  material  is  under  the  direction  of  an  active
standard  of  judgment.  We  seek  to  trace  a  law  of  known  conceptual
structure  through  a  given  sequence  of  observations,  and  we  measure
the  truth  of  this  law  by  its  success  in  characterizing  the  places  left
vacant  by  immediate  perception,  and  in  anticipating  their  filling-in
by  future  investigation.  In  this  sense,  Kepler  successively  connected
the  facts  regarding  tho  positions  of  Mars,  left  by  Tycho  cle  Brahe,  by
the  most  diverse  geometrical  curves;  and  with  these  curves  as  known
ideal  norms,  he  compared  the  facts,  until  he  finally  reached  the  ellipse
as  that  line,  which  enabled  him  to  deduce  the  greatest  number  of
observations  from  the  relatively  simplest  geometrical  principle  of
progression.  Due  to  the  nature  of  the  problem,  this  work  never
reached  an  absolute  limit;  for  no  matter  how  many  points  of  the
path  of  the  planet  might  be  given,  it  is  nevertheless  always  possible
to  connect  them  by  any  number  of  lines  of  different  and  more  com-
plicated form.  Only  the  methodic  requirement  remains  permanent,
that  in  the  last  analysis  the  processes  of  nature  be  reduced  to  definite
simple  rules,  no  matter  how  necessary  complex  assumptions  may
prove  for  the  representation  of  a  limited  concrete  field  of  facts.  This
reduction  to  simple  rules  is  comparable  to  the  manner  in  which  we
gradually  reduce  arithmetical  series  of  any  higher  order  to  the  funda-
mental type  of  a  series  with  a  constant  difference  between  its  members.
The  concept  of  the  "fundamental"  relation  and  the  relation  of  mathe-
matical necessity.  This  reduction  of  the  manifold  and  ceaselessly
changing  material  of  perception  to  ultimate  constant  relations  must  be
granted  without  limitation  by  even  the  most  radical  "empiricism."
For  the  assumption  of  this  fundamental  relation  is  all  that  remains
for  empiricism  of  the  concept  of  the  "object,"  and  thus  of  the  con-
cept of  nature.  "A  body,"  Mach  says,  "looks  different!}  in  each
illumination,  gives  a  different  optical  image  in  each  position,  gives  a
different  tactual  image  with  each  temperature,  etc.  However,  all
these  sensuous  elements  so  hang  together,  that  with  the  same  position,
illumination  and  temperature,  the  same  images  recur.  It  is  thus  a
permanency  of  the  connection  of  sensuous  elements,  that  is  involved
here.  If  we  could  measure  all  the  sensuous  elements,  then  we  would
say  that  the  body  subsists  in  the  realization  of  certain  equations,
that  hold  between  the  sensuous  elements.  Even  where  we  cannot


ON  THE  PROBLEM  OP  INDUCTION  261

measure,  the  expression  may  be  retained  symbolically.  These
equations  or  relations  are  thus  the  really  permanent."  The  logical
development  of  natural  science  tends  more  and  more  to  a  recognition
that  the  original,  nai've  representations  of  matter  are  superfluous;
at  most  we  grant  them  the  value  of  pictorial  representations,  and
recognize  the  quantitative  relations,  that  prevail  between  phenomena,
as  what  is  truly  substantial  in  them.  "To  the  extent  that  the
conditions  of  a  phenomenon  are  known,  the  impression  of  materiality
is  reduced.  We  recognize  the  relations  between  condition  and
conditioned,  the  equations  which  rule  a  larger  or  smaller  field,  as
constituting  what  is  really  permanent  and  substantial,  and  as  con-
stituting that,  the  discovery  of  which  makes  possible  a  stable  pic-
ture of  the  world."14  So  far  modern  empiricism  is  in  complete
agreement  with  the  critical  interpretation  of  the  meaning  and  pro-
gressive tendency  of  natural  science.  The  Critique  of  Pure  Reason
clearly  taught  that  all  that  we  know  of  matter  arc  more  relations;
but  among  these  relations  there  are  some  that  are  independent  and
permanent,  by  which  a  definite  object  is  given  us.15  Opposition
sets  in,  however,  when  this  concept  of  permanence,  to  which  the
concept  of  the  object  is  reduced,  is  to  be  determined  more  closely  in
its  logical  meaning  and  logical  origin.  Is  the  permanence  a  property
of  the  sensuous  impressions,  immediately  inhering  in  them,  or  is  it
the  result  of  intellectual  work,  by  which  we  gradually  transform  the
given  according  to  definite  logical  requirements?  In  the  light  of  our
earlier  developments,  the  answer  cannot  be  doubtful.  Permanence
is  never  found  ready  made  in  the  sensuous  experience  as  such,  for
the  sensuous  experience  gives  only  a  conglomeration  of  the  most
diverse  impressions,  limited  to  a  single  moment  of  time  and  never
recurring  in  exactly  the  same  way.  Permanence  only  appears  to  the
extent  that  wo  are  able  to  transform  the  sensuous  manifold  into  a
mathematical  manifold,  i.e.,  in  so  far  as  we  let  it  issue  from  certain
fundamental  elements  according  to  rules  held  as  unchangeable.
The  kind  of  certainty,  that  belongs  to  these  rules,  is  clearly  distin-
guished from  the  certainty  of  a  particular  sensation.  Even  from
the  standpoint  of  a  mere  "phenomenology"  of  the  facts  of  conscious-
ness, it  is  something  entirely  different  whether  the  various  contents  of
consciousness  merely  follow  each  other  factually,  or  whether  the

14  Mach,  Die  Prinzipien  der  W&Tmelehre,  Leipzig  1896,  p.  422  ff .
16  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,  2nd  ed.,  p.  341.


262  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

succeeding  ones  are  known  "from"  their  predecessors  according  to
some  pervading  logical  principle.  Leibniz  illustrated  this  difference
incidentally  by  pointing  to  the  example  of  the  theory  of  numbers,
which  sharply  marks  the  general  relation  involved  here.  If  we  take
the  series  of  squares  as  given,  for  example,  then  by  making  numerous
tests,  we  can  establish  purely  empirically  the  fact  that  the  differences
between  the  individual  members  can  be  represented  by  the  progres-
sive series  of  the  odd  numbers  1,  3,  5,  7  ...  On  the  basis  of
this  fact,  we  may  expect  that  when  we  proceed  from  the  last  given
member  of  the  series  of  squares,  and  add  the  corresponding  odd
number  to  this  member,  that  a  square  will  result;  but  nothing  justifies
us  in  taking  this  psychological  expectation  as  the  same  as  a  logical
necessity.  No  matter  how  many  members  have  been  tested  and
found  to  correspond  to  the  rule,  it  always  remains  possible  that  at  a
certain  point  the  previously  constant  type  of  progress  may  be  broken
off.  No  accumulation  of  observations  regarding  particular  numbers,
no  matter  how  great,  could  ever  enable  us  to  reach  a  new  form  of
certainty,  that  would  give  us  more  assurance  in  this  regard.  This
form  of  certainty  is  to  be  gained  when  we  proceed  from  the
"universal"  member  of  the  series,  i.e.,  from  its  identical  law  of
construction,  rather  than  from  the  enumeration  of  its  particular
members.  The  formula  (n  + 1)2  —  n2  =  2n  +  1  shows  at  one  stroke,
and  without  the  necessity  of  several  tests,  the  constant  and  necessary
relation,  that  subsists  between  the  progression  of  the  squares  and
that  of  the  odd  numbers.  When  once  it  is  grasped,  this  formula
holds  of  any  arbitrary  n,  since  in  its  deduction  and  proof  no  account
is  taken  of  the  particularity  of  any  definite  number,  and  thus  the
particular  value  can  vary  arbitrarily  without  affecting  the  meaning  of
the  proof  itself.  The  totality  of  squares  and  that  of  the  odd  numbers
are  now  taken  up  into  one  system,  in  which  the  one  is  kno\vn  through
the  other,  while  hitherto,  no  matter  how  far  we  traced  their  reciprocal
correspondence,  the  two  were  merely  in  conjunction.

This  same  fundamental  difference  can  also  be  shown  in  the  case  of
every  true  physical  law.  If  we  consider  a  law,  such  as  Galileo's
law  of  falling  bodies  or  the  law  of  Mariott,  we  discover  that  the
correlated  values  of  space  and  time,  of  pressure  and  volume,  are
not  simply  registered  in  conjunction,  but  are  taken  as  conditioned  by
each  other.  So  far  as  the  mere  facts  are  concerned,  it  is  true  that  a
list  of  numerical  values  might  accomplish  purely  materially  all  that


ON  THE PROBLEM OF  INDUCTION  263

the  mathematical  functional  rule  could  ever  give  us,  provided  that
for  each  particular  pressure-value  the  corresponding  volume-value
was  noted  in  the  list,  and  for  each  time-value  the  corresponding
space- value.  And  yet  such  an  accumulation  of  particular  numerical
data  would  lack  precisely  the  characteristic  element,  in  which  rests
the  meaning  of  law.  For  the  decisive  element  would  be  gone;  the
type  of  determination  by  which  one  magnitude  is  conceived  to  issue
from  another,  would  be  left  in  darkness,  even  if  the  result  were  cor-
rectly stated.  In  the  quantitative  equation,  this  type  of  determina-
tion is  clearly  evident;  for  the  quantitative  equation  shows  by  what
purely  algebraic  operations  from  universal,  established  rules,  the
value  of  the  dependent  variable  is  to  be  gained  from  the  value  of  the
argument.  And  to  this  mathematical  connection,  physical  theory
adds  a  corresponding,  objective  and  causal  connection.  Here  the
values  of  the  function,  along  with  those  of  the  independent  variables,
belong  to  a  common  system  of  causes  and  effects,  of  conditions  and
conditioned;  and  they  are  thus  connected  with  each  other  in  such  a
way,  that  the  assumption  of  one  draws  the  others  necessarily  after  it.
Here  also  we  do  not  place  the  particular  values  of  the  one  series
simply  in  conjunction  with  those  of  the  other;  but  we  seek,  at  least
hypothetically,  to  grasp  the  two  series  in  their  law  of  construction  and
thus  in  the  totality  of  their  possible  determinations,  and  to  compare
them  with  each  other.  Methodically  guided  induction  tends  to  this
goal;  it  represents  what  experience  knows  only  as  a  complex  coexist-
ence of  members,  as  being  a  resultant  of  simpler  series  of  dependency,
and  these  for  their  part  progress  according  to  the  strict  relation  of  the
mathematical  "ground"  to  the  mathematical  "consequence."

The  two  fundamental  types  of  knowledge.  This  application  of  the
concept  of  ground  and  consequence  is  obviously  free  from  all  meta-
physical implications.  Here  again,  in  opposition  to  the  theory  of
"description,"  it  is  necessary  to  maintain  the  purely  logical  character
of  the  relation  of  ground  and  consequence,  without  making  this
character  ontological.  (Cf.  above  p.  137  f.)  To  "describe"  a
natural  process  in  quantitative  equations,  in  the  sense  of  mathemati-
cal phenomenalism,  means  also  to  "explain"  it  in  the  only  scientifi-
cally admissable  sense;  for  the  equation  is  the  pattern  of  a  purely
conceptual  insight.  If  we  represent  mathematically  a  given  totality
of  observations  by  the  "superposition"  of  several  series,  we  do  not
indeed  thereby  increase  our  knowledge  of  the  absolute  and  transcend-


264  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

ent  causes  of  the  process;  but  we  have  raised  ourselves  to  a  new  type
of  knowledge.  It  is  true  we  do  not  grasp  the  force  in  things,  by  which
a  definite  effect  issues  from  a  definite  cause;  but  we  comprehend  the
progress  of  each  step  of  the  theory  to  the  next  as  strictly  and  as
exactly  as  we  grasp  the  transformation  of  any  quantitative  relation
into  another,  that  is  logically  equivalent  to  it.  The  concept  of
"description"  is  only  justified  and  admissible  when  we  take  it  hi
an  active  sense.  To  describe  a  group  of  phenomena,  then,  means  not
merely  to  record  receptively  the  sensuous  impressions  received  from
it,  but  it  means  to  transform  them  intellectually.  From  among
the  theoretically  known  and  developed  forms  of  mathematical
connection  (for  instance,  from  among  the  forms  of  pure  geometry),
a  selection  and  combination  must  be  made  such  that  the  elements
given  here  and  now  appear  as  constructively  deduced  elements  in
the  system,  which  arises.  The  logical  moment  given  here  cannot  be
denied  oven  in  the  theories  of  empiricism,  or  under  whatever  names
it  may  be  concealed.  The  "adjustment  of  ideas  to  reality"  pre-
supposes the  very  concept  of  this  reality,  and  thus  a  system  of  intel-
lectual postulates.  It  is  in  the  principle  of  the  unambiguity  (Eindeu-
tigkeit)  of  natural  processes  above  all,  that  all  these  postulates  are
ultimately  combined.  "I  am  convinced,"  says  Mach  himself,
"that  in  nature  only  so  much  happens  as  can  happen,  and  that  this
can  happen  only  in  one  way."  All  physical  process  is  thus  com-
pletely determined  by  the  momentarily  effective  circumstances,  and
can  thus  take  place  in  only  one  way.16  However,  if  we  analyse  the
grounds  of  this  conviction,  we  are  implicitly  led  back  v to  all  those
fundamental  conceptions,  which  the  sensationalistic  explanation
explicitly  denies.  The  conception  of  the  unambiguity  and  "stability"
of  being  obviously  is  not  in  the  content  of  perception  as  given  in  our
first  immediate  experience,  but  it  indicates  the  goal,  which  the
intellectual  labor  of  science  seeks  to  have  this  content  approximate.
This  goal  can  only  be  reached,  if  we  are  able  to  establish  certain
permanent  relations  in  the  flux  of  sensations,  which  differ  and  have
their  truth  limited  to  a  single  moment  of  time;  the  rules  of  these
permanent  relations  we  can  call  to  mind  independently  of  change  of
the  momentary  material.  To  the  extent  that  this  takes  place,  the
scientific  concept  of  nature  develops  and  is  confirmed.  The  biologi-

16  Mach,  Prinzipien  der  Warmelehre,  p.  392  f.;  cf.  Analyse  der  Empfindungen
2nd.ed.,  p.  222  ff.


ON  THE PROBLEM OF  INDUCTION  265

cal  theory  of  knowledge,  on  the  other  hand,  seeks  to  preserve  the
constancy  of  being  through  the  theory  that  all  knowledge  is  a  pro-
gressive adaptation  to  being;  yet  it  is  not  able  to  ground  the  assertion
of  this  constancy  in  an  appropriate  instrument  of  knowledge.  A
permanence  of  our  environment  is  spoken  of,  out  of  which  a  corre-
sponding permanence  of  thought  is  to  develop.  But  it  is  overlooked
that  ultimately  nothing  else  is  meant  by  this  permanence  of  the
environment  than  the  persistence  of  fixed  functional  relations,  which
are  formulable  between  the  elements  of  experience.  Along  with  the
content  of  these  elements,  there  is  recognized  a  form  of  their  con-
nection, which  at  any  rate  can  in  no  way  be  reduced  to  the  material
oppositions  of  sensation,  i.e.,  to  the  bright  and  the  dark,  the  sweet
and  the  bitter,  etc.  But  all  conflict  is  herewith  in  principle  removed.
From  the  beginning,  it  has  been  admitted  and  emphasized  that  the
conception  of  a  constant  law  is  indispensable  in  the  definition  of  a
natural  object.  It  only  remains  to  perceive  that  this  conception  is
a  perfectly  independent  element  of  knowledge,  and  resists  all  reduc-
tion to  the  assumed  "simple"  sense  impressions.  Progressive  analy-
sis leads  to  increasingly  exact  confirmation  of  this  fundamental
difference.  The  logical  character  of  the  pure  concepts  of  relation  is
revealed  to  the  extent  that  they  arrange  themselves  in  a  fixed  system
and  are  exhibited  in  the  whole  wealth  of  their  ramifications  and  mutual
dependencies.

in

The  problem  of  laws  of  nature.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  two
fundamental  moments  of  induction:  the  gaining  of  particular  "facts"
and  the  connecting  of  these  facts  into  laws,  go  back  to  the  same
motive  of  thought.  In  both  cases,  the  problem  is  to  raise  from  the
flux  of  experience  elements,  that  can  be  used  as  constants  of  theoreti-
cal construction.  Even  the  establishment  of  a  particular,  tempo-
rally limited  occurrence  reveals  this  fundamental  feature:  viz.,  that
in  the  changing  process,  certain  permanent  connections  can  be
grasped  and  retained,  (p.  243  ff.)  The  scientific  explanation  of
any  involved  group  of  phenomena  by  means  of  the  "isolation"  and
"superposition"  of  simpler  relations  carries  the  task  imposed  here  a
step  further.  We  discover  in  the  ultimate  empirical  "laws  of  nature"
what  may  be  called  constants  of  a  higher  order,  such  as  rise  above
the  mere  existence  of  the  individual  fact,  that  is  established  in  a


266  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

definite  magnitude.  Nevertheless,  the  general  procedure,  which  is
here  everywhere  effective,  only  reaches  apparent  completion  in  this
result.  The  "fundamental  laws"  of  natural  science  seem  at  first  to
represent  the  final  "form"  of  all  empirical  processes,  but  regarded
from  another  point  of  view,  they  serve  only  as  the  material  for  further
consideration.  In  the  further  process  of  knowledge,  these  "constants
of  the  second  level"  are  resolved  into  variables.  They  are  only
valid  relatively  to  a  certain  sphere  of  experience,  and  must  be  ready,
when  this  sphere  is  extended,  to  change  their  import.  Thus  we
stand  before  a  ceaseless  progress,  in  which  the  fixed  form  of  being
and  process  that  we  believed  we  had  gained,  seems  to  escape  us.
All  scientific  thought  is  dominated  by  the  demand  for  unchanging
elements,  while  on  the  other  hand,  the  empirically  given  constantly
renders  this  demand  fruitless.  We  grasp  permanent  being  only  to
lose  it  again.  From  this  standpoint,  what  we  call  science  appears
not  as  an  approximation  to  any  "abiding  and  permanent"  reality,
but  only  as  a  continually  renewed  illusion,  as  a  phantasmagoria,  in
which  each  new  picture  displaces  all  the  earlier  ones,  only  itself  to
disappear  and  be  annihilated  by  another.

Laws  and  constants.  This  very  comparison,  however,  points  to  a
necessary  limit  in  radical  scepticism.  The  images  in  the  presenta-
tional life  of  the  individual,  to  which  the  particular  phases  of  science
are  here  compared,  always  have  a  certain  inner  form  of  connection
with  each  other,  no  matter  how  variegated  and  diverse  in  their
succession;  and  without  this  inner  connection,  they  could  not  be
grasped  as  contents  of  the  same  consciousness.  They  all  stand  at
least  in  an  ordered  temporal  connection,  in  a  definite  relation  of
earlier  and  later;  and  this  one  feature  suffices  to  give  them  a  fundar
mental  common  character  through  all  diversity  of  individual  form.
No  matter  how  much  the  particular  elements  may  differ  from  each
other  in  their  material  content,  they  must  nevertheless  agree  in  those
determinations,  on  which  the  serial  form  rests,  in  which  they  all
participate.  Even  in  the  loosest,  most  slack  succession  of  members,
the  preceding  member  is  not  absolutely  destroyed  by  the  entry  of
the  succeeding  member;  but  certain  fundamental  determinations
persist,  on  which  rest  the  homogeneity  and  uniformity  of  the  series.
In  the  successive  phases  of  science,  this  postulate  is  most  purely  and
perfectly  realized.  Each  change  in  the  system  of  scientific  concepts
places  in  a  clear  light  the  permanent  structural  elements  to  be


ON  THE PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION  267

ascribed  to  this  system,  as  it  is  only  under  the  assumption  of  these
elements  that  it  can  be  described.  If  we  take  as  given  the  whole  of
experience,  as  it  is  represented  in  any  definite  stage  of  knowledge,
this  whole  is  never  a  mere  aggregate  of  perceptual  data,  but  is
divided  and  unified  according  to  definite  theoretical  points  of  view.
It  has  already  been  shown  on  all  sides  that,  without  such  points  of
view,  no  single  assertion  concerning  facts,  in  particular  no  single
concrete  measurement,  would  be  possible.  (Cf.  above  p.  140  ff.)
Thus  if  we  view  the  totality  of  empirical  knowledge  at  any  point  of
time,  we  can  represent  it  in  the  form  of  a  function,  which  reproduces
the  characteristic  relation  according  to  which  we  conceive  the  indi-
vidual members  arranged  in  mutual  dependency.  Generally  speak-
ing, we  have  some  such  form  as  F  (A,  B,  C,  D  .  .  .  .  ),  in  which  it  is
to  be  remembered  that  what  appears  in  this  expression  as  an  element
may  prove,  otherwise  considered,  to  be  a  very  complex  system,  so
that  the  member  A  would  be  replaced  by  f  (ai,  a2,  . . .  an),  the  member
B  by  <t>  (bi  b2  ...  bn)  etc.  Thus  there  arises  a  complex  whole  of
overlapping  (ineinandergreifender)  syntheses,  which  stand  in  a
certain  mutual  relation  of  superordination  and  subordination.  Two
fields  of  phenomena  A  and  B  are  first  united  each  according  to  a
particular  law  ^i  («i,  a  2,  «a),  ^2  (j9i,  $2,  $3  . .  .)j  these  laws  are  again
connected  among  themselves  by  a  new  relation  4>(^i,  ^2),  until  we
finally  reach  the  most  general  relation,  which  ascribes  to  each  indi-
vidual factor  its  definite  place  with  regard  to  the  others.  The  funda-
mental form  F  is  analysed  for  thought  into  a  structure  of  mutually
dependent  determinations,  which  would  be  symbolically  represented,
for  example,  by  an  expression  F[$i  (^1^2),^  (¥s¥4)$s  .  .  .  ].  Kit
is  found  that  some  wholly  assured  observation  does  not  agree  with  the
determinations,  that  are  to  be  expected  and  calculated  on  the  basis
of  this  most  general  theoretical  formula,  then  this  formula  needs
correction.  But  this  correction  cannot  involve  the  removal  of  any
element  indiscriminately  from  the  formula,  for  the  correction  must
proceed  according  to  a  definite  principle  of  methodic  advance.  The
transformation  occurs,  as  it  were,  "from  within  outwards;"  at  first,
while  retaining  the  more  inclusive  relations  F,  3>i,  <£2,  etc.t  the  special
relations  ^i,  ^2  ...  would  be  transformed;  and  in  this  way,  we  would
attempt  to  establish  again  the  unbroken  agreement  of  theory  and
observation.  The  insertion  of  intermediate  terms,  and  the  institu-
tion of  new  experiments  occurs  as  part  of  the  intellectual  tendency


268  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

to  verify  and  to  "save"  the  more  inclusive  laws,  by  deducing  the
diverging  result  from  the  laws  themselves  through  addition  of  a  new
determining  factor.

The  general  form  of  experience.  The  preservation  of  a  general
"form"  of  experience  is  evident  here;  it  is  found  even  when  the
necessary  revision  goes  beyond  the  "facts"  and  their  purely  empirical
"rules"  of  connection  to  the  principles  and  universal  laws  themselves.
Also  such  principles  as,  for  example,  those  on  which  Newton  founds  his
mechanics,  do  not  need  to  be  taken  as  absolutely  unchanging  dogmas;
they  can  rather  be  regarded  as  the  temporarily  simplest  intellectual
"hypotheses,"  by  which  we  establish  the  unity  of  experience.  We
do  not  relinquish  the  content  of  these  hypotheses,  as  long  as  any
less  sweeping  variation,  concerning  a  deduced  element,  can  reestablish
the  harmony  between  theory  and  experience.  But  if  this  way  has
been  closed,  criticism  is  directed  back  to  the  presuppositions  them-
selves and  to  the  demand  for  their  reshaping.  Here  it  is  the  "func-
tional form"  itself,  that  changes  into  another;  but  this  transition
never  means  that  the  fundamental  form  absolutely  disappears,  and
another  absolutely  new  form  arises  in  its  place.  The  new  form  must
contain  the  answer  to  questions,  proposed  within  the  older  form;
this  one  feature  establishes  a  logical  connection  between  them,  and
points  to  a  common  forum  of  judgment,  to  which  both  are  sub-
jected. The  transformation  must  leave  a  certain  body  of  principles
unaffected;  for  it  is  undertaken  merely  for  the  sake  of  preserving
this  body  of  principles,  and  these  reveal  its  real  goal.  Since  we
never  compare  the  system  of  hypotheses  in  itself  with  the  naked
facts  in  themselves,  but  always  can  only  oppose  one  hypothetical
system  of  principles  to  another  more  inclusive,  more  radical  system,
we  need  for  this  progressive  comparison  an  ultimate  constant  stand-
ard of  measurement  of  supreme  principles  of  experience  in  general.
Thought  demands  the  identity  of  this  logical  standard  of  measure-
ment amid  all  the  change  of  what  is  measured.  In  this  sense,  the
critical  theory  of  experience  wouW  constitute  the  universal  invariant
theory  of  experience,  and  thus  fulfill  a  requirement  clearly  urged  by
inductive  procedure  itself.  The  procedure  of  the  "transcendental
philosophy"  can  be  directly  compared  at  this  point  with  that  of
geometry.  Just  as  the  geometrician  selects  for  investigation  those
relations  of  a  definite  figure,  which  remain  unchanged  by  certain
transformations,  so  here  the  attempt  is  made  to  discover  those


ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION  269

universal  elements  of  form,  that  persist  through  all  change  in  the
particular  material  content  of  experience.  The  " categories"  of
space  and  time,  of  magnitude  and  the  functional  dependency  of
magnitudes,  etc.,  are  established  as  such  elements  of  form,  «vhich
cannot  be  lacking  in  any  empirical  judgment  or  system  of  judgments.
Also  the  method  followed  here  shows  the  same  "rational' '  structure
as  was  found  in  mathematics.  Here  as  there,  it  was  not  necessary,
in  order  to  prove  the  independence  of  a  conceptual  relation  from
certain  changes,  that  we  should  actually  carry  out  these  changes,
but  it  was  sufficient  merely  to  grasp  the  direction  of  the  change  once
for  all,  in  making  the  decision.17  We  prove  that  the  meaning  of
certain  functions  of  experience  is  not  affected  in  principle  by  a  change
in  their  material  content.  For  example,  the  validity  of  a  space-
time  dependency  of  the  elements  in  natural  processes  expressed  by
universal  causal  law,  remains  unaffected  by  any  change  in  the
particular  causal  principles.  The  goal  of  critical  analysis  would  be
reached,  if  we  succeeded  in  isolating  in  this  way  the  ultimate  common
element  of  all  possible  forms  of  scientific  experience;  i.e.,  if  we  suc-
ceeded in  conceptually  defining  those  moments,  which  persist  in  the
advance  from  theory  to  theory  because  they  are  the  conditions
of  any  theory.  At  no  given  stage  of  knowledge  can  this  goal  be
perfectly  achieved;  nevertheless  it  remains  as  a  demand,  and  pre-
scribes a  fixed  direction  to  the  continuous  unfolding  and  evolution  of
the  systems  of  experience.

The  concept  of  the  a  priori  and  the  u  invariants  of  experience."  From
this  point  of  view,  the  strictly  limited  meaning  of  the  "a  priori"  is
clearly  evident.  Only  those  ultimate  logical  invariants  can  be
called  a  priori,  which  lie  at  the  basis  of  any  determination  of  a
connection  according  to  natural  law.  A  cognition  is  called  a  priori
not  in  any  sense  as  if  it  were  prior  to  experience,  but  because
and  in  so  far  as  it  is  contained  as  a  necessary  premise  in  every  valid
judgment  concerning  facts.  If  we  analyse  such  a  judgment,  we
find,  along  with  the  immediate  contents  of  sensuous  data  and  ele-
ments differing  from  case  to  case,  something  permanent;  we  find,  as  it
were,  a  system  of  "arguments,"  of  which  the  assertion  involved
represents  an  appropriate  functional  value.  In  fact,  this  funda-
mental relation  has  never  been  seriously  denied  by  even  the  most
convinced  "empiricism."  When,  for  instance,  the  evolutionary

17  C/.  above  p.  239  ff.


270  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

theory  of  experience  lays  weight  on  the  fact  that  the  sensation  of
time  and  the  idea  of  time  evolve  "in  adjustment  to  the  temporal  and
spatial  environment,"  this  uncontested  and  incontestable  proposition
contains  the  very  factors  here  in  question,  in  the  concept  of  "environ-
ment/' which  it  presupposes.  It  is  herein  assumed,  that  there  "is"
a  fixed,  objective  order  of  time,  and  that  events  do  not  succeed  each
other  in  arbitrary,  capricious  fashion,  but  proceed  "out  of  each  other"
according  to  a  definite  rule.  The  truth  of  this  assumption  must
remain  fixed,  if  the  conception  of  evolution  is  to  have  any  justifica-
tion, indeed  any  meaning.  And  it  is  to  the  truth  of  this  judgmental
connection,  and  not  to  the  existence  of  any  sort  of  presentations  in  us,
that  the  concept  of  the  a  priori  is  alone  applicable  in  its  purely
logical  meaning.  We  are  not  concerned  with  the  existence  of  psychic
contents,  but  only  with  the  validity  of  certain  relations  and  with
their  superordination  and  subordination.  According  to  the  critical
theory  of  knowledge,  space  and  not  color  is  "a  priori"  because  only
space  forms  an  invariant  in  every  physical  construction.  But  the
more  sharply  the  opposition  appears  between  truth  and  reality,  the
more  clearly  it  is  shown  to  contain  an  unsolved  problem.  Necessary
as  their  separation  is,  a  mediation  between  them  on  the  other  hand,
must  be  assumed,  if  knowledge  is  to  be  brought  into  a  unitary  system.
It  must  now  be  asked  whether  there  is  a  path  within  knowledge
itself,  leading  from  the  pure  logical  and  mathematical  systems  to  the
problem  of  reality.  And  if  such  a  path  can  be  shown,  what  new
meaning  does  the  problem  gain  thereby,  and  in  what  direction  is  its
solution  to  be  pointed  out  to  thought?


CHAPTER  VI

THE  CONCEPT  OF  REALITY

The  separation  of  "subjective"  and  "objective"  reality.  The  charac-
teristic procedure  of  metaphysics  does  not  consist  in  transcending  the
field  of  knowledge  in  general, — for  beyond  this  field  there  would  not  be
even  material  for  a  possible  question, — but  in  separating  correla-
tive standpoints  within  the  field  of  knowledge  itself,  and  thus  trans-
forming what  is  logically  correlative  into  an  opposition  of  things.
(Cf.  above,  p.  237  f.)  At  no  point  is  this  feature  so  significant  as
in  the  old  question  as  to  the  relation  of  thought  and  being,  of  the
subject  and  object  of  knowledge.  This  one  opposition  conceals
all  the  others  within  it  and  can  progressively  develop  into  them.  If
once  "things"  and  the  "mind"  become  conceptually  separated,  they
fall  into  two  separate  spatial  spheres,  into  an  inner  and  an  outer
world,  between  which  there  is  no  intelligible  causal  connection.
And  the  conflict  constantly  grows  sharper.  If  the  objects  only  exist
as  a  plurality,  then  for  the  subject  the  postulate  of  unity  is  essential;
if  the  element  of  change  and  motion  belongs  to  the  essence  of  reality,
then  it  is  identity  and  unchangeableness,  that  is  demanded  of  the
true  concept.  No  dialectical  solution  can  ever  fully  transcend  these
separations,  which  are  already  present  in  the  original  formulation  of
problems;  the  history  of  metaphysics  wavers  between  opposing
tendencies,  without  being  able  to  deduce  the  one  from  the  other,  or
to  reduce  them  to  each  other.

And  yet  at  least  the  system  of  empirical  knowledge  has  an  original
unity,  which  persists  in  spite  of  all  these  oppositions.  The  constant
progress  of  science  is  not  diverted  from  its  goal  by  the  varying
fortunes  of  metaphysics.  It  must  be  possible  to  gain  clarity  regard-
ing the  direction  of  this  advance,  without  presupposing  the  dualism
of  the  metaphysical  concepts.  In  so  far  as  this  dualism  is  applic-
able to  experience,  it  must  make  itself  intelligible  entirely  on  the
basis  of  experience  and  its  characteristic  principles.  Thus  the
question  is  no  longer  what  absolute  separation  underlies  the  opposi-
tion of  the  "inner"  and  the  "outer,"  the  "presentation"  and  the
"object;"  the  question  merely  is  from  what  standpoints  and  by  what

271


272  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

necessity  does  knowledge  itself  reach  these  divisions.  The  separation
and  reconciliation  of  these  concepts  has  been  a  problem  throughout
the  whole  history  of  philosophy;  are  these  concepts  merely  intel-
lectual phantoms,  or  do  they  have  a  fixed  meaning  and  function  in
the  structure  of  knowledge?

The  development  of  the  concepts  of  objectivity  and  subjectivity.  If
we  consult  immediate  experience  unmixed  with  reflection,  the  opposi-
tion of  the  "subjective"  and  the  "objective"  is  shown  to  be  wholly
foreign  to  it.  For  such  experience,  there  is  only  one  plane  of  "exist-
ence," and  this  includes  all  contents  uniformly  and  without  dis-
tinction. What  is  grasped  by  consciousness  here  and  now  "is,"
and  is  precisely  in  the  form  offered  by  direct  experience.  Between
the  experiences,  in  particular,  that  refer  to  the  individual's  own
body,  and  those  that  refer  to  "outer"  things,  there  is  still  no  fixed
line  of  division.  The  temporal  limits  of  the  particular  experiences
are  vague;  the  past,  in  so  far  as  it  is  taken  up  into  memory,  is  just  as
given  and  as  "real"  as  the  present.  The  various  contents  are
arranged,  as  it  were,  in  one  plane;  as  yet  there  is  no  definite  point  of
view,  that  would  establish  any  preeminence  of  one  over  the  other.
If  we  characterize  this  level  at  all  by  the  opposition  of  the  subjective
and  the  objective  (and  it  can  only  be  done  in  an  extravagant  and
unreal  sense),  then  we  must  ascribe  to  it  thorough-going  objectivity;
for  the  contents  still  have  that  passivity,  that  indubitable  givenness,
which  we  customarily  connect  with  the  conception  of  the  "thing."
But  the  very  first  beginning  of  logical  reflection  destroys  this  impres-
sion of  perfect  unity  and  completeness.  The  division,  whose  growth
starts  here,  is  already  present,  though  concealed,  in  the  first  attempts
at  a  scientific  view  of  the  world.  The  fundamental  tendency  of  this
view  is  not  simply  to  receive  sensuous  data,  but  to  distinguish  their
values.  The  fleeting,  unique  observation  is  more  and  more  forced  to
the  back-ground;  only  the  "typical"  experiences  are  to  be  retained,
such  as  recur  in  a  permanent  manner,  and  under  conditions  that  can
be  universally  formulated  and  established.  When  science  under-
takes to  shape  the  given  and  to  deduce  it  from  definite  principles,
it  must  set  aside  the  original  relation  of  coordination  of  all  the  data  of
experience,  and  substitute  a  relation  of  superordination  and  subor-
dination. Every  critical  doubt,  however,  that  is  directed  against
the  universal  validity  of  any  perception,  bears  within  it  in  germ  the
division  of  being  into  a  "subjective"  and  an  "objective"  sphere.  The


THE  CONCEPT  OF  REALITY  273

analysis  of  the  concept  of  experience  has  already  led  to  that  opposition,
which  is  destined  to  resolve  the  metaphysical  division  of  subject  and
object  by  taking  up  into  itself  its  essential  conceptual  meaning.

Changing  and  constant  elements  of  experience.  The  goal  of  all
empirical  knowledge  lies  in  gaining  ultimate  invariants  as  the  neces-
sary and  constitutive  factors  in  each  empirical  judgment.  From
this  standpoint,  however,  the  various  empirical  assertions  appear  of
very  different  value.  Along  with  the  loose,  associative  connection
of  perceptions  united  only  under  particular  circumstances  (as,  for
example,  under  definite  physiological  conditions),  there  are  found
fixed  connections,  which  are  valid  for  any  whole  field  of  objects,
and  belong  to  this  field  independently  of  the  differences  given  in  the
particular  place  and  definite  time  of  the  observation.  We  find
connections,  which  hold  their  ground  through  all  further  experimental
testing  and  through  apparently  contrary  instances,  and  remain
steadfast  in  the  flux  of  experience  while  others  dissolve  and  vanish.
It  is  the  former,  that  we  call  "objective"  in  a  pregnant  sense,  while
we  designate  ,the  latter  by  the  term  "subjective."  We  finally  call
objective  those  elements  of  experience,  which  persist  through  all
change  in  the  here  and  now,  and  on  which  rests  the  unchangeable
character  of  experience;  while  we  ascribe  to  the  sphere  of  subjectivity
all  that  belongs  to  this  change  itself,  and  that  only  expresses  a
determination  of  the  particular,  unique  here  and  now.  The  result
of  thus  deriving  the  distinction  between  the  subjective  and  the
objective,  is  that  it  has  merely  relative  significance.  For  there  are
no  absolutely  changeable  elements  of  experience  at  any  stage  of
knowledge  we  have  reached,  any  more  than  there  are  absolutely
constant  elements.  A  content  can  only  be  known  as  changeable
with  reference  to  another,  with  which  it  is  compared,  and  which  at
first  claims  permanent  existence  for  itself.  At  the  same  time,  the
possibility  always  remains  that  this  second  content  will  be  corrected
by  a  third,  and  thus  may  no  longer  hold  as  a  true  and  perfect  expres-
sion of  objectivity,  but  as  a  mere  partial  expression  of  being.  Thus
we  are  not  concerned  here  with  a  fixed  line  of  division,  separating
two  eternally  sundered  fields  of  reality,  but  with  a  moving  limit,
which  constantly  shifts  in  the  progress  of  knowledge.  The  present
phase  of  experience  appears  just  as  "objective"  in  contrast  to
the  past,  as  it  appears  "subjective"  in  contrast  to  the  later
phases.  Only  this  mutual  act  of  correction  remains  standing,  only


274  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

this  function  of  comparison  persists,  while  the  material  content  of
the  two  fields  is  in  constant  flux.  The  spatial  expression  of  the
division,  i.e.,  the  analysis  of  being  into  an  inner  and  an  outer  world,
is  thus  insufficient  and  misleading,  because  it  obscures  this  funda-
mental relation;  it  establishes  instead  of  a  living,  reciprocal  relation
realized  along  with  advancing  knowledge,  a  fixed  and  absolutely
closed  division  of  things.  The  opposition  involved  here  is  not  of
spatial,  but  rather  of  dynamic  nature;  it  signifies  the  differing  power
of  empirical  judgments  to  withstand  continuous  testing  by  theory  and
observation,  without  thereby  being  altered  in  content.  In  this
perpetually  renewed  process,  groups,  that  were  originally  taken  as
"fixed,"  are  always  being  separated  out;  and  now  that  they  cannot
satisfy  the  test,  they  lose  this  character  of  fixity,  which  constitutes
the  fundamental  property  of  all  objectivity.  But  it  now  becomes
clear  that  our  concern  with  this  transition  into  the  subjective  is  not
with  a  change  in  the  substance  of  things,  but  merely  with  a  change
in  the  critical  evaluation  of  cognitions.  "Things"  are  not  thereby
degraded  into  mere  "presentations,"  but  a  judgment,  that  previously
seemed  to  hold  unconditionally,  is  now  limited  to  a  certain  sphere  of
conditions.

The  subjectivity  of  the  sensuous  qualities.  This  relation  can  be  made
plain,  if  we  consider  the  best  known  example  of  this  transformation
of  objectivity  into  subjectivity,  viz.,  the  discovery  of  the  "subjectivity
of  the  sensuous  qualities."  Even  for  Democritus,  who  made  this
discovery,  it  means  fundamentally  nothing  but  the  fact  that  the
colors  and  tones,  the  smells  and  tastes  have  a  peculiar  character  for
knowledge,  by  which  they  are  excluded  from  the  scientific  construc-
tion of  reality.  They  pass  from  the  yvrjvirj  yvkw  into  the  ffKorirr
yv<jofjnj ;  they  are  separated  from  the  pure  mathematical  ideas  of  space,
of  form  and  motion,  to  which  alone  henceforth  physical  "truth"
is  ascribed.  However,  this  division  does  not  mean  that  they  are
denied  all  part  in  being  in  general;  rather,  a  narrower  field  is  marked
off  for  what  previously  passed  as  absolute  witness  of  reality;  never-
theless within  this  narrower  field,  the  sense  qualities  retain  their
full  validity.  The  seen  color,  the  heard  tone,  is  and  remains  some-
thing "real;"  only  this  reality  does  not  subsist  in  isolation  and  for
itself,  but  results  from  the  interaction  of  the  physical  stimulus  and
the  appropriate  organ  of  sensation.  Thus  when  the  qualities  are
explained  as  subjective,  they  fall  outside  the  world  of  "pure  forms,"


THE CONCEPT  OF  REALITY  275

that  mathematical  physics  constructs,  but  not  outside  of  nature  as
such;  for  precisely  this  relation  of  physical  and  physiological  condi-
tions, on  which  the  sense  qualities  rest,  is  itself  a  part  of  "nature,"
indeed,  the  concept  of  nature  is  first  realized  in  the  reciprocal  causal
dependency  of  particular  elements.  The  same  holds  true  when  we
go  beyond  the  sphere  of  secondary  qualities  to  the  illusions  and
deceptions  of  the  senses.  When  the  straight  stick  appears  in  water
as  if  broken,  this  is  no  unreal  appearance  but  a  phenomenon  "well-
grounded"  in  the  laws  of  the  refraction  of  light;  and  as  such  expresses
with  perfect  adequacy  a  complex  connection  of  elements  of  experi-
ence. Error  only  begins  when  we  transfer  a  determination,  which
holds  of  a  particular  member,  to  the  total  complex;  we  thus  apply  a
judgment,  that  has  been  found  valid  under  certain  limitations,  to
experience  as  a  whole,  apart  from  any  limiting  condition.  That  the
stick  is  broken,  is  a  valid  empirical  judgment,  in  so  far  as  the  phenom-
enon it  refers  to  can  be  confirmed  and  deduced  as  necessary; — only
we  must  add  to  this  judgment,  as  it  were,  a  logical  index  signifying  the
special  conditions  of  its  validity,  from  which  it  cannot  be  abstracted.
The  series  of  degrees  of  objectivity.  If  we  survey  the  whole  of
these  considerations,  the  series  of  degrees  of  objectivity  is  clearly
revealed.  As  long  as  we  remain  at  the  stage  of  the  metaphysical
distinction  of  the  inner  and  outer,  we  have  an  opposition  that  permits
absolutely  no  mediation.  Here  there  is  only  a  simple  "either-or."
Just  as  a  thing  cannot  be  simultaneously  at  two  different  places  in
space,  so  the  "inner"  cannot  in  any  aspect  be  at  the  same  time  an
outer,  and  conversely.  In  the  critical  formulation  of  the  question,
on  the  contrary,  this  limitation  is  set  aside.  The  opposition  is  no
longer  between  two  members,  but  between  many  members;  as  we
have  seen,  the  same  content  of  experience  can  be  called  subjective
and  objective,  according  as  it  is  conceived  relatively  to  different
logical  points  of  reference.  Sensuous  perception,  as  opposed  to  the
hallucination  and  the  dream,  signifies  the  real  type  of  the  objective;
while  measured  by  the  schema  of  exact  physics,  sense  perception
can  become  a  phenomenon  that  no  longer  expresses  an  independent
property  of  "things,"  but  only  a  subjective  condition  of  the  observer.
In  truth,  we  are  always  concerned  here  with  a  relation,  holding
between  a  relatively  narrower  and  a  broader  sphere  of  experience,
between  relatively  dependent  and  independent  judgments.  Instead
of  a  mere  duality  of  determinations  a  series  of  values  is  given,


276  SUBSTAN'CE AND FUNCTION*

which  progresses  according  to  a  definite  rule.  Each  member
points  to  a  successor,  and  requires  this  successor  for  its  own  comple-
tion. Even  in  the  popular  and  prescientific  view,  the  first,  impor-
tant phases  of  this  development  can  be  recognized.  When  we  charac-
terize a  sensuous  impression,  that  is  given  us  here  and  now  in  a
definite  nuance,  as  "rod"  or  "green,"  even  this  primitive  act  of
judgment  is  directed  from  variables  to  constants,  as  is  essential
to  all  knowledge.  Even  here  the  content  of  the  sensation  is  separated
from  its  momentary  experiencing  (Erlebnis)  and  is  opposed  as
independent;  the  content  appears,  over  against  the  particular  tem-
poral act,  as  a  permanent  moment,  that  can  be  retained  as  an  identical
determination .  But  this  intellectual  permanence,  which  is  latent  even
in  the  individual  impression,  lending  it  a  real  existence,  is  nevertheless
far  behind  that  in  the  thing-concept  of  ordinary  experience.  Here  it
is  not  sufficient  simply  to  combine  the  sensuous  perceptions,  but
along  with  this  mere  unification  must  go  an  act  of  logical  com-
pletion. The  object  of  experience  is  conceived  as  a  continuous  being,
whose  persistence  in  every  point  of  the  continuous  sequence  of
moments  of  time  is  postulated  as  necessary.  Direct  perception,  on
the  contrary,  always  offers  us  only  isolated  fragments,  only  entirely
discrete  values,  which  in  no  combination  constitute  a  continuous
whole.  The  truly  "seen"  and  "heard"  furnishes  only  disconnected,
temporally  separated  masses  of  perception;  while  the  concept  of  the
"object"  requires  the  perfect  filling  of  the  time  series,  and  thus,
strictly  speaking,  requires  the  assumption  of  an  infinite  totality  of
elements.  Thus  at  this  second  level,  the  general  procedure  is  clearly
revealed  for  transforming  and  enriching  the  given,  on  the  basis  of  the
logical  demand  for  its  thorough-going  connection.  It  is  on  the
continuation  of  this  procedure,  that  science  bases  its  definition  of
nature  and  the  natural  object.  The  logical  tendencies  found  in  the
concept  of  experience  of  the  ordinary  view  of  the  world  are  now
consciously  taken  up  and  carried  further  with  methodic  purpose.
The  "things,"  that  arise  henceforth,  prove, — the  more  distinctly
their  real  meaning  is  comprehended, — to  be  metaphorical  expres-
sions of  permanent  connections  of  phenomena  according  to  law,
and  thus  expressions  of  the  constancy  and  continuity  of  experience
itself.  This  fixity  and  continuity  is  never  fully  realized  in  any  sen-
suously perceptible  object;  so  in  order  to  reach  it,  thought  is  led  to  a
hypothetical  substructure  of  empirical  being,  which  however  has  no


THE CONCEPT OF REALITY  277

other  function  than  to  represent  the  permanent  order  of  this  being
itself.  (Cf.  above  p.  164  ff.)  Thus  there  is  an  unbroken  develop-
ment from  the  first  stages  of  objectification  to  its  completed  scientific
form.  The  process  would  be  completed  as  soon  as  we  succeeded
in  advancing  to  the  ultimate  constants  of  experience  in  general,
which,  as  we  have  seen,  constitute  both  the  presupposition  and  the
goal  of  investigation.  The  system  of  these  unchanging  elements
constitutes  the  type  of  objectivity  in  general, — in  so  far  as  this  term
is  purely  limited  to  a  meaning  wholly  comprehensible  to  knowledge.

The  logical  gradations  of  the  contents  of  experience.  True,  it  remains
an  insoluble  problem  how  the  "thing-in-itself"  passes  into  the  mere
"presentation,"  how  absolute  existence  changes  into  absolute  knowl-
edge; but  with  this  question  we  have  nothing  to  do  in  the  critically
clarified  conception  of  the  opposition  of  the  subjective  and  the  objec-
tive. Here  we  do  not  measure  presentations  with  respect  to  absolute
objects;  but  different  partial  expressions  of  the  same  total  experi-
ence serve  as  standards  of  measurement  reciprocally  for  each  other.
Each  partial  experience  is  accordingly  examined  as  to  what  it  means
for  the  total  system;  and  this  meaning  determines  its  degree  of
objectivity.  In  the  last  analysis,  we  are  not  concerned  with  what
a  definite  experience  "is,"  but  with  what  it  "is  worth;"  i.e.,  with
what  function  it  has  as  a  particular  building-stone  in  the  structure  of
the  whole.  Dream  experiences  also  are  not  distinguished  from  wak-
ing experiences  by  any  specific  character  (Ding char akter)  attached
as  a  permanently  recognizable  property.  They  also  have  a  sort  of
"being,"  in  so  far  as  they  are  grounded  in  definite  physiological
conditions,  in  "objective"  bodily  states;  but  this  being  does  not
extend  beyond  the  sphere  and  time-span  within  which  these  con-
ditions are  fulfilled.  Insight  into  the  subjective  character  of  the
dream  means  nothing  else  than  the  reestablishment  of  a  logical
gradation  among  the  contents  of  consciousness,  which  for  a  time
threatened  to  disappear.  Thus  in  general,  the  opposition  of  the
subjective  and  objective  serves  in  its  development  for  the  increas-
ingly strict  organization  of  experience.  We  seek  to  gain  permanent
contents  in  place  of  changing  contents;  but  at  the  same  time  we  are
conscious,  that  every  attempt  in  this  direction  only  partially  ful-
fills the  fundamental  demand,  and  hence  requires  completion  in  a
new  construction.  We  thus  gain  a  sequence  of  superordinated  and
subordinated  moments,  representing,  as  it  were,  various  comple-


278  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

mentary  phases  of  the  solution  of  the  same  problem.  None  of  these
phases, — not  even  those  most  remote  from  the  goal, — can  be  entirely
dispensed  with;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  no  one  of  them  represents  an
absolutely  unconditional  solution.  Thus  it  is  true  we  can  never
compare  the  experience  of  things  with  the  things  themselves,  as  they
are  assumed  to  be  in  themselves  separate  from  all  the  conditions  of
experience;  but  we  can  very  well  replace  a  relatively  narrower  aspect
of  experience  by  a  broader,  so  that  the  given  data  are  thereby  ordered
under  a  new,  more  general  point  of  view.  The  earlier  results  are
not  thereby  rendered  valueless,  but  are  rather  confirmed  within  a
definite  sphere  of  validity.  Each  later  member  of  the  series  is
necessarily  connected  with  the  earlier  ones,  in  so  far  as  it  answers  a
question  latent  in  them.  We  face  here  a  perpetually  self-renewing
process  with  only  relative  stopping-points;  and  it  is  these  stopping-
points,  which  define  the  concept  of  "objectivity"  at  any  time.

The  problem  of  transcendence.  The  direction  of  this  progress  of
experience  is  also  directly  opposed  to  what  would  be  expected  on  the
ordinary  metaphysical  presuppositions.  From  the  standpoint  of
these  presuppositions,  it  is  the  subject,  it  is  the  presentations  in  us,
which  alone  are  given  to  us  in  the  beginning,  and  from  them  we  gain
access  to  the  world  of  objects  only  with  difficulty.  The  history  of
philosophy  shows,  however,  how  all  attempts  of  this  sort  fail.  If  we
have  once  enclosed  ourselves  in  the  circle  of  "self-consciousness/'
no  labor  on  the  part  of  thought  (which  itself  belongs  wholly  to  this
circle)  can  lead  us  out  again.  On  the  other  hand,  the  criticism  of
knowledge  reverses  the  problem;  for  it,  the  problem  is  not  how  we  go
from  the  "subjective"  to  the  "objective,"  but  how  we  go  from  the
"objective"  to  the  "subjective."  It  recognizes  no  other  and  no
higher  objectivity  than  that,  which  is  given  in  experience  itself  and
according  to  its  conditions.  Thus  it  does  not  ask  whether  the
whole  of  experience  is  objectively  true  and  valid, — for  this  would
presuppose  a  standard  that  could  never  be  given  in  knowledge, —
but  it  only  asks  whether  a  special,  particular  content  is  a  permanent
or  transitory  part  of  this  whole.  We  are  not  concerned  with  estimat-
ing the  absolute  value  of  the  system  in  its  totality,  but  with  estab-
lishing a  difference  in  value  among  its  particular  factors.  The
question  as  to  the  objectivity  of  experience  in  general  rests  ultimately
on  a  logical  illusion,  of  which  the  history  of  metaphysics  offers  many
examples.  Such  a  question  is  on  the  same  plane  in  principle  with  the


THE CONCEPT OF KEALITY  279

question,  for  instance,  as  to  the  absolute  place  of  the  world.  Just
as  in  this  latter  we  falsely  carry  over  to  the  universe  as  a  whole  a
relation,  which  is  only  valid  for  the  particular  parts  of  the  universe  in
their  reciprocal  relations,  so  in  the  former  question  a  conceptual
opposition,  proper  for  distinguishing  the  particular  phases  of  empirical
knowledge,  is  applied  to  the  conceived  totality  of  these  phases  and
their  sequence.  The  full  measure  of  "objectivity"  belongs  to  each
particular  experience,  as  long  as  it  is  not  displaced  and  corrected  by
another.  To  the  degree  that  this  continual  testing  and  self-correc-
tion is  carried  on,  there  is  an  increasing  exclusion  of  material  from
the  final  scientific  conception  of  reality,  although  the  material  retains
its  right  within  a  limited  sphere.  Elements,  that  at  first  seemed
necessary  and  constitutive  in  the  concept  of  empirical  being, —
such  as  the  specific  content  of  the  particular  sensations, — lose  this
dominant  position,  and  henceforth  have  no  central  significance  but
only  a  peripheral  one.  Thus  the  designation  of  an  element  as  "sub-
jective" does  not  belong  to  it  originally,  but  presupposes  a  compli-
cated use  of  intellectual  and  empirical  controls,  which  is  only  gained
at  a  relatively  high  level.  This  designation  first  arises  in  the  recipro-
cal criticism  of  experiences,  where  the  changing  existence  is  separated
from  the  permanent.  The  "subjective"  is  not  the  self-evident,  given
starting-point  out  of  which  the  world  of  objects  is  constructed  by  a
speculative  synthesis;  but  it  is  the  result  of  an  analysis  and  pre-
supposes the  permanence  of  experience  and  hence  the  validity  of
fixed  relations  between  contents  in  general.

The  meaning  of  judgment.  The  progress  of  this  analysis  is  evident
when  we  turn  back  to  the  relation  of  the  "universal"  and  "particu-
lar," which  appeared  in  the  definition  of  the  inductive  judgment.
We  saw  that  each  particular  judgment  originally  claims  uncondi-
tional validity  for  itself.  As  a  judgment,  it  does  not  intend  to
describe  only  momentary  sensations  in  their  individual  peculiarity,
but  to  establish  a  matter  of  fact  held  to  be  valid  in  itself,  independent
of  all  particular  temporal  circumstances.  The  judgment  as  such,  by
virtue  of  its  logical  function,  looks  beyond  the  circle  of  what  is  given
at  any  moment,  while  it  affirms  a  universally  valid  connection
between  the  subject  and  predicate.  (See  above  p.  246  ff.)  Only
special  motives  are  able  to  lead  thought  to  deviate  from  this  first
demand,  and  to  limit  its  assertions  expressly  to  a  narrower  circle.
This  limitation  only  takes  place  in  so  far  as  there  is  a  conflict  between


280  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

different  empirical  assertions.  Assertions,  that  would  be  incompati-
ble in  content  if  taken  absolutely,  are  now  set  in  harmony  with  each
other  by  being  related  to  different  subjects; — thus  at  least  one  of
them  confines  itself  to  expressing  the  "nature"  of  things,  not  abso-
lutely, but  only  from  a  special  point  of  view  and  under  certain
limiting  conditions.  As  the  particular  geometrical  form,  according  to
a  well-known  proposition  of  the  Kantian  theory  of  space,  is  only
gained  by  limitation  of  the  "one"  all-inclusive  space,  so  the  particu-
lar judgment  of  experience  issues  from  a  limitation  of  the  one  system
of  experiential  judgments  in  general,  and  presupposes  this  system.
The  particular  judgment  of  experience  arises  when  a  plurality  of
spheres  of  experience,  each  one  conceived  to  be  entirely  determined
according  to  law,  intersect  and  mutually  determine  each  other.
There  is  no  road  to  the  law  from  the  absolutely  isolated  "impres-
sion," where  every  thought  of  logical  relation  is  extinguished;  on  the
other  hand,  it  is  entirely  intelligible  how,  owing  to  the  general  demand
for  a  thorough  ordering  of  experiences  according  to  law,  we  are  led  at
first  to  exclude  particular  contents,  such  as  cannot  apparently  be
brought  into  the  general  plan,  in  order  to  deduce  them  subsequently
from  a  particular  complex  of  conditions.

The  "transcending"  of  sensuous  experience.  It  is  thus  a  logical
differentiation  of  the  contents  of  experience  and  their  arrangement  in
an  ordered  system  of  dependencies,  that  constitutes  the  real  kernel
of  the  concept  of  reality.  This  connection  is  confirmed  anew  when
we  consider  the  logical  character  of  scientific  investigation  more
closely,  for  this  is  indeed  the  genuine  witness  of  empirical  reality.
The  scientific  experiment  never  makes  a  simple  report  regarding  the
present,  momentary  facts  of  perception,  but  it  only  gains  its  value  by
bringing  the  particular  data  under  a  definite  standpoint  of  judgment,
and  thus  giving  them  a  meaning  not  found  in  the  simple  sensuous
experience  as  such.  What  we  observe,  for  instance,  is  a  definite
deflection  of  the  magnetic  needle  under  certain  conditions;  what  we
assert,  on  the  contrary,  as  the  result  of  the  experiment  is  always  an
objective  connection  of  physical  propositions,  which  far  transcend
the  limited  field  of  facts  accessible  to  us  at  a  particular  moment.
As  Duhem  has  admirably  explained,  the  physicist,  in  order  to  reach
a  r^al  result  in  his  investigations,  must  always  transform  the  actual
case  before  his  eyes  into  an  expression  of  the  ideal  case,  which  theory
assumes  and  requires.  Therewith  the  particular  instrument  before


THE CONCEPT  OP REALITY  281

him  changes  from  a  group  of  sensuous  properties  into  a  whole  of
ideal  intellectual  determinations.  It  is  no  longer  a  definite  tool,
a  thing  of  copper  or  steel,  of  aluminum  or  glass,  to  which  he  refers  in
his  assertions;  but  in  its  place  are  concepts,  such  as  that  of  the  mag-
netic field,  the  magnetic  axis,  the  intensity  of  the  current,  etc.,  which,
for  their  part,  are  again  only  the  symbol  and  husk  of  universal
mathematico-physical  relations  and  connections.1  The  characteristic
merit  of  experiment  rests  on  the  fact  that  in  it  one  stroke  establishes
a  thousand  connections.  The  limited  circle  of  facts,  that  is  sensu-
ously accessible,  expands  before  our  intellectual  vision  into  a  univer-
sal connection  of  phenomena  according  to  natural  law.  The  imme-
diate indications  of  the  moment  are  transcended  on  every  hand;  in
their  place  appears  the  conception  of  a  universal  order,  of  such  a  sort
that  it  has  equal  validity  in  the  smallest  as  in  the  greatest,  and  can
be  reconstructed  again  from  any  particular  point.  It  is  only  by
means  of  this  enrichment  of  its  immediate  import,  that  the  content  of
perception  becomes  the  content  of  physics,  and  thus  becomes  an
"objectively  real"  content.

Thus  we  have  to  do  here  with  a  type  of  "transcendence;"  for  the
particular  given  impression  does  not  remain  merely  what  it  is,  but
becomes  a  symbol  of  a  thorough-going  systematic  organization,
within  which  it  stands  and  to  a  certain  extent  participates.  This
change  in  the  empirical  impression  does  not,  however,  alter  its
metaphysical  "substance,"  but  merely  its  logical  form.  What  at
first  appeared  in  isolation,  now  combines  and  shows  a  reciprocal
reference;  what  previously  passed  as  simple,  now  reveals  an  inner
wealth  and  multiplicity,  in  so  far  as  we  can  reach  from  it  other  and
still  other  data  of  experience,  by  a  continuous  progress  according  to
definite  rules.  In  connecting  the  particular  contents  with  each  other,
— as  it  were,  ever  with  new  threads, — we  give  them  that  fixity,  which
is  the  distinguishing  property  of  empirical  objectivity.  What
imprints  the  mark  of  true  objectivity  is  not  the  sensuous  vividness
of  the  impression,  but  this  wealth  of  inner  relations.  What  elevates
the  "things"  of  physics  above  the  things  of  sense  and  lends  them  their
peculiar  kind  of  "reality,"  is  the  wealth  of  consequences  proceeding
out  of  them.  Such  things  of  physics  only  indicate  different  ways  of
advancing  from  one  experience  to  another,  so  that  the  totality  of  being
can  be  finally  surveyed  as  the  totality  of  the  system  of  experience.

1  Duhem,  La  Th6orie  Physique,  p.  251  f .,  cf.  above  p.  190  ff.


282  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

The  concept  of  "representation."  The  concept  and  term,  repre-
sentation, has,  in  spite  of  all  the  attacks  against  it,  persistently
maintained  a  central  position  in  the  history  of  the  theory  of
knowledge;  and  this  concept  here  receives  a  new  meaning.  In
metaphysical  doctrines,  the  "presentation"  (Vorstellung)  refers  to
the  object,  which  stands  behind  it.  Thus  the  "sign"  here  is  of  an
entirely  different  nature  than  the  signified,  and  belongs  to  another
realm  of  being.  Precisely  in  this  lies  the  real  riddle  of  knowledge.
If  the  absolute  object  were  already  otherwise  known  to  us,  then  at
least  it  might  be  understood  how  we  could  indirectly  read  off  its  par-
ticular properties  from  the  sort  of  presentations,  that  arise  from  it.
Once  we  have  assured  ourselves  of  the  existence  of  two  different  series,
we  might  attempt  by  an  analogical  inference  to  carry  over  the  rela-
tions we  find  in  one  series  to  the  other;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  incom-
prehensible how  we  should  succeed  in  inferring  the  existence  of  one
series,  from  data  belonging  exclusively  to  the  other.  As  soon  as  we
have  even  a  general  certainty  of  transcendent  thiugs  beyond  all
knowledge,  we  can  seek,  in  the  immediate  content  of  experience  for
signs  of  this  reality,  which  are  given  at  least  in  concept;  how  this  con-
cept itself  arises  and  what  makes  it  necessary,  is,  on  the  other  hand,
not  explained  by  the  theory  of  signs.  This  difficulty  continually
reappears  in  the  development  of  the  concept  of  representation.  In
ancient  atomism,  the  "images"  of  things,  which  inform  us  of  their
being,  are  conceived  as  material  parts,  which  separate  themselves
from  things  and  undergo  many  physical  changes  on  the  way  to  our
sense-organs.  It  is,  although  in  reduced  measure,  the  real  substance
of  the  body,  which  enters  us  in  sense-perception  and  blends  with  our
own  being.  But  this  materialistic  account  cannot  reach  the  logical
goal  for  which  it  was  undertaken;  for  here  again  the  unity  of  experi-
ence is  only  apparently  preserved.  Even  if  things  gave  off  a  part
of  themselves,  as  it  were,  in  order  to  become  known,  it  would  still
remain  as  obscure  as  before  how  this  part  could  possibly  be  taken,
not  as  what  it  was  in  and  for  itself,  but  as  an  expression  of  an  includ-
ing whole.  This  reference  to  the  whole  would  always  require  a
peculiar  function,  that  is  not  deduced  but  presupposed.  Thus  the
Aristotelian  and  scholastic  theory  of  perception  seems  to  come  closer
to  the  real  psychological  fact,  when,  instead  of  explaining  this  func-
tion, it  postulates  it  from  the  beginning.  The  whole  content  of  the
"immaterial  species,"  by  which  we  grasp  the  being  of  things,  is


THE CONCEPT OF REALITY  283

accordingly  reduced  to  the  act  of  representation.  We  do  not  know
any  determinations  of  the  species  itself,  yet  only  through  it  do  we  know
the  relations  of  outer  things;  "cognoscimus  non  ipsam  speciem  im-
pressam,  sed  per  speciem"  The  ' 'similarity/'  which  is  to  be  assumed
between  the  sign  and  the  signified,  is  thus  not  to  be  conceived  as  if
both  belonged  to  the  same  logical  category.  The  species  agree  in
no  single  actual  property  with  the  object  to  which  they  refer,  for
they  are  characterized  only  by  this  operation  of  reference,  and  not
by  any  property  in  which  they  could  be  similar  to  other  things.
The  conception,  that  they  are  "formates  similitudines  ac  veluti  pic-
turae  objectorum"  is  expressly  contested  and  rejected, — at  least  in
the  most  mature  and  consistent  exposition  of  the  theory  by  Suarez.
"The  assimilation  of  consciousness  with  the  object  does  not  mean  for
Suarez  that  elements  are  thereby  brought  into  consciousness,  and
that  these  elements  stand  in  objective  relation  to  other  functions  of
consciousness,  and  appear  to  these  as  the  object;  but  rather  his
meaning  is  that  the  whole  consciousness  becomes  an  instrument  of
knowledge,  and  in  so  far  an  image  (better,  an  expression,  species
expressa).  Consciousness  performs  an  act,  assumes  a  peculiar
property,  which  of  itself  directs  consciousness  on  the  real  object.
The  living  activity  of  consciousness,  a  perceiving,  not  a  perceived,
which  knows  the  extra-conscious  object  by  means  of  the  species,  is
said  to  be  similar  to  the  object."2  A  weighty  new  distinction  appears
here,  although  concealed  in  scholastic  terminology.  The  fact,  that
an  element  "refers"  to  another  and  indirectly  represents  it,  is  now  no
longer  explained  by  a  particular  property  of  this  element  itself,  but
is  reduced  to  a  characteristic  function  of  knowledge,  and  in  particular
to  the  judgment.  It  is  true  this  insight  could  not  be  maintained
with  all  strictness;  for,  on  the  contrary,  the  functional  relation  of
expression,  to  which  the  analysis  leads,  always  threatens  to  change
into  a  substantial  relation  of  the  participation  of  things  in  certain
objective  properties.  Thus  the  species  again  become  the  "traces"
of  things  although  they  no  longer  possess  complete  existential  import,
but  only  a  faded  "essence."  The  conflict  of  these  two  conceptions
finally  deprives  the  concept  of  "representation"  of  its  clear  and
definite  meaning.  In  order  to  let  the  operation  of  expression  be  seen,
the  content,  which  serves  as  a  sign,  must  be  stripped  more  and  more

2  H. Schwarz, Die Umwalzung der Wahrnemungshypothesen durch die
mechanische  Methode. Leipzig  1895,  I,  p.  25;  cf.  p.  12  ff.


284  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

of  its  thing-like  character;  at  the  same  time,  however,  the  objectify-
ing meaning  ascribed  to  the  content  seems  to  lose  its  best  support.
Thus  the  theory  of  representation  always  threatens  to  lapse  into
skepticism;  for  what  assurance  have  we  that  the  symbol  of  being,
which  we  believe  we  have  in  our  presentation,  genuinely  reproduces
the  content  of  being,  arid  does  not  misrepresent  its  essential  features?

Transformation  of  the  concept  of  representation  and  progress  to  the
"whole  of  experience"  The  new  meaning,  which  the  criticism  of
knowledge  gives  to  the  concept  of  representation,  removes  this
danger.  It  is  now  recognized  that  each  particular  phase  of  experi-
ence has  a  "representative"  character,  in  so  far  as  it  refers  to  another
and  finally  leads  by  progress  according  to  rule  to  the  totality  of
experience.  But  this  reference  beyond  concerns  only  the  transition
from  one  particular  serial  member  to  the  totality,  to  which  it  belongs,
and  to  the  universal  rule  governing  this  totality.  The  enlargement
does  not  extend  into  a  field  that  is  absolutely  beyond,  but  on  the
contrary,  aims  to  grasp  as  a  definite  whole  the  same  field,  of  which
the  particular  experience  is  a  part.  It  places  the  individual  in  the
system.  But  if  we  ask  further,  as  to  whence  the  particular  empirical
content  has  this  capacity  of  representing  the  whole,  we  are  involved
by  the  question  in  a  reversal  of  the  problem.  The  connection  of
the  facts  and  their  reciprocal  relation  is  what  is  primary  and  original,
while  their  isolation  represents  merely  the  result  of  a  technical
abstraction.  Hence  if  we  understand  "representation"  as  the  expres-
sion of  an  ideal  rule,  which  connects  the  present,  given  particu-
lar with  the  whole,  and  combines  the  two  in  an  intellectual  synthesis,
then  we  have  in  "representation"  no  mere  subsequent  determination,
but  a  constitutive  condition  of  all  experience.  Without  this  apparent
representation,  there  would  also  be  no  presentation,  no  immediately
present  content;  for  this  latter  only  exists  for  knowledge  in  so  far  as
it  is  brought  into  a  system  of  relations,  that  give  it  spatial  and  tem-
poral as  well  as  conceptual  determinateness.  Just  as  the  necessity
for  positing  a  being  outside  of  all  relation  to  knowledge  can  not  be
deduced  from  the  mere  concept  of  knowledge,  so  must  the  con-
cept of  knowledge  necessarily  have  within  it  that  postulate  of
connection  to  which  the  critical  analysis  of  the  problem  of  reality
leads.  The  content  of  experience  becomes  "objective"  for  us  when
we  understand  how  each  element  is  woven  into  the  whole.  If  we
attempt  to  characterize  this  whole  itself  as  an  illusion,  it  is  a  mere


THE CONCEPT OF  REALITY  285

play  of  words;  for  the  difference  between  reality  and  appearance
presupposed  here  is  itself  only  possible  within  the  system  of  experi-
ence and  under  its  conditions.  (C  ;  -above  p.  273  ff .)  The  question
as  to  the  "similarity"  of  the  empirical  sign  with  what  it  signifies
offers  no  further  difficulty.  The  particular  element,  which  serves  as  a
sign,  is  indeed  not  materially  similar  to  the  totality  that  is  signified, —
for  the  relations  constituting  the  totality  cannot  be  fully  expressed
and  "copied"  by  any  particular  formation,— but  a  thorough-
going logical  community  subsists  between  them,  in  so  far  as  both
belong  in  principle  to  the  same  system  of  explanation.  The  actual
similarity  is  changed  into  a  conceptual  correlation;  the  two  levels  of
being  become  different  but  necessarily  complementary  points  of  view
for  considering  the  system  of  experience.

Association  as  a  principle  of  explanation.  Indeed  the  sensational-
istic  theory  of  knowledge  might  attempt  to  bring  this  fact  into  its  own
explanation,  without  contesting  it,  by  reducing  it  to  the  psychological
concept  of  "association."  The  concept  of  association  seems  to  offer
all  the  principles  for  the  formulation  and  solution  of  the  problem  of
reality,  for  it  proceeds  from  the  content  of  the  particular  impres-
sions to  the  fixed  connections  between  them.  The  defect  of  the
explanation  is  shown,  however,  when  we  analyse  more  closely  the
form  of  connection  assumed  here  and  which,  according  to  the  concepts
of  associationistic  psychology,  appears  alone  admissible.  The
"connection"  between  the  particular  members  of  the  series  here
means  nothing  but  their  frequent  empirical  coexistence.  And  this
coexistence  of  particular  presentations  produces  not  so  much  a
connection  between  them,  as  rather  an  appearance  of  one.  No
conceptual  principle,  such  as  can  be  expressed  and  established  in
strict  logical  identity,  unifies  the  elements  of  association.  The
paths  from  one  element  to  another  arc  in  and  for  themselves  un-
limited. Which  of  these  paths  is  followed  in  real  psychological
thought  depends  merely  on  the  preceding  psychical  "dispositions,"
and  thus  upon  a  circumstance,  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  variable
from  moment  to  moment,  and  from  individual  to  individual.  Here
that  constancy  and  exactitude  is  lost,  which  is  the  distinguishing
feature  of  the  conception  of  reality.  But  it  is  only  through  the  critical
evaluation  of  concepts  that  the  formation  of  the  "object"  comes  to
light.  If  we  proceed  from  the  particular  content  of  experience  at  a
particular  moment  of  time,  there  arc  given  in  it  not  only  certain


286  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

elements  but  also  certain  lines  of  direction,  according  to  which  thought
can  gradually  expand  the  particular  phase  into  the  whole  system.
The  advance  is  not  left  to  individual  caprice,  but  is  demanded  accord-
ing to  law.  As  science  grasps  the  whole  of  these  demands  more
strictly  and  exactly,  it  progressively  gains  the  concept  of  the  real.
It  has  already  been  styown  on  all  hands  that  this  development  must
everywhere  transcend  the  sphere  of  mere  association.  Association,
understood  in  the  most  favorable  sense,  is  merely  able  to  formulate
the  question;  the  answer  lies  only  in  the  universal  serial  principles,
which  predetermine  and  order  the  possible  logical  transitions  from
member  to  member,  in  accordance  with  certain  points  of  view.  The
specific  meaning  of  these  points  of  view  must  remain  constant,  if  the
advance  is  not  to  lose  itself  in  the  indefinite.  The  necessary  guiding
concepts  of  association  cannot  arise  from  association  itself,  but
belong  to  another  field  and  logical  origin.8

In  general  it  appears,  that  the  further  we  advance  into  the  particu-
lar conditions  of  the  problem  of  reality,  the  more  clearly  it  unites
with  the  problem  of  truth.  If  it  is  once  understood  how  knowledge
attains  a  constancy  of  certain  predicates  and  establishes  judgmental
connections,  then  the  "transcendence"  of  the  object  as  opposed  to
the  mere  presentation  no  longer  offers  any  difficulty.  And  the
means  used  by  knowledge  are  shown  to  be  the  same  in  both  fields  of
problems.  Just  as  the  real  achievement  of  the  concept  is  not  in
"copying"  a  given  manifold  abstractly  and  schematically,  but  in
constituting  a  law  of  relation  and  thus  producing  a  new  and  unique
connection  of  the  manifold,  just  so  it  is  shown  to  be  the  form  of
connection  of  experiences  that  transforms  changeable  "impressions"
into  constant  objects.  In  fact,  the  most  general  expression  of
"thought"  is  the  same  as  the  most  general  expression  of  "being."
The  opposition,  that  metaphysics  could  not  reconcile,  is  resolved  by
going  back  to  the  logical  function  from  the  application  of  which
both  problems  arose,  and  in  which  they  must  finally  find  their
explanation.

ii

The  concept  of  objectivity  and  the  problem  of  space.  In  the  history  of
scientific  and  speculative  thought,  the  problem  of  reality  has  always
been  inseparably  connected  with  the  probkm  of  space.  So  close  is

3  Cf.  above  esp.  p.  14  and  p.  261  ff.


THE CONCEPT OF REALITY  287

this  connection,  and  so  exclusively  has  it  governed  logical  interest,
that  all  questions  connected  with  the  concept  of  the  real  are  con-
sidered solved,  as  soon  as  the  question  of  the  reality  of  the  "external
world"  has  been  finally  decided.  Even  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason
could  only  approach  its  real  theme  by  starting  with  a  transformation
of  the  theory  of  space.  Thereby,  however,  the  fate  of  its  historical
effect  was  in  large  part  decided;  in  the  minds  of  contemporaries  and
successors,  what  was  intended  to  be  a  criticism  of  the  concept  of
experience  was  misapprehended  as  a  metaphysics  of  the  concept  of
space.  In  truth,  here  again  the  order  of  problems  must  be  reversed.
We  cannot  proceed  from  a  fixed  view  of  the  "subjective"  or  "objec-
tive" character  of  space  and  from  it  determine  the  concept  of  empiri-
cal reality  in  general;  but  it  is  the  supreme  and  universal  principles
of  empirical  knowledge,  that  must  finally  decide  the  question  as  to
the  "nature"  of  space.

The  theory  of  projection  and  its  defects.  The  empirical-physiologi-
cal view,  which  was  founded  by  Johannes  Muller,  conflicts  with  this,
in  so  far  as  it  starts  with  an  axiom  of  unconcealed  metaphysical
character.  It  is  presupposed,  that  what  we  perceive  are  not  things
themselves  in  their  real  shape  and  real  mutual  position  and  distance,
but  are  immediately  only  certain  determinations  of  our  own  body.
The  object  of  visual  sensation  is  not  the  external  objects,  but  parts
of  the  retina,  which  we  can  grasp  in  their  real  spatial  magnitude  and
extension.  The  problem  of  the  physiology  of  vision  is  to  describe
the  transition,  by  which  we  pass  from  this  consciousness  of  the  retinal
images  to  knowledge  of  the  spatial  order  of  objects.  It  must  be
shown  how  we  come  to  place  the  sensations  given  "in  us"  in  the  outer
world,  and  how  we  come  to  comprehend  them  as  a  self-subsisting
spatial  world.  However,  if  we  take  the  problem  in  this  form,  it
soon  proves  to  be  insoluble.  All  attempts  to  reduce  the  peculiar
process  of  "projection,"  which  is  assumed,  to  "unconscious  infer-
ences," move  in  a  circle;  they  always  assume  a  general  knowledge
of  the  "external,"  yet  this  is  what  is  to  be  deduced.  In  fact,  there
is  no  phase  of  experience,  in  which  sensations  are  given  as  inner
states  and  separated  from  all  "objective"  reference.  Sensation  in
this  sense  is  no  empirical  reality,  but  only  the  result  of  an  abstrac-
tion, resting  upon  very  complex  logical  conditions.  We  pass  from
the  seen  objects  to  the  assumption  of  certain  nerve  excitations  and
the  sensations  corresponding  to  them;  we  do  not  proceed  in  the


288  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

reverse  direction  from  the  sensations  known  in  themselves  to  the
objects,  which  may  correspond  to  them.4  Thus  the  general  form
of  spatiality,  the  coexistence  and  externality  of  the  particular  ele-
ments is  no  mediated  result,  but  is  a  fundamental  relation  posited
with  the  elements  themselves.5  It  cannot  be  asked  how  this  form
arises  in  and  for  itself;  it  can  merely  be  enquired  how  the  form  is
more  closely  determined  and  specialized  in  empirical  knowledge.
What  needs  explanation  is  not  the  fact  that  we  go  from  the  inner
to  the  outer, — for  the  absolutely  "inner"  is  a  mere  fiction, — but
how  we  are  led  to  regard  certain  contents  of  the  original  external
world  as  finally  "in  us,"  i.e.,  how  we  are  led  to  determine  them  not
only  as  in  general  spatial,  but  as  in  necessary  correlation  with  our
bodily  organs,  with  certain  parts  of  our  retina  or  our  brain.  (Cf.
above  p.  274  ff.)  It  is  not  localization  in  general,  but  this  particular
localization,  that  is  to  be  explained;  and  any  such  explanation  must
obviously  take  the  general  relation  of  spatiality  as  a  basis.

Concept  and  perception  distinguished  (Helmholtz).  To  determine
the  concept  of  "reality"  means  also  to  find  a  motive  of  differentiation,
enabling  us  to  separate  the  originally  homogeneous  totality  of
experiences  into  groups  of  different  value  and  import.  For  example,
if  we  conceive  the  different  perceptual  images,  which  we  receive  from
one  and  the  same  "object"  according  to  our  distance  from  it  and
according  to  changing  illumination,  as  comprehended  in  a  series  of
perceptual  images,  then  from  the  standpoint  of  immediate  psycholog-
ical experience,  no  property  can  be  indicated  at  first  by  which  any
of  these  varying  images  should  have  preeminence  over  any  other.
Only  the  totality  of  these  data  of  perception  constitutes  what  we  call
empirical  knowledge  of  the  object;  and  in  this  totality  no  single
element  is  absolutely  superfluous.  No  one  of  the  successive  per-
spective aspects  can  claim  to  be  the  only  valid,  absolute  expression
of  the  "object  itself;"  rather  all  the  cognitive  value  of  any  particular
perception  belongs  to  it  only  in  connection  with  other  contents,
with  which  it  combines  into  an  empirical  whole.  And  yet  this
thoroughgoing  connection  does  not  mean  the  complete  equivalence
of  the  particular  factors.  We  only  gain  perception  of  a  definite

4  Cf.  more  particularly  for  the  psychological  refutation  of  the  "projection
hypotheses,"  Stumpf,  Cf  her  den  psychologischen  V r sprung  der  Raumvorstell-
ung,  p.  184  ff .,  as  well  as  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  II,  31  ff .

6  C'/.  later  Ch.  8.


THE CONCEPT  OP  REALITY  289

spatial  form,  when  we  break  through  this  equivalence.  As  Helm-
holtz  explains  incidentally,  when  we  ask  what  is  to  be  understood
by  a  body  extended  in  three  dimensions,  we  are  led  psychologically
to  nothing  else  than  a  series  of  particular  visual  images,  which
mutually  pass  into  one  another.  Closer  analysis,  however,  shows
that  the  mere  succession  of  these  images,  no  matter  how  many  we
assume,  would  never  of  itself  give  us  the  presentation  of  a  corporeal
object,  if  the  thought  of  a  rule  were  not  added,  by  which  a  cer-
tain order  and  position  is  ascribed  to  each  in  the  total  complex.
In  this  sense,  the  presentation  of  the  stereometric  form  plays  "the
rdle  of  a  concept  compounded  from  a  great  series  of  sense-
perceptions,  which,  however,  could  not  necessarily  be  construed
in  verbally  expressible  definitions,  such  as  the  geometrician  uses,
but  only  through  the  living  presentation  of  the  law,  according  to
which  the  perspective  images  follow  each  other."  This  ordering  by  a
concept  means,  however,  that  the  various  elements  do  not  lie  along-
side of  each  other  like  the  parts  of  an  aggregate,  but  that  we  estimate
each  of  them  according  to  its  systematic  significance.  We  also  dis-
tinguish the  "typical"  experiences,  such  as  we  assume  to  occur  uni-
formly, from  "accidental"  impressions  only  found  in  individual  cir-
cumstances. And  it  is  the  "typical"  experiences,  that  we  exclusively
apply  in  the  construction  of  the  "objective"  spatial  world,  while
endeavoring  to  exclude  all  contents  in  conflict  with  them.

Helmholtz'  account  has  illumined  this  process  in  detail.  Here
the  general  rule  is  first  established  "that  we  always  perceive  as
present  in  the  field  of  vision  such  objects  as  ought  to  be  present  to
produce,  under  ordinary  normal  conditions  of  the  use  of  our  eyes,
the  same  impression  on  the  nervous  apparatus."  A  stimulation,
occurring  under  unusual  conditions,  is  at  first  given  the  meaning
that  would  belong  to  it  if  it  were  conceived  to  arise  in  the  ordinary
way.  "To  use  an  example,  let  us  assume  that  the  eye-ball  is  mechan-
ically stimulated  at  the  outer  corner  of  the  eye.  We  then  think
that  we  see  a  light  on  the  nasal  side  of  the  field  of  vision.  In  the
ordinary  use  of  our  eyes,  where  they  are  stimulated  by  a  light  coming
from  without,  the  external  light  must  enter  the  eye  from  the  nasal
side,  if  a  stimulation  of  the  retina  in  the  region  of  the  outer  corner
of  the  eye  is  to  occur.  It  is  thus  in  accordance  with  the  previously
established  rule,  that  we  place  a  luminous  object  in  such  a  case  in
this  aforementioned  position  in  the  field  of  vision, — in  spite  of  the


290  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

fact,  that  the  mechanical  stimulus  comes  neither  from  in  front  in
the  field  of  vision  nor  from  the  nasal  side  of  the  eye,  but  on  the
contrary,  from  the  external  surface  of  the  eye  and  more  from  behind."6
The  particular  observations  are  thus  adjusted  to  a  certain  set  of
conditions,  that  we  regard  as  constant.  In  these  conditions  we
have  a  fixed  system  of  reference,  to  which  each  particular  experience
is  tacitly  referred.  And  it  is  only  through  this  peculiar  interpreta-
tion of  the  material  of  sensation,  that  the  whole  of  objective  visual
and  tactual  space  arises.  This  whole  of  space  is  never  a  mere  dead
copy  of  particular  sense  perceptions,  but  it  is  a  construction,  following
from  certain  universal  rules.  To  the  extent  that  the  unchanging
elements  of  experience  are  separated  from  the  changing  elements  in
accordance  with  these  rules,  there  results  a  division  into  an  objective
and  a  subjective  sphere.  And  here  there  is  no  doubt,  that  the  knowl-
edge of  subjectivity  does  not  represent  the  original  starting-point,
but  a  logically  mediated  and  later  insight.  Helmholtz  expressly
emphasizes  that  the  knowledge  of  objects  precedes  the  knowledge  of
sensations,  and  that  it  is  far  superior  in  clarity  and  distinctness.
Under  ordinary  psychological  conditions  of  experience,  the  sensa-
tion is  so  exclusively  directed  on  the  object  and  enters  into  it  so
completely,  that  it  disappears  behind  it,  as  it  were.  The  apprehen-
sion of  sensation  as  sensation  is  always  the  work  of  subsequent
conscious  reflection.  We  must  first  always  learn  to  direct  our  atten-
tion on  our  particular  sensations,  "and  we  ordinarily  learn  this  only
for  the  sensations,  that  serve  as  means  of  knowledge  of  the  outer
world."  "While  we  attain  an  extraordinary  degree  of  niceness  and
sureness  in  objective  observation,  we  not  only  do  not  gain  this  for
subjective  observation,  but  we  rather  gain  to  a  high  degree  the
capacity  to  overlook  these  subjective  sensations,  and  to  proceed  in
the  estimation  of  objects  independently  of  them,  even  where  they
could  easily  enough  be  noticed  by  reason  of  their  strength."7

The  division  into  circles  of  objectivity.  What  is  described  here  as  a
merely  negative  achievement,  as  an  act  of  overlooking  and  forgetting,
is  really  that  highly  positive  function  of  the  concept  already  seen  on
every  side.  It  is  the  retention  of  the  identical  relations  in  the  vary-
ing content  of  presentation,  that  characterizes  every  stage,  even  the
earliest  stages,  of  objectively  valid  knowledge.  What  is  absolutely

8  Helmholtz,  Handbuch  der  Physiolog.  Optik,  §26,  p.  428.
7  Helmholtz ov.  cit..  D.  432.


THE CONCEPT OF  REALITY  291

changeable  falls  away  from  the  momentary  content,  and  only  that
remains,  which  can  be  fixed  in  permanent  conceptions.  By  the
central  tendency  of  thought,  a  certain  circle  of  experiences,  which
satisfy  certain  logical  conditions  of  constancy,  is  raised  out  of  the
flux  of  experience  and  distinguished  as  the  "fixed  kernel"  of  being.
In  this  first  construction  and  characterization  of  the  "real,"  the
relatively  fleeting  contents,  on  the  other  hand,  in  which  no  thorough
determinateness  of  experience  is  expressed,  can  be  left  unnoticed.
Deeper  reflection,  however,  teaches  that  these  elements  also  do  not
fall  absolutely  outside  the  circle  of  experience,  but  that  they  also
claim  a  place  in  it  in  so  far  as  their  variation  is  itself  not  arbitrary,
but  subjected  to  definite  rules.  Thus  the  variable  itself,  by  a  new
interest  of  knowledge,  is  made  the  object  of  consideration.  This
knowledge  of  the  "subjective"  means  an  objedification  of  a  higher
kvelj  in  that  it  discovers  an  element  of  determinability  in  a  material,
that  was  at  first  left  absolutely  undetermined.  The  given  is  now
divided  into  wider  and  narrower  circles  of  objectivity,  which  are
distinctly  separated  and  arranged  according  to  definite  points  of
view.  Each  particular  experience  is  henceforth  determined  not  only
by  the  material  content  of  the  impressions,  but  through  the  charac-
teristic function  by  which  some  experiences  serve  as  a  fixed  point  of
reference  for  measuring  and  interpreting  others.  In  this  way  we
produce  definite,  conceptually  distinguished  centers,  around  which
the  phenomena  are  ordered  and  divided.  The  particular  phenomena
do  not  flow  by  uniformly,  but  are  limited  and  separated  from  each
other;  the  initial  surface-picture  gains  foreground  and  background,
as  it  were.  The  real  origin  of  the  concept  of  object  proves  to  be,  not
the  "projection"  of  the  inner  and  outer,  but  the  division  of  phenomena
into  partial  fields,  distinguished  by  their  systematic  meaning.  Each
particular  receives  an  index,  which  signifies  its  position  in  the  whole,
and  in  this  index  its  objective  value  is  expressed.  For  the  naive
view,  it  is  the  "thing,"  that  is  given  from  the  beginning,  and  that  is
expressed  and  partially  copied  in  each  of  our  perceptions.  Thus  the
naive  view  also  presupposes  a  whole,  with  which  we  compare  each
particular  experience  and  thereby  measure  its  value.  The  demand
made  by  the  naive  view  still  holds  from  the  standpoint  of  critical
consideration.  The  defect  of  the  naive  view  is  not  that  it  makes  this
demand,  but  that  it  confuses  the  demand  and  its  fulfillment; — it
takes  the  problem,  that  knowledge  has  to  work  out,  as  already  solved.


292  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

The  whole,  which  we  seek  and  on  which  the  concept  is  directed,
must  not  be  conceived  as  an  absolute  being  outside  of  all  possible
experience;  it  is  nothing  else  than  the  ordered  totality  of  these  possible
experiences  themselves.

"Projection"  and  "selection."  The  modern  psychology  of  space
perception  has  replaced  the  projection  theory  by  another  view,
which  expresses  the  facts  of  knowledge  more  purely  and  sharply,  since
it  represents  them  independently  of  all  metaphysical  assumptions.
According  to  it,  the  presentation  of  "objective"  space  is  not  a  work  of
"projection"  but  of  "selection;"  it  rests  on  an  intellectual  selection
made  among  our  sense  perceptions,  especially  in  the  field  of  visual
and  tactual  impressions.  In  the  homogeneous  mass  of  these  impres-
sions, we  only  retain  those  contents,  that  correspond  to  "normal"
physiological  conditions;  while  we  more  and  more  suppress  others,
that  arise  under  extraordinary  conditions  and  lack  the  same  repeat-
ability as  the  first.  Because  our  apperception  separates  a  certain
group  of  experiences  in  this  way  from  the  flux  of  the  others,  this
group  tends  to  be  emphasized.  These  pass  as  reality  absolutely,
while  all  the  other  contents  only  have  value  in  so  far  as  they  refer
as  "signs"  to  this  reality.  It  is  thus  no  absolute  difference  in  being,
but  a  difference  of  emphasis,  that  separates  the  objective  from  the
subjective.  The  construction  of  spatial  reality  has  in  it  a  process  of
logical  elimination,  and  without  this  its  result  could  not  be  understood.
The  mass  of  spatial  "perceptions"  is  gradually  organized  according  to
a  definite  plan,  and  in  this  organization  gains  fixed  form  and  struc-
ture.8 From  the  standpoint  of  logic,  it  is  of  especial  interest  to
trace  the  function  of  the  concept  in  this  gradual  process  of  construc-
tion. Hehnholtz  touches  on  this  question  when  he  affirms,  that
even  the  presentation  of  a  connection  of  contents  in  temporal
sequence  according  to  law  would  not  be  possible  without  a  conceptual
rule.  "We  can  obviously  learn  by  experience  what  cfther  sensations
of  vision,  or  some  other  sense,  an  object  before  us  would  give  us,  if
we  should  move  our  eyes  or  our  bodies  and  view  the  object  from
different  sides,  touch  it,  etc.  The  totality  of  all  these  possible  sensa-
tions comprehended  in  a  total  presentation  is  our  presentation  of
the  body;  this  we  call  perception  when  it  is  supported  by  present
sensations,  and  memory-image  when  it  is  not.  In  a  certain  sense,

8C/.  more  particularly  on  the  theory  of  "selection,"  James,  Principles  of
Psychology  II,  237  ff.


THE CONCEPT OF REALITY  293

although  contrary  to  ordinary  usage,  such  a  presentation  of  an
individual  object  is  already  a  concept t  because  it  comprehends  the
whole  possible  aggregate  of  particular  sensations,  that  this  object  can
arouse  in  us  when  viewed  from  different  sides,  touched  or  otherwise
investigated."9  Here  Helmholtz  is  led  back  to  a  view  of  the  concept
that  is  foreign  to  traditional  logic  and  that  at  first  appears  paradoxi-
cal even  to  him.  But  in  truth  the  concept  appears  here  in  no  mere
extravagant  and  derivative  sense,  but  in  its  true  and  original  meaning.
It  was  the  "serial  concept,"  in  distinction  from  the  "generic  concept,"
that  was  decisively  revealed  in  the  foundations  of  the  exact  sciences,
and  that,  as  is  now  seen,  has  further  applications,  proving  itself  to
be  an  instrument  of  objective  knowledge.

in

The  function  of  judgment;  permanence  and  repetition.  The  psycho-
logical analysis  of  the  idea  of  space  thus  confirms  the  concept  of
objectivity  derived  from  the  logical  analysis  of  knowledge.  The
mysterious  transition  between  two  different,  essentially  separated
spheres  of  being  now  disappears;  in  its  place  appears  the  simple
problem  of  the  connection  of  the  particular,  partial  experiences  into
an  ordered  totality.  The  particular  content,  in  order  to  be  called
truly  objective,  must  expand  beyond  its  temporal  narrowness  and
become  the  expression  of  the  total  experience.  Henceforth  the
content  stands  not  only  for  itself  but  for  the  laws  of  this  experience,
which  it  brings  to  representation.  The  particular  moment  is  the
starting-point  of  an  intellectual  construction,  that  determines  and
includes  in  its  narrower  and  broader  consequences  the  whole  of
experiential  reality.  The  procedure  of  this  logical  "integration"
is  discoverable  in  outline  in  the  simplest  judgment  about  "facts."
Everywhere,  even  where  only  a  concrete,  particular  property  is
ascribed  to  an  individual  thing,  a  connection  once  established  logically
persists.  This  persistence  is  posited  with  the  very  form  of  judgment,
and  is  found  even  where  the  content,  on  which  the  judgment  is
directed,  is  changeable.  In  the  simplest  schematic  characterization
of  this  relation,  it  is  enough  to  point  to  the  fact,  that  in  any  asser-
tion a  is  b  an  element  of  permanence  is  included,  since  a  dependency
is  therewith  established,  and  this  dependency  is  intended  to  be  valid

9  Handbuch  der  physiolog.  Optik,  2nd  ed.;  p.  947  f .


294  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

not  only  for  a  particular  instant,  but  is  regarded  as  identically
transferable  to  the  whole  sequence  of  moments  of  time.  The
"property"  b  belongs  to  the  "thing"  a  not  only  at  a  definite  point  of
time  to,  in  which  it  is  apprehended  by  the  act  of  perception,  but  it  is
maintained  for  the  whole  series  ti  t2  ts  ...  (Cf.  above  p.  243  ff.,  268.)
Thus  at  first  one  and  the  same  determination  is  posited  as  absolutely
capable  of  repetition  and  as  fixed  in  judgment.  To  this  original
act,  however,  another  may  be  added,  in  which  the  change  of  the
particular  elements  is  conceived  as  logically  determined.  As  judg-
ment has  ascribed  to  the  subject  a,  at  the  time  ti,  the  predicate  6,
so  it  can  ascribe  to  it  at  the  time  ti  the  predicate  £>',  at  the  time  t2
the  predicate  6",  in  so  far  as  this  change  of  properties  does  not  take
place  without  rule,  but  is  conditioned  and  demanded  according  to
law  by  appropriate  changes  in  another  series.  Only  thus  does  the
general  schema  for  the  concept  of  the  empirical  "object"  result;
for  the  scientific  concept  of  a  definite  object  comprises  in  its  ideal
completion  not  only  the  totality  of  its  properties  given  here  and  now,
but  also  the  totality  of  necessary  consequences,  that  could  develop  from
it  under  definite  circumstances.  We  connect  a  series  of  different,
temporally  separate,  circumstances  by  means  of  a  unitary  complex
of  causal  rules;  and  this  connection  gives  the  individual,  in  Platonic
language,  the  seal  of  being.  The  content  of  the  particular  time-
differential  gains  objective  meaning,  in  so  far  as  the  total  experience
can  be  reconstructed  from  it  according  to  a  definite  method.

The  problem  of  the  "transsubjective."  In  contrast  to  this  continuous
process,  by  which  the  originally  fragmentary  and  disconnected
experiences  are  gradually  shaped  into  a  system  of  empirical  knowl-
edge, the  metaphysical  view  at  some  point  necessarily  reaches  a
chasm,  which  thought  cannot  bridge  even  though  it  can  leap  across  it.
This  defect  appears  most  clearly  and  sensibly  exactly  where  the  most
strenuous  effort  is  made  to  break  through  the  limits  of  the  mere
"world  of  presentation,"  in  order  to  reach  the  world  of  real  "things."
When  "transcendental  realism"  undertakes  to  show  the  inferences,
that  lead  from  the  field  of  the  subjective  (at  first  the  only  accessible
field),  to  the  realm  of  the  "transsubjective,"  a  barrier  between
thought  and  being  is  already  raised  by  this  way  of  stating  the  ques-
tion, that  no  logical  efforts  can  remove.  It  is  taken  as  an  assump-
tion needing  no  further  scrutiny,  that  all  consciousness  is  first  directed
on  the  subjective  states  of  our  ego  and  that  nothing  except  these


THE CONCEPT OF REALITY  295

states  is  immediately  given.  There  is  a  sphere  of  "immanence,"
which  never  goes  beyond  these  first,  original  data;  there  is  a  type  of
self-consciousness,  which  limits  itself  merely  to  taking  in  passively
the  content  of  particular,  present  impressions,  without  adding  any
new  element  or  logically  judging  the  content  according  to  a  definite
conceptual  point  of  view.  Only  this  is  asserted,  that  this  first  stage,
while  sufficient  for  the  consciousness  of  the  ego,  in  no  way  suffices
to  ground  the  consciousness  of  the  object.  The  object  of  natural
science  especially  cannot  be  treated  by  these  primitive  means.  The
objects  of  science,  "mass"  and  "energy,"  "force"  and  "acceleration"
are  strictly  and  unmistakably  distinguished  from  all  contents  of
immediate  perception.  He  who  grants  science  the  right  to  speak  of
objects  and  of  the  causal  relations  of  objects,  has  thereby  already
left  the  circle  of  immanent  being  and  gone  over  into  the  realm  of
"transcendence."

The  correlation  of  the  consciousness  of  the  ego  and  the  consciousness  of
the  object.  One  can  fully  accept  these  conclusions  so  far; — but
it  is  a  strange  error  to  believe  that  they  affect  not  only  psychological,
presentational  idealism  but  also  critical  idealism  in  its  ground  and
root.  Critical  idealism  is  distinguished  from  the  "realism"  here
advocated,  not  by  denying  the  intellectual  postulate  at  the  basis  of
these  deductions  of  the  concept  of  objective  being,  but  conversely
by  the  fact  that  it  grasps  this  intellectual  postulate  more  sharply
and  demands  it  for  every  phase  of  knowledge,  even  the  most  primi-
tive. Without  logical  principles,  which  go  beyond  the  content  of
given  impressions,  there  is  as  little  a  consciousness  of  the  ego  as  there
is  a  consciousness  of  the  object.  From  the  standpoint  of  critical
idealism,  what  is  to  be  contested  is  not  so  much  the  concept  of
"transcendence"  as  rather  the  concept  of  "immanence,"  that  is  here
presupposed.  The  thought  of  the  ego  is  in  no  way  more  original
and  logically  immediate  than  the  thought  of  the  object,  since  both
arise  together  and  can  only  develop  in  constant  reciprocal  relation.
No  content  can  be  known  and  experienced  as  "subjective,"  without
being  contrasted  with  another  content,  which  appears  as  objective.
(Cf.  above  p.  273.)  Thus  the  conditions  and  presuppositions  of
"objective"  experience  cannot  be  added  as  a  supplement,  after  the
subjective  world  of  presentations  has  been  completed,  but  they  are
already  implied  in  its  construction.  The  "subjective"  signifies  only
an  abstract  moment  of  a  conceptual  distinction,  and  as  such  has  no


296  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

independent  existence,  because  its  whole  meaning  is  rooted  in  its
logical  correlate  and  opposite.

The  separation  of  thought  and  experience.  Although  this  relation
seems  very  clear,  when  once  the  metaphysical  difference  of  subject
and  object  is  changed  into  a  methodological  distinction,  nevertheless
it  is  worth  while  to  pause  over  it.  For  the  kernel  of  all  the  miscon-
ceptions among  the  various  epistemological  tendencies  is  found  here.
The  deeper  reason,  that  the  outer  and  inner  world  are  opposed  as  two
heterogeneous  realities,  lies  in  an  analogous  opposition  between
experience  and  thought.  The  certainty  of  pure  experience  is  taken
to  be  entirely  different  from  that  of  thought.  And  as  both  are
different  in  their  origin,  they  are  accordingly  related  each  to  a
separate  sphere  of  objects,  within  which  they  possess  unique  and
exclusive  validity.  It  is  pure  experience,  free  from  any  admixture
of  the  concept,  which  assures  us  of  the  states  of  our  ego;  while  all
knowledge  of  the  outer  object  is  really  guaranteed  by  the  necessity
of  thought.  Inner  perception,  by  which  the  ego  comprehends  itself,
has  a  peculiar  and,  of  its  sort,  unsurpassable  "evidence"  (Evidenz);
but  this  "evidence "  is  purchased  at  the  price  of  conceiving  the  content
as  absolutely  individual,  and  as  merely  given  in  its  unique  properties
here  and  now.  When  from  our  presentations,  "all  intellectual
necessity,  all  logical  order  is  removed,  and  they  exist  only  in  a
blending  of  the  similar  and  the  like:"  then  and  only  then  can  they
be  taken  as  self-evident.  Thus  the  beginning  of  every  theory  of
knowledge  must  involve,  that  we  divest  ourselves  of  all  connection
with  the  realms  of  intellect  and  nature,  of  all  commerce  with  the
common  values  of  civilization,  so  that  we  merely  retain  our  individ-
ual consciousness  "in  its  whole  emptiness  and  nakedness."  Only
in  this  way  do  we  reach  a  type  of  certainty,  in  which  thought  in  no
way  participates, — only  to  find,  that  we  cannot  remain  with  such  a
certainty,  that  it  must  be  broadened  by  logical  assumptions  and
postulates,  by  means  of  which  we  posit  an  object  of  knowledge.10
This  apparently  presuppositionless  beginning,  however,  contains
a  premise,  that  is  unjustified  both  from  the  standpoint  of  logic
and  from  that  of  psychology.  The  division  here  between  perception
and  thought  negates  the  concept  of  consciousness  no  less  than  the
objective  concept  of  experience.  All  consciousness  demands  some

10  Cf.  Volkelt,  Die  Quellen  der  menschlichen  Gewissheit.  Mtinchen  1906;
esp.  p.  15  ff.;  cf.  Erfahrung  nndDenken,  Leipzig  1878,  Ch.  I.


THE CONCEPT  OF  REALITY  297

sort  of  connection;  and  every  form  of  connection  presupposes  a  rela-
tion of  the  individual  to  an  inclusive  whole,  presupposes  the  insertion
of  the  individual  content  into  some  systematic  totality.  However
primitive  and  undeveloped  this  system  may  be  conceived  to  be,  it
can  never  wholly  disappear  without  destroying  the  individual  content
itself.  An  absolutely  lawless  and  unordered  something  of  percep-
tions is  a  thought,  that  cannot  even  be  realized  as  a  methodological
fiction;  for  the  mere  possibility  of  consciousness  includes  at  least  the
conceptual  anticipation  of  a  possible  order,  even  though  the  details
may  not  be  made  out.  Therefore  if  we  characterize  every  element,
that  goes  beyond  the  mere  givenness  of  the  individual  sensation,  as
"transsubjective,"  then  the  paradoxical  proposition  holds,  that  not
only  the  certainty  of  the  object,  but  also  the  certainty  of  the  subject
conceals  a  "transsubjective"  element.  For  even  the  mere  "judgment
of  perception"  gains  its  meaning  only  through  reference  to  the  system
of  empirical  judgments,  and  must  therefore  acknowledge  the  intel-
lectual conditions  of  this  system.  (C/.  above  p.  245  f.)

The  concept  of  the  object  in  critical  idealism.  If  we  determine  the
object  not  as  an  absolute  substance  beyond  all  knowledge,  but  as  the
object  shaped  in  progressing  experience,  we  find  that  there  is  no
"epistemological  gap"  to  be  laboriously  spanned  by  some  authorita-
tive decree  of  thought,  by  a  "transsubjective  command."11  For
this  object  may  be  called  "transcendent"  from  the  standpoint  of  a
psychological  individual;  from  the  standpoint  of  logic  and  its  supreme
principles,  nevertheless  it  is  to  be  characterized  as  purely  "immar
nent."  It  remains  strictly  within  the  sphere,  which  these  principles
determine  and  limit,  especially  the  universal  principles  of  mathemati-
cal and  scientific  knowledge.  This  simple  thought  alone  constitutes
the  kernel  of  critical  "idealism."  When  Volkelt  repeatedly  urges  in
his  criticism,  that  the  object  is  not  given  in  mere  sensation,  but  that
it  is  first  gained  on  the  basis  of  intellectual  necessity,12  he  defends  the
most  characteristic  thesis  of  this  idealism.  The  ideality,  which  is
here  alone  asserted,  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  subjective
"presentation;"  it  concerns  merely  the  objective  validity  of  certain
axioms  and  norms  of  scientific  knowledge.  The  truth  of  the  object —
this  alone  is  affirmed — depends  on  the  truth  of  these  axioms,  and  has

11  Cf.  Volkelt,  Quellen  der  menscklicken  Geurissheit,  p.  46  f.,  etc.]  Erfahrung
und  Denken,  p.  186  ff.

12  Quellen  der  menschlichen  Gewissheit,  p.  32  ff.,  etc.


298  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

no  other  and  no  firmer  basis.  It  is  true  that  there  results,  strictly
speaking,  no  absolute,  but  only  a  relative  being.  But  this  relativity
obviously  does  not  mean  physical  dependency  on  particular  thinking
subjects,  but  logical  dependency  on  the  content  of  certain  universal
principles  of  all  knowledge.  The  proposition,  that  being  is  a  "prod-
uct "  of  thought,  thus  contains  no  reference  to  any  physical  or  meta-
physical causal  relation,  but  signifies  merely  a  purely  functional
relation,  a  relation  of  superordination  and  subordination  in  the
validity  of  certain  judgments.  If  we  analyse  the  definition  of  the
"object,"  if  we  bring  to  clear  consciousness  what  is  assumed  in  this
concept,  we  arc  led  to  certain  logical  necessities,  which  appear  as  the
inevitable  constitutive  "factors"  of  this  concept.  Experience  and
its  object  are  conceived  as  dependent  variables,  which  are  succes-
sively reduced  to  a  sequence  of  logical  "arguments;"  and  it  is  this
pure  dependence  in  content  of  functions  on  their  arguments,  which
is  characterized  in  the  language  of  idealism  as  the  dependence  of  the
"object"  on  "thought."  (C/.  above  esp.  p.  267  ff.)

The  objectivity  within  pure  mathematics.  This  sort  of  dependence
is  so  unmistakable,  that  it  is  also  attested  and  emphasized  by  the
opposing  side.  It  is  finally  admitted,  that  the  actual  necessity  by
which  we  go  beyond  the  circle  of  particular  disconnected  sensations
and  rise  to  the  conception  of  continuous  objects  connected  by  strict
causal  rules,  is  ultimately  a  logical  necessity.  "It  is  in  the  name  of
reasotij  that  the  certainty  of  actual  necessity  dominates  me  and  com-
pels me  to  make  transsubjective  assumptions.  Everything  that  we
call  judgment,  reflection,  thought,  understanding,  reason,  science
would  seem  uprooted  if  we  acted  contrary  to  this  certainty."  By
validity  of  being,  nothing  is  to  be  understood  except  "the  trans-
subjective  significance,  which  we  give  to  the  contents  of  judgment  by
virtue  of  intellectual  necessity."13  Thus  it  is  according  to  the  univer-
sal rules  of  reason,  that  we  construct  the  concept  of  being  and  deter-
mine it  in  detail.  The  justification,  as  well  as  the  limits  of  every  sort
of  "transcendence,"  is  thereby  exactly  characterized.  This  limita-
tion of  transcendence  is  most  clearly  seen  when  we  compare  the
object  of  experience  with  the  object  of  pure  mathematics.  The
object  of  pure  mathematics  also  can  in  no  way  be  reduced  to  a
complex  of  sensations;  it  is  also  characteristic  for  it  to  transcend  the
given  in  an  intellectual  construction,  that  has  no  direct  correlate  in

11  Volkelt,  Die  Quellen  der  menschlichen  Gewissheit,  p.  33  and  37.


THE CONCEPT  OF  KEALITY  299

any  particular  content  of  presentation.  And  yet  the  objects  of
mathematical  knowledge,  the  numbers  and  the  pure  forms  of  geom-
etry, do  not  constitute  a  field  of  self-subsisting,  absolute  existences,
but  are  only  the  expression  of  certain  universal  and  necessary  ideal
connections.  If  this  insight  is  once  gained,  it  can  be  carried  over  to
the  objects  of  physics,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  are  nothing  but  the
result  of  a  logical  work,  in  which  we  progressively  transform  experi-
ence according  to  the  demands  of  the  mathematical  concept.  The
"transcendence,"  which  we  ascribe  to  the  physical  objects,  in  dis-
tinction from  the  flowing,  changing  content  of  perception,  is  of  the
same  sort  and  rests  on  the  same  principles  as  the  distinction  between
the  mathematical  idea  of  the  triangle  or  of  the  circle  and  the  particular
intuitive  image,  by  which  it  is  represented  here  and  now  in  a  real
presentation.  In  both  cases,  the  momentary  sensuous  image  is
raised  to  a  new  logical  significance  and  permanence;  but  no  entirely
foreign  being  is  grasped  by  us  by  virtue  of  this  division  in  either
case,  but  a  new  character  of  conceptual  necessity  is  imprinted  on  cer-
tain contents.  The  same  conditions,  that  were  fundamental  in
the  transition  from  the  empirical  data  of  touch  and  vision  to  the
pure  forms  of  geometry,  are  necessary  and  sufficient  for  the  trans-
formation of  the  content  of  mere  perception  into  the  world  of  empiri-
cal-physical masses  and  movements.  Here,  as  there,  a  constant
standard  of  measurement  is  introduced,  to  which  the  changeable  is
henceforth  referred;  and  on  this  fundamental  function  rests  the
positing  of  any  sort  of  objectivity.

Thus  "realism"  is  justified  when  it  urges,  that  what  makes  a  judg-
ment a  judgment,  and  what  makes  knowledge  knowledge,  is  not
something  given,  but  something  that  is  added  to  the  given.  "We
could  never  mean  anything,  if  we  were  limited  merely  to  the  given;
for  all  attempts  to  remain  purely  within  the  given  in  the  case  of
meaning,  of  judgment,  become  tautologies  and  lead  to  meaningless
propositions.  Judgment  and  knowledge  go  beyond  the  given  in  their
meaning;  what  is  meant  in  them  is  transcendent  to  the  given  and  thus
to  them  in  so  far  as  they  are  considered  only  as  given,  as  present
psychical  contents.  Each  thought  ....  is  thus  transcend-
ent to  itself,  in  so  far  as  it  can  never  mean  itself."14  These  proposi-
tions are  entirely  satisfactory;  but  only  a  slight  change  in  their

14  W.  Freytag,  Der  Realismua  und  das  Transzendenzproblem^  Halle  1902,
p.  123.


300  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

formulation  is  needed  in  order  to  draw  an  entirely  different  conse-
quence from  them  than  the  one  here  drawn.  If  all  thought  is  really
"transcendent  to  itself ,"  if  it  belongs  to  its  original  function  not  to
remain  with  the  present  sensations  but  to  go  beyond  them, — then
the  converse  inference  holds.  The  "transcendence,"  which  can
be  grounded  and  proved  by  thought,  is  no  other  than  that  which  is
posited  and  guaranteed  in  the  fundamental  function  of  judgment.15
The  "object"  is  just  as  much  and  just  as  little  ^transcendent  as
judgment  is.  Thereby,  however,  the  correlation  of  knowledge  and
the  object  is  admitted  in  the  critical  sense;  for,  much  as  judgment
transcends  the  mere  content  of  present,  sensuous  perception,  we  can
not  affirm  that  it  stands  beyond  the  logical  principles  of  knowledge.
It  was  dependence  on  these  principles,  and  not  on  any  concrete
psychic  contents  or  acts,  that  methodic  idealism  alone  represented
and  demanded.  "Immanence"  in  the  sense  of  psychologism  must
indeed  be  overcome  in  order  to  reach  the  concept  of  the  physical
object;  but  this  object  itself,  while  it  transcends  the  sphere  of  sensa-
tion, gains  its  existence  iw  conceptual  relations,  from  which  its  essence
and  its  definition  are  inseparable.  To  the  psychological  immanence
of  impressions  is  opposed,  not  the  metaphysical  transcendence  of
things,  but  rather  the  logical  universality  of  the  supreme  principles
of  knowledge.  The  fact  must  be  granted  unconditionally,  that  the
particular  "presentation"  reaches  beyond  itself,  and  that  all  that  is
given  means  something  that  is  not  directly  found  in  itself;16  but  it  has
already  been  shown  that  there  is  no  element  in  this  "representation,"
which  leads  beyond  experience  as  a  total  system.  Each  particular
member  of  experience  possesses  a  symbolic  character,  in  so  far  as  the
law  of  the  whole,  which  includes  the  totality  of  members,  is  posited
and  intended  in  it.  The  particular  appears  as  a  differential,  that  is
not  fully  determined  and  intelligible  without  reference  to  its  integral.

16  C/.  Freytag,  op.  cit.,  p.  126:  "In  this  general  conviction  of  the  objective
nature  of  truth,  however,  the  transcendence  of  judgment  is  involved  as  a  neces-
sary presupposition.  For  if  judgment  were  not  transcendent,  had  it  no  mean-
ing going  beyond  what  is  given  in  it,  did  all  its  meaning  consist  in  what  it  is
as  a  psychic  process,  then  the  truth  of  the  judgment  would  be  directly  estab-
lished; whether  I  judge  a  is  b  or  a  is  not  b,  each  judgment  would  be  correct  in
itself,  because  in  the  first  precisely  the  a  was  meant,  which  is  actually  judged
to  be  6,  and  thus  would  also  have  been  given ;  in  the  second  the  a  is  meant,  that
is  actually  judged  as  not  being  6,  and  therefore  would  be  also  thus  given."

19  Cf.  e.g.  Uphues,  Kant  und  seine  Vorg&nger,  Berlin  1906,  p.  336.


THE CONCEPT  OF  REALITY  301

Metaphysical  "realism"  misunderstands  this  shift  of  logical  meaning
when  it  conceives  it  as  a  sort  of  transubstantiation.  "Whatever
is  to  mean  anything,"  it  is  here  argued,  "must  mean  something  else
than  it  is;  for  what  it  is,  that  it  is,  and  therefore  does  not  need  to
mean."17  But  this  "other"  need  not  at  all  be  something  actually
heterogeneous;  rather  we  are  here  concerned  with  a  relation  between
different  empirical  contents,  which  belong  to  a  common  order.  This
relation  brings  it  about,  that  we  can  pass  from  a  given  starting-point
through  the  whole  of  experience  in  a  progress  according  to  rule,
but  not  that  we  can  pass  beyond  experience.  The  constant  reaching
out  beyond  any  given,  particular  content  is  itself  a  fundamental
function  of  knowledge,  which  is  satisfied  in  the  field  of  the  objects  of
knowledge.  Among  the  philosophical  physicists,  it  is  Fechner,  who
has  clearly  grasped  the  problem  involved  here.  "The  fact,  that  the
world  of  phenomena  is  such  that  one  phenomenon  can  exist  only  in
and  through  another,  can  easily  lead  one  (and  has  led  some)  to  deny
real  existence  to  phenomena  in  general;  and  can  lead  them  to  assume,
as  a  basis  for  the  varying  multiplicity  of  phenomena,  independently
existing,  fixed  things  in  themselves  behind  the  phenomena;  these
things  in  themselves  can  never  appear  as  they  are  among  phenomena,
but  they  rather  produce  the  whole  dependent  appearance  of  phenom-
ena either  by  external  interaction  among  themselves  or  by  their
inner  working.  For  it  is  said:  if  one  phenomenon  is  always  only  to
appeal  to  another  with  reference  to  the  ground  of  its  existence,  then
a  ground  for  all  existence  is  ultimately  lacking;  if  A  says,  'I  can  only
exist  in  so  far  as  B  exists/  and  B  in  return,  'I  can  only  exist  in  so  far  as
A.  exists/  then  both  of  them  are  founded  on  nothing  ....  But
instead  of  seeking  for  the  ground  of  the  existence  of  A  and  B  (which
neither  can  find  in  the  other)  in  something  behind  them,  that  gives
a  ground  and  kernel  to  their  appearance,  it  is  to  be  sought  in  the
totality,  of  which  they  are  both  members;  the  whole  is  the  basis  and

kernel  of  the  whole  and  of  all  that  is  in  it In  the  whole,

the  basis  of  the  individual  is  not  to  be  sought  in  something  particular,
in  something  other  behind  the  individual,  concerning  whose  ground
we  would  have  to  ask  anew;  but  we  can  investigate  by  what  rules
the  individual  is  united  to  the  whole,  and  what  are  the  ultimate

elements What  we  can  find  objective  in  a  material

thing  never  consists  in  an  obscure  thing  behind  and  independent  of

17  E.  v.  Hartmann,  Das  Grundproblem  der  Erkenntnistheorie,  p.  49.


302  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

perceptions  or  phenomena,  but  consists  of  a  unified  connection
according  to  law  of  the  same,  of  which  connection  each  phenomenon
realizes  a  part,  but  which  connection  goes  beyond  the  particular
perceptions  or  the  particular  phenomena,  which  the  thing  affords.  "18
Although  these  propositions  draw  the  line  between  metaphysics  and
physics  very  distinctly,  Fechner  still  betrays  an  inner  obscurity  in
the  definition  of  the  object  of  physics.

The  unity  of  the  physical  world.  In  order  to  avoid  the  conception
of  matter  as  a  completely  unknown,  indeterminate  something,
which  "lies  at  the  basis"  of  the  sensuously  perceivable  properties,
Fechner  defines  matter  by  these  very  sensible  properties ;  the  matter
of  the  physicist  is  "in  entire  agreement  with  the  most  common  usage;"
it  is  nothing  else  than  what  is  perceptible  by  touch.  Matter  is  thus
equivalent  to  the  "tangible."  What  may  lie  behind  the  data  of  touch
and  feeling  need  not  concern  the  physicist;  to  him,  tangibility  alone
is  able  to  be  pointed  out,  to  be  grasped  by  experience  and  to  be
traced  further;  and  this  suffices  to  give  the  concept  the  fixed  founda-
tions necessary  for  his  purposes.19  Here  the  attempt  to  exclude  the
metaphysical  elements  of  the  concept  of  matter  has  again  led  to
setting  aside  the  logical  element,  that  is  characteristic  of  it.  The
critical  view  stands  between  the  two  views.  It  defines  the  object
of  natural  science  by  relation  to  the  "whole  of  experience;"  but
it  is  also  aware  that  this  whole  can  never  be  represented  and  grounded
as  a  mere  sum  of  particular  sense  data.  The  whole  gains  its  form
and  system  only  by  the  assumption  of  original  relations,  of  which  no
one  can  be  pointed  out  as  "tangible"  like  a  given  sensuous  content; —
and  it  is  one  of  the  manifold  expressions  of  these  relations,  that  is
presented  in  the  concept  of  matter,  as  also  in  that  of  force  or  energy.
(Cf.  above  p.  169  f.)

IV

The  historical  transformation  of  the  "thing."  The  reduction  of  the
concept  of  thing  to  a  supreme  ordering  concept  of  experience  disposes
of  a  dangerous  barrier  to  the  progress  of  knowledge.  For  the  first
naive  view  of  reality,  it  is  true,  the  concept  of  thing  offers  no  riddle  or
difficulty.  Thought  does  not  need  to  reach  things  gradually  and  by

11  Fechner, t)ber  die  physikalische  und  philosophiache  Atomenlehre.  2nd
ed.,  Leipzig  1864,  p.  Ill  ff .
19  Op.  tit.,  p.  106  f.


THE CONCEPT  OF  REALITY  303

complicated  inferences;  but  possesses  them  immediately,  and  can
grasp  them  just  as  our  bodily  organs  of  touch  grasp  the  corporeal
object.  But  this  naive  confidence  is  soon  shattered.  The  impres-
sion of  the  object  and  the  object  itself  are  separated  from  each  other;
instead  of  identity,  the  relation  of  representation  appears.  No
matter  how  complete  our  knowledge  may  be  in  itself,  it  never  offers
us  the  objects  themselves,  but  only  signs  of  them  and  their  reciprocal
relations.  An  increasing  number  of  determinations,  that  were
formerly  taken  as  belonging  to  being  itself,  are  now  changed  into
mere  expressions  of  being.  Following  the  well-known  path  of  the
history  of  metaphysics,  the  thing  is  to  be  conceived  as  free  not  only
from  all  the  properties  belonging  to  our  immediate  sensations  (for
the  thing  is  in  itself  neither  luminous  nor  odorous,  neither  colored
nor  sounding),  but  also  as  having  all  spatial-temporal  properties,
such  as  plurality  and  number,  change  and  causality,  stripped  from
it.  All  that  is  known,  all  that  is  knowable,  is  set  over  in  opposition
against  the  absolute  being  of  the  object.  The  same  ground,  that
assures  us  of  the  existence  of  things,  shows  them  to  be  incomprehen-
sible. Skepticism  and  mysticism  are  united  in  this  one  point.  No
matter  how  many  new  relations  of  "phenomena"  scientific  experi-
ence may  teach  us,  the  real  objects  seem  not  so  much  revealed  as
rather  the  more  deeply  concealed  by  these  relations.

All  this  doubt  and  suspicion  disappear,  however,  when  we  reflect
that  what  appears  here  as  the  uncomprehended  residuum  of  knowl-
edge really  enters  into  all  knowledge  as  an  indispensable  factor  and
necessary  condition.  To  know  a  content  means  to  make  it  an  object
by  raising  it  out  of  the  mere  status  of  givenness  and  granting  it  a
certain  logical  constancy  and  necessity.  Thus  we  do  not  know
"objects"  as  if  they  were  already  independently  determined  and
given  as  objects, — but  we  know  objectively,  by  producing  certain
limitations  and  by  fixating  certain  permanent  elements  and  con-
nections within  the  uniform  flow  of  experience.  The  concept  of  the
object  in  this  sense  constitutes  no  ultimate  limit  of  knowledge,  but  is
rather  the  fundamental  instrument,  by  which  all  that  has  become
its  permanent  possession  is  expressed  and  established.  The  object
marks  the  logical  possession  of  knowledge,  and  not  a  dark  beyond
forever  removed  from  knowledge.  The  "thing"  is  thus  no  longer
something  unknown,  lying  before  us  as  a  bare  material,  but  is  an
expression  of  the  form  and  manner  of  conceiving.  What  metaphysics


304  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

ascribes  as  a  property  to  things  in  themselves  now  proves  to  be  a
necessary  element  in  the  process  of  objectification.  While  in  meta-
physics the  permanence  and  continuous  existence  of  objects  is
spoken  of  as  distinguishing  them  from  the  changeableness  and  dis-
continuity of  sense  perceptions,  here  identity  and  continuity  appear
as  postulates,  which  serve  as  general  lines  of  direction  for  the  progres-
sive unification  of  laws.  They  signify  not  so  much  the  known  proper-
ties of  things,  but  rather  the  logical  instrument,  by  which  we  know.
In  this  connection  the  peculiar  changeableness  is  explained,  that  is
manifest  in  the  content  of  scientific  concepts  of  objects.  According
as  the  function  of  objectivity,  which  is  unitary  in  its  purpose  and
nature,  is  realized  in  different  empirical  material,  there  arise  different
concepts  of  physical  reality;  yet  these  latter  only  represent  different
stages  in  the  fulfillment  of  the  same  fundamental  demand.  Merely
this  demand  is  unchanging,  not  the  means  by  which  it  is  satisfied.

Helmholtz'  theory  of  signs.  Thus  natural  science,  even  where  it
retains  the  concept  of  the  absolute  object,  can  find  no  other  expres-
sion for  its  import  than  the  purely  formal  relations  at  the  basis  of
experience.  This  fact  appears  in  significant  form  in  Helmholtz'
theory  of  signs,  which  is  a  typical  formulation  of  the  general  theory
of  knowledge  held  by  natural  science.  Our  sensations  and  presenta-
tions are  signs,  not  copies  of  objects.  From  a  copy  we  demand  some
sort  of  similarity  with  the  object  copied,  but  we  can  never  be  sure  of
this  in  the  case  of  our  presentations.  The  sign,  on  the  contrary,
does  not  require  any  actual  similarity  in  the  elements,  but  only  a
functional  correspondence  of  the  two  structures.  What  is  retained
in  it  is  not  the  special  character  of  the  signified  thing,  but  the  objective
relations,  in  which  it  stands  to  others  like  it.  The  manifold  of  sen-
sations is  correlated  with  the  manifold  of  real  objects  in  such  a  way,
that  each  connection,  which  can  be  established  in  one  group,  indicates
a  connection  in  the  other.  Thus  by  our  presentations  we  do  not
know,  indeed,  the  real  absolutely  in  its  isolated,  self-existent  proper-
ties, but  we  rather  know  the  rules  under  which  this  real  stands  and  in
accordance  with  which  it  changes.  What  we  discover  clearly  and  as  a
fact  without  any  hypothetical  addition  is  the  law  in  the  phenomenon;
and  this  law  is  a  condition  of  our  comprehending  the  phenomenon,
and  is  the  only  property,  which  we  can  carry  over  directly  to  things
themselves.20  But  in  this  view  also  no  entirely  new  content  is

20  Helmholtz,  Handbuch  der  physiolog.  Optik,  2nd  ed.f  p.  586  ff .,  947  f .


THE CONCEPT OF REALITY  305

posited,  but  only  a  double  expression  is  produced  for  one  and  the  same
fact.  The  lawfulness  of  the  real  means  ultimately  nothing  more  and
nothing  else  than  the  reality  of  the  laws;  and  these  exist  in  their
unchanging  validity  for  all  experience,  in  abstraction  from  all  particu-
lar limiting  conditions.  When  we  declare  connections,  that  at  first
could  appear  as  mere  regularities  of  sensation,  to 'be  laws  of  things,
we  have  merely  produced  a  new  designation  for  the  universal  meaning
ascribed  to  them.  The  known  facts  are  not  changed  in  their  nature
by  our  choosing  this  form  of  expression,  but  are  merely  strengthened
in  their  objective  truth.  Thinghood  is  always  only  such  a  formula
of  confirmation  and,  when  separated  from  the  whole  of  the  empirical
connections  by  which  it  is  accredited,  has  no  significance.  The
objects  of  physics  are  thus,  in  their  connection  according  to  law,  not
so  much  "signs  of  something  objective"  as  rather  objective  signs,  that
satisfy  certain  conceptual  conditions  and  demands.

The  logical  and  the  ontological  conceptions  of  relativity.  It  follows  of
itself  that  we  never  know  things  as  they  are  for  themselves,  but  only
in  their  mutual  .relations:  that  we  can  only  establish  their  relations  of
permanence  and  change.  But  this  proposition  involves  none  of  the
skeptical  consequences  that  are  connected  with  it  in  realistic  meta-
physics. If  we  proceed  from  the  existence  of  absolute  elements,  then
it  must  indeed  appear  as  a  defect  of  thought,  that  this  existence  can
never  be  mastered  in  its  pure  and  separate  form.  According  to  this
view,  things  exist  for  themselves;  but  they  are  only  known  to  us  in
their  interactions,  and  their  interactions  influence  and  obscure  the
nature  of  each.  Helmholtz  formulates  his  view  thus:  "Each
property  or  quality  of  a  thing  is  in  reality  nothing  but  its  capacity  to

produce  certain  effects  on  other  things We  call  such  an

effect  a  property  when  we  hold  the  reagent,  on  which  it  works,  in
mind  as  self-evident  without  naming  it.  Thus  we  speak  of  the
solubility  of  a  substance,  that  is  its  reaction  to  water;  we  speak  of  its
weight,  that  is  its  attraction  for  the  earth;  and  with  the  same  justifi-
cation we  call  it  blue,  since  we  thereby  presuppose  as  self-evident,  that
we  are  merely  concerned  with  defining  its  effect  on  a  normal  eye,
If,  however,  what  we  call  a  property  always  involves  relation  between
two  things,  then  such  an  action  naturally  never  depends  on  the
nature  of  one  of  the  agents  alone,  but  always  exists  only  in  relation
to  and  in  dependence  upon  the  nature  of  a  second  being,  on  which


306  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

the  effect  is  exerted."*1  These  propositions,  with  their  striking
formulation  of  the  general  principle  of  relativity,  have  been  appealed
to  as  a  ground  for  demanding  the  exclusion  in  principle  of  all  ontolog-
ical  elements  from  natural  science.22  Yet  in  truth,  they  too  contain
an  unmistakable  ontological  element.  A  closer  interpretation  of  the
principle  of  the  relativity  of  knowledge  does  not  find  this  principle
to  be  a  mere  consequence  of  the  universal  interaction  of  things,  but
recognizes  in  it  a  preliminary  condition  for  the  concept  of  thing
itself.  This  is  the  most  general  and  most  radical  meaning  of  relativ-
ity. Its  meaning  is  not  that  we  can  only  grasp  the  relations  between
elements  of  being  by  conceiving  these  elements  still  as  obscure,
self-existent  kernels,  but  rather  that  we  can  only  reach  the  category
of  thing  through  the  category  of  relation.  We  do  not  grasp  the
relations  of  absolute  things  from  their  interaction,  but  we  concen-
trate our  knowledge  of  empirical  connections  into  judgments,  to  which
we  ascribe  objective  validity.  Therefore  the  "relative"  properties
do  not  signify  in  a  negative  sense  that  residuum  of  things,  that  we
are  able  to  grasp,  but  they  are  the  first  and  positive  ground  of  the
concept  of  reality.  There  is  a  circle  in  attempting  to  explain  the
relativity  of  knowledge  from  the  thorough-going  interaction  of  things,
for  this  interaction  is  rather  only  one  of  those  ideas  of  relation,  that
knowledge  posits  in  the  sensuous  manifold  in  order  to  unify  it.

The  unity  of  the  scientific  view  of  the  world.  It  is  of  especial  interest
to  follow  the  manner  in  which  this  view  gains  methodic  clarity  and
sharpness  within  modern  physics.  A  characteristic  example  of  it
is  lately  offered  by  a  prominent  physicist  in  his  exposition  of  the
progress  and  general  goals  of  the  physical  method.  In  a  short  sketch
in  his  treatment  of  the  unity  of  the  physical  world,  Planck  has
defined  the  general  points  of  view,  that  account  for  the  continual
transformation  of  physical  theories.  If  the  first  stage  of  our  physical
definitions  is  marked  by  the  fact  that  we  try  to  reproduce  the  content
of  sensation  directly  in  the  concept,  all  further  logical  progress  con-
sists in  removing  this  dependence  more  and  more.  Sensation  as
such  contains  an  anthropomorphic  element,  in  so  far  as  it  neces-

21  Helmholtz,  Die  neueren  Fortschritte  in  der  Theorie  des  Sehens.  (Vortrdge
und  Reden,  4th  ed.,  Braunschweig 1896,  p.  321),  c/. Physiologische  Opiik*,
p.  689.

22  C/.  Stallo,  The  Concepts  and  Theories  of  Modern  Physics,  German  ed.
Leipzig  1901f  p.  131,  186  ff .


THE CONCEPT OF REALITY  307

sarily  involves  a  relation  to  a  definite  sense-organ,  thus  to  a  specific
physiological  structure  of  the  human  organism.  How  this  anthro-
pomorphic element  is  constantly  forced  into  the  background,  so  that
it  entirely  disappears  in  the  ideal  plan  of  physics :  of  this,  the  history
of  natural  science  furnishes  a  single  continuous  example.23  It
must  now  be  asked,  what  compensation  is  offered  by  the  scientific
scheme  of  the  world  for  these  lost  contents?  What  positive  advan-
tage is  there  at  the  basis  of  its  significance  and  necessity?  It  is
soon  made  clear  that  the  required  compensation  cannot  be  based
on  anything  material,  but  purely  on  a  formal  moment.  While
science  renounces  the  wealth  and  varied  multiplicity  of  immediate
sensation,  it  regains  its  apparent  loss  in  content  through  increased
unity  and  completeness.  The  inner  heterogeneity  of  the  impres-
sions has  disappeared  along  with  their  individual  particularity,  so
that  fields,  that  are  absolutely  incomparable  from  the  standpoint  of
sensation,  can  now  be  conceived  as  members  of  the  same  total  plan
and  in  reciprocal  connection.  The  peculiar  value  of  the  scientific
construction  lies  in  this  alone:  that  in  the  scientific  construction
there  appears  as  connected  by  continuous  conceptual  intermediates,
what  in  the  first  naive  view  appears  in  mere  conjunction  and  unre-
lated. The  more  purely  this  tendency  is  carried  through,  the  more
perfectly  the  investigation  fulfills  its  task.  "If  we  look  more  closely,
we  see  that  the  old  system  of  physics  was  not  like  a  single  picture,
but  rather  a  collection  of  pictures;  there  was  a  special  picture  for
each  class  of  natural  phenomena.  And  these  various  pictures  did
not  hang  together;  one  of  them  could  be  removed  without  affecting
the  others.  That  will  not  be  possible  in  the  future  physical  picture
of  the  world.  No  single  feature  will  be  able  to  be  left  aside  as  un-
essential; each  is  rather  an  indispensable  element  of  the  whole  and
as  such  has  a  definite  meaning  for  observable  nature;  and,  conversely,
each  observable  physical  phenomenon  will  and  must  find  its  cor-
responding place  in  the  picture."  We  see  that  the  characteristics  of
the  true  physical  theory,  as  developed  here,  entirely  coincide  with

28  See  Planck,  Die  Einheit  des  physikalischen  Weltbildes,  Leipzig  1909. —
The  exposition  of  the  development  of  the  conceptual  constructions  of
natural  science  in  the  fourth  chapter  (cf.  esp.  p.  164  ff.)  was  already  completed
when  Planck's  lecture  appeared.  It  is  so  much  the  more  welcome  to  me  be-
cause our  own  result  is  confirmed  in  all  essential  points  in  the  philosophical
part  of  Planck's  treatment  and  is  thereby  illumined  from  another  point  of  view.


308  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

the  criteria  of  empirical  reality,  as  shown  by  epistemological  analysis.
Planck  requires  as  the  condition  of  any  physical  theory:  "unity  in
respect  of  all  features  of  the  picture,  unity  in  respect  of  all  places  and
times,  unity  with  regard  to  all  investigators,  all  nations,  all  civiliza-
tions." The  realization  of  all  these  demands  is  what  constitutes  the
real  meaning  of  the  concept  of  the  object.  In  opposition  to  the
phenoinenalistic  view,  which  remains  with  the  data  of  mere  sensation,
Planck  can  justly  characterize  his  view  as  "realistic."  This  "real-
ism," however,  is  not  the  opposite  but  the  correlate  of  a  rightly
understood  logical  idealism.  For  the  independence  of  the  physical
object  of  all  particularities  of  sensation  shows  clearly  its  connection
with  the  universal  logical  principles;  and  it  is  only  with  reference  to
these  principles  of  the  unity  and  continuity  of  knowledge,  that  the
content  of  the  concept  of  the  object  is  established.


CHAPTER  VII

SUBJECTIVITY AND OBJECTIVITY OF THE RELATIONAL

CONCEPTS

The  problem  of  the  subjectivity  and  objectivity  of  relational  concepts.
The  analysis  of  knowledge  ends  in  certain  fundamental  relations,
on  which  rests  the  content  of  all  experience.  Thought  cannot  go
further  than  to  these  universal  relations;  for  only  within  them  are
thought  and  its  object  possible.  And  yet  with  this  answer  it  may
seem  as  if  we  have  moved  in  a  circle.  The  end  of  the  enquiry  leads
us  back  to  the  same  point  at  which  we  began.  The  problem  seems
shifted,  but  not  solved;  for  the  opposition  of  the  subjective  and  the
objective  still  persists  as  sharply  as  ever.  The  pure  relations  also
fall  under  the  same  question,  that  was  previously  directed  upon
sensations  and  presentations.  Are  pure  relations  an  element  of
being,  or  are  they  mere  constructions  of  thought f  Is  the  nature  of
things  revealed  in  them,  or  are  they  only  the  universal  forms  of
expression  of  our  consciousness,  and  thus  valid  only  for  consciousness
and  the  sphere  of  its  contents?  Or  does  there  exist  a  mysterious
pre-established  harmony  between  mind  and  reality,  by  virtue  of
which  both  must  necessarily  agree  ultimately  in  fundamental
character?

The  universal  functions  of  rational  and  empirical  knowledge.  But
to  state  the  problem  in  this  way  shows  that  it  has  been  over-
come in  principle  as  the  result  of  the  preceding  enquiry.  At
any  rate,  "common"  ground  for  resolving  the  opposition  of
thought  and  being  exists.  Yet  this  common  ground  is  not  to  be
sought  in  an  absolute  ground  of  all  things  in  general,  but  merely  in
the  universal  functions  of  rational  and  empirical  knowledge.  These
functions  themselves  form  a  fixed  system  of  conditions;  and  only
relative  to  this  system  do  assertions  concerning  the  object,  as  well  as
concerning  the  ego  or  subject,  gain  an  intelligible  meaning.  There  is
no  objectivity  outside  of  the  frame  of  number  and  magnitude,  per-
manence and  change,  causality  and  interaction:  all  these  determina-
tions are  only  the  ultimate  invariants  of  experience  itself,  and  thus
of  all  reality,  that  can  be  established  in  it  and  by  it.  The  same  point

309


310  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

of  view  directly  includes  consciousness  itself.  Without  a  temporal
sequence  and  order  of  contents,  without  the  possibility  of  combining
them  into  certain  unities  and  of  separating  them  again  into  certain
pluralities,  finally  without  the  possibility  of  distinguishing  relatively
constant  conditions  from  relatively  changing  ones,  the  conception
of  the  ego  has  no  meaning  or  application.  Analysis  teaches  us  very
definitely  that  all  these  relational  forms  enter  into  the  concept  of
"being"  as  into  that  of  "thought;"  but  it  never  shows  us  how  they
are  combined,  nor  whence  they  have  their  origin.  In  fact,  every
question  as  to  this  origin,  every  reduction  of  the  fundamental  forms
to  an  action  of  things  or  to  an  activity  of  mind  would  involve  an
obvious  petitio  principii;  for  the  "whence"  is  itself  only  a  certain
form  of  logical  relation.  If  causality  is  once  understood  as  a  rela-
tion, all  question  as  to  the  causality  of  relations  in  general  disappears.
With  regard  to  relations  in  general,  we  can  only  ask  what  they  are
in  their  logical  meaning,  and  not  as  to  the  manner  in  which  and  the
beginnings  from  which  they  have  arisen.  After  these  relations  are
established  in  their  meaning,  we  can  seek  out  the  origin  of  particular
objects  and  processes  with  their  help  and  with  the  guidance  of  experi-
ence. It  is  hopeless,  on  the  contrary,  to  seek  to  trace  them  to  more
ultimate  beginnings,  to  psychical  or  physical  "forces,"  as  is  done  with
a  changing  empirical  existence.

The  reciprocal  relation  of  the  "/orra"  and  "matter"  of  knowledge.
Thus  the  possibility  disappears  of  separating  the  "matter"  of  knowl-
edge from  its  "form"  by  referring  them  each  to  a  different  origin  in
absolute  being;  as  when,  for  example,  we  seek  the  origin  of  one  factor
in  "things,"  and  of  the  other  in  the  unity  of  consciousness.1  For  all
the  determinateness,  that  we  can  ascribe  to  the  "matter"  of
knowledge,  belongs  to  it  only  relatively  to  some  possible  order  and
thus  to  a  formal  serial  concept.  The  particular,  qualitatively  specific
sensation  gains  its  character  only  by  distinction  from  other  contents
of  consciousness;  it  exists  only  as  a  serial  member  and  only  as  such
can  be  truly  conceived.  Abstraction  from  this  condition  would
result  not  merely  in  a  greater  or  less  "indefiniteness"  of  its  content,

1  Cf.  Riehl,  Der  philosophische  Kriticismus  (esp.  II,  1,  p.  285  ff.)  and  also
the  treatment  by  Honigswald,  Beitrdge  zur  Erkenntnistheorie  u.  Methodenlehre,
Lpz.  1906. — On  the  following,  cf.  my  criticism  of  this  writing,  Kant  Studien
XIV,  p.  91-98;  on  the  problem  of  constant  magnitudes,  cf.  above  p.  230  ff.


SUBJECTIVITY  AND OBJECTIVITY  OF CONCEPTS  311

but  would  absolutely  annihilate  it.2  This  indissoluble  logical  corre-
lation withstands  every  attempt  to  explain  the  relation  here  by  two
separate  causal  factors,  which  are  assumed  to  exist  and  to  act  in
themselves.  Matter  is  only  with  reference  to  form,  while  form,  on
the  other  hand,  is  valid  only  in  relation  to  matter.  If  we  abstract
from  their  correlation,  neither  matter  nor  form  has  any  "existence,"
concerning  whose  ground  and  origin  we  could  enquire.  The  material
particularity  of  the  empirical  content  can  thus  never  be  adduced  as
proof  of  the  dependence  of  all  objective  knowledge  on  an  absolutely
"  transcendent"  ground ;  for  this  determinateness,  which  as  such  undeni-
ably exists,  is  nothing  but  a  characteristic  of  knowledge  itself,  by
which  the  concept  of  knowledge  is  first  completed.  If  we  give  it  its
most  purely  scientific  expression,  it  means  ultimately  nothing  but
the  proposition,  that  universal  rules  of  connection  and  universal
equations  of  natural  phenomena  do  not  suffice  for  the  construction
of  experience  and  the  constitution  of  its  object;  but  the  knowledge  of
particular  constants  is  also  needed,  such  as  can  only  be  gained  by
experimental  observation.  Still  it  is  not  evident  how  these  con-
stants attest  to  more  than  the  empirical  reality  of  the  objects  of
experience,  or  how  they  reveal  anything  regarding  its  absolute
foundations.  For  the  particularization  of  a  law  presupposes  this
law  and  is  only  intelligible  with  reference  to  it;  hence  the  particular,
fixed  value  always  remains  in  the  sphere  of  that  concept  of  being,
that  is  defined  and  limited  by  the  universal  principles  of  mathematics.
This  limitation,  however,  constitutes  the  true  "ideality"  of  a  value.
Such  ideality  cannot  be  established  by  correlation  with  the  presenta-
tions and  acts  of  thought  of  psychological  individuals,  but  only  by
correlation  with  the  universal  principles  and  conditions  of  scientific
truth.  (See  above  p.  296  f .)

The  existence  of  the  ^eternal  truths."  But  while  the  question  as  to
the  metaphysical  origin  of  these  conditions  proves  to  be  a  miscon-
ception, if  the  problem  as  to  whether  they  are  to  be  deduced  from  the
mind  or  from  things  or  from  an  interaction  between  the  two  comes  to
nothing,  the  old  opposition  of  the  "subjective"  and  the  "objec-
tive" has  not  yet  been  removed  in  every  sense.  On  the  contrary,
it  seems  to  press  anew  for  solution  when  we  enquire  as  to  what  are
the  instruments  of  knowledge,  what  are  the  forms  of  judgment  and

*  Cf.  now  especially:  G.  F.  Lipps,  Mythenbildung  und  Erkenntnis,  Lpz.
1907,  p.  154  ff .


312  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

of  relating  thought,  in  which  we  can  present  to  ourselves  temporally,
in  actual  empirical  experience,  the  pure  timeless  validity  of  the  ideal
principles.  We  may  be  tempted  to  reject  this  question  entirely  also,
for  the  sake  of  the  strictness  and  purity  of  the  logical  foundation.
Leibniz  declares  (in  close  conjunction  with  Plato),  that  the  "eternal
truths"  are  valid  in  complete  independence  of  every  fact  of  reality,
whatever  its  properties  may  be.  These  eternal  truths  merely  repre-
sent hypothetical  systems  of  consequences;  they  connect  the  validity
of  certain  conclusions  with  the  validity  of  certain  premises,  without
considering  whether  examples  of  these  abstract  connections  can  be
found  in  the  world  of  empirical  things,  indeed,  without  asking  whether
there  are  individuals  in  whose  thought  the  transition  from  the
premises  to  the  consequences  is  ever  actually  made.  The  truths  of
pure  arithmetic  would  remain  what  they  are,  even  if  there  was  noth-
ing that  could  be  counted  nor  anyone  who  knew  how  to  count.3
In  the  real  classics  of  idealism,  the  negation  of  any  merely  psychologi-
cal foundation  is  expressed  with  the  greatest  clarity.  These  classi-
cal writers  all  incline  to  the  same  thought,  that  has  found  paradoxical
expression  in  Bolzano 's  conception  of  a  realm  of  "propositions  and
truths  in  themselves."  The  "subsistence"  of  truths  is  logically
independent  of  the  fact  of  their  being  thought.  For  example,  the
meaning  of  the  propositions  of  pure  geometry,  as  they  issue  from
each  other  in  a  strict,  necessary  sequence,  thus  forming  an  ideal
whole,  can  be  perfectly  deduced  and  expressed  without  going  back  to
the  psychological  acts,  in  which  we  bring  the  content  of  these  propo-
sitions to  intuitive  or  conceptual  pr6sentation.  No  matter  whether
these  acts  are  different  in  different  individuals  or  whether  they  are
uniform  and  have  constant  properties, — in  no  case  is  it  these  proper-
ties, that  we  mean,  when  we  speak  of  the  objects  of  geometry,  of
lines,  surfaces  and  angles.  The  being,  that  we  ascribe  to  these
objects  is  no  sort  of  temporal  reality,  such  as  belongs  to  concrete
physical  or  psychical  contents,  but  is  merely  their  reciprocal  being
determined;  it  affirms  an  objective  dependency  in  the  realm  of  what
is  thought  of,  but  no  actual  causal  connection  in  the  realm  of  thinking.
The  concept  of  truth  of  modern  mathematics.  It  is  especially  the
modern  extension  of  mathematics,  that  has  fully  revealed  this  fact

1  See  Leibniz,  Juris  et.aequi  elementa  CMollat,  Mitteilungen  aus  Leibnizens
ungedruckten  Schriften.  Lpz.  1893,  p.  21  f ;  cf.  my  ed.  of  Leibniz1  Hauptschriften
zur  Grundlegung  der  Philosophic.  Lpz.  1904  ff .,  II,  p.  504  f .)


SUBJECTIVITY  AND OBJECTIVITY OF CONCEPTS  313

and  has  thereby  prepared  the  ground  anew  for  the  logical  theory
that  rests  upon  it.  These  structures,  with  which  the  general  theory
of  the  manifold  is  concerned,  are  the  true  and  complete  objects  of
mathematics,  and  their  conceptions  first  represents  mathematics  in
its  full  extension.  These  structures  can  be  fully  developed,  however,
without  going  into  the  complex  and  difficult  psychological  problems
as  to  in  what  intellectual  processes  we  present  to  ourselves  the  mean-
ing of  the  infinite  totalities  here  under  consideration.  Further,
since  all  the  properties  of  these  groups  are  fixed  by  their  original
concept  and  belong  to  them  in  a  necessary,  unalterable  way,  there  is
no  room  left  for  any  arbitrary  activity  of  thought;  on  the  contrary,
thought  is  resolved  entirely  into  its  object  and  is  determined  and
guided  by  it.  "For,"  as  a  modern  representative  of  mathematical
logic  says,  "phrase  it  as  you  will,  there  is  a  world  that  is  peopled  with
ideas,  ensembles,  propositions,  relations,  and  implications,  in  endless
variety  and  multiplicity,  in  structure  ranging  from  the  very  simple
to  the  endlessly  intricate  and  complicate.  That  world  is  not  the
product  but  the  object,  not  the  creature  but  the  quarry  of  thought,
the  entities  composing  it — propositions,  for  example, — being  no
more  identical  with  thinking  them  than  wine  is  identical  with  the
drinking  of  it.  The  constitution  of  that  extra-personal  world,  its
intimate  ontological  make-up,  is  logic  in  its  essential  character  and
substance  as  an  independent  and  extra-personal  form  of  being.
.  .  .  .  Just  as  the  astronomer,  the  physicist,  the  geologist,  or
other  student  of  objective  science  looks  abroad  in  the  world  of  sense,
so,  not  metaphorically  speaking  but  literally,  the  mind  of  the  mathe-
matician goes  forth  into  the  universe  of  logic  in  quest  of  the  things
that  are  there;  exploring  the  heights  and  depths  for  facts — ideas,
classes,  relationships,  implications."4  These  propositions  define  the
problem  very  sharply,  on  the  positive  as  well  as  on  the  negative  side.
The  necessity  of  universal  mathematical  connections  must  remain
undisputed;  and  this  necessity  constitutes  a  peculiar  entity,  an
objective  content,  which  is  set  over  against  the  psychological  activity
of  thought  as  an  absolutely  binding  norm.  But  does  this  content  of
truth  stand  on  the  same  plane  as  sensuous  reality,  of  which  we  can
have  merely  empirical  knowledge?  Are  the  "facts"  of  the  mathema-
tician nothing  else,  and  have  they  no  other  meaning  than  those,  for

4  C.  J.  Keyser,  Mathematics — a  lecture  delivered  at  Columbia  University,
New  York,  1907,  p.  25  f .


314  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

example,  which  the  comparative  anatomist  and  zoologist  establish
in  the  description  and  comparison  of  various  bodily  structures?  The
very  logic  of  mathematics  and  of  mathematical  physics  definitely
forbids  any  such  identification  of  the  exact  and  the  descriptive  methods.
Necessities  cannot  be  simply  described,  cannot  as  such  be  absolutely
"found;"  for  what  is  merely  found  holds  only  for  the  moment  for
which  it  is  established,  and  thus  signifies  an  empirically  unique  fact.
The  question  as  to  the  intellectual  operations,  in  which  we  compre-
hend these  necessities,  thus  presses  anew  for  solution.  These
operations  can  indeed  never  blend  indistinguishably  into  what  is
known  by  them;  the  laws  of  the  known  are  not  the  same  as  those  of
knowing.  Nevertheless,  the  two  types  of  law  are  related  to  each
other,  in  so  far  as  they  represent  two  different  aspects  of  a  general
problem.  Thus  there  exists  a  deeper  and  more  intimate  mutual
relation  between  the  object  and  the  operation  of  thought  than  between
-  -the  wine  and  the  drinking  of  the  wine.  The  wine  and  the  drinking
are  not  exactly  correlated ;— but  every  pure  act  of  cognition  is  directed
on  an  objective  truth,  which  it  opposes  to  itself,  while  on  the  other
hand,  the  truth  can  only  be  brought  to  consciousness  by  these  acts
of  cognition  and  through  their  mediation.

ii

The  relational  concepts  and  the  activity  of  the  ego.  Hence  it  is
necessary,  on  the  basis  of  the  concept  of  "objectivity"  gained  from
the  analysis  of  scientific  principles,  to  define  the  concept  of  "sub-
jectivity" in  a  new  sense.  The  general  characterization  of  the
object,  resulting  from  such  analysis,  has  implicit  in  it  the  answer  to
the  question  as  to  what  are  the  intellectual  means  and  methods  by
which  we  reach  this  knowledge.  One  aspect  above  all  stands
out  decisively.  As  long  as  the  object  was  simply  the  "thing"  in
the  customary  sense  of  naive  dogmatism,  the  particular  "impres-
sion" or  mere  sum  of  such  impressions  might  grasp  it  and  copy  it.
But  this  sort  of  appropriation  is  denied,  when  the  validity  of  certain
logical  relations  is  established  as  the  necessary  condition  and  real
kernel  of  the  concept  of  the  object.  For  pure  relations  can  never
be  represented  in  mere  sensuous  impressions;  the  similarity  or  dis-
similarity, the  identity  or  difference  of  the  seen  or  touched,  is  never
itself  something  that  is  seen  or  touched.5  Everywhere  we  must  go

8  Cf.  more  particularly  Ch.  VIII.


SUBJECTIVITY  AND OBJECTIVITY OF CONCEPTS  315

back  from  the  passive  sensation  to  the  activity  of  judgment,  in
which  alone  the  concept  of  logical  connection  and  of  logical  truth  is
adequately  expressed.  We  may  conceive  the  idea  of  the  thing —
as  a  complex  of  sensuous  properties — to  have  arisen  through  these
properties  having  been  perceived  for  themselves,  and  having  com-
bined of  themselves  by  virtue  of  an  automatic  mechanism  of  "associa-
tion." But  necessary  connection,  in  order  to  be  defined  psychologi-
cally, requires  reference  to  an  independent  activity  of  consciousness.
The  progress  of  the  judgment  according  to  law  is  the  correlate  of  the
unification  of  relations  according  to  law  in  the  object  of  knowledge.

Constancy  and  change  in  knowledge.  The  content  of  truth,  and
with  it  the  content  of  "being,"  seems  once  more  to  be  in  flux;  for
according  to  this  whole  view,  we  can  only  realize  what  a  certain
truth  "is"  by  intellectually  regenerating  it,  z'.e.,  by  allowing  it  to
develop  before  us  out  of  its  particular  conditions.  But  this  "genetic"
view  of  knowledge  is  not  opposed  to  the  demand  for  permanence.
For  the  activity  of  thought,  to  which  we  here  recur,  is  not  arbitrary,
but  a  strictly  regulated  and  constrained  activity.  The  functional
activity  of  thought  finds  its  support  in  the  ideal  structure  of  what  is
thought,  a  structure  that  belongs  to  it  once  for  all  independently  of
any  particular,  temporally  limited  act  of  thought.  The  two  ele-
ments of  structure  and  function  in  their  interpenetration  determine
the  complete  concept  of  knowledge.  All  of  our  intellectual  opera-
tions are  directed  on  the  idea  of  a  "fixed  and  permanent"  realm  of
objectively  necessary  relations.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  all
knowledge  contains  a  static  and  a  dynamic  motive,  and  only  in  their
unification  is  its  concept  realized.  Knowledge  realizes  itself  only
in  a  succession  of  logical  acts,  in  a  series  that  must  be  run  through
successively,  so  that  we  may  become  aware  of  the  rule  of  its  progress.
But  if  this  series  is  to  be  grasped  as  a  unity,  as  an  expression  of  an
identical  reality,  which  is  defined  the  more  exactly  the  further  we
advance,  then  we  must  conceive  the  series  as  converging  toward  an
ideal  limit.  This  limit  "is"  and  exists  in  definite  determinateness,
although  for  us  it  is  not  attainable  save  by  means  of  the  particular
members  of  the  series  and  their  change  according  to  law.  A  different
view  results,  according  as  we  choose  our  standpoint  at  the  conceived
limit  or  within  the  series  and  its  progress;  yet  each  of  the  two  aspects
requires  the  other  for  its  completion.  The  change  is  directed  toward
a  constancy,  while  the  constancy,  on  the  other  hand,  can  only  come
to  consciousness  in  the  change.  There  is  no  act  of  knowledge,  which


316  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

is  not  directed  on  some  fixed  content  of  relations  as  its  real  object;
while,  on  the  other  hand,  this  content  can  only  be  verified  and  com-
prehended in  acts  of  knowledge.

The  independence  of  logical  truths  of  the  thinking  subject.  At
this  point,  the  general  tendencies  dominating  present  epistemologi-
cal  discussion  divide  most  distinctly.  On  the  one  hand,  attempt  is
made  to  maintain  the  pure  objectivity  of  the  logical  and  the  mathe-
matical, by  giving  up  all  reference  in  principle  to  thought  and  to  the
''thinking  mind."  If  we  analyse  the  ideal  structure  of  mathematics
and  if  we  clearly  represent  the  whole  of  its  definitions,  axioms  and
theorems,  it  is  urged,  we  do  not  find  the  concept  of  the  thinking  sub-
ject to  which  this  whole  system  is  given,  among  the  "logical  con-
stants" that  ultimately  remain.  Therefore,  this  concept  of  the
subject  does  not  belong  to  the  field  of  pure  logic  and  mathematics;
it  is  rather  to  be  accounted  one  of  those  "entirely  meaningless"
conceptions,  that  have  only  gotten  into  science  by  the  help  of  philoso-
phy.6 Thus  all  closer  relation  is  lacking  between  the  ideal  truths  of
mathematics  and  logic  and  the  activity  of  thought;  it  is  rather  em-
phasized that  the  mind,  in  grasping  these  truths,  receives  them  only
receptively  as  given  material.  The  mind  is  as  completely  passive
in  cognizing  a  definite. system  of  inferences  as  sense  is — according  to
the  ordinary  view — in  the  perception  of  sensuous  objects.7  "In  short,
all  knowledge  must  be  recognition,  on  pain  of  being  mere  delusion;
arithmetic  must  be  discovered  in  just  the  same  sense  in  which  Co-
lumbus discovered  the  West  Indies,  and  we  no  more  create  numbers
than  he  created  the  Indians.  The  number  2  is  not  purely  mental,
but  is  an  entity  which  may  be  thought  of.  Whatever  can  be  thought
of  has  being,  and  its  being  is  a  precondition,  not  a  result,  of  its  being
thought  of."8  The  "objectivity"  of  pure  concepts  and  truths  is
accordingly  put  on  a  plane  with  that  of  physical  things.  Neverthe-
less, the  difference  between  them  is  sharply  revealed  again,  when
we  recall  that  in  the  sphere  of  logic  and  mathematics  we  cannot
reach  absolute  "objects,"  but  always  only  relative  objects.  Not
number,  but  rather  the  numbers  constitute  a  true  "entity."  Here

•  Cf.  Russell,  The  Principles  of  Mathematics,  I,  p.  4:  Philosophy  asks  of  Mathe-
matics: What  does  it  mean?  Mathematics  in  the  past  was  unable  to  answer,
and  Philosophy  answered  by  introducing  the  totally  irrelevant  notion  of  mind.
But  now  Mathematics  is  able  to  answer,  so  far  at  least  as  to  reduce  the  whole
of  its  propositions  to  certain  fundamental  notions  of  logic.

7  Russell,  op.  cit.,  §37,  p.  33.

«  Russell,  on.  cit..  $427.  n.  451 .


SUBJECTIVITY AND OBJECTIVITY OF CONCEPTS  317

the  individual  gains  its  meaning  and  content  only  from  the  whole; —
but  this  whole  cannot  be  presented  like  a  quiescent  object  of  per-
ception, but,  in  order  to  be  truly  surveyed,  must  be  grasped  and
determined  in  the  law  of  its  construction.  In  order  to  comprehend
the  number  series  as  a  series  and  thus  to  penetrate  into  its  systematic
nature,  there  is  needed  not  merely  a  single  apperceptive  act  (such  as
is  considered  sufficient  for  the  perception  of  a  particular  thing  of
sense),  but  always  a  manifold  of  such  acts,  which  reciprocally  con-
dition each  other.  Thus  a  movement  of  thought  is  always  demanded,
yet  a  movement  which  is  no  mere  change  of  presentation,  but  in
which  what  is  first  gained  is  retained  and  made  ohe  starting-point
of  new  developments.  Thus  from  the  activity  itself  flows  the  recog-
nition of  a  fixed  body  of  truths.  Within  the  act  of  production,
there  arises  for  thought  a  permanent  logical  product,  in  so  far  as
thought  is  aware  that  this  act  does  not  proceed  arbitrarily  but  ac-
cording to  constant  rules,  which  it  cannot  avoid  if  it  is  to  gain  cer-
tainty and  definiteness.

The  problem  of  pragmatism.  The  "spontaneity"  of  thought  is
thus  not  the  opposite  but  the  necessary  correlate  of  "objectivity,"
which  can  only  be  reached  by  means  of  it.  If  this  fundamental
relation  between  spontaneity  and  objectivity  is  not  fully  grasped,
if  a  single  element  of  it  is  stressed  one-sidedly,  a  reaction  will  ensue
such  as  to  endanger  the  constancy  of  logic  itself.  From  this  general
motive,  we  can  perhaps  most  easily  understand  the  attack,  that
has  been  made  by  "pragmatism"  on  "pure  logic."  In  so  far  indeed
as  pragmatism  consists  of  nothing  but  the  identification  of  the  con-
cepts "truth"  and  "utility,"  we  can  confidently  abandon  it  to  the
general  fate  of  philosophical  catch-words.  What  has  been  advanced
in  defence  of  this  view  is  clad  almost  entirely  in  a  rhetorical  and
polemical  style,  and  melts  away  when  we  attempt  to  translate  it
into  the  sober  language  of  logic.  The  very  concept  of  utility  defies
all  attempt  at  exact  definition:  now  it  is  the  particular  individual
with  his  special  wishes  and  inclinations,  now  it  is  some  common,
generic  structure  of  man,  with  reference  to  which  utility  is  defined
and  measured.  The  first  case  leaves  unsolved  precisely  the  decisive
problem,  the  possibility  of  exact  scientific  knowledge;  for  a  science  of
nature  is  no  more  constructed  from  individual  feelings  and  tendencies
than  from  individual  sensations,  and  is  rather  directed  on  the  exclu-
sion of  all  purely  "anthropomorphic"  elements  from  its  system  of  the


318  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

world.  (Cf.  above  p.  306  ff.)  In  the  second  case,  a  constant
psycho-physical  subject  is  assumed  having  a  permanent  organiza-
tion, which  develops  under  conditions  themselves  possessing  objec-
tive laws;  thus  the  whole  concept  of  being,  which  should  be  deduced,
is  in  fact  presupposed.  There  is  "utility"  only  in  a  world,  in  which
everything  does  not  issue  arbitrarily  from  everything,  but  where
certain  consequences  are  connected  with  certain  presuppositions.
The  standpoint  of  utility  is  only  intelligible  and  applicable  inside  of
being  and  a  definite  order  of  process.  (Cf.  above  p.  264  f .)

Truth  and  the  "practical."  However,  such  considerations  do  not
affect  the  finer  and  more  subtle  interpretation  that  pragmatism  has
received  especially  from  Dewey  and  his  school.  Here  the  problem  is
freed  at  least  from  those  obscurities  and  ambiguities  that  attached
to  it  in  popular  philosophical  discussion.  Here  it  clearly  appears,
that  pragmatism  is  concerned  with  the  relation  to  be  assumed
between  the  objectively  valid  propositions  of  science  and  the  activity
of  thought.  For,  as  closer  examination  shows,  thought  has  here
become  the  pure  and  complete  expression  of  " doing."  Our  inferences
and  conclusions,  our  investigations  and  experiments  are  "practical"
not  because  they  are  necessarily  directed  on  gaining  an  outer  purpose,
but  merely  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  unity  of  all  thought,  which
stands  constantly  before  us  as  an  ultimate  goal  and  directs  our
cognition.  The  truth  of  any  particular  proposition  can  only  be
measured  by  what  it  contributes  to  the  solution  of  this  fundamental
problem  of  knowledge,  by  what  it  contributes  to  the  progressive  unifi-
cation of  the  manifold.  We  can  never  set  a  judgment  directly
over  against  the  particular  outer  objects  and  compare  it  with  these,
as  things  given  in  themselves;  we  can  only  ask  as  to  the  function  it
fulfils  in  the  structure  and  interpretation  of  the  totality  of  experi-
ence. We  call  a  proposition  "true,"  not  because  it  agrees  with  a
fixed  reality  beyond  all  thought  and  all  possibility  of  thought,  but
because  it  is  verified  in  the  process  of  thought  and  leads  to  new  and
fruitful  consequences.  Its  real  justification  is  the  effect,  which  it
produces  in  the  tendency  toward  progressive  unification.  Each
hypothesis  of  knowledge  has  its  justification  merely  with  reference  to
this  fundamental  task;  it  is  valid  to  the  degree  that  it  succeeds  in
intellectually  organizing  and  harmoniously  shaping  the  originally
isolated  sensuous  data.9

•  Cf.  Studies  in  Logical  Theory,  edited  by  Dewey  (The  Decennial  Publica-
tions of  the  University  of  Chicago,  First  Series,  Vol.  Ill,  Chicago  1903).


SUBJECTIVITY  AND OBJECTIVITY OF CONCEPTS  319

The  critical  concept  of  truth.  The  critical  view  of  knowledge  and
of  its  relation  to  the  object  is  not  affected,  however,  by  these  develop-
ments; for  in  them  a  thought  is  merely  spun  out,  which  the  critical
view  has  recognized  and  taken  as  a  basis  from  the  beginning.  For
the  critical  view,  too,  concepts  do  not  gain  their  truth  by  being  copies
of  realities  presented  in  themselves,  but  by  expressing  ideal  orders  by
which  the  connection  of  experiences  is  established  and  guaranteed.
The  "realities,"  which  physics  affirms,  have  no  meaning  beyond  that
of  being  ordering  concepts.  They  are  not  grounded  by  pointing  out
a  particular  sensuous  being,  that  "corresponds"  to  them,  but  by  being
recognized  as  the  instruments  of  strict  connection  and  thus  of
thorough-going  relative  determinatcness  of  the  "given."  (C/.  above
p.  164  ff.)  The  recognition  of  this  fact,  however,  involves  none  of
the  consequences,  that  pragmatism  is  accustomed  to  attach  to  it.
No  matter  how  far  we  may  grant  and  urge  the  "instrumental"
meaning  of  scientific  hypotheses,  we  are  obviously  concerned  here
with  a  purely  theoretical  goal,  that  is  to  be  sought  with  purely  theoreti-
cal means.  The  will,  that  is  here  to  be  satisfied,  is  nothing  but  the
will  to  logic.  The  direction  of  the  progress  of  knowledge  is  not
determined  by  any  sort  of  individual  needs,  such  as  vary  from  one
subject  to  another,  but  by  the  universal  intellectual  postulate  of
unity  and  continuity.  In  fact,  this  consequence  has  occasionally
come  to  light  very  clearly, — in  spite  of  all  the  ambiguity  in  the  con-
cept of  the  "practical."  James  himself  emphasizes  the  fact  that  our
knowledge  is  subject  to  a  double  compulsion;  just  as  we  are  bound
to  the  properties  of  our  sensuous  impressions  in  our  knowledge  of
facts,  so  our  thought  is  determined  by  an  "ideal  compulsion"  in  the
field  of  pure  logic  and  mathematics.  Thus,  for  example,  the
hundredth  decimal  of  the  number  IT  is  ideally  predetermined,  even
if  no  one  has  actually  calculated  it.  "Our  ideas  must  agree  with
realities,  be  such  realities  concrete  or  abstract,  be  they  facts  or  be
they  principles,  under  penalty  of  endless  inconsistency  and  frus-
tration."10 It  is  clear  that  the  assumption  of  such  "coercions  of
the  ideal  order"  does  not  differ  from  the  assumption  of  an  objective,
logical  criterion  of  truth;  both  are  only  different  expressions  of  the
same  fact.  What  is  accomplished  is  no  refutation  of  "pure  logic,"
but  at  any  rate  a  further  development  of  the  thought  on  which  it
rests.  It  is  not  a  new  solution  that  is  offered,  but  a  new  problem,

1°  James,  Pragmatism,  New  York  1907,  p.  209  ff.


320  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

such  as  could  be  neglected  at  first  in  the  general  attempt  to  ground
knowledge.  The  universal  truths  of  logic  and  mathematics  are  noi/
only  deprived  of  any  empiristic  grounding,  but  they  also  seem  to  lack
any  relation  to  the  world  of  empirical  objects.  Their  apriority  is
based  on  their  "freedom  from  existence,"  and  only  holds  to  the
extent  that  this  condition  is  satisfied.  The  moment  thought  turns
to  the  empirical  existence  of  the  objects,  it  seems  to  separate  itself
from  the  real  foundation  of  its  certainty.  True  insight  into  the
necessity  of  a  connection  can  only  be  reached,  where  we  renounce
all  attempts  to  assert  anything  regarding  the  reality  of  the  elements,
that  enter  into  the  relation.11  Nevertheless  we  cannot  hold  to  this
unconditional  separation, — however  unavoidable  it  may  appear  at
first  from  a  methodological  standpoint;  for  the  mere  possibility  of  a
mathematical  science  of  nature  contradicts  it.  For  in  mathematical
science  of  nature  the  two  types  of  knowledge,  that  are  here  opposed,
are  once  more  immediately  related  to  each  other.  It  is  empirical
being  itself,  that  we  seek  to  grasp  in  the  form  of  rational  mathematical
order.  That  this  demand  is  never  ultimately  and  definitely  satis-
fied, results  from  the  nature  of  the  task  itself.  For  the  material,
that  is  here  subjected  to  mathematical  treatment,  is  never  found
finished  as  a  complete  store  of  "facts,"  but  is  only  shaped  in  the  process,
and  in  the  process  constantly  assumes  new  forms.  It  is  no  constant,
but  a  variable  datum  and  is  to  be  comprehended  in  its  variability,
in  the  possible  transformation  that  it  can  undergo  through  new
observations  and  investigations.  But  this  variability  is  of  the  essence
of  the  empirical  and  involves  no  element  of  "subjective"  arbitrariness.
The  change  is  itself  determined  and  necessary,  since  we  do  not  go
arbitrarily  from  one  stage  to  another  but  according  to  a  definite  law.
It  is  customary  to  appeal  especially  to  the  purely  relative  validity
of  our  astronomical  system  of  the  world,  in  order  to  prove  the  relativ-
ity of  the  concept  of  empirical  truth.  It  is  argued,  that  since  the
absolute  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  are  not  given  to  us  in  experi-
ence and  can  never  be  given  to  us,  and  since  therefore  we  can  never
compare  our  astronomical  constructions  with  these  motions  them-
selves and  thus  test  them,  there  is  no  meaning  in  granting  to  any
one  system  (for  instance,  the  Copernican)  the  merit  of  "truth"
above  all  others.  All  systems  are  equally  true  and  equally  real,

11  See  above  p.  319  f.;  cf.  Meinong,  Uberdie  Stellung  der  Gegenstandstheorie
im  System  der  Wisaenschaften,  Lpz.  1907,  section  5  ff.


SUBJECTIVITY AND OBJECTIVITY OF CONCEPTS  321

since  they  are  all  equally  remote  from  the  absolute  reality  of  things
and  signify  only  subjective  conceptions  of  phenomena,  which  can
and  must  differ  according  to  the  choice  of  the  intellectual  and  spatial
standpoint.  The  defect  of  this  inference,  however,  is  plain;  for  the
abolition  of  an  absolute  standard  in  no  way  involves  the  abolition
of  differences  in  value  between  the  various  theories.  The  latter
remain  in  all  strictness  in  so  far  as  the  general  presupposition  is
retained  that  the  changing  phases  of  the  concept  of  experience  do
not  lie  absolutely  outside  of  each  other,  but  are  connected  by  logical
relations.  The  system  and  convergence  of  the  series  takes  the  place
of  an  external  standard  of  reality.  Both  system  and  convergence
can  be  mediated  and  established,  analogously  to  arithmetic,  entirely
by  comparison  of  the  serial  members  and  by  the  general  rule,  which
they  follow  in  their  progress.  This  rule,  on  the  one  hand,  is  given  by
the  fact  that  the  form  of  experience  persists;  thus  the  particular
configurations  in  space,  which  we  take  as  a  basis  for  our  construction
of  the  system  of  the  world,  vary, — while  space  and  time,  number  and
magnitude  are  retained  as  instruments  of  any  construction.  (Cf.
above  p.  266  ff.)  Further  there  are  also  certain  material  features  of
the  system,  that  are  unaffected  by  the  transition  from  one  stage  to
the  following:  the  variation  does  not  absolutely  cancel  the  earlier
stage,  but  allows  it  to  remain  in  a  new  interpretation.  All  the
observations  of  Tycho  de  Brahe  enter  into  the  system  of  Kepler,
although  they  are  connected  and  conceived  in  a  new  way.  The
claim  of  any  such  connection,  however,  is  not  measured  with  respect
to  things  themselves,  but  by  certain  supreme  principles  of  the  knowl-
edge of  nature,  that  are  retained  as  logical  norms.  The  spatial
order  is  called  "objective,"  that  corresponds  to  these  principles,  that
e.g.,  has  been  constructed  by  us  in  accordance  with  the  presupposi-
tion and  the  requirements  of  the  law  of  inertia.  (Cf.  above  p.  183  ff.)
Going  back  to  such  supreme  guiding  principles  insures  an  inner
homogeneity  of  empirical  knowledge,  by  virtue  of  which  all  its
various  phases  are  combined  in  the  expression  of  one  object.  The
"object"  is  thus  exactly  as  true  and  as  necessary  as  the  logical  unity
of  empirical  knowledge; — but  also  no  truer  or  more  necessary.  Yet
little  as  this  unity  ever  appears  as  complete,  much  as  it  remains  rather
a  "projected  unity,"  its  concept  is  none  the  less  definitely  determined.
The  demand  itself  is  what  is  fixed  and  permanent,  while  every  form  of
its  realization  points  beyond  itself.  The  one  reality  can  only  be


322  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

indicated  and  defined  as  the  ideal  limit  of  the  many  changing  theories ;
yet  the  assumption  of  this  limit  is  not  arbitrary,  but  inevitable,  since
only  by  it  is  the  continuity  of  experience  established.  No  single
astronomical  system,  the  Copernican  as  little  as  the  Ptolemaic,
can  be  taken  as  the  expression  of  the  "true"  cosmic  order,  but  only
the  whole  of  these  systems  as  they  unfold  continuously  according  to
a  definite  connection.  Thus  the  instrumental  character  of  scien-
tific concepts  and  judgments  is  not  here  contested.  These  concepts
are  valid,  not  in  that  they  copy  a  fixed,  given  being,  but  in  so  far  as
they  contain  a  plan  for  possible  constructions  of  unity,  which  must  be
progressively  verified  in  practice,  in  application  to  the  empirical
material.  But  the  instrument,  that  leads  to  the  unity  and  thus  to
the  truth  of  thought,  must  be  in  itself  fixed  and  secure.  If  it  did
not  possess  a  certain  stability,  no  sure  and  permanent  use  of  it
would  be  possible;  it  would  break  at  the  first  attempt  and  be  resolved
into  nothing.  We  need,  not  the  objectivity  of  absolute  things,  but
rather  the  objective  determinateness  of  the  method  of  experience.

The  reconciliation  of  permanence  and  change.  The  real  content  of
the  object  of  thought,  to  which  knowledge  penetrates,  corresponds
therefore  to  the  active  form  of  thought  in  general.  In  the  realm  of
rational  knowledge,  as  in  that  of  empirical,  the  same  problem  is  set.
In  the  process  of  knowledge,  the  conception  is  established  of  a  body
of  ideal  relations,  that  remain  self-identical  and  unaffected  by  the
accidental,  temporally  varying  conditions  of  psychological  appre-
hension. The  affirmation  of  such  a  constancy  is  essential  to  every  act
of  thought;  only  in  the  way  in  which  this  affirmation  is  proved  is
founded  the  difference  of  the  different  levels  of  knowledge.  As  long
as  we  remain  in  the  field  of  purely  logical  and  mathematical  proposi-
tions, we  have  a  fixed  whole  of  truths,  that  remain  unchanged.
Each  proposition  is  always  what  it  once  is;  it  can  be  suoplemented
by  others  being  added  to  it,  but  it  cannot  be  transformed  in  its  own
import.  Pure  empirical  truth,  however,  seems  in  principle  to  be
deprived  of  this  determinateness;  it  is  different  today  from  what
it  was  yesterday,  and  merely  signifies  a  temporary  hold,  that  we
gain  amid  the  flux  of  presentations  only  to  relinquish  again.  And
still  both  motives,  in  spite  of  their  opposition,  are  ultimately  united
in  a  unitary  type  of  knowledge.  It  is  only  in  abstraction  that  we
can  separate  the  absolutely  permanent  element  from  the  changing
and  oppose  them  to  each  other.  The  genuine,  concrete  problem  of


SUBJECTIVITY  AND OBJECTIVITY OF CONCEPTS  323

knowledge  is  to  make  the  permanent  fruitful  for  the  changing.  The
body  of  eternal  truths  becomes  a  means  for  gaining  a  foothold  in
the  realm  of  change.  The  changing  is  considered  as  if  it  were
permanent,  when  we  attempt  to  understand  it  as  the  result  of  univer-
sal theoretical  laws.  The  difference  between  the  two  factors  can
never  be  made  to  disappear  entirely;  still  in  the  constant  assimila-
tion between  them  consists  the  whole  movement  of  knowledge.  The
changeableness  of  the  empirical  material  proves  in  no  way  to  be  a
hindrance,  but  rather  a  positive  furthering  of  knowledge.  The
opposition  between  mathematical  theory  and  the  totality  of  observa-
tions known  at  any  time  would  be  irreducible,  if  there  were  fixed,
unchanging  data  involved  on  both  sides.  The  possibility  of  remov-
ing the  conflict  only  opens  up,  when  we  become  aware  of  the  con-
ditional character  of  our  empirical  cognitions  and  thus  of  the  plastic-
ity of  the  empirical  material  with  which  knowledge  works.  The
harmony  of  the  given  and  the  demanded  is  established  by  our  investi-
gating the  given  in  the  light  of  the  theoretical  demands,  and  thus
broadening  and  deepening  its  concept.  The  constancy  of  the  ideal
forms  has  no  longer  a  purely  static,  but  also  and  especially  a  dynamic
meaning;  it  is  not  so  much  constancy  in  being,  as  rather  constancy  in
logical  use.  The  ideal  connections  spoken  of  by  logic  and  mathe-
matics are  the  permanent  lines  of  direction,  by  which  experience  is
orientated  in  its  scientific  shaping.  This  function  of  these  con-
nections is  their  permanent  and  indestructible  value,  and  is  verified
as  identical  through  all  change  in  the  accidental  material  of
experience.

The  double  form  of  the  concept.  Identity  and  diversity,  constancy
and  change  appear  from  this  side  also  as  correlative  logical  moments.
To  establish  an  absolute,  real  opposition  between  them  would  be  to
cancel  not  only  the  concept  of  being,  but  that  of  thought.  For
thought  is  not  limited  to  separating  out  the  analytically  common
element  from  a  plurality  of  elements,  as  has  been  shown  but  reveals
its  true  meaning  in  its  necessary  progress  from  one  element  to  another.
Difference  and  change  are  not  points  of  view  in  principle  "alien  to
thought,"12  but  belong  in  their  fundamental  meaning  to  the  character-
istic function  of  the  intellect  and  represent  this  function  in  its  full  scope.
If  this  correlative  double  form  of  the  concept  is  misunderstood,  then

11  For  the  concept  of  'alienation  from  thought'  (" Denkfremdheit") ,  see  Jonas
Cohn,  Voraussetzungen  u.  Ziele  des  Erkennens,  Lpz.  1908,  esp.  107  ff.


324  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

a  gap,  that  cannot  be  bridged,  must  arise  between  knowledge  and
phenomenal  reality.  We  reach  once  more  the  fundamental  view  of
Eleatic  metaphysics,  which  has  had  in  fact  an  interesting  and  signifi-
cant revival  in  modern  criticism  of  knowledge.  In  order  to  under  stand
reality  by  our  mathematico-physical  concepts,  it  is  concluded  that  we
must  destroy  it  in  its  real  nature,  i.e.,  in  its  multiplicity  and  change-
ableness.  Thought  does  not  tolerate  any  inner  heterogeneity  and
change  in  the  elements,  from  which  it  constructs  its  form  of  being.
The  manifold  physical  qualities  of  things  are  resolved  into  the  one
concept  of  the  other,  which  is  itself  nothing  else  than  the  hypos-
tatization  of  empty  space  devoid  of  qualities.  The  living  intuition
of  the  temporal  flow  of  events  is  transfixed  by  thought  into  the  per-
manence of  ultimate  constant  magnitudes.  To  explain  nature  is
thus  to  cancel  it  as  nature,  as  a  manifold  arid  changing  whole.  The
eternally  homogeneous,  motionless  "sphere  of  Parrnenides"  con-
stitutes the  ultimate  goal  to  which  all  natural  science  unconsciously
approaches.  It  is  only  owing  to  the  fact  that  reality  withstands  the
efforts  of  thought  and  sets  up  certain  limits,  that  it  cannot  transcend,
that  reality  maintains  itself  against  the  logical  leveling  of  its  content;
it  is  only  by  such  opposition  from  reality,  that  being  itself  does  not
disappear  in  the  perfection  of  knowledge.13  Paradoxical  as  this
consequence  may  seem,  it  is  nevertheless  exactly  and  consistently
deduced  from  the  assumed  explanation  of  the  intellect  and  its
peculiar  function.  But  this  explanation  requires  a  limitation.  The
identity,  toward  which  thought  progressively  tends,  is  not  the  iden-
tity of  ultimate  substantial  things,  but  the  identity  of  functional
orders  and  correlations.  These  functional  correlations,  however,
do  not  exclude  the  element  of  diversity  and  change,  but  are  deter-
mined only  in  it  and  by  it.  It  is  not  the  manifold  as  such  that  is
cancelled,  but  only  one  of  another  dimension;  the  mathematical
manifold  is  substituted  in  scientific  explanation  for  the  sensuous
manifold.  What  thought  demands  is  not  the  extinction  of  plurality
and  change  in  general,  but  its  mastery  by  the  mathematical  con-
tinuity of  serial  laws  and  serial  forms.  In  establishing  this  continuity,
thought  requires  the  standpoint  of  diversity  no  less  than  it  requires
the  standpoint  of  identity.  The  former  also  is  not  absolutely  forced
upon  it  from  without,  but  is  grounded  in  the  character  and  task  of
scientific  "reason."  When  analysis  resolves  the  given,  sensuous

11  See  E.  Meyerson,  Identitt  et  Rtalitt,  esp.  p.  229  ff.


SUBJECTIVITY  AND OBJECTIVITY OF  CONCEPTS  325

qualities  into  a  wealth  of  elementary  motions,  when  the  reality  of  the
"impression"  becomes  the  reality  of  the  "vibration,"  then  it  is
seen  that  the  path  of  investigation  does  not  merely  consist  in  going
over  from  plurality  to  unity,  from  motion  to  rest,  but  that  it  also
leads  in  the  reverse  direction,  and  that  the  setting  aside  of  the  appar-
ent constancy  and  simplicity  of  perceptual  things  is  no  less  neces-
sary. Only  by  thus  setting  aside  the  simplicity  of  the  perceptual
things  can  we  reach  the  new  meaning  of  identity  and  permanence,
which  lies  at  the  basis  of  scientific  laws.  The  complete  concept  of
thought  thus  reestablishes  the  harmony  of  being.  The  inexhaust-
ibleness  of  the  problem  of  science  is  no  sign  of  its  fundamental  insolu-
bility, but  contains  the  condition  and  stimulus  for  its  progressively
complete  solution.


CHAPTER  VIII
ON  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  RELATIONS


Logical  relations  and  the  problem  of  self -consciousness.  The  prob-
lem of  knowledge,  instead  of  leading  us  to  a  metaphysical  dualism
of  the  subjective  and  the  objective  worlds,  has  led  us  to  a  totality
of  relations,  that  contains  the  presupposition  of  the  intellectual
opposition  of  the  "subject"  and  the  "object."  Confronted  with
this  totality,  the  customary  separation  is  seen  to  be  impracticable.
This  totality  is  objective,  in  so  far  as  all  the  constancy  of  empirical
knowledge  rests  upon  it  as  well  as  the  whole  possibility  of  objective
judgment,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  can  only  be  comprehended
in  judgment  and  thus  in  the  activity  of  thought.  From  this,  it  is
evident  that  the  characterization  of  this  totality  is  subject  to  a  double
method  and  can  be  attempted  in  a  twofold  way.  What  these
relations  are  in  their  purely  logical  meaning,  can  only  be  learned  from
the  meaning  they  gain  in  the  total  system  of  science.  Each  particu-
lar proposition  is  bound  and  connected  with  another  within  this
system;  and  the  position,  that  the  proposition  thus  gains  within  the
whole  of  possible  knowledge,  indicates  the  measure  of  its  certainty.
The  question,  as  to  how  this  whole  is  realized  in  the  knowing  individ-
uals, must  be  subordinated,  as  long  as  we  are  concerned  with  under-
standing the  pure  system  of  foundations  and  deducing  it  in  its  truth.
The  development  of  science  itself  urges  us  to  leave  this  question  in
the  background.  Science  advances  from  one  objectively  valid
proposition  to  another  for  which  it  claims  the  same  form  of  validity,
without  being  diverted  from  this  path  by  psychological  considera-
tions and  psychological  doubt.  And  yet  precisely  this  independent
progress  ultimately  creates  a  new  problem  for  psychology  also.
It  is  evident,  that  in  so  far  as  psychological  analysis  proceeds  from
mere  sensuous  experience  and  seeks  to  remain  in  this  type  of  experi-
ence, it  can  in  no  way  do  justice  to  the  problems,  that  are  continually
raised  from  the  side  of  science.  The  object,  that  science  presents  to
us  as  distinct  and  certain,  requires  new  psychological  means  for  its
description.  Thus  the  general  demand  for  a  psychology  of  relations

326


ON  THE PSYCHOLOGY OF RELATIONS  327

leads  to  a  transformation  of  psychological  methods  in  general.  This
transformation  in  the  principles  of  psychology  constitutes  a  weighty
problem  of  epistemology.  It  is  clear  that  here,  as  in  other  fields,
it  is  the  type  of  conceptual  construction,  that  undergoes  a  charac-
teristic change.

Plato's  psychology  of  relations.  For  a  long  time  modern  psychology
seemed  completely  to  have  lost  sight  of  the  peculiarity  of  the  pure
relational  concepts.  Only  in  relatively  recent  times  and  by  remark-
able, round-about  ways,  has  it  begun  to  approach  them  again.  From
a  historical  point  of  view,  there  is  a  strange  anomaly  in  this;  for
what  the  modern  psychologist  may  easily  consider  the  end  of  his
science,  really  constitutes  its  historical  beginning.  The  conception
of  scientific  psychology  goes  back  historically  to  Plato.  With
Plato,  the  concept  of  the  soul  emerges  for  the  first  time  from  the  general
concept  of  nature,  and  receives  peculiar  and  independent  features.
The  soul  is  no  longer  the  mere  breath  of  life,  which  has  in  it  the
principle  of  its  preservation  and  self-movement,  but  the  soul  passes
over  from  this  general  meaning  to  that  of  self-consciousness.  This
transition,  however,  is  only  possible  owing  to  the  fact  that  Plato
has  already  made  sure  of  his  necessary  intermediate  terms,  in  pure
logic  as  well  as  in  pure  geometry  and  arithmetic.  There  is  no  path
from  mere  perception  as  such  to  the  new  concept  of  the  "self,"  that
is  to  be  established.  For  perception  seems  a  mere  part  of  the  processes
of  nature;  as  represented  by  Empedocles  and  all  the  older  philosophy
of  nature,  perception  seems  nothing  else  than  the  adjustment,  which
takes  place  between  our  body  and  the  material  things  of  its  environ-
ment. In  order  to  know  the  corporeal  things  in  perception,  the
soul  must  be  of  the  same  nature  and  constitution  as  they.  In  the
development,  which  Plato  has  given  the  proposition  of  Protagoras  in
the  Theatetus,  this  view  is  still  plainly  re-echoed.  "Subject"  and
"object"  are  related  as  two  forms  of  motion  directed  on  each  other;
these  forms  of  motion  we  can  never  separate  in  their  purity  and
independence,  but  can  only  grasp  in  their  reciprocal  determination
by  each  other.  We  always  grasp  only  the  result,  without  being  able
to  analyse  it  into  its  real  components.  To  this  view,  Plato  conforms
for  a  short  space — as  long  as  he  is  concerned  with  the  analysis  of
sensation, — but  leaves  it  behind  when  he  turns  to  the  analysis  of  the
pure  concepts.  The  image  and  analogy  of  physical  action  and  reac-
tion now  has  to  be  abandoned.  Unity  and  diversity,  equality  and


328  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

inequality  are  not  corporeal  objects,  pressing  in  upon  us  with  corpo-
real forces.  The  manner,  in  which  they  are  presented  to  the  ego,  is
fundamentally  new  and  characteristic.  The  eye  may  distinguish
the  bright  and  the  dark,  and  touch  may  distinguish  the  light  and  the
heavy,  the  warm  and  the  cold, — but  the  whole  of  knowledge  is  never
exhausted  in  the  totality  of  such  sensuous  differences.  It  is  knowl-
edge when  we  say  of  color  or  tone,  that  each  of  them  is,  that  one  of
them  is  different  from  the  other,  or  that  both  of  them  united  are  two.
But  although  being  and  non-being,  similarity  and  dissimilarity,  unity
and  plurality,  identity  and  opposition  are  objectively  necessary
elements  of  every  assertion,  they  cannot  be  represented  by  any
content  of  perception.  For  just  this  is  their  function,  that  they  go
beyond  the  particularity  of  sensuous  contents  in  order  to  establish  a
connection  between  them;  and  while  both  the  sensuous  contents
participate  in  this  connection  in  the  same  sense,  the  latter  can  be
pointed  out  directly  in  neither  of  the  two  particular  elements  as  such.
The  relation  between  the  heterogeneous  fields  of  sense-perception
could  not  be  attained,  if  there  were  no  structures  which  remained
outside  of  their  special  characters  and  thus  outside  of  their  qualita-
tive oppositions.  These  universal  elements  neither  require  nor  are
connected  with  any  special  organ ;  rather  the  soul  gains  them  purely
from  itself  in  free  construction.  The  concept  of  the  unity  of  con-
sciousness here  first  gains  a  firm  foothold  and  sure  foundation.  If
we  rest  in  the  content  of  the  particular  sensation,  nothing  is  offered
us  but  a  chaos  of  particular  experiences.  The  perceptions  are  packed
together  in  us  like  the  heroes  in  the  wooden  horse,1  but  nothing  is
found  that  refers  them  to  each  other  and  combines  them  into  an
identical  self.  The  true  concept  of  the  self  is  connected  with  the
concepts  of  the  one  and  the  many,  the  like  and  the  unlike,  being  and
non-being,  and  finds  its  true  realization  only  in  these.  When  we
comprehend  the  perceptions  under  these  concepts,  we  combine  them
into  one  idea, — whether  or  not  we  designate  this  unity  as  "soul."
The  "soul"  is  thus,  as  it  were,  conceived  and  postulated  as  the  unitary
expression  of  the  content  and  as  the  systematic  arrangement  of  pure
relational  concepts.  The  fundamental  problem  of  psychology  is
defined  with  reference  to  the  fundamental  problems  of  pure  logic  and
mathematics;  and  it  is  this  connection,  which  definitely  frees  the
Platonic  concept  of  the  soul  from  the  Orphic  speculation  and  that

1  Cf.  esp.  Theatetus,  184  C.  ff.


ON THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  RELATIONS  329

of  the  philosophy  of  nature  with  which  it  at  first  seems  closely
connected.

Aristotle's  Doctrine  of  the  Koivbv.  The  Platonic  view  is  un-
doubtedly influential  in  Aristotle's  doctrine  of  the  Koipbv;  but  already
its  center  of  gravity  has  shifted.  In  his  division  of  sense-perceptions,
Aristotle  starts  from  the  fact  that  there  is  a  particular  content  belong-
ing to  each  sense,  peculiar  to  it  alone  and  distinguishing  it  from  all
the  other  senses.  Thus  color  belongs  to  vision,  tone  as  such,  an
Ibiov  belongs  to  hearing,  while  touch  includes  indeed  a  plurality
of  qualities,  but  is  related  to  each  of  them  in  the  same  way  as  any
sense  is  related  to  its  specific  content.  But  this  sort  of  relation  does
not  suffice,  when  we  are  determining  the  psychological  correlate  of
concepts  like  motion  and  rest,  magnitude  and  number.  These
concepts  represent  something  truly  "common,"  that  reaches  beyond
all  particular  differences.  As  Aristotle  further  concludes,  a  univer-
sality of  the  receptive  organ  must  correspond  to  the  universality  of
the  object.  When,  for  example,  we  correlate  the  white  with  the
sweet  or  oppose  them  to  each  other,  it  is  necessarily  sense  itself  that
performs  this  act  of  comparison.  For  with  what  other  faculty  could
we  grasp  contents  of  purely  sensuous  nature?  But  here  sense  no
longer  functions  in  any  special  capacity,  as  mere  vision  or  mere  taste,
but  as  a  "common  sense"  in  an  inclusive  meaning.  To  this  common
sense,  all  the  individual  data  of  perception  are  referred,  to  be  collected
in  it  and  related  to  each  other.2  Thus  what  was  conceived  by  Plato
as  a  spontaneous  and  free  function  of  "consciousness  itself,"  here
appears  as  a  power  at  once  abstract  and  sensuous,  wherein  is  combined
all  in  which  the  different  types  and  fields  of  perception  agree.  This
psychological  view  of  Aristotle's  corresponds  to  his  fundamental
logical  view;  it  rests  on  the  view  of  the  "concept"  as  nothing  but  a
sum  of  sensuous  properties,  which  are  found  uniformly  in  a  plurality
of  objects.

"Thoughts  of  relation'1  in  modern  psychology.  At  first,  modern
psychology  makes  only  isolated  attempts  to  reach  a  new  interpreta-
tion of  the  problem.  Leibniz  harks  back  directly  to  Plato  when  he
urges,  that  the  contents,  which  the  traditional  doctrine  ascribes  to
the  "common  sepse"  (in  particular,  extension,  form  and  motion),
are  ideas  of  the  pure  understanding;  and  although  they  are  formed  on
the  occasion  of  sense-impressions,  can  never  be  completely  grounded

2  Cf.  especially  Aristotle,  wtyvxw  II,  6,  4lSa;  III,  2,  426b.


330  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

in  them.  In  modern  German  psychology,  it  is  Tetens  especially,
who  takes  up  this  suggestion  and  develops  it  into  a  theory  of  the  pure
"thoughts  of  relation."  But,  on  the  whole,  Locke's  schema  is
dominant  throughout;  and  according  to  it  a  concept  can  only  be
taken  as  truly  understood  and  deduced,  when  we  are  able  to  show  the
simple  sense-contents  out  of  which  it  is  compounded.  The  ideas  of
' 'reflection71  also,  although  they  seem  at  first  to  occupy  a  special
position,  are  finally  measured  by  this  standard.  They  possess
truly  positive  content  only  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  expressed  im-
mediately in  individual,  perceptually  given  presentations.  This
reliance  on  a  perceptual  criterion  appears  most  clearly  in  the  concept
of  the  infinite,  which  is  criticized  for  no  other  reason  than  because  it
is  clear  that  what  it  means  is  never  realized  in  actual  presentations,
but  subsists  merely  with  reference  to  a  possible,  unlimited  intellec-
tual progress.  Even  if,  from  the  standpoint  of  logic  and  mathe-
matics, the  general  rule  of  this  progress  constitutes  the  existence  and
truth  of  the  infinite,  nevertheless,  from  the  psychological  view,  this
rule  carries  the  stamp  of  the  merely  negative.  For  within  this
psychological  view  no  adequate  expression  has  been  discovered  for
the  validity  and  peculiarity  of  relations.  Nevertheless  the  thought  of
these  relations  constantly  returns,  no  matter  how  much  it  may  be
repressed.  Like  a  ghost  of  uncertain  nature  and  origin,  it  mixes
among  the  clear,  certain  impressions  of  perception  and  memory.
No  matter  how  much  one  may  ridicule,  with  Berkeley,  the  infinitesi-
mal magnitudes  of  mathematics  as  the  "ghosts  of  departed  quantities/'
these  ghosts  cannot  be  laid  to  rest.  Analysis  here  strikes  an  ulti-
mate remainder,  which  it  can  neither  comprehend  nor  set  aside.
The  concepts,  which  prove  effective  and  fruitful  in  actual  scientific
use,  are  never  contained  in  those  elements  that  the  psychological
view  recognizes  as  the  unique  bearers  of  "objectivity."  The  signifi-
cance of  such  scientific  concepts  rests  on  the  fact,  that  they  persis-
tently transcend  the  type  of  reality  that  is  here  taken  as  a  pattern.

The  concept  of  substance.  The  deeper  ground  of  this  conflict,
however,  rests  in  the  fact  that  psychological  criticism  has  by  no
means  freed  itself  from  the  presuppositions  it  struggles  against.
The  concept,  which  Locke  attacks  most  sharply  and  thoroughly,
is  the  concept  of  substance.  All  the  weapons  of  ridicule  are  sum-
moned against  the  assumption  of  an  independent,  separate  "some-
thing" without  properties,  which  is  assumed  to  be  the  "bearer"  of


ON THE PSYCHOLOGY OF RELATIONS  331

sensuous  qualities.  He  shows  repeatedly  that  the  real  validity  of
knowledge  is  overthrown  by  the  assumption  of  substance,  since  what
is  best  known  to  us  and  most  certain  from  the  standpoint  of  experi-
ence is  explained  by  means  of  something  entirely  without  content  and
unknown.  A  mysterious  "I  know  not  what"  is  made  the  conceptual
ground  of  all  truly  knowable  qualities  and  properties.  In  this  po-
lemic against  the  concept  of  substance,  Locke  believes  he  has  struck
the  real  kernel  of  all  metaphysics  and  of  all  scholastic  explanation  of
reality.  And  after  Hume  has  transferred  its  result  from  outer  to
inner  experience,  the  work  of  criticism  seems  ended.  The  substance
of  the  ego  seems  now  explained  away  like  the  substance  of  the  thing;
mere  associative  connections  of  presentations  take  the  place  of  both.
In  spite  of  all  this,  the  view  of  physical  and  psychical  reality,  that  is
constructed  on  these  foundations,  has  in  it  the  general  category  of
substantiality  in  its  decisive  meaning.  Only  the  applications  of  this
category  have  been  changed,  while  it  itself  retains  its  old  rank  and
position  unnoticed.  The  substantiality  of  the  "soul"  is  only  ap-
parently done  away  with;  for  it  lives  on  in  the  substantiality  of  the
sensuous  "impression."  After,  as  before,  the  conviction  prevails,
that  only  that  is  truly  "real"  and  the  ground  of  the  real,  which  stands
for  itself  alone  and  is  intelligible  purely  of  itself  as  an  isolated  exist-
ence. Here  what  is  unchanging  and  essential  in  known  reality  lies
before  us,  while  all  connections,  which  are  established  subsequently
between  the  particular  contents,  form  a  mere  addition  of  the  mind.
They  thus  only  express  an  arbitrary  tendency  of  the  imagination,
but  not  an  objective  connection  of  things  themselves.  This  result
constitutes,  as  it  were,  the  negative  proof  of  the  stability  that  the
substantialistic  view  still  possesses  in  spite  of  everything.  When
the  attempt  is  made  to  conceive  the  pure  concepts  of  connection
(in  particular  the  concepts  of  cause  and  effect)  not  as  impressions  and
copies  of  objects, — their  logical  import  disappears.  What  is  not
"impression"  is  by  that  very  fact  a  mere  fiction.  Nor  does  this
fiction  gain  any  inner  value  through  the  fact  that  it  appears  to  be
based  in  the  "nature"  of  the  mind  and  established  with  a  kind  of
universality  and  regularity  under  definite  conditions.

The  doctrine  of  the  "form-quality"  in  modern  psychology.  Modern
psychology  tried  for  a  long  time  to  avoid  the  skeptical  consequences
of  Hume's  doctrine,  without  submitting  the  premises  on  which  it
rests  to  a  thorough-going  change.  In  its  own  concepts,  there  de-


332  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

veloped  a  new  form  of  "reality,"  which  was  at  first  naively  and  con-
fidently accepted.  All  the  peculiarities  of  psychological  analysis
were  directly  taken  as  properties  of  the  psychical  object.  Thus,  there
resulted  that  self-deception  discovered  and  described  by  James  as
the  "psychologist's  fallacy."  The  means  used  to  represent  a  definite
psychical  fact  and  to  make  it  communicable  in  a  simple  way  were
taken  as  real  moments  of  this  fact  itself.  Imperceptibly,  the  stand-
point of  analysis  and  reflective  observation  took  the  place  of  the
standpoint  of  real  experience.3  A  typical  example  of  this  whole
view  is  the  doctrine  of  the  "simple"  elements,  out  of  which  each
state  of  consciousness  is  to  be  compounded.  The  ultimate  parts
which  we  can  conceptually  discriminate  become  the  absolute  atoms  out
of  which  the  being  of  the  psychical  is  constituted.  But  this  being
remains  ambiguous  in  spite  of  everything.  Properties  and  charac-
teristics constantly  appear  in  it,  that  cannot  be  explained  and  de-
duced from  the  mere  summation  of  the  particular  parts.  The
further  introspection  advances  and  the  further  it  follows  its  own
way  without  prejudice,  the  more  do  new  problems  come  to  light.
At  first  they  are  formulated  only  from  a  limited  viewpoint  and  a  special
interest.  The  questions,  which  are  combined  in  psychology  under
the  concept  of  the  form-quality,  furnish  the  first  stimulus  to  a  renewed
revision  of  the  general  concepts.  Here  it  is  shown  in  specially
striking  examples  that  not  every  spatial  or  temporal  whole,  that
experience  offers  us,  can  be  represented  as  a  simple  aggregate  of  its
particular  parts.  When  our  consciousness  follows  and  apprehends  a
simple  melody,  at  first  all  the  content  present  to  it  seems  to  consist
in  the  perception  of  the  particular  tones.  Closer  observation  shows,
however,  that  such  a  description  does  not  touch  the  real  fact.  We
can,  by  transition  into  another  kind  of  tone,  allow  all  the  individual
tones  originally  in  the  melody  to  disappear,  and  we  can  replace  them
by  others  without  ceasing  to  retain  and  to  recognize  the  melody  itself
as  a  unity.  Its  specific  character  and  properties  thus  cannot  depend
for  us  on  the  particularity  of  the  elements,  since  the  melody  remains
in  spite  of  all  change  of  this  particularity.  Two  entirely  different
complexes  of  tone-sensations  can  give  us  the  same  melody  while,  on
the  other  hand,  two  complexes  of  elements  having  the  same  content
can  lead  to  entirely  different  melodies,  in  so  far  as  these  elements  are
different  from  each  other  in  their  relative  sequence.  The  same

*  C/.  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  I,  196  ff.,  278  ff.,  etc.


ON  THE PSYCHOLOGY  OF  RELATIONS  333

thought  can  be  carried  over  from  the  unity  of  the  "tone-form"  to  the
unity  of  the  "spatial  form."  In  space,  we  call  certain  figures  "simi-
lar" to  each  other  and  conceive  them  as  identical  according  to  their
mere  geometrical  concept  even  though  they  are  built  out  of  qualita-
tively wholly  different  spatial  sensations.  This  consciousness  of
the  identity  of  wholes  that  differ  from  each  other  in  all  their  particu-
lar elements  requires,  if  not  a  special  explanation,  at  least  a  special
psychological  designation.  The  concept  of  form-quality  contains
this  designation,  though  at  first  it  only  defines  the  problem  without
giving  it  a  definite  solution.  What  connects  the  manifold  presenta-
tional contents  into  one  psychological  form,  is  not  to  be  found  in
these  contents  themselves  nor  in  their  mere  coexistence  as  an  aggre-
gate. But  a  new  function  is  found  here  embodied  in  an  independent
structure  of  definite  properties.  The  existence  of  such  a  structure
and  of  the  peculiar  increase  in  content  given  with  it  is  to  be  recog-
nized as  an  empirical  datum,  no  matter  from  what  theoretical  pre-
suppositions one  may  interpret  it.4

Such  a  theoretical  interpretation  is  already  found,  when  one
attempts  to  explain  the  unity  of  the  complex  psychical  structures,
not  from  the  mere  coexistence  of  their  parts,  but  from  the  reciprocal
action  they  exert  on  each  other.  It  is  objected  and  is  not  to  be
disputed,  that  the  melody  appears  as  an  independent  content  as
opposed  to  the  particular  tones  which  enter  into  it.  But  in  the
explanation  of  this  fact  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  introduce
entirely  new  elements  along  with  the  ordinary  elements  of  sensa-
tion and  presentation  and  as  added  to  them.  To  form  a  whole
means  psychologically  nothing  else  than  to  act  as  a  whole.  Not  only

4  Cf.  esp.  Ehrenfels,  Vber  Gestaltqualitaten,  Vierteljahrschr.  f.  vriss.  Philos.,
XIV  (1890),  p.  249  ff.,  also  Meinong,  Zur  Psychologic  der  Komplexionen  u.
Relationen,  Zeilschr.  fur  Psychologic  u.  Physiologic  der  Sinnesorgane  II  (1891),
p.  245  ff.— The  psychological  explanation  of  the  problem  of  the  "form-quali-
ties" would  doubtless  have  been  of  more  general  significance,  if  it  had  gone
into  the  corresponding  logical  problems  more  closely,  that  immediately  present
themselves  here.  As  the  psychological  examples  adduced  always  show,  the
concern  here  is  with  a  general  process  of  liberation  and  separate  consideration
of  the  relational  content,  which  is  particularly  characteristic  and  of  fundamen-
tal importance  for  wide  fields  of  mathematics.  (See  especially  Ch.  Ill,  p.
93  ff.)  The  possibility  of  retaining  a  relation  as  invariant  in  its  meaning,
while  the  members  of  the  relation  undergo  the  most  various  transformations,
is  only  illumined  and  established  from  a  new  side  in  purely  psychological
considerations.


334  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

the  parts  as  such,  but  also  their  whole  complex  always  produces
definite  effects  upon  our  feeling  and  presentations.  And  it  is  by
virtue  of  these  effects,  which  proceed  from  the  complex  and  are  thus
dependent  on  the  order  of  the  elements  within  it,  that  we  judge
concerning  the  similarity  or  dissimilarity,  the  equality  or  inequality
of  wholes.  This  explanation  seems  in  its  general  application  to
render  unnecessary  any  assumption  of  special  relational  presenta-
tions and  relational  concepts.  It  is  again  the  simple  perception,
which  decides  not  only  regarding  sensuous  properties  such  as  color
and  tone,  smell  and  taste,  but  which  also  informs  us  of  unity  and
plurality,  of  permanence  and  change,  and  of  the  temporal  sequence
and  the  temporal  persistence  of  contents.  For  all  these  determina-
tions are  distinguished  from  the  simple  sense  impressions  only  by  the
fact  that  they  are  "effects"  not  of  single  stimuli,  but  of  complexes  of
stimuli.  Just  as  a  certain  ether  vibration  produces  in  us  the  impres-
sion of  a  definite  color,  so  a  certain  composition  and  connection  of
stimuli  affecting  our  consciousness  produce  in  it  an  impression  of
similarity  or  difference,  of  change  or  permanence.  Thus,  e.g.,  when
different  tone  sensations  are  aroused  in  us  at  definite  temporal  dis-
tances from  each  other,  we  can  measure  the  length  of  the  intervening
pauses  by  each  other  and  accordingly  speak  now  of  a  more  rapid,
now  of  a  slower  succession.  No  special  intellectual  act  is  needed
for  the  "comparison"  of  temporal  intervals,  but  the  simple  assump-
tion suffices  that  a  certain  effect  issues  from  the  complex  of  rapidly
succeeding  tones,  that  is  different  from  the  effect  produced  with  a
greater  distance  between  the  tones.5  However,  if  we  follow  this
attempted  explanation  to  the  end,  we  discover  at  once  the  epistemo-
logical  circle  that  it  involves.  The  totality  of  pure  relational
thoughts  is  reduced  to  an  actual  effect  resulting  from  certain  mani-
folds, while  however  the  mere  application  of  the  standpoint  of  cause
and  effect  involves  a  special  relational  thought.  It  is  not  the  case
that  we  can  be  led  from  the  knowledge  of  certain  causal  connections
to  the  understanding  of  relational  concepts  in  general;  rather,
conversely,  what  these  concepts  mean  must  be  already  presupposed
in  order  to  be  able  to  speak  of  causal  connections  of  reality.  When

5  Schumann,  Zur  Psychologic  der  Zeitanschauung.  Ztschr.  f.  Psychol.  XVII
(1899)  p.  106  ff. — For  a  criticism  of  Schumann,  c/.  esp.  Meinong's  treatment,
Uber  Gegenstande  hoherer  Ordnung  u.  deren  Verhdltnis  zur  inneren  Wahrneh-
mung.  Ztschr.  f.  Psychol.  XXI.  (1899),  p.  236  ff.


ON THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  RELATIONS  335

the  psychological  explanation  proceeds  from  the  factual  elements
and  the  action  which  they  exert  in  the  whole  psychic  process,  it  has
already  taken  for  granted  everything  the  logical  justification  of
which  stands  in  question.  It  places  a  world  of  things,  in  which
various  objective  relations  prevail,  at  the  starting  point  of  its  con-
sideration,— while  it  had  appeared  at  first  as  if  this  whole  kind  of
reality  could  and  should  be  deduced  out  of  simple  sensations  as  the
unique  data  of  pure  experience,  without  the  assumption  of  any
other  element.  This  reversal  is  indeed  not  strange;  for  it  actually
only  reestablishes  the  order  of  problems  that  was  perverted  in  the
first  approach  to  the  problem.  What  is  truly  known  and  given
empirically  in  the  field  of  consciousness,  is  not  the  particular  elements,
which  then  compound  themselves  into  various  observable  effects,
but  it  is  rather  always  a  manifold  variously  divided  and  ordered
by  relations  of  all  sorts, — such  a  manifold  as  can  be  separated
into  particular  elements  merely  by  abstraction.  The  question  here
can  never  be  how  we  go  from  the  parts  to  the  whole,  but  how  we  go
from  the  whole  to  the  parts.  The  elements  never  "subsist"  outside
of  every  form  of  connection,  so  that  the  attempt  to  deduce  the  pos-
sible ways  of  connection  from  them  moves  in  a  circle.  Only  the  total
result  itself  is  "real"  in  the  sense  of  experience  and  of  psychological
process,  while  its  individual  components  have  only  the  value  of
hypothetical  assumptions.  Their  value  and  justification  accordingly
is  to  be  measured  by  whether  they  are  able  to  represent  and  recon-
struct in  their  combination  the  totality  of  the  phenomena.

Ebbinghaus's  physiological  account  of  relations.  Thus  within  psy-
chological investigation  itself  the  speculative  attempts  to  deny
the  peculiar  character  of  pure  relations  and  to  replace  them  by  mere
complexes  of  sensations  gradually  die  out.  The  ideal  of  conceptual
"explanation,"  that  was  here  taken  as  a  standard,  is  in  general
retained;  but  it  is  recognized  that  our  actual  experience  and  our
real  empirical  psychological  knowledge  prevent  its  realization.  Just
as  we  must  assume  certain  classes  of  simple  sensations  as  ultimate
facts  so,  it  is  now  explained,  we  must  recognize  also  as  fundamental
and  irreducible  data  of  consciousness  certain  specific  relations,  such
as  unity  and  plurality,  similarity  and  difference,  spatial  coexistence
and  temporal  duration.  "Naturally  this  does  not  mean  to  explain
things,"  a  representative  of  this  view  remarks,  "but  it  means  to
prefer  honest  poverty  to  the  appearance  of  wealth."'  One  way


336  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

seems  still  to  remain,  that  would  permit  us  to  resolve  the  conceptual
manifold  of  relations  into  the  unity  of  a  single  causal  origin.  What
is  denied  to  the  purely  psychological  type  of  consideration  here
seems  to  receive  a  physiological  explanation.  The  general  relational
determinations,  which  are  uniformly  found  with  all  sensations  regard-
less of  their  qualitative  difference,  thus  prove  to  be  a  common  con-
dition of  sensation,  for  which  a  corresponding  community  is  to  be
demanded  in  the  appropriate  physiological  processeSv  This  agree-
ment in  the  physical  foundations  of  each  perception,  no  matter  to
what  particular  field  it  may  belong,  can  easily  be  pointed  out.  At
first  the  sense  organs  and  their  appropriate  nervous  centers  appear
to  be  very  differently  built  and  differently  equipped  apparatuses;
nevertheless,  they  form  a  unity  in  so  far  as  they  are  all  built  up  out  of
the  same  material,  out  of  nervous  elements  according  to  certain
uniform  principles.  "If  external  stimuli  affect  them,  then  the
processes  called  forth  in  them  must  naturally  be  different,  in  so  far
as  the  physico-chemical  properties  of  the  stimulus  and  the  function
of  the  receiving  apparatus  adapted  to  it  are  different.  At  the  same
time,  those  processes  must  be  like  or  similar,  in  which  the  mode  of
connection  of  the  stimuli  into  a  whole  in  the  outer  world  and  the
properties  of  the  nervous  matter  within  the  sense  organ  and  the

general  principles  of  its  construction  are  the  same It

is  owing  to  the  special  character  of  the  stimulations  involved  in  seeing,
hearing  and  tasting,  that  we  sense  their  mental  effects  as  something
entirely  disparate,  as  bright,  loud,  bitter; — it  is  due  to  the  agreeing
features  of  the  same  stimulations,  that  we  are  aware  of  these  impres-
sions as  permanent  or  intermittent,  as  changing  etc.y  according  to
circumstances."  The  nervous  processes,  that  lie  at  the  basis  of  the
"intuitions"  of  space  and  time,  of  unity  and  plurality,  of  constancy
and  change,  "are  thus  found  entirely  in  the  same  processes  that  are
correlated  with  sensations;  but  they  are  not  found  in  all  features,
but  only  in  the  common  characteristics  of  these  processes,  which  as
yet  cannot  be  indicated  more  closely."7

Criticism  of  the  physiological  explanation  of  relational  concepts.  At
first  glance,  this  explanation  seems  to  operate  wholly  with  the  means
of  modern  scientific  investigation;  nevertheless  in  principle  it  leads
us  back  to  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  the  "common  sense."  It
is  true  we  have  not  a  special  organ  at  our  disposal  for  apprehending

7  Ebbinghaus,  op.  tit.,  p.  442  f.


ON THE PSYCHOLOGY OF RELATIONS  337

relations,  as  we  have  for  the  particular  sense  qualities;  but  yet  there
exists  a  sort  of  common  organ  by  which  we  take  up  into  our  con-
sciousness the  real  relations  of  outer  objects.  However,  if  this
causal  explanation  is  meant  also  to  be  a  logical  deduction  of  the
validity  of  the  relational  concepts,  then  it  would  also  involve  that
tiffrepov  irpbrtpov  in  itself,  which  we  have  previously  met.  For  in
order  to  explain  the  presentation  of  equality  or  difference,  of  identity
or  similarity,  such  an  account  must  obviously  go  back  to  similarity
or  difference  in  things,  more  specifically  in  the  peripheral  and  central
organs  of  perception.  The  concept  of  being,  assumed  at  the  outset,
already  contains  in  it  all  those  categorical  determinations  that  are
subsequently  drawn  out  of  it  in  the  course  of  the  psycho-physiological
deduction.  The  truth  of  these  determinations  has  to  be  presupposed,
although  the  manner  in  which  they  reach  the  consciousness  of  the
individual  subject  may  be  open  to  an — indeed  only  hypothetical —
explanation.  Further,  every  purely  physiological  representation  of
the  matter  must  leave  in  obscurity  the  point  that  is  above  all  in  ques-
tion. An  identity  or  community  in  the  outer  stimuli  never  suffices
to  explain  the  correlative  expression  of  these  relations  in  conscious-
ness. The  physically  like  must  be  recognized  and  judged  as  like,
the  actually  different  must  be  conceived  as  different  for  there  to  be
that  separation  of  the  general  content  from  the  particular  content  of
sensation,  which  is  here  assumed.  Thus  the  pure  conscious  func-
tions of  unity  and  difference  can  never  be  dispensed  with  or  be  re-
placed by  reference  to  the  objective  physiological  causes.  The
demand  is  that  they  be  represented  by  a  type  of  explanation  that
remains  within  the  field  of  the  psychical  phenomena  themselves,
without  going  back  to  their  hypothetical  grounds.  Thus  from  all
sides  we  are  directed  with  increasing  clarity  to  a  second  great  field
of  psychological  investigation, — a  field  that  was  at  first  neglected
and  subordinated.  In  contrast  to  the  psychology  of  sensation,
appears  the  psychology  of  thought.  Such  a  psychology  is  dominated
from  the  first  by  an  entirely  different  formulation  of  the  problem,
and  by  a  new  order  of  value  between  the  "absolute"  and  the  "rela-
tive' '  elements  of  consciousness.

ii

Meinong's  theory  of  "founded  contents.'1 The  general  problems
involved  in  the  theory  of  the  "form-qualities' '  receive  sharper  expres-


338  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

sion  in  the  transformation  which  this  doctrine  has  undergone  in  the
theory  of  "founded  contents"  (fundierten  Inhalte).  Here  it  is
clearly  shown  that  the  questions  thereby  introduced  into  psychology
do  not  tend  to  a  mere  extension  of  its  field,  but  to  an  inner  trans-
formation of  its  concept.  Two  forms  of  psychic  "objects"  are  now
definitely  opposed  to  each  other.  Over  the  simple  sensations  and
qualities  of  the  different  senses,  there  are  built  "objects  of  higher
orders."  These  latter  objects  are  borne  by  the  elementary  contents
and  require  them  as  supports,  but  cannot  be  reduced  to  them.
We  cannot,  indeed,  speak  of  equality  or  difference,  of  unity
or  plurality,  without  thinking  of  equality  or  difference,  unity  or
plurality  of  something.  But  this  something  may  vary  arbitrarily;
it  can  appear  as  color  or  tone,  as  odor  or  taste,  as  concept  or  judg-
ment,— of  all  of  which,  difference  or  unity  can  be  predicated, —
without  the  real  meaning  being  thereby  affected.  Thus  the  depend-
ence, which  seems  to  belong  to  pure  relations  in  their  actual  occur-
rence and,  as  it  were,  in  their  psychic  existence,  does  not  exclude  a
complete  independence  in  their  characteristic  meaning.  The  uni-
versally valid  relations  do  not  exist  as  temporally  or  spatially  bounded
parts  of  psychical  or  physical  reality;  but  they  "subsist"  absolutely
by  virtue  of  the  necessity  which  we  recognize  in  certain  assertions.
Whoever  represents  to  himself  four  real  objects  does  not  represent
fourness  as  a  particular  piece  of  reality  along  with  them,  although  he
claims  a  certain  objective  truth  and  validity  for  his  judgment  regard-
ing the  numerical  relation.  Thus  in  general,  in  contrast  to  the
relations  between  existences,  there  appear  pure  ideal  relations:  and
corresponding  to  this  distinction,  there  is  further  a  characteristic
opposition  in  the  value  of  the  cognitions  relating  to  these  objects.
Wherever  the  judgment  refers  to  an  object  of  actual  reality  and  is
meant  to  designate  a  particular  determination  of  it,  the  judgment  is
necessarily  limited  to  the  here  and  now,  thus  to  an  assertion  of  merely
empirical  validity.  To  this  case,  in  which  we  merely  ascribe  to  an
individual  thing  an  individual  property  known  by  experience,  there
is  opposed  the  other  case,  in  which  the  type  of  dependency  between
the  two  elements  a  and  6  is  determined  and  exactly  prescribed  by  the
"nature"  of  the  members.  Concerning  ideal  relations  of  this  sort,
judgments  are  possible  that  do  not  need  to  be  tested  by  different
successive  cases  in  order  to  be  grasped  in  their  truth,  but  which  are
recognized  once  for  all  by  insight  into  the  necessity  of  the  connection.


ON THE PSYCHOLOGY OF RELATIONS  339

Along  with  the  empirical  judgments  concerning  objects  of  experience,
there  are  thus  "a  priori"  judgments  concerning  "founded  objects."
While  the  psychic  "phenomenon/'  like  color  or  tone,  can  simply  be
established  in  its  occurrence  and  properties  as  a  fact,  there  are
judgments  connected  with  the  "metaphenomenal"  objects,  like
equaHty  and  similarity,  that  are  made  with  consciousness  of  timeless
and  necessary  validity.  In  place  of  the  mere  establishment  of  a
fact,  there  appears  the  systematic  whole  of  a  rational  connection  with
elements  that  reciprocally  demand  and  condition  each  other.8

"Objects  of  a  higher  order."  However  energetically  this  theory  may
strive  to  extend  the  field  of  psychological  problems  beyond  the  usual
limits,  it  is  still  under  the  influence  of  the  traditional  theory  of  the
concept  at  one  point.  It  starts  with  the  simple  sensational  contents
as  recognized  data  in  order  to  proceed  from  them  to  the  more  complex
structures.  The  "objects  of  a  higher  order"  cannot  be  separated
from  whatever  perceptual  elements  they  may  be  founded  in,  without
thereby  losing  all  meaning.  On  the  other  hand,  the  converse  of
this  proposition  does  not  hold;  while  the  "superius"  is  necessarily
referred  to  the  "inferi&ra"  the  latter  for  their  part  are  characterized
by  the  fact  that  they  exist  for  themselves  alone  and  rest  entirely
in  themselves.  The  relations,  which  are  built  up  over  the  perceptual
elements,  appear  as  a  subsequent  result;  their  being  or  non-being
adds  nothing  to  the  existence  of  the  elements,  and  can  neither  ground
nor  imperil  it.  Sharper  analysis,  however,  destroys  this  last  appear-
ance of  the  independence  of  the  simple.  In  place  of  a  succession,
of  a  superordination  and  subordination  of  contents,  analysis  fixes  a
relation  of  strict  correlativity.  Just  as  the  relation  requires  reference
to  the  elements,  so  the  elements  no  less  require  reference  to  a  form
of  relation,  in  which  alone  they  gain  fixed  and  constant  meaning.
Each  conceptual  assertion  regarding  an  "inferius"  considers  this
inferius  from  the  standpoint  of  some  relation,  which  we  correlate
with  the  content  in  question.  The  "foundations"  are  always  deter-
minable  and  determined  only  as  foundations  of  possible  relations.
What  deceives  us  at  first  is  the  fact,  that  all  the  relational  determina-
tions into  which  an  individual  can  enter  are  somehow  contained  in
it  but  in  no  way  actually  realized  from  the  beginning.  In  order  to

8  Cf.  more  particularly  on  the  theory  of  "founded  contents'"  and  "objects
of  higher  order' '  Meinong,  Z.  f.  Psychologie  XXI,  182  ff.;  cf.  also  Hofler,  Zur
gegenw.  Naturphilosophie,  p.  75  ff.


340  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

transform  the  "potential"  logical  import  into  "actual"  import,
there  is  needed  a  series  of  involved  intellectual  operations  and  con-
stantly renewed  conceptual  work.  But  the  possibility  of  separating
a  content  from  this  or  that  conceptual  determination,  and  of  consider-
ing it  before  this  determination,  as  it  were,  must  not  lead  us  to  divest
it  of  all  forms  of  determination  in  general.  Consciousness  as  con-
sciousness would  be  extinguished,  not  only  if  we  conceived  the  sensu-
ous phenomena,  such  as  the  colors  and  tones,  the  smells  and  tastes
to  be  removed,  but  also  if  we  conceived  the  "metaphenomenal"
objects,  such  as  plurality  and  number,  identity  and  difference  to  be
removed.  The  existence  of  consciousness  is  rooted  ^  ely  in  the
mutual  correlativity  of  the  two  elements,  and  neither  is  to  be  pre-
ferred to  the  other  as  "first"  and  original.

The  conflict  between  empiricism  and  nativism.  From  this  stand-
point, new  light  falls  on  the  old  psychological  controversy  between
"empiricism"  and  "nativism."  This  controversy  we  see  is  also  rooted
in  an  unclarified  statement  of  the  problem.  It  is  asked  whether
the  common  determinations,  which  appear  with  the  sensations  are
immediate  properties  of  the  sensations,  whether  their  unity  and
plurality,  their  spatial  arrangement,  their  longer  or  shorter  temporal
duration  are  properties  just  as  immediate  as  the  differences  of  the
sensations  themselves,  and  are  apprehended  at  the  same  time  as
sensations, — or  do  they  form  a  later  product  of  mental  comparison,
which  first  imprints  a  definite  form  on  the  unordered  perceptual
material?  In  other  words,  is  it  a  peculiar  spiritual  activity  that
leads  to  these  determinations,  or  are  they  directly  given  in  the  first
act  of  perception  implicitly  as  elements?  There  are,  however,  two
different  standpoints,  which  unnoticed  are  identified  with  each
other  in  these  questions.  The  logical  separation  of  the  moments  of
knowledge  is  replaced  by  a  temporal  separation  in  the  occurrence  of
certain  psychic  contents;  and  an  attempt  is  made  to  solve  both  of
these  completely  heterogeneous  problems  at  the  same  time  and  by
means  of  each  other.  When  it  is  shown  from  the  standpoint  of
nativism,  that  even  the  earliest  state  of  consciousness,  which  can  be
assumed  or  conceived,  exhibits  some  form  of  spatial-temporal  or
conceptual  connection,  it  is  believed  that  the  logical  value  of  the
connections  has  therewith  been  reduced  to  that  of  mere  sensation.
It  is  concluded  that  there  is  an  immediate  consciousness  of  relations
in  the  same  way  that  there  is  an  immediate  consciousness  of  colors


ON THE PSYCHOLOGY OF RELATIONS  341

or  tones.  We  apprehend  in  inner  perception,  in  mere  "feeling/'
the  meaning  of  "and/'  "but,"  "if"  and  "therefore"  just  as  truly  as  we
gain  information  by  perception  concerning  the  content  "blue"  or
"cold."  The  actus  purus  of  the  understanding  thus  proves  to  be
unnecessary,  for  everything  that  it  was  to  produce  is  in  fact  already
contained  in  the  first  data  of  perception.9  If  we  would  be  critically
just  to  this  conception,  we  must  distinguish  the  general  tendency
ruling  it  from  the  special  way  in  which  it  is  worked  out.  What  is
meant  to  be  emphasized  above  all  is  this:  that  the  element  of  order
is  related  to  the  element  of  content  in  no  temporal  relation  of  before
and  after,  of  earlier  or  later.  Only  analysis  can  discover  this  dis-
tinction in  the  originally  unitary  material  of  the  "given."  In  this
sense,  it  is  correct  that  even  the  most  elementary  psychic  state  in-
cludes the  general  elements  of  form.  The  inference,  however,  that
these  elements  therefore  belong  to  the  mere  passivity  of  perception,
is  not  thereby  justified.  On  the  contrary,  the  converse  inference
holds.  The  fact  that  there  is  no  content  of  consciousness,  which  is
not  shaped  and  arranged  in  some  manner  according  to  certain  rela-
tions proves  that  the  process  of  perception  is  not  to  be  separated  from
that  of  judgment.  It  is  by  elementary  acts  of  judgment,  that  the
particular  content  is  grasped  as  a  member  of  a  certain  order  and  is
thereby  first  fixed  in  itself.  Where  this  is  denied,  judgment  itself  is
understood  only  in  the  external  sense  of  a  comparing  activity,  which
subsequently  adds  a  new  predicate  to  a  "subject"  already  fixed  and
given.  Such  an  activity  appears  indeed  as  accidental  and  arbitrary,
in  contrast  to  the  material  with  which  it  is  connected.  Whether  or
not  such  an  activity  takes  place,  this  material  remains  what  it  is
and  retains  the  properties,  which  belong  to  it  prior  to  all  logical
activities.  In  its  real  form,  on  the  contrary,  judgment  does  not
signify  such  an  arbitrary  act,  but  is  rather  the  form  of  objective
determination  in  general,  by  which  a  particular  content  is  distin-
guished as  such  and  at  the  same  time  subordinated  systematically
to  a  manifold.  From  this  form,  we  cannot  abstract  without  thereby
losing  all  the  qualitative  differences  in  content.  Thus  it  may  be
that  when  we  consider  the  pure  temporal  relation,  relations  will  be
"found"  at  the  same  time  as  the  sensational  contents;  nevertheless  it
is  true,  that  this  very  "finding"  involves  within  itself  the  elementary
forms  of  intellectual  activity.  If  we  consider  these  forms  removed;

9  James,  The  Principles  of  Psychology  I,  244  f . ;  cf.  esp.  II,  148.


342  SUBSTANCE AND FUNCTION

all  possibility  would  thereby  disappear  of  further  application  of
the  concept  of  consciousness.  Whatever  the  content  might  be
or  mean  in  and  for  itself, — for  us,  for  the  unity  of  the  self,  it
would  not  be  present.  For  the  self  comprehends  and  constitutes
itself  only  in  some  form  of  activity.  It  is  always  with  certain  types
of  the  "apperception  of  unity/'  that  the  apprehension  of  definite
relations  between  objects  is  necessarily  connected  psychologically.10
Thus  the  inseparable  correlation  of  sensations  with  the  pure  relations,
when  its  consequences  are  consistently  traced,  implies  the  opposite
of  what  was  initially  deduced  from  it;  it  shows  not  the  passivity  of  the
ego  in  apprehending  these  thoughts,  but  conversely  the  element  of
activity,  that  belongs  to  every  process  of  perception  in  so  far  as  it
does  not  stand  for  itself  alone,  but  belongs  to  the  whole  of  conscious-
ness and  experience.  We  can,  in  fact,  attempt  to  deduce  the  rela-
tions from  sensation;  but  then  we  have  already  placed  in  sensation
determinations,  that  go  beyond  the  isolated  impression.  It  is  no
longer  the  abstract  "simple"  sensation;  but  it  rather  signifies  merely
the  initial,  still  unordered  content  of  consciousness,  to  which,  how-
ever, definite  relations  and  connections  are  always  essential,  leading
from  it  to  other  elements.

The  psychology  of  the  idea  of  space.  This  is  all  the  clearer  when  we
consider  the  special  problem,  that  has  always  been  the  center  of
discussion  between  empiricism  and  nativism.  The  fate  of  the
different  theories  is  decided  by  the  question  as  to  the  psychological
origin  and  the  psychological  meaning  of  the  idea  of  space.  If  it  is
possible  to  deduce  space  from  absolutely  non-spatial  sensations
differing  only  in  their  quality  and  intensity,  then  there  is  nothing  in
principle  to  prevent  us  from  carrying  through  the  same  explanation
for  all  the  different  types  of  relation  in  general.  However,  it  is  at
once  evident  that  the  empiristic  theory,  when  it  undertakes  to  deduce
the  origin  of  spatial  order  from  the  mere  material  of  perceptions  and
the  simple  forces  of  associative  connection,  is  obliged  to  be  untrue  to
its  own  methodic  ideal.  For  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  an
origin,  if  indeed  it  is  to  be  assumed,  cannot  be  pointed  out  in  our
actual  experience.  Each  experience,  whatever  its  properties  may
be,  reveals  some  primitive  form  of  the  "coexistence"  of  particular
elements  and  thus  the  specific  element  in  which  every  spatial  con-

10  Cf.  above  all  the  treatment  by  Th.  Lipps,  Einheiten  und  Relationen,
Sine  Skizze  zur  Psychologic  der  Apperception,  Lpz.  1902.


ON  THE PSYCHOLOGY  OP  RELATIONS  343

struction,  no  matter  how  complex,  is  originally  rooted.  If  we
attempt  to  go  behind  this  psychological  fact,  if  we  attempt  to  show
how  order  itself  arises  and  evolves  out  of  the  absolutely  unordered,
we  surrender  ourselves  to  an  hypothesis,  which  goes  beyond  the
limits  of  experience  in  two  directions.  Empirically  we  know  just  as
little  of  a  simple,  absolutely  unlocalized  perception,  as  we  know  of  a
particular  function  of  the  soul,  which  transforms  the  previously
formless  into  a  form,  on  the  basis  of  unconscious  "inferences."  How-
ever we  may  judge  of  the  methodic  value  of  such  concepts,  it  would  be
dangerous  and  misleading  to  misunderstand  them  as  an  expression
of  concrete  facts.  Here  the  criticism  of  the  "empiristic"  theories  of
space  in  modern  psychology  (especially  by  Stumpf  and  James)  is  in
the  right,  in  so  far  as  it  urges  that  mere  "association"  as  such  can
produce  no  new  psychic  content.  No  mere  repetition  and  arrange-
ment of  contents  could  give  them  spatiality,  if  spatiality  were  not
already  somehow  placed  in  them.11  But  here  again  the  temporal

11  Cf.j  e.g.,  James,  op.  cit.,  II,  270, 279,  etc. — The  effects  of  the  general  schema
of  associationistic  psychology  are  also  shown  in  its  critics,  however,  in  the  fact
that  they  can  only  affirm  the  originality  of  the  spatial  order  by  condensing  it
into  a  peculiar  and  original  content  of  perception.  Stumpf  in  particular
explains,  that  the  spatial  order  would  not  be  intelligible  without  there  being
a  positive,  absolute  content  at  its  basis.  This  content  first  gives  the  spatial
order  its  peculiar  character,  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  other  orders.
"To  distinguish  the  various  orders  from  each  other,  we  must  recognize  every-
where a  special  absolute  content  with  reference  to  which  the  order  is  found.
And  thus  space  also  is  not  a  mere  order,  but  is  precisely  what  distinguishes  the
spatial  order,  adjacency  (Nebeneinander),  from  other  orders."  (Obcr  den  psy-
chologischen  Ursprung  der  Raumvorslellung,  p.  15,  cf.  p.  275.)  Two  Different
points  of  view,  that  are  not  strictly  differentiated,  are  combined  in  this  argu-
ment. It  may  be  accepted  that  every  relation  is  the  relation  of  something,  and
therefore  presupposes  some  "foundation,"  on  which  it  is  built, — although  it
is  also  to  be  remembered  that  the  dependence  is  throughout  reciprocal,  so  that
the  "foundation"  requires  the  relation  just  as  much  as  the  latter  requires  the
"foundation."  But  this  does  not  involve  that  what  constitutes  the  peculiar
character  of  a  definite  principle  of  order  must  be  able  to  be  pointed  out  as  a
property  of  the  ordered  elements.  For  if  we  assumed  this,  we  would  finally
have  to  ascribe  to  the  content  as  many  special  "qualities"  as  there  are  ways  of
connecting  the  content  with,  and  referring  it  to,  others.  A  specific  perceptual
quality  would  be  demanded  not  only  for  spatial  order,  but  for  temporal  order
and  further  for  all  sorts  of  quantitative  or  qualitative  comparison,  liut  in
general  it  is  not  obvious  how  a  mere  difference  in  the  content  of  the  compared
elements  should  serve  to  define  and  separate  the  various  possible  types  of
relation.  If  two  orders  are  distinguished  as  orders,  some  means  of  conscious-


344  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

connection  of  the  two  factors  in  no  way  proves  their  logical  equiva-
lence. When  the  criticism  of  knowledge  distinguishes  the  spatial  and
temporal  form  from  the  content  of  sensation  and  treats  it  as  an  inde-
pendent problem,  it  does  not  require  the  conception  of  a  real  separate-
ness  of  the  two  in  some  mythical  stage  of  consciousness.  What  it
affirms  and  defends  is  merely  the  simple  thought,  that  the  judgments
based  and  constructed  on  these  forms  of  relation  have  a  characteristic
validity  of  their  own,  which  is  denied  to  mere  assertions  regarding
the  existence  of  the  sensation  given  here  and  now.  The  original
unitary  content  is  differentiated,  when  we  recognize  it  as  the  start-
ing-point of  two  different  systems  of  judgments,  which  are  separated
according  to  their  dignity.  According  to  whether  we  emphasize  the
specific  moment  of  a  particular  sensation  (the  blue  and  red,  the  rough
and  smooth,  etc.),  or  merely  consider  the  universal  relations  subsisting
between  these  particular  elements,  different  propositions  arise,
belonging  to  thoroughly  different  types  of  grounding.  Psychology,
indeed,  within  the  limits  of  its  task,  cannot  trace  and  survey  this
conceptual  division  in  its  totality,  since  psychology  merely  de-
scribes and  analyses  thought  as  a  temporal  process,  but  not  the
content  of  what  is  thought.  The  tendency  of  the  process  only
becomes  clear  in  its  final  result;  only  the  fully  developed  system
of  geometry j  constructed  according  to  unitary  rational  principles,

ness  must  be  given  by  which  the  type  of  connection  can  be  grasped  purely  as
such,  and  distinguished  from  all  others.  If  we  ascribe  to  consciousness  the
capacity  of  distinguishing  the  simple  data  of  perception  from  each  other,
it  is  not  obvious  how  we  can  deny  it  the  same  capacity  in  the  case  of  the  various
original  functions  of  order.  The  deeper  ground  of  the  difficulty  here  seems  to
lie  not  so  much  in  psychology  itself,  as  in  the  ordinary  conception  of  logic.
Logic,  in  its  traditional  form,  is  founded  on  the  thought  of  identity,  and  seeks
to  reduce  all  types  of  connection  and  inference  ultimately  to  identity.  If,
however,  identity  is  taken  as  an  expression  of  the  relational  form  in  general,
then  the  diversity  of  relations  (which  in  any  case  must  be  explained)  can  be
founded  merely  in  the  content  of  the  elements,  that  are  related  to  each  other.
The  modern  form  of  logic,  however,  has  destroyed  the  basis  of  this  view;  it
has  shown  with  increasing  distinctness  that  it  is  impossible  to  reduce  the  di-
verse forms  of  judgment  to  the  single  type  of  identity.  (For  further  particu-
lars, cf.  e.g.,  Jonas  Cohn,  Voraussetzungen  und  Ziele  des  Erkennens,  p.  85  fit.)
Just  as  we  are  here  forced  to  recognize  an  original  plurality  of  diverse  relational
syntheses  (R,  R',  R",  etc.),  that  are  not  mutually  reducible  to  each  other,  so
psychological  consideration  must  ultimately  recognize  differences  belonging
to  the  manner  and  way  of  "apperceptive  connection"  itself,  without  finding
their  expression  in  any  particular  quality  of  sensation.


ON  THE PSYCHOLOGY OP  RELATIONS  345

contains  the  definite  characterization  of  the  elements  of  space.  But
although  psychology  cannot  establish  this  characterization,  it  need
not  contradict  it  at  any  point.  Its  own  treatment  of  the  problem  of
relations  leads  it  with  inner  necessity  to  a  point  where  a  new  type  and
direction  of  consideration  begins.  The  separation  of  the  element  of
relation  from  the  element  of  content,  to  which  psychology  is  forced,
remains,  so  to  speak,  proleptical  in  it,  and  only  receives  full  illumina-
tion in  a  broader  field.

The  psychology  of  thought.  Even  the  purely  empirical-experi-
mental view  of  mental  phenomena  significantly  reveals  such  a
tendency  of  the  problem.  The  effort  more  and  more  is  to  apply  the
method  of  experiment  not  only  to  the  facts  of  sensuous  perception,
but  with  its  help  to  discover  the  complex  processes  of  conceptual
understanding  in  their  fundamental  features.12  But  in  applying  the
method  of  experiment  here,  it  becomes  constantly  clearer  that  it  is
not  the  intuitive  factual  presentations,  not  the  direct  perceptual
images,  that  bear  and  support  this  process  of  the  understanding.
The  understanding  of  the  simplest  proposition  in  its  definite  logical
and  grammatical  structure  requires,  if  it  is  to  be  apprehended  as  a
proposition,  elements,  that  are  absolutely  removed  from  intuitive
representation.  The  pictorial  presentations  of  the  concrete  objects,
of  which  the  assertion  holds,  can  vary  greatly  or  even  wholly  disap-
pear, without  the  apprehension  of  the  unitary  meaning  of  the  proposi-
tion being  endangered.  The  conceptual  connections,  in  which  this
meaning  is  rooted,  must  therefore  be  represented  for  consciousness  in
peculiar  categorical  acts  which  are  to  be  recognized  as  independent,
not  further  reducible  factors  of  every  intellectual  apprehension.
The  manner,  in  which  psychological  investigation  has  reached  this
insight,  is  indeed  noteworthy  enough;  and  it  further  signifies  the
historical  dependence  of  the  methods  and  problems  of  psychology.
"Thought"  is  not  conceived  and  observed  here  in  its  independent
activity;  but  the  attempt  is  made  to  establish  its  peculiar  character
in  the  reception  of  a  finished  content  from  without.  Accordingly,
the  new  factor  thus  gained  appears  rather  as  a  paradoxical,  incom-
pletely understood  remainder  left  by  analysis,  than  as  a  positive  and
characteristic  function.  The  criticism  of  knowledge  reverses  this
relation;  for  it,  that  problematic  "remainder"  is  what  is  really  first

12  A  neat  and  synoptical  treatment  of  this  tendency  in  psychological  investi-
gation is  given  by  Messer,  Empfindung  und  Denken,  Lpz.  1908.


346  SUBSTANCE  AND FUNCTION

and  "intelligible"  and  is  the  point  of  departure.  It  does  not  study
thought  where  thought  merely  receptively  receives  and  reproduces
the  meaning  of  an  already  finished  judgmental  connection,  but  where
it  creates  and  constructs  a  meaningful  system  of  propositions.  When
psychology  pursues  this  line  of  enquiry  and  considers  thought  equally
in  the  concrete  totality  of  its  productive  functions,  the  initial  opposi-
tion of  methods  is  more  and  more  resolved  into  a  pure  correlation.
Psychology  in  this  sense  gives  the  approach  to  problems,  which  must
seek  their  solution  in  logic  and  in  their  application  to  science.


SUPPLEMENT

EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY  CON-
SIDERED FROM  THE  EPISTEMOLOGICAL
STANDPOINT


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE

The  following  essay  does  not  claim  to  give  a  complete  account  of
the  philosophical  problems  raised  by  the  theory  of  relativity.  I
am  aware  that  the  new  problems  presented  to  the  general  criticism
of  knowledge  by  this  theory  can  only  be  solved  by  the  gradual  work
of  both  physicists  and  philosophers;  here  I  am  merely  concerned  with
beginning  this  work,  with  stimulating  discussion,  and,  where  pos-
sible, guiding  it  into  definite  methodic  paths,  in  contrast  to  the  un-
certainty of  judgment  which  still  reigns.  The  purpose  of  this  writing
will  be  attained  if  it  succeeds  in  preparing  for  a  mutual  understand-
ing between  the  philosopher  and  the  physicist  on  questions,  con-
cerning which  they  are  still  widely  separated.  That  I  was  concerned,
even  in  purely  epistemological  matters,  to  keep  myself  in  close  contact
with  scientific  physics  and  that  the  writings  of  the  leading  physicists
of  the  past  and  present  have  everywhere  essentially  helped  to  deter-
mine the  intellectual  orientation  of  the  following  investigation,  will  be
gathered  from  the  exposition.  The  bibliography,  which  follows,  how-
ever makes  no  claim  to  actual  completeness;  in  it  only  such  works  are
adduced  as  have  been  repeatedly  referred  to  and  intensively  con-
sidered in  the  course  of  the  exposition.

Albert  Einstein  read  the  above  essay  in  manuscript  and  gave  it
the  benefit  of  his  critical  comments;  I  cannot  let  it  go  out  without
expressing  my  hearty  thanks  to  him.

ERNST  CASSIRER.

University  of  Hamburg.


CHAPTER  I
CONCEPTS  OF  MEASURE  AND  CONCEPTS  OF  THINGS

"The  use,  which  we  can  make  in  philosophy,  of  mathematics/1
Kant  wrote  in  the  year  1763  in  the  Preface  of  his  Attempt  to  Introduce
the  Concept  of  Negative  Magnitudes  into  Philosophy,  "consists  either
in  the  imitation  of  its  methods  or  in  the  real  application  of  its  proposi-
tions to  the  objects  of  philosophy.  It  is  not  evident  that  the  first
has  to  date  been  of  much  use,  however  much  advantage  was  originally
promised  from  it.  The  second  use,  on  the  contrary,  has  been  so  much
the  more  advantageous  for  the  parts  of  philosophy  concerned,  which,
by  the  fact  that  they  applied  the  doctrines  of  mathematics  for  their
purposes,  have  raised  themselves  to  a  height  to  which  otherwise  they
could  make  no  claim.  These,  however,  are  only  doctrines  belonging

to the theory of nature As far as metaphysics is

concerned,  this  science,  instead  of  utilizing  a  few  of  the  concepts
or  doctrines  of  mathematics,  has  rather  often  armed  itself  against
them  and,  where  it  might  perhaps  have  borrowed  a  sure  founda-
tion for  its  considerations,  we  see  it  concerned  with  making  out
of  the  concepts  of  the  mathematician  nothing  but  fine  imaginings,
which  beyond  his  field  have  little  truth  in  them.  One  can  easily
decide  where  the  advantage  will  fall  in  the  conflict  of  two  sciences,
of  which  the  one  surpasses  all  others  in  certainty  and  clarity,  the
other  of  which,  however,  is  only  striving  to  attain  certainty  and
clarity.  Metaphysics  seeks,  e.g.,  to  discover  the  nature  of  space  and
the  supreme  ground  from  which  its  possibility  can  be  understood.
Now  nothing  can  be  more  helpful  for  this  than  if  one  can  borrow
from  somewhere  sufficiently  proved  data  to  take  as  a  basis  for  one's
consideration.  Geometry  offers  several  data,  which  concern  the
most  general  properties  of  space,  e.g.,  that  space  does  not  consist  of
simple  parts;  but  these  are  passed  by  and  one  sets  his  trust  merely
on  the  ambiguous  consciousness  of  the  concept,  which  is  conceived
in  a  wholly  abstract  fashion The  mathematical  con-
sideration of  motion  in  connection  with  knowledge  of  space  furnishes
many  data  to  guide  the  metaphysical  speculations  of  the  times  in  the
track  of  truth.  The  celebrated  Euler,  among  others,  has  given  some
opportunity  for  this,  but  it  seems  more  comfortable  to  remain  with

351


352  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

obscure  abstractions,  which  are  hard  to  test,  than  to  enter  into  con-
nection with  a  science  which  possesses  only  intelligible  and  obvious
insights/'

The  essay  of  Euler,  to  which  Kant  here  refers  the  metaphysician,
is  the  former's  Reflexions  sur  I'espace  et  le  temps,  which  appeared  in
the  year  1748  among  the  productions  of  the  Berlin  Academy  of
Science.  This  essay  sets  up  in  fact  not  only  a  program  for  the
construction  of  mechanics  but  a  general  program  for  the  epistemology
of  the  natural  sciences.  It  seeks  to  define  the  concept  of  truth  of
mathematical  physics  and  contrasts  it  with  the  concept  of  truth  of
the  metaphysician.  Materially,  however,  the  considerations  of
Euler  rest  entirely  on  the  foundations  on  which  Newton  had  erected
the  classical  system  of  mechanics.  Newton's  concepts  of  absolute
space  and  absolute  time  are  here  to  be  revealed  not  only  as  the
necessary  fundamental  concepts  of  mathematico-physical  knowl-
edge of  nature,  but  as  true  physical  realities.  To  deny  these  realities
on  philosophical,  on  general  epistemological  grounds,  means,  as
Euler  explains,  to  deprive  the  fundamental  laws  of  dynamics — above
all  the  law  of  inertia — of  any  real  physical  significance.  In  such  an
alternative,  however,  the  outcome  cannot  be  questioned :  the  philoso-
pher must  withdraw  his  suspicions  concerning  the  "possibility"  of
an  absolute  space  and  an  absolute  time  as  soon  as  the  reality  of  both
can  be  shown  to  be  an  immediate  consequence  of  the  validity  of  the
fundamental  laws  of  motion.  What  these  laws  demand,  also  "is" —
and  it  is,  it  exists  in  the  highest  sense  and  highest  degree  of  objectivity
which  is  attainable  for  our  knowledge.  For  before  the  reality  of
nature  as  it  is  represented  in  motion  and  its  empirical  laws  all  logical
doubt  must  be  silent;  it  is  the  business  of  thought  to  accept  the  exist-
ence of  motion  and  its  fundamental  rules  instead  of  attempting  to
prescribe  to  nature  itself  from  abstract  considerations  concerning
what  can  or  cannot  be  conceived.

This  demand,  however,  illuminating  as  it  appears  and  fruitful  as
the  methodic  stimulus  of  Euler  proved  in  the  development  of  the
Kantian  problem,1  becomes  problematical  when  considered  from  the
standpoint  of  modern  physics  and  epistemology.  Kant  believed
that  he  possessed  in  Newton's  fundamental  work,  in  the  Philosophiae
Natnralis  Principia  Mathematica,  a  fixed  code  of  physical  "truth"

1  For  more  detail  concerning  Euler  and  Kant's  relation  to  him,  cf.,  Erkennt-
nisproblem  (7),  II,  472  ff.,  698,  703  f.


CONCEPTS OF  MEASURE AND OF  THINGS  353

and  believed  that  he  could  definitively  ground  philosophical  knowl-
edge on  the  "factum"  of  mathematical  natural  science  as  he  here
found  it ;  but  the  relation  between  philosophy  and  exact  science  has
since  changed  fundamentally.  Ever  more  clearly,  ever  more  com-
pellingly  do  we  realize  today  that  the  Archimedean  point  on  which
Kant  supported  himself  and  from  which  he  undertook  to  raise  the  whole
system  of  knowledge,  as  if  by  a  lever,  no  longer  offers  an  uncondition-
ally fixed  basis.  The  factum  of  geometry  has  lost  its  unambiguous
definiteness;  instead  of  the  one  geometry  of  Euclid,  we  find  ourselves
facing  a  plurality  of  equally  justified  geometrical  systems,  which
all  claim  for  themselves  the  same  intellectual  necessity,  and  which,
as  the  example  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity  seems  to  show,  can
rival  the  system  of  classical  geometry  in  their  applications,  in  their
fruitfulness  for  physics.  And  the  system  of  classical  mechanics
has  undergone  an  even  greater  transformation,  since  in  modern
physics  the  "mechanical"  view  of  the  world  has  been  more  and  more
superseded  and  replaced  by  the  electro-dynamic  view.  The  laws,
which  Newton  and  Euler  regarded  as  the  wholly  assured  and  im-
pregnable possession  of  physical  knowledge,  those  laws  in  which  they
believed  to  be  defined  the  concept  of  the  corporeal  world,  of  matter
and  motion,  in  short,  of  nature  itself,  appear  to  us  today  to  be  only
abstractions  by  which,  at  most,  we  can  master  a  certain  region,  a
definitely  limited  part  of  being,  and  describe  it  theoretically  in  a
first  approximation.  And  if  we  turn  to  contemporary  physics  with
the  old  philosophical  question  as  to  the  "essence"  of  space  and  tune,
we  receive  from  it  precisely  the  opposite  answer  to  that  which  Euler
gave  the  question  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago.  Newton's  con-
cepts of  absolute  space  and  absolute  time  may  still  count  many
adherents  among  the  "philosophers,"  but  they  seem  definitively
removed  from  the  methodic  and  empirical  foundations  of  physics.
The  general  theory  of  relativity  seems  herein  to  be  only  the  ultimate
consequence  of  an  intellectual  movement,  which  receives  its  decisive
motives  equally  from  epistemological  and  physical  considerations.

The  working  together  of  the  two  points  of  view  has  always  come
to  light  with  special  distinctness  at  the  decisive  turning  points  in  the
evolution  of  theoretical  physics.  A  glance  at  the  history  of  physics
shows  that  precisely  its  most  weighty  and  fundamental  achievements
stand  in  closest  connection  with  considerations  of  a  general  episte-
mological nature.  Galileo's  Dialogues  on  the  Two  Systems  of  the


354  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

World  are  filled  with  such  considerations  and  his  Aristotelian  oppo-
nents could  urge  against  Galilei  that  he  had  devoted  more  years
to  the  study  of  philosophy  than  months  to  the  study  of  physics.
Kepler  lays  the  foundation  for  his  work  on  the  motion  of
Mars  and  for  his  chief  work  on  the  harmony  of  the  world  in
his  Apology  for  Tycho,  in  which  he  gives  a  complete  methodo-
logical account  of  hypotheses  and  their  various  fundamental  forms;
an  account  by  which  he  really  created  the  modern  concept  of  physical
theory  and  gave  it  a  definite  concrete  content.  Newton  also,  in  the
midst  of  his  considerations  on  the  structure  of  the  world,  comes  back
to  the  most  general  norms  of  physical  knowledge,  to  the  regulae
philosophandi.  In  more  recent  times,  Helmholtz  introduces  his
work,  Uber  der  Erhaltung  der  Kraft  (1847),  with  a  consideration  of
the  causal  principle  as  the  universal  presupposition  of  all  "compre-
hensibility  of  nature,"  and  Heinrich  Hertz  expressly  asserts  in  the
preface  of  his  Prinzipien  der  Mechanik  (1894),  that  what  is  new  in
the  work  and  what  alone  he  values  is  "the  order  and  arrangement  of
the  whole,  thus  the  logical,  or,  if  one  will,  the  philosophical  side  of
the  subject."2  But  all  these  great  historical  examples  of  the  real
inner  connection  between  epistemological  problems  and  physical
problems  are  almost  outdone  by  the  way  in  which  this  connection
has  been  verified  in  the  foundation  of  the  theory  of  relativity.  Ein-
stein himself- — especially  in  the  transition  from  the  special  to  the
general  theory  of  relativity — appeals  primarily  to  an  epistemological
motive,  to  which  he  grants,  along  with  the  purely  empirical  and
physical  grounds,  a  decisive  significance.3  And  even  the  special
theory  of  relativity  is  such  that  its  advantage  over  other  explana-
tions, such  as  Lorentz's  hypothesis  of  contraction,  is  based  not  so
much  on  its  empirical  material  as  on  its  pure  logical  form,  not  so
much  on  its  physical  as  on  its  general  systematic  value.4  In  this
connection  the  comparison  holds  which  Planck  has  drawn  between
the  theory  of  relativity  and  the  Copernican  cosmological  reform.5
The  Copernican  view  could  point,  when  it  appeared,  to  no  single  new
"fact"  by  which  it  was  absolutely  demanded  to  the  exclusion  of  all
earlier  astronomical  explanations,  but  its  value  and  real  cogency

4  Cf.  Helmholtz  (29,  p.  4) ;  H.  Hertz  (31,  p.  XXVII).

5  Cf.  Einstein  (17,  p.  8).
4  See  below,  Sect.,  II.
*Cf.  Planck  (68),  p.  117  f.


CONCEPTS  OF  MEASURE  AND OF  THINGS  355

lay  in  the  fundamental  and  systematic  clarity,  which  it  spread  over
the  whole  of  the  knowledge  of  nature.  In  the  same  way,  the  theory
of  relativity,  taking  s-3  start  in  a  criticism  of  the  concept  of  time,
extends  into  the  field  of  epistemological  problems,  not  merely  in  its
applications  and  consequences,  but  from  its  very  beginning.  That
the  sciences,  in  particular,  mathematics  and  the  exact  natural  sciences
furnish  the  criticism  of  knowledge  with  its  essential  material  is
scarcely  questioned  after  Kant;  but  here  this  material  is  offered  to
philosophy  in  a  form,  which,  even  of  itself,  involves  a  certain  episte-
mological interpretation  and  treatment.

Thus,  the  theory  of  relativity,  as  opposed  to  the  classical  system
of  mechanics,  offers  a  new  scientific  problem  by  which  the  critical
philosophy  must  be  tested  anew.  If  Kant — as  Hermann  Cohen's,
works  on  Kant  urged  repeatedly — and  proved  from  all  angles —
intended  to  be  the  philosophical  systematizer  of  the  Newtonian
natural  science,  is  not  his  doctrine  necessarily  entangled  in  the  fate
of  the  Newtonian  physics,  and  must  not  all  changes  in  the  latter
react  directly  on  the  form  of  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  critical
philosophy?  Or  do  the  doctrines  of  the  Transcendental  Aesthetic
offer  a  foundation,  which  is  broad  enough  and  strong  enough  to  bear,
along  with  the  structure  of  the  Newtonian  mechanics,  also  that  of
modern  physics?  The  future  development  of  the  criticism  of
knowledge  will  depend  on  the  answer  to  these  questions.  If  it  is
shown  that  the  modern  physical  views  of  space  and  time  lead  in  the
end  as  far  beyond  Kant  as  they  do  beyond  Newton,  then  the  time
would  have  come  when,  on  the  basis  of  Kant's  presuppositions,
we  would  have  to  advance  beyond  Kant.  For  the  purpose  of  the
Critique  of  Pure  Reason  was  not  to  ground  philosophical  knowledge
once  for  all  in  a  fixed  dogmatic  system  of  concepts,  but  to  open  up
for  it  the  "continuous  development  of  a  science"  in  which  there  can
be  only  relative,  not  absolute,  stopping  points.

Epistemology,  however,  closely  as  its  own  fate  is  connected  v.ith
the  progress  of  exact  science,  must  face  the  problems  which  are
presented  to  it  by  the  latter,  with  complete  methodic  independence.
It  stands  to  physics  in  precisely  the  relation,  in  which,  according  to
the  Kantian  account,  the  "understanding"  stands  to  experience  and
nature:  it  must  approach  nature  "in  order  to  be  taught  by  it:  but
not  in  the  character  of  a  pupil,  who  agrees  to  everything  the  master
likes,  but  as  an  appointed  judge,  who  compels  the  witnesses  to  answer


356  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

the  questions  which  he  himself  proposes."  Each  answer,  which
physics  imparts  concerning  the  character  and  the  peculiar  nature  of
its  fundamental  concepts,  assumes  inevitably  for  epistemology  the
form  of  a  question.  When,  for  example,  Einstein  gives  as  the  essen-
tial result  of  his  theory  that  by  it  "the  last  remainder  of  physical
objectivity"  is  taken  from  space  and  time  (17,  p.  13),  this  answer  of
the  physicist  contains  for  the  episternologist  the  precise  formulation
of  his  real  problem.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  the  physical
objectivity,  which  is  here  denied  to  the  concepts  of  space  and  time?
To  the  physicist  physical  objectivity  may  appear  as  a  fixed  and  sure
starting-point  arid  as  an  entirely  definite  standard  of  comparison;
epistemology  must  ask  that  its  meaning,  that  what  is  to  be  expressed
by  it,  be  exactly  defined.  For  epistemological  reflection  leads  us
Everywhere  to  the  insight  that  what  the  various  sciences  call  the
"object"  is  nothing  given  in  itself,  fixed  once  for  all,  but  that  it  is
first  determined  by  some  standpoint  of  knowledge.  According  to
the  changes  of  this  ideal  standpoint,  there  arise  for  thought  various
classes  and  various  systems  of  objects.  It  is  thus  always  necessary
to  recognize,  in  what  the  individual  sciences  offer  us  as  their  objects
and  "things,"  the  specific  logical  conditions  on  the  ground  of  which
they  were  established.  Each  science  has  its  object  only  by  the  fact
that  it  selects  it  from  the  uniform  mass  of  the  given  by  certain  formal
concepts,  which  are  peculiar  to  it.  The  object  of  mathematics  is
different  from  that  of  mechanics,  the  object  of  abstract  mechanics
different  from  that  of  physics,  etc.,  because  there  are  contained  in  all
these  sciences  different  questions  of  knowledge,  different  ways  of
referring  the  manifold  to  the  unity  of  a  concept  and  ordering  and
mastering  the  manifold  by  it.  Thus  the  content  of  each  particular
field  of  knowledge  is  determined  by  the  characteristic  form  of  judg-
ment and  question  from  which  knowledge  proceeds.  In  the  form  of
judgment  and  question  the  particular  special  axioms,  by  which  the
sciences  are  distinguished  from  each  other,  are  first  defined.  If  we
attempt  to  gain  a  definite  explanation  of  the  concept  of  "physical
objectivity"  from  this  standpoint,  we  are  first  led  to  a  negative
feature.  Whatever  this  objectivity  may  mean,  in  no  case  can  it
coincide  with  what  the  naive  view  of  the  world  is  accustomed  to
regard  as  the  reality  of  things,  as  the  reality  of  objects  of  sensuous
perception.  For  the  objects,  of  which  scientific  physics  treats  and
for  which  it  establishes  its  laws,  are  distinguished  from  this  reality


CONCEPTS OF  MEASURE AND OF  THINGS  357

by  their  general  fundamental  form.  That  concepts,  such  as  those  of
mass  and  force,  the  atom  or  the  ether,  the  magnetic  or  electrical
potential,  even  concepts,  like  those  of  pressure  or  of  temperature,  are
no  simple  thing-concepts,  no  copies  of  particular  contents  given  in
perception:  this  scarcely  needs  any  further  explanation,  after  all
that  the  epistemology  of  physics  itself  has  established  concerning  the
meaning  and  origin  of  these  concepts.  What  we  possess  in  them  are
obviously  not  reproductions  of  simple  things  or  sensations,  but  the-
oretical assumptions  and  constructions,  which  are  intended  to  trans-
form the  merely  sensible  into  something  measurable,  and  thus  into  an
"object  of  physics/7  that  is,  into  an  object  for  physics.  Planck's
neat  formulation  of  the  physical  criterion  of  objectivity,  that  every-
thing that  can  be  measured  exists,  may  appear  completely  sufficient
from  the  standpoint  of  physics;  from  the  standpoint  of  epistemology,
it  involves  the  problem  of  discovering  the  fundamental  conditions
of  this  measurability  and  of  developing  them  in  systematic  complete-
ness. For  any,  even  the  simplest,  measurement  must  rest  on  certain
theoretical  presuppositions  on  certain  "principles,"  "hypotheses,"  or
"axioms,"  which  it  does  not  take  from  the  world  of  sense,  but  which
it  brings  to  this  world  as  postulates  of  thought.  In  this  sense,  the
reality  of  the  physicist  stands  over  against  the  reality  of  immediate
perception  as  something  through  and  through  mediated;  as  a  system,
not  of  existing  things  or  properties,  but  of  abstract  intellectual  sym-
bols, which  serve  to  express  certain  relations  of  magnitude  and  meas-
ure, certain  functional  coordinations  and  dependencies  of  phenomena.
If  we  start  from  this  general  insight,  which  within  physics  itself  has
been  made  very  clear,  especially  by  Duhem's  analysis  of  the  physical
construction  of  concepts,  the  problem  of  the  theory  of  relativity
gains  its  full  logical  definiteness.  That  physical  objectivity  is  denied
to  space  and  time  by  this  theory  must,  as  is  now  seen,  mean  some-
thing else  and  something  deeper  than  the  knowledge  that  the  two  are
not  things  in  the  sense  of  "naive  realism."  For  things  of  this  sort,
we  must  have  left  behind  us  at  the  threshold  of  exact  scientific
physics,  in  the  formulation  of  its  first  judgments  and  propositions.
The  property  of  not  being  thing-concepts,  but  pure  concepts  of
measurement,  space  and  time  share  with  all  other  genuine  physical
concepts;  if,  in  contrast  to  these,  space  and  time  are  also  to  have  a
special  logical  position,  it  must  be  shown  that  they  are  removed  in
the  same  direction  as  these,  a  step  further  from  the  ordinary  thing-


358  EINSTEIN'S  THEOBY  OF  RELATIVITY

concepts,  and  that  they  thus  represent,  to  a  certain  extent,  concepts
and  forms  of  measurement  of  an  order  higher  than  the  first  order.

The  fact  appears  even  in  the  first  considerations,  from  which  the
theory  of  relativity  starts,  that  the  physicist  does  not  have  only  to
hold  in  mind  the  measured  object  itself,  but  also  always  the  particular
conditions  of  measurement.  The  theory  distinguishes  between
physical  determinations  and  judgments,  which  result  from  measure-
ment from  resting  and  moving  systems  of  reference,  and  it  emphasizes
the  fact  that  before  determinations,  which  have  been  gained  from
diverse  systems  of  reference,  can  be  compared  with  each  other,  a
universal  methodic  principle  of  transformation  and  permutation
must  be  given.  To  each  objective  measurement,  there  must  be
added  a  certain  subjective  index,  which  makes  known  its  particular
conditions  and  only  when  this  has  taken  place  can  it  be  used  along
with  others  in  the  scientific  construction  of  the  total  picture  of  reality,
in  the  determination  of  the  laws  of  nature,  and  be  combined  with
these  others  into  a  unitary  result.  What  is  gained  by  this  reflection
on  the  conditions  of  physical  measurement  in  a  pure  epistemological
regard  appears  as  soon  as  one  remembers  the  conflicts,  which  have
resulted  from  the  lack  of  thus  reflection  in  the  course  of  thfc  history
of  philosophy  and  of  exact  science.  It  seems  almost  the  unavoidable
fate  of  the  scientific  approach  to  the  world  that  each  new  and  fruit-
ful concept  of  measurement,  which  it  gains  and  establishes,  should  be
transformed  at  once  into  a  thing-concept.  Ever  does  it  believe  that
the  truth  and  the  meaning  of  the  physical  concepts  of  magnitude
are  assured  only  when  it  permits  certain  absolute  realities  to  corre-
spond to  them.  Each  creative  epoch  of  physics  discovers  and  formu-
lates new  characteristic  measures  for  the  totality  of  being  and  natural
process,  but  each  stands  in  danger  of  taking  these  preliminary  and
relative  measures,  these  temporarily  ultimate  intellectual  instruments
of  measurement,  as  definitive  expressions  of  the  ontologically  real.
The  history  of  the  concept  of  matter,  of  the  atom,  of  the  concepts  of
the  ether  and  of  energy  offer  the  typical  proof  and  examples  of  this.
All  materialism — and  there  is  a  materialism  not  only  of  "matter"
but  also  of  force,  of  energy,  of  the  ether,  etc., — goes  back  from  the
standpoint  of  epistemology,  to  this  one  motive.  The  ultimate
constants  of  physical  calculation  are  not  only  taken  as  real,  but  they
are  ultimately  raised  to  the  rank  of  that  which  is  alone  real.  The
development  of  idealistic  philosophy  itself  is  not  able  to  escape  this


CONCEPTS  OP  MEASURE  AND OF  THINGS  359

tendency.  Descartes  as  an  idealistic  mathematician  was  at  the
same  time  the  founder  of  the  "mechanical  view  of  the  world."  Since
only  extension  offers  us  exact  and  distinct  concepts  and  since  all
clearly  comprehended  truth  is  also  the  truth  of  the  existing,  it  follows,
in  his  view,  that  mathematics  and  nature,  the  system  of  measure-
ments and  the  totality  of  material  existence,  must  be  identified.
The  manner,  in  which  the  same  step  from  the  logico-mathematical
to  the  ontological  concept  has  been  repeated  in  the  development  of
modern  energetics,  is  known.  Here,  after  energy  has  been  discovered
as  a  fundamental  measure,  as  a  measure  which  is  not  limited  to  the
phenomena  of  motion,  but  spans  equally  all  physical  fields,  it  was
made  into  an  all-inclusive  substance,  which  rivalled  "matter"  and
finally  took  it  up  into  itself  completely.  But  on  the  whole,  we  are
here  concerned  with  a  metaphysical  by-way,  which  has  not  seduced
science  itself  from  its  sure  methodic  course.  For  the  concept  of
energy  belongs  in  conception  to  that  general  direction  of  physical
thought,  which  has  been  called  the  "physics  of  principles"  in  con-
trast to  the  physics  of  pictures  and  mechanical  models.  A  "prin-
ciple," however,  is  never  directly  related  to  things  and  relations  of
things,  but  is  meant  to  establish  a  general  rule  for  complex  functional
dependencies  and  their  reciprocal  connection.  This  rule  proves  to
be  the  really  permanent  and  substantial:  the  epistemological,  as
well  as  the  physical,  value  of  energetics  is  not  founded  on  a  new
pictorial  representation  to  be  substituted  for  the  old  concepts  of
"matter"  and  "force"  but  on  the  gaining  of  equivalence-numbers,  such
as  were  expressly  demanded  and  discovered  by  Robert  Mayer  as  the
"foundation  of  exact  investigation  of  nature."  (Cf.  52,  p.  145.  237  ff.)
Even  in  these  two  examples  we  can  learn  that  through  the  whole
history  of  physics  there  is  a  certain  intellectual  movement,  which
throughout  runs  parallel  to  the  movement  in  epistemology  that
mediates  and  passes  to  and  from  between  the  "subject"  and  the
"object"  of  knowledge.  Physical  thought  is  always  concerned  at
first  with  establishing  a  characteristic  standard  of  measurement  in
an  objective  physical  concept,  in  a  certain  natural  constant.  Then
it  is  concerned,  in  the  further  development,  with  understanding  more
and  more  clearly  the  constructive  element  that  is  contained  in  any
such  original  constant,  and  with  becoming  conscious  of  its  own
conditionality.  For,  whatever  particular  properties  they  may  have,
no  constants  are  immediately  given,  but  all  must  be  conceived  and


360  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

sought  before  they  can  be  found  in  experience.  One  of  the  most
pregnant  examples  of  this  is  found  in  the  history  of  the  concept  of
the  atom.  The  atoms  were  postulated  by  Democritus  as  ultimate
constants  of  nature  long  before  thought  possessed  any  means  of
concretely  realizing  this  postulate.  Fundamentally,  such  a  realiza-
tion, such  a  strictly  quantitative  meaning  of  the  concept  of  the  atom,
was  only  reached  in  the  beginnings  of  modern  chemistry  in  the  law
of  multiple  proportion.  To  the  extent,  however,  that  we  add,  to  this
particular  realization  of  the  concept  of  the  atom  in  the  law  of  mul-
tiple proportion,  others  and  still  others  and  the  concept  of  the  atom
finally  comes  to  characterize  and  to  organize  intellectually  the  most
diverse  fields,  its  character  as  a  pure  principle,  which  was  originally
fused  with  its  thing-character,  comes  to  light.  The  content  of  the
idea  of  the  atom  changes  and  shifts  from  place  to  place  in  the  course
of  the  development  of  physics  and  chemistry,  but  the  function  of  the
atom  as  the  temporarily  ultimate  unit  of  measurement  remains.
When  we  pass  from  the  consideration  of  "ponderable"  matter  to
the  consideration  of  the  ether,  when  we  seek  a  unity,  which  compre-
hends not  only  the  mechanical  but  also  the  optical  and  electrical
phenomena,  the  atom  of  matter  becomes  the  atom  of  electricity,
the  electron.  In  recent  physics,  there  appears  further,  with  Planck's
Quanta  Theory  the  thought  of  an  atomistic  structure  not  only  of
matter  but  of  energy.  It  would  be  in  vain  were  one  to  attempt
to  combine  all  these  various  applications  of  the  concept  of  the
atom  in  chemistry,  in  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  and  in  the  doctrine
of  light  and  heat  radiation,  etc.,  into  a  unitary  picture.  But  the
unity  of  its  meaning  requires  no  such  pictorial  unity;  it  is  satisfied,
indeed  verified  in  a  far  stricter  logical  sense,  when  it  is  shown  that
here  a  common  relation,  a  peculiar  "form"  of  connection,  prevails,
which  as  such  can  be  verified  and  represented  in  the  most  diverse
contents.  The  atom  shows  itself  thereby  to  be,  not  an  absolute
minimum  of  being,  but  a  relative  minimum  of  measure.  It  was  one
of  the  founders  of  modern  philosophy,  Nicholas  Cusanus,  who,
with  true  speculative  profundity,  anticipated  and  announced  this  as
the  function  of  the  concept  of  the  atom,  which  was  to  be  actually
realized  only  in  the  history  of  natural  science.  Cusanus'  fundamental
doctrine  of  the  infinite  and  of  the  unity  of  opposites  in  the  infinite
rested  entirely  on  this  insight  into  the  relativity  in  principle  of  all
determinations  of  magnitude,  on  the  coincidence  of  the  "greatest"


CONCEPTS OF  MEASXJKE  AND OF  THINGS  361

and  the  "smallest."  (Cf.  7,  I,  40  ff,  265  ff.)  Modern  criticism  ot
knowledge  brings  the  riddle,  with  which  Cusanus'  doctrine  of  the
minimum  struggles,  to  a  simple  expression.  Contradiction  only
enters  when  we  attempt  to  unify  after  the  fashion  of  a  thing  all  the
different  forms,  which  the  thought  of  the  "smallest"  assumes,  in  the
different  fields  of  thought;  but  it  disappears  as  soon  as  we  reflect
that  the  true  unity  is  never  to  be  sought  in  things  as  such,  but  in
intellectual  constructions,  which  we  choose  according  to  the  peculiar-
ity of  the  field  to  be  measured,  and  which  are  thus  in  principle  pos-
sessed of  an  unlimited  variability.  It  follows  from  this  that,  as
what  is  to  be  measured  is  unlimited  in  variety,  so  what  measures  can  be
represented  in  infinitely  many  and  infinitely  diverse  ways.  In  other
words,  the  unity  that  we  have  to  seek  lies  neither  in  the  one  nor  the
other  member,  but  merely  in  the  form  of  their  reciprocal  connection,
i.e.,  in  the  logical  conditions  of  the  operation  of  measurement  itself.

This  receives  new  confirmation  when  we  pass  from  the  concept  of
matter,  of  energy  and  of  the  atom  to  the  real  concept  of  objectivity
of  modern  physics,  that  of  motion.  The  historical  beginnings  of  the
modern  theory  of  motion  in  Galileo  refer  directly  to  the  epistemologi-
cal  question,  which  has  received  its  definitive  formulation  in  the
general  theory  of  relativity.  What  Galileo  gained  with  his  idea  of
relativity  was  the  cancelling  of  the  absolute  reality  of  place,  and  this
first  step  involved  for  him  the  most  weighty  logical  consequences,
viz.,  the  new  concept  of  the  lawfulness  of  nature  and  the  new  inter-
pretation of  the  particular  laws  of  dynamics.  Galileo's  doctrine  of
motion  is  rooted  in  nothing  less  and  nothing  more  than  in  the  choice  of
a  new  standpoint  from  which  to  estimate  and  measure  the  phenomena
of  motion  in  the  universe.  By  this  choice,  there  was  given  him  a&
once  the  law  of  inertia  and  in  it  the  real  foundation  of  the  new  view  ot
nature.  The  ancient  view  saw  in  place  a  certain  physical  property
that  produced  definite  physical  effects.  The  "here"  and  "there,"
the  "above"  and  "below,"  were  for  it  no  mere  relations;  but  the
particular  point  of  space  was  taken  as  an  independent  real,  which
consequently  was  provided  with  particular  forces.  In  the  striving
of  bodies  to  their  "natural  places,"  in  the  pressure  of  air  and  fire
upwards  and  in  the  sinking  of  heavy  masses  downwards,  these  forces
seemed  given  as  immediate  empirical  realities.  Only  when  one  takes
account  of  these  fundamental  features,  not  only  of  ancient  astron-
omy and  cosmology,  but  also  of  ancient  physics,  does  one  under-


362  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

stand  the  boldness  of  the  new  intellectual  orientation,  resulting
from  the  Copernican  system  of  the  world.  One  of  the  most  fixed  and
certain  realities  on  which  Grecian  thought  had  constructed  its  picture
of  the  world  now  became  a  mere  illusion,  a  purely  "subjective"  fea-
ture. Kven  the  first  adherents  of  the  new  doctrine  drew  the  decisive
conclusion  with  reference  to  the  doctrine  of  place.  What  Gilbert,
e.g.,  urges  against  the  Aristotelian  physics  and  cosmology  is  above
all  this  cpistemological  feature,  i.e.,  that  it  confuses  the  ideal
and  the  real.  Differences  belonging  merely  to  our  thought,  to
our  subjective  reflection,  are  throughout  made  into  objective
oppositions.  But  in  truth,  no  place  in  itself  is  opposed  to  any
other,  but  there  are  in  nature  only  differences  in  the  mutual  posi-
tions of  bodies  and  of  material  masses.  "It  is  not  place  which,
in  the  nature  of  things,  works  and  produces,  which  determines  the
rest  and  motion  of  bodies.  For  it  is  in  itself  neither  a  being  nor  an
effective  cause;  rather  bodies  determine  their  mutual  place  and  posi-
tion by  virtue  of  the  forces  which  are  immanent  in  them.  The
place  is  a  nothing;  it  does  not  exist  and  exerts  no  force,  but  all  natural
power  is  contained  and  grounded  in  bodies  themselves."  (7,  I,
360  f.)  It  is  implied  in  this  that  what  we  call  the  "true  place"  is
never  given  to  us  as  an  immediate  sensuous  property,  but  must  be
discovered  on  the  basis  of  calculation  and  of  the  "arithmetic  of
forces"  in  the  universe.  All  determination  of  place — as  Kepler
sharply  and  clearly  expresses  this  insight  which  for  him  resulted
equally  from  astronomical  convictions,  physiological  optics  and
analysis  of  the  general  problem  of  perception — is  a  work  of  the  mind:
omnis  locatio  mentis  est  opus.  (37,  II,  55,  cf.  7,  1,  339.)  From  this
point  the  way  is  open  to  Galileo's  foundation  of  dynami  csifor  since
place  has  ceased  to  be  something  real,  the  question  as  to  the  ground
of  the  place  of  a  body  and  the  ground  of  its  persistence  in  one  and
the  same  place  disappears.  Objective  physical  reality  passes  from
place  to  change  of  place,  to  motion  and  the  factors  by  which  it  is
determined  as  a  magnitude.  If  such  a  determination  is  to  be  possible
in  a  definite  way,  the  identity  and  permanence,  which  were  hitherto
ascribed  to  mere  place,  must  go  over  to  motion;  motion  must  possess
"being,"  that  is,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  physicist,  numerical
constancy.  This  demand  for  the  numerical  constancy  of  motion  itself
finds  its  expression  and  its  realization  in  the  law  of  inertia.  W;
recognize  here  again  how  closely,  in  Galileo,  the  mathematical  motive


CONCEPTS OF MEASURE AND OF  THINGS  363

of  his  thought  was  connected  with  an  ontological  motive,  how  his
conception  of  being  interacted  with  his  conception  of  measure.
The  new  measure,  which  is  found  in  inertia  and  in  the  concept  of
uniform  acceleration,  involves  also  a  new  determination  of  reality.
In  contrast  with  mere  place,  which  is  infinitely  ambiguous  and  differs
according  to  the -choice  of  the  system  of  reference,  the  inertial  move-
ment appears  to  be  a  truly  intrinsic  property  of  bodies,  which  belongs
to  them  "in  themselves"  and  without  reference  to  a  definite  system  of
comparison  and  measurement.  The  velocity  of  a  material  system  is
more  than  a  mere  factor  for  calculation;  it  not  only  really  belongs  to
the  system  but  defines  its  reality  since  it  determines  its  vis  viva,
i.e.,  the  measure  of  its  dynamic  effectiveness.  In  its  measure  of
motion,  in  the  differential  quotient  of  the  space  by  the  time,  Galileo's
physics  claims  to  have  reached  the  kernel  of  all  physical  being,  to
have  defined  the  intensive  reality  of  motion.  By  this  reality,  the
dynamic  consideration  is  distinguished  from  the  merely  phoronomic.
The  concept  of  the  "state  of  motion,"  not  as  a  mere  comparative
magnitude,  but  as  an  essential  element  belonging  to  the  moving
system  intrinsically,  now  becomes  the  real  mark  and  characteristic
of  physical  reality.  Leibniz,  too,  in  his  foundation  of  dynamics,
stands  throughout  at  this  standpoint,  which  becomes  for  him  a
starting-point  for  a  new  metaphysics  of  forces.  Motion  conceived  as
a  mere  change  of  place  in  the  purely  phoronomical  sense,  he  explains,
remains  always  something  purely  relative;  it  only  becomes  an  expres-
sion of  a  true  physical  and  metaphysical  reality  when  we  add  to  it  an
inner  dynamic  principle,  a  force  conceived  as  an  "originally  implanted
principle  of  permanence  and  change,"  principium  mutationis  et
perseverantiae.  (42,  VI,  100  cf.  5,  p.  290  ff.)  In  all  these  examples,
it  is  evident  how  sharply,  on  the  one  hand  the  physical  thought  of
modern  times  has  grasped  the  thought  of  the  relativity  of  place  and
of  motion,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  how  it  has  shrunk  back  from
following  it  to  its  ultimate  consequences.  If  not  only  place  but  the
velocity  of  a  material  system  is  to  signify  a  magnitude  that  entirely
depends  on  the  choice  of  the  reference  body  and  is  thus  infinitely
variable  and  infinitely  ambiguous,  there  seems  no  possibility  of  an
exact  determination  of  magnitude  and  thus  no  possibility  of  an
exact  objective  determination  of  the  state  of  physical  reality.  Pure
mathematics  may  be  constructed  as  the  ideal  doctrine  of  the  compari-
son and  connection  of  magnitudes,  as  a  system  of  mere  relations  and


364  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

functions  and  may  come  to  recognize  itself  as  such  ever  more  clearly >
but  physics  seems  necessarily  to  reach  an  ultimate  limit,  a  non  plus
ultra,  if  it  is  not  wholly  to  lose  any  basis  in  reality.

The  difficulty,  which  remains  in  the  structure  of  classical  mechanics
in  the  formulation  of  the  principle  of  inertia,  is  expressed  in  an
epistemological  circle,  from  which  there  seems  no  escape.  To
understand  the  meaning  of  the  law  of  inertia,  we  need  the  concept  of
"equal  times"  but  a  practicable  physical  measure  of  equal  times  can,
as  is  discovered,  only  be  gained  by  presupposing,  in  its  content  and
validity,  the  law  of  inertia.  In  fact,  since  Carl  Neumann's  work,
Uber  die  Prinzipien  der  Galilei-Newton' schen  Theorie  (57),  which  set
in  motion  the  modern  discussion  on  the  law  of  inertia,  it  is  customary
in  mechanics  to  define  equal  times  as  times  within  which  a  body  left
to  itself  traverses  equal  distances.  Maxwell  too,  in  his  exposition
of  the  Newtonian  mechanics,  conceived  the  law  of  inertia  as  a  pure
definition  of  measure.  The  first  law  of  Newton,  as  he  explains
clearly  and  pregnantly,  tells  under  what  conditions  no  external  force
is  present.  (51,  p.  31.)  Thus  in  the  progress  of  mechanics  the  princi-
ple of  inertia  is  recognized  with  increasing  distinctness  as  what  it
meant  fundamentally  to  Galileo.  It  is  no  longer  taken  as  a  direct
empirical  description  of  given  processes  of  nature,  but  as  the  "axiom
of  the  field,"  the  fundamental  hypothesis  by  which  the  new  science
of  dynamics  prescribes  to  itself  a  certain  form  of  measurement.
Inertia  appears,  not  as  an  absolute  and  inherent  property  of  things
and  of  bodies,  but  as  the  free  establishment  of  a  certain  standard  and
symbol  of  measurement,  by  virtue  of  which  we  can  hope  to  reach  a
systematic  conception  of  the  laws  of  motion.  In  this  alone  is  rooted
its  reality,  i.e.,  its  objective  and  physical  significance.  Thus,  within
the  historical  development  of  physics  itself  what  measures  is  separated
with  increasing  distinctness  from  what  is  measured,  with  which  it  at
first  seems  to  coincide;  the  observable  data  of  experience  are  separated
with  increasing  distinctness  from  what  must  be  presupposed  and  used
as  a  condition  of  observation  and  of  measurement.

And  what  is  here  seen  in  a  particular  example  and  within  a  narrow
field  is  repeated,  on  closer  examination,  in  all  the  special  fields  of
physics.  Everywhere  physical  thought  must  determine  for  itself
its  own  standards  of  measurement  before  it  proceeds  to  observation.
There  must  be  established  a  certain  standpoint  for  the  comparison
and  correlation  of  magnitudes;  certain  constants  must  be  established


CONCEPTS OP  MEASURE  AND OP  THINGS  365

at  least  hypothetically  and  in  preliminary  fashion  before  a  concrete
measurement  can  take  place.  In  this  sense,  each  measurement
contains  a  purely  ideal  element;  it  is  not  so  much  with  the  sensuous
instruments  of  measurement  that  we  measure  natural  processes  as
with  our  own  thoughts.  The  instruments  of  measurement  are,  as
it  were,  only  the  visible  embodiments  of  these  thoughts,  for  each  of
them  involves  its  own  theory  and  offers  correct  and  useful  results
only  in  so  far  as  this  theory  is  assumed  to  be  valid.  (Cf.  8,  p.  189
ff.)  It  is  not  clocks  and  physical  measuring-rods  but  principles  and
postulates  that  are  the  real  instruments  of  measurement.  For  in
the  multiplicity  and  mutability  of  natural  phenomena,  thought
possesses  a  relatively  fixed  standpoint  only  by  taking  it.  In  the
choice  of  this  standpoint,  however,  it  is  not  absolutely  determined  by
the  phenomena,  but  the  choice  remains  its  own  deed  for  which  ulti-
mately it  alone  is  responsible.  The  decision  is  made  with  reference
to  experience,  i.e.,  to  the  connection  of  observations  according  to  law,
but  it  is  not  prescribed  in  a  definite  way  by  the  mere  sum  of  observa-
tions. For  these  in  themselves  can  always  be  expressed  by  a  number
of  intellectual  approaches  between  which  a  choice  is  possible  only
with  reference  to  logical  "simplicity,"  more  exactly,  to  systematic
unity  and  completeness,  of  scientific  exposition.  When  thought,
in  accordance  with  its  claims  and  demands,  changes  the  form  of  the
"simple"  fundamental  measuring  relations,  we  stand  before  a  new
"picture"  of  the  world  with  regard  to  content  also.  The  previously
gained  relations  of  experience  do  not  indeed  lose  their  validity,  but,
since  they  are  expressed  in  a  new  conceptual  language,  they  enter
into  a  new  system  of  meanings.  The  fixed  Archimedean  point  of
the  former  view  of  the  world  moves;  the  previous  irov  <rro>  of  thought
appears  transcended.  But  it  is  soon  seen  that  thought,  by  virtue
of  its  peculiar  function,  can  only  transcend  an  earlier  construction
by  replacing  it  by  a  more  general  and  more  inclusive  one;  that  it
only  shifts,  among  phenomena,  the  constancy  and  identity,  which  it
cannot  cease  to  demand,  to  another  and  deeper  place.  That  every
realization,  which  the  demand  of  thought  for  ultimate  constants  can
find  within  the  empirical  world  is  always  only  conditioned  and  rela-
tive, is  guaranteed  by  the  unconditionally  and  radicalism  of  precisely
this  demand.  The  critical  theory  of  knowledge  would  not  only  show
this  connection  in  dbstracto,  but  for  it  the  concrete  movement  of
thought,  the  continual  oscillation  between  experience  and  concept,


366  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

between  facts  and  hypotheses  in  the  history  of  physics,  forms  a
perpetually  new  source  of  instruction.  In  the  midst  of  the  change
of  particular  theoretical  instruments  of  measurement,  the  critical
theory  holds  fast  to  the  thought  of  the  unity  of  measurement,  which
indeed  signifies  for  it  no  realistic  dogma  but  an  ideal  goal  and  a  never-
to-be-concluded  task.  Each  new  physical  hypothesis  erects,  as  it
were,  a  new  logical  system  of  coordinates,  to  which  we  refer  phenom-
ena, while  nevertheless  the  doctrine  is  retained  as  a  regulative
idea  for  investigation  that  all  these  systems  converge  on  a  certain
definite  limiting  value.  In  the  confusion  and  continuous  flux  of
phenomena,  the  understanding  seems  at  first'  almost  arbitrarily  to
fix  and  separate  out  certain  points  in  order  to  learn  through  them  a
definite  law  of  change,  but  everything  which  it  regards  as  determined
and  valid  in  this  sense  proves,  in  the  course  of  further  progress,  to  be  a
mere  approximation.  The  first  construction  must  be  both  limited
and  more  exactly  defined  logically  by  the  second,  this  again  by  the
third,  etc.  Thus,  ever  anew  does  the  temporarily  chosen  theoretical
center  of  thought  shift;  but  in  this  process,  the  sphere  of  being,  the
sphere  of  objective  knowledge,  is  more  and  more  penetrated  by
thought.  As  often  as  it  seems  that  thought  is  overturned  by  new
facts  and  observations,  which  are  outside  its  previously  formulated
laws,  it  is  seen  that,  in  fact,  thought  has  found  in  them  a  new  point
of  leverage,  around  which  moves  henceforth  the  totality  of  empiri-
cally provable  "facts."  The  epistemological  exposition  and  evalua-
tion of  each  new  physical  theory  must  always  seek  to  indicate  the
ideal  center  and  turning-point  around  which  it  causes  the  totality
of  phenomena,  the  real  and  possible  observations,  to  revolve, — whether
this  point  is  clearly  marked  or  whether  the  theory  only  refers  to  it
indirectly  by  the  intellectual  tendency  of  all  its  propositions  and
deductions.


CHAPTER  11

THE  EMPIRICAL  AND  CONCEPTUAL  FOUNDATIONS  OF  THE  THEORY  OF

RELATIVITY

If  there  can  be  no  doubt,  according  to  the  opening  words  of  the
Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  that  all  our  knowledge  begins  with  experi-
ence, then  this  holds  especially  when  we  are  concerned  with  the
origin  of  a  physical  theory.  The  question  here  can  never  run  as  to
whether  the  theory  has  issued  from  experience  but  merely  as  to  how
it  is  based  on  experience,  and  what  is  the  relation  of  the  diverse  ele-
ments which  characterize  and  make  up  the  concept  of  experience  as
such.  There  is  accordingly  needed  no  special  epistemological
analysis  to  make  clear  the  relation  of  the  special  and  general  theories
of  relativity  to  experience,  to  the  whole  of  observation  and  of
physical  experiment;  such  an  analysis  will  only  have  to  decide  whether
the  theory  in  its  origin  and  development  is  to  be  taken  as  an  example
and  witness  of  the  critical  or  of  the  sensualistic  concept  of  experience.
Does  "experience,"  as  it  is  used  here,  mean  merely  the  bare  sum  of
particular  observations — experimentorum  multorum  coacervatio,  as
a  sensualistic  thinker  once  described  it — or  is  there  involved  in  it  an
independent  intellectual  form?  Is  the  construction  of  the  theory
merely  a  matter  of  joining  "fact"  to  "fact,"  perception  to  perception,
— or,  in  this  connection  of  particulars,  have  there  been  effective  all
along  certain  universal  and  critical  norms,  certain  methodic  presup-
positions? No  "empiricism"  however  extreme  can  ever  seek  to  deny
the  r61e  of  thought  in  establishing  and  grounding  physical  theories,
and  just  as  little  is  there,  on  the  other  hand,  a  logical  idealism,  which
would  attempt  to  free  "pure  thought"  from  reference  to  the  world  of
the  "factual"  and  from  being  bound  to  it.  The  question  dividing
the  two  views  can  only  be  as  to  whether  thought  consists  in  a  simple
registration  of  facts,  or  whether,  even  in  the  establishment,  in  gaining
an  interpretation  of  "particular  facts,"  thought  reveals  its  charac-
teristic power  and  function.  Is  its  work  completed  in  arranging
particular  data,  immediately  taken  from  sense  perception,  like
pearls  on  a  thread — or  does  it  face  them  with  its  own  original  measures
as  independent  criteria  of  judgment?

367


368  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

The  problem  raised  here  received  its  first  sharp  and  clear  systematic
formulation  in  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  ideas.  For  Platonic  idealism,
too,  the  proposition  holds  that  it  is  not  possible  to  think  save  on  the
basis  of  some  perception:  ov  SVVOLTOV  ivvoiv  ij  &c  TLVOS  aiffdycreus.
But  the  function  of  the  "logic  in  us"  consists  indeed  not  in  finding
the  sum  of  the  particular  perceptions,  not  in  deriving  and  deducing
the  "idea  of  the  equal"  from  the  "equal  pieces  of  wood  and  stone,"
but  the  "logic  in  us"  is  revealed  in  discriminating  and  judging  what
is  given  in  perception.  This  discriminating  constitutes  the  real
fundamental  character  of  thought  as  diavoux,  as  discursus.  Not
all  perceptions  and  observations  stimulate  equally  the  critical  and
discriminating  activity  of  thought.  There  are  some  which  do  not
summon  the  understanding  to  reflection,  since  satisfaction  is  done
them  by  mere  sensation,  but  there  are  others  which  in  all  ways  call
forth  thought,  as  in  their  case  perception  by  itself  could  gain
nothing  solid.  "Not  stimulating,  namely,  is  that  which  does  not  pass
into  an  opposite  perception;  stimulating  objects  I  call  those  which  give
opposite  perceptions,  because  here  perception  gives  no  more  vivid
idea  of  any  particular  object  than  of  its  opposite.  Much  in  percep-
tion is  a  paraclete  of  thought  (wapaKXriTiKa  rfjs  Suxvolai),  while
other  perceptions  are  not — such  an  awakener  of  thought,  namely,  is
everything,  which  comes  into  sense  at  the  same  time  as  its  opposite;
but  what  does  not,  that  also  does  not  arouse  thought."  (Republic
523-524.)  In  this  Platonic  characterization  of  the  relation  of  thought
and  sensation,  of  reason  and  sensibility,  we  have,  as  Cohen  has  urged,
"one  of  the  most  fundamental  thoughts  in  the  evolution  of  the  cri-
tique of  cognition."  (12,  p.  16  ff.)  Just  as  for  Plato  thought  becomes
what  it  is  in  assertion  and  contradiction,  in  dialectic,  so  only  a
perception  to  which  this  feature  corresponds  can  become  the
awakener  and  paraclete  of  thought.  The  dialectic  of  percep-
tion summons  that  of  thought  to  judgment  and  decision.  Where
the  perceptions,  as  it  were,  rest  peacefully  side  by  side,  where  there  is
no  inner  tension  between  them,  thought  rests  also;  only  where  they
contradict  each  other,  where  they  threaten  to  canc.el  each  other  does
thought's  fundamental  postulate,  its  unconditional  demand  for
unity  stand  forth  and  demand  a  transformation,  a  reshaping  of
experience  itself.

The  evolution  of  the  theory  of  relativity  has  furnished  a  new
typical  proof  of  this  general  relation.  It  was  in  fact  a  fundamental
contradiction  hpf.wppn  nhvsipfl.1  PYnprimpnta  from  which  the  theory


EMPIRICAL AND CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATIONS  369

of  relativity  took  its  start.  On  the  one  side  stood  the  investigation
of  Fizeau,  on  the  other,  that  of  Michelson,  and  the  two  seemed  in
their  results  absolutely  irreconcilable.  Both  sought  to  gain  an  answer
to  the  question  as  to  how  the  velocity  of  light  in  a  moving  medium
was  related  to  its  velocity  in  a  resting  medium;  and  they  answered
this  question  in  completely  opposite  ways.  The  investigation  of
Fizeau  showed  that  the  velocity  of  light  in  flowing  water  was  greater
than  in  water  at  rest;  that,  however,  not  the  whole  velocity  of  the
flowing  water,  but  only  a  fraction  of  it  was  added  to  the  velocity  of
light  in  a  medium  at  rest.  If  we  call  the  velocity  of  light  in  the
moving  medium  W  and  the  velocity  of  light  in  a  medium  at  rest  w
and  the  velocity  of  the  flowing  v,  it  results  not  simply  that  W  =

w  +  v,  but  rather  that  W  =  w  +  v  (  1  —  ~  J,  in  which  the  magnitude

n
n =  —  signifies  the  exponent  of  the  refraction  of  the  liquid. This

A/V

result,  as  interpreted  by  the  theory  of  Lorentz,  spoke  directly  for  the
assumption  of  a  motionless  ether  not  carried  along  by  the  body  in
its  movement.  But  the  attempt  of  Michelson,  to  discover  the
consequences  of  the  movement  of  the  earth  with  reference  to  this
motionless  ether,  failed.  In  no  way  could  any  influence  be  shown  of
the  motion  of  the  earth  on  the  velocity  of  the  propagation  of  light;
it  was  rather  shown  with  increasing  evidence  that  all  optical  phenom-
ena take  place  as  if  there  were  no  translation  of  the  earth  against
the  ether.1  And  behind  this  conflict  of  "facts"  there  stood,  as  one
was  forced  to  recognize  more  and  more,  a  conflict  in  general  principles,
to  which  the  theories  of  mechanical  and  of  optical  and  electromagnetic
phenomena  seemed  to  lead  necessarily.  Experiments  in  the  latter
could  finally  be  summarized  in  a  single  proposition,  the  principle  of
the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  in  a  vacuum.  The  validity  of
the  fundamental  equations  of  electrodynamics  of  Maxwell  and
Hertz  involved  the  assumption  that  light  in  an  empty  space  is
always  propagated  with  a  definite  velocity  V  independently  of  the
state  of  motion  of  the  body  emitting  it.  From  whatever  system  one
made  the  observation  and  from  whatever  source  the  light  issued
there  would  always  be  found  the  same  determinate  value  for  its
velocity  of  propagation.  But  this  assumption  of  the  velocity  of

1  For  more  detail  concerning  the  investigations  of  Fizeau  and  Michelson  as
well  as  concerning  the  negative  outcome  of  other  investigations  on  the  influ-
ence of  the  movement  of  the  earth  on  optical  and  electrical  phenomena,  c/.
Laue  (40),  p.  10  ff .


370  EINSTEIN'S  THEOKY  OF  RELATIVITY

light  as  a  universal  constant  the  same  for  all  systems,  necessarily
demanded  by  the  principles  of  electrodynamics,  now  comes  into
opposition  with  the  principle  of  relativity  of  the  Galileo-Newtonian
mechanics.  This  principle  demands  that,  when  any  definite  Galileian
reference  body  is  given  — i.e.,  a  body  relatively  to  which  a  body
"left  to  itself"  persists  in  its  state  of  rest  or  of  uniform  motion  in  a
straight  line—  all  the  laws,  which  are  valid  relatively  to  this  reference
body  K  remain  valid  when  one  passes  to  the  system  of  reference
K',  which  is,  with  reference  to  K,  in  uniform  translatory  motion.
In  the  transition  from  K  to  K',  the  equations  of  the  "Galileo-trans-
formation" hold,  (where  v  signifies  a  constant  velocity  of  K'  with

x'  = x  —  vt,  y'  =  y,  z' = z

reference  to  K  parallel  to  the  x  and  x'  axes),  to  which  there  is  to  be
added  the  identical  transformation  from  the  time  t'  =  t,  which  is
not  especially  noticed  in  classical  mechanics.  If  we  seek,  however,
to  apply  the  principle  of  relativity  of  mechanics  to  electrodynamics,
i.e.,  to  recalculate  its  equations  according  to  the  formulae  of  the
Galileo-transformation,  it  is  seen  that  this  cannot  be  done:  the
electrodynamic  equations,  in  contrast  to  the  Newtonian  equations
of  motion,  alter  their  form  when  we  insert  the  coordinates  x',  y',  z',  t',
into  them  in  place  of  the  coordinates  x,  y,  z,  t  according  to  the  rules
of  the  Galileo-transformation.  The  effort  to  unite  mechanics  and
electro-dynamics  by  carrying  over  the  principle  of  relativity  of  the
first  into  the  second  thus  has  to  be  given  up:  the  Hertzian  theory,
which  represented  such  an  attempt,  came  into  irreconcilable  conflict
with  assured  experimental  results.  Physical  investigation  stood
before  the  dilemma  of  giving  up  a  principle  which  had  been  verified
without  exception  in  all  the  phenomena  of  motion  and  which  formed
a  corner-stone  in  the  structure  of  classical  mechanics — or  of  retain-
ing it  within  its  field  but  denying  its  applicability  to  optical  and
electromagnetic  phenomena.  In  both  cases,  the  unity  of  the  explana-
tion of  nature,  the  unity  of  the  very  concept  of  nature,  seemed  de-
stroyed. Here  in  fact  the  condition  set  up  by  Plato  of  the  intellec-
tual fruitfulness  of  experience  was  fulfilled:  here  experience  stood  at
a  point  at  which  assured  observation  seemed  to  pass  directly  into
its  opposite.  The  conflict  between  the  principle  of  the  constancy
of  the  propagation  of  light  and  the  principle  of  relativity  of  mechanics
became  the  "paraclete  of  thought" — the  real  awakener  of  the  theory
of  relativity.


EMPIRICAL  AND CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATIONS  371

But  how  did  physical  thought  go  about  overcoming  this  conflict,
since  it  was  bound  to  the  outcome  of  observation  as  such,  since  it
could  neither  set  aside  the  facts  expressed  in  the  principle  of  the
constant  velocity  of  light  in  a  vacuum,  nor  those  expressed  in  the
principle  of  relativity  of  mechanics?  If  we  look  back  on  the  histori-
cal development  of  the  theory  of  relativity,  we  recognize  that  the
latter  has  followed  here  a  counsel  which  was  once  given  by  Goethe.
"The  greatest  art  in  theoretical  and  practical  life,"  wrote  Goethe  to
Zelter,  "consists  in  changing  the  problem  into  a  postulate;  that  way
one  succeeds. "  In  fact,  this  was  the  course  which  Einstein  followed
in  his  fundamental  essay.  Zur  Elektrodynamik  bewegter  Systeme  of
the  year  1905.  The  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of
light  was  given  first  place  as  a  postulate,  but, — supported  by  the
negative  result  of  all  attempts  to  establish  an  "absolute"  motion
with  reference  to  a  chosen  system  of  reference,  i.e.,  the  "motionless
ether," — the  supposition  was  made  that  there  correspond  to  the
concept  of  absolute  rest  no  properties  of  phenomena  in  either
mechanics  or  electrodynamics,  but  rather  that  the  same  electro-
dynamic  and  optical  laws  hold  for  all  systems  of  coordinates  of
which  the  mechanical  equations  hold.  And  this  "supposition"  does
not  continue  such,  but  is  expressly  "made  a  presupposition,"  i.e.,  a
shaping  of  theory  is  demanded  which  will  simultaneously  satisfy  the
conditions  of  the  principle  of  relativity  and  those  of  the  principle  of
the  constant  propagation  of  light.  (Cf.  16,  p.  26).  The  two  assump-
tions are  indeed  not  compatible  according  to  the  means  and  habits  of
thought  at  the  disposal  of  the  kinematics  generally  accepted  before
the  establishment  of  the  theory  of  relativity,  but  they — ought  no
longer  to  be  incompatible.  The  demand  made  of  physical  theory
was  that  it  remove  this  incompatibility  by  subjecting  precisely  these
means  and  habits  of  thought  themselves  to  a  critical  examination.
By  an  analysis  of  the  physical  concepts  of  space  and  time,  it  now
appears  that  in  fact  the  incompatibility  of  the  principle  of  relativity
with  the  law  of  the  propagation  of  light  is  not  to  be  found;  that  rather
there  is  only  needed  a  transformation  of  these  concepts  in  order  to
reach  a  logically  unobjectionable  theory.  The  decisive  step  is  taken
when  it  is  seen  that  the  measurements,  to  be  gained  within  a  system
by  definite  physical  methods  of  measurement,  by  the  application  of
fixed  measuring-rods  and  clocks,  have  no  "absolute"  meaning  fixed
once  for  all,  but  that  they  are  dependent  on  the  state  of  motion  of


372  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

the  system  and  must  necessarily  result  differently  according  to  the
latter.  There  now  arises  the  purely  mathematical  problem  of  dis-
covering the  laws  of  permutation,  according  to  which  the  space-
time  values  of  an  event  are  changed  in  going  from  one  reference
body  to  another,  which  is  in  uniform  translatory  motion  with  regard
to  the  first.  This  problem  is  solved,  as  is  known,  by  the  funda-
mental equations  of  the  "Lorentz-transformation:"

, x-  vt

Xi


y  =  y

I'-


On  the  basis  of  these  equations,  we  see  that  the  law  of  the  propaga-
tion of  light  in  a  vacuum  is  equally  fulfilled  for  all  justified  systems
K  and  K';  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  seen  that  Maxwell's  fundamental
equations  of  electrodynamics  do  not  change  their  form  when  the
formulae  of  the  Lorentz-transformation  rather  than  those  of  the
Galileo-transformation  are  applied  to  them.  There  is  thus  a  univer-
sal principle  of  relativity,  which  comprehends  the  totality  of  physical
phenomena;  the  laws,  according  to  which  the  states  of  physical
systems  change,  are  independent  of  whether  they  are  referred  to  one
or  the  other  of  two  systems  of  coordinates  in  uniform  translatory
motion  relative  to  each  other.  (C/.  16,  p.  29).  The  principle  of
relativity  of  classical  mechanics  is  so  little  contradicted  by  this
general  principle  that  it  is  rather  contained  in  it  as  a  special  case;
the  equations  of  the  Galileo-transformation  directly  issue  from  those
of  the  Lorentz-transformation  when  one  considers  only  such  veloci-
ties v  as  are  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  velocity  of  light  so

v  v^
that  the  values  — ^  -,  can  practically  be  left  out  of  account. It  follows

from  this  that  the  principle  of  relativity  of  electrodynamics,  carried
over  to  mechanics,  can  come  into  conflict  with  no  empirical  result,
while  the  converse  carrying-over  of  the  principle  of  relativity  of
mechanics  to  electrodynamics  proves  to  be  impossible,  as  the  col-
lapse of  Hertz's  theory  showed.  More  closely  considered,  however,


EMPIRICAL AND CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATIONS  373

in  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  the  electrodynamic  processes  are
not  used  as  a  key  to  the  mechanical,  but  a  truly  universal  principle,
a  heuristic  maxim  of  investigation  in  general,  is  established,  which
claims  to  contain  a  criterion  of  the  validity  and  permissibility  of  all
particular  physical  fields  and  theories.  Thus  it  is  seen  that  the
initial  contradiction,  appearing  between  the  principles  of  mechanics
and  those  of  electrodynamics,  has  shown  the  way  to  a  far  more
perfect  and  deeper  unity  between  them  than  previously  existed.
And  this  result  was  not  reached  entirely  by  heaping  up  experiments
by  newly  instituted  investigations,  but  it  rests  on  a  critical  trans-
formation of  the  system  of  fundamental  physical  concepts.

On  the  purely  epistemological  side,  there  thus  appears  with  special
distinctness  in  this  intellectual  process  in  which  the  theory  of  relativ-
ity originates,  that  peculiar  "Copernican  revolution."  that  variation
in  the  conceptual  foundations  of  the  theory  of  nature,  which  we  have
previously  traced  in  the  example  of  classical  mechanics  and  the  older
physics.  An  essential  part  of  its  achievement  seems  based  on  the
fact,  that  it  has  shifted  the  previous  logical  constants  of  physical
knowledge,  that  it  has  set  them  at  another  place  than  before.  For
classical  mechanics,  the  fixed  and  immovable  point  was  the  assump-
tion of  the  identity  of  the  spatial  and  temporal  values  gained  by
measurement  in  the  various  systems.  This  identity  was  taken  to
be  the  unquestionable  and  sure  foundation  of  the  concept  of  objectiv-
ity in  general:  as  that  which  first  really  constituted  the  object  of
"nature"  as  a  geometrical  and  mechanical  object  and  distinguished
it  from  the  changeable  and  relative  data  of  sensation.  r6  plv  axMa
Ka&*  avrb  kan,  rd  dl  y\VKb  /cat  6Xa>s  rb  ala^vjTbv  Trpbs  &\\o  Kal  kv  aXXots
— thus  runs  the  proposition,  which  Democritus  brought  into
the  foundations  of  atomism,  and  which  in  modern  times  was  taken
up  by  Galileo  to  support  the  fundamental  distinction  between  "pri-
mary" and  "secondary"  qualities,  and  thus  the  whole  "mechanical"
view  of  the  World.  Although  the  principle  here  established  proved
to  be  very  fruitful  and  has  been  frequently  confirmed  in  mathematical
physics,  the  modern  evolution  of  physics  shows,  with  increasing
evidence,  that  it  was  conceived  too  narrowly  in  a  philosophical
and  methodological  sense.  The  true  goal  of  science  is  not  mecha-
nism but  unity — as  Henri  Poincare*  once  formulated  the  guiding
maxim  of  modern  physics.  But  concerning  this  unity  the  physicist
does  not  need  to  ask  whether  it  is,  but  merely  how  it  is;  i.e.,  what  is


374  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

the  minimum  of  presuppositions  that  are  necessary  and  sufficient
to  provide  an  exact  exposition  of  the  totality  of  experience  and  its
systematic  connection.  (72  p.  172  ff.)  In  order  to  maintain  this
unity,  which  seemed  endangered  by  the  conflict  of  the  principle  of
the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  and  the  principle  of  relativity
of  mechanics,  and  to  ground  it  more  deeply  and  securely,  the  theory
of  relativity  renounces  the  unity  of  the  values  of  spatial  and  temporal
magnitudes  in  different  systems.  It  surrenders  the  assumption  that
the  temporal  interval  between  events  is  a  magnitude  fixed  once  for
all  independently  of  the  state  of  motion  of  the  reference  body  and
that  in  the  same  way  the  spatial  distance  between  two  points  of  a
rigid  body  is  independent  of  the  state  of  motion  of  the  reference
body.  By  going  back  to  the  method  of  measuring  time  and  to  the
fundamental  r61e  that  the  velocity  of  light  plays  in  all  our  physical
time  measurements,  it  discovers  the  relativity  of  the  simultaneity  of
two  processes  and  further  leads  to  the  insight  that  the  magnitude  of
the  length  of  a  body  of  its  volume,  its  form,  its  energy  and  tempera-
ture, etc.,  are,  as  results  from  the  formulae  of  the  Lorentz-transforma-
tion,  to  be  assumed  as  different  according  to  the  choice  of  the  system
of  reference  in  which  measurement  takes  place.  But  these  "relativi-
zations"  are  not  in  contradiction  with  the  doctrine  of  the  constancy
and  unity  of  nature;  they  are  rather  demanded  and  worked  out  in  the
name  of  this  very  unity.  The  variation  of  the  measurements  of
space  and  time  constitutes  the  necessary  condition  through  which  the
new  invariants  of  the  theory  are  discovered  and  grounded.  Such
invariants  are  found  in  the  equal  magnitude  of  the  velocity  of  light
for  all  systems  and  further  in  a  series  of  other  magnitudes,  such  as
the  entropy  of  a  body,  its  electrical  charge  or  the  mechanical  equiva-
lent of  heat,  which  are  unchanged  by  the  Lorentz-transf ormation  and
which  thus  possess  the  same  value  in  all  justified  systems  of  reference.
But  above  all  it  is  the  general  form  of  natural  law  which  we  have  to
recognize  as  the  real  invariant  and  thus  as  the  real  logical  frame-
work of  nature  in  general.  While  the  special  theory  of  relativity
limits  itself  to  regarding  all  reference  bodies  K'  which  are  moving
uniformly  in  a  straight  line  relatively  to  a  definite  justified  reference
system  K,  as  equivalent  for  the  formulation  of  natural  laws,  the
general  theory  extends  this  proposition  to  the  assertion  that  all
reference  bodies  KK',  whatever  their  state  of  motion  may  be,  are
to  be  taken  as  equivalent  for  the  description  of  nature.  (17  p.  9;


EMPIBICAL  AND  CONCEPTUAL  FOUNDATIONS  375

18,  p.  42.)  But  the  path  by  which  alone  this  true  universality  of
the  concept  of  nature  and  of  natural  law,  i.e.,  a  definite  and  objec-
tively valid  description  of  phenomena  independent  of  the  choice
of  the  system  of  reference,  is  to  be  reached,  leads,  as  the  theory  shows,
necessarily  through  the  "relativization"  of  the  spatial  and  temporal
magnitudes,  that  hold  within  the  individual  system;  to  take  these  as
changeable,  as  transformable,  means  to  press  through  to  the  true
invariance  of  the  genuine  universal  constants  of  nature  and  universal
laws  of  nature.  The  postulate  of  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of
light  and  the  postulate  of  relativity  show  themselves  thus  as  the  two
fixed  points  of  the  theory,  as  the  fixed  intellectual  poles  around
which  phenomena  revolve;  and  in  this  it  is  seen  that  the  previous
logical  constants  of  the  theory  of  nature,  i.e.,  the  whole  system  of
conceptual  and  numerical  values,  hitherto  taken  as  absolutely  deter-
minate and  fixed,  must  be  set  in  flux  in  order  to  satisfy  the  new  and
more  strict  demand  for  unity  made  by  physical  thought.

Thus  reference  to  experience,  regard  for  phenomena  and  their
unified  exposition,  proves  to  be  everywhere  the  fundamental  feature,
but  at  the  same  time  it  is  seen  that,  in  the  words  of  Goethe,  experi-
ence is  always  only  half  experience;  for  it  is  not  the  mere  observa-
tional material  as  such,  but  the  ideal  form  and  the  intellectual  inter-
pretation, which  it  is  given,  that  is  the  basis  of  the  real  value  of  the
theory  of  relativity  and  of  its  advantage  over  other  types  of  explana-
tion. As  is  known,  the  investigation  of  Michelson  and  Morley,
which  gave  the  impetus  and  starting-point  for  the  development  of
the  theory  of  relativity,  was  explained  as  early  as  the  year  1904  by
Lorentz  in  a  manner  which  fulfilled  all  purely  physical  demands.
The  Lorentzian  hypothesis,  that  each  body  moving  with  reference  to
the  motionless  ether  with  a  velocity  v  undergoes  a  certain  shortening
in  the  dimension  parallel  to  the  motion,  and  indeed  in  the  ratio  of

1 :  Vi  —  £,  was  sufficient  to  give  a  complete  explanation  of  all  known

observations.  An  experimental  decision  between  Lorentz's  and
Einstein's  theories  was  thus  not  possible;  it  was  seen  that  between
them  there  could  fundamentally  be  no  experimentum  crucis.2  The
advocates  of  the  new  doctrine  accordingly  had  to  appeal — an  unusual
spectacle  in  the  history  of  physics — to  general  philosophical  grounds,

*  For  more  detail  cf.  e.  g.  Ehrenfest  (15a),  p.  16  ff.


376  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

to  the  advantages  over  the  assumption  of  Lorentz  which  the  new
doctrine  possessed  in  a  systematic  and  epistemological  respect.
"A  really  experimental  decision  between  the  theory  of  Lorentz  and
the  theory  of  relativity,"  Laue,  e.g.,  explains  in  his  exposition  of
the  principle  of  relativity  in  the  year  1911,  "is  indeed  not  to  be
gained,  and  that  the  former,  in  spite  of  this,  has  receded  into  the
background,  is  chiefly  due  to  the  fact,  that,  close  as  it  comes  to  the
theory  of  relativity,  it  still  lacks  the  great  simple  universal  principle,
the  possession  of  which  lends  the  theory  of  relativity  ....  an
imposing  appearance."3  Lorentz's  assumption  appeared  above  all
to  be  epistemologically  unsatisfactory  because  it  ascribes  to  a  physi-
cal object,  the  ether,  definite  effects,  while  at  the  same  time  it  results
from  these  effects  that  ether  can  never  be  an  object  of  possible  obser-
vation. Minkowski  too  explains  in  his  lecture  on  space  and  time
that  the  Lorentzian  hypothesis  sounds  extremely  fantastical;  for
the  contraction  is  not  to  be  conceived  as  a  physical  consequence  of
the  resistance  of  the  ether  but  rather  purely  as  "a  gift  from  above/'
as  an  accompaniment  of  the  state  of  motion.  (47  p.  60  f.)  What
thus,  in  the  last  analysis,  decided  against  this  assumption  was  not
an  empirical  but  a  methodological  defect.  It  conflicted  most
sharply  with  a  general  principle,  to  which  Leibniz  has  appealed  in
his  struggle  against  the  Newtonian  concepts  of  absolute  space  and
time,  and  which  he  formulated  as  the  "principle  of  observability"
(principe  de  Vobservdbilite.)  When  Clarke,  as  the  representative  of
Newton,  referred  to  the  possibility  that  the  universe  in  its  motion
relatively  to  absolute  space  might  undergo  retardation  or  accelera-
tion which  would  not  be  discoverable  by  our  means  of  measurement,
Leibniz  answered  that  nothing  fundamentally  outside  the  sphere  of

3  40,  p.  19  f . ;  cf.  41,  p.  106.  Cf.  also  the  characteristic  remark  of  Lorentz
himself  in  his  Haarlem  lecture:  "The  estimation  (of  the  fundamental  con-
cepts of  Einstein's  theory  of  relativity)  belongs  to  a  very  large  extent  (grros-
stenteils)  to  the  theory  of  knowledge,  and  one  can  leave  the  judgment  to  the
latter  in  confidence  that  it  will  consider  the  questions  mentioned  with  the
necessary  thoroughness.  But  it  is  certain  that  it  will  depend  for  a  great  part
on  the  type  of  thought  to  which  one  is  accustomed,  whether  one  feels  drawn
more  to  the  one  or  the  other  conception.  As  far  as  concerns  the  lecturer
himself,  he  finds  a  certain  satisfaction  in  the  older  conceptions,  that  ether  pos-
sesses at  least  some  substantiality,  that  space  and  time  can  be  sharply  sepa-
rated, that  one  can  talk  of  simultaneity  without  further  specification. "  (46a,
p.  23.)


EMPIRICAL  AND CONCEPTUAL  FOUNDATIONS  377

observation  possessed  "being"  in  the  physical  sense:  quand  il  n'y
a  point  de  changement  observable,  il  n'y  a  point  de  changement  du  tout.
(5,  p.  247  ff.).  It  is  precisely  this  principle  of  ' 'observability/'
which  Einstein  applied  at  an  important  and  decisive  place  in  his
theory,  at  the  transition  from  the  special  to  the  general  theory  of
relativity,  and  which  he  has  attempted  to  give  a  necessary  connec-
tion with  the  general  principle  of  causality.  Any  physical  explana-
tion of  a  phenomenon,  he  urges,  is  epistemologically  satisfactory
only  when  there  enter  into  it  no  non-observable  elements;  for  the
law  of  causality  is  an  assertion  concerning  the  world  of  experience
only  when  observable  facts  occur  as  causes  and  effects.  (17,  §2).
Here  we  stand  before  one  of  the  fundamental  intellectual  motives  of
the  theory  of  relativity — a  motive  which  not  only  gives  it  the  advan-
tage over  the  empirically  equivalent  hypothesis  of  Lorentz,  but  which
also  produces  the  advance  from  the  more  limited  interpretation  of
the  postulate  of  relativity  in  the  special  theory  to  the  completely
universal  formulation.

The  way  in  which  this  advance  has  taken  place  is  especially  suited
to  make  clear  the  conceptual  and  empirical  presuppositions  of  the
theory  and  their  reciprocal  connection.  The  special  theory  of
relativity  rests,  as  has  been  shown,  on  two  different  assumptions,
which  stand  equally  justified,  side  by  side:  on  the  postulate  of  the
uniformity  of  the  propagation  of  light  in  a  vacuum  and  on  the  pre-
supposition that  all  reference  systems  in  rectilinear,  uniform  and
non-rotary  motion  relatively  to  a  definite  justified  system  K  are
equally  permissible  for  the  formulation  of  the  laws  of  nature.  If  one
considers  these  presuppositions,  which  stand  in  inseparable  con-
nection in  the  empirical  structure  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity,
from  a  purely  methodological  standpoint,  it  is  seen  that  in  this
respect  they  belong  to  different  strata.  On  the  one  side,  stands
the  assertion  of  a  general  fact,  a  constant  of  nature,  which  results
from  the  experimental  findings  of  optics  and  electrodynamics;  on
the  other  side  stands  a  demand,  which  we  make  of  the/orm  of  natural
laws.  In  the  first  case,  it  is  empirically  established  that  there  is  a
peculiar  velocity  with  a  definite  finite  value,  which  retains  this
value  in  any  system  independently  of  the  state  of  motion  of  the  latter.
In  the  second,  a  general  maxim  is  established  for  the  investigation  of
nature,  which  is  to  serve  as  a  "heuristic  aid  in  the  search  for  the
general  laws  of  nature."  In  the  formal  limitation,  which  is  placed


378  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

on  natural  laws  by  this  maxim,  lies — as  Einstein  himself  has  urged —
the  characteristic  "penetration"  (Spiirkraft)  of  the  principle  of  relativ-
ity. (18,  pp.  28,  67.)  But  the  two  principles,  the  "material"
and  the  "formal"  are  not  distinguished  from  each  other  in  the
shaping  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity.  The  fact  that  this  dis-
tinction is  made  and  that  the  general  and  "formal"  principle  is
placed  above  the  particular  and  "material"  principle  constitutes,  from
the  purely  epistemological  standpoint,  the  essential  step  taken  by
the  general  theory  of  relativity.  And  this  step  seems  to  lead  to  a
strange  and  paradoxical  consequence;  for  the  particular  result  is  not
taken  up  into  the  general,  but  rather  is  cancelled  by  it.  From  the
standpoint  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  the  law  of  the  constancy
of  the  velocity  of  light  in  a  vacuum  no  longer  possesses  unlimited
validity.  According  to  the  general  theory  of  relativity  the  velocity
of  light  is  dependent  on  the  gravitation  potential  and  must  thus  in
general  vary  with  places.  The  velocity  of  light  must  always  depend
on  the  coordinates  when  a  field  of  gravitation  is  present;  it  is  only
to  be  regarded  as  constant  when  we  have  in  mind  regions  with  a
constant  gravitation  potential.  This  consequence  of  the  general
theory  of  relativity  has  often  been  regarded  as  a  refutation  of  the
presupposition  from  which  the  special  theory  of  relativity  took  its
start  and  on  which  it  based  all  its  deductions.  But  with  justice
Einstein  rejects  any  such  conclusion.  The  special  theory  of  relativ-
ity, he  explains,  is  not  rendered  valueless  by  the  fact  that  one  comes
to  see  that  its  propositions  refer  to  a  definitely  limited  field,  namely,
to  the  phenomena  in  an  approximately  constant  field  of  gravitation.
"Before  the  establishment  of  electrodynamics,  the  laws  of  electro-
statics were  regarded  as  the  laws  of  electricity  in  general.  Today
we  know  that  electrostatics  can  only  describe  electrical  fields  cor-
rectly in  the  case,  that  is  never  exactly  realized,  in  which  the  electric
masses  are  exactly  at  rest  relatively  to  each  other  and  to  the  system
of  coordinates.  Is  electrostatics  overthrown  by  Maxwell's  electro-
dynamical  equations?  Not  in  the  least !  Electrostatics  is  contained
as  a  limiting  case  in  electrodynamics;  the  laws  of  the  latter  lead
directly  to  those  of  the  first  for  the  case  that  the  fields  are  temporarily
unchangeable.  The  most  beautiful  fate  of  a  physical  theory  is  to
point  the  way  to  the  establishment  of  a  more  inclusive  theory,  in
which  it  lives  on  as  a  limiting  case."  (18,  p.  52.)  In  fact,  in  the
advance  from  the  special  to  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  we


EMPIRICAL  AND CONCEPTUAL  FOUNDATIONS  379

have  only  a  verification  of  the  same  principle  of  the  construction  of
concepts  of  natural  science  that  is  found  in  the  advance  from  classical
mechanics  to  the  special  theory  of  relativity.  The  constants  of
measurement  and  of  the  theory  of  nature  in  general  are  shifted  and
magnitudes,  which  were  regarded  as  absolute  from  the  earlier  stand-
point, are  again,  with  the  gaming  of  a  new  theoretical  unit  of  measure-
ment, made  into  merely  relative  determinations  valid  only  under
definite  conditions.  While  classical  mechanics,  like  the  special
theory  of  relativity,  distinguishes  between  certain  reference  bodies
relatively  to  which  the  laws  of  nature  were  valid  and  certain  relatively
to  which  they  were  not,  this  distinction  is  now  cancelled.  The
expression  of  the  universal  physical  laws  is  freed  from  any  connection
with  a  particular  system  of  coordinates  or  with  a  certain  group  of
such  systems.  To  be  expressed  the  laws  of  nature  always  require
some  definite  system  of  reference;  but  their  meaning  and  value  is
independent  of  the  individuality  of  this  system  and  remains  self-
identical  whatever  change  the  latter  may  undergo.

Only  with  this  result  do  we  reach  the  real  center  of  the  general
theory  of  relativity.  Now  we  know  where  lie  its  truly  ultimate
constants,  its  cardinal  points,  around  which  it  causes  phenomena  to
revolve.  These  constants  are  not  to  be  sought  in  particular  given
things,  which  are  selected  as  chosen  systems  of  reference  from  all
others,  such  systems  as  the  sun  was  to  Copernicus  and  as  the  fixed
stars  were  for  Galilei  and  Newton.  No  sort  of  things  are  truly  in-
variant, but  always  only  certain  fundamental  relations  and  functional
dependencies  retained  in  the  symbolic  language  of  our  mathematics
and  physics,  in  certain  equations.  This  result  of  the  general  theory
of  relativity,  however,  is  so  little  a  paradox  from  the  standpoint  of
the  criticism  of  knowledge,  that  it  can  rather  be  regarded  as  the
natural  logical  conclusion  of  an  intellectual  tendency  characteristic
of  all  the  philosophical  and  scientific  thought  of  the  modern  age.4
To  the  popular  view  and  its  habits  of  thought  the  radical  resolution  of
"things"  into  mere  relations  remains  as  ever  suspicious  and  alienating,
for  this  view  believes  that  it  would  lose  with  the  thing-concept  the
one  sure  foundation  of  all  objectivity,  of  all  scientific  truth.  And
thus,  from  this  side  not  so  much  the  positive  as  the  negative  aspect  of

4  Here,  indeed,  I  can  only  make  this  assertion  in  a  general  way;  for  its
proof  I  must  refer  to  the  more  specific  explanation  in  my  work  Substance
and  Function.  (8,  pp.  148-310.)


380  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

the  theory  of  relativity  has  been  emphasized;  what  it  destroys,  not
what  it  constructs  has  been  comprehended.  But  it  is  remarkable
to  find  this  interpretation  not  only  in  popular  expositions  of  the
theory  of  relativity  but  in  investigations  of  its  general  "philo-
sophical" significance;  and  to  meet  in  the  latter  also  the  view  that  it
brings  an  element  of  subjective  arbitrariness  into  the  formulation  of
the  laws  of  nature  and  that,  along  with  the  unity  of  space  and  time,
the  unity  of  the  concept  of  nature  is  destroyed.  In  truth,  as  closer
consideration  shows,  the  theory  of  relativity  is  characterized  through-
out by  the  opposite  tendency.  It  teaches  that  to  attain  an  objective
and  exact  expression  of  natural  process,  we  cannot  take  without
further*  consideration  the  space  and  time  values,  gained  by  measure-
ment within  a  definite  system  of  reference  as  the  only  and  universal
values,  but  that  we  must,  in  scientifically  judging  these  measure-
ments, take  account  of  the  state  of  motion  of  the  system  from  which
the  measurement  is  made.  Only  when  this  is  done  can  we  compare
measurements  which  have  been  made  from  different  systems.  Only
those  relations  and  particular  magnitudes  can  be  called  truly  objec-
tive which  endure  this  critical  testing,  that  is,  which  maintain  them-
selves not  only  for  one  system  but  for  all  systems.  That  not  only
are  there  such  relations  and  values,  but  that  there  must  be  such,  in  so
far  as  a  science  of  nature  is  to  be  possible,  is  precisely  the  doctrine  the
theory  of  relativity  sets  up  as  a  postulate.  If  we  start,  as  practically
we  must  do  at  first,  from  a  definite  system  of  measurement,  we  must
bear  in  mind  that  the  empirical  values,  which  we  gain  here,  do  not
signify  the  final  natural  values  but  that,  to  become  such,  they  must
undergo  an  intellectual  correction.  What  we  call  the  system  of
nature  only  arises  when  we  combine  the  measurements,  which  are
first  made  from  the  standpoint  of  a  particular  reference  body,  with
those  made  from  other  reference  bodies,  and  in  principle  with  those
made  from  all  "possible"  reference  bodies,  and  bring  them  ideally
into  a  single  result.  How  there  can  be  found  in  this  assertion  any
limitation  of  the  "objectivity"  of  physical  knowledge  is  not  evident;
obviously  it  is  meant  to  be  nothing  but  a  definition  of  this  very
objectivity.  "But  it  is  clear,"  says  Kant,  "that  we  have  only  to  do
with  the  manifold  of  our  presentations  and  that  X,  which  corresponds
to  them  (the  object),  since  it  is  to  be  something  distinct  from  all  our
presentations,  is  for  us  nothing;  the  unity,  which  makes  the  object
necessary,  can  be  nothing  else  than  the  formal  unity  of  consciousness


EMPIRICAL  AND CONCEPTUAL  FOUNDATIONS  881

in  the  synthesis  of  the  manifold  of  presentations. Thus  we  say:
we  know  the  object  when  in  the  manifold  of  intuition  we  have  pro-
duced synthetic  unity." The  object  is  thus  not  gained  and  known  by
our  going  from  empirical  determinations  to  what  is  no  longer  empirical
to  the  absolute  and  transcendent,  but  by  our  unifying  the  totality
of  observations  and  measurements  given  in  experience  into  a  single
complete  whole. The  theory  of  relativity  shows  the  whole  complexity
of  this  task;  but  it  retains  the  postulate  of  the  possibility  of  such  a
system  all  the  more  strenuously  and  points  out  a  new  way  to  realize
it. Classical  mechanics  believed  itself  at  the  goal  too  soon. It
clung  to  certain  reference  bodies  and  believed  that  it  possessed,  in
connection  with  them,  measures  in  some  way  definitive  and  universal,
and  thus  absolutely  "objective." For  the  new  theory,  on  the  con-
trary, true  objectivity  never  lies  in  empirical  determinations,  but
only  in  the  manner  and  way,  in  the  function,  of  determination  itself.
The  space  and  time  measurements  in  each  particular  system  are
relative;  but  the  truth  and  universality,  which  can  be  gained  never-
theless by, physical knowledge, consist in the fact that all
these  measurements  correspond  mutually  and  are  coordinated  with
each  other  according  to  definite  rules. More  than  this  indeed
knowledge  cannot  achieve,  but  it  cannot  ask  for  more,  if  it  under-
stands itself. To  wish  to  know  the  laws  of  natural  processes  inde-
pendently of  all  relation  to  any  system  of  reference,  is  an  impossible
and  self-contradictory  desire;  all  that  can  be  demanded  is  that  the
content  of  these  laws  not  be  dependent  on  the  individuality  of  the
system  of  reference. It  is  precisely  this  independence  of  the  acciden-
tal standpoint  of  the  observer  that  we  mean  when  we  speak  of  the
"natural"  object  and  the  "laws  of  nature"  as  determinate  in  them-
selves. Measurements  in  one  system, or  even  in  an  unlimited
number  of  "justified"  systems  would  in  the  end  give  only  particulari-
ties, but  not  the  true  "synthetic  unity"  of  the  object. The  theory
of  relativity  teaches,  first  in.the  equations  of  the  Lorentz-transforma-
tion  and  then  in  the  more  far-reaching  substitution  formulae  of  the
general  theory,  how  we  may  go  from  each  of  these  particularities  to  a
definite  whole,  to  a  totality  of  invariant  determinations. The
anthropomorphism  of  the  natural  sensuous  picture  of  the  world,
the  overcoming  of  which  is  the  real  task  of  physical  knowledge,5

*  Cf.  Planck  (66)  p.  6  ff .  and  (67)  p.  74.


382  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

is  here  again  forced  a  step  further  back.  The  mechanical  view  of  the
world  thought  to  have  conquered  it,  when  it  resolved  all  being  and
natural  process  into  motion  and  thus  put  everywhere  pure  magnitudes
in  place  of  qualitative  elements  of  sensation.  But  now  it  is  seen  that
precisely  the  determination  of  these  values,  the  measurements,  which
it  applies  to  motions,  are  still  bound  to  certain  limiting  presupposi-
tions. Reflection  on  the  manner  in  which  we  make  empirical  meas-
urements of  space  and  time  shows  how  anthropomorphism  reaches
into  this  field  that  was  thought  withdrawn  from  it  in  principle.
It  is,  as  it  were,  this  earthly  remainder  still  belonging  to  classi-
cal mechanics  with  its  assumption  of  finite  fixed  reference  bodies
and  motionless  inertial  systems,  from  which  the  theory  of  relativity
seeks  to  free  itself.  The  conceived  unit  of  connection  determined
by  a  system  of  mathematical  equations  here  takes  the  place  of  any
sensuously  given,  and  also  sensuously  conditioned,  unit  of  measure-
ment. As  is  seen,  there  is  involved  here  not  a  cancellation  but  a
critical  correction  of  the  empirical  concept  of  objectivity,  by  which
a  correction  of  our  empirical  spatial  and  temporal  measures  and  their
transformation  into  the  one  system  of  natural  laws  are  gained.

We  are  brought  to  the  same  outcome  by  consideration  of  the
historical  problems  out  of  which  the  theory  of  relativity  has  grown.
To  give  the  propositions  of  abstract  mechanics,  especially  the  prin-
ciple of  inertia  a  definite  physical  meaning  had  been  attempted
repeatedly  by  trying  to  point  out  some  empirical  systems  for  which
they  would  possess  strict  validity.  But  these  attempts  were  all
thwarted,  in  particular,  by  the  discovery  of  the  motion  of  the  solar
system  and  of  the  fixed  stars;  to  find  a  fixed  and  clear  empirical
meaning  for  the  equations  of  the  Galileo-Newtonian  mechanics,
nothing  remained  save  to  postulate,  with  Carl  Neumann,  an  afee-
lutely  motionless  body  at  some  unknown  place  in  space.  But
such  a  postulate  of  the  existence  of  a  particular  physical  object,  a
body  which  can  never  be  discovered  by  observation,  remains  the
strangest  anomaly,  from  the  epistemological  standpoint.  (8,  p.
238  ff.)  The  absolutely  motionless  ether  too,  which  seemed  for  a
time  to  offer  the  lacking  physical  reference  system  of  the  Galileo-
Newtonian  mechanics,  showed  itself  unsuited  to  this  purpose;  since
the  negative  outcome  of  Michelson's  investigation  the  question
seemed  to  be  decided  here  also.  At  this  point,  as  has  been  seen,
the  theory  of  relativity  begins.  It  makes  a  virtue  out  of  the  difficulty


EMPIRICAL  AND  CONCEPTUAL  FOUNDATIONS  383

into  which  philosophical  thought  had  fallen  in  its  attempt  to  find  a
particular  privileged  system  of  coordinates.  Experience  had  shown
that  there  is  no  such  system,  and  the  theory,  in  its  most  general
interpretation,  makes  it  a  postulate  that  there  cannot  and  must  not
be  such.  That,  for  the  physical  description  of  the  processes  of
nature,  no  particular  reference  body  is  to  be  privileged  above  any
other  is  now  made  a  principle.  "In  classical  mechanics,  as  well  as
the  special  theory  of  relativity,"  says  Einstein,"  a  distinction  is
drawn  between  reference  bodies  K  relatively  to  which  the  laws  of
nature  are  valid  and  reference  bodies  K'  relatively  to  which  they  are
not  valid.  With  this  state  of  affairs  no  consistently  thinking  man
can  be  satisfied.  He  asks:  how  is  it  possible  that  certain  reference
bodies  (and  their  states  of  motion)  are  privileged  over  other  reference
bodies  (and  their  states  of  motion)?  In  vain,  I  seek  in  classical
mechanics  for  something  real  to  which  I  might  trace  the  difference
in  the  behavior  of  the  body  with  reference  to  the  systems  of  refer-
ence K  and  K'.'1  (18,  p.  49.)  In  this  argument  from  the  principle  of
insufficient  reason,  the  physicist  seems  to  move  on  slippery  ground.
One  is  inevitably  reminded  of  the  argument  of  Euler,  who  thought
that  he  proved  the  principle  of  inertia  of  classical  mechanics  by
explaining  that,  if  a  body  changed  its  state  of  motion  without  the
influence  of  external  forces,  there  would  be  no  reason  why  it  should
choose  any  particular  change  of  magnitude  and  direction  of  its
velocity.  (23.)  The  circle  involved  here,  namely,  that  "the  state
of  motion"  of  a  body  is  assumed  to  be  a  determinate  magnitude,
while  it  is  only  defined  as  such  by  the  law  of  inertia  itself,  is  easily
seen.  In  Einstein's  appeal  to  the  "principle  of  reason,"  there  is
doubtless  involved  a  more  general  and  deeper  epistemological  motive.
If  we  assume  that  the  final  objective  determinations,  which  our
physical  knowledge  can  reach,  t.e.,  the  laws  of  nature,  are  provable
and  valid  only  for  certain  chosen  systems  of  reference,  but  not  for
others,  then,  since  experience  offers  no  certain  criterion  that  we  have
before  us  such  a  privileged  reference  system,  we  can  never  reach  a
truly  universal  and  determinate  description  of  natural  processes.
This  is  only  possible  if  some  determinations  can  be  pointed  out,  which
are  indifferent  to  every  change  in  the  system  of  reference  taken  as  a
basis.  Only  those  relations  can  we  call  laws  of  nature,  t.e.,  ascribe
to  them  objective  universality,  whose  form  is  independent  of  the
particularity  of  our  empirical  measurements  of  the  special  choice


384  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

of  the  four  variables  xb  x2,  x3,  x4,  which  express  the  space  and  time
parameters.  In  this  sense,  one  could  conceive  the  principle  of  the
universal  theory  of  relativity,  that  the  universal  laws  of  nature  are
not  changed  in  form  by  arbitrary  changes  of  the  space-time  variables,
as  an  analytic  assertion;  as  an  explanation  of  what  is  meant  by  a
"universal"  law  of  nature.  But  the  demand,  that  there  must  in
general  be  such  ultimate  invariants,  is  synthetic.

In  fact,  it  can  be  shown  that  the  general  doctrine  of  the  invariabil-
ity and  determinateness  of  certain  values,  which  is  given  first  place
by  the  theory  of  relativity,  must  recur  in  some  form  in  any  theory  of
nature,  because  it  belongs  to  the  logical  and  epistemological  nature  of
such  a  theory.  To  start  from  the  picture  of  the  world  of  general
energetics — Leibniz,  in  establishing  the  law  of  the  "conservation  of
vis  viva"  as  a  universal  law  of  nature,  referred  to  this  logical  element
in  it.  He  first  defines  the  vis  viva  of  a  physical  system  as  a  quantity
of  work;  he  determines  that  forces  are  to  be  called  equal,  when  they
are  able  to  perform  equal  mechanical  work,  no  matter  what  their
properties  may  be  in  detail;  thus  if  they  produce  an  equal  degree  of
tension  in  an  equal  number  of  elastic  springs,  raise  an  equal  weight
to  the  same  height,  communicate  to  an  equal  number  of  bodies  the
same  amount  of  velocity,  etc.,  they  are  equal.  In  this  definition  it
is  assumed  that  measurement  of  the  vis  viva  by  different  systems
of  measurement  will  give  results  equivalent  to  each  other,  and
thus  that  force  which,  when  measured  by  a  certain  effect,  prove  to
be  equal  or  in  a  definite  relation  of  greater  or  smaller,  will  retain
this  same  relation  if  we  measure  them  by  any  other  effect.  If  this
were  not  the  case,  and  did  there  result  a  different  relation  of  forces
according  to  the  different  effect  one  uses  as  a  measure,  nature  would
be  without  laws;  the  whole  science  of  dynamics  would  be  superfluous;
and  it  would  not  be  possible  to  measure  forces,  for  forces  would  have
become  something  indeterminate  and  contradictory,  quiddam  vagum
et  absonum.  (42,  III,  208  ff.;  VI,  209  f.;  cf.  5,  p.  305  ff.)  The  same
process  of  thought  has  been  repeated  on  broader  physical  lines  in
the  discovery  and  grounding  of  the  modern  principle  of  energy.
Here,  too,  the  energy  of  a  material  system  in  a  certain  state  was
defined — e.g.,  by  W.  Thompson — first  as  the  amount  of  all  the  effects,
expressed  in  mechanical  units  of  work,  called  forth  outside  the  system
when  the  system  passes  in  an}^  way  from  its  state  into  a  definite  but
arbitrarily  defined  state  of  nullity.  This  explanation  at  first  leaves


EMPIRICAL  AND CONCEPTUAL  FOUNDATIONS  385

it  entirely  undecided  as  to  whether  there  exists  a  determinate  value  of
what  is  here  called  "energy,"  i.e.,  whether  the  results  of  the  measure-
ment of  the  amount  of  work  of  a  system  turn  out  the  same  or  differ-
ently According  to  the  method  of  bringing  the  system  from  the
given  state  into  a  definite  state  of  nullity.  But  that  this  determinate-
ness  in  fact  exists,  that  there  always  results  the  same  amount  of
energy  no  matter  what  effect  we  use  as  the  measure  of  work  and
what  type  of  transition  we  choose,  is  precisely  what  the  principle
of  the  conservation  of  energy  affirms.  This  affirms  nothing  else
and  has  no  other  physically  comprehensible  meaning  than  that  the
amount  of  all  the  effects,  measured  in  units  of  mechanical  work,
which  a  material  system  calls  forth  in  its  external  environment,
when  it  passes  from  a  definite  state  in  any  arbitrary  manner  to  an
arbitrarily  defired  state  of  nullity,  has  a  determinate  value,  and  is
thus  independent  of  the  type  of  transition.  If  this  independence
did  not  exist — and  that  it  exists  only  experience  can  teach  us — it
would  follow  that  what  we  called  "energy"  is  not  an  exact  physical
determination;  energy  would  not  be  a  universal  constant  of  measure-
ment. We  would  have  to  seek  for  other  empirical  values  to  satisfy
the  fundamental  postulate  of  determinateness.  But  it  holds,  con-
versely, that  if  energy  is  once  established  as  a  constant  of  measure-
ment, it  thus  becomes  a  constant  of  nature  also,  a  "concept  of  a
definite  object."  Now  from  a  physical  standpoint  a  "substantial"
conception  of  energy  can  be  carried  through  without  arousing  suspi-
cion; energy  can  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of  "reserve  supply"  of  the
physical  system,  the  quantity  of  which  is  completely8  determined
by  the  totality  of  the  magnitudes  of  the  states,  which  belong  to  the
system  involved.  From  the  epistemological  standpoint,  it  must  be
remembered  that  such  an  interpretation  is  nothing  more  than  a  con-
venient expression  of  the  relations  of  measurement,  that  alone  are
known,  an  expression  which  adds  to  them  nothing  essential.  The
unity  and  determinateness  of  measurement  can  be  immediately
understood  and  expressed  as  the  unity  and  determinateness  of  the
object,  precisely  because  the  empirical  object  means  nothing  but  a
totality  of  relations  according  to  law.  It  follows  from  this  analogy
from  a  new  angle  that  the  advance  in  "relativization"  which  takes
place  in  the  theory  of  relativity,  represents  no  contrast  to  the  general

1  In  more  detail  in  Planck  (63)  p.  92  ff.


386  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

task  of  objectification,  but  rather  signifies  one  step  in  it,  since,  by  the
nature  of  physical  thought,  all  its  knowledge  of  objects  can  consist
in  nothing  save  knowledge  of  objective  relations.  " Whatever  we
may  know  of  matter,"  here,  too,  we  can  cite  the  Critique  of  Pure
Reason,  "is  nothing  but  relations,  some  of  which  are  independent  and
permanent  and  by  which  a  certain  object  is  given  us."  (34,  p.  341;
cf.  Miiller's  Trans,  p.  232.)  The  general  theory  of  relativity  has
shifted  these  "independent  and  permanent  relations"  to  another
place  by  breaking  up  both  the  concept  of  matter  of  classical  mechanics
and  the  concept  of  the  ether  of  electrodynamics;  but  it  has  not  con-
tested them  as  such,  but  has  rather  most  explicitly  affirmed  them  in
its  own  invariants,  which  are  independent  of  every  change  in  the
system  of  reference.  The  criticism  made  by  the  theory  of  relativity
of  the  physical  concepts  of  objects  springs  thus  from  the  same  method
of  scientific  thought,  which  led  to  the  establishment  of  these  con-
cepts, and  only  carries  this  method  a  step  further  by  freeing  it  still
more  from  the  presuppositions  of  the  naively  sensuous  and  "sub-
stantialistic"  view  of  the  world.  To  grasp  this  state  of  affairs  in  its
full  import  we  must  go  back  to  the  general  epistemological  questions
offered  to  us  by  the  theory  of  relativity;  we  must  go  back  to  the
transformation  of  the  physical  concept  of  truth  involved  in  it  by  which
it  comes  into  direct  contact  with  the  fundamental  problem  of  logic.


CHAPTER  III

THE PHILOSOPHICAL CONCEPT  OF TRUTH AND  THE THEORY

OP  RELATIVITY

The  general  principle  of  the  relativity  of  knowledge  received  its
first  complete  systematic  working  out  in  the  history  of  ancient
skepticism.  Here  it  possessed,  according  to  the  fundamental  charac-
ter of  skepticism,  an  exclusively  negative  meaning;  it  signified  the
limit  in  principle  which  is  set  to  all  knowledge  and  by  which  it  is
separated  once  for  all  from  the  definitive  apprehension  of  the  truth
as  "absolute."  Among  the  skeptical  "tropes"  intended  to  show  the
uncertainty  of  sensuous  and  conceptual  knowledge,  the  "trope"
of  irpbs  n  stands  in  the  first  place.  To  know  the  object,  our  knowl-
edge would,  above  all,  have  to  be  in  a  position  to  grasp  it  in  its  pure
"in  itself"  and  to  separate  it  from  all  the  determinations,  which  only
belong  to  it  relatively  to  us  and  other  things.  But  this  separation
is  impossible,  not  only  actually,  but  in  principle.  For  what  is
actually  given  to  us  only  under  certain  definite  conditions  can  never
be  made  out  logically  as  what  it  is  in  itself  and  under  abstraction  from
precisely  these  conditions.  In  what  we  call  the  perception  of  a
thing,  we  can  never  separate  what  belongs  to  the  objective  thing  from
what  belongs  to  the  subjective  perception  and  contrast  the  two  as
independent  factors.  The  form  of  subjective  organization  enters  as  a
necessary  element  into  all  our  so-called  objective  knowledge  of  things
and  properties.  The  "thing"  appears,  accordingly,  not  only  differ-
ently to  the  various  senses  but  it  is  limitlessly  variable  for  the  same
organ  according  to  the  time  and  varying  conditions  of  perception.
For  its  whole  character  depends  on  the  relations  under  which  it  is
presented  to  us.  No  content  is  given  us  in  experience  unmixed  with
others  in  a  purely  self-identical  character,  but  what  is  given  us  is
always  only  a  general  combination  of /impressions.  It  is  not  one  or
the  other,  "this"  or  "that"  definite  quality,  but  only  the  reciprocal
relation  of  the  one  to  the  other  and  the  other  to  the  one  that  is  here
known,  indeed  that  is  alone  knowable.

Modern  science  has  overcome  the  objections  of  skepticism  to  the
possibility  of  knowledge,  not  by  contesting  their  content,  but  by
drawing  from  them  a  wholly  different,  indeed,  opposite  logical

387


388  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

consequence.  Modern  science  also  assumes  the  reduction  of  what  is
taken  in  the  naive  view  of  the  world,  as  fixed  and  absolute  "proper-
ties" of  things  to  a  system  of  mere  relations.  "With  regard  to  the
properties  of  the  objects  of  the  outer  world,"  we  read  in,  e.g.,  Helm-
holtz's  Handbuch  der  physiologischen  Optik,  "it  is  easy  to  sec  that  all
the  properties  we  can  ascribe  to  them,  signify  only  the  effects  they
produce  either  on  our  senses  or  on  other  natural  objects.  Color,
sound,  taste,  smell,  temperature,  smoothness,  solidity  belong  to  the
first  class;  they  signify  effects  on  our  sense  organs.  The  chemical
properties  are  likewise  related  to  reactions,  i.e.,  effects,  which  the
natural  body  in  question  exerts  on  others.  It  is  thus  with  the  other
physical  properties  of  bodies,  the  optical,  the  electrical,  the  magnetic.
Everywhere  we  are  concerned  with  the  mutual  relations  of  bodies  to
each  other,  with  effects  which  depend  on  the  forces  different  bodies

exert  on  each  other From  this  it  follows  that  in  fact,

the  properties  of  the  objects  of  nature  do  not  signify,  in  spite  of  their
name,  anything  proper  to  the  particular  objects  in  and  for  themselves,
but  always  a  relation  to  a  second  object  (including  our  sense  organs).
The  type  of  effect  must  naturally  always  depend  on  the  peculiarities
of  the  effecting  body  as  well  as  on  those  of  the  body  on  which  the

effect is exerted To question whether cinnabar is

really  red  as  we  see  it,  or  whether  this  is  only  an  illusion  of  the  senses,
is  therefore  meaningless.  The  sensation  of  red  is  the  normal  reac-
tion of  normally  constituted  eyes  to  the  light  reflected  from  cinnabar.
A  color-blind  person  will  see  the  cinnabar  black  or  dark  grey;  this
also  is  the  correct  reaction  of  his  peculiarly  constituted  eye.
.  .  .  .  In  itself,  the  one  sensation  is  not  more  correct  and  not

more false  than  the  other " (30,  p.  588  f.) The  old

skeptical  "trope,"  the  argument  of  the  irpbs  n  here  stands  before
us  again  in  all  distinctness.  But  renunciation  of  the  absoluteness  of
things  involves  no  longer  renunciation  of  the  objectivity  of  knowledge.
For  the  truly  objective  element  in  modern  knowledge  of  nature  is  not
so  much  things  as  laws.  Change  in  the  elements  of  experience  and
the  fact  that  no  one  of  them  is  given  in  itself,  but  is  always  given
with  reference  to  something  else,  constitute  no  objection  to  the  possi-
bility of  objectively  real  knowledge  in  so  far  as  the  laws  establish
precisely  these  relations  themselves.  The  constancy  and  absolute-
ness of  the  elements  is  sacrificed  to  gain  the  permanency  and  neces-
sity of  laws.  If  we  have  gained  the  latter,  we  no  longer  need  the


THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  CONCEPT  OF  TRUTH 389

former.  For  the  objection  of  skepticism,  that  we  can  never  know
the  absolute  properties  of  things,  is  met  by  science  in  that  it  defines
the  concept  of  property  in  such  a  way  that  the  latter  involves  in  itself
the  concept  of  relation.  Doubt  is  overcome  by  being  outdone.
When  it  is  seen  that  "blue"  can  mean  absolutely  nothing  save  a  rela-
tion to  a  seeing  eye,  that  "heavy"  means  nothing  save  a  relation  of
reciprocal  acceleration  and  that  in  general  all  "having"  of  properties
can  be  resolved  purely  and  simply  into  a  "being-related"  of  the
elements  of  experience,  then  the  longing  to  grasp  the  ultimate  absolute
qualities  of  things,  secretly  at  the  basis  of  skepticism,  loses  its  mean-
ing. Skepticism  is  refuted,  not  by  showing  a  way  to  a  possible
fulfillment  of  its  demands,  but  by  understanding  and  thus  rendering
ineffective  the  dogmatic  import  of  these  demands  themselves.

In  this  transformation  of  the  general  ideal  of  knowledge,  modern
science  and  modern  logic  are  both  involved;  the  development  of  the
one  is  in  closest  connection  with  that  of  the  other.  Ancient  logic  is
entirely  founded  on  the  relation  of  "subject"  and  "predicate,"  on
the  relation  of  the  given  concept  to  its  also  given  and  final  properties.
It  seeks  finally  to  grasp  the  absolute  and  essential  properties  of
absolute  self-existent  substances.  Modern  logic,  on  the  contrary,
in  the  course  of  its  development,  comes  more  and  more  to  abandon
this  ideal  and  to  be  made  into  a  pure  doctrine  of  form  and  relation.
The  possibility  of  all  determinate  character  of  the  content  of  knowl-
edge is  grounded,  for  it,  in  the  laws  of  these  forms,  which  are  not
reducible  to  mere  relations  of  subsumption  but  include  equally  all
the  different  possible  types  of  relational  construction  and  connection
of  elements  of  thought.  But  here  doubt  must  begin  in  a  new  and
deeper  sense.  If  knowledge  of  things  is  understood  as  knowledge  of
laws  and  if  an  attempt  is  made  to  ground  the  former  in  the  latter  and
to  protect  it  from  the  attacks  of  skepticism,  then  what  guarantees  the
objectivity,  the  truth  and  universality  of  the  knowledge  of  laws?
Do  we  have,  in  the  strict  sense,  knowledge  of  laws  or  does  all  that
we  can  gain  resolve  itself  in  the  most  favorable  case  into  knowledge
of  particular  cases?  Here  as  we  see,  the  problem  of  skepticism  is
reversed  on  the  basis  of  the  modern  conception  of  law.  What
perplexed  the  ancient  skeptic,  who  sought  the  substance  of  things,
was  the  limitless  relativity  of  all  phenomena;  it  was  the  fact  that
phenomena  would  not  remain  fixed  individual  data,  but  were  reduced
for  knowledge  ever  again  into  mere  relations  and  relations  of  relations.


390  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

But  for  the  modern  skeptic,  to  whom  the  objective  truth,  in  so  far
as  it  is  attainable,  means  the  one  all-inclusive  and  necessary  law  of
all  process,  the  basis  of  doubt  lies  in  the  fact  that  reality  is  never
given  us  in  this  universal  intellectual  form,  but  is  always  divided
and  broken  up  into  mere  punctual  particularities.  We  grasp  only  a
here  and  a  now,  only  a  particularity  isolated  in  space  and  time,  and
it  is  not  to  be  seen  how  we  could  ever  pass  from  this  perception  of
the  individual  to  a  view  of  the  objective  form  of  the  whole.  No  more
than  the  continuum  can  be  built  up  and  generated  by  the  summation
of  mere  unextended  points  can  a  truly  objective  and  necessary  law
be  gained  and  deduced  by  the  simple  aggregation  of  however  many
particular  cases.  This  is  the  form  of  Hume's  skepticism,  which  is
characteristically  distinguished  from  the  ancient.  While  the  ancient
skeptic  could  not  reach  the  absolute  substance  because  of  the  relativi-
ties in  which  the  phenomenal  world  involved  him,  the  modern  skeptic
fails  to  reach  laws  as  universal  relations  because  of  the  absolute
particularities  of  sensation.  While  in  the  former  it  is  the  certainty
of  things  that  is  questionable,  in  the  latter  it  is  the  certainty  of  causal
connections.  The  connections  of  processes  become  an  illusion;  what
remains  is  only  their  particular  atoms,  the  immediate  data  of  sensa-
tion, in  which  all  knowledge  of  "facts,"  of  "matter  of  fact"  ultimately
consists.

If  it  is  possible  to  overcome  this  essentially  more  radical  form  of
skepticism  also,  it  can  only  be  by  there  being  shown  in  it  too  a
concealed  dogmatic  assumption,  which  lies  implicitly  at  its  basis.
And  this  assumption  consists  in  fact  in  its  concept  of  empirical
"givenness"  itself.  This  givenness  of  "bare"  impressions  in  which
abstraction  is  made  in  principle  from  all  elements  of  form  and  con-
nection, proves  to  sharper  analysis  to  be  a  fiction.  When  this  is
understood,  doubt  is  directed,  not  on  the  possibility  of  knowledge,  but
on  the  possibility  of  the  logical  measuring-rod  with  which  knowledge
is  measured  here.  Instead  of  the  criterion  of  the  "impression"
making  the  universal  formal  relations  of  knowledge  and  its  axioms
questionable,  the  validity  of  this  criterion  must  be  contested
on  the  basis  of  these  relations.  The  only  refuge  from  radical
doubt  lies  in  its  being  not  set  aside  but  intensified,  in  our  learning  to
question,  as  ultimate  elements  of  knowledge  known  in  themselves,
not  only  "things"  and  "laws"  but  especially  sensations.  The
skepticism  of  Hume  left  the  "simple"  sensation  as  a  completely
unproblematic  certainty,  as  a  simple  and  unquestionable  expression


THE PHILOSOPHICAL  CONCEPT OF TRUTH  391

of  "reality."  While  antique  skepticism  rested  completely  on  the
tacit  assumption  of  absolute  things,  that  of  Hume  rests  on  the
assumption  of  absolute  sensations.  The  hypostasization  in  the  one
case  concerns  "outer"  being,  in  the  other,  "inner"  being,  but  its
general  form  is  the  fame.  And  only  by  this  hypostasization  does
the  doctrine  of  the  relativity  of  knowledge  gain  its  skeptical  character.
Doubt  does  not  result  directly  from  the  content  of  this  doctrine,  but,
on  the  contrary,  it  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  doctrine  is  not  truly
and  consistently  thought  through.  As  long  as  thought  contents  itself
with  developing,  with  reference  to  phenomena  and  according  to
demands  of  its  own  form,  its  logical  axioms,  and  truth  as  a  system
of  pure  relations,  it  moves  within  its  own  circle  with  complete
certainty.  But  when  it  affirms  an  absolute,  whether  of  outer  or
inner  experience,  it  is  forced  skeptically  to  annihilate  itself  with
reference  to  this  absolute.  It  strikes  this  absolute  of  things  or  of
sensations  again  and  again  as  if  against  the  wall  of  the  cell  in  which
it  is  enclosed.  Relativity,  which  is,  fundamentally,  its  immanent
force,  becomes  its  immanent  limit.  It  is  no  longer  the  principle,
which  renders  possible  and  governs  the  positive  advance  of  knowl-
edge, but  is  merely  a  necessary  instrument  of  thought,  which  by  that
fact  confesses  itself  not  adequate  to  being  the  absolute  object  and
the  absolute  truth.

This  relation  is  indeed  changed  when  we  contrast  to  both  the
dogmatic  and  the  skeptical  concept  of  truth,  which  are  united  by  a
common  root,  the  idealistic  concept  of  truth.  For  the  latter  does
not  measure  the  truth  of  fundamental  cognitions  by  transcendent
objects,  but  it  grounds  conversely  the  meaning  of  the  concept  of  the
object  on  the  meaning  of  the  concept  of  truth.  Only  the  idealistic
concept  of  truth  overcomes  finally  the  conception  which  makes
knowledge  a  copying,  whether  of  absolute  things  or  of  immediately
given  "impressions."  The  "truth"  of  knowledge  changes  from  a
mere  pictorial  to  a  pure  functional  expression.  In  the  history  of
modern  philosophy  and  logic,  this  change  is  first  represented  in
complete  clarity  by  Leibniz,  although  in  his  case,  the  new  thought
Appears  in  the  setting  of  a  metaphysical  system,  in  the  language  of
the  monadological  scheme  of  the  world.  Each  monad  is,  with  all  its
contents,  a  completely  enclosed  world,  which  copies  or  mirrors  no
outer  being  but  merely  includes  and  governs  by  its  own  law  the
whole  of  its  presentations;  but  these  different  individual  worlds
•express,  nevertheless,  a  common  universe  and  a  common  truth.


392  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

This  community,  however,  does  not  come  about  by  these  different
pictures  of  the  world  being  related  to  each  other  as  copies  of  a
common  "original"  but  by  the  fact  that  they  correspond  functionally
to  each  other  in  their  inner  relations  and  in  the  general  form  of  their
structure.  For  one  fact,  according  to  Leibniz,  expresses  another
when  there  exists  between  what  can  be  said  of  the  one  and  of  the
other  a  constant  and  regular  relation.  Thus  a  perspective  projection
expresses  its  appropriate  geometrical  figure,  an  algebraic  equation
expresses  a  definite  figure,  a  drawn  model  a  machine;  not  as  if  there
existed  between  them  any  sort  of  factual  likeness  or  similarity,  but
in  the  sense  that  the  relations  of  the  one  structure  correspond  to
those  of  the  other  in  a  definite  conceptual  fashion.  (43,  VII,  263  f,
44,  II,  233;  cf.  7,  II,  167.)  This  Leibnizian  concept  of  truth  was
taken  up  and  developed  by  Kant  who  sought  to  free  it  from  all  the
unproved  metaphysical  assumptions  that  were  contained  in  it.
In  this  way  he  gained  his  own  interpretation  of  the  critical  concept
of  the  object,  in  which  the  relativity  of  knowledge  was  affirmed  in  a
far  more  inclusive  meaning  than  in  ancient  or  modern  skepticism,
but  in  which  also  this  relativity  was  given  a  new  positive  interpre-
tation. The  theory  of  relativity  of  modern  physics  can  be  brought
without  difficulty  under  this  interpretation,  for,  in  a  general  epistemo-
logical  regard,  it  is  characterized  by  the  fact  that  in  it,  more  clearly
and  more  consciously  than  ever  before,  the  advance  is  made  from  the
copy  theory  of  knowledge  to  the  functional  theory.  As  long  as  physics
retained  the  postulate  of  absolute  space,  the  question  still  had
a  definite  meaning  as  to  which  of  the  various  paths  of  a  moving
body  that  result  when  we  regard  it  from  different  systems  of
reference,  represents  the  real  and  "true"  motion;  thus  a  higher
objective  truth  had  to  be  claimed  for  certain  spatial  and  temporal
values,  obtained  from  the  standpoint  of  certain  selected  systems,  than
for  others.  The  theory  of  relativity  ceases  to  make  this  exception;
not  that  it  would  abandon  the  detenninateness  of  natural  process,
but  because  it  has  at  its  disposal  new  intellectual  means  of  satisfying
this  demand.  The  infinite  multiplicity  of  possible  systems  is  not
identical  with  the  infinite  indeterminateness  of  the  values  to  be
gained  in  them — in  so  far  as  all  these  systems  are  to  be  related  and
connected  with  each  other  by  a  common  rule.  In  this  respect,  the
principle  of  relativity  of  physics  has  scarcely  more  in  common
with  "relativistic  positivism,"  to  which  it  has  been  compared,  than
the  name.  When  there  is  seen  in  the  former  a  renewal  of  ancient


THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  CONCEPT  OF  TRUTH 393

sophistical  doctrine^  a  confirmation  of  the  Protagorean  doctrine
that  man  is  the  "measure  of  all  things/'  its  essential  achievement  is
mistaken.1  The  physical  theory  of  relativity  teaches  not  that  what
appears  to  each  person  is  true  to  him,  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  warns
against  taking  appearances,  which  hold  only  from  a  particular  system,
as  the  truth  in  the  sense  of  science,  i.e.,  as  an  expression  of  an  inclu-
sive and  final  law  of  experience.  The  latter  is  gained  neither  by  the
observations  and  measurements  of  a  pai^ticular  system  nor  by  those
of  however  many  such  systems,  but  only  by  the  reciprocal  coordina-
tion of  the  results  of  all  possible  systems.  The  general  theory  of
relativity  purports  to  show  how  we  can  gain  assertions  concerning
all  of  these,  how  we  can  rise  above  the  fraginentariness  of  the  indi-
vidual views  to  a  total  view  of  natural  processes.  (Cf.  above.)  It
abandons  the  attempt  to  characterize  the  "object"  of  physics  by  any
sort  of  pictorial  properties,  such  as  can  be  revealed  in  presentation,
and  characterizes  it  exclusively  by  the  unity  of  the  laws  of  nature.
When,  for  example,  it  teaches  that  a  body  regarded  from  one  system
possesses  spherical  form  and,  regarded  from  another  system,  in
motion  relatively  to  the  first,  appears  as  an  ellipsoid  of  rotation,  the
question  can  no  longer  be  raised  as  to  which  of  the  two  optical  images
here  given  is  like  the  absolute  form  of  the  object,  but  it  can  and  must
be  demanded  that  the  multiplicity  and  diversity  of  the  sensuous
data  here  appearing  can  be  united  into  a  universal  concept  of  experi-
ence. Nothing  more  is  demanded  by  the  critical  concept  of  truth  and
the  object.  According  to  the  critical  view,  the  object  is  no  absolute?
model  to  which  our  sensuous  presentations  more  or  less  correspond
as  copies,  but  it  is  a  "concept,  with  reference  to  which  presentations
have  synthetic  unity."  This  concept  the  theory  of  relativity  no
longer  represents  in  the  form  of  a  picture  but  as  a  physical  theory,
in  the  form  of  equations  and  systems  of  equations,  which  are  co-
variant  with  reference  to  arbitrary  substitutions.  The  "rclativiza-
tion,"  which  is  thus  accomplished,  is  itself  of  a  purely  logical  and
mathematical  sort.  By  it  the  object  of  physics  is  indeed  determined
as  the  "object  in  the  phenomenal  world;"  but  this  phenomenal  world
no  longer  possesses  any  subjective  arbitrariness  and  contingency.
For  the  ideality  of  the  forms  and  conditions  of  knowledge,  on  which
physics  rests  as  a  science,  both  assures  and  grounds  the  empirical
reality  of  all  that  is  established  by  it  as  a  "fact"  and  in  the  name  of
objective  validity.

1  Cf.  Petzoldt  (61).


CHAPTER  IV
MATTER,  ETHER  AND  SPACE

In  the  structure  of  physics  we  must,  it  seems,  distinguish  two  differ-
ent classes  of  concepts  from  each  other.  One  group  of  concepts
concerns  only  the  form  of  order  as  such,  the  other  the  content  that
enters  into  this  form ;  the  first  determines  the  fundamental  schema  which
physics  uses,  the  other  concerns  the  particular  properties  of  the  real
by  which  the  physical  object  is  characterized.  With  regard  to  the
pure  formal  concepts,  they  appear  to  persist  as  relatively  fixed  unities
in  spite  of  all  changes  of  physical  ideals  in  detail.  In  all  the  diversity
and  conflict  of  the  systematic  concepts  of  physics,  space  and  time
are  distinguished  as  the  ultimate,  agreeing  unities.  They  seem,  in
this  sense,  also,  to  constitute  the  real  a  priori  for  any  physics  and
the  presupposition  of  its  possibility  as  a  science.  But  the  first
step  from  these  bare  possibilities  to  reality,  which  is  a  matter  not  of
the  spatio-temporal  form,  but  of  the  somewhat  that  is  thought  to  be
somehow  "given"  in  space  and  in  time,  seems  to  force  us  beyond  the
circle  of  the  a  priori.  Kant  indeed,  in  the  Metaphysischen  Anfangs-
griinden  der  Naturwissenschaft,  attempted  an  a  priori  deduction  and
construction  of  the  concept  of  "matter"  as  a  necessary  concept  of
physics;  but  it  is  easy  to  see  that  this  deduction  does  not  stand  on  the
same  plane  and  cannot  claim  the  same  force  as  the  Transcendental
Aesthetic  or  the  Analytic  of  the  Pure  Understanding.  He  himself
believed  that  he  possessed  in  these  deductions  a  philosophical
grounding  of  the  presuppositions  of  the  science  of  Newton;  today  we
recognize  to  an  increasing  extent  that  what  he  so  regarded  was  in
fact  nothing  but  a  philosophical  circumlocution  for  precisely  these
presuppositions.  As  a  fundamental  definition  of  the  physical
concept  of  the  object,  the  classical  system  of  mechanics  is  only  one
structure,  by  the  side  of  which  there  are  others.  Heinrich  Hertz,
in  his  new  grounding  of  the  mechanical  principles,  distinguished
three  such  structures:  the  first  is  given  in  the  Newtonian  system,
which  is  founded  on  the  concepts  of  space,  of  time,  of  force,  and  of
mass,  as  given  presentations;  the  second  leaves  the  presuppositions
of  space,  time  and  mass  unchanged,  but  substitutes  for  the  concept  of
force  as  the  mechanical  "cause  of  acceleration"  the  universal  concept

394


MATTER, ETHER  AND  SPACE  395

of  energy,  which  is  divided  into  two  different  forms,  potential  and
kinetic  energy.  Here,  too,  we  have  four  mutually  independent
concepts,  whose  relations  to  each  other  are  to  constitute  the  content
of  mechanics.  Hertz's  own  formulation  of  mechanics  offers  a  third
structure  in  which  the  concept  of  force  or  of  energy  as  an  independent
idea  is  set  aside  and  the  construction  of  mechanics  is  accomplished  by
only  three  independent  fundamental  ideas,  space,  time  and  mass.
The  circle  of  possibilities  would  thus  have  seemed  completely  sur-
veyed— had  not  the  theory  of  relativity  once  more  given  a  new  inter-
pretation to  the  mutual  relation  between  the  pure  formal  concepts
and  the  physical  concepts  of  the  object  and  substance,  and  thus  trans-
formed the  problem  not  only  in  content  but  in  principle.

The  concept  of  "nature,"  the  gaining  of  which  is  the  real  methodic
problem  of  physics,  leaves  room,  as  the  history  of  physical  thought
shows,  for  a  dualism  of  presuppositions,  which  as  such  seems  neces-
sary and  unavoidable.  Even  in  the  first  logical  beginnings  of  genuine
natural  science,  which  are  found  in  Greek  thought,  this  dualism
appears  in  full  distinctness  and  clarity.  Antique  atomism,  which  is
the  first  classical  example  of  a  conceptual  and  scientific  picture  of
the  world,  can  only  describe  and  unify  the  "being"  of  nature  by
building  it  up  out  of  two  heterogeneous  elements.  Its  view  of
nature  is  founded  on  the  opposition  of  the  "full"  and  the  "void."
The  two,  the  full  and  the  void,  prove  necessary  elements  for  the
constitution  of  the  object  of  physics.  To  the  being  of  the  atom  and
matter  as  the  irainr\ape$  bv,  there  is  opposed  by  Democritus  the
not-being,  the  JUT)  6v  of  empty  space;  both  this  being  and  this  not-
being  possessed  for  him,  however,  uncontested  physical  truth  and
thus  indubitable  physical  reality.  The  reality  of  motion  was  only
intelligible  by  virtue  of  this  dual  presupposition;  motion  would
disappear  if  we  did  not  both  distinguish  empty  space  from  the  mate-
rial filling  of  space  and  conceive  the  two  as  in  inseparable  mutual
relation,  as  fundamental  elements  in  all  natural  processes,.  At  the
beginning  of  modern  times,  Descartes  attempted  philosophically  to
overcome  this  duality  in  the  foundations  of  physical  thought.  Pro-
ceeding from  the  thought  of  the  unity  of  consciousness,  he  postulated
also  a  new  unity  of  nature.  And  this  seemed  to  him  only  attainable
by  abandoning  the  opposition  of  the  "full"  and  the  "void,"  of
matter  and  extension.  The  physical  being  of  the  body  and  the
geometrical  being  of  extension  constitute  one  and  the  same  object:


396  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

the  "substance"  of  a  body  is  reduced  to  its  spatial  and  geometrical
determinations.  Thus  a  new  approach  to  physics,  methodologically
deeper  and  more  fruitful,  was  found,  the  concrete  realization  of
which,  however,  could  not  be  accomplished  by  Descartes'  physics.
When  Newton  fought  the  hypothetical  and  speculative  premises  of
the  (-artesian  physics,  he  also  abandoned  this  approach.  His
picture  of  the  world  was  rooted  in  the  dualistic  view,  which  was  even
intensified  in  it  and  which  set  its  seal  on  his  universal  law  of  nature
and  the  cosmos.  On  the  one  side,  there  stands  space  as  a  universal
receptacle  and  vessel;  on  the  other,  bodies,  inert  and  heavy  masses,
which  enter  into  it  and  determine  their  reciprocal  position  in  it  on
the  basis  of  a  universal  dynamic  law.  The  "quantity  of  matter,"
on  the  one  hand,  the  purely  spatial  "distance"  of  the  particular
masses  from  each  other,  on  the  other,  give  the  universal  physical
law  of  action,  according  to  which  the  cosmos  is  constructed.  Newton
as  a  physicist  always  declined  to  ask  for  a  further  "why,"  for  a
reason  for  this  rule.  It  was  for  him  the  unitary  mathematical
formula,  which  included  all  empirical  process  under  it  and  thus
perfectly  satisfied  the  task  of  the  exact  knowledge  of  nature.  That
this  formula  concealed— in  the  expression  for  the  cosmic  masses
and  in  the  expression  for  their  distance — two  wholly  different  ele-
ments seemed  a  circumstance  that  no  longer  concerned  the  physicist
but  only  the  metaphysician  and  the  speculative  philosopher  of  nature.
The  proposition  "hypotheses  nonfingo"  cuts  off  any  further  investiga-
tion in  this  direction.  For  Newton  as  for  Democritus,  matter  and
space,  the  full  and  the  void,  form  for  us  the  ultimate  but  mutually
irreducible  elements  of  the  physical  world,  the  fundamental  building-
stones  of  all  reality,  because  as  equally  justified  and  equally  neces-
sary factors,  they  enter  into  the  highest  law  of  motion  taught  us  by
experience.

If  we  contrast  this  view  with  the  picture  of  the  world  of  modern
and  very  recent  physios,  there  results  the  surprising  fact  that  the
latter  seems  to  be  again  on  the  road  to  Descartes,  not  indeed  in
content,  but  certainly  in  method.  It  too  strives  from  various  sides
toward  a  view  in  which  the  dualism  of  "space"  and  "matter"  is
cancelled,  in  which  the  two  no  longer  occur  as  different  classes  of
physical  object-concepts.  There  now  appears  in  the  concept  of
the  "field"  a  new  mediating  concept  between  "matter"  and  "empty
space;"  and  this  it  is  which  henceforth  appears  with  increasing


MATTER,  ETHER  AND  SPACE  397

definiteness  as  the  genuine  expression  of  the  physically  real  since  it
is  the  perfect  expression  of  the  physical  law  of  action.  In  this
concept  of  the  field,  the  typical  manner  of  thought  of  modern  physics
has  gained,  from  the  epistemological  standpoint,  its  sharpest  and
most  distinct  expression.  There  now  takes  place,  starting  from
electrodynamics,  a  progressive  transformation  of  the  concept  of
matter.  Already  with  Faraday,  who  constructed  matter  out  of
"lines  of  force/'  there  is  expressed  the  view  that  the  field  of  force
cannot  depend  on  matter,  but  that  on  the  contrary,  what  we  call
matter  is  nothing  else  than  specially  distinguished  places  of  this
field.1  In  the  progress  of  electrodynamics,  this  view  is  confirmed
and  assumes  ever  more  radical  expression.  The  doctrine  is  carried
through  more  and  more  of  a  pure  "field-physics/'  which  recognizes
neither  bare  undifferentiated  space  by  itself  nor  matter  by  itself
subsequently  entering  into  this  finished  space,  but  which  takes  as  a
basis  the  intuition  of  a  spatial  manifold  determined  by  a  certain  law
and  qualified  and  differentiated  according  to  it.  Thus,  e.g.,  there
was  established  by  Mie  a  more  general  form  of  electrodynamics  on
the  basis  of  which  it  seemed  possible  to  construct  matter  out  of  the
field.  The  concept  of  a  substance  existing  along  with  the  electro-
magnetic field  seemed  unnecessary  in  this  approach;  according  to
the  new  conception,  the  field  no  longer  requires  for  its  existence  matter
as  its  bearer,  but  matter  is  considered  and  treated,  on  the  contrary,
as  an  "outgrowth  of  the  field. "  It  is  the  last  consequence  of  this
type  of  thought  that  is  drawn  by  the  theory  of  relativity.  For
it,  too,  the  real  difference  finally  disappears  between  an  "empty"
space  and  a  space-filling  substance,  whether  one  calls  this  matter  or
ether,  since  it  includes  both  moments  in  one  and  the  same  act  of
methodic  determination.  The  "riddle  of  weight"  is  revealed  to  us,
according  to  the  fundamental  thought  of  Einstein's  theory  of  gravita-
tion, in  the  consideration  and  analysis  of  the  inner  relations  of
measurement  of  the  four  dimensional  space-time  manifold.  For  the
ten  functions  g/i",  which  occur  in  the  determination  of  the  linear

4

elements  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity  ds2  =  2g»vdx^dXj,  /^

v  =  1,  2,  3,  4),  represent  also  the  ten  components  of  the  gravitation
potential  of  Einstein's  theory.  It  is  thus  tne  same  determinations,
which,  on  the  one  hand,  designate  and  express  the  metrical  properties

1  On  Faraday,  cf.  Buck  (4,  esp.  p.  41  ff.);  cf.  also  Weyl  (83,  p.  142).


398  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

of  the  four-dimensional  space  and,  on  the  other,  the  physical  proper-
ties of  the  field  of  gravitation.  The  spatio-temporal  variability  of
the  magnitudes  g/zv  and  the  occurrence  of  such  a  field  prove  to  be
equivalent  assumptions  differing  only  in  expression.  Thus  it  is
shown  most  distinctly  that  the  new  physical  view  proceeds  neither
from  the  assumption  of  a  "space  in  itself,"  nor  of  "matter"  nor  of
"force  in  itself" — that  it  no  longer  recognizes  space,  force  and  matter
as  physical  objects  separated  from  each  other,  but  that  for  it  exists
only  the  unity  of  certain  functional  relations,  which  are  differently
designated  according  to  the  system  of  reference  in  which  we  express
them.  All  dynamics  tends  more  and  more  to  be  resolved  into  pure
metrics,  a  process  in  which  indeed  the  concept  of  metrics  undergoes,
in  contrast  with  classical  geometry,  an  extraordinary  broadening  and
generalization  whereby  the  measurements  of  Euclidean  geometry
appear  as  only  a  special  case  within  the  total  system  of  possible
measurements  in  general.  "The  world,"  as  is  said  by  Weyl,  in
whose  account  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity  one  can  trace  and
survey  this  development  most  clearly,"  is  a  (3  +  1)  =  dimensional
metrical  manifold;  all  physical  phenomena  are  expressions  of  world

metrics The  dream  of  Descartes  of  a  purely  geometrical

physics  seems  to  be  about  to  be  fulfilled  in  a  wonderful  way,  which
could  not  have  been  foreseen  by  him."  (83,  p.  244;  cf.  p.  85  ff.,
ITOff).

Just  as  the  dualism  of  matter  and  space  is  superseded  here  by  a
unitary  physical  conception,  so  the  opposition  between  "matter"
and  "force"  is  to  be  overcome  by  the  principle  and  law  of  the  new
physics.  Since  Newton,  as  a  physicist,  established  this  opposition
between  the  "inert  masses"  and  the  forces  that  affect  them  in  the
Pfnlosophiae  Naturalis  Printipia  Mathematica,  attempts,  indeed,
have  not  been  Jacking  to  overcome  it  from  the  philosophical  and
speculative  side.  Leibniz  led  the  way  here;  but  although,  in  his
metaphysics,  he  wholly  resolved  substance  into  force  he  retained  in
the  construction  of  his  mechanics,  the  duality  of  an  "active"  and  a
"passive"  force,  whereby  matter  is  subsumed  under  the  concept  of
the  latter.  The  essence  of  matter  consists  in  the  dynamic  principle
immanent  in  it;  but  this  expresses  itself,  on  the  one  hand,  in  activ-
ity and  striving  for  change,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  resistance  which
a  body  opposes,  according  to  its  nature,  to  change  coming  upon  it  from


MATTER, ETHER  AND SPACE  399

without.2  As  for  Newton,  the  opposition  in  fundamental  concepts,
which  he  assumes,  threatens  finally  to  destroy  the  unity  of  the  physi-
cal structure  of  his  world;  he  can  only  retain  this  unity  by  introducing
at  a  certain  place  a  metaphysical  factor.  The  principle  of  the  conser-
vation of  vis  viva  is  disputed  by  him  because  all  bodies  consist  of
"absolutely  hard"  atoms,  and  in  the  rebounding  of  such  atoms,
mechanical  energy  must  be  lost;  the  sum  total  of  force  is  in  a  con-
tinuous decrease,  so  that  for  its  preservation  the  world  needs  from
time  to  time  a  new  divine  impulse.  (58,  p.  322  ff.)  Kant  attempted
in  a  youthful  work,  the  Monadologia  Physica  of  the  year  1756,  a
reconciliation  and  mediation  between  the  principles  of  the  Leibni-
zian  philosophy  and  those  of  Newtonian  mechanics;  and  in  the
Metaphysischen  Anfangsgrunden  der  Naturwissenschaft  he  returns  to
the  attempted  purely  dynamic  deduction  and  construction  of  matter.
The  "essense"  of  matter  i.e.,  its  pure  concept  for  experience,  accord-
ing to  which  it  is  nothing  else  than  a  totality  of  external  relations,  is
resolved  into  a  pure  interaction  of  forces  acting  at  a  distance;  but
since  these  forces  themselves  occur  in  a  double  form,  as  attracting
and  repelling  forces,  the  dualism  is  not  fundamentally  overcome,  but
is  only  shifted  back  into  the  concept  of  force  itself.

Modern  physics  has  sought,  from  essentially  different  standpoints
and  motives,  to  overcome  the  old  opposition  between  matter  and
force,  which  seemed  sanctioned  and  made  eternal  in  the  classical
system  of  mechanics.  Heinrich  Hertz's  Prinzipien  der  Mechanik
takes  the  opposite  course  to  that  of  previous  philosophical  specula-
tion by  placing  the  sought  unity  in  the  concept  of  mass,  instead  of  in
the  concept  of  force.  Along  with  the  fundamental  concepts  of
space  and  time,  only  the  concept  of  mass  enters  into  the  systematic
construction  of  mechanics.  The  carrying  out  of  this  view  presup-
poses, indeed,  that  we  do  not  remain  with  gross  perceptible  mass  and
gross  perceptible  motion  but  supplement  the  sei^uously  given  ele-
ments, which  by  themselves  do  not  constitute  a  lawful  world,  by
assuming  certain  "concealed"  masses  and  "concealed"  motions.
This  supplementation  takes  place  when  it  is  shown  to  be  necessary
for  the  description  and  calculation  of  phenomena,  and  without  arous-
ing suspicion  since  mass  is  conceived  by  Hertz  from  the  beginning
merely  as  a  definite  factor  of  calculation.  It  is  intended  to  express

•  Cf.  (44),  I,  204,  267  ff.,  332 II,  290  ff .,  303.


400  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

nothing  hut  certain  coordination  of  space  and  time  values:  "a
particle  of  mass,"  as  Hertz  defines  it,  "is  a  property  by  which  we
coordinate  unambiguously  a  certain  point  of  space  to  a  certain  point
of  time  (and)3  a  certain  point  of  space  to  every  other  time."  (31,  p.
29  ff.,  54.)  Another  attempt  was  made  by  general  energetics  to
reach  a  unified  foundation  for  physics  and  with  it  for  mechanics.
Inert  mass  appears  here  merely  as  a  definite  factor  of  energy,  as  the
capacity-factor  of  the  energy  of  motion,  which  with  certain  other
capacity-factors  shares  with  the  different  types  of  energy,  e.g.,
electricity,  the  empirical  property  of  quantitative  conservation.
PJnergetics  refuses  to  grant  this  law  of  conservation  a  special  place
and  to  recognize  matter  as  a  particular  substance  along  with  energy.
(Cf.  60,  p,  282  ff.)  But  precisely  in  this  we  see  very  distinctly  what
is  logically  unsatisfactory,  which  consists  in  that  the  principle  of
conservation  refers  to  wholly  different  moments  between  which  an
inner  connection  is  not  to  be  seen.

The  theory  of  relativity  brings  important  clarification  here  too  in
that  it  combines  the  two  principles  of  conservation,  that  of  the
conservation  of  energy  and  that  of  the  conservation  of  mass  into  a
single  principle.  This  result  it  gains  by  applying  its  characteristic
manner  of  thought;  it  is  led  to  this  result  by  general  considerations
on  the  conditions  of  measurement.  The  demand  of  the  theory  of
relativity  (at  first  of  the  special  theory)  is  that  the  law  of  the  con-
servation of  energy  be  valid  not  only  with  reference  to  any  system
of  coordinates  K  but  also  with  reference  to  any  other  in  uniform
rectilinear  motion  relatively  to  it;  it  results  from  this  presupposition,
however,  combined  with  the  fundamental  equations  of  Maxwell's
electrodynamics  that  when  a  body  in  motion  takes  up  energy  E0
in  the  form  of  radiation  its  inert  mass  increases  by  a  definite  amount
(Jj).  The  mass  of  a  body  is  thus  a  measure  of  its  content  of  energy;
if  the  energy  content  alters  a  definite  amount  then  its  mass  alters
proportionately.4  Its  independent  constancy  is  thus  only  an  appear-
ance; it  holds  good  only  in  so  far  as  the  system  takes  up  and  gives  off
no  energy.  In  the  modern  electron  theory,  it  follows  from  the  well-
known  investigation  of  Kaufmann  that  the  "mass"  of  an  electron
is  not  unchangeable,  but  that  it  rapidly  increases  with  the  velocity
of  the  electron  as  soon  as  the  latter  approaches  the  velocity  of  light.

1  Trans.

« Einstein  (16a)  and  Planck  (64  and  65).


MATTER,  ETHER  AND  SPACE  401

While  previously  a  distinction  had  been  made  between  a  "real"  and  a
"fictitious"  mass  of  electrons,  i.e.,  between  an  inertia,  which  came
from  its  ponderable  mass,  and  another,  which  they  possessed  solely
because  of  their  motion  and  their  electric  charge,  in  so  far  as  this
opposed  a  certain  resistance  to  every  change  of  velocity,  it  now  turns
out  that  the  alleged  ponderable  mass  of  the  electrons  is  to  be  taken  as
strictly  =  0.

The  inertia  of  matter  thus  seems  completely  replaced  by  the  inertia
of  energy;  the  electron — and  thus  the  material  atom  as  a  system  of
electrons — possesses  no  material  but  only  "electromagnetic"  mass.
What  was  previously  regarded  as  the  truly  fundamental  property
of  matter,  as  its  substantial  kernel,  is  resolved  into  the  equations  of
the  electro-magnetic  field.  The  theory  of  relativity  goes  further
in  the  same  direction;  but  it  reveals  in  this  too  its  peculiar  nuance
and  character.  This  comes  out  especially  in  the  process  by  which  it
gains  one  of  its  fundamental  propositions:  in  the  establishment  of
the  equivalence  of  phenomena  of  inertia  and  weight.  Here  it  is  at
first  merely  a  calculation,  a  consideration  of  the  same  phenomena
from  different  systems  of  reference,  which  points  the  way.  We
can,  as  it  shows,  regard  one  and  the  same  phenomenon  now  as  a
pure  inertial  movement  and  now  as  a  movement  under  the  influence
of  a  field  of  gravitation  according  to  the  standpoint  we  choose.  The
equivalence  of  judgment,  here  indicated,  grounds  for  Einstein  the
physical  identity  of  phenomena  of  inertia  and  weight.  If  certain
accelerated  motions  occur  for  an  observer  within  his  sphere  of  obser-
vation, he  can  interpret  them  either  by  ascribing  them  to  the  effects
of  a  field  of  gravitation  or  conceive  the  system  of  reference  from
which  he  makes  his  measurements  as  in  a  certain  acceleration.  The
two  assumptions  accomplish  precisely  the  same  in  the  description
of  the  facts  and  can  thus  be  applied  without  distinction.  We  can —
as  Einstein  expresses  it — produce  a  field  of  gravitation  by  a  mere
change  of  the  system  of  coordinates.  (17,  p.  10;  cf.  18,  p.  45  ff.)
Hence,  it  follows  that  to  attain  a  universal  theory  of  gravitation  we
need  only  assume  such  a  shift  of  the  system  of  reference  and  estab-
lish its  consequences  by  calculation.  It  suffices  that  in  purely  ideal
fashion  we  place  ourselves  at  another  standpoint  to  be  able  to  deduce
certain  physical  consequences  from  this  change  of  standpoints.
What  was  previously  done  in  the  Newtonian  theory  of  gravitation
by  the  dynamics  of  forces  is  done  by  pure  kinematics  in  Einstein's


402  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

theory,  i.e.,  by  the  consideration  of  different  systems  of  reference
moving  relatively  to  each  other.

In  emphasizing  this  ideal  element  in  Einstein's  theory  of  gravita-
tion, the  empirical  assumption  on  which  it  rests  must  naturally  not
be  forgotten.  That  we  change  in  thought,  by  the  mere  introduction
of  a  new  system  of  reference,  a  field  of  inertia  into  a  field  of  gravita-
tion, and  a  field  of  gravitation  of  special  structure  into  a  field  of
inertia,  rests  on  the  empirical  equality  of  inert  and  gravitating  masses
of  bodies,  as  was  established  with  extraordinary  exactitude  by  the
investigation  of  Eotvos  to  which  Einstein  refers.  Only  the  fact  that
gravitation  imparts  to  all  bodies  found  at  the  same  place  in  the  field
of  gravitation,  the  same  amount  of  acceleration,  and  that  thus  it  is
for  any  definite  body  the  same  constant,  i.e.,  mass,  which  determines
its  inertial  effects  and  its  gravitational  effects,  renders  possible  that
transformation  of  the  one  into  the  other,  from  which  the  Einstein
theory  starts.6  But  it  is  especially  interesting  and  important  from  a
general  methodological  standpoint  that  this  fundamental  fact  is  given
a  completely  different  interpretation  than  in  the  Newtonian
mechanics.  What  Einstein  urges  against  the  latter  is  that  it  regis-
tered the  phenomenon  of  the  equivalence  of  gravitating  and  inert
masses,  but  did  not  interpret  it.  (18,  p.  44.)  What  was  established
as  a  fact  by  Newton  is  now  to  be  understood  from  principles.  In
this  problem  one  can  trace  how  gradually  the  question  as  to  the
"essence"  of  matter  and  of  gravitation  is  superseded  by  another
epistemological  formulation  of  the  question,  which  finds  the  "essence"
of  a  physical  process  expressed  wholly  in  its  quantitative  relations
and  its  numerical  constants.  Newton  never  ceased  to  reject  the
question  as  to  essence,  which  met  him  ever  again,  and  the  phrase
that  physics  has  to  do  merely  with  the  "description  of  phenomena"
was  first  formulated  in  his  school  and  is  an  expression  of  his  method.6
But  so  little  was  he  able  to  escape  this  question  that  he  expressly
urged  that  universal  attraction  was  not  itself  grounded  in  the  essence
of  body,  but  that  it  came  to  it  as  something  new  and  alien.  Weight
is,  as  he  emphasizes,  indeed  a  universal  but  not  an  essential  property
of  matter.  (59,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  4.)  What  this  distinction  between
the  universal  and  the  essential  means  from  the  standpoint  of  the

*  For  more  detail,  cf.  Freundlich  (24),  pp.  28  and  60  f.  and  Schlick  (79)
p.  27  ff;  cf.  Einstein  (18),  p.  45  ff.

•  Keill,  Introductio  ad  veram  Physicam  (1702),  (36);  cf.  7,  II,  404  ff.


MATTER, ETHER AND SPACE  40$

physicist,  who  has  to  do  merely  with  the  laws  of  phenomena,  and  thus
with  the  universality  of  the  rule  to  which  they  are  subjected,  is  here
left  in  the  dark.  Here  lies  a  difficulty,  which  has  been  felt  again  and
again  in  the  tedious  controversy  of  physicists  and  philosophers  on
the  actuality  and  possibility  of  force  acting  at  a  distance.  Kant,
in  his  Metaphysischen  Anfangsgriinden  der  Naturwissenschaft,  urges
against  Newton  that,  without  the  assumption  that  all  matter  merely
by  virtue  of  its  essential  properties  exercises  the  action  we  call
gravitation,  the  proposition  that  the  universal  attraction  of  bodies
is  proportional  to  their  inert  mass,  would  be  a  totally  contingent  and
mysterious  fact.  (35,  IV,  p.  421.)  In  its  solution  of  this  problem
the  general  theory  of  relativity  has  followed  the  path  prescribed  by
the  peculiarity  of  the  physical  method.  The  numerical  proportion
which  is  universally  found  between  inert  and  heavy  masses  becomes
the  expression  of  physical  equivalence,  of  the  essential  likeness  of
the  two.  The  theory  of  relativity  concludes  that  it  is  the  same
quality  of  the  body,  which  is  expressed  according  to  circumstances
as  "inertia"  or  as  "weight."  We  have  here  in  principle  the  same
procedure  before  us,  which,  e.g.,  in  the  electromagnetic  theory  of
light  led  to  insight  into  the  "identity"  of  light  waves  and  electrical
waves.  For  this  identity  too  means  nothing  else  and  nothing  more
mysterious  than  that  we  can  represent  and  master  the  phenomena  of
light  and  the  phenomena  of  dielectric  polarization  by  the  same
equations  and  that  the  same  numerical  value  results  for  the  velocity
of  light  and  for  that  of  dielectric  polarization.  This  equality  of
values  means  to  the  physicist  likeness  in  essence — since  for  him
essence  is  defined  in  terms  of  exact  determinations  of  measure  and
magnitude.  In  the  advance  to  this  insight,  there  may  be  traced
historically  a  definite  series  of  steps,  a  culmination  of  physical
theories.  The  physics  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  in  general
rooted  in  a  substantialistic  view.  In  the  fundamental  investigations
of  Sadi  Carnot  on  thermodynamics  heat  was  still  regarded  as  a
material,  and  the  assumption  seemed  unavoidable,  in  understanding
electricity  and  magnetism,  of  a  particular  electric  and  magnetic
"matter."  Since  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  however,
there  appears  in  place  of  this  "physics  of  materials,"  ever  more
definitely  and  distinctly  the  physics  that  has  been  called  the  "physics
of  principles."  Here  a  start  is  not  made  from  the  hypothetical
existence  of  certain  materials  and  agents,  but  from  certain  universal


404  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

relations,  which  are  regarded  as  the  criteria  for  the  interpretation
of  particular  phenomena.  The  general  theory  of  relativity  stands
methodologically  at  the  end  of  this  series,  since  it  collects  all  particu-
lar systematic  principles  into  the  unity  of  a  supreme  postulate,  in
the  postulate  not  of  the  constancy  of  things,  but  of  the  invariance  of
certain  magnitudes  and  laws  with  regard  to  all  transformations  of
the  system  of  reference.

The  same  evolution,  that  is  characteristic  of  physical  conceptual
•construction  in  general,  is  seen  when  we  go  from  the  concept  of  matter
to  the  second  fundamental  concept  of  modern  physics,  to  the  concept
of  the  ether.7  The  idea  of  the  ether,  as  the  bearer  of  optical  and
magnetic  effects  was  at  first  conceived  in  the  greatest  possible  analogy
and  affinity  with  our  presentations  of  empirically  give-in  materials
and  things.  A  sensuous  description  of  its  fundamental  properties
was  sought  by  comparing  it  now  with  a  perfectly  incompressible
fluid,  now  with  a  perfectly  elastic  body.  But  the  more  one  attempted
to  work  these  pictures  out  in  detail,  the  more  distinctly  was  it  seen
that  they  .demanded  the  impossible  of  our  faculty  of  presentation,
that  they  demanded  the  unification  of  absolutely  conflicting  proper-
ties. Thus  modern  physics  was  more  and  more  forced  to  abandon
in  principle  this  sort  of  sensuous  description  and  illustration.  But
the  difficulty  was  unchanged  also  when  one  asked,  not  concerning
any  concrete  properties  of  the  ether,  but  merely  concerning  the
abstract  laws  of  its  motion.  The  attempt  to  construct  a  mechanics
of  the  ether  led  little  by  little  to  the  sacrifice  of  all  the  fundamental
principles  of  classical  mechanics;  it  was  seen  that,  really  to  carry  it
through,  one  would  have  to  give  up  not  only  the  principle  of  the
equality  of  action  and  reaction,  but  the  principle  of  impenetrability
in  which,  e.g.,  Euler  saw  the  kernel  and  inclusive  expression  of  all
mechanical  laws.  Ether  was  and  remained  accordingly,  in  an  expres-
sion of  Planck,  the  "child  of  sorrow  of  the  mechanical  theory ;"  the
assumption  of  the  exact  validity  of  the  Maxwell-Hertzian  differential
equations  for  electrodynamic  processes  in  the  pure  ether  excludes
the  possibility  of  their  mechanical  explanation.8  An  escape  from

7  Here  I  do  not  go  into  details  in  the  development  of  the  hypothesis  of
the  ether;  they  have  been  expounded  from  the  standpoint  of  epistemology  by
e.  g.,  Aloys  Miiller  (55,  p.  90  ff.)  and  Erich  Becher  (2,  p.  232  ff.). On  the
following  c/.  Substance  and  Function  (8,  p.  215  ff.).

8  C/.  Planck  (67),  p.  64  ff. Lenard  (45a  and  6),  especially  declares  for
the  possibility  and  necessity  of  a  "  mechanics  of  the  ether. "


MATTER,  ETHER  AND  SPACE  405

this  antinomy  could  only  be  reached  by  reversing  the  treatment.
Instead  of  asking  about  the  properties  or  constitution  of  the  ether  as  a
real  thing,  the  question  must  be  raised  as  to  by  what  right  here  in
general  one  seeks  for  a  particular  substance  with  particular  material
properties  and  a  definite  mechanical  constitution.  What  if  all  the
difficulties  of  the  answer  are  based  on  the  question  itself,  there
being  in  it  no  clear  and  definite  physical  meaning?  That  is,  in  fact,
the  new  position  which  the  theory  of  relativity  takes  to  the  question
of  the  ether.  According  to  the  outcome  of  Michelson's  investigation
and  the  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the  propagation  of  light,  each
observer  has  the  right  to  regard  his  system  as  "motionless  in  the
ether ;"  one  must  thus  ascribe  to  the  ether  simultaneous  rest  with
reference  to  wholly  different  systems  of  coordinates  K,  K',  K",
which  are  in  uniform  translatory  motion  relatively  to  each  other.
That,  however,  is  an  obvious  contradiction  and  it  forces  us  to  abandon
the  thought  of  the  ether  as  a  somehow  moving  or  motionless  "sub-
stance," as  a  thing  with  a  certain  "state  of  motion."  Physics,
instead  of  imagining  some  sort  of  hypothetical  substratum  of  phenom-
ena and  losing  itself  in  consideration  of  the  nature  of  this  substra-
tum, is  satisfied,  as  it  becomes  a  pure  "physics  of  fields,"  with  the
body  of  field-equations  themselves  and  their  experimentally  verifiable
validity.  "One  cannot  define,"  says  e.g.,  Lucien  Poincare*,  "ether
by  material  properties  without  committing  a  real  fallacy,  and  to
characterize  it  by  other  properties  than  those,  the  direct  and  exact
knowledge  of  which  is  produced  for  us  by  experiment,  is  an  entirely
useless  labor  condemned  to  sterility  from  the  beginning.  The  ether
is  defined  when  we  know  the  two  fields,  which  can  exist  in  it,  the
electric  and  magnetic  fields,  in  their  magnitude  and  direction  at  each
point.  The  two  fields  can  change;  by  custom  we  speak  of  a  motion
propagated  in  the  ether;  but  the  phenomenon  accessible  to  experi-
ment is  the  propagation  of  these  changes."  (75,  p.  251.)  Here  we
again  face  one  of  those  triumphs  of  the  critical  and  functional  concept
over  the  nai've  notion  of  things  and  substances,  such  as  are  found
more  and  more  in  the  history  of  exact  science.  The  physical  r61e  of
the  ether  is  ended  as  soon  as  a  type  of  exposition  is  found  for  the
electrodynamic  laws  into  which  it  does  not  enter  as  a  condition.
"The  theory  of  relativity,"  remarks  one  of  its  representatives,  "rests
on  an  entirely  new  understanding  of  the  propagation  of  electromag-
netic effects  in  empty  space;  they  are  not  carried  by  a  medium,  but


406  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

neither  do  they  take  place  by  unmediated  action  at  a  distance.  But
the  electromagnetic  field  in  empty  space  is  a  thing  possessing  self-
existent  physical  reality  independently  of  all  substance.  Indeed,
one  must  first  accustom  himself  to  this  idea;  but  perhaps  this  habitua-
tion  will  be  made  easier  by  the  remark  that  the  physical  properties
of  this  field,  which  are  given  most  adequate  expression  in  Maxwell's
equations,  are  much  more  perfectly  and  exactly  known  than  the
properties  of  any  substance."  (Laue,  41,  p.  112.)  Habituation  with
regard  to  a  "  thing  independent  of  any  substance'  '  can  indeed  be  as
little  attributed  to  common  human  understanding  as  to  the  episte-
mologically  trained  understanding;  for  precisely  to  the  latter  does
substance  mean  the  category  on  the  application  of  which  rests  all
possibility  of  positing  "things."  But  it  is  obvious  that  we  have  here
only  an  inexactitude  of  expression  and  that  the  "independent  physical
reality"  of  the  electromagnetic  field  can  mean  nothing  but  the  reality
of  the  relations  holding  within  it  which  are  expressed  in  the  equations
of  Maxwell  and  Hertz.  Since  they  are  for  us  the  ultimate  attainable
object  of  physical  knowledge,  they  are  set  up  as  the  ultimate  attain-
able reality  for  us.  The  idea  of  the  ether  as  an  inexperienceable
substance  is  excluded  by  the  theory  of  relativity  in  order  to  give
conceptual  expression  merely  to  the  pure  properties  of  empirical
knowledge.

For  this  purpose,  however,  according  to  the  theory  of  relativity,
we  do  not  need  the  fixed  and  rigid  reference  body,  to  which  classical
mechanics  was  ultimately  referred.  The  general  theory  of  relativity
no  longer  measures  with  the  rigid  bodies  of  Euclidean  geometry  and
classical  mechanics,  but  it  proceeds  from  a  new  and  more  inclusive
standpoint  in  its  determination  of  the  universal  linear  element  ds.
In  place  of  the  rigid  rod  which  is  assumed  to  retain  the  same  unchang-
ing length  for  all  times  and  places  and  under  all  particular  conditions
of  measurement  there  now  appear  the  curved  coordinates  of  Gauss.
If  any  point  P  of  the  space-time  continuum  is  determined  by  the
four  parameters  Xi,  x2,  xs,  X4,  then  for  it  and  an  infinitely  close  point
P'  there  is  a  certain  "distance"  <fe,  which  is  expressed  by  the  formula:


+ g22dxa* + gasdxa* + g44dx42  + 2gi2dxidx2 +
2gi3dxidx8+.  .  .

in  which  the  magnitudes  gn,  g22--  -g«  have  values,  which  vary
with  the  place  in  the  continuum. In  this  general  expression,  the


MATTER,  ETHER  AND  SPACE  407

formula  for  the  linear  element  of  the  Euclidean  continuum  is  con-
tained as  a  special  case.  We  need  not  here  go  into  details  of  this
determination;9 — its  essential  result,  however,  is  that  measurements
in  general  different  from  each  other  result  for  each  place  in  the  space-
time  continuum.  Each  point  is  referred,  not  to  a  rigid  and  fixed
system  of  reference  outside  of  it,  but  to  a  certain  extent  only  to  itself
and  to  infinitely  close  points.  Thus  all  measurements  become  infi-
nitely fluid  as  compared  with  the  rigid  straight  lines  of  Euclidean
geometry,  which  are  freely  movable  in  space  without  change  of  form;
and  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  all  these  infinitely  various  determinations
are  collected  into  a  truly  universal  and  unitary  system.  We  now
apply,  instead  of  given  and  finite  reference  bodies,  only  "reference
mollusks"  as  Einstein  calls  them;  but  the  conceptual  system  of  all
these  "mollusks"  satisfies  the  demand  for  an  exact  description  of
natural  processes.  For  the  universal  principle  of  relativity  demands
that  all  these  systems  can  be  applied  as  reference  bodies  with  equal
right  and  with  the  same  consequences  in  the  formulation  of  the
universal  laws  of  nature ;  the  form  of  the  law  is  to  be  completely  inde-
pendent of  the  choice  of  the  mollusk.  (18,  p.  67.)  Here  is  ex-
pressed again  the  characteristic  procedure  of  the  general  theory  of
relativity;  while  it  destroys  the  thing-form  of  the  finite  and  rigid
reference  body  it  would  thereby  only  press  forward  to  a  higher  form
of  object,  to  the  true  systematic  farm  of  nature  and  its  laws.  Only
by  heightening  and  outdoing  the  difficulties  which  resulted  even  for
classical  mechanics  from  the  fact  of  the  relativity  of  all  motions,
does  it  hope  to  find  an  escape  in  principle  from  these  difficulties.
"The  clearer  our  concepts  of  space  and  time  become,"  as  was  said  in
the  outline  of  mechanics,  which  Maxwell  has  given  in  his  short  work,
Matter  and  Motion,  "the  more  do  we  see  that  everything  to  which
our  dynamic  doctrines  refer,  belongs  in  a  single  system.  At  first
we  might  think  that  we,  as  conscious  beings,  must  have  as  necessary
elements  of  our  knowledge,  an  absolute  knowledge  of  the  place,  in
which  we  find  ourselves,  and  of  the  direction  in  which  we  move .  But
this  opinion,  which  was  undoubtedly  that  of  many  sages  of  antiquity,
disappears  more  and  more  from  the  idea  of  the  physicist.  In  space,
there  are  no  milestones;  one  part  of  space  is  precisely  like  any  other
part,  so  that  we  cannot  know  where  we  are.  We  find  ourselves  in  a

•  Cf.  Einstein  (17  and  18,  pp.  59  ft .) ;  cf.  below  VI.


408  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OP  RELATIVITY

waveless  sea  without  stars,  without  compass  and  sun,  without  wind
and  tide,  and  cannot  say  in  what  direction  we  move.  We  have  no
log  that  we  can  cast  out  to  make  a  calculation;  we  can  indeed  deter-
mine the  degree  of  our  motion  in  comparison  with  neighboring  bodies,
but  we  do  not  know  what  the  motion  in  space  of  these  bodies  is."
(51,  p.  92  f.)  From  this  mood  oi"ignorahimus"  into  which  physics
was  sinking  more  and  more,  only  a  theory  could  free  it  which  grasped
the  problem  at  its  root;  and,  instead  of  modifying  the  previous  solu-
tions, transformed  fundamentally  the  formulation  of  the  question.
The  question  of  absolute  space  and  absolute  motion  could  receive
only  the  solution  which  had  been  given  to  the  problem  of  the  perpet-
ual mobile  and  the  squaring  of  the  circle.  It  had  to  be  made  over
from  a  mere  negative  expression  into  a  positive  expression,  to  be
changed  from  a  limitation  of  physical  knowledge  to  a  principle  of
such  knowledge,  if  the  true  philosophic  import,  which  was  con-
cealed in  it,  was  to  be  revealed.


CHAPTER  V

THE  CONCEPTS  OF  SPACE  AND  TIME  OF  CKITICAL  IDEAUSM  AND  THE
THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

We  have  hitherto  sought  primarily  to  understand  the  special  and
general  theory  of  relativity  on  its  physical  side.  In  fact,  this  is  the
standpoint  from  which  it  must  be  judged  and  one  does  it  poor  service
if  one  seeks  precipitately  to  interpret  its  results  in  purely  "philo-
sophical" or  indeed  in  speculative  and  metaphysical  terms.  The
theory  contains  not  one  concept,  which  is  not  deducible  from  the
intellectual  means  of  mathematics  and  physics  and  perfectly  repre-
sentable  in  them.  It  only  seeks  to  gain  full  consciousness  of  precisely
these  intellectual  means  by  seeking  not  only  to  represent  the  result  of
physical  measurement,  but  to  gain  fundamental  clarity  concerning
the  form  of  any  physical  measurement  and  its  conditions.

Thereby  it  seems  indeed  to  come  into  the  immediate  neighborhood
of  the  critical  and  transcendental  theory,  which  is  directed  on  the
"possibility  of  experience;"  but  it  is  nevertheless  different  from  it  in
its  general  tendency.  For,  in  the  language  of  this  transcendental
criticism,  the  doctrine  of  space  and  time  developed  by  the  theory  of
relativity  is  a  doctrine  of  empirical  space  and  empirical  time,  not  of
pure  space  and  pure  time.  As  far  as  concerns  this  point,  there  is
scarcely  possible  a  difference  of  opinion;  and,  in  fact,  all  critics,
who  have  compared  the  Kantian  and  the  Einstein-Minkowski
theories  of  space  and  time  seem  to  have  reached  essentially  the  same
result.1  From  the  standpoint  of  a  strict  empiricism,  one  could
attempt  to  dispute  the  possibility  of  a  doctrine  of  "pure  space"  and
of  "pure  time;"  but  the  conclusion  cannot  be  avoided  that  in  so
far  as  such  a  doctrine  is  justified,  it  must  be  independent  of  all
results  of  concrete  measurement  and  of  the  particular  conditions,
which  prevail  in  the  latter.  If  the  concepts  of  pure  space  and  pure
time  have  in  general  any  definite  justified  meaning,  to  use  a  phrase
of  the  theory  of  relativity,  then  this  meaning  must  be  invariant  with
regard  to  all  transformations  of  the  doctrine  of  the  empirical  measure-
ment of  space  and  time.  The  only  thing  that  such  transformations

1  (7/,  esp.  Natorp  (56,  p.  392  ff.).  Honigswald  (33,  p.  88  ff.).  Frischei-
sen-Kohler  (26,  p.  323  ff.)  and  more  recently  Sellien  (81,  p.  14  ff.).

409


410  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OP  RELATIVITY

can  and  will  accomplish  is  that  they  teach  us  to  draw  the  line  more
sharply  between  what  belongs  to  the  purely  philosophical,  "transcen-
dental," criticism  of  the  concepts  of  space  and  time  and  what  belongs
merely  to  the  particular  applications  of  these  concepts.  Here,  in
fact,  the  theory  of  relativity  can  perform  an  important  indirect
service  for  the  general  criticism  of  knowledge, — if  we  resist  the
temptation  to  translate  its  propositions  directly  into  propositions  of
the  criticism  of  knowledge.

Kant's  doctrine  of  space  and  time  developed  to  a  large  extent  on
the  basis  of  physical  problems,  and  the  conflict  carried  on  in  the
natural  science  of  the  eighteenth  century  on  the  existence  of  absolute
time  and  absolute  space  affected  him  keenly  from  the  beginning.
Before  he  approached  the  problems  of  space  and  time  as  a  critical
philosopher,  he  had  himself  lived  through  the  various  and  opposite
solutions  by  which  contemporary  physics  sought  to  master  these
problems.  Here,  at  first,  contrary  to  the  dominant  scholastic
opinion,  he  took  his  stand  throughout  on  the  basis  of  the  relativistic
view.  In  his  Neuen  Lehrbegriff  der  Bewegung  und  der  Ruhe  of  the
year  1758,  the  thirty-four  year  old  Kant  set  up  the  principle  of  the
relativity  of  all  motion  with  all  decisiveness  and  from  it  attacked
the  traditional  formulation  of  the  principle  of  inertia.  "Now  I
begin  to  see,"  he  says  after  he  has  illustrated  the  difficulties  of  the
concept  of  "absolute  motion"  with  well-known  examples,  "that  I
lack  something  in  the  expression  of  motion  and  rest.  I  should
never  say:  a  body  rests  without  adding  with  regard  to  what  thing  it
rests,  and  never  say  that  it  moves  without  at  the  same  time  naming
the  objects  with  regard  to  which  it  changes  its  relation.  If  I  wish  to
imagine  also  a  mathematical  space  free  from  all  creatures  as  a
receptable  of  bodies,  this  would  still  not  help  me.  'For  by  what
should  I  distinguish  the  parts  of  the  same  and  the  different  places,
which  are  occupied  by  nothing  corporeal?"  (35,  II,  19.)  But
Kant,  in  his  further  development  did  not  at  first  remain  true  to  the
norm,  which  he  here  set  up  so  decisively  and  of  which  a  modern
physicist  has  said  that  it  deserves  to  be  set  up  in  iron  letters  over
each  physical  lecture  hall.2  He  ventured  to  abandon  the  concept  of
inertial  force,  of  vis  inertiae;  he  refused  to  pour  his  thoughts  on  the
principles  of  mechanics  "into  the  mill  of  the  Wolffian  or  of  any

*  Streintz  (82),  p.  42.


SPACE  AND  TIME OF  CRITICAL IDEALISM  411

other  famous  system  of  doctrine."  But  while  he  opposed  in  this
way  the  authority  of  the  leading  philosophers,  he  could  not  perman-
ently withdraw  himself  from  the  authority  of  the  great  mathematical
physicists  of  his  time.  In  his  Versuch,  den  Begriff  der  negativen
Grossen  in  die  Weltweisheit  einzufuhren  of  the  year  1763,  he  took  his
place  at  the  side  of  Euler  to  defend  with  him  the  validity  of  the
Newtonian  concepts  of  absolute  space  and  absolute  time,  and  six
years  later,  in  his  essay  on  the  first  grounds  of  the  difference  of
regions  in  space  (1769),  he  sought  to  support  the  proof,  that  Euler
had  attempted,  of  the  existence  of  absolute  space  from  the  principles
of  mechanics,  by  another,  purely  geometrical  consideration,  which
"would  give  practical  geometricians  a  conclusive  reason  to  be  able  to
affirm  the  reality  of  their  absolute  space  with  the  "evidence"  which  is
customary  to  them."  (35,  II,  394.)  But  this  is  indeed  only  an
episode  in  Kant's  evolution;  for  only  a  year  later  the  decisive  critical
turn  in  the  question  of  space  and  time  had  taken  place  in  his  Inaugural
Dissertation  of  the  year  1770.  By  it  the  problem  receives  an  entirely
new  form;  it  is  removed  from  the  field  of  physics  to  that  of  "transcen-
dental philosophy"  and  must  be  considered  and  solved  according  to
the  general  principles  of  the  latter.

But  the  transcendental  philosophy  does  not  have  to  do  primarily
with  the  reality  of  space  or  of  time,  whether  these  are  taken  in  a
metaphysical  or  in  a  physical  sense,  but  it  investigates  the  objective
significance  of  the  two  concepts  in  the  total  structure  of  our  empirical
knowledge.  It  no  longer  regards  space  and  time  as  things,  but  as
"sources  of  knowledge."  It  sees  in  them  no  independent  objects,
which  are  somehow  present  and  which  we  can  master  by  experi-
ment and  observation,  but  "conditions  of  the  possibility  of  experi-
ence," conditions  of  experiment  and  observation  themselves,  which
again  for  their  part  are  not  to  be  viewed  as  things.

What — like  time  and  space — makes  possible  the  positing  of  objects
can  itself  never  be  given  to  us  as  a  particular  object  in  distinction
from  others.  For  the  "farms"  of  possible  experience,  the  forms  of
intuition  as  well  as  the  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding,  are  not
met  again  as  contents  of  real  experience.  Rather  the  only  possible
manner  in  which  we  can  ascribe  any  sort  of  "objectivity"  to  these
forms  must  consist  in  that  they  lead  to  certain  judgments  to  which  we
must  ascribe  the  values  of  necessity  and  universality.  The  meaning
is  thus  indicated,  in  which  one  can  henceforth  inquire  as  to  the  objec-


412  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

tivity  of  space  or  time.  Whoever  demands  absolute  thing-liku
correlates  for  them  strains  after  shadows.  For  their  whole  "being"
consists  in  the  meaning  and  function  they  possess  for  the  complexes
of  judgments,  which  we  call  science,  whether  geometry  or  arithmetic,
mathematical  or  empirical  physics.  What  they  can  accomplish
as  presuppositions  in  this  connection  can  be  exactly  determined  by
transcendental  criticism;  what  they  are  as  things  in  themselves  is  a
vain  and  fundamentally  unintelligible  question.  This  basic  view
comes  out  clearly  even  in  the  Inaugural  Dissertation.  Even  here
absolute  space  and  time  possessing  an  existence  separate  from  empiri-
cal bodies  and  from  empirical  events,  are  rejected  as  nonentities,  as
mere  conceptual  fictions  (inane  rationis  commentum.)  The  two,
space  and  time,  signify  only  a  fixed  law  of  the  mind,  a  schema  of
connection  by  which  what  is  sensuously  perceived  is  set  in  certain
relations  of  coexistence  and  sequence.  Thus  the  two  have,  in
spite  of  their  "transcendental  ideality,"  "empirical  reality,"  but  this
reality  means  always  only  their  validity  for  all  experience,  which
however  must  never  be  confused  with  their  existence  as  isolated  ob-
jective contents  of  this  experience  itself.  "Space  is  merely  the  form
of  external  intuition  (formal  intuition)  and  not  a  real  object  that  can
be  perceived  by  external  intuition.  Space,  as  prior  to  all  things
which  determine  it  (fill  or  limit  it),  or  rather  which  give  an  empirical
intuition  determined  by  its  form,  is,  under  the  name  of  absolute
space,  nothing  but  a  mere  possibility  of  external  phenomena.
If  we  try  to  separate  one  from  the  other,  and  to  place  space
outside  all  phenomena,  we  arrive  at  a  number  of  empty  determi-
nations of  external  intuition,  which,  however,  can  never  be  possible
perceptions;  for  instance,  motion  or  rest  of  the  world  in  an  infinite
empty  space,  i.e.,  a  determination  of  the  mutual  relation  of  the  two,
which  can  never  be  perceived,  and  is  therefore  nothing  but  the  predi-
cate of  a  mere  idea."  (34,  p.  457;  Miiller  trans.,  p.  347.)

Accordingly,  when  Einstein  characterizes  as  a  fundamental  feature
of  the  theory  of  relativity  that  it  takes  from  space  and  time  "the
last  remainder  of  physical  objectivity"  it  is  clear  that  the  theory  only
accomplishes  the  most  definite  application  and  carrying  through  of
the  standpoint  of  critical  idealism  within  empirical  science  itself.
Space  and  time  in  the  critical  doctrine  are  indeed  distinguished  in
their  validity  as  types  of  order  from  the  contents,  which  are  ordered
in  them;  but  these  forms  possess  for  Kant  a  separate  existence  neither


SPACE  AND TIME OF  CRITICAL  IDEALISM  413

in  the  subjective  nor  in  the  objective  sense.  The  conception,  that
space  and  time  as  subjective  forms  into  which  sensations  enter  "lie
ready  in  the  mind"  before  all  experience,  not  as  "physical"  but  as
"psychical"  realities,  today  scarcely  needs  refutation.  This  con-
ception indeed  seems  to  be  indestructible,  although  Fichte  poured
upon  it  his  severe  but  appropriate  scorn;  but  it  disappears  of  itself
for  everyone  who  has  made  clear  to  himself  even  the  first  conditions
of  the  transcendental  formulation  of  the  question  in  opposition  to  the
psychological.  The  meaning  of  the  principle  of  order  can  in  general
be  comprehended  only  in  and  with  what  is  ordered;  in  particular,  it
is  urged  in  the  case  of  the  measurement  of  time  that  the  determina-
tion of  the  temporal  positions  of  particular  empirical  objects  and
processes  cannot  be  derived  from  the  relations  of  the  phenomena  to
absolute  time,  but  that  conversely  the  phenomena  must  determine
and  make  necessary  their  positions  in  time  for  each  other.  "This
unity  in  the  determination  of  time  is  dynamical  only,  that  is,  time
is  not  looked  upon  as  that  in  which  experience  assigns  immediately
its  place  to  every  existence,  for  this  would  be  impossible;  because  abso-
lute time  is  no  object  of  perception  by  which  phenomena  could  be
held  together;  but  the  rule  of  the  understanding  through  which  alone
the  existence  of  phenomena  can  receive  synthetical  unity  in  time
determines  the  place  of  each  of  them  in  time,  therefore  a  priori  and
as  valid  for  all  time."  (34,  p.  245  and  262;  cf.  56,  p.  332;  cf.  Mtiller
trans.,  p.  175.)

It  is  such  a  "rule  of  the  understanding,"  in  which  is  expressed  the
synthetic  unity  of  phenomena  and  their  reciprocal  dynamical  rela-
tion, on  which  rests  all  empirical  spatial  order,  all  objective  relations
of  spatial  "community"  in  the  corporeal  world.  The  "communio
spatii,"  i.e.,  that  a  priori  form  of  coexistence,  which  in  Kant's
language  is  characterized  as  "pure  intuition"  is,  as  he  expressly
urges,  only  empirically  knowable  for  us  by  the  commercium  of  sub-
stances in  space,  i.e.,  by-  a  whole  of  physical  effects,  that  can  be
pointed  out  in  experience.  We  read,  in  a  passage  of  the  Critique  of
Pure  Reason,  which  appears  especially  significant  and  weighty  in
connection  with  the  development  of  the  modern  theory  of  relativity:
"The  word  communion  (Gemeinschaff),  may  be  used  in  two  senses,
meaning  either  communio  or  commercium.  We  use  it  here  in  the
latter  sense:  as  a  dynamical  communion,  without  which  even  the
local  communio  spatii  could  never  be  known  empirically.  We  can


414  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OP  RELATIVITY

easily  perceive  in  our  experience,  that  continuous  influences  only  can
lead  our  senses  in  all  parts  of  space  from  one  object  to  another;  that  the
light  which  plays  between  our  eyes  and  celestial  bodies  produces  a  mediate
communion  between  us  and  them,  and  proves  the  coexistence  of  the
latter;  that  we  cannot  change  any  place  empirically  (perceive  such  a
change)  unless  matter  itself  renders  the  perception  of  our  own  place
possible  to  us,  and  that  by  means  of  its  reciprocal  influence  only
matter  can  evidence  its  simultaneous  existence,  and  thus  (though
mediately  only)  its  coexistence,  even  to  the  most  distant  objects."
(34,  p.  260;  c/.,  Mtiller  trans.,  p.  173  f.)  The  spatial  order  of  the
corporeal  world,  in  other  words,  is  never  given  to  us  directly  and
sensuously,  but  is  the  result  of  an  intellectual  construction,  which
takes  its  start  from  certain  empirical  laws  of  phenomena  and  from
that  point  seeks  to  advance  to  increasingly  general  laws,  in  which
finally  is  grounded  what  we  call  the  unity  of  experience  as  a  spatio-
temporal  unity.

But  is  there  not  found  in  this  last  expression  the  characteristic  and
decisive  opposition  between  the  theory  of  space  and  time  of  critical
idealism  and  the  theory  of  relativity?  Is  not  the  essential  result  of
this  theory  precisely  the  destruction  of  the  unity  of  space  and  time
demanded  by  Kant?  If  all  measurement  of  time  is  dependent  on  the
state  of  motion  of  the  system  from  which  it  is  made  there  seem  to
result  only  infinitely  many  and  infinitely  diverse  "place-times,"
which,  however,  never  combine  into  the  unity  of  "the"  time.  We
have  already  seen,  however,  that  this  view  is  erroneous,  that  the
destruction  of  the  substantialistic  unity  of  space  and  time  does  not
destroy  their  functional  unity  but  rather  truly  grounds  and  confirms  it.
(Cf.  above,  p.  33  ff.  54  ff.)  In  fact,  this  state  of  affairs  is  not  only
granted  by  the  representatives  of  the  theory  of  relativity  among  the
physicists,  but  is  expressly  emphasized  by  them.  "The  boldness  and
the  high  philosophical  significance  of  Einstein's  doctrine  consists,"  we
read,  e.g.,  in  the  work  of  Laue,  "in  that  it  clears  away  the  traditional
prejudice  of  one  time  valid  for  all  systems.  Great  as  the  change  is,
which  it  forces  upon  our  whole  thought,  there  is  found  in  it  not  the
slightest  epistemological  difficulty.  For  in  Kant's  manner  of  expres-
sion time  is,  like  space,  a  pure  form  of  our  intuition;  a  schema  in  which
we  must  arrange  events,  so  that  in  opposition  to  subjective  and
highly  contingent  perceptions  they  may  gain  objective  meaning.
This  arranging  can  only  take  place  on  the  basis  of  empirical  knowl-


SPACE  AND TIME OF  CRITICAL  IDEALISM  415

edge  of  natural  laws. The  place  and  time  of  the  observed  change  of  a
heavenly  body  can  only  be  established  on  the  basis  of  optical  laws.
That  two  differently  moving  observers,  each  one  regarding  himself
at  rest,  should  make  this  arrangement  differently  on  the  basis  of  the
same  laws  of  nature,  contains  no  logical  impossibility. Both  arrange-
ments have,  nevertheless,  objective  meaning  since  there  may  be
deduced  exactly  from  each  of  them  by  the  derivative  transformation
formulae  that  arrangement  valid  for  the  other  moving  observer."
(40,  p.  36  f .) This  one-to-one  correlation  and  not  the  oneness  of  the
values  gained  in  the  different  systems,  is  what  remains  of  the  notion
of  the  "unity  of  time";  but  precisely  in  it  is  expressed  all  the  more
sharply  the  fundamental  view  that  this  unity  is  not  to  be  represented
in  the  form  of  a  particular  objective  content,  but  exclusively  in  the
form  of  a  system  of  valid  relations. The  "dynamic  unity  of  temporal
determinations"  is  retained  as  a  postulate;  but  it  is  seen  that  we
cannot  satisfy  this  postulate  if  we  hold  to  the  laws  of  the  Newtonian
mechanics,  but  that  we  are  necessarily  driven  to  a  new  and  more
universal  and  concrete  form  of  physics. The  "objective"  deter-
mination shows  itself  thus  to  be  essentially  more  complex  than  the
classical  mechanics  assumed,  which  believed  it  could  literally  grasp
with  its  hands  the  objective  determination  in  its  privileged  systems
of  reference. That  a  step  is  thereby  taken  beyond  Kant  is  incon-
testable; for  he  shaped  his  "Analogies  of  Experience"  essentially  on
the  three  fundamental  Newtonian  laws:  the  law  of  inertia,  the  law
of  the  proportionality  of  force  and  acceleration,  and  the  law  of  the
equality  of  action  and  reaction. But  in  this  very  advance  the  doc-
trine that  it  is  the  "rule  of  the  understanding,"  that  forms  the  pattern
of  all  our  temporal  and  spatial  determinations,  is  verified  anew. In
the  special  theory  of  relativity,  the  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the
velocity  of  light  serves  as  such  a  rule;  in  the  general  theory  of  relativ-
ity this  principle  is  replaced  by  the  more  inclusive  doctrine  that  all
Gaussian  coordinate  systems  are  of  equal  value  for  the  formulation
of  the  universal  natural  laws. It  is  obvious  that  we  are  not  con-
cerned here  with  the  expression  of  an  empirically  observed  fact,
but  with  a  principle  which  the  understanding  uses  hypothetically  as
a  norm  of  investigation  in  the  interpretation  of  experience,  for  how
could  an  infinite  totality  be  "observed"? And  the  meaning  and
justification  of  this  norm  rest  precisely  on  the  fact  that  only  by  its
application  could  we  hope  to  regain  the  lost  unity  of  the  object,


416  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

namely,  the  "synthetic  unity  of  phenomena  according  to  temporal
relations."  The  physicist  now  depends  neither  on  the  constancy  of
those  objects  with  which  the  naive  sensuous  view  of  the  world  rests
nor  on  the  constancy  of  particular  spatial  and  temporal  measure-
ments gained  from  a  particular  system,  but  he  affirms,  as  a  condition
of  his  science,  the  existence  of  "universal  constants"  and  universal
laws,  which  retain  the  same  values  for  all  systems  of  measurement.

In  his  Metaphysischen  Anfangsgrunden  der  Naturwissenschaft,
Kant,  returning  to  the  problem  of  absolute  space  and  time,  formu-
lates a  happy  terminological  distinction,  which  is  suited  to  character-
ize more  sharply  the  relation  of  critical  idealism  to  the  theory  of
relativity.  Absolute  space,  he  urges  here  too,  is  in  itself  nothing
and  indeed  no  object;  it  signifies  only  a  space  relative  to  every  other
which  I  can  think  outside  of  any  given  space.  To  make  it  a  real
thing  means  to  confuse  the  logical  universality  of  any  space  with
which  I  can  compare  any  empirical  space  as  included  in  it  with  the
physical  universality  of  real  extension  and  to  misunderstand  the  Idea
of  reason.  The  true  logical  universality  of  the  Idea  of  space  thus
not  only  does  not  include  its  physical  universality,  as  an  all-inclusive
container  of  things,  but  it  is  precisely  of  a  sort  to  exclude  it.  We
should,  in  fact,  conceive  an  absolute  space,  i.e.,  an  ultimate  unity
of  all  spatial  determinations;  but  not  in  order  to  know  the  absolute
movements  of  empirical  bodies,  but  to  represent  in  the  same  "all
movements  of  the  material  as  merely  relative  to  each  other,  as
alternatively  reciprocal,  but  not  as  absolute  motion  or  rest."  "Abso-
lute space  is  thus  necessary  not  as  a  concept  of  a  real  object,  but  as
an  Idea,  which  should  serve  as  a  rule  for  considering  all  motions  in
it  as  merely  relative,  and  all  motion  and  rest  must  be  reduced  to  the
absolute  space,  if  the  phenomena  of  the  same  are  to  be  made  into  a
definite  concept  of  experience  that  unifies  phenomena."  (35,  IV,
383  f.,  472  f.)  The  logical  universality  of  such  an  idea  does  not
conflict  with  the  theory  of  relativity;  it  starts  by  regarding  all  motions
in  space  as  merely  relative  because  only  in  this  way  can  it  combine
them  into  a  definite  concept  of  experience,  that  unifies  all  phenomena.
On  the  basis  of  the  demand  for  the  totality  of  determinations  it
negates  every  attempt  to  make  a  definite  particular  system  of
reference  the  norm  for  all  the  others.  The  one  valid  norm  is  merely
the  idea  of  the  unity  of  nature,  of  exact  determination  itself.  The
mechanical  view  of  the  world  is  overcome  from  this  standpoint.


SPACE AND TIME OF CRITICAL IDEALISM  417

The  " unity  of  nature"  is  grounded  by  the  general  theory  of  relativity
in  a  new  sense,  since  it  includes  under  a  supreme  principle  of  knowl-
edge along  with  the  phenomena  of  gravitation,  which  form  the  real
classical  field  of  the  older  mechanics,  the  electrodynamic  phenomena.
That  in  order  to  advance  to  this  "logical  universality  of  the  Idea,"
many  trusted  presentational  pictures  must  be  sacrificed  need  not
disturb  us;  this  can  affect  the  "pure  intuition"  of  Kant  only  in  so
far  as  it  is  misunderstood  as  a  mere  picture  and  not  conceived  and
estimated  as  a  constructive  method.

In  fact,  the  point  at  which  the  general  theory  of  relativity  must
implicitly  recognize  the  methodic  presupposition,  which  Kant  calls
"pure  intuition"  can  be  pointed  out  exactly.  It  lies,  in  fact,  in  the
concept  of  "coincidence"  to  which  the  general  theory  of  relativity
ultimately  reduces  the  content  and  the  form  of  all  laws  of  nature.
If  we  characterize  events  by  their  space-time  coordinates  Xi,  X2,  xs,
X4,  x'j,  x'2,  x's,  x't,  etc.,  then,  as  it  emphasizes,  everything  that  physics
can  teach  us  of  the  "essence"  of  natural  processes  consists  merely
in  assertions  concerning  the  coincidences  or  meetings  of  such  points.
We  reach  the  construction  of  physical  time  and  of  physical  space
merely  in  this  way;  for  the  whole  of  the  space-time  manifold  is  noth-
ing else  than  the  whole  of  such  coordinations.3  Here  is  the  point  at
which  the  ways  of  the  physicist  and  of  the  philosopher  definitely
part,  without  their  being  thereby  forced  into  conflict.  What  the
physicist  calls  "space"  and  "time"  is  for  him  a  concrete  measurable
manifold,  which  he  gains  as  the  result  of  coordination,  according  to
law,  of  the  particular  points;  for  the  philosopher,  on  the  contrary,
space  and  time  signify  nothing  else  than  the  forms  and  modi,  and
thus  the  presuppositions,  of  this  coordination  itself.  They  do  not
result  for  him  from  the  coordination,  but  they  are  precisely  this
coordination  and  its  fundamental  directions.  It  is  coordination
from  the  standpoint  of  coexistence  and  adjacency  or  from  the
standpoint  of  succession,  which  he  understands  by  space  and
time  as  "forms  of  intuition."  In  this  sense,  both  are  expressly
defined  in  the  Kantian  Inaugural  Dissertation.  "Tempus  non  est
objectivum  aliquid  et  reak  .  .  .  .  sed  subjectiva  conditio,  per
naturam  mentis  humanae  necessaria,  quaelibet  sensibilia  certa  lege  sibi
coordinandi  et  intuitus  purus Spatium  est  .  .  .  .

8  Einstein  (17),  p.  13  f.;  (18),  p.  64.


418  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

subjectivum  et  ideale  et  e  natura  mentis  stahili  lege  profisiscens  veluti
schema  omnia  omnino  externe  sensa  sibi  coordinandi.1  '(35;  II,  416,
420.)  Whoever  recognizes  this  law  and  this  schema,  this  possibility
of  relating  point  to  point  and  connecting  them  with  each  other,  has
recognized  space.  a»d  time  in  their  "transcendental  meaning,"  for  we
can  abstract  here  from  any  psychological  by-meaning  of  the  concept
of  form  of  intuition.  We  can  thus  conceive  the  "world-points"
Xi  X2  Xs  X4  and  the  world-lines,  which  result  from  them,  so  abstractly
that  we  understand  under  the  values  Xi  X2  Xs  X4  nothing  but  certain
mathematical  parameters;  the  "meeting"  of  such  world-points
involves  a  comprehensible  meaning  only  if  we  take  as  a  basis  that
"possibility  of  succession,"  which  we  call  time.  A  coincidence,
which  is  not  to  mean  identity,  a  unification,  which  is  still  a
separation,  since  the  same  point  is  conceived  as  belonging  to
different  lines:  all  this  finally  demands  that  synthesis  of  the
manifold,  for  which  the  term  "pure  intuition"  was  formulated.
The  most  general  meaning  of  this  term,  which  indeed  was  not  always
grasped  by  Kant  with  equal  sharpness,  since  more  special  meanings
and  applications  were  substituted  involuntarily  in  his  case,  is  merely
that  of  the  serial  form  of  coexistence  and  of  succession.  Nothing  is
thereby  presupposed  concerning  special  relations  of  measurement  in
the  two,  and  in  so  far  as  these  depend  in  particular  on  the  relations  of
the  physical  in  space,  we  must  guard  against  seeking  to  find  an  exhaus-
tive determination  in  the  mere  "forms  of  possibility"  of  the  relations
of  the  "real."  (C/.  below  VI.)  When  e.g.,  in  the  mathematical
foundations  of  the  theory  of  relativity  the  formula  is  deduced  for  the
"distance"  of  the  two  infinitely  close  points  Xi  x2  x3  x4,  and  xi  +
dxi,  x2  +  dxa,  Xs  +  dxa,  X4  +  dx4,  this  cannot  indeed  be  conceived
as  a  rigid  Euclidean  distance  in  the  ordinary  sense,  since  there  is
involved  in  it,  by  the  addition  of  time  as  a  fourth  dimension,  not  a
magnitude  of  space  but  rather  one  of  motion;  but  the  fundamental
form  of  coexistence  and  succession  and  their  reciprocal  relation  and
"union"  is  unmistakably  contained  in  this  expression  of  the  general
linear  element.  Not  that  the  theory,  as  has  been  occasionally
objected,  presupposes  space  and  time  as  something  already  given,  for
it  must  be  declared  free  of  this  epistemological  circle,  but  in  the  sense
that  it  cannot  lack  the  form  and  function  of  spatiality  and  temporality
in  general.


SPACE AND TIME OF CRITICAL IDEALISM  419

What  seems  to  render  understanding  difficult  at  this  point  between
the  physicist  and  the  philosopher  is  the  fact  that  a  common  problem
is  found  here,  which  both  approach  from  entirely  different  sides.
The  process  of  measurement  interests  the  critic  of  knowledge  only
in  so  far  as  he  seeks  to  survey  in  systematic  completeness  the  concepts,
which  are  used  in  this  process,  and  to  define  them  in  the  utmost
sharpness.  But  any  such  definition  is  unsatisfying  and  fundamen-
tally unfruitful  to  the  physicist  as  long  as  it  is  not  connected  with  any
definite  indication  as  to  how  the  measurement  is  to  be  made  in  the
concrete  particular  case.  "The  concept  exists  for  the  physicist,"
says  Einstein  in  one  place  neatly  and  characteristically,  "only  when
the  possibility  is  given  of  finding  out  in  the  concrete  case  whether  the
concept  applies  or  not."  (18,  p.  14.)  Thus  the  concept  of  simul-
taneity, for  example,  only  receives  a  definite  meaning,  when  a  method
is  given  by  which  the  temporal  coincidence  of  two  events  is  deter-
mined by  certain  measurements,  by  the  application  of  optical  signals;
and  the  difference  which  is  found  in  the  results  of  this  measurement
seems  to  h^ve  as  a  consequence  the  ambiguity  of  the  concept.  The
philosopher  has  to  recognize  unconditionally  this  longing  of  the
physicist  for  concrete  determinateness  of  concepts;  but  he  is  ever
again  brought  to  the  fact  that  there  are  ultimate  ideal  determina-
tions without  which  the  concrete  cannot  be  conceived  and  made  intel-
ligible. To  make  clear  the  opposition  in  formulation  of  the  question
which  is  here  fundamental,  one  can  contrast  to  Einstein's  expression
one  of  Leibniz.  "On  pent  dire"  we  read  in  Leibniz*  Nouveaux  Essais,
"qu'il  nefaut  point  s'imaginer  deux  6tendueSj  Vune  abstraitCj  de  Vespace,
Vautre  concr&te,  du  corps;  le  concret  n'etant  tel  que  par  Vabstrait"  (43,
V,  115.)  As  we  see,  it  is  the  unity  of  the  abstract  and  the  concrete,
of  the  ideal  and  the  empirical  in  which  the  demands  of  the  physicist
and  the  philosopher  agree;  but  while  the  one  goes  from  experience  to
the  idea,  the  other  goes  from  the  idea  to  experience.  The  theory  of
relativity  holds  fast  to  the  "pre-established  harmony  between  pure
mathematics  and  physics;"  Minkowski,  in  the  well-known  concluding
words  of  his  lecture,  "Space  and  Time,"  has  expressly  taken  up  again
and  brought  to  honor  this  Leibnizian  term.  But  this  harmony  is
for  the  physicist  the  incontestable  premise  from  which  he  strives  to
reach  the  particular  consequences  and  applications,  while  for  the
critic  of  knowledge  the  "possibility"  of  this  harmony  constitutes  the
real  problem.  The  basis  of  this  possibility  he  finds  ultimately  in  the


420  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OP  RELATIVITY

fact  that  any  physical  assertion,  even  the  simplest  determination  of
magnitude  established  by  experiment  and  concrete  measurement,
is  connected  with  universal  conditions,  which  gain,separate  treatment
in  pure  mathematics,  i.e.,  that  any  physical  assertion  involves  certain
logico-mathematical  constants.  If  we  desire  to  bring  all  of  these
constants  into  a  short  formula,  we  can  point  out  the  concept  of
number,  the  concept  of  space,  the  concept  of  time,  and  the  concept  of
function  as  the  fundamental  elements,  which  enter  as  presuppositions
into  every  question  which  physics  can  raise.  None  of  these  concepts
can  be  spared  or  be  reduced  to  another  so  that,  from  the  standpoint  of
the  critique  of  cognition,  each  represents  a  specific  and  characteristic
motive  of  thought;  but  on  the  other  hand,  each  of  them  possesses
an  actual  empirical  use  only  along  with  the  others  and  in  systematic
connection  with  them.  The  theory  of  relativity  shows  with  especial
distinctness  how,  in  particular,  the  thought  of  function  is  effective
as  a  necessary  motive  in  each  spatio-temporal  determination.  Thus
physics  knows  its  fundamental  concepts  never  as  logical  "things  in
themselves,"  but  only  in  their  reciprocal  combination;  it  must,
however,  be  open  to  epistemology  to  analyze  this  product  into  its
particular  factors.  It  thus  cannot  admit  the  proposition  that  the
meaning  of  a  concept  is  identical  with  its  concrete  application,  but  it
will  conversely  insist  that  this  meaning  must  be  already  established
before  any  application  can  be  made.  Accordingly,  the  thought  of
space  and  time  in  their  meaning  as  connecting  forms  of  order  is  not
first  created  by  measurement  but  is  only  more  closely  defined  and
given  a  definite  content.  We  must  have  grasped  the  concept  of  the
"event"  as  something  spatio-temporal,  we  must  have  understood  the
meaning  expressed  in  it,  before  we  can  ask  as  to  the  coincidence  of
events  and  seek  to  establish  it  by  special  methods  of  measurement.

In  general,  physics  sees  itself  placed  by  its  fundamental  problem
from  the  beginning  between  two  realms,  which  it  has  to  recognize
and  between  which  it  has  to  mediate  without  asking  further  as  to
their  "origin."  On  the  one  side,  stands  the  manifold  of  data  of
sensation,  on  the  other  a  manifold  of  pure  functions  of  form  and
order.  Physics,  as  an  empirical  science,  is  equally  bound  to  the
"material"  content,  which  sense  perception  offers  it,  and  to  these
formal  principles  in  which  is  expressed  the  universal  conditions  of  the
"possibility  of  experience."  It  has  to  "invent"  or  to  derive  deduc-
tively the  one  as  little  as  the  other,  i.e.,  neither  the  whole  of  empirical


SPACE  AND  TIME OF  CRITICAL  IDEALISM  421

contents  nor  the  whole  of  characteristic  scientific  forms  of  thought,
but  its  task  consists  in  progressively  relating  the  realm  of  "forms"
to  the  data  of  empirical  observation  and,  conversely,  the  latter  to
the  former.  In  this  way,  the  sensuous  manifold  increasingly  loses
its  "contingent"  anthropomorphic  character  and  assumes  the  imprint
of  thought,  the  imprint  of  systematic  unity  of  form.  Indeed  "form,"
just  because  it  represents  the  active  and  shaping,  the  genuinely
creative  element,  must  not  be  conceived  as  rigid,  but  as  living  and
moving.  Thought  comprehends  more  and  more  that  form  in  its
peculiar  character  cannot  be  given  to  it  at  one  stroke,  but  that  the
existence  of  form  is  only  revealed  to  it  in  the  becoming  of  form  and
in  the  law  of  this  becoming.  In  this  way,  the  history  of  physics
represents  not  a  history  of  the  discovery  of  a  simple  series  of  "facts,"
but  the  discovery  of  ever  new  and  more  special  means  of  thought.
But  in  all  change  of  these  means  of  thought  there  is  nevertheless
revealed,  as  surely  as  physics  follows  the  "sure  course  of  a  science,"
the  unity  of  those  methodic  principles  upon  which  rests  the  formula-
tion of  its  question.  In  the  system  of  these  principles,  space  and
time  take  their  fixed  place,  although  they  are  not  to  be  conceived  as
fixed  things  or  contents  of  presentation.  The  ancient  view  believed
that  it  possessed  and  encompassed  the  spatio-temporal  unity  of
being  directly  in  presentation.  To  Parmenides  and  fundamentally
the  whole  ancient  world  being  was  given  "like  the  mass  of  a  well-
rounded  sphere."  With  the  reform  of  Copernicus,  the  security  of
this  possession  was  gone  once  for  all.  Modern  science  knows  that
there  is  a  definite  spatio-temporal  order  of  phenomena  for  knowledge
only  in  so  far  as  knowledge  progressively  establishes  it,  and  that
the  only  means  of  establishing  it  consists  in  the  scientific  concept  of
law.  But  the  problem  of  such  a  general  orientation  remains  for
thought  and  becomes  the  more  urgent  the  more  thought  knows  it  as
a  problem  never  to  be  solved  definitively.  Precisely  because  the  unity
of  space  and  time  of  empirical  knowledge  seems  to  flee  eternally  before
all  our  empirical  measurements,  thought  comprehends  that  it  must
seek  it  eternally  and  that  it  must  avail  itself  of  new  and  ever  sharper
instruments.  It  is  the  merit  of  the  theory  of  relativity  not  only  to
have  proved  this  in  a  new  way  but  also  to  have  established  a  prin-
ciple, i.e.,  the  principle  of  the  co-variancy  of  the  universal  laws  of
nature  with  regard  to  all  arbitrary  substitutions,  by  which  thought
can  master,  out  of  itself,  the  relativity  which  it  calls  forth.


422  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

In  the  analysis  of  spatial  and  temporal  measurements,  made  by
the  theory  of  relativity  this  fundamental  relation  can  be  traced  in
detail.  This  analysis  does  not  begin  by  accepting  the  concept  of  the
"simultaneity"  of  two  processes  as  a  self-evident  and  immediately
known  datum,  but  by  demanding  an  explanation  of  it — an  explana-
tion, which,  as  a  physical  explanation,  cannot  consist  in  a  general
conceptual  definition,  but  only  in  the  indication  of  the  concrete
methods  of  measurement,  by  which  "simultaneity"  can  be  empirically
pointed  out.  The  simultaneity  of  such  processes  as  take  place
practically  in  "the  same"  point  of  space  or  in  immediate  spatial
adjacency  is  at  first  presupposed;  we  assume,  as  Einstein  explains,
the  determinability  of  "simultaneity"  for  events,  which  are  imme-
diately adjacent  spatially,  or,  more  exactly,  for  events  in  immediate
spatio-temporal  adjacency  (coincidence),  without  defining  this  concept
(17,  §3.)  In  fact,  recourse  here  to  a  mediating  physical  method  of
measurement  seems  neither  desirable  nor  possible;  for  any  such
method  would  always  presuppose  the  possibility  of  making  a  temporal
coordination  between  diverse  events,  thus,  e.g.,  of  establishing  "the
simultaneity"  of  a  definite  event  with  a  certain  position  of  the  hands
of  a  clock  found  at  the  "same"  place.  The  real  problem  of  the  theory
of  relativity  begins  only  when  we  are  no  longer  concerned  with
temporally  connecting  spatially  adjacent  series  of  events  with  each
other,  but  rather  series  of  events  spatially  removed  from  each  other.
If  we  assume  that  there  is  established  for  the  two  points  of  space  A
and  B  a  certain  "place-time,"  then  we  possess  only  an  "A-time"
and  "B-time"  but  no  time  common  to  A  and  B.  It  is  seen  that
every  attempt  to  establish  such  a  common  time  as  an  empirically
measurable  time,  is  bound  to  a  definite  empirical  presupposition
concerning  the  velocity  of  light.  The  assumption  of  the  uniform
velocity  of  light  enters  implicitly  into  all  our  assertions  concerning
the  simultaneity  of  what  is  spatially  distant.  A  time  common  to  A
and  B  is  gained  when  one  establishes  by  definition  that  the  "time,"
which  light  takes  in  going  from  A  to  B  is  equal  to  the  "time,"  which  it
takes  in  going  from  B  to  A.  Let  us  assume  that  a  ray  of  light  is
sent  at  A-time  tA  from  a  clock  found  in  A  to  B,  and  then  at  B-time,
ts,  the  ray  of  light  is  reflected  to  A  and  reaches  A  again  at  A-time,
t'A;  then  we  establish  by  definition  that  the  two  clocks  of  A  and  B
are  to  be  called  "synchronous"  if  tB  —  t'A  =  t'A  —  ts-  Thus  for  the
first  time  an  exact  determination  is  made  of  what  we  are  to  under-


SPACE AND TIME OF CRITICAL IDEALISM  423

stand  by  the  "time"  of  an  event  and  by  the  "simultaneity"  of  two
processes;  "the  time"  of  an  event  is  what  is  told  us  by  a  motionless
clock  found  at  the  place  of  the  event  simultaneously  with  the  event,
a  clock  which  runs  synchronously  with  a  certain  motionless  clock
and  indeed  synchronously  with  the  latter  at  all  times."  (16,  p.  28  f.)
That  the  "forms"  of  space  and  time  as  definite  forms  of  the  co-
ordination of  different  contents  already  enter  into  the  concrete
determinations,  which  are  here  made  for  the  procedure  of  the  physical
measurement  of  time,  scarcely  needs  special  explanation.  The  two
are  immediately  assumed  in  the  concept  of  the  "place-time;"  for  the
possibility  is  involved  in  it  of  grasping  a  definitely  distinguished
"now"  in  a  definitely  distinguished  "here."  This  "here"  and  "now"
does  not  signify  indeed  the  whole  of  space  and  time,  to  say  nothing  of
all  the  concrete  relations  within  the  two  to  be  established  by  measure-
ment; but  it  represents  the  first  foundation,  the  unavoidable  basis
of  the  two.  The  first  primitive  difference,  which  is  expressed  in  the
mere  positing  of  a  "here"  and  a  "now"  remains  thus,  for  the  theory
of  relativity,  too,  an  indefinable  on  which  it  grounds  its  complex
physical  definitions  of  space  and  time  values.  And  while  for  these
definitions  it  appeals  to  a  definite  assumption  concerning  the  law  of
the  propagation  of  light,  this,  too,  involves  the  presupposition  that  a
certain  condition  that  we  call  "light"  occurs  in  succession  at  different
places  and  according  to  a  definite  rule,  in  which  what  space  and
time  mean  as  mere  schemata  of  coordination,  is  obviously  contained.
The  epistemological  problem  seems  indeed  to  be  heightened  when  we
reflect  on  the  reciprocal  relation  of  space  and  time  values  in  the
fundamental  equations  of  physics.  What  is  given  in  these  equations
is  the  four-dimensional  "world,"  the  continuum  of  events  in  general,
the  temporal  determinations  in  this  continuum  not  being  separated
from  the  spatial.  The  intuitive  difference  between  a  spatial  dis-
tance and  a  temporal  duration,  which  we  believe  ourselves  to  grasp
immediately,  plays  no  r61e  in  this  purely  mathematical  determina-
tion. According  to  the  temporal  equation  of  the  Lorentz-
transf  ormation :


424  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

the  time  differential  At'  between  two  events  with  reference  to  K
does  not  disappear  when  the  time  differential  At  of  the  same  disap-
pears with  reference  to  K;  the  purely  spatial  distance  of  two  events
with  reference  to  K  has  as  a  consequence  in  general  the  temporal
sequence  of  the  same  with  reference  to  K'.  This  leveling  of  space
and  time  values  is  developed  even  further  in  the  general  theory  of
relativity.  Here  it  is  seen  to  be  impossible  to  construct  a  reference
system  out  of  fixed  bodies  and  clocks  of  such  a  sort  that  place  and
time  are  directly  indicated  by  a  fixed  arrangement  of  measuring  rods
and  clocks  relatively  to  each  other;  but  each  point  of  the  continuous
series  of  events  is  correlated  with  four  numbers,  xi,  x2,  x3,  x4,  which
possesses  no  direct  physical  meaning,  but  only  serve  to  enumerate
the  points  of  the  continuum  in  a  definite  but  arbitrary  way.  This
correlation  need  not  have  such  properties  that  a  certain  group  of
values  Xi  x2  xs  must  be  understood  as  the  spatial  coordinates  and
opposed  to  the  "temporal"  coordinate  x4.  (18,  p.  38,  64.)  The
demand  of  Minkowski  that  "space  for  itself  and  time  for  itself  be
completely  degraded  to  shadows"  and  that  only  "a  sort  of  union  of
the  two  shall  retain  independence"  seems  thus  now  to  be  strictly
realized.  Now  at  any  rate,  this  demand  contains  nothing
terrible  for  the  critical  idealist,  who  has  ceased  to  conceive  space  and
time  as  things  in  themselves  or  as  given  empirical  objects.  For  the
realm  of  ideas  is  for  him  a  "realm  of  shadows,"  as  Schiller  called  it,
since  no  pure  idea  corresponds  directly  to  a  concrete  real  object,
but  rather  the  ideas  can  always  only  be  pointed  out  in  their  syste-
matic community,  as  fundamental  moments  of  concrete  objective
knowledge.  If  it  thus  appears  that  physical  space  and  time  measure-
ments can  be  assumed  only  as  taking  place  in  common,  the  difference
in  the  fundamental  character  of  space  and  time,  or  order  in  coexist-
ence and  succession  is  not  thereby  destroyed.  Even  if  it  is  true  that,
as  Minkowski  urges,  no  one  has  perceived  a  place  save  at  a  time  and
a  time  save  at  a  place,  there  remains  a  difference  between  what  is  to
be  understood  by  spatial  and  by  temporal  discrimination.  The
factual  interpenetration  of  space  and  time  in  all  empirical  physical
measurements  does  not  prevent  the  two  from  being  different  in  prin-
ciple, not  as  objects,  but  as  types  of  objective  discrimination.
Although  two  observers  in  different  systems  K  and  K'  can  assume
the  arrangement  of  the  series  of  events  in  the  orders  of  space  and
time  to  be  different,  it  is  still  always  a  series  of  events  and  thus  a


SPACE  AND  TIME  OP  CRITICAL  IDEALISM  425

continuum  both  spatial  and  temporal,  which  they  construct  in  their
measurements.  Each  observer  distinguishes  from  his  standpoint  of
measurement  a  continuum,  which  he  calls  "space,"  from  another,
which  he  calls  "time;"  but  he  can,  as  the  theory  of  relativity  shows,
not  assume  without  further  consideration  that  the  arrangement  of
phenomena  in  these  two  schemata  must  be  similar  from  each  system
of  reference.  There  may  thus,  according  to  Minkowski's  "world
postulate,"  be  given  only  the  four-dimensional  world  in  space  and
time,  and  "the  projection  into  space  and  time"  may  be  possible
"with  a  certain  freedom;"  this  only  affects  the  different  spatio-
temporal  interpretations  of  phenomena,  while  the  difference  of  the
form  of  space  from  that  of  time  is  unaffected.

For  the  rest,  here  too  the  transformation-equation  reestablishes
objectivity  and  unity,  since  it  permits  us  to  translate  again  the
results  found  in  one  system  into  those  of  the  other.  Also,  if  one
seeks  to  clarify  the  proposition  of  Minkowski  that  only  the  insepa-
rable union  of  space  and  time  possesses  independence,  by  saying  that
this  union  itself,  according  to  the  results  of  the  general  theory  of
relativity,  becomes  a  shadow  and  an  abstraction,  and  that  only
the  unity  of  space,  time  and  things  possesses  independent  reality,4
then  this  classification  only  leads  us  back  again  to  our  first  epistemo-
logical  insight.  For  that  neither  "pure  space"  nor  "pure  time"  nor
the  reciprocal  connection  of  the  two,  but  only  their  realization  in
some  empirical  material  gives  what  we  call  "reality,"  i.e.,  the  physical
being  of  things  and  of  events,  belongs  to  the  fundamental  doctrines
of  critical  idealism.  Kant  himself  did  not  weary  of  referring  re-
peatedly to  this  indissoluble  connection,  this  reciprocal  correlation
of  the  spatio-temporal  form  and  the  empirical  content  in  the  exist-
ence and  structure  of  the  world  of  experience.  "To  give  an  object,"
we  read,  "if  this  is  not  meant  again  as  mediate  only,  but  if  it  means
to  represent  something  immediately  in  intuition,  is  nothing  else  but

to  refer  the  representation  of  the  object  to  experience

Even  space  and  time,  however  pure  these  concepts  may  be  of  all
that  is  empirical,  and  however  certain  it  is  that  they  are  represented
in  the  mind  entirely  a  priori,  would  lack  nevertheless  all  objective
validity,  all  sense  and  meaning,  if  we  could  not  show  the  necessity  of
their  use  with  reference  to  all  objects  of  experience.  Nay,  their

<  See  Schlick  (79),  p.  51;  cf.  p.  22.


426  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

representation  is  a  pure  schema,  always  referring  to  that  reproduc-
tive imagination,  which  calls  up  the  objects  of  experience,  without
which  objects  would  be  meaningless. "  (34,  p.  195;  c/.  Miiller  trans.,
p.  127  f.)  The  "ideal"  meaning,  that  space  and  time  possess  "in  the
mind"  thus  does  not  involve  any  sort  of  particular  existence,  which
they  would  possess  prior  to  things  and  independently  of  them,  but  it
rather  expressly  denies  it — the  ideal  separation  of  pure  space  and
pure  time  from  things  (more  exactly,  from  empirical  phenomena),
not  only  permits  but  demands  precisely  their  empirical  "union."
This  union  the  general  theory  of  relativity  has  verified  and  proved  in
a  new  way,  since  it  recognizes  more  deeply  than  all  preceding  physical
theories  the  dependency  belonging  to  all  empirical  measurement,  to
all  determination  of  concrete  spatio-temporal  relations.5  The  rela-
tion of  experience  and  thought  that  is  established  in  the  critical
doctrine  does  not  contradict  this  result  in  any  way,  but  rather  it
confirms  it  and  brings  it  to  its  sharpest  expression.  It  is  indeed  at
first  glance  strange  and  paradoxical  that  the  most  diverse  epistemo-
logical  standpoints;  that  radical  empiricism  and  positivism  as  well
as  critical  idealism  have  all  appealed  to  the  theory  of  relativity  in
support  of  their  fundamental  views.  But  this  is  satisfactorily
explained  by  the  facts  that  empiricism  and  idealism  meet  in  certain
presuppositions  with  regard  to  the  doctrine  of  empirical  space  and  of
empirical  time,  and  that  the  theory  of  relativity  sets  up  just  such  a
doctrine.  Both  here  grant  to  experience  the  decisive  rdle,  and  both
teach  that  every  exact  measurement  presupposes  universal  empirical
laws*  But  the  question  becomes  all  the  more  urgent  as  to  how  we
reach  these  laws,  on  which  rests  the  possibility  of  all  empirical
measurement,  and  what  sort  of  validity,  of  logical  "dignity"  we
grant  to  them.  Strict  positivism  has  only  one  answer  to  this  ques-
tion: for  it  all  knowledge  of  laws,  like  all  knowledge  of  objects,  is
grounded  in  the  simple  elements  of  sensation  and  can  never  go  beyond
their  realm.  The  knowledge  of  laws  possesses  accordingly  in  prin-
ciple the  same  purely  passive  character  that  belongs  to  our  knowledge
of  any  particular  sensuous  qualities.  Laws  are  treated  like  things
whose  properties  one  can  read  off  by  immediate  perception.  Mach
attempts,  quite  consistently  with  his  standpoint,  to  extend  this

8  On  the  "relativization"  of  the  difference  of  space  and  time,  c/.  also  below,
VII.

•  (8),  p.  191  ff.;  cf.  Sellien  (81),  p.  14  ff.


SPACE  AND  TIME OF  CRITICAL  IDEALISM  427

manner  of  consideration  to  pure  mathematics  also  and  the  deduction
of  its  fundamental  relations.  The  way  in  which  we  gain  the  differen-
tial quotient  of  a  certain  function,  as  he  explains,  is  not  distinguished
in  principle  from  the  way  in  which  we  establish  any  sort  of  properties
or  changes  of  physical  things.  As  in  the  one  case  we  subject  the
thing,  so  in  the  other  case  we  subject  the  function  to  certain  opera-
tions and  simply  observe  how  it  "reacts"  to  them.  The  reaction
of  the  function  y  =  xm  to  the  operation  of  differentiation  out  of  which

dy

the  equation  T~  =  mx**1"1  results  "is  a  distinguishing  mark  of  xm

just  as  much  as  the  blue-green  color  in  the  solution  of  copper  in
sulphuric  acid."  (49,  p.  75.)  Here  we  find  clearly  before  us  the
sharp  line  of  distinction  between  critical  idealism  and  positivism  of
Mach's  type.  That  the  equations  governing  larger  or  smaller
fields  are  to  be  regarded  as  what  is  truly  permanent  and  substantial,
since  they  make  possible  the  gaining  of  a  stable  picture  of  the  world,7
that  they  thus  constitute  the  kernel  of  physical  objectivity:  this  is
the  fundamental  view  in  which  the  two  theoriep  combine.  The
question  concerns  only  the  manner  of  establishing,  only  the  exact
grounding,  of  these  equations.  Idealism  urges  against  the  stand-
point of  "pure  experience"  as  the  standpoint  of  mere  sensation,  that
all  equations  are  results  of  measurement;  all  measurement,  however,
presupposes  certain  theoretical  principles  and  in  the  latter  certain
universal  functions  of  connection,  of  shaping  and  coordination.  We
never  measure  mere  sensations,  and  we  never  measure  with  mere
sensations,  but  in  general  to  gain  any  sort  of  relations  of  measure-
ment we  must  transcend  the  "given"  of  perception  and  replace  it  by
a  conceptual  symbol,  which  possesses  no  copy  in  what  is  immediately
sensed.  If  there  is  anything  that  can  serve  as  a  typical  example  of
this  state  of  affairs,  it  is  the  development  of  modern  physics  in  the
theory  of  relativity.  It  is  verified  again  that  every  physical  theory,
to  gain  conceptual  expression  and  understanding  of  the  facts  of
experience,  must  free  itself  from  the  form  in  which  at  first  these
facts  are  immediately  given  to  perception.8  That  the  theory  of
relativity  is  founded  on  experience  and  observation  is,  of  course,

'  See  Mach  (49),  p.  429.

8C/.  Duhem  (15,  p.  322):  "Les  fails  d'exp&rience,  pris  dans  leur  brutaliU
native ,  ne  sauraient  servir  au  raisonnement  mathtonatique\  pour  alimenter  ce
raisonnement,  ils  doivent  etre  transform^  et  mis  sous  forme  symbolique."


428  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

beyond  question.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  its  essential  achievement
consists  in  the  new  interpretation  that  it  gives  to  the  observed
facts,  in  the  conceptual  interpretation  by  which  it  is  progressively
led  to  subject  the  most  important  intellectual  instruments  of
classical  mechanics  and  the  older  physics  to  a  critical  revision.
It  has  been  pointed  out  with  justice  that  it  has  been  precisely  the
oldest  empirical  fact  of  mechanics,  the  equality  of  inert  and  heavy
masses,  which,  in  the  new  interpretation  it  has  received  from  Ein-
stein, has  become  the  fulcrum  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity.
(24a.)  The  way  in  which  the  principle  of  equivalence  and  with  it
the  foundations  of  the  new  theory  of  gravitation  have  been  deduced
from  this  fact  can  serve  as  a  logical  example  of  the  meaning  of  the
pure  " thought-experiment"  in  physics.  We  conceive  ourselves  in
the  position  of  an  observer,  who,  experimenting  in  a  closed  box,
establishes  the  fact  that  all  bodies  left  to  themselves  move,  always
with  constant  acceleration,  toward  the  floor  of  the  box.  This  fact
can  be  represented  conceptually  by  the  observer  in  a  double  manner:
in  the  first  place,  by  the  assumption  that  he  is  in  a  temporarily  con-
stant field  of  gravity  in  which  the  box  is  hung  up  motionjess,  or,  in
the  second  place,  by  the  assumption  that  the  box  moves  upward  with
a  constant  acceleration  whereby  the  fall  of  bodies  in  it  would  repre-
sent a  movement  of  inertia.  The  two :  the  inertial  movement  and  the
effect  of  gravitation,  are  thus  in  truth  a  single  phenomenon  seen  and
judged  from  different  sides.  It  follows  that  the  fundamental  law
that  we  establish  for  the  movement  of  bodies  must  be  such  that  it
includes  equally  the  phenomena  of  inertia  and  those  of  gravitation.
As  is  seen,  we  have  here  no  empirical  proposition  abstracted  from
particular  observations,  but  a  rule  for  our  construction  of  physical
concepts:  a  demand  that  we  make,  not  directly  of  experience,  but
rather  of  our  manner  of  intellectually  representing  it.  "Thought-
experiments"  of  such  force  and  fruitfulness  cannot  be  explained  and
justified  by  the  purely  empiristic  theory  of  physical  knowledge.
It  is  not  in  contradiction  with  this  that  Einstein  refers  gratefully
to  the  decisive  stimulus,  which  he  received  from  Mach  (20);  for  a
sharp  distinction  must  be  made  between  what  Mach  has  accomp-
lished as  a  physicist  in  his  criticism  of  Newton's  fundamental  con-
cepts, and  the  general  philosophical  consequences  he  has  drawn  from
this  achievement.  Mach  himself  has,  as  is  known,  granted  wide
scope  to  the  pure  " thought-experiment"  in  his  own  logic  of  physics;


SPACE  AND TIME OF CRITICAL IDEALISM  429

but,  more  closely  considered,  he  has  thereby  already  left  the  ground
of  a  purely  sensatory  founding  of  the  fundamental  concepts  of
physics.9  That  there  is  no  necessary  connection  between  the  theory
of  relativity  and  Mach's  philosophy  may  be  concluded  from  the
fact,  among  other  things,  that  it  is  precisely  one  of  the  first  advocates
of  this  theory,  Max  Planck,  who  among  all  modern  physicists  has
most  sharply  criticized  and  fought  against  the  presuppositions  of
this  philosophy.  (69.)  Even  if  one  take  the  theory  of  relativity
as  an  achievefneiit  and  outcome  of  purely  empirical  thought,  it  is
thereby  a  proof  and  confirmation  of  the  constructive  force  imma-
nent in  this  thought  by  which  the  system  of  physical  knowledge  is
distinguished  from  a  mere  ''rhapsody  of  perceptions ."

•  See  Mach  (50,  p.  180  ff.);  cf.  (8),  p.  316  ff.  and  (39),  p.  86  f.


CHAPTER  VI

EUCLIDEAN  AND  NON-EUCLIDEAN  GEOMETRY

In  the  preceding  considerations,  however,  we  have  taken  up  only
incidentally  an  achievement  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity,
which,  above  all  others,  seems  to  involve  a  "revolution  of
thought,"  In  the  working  out  of  the  theory,  it  is  seen  that  the
previous  Euclidean  measurements  are  not  sufficient;  the  develop-
ment of  the  theory  can  only  take  place  by  our  going  from  the  Euclidean
continuum,  which  was  still  taken  as  a  basis  by  the  special  theory  of
relativity,  to  a  non-Euclidean  four-dimensional  space-time  continuum
and  seeking  to  express  all  relations  of  phenomena  in  it.  Thus  a
question  seems  answered  physically  which  had  concerned  the  epis-
temology  of  the  last  decades  most  vitally  and  which  had  been
answered  most  diversely  within  it.  Physics  now  proves  not  only  the
possibility,  but  the  reality  of  non-Euclidean  geometry;  it  shows
that  we  can  only  understand  and  represent  theoretically  the  rela-
tions, which  hold  in  "real"  space,  by  reproducing  them  in  the  lan-
guage of  a  four-dimensional  non-Euclidean  manifold.

The  solution  of  this  problem  from  the  side  of  physics  was,  on  the
one  hand,  for  a  long  time  hoped  for  as  keenly,  as,  on  the  other  hand,
its  possibility  was  vigorously  denied.  Even  the  first  founders  and
representatives  of  the  doctrine  of  non-Euclidean  geometry  sought
to  adduce  experiment  and  concrete  measurement  in  confirmation
of  their  view.  If  we  can  establish,  they  inferred,  by  exact  terres-
trial or  astronomical  measurements,  that  in  triangles  with  sides  of
very  great  length  the  sum  of  the  angles  differs  from  two  right  angles,
then  empirical  proof  would  be  gained  that  in  "our"  empirical  space
the  propositions  not  of  Euclidean  geometry,  but  of  one  of  the  others
were  valid.  Thus,  e.g.,  Lobatschefsky,  as  is  known,  used  a  triangle
E!  E2  S,  whose  base  EI  E2  was  formed  by  the  diameter  of  the  orbit
of  the  earth  and  whose  apex  S  was  formed  by  Sirius  and  believed  that
ho  could,  in  this  way,  prove  empirically  a  possible  constant  curvature
of  our  space.  (48.)  The  fallacy  in  method  of  any  such  attempt
must  be  obvious,  however,  to  any  sharper  epistemological  analysis
of  the  problem  and  it  has  been  pointed  out  from  the  side  of  the
mathematicians  with  special  emphasis  by  H.  Poincar£.  No  measure-

430


EUCLIDEAN  AND  NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY  431

ment,  as  Poincar6  objects  with  justice,  is  concerned  with  space  itself
but  always  only  with  the  empirically  given  and  physical  objects  in
space.  No  experiment  therefore  can  teach  us  anything  about  the
ideal  structures,  about  the  straight  line  and  the  circle,  that  pure
geometry  takes  as  a  basis;  what  it  gives  us  is  always  only  knowledge
of  the  relations  of  material  things  and  processes.  The  propositions
of  geometry  are  therefore  neither  to  be  confirmed  nor  refuted  by
experience.  No  experiment  will  ever  come  into  conflict  with  the
postulates  of  Euclid;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  no  experiment  will
ever  contradict  .the  postulates  of  Lobatschefsky.  For  granted,
that  some  experiment  could  show  us  a  variation  in  the  sums  of  the
angles  of  certain  very  great  triangles,  then  the  conceptual  represen-
tation of  this  fact  would  never  need  to  consist  in,  and  methodologi-
cally could  not  consist  in,  changing  the  axioms  of  geometry,  but
rather  in  changing  certain  hypotheses  concerning  physical  things.
What  we  would  have  experienced,  in  fact,  would  not  be  another
structure  of  space,  but  a  new  law  of  optics,  which  would  teach  us
that  the  propagation  of  light  does  not  take  place  in  strictly  recti-
linear fashion.  "However,  we  turn  and  twist,"  Poincar6  therefore
concludes,  "it  is  impossible  to  attach  a  rational  meaning  to  empiricism
in  geometry."  (72,  p.  92  ff.)  If  this  decision  holds  and  if  it  can  be
proved,  on  the  other  hand,  that  among  all  possible  self-consistent
geometries  the  Euclidean  possesses  a  certain  advantage  of  "sim-
plicity" since  it  defines  the  minimum  of  those  conditions  under  which
experience  is  possible  in  general,  there  would  then  be  established  for
it  an  exceptional  position  from  the  standpoint  of  the  critique  of
knowledge.  It  would  be  seen  that  the  different  geometries,  which  are
equivalent  to  each  other  from  a  purely,  formal  standpoint,  as  regards
their  logical  conceivability,  are  yet  distinguished  in  their  fruitfulness
in  the  founding  of  empirical  science.  "The  geometries  are  dis-
tinguished from  each  other  in  principle,"  one  can  conclude,  "only
by  reference  to  their  epistemological  relation  to  the  concept  of
experience;  for  this  relation  is  positive  only  in  the  case  of  the  Euclid-
ean geometry."1

In  connection,  however,  with  the  new  development  of  physics  in
the  general  theory  of  relativity,  this  epistemological  answer  seems
to  become  definitely  untenable.  Again  and  again  the  fact  has  been

1  Cf.  Hflnigswald  (32);  on  the  following  cf.  Bauch  (1),  p.  126  ff.


432  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

appealed  to  in  the  controversy  concerning  the  epistemological  justi-
fication of  the  different  geometries  that  what  determines  value  must
not  be  sought  in  formal  but  in  transcendental  logic;  that  the  com-
patibility of  a  geometry  with  experience  is  not  involved  but  rather  its
"positive  fruitfulness,"  i.e.,  the  ''founding  of  experience,"  that  it  can
give.  And  this  latter  was  thought  to  be  found  in  Euclidean
geometry.  The  latter  appeared  as  the  real  and  unique  "foundation
of  possibility  of  knowledge  of  reality/'  the  others,  on  the  contrary,
always  as  only  the  foundations  of  the  possible.  But  with  regard  to
the  extraordinary  rdle  that  the  concepts  and  propositions  of  Rieman-
nian  geometry  played  in  the  grounding  and  construction  of  Einstein's
theory  of  gravitation,  this  judgment  cannot  be  supported.  Supported
by  the  same  logical  criterion  of  value,  one  now  seems  forced  rather
to  the  opposite  conclusion:  non-Euclidean  space  is  alone  "real,"
while  Euclidean  space  represents  a  mere  abstract  possibility.  In
any  event,  the  logic  of  the  exact  sciences  now  finds  itself  placed  before
a  new  problem.  The  fact  of  the  fruitfulness  of  non-Euclidean  geom-
etry for  physics  can  no  longer  be  contested,  since  it  has  been
verified,  not  only  in  particular  applications,  but  in  the  structure  of  a
complete  new  system  of  physics;  what  is  in  question  is  the  explana-
tion to  be  given  to  this  fact.  And  here  we  are  first  forced  to  a  nega-
tive decision,  which  is  demanded  by  the  first  principles  of  the  theory
of  relativity.  Whatever  meaning  we  may  ascribe  to  the  idea  of
non-Euclidean  geometry  for  physics,  for  purely  empirical  thought,
the  assertion  has  lost  all  meaning  for  us  that  any  space,  whether
Euclidean  or  non-Euclidean,  is  the  "real"  space.  Precisely  this  was
the  result  of  the  general  principle  of  relativity,  that  by  it  "the  last
remainder  of  physical  objectivity"  was  to  be  taken  from  space.
Only  the  various  relations  of  measurement  within  the  physical  mani-
fold, within  that  inseparable  correlation  of  space,  time,  and  the
physically  real  object,  which  the  theory  of  relativity  takes  as  ulti-
mate, are  pointed  out;  and  it  is  affirmed  that  these  relations  of
measurement  find  their  simplest  exact  mathematical  expression  in
the  language  of  non-Euclidean  geometry.  This  language,  however,
is  and  remains  purely  ideal  and  symbolic,  precisely  as,  rightly  under-
stood, the  language  of  Euclidean  geometry  could  alone  be.  The
reality  which  alone  it  can  express  is  not  that  of  things,  but  that  of
laws  and  relations.  And  now  we  can  ask,  epistemologically,  only
one  question:  whether  there  can  be  established  an  exact  relation


EUCLIDEAN  AND NON-EUCLIDEAN  GEOMETRY  433

and  coordination  between  the  symbols  of  non-Euclidean  geometry
and  the  empirical  manifold  of  spatio-temporal  "events."  If  physics
answers  this  question  affirmatively,  then  epistemology  has  no
ground  for  answering  it  negatively.  For  the  "a  priori"  of
space  that  it  affirms  as  the  condition  of  every  physical  theory  involves,
as  has  been  seen,  no  assertion  concerning  any  definite  particular
structure  of  space  in  itself,  but  is  concerned  only  with  that  function
of  "spatiality"  in  general,  that  is  expressed  even  in  the  general  con-
cept of  the  linear  element  ds  as  such,  quite  without  regard  to  its
character  in  detail.

If  it  is  seen  thus,  that  the  determination  of  this  element  as  is  done
in  Euclidean  geometry,  does  not  suffice  for  the  mastery  of  certain
problems  of  knowledge  of  nature  then  nothing  can  prevent  us,  from  a
methodological  standpoint,  from  replacing  it  by  another  measure,  in
so  far  as  the  latter  proves  to  be  necessary  and  fruitful  physically.
But  in  either  case  one  must  guard  against  taking  the  "preestablished
harmony  between  pure  mathematics  and  physics,"  that  is  revealed  to
us  in  increasing  fullness  and  depth  in  the  progress  of  scientific  knowl-
edge, as  a  naive  copy  theory.  The  structures  of  geometry,  whether
Euclidean  or  non-Euclidean,  possess  no  immediate  correlate  in  the
world  of  existence.  They  exist  as  little  physically  in  things  as  they
do  psychically  in  our  "presentations"  but  all  their  "being,"  i.e.,
their  validity  and  truth,  consists  in  their  ideal  meaning.  The
existence,  that  belongs  to  them  by  virtue  of  their  definition,  by  virtue
of  a  pure  logical  act  of  assumption  is,  in  principle,  not  to  be  inter-
changed with  any  sort  of  empirical  "reality."  Thus  also  the  appli-
cability, which  we  grant  to  any  propositions  of  pure  geometry,  can
never  rest  on  any  direct  coinciding  between  the  elements  of  the  ideal
geometrical  manifold  and  those  of  the  empirical  manifold.  In  place
of  such  a  sensuous  congruence  we  must  substitute  a  more  complex  and
more  thoroughly  mediate  relational  system.  There  can  be  no  copy
or  correlate  in  the  world  of  sensation  and  presentation  for  what  the
points,  the  straight  lines  and  the  planes  of  pure  geometry  signify.
Indeed,  we  cannot  in  strictness  speak  of  any  degree  of  similarity,
of  greater  or  less  difference  of  the  "empirical"  from  the  ideal,  for  the
two  belong  to  fundamentally  different  species.  The  theoretical
relation,  which  science  nevertheless  establishes  between  the  two,
consists  merely  in  the  fact,  that  it,  while  granting  and  holding  fast  to
the  difference  in  content  of  the  two  series,  seeks  to  establish  a  more


434  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

exact  and  perfect  correlation  between  them.  All  verification,  which
the  propositions  of  geometry  can  find  in  physics,  is  possible  only  in
this  way.  The  particular  geometrical  truths  or  particular  axioms,
such  as  the  principle  of  parallels,  can  never  be  compared  with  particu-
lar experiences,  but  we  can  always  only  compare  with  the  whole  of
physical  experience  the  whole  of  a  definite  system  of  axioms.  What
Kant  says  of  the  concepts  of  the  understanding  in  general,  that  they
only  serve  "to  make  letters  out  of  phenomena  so  that  we  can  read
them  as  experiences"  holds  in  particular  of  the  concepts  of  space.
They  are  only  the  letters,  which  we  must  make  into  words  and  proposi-
tions, if  we  would  use  them  as  expressions  of  the  laws  of  experience.
If  the  goal  of  harmony  is  not  reached  in  this  indirect  way,  if  it  appears
that  the  physical  laws  to  which  observation  and  measurement  lead
us  cannot  be  represented  and  expressed  with  sufficient  exactitude  and
simplicity  by  a  given  system  of  axioms,  then  we  are  free  to  determine
which  of  the  two  factors  we  shall  subject  to  a  transformation  to
reestablish  the  lost  harmony  between  them.  Before  thought  ad-
vances to  a  change  of  one  of  its  "simple77  geometrical  laws  it  will
first  make  the  complex  physical  conditions  that  enter  into  the
measurement  responsible  for  the  lack  of  agreement;  it  will  change  the
"physical"  factors  before  the  "geometrical.77  If  this  does  not  lead
to  the  goal  and  if  it  is  seen  on  the  other  hand,  that  surprising  unity
and  systematic  completeness  can  be  reached  in  the  formulation  of  the
"laws  of  nature77  by  accepting  an  altered  conception  of  geometrical
methods,  then  in  principle  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  such  a  change.
For  if  we  conceive  the  geometrical  axioms,  not  as  copies  of  a  given
reality,  but  as  purely  ideal  and  constructive  structures,  then  they
are  subjected  to  no  other  law  than  is  given  them  by  the  system  of
thought  and  knowledge.  If  the  latter  proves  to  be  realizable  in  a
purer  and  more  perfect  form  by  our  advancing  from  a  relatively
simpler  geometrical  system  to  a  relatively  more  complex,  then  the
criticism  of  knowledge  can  raise  no  objection  from  its  standpoint.
It  will  be  obliged  to  affirm  only  this:  that  here  too  "no  intelligible
meaning  can  be  gained"  for  empiricism  in  geometry.  For  here,  too,
experience  does  not  ground  the  geometrical  axioms,  but  it  only  selects
from  among  them,  as  various  logically  possible  systems,  of  which
each  one  is  derived  strictly  rationally,  certain  ones  with  regard  to
their  concrete  use  in  the  interpretation  of  phenomena.2  Here,  too,

*  On  this  relation  of  the  problem  of  metageometry  to  the  problem  of  "  experi-
ence, "  cf.  esp.  Albert  Gotland  (28.  p.  324  ff.)


EUCLIDEAN AND NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY  435

Platonically  speaking,  phenomena  are  measured  by  Ideas,  by  the
foundations  of  geometry,  and  these  latter  are  not  directly  read  out
of  the  sensuous  phenomena.

But  when  one  grants  to  non-Euclidean  geometry  in  this  sense
meaning  and  fruitfulness  for  physical  experience,  the  general  methodic
difference  can  and  must  be  urged,  that  still  remains  between  it  and
Euclidean  geometry.  This  difference  can  no  longer  be  taken  from
their  relation  to  experience,  but  it  must  be  recognized  as  based  on
certain  "inner"  moments,  i.e.,  on  general  considerations  of  the  theory
of  relations.  A  special  and  exceptional  logical  position,  a  fundamen-
tal simplicity  of  ideal  structure,  can  be  recognized  in  Euclidean
geometry  even  if  it  must  abandon  its  previous  sovereignty  within
physics.  And  here  it  is  precisely  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  the
general  theory  of  relativity,  that,  translated  back  into  the  language  of
logic  and  general  methodology,  can  establish  and  render  intelligible
this  special  position.  Euclidean  geometry  rests  on  a  definite  axiom
of  relativity,  which  is  peculiar  to  it.  As  the  geometry  of  space  of  a
constant  curvature  0,  it  is  characterized  by  the  thorough-going
relativity  of  all  places  and  magnitudes.  Its  formal  determinations
are  in  principle  independent  of  any  absolute  determinations  of
magnitude.  While,  e.g.,  in  the  geometry  of  Lobatschefsky,  the  sum
of  the  angles  of  a  rectilinear  triangle  is  different  from  180°  and  indeed
the  more  so,  the  more  the  surface  area  of  the  triangle  increases,  the
absolute  magnitude  of  the  lines  enters  into  none  of  the  propositions
of  Euclidean  geometry.  Here  for  every  given  figure  a  "similar"
can  be  constructed;  the  particular  structures  are  grasped  in  their
pure  "quality,"  without  any  definite  "quantum,"  any  absolute
value  of  number  and  magnitude,  coming  into  consideration  in  their
definition.  This  indifference  of  Euclidean  structures  to  all  absolute
determinations  of  magnitude  and  the  freedom  resulting  here  of  the
particular  points  in  Euclidean  space  from  all  determinations  and  prop-
erties, form  a  logically  positive  characteristic  of  the  latter.  For  the
proposition,  omnis  determinatio  est  negatio,  holds  here  too.  The
assumption  of  the  indeterminate  serves  as  the  foundation  for  the  more
complex  assumptions  and  determinations  which  can  be  joined  to  it.
In  this  sense,  Euclidean  geometry  is  and  remains  the  "simplest,"
not  in  any  practical,  but  in  a  strictly  logical  meaning;  Euclidean
space  is,  as  Poincar6  expresses  it,  "simpler  not  merely  in  consequence
of  our  mental  habits  or  in  consequence  of  any  direct  intuition,  which


436  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

we  possess  of  it,  but  it  is  in  itself  simpler,  just  as  a  polynomial  of  the
first  degree  is  simpler  than  a  polynomial  of  the  second  degree."
(72,  p.  67.)  This  logical  simplicity  belonging  to  Euclidean  space  in
the  system  of  our  intellectual  meanings  wholly  independently  of
its  relations  to  experience,  is  shown,  e.g.,  in  the  fact  that  we  can  make
any  "given"  space,  that  possesses  any  definite  curvature,  into  Euclid-
ean by  regarding  sufficiently  small  fields  of  it  from  which  the  differ-
ence conditioned  by  the  curvature  disappears.  Euclidean  geometry
shows  itself  herein  as  the  real  geometry  of  infinitely  small  areas,  and
thus  as  the  expression  of  certain  elementary  relations,  which  we  take
as  a  basis  in  thought,  although  we  advance  from  them  in  certain
cases  to  more  complex  forms.

The  development  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity  leaves  this
methodic  advantage  of  Euclidean  geometry  unaffected.  For  Euclid-
ean measurements  do  not  indeed  hold  in  it  absolutely  but  they  hold
for  certain  "elementary"  areas,  which  are  distinguished  by  a  certain
simplicity  of  physical  conditions.  The  Euclidean  expression  of  the
linear  element  shows  itself  to  be  unsatisfactory  for  the  working  out
of  the  fundamental  thought  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  since
it  does  not  fulfill  the  fundamental  demand  of  retaining  its  form
in  every  arbitrary  alteration  of  the  system  of  reference.  It

4

must  be  replaced  by  the  general,  linear  element  (ds2  =  S  g dx  dx  ),

which  satisfies  this  demand.  If,  however,  we  consider  infinitely
small  four-dimensional  fields,  it  is  expressly  demanded  that  the  pre-
suppositions of  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  and  thus  its  Euclidean
measurements  shall  remain  adequate  for  them.  The  form  of  the
universal  linear  element  here  passes  over  into  the  Euclidean  element
of  the  special  theory  when  the  ten  magnitudes  0,  which  occur  in  this
as  functions  of  the  coordinates  of  particular  points  assume  definite
constant  values.  The  physical  explanation  of  this  relation,  however
consists  in  that  the  magnitudes  g^v  are  recognized  as  those  which
describe  the  gravitational  field  with  reference  to  the  chosen  system  of
reference.  The  condition,  under  which  we  can  pass  from  the  pre-
suppositions of  the  general  theory  of  relativity  to  the  special  theory,
can  accordingly  be  expressed  in  the  form  that  we  only  consider  regions
within  which  abstraction  can  be  made  from  the  effects  of  fields  of
gravitation.  This  is  always  possible  for  an  infinitely  small  field  and


EUCLIDEAJST  AND NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY  437

it  holds  further  for  finite  fields  in  which,  with  appropriate  choice  of
the  system  of  reference,  the  body  considered  undergoes  no  noticeable
acceleration.  As  we  see,  the  variability  of  the  magnitudes  gMV,

which  expresses  the  variation  from  the  homogeneous  Euclidean
form  of  space,  is  recognized  as  based  on  a  definite  physical  circum-
stance. If  we  consider  fields  in  which  this  circumstance  is  absent  or
if  we  cancel  it  in  thought,  we  again  stand  within  the  Euclidean
world.  Thus  the  assertion  of  Poincar£  that  all  physical  theory  and
physical  measurement  can  prove  absolutely  nothing  about  the
Euclidean  or  non-Euclidean  character  of  space,  since  it  is  never
concerned  with  the  latter  but  only  with  the  properties  of  physical
reality  in  space  remains  entirely  in  force.  The  abstraction
(or,  better  expressed,  the  pure  function)  of  homogeneous  Euclidean
space  is  not  destroyed  by  the  theory  of  relativity,  but  is  only  known
as  such  through  it  more  sharply  than  before.

In  fact,  the  pure  meaning  of  geometrical  concepts  is  not  limited
by  what  this  theory  teaches  us  about  the  conditions  of  measurement.
These  concepts  are  indeed,  as  is  seen  now  anew,  neither  an  empirical
datum  nor  an  empirical  dabile,  but  their  ideal  certainty  and  meaning
is  not  in  the  least  affected  thereby.  It  is  shown  that  in  fields  where
we  have  to  reckon  with  gravitational  effects  of  a  definite  magnitude,
the  preconditions  of  the  ordinary  methods  of  measurement  fall
short,  that  here  we  can  no  longer  use  "rigid  bodies"  as  measures  of
length,  nor  ordinary  "clocks"  as  measures  of  time.  But  this  change
of  relations  of  measurement  does  not  affect  the  calculation  of  space,
but  the  calculation  of  the  physical  relation  between  the  measuring
rods  and  rays  of  light  determined  by  the  field  of  gravitation.  (Cf.
83,  p.  85  ff.)  The  truths  of  Euclidean  geometry  would  only  be  also
affected  if  one  supposed  that  these  propositions  themselves  are  noth-
ing but  generalizations  of  empirical  observation,  which  we  have
established  in  connection  with  fixed  bodies.  Such  a  supposition,
however,  epistemologically  regarded,  would  amount  to  a  petitio
principii.  Even  Helmholtz,  who  greatly  emphasizes  the  empirical
origin  of  the  geometrical  axioms  occasionally  refers  to  another  view,
which  might  save  their  purely  ideal  and  "transcendental"  character.
The  Euclidean  concept  of  the  straight  line  might  be  conceived  not  as
a  generalization  from  certain  physical  observations,  but  as  a  purely
ideal  concept,  to  be  confirmed  or  refuted  by  no  experience,  since


438  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

we  would  have  to  decide  by  it  whether  any  bodies  of  nature  were  to
be  regarded  as  fixed  bodies.  But,  as  he  objects,  the  geometrical
axioms  would  then  cease  to  be  synthetical  propositions  in  Kant's
sense,  as  they  would  only  affirm  something  that  would  follow  analyti-
cally from  the  concepts  of  the  fixed  geometrical  structures  neces-
sary to  measurement.  (30a,  II,  30.)  It  is,  however,  overlooked
by  this  objection  that  there  are  fundamentally  synthetic  forms  of  unity
besides  the  form  of  analytic  identity,  which  Helmholtz  has  here  in
mind  and  which  he  contrasts  with  the  empirical  concept  as  if  the
form  of  analytic  identity  were  unique,  and  that  the  axioms  of  geome-
try belong  precisely  to  the  former.  Assumptions  of  this  sort  refer
to  the  object  in  so  far  as  in  their  totality  they  "constitute"  the  object
and  render  possible  knowledge  of  it;  but  none  of  them,  taken  for  itself,
can  be  understood  as  an  assertion  concerning  things  or  relations  of
things.  Whether  they  fulfill  their  task  as  moments  of  empirical
knowledge  can  be  decided  always  only  in  the  indicated  indirect  way:
by  using  them  as  building-stones  in  a  theoretical  and  constructive
system,  and  then  comparing  the  consequences,  which  follow  from
the  latter,  with  the  results  of  observation  and  measurement.  That
the  elements,  to  which  we  must  ascribe,  methodologically,  a  certain
"simplicity,"  must  be  adequate  for  the  interpretation  of  the  laws  of
nature,  can  not  be  demanded  a  priori.  But  even  so,  thought  does
not  simply  give  itself  over  passively  to  the  mere  material  of  experi-
ence, but  it  develops  out  of  itself  new  and  more  complex  forms  to
satisfy  the  demands  of  the  empirical  manifold.

If  we  retain  this  general  view,  then  one  of  the  strangest  and,  at
first  appearance,  most  objectionable  results  of  the  general  theory  of
relativity  receives  a  new  light.  It  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  this
theory  that  in  it  one  can  no  longer  speak  of  an  immutably  given
geometry  of  measurement,  which  holds  once  for  all  for  the  whole
world.  Since  the  relations  of  measurement  of  space  are  determined
by  the  gravitational  potential  and  since  this  is  to  be  regarded  as  in
general  changeable  from  place  to  place,  we  cannot  avoid  the  conclu-
sion that  there  is  in  general  no  unitary  "geometry"  for  the  totality  of
space  and  reality,  but  that,  according  to  the  specific  properties  of  the
field  of  gravitation  at  different  places,  there  must  be  found  different
forms  of  geometrical  structure.  This  seems,  in  fact,  the  greatest
conceivable  departure  from  the  idealistic  and  Platonic  conception  of
geometry,  according  to  which  it  is  the  "science  of  the  eternally  exist-


EUCLIDEAN  AND NON-EUCLIDEAN  GEOMETRY  439

ent,"  knowledge  of  what  always  "is  in  the  same  state"  (dcZ  /card
ravrd  w<rai>rws  %xov).  Relativism  seems  here  to  pass  over  directly
into  the  field  of  logic;  the  relativity  of  places  involves  that  of  geometri-
cal truth.  And  yet  this  view  is,  on  the  other  hand,  only  the  sharpest
expression  of  the  fact  that  the  problem  of  space  has  lost  all  ontological
meaning  in  the  theory  of  relativity.  The  purely  methodological
question  has  been  substituted  for  the  question  of  being.  We  are
no  longer  concerned  with  what  space  "is"  and  with  whether  any
definite  character,  whether  Euclidean,  Lobatschefskian  or  Rieman-
nian,  is  to  be  ascribed  to  it,  but  rather  with  what  use  is  to  be  made  of
the  different  systems  of  geometrical  presuppositions  in  the  inter-
pretation of  the  phenomena  of  nature  and  their  dependencies  accord-
ing to  law.  If  we  call  any  such  system  a  particular  "space,"  then
indeed  we  can  no  longer  attempt  to  grasp  all  of  these  spaces  as  intui-
tive parts  to  be  united  into  an  intuitive  whole.  But  this  impossibility
rests  fundamentally  on  the  fact  that  we  have  here  to  do  with  a
problem,  which  as  such  stands  outside  the  limits  of  intuitive  repre-
sentation in  general.  The  space  of  pure  intuition  is  always  only  ideal,
being  only  the  space  constructed  according  to  the  laws  of  this  intui-
tion, while  here  we  are  not  concerned  with  such  ideal  syntheses  and
their  unity,  but  with  the  relations  of  measurement  of  the  empirical
and  the  physical.  These  relations  of  measurement  can  only  be
gained  on  the  basis  of  natural  laws,  i.e.,  by  proceeding  from  the
dynamic  dependency  of  phenomena  upon  each  other,  and  by  permit-
ting phenomena  to  determine  their  positions  reciprocally  in  the  space-
time  manifold  by  virtue  of  this  dependency.  Kant  too  decisively
urged  that  this  form  of  dynamic  determination  did  not  belong  to
intuition  as  such,  but  that  it  is  the  "rules  of  the  understanding"
which  alone  give  the  existence  of  phenomena  synthetic  unity  and
enable  them  to  be  collected  into  a  definite  concept  of  experience.
(Cf.  above  p.  79.)  The  step  beyond  him,  that  we  have  now  to  make
on  the  basis  of  the  results  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  consists
in  the  insight  that  geometrical  axioms  and  laws  of  other  than  Eucli-
dean form  can  enter  into  this  determination  of  the  understanding,
in  which  the  empirical  and  physical  world  arises  for  us,  ard  that  the
admission  of  such  axioms  not  only  does  not  destroy  the  unity  of  the
world,  i.e.,  the  unity  of  our  experiential  concept  of  a  total  order  of
phenomena,  but  first  truly  grounds  it  from  a  new  angle,  since  in  this
way  the  particular  laws  of  nature,  with  which  we  have  to  calculate


440  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

in  space-time  determination,  are  ultimately  brought  to  the  unity  of  a
supreme  principle, — that  of  the  universal  postulate  of  relativity.
The  renunciation  of  intuitive  simplicity  in  the  picture  of  the  world
thus  contains  the  guarantee  of  its  greater  intellectual  and  systematic
completeness.  This  advance,  however,  can  not  surprise  us  from  the
epistemological  point  of  view;  for  it  expresses  only  a  general  law  of
scientific  and  in  particular  of  physical  thought.  Instead  of  speaking
ontologically  of  the  being  or  indeed  of  the  coexistence  of  diversely
constituted  "spaces,"  which  results  in  a  tangible  contradiction,  the
theory  of  relativity  speaks  purely  methodologically  of  the  possibility
or  necessity  of  applying  different  measurements,  i.e.j  different  geo-
metrical conceptual  languages  in  the  interpretation  of  certain  physical
manifolds.  This  possible  application  tells  us  nothing  concerning  the
"existence"  of  space,  but  merely  indicates  that  by  an  appropriate
choice  of  geometrical  presuppositions  certain  physical  relations,  such
as  the  field  of  gravitation  or  the  electromagnetic  field,  can  be
described.

The  connection  between  the  purely  conceptual  thought,  involved
in  the  working  out  of  the  general  doctrine  of  the  manifold  and  order,
and  physical  empiricism  (Empiric)  here  receives  a  surprising  con-
firmation. A  doctrine,  which  originally  grew  up  merely  in  the
immanent  progress  of  pure  mathematical  speculation,  in  the  ideal
transformation  of  the  hypotheses  that  lie  at  the  basis  of  geometry,
now  serves  directly  as  the  form  into  which  the  laws  of  nature  are
poured.  The  same  functions,  that  were  previously  established  as
expressing  the  metrical  properties  of  non-Euclidean  space,  give  the
equations  of  the  field  of  gravitation.  These  equations  thus  do  not
need  for  their  establishment  the  introduction  of  new  unknown  forces
acting  at  a  distance,  but  are  derived  from  the  determination  and
specialization  of  the  general  presuppositions  of  measurement.
Instead  of  a  new  complex  of  things,  the  theory  is  satisfied  here  by
the  consideration  of  a  new  general  complex  of  conditions.  Biemann,
in  setting  up  his  theory,  referred  to  its  future  physical  meaning  in
prophetic  words  of  which  one  is  often  reminded  in  the  discussion  of
the  general  theory  of  relativity.  In  the  "question  as  to  the  inner
ground  of  the  relations  of  measurement  of  space,"  he  urges,  "the
remark  can  be  applied  that  in  a  discrete  manifold  the  principle  of
measurement  is  already  contained  in  the  concept  of  this  manifold,
but  in  the  case  of  a  continuous  manifold  it  must  come  from  else-


EUCLIDEAN AND NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY  441

where.  Either  the  real  lying  at  the  basis  of  space  must  be  a  discrete
manifold  or  the  basis  of  measurement  must  be  sought  outside  it  in
binding  forces  working  upon  it.  The  answer  to  this  question  oan
only  be  found  by  proceeding  from  the  conception  of  phenomena,
founded  by  Newton  and  hitherto  verified  by  experience  and  gradually
reshaping  this  by  facts  that  cannot  be  explained  from  it;  investiga-
tions, which,  like  the  one  made  here,  proceed  from  universal  concepts,
can  only  serve  to  the  effect  that  these  works  are  not  hindered  by
limitations  of  concepts  and  the  progress  in  knowledge  of  the  con-
nection of  things  not  hindered  by  traditional  prejudices."  (77).
What  is  here  demanded  is  thus  full  freedom  for  the  construction  of
geometrical  concepts  and  hypotheses  because  only  thereby  can  physi-
cal thought  also  attain  full  effectiveness,  and  face  all  future  problems
resulting  from  experience  with  an  assured  and  systematically  per-
fected instrument.  But  this  connection  is  expressed,  in  the  case  of
Riernann,  in  the  language  of  Herbartian  realism.  At  the  basis  of
the  pure  form  of  geometrical  space  a  real  is  to  be  found  in  which  is  to
be  sought  the  ultimate  cause  for  the  inner  relations  of  measurement
of  this  space.  If  we  carry  out,  however,  with  reference  to  this  formu-
lation of  the  problem,  the  critical,  "Copernican,"  revolution  and
thus  conceive  the  question  so  that  a  real  does  not  appear  as  a  ground
of  space  but  so  that  space  appears  as  an  ideal  ground  in  the  con-
struction and  progress  of  knowledge  of  reality,  there  results  for  us  at
once  a  characteristic  transformation.  Instead  of  regarding  "space"
as  a  self-existent  real,  which  must  be  explained  and  deduced  from
"binding  forces"  like  other  realities,  we  ask  now  rather  whether  the
a  priori  function,  the  universal  ideal  relation,  that  we  call  "space"
involves  possible  formulations  and  among  them  such  as  are  proper
to  offer  an  exact  and  exhaustive  account  of  certain  physical  relations,
of  certain  "fields  of  force."  The  development  of  the  general  theory
of  relativity  has  answered  this  question  in  the  affirmative;  it  has
shown  what  appeared  to  Riemann  as  a  geometrical  hypothesis,  as
a  mere  possibility  of  thought,  to  be  an  organ  for  the  knowledge  of
reality.  The  Newtonian  dynamics  is  here  resolved  into  pure  kine-
matics and  this  kinematics  ultimately  into  geometry.  The  content
of  the  latter  must  indeed  by  broadened  and  the  "simple"  Euclidean
type  of  geometrical  axioms  must  be  replaced  by  a  more  complex  type;
but  in  compensation  we  advance  a  step  further  into  the  realm  of
being,  i.e.,  into  the  realm  of  empirical  knowledge,  without  leaving  the


442  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

sphere  of  geometrical  consideration.  By  abandoning  the  form  of
Euclidean  space  as  an  undivided  whole  and  breaking  it  up  analytically
and  by  investigating  the  place  of  the  particular  axioms  and  their
reciprocal  dependence  or  independence,  we  are  led  to  a  system  of  pure
a  priori  manifolds,  whose  laws  thought  lays  down  constructively,  and
in  this  construction  we  possess  also  the  fundamental  meanS  for
representing  the  relation  of  the  real  structures  of  the  empirical
manifold.

The  realistic  view  that  the  relations  of  measurement  of  space  must
be  grounded  on  certain  physical  determinations,  on  "binding  forces"
of  matter,  expresses  this  peculiar  double  relation  one-sidedly  and
thus,  epistemologically  regarded,  inexactly  and  unsatisfactorily.
For  this  metaphysical  use  of  the  category  of  ground  would  destroy
the  methodological  unity,  which  should  be  brought  out.  What  rela-
tivistic  physics,  which  has  developed  strictly  and  consistently  from
a  theory  of  space  and  time  measurement,  offers  us  is  in  fact  only  the
combination,  the  reciprocal  determination,  of  the  metrical  and  physi-
cal elements.  In  this,  however,  there  is  found  no  one-sided  relation
of  ground  and  consequent,  but  rather  a  purely  reciprocal  relation,  a
correlation  of  the  "ideal"  and  "real"  moments,  of  "matter"  and
"form,"  of  the  geometrical  and  the  physical.  In  so  far  as  we  assume
any  division  at  all  in  this  reciprocal  relation  and  take  one  element  as
"prior"  and  fundamental,  the  other  as  "later"  and  derivative,  this
distinction  can  be  meant  only  in  a  logical,  not  in  a  real  sense.  In
this  sense,  we  must  conceive  the  pure  space-time  manifold  as  the
logical  prius;  not  as  if  it  existed  and  were  given  in  some  sense  outside
of  and  before  the  empirical  and  physical,  but  because  it  constitutes
a  principle  and  a  fundamental  condition  of  all  knowledge  of  empirical
and  physical  relations.  The  physicist  as  such  need  not  reflect  on  this
state  of  affairs;  for  in  all  the  concrete  measurements,  which  he
makes,  the  spatio-temporal  and  the  empirical  manifold  is  given  always
only  in  the  unitary  operation  of  measurement  itself,  not  in  the
abstract  isolation  of  its  particular  conceptual  elements  and  conditions.

From  these  considerations  the  relation  between  Euclidean  and
non-Euclidean  geometry  appears  in  a  new  light.  The  real  superiority
of  Euclidean  geometry  seems  at  first  glance  to  consist  in  its  concrete
and  intuitive  determinateness  in  the  face  of  which  all  "pseudo-geom-
etries" fade  into  logical  "possibilities."  These  possibilities  exist
only  for  thought,  not  for  "being;"  they  seem  analytic  plays  with


EUCLIDEAN AND NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY  443

concepts,  which  can  be  left  unconsidered  when  we  are  concerned  with
experience  and  with  "nature,"  with  the  synthetic  unity  of  objective
knowledge.  When  we  look  back  over  our  earlier  considerations,
this  view  must  undergo  a  peculiar  and  paradoxical  reversal.  Pure
Euclidean  space  stands,  as  is  now  seen,  not  closer  to  the  demands  of
empirical  and  physical  knowledge  than  the  non-Euclidean  mani-
folds but  rather  more  removed.  For  precisely  because  it  represents
the  logically  simplest  form  of  spatial  construction  it  is  not  wholly
adequate  to  the  complexity  of  content  and  the  material  determinate-
ness  of  the  empirical.  Its  fundamental  property  of  homogeneity,  its
axiom  of  the  equivalence  in  principle  of  all  points,  now  marks  it  as
an  abstract  space;  for,  in  the  concrete  and  empirical  manifold,  there
never  is  such  uniformity,  but  rather  thorough-going  differentiation
reigns  in  it.  If  we  would  create  a  conceptual  expression  for  this
fact  of  differentiation  in  the  sphere  of  geometrical  relations  them-
selves, then  nothing  remains  but  to  develop  further  the  geometrical
conceptual  language  with  reference  to  the  problem  of  the  "hetero-
geneous." We  find  this  development  in  the  construction  of  metage-
ometry.  When  the  concept  of  the  special  three-dimensional  mani-
fold with  a  curvature  0  is  broadened  here  to  the  thought  of  a  system
of  manifolds  with  different  constant  or  variable  curvatures,  a  new
ideal  means  is  discovered  for  the  mastery  of  complex  manifolds;  new
conceptual  symbols  are  created,  not  as  expressions  of  things,  but  of
possible  relations  according  to  law.  Whether  these  relations  are
realized  within  phenomena  at  any  place  only  experience  can  decide.
But  it  is  not  experience  that  grounds  the  content  of  the  geometrical
concepts;  rather  these  concepts  foreshadow  it  as  methodological
anticipations,  just  as  the  form  of  the  ellipse  was  anticipated  as  a
conic  section  long  before  it  attained  concrete  application  and  signifi-
cance in  the  courses  of  the  planets.  When  they  first  appeared,  the
systems  of  non-Euclidean  geometry  seemed  lacking  in  all  empirical
meaning,  but  there  was  expressed  in  them  the  intellectual  prepara-
tion for  problems  and  tasks,  to  which  experience  was  to  lead  later.
Since  the  "absolute  differential  calculus,"  which  was  grounded  on
purely  mathematical  considerations  by  Gauss,  Riemann  and
Christoffel,  gains  a  surprising  application  in  Einstein's  theory  of
gravitation,  the  possibility  of  such  an  application  must  be  held  open
for  all,  even  the  most  remote  constructions  of  pure  mathematics
and  especially  of  non-Euclidean  geometry.  For  it  has  always  been


444  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

shown  in  the  history  of  mathematics  that  its  complete  freedom
contains  the  guarantee  and  condition  of  its  fruitfulness.  Thought
docs  not  advance  in  the  field  of  the  concrete  by  dealing  with  the
particular  phenomena  like  pictures  to  be  united  into  a  single  mosaic,
but  by  sharpening  and  refining  its  own  means  of  determination
while  guided  by  reference  to  the  empirical  and  by  the  postulate
of  its  determinateness  according  to  law.  If  a  proof  were  needed  for
this  logical  state  of  aff airs,  the  development  of  the  theory  of  relativity
would  furnish  it.  It  has  been  said  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity
that  it  "substituted  mathematical  constructions  for  the  apparently
most  tangible  reality  and  resolved  the  latter  into  the  former.7'  (38,
p.  13).  The  advance  to  the  general  theory  of  relativity  has  brought
this  constructive  feature  more  distinctly  to  light;  but,  at  the
same  time,  it  has  shown  how  precisely  this  resolution  of  the  "tangible"
realities  has  verified  and  established  the  connection  of  theory  and
experience  in  an  entirely  new  way.  The  further  physical  thought
advances  and  the  higher  universality  of  conception  it  reaches  the
more  does  it  seem  to  lose  sight  of  the  immediate  data,  to  which  the
naive  view  of  the  world  clings,  so  that  finally  there  seems  no  return  to
these  data.  And  yet  the  physicist  abandons  himself  to  these  last
and  highest  abstractions  in  the  certainty  and  confidence  of  finding  in
them  reality,  his  reality  in  a  new  and  richer  sense.  In  the  progress
of  knowledge  the  deep  words  of  Heraclitus  hold  that  the  way  upward
and  the  way  downward  are  one  and  the  same:  6ddf  &vw  K&TW  jufy.
Here,  too,  ascent  and  descent  necessarily  belong  together:  the
direction  of  thought  to  the  universal  principles  and  grounds  of
knowledge  finally  proves  not  only  compatible  with  its  direction  to
the  particularity  of  phenomena  and  facts,  but  the  correlate  and
condition  of  the  latter.


CHAPTER  VII
THE  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY  AND  THE  PROBLEM  OF  REALITY

We  have  attempted  to  show  how  the  new  concept  of  nature  and  of
the  object,  which  the  theory  of  relativity  establishes,  is  grounded  in
the  form  of  physical  thought  and  only  brings  this  form  to  a  final
conclusion  and  clarity.  Physical  thought  strives  to  determine  and
to  express  in  pure  objectivity  merely  the  natural  object,  but
thereby  necessarily  expresses  itself,  its  own  law  and  its  own  principle.
Here  is  revealed  again  that  "anthropomorphism"  of  all  our  concepts  of
nature  to  which  Goethe,  in  the  wisdom  of  old  age,  loved  to  point.  "All
philosophy  of  nature  is  still  only  anthropomorphism,  i.e.,  man,
at  unity  with  himself,  imparts  to  everything  that  he  is  not,  this

unity,  draws  it  into  his  unity,  makes  it  one  with  himself

We  can  observe,  measure,  calculate,  weigh,  etc.,  nature  as  much  as
we  will,  it  i£  still  only  our  measure  and  weight,  as  man  is  the  measure
of  all  things."  Only,  after  all  our  preceding  considerations,  this
" anthropomorphism"  itself  is  not  to  be  understood  in  a  limited
psychological  way  but  in  a  universal,  critical  and  transcendental
sense.  Planck  points  out,  as  the  characteristic  of  the  evolution  of
the  system  of  theoretical  physics,  a  progressive  emancipation  from
anthropomorphic  elements,  which  has  as  its  goal  the  greatest  possible
separation  of  the  system  of  physics  from  the  individual  personality
of  the  physicist.  (68,  p.  7.)  But  into  this  "objective"  system,  free
from  all  the  accidents  of  individual  standpoint  and  individual  per-
sonality, there  enter  those  universal  conditions  of  system,  on  which
depends  the  peculiarity  of  the  physical  way  of  formulating  problems.
The  sensuous  immediacy  and  particularity  of  the  particular  percep-
tual qualities  are  excluded,  but  this  exclusion  is  possible  only  through
the  concepts  of  space  and  time,  number  and  magnitude.  In  them
physics  determines  the  most  general  content  of  reality,  since  they
specify  the  direction  of  physical  thought  as  such,  as  it  were  the  form
of  the  original  physical  apperception.  In  the  formulation  of  the
theory  of  relativity  this  reciprocal  relation  has  been  confirmed
throughout.  The  principle  of  relativity  has  at  once  an  objective
and  a  subjective,  or  methodological  meaning.  The  "postulate  of
the  absolute  world,"  which  it  involves  according  to  an  expression  of


446  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

Minkowski,  is  ultimately  a  postulate  of  absolute  method.  The
general  relativity  of  all  places,  times  and  measuring  rods  must  be  the
last  word  of  physics,  because  "relativization,"  the  resolution  of  the
natural  object  into  pure  relations  of  measurement  constitutes  the
kernel  of  physical  procedure,  the  fundamental  cognitive  function  of
physics.

If  we  understand,  however,  how,  in  this  sense,  the  affirmation  of
relativity  develops  with  inner  consequence  and  necessity  out  of  the
very  form  of  physics,  a  certain  critical  limitation  of  this  affirmation
also  appears.  The  postulate  of  relativity  may  be  the  purest,  most
universal  and  sharpest  expression  of  the  physical  concept  of  objectiv-
ity, but  this  concept  of  the  physical  object  does  not  coincide,  from
the  standpoint  of  the  general  criticism  of  knowledge,  with  reality
absolutely.  The  progress  of  epistemological  analysis  is  shown  in
that  the  assumption  of  the  simplicity  and  oneness  of  the  concepts  of
reality  is  recognized  more  and  more  as  an  illusion.  Each  of  the
original  directions  of  knowledge,  each  interpretation,  which  it  makes
of  phenomena  to  combine  them  into  the  unity  of  a  theoretical
connection  or  into  a  definite  unity  of  meaning,  involves  a  special
understanding  and  formulation  of  the  concept  of  reality.  There
result  here  not  only  the  characteristic  differences  of  meaning  in  the
objects  of  science,  the  distinction  of  the  "mathematical"  object  from
the  "physical"  object,  the  "physical"  from  the  "chemical,"  the
"chemical"  from  the  "biological,"  but  there  occur  also,  over  against  the
whole  of  theoretical  scientific  knowledge,  other  forms  and  meanings  of
independent  type  and  laws,  such  as  the  ethical,  the  aesthetic  "form."
It  appears  as  the  task  of  a  truly  universal  criticism  of  knowledge  not
to  level  this  manifold,  this  wealth  and  variety  of  forms  of  knowledge
and  understanding  of  the  world  and  compress  them  into  a  purely
abstract  unity,  but  to  leave  them  standing  as  such.  Only  when  we
resist  the  temptation  to  compress  the  totality  of  forms,  which  here
result,  into  an  ultimate  metaphysical  unity,  into  the  unity  and  simplic-
ity of  an  absolute  "world  ground"  and  to  deduce  it  from  the  latter,
do  we  grasp  its  true  concrete  import  and  fullness.  No  individual
form  can  indeed  claim  to  grasp  absolute  "reality"  as  such  and  to
give  it  complete  and  adequate  expression.  Rather  if  the  thought
of  such  an  ultimate  definite  reality  is  conceivable  at  all,  it  is  so  only
as  an  Idea,  as  the  problem  of  a  totality  of  determination  in  which
each  particular  function  of  knowledge  and  consciousness  must


RELATIVITY  AND  THE  PROBLEM  OF  REALITY 447

cooperate  according  to  its  character  and  within  its  definite  limits.
If  one  holds  fast  to  this  general  view,  there  results  even  within  the
pure  concepts  of  nature  a  possible  diversity  of  approaches  of  which
each  one  can  lay  claim  to  a  certain  right  and  characteristic  validity.
The  "nature"  of  Goethe  is  not  the  same  as  that  of  Newton,  because
there  prevail,  in  the  original  shaping  of  the  two,  different  principles
of  form,  types  of  synthesis,  of  the  spiritual  and  intellectual  combina-
tion of  the  phenomena.  Where  there  exist  such  diversities  in  funda-
mental direction  of  consideration,  the  results  of  consideration  cannot
be  directly  compared  and  measured  with  each  other.  The  naive
realism  of  the  ordinary  view  of  the  world,  like  the  realism  of  dogmatic
metaphysics,  falls  into  this  error,  ever  again.  It  separates  out  of  the
totality  of  possible  concepts  of  reality  a  single  one  and  sets  it  up  as  a
norm  and  pattern  for  all  the  others.  Thus  certain  necessary  formal
points  of  view,  from  which  we  seek  to  judge  and  understand  the  world
of  phenomena,  are  made  into  things,  into  absolute  beings.  Whether
we  characterize  this  ultimate  being  as  "matter"  or  "life,"  nature"
or  "history,"  there  always  results  for  us  in  the  end  confusion  in  our
view  of  the  world,  because  certain  spiritual  functions,  that  cooperate
in  its  construction,  are  excluded  and  others  are  over-emphasized.

It  is  the  task  of  systematic  philosophy,  which  extends  far  beyond
the  theory  of  knowledge,  to  free  the  idea  of  the  world  from  this  one-
sidedness.  It  has  to  grasp  the  whole  system  of  symbolic  forms,  the
application  of  which  produces  for  us  the  concept  of  an  ordered  reality,
and  by  virtue  of  which  subject  and  object,  ego  and  world  are
separated  and  opposed  to  each  other  in  definite  form,  and  it  must
refer  each  individual  in  this  totality  to  its  fixed  place.  If  we  as-
sume this  problem  solved,  then  the  rights  would  be  assured,  and  the
limits  fixed,  of  each  of  the  particular  forms  of  the  concept  and  of
knowledge  as  well  as  of  the  general  forms  of  the  theoretical,  ethical,
aesthetic  and  religious  understanding  of  the  world.  Each  particular
form  would  be  "relativized"  with  regard  to  the  others,  but  since
this  "relativization"  is  throughout  reciprocal  and  since  no  single
form  but  only  the  systematic  totality  can  serve  as  the  expression
of  "truth"  and  "reality,"  the  limit  that  results  appears  as  a  thor-
oughly immanent  limit,  as  one  that  is  removed  as  soon  as  we  again
relate  the  individual  to  the  system  of  the  whole.

We  trace  the  general  problem,  which  opens  up  here,  no  further  but
use  it  merely  to  designate  the  limits,  that  belong  to  any,  even  the


448  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

most  universal,  physical  formulation  of  problems,  because  these
limits  are  necessarily  grounded  in  the  concept  and  essence  of  this
way  of  formulating  the  question.  All  physics  considers  phenomena
under  the  standpoint  and  presupposition  of  their  measurability.
It  seeks  to  resolve  the  structure  of  being  and  process  ultimately  into
a  pure  structure  or  order  of  numbers.  The  theory  of  relativity  has
brought  this  fundamental  tendency  of  physical  thought  to  its  sharpest
expression.  According  to  it  the  procedure  of  every  physical  "ex-
planation" of  natural  process  consists  in  coordinating,  to  each  point
of  the  space-time  continuum,  four  numbers,  xi,  x2,  x3,  x4,  which
possess  absolutely  no  direct  physical  meaning  but  only  serve  to
enumerate  the  points  of  the  continuum  "in  a  definite,  but  arbitrary
way."  (18,  p.  64).  The  ideal,  with  which  scientific  physics  began
with  Pythagoras  and  the  Pythagoreans,  finds  here  its  conclusion;
all  qualities,  including  those  of  pure  space  and  time,  are  translated
into  pure  numerical  values.  The  logical  postulate  contained  in  the
concept  of  number,  which  gives  this  concept  its  characteristic  form,
seems  now  fulfilled  in  a  degree  not  to  be  surpassed;  all  sensuous  and
intuitive  heterogeneity  has  passed  into  pure  homogeneity.  The
classical  mechanics  and  physics  seeks  to  reach  this  immanent  goal  of
conceptual  construction  by  relating  the  manifold  of  the  sensuously
given  to  the  homogeneous  and  absolutely  uniform  time.  All  differ-
ence of  sensation  is  hereby  reduced  to  a  difference  of  motions;  all
possible  variety  of  content  is  resolved  into  a  mere  variety  of  spatial
and  temporal  positions.  But  the  ideal  of  strict  homogeneity  is  not
reached  here  since  there  are  still  always  two  fundamental  forms  of  the
homogeneous  itself  that  are  opposed  to  each  other  as  pure  space  and
pure  time.  The  theory  of  relativity  in  its  development  advances
beyond  this  opposition  also;  it  seeks  to  resolve  not  only  the  differences
of  sensation  but  also  those  between  spatial  and  temporal  determina-
tions into  the  unity  of  numerical  determinations.  The  particularity
of  each  "event"  is  expressed  by  the  four  numbers  Xi,  x2,  xs,  X4,
whereby  these  numbers  among  themselves  have  reference  to  no
differences,  so  that  some  of  them  xi,  x2,  x8,  cannot  be  brought  into
a  special  group  of  "spatial"  coordinates  and  contrasted  with  the
time  coordinate"  x4.  Thus  all  differences  belonging  to  spatial  and
temporal  apprehension  in  subjective  consciousness  seem  to  be  con-
sistently set  aside  in  the  same  way  that  nothing  of  the  subjective


RELATIVITY  AND  THE  PROBLEM  OF  REALITY 449

visual  sensation  enters  into  the  physical  concept  of  light  and  color.1
Not  only  are  all  spatial  and  temporal  values  exchangeable  with  each
other,  but  all  inner  differences  of  the  temporal  itself,  unavoidable
for  the  subjective  consciousness,  all  differences  of  direction,  which
we  designate  by  the  words  "past"  and  "future,"  are  cancelled.  The
direction  into  the  past  and  that  into  the  future  are  distinguished
from  each  other  in  this  form  of  the  concept  of  the  world  by  nothing
more  than  are  the  +  and  —  directions  in  space,  which  we  can  deter-
mine by  arbitrary  definition.  There  remains  only  the  "absolute
world"  of  Minkowski;  the  world  of  physics  changes  from  a  process-
in  a  three-dimensional  world  into  a  being  in  this  four-dimensional
world,  in  which  time  is  replaced  as  a  variable  magnitude  by  the
imaginary  "ray  of  light"  (Lichtweg)  (x4  =  \/  —i  c  t)-2

This  transformation  of  the  time-value  into  an  imaginary  numerical
value  seems  to  annihilate  all  the  "reality"  and  qualitative  determinate-
ness,  which  time  possesses  as  the  "form  of  the  inner  sense,"  as  the
form  of  immediate  experience.  The  "stream  of  process,"  which,
psychologically,  constitutes  consciousness  and  distinguishes  it  as
such,  stands  still;  it  has  passed  into  the  absolute  rigidity  of  a  mathe-
matical cosmic  formula.  There  remains  in  this  formula  nothing  of
that  form  of  time,  which  belongs  to  all  our  experience  as  such  and
enters  as  an  inseparable  and  necessary  factor  into  all  its  content.3
But,  paradoxical  as  this  result  seems  from  the  standpoint  of  this
experience,  it  expresses  only  the  course  of  mathematical  and  physical
objectification,  for,  to  estimate  it  correctly  from  the  epistemological
standpoint,  we  must  understand  it  not  in  its  mere  result,  but  as  a
process,  a  method.  In  the  resolution  of  subjectively  experienced
qualities  into  pure  objective  numerical  determinations,  mathematical
physics  is  bound  to  no  fixed  limit.  It  must  go  its  way  to  the  end;
it  can  stop  before  no  form  of  consciousness  no  matter  how  original
and  fundamental;  for  it  is  precisely  its  specific  cognitive  task  to
translate  everything  enumerable  into  pure  number,  all  quality  into
quantity,  all  particular  forms  into  a  universal  order  and  it  only  "con-
ceives" them  scientifically  by  virtue  of  this  transformation.  Philoso-
phy would  seek  in  vain  to  bid  this  tendency  halt  at  any  point  and  to
declare  ne  plus  ultra.  The  task  of  philosophy  must  rather  be  limited  to

1  On  this  latter  point  c/.  now  Planck,  Das  Wesen  des  Lichts  (71).

2  Cf.  Minkowski  (54,  p.  62  ff.);  Einstein  (18,  p.  82  f.).
»  C/.,  e.  g.,  J.  Cohn  (14,  p.  228  ff.).


450  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  BELATIVITY

recognizing  fully  the  logical  meaning  of  the  mathematical  and  physical
concept  of  objectivity  and  thereby  conceiving  this  meaning  in  its  logi-
cal limitedness.  All  particular  physical  theories  including  the  theory
of  relativity  receive  their  definite  meaning  and  import  only  through  the
unitary  cognitive  will  of  physics,  which  stands  back  of  them.  The
moment  that  we  transcend  the  field  of  physics  and  change  not  the
means  but  the  very  goal  of  knowledge,  all  particular  concepts  assume
a  new  aspect  and  form.  Each  of  these  concepts  means  something
different,  depending  on  the  general  "modality "  of  consciousness  and
knowledge  with  which  it  is  connected  and  from  which  it  is  considered.
Myth  and  scientific  knowledge,  the  logical  and  the  aesthetic  con-
sciousness, are  examples  of  such  diverse  modalities.  Occasionally
concepts  of  the  same  name,  but  by  no  means  of  the  same  meaning,
meet  us  in  these  different  fields.  The  conceptual  relation,  which
we  generally  call  "cause"  and  "effect"  is  not  lacking  to  mythical
thought,  but  here  its  meaning  is  specifically  distinct  from  the  meaning
that  it  receives  in  scientific,  and  in  particular,  in  mathematical  and
physical  thought.  In  a  similar  way,  all  the  fundamental  concepts
undergo  a  characteristic  intellectual  change  of  meaning  when  we
trace  them  through  the  different  fields  of  intellectual  consideration.
Where  the  copy  theory  of  knowledge  seeks  a  simple  identity,  the
functional  theory  of  knowledge  sees  complete  diversity,  but,  indeed,
at  the  same  time  complete  correlation  of  the  individual  forms.4

If  we  apply  these  considerations  to  the  concepts  of  space  and  time,
then  it  is  obvious  what  the  transformation  of  these  concepts  in  modern
physics  means,  in  its  philosophical  import,  and  what  it  cannot  mean.
The  content  of  physical  deductions  cannot,  without  falling  into  the
logical  error  of  a  ner&fiaatC  tlf  aXXo  ykvo£  be  simply  carried  over  into
the  language  of  fields  whose  structure  rests  on  a  totally  different
principle.  Thus,  what  space  and  time  are  as  immediate  con-
tents of  experience  and  as  they  offer  themselves  to  our  psychologi-
cal and  phenomenological  analysis  is  unaffected  by  the  use  we  make  of
them  in  the  determination  of  the  object,  in  the  course  of  objective
conceptual  knowledge.  The  distance  between  these  two  types  of
consideration  and  conception  is  only  augmented  by  the  theory  of

4 1  am  aware  of  the  fragmentary  character  of  these  suggestions :  for  their
supplementation  and  more  exact  proof  I  must  refer  to  some  subsequent  more
exhaustive  treatment.  Cf.  also  the  essay  Goethe  und  die  mathematische  Physik
(11).


RELATIVITY  AND  THE  PROBLEM  OP  REALITY 451

relativity  and  thus  only  made  known  more  distinctly,  but  is  not  first
produced  by  it.  Rather  it  is  clear  that  even  to  attain  the  first  ele-
ments of  mathematical  and  physical  knowledge  and  of  the  mathe-
matical and  physical  object  we  assume  that  characteristic  transfor-
mation of  "subjective"  phenomenal  space  and  of  "subjective"
phenomenal  time,  which  leads,  in  its  ultimate  consequences,  to  the
results  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity.  From  the  standpoint  of
strict  sensualism  too,  it  is  customary  to  admit  this  transformation,
this  opposition  between  the  "physiological"  space  of  our  sensation
and  presentation  and  the  purely  "metrical"  space,  which  we  make
the  basis  of  geometry.  The  latter  rests  on  the  assumption  of  the
equivalence  of  all  places  and  directions,  while  for  the  former  the
distinction  of  places  and  directions  and  the  marking  out  of  the  one
above  the  others  is  essential.  The  space  of  touch,  like  that  of  vision,  is
anistropic  and  inhomogeneous,  while  metrical  Euclidean  space  is
distinguished  by  the  postulate  of  isotropism  and  homogeneity.
Compared  with  "metrical"  time,  physiological  time  shows  the  same
characteristic  variations  and  differences  of  meaning;  one  must,  as
Mach  himself  urges,  as  clearly  distinguish  between  the  immediate
sensation  of  duration  and  the  measuring  number  as  between  the  sensa-
tion of  warmth  and  temperature.5

5  Mach  (50,  p.  331  ff.,  415  ff.).  If,  with  Schlick  (79,  p.  51ff.),  one  would
call  the  psychological  space  of  sensation  and  presentation  the  space  of  intui-
tion, and  contrast  with  it  physical  space  as  a  conceptual  construction,  no  objec-
tion could  be  made  against  this  as  a  purely  terminological  determination;  but
one  must  guard  against  confusing  this  use  of  the  word  "intuition"  with  the
Kantian,  which  rests  on  entirely  different  presuppositions.  When  Schlick
sees  in  the  insight  that  objective  physical  time  has  just  as  little  to  do  with  the
intuitive  experience  of  duration  as  the  three-dimensional  order  of  objective
space  with  optical  or  "haptical"  extension,  "the  kernel  of  truth  in  the  Kantian
doctrine  of  the  subjectivity  of  time  and  space,"  and  when  he  on  the  other
hand  combats,  on  the  basis  of  this  distinction,  the  Kantian  concept  of  "pure
intuition,"  this  rests  on  a  psychological  misunderstanding  of  the  meaning  of
the  Kantian  concepts.  The  space  and  time  of  pure  intuition  are  for  Kant
never  sensed  or  perceived  space  or  time,  but  the  "mathematical"  space  and
time  of  Newton;  they  are  themselves  constructively  generated,  just  as  they
form  the  presupposition  and  foundation  of  all  further  mathematical  and  physi-
cal construction.  In  Kant's  thought,  "pure  intuition"  plays  the  r61e  of  a
definite  fundamental  method  of  obj  edification;  it  coincides  in  no  way  with
"subjective,"  i.e.,  psychologically  experienceable  time  and  space.  When
Kant  speaks  of  the  subjectivity  of  space  and  time,  we  must  never  understand


452  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

This  contrast  between  subjective,  "phenomenal"  space  and  time,
on  the  one  hand,  and  objective  and  mathematical  space  and  time,
on  the  other,  comes  to  light  with  special  distinctness,  when  one
considers  a  property  which  seems  at  first  glance  to  be  common  to
them.  Of  both  we  are  accustomed  to  predicate  the  property  of
continuity,  but  we  understand  thereby,  more  closely  considered,
something  wholly  different  in  the  two  cases.  The  continuity,  which  we
ascribe  to  time  and  processes  in  it  on  the  basis  of  the  form  of  our
experience,  and  that  which  we  define  in  mathematical  concepts  by
certain  constructive  methods  of  analysis,  not  only  do  not  coin-
cide but  differ  in  their  essential  moments  and  conditions.  The
experiential  continuity  affirms  that  each  temporal  content  is  given  to
us  only  in  the  way  of  certain  characteristic  "wholes,"  which  can  not
be  resolved  into  ultimate  simple  "elements'"  analytic  continuity
demands  reduction  to  such  elements.  The  first  takes  time  and
duration  as  "organic"  unities  in  which  according  to  the  Aristotelian
definition,  "the  whole  precedes  the  parts;"  the  second  sees  in  them
only  an  infinite  totality  of  parts,  of  particular  sharply  differentiated
temporal  points.  In  the  one  case,  the  continuity  of  becoming  signifies
that  living  flux,  that  is  given  to  our  consciousness  only  as  a  flux,  as  a
transition,  but  not  as  separated  and  broken  up  into  discrete  parts;
in  the  other,  it  is  demanded  that  we  continue  our  analysis  beyond  all
limits  of  empirical  apprehension;  it  is  demanded  that  we  do  not
allow  the  division  of  elements  to  cease  where  sensuous  perception,
which  is  bound  to  definite  but  accidental  limits  in  its  capacity  for
discrimination,  allows  it  to  end,  but  that  we  follow  it  purely  intellec-
tually ad  infinitum.  What  the  mathematician  calls  the  "continuum"
is  thus  never  the  purely  experiential  quality  of  "continuity,"  of
which  there  is  no  longer  possible  any  further  "objective"  definition,
but  it  is  a  purely  conceptual  construction,  which  he  puts  in  the  place
of  the  latter.  Here  too  he  must  follow  his  universal  method;  he  must
reduce  the  quality  of  continuity  to  mere  number,  i.e.,  precisely  to  the
fundamental  form  of  all  intellectual  discreteness.  (Cf .  6,  p.  21).  The
only  continuum  he  knows  and  the  one  to  which  he  reduces  all  others,
is  always  the  continuum  of  real  numbers  which  modern  analysis  and

experiential  subjectivity  but  their  "transcendental"  subjectivity  as  condi-
tions of  the  possibility  of  "objective/'  i.e.,  of  objectifying  empirical  knowl-
edge. (Cf.  also  the  significant  remarks  of  Selliens  against  Schlick;  81,  p.
19,  39).


RELATIVITY  AND  THE  PROBLEM OF REALITY  453

theory  of  groups  seek,  as  is  known,  to  construct  strictly  conceptually
with  renunciation  in  principle  of  any  appeal  to  the  "intuition"  of
space  and  time.  The  continuum  thus  considered,  as  Henri  Poincar6
especially  has  urged  with  all  emphasis  is  nothing  but  a  totality  of
individuals,  which  are  conceived  in  a  definite  order  and  are  given
indeed  in  infinite  number,  of  which  each  one  is  opposed  to  the
others  as  something  separate  and  external.  We  are  here  no  longer
concerned  with  the  ordinary  view,  according  to  which  there  exists
between  the  elements  a  sort  of  "inner  bond"  by  which  they  are
connected  into  a  whole,  so  that,  e.g.,  the  point  does  not  precede  the
line,  but  the  line  the  point.  "Of  the  famous  formula,  that  the
continuum  is  the  unity  of  the  manifold,"  concludes  Poincar6,  "there
remains  only  the  manifold, —  the  unity  has  disappeared.  The
analysts  are  nevertheless  right  when  they  define  continuity  as  they  do,
for  in  all  their  inferences  they  are  concerned,  in  so  far  as  they  claim
rigor,  only  with  this  concept  of  the  continuous.  But  this  circum-
stance suffices  to  make  us  attentive  to  the  fact  that  the  true  mathe-
matical continuum  is  something  totally  different  from  that  of  the
physicist  and  the  metaphysician."  (72,  p.  30.)  In  so  far  as  physics
is  an  objectifying  science  working  with  the  conceptual  instruments
of  mathematics,  the  physical  continuum  is  conceived  by  it  as  related
to  and  exactly  correlated  with  the  mathematical  continuum  of  pure
numbers.  But  the  "metaphysical"  continuum  of  the  pure  and
original  "subjective"  form  of  experience  can  never  be  comprehended
in  this  way,  for  the  very  direction  of  mathematical  consideration  is
such  that,  instead  of  leading  to  this  form,  it  continually  leads  away
from  it.  The  critical  theory  of  knowledge,  which  does  not  have  to
select  from  among  the  different  sorts  of  knowledge,  but  merely  to
establish  what  each  of  them  "is"  and  means,  can  make  no  normative
decision  as  to  the  opposite  aspects  under  which  the  continuum  here
appears,  but  its  task  consists  in  defining  the  two  with  reference  to
each  other  in  utmost  distinctness  and  clarity.  Only  by  such  a
delimitation  can  be  reached,  on  the  one  hand,  the  goal  of  phenomeno-
logical  analysis  of  the  temporal  and  spatial  consciousness,  and,  on
the  other  hand,  the  goal  of  the  exact  foundation  of  mathematical
analysis  and  its  concepts  of  space  and  time.  "With  regard  to  the
objection,  "says  a  modern  mathematical  author  in  concluding  his  inves-
tigation of  the  continuum,  "that  nothing  is  contained  in  the  intuition
of  the  continuum  of  the  logical  principles  that  we  must  adduce  in  the


454  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

exact  definition  of  the  concept  of  the  real  number,  we  have  taken
account  of  the  fact  that  what  can  be  found  in  the  intuitive  continuum
and  in  the  mathematical  world  of  concepts  are  so  alien  to  each  other,
that  the  demand  that  the  two  coincide  must  be  rejected  as  absurd.
In  spite  of  this,  those  abstract  schemata,  which  mathematics  offers
us,  are  helpful  in  rendering  possible  an  exact  science  of  fields  of
objects  in  which  continua  play  a  r61e.  The  exact  temporal  or  spatial
point  does  not  lie  in  the  given  (phenomenal)  duration  or  extension
as  an  ultimate  indivisible  element,  but  only  reason  reaching  through
this  can  grasp  these  ideas  and  they  crystallize  into  full  determinate-
ness  only  in  connection  with  the  purely  formal  arithmetical  and
analytical  concept  of  the  real  number/'6

If  we  bear  in  mind  this  state  of  affairs,  the  deductions  of  the  theory
of  relativity  in  its  determination  of  the  four-dimensional  space  and
time  continuum  lose  the  appearance  of  paradox,  for  it  is  seen  that
they  are  only  the  final  consequence  and  working  out  of  the  fundamen-
tal methodic  idea  on  which  rests  mathematical  analysis  in  general.
But  .the  question  as  to  which  of  the  two  forms  of  space  and  time,
the  psychological  or  the  physical,  the  space  and  time  of  immediate
experience  or  of  mediate  conception  and  knowledge,  expresses  the
true  reality  has  lost  fundamentally  for  us  all  definite  meaning.  In
the  complex  that  we  call  our  "world,"  that  we  call  the  being  of  our
ego  and  of  things,  the  two  enter  as  equally  unavoidable  and  necessary
moments.  We  can  cancel  neither  of  them  in  favor  of  the  other  and
exclude  it  from  this  complex,  but  we  can  refer  each  to  its  definite
place  in  the  whole.  If  the  physicist,  whose  problem  consists  in
objectification,  affirms  the  superiority  of  "objective"  space  and  time
over  "subjective"  space  and  time;  if  the  psychologist  and  the  meta-
physician, who  are  directed  upon  the  totality  and  immediacy  of
experience  draw  the  opposite  conclusion;  then  the  two  judgments
express  only  a  false  "absolutization"  of  the  norm  of  knowledge  by
which  each  of  them  determines  and  measures  "reality."  In  which
direction  this  "absolutization"  tdces  place  and  whether  it  is  directed
on  the  "outer"  or  the  "inner"  is  a  matter  of  indifference  from
the  standpoint  of  pure  epistemology.  For  Newton  it  was  certain
that  the  absolute  and  mathematical  time,  which  by  its  nature  flowed
uniformly,  was  the  "true"  time  of  which  all  empirically  given  tem-

•  Weyl,  84,  p.  83,  71.


RELATIVITY  AND  THE  PROBLEM  OF  REALITY 435

poral  determination  can  offer  us  only  a  more  or  less  imperfect  copy;
for  Bergson,  this  "true"  time  of  Newton  is  a  conceptual  fiction  and
abstraction,  a  barrier,  which  intervenes  between  our  apprehension
and  the  original  meaning  and  import  of  reality.  But  it  is  forgotten
that  what  is  here  called  absolute  reality,  dnree  r6elle,  is  itself  no  abso-
lute but  only  signifies  a  standpoint  of  consciousness  opposed  to  that
of  mathematics  and  physics.  In  the  one  case,  we  seek  to  gain  a
unitary  and  exact  measure  for  all  objective  process,  in  the  other  we
are  concerned  in  retaining  this  process  itself  in  its  pure  qualitative
character,  in  its  concrete  fullness  and  subjective  inwardness  and
"contentuality."  The  two  standpoints  can  be  understood  in  their
meaning  and  necessity;  neither  suffices  to  include  the  actual  whole
of  being  in  the  idealistic  sense  of  "being  for  us."  The  symbols  that
the  mathematician  and  physicist  take  as  a  basis  in  their  view  of  the
outer  and  the  psychologist  in  his  view  of  the  inner,  must  both  be
understood  as  symbols.  Until  this  has  come  about  the  true  philo-
sophical view,  the  view  of  the  whole,  is  not  reached,  but  a  partial  experi-
ence is  hypostasized  into  the  whole.  From  the  standpoint  of  mathe-
matical physics,  the  total  content  of  the  immediate  qualities,  not
only  the  differences  of  sensation,  but  those  of  spatial  and  temporal
consciousness,  is  threatened  with  complete  annihilation;  for  the
metaphysical  psychologist,  conversely,  all  reality  is  reduced  to  this
immediacy,  while  every  mediate  conceptual  cognition  is  given  only
the  value  of  an  arbitrary  convention  produced  for  the  purposes  of  our
action.  But  both  views  prove,  in  their  absoluteness,  rather  perver-
sions of  the  full  import  of  being,  i.e.,  of  the  full  import  of  the  forms
of  knowledge  of  the  self  and  the  world.  While  the  mathematician
and  the  mathematical  physicist  stand  in  danger  of  permitting  the
real  world  to  be  identified  with  the  world  of  their  measures,  the  meta-
physical view,  in  seeking  to  narrow  mathematics  to  practical  goals,
loses  the  sense  of  its  purest  and  deepest  ideal  import.  It  violently
closes  the  door  against  what,  according  to  Plato,  constitutes  the  real
meaning  and  the  real  value  of  mathematics;  that,  namely,  "by  each
of  these  cognitions  an  organ  of  the  soul  is  purified  and  strengthened,
which  under  other  occupations  is  lost  and  blinded;  for  its  preserva-
tion is  more  important  than  that  of  a  thousand  fcyes;  for  by  this
alone  is  the  truth  seen."  And  between  the  two  poles  of  consideration,
which  we  find  here,  there  stand  the  manifold  concepts  of  truth  of  the
different  concrete  sciences — and  therewith  their  concepts  of  space


456  EINSTEIN'S  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

and  time.  History,  to  set  up  its  temporal  measure,  cannot  do  with-
out the  methods  of  the  objectifying  sciences:  chronology  is  founded
on  astronomy  and  through  this  on  mathematics.  But  the  time  of  the
historian  is  nevertheless  not  identical  with  that  of  the  mathematician
and  physicist,  but  possesses  in  contrast  to  it  a  peculiar  concrete
form.  In  the  concept  of  time  of  history,  the  "objective"  content  of
knowledge  and  the  "subjective"  experiential  content  enter  into  a
new  characteristic  reciprocal  relation.  An  analogous  relation  is
presented,  when  we  survey  the  aesthetic  meaning  and  shaping  of
the  forms  of  space  and  time.  Painting  presupposes  the  objective
laws  of  perspective,  architecture  the  laws  of  statics,  but  the  two
serve  here  only  as  material  out  of  which  develops  the  unity  of  the
picture  and  of  the  architectural  spatial  form,  on  the  basis  of  the
original  artistic  laws  of  form.  For  music,  too,  the  Pythagoreans
sought  a  connection  with  pure  mathematics,  with  pure  number;  but
the  unity  and  rythmical  division  of  a  melody  rests  on  wholly  differ-
ent structural  principles  than  those  on  which  we  construct  time  in
the  sense  of  the  unity  of  objective  physical  processes  of  nature.
What  space  and  time  truly  are  in  the  philosophical  sense  would  be
determined  if  we  succeeded  in  surveying  completely  this  wealth  of
nuances  of  intellectual  meaning  and  in  assuring  ourselves  of  the  under-
lying formal  law  under  which  they  stand  and  which  they  obey.  The
theory  of  relativity  cannot  claim  to  bring  this  philosophical  problem
to  its  solution;  for,  by  its  development  and  scientific  tendency  from  the
beginning,  it  is  limited  to  a  definite  particular  motive  of  the  concepts
of  space  and  time.  As  a  physical  theory  it  merely  develops  the
meaning  that  space  and  time  possess  in  the  system  of  our  empirical
and  physical  measurements.  In  this  sense,  final  judgment  on  it  be-
longs exclusively  to  physics.  In  the  course  of  its  history,  physics
will  have  to  decide  whether  the  world-picture  of  the  theory  of  relativ-
ity is  securely  founded  theoretically  and  whether  it  finds  complete
experimental  verification.  Its  decision  on  this,  epistemology  cannot
anticipate;  but  even  now  it  can  thankfully  receive  the  new  impe-
tus which  this  theory  has  given  the  general  doctrine  of  the  princi-
ples of  physics.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  457

BIBLIOGRAPHY

(1)  BAUCH, BRUNO:  Studien  zur  Philosophie der exakten  Wissenschaften.

Heidelberg,  1911.

(2)  BECKER, ERICH:  Philosophische Voraussetzungen der exakten Natur-

wissenshaften. Leipzig,  1906.

(3)  BERG, OTTO:  Das Relativitdtsprinzip der Elektrodynamik. (Abt.  der

Friesschen  Schule,  N.  F.,  Gottingen,  1912.)

(3a)  BLOCK,  W.:  Einfuhrung  in  die  Relativitatstheorie,  Lpz.  und  Berl.,  1918.
(Aus  Natur.  u.  Geisteswelt,  Bd.  J18.)

(4)  BUEK,  OTTO:  Mich.  Faradays  System  der  Natur  und  seine  begrifflichen

Grundlagen. Philos. Abhandlungen zu II. Cohens 70. Geburtstag.
Berlin,  1912.

(5)  CASSIRER,  ERNST:  Leibniz'  System  in  seinen  unssenschaftlichen  Grund-

lagen. Marburg,  1902.

(6)  CASSIRER, ERNST:  Kant und  die  moderne  Mathematik. Kant-Studien

XII  (1901).

(7)  CASSIRER,  ERNST:  Das  Erkenntnisproblem  in  der  Philosophie  und  Wissen-

schaft  der  neueren  Zeit. Bd.  I  und  H,  2.  Aufl.,  Berlin,  1911;  Bd.  Ill,
Berlin,  1920.

(8)  CASSIRER,  ERNST:  Substance  and  Function.

(9)  CASSIRER, ERNST:  Erkenntnistheorie  nebst  den  Grenzfragen  der  Logik.

In  Jahrb.  fur Philosophie }  hg.  von Max  Frischeisen-Kohler, Berlin,
1913.

(10)  CASSIRER,  ERNST:  Kants  Leben  und  Lehre,  Berlin,  1918.

(11)  CASSIRER,  ERNST:  Goethe  und  die  mathematische  Physik  (In:  Idee  und

Gestalt,  Funf  Aufsatze,  Berlin,  1920).

(12)  COHEN,  HERMANN:  Kants  Theorie  der  Erfahrung,  3.  Aufl.,  Berlin,  1918.

(13)  COHEN,  HERMANN:  Logik  der  reinen  Erkenntnis,  Berlin,  1902.

(13a)  COHN,  EMIL:  Physikalisches  uber  Raum  und  Zeit,  4-  Aufl.,  Berlin,  1920.

(14)  COHN, JONAS:  Relativit&t  und  Idealismus, Kant-Studien (XXI),  1916,

p.  222  ff.

(15)  DUHEM,  PIERRE:  La  Theorie  Physique,  son  objet  et  sa  structure. Paris,

1906.
(15a)  EHRENFEST,  P.:  Zur  Krise  der  Lichtaether-Hypothese,  Berlin,  1913.

(16)  EINSTEIN,  ALBERT:  Zur  Elektrodynamik  bewegter  Systeme. Annalen  der

Physik,  4.  F.,  XVII,  p.  891  (1905), (Cited  from  No.  47).

(16a)  EINSTEIN, ALBERT:  1st  die  Trdgheit  eines  Kdrpers  von  seinem  Ener-
giegehalt  abh&ngigt Annal.  der  Physik  (17),  1905.

(17)  EINSTEIN,  ALBERT:  Die  Grundlagen  der  allgemeinen  Relativitdtstheorie,

Lpz.,  1916.

(18)  EINSTEIN, ALBERT:  Uber  die spezielle  und  die  allgemeiiie  Relativitats-

theorie  (Sammlung  Vieweg,  Heft  88)  2.  Aufl.,  Braunschweig,  1917.

(19)  EINSTEIN,  ALBERT:  Die  formalen  Grundlagen  der  allgemeinen  Relativi-

tatstheorie. Sitzungsber.  der  Berliner  Akad.  d.  Wiss.,  XLI,  1916.

(20)  EINSTEIN,  ALBERT:  Ernst  Mach,  Physikalische  Zeitschrift,  XVII  (1916),

p.  101  ff.


468  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

(21)  ERDMANN,  BENNO:  DieAxiomeder  Geometric. Sine  philosophische  Un-

tersuchung  der  Riemann-Helmholtzschen  Raumtheorie  (1877).

(22)  EULER,  LEONHARD:  Reflexions  sur  I'espace  et  le  temps. Hist.  deVAcad.

des  Sciences  et  Belles  Lettres,  Berlin,  1748.

(23)  EULER,  LEONHARD  :  Brief e  an  eine  deutsche  Prinzessin  (1768) .

(24)  FREUNDLICH, ERWIN:  Die  Grundlagen  der  Einsteinschen  Gravitations-

theorie. Berlin,  1916.

(24a)  FREUNDLICH,  ERWIN:  Die  Entwicklung  des  physikalischen  Weltbildes
bis  zur  allgemeinen  Relativitatstheorie,  Weisse  Blatter,  1920,  p.  174  ff .

(25)  FRISCHEISEN-KOHLER,  MAX:  Wissenschaft  u.  Wirklichkeit,  Leipzig  and

Berlin,  1912.

(26)  FRI8CHEISEN-K5HLER,  MAX:  Das  Zeitproblem. In:  Jahrb.  f. Philoso-

phic IB.  Nr.  9] . Berlin,  1913.

(27)  GALILEI:  Opere,  ed.  Alberi^ Firenze,  1843  ff.

(28)  GtiRLAD,  ALBERT:  Aristoteles  und  Kant bezuglich  der  Idee  der  theoret-

ischen  Erkenntnis  untersucht.  [Philos.  Arbeiten,  hg.  von  H.  Cohen  u.
P.  Natorp,  Band  II.]  Giessen,  1909.

(29)  HELMHOLTZ,  HERMANN:  Uber  die  Erhaltung  der  Kraft  (1847). Ostwalds

Klassiker  der  exakten  Wissenschaft,  H.  1,  1889).

(30)  HELMHOLTZ,  HERMANN:  Handbuch  der  physiologischen  Optik,  2.  Aufl.t

Hamburg  and  Leipzig,  1896.

(30a)  HELMHOLTZ,  HERMANN:  Ober  den  Ur sprung  und  die  Bedeutung  der
geometrischen  Axiome  (1870)  in:  Vortrage  und  Redent  4*  Aufl.,  Braun-
schweig, 1896,  Bd.  II.

(31)  HERTZ,  HEINRICH:  Die  Prinzipien  der  Mechanik,  Lpz.,  1904.

(32)  H5NIG8WALD,  RICHARD:  t)ber  den  Unterschied  und  die  Beziehungen  der

logischen  und  der  erkenntnistheoretischen  Elemente  in  der  kritischen
Philosophic  der  Geometrie  (Verh.  des  III.  internal.  Kongr.  fur  Philos.
Heidelb,,  1908.

(33)  HONIGSWALD,  RICHARD:  Zum  Streit  uber  die  Grundlagen  der  Mathematik.

Heidelb.,  1912.

(34)  KANT:  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft  (cited  from  Ed.  2,  1787).

(35)  KANT:  Werke,  herausgegeb.  von  Ernst  Cassirer,  Bd.  I-X,  Berlin,  1911  ff.

(36)  KEILL:  Introductio  ad  veram  Physicam,  Oxford,  1702.

(37)  KEPLER:  Opera  omnia,  ed.  Frisch,  Vol.  I-VIII,  Frankf.  and  Erlangen,

1858  ff.

(38)  KNESER,  ADOLF:  Mathematik  und  Natur. Rede. Breslau,  1911.

(39)  K5NIG,  EDMUND:  Kant  und  die  Natur wissenschaft,  Braunschweig,  1907.

(40)  LAUE,  MAX:  Das  Relativitdtsprinzip  (Die  Wissenschaft,  H.  38),  Braun-

schweig,  1911.

(41)  LAUE,  MAX:  Das  Relativitdtsprinzip. In:  Jahrb.  f.  Philosophic  (s.  Nr.  9),

Berlin,  1913.

(42)  LEIBNIZ:  Mathematische  Schriften,  Bd.  I-VII,  hg.  von  C.  J.  Gerhardt,

Berlin,  1849  ff.

(43)  LEIBNIZ:  Philosophische  Schriften,  Bd.  I-VII,  hg.  von  C.  J.  Gerhardt,

Berlin,  1875  ff.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  459

(44)  LEIBNIZ:  Hauptschriften  zur  Grundlegung  der  Philosophic,  ubersetzt  von

A.  Buchenau,  kg.  von  E.  Cassirer,  Bd.  I,  II,  Lpz., 1904/06. (Philos.

Bibliothek).
(46)  LEIBNIZ:  Neue  Versuche  uber  den  menschlichen  Verstand,  ubers.  u.  her-

ausgeg,  von  E.  Cassirer,  Lpz.,  1915  (Philos.  Bibliothek).
(45a)  LENARD,  PHILIPP:  Uber  Ather  und  Materie,  2.  Aufl.,  Heidelberg,  1911.

Uber  Relativit&tsprinzip,  Ather,  Gravitation,  Lpz.,  1918.

(46)  LORENTZ,  H.  A.:  Electromagnetic  phenomena  in  a  system  moving  with  any

velocity  smaller  than  that  of  light.  Proceed.  Acad.  Sc.  Amsterd.  6  (1904),
(Cited  from  No.  47).

(46a)  LORENTZ,  H.  A. :  Das  Relativit&tsprinzip,  drei  Vorlesungen,  gehalten  in
Teylers  Stiftung  zu  Haarlem. Lpz.  and  Berl.,  1914.

(47)  LoRENTZ-EiNSTEiN-MiNKOWBKi:  Das Relativitdtsprinzip. Eine Samm-

lung  von  Abhandlungen.  Mit  Anmerk.von  A.  Sommerfeldund  Vorwort
von  O.  Blumenthal.  (Fortschritte  der  mathemat.  Wissensch.,  Heft  8,
Leipzig  and  Berlin,  191S.)

(48)  LOBATSCHEFSKY:  Zwei  geometrische  Abhandlungen,  tiber 8.  v.  Fr.  Engel,

Lpz.,  1898.

(49)  MACH,  ERNST:  Die  Prinzipien  der  W&rmelehre,  Lpz.,  1896.

(50)  MACH, ERNST:  Erkenntnis und  Irrtum, Skizzen zur Psychologic  der

Forschung,  Lpz.,  1905.

(51)  MAXWELL,  J.  C. :  Substanz  und  Bewegung  (Matter  and  Motion),  dtsch.  von

E.  v.  Fleischel,  Braunschw.,  1881.

(52)  MATER,  ROBERT:  Die  Mechanik  der  W&rme  in  gesammelten  Schriften,  hg.

von  Weyrauch,  S.  Aufl.,  Stuttgart,  1893.

(53)  MEYERSON,  EMILE:  Identity  et  rialite,  Paris,  1908.

(54)  MINKOWSKI,  HERMANN:  Raum  und  Zeit,  Vortrag,  Coin,  1908  (Cited  from

No.  47).

(55)  MILLER,  ALOYS:  Das  Problem  des  absoluten  Maumes  und  seine  Bezie-

hung  zum  allgemeinen  Raumproblem. Braunschweig,  1911.

(56)  NATORP,  PAUL:  Die  logischen  Orundlagen  der  exakten  Wissenschaften.

Lpz.  and  Berl.,  1910.

(57)  NEUMANN,  CARL:  Uber  die  Prinzipien  der  Galilei-Newtonschen  Theorie,

Lpz.,  1870.

(58)  NEWTON,  ISAAC:  Optice,  lat  reddid.  S.  Clarke,  Lausanne  and  Geneva,  1740.

(59)  NEWTON, ISAAC:  Philosophiae  naturalis  principia  mathematica (1686).

Ausg.  von  Le  Seur  und  Jacquier,  4.  Bd.,  Genf,  1739  ff .

(60)  OSTWALD,  WILHELM:  Vorlesungen  Uber  Naturphilosophie,  Leipzig,  1902.

(61)  PETZOLDT, Jos.:  Die  Relativitatstheorie  im erkenntnistheoretischen Zu-

sammenhang  des  relativistischen  Positivismus. Verh.  der  Dtsch.  Physik.
Gesellschaft  XIV.,  Braunschweig,  1912.

(62)  PPLUGEB, A. :  Das  Einsteinsche  Relativit&tsprinzip t  gemeinverst&ndlich

dargestellt,  8.  Aufl.,  Bonn,  1920*

(63)  PLANCK,  MAX:  Das  Prinzip  der  Erhaltung  der  Energie,  Leipzig,  1887.

(64)  PLANCK,  MAX:  Zur  Dynamik  bewegter  Systeme. Annalen  der  Physik,

4.  F.,  XXVI,  1  ff. (1908).


460  SUBSTANCE  AND  FUNCTION

(65)  PLANCK,  MAX:  Bemerkungen  zum  Prinzip  der  Aktion  und  Reaktion  in  der-

allg.  Dynamik.  Physikal.  Zeitschrift  IX  (1908).

(66)  PLANCK,  MAX  :  Die  Einheit  des  physikalischen  Weltbildes,  Leipzig,  1909.

(67)  PLANCK,  MAX:  Die  Stellung  der  neuen  Physik  zur  mechanischen  Welt'

anschauung. (Verh.  der  Ges.  dtsch.  Naturf.  u.  Arzte  in  Konigsberg,
1910, Leipzig,  1911,  S.  58-75.)

(68)  PLANCK,  MAX:  Acht  Vorlesungen  uber  theoretische  Physik,  Leipzig,  1910.

(69)  PLANCK, MAX  :  Zur  Machschen  Theorie  der  physikalischen  Erkenntnis.

Vierteljahresschr.fiir  wissensch.  Philos.,  1910.

(70)  PLANCK,  MAX:  Neue  Bahnen  der  physikalischen  Erkenntnis  (Rektorats-

rede),  Berlin,  1913.

(71)  PLANCK,  MAX:  Das  Wesen  der  Lichtst  Vortrag,  Berlin,  1920.

(72)  POINCAR^,  HENRI:  La  Science  et  Vhypothese,  Paris.

(73)  POINCARE",  HENRI:  Der  Wert  der  Wissenschaftt  dtsch.  v.  E.Weber,  mil.

Anmerk  und  Zusdtzen  von  H.  Weber,  Berlin  and  Leipzig,  1906.

(74)  POINCARE",  HENRI:  Science  et  methode,  Paris,  1908.

(75)  POINCARK*,  LUCIEN  :  Die  moderne  Physik,  dtsch.  von  Brahn,  Leipzig,  1908.

(76)  RIEHL,  AL:  Der  philosophische  Kritizismus  und  seine  Bedeutung  fur  die

positive  Wissenschaft  I/II,  Leipzig,  1876-97.

(77)  RIEMANN,  B :  Uber  die  Hypothesenf  welche  der  Geometric  zugrunde  liegen

(1854).

(78)  RIGHI:  Die  moderne  Theorie  der  physikalischen  Erscheinungen,  dtsch.  von

Dessau,  Leipzig,  1908.

(79)  SCHLICK,  MORTIZ  :  Raum  und  Zeit  in  der  gegenwdrtigen  Physik,  Berlin,

1917.

(80)  SCHLICK,  MORITZ:  Allgemeine  Erkenntnislehre,  Berlin,  1918.

(81)  SELLIEN, EWALD:  Die erkenntnistheoretische Bedeutung der Relativi-

tdtstheorie,  Kieler  Inaug.-Diss.,  Berlin,  1919.

(82)  STEEINTZ, H. :  Die  -physikalischen  Grundlagen  der  Mechanik,  Leipzig,

1883.

(83)  WEYL, HERMANN:  Raum.  Zeit.  Materie. Vorlesungen  uber  allgemeine

Relativitatstheorie,  5.  Auft.,  Berlin,  1920.

(84)  WEYL,  HERMANN:  Das  Kontinuum. Kritische  Untersuchungen  uber  die

Grundlagen  der  Analysis. Leipzig,  1918.

The  work  of  Dr.  Hans  Rerchenbach  on  the  meaning  of  the  theory  of  rela-
tivity for  the  concept  of  physical  knowledge  (Die  Bedeutung  der  Relativitats-
theorie fur  den  physikalischen  Erkenntnisbegriff)  became  accessible  to  me  in
manuscript  while  this  essay  was  being  printed.  I  can  here  only  refer  to  this
thorough  and  penetrating  work,  which  has  much  in  common  with  the  present
essay  in  its  way  of  stating  the  problem;  I  cannot,  however,  completely  agree
with  its  results,  especially  with  regard  to  the  relation  of  the  theory  of  relativity
to  the  Kantian  critique  of  cognition.


INDEX


ABSTRACTION,  6,  ioff.,  i95ff.

Activity  of  ego,  314.

Acts,  logical,  25.

Analogy  and  induction,  250ff.

Analytic  geometry,  72f.

Anaxagoras,  152f.

Anaximander,  151f.

A  priori,  246,  269f.

Apollonius,  70.

Aristotle,  134,  220,  329.

Aristotelian  logic,  3ff.

Arithmetic;  27ff.;  empiristic  theory
of,  28;  and  psychology,  32.

Association,  285.

Atom,  159ff.,  188;  as  a  relational  con-
cept, 207,  regulative  use  of,  209f.

Atomic  weight,  criteria  of,  206.

Atomism  and  number,  155ff.;  an-
cient, 395.

Ausdehnungslehre,  96ff.

gACON,  147,  154.

Being,  a  product  of  thought?  298.
Beltrami,  110.
Bergson,  455.
Berkeley,  9ff.
Bernard,  C.,  250f.
Berzelius,  219.
Body  Alpha,  179-181.
Boltzmann,  159f.
Bolzano,  312.
Boscovich,  159.
Bouasse,  257.


Chemistry,  types  in,  212;  construc-
tion of  concepts  in,  203-220;  and
mathematics,  217.

Class  and  number,  44fL

Cohen,  H.,  99,  355,  368.

Cohn,  323.

Compositive  method,  252.

Concept,  3ff.,  9,  19,  53,  68,  113,  221,
351ff.

Conceptual  foundations  of  relativity,
367.

Consciousness  of  ego,  295.

Conservation  of  energy,  157.

Constant  relations,  reduction  to,  260.

Constants,  230,  265.

Continuity,  79,  158,  452f.

Continuum,  248.

Critical  idealism,  295,  297.

Cusanus,  360.

J)ALTON,  206f .

Dedekind,  35f.,  38,  58,  60.
Definite  proportions,  law  of,  204f.
Democritus,  167ff.,  274,  373,  395.
Descartes,  70f.,  76,  95,  395-398.
Description  and  explanation,  263.
Dewey,  318f.

Differential  equations,  159ff.
Drobisch,  21.

du  Bois-Reymond,  122ff.,  129.
Duhem, 138, 143, 175, 200f., 216,

252,  280.
Dumas,  212.


CANTOR,  62ff.,  65.

Cardinal  number,  41,  46ff.
Carnot,  403.
Categories,  269.
Causality,  226n,  249.
Cayley,  86.
Characteristic,  92.


J?BBINGHAUS,  335.

Einstein,  354,  356,  371,  375,  377ff.,

383, 397, 401f., 407, 412, 414,

419,  422,  428.
Eleatics,  167.
Empirical  foundations  of  relativity,

367ff.


461


462


INDEX


Empiricism,  128f.,  340.

Energism,  192f.,  199-003.

Energy,  170,  188-192,  197f.,  359.

Efltvos,  402,

Ephodion,  69.

Equivalence,  197.

Erdmann,  23.

Eternity,  in  empirical  judgment,  242.

Ether,  162f.,  397ff.,  404ff.

Ethics  and  aesthetics,  232.

Euclidean and Non-Euclidean

Geometry,  430ff.
Euler,  352ff.,  383,  404,  411.
Existence,  123ff.
Experiment,  254.
Experience,  246,  268,  270,  273,  278,

284.

PACT  and  theory,  143f .

Faraday,  397.
Fechner,  159,  301.
Fichte,  413.

Field,  concept  of,  396!.,  405.
Fixed  stars,  183.
Fizeau,  369.
Form  (Aristotelian),  7.
Form  and  matter  of  knowledge,  310.
Form-quality,  311.
Frege,  28f.,  43,  45f.,  52.
Freytag,  299.

Functions,  categorical,  16.
Functions  and  magnitude,  75.

GALILEO,  139,  156, 168,  175,  254,

361f.,  373.

Gauss,  55,  406.

Gerhardt,  215.

Generic  image,  15.

Geometry,  68ff.;  ancient  method  in,
69;  and  theory  of  groups,  88;
constancy  and  change  in,  90;
as  doctrine  of  relations,  95;  Eucli-
dean, 398-407;  Non-Euclidean,
fruitfulness  of,  430ff.;  not  a  copy
of  real  world,  433.

Goethe,  243,  371,  375,  445.

Gra^smann,  96.


HAMILTON,  w.,  40.

Hartmann,  301.
Helm,  198.

Helmholtz,  41,  288,  304f.,  388,  438.
Hertz,  H.,  170,  184f.,  198,  394f.,  399f.
Hessen,  226.
Hilbert,  93.
Hume,  331.
Husserl,  24.

Hypothesis,  concept  of,  135-138,
140f.,  146ff.

IDEALISM,  123, 126.

Ideal and reality, relation of,

129f.

Identity  and  diversity,  324.
Illusions,  275.

Imaginary  in  geometry,  82f .
Induction,  237ff.
Inertia, principle of, 176f., 364;

Galileo's conception of, 168f.;

and  body  alpha,  177ff. ;  and  gravi-
tation, 401ff.,  428.
Inexhaustibility  of  individual,  232.
Infinitesimal  geometry,  73.
Infinity  in  judgment,  247.
Intellectual  experiment,  176f .
Intension  and  extension,  5.
Intuition  and  thought  in  geometry  of

position,  76.
Invariants, and  induction,  249;  of

experience,  269;  consonant  with

relativity,  374,  379.
Isolation  and  superposition,  256.

KANT,  40,  ioe,  210,  245,  351,  355,

380,  386,  392,  394,  399,  403,  415ff.,
425,  434,  439,  451n,  on  relativity
of  motion,  410;  on  space  and
time,  410ff.,  416.

Kaufmann,  400.

Kepler,  116,  118,  135f.,  251,  258.

Keyser,  313.

Kirchhoff,  119.

Klein,  86,  90.

Knowledge,  problem  of,  in  ancient
thought,  131ff.


INDEX


463


Kronecker,  41.
Kummer,  117.

LAMBERT,  19.

Lask,  230.

Laue,  376,  406,  414.

Laurent,  215.

Law,  and  rules,  258;  meaning  of,  263.

Laws  of  nature,  265,  383.

Leibniz,  43,  77,  91f.,  95,  184,  186,  201,
262,  312,  329,  363,  376,  384,  391f.,
398,  419.

Liebig,  215.

Light,  uniform  velocity  of,  369,  422.

Limiting  concept,  122f.,  125.

Lipps,  342.

Lobatschefsky,  430.

Locke,  217,  214f.,  330.

Logic,  new  development  of,  3;  Aristo-
telian, 4ff.,  7;  function  of,  21;  of
relations,  36.

Lorentz,  375ff.

Lorentz-transformation,  372,  423.

Lotze,  21.

M  ACH,  174,  176f.,  238f.,  260,  264,
427f.,  451.

Mass,  399f.

Mathematics,  symbols  in,  43;  con-
cepts of,  112,  116;  and  teleology,
133ff.,  Plato's  interpretation  of,
134;  and  word  meanings,  223.

Matter,  169f.,  188,  397ff.

Matter  and  form  of  knowledge,  311.

Maxwell,  249,  364,  407.

Mayer,  R.,  139,  197ff.

Measurement,  presuppositions  of,
141f.;  units  of,  144f.

Mechanism  and  motion,  117ff.

Mechanics,  119ff.;  postulate  of  rela-
tivity of,  370.

Medicine,  experimental,  250.

Meinong,  320,  337£f.

Metageometry,  100,  443.

Meyer,  Lothar,  217.

Meyerson,  324.


Michelson,  369,  375.

Mie,  397.

Mill,  J.  S.,  lOff.,  28,  34.

Minkowski,  376,  419,  424f.

Motion,  361f.

Muller,  J.,  287ff.

Multiple  proportion,  law  of,  206.


,  340.

Nature,  264,  275,  395.

Natural  science  and  reality,  220.

Neumann,  C.,  179f.,  364,  382.

Newton,  136ff.,  170f.,  258,  268,  352ff.,
396,  398f.,  402.

Non-being,  167.

Null,  50.

Number,  27ff.  ;  logical  foundations  of,
35ff.;  ordinal,  39f.;  cardinal,  41,
46ff.;  extensions  of,  54ff.;  imagi-
nary, 55;  negative,  55;  transfinite
62ff.;  second  principle  of  genera-
tion of,  66.

OBJECTIVITY,  272;  degrees  of,
275;  and  space,  286;  circles  of,
290f.;  in  mathematics,  298;  func-
tion of,  304;  physical,  356ff.,  361.

Object,  293;  of  first  and  second
orders,  23,  338;  physical  164ff.;
in  critical  idealism,  297;  as  pro-
jected unity,  321.

Observability,  principle  of,  376f.

Ostwald,  130,  141,  205,  216,  243.


,  lOlf.
Pearson,  120f.

Perception,  245,  282,  342.

Periodic  system,  216.

Permanence,  of  mathematical  rela-
tions, 80;  and  change,  322.

Phenomenology,  24.

Physics,  logical  ideal  of,  114ff.;
Aristotelian,  154;  as  science  of
qualities,  201;  and  philosophy,
419;  constants  in,  420;  posi-
tivistic,  427ff.


464


INDEX


Plato, 131ff., 134f., 312, 327, 368,

370,  455.

Planck,  306f.,  357,  360,  404,  445.
PoincarS,  H.,  108,  373,  431,  435,  453.
Poincare*,  L.,  405.
Poncelet,  78.
Power  (M&chtigkeit),  62.
Pragmatism,  317ff.
Progression,  38.
Projection,  theory  of,  287,  292.
Projective  metric,  86.
Propositions,  345.
Psychologist's  fallacy,  332.
Psychology  of  relations,  326ff.


RADICAL,  chemical,  215.
Radio-activity,  219.

Rankine,  193f.,  195.

Reality,  ^71ff.

Relations,  255,  310,  336,  398.

Relativity  of  knowledge,  306.

Relativity,  theory  of,  presupposi-
tions of  special  theory,  377;
relation  of  special  to  general
theory,  378f.;  and  functional
theory  of  knowledge,  392;  not
Protagorean  relativism,  393;  and
reality,  445ff . ;  resolves  being  into
pure  order  of  numbers,  448.

Representation,  282,  284.

Resolutive  method,  252.

Richter,  205.

Rickert,  221ff.

Riehl,  310.

Riemann,  440f.

Russell,  B.,  46,  50,  88,  95,  316.


SCHWARZ,  H.,  283.

Science,  natural,  concepts  of,
113ff.;  as  description,  114f.,  119f.;
and  history,  231;  transformation
of  system  of,  266.

Sensuous  qualities,  subjectivity  of,
274.


Serial  order,  15,  26,  190,  148f.,  259.

Signs,  304.

Sigwart,  222.

Simultaneity,  422f .

Skepticism,  387fF.

Socrates,  133.

Soul  (Platonic),  377.

Source,  logic  of,  99.

Space,  68ff.;  and  number,  70;  and
order,  87;  mathematical  and
sensuous,  104;  Euclidean,  108,
443;  psychology  of,  342;  without
ontological  meaning,  439.

Space  and  time,  118,  170f.,  397ff.;
Kant's  theory  of,  106,.409ff.,  414,
416,  423;  as  mathematical  ideals,
181ff.;  Newton's  theory  of,  171f.,
352f.,  for  physicist  and  philos-
opher, 417;  transformation  of
values  of  449f . ;  psychological  and
physical,  454f.

Stallo,  306.

Staudt,  85f.

Steiner,  77f.

Streintz,  178f.

Structure  and  function  in  knowl-
edge, 315.

Stumpf,  288.

Suarez,  283.

Subjectivity  and  objectivity  of  rela-
tional concepts,  309ff.

Substance,  8,  151ff.,  164,  330.

System  of  reference,  172f.

THING,  concept  of,  17,  149,  204,
302,  357f.

Thompson,  W.,  384.

Time,  145  (See  Space).

Thought,  experiment,  238;  and  ex-
perience, 296;  psychology  of,  345.

Transcendence,  278,  300.

Transcendental  philosophy,  268.

Transcendental  realism,  294.

Transubjective,  294,  297.

Truth,  311,  319,  387ff.,  391f.

Tycho  de  Brahe,  260.


INDEX  465

{^AMBIGUITY,  principle  of,  264. Volkelt,  296ff.

Unity>  50-  Volkmann,  256f.

Unity  of  nature,  373f.,  417.

Universal  and  particular,  232.

Universal  laws,  416.  \\fEYL,  398.

VALENCY,  211.  Wholes,  discrete  and  continu-

Veronese,  101.  ous,  248.
