A Treatise on the Deluge
Alexander Catcott
A Treatise on the Deluge. London: M. Withers, 1761 (first edition).
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/treatiseondeluge00catciala).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

\  :<


\


TREATISE


O N T H E


DELUGE.


TREATISE

O  N T  H  E

DELUGE.

CONTAINING

I.  Remarks  on  the  Lord  Bifhop  of  CLOGHER'S  Ac-
• count  of  that  Event.

II.  A  full  Explanation  of  the  Scripture  Hiftory  of  it.

III.  A  Collection  of  all  the  principal  Heathen  Accounts.

IV.  Natural  Proofs  of  the  Deluge,  deduced  from  a

great  Variety  of  Circumftances,  on  and  in  the
terraqueous  Globe.

AND,
Under  the  foregoing  GENERAL  ARTICLES,

The  following  Particulars  will  be  occafionally  difcufled

and  proved,  <i>«:.

The  Time  when,  and  the  Manner  how  America  was  firfl  peopled.—
The  Mofaic  Account  of  the  Deluge  written  by  Inspiration. — The
Certainty  of  an  Abyfs  of  Water  within  the  earth. — The  Reality
of  an  inner  Globe  or  central  Nucleus. — The  Caufe  ofihefubterranean
Vapour  and  of  Earthquakes. — The  Origin  of  Springs,  Lakes,  &c.
— The  Formation  of  Mountains,  Hills ;  Dales,  tallies,  &c. — The
Means  by  which  the  Bed  of  the  Ocean  was  formed. — The  Caufe
of  Caverns  or  natural  Grottos ;  with  a  Defcription  of  the  moil
remarkable,  efpecially  thofe  in  England. — Alfo  an  Explication
of  feveral  letter  Phenomena  in  Nature.

Adorned  with  ^.Copper-Plate,  reprefenting  the  internal  Structure  of
the  terraqueous  Globe,  from  the  Center  to  the  Circumference.

BY A. CATCOTT,
LECTURER  of  St.  John's, in  the  City  of  BRISTOL

LONDON:

Sold  by  M.  WITHERS,  at  ikefeven  Stars,  in  Fleet-Jtreet ;  and
D.  PRINCE,  in  Oxford,  1761.

Where  alfo  may  be  bad, — RZMAR  KS  on  the  Lord  Bifliop  of  CLOCHER'S  Expla-
nation of  the  Mofaic  Hiftory  of  the  Creation  and  Formation  of  this  World,  &c.


2221169


PREMONITION.

ABOUT  five  years  ago  I  publifhed
fome  REMARKS  on  the  Lord  Bp.
^CLOGHER'J  Explanation  of  the  Mofaic
Account  of  the  Creation  and  Formation  of
this  World^  and  intended  that  this  Trad
fhould  have  followed  foon  after,  as  a  kin<i
of  Second  Part;  but  before  \  could  quite
finifli  it,  I  was  feized  with  an  illncfs,
which  affected  my  fight  in  fuch  a  manr-
ner,  that  I  was  obliged  to  lay  afide  all
thoughts  of  compleating  it  (tho'  nearly
finiflied)  for  three  or  four  years:  and  it
was  not  without  feveral  relapfes,  that  I
could  bring  it  to  the  ftate  in  which  it
is  now  prefented  to  the  reader.


PREMONITION.

SOON  after  the  publication  of  the  firft
Trad,  his  Lordfiiip  of  Clogher  (the  late
Rev.  Dr.  Clayton)  alfo  died ;  on  whkh
account  (and  for  the  reafons  mentioned,
page  8.)  I  have  in  a  great  meafure  drop-
ped the  controverfial  part  in  this;  having
only  felected  one  or  two  principal  Arti-
cles, that  I  thought  exceptionable  ;  and
thefe,  not  fo  much  becaufe  his  Lordfhip
had  aflerted  them,  as  becaufe  feveral,
otherwife  learned  and  ingenious,  writers
had  maintained  the  fame;  and  it  appear-
ed to  me  to  be  of  fome  confequence  to
fettle  the  truth.

To  pretend  to  introduce  Novelties  in
Natural  Philofophy  in  this  enlightened
age,  may  be  efteemed  by  fome  almoft  as
bad  as  to  prefume  to  make  new  difcove-
lies  in  Religion :  and  yet,  fome  points


PREMONITION.

difcufled  in  this  Trad:,  may  poffibly  be
new  to  many.  In  order  therefore  to
remove  this  formidable,  though  in  it-
felf  weak,  objection,  I  have  frequently
chofen  to  make  ufe  of  the  words  of  any
other  writer  (that  had  exprefled  himfelf
judicioufly  on  the  point)  rather  than  my
own  :  which  alfo  is  the  reafon,  why
feveral  quotations  will  be  found  in  this
Tract,  that  otherwife  might  have  been
omitted.

IT  may  be  proper  to  inform  thole,  who
have  encouraged  the  publication  of  this
Trad:  by  their  Subscriptions  (to  all  of
whom  I  defire  my  fincereft  Thanks  fcr
their  favours),  that  it  is  a  diftinct  Trea-
tife  of  itfelf,  at  leaft  independent  of  the
above-mentioned  Tratf,  relating  to  the
Creation,  &c.  the  few  particulars  in  That,


P  REMO  N ITI  0  N.

which  were  explicative  of  This,  being
introduced  in  their  proper  places,  or
fimilar  explanations  given.

SOME  of  my  Subfcribers  may  poffibly
find  a  difficulty  in  underftanding  the
Mofaic  Account  of  the  Flood,  as  philo-
fophically  explained  in  \hz  former  part  of
this  Tract,  I  would  therefore  advife  fuch
fir  ft  to  make  themfelves  well  acquainted
with  the  Copper-Plate^  and  the  Expla-
natory Notes  belonging  to  it,  p.  54;  and
then,  I  hope,  there  will  be  no  great  dif-
ficulty in  comprehending  it ;  or  at  leaft
a  fccond  perulal  will  make  the  whole
plain  and  clear.


THE

CONTENTS.

Page

Preliminaries.

TH  E  Mofaic  account  of  the  Deluge  full
and  complete,  not  too  fhort  or  imper-
,  as  fome  have  imagined  -  -  -  -  i— .  3

The  nature  of  the  Miracle  exerted  to  effecl:  the

Deluge - - _ - - * - - . .  ^ —  8

The  manner  in  which  the  Author  propofes  to
examine  his  Lordfliip  of  Clogher's  account
of  the  Deluge ;  with  fome  ftrictures  on  that
account  ------____  g — jg

A  full  Explanation  of  the  Scripture
Hiftory  of  the  Flood.

GEN.  vi.  ig.  And  God  f aid  unto  Noah,  'The
end  of  all  fiejh  is  come  before  me  ; — and  behold
I  will  dejlroy  them  with  the  earth ;  paraph  rafed ;
and  the  Univerfality  of  the  Deluge  urged
therefrom  - 17 — 18

Ver.  14.  Make  thee  an  Ark  of  gopher-wood,
(rooms  /halt  thou  make  in  the  ark)  and  pilch
it  within  and  without  with  pitch. — A  window
Jhalt  thou  make  to  the  Ark, — And  of  every  liv-


(CONTENTS.

ing  thing  of  all  fiejh,  two  of  tfvery  fortjhalt
thou  bring  into  the  ark  to  keep  them  alive^  &c.
"-Thus  did  Noah,  according  to  all  that  God
commanded  him,  fo  dtd  he>  The  neceflity  of
Divine j Inftruttion  in  order  to  execute  the
above  Command,  and  the  certainty  that  all
-  creatures  perifhed  that  were  not  wkhin  the
intent  of  that  inftruction,  fhewn  -  -  -18—25

GEN.  vii.  n.  And  the  fame  day  were  all  the
Fountains  of  the  GREAT  DEEP  broken  up.
"What  the  Great  Deep  or  Abyfs  is,  explained  25 —  6

And  in  order  to  ihew  the  full  meaning  of  the
Event  here  related,  a  brief  explication  of  the
firft  Formation  .of  the  earth  is  introduced.

GEN.  i.  2.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the

L fact  of  the  waters - •? •« * - - - -26—  9

AndGodfaid,  Let  there  be  Light  and  there  was

Light 29

And  God  f  aid,  Let  there  be  a  Firmament  in  the
'  midft  of  the  waters,  and  let  it  divide  the  wa-
ters from  the  waters,  &c.  29 — 34

And  God  f  aid,  Let  the  water  under  the  heaven  be
gathered  together  unto  one  place,  and  let  the
dry -land  appear  *-'.--._  .34 —  £

GEN.  vii.  n.  And  all  the  fountains  of  the  Great
Deep  were  broken  up.  The  manner  how  this
Event  was  accomplimed  fhewn  at  large  -37—40

And  the  Windows  of  heaven  were  opened.  Ex-
plained •,  and  the  Dtffblution  of  the  earth
proved  therefrom  •,  with  other  texts  denoting
the  fame  ------.__  -4.0— -44


CONTENTS.

Page

Ver,  12.  And  the  Rain  was  upon  the  earth  forty
days  and  forty  nights :  and  the  waters  increafed
and  bare  up  the  ark : — And  the  waters  pre-
vailed upon  the  earth  exceedingly -,  and  all  the
hi,  h  hills i  that  were  under  the  whole  heaven^
were  covered:  The  Univerfality  of  the  De-
luge urged  from  this  paflage  -  -  -  -44—  6

Ver.  2  4.  And  the  waters  prevailed  upon  the  earth
^  an  hundred  and  fifty  days. What  this  preva-
lence of  the  waters  was,  explained - - -46 —  7

Gen.  viii.  i.  And  God  made  a  Wind  [the  Spi-
rit] to  pafs  over  the  earth,  and  the  waters
affwaged.  This  Wind  fhewn  to  be  the  fame
as  the  Spirit  that  moved  upon  ihe  face  of  the
waters  at  the  beginning  ------  48

Ver.  2.  The  Fountains  alfo  of  the  Deep,  and  the
windows  of  heaven  were  Jiopped,  and  the  rain
from  heaven  was  retrained ;  paraphrafed  on  48 — 50

Ver.  3.  And  the  waters  returned  from  off  the
earth  continually.  How  this  event  was  brought
to  pafs,  fliewn  -------  _^o —  i

Ver.  4.  And  the  Ark  refted  upon  the  mountains  of
Ararat^  &c.  -----  -  .  -  ^t

Ver.  8.  And  Noah  fent  forth  a  dove  from  him*  '
to  fee  if  the  waters  were  abated  from  off  the
face  of  the  ground,  &c. - 51

Ver.  15.  And  -God  fpzke  unto  Noah,  Go  forth
of  the  ark,  thou  and  thy  wife,  &c.  And  God
bleffed  Noah  and  his  Sons,  and  f aid,  Be  fruit-
ful and  multiply,  and  repleni/h  the  Earth.
An  argument  hence  drawn  for  the  Univer-
fality  of  the  Deluge  ------  -52 —  3


CONTENTS.

Page


A  Collection  of  the  principal  Hea-
then Accounts  of  the  Flood.

The  Roman  defcription  as  given  by  Ovid  - -56  —  8

The  Grecian,  Syrian  and  Arabian  as  recorded

byLucian .- -  - - -58  —  6%

The  Egyptian,  as  retained  under  the  hi  (lory  of


The  Babylonian,  as  preferved  by  Jofepbus  and

Berojus  -  .....  61  —  4

The  Adrian,  from  Afcdenus,  as  recorded  by

Eujehius  ----------- 64

The  Perf.an,  from  Dr.  Hyde's  Hiftoria  veterum

Perjantm,  &c. • - ...... •  64  —  5

The  Accounts  of  the  Flood  as  retained  by  the

inhabitants  of  the  Eaft-  Indies  .....  65  —  8

—  As  preferved  among  the  Chinefe - - -68  --70

The  defcriptions  of  it  as  given  by  the  feveral

nations  of  America,  in  general - - - -  70  —  2

In  particular,  by  the  nation  of  the  Iroptots - 72
By  thofe  of  Cuba  ........ -72  —  3

By  the  inhabitants  of  Terra  Firma  - - - - 73

By  the  Peruvians .........  73  —  4

By  the  BraftUens  -------- -74  —  6


CONTENTS.

Page

Some  Conclufions,  deduced  from  the  above
Accounts,  refpecting  the  Certainty — that
there  has  been  a  Flood, — that  it  was  Uni-
verfal, — and  that  the  Mofaic  Description  of
it  was  written  by  Infyiration  -  -  -  -  76 —  83

The  Time  when,  and  the  Manner  how  Ame-
rica was  firlt  peopled  ---»--  83 —  99

Natural  Proofs  of  the  Scripture
Account  of  the  Deluge,  dedu-
ced from  a  great  variety  of  cir-
cumftances,  on  and  in  the  ter-
raqueous Globe.

I.  Proofs  of  the ABYSS,
o  R,

That  there  is  a  quantity  of  Water  in  the  in-
fide  of  the  Earth  abundantly  fufficient  for
anfwering  the  Effects  of  the  Deluge  as  de-
icribed  in  Scripture.  This  proved

1.  From the  Quantity  of  water  that  is
poured  into  the  Ocean  from  the  mouths

of  all  the  Rivers  upon  Earth  - - - -101 —  12

2.  From  the  Quantity of  water that  is
thrown  out  at  the  beads  or  fources  of  all

the  Rivers -------- -112 —  36

3.  From  Whirlpools, Under -cur rents, and

Gulpbs  in  the  Ocean ----- -136 —  42

4.  From  Lakes ------. -143 —  48

5.  From  Phenomena  attending  Eartfyttakfs  148—  52


CONTENTS.

Page

6.  From  accidental  difcovcries  of  waters,  ri-
vers, &c.  in  the  infide  of  the  earth  -  -1^2 —  58

II.  Proofs  of  the  UNIVERSALITY  of  the
FLOOD  ;

OR,

That  the  Waters  of  the  Deluge  covered  the
whole  furf ace  of  the  earth.  This  proved

1.  From  the  divifion  of  the  Surface  of  th»
earth  into  Mountains,  Hills  \  Combs*  Dales,

I/allies,  &c. - - - -159—  88

2.  From  the  Nature,  Form,  and'  Situation
offeveral  Subftances  that  at  prefent  lie  loofe

upon  the  furf  ace  of  the  Earth  - - - -189 — 232

3.  From  Caves, natural  Grottos, Swallet-

boles,  fcfr. 232 —  50

4.  From  the  numerous  Spoils  of  fea  and  land
Animals  and  Vegetables  now  found  buried  in

all  parts  of  the  earth -251— •  60

III.  Proofs  of  the  DISSOLUTION  ;
o  R

That,  during  the  Deluge,  the  whole  earth
was  dijfohed,  all  the  mineral  and  metallic
matter  being  reduced  to  its  original"  cor-
pufcles,  and  aflfumed  up  into  the  Wa-
ter. This  prove4

1.  From  the  outward  Farm  of  the  Earth  -  261

2.  From  the  fame  ------- -261-*- 2


CONTENTS.

Page

3.  From  the  prefent  Solidity  of  the  Earth -262  — 3

4.  From  the  Veins  in  moft  forts  of  Stone -263— 4

5.  From  the  Interchange  or  Mixture  of  *&/-

ferent  Jlrata  -------- -264  — 5

6.  From  the  Formation  and  Situation  tf  No-

dules ---------- -265  — 6

7.  From  extraneous  FoJJils - - - - -266  — 8

8.  From  the  internal  Structure  of  the  Shell

of  /&  £0r/£ ........  268  — 9

Corollaries;  and  Objections  anfwered  - - -270  — 6

IV.  Of  the  RE-FORMATION,
o  R

Confolidation  of  the  terreftrial  parts after

the  Diffolution ........  276  — 9


A  Paraphrafe  of  the  iO4th  Pfalm - - -280  — 4


Appendix,  containing  fome  corroborating  ar-
guments for  the  manner  in  which  the
Author  fuppofes  America  to  have  been
firfi  peopled  .........  285  —  296


ERRATA.

Page  12.  Line  32.  dele_/a^.  —  p.  38.  1.  2.  read  rend.  —  p.  44.
1.  9.  r.  orbit.  —  p. 53.  1.  32.  r.  Polibius.-~'$.  58,  1.  27.  r.  where.
Any  literal  error  the  reader  will  correvt  for  himfelf.


O  N T  H  E


DELUGE.


B


EFORE  I  proceed  immediately  to  the
}>  difcuflion  of  the  fubject  I  am  to  treat
* of,  it  may  be  proper  to  premife  a  few
articles.

THE  Mofaic  defcription  of  the  De-
luge has  been  accounted  by  fcveral  to  be  too  fhort
and  concife  for  the  due  relation  of  fo  important  an
event  :  but  thofe  who  make  this  objection  feem  not
rightly  to  underftand  the  nature  of  the  cafe  ;  the
proper  ftating  of  which  will  ferve  for  a  full  anfwer  to
the  objection.

FIRST  then,  Let  it  be  confidered  that  as  at  the  time
of  the  Deluge  the  Earth  was  deftroyed,  broken  to
pieces,  reduced  to  its  chaotic  ftate,  or  un-formed^  and
afterwards,  formed  again;  and  this,  its  fecond  For-
mation, anfwerable,  both  in  the  manner  and  means,
to  its  firft  and  original  (for  fimilar  exprefiions  are
ufed,  and  the  fame  caufes  are  mentioned  to  have  been
employed,  in  both  cafes)  and  as  a  defcription  had  been


[2]

given  at  large  of  the  manner  of  the  firft  formation  in
the  Mofaic  narrative  of  the  Original  of  things ;  fo  it
would  be  needlefs  to  have  enlarged  on  that  point  in
the  account  of  the  Re-formation  of  the  earth  at  the
deluge  •,  juft  mentioning  the  chief  articles  would  be
fufficient,  as  every  judicious  reader  would  naturally
recur  to  the  firft  and  fuller  defcription.  Be-

fides,  As  many  of  the  effects  of  the  Deluge  are
legibly  written  in  the  book  of  Nature,  being  engraved
in  the  deepeft  characters  in  the  hardeft  rocks  all  over
the  earth  -,  fo  thofe,  who  would  be  at  the  pains  to  read
this  book,  who  'would  go  up  as  high  as  the  bills,  and
down  fo  the  vallies  beneath,  and  enter  into  the  dark  cham-
bers of  the  earth  (carrying  the  divine  light  in  their
hands)  fhould  find  the  ineftimable  treaiure,  Ihould
fee  that  the  world  had  been  deftroyed,  and  formed
again,  and  in  what  manner  this  furprifing  tranfaction
had  been  effected  i  and  would  by  this  means  have  full
proof — that  there  is  a  GOD, — Who  that  GOD  is, — and
that  he  governs  the  world.  And  they,  who  would  not
be  at  this  pains  (or  liften  to  thofe  that  had  been)  did
not  deferve  this  peculiar  proof  and  knowledge.  Suf-
ficient be  it  for  GOD,  and  even  gracious  muft  we
efleem  it,  that  he  informs  us  of  fuch  and  fuch  things
in  his  Word,  and  gives  us  eyes  to  fee  the  reft  or  another
part  of  the  evidence  in  Nature  :  and  they  who  will
neglect  either  or  both  of  thefe  proofs,  may  defer vedly
remain  fo  far  in  ignorance.  GOD  indeed  will  do  for  us
what  we  cannot  do  for  ourfelves  ;  but  we  muft  not  ex-
pect that  he  will  do  what  we  can  do :  This  would  be
to  undo  what  himfelf  had  before  done,  or  give  us
power  on  purpofe  to  take  it  away,  and  give  it  us  again ;
and  would  alfo  be  encouraging  floth,  idlenefs,  and  the
difufe  of  our  rational  faculties.  Therefore  to  fpur  up
our  abilities  and  quicken  our  diligence,  he  gives  us
That  whereon  we  may  reafon,  and  then  juftly  leaves  us


f  3  1

to  reafon. From  what  has  been  faid  then,  two

points  I  think  are  manifeft  i  firft,  the  ignorance  and  in-
excufablenefs  of  thofe,  who  havefpoken  againfl  the  0/0-
faic  account  of  the  Deluge  as  imperfefl  and  deficient  -,
fecondly,  ho\v  unqualified  thofe  perfons  mufr  be  to  give
a  true  account  of  the  Deluge,  that  have  not  examined
Nature,  but  fat  down  at  eafe  in  their  ftudies,  drew
lines  upon  paper,  &c.  vainly  imagining  that  the  form
and  inclination  of  Rocks,  courfes  of  Rivers,  veins  of
Ore,  and  the  fituation  of  things  in  the  folid  earth,
would  fnape  and  wind  themfelves  according  to  their
fancies.

ANOTHER  article  necelTary  to  be  fettled,  as  prepa-
ratory to  the  fubje<5t  I  am  to  fpeak  of,  is,  in  what
manner  and  bow  far  the  Divine  Interpofition  is  to  be
allowed  in  the  Miracle  of  the  Noachian  Deluge,  or  in
deftroying  and  re-forming  the  earth  at  that  time.  For
as  in  my  interpretation  ot  the  account  of  the  forma-
tion of  the  earth,  I  have  had  (becaufe  Scripture  di-
re6ted  me)  much  recourfe  to  the  mediation  of  Natural
Caufes,  or  endeavoured  to  explain  it  pbilofopbicalhj
and  I  mall  do  the  fame,  (becaufe  I  think  I  ought)
with  regard  to  the  Deluge,  fo  I  would  obviate  an  ob-
jection, which  an  inattentive  reader  might  make  to
fuch  kind  of  explanations,  as  tho'  they  -took  away  or
leffewd  the  Divine  Power  in  the  fact  related.  But  I
truft,  upon  examination,  we  mall  find,  that  this  way
of  explicating  or  unfolding  Miracles,  will  manifeft  the
Wtfdom  and  Gccdr^fs  as  well  as  the  Power  of  GOD,  and
in  a  manner  too,  far  fuperior  to  any  other.  When  an
extraordinary  effect  is  performed,  to  tell  a  perfon, —
that  GOD  did  it  i — and  there  reft,  without  explaining
the  end)  the  means  and  the  manner  of  doing  it,  is  lofinr;
great  part  of  the  evidence  of  the  miracle,  and  the  in-
tent for  which  it  was  performed ;  and  is  generally

fl 2


m

Ipoken  as  a  cover  for  our  ignorance,  or  rather  our
pride,  which  is  piqued  at  a  difficulty  we  cannot  folve.
But  GOD  is  a  GOD  cf  order ;  and  when  things  are  done
for  the  fake  of  .man,  he  adapts  his  operations  to  the
ftate  and  circumftances  of  man.  Now  it  is  an  allowed
truth,  that  the  fituation  of  man  in  this  world  is  fuch,
that  he  is  confined  for  his  ideas,  the  foundation  of  his
knowledge,  tofenfible  or  material  objects-,  and  it  is  al-
fo  certain,  that  the  prevailing  Idolatry  >  both  long  before
and  long  after  the  time  ofMofes,  even  almoft  from  the
creation  of  man  to  the  coming  of  Chrift,  was  the  wor-
Ihipping  the  Natural  Agents  or  fome  Part  or  other  of  the
Syftem  of  Nature,  inftead  of  GOD  the  Creator  and
Former  of  all*  Such  then  being  the  ftate  of  man  and
fuch  the  peculiar  circumftances  of  the  former  world,  the
moft  fuitable  method  to  deftroy  this  idolatry  would  be,  to
overrule,  fufpend,  or  divert  the  commsn  courfe  of  the
Natural  Agents -,  which  would  undeniably  prove,  that
they  had  a  Superior,  one  who  could  turn  them,  whither-
Jcever  hepleafed.  And  when  fuch  an  act  was  performed,
the  part  of  man  would  be,  to  difcover  the  propriety  of
the  Agent  or  Agents,  over-ruled  or  fufpended,  on  parti-
cular occafions ;  and  trace  out  how  appofitely  the  Means
conduced  to  the  End.  I  mail  illuftrate  and  exemplify
my  meaning  from  that  publick  and  grand  difpute  be-
tween JEHOVAH  and  Baal,  under  the  conduct  of  Elijah
and  Baal's  prophets,  recorded  i  Kings  xviii.  which
the  reader  is  defired  to  perufe.  The  Conteft  here  was
concerning  the  true  GOD,  whether  JEHOVAH  or  Baal,
or  rather  who  was  the  Ruler  (for  that  is  the  meaning  of

«  Deut.  iv.  19.  xvii.  3.  i  Kings  xi.  5.  2  Kings  xvii.  9.  xxiii.
4,  &c.  2  Chron.  xiv.  3,  <j.  Job  xxxi.  26 — 29.  Jerem.  vii.  9,  18.
viii.  i,&c.  xix.  4,  <j,  13.  xxxii.  xliv.  Ezek.  viii.  15,  16.  xxiii.
30,  37.  Wild  xiii.  i — 4.

The  Writings  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  abundantly  teftify  the
fame,  as  feveral  Authors  have  fhewn  at  large.  Particularly  Parker
in  his  Tentamina  Phyjico^-lbeologica  de  Deo.


[5]

the  word  Baal  in  the  Original)  the  material  Heavens  or
Agents,  "or  any  Being  above  them.  JEHOVAH  had  al-
ready (hewed  himfelf  fuperior  to  the  Heavens  (at  leaft,
to  every  unprejudiced  mind)  by  having  fufpended  their
power  or  affion  in  giving  de-w  or  r#/#  for  above  three
years-,  (fee  i  Kings  xvii.  &f  xviii.  Luke  iv.  25.)  but
Baal's  followers  regarded  not  this  ;  for  all  that  time
they  eat  at  the  royal  [Jezebel's]  table,  and  lived  in  plenty  -,
verifying  a  common  obfervation,  that  as  long  as  men
have  enough  of  this  world,  they  are  not  apt  to  be  very
folicitous  about  the  Governor  thereof.  But  the  famine
increafing  more  and  more,  the  king  and  his  fervants
are  obliged  to  go  from  home,  and  feek  in  different
places  for  food  tor  themielves  and  cattle  ;  and  GOD  at
laft  out  of  companion  to  his  people  fends  Elijah  to
meet  the  king,  and  have  the  contefl  decided  at  once.
That  Elijah's  GOD  had  power  over  \hzWater  of 'Heaven \
was  pretty  plain-,  he  now  proceeds  further,  and  will
fhew  that  he  has  power  over  its  oppofite,  the  Fire,  and
can  make  it  act  or  ceafe  from  afting  juft  as  he  pleafes;
and  from  Jerem.  xix.  5.  it  is  evident  that  Fire  (which
is  the  moil  powerful  operation  of  the  Heavens  or  Air)
was  efteemed  iacred  to  Baal, — they  have  alfo  built  the
high-places  of  Baal,  to  burn  their  fons  with  fire  for  burnt-
offerings  unto  Baal.  The  Teft,  agreed  to  on  both  fides
then  was, — that  the  GOD  which  anfwereth  by  fire,  and
confumeth  the  offered  viftim,  Hejloould  be  GOD  :  and  if
Baal  could  aniwer  by  any  thing,  it  certainly  mufl  be
by  one  of  his  own  emblems.  The  place  chofen  for  the
fcene  of  action  was  Mount  Carmel,  which  probably  thele
idolaters  had  made  an  high-place  of  to  Baal;  fince  we
are  told,  they  had  broken  down  the  altar  of  JEHOVAH
that  was  there.  Thus  Elijah  grants  them  every  favour-
able circumftance.  And  when  they  had  called  upon
their  God  from  morning  even  until  noon  (when  the  Heat,
thzgreateft  power  of  the  day,  was  -come)  and  in  their
B  3


[6]

furious  fits  of  madnefs  and  defpair  had  leapt  upon  their
altar )  and  cut  themfehes  with  knives  and  lancets  ;  but
wither  'voice  came,  nor  any  to  anfwer,  nor  any  that  re-
garded:— then  Elijah  repaired  the  altar  of  the  LORD,
and  laid  thereon  a  facrifice  ;  and  to  (hew  the  mighty
power  of  GOD,  ordered  a  great  quantity  of  water  to  be
poured  on  the  facrifice  and  the  altar,  fo  as  to  fill  a
trench  that  was  drawn  round  about  it;  and  by  this
means  render  the  facrifice  lefs  fufceptikle  of  the  action  of
Fire ;  and  take  off  all  poffible  fufpicion  of  deceit.  All
things  thus  prepared,  Elijah  invokes  his  GOD  to  give
the  decifive  proof  of  his  Deity ;  and  immediately,  at
his  requeft,  Fire  ftreams  down  from  heaven,  confuwes  the
offered  viftim,  and  licks  up  all  the  water  in  the  trench.
At  whichftriking,  <vifible  manifeftation  of  the  Superiority
of  Elijah's  GOD,  all  the  people  fell  on  their  faces,  and
cried  out,  JEHOVAH,  He  is  GOD;  JEHOVAH,
He  is  GOD.  And  a  greater  proof  of  Divine  Inter-
pofition  could  not  be  defired,  nor  one  more  applicable
to  the  purpofe  be  given.  Here  the  Heavens  were
made, — in  a  particular  place,  at  an  appointed  time,  in
an  interefting  difpute, — to  exhibit  their  ftrongeft  ope-
ration, Fire,  and  pour  it  down  in  honour  of  a  facrifice
dedicated  to  JEHOVAH,  and  were  with-held  from  doing
the  fame  on  a  facrifice  dedicated  to  themfelves  :  and
fo  themfelves  in  fact  forced  to  confefs  their  own  in-
ability, bring  confufion  on  their  own  votaries,  arid
give  glory  to  the  true  GOD. — Such  alfo  was  the  cafe  at
the  Deluge.  The  grand  object  of  falfe  worfhip  then
was,  the  Natural  Agents  or  fome  part  or  other  of  the
Syftem  of  Nature,  as  thofe  words  of  GOD,  Gen.  vi.  17.
(the  prelude  to  that  dreadful  cataftrophe)  indicate :
And  behold^  I,  even  J,  do  bring  a  flood  if  waters,  &c.
*  It  is  not  faid,  Let  there  be,  or  let  the  Agents  which  1
'  have  eftablijhed,  or  let  us  bring-,  but  /,  even  /,  in
'  direct  oppofition  to  all  the  Laws  of  Nature,  or


C7]

*  powers  eflablifhed  in  Matter.'  But  the  means  ufed  in,
and  the  manner  of,  the  execution  declare  this  plainer.
As  the  Corruption  of  mankind  before  the  flood  was.
remarkably  great,  and  the  Imagination  of  their  heart
only  evil  continually,  it  could  not  well  be  in  fuch  a
general  Apoftacy,  but  that  many  objects  of  falfe  worfhip
would  be  fet  up  ;  fome  imagining  one  part,  others
another  part  of  Nature  to  be  Supreme.  But  from  the
manner  of  their  punimment  the  three  principal  Deities
Teem  to  have  been,  the  Air,  the  Water,  and  the  Earth;
the  firft,  the  heathen  Jupiter  ;  the  fecond,  Neptune ;
the  third,  'Terra.  Accordingly  GOD  to  defeat  this
idolatry,  and  manifeft  his  power  over  Matter,  inverted
the  order  and  natural  State  of  Thefe  in  particular ;  he
made  the  Air  to  defcend  into  the  place  of  the  Water,
that  lay  beneath  the  earth,  and  the  Water  to  occupy
the  place  of  the  air,  and  by  the  pafllng  and  re-pafiing
of  thefe  two  agents  thro'  the  Earth ',  the  fhell  or  orb
thereof  would  be  torn  to  pieces,  its  lolid  form  reduced
to  fluid  (of  each  of  which  effects  more  explicitly  here-
after) and  all  the  idolatrous  inhabitants  deftroyed  by  the
very  Means  or  Agents  they  depended  on  for  fuccour.
Thus  the  true  GOD  demonftrated  his  power  over  Mat-
ter i  and  tho'  he  made  ufe  of  material  Means,  yet  the
Act  was  undeniably  fupernatural,  above  all  the  laws
and  powers  of  nature.  The  Natural  Agents  could  not?
or  if  they  could,  they  certainly  would  not,  have  over-
turned their  own  empire,  puniihed  their  own  votaries,
and  fuffered  themfehes  to  be  made  the  inftruments  of
punifhing  them.  .This  manner  of  working  mir ades  is
eminently  ftriking,  and  indeed  irrefiftable ;  as  it  af-
fords manfenfible  and  material  evidence,  is  level  to  the
conception  of  all,  and  was  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  ftate
of  the  'world,  when  fuch  kind  of  miracles  were  wrought.

B  4


[  8  I

THUS  much  I  have  premifed  in  general  :
IN  particular,  with  regard  to  his  Lp.  of  Clogher,  I  pro-
pofe  not  to  attend  him,  ftep  by  ftep,  in  his  account
of  the  deluge,  as  I  have  done  in  his  explanation  of  the
Scripture  account  of  the  Formation  •,  becaufe  replying
to  one,  is  much  the  fame  as  anfwering  the  other  ;
fincc  the  Deluge  is  a  parallel  a6V,  (only  in  an  inverted
order)  to  that  of  the  firft  Formation,  as  I  have  ob-
ferved  already,  and  which  will  more  evidently  appear
in  the  procefs  of  this  treatife.  I  mall  therefore  only
felect  one  or  two  of  the  mod  exceptionable  parts  of
our  Author's  account  of  the  Flood,  examine  them,
and  have  a  principal  regard  to  them  in  explaining
that  event.  I  hope  alfo  to  lay  down  fuch  a  clear  and
full  defcription  of  the  deluge,  that  any  one  by  com-
paring his  Lp's  tract  with  this,  may  determine  for
himfelf  where  the  truth  lies.  .

THE  chief  exceptions  I  have  to  his  Lord/hip's  ac-
count of  the  Flood  relate  to  the  Extent  of  it;  firft
with  refpect  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth ;  fecondly,
with  regard  to  the  Earth  itfelf,  or  its  folid,  metallic,  and
mineral  part.  In  each  of  thefe  points  he  is  of  opinion
that  the  effefts  of  the  Deluge  were  not  univerfal,  but
only  partial.

4  AND  therefore  (fays  he,  p.  171,  concerning  the
firft)  altho'  I  look  upon  that  part  of  this  [fcripture]
narration,  relating  to  the  dejlruttion  of  mankind,
and  of  birds,  and  of  beafts,  at  the  Deluge,  to  be
literally  true,  in  refpecl  ONLY  of  that  part  of  the
world,  in  which  Noah  lived  before  the  flood,
and  which  was  afterwards  peopled  by  his  three
fons,  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhet,  yet  I  cannot  but
acknowledge  that  this  Deluge,  which  happened  in
the  time  of  Noah,  muft  have  been  general  in  fome
degree ;  as  manifeftly  appears  from  the  general
elevation  of  mountains  over  the  whole  world,  and


[9  J

from  the  immenfe  quantity  of  fea-lhells,  which  are
frequently  found  in  the  mod  diftant  regions  of  the
earth. Neverthelefs  I  cannot  but  fuppofe, that
other  parts  of  the  then  habitable  world,  which  by
the  force  of  the  Deluge  were  feparated  into  iflands,
and  were  divided  from  the  continent  whereon  the  ark
landed,  were  in  fome  fort  exempted  from  the  com-
mon calamity,  brought  upon  the  reft  of  the  world
by  the  Deluge  -,  inafmuch  as  the  Continent  of  Ame-
rica, and  many  Iflands  in  the Eaft- Indies^ are at
prefent  partly  inhabited  by  wild  beafts  and  noxious
animals,  which  it  is  not  reafonable  to  imagine,  that
any  body  could,  or  would,  have  imported  thither
fince  that  time. Therefore,  I  own,  I  cannot  fee
any  other  probable  folution  of  this  difficulty,  than
to  fuppofe  them  protected  by  the  Providence of
GOD  from  the  general  deftrudlion,  in  fome  extraor-
dinary manner,  for  the  propagation  of  their  own
fpecies.' Which  paffage,  I  humbly  apprehend,  is
fcarce  confident  with  itfelf ;  at  leaft  the  pofition,  that
is  laid  down  therein,  will  not  coincide  with  other  parts
of  the  author's  treatife  j and  is  contrary  to  Scripture
and  Reafon. His  Lp.  feems  to  forget,  that,  accord-
ing to  his  Syftem,  bait  a  very  fmall  part  of  the  world
was,  or  indeed  poflibly  could  be, inhabited  before
the  flood,  viz.  that  tract  of  land  only  which  lay  be-
tween the  Northern  'Tropic  and  the  Arftic  Circle  (fee  of
his  Treatife,  p.  74,  75)  there  being  a  great  '  belt  of
water  under  the  equator  (equal  in  extent  to  the
fp^ace  between  the  two  Tropics  j fee  PLATE  3d')
which  feparated  one  part  of  the  earth  from  the
other  •,  fo  that  only  one  of  the  Hemifpheres  [if  the
above-mentioned  traft  could  be  properly  called  an
hemifpbere~]  was  the  feat  of  the  habitation  or  the  Ions
of  Adam  before  the  Deluge, p.  65,  75.' If  fucii
was  the  fituation  of  mankind  before  the  flood,  had


even  the  far  greater  part  of  America  been  exempted
from  the  effects  of  the  deluge,  no  inhabitants  of  the
former  world  would  have  been  faved  on  it;  much
lefs  could  any  have  been  faved  by  exempting  the
JJlands  of  the  jEaft- Indies  from  that  deft  ruction ;  be-
caufe  they  lay  either  direfily  under^  or  quite  on  the
other  fide  of  the  aforefaid  great  belt  of  waters  ;  and  fo
could  not  poffibly  have  been  inhabited  before  the
flood.  Befides ;  as  according  to  his  Lp.  the  falling
down  of  this  great  belt  of  waters,  or  '  their  rufliing
c  from  under  the  equator  [the  higher  ground]  towards

*  the  poles'  [the  lower]  (p.  155.)  was  one  great  caufe
of  the  deluge,  fo  it  could  not  but  be,  that  fuch  a  vio-
lent efflux  of  water  running  in  this  direction  would
drive  all  the  then  inhabitants  of  the  world  towards  the
Northern  Pole-,  where  if  they  arrived,  they  muft,  ac-
cording to  himfelf,  '  have  pcrifhed  on  account  of  the
4  Cold/ Nay, what  is  more, he  afferts,  that  the
waters  thus  rufhing  from  under  the  equator  '  would

*  return  to  their  natural  and  original  fituation  of  over-

*  Spreading  the  whole  earth, p.  155,  in  the manner
they  did  on  the  firft  day  of  the  Formation,  before  the
kaft  fpot  of  Dry-land  had  appeared. Now  how  we  can
reafonably  allow,  that  any  perfons,  in  fuch  an  univer-
fal  flood  as  this,  could  efcape  being  drowned,  I  cannot
conceive. But  even  let  us  fuppofe,  that  fome  of  them
were  expert  fwimmers,  and  could  live  a  long  time  in
the  water*  yet  according  to  our  author's  further  de-
icription  of  the  deluge,  they  certainly  could  not  be
able  to  weather  out  the  whole  ftorm,  for  thus  dread-
ful was  it,  '  When  the  fountains  of  the  great  Abyfs  were

broken  #/>,  and  an  immenfe  hollow  was  excavated
out  of  the  earth  from  pole  to  pole,  as  a  bed  for  the
Tea  to  lye  in ;  when  the  rocks,  and  the  fands,  and
the  ihells,  and  the  earth,  that  were  taken  thereout,
were  thrown  upon  the  land,  and  raifed  in  mountain


•  t "  ]

upon  mountain,  fo  as  to  afiail  the  fkies  and  invade
the  region  of  the  clouds  :  And  when  this  heretoge-
neous  mixture  was  flowered  down  again  upon  the
earth,  it  did  not  only  rain,  but  the  water,  andfand,
and  earth,  and  rock,  and  (hells,  were  poured  down
in  catarafts  from  heaven,  for  forty  days,  over  the  face
of  the  whole  earth,*  p.  88,  153,  118. Surely  in  fuch
a  terrible  florm  as  this, neither  the  leaft,  nor  the
greateft,  nor  the  ftrongeft  animal,  could  efcape  being
darned  to  pieces, much lefs  a  poor, deftitute,  af-
frighted, naked  man  : So  that  it  muft  have  required
a  miracle,  far  greater  than  That  by  which  Noah  and
his  family  were  laved,  to  have  preferved  one  fuch  per-
fon. And  fmce  GOD  took  fo  much  care  and  allowed
fo  much  time  for  the  prefervation  of  a  few  juft  ibuls,
we  cannot  imagine,  that  he  would  fuflfer,  by  a  more
extraordinary  miracle,  a  number  of  wicked  to  furvive  •,
for  whofe  fake,  and  purpofely  to  dejlroy  whom, he
brought  the  deluge  upon  the  world,  and  put  even  the
righteous  to  a  fevere  trial  of  their  faith  in  and  depend-
ence on  him. This  certainly  is  contrary  both  to
Scripture  and  Realbn ;  as  will  be  fliewn  more  fully
hereafter.

But  his  Lordmip  imagines,  that  the  Text  will  au-
thorife  his  fuppofing  thztfome  did  efcape  j  which  there-
fore muft  be  examined.  He  lays,  that  the  writers  of
Scripture  *  frequently  put  the  whole  for  the  great  eft
'  part,9  p.  168.  and  would  therefore  conclude,  that  the
words  All  and  Every  ufed  in  the  account  of  the  flood,
as  '  All  flejh  died,  and  Every  living  fubftance  was  de-
*  ftroyed,  &c.  ought  to  be  underftood  with  certain  H-
'  mitations,'  p.  1 70.  and  therefore  we  may  fuppoie,
that  All  were  not  deftroyed.  That  the  words  All
and  Every  are  fometimes  ufed  in  the  Scripture  to  fig
nify  an  integral  fart,  is  very  certain  ;  and  I  believe,
there  is  no  language  in  which  they,  or  fynonimous


terms,  are  not  fo  ufed.  Since  they  are  words  which
occur  fo  often,  and  in  fuch  a  variety  of  fenfes,  it
would  have  required  much  circumlocution  to  have  de-
fined, in  every  inftance,  their  precife  meaning  -,  the
Context  therefore  is  always  left  to  determine  that  point.
Now,  the  fenfe,  in  which  thefe  words  are  ufed  in  the
Scripture  account  of  the  Deluge,  is  fo  fixed  and  de-
termined, that  it  cannot  poffibly  be  miftaken.  Mofes
fays  (after  he  had  related,  that  the  waters  of  the  flood
had  rifen  to  fuch  a  height,  as  to  have  covered  All  the
high  hills  under  the  whole  heaven)  And  ALL  FLESH  died,
that  moved  upon  the  earth,  both  of  FOWL,  and  0/ CATTLE,
and  of  BEASTS,  and  of  EVERY  CREEPING  THING  that
creepeth  upon  the  earth,  and  EVERY  MAN.  All  in  whofe
•noftrih  was  the  breath  of  life,  of  all  that  was  in  the  dry
land  died.  And  every  living  fubftance  was  deftroyed  which
wa*  upon  the  face  of  the  ground,  both  man,  and  cat-
tle,' gnd  creeping  things,  and  the  fowl  of  the  heaven  ;
andtheyw^re  deftroyed  from  the  earth  ;  tf#afNoAH  ONLY
remained  alive,  and  THEY  that  were  with  him  in  the
ark,  Gen.  vii.  21.  Had  Mofes  intended  to  declare
that  every  individual  living  creature  thatlwas  upon  the
Earth,  before  and  during  the  flood,  were  deftroyed  by
the  flood,  he  could  not  have  been  more  exprefs  and
particular  •,  he  fays,  that  every  living  fubftance,  both
man,  and  cattle,  and  creeping  thing,  and  fowl  of  the  air,
that  was  upon  the  face  of  the  ground,  or  in  the  dry  land,
died  •,  and  we  know  of  but  one  ark  which  went  upon  the
face  of  the  waters,  and  fo  faved  the  men  and  the  animals
therein  :  of  courfe,  according  to  the  Scripture  account,
there  was  no  living  creature  upon  the  face  of  the  whole
earth,  but  iflfc  perifoed  by  the  flood.  And  what  mews
this  plainer  is ,  that  thofe,  whomjwe  know,  were  exempted
from  this,  otherwife,  univerfal  deftruffion,  are  exprelsly
mentioned  to  have  been  faved  •,  and  their  prefervation
mentioned  too  in  fetch  a  manner  as  to  fpecify,  that  no


[  '3]

other  perfons  or  creatures  were  faved,  And  NOAH  ONLY
remained  alive,  and  THEY  that  were  with  him  in  the  ark.
Nay,  St.  Peter  defcribes  this  affair  ftill  more  circum-
ftantially,  and  fixes  the  very  number  that  were  delivered,
i  Epift.  iii.  20.  wherein  [i.  e.  in  the  ark}  FEW,  that  is,
EIGHT  fouls,  were  faved  by  water ;  and  again,  2*  Epift.
ii.  5.  GOD  /pared  not  the  old  world,  but  faved  NOAH
the  EIGHTH  perfon  [who  with  his  own  wife,  his  three
fons,  and  their  three  wives,  was  juft  the  eighth  perfon]
bringing  in  the  flood  upon  the  WORLD  of  the  UNGODLY.
All  the  ungodly  therefore  muft  have  periihed.  So  that
the  words  all  and  every  in  the  above  pafTages  muft  be
taken  in  the  large/I  latitude,  and  extended  to  the  utmoft
Univerfality,  with  regard  to  the  wicked.  I  may  juft
add  too,  (for  as  many  have  urged  the  above  objection
againft  the  Univerfality  of  the  Flood,  fo  I  would  will-
ingly remove  it  by  every  means  without  being  tedious)
that  each  of  the  arguments,  which  will  be  hereafter
brought,  efpecially  thofe  from  Scripture,  in  proof  of
the  Univerfality  of  the  Deluge,  will  mew  alfo,  that  the
words  all  and  every  are  to  be  underftood  in  the  fenfe
I  contend  for;  becaufe  Scripture  (as  GOD  was  its  au-
thor) muft  be  confiftent  with  Itfdf,  and  with  'Truth. —
His  Lordfhip's  difficulty  concerning  the  peopling  of  A-
merica,  I  propofe  to  give  an  eafy  folution  to  hereafter,
obferving  here  by  the  by,  that  whether  we  could  get
over  this  difficulty  or  not,  it  would  not  invalidate  the
above  arguing-,  which  depends  entirely  upon  the  fenfe
of  Scripture,  and  which  may  be  corroborated  by
many  proofs  from  the  natural  ftate  of  the  earth;  and
where  thefe  two  concur  to  offer  clear,  exprefs,  and
united  evidence,  there  no  event  in  nature,  which  may
appear  unaccountable  to  fome,  but  may  be  eafily  ac-
counted for  by  others,  ought  to  fet  afide  their  fupe-
rior  authority.


[  14  J

THE  other  article  which  I  am  to  confidcr,  is  our
Author's  fuppofition  (p.  135.)  that  only  the  upper  fur  -
face  of  the  earth  was  difturbed  or  deftroycd  at  the  Deluge.
For  '  He  does  not  fuppofe  with  Dr.  Woodward^  that

*  the  whole  material  world  was,  at  the  time  of  the  de-

*  luge,  reduced  into  zfoft  pulp,  but  allows  that  every
4  thing  continued  in  its  then  ftate  of  folidity' And  yet,
he  fays,  '  it  muft  be  acknowledged,  that  at  the  time

*  of  the  breaking  up  of  the  fountains  of  the  Abyfs,  a
'  great  part  of  the  materials,  which  were  fcooped  out
«  of  the  earth,  as  well  as  thofe,  which  then  lay  on.  the

*  furface  of  the  fand  and  of  the  more,  would  be  loofe,
'  feparate,  and  divided,  and  would  float  irregularly
'  in  that  confufion  of  elements,  which  fuch  a  wonder-
'  ful  operation  muft  have  occafioned,  not  only  when

*  fhowered  down  in  cataracts  from  on  high,  but  alfo,
c  when  conveyed  by  the  force  of  the  waters  of  the  fea,

*  which  gufhed  forth,  as  out  of  a  womb,  to  the  place
'  deftined  for  their  abode,' p. 118. So  that,  if  I
rightly  underftand  his  Lp.  his  opinion  is, that  the
upper  parts  of  the  earth  only  were  moved  at  the  flood ;
and  thefe  irregularly  thrown  about  by  the  waters  of  the
deluge,  in  large,  loofe  or  detached,  fetid  majjes  ;  but
were  not  diffohed  or  reduced  to  their  original  atoms ;
much  lefs  were  thejlrata,  that  lay  beneath  the  places
from  whence  thefe  parts  were  torn  :  for  thus  he  fays,
p.  140,  (where  fpeaking  of  part  of  a  fkeleton  of  an
elephant  and  of  feveral  horns  of  the  moofe-deer,  that
were  found  foflil  in  Ireland)  '  klikewife  hence  appears,

that  ibme  of  the  low  grounds  in  Ireland  have  not  been
covered  more  than  from  five  or  ten  feet  thick  with  the
Slutcb  of  the  deluge ; — fince  it  is  not  probable  that
at  the  time  of  the  death  of  the  afore- mentioned
elephant  and  moofe-deer,  the  places  upon  which  they
were  found  lying,  were  the  natural  fur  face  vi  the  then
habitable  earth  j  or  as  it  is  more  clearly  exprefled,


c  p.  104.  where  we  may  fuppofe  the  furface  of  this
*  earth  was,  when  there  were  no  mountains,  but  all
'  this  world  was  an  uniform  globe,  covered  with  water
«  (as  at  the  creation)  there  thejlrata  are  uniform  •,  and
6  the  feveral  layers  of  them,  whether  land,  clay,  mi-
4  nerals,  or  gravel,  are  difpofed  in  an  boriz/ontalfofition,
'  parallel  to  one  another.'  This  laft  obfervation
(which  is  the  only  proof  brought  for  his  Lordfhip's
opinion,  and  is  laid  down  upon  the  authority  of  Mon-
Jieur  Bujfcn}  is  certainly  falfe  in  fact ;  as  I  will  venture
to  affirm,  every  one  will  find  that  will  but  make
ten  obfervations  upon  the  regular  ftrata  of  the  earth,
in  ten  different  places  ^  it  being  far  more  common  to
find  the  ftrata,  which  lye  beneath  the  flutch  and  rub-
ble left  by  the  waters  of  the  deluge,  upon  the  furface
of  the  earth,  inclined  in  various  direftions,  rather  than
horizontally  difpcfed;  which  muft  undeniably  prove
that  fuch  Jirata  have  been  moved  or  difplaced,  and  of
courfe,  that  the  effects  of  the  deluge  reached  below  what
is  called  by  fome,  the  f aft-ground,  or  what  our  Author
imagines  to  have  been  the  fur  face  of  the  Earth  before
the  flood.  And  I  dare  fay,  if  he  will  have  the  earth
opened  in  the  places,  where  the  above  mentioned
horns  of  the  moofe-deer,  &c.  were  found,  deeper
than  ten  feet,  he  will  difcover  as  many  infallible  marks
of  the  deluge,  as  the  horns,  &c.  of  the  aforefaid
animals,  fuch,  for  inftance,  as  fea- (hells,  teeth  and
bones  of  other  animals,  or  plants,  &c.  At  lead
fuch  are  frequently  found  in  England,  beneath
what  is  commonly  called  Slutcb;  and  I  fuppofe  Ireland
was  not  more  favoured  during  the  deluge  than  Eng-
land. In  fhorr,  what  is  called  Slutcby  is  no  more,  (as
I  obierved  before)  than  that  matter,  which  the  waters
in  their  retreat  from  the  ea*&  at  the  end  of  the  deluge,
left  on  places  fit  to  receive  it,  as  the/^/j  on  the  fides
of  mountains,  the  bottoms  of  daks,  va/Jifsy  &:


the  fubftance  of  which  this  matter  confifts,  and  the
manner  in  which  it  lies,  evidently  prove;  it  being
generally  of  a  mixed  nature,  confifting  of  various  fub-
ftances, — and  lying,  not  in  regular  ftrata,  as  Hone,
chalk,  &c.  do,  but  in  fmall  feams  or  ftreaks,  of  un-
equal breadth  in  different  parts,  and  in  a  train,  juft
as  the  laft  fediment  of  water  would  naturally  leave  it.
So  that  it  is  no  wonder  his  Lp.  cannot  be  of  opinion
that  all  the  metallic  and  mineral  matter  of  the  earth
was  diffolvedvrfeparated  and  reduced  to  its  original  atoms
at  the  Deluge,  when  it  does  not  appear  from-4iis  ob-
fervations,  that  he  ever  examined  the  earth  below  ten
feet,  but  judged  of  the  effefts  of  the  Deluge  upon  the
whole  body  of  the  earth,  from  what  was  tranfacled  only,
and  that  very  weakly,  on  the  fuperficial  fart.  But  I
hope  to  make -it  evident,  both  from  fcripture  and  na-
ture, that  all  the  ftrata  offtone,  coal,  chalk,  fciV.  and  all
the  veins  of  ore  in  the  antediluvian  earth  were  aQually
diffolved,  their  conftituent  corpufcles  feparated  one  from
another,  and  when  in  this  ftate  of  feparation,  were
mixed  with  a  large  quantity  of  water,  fo  that  the
whole  was  reduced  to  a  fluid  colluvies.  But  of  this  in
its  due  place  and  order.

HAVING  premifed  thus  much;  I  mail  now  endea-
vour to  lay  before  the  reader  a  plain,  clear,  and  full
account  of  the  Deluge  •,  firft,  as  defcribed  in  Scrip-
ture; fecondly,  as  confirmed  by  other  hiftorical  evi-
dence ;  and  thirdly,  as  corroborated  by  the  prefent
natural  ftate  of  the  eaith.  And  I  hope  to  bring  fuch
proof  of  every  materisft-cif  cumftance,  that  all,  except
thofe  who  will  not  fee,  mall  be  able  to  difcern  the
manifold  evidence  for  this  wonderful  tranfaction.  And
,in  explaining  this  event,  I  defign  to  have  particular
regard  to  the  two  above-mentioned  exceptionable  ar-
ticles of  our  author,  not  only  becaufe  He  has  afierted


them,  but  becaufe  maty,  other  wife  learned  and  ju-
dicious writers,  as  Voffms,  Bifhop  Stilling  fleet,  &c.  and
fome  fuppofed  to  be  learned,-  as  Dr.  Burnet,  Mr.  Whif-
ton,  &c.  have  maintained  the  fame,  and  his  Lp.  has
flickered  himielf  under  fome  of  their  names.

WITH  regard  to  the  Scripture  account,  I  begin  with
Gen.  vi.  13.  And  God  f  aid  unto  Noah,  The  end  of  all
fiejb  is  come  before  me  :  for  the  earth  is  filled  with  -vio-
lence through  them:  and  behold  I  will  deftroy  THEM  with
the  EARTH.  So  that  the  Earth  itfelf,  as  well  as  its
inhabitants,  was  to  be  deftroyefl,.  The  Earth,  as  we  arc
told  before,  was  corrupt  before  God  -,  its  primitive  good-
nefs  and  fertility  had  been  abufed  and  perverted  by
man,  and  inftead  of  rendering  him  more  dependent
on  and  thankful  to  his  Creator,  caufed  him  to  aflume
independency,  and  even  to  deify  the  earth,  the  imme-
diate producer  of  its  fruits,  and  to  forget  GOD  the  ori-
ginal Author  and  Former  of  all.  b  So  that  GOD  (in
C


*  Gen.  vi.  12.  /^WGoD  looked  upon  the  earth,  and  behold  it  was
corrupt  ;  for  all  fejh  bad  coh-npted  H^s  WAY  upon  the  earth,  1.  e.
GOD'S  way  ;  for  their  own  IK  ay  was  corrupt  enough  ;  and  they  could
not  properly  be  laid  to  have  corrupted  That.  Noah  we  find,  was
exempted  from  the  general  deftruftion,  becaufe  (Gen.  vi.  9.)  he  walked
with  GOD,  ;'.  e.  he  went  in  the  true  way,  obferved  the  precepts  of
the  true  religion,  or  did  not  depart  from  his  GOD,  CHRIST,  (who  is
filled  THE  WAY,  'John  xiv.  6.  and  is  the  LIVING  WAY,  Heb.  x.  20).
But  all  thofe  who  do  dtpart,  and  fet  up  other  gods,  other  faviours,
new  protectors,  of  what  kind  or  fort  fot<uer,  are  fermed  Idolaters,  A-
poftates,  Imogir.crs',  Ccrrupters  of  the  way,  &c.  and  fuch  will  be  guilty
of  every  evil  work  as  well  as  thought  ;  for  as  their  perverted  thoughts
or  imaginations  lead  the  way,  fo  bad  practice  will  of  courfe  enfue.
'  Corrupting,  (fays  dinjkvorth  on  the  place)  is  in  fpecial  applied  to
'  Idolatry,  and  depraving  of  GOD'S  true  fervice.  Exod.  xxxii.  7.
'  Deut.  xxxii.  5.  Judg.  ii.  19.  as,  the  people  arefaidto  do  corruptly,
«  2  Cbron.  xxvii.  z.  when  they  facrifced  and  burnt  incttife  in  the  high-
'  places,  2  Kings  xv.  35.  So  Idolatry  was  their  chief  corruption  here,
«  as  may  alfo  be  gathered  by  Gen.  iv.  26.  fee  the  Annotations  there.'


judgment  always  remembering  mercy)  determines  to
deftroy  by  a  flood  of  waters  the  Earth  that  then  was,
retrench  its  luxuriancy,  and  fo  take  away  the  caufeof
the  general  corruption  ;  that  thus  by  altering  the  ftate
of  the  earth,  he  might  neceffitate  man  to  a  greater
degree  of  labour,  fhorten  the  period  of  human  life,
and  demonftrate  to  the  future  race  of  men,  their  real
weaknefs  and  abfolute  dependence  on  Him. Hence
appears  the  neceffity  for  the  deftruBion  of  the  whole
globe. So  that  the  opinion  of  thofe  who  have  carried
a  -partial  flood  to  the  greateft  extent,  and  allowed  that
all  mankind,  except  thofe  in  the  ark,  were  deflroyed ;
• — imagining  that  mankind  inhabited  only  a  large  part
of  the  world ;  but  the  brute- animals ,  the  'whole  ; and
that  the  deluge  did  not  reach  beyond  the  parts  inha-
bited by  man  (for  wbofe  Jake  alone  they  fuppofe  the
flood  to  have  been  brought  upon  the  earth)  fo  that  the
parts  inhabited  by  beafts  only,  as  the -Continent of
America,  &c. were  exempted  from  the  dellruclion,
and  the  animals  thereon  preferved  alive  (by  which  they
think  they  get  over  one  difficulty,  viz.  the  repleni/hing
the  earth with  animals  after  the  flood:) — even  this
opinion,  I  fay,  will  not  ftand  the  teft  of  the  Scripture
account;  for  the  Deluge,  we  fee,  was  not  aimed  iblely
at  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  but  included  alfo  the
Earth  itfelf. Had  Man  been  the  only  intended  objett
of  dtftruBion,  there  v/ere  many  ways  to  take  him  off;
there  was  the  Famine,  the  Sword,  the  Peftilence,  Fire,
Wind,  and  Storm  at  the  wor d  or  command  of  GOD  ;  and
either  of  thefe  might  have  been  employed,  without  un-
hinging  the  whole  frame  of  the  earth,  and  dijjolving  all
the  fo  lid  ftrata  thereof. But  this  laft  method  was  in-
tended, was  threatned,  was  executed,  was  neceffary  ;
and  therefore  the  Deluge  UNIVERSAL.

I  PROCEED  with  the  Scripture  account,  ver.  14,
Make  thee  an  Ark  of  gopher-wood;  (rooms  jhalt  thou
make  in  the  Ark)  and  Jhall  pitch  it  within  and  without


[  19  ]

with  pitch.  And  this  is  the  fajhion  which  thou  Jhalt  make
it  of-,  the  length  of  the  Ark  jh  all  be  three  hundred  cubits,
the  breadth  of  it  fifty  cubits,  and  the  height  of  it  thirty
cubits :  (a  window  /halt  thou  make  to  the  Ark')  and  in
a  cubit  JJjalt  thou  finifh  it  above :  (and  the  door  of  the
Ark  Jh  alt  thou  fet  in  the  fide  thereof)  with  lower,  fecond,
and  third  ft ories  Jhalt  thou  make  it.  And  behold  I,  even
I,  do  bring  a  flood  of  waters  upon  the  earth  to  deftroy  all
flejh,  wherein  is  the  breath  of  life,  from  under  heaven,  and
every  thing  that  is  in  the  earth  Jhall  die.  But  with  thce
will  I  eflablijh  my  covenant :  and  thouJJoalt  come  into  the


e  I  have  included  this  fentence,  together  with  one  juft  before,  and
another^almoft  immediately  following,  in  parenthefes,  as  the  fenfe  of
the  Context  requires,  and  the  Original  fully  juilifies  :  for  the  word  it
in  the  next  fentence,  viz.  in  a  cubit  Jhalt  tbou  finijb  it  above,  plainly
refers  to  the  Ark  hot  to  the  fffuutnv  ;  fince  the  relative  it  is  in  the
feminine  gender,  and  the  word  for  Ark  in  the  feminine  alfo,  but  the
word  for  Window  is  in  the  mafculine  ;  fo  the  fentence  where  That  is,
muft  be  taken  fsparately  from  the  reft,  or  included  in  a  parenthefis.
And  the  fenfe  is,  In  a  cubit  thou  Jhalt  finijh  it  (the  Ark')  above,  that
is,  the  top  part  of  the  roof  of  the  Ark  was  to  be  made  a  cubit  high
in  the  middle,  and  Hoping  on  each  fide  ;  on  purpofe  I  fuppofe  that
the  rain  and  moiflure,  which  might  fall  during  the  Deluge,  mould
eafiiy  flide  off,  without  damaging  the  Ark.

As  Commentators  have  been  much  puzzled  concerning  what  this
Windo-jj  in  the  Ark  was,  and  I  know  but  one  Author  that  has  pro-
perly explained  it,  and  fince  his  treatife  is  fcarce,  (viz.  DICKINSOM-
Phyfica  <vetus  &  <vera)  I  mall  lay  down,  and  endeavour  to  prove  the

certainty  of  his  explication. The  common  opinion  is,  that  this

Windo-M  was  a  Hole  in  the  uf  per  part  of  the  Ark  about  a  cubit  [quart,
or  a  cubit  in  height ;  but  how  fuch  a  cavity  as  this  could  poflibly  af-
ford light  to  the  three  fiories  of  the  Ark  (one  of  which  wasdoubtlefs
underwater)  and  to  all  t\&feparate  partitions  in  thofeftories,  and  to
the  many  1'rJ/iuges  leading  to  thofe  partitions,  and  this  during  the
night,  at  leaft  feme  part  of  the  night,  as  well  as  in  the  day,  is  alto-
gether inconceivable  :  fo^that  this  opinion,  I  think,  cannot  be  true.
But  (z*1*']  the  foundation  on  which  it  is  built,  viz.  thpfe  words,  ///
«  cubit  tbou  Jhalt  fnijh  it  above,  reft- r,  as  I  have  already  fhew'd,  to
the  Ark,  and  not  to  the  m/dw.  So  that  (3dl>r-)  let  the  reader  r*-


[20]

Ark;  thov.)  and  thy  fans  i  and  thy  wife,  and  thy  fons  wives
with  thee.  And  of  every  living  thing  of  allflejh^  tiyo  of
every  fort  jhalt  thou  bring  into  the  Ark  to  keep  them  alive
with  thee  :  they  Jhall  be  male  and  female.  Of  fowls  after
their  kindy  and  of  cattle  after  their  kind,  of  every  creeping
thing  cf  the  earth  after  his  kind:  two  of  every  fort  Jhall
•ccme  unto  thee,  to  keep  them  alive.  And  take  thou  unto
thee  of  all  food  that  i*  eaten,  and  thou  Jhalt  gather  it  to
thee  ;  and  it  Jhall  be  food  for  thee  and  for  them.  Thus  did
Noah ;  according  to  all  that  God  commanded  him  fo  did  be.
WHAT  Forefight  and  Wifdom  were  here  requiiite !  I
have  already  proved  that  the  Deluge  was  zfupernatural


irember,  there  is  no  precife  outward  form  afcribed  to  this  Window.
And  (4thl)")  what  is  tranflated,  A  window  thou /halt  make  TO  THE
ARK,  if,  render'd  according  to  the  Original,  is,  for,  or  for  the  ufe  of
the  ark,  LaTaBE ;  fo  that  a  window  in  the  common  acceptation  of
the  word,  canfcarcely  be  the  meaning  of  the  infpired  writer. — jtiuy.
The  word  JER  (tranflated  window)  properly  denotes  a  clear  light,
and  as  IJER  fignifying  oil,  comes  fiom  the  fame  root,  and  both  are
derived  from  a  verb,  fignifying  tojbine  bright,  fothe  command  here
given  to  Noah,  in  all  probability  was,  to  make  a  clear  Jhining  jub-
Jlance,  or  a  bright  oleaginous  matter,  for  the  ufe  of  the  Ark.  Now
fach  would  certainly  be  of  great  fervice  by  affording  light  to  every
feparate  room  fmce  it  might  be  hungup  in fmall  *v?J}els,  or  other-
wife,  as  the  circumllanccs  of  time  and  place  required  :  this  fubftance
too  might  be  of  fuch  a  falutifcrous  nature,  or  fend  forth  fuch  vivify -\
ing  rays,  as  would  greatly  conduce  to  the  health  of  the  animal f  in
the  Ark.  That  it  is  poffible  to  make  fuch  a  felf-Jkining  matter,
either  liqtid  Of  folid,  the  bermetical  Phcfpbor  of  Balduinus,  the
aerial  and  glacial  Noflilucas  of  Mr.  Boyle,  and  the  Pantarba  of
Jarcbus,  (which  laft  *  ihone  in  the  day,  as  fire,  and  at  night  emit-
*  ted  a  flame  or  light,  as  bright  as  day,  tho'  not  altogether  fo  ttrong')
and  many  other  preparations  cf  the  like  fort  fufficiently  evince  (fee
Stackhoufe's  Hijiory  of  the  Bible,  Vol.  I.  p.  I  30.) ;  and  that  it
might  have  been,  or  that  many  have  been,  of  the  above  fuppofed
falutiftrcui  nature,  Widerifitlct  in  his  fecond  Book  de  Medicamentit
has  plainly  fhew'd.  And  by  the  command  here  given  to  Noah,
without  any  particular  directions  about  preparing  this  fubftance,  we
may  fairly  coiled,  that  he  well  knew  of  what,  and  in  what  man-
ner, to  make  it. — 6^h^-  The  Jtwifi  Rabbles  feem  to  have  had


act,  and  it  is  undeniably  certain  that  no  human  know-
ledge, no  natural  experience,  no  deduction  from  caufes
or  effects,  could  poffibly  have  given  mankind  the  ieaft
notice  of  fuch  an  event :  of  courfe  a  revelation  (as  Mo  fa
informs  us)  muft  have  been  made  to  Noah,  in  order  that
he  might  forefee  and  be  provided  againft  fuch  a  tranf-
action.  And  not  only  a  revelation  of  the  Fact,  buf.
the  Means  alfo  declared,  by  which  he  might  avoid
the  confequences  of  it,  and  have  time  to  take  due  care
fortheprefervationof  himfelf  and  family,  and  for  re-
plenifhing  the  earth  with  a  flock  of  its  former  inhabi-
tants. As  he  was  told  that  the  whole  earth  was  to  be


ibme  notion  of  the  true  meaning  of  the  word  under  confideration'
by  fup}X)fmg  that  it  denoted  a  large  bright  Ca>t>urc/f,  or  frcdou?
ftone,  which  Noah  hung  up  in  the  middle  of  the  Ark,  to  give  1^
all  around  ;  but  this  certainly  would  not  wholly  anfwer  the  end,  to*"
fuch  a  ftone  (fuppofing  there  was  fuch)  could  not  emit  light  into
every  feparate  partition,  and  all  the  paffages  leading  to  the  partiti-
ons, &c;  fo  that  fame  fuch  Jhlning  Sub/lance,  as  the  above,  which
might  be  carried  in  the  hand  from  p'ace  to  place,  or  hung  up,
or  &c.  was  certainly  neceflary  and  intended. — 7thly-  The  Chaldee
Faraphrafe  renders  the  woj:d  for  window  by  one  fignifying  fimply
light. — 8thly-  The  Scptutgint  Tranflators  (probably  not  knowing
any  word  in  the  Greek  that  would  anfwer  to  the  Hebrew  ]  E  R)  have
omitted  or  elfe  have  fubftituted  a  \'erb  (etrMvctfuv}  for  it,  which  con-
veys neither  the  idea  of/ig/jf  nor  window ;  and  this  certainly  they  would
not  have  done,  had  they  thought  the  word  meant  a  common  window.
—9thl>'<  But  what  adds  great  confirmation  to  the  above  expofition
is  that  the  common  word  for  window  [viz.  HaLUN,  which  is  de-
rived from  a  verb  fignifying  to  horc  or  cut  thr<?  t  and  properly  de-
notes a  Hole  or  Window  in  a  building]  is  not  ufed  in  this  place  j
and  yet  it  is  ufed  in  the  account  of  the  Ark,  Gen.  vii.  6.  where
Noah  is  faid  to  have  opened  the  Vf'indsiv  of  the  Ark  and  let  out  a  ru-
men. Here  a  Window  as  generally  underftood,  is  certainly  meant,
and  the  common  and  proper  word  [HaLUN,  not  JER]  is  ufed;
which  evidently  mews  that  fome  other  interpretation  than  that  of
Window,  muft  be  attributed  to  the  word  JER;  and  fince  the  fignifi.-
cation  I  have  above  contended  for  is  ib  remarkably  corrobtf/ated  by
fuch  a  number  of  circumftahces,  \ye  may,  I  prefume,  juftly  con-
clude it  to  be  the  true.


[22]

deftroyed  by  a  flood  of  water,  fb  the  moft  he  could  pre-
conceive concerning  the  impending  danger  (allowing
he  could  conjecture  thus  much,  which,  unlefs  Ship-
ping had  been  in  ufe  before  the  flood,  he  probably
could  not)  was,  that  a  veflel  of  wood  would  be  the
moft  likely  means  of  faving  him,  and  all  that  was
neceffary  to  be  fecured  :  but  of  what  fize  or  form  to
make  this  vefiel,  that  it  might  fuitably  contain  the
thmgs  that  were  to  be  taken  in,  and  anfwer  in  all  other
refpects,  no  human  wifdom,  I  believe,  could  poffcbly
adjuft.  Had  man  been  left  to  himfelf  to  form  a  veffel
that  fliould  conveniently  hold  a  certain  number  of  all
the  'various  fpecies  of  birds  ^  beafis,  and  creeping^  things  in
the  earth,  and  contain  alfo  proper  and  fufficient  food
for  them  for  the  fpace  of  a  whole  year ',  (forfo  long  the
Dduge  lafted)  he  probably  would  have  made  the  vef-
iel"  unnecefiarily  big,  even  fo  large  as  to  endanger  it's
fafety :  and  this  is  pretty  certain,  from  the  objections
which  thofe  who  have  laid  claim  to  the  greateft  mare  of
human  Reafon  (viz.  our  wife  free  or  rather  no-thinkers}
have  made  to  the  Mofaic  account,  fuppofing  the  Ark
therein  defcribed  to  have  been  of  too  narrow  dimenfions.
But  the  wifdom  of  man  is  foolijhncfs  with  GOD,  and
every  objection  to  Scripture  proves  nothing  but  the
folly  of  the  objector,  which  in  this  cafe  is  abundantly
manifefti  for  after  the  ftricteft  examination  and  moft
accurate  furvey,  it  has  been  proved  by  feveral  learned
perfons,  that  the  fize  of  the  Ark,  as  given  by  Mofes,
was  exactly  correfpondent  to  the  things  that  were  to
be  taken  in.d  And  tho'  Mofes  could  not  but  forefee,
that  fuch  objections  as  thefe  would  be  raifed  againft

*  See  BUTEO  de  Area  Not ;  cujus  form*  &  capacitatis  fuerat.
Sir  WALTER  RALEIGH'S  HiJJotj  of  the  World,  Book  I.  Chap,  7.
$  9.  TLv<t  the  Ark  <was  of  fuff.dent  capacity.  Bifhop  WJL KIN'S
f>ffay  toivards  a  real  char  after  and  a  pbiiofcphical  language.  PzK
II.  Chap.  v.  $.  6.


[23]

his  account,  yet  he  left  it  to  ftand  the  teft,  barely  re-
lating the  fact,  not  anxioufly  explaining  the  reafon  of
every  thing  •,  well  knowing  that  he  was  directed  in  what
he  faid  by  Infinite  Wifdorn,  who  would  order  all  things
in  meafure^  and  number ,  and  weighty  and  quite  fatisfied
that  if  man  would  but  act  the  proper  part  and  ufe  his
Reafon  aright,  that  is,  not  judge  till  he  had  well
weighed  and  confidered  the  fubject,  the  juftnefs  and
propriety  of  what  he  related  would  eminently  appear.
[Hence,  by  the  way,  we  may  fee  the  great  neceflity
of  much  natural  knowledge  in  order  to  apprehend  the
philofophical  parts  of  the  Bible,  and  that  Mofes  did
not  fuit  his  defcriptions  of  things  to  the  capacities  of
the  vulgar,  but  wrote  for  the  moft  improved  Under-
frandings.] — Again ;  as  it  was  necefiary  that  Iwo  at
leaft  of  each  fpecies  of  animals  of  the  land  and  air^  and
thefe  a  male  and  female  (for  future  propagation;  fhould
be  taken  into  the  Ark,  fo  it  was  impoflible  that  Noah
and  his  family  of  themfelves  could  have  collected  them
together ;  many  of  the  creeping  kind&tt  fo  fmall  as  to
efcape  the  human  fight,  unaffifted  by  the  beft  GlafTes,
and  probably  many  there  are  that  cannot  be  difcerned
even  by  the  help  of  them,  at  leaft  fo  far  as  to  difcover
which  are  male  and  which  fema/e ;  others  are  of  fo  fwift
a  flight,  or  of  fo  wild  and  rapacious  a  nature  that  they
cannot  be  caught  and  tamed  by  man:  GOD  therefore
muft  have  directed  the  fever al  kinds  in  fuitable  numbers
to  the  Ark  (probably  in  the  manner  he  influenced  them
to  come  to  Adam^  when  they  were  firfl  named.
Gen.  ii.  19.)  Agreeably  to  this  Mofes  informs  us  that
the  fame  divine  Perfon  who  forewarned  Noah  of  the
flood,  aflfured  him,  that  two  [or  rather  as  the  word
may  be  render'd  couples ;  for  more  than  two  of  fome
fpecies  were  taken  in]  of  every  fort  Jhould  come  unto  "him

10  be  kept  alive.  Gen.  vi.  20. All  thefe  articles

were  neceflary to  be  known, all  thefe  preparations
neceffary  to  be  made  by  thoic  who  could  poffibly be


C  ?*]

faved,  and  anfwer  the  end  of  their  falvation  (by  being
able  to  replenifh  the  Earth  with  a  ftock  of  its  former
inhabitants)  in  fuch  a  Flood  as  was  That  in  the  time
of  Neah.  But  thefe  articles  could  not  be  known,  nor
could  thefe  preparations  be  made  without  divine  ajfift-
ance ;  fuch  affiftanc^  therefore  was  undeniably  given  to
Noah ;  and  it  is  equally  undeniable,  that  all  thofe  who
had  it  not,  periflied.  Hence  our  Saviour  reprefents  the
Flood  as  coming  upon  the  ungodly  quite  unexpectedly,
Matt.  xxiv.  38.  In  the  days  that  were  before  the  flood^
they  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in
marriage,  until  the  day  that  Noah  entered  into  the  ark,  and
KNEW  NOT  until  the  flood  came  and  took  them  ALL  away.
Surely  then  none  either  did,  or  could  efcape ;  for,  if
even  a  few  had  reached  the  higheft  mountains,  yet  as
they  had  had  no  time  to  prepare  themfelves  with  food
and  the  common  neceflaries  of  life,  they  mull  foon
have  perimed  thro*  hunger.

AGAIN  ;  had  not  the  Deluge  been  univerfal,  but
partial  only,  and  extended  even  over  one  half  of  the
globe,  there  certainly  had  been  no  need  of  the  Ark,
Noah  and  his  family  might  have  retired  from  the  de-
ftru&ion,  in  the  fame  manner  as  Lot  and  his  family
did  from  that  of  Sodom  and  the  countries  adjacent,  into
fome  other  part  of  the  earth ;  and  this  might  have
been  done  in  much  Jefs  time  and  with  far  lefs  care  and
trouble,  than  to  have  built  fo  large  a  veflel  as  the  Ark
was,  and  prepared  all  the  nece0ary  things  for  the
fafety  of  the  animals  that  were  to  be  included.  At
leail  had  the  Deluge  been  partial,  there  had  been  no
occafion  of  taking  in  animals  of  every  kind^  male  and
female  of  every  fort  to  keep  feed  dive  upon  the  face  of  all
ihe  earthy  (Gen.  vii.  3.)  for  had  any  iflands  or  countries
with  the  creatures  peculiar  thereunto,  been  exempted
from  the  common  calamity  (as  our  Author  fuppofes)
it  had  been  needlefs  to  have  preferved  fuch  by  means
of  the  Ark  3  or  indeed  to  have  taken  in  any  of  the


[ 25 ]

Brute-creation  at  all,  fmce  they  might  have  been  con-
ducted to  thofe  parts  of  the  earth  which  the  Deluge
reached  not,  by  the  fame  means  that  they  were
brought  to  the  ark  to  be  faved  thereby  ;  many  of  the
beafs  fuch  as  are  of  the  fwift  and  wild  kind,  might  eafily
have  efcaped  thither  -,  and  the  birds  without  difficulty,
might  have  fled,  from  the  approaching  danger,  into  the
molt  diftant  regions  of  the  earth.  But  as  all  this  pre-
caution was  taken,  all  thefe  meafures  executed,  it  is
certain  that  GOD  intended  that  the  Deluge  fhould  be
ttniverfal •,  and  we  mail  fee  hereafter  from  the  effefts  of
it,  that  it  really  was  fo.

FOR,  as  foon  as  Noah  and  the  animals  were  entered
into  the  ark,  we  are  told,  that

All  the  Fountains  of  the  Great  Deep  were  broken  up.

THE  Maker  of  this  earth  (who  certainly  knows  its
inward  as  well  as  outward  ftrudure)  has  inform'd  us,
that  there  is  a  vafl  collection  of  waters  within  it,  cha-
racterifed  (to  diftinguim  it  from  all  lejjer  Deeps,  Seas,
&c.)  under  the  name  of  the  GREAT  D-E  E  P;
it  is  called  Gen.  xlix.  25.  The  Deep  that  lieth  under,
\.  e.  the  earth;  and  Dcut.  xxxiii.  13.  The  Deep  that
coucheth  beneath  :  and  in  the  fecond  commandment  is  in-
cluded under  the  term  ot  the  Water  under  the  earth.
From  this  refervoir  all  fountains  and  rivers  receive
their  fupplies  as  the  wifeft  of  natural  Philofophers  has
told  us,  Ecdef.i.  7.  All  the  rivers  run  into  the  Sea  [the
general  collection  of  waters,  part  high  up,  and  part
beneath,  the  earth]  yet  the  Sea  is  not  full  [doth  not
reach  the  height  of,  or  run  over,  its  mores].  Unto  the
•place  from  whence  the  risers  came^  thither  they  return
again.*  The  fhell  of  the  earth  is  reprefcnted  as
lying  directly  over  this  abyfs,  or  covering  it  as  an

e  This  collection  of  waters  I  have  defoliated  by  G.  H.  in  the  fub-
fequent  Plate,  which  the  reader  will  confult,  and  alib  what  is  faid  i»
Note  k.


[26]

Arch  ftretched  over  an  orb  of  water ,  fo  the  Pfalmift,
xxiv.  i .  The  earth  is  the  LORD'J  ; — for  he  hath  FOUNDED
it  UPON  THE  SEAS,  and  ESTABLISHED  it  UPON  THE
FLOODS;  and  again,  cxxxvi.  O give  thanks  to  tbe'LoRn
of  Lords,  'who  alone  doth  great  wonders  ; — to  Him  (for
this  is  a  wonderful  and  very  beneficial  act)  that
STRETCHED  OUT  the  earth  above  the  waters:  So  of  the
jirft  fediment,  jlrata,  and  laying  the  foundations  of  the
earth,  Prov.  viii.  27.  Whm  he  -prepared  the  heavens,  1
was  there;  when  he  fet  a  Circle  upon  the  face  of  the
Depth ;  when  he  appointed  the  foundations  of  the  earth.
And  Job  xxxviii.  4.  Where  waft  thou  when  I  laid  the
foundations  of  the  earth  ?  Whereupon  are  the  fockets
thereof  faftened  ?  Or  who  had  laid  the  Corner- flone  [the
key-ftone  of  the  arch]  thereof?  And  ch.  xxvi.  10.  He
fet  a  Circle  upon  the  face  of  the  waters.  So  that  the
fhell  of  the  earth  is  of  a  circular  form,  comprehending
(as  the  fnell  of  an  Egg  contains  the  Fluid  within)  an
crb  of  water,  according  to  the  delineation  in  the  Plate,
where  F.  denotes  the  cruft  of  the  earth,  and  G.  H.  the
fluid  within.  Thus  were  things  fituated  before  the
Flood,  and  thus  indeed  are  they  at  preferit.

BUT  before  I  can  mew  what  the  alterations  wej-e
that  were  made  in  the  terraqueous  Globe  at  the  time
of  the  Deluge, — what  Agents  were  employed, — and
the  Manner  of  their  acting, — it  will  be  proper  to  fay
ibmething  of  the  original  formation  of  the  earth.

THE  firft  Agent  that  is  mentioned  to  have  had  any
effect  towards  reducing  thcformlefs  mafs  of  the  earth
into  fliape,  is  the  Spirit,  Gen.  i.  2.  And  the  Spirit  of
GOD  moved  upon  ihe  face  of  ihs  waters.  What  this
Spirit  is  may  be  judged  of  from  fimilar  pafftges  in
Scripture.  The  word  rendered  Spirit  [RUE]  is  the
fame  as  is  ufually  translated  Wind,  and  denotes  Air
in  wot  ion,  as  If  a.  xl.  7.  The  grafs  wither  eth,  the  fower
fc.dcth;  bccauje  the  Spirit  of  the  LORD  BLOWETH  upon


[  271

it :  here  certainly  the  natural  motion  of  the  wind  is
meant  •,  as  alfo  it  is  in  the  following  paffage,  Pfalm
cxlvii.  1 6.  He  givetb  fnow  like  wool;  fcatteretb  the
boar-froft  like  ajhes.  He  caftetb  forth  his  ice  like  mor-
fels  ;  who  can  ft  and  before  his  cold  ?  He  fendeth  out  his
Word  [lymbolically  placed  for  the  Light  cf  the  Sun  ;
as  his  real  Son  is  the  Light  of  the  world,  and  the  Word
of  life]  and  melteth  them  :  he  caufeth  his  Wind  [RUE,
his  Spirit]  to  blow,  and  the  waters  flow.  So  alfo,  Job
xxx vii.  21.  And  now  men  fee  not  the  bright  light  which
is  in  the  clouds  [more  properly  it  means,  in  thejkies]  :
but  the  Wind  [the  Spirit]  paffetb  away  and  cleanfcth  them;
i.  e.  by  the  motion  of  the  air  the  iky  is  cleared,  and  the
light  rendered  vifible.  So  again,  ch.  xxxvi.  16.  By  his
Spirit  he  hath  garnijhed  the  Heavens.  But  what  more
evidently  confirms  the  above  interpretation  is,  that  at
the  time  of  the  Deluge  when  the  Earth  was  totally  dif-
folved,  and.  all  things  in  \hzfame  confufed  Hate  they  were
at  the  beginning  of  its  firft  formation,  the  fame  Agent
is  mentioned  to  have  been  employed  towards  the  re-
forming of  it,  viz.  Gen.  viii.  i.  And  GOD  made  a
Wind  (  RUE,  the  Spirit]  to  pafs  over  the  earth  and  the
waters  ajjwaged.  Here  certainly  a  motion  in  the  air  is
meant,  and  as  certainly  it  is  to  be  underftood  in  the
former  cafe  when  we  are  told,  that  the  jpirit  ef  Goo
moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters;  i.  e.  GOD  by  his
immediate  power  caufed  a  motion  or  raifed  an  agi-
tation in  the  (before)  dark,  ftagnant  Air  around  the
earth,  (and  it  is  called  His  Spirit,  bccaufe  he  alone
did,  or  indeed  could,  produce  fuch  a  motion)  which
MeReHPeT,  MOVED  ;  this  word  in  the  original,  as  his
Lp.  of  Clogher  obierves  (who  alfo  allows  that  the  Spi-
rit here  fpoken  of  is  the  Airr)  fignifies  properly  '  a

f  See  bis  Vindication  of  the  bifivrics  of  the  r.hi  and  ufw  Tejlattfnt,
Part  II.  p.  47. Many  ancient  writers  have  thus  interpreted  it,  as


[a8  J

fhivermg  or  tremulous  kind  of  motion,  fuch  as  a  man
maketh,  when  he  fhaketh  for  fear ; in  which fenfe
the  word  is  ufed  Jer.  xxiii. 9.  or  as  a  hen  [Deaf.
xxxii,  u.  an  eagle}  ufeth  when  fhe  expandeth  her
body and wings [fiuttereth] over her  brood of
chickens  [her young  ones]. And  therefore  this  word
is  elegantly  expreffive  of  the  vibrating  motion  of  tie
Air? This  action  of  the  air,  we  are  told,  \yas  upon
ibe  face  of  the  water 's,  i.  e.  upon  \hefurface  of  the  fluid
turbid  mafs  of  the  earth, and  therefore  would  have
fuitable  effects  upon  it,  i.  e.  by  furrounding  and  com-
preffing  the  outfide,  would  determine  the  earth  to  be
of  a  fyherical  or  orbicular  fhape,  as  the  action  of  the
Air  upon  any  fluid  body,  fufpended  in  ir,  at  prefent
determines  it  to  be. But  the  grofs  action  of  the  Spi-
rit alone  could  not  enter  much  beyond  the  furface
or  caufe  any  great  alteration  in  the  Injide ; fome  other
therefore  more  fubtle, penetrating  Agent  than  this,
was  requifite  to  form  thejhell  cf  the  earth  or  drive  to-
gether the  folid  atoms  thereof. Accordingly  the
next  thing  we  read  of  was  the  Production  of  Light.

Pbifo  "Judfeus,  Martain  de  Borbai,  "Joannes  Mariana,  and  two  or  three
of  the  Fathers  were  of  this  opinion,  as  his  Lp.  obferves.  And  even
Hobbes  (whofe  opinion  may  pleafe  fome  perfons  better  than  any  one's
elfe)  argues  thus,  (Lei-iat.  p.  208.)  4  Gen.  i.  2.  The  Spirit  of  GOD

*  moved  upcn  the  face  of  the  waters. Here  if  by  the  Spirit  cfGoo
'  be  meant  GOD  himfelf,  then  is  motion  attributed  to  GOD,  andcon-

*  fequently  place,  which  are  intelligible  only  of  bodies, and  not  of

*  fubftances  incorporeal ;  and  fo  the  place  is  above  our  underihnding,
c  that  can  conceive  nothing  moved  that  changes  not  place,  or  that  has
'  not  dimenfion ;  and  whatfoever  has  dimenfion  is  body. But  the
4  meaning  of  thofe  words  is  beft  underftood  by  the  like  places,  Gee.
«  viii.  i.  Where  when  the  earth  were  covered  with  waters,  as  in  the

*  beginning,  GOD  intending  to  abate  them  and  again  to  difcover  the
'  dryland,  ufeth  the  like  words,  I  will  bring  my  Spirit  upon  the  curt  bt

*  and  the  tnatertjball  be  dimlnijhed:  In  which  place  by  Spirit  is  un-
«  derftood  a  wind,  (that  is, an  air  or  fyirit  moved']  which  might  be
«  called  (as  in  the  former  place)  the  Sfifit  of  GOD, becaufe  it  was
«  GOD'S  work.'


And  GOD  faid  [decreed,  commanded]  Let  there  be
Light ;  and  there  was  Light.

HERE  an  Agent  is  introduced,  the  moft  fubtlc
as  well  as  moft  powerful  of  any  in  nature.  We  all
know,  that  Light  paffes  freely  thro'  the  hardeft  and
clofeft  of  terreftrial  fubftances,  and  when  its  atoms
are  collected  in  a  focus,  will  feparate  and  difiblve  the
parts  of  the  moft  compact  body.  Here  then  are
two  very  powerful  Agents  •,  one  that  difplays  itfelf
principally  by  preJJ'ure,  the  other  by  penetration.  And
what  might  not  fuch  Agents  as  thefe  do,  in  the  hand
of  the  mighty  Creator  ?  No  Command  in  Nature
could  be  infuperable  to  fuch  fervants,  under  the
direction  of  fuch  a  Mailer.  We  need  not  therefore
wonder,  if  we  mould  hear  of  great  and  mighty  events
brought  about  by  thefe  Agents  in  ever  fo  ihort  a  fpace
of  time,  nay,  if  the  earth,  from  a  formlefs,  fluid,
confufed  mafs^  mould  be  made,  within  the  fpace  of  a
day  or  two,  into  a  folid  habitable  Globe.  To  effect
which,  thefe  Agents  are  put  in  commiflion  by  the  fol-
lowing Command.

And  God  j aid,  Let  there  be  a  Firmament  [Marg.  Ex-
pail/ion]  in  t fa  MIDST  of  the  WATERS  \\htfluid,  chaotic
mafs  of  the  Earth,  called  Waters  before,  ver.  2.]  and
let  it  [there]  divide  the  waters  from  the  waters.  The
reader  then  will  remember  that  this  whole  tranfaction
was  to  be  upon  or  in  the  Earth,  not  in  the  midft  of  the
heavens  or  in  the  Air  at  a  vaft  diftance  from  the  Earth,
as  many  Commentators  have  imagined,  but  the  whole
tranfaftion  was  to  be  in  the  midft  of  the  waters  of  the
Earth.  And  the  words  plainly  imply,  as  others  in
this  chapter  do,  a  Command  to  natural  Agents  to
operate.  Light  had  been  formed,  had  reached  and
afted  upon  this  Globe :  and  wherever  Light  and  Spi-
rit [or  Air  in  motion]  are,  there  would  of  courfe  be
a  ftruggl$  between  them,  and  this  ftruggle  would  pro-


duce  an  Expanfion,  this  expaniion  a  divifion,  and  fo
on.  The  word  tor  Firmament,  RaQjo,  explains  what
the  Firmament  is ;  the  word  fignifies,  as  we  fee  in
the  margin  of  our  bibles,  Expanfton,  and  the  mean-
ing is,  Let  the  Light  and  Spirit  expand  and  diffufe
themfelves,  and  let  them  prefs  into  the  mixture,  called
Waters^  and  let  them  act  in,  among,  or  between  the
'parts  of  it,  and  drive  the  folid  parts  together,  and
thereby  make  a  feparation,  and  with  the  parts  fepa-
rated  a  dhijton  or  wall  between  the  waters  ;  fo  that
one  moiety  of  the  waters  mall  Jie  on  one  fide  of  this
wall,  and  the  other  on  the  other  fide.  To  explain
how  this  was  done :  the  Earth,  we  are  told,  was
created  void,  (Gen.  i.  2.)  i.  e.  hollow,  emptyivithin  (as
the  word  means  Ifa.  xlv.  18.)  or  with  a  large  central
Hollow  (called,  Job  xxxviii.  8.  the  womb  of  the  earth)
rilled  only  with  air,  as  every  hollow  place  in  the  earth
at  prefent  \sfilled.  As  foon  therefore  as  the  light  had
reached  .this  central  or  inward  air,  there  would  in-
itantly  commence  a  conflict  between  them,  or  a  ftrug-
gling  this  way  and  that  as  from  a  center;  which  is  ob-
vious to  every  ordinary  capacity  in  the  cafe  of  a  blad-
der that  is  flaccid  or  half- filled  with  air,  when  held
before  the  fire.  The  light,  (which  not  even  the
clofeft-compacted  fubflance  can  deny  a  paffage  to)
iflues  forth  from  the  fire,  and  penetrates  the  pores  of
the  bladder,  drives  itfelf  in  amongft  the  grofs  air,
which  muft  force  That  to  pum  itfelf  every  way  out-
ward, and  diftend  the  fides  of  the  bladder  that  in-
clofes  it.  Thus  would  the  inward  Expanfe  or  ex-
panding-air  act  upwards  every  way  from  the  center
to  the  circumference  of  the  Chaotic  mixture  •,  while
the  out-ward  Expanfe  or  the  light  and  fpirit  on  the
outftde  of  this  globe  would  act  downwards  on  and
through  every  part  of  it.  And  by  thefe  two  equal
and  counter-acting  agents  the  earthy  Qr  folid ^par Is  of


[30

the  chaotic  mafs  would  be  driven  together  into  a
fpbericaljbett  at  a  confiderable  diftance  irorn  the  cen-
ter of  the  earth,  and  there  be  fuftained ;  and  as  the
earthy  or  folid  parts  would  be  driven  together  into  a
clofe  hard  fhell  or  cruft,  fo  by  the  fame  action  would
the  fluids  be  permitted  to  (lip  between  on  each  fide
of  this  cruft.  Thus  would  \hzjhell  of  ftone  or  tbe
Earth  be  formed  between  two  orbs  of  water ;  one  orb
would  cover  the  outward  furface  ;  the  other  would
cover,  or  by  the  force  of  the  expanding  air  from  the
center,  be  prefled  clofe  to,  the  inward  furface  of  the
earth.  Such  being  the  fituation  of  things,  it  will
now  be  apparent  to  every  one  how  the  earth  was
founded  upon  and  formed  between  the  waters. — And  as
the  fliell  or  cruft  of  the  earth  was  driven  together  by
the  expanfive  power  of  the  air,  and  formed  between
two  orbs  of  water,  fo  the  Firmament  acted  the  part  it
was  commanded  of  dividing  the  waters  from  the  waters.

AND  as  the  Expanfion  had  this  power  from  the
Creator  (for  He  firft  caufed  the  motion  in  the,  before,
dark  ftagnant  air ;  that  motion,  produced  Light  •,  that
Light  and  that  Spirit  an  Exparfon,  &c.)  and  as  it  was
now  immediately  under  the  influence  of  its  Maker ,
and  acted  according  to  his  Directions;  fo  (and  to  pre-
vent the  Ifraelites  from  imagining  it  to  be  a  God,  and
not  the  work  of  GOD,  as  the  idolatrous  nations  did)
Mofes  adds,
And  God  MADE  the  Firmament;  and  divided  the  Heaters

which  were  under  the  Firmament,  from  the  Waters

which  were  above  the  Firmament.
•  THIS  is  a  further  defcription  of  things,  in  order  to
prevent  our  miftaking  where  the  Waters  divided,  and
where  the  Airs  dividing,  were;  and  to  prepare  the
reader  for  what  was  to  follow.  The  Expanje,  as  we
have  feen,  acted  from  above  and  from  below,  .and  by
forming  the  cruft  of  the  earth  in  the  midft  of  the*


[32]

Waters,  feparated  the  waters  from  the  waters  •,  WhicK
waters,  thus  feparated,  would  be  in  two  diftinct  orbs ;
one  covering  the  outward  furface  of  the  earth,  which
therefore  would  juftly  be  defignated  by  the  waters
under  the  open  Air^  Heaven ,  Firmament  ^  or  Expan-
Jion;  in  the  fame  fenfe  as  the  hills  (Gen..v\\.  19.)  are
faid  to  be  under  the  heaven  ;  and  as  thefe  waters  then
covered  the  whole  furface  of  the  earth,  they  were
more  immediately  under  the  heaven.  And  as  we
have  feen  already  there  was  a  body  of  expanding
air  at  and  round  the  center  of  the  earth,  fo  the  wa-
ters that  were  directly  above  this  inward  Expanfion,
$.  e.  thofe  which  were  clofe  to  the  concave  furface
of  the  earth,  would  properly  be  denominated  Waters

above  Air^  Firmament ',  or  Expan/ion.t That  there

was  really  a  body  of  expanding  air  at  and  round  the
center  of  the  earth  (on  which  fuppofition  the  above
interpretation  depends;  and  ignorance  of  this  has
produced  all  the  difficulty  which  this  part  of  Scrip-
ture has  been  thought  to  labour  under)  is  evident,  not
only  from  its  being  afferted  that  the  earth  was  created
comparatively  hollow^  or  filled  only  with  air  ;  but  from
the  text  under  confideration  :  For  (i ft.)  here  is  ex-
prefs  mention  made  of  two  Expanfes,  and  the  opera-


s  The  reader  may  have  an  idea  how  things  were  fituated  at  this
time  from  the  PLATE  annexed  (tho'  not  principally  deiigned  for  this
purpofe)  by  a  little  mental  alteration.  Let  D.  denote  the  outward
Expanje^  (unrounding,  compreffing  and  penetrating  the  mafs  of  the
Earth.  Let»the  vacant  Space,  E.  (encompaffing  the  Earth)  be  fup-
pofed  to  be  filled  with  the  water  H.  as  it  was  at  this  time,  and  then
this  water  will  fignify  the  waters  utidtr  the  [outward]  Firmament  or
Expanfe.  Let  the  Spaces  defignated  by  H.  and  1.  be  filled  with  the
Air  or  Expanfe  E.  and  then  this  will  denote  the  in-Mard  Expanfe  t
acting  upwards;  and  the  orb  of  water  G.  will  ftand  for  the  waters
above  the  [inward]  Firmament  or  Expanfe.

And  thus  the  fhell  of  the  Earth  F.  will  be  formed  between  two  orbs
of  wattr,  by  the  a&ioa  of  the  tiva


[33  ]

tlon  of  each,  as  I  have  Ihewed  already,  was  on  or  in
this  earth.  It  is  allowed  by  all,  that  one  Expanfe
acted  on  the  outward  or  convex  furface  of,  the  globe  ;
the  other  therefore  muft  be  within,  and  act  on  the
inward  or  concave  furface.  But  (zdly.J  had  there
not  been  an  Expanfion  from  within,  or  from  below,
as  well  as  from  above,  there  could  have  been  nofepa-
ration  of  waters  from  the  waters,  or  the  /hell  of  the
earth  could  not  have  been  formed  between  the  waters  ;
for  had  the  outward  Expanic  acted  only,  it  would
have  driven  the  folid  parts  of  the  terraqueous  mafs
quite  down  to  the  center,  in  the  fame  manner  as  it
now  precipitates  mud  or  any  earthy  folid  fubflances
through  the  waters  of  the  fea ;  and  in  this  cafe  the
earth  would  have  been  formed  as  a.  folid  ball,  or  kernel,
at  the  center  •,  and  all  the  water  would  have  lain  over
it  in  one  united  mafs,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  at-
mofphere  at  prefent  covers  the  earth.  But  there  was
a  Separation  of  waters  from  the  waters,  by  the  interven-
ing Jhell  of  the  earth,  formed  by  the  expanfive  power  of
the  Air ;  and  therefore  there  was  an  inward  Expanfton

as  well  as  an  outward. And  as  there  was  an  orb

of  water,  feparated  from  the  terraqueous  mafs,  by  this
inward  Expanfton,  fo  it  could  be  no  otherwife  diftin-
guimed  than  by  being  called  (as  it. is)  Waters  above
the  Firmament,  or  Expanfwn. — But  then  a  queftion  may
be  afked,  How  mould  this  inward  orb  of  water  be
fuftained,  or  kept  clofe  to  the  inward  or  concave  fur-
face  of  the  earth,  and  fo  be  prevented  from  falling
down  to  the  center  ? — I  anfwer,  by  the  fame  means
that  the  outward  orb  of  water  was  kept  clofe  to  the
outward  or  convex  furface  of  the  earth,  or  as  the  fea
is  at  prefent  prevented  from  falling  down  through  the
clouds  (cfpccially  at  our  antipodes,  to  fpeak  as  the  vul-
gar would  moft  naturally  think)  or  from  returning
again  to  cover  the  earth  (though  the  earth  be  rcvolv-
D


[  34]

ed  fo  immcnfely  fwift  on  its  axis) — all  which  is  ef-
fected by  the  compreffure  of  the  Expanfion,  or  the  Air
acting  on  the  outward  furface  of  it-,  which  Agent
might  as  well  keep  waters  above  it  as  under  it ;  for
there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  innate  gravity,  or  natural
tendencies  of  bodies  to  centers,  &c.  All  matter,  as
our  modern  philofophers  allow,  is  dead,  innert,  in^,
attive,  quite  indifferent  to  every  kind  of  motion  ;  and
therefore  cannot  poflibly  move  unlefs  impelled •,  and
which  way  fo  ever  it  is  impelled,  either  upwards,  down-
wards, or  fideways,  thither  it  muft  move.  Sir  Ifaac
Newton  in  feveral  parts  of  his  writings  fpeaks  of  Gra-
vity as  being  no  more  than  Impulfe,  and  attributes  the
Caufe  of  it  to  an  <etherial  medium,  or  jubtile  fluid  *;
which  way  foever  therefore  fuch  a  fluid  impels,  that
way  muft  motion  be.  And  with  regard  to  up  and
down,  or  above  and  below,  every  child  in  philofophy
knows  that  they  are  only  relative  terms,  refpecting
our  fituation  upon  the  earth.  No  fuch  difference  can
properly  be  applied  to  the  inanimate  agents  ;  which
muft  of  courie  act  uniformly  the  fame,  up  or  down,
juft  as  they  are  placed,  and  have  room  to  exert  their
power  :  And  as  at  this  time  they  were  differently
fituated  from  what  they  are  nowj — there  being  a  body
of  expanding-air  at  the  center,  as  well  as  one  upon
the  circumference  of  the  earth,  fo  each  would  pro-
duce the  fame  effect  on  the  fide  it  acted  againft,  /.  f.
feparate  andfupport  an  orb  of  water.

THE  Earth  being  thus  totally  covered  with  water*
the  next  requifite  ftep  would  be  to  free  its  furface  of
this  fluid,  and  permit  the  dry  land  to  appear.

HENCE  we  read  the  next  Command  of  GOD  was,
— And  GOD  faid,  Let  the  water  under  the  Heaven  be
gathered  together  unto  one  place  [or  be  united],  and  let
the  dry-land  appear.  The  waters  were  before  in  two

"  Frittc.  Mat.  3d.  Edit.  p.  147.  i8S.  488.  Optics  p.  323.— 29.


[  35  1

places  i  one  orb,  covering  the  outward  furface  of  the
earth  \  the  other,  incloled  within  its  inward  furface.
The  former  of  thefe  muft  be  gathered  to  the  latter,
that  is,  the  waters  that  were  under  the  heaven  or  open
air  (viz.  thofe  which  were  upon  the  outward  furface  of
the  earth,  and  which  prevented  the  appearance  of  the
dry-ground)  were  to  be  gathered  together  to  thcfe  be-
neath the  earth,  which  was  the  only  place  where  there
were  other  waters.  The  manner  how  this  was  effected
by  the  Agents  then  in  Commiffion  may  eafily  be  con-
ceived. As  the  matter  of  the  heavens  would  be  more
and  more  melted  down  by  the  intenfe  fiie  at  the  focus
of  the  primaeval  light,  fo  would  the  flrength  of  the
Expansion  be  increafed,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity
of  matter  melted,  and  the  degree  of  agitation  •,  and
how  great  its  force  muft  have  been  on  this  the  third
day,  may  be  partly  gathered  from  the  extent  of  its
fphere  on  the  fourth,  which  reached  by  that  time  the
other  orbs,  and  even  the  fixed  ftars,  as  is  evident  from
ver.  17.  The  Light  and  Spirit  having  fuch  an  im-
menfe  fphere  of  action,  and  acting  very  powerfully
near  the  earth  (as  is  certain  from  the  quick  growth
of  vegetables,  &c.  on  this,  the  third  day)  would  prefs '
ftrongly  upon  the  outward  furface  of  it ;  and  by  the
continual  and  new  admiffion  of  light,  through  the  melt
to  the  central  air,  the  inward  expan/ion  would  be  vaftly
heightened  and  increafed  (in  the  manner  defcribed  p.
30.)  and  by  this  means  would  be  made  to  act  more
forcibly  againft  the  inward  or  concave  furface  of  the
earth.  This  force  continuing  to  act  with  increafed
vigour,  would  foon  crack,  cleave,  and  break  the  fhell
of  the  earth  in  many  places,  and  fo  make  room  for
the  waters  that  covered  the  outward  furface  to  defcend,
or  be  prefied  down  through  thefe  cracks ;  and  as  the
inward  air  went  out,  the  outward  orb  of  waters  would
rufli  in,  and  fupply  its  place  -,  and  fo  be  mixed  or
united  with  the  waters  that  were  beneath  the  earth.


[3H

And  thus  by  the  waters  under  the  heaven  [viz.  thofe
that  once  filled  the  Space  E]  being  gathered  together
to  thofe  that  were  beneath  the  earth,  [viz.  H.  where
was  the  one  place  appointed  for  them  all,  and  when  united
in  this  one  place  they  would  conftitute  the  Great  Abyfs^
G.  H.]  the  dry-land  would  of  courfe  appear,  and  the
Command  be  effected.  And  GOD  called  the  dry -I and

[that  which  was  at  firft  immerfed  in  the  waters,  but
now  prominent  above  them]  EARTH  -,  and  the  Gather-
ing together  [the  whole  collection]  of  the  waters,  called
he  [under  the  general  Name  of]  SEAS.  And  thus
would  the  Earth  be  formed,  much  of  the  fame  fhape
it  is  at  prcfent,  and  as  the  Plate  annexed  reprefents  it.
FROM  the  defcription  here  given  how  the  Earth  was
at  firft  formed,  we  may  obtain  an  eafy  folution  of  the
fevcral  feeming  difficulties  relating  to  the  Deluge.
For,  firft,  we  have  here  difcovered  where  a  body  of
water  lies,  (viz.  G.  H.  the  great  Abyfs)  fufficient  to
flood  the  Earth  to  an  immenfe  height,  for  but  part  of
this  water  (viz.  the  orb  G.)  once  covered  its  whole
furface.  And  we  have  alfo  difcovered  two  very  pow-
erful Agents,  cne  [viz.  the  Spirit  or  Air  in  a  violent
motion  j  capable  ot  performing  the  grander!  tranfaftions
by  pre/ure ;  the  other  (viz.  the  Light]  capable  of  dif-
playing  immenfe  power  by  penetration.  We  have

feen  that  thefe  two  Agents  (under  GOD)  feparated  the
Solids  from  the  Fluids  of  this  globe,  drove  them  to-
gether into  a  hard  circular  JheU,  and  permired  the  fluids
to  flip  on  each  fide  i  and  by  renev/ed  vigour  and  re-
doubled power,  cleaved^  cracked,  and  broke  this
ihell  in  various  places  and  fo  opened  a  way  for  the
water  that  covered  the  outward  furface  of  it  to  de-
fcend,  part  into  the  infide,  and  part  to  occupy  the
large  cavities  it  had  made  in-the  mell,  and  fo  confti-
tute feas,  lakes,  and  by  this  means  fo  diverfify  the
furface  of  this  globe,  with  land  and  water,  as  to  ren-


[  37  ]

der  it  a  commodious  and  a  pleafant  fituation  for  its
future  inhabitants.

BUT  as  thefe  inhabitants,  about  1600  years  after
the  formation  of  this  beautiful  feat,  had  greatly  abufed
thegoodnefs  of  the  maker,  forgot  the  original  Author
of  it,  and  deified  the  Creature,  inftead  of  the  Creator;
GOD  determined,  by  inverting  the  order  of  Nature,
to  deftroy  them,  and  demonftrate  his  power  over  the
natural  Agents  to  the  future  race  of  men,  by  bringing
a  flood  of  waters  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  and
fo  making  the  air  defcend  into  the  place  of  the  water,
and  the  water  afcend  into  and  occupy  the  place  of  the
air,  and  by  this  means  deftroy  that  wicked  generation
in  the  moft  dreadful  manner.

ACCORDINGLY  GOD  publifhes  his  Declaration,  Gen.
vi.  17.  And  behold  7,  even  7,  do  bring  [MCBIA,  am  the
caufe  or  inftrument  of  bringing]  a  flood  of  waters  upon
the  earth  to  deftroy  all  flcjb,  &c.

AND  as  foon  as  Noah  and  his  righteous  family  were
entered  into  the  Ark,  we  are  told, — The  fame  day  all
the  fountains  of  the  Great  Deep  were  broken  up.

WHAT  the  Great  Deep  is  we  have  feen  already,  and
alfo  that  the  orb  of  the  Earth  furrounds  it  as  a  ihell ;
and  moreover  have  feen,  that  this  fhell  was  at  firft
formed  whole  and  entire  by  the  expavfrce  pcwcr  of  the
Air  or  Firmament,  and  by  an  increafed  ftrength  or  re-
doubled force  of  that  Power  was  cracked  and  broken
in  various  places,  in  order  to  permit  a  quantity  of  wa-
ter that  covered  its  outward  furface  to  defcend  into
the  inlide.

Now,  an  Agent  that  could  once  by  the  direction  of
its  maker,  do  this,  could  do  the  fame  at  any  time,
when  that  divine  Author  pleafcd.  The  force  of
the  natural  perpendicular  Preflure  of  the  air  upon  the
earth  is  known  to  be  very  great-,*  and  its  lateral

*  The  Weight  of  Air  on  every  fupeificial  Snuare  Feet  is  alvu'e
"  2cco  Pound  M'tigbt." — And  "  fince  the  Nvmber  of  Square  Miles  on


[33  1

or  horizontal  preffure,  as  in  cafe  of  high  winds  and  tem-
pefts,  will  renefthe  rocks,  and  elevate  the  v/aters  of
the  Ocean  to  a  prodigious  height.  So  that  the  Power
of  this  Agent  being  preternaturally  increafed,  and
its  force  exerted  upon  the  water  of  the  Ocean  and  of
courfe  upon  thai  of  the  Abyis  (which  is  connected
with  it  and  lies  immediately  under  it)  would  caufe
thofe  waters  to  ifTue  from  their  (before)  confined  ftation,
buril  open  their  common  outlets  or  the  paffages  for
fprings,  fountains,  &c.  and  flood  the  earth  in  pro-
portion to  the  quantity  of  water  emitted.  The  Con-
fequence  of  fuch  an  extraordinary  Preffure  of  the
Air  may  be  judged  of  from  the  EfffSs  which  a  fimilar
preffure  of  this  Agent  had  upon  the  waters  of  the
Red  Sea,  recorded  Exod.  xiv.  21,  22.  xv.  8.  When
a  Jlrong  Wind  [RUE,  a  violent  Spirit  or  Agitation
in  the  Air]  drove  back  the  waters  of  that  Sea,  caufed
(be  foods  thereof  to  jland  upright  as  an  heap,  and
IK  ere  a  wall  to  the  Children  of  ifrael  en  the  right
hand  and  on  the  left  as  they  faffed  through.  Now
a  Continuation  of  fuch  a  Force  as  this  upon  the
waters  of  the  Sea  and  thofe  of  the  Abyfs  would  cer-
tainly break  open  the  fountains  of  the  Abyfs,  and
raifc  the  water  above  the  Tops  of  the  higheft  moun-
tains or  to  any  height  whatever.  To  one  of  the  above
acts  the  Pfalmift  alludes  when  he  fays,  (Pfal.  xviii.
15.)  T'ben  the  fprings  of  water  vere  feen,  and  the  foun-
dations of  the  round  world  were  difcovered  at  thy  chiding,
O  LORD,  at  the  blajling  of  the  breath  of  thy  difpleafure.
The  effects  alfo  of  zftrong  Wind  or  a  violent  agitation

"  the  Earth's  Superficies  is*  computed  1992^0205,  and  in  one  Square
"  Mile  are  27878400  Square  Feet,  the  Square  Feet  on  the  Earth's
"  Superficies  will  befiMnewhat  above  5547800000000000;  whence
"  the  Weight  of  the  Icicle  Atmcfphcre,  or  its  Prefiure  on  the  Super-
"  ficies  of  the  whole  Earth,  is  more  than  11095600000000000000
*'  Pounds,  or  much  about  jcccooooocooocro  Tons  ;  that  is.  the
"  Atmofphere  compreileth  the  Earth  \vith  a  Force,  or  Power,  nearly
«  equal  to  that  of"  ei-jf-thyui~und  Millions  of  Mi  Hi -im  'f  'Tons.'"  Sje
Maftiiit  f biUJopbical  Grammar.  Page  i  So,  &c.


[39]

of  the  Spirit  are  defcribed  i  Kings  xix.  i  %,  When  Ifaiab
had  an  exhibition  of  fome  grand  difplay  of  the  Power
of  GOD,  And  behold  the  LORD  pajjed  by,  and  a  great
and  ftrong  Wind  rent  the  mountains  and  brake  in  'pieces
the  rocks  before  the  LORD  •,  and  after  the  Wind  [as  a
confequence  of  this  violent  agitation  of  the  air]  c.n
Earthquake :  And  fuch  certainty  there  was  at  the  Dif-
ruption  of  the  fhell  of  the  earth  in  the  time  of  the  de-
luge. A  very  terrible  event  this  (fays  a  certain  Au-
thor) no  lefs  than  the  fhell  of  (lone  broken  up  in  many
places,  and  fhartered  in  all  the  reft  ;  all  the  Inlets,
Under- Seas,  Lakes,  &V.  made  Fountains-,  and  all
the  ftrata  which  formed  their  fides,  and  the  fides  of
the  old  Springs,  thrown  up  unto  the  furface  ;  fpouts
of  vapours  to  darken  the  fky,  and  vaft  fpouts  of
water  rifing  like  fountains,  making  a  dreadful  noife;
rifing  in  the  fea,  and  running  to  the  fea,  and  the  fea
rifing  and  driving  the  people,  &c.  to  the  mountain
tops,  their  laft  fhift;  where  they  with  fright,  rain,  or
hunger,  perifh'd  ;  or  thofe  who  furvived  'till  the  wa-
ters came  were  deflroyed  by  them.  And  thus  alfo
the  beginning,  procefs,  and  completion  of  the  deluge
are  defcribed  in  the  book  of  Job,  ch.  xxxviii.  8.  Who
poured  out*-  (fays  GOD)  the  jea  thro*  doors,  when  it  brake
forth,  as  if  it  had  iffued  out  of  the  womb  ?  When  I  made
the  Cloud  [grofs  air]  the  garment  thereof,  and  thick  dark-
nefs  [condenfed,  ftagnant  air]  a  fwaddling-band  for  it
[this  muft  have  been  at  the  time  when  the  flood  was  at
the  higheft,  when  the  inward  Air  or  Firmament  (or  the
air  which  had  preffed  upon  and  at  laft  broke  its  way
thro'  the  fliell  of  the  earth)  had  driven  out  great  part
of  the  water  of  the  abyfs,  occupied  its  place,  and  fup-
ported  the  remaining  part  ot  the  water  againft  the  in-
ward or  concave  furlace  of  the  earth-,  and  when  the
outward  Air  or  Firmament,  furrounded  and  comprdfed
the  upper  orb  of  water,  clofe  to  the  outward  furface  of

[  "\D(  from  "]D3  fudit,  rjfudit,  ftrfudit  liquor*  aiiquo.  MAR.  CAL.


[  40]

the  earth].  And  then  I  brake  up  for  it  my  decreed  place,
[i.  e.  the  fhell  of  the  earth  which  I  had  formed  and
eftablimed  between  the  waters  ;  and  by  breaking  this,
permitted  the  upper  waters  to  go  to  their  appointed
place ;  and  when  once  retired  thither]  /  fet  bars  and
doors,  andfaid,  Hitherto  JhaJt  thou  come,  but  no  further  ;
and  here  jh  all  thy  proud  waves  be  Jlayed.

BUT  what  is  more  than  all  this,  an  effect  greater
than  the  difruption  of  the  fountains  of  the  Abyfs,  is  That
which  follows,

And  the  windows  of  heaven  were  opened.
Mr.  HUTCHINSON  is  the  only  Author  I  know  of,
who  has  properly  explained  thefe  words,  I  fhall  there-
fore give  the  reader  his  explication ;  Mcfes's  Principia,
p.  70.  '  The  windows  of  heaven  have  been  taken  for
imaginary  falls  of  water  from  above  the  heavens,  from
the  clouds, from the  air turning  into  water, &c.
Synop.  Crit.  Tom.  i.  p.  97. '  CataraEfa  c<eli,  &c.
4  i.  e.  'The  Cataraffs  of  heaven, — the  windows,  holes,
1  openings  or  cataraffs  of  HEAVEN,  /'.  e.  of  the  AIR,
'  asGfif.  i.  7.  Ifai.  xxiv.  18.' Crit.  Sacri,  Tom.  i.
p.  147.  '  Nam  Cataraff<£tefte  Hieronimo,  6cc.  i.e.  For
c  a  Cataraft,  according  to  St.  Jerom,  is  a  hole  in  a
'  wall, fuch  as  fmoak  gets  through. Ifai. Ix.  8.  as
'  doves  cnvo'iN  SK  (by  Sym.)  to  their  doors  [GufJaj]
6  to  their  windows. Ifai.  xxiv.  18.  The  windows  of
'  heaven  were  opened-, — li.  6.  The  heavens  /hall  vanijh
1  like  fmoak. ' 'Tis  plain,  Catara£f*e  fignify  windows,
holes,  (luices,  or  flood-gates,  or  cracks  or  chinks  in
walls  or  buildings,  fuch  as  fmoak  paffes  through
out  of  one  houfe  into  another,  or  windows  fuch  as
pigeons  go  in  at,  or  cracks  or  holes  in  the  walls  of
great  buildings  or  rocks,  fuch  as  pigeons  creep  into
and  harbour  in. This  word  is  mod  clearly  compared,
and  is  the  very  fame  they  fay  it  is. The  Airs,  and
the  Ab\fs  of  waters,  are  each  called  GOD'S  Stcreboufe;
and  the  wall  between  them  is  thtfpbere  of  the  earthor


[  4'  ]

*  Shell  Q^ theStrata  offlom^  in  which  there  are  innumerable

*  cracks^  through  which  the  fumes  or  vapours  or  mix-
.*  /#ra  «;/'/£  air,  like  fmcak>  continually  pafs at  the

*  famttpajfage,  fometimes  up  for  rain,  &c.  and  fome-
'  times  down.5'11 [So  that  the  phrafe  windows  of  heaven

k  Mr.  HUTCHINSON,  in  his  Olfervatioat  in  the  year  1706,
(\ft.  edit.  p.  93.]  remarks,  (long  before,  I  believe,  he  had  any
thought  of  interpreting  the  paffage  under  confideration  in  the  manner
he  has  done)  '  Through  the  cracks  in  the  ftrata,  the  water  alfo  paffes
'  to  fprings. — In  fair  clear  weather,  when  there  is  any  wind  Jlirring
'  and  motion  in  the  Air  above,  the  air  telo<vu  in  mines  pafies  fo  fenfi-
«  bly  at  thefe  cracks,  as  fometimes  to  blow  out  a  candle.  But  when
<  the  rains  are  rifing,  the  moifcure  expels  the  air,  and  caufes  fuch  a
'  fcarcity  of  it,  or  elfe  a  want  of  circulation  of  that  air,  that  the  can-
'  dies  will  not  burn  ;  and  withal  fuch  a  fenfation  of  heat  to  men,  as
'  fcarcity  of  air,  in  other  places,  does — It  is  plain,  the  air  will  be

*  thus  expelled  out,  and  return  alternately  into  thefe  cracks,  as  the
«  Steams  that  fupply  rain,  fill  and  quit  them.' The  fame  is  re-
marked by  Dr.  Woodward ;  and  the  free  intercourfe  between  the  /tir
belo-M  and  our  Atmofphcre  or  the  air  above,  through  every  cranny  in
the  earth,  is  fully  proved ;  and  the  alterations  or  the  rife  and  fall
of  the  mercury  in  the  Barometer  are  fliewn  to  depend  thereon ;  vid.
his  Nat.  liijl .  of  tbi  Earth  illus.  &c.  T raffia  tor's  Intreduflion,  p.  i  co—
153.  See  alfo  Lcvut  harp's  Ab>idg*«.  of  the  Phil.  Tranf.  Vol.  II.  ch.  iii.
and  Gcjjer.di  animad.  in  \  oum  librum  Dioginit  Laer/ti,  Vol  II.  p.  i  oc  2.

I  may  here  obferve,  with  regard  to  the  text  under  confideration,
that  the  word  nn~)i<  (tranflated  windowi)  is  derived  from  the  verb
3~1X  which  fignifiesto  lie  in  nuait,  to  lurk  privily  in  a  den,  to  ivatcb
in  a  kale,  undtr  cover  ;  as  Pfalm  x.  9.  n"1K»  he  lieth  in  wait  ftcretly
as  a  lion  in  his  den.  Job  xxxviii.  40.  The  young  lions  abide  in  the
(overt  to  lie  in  wait.  And  the  word  3.1X  figninuth  a  dcr,  or  hole,  or
cave  in  the  rock,  asje£  xxxvii.  8.  Then  the  btnjls  go  into  deus  [aiK].
And  even  the  Septuagint  Tranflation  of  this  word,  xax-ax'ai,  in-
cludes much  of  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew,  as  ue&etyu&m  is  derived
from  xcC'xr^xcau  to  ijffitt  out,  to  break  through  ;  and  may  be  rendered
thcp/ace  of  rupture  or  breaking  through  ;  it  alfo  fignifies  a  Gate,  fee
Scup.  Lcxi.  So  that  the  fume  idea  of  a  bile,  cavr.  p'-Ji^e,  '-punia?,  &c.
is  prefervedin  all  the  above  places,  the  context  in  each  place  deter-
mining the  precife  meaning  of  the  word  Hence  other  paiiages,  which
feem  to  differ,  maybe  reconciled  to  this  explication,  aa  2  l\mgi  vii.  2.
where,  on  account  of  an  extreme  famine.,  a  Nobleman  for  difLelieving
the  word  of  £////?«,  (who  had  foretold  that  there  ihculd  fccn  be  a  great
pknty  of  ficur  and  barley) — fays,  Ij  thi  LORD  ivea/d  make  windows


[ 42 ]

may  here  be  rendered  the  paflages  of  the  Airs.'] — c  In
*  the  narroweft  acceptation  the  pajjages  of  the  Airs  are
'  through  every  fffure^  and  between  every  fragment  of
c  Stone,  and  they  are  fo  many,  that  moft  forts  of  Stone
€  are  divided  by  great  cracks,  into  pieces  of  perhaps  a


[openings,  paj/ages]  in  [not  of]  heaven,  [and  thro'  them  pour  down
flour  and  barley,  as  he  had  heretofore  rained  down  manna  upon  the
children  of  Jfrael,  Pfalm  Ixxviii.  23,  24  ]  might  this  thing  be  ? — And
again,  Malachi  iii.  10.  where  GOD,  accufing  the  Jt ws  for  robbing
him  in  hii  tithes  and  offerings,  promifes  (if  they  would  repent)
that  he  would  rebuke  the  deftroyer  that  he  Jhpuld  not  defray  the  FRUITS
of  their  ground,  and  fays,  Prove  me  now, — If  I 'will  not  open  you  the
windows  of  heaven  [the  paj/ages  of  the  Airs']  and  empty  out  a  blejjing,
that  there  /hall  not  be  room  enough  to  receive  it.  Here  is  the  very
fame  phrafe  ufed  as  in  the  text  under  confideration,  and  muft  be  un-
derftood  in  the  fame  fenfe.  The  Abyfs  is  called  GOD'S  Jiorehoufe  ;
and  ihefruit/u/nefs  of  the  earth  or  Vegetation,  depends  much  upon
the  influences  thereof,  or  water  fentfrom  thence,  as  any  one  may  be
convinced  by  confulting  the  Authors  juft  referred  to,  but  I  /hall  con-
fine myfelf  to  Scripturg.  Ezekiel  comparing  the  proud  AJJyrian  to  a
fourifhing  Cedar  in  Libanu<,  nouriihed  by  the  fubterranean  waters,
fays,  (xxxi.  4.)  The  WATERS  made  him  great,  the  DEEP  fet  him  up  on
high  vjith  HER  rivers  [fo  rivers  proceed  from  her,  the  Decp~\  running
about  his  plants,  and  Jent  out  her  little  riven  unto  ALL  THE  TREES
OF  THE  FIELD  :  therefore  his  height  nuas  exalted  above  all  the  trees
of  the  field,  and  his  boughs  vjcre  multiplied,  and  his  branches  became

tang, BECAUSE  OF THE MULTITUDE OF WATERS, 1V/je» he  Jhot

forth.  And  the  Blrftdncfs  or  Fruitfulnefs  of  a  land  is  attributed  to
the  Deep  below  as  well  as  to  the  Heaven  above,  Deut.  xxxiii.  1 1.
BleJTedofthe  LORD  be  Jofeph's  Land  for  the  precious  things  of  hea-
ven, for  the  dew,  and  for  the  Deep  that  coucheth  beneath.  And
Gen.  xlix.  2;.  we  have  exprefs  mention  of  the  Blejfings  of  the  Deep
or  Abyfs.  So  that,  vvith-holding  or  clofmg  up  the  pajfeges  in  the
earth,  thro'  which  the  waters,  Jt earns  and  kindly  vapours  arife  for
tnoiliening  the  Earth,  and  nourijhing  its  plants,  would  certainly  ren-
der a  land  dry,  barren,  and  dcfolate  ;  and  on  the  contrary,  opening
thefe  pa/ages,  and  permitting  the  vapours  to  afcend,  would  greatly
conduce  to  \kefruitfulnefs  or  ble/cdnejs  of  a  land.  The  reader  by
viewing  the  irregular  black  jirottes  in  the  figure  of  the  fhell  of  the
earth,  reprefented  by  F,  in  the  fubfequent  plate,  may  have  a  ftill
clearer  idea  what  thefe  pa/ages  of  the  Ain  arc,  and  how  the  Abyfs
is  the  Storehoufe  from  whence  they  are  fupplied.


[43]

tun  weight,  &c. — How  far  the  parts  were  divided,
and  the  cracks  opened  at  firft,  is  not  to  be  deter-
mined ;  but  they  were  opened,  and  the  fragments
diftanced  fo  wide,  or  in  fo  many  places,  that  the
Airs  went  down  into  the  Abyfs  as  faft  as  the  Waters
came  up,  quantity  for  quantity.  But  the  Continu-
ancr  and  Repetition  of  this  force  would  by  degrees
reduce  them  fmaller  and  fmaller.  If  we  carry  this
expreffcon  of  the  pajfages  of  the  Airs  being  opened  to
the  utmoft  exte.nl,  the  Waters,  much  more  the  Airs,
pafs  between  the  grains  or  fands  of  moft  forts  of  ft  one -^
and  perhaps  it  will  at  fome  time  appear  that  the
parts  of  the  Airs  pafs  between  every  atom  of  ftone,
and  then  the  words  imply  a  DISSOLUTION,  as  it
really  was,  though  executed  by  degrees,  as  men,  &c.
were  deftroyed.'

As  there  are  other  texts  which  mention  the  Diffolu-
tion  of  the  Earth,  it  may  be  proper  to  cite  them  ;
Pfalm  xlvi.  i.  God  is  our  refuge; — therefore  will  we
vot  fear,  though  the  Earth  be  removed  [  B  E  M  i  R
be  changed,  be  quite  altered,  as  it  was  at  the  Deluge]
find  tho*  the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midft  of  the
fea  i  though  the  waters  thereof  roar,  and  be  troubled,
tho'  the  mountains  Jhake  with  the  fwelling  thereof; —
God  uttered  his  voice,  the  earth  MELTED  [THCMUG,
flowed,  dijfched  to  atoms1']  So  Job  xiv.  19.  which  I
Ihall  tranQate  nearly  according  to  Pagninus's  verfion  ;
that  being  the  nearefl  of  any  other  to  the  original ;
For  truly  the  falling  mountain  diffohed,  and  the  rock  [the
ftrata  of  ftone]  was  removed  out  of  its  place.  The  wa-
ters dafljed  the  ft  ones  to  pieces  •,  and  wajhed  away  the  pro-
d','Hs  of  the  dtift  of  the  earth :  and  thou  deftroyedft  tfo
hope  of  man.  Again;  Chap,  xxviii.  g.  in  which  alfo
I  ihall  chiefly  follow  Pagninufs  verfion,  Us  fent  his
hand  [the  ExpanfiGn,  his  Inftrument  or  the  Agent  by

.!  MAR.  CALAS.  :;n  eft  Difihth  &  Diminu.'tc.


[  44  ]

which  he  worked]  againft  the  Rock ;  he  overturned  the
mountains  by  the  roots;  he  caufed  the  rivers  to  burft
forth  from  between  the  rocks  ( or  broke  open  the  fountains
of  the  abyfs].  His  eye  [fymbollically  placed  for  the
Light']  faiv  [patted  through  or  between]  every  minute
thing  [every  atom ;  and  lo  dijfolved  the  whole].  Pie
(at  laftj  bound  up  the  waters  fro-,n  weeping  [i.  e.  from
prefTmg  through  the  fhell  of  the  earth,  as  tears  make
their  way  thro'  the  orbjjftf  the  eye  i  or,  as  its  related
Gen.  viii.  2.  be  flopped  I  he  fountains  of  the  ab"fs  and  the
windows  of  heaven].  And  brought  out  the  Light  from
its  hiding-place  [i.  e.  from  the  inward  parts  of  the
earth  from  between  every  atom,  where  it  lay  hid,  and
kept  each  atom  feparate  from  the  other,  and  fo  the
whole  in  a  ftate  of  dijfolution ;  his  bringing  out  thefe
parts  of  the  light  which  caufed  the  Diflblution  would
of  courfe  permit  the  Agents  to  act  in  their  ufual
way,  and  fo  re-form  the  earth].  2  Efdras.  viii.  O
Lord,  whcfe  fervice  is  conversant  in  Wind  and  Fire ;
whofe  word  is  true ; — whofe  look  drieth  up  the  depths,
and  indignation  makcth  the  mountains  to  melt  away,
which  the  Truth  witneffeth,  [which  the  word  of  GOD,
and  prefent  natural  ftate  of  the  Earth  bear  witnefs  to].
VER.  12.  And  the  Rain  [the  vapours  which  were
carried  high  up  into  the  Atmofphere,  and  formed
into  rain]  was  upon  the  earth  [falling  and  fubfiding]
forty  days  and  forty  nights. — And  the  waters  increased,
and  bare  up  the  ark ; — and  the  waters  prevailed  and
increafed  greatly  upon  the  earth  \  and  the  ark  went
upon  the  face  of  the  waters.  And  the  waters  prevailed
exceedingly  upon  the  earth ;  and  all  the  high  hills,
that  were  under  the  whole  heaven,  were  covered  \
fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  prevail,  and  the
mountains  were  covered.™

m  From  mention  being  here  made  of  Mountains,  as  fubfilting  un-
der the  waters  of  the  deluge,  fome  have  imagined  that  Thy  were  not,


US]

So  that,  there  was  no  high  Hill  or  Mountain  upon
any  part  of  the  earth  which  was  before  covered  with
air,  but  what  was  now  covered  with  water  ;  of  courfe
the  Deluge  was  univerfal.  But  an  irrefragable  ar-

gument may  be  drawn  from  thefe  words  againft  a
partial  Flood,  or  an  univerfal  one  effected  by  partial
means,  if  I  may  fo  fay,  that  is,  by  the  waters  firft
warning  over  one  part  of  the  earth,  and  then  the  fame
water  proceeding  on  and  overflowing  another,  and  fo
fuccefiively,  'till  in  the  end  the  whole  was  drowned.
For,  according  to  Scripture,  the  water  rofe  gradually
and  equally,  and  at  laft  covered  all  the  high  hills  and
mauntains  at  one  and  the  fame  time,  fo  that  the  Flood
could  not  have  been  of  the  above-mentioned  wan-
dering nature,  as  fome,  for  want  of  knowing  where  a
fufficient  quantity  of  water  lay  for  flooding  the  whole
earth,  have  falfly  imagined.  Befides,  it  is  alto-
gether impoffible  to  conceive,  that  the  waters  could
have  rifen  to  the  height  of  any  high  hill  under  heaven,
and  not  at  the  fame  time  to  have  been  of  equal  height
over  the  whole  earth  •,  for  the  parts  of  water  are  diffu-
five,  having  no  tie  or  connection  with  each  other ;  fo
that  as  they  mounted  upwards  they  would  fpread  and
extend  themfelves  equally  on  all  fides  ;  and  at  the  fame
time  that  they  covered  one  high  hill,  they  would  of
courfe  cover  all  others  of  equal  height  over  the  whole
face  of  the  earth.  For  we  are  not  to  imagine

and  of  courfe  that  the  <u.bole  earth  was  net,  dijol<ved Curing  the  flood.
Uut  fuch  feem  not  to  confider  that  the  DiJJoliftiqn  (as  obferved  above)
was  executed  by  degrees,  as  men,  &c.  were  deftroyed.  It  is  faid  in-
deed that  on  the  day  that  Noah  entered  into  the  ark  ALL  the  foun-
tains of  the  Great  Deep  were  broken  up,  but  it  is  not  faid,  that  ALL
the  ivineio-ius  nf  heaven  or  all  the  paJJc%(S  of  the  airs  were  opened  on
that  day,  and  it  does  not  appear  that  they  were  all  opened  or  the
earth  totally  difTolved  'till  the  third  and  laft  prevalance  of  the  wa-
ters, or  the  event  mentioned  ver.  24,  was  effected;  as  the  comment
en  thaiverfe  will  fhew.


[46  )

without  a  miracle  of  a  mod  aftonifliing  kind  (which
in  this  cafe  is  not  to  be  admitted,  becaufe  not  men-
tioned) that  4  a  huge  mafs  of  water  could  have  hung
'  about  any  particular  part  of  the  earth,  as  if  congealed;
'  or  flood  upon  the  middle  of  it  like  one  great  drop,
'  or  a  trembling  jelly,  and  all  the  places  about  it  dry
c  and  untouched,'  as  an  author  obfervesi  and  then
that  this  faid  mountain  of  water  fhould  be  removed,  or
rolled  to  another  place,  and  fo  on,  'till  at  length  it
had  cove-red  the  whole  earth.  This  fliift  to  avoid
one  real  miracle,  is  only  multiplying  a  number  of
others  that  never  were  effected-,  and  I  may  juft  add
here  the  obfervation  of  a  judicious  Divine,  '  that  no
'  man  departed  from  the  common  faith  upon  pretence

*  of  avoiding  any  abfurdity  therein  fuppoied,  but  that

*  he  ran  himfelf  upon  the  neceflity  of  believing  greater
'  abfurdities  than  any  he  pretended  to  avoid.'

'  WHAT  is  related  above, — that  the  waters  prevailed
fifteen  cubits  upwards ,  and  (or  according  to  the  tran-
flation  of  Jun.  and  'Tremel.  after)  the  mountains  were
covered, — does  not  feem  to  be  fpoken  to  determine  the
precife  height  of  the  waters,  but  only  to  denote  that
all  living  creatures  muft  have  perijhed  in  fuch  a  flood ;
For  it  immediately  follows,

And  allfiejh  died  that  moved  upon  the  earth,  both  of
fowl^  and  of  cattle^  and  of  beaft^  and  of  every  creeping
thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  Earth^  and  every  man ; —
Noah  only  remained  alive,  and  they  that  were  with  him
in  the  ark.

VER.  24.  And  the  waters  prevailed  upon  the  earth  an
hundred  and  fifty  days.

As  this  is  mentioned  after  the  mountains  are  faid  to
have  been  covered  fifteen  cubits  (which  was  only  related
to  denote  the  means  by  which  allflejh  perijhed)  we  may
reafonably  fuppofe,  that  the  waters  prevailed  anew  or
continued  to  prevail  for  feme  time  at  leaft  after  the


[471

mountains  were  covered  fifteen  cubits -,  efpecially  if  we
confider  that  there  is  no  mention  yet  made  of  the  foun-
tains of  the  Abyfs  or  the  pajfages  of  the  Airs  being  clofed;
fo  that  the  waters  were  flill  preffed  upwards,  and
reached  in  their  real  altitude  far  above  fifteen  cubits
higher  than  the  mountains  -,  as  many  appearances  in
and  on  the  earth  undeniably  evince.

It  may  be  proper  to  remark  here,  that  the  word
rendered  prevail,  fignifieth  fomewhat  more  than  the
bare  increafe  or  augmentation  of  the  waters,  (tho'  that
idea  is  alfo  included)  for  a  diftincl:,  and  very  proper
word  for  the  increafe  of  the  waters  is  ufed  ver.
17  and  18,  and  the  waters  increafed  [IRCBU,  were
multiplied].  And  the  word  which  we  render  prevail,
very  juftly  has  that  meaning ;  it  denotes  power ;  Jlrengtb
to  prevail,  get  the  better  of,  to  fubdue  -,  fo  that  by  the
waters  •prevailing  upon  the  earth  may  be  meant  (efpe-
cially as  this  prevalence  is  mentioned  three  times,  ver.
1 8,  19,  and  24)  the  total  Subduing  or  Diffolution  of
the  earth  by  the  waters :  Mofes  by  this  expreffion  giv-
ing us  to  underftand,  that  the  waters  had  atted  upon
the  earth  infuch  a  manner  and  effected  it  to  fuch  a  degree,
as  to  have  reduced  it,  like  itfelf,  to  a  fluid,  loofejtaie-,
at  leaft,  this  muft  have  been  the  confequence  of  fuch
a  prevalence  of  the  waters ;  for,  as  the  Paffages  of  the
airs  are  faid  to  have  been  opened  and  the  fountains  of  the
Great  Deep  broken  up,  BEFORE  this  Prevailing  of  the
waters,  it  could  not  but  be,  that  the  waters,  as  they
rofe  upwards  from  the  Abyfs,  would  make  their  way
thro'  thefe  Pajfages,  and  by  continuing  and  repeating
this  action,  would  feparate  and  widen  the  pores  of  the
earth,  and  at  laft  reduce  it  to  its  original  principles  or
unformed,  fluid,  chaotic  condition,  mentioned  Gen.  i.  2.
So  that  the  Earth  muft  now  have  been  totally  diffolved
in  the  water.


[  48  ]

VENGEANCE  having  been  thus  executed  upon  the
wicked,  a  polluted  earth  deftroyed,  and  cleanfed
by  water;  the  next  procedure  would  be  to  form  it.
again.  Accordingly  we  are  toldch.  viii.  i.  that  GOD
(who  delights  not  in  feeing  things  in  diforder,  but  pi-
ties when  he  diftreffes)  remembered  Noah,  and  every  liv-
ing thing,  and  all  the  cattle  that  were  with  him  in  the  ark.

And  God  made  a  Wind  [RUE,  the  Spirit}  to  pafs
over  the  earth,  and  the  waters  ajfwaged.

THE  fame  word  that  is  here  rendered  Wind  is  tran-
flated  Spirit  in  the  account  of  the  firft  Formation  of
things,  (as  I  have  already  obferved)  Gen.  i.  2.  And
the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters.
And  as  the  motion  then  raifed  in  the  air  by  the  im-
mediate power  of  God,  was  the  primum  mobile  or
chief  Caufe  of  bringing  the  Earth  out  of  its  chaotic
flate  into  its  intended  beautiful  form,  fo  the  fame  Agent
is  here  employed  in  order  to  re-form  the  earth  af-
ter its  deftruction  or  diffolution  during  the  deluge:

and  of  courfe  the  fame  effects  followed. The

Waters  were  before  increa/ing  and  prevailing  upwards,
but  now  they  are  ajjwaged,  and  prevented  from
extending  their  orb  by  the  faffing  of  the  Spirit  over
them.  The  Spirit  had  before  acted  through  the  earth,
and  by  its  impulfe  broke  open  the  fountains  of  the  Abyfs
and  the  windows  of  heaven,  but  it  was  now  made  to  act
in  its  ufual  way  of  preffing  only  or  chiefly  upon  the  fur-
face :  things  therefore  would  now  be  returning  to
their  former  courfe,  and  the  fame  effects  enfue  as  had
been  largely  defcribed  in  the  account  of  the  firft  For-
mation, and  fo  needed  not  to  have  been  repeated  here.
HENCE  we  read  in  the  next  verfe,  The  fountains  of
the  Deep,  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  flopped,  and
the  rain  from  heaven  was  retrained.

THIS  was  no  more  than  a  confequence  of  fetting  the
Powers  of  Nature  to  work,  as  at  the  firft.  The  earth


[49]

had  been  difiblved,  and  all  the  atoms  of  the  ftrata  of

ftone  floating  loofe  and  irregularly  in  the  waters ;  but

as  foon  as  the  natural  agents  began  to  operate,  as  foon

as  the  outward  and  inward  Expanfe  [z.  e .  the  Light  and

the  Air  without  and  within  the  earth]  began  to  aft,

to  make  a  divifion  between  the  waters,  they  would  drive

all  the  folid  parts  of  the  earth  together  (much  in  the

fame  manner  as  the  fame  Agents  at  prefent  feparate  and

impel  the  particles  of  (lime  and  mud  in  dirty  water)

into  a  Jhell  or  cruft  and  permit  all  the  Fluids  to  flide

between  ;  fo  that  there  would  be  two  orbs  of  water  and

one  Jhell  of  ftone  or  the  cruft  of  the  earth  between  them ;

as  things  were  circumftanced  on  the^aWday  after  the

creation,  Gen.  i.  6,  7.  When,  by  the  interpolation  of  the

folid  Jhell  of  the  earth,  the  'waters  were  divided  from  the

waters,  and  the  earth  would  be  in  the  fituation  it  is

defcribed  to  be  in  by  St.  Peter* (2 Epift. iii. 5.)

during  the  height  of  the  Flood*  And  the  Earth  ftand-

ing  out  of  the  water  and  in  the  water  ; whereby  the

world  that  then  was, being overflowed  with water,

perifoed. The account  of  the  deftruftion of  the

earth  and  of  its  Re-formation  illuftrate  and  confirm

each  other  :  in  order  to  deftroy  the  Earth  the  fountains

of  the  Great  Deep  were  broken  up,  and  the  paffages  of  the

Airs  through  the  ftrata  opened,  but  at  the  Re-formation*

Mofes  tells  us,  they  were  both  flopped  of  clofed*  and

even  the  vapours  for  rain  prevented  from  rifing. So

that  the  folid  {hell  of  the  earth  permitted  neither  the

waters  to  defcend,  nor  the  vapours  to  afcend :  and  of

courfe  the  Shell  muft  before  have  been  dijfolved  t&  atoms;

for  had  it  been  only  broken  or  fractured  into  large  pieces,

it  could  not  have  been  fo  clofed  01  joined  together,  but

that  both  waters  and  vapours  would  have  paffed  through ;

and  in  this,  cafe  it  could  not  have  been  laid,  that  the

of  the  Airs  were  flopped.

F;


Tntjhell  of  the  Earth  having  been  thus  confolidated
and  formed  anew,  did  not,  and  indeed  could  not,  re-
main long  whole  and  entire.  For,  as  the  Expanfe  or
Firmament  had  now  received  its  full,  if  not  new,
powers  of  acting,  the  Light  (which  penetrates  all  ter-
reftrial  bodies)  would  ibon  make  its  way  through  the
waters  and  ftrata  ofjtcne  to  the  comparatively  thinner  me-
dium or  air  at  the  center  of  the  earth  (for  it  muft  be  re-
membered that  the  air  or  that  part  of  our  Atmofphere,
which  at  the  beginning  of  the  deluge,  was  forced  down
into  the  Abyfs,  drove  out  the  waters  from  thence,  and
elevated  them  over  the  furface  of  the  whole  earth,  would
there  continue  as  long  as  that  elevation  laded,  and  fo
conftitute  an  inward  Air  or  Firmament)  caufe  there  a
rarefaction,  and  fo  increafe  the  force  of  the  inward
Expanfe,  which  by  this  means  would  a<5b  more  ftrong-
ly  againft  the  concave  part  of  the  fhell  of  the  earth,
and"  by  continuing  to  exert  and  extend  its  power  on  all
fides  from  the  center,  would  by  degrees  make  fmall
cracks  and  crevices  in  the  fhell,  and  at  laft  by  receiving
new  ftrength  and  increafed  vigour  open  and  widen
thefe  cracks,  fo  as  to  permit  the  water,  that  covered
the  furface  of  the  earth,  to  be  prefled  down  through
them  into  the  Abyfs  by  the  force  of  the  outward  Ex-
panfe, as  was  the  cafe  at  the  firft  Formation.  Hence
it  follows  in  the  next  verfe
And  the  waters  returned  from  off  the  earth  continually.

IN  the  verfe  preceding,  the  fountains  of  the  abyfs  and
the  windows  of  heaven  were  clofed^  fo  that  neither  va-
pours nor  waters  could  pafs ;  but  here  we  find  that
the  waters  are  returning  i.  e.  going  back  to  the  place
from  whence  they  came-,  they  came,  we  faw,  from
the  Abyfs,  fo  that  new  inlets  or  apertures  into  the
abyfs  muft  now  have  been  made  for  the  defcent  of
the  waters,  otherwife  they  could  never  have  returned
from  whence  they  came  j  or  have  been  gathered  into


[5-  ]

ene  [and  their  former]  place.  They  returned  from  off
the  earth^  CONTINUALLY,  or  as  tranflated  in  the  mar-
gin, in  going  and  returning^  in  flowing  backwards  and
forwards,  in  fluctuating  here  and  there;  for  as  the
Airs  began  to  afcend  before  the  Waters  began  to  de-
fcend,  they  would  of  courfe  impede  and  in  part  drive
back  the  waters  and  fo  caufe  a  fluctuating  or  reverbe-
rating motion  in  them ;  and  by  this  means  alfo  the
waters  would  be  prevented  from  rulhing  down  too
faft  and  from  tearing  the  {hell  of  the  earth  too  much.

VER.  4.  And  the  ark  refted — upon  the  mountains  of
Ararat.  As  antiquity,  and  the  tradition  of  the  coun-
try at  prefent,  teftify."  <•

VER.  8.  And  No  ah  fent  forth  a  dove  from  him^  to  fee
if  the  waters  were  abated  from  off  the  face  of  the  Ground:
but  the  dove  found  no  reft  for  the  fole  of  her  feet  andjhe
returned  unto  him  into  the  ark.  Again  he  fent  forth  the
dove  out  of  the  ark.  And  the  dove  came  into  him  in  the
evening,  and  to,  in  her  mouth  was  an  olive-leaf  [or
branch  ;  an  emblem  of  peace°~\  pluckt  off:  fo  Noah  knew
E  2


*  See  Univerfal  Hiftory,  Vol.  I.  p.  239,  &c.

0  Some  have  imagined  from  the  circumftance  of  the  Dove*s  bring-
ing Noah  a  leaf  or  branch  pluckt  from  a  tree,  as  a  proof  of  the  dc-
creafe  of  the  waters,  that  this  Tree  muft  have  been  landing  upright
Or  in  its  original  pofition  :  otherwife  a  branch  pluckt  from  it  could
not  have  ferved  for  fuch  a  proof;  and  therefore,  if  the  Tree  was
thus  ftanding  on  the  ground,  it  muft  follow,  that  the  earth  was  not
total' y  diflblved  during  the  Deluge.  But  fuch  feem  not  to  have
confidered  that  whether  the  earth  was  difTolved  or  not  (but  that  it
was,  I  think,  I  have  abundantly  proved  above)  it  had  been  impof-
fible  for  any  thing  upon  the  furface,  fuch  as  Houfes,  trees,  Sec.  to
have  withftood  the  prodigious  torrents  of  water  that  muft  have  rufh-
ed  down  from  the  mountains,  after  they  had  been  covered  far  cibo<vr.
ffteen  cubits  high  ;  but  of  all  things,  far  lefs  capable  were  trees  and
vegetabhi  of  withftanding  thefe  torrents,  becaufe  as  the  waters  had
been  out  upon  the  furface  of  the  earth  foe  federal  months,  it  could
not  be,  but  that,  by  their  irregular  motions  in  flowing  backwards
and  forwards,  they  rmiil  foon  have  difiblved,  liquified  of  di


[52]

that  tie  waters  were  abated  from  off  the  earth.  And  he
ft  aid  yet  other  feven  days  ^  and  fent  forth  the  dove-,  which
returned  not  again  unto  him  any  more.

VER.  13.  And  Noah  removed  the  covering  of  the  arkj
and  looked.,  and  behold^  the  face  of  the  ground  was  dry.

So  the  dry-land  appeared  by  the  return  of  the  wa-
ters to  the  place  from  whence  they  came,  in  the  fame
manner  as  they  had  done  at  firft,  when  GOD  com-
manded that  the  waters  under  the  heaven  Jhould  be  ga-
thered together  unto  one  place  (the  abyfs)  and  the  dry
land  appear.

VER.  15.  And  God  fpake  unto  Noah  [as  GOD  had
ordered  Noah  to  enter  into  the  ark  at  a  particular
time,  fo  Noah  waits  the  divine  command  for  his  COITH
ing  out]  faying^  Go  forth  of  the  ark,  thou  and  thy  wife+
and  thy  fons  wives  with  thee.  Bring  forth  with  thee
every  living  thing  that  is  with  thee^  of  all  fle/h^  both  of
fowl  and  of  cattle,  and  of  creeping  thing  that  creepeth


the  vegetable  mould  and  all  the  loofe  parts  on  the  upper  furf ace  of  the
earth  ;  fo  that  all  trees  would  have  fallen  of  courfe,  as  the  ground,
on  which  they  flood,  ga<v e  <way :  hence  Noah  could  not  but  conclude
(had  he  ever  feen  a  common  ftorm,  attended  with  violent  rain)  that —
in  fuch  an  inundation  as  was  That  in  his  time,  when  GOD  affured  him,
be  would  dejlroy  the  'whole  earth ;  all  trees,  &c.  muft  have  been  thrown
down  upon  the  furface ;  and  therefore  if  the  Dove  brought  him  a  leaf
from  one,  it  muft  have  lain  along  upon  the  ground  ;  and  fo  be  as  full
a  proof  of  the  abatement  of  the  waters,  as  if  it  had  been  {landing  up-
right. And  that  the  olive-tree  did  thus  lie,  feems  evident  from  trie
prefent  ftate  of  things  on  and  near  the  earth's  furface ;  it  being  very
common  to  find  prodigious  numbers  of  trees  lying  juft  beneath  the
vegetable  mould,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  the  waters  ruming  from  the
neighbouring  mountains  would  naturally  leave  them.

But  there  is  another  folution  to  this  difficulty,  which,  confidering
the  emblematical  ilyle  of  Scripture  and  the  circumftances  of  the  cafe,
may  be  thought  more  juft  than  the  former ;  tho'  very  reconcilable
with  that  interpretation.  As  it  is  particularly  mentioned  that  Noah
ftaid  juft  fe<ven  days  before  each  time  of  fending  out  the  Dove,  fo  in
all  probability  the  day  on  which  he  fent  her  out  was  the  Sabbath  ;
and  the  time  of  the  day,  juft  after  he  -had  performed  religious  fer-
vice ;  as  he  might  moll  rcafonably  think  that  would  be  the  beft  for


[  53  ]

upon  the  earth ;  that  they  may  breed  abundantly  in  the
earth,  and  be  fruitful  and  multiply  upon  the  earth.  And
Noah  went  forth  and  his  fom  and  his  wife,  6JV.  And
God  blejjed  Noah  and  his  fans ^  and  f aid  unto  them,  be
fruitful  and  multiply,  and  replenijh  the  earth.

HERE  the  fame  blejfling  for  repleni/hing  the  earth  ivitlo
men  is  beftowed  upon  Noah  and  his  family,  as  was
pronounced  upon  the  firft  pair  of  the  human  fpecits  ;
and  zfimilar  declaration  made  with  regard  to  the  brute-
animals  that  came  out  of  the  ark  to  be  fruitful  and  mul-
tiply upon  the  earth,  as  had  been  done  at  their  firft  for-
mation: whence  it  muft  follow,  that  the  earth,  after
the  flood,  was  as  entirely  void  of  any  living  creature
of  the  land  or  air  (except  thofe  that  were  preferved  by
the  ark)  as  it  was  before  any  fuch  were  in  being.
And  therefore  the  Deluge,  in  this  refpecl;,  was  unquef-
jtionably  uni-verfal.


expefting  a  blefling  or  a  favour  from  heaven  :  Accordingly,  at  the
fecond  return  of  the  Dove  the  divine  fignal  was  brought, — an  Olive-
branch,  an  emblem  of  peace,  in  token  that  the  -waters  wrre  abated
and  the/ary  of  GOD'S  wrath  upon  a  wicked  world  was  ceafmg,  and
that  joy  and  comfort  would  foon  fucceed  to  the  afflicled  righteous.
And  unlefs  this  branch  be  looked  upon  as  a  divi ne  fignal  and  pro-
videntially given,  it  will  be  difficult  to  fay  what  could  induce  the
Dove  to  bring  any  branch  at  all, — and  why  an  Olive-branch, — and
that  this  ihould  be  particularly  mentioned ;  when  faying  that  a  leaf
or  branch  was  brought,  had  been  fufficient,  without  fpecifying  the
tree  from  whence  the  branch  was  taken;  unlefs  fomething  particu-
lar had  been  intended  thereby.  And,  that  the  Olive-brat,ch  was
an  emblem  or  f.gn  of  Peace,  Yriendjhif,  or  Abatement  of  Anger,  Dif-
cordt  tjfc.  throughout  almoft  the  whole  world.  See  Ph-git's  ^»eid.
Lib.  viii.  116.  &  Lib.  xi.  101.  L'wy.  Lib.  xxix.  16.  PokHus,
Lib.  iii.  And  we  learn  from  Coiumbufs  Voyages,  chap.  101.  that
this  Symbol  was  ufed  even  in  America.  So  tlien  Noub  as  foon  as
he  faw  the  Divine  Signal,  deciphered  the  meaning  thereof,  and
knew  that  the  waters  were  abated.  In  this  view,  it  does  not  at  all
fignify,  whether  the  tree,  from  whence  the  branch  which  the  Dove
brought  was  pluckt,  was  lying  down  or  /iand:ng  i, fright  :  for  the
furtnularfpccies  of  tree  fpoke  its  own  meaning.


[  54]

An  EfXplanation  of  the  C  o  p  p  E  R-P  LATE,

REPRESENTING

The  internal  ftrufture  of  the  terraqueous  Globe,  from  the  Center  to
the  Circumference,  and  the  Air  around  it.

D.  The  outward  Expanfe  or  the  open  Firmament  of  Heaven.

E.  A  drcular  Space  filled  with  water  during  the  height  of  the  Deluge,
- but  now  with  the  Air  that  came  from  the  central  Hollow  of  the

earth;  and  atprefent  conftitutes  what  we  call  our  Atmofphere.

F.  The  Jhell  of  the  earth  broken  into  innumerable  apertures  and
fjjures,  of  various  lhapes  and  fizes ;  the  larger  of  which,  f.  f.  f.  f.  f.

being  filled  with  the  water  that  defcended  from  the  furface  of
the  earth,  form  Seas  and  Lakes  ;  the  le/er  (which  branch  from  the
former,  or  pafs  immediately  from  the  under-part  of  the  fhell  of
the  earth  to  the  tops  of  the  higheft  mountains)  ferve  as  canals  for
the  water  which  fupplies  Springs  and  Rivers  to  run  in  ;  the  leaft
cf  all  (denoted  by  the  irregular  black  ftrokcs  in  the  folid  fhell  of
the  earth)  represent  the  cracks  thro'  which  vapours  principally
afcend.

G.  H.  The  Great  Abyfs  of  water  within  the  earth  -f  with  which  all
Seas,  Lakes,  Rivers,  &c.  communicate ;  and  from  whence  they
receive  their  fupplies. G.  H.  are  divided  from  each  other  by  a
dotted  circle,  becaufe  one  of  them  reprefents  the  water  that,  dur-
ing the  Deluge, covered  the  whole  furface  of  the  earth, but
which  was afterwards  forced  down,  thro'  the  above-mentioned
larger  apertures  and  fifTures,  to  its  original  place,  as  the  inward
Air  was  forced  out  thro'  the  letter  and  oblique  figures :  and  the
ether  cf  them  reprefents  that  part  of  the  Abyfs  which,  during
the  Deluge,  remained  beneath  the  earth.

}.  A  folid  Ball  or  Nucleus  of  terreftrial  matter,  formed  from  what
the  water  in  its  defcent  from  the  furface,  and  paiTage  through  the
flrata  of  the  earth,  tore  off",  and  carried  down  with  it  into  the
Abyfs,  and  repented  at  the  loweii  place,  the  center  of  the  earth.

j^  So  that  the  Opinion  of  the  Ancients  concerning  the  Earth's  re-
fembling  an"  Egg  has  great  propriety  in  it :  for  the  Central  Ku-
c-'fus,  ( I. }  by  its  innermoft  lituation  and  ihape,  may  well  repre-
ient  rhe  Yolk ;  the  Abyfs  of  water,  (G.  H.)  which  furrounds  it,
and  is  in  a  middle  pofition,  may  ftand  for  the  clear  fluid  of  the
White  ;  the  Cruft  of  the  Earth  (  F.  )  (allowing  only  for  its  breaks
and  cracks)  by  its  roundnefs,  hardnefs,  uppermofl  fituation,  and
little  inequalities  on  its  furface,  isjullly  analogous  to  the  Shell,
And  on  this  account  the  term  tks  Jhell  of  the  earth  is  frequently
ufed  in  this  treatife.


[  55]


COLLECTION

O  F T  H  E

Principal  Heathen  Accounts  of  the  Flood.


given  at  large  an  explanation  of  the
Mofaic  Hiftory  of  the  Deluge-,  I  fhall  now
fubjoin  the  teftimonies  of  feveral  Heathen  Na-
tions in  proof  of  the  fame  facb.  For,  it  may  juftly
be  liippofed,  that  did  any  iuch  event  really  happen,
it  could  not  be  but  that  all  or  mod  nations  upon  the
earth  muft  have  retained  fome  knowledge  or  tradition
of  it.  And  if  upon  enquiry  it  fhould  appear  that  the
fame  of  the  Deluge  has  gone  throughout  the  whole
world,  that  almoft  every  nation  upon  earth  has  fome
ftory  or  other  to  relate  concerning  it  •,  it  will  certainly
follow,  that  there  has  been  fuch  an  Event,  and  that
it  was  univerfeiL  But  of  fuch  deductions  and  corol-
laries as  thefe  hereafter.

To  colled  all  the  evidence  that  might  be  produced
on  this  occafion  would  be  endlefs  and  needlels  ;  I
fhall  therefore  felect  here  and  there  particular  ac-
counts from  the  moft  eminent  nations  ;  and  in  ga-
thering thefe,  /hall  travel  quite  round  the  world.

I  BEGIN  with  the  great  and  famous  nation  of  the
Romans.  Many  of  their  writers,  both  Poets  and
Hiftorians,  make  mention  of  an  univerfal  Flood  ;
but  one  may  fpeak  the  voice  of  all.  I  mail  take
That  of  Ovid-,  who,  purpofing  to  relate  fome  parti-
cular circumftances  of  the  hiftory  of  mankind  from


[56]

the  beginning,  regularly  proceeds  from  the  formation
of  man,  thro'  the  feverai  ages  of  the  world,  to  the.
time  of  the  Deluge  j  the  caufe  and  manner  of  which
(after  having  related  the  height  of  impiety  and  wick-
ednefs  that  reigned  upon  the  earth  during  the  iron-age}
he  thus  defcribes,  Metam.  Lib.  i.

Neve  for et  terris  fecurior  arduus  tether^  &c.  i.  e.
c  Nor  were  the  Gods  themfelves  more  fafe  above ;

*  Againft  beleaguer'd  Heaven  the  Giants  move  :

'  Hills  pil'd  on  hills,  on  mountains  mountains  lie,
'  To  make  their  mad  approaches  to  the  fky.
'  Till  Jove  no  longer  patient,  took  his  time

*  T'avenge  with  thunder  their  audacious  crime  ;

*  Red  lightning  play'd  along  the  firmament,
'  And  their  clemolim'd  works  to  pieces  rent.

*  Sing'd  with  the  flames,  and  with'  the  bolts  transfix'd,

*  With  native  earth  their  blood  the  monfters  mix'd  j
f  The  blood,  indu'd  with  animating  heat,

*  Did  in  th*  impregnant  earth  new  fom  beget.

'  They,  like  the  feed  from  which  they  fprung,  accurs'd,
'  Againft  the  Gods  immortal  hatred  nurs'd  ;p
'  An  impious,  arrogant,  and  cruel  brood  j
'  Expreffing  their  Original  from  Blood.

*  Which  when  the  KING  of  GODS  beheld  from  high—
'  He  figb'd ;  nor  longer  with  his  pity  flrove ;
'  But  kindled  to  a  wrath  becoming  Jove.' —

<c  Mankinds  a  monfter,  and  the  ungodly  times
"  Confederate  into  guilt ,  are  fworn  to  crimes.
"  All  are  alike  involved  in  'ill,  and  all
li  Muft  by  the  fame  relentlefs  fury  fall"  *

p  This  anfwers  to  the  Scripture  account  of  the  Giant  i,  the  4pof-
tates  (thofe  rebels  to  the  Will  of  Heaven  or  Word  of  God]  that  were
before  the  Flood,  and  to  the  children,  the  Sons,  that  {prang  from
them,  who  were  'iuorfe  than  their  Fathers,  fee  Gen.  vi.  1—5-

i  Gen.  vi.  12.  Ai:d  God  LOOKED  UPON  the  earth,  and  BEHOLD  //
•was  corrupt ;  for  all  Fkjb  had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the  earth.


[S7l

f  Thus  ended  he  •,  the  greater  Gods  afient,

*  By  clamours  urging  his  fevere  intent ;

'  The  lefs  fill  up  the  cry  for  punifliment.

4  Yet  (till  with  pity  they  remember  man

4  And  mourn  as  much  as  beatfnly  Spirits  can.

* But  Jove

c  Concludes  to  pour  a  watry  Deluge  down,

4  And  what  he  durft  not  burn,  refolves  to  drown.

'  The  Northern  breath,  that  freezes  Moods,  he  binds,
'  With  all  the  race  of  cloud-difpelling  winds.
'  The  South  he  loofed,  who  night  and  horror  brings  ;
'  And  fogs  are  fliaken  from  his  flaggy  wings.

*  With  rain  his  robe  and  heavy  mantle  flow,
4  And  lazy  mifts  are  lowring  on  his  brow.

c  The  fkies  from  pole  to  pole  with  peels  refound,

*  Andjhow'rs  inlarg'd  come  pouring  on  the  ground.

4 ! Impetuous  rain  defends.

4  Nor  from  his  patrimonial  Heav'n  alone

'  Is  Jove  content  to  pour  his  vengeance  down,

4  Aid  from  bis  Brother  of  the  fe 'as  he  craves;

6  To  help  him  with  auxiliary  waves.

4  The  watry  Tyrant  calls  his  brcoks  and  feeds,

*  Who  roll  from  mofly  caves  (their  moift  abodes)-, —

4  The  floods,  by  nature  enemies  to  land,
4  And  proudly  fwelling  with  their  new  command,
4  Remove  the  living  ftones,  that  ftop'd  their  way,
4  And  gufhing  from  their  fource,  augment  the  fea.
4  Then  with  his  mace,  their  Monarch  ftruck  the  ground  ^
4  With  inward  trembling  earth  receiv'd  the  voundj C
4  And  rifmg  fir  cams  a  ready  p^Jfage  found.  \

Aad  it  REPENTED  the  Lard  that  be  lad  made  man  on  the  earth,  and
it  GRIEVED  him  at  lit  heart.  And  the  Lordjnid,  Zivi/t  atflrty  man
nv^om  1  have  created,  &c.  and  bring  a  FLOOD  OF  WATERS  t<poti  the
earth  to  dejlroy  all  f.ejb,  &c.  The  reader,  as  he  proceeds,  may
make  many  fuch  finking  refemblances  as  thcfe  between  Scripture
and  Heathen  Hiitcry.


'  Th'  expanded  waters  gather-on  the  plain ;
'  They  float  the  fields  and  overtop  the  grain ;

*  Then  milling  onwards  with  a  fweepy  fway,

*  Bear  flocks  and  folds  and  lab'ring  hinds  away.

*  Nor  fafe  their  dwellings  were,  for  fap'd  by  floods,

*  Their  houfes  fell  upon  their  houfhold  gods.

*  The  folid  piles  too  flrongly  built  to  fall,

*  High  or'e  their  heads  behold  a  watry  wall.

*  Now  Seas  and  Earth  were  in  confufion  loft  ;
4  A  world  of  waters,  and  without  a  coaft. —

'  The  moft  of  mortals  perifh  in  the  flood ;
'  The  fmall  remainder  dies  for  want  of  food.

'  A  mountain  of  ftupendous  height  there  Hands
4  Betwixt  th'  Athenian  and  Emotion  lands,
'  Parnaffus  is  its  name ;  whofe  forky  rife
c  Mount  thro'  the  clouds,  and  mates  the  lofty  fkies.

*  High  on  thv-  Summit  of  this  dubious  cliff,
6  Deucalion  wafting,  moor'd  his  little  Jkiff.

*  He  with  his  wife  were  only  left  behind

*  Qfperijk'd  man\  they  two,  were  hitman  kind.

*  The  mountain  Nymphs  and  Themis  they  adore,
'  And  from  her  Oracles  relief  implore.

c  The  moft  upright  of  mortal  men  was  he,
'  The  moftfmcere  and  holy  woman,  fhe.

'  When  Jupiter,  furveying  earth  from  high
'  Beheld  it  in  a  lake  of  water  lie  •,
'  That  vv;ere  fo  many  millions  lately  liv'd,
'  But  two,  the  beft  of  either  fex  furviv'd  ;
'  He  loos'd  the  Northern  Wind ;  fierce  Boreas  flies
'  To  puff  away  the  clouds  and  purge  the  fkies :
c  Serenely,  while  he  blows,  the  vapours  driv'n

*  Difcover  Heav'n  to  Earth,  and  Earth  to  Heav'n. —

DRYDEN.

FROM  Rome  let  us  proceed  to  Greece.  I  fhall  here
take  the  teftimony  of  Lucian  or  the  author  of  the  book
•de  Dea  Syria,  as  it  will  include  that  of  the  Scythians^


[  59]

Syrians ;  and  Arabians ;  as  well  as  Grecians.  Ot  ^fv
w  TToXfoi  ArjxaAiwKa,  &c.  i.  e.  '  Many  fay  that  this
4  temple  [that  at  Hierapolis  in  Syria]  was  built  by
'  Deucalion,  the  Scythian.  That  Deucalion,  I  mean,
«  in  whofe  time  the  greateft  inundation  of  waters  was.
«  I  have  heard  in  Greece,  what  the  Grecians  fay  con-
«  cerning  this  Deucalion.  The  ftory  they  relate,  is  as
<  follows  :  The  prefent  race  of  men  was  not  the  firft,
(  for  they  totally  perimed ;  but  is  of  a  fecond  genera -
«  tion,  which  being  defcended  from  Deucalion,  in-
(  created  to  a  great  multitude.  Now  of  thefe  former
«  men  they  relate  this  ftory :  they  were  infolent,  and
«  addicted  to  unjuft  actions ;  for  they  neither  kept
«  their  oat-hs,  nor  were  hofpitable  to  ftrangers,  nor
c  gave  ear  to  fuppliants  •,  for  which  reafon  this  great
c  calamity  befel  them  :  on  a  fudden  the  earth  poured
«  forth  a  vaft  quantity  of  water,  great  fhowers  fell,

*  the  rivers  overflowed,  and  the  fea  arofe  to  a  prodi-
c  gious  height  j  fo  that  all  things  became  water,  and

*  all  men  were  deftroyed  :  only  Deucalion  was  left  unto
«  a  fecond  generation,  on  account  of  his  prudence

*  and  piety. He  was  faved  in  this  manner :  he  went

*  into  a  large  ark  or  cheft  which  he  had,  together
c  with  his  fons  and  their  wives  •,  and  when  he  was  in,

*  there  entered  fwine,  and  horfes,  and  lions,  and  fer-

*  pents,  and  all  other  creatures  which  live  on  earth,

*  by  pairs. He  received  them  all,  and  they  did  him

*  no  hurt ;  for  the  Gods  created  a  great  friendfliip  a-
'  mong  them ; fo  that  they  failed  all  in  one  cheft
'  while  the  water  prevailed. Thefe  things  the  Greeks
'  relate  of  Deucalion. But,  as  to  what  happened  after
6  this,  there  is  an  ancient  tradition  among  thole  of
'  Hierapolis, which  deferves  admiration ; viz. that
4  in  their  country  a  great  chafm  opened,  and  received
4  all  the  water  •,  whereupon  Deucalion  erected  altars,

*  and  built the temple  of  Juno, over  the  chafm.


[  60  ]

*  This  chafm  I  have  feen,  and  it  is  a  very  fmall  one

*  under  the  temple  •,  whether  it  was  formerly  bigger,
«  and  fince  lettered,  I  cannot  tell ;  but  that  which  I
«  have  feen  is  little. In  commemoration  of  this  hif-
8  tory,  they  do  thus  : Twice  in  every  year  water  is

*  brought  from  the  fea  to  the  temple,  and  not  by  the

*  priefts  only,  but  all  Syria  and  Arabia,  many  come
'  from  beyond  Euphrates  to  the  fea,  and all  carry

*  water,  which  they  firft  pour  out  in  the  temple  and

*  afterwards  it  finks  into  the  chafm  ;  which,  tho*  it
'  be  fmall,  receives  abundance  of  water. And  when

*  they  do  this,  they  fay  Deucalion  inftituted  the  cere-

*  mony  in  that  temple,  as  a  memorial  of  the  cala-

*  mity,  and  of  his  deliverance  from  it.r

WE  will  next  pafs  to  Egypt ;  whofe  ancient  inhabi-
tants have  retained  the  knowledge  of  the  Deluge  under
the  hiftories  of  Ofiris  and  Typbon  ;  as  is  evident  from
what  Plutarch  fays  concerning  them  in  his  Jfis  and
Ofiris.  For  firft  he  informs  us  p.  30,  (of  Squire's  edi-
tion) that  they  relate,  '  that  when  Ofiris  was  born,  a

*  voice  was  heard,  faying,  The  Lord  of  all  the  earth  is
'  born,'  and  p.  42.  that  '  in  their  funeral-lamentation
'  over  him,  they  bewail'd  him,  who  was  born  on  the
'  right  fide  of  the  world,  and  who  periled  on  the  left*
P.  17.'  He  is  faid  to  have  been  put  into  a  cheft,'  and
they  particularly  aiTert,  that  it  was  on  the  i  yth  day  of
the  month  Atbyr  [fee  Gen.  vii.  u]  and  thrown  into
the  fea" After  thefe  things  Ofiris  is  faid  to  have  re-
turned from  the  other  world,  and  to  have  appeared  to
his  fon  Orus.— The  perfon  who  thus  ukd  Ofiris  is  laid
to  have  been  one  'Typbo,*  which  name  the  Egyptians

1  LUCIAN  de  Dea  S\ria,  Tom.  U.  p.  882.  Vid  Univir.  Hijlory
Vol.  I.  p.  203.

•  The  name  Typbo  according  to  fo'me  learned  men  fignifies  a  De-
luge or  Inundation  ;  fee  JURIEU'S  Dicirines  and 'WQ'Jhip  of  the  church.
Part.  in.  Tr.  iv.  And  Ttfhon,  or  as  the  Latin  Poets  call  him


[  6i  ]

explain  by  interpreting  it  the  Sea9  and  they  call  tbg
fait  ofthefea^  Typbo'sfoam,  p.  42.  and  p.  54,  agreeable
to  this  interpretation  is  what  we  are  further  told^
4  that  Typho  was  once  in  pojjeflion  of  the  portion  orpro-

*  vince  which  belonged  to  Ofiris  •,  by  which  they  mean,

*  that  Egypt  was  once  covered  with  the  Sea. Which
'  opinion,  fay  thefe  philofophers,  is  probable  enough,
c  from  that  great  number  of  fea-fhells,  which  are  not
'  only  dug  out  of  their  mines,  but  found  likewife  upon
'  the  tops  of  their  mountains  •, and  hence  likewife  it

*  is,  that  their  fountains  and  wells,  though  many  in

*  number,  have  all  of  them  a  brackifh  or  faltiih  tade,
'  with  them,  as  containing  the  vapid  relics  of  the  fea*
'  water,  which  once  covered  their  whole  country.'

FROM  Egypt  we  will  proceed  to  Babylon^  and  fee
what  the  Chaldeans  relate  of  the  Deluge.  I  mall  cite
their  teftimoriy  as  preferved  by  Jofephus,  in  thcfirft
book  of  his  Jewijh  Antiquities,  p.  10.  T«  <fc  xa?»xAw<r-
ftoy  ToyJa,  &c.  i.  e.  '  But  of  this  [the  Noachian]  Deluge
'  and  the  ark  all  the  heathen  hijlorians  make  mention  j
'  among  whom  is  Berofus  the  Chaldean,  who,  relat-
'  ing  the  particular  circumftances  of  the  Deluge,
'  writeth  thus,  '  It  is  reported,  that  part  of  the  fhip
'  as  yet  remaineth  in  Armenia  on  the  mountain  of  the

*  Cordy<eans  ;  and  that  fome  perfons  taking  off  -the
'  alphaltus [bitumen  or  pitch]  carry it  away,  and
'  that  men  make  ufe  of  that  which  is  thus  taken  off,

*  by  way  of  charm,  to  avert  evil.' And  again,  in
'  his  difpute  with  Apion,  he  publickly  appeals  to  the

*  teftimony  of  the  fame  Berofus^  as  being  agreeable  to
'  that  of  Mofes  (Book  the  ift.  p.  1044.)


Typhus,  is  reprefented  as  a  monftrous  Giant  warring  againft  heaven  ;
and  who  was  at  laft  overconie  by  'Jupiter,  and  as  one  fays,  lies  new
fubmerjed  in  water.  APOLL.  ARC  Lib.  2.  The  Arabs  at  this
day  expqefs  the  general  Deluge  by  the  word  al  tufan  ;  UNIVERSAL
HIST.  Vol.  I.  p.  200.


[62]

-5,  &c.  e  Now  this  Berofus  following  the  moft

*  ancient  records,  writeth  the  hiftory  of  the  Deluge,

*  and  of  the  deftruction  of  mankind  therein,  juft  as
c  Mofes  hath  related  it ;  and  alfo  of  the  Ark^  in  which
'  Noah.,  the  Chief  or  Leader  of  our  race,  was  faved

*  when  it  was  carried  to  the  tops  of  the  Armenian

*  mountains.1 And  if  the  Babylonian  Antiquities,
that  now  pafs  under  Berofus's  name,  be  truly  tranf-
lated  from  the  Original (and I  fee  no  reafon to
imagine  that  they  are  not,  fince, as  far  as  they  re-
main, they  are  confiftent  with, at  leaft  do  not  con-
tradict,  what  Jofephus  and  other  writers  have  quoted
from  the  Original1)  his  account  of  the  Deluge  is  as
follows, c  Ante  aquarum  cladem  famofam, &c. i.  e<

*  Before  that  famous  devaflation  of  waters,  in  which
c  the  whole  world  perifhed,  many  ages  had  pafTed,
c  which  were  faithfully  remarked  by  our  Chaldeans.*
*•  They  write  that  in  thofe  times  there  was  a  great

*  city  of  Giants,  called  Mno^  fituated  near  Libanus^
«  who  governed  the  whole  world,  from  the  rifmg  to
4  the  fetting  of  the  fun. Thefe  trufting  to  the  great-
4  nefs  of  their  bodies  and  ftrength,  and  having  in-
'  vented  arms  opprefled  all,  and  being  (laves  to  their
4  luft  found  out  mufical  inftruments,  and  all  kind  of
'  delights. They  devoured  men,  and  procured  abor-

*  tions  on  purpofe  to  drefs  them  for  food  ;  they  pro-
e  mifcuoufly lay  with mothers, daughters, lifters,
'  men  and  brutes ;  and  there  was  no  kind  of  wicked-
4  nefs  which  they  did  not  commit ;  they  were  de-
'  fpifers  of  religion  and  of  the  Gods. Then  many
6  foretold and prophefied, and carved out upon


*  I  think  what  his  Lordfhip  fays  on  this  head  in  the  firjl  part  of
his  Vindication  of  the  hiftoriet  of  the  Old  and  Neiv  Te/iametit,  p.  I  2 1
— 128.  juftifies  this  afi'ertion.  Berofxs  was  a  Chaldaan  Prieft  ;
and  lived  about  270  years  before  the  birth  of  CHRIST.


[  63  1

c  (tones  the  things  relating  to  that  deftru&ion  which

*  was  foon to come upon the  world. But  they,

*  following  their  old  courfe,  derided  all  fuch  admo-
6  nitions, tho'  the  anger  and  revenge  of  the  Gods
4  were  ready  to  fall  upon  them  for  their  impiety  and
€  wickednefs. There  was  one  among  the  Giants  who
'  reverenced  the  Gods  and  was  more  wife  and  prudent
'  than  all  the  reft ;  his  name  was  Noa ;  he  dwelt  in

*  Syria,  with  his  three  fons  Sem^  Japet,  Cham,  and  their
6  wives  the  great  ffdea9 Pandora^  Noela,  and  Nocgla.
'  This  man,  fearing  the  deftruction  which  he  forefaw
c  from  the  ftars  would  come  to  pafs,  began,  in  the  fe-
'  venty-eighth  year  before  the  inundation,  to  build  a
«  (hip  covered  like  an  ark.  Seventy-eight  years  from  the
'  time  he  began  to  build  this  Jliip,  the  Ocean  of  a
'  fudden  broke  out,  and  all  the  inland  feas,  and  the
«  rivers  and  the  fountains  burfting  from  beneath,  (at-

*  tended  with  moft  violent  rains from heaven  for

*  many  days)  overflowed  all  the  mountains  -,  fo  that
«  the  whole  human  race  was  buried  in  the  waters  ;
'  except  Noa  and  his  family  who  were  faved  by  means
'  of  the  (hip  •,  which  being  lifted  up  by  the  waters,

*  refted  at  laft  upon  the  top  of  the  Gordyaan  moun-
ctain-,  of  which,  it  is  reported,  there  now  remaineth
'  fome  part,  and  that  men  take  away  the  bitumen
'  from  it,  and  make  ufe  of  it,  by  way  of  charm  or

*  expiation,  to  avert  evil. We  mud  therefore-.

'  allow  from  thefe  premiies, that which  both  the
'  Chaldeans  and  Scythians  write  of,  that,  after the

*  earth  was  dried from  the  waters, there  were  no
'  more  than  the above-mentioned  eight  perfons  in
'  Armenia  Saga^  and  "that  from  thefe  all  men  upon

*  earth  fprung ; and  for  this  reafon  it  is,  that  the
4  Scythians  jumy  fay  and  call  NOA  the  father  of  all  the
'  greater  and  leffcr  Gods,  the  author  of  the  human  race,,

'  and  feed  of  the  world.


[  64  ]

FROM  the  Babylonians  we  will  go  to  the  Ajfyrians.
For  whom  let  Abydenus  fpeak,  whofe  authority  is  thus
cited  and  publickly  appealed  to  by  Eufebius,  Prepar.
Evang.  Lib.  ix.  Cap.  12.  *  MfS'  w  aAAot  TZ  >ip£ai/,  x>
'  Sfto-tdp®*,  &c:  After  whom  others  reigned,  and
'  then  Si/itbrus ;  to  whom  Saturn  foretold  that  there
6  fhould  be  a  great  flood  of  waters  (or  mariy  fhowers)

*  upon  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month  Defuis ;  and  or-

*  dered  him  to  hide  whatever  writings  he  could  find,
'  in  Heliopolis?  a  City  of  the  Sippari. Siftthrus  having

*  performed  this,  immediately  failed  towards  Arme-

*  ma  ; and  inftantly  after, thofe  things  which  GOD

*  had  foretold  came  to  pafs. And  on  the  third  day,

*  when  the  tempeft  was  ceafed,  he  made  a  trial,  by

*  fending  out  birds,  to  fee  if  they  could  efpy  any  land

*  uncovered  of  water. But  they  finding  nothing  but
'  the  immenfe  Ocean,  and  not  knowing  which  way

*  to  dire6l  themfelves,  returned  to  Sifitbrus  •,  and  af-
«  ter  thefe  he  fent  out  others. That  the  third  time
'  it  anfwered,  for  the  birds  returned  with  their  feet

*  all  mudded. But  as  for  Si/itbrus,  the  Gods  took
'  him  from  among  men. And  the  Ship  was  carried
c  to  Armenia,  and  afforded  the  people  of  the  country
'  amulets  of  wood,  to  difpel  difeafes.u

FROM  Affyria  we  will  pafs  into  Perfia.  Dr.  Hyde^
in  his  Hijtoria  religionis  veterum  Perfariim^  p.  171.
writes  thus,  '  Veterum  Perfarum  orthodoxi  credunt —


u  That  by  the  Floods  of  Deucalion  and  Sijithrus,  as  alfo  that  which
is  faid  to  have  happened  in  the  time  of  Ogyges,  the  ancients  could
»iean  no  other  than  the  general  Deluge  in  the  time  of  NOAH  is  abun-
dantly evident  from  the  relations  themfelves,  but  if  the  reader  is
defirous  to  fee  it  circumftantially  proved,  he  may  confuh  the  fol-
lowing Treatifes,  Bp.  STILLI^G-FLEET'S  Origines  facr<e,  Lib.  iii.
ch.  5.  §.  5.  GALE'S  Court  of  the  Getitiks,  Part  I.  Book  3.  ch.  6.
RAY'S  Three  Phyf.  Thcol.  Difceurfa,  p.  66.  KIRCHER'S  Area
Noa-,  Lib.  2.  cap.  6.  GROTIUS  de  Verit,  Lib.  I.  cap.  16,
H£iDEGG£R.'.s  HiJ}.  Pafriar.  Exer.  xviii.  §.  xliii.


diluvium,  &c.  t  The  orthodox  among  the  ancient  Per-
* '  jians  believe  a.  Deluge,  and  that  it  was  univerfal,  and
4  overwhelmed  the  whole  earth.  But  as  they  have
4  various  opinions  and  fentiments  concerning  all  thofe
4  things  which  are  Ib  remote  in  antiquity,  they  differ
'  fomewhat  among  themfelves  and  run  into  fables.
4  For  Ibn  Shabna,  the  Arabian,  in  his  book  de  Prirnis

*  6?  Poftremis  afferts,  That  there  are  fome  among  the
^JVlagi  who  deny  a  Deluge  ; — others  he  fays,  acknow-
4  ledge  it ;  but  lay  that  it  was  not  univerfal,  and  that
'  it  did  not  reach  beyond  the  top  Of  a  mountain  near

*  Huhan  •,  a  city  fituated  between  the  confines  of  Af-
4  fyria  and  Perfia. From  the  opinion  of  Zoroaftef
4  they  maintain,  that  there  had  not  been  a  Deluge,
4  neither  had  the  world  been  drowned,  but  for  the

*  iniquity  and  diabolical  wiles  of  that  moft  wicked  of
4  mortals,  Malcus. In  the  Book  Pharb.  Sftr.  ttye

*  famous  mountain,  where  Noah  dwelt  when  the  wa~

*  ters  of  the  deluge  broke  out  from  it,  is  mentioned  ;

*  and  Zala-Cupha  is  faid  to  be  the  name  of  the  old  wo-
4  man,  from  whofe  oven  the  waters  firft  iffuedout.'

FROM  Perfia  we  will  enter  the  Eaft-Indies,  which
eoifntry  being  vaftly  extenfive,  the  inhabitants  nu-
merous, and  of  different  feels  and  orders,  it  is  no
wonder  that  fome  (as  is  afferted)  deny  a  Deluge,  and
others  affirm  that  there  has  been  one.  But  if  the  tra-
dition of  it  has  reached  this  part  of  the  world,  it  will
be  fufficient  for  our  purpofe.  LORD  in  his  Difcourfe
of  the  Banian  Religion,  c.  6  &  7.  informs  us,  '  That
4  the  Bramins  fay,  that  the  four  tribes  or  cafts,  of

*  which  the  firft  race  of  men  confided,  de-generating
4  from  their  primitive  innocence, — the  Prieft  neglect  -
4  ing  his  piety,  the  Soldier  becoming  infolent  and  ty-
c  rannical,  the  Merchant  praclifing  deceit  in  trade,
4  and  ufing  falfe  balances,  and  the  Artizan  fpending
4  the  profits  of  his  inventions  in  riot  and  excefs  ; — their


[  66  ]

4  impiety  and  wicked nefs  grew  at  length  to  fo  infuffer-
'  able  an  height,  that  GOD'S  indignation  was  juftly

*  provoked,  and  he  fent  a  Flood^  which  dejiroyed  all

*  nal'^m  -without  exception. Atter  which  GOD,  to  re-

*  pair  mankind,  created  three  perfons  of  greater  ex~
'  cellency  than  thofe  of  the  former  generation  •,  to  one
'  of  whom  named  Bremaw^  he  gave  the  power  of  cre-

*  ating  men  and  animals,  which  he  executed  according-
'  ly :  the  firil  human  pair  proceeding,  one  from  his
'  right  fide,  the  other  from  his  left. The  man  was
'  called  Manow,  and  the  woman  Ceteroupa, and  by

*  them  was  the  earth  replenifned.'w Father  Boucbet,
fpeaking  of  the  Indians,  efpecially  thofe  that  live  about
Maduras  and  Carnate, writeth  more largely thus,*

*  They  fay,  that  Parabardvafwn,  i.  e.  the  Supreme  God,

*  has  created  three  inferior Divinities,  viz.  Bruma,
.*  Vichnou^  and  Routren. To  the  firft  he  has  given

*  the  power  of  creating ; to  the  fecond  of  preferring  5

'  and  to  the  third,  that  of  deftroying.* — The  God

'  Routren,  who  is  the  grand  deftroyer  of  all  created

*  beings,  refolved  one  day  to  drown  all  mankind,  pre-
'  tending  he  had  juft  reafons  to  be  dhTatisfied  with

*  their  behaviour. This  defign  was  not  kept  fo  fecret,

*  but  it  was  found  out  by  Vicbnou,  Preferver  of  all

*  creatures,  who  difcovered  the  very  day  on  which  the
'  Flood  was  to  happen. Though  his  power  did  not
'  extend  fo  far'  as  to  fufpend  the  execution  of  what  the

*  God  Routren  had  refolved  upon,  yet,  as  he  was  the
'  God-preferver  of  all  created  beings,  this  gave  him  a
'  right  to  prevent,  if  poflible,  the  pernicious  effects

*  of  it. The  method  he  took  for  that  purpofe  was  as

*  follows. He  one  day  appeared  to  Sattiavarti,  his


w  Univer  Hift.  Vol  I.  p.  229.

*  See  his  Letter  to  the  Bifliop  of  A-vrancbes,  printed  in  Picar?*
Cerent,  abrid.  p.  379.


*  great  confident,  and  privately  affured  him,  that  an
4  univerfal  Flood  would  foon  happen ;  that  the  earth
4  would  be  covered  with  water,  and  that /?0#/ra;'s  de-
4  fign  was  no  lefs  than  that  of  thereby  deflroying  all

*  mankind,  and  every  kind  of  animal. He  neverthe-
4  lefs  affured  him  that  he  himfelf  need  not  be  under
4  the  leaft  apprehenfions  ;  for  that  in  fpite  of  Routren,
6  he  would  find  opportunity  to  preferve  him,  and  to

*  take  fuch  meafures,  that  the  world  fhould  afterwards
4  be  re-peopled. His  defign  was  to  make  a  wondef-
4  ful  bark  rife  up  on  a  fudden,  at  a  time  when  Routren
'  fhould  leaft  fufpect  any  fuch  thing,  and  to  ftore  it
'  with  a  large  provifion  of  fouls  and  feeds  of  beings,
4  eight  hundred  and  forty  millions  at  leaft. As  for
4  Sattiavarti,  he,  at  the  time  of  the  Flood,  was  to  be

*  upon  a  very  high  mountain,  which  he  pointed  out
4  to  him  very  exactly. Some  time  after,  Sattiavarti,
4  as  had  been  foretold  him,  perceived  a  numberlefs
4  multitude  of  clouds  drawing  together,  but  beheld
e  with  unconcern  the  ftorm  which  was  gathering  over
«  the  heads  of  the  guilty,  when  the  moft  dreadful  rain
1  that  had  ever been  feen, poured  down  from  the
«  fkies ;  the  rivers  fwelled,  and  fpread  themfelves  with
«  rapidity  over  the  furface  of  the  whole  earth  ;  the  lea
e  broke  its  appointed  bounds,  and  mixing  with  the
4  rivers,  which  now  had  left  their  channels,  foon  co-
4  vered  the  higheft  mountains. Trees,  animals,  men,

*  cities,  kingdoms,  were  all  drowned  ;  in  a  word,  all
4  animated  beings  were  inftantly  deftroyed. In  the
4  mean  time,  Sattiavarti^  with  fotne  of  his  penitents,
4  had  withdrawn  to  the  appointed  mountain,  where  he
'  waited  for  the  fuccour  which  God  had  promifed  him.
4  However,  this  did  not  prevent  his  being  feized  with

*  fome  fhort  intervals  of  terror. As  the  water  ga-
4  thered  ftrength  continually  as  it  rolled,  and  each  mo-
'  ment  drew  nearer  to  his  djyfam,  he  was  every  now

F  2


[  68  ]

c  and  then  in  a  panic.  But  that  very  inftant  which
'  he  thought  would  be  his  laft,  he  beheld  the  bark
'  that  was  to  fave  him  :  No  fooner  did  he  fet  his"  eyes
'  upon  it,  than  he  immediately  got  into  it,  with  all
'  the  devotees  in  his  company,  and  alfo  the  eight  hun-

*  dred  and  forty  millions  of  fouls  and  feeds  of  beings.

*  The  difficulty  now  was  how  to  fleer  the  bark,  and
'  to  preferve  it  from the  impetuofity  of  the  waves,

*  which  raged  with  prodigious  violence  ;  but  Vichnou
'  took  care  of  this ; for  immediately  afluming  the
6  fhape  of  a  fim,  he  fleered  the  fhip  with  his  tail,  as
'  though  it  had  been  a  rudder. The  God  who  was

*  now  both  fim  and  pilot, played  his  part  fo  well,
'  that  Sattiavarti  waited  very  quietly  in  his  Afylum,  'till
'  fuch  time  as  the  waters  were  run  off  from  the  furface
«  of  the  earth.'

Wz  come  now  to  China.  Among  whofe  Inhabi-
tants we  find  the  knowledge  of  the  Deluge  flill  re-
maining-, only  fome  afTert  that  it  was  but  partial  ;
tho'  others  maintain  that  it  was  general.  The  authors
of  the  Univerfal  Hi/lory,  Vol.  I.  p.  204.  (quoting
Anciennes  relations  des  Ind.es,  fcf  de  la  Chine,  p.  67.)
write  thus,  '  An  Arab,  who  travelled  into  China  about
4  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  century,  giving  an  ac-
'  count  of  a  converfation  he  had  with  the  Emperor,
'  among  other  things,  ays,  that  mentioning  the

*  Flood  to  that  Prince,  on  occafion  of  a  picture  of

*  Noah  which  he  mewed  him,  and  telling  him,  that

*  that  prophet,  and  thofe  that  were  faved  with  him
'  in  the  ark,  peopled  the  whole  earth ;  the  Emperor
'  laughed,  and  faid, '  Thou  art  not  deceived  as  fo
"  the  name  of  Noah  ;  but  as  to  the  univerfal  Deluge,
"  we  know  .nothing  of  it. It  is  true,  that  the  Deluge
t£  [fo  even  thefe  allow  a  Delu?e\  did  drown  a  part  of
"  the  earth  ;  but  it  did  not  reach  fo  far  as  our  country,
<<  nor  yet  to  the  Indies" Which  laft  circumftance


[  69  ]

is  juft  as  probable,  as  what,  tkofe  among  the  Per/tans
who  denied  the  tmiverfality  of  the  Deluge,  aiTerted,
viz.  that  it  reached  no  farther  than  fluhan^  a  city
on  the  .confines  of  their  country  (p.  65.).  But  we
have  already  (hewed  the  impojjibility  ot  fuch  a  Deluge  i
(p.  45.,  and  therefore  this  confeflion  muft  be  the
remains  of  the  Flood  in  the  time  of  Ncth.  And  that
it  really  is  fo,  or  that  the  tradition  of  the  Flood  as
held  by  fqme  of  them  is  the  lame  with  Noah's,  feems
certain,  becaufe  (as  Martinius  obferves,  Sin.  Hi/}.
Lib.  i.  p.  12.)  '  The  Cbinefe  hiftory  of  the  Deluge
'  fallcth  in  nearly  with  the  time  of  the  Noacbian,  for
'  it  preceded  the  common  chriftian  aera  about  three
'  thoufand  years.'  Befides  •,  many  reafons  may  be
given  to  prove  that  their  firft  king,  Fobi,  was  no
other  than  the  fcripture  Noab.  For  firft  (to  ufe  the
words  of  Dr.  Sbuckford  on  this  occafion  in  his  Gannett,
of  Sacr.  &?  Prof.  Hijtcry,  Vol.  I.  p.  29,  102.;  '  The
'  Cbinefe  antiquities  reach  no  higher  than  the  times
c  of  Noah,  for  Fobi  was  their  firft  King.  Their  wri-
'  ters  in  the  general  agree,  that  Fobi  lived  about  2952
'  years  before  Cbrift:  the  Author  Mirandorum  in  Sina

*  &  Europa,  computes  him  to  reign  but  2847  years
4  before  our  Saviour,  and  Alvarez  Scvedo  places  his

*  reign  not  fo  early,  imagining  it  to  be  but 2060
'  years  ;  and  all  thefe  computations  agree  well  enough

*  with  the  time  of  Noab ;  for  Noab  was  born,  accord-
4  ing  to  Arch-bifhop  U/her  2948  years, and died
'2016  years,  before  Cbrift;  fo  that  all  the  feveral

*  computations  fall  pretty  near  within  the  compals  of
'  Noab's  life.  And  therefore  we  may  conclude  Mofes's
'  Noab  and  the  Cbinefe  Fobi  to  be  the  fame  perfon.
'  But,  2.dly.  They  fay  Fobi  had  no  father,  i.  e.  Ncab
'  was  the/r/?  man  in  the  poftdiluvian  world  ;  his  an-
'  ceftors  perimed  in  the  Flood,  and  no  tradition  there-

*  of  being  preferved  in  the  Cbinefe  annals,  Noab  or

F  3


1 70]

6  Fohi  Hands  there  as  if  he  had  had  no  father  at  all.
'  fdly.  Fobfs  mother  is  faid  to  have  conceived  him

*  encompaffed  with  a  rainbow  \  a  conceit  very  probably

*  arifing  from  the  rainbow" 'j  firft  appearing  to  Noah,

*  and  the  Chineje  being  willing  to  give  fome  account
'  of  its  original. 4thly.  Fobi  is  faid  to  have  carefully

*  bredfeven  forts  of  creatures,  which  he  ufed  tofacri-

*  fice  to  the  fitpretne  Spirit  of  heaven  and  earth  •,  and
'  Mofes  tells  us,  that  Noah  took  into  the  ark^  of  every

*  clean  bead  by  fevens,  and  of  fowls  of  the  air  by  fevens.
c  And  after  the  flood  built  an  altar,  and  took  of  every
'  clean  beaft,  and  every  clean  fowl  and  offered  burnt-
«  offerings, fthly.  The  Chinefe  derive  the  name  of
'  Fohi,  from  his  oblation,  and  Mofes  gives  Noah  his
'  name  upon  account  of  the  grant  of  the  creatures  for
4  the  ufe  of  men,  which  he  obtained  by  his  Offering.

*  Lailly, the  Chinefe  hiflory  fuppofes  Fobi  to  have
'  fettled  in  the  province  of  Xeitfi,  which  is  the  North-
c  weft  province  of  China^  and  near  to  Ararat  where
4  the  Ark  refted.'

FROM  China  we  will  pafs  into  America ;  an  immenfe
traft  of  land  unknown  to  us  'till  lately ;  and  yet  when
firft  difcovered,  the  people  thereof  almoil  univerfally
retaining  the  knowledge  of  the  Deluge.  Acojla  in  his
Hiftory  of  the  Indies  (one  of  the  firft  Treatifes  printed
on  the  fubjecl:)  Lib.  i.  c.  25.  fpeaketh  thus  in  gene-
ral, '  They  [the  American  Indians]  make  great  men-
tion of  a  Deluge^  which  happened  in  their  country  :
but  we  cannot  well  judge,  if  this  Deluge  were  the
univerfol  (whereof  the  Scripture  makes  mention)  or
fome  particular  inundation  of  thofe  regions  where
they''  are.  Some  expert  men  fay,  That  in  thofe
countries  are  notable  figns  of  fome  great  inundation,
and  I  am  of  their  opinione  which  thinke  that  thefe
marks  and  Ihewes  of  a  deluge,  w.as  not  that  of  Noe,
but  fome  other  particular,  as  that  which  Plato


[7*  1

*  fpeaks  of,  or  Deucalion's  Flood  which  the  poets  fmg
*of:y  whatfoever  it  be,  the  Indians  fay,  That  ALL
'  men  were  drowned  in  this  Deluge. And  they  re-

*  port,  that  out  of  the  great  lake  Titicaca,  came  one

*  Viracocha,  which  (laid  in  Tiaguanaco,  where  at  this
4  day  there  are  to  be  feene  the  ruines  of  ancient  and

*  very  ftrange  buildings,  and  from  thence  came  to
'  Cufco ;  and  fo  begane  mankind  to  multiply. They
4  fhew  in  the  fame  ifland  a  fmall  lake,  where  they
'  faine  that  the  Sunne  hid  himfelf,  and  fo  was  pre-
'  ferved ,  and  for  this  reafon  they  make  great  facri-

*  fices  unto  him  in  that  place,  both  of  meepe  and
'  men. Others  report  that  fix,  or  I  know  not  what

*  number  of  men,  came  out  of  a  certaine  cave  by  a
f  windowe  ;  by  whom  men  firft  begane  to  multiply  ;

*  and  for' this  reafon  they  call  them  Pacaritampo. And

*  therefore  they  are  of  opinion,  that  the  Tambos  is  the

*  moft  ancient  race  of  men. They  fay  alfo,  thatA£z»-
'  go  Cupa,  whom  they  acknowledge  for  the  founder

*  and  chiefe  of  their  Inguas^  was  ifTued  of  that  race,
4  and  that  from  him  fprang  two  families  or  linages ;
c  the  one  of  Havan  Cufco,  the  other  of  Hurni  Cufco.

*  They  fay  moreover,  that  when  the  Kings  \lnguas\
e  attempted  warre  and  conquered  fundrie  provincies,

*  they  gave  a  colour  and  made  a  prerext  of  their  en-
4  terprize,  faying,  That  all  the  world  ought  to  ac-

*  knowledge  them  •,  for  all  the  world  was  renued  by
'  their  race  and  country  :  and  alfo,  that  the  true  reli-
«  gion  had  been  reveiled  to  them  from  heaven.'

BUT  as  America  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  little
world  of  itfelf,  it  may  be  expected  that  I  mould  be
fomewhat  more  explicit  than  giving  a  fingle  general
teftimony  •,  I  mail  therefore  traverfe  it  throughout,  as
I  have  done  in  relation  to  other  parts  of  the  earth.

'  See  Note  u  p.  64,  and  what  folfews  fhews  that  it  was  a  tradition
of  the  Vnivtrfal  Flood.


[7*1

AND  firft,  for  the  upper  or  Northern  part  of  Ame-
rica. HENNEPIN  in  his  new  dicovery  of  a  V aft  country
in  North- America,  (vid.  Continu.  of  the  new  Difcovery,
&c.  p.  54.)  fays  thus,  '  Other  Savages  upon  the  fame
'  continent,  are  of  opinion,  that  a  certain  Spirit,
'  called  Otkon  by  the  Iroquqis,  and  Atahauta  by  the
6  other  barbarians  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  St.  Lau-
'  rence,  is  the  Creator  of  the  world,  and  that  one
'  Mfffou  repaired  it  after  the  Deluge. — They  fay,  that
'  this  Meffbu  or  Otkon  being  a  hunting  one  day,  his

*  dogs  loft  themfelves  in  a  great  lake,  which  thereupon
'  over-flowing, covered the  whole  earth  in  a  fhort
'  time, and  fwallowed  up  the  world. They add,
'  that  this  Mejfou  or  Otkon  gathered  a  little  earth  to-
'  gether  by  the  help  of  fome  animals,  and  made  ufe

*  of  this  earth  to  repair  the  world  again.'

FROM  the  nations  of  the  Iroquois,  &c.  we  will  def-
cend  fouthward  to  Cuba.  ANTONIO  DE  HERRERA  in
his  Hiftory  cf  America  from  the  firft  difcovery  thereof  \
ivith  the  beft  accounts  the  people  could  give  of  their  anti-
quities; collected  from  the  Original  relations  fent  to  the
Kings  of  Spain ,  tranjlated  from  the  Spanijh,  by  Capt.
John  Stevens,  Decad.  I.  Book  ix.  C.  n.  informs  us,
'  That  the  people  of  Cuba  knew  that  heaven,  the
'  earth,  and  other  things  .had  been  created  :  and  faid
c  they  had  much  information  concerning  the  Flood,
f  and  that  the  world  had  been  deftroyed  by  water,  by

*  three  perfons  that  came  three  feveraJ  ways. Men  of
c  above  feventy  years  of  age  faid,  that  an  okl  man

*  knowing  the  Deluge  was  to  come,  built a  great

*  fliip,  and  went  into  it,  with  his  family  and  abun-

*  dance  of  animals,  that  he  fent  out  a  crow,  which  did

*  not  return,  flaying  to  feed  on  the  dead  bodies ;  and
4  afterwards  returned  with  a  green  branch  •,  with  other
'  particulars,  as  far  as  Noah's  fons  covering  him  when
'  drunk,  and  the  other  fcoffing  at  it;  adding,  that


[73  ]

the  Indians  defcended  from  the  latter,  and  therefore
had  no  coats  nor  cloaths  :  but  that  the  Spaniards
defcending  from  the  other  that  covered  him, -were
therefore  cloathed  and  had  horfes.  What  has  been
here  faid,  was  told  by  an  Indian  of  above  feventy
years  of  age  to  Gabriel  de  Cabrera,  who  one  day
quarrelling  with  him,  called  him  dog,  whereupon  he
afked,  Why  he  abufed  and  called  him  dog,  fmce
they  were  brethren,  as  defcending  from  the  two
fons  of  him  that  made  a  great  fhip,  with  all  the 'reft
that  has  been  faid  above.  The  lame  he  repeated
in  the  prefence  of  feveral  Spaniards,  after  his  matter
had  reported  it.'

FROM  Cuba  we  will  pafs  to  Terra-Firma,  the  firft
country  of  South- America.  The  laft  cited  Author  ac-
quaints us,  Decad.  n.  Book  I.  chap.  iv.  that  the
inhabitants  of  Caftilla  del  Oro  (in  lerra-Firma]  faid,
'  That  when  the  univerfal  deluge  happened,  one  man
'  with  his  wife  and  children,  efcaped  in  a  canoe,  and
'  that  from  them  the  world  had  been  peopled  ;  as  allo
'  that  there  was  one  LORD  in  heaven,  who  fent  the
'  rain  and  caufed  all  the  celeftial  motions.  That
'there  was  likewife  a  very  beautiful  woman  in  heaven*
'  with  a  child  ;  but  they  went  no  farther,  nor  did
'  they  know  any  thing  of  their  own  original.'

BORDERING  upon  'Terra-Firma  is  Peru.  '  The  an-
4  cient  Indians  (fays  the  above  cited  Author,  Decad.  in.

*  Book  xi.  chap.  i.  fpeaking  of  the  Peruvians)  report-
'  ed,  they  had  received  by  tradition  from  their  an-

*  ceftors,  that  many  years  before  there  were  any  Ingas
'  [Kings], at  the  time  when  the  country  was  very
'  populous,  there  happened a  great  Ficod ;  the  fea
'  breaking  out  beyond  its  bounds,  fo  that  the  Land
'  was  covered  with  water,  and  all  the  people  perifh-

*  ed. To  this  the  Guancas  inhabitating  the  xrale  of
'  Xaufca,  and  the  natives  of  Ckiquito  in  the  province


[74J

*  of  Collao,  add,  That  fome  perfons  remained  in  the
'  hollows  and  caves  of  the  higheft  mountains,  who
«  again  peopled  the  land. Others  of  the  mountain-

*  people  affirm,  that  all  perifhed  in  the  Deluge,  only
€  fix  perfons  being  faved  on  a  float ;  from  whom  de--
c  fcended  all  the  inhabitants  of  that  country.'

FROM  Peru  we  will  pafs  into  Brafil. NIEUHOFF  in
his  Voyages,  &c.  to  Brafil,  p.  150.  writes  thus :  '  The

*  m,oil  barbarous  of  the  Erajilians  inhabitating the

*  inland  countries  fcarce  knew  any  thing  of  religion  or

*  an  almighty  being. They  have  fome  knowledge
'  remaining  of  a  general  Deluge  it  being  their  opinion,

*  that  the  whole  race  of  mankind  were  extirpated  by

*  a  general  Deluge,  except  one  Man  and  his  own
'  filter,  who  being  with  child  before,  they  by  degrees

*  re-peopled  the  world.' But  Monf.  Thtvet  fpeaking
of  the  Brafilians  that  lived  near  the  fea-coaft,  viz.  at
Cap  de  Frie  or  C.  Frio,  gives  their  account  of  the  De-
Juge  very  circumftantially  thus  (Cofmographie  univer-
felle, Tome quatrieme, Livre  xxi.  cap.  iiii.)  «  Le
4  Deluge  done,  que  ces  Barbares  chantent  &  duquel  m*ont

*  fouventefois  parle,  &c. The  Deluge  which  thefe  Sa-
c  vages  talk  fo  much  about, of  which  they  fpoke
<  often  to  me,  was  in  their  opinion  univerfal ;  they
«  fay,  that  Sommay,  a  Carribee  of  great  dignity, — had
«  two  children,  the  name  of  one  was  Tametohttfre,

*  the  name  of  the  other  Ariconte,  who  were  of  differ-

*  ent  complexions  and  natures,  and  therefore  mortally

*  hated  each  other. Tamendonare  (they  fay)  was  a

*  good  ceconomift,  having  a  wife  and  children,  anc^

*  took  great  delight  in  cultivating  the  earth:  Ariconte,

*  on  the  contrary, regarded  not  this, being  folely

*  bent  on  war,  and  defiring  nothing  but  to  fubdue  by

*  his  power  all  the  neighbouring  nations,  and  even
'  his  brother. It  happened  as  this  warrior  returned
'  one  day  from  the  battle,  he  brought  the  arm  of


[75]

*  his  enemy  to  his  brother  Tamendonare^  telling  him

*  with  great  haughtinefs,  go,  coward  as  thou  art,  I

*  mall  have  this  wife  and  children  in  my  power,  thou
c  art  not  ftrong  enough 'to  defend  thyfelf. Tamjtuio-
1  nare  hearing  his  brother  fpeak  thus,  was  very  much
'  grieved  at  his  pride,  and  faid  to  him,  If  thou  wert

*  fo  valiant  as  thou  boafteft,  thou  wouldft  have  brought
'  thine  enemy  entire. Ariconte  incenfed  at  this  re-
'  proach,  threw  the  arm  againft  the  door  of  his  bro-
6  ther's  houfe  :  but  at  the  fame  inftant,  the  whole  vil-

*  lage,  where  they  were,  was  carried  up  into  the  fky,
«  and  they  remained  on  earth. Tamendonare  feeing
'  this,  whether  out  of  aftonilhment  or  paffion,  ftruck
'  the  ground,  fo  violently,  that  out  of  it  ifiued  a  great
'  fource  of  water,  which  flowed  fo  high,  that  in  a

*  fhort  time  it  reached  the  hills  and  mountains,  and

*  feemed  to  exceed  the  height  of  the  clouds,  and  which

*  continued  till  the  earth  was  entirely  covered. The
'  two  brothers feeing  this, and  follicitous  to  lave
«  themfelves,  afcended  the  higheft  mountains  of  all
'  the  country,  and  with  their  wives  got  upon  the  trees
c  that  were  thereon. famendonan  climbed  up  a  tree,

*  named  Pindona^  (of  which  tfrere  are  two  forts  ;  one,
'  whofe  fruit  and  leaves  are much  larger  than  the

*  other)  taking  with  him  one  of  his  wives  :  Ariconte
'  with  his  wife  climbed  up  another  tree,  named  Geni-
'  par  •,  that  they  might  fee  if  the  waters  were  abated.
8  Whilft  they  were  there,  Ariconte  offered  fome  of  the

*  fruit  of  his  tree  to  his  wife,  faying, break  off  a
'  piece  of  this, and  let  it  fall  down  ;  which  being

*  done,  they  knew  that  it  was  not  yet  time  to  defcend
'  into  the  vallies,  and  that  the  waters  were  yet  very
4  high. They  affert,  that  by  this  deluge  all  mankind

*  and  all  animals  were  drowned,  except  the  two  bro-
4  thers  and  their  wives :  from  whom  afterwards  fprung

*  two  different  people,  called  'Tonafearrt^  furnamed


Toupinambaux,  and  the  Tonaiatz  Hoyanas,  furnam-
ed  Tominous,  who  live  in  perpetual  difcord  and  war:
hence  alfo  it  is  that  the  'Toupinambaux^  when  they
are  defirous  of  praifing  themfelves  as  above  their
neighbours,  fay,  we  are  defcended  from  Tamendo-
nare^  and  you  from  Ariconte ;  as  if  by  this  they
would  infer,  that  Tamendonare  was  a  better  man  than
Ariconte.''

THUS  I  have  travelled  quite  round  the  world,  and
fhewed  that  the  fame  of  the  Deluge  has  gone  through-
out. I  am  now  to  draw  fome  conclufions  or  corol-
laries from  what  has  been  advanced.  Thefe  fliall  re-
fpect  principally  the  certainty  that  there  has  been  a
Flood, — that  it  was  univerfa/, — that  the  Mofaic  account
is  true  or  written  by  one  infpired  by  GOD,  the  author
of  the  Event.

FIRST,  with  regard  to  the  certainty  of  the  Flood,  I

may  argue  in  the  manner  of  Ariftotele,  '  What  feems

true  to  fome  wife  men  is  fomeivhat  probable ; what

feems  fo  to  moft  or  to  all  wife  men  is  very  probable  -,

what  moft  men,  both  wife  and  unwife,  affent  unto,

doth  {till  more  refemble  truth  ;  but  what  men  generally

confent  in,  hath  the  higheft probability ,  and  approaches

near  to  demonftrable  truth  :'  Surely  then,  what  men

uviverfally  agree  in,  what,  I  may  fay,  all  nations  (o-

therwife  differing  in  opinion,  cuftoms,  language,  re~

ligion,  and  even  ignorant  of  one  another's  exiftence)

have,  throughout  all  known  ages,  affented  unto,  may

well  pafs  for  an  eftablffid  axiom  and  a  demon/arable

truth. And  fuch  I  have  fhewed  is  the  ftate  of  the

cafe  with  regard  to  the  knowledge  of  the  deluge.

AGAIN  ;  the  report  of  the  Flood  muft  have  come
from  fome  quarter  or  other,  and  when  or  wherefoever
it  was  firft  publifhed,  the  relation  of  a  fact  fo  extra-
ordinary, would  naturally  raife  thecuriofity  of  the  firft
hearers,  and  excite  them  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of


[77]

it.  Now  if  they  difcovered  that  the  report  was  falfe
or  groundlefs ;  the  hiftory  would  have  been  immedi-
ately difcredited,  and  the  relater  and  his  ftory  no
more  heard  of:  But  the  tradition  prevailing  univer-
fatly,  it  is  certain  that  fuch  an  event  did  "happen  ; —
and  moreover  that  it  was  univerfal  in  its  effects,  elfe
it  could  not  have  been  tiniverfally  believed.

WHICH  (feccnd)  article  is  further  evident  from  the
afore-cited  teflimonies  themfelves  ;  for  in  all  thofe
that  are  tolerably  full  and  explicit,  we  find  a  method
mentioned  by  which  a  few  efcaped  out  of  the  general
deftru<5tion,  from  whom  the  world  was  afterwards
peopled  •,  which  is  a  plain  confeffion,  that  according
to  their  opinion  the  whole  race  of  mankind  (except  the
few  allowed  to  be  faved)  was  defrayed'*  and  fo  the
deluge  unrperfal.

BUT  farther  yet  •,  an  univerfal  deluge,  is  not  an  ar-
ticle of  mere  fpeculation,  or  a  point,  the  certainty  of
which,  might  be  proved  only  by  properly  examining
the  afierter  thereof,  but  is  an  Event,  a  Faff  in  Nature,
and  of  fuch  a  peculiar  kind  that  did  fuch  ever  happen,
it  could  not  but  have  left  undeniable  marks  of  its  ex-
iftence  on  every  part  of  the  earth ;  and  fo  the  relater
of  fuch  an  event  might  have  been  confuted  or  his  ad-
verfaries  convinced  on  the  fpot.  Efpecially  was  this
confutation  or  confirmation  eafily  to  be  eftabliflied  in
the  firft  ages  of  the  world ;  or  rather,  This  is  a  point
which  could  not  but  be  then  fettled.  For  as  men  be-
gan to  multiply  after  the  flood,  they  would  of  courfe
feparate  -and  divide,  and  fo  re-people  the  earth  ;  and
as  they  thus  feparated  they  could  not  fail  of  knowing
whether  the  Flood  was  univerfal  or  not.  For,  if  they
could  find  no  human  inhabitants  in  the  countries  to
which  they  came,  nor  any  marks  of  their  former  works,
as  houfes,  palaces,  temples,  gardens,  &c.  and  could
fee  nothing  but  ruin  and  devaluation  in  the  things  that


t  7§  3

did  remain,  they  would  certainly  conclude  that  the
deluge  was  univerfal:  On  the  contrary,  if,  as  they
difperfed  or  endeavoured  to  difperfe,  they  found  the
neighbouring  countries  ftill  full  of  inhabitants*  the
lands  cultivated,  &c.  they  would  as  certainly  conclude
that  the  deluge  had  not  been  univerfal.  And  from
this  infallible  and  unavoidable  means  of  knowing  the
truth,  the  relation  of  the  flood  would  have  been  handed
down  to  pofterity  •,  but  pofterity  all  over  the  world
fpeak  of  it  as  univerfal ;  or  allow  that  there  has  been
a  deluge,  which  comes  to  the  fame  tiling-,  for  had  it
been  partial  or  extended  only  over  a  few  countries,  the
remaining  part  of  the  world  would  have  been  utterly
ignorant  of  fiich  an  event,  or  at  leaft  if  they  fpoke  of
it,  they  would  not  have  acknowledged,  as  they  gene-
rally do,  that  it  happened  in  their  own  country,  and
have  fuppofed  that  a  king  or  an  eminently  righte-
ous perfon  of  their  own  nation  (including  fome  others)
was  preferved  from  the  deftruction.  All  this  abun-
dantly proves  that  the  deluge  was  univerfal.

THE  certainty  and  universality  of  the  flood  appear-
ing thus  evident,  I  mall  now,  (thirdly),  make
fome  obfervations  concerning  the  Truth,  Perfection,
and  Divinity  of  the  Mofaic  account.

FIRST,  as  Truth  is  the  purer  the  nearer  to  the  foun-
tain head,  fo  Mofes  has  the  advantage  of  all  other
hiftorians  in  this  refpecl:  j  none  can  prefume  to  equal
him  in  antiquity  ;  he  is  allowed  by  all  learned  men
whatever  to  have  wrote  a  confiderable  diftance  of  time
before  them  all.

AND  as  he  lived  nearer  the  event  than  any  other
writer,  fo  is  his  relation  more  full  and  exprefs  •,  nay,
if  you  take  all  the  above-mentioned  heathen  accounts
together,  and  collect  from  them  every  different  part,
you  cannot  exceed  the  Mofaic  in  fulnefs  of  defcription  >


t79l

far  lets  can  you  do  this,  if  you  add  to  it  the  confide-
ration  I  have  mentioned  p.  i.

AND  not  only  in  fulnefs  of  matter  does  Mofes  fur-
pafs,  but  in  juftnefs  of  thought  and  diction,  and  in
the  confiftency  of  the  icheme  he  delivers.  Jn  the
heathen  hiftorians  there  are  many  imperfections  of
this  kind,  fome  failing  in  more,  fome  in  fewer  arti-
cles. But  Mofes  tho'  he  extends  the  duration  of  the
Deluge  far  beyond  what  any  of  them  do,  and  afferts
its  Univerfality  in  the  higheft  degree,  has  yet  provided
againtt  all  exigencies ;  he  fafely  embarks  the  numerous
creatures  in  the  ark,  prepares  every  thing  necefTary
for  their  being  and  well-being  there,  and  as  fafely
lands  them.

As  the  heathen  accounts  differ  more  or  lefs  from
the  Mofaic,  which  was  confcffedly  prior  to  them  all,
fo  we  may  afTert  of  the  relaters  of  them,  as  Scaliger  is
faid  to  write  of  the  Greek  hiftorians,  '  They  ought  ra-

*  ther  to  be  pitied  for  not  having  had  the  advantage

*  of  authentic antiquities  and records,  to  let  them
'  right,  than  to  forfeit  their  authority  for  fueh deviations

*  from  the  truth  of  the  ftory,  as  render  their  confir-

*  mation  of  the  truth  of  the  Sacred  Hiftory  much
1  ftronger,  becaufe  much  lefs  to  be  lufpedled,  than  if

*  they  agreed  with  it  in  every  circumftance.' So  that
the  imperfect  and  in  many  refpects  falfe  accounts  of
the  Heathen  bear  witnefs  to  the  truth  and  perfeftioa
of  that  of  Mcfes.

BUT  what  diftingiufhes  the  Mofaic  writings,  and
fets  them  in  an  eminently  confpicuous  light,  and  inti-
mates their  high  Antiquity  and  Divinity,  is,  that  in
them  there  is  no  reference  made,  for  the  truth  of  what
they  contain,  to  any  prior  traditionary  accounts,  hif-
tories. .  or-  records,  as  is  the  ufual  manner  with  other
hiftorians  •,  which  kind  of  proof  all  mere  human
writers  are  glad  to  embrace,  thinking  nothing  more


[8o]

venerable  and  true  than  that  which  has  been  delivered
down  to  them  from  their  forefathers.  But  Mofes,  as
greatly  fuperior  to  them  in  time,  fo  much  more  in
dignity  and  authority,  demands  audience  from  us  as
from  GOD  himfelf  •,  he  refers,  for  the  truth  of  what
he  fays,  to  an  immediate  Infpiration  from  the  Deity,
the  Author  and  Difpofer  of  all  events ;  I  AM,^fays
he  (Exod.  iii.  14.)  hath  fent  me.,  JEHOVAH  HIMSELF
commimoned  him  to  act,  and  a  Thus  faith  the.  LORD
authorifed  him  to  write.

AND  had  not  Mofes  been  thoroughly  perfuaded,
that  he  was  infpired  by  GOD  in  his  writings,  he
certainly  never  would  have  ventured  the  truth  of
all  he  fays  upon  the  afiertion  of  a  moft  impro-
bable and  aftonifhing  fact,  viz.  That  the  whole  world
had  been  deftroyed  by  a  flood  of  waters  -, — a  Fact,  which
lie  could  not  by  any  natural  means  have  had  proof  of,
unlefs  he  had  travelled  all  over  the  world,  or  had  re-
ceived his  information  from  one  that  had,  which  I  be-
lieve no  perfon  will  fuppofe.  any  one  to  have  done  in
thofe  early  ages  •, — a  Fact  too,  the  truth  or  falfity  of
which  could  not  but  have  been  difcovered,  as  mankind
difperfed  to  re-people  the  earth,  or  as  commerce  had
opened  a  correfpondence  throughout  •, — a  Fact  alfo,
which  Mofes,  as  a  human  writer,  does  not  appear  to
have  been  under  any  neceflity  of  mentioning  at  all ;
or  if  he  thought  proper  to  record  it»  he  might  not
have  made  it  fo  extenfive  as  he  has  done,  and  yet  in
all  probability  have  faved  his  credit  as  an  author.
But,  inftead  of  all  this,  confcious  of  Truth  and  of
the  unerring  Wifdom  of  his  Infpirer,  he  openly  de-
clares the  Univerfality  of  the  Flood,  and  that  the  whole
•world  was  deftrcyed,  and  leaves  the  iffne  to  Providence
and  the  difquifition  of  the  truth  of  his  afifertion  to  fu-
ture ages.


[  8.  ]

BUT  what  fets  Mofes  in  the  higheft  point  of  view,
and  his  writings  on  the  firmed  foundation,  is  his  ex-
erting fupernatural  powers,  performing  MIRACLES*
and  delivering  PROPHECIES,  in  proof  of  his  divine
Jnfpiration:  fome  of  which  are  remaining  at  this  day.
J  mall  mention  one,  refpefting  the  affair  of  the  £>£/#£<?.
Mofes  writes  thus,  Gen.  ix.  12.  And  GQD  /aid.  This  is
the  token  of  the  Covenant  which  I  make  between  me  and
you,  and  every  living  Creature,  for  PERPETUAL  GENE-
RATIONS :  I  do  fet  my  Bow  in  the  Cloud?  and  it  Jhall
came  to.  pafs,  when  1  bring  q  cloud  over  the  earth,  that
the  Bow  /ball  be  fan  in  tbe  cloud :  and  I  will  remember
my  Covenant  'which  is  between  me  and  you,  and  every
living  creature  of  all  fleft)  •,  and  the  waters  Jball  no  more
become  a  flood  to  dejlroy  allfiejb..  This  Token  we  fee
is  frequently  exhibited,  fo  that  this  faithful  IVitmfs  in
heaven*  is  ftjll  prefer ved.  No  flood  has  really  yet
happened  (fmcethat  on  account  of  which  this  promife
was  made)  in  which  the  whole  earth  has  been  drowned.
Now  if  there  be  any  God  fuperior  to  Mefes's  GQD,  it
behoves  him  to  deftroy  this  Prophecy  by  annihilating
thefign  of  it  out  of  heaven,  or  the  remembrance  of  it
G

i>9-+*";r f-:  .-.'  —  -.•  •- — — : •- — — ~ r~r  ~— — " •  ?"~P^T " ••••

»  That  tbe  rnjracles  aflbrted  in  thp  Bible  to  have  been  performed
by  Mcfts,  were  really  tranfaftcd  as  there  related,  and  of  courfe  that
the  do^rines  delivered  upon  the  authority  of  thofe  rpiracks  are  in-
difputably  true  or  were  of  divine  Infpiraticn,  the  Reader  may  fee  a
regular  and  fuccinft  proof  of  in  the  Rev.  Mr.  A.  S.  CATCOTT'S  Str-
marn  p.  5  51 — 48  It  wou'd  be  tpo  tedious  to  introduce  fiich  a  proof
here,  and  therefpre  the  Author  reds  the  evidence  of  Mofes'i  Infpira-
tion  upon  a  Prophecy,  relative  to  t)ie  Subjcdl  he  is  treating  of,  and
which  is  exiftent  at  this  day,  and  affords  ocular  Demonltration  of
Mofcsi  I^ifllon  fron)  the  Divine  Being.

a  That  thefe  words  of  the  Fj«l?/rijt  (Pfol.  Ixxxix.  37.)  are  really
to  be  underftood  of  the  Rainbow,  (and  not  of  the  Moon,  as  ufually
interpreted)  appears  to  be  fufiiciently  evident  fioin  what  the  Author
of  An  Effay  on  the  proper  Lr//oni,  npjbhifid  l<y  the  Lftatfy  of  tbe  Cbunh
,  &.-C.  fays  on  this  text,  Vol.11.  r\  87.


[82 ]

cut  of  the  mind  of  man,  elfe  it  will  remain  an  indubita-
ble proof  of  Mofes's  Miflion  from  the  Supreme  Being,
— the  GOD  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Creator,  Former,

and  Preferver  of  all  Things  in  this  world. If  it

be  faid,  that  the  Rainbow  was  exiftent  before  the  flood -,
therefore  the  argument  will  not  ftand  good.  I  reply,
that  fuppofing  it  to  have  been  fo,  it  could  not  have
exifted  as  a  Sign  from  the  Supreme  Being,  that  a  flood
of  waters  mould  never  cover  the  earth  (becaufe  fuch
did  cover  it)  and  therefore  it  will  not  in  the  leaft  affect
the  argument  here  ufed  ;  which  does  not  refpeft  its
bare  natural  State,  but  its  fuper-natural  ufe  and  divine
appointment.  .And  left  it  mould  be  imagined,  that
Mofes  afligned  this  token  as  of  himfelf,  and  to  mew
the  folly  of  fuch  imaginations  when  men  prefume  to
make  appearances  in  heaven  figns  or  tokens  of  things
upon  earth,  without  a  divine  direction,  I  mail  here
quote  a  Fact  recorded  by  Gaffendus  in  his  Animadver-
fions  on  the  tenth  book  of  Diogenes  Laertius,  Tom.  II.
p.  93~8.  *  Memorabile  certe  eft,  &c.  /'.  e.  It  is  really

*  worth  remarking,  what  is  written  in  the  hiftories,

*  and  in  almofi.  all  the  books  of  the  laft  age :  When
4  the  Aftrologers,  by  reafon  of  the  many  great  con-
'  junctions  of  the  Planets,  and  not  a  few  of  them  hap-
'  'ning  in  the  watry  Conftellations  foretold,  that  in  the
'  month  of  February  in  the  year  1524,  there  would  be

*  a  general  Deluge, and  fo  great  a  devaflation of
'  things, as  was  never  heard  of  before. So  that-
'  numbers  of  perfons  in  France, Spain, Italy, and

'  Germany,  being  terrified  with  thefe  apprehenfions,
'  had  prepared  Ships,  or  had  got  together  what  pro-
'  vifions  they  could,  and  other  necerTaries,  and  made
'  to  the  higheft  places :  But  fo  it  happened,  that  the
c  whole  month  of  February  was  the  moft  ferene  and
c  fair  weather  ever  known ;  apparently,  as  if  it  had
'  been  fo  ordered  on  purpofe  for  refuting  the  predic-


'  tions  of  thefe  Aftrologers  (when  otherwife  it  is  very

*  unufual,  that  the  month  of  February  fliould  be  with-
'  out  rain  •,)  which  even  Cardan  and  Origan  [two  noted
'  judicial  Aftrologers  of  that  time]  could  not  deny ;

*  greatly  grieving  that  this  Judgment  concerning  the

*  Deluge  was  declared  by  Sttffler  fo  much  to  the  in-
'  famy  of  Aftrology.' As  long  then  as  the  above
Appeal  to  the  true  GOD,  and  Challenge  to  all  falfe
Deities  remains, fo  long  will  each  fucceeding  age
have  undeniable  proof,  nay  ocular  Demonftration  of
Mofes's  Mijfion  from,  and  Infpiration  by,  the  GOD  of
all  truth,  power,  and  wifdom. And  when  we  con-
fider  that  this  bold  Appeal  has  been  recorded  in  wri-
ting, already  above  three  thoufand  years,  and  no  de-
teftion  yet  made  that  it  was  falfe  or  unauthorifed  by
the  true  GOD,  we  may  juftly  fuppofe  it  will  remain  as
long  as  the  Heavens  themfelves  mail  endure,  /.  e.  to
the  Confummation  of  all  things.


AND  this  I  think  a  proper  place  (before  I  have
quite  done  with  Scripture  and  ancient  Hiftory)  to  take
notice  of  his  Lordlhip's  objection  to  the  Univerfality
of  the  Flood  drawn  from  the  peopling  of  America,  and
its  being  inhabited  with  wild  beafts,  &c.  when  we  firft
difcovered  it.  To  account  for  which  he  fuppofes,
'  that  fome  parts  of  the  habitable  ante-diluvian  world,

•  which  by  the  force  of  the  Deluge  were  feparated  into
4  iflands,  and  were  divided  from  the  Continent  where  -
'  on  the  Ark  landed,  were  in  fome  fort  exempted  from
4  the  common  calamity  brought  upon  the  reft  of  the

*  world,  &c.5 But  how  inconfiftent  this  fuppofition
is  with  his  own  defcription  of  the  Deluge  and  with  the
truth  of  Scripture,  I  have  (hewed  already  (p.  9,  &c.) »
and  alfo  obferved,  that  fuppofing  we  could  not  folve
this  difficulty,  yet  a  feemingly  unaccountable  event  in


Nature  (or  rather  that  which  may  appear  unaccountar
ble  to  fome,  but  not  fo  to  others)  ought  not  to  fet  afide
the  united  evidence  of  Scripture,  Reafon,  and  Fact,
concurring  in  all  other  refpects  to  prove  the  Point  unT
der  confideration.

BUT  to  mew  bow  or  by  what  means  America  became
inhabited  by  men  and  other  animals.

AND  here  it  will  be  neceffary  to  premife  a  few  things,
introductory  to  the  difcuflion  of  this  article.

FIRST,  then,  America  was  peopled  after  the  Flood.
This  is  certain  from  the  inhabitants  thereof  having  the
knowledge  of  that  Event.

SECONDLY,  Since  the  Tradition  of  the  Flood  was
univerfally  fpread  throughout  that  vaft  tract  of  land,
and  acknowledged  by  the  feveral  nations  thereof  to
have  been  delivered  down  to  them  from  the  higheil
antiquity,  we  may  reafonably  fuppofe,  that  it  was
peopled  foon  after  the  deluge  ;  whilft  the  knowledge
of  the  Fact  was  frem  and  lively  upon  the  minds  of
the  original  inhabitants.

AND  fince,  when  this  part  of  the  world  was  firft
tlifcovered  by  the  Europeans*  the  inhabitants  were
found  to  be  ignorant  of  the  art  of  writing  with  letters*
and  could  record  things  only  in  the  ancient  hiercglyphi-
cal  way,  by  figns  and  emblems,13  it  feems  alfo  hence
evident  that  it  was  peopled  early.

WHICH  will  further  appear  from  their  ignorance  of
the  art  of  working  iron  into  ufeful  tools  or  warlike  wea-.
pons,  'till  the  method  was  difcovered  to  them  by  the
Spaniards.  For  tho'  there  is  plenty  of  iron-ore  in  A-
merica,  yet  the  ancient  inhabitants  were  ignorant  of  the
ufe  which  the  Afiatics  and  Europeans  make  of  it;  and
initead  thereof  ufed  Ihells,  bones,  or  generally  hard

b  Furchas's  Pilgrimage,  p.  8 1 1 .  quoting  dccfla,  Gamqra,  Peter
Martyr,  &c.


ftones,  which  with  immenfe  labour  and  trouble  they
fhaped  by  grinding  or  whetting,  into  the  utenfils  or
weapons  the^  wanted,6  And  tho'  the  art  of  manu-
facturing iron,  was  known  before  the  flood  (Gen.  iv.
22.d)  yet  it  feems  to  have  been  loft,  foon  after  ;  and  the
lofs  was  probably  owing  to  thefe  two  caufes  ;  firft,
that  as  all  the  metallic  and  mineral  bodies  that  were
in  the  earth  before  the  Deluge  were  deftroyed  and  even
diflblved  during  that  Cataftrophe  (as  will  be  fhewn
hereafter)  fo  of  courfe  all  the  inftruments  and  utenfils
that  were  made  of  thefe  bodies  perimed  likewife  •,  which
would  certainly  tend  much  towards  obliterating  the
memory  of  ftich  inftruments  in  the  poft-diluvian
world.  And  fecondly,  fince,  for  fome  confiderable
time  after  the  flood,  the  inhabitants  of  the  new  earth
would  be  employed  and  their  time  wholly  taken  up
in  providing  and  fecuring  the  common  necefiaries  of
life  at  firft  hand,  or  when  they  came  to  feparate  from
one  another  in  travelling  and  feeking  out  agreeable
countries  to  inhabit,  fo  the  art  of  mining  and  work-
ing metals,  and  fuch  like  knowledge,  (among  their
cares  and  concerns  for  many  things  immediately  need-
ful and  abiblutely  neceflary)  might  be  forgotten.  And
it  feems  certain  that  this  art  was  loft,  'till  fome  time
after  the  flood  ;  for  there  are  found,  even  at  this  day,
in  almoft  all  parts  of  the  world  many  inftruments,
fuch  as  axes,  chifels,  heads  of  arrows,  &c.  conlifting
wholly  of  Stene^  generally  of  the  hardeft  kind-,  which
certainly  were  made  before  the  ufe  of  iron  was  reco-


c  Dr.  WOODWARD'S  Lefters,  relating  to  the  method  of  Fojpls  ;
Letter  III.

d  And7M!a~h,  fit  atfi  tare  TuBAL-CAlN,  an  inf.ruStr  of  cverv
artificer  in  brafs  and  inn.  From  this  petfon's  N.7n:f  and  Ojfj  :ce  %var.
the  -fictitious  VUL-CAN  of  ths  Latins.


[  36]

vered  after  the  deluge,  for  they  are  neglected  and  dif-
ufed  wherever  iron  is  known.  And  fmc;e  when  we  fir  ft
difcovered  the  Americans  they  had  no  other  tools  or
weapons  but  fuch  as  were  formed  out  of  Stone,  &c.  it
is  evident,  that  they  departed  from  us  before  the
working  of  iron  was  in  practice  after  the  Flood  ;  for
had  they  ever  known  this  ufeful  art,  it  is  not  proba-
ble that  they  would  ever  have  loft  it,  any  more  than
ourfelves  j  and  fmce  we  have  retained  it  for  thefe  fe-
veral  ages  back,  even  from  time  immemorial,  it  is
certain  that  the  Americans  departed  from  us  even  be-
fore that  early  time.

ANOTHER.  Gonfideration  which  may  be  brought  in

favour  of  the  early  peopling  of  America,  is,  that  the

inhabitants  were  ignorant  of  that  noble  and  ufeful

Structure  the  Arch,  and  even  of  building  with  mortar

or  any  kind  of  Cement-,*  and  yet  their  edifices  con-

fifted  of  Stones  great  beyond  imagination,5  and  thefe

Stones  were  fo  artificially  wrought,  and  placed  upon

one  another,  that  in  many  places  their  joinings  were

not  vifible:  'And  that  which  is  moft  ftrange  (fays

Acofla],  thefe  Stones  not  being  cut  nor  fquared  to

join,  but  contrariwife  very  unequal  one  with  another

both  in  form  and  greatnefs, yet  did  they  join  them

together  without  cement,  after  an  incredible  manner :

all  this  was  done  by  the  force  of  men, who  endured

their  labour  with  an  invincible  patience.' Certainly

if  they  had  known  the  ufe  of  mortar  or  cement,  they

would  never  have  taken  fuch  a  tedious  method  as

this. Now  the  firft  poft-diluvian  account  we  have

of  Cement  being  ufed  in  building  was  at  the  'Toiler  of


f  See  ACOSTA'S  Hrftory  of  the  Indl<s,  Book  vi.  chap.  14.

8  AcoK».  meafured  one  of  thefe  Stones  in  a  building,  and  it  was
38  feet  long,  18  broad,  and  6  thick;  which  I  think,  vaftly  exceeds
any  of  thofe  that  are  now  remaining  in  our  ancient  Druidical  Temples.


f  87]

Babel  (Gen.  xi.j;  but  as  this  in  all  probability  was
that  pitchy  fubftance,  called  Afpbaltus,  with  which
that  Country  particularly  abounds,  fo  unlefs  the  Ameri-
cans had  difcovered  a  fubftance  of  a  fimilar  nature  yi
their  new  land,  they  might  not  think  of  making  ufe
of  any  other,  and  be  as  much  at  a  lofs  for  what  we
now  call  mortar  as  if  they  had  never  heard  of  any
thing  like  it.  So  that  indeed  we  cannot  conclude
from  hence  that  they  departed  from  us  before  the
Building  of  Babel  but  only  before  the  general  ufe  of
Mortar  or  Cement;  and  even  this  was  very  early,  as
the  remains  of  the  oldeft  Buildings  in  the  world  fuch
as  the  Pyramids  of  Egypt  &c.  teftify,  in  which  the
mortar  is  vifible  at  this  day.h

THE  laft  circumftance  I  mail  mention,  tending  to
prove  the  Antiquity  of  the  American  Colonies  (for  I
might  enlarge  upon  feveral,  as  their  ignorance  of
coined  money,  the  plough,  the  bellows,  &c.  all  which
would  ferve  to  mew  that  they  departed  from  us  in  the
very  infancy  of  the  poft-diluvian  world,  before  thefe
arts  were  known  to  mankind)  is,  that  they  were  igno-
rant of  Shipping  or  the  art  of  making  large  veflels
with  Sails  &c.  till  they  firft  faw  ours  ;  knowing  be-
fore no  other  kind  of  veflels  than  fmall  boats^  made  of
the  bark  of  trees,  fkins  of  fifties,  &c.  or  canoes,
confiding  of  a  fingle  trunk  of  a  tree  hollowed  out  by
means  of  fire,  and  thefe  to  be  directed  only  by  the
help  of  oars  or  a  paddle.1  From  whence  I  would

THIRDLY  obferve, that  America  muft  have  been

peopled  by land: for  had  the  original  inhabitants

been  carried  thither  in  a  Ship, either  by  diftrefs  of

weather  or  defignedly  (both  which  are  fuppofitions

G  4


h  Dr.  SHAW'S  Travels,  p.  415.

1  PURCHAS'S  Pilgrimage,  p.  750,  755  &c. HEYLYN'S  Cafmogra

ic,  p.  10 1 6.


[88]

that  can  fcarcely  be  allowed  when  we  confider  the  dif-
ficulties attending  them)  they  certainly  would  never
have  forgot  that  ufeful  part  of  (hipping,  the  Sail',
even  fuppofing  that  fabricating  a  large  veflel  might
be  inconvenient  or  impofiible  to  them  when  they  fir  ft
arrived  on  their  new  land,  and  therefore  the  know-
ledge of  it  be  loft  to  their  pofterity ;  yet,  I  fay,  the
ufe  of  the  Sail  -would  in  all  probability  have  remained
among  them,  fmce  it  would  have  been  of  fuch  fervice
in  navigating  their  fmall  canoes.

BUT  what  feems  moft  to  confirm  the  opinion,  that
America  was  peopled,  or  at  leaft  (locked  with  animals,
by  land,  is,  that  that  vaft  Continent  is  every  where  in-
habited by  wild  beafts  and  the  moft  noxious  creatures,
fuch  as  Lions,  Tygers,  Rattle -fnakes,  &c.  which  we
cannot  imagine  that  any  perfons  would  be  at  the  trou-
ble, or  expofe  themfelves  to  the  danger,  of  conveying
over  thither  in  Ships,  and  at  the  fame  time  leave  be-
hind them  fuch  ufeful  creatures  as  the  Horfe,  the
Camel,  &c.  which  were  not  known  in  the  Weft-
Indies  'till  tranfported  thither  from  us.k  Nay,
what  is  moft  remarkable,  America  has  creatures  pecu-
liar to  itfelf,  fuch  at  leaft  as  are  not  known  to  exift  in
any  other  part  of  the  world-,  which  therefore  cannot  be
fuppofed  to  have  been  carried  from  hence  thither  :
and  befides  they  are  of  fuch  a  nature  that  ot  themfelves
they  could  not  have  crofied  the  Seas,  and  therefore
muft  have  come  thither  by  land.1'

IT  appearing  then  thus  clear  that  America  was  peo-
pled early  and  by  land^  the  next  queftion  to  be  folved
is,  by  whom  or  from  -what  land?

IN  order  to  folve  which,  Let  itbeobferved,  that  the
facred  and  moft  ancient  Hiftorian  informs  us,  in  his
account  of  mankind  after  the  flood,  \h*\.  the  whole  earlfr

k  PURCHAS  p.  732 — 35. HEYLYN,  p.  1017 — 19.


was  over fj>rtad  by  thl  defcwdtnts  dftht  tfctt  $*ns  rfNoab,
— Sbcnt)  Ham  and  J-aphet,  who  went  forth  of  the  Ark*
Gen.  ix.  19.  From  whence  it  is  certain,  that  no  part
of  the  world  could  have  been  peopled  by  any  other
anti-diluvians  than  thofe  that  went  out  of  the  Ark;
and  of  courie  that  America  was  peopled  jfter  the  Flood,
and  by  the  Pofterity  of  Ninth.

SECONDLY,  Let  us  confide^  that  Mofis  proceeds
next  to  give  us  the  names  of  the  firft  defceridents  of
theie  three  Sons,  and  to  mention  the  names  of  the
Countries  which  the  principal  of  them  inhabited,
tfpecially  thofe  whofe  affairs  would  afterwards  be
mixed,  or  have  Ibrtie  connexion,  with  the  Tranf-
actions  related  in  the  Bible,  particularly  with  tlielfravti-
tijb  Nation.  But  as  tor  the  reft  he  takes  little  or  no
notice  of  them.

So  that,  Thirdly,  We  cannot  expect  that  any  great
notice  fhould  be  taken  of  the  inhabitants  of  ib  diftant
a  part  of  the  world  (from  that  where  Mofis  wrote,
and  the  intent  of  his  writing)  *s  the  Continent  of
America  •,  and  yet,  one  would  be  apt  to  imagine,  that
as  He,  who  infpired  Mofes  in  his  account,  f&w  aU
things  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  (and  •asbo  had  mtidt
of  one  blood  all  mtiam  &f  in?,i  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  fact
of  the  earth,  and  had  at  I  fr  mined  the  times  beftin  appointed^
and  the  bounds  of  their  habitation,  Acts  xvii.  26.)  fo
He  would,  in  fpeaking  of  the  migration  of  mankind
towards  re-peopling  the  earth,  make  fome  mention,
let  drop  fome  few  words  concerning  the  manner  by
which  fo  large  a  part  of  the  world,  as  the  Continent
of  Amerka,  became  inhabited.

AND  fuch  there  is  reafon  to  think  he  has  done,  and
left  recorded  in  the  following  remarkable  paifage  (the
event  denoted  by  which,  was  fo  fmgular  as  to  give
name  to  one  of  the  poft-diluvian  Patriarchs  ;  and  is
twice  repeated  in  Scripture)  viz.  Gen.  x.  25.  i  Chr&n.


[90]

i.  19.  And  the  natty  of  one  (ofHeber'sfons)  was  PELEG,
for  in  bis  days  was  the  earth  DIVIDED  [NePeLeGEJ  On
which  words,  that  celebrated  Biblical  Critic  Bengelius
thus  occasionally  remarks  in  his  Ordo  Temporum,  p.  54.

*  Peleg  a  divtjione  terra  nominatus  eft,  &c.  i.  e.  Pe-
*•  leg  was  named  from  the  divijion  of  the  earth  [which

*  happened  in  his  days']  -9 — The  earth  after  the  deluge
'  was  divided  by  degrees,  by  a  genealogical  and  'political

*  divifion,  .which  is  exprefied  by  the  words  rws:*  and

*  vnffl!.1 But  a  very  different  kind  of  Divifion  is

*  meant  by  the  word  HJJWM  [NePeLeGE],  namely,  apby-

*  Jical  and  geographical  divifion,  which  happened  at

*  once,  and  which  was  fo  remarkable,  and  of  fuch  ex-

*  tent,  as  fuitably  to  anfwer  the  naming  the  Patriarch
'  therefrom. By  this  word  [peLec]  that  kind  of  Divi-

*  fan  is  principally  denoted,  which  is  applicable  to
'  Land  and  Water. From  whence  in  the  Hebrew

*  tongue  jSs  [peLec]  fignifies  a  River,  and  in  the  Greek
'  IlEAAros  [PELAGOS]  the  Sea? [and  in  the  Latin,
Pelagus  denotes  the  fame]. From  this  precife  meaning
©f  the  word  then  we  may  conclude,  that  the  Earth
wasj5>///  or  divided  afunder  for  a  very  great  extent,  and
the  Sea  came  between,  in  the  days  of  Peleg. Now  fu re-
ly when  any  perfon  views  the  fkuation  of  America,  and
confiders  how  it  Hands  disjoined  from  this  part  of
the  world,  and  what  an  immenfe  Sea  divides  it  from
us,  he  will  not  be  backward  in  allowing,  that  This
was  the  grand  Divifion  intended  by  the  Paffage  under
confideration. And  therefore  we  may  juftly  fuppofe

k  As  Gen.  ix.  19.  Tbefe  are  the  three  Sons  of  Noah  :  and  cf  thtm
was  the  whole  earth  OVERSPREAD  [ni*D3].

1  As  Gen.  x.  5.  By  thefe  were  the  ijlands  of  the  Gentiles  DIVIDE*
[n"lD3]  m  their  lands  ;  every  one  after  hit  tongue,  after  their  fa-
milies, in  their  nations  ;  fo  alfo  ver.  18,  and  32  ;  and  ch.  xl.  9.  Frcm
thence  [from  Babel]  did  the  Z,c?WsCATTER  THEM  ABROAD  [Dtf'SiT]
vfori  the  face  of  all  the  earth.


[  9'  ]

'with  the  above-mentioned  writer,  *  That,  foon  af-
'  ter  the  Confufion  of  tongues  and  the  difperfion  of
'  mankind  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  fome  of
'  the  fons  of  Ham™  [to  whom  Africa  was  allotted]  went
'  out  of  Africa  into  that  part  of  America,  which  now

*  looks  towards  Africa  ;  and  the  earth  being  divided  or
'  fplit  afunder  in  the  dap  of  Peleg,  they  with  their  pof-

.'  terity  (the  Americans)  were  for  many  ages  feparated
'  from  the  reft  of  mankind.  This  feparation  of  the
'  human  race,  by  means  of  fo  large  a  fea,  prevented

*  in  like  manner  any  evil  and  pernicious  confpiracy,

*  as  the  Confufion  of  tongues  did.'

AND  if  this  account  can  be  feconded  by  any  fimilar
event  related  in  ancient  Heathen  Hiftory,  our  fuppo-
fition  may  deferve  a  greater  degree  of  credit.  And
fuch  an  event  we  have  recorded  by  Plato  in  his  Dia-
logue named  Tim<eus;  in  which  he  treats  of  Nature
or  the  Syftem  of  the  Univerfe,  its  generation  or  begin-
ning, and  the  Nature  of  Man,  And  as  a  prelude  to
his  Subject  he  makes  mention  of  a  Fadt  that  happened
in  the  mod  early  ages,  the  nearefl  of  any  known  to
the  beginning  of  the  world  ;  and  that  is  of  a  vaft  Tracl
of  land  or  an  Ifland  greater  than  Libya  and  AJia,  fitu-
ated  beyond  the  bounds  of  Africa  and  Europe,  which,
by  the  ciincuffion  of  an  earthquake,  was  fwallowed  up
in  the  Ocean.  Plato  introduceth  this  fact,  as  related
by  Solon  (one  of  the  firft  of  the  feven  wife  men  of  Greece)
who,  while  he  was  in  Egypt,  had  heard  it  of  an  old  Egyp-
tian Priejl,  when  he  difcourfed  with  him  concerning
the  mcft  ancient  events.  This  Prieft  tells  Solon,  that  the
Greeks,  with  regard  to  their  knowledge  in  antiquity,
had  always  been  children  •,  and  then  informs  him  of  the
hiftory  of  this  famous  Ifland  (which  they  knew  nothing

In  From  what  the  Indian  fays  to  the  Spaniard t  p.  72,  it  appears,
that  the  American!  themfelves  retained  fome  kind  of  tradition  that
they  were  descended  from  this  Son  of  Noah.


•[  92  ]

of  before).  The  description  of  which  and  its  cataf-
tophre  is  as  follows  (which  in  itfelf  is  fo  remarkable,
that  there  muft  have  been  fome  ground  in  nature  for
the  tradition  of  it),  '  There  was  formerly  an  Ifland  at

*  the  entrance  of  the  Ocean,  where  the  pillars  of  Her-

*  cults  ftand  [and  fo  beyond  the  then  fuppofed  bounds
c  of  Europe  and  Africa]. This  ifland  was  larger  than

*  all  Ubya  and  AJia  •,  and  from  it  was  an  eafy  paflage

*  to  many  other  iflands.;  and  from  thefe  iQands  to  all

*  that  Continent  which  was  oppofite,  and  next  to  the

*  true  fea [*A?i0u/o!/  iroflov]. Yet within  the mouth,
4  there  was  a  gulf,  with  a  narrow  entry. But  that

*  Land,  which  furrounded  the  Sea  called  rieXay^  [Pz-

*  LAGOS,  where  the  'Divifion  was  made] might  juftly

*  be  called  a  Continent. In  after-times  there  hap-

'  pe-ned  a  dreadful  earthquake  and  an  inundation  of

*  water,  which  continued  for  the  fpace  of  a  whole  day
'  and  night,  and  this  ifland  Atlantis,  being  covered

*  and  overwhelmed  by  the  waves,  funk  beneath  the

*  ocean,  and  fo  difappeared :  Wherefore  that  Sea  [II*-

*  A*yo?]  is  now  unpaffable,  on  account  of  the  flime  and

*  mud  that  has  been  left  by  the  immerfed  ifland.'

THIS  paffage  of  Plato  may  receive  fome  illuftration,
and  the  point  I  am  upon,  fome  degree  of  confirmation*
from  what  occurs  in  the  i8th  ch.  of  the  third  book  of
^ELIAN'S  Htftory  of  various  things.  '  T'heopompus  re-

*  lates  a  certain  difcourfe  that  paffed  between  Midas  the
4  Phrygian  and  Si-terms. This  Silenus  was  the  fon  of  a
*•  Nymph,  and  was  inferior  to  the  Gods,  but  iuperior

*  to  mortals. When  thefe  two  had  difcourfed  of  ma-

*  ny  things,  Siknus,  above  all, tells  Midm, '  That
*'  Europe \  A/ia,  and  Libya,  ought  to  be  confrdered  as
"  Iflands,  which  the  Ocean  wholly  furrounded  \  and
114  that  that  part  of  the  world,  which  lay  beyond  this,
*c  ought  only  to  be  cfteemed  the  Continent :  as  it  was

*  of  an  immenfe  extent,  and  nourished  very  different,


[  93  ]

*'  and  vaftly  larger,  kinds  of  animals  than  this  fide
"  of  the  world  •,  and  the  men,  that  inhabited  it,  were
"  twice  as  big."

FROM  what  has  been  offered,  I  think,  we  may  con~
elude,  that  Africa  and  America  were  once  joined,  or
at  leaft  feparated  from  each  other  but  by  a  very  nar*
row  gulf-,  and  that  iome  time  after  the  Flood  the
earth  was  divided  or  parted  afundcr,  probably  by
means  of  an  earthquake,  and  then  this  middle  land
funk  beneath  the  Ocean.

ACCORDING  to  Scripture  this  event  came  to  pafs  *'*
the  days  of  Peleg,  for  we  are  told,  that  IN  HIS  DAY*
the  earth  was  divided.  From  whence  fome  have  ima-
gined, that  this  divifion  fell  out  exactly  at  the  time  of
bis  birth  \  but  the  extenfive  expreflion  of  his  days  rather
implies  the  contrary,  and  denotes  that  it  happened
when  he  was  in  an  advanced  age,  when  he  had  feen
many  days,  not  when  he  had  feen  but  one.  So  that
nis  name  muft  have  been  given  him  prophetically,  in
the  fame  manner  as  was  Noah's,  under  which  was
predicted  an  event  which  did  not  come  to  pafs  'till
fome  hundreds  of  years  after  his  birth  (Gen.  v.  519.
viii.  2 1 ).  Several  other  of  the  Patriarchs  alfo  had  fuch
prophetical  names.

Now  it  appears  from  Gen.  xi.  10—17.  tftat  P&g
was  born  in  the  ioist  year  after  the  flood,  and  Jived
239  years :  fo  that  if  the  circumftance  that  caufed  his
name  to  be  given  him,  happened,  when  he  was  in  an
advanced  age,  we  may  fairly  fuppofe  that  it  fell  out
about  300  years  after  the  flood.

ALLOWING  this  diftance  of  time,  we  fliall  find  up-
on calculation,  that  there  muft  have  been  a  fufikient
number  of  mankind  upon  the  earth  to  have  re-peopled
it  abundantly.  In  order  to  mew  this,  and  a!fo
in  what  manjier  the  poft-diluvians  may  be  juftiy  fup-
pofed,  even  in  a  natural  way,  to  have  fepaj^ted  and


[94]

difperfed,  and  r'e-peopled  the  globe,  I  fhall  tranfcribe
fo  me  li  nes  from  the  Abridgment  of  P  i  c  A  R  T  's  religious
Ceremonies^  p.  279.  *  'Tis  very  probable,  that  Ameri-
ca was  as  populous  a  few  centuries  after  the  deluge
as  it  is  at  this,  time  ;  after  which  States  and  King-
doms were  foon  formed :  However  this  was  done
progreflionally,  according  as  Families  feparated,  and
that  the  children  themfelves  becoming  Parents  of  a
numerous  progeny,  were  obliged  to  quit  their  na-
tive countries.  Thefe  Separations  gave  rife  to
States,  in  which  ambition  and  a  defire  of  fuperiority
might  even  in  thofe  ages  have  had  fome  mare.  Ne-
verthelefs  'tis  probable  that  Afia  did  not  fend  out  any
colonies,  'till  after  having  been  forced  to  drive  out
fuch  young  people  as  were  capable  of  fubfifting  by
themfelves.  But  thefe  Settlements  were  very  eafily
made  in  thofe  times :  Hufbandry  was  then  the  onl^,
employment ;  mankind  then  fpent  their  lives  in  lead-
ing their  flocks  to  pafture  ;  and  'tis  by  the  opportu-
nities which  rural  occupations  gave  to  people  whofe
paflions  were  as  yet  but  in  their  infancy,  that  the
firft  conquefts  were  made  in  Afia,  and  the  fending
out  of  the  firft  Colonies.  A  Shepherd,  who  was  at
the  head  of  a  numerous  family,  mafter  of  feveral
flocks,  and  who  found  himfelf  well  fettled  in  Chaldea^
fent  one  of  his  Children  or  Dependents,  feveral
leagues  ofF,  with  a  detachment  of  oxen,  afTes  and
camels.  The  flock  went  gently  on,  grazing  in  their
paffage,  and  infenfibly  drew  farther  from  the  true
owner.  In  the  mean  time  the  Detachment  grew  more
numerous;  from  this  flock  there  fprung  another.
The  Shepherd,  who  at  firft  was  no  more  than  a  de-
puty, became  himfelf  the  Mafter  and  Father  of  a
family :  He  then  alfo  feparated  part  of  his  wealth,
and  gave  it  as  an  inheritance  to  that  Son  whom  he
intended  fhould  fettle,  in  a  foreign  country,  or  to


[95l

*  fome  dependent  that  .was  going  to  fettle  further  oft.

*  We  prefume  that  in  this  manner  an  hundred  years
'  was  time  fufficient  to  people  Europe,  Afia,  and  Afri-
'  sa,  very  confiderably  -,  and  an  hundred  more  to  peo-
4  pie  the  Continent  of  America. Let  us  fuppofe  for

*  this  purpofe,  that  at  the  flood  Sbem,  Ham,  and  Ja-
'  pbet  had  each  12  children,"  and  that  all  thefe  chil-
'  dren  were  fit  for  marriage  about  15  or  18  years  af-
4  ter  the  flood. 'Tis  very  probable,  that  after  they

*  had  been  married  12  years,  they  might  fee  apofteri-
'  ty  of  four  hundred  and  thirty-two  perfons. In  this

*  manner  Noah  might  have  been  at  the  head  0f  above
'  five  hundred  defcendents  in  the  fpace  of  thirty  years  ;
'  and  if  we  then  fuppofe  that  every  one  of  Noah's  great
'  grand-children  had  ten  children,  thefe  four  hundred

*  thirty  two  perfons  might  have  begot  four  thoufand
'  three  hundred  and  twenty  children  in  ten  years  time.
'  All  this  might  have  happened  in  the  fpace  of  half  a

*  century  •, fo  that  multiplying  them  always  by  ten,

*  and'  leaving  an  interval  of  about  twenty  or  twenty  -

"  Left  the  fubfequent  Calculation  mould  feem  unreafbnable,  the
reader  is  defired  to  attend  to  the  following,  which  is  founded  npon  a
Scripture-matter  of  fact,  '  It  is  evident  from  facred  Hiftory,  \_Exod.
xii.  37.]  that  in  the  fpace  of  about  266  years,  the  pofterity  of
Jacvb  alone,  by  his  [twelve]  fens,  amounted  to  Jix  hundred  thou-
fand males  above  the  age  of  twenty,  all  able  to  go  forth  to  war.
Now  by  Mr.  Graunt's  obfervations  on  the  bills  of  Mortality  it  ap-
pears that  about  -^  are  between  the  ages  of  fixteen  and  fifty-fix  :
which  may  be  near  the  proportion  of  males  numbered,  to  the  en-
tire number  of  them  all.  So  that  as  34  is  to  100,  by  the  Golden
Rule,  muft  fix  hundred  thoufand  be  to  the  entire  number  of  the
males  of  Ifrael  at  that  time:  which  was  therefore  one  million  f even
hundred  fixty-four  thoufand  and  jc<ucn  hundred.  To  which  add/>-
ma/es,  near  T"5  fewer,  as  fuppofe,  to  make  the  fum  even,  one  mil-
lion Jtx  hundred  thirty-Jiije  thoufand  three  hundred,  the  Total  is,
Three  millions  and  four  hundred  thoufand ;  add  forty-three  thoufand
for  the  Levitts  (not  included  in  the  former  accounts),  the  entire
fum  will  at  laji  amount  to  three  million st  and  four  hundrtd  Jortj
thret  thoufand  fouls.'  WHISTCN'S  Theory,  p.  2^0.


[96]

*  five  years  between  o»e  generation  and  another,  Afia.,
4  Europe^  and  Africa  may  have  been  peopled  with  four
c  hundred  thirty- two  millims  of  inhabitants,  an  hundred
4  and  fifty  years  after  the  ftood. Methinks  this  could

*  not  be  difputed,  were  we  only  to  have  regard  to  the
c  ordinary  methods  of  propagation. 'Tis  true  indeed,

*  that  we  fuppofe  every  Head  of  a  family  to  have
4  had  ten  children, when  probably  fever^l  of  thofe

*  Chiefs  might  not  have  had  rjear  fo  many, But  then
'  how  many  do  we  fee  jn  our  days,  who  have  more
4  than  ten  •,  and  if  we  cqnfider  wha,t  Bp.  Burnet  has  tojd

*  US  concerning  Meff.  fr  endow  ancj  Calfindrin  of  Geneva*
"  the  former  of  whom  at  the  age  of  feventy  five,  had
4£  one  hundred  and  fifteen  children*  or  perfon§  married
*-c  to  his  children,  that  coujdcajl  him  Father  -,  and  the
*'  other,  at  the  age  of  forty  feyen,  had  one  hundred
"  and five peribns who  were  all his nephews  or
4'  nieces  by  his  brothers  or  fillers." If,  I  fay,  we

*  cqnfider thefe  two  inftances,  'twill  be  found  that

*  our  computation  is  model! enough, for an age
'  when poverty  and  the  cares  of  life had  not  yet

*  deflroyed  man's  vigour, nor  reduced  Jiirp  to  the

*  neceffity  of  refraining  from  marriage  (the  lawful

*  method  of  propagation)  for  fear  ot  not  being  a-
4  ble  to  iupport  his  family. But  although  the  in-

*  creafe of  our fpecies had for  one hundred and
4  fifty years been much lefs than we have fup-

*  pofed it, and that  only  four  hundred  millions of
6  people had came into  the world ; nay  farther,

*  tho'  we  were  Hill  to  fubftract  thirty  millions  from
4  that fum, for  the  immature  and  violent  deaths,

*  difeafes  and  wars, which  in  all  probability  were

*  not fo bloody  in thofe  ages  as  they  have been

*  fmce,  'tis  very  natural  to  think  that  fome  millions
e  might  detach themfelves  from  the  remaining  three
'  hundred  and  feventy  millions, in  order  to  leek  their


[  97  1

*  fortunes  in  America. And  tho'  we  afterwards  fup-
'  pofe,  that  propagation  may  have  been  very  much
'  prejudiced  by  reafon  of  the  fatigues  they  laboured
'  under  in  their  voyage, and from the change  of
'  climate, &c. we mall neverthelefs find  that  ten
4  or  twelve millions  of  people  may  have  been  able
'  to  furnifh  America  with  forty  millions of  fouls, in

*  fifty  years time- What is here advanced ought
'  not  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  paradox, nor  mould

*  any  difficulties  be  raifed  with  refpect  to  our  cal-
'  culation  ; difficulties  which  are  founded  only on

,  *  the  length  of  man's  life  in  our  days.  Mankind  in
'  thofe  ages  had  not  invented  all  thole  pernicious  arts,
'  which  at  the  fame  time  that  they  morten  life,  do  alfo
'  leflen  propagation.'  And  if  to  all  this  we  add  the
confideration  of  what  we  are  told  in  Gen.  ix.  i.  viz.
That  GOD,  immediately  after  the  deluge,  bleffcdNoab
and  his  font  •,  and  f aid  unto  them^  Be  fruitful  and  multi-
ply and  replenijh  the  earth ;  if,  I  fay,  we  add  to  the
above  obfervations  the  confideration  of  this  divine
JBlefTing,  and  injunction,  we  cannot  doubt  that  the
Progeny  of  Noah  and  his  Sons  was  very  much  increafed
foon  after  the  Flood,  and  fufficiently  numerous  to  re-
people  the  earth.'  And,  when  we  farther  confider,
that  after  the  Confufion  of  Babel  (which  happened  about
an  hundred  years  after  the  deluge)  it  is  faid,  Gen.  xi.
9.  And  from  thence  did  the  Lord  feat ter  them  [i.  e.  the
Projectors  of  Babel]  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the
whole  earth  •,  I  fay  when  we  confider  this,  that  thofe
who  were  reluctant  to  GOD'S  defign  were  forced  to  go,
and  doubtlefs  many  co-operated  with  the  divine  inten-
tion willingly,  and  as  mankind,  within  two  or  three
hundred  years  after  the  flood,  were  abundantly  fuffi-
cient  for  re-peopling  the  whole  earth,  fo  we  may  fairly
conclude,  that  within  that  fpace  of  time  they  actually
peopled  it.


WITH  regard  to  the  brute  part  of  the  world,  they
certainly  complied  with  the  divine  injunction,  Gen.  viii.
1 7.  and  were  fruitful,  multiplied  upon  the  earth^  and
bred  abundantly.  And  with  refpedt  to  their  difperfion,
their  peculiar  qualities  and  inflincts  would  prompt
them  to  feek  fuch  countries  and  climates  as  would  be
moft  fuitable  to  their  natures  i  in  the  fame*  manner  as
many  of  them  now  pafs  from  one  country  to  another,
to  immenfe  diftances,  when  the  alteration  of  the  fea-
fon  affects  them.  Add  to  this,  that  the  mild  and
meek  kind  of  animals,  fuch  efpecially  as  were  defigned
to  be  the  prey  of  others,  would  naturally  avoid  the
wild  and  rapacious,  and  the  lafl  would  as  naturally
fjurfue  •,  fo  that  both  would  be  induced  to  get  as  far
from  the  place  where  the  ark  landed,  as  they  conve-
niently could:  and  by  this  means  the  whole  globe
would  be  foon  re-fupplied  with  animals.

THUS  then,  within  two  or  three  hundred  years  af-
ter the  Deluge,  the  whole  Earth  would  be  re -peopled
with  men,  and  flocked  with  other  animals.  And  as
about  this  time  the  Earth  was  divided  or  fplit  afunder,
and  we  may  juflly  fuppofe  that  the  land,  which  united
Africa  and  America  together,  fuffered  in  this  divijien,
was  disjoined  from  the  two  Continents,  and  funk  be-
neath the  Ocean  •, — fo  would  both  Continents  be  ftill
inhabited ;  tho'  for  the  time  forward  the  inhabitants
of  each  would  be  feparated  from  the  other.

THUS  we  have  difcovered  an  eafy  way  by  which
-America  might  have  been,  and  I  apprehend,  the  true
way,  by  which  it  really  was  fupplied  with  inhabitants
after  the  flood ;  a  way  this,  that  affords  a  very  con-
venient paffage  (thro5  a  warm  and  fruitful  climate)
for  the  moft  tender  and  delicate  animals,  and  fuch  as
could  not  endure  any  great  degree  of  Cold,  and  of
courfe  a  very  eafy  one  for  robuft  man.


t  99  ]


NATURAL PROOFS

OF THE

Scripture  Account  of  the  Deluge,

Deduced  from  a  great  variety  of  circumftances,
on  and  in  the  terraqueous  globe.

&>*<08(  AM  now  come  to  Jay  before  the  reader
*Jf  j  "y  what  natural  proofs  may  be  deduced,
C\  /"S  from  tne  Pre^ent  Situation  of  things  id
xLr  \J*  tne  eartn)  jn  favour  of  the  Mofaic  de-
fcription  of  the  Deluge.

AND  here,  I  mall  felect  four  Particulars,  which
if  I  can  evince,  the  truth  of  the  whole  will,  I  believe,
be  readily  admitted,  viz.  if  I  can  prove, —

I.  THAT  there  is  a  quantity  of  water  in  the  earth
abundantly  fufficient  for  flooding  it  to  the  height  re-
prefented  in  Scripture  ;

II.  THAT  this  water  did  actually  thus  overflow  it ;

III.  THAT,  during  this  Flood,  the  folid  ftructure
or  compages  of  the  earth  was  diflblved,  all  the  mine-
ral and  metallic  matter  reduced  to  its  original  corpuf-
cles, and  affumed  up  into  the  water;  fo  that  the
whole  conftituted  one  fluid  mafs  or  colluvies  •,

IV.  THAT  all  this  matter,  together  with  the  animal
and  vegetable  bodies  inclofed  within  it,  fubfided  again,
and  formed  the  prefent  folid  ftrata  of  the  earth.

IF,  I  fay,  I  can  prove  thefe  four  points,  the  truth
of  the  Mofaic  defcription  of  the  Flood  cannot,  I
think,  well  be  difputed.

H  2


AND  I.  to  flievv,  That  there  is  a  fuiEcient  quantity
of  water  in  the  earth  for  covering  alt  the  high  moun-
tains under  the  -whole  heaven,  or  rather  the  whole  fur-
face  of  the  Earth  above  the  height  of  the  higheft
mountains.

THIS  has  been  thought  the  main  and  principal  hinge
on  which  the  whole  affair  of  the  Deluge  turns,  the  Cauja
fine  qua  non  of  folving  that  grand  cataftrophe  •,  for  un-
lefs  we  can  procure  fufficient  materials  for  the  work,  it
would  be  idle  to  attempt  the  foliation  of  the  effect.
And  all  nature,  both  from  above  and  from  below,
has  been  ranfacked  by  feveral  writers  on  this  fubjeft
to  find  out  a  place  where  there  lies  a  quantity  of  wa-
ter fufficient  for  flooding  the  earth ;  which,  confidering
the  light  that  writers  in  general  have  looked  upon  the
deluge  in,  namely  as  a  flood  of  waters  barely  over-
flowing the  terreftrial  parts  of  the  globe,  is  a  matter
of  fome  furprize  that  they  mould  be  at  a  lofs  to  find
a  fuitable  quantity :  for  let  any  one  but  caft  his  eye
over  a  map  or  globe  of  the  earth,  and  he  will  at  once
perceive  that  the  Ocean  and  Seas  greatly  exceed  the
•  terreftrial  j&rts,  and  if  he  will  take  a  nearer  and
more  accurate  furvey  and  add  to  the  account  the
fpaces  occupied  by  all  the  rivers  and  lakes  upon  the
earth,  he  will  find,  that  the  dry  land  comprehends
not  more  than,  if  fo  much  as,  one  third  part  of  the
earth's  furface.  And  as  it  is  well  known,  that  the
fea  is  unfathomable  in  many  places,  and  that  its  depth
is  equal  to  the  height  of  the  mountains  -,°  fo  it  is  evi-
dent;, and  manifelt  to  ienfe,  that  there  is  a  quantity

°  See  VARENIUS'S  Geograpb\,  by  SHAW,  Vol.  I.  p.  i  '3,  195,  8.
As  I  fhall  have  occafion  to  quote  this  Trcatife  hereafter,  it  may  not
be  arnifs  to  acquaint  the  reader  with  its  authority  and  character.  Sir
Jfaac  Newton  thought  it  fo  judicious  and  ufetul  a  work,  that  he  re-
printed an  accurate  latin  edition  of  it  at  Cambridge,  for  the  ule  of  the
Students  in  that  Univerfky.  This  edition  meeting  \vith  a  quick  fale.


of  water  in  the  earth  capable  of  covering  all  the
mountains  under  the  whole  heaven.  But  as  this  act
of  barely  covering  the  mountains  will  not  anfwer  the
defcription  of  the  Flood  as  given  in  Scripture,  nor  fuit
with  the  efeEls  of  that  Flood  as  they  are  now  dilcernible
upon  and  in  the  earth  (of  which  hereafter)  fo  we  mull
find  out  a  quantity,  even  greater  than  this.  But  what
I  have  faid  may  ferve  to  pave  the  way,  and  leflen  the
wonder  the  reader  may  conceive  concerning  the  quan-
tity of  water  requifite  for  fuch  a  grand  tranfaction.

THE  Prelude  to  which  mighty  event  was,  accord-
ing to  Mofes,  The  breaking  up  of  tbe  fountains  of  (be
Great  Deep.  What  this  Great  Deep  or  Abyfs  is  has
been  fbewn  already,  namely,  that  it  is  an  immenfely
large  Refervoir  of  water  lying  beneath  the  circular
fhell  of  the  earth,  communicating  with  all  lefier  Deeps
or  Seas,  and  affording  lupplies  for  the  numerous
rivers  upon  the  earth.  Such  is  the  Scriptural  account
of  this  Abyfs,  fee  p.  25,  &c.

LET  us  now  fee  whatreafon  there  is  to  believe,  from
a  view  of  the  ftructure  and  parts  of  th!s  globe,  that
there  is  fuch  a  fubterraneous  magazine  ot^vater.

i.  THE/r/?  argument  which  I  ihall  bring  in  proof
of  this  Abyfs  is  (to  fpeak  in  the  words  of  Scripture
wherever  we  can)  That  all  the  rivers  run  into  tbe  Sea,
and  yet  tbe  Sea  is  not  full,  or  does  not  reach  the  height

and  confequently  foon  becoming  fcarce,  Dr.  Bent!e>;  importance!  Dr.
Jut  in  to  print  another  edition,  and  to  affix  an  appendix  of  later  Dif-
coveries.  Mr.  DugdfiU  published  an  cn^i-ji?  •7V1,/,//;/^«  from  Juries
edition,  with  feveral  additional  notes ;  which  has  fi nee  been  revifed,
corrected  and  re  publifhedby  Dr.  6'£<7if.  And  1  fcarce  know  a
more  ufeful  Book  for  a  Student  in  Flsiloibphy  to  begin  with.

See  alfo  Hiltti-e  Pbf/jquc  d .-lamer  far  O.n:e  d,  MARSILLI,  p.  i  i.
This  alfo  Is  a  valuable  Treatife,  and  the  Author  of  it  fo  w-.-li  known
for  his  indefatigable  indaftry,  judgment  and  accuracv  in  making  ex-
periments and  observations  upon  the  tops  of  the  hi^heft  mountains,
the  deepeil  cave-,  and  even  t'^e  bottom  ><\  t!\..'  Sea,  that  1  need  unly
to  ir.tution  Li^  naiiie  to  ^aiii  credit  to  liis  b:uk


t I°2 ]

of,  or  run  over,  its  fhores. This  is  a  fact  as  flu
as  it  is  apparent  \  but,  like  other  common  truths,  the
obvioufneis  of  it  leffens the  wonder,  and  takes  off
the  weighty  confiderations  deducible  therefrom. But
the  Event  in  itfelf  i«  truly  wonderful,  and  deferves  our
particular  notice  on  the  prefent  occafion. To  enu-
merate and  defcribe  all  the  rivers  upon  the  earth  would
be  endlefs  and  impofiible. I  mall  therefore  mention
fome  of  the  largeft ;  in  order  that  we  may  form  a
judgment  of  the 'quantity  of  water  poured  into  the
Sea  by  all  of  them. The  Danube,  after  it  has  ran
a  courfe  of  above  two  thoufand  miles,  and  received  by
the  way  fixty  rivers,  (thirty  of  which  are  fo  large  as  to
be  navigable)  throws  itfelf,  by  five  or  fix  great  ftreams,
with  fuch  rapidity  into  the  Euxine  Sea,  that  its  water
continues  frefh  and  unmixt  with  the  fait  for  twenty
leagues. Its depth,  in  moil  places,  is  two  hundred
feet.? The  Volga,  after  it  has  taken  an  irregular  tour
of  two  thousand  nine  hundred  miles ,  and  increafed its
ilream  by  the  addition  of  two  hundred  rivers  and
brooks,  difcharges  itfelf  by  twenty  five  mouths  into  the
Cafpian  Sea, and  makes  that  Sea  lefs  brackilh  for
many  leagues.* The  Oby,  a  river  in  Siberia,  in  fome
places  half  a  league,  and  in  others  a  whole  league
broad,  runs  for  about  two  thoufand  four  hundred  miles
(without  reckoning  its  windings)  and  then  empties  it-
felf by  fix  mouths  into  the  Icy  Sea.r To  which  we
may  add  the  Jenifa,  about  ten  weeks  journey  diftant
from  the  former  river,  and  equal,  if  not  fuperior  to
it,  both  in  length  and  breadth.* The  Crocc<£us  or  yellow
r'tver  of  China,  after  having  flowed  thro'  feveral  Pro-
vinces for  more  than  two  thoufand  miles,  falls  at  length

*  COLLIER'S  Miflorita/,  Geographical,  &c.  Dictionary.

i Atlas  Ge'.grapbus,  Vol.  I.  p. 164. Vdrcnius,  p. 291.

r  Atlas  Gtcg. p.  165. VA  RE  Nil's'/  Geography, Vol.  1.  p.  349.

'  f'arcniu},  ibid.


into  the  Haft-Sea.1  Not  far  from  this  is  tfre  J&ttft,  re-
markable for  its  depth)  being  unfathomable  in  feverai
places,  fo  that  the  Chinefe  have  a  proverb  among  them
\vhich  fays,  The  Sea  hath  no  bounds  and  the  Kiam  hath
no  bottom.  This  impetuous  river  (which  is  fo  very-
rapid  when  the  torrents  from  the  mountains  incrcafe
its  ftream,  that  it  frequently  bears  away  the  iQands
that  lye  in  its  channel,  and  buries  them  under  ite
waves)  after  having  ran  a  courfe  of  twelve  hundred
miles,  difburthens  itfelf  into  the  Eaft-Sea  of  China*
The  Ganges,  famous  for  its  length,  breadth  and  depth,
being  VK&X  fifteen  hundred  miles  long;  and  in  its  nar-
roweft  places  eight  miles  broad,  in  the  molt  open  parts
twenty  •,  and  feldom  fo  mallow  but  that  its  depth  mea-
fures  an  hundred  feet.w  The  Euphrates,  after  having
ran  a  courfe  of  about  a  thcufand  miles  joins  that  remark-
ably rapid  river  the  Tigris  (after  the  Tigris  had  patted
a  courfe  of  about  five  hundred  miles)  and  both  of  them,
about  j&#  miles  beyond  their  union,  exonerate  them-
felves  into  the  Per/tan  Gulph.  The  Nile  takes  its  rife
in  12  deg.  of  N.  Lat.  and  having  flowed  fifteen  hun-
dred miles,  nearly  from  South  to  North,  divides  into
two  branches,  and  then  falls  into  the  Mediterranean
Sea.*  The  Niger,  the  longeft  river  in  Africa,  after  a
courfe  of  two  tboufand  four  hundred  miles,  empties  it-
felf by  fix  great  ftreams  into  the  Atlantic  Ocean.7
The  Zaire,  another  river  in  Africa,  which,  though  it
does  not  equal  any  of  the  above  in  the  length  of  its
courfe,  yet  exceeds  them  all  in  its  breadth,  being  at
H  4

1 LE  COMTB'S  Qbfir-vations  made  in  a  Journey  thro'  the  Empire  of
China, p. 108.
"  Ibid.
w  SALMON'S  modern  Gazetteer:  HE VLYN'S  CnCmtgrpphy,  p S'Q.

*  SALMON'S  /)/-,  /<•;//  Jlatc  aft  ill  nation*, Vol.  V.  p.  10.

*  VARENIUS,  p,  349. COLLIER'S  Did.


104

its  mouth  twenty  eight  miles  broad,  and  rufhes  into  the
Ethiopic  Sea  with  fo  great  a  force,  as  to  preferve  its
waters  pure  and  frefh  for  ten  miles  commonly,  for  fif-
teen at  other  times. z  But  if  we  pals  into  America,  we
mall  find  rivers  exceeding  any  yet  mentioned.  The
river  of  St.  Laurence,  alter  having  ran  through,  and
been  fed  by,  feveral  great  Lakes,  and  taken  a  courfe
of  one  thoufandfive  hundred  miles  (and  its  fource  yet  un-
known) difcharges  itfelf  into  the  gulph  of  St.  Laurence ;
being  at  its  mouth  between  feventy  and  eighty  miles
broad,  and  two  hundred  fathoms  deep.3  The  Paria  or
Oronoque  is  navigable  for  a  tboufand  miles  by  mips  of
burden,  and  two  tboufand  by  boats  and  pinnaces  ;  and
having  received  into  its  channel  an  hundred  rivers,
openeth  into  the  fea  with  fixleen  mouths,  which  part
the  earth  into  fo  many  iflands.b  Rio  de  la  Plata,  in
length  from  its  firft  fountain  two  tboufand  miles,  in
breadth  at  its  fall  into  the  Stzfixty  miles  •,  and  of  fo
violent  a  ftream  that  the  Sea  for  many  leagues  together
altereth  not  the  taile  of  it.0  The  River  of  the  Amazons,
efteemed  the  greateft  in  the  world  ;  Orellana  is  reported
to  have  failed  in  it  five  tboufand  miles,  including  the
feveral  turnings  and  v/indings  he  took;  in  many  places
it  is  fo  deep  as  to  be  unfathomable-,  and,  at  the  time
of  its  higheft  rifings,  the  Current  is  an  hundred  and
eighty  miles  broad,  and  rufhes  into  the  Sea  with  fuch
impetuofity  as  to  preferve  its  natural  tafte  and  colour

for  more  than  thirty  miles.* Now  to  the  above

let  any  one  make  an  addition  of  all  the  remaining  ri-
vers upon  the  earth,  and  then  conceive  within  himfclf


HEYLYN'S  Cofmog,  p.  989,  995-

COLLIER'S  Di£t.

HETL,YN'S  Cofmograpby,  p.  1056.

Ibid.

Ibid. CcckSs  fejage  to  the  South  Sea,  &c.  p.  254.


[ 105

what  an  immenfe  profufion  of  water  muft  be  poured
into  the  Ocean,  1  need  not  lay,  yearly,  monthly,  but
daily,  or  even  hourly? — It  was  the  opinion  ot  that  ac-
curate Geographer  Farenius,*  [and  to  which  I  believe,
every  one  upon  mature  consideration  wi-il  confent,  as
Bp.  Stillingfleet,  Dr.  Plot,  Stackhoufe,  and  others  have
done]  that  each  of  the  larger  fort  of  rivers,  (and  fuch,
every  one  of  thofe  that  t  have  mentioned  above,  may
well  be  efteemed,  and  many  others  that  are  not
mentioned)  empties  into  the  Sea,  in  one  year's
time,  a  quantity  of  water  fufficient  to  cover  the
whole  fur  face  of  the  earth.  And  if  feveral  rivers,
fmgly  coniidered,  throw  in  fuch  a  quantity,  and  fome  of
them  a.  far  greater,  What  muft  all  of  them  added  to-
gether effund  ? In  order  to  fee  what  a  quantity  this

would  amount  to,  and  to  what  an  height,  if  it  was
poured  upon  the  earth,  it  would  arife,  Let  us  fuppofe,
that  the  mouths  of  all  the  rivers,  or  the  places  where
they  enter  into  the  Sea,  were  flopped  and  dammed  up
fo  high,  that  their  currents  were  diverted  from  rufhing
into  the  fea,  and  turned  back  upon  the  dry-land ;  and
how  foon  would  the  higheft  mountains  be  covered  ? —
For,  if  one  river,  in  one  year's  time,  produces  a  quan-
tity fufficient  to  effect  this,  (or  rather  twice  as  much  as
would  be  fufficient,  for  the  Dry-land  occupies  but  one
third  part  of  the  earth's  furface)  and  there  are  many
fuch  rivers,  and  feveral  much  larger,  and  if  all  the
lefler  ftreams  were  united,  they  would  exceed  the
larger  already  mentioned,  How  foon,  I  fay,  in  this
cafe,  muft  the  higheft  mountains  be  covered  ?  Surely,
not  many  days,  it  hours,  would  be  requifite  for  fuch

an  inundation. Now  when  we  confider,  that  fuch

an  inconceivably  great  quantity  of  water  is  daily  ^  or  at


^  Gin/  Geography,  p 299.


[ io6  J

lead  weekiy  difcharged  into  the  Sea,  and  yet//^  Sea  is
not  full,  nor  even  any  vifible  increafe  produced  there-
by, What  an  immenfely  large  receptacle  mutt  there  be
beneath  the  Ocean  and  the  Land  for  containing  fuch
an  afiemblage  of  water  ?  Well  might  it  be  called  in
Scripture  THE  GREAT  DEEP,  as  all  leffer  Deeps
or  Seas  are  nothing  in  companion  to  it.

ALLOWANCE  indeed  muft  be  made  in  the  above  cal-
culation, for  the  quantity  of  water  that  is  raifed  from
the  Ocean  in  vapour  by  the  heat  of  the  fun,  &c.
which  fome  have  been  fo  extravagant  as  to  imagine  to
be  equal  to  That  which  is  poured  into  the  Ocean  by
all  the  rivers  upon  earth  ;  and  therefore  they  fuppofe,
that  what  the  Sea  gets  by  the  rivers,  it  loies  by  eva-
poration ;  and  fo  a  mutual  and  equable  interchange  is
prefervcd.  But  furely  this  Hypothecs  can  never

Hand  the  examination  of  common  fenfe  or  experi-
ments. For  i/}.  it  is  well  known,  that  the  vapours
and  rain  fall  upon  the  Sea,  as  well  as  upon  the  land  ;
and  the  furface  of  the  Ocean  is  full 'as  large  again  as
That  of  the  Dry-land;  fo  we  may  juftiy  fuppofe  that
two  thirds  of  what  is  raifed  in  vapour  returns  from
whence  it  came,  without  falling  upon  the  Dry-land.
idly.  Befides,  as,  it  has  been  obferved  '  This  is  a
1  Summer  reafon,  and  would  pafs  very  ill  in  winter,
4  efpecially  in  our  Northern  climate,  when  the  heat  of
1  the  Sun  is  much  lefs  powerful  ;'  and  yet  our  Seas
have  no  fuch  fenfible  diminution  in  Summer,  or  over-
flowing in  winter,  as  might  be  expected,  if  their  in-
creafe  and  decreafe  depended  fo  much  upon  vapours.
And,  %dly.  I  may  add  too,  This  is  a  day  reafon,  and
will  not  hold  in  the  night;  when  the  vapours  fre-
quently fall  nearly  as  fail  as  they  role  in  the  precedent
day.  But,  ^tbly.  fince  the  favourers  of  this  hypo-
thefis  fuppofe,  That  the  fnpply  of  all  the  rivers  upon
earth  is  owing  to  the  vapours  that  are  raifed  from  the


Sea,  carried from thence  by  wind, and condenfed
againft  the  fides  of  mountains,  and  fo  trickling  down
thro'  the  crannies  of  the  rocks,  enter  into  the  hollow
places  thereof,  form  collections  of  water,  &c.  from
whence  they  illue  out  at  the  firft  orifice  they  can  find,
and  by  this  means  conftitute  Springs  and  Rivers  •,  fince,
I  fay,  they  hold  this  hypothefis  as  a  conference  of
the  former,  it  mould  follow,  That  as  the  evaporations
are  greater  in  Summer  time  than in Winter,  fo  the
Springs  and  Rivers,  which  depend  upon  the  quantity
of  theie  evaporations,  ought  to  be  higher  and  fuller  in
Summer  than  in  Winter;  the  contrary  to  which  is
well  known  to  be  fact,  at  leaft  in  our  Northern  re-
gions ;  unlefs  when  the  vapours  happen  to  be  con-
gealed and  frozen  into  Snow,  asfoon  as  they  fall ;  and
then  they  of  courfe  (in  their  frozen  and  confined  ftate)
cannot  afford  any  fupply  for  the  augmentation  of  ri-
vers •,  and  in  this  cafe,  or  in  fuch  places  where  this
happens,  the  rivers  generally  remain  of  the  fame  height
in  Winter  as  in  Summer. Which  laft  confederation  will
furnifh  another  argument  againft  the  opinion  of  thofe
who  afcribe  the  origin  of  Springs  and  Rivers  to  the
condenfation  of  vapours  againft  the  fides  of  mountains,
&c.  for  it  is  obferved  by  Mr.  Ray,  (who  himfelf  tra-
velled over  the  Alps)  '  That  the  tops  of  the  Alps  above
'  the  fountains  of  four  of  the  greateft  rivers  in  Europe,
'  the  Rhine,  the  Rhofne,  the  Danube,  and  the  Po,  are
*  for  about./?*  months  in  the  year  conjlantly  covered  with
4  Snow  to  a  great  tbicknefs  •,  Ib  that  there  are  no  vapours
'  all  that  while  that  can  touch  thofe  mountains,  and  be
'  by  them  condenfed  into  water :  there  falls  nothing
'  there  but  Snow ;  and  that  continuing  all  that  while
'  on  the  ground  without  diffolution,  hinders  all  accefs  of
c  vapours  to  the  earth,  if  any  rofe,  or  were  by  winds
'  carried  fo  high  in  that  form,  as  I  am  confident  there
'  are  not. And  yet  lor all  that  do  not  thofe  Springs


[ io8  ]

6  fail,  but  continue  to  run  all  winter,  and  it  is  likely
'  too,  without  diminution.''  But,  Laftly,  this  Hy-
pothefis — that  the  origin  of  Springs  and  Rivers  is  ow-
ing to  vapours  condenfed  into  water  and  rain,  and  that
the  quantity  of  water  which  is  evaporated  from  the
Ocean  is  equal  to  that  which  is  poured  into  it  by  all
the  rivers  upon  the  earth, — has  been  fo  fully  examined
and  confuted  by  Dr.  Gualtieri  in  anfwer  to  Dr.  Valif-
nieri  (who  maintained  the  above  hypothefis)  and  this
too,  by  making  the  mod  reasonable  or  rather  over-
reafonable  allowances  to  the  favourers  of  this  hypothe-
fis, That  I  mail  only  tranfcnbe  part  of  what  Dr.  Gu-
altieri has  faid  on  this  head,  as  it  is  abridged  in  the
Memoirs  of  Literature  for  Aug.  1725.  'After  this,

*  Dr.  Gualtieri  undertakes  to  prove  the  impoflibility  of
'  afcribing  the  origin  of  Springs  and  rivers  to  rain-
'  water,  &c. To  demonftrate  this  impoffibility,

*  it  ought  to  be  proved  that  the  quantity  of  rain-water
'  is  far  from  being  fufHcient  to  keep  up  the  continual
4  courfe  of  fprings  and  rivers. And  to  fet  that  pro-
4  pofition  in  its  full light,  one  mud  determine  by  a

*  Calculation  the  quantity  of  rain-water,  andthequan-
'  tity  of  the  water  of  thofe  rivers  that  fall  into  thefea:
4  and  jf  one  exceeds  the  other  confiderably,  the  quef-

*  tion  will  be  decided. It  refill cs  (fays  the  Author)
'  from  the  obfcrvations  made  by  the  Paris- Academy,

*  for  the  fpace  of  nineteen  years,  that  the  mean  quantity

*  of  rain,  that  falls  at  Paris,  is  about  18  or  19  inches

*  high  every  year.f To  find how  much  it  rains  in

f  It  may  be  proper  to  make  a  few  remarks  here,  Ist-  That  it  has
been  now  determined  by  a  cov.rfe  of  oHfervati ops  that  hav?  been  fuc-
ceflively  continued  bv  the  Profdlors  of  the  Academy  for  no  lefs  than
tfVrv  fi-ve  yt.a>-s,  that  it  a  rnedi.:m,  crone  year  with  another,  there
falls  no  more  than  ibmcbc;,  and  8  lines  of  rain;  feeTi-.MPLtMA.N's
Kxtrafis  from  the  mrtn'iin  cf  the  Acini  >n\  tit  Parif,  Vol  II  p.  32-?;
juft  prir.tcd.  2d1'-  That  under  the  term  R.\in  is  ulib  included  all  the


[ T°9  J

*  Italy  during  one  year,  the  Author  requires  that  the
4  whole  furface  of  that  country  be  reduced  to  an  ob-

*  long  rectangular  parallelogram  ;  the  length  whereof
4  be  or  600  miles  of  Bologna,  and  the  breadth  of  1 20.
4  In  the  next  place,  he  fuppofes  that  all  the  water  fall-
4  ing  upon  that  extent  of  ground,  in  the  fpace  of  one
«  year, is  kept  in,  without  being  able  to  run  out.
4  That  water,  in  this  fupp^ofidon,  will  rife,  according
4  to  the  obfervations  of  the  Academy,  to  the  height  of

*  one  foot  and  a  half;  and  if  the  whole  be  calculated,
'  it  will  appear  to  amount  to  the  fum  of  two  trillions,
4  feven hundred  billions  of  cube  feet  of  water,  that
4  Kill  in  one  year  upon  the  furface  of  all  Italy. Now,
4  in  order  to  know  the  quantity  of  water  carried  into
4  the  fea  by  all  the  rivers  ot  that  country  in  one  year,
4  we  mufl  fuppofe  a  canal  of  a  depth  and  breadth  pro-

*  portionable  to  the  dimenfions  of  thofe  rivers,  where-

*  of  thofe  that  fall  into  the  fea,  are  two  hundred  in
'  number,  without  reckoning  the  other  rivers,  brooks,

*  fountains,  fubterraneous  canals,  &c. Dr.  Gualiierr^
1  before  he  determines  the  length  and  breadth  of  fuch

*  a  canal,  obferves  that  the  Po  is  near  a  mile  broad  at
4  its  entrance  into  the  fea. If  we  add  to  the  waters  of
4  the  Po  thofe  of  eighteen  other  great  rivers^  can  we  al-
4  low  to  a  canal  that  mould  contain  them  all,  lefsthan
4  one  mile  or,  5000 feet  in breadth,  and  20  feet  in
4  depth  ?  If  we  add  (till  the  water  of  the"  fmall  rivers,
4  and  of  all  the  fountains  and  fprings,  that  fall  into
4  the  fea  ;  Can  any  one  believe  that  thole  waters col-
4  leded  can  be  contained  in  inch  a  canal  ? [Doubtleft

water  that  fails  in  [now,  dt<w,  vapours,  &c.  3<ly>  That  this  quan-
tity is  meafured  almoft  as  foon  as  it  fa  h,  and  the  fum  total  determined
from  thefe  feveral  lefier  meafurements  j  and  no  allowance  made  fbi
what  would  othervvife  have  been  carried  ofFby  <uvW.<,  by  cxh  <//;/•/'.»  ,
contained  in  ••vegetation,  imbibed  by  the  eartht  &c ;  which,  if  ukca
into  the  account,  would  greatly  lefien  the  above  eftimare.


«  not]. However  the  Author  is  willing  to  reduce  the

*  breadth  of  that  canal  to  that  of  1250  feet,  which  is
«  only  the  fourth  part  of  5000,  and  its  depth  to  that

*  of  15  feet. [This  certainly  is  an  over-reafonable

<  allowance  given  to  his  adverfary]. After  this  re-

<  duction, the  author  following the  calculation  of

<  Dr.  Guglielmini^  finds  that  the  quantity  of  water  con-
«  tinually  carried  into  the  fea  by  a  canal  of  that  di-

<  menfion,  during  366  days,  would  be  equal  to  the
6  fum  of  five  trillions,  five  hundred  twenty  two  billions,
«  three  hundred  ninety  one  millions  of  cube  feet  of
«  water. But  all  the  rain-water, that  falls  in  Italy
«  during  one  year,  amounts  only  to  the  quantity  of
£  two  trillions,  feven  hundred  billions  of  cube  feet  of

<  water. Therefore  all  the  rivers  in  Italy  carry  into

*  the  fea  two  trillions^  eight  hundred  twenty  two  billions^
'  three  hundred  ninety  one  millions  of  cube  feet  of  water
'  ABOVE  that  which  the  rain  affords  in  one  year. From

*  whence  comes  that  overplus,  if  it  be  not  from  the
«  fea  itfelf  [or  rather  from  the  Abyfs  that  lieth  within

*  the  earth]  ? The  Author  confirms  this

"'  proof  by  another  fort  of  fupputation,  viz.  by  that

*  of  the  quantity  of  water, which  evaporates  daily.
1  'Tis  well  known,  (fays  he)  by  feveral  experiments,
«  that  from  a  furface  of  water  ten  inches  fquare,  a  cube
4  inch  of  water  evaporates  in  24  hours. A fquare

*  mile  of  water  contains  twenty  five  millions  of  fquare
1  feet  of  water,  which  make  three  billions,  fix  hundred
'  millions  of  fquare  inches :  from  whence  it  follows

*  that  from  a  furface  of  a  fquare  mile,  three  hundred
'  fixty  millions  of  cube  inches  of  water  evaporate in
c  24  hours,  which  make  208  thoufand,  333  cube  feet.

*  Allowing  the  Mediterranean  Sea  to  be  3000  miles
'  long  and  420  miles  broad,  its  whole  furface  will  be

*  of  one  million,  260000  fquare  miles,  which  number
6  being  multiplied  by  that  of  208  thoufand,  333  cube


!


[  "I  ]

c  feet,  we  fliall  have  the  number  of  262  billions,  499
'  millions,  580  thoufand  cube  feet  of  water,  which
'  in  24  hours  evaporate  from  the  whole  furface  of  the
c  Mediterranean  fea ;  and  multiplying  again  that  num-
4  ber  by  that  of  365  days,  there  will  be  95  trillions,
4  812  billions,  346  millions,  700000  cube  feet  of
4  water,  which  evaporate  from  the  fame  furtace,  in
'  the  fpace  of  one  year.  Afterwards  if  we  reduce  all
4  the  rivers  that  fall  into  the  Mediterranean  to  a  canal
4  fix  Italian  miles  broad,  and  15  feet  deep  'which  is  a
4  very  low  fuppofition)  fuch  a  canal  will  carry  into
{  that  fea,  a  hundred  thirty  two  trillions^  five  hundred
4  thirty  fe-ven  billions ,  three  hundred  eighty  four  millions
4  of  yibe  feet  of '-water , — a  quantity  very  much  exceed -
4  ing  tha£  which  evaporates  from  that  fea  in  one  year.
4  That  Dr.  Valijnuri  may  have  no  ground  to  complain,
4  the  Author  is  willing  to  grant  him,  againftthe  tefti-
4  mony  of  all  obfervations,  that  thirty  inches  of  water
4  fall  in  Italy  every  year.  But  he  tells  him  at  the  fame
'  time,  that  all  this  water  is  not  employed  in  keeping
4  up  the  courfe  of  fountains  and  rivers.  One  mult
4  deduct  out  of  it,  i.  All  the  quantity  neceflary  to*
4  moiften  the  ground  to  the  depth  of  lome  fathoms,
c  without  which  an  excefiive  drought  would  reduce  it
'  to  duft;  and  this  quantity  muft  needs  be  very  con-
4  fiderable.  2.  One  muft  deduct  that  quantity  which
4  ferves  for  the  nourifliment  and  growth  of  trees,  and
4  all  the  other  plants  of  Italy ^  during  the  whole  year  ;
4  and  in  order  to  conceive  how  far  this  can  go,  it  is  fuf-
4  ficient  to  cbnfider,  that  according  to  the  experiments
4  of  Mr.  de  la  Hire^  one  fingle  fig-tree,  furnifhed  with
4  an  hundred  and  thirty  leaves,  ablorbs  two  pounds  and
4  a  half  of  water,  in  the  fpace  of  five  hours,  and  con-
4  fequently  three  thoufand  one  hundred  and  ninety  four
4  founds  in  one  year.  3.  One  mull  deduct  out  of
4  rain-water  that  which  continually  evaporates?  the


quantity  whereof  has  been  determined  above.  Now,
how  likely  is  it  that  30  inches  of  water  yearly  may  be
fufficient  for  all  thofe  ufes  j  and  that  there  fhould
remain  enough  ftill  to  keep  up  the  courfe  of  fountains
and  rivers.  Again-,  Dr.Gualtieri  makes  another  im-
poffiblc-  fuppofition  in  favour  of  his  adverfary,  viz.
that  out  of  thofe  30  inches  of  water,  15  only  are  em-
ployed for  the  continual  evaporation,  and  to  fupply  the
•wants  of  the  ground  and  plants;  and  that  the  other  15
inches  ferve  for  the  courfe  of  fountains  and  rivers.
But  notwithftanding  all  the  endeavours  of  Dr.  Gual-
tieri  in  favour  of  his  antagonift.  what  Ihift  can  the
latter  make  with  15  inches  of  water,  whilft  the  18
inches  found  by  the  Academy,  are,  as  has  been
(hewn  above,  much  beneath  the  quantity  requifite  to
keep  up  that  perpetual  commerce  between  freih  and
fea- water.'

II.  SECONDLY,  as  the  quantity  of  water  that  is
poured  into  the  Ocean  from  the  mouths  of  all  the  ri-
vers upon  the  earth  proves  the  certainty  of  an  Abyfs  be-
neath the  Ocean  and  the  Land,  fo  the  quantity  ^hat  is
thrown  out  at  the  heads  or  fources  of  all  the  rivers
equally  proves  the  fame ',  and  efpecially  that  this  Abyfs
lyeth  beneath  the  Earth  as  well  as  the  fea.  In  the  above
defcription  of  feveral  of  the  larger  rivers,  I  have  men-
tioned the  length  of  their  ccurfcs  as  well  as  breadth  of
their  mouths,  in  order  that  the  reader  may  judge  from
thence  what  an  immenfe  quantity  of  water  is  requifite
for  preferving  their  channels  full,  and  keeping  their
currents  ilrong;  and  alfo  that  he  may  obferve  that
their  Sources,  or  the  Springs  that  fupply  them  with
water,  lye  high  up  in  the  inland  countries,  fo  that  fe-
veral of  them  are  fome  hundred,  nay  thoufands  of  miles
diftant  from  the  Se#  they  at  laft  fall  into;  and  fome
of  their  Springs  rife  in  the  very  middle  or  centre  of
the  largeft  Continents.  So  that  fmce  they  are  fituated


[  "3  ]

at  fuch  a  vaft  diftance  from  any  fea,  and  take  their
rife  generally'  in  the  higheft  mountains,  the  refervoir
that  fuppiies  them  with  water  muft  certainly  be  beneath
thofe  mountains.  And  fmce,  befides  thefe  larger  ri-
vers there  are  a  multitude  of  other  rivers,  rivulets,
and  fprings,  that  indifcriminately  arife  in,  and  pafs
thro'  the  different  parts  of  any  one  of  the  larger  Con-
tinents into  which  the  world  isufually  divided,  fo  that
it  a  perfon  would  but  take  a  view  of  the  map  of  either
of  the  Continents,  and  obferve  the  heads  of  the  feveral
rivers  that  fpring  up  in  it,  that  Continent,  and  fo  the
whole  Earth,  would  appear  as~  if  it  were  bored  thro*
in  innumerable  places,  thro*  which  a  continual  efflux
of  water  proceeded;  and  from  hence  he  will  readily
conclude,  that  the  Earth  is,  as  the  Pfalmtft  fays,
ftretched  out  or  expanded  upon  water,  or  eftablijhed  upon
the  Abyfs  that  lieth  bemath\  fee  p.  25,  &c.

To  fay,  that  the  Origin  of  thefe  fprings  and  rivers
is  owing  to  rain  and  vapours  condenfed  againfl  the  fides
of  mountains,  is,  as  we  have  already  feen,  falie  in  fact
as  wf  11  as  anti-fcriptural.  But  as  it  is  the  prefent  pre-
vailing opinion,  it  may  be  expected  that  1  mould  ex-
amine the  chief  of  the  arguments  ufually  brought  in
favour  of  it-,  which  I-fhall  do,  and  endeavour  to  con-
fute them  ;  and. then  introduce  an  experiment  or  two,
which  ought  forever  to  filence  this  opinion,  and  which
indeed  might  make  thofe  afhamed  of  it  that  have  em-
braced it.  The  firft  and  chief  argument, — that  the
quantity  of  water  which  falls  in  rain  and  vapours
throughout  the  year  is  fufficient  for  the  fupply  of  ail
the  rivers  upon  the  earth, — has  been  already  (hewn
to  be  an  egregious  miftake  ;  there  being  no  rcafon  to
think  it  fufficient  for  the  fupply  of  one  of  the  larger
rivers,  much  lefs  for  all,  during  that  fpace  of  time.
'idly.  It  has  been  faid,  That  fmce  rivers  increafe  and
overflow  their  banks  after  any  great  rains,  efpeciall/


fuch  as  are  periodical,  and  after  the  flowing  or  melt-
ing of  the  fnow  upon  the  mountains,  it  certainly  fol-
lows, that  their  fupplies  are  owing  to  rain,  vapours  or
fnow. — But  this  is  fo  far  from  proving  that  the  conflant
and  regular  flux  of  rivers  (which  is  the  point  in  quef-
tion)  is  derived  from  hence,  that  it  rather  proves  the
contrary  ;  and  only  mews  that  the  fudden  incresife  or
accidental  inundations  of  rivers  may  be  owing  to  thefe
caufes  ;  but  does  not  at  all  account  for  the  water  that
continually  iflues  forth  from  the  fprings  or  heads  of
rivers,  and  which  affords  them  a  conftant  and  equable
fuppfy,  when  no  fuch  rains  fall,  and  no  fnow  is  melt-
ed. Again  •,  it  has  been  faid,  That  the  rain  that
falls,  and  the  fnow  that  is  melted,  upon  the  mountains,
fink  thro'  the  earth,  and  is  referved  there  in  large  ca-
vities or  bafons,  from  whence  'tis  gradually  difpenfed
for  the  fupply  of  fprings  and  rivers. — But  the  above
argument  deftroys  this,  for  we  find  that  rivers  fwell
and  increafe  immediately  after  and  in  proportion  to  the
rain  that  falls  or  the  fnow  that  is  melted  ;  and  there-
fore, the  water  that  proceeds  from  either  is  not  detained
within  the  mountains.  And  it  is  evident  to  fenfe,
that,  after  any  fudden  mower  or  even  a  rain  of  long
continuance,  or  the  gradual  melting  of  fnow,  the
water  which  proceeds  from  either  flows  down  from
the  mountains  along  upon  the  furface,  almoft  as  foon
as  it  falls,  and  does  not  enter  into  the  bowels  of  the
earth  [unlefs  where  there  happen  to  be  natural  hollows
or  pits  dug  for  mining,  &c.  which  lie  open  to  the  fur-
face  -,  and  then  fome  part  of  the  rain  that  falls  will  of
courfe  pafs  thro*  thefe  -,  but  as  this  tinges  the  water
of  the  fpring  with  the  colour  of  the  foil  it  has  pafied
thro',  fo  its  continuance  is  eafily  diftinguifhable,  and
it  feldom  lafts  above  a  few  hours  after  the  rain]  but
in  general,  I  fay,  it  is  evident  to  fenfe,  that  the  water
which  falls  in  rain  or  from  fnow  flows  down  from  the


fides  of  the  mountain  in  fireams  or  torrents  towards
the  lower  grounds,  and  either  unites  with  rivers  and
with  them  tails  into  the  fca,  or  e'le  fettles  at  the  bot-
tom of  hills  (but  not  upon  the  tops  or  fides,  from  whence
fprings  generally  rife,  and  to  can  afford  no  iupply  for
them )  i  and  even  from  thence  is  in  a  few  days  conveyed
away,  part  of  it  being  evaporated  by  the  heat  of  the
fun,  part  carried  off  by  the  winds,  part  fpent  in  the
nourimment  of  vegetables,  and  part  imbibed  by  the
earth.  But  it  has  been  farther  aiTerted,  Thar,

fince  in  the  hotter  feafons  of  the  year  and  in  great
droughts,  when  no  rain  has  fallen  for  fome  time,  the
fprings  and  rivers  fenlibly  tail  or  are  diminifhcd ;
therefore,  as  their  deficiencies  are  owing  to  want  of

rain,  their fupplies  muft  be  owing  to  rain. But

this  by  no  means  follows,  for  the  part  that  rain  bears
in  the  fupply  of  rivers  is  only  (as  we  have  feeh  al-
ready") an  accidental  increafe  or  fwelling  of  their  wa-
ters, but  has  no  mate  in  affording  a  regular  and  fuf-
ficient  quantity  of  water  for  their,  otherwife,  equable
and  conjtant  courfes.  And  the  reafon  why  fprings  and
rivers  fail  or  are  leffened  in  great  droughts  and  the
hotter  feafons  of  the  year  is  evident,  for  during  fuch
times  the  heat  of  the  weather  and  the  action  of  the
Sun-beams  upon  the  water  at  the  Spring-head  ^  where
the  quantity  is  generally  fmall,  and  in  the  channels  of
rivers-  will  caufe  the  water  to  be  exhaled  and  evapo-
rated in  proportion  to  fuch  heats  and  droughts,  and
therefore"  fprings  and  rivers  will  proportionably  fail.
Befides ;  in  fuch  hot  and  dry  weather,  the  ufual
moifture  of  the  ground  is  exhaled,  and  the  fur-
face  of  the  earth  parched  and  cracked  into  chafms
and  openings,  fo  that  the  moid  vapours  that  arife
from  beneath  or  from  within  the  earth,  (of  which
more  particularly  hereafter)  and  which  in  a  great
meafure  afford  fupplies  for  fprings  and  even  for  rain,

I 2


[ 1,

are,  when  they  come  to  the  furface  of  the  earth,  at-
tenuated, divided,  and  difperfed  here  and  there  (as
our  breath  or  the  fume  emitted  from  our  lungs,  is  in
the  fummer-time)  by  the  action  qf  the  fun-beams  or
heat  in  the  air,  inftead  of  being  collected  and  condenfed
at  and  under  the  furface  of  the  earth  -  (as  is  the  cafe
during  the  colder,  and  more  moderate  months)  and
fo  faturating  the  vegetable  mould,  and  repleniihing
fprings,  &c.  And  hence  it  comes  to  pafs  (quite  con-
trary to  the  hypothefis  of  fprings  being  derived  from
rain,  Sec.)  that  tho'  there  fails  in  England  and  the  adja-
cent countries  a  much  greater  quantity  of  rain  in  June
and  July  than  in  December  and  ^-fc.mic.r'^  yet  the
fprings  and  rivers  are  much  lower  and  the  earth  more
dry  in  the  two  former  months  than  m  the  two  latter  ;
and  this  certainly  happens  on  account  of  the  greater
heat  of  the  fun,  and  more  copious  exhalations  from
the  earth  and  water  ;  whereas  in  the  two  other  months,
the  fun's  power  is  lefs,  and  the  furface  of  the  earth
clofed  and  frozen ;  fo  that  the  inward  or  fubterranean
vapours  are  confined,  ccndenfed,  and  increafed  beneath
the  earth's  furface ;  and  hence  fprir.gs  and  wells  receive
a  furplufage  of  water,  and  the  inward  parts  of  the  earth
are  quite  fated  or  glutted  with  moifture,  which  collect-
ing into  drops  falls  more  plentifully  from  the  tops  of
caves,  grottos,  &c.  during  thefe  colder  months :  and
yet  this  is  a  time  when  Rain  is  not  only  lefs  in  quan-
tity, but  lefs  able  to  fend  fupplies  to  fprings,  on  ac-
count of  the  clofe  union  or  compaction  of  the  upper
parts  of  the  earth ;  fo  that  their,  fources  mull  lie  be-
neath the  earth,  and  their  fupplies  be  inward^  not  cut"
ward.


E  WOODWARD'S  Nat.  Wjl.  p.  213. MARTYN'S  Abridgment cf
ike  Memoirs  of  the  Acadtm^  of  Sciences,  &c.  Vol.  II.  p.  44.


[  "7]

BUT  I  mall  now  produce  an  experiment  or  two  of
Mr.  de  la  Hire,  fufficient  to  overthrow  this  whole
theory  of  the  origin  of  fprings  being  owing  to  rain
and  vapours.  This  gentleman  was  reiblved  to  bring
this  hypothefis  to  the  teft  of  experiments,  and  to  ex-
amine it  in  its  moft  ejjential  article,  viz.  by  endeavour-
ing to  find  to  what  depth  rain  or  fnow- Water  did  really
defcend  into  the  earth.  In  order  to  know  this,h  '  He

*  dug  a  hole  in  the  lower  terrafs  of  the  Obfervatory  at
'  Paris,  and  placed  therein,  eight  feet  under  ground,
'  a  large  leaden  bafon,  a  tittle  inclined  towards  one  of
'  its  angles,  to  which  was  foldered  a  leaden  pipe  12
c  feet  long,  which,  after  a  confiderable  defcent,  reached
'  into  a  cellar  adjoining. And  after  having  covered

*  the  head  of  the  pipe  in  the  bafon  with  feveral  flints  of
'  different  fizes, to  prevent  the  orifice  from  being
'  Hopped,  he  threw  in  a  quantity  of  earth  of  a  middle

*  nature,  between  fand  and  loam,  (and  fo  eafily  per-
4  meable  by  water)  to  the  depth  of  eight  feet  -,  and  then
'  judged,  that  if  the  rain  and  fnow-water  penetrated
'  the  earth  to  the  depth  that  fome  fprings  are  found
'  at  (which  in  digging  wells  and  mines  are  difcovered
'  to  be  at  all  depths,  from  8  to  800  feet)  or  'till  they
'  meet  with  the  firft  clayey  or  compact  flratum  to  flop
'  them,  that  then  the  bottom  of  the  bafon  would  ferve
£  to  Hop  and  collect  the  water :  and  by  this  means  there
4  would  foonbe  a  fpring  burfling  forth  thro'  the  leaden

*  pipe  into  the  cellar. But  on  the  contrary,  after  hav-
'  ing  kept  the  bafon  in  this  fituation  for  no  lefs  than
'  15  years,  and  the  ground  all  the  while  expofed  open
4  to  whatever  rain, fnow,  or  vapours  that  fell,  he
'  could  not  obferve  that  ^fingle  drop  of  -water  had  ever

I  3

h  See  Mittioin  de  la  Acadim,  or  MARTYN'S  Abridgvur.t ^  Vol.  II.
p.  52.  &c.


«  pafled  thro*  the  leaden  pipe  into  the  cellar. — At  the
_'  fame  time  that  he  begun  the  above  experiment,  he
«  placed  another  bafon  about  8  inches  under  ground,

<  and  chofe  a  place  where  the  rain  and  vapours  might
«  fall,  and  yet  the  ground  be  fcreened  from  the  heat  of
'  the  fun  and  the  aclion  of  the  wind,  and  took  care  to
«  pull  up  all  the  grafs  and  herbs  which  grew  over  the
«  bafon,  that  all  the  water,  which  mould  fall  on  the

<  ground,  might  pafs  uninterrupted  to  the  bottom  of
'  the  -bafon,  wherein  was  a  little  hole,  with  a  tube  to
<•  convey  the  water  into  another  veiTel. The  effect  was,

<  that  in  all  the  fpace  of  time  from  the  iith  of  'June
<•  to  the  igth  of  February  following  (more  than  eight
'•months)  no  water  came  by  the  tube  from  the  bafon ;
e  and  tho'  it  began  to  run  on  the  lyth  of  February,  this
«  was  entirely  owing  to  the  great  quantity  of  fnow

<  which  had  fallen,  and  was  then  melting. From  that
'  time  the  earth  in  the  bafon  was  always  very  moift,
«  though  the  water  would  only  run  a  tew  hours  aftef1
«  raining,  and  it  ceafed  running,  when  the  quantity

<  fallen  was  drained  off. A  year  after,  he  repeated

c  the  fame  experiment,  but  buried  the  bafon  16  inches
'  under  ground. He  took  care  alfo  that  there  was  no
'  grafs  on  the  ground,  and  that  it  might  be  fcreened
'  from  the  fun  and  wind,  which  would  dry  it  too  fail.
'  The  effect  was  much  the  fame  as  in  the  former,  ex-
'  cepting  that  when  a  confiderable  time  pafled  without
'  raining,  the  earth  would  grow  a  little  dry ;  fo  that
'  a  moderate  rain  coming  on,  it  would  not  moiilen

'  it fufficiently  to make  it run. Laflly, he

'  planted  herbs  on  the  ground  over  the  bafon,  but
'  found,  that  when  thefe  were  grown  up  a  little,  the
'  ground  was  fo  far  from  fending  any  water  after  rain,
'  that  all  that  fell  was  not  fujfident  to  fujlam  them,
'  but  they  would  droop  and  wither,  unlefs  re-fprinkled
'  from  time  to  time  with  water.' This,  I  think.


[  "9]

abundantly  proves,  not  only  that  the  rain-water  does
not  penetrate  the  earth,  fo  as  to  form  the  (mailed  col-
lection of  water,  above  16  or  18  inches,  but  that
the  quantity  that  falls,  is  not  fuffident  to  furnifh  the
quota  requifite  for  the  growth  of  vegetables  ;  fo  that
we  muft  call  in,  as  the  above-mentioned  author  re-
marks, '  fome  foreign  affijlance  to  fupport  them  ;'
which  alfo  he  found  to  be  true  from  *  feveral  experi-
*  merits  that  he  made  upon  the  quantity  of  water  eva-
4  porated  thro'  the  leaves  of  plants. '_  And  what  he
fays  concerning  the  rain-water  not  finking  above  1 6  or
1 8  inches  in  a  foil  of  a  middle  nature,  between  fand
and  loam,  I  have  obferved  to  be  nearly  true  even
in  the  moft  lax  and  gravelly  foil,  fuch  as  that  in  the
low-lands  about  Oxford,  which  confifts  of  fmall  round
pebbles  and  fand.  I  have  examined  it  frequently  after
the  hardeft  rains,  and  thofe  of  long  continuance,  [but
could  never  perceive  that  the  rain  had  defcended,
(tho'  the  ground  was  upon  a  level,  in  a  valley,  and
of  a  wide  extent)  above  20  inches  or  two  feet  at  moft;
and  at  about  this  depth  I  obferved  in  feveral  places
where  the  earth  was  opened,  that  the  gravel  was  un-
commonly hard  and  compact,  the  parts  of  it  fo  in-
timately united,  that  it  formed  a  kind  of  ftratum,
which  in  tenacity  equalled  fome  kinds  of  ftrata  of  (tone :
and  upon  examining  the  reafon  of  it,  I  found  it  to  pro-
ceed from  hence,  that  the  rain  water  had  drained  down
as  low  as  this,  and  here  lodged  ;  and  as  it  defcended,
it  had  carried  with  it  the  fmaller  granules  of  fand  and
other  finer  matter,  which  being  repofited  among  and
between  the  other  pebbles,  cemented  them  clofe  to-
gether and  confolidated  the  whole  ;  and  that  this  was
the  caufe  of  their  union  was  manifeft  from  the  finer
matter  being  affixed  to  the  fides  and  under-parts  of  moft
of  the  pebbles,  juft  in  the  manner  as  the  draining  or
laft  fediment  of  water  would  naturally  leave  it,  Buu
I  4


[ 120 ]

I  fay,  after  repeated  obfervations,  I  could  never  per-
ceive that  the  rain-water  had  penetrated  thro1  this  com-
pact ftratum  of  gravel  •,  and  unlefs  the  ram  haa  bf-en
of  long  continuance,  and  the  weathef  very  moift  and
wet  before,  I  could  not  find  that  it  had  penetrated
even  thus  far;  but  faw  plainly  that  all  the  rain  that
fell  was  not  fufficient  for  the  fupport  and  nounmment
1  of  the  herbage  and  vegetables ;  which,  unlefs  they  had
been  aflifted  by  the  foreign  fuppiy  of  the  vapours  that
afc end  from  the  infide  of  the  earth  or  whkh  proceed
from  beneath  upwards  (not  thoie  that  fall  from  the
clouds,  or  from  above,  downwards)  would  foon  have
drooped  and  withered,  as  thofe  planted  by  the  above-
mentioned  gentleman  did.

IT  appearing  then  thus  evident  that  the  origin  of
Springs  and  Rivers  is  not  owing  to  rain  or  any  vapours
that -may  fall  from  above,  we  muft  feek  for  an  internal
fupply,  for  a  magazine  of  water  underneath  the  earth ;
and  how  immenfely  great  this  muft  be,  I  have  given
the  reader  reafon  to  judge  from  what  has  been  faid
at  the  beginning  of  this  argument,  p.  105.  But  it
may  be  proper  (in  order  to  obviate  all  objections  and"
entirely  to  clear  the  fubject  I  am  upon;  to  explain  how
and  by  what  means  the  water  of  this  fubterranean
Abyfs  is  conveyed  to  the  tops  of  the  highefl  moun-
tains, and  there  breaks  out  in  Springs,  &c.  Now
any  one  that  has  but  ju.lt  looked  into  the  infide  of  the
earth,  and  obferved  the  ftructure  of  ir,  cannot  but
know  that  the  ftrata  or  beds  of  (lone,  &c.  of  which
it  confifts,  have  innumerable  cracks  or  ffures  in  them,
ibme  perpendicular,  others  oblique>  and  others  hori-
zontal, or  rather  fuch  as  interfect  and  divide  the  ftra-
ta at  all  angles,  and  in  all  directions  whatever ;  and
alfo  that  thefe  fiffures  are  of  various  frzes  and  capa-
cities, from  foir.e  that  are  feveral  feet  in  breadth  to  a
multitude  of  "others  that  arc  not  more  than  a  line  in


width,  or  even  invifible  ('till  fome  force  be  applied  to
the  ftonc,  &c.  and  then  the  (lone  will  break  into  fmall
fhatters  or  fragments,  and  difcover  where  thefe  cracks
were,  as  every  one  knows) ;  and  it  is  alfo  certain,  that
feveral  of  thefe  fifiures  or  rather  thefe  divifions  or  part-
ings of  the  regular  flrata  are  filled  with  a  rubbley-kind
of  matter,  confitling  of  a  mixture  of  fmall  loofe  flones,
clay,  fludge  and  fand ;  and  that  others  of  them  are
quite  open.1  It  is  allo  well  known  to  thole  that

are  at  all  converfant  in  the  fubterranean  world,  that
there  is  a  moift  vapour  or  a  kind  of  fleam  continually
paffing,  from  beneath  upwards,  thro'  the  fhell  or  cruft
of  the  earth  i  and  that  this  vapour  pervades,  not  only
the  fmaller  and  leffer  fiffures,  but  even  the  interflices
and  pores  of  moft  forts  of  flone,  &c ;  and  that  the
deeper  you  defcend,  the  more  fenfibly  and  forcibly
this  vapour  ads  or  aicends.k  Now  upon  the  certainty
of  thefe  two  facts  (the  reality  of  which  any  perfon  may
be  convinced  of,  by  giving  himfelf  the  trouble  of  look-
ing into  the  infide  of  the  earth)  we  (hall  be  under  no
great  difficulty  in  accounting  for  the  afcentof  the  fub-
terranean water  to  the  tops  and  fides  of  mountains  for
the  origin  of  fprings,  rivers,  &c.  For,  firft,

fince  the  Earth  is  thus  cracked  and  divided,  from
the  bottom  of  its  iliell  to  the  top,  into  an  innumerable
number  of  fiffures  of  various  fhapes  and  various  fizes,
it  cannot  but  be  that  the  water  of  the  Abyfs  pervades
thefe  cracks  and  enters 'up  into  them  to  a  level  with
the  water  of  the  Sea  :  for  however  irregular  and  wind-
ing thefe  fiffures  may  be,  yet  it  is  evident,  from  the
common  experiment  of  immerging  feveral  tubes  that
are  of  the  moil  different  fhapes  and  fizes  into  a  veffel
of  water,  that  the  water  will  rife  to  an  equal  height

'  See  the  Expltu^tizn  of  the  ljlatc  under  the  Letter  F.
k  See  Note  k  p.  41 .  and  the  references.


[ ,22]

in  each,  and  be  level  with  the  furface  of  the  water  in
the  veffel  -,  and  fo  muft  the  water  of  the  Abyfs  fcand
with  refpect  to  the  furface  of  the  Ocean.  So  that  if
we  were  to  fuppofe  the  Earth,  or  rather  the  mountain-
ous Part  of  ir,  to  be  cut  off  to  a  level,  or  concentri-
cally, with  the  furface  of  the  Sea,  it  is  certain  that
the  fiffures  and  chafms,  which  communicated  with
the  Abyfs  beneath,  would  be  full  of  water  to  their
very  tops,  notwithftanding  the--  Preffure  of  the  out-
ward Air  upon  them  •,  for,  neither  this  nor  the  ir-
regularity of  the  fubterranean  canals  would  prevent
the  water  from  rifmg  in  every  one  of  thefe  fiffures  to
a  level  with  the  furface  of  the  Ocean,  as  is  evident
from  the  above-mentioned  well-known  experiment.
Nay,  it  will  rile  much  higher,  for  (as  Dr.  Gualtieri
juftly  obferves)  '  Two  Liquids  of  an  unequal  weight,
4  put  in  an  equal  quantity  into  two  equal  tubes  raifed
c  perpendicularly  upon  the  fame  plain,  have  a  different

*  height  relatively  to  their  weight. This  being  laid
6  down,  'tis  certain  by  many  experiments,  that  Sea-

*  water  is  heavier  than  frefli  water,  and  that  the  gra-

*  vity  of  the  firft  is  to  that  of  the  fecond,  as 103  to

*  100. And  therefore  if  we  fuppole  the  Sea  to  be  an
6  100  feet  deep,  and  that  the  fea- water  being  deprived
6  of  its  fait  by  filtration,  fills  up  the  fubterraneous

*  paffages  thro'  which  it  circulates,  it  may  rife  to  the

*  height  of  3  Feet  above  the  level  of  the  lea. Now,

*  if  we  fuppofe  the  fea  to  have  the  depth  of  an  Italian

*  mile,  which  makes  5000  feet  (meafure  of  Bologna)^
c  frefh  water  may  rife  to  the  height  of  1 50  feet  above

*  the  fame  level. That  height  of  150  feet  is  already
4  fomething  confiderable  for  a  mountain. But  be-
c  caufe  fome  are  much  higher,  at  the  tops  of  which
'  there  are  Springs  of  frefh  water  ;  we  may  obferve,
'  that  in  many  places,  Pilots  have  not  been  able  to
1  meafure  the  depth  of  the  fea,  becaufe  they  could  not


*  firrd  the  bottom  of  it ;  but  tho'  they  mould  find  it
'  in  fuch  places,  one  may  very  well  fuppoie  that  there
'  are  in  them  abyffes,  caverns,  c\c.  which  the  plum-
4  met  does  not  reach,  and  which  penetrating  into
4  the  moft  internal  pares  of  the  earth,  from  a  perpen-
'  dicular  column  of  fait- water  ot  an  immenfe  height.'
Now  if,  under  thefe  circumftances,  we  fuppofe  the
mountainous  part  of  the  earth  or  that  portion  of  its
fphere  which  is  higher  than  the  fur  face  of  the  Sea  (and
which  we  before  ilippofed  to  have  been  taken  off)  to
be  re-placed  in  its  firft  and  original  pofition,  fo  than
the  fiffures  in  the  mountainous  Part  mall  be  directly
over  the  fiffures  that  are  full  of  water  to  their  tops  (as
is  the  real  fituation  of  them  in  the  prefent  ftructure
of  the  earth)  how  foon,  in  this  cafe,  and  to  what  a
height  would  the  water  of  the  Abyfs  be  preffed  up
thro'  the  fiffures  into  the  mountains  ?  For  now  the  per-
pendicular preflure  of  the  outward  Air  upon  the  fur-
face  of  the  water  in  the  fiffures  being  taken  off  or  e-
luded  by  the  covering  of  the  mountains  or  their  fuper-
incumbent  ftrata,  the  fubterranean  water,  by  the  force
and  action  of  the  outward  Air  upon  the  Seas  and  the
weight  of  the  fait  water  in  the  Seas  (which  com-
municate, or  are  one,  with  the  Abyfs),  would  be
forced  up  through  the  fiffures  in  the  mountains  vaft-
'ly  above  the  level  of  the  Sea-;  in  the  fame  manner
(to  compare  great  things  with  final  1)  as  water  is  pref-
fed up  thro'  the  pores  in  a  heap  of  fand,  or  thro1  the
cracks  in  a  block  of  ftone,  whofc  bottom  or  under-part
lies  immerfed  in  a  pond  of  water,  but  whofe  upper
part  is  much  above  it  •,  for  by  this  fituation  of  the
Sand  or  Stone,  that  part  of  either  which  is  prominent
or  above  the  water  receives  the  perpendicular  prei-
fure  of  the  outward  air  upon  its  exterior  furface,  and
io  eludes  or  weakens  the  action  ot  the  Air  upon  the
water  that  is  under  or  in  the  pores  of  the  ftone  •,  and


[

alfo,  comparatively  fpeaking,  increafts  the  pfefTui'e
and  ftrength  of  the  external  Air  upon 'the.  furface  of
the  water  in  the  pond,  which  therefore  will  force  the
water  that  is  leaft  preffed  (viz.  That  which  is  under
and  in  the  pores  ot  the  ftone)  to  that  place  where  it
can  find  eaiieft  admittance,  which  will  be  up  into  the
pores  and  cracks  in  the  ftone,  as  there  is  the  thineft
medium  and  freed  paffage.  Now  if  we  carry  this
analogy  farther,  and  confider  that  the  whole  furface
of  the- earth  is  compreffed  by  the  ftrength  of  the  Ex-
panfe,  or  the  Fluid  of  the  Heavens  furrounding  and
binding  it  on  all  fides  ;  and  that  this  Preffure  or  Ten-
fion  is  fo  very  great  and  fo  clofely  applied  to  every
part,  as  to  prefer  ve  the  earth  in  its  prefent  folid  ftate
and  circular  form  (tho*  it  be  revolved  fo  immenfely
fwift  upon  its  axis).*  And  when  we  farther  confider,
that,  while  the  external  Air  or  grofier  part  of  the  Hea-
vens (the  Spirit}  preffes  chiefly  upon  the  furface,  the
finer,  purer,  or  the  ethereal  Part  (theL/g$/)  pervades
and  reaches  the  inmoft  receffes  of  the  earth  (for,  we
find,  that  no  terreftrial  body  can  deny  it  entrance)  and
penetrates  even  to  the  center.  And  as  there  is  anew  and
fnccej/i-je  ftream  of  Light,  almoftinftantaneoufly,  mov-
ing or  impelled  from  the  Fire  at  the  Sun,  and  con-
tinually preffing  againft,  and  making  its  way  into
the  orb  of  the  earth  (chiefly  at  or  under  the  torrid
Zone),  and  having  palled  thro'  the  fhell  or  the  wa-
ters of  the  Ocean,  enters  into  the  Abyfs  and  there
agitates  and  expa nds  the  water :  And  as  in  order  to
gain  itfelf  admittance  and  occupy  a  fpace  in  the  Abyfs
equivalent  to  its  own  bulk  or  quantity,  a  proportion-
able quantity  of  other  matter  mull  recede,  give  way,
or  pafs  out  of  the  Earth  -,'  fo  this  receding  matter,  as

*  Sec  alfo  what  is  faid  of  the  ?---^v/rt  of  the  air,  in  the  note,  p.  37.

1  To  explam  ihife  fomewhat  farther,  it  is  now,  I  think,  univer-
fally  allowed  that  Light  is  a  bod-;  or  a  material  fukjiaxce.  And
\\  hen  we  confider  that  its  particles  refie&cd  from  a  concave  ff  eculuai,


[ -25 ]

it  is  impelled  upwards  from  the  center  to  the  furface,
would  takte  the  eafieft  and  readieft  paiTages  it  could
find,  and  therefore  would  endeavour  to  pafs  thro'  the
cracks  and  fifliires  of  the  earth  ;  but  as  all  the  fuTures
that  communicated  with  the  Abyfs  beneath,  were  before
full  of  water,  even  to  a  level  with,  or  rather  much
higher  than  the  furface  of  the  Sea,  fo  this  receding
matter  in  its  afcent  would  certainly  contribute  to-
wards forcing  the  water  in  the  fi fibres  y?///£^ /for  up

aft  with  fuch  force  as  to  divide  and  inftantly  to  fplit  aflnder  the  parts
of  a  diamond  or  the  clofeft  body  we  know,  it  muft  be  allowed  to  be
a  fubilance  inconceivably  bard  and  I'ubtlc ;  and  its  motion  immenfelt
fnaift  and  Jhvng  :  which  laft  article  is  further  evident  from  the  almoft
infinite  number  of  reverberations  it  will  endure  from  fpecula  to  fpe-
cula,  and  yet  its  angle  of  reflection  be  equal  to  its  angle  of  incidence.
Such  being  the  Solidity,  Subtilty,  Activity,  and  Velocity  of  Light,
no  terreftrial  body  furely  can  prevent  its  paffing  thro' their  pores;  and
when  we  confider  that  the  Earth  has  been  expofed  to  the  aftion  of
this  fjbtie  penetrating  Agent  for  federal  tboufand  years,  there  cer-
tainly can  be  no  fpace  in  it,  that  can  receive  an  atom  of  Light,  b.:t
what  has  one ;  and  therefore  the  Earth  from  center  to  circumference  is  a
Plenum,  cr  there  is  no  one  atom  in  it,  but  what  is  in  contact  with
another  atom,  of  fome  kind  or  other,  but  chiefly  with  the  particks
of  Light;  as  is  evident  not  only  from  the  tenuity  of  this  body  which
will  premeate  the  pores  of  any  other,  but  fince  the  far  greater  part  of
the  terraqueous  globe  is  in  a  ftate  ofyf^V/Vj  or  confiftsof  ivnter  ;  and
we  know  that  the  adion  or  comparative  non-aftion  of  Light,  Heat
or  Fire  (for  each  are  the  fame  in  fubftance,  and  differ  only  in  degree
or  mariner  of  motion)  cau!es  the  Fluidity  .or  Soliairv  r,f  <watt:r  (its
fluid  or  frozen  ftate) ;  and  as  the  earth  is  warmer,  the  deeper  we
deicend;  and  there  is  an  imraeniely  large  fphere  of  water  in  a  (late
of  fluidity  and  motion  or  perpetual  circulation  underneath  the  earth
(as  will  more  evidently  be  (hewn  hereafter1! ;  fo  there  muft  be  a  free
admiflion  and  full  penetration  of  the  particles  of  Light  thro'  that
mafs  of  water  in  order  to  preferve  \iiuch  or  keep  it  in  a  (late  fuf-
ccptiBle  of  eafy  motion  and  brifk  circulation.  Such  being  the  con-
dition of  the  earth ;  and  iince  it  is  imporiible  that  any  two  bodies
can  fubfift  together  in  one  and  the  iame  place,  it  muft  follow,  that
wherever,  in  iuch  a  plenum  as  the  above-mentioned,  there  is  an
intrufion  of  any  other  body  or  matter,  there  mull  be  a  protrufion  of
other  marttr,  quantity  f/r  quantity.


f  .26]

or  nearer  to  the  tops  of  the  mountains :  And  this  its
Effect  muft  be  judged  of  from  the  nature  and  force
of  this  receding  matter.  We  muft  therefore  next  de-
termine what  this  matter  is.  Now  this  can  be,  no
other  than  the  above-mentioned  fubUrrancan  moift  va-
pour-, it  being  certain,  that  this  is  inceffantly  palling
thro'  (and  we  know  of  no  other  matter  that  is  fo)  the
ihell  of  the  earth  from  beneath  upwards  or  from  the
center  to  the  circumference  •,  and  it  anfwers  in  its  nature
and  form  what  we  might  juftly  expect  fuch  receding
matter  to  be.  For  it  cannot  but  be  allowed,  that,  as
the  Light  penetrated  into  the  Abyfs;  and  protruded
or  pufhed  out  other  matter  to  gain  itfclf  admifiion,
the  matter  thus  driven  out  would  be  the  fineft  and
pureft  that  was  in  the  Abyfs,  which  could  be  no  other
than  the  Light  and  fine  Air  that  were  there  before
(for  it  is  certain  that  there  is  fome,  tho'  very  pure  air,
as  well  as  Light,  in  the  Abyfs,  elfe  fifties  could  not
live  and  breathe  at  the  bottom  of  the  Ocean  •,  nor  the
water  of  the  fprings  that  are  difcovered  at  the  loweft
depth  in  the  earth  be  fo  replete  with  air).  Now  as
this  Light  and  fine  Air  were  pufhed  outward,  they
muft  ot  courfe  pafs  thro'  the  water  of  the  Abyfs.  And
as  this  water  had  been  before  rahfied  and  expanded
by  the  colluctation  of  the  atoms  of  Light  between
themfelves  (and  it  is  not  improbable,  fince  the  earth
is  of  a  fpherical  form,  that  the  rays  of  light  which
pafs  thro'  the  Ocean  and  the  Abyfs,  on  each  fide  of
the  equator,  are  refracted  or  converge  towards  one
another  till  they  meet  in  a  focus  near  the  center  of  the
earth-,  and  then  the  heat  and  agitation  would  be  much
greater)  and  alfo  by  their  ftruggle  to  difpoffefs  and
drive  out  the  fubterranean  light  and  air,  fo  this  light
and  air  thus  driven  out  would  arife  from  the  Abyfs
in  form  offteam  or  vapour-,  which  we  find  actually
to  be  the  cafe.  Now  this  vapour,  in  its  paflUge


[ 127 ]

from  the  Abyfs  thro'  the  cracks  and  pores  in  the  ftra-
ta  of  the  earth,  would  not  only  be  a  means  of  elevat-
ing the  water  in  thofe  cracks,  but  would  itfelf  be
turned  or  condenfed  into  water  (as  the  fleams  that  rife
in  an  alembick  are)  as  it  ftruck  againft  the  tops,  fides,
and  irregular  hollows  in  the  failures ;  and  by  this  re-
peated action  be  continually  forming  into  drops,  and
trickling  down  the  fides  of  the  failures  ±  and  thus,  not
only  increafe  the  water  that  was  before  paffing  thro'
the  fi  iTu res,  but  in  fome  places,  where  there  were
natural  bafons  or  cavities  in  the  rock,  be  amaffed  in
confiderable  quantities.  And  if  fuch  bafons  or  fiffures
happen  to  be  higher  than  the  ordinary  furface  of  the
earth,  or  than  the  lower  grounds  (as  is  the  fituation
of  them  all  in  mountains)  the  water  thus  collected,  or
rather  inceffantly  collecting  would  break  out,  where  -
ever  it  could  find  vent,  on  the  outfide  of  the  moun-
tain, and  there  form  fprings,  rivulets,  &c.  But  if
the  bafons  or  fiffures  in  the  infide  of  the  mountain  be
not  higher  than  the  mean  furface  of  the  earth,  or
there  happen  to  be  any  depreffed  or  hollow  place  on
the  outfide  of  the  mountain,  the  water  that  ouzed
out  of  the  infide  would  then  fall  into  them,  and  there
fettle  •,  and  become  either  fmall  -pools  or  large  lakes,
according  to  its  extent  or  quantity.  And  thus,  by
this  inward  fupply,  by  the  afcent  of  the  fubterranean
water  and  vapour >  there  will  be  a  conftant  Fund  and
fufficient  Source  of  water  for  the  production  of  Springs,
Rivers,  Lakes,  &c.  throughout  the  whole  earth.

BUT  there  is  a  difficulty  attending  this  account  of
the  origin  of  Springs  which  may  be  thought  too  ma-
terial to  be  patted  by  without  a  folution  :  and  that  is,
— That  if  Springs  derive  their  water  from  the  Sea  or
from  the  Abyfs  which  communicates  with  the  fea,
how  comes  it  to  pals,  that  Spring-water  is  not  fait
and  briny,  like  the  fource  from  whence  it  proceeds ;


[  "3]

but  on  the  contrary  is  generally  frefh  and  fweet,  or
infipid.  Now  fuppofing  the  Abyfs  beneath  the  earth
to  be  fait  like  the  Sea  (which  yet  we  can  have  no  ab-
folute  proof  of;  and  I  could  give  feveral  reafons  to
ihew,  that  it  may  not  be  fo,  at  leaft,  not  equally  fait  with
the  Sea)  yet  we  may  folve  the  difficulty  upon  the  fol-
lowing facls  and  obfervations.  Firft,  let  it  Be  re-
marked, that  Sea-water  may  be  diverted  of  its  faline
particles,  and  is  frequently  rendered  frefh  in  a  natural
way  .  —  the  vapours  that  are  exhaled  from  the  fea,  and
which  fall  again  in  frefli  fhowers  of  rain,  is  one  proof
of  this  •,  —  and  the  flefh  of  fifli,  which  are  caught,  and
which  before  lived  and  fed,  in  the  Sea,  being  fweet,
is  another  proof  of  it  ;  —  and  from  in  experiment  which
Mr.  L^jierm  made,  it  is  certain,  that  the  w'ater  which  is
fucked  up  (as  we  commonly  fay)  or  rather  impelled
and  ilrained  through  the  tubes  and  veffels  of  the  Alga
marina  or  common  Sea-weed  is  frefh,  fweet  and  pota-
ble ;  tho'  the  diftillation  be  made  from  a  bafon  full
of  falt-water.  Or,  what  is  more  applicable  to  the
prefent  cafe,  Monf.  Marjtlli  having  -filtrated  a  certain-
quantity  of  the  falteft  and  heavier!  Sea-  water  he  could
procure  thro'  feveral  veflels  filled  with  fand,  all  which
together  made  up  a  cylinder  of  fand  of  75  inches  in
depth,  found,  that  the  water  had  loft  near  one  half
of  its  degree  of  faltnefs  -,  and  concluded  that  had  it
been  drained  again  thro'  twice  the  fame  quantity  of
{and,  it  would  have  been  entirely  deprived  of  its  faline
particles  -,n  or  we  may  fafely  fay,  that  had  it  pallid
thro'  a  -cylinder  of  land,  confining  of  as  many  feet,
as  the  above  did  of  inches,  it  would  have  been  as
pure  and  frefh  as  the  water  of  the  wells  of  St.  Marfs
on  the  fhore  of  Languedoc  in  France,  which


Phil.  Tranf.  N°-  156.  Q^Lywtkor^s  Abridg.  Vol.11,  p.  297.
De  laMtr.  p.  33.


f  I29  1

fays  are  not  more  than  60  feet  diftant  From  the  neareli
place  where  the  Sea- water  reaches.0  Here  then  are
feveral  flrainers,  or  means  by  which  Sea-water  may  be
percolated  and  rendered  frem,  in  aneafy,  natural,  and
expeditious  way*  Now  tho'  the  pores  of  the  earth
are  larger  or  more  open  than  the  ftrainers  here  men-
tioned, yet  when  we  confider  the  bulk  of  the  earth  or
the  thicknefs  of  its  mell,  the  great  variety  of  ftrata
of  which  it  confirts,  the  many  turnings  and  windings
of  the  fifllires  (by  means  of  which  the  fubterranean
water  may  pafs  thro'  this  variety  of  ftrata),  the  thick
grofs  vapour  that  is  continually  paffing  thro*  the  whole
body  of  the  earth,  and  the  great  quantity  of  Sea-weed
and  other  marine  productions  that  are  at  the  bottom
of  the  Ocean,  efpecially  in  fuch  calm  and  quiet  places
as  the  cavities  at  the  mouths  of  the  fiffures,-  I  fay,
taking  all  thefe  into  consideration,  which  may  be
efteemed  as  fo  many  percolators,  and  tho'  more  open
and  porous  than  the  above-mentioned,  yet  by  the
length  of  their  courfes  and  the  variety  of  their  fubftancesi
they  will  certainly  anfwer  the  end  of  the  atore-men-
tioned.  And  this  appears  to  be  fact  from  hence,
That  in  fuch  places  where  the  Sea-water  has  admif-
fion  into  the  earth,  the  Springs  and  Wells  are  more
or  lefs  brackifh,  as  they  are  nearer  to,  or  farther  from
the  Sea.  Thus  Mr.  Norwood,  fpeaking  of  the  Ber-
muda iflands,  fays,p  *  We  dig  WtUs  of  frejh  'water

*  fometimes  within  20  yards  of  the  fea,  or  lefs  •,  which

*  rife  and  fall  upon  the  Flood  and  Ebb,  as  the  fea
'  doth ;  as  do  mofb  of  the  wells  in  the  country,  tho*
'  further  up  (as  I  am  informed). Wherefoever  they
e  dig  wells  here,  they  dig  'till  they  come  almofl  to  z

K


0 De  la  Mer,  ibid.

p  i  Abridg.  Vol.  II.  p.  2q9.


'  level  with  the  fuperficies  of  the  fea,  and  then  they

*  find  either  frejh  water  or  fait. If  it  be/r^&,  yet  if
'  they  dig  two  or  three  feet  deeper,  or  often  lefs,  they
'  ccme  to  fait  water. Jf  it  be  a  fandy  ground,  or  a

*  faxdy  crumbling  ftone,  that  die  water  foaks  gently  thro',

*  they find  ufually  frejb  water  ;  but  if  there  be  hard
c  lime-ftone  rocks,  which  the  water  cannot  leak  thro',
'  but  pafieth  in  chinks  or  clefts  between  them,  the
c  water  is  fait  or  brackifh' Parotitis  relates  the  fame
of  feveral  places,  and  obferves  '  that  Springs  near  the
'  Ocean  are  fait  or  brackifh,  and  the  nearer  they  are
c  the  fea,  the  more  .they  are  fated  with  fait ;  as  on  the
'  more  of  Africa,  and  in  Indiay  chiefly  on  the  more  of
'  Coromandel,  where  no  vines  grow,  and  all  their  wells
'  tafte  fait. Near  the  town  of  Suez,  at  the  end  of  the
'  Red  Sea,  their  fprings  are  all  fait  and  bitter ;  and

*  even  the  water  which  is  fetched  two  German  miles
«  from  the  more,  taftes  a  little  bracki/h. Alfo  in  fe-
'  veral  fmall  iflands  there  are  no  frefh  fprings  but
'  all  fait  (tho'  fomething  lefs  fated  than  the  Ocean)
'  as  in  the  ifland  of  SL  Vincent,  and  others. In  the
'  low  countries  of  Peru  that  border  upon  the  Ocean,

*  their  Lakes  are  faltifhy  becaufe  of  the  vicinity  of
c  the  Sea.q But  farther  up  in  the  inland  countries,  it
is  well  known,  that  the  Springs  and  Lakes  are  frefh
and  fweet. Hence  then  we  may  fairly  conclude,
that  the  water  of  the  Ocean  and  the  Abyfs  is,  by  a
gradual filtration  thro'  the  ftrata  of  the  earth, fo
itrained  and  purified  as  to  leave  behind  all  its  faline
or  briny  particles,  and  when  it  arrives  at  a  due  dif-
tance  (either  greater,  or  lefs,  according  to  the  poro-
fity  or  tenacity  of  the  ftrata  it  paffes  through)  from  its
original  refervoir,  there  to  become  fweet  and  frefh,  or
at  leaft  diverted  of  its  primitive  qualities. A  fur-

«  VAREXIUS'S  Geography^  Part  I.  Ch.  xvi.  Proportion  5.


thef  proof,  that  the  water  of  the  Abyfs, in  its  paf-
fage  thro'  the  ftrata  of  the  earth, depofits  its  faline
particles,  may  be  drawn  from  the  peculiar  qualities
of  mineral  Springs-,  of  which  there  are  almoft  an  infi-
nite number,  differing  from  each  other  in  the  moft
diftinguifhable  properties,  according  to  the  particular
fpecies  of  the  mineral  or  metallic  effluvia  they  are  im-
pregnated with; and  tho'  feveral  of  thefe  have  a
laltilh  tafte,  yet  it  is  well  known,  that  even  That  pro-
ceeds from  other  fairs  than  thofe  which  the  Sea- water
is  replete  with. "Whence  it  muft  follow, that  all
mineral  waters, before  they  arrive  at  their  outlets,
have  not  only  depofited  their faline particles, but
even  affumed  others,  very  different  and  diftinct  there-
from. And fince this  is  the cafe^  we may  fairly
fuppofe, that where the fubterranean water  pafles
through  ftrata  that  have  no  proper,  or  no  great  quan-
tity of  proper,  matter  for  the  production  of  mineral
waters  *  that  there  it  will  break  out  in  fprings  of  pure
and  frefh  water.  It  may  not  be  amifs  to  obferve

in  this  place,  that>  upon  the  fuppofition  of  Springs,
being  owing  to  rain  or  vapours  that  fall  upon,  and
make  their  way  through  the  outfides  of  the  mountains^
to  the  places  from  whence  they  rife,  it  is  altogether
abfurd  and  impofiible  to  conceive,  that  the  fmall por-
tion of  the  earth  which  lies  above  feveral  mineral  fprings,
efpecially  fuch  as  break  out  near  the  tops  of  the  high-
eft  mountains,  can  be  fufficient  for  affording  a  conftant
and  equable  fupply  of  mineral  matter  for  the  impregnation
of  them.  Befides;  it  is  well  known,  that  in  fuch
places  where  mineral  Springs  are,  and  there  happen
to  be  any  cavities  open  at  the  furface  of  the  earth,  or
any  chinks  or  crevices  in  the  rock,  through  which  the
rain-water  may  defcend  and  gleet  down  to  the  nfiure
through  which  the  mineral  water  flows,  that  in  fuch
cafes  the  rain-water  is  fo  far  from  increafing  the  vir-


tues  of  the  Spring,  that  it  either  deftroys  or  leficns
them  for  a  time,  and  renders  fuch  as  are  hot  and
warm  cold  or  cool,  fuch  as  are  acrid  and  bitter  fome-
vvhat  f #eet  or  lefs  acrid,  and  fo  of  the  reft  •,  which
plainly  mews,  as  I  obferved  before,  that  when  rain-
water permeates  the  earth,  and  reaches  the  water  of
Springs,  it  only  makes  an  accidental  or  temporary  in-
creafe,  but  does  not  afford  the  conftant  and  regular
flux  •,  and  is  fo  far  from  being  the  Source  of  mineral
water,  or  bringing  down  any  matter  proper  for  the
production  or  continuance  of  fuch  Springs,  that  were
it  reaches  them,  it  in  part  deftroys  their  qualities ;
which,  I  may  obferve,  the  Springs  recover  again  when
the  rain  is  over :  fo  that  their  fupplies  cannot  be  ow-
ing to  rain  :  and  we  muft  feek  deeper  for  their  fources
than  that  fmall  portion  of  the  earth  which  rain-water
penetrates  •,  and  therefore  muft  have  recourfe  to  zfub-
terranean  refervoir.  And  upon  the  fuppofition  of
an  Abyfs  of  water  beneath  the  earth,  as  the  grand
fund  or  promptuary  of  all  Springs,  thereis  the  whole
thicknefs  of  the  mell  of  the  earth,  confifting  of  a  vari-
ety of  different  ftrata,  rilled  with  a  variety  of  folubie
mineral  and  metallic  particles,  and  the  fiiTures  full  of
a  grofs  watery  vapour,  that  has  paffed  through  the
neighbouring  ftrata,  at  every  crack  and  cranny,  re-
plete with  the  mineral  cr  metallic  effluvia  that  it  has
brought  out  of  thefe  ftrata, — There  is  all  this,  I  fay,
for  the  waters  of  the  Abyfs  to  make  their  way  through  -y
before  they  break  out  in  fprings  on  the  furface  of  the
earth.  So  that  there  is  reafon  to  believe,  that  fome  min-
eral waters  may  have  loft  their  original  properties,  gain-
ed others,  loft  them,  and  have  regained  their  original  or
others  of  the  fame  kind,  before  they  appear  as  Springs  -t
and  certain  it  is,  that  feveral  of  them  come  up  endued
or  impregnated  with  a  variety  of  mineral  qualities,  and
thereby  mew  the  large  Ipace  they  have  ranged  through


[  '33  ]

for  the  acquifition  of  them.  And  though  the

mouths  or  firft  -pajfages  of  the  nfTures  that  reach  from
the  Abyfs  to  the  furface  of  the  earth,  are  probably
large  and  fo  open  as  to -admit  freely  to  fome  diftance
the  fubterranean  water,  endued  with  its  peculiar  pro-
perties, whether  faline,  or  whatever  they  are  •,  yet  as
thefe  fiflures  gradually  lefien  as  they  tend  towards  the
furface  of  the  earth,  and  frequently  break  off  or  run
into  other  fiflures  that  are  of  an  horizontal  or  oblique
fituation,  which  again  divert  and  branch  off  into
others  ftill  lefs,  and  fome  fo  fmall  as  to  be  invifiblej
fmce  many  of  thefe  figures,  are  filled  with  a  rubbley
kind  of  matter,  as  fand,  clay,  fludge,  fmall  ft  ones,  &c.
and  fo  fit  for  ftraining  and  refining  the  water ;  fmce
the  fubterranean  Vapour,  by  being  condenfed  againft
the  tops,  and  trickling  down  the  fides  of  the  fUTures
is  continually  adding  irefh  fupplies  of  water  that  has
been  purified  or  deprived  of  its  original  properties
by  evaporation  and  diftillation ;  and  fmce  there  is  a
perpetual  ouzing  of  water  into  the  larger  fiflures
through  the  cracks  and  crannies  in  their  fides ;  to
which  '  continual  diftilling  alone,  gleeting,  or  ftrain-
4  ing  of  the  watery  particles  through  the  terreftrial  flra-
'  ta'  Varenius  attributes  the  deprivation  of  the  faline
particles  in  the  fea-water  ;  and  juftly  remarks,  *  that
'  we  obferve  this  very  thing  in  mines  digged  to  a  vaft
'  depth  (and  the  deeper  we  defcend,  the  more  difcern-
4  ible  it  is),  how  that  water  on  every  fide  is  conti-
4  nually  dropping,  and  collecting  itlelf  into  fmall  guts,
4  which  are  called  veins  of  water-,  and  if  feveral  fuch
4  guts  or  runnels  as  thefe,  concur  in  one  receptacle,
4  they  form  a  fountain,  as  they  who  make  drains,  to

4  bring  water  into  wells,  ver/  well  know  :'r Now

all  thefe  circumftances  being  added  together,  we  ccr-

r  General  Geog.  p.  305.


1 134}

fcainly  have  a  folution  to  the  above-mentioned  difrkulr
ty,  and  have  reafon  enough  to  conclude,  that  the  wa-
ter of  the  Abyfs,  in  its  pafiage  through  the  flrata  of
the  earth,  is  deprived  feveral  times  of  the  different
qualities  it  gains,  and  therefore,  foon  after  its  per-
meation, is  entirely  diverted  of  its  faline  pr  original
properties,  whatever  they  be.

THUS,  I  hope,  I  have  now  cleared  ray  way,  and
fufficiently  anfwered  every  material  objeflion,  and  plain-
ly mewed,  That  the  origin  of  Springs  is  owing  to  an
internal  fupply  ;  the  water  of  which,, — by  the  general
action  of  the  Air  upon  the  Seas  and  (by  their  commu-
nication) upon  the  Abyfs,  and  by  the  recefs  of  the
finer  Air  and  Light  from  the  centre  of  the  earth  to  the
circumference, — is  impelled  or  prefTed  up  through
the  cracks  and  MrTures  in  the  terreftrial  ftrata  to  the
tops  of  the  higheft  mountains.  And  as  there  are
Springs  breaking  out  all  over  the  furface  of  the  earthy
as  well  in  the  moft  inland  as  the  maritime  parts ;  and
thefe  Springs  are  the  Heads  or  Sources,  from  whence
that  profufion  of  water  proceeds  which  affords  the  con-
flant,  uninterrupted,  and  regular  ftreams  or  courfes
of  all  the  numerous  rivers  upon  the  earth,  it  muft  fol-
low that  there  is  an  internal  magazine  or  an  Abyfs  of
water  beneath  the  earth-,  and  that  this  Abyfs  is  alfo
equal  in  extent  to  the  lower  part  of  the  Ihell  of  the
earth.  So  that  as  I  before  argued,  that,  from  the
quantity  of  water  poured  into  the  Ocean  from  the
mouths  or  at  the  ends  of  all  the  rivers  upon  the  earth,
there  muft  be  an  immenfely  large  Receptacle  beneath
the  Ocean  for  containing  it,  fo  from  the  quantity  that
is  thrown  out  at  the  Heads  or  Sources  of  .all  the  rivers,
there  muft  be  a  Refervoir  beneath  the  earth  for  fupply-
ing  this ;  and  if  thefe  two'Confervatories  were  not  full
and  in  union  with  each  other,  there  muft  loon  appear
a  great  fuperfiuity  in  one,  or  a  great  deficiency  in  the


r  >35  ]

other,  but  as  neither  of  thefe  is  obferved,  they  muft
be  in  conjunction,  and  a  mutual  interchange  and  per-
petual circulation  be  maintained  between  them.  And
hence  is  evident  that  two-fold  fcriptural  argument
Ecclef.  i.  7  ;  the  firft  part  of  which  I  have  already
quoted,  proved,  and  mewed  the  reafon  of  from  Na-
ture ;  and  by  now  adding  (fince  I  have  proved)  the
fecond,  they  will,  when  united,  corroborate  each
other  ; — All  the  riven  run  into  the  Sea,  yet  the  Sea  [the
general  collection  of  waters,  including  the  Sea  and  the

Abyfs ; fee  page  25, and  p.  36.]  is  not  full;

— unto  the  place  from  whence  the  rivers  come^  thither  they
return  again.  And,  I  hope,  it  now  at  lall  ap-

pears, from  all  that  has  been  laid,  to  be  no  more
wonderful  that  there  fhould  be  a  circulation  of  waters
throughout  the  earth,  and  that  Springs  mould  break
out  on  the  tops  of  the  highell  mountains,  than  that
there  mould  be  a  circulation  of  blood  in  the  human
body,  and  that  a  man  mould  bleed,  when  pricked,
in  the  veins  or  arteries  of  his  forehead,  as  freely  as
in  thofe  of  his  feet.  For,  the  fame  Caufe  produces
both  thefe  effects.  The  Blood, — by  the  preflure  of
the  outward  Air  or  Atmofphere  upon,  and  by  the
penetration  of  the  finer  Air  and  Light  into,  the  hu-
man body, — is  impelled  or  ejected  from  the  Heart
(the  Centre.)  into  the  arteries  to  the  extremities  of  the
body,  and  from  the  arteries  is  forced  into  the  veins,
and  by  the  veins  is  refunded  back  into  the  heart :  So
the  Subterranean  or  Central  Water,  by  the  fame  A-
gents  and  after  the  fame  manner,  is  prefted  up  through
the  veins  or  fiffures  in  the  earth  to  its  extreme  or
higheft  parts,  and  from  thence  is  conveyed  down,
through  the  channels  of  rivers,  into  the  Sea,  and  from
the  Sea  is  returned  into  the  Abyfs,  from  whence  it
firft  came.  And  the  afcenf  of  thefe  two  Fluids  (the
Blood  and  the  Water)  is  as  natural  as  the  detent  --,  for
K4


[

neither  of  them  having  any  innate  Gravity  or  Levity,
but,  like  all  other  matter,  being  indifferent,  and
therefore  fubject,  to  motion  any  way,  they  are  moved
either  up  or  down,  this  way  or  that,  juft  as  they  are
impelled  by  tl>e  Univerfal  Agents  Light  and  Air*

III.  -Thirdly.  ANOTHER  Proof  of  a  Subterranean
Abyfs  of  water  may  be  drawn  from  Whirlpools,  Un-
der-current s  and  Gulphs  in  the  Ocean.

OF  the  firft  of  thefe  is  that  remarkable  Whirlpool
upon  the  coaft  of  Norway ,  which  is  thus  briefly  de-
fcribed  by  Gordon  in  his  Geographical  Grammar,  p.  76.
'  Upon  the  coaft  of  Norway,  near  the  ifle  of  Hitterej
'  in  the  latitude  of  68,  is  that  remarkable  and  dan-
'  gerous  whirlpool,  commonly  called  Maeljlrocm,  and

*  by  "navigators  the  Navel  of  the  Sea. Which  whirl-

*  pool  is,  in  all  probability,  occafioned  by  fome  migh-
4  ty  fubterranean  Hiatus,  and  proves  fatal  to  mips  that
'  approach  too  nigh,  provided  it  be  in  the  time  of

*  flood :  for  then  the  fea, upwards  of  two  leagues
4  round,  makes  fuch  a  terrible  Vortex,  that  the  force

*  and  in- draught  of  the  water,  together  with  the  noife

*  and  tumbling  of  the  waves  upon  one  another, is
'  rather  to  be  admired,  than  exprefled. But,  as  in

*  the  time  of  flood,  the  water  is  drawn  in  with  a  migh-
'  ty  force,  fo  during  the  tide  of  ebb  does  it  throw  out

*  the  fea  with  fuch  a  violence,  that  the  heavieft  bodies

*  then  caft  into  it,  cannot  fjnk,  but  are  tofifed  back
'  again  by  the  impetuous  ftream  which  rumeth  out
6  with  incredible force. AncJ  during  that  time is
'  abundance  of  fifties  caught  by  fifhermen  who  watch

*  the  opportunity ;  for  being  forced  up  to  the  fur-

*  face  of  the  water,  they  cannot  well  dive  again,  fo
'  violent  is  the  rifing  current.' Some  have  imagined
from  the  circumftance  of  the  bodies  that  are  thrown  in-
to  this  Vortex  being  returned  again,  that  therefore  there


t  '37  1

is  only  a  great  Cavity  with  a  confined  bottom,  but
no  Hollow  or  Paflage  through  the  (hell  of  the  earth*.
But  were  there  not  a  free  pafiage  for  the  waters  thro*
the  whole  Ihell  of  the  earth,  I  cannot  fee  how  they
could  return  with  fuch  impetuonty  as  here  defcribed,
and  the  reafon  why  the  bodies  .thrown  in  do  not  to-
tally difappear  but  are  caft  back  again,  is,  in  all  pro-
bability owing  to  the  irregularity  of  the  aperture  or
channel  of  this  Vortex,  being  in  fome  places  narrower,
in  others  broader,  as  is  the  form  of  the  natural  cavi-
ties in  the  earth,  and  even  of  thofe  in  the  Sea,  where
we  can  vifit  them,  as  witnefs  thofe  remarkable  ones
in  the  bottom  of  Zirchnitzer  Sea  in  Carniola,  defcribed
in  the  Phil.  Tranf.  No.  54,  109,  191.

AGAIN  •,  '  The  Cafyian  Sea  (fays  Stackhcufe  in  his
ftiftory  of  the  Bible,  Vol.  I.  p.  122,  citing  for  proof
Moll's  Geography  t  p.  67.  Stillingfieet's  Orig.  Sacr.  1.  3.
c.  4.  and  Bedford's  Scripture  Chronology,  c.  12.)  4  is
'reckoned  in  length  to  be  above  an  120  German
'  leagues,  and  in  breadth  from  eaft  to  weft  about  90
'  of  the  fame  leagues.  There  is  no  vifible  way  tor
4  the  water  to  run  out,  and  yet  it  receives  in  its  bofom

*  near  an  hundred  large  rivers,  and  particularly  the
'  river  Volga,  which  of  itlelf  is  like  a  Sea  for  large -
'  nefs,  and  is  fuppofed  to  empty  fo  much  water  into
'  it  in  a  year's  time,  as  might  fuffice  to  cover  the  whole
'  earth  [fee  p.  105.]  -,  and  yet  it  is  never  increafed  nor
'  diminished,  nor  is  obferved  to  ebb  or  flow,  which
'  makes  it  evident,  that  it  muft  neceflarily  have  afub-
'  terraneous  communication  with  other  parts  of  the  world.
'  And  accordingly,  Father  Avril,  a  modern  traveller,

*  tells  us,  that  near  the  coaft  of  Xylan  there  is  in  this
'  Sea  a  mighty  Whirlpool,  which  fucks  in  every  thing

*  that  comes  near  it,  and  confequently  has  a  Cavity  in
4  the  earth,  into  which  it  delcends.*


[  '38  1

OF  a  fimilaf  nature  and  of  the  fame  name  with  the
above  Sea  is  another  in  Hifpaniola  in  the  Weft- Indies,
4  which  (as  Peter  Martyr  in  his  Hiftory  of  the  Weft-Indies,
f  p.  135,  informs  us)  confifts  of  fah,  four,  and  bitter
4  water,  as  we  read  of  the  Sea  called  Cafpium,  (lying
4  in  the  firm  land  between  Sarmatia  and  Hircania] ;  we
4  have  therefore  named  it  Cafpium.  It  hath  many

*  fwallowing Gulphs, by which  both  the  water of
4  the  great  Sea  fpringeth  into  it,  and  alfo  fuch  as
4  fall  into  it  from  the  mountains  are  fwallowed  up.
'  The  rivers  which  fall  into  this  Lake  or  Sea,  are  thefe ;
4  from  the  North,  Guanicabon  •,  from  the  South,  Xac-
4  fOfi  3  from  the  Eaft,  Guannabo  -,  and  from  the  Weft,
4  Occoa  ;  they  fay,  that  thefe  rivers  are  great  and  con-

*  tinuat,  and  that  befides  thefe  there  are  twenty  other
4  fmall  rivers  which  fall  into  this  Cafpium. This  Lake
4  istoffed  with  ftorms  and  tempefts,and  often  drowneth
4  ffnatt  mips  or  fifher's  boats,  and  fwalloweth  them
4  up  with  the  mariners,  infomuch  that  it  hath  not  been
4  heard  of,  that  any  man  drowned  by  fhipwreck  was
4  ever  caft  on  the  fhore,  as  commonly  chanceth  of  the
'  dead  bodies  of  fuch  as  are  drowned  in  the  Sea,'

OF  Under -Currents,  Dr.  Smith  in  the  Phil.  Tranf.
No.  158.  writes  thus,  '  In  the  Offing  between  the
Norih-foreland  and  £oti!h-forcland,  it  runs  tide  and
half  tide,  that  is,  it  is  either  ebbing  water  or  flood
upon  the  fhore,  in  that  part  of  the  Downs,  three
hours,  (Which  is,  grofsly  fpeaking,  the  time  of  half
a  tide)  before  it  is  ib  off  at  fea.  And  it  is  a  moil
certain  obfervation,  that  where  it  flows  tide  arid  ha>f
tide,  though  the  ride  of  flood  runs  aloft,  yet  the  tide
of  ebb  runs  under  foot,  that  is,  clofe  by  the  ground ;
and  fo  at  the  tide  of  ebb,  it  will  Row  under  foot.
Th~re  is  a  vaft  draught  of  water  poured  continually
out  of  the  Atlantic  into  the  Mt diterranean,  the  mouth
or  entrance  of  which  between  Cape  Spartel  or  Sprat,


f  '39]

c  as  the  feamcn  call  it,  and  Cape  Trafalgar,  may  be
'  near  feven  leagues  wide,  the  current  fetting  flrong
'  into  it,  and  not  lofing  its  force  'till  it  runs  as  far  as
c  Malaga,  which  is  about  twenty  leagues  within  the
'  Streights.  By  the  benefit  of  this  current,  though
c  the  wind  be  contrary,  if  it  does  not  overblow,  fhips

*  eafily  turn  into  the  Gutt? as  they  term  the  narrow
'  paffage,  which  is  about  twenty  miles  in  length. At

*  the  end  of  which are two towns, Gibraltar  on
'  the  coaft  of  Spain,  which  gives  denomination  to  the

*  ftreights,  and  Ceuta  on  the  Barbary  coaft  :  at  which
'  Hercules  is  fuppofed  to  have  fet  up  his  pillars. What

*  becomes  of  this  great  quantity  of  water  poured  in
6  this  way,  and  of  that,  which  runs  from  the  Euxine
<  into  the  Bofpborus  and  Propontis,  and  is  carried  at
'  lail  through  the  Hellefpont  in  the  Mgean  or  Archipt-
6  lago,  is  a  curious  fpeculation,  and  has  exerciled  the

*  wit  and  underflanding  of  philofophers  and  naviga-

*  tors.. For  there  is  no  fenfible  Fifing  of  the  water
'  all  along  the  Barbary  coaft  even  down  tv  Alexandria  -,
'  the  land  beyond  ^ripoli^  and  that  of  Egypt  lying  very

*  low,,  and  eafily  overfiowable. They  obferve  indeed
'  that  the  water  rifes  three  feet,  or  three  feet  and  a  half,

*  in  the  Gulf  of  Venice,  and  as  much,  or  very  near  as

*  much,  all  along  the  Riviera  of  Gemua,  as  far  as  the

*  river  Arno : But this  rather  adds  to  the  wonder.
'  My  conjecture is,  that  there  is  an  Under- current,
c  whereby  as  great  a  quantity  of  water  is  carried  out,
'  as  comes  flowing  in. To  confirm  which,  befides
'  what  I  have  faid  above,  about  the  difference  of  tides
e  in  the  Offing,  and  at  the  more  in  the  Downs,  which
'  neceffariiy  fuppofes  an  Under-current,  I  mall  prefent
4  you  with  an  inftance  of  the  like  nature  in  the  Baltick

*  Sound,  as  I  received  it  from  an  able  feaman,  who
'  was  at  the  making  of  the  trial. He  told  me,  that


[  ,4o]

'  being  there  in  one  of  the  king's  frigates,  they  went

*  in  -their  pinnace  into  the  middle  ftream,  and  were
'  carried  violently  by  the  current :  That  foon  after
'  they  funk  a  bucket  with  a  very  large  cannon-bullet

*  to  a  certain  depth  of  water,  which  gave  a  check  to
'  the  boat's  motion  •,  and  finking  it  ilill  lower  and

*  lower,  the  boat  was  driven  a- head  to  the  windward

*  againft  the  upper-current ;  the  current  aloft,  as  he

*  added,  not  being  above  four  or  five  fathom  deep,
c  and  that  the  lower  the  bucket  was  let  fall,  they  found
4  the  under-current  the  ftronger.'

So  alfo  Marfelli  (as  quoted  by  Mr.  Ray  in  his  three
Phyfico-Theological  Difcourfes,  p.  8 1.)  affirms,  'That

*  the  lower  water  in  the  channel  of  the  Thradan  BoJ-

*  pborus,  is  driven  Northward  into the  Euxine  Sea,

*  whilft  the  upper  flows  conftantly  from  the  Euxine
c  Southward. And  that  that  which  flows  from  the

*  South  is  falter  and  heavier ;  which  he  found  by  let-
1  ting  down a  vefiel  clofe  {hut  up, fitted  with a
c  valve  to  open  at  pleafure,  and  let  in  the  lower  water,

*  which  being  brought  up  and  weighed,  was  obferved
'  to  be  ten  grains  heavier  than  the  upper. That  the
'  upper  and  lower  flow  contrary  ways,  he  found  by  the

*  fifhermen's  nets,  which  being  let  down  deep  from

*  veffels  that  were  fixed,  were  always  by  the  obferva-

*  tion  of  the  fifhermen,  by  the  fprce  of  the  current'
'  driven  towards  the Black  Sea : and  by  the  letting

1  down  of  a  plummet  •, for  if  it  were  flopped  and  de-
c  tained  at  about  five  or  fix  feet  depth,  it  did  always

*  decline  towards  the  Marmora  or  Propontis,  but  if  it
'  defcended  lower,  it  was  driven  to  the  contrary  part,
4  that  is,  the  Euxine' And  though  Mr.  Ray  fpeaks
of  this  (and  alfo  of  the  Under-current  at  the  Streigbt's
Mouth)  as  being  '  the  concurrent  and  unanimous  vote

*  and  fufFrage  of  mariners,  voyagers,  and  philofophers,'
yet  he  feems  to  make  a  doubt  of  it,  becaufe,  fays  he,


'  I  do  not  underfland  how  waters  can  run  backward
'  and  forward  in  the  fame  channel  at  the  fame  time  ;
*  for  there  being  but  one  declivity,  this  is  as  much  as
4  to  affirm,  that  a  heavy  body  mould  afcend.'
But  furely  Mr.  Ray  may  eafily  conceive,  how  water
may  be  made  to  run  into  a  vefiel  or  pond  at  one  part,
and  be  made  to  run  out  in  a  contrary  direction  at  the
bottom  by  means  of  a  cavity  beneath,  and  fo  two  dif-
ferent Currents  be  formed  •,  which  certainly  is  the
cafe  in  the  above-mentioned  feas  ;  there  being  a  great
cavity  or  aperture  at  the  mouths  of  each  leading  into
the  Abyfs  beneath,  which  caufes  a  current  different
from,  and  in  a  contrary  direction  to,  That  which  ap-
pears upon  the  furface  of  the  waters.

VARENIUS  (in  his  Syftem  of  Geography,  Chap.  iv.
Sect,  iv.)  gives  an  account  of  the  feveral  principal
Currents  in  the  Ocean  i  fome  of  which  are  certainly
owing  to  fubterranean  gulpbs  or  paflfages  that  lead  un-
der the  earth,  particularly  the  two  that  follow, (as
he  himfelf  imagines)  fmce  they  fet  in  towards  the  Shore ;
i.  '  The  moil  extraordinary  Current  of  thefeais  that
by which  part  of  the  Atlantic  or  African  Ocean
moves  about  Guinea  from  CapeFerd  towards  the  cur-
vature or  bay  of  Africa,  which  they  call  Fernando  Poo,
viz.  from  Weft  to  Eaft,  which  is  contrary  to  the  ge-
neral motion. And  fuch  is  the  force  of  this  current,
that  when  mips  approach  too  near  the  more  it  carries
them  violently  towards  that  bay,  and  deceives  the
Mariners  in  their  reckoning. — This  current  effects  not
the  whole  Ethiopic  Ocean,  only  that  part  which  is  ad-
jacent to  the  more  of  Guinea,  to  the  end  of  the  bay,
and  to  about  one  degree  of  fouth  latitude. It  is  ob-
ferved  not  to  exceed  the  diftance  of  fourteen  miles
from  the  more  •,  therefore  mips  are  very  careful  left
they  mould  approach  fo  near,  when  they  fail  along


[ 142]

*  thefe  coafts ; which  would  hinder  their  intended

*  courfe  and  drive  them  to  a  place  they  would  not

*  care  to  vifit.' 2.  The  fecond  perpetual  current  is

*  where  the  Ocean  moves  fwiftly  from  about  Sumatra

*  into  the  bay  of  Bengal,  from  fouth  to  north  [that  is

*  from  the  lea  towards  the  more] ;  fo  that  it  is  proba-

*  ble  this  bay  was  made  by  the  rapidity  of  the  current.

*  I  do  not  know  whether  the  caufe  may  be  owing  to  the

*  many  iflands,  and  to  capeM*&?3  upon  the  fouth  con-
'  tinent,  whereby  rhe  ocean  in  it's  paifage  weftward  may

*  be  diverted  northwards,  or  there  may  be  a  fubterra-
c  neous  Receptacle  in  the  bay  itfelf.*

THE  reader  may  fee  defcriptions  of  feveral  o-
ther  lefler  Gulphs,  Whirlpools,  and  Under-Currents
in  the  Sea  in  Kircber's  Mundus  Subter  Lib.  ii.  &  iii ;
and  from  viewing  and  confidering  the  number  and
fituation  of  them,  we  may  reafonably  conclude  that
there  are  few  or  no  Seas  without  one  or  more  of  fuch
Gulphs,  and  confequently  that  there  is  an  immenfc
quantity  of  water  daily  poured  into  the  infide  of  the
earth  through  the  mouths  of  them  all.

AND  here,  by  the  way,  I  may  juft  animadvert  up-
on the  inaccuracy  of  thofe  writers  who  have  endea-
voured to  prove,  by  exact  mathematical  calculation
(which  proves  juft  nothing  at  all  when  founded  on
falfe  facts),  that  the  quantity  of  water  which  is  raifed
from  the  Ocean  in  vapour  is  equal  to  that  which  is
poured  into  it  by  all  the  rivers  upon  the  earth,  with-
out having  taken  notice  of,  or  made  any  allowance
for,  thefe  U^r- currents  and  In- draughts^  which  muft
neceffarily  carry  off  a  great  quantity  of  the  water.  I
have  already  had  occafion  to  examine  this  opinion  at
large  (page  108,  &c.)  and  have  fhewed  the  falfity  of
it  from  facts  and  experiments ;  and  this  article
be  brought  as  another  argument  againfl  it.


[  '43  1

IV.  A  fourth  Proof  of  a  fubterranean  Refervoir  tf
wafer  may  be  deduced  from  Lakes.

OF  thefe  there  are  feveral  forts,  each  tending  to
prove  the  point  in  queftkm,  as,  firft,  Thofe  which  re-
ceive a  great  quantity  of  water,  either  from  rivers  or
other  means,  but  externally  emit  none;  fecondly,
Thofe  that  fend  forth  a  great  quantity  of  water,  but
outwardly  receive  none ;  thirdly,  Thofe  that  neither
increafe  nor  decreafe,  notwithstanding  the  difference
of  fcafons,  or  the  quantity  of  water  carried  off  by
evaporation.  In  each  of  thefe  cafes  there  muft  be
a  fubt£rraneoi4S  exit,  or  elfe  an  internal  fupply  •,  and
when  it  has  been  proved,  that  there  are  fome  of  thefe
Lakes  in  almoft  every  part  of  the  world,  it  muft  be
allowed  that  the  refervoir  which  fupplies  them  muft
be  equally  extenfive  with  themfelves,  or  that  there  is
a  collection  of  water  which  extends  under  the  whole
furface  of  the  earth.

OF  t\\tfirft  fort  of  Lakes  are  the  following,  reck-
oned up  by  Varenius,  (Syftem  of  Geog.  p.  280.)  4  In  the
'  foregoing  proportion  we  obferved  that  the  Lake
6  Titicaca  difcharges  a  river  into  a  fmaller  called  Parta,

*  which  therefore  may  be  referred  to  this  clafs,  viz.  to
'  fuch  as  receive  rivers  but  emit  none. The  lake
c  Afphaltites,  which  is  alfo  calJed  the  Dead  Sea,  re~
'  ceives  the  river  Jordan,  but  emits  none  : Its  length,
'  from  north  to  fouth,  is  feventy  German  miles,  and
'  its  breadth  five,  as  fome  make  it. There  is  one
4  in  the  lefler  Afia. There  is  a  fmall  one  in  Mace-

*  donia,  called  Jana,  which  receives  two  little  rivers.
'  One  in  Perfia  near  Calgiftan. The  lake  Soran,  in
c  Mufcovy,  receives  two  fmall  rivers. The  river
'  Gbir,  in  Africa, is  reported, by  Leo  Africanus,  to
'  lofe  itfelf  in  a  lake,  and  fome  maps  fo  reprefent  it,
'  but  others  join  it  to  Nubia.'' Peter  Martyr  in  his
Hiftory  of  tbe  Weft- Indies,  p.  135,  fpeaking  of  Hijpa-


t  '44  I

toiola,  fays,  '  That  about  threefcore  miles  diftant  from
'  the  chief  city  of  St.  Dominick,  there  are  certain  high
'  mountains,  upon  the  tops  whereof  is  a  Lake  or

*  (landing  Pool  of  frelh  water  three  miles  in  compafs^

*  and well replenifjied  with  divers  kinds  of  fifhes.
'  Many  fmall  rivers  and  brooks  fall  into  it. It  hath

*  no  paflage  out,  but  is  on  every  fide  inclofed  with
c  the  tops  of  mountains.* Under  this  head  we  may
reckon  a  Lake  mentioned  by  Du  Hatde,  in  his  Defcrip-
tion  of  the  Empire  of  China,  Vol.  I.  p.  20.  '  This  vaft

Lake  [named  Tong-ting-Hu,  in  the  province  of  Hu-
quang\  is  remarkable  for  the  greatnefs  of  its  circum-
ference, which  is  above  80  french  leagues,  and  the
abundance  of  its  waters,  efpecially  in  certain  feafons,
when  two  of  the  largeft  rivers  in  the  province,
fuelled  with  the  rains,  difcharge  themfelves  into  it,
and  when  it  difembogues  them,  one  can  fcarce  per-
ceive it  to  be  diminifhed.' To this article  alfa
may  be  referred  what  has  been  already  faid  concern-
ing the  two  lefTer  leas  or  lakes,  called  the  Cafpian,
one  in  Afia,  the  other  in  America,  p.  137,  8.

OF  the  fecond  fort  of  Lakes,  or,  thofe  which  fend
forth  a  great  quantity  of  water  but  outwardly  receive
nonej  take  the  following  account  from  Vartnius  (Syf-
tem  of  Geog.  p.  278^)  c  There  is  an  infinite  number

*  of  thefe  Lakes  and  moft  large  rivers  flow  from  fuch,
6  as  out  of  citterns  -, — of  the  fmaller  fort  are  the  follow-
'  ing,  the  Lake  Wolga,  at  the  head  of  the  river  Wolga  \

*  the  Odoium  at  the  head  of  the  Tanais ;  the  Adac^  from

*  whence  one  of  the  branches  of  the  river  Tigris  flows  •,

*  the  Ozero  [or  White  Lake] in  Mufcovy^  that  gives

*  fource  to  the  river  Sbackfna^ which  is  poured  into

*  the  Wol^a,  and  many more  little  ones  •, we  mall

*  here  only  reckon  fome  of  the  larger  fort  that  are

*  more  remarkable. The  great  lake  Chaamay  in  the
'  latitude  of  twenty  fix  degrees  north,  not  far  from


[  '45  ]


6  India  to  the  eaftward  of  the  river  Ganges  •,  out  of  this

*  lake  flow  four  very  large  rivers,  which  water  and  fer-
c  tilize  the  countries  of  Siam, Pegu, &c. viz.  the
'  Menaw,  the  Afa> the  Caipoumo, and  the  Laquia.
'  Some  maps  exhibit  a  fmall  river  that  runs  into  this

*  lake. The  lake  Singhay,  upon  the  eaft  border  of
6  China,  fends  out  a  great  river  fouthward, which
'  being  joined  to  another,  enters  China. The  lake  37-
€  ticaca,  in  [Los  Charcas]  a  province  in  fouth  America,
«  is  eighty  leagues  in  circuit,  and  emits  a  large  river,
«  which  is  terminated  in  another  fmall  lake,  and  is  no
4  more  feem There  are  feveral  towns  and  villages

*  difcovered  about  this  lake. The  lake  Nicaragua,  in

*  a  province  of  the  fame  name, in  America, is  only

*  fourteen  German  miles  from  the  Pacific,  or  fouth  fea,
c  and  above  one  hundred  from  the  Atlantic,  into  which

*  it  is  difcharged  at  broad  flood-gates. The  lake  Fron-
4  tena,  in  Canada,  out  of  which  iflfues  the  river  of  St.

*  Lawrence. The  lake  Annibi,  in  AJia,  in  the  latitude

*  of  lixty-one  degrees.' And  after  p.  282,  where  the
Author  gives  an  account  of  Lakes  that  both  receive  and
emit  rivers,  it  is  evident  that  the  quantity  of  water
emitted  by  fome  is  far  fuperior  to  what  is  received  ;
and  in  others  the  quantity  received  fuperior  to  what  is
emitted  ;  fo  that  there  muft  be  fubterraneous  fupplies
and  exits.

THE  next  quotation  I  mall  cite  may  ferve  both  for
this  fecond  article  and  alfo  for  the  laft,  viz.  for  thofe
Lakes  that  neither  increafe  nor  decreafe,  notwithftanding
the  difference  of  feafons  and  the  quantity  of  water  carried
off  h  evaporation:  It  is  from  Acofta's  Hiftory  of  the  In-
dies,  Book  iii.  chap.  1  6,  '  It  is  a  queflidn  often  alked,
'  Why  there  are  fo  many  Lakes  in  the  tops  of  thefe
.*  mountains,  into  which  no  river  enters,  but  contrary-
*  wife  many  great  dreams  ifiue  forth,  and  yet  do  we


[  i46  ]

4  fcarce  fee  thefe  lakes  to  diminim  any  thing,  at  any
'  feafon  of  the  Year.  To  imagine  thefe  lakes  grow
4  by  the  fnow  that  melts,  or  rain  from  heaven,  That
4  doth  not  wholly  fatisfy  me ;  for  there  are  many  that

*  have  not  this  abundance  of  fnow,  nor  rain,  and  yet
4  we  fee  no  decreafe  in  them  :  which  makes  me  to  be-
4  lieve  they  are  fprings  which  rife  there  naturally ;
4  although  it  be  n6t  againft  reafon,  to  think  that  the
'  fnow, and  rain help fbmewhat  in  fome  feafons.
4  Thefe  Lakes  are/:?  common  in* the  higkeft  tops  of  the
4  mountains,  that  you  mail  hardly  find  any  famous  ri-

*  ver  that  takes  not  its  beginning  from  one  of  them.
'  Their  water  is  clear  and  breeds  little  ftore  of  fifh,

*  and  that  little  is  very  fmall,  by  reafon  of  the  cold
6  which  is  there  continually. Notwithftanding-  fome
4  of  thefe  lakes  be  very  hot,  which  is  another  wonder.

*  At  the  end  of  the  valley  of  Tarapaya  near  to  Potozi,
4  there  is  a  lake  in  form  round,  which  feems  to  have

*  been  made  by  a  compafs,  whofe  water  is  extreamly
4  hot,  and  yet  the  land  is  very  cold : they  are ac-

*  cuftomed  to  bathe  themfelves  near  the  bank,  for  elfe

*  they  cannot  endure  the  heat  being  farther  in. In  the

*  midft  of  this  lake  there  is  a  boiling  of  above  twenty
4  feet  fquare,  which  is  the  very  fpring,  and  yet  (not-
4  withftanding  the  greatnefs  of  this  fpring)  it  is  never

*  feen  to  increafe  in  any  fort:  it  feems  that  it  exhales
4  of  itfelf,  or  that  it  hath  fome  hidden  or  unknown
4  iflue :  neither  do  they  fee  it  decreafe, which  is  an-

*  other  wonder,  although  they  have  drawn  from  it  a

*  great  ftream,  to  make  certain  Engines  for  metal,
4  confidering  the  great  quantity  of  water  that  ifllieth
4  forth,  by  reafon  whereof  it  mould  decreafe.' But
the  greateft  Lake  of  this  kind  in  America,  and  indeed

'in  the  whole  world,  is  the  Lake  Parime,  lying  directly
under  the  Equator.  4  It  is  (as  Varenius  fays  in  his
4  £v//.  Geog.  p.  278)  in  length  from  eaft  to  weft,  about


f  147]

*  105  German  miles,  and  in  the  broadeft  place 100

*  miles  over  or  thereabouts  •,  fo  that  it  may  be  com-
c  pared  with,  if  it  do  not  exceed, any  lake  in  the
6  world  for  magnitude  •, yet  it  neither  receives  nor

*  emits  any  rivers/ Gordon  in  his  Geographical  Gram-
mar fpeaking  of  Scotland, writeth  thus, page 204*
'  Towards  the  north-weft  part  of  Murray is  the  fa-
c  mous  Lough-Nefs,  which  never  freezeth ;  but  retain-
c  eth  its  natural  heat,  even  in  the  ejitreameft  cold  of
'  winter ; and  in  many  places  this  lake  hath  been
c  founded  with  a  line  of  500  fathoms  but  no  bottom

*  found. Nigh  to  Lock-Nefs  is  a  large  round  Moun-
'  tain  [called  Meal-fuor-rtouny]  about  two  miles  of  per-

*  pendicular  height  from  the  furfaceof  the  Nefs-,  upon

*  the  very  top  of  which  mountain  is  a  lake  of  cold  frefli

*  water  often  founded  with  lines  of  many  fathoms,  but
'  never  could  they reach  the  bottom. This  lake,

*  having  novifible  current  running  either  to  it  or  from
c  it,  is  equally  full  all  feafons  of  the  year  •,  and  it  never
c  freezeth.'  Sir  Robert  Sibbald  in  his  Scctia  illuftrata,
p.  22,  fays  *  That  there  are  various  Lakes  in  Scotland,
'  efpecially  in  the  bigkeft  places, which  neither  emit
c  nor  receive  rivers,  and  yet  are  full  of  water-/  and
concludes  '  that  fuch  mull  be  fupplied  by  fources

*  from  beneath,  at  leaft  with  a  quantity  of  water  equi-

*  valent  to  what  is  carried  off  by  the  heat  of  the  Sun/

IN  Kircher's  Mundus  Subterraneus,  Lib.  v.  Ch.  4.
there  is  an  account  of  feveral  other  Lakes  of  each  of
the  above-mentioned  kinds,  and  full  proof  that  they
derive  their  origin  from,  and  are  continued  by,  Jub-
terrene  fources.  And  though  probably  fome  of  thefe
Lakes  are  maintained  by  rivers  that  run  under-ground
or  by  fprings  that  iflue  out  at  their  bottoms,  yet,  as  we
have  already  mewed  (p.  120,  &c.)  that  the  Springs  and
Rivers  which  appear  above  ground  owe  their  fupplies  to
L  2


[  '48  ]

an  infernal  Refervoir,  it  muft  much  more  ftrongly  fol-
low that  thefe  covert  Springs  and  Rivers  are  owing  to
the  fame,  and  therefore  that  the  Lakes,  which  are
fupported  by  them,  plainly  mew  that  there  muft  be  a
ju&terranean  Refervotr  of  wafer.

V.  A.  fifth  Argument  in  proof  of  an  Abyfs  of  water
beneath  the  earth  may  be  drawn  from  the  confideration
of  fome  phenomena  attending  Earthquakes.

AN  account  of  which  I  mall  tranfcribe  from  Dr.
Woodward's  Nat.  Hi/lory  of  the  Earth  j  the  truth  of
which  every  perfon  that  is  at  all  converfant  in  the
hiftory  of  Earthquakes  cannot  but  know  j  and  indeed
the  effects  of  the  late  dreadful  mock  of  the  earth  at
Ujbon,  which  extended  themfelves  (through  means  of
the  agitation  of  the  waters  of  the  Sea  and  the  Abyfs)
to  the  four  quarters  of  the  world,*  being  at  prefent
freih  in  the  memory  of  almoft  all  now  living,  will
bear  ample  teftimony  to  the  truth  of  what  the  Doctor
afierts,  Nat.  tlift.  p.  133,  '  That  this  fubterranean
'  Heat  or  Fire,  which  thus  elevates  the  water  out  of
'  the  Abyfs,  being  in  any  part  of  the  earth  flopped,  and

*  fo  diverted  from  its  ordinary  courfe,  by  fome  acci-

*  dental  glut  or  obftruction  in  the  pores  or  paflages

*  through  which  it  ufed  to  afcend  to  the  furface  :  and
'  being  by that  means  preternaturally  afTembled,  in

*  greater  quantity  than  ufual,  into  one  place,  it  caufeth
4  a  great  rarefaction  and  intumefcence  of  the  water
'  of  the  abyfs,  putting  it  into  very  great  commotions
'  and  diforders  :  and  at  the  fame  time  making  the  like
'  effort  upon  the  Earth,  which  is  expanded  upon  the
c  face  of  the  abyfs,  it  occafions  that  agitation  and  con-
'  cuffion  of  it,  which  we  call  an  Earthquake. That


1  See  an  Account  of  thefe  effefts,  and  how  extenfive  they  were,
in  Phil.  Tranf.  for  the  year  1756,"  Vol.  XLIX.  Part  i.  §.ii.


[  H9  ]

6  this  effort  is  in  fome  earthquakes  fo  vehement  that  it
4  fplits  and  tears  the  Eartbt  making  cracks  or  cbafms
4  in  it  fome  miles  in  length,  which  open  at  the  in-
4  flants  of  the  fhocks,  and  clofe  again  in  the  intervals
4  betwixt  them  :  nay,  it  is  fometimes  fo  extreamly
4  violent,  that  it  plainly  forces  the  fuperincumbent
4  Strata ;  breaks  them  all  throughout,  and  thereby

*  perfectly  undermines  and  ruins  the  foundations  of
1  them  j  fo  that  thefe  failing,  the  whole  Trail,  as  foon
4  as  ever  the  mock  is  over,  finks  down  to  rights  into
4  the  Abyfs  underneath,  and  is  fwallowed  up  by  it,
'  the  water  thereof  immediately  rifing  up,  and  form-
4  ing  a  lake  in  the  place  where  the  laid  tract  before
4  was. That  feveral  confiderable  tracts  of  land,  and

*  fome  with  cities  and  towns  Handing  upon  them ;  as
4  alfo  whole  mountains,  many  of  them  very  large,  and
c  of  a  great  height,  have  been  thus  totally  /waucvvedug.
4  That  this  effort  being  made  in  alldzre&iojisindiffcrent-

*  ly ;  upwards,  downwards,  and  on  every  fide  -,  the  fire

*  dilating  and  expanding  on  all  hands,  and  endea-
£  vouring,  proportionably  to  the  quantity  and  ftrength
4  of  it,  to  get  room,  and  make  its  way  through  all
4  obftacles,  fails  as  foul  upon  the  water  of  the  Abyfs
4  beneath,  as  upon  the  earth  above,  forcing  it  forth
'  which  way  foever  it  can  find  vent  or  paflage ; as
4  well  through  its  ordinary  exits,  wells,  fprings,  and
4  the  outlets  of  rivers ; as  through  the  chafms  then
4  newly  opened ;  through  the  Camini  or  fpiracles  of
4  JEtna,  or  other  near  Volcanoes ;  and  thofc  Hiatus's

*  at  the  bottom  of  the  fea,  whereby  the  Abyfs  below'

*  opens  into  it  and  communicates  with  it. That  as
'  the  water  refident  in  the  Abyfs  is,  in  nil  farts  of  it,
4  ftored  with  a  confiderable  quantity  of  heat,  and  more
4  efpecially  in  thofe  where  thefe  extraordinary  aggre-
4  gations  of  this  fire  happen,  fo  likewife  is  the  water
'  which  is  thus  forced  out  of  it ;  infomuch,  that  when


'  thrown  forth,  and  mixed  with  the  waters  of  wells,

*  of  fprings,  of  rivers,  and  the  fea,  it  renders  them.
'  very  fenfibly  hot. That  it  is  ufually  expelled  forth
'  in  vafl  quantities  and  \v\\h.  great  impetuofity,  infomuch

*  that  it  hath  been  feen  to  fpout  up  out  of  the  deep
'  wells,  and  fly  forth,  at  the  tops  of  them,  upon  the
'  face  of  the  ground. With  like  rapidity  comes  it
'  out  of  the  fources  of  rivers,  filling  them  fo  of  a

*  fudden  as  to  make  them  run  over  their  banks,  and
'  overflow  the  neighbouring  territories, without  fo

*  much  as  one  drop  of  rain  tailing  into  them,  or  any

*  other  concurrent  water  to  rife  and  augment  them.
4  That  it  fpues  out  of  the  chafms  opened  by  the  Earth -
'  quake, in great abundance  : mounting up, in

*  mighty  fir  earns  to  an  incredible  height  in  the  air,  and
'  this  often-times  at  many  miles  diftance  from  any
'*  fea. That  it  likewife  flows  forth  of  the  Volcanoes  in

*  vaftfloods^  and  with  wonderful  violence. That  it  is
'  forced  through  the  Hiatus's  at  the  bottom  of  the  fea
'  with  fuch  vehemence,  that  it  puts  the  fea  immedi-
4  ately  into the  moft  horrible  diforder  and  pertur-

*  bation  imaginable,  even  when  there  is  not  theleaft
c  breath  of  wind  ftirring,  but  all,  'till  then,  calm  and
'  ftill  •,  making  it  rage  and  roar  with  a  moft  hideous
6  and  amazing  noife  •,  railing  its  farface  into  prodig-
'  ious  waves,  and  toffing  and  rolling  them  about  in
'  a  very  ilrange  and  furious  manner;  overfetting  mips
'  in  the  harbours,  and  finking  them  to  the  bottom  •,
1  with  many  other  like  outrages. That  it  is  refunded

*  out  of  thefe  Hiatus's  in  fuch  quantify  alio,  that  it
'  makes  a  vaft  addition  to  the  water  of  the  lea  •,  raifing
'  it  many  fathoms higher  than  ever  it  flows  in  the
'  higheft  tides,  fo  as  to  pour  it  forth  far  beyond  its

*  ufual  bounds,  and  make  it  overwhelm  the  adjacent
'  country ;  by  this  means  ruining  ant]  deftroying  towns
>  and  cities ,  drowning  both  men  and  cattle  ;  breaking


'  the  cables  of  fhips,  driving  them  from  their  anchors,
4  bearing  them  along  with  the  inundation  feveral  miles
4  up  into  the  country,  and  there  running  them  a-
4  ground  -,  (handing  whales  likewife,  and  other  great
4  fifties,  and  leaving  them,  at  its  return,  upon  dry-land.*
And  again,  Nat.  Hift.  of  the  Earth  illus.  p.  104.

*  Now  fiace  there  are,  on  record,  earthquakes,  and
'  indeed not  a  few, by  which  the  globe,  for  many
4  hundred  miles  together,  has  been  fhaken,  at  the  very

*  fame  moment  of  time,  it  thence  follows, that  the
4  waters, which  caufed  thofe  concuffions,  were  not
4  only  equal  in  extent  to  that  fpace  of  the  Globe  which
4  was  fo  fhook,  but  one  fluid  body  continued^  and  not

*  divided  into  parts  or  diftinguifhed  into  regions,  fo
4  that  particular  portions  thereof  mould  be  confined
4  each  to  its  proper  cavern. Nay,  there  want  not  in-
4  fiances  of  fuch  an  univerfal  concuffion  of  the  whole
4  Globes as  mufl  needs  imply  an  agitation  of  the
4  whole  abyfs. For  an  effect  of  fo  vaft  an  extent

*  could  never  have  proceeded  but  from  a  caufe  equally
4  extenfive  ;  fuch  as  might  affect  the  whole  earth  at
4  once  ;  which  cannot  be  done  without  fuch  an  orb
4  of  water,  as  I  have  defcribed. We  have  had  ac-
4  counts  from  writers  of  the  mod  unqueftioned  fideli-
ty, and  even  from  eye-witneffes,  that  there  have
'  been  earthquakes,  in  our  own  times,  wherein  the
1  motion,  given  to  the  earth  at  the  feveral  fhocks,
'  perfectly  refembled  that  of  the  waves  of  the  fea  railed
1  by  a  flrong  wind. Whoever  mail  rightly  attend
'  to  this  phenomenon  in  particular, he  muft,  not
'  only  acknowledge  that  the  earth  contains  in  it  an
1  abyfs  of  water,  and  is  moved  by  the  fame  :  but  mufl
'  alfo  readily  agree  with  me  that  this  terreftrial  part

L  4

*  See  RAY'S  Phyfico-tbezlogical  Df/aur/es,  p.  13.


[ 15']

*  of  the  globe  is  nothing  but  a  //&/«  foelt,  which  i$-
'  eludes  in  it,  clofely  on  every  fide,  an  immenfe  mafs
'  of  waters,  and  whenever  thofe  waters  happen  to  bq

*  put  into  any  extraordinary  motion,  the  earth  is  by
c  them  moved  and  agitated  juft  in  the  fame  manner  as
c  the  inclofed  waters  are  moved  and  agitated.'

VI.  THAT  there  is  an  Abyfs  of  waters  beneath  the
earth,  may  be  ftill  further  mewed  from  the  quantity
of  water  that  has  been  difcovered  in  the  infide  of  the
earth,  in  opening  the  ftrata  either  for  Stone,  Coal,  &c.
in  digging  for  wells,  &c.  in  fearching  after  minerals,
ores,&c.  from  fuddenand  accidental  eruptions  of  water
out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earth  -,  or  from  difcoveries  of
fubterranean  waters  that  have  been  made  by  any  other
means,  either  accidental  or  defigned,  that  do  not  pro-
perly come  under  the  heads  I  have  already  difcuffed.

Mr.  HUTCHINSON  in  his  Obfervations  on  the  earth
(fee  Vol.  XII.  of  his  works,  p.  331.)  fays,  '  It  is
'  hardly  credible  how  great  a  quantity  of  water  will  be
'  fometimes  flung  upon  miners,  when  they  come  to
6  break  up  ftrata  of  ftone,  that  have  in  them  many  of
'  thefe  cracks,  that  are  fo  fmall  that  they  are  hardly
4  difcernible.  Thefe  are  indeed  the  natural  convey-

*  ances  of  water : and,  when  once  they  are  opened,
'  it  runs  inceffantly. I  have  obferved  fuch  an  irrup-

4  tion  of  water  in  vafl  quantity  out  of  Stone,  that,  ex-

*  empting  thofe  cracks,  is  much  too  denfe  and  clofe

5  to  let  any,  the  leaft,  humidity  pafs.3 The  vafl
profufion  of  water  that  fometimes  enfues  the  break-
ing up  of  the  ftrata  in  Coal-pits  is  well  known  to  all
that  are  in  the  leaft  converfant  in  that  affair  •,  and  what
amazing  quantities  are  drawn  off  from  deep  mines,
cither  by  chains  or  levels,  or  raifed  by  engines,  is  alfo
well  known : Nay,  in  digging  common  wells and
ponds,  in  places  where  there  are  no  Springs  above


[  '53  ]

ground,  it  frequently  happens,  that  fuch  a  glut  of
water  ifiues  forth  as  to  endanger  the  lives  of  the
workmen.  Of  this  Dr.  Shaw  gives  us  a  remarkable
inflance  in -his  Travels ,  p.  135,  'The  Villages  of
4  Wadreagg  [in  the  eaftern  province  of  Barbary~\  arc

*  built  in  a  plain,  without  any  river  running  by  them,
'•  and  are  fupplied  in  a  particular  manner  with  water.
6  They  have,  properly  fpeaking,  neither  fountains  nor

*  rivulets;  but  by  digging  wells  to  the  depth  of  an
'  hundred  and  fometimes  two  hundred  fathom,  the  in-

*  habitants  never  fail  of  obtaining  a  plentiful  dream.
c  And  to  this  purpofe,  they  dig  thro'  different  layers
«  of  fand  and  gravel,  'till  they  come  to  a  fleaky  kind

*  of  ilone,  like  unto  Slate,  which  is  known  to  lie  im-

*  mediately  above  The  [Bahar  ta.ht  el  Era1]  Sea  below
'  ground^  as  they  feem  to  call  the  Abyfs. This  is  eafily
'  broken  through  ;  and  the  flux  of  water  which  fol-

*  loweth  the  flroke,  rifeth  generally  fo  fuddenly  and
c  in  fuch  abundance,  that  the  perfon  let  downtoper-
'  form  the  operation,  hath  fometimes  been  overtaken

*  and  fuffocated  by  it,  tho*  raifed  up  with  the  greatefl
4  dexterity.'  Of  fudden  Eruptions  of  water  from
out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earth  there  are  feveral  ac-
counts recorded  in  hiftory,  fome  that  have  overflowed
whole  countries,  others  large  towns  and  cities,  others
villages  :  of  thefe  the  reader  may  fee  feveral  accounts
in  Kir  cherts  mundus  fubterraneus  •,  Ehrartus  de  Belemnitis
Suevicis,  Prxfamn ;  Phil.  Tranf.  &c.  I  fnall  cite  one
account  from  the  laft  mentioned  Treatife  in  order  to
give  the  reader  an  idea  of  fuch  Eruptions,  No.  I.  p.  q.
'  In  the  beginning  of  July 1678,  after  fome  gentle
e  rainy  days,  which  had  not  fwelled  the  waters  of  the

*  Garonne  more  than  ufual,  one  night  this  river  fwelled

*  all  at  once  fo  mightily,  that  all  the  bridges  and
'  mills  above  Totcufe  were  carried  away  by  it. In
6  the  plains  which  were  below  this  town,  the  inhabi-


[  154]

c  tants,  who  had  built  in  places  which  by  long  cx-
'  perience  they  had  found  fkfe  enough,  from  any  for-

*  mer  inundations,  were  by  this  furpnzed  •,  fome  were
'  drowned  together  with  their  cattle  i  others  had  not

*  faved  themfelves  but  by  climbing  of  trees,  and  get-

*  ing  to  the  tops  of  houfes  ;  and  fome  others  who
'  were  looking  after  their  cattle  in  the  field,  warned

*  by  the  noife  which  this  horrible  and  furious  torrent
4  of  water (rolling towards  them  with a  fwiftnds
'  like  that  of  the  lea)  [in  Britaigne  he  means']  made

*  at  a  diitance  •,  could  not  efcape  without  being  over-
'  taken,  though  they  fled  with  much  precipitation  :

*  This  neverthelefs  did  not  laft  many  hours  with  this

*  violence. At  the  fame  time  exactly, the  two
c  rivers  only  of  Adour  and  Gaue,  which  fall  from  the
'  Pyr^nean  hills,  as  well  as  the  Garonne,  and  fome

*  other  little rivers of  Gafcoyne, which have  their
'  fource  in  the  plain, as  the  Gimone,  the  Saue,  and

*  the  Rat, overflowed  after  the  fame  manner, and
*•  cauled  the  fame  devaftations. But this accident
'  happened  not  at  all  to  the  Aude,  the  Ariegey  or  the
'  Arife,  which  come  from  the  mountains  of  Foix,  only

*  that  they  had  more  of  the  fame  than  thofe  of  the

*  Conferunt,  the  Comminge,  and  the  Bigorre. M.  Mar-
'  tell  (by  the  order  of  M.  Foucault )  \\zt\\  fearched  after

*  the  caufe  of  this  deluge,  being  aflured  that  it  muft
4  ha>ve  had  one  very  extraordinary  : for  all  who  had
'  feen  the  circumftances  agreed,  that  it  had  rained  in-

*  deed,  but  that  the  rain  was  neither  fo  great,  nor
4  lafted  fo  long,  as  to  fwell  the  rivers  to  that  excefa  or
'  to  melt  the  fnows  of  the  mountains. But  the  nature

*  of  thefe  waters,  and  the  manner  of  their  flowing
'  from  the  mountains,  confirmed  him  perfeclly  in  his
6  fentiments. For, i.  the  inhabitants  of  the  lower

*  Pyrxnsans  obferved,  that  the  water  flowed  with  vio-

*  knee  from  the  entrails  of  the  mountains,  about  which


t  '553

*  there  were  opened  feveral  channels,  which  forming
6  fo  many  furious  torrents  tore  up  the  trees,  the  earth,
'  and  great  rocks,  in  fuch  narrow  places  where  they
'  found  not  a  pafiage  large  enough. The  water  aifo

*  which  fpouted  from  all  the  fides  of  the  mountain  in
'  innumerable  Jets,  which  laded  all  the  time  of  the
'  greateft overflowing, had the tafte  of  Minerals.

*  2.  In  fome  of  the  pafiages,  the  waters  were  ftinking
'  (as  when  one  ftirs  the  mud  at  the  bottom  of  the  mi-
'  neral  water )  in  fuch  fort  that  the  cattle  refufed  to
'  drink  of  it,  which  was  more  particularly  taken  no-
'  tice  of  at  Lomber,  in  the  overflowing  of  the  Saue
'  (which  is  one  of  the  rivers)  where  the  horfes  were
'  eight  hours  thirfty  before  they  would  endure  to  drink
'it. 3.  The  Bifliop  of  Lombez  having  a  defire  to
'  cleanfe  his  gardens,  which  the  Saue  paffing  thorough
6  by  many  channels  by  this  overflowing, had  filled

*  with  fand  and mud  •, thofe  which entered them

*  felt  an  Itching,  like  to  that  which  one  feels  when
'  one  bathes  in  Salt-water, or  wafhes  onefelf  with
;  fome  ftrong  Lixivial. This  Itching  could not
4  be  produced  by  either  rain  or  fnow  water,  but  by
'  fome  mineral  Juice, either  Vitriolick  or  Aluminous,
'  which  the  waters  had  difiblved  in  the  bowels  of  th'e
'  mountains,  and  had  carried  along  with  it  in  pafTing

*  out  through  thofe  numerous  crannies. For  thele

*  reafons  M.  Mart  ell'  believes  the  true  caufe  of  this

*  Overflowing  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  fubterranecus
1  Waters'  I  might  here  add  an  account  of  the
Rivers  that  are  known  to  run  wholly  under-ground,
and  even  of  the  Catarafts-  that  have  been  difcovered
there  (of  which  Herbinius  in  his  Differtationes  de  admi-
randis  mundi  Cataraflis,  fupra  &  fubterraneis,  &c.  gives
a  defcription)  but  to  avoid  prolixity mail  conclude
with  obferving,  that  the  deeper  we  penetrate  into  the
earth,  the  greater  quantity  of  water  is  met  "jcitb^  and


[  '56]

ikat  generally  this  water  breaks  forth  infuch  a  manner
as  manifeftly  to  (hew  that  it  is  raifed  by  a  power  from
underneath,  thereby  plainly  indicating  its  fubterranean
origin.

THUS  I  have  produced  feveral  arguments  to  prove
that  there  is  an  Abyfs  of  water  beneath  the  earth  -,  and
feveral  others  might  be  brought ;  but  thefe  may  more
naturally  be  introduced  under  fome  of  the  fublequcnt
heads.  For,  I  would  obferve  here,  once  for  all,  that
there  is  fuch  a  clofe  connection  between  the  feveral
parts  of  the  fubject  I  am  treating  of,  or  the  Heads  I
have  been  obliged  to  divide  it  into,,  that  very  often
one  and  the  fame  argument  (or  at  leaft  with  the  help
of  a  few  additional  fentences)  will  prove  two  or  three
of  thefe  Heads,  but  yet  is  more  immediately  applica-
ble to  one,  I  fnall  therefore  difpofe  of  it  under  its
proper  Head,  and  as  far  as  it  affords  proof  for  other
particulars,  deduce  them  by  way  of  corollaries  or  con-
clufions.

BUT  before  I  quite  finim.  the  Article  I  am  now  up-
on, it  may  not  be  amifs  to  endeavour  to  mew  what
the  Form  and  what  the  Size  of  this  Abyfs  may  be.

FROM  what  has  been  already  faid  (p.  134)  it  ap-
pears that  the  Abyfs  and  the  Ocean  are  in  conjunction
v/ith  each  other,  and  therefore  that  the  Abyfs  is  not
divided  into  feparate  parts  or  diftinguifhed  into  large
detached  caverns  (as  fome  have  imagined)  but  is  one
continued  and  united  body  of  water,  and  equal  in  extent
to  the  circumference  of  the  lower  part  of  the  fhell  of
the  earth,  and  lying  immediately  under  k  ;  as~Ts~  al-
fo  evident  from  what  is  faid  page  151.  And  there-
fore as  the  Shell  of  the  earth  is  of  a  round  form,  we
may  juftly  efteem  the  Abyfs  to  be  fo  likewife,  as  it  is
reprefented  in  the  Plate  by  G.  H.  And,  that  the
Abyfs  is  really  of  this  form  we  have  better  proof  than
any  that  can  be  deduced  from  natural  evidence,  for
He  who  made  it  and  the  whole  earth  hath  allured  us


[  '57]

that  it  is  fo,  as  I  have  mewed  page  26;  and  in  ordef
to  ftrengthen  the  comments  there  made  upon  Scrip-
ture, and  to  add  authority  to  the  juftntfs  of  them,  I
(hall  cite  the  opinion  of  the  celebrated  Stackhoufe  in
his  Hiftory  of  the  Bible,  p.  125..  I  feleft  this  writer
(out  of  feveral  that  might  be  brought)  not  only  becaule
he  has  determined  the  Form  of  the  Abyfs,  but  has  fpo-
ken  of  the  Size  of  it,  and  given  a  calculation  by  which
-the  reader  may  judge  of  the  quantity  of  water  con-
tained therein.  e  Tis  certainly  (fays  he)  more  thaa
4  probable  (becaufe  a  matter  or  divine  Revelation)  that
4  there  is  an  immenfe  body  of  water  enclofed  in  the
4  center  of  the  earth,  to  which  the  Pfalmift  plainly  al-
4  hides  when  he  tells  us,  that  (Pfal.  xxiv.  2.)  God
4  founded  the  earth  upon  the  feas,  and  efiablijhed  it  on  the
'floods;  that  (Pfal.  cxxxvi.  6.)  he  jlretched  out  the
4  earth  above  the  waters;  that  (Pfal.  xxxiii.  j.)  he  ga-
4  tbered  up  the  waters  as  in  a  Bag  (fo  the  beft  tranflati-
4  ons  have  it)  and  laid  up  the  Deep  as  in  a  Storehoufe.
4  Nay,  there  is  a  paffage  or  two  in  the  proverbs  of
4  Solomon  (where  Wifdom  declares  her  Antiquity,  and
4  pre-exiftence  to  all  the  works  of  the  earth  j  which
4  lets  before  our  eyes,  as  it  were,  the  very  Form  and
4  Figure  of  this  Abyfs;  (Proverbs  viii.  27,  2%.)  When
4  be  prepared  the  heavens,  I  was  there,  when  he  fet  a
4  Compafs  upon  the  face  of  the  Deep,  and  Jirengthened  the
4  Fountains  of  the.  Ab\fs.  Here  is  mention  made  of
4  the  Abyfs  and  of  the  Fountains  of  the  Abyfs ;  nor  is
4  there  any  queftion  to  be  made,  but  that  the  Foun-
4  tains  of  the  Abyis  here  are  the  fame  with  thofe,
4  which  Mofes  mentions,  and  which,  as  he  tells  us,
4  were  broken  up  at  the  Deluge.  And  what  is  more
4  obfervable  in  this  Text,  the  word,  which  we  render
4  Compafs,  properly  fignifies  a  Circle  or  Circumference,
4  or  an  Orb,  or  Sphere:  fo  that  according  to  the  tefti- ,
4  mony  of  V/ifdom,  who  was  then  prefent,  there  was


[

« in  the  beginning  a  Sphere,  Orb,  or  Arch,  fet  round
«  the  Abyfs,  by  the  means  of  which, the  fountains

*  thereof  were  Jtrengthened-, for  we  cannot  conceive,
6  how  they  could  have  been  ftrengthened  any  other  way,
e  than  by  having  a  ftrong  Cover  or y^r£ ;#tf^  over
<  /£i/9.  If,  fuch  then  be  the  form  of  this  Abyfs,

*  that  it  feems  to  be  a  vaft  mafs,  or  body  of  water,
e  lying  together  in  the  womb  of  the  earth,  it  will  be
e  no  hard  matter  to  compute  what  a  plentiful  fupply
c  might  have  been  expected  from  thence,  in  order  to

*  effect  an  univerfal  Deluge. For,  if  the  Circumfer-

*  ence  of  the earth  (according  to  the  loweft  com-
«  putation)  be  21000  miles,  the  diameter  of  it  (accord-
c  ding  to  that  circumference.)  7000  miles,  and  confe-

*  quently  from  the  fuperficies  to  the  center, 3500
6  miles  -,  and  if  (according  to  the  bed  account)  the

higheft  mountain  in  the  world  (taking  its  altitude
from  the  plain  it  Hands  upon)  does  not  exceed  four
perpendicular  miles  in  height  -,  then  we  cannot  but
conclude,  that,  in  this  Abyfs,  there  would  be  infi-
nitely more  water  than  enough,  when  drawn  out
upon  the  furface  of  the  earth,  to  drown  the  earth,
to  a  far  greater  height  than  Mofes  relates.'


[  '59  1

SECONDLY,

I  AM  now  to  prove  that  the  whole  Earth  was
covered  to  an  immenfe  height  by  this  Subterranean
Water,  or  that  the  Deluge,  in  the  time  of  Noah,  wa$
univerfal ;  the  Fountains  of  the  Great  Abyfs  having
been  broken  up,  and  the  water  thereof  elevated  above
all  the  high  Hills  under  the  whole  heaven.

AND,  firft,  to  begin  with  proofs  deducible  .from
the  circumftances  of  things  on  or  near  the  Surface  of
the  Earth.

I.  THE  Divifion  of  the  furface  of  the  earth  into
Mountains,  Hills,  Combs,  Dales,  Vallies,  &c.  isib
obvious  and  ftrikmg,  that  few  or  none  but  muft  have
obferved  it ;  though  probably  but  few  have  feen  how
far  this  regularly  irregular  Divifion  (as  I  may  iuftly
call  it)  was  owing  to,  and  is  a  proof  of,  an  univerfal
Flood,  or  that  the  furface  of  the  earth  has  been  covered
to  a  great  height  by  an  inundation  of  water.  I

fhall  therefore  enlarge  on  this  article,  and  point  out
the  evidence  deducible  therefrom.

Mountains  and  Hills  have  generally  on  all  fides  a
regular  defcent  or  inclination  from  their  tops,  greater
or  lefs,  longer  or  fhorter.  And  when  feparately.con-
fidered,  and  without  attending  to  every  little  inequa-
lity, may  be  faid  to  be  of  a  conical  or  pyramidal
lhape;  and  when  many  lie  clofe  together,  or  are  con-
tinued in  a  direcl:  chain  through  whole  countries,  they
may  be  faid  to  be  of  a  prifmatical  form.  The

point  therefore  to  be  decided  is,  Whether  this  be  their
original  Jbape,  That  which  was  neceffarily  produced
by,  and  in  which  they  have  always  remained  fmce,
the  firfl  fituation  of  their  materials  in  the  places  they
now  ftand  ? — Or,  Did  they  obtain  their  prefent  form  af-
tcrwards,  i.  e.  were  their  original  materials  modelled,
framed,  or  brought  into  this  fhape  by  the  action  of
fome  outward  Caufe  ? — And  what  was  that  Caufe  ?


THAT  Mountains  were  not  originally  of  this  fhape
feems'evident  from  the  manner  in  which  their  mate-
rials or  conftituent  parts  fubnded  and  at  prefent  lie,
they  being  difpoied  in  ftrata,  beds,  or  layers  (whe-
ther of  ftone,  clay,  chalk,  &c.)  of  equal  thicknefs
throughout,  and  regularly  lying  upon  each  other  in  a
flat,  level,  or  horizontal  pofitionj  which  ihuation  of
all  others  feems  the  ieaft  proper  for  difpofmg  fuch
materials  into  a  conical  or  prifmatical  figure.  Did
their  ftrata  or  layers  Hand  one  againft  another  in  a
Hoping  poihire  like  the  ridge  of  a  houfe,  or  even
perpendicularly  upright,  it  might  more  probably  have
indicated  their  prefent  fhape  to  have  been  the  original ;
but  fince  they  are  pofited  in  a  flat,  level  fituation,
(which  is  the  moil  different  from  any  of  the  upright
forms)  it  feems  plainly  to  mew  that  their  prefent
fliapes  were  not  the  original,  but  are  owing  to  fome
external  force.  Which  is  further  evident  from

hence,  That  in  mountainous  countries,  which  confift
of  the  fame  kind  of  ftrata,  the  ftrata  in  each  moun-
tain (hall  exactly  anfwer  or  correfpond  together  in
every  refpect, — in  fpecies,  in  colour,  in  depth,  in
thicknefs,  in  fituation  and  in  their  contents.  So  that
fuppofe,  the  ift  [under  the  vegetable  mould]  or  up-
permoft  ftratum  to  be  of  a  whitifh  coloured  Sand-
ftone,  one  yard  thick;  the  2d  a  red  Marl,  two  yards ;
the  gd  a  blue  Lime-ftone,  containing  fhells,  teeth,
bones,  &c.  of  particular  kinds,  one  yard  thick-,  the
4th  a  blue  Clay,  containing  native  foffils,  fuch  as  fe-
lenitae,  pyritae,  &c.'  three  yards  thick ;  the  5th  a  grey
Flag-ftone,  eight  yards  thick  \  the  6th  a  ftratum  of
Coal,  [with  its  ufual  attendant,  a  black  clayey  flate,
replrte  with  plants  of  all  forts  ]  two  yards  thick ;  the
yth  a  Rag-ftonc,  ten  yards  thick-,  the  8th  a  Free-
ftone,  containing  a  great  variety  of  fhells,  twelve  yards
thick  i  the  9th  a  red  Sand-ftoae,  fifteen  yards  thick ;


the  loth  a  ftratum  of  grey  Lime-ftone,  containing  d
great  variety  of  corals,  fhells,  &c.  reaching  to  the  bot-
tom of  the  mountain."  Now  in  the  fame  order  and
in  the  fame  horizontal  pofition  you  mall  find  fimilar
ftrata  in  each  mountain  throughout  fuch  a  country.
The  queftion  therefore  is,  whether  they  were  not  all
once  united,  or  the  ftrata  continued  throughout  in  one
entire  body^  without  any  of  thcfe  Eminences  We  call
Mountains,  or  thofe  Hollows  called  Vallies  ?  And  it
fo,  then  the  prefent  mountainous  form  was  not  the  origi-
nal, or  thefe  mountains  were  not  coeval  with,  or  any
ways  owing  to,  the  difpofition  of  their  materials  oif
the  fettlement  of  their  ftrata.  Now  in  order  to  fhew
that  the  ftrata  in  thefe  mountains  were  once  wholly
continued,  let  a  perfon  firft  examine  a  fingle  chain  or
M


u  If  any  perfon  mould  he  defirous  of  examining  the  ftrata  of  the
earth  in  a  mountainous  country,  and  fhoitld  not  find  any  great  variety
of  ftrata,  or  even  but  one  fingle  ftratum,  yet  upon  ftrift  infpe&ion  or
rather  at  firft  fight  he  will  perceive  that  this  fmgJe  ftratum  is  divided
into  a  great  number  of  lefTer  ftrata  or  fmall  layers,  which  will  be  ea-
fily  diftinguifhable  from  each  other,  either  by  their  colour,  depth,
thicknefs.  or  more  remarkably  by  their  Contents  or  the  fofiU  bodies
they  contain,  one  layer  abounding  with  one  fpecies  of  ihells,  another
with  a  different ;  another  layer  containing  bones  and  teeth  of  nfhes  ;
another  corals  of  various  kinds,  &c.  &c.  &c.  fo  as  to  afford.him  e-
vident  marks  by  which  he  may  diftinguiih  one  layer  from  another
alonoft  as  readily  as  if  there  had  been  ftrata  of  different  lubftances.

In  the  description  of  the  above  fuppofed  Mountain  the  Strata  are
not  reprefented  as  lying  according  to  their  fpecifkk  Gravities,  for
however  commonly  received  the  opinion  is  that  they  do  fo  lie,  vet  1
never  could  find  them  in  this  fituation  in  any  place  that  I  have  Veen.
And  the  feveral  experiments  and  obfervations  that  have  been  made
upon  the  ftrata  of  the  earth,  when  opened  to  the  greateji  depths,
fhew  that  they  do  not  lie  according  to  their  fpecifick  gravities ;  fee  in
particular  ljhilcfof.  Tranfac.  No.  336.  Art.  xi.  No.  zjo,  Art.  \\.
No.  360,  Art.  iv.  No.  391,  Art.  i.  VARKNIUS'S  Gepgrqffy,  Lib.  I.
Cap.  vii.  Propos.  7.  HAUSKBEE'S  Experiments,  p.  317,  Exttcriix,
xx.  LUIDII  Lytbafhil.  p.  MO,


[ 162 ]

ridge  of  them,  riming  for  ten,  twenty,  or  thirty
miles  only,  [and  they  Ibmetimes  continue  for  feveral
hundred]  in  which  chain  particular  mountains  are
diftinguifhable  from  each  other  only  by  the  reparation
or  vacant  fpaces  between  their  tops,  reaching  to  dif-
ferent depths  and  at  various  diftances  •,  and  fuppofe,
upon  examination,  he  mould  find  that  the  ftrata  in
each  of  the  tops  were  of  the  fame  kiad,  colour,.thick-
nefs,  &c.  (as  above  defcribed)  and  lying  in  the  fame
pofition,  and  only  parted  from  each  other  by  the  va-
cant fpaces  between  their  fummits,  and  that  ti\z  ftrata
underneath,  in  the  body  of  the  mountain,  were  quite
whole  and  entire,  lying  in  the  fame  direction  or  parallel
with  thofe  in  the  tops,  Would  he  not  conclude  that
the  uppermoft  ftrata  were  likewife  once  whole  and  li-
nked [which  are  now  only  difcontinued  by  the  com-
paratively fmall  vacant  fpaces  between  the  fummits  of
the  mountains]  as  well  as  thofe  that  are  underneath  ?
Efpecially,  if  he  was  to  remark,  that,  where  the  fepa-
ration  between  the  tops  of  fome  of  the  mountains  was
not  fo  great  or  deep  as  in  others,  the  ftrata  that  did
not  appear  in  the  reft,  would  appear  in  thefe ;  or  fup-
pofe the  depth  of  the  fpace  between  fome  of  the  moun-
tains to  be  no  more  than  thirty  yards  or  to  reach  down
to  the  ftratum  of  Free-ftone  (in  the  above  defcription)
but  that  in  other  of  the  vacant  fpaces  between  the
mountains  even  this  ftratum  of  Free-ftone  fhpuld  not
be  found,  or,  as  is  frequently  the  cafe,  only  a  part  or
half  of  it  be  wanting,  Would  he  not  conclude,  that
the  other  part  was  formerly  fubfifting  in  its  due  place
and  order  ?  And  if  he  would  judge  thus  of  this  ftra-
tum, doubtlefs  he  would  determine  the  fame  of  the
reft,  and  that  the  vacant  fpaces  between  the  tops  of
the  mountains  throughout  this  chain  were  formerly
filled  up  with  their  refpective  ftrata.  Judging  then
thus  of  this  fingle  Ridge  of  mountains,  Jet  him  now


extend  his  view  on  every  fide,  and  behold  how  exact-
ly parallel  the  lame  kind  of  ftrata  in  the  adjacent
mountains  lie  with  their  fimilar  ones  in  this  chain,
and  he  will  as  readily  conclude  that  they  were  all  once
in  conjunction  and  the  vallies  between  them  filled  up
with  correfponding  ftrata,  as  thofe  vacant  fpaces  were
between  the  tops  of  the  firft  chain  of  mountains  he
examined.  In  Ihort,  if  a  perfon  was  to  fee  the  broken
walls  ot  a  palace  or  caftle  that  had  been  in  part  de-
moliflied,  he  would  certainly  conclude  that  the
breaches  or  vacant  fpaces  in  thofe  walls  were  once
filled  up  with  fimilar  fubftances,  and  in  conjunction
with  the  reft  of  the  walls,  and  could  eafily  with  his
eye  fee  the  lines  in  which  the  walls  were  carried,  and
in  thought  fill  up  the  breaches  and  re-unite  the  whole  :
And  in  the  fame  manner  if  a  perfon  was  to  view  the
naked  ends  or  broken  edges  of  the  ftrata  in  a  moun-
tain on  one  fide  of  a  valley  and  compare  them  with
their  correfpondent  ends  in  the  mountain  on  the  other
fide  of  the  valley,  he  would  manifeftly  perceive  that
the  fpace  between  each  was  once  filled  up,  and  the
ftrata  continued  from  mountain  to  mountain.  So  that
the  prefent  conical  mape  of  mountains  was  not  coeval
with  their  fubftances  or  with  their  inward  and  origi-
nal form  •,  they  being  primarily  of  no  outward  form,
if  I  may  fo  fay,  or  rather  there  were  once  none  of  thofe
Eminences  upon  the  earth  which  we  now  call  Moun-
tains ;  for  when  the  ftrata  of  the  earth  were  whole  and
entire,  and  in  conjunction-  with  one  another,  and  the
vacancies  that  now  occafion  vallies,  dales,  &c.  filled
up  with  their  refpeclive  ftrata",  the  earth  muft  have
been  of  cm  Jpberical  form  without  mountains,  hills,
dales,  vales,  &c.  and  all  the  ftrata  muft  have  lain
originally  horizontally  upon  one  another,  or  rather,
to  fpeak  philofophically,  concentrically  with  each
other.  And  wlut  further  lliews,  That  mountains


[  164]

are  only  Eminences  of  the  earth,  caufed  by  the  exca-
vation or  fcooping  out  of  the  fubftances  or  ftrata  that
formerly  occupied  thofe  Hollows,  which  we  now  call
Vallies,  Dales,  Combs,  &c.  is  this,  that  it  may  be
demonftrated,  That  the  origin  of  mountains  cannot  be
owing  to  any  Elevation  or  Depreflion  of  their  ftrata  -,
though  mofl  writers  have  attributed  it  to  this  caufe,
and  fuppoled  them  to  have  been  produced  by  Dif-
ruptions  from  within  the  earth,  occafioned  by  the
breaking  out  of  fubterranean  fires,  earthquakes,  &c.
whereby  the  ftrata  became  elevated  in  fome  places,
and  depreffed  in  others  :  but  this  could  not  have  been
the  cafe.  For,  the  ftrata  of  Mountains  in  the  inland
countries  (and  fuch  mediterranean  Eminences  are  pro-
perly to  be  termed  Mountains  -,  Hills  being  lefs,  and
fituflted  at  a  diftance  from  mountains,  and  nearer  the
fea)  are  generally,  and  if  the  higheft  or  moft  inland
in  the  Continents  or  Iflands  on  which  they  ftand,  are,
I  may  venture  to  fay,  always  pofited  in  an  horizontal
direction,  or  but  very  little  inclining  therefrom,  and
even  this  inclination  accountable  from  other  caufes
than  Difruptions,  as  will  be  feen  in  the  procefs  of  this
treatife.w  Now  the  ftrata  of  Mountains  being  thus
horizontally  placed,  which  alfo  appearing  to  have  been
their  original  pofition,  (as  will  more  clearly  be  fhewn

w  Thus  much  I  can  fay  for  certain,  that  the  Strata  in  fome  of  the
higheft  ridges  of  Mountains  in  England  and  Wales  are  horizontally
•pofited',  which  is  a  plain  proof  that  Mountains  in  general  might  have
been,  and  that  thefe  in  particular  really  were,  formed  without  any
elevation  or  depreffion  of  the  ftrata  :  and  hence  alfo  it  appears  that
the  horizontal  pojition  is  the  original  and  natural  fetuation  of  the  ftrata.
And  in  fuch  mountainous  places  where  I  have  obferved  the  ftrata  to
be  fomt<what  inclined,  it  has  generally  been  where  there  are  large  and
deep  vallies,  fteep  precipices,  naked  rocks  for  a  great  extent  of
ground,  and  many  other  fuch  like  proofs  that  the  Agent  (the  'water,
as  will  be  feen  hereafter)  that  tore  out  the  hollows  of  the  dales  and
rallies,  paffed  off  with  great  rapidity  and  adedwith  great  force  upon


hereafter)  is  an  undeniable  proof,  that  they  have  wt
been  difylaced,  and  therefore  that  thefe  eminent  parts
of  the  earth  were  not  owing  to  any  Elevations,  or  £)/?-
fre/ions  of  their  ftrata  ;  for  had  they  been  produced
by  either  of  thefe  means  the  ftrata  muft  have  been  in-
clined in  various  angles,  and  placed  in.  the  moft  differ-
ent directions  from  the  horizontal.  Befides,  had  Moun-
tains been  owing  to  the  Elevation  or  Depreflion  of
their  ftrata,  the  outfides  and  forms'  of  Mountains
would  have  been  fhaped  or  in  a  great  meafure  have
anfwered  the  inward  pofition  of  the  ftrata  -,  whereas
this  is  feldom  the  cafe  •,  and  in  Mountains  where  the
ftrata  are  horizontal,  never  can  be,  provided  thofe
Eminences  are  of  the  common  pyramidal  or  conical
fhape ;  but  where  fuch  have  large  extenfive  plains  or
much  level  ground  upon  their  tops,  the  outward
fhapes  of  thefe  indeed  ufually  anfwer  or  correfpond
with  the  inward  level  fite  of  the  ftrata  j  but  fuch  fiat
eminences  as  thefe  are  not  what  we  generally  under-
ftand  by  the  term  Mountains^  and  ougtit  rather  to  be
called,  as  they  commonly  are,  high  Plains  or  Dows.
And  in  fuch  mountains  or  rather  Hills  where  the  ftra-
ta are  inclined,  I  have  feen  the  outward  form  very
M  3


the  fubjacent  ftrata;  in  doing  which  it  would  naturally  (in  fuch
places  where  there  was  a  variety  of  ftrata)  wafh  and  carry  away  the
more  foft  and  brittle  ftrata,  and  by  this  means  undermine,  and  fo
incline,  the  fuperior  beds  of  ftone ;  &c.  and  in  many  places  I  have
remarked,  particularly  upon  the  fides  of  fteep  mountains,  that  this
inclination  of  the  ftrata  is  but  for  the  depth  of  fom,e  feet,  or  what
I  may  call,  fuperfidal ;  and  that  the  beds  of  ftone  upon  the  top  of
the  mountain  are  but  little,  or  not  at  all,  inclined  ;  and  in  the  body
of  the  mountain  are  horizontally  fofited :  which  plainly  mews,  that
the  upper  ftrata  only  have  been  moved,  and  moved  too  by  fome  aut-
fuaard  caufe,  and  not  the  whole  body  of  the  mwntfiin,  cither  by  ele-
vation or  depreflion  of  the  ftrata.


different  from  what  one  might  expect  from  the  inward
inclination  of  the  ftrata,  nay,  fometimes  direflly  con-
trary to  it.  It  being  then  thus  certain,  that  the
prefent  outward  form  of  Mountains  was  not  owing  to,
either,  the  inward  difpofttion,  or  prefent  fituation,  of
the  ftrata,  and  that  the  vacant  Spaces  between  the
tops  and  fides  of  mountains  were  once  filled  up,
it  muft  follow,  That  thefe  high  and  eminent  parts  of
the  earth  were  caufed  by  fome  external  Agent  or
Means  that  acled  upon  the  outward  fur  face  of  the  earth,
and  which,  by  tearing  off  and  carrying  away  the  matter
or  ftrqta  that  formerly  occupied  thofe  places  we  now
call  rallies,  left  thole  Eminences  ilanding,  which  we
now  call  Mountains.

AND  that  this  was  really  the  cafe  will  yet  more
manifeftly  appear,  in  tracing  out  what  that  Agent  was
that  effected  this,  which  is  the  next  thing  to  be  con-
fide red.

THAT  the  outward  form  of  Mountains  was  owing
to  the  action  of  fome  Fhtid,  which  by  foftening  and
mollifying  the  parts  gradually  wore  and  tore  away  the
circumjacent  ftrata,  is  evident  from  the  conical  fhape,
regular  Hope  or  gradual  defcent  of  Mountains  from
their  tops  quite  down  their  fides ;  and  when  we  con-
fider  the  bulk  of  a  mountain,  and  the  prodigious
number  of  them  upon  the  earth,  there  is  no  Fluid  of
a  nature  proper,  and  in  quantity  Efficient,  for  effect-
ing this  but  IVaier.  And  that  Water  was  the  A-
gent  is  further  evident,  from  the  general  tendency'or
inclination  of  the  fides  of  mountains  down  towards  the
Sea,  efpecially  in  iflands  and  peninfulas,  chiefly  and
more  remarkably  in  fuch  as  are  longer  than  they  are
broad-,  and  in  necks  or  promontories  of  land  that  jut
out  into  the  fea,  and  have  water  on  both  fides  of  them.
So  in  the  iflands  of  Cuba,  llij'pun'iola,  California,  Ma-
Sumatra,  Sucoma,St.Cbriflopber,  and  many


others,  there  is  a  ridge  or  Chain  of  mountains  run  -
ing  directly  through  the  middle,  in  a  line  with  the
length  of  thofe  iflands  and  peninfulas,  gradually  leflen-
ing  and  lefiening  with  gentle  declivities  on  each
fide,  tending  outward  or  falling  away  down  to-
wards the  two  feas  [not  inward  towards  the  land],
juft  in  fuch  a  manner  as  Water  defcending  from  the
tops  of  thefe  ridges  would  naturally  have  torn  and
carried  away  the  ground,  and  fo  have  formed  regular
defcents  on  both  fides ;  which  defcents  generally  con-
tinue for  feveral  miles  underneath  the  feaj  for  it  is  a
common  obfervation  with  mariners  that  where  the
more  lies  nearly  level  or  upon  a  gentle  defcent,  that
there  the  fea  gradually  increafes  deeper  and  deeper  the
farther  you  proceed  from  land  ;x  fo  as  plainly  to  mew
that  the  ground  underneath  or  the  bottom  of  the  ocean
was  formed  after  the  fame  manner,  and  is  only  a  con-
tinuation of  that  at  Land  :  fmcethen  thefe  Defcents  or
Declivities  are  at  prefent  in  part  covered  with  •water^
there  can  be  no  reafon  to  doubt  that  this  was  the  A-
gent  that  formerly  covered  and  formed  the  whole.
So  in  Promontories  or  parts  of  land  that  project  into
the  Sea,  where  fuch  are  long  and  narrow,  there  is
commonly  a  ridge  or  feveral  ridges  of  mountains
pafling  through  the  middle  with  gentle  declivities  on
each  fide.  Thus  in  Italy  the  Apennine  mountains  are  con-
tinued lengthways  through  the  middle  of  that  country,
and  divide  it  in  two  parts,  juft  in  the  manner  (as  it  has
been  reprefented)  as  the  back-bone  of  an  animal  does  his
body,  fimilar  is  the  fituation  of  the  mountains  in
Norway )  Malacca,  Ccrea,  Cambodia,  India  within  the
Ganges,  the  South  part  of  Africa  for  feveral  hundred
M  4


*  KIRCHER'S  Mundus  Subterrancus, p.  97. MARSILLI Je  la.
Met;  p.  ii. RAX'S  Three  phyftco  theological  Di/cour/ej,  p.  27.


[  i68  ]

and  for  as  many  in  the  fouthpaftqF/f«mV0,  &c.
And  what  is  further  remarkable  in  Promontories  and
iuch  procurrent  parts  of  land,  they  generally,  and
cfpecially  where  there  is  an  open  and  free  Sea,  gradu-
ally le'ffen  and  terminate  in  a  point  like  a  Wedge  -,
which  is  exactly  the  form  that  water,  retreating  from
the  upper  lands,  and  falling  on  each  fide,  would  natu-
rally fhape  and  reduce  it  into.  Whereas,
the  effects  of  the  water  defcending  from  the  furface  of
fuch  extenfive  parts  of  the  earth,  as  large  Continents
are,  would  exhibit  a  different  appearance  of  things
from  what  they  do  upon  iilands  and  promontories;
for  in  this  cafe  the  water  would  take  many  and  various
courfes,  according  to  the  greater  number,  diftance,
and  irregular  fituation  of  the  PaiTages  or  Inlets  it  had
into  the  Abyfs  (which  inlets  we  may  fuppofe  to  be  in
iuch  places  where  Seas  and  large  Lakes  are  at  prefent)  •,
and  alfo  according  to  the  greater  variety  of  the  Strata
it  had  to  act  upon  (many  of  which  ftrata  would  refift,
and  as  many  yield  to,  the  force  of  the  water;  andlbme
more,  fome  lefs)  fo  that  under  fuch  manifold  and  dif-
ferent :circumftances  we  might  expect  to  find  the
Chains  or  Ridges  of  Mountains  upon  large  Continents
lying  in  many  and  various  directions ;  and  accordingly
we  lo  find  them.  But  yet,  in  fome  degree,
the  outward  form  or  furface  of  Continents  and  Iflands
would  refemble  each  other;  for  upon  both,  and  even
where  there  were  no  remarkably  great  mountains,  we
Yn'tght  reafonably  imagine,  that  the  inland  parts  would
be  the  higheft,  or  more  eminent  than  the  maritime  •,  for
the  water  would  act  more  ftrongly  and  tear  off  a  greater
quantity  cf  the  earth  near  the  fea-coafts  than  higher  up
within  the  land;  and  this,  for  two  reafons; — becaule
the  PafTages  into  the  Abyfs  lay  nearer  the  fea-coalb,
and  thither  the  whole  force  of  the  v/ater  was  directed ;
• — and  becaufe  all  ths  water  that  covered  the  inland


[  169  ]

parts  of  the  earth  would  flow  over  and  act  upon  the
maritime,  and  would  bring  along  with  it  large  frag-
ments of  rocks  and  a  great  quantity  of  rubbifh,  which
by  being  driven  upon,  would  wear  and  tear  away,  the
land  near  the  fea-coafts  to  a  great  degree ;  and  there-
fore the  mediterranean  parts  of  Iflands  and  Continents
would  be  lefs,  or  but  little,  torn  ;  and  on  this  ac-
count, after  the  retreat  of  the  water,  be  left  ftanding
higheft.  And  this  alfo  we  find  to  be  fact :  as  is  evi-
dent from  the  courfes  or  falls  of  rivers ;  they  gene-
rally, or  indeed  almoft  univerfally,  taking  their  rife
in  or  near  the  Middle  of  Continents  and  Iflands,  and
flowing  down  towards,  at  lafl  empty  themfelves  into
the  Sea ;  and  as  it  is  certain  that  the  fall  of  water  is
always  from  the  higher  to  the  lower  grounds,  fo  it  is
as  certain  that  the  inland  parts  of  the  earth  are  higher
than  the  maritime.  Befides,  it  is  a  common

obfervation  that  Mountains  or  inland  Eminences  are
higher,  and  their  defcents  or  fides  longer  than  thofe
of  Hills  ;  which  are  generally  fhorter,  but  their  fides
or  falls  more  fudden  and  precipitous  :  and  that  the
ftrata  in  Mountains  are  horizontal,  but  in  Hills  (or
lefier  Eminences  nearer  the  fea)  are  generally  oblique
or  inclined.  All  which  is  exactly  confonant  to  what
a  Flood  of  water,  retreating  from  the  furface  of  the
earth,  would  naturally  produce;  as  is  evident  from
what  has  been  faid  in  the  above  paragraph :  and  the
truth  of  the.  fact  may  be  exemplified  from  the  man-
ner in  which  water  moves  when  permitted  to  run
out  at  an  orifice  at  the  bottom  of  a  large  and  deep
veflel ;  the  chief  action  or  motion  of  the  water  is  at
and  near  the  orifice;'  while  the  furface  is  almoft
calm  -,  and  if  the  bottom  of  the  vefiei  be  made  of
any  matter  that  will  yield  to  the  force  of  water,  it
will  be  moft  torn  at  and  near  the  orifice,  fince  the
current  will  be  there  ftrongeft:  And  fo,  as  the  \va-


ter,  that  covered  the  earth,  retreated  from  the  fur-
face  towards  the  apertures  in  its  fhell,  the  chief  mo-
tion and  violence  would  be  at  the  mouths  of  the  ori-
fices that  led  into  the  abyfs,  whither  the  whole  body  .
of  the  water  tended,  and  its  whole  force  was  exerted  ;
and  near  thefe  apertures  the  currents  of  water  would
be  very  ftrong  and  rapid,  and  which,  by  wafhing
away  the  more  foft  and  brittle  ftrata,  would  undermine
whole  ridges  of  mountains  and  lay  their  ftrata  in  a
Hoping  pofture,  and  by  its  continual  action  in  pafling
over  thefe  ridges,  would  reduce  and  wear  them  lefs
and  lefs  until  they  came  to  be  of  their  prefent  fize  or
Hills.  But  higher  up  or  at  a  greater  diftance  from
the  fea,  the  force  would  be  proportionably  diminifhed,
as  the  quantity  of  water  would  be  iefs  and  the  current
weaker;  fo  that  the  ftrata  in  mountains  are  but  little
or  "not  at  all  difturbed  from  their  original  horizontal
pofition  -,  and  as  a  lefs  degree  of  force  was  exerted  in
forming  them  than  in  Hills,  fo  their  defcents  would
of  courfe  be  longer  and  more  gradually  declining  than
thofe  of  Hills.  And  from  what  has  been  juft

faid,  we  may  fee  the  propriety  of  Monf.  Buacbe's  plan
of  the  difpofition  of  Mountains,  as  laid  down  and  de-
lineated in  Hiftoire  de  V  Acad.  des  Scicn.  An.  1752,
Nov.  15.  according  to  which,  the  greater  or  moft  re-
markable Ridges  of  Mountains  upon  the  feveral  Con-
tinents of  the  earth  take  their  rife  in  or  near  the
middle  of  large  Tracts  of  land  •,  and  are  ftretched  out,
as  radii,  from  fome  high  and  extenfive  Plains  •,  one  of
which  plains  rifes  in  Africa,  another  in  Afia,  two
fmall  ones  in  Europe,  one  in  North  and  another  in
South  America  ;  and  from  each  of  thefe,  refpectively,
iilue  out,  like  horizontal  fhoots  from  a  ftock,  feveral

long  Ridges  or  Chains  of  Mountains. In  order  to

fee  the  reaibn  of  this  from  Experiments,  and  how  far
it  would  favour  our  prefent  hypothecs,  I  provided  a


large  veiTel  of  Glafs,  had  feveral  holes  of  different
fizes  bored  in  the  fides  about  fix  inches  from  the  bot-
tom, and  flopped  each  with  cork :  I  then  filled  the
veflel  with  water  ;  and  having  pulverized  before-hand
certain  portions  of  the  various  ftrata  of  which  the
earth  confift,  as  Ston<°,  Coal,  Clay,  Chalk,  &c.  I
permitted  thefe  fubftances  to  fubfide  one  after  another
through  the  water, 'till  the  terreftrial  mafs  reached  about
two  inches  above  the  level  of  the  holes :  and  the  whole
fettled  in  regular  layers  one  upon  another,  juft  ac-
cording to  the  difpofition  of  things  in  the  earth.  I
then  (with  the  afliftance  of  another)  pulled  the  corks
out  of  each  hole  as  nearly  at  the  fame  time  as  poflible.
The  water  immediately  began  to  drive  the  earthy  parts
through  the  holes,  and  fcooped  or  tore  the  furtace  of
the  earthy  mafs  in  fuch  a  manner  as  that  the  deepeft
Hollows  were  near  the  Apertures,  /'.  e.  where  the  force
was  greateft,  and  the  feveral  furrows  gradually  Jefs
and  lefs,  towards  the  middle  part  •,  as  the  force  of  the
water  was  proportionably  diminifhed  to  its  diftance
from  the  place  where  its  moft  violent  action  was :  So
that  at  the  greateft  diftance  from  the  apertures,  /'.  e.  in
the  middle  of  the  heap  of  the  terreftrial  mafs  there  were
no  furrows  at  all,  and  that  part  remained  the  higheft
of  all  the  reft,  and  anfwered  to  one  of  the  above-men-
tioned high  plains  upon  the  furface  of  the  earth :  and
from  this  middle-part  there  tended  feveral  ridges,  be-
tween the  furrows  leading  down  towards  the  holes  in
the  vefTel,  juft  in  fuch  form  as  the  chains  of  mountains,
which  take  their  rife  in  or  near  the  middle  of  fome
Continent  upon  the  earth,  and  tend,  like  radii,  from
fome  high  inland  plain  towards  their  refpective  aper-
tures in  the  Seas  next  adjoining.  Befides  •,  the  ftrata
in  the  middle- part  of  the  terreftrial  mafs  remained
immoveable,  ar.d  without  the  leaft  alteration,  but
thole  near  the  apertures  in  the  veffel,  were,  bent  and


[ '7* ]

inclined,  and  in  fome  parts  confufedly  mixt  together,
agreeably  to  the  difpofition  of-  things  in  the  earth,
with  refpeft  to  inland  and  maritime  Eminences,  as  I
have  obferved  already.  Thus  do  the  phe-

nomena, on  the  fuiface  of  the  earth,  with  regard  to
Mountains  and  Hills,  higher  and  lower  lands,  both
upon  iflands,  peninfulas,  promontories,  and  conti-
nents, exactly  anfwer  to,  and  manifeftly  fhew  forth,
the  effects  of  a  Flood  of  Water  which  once  covered
the  whole,  and  gradually  retreated  therefrom.

AND  this  will  be  ilill more  evident  if  we  defcend
to  a  particular  examination  of  the  form, fituation,
and  caufe  of  Combs,  Dales,  Vallies,  &c. It  was  ne-
ceffary  to  fpeak  fomewhat  of  thefe  before,  but  they
deferve  a  feparate  and  clofer  confideration  than  could
hitherto  have  been  conveniently  beftov/ed  upon  them.
A  Comb,  a  Glin,  a  Dingle,  or  a  Gill,  &c. (for  it
paiTes  under  different  names  in  different  parts  of  Eng-
land) is  a  gradually  increafing  or  gently  declining
Hollow  upon  the  furface  of  the  earth  ;  the  fides  regu-
larly doping  down  towards  the  middle  part.  They
are  of  various  fizes  ;  fome  being  not  more  (or  even
lefs)  than 3  or  400  yards  in  length,  50  in  breadth,
and  20  in  depth  at  their  largeft  end  ;  others  there  are
that  are  three or  four  miles  in  length,  a  mile in
breadth,  and  4  or  500  yards  deep  ;  and  others  of  all
intermediate  fizes. They  generally  begin  at  a  ridge
of  mountains  or  hills,  and  tend  down  their  fides  to-
wards the  lower  lands; their  beginnings or  upper
parts  are  very  fmall,  in  fome  places  fcarcely  percep-
tible ;  and  they  gradually  open  or  increafe  to  fome  of
the  above-mentioned  lengths,  breadths,  and  depths.
The  ftrata  in  moil  of  them  are  bare  and  vifible,  if
not  throughout  the  whole  Comb,  yet  in  fome  part  or
other, or  rather  in fever al  parts  \ and  the  broken
ends  or  edges  of  the  rocks  that  project  from  each


[  173  ]

fide  generally  anfwer  each  other  to  a  furprifing  exacr.-
nefs  ;  and  near  the  beginning  or  in  the  upper  parts  of
the  Comb  they  almoft  touch  and  meet  each  other,
and  at  the  very  beginning  are  united ;  and  fo  leave
no  doubt  to  conclude  but  that  the  ftrata  were  once  in
contact  or  continued  in  parallel  lines  from  fide  to  fide
throughout  the  whole  Comb/  And  this  mutual  agree-
ment between  the  ftrata  on  each  fide  of  Combs  evi-
dently mews,  that  thefe  and  fuch  like  Cavities  were
caufed  by  fome  outward  Agent  that  acted  upon  the
furface  of  the  earth,  and  which  by  tearing  off  and
carrying  away  the  interjacent  ftrata,  left  thefe  Hol-
lows, and  were  not  owing  to  any  inward  difruption,
or  a  force  from  beneath :  for,  had  this  latter  been
the  cafe,  it  could  not  be  but  that  the  ftrata  on  one
fide  or  other  of  Combs  would  always  appear  elevated
or  deprefTed,  or  fome  way  or  other  altered.  And  k
is  further  demonftrable  that  Combs  and  Gills  were
not  owing  to  any  inward  difruptions,  fmce  it  is  com-
mon to  obferve  in  fuch  of  them  as  have  rapid  rivers
or  ftrong  currents  of  water  runing  through  them,

y  Sometimes  indeed  the  ftrata  on  one  fide  of  a  Comb  are  different
both  in  kind  and  fituation  from  thofe  on  the  other ;  but  then  the
reafon  is  evident  upon,  the  fpot ;  as,  firft,  either  the  Comb  was
formed  in  a  place  where  the  ends  of  different  llrata  met,  or  in  a  deep
fUTure,  or  two  or  three  Combs  happened  to  be  formed  near  together,
and  by  the  fide  of  each  other,  and  then  the  Agent  that  tore  the
largeft  has  fhelved  off  or  inclined  the  ftrata  of  the  larger  to-
wards the  lefler,  there  being  no  ftrata  on  the  back-part  (on  account
of  the  cavity  of  the  letter  Comb)  to  fupport  it ;  or  fome  fuch  accident
or  other  has  made  a  difference,  which  will  be  at  once  manifeft  to  a.
judicious  fpeftator.  And  thefe  accidents  generally  happen  in  hilly
countries  or  fuch  as  are  near  the  lea,  where  the  water  of  the  deluge,
in  its  retreat  from  the  furface  of  the  earth,  defcended  with  violence
and  acted  with  great  fotce ;  whereas  higher  up  in  the  inland  countries
or  near  the  mountains  the  Combs  and  Gills  are  generally  very  regular
and  exact,  and  the  broken  edges  of  the  Urata  on  each  fide  tally  aad
correfpond  to  the  uttnoft  nicety.


[  '74]

that  the  ftrata  at  their  bottoms  are  whole  and  entire,
and  lie  parallel  with  thofe  above ;  nay,  when  miners
have  occafion,  in  tracing  or  purfuing  a  vein  of
ore,  to  dig  under  Combs  they  find  the  ftrata  be-
neath, as  regularly  placed  and  in  the  fame  direction
as  thofe  above,  and  where  they  are  horizontal  above
they  are  horizontal  below;  which  affords  an  undeni-
able argument  that  Combs  were  not  formed  by  any
Force  from  beneath,  but  by  the  operation  of  fome  out-
ward Caufe.  And  when  we  confider  the  general  regu-
larity, fmoothneis,  gently  Hoping  fides,  and  the  gradu-
ally increafing  length,  breadth  and  depth  of  Combs  or
Gills,  we  can  attribute  the  Caufe  of  their  formation  to
no  other  Agent  than  Water,  that  formerly  covered  the
tops  and  ridges  of  the  Mountains  and  Hills  where  thefe
doping  Hollows  are  now  found,  and  which  by  dele-end-
ing from  thence,  gradually  tore  and  furrowed  the  earth
into  fo  many  afoei  or  channels,  juft  in  the  fame
manner  as  water,  falling  in  a  ludden  and  great  thun-
der-mower, and  retreating  from  the  hills  above  to-
wards the  fea  or  any  great  river,  tears  and  wears
channels  in  the  ouze  or  mud  upon  the  more.  Ano-
ther mark, — that  Gills  and  Combs  were  formed  by
currents  of  water — is  the  ferpentine  lhape  or  winding
courfe  of  fuch  as  are  long  and  large,  and  the  apparent
caufes  of  fuch  deflexions  or  curvatures.  For  water
defcending  from  the  mountain-tops  would  of  courfe
be  diverted  from  a  rectilineal  motion  (efpecially  if  it
ran  for  any  confiderable  length ,  by  reafon  of  the  dif-
ferent ftrata,  or  different  conftitution  of  the  fame  ftra-
ta, it  acted  upon ;  fome  parts  being  hard,  others  fofr
fome  having  but  few,  others  many  and  large  crack
&c.  and  according  to  the  different  circumilances
thefe  accidents  the  courfe  of  the  water  would  be  varic
and  the  ftream  occafionally  diverted  from  the  pa
that  refilled  moft  towards  thofe  that  refilled  lefs  :  r


[ '75  J

on  the  fame  account,  there  would  be  many  and  va-
rious dreams  rulhing  down  the  fides  of  the  fame  moun-
tain, and  as  thefe  would  be  irregular  and  winding,
two  or  more  would  frequently  unite,  particularly  the
Jeffer  fall  in  with  and  join  the  larger  ;  and  of  this  there
are  manifeft  marks  and  the  effects  now  remaining ;
for  it  is  common  to  oblerve  at  fuch  places  where  a
long  and  large  Comb  begins  to  turn  off,  that  there  is
a  furrow  or  channel  now  vifible  upon  the  furface  of
the  earth,  and  the  Comb  is  deflected  from  its  former
courfe  according  to  the  angle  in  which  this  furrov;
meets  it  (allowing  for  the  fize  of  the  furrow)  and  alfo
is  proportionably  broader  and  deeper  according  to  the
fize  of  this  concurring  channel  j  manifeftly  fhewing,
that  where  the  dream  that  formed  this  lefier  furrow
met  the  larger,  that  there  the  deflexion  would  natu-
rally begin,  the  Comb  be  turned  off,  and  enlarged,
in  proportion  to  the  additional  force  of  the  Current
that  formed  this  lefTcr  channel.  Many  fuch  obler-
vations  as  thefe  might  be  made,  if  we  were  to  confider
particularly  and  minutely  the  form  and  fituation  of  the
mountain  or  hill  in  which  the  Comb  lies,  the  condi-
tution  and  pofition  of  the  drata  within,  the  courfe  of
the  fiffures,  the  lhape  of  the  valley  beneath,  the  dif-
tance  of  the  ft-a,  or  any  great  lake,  &c.  from  each
and  all  of  which  many  and  different  proofs  might  be
drawn,  plainly  indicating,  that  Combs  were  formed
by  currents  of  water  •,  but  thefe  are  eafier  to  be  feen  and
difcovered  by  a  fpectator  than  to  be  defcribed  to  a
reader;  and  they  will  be  very  evident  to  any  one  that  has
had  but  the  hint  given  him  that  Combs  and  Gills  were
channels  tore  in  the  e.arth  by  the  defcent  of  water  from
the  upper  lands.  And  what  has  been  laid

above  in  relation  to  Gills  may  in  a  great  meafure  be
applied  to  Dales  \  which  begin  at  the  end  of  two  or
more  Gills,  and  gradually  increafe  in  length,  breadth,
and  depth,  in  proportion  to  the  number  and  lize  of


[  i76]

the  Gills  that  lead  into  them  ;  juft  in  the  fame
ner,  and  as  evidently  by  the  fame  means,  as  the
larger  Combs  were  increaied  and  opened  by  the  flreams
of  water  that  tore  the  lefler  channels  that  enter  into
them.  As  the  Dales  fall  off  from  the  moun-

tains, and  meet  or  unite  at  a  greater  or  lefs  diflance,
a  ftill  larger  Hollow  prefents  itfelf ;  which  gradually
opens  and  dilates  as  the  former-,  and  conftitutes
what  we  call  a  Valley  -,  of  greater  or  lefs  extent  and
dimenfion  according  to  the  number  and  fize  of  the
Gills  and  Dales  thatdefcend  into  it.  At  laft,

at  a  great  diftance  from  the  mountains,  two  or  more
vallies  unite,  and  open  into  a  wide  extenfive  low-land
Plain,  or  rather,  a  gently  declining  country  •,  which  ad-
joins to  the  Sea-Jbore;  the  bottom  of  which  (efpecially
if  it  is  of  a  foft  yielding  nature,  not  rocky  and  ftoney)
is-  of  a  fimilar  form,  continues  the  fame  declivity,  or
gradually  grows  deeper  and  deeper  'till  it  ends  in  an
unfathomable  Abyfs.  And  thus  does  the

Whole  clearly  point  out  the  effedls  of  a  Flood  of  wa-
ter that  formerly  covered  the  mountain-tops,  and
retreated  therefrom  down  to,  and  even  beyond,  the
very  depth  of  the  Ocean  ;  forming  (in  its  paflage  from
the  furface  of  the  earth  to  the  center)  high  up,  where
its  force  was  weakerr,  the  lefler  channels  or  Gills  and
Combs  •,  and  where  feveral  flreams  united,  the  Dales  -,
and  where  the  currents,  that  made  the  dales,  met  and
joined  their  forces,  hollowing  out  the  Vallies  \  and
were  the  torrents  that  fcooped  out  vallies  opened  and
expanded  themfelves,  there  forming  the  wide  low-land
Plains,  gradually  declining  Sea-Jhore,  and  the  Jloping
bofom  of  the  Ocean.

HAVING  thus,  fafely  and  truly,  I  hope,  conveyed
the  reader  from  the  tops  of  the  highefl  Mountains
down  to  the  bottom  of  the  deeped  Seas,  we  will  now
take  a  review  of  the  paths  we  have  trod,  and  draw
ibme  fuitable  conclusions  from  the  whole.  And


[  '77  ]

:  l .  FROM  what  has  been  faid,  we  may  fee  the  error  of
his  Lordihip's  opinion  concerning  the  origin  of  moun-
tains, p.  88,  viz.  c  That  when  the  Fountains  of  the
'  great  Abyfs  were  broken  up,  and  an  immenfe  Hollow
6  was  excavated  out  of  the  earth  from  pole  to  pole,  as
4  a  bed  for  the  fea  to  lie  in  •,  when  the  rocks,  and  the
4  fands,  and  the  fhells,  and  the  earth,  that  were  taken
4  thereout,  were  thrown  upon  the  land,  and  raifed  in
4  Mountain  upon  Mountain,  fo  as  to  afiail  the  fkies
'  and  invade  the  region  of  the  clouds ;  when  Promon-

*  tories,  and  Capes,  and  Head-lands  ftarted  up  in  an
4  irregular  order,  &c ;  or  as  it  is  elfewhere  defcribed
4  p.  118.  '  At  the  time  of  the  breaking  up  the  foun-
4  tains  of  the  Abyfs,  a  great  part  of  the  materials,
e  which  were  fcooped  out  Of  the  earth,  as  well  as  thofe

*  which  then  lay  on  the  furface  of  the  fand  and  of  the

*  more, would  be  loofe,  feparate  and  divided, and
4  would  float  irregularly  in  that  confufion  of  Elements,

*  which  fuch  a  wonderful  operation  muft  have  bccafi-
4  oned,  not  Only  when  Ihowered  down  in  cataracts
4  from  on  high,  but  alfo,  when  conveyed  by  the  force

*  of  the  waters  of  the  Sea,  which  gufhed  forth,  as  out
4  of  a  womb  to  the  place  deftined  for  their  abode ;
4  where  this  heterogeneous  mafs  would  fubfide, and
4  form  itfelf  into  fuch'  Hills  and  Mountains,  of  fuch  a
4  mixed  kind  of  materials,  as  we  now  find  them  to  be,

*  according  to  the  wife  defignation  of  the  great  Author
4  of  Nature.' Such  was  the  Manner,  fuch  the  Means,
according  to  his  Lp.  by  which  Mountains  and  Hills
were  produced. From  whence  it  ftlould  follow,  that
Mountains  and  Hills  are  no  more  than  huge  heaps  of
Rubbijh,  thrown  out  of  the  Sea, of  the  place  where
the  fea  now  is,  by  the  omnipotent  Hand  of  GOD  ; —
as  his  Lp.  more  clearly  afferts,  p.  108,  and  115:  But
this  referring  to  the  firft  Caufe,  when  the  operation

N


[  '78]

was  manifeftly  performed  by  fecond  Caufes,  is  boldly
cutting  the  Gordian  knot,  which  we  cannot  fairly  un-
tie, and  {hews  neither  the  Philofopher  nor  the  Divine
in  this  cafe-,  for  both  the  Word  of  GOD,  and  the  whole
face  of  the  earth,  declare  the  contrary,  as  I  have  already
Ihewed  at  large,  and  fh all  conclude  this  fection  with
the  Teftimony  of  another  Author,  againft  this  opi-
nion, '  We  are  to  confider  that  a  great  many  Moun-

*  tains  of  the  Earth  are  far  diftant  from  any  feas,  as

*  the  great  iii-land  Mountains  of  Afia  and  of  Africk,
4  and  the  Sarmathk  Mountains  and  others  in  Europe \
4  how  were  thefe  great  bodies  flung  thorough  the  air
4  from  their  refpe&ive  feas,  whence  they  are  taken,
'  to  thofe  places  were  they  ftand?  what  appearance  is
4  there  in  common  reafon  or  credibility, that  thefe
4  huge  mafies  of  earth  and  flone  that  ftand  in  the  mid-

*  die  of  continents, were  dug  out  of  any  feas  ?  we
c  think  it  ftrange,  and  very  defervedly,  that  a  little
4  chapel  mould  be  tranfported  from  Pale/tine  to  Italy
4  over  land  and  fea,  much  more  the  tranfportation  of
4  Mount  Atlas  or  Taurus  thorough  the  air,  or  of  a
4  range  of  mountains  two  or  three  thoufand  miles  long,
4  would  furely  upon  all  accounts  appear  incongruous
4  and  incredible :  befides,  neither  the  hollow  form  of
4  mountains,  nor  the  flony  matter  whereof  they  com-
e  monly  confift,  agrees  with  that  fuppofition,  that  they
4  were  prefs'd  or  taken  out  of  the  channel  of  the  fea.

* Then  too,  we  are  to  confider,  that  the  moun-

4  tains  are  not  barely  laid  upon  the  earth,  as  a  tomb-
4  ftone  upon  a  grave,  nor  ftand  as  ftatues  do  upon  a
4  pedeftal,  as  this  opinion  feems  to  fuppofe-,  but  they
4  are  one  continued  fubftance  with  the  body  of  the
4  earth,  and  their  roots  reach  into  the  abyfs ;  as  the
4  rocks  by  the  fea-fide  go  as  deep  as  the  bottom  of  the
4  fea  in  one  continued  mafs : and  'tis  a  ridiculous


6  thing  to  imagine  the  earth  firft  a  plain  furface,  then
6  all  the  mountains  fet  upon  it,  as  hay-cocks  in  a

*  Field,  {landing  upon  their  flat  bottoms. There  is

*  no  fuch  common  lirface,  in  nature,  nor  confequently

*  any  fucli  fuper-additions:  'tis  all  one  frame  or  mafs,
4  only  broken  and  disjointed  in  the  parts  of  it.

.  2.  FROM  the  above  defcription  of  things  appears
alfo  the  abfurdi:y  of  the  opinion,  that  is  at  prefent  fo
much  in  vogue  in  France,,  concerning  the  origin  of
Mountain's,2  viz. — That  Mountains  are  only  Heaps
of  Sand  and  Mud,  formed  by  the  agitation  of  the
waters  of  the  fea,  which  were  chiefly  put  into  motion
by  the  flux  and  reflux  of  its  waves  in  tides,  or  fome
ftrong  currents  that  met  and  oppofed  each  other,
during  the  time  when  the  whole  furface  of  the  earth
was  covered  with  water  (for  the  maintainers  of  this
fyftem  allow  that  it  has  been  thus  covered).  The
Sand  and  Mud  having  been  thus  collected  and  heaped
up  together,  and  the  water  fubfiding  and  finking  to
occupy  the  cavities  at  the  bottom  of  the  fea  from
whence  the  fand  and  mud  were  excavated,  the  dry-
land by  this  means  and  mountains  were  raifed  upon

the  whole  furface  of  the  earth. But  lurely  the

Authors  of  this  hypothecs  could  never  have  obferved
the  effects  of  the  Agent,  which  they  fuppofe  to  have
been  the  Former  of  mountains,  during  any  violent
agitation  of  the  fea,  nor  have  obferved  the  inward
Conftitution,  or  outward  Form  of  Mountains.  For
with  regard  to  the  firft  of  thefe  articles,  as  his  Lp.
juitly  remarks  (in  his  Anfwer  to  this  Syftem  of  the
origin  of  Mountains,  p.  1 1.)  *  The  Sea,  in  itsgreatefl
4  agitations,  always  levels  every  thing  in  its  power,
'  inftead  of  raifmg  it  into  Hills  and  Vallies.  And  if

z  Sec  MefTrs.  Le  Cat's,  Baffin's,  DC  Mailht'st  £c.  writings.

N 2


[  i8o]

c  thefe  Authors will  but  make  the  experiment, of

*  raifing  a  Mound  within  the  reach  of  the  Tides,  and

*  let  but  a  fmgle  Spring-tide  get  above  their  works,  I
'  believe,  inftead  of  finding  their  Mound  increafed  into

*  a  Mountain,  they  will  find  their  Mountain  reduced

*  into  a  Mole-hill, if  not  entirely  carried  off  and

*  levelled  with  the  bottom  of  the  Sea.'  And,  in
oppofition  both  to  his  Lp's.  Syftem  and  that  of  thefe
Authors,  it  muft  be  remarked,  that  the  inward Jlrufture
of  Mountains  undeniably  difproves  each  of  their  opi-
nions.  For,  mountains  confift  of  regular  ftrata  or  beds,
(whether  of  ftone,  coal,  clay,  &c.)  orderly  pofited
upon  each  other,  and  in  an  horizontal  direction;  and
befides,  each  refpective  ftratum  is  of  equal  thicknefs
throughout,  though  they  continue  for  feveral  miles  in
extent;— all  which  clearly  demonftrates  that  the  whole
fettled  in  a  regular  and  fuccefiive  order,  during  a
quiet  and  calm  fea,  or  without  the  lead  perturbation
of  the  water  it  fubfided  in. And  fince  thole  parts,
that  now  remain  ,and  are  vifible,  of  the  Mafs  that
thus  fettled,  viz.  the  Mountains  and  their  tops,  ftill
retain  their  firft  and  horizontal  direction,  it  is  evident
that  they  have  not  been  difplaced  or  their  pofition
altered;  and  alfo  that  they  have  not  received  any  new
or  frefti  Matter  to  cover  them  (except  the  vegetable
mould  and  a  few  feet  of  loofe  ftones  and  fludge;  of
which  hereafter) ;  neither  were  they  formed  by  occa-
fional  or  fucceffive  additions  of  Sand  and  Mud  or
heaps  of  Rubbifh,  for  had  this been  the  cafe,  there
would  have  been  no  regular  ftrata  or  layers  of  ftone,
coal,  clay,  &c.  or  if  there  had  beenfuch,  they  would
have  been  inclined  on  all  fides  or  Ihaped  according  to
the  outward  form  ot  the  mountain,  and  have  covered
thefe  conical  or  prifmatical  Eminences  like  fo  many
caps  or  arches  laid  one  upon  another;  neither  could


f  '8,  ]

the  layers  have  been  of  the  fame  thicknefs  throughout
even  in  a  fingle  Mountain (much  lefs  in  hundreds  or
thoufands)  but  would  have  been  much  thicker  at  bot-
tom than  at  top ;  at  lead  thofe  layers  that  fettled  laft
mufl  have  been  formed  thus;  for  when  the  Mountain
had  attained  to  any  confiderable  fize,  and  a  new  layer
or  fediment  of  loofe  matter  fubfided  on  it,  the  far
greater  quantity  would  (all  down  on  each  fide,  and
fettle  molt  at  and  round  the  bottom,  with  thin  edges
towards  or  near  the  top;  which  is  a  form  that,  I  believe,
no  mountain  upon  earth  has. But  what  further
fhews, that  Mountains  are  not  Heaps  of  Rubbim
thrown  out  of  the  fea,  or  quantities  of  Sand  and  Mud
confufedly  coacervated,  is,  the  general  uniformity  of
their  fhapes,  their  regularly  doping  fides,  the  man-
ner in  which  Chains  or  Ridges  of  Mountains  are  con-
tinued, being  extended  length  ways  upon  fuch  iflands
and  peninfulas  as  are  longer  then  they  are  broad;  and
fhooting  oiit,  like  branches  from  a  flock,  from  high
extenfive  Plains  upon  the  larger  Continents  of  the
«arth:  and  then  the  Gills  gradually  falling  off  from
the  mountain- tops,  and  meeting  the  Dales  down  their
fides,  the  Dales  uniting  with  the  Vallies,  andtheVal-
lies  opening  into  extenfive  declining  Countries,  and
thefe  adjoining  to  the  IhelvingBed  of  the  Ocean, — all
manifestly  mew,  that  the  Agent  that  formed  moun-
tains did  not  acY  from  the  Sea  upward,  or  towards  the
inland  countries,  and  amafled  together  large  heaps  of
fand  and  earth,  but  defcended  from  the  mountain-tops,
or  the  moft  inland  parts  of  the  earth,  and  furrowed  or
made  its  way  down  towards  the  very  bottom  of  the
Ocean,  carrying  before  it  almoft  every  thing  that  was
moveable  or  oppofed  its  paffage.

3.  FROM  the  above-mentioned  uniformity  in  the
fhape and  courfe  of  Mountains, and  the  apparent
N  3


[ 182 ]

cajufe  thereof;  and  from  the  regular  manner  in  which
Gills,  Dales,  and  Vallies  defcend  from  the  mountains
and  run  into  each  other,  gradually  declining  towards
the  Sea,  it  is  alfo  evident  that  Mountains  were  not
owing  either  to  any  irregular  Elevation  or  Depreffiori
of  the  ftrata  of  the  earth :  for  had  either  of  thefe  been
the  Caufe,  this  regularity  could  never  have  been  pre-
ferved  and  been  vifible  over  the  whole  face  of  the  earth.
So  that  neither  Dr.  Burners,  nor  Dr.  Woodward's  and
Mr.  fflbifton's  Syftem  of  the  origin  of  Mountains  is  true
or  confident  with  the  face  of  Nature ;  the  firft  of  whom
fuppofes  them  owing  to  a  fudden  depreflion  or  finking
in  of  the  ftrata  of  the  earth,  a.nd  the  other  two,  to  as
fudden  and  violent  a  Depreflion  of  fome  of  the  ftrata
and  Elevation  of  others;  for,'  upon  either  of  thefe
fchemes,  the  Eartn  muft  have  exhibited  the  moft  ghaftly
appearances  of  Rocks  and  Precipices,  and  the  whole
form  of  it  would  have  refembled  the  ruins  of  a  defolated
edifice,  that  had  been  thrown  down  by  a  Tempeft,  or
blown  up  by  a  fubterranean  explofion :  fo  that  there
would  have  been  no  traces  of  the  operation  of  a  Fluid
Agent  that  dt-fcended  from  the  mountain-tops  and  gra-
dually tore  its  way  quite  down  to  the  Sea,  and  fo
formed  the  regularly-Doping  fides  of  Mountains,  the
cafy  and  natural  Cadence  and  Connexion  of  Gills  with
D.alcs,  Dales  with  Valiies,  &c.  And

4.  THIS  fame  regularity  and  uniformity  in  the  rifings
and  fallings  of  the  higher  and  lower  lands,  and  their
mutual  dependences  on  and  inclinations  with  each
other,  remaining  the  fame  at  this  day  in  all  countries,
manifeftly  (hews,  that  there  have  been  no  Mountains
or  Hills,  Dales  or  Vallies  made  fmce  the  Deluge  or  the
Inundation  that  caufed  the  prefent;  and  therefore  that
Mountains  are  not  continually  a- forming,  as  fome  of  the
modern  French  philofophefs  afiert;  neither  were  they


occafionally  thrown  up  by  earthquakes  or  fubterranean
eruptions  as  fome  of  the  old  philofophers  imagined:
indeed  earthquakes  and  fuch  like  explofions,  inftcad
of  railing  new  mountains,  rather  tend  to  throw  down
the  old,  by  fhaking  and  diflocating  the  land,  where
the  violence  of  the  concufllon  prevails,  and  finking  it
beneath  the  Ocean  or  into  the  Abyfs-,  and  befides
earthquakes  generally  happen  near  the  fea,  and  affect
not  inland  eminences  or  Mountains.

5.  NEITHER  could  the  channels  of  Gills,  Dales,
and  Vallies  have  proceeded  from  Contractions  or  la-
teral fhrinking  of  the  ftrata  of  the  earth  (and  fo  the
parts  of  the  earth  above,  or  on  each  fide  of  thefe
cracks,  be  left  eminent  or  in  the  form  of  mountains)
in  the  fame  manner  and  by  the  fame  means  as  Chaps
or  Cracks  are  made  in  the  mud  and  ouze  upon  the
fea-fhore  by  the  heat  of  the  fun-beams  and  action  of  the
wind,  according  to  the  opinion  of  fome  of  the  An-
cients. But  had  this  been  the  cafe,  as  the  tops  of  the
mountains  were  dry  fooneft  and  mofb  expofed  to  the
influence  of  thefe  two  agents,  the  Combs  and  Dales
would  have  been  deepctt  near  the  fummits  of  hills  and
mountains,  and  gradually  have  leifened  or  been  fhal-
lower  and  mal  lower  as  they  proceeded  down  the  fides,
and  terminated  in  a  point  at  the  bottom  of  mountains  ;
but  the  direct  contrary  to  this  is  their  form  :  therefore
This  could  not  have  been  the  Caufe,  Befides  \
fuch  Contractions  as  thefe  could  never  have  made
Eminences,  nor  would  there  have  been  any  difference
between  Mountains  and  Hills,  neither  would  the  in-
land parts  of  Continents  and  large  iflands  have  been
the  higheft,  as  I  have  plainly  fliewed  they  are ;  for
when  the  mud  upon  the  fea-fhore  or  when  the  ground
in  large  flat  and  low  marmes  is  dried  and  cracked  in
-the  fummer-time,  the  parts  or  pieces  of  land  between
N  4


jthe  cracks  are  equally  high,  and  the  whole  fur&ce.
level.  Though  indeed  thus  much  may  be  faid  for
this  opinion,  that  the  Cracks  and  Fiffures  that  were
made  in  the  fhell  of  the  earth  (after  it  had  fettled,  fa-
turated  with  water,  and  the  Expanfe  from  above  and
from  below  had  compreffed  and  hardened,  and  fo
contracted  the  ftrata  in  fome  places,  and  thereby  left
gaps  andfj/ures  in  others8)  gave  room  for  the  water
that  covered  the  earth  during  the  deluge  to  defcend
through  into  the  Abyfs ;  and  fuch  as  ferved  for  this
purpoie  directed,  in  fome  meafure,  or  were  the  caufe
of  the  direction  of,  the  courfes  of  the  Vallies,  Dales
and  Combs-,  but  they  neither  did,  nor  could  have
formed  them  for  the  reafons  above  given  :  befides,
thefe  Cracks  are  feldom  above  eight  or  ten  feet  broad
(and  generally  much  lefs)  and  feveral  vallies  are  as
many  mites  in  breadth,  and  exceed  them  as  much  in
length  as  they  do  in  breadth  -,  and  what  is  more  re-


a  Or,  to  give  an  account  of  this  Effedt  in  the  words  of  a  modern
writer,  «  firft  then  thefe  Fiffures  are  no  more,  as  they  feem  to  me,

*  than  the  neceffary  confequences  of  the  firft  fettlement  of  matter,
'  when  it  was  divided  into  wet  and  dry,  folid  and  fluid. That  we

*  may  the  more  clearly  apprehend  this,  let  us  recolleft  what  happens

*  to  finall  maffes  of  matter,  cloven  by  like  failures,  whence  we  may
'  infer  what  is  probably  the  caufe  of  thofe  greater  cliffs  which  we  are

*  now  infearch'of. We  all  know  that  flime,  diluted  clay,  andpul-

*  verized  or  diiTolved  done,  mall  occupy  more  fpace  in  that  ftate  of
'  moifture  than  when  the  fame  clay,  (lime,  or  ftone,  becomes  dry  and
'  hard;  and,  from  a  parity  of  reafon  we  may  argue,  that  when  folids

*  and  fluids  formed,  and  from  a  ftate  of  chaos  became  divided  into,

*  diftinft  bodies,  the  parts  of  the  former,  being  defeated  by  the  latter,

*  nuift  needs  grow  cloier  together,  and  confequently  leave  chafms  and
«  crevices  betwixt  them. But  the  maffes  of  earth,  ttone,  and  clay,
'  were  not  at  this  time  meerly  paffive;  they  formed  larger  and  more
'  compact  bodies  every  where,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  and
'  mutual  attraction  of  their  fimilar  parts, within  proper  diftance.
^  Hence  arofe  firmer  combinations,  and  confequently  greater  open-


[  1*5]

markable,  the  Cracks  and  Veins  of  ore  in  many  places
run  directly  acrofs  the  rallies,  and  yet  the  vallies  con-
tinue on  in  their  ufual  courfes  ;  which  plainly  {hews
that  they  were  neither  formed,  nor  even  altered,  by
thefe  cracks.  But,  in  fhort,  the  fea-fhore  itfelf
(from  whence  the  above  hypothecs  is  brought)  affords
a  manifeft  difference  between  the  Cracks  made  by
fhrinking  and  the  regularly-increafing  Channels  of
Combs,  Dales,  and  Vallies  ;  for  upon  the  fea-fhore
or  the  banks  of  a  large  river,  efpecially  where  there  is
any  quantity  or  depth  of  mud  and  ouze,  the  chinks
caufed  by  the  action  of  the  Sun-beams  and  Wind  are
nearly  throughout  of  the  fame  fize,  meet  and  interfect
each  other  at  almoft  all  angles,  chiefly  at  right,
and  fo  divide  the  parcels  of  ground  or  mud  between
into  fquares,  pentagons,  or  fome  fuch  figure,  but
never,  or  fcarcely  ever,  into  long  ridges  like  the
chains  of  mountains.  And  what  is  further  obfervable
in  the  fame  place,  the  Channels  or  Gulleys  tore  in  the


«  ings  between  fuch  maffes.  Farther,  it  muflbe  obferved,  that  as  all
«  fimilar  particles  ftruggkd  to  come  into  contact  with  each  other,  fo,
'  at  the  fame  time,  they  deferted,  and  repelled,  and  expreffed  all

*  diflimilar  and  contending  particles ;  confequently  maffes  of  differently
'  natured  particles  feceded  and  fled  from  each  other,  every  party  (if
'  I  may  ufe  the  expreffion)  tending  to  form  and  flick  clofe  to  its  like :
«  betwixt  fuch  different  fubftances  therefore,  attracted  here,  and  there
'  repelled,  fome  chink  or  interval  mult  needs  happen. Thefe  caufes

*  then,  viz :  the  defertion  of  moifture,  the  union  of  fimilar  and  the
«  mutual  repulie  of  difimilar  particles,  muft  all  have  contributed  to
'  form  the  maffes  of  our  terraqueous  globe  into  fuch  feparate  portions
'  as  we  now  find  them  in ;  for  that  indeed  it  was  not  poflible  for

*  bodies  to  grow  hard  and  dry,  unite  and  contract,  without  leaving
'  fome  chafms  and  fiffures  between  them.  What  enfued  upon  the  hard-

*  ening  of  particular  and  fmaller  maffes,  enfued  alfo  in  the  larger  pcr-
'  tions  of  the  whole  earth,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  fojids
«  united  at  any  one  effort,  whether  a  grain,  zftratum,  a  county,  or
«  a  region:\


mud  by  the  retreat  of  the  fea-water  in  ebbing,  or  by  the
defcent  of  land-floods,  do  really  leave  the  interjacent
land  in  prominent  ridges  juft  like  Thole  of  Mountains ;
and  thofe  gulleys  or  little  furrows  gradually  increafe  in
length,  breadth,  and  depth,  as  they  unite  and  fall  in
with  each  'other,  juft  in  the  fame  manner  as  Gills,
Dales  and  Vallies  do ;  which  manifefliy  fhews,  that
both  kinds  were  formed  by  currents  of  defcending
water.

6.  SINCE  there  are  Mountains  and  Hills,  Combs,
Dales,  and  Vallies  upon  the  whole  fur  face  of  the  earth,
and  thefe  were  caufed  by  the  retreat  of  Water  from  the
furface,  it  is  certain,  that  the  Deluge  that  formed  them
was  univerfal:  And  I  have  already  proved  that  there
never  was  but  one  univerfal  Flood,  which  was  That
recorded  by  Mcfes.

7.  SINCE  Gills,  Dales  and  Vallies,  fall  away  from
the  Mountain-tops,  and  tend  in  their  courfes  down  to-
wards the  neighbouring  feas,  and  are  united  to  the
fhelving  Bed  of  the  Ocean,  nay,  fince  fome  of  the
chains  of  Mountains  are  continued  under  the  lea  and
appear  again  on  the  oppofite  land,  or,  what  is  more,
fmce  there  are  Mountains  and  Hills,  Dales  and  Vallies,
even  entirely  under  the  fea,b  it  is  evident,  that  the
water  that  formed  them,  defcended  not  only  down
towards  the  fea,  but  even  beyond  it,  into  fome  great
Cavity  in  the  infide  of  the  earth  ;  for  had  it  reached
no  farther  than  the  prefent  furface,  or  even  any  con-
fiderable  way  into  the  bed,  of  the  Ocean,  its  waves
muft  have  been  reverberated  or  returned  upon  them-
felves,  and  fo  would  foon  have  loft  all  their  force  :
but  fmce  this  force  continued  and  cut  and  tore  the

*  KIRCHER'S  Mundiu  Subterraneus  p.  69,  ^6,  &c.  MARSILLI  dt
la  Mcr.-p.  3—12.


earth  under  the  fea  to  unfathomable  depths,  we  may
juftly  fuppofe  that  the  water  defcended  far  beyond,
entered  into,  and  filled  up,  a  large  Concavity  within
the  earth,  and  fo  conftituted  what  Mofes  calls  the
ABYSS.

8.  SINCE  the  Water  that  fcooped  out  the  hollows  of
Combs,  Dales,  and  Vallies  defcended  into  the  Abyfs,
it  muft  ofcourfe  have  carried  with  it  all  that  quantity
of  the  earth  which  it  tore  away  for  making  thefe  hol-
lows; and  as  it  defcended  from  every  part  of  the
earth's  furface  down  towards  the  centre,  it  would  at
lad  repofit  and  fettle  the  whole  there,  in  form  of  a
Central  or  inner  globe  or  nucleus  of  terreftrial  matter,
furrounded  on  all  fides  by  the  water  of  the  Abyfs.
To  which,  or  to  a  fimilar  kind  of  nucleus,  moveable
in  a  fluid  medium,  Dr.  Halley  afcribes  the  Caufe  of  the
variation  of  the  magnetic  needle^  and  to  which  not  only
This,  but  many  other  and  far  greater  effecls,  both  in
and  on  the  earth,  are  to  be  attributed.  And

q.  WHEN  we  confider  the  great  length,  breadth
and  depth  of  the  larger  Vallies  upon  the  earth,  the
multitude  of  the  leffer,  together  with  the  numerous
Combs  and  Dales  that  lead  into  them, — the  Height
of  the  Mountains  and  inland  Eminences  above  the*
lowland,  their  diftance  from  the  Sea,  or  rather,  from
the  correfponding  Chain  of  Mountains  on  theoppoiite
Continent, — the  vaft  Bed  of  the  Ocean,  the  cavities
pf  all  the  Lakes,  Rivers,  &c.  I  fay,  when  we  confider
all  this,  and  reflect,  that  all  thefe  Hollows  were  once
filled  up,  with  the  folid  ftrata  or  fubftance  of  the  earth,
from  the  top  of  one  ridge  of  Mountains  to  the  oppo-
fite,  and  from  that  to  the  next  beyond,  and  fo  on
quite  round  the  globe,  (which  therefore  was  once  en-

,e  Pbibf.Tranf.W.  148,  195.-


[  '88  ]

tirely  fpherical,  and  without  any  inequalities,  or  the
lead  rifing  and  falling,  of  hill  or  dale)  -9  and  that  all
this  fubftance  was  fcooped  or  hollowed  out  and  car-
ried down  into  the  Abyfs,  we  may  fuppole  the  central
nucleus  to  be  of  fome  confiderable  bulk  or  fize.  But
the  Agent  that  did  all  this,  the  Water  that  thus  tore  and
fwept  away  the  folid  rocks,  and  left  fuch  deep  and  wide
marks  of  its  power,  muft  be  great  in  quantity  beyond
conception,  far  exceeding  what  might  be  fufficient
barely  to  fill  all  thefe  Hollows,  for  it  muft  have  pafled
over  and  through  the  folid  rocks,  where  thefe  Hol-
lows are,  many  times  before  it  could  have  made  fuch
gradually  worn  channels  and  have  opened  fuch  exten-
five  breaches;  and  therefore  be  far  fuperior  in  quan-
tity to  the  bulk  of  the  whole  Ocean  itfelf  and  all  the
water  that  fills  every  other  Cavity  upon  the  earth ;  for
all  thefe  Cavities  were  made  by  the  repeated aftions  of
this  defcending  Flood.  And  fmce  the  Tendency  of
thele  Hollows  and  Channels  plainly  fhews,  that  the
Water  that  tore  them  defcended  down  towards  the
Ocean  or  the  feveral  Seas  upon  the  earth,  and  fince
the  water  in  them  is  not  fumcient  in  quantity  to  have
effected  all  this,  there  muft  be  (from  a  consideration
alone  of  the  quantity  of  Water  neceflary  to  caufe  thefe
effects)  a  large  Refervoir  or  an  Abyfs  of  Water  be-
neath the  earth;  which,  during  thefe  Tranfaclions,
muft  have  been  elevated  far  above  all  the  higheft
Mountains  or  Eminences  upon  the  whole  furface  of
the  earth-,  and  therefore  the  Deluge  at  that  time  uni-
verfal,  and  caufed  not  barely  by  an  effufion  of  the
waters  of  the  Ocean,  but  principally  by  thofe  of  the
y  according  to  the  defcription  given  by  Mofes.


[  '89  ]

II.  ANOTHER  general  argument  (including,  like
the  former,  feveral  particular  ones,  and  deduced  alfo
from  the  circumftances  of  things  upon  the  furface  of
the  earth)  in  proof  of  an  Univerfal  Flood  may  be  drawn
from  the  consideration  of  the  nature,  form,  and  fitu-
ation  of  feveral  bodies  or  fubftantes  that  at  prefent  lie
loofe  upon  the  furface  of  the  earth.  For,

i.  IT  is  common  to  obferve  upon  the  fides,  and
even  the  fummits,  of  the  higheft  Hills,  Mountains,
and  inland  Eminences  (efpecially  fuch  as  confift  of
folid  flrata  or  hard  rock  within,  and  have  long  flats
or  any  level  ground  at  their  tops)  a  prodigious  num-
ber of  Stones^  of  various  forts  and  fizes,  but  generally
of  one  or  nearly  the  fame  form  i  being  either  perfectly
fpherical  or  oval,  or  fome  way  or  other  tending  to  a
round  figure  ;  their  furfaces  or  outfides  being  quite
fmooth,  without  any  projections  or  angles.  I  have
obferved  multitudes  ot  fuch  flones,  of  all  fizes, — from
fome  that  were  eight  or  ten  feet  in  circumference  to
others  that  were  but  two  or  three  inches  in  circuit, —
lying  upon  the  tops  and  fides  of  fome  of  the  higheft
hills  and  eminences  in  England  and  Whales \  particularly
'  upon  the  long  chain  of  Mountains  that  run  through
the  middle  of  South  Wales,  and  upon  the  high  lands
in  the  northern  parts  of  Worcefterjhire^  Warwick/hire*
Strop/hire^  and  Staffordshire.  And  thofe  large  ftones
that  lie  upon  the  wtjlcrn  fide  of  Sbotover  hill,  near
Oxford,  and  which  on  account  of  their  Roundnefs,  are
called,  by  Dr.  Plot,  Lapides  tefticulares^  are  of  this
fort.  So  alfo  upon  Marlborougb  Downs,  in  Wiltjkire>
are  an  inconceivable  number  of  large  flones,  which,
from  their  fhape  and  fituation,  are  called  the  grey  Wea-
tbcrs,  as  refembling  a  flock  of  fheep  lying  down ;  and

«  Nat.Hift  ofOxfordfhire,  p.  129.


[  i9o  ]

many  of  thefe,  efpecialiy  fuch  aslie  at  a  diftance  frotn,
the  center  or  middle  of  thefe  flones,  are  quite  round
and  fmootK,  though  vaftly  large.  Mr.  Hutchinfon
fays,  that  he  obferved  '  rriahyfuch  round  fmootli  Hones,

*  of  various  fizes,  frofn  the  bignefs  of  a  melon  to  an

*  hundred  weight,  lying, not  only  upon  the  fides,
'  but  upon  the  tops  and  ridges  of  the  high  hills  in  the
4  North  of  England,  particularly  in  Arkendale,  and  in

*  many  other  places  ; and  alfo  in  Cornwall,  and  in
4  Devon/hire,  upon  Dartmoor'* Dr.  Lifter,  in  Phil.
Tranf.  N°.  164,  remarks,  '  that  all  the  high  mountains
c  and  Woolds in  the  North  of  England  are  covered,

*  more  or  lefs,  with  a  quantity  ot  Sand,  mixt  with
c  white  pebbles  of  a  greater  fize.' Langius  in  his  Pre-
face to  his  Hiftoria  Lapidum  figuratorum  Helvetia,  &c.
or,  Hiftory  cf  the  figured  Stones  in  Switzerland,  ftarts
the  following  queftion  (but  leaves  it  undecided)  *  Al-
'  fo  it  has  often  been  inquired,  Whether  the  fmootb
c  round  ft  ones  and  flints  that  are  now  found  upon  the

*  tops  of  the  highefl  mountains,  even  of  the  Alps,

*  where  no  river  can  poffibly  pafs,  were  thus  fmooth
'  and  round  by  nature,  or  whether  they  were  at  firft
c  and  originally  rough  and  unequal,  and  then  afterwards
<  fmooth  id  and  rounded  by  currents  of  water,  during  the
'  Deluge, and  carried  to  the  higheft mountains  ?f9

e  Vol.  XII.  of  his  Works,  p.  294.

f  Cffta-um  de  Si/uilus  fubwtundis  &  licvibuSi  &c.  It  may  be
proper  to  remark  here,  with.  Dr.  Woodward,  (fee  his  Cat.  of  Englijb
Fcji!.<,  p.  83.)  'That  the  Damjb,  German,  and  other  writers  of
«  FoflU?  do  not  reilrain.  the  name  Silix,  to  what  we  in  England  call
'  Flint,  but  apply  that  name  to  very  various  bodies  ;'  and  alfo  that
the  Rhf'.t-Ks  (s*  the  Doftor  proves  at  large,  p.  22.)  did  the  fame;
undemanding  by  it  ajiy  very  hard  Scone  that  would  ftrike  fire,  as
indeed  moft  hard  Stones  wi!l.  I  mention  this,  becaufe  the  bodies
u-hich  we  in  England  call  Flints,  are  fometimes  found,  and  were  fop
formed,  natural^  of  a  rwvdjhepe  ;  and  it  might  be  objefted  to  the


Dr.  Baltbafar  Ebrhart  in  the  account  he  gives  of  his
Journey  from  Memingen  over  the  fyroknfian  Alps  (fee
Phil.  Tranf.N0.  458,  for  1740)  makes  the  following
obfervations  '  The  mountains  of  Memingen,  which  are
'  higher  than  the  middle  of  the  higheft  mountains  in

*  thefe  parts,  have  upon  their  very  fummits  vaft  quan-
1  tities  of  Stones  about  three  or  four  inches  in  circum-

*  ference,  that  have  been  plainly  worn  round,  andjuft

*  after  the  fame  manner  as  thofe  that  are  thus  formed
'  by  the  ftream  and  attrition  of  rivers. But  it  is  ma-
'  nife'ftly  evident  that  this  immenfely  large  heap  of
'  Stones,  which  lie,  as  it  were,  in  a  feparate  and  de-
6  tached  manner  upon  thefe  mountains,  where  KO  river
1  flows,  could  never  have  been  formed  by  currents  of
c  this  kind. Another  remarkable  circumftance  is,
'  that  thefe  Stones  are  found  to  increafe  in  bulk  or  di-
c  atneter  from  Memingen  towards  the  Alps,  fo  as  at  lad
'  to  equal  maffes  or  trunks  three  or  four  feet  thick, .
"  but  from  Memingen  towards  the  oppofite  country  and

*  more  remote  from  the  Alps  they  proportionably  de-
4  creafe  lefs  and  lefs,  fo  as  at  laft  to  be  reduced  to  a
4  fpecies  of  grofs  fand. This  remarkable  phsnomc-

*  non,  which  may  ferve  to  explain  the-theory  of  the
'-  earth,  may  be  accounted  for  from  the  following

above  quotation  that  the  Flints  therein  fpoken  of  might  have  been
naturally  of  a  round  form,  and  fo  not  have  been  worn  by  any  agita-
tion in  water.  But,  firft,  I  would  obferve  that  round  flints  are  <ve*y
feiv  in  comparifon  of  the  number  of  others  that  are  found  in  all  kinds
of  fhapes;  and  Langius  himfelf,  in  the  defcription  he  afterwards
gives  of  a  Flint  or  rather  of  the  body  he  applies  the  word  Silix  to
;p.  13.)  does  not  mention  it  as  being  nnti-ral'y,  or  even  accidentally
of  a  round  form  ;  and  whatever  he  underllands  by  the  word  Silix  y  it
is  certain  that  the  bodies  he  fpeaks  of  in  the  above  quotation  carried
in  themfelves  evident  marks  of  having  been  ivorn,  ground  dcwn,  and
even  rounded,  by  water ;  otherwife  he  would  never  have  thought  of
putting  the  above  queftion.


[ 192 ]

«  dbfervations  and  reflexions. I  have  obferved  among

*  the  Tyroknfian  Alps  whole  and  entire  fummits of

*  Mountains,  that  have  in  one  continued  rock  the  very
<  fame  kind  of  Stone  with  that  which  is  now  found

*  infeparate  and  worn-parts^  and  placed  at  a  diftance
« in  the  country  between  the  Alps  and  the  Danube.

*  There  are  alfo  juft  as  great  a  variety  of  thefe  worn

*  (tones,  as  there  are  of  Rocks  in  the  Alps. The
«  Caufe  which  broke  the  Alpine  rocks  and  covered  all
'  this  part  of  Germany  with  fragments  torn  from  thence

*  (and  which  were  afterwards  rounded  by  the  mutual

*  attrition,  between  themfelves  and  the  waves)  could
'  be  no  other  than  the  great  deluge.— The  fragments
'  of  ftone  which  were  torn  from  the  mattered  Alps
4  (which  were  as  high  again  as  they  are  at  pfefent  be-

*  fore  the  deluge)  the  farther  they  were  carried  and

*  the  more  they  were  rolled,  the  more  were  they  worn

*  and  leffened. Hence  the  places  the  neareft  the  Alps

*  were  covered  with  the  largeft  fragments,  thofe  that
c  were  more  remote,  with  the  fmalleft. The  exact

*  agreement  between  the  moft  broken  pieces  of  thefe

*  ftones,  and  the  larger  and  entire  rocks  in  the  Alps

*  demonftrate  to  the  eye  the  place  from  whence  they
c  came, and  that  the  former  are  no  other  than  the
4  difperfed  ruins  of  the  latter.' Swedenborg  in  his
Mifcellanea  obfervata,  &c.  p.  11,  fpeaks  of  Mountains
in  Sweden,  '  qui  lapides  habent  admodum  tritos,  6?  quaft

*  politos,  &  mixtos  cum  arems?  i.  e.  which  have  ftones
'  upon  them  that  are  much  worn,  and  as  it  were  polijhedy
6  mixed  with  Sand.' Bifhop Pontoppidan  mhisHiftory
of  Norway,  p.  56,  fpeaking  of  the  Effects  or  Confe-
quences  of  the  Deluge,  writes  thus,  '  This  [/'.  e.  the

*  Deluge]  is  like  wife  the  origin  of  moft  of  thofe  Peb-
6  bles,  which  are  found  fcattered  in  all  parts  of  the

*  globe* And  indeed,  I  think,  we  may  fairly  conclude


t  '93  1

&om  the  inftances  I  have  brought,  that,  if  all
parts  of  the  globe  were  examined  by  proper  and  ju-
dicious perfons,  fome  fuch  round  or  fmooth  Stones
as  the  above-mentioned,  lying  (at  greater  or  lefs
diftances,  in  greater  or  fmaller  numbers,  would  be
found  upon  rh'm.

THE  Point  therefore  to  be  decided  is,  How  came
thefe  Stones  to  be  of  this  round  fhape  ? — Were  they
originally  thus  ?— Or,  formed  fo  afterwards  ? — And
by  what  means  ?

THAT  thefe  ftories  were  not  originally  and  at  firft
of  their  prefent  figure  is  evident  trom  many  particu-
lars, as,  ift,  From  fome  of  them  having  on  their -
outfides  the  bafes  of  hexagonal  moots  of  fpar  and
chryftal,  which  are  now  of  a  round  or  circular
form  at  their  tops,  whereas  it  is  well  known  that
thefe  naturally  terminate  or  end  in  fharp  pointed
angles,  wherever  there  is  room  or  fpace  for  them  to
fhoot,  and  fuch  there  rnufl  have  been  here,  if  thefe
ftones  had  always  been  of  the  fame  fhape  arid  fize :  fo
that  as  thefe  moots  of  fpa"r  were  once  longer,  and
alfo  pointed  at  top,  and  being  now  round  or  hemi-
fpherical,  it  is  manifeft,  that  they  have  been  Worn
and  ground  down  to  this  form  by  fome  regular  at-
trition.  2dly, — From  feveral  of  thefe  Stones

having  now,  lying  immerfed  in  them,  and  united  with
their  fubftance,  the  ihells,  teeth,  and  bones  of  various
animals,  pieces  of  wood,  coral,  &c.  all  of  which
bodies  are  naturally  of  fome  determinate  figure,  and
greatly  differing  from  each  other,  and  yet  fuch  parts
of  thefe  (hells,  bones,  corals,  &c.  as  appear  on  the
outfides  of  thefe  Stones  mall  be  round  or  circular  or
anfwerable  to  the  outward  fhape  of  the  ftohe;  and  yet
the  parts  which  lie  immerfed  within  the  ftone  mail  be
of  the  true,  ufual,  and  natural  form  of  thefe  bodies ;
nay,  when  the  ftone  is  broken  *  there  ftiall  frequently
O


[  1943

be  Found  in  the  infide  the  fame  fpecies  of  (Hells,
corals,  &c.  quite  whole  and  entire,  as  thofe  on  the
outfide,  which  are  now  ihaped  to  the  figure  of  the
ilone  -,  and  therefore  thefe  on  the  outfide  were  formerly
of  the  fame  fhape  as  thofe  in  the  infide  ;  and  of  courfe
both  Shells,  Corals  and  Stone  muft  have  been  rounded
or  brought  to  this  unnatural,  fpherical,  figure  by  fome

external  force  or  agency.- ^lf. — The  fame  is

jmanifeft  from  the  Contraft  between  the  manner  in
which  the  c onftituent  parts  of  thefe  Stones  originally  fe /-
tied,  and  their  prefent  outward  form,  it  being  evident
to  fight,  particularly  in  the  larger  ones,  and  efpecially
in  fuch,  as  are  of  a  fiflile  nature,  that  they  fettled  in  a
flat  regular  manner,  or  in  lines,  layer  upon  layer,
each  of  equal  length,  breadth,  and  thickneis  in  all  its
parts;  which  could  not  poflibly  form  a  body  ot  a
fpherical  fhape;  but  as  thefe  are  now  of  an  orbicular
form,  they  muft  have  been  reduced  and  rounded  by

fome  outward  force.; But,  4thty. — Where  thefe

Stones  occur,  the  far  greater  number  of  them  are  gene-
rally of  the  fame  kind,  contain  the  fame  fpecies  of
fhells,  corals,  &c.  and  apparently  fettled  in  ftrata  of
the  fame  fize  and  order,  as  the  Stone  or  Rocks  in  the
adjacent  Mountains;  and  fo  afford  an  undeniable  proof
that  they  are  only  fragments  or  pieces  torn  off  from
the  adjoining  mountains;  and  therefore  were  not  ori-
ginally of  the  fame  fize  and  form  as  they  are  now;
but  have  been,  fince  their  feparation,  much  lefTened
and  worn  into  a  round  figure.  And  their

lhape  and  fmoothnefs  manifeftly  fhew,  that  they  ob-
tained their  form  in,  and .  by  the  motion  of,  a  wet
Fluid,  fuch  as  Water;  for  had  they  been  fubjecled  to
the  adion  of  a  dry  Fluid,  fuch  as  the  Air,  in  a  vio-
lent wind  or  tempeft,  &c.  it  could  not  be  but  that  they
would  have  been  of  the  moll  irregular  forms,  and
their  outfides  j^g^ed  and  pointed  with  angles  or  em-


[  '951

tofied  with  protuberances  in  every  direction-,  but  fince
they  are  fo  regularly  rounded  and  their  furf'aces  fo  ex-
tremely fmooth  they  muft  have  procured  their  fhapes
from  being  agitated  in  and  by  a  moid  Fluid,  fuch  as
could  penetrate  and  mollify  their  outward  parts,  and
fo  permit  them  to  be  worn  away,  granule  after  gra-
nule, of  by  a  gradual  attrition.  And  when  we
confider  the  great  fize  and  weight  of  fome  of  thefe
Stones,  their  immenfe  number,  and  the  vaft  extent  of
ground  that  in  fome  places  they  are  fpread  over  nay
that  there  is  reafon  to  fuppofe,  that  they  are  in  fome
meafure  fcattered  over  the  whole  face  of  the  earth)  it
may  fairly  be  concluded,  that  there  is  no  motft  Fluid?,
in  or  upon  the  earth,  in  a  quantity  fufficient  for  ef-
fecting this  but  Water  \  which  therefore  muft  have
been  the  Medium  in  which,  and  the  Agent  by  which,
this  wonderful  phcenomenon  was  tranfacted.  >

As  is  moreover  evident  from  the  manner  in.  which  thefe
Stones  lie.  Thofe  that  are  upon  the  long  tops  and
fiats  of  Mountains  or  upon  high  level  ground  are
fituated  for  the  moil  part  at  a  little  diftance  from  each
other  or  lie  in  a  feparate  detached  form  [not  heaped
together  or  in  trains]-,  for  as  upon  fuch  even  land,  there
could  be  no  inclination  in  the  ground  to  determine
them  to  one  place  more  than  another,  and  as  the  cur-
rents of  water,  that  formed  the  Combs  that  defcend  on
all  fides  of  fuch  high  land,  fet  different  ways,  fo  thefe
Stones,  that  were  muffled  and  rolled  about  upon  the
top,  would  be  left  in  the  moft  irregular,  loofe,  de-
tached or  ilragling  manner  pomblej  arid  accordingly
we  fo  find  them.  But  thole  that  are  upon  the  fides' of
Hills,  efpecially  fuch  are  fomewhat  fteep,  and  parti-
cularly at  fome  considerable  diftance  from  the  top,  lie
thick  and  clofe,  and  heaped  upon  one  another:  thofe
that  are  in  the  Combs,  Dales,  and  Vallies  (tha.t  fall
off  from  the  Mountains)  lie  ftill  thicker  and  clofer:

O 2


1 196  ]

and  chiefly  in  the  bottoms  of  fuch  Cavities,  there  being
few  or  none  upon  their  fteep  fides;  and  alfo  tend  in  a
train  from  the  tops  of  thefe  Cavities,  and  gradually
increafe  in  number  and  quantity,  as  the  gills,  dales  and
valliesopen  and  enlarge  by  receiving  other  gills,  dales
and  vallies  into  them ;  in  which  lateral  gills  and  dales
are  allb  a  few,  the  greater  part  having  been  carried
down  into  the  large  vailies,  where  they  lie  in  inconceiva-
ble numbers-,  and  particularly  in  the  curving  parts  of
the  vallies,  juft  before  their  turnings-,  or  where  any
rock,  that  withftood  the  force  ot  the  Flood,  or  large
fragment  of  a  rock,  that  the  waters  could  carry  no
further,  ftands  in  the  middle  or  any  part  of  a  valley,
there  thefe  round  Stones  are  found  in  ftill  greater
plenty  for  the  depth  of  many  feet  under  the  ground.
And  what  is  remarkable,  and  yet  a  general  rule  in  this
cafe,  is,  that  fuch  Stones  of  the  above  kind  as  lie
near  the  beginnings  of  the  Combs  are  leaft  worn,
thofe  that  lie  farther  down  in  the  dales  more  woin,
thofe  that  lie  in  the  vallies  and  in  the  low  flat  countries
moil  of  all  worn  and  perfectly  rounded,  as  having
been  carried  furtheft,  and  agitated  mod.  So  that  all
of  them  manifeftly  bear  the  appearance  of  having  been,
not  only  formed  or  rounded  by  water,  but  alfo  of  hav-
ing been  placed  juft  in  fuch  manner,  as  water  alone,  re-
treating from  the  mountain-tops  down  through  the
vallies,  would  naturally  difpofe  them.s  Many  other

«  It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  among  the  Stones,  that  were  thus
apparently  worn  round  by  accident,  fome,  that  were  always,  or  na-
turall  of  a  ro  nd  mape;  and  it  may  be  proper  to  inform  the  reader
how  to  diftinguifti  between  the  one  and  the  other;  and  alib  to  fhew
how  far  even  thefe  laft  are  ferviceable  in  proving  the  point  in  debate.
The  Stones  that  are  naturally  of  a  round  fhape,  and  which  are  com-
monly called  hcdul<}.  have  generally  an  outward  coat  or  cruft,  dif-
fering from  the  internal  part  of  the  body  either  in  fubftance,  colour,
or  hardnefs ;  or  elfe  confift  of  ieveral  coats ,-  and  are  ufually  very  hard :
thofe  that  are  of  the  fame  fubftance  throughout  (as  flinty,  alabafter


f  '97  ]

circum (lances  there  are  (which  will  readily  be  perceived
by  an  obferver,  though  they  are  not  fo  eafily  to  be
defcribed  to  a  reader)  depending  either  upon  the  nature
of  thefe  Stones,  the  Conititution  of  the  ftrata  in  the
adjoining  land,  or  the  fituation  of  the  ground,  &c.
that  afford  occular  demonftrations,  that  thefe  round
Stones  are  only  Fragments,  which  were  beaten  off  from
the  neighbouring  rocks,  and  worn  into  their  prefent
figures,  by  the  agitation  of  Water  ; — which  fluid
muft  therefore  once  have  filled  all  the  deep  Vallies,  and
have  covered  all  the  high  Hills  and  Mountains,
where  thefe  Stones  are  now  found.


nodules,  &c  commonly  are)  when  broken,  fplit  or  fall  apart  in  aP
kinds  of  directions;  thofe  that  confift  of  feveral  coats  of  different
matter,  open  or  feparate  in  pieces,  that  are  convex  on  the  o  ;tfide  and
concave  in  t  .e  infide  according  to  the  feveral  coats.  On  the  con-
trary, Stones  that  are  worn  to  a  roundntfs,  which  was  not  natural
to  them,  fuch  as  Pebbhs  found  upon  the  fea  more,  and  thofe  that
are  now  found  upon  the  higheit  mountains,  have  never  any  coat  or
inveftient  cruft,  break  reg  .larly,  or  according  to  the  grain  of  the
ftone,  and  freq  emly  into  a  number  of  thin  flat  plates  like  the  flone
thit  lies  in  ftrata  in  the  adjoining  hills,  and  are  generall.,  either
foft  or  hard,  accordmg  to  fuch  fton.j ;  and  carry  in  themfelves  evident
marks  of  which  I  have  already  recited  at  large  the  particulars)  thatthey
are  pieces  orfragm:nts  of  the  adjacent  rocks,  ivom  round  by  being
rubbed  againft  one  another  in  fuch  a  fluid  as  Water  And  even  the
Noddles  themfelves,  that  are  fometimes  found  among  the  Pebbles,
exhibit  manifeft  proofs  of  having  been  broken  out  of  regular  itrata,  car-
ried from  their  natural  and  original  place,  and  of  having  endurtd  the
outward  force  or  aftion  of  Water  For,  firft,  in  fuch  places  where
v.'e  find  Nodu'e-.  of  flint,  cryftal,  alabafter,  &c.  lying  loofe  upon  the
furfaceof  the  earth,  it  is  common  to  find  the  very  fame  kind  of  No-
dules, immerfed  in  their  natural  beds  in  the  ftrata  of  the  rocks  adjoin-
ing, and  very  diftinft  and  eafily  feparable  from  the  fubftnnce  of  the
rock  (which  is  another  mark  by  which  Nodules  may  be  known  from
rounded  pieces  ofthe  rock)  :  it  is  therefore  reafonable,  to  believe  that
the  Nodules,  that  are  now  loofe,  and  detached  upon  the  fuy/ace  of
the  earth,  formerly  lay  in,  and  were  beaten  out  of,  the  adjacent  rocks,
by  the  fame  means  or  by  the  fame  flood  of  water,  that  parts  of  the
rocks  themfelves  were  broken  off  and  worn  found;  among  \vhici,

O  3


[  -931

BUT  befides  this  larger  fort  of  round  or  Bowler  Stones^
(as  they  are  called  in  fome  parts  of  England;  their  very
form  indicating  to  the  mo(t  fuperficial  obferver  that
they  have  been  rolled  or  bowled  about)  there  is  another
kind  of  a  lefs  fize,  from  fome  that  are  two  or  three  in-
ches in  circuit  to  others  that  are  as  fmall  as  peafe,  com-
monly known  under  the  name  of  Gravel.  This  con-
fifts  of  a  variety  of  fubftances,  not  only  of  hard,  round
or  fmoothed  Stones  of  different  kinds,  but  of  parts  of
Bones,  pieces  of  Shells,  Coral,  &c.  that  have  been
alfo  rounded  or  worn,*1  fo  as  evidently  to  demonftrate,
that  the  whole  has  been  in  agitation,  and  that  fuch  a


thefe  Nodules  now  lie.  This  a'fp  is  evident  from  a  circumftance  at-
tending many  of  them,  viz.  that  their  outward  coats  have  apparently
been  much  rubbed  and  worn,  efpecially  in  the  more  prominent  parts,
and  in  fome  of  them  quite  worn  off  I  have  obferved  too  that  feveral
of  them  have  had  parts  or  pieces  of  the  rock,  from  whence  they  were
originally  torn,  affixed  to  their  outfides,  which  though  at  firft  certainly
of  no  determinate  fhape,  have  been,  fmce  their  feparation,  regularly
rounded  to  the  ftiape  of  the  Nodules :  nay,  I  have  obferved  large
Mattes  of  the  rock,  containing  feveral  Nodules  in  them,  thus  worn,
and  rounded ;  which  manifertly  {hews,  that  even  thefe  Nodules  arc
Fragments,  or  at  leaft  were  beaten  out,  of  the  rock.  Then,  laftly,
Nodules,  being  found  lying  together  with  and  exactly  in  the  fame
wanner  as,  the  mountain  pebbles  and  other  worn  fragments  of  ftone,
undeniably  proves,  that  they  were  pofited  upon  the  places,  and  in
the  manner,  they  are  now  found  by  the  fame  means,  that  the  inland-
pebbles  were,  and  though  they  do  not  flievv  fuch  ftrong  and  clear  figns
of  having  endured  the  force  or  action  of  water  as  the  pebbles  (chiefly
on  acco  nt  of  their  fuperior  hardnefs  and  original  roundnefs);  yet  they
exhibit  fufficient  marks,  as  I  have  defcribed  above,  of  having  beea
fubjeft  to  its  force.

h  It  may  not  be  amifs  to  obferve  here,  that  in  fome  parts  of  England
the  inhabitants  very  improperly  call  any  fmall,  lobfe,  rubble  Hones,
though  they  are  fiat,  pointed  with  angles,  or  of  all  lhapes,  provided
they  lie  near  the  furface  of  the  earth,  by  the  name  of  G reeve  I:  but
unlefs  they  are  anfwerable  to  the  above  defcription,  and  apparently
worn,  or  a  great  part  of  them  worn  and  rounded,  they  ought  not
properly  to  be,  neither  indeed  are  they  generally  and  commonly,
fo  called,


[ '99  ]

fluid  as  Water  was  the  Agent.  Which  is  further
apparent  from  the  manner  in  which,  and  the  places  on
which,  Gravel  lies.  It  being  always  pofited  in  a
loofe,  irregular  form,  not  in  a  clofe  compact  ftate,  or
in  uniform  ftrata  of  equal  thicknefs  in  all  parts,  as  the
regular  beds  of  Stone,  &c.  are;  no,  this  is  thrown  or
pitched,  as  it  were,  in  ftreaks  or  unequal  feams,  and
in  all  directions,  generally  in  an  oblique,  fometimes  in
a  wave-like  form,  juft  in  fuch  manner  as  the  undulat-
ing motion  of  departing  Water  would  naturally
caft  it.  Betides,  it  is  ufually  found  free  and  void

of  all  lighter,  earthly,  ochreous,  clayey  or  fuch  like
matter,  which,  being  fokibje  in  water,  would,  when
once  aflbmed  up  therein,  be  contained  longer,  and
carried  farther  than  (and  fo  feldom  fubfide  together
with)  the  heavier  and  harder  parts  of  Gravel;  which
therefore  would  be  left  clear  and  divefted  of  all  fuch
lighter  matter,  and  indeed  at  prefent  it  appears  to  the
eye  to  have  been  warned  and  cleanfed  "by  Water.
Then  too  Gravel  is  commonly  found  over  unmoved
and  horizontal  beds  of  Stone,  Chalk,  &c.  and  being
of  a  nature  different  from  thefe,  and  lying  in  a  man-
ner different  from  that  in  which  the  ftrata  of  the  earth
originally  fettled,  it  is  manifeft  that  This  has  been,
moved,  agitated,  and  brought  from  other  places.
And  fince  great  part  of  this  mixt  fubftance,  Gravel,
is  of  the  fawie  nature  with,  and  confifts  of  the  fame
kind  of  (hells,  corals,  &c.  as  thofe  which  are  found
in  the  higher  lands  or  in  the  grounds  above,  it  is  an
evident  proof  that  it  was  brought  from  thefe  lands.
And  when  we  confider  the  places  where  Gravel  is  com-
monly found,  viz.  either  upon  extenfive  flats  juft  un-
der Mountains  or  higher  ground  or  in  the  bottoms  of
large  vallies,  or  elfe  fpread  over  low-land  gently-de-
clining countries,  but  feldom  or  never  (or  but  in  very
{mall  quantity)  upon  the  tops  or  even  fides  of  fharp-
O  4


20°

pointed  and  fteep  mountains,  it  affords  an  additional
and  undeniable  evidence,  tuat  it  was  brought  from  the
upper  lands-,  and  being  difpoftd  or  pofiied  juft  iri
fuch  manner  and  juft  upon  thoie  places,  where  water,
retreating  from,  the  higher  grounds.,  would  naturally
throw  or  leave  it,  it  evidently  fhews,  that  Water  was
not  only  the  Cauft  of  the /cm  of  roundnefs  of  the  va-
rious parts  of  Gravel,  but  of  the  Difpofition  or  Settle-
ment of  the  whole.  Such  is  the  form  and  fnuation  of
Gravel  in  En  land;  and  no  doubt  is  to  be  made  but
that  ic  is  the  lame  or  fimiiar  in  every  part  of  the  earth
where  it  is  found;  and  fince  there  is  i'carce  a  country
over  the  whole  globe  but  what  has  it,  more  or  lefs,  fo
it  is  certain  that  all  thefe  countries  or  the  whole  face
of  the  earth  have  been  overfpread  by  Water.

UNDER  this  article  may  alfo  be  reckoned  a  ftill  lef-
fer  fpecies  of  round  ftones  than  any  of  the  above-
mentioned,  viz.  thofe  which  conftitute  what  we  com-
monly call  Sand;  this  fubftance  '  being  really  no  other

*  (as  Dr.  Woodward  $&\y  obferves,  Nat.  Hifc.  p.  188)
c  than  very  fmall  pebbles;  as  may  appear  to  any  one
6  who  mail  carefully  examine  it, efpecially  with a

*  good  microfcope.' And  when  thus  viewed and
magnified ;  the  various  bodies  of  which  it  confifts  as
manifestly  exhibit marks of  having  been  worn  or
ground  clown  to  their  prefent  fize  and  form  by  the
agitation  of  water,  as  the  parts  of  Gravel  4o. Sand
too  lying  in  a  fimiiar  irregular  manner,  a,nd  being
pofited  upon  fuch  pieces,  as  Gravel,  equally  points  out
the  aftion  of  water,  retreating  from  the  higher  grounds,
to  have  been  the  Caufe  of  its  fituation  and  pofition.1

5  In  fome  places  indeed  what  is  properly,  and  ought  fo  to  be
called,  S'-inrfJionf,  lies  in  fuch  a  loofe  lax  manner,  even  upon  the  tops
of  the  higheft  mountains,  (where  their  upper  parts  happen  to  confift
of  Sandiione)  and  in  fome  places  Sand  itielf  lies  thus,  as  at  firft  fight
greatly  to  referable  the  Sand,  found  in  the  vallies  and  in  the  low  cam-


at  adds  confirmation  to  this  is,  that  where  the  up*
per  lands  confift  of  a  lax  friable  ftone,  there  the  Sand
lies  in  the  valleys  beneath  in  a  greater  plenty  than,
ufual,  or  where  the  country  is  an  extenfive  low-land
plain,  and  the  mountains  at  a  great  diftance,  there
alfo  is  generally  a  vaft  quantity  of  Sand ;  as  is  the
cafe  with  thofe  immenfely  large  fandy  Defarts  in  the
lower  or  remote  parts  of  Africa,  bordt  ring  upon  the
Mediterranean  fea;  for  the  water,  that  termed  the
Mountains  in  the  in-land  or  higher  part  of  that  great
Continent,  muft  have  patted  over  fuch  fpacious  tracts
of  land  in  its  retreat  towards  the  fea,  that  in  all  pro-
bability it  would  meet,  in  many  places,  with  ftrata
of  a  loofe  friable  kind  of  ftone,  which  it  would  foon  fe-
parate,  tear  afunder,  fhatter  to  pieces,  and  at  laft  grind
down  to  Sand,  and  when  thus  reduced,  this  matter
would  be  eafily  carried  and  hurried  away  by  the  tor-
rents of  defcending  waters  to  a  great  diftance  from  the
mountains,  and  at  laft  be  naturally  left  expanded  over
the  low  flat  countries ;  or  pofited  in  the  bottoms  of
large  and  deep  vallies  •,  and  fuch  from  the  maps  ap-
pears to  be  the  fituation  of  moft  of  the  fandy  Defarts
upon  the  earth.  And  I  cannot  but  think  that  the
far  greater  quantity  of,  what  is  called,  Sea-fand^  was
pot  termed  upon  the  mores,  where  it  is  now  found,
but  was  originally  Land-fand^  and  brought  down  even

paign  countries:  but  there  is  always  a  manifeft  difference  between
them;  for  the  Sand  or  Sandftone  of  Mountains  it  more  coarfe  than
the  other,  and  generally  adheres  in  lumps,  and  is  found  in  vaft  large
ftrata  or  beds  of  equal  thicknefs  in  every  part,  and  regularly  divided
by  horizontal  and  perpendicular  fiffures,  as  the  Tblid  unmoved
beds  of  ftone,  &c.  are;  whereas  the  Sand  found  in  the  vallies  is
fmail  and  fine,  eafily  feparates  when  touched,  and  is  alway>  pitched
jn  unequal  ftreaks,  that  are  commonly  thicker  in  one  part  than
another,  and  gradually  terminate  in  points  towards  either  end,  and
is  pofited  in  all  the  variety  of  directions,  that  water,  flowing  over
uneven  ground,  could  po&bly  throw  it  into.


[ 202 ]

From  the  in-land  countries.  Thus  much  is  certain,
that  the  rains  that  fall  upon  the  higher  grounds  gene-
rally come  down  replete  with  Sand,  and  depofit  it  in
rivers-,  and  rivers,  by  wafhing  away  their  banks,  ftill
receive  more  fand ;  which  being  carried  down  by  the
currents  is  at  laft  difcharged  into  the  Ocean.  And
it  is  very  remarkable  that  upon  a  fandy  fhore  there  is
generally  a  great  load  or  bar  of  Sand  at  the  mouths  of
the  rivers,  the  very  place  where  the  Sand,  brought
down  by  the  river,  would  naturally  fubfide,  not  only
on  account  of  the  dream  being  there  broadeft  and  lefs
itrong,  but  chiefly  by  reafon  of  the  oppoiition  the  ri-
ver-water would  meet  with  from  the  waves  of  the  Sea,
which  would  beat  back  the  current  of  the  river,  wea-
ken its  force,  and  oblige  it  to  lay  down  its  burthens.
So  alfo  with  regard  to  thofe  immenfe  Sand-Banks  that
are  found  upon  fome  fhores,  even  where  there  are  no
very  large  rivers  immediately  adjoining  (though  they
are  generally,  where  there  are  fuch  rivers)  it  is  certainly
very  reafonable  to  conclude,  that  they  are  in  a  great
meafure  the  product,  of  the  diluvian  waters  -,  and  had
the  Sea,  after  the  deluge,  retreated  farther  within  its  bed
they  would  have  been  left  upon  the  low-lands  and
now  found  in  the  form  of  fandy  T)efarts\  for  as  the
waters  of  the  deluge  retreated  from  the  higher  lands,
tore  out  and  carried  away  fuch  vaft  quantities  of  ter-
reftial  matter  (as  the  hollows  of  the  Combs,  Dales,
and  Vallies  over  the  whole  furface  of  the  earth  abun-
dantly demonftrate)  they  wpuld  naturally  depofir  a
great  portion  of  that  mixt  fubftance  they  were  loaded
with,  efpecially  of  the  finer  and  lighter  fort,  upon
thofe  parts  or  places,  where  their  force  firil  began  to
abate,  or  the  land  was  of  a  proper  form  for  receiving
and  retaining  it,  and  fuch  certainly  are  thofe  low  flat
Shores  where  the  principal  Sand-banks  are  found.
Some  perfons  indeed  have  imagined  that  there  is  a  dif-


ference  between  Sea-fand  and  Land-fand; but
ftricteft  inflection  can  difcover  none: And  Dr.
ward  obferves,  that  '  The  Sand  upon  the  fhores  of

*  i^/'/x?)'  confift  of  extremely  fmall  pebbles  of  the  very
'  fame  kind  with  thofe  corrjmonly  found  in  land-pits
'  at  land,  in  various  parts  of  England,  particularly  ia
'  feveral  parts  of  Kent*  (in  which  County  the  ifle  of  Skep-
pey  lies):  Dr.  Lifter  too  remarks  (Phil.  Tranf.  N°.  164)
'  That  the  in- land  Sand- hit's  above  Eulloigm  in  Picardy

*  in  France  is  of  the  very  fame  kind  with  that  on  the
'  fea-Jhore  at  Calais.''  So  that,  upon  the  whole,
we  may  as  fairly  conclude,  that  the  granules  of  Sand
were  caufed  by  a  friction  of  the  parts  among  themlelves
in  agitated  water,  as  that  the  pebbles  of  which  Gravel
confifts  were;  and  alfo  that  the  far  greater  quantity  of
the  Sand  now  lying  upon  the  fea  more  was  not  owing
to  the  agitation  of  the  waters  of  the  Sea, but  that  the
origin  of  this  and  of  all  the  Land-fand  is  to  be  attributed
to  the  action  of  other  waters :  and  when  we  confider
the  vaft  extent  of  the  feveral  Sandy  Defarts  upon  the
earth,  and  the  largenefs  of  many  of  the  Sand-banks
upon  the  fea-fhore,  and  the  diftance  of  thefe  from  one
another,  and  how  in  a  meafure  they  are  fcattered  over
the  whole  face  of  the  earth,  we  muft infer  that  the
Caufe  was  as  univerfal  as  the  Effects,  and  therefore  that
a  flood  of  Platers  has  covered  the  whole  furface  of  the
(firth.

II.  BUT  befides  thefe  Stones  that  have  been  thus  ap-
parently rounded  by  water,  there  are  others  that  have
plainly  endured  the  force  of  this  fluid,  though  not  in
fo  great  a  degree  as  the  above,  either  on  account  of
their  fize,  hardnefs,  or  the  fliort  time  they  were  fub-
ject  to  its  force,  but  yet  they  manifeflly  exhibit  marks
pf  its  power ;  and  their  fize,  number,  and  fituation
iufficiently  demcmftrate  that  the  action  of  the  water,


t  204  ]

to  which  they  were  fubjecl:,  was  univerfal  or  extended
over  the  whole  lurface  of  the  earth.  For

THERE  is  abundant  reafon  for  believing,  that  there
are  very  few  hills  or  mountains,  at  lead  luch  as  con-
fift  of  folid  ftrata  or  hard  rock  within,  but  what  have
feparate  maiTes  of  ftone,  fome  of  an  immenfe  bulk,
together  with  fmaller  pieces,  lying  upon  their  tops  or
fides,  and  alfo  that  there  are  fuch  ftones  in  the  val-
lies  beneath;  and  both  the  larger  and  fmaller  mafies,
of  a^l  kinds  of  fhapes,  and  lying  in  all  kinds  of  pof-
tures,  though  generally  in  fuch  a  direction,  and  fo
fituated,  as  plainly  to  indicate  that  a  flood  of  waters,  re-
treating trom  the  higher  grounds,  was  the  caufe  of
.their  pofition.  What  Mr.  Lhwyd  fays  of  Wales

(Phil.  TranJ.  N°.  334)  I  have  obferved  to  be  true,  not
only  in  that  Country,  but  in  various  parts  of  England  :

*  What  feemed  to  me  moil  ftrange,  were  'vajt  confufed

*  Stones,  and,  to  appearance,  Fragments  ofrocks^  Handing

*  on  the  furiace  or  the  earth,  not  only  in  wide  plains,

*  but  on  the  fummits  alfo  of  the  higheft  mountains  ;*
To  which  hefubjoins  this  remark,  '  There  is  no  Brim-
c  ftone  or  Pumice-ftones  on  the  tops  oi  our  mountains,

*  nor  any  thing  elfe  that  I  fufpedt  to  have  be;-n  the  ef-

*  feels  oif  Volcanoes',  [fo  thefe  ftones  not  to  be  attributed
to  fuch  cautes]. Again;  Dr.  Slukeley  (after  having
cited  the  above  quotation  from  Mr.  Lhw.d  in  his  Alury-
reftored,  &c.  p.  17)  writes  thus :  '  So  [in  the  fame  ^nan-
4  ner  as  the  above  Stones] lie  the  Moof-ftones  c^n  the
c  waftes  and  hill  tops  'of  Cornwall,  Derbyfcire.  Dcicn-
'Jbire,  Torkjhire,  and  other  places,  of  a  harder  nature

*  than  thefe  \  i.  e.  the  grey  weather-fiords  on  the  Marl-

*  borough  downs,  of  which  the  Dr.  is  firft  fpeaking]

*  and  much  the  fame  as  the  Egyptian  Granate.* But
the  grey  weather-ftones  themielves  (of  which  I  have
fpoken  in  part  before  p.  189)  are  probably  as  remarka-
ble as  any,  and  as  they  lie  in  a  part  of  England,  that


[  2°5  I

is  much  frequented  on  account  of  the  great  roads,
that  are  near  them,  principally  one  that  leads  from
the  fecond  to  the  firft  City  of  the  kingdom,  and  are
xveil  known  to  mod  travellers  in  thefe  parts,  I  mail
give  a  particular  account  of  them,  to  fave  the  trouble
of  being  circumftantial  in  other  relations.  Thefe
Stones  are  of  a  baftard  kind  of  lighted  grey  marble:
and  are  of  various  fizes;  fome  of  them  ot  50,  60,  or
even  70  ton  weight  ;k  others  fo  fmall  as  to  weigh  but
a  few  pounds.  They  are  fpread  over  an  irregular  fpace
of  ground  for  forty  miles  in  circuit,  as  I  have  obferved
myfelf;  and  have  been  informed,  that  they  extend
much  farther.1  They  begin  at,  or  thole  that  are
higheft  lie  upon,  the  tops  of  the  greateft  Eminences
on  thefe  downs,  and  tend  on  each  fide  in  incredible
Numbers  for  feveral  miles  down  towards  the  two
nearly  oppofite  Seas,  the  Englijh  Channel  and  the  Brif-
tol  Channel,  and  many  of  them  lie  in  long  trains,  juft
in  fuch  a  manner  and  direction,  as  water  retreating  from

k  'But  our  grey- weather  ftone  is  of  fo  hard  a  texture,  that  Mr.
••  AylojftfiVotton  baJTtt  hewed  one  of  them  to  make  a  rape- mill  ftone,

*  and  employed  20  yoke  of  oxen  to  carry  it  off;  yer  fo  great  was  its
«  weight,  that  it  repeatedly  broke  all  his  tackle,  and  he  was  forced  to

*  leave  it Ld.  Pimbrok-r  caufed  feveral  of  thefe  ftones  to  be  dug  un-

*  der,  and  found  them  loofe  and  detached. My  Lord  computed  the
«  general  weight  of  our  ftones  at  above  50  ton,  and  that  it  required

*  an  «oo  yoke  of  oxen  to  draw  one. Dr.  Stephen  Hales  makes  the
'larger  kind  of  them  70  ton.' Dr.  STUKELEY'S  Stonehcngr,  p. 6.
Some  of  the  largeft  of  thefe  Stones  lie  in  the  bottom  of  a  Comb  or
Valley  called  Grey-rweatber-bottom',  and  are  in  a  great  meafure  covered
with  coppice  wood,  which  muft  be  removed,  and  the  Stones  carefully
Purveyed  on  all  fides,  in  order  to  fee  their  due  fize.

1  It  is  certain  that  thefe  Stones  were  formerly  far  more  numerous
than  they  are  at  prefent,  for  many  of  the  Houfes  and  moft  of  the  Walls
for  garden^  and  enclofures  of  all  the  Villages  on  and  near  thefe  Downs
are  built  ot  them ;  and  for  feveral  years  paft  full  liberty  has  been  given
to  all,  that  might  want  them,  to  take  them  away  (in  order  that  the
ground  might  be  ploughed)  and  vaft  numbers  have  accordingly  been
taken  off.  Then  too,  the  huge  Stones  of  which  the  two  Druidical


[ 206 ]

thefe  ridges  would  naturally  have  thrown  of  placed
them,  as  the  courfes  of  the  rivers  adjoining  evidently  de-
monilrate,  they  tending  thefe  two  ways ;  nay,  even  the
rain,  that  falls  perpendicularly  upon  the  earth  parts  on
the  tops  of  feveral  of  thefe  hills,  and  retreats  towards
the  two  above-mentioned  feas-,  one  portion,  falling  into
a  branch  of  the  river  Avon,  delcends  to  Brijiol-,  and
another,  entering  into  the  river  Kennet^  (which  at
fome  diftance  joins  with  the  Thames)  goes  to  London^
and  empties  itfelf  near  the  Eaft  end  of  the  Englijh
Channel ;  but  on  the  South  fide  of  thefe  downs*  the
rain  that  falls  retreats  into  another  river  called  the
-)  and  runs  directly  into  the  very  middle  of  the
Channel:  fo  that  thefe  Hills  are  manifeftly  the
higheft  land  in  the  South  part  of  England,  and  from
them  there  lies  a  gentle  declination  on  each  fide  to-
wards the  neareft  feas :  which  declination  (as  I  have
above  mewed)  was  caufed  by,  or  was  the  natural  con-
fequence  of,  a  flood  of  waters  that  formerly  covered


Temples  of  A^ury  and  Stowebenge  (the  former  fituated  on,  the  other
at  about  the  diftance"  of  16  miles  from,  thefe  Downs)  confiit,  werr
brought  from  thefe  Hills  and  once  made  a  part  of  the  Grey-weathers,
as  cannot  be  do  bted  when  we  confider,  That  there  is  no  ftone  of
the  kind  of  which  thefe  Temples  are  built,  nearer  than  thefe  Downs ;
•nay,  that  ti.ere  is  no  ftone,  that  I  know  of,  in  all  England  of  the
fame  kind  but  thofe  that  lie  on  thefe  downs :  which  alfo  by  being  fe-
parate  and  detached  from  any  rock,  and  lying  loofe  upon  the  furface
of  the  earth,  were  n;oft  fit  for  ufe  and  ready  for  carriage:  befides;  in
the  Valley  where  the  biggeft  of  thefe  Stones  lie  are  now  to  be  feen
feveral  great  Holes  or  Cavities  in  the  ground  with  fiopes  on  each  lidc,
which  have  been  plainly  dug,  and  the  chief  fubftance  carried  away;
and  in  two  or  three  of  thefe  Cavities  I  obferved  a  large  grey  <weathcr-
Jtcnc  lying,  but  broken  in  the  middle  ,  and  it  was  very  evident,  that
the  earth  had  been  dug  away  from  fuch  Stones,  that  they  might  the
more  eafily  be  carried  oft";  but  probably,  by  fome  -ccident  (as  the
machinery  not  being  ftrong  enough),  the  Stone  in  r  dfmg,  fell  and
fplit  alunder,  and  then  was  too  fmall  to  ar.fwer  the  enu  de%neds  and
therefore  wasleft,  as  not  being  worth  the  carriage,


[  207  1

thefe lands, and  retreated  from  the  in-Iand  parts
down  towards  the  fea-coafts ;  and  as  the  Stones  I  am
fpeaking  of,  tend  in  a  courfe  anfwerable  to  the  effects
of  fuch  a  flood,  we  may  juftly  fuppofe  that  their  pre-
fent pofition and fituation were owing  thereunto.
Which  will  be  further  apparent  from  a  more  particular
confideration  of  them. On  the  tops, and  near  the
ridges  of  the  Hills,  there  are  few,  and  thofc  feparate
from  each  other;  but  as  the  diftance  increafes,  they  in*
creafe  in  number,  lying  thicker  and  clofer,  and  chiefly
in  the  bottoms  of  the  Combs;  and  befides,  ihape  and
wind  their  courfe  according  to  the  direction  of  the
Combs and V  allies-, which  clearly fhews  that  the
Agent  that  formed  the  one  (the  Combs),  placed  alfo
the other  (the  Stones): and  when we  lofe  fight  of
them  above  ground,  they  are  ftill  to  be  found  under-
neath, lying  among  broken  flints  and  gravel,  and  fuch
as  I  difcovered  here  were  much  lefs  than  thofe  that  lay
upon  the  furtace  of  the  earth  and  higher  up  in  the  Vai-
lies,  and  alfo  much  more  worn,  and  many  of  them
fairly  rounded: All  which  evidently  denotes,  that
water  deicending  from  the  higheft  eminences  on  thefe
Downs  was  the  caufe  of  the  pofition,  fituation,  and
direction  of  thefe  Stones.  I  have  obferved  too

fuch  maffes  of  Stone,  as  the  above,  lying  not  only
in  in-land  countries,  but  alfo  on  the  Sea-coafts,  and
many  of  them  fo  large  as  to  conftitute  Rocks  and  fmall
I/lands;  and  that  they  were  really  no  more  than  Frag-
ments broken  off,  and  brought  down  from  the
mountains  or  hills  above,  was  fufficiently  manifeff,
not  only  from  the  ftrata  in  them  being  in  a  different
pofition,  and  of  a  different  kind  from  the  unmoved
ftrata  on  the  fea-coafts,  but  that  the  neareft  place,
where  there  were  any  ftrata  of  the  fame  kind  with  the
fragments,  was  in  the  mountains  or  hills  above-,  and
from  them  there  lay  ieparate  roafies  of  the  fame  kind


.  (  "8  ]

of  ftorie,  fome  more,  forhe  lefs  worn,  in  the  cornbs3
dales,  and  vallies,  quite  down  to  the  fea-coafts-,  where
the  larger  fragments  lay,  and  refted,  as  it  were,  upon
the  loweft  ground.

AND  what  is  thus  obfervable  in  England  is  to  be  feeri
alfo  in  other  parrs  of  the  world.  Mr.  Innes  in  his
Mifcellaneous  Letters,  &c.  (p.  6)  fpeaking  of  the  parifh
of  Magilligan  in  the  County  of  Londonderry  in  Ireland,
fays  thus,  '  The  Deluge  hath  left  us  other  marks  of

*  its  tury,  for  more  than  half  of  our  Mountain,  is  one

*  continued  Heap  of  Stones  and  Rocks  tumbled  down,

*  and  in  particular  one  Rock  left  Handing  upon  the
'  fide  of  the  precipice:  it  is  about  28  feet  in  height,
*» about  6  yards  about,  with  natural  feams  in  it,  not
'  very  well  cemented;  no  art  of  the  Irifo  could  place
c  it  there.' So  alfo  Mr.  Smith  in  his  ancient  and  pre~

fent  State  of  the  County  of  Kerry  in  that  kingdom,  p.  82.

*  The  moft  confiderable  natural  curiofities  in  this  [the

<  Southern ) part  of  the  Country are  two  Rocks,  on

*  either  fide  of  the  river  Roughly,  [which  in  this  place

*  is  about  a  mile  broad!  which  feem  to  have  exchang'd
c  their  fituation :  one  of  them  the  Country-folks  name
'  Clough-Bearradh,  /.  e.  the  (tone  flice. This  river

<  divides  a  lime-ftone  foil,  from  one  of  common  grit,

*  a  thing  very  frequent  in  Ireland,  tho'  but  little  no-
c  ticed,  becaufe  of  its  being  very  common. Except

*  the  above-mentioned  rocks,  all  the  (lone  on  one  fide
«  of  this  river,  is  lime-ftone,  and  that  on  the  other,
'  is  a  coarfe  grit, or  common  mountain- (tone: but

*  oppofite  to  each  other,  on  different  fides  of  the  river,
'  a  large  rock,  too  heavy  for  human  force  to  remove,

*  of  lime-ftone,  hath  feated  itfelf  on  the  grit- (tone  fide
'  of  the  ftream  •,  and  a  large  rock  of  grit,  hath  oc-

*  cupied  the  place  from  whence  the  other  feemed  to  be
'  detached,  and  is  feated  among  the  rocks  of  lime-

*  ftone :  which  is  a  fpeties  of  Lulus  Naturae,  or  fport*


. 2°9

c  ing  of  nature,  not  very  incurious;  and  which  muft

*  have  been  effected  by  fome  prodigious  flood,  or  fhock
4  of  the  earth;  but  earthquakes  have  been  hitherto,
4  'till of  late, quite unknown to this kingdom.'
Bifhop  Pontoppidan  in  his  Hijtory  of  Norway,  p.  56,
writes  thus,  '  Hence  [i. e.  from  the  Deluge,  as  her
4  rightly  concludes]  likewife  remain  on  the  fur  face  of

*  the  earth  the  many  detached  blocks  and  fragments,

*  like  lumps  of  mortar,  feattered  not  only  in  the  val-

*  lies  and  creeks,  but  alfo  on  the  tops  of  the  higheft
4  mountains ;  many  fu*:h  being  found  here  of  the  bulk
'  of  a  common  houfe,  confequently  too  ponderous  to
'  have  been  railed  to  fuch  a  height  by  the  hands  of

*  men-, and befides, of no vilible ufe.' Again;
p.  177,  '  The  higheft  creft  of  the  mountain  of  Svuka
4  in  Oefterdalen,  a  province  of  Norway,  lies,  according

*  to  afurvey  taken  by  the  barometer,  above  two  thou-

*  fand  ells  higher  than  the  lake  of  Famund,  a  water

*  betwixt  the  mountains. This  mount  confifts  of  one
4  folid,  hard  iand-ftone-,  on  the  top  of  the  mountain
4  ftands  a  folid  huge  mafs  of  the  fame  ftonc,  which

*  bears  on  it  many  marks  of  a  diflblution  and  difrup-

*  tion,  which  can  be  attributed  to  nothing  but  water.*
Zwcdenborg  in  Aft  a  Literaria  Sueri<e  (tranflated  in  the
literary  Memoirs  of  Germany,  Vol.  I.  p.  66).obferve's
thus,  c  That  the  Ocean  once  ftood  high  above  the

*  Earth  feems  to  be  more  evidently  concluded  from
'  the  face  of  the  Northern  parts,  than  from  that  of
c  countries  more  Southerly. Here  [in  Sweden]  we
4  find  entire  tracts  filled,  as  it  were  paved*  with  Stones

*  of  a  huge  weight  and  bulk :  and  the  higher  the

*  country  lies  from  the  tea,  thefe  Stones  ars  larger  and

*  more  numerous; as  in  Orebo,  which  lies  high

4  and  between  two  Seas,  larger  and  more  numerous
c  Fragments  are  obferved  than  any  where  elfe.' Ijift-

in  his  Preface  to  his  Hiftoria  Lapidum,  &c, or
P


Hiliory  of  the  figured  Stones  in  Switzerland^  remarks  thus,
6  Then  concerning  Stones  this  truly  wonderful  occurs,
6  that  the  tops  of  rocks  and  fummits  of  the  higheft

*  mountains  are  fometimes  divided  by  ioints  into  ie-
4  parate  pieces ;  and  moreover  that  certain  Fragments
6  or  large  pieces  of  Stone  offome  cubits  in  height  and

*  breadth  are  found  lying  upon  Plains,  and  even  upon

*  Hills  which  are  at  a  great  diftance  from  higher

*  grounds,  or  feparated  from  them  by  vallies :  now

*  by  what  means  the aforefaid  Divisions or  Sepa-
'  rations  were  produced  in  the  hardeil  Rocks,  and

*  how  the  above-mentioned  Fragments  of  rocks  were

*  brought  down  to  the  places  where  they  are  now  found

*  deferves,  in  my  opinion,  a  diligent  inquiry : for  I
4  can  fcarcely  think  that  they  were  naturally  generated

*  in  thefe  places,  fmce  they  carry  in  themlelves  evident

*  marks  of  being  really  the  Fragments  of  Rocks.,  cum  ve-
4  riflima  rupium  Fragmenta  pr^-fe-ferant* A  perfon,
who  attended  Sir  Martin  Frobijher  in  his  fecond  voyage
to  the  Streights  that  pafs  under  his  name,  obferved
upon the adjoining land, *  Huge and monftrous
4  mountains,  whofe  great  fubflance  were  Stones,  and
4  thefe  Stones  fo  fhaken  by  fome  extraordinary  means
'  that  one  is  feparated  from  another,  and  difcordant
c  from  all  other  quarries,'  Hakhqfs  $d.  Vol.  of  Voyages  y
p.  38. Mr.  Ellis  in  his  Voyage  to  Hudfon*s-Bayy  &c.
p.  147,  fpeaking  of  an  ifland  (called  Marble-ifland)
near  the  Coaft  of  new  Nortb-Wales,  fays,  '  The  tops
c  of  the hills are prodigioufly  rent  and  mattered,
4  numbers  of  huge  Rocks  are  confufedly  huddled  to-
4  gether, as  if  by  an  irruption.' Ltidolphus, in  his
Hiftory  oi Ethiopia,  p.  28  j  defcribing  the  Mountains
and Rocks in Habeffmia, writes thus, '  Amongft
4  thefe  Mountains,  and  frequently  in  the  Plain  itfelf,
4  and  in  the  middle  of  the  fields,  rife  up  Rocks  every
4  way  fteep,  yet  varying  their  ihape ;  fome  looking


afar  off  like  towers,  fome  like  pyramids,  fome  like
four-fquare  towers  built  by  art,  and  fo  even  on  the
fides,  as  if  the  workman's  hand  had  done  it :  fo  that
there  is  no  way  to  get  to  the  top  but  by  the  help  of
ladders  and  ropes.*  Under  this  head  may  probably  be
reckoned thofe two remarkable  Rocks or  Stones,,
which  front  each  other,  near  tilankemburgh  in  Germany.,
and  which  are  called  Monks  Craigs^  on  account  of
their  refembling  at  a  diftance  the  appearance  of  two
monks in  their proper habits, Atlas  Geograpbus^
p.  544. So  alfo  I  may  here  mention  that  large  and
curious  Mafs  or  Mountain  (as  it  is  called)  of  iron-ore
at  Taberg  in  Smalandia,  in  Sweden,  for  it  can  really  be
no  other  than  an  enormous  Fragment,  torn  from  the
mountains  above, as  is  evident  from  Dr.  Afcanius*?.
defcription  of  it,1*  which  is  as  follows,  c  This  Moun-
tain is  fituated  in  a  fandy  tract  of  land,  of  which  the
fand  is  extremely  fine. Oppofite  to  it  is  a  valley,
through  which  a  fmall  river  flows. It's  perpendi-
cular height  is  above  4 op  feet-, its  circumference
half  a  Swedifh  league,  or  three  Englifh  miles. The
whole  mountain  is  one  mafs  of  rich  iron-ore,  and
even  in  fome  parts  is  mixed  with  particles  of  native
iron. — There  are  many  perpendicular  as  alfo  horn-
zontal  fiffures  all  over  the  mountain,  which  are  filled
with  the  fame  fand,  reduced  to  a  kind  of  line  mudr
like  pafte,  and  in  no  part  whatever  is  it  impregnated
with  the  leaft  particle  of  the  iron-ore  of  the  mountain,
but  is  of  the  fame  purity  and  nature  as  is  found  on
the  fea-beaches. — No  ore  is  found  beyond  the  foot
of  the  mountain,  nor  on  the  neighbouring  plain ;
fo  that  it  appears  as  if  the  mountain  frad  been  artifi-
cially laid  on  the  fand ,  for  it  has  no  roots,  or,  like
other  mountains,  its  fubftance  does  not  penetrate  the

B  S&P&ilof.  Tratrfaffions,  Vol.  XLlX,  p.  30,  fortheyw  1756
P 2


[ 212 ]

'  ground. — It  is  fituated  near  40  Swedifh  leagues  dif-

*  tant  from  the  lea.* Another  Hill  or  Eminence
that  may  come  under  the  denomination  of  a  Fragment,
is  that  called  the  inaccejjible  or  Needle-mountain  in  Dau-
phiny  in  France?  as  the  form  and  fituation  of  it  plainly
denote,  '  The  pofition  of  this  Hill  is  fuch,  that  it  ap^
'  pears  to  have  been  inverted  or  turned  upfide  downt

*  for  it  is  no  more  than  a  thoufand  paces  in  circumfe-
'  rence  at  the  bottom,  and  is  two  thoufand  at  top  •,  from
'  whence  it  is  called  the  inaccejjible  Mountain. — At  the
'  top  upon  the  plain  of  this  hill  there  is  a  narrow  and
'  fteep  Rifing  or  a  marp-pointed  Elevation ; which
'  gave  this  hill  the  name  of  the  Needle-mountain  (fee

*  Htftoire  de  JJAcad.  des  Sciences  \  for  the  year  1700,
'  p.  4)'  and  which,  probably  was  the  caufe,  why  it
did  not  fettle  upon  its  larger  bafis,  or  the  plain  at  the
top. The  famous  Rock  in  Horeb,  anciently  called
Maffah  or  Meribah,  and  at  prefent  the  Stone  of  Mofes
and  the  Stone  of  the  Fountains  (being  that  which  Mofes
ftriick  with  his  rod,  in  order  to  give  water  to  the  children
of  Ifraclin  the  Wildernefs,  Exod.  xvii)  is  preferved  to
this  day  without  the  leait  injury  from  time  or  accidents,
and  is  certainly  a  Fragment  from  mount  Sinai,  as  ap-
pears from  Dr.  Shaw's  dcfcription  of  it,  '  It  is  a  Block

*  of  Granate  marble, about  fix  yards  fquare, lying
4  tottering  as  it  were  and  loofe  in  the  middle  of  the

*  valley  [of  Repbidim],  and  feems  to  have  formerly  be-
'  longed  to  mount  Sinai,  which  hangs,  in  a  variety

*  of  precipices,  all  over  this  plain.'"

n  SHAW'S  Travels,  p.  352.  It  may  not  be  unacceptable  to
the  reader,  nor  altogether  foreign  to  our  prefent  purpofe,  to
continue  the  Dr's  defcription  of  this  Rock,  which  is  as  follow?.

*  The  '•Maters  ivbich  giifbed  out,  and  the  Stream  ivbicb  jlo-~wed  ivithal
1  (Pfalm, Ixxviii, 20) have  hollowed  acrofs  one  corner  of  this
«  rock  a  Channel  about  two  inches  deep,  and  twenty  wide,  ap-

*  peuring  to  be  incruftated  all  over,  like  the  infide  cf  a tea


[ 213 J

THUS  I  have  given  inftanccs  of  large  maffes  of  Stone
or  Rocks  lying  loofe  upon  the  ground  in  various  parts
of  the  earth,  and  no  doubt  is  to  be  made  but  that  iimi-
lar  mafles  are  to  be  found  in  every  part,  where  there
is  any  confiderable  extent  of  land,  though  fuch  only
are  taken  notice  of  by  travellers  as  have  fomething
remarkable  in  their  appearance.  And  that  thefe
are  really  no  other  than  Fragments  torn  off,  and  car-
ried down,  from  higher  grounds,  every  circumftance
in  the  above  defcriptions  tends  to  point  out,  as  the
reader  will  be  a  fufficicnt  judge  for  himfelf  from  what
has  been  already  faid  on  the  lubject.  I  mall  therefore


kettle,  that  hath  been  long  in  ufe. Befides  feveral  mo/Ty  produc-
tions,  that  are  ftill  preferved  by  the  dew,  we  fee  all  over  this
channel,  a  great  number  of  Holes,  fome  of  them  four  or  five
inches  deep  and  one  or  two  in  diameter,  the  lively  and  demon-
ftrative  Tokens  of  their  having  been  formerly  fo  many  Foun-
tains. It  likewife  may  be  further  obferved,  that  Art  or  Chance
could  by  no  means  be  concerned  in  the  contrivance; for  every
circumftance  points  out  to  us  a  Miracle,  and,  in  the  fame  man-
ner with  the  Rent  in  the  Rock  of  mount  Calvary  at  Jerufalem,
never  fails  to  produce  a  religious  furprize  in  all  who  fee  it.' Simi-
lar to  which  is  Dr.  Pccotke's  Account  of  this  Rock,  and  alfo  that  of
the  Prefetfo's  of  'Egypt ;  each  of  which  the  reader  may  fee  inferted
in the  Bijbcp of  CLOGHER'S  Tranjlailon of  a  MS.  Journal  from
Grand  Cairo  to  Mount  Sinai, &c.  p.  34, ZA  Edit.

I  may  here  obferve  too,  that  in  confidering  this  Rock  as  a
fragrpegt,  the  Miracle  of  the  water's  flowing  out  of  it  will  ap-
pear much  greater  than  if  it  had  been  in  its  natural  bed  or  united
to  the  folid  orb  of  the  earth';  for  it  is  not  uncommon,  in  break-
ing up  or  only  boring  through  the  regular  ftrata  of  the  earth,  to
enter  into  a  natural  ft  flu  re,  which,  communicating  with  thj;
Abyfs,  is  always  full  of  water,  and  when  fuch  is  broken  into,
a  ftream  of  water  will  immediately  iffue  out  and  continue  flow-
ing: but  as  this  Rock  was  feparare  and  detached  from  the  re-
gular and  undifturbed  ftrata,  and  lying  loofe  upon  the  furface  of
the  earth,  it  cannot  be  fuppofed  to  have  had  any  communication
with  the  natural  fiflures,  and  therefore  the  water  that  proceeded
from  it,  muft  have  been  owing  to  a  fupernamral  Cauic;  which
is  agreeable  to  what  an  ancient  Traveller  (M.  BAUMCARTEX,  *

P  3


in  this  place  only  enlarge  a  little  on  the  aforecited  paf-
iage  tofLangius,  (p  210)  '  That  the  tops  of  Rocks  and
*  lummits  of  the  higheft  mountains  are  fometimes
'divided  by  joints  into  feparate  pieces-/  for  though
this  may  feem  a  trifling  and  infignirlcant  obfervation,
yet  the  opening  or  widening  of  thefe  kind  of  joints
was  the  immediately  preceding  effect  to  the  tearing
off  and  carrying  down  of  the  Fragments,  and  one  was
the  confequence  of  the  other,  as  will  be  evident  from
the  following  particulars.  :;  Thefe  Joints  or  Openings
between  the  ftones  in  the  upper  parts  of  Rocks  ought
to  be  diftinguifhed  from  the  natural  fiffures  in  the
body  of  the  rock,  and  are  diftinguimable  there-from

German  Nobleman,  who  travelled  into  Arabia  in  the  year  1507  ;
fee  his  Travels  in  CHURCHILL'S  Colhflion  of  Voyages,  &c.  Vol.  I;
p.  337)  remarks :  «  Which  Miracle  (of  the  water's  flowing  out  of
'  the  above-mentioned  Rock)  was  the  more  wonderful,  becaufe

*  thie  Stone,  though  it  is feparated  from  the  reft  of  the  rock,
'  and  is almoft  of  a  fquarc  figure,  yet  is  fixed  in  the  ground  by
<  only  one  pointed  corner  [fee  Dr.  SHAW'S  Draught  of  it,  in  his

*  Travels,  p. 350] and  confequently  not  in  fo  fit  a  pofture  to
'  extraft  any  moifture  from  the  earth;  and  therefore  its  fending
'  forth  fuch  abundance  of  water  muft  have  been the  work  of  an
'  Almighty  Hand.' I  may  here  add  too,  that  this  Stone  was
'fo  fmall,  expofed  in  fuch  a  manner,  and  fituated  in  fuch  a  tot-
tering condition,  that  it  might  eafily  be  viewed  on  all  fides,  and
even  turned  upfide  ddwn,  had  the  people  that  attended  Mvfcs
iafpe£ed  any  cheat  or  impofture  in  this  affair;  and  in  order to
take  oifall  iufpicion  of  this  kind  might  be  one  reafon  why  GOD
made  chou-p  of  fuch a  Stone  as  this for  the  operation  of  this
miracle,  which  was  fo  extraordinary  and  attended  with  fuch  in-
dubitab'e  proof,  that  the  perfons,  who  had  juft  before  murmured
and  queiUoned  the  divine  Miffion  of  Mofes,  now  entirely  ac-
qniefced  in  it: :;t  d if  inch  perfons as  Corab^  Datban,  Abiram,
md  tkar  companies (who  were  ready  on  every  occafion to  find
fault  with  A/V>.-  <md  difpute  his  Authority)  were  fatisfied,  furely
our  prefent  unbelievers  (who  lay  claim  to  great  modefty  and  i'ea-
fon)  ought  to  be  fo,  fince  the  Miracle  was  examined  by  their  own
iet  of  people,  and  they  may  have  ocular  demonllration  of  thfc
tm:h  ot  it  at  this  day.  f


1 215  ] ..

by  various  marks, — being  generally  far  more  nume-
rous than  the  others,  commonly  filled  with  fludge  or
an  earth-like  matter,  but  principally  are  to  be  known
from  the  others  on  account  of  their  greater  width  in
proportion  to  their  length,  and  becaufe  their  edges  or
terminations  are  much  worn  and  rounded,  and  alfo
the  extraneous  bodies,  fuch  as  fliells,  corals,  &c.  that
project  from  the  edges,  much  worn  and  rubbed.
All  which  clearly  Ihew  that  thefe  edges  have  been
fubject  to  fome  gradual  attrition,  and  that  thefe  joints
or  openings  have  been  a  pafTage  for  fome  fuch  fluid  as
Water;  which  alfo  muft  have  parTed  through  them  with
fome  force  or  violence,  ejfe  thefe  edges  (which  doubt-
lefs  at  firft  like  the  ends  or  terminations  of  other
cracks  in  ftone,  were  fharp,  jagged,  or  pointed  with
acute  angles)  cojjld  not  have  been  worn  to  fuch  a  de-
gree ;  which  laft  confideration  further  mews,  that  this
effed  is  not  to  be  afcribed  to  the  flow  and  gentle
gleanings  of  rain  through  the  earth;  ^ nor  even  where
the  rock  is  naked  and  expoled  to  all  the  violence  and
beating  of  the  wind  and  rain  are  thefe  openings  to  be
attributed  to  them  (though  probably  they  may  en-
large them  a  little),  for  they  are  found  almoit  equal  in
number,  and  fize,  and  have  as  manifeft  marks  of  the
force  of  running  water,  where  the  rocks  are  covered
with  mould  and  rubble  for  the  depth  of  feveral  feet,
as  where  the  rocks  are  expofed  to  the  weather.  And
I  believe  that  there  are  few  or  no  rocks  but  what  have
thefe  joints  or  openings  made  by  the  aclion  of  water,  in
a  greater  or  lefs  degree,  even  under  the  turf;  which
is  a  proof  that  this  effect  was  produced  before  the
earth' was  covered  with  vegetable  mould:  and  fince
thefe  marks  of  the  force  of  water,  are  to  be  feen  upon
the  fummits  of  the  higheft  mountains  and  rocks
throughout  the  whole  world  (for  we  may  reafonably
fupppfe  that  what  is  common  to  the  rocks  and  mount:
P  4


1 216  ]

tains  in  England  and  Switzerland,  is  common  alib  to
all  other)  we  muft  conclude,  that  the  water  that  opened
or  enlarged, and  patted  through  thefe  cracks  was
equally  univerfal  with  its  effects,  or  fpread  over  the
whole  furface  of  the  earth  •,  and  therefore  the  Deluge,
in  which  thefe  accidents  happened,  univerfal. And
as  the  Water  made  its  way  through  thefe  cracks,  it
would  not  only  wear  and  widen  them,  but  by  con-
tinuing and  repeating  its  action  would  at  laft  feparate
and disjoin  large pieces  of  the  rock, and  remove
them  from  their  places :  and  accordingly  it  is  com-
mon to  fee,  in  a  country  that  is  expofed  and  the  rocks
laid  bare,  large  mafies  of  Stone,  ibme  difplaced  but
two  or  three  'inches  from  their  original  beds,  others
two  or  three  feet  (and  there  remaining  pendulous  at
the  tops  of  precipices  and  brows  of  hills), others
carried  down  the  fides  of  mountains  and  hills  for  fe-
veral  yards  -,  but  none  of  them  removed  to  fuch  a  dif-
tance,  or  fo  much  injured  in  the  carriage,  but  that  a
judicious  perfon  may  find  the  very  place  they  for-
merly occupied  in  the  natural  rock,  and  have  as  con-
vincing a  proof  that  they  are  disjefta  membra  or  the
difTevered  parts  of  the  adjacent  rocks,  as  if  he  had
feen  them  torn  from  thence. And  if  he  would  judge
thus of  thofe  that  lie  upon  the  tops  and fides  of
mountains,  he  would  certainly  determine  the  fame  of
thole  that  lie  farther  down  in  valiies  •,  for  the  former,
are  only  the  beginning ;  the  latter,  the  end  of  the  fame
train :  and  as  the  former  were  pufhed  down  or  re-
moved out  of  their  places  by  the  force  of  defcending
water,  fo  alfo  we  muft  conclude  of  the  latter;  and
that  both  are  proofs  that  a  flood  of  waters  formerly
covered, and retreated from, the furface of  the

4e  earth.

II.  Bi'T  befides  thefe  larger  Stones,  there  are  others
are  lefsj  which  aifo  are  to  be  found  Icofe  upon


1 2,7]

the  furface  of  the  earth,  or  elfe  but  a  little  way  be-
neath it-,  and  are  of  fuch  a  nature  themfelves,  and  lie
in  fuch  a  manner,  as  clearly  to  point  out  that  they  are
Fragments  torn  from  the  itrata  above,  and  placed  in
the  form  they  now  lie,  by  currents  of  water  defcend-
ing  from  the  higher  grounds. Of  thefe  lefier  frag-
ments there  are  a  great  variety,  and  no  country  what-
ever without  them. And  as  it  would  be  endlefs  to
fpeak  of  every  different  fpecies,  trace  out  the  acci-
dents  that  have  happened  to  them,  and particula-
rize the  arguments  deducible  from  each,  I  fhall  there-
fore treat,  only  of  one  fpecies,  which,  on  account  of
its  ufefulnefs  in  leading  to  the  difcoveries  of  veins  of
ore,  &c.  has  been  accurately  fearched  into,  and  care-
fully examined,  by  moft  miners. The  fpecies  I  mean,
are  thofe  Stones  which  are  commonly  called  Shoad-
ftones. An  account  of  which  I  fhall  take  from  Mr.
Borlafis  Natural  Hiftory  of  Cornwall,  p.  149  ;  as  that
Author  has  illuflrated  his  meaning  by  fome  Copper-
plate  cuts,  which  the  reader,  if  not  converfant  in  the
affair,  would  do  well  to  confult. But  firft  it  will  be
necefTary  to  explain  a  few  terms. A  Vein  of  ore,  or  a
fffure  containing  ore,  is  called  in  Cornwall  a  Lode  or  ra-
ther Load;  and  I  fuppofe  for  this  reafon,  becaufe  that
is  the  place  where  the  ore  lies,  as  if  it  had  been  loaded
up  or  laded  in,  as  goods  are  in  a  fhip. The  Top-part
of  the  Vein  or  that  which  is  neareft  to  the  furface  of
the  earth,  and  which  generally  confifts  of  a  mixture
of  ore,  loofe  ftones  and  rubble,  is  called  the  Broil.
When  this  Broil,  or  rather  that  which  was  once  the
Broil,  is  found  difperied  or  lying  at  any  diftance  from
the  Load,  thefe  difperied  or  ieparated  parts  are  called
Shades  or  Sboad-jlones,  becaufe,  I  fuppofe,  they  lie  in
fuch  a  manner  as  manifeftly  to  fhevv  that  they  were
Jhed  abroad  or  detached  from  the  main  Vein  or  Load  -,
and  that  this  detachment  or  iepararion  v.'as  made  by


/  [*i8]

the  Force  of  water  will  appear  from  the  following  phce-
nomena,  as  extracted  from  the  above-mentioned
Author. — "  Firft,  the  Broil  is  found  in  greater  quan-
tity in  the  valiies  than  on  the  tops  or  fides  of  hills ;  in
the  level  grounds,  it  is  but  juft  moved  from  its  firft
Ilation,  and  fpread  on  each  fide  the  vein  in  an  equable
manner  i  but  if  the  lode  has  any  declivity  near  it,
then  many  of  the  looie  ftones  of  the  broil  are  found
ilrewed  down  the  hill. .2dly<  The  longer  the  de-
clivity, the  farther  are  thefe  Stones  removed ;  but  the
fhorter  and  fteeper  the  fides  of  the  hill  are,  the  lefs

diftant  they  are  found. 3dl/p  The  fmaller  Stones

are  carried  farthefc  •,  on  the  contrary,  the  largeft  ftones

are  neareft  to  the  lode. 4th!'-  The  fmaller  are

alfo  nearer  to  the  furface  of  the  ground,  but  the  larger
ones,  deeper,  and  ftill  deeper  as  you  approach  the
lode,  'till  the  laft  are  found  contiguous  to  the  lode

itfelf. 5thly-  The  farther  diftant  thefe  Stones  are

from  the  lode,  the  lewer  they  are  in  number  ;  but
they  multiply  as  you  come  nearer,  and  are  always  in

greateft plenty next the lode. 6thly- Thefe

Stones  are  known  from  all  others  by  their  being  of  a
different  colour  and  ftruclure  from  the  fhelf,  rubble?
and  other  common  ftones  of  the  ground  where  they
lie,  but  more  particularly  by  their  angles  being  worn
off;  and  the  farther  diftant  they  are  from  the  lode,  the
fmoother  they  are ;  and  the  nearer,  the  lefs  are  their
angles  blunted.  In  Cornwall  we  call  thefe  difperfed

parts  of  the  broil  Shcdes. (Now)  From

daily  obferving  the  grounds  they  fearch,  and  the  dif-
ferent fubftances  they  there  meet  with,  the  tinners  can
readily  diftinguifh  between  what  has  been  removed,
from  what  has  perpetually  kept  one  and  the  fame  fta-
tion;  the  karn,  that  is  the  firm  folid  rock,  feldom
affords  us  any  inftances  of  alteration  or  movement,
but  every  looie  unconnected  part  of  the  earth  has  been


[  "9  ]

moved  and  (hifted  •,  and  for  as  much  as  the  tranipoied
bodies  are  found  to  be  moved  more  or  lefs,  farther  or
lefs  diftant  from  their  former  beds,  according  to  their
own  fpecific  weight,  and  the  declination  of  the  plane
they  moved  on,"  it  is  the  general  perfuafion  of  every
intelligent  tinner,  that  this  change  of  fituation  can  be
owing  to  nothing  but  tbe  Force  of  Water,  and  of  no
other  water  fo  likely  as  that  of  the  uniuerfal  deluge^
neither  are  we  to  think  this  lei's  the  voice  of  truth,  be-
caufe  it  is  fo  common  an  opinion  •,  for  indeed  the
caufe  fpeaks  fo  much  for  itfelf,  that  in  order  to  con-
firm the  juftnefs  of  this  reafoning,  there  remains  no-
thing more  to  do,  than  to  point  out  the  correfpon-
fdence  and  circumftantial  agreement  betwixt  this  af-
(igned  caufe,  and  each  particular  effect  and  property

mentioned  before. Firft  then,  In  low  and  level

grounds  the  Broil  is  greater  in  quantity,  and  lefs  dif-
turbed,  than  on  the  tops  or  fides  of  hills,  as  being  but
juft  moved  from  its  firfl  iettlement  by  the  vacillating
waters  of  the  deluge  on  a  plane  furface;  whereas  on
a  declivity,  and  a  more  expofed  fituation,  the  waters
had  more  power  to  agitate  and  dilperfe,  and  confe-
quently  the  original  covering  of  the  lode  is  much  lef-

fened  in  quantity. 2dly>  The  gravitation  of  thefc

ftones  (ulually  impregnated  with  metal)  will,  xvhen
moved  with  water, -make  them  deicend  a  deep  hill
quicker  than  down  a  more  eafy  deicent,  in  the  fame
proportion  as  bodies  moved  on  inclined  planes,  their
velocity  being  in  proportion  to  their  own  weight,  the
declivity  on  which  they  move,  and  the  impediments
they  meet  with  there ;  but  the  quicker  they  defcend,
the  fooner  they  get  at  reft,  and  fix  by  immerging  them-

felves  in  the  ftiff  clay  and  rubble  andr/V*  verfa.

3 dly  •  The  fmaller  Shodes  were  moved  to  and  fro  eafily  and
frequently,  and  consequently  much  difperied  ;  whereas
the  greater  and  weightier  the  Ihod^s  were,  the  more


[220]

they  refitted  the  agitation  of  the  waters,  and  were  lei*.

removed. -4thl>r'  The  fmaller  Shodes  are  ufually

found  in  and  near  the  furface,  being  waflied  down-
wards, till,  by  the  refiftance  of  the  ground  on  which
they  are  fpread,  they  are  forced  out  like  the  rills  of
brooks  into  open  day,  whilft  the  larger  by  their  fupe-.
riour  weight,  reft  deeper  interred,  and  nearer  the

lode. 5thly>  The  more  diftant  Shodes  are  found

from  the  lode,  the  more  they  were  difperfed  by  the
water,  and  confequently  became  fewer  in  number  in
any  equal  fpace,  like  diverging  rays-,  and  the  nearer
to  the  lode,  the  thicker  and  more  frequent  they  re-
main for  the  fame  reafon. 6thlyt  That  the  an-
gles of  thefe  Hones  are  blunted,  proceeds  evidently
from  the  agitation  of  water,  and  they  are  fmoothed
in  proportion  to  the  diftance  they  have  been  rolled;
and  had  the  force  continued  a  fufficient  while,  thefe
ftones  would  have  been  as  round  as  the  pebbles  on  the
fea-fhore;  but  the  farther  we  find  them  from  the  lode,
the  more  trituration  they  have  undergone,  and  vice
verfa."

III.  TOGETHER  with  the  above-mentioned  Frag-
ments of  Stone,  both  thole  of  the  larger  as  well  as  thofe
of  the  fmaller  kind,  both  thofe  that  are  round  as  well  as
thofe  of  the  moft  irregular  fhapes,  there  are  alfo  found
a  variety  of  other  fubftances,  lying  in  ftich  a  manner,
both  with  refpeft  to  themfelves,  and  alfo  with  regard
to  the  ground  they  lie  upon,  as  plainly  to  fhew  that
their  fituation  and  direction  were  owing  to  the  effects
of  a  Flood  of  Water  that  once  covered,  and  retreated
from,  the  furface  of  the  whole  earth.

FOR,  firft,  it  is  common  to  obferve  upon  the  tops
of  the  higheft  Mountains  a  fmall  thin  covering  of  a
kind  of  blackifh  bituminous  earth,  commonly  known
in  England  by  the  name  of  Peat-earth  or  Turf ;  and
this  upon  examination  appears  to  be  no  other  than  a


[  "I  ]

mafs  of  rotten  and  perifhed  vegetable s.°  And  where
the  mountains  happen  to  have  any  extenfive  flats  or
large  fpacious  Cavities,  in  form  of  bafons,  at  or  be-
tween their  tops,  there  is  generally  a  ftill  greater  quan-
tity of  thefe  fubftances,  lying  in  a  moffy  or  moraffy
kind  of  ground,  with  a  vaft  number  of  trees,  of  all
forts  and  fizes,  buried  under  them  :  and  many  of  the
trees  and  vegetables  ot  fuch  fpecies  are  not  now  known
to  be  growing  near  thefe  places,  nay,  fomeofthem  of
luch  kinds  as  the  nature  of  the  climate  will  not  permit
to  grow  there:?  confequently,  they  muft  have  been
brought  from  other,  far  more  diftant,  regions:  and
no  Agent  or  Medium  can  be  thought  upon  ib  proper
for  effecting  this  as  Water,  a  Medium  upon  which
thefe  bodies  would  naturally  fwim  and  float,  and
therefore  be  eafily  conveyed  from  place  to  place.
And  the  parts  they  are  now  found  upon  plainly  ihew,
that  their  prefent  fituation  was  owing  to  a  flood  of
waters  that  covered  the  whole  furface  of  the  earth ;
for  they  are  left  upon  fuch  places  where  fuch  a  flood,
in  its  retreat  to  the  lower  land,  would  molt  naturally
depofit  a  great  portion  of  its  floating  wealth,  viz.  upon
the  higheft  and  more  eminent  parts,  or  thofe  places
which  it  firft  receded  from  -,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the
water  upon  the  lea-more  in  retiring,  after  an  high  tide,
throws,  and  by  the  unequally  reciprocal  or  gradually
decreafing  repercuflive  motion  of  its  waves,  leaves,
upon  the  parts  it  firft  recedes  from,  all  lighter  bodies
or  the  fubftances  that  fwamupon  its  furface;  and  in  a
fimilar  manner  as  the  fame  water  in  retiring  from  the
channels  of  rivers,  bays,  &c.  leaves  upon  the  banks
and  fliores  the  finer  parts  of  the  mud  and  ilutch  that


0  WOODWARD'S  Cat.ofFoJfils,  Part  II.  p.  17.  MORTO.N'S  //;-?.
of  Northampton/hire,  p.  83, &c. HALE'S
IP  WOODWARD'S  Nat.  Hiji.  Him.  p.  60,


222

it  was  pregnant  with,  fo  when  t;he  flood  that  drowned
the  whole  earth  retreated  to  its  appointed  place,  it  left
thefurface  in  a  manner  covered  with  the  fined,  lighteft}

and  pureft  of  terreftrial  matter,  Vegetable  Mould.

Secandly  -,  Under  the  vegetable  mould  there  lies  a  vaft
variety  of  Subftances,  of  all  forts,  fliapes,  and  fizes,
but  each  and  all  of  them  placed  in  fuch  a  direction  as
manifeftly  to  indicate  that  their  pofition  and  fituation
were  the  effects  of  a  flood  of  water  retreating  from  the
higher  grounds.  Thus,  for  inftance,  where  the
higher  and  more  inland  countries  abound  with  free-
ftone,  and  chalk,  interlined  with  layers  of  flint ;  in
the  lower  lands  you  will  find  for  the  depth  of  feveral  feet
the  two  former  fubftances  intimately  blended  together
<»r  \vafhed  and  worn  down  to  a  gritty  kind  of  maum,
and  the  nodules  of  flint  broken  into  innumerable
pieces,  and  confufedly  mixed  with  the  afore-mentioned
matter.  In  fuch  places  where  the  upper  ftrata  of
Mountains  confift  of  Lime-ftone,  with  interjacent
layers  of  clay,  and  of  iren-ftone,  replete  with  yellow
and  red  oker,  or  ruddle-,  in  the  vallies  beneath  you
may  difcover  both  large  and  fmall,  round  and  ir-
regular, fragments  of  the  iron  and  lime-ftone,  with
unequal  and  uneven  ftreaks  or  feams  of  Clays  of  all
colours,  that  the  above-mentioned  fubftances  could
tinge  them  with.  Where  the  upper  ftrata  confift  of
it  loofe  Sand-frone,  and  a  brittle  flakey  Slate,  with
beds  of  clay  intervening-,  in  the  lower  lands  you  will
find  for  a  considerable  depth  a  gritty  marly  rubble,
filled  with  immenfely  fmall  pieces  of  iharp  flakey
ftone,  thrown  in  a  variety  of  poftures.  And  the

fame  may  beobferved  refpeclively  and  proportionably
of  all  kinds  of  flrata,  in  fuch  places.  If  we  defcend
from  the  in-land  and  mountainous  countries  to  the
Hills  and  the  Vallies  beneath  them,  and  examine  the
rranner  in  which  things  'ie  under  the  vegetable  Mould,


we  mall  find  them  placed  much  in  the  fame  form  as
thofe  already  defcribed,  only  a  greater  quantity  and
a  greater  variety  of  them  (according  to  the  different
fpecies  of  ftrata  that  lay  between  the  Hills  and  the
Mountains)  and  thefe  alfo  in  general  much  more  worn
and  much  imaller,  efpecially  thofe  parts  that  came
from  the  Mountains.  If  we  go  farther  down,  and
vifit  the  Low-lands  and  Marmes  near  the  Sea-fhore,
a  ftill  greater  variety  and  greater  quantity  of  Rubble
will  prefent  itfelf  to  our  view ;  and  the  fragments  of
ftone  much  more  worn,  and  in  many  places,  ground
down  to  a  fine  Sand  or  Slutch.

Now  that  this  Rubbly-matter  was  placed  in  the
manner  above-defcribed  by  the  action  of  Water  re-
treating  from the  higheft  in-land  Eminences  down
towards  the  Sea-fliore  is  evident, — from  the  multitude
of  Stones  that  are  found  in  it  which  have  been  appa-
rently worn  round  by  agitation  of  Water ; — from  the
number  of  fragments  of  Stone  that  lie  in  trains,  tend-
ing from  the  higher  towards  the  lower  grounds,  juft
in  fuch  form  and  direction  as  water  in  its  retreat
would  naturally  caft  them  (as  I  have  already  mewed
\vith  refpect  to  thofe  Stones  and  Fragments  that  lie
above ground)  j — from the irregular and unequal
ftreaks  and  feams  into  which  it  is  caft  -y  and  what  is
very  remarkable  that  in  fueh  places  where  there  is  any
eminent  projection  in  the  ground  or  rock  underneath,
or  large  fragments  of  Stone  which  the  waters  could
carry  no  farther,  there  thefe  ftreaks  and  feams  of  dif-
ferent matter  are  thrown  over  it  in  various  concentric
arches,  and  the  whole  terminated  in  fuch  a  form  as
plainly  to  indicate  that  the  force  of  a  defcending  flood
placed them  thus ; — and  alfo  from the manner  in
which  this  Rubble  lies  all  over  the  earth ;  as  for  in-
ftance,  upon  the  higheft  in-land  Eminences,  efpecially
fuch  as  are  (harp-pointed  and  fteep,  there  is  but  *


[ 224 ]

fmall  portion  of  this  rubble,  feldom  exceeding  a  few
inches  in  depth  -,  i,n  the  bottoms  of  the  combs  that
defeend  from  thefe  Eminences,  you  will  find  the
quantity  Ibmewhat  increafed  •,  in  the, dales,  (till  more;
in  the  vallies,  a  much  larger  portion -,  and  in  the  low-
land marfhes  near  the  fea-lhore  a  ftill  greater  quantity,
for  2  or  300  feet  in  depth,  and  in  many  places  even  un-
fathomable. All  which  would  be  the  natural  refult
of  a  flood  of  water,  that  formerly  covered,  and  re-
treated from,  the  furFace  of  the  whole  earth,  and  de-
fcended  into  the  Sea,  or  rather,  the  Abyfs  beneath
the  Sea.  For,  as  the  in -land  parts  of  the  earth  were
at  the  greateft  diftance  from  thofe  places  (the  apertures
into  the  Abyfs)  where  the  moft  violent  force  and
flrongeft  action  of  the  water  was,  fo  they  would  be
leaft  torn,  and  of  courfe  lead  covered  with  Fragments
and  Rubbiih ;  and  the  wear  and  tear  by  the  water
would  be  in  proportion  greater  and  greater,  and  the
load  of  loofe  rubble  gradually  and  continually  in-
creafed, till  it  approached  the  Sea-more  i  and  by  the
time  that  the  latter- waters  arrived  thither,  the  Ocean
would  be  full  or  nearly  fo,  and  therefore  thefe  waters
would  be  repelled  back  again,  and  the  loofe  clay-,
mud,  flutch,  &c.  with  which  they  were  filled,  be
caufed  to  fettle  upon  or  near  the  fea-fhore,  and  fo
conilitute,  what  we  call  a  Marjh  or  Moor,  being  a
loofe  clayey  ground,  confiding  of  a  variety  of  terref-
trial  fubftances  worn  extremely  fmall,  and  placed,  in
all  kinds  of  direction,  as  the  reciprocal  and  undulating
motion  of  water  would  naturally  caft  them.

THUS  I  have  mewed,  from  the  confederation  of
that  vaft  variety  of  bodies  or  fubftances  that  are  now
found  loofe  upon  the  furface  of  the  earth  (each  parti-
cular fpecies  carrying  its  particular  proof)  that  this
terreftrial  globe  has  been  covered  by  an  inundation
of  water.


[  "5]

I  AM  now  to  deduce  fome  Corollaries  from  what  hag
been  advanced.

1.  THEN,  from  the  quantity  of  matter  that  is  now
found  loofe  at  the  bottoms  of  Combs,  Dales,  and  Val-
lies,  and  from  this matter  being  principally  of  the
fame  kind  with  the  ftrata  in  the  fides  of  thefe  Cavities  j
we  may  reaforta'bly  infer  that  it  once  made  a  part  of

•  the  ftrata,  and  fo,  that  the  firata  were  once  continued
from  fide  to  fide,  and  of  courie  that  the  Hollows  of
Combs,  Dales,  and  Vallies,  were  once  filled  up  with
ftrata  fimilar  to  thofe,  which  now  appear  in  their  fides
or  in  the  bodies  of  the  mountains  Or  hills,  in  which
thefe  fuperficial  Cavities  are :  and  as  Mountains  and
Hills  are  no  more  than  Eminences  caufed  by  the
formation  of  the  Hollows  of  Combs,  Dales,  a"nd  Val-
lies, fo  it  is  certain  that  the  earth  was  once  of  one  uni-
form fpherical  furface,  and  that  the  prefent  irregular,
mountainous  form,  was  not  the  original,  but  owing  to
fome  after-caufe,  as  I  have  already  endeavoured  td
prove,  p.  1 60,  &c.

2.  FROM  that  vaft  Quantity  of  Rubble  which  in  ^
manner  covers  the  whole  furface  of  the  earth,  chiefly
from  that  which  is  pcfited  in  Combs,  Dales,  and  Val-
lies, it  is  manifeft  that  the  Hollows  of  combs  and
Vallies  were  not  caufed  by  any  ContraSfieH  or  lateral
Jhrinking  of 'the ftrata  (  fee  p.  183)  for  had  thefe  cavi-
ties been  owing  to  fuch  a  caufe,  there  would  have  been
but  little  or  no  loofe  matter  found  in  them, for  in
fuch  a  cafe  the  parts  of  the  ftrata  (when  the  whole
earth  began  to  be  confolidated  after  its  diflblution)  by
being  contracted  within  themfelves, atom  to  atom,
would  be  fo  clofely  united  together,  that  the  Cavities
Caufed  by  thefe  Contractions  would  contain  little  or  no
loofe  matter  in  them,  as  is  the  cafe  with  the  covered
Fiffuresor  thofe  Chafms  in  the  body  of  the  earth,  which
terminate  in  themfelves  and  have  no  Communication
with  other  cracky ;  in  thefe  we  never  find  any  fuch

Q


[226]

loofe  matter  or  rubble  as  that  which  lies  in  the  bot-
toms of  dales  and  rallies :  had  therefore  one  fort  of
thefe  Cavities,  as  well  as  the  other,  been  formed  by
Cetttraflions,  there  would  have  been  like  matter  found
in  each  and  refpectively  placed.

3.  FROM  the  regular  and  gradually  increafing proportion
of  the  rubble  that  is  found  in  Combs,  Dales,  and  Val-
lies, it  is  manifeft  that  thefe  Channels  were  not  caufed
by  any  elevation  and  depreflion  of  the  ftrata  -,  for  had
this  been  the  cafe,  this  rubble  would  have  been  placed
in  the  moft  confufed  and  irregular  manner  pofiible.

4.  FROM  this  fame  increafe  and  apparent  tendency
of  this  rubble  from  combs  to  dales,  from  dales  to  val-
lies, from  vallies  to  the  (helving  bed  of  the  ocean,
we  may  determine  the  place,  whither  the  other  part
of  this  rubble  (viz.  That  which  formerly  filled  up  all
the  Hollows  and  Channels  upon  the  earth  and  in  the
lea)  was  carried  to,  namely,  the  Center  of  the  Earth.
For  had  it  been  carried  no  farther  than  the  bed  of  the
ocean,  and  depofited  there^  it  would  more  than  have
filled  that  ;  becaufe  the  matter  that  was  tore  out  for
making  that  Cavity, would  equally  have  filled it
when  in  the  form  of  rubble,  as  when  it  remained  in
whole  and  unbroken  ftrata :  and  then  there  was  the
additional  fubftance  of  all  that  matter,  that  before  filled
up  the  hollows  of  the  Combs, Dales, and  Vallies
over  the  whole  furface  of  the  earth :  and  had  all  this
been  placed  in  the  bafon  of  the  fea,  it  muft  more  than
have  filled  it. Now  fmce  it  is  certain  that  all  this  rub-
ble was  carried  down  into  the  bed  of  the  Ocean,  and
as  that  did  not  retain  it,  it  muft  therefore  have  pafTed
through,  and  been  carried  into  fome  place  beyond  the
bottom  of  the  fea,  and  that  could  be  no  other  than  the
center  of  the  earth,  the  laft  place  it  could  be  driven
to ;  and  there  it  would  remain  in  form  of  a  nucleus  or
inner-globe^  as  defcribed  p,  54, 187,  and.  delineated
by  I  in  the  Copper-plate.


[2£7]

5.  IF  this  load  of  rubble  and  fragments  of  ftone  were
carried  down  to  the  center  of  the  earth,  it  will  cer-
tainly follow,  that  the  Agent  that  did  this,  that  the
water  (as  it  is  of  a  more  fubtle  and  penetrating  nature
than  this  matter)  accompanied  it  in  its  paflage  and  de-
fcended  together  with  it  j  and  as  this  loofe  matter  oc-
cupied the  center, the  water  would  naturally  fettle
around  it,  as  denoted  by  G.  H.  In  the  PLATE  5  and
fo  conflitute  the  Mofaic  Abyfs.

6.  As  in  tracing  the  fragments  of  ftone  that  lie  in
trains  from  the  mountains,  it  is  common  to  obferve
where  the  defcents  are  gradual  (where  they  are  irre-
gular and  attended  with  fudden  falls  and  precipices*
great  irregularity rriuft  naturally  be  expected)  that
thofe  flones  that  are  largeft  and  lead  worn  lie  neareft
the  tops,  and  thofe  that  are  lefs  and  moft  worn  at  the
greateft  di fiance,  and  alfo  that  thefe  Stones  are  of  the
fame  kind  with  the  ftrata  in  the  mountains  above,
and  not  of  the  kind  with  the  ftrata  m  the  vallies  be-
neath (unlefs  where  they  both  happen  to  be  of  the
fame  fpecies)  fo  it  is  certain  that  the  currents  of  water
which  removed  thefe  ftones  from  their  original  beds,
and  placed  them  in  the  manner  we  now  find  them,
came  from  the  mountain-tops  and  drove  towards  the
fea, and  therefore  that  thefe  Stones  were  not  thus
placed  by  partial  deluges,  owing  to  high  tides  or  ac-
cidental inundations  of  the  fea,  aslbme  have  imagined;
for had  either  of  thefe  latter  been  the  caufe, the
larger  ftones  would  have  been  left  neareft  the  lower
grounds,  and  the  lefTer  necefiarily  thrown  higher  up:
and  if  the  water  of  fuch  a  flood, in  its  return  tc»
the  fea,  had  force enough to bring  back any of
thefe  bodies, it  would  naturally  leave  them  in  the
greateft  irregularity,  the  lefTer  would  be  brought  to
the  larger,  and  the  ftones  of  the  vallies  be  mixed  with
thofe  of  the  mountains j  which  is  not  the  cafe:  and
therefore  thefe  Stones  were  not  thus  placed  by  fuch
partial  floods.  Q^  2


[ 228 ]

7-  FROM  the  confideration  of  fomc  other  circum-
fiances  attending  thefe  fragments  of  Stone,  efpecially
thofe  that  have  been  worn  round  by  water,  we  may
fee  the  falfity  of  another  hypothefis,  calculated  to  folve
thefe  phenomena,  without  reference  to  the  univerfal
Deluge  in  the  time  of  Noah  -,  viz.  that  thefe  Stones
were  thus  rounded,  and  the  fragments  of  Rocks  torn
from  their  original  beds  and  fcattered  over  the  furface
of  the  earth,  at  the  firft  formation  of  things,  when  the
earth  was  totally  covered  with  water,  at  which  time
the  high'eft  mountains  conftituted  part  of  the  bottom
of  the  fea,  therefore  it  is  no  wonder,  fmce  the  retreat
of  thofe  waters,  that  we  now  find  pebbles  and  rocks  in
the  moft  inland  countries.  But  the  grand  queftion  to
befolved,  is,  How  came  thefe  waters  to  retire?  in  which
principal  particular  the  Authors  of  this  hypothefis
are  not  agreed,  fome  imagining  that  the  water  was
rarified  and  changed  into  air  •,  others  that  the  Sea  by
the  violent  motion  of  its  flux  and  reflux,  threw  up
vaft  quantities  of  fand  and  mud,  and  thereby  left  the
fpaces  between  them  as  Vallies,  which  the  water  oc-
cupying, the  eminent  parts  became  dry  and  habitable ;
with  feveral  fuch  groundlefs  and  unphilofophical  afler-
tions.  But  it  required,  and  thefe  Authors  fuppofe
it  did  require,  a  great  length  of  time,  even  that  of
ages,  before  thefe  tranfaclions  were  completed,  and
therefore  that  the  parts  of  the  earth,  which  at  prefent
bear  marks  of  the  Sea  conftituted  for  a  long  time  the
bottom  of  it,  and  thereby  gave  room  for  the  waters  to
feparate  the  rocks  from  their  natural  places,  and  form
the  fragments  of  ftone  into  pebbles,  and  place  them  in
the  manner  we  now  find  them  in  the  moft  diftant  coun-
tries from  the  fea.  But  then  there  is  a  very  material
difference  between  the  in-Jand  pebbles  and  rocks,  and
thofe  formed  arid  found  at  fea.  It  is  common  to  ob-
ferve  vaft  numbers  of  pebbles  and  ftones  upon  the  fea-
fhore  which  have  feveral  extraneous  bodies,  fuch  as
(hells,  corals,  and  corallines,  affixed  to  their  outfidesa


and  many  of  thefe  fo  clofely  adhering  that  it  is  almoft
impofiible  to  difengage  one  from  the  other  without
breaking  both-,  and  it  is  alfo  certain  that  thefe  grow
and  are  formed  at  this  day,  especially  in  calm  and
quiet  places.  But  now,  after  the  ftricleft  examination
I  could  make  upon  immenfe  multitudes  of  Rocks  and
rounded  ftones  that  I  have  feen  at  land,  I  never  could
obferve  any  fuch  extraneous  bodies  adhering  to  them,*1
nay,  not  upon  fuch  as  were  but  a  few  miles  from  the
fea,  when  the  pebbles  upon  the  fea-mpre  abounded
with  them ;  which  muft  plainly  mew,  that  the  places
where  thefe  pebbles  are  now  found  were  never  the  bot-
tom of  the  fea,  nor  the  pebbles  themfelves  formed  at
fea,  but  that  they  were  made  at  fome  particular  time,
or  in  fome  general  deluge,  the  waters  of  which  muft
have  been  in  fuch  conftant  agitation  and  perpetual
fluctuation,  as  not  to  permit  fuch  things  to  fettle  and
grow  •,  which  is  agreeable  to  the  Mofaic  account  of  the
Flood  in  the  time  of  Noab^  fee  p.  51.  And  what
further  mews  that  the  places  where  thefe  Stones  are  now
found  were  never  the  bottom  of  the  fea,  nor  the  Stones
themfelves  formed  at  fea,  is,  that  we  never  find  (what
is  very  common  to  find  at  fea,  and  upon  the  fea- more)
any  artificial  things,  fuch  as  regularly  fhaped  pieces  of
wood,  ftone-inftruments,  iron-tools,  potfherds,  &c.


•>  I  have  feen  indeed  one  or  two  inftances  of  Nodules,  having  a
{"mail  fhell  or  a  plant  flicking  to  their  outfides ;  but  then  thefe
are  a  very  different  fpecies  of  Stones  from  in-land pebbles  (though
they  refemble  them  in  their  outward  fhape)  as  I  have  fhew'ed,
p.  196.  Ncduhs  were  formed  during  the '  diflblved  llate  of  the
earth  and  the  great  confufion  of  things  at  that  time,  and  many
of  them  have  apparently  paffed  through  feveral  ftrata  that
abounded  with  (hells  and  plants,  and  at  laft  fettled  in  ftrata  that
were  replete  with  thefe  extraneous  bodies,  fo  that  it  is  no  won-
der that  we  fcmetimes  find  one  or  two  of  thefe  bodies  adhering
to  their  outfides :  but  in-land  pebbles  were  formed  at  a  different
time,  in  a  different  place,  and  in  a  different  manner,  as  oiay  be
f?en  in  the  above  cited  page.


naturally  lying  among  them,  but  only  fuch  as  were
placed  there  by  defign  or  accidentally  dropt,  as  is  evi-
dent from  the  prior  disturbance  of  the  earth,  where
fuch  have  been  taken  up  at  any  depth,  and  their  being
generally  found  in  fuch  places  where  Old  Cities,
Caftles,  Camps,  or  Lakes  have  been/  And  indeed
had  thefe  artificial  things  ever  been  cceyal  with  thefe
fragments  of  (tones,  or  fubject  to  the  agitation  of  water
as  they  have  been,  they  would  certainly  have  been
worn  and  rounded  in  the  fame  manner  as  they  are.
Befides,  the  artificial  things  that  are  taken  up  at  Tea,
have  indifcriminately  fhells  and  corals,  growing  on
them,  as  well  as  the  {tones  and  pebbles  on  the  more,


r  'I  have  read  indeed  of  boats,  fmall  barques,  anchors  of
Ships,  &c.  being  found  at  land  in  countries'  far  diftant  from  the
fea,  but  then  it  has  generally  been  in  authors  of  no  great  credit,
and  the  facts  aflerted  upon  no  good  teftimony ;  but  even  allowing
them  to  have  been  true,  it  is  certainly  much  more  reafonable  to
fuppofe,  that  the  places  where  thefe  things  were  found,  were  for-
merly the  bottoms  of  large  Lakes,  which  by  defign  or  accident
had  been  drained,  rather  than  the  ancient  bed  of  the  Sea1;  in  the
fame  manner  as  in  draining  the  famous  Lake  of  Martin-mcsr  in
Lancajbire,  which  was  eighteen  miles  in  circumference,  there  were
found  in  the  dutch  at  the  bottom  no  lefs  than  eight  boats,  fhaped
fomewhat  like  the  Canoes  made  ufe  of  in  America,  as  Dr.  Leigh
in  his  hiftory  of  that  County, '  aflures  us  of  his  own  know-
ledge, p.  \S,  and  181.  Or  elfe  thefe  things  might  be  attri-
buted to  violent  tempefts  or  accidental  overflowings  of  the  Sea;
and  befides,  whatever  things  of  this  nature  may  be  now
found  at  land  in  Europe,  fome  alldwance  muft  be  made  for  the
event  recorded  (p  82)  of  this  treatife,  when  numbers  of  perfons
procured  Ships  and  other  conveniences,  under  apprehenfion  of  a
general  Deluge,  and  probably  many  of  thefe  were  made  at  land
in  countries  far  diftant  from  the  Sea,  as  it  was  fuppofed  that  the
devaftntio'n  would  reach  all  over  Europe :  which  therefore,  as  the
event  did  not  happen,  would  be  left  in  the  places  where  they
were  firft  made,  and  in  the  future  ages  might  be  imagined  to
have  been  wrecks  of  mips  loft  at  fea,  though  the  fea  never  reached
thefe  parts;  and  what  parts  of  the  earth  the  fea  has  really  covered
vi I j  be  beft  determined  by  the  marks  given  in  the  text,  in  the
iubfequent  pages.


[ 231 ]

but  the  artificial  things,  even  thofe  that  bear  the
marks  of  the  greateft  antiquity,  which  are  taken  up
in  the  inland  countries,  have  no  fuch  bodies  adhering
to  them;  which  is  a  plain  and  an  undeniable  proof,
that  neither  they,  nor  the  places  where  they  are  now
found,  were  ever  covered  by  the  fea.  And  here,  by
the  way,  we  have  an  eafy  and  certain  method  of  dif-
covering  what  parts  of  the  earth  the  fea  might  formerly
have  encroached  upon,  and  covered  for  any  length  of
time,  and  after  have  retreated  there-from,  and  what
not,  viz.  by  obferving  whether  the  rocks  and  flones,
efpecially  the  artificial  things,  found  at  land,  have  any
marine  productions  adhering  to  them  or  not ;  if  they
have  none,  we  may  depend  upon  it,  the  Sea  never
reached  thefe  parts  •,  if  they  have  fome,  efpecially  if
they  are  of  the  fame  kind  with  the  fhells  and  corals
upon  the  neareft  fea-ihore,  we  may  conclude  it  has.
But  upon  the  ftricteft  refearches  I  could  make  with
regard  to  thefe  particulars,  I  could  never  find  that  the
Sea  had  receded  above  a  few  miles  in  length,  or  a  few
yards  in  depth,  from  its  original  and  firft  known  boun-
daries ;  and  that  only  in  places  where  the  land  was
low  and  flat,  and  thefe  recefles  or  retreats  chiefly  ow-
ing to  banks  thrown  up,  or  canals  cut,  by  the  art  and
labour  of  man.  All  Hypothefes  therefore  to  ac-
count for  thefe  in-land  rocks  and  pebbles  (which  fo
apparently  carry  marks  of  having  been  moved,  muf-
fled, or  worn  round  by  water)  upon  fuppofition  that
the  places  where  they  are  now  found  were  formerly  the
bottom  of  the  fea,  muft  fail,  and  recourfe  can  only
be  had,  for  the  explication  of  thefe  phenomena,  to
the  one  Universal  Deluge  in  the  time  of  Noah.


III.

FROM  the  confideration  of  things  upon  the  fur-
Face  of  the  earth,  let  us  now  defcend  into  the  inftde%
and  fee  what  proofs  we  can  educe  from  thence  of  an
UNIVERSAL  FLOOD.

AND  here  let  us  enter  the  fubterranean  Kingdom  by
thofe  eafy  and  convenient  paffages, — the  natural  Caves
and  Holes  of  the  Earth :  and  in  the  firft  place  collect
what  evidence  we  can  for  the  point  in  queflion  from
thefe  Caves  themfelves.

ALL  the  natural  Caverns  that  I  have  feen  myfelf,
or  thofe  that  I  have  read  defcripdons  of,  appear  to
me  to  be  no  other  than  what  in  the  North  of  England
are  called  Swallows, and  in  the  PFeJl, Swallet-boks.
Thefe  Holes  or  Caves  are  generally  nearly  circular  at
top  -,  and  from  twenty  tp  two  hundred  yards  or  more  in
circumference. Many  of  them  have  a  direct  perpen-
dicular defcent,  like  the  Hollow  of  a  Well,  for  the
depth  of  feveral  fathoms ; in  others  the  defcent  is
fomevvhat  winding  and  crooked ;  and  generally,  at  a
greater  or  lefs  diftance,  there  is  a  large  fpacious  Open-
ing, into  which  enter  leveral  leifer  Caves  or  Conduits ;
fome  gently  declining  from  the  top,  others  lying  in
nn  horizontal  line,  and  fome  defcending  perpendicu-
larly downright  to  unfathomable  depths. The  En-
trance or  Mouth  leading  into  many  of  thefe  Caverns
is  at  prefent  horizontal  and  very  fmall;  and  hence  Na-
turalifts have  been  greatly  puzzled  about  the  vaft
Spaces  within,  and  how  it  came  to  pafs  that  fuch  fmall
orifices mould lead to fuch fpacious Openings;
•whereas  in  fact  the  larger  Cavities  were  made  nrft,  and
the  lefier  that  proceed  from  them  after :  and  the  true
entrance  into  fuch  Caverns  is  at  top,  upon  the  furface
of  the  earth,  and  only  covered  with  rubble  and  mould ;
and  indeed  the  large  Spaces  within,  in  mod  of  thefe
Caverns,  reach  near  to  the  furface  and  form  part  of
the  true  and  original  entrance  j  fo  that  they  aii  may


r

be  looked  upon  as  Swallets,  or  in-Iand  gulpbs  that  f wal-
lowed down  the  waters  of  the  deluge.

HAVING  thus  far  explained  myfelf,  I  fhall  now
fhew  in  what  various  parts  of  the  earth,  and  how  dif-
tant  from  each  other,  thefe  Caverns  are  to  be  found.

THE  firft  that  I  fhall  mention,  and  the  moft  noted  in
England,  is  that  called  Elden-hcle,  \nDerbyJhire. This
is  a  direct  perpendicular  Chafm,  of  an  oblong  form,
as  far  as  the  eye  can  difcern  its  depth  ;  the  mouth  of  it
is  about  twenty  yards  over  one  way, and  eight  the
other. Mr.  Cotton  endeavoured  to  find  the  bottom*
by  plumbing  it  with  a  line  eight  hundred  and  eighty-four
yards  long,  but  could  not  reach  it:  and  upon  ex-
amining the  lower  end  of  the  line,  he  found  that  eighty
yards  of  it  had  funk  through  Water.5 Another  gen-
tleman let  down  a  line  nine  hundred  and  thirty- three
yards,  without  meeting  with  the  bottom.1 The  Earl
of  Leicejler,  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  days,  caufed  a  man
to  be  let  down  with  a  bafket  of  Hones  tied  to  his  mid-
dle, in  order  that  by  letting  fome  of  them  occafionally
fall,  he  might  judge  of  the  depth  of  the  Cave,  and  after
he  had  remained  at  the  length  of  a  rope  6f  two  hundred
ells  for  fome  time,  was  pulled  up,  in  expectation  of
fome  great  difcoveries : but  when  he  came  up,  he
was  fenfelefs, and  died  of  a  phrenfy  in  eight  days*
When  I  was  upon  the  fpot,  I  found,  upon  enquiry,  that
two  men  had  lately  ventured  down  this  cavity,  upon
fuppofition,  that  fome  cattle,  that  had  been  miffing,
might  have  fallen  into  it :  and  when  they  had  de-
fcended  to  the  depth  of feventy  yards,  they  found  the
carcafes  of  feveral  oxen  and  meep ;  but  could  get  no
further ;  thefe  carcafes,  together  with  the  frones  that
had  been  thrown  in  by  the  curious  in  endeavouring  to

s. See  the  Wonders  of  the  PtaL~,  p.  40.

*  Pbilof.  T'ranf.  N"  2.

*  HOBBES  de  Mirabilibus  Petti.


[  234  3

diicover  its  depth,  having  probably  covered  and  (lop-
ped up  the  leading  Cavity.  They  faid  alfo,  that  af-
ter they  had  been  let  down  about  half  way,  the  cavern
opens  and  widens  into  a  fpacious  vault,  and  that  there
appeared  to  be  another  great  cavity,  befides  that  of
Elden-hole,  leading  to  the  fur  face  of  the  earth.  And
upon  examination,  I  obferved,  that,  at  about  the  dif-
tance  of  two  hundred  yards  from  Elden-hole,  there  was
a  gradual,  nearly  circular,  Sinking  in  the  earth,  near
three  hundred  yards  in  circumference,  and  from  its  ut-
tnoft  fummit,  about  twenty  yards  deep  :  and  this  ap-
peared to  me  to  be  undeniably  the  true  mouth  of  this
Swallow^  and  that  Elden-hole  is  no  more  than  a  lateral
conduit  leading  into  it.  Three  miles.  Northward

of  Elden  is  another  famous  Cavity,  called  Peak-hole^
fituated  almoft  in  the  Village  of  Caftltton,  and  at  the
foot  of  a  femi-circular,  or  rather  femi-cylindrical
Rock,  (the  hollow  fide  facing  you  as  you  enter)  above
i/voo  hundred  feet  high,  and  the  diameter  of  the  cylinder
•jfoQutJixty  feet ;  at  the  bottom  of  this^jperpendicularly
hollowed  rock,  this  Cavern  opens  its  mouth  in  form
of  an  arch  atleaft/tfr/y/a?/  high,  andyfo/jy  broad  at  the
bottom  jw  the  top  part,  and  the  fides  of  this  arch,  as
alfo  the  whole  femi-cylindrical  rock  above,  are  very
fmooth,  and  apparently  worn  away  by  the  gradual  at-
trition of  fome  fuch  Agent  as  water ;  and  had  not  one
fide  of  this  tubular  Hollow  been  broken  down  and
carried  away  by  the  Agent  that  firft  formed  this  per-
pendicular Channel,  it  had  refembled  at  the  top  and  in
the  infide  a  common  well,  and  at  firft  fight  would,
have  been  efteemed  a  Swattet-bole  •,  and  the  not  attend-
ing to  this  particular,  has  caufed  great  perplexity  in  ac-
counting for  the  origin  of  this  Cave.  From  the

w  If  the  reader  has  not  feen  the  place,  he  may  have  a  juil
idea  of  it  from  N°-  8.  of  Mr.  SMITH'S  Prints  of  the  profpefts  iji
th&  Mountainous  parts  of  Derlyfeire ,  &c.


1 235  ]

mouth  of  this  Hole  to  the  diftance  of  one  hundred  yards
the  roof  gradually  declines,  till  you  are  obliged  to
bend  and  creep  in  order  to  proceed  forward,  and  after
you  have  crept  a  little  way,  you  enter  into  a  fpacious
wide  apartment-,  which  continues  for  about  thirty
yards^  when  the  rock  almoft  clofes  again,  and  after
you  have  palled  (in  a  little  boat)  a  river  that  runs
through  the  Cave,  the  rock  widens  again  into  a  (till
greater  Opening,  till  you  come  to  a  fecond  ftream  of
water,  where  it  again  contracts  itfelf  •,  but  as  foon  as
you  have  paJGTed  this  Current,  another  fpaeious  Open-
ing prefents  itfelf,  which  continues  in  fome  places
higher,  in  others  wider,  till  the  roof  of  the  rock  lies
upon  the  very  furface  of  a  third  Current  of  water,  and
puts  an  end  to  the  traveller's  journey  ;  but  by  agitating
this  water  with  our  feet,  we  heard  a  rumbling  undulat-
ing noife  in  fome  great  cavern  beyond.  From  the  en-
trance to  the  end  of  this  Cave  is  about  feven  hundred
yards.  Where  the  larger  Openings  were,  there  v/ere
feveral  leflfer  lateral  Cavities  or  rather  Conduits,  and
fome  that  defcended  perpendicularly  down  from  the
top,  a*nd  the  fides  of  all,  both  large  and  fmall,  are  worn
'  as  ijnooth  and  as  round  or  rather  tubular  as  a  conflant
paffage  of  water  could  poflibly  wear  them :  and  as  this
Agent  would  exert  itfelf  ftronger  and  make  more
room  for  itfelf  where  the  greater  number  of  ftreams
met,  hence  it  is  that  where  the  Conduits  for  the  water
appear  to  be  larger  and  more  numerous,  there  the
Openings  within  are  wider  and  more  fpacious ;  and
where  there  appear  to  have  been  but  one  or  two  paf-
fages  for  the  water,  and  thofe  fmall,  there  the  Cavi-
ties are  proportion  ably  lefs.  Not  that  I  would  fup-
pofe  that  the  water  tore  thefe  pafiages  through  the  fo-
lid  rock  without  any  prior  opening  or  fiilurc :  no ;
there  were  proper  cracks  and  chafms  made  for  its  de-
fccnt  before,  as  I  have  me  wed,  p.  50,  184.  But  where


thcfe  cracks  were  larger  than  in  other  places,  there  the
water  would  defcend  in  a  fuller  body  and  with  greater
impetuofity,  and  would  work  and  wind  its  way
through  lefTer  cracks  to  get  into  the  greater  Cavities,
and  by  its  frequent  paffages  through  both  forts  of  thefe
Channels,  would  wear  and  tear  away  the  rock  to  a  great
degree,  and  fo  vaftly  widen  the  original  openings.
And  as  thefe  original  Cracks  would  naturally  be  tf-
regular,  according  to  the  grain  or  different  conftitu-
tion  of  the  ftone  or  ftrata  in  which  they  were  formed,
fo  thefe  irregularities,  when  opened  and  widened  by
the  pafTage  of  the  water,  would  produce  the  rifings
and  fallings  in  this  and  fuch-like  Caverns.  I  have
been  longer  in  defcribing  and  accounting  for  the  ori-
gin of  this  Cave,  than  I  need  be  with  refpecl  to  any
other,  for  though  there  are  fcarcely  two  that  are  ex-
actly alike  in  every  thing,  yet  there  are  none,  that  I
have  feen,  but  what  agree  in  the  chief  and  principal
particulars.  Thus,  at  about  the  diftance  of  eight
miles  South-Weft  from  Peak-hole  there  is  another
fimilar  Cavity  known  by  the  name  of  Poolis-hole  (not
far  from  the  village  of  Buxton]  aboutyfo  hundred  yards
in  length.  In  this  alfo  there  are  feveral  rifings  and
fallings,  feveral  lefTer  and  larger  Openings,  with  col-
lateral conduits,  and  the  fides  of  the  rock  in  all  much
worn,  and  in  many  places  greatly  torn,  as  appears  from
the  large  fragments  that  lie  loofe  at  the  bottom.  The
three  above  defcribed  Caverns  are  indeed  juftly
efteemed  the  principal  in  this  County,  but  there  are
many  that  are  lefs,  and  equally  demonftrative  of  the
opinion  I  have  advanced  -,  and  there  are  {till  a  greater
number  that  are,  in  a  manner,  undifcovered ;  for
though  they  cannot  be  entered  and  examined,  yet
thefe  entrances  or  orifices  are  very  vifible,  and  are
cafily  diftinguifnable  from  the  mouths  of  the  pits  from
whence  they  dig  ore,  for  thefe  latter  have  generally  a


[2371

li^.p  of  rubbifh  thrown  out  all  around  them,  and  dc-
fcend  perpendicularly  downright,  whereas  the  ^wallet-
holes  have  no  fuch  matter  round  them,  but  the  rubbilh.
lies  in  the  bottom,  and  there  is  commonly  a  gradual
inclination  or  feeming  finking  in  of  the  earth  that  leads
to  them.  It  is  not  unuiual  for  miners  in  tracing  veins
of  ore  to  open  fome  of  thefe  concealed  Cavities,  and
when  they  do  fo,  they  generally  find  as  large  Caverns
within  them  as  either  of  the  above  defcribed.  This
Country  indeed  abounds  with  thefe  covered  Swallows
(as  they  are  called)  efpecially  upon  the  moor-lands,  and
I  have  feen  fome  of  the  extenfive  flats  there  fo  perfo-
rated with  them,  that  the  face  of  the  earth  refembled,
(comparatively  fpeaking)  a  Sieve.  I  have  alfo  feen
ieveral  fuch  upon  the  Mountains  in  Wales^  efpecially
upon  thofe  above  Tenby  in  Pembroke/hire,  and  van:
numbers  of  them  upon  Mendip-bills  in  Somerfetfoire*
particularly  in  Charterhoufe-liberty  and  near  Green-ore
Farm;  and  Ookey-hole,  which  is  about  four  miles  dif-
tant  from  the  lafl  mentioned  place  (of  which  and  of
fome  other  Caverns  near  it,  there  is  a  particular  account
in  Pbilof.  Tranf.  N°-  2)  is  evidently  no  other  than  a
Sw&ttet  itfelf-,  as  alfo  are  the  Caves  lately  difcovered  at
Lockfton  and  Banwell^  about  twelve  miles  to  the  North
Weft  of  Ookey ;  all  thefe  being  in  every  material  cir-
cumftance  exactly  fimilar  to  thofe  I  have  already  de-
fcribed. There  are  alfo  a  few  of  thefe  Swallet-boles
in  and  near  St.  Vincent's  Rocks,  about  two  miles  dif-
tant  from  Briftol;  and  Penpark-hole  (of  which  the
reader  may  fee  a  defcription,  and  a  cut  reprefenting
the  infide  of  it,  in  N0>  143,  of  Philof.  Tranf.)  which  is
about  four  miles  Northward  from  the  aforefaid  Rocks,
is  manifeflly  no  other.  Of  the  fame  kind  is  the
Cavern  mentioned  by  Sir  Robert  Atkyns,  in  bis  ancient
and  present  State  of  Gloucefterflrire,  p.  230,  to  have  been
difcovered  at  Cold-AJhton^  ten  miles  to  the  Eaft  of  Pen-
park  (which  upon  enquiry,  I  found  has  been  fmcc


[238  ]

ftopped  up) ;  the  defcription  of  which  is  fo  natural
that  it  is  worth  reciting,  '  As  a  perfon  was  plowing
«  with  oxen,  one  of  the  oxen  faltered  in  a  hole,  which,

*  when  the  earth  was  removed  from  it,  appeared  like

*  to  the  Tun  of  a  Chimney  -,  through  which  feveral

*  perfons  have  been  let  down  ;  where  they  found  a
c  Cavity,  in  which  one  might  walk  above  half  a  mile

*  one  way,  and  it  is  not  known  how  far  the  other  :
«  and  as  they  walked  with  candles,  they  obferved  fe-

*  veral  fuch  Tunnels  afcending  towards  the  furface  of
c  the  earth.' An  ingenious  gentleman,  in  giving,
an  account  of  his  Journey  over*  Crcfs-fell  Mountain  in
Cumberland  (which  is  part  of  that  immenfe  ridge  of
mountains  that  reach  from  Derbyjhire  to  Scotland,  and
are  called  the  Britijh  Alps)  writes  thus :  «  The  Swal-

*  lows,  thofe  inconteftable  remains  of  Noalfs  Deluge,
c  begin  here  [on  Roderic  heights]  to  be  very  frequent.

*  Some  of  thefe  are  thirty  or  forty  yards  in  diameter,
4  and  near  as  much  deep,  perfectly  circular,  but  con-
4  tain  no  water  at  any  feafon,  the  ground  having  gra-

*  dually  fallen  in  at  the  finking  of  the  waters ; but
c  where  they  happened  amid  rocks,  the  holes 'are  left
c  open  to  incredible  depths.' The  lame  Author  fays,

*  That  on  the  top  of  the  fame  \Roderic}  heights,  is  a
'  pretty  large  Lake,  called  Greencaftle-lecb^  which  re-

*  ceives  no  vifible  feeder,  but  emits  a  fmall  ftream
c  Northward  to  the  faid  burn;'*  and  this  in  all  proba-
bility is  no  other  than  the  mouth  of  a  large  Swallet.
Another  gentleman  gives  the  following  defcription  of
Ingleborough  Mountain  in  the  Weft-riding  of  Tork-
Jbire  ;Y  which  as  it  contains  not  only  an  account  of

*  Gent.  Mag.  for  Auguft, 1747.

i  Gent.  Mag.  for  March,  1761.  This  Mountain  is  reckoned
to  be  one  of  the  higheft  in  England,  according  to  an  old  faying  in
the  North,

P enHle -bill,  Petti  gent  and  Inglelorough

Are  the  higheft  Hills  all  England  thorough.


1 239  ]

Swallet-holes,  but  alfo  fome  other  particulars  relative  to
the  fubject  I  have  been  treating  of,  I  mall  infert  it  at
large.  '  This  mountain  is  fingularly  eminent,  whether
c  you  regard  its  height,  or  the  immenfe  bafe  upon
'  which  it  ftands.  It  is  near  twenty  miles  in  circumfe-
'  rence.  In  this  mountain  rife  confiderable  ftreams,
e  which  at  length  fall  into  the  Irtfb  Sea.  The  land
c  round  the  bottom  is  fine  fruitful  pafture,  interfperfed
e  with  many  acres  of  lime-done  rocks.  As  you  afcend

*  the  mountain,  the  land  is  more  barren,  and  under  the
'  furface  is  peat-mofs,  in  many  places  two  or  three  yards
c  deep,  which  the  country  people  cut  up,  and  dry  for
'  burning,  inftead  of  coal. As  the  mountain  rifes,  it

*  becomes  more  rugged  and  perpendicular,  and  is  at
'  length  fo  fteep  that  it  cannot  be  afcended  without

*  great  difficulty,  and  in  fome  places  not  at  all. In

*  many  parts  there  are  fine  quarries  of  flate,  which  the
6  neighbouring  inhabitants  ufe  to  cover  their  houles ;

*  there  are  alfo  many  loofe  ftones,  but  no  lime-Hones^
4  yet,  near  the  bafe,  no  ftones  but  lime-Hones  are  to

*  be  found. The  loofe  flones  near  the  fummit  the

*  people  call  greet-ftone. The  foot  of  the  mountain

*  abounds  with  fine  fprings  on  every  fide,  and  on  the

*  weft- fide  there  is  a  very  remarkable  fpring  near  the

*  fummit. The  top  is  very  level,  but  fo  dry  and  bar-

*  ren  that  it  affords  little  grafs,  the  rock  being  but

*  barely  covered  with  earthi It  is  faid  to  be  about  a
4  mile  in  circumference. There  are  likewife  difcover-

*  able  a  great  many  other  mountains  in  fPeftmoreland

*  and  Cumberland^  as  alfo  the  town  of  Lancafter,  from

*  which  it  is  diftant  about  twenty  miles. The  weft  and

*  north  fides  are  moft  fteep  and  rocky ;  there  is  one

*  part  to  the  fouth,  where  you  may  afcend  on  horfe-

*  back  i  but  whether  the  work  of  nature,  or  of  art,  I

*  cannot  fay. A  part  of  the  faid  mountain  juts  out  to
6  the  north-eaft  near  a  mile,  but  fomewhat  below  the


[  240  ]

e  fummit ;  this  part  is  called  Park-fell  -,  another  part
'  juts  out  in  the  fame  manner,  near  a  mile,  towards

*  the  eaft,  and  is  called  Simon-fell  •,  there  is  likewife
4  another  part  towards  the  fouth,  called  Little  Ingh-

*  borough ;  the  fummits  of  all  which  are  much  lower
6  than  the  top  of  the  mountain  itfelf. Near  the  bafe,

*  there  are  holes  or  chafms,  called  Swllows,  fuppofed
e  to  be  the  remains  of  Noah*s  deluge ;  they  are  among

*  the  lime-ftone  rocks,  and  are  open  to  an  incredible

*  depth. The  fprings  towards  the  eaft  all  come  to-

*  gethcr,  and  fall'  in*j  one  of  thefe  fwallows,  or  holes,

*  called  Allan  Pctf-,  and  after  pafiing  under  the  earth

*  about  a  mile,  they  burft  out  again,  and  flow  into

*  the  river  Kibble,  whofe  head,  or  fpring,  is  but  a
4  little  further  up  the  valley. The  depth  of  this  fwal-

*  low, or  hole, could never  be afcertained ; it  is

*  about  twenty  poles  in  circumference, not  perfectly

*  circular,  but  rather  oval. In  wet  foggy  weather,
'  it  fends  out  a  fmoak,  or  mifl,  which  may  be  feen  a

*  confiderable diftance. Not far from this hole,
c  nearly  north,  is  another  hole,  which  may  be  eafily
'  defcended. In  fome  places  the  roof  is  four  or  Jive

*  yards  high, and  its  width  is  the  fame ; in  other
f  places  not  above  a  yard  ;  and  was  it  not  for  the  run

*  of  water,  it  is  not  to  be  known  how  far  you  might
c  walk, by the help of  a  candle, or  other  light.
c  There  is  likewife  another  hole,  orchafm,  a  little  weft
e  from  the  other  two,  which  cannot  be  defcended  with-
c  out  difficulty  :  you  are  no  fooner  entered  than  you
c  have  a  fubterraneous  paflage,  fometimes  wide  and

*  fpacious,  fometimes  fo  narrow  you  are  obliged  to

*  make  ufe  of  both  hands,  as  well  as  feet,  to  crawl  a
c  confiderable  way ;  and  as  I  was  informed,  fome  per-
e  fons  have  gone  feveral  hundred  yards, and  might

*  have  gone  much  further,  durfl  they  have  ventured.
6  There  are  a  great  many  more  holes,  or  caverns,  well


[ 24' ]

c  worth  the  notice  of  a  traveller :  fomedry,  fomehav-

*  ing  a  continual  run  of  water;  fuch  as  Elackfide  Cove,
4  Sir  William9  s  Co-ve,  Atkinfoiis  Chamber^  &c.  all  vvhofe
«  curiofities  are  more  than  I  can  defcribe. There  is
4  likewife, partly  fouth-eaft, a  fmall  rivulet,  which
4  falls  into  a  place  considerably  deep,  called  Long-Kin-,
4  there  is  likewife  another  fwallow, or  hole, called

*  Johnforfs  Jacket-hole^  a  place  refembling  a  funnel  in

*  ihape,  but  vaftly  deep ;  a  ftone  being  thrown  into
«  it,  makes  a  rumbling  noife,  and may  be  heard  a
'  confiderable  time-,  there  is  alfo  another,  called  Ga-
4  psr-Gill,  into  which  a  good  many  fprings  fall  in  one
4  ftream,  and  after  a  fubterraneous  pafTage  of  upwards
'of  a  mile,  break  out  again,  and  wind  through,  Clap-
4  ham\  then,  after  a  winding  courfe  of  feveral  miles,
4  this  ftream  joins  the  river  Lon,  or  Lune;  and,  pafs-

*  ing  by  the  town  of  Lam -after •,  it  falls  into  the  Irijh
'  Sea:  there  are  likewife,  both  on  the  weft  and  north
«  fides,  a  great  many  fprings,  which  all  fall  into  fuch
'  cavities,  and  burfting  out  again,  towards  the  bafe  of
4  the  faid mountain,  tall  likewife  into  the  Irijh  Sea,
4  by  the  town  of  Lane  after ;  and  what  feemed  very  re-
4  markable  to  me,  there  was  not  one  rivulet  running
4  from  the  bafe  of  the  mountain,  that  had  not  a  confi-
4  derable  fubterraneous  paffage. All  the  fprings  arofe
4  towards  the  lummit, "  amongft  the  greet-ftoms  and
'  funk  or  fell  into  fome  hole,  as  foon  as  they  descended
4  to  the  lime-ftone  rocks ;  where  pafling  under  ground
4  for  fome  way,  they  burft  out  again  towards  the  bafe.
4  There  is  likewife,  to  the  weft  and  north,  a  great

*  many fwallows or holes, fome vaftly deep and
4  frightful,  others  more  fhallow,  all  aftoniming,  with

*  a  long  range  of  the  moft  beautiful  rocks that  ever
'-_  adorned  a  profpecr.,  rifing  in  a  manner  perpendicular
'  UD  to  an  immenfe  height.'

R


BEFORE  I  proceed  to  ihew,  that  thefe  Swallet-bolss
are  to  be  found  in  other  parts  of  the  world  than  Eng-
land^ it  may  be  proper  to  fubjoin  fome  other  particu-
lars (which  could  not  well  be  reduced  under  the  fore-
going heads,  without  breaking  the  narrative  too  much)
which  will  ferve  further  to  prove,  that  thefe  Cavities
were  formed  by  the  pafTage  of  water.

i.  THEKT  it  is  common  to  obferve  in  Caverns  of  this
kind  where  the  Rock  contains  any  extraneous  foffils,
fuch  as '(hells,  corals,  bones,  &c.  that  thefe  extra-
neous fubftances  are  all  worn  fmooth  and  fhaped  to
the  form  of  the  rock.  Now  it  is  certain  that  thefe
bodies  have  naturally  a  determinate  figure,  each  dif-
ferent from  the  other,  and  all  diverfe  from  what  we
can  fuppofe  the  infide  of  a  rock  to  be  ;  and  when  we
fee,  that  parts  only  of  thefe  bodies  remain  in  the  rock,
here  an  half,  there  a  quarter,  and  in  an.pther  place  a
third  part,'  and  thefe  remaining  portions,  not  of  their
natural  figures,  but  fliaped  and  curved  according  to
the  concavity  of  the  rock,  it  is  manifeft  that  fome
external  force  hath  carried  av/ay  the  deficient  parts ;
and  when  we  confider  the  regular  fmoothnefs  of  the
rock,  and  the  gradual  wear  or  attrition  that  thefe
bodies  have  apparently  undergone,  we  can  attribute
this  work  to  no  other  agent  than  Water ;  and  though
in  thefe  caverns  there  are  generally  drainings  and
droppings  of  this  fluid,  yet  die  motion  of  it  in  this
cafe  is  fo  (low  and  the  quantity  fo  fmall,  that  the
above-mentioned  effects  can  never  be  afcribed  to  it ;
nay,  I  haveobferved  the  above-mentioned  phcenomena
in  covered  Swatiets.,  and  even  near  the  mouths  of  them,
when  the  mouths  themfejves  had  been  covered,  for  the
depth  of  feveral  feet  with  rubble,  and  yet  none  of  the
rubble  in  the  infide  of  the  SwaHst-boles,  fo  that  the  wear
and  tear  of  thefe  extraneous  bodies  could  never  have


1 243  ]

been  owing  to  the  fluggifh  motion  of  the  draining?  of
water  fro.n  the  furface  of  the  earth.  And  befides,
thefe  bodies  themfelves  exhibit  full  proof,  that  the  water
pafled  through  the  concavities  in  which  they  are,  with
vaft  violence  and  impetuofity ;  for,  it  is  common  to
obferve  in  the  natural  and  unworn  fifiures  of  the  eirth
(where  the  rock  happens  to  contain  extraneous  bodies)
part  of  a  fliell  or  of  a  branch  of  Coral  flicking  in  the
rock  on  one  fide  of  a  fiffure,  and  the  other  part  of  the
fame  Shell  or  Coral  on  the  oppofite  fide,  fo  that  it  is
plain  that  no  force  has  been  here  ufed  befides  that
which  made  the  original  crack:  but  on  the  contrary
in  Swalkt -holes  I  have  often  feen  part  of  a  large  fhell  or
the  ftem  of  a  fpreading  branch  of  Coral  on  one  fide  of
the  Cavity  and  no  appearance  of  any  fimilar  fubftance
on  the  other-,  fo  that  it  is  undeniable,  that  the  original
fiflure  has  been  torn,  widened,  and  the  rock  carried
away,  the  whole  face  of  the  Cavity  pointing  out,
that  Water  was  the  Agent,  which  theulore  mult  have
parted  through  with  great  force  and  violence.  Ano-
ther proof  that  thefe  Caverns  were  formed  by  water,
or,  that  rapid  currents  of  that  fluid  has  pafled  through
them,  may  be  drawn  from  the  multitude  of  in-land
pebbles  that  are  to  be  found  in  molt  of  them.  That
thefe  pebbles  obtained  their  fhape  by  being  agitated  in
water,  and  that  wherever  they  arc  now  naturally  found,
water  has  been,  I  have  already  fhewed  at  large  (p.  193)
and  that  this  water  pafTed  through  the  Caverns  in  a
full  body,  and  brought  down  with  it  vafl  quantities  of
thefe  pebbles,  is  evident  from  hence,  that  they  are
not  only  to  be  found  at  the  bottoms  or  in  the  lower
parts  of  thefe  Caves,  but  even  high  up  in  the  nitches
and  covered  cavities  in  the  fides,  and  many  of  thefe
pebbles  confift  of  a  different  kind  of  Hone  from  that  of
the  rock  of  the  cavern,  fo  that  they  mtift  have  came
from  far,  and  the  flreams  that  brought  them  been  ra-
•  -  R  2


[  244  3

pjd  and  ftrong.  Another  material  circumftance

evincing  that  thefe  Swallows  were  made  by  water,  is,
that  where  great  numbers  of  them  occur  together^
reaching  over  perhaps  an  extent  of  land  ot  fome  miles
in  circumference,  there  the  land  is  nearly  level  and
fiat,  without  any  of  the  Pivifions  or  breaks  in  the
earth  caufed  by  Combs  and  Dales  •,  and  the  reafon  is
plain,  for  the  water  that  would  otherwife  have  torn
the  ground  into  gills  a.nd  dales,  patted  off  through
thefe  S  wallet  holes,  and  fo  tore  inward  and  fubter-
ranean  Cavities,  inftead  of  outward  and  fuperficiai
Hollows.  This,  J  fay,  is  the  cafe  where  va.ft  nym-
bers  of  thefe  holes  happen  to  be  near  each  other,  but
where  there  are  few,  not  more  than  three  or  four,  and
thofe  very  large,  and  fo  clofe  together  as  to  make  but
one,  and  no  Swallows  near  them  for  the  fpace  of  feve-
ral  miles,  there  I  ha.ve  obferved  two  or  three  fmall
Combs,  running  in  different,  almoft  opposite  direction,
and  meeting  in  the  mouth  of  the  Swallet  as  in  a  cen-
ter. -  And  -the  reafpn  of  this  is  equally  clear  for  the
point  in.  queftiqn.-  For  there  being  here  a  natural
drain  for  the  waters,  and  that  a  very  large  one,  and
no  other  fimilar  cavity  near  it,  npp  only  the  waters
that  were  immediately,  over  this  hole,  but  even  thofe
that  were  at  a  diftance,  would  rufh  towards  it  and  in
their  accefs  wear  and  tear  the  ground  into  gulleys  and
combs,  and  Jeave  the  prefent  ftanding  marks  of  its
courfe  and  agency.  '  And  wherever  we  fe.e  three  or
four  Combs  terminating,  from  oppofite  fides,  in  a
point,  and  a  deep  finking  in  the  earth  in  the  center,
we  may  depend  upon  it  there  was  a  Swallet-hole  •,  and
this  I  have  frequently  obferved  to  have  been  the  cafe
in  a  low  .wet  marlhy  bottom,  or  where  there  has  been
a  fmall  lake  or  natural  pond.  And  from  the  defcrip-
tion  that  I  have  already  given  of  Lakes  (p.  143,  &c.)
jive,  may  conclude  that  moft,  if  not  all  of  them,  were


f  245  ]

briginally  Swaff ft -boles,  and  alfo  that  the  Cavities  of
the  Wb'irlpools,  Under -currents,  and  Gulphs,  treated  of
(p.  136,  Src.)  were  the  fame,  and  therefore  that  thefe
holes  are  to  be  found  all  over  the  face  of  the  earth,
and  of  courfe  the  water  that  palled  through  them
muft  have  been  equally  extenfive.

BUT  befides  what  I  have  already  faid,  to  mew  the
extenfivenefs  of  thefe  effecls,  I  may  alfo  add  fome
other  accounts  from  different  countries.  Mr.  Smith
in  his  ancient  and  prefent  ftate  of  the  County  of  Kerry  in
Ireland  (p.  122)  fpeaks  '  of  a  large  and  deep  Hole,
4  filled  with  water,  called  the  D'fuiFs  punch-bowl,  on
4  the  Weft- fide  of  the  mountains  called  the  Reeks-*
which  certainly  can  be  no  other  than  a  Swallow ;  anct
the  cave£  mentioned  (p.  167)  are  of  the  fame  fort,  '  All
4  the  lands  about  Killeehe  are  good  lime-fidne  grounds,
4  having,  in  fome  places,  confiderable  Caverns  •,  a  thingj
'  not  uncommon  in  fuch  kinds  of  Soil :"  which  lad
obfervation  is  fo  true  that  I  fcarce  ever  faw  alime-ftone
country  but  what  abounded  with  Swallet-holes.  In
France,  at  a  place  called  Roufgnac,  about  foe  Leagues
from  P'erigueux,  is  a  famous  Cavern  called  Grandville's
Hole,  whkh  has  feveral  deep  cavities ,  collateral  conduit  s^
and  circular  holes  in  the  vaulted  roof,  rifinglike  regular
cupolas,  fimflar  to  thofe  in  Ookey  and  in  the  Peak-
holes*  Bifhop  Pdntoppidan,  in  his  hiftory  of  Norway
(p.  47)  defcribes  a  rock  or  mountain,  '  that  has  an
*  aperture  in  it  paflable  throughout,  one  hundred  and
'  fifty  dti  m  height,  and  three  hundred  in  length  •,'  and
(p.  49,  50)  he  mentions  other  Caves,  *  in  fome  of
4  which  he  obferved  fmooth  beds  of  little  ftones  or  a
4  gravelly  bottom.'  Dr.  Behrens  in  his  natural  Hiftory
of  Hartz-foreft,  in  Germany,  gives  a  full  and  particular

- Gent.  Ma?,  for  1748,  p.  581,  tranflated  from  the  French*

1  3


[  246  ]

account  of  a  great  number  of  Caverns  that  are  to  be
found  there  ;  and  from  the  defcription  it  appears,  that
there  is  fuch  a  fimilarity  between  them  and  thof -  found
in  England,  that  no  doubt  can  be  made  that  they  w-re
all  owing  to  the  fame  origin,  or  formed  by  the  fame
means.  In  thePbilof.  Tranf.  (N0<  109,  and  Not  191)
there  is  a  long  account  of  a  little  Sea  or  rather  a  large
Lake,  called  the  Zircbnitzer-Sea  in  Carniola,  in  the
South-Eaft  part  of  Germany ;  the  water  of  which  re-
tires under-ground  through  feveral  great  holes  at  the
bottom  of  it,  once  every  year,  and  then  thefe  holes
are  vifible,  '  which  are  in  the  fhape  of  bafons  or  caul-
'  drons,  the  breadth  of  them  being  from  twenty  to  fixty

*  cubits  more  or  lefs  ; and  the  depth  from  eight  to

*  twenty  cubits ;  and  in  the  bottom  of  them  are  feverai
'  leffer  holes.' '  And  befides  thefe  there  are  alfo  di-
'  verfe  Caverns  and  deep  places  in  this  Country,  even
'  where  there  is  no  water  •,  particularly  in  the  moun-
'  tain  called  Javorrick,  near  this  lake,  there  are  two
'  Holes  or  exceeding  deep  precipices,  in  which  many
'  thoufand  wild  pigeons  rooft  all  the  winter;  and  on

*  the  top  of  this  Hill  is  a  Hole  of  an  unknown  depth,
'  out  of  which  there  often  proceed  noxious  fleams  :
'  and  on  another  mountain  are  two  great  and  terrible
c  ftony  caves, which  though  far  diftant  from  each
'  other,  have  yet  the  lame  effect,  viz.  when  it  thun-
c  cters  and  lightens,  do  emit  water  with  an  incredible

*  force. Near  this  Lake  is  the  natural  Grotto  Podpetf-
'  cbio,  with  feveral  channels  in  it, running  di verfe

*  ways,  and  all  the  channels  are  formed  in  a  very  hard
'  rock,  and  are  fmooth  or  poliflied  as  if  cut  by  men's

*  hands.' And  the  Author  mews  from  feveral  phoe-
nomena,  that  the  Country  is  cavernous  for  feveral  miles
in  extent,  and  though  water  pafies  through  fome  of
thefe  caverns  at  prefent,  yet  it  does  not  through  all,


f  247  ]

though  all  have  marks  of  its  force. 'the  farribuS
Grotto,  in  one  of  the  Iflands  of  the  Archipelago ,  called
Anti-paros,  which  is  reputed  to  be  nine  hundred  yards
deep,  and  has  fl-veral  collateral  Cavities  and  profound
Abyfies  in  it,  is  certainly  a  great  Swallet,  as  is  abun-
dantly evident  from  the  defcription,  given  at  large  of
it,  by  Monf.  Tourmfort  in  his  Voyage  into  the  Levant  $
Vol.  I.  p.  146,  &c. Scbeucbzer  in  his  Itinera  Al-pina^
Vol.  I.  p.  281,  fpeaking  of  a  Lake  upon  one  of  the
mountains  of  the  Alps,  writes  thus,  '  Circa  bfinc  La-
'  cum,  &c. You  may  fee,  on  every  fide,  around  this
e  Lake*  certain  winding  traces  or  furrows  worn  in  the
6  hard  rock,  which  perhaps  were  owing  to  the  waters
'  of  the  deluge.' Kircher  in  his  Mundus  fiilterraneu?
gives  particular  accounts  of  federal  Caverns  (too  long
to  be  inferred  here)  and  mews  from  a-  variety  of
Authors,  that  fuch  like  Cavities  are  to  be  found  in
all  parts  of  the  world,  both  in  Europe, .  Afia,  Africa,
and  America;  and  as  no  doubt  is  to  be  made  that
iimilar  effects  were  owing  to  fimilar  caufes^  fo  we  may
fafely  conclude^  that  the  Caverns  in  other  parts  of
the  earth  were  formed  by  the  fame  means  and  are  of
the  fame  kind  with  thofe  in  England-,  and  a$  I  have
already  mewed,  that  thofe  in  England  were  owing  tOj
or  at  leaft  have  been  torn  and  widened  by,  the  paffage
of  ftrong  currents  of  water}  fo  we  muft  determine  of
the  reft ;  and  of  courfe  that  the  water  was  as  extenfive
as  its  forcej  i.  c.  extended  all  over  the  earth, and
therefore  that  there  has  been  an  Unherfal  Deluge.

I  SHALL  now  fubjoin  a  corollary,  or  an  obfervation
or  two,  to  what  has  been  above  difcufled,  by  way  of
general  proof  of  fome  of  the  particulars  already
advanced.


Lib. ll; Cap. XX*

R


C  248  ]

1.  As  the  regular  defcent  of  Combs,  Dales,  and
Vallies,  and  the  final  union  of  all  thefe  in  one  large
furrow,  even  under  the  Sea,  (hewed,  that  -the  water
that  excavated  thefe hollows, defcended into  fome
great  cavity  in  the  infide  of  the  earth,  even  beyond
the bed  of  the  Ocean, and  there  formed  an  Abyfs*
fo  the  collateral  Conduits  of  the  Swallet- holes,  lead-
ing down  into  one  great  unfathomable  Cavity  in  the
bowels  of  the  earth, prove, that  the  Water that
formed  them, defcended  likewife  even  through  the
fhell  of  the  earth,  and  there  conftituted  a  part  of  the
above-mentioned  fubterranean 'Refervoir.

2.  IT  is  not  uncommon  to  find  Swallets  that  have
fmail  rivers  running  into  them,  and  which  have  no
known  exit;  and  when  miners  are  digging  very  deep
in  the  earth,  they  fometimes  break  fideways  into  a
Swallet-hole, and when they do fo, they advan-
tageoufly  turn  all  the  water  of  the  mine  into  it,  and
moreover  throw  in  all  the  rubbifh  they  dig  out,  and
yet  can  difcover  no  bottom. And  it  thofe  Lake's  men-
tioned p.  143,  which  receive  one  or  more  large  rivers
into  them,  are  alfo  Swallets  (as  I  have  above-fhewed
they  in  all  probability  are)  then  this  alfo  is  a  proof  that
there  is  a  fubterranean  refervoir  of  water. And  left
any  one  mould  imagine  from  this  particular, that
therefore  Swallets  in  general  might  have  been  formed,
by  river-water,  let  it  be  remembered  that  they  are  com-
monly found  upon  the  tops  of  the  bigbeft  Mountains
efpecially  fuch  as  have  extenfive  flats y  where  neither
river nor rain-water could  have  any  force  to  tear
fuch  Cavities,  and  therefore  they  could  not  owe  their
origin  to  fuch  a  Caufe. In  thofe  places  indeed  where
thefe  holes  lie  at  the  bottoms  of  mountains,  fuch  ri-

b  See  Page  186,  &c.


249

vers  as  take  their  rife  near  the  tops,  would  naturally
flow  into  them ;  and  where  the  Swallet-holes  are  fu-
$erfitial,  or  even  run  for  a  confiderable  way  under  the
Earth,  but  not  deep  into  it,  would  flow  out  again ;  in
the  fame  manner  as  the  rivers  run  down  the  bottoms  of
Combs  and  Dales,  or  any  natural  declivity  or  hollow;
but  as  thefe  latter  were  not  formed  by  river-water,
fo  neither  were  the  former.

3.  As  Swallet-holes  are  extended  all  over  the  earth,
and  the  water  that  formed  them  defcended down-
wards from  every  fide  towards  the  center  and  paffed
through  the  fhell  of  the  earth,  it  would  naturally  re-
pofit  at  the  center  all  the  matter  that  it  tore  out  in  ex-
cavating thefe  Hollows,  which  would  there  conftitute
a  nucleus  or  inner-globe.

4.  AFTER  the  drifted  fearch  and  examination  I  could
make, either from  books  or  obfervation, 1  could
never  learn  that  there  had  ever  been  any  natural  fea-
fhell,  coral,  or  coralline  difcovercd  in  any  of  the  ca-
verns at  land  in  the  manner  they  are  frequently  found
in  the  caves  and  cavities  in  the  rocks  on  the  fea-fhore,
the  fides  of  which  are  ufually  lined,  and  the  fmalier
cracks  and  crevices  filled,  with  them;  but  no  fuch
being  to  be  difcovered  in  the  Caverns  and  Swallet-
holes  at  land,  we  may  fafely  conclude,  that  the  parts
of  the  earth  where  thefe  in- land  Cavities  are,  were
never  the  bottom  of  the  Sea  or  for  any  confiderable
time  covered  with  the  Ocean,  and  therefore  that  the
hypothecs, (lately renewed and refitted by fome
French  philolbphers,  and  favoured  by  feveral  Eng-
lilh)  is  falfe,  which  attributes  the  manif eft  appearances
of  this  Globe's  having  been  covered  by  water,  to  the
primeval  inundation  of  the  Sea,  by  which  it  is  fup-
pofed  that  at  the  fird  fettiement  of  things,  the  water
would  naturally  cover  the  whole  furface  of  the  globe,


[  ijo]

and  conflitute  a  Sea  over  every  part ;  but  after  a  long
time  (by  fome  means  or  other)  it  receded  and  permit-
ted the  Sea  to  retire  into  the  lower  and  hollow  parts  of
the  earth';  and  to  this  original  inundation  or  difpofi-
tion  of  things  are  to  be  attributed  all  the  marks  of  an
inundation  on  tke  furface  and  in  the  infide  of  the  earth ;
but  had  this  been  the  cafe,  thefe  in:land  Caves  would
have  been  filled  with  the  fpoils  of  the  Ocean,  and  we
fhould  fee  Shells,  Corals  and  Corallines,  in  their  na-
tural ftate,  flicking  on  to  the  fides  and  filling  the  cre-
vices of  the  rocks  ;  xvhereas  all  the  fHells  and  corals
that  ever  I  difcovered  in  thefe  caverns  were  in  an  ex-
traneous ftate,  either  filled  with  (lone  or  immerfed  in
the  folid  body  of  the  rock,  which  could  never  have
been  their  natural  ftate;  and  therefore  they  could
never  have  been  placed  in  this  manner  according  to  the
common  laws  of  nature.

5.  AND  from  the  fame  arguing  and  circumfta'nces
of  things  we  may  have  undeniable  marks  how  far  the
Sea,  in  any  place  for  any  confiderable  time,  has
covered  the  land  ;  for  if  in  the  holes  and  caves  of  the
earth,  in  any  fuch  fuppofed  place*  there  be  found
iriells  and  corals  in  their  natural  ftate,  efpecially  if
they  be  of  the  kinds  with  thofe  ufually  growing  in
the  neareft  adjoining  Sea,  we  may  then  juftly  fuppofe$
that  the  Sea  has  covered  thefe  parts ;  but  if  no  fuch
fhells  or  corals  be  difcovered  in  thefe  caverns*  then
we  may  depend  upon  it>  that  the  Sea  has  never  reach-
ed thefe  parts,  or  covered  them  in  the  manner  it  novr
covers  and  overflows  its  ufual  and  well  known  bed$
or  the  Sea-fhore,


1 251  ]

IV.

ANOTHER  general  and  comprehenfive  Proof  of  an
UNIVERSAL  DELUGE  may  be  drawn  from  the  nume-
rous and  various  fpoils  of  fea  and  land  animals  and  ve-
getables that  are  now  found  in  every  part  of  the  earth.

*  HERE  then  [to  make  ufe  of  the  words  of  a  learned
'  and  ingenious  Author6]  we  appeal  once  more  to  Na-
4  ture  •,  and  find  that,  in  faft,  there  are,  at  this  day,

*  as  evident,  as  demonftrative,  as  incontestable  proofs

*  of  the  deluge,  over  the  face  of  the  whole  Earth,  at
4  the  diftance  of  about  four  thoafand  years,  as  if  it  had
'  happen'd  but  laft  year. And  whereas  Mofes  allures
'  us,  that  the  waters  prevailed  fifteen  cubits  above  the
4  tops  of  the  higheft  mountains,  let  the  mountains  them-
4  felves  be  appealed  to  for  the  truth  of  this  affertion :

*  examine  the  highefl  eminences  of  the  earth,  and  they
4  all,  with  one  accord,  produce  the  fpoils  of  the  ocean
4  depofited  upon  them  on  that  occafion ;  the  fhells  and
'  fkeletons  of  fea-fifh,  and  fea-monfters  of  all  kinds.

*  The  Alps*  the  Apennine,  the  Pyrenees,  Libanus,  and
'  Atlas,  and  Ararat,  every  mountain  of  every  region
4  under  heaven,  (where  fearch  hath  been  made)  from
'  Japan  to  Mexico,  all  confpire  in  one  uniform,  one

*  univerfal  proof,  that  they  all  had  the  fea  fpread  over
4  thieir  higheft  fummits. Search  the"  earth  ;  you  {hall
4  find  the  moufe-deer,  natives  of  America,  buried  in
4  Ireland-,  elephants,  natives  of  Afia  and  Africa,  bu-
4  ried  in  the  midfl  of  England;  crocodiles,  natives  of
4  the  Nile,  in  the  heart  of  Germany,  mell-fim,  never
4  known  but  in  the  American  leas,  together  with  entire
'  fkeletons  of  whales,  in  the  moft  in-land  regions  of

c  Revelation  examined  with  Candour,  Vol.  I,  p.  192;  and  for
the  truth  of  the  fubfequent  particulars,  and  many  more  equally
furprifing,  the  reader  may  confult  Dr.  Wood-Mard'*,  Dr.
Scfouckzcr's  or  Darggm'tlle's  Writings,  or  indeed  any  other  emi-
nent Author  on  the  Subjeft.


4  England ; trees  of  vaft  dimenfions,  with  their  roots

*  and  tops,  and  fome  alfo  with  leaves  and  fruit,  at
4  the  bottoms  of  mines  and  marks ;  and  that  too,  ih
4  regions  where  no  tree  of  that  kind  was  ever  known  to
4  grow ;  nay,  where  it  is  demoriftrably  impoffible  they

*  could  grow.'

THIS  has  beeri  thought  by  feveral  to  be  the  chief,
and  indeed  the  only  argument,  that  could  be  brought
in  proof  of  an  Univerfal  Flood,  and  hence  it  has  been
oppofed  by  every  objection;  that  the  infidel  could
•  think  of.  About  a  century  or  two  ago  it  was  urged,
that  thefe  foffil  Animals  and  Vegetables  were  not
really  what  they  appear  to  be,  but  Only  Mock-forms,
or  reprefentations  of  fuch  things,  caufed  by  a  lufus
nature  or  an  accidental  Sporting  of  Nature  under-
ground. But  fince  this  affair  has  been  more  accu-
rately inquired  into,  and  collections  of  fea  and  land
Productions  been  made  from  every  part  of  the  globe,
and  compared  with  the  foffils  of  the  fame  kind,  fuch
a  nice  refemblance  and  exact  agreement  has  been  found
between  them, — *  The  foffil  ones  being  ofthe  fame  fiz6
4  that  the  others  are  of,  and  of  the  fame  fhape  pre-
4  cifely ;  ofthe  fame  fubftance  and  texture;  as  confift-
4  ing  ofthe  fame  peculiar  Matter,  and  this  conftituted
'  and  difpofed  in  the  fame  manner,  as  that  of  their  ref-
4  pective  fellow-kinds  at  Sea:  the  tendency  of  the
4  fibres  and  Stride  the  fame :  the  compofition  of  the
4  Lamella,  conftituted  by  thefe  fibres,  alike  in  both :
4  the  fame  Veftigia  of  Tendons  (by  means  whereof  the
4  Animal  is  faften'd  and  join'd  to  the  fhell)  in  each  :
4  the  fame  Papilla :  the  fame  Sutures,  and  every  thing
4  elfe,  whether  within  or  without  the  fhell,  in  its  ca«
4  vity  or  upon  its  convexity,  in  the  fubftance,  or  upon
4  the  furface  of  it:  anfwering  all  Chymical  tryals  in
4  like  manner  as  fea-lhells  do;  their  parts  when  dif-
4  foiv'd  have  the  fame  appearance  to  view,  the  fame


*  imell  and  tafte  •,  they  have  the  fame  vires  and  effedli
4  in  medicine,  when  inwardly  adminifter'd,  to  animal

*  bodies  •, Aqua-fort  is,  Oil  of  Vitriol,  and  other  like

*  Menjlrua,  have  the  very  fame  effecls  upon  both.'*
Such  an  exaCl  agreement  as  this,  I  fay,  being  found
between  thefoflli  and  natural  bodies  of  the  animal  and
vegetable  kind,  it  is  now  univerfally  allowed  that  the
foflil  are,  what  they  appear  to  be,  the  Remains  of  de-
ftroyed  Animals  and  peri/hed  Vegetables.

AND  at  prefent  a  prevailing  opinion  is,  that  though
thefe  bodies  are  what  they  appear  to  be,  yet  thofe,  that
feem  to  have  belonged  to  the  fea,  were  never  of  ma-
rine production,  nor  the  vegetables,  the  growth  of
the  earth,  but  both  forts  were  produced  and  formed
in  the  places  where  they  are  now  found,  the  femina
qf  thefe  things  having  been  placed  in  and  difperfed
throughout  the  whole  globe  of  the  earth  at  the  time  of
its  Creation,  when  all  things  were  confufedly  mixt
together:  and  ftnce  that  time  thefe  femina  have  occa-
fionally  (hot  out,  grown  and  increafed  by  fome  plaftic
virtue  or  power.

BUT  till  this  plaftic  virtue  or  power  be  further
fhewn,  and  proved  to  exift,  it  will  be  looked  on  by
all  fenfible  perfons  to  be  no  other  than  the  lufus  nature,
or  an  occult  Quality  of  the  Ancients.  And  with

regard  to  the  Semina  of  thefe  bodies  being  placed  in
the  earth  at  the  time  of  the  Creation,  v/hen  the  whole
earth  was  in  a  diffoived  chaotic  ftate,  it  muft  be  re-
membered (if  we  follow  the  Mofaic  account,  which  I
have  already  mewed  is  the  only  true,  p.  78,  &c.)  that
the  femina  of  thefe  things  were  not  made  till  after  the
earth  was  confolidated  and  dry  land  had  appeared  (Gen.  i.
12,  20,  &c.)  fo  that  they  could  never  have  funk
through  the  earth  at  that  time :  and  if  it  be  fuppofed
that  fome  of  them  funk  through  after,  it  muft  have

*  WOODWARD'^  Nat,  His.  p.  23,


[  254  .1

been  through  the  cracks  and  crevices, not  the  folicj
body,  of  the  earth ;  but  unfortunately  for  this  opinion
there  are  fcarce  ever  any  of  thefe  bodies,  even  in  a
foffii  flate  (never  any  in  a  natural)  to  be  found  in  the
cracks  and  crevices,  but  commonly  all  fixed  in  the
iblid  ftrataj and  as  that  part  of  the  flrata  which
immediately  furrounds  thefe animal and  vegetable
bodies,  has  the  exprefs  image  of  the  outfides  of  thefe
bodies  delineated  upon  it to  the  niceft  exactnefs,  it
is  certain  that  the  Rock,  Stone,  Clay,  &c.  that  con-
tains thefe bodies, was  formed and  hardened  after
thenH  as  certain  as  that  the  impreffion  of  a  Seal  upon
Sealing-wax  was  pofterior  to  the  feal ;  and  both  formed
after  a  different  manner, at  different  times,  and  in
different  places. Befides,  as  Fabius  Columna  argues,
Natura  nihil  facit  fruftra^  Nature  makes  nothing  in
vain ;  but  thefe  teeth,  bones,  mells,  &c.  were  they
thus  formed  in  the  earth,  would  be  in  vain  ;  for  they
could  not  have  been  of  any  life  as  teeth, neither
could  the  bones  have  been  of  ufein  fupporting  of  any
animal. Nature  never  made  teeth  without  a  jaw,
nor  mells  without  an  animal  inhabitant,  nor  fingle
bones,  much  lefs  pieces  of  bones,  teeth,  &c.  no  not
in  their  own  proper  element,  much  lefs  in  a  flrange
one.* Therefore  the  places  where  thefe  bodies  are
now  found,  couid  never  have  been  their  original. And
in  order  to  fhew  that  the  fcffil  mells,  bone?,  teeth,
&c.  that  fo  exactly  refemble  the  marine  ones  of  the
fame  fpecies,  were  really  the  product  of  the  fea,  and
not  formed  in  the  places  where  they  are  now  found,
I  fhall  make  life  of  a  few  arguments  as they are
judicioufly  drawn  up  by  Dr.  Woc&ixard  in  his  Nat.  Hi  ft.
of  the  Eartb  illujlrated,  p.- 151.  "  Firft,  the  (foffii)  fliells,
which  are  digged  up  in  places,  and  found  lodg'd  in
matter,  fit  to  preferve  them,  and  which  therefore  are
firm,  found,  and  have  lefs  felt  the  injuries  of  time,
yield  ftill  a  true  marine  fait  fuch  as  recent  fhells  taken


[»S5l

out  of  the  fea,  or  cafl  on  t}ie  mores,  are  wont  to  yield.
2a:/.  jnere  are  aif0  found  in  the  earth  the  teeth  of
fifties  ground  down,  and  worn  away,  in  the  very  fame
manner  as  the  teeth  of  thofe  kinds  of  fifhes,  taken  at
fea,  ufually  are,  by  chewing  their  food.  3dly-  The
fhell-fifh  called  the  Purpura^  has  a  tongue  of  a  con-
fiderable  length,  terminating  in  a  hard  boney  fharp
point,  with  which,  as  with  an  augre,  he  bores  holes
through  the  fhells  pf  other  mell-fiih,  and  feeds  on  the
Jubilance  of  them  drawn  forth  through  thofe  holes.
Now  there  are  commonly  found  in  the  earth,  among
others,  fhells  bored  thorow  in  the  manner  above  de-
fcribed,  whence  it  is  certain  that  thofe  fhells  had  once
living  fifhes  in  them,  and  that  thofe  fifnes  formerly
lived  in  fome  place,  where  allb  there  were  Purpur<e  to
feed  on  them  :  and  that  place  could  be  no  other  than
the  fea.  4thl>'  It  is  common  to  dig  up  the  fhells  of
Oyflers,  Concha,  Peftims,  and  other  Bivalves,  which
retain  plain  marks  of  tendons,  and  other  figns  which
undoubtedly  fhew  that  they  had  once  living  creatures  in
them.  5th ly<  Laftly,  The  Echinit*,  Conchit<ey  Chocb-
Iif<e,  and  other  bodies  of  that  kind,  confiiling  of  flone,
flint,  fpar,  and  other  mineral  matters,  which  every*
way  match  the  fize,  and  exhibit  the  perfect  refem-
blance  of  the  interior  part  of  thofe  fhells,  from  which
they  have  deriv'd  their  names,  could  never  have  been
fo  formed,  moulded  and  fliaped,  had  not  thofe  fhells
been  quite  empty.  But  there  are  other  bodies  alib,
of  which  I  have  famples  by  me,  formed  likewife  of
flone,  flint,  and  fpar,  which  reprefent  only  pieces,  or
fome  particular  parts  of  the  Ecbimt<e,  Conchit<e,  and:
Cochlit£.  Thefe,  any  one,  at  firfl  fight,  may
plainly  difcern  were  formed  in  the  fhells,  while  they
had  yet  their  fifhes  actually  in  them :  and  therefore
could  receive  only  fo  much  of  the  Honey,  flinty  or
fparry  matter,  as  would  fill  up  the  parts  which  were


empty  or  vacant,  and  not  pofleflcd  or  taken  up  by  the
fifh.  Thence  it  is,  that  thofe  ftoney,  flinty  and  fparry
bodies  bear  only  the  refemblance  of  that  vacancy,  as
having  been  moulded  in  it.  Now  thefe  bodies
plainly  mew  thofe  fhells  to  have  had  fimes  for-
merly in  them :  and  at  the  fame  time  point  forth  to  us
the  true  origin  of  them,  viz.  that  they  were  not  pro-
duced in  the  places  where  they  are  now  found,  but
were  at  fome  time  brought  all  from  the  fea."

OTHERS  indeed  allow  that  the  fo fill  animal  and  vege-
table bodies  are  really  what  they  appear  to  be,  and
that  the  marine  ones  were  produced  and  bred  at  Sea  •,
but  then  they  fuppofe  that  they  were  brought  to  land
by  "partial  deluges,  or  occafional  inundations  of  the
fea.  But  certain  it  is,  there  are  no  records  in  hiftory
of  any  fuch  inundations  that  can  by  any  means  be
applicable,  either  with  refpeCl  to  their  Antiquity  or
Extent,  to  the  phoenomena  of  this  kind  obfervable
throughout  the  whole  body  of  the  Earth.  The  Py-
ramids of  Egypt  are  reckoned  to  be  fome  of  the  moft
ancient  ftru£tures  in  the  known  World,  and  fituated
alfo  in  a  Country  that  is  frequently  overfiooded  by
the  Sea,  and  yet  the  Stones,  of  which  thefe  Pyramids
confift,  abound  with  foffil  marine  Jhells  and  corals ;
(as  I  have  feen  in  feveral  famples  of  thefe  ftones,  and
have  fome  fpecimens  by  me,  given  me  by  Dr.  Sbaiv]
and  thefe  fhells  and  corals  are  of  the  fame  kind  with
thofe  that  are  now  found  in  the  regular  ftrata  of  the
earth  in  the  neighbourhood  ot  theie  buildings.0  So
that  it  is  evident  that  thefe  marine  bodies  were  brought
to  land  before  the  time  of  erecting  thefe  Pyramids.
Again,  Steno  (who  was  an  Italian,  and  wrote  about  a
Century  ago;  in  his  Prodromus  to  a  DirTertation  De  Solido,
intra  Solidum  naturaliter  content '0,  i.e.  Concerning  Solids


«  See  SHAW'S  Travel's,  p.  416.


naturally  contained  within  Solids  (p.  87)  fays,  That  in
the  foundation-ftones  and  walls  of  the  City  of  Vdaterra,
(the  ancient  Seat  of  the  Etrurians')  there  are  various
forts  of/Wfrj  and  the  fhells  are  of  the  fame  fpecies
with  thofe  that  are  found  in  the  ftone  and  natural  beds
of  the  Hill  on  which  the  City  formerly  ftood.  Now  it
is  certain  that  Vdaterra  was  a  place  of  great  note  and
power,  long  before  the  foundation  of  Rome,  It  is
now  fomewhat  more  than  two  thoitf and  five  hundred
years  fince  Rome  was  firft  founded.  And  certainly
feveral  centuries  muft  have  pafied  from  the  time  that
the  Etrurians  firft  fettled  there*  till  their  City  had
gained  the  character  and  fize  it  Had,  when.  Rome  was
firft  began  to  be  built.  Now  if  we  allow  but  jive  of
fix  hundred  years  for  the  completion  of  this,  it  will
then  follow,  that  thefe  fhells  have  remained  there  for
at  lead  three  tboufatid  years.  And  when  we  confider
that  this  will  advance  the  proof  of  their  etfiftence  to
within  one  thoufand  years  of  the  very  time  when  the
Deluge  of  Noah  happened,  furely  norie  will  be  at  a
-  fland  to  attribute  the  time  of  their  tranfpo'rtatibn  to
this  Caufe,  which  in  every  refpect  was  anfwerable
thereunto,  and  prior  to  all  accounts  of  partial  Floods.
But  when  we  take  in  the  additional  circumfta'nce  of
the  exten/ivenefs  of  the  Effetts  of  that  Deluge  in  which
thefe  things  happened,  the  matter  will  foon  appear
inconteftably  clear.  Let  any  one  read  the  argument
in  proof  of  an  Unive rfal  Deluge  as  dated  and  dcfcribed
p.  251,  and  he  can  never,  with  the  leaft  mew  of  rea-
fon,  attribute  the  EffeRs  there  related  to  -partial Floods.
Befides  ^  I  have  already  laid  down  fuch  marks  as  will
demonftrably  mew,  how  far  the  Sea  in  any  place  has
occafionally  covered  the  landj  and  that  the  effects  of
an  Universal  Flood  are  vifible  where  partial  inunda-
tions never  reached  (p.  230,;  and  alfo  have  fhewed,
that  the  marine  bodies  that  are  difcovered  at  land  are
S


[  253  j

found  in  fucb  places,  viz.  in  the  folid  fuljlame  of  the
ftrata,  where  partial  floods  or  any  mere  inundation
of  the  Sea,  how  extenfive  foever,  could  never  have
placed  them,  and  that  thefe  bodies  are  fcarceever  found
in  thofe  par ts^  viz.  in  the  cracks  andjiffures  of  the  earth,
where  fuch  floods  would  moft  naturally  have  thrown
them  (p.  254)-,  which  is  an  unanswerable  argument
againft  this  hypothecs  :  and  other  particulars,  to  (hew
the  weaknefs  of  this  Suppofition,  will  occafionally  oc-
cur in  the  procefs  of  this  treatife.

BUT  betore  I  fmifh  this  head,  it  may  be  proper  to
take  notice  of  Monf.  Le  Cat's  argument,  againft  the
opinion  of  the  fcfiil  animal  and  vegetable  bodies  be-
ing placed  in the  earth  at  the  time  of  that  Deluge
which  is  recorded  in  Scripture :  '  The  waters  of  the
'Deluge,  faith  he,  according  to  the  aiTertion  of  Scrip-
*  ture  itfelf,  exceeded  the  higheft  mountains  by  fifteen
'  cubits-,  whence  it  muft  follow,  that  thefe  mountains
'  were  before  the  Deluge. Now  in  the  bowels  of  thefe
4  mountains  are  found  animals  inclofed  in  the  (tones
'  and  quarries  of  which  they  confift. Therefore  thofe
'  animals,  inclofed  in  the  bafes  of  thefe  mountains,
'  muft  have  exifted,  together  with  thofe  mountains
*  before  the  Deluge. The  Deluge  then  is  a  Revolu-
1  tion  which  does  not  account  for  thefe  phcenomena.'
But  Monf.  Le  Cat  feems  not  to  have  confidered,  or
not  to  have  known,  that  the  mountains  that  were  be-
fore the  flood  and  thole  that  were  after,  were  not  one
and  the  fame,  but  formed  at  two  different  times,  and
with  refpect  to  the  point  in  queftion,  vaftly  different.
The  mountains  that  were  before  the  flood  were  formed
by  the  retrtat  of  thofe  waters  that  frft  covered  the  fur-
face  of  the  earth,  and  permitted  dry  land  to  appear^  on
the  third  day  after  the  Creation, and  before  any  animal
or  vegetable  body  was  made  j  and  therefore  no  fuch
could  poffibly  have  been  found  in  thofe  mountains.


The  mountains  that  were  formed  after,  or  at  the  end
of  the  Flood,  had  their  origin  at  a  time  when  the
earth  was  replete  with  animal  and  vegetable  bodies  j
and  as  all  the  folid  ftructure  of  the  earth  had  juft  be-
fore been  totally  diffolved  (and  fo  all  the  ante-dilu-
vian  mountains  wholly  deftroyed)  but  thefe  animaj
and  vegetable  bodies  preferved  entire,  it  could  not  but
be  that  in  the  fettlerr.cn  t  of  this  diflblved  earth  thefe
bodies  would  be  found  involved  therein*  and  buried
at  the  loweft  depths ;  which  could  not  have  been  the
cafe  with  regard  to  the  mountains  before  the  flood*
for  the  reafons  above-given :  and  therefore  Mohf.  Le.
Gz/'s  argument  which  hie  is  pleafed  to  fay  is  founded
upon  a  '  Reafon  which  admits  of  no  reply/  is,  in
fhort,  founded  upon  a  falfe  matter  of  f aft,  and  fo  de-
ft roys  itfelf.

THUS  I  have  mewed,  by  feveral  general  and  exten-
five  arguments,  the  certainty  of  an  Univerfal  Flood*  or
that  this  earth  has  been  covered  to  an  immenfe  heighc
by  an  inundation  of  water,  and  moreover  have  prov-
ed, that  this  water  was  brought  from  the  Abyfs  be-
neath)  and  have  Ihewed  that  in  feveral  other  refpects
the  effects  of  the  Flood,  fo  obfervable  on  and  in  every
part  of  the  earth,  are  exactly  confonant  to,  and  can-
not with  propriety  be  attributed  to  any  fuppofed  Event
of  this  kind,  other  than  that  Deluge  which  happened
in  the  time  of  Noah,  and  is  defcribed  by  Mcfes  in  hi$
writings.  And

IN  the  pirocefs  of  thefe  arguments  the  reader  can-
not but  have  obferved  that  I  have  been  very  careful
and  induftrious  in  collecting  a  variety  of  testimonies
(befides  my  own)  from  different  Authors,  who  lived
at  different  times  and  in  different  places,  in  order  to
confirm  and  eftablifh  the  chief  particulars  upon  which
each  argument  depends  j  fo  that  it  appears,  that  there
S  2


[ 260 )

is  fcarre  a  region  under  heaven  but  what  bears  tefti-
mony  co  the  UNIVERSALITY  of  the  flood:  buc  left  the
reader fhould fufpect thefe evidences, or rather,
would  be  fatisfied  in  this  cafe  by  nothing  lefs  than
ocular  dsniortftratiori)  I  would  defire  him  to  afcend  the
neareft  high  mountain  to  the  place  where  he  lives,  and
carefully  examine  the  upper  parts  of  it,  and  in  all  pro-
bability he  will  foon  find  fome  marine  extraneous  fo-
flil,  either  a  fhell,  tooth,  bone,  coral,  coralline,  or
elfe  fome  in-land  pebbles,  trains  of  ftone,  &c.  or  at
leaft  perceive  fome  one  or  other  of  the  marks  already
given, whereby  he will  foon  be  fatisfied  that  this
mountain  has  been  covered  to  a  confiderable  height
by  an  inundation  of  water :  and  if  this  Mountain  was
thus  covered,  certainly  the  Combs,  Dales,  and  Val-
lies  benea:h,  (which  were  formed  by  Currents  of  wa-
ter from  this  mountain;  were  equally  inundated:  or
rather,  fince  the  parts  of  water  have  no  tie  or  con-
nection with  each  other,,  but  naturally  fall  away  or
are  carried  to  the  loweft  places  firft,  it  could  not  but
be  that  every  Comb,  Dale  and  Valley,  nay  Hill  and
Mountain  over  the  whole  furface  of  the  earth,  that
was  of  equal  height  with  this,  muft  have  been  equally
covered. So  that,  in  fhort,  any  perfon,  at  this  day,  by
giving  himfelf  only  the  trouble  of  vifiting  the  neareft
high  mountain  may  have  full  proof  that  that  moun-
tain was  covered,  nay,  formed  by  water-,  and  if  any
one  mountain  upon  the  earth  was  thus  covered  and
formed,  he  will  readily  conclude  that  they  all  have
been  fo-,  and  hereby  have,  Iromany  fingle  Mountain,
undeniable  teftimony  that  all  the  high  hills  and  moun-
tains under  the  izhok  heaven  have  been  covered  by  an  in-
of  water.


[26r  J

THIRDLY,

I  AM  now  come  to  the  third  Divifion  of  this
Section,  wherein  I  am  to  fhew,  that,  during  the
above-mentioned  Flood,  the  Earth,  was  not  only
covered  by  water,  but  totally  diffohed,  all  the  mineral
and  metallic  matter  being  reduced  to  its  original  cor'
pufctes ;  and  ajjumed  up  into  the  water ;  fo  that  ihe  whole
terraqueous  globe  wee  cpnftituted  one  fluid  Mafs  or
Colluvies.

THE  Effects  of  this  Diffolution  are  vifible  on,  in,
and  throughout  the  whole  body  of  the  earth.  For

i.  THE  very  outward  form  of  the  earth  indicates  as
much.  I  have  already  (hewed  that  all  the  Cavities
upon  the  earth's  furface,  fuch  as  Combs,  Daks,  Val-
lies,  &c.  were  once  filled  up  with  beds  of  matter  of
the  fame  kind,  and  placed  in  the  fame  manner,  as
their  correfponding  ftrata  in  the  fides  of  the  adjacent
hills  or  eminences-,  fo  that  the  earth  was  once  regularly
round  without  any  of  the  inequalities  of  hills  and
dales.  But  this  torm  could  never  have  been  the  re-
fult  of  matter  fetcling  in  large  feparate  maffes  or  de-
tached rocks :  had  the  parts  of  the  earth  fubfided  in
fuch  enormous  fragments  as  thefe,  the  furface  of  the
earth  would  have  been  almoft  as  irregular  as  it  is  at
prefent.  But  as  the  earth,  when  the  parts  of  it  firft
fettled,  was  perfectly  fpherical  and  all  the  ftrata  lay
upon  each  other,  with  the  niceft  exactnefs,  in  parallel
circular  lines ;  fo  it  muft  follow,  in  order  that  fuch  a
regular  difpofition  of  things  might  take  effect,  that
the  whole  was  diflblved,  and  fubfided  in  the  minuted
parts  or  primogenial  atoms.

ir.  THE  fpherical  rnape  of  the  earth  alfo  may  be
juftly  efteemed  as  the  natural  refult  of  the  equal  pref-
fure  of  the  Air  upon  its  once  fluid,  diflblved  parts.
S  3


It  is  certain  that  whatever  is  in  a  fluid  ftate,  and  is1
furrounded  and  lupported  by  the  air,  is  of  a  globular
form  -,  and  as  the  earth  is  not  only  buoyed  up,  but
at  prefent  prelTed  on  all  fides  by  the  air,  and  was  at
firft  formed  by  its  circumambient  force,  and  as  this
force  is  not  fufficient  to  reduce  Solids  (if  of  a  different
figure)  into  a  regular  fpherical  fhape,  unlefs  the  parts
thereof  are  fo  intimately  m;xed  with  a  fluid,  as  to  be
equally  lufceptible  of  motion,  fo  the  earth,  unlefs  it
had  been  dilTolved,  and  the  parts  of  it  blended  with  a
fluid,  could  never  have  been  modelled  to  a  globu-
lar form,

in.  THE  Solidity,  or  Coheilon  of  the  folid  parts  of
the  earth,  is  another  proof  that  the  whole  has  been
diflblved  and  immerled  in  a  fluid.  It  you  take  any
of  the  fclid  fubftances  of  which  the  earth  confifts,
though  reduced  to  rj^e  minuted  fize  polLble,  and

Erefled  ever  fo  clofe  together,  yet  if  the  mafs  is  free
•om  all  moift  or  fluid  particles,  the  whole  will  ftilj
remain  in  a  manner  difunited  and  the  parts  thereof
eafily  feparablc  from  each  other,  being  no  other  than
a  congeries  ot  fine  duft  or  dry  Sand  prelTed  together ;
and  in  order  to  bring  the  parts  into  fuch  a  dole  contadt
and  cohefion  with  each  other  as  to  form  a  compact
Solid,  there  is  a  neceffity  of  adding,  or  rather  ot  in-
timately mixing  with  thefe  fubftances,  fome  fluid
body-,  in  which  and  by  which  (on  account  of  the
lubricity  of  its  parts)  the  particles  of  the  Solids  might
be  fo  moved  and  fhifted  every  way,  till  at  laft  fimilar
furfaces  might  meet,  prefs  out  the  fluid  between  them
and  come  into  clofer  contact  with  each  other  than
they  were  before ;  and  this  compreflure  and  union
ftill  continuing  and  encreafing  by  the  farther  expulfion
of  the  moift  particles,  the  mafs  would  at  laft  be
brought  into  a  much  narrower  compafs  th'an  it  at  firft


occupied,  ;'.  e.  the  parts  would  be  brought  into  a
clofer  contact  with  each  other,  and  fo  the  (before)
loofe,  feparate,  detached  Solids  be  united  into  one
firm  compact  body.  And  if  this  is  the  general

procefs  of  Confolidation  in  the  various  fubftances  of
the  earth  that  we  can  make  any  trials  or  experiments
upon,  we  may  reafonably  conclude  the  fame  of  the
whole  ;  and  alfo  that  the  firmer,  finer,  and  clofer  any
body  is  at  prefent,  the  greater  has  been  the  diffoluticn
and  divifion  of  its  parts.

iv.  A  FOURTH  argument  that  the  earth  has  been  in
a  loofe  fluid  (late  may  be  drawn  from  the  confideratica
of  the  Veins  in  fome  forts  of  ftone,  particularly  in  the
harder!:  and  moft  beautiful  marbles.  It  is  common
to  obferve  in  fuch,  a  great  variety  of  matter  in  the
greateft  variety  of  forms  and  directions  ;  in  fome  part
matter  that  was  lighter  (to  fpeak  in  the  common  ac-
ceptation of  worcis)  than  .the  neighbouring,  pi  efied
down  below  the  place  due  to  its  fpecific  gravity,  and
afterwards  elevated  to  a  confiderable  height,  till  at
laft  meeting  with  matter  that  was  heavier  and  making
its  way  downwards,  the  whole  (hall  be  curved,  by  the
afcent  of  the  one  and  the  defcent  of  the  other,  into  a
vaft  variety  of  arches,  confiding  of  the  fined  and  molt
delicate  lines :  in  other  parts  you  may  fee  ftreaks  or
feams  of  different  fubftances  proceeding  on,  as  ir  were,
horizontally,  in  nearly  ftreight  lines,  till  they  have
been  met  and  oppofed  by  other  matter  in  a  contrary
direction  ;  and  at  the  point  of  conflux  both  fpecies  of
matter  turned  back  and  deflected  in  all  the  variety  of
wave- like  difpofitions  that  can  well  be  imagined  to
have  happened  to  two  dreams  of  water,  meeting  each
other  in  oppofite  currents :  and  in  fhort  you  may  ffe
all  the  diverfities  of  forms  and  figures  in  the  Solid
that  any  kind  of  agitation  in  a  fluid  could  poflibly  dif-
S  4


play  :  and  therefore  we  cannot  but  conclude,  that  the
Solid  was  once  in  as  great  a  date  of  fluidity  as  if  it
had  been  a  Fluid  itfelf.  And  though  indeed  thefe
greatly  variegated  beds  of  ftone  are  but  few  in  com-
panion of  the  flrata  that  compofe  the  whole  body  of
the  earth,  yet  there  are  very  tew  ftrata  but  what  have
fome  fuch  wave  like  ftreaks  or  learns  •,  and  as  thefe
beds  of  ftone  are  fometimes  found  at  confiderable
depths  in  the  earth,  and  confiii  of  layers  of  equal
thicknefs  throughout,  it  had  been  impotflble  that  they
fhould  have  been  in  a  (late  of  fluidity,  unlefs  all  the
iuperincumbent  ftrata  had  been  equally  fluid,  or  not
formed :  nay,  when  we  confider  that  theie  veined
beds  of  ftone  generally  conftitute  the  hardeft  fpecies
of  marble,  we  may  reafonably  conclude,  that  if  they
were  diffolved,  all  the  other  flrata  of  the  earth  were
equally  in  4  date  of  djfTolution.

v.  IT  is  coromon  to  obferve  in  places  where  dif-
ferent ftrata  meet,  that  there  has  been  fuch  an  inti-
mate mixture  of  both,  as  could  not  pofiibly  have
happened  without  a  free  and  eafy  interchange  between
each,  and  confequently  not  without  a  Diffolution.
Thus,  for  inftance,  in  a  country  that  abounds  with
chalk,  where  the  chalk  ends,  and  a  different  foil  and
different  ftrata  begin,  (fuppofe)  that  of  Free- ftone,
there  is  commonly  to  be  feen  upon  the  edge  of  thefe
two  countries  a  kind  of  fubftance  between  Chalk  and
Free-ftone,  confiding  chiefly  of  Chalk  upon  the
Chalk  fide  of  the  Country,  and  principally  of  Free^
ftone  upon  that  of  the  Free-ftone  Country  j  fo  that
on  the  on-  fide,  there  is  a  coarfe  fort  of  Chalk,  on  the
otuer  a  fine  fott  fpecies  of  Free-ftone :  the  former
fort  gradually  coarkr  and  coarfer  the  nearer  it  ap-
proaches the  Free 'ftone,  the  latter  finer  and  finer  the
nearer  it  is  fituated  to  the  Chalk.  And  this  I  have  ob^


1 265  ]

ierved  for  leveral  hundred  yards  upon  the  furface  of
the  earth,  and  for  a  confiderable  depth  Within  it.
A  fimilar  kind  of  Conjunction  or  Intercovrfe  I  have
feen  alfo  between  the  ftrata  of  Sand-ftone  and  Lime-
flone,  between  Flag-ftone  and  Iron-ftone,  and  indeed
every  kind  of  ftrata,  where  they  happen  to  meet
in  conflderable  quantities,  or  large  tracts  ^of  land
abound  with  them.  And  generally,  the  greater  the
quantities  that  meet,  the  more  extenfive  the  int-r-
change  appears  to  have  been,  and  of  courfe  the  Dif-
fplution  the  greater.

vi.  THE  Formation  and  Situation  of  Nodules
plainly  evince  that  the  Earth  has  been  in  a  fluid,  dif-
folved  (late.  What  thefe  are  I  have  already  in  part
mewed,  and  alfo  how  to  diftinguifh  them  from  fea
or  in-land  pebbles  (p.  196).  But  befides  the  fpecies
of  Nodules  principally  there  fpoken  of,  viz.  Thofe
of  a  ftoney  or  mineral  nature,  there  are  others  of  the
metallic  or  iemi-metallic  kind,  fuch  in  particular  as
the  Pyrites.  This  body  is  found  in  great  plenty ;  ef-
pecially  in  chalky  countries ;  and  commonly  of  a
round  form  outwardly ;  and  its  inward  texture  mews,
that  itfelf  and  all  the  matter  around  it  has  been  in  a
fluid  (late-,  for  it  confifts  of  a  multitude  of  long  and
extremely  fine  fpiculae,  clofely  united  together,  and
all  driven  to  a  center ;  and  the  fubftance  of  which  it  is
formed,  is  of  a  quite  different  nature  and  kind  from  the
matter  or  ftratum  in  which  it  is  ufually  found,  and
bears  but  a  very  fmall  proportion  to  the  ftratum.
Now  this  body  muft  either  have  been  formed  out  of
the  ftratum,  and  afterwards  have  fettled  in  it,  or  elfe
been  originally  formed  where  'tis  now  found :  and  in
either  cafe  there  muft  have  been  a  diffblution  or  fe-
paration  of  the  parts  of  both.  For  wherever  the  body
was  formed  (either  in  the  ftratum  where  it  now  lies,


[  266  ]

or  in  any  other  above  it)  as  it  confifts  of  matter  of
fuch  a  peculiar  kind,  and  is  of  fuch  a  particular
ihapc*,  as  plainly  to  (hew,  that  its  atoms,  during  its
formation,  were  collefled  togecher  from  above,  from
beneath,  and  trom  each  fide  (otherwife  it  could  never
h  ,v-  b^en  of  a  radiated  globular  form),  fo  it  muft
follow  that  there  muft  have  been  a  feparation  of  its
own  parts  and  alfo  of  the  matter  around  it,  in  order
to  permit  a  free  and  eafy  pafiage  for  the  accefs  of  one
and  recefs.of  the  other  lort  of  matter.  Other

Nodules  there  are  that  were  undeniably  formed  out
of  the  ftratum  where  they  now  lie,  and  afterwards
fettled  in  it-,  efpedally  thcfe  of  the  coated  kind,  and
in  particular  where  the  coats  or  crufts  of  the  nodules
confiit  of  the  fame  kind  of  fubftances,  reflectively,
wi:h  thole  that  conftitute  the  Itrata  immediately  above
the  bed  where  they  are  now  found.  Now  it  is  certain
that  thefe  bodies  could  never  have  obtained  teguments
of  the  fame  fpecies  of  matter,  and  placed  in  the  fame
order  trom  the  center,  with  the  fuperincumbent  ftrata,
unlefs  they  had  pa/Ted  "through  them;  for  the  beds
wherein  they  are  now  found  have  no  fuch  matter  in
them  (except  what  immediately  furrounds  thefe  bodies
themfelves),  and  the  ftrata  underneath  are  frequently
of  a  very  different  kind  from  either;  fo  that  they
muft  have  pafied  through  the  fuperior  ftrata,  and
have  procured  their  coats  in  their  pafiage;  and  if  fo,
thofe  Itrata  muft  undeniably  have  been  foft  and  fluid,
otherwife  they  could  never  have  pafled  through  them
and  have  collected  coats  frorn  each,  as  alfo  muft  the
bed  have  been  fo,  where  they  are  now  found,  other-
wife  they  could  never  have  fubfided  and  fettled  in
it :  fo  that  the  whole  was  once  in  a  ftate  of  Fluidity.

vu.  BUT  the  moft  ftriking  proof  of  this  kind  may
be  drawn  from  the  extraneous  foffils  or  thofe  bodies


1 267  ]

that  are  now  found  in  the  earth,  and  which  do  not
properly  belong  to  the  places  where they  are now
found,  fuch  as  corals, fea-fhells;  the bones,  teeth,
&c. of fea  and  land animals  •, plants, trees, &c.
Now  t  have  already  {hewed  (p.  254) that  the  former
fort  of  thefe  bodies  were  produced  at  lea,  and  the  lat-
ter, at  land  •,  that  the  broken  parts  of  thefe  bodies
once conftituted complete  forms  ; that the bones,
teeth  and  fhells  once  belonged  to  living  animals,  fur-
viving  in  their  proper  elements  ;  that  the  leaves  and
branches  pt  the  vegetables  once  grew  upon  their  pro-
per plants  and  trees :  fo  that  the  marine  productions
were  originally  bred  and  formed  at  the  bottom  of  the
fea  ;  the  terrene,  upon  the  furface  of  the  land :  but
at  prefent  thefe  bodies  are  found  lying  promifcuofly
throughout  the  whole  folid  body  of  the  earth;  fome
at  the  tops  of  the  higheft  mountains,  others  at  the  bot-
toms of  the  deepett  cavities  that  were  ever  dug;  and
lying  too  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  make  but  one  com-
mon mafs  with  the  ftrata  in  which  they  are  found ;
andjhis,  not  only  in  the  fofter  kinds  of  ftrata,  as  thofe
of  clay,  chalk,  &c.  but  in  the  inmoft  fubltances  of
the  hardeft  and  clofeft  marbles;  and  generally, the
harder  and  more  compact  the  matter  is,  the  clofcr  and
more  intimately  united  is  the  extraneous  foffil ;  which,
if  a  tooth  or  a  fhell,  has  not  only  the  exterior  furface
or  outward  lineaments  moft  nicely  delineated  in  the,
rock,  but  the  infide  totally  replete  with  the  fame  fub-
flance,  every,  even  the  fmalleft  vacuity  and  flighteil
indenture  being  filled  up  with  floney  matter;  and  in
fome  cafes,  where  the  Ihell  has  been  doled,  the  ca-
vity through  which  the  matter  palled  or  entered  into
the  Ihell  is  inconceivably  fmall ;  in  others  the  various
convolutions  and  different  concamerations  are  fo  many
and  yet  fo  minute,  and  the  paffage  leading  through
them  fo  extremely  fmall,  as  not  to  exceed  in  fize  the


[  268  J

orifice  of  a  capillary  tube  in  the  human  body,  and
yet  each  and  every  one  of  thefe  totally  filled  up  with
the  ftoney  fubftance;  fo  that  the  matter  contained
within  the  fheil  exactly  refembleth  any  liquable  fub-
ftance  caft  fluid  into  a  mould.  If  the  extraneous  fof-
fii  be  a  Leaf,  then  not  only  the  upper  and  under-fides
are  molt  accurately  imprefied  in  the  rock,  but  the
very  pores  filled  to  the  inmoft  recefles,  and  the  leaf
as  turgid  and  as  much  fwelled  by  fhe  penetration  of
the  itoney  matter,  as  if  it  had  been  for  a  long  time
foaked  in,  and  moil  intimately  permeated  by,  the
particles  of  water.  Now  for  a  fubftance, — The  tex-
ture of  which  is  inconceivably  delicate  and  compli-
cated, and  even  its  largeft  pores  invifible  to  the
naked  eye,  and  which  once  grew  uppn  the  furface  of
the  earth, — to  be  thus  immerfed  in,  and  penetrated
by,  the  folid  rock,  and  to  have  lunk  through  the  folid
body  of  the  earth  to  the  greateil  depths  we  ever  dig,
is  an  undeniable  teftimony  that  the  Earth  was  once  as
fluid  as  water  itfelf.  And  thefe  extraneous  bodies
point  out  alio  the  time  when  this  Diffolution  happened,
viz.  at  the  Deluge,  and  not  at  the  Creation,  as  fome
have  imagined  (fee  p.  253).

vni.  THE  eighth  argument  I  fhall  mention  in  proof
of  the  DiiTolution  is  drawn  from  the  internal  Structure
of  the  /bell  of  the  earth.  It  is  well  known  to  thofe  that
are  in  the  lead  converfant  with  philofophical  matters,
that  all  the  various  fubftances  of  which  the  main  body
of  the  earth  confifts,  are  difpofed  (as  theChymifts  caJJ
it)  (Iratafuperftrata,  or  layer  upon  layer;  and  it  is  alfo
well  known  that  fuch  a  Difpofition  of  things  could  na-
turally be  the  refult  of  nothing  but  ihefetttementof
thefe  bodies  in  a  dijfolvedjlate  through  fuch  a  Fluid  as
Water.  If,  for  inftance,  you  take  a  certain  portion
of  thefe  bodies,  and  pulverize  them  to  the  fineft  de-


£269  J

gree  imaginable  and  mix  them  as  confufedly  together
as  pofiible,  and  let  them  fall  through  a  dry  Fluid,
fuch  as  the  Air,  they  will  fettle  juft  in  the  fame  con-
fufed  ftate  as  they  were  at  firft,  and  without  the  leafi;
appearance  of  forming  Jlrata :  if,  on  the  contrary,
you  permit  them  to  fubfide  through  water,  they  will
fettle  more  or  fefs  in  parallel  ftrata.  Indeed  it  re-
quires twenty  or  thirty  times  the  Quantity  of  water  to
earth  to  make  this  layer-like  fubfidence  tolerably  ap-
parent, even  in  the  mixture  of  but  three  or  four  bo  •
dies.  But  the  greater  quantity  of  water  you  ufe,  and
the  finer  you  pulverize  the  fubftances,  the  more  ap-
parent and  regular  the  ftrata  will  be :  yet  after  all
the  Trials  that  can  be  made,  the  diftinction  of  ftrata
will  never  be  fo  exact  as  they  are  in  the  body  of  the
earth.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  fee  in  .the  earth  vaftly
large  beds  of  ftone,  coal,  clay,  &c.  lying  each  upon
the  other,  at  one  depth  the  ftone  above  the  coal,  at
another  depth  the  coal  above  the  ftone,  in  one  part
the  clay  above  each,  in  another  under  all,  &c.  and
yet  each  of  thefe  ftrata  fo  diftinct  in  themfelves,  and
fo  nicely  forted,  that  the  ftone  contains  none  of  the
coal,  nor  the  coal  any  of  the  ftone,  nor  does  the  clay
partake  of  either  (^only  each  ftratum  a  little  tinged  on
the  fides  next  to  the  adjoining  ftrata).  Now  the
quantity  of  water  requifite  for  effecting  this  mufl
have  been  immenfely  great^  and  the  whole  body  of  the
earth  muft  have  been  dijfohed  to  its  very  elements  or
primogenial  atoms,  to  produce  fuch  a  regular  affort-
ment  of  ftrata.

HAVING  thus  proved  that  the  whole  ftructure  of
the  earth  has  been  unhinged,  the  conftituent  parts
thereof  feparated  one  from  another,  and  aflumed  up
into  a  large  body  of  water  -,  I  (hall  now  draw  fome
conclufions  from  what  has  been  advanced.


f  270]

1.  SINCE the  quantity  of  water  requifite  for  thfi
aflumption  of  the  dillolved  parts  of  the  earth,  and  the
fubfidence  of  them  in  regular  ftrata,  muft  be  vaitly
greater  than  what  appears  of  this  Fluid  on  the  furtace
of  the  earth  or  in  the  Seas  or  Ocean,  there  muft  be  an
immenfely  large  body  of  water  in  the  infide. I  have  ob-
ferved  already  indeed  (p.  100.)  that  the  water  on  the
furface  of  the  terraqueous  Giobe  occupies  more  than
two  thirds  of  the  earth's  fuperficies  :  butthen  it  muft
be  remembered,  that  the  land  is  ftill  continued,  in  a,
great  meafure,  under  this  water : and  from  the  ap-
pearance of  iflands  in  the  midft  of  large  feas,  at  a  great
diftance  from  the  fea-fhore,  and  irom  the  many  known
ridges  of  mountains  that  run  under  the  fea,  and  front
the  time,  that,  according  to  fcripture,  the  waters  of
the  deluge  were  retreating  from  the  furface  of  the
earth,  we  muft  conclude  that  the  apertures  in  the
feas  thro*  which  the  water  defcended  are,  comparative-
ly fpeaking,  but  ftfiall :  fo  that  the  Ihell  of  the  earth
is  in  a  manner  continued  quite  under  the  feas  (except
where  the  above  apertures  occur). And  probably  the
iand  under  any  fea  equals  in  bulk  that  fea  itfelf. So
that  upon  a  thorough  infpection  of  the  whole  fhell  of
the  earth,  the  terreftrial  parts  vaftly  exceed  the  waters*
And  though  there  appears  water  enough  upon  the
furface  of  the  globe  abundantly  fufficient  for  lardy
covering  the  dry- land  ;  yet  there  by  no  means  appears
a  quantity  fufficirnt  for  dijfching  or  ajfuming  up  the
diffofoed  parts  of  the  earth,  and  permitting  them  to  fubjide
in  the  manner  we  now  find  them :  and  fmce  this  quan-
tity does  not  appear  upon  the  furface  or  within  our
reach,  it  muft  be  in  the  infide,  and  there  conftitute
an  abyfs  of  water.

2.  FROM  the  quantity  of  water  neceffary  for  the
fublevation  of  the  diifolved  parts  of  the  earth,  we  fee,


['7'  J

that  all  folutions  of  a  deluge,  without  having  recourfe
to  an  Abyfsj  muft  fail  or  not  anfwer  the  effects  vifible
throughout  the  whole  body  of  the  earth. And  hence,
I  am  furp'rized,  that  a  modern  ingenious  Writer/
(whofe  works  I  have  made  fome  quotations  from  in
this  Trad)  mould  attempt  to  folve  it  without  the  in-
troduction of  fuch  means. He  imagines,  that the
water  of  the  Sea  only  would  be  fufficient  for  the  work.
And  in  order  to  account  for  the  elevation  of  this  wa-
ter over  the  tops  of  the  higheft  mountains,  he  fup-
pofes,  That  the  Omnipotent  hand  of  GOD  orfrft  Al-
mighty Caufe  lifted  up  the  bottom  or  bed  of  the'fea,  and
by  that  means  poured  its  water  all  over  the  earth  ;
and  by  letting  it  drop  down  again,  reftored  all  things  to
their  former  fituation  :  and fo  the  deluge  was  over.
This  he is  pleafed  to  call  the  eafieft  and  moft  eligible
method  of  tranfacting  this  event : But  I  fuppofe  that
all  methods  are  equally  eafy  to  Omnipotence ;  and  I
could  mention  an  hundred  other  methods  by  which
GOD might  have  deluged  the  world,  and  yet  neither
of  them  the  true,  though  all  equally  eafy  to  the  firfl
Caufe. The  point  to  be decided  is,  What  was  the
method  GOD  did  ufe  ?  If  we  can  difcovrer  this,  we  may
depend  upon  it,  that  'That  was  the  moft  eligible. Now
GOD  himfelf  tells  us,  that  in  order  to  dejiroy  the  earth
by  a  flood  of  water,  he  broke  up  the  Fountains  of  the
Ab_fs,  and  opened  the  windows  of  heaven  (or  the  pa/agcs
of  the  air  through  the  (hell  of  the  earth)  and  fo  unhinged
and  dijjohed  the  whole  globe. This  I  have  (hewed  to
be  the  Cafe  from  the  ftate  of  the  earth,  from  the  Center
to  the  Circumference  •,  and  all  nature  bears  ample  tefti-
mony  to  the  truth  of  the  Word  of  GOD  : and  yet  Mr.
Borlafe  is  pleafed  to  ridicule  this  method  and  cha-
racterize it  as  attended  with  '  the  egregious  abfurdities  cf

{  Rev.  Mr.  BORLASE  in  his  Natural  Hijfory  of  Cornwall,  p.  78.


«  an  Abyfs,  apertures,  difruptibns  of  the  Jhell,  atid  tht
'  like :'  I  was  forry  to  fee  fuch  words  fall  from  fuch
an  Author,  and  as  he  gives  us  reafon  to  think  that  he
will  write  fomething  farther  upon  the  fubjecl:,  I  hopb
he  will  kindly  take  this  friendly  hint*  and  re-confider
the  affair.

3.  FROM  the  certainty  that  the  whole  globe  was
diffolved  during  the  deluge  we  may  fee  the  impro-
priety of  his  Lordfhip's  opinion, — that  the  fuperficial
parts  only  were  affected  during  that  cataftrophe*  and
that  the  Rubble  and  Slutch  left  by  the  deluge  on  the
furface  of  the  earth  are  the  only  marks  of  its  devafta-
tion  is  but  we  have  feen  that  the  Very  form  of  the
earth  throughout,  its  internal  conftitution,  its  difpo-
fition  in  ftrata,  and  thefe  ftrata  abounding  with  the
exuviae  of  land  and  fea  animals,  &c.  manifeftly  de-
jmonflrate  its  DifTolution  in  every  part.  Though

indeed  there  is  one  circumftance  even  in  the  Rubble  and
Slutch  that  indicates  the  DiJJoluticn  of  the  whole  earth,
and  therefore  may  not  improperly  be  mentioned  in  this
place.  After  all  the  refearches  I  could  make,  Or  the
bed  teftimonies  I  could  procure,  I  could  never  learn
that  there  was  ever  any  ante-diluvian  artificial  thing ,
either  utenfil  or  weapon  of  ftone,  iron,  or  brafs,  &c.
found  in  the  Rubble  as  naturally  left  there  by  the
waters  of  the  deluge.  All  things  of  this  kind  that  I
have  feen  were  evidently  found  in  places  where  the
Rubble  had  been  diflurbed,  fuch  as  in  old  caftles,
camps,  &c.  and  therefore  the  things  themfelves  might
have  been  pofterior  to  the  Deluge.  And,  though  the
Rubble  itfelt  lies  in  an  irregular  manner  (with  refpecl
to  the  regularity  of  Strata)  yet  it  is  not  fo  irregular,
but  that  had  it  been  diflurbed  or  broken  through  by
digging,  &c.  the  rupture  would  have  been  vifible  :

*  See  of  this  Traft  p.  14,  &c.


['73  1

F&r  as  it  confifts  of  ftreaks  and  feams  extended  length-^
ways  or  inclined  in  wave-like  directions,  any  perpen-
dicular irruption  muft  have  been  difcernible.  So  that
if  the  Rubble,  left  by  the  deluge,  naturally  contains-
no  metallic  or  mineral  fubftance  worked  by  the  art  of
man  or  engraven  by  his  device,  we  may  then  juftly.
conclude  that  all  fuch  inftruments,  and  of  courfe  all
matter  of  the  fame  kind  with  them,  -/'.  e.  all  the  me-
tallic and  mineral  fubftances  in  the  whole  body  of  the
earth,  were  diffblved  during  the  deluge.

4.  IT  may  feem  ftrange  to  fome,  how  it  was  pofli-
ble  that  all  the  diffblved  parts  of  the  earth  mould  float  in
or  be  fupported  by  fuch  a  thin  fubftance  as  Water.
But  to  folve  this  difficulty,  let  it  be  remembered,
that  they  were  diffohed,  and  alfo  to  their  fineft  parts  or
original  atoms.  Salt  and  Sugar,  when  in  maffes,  will
both  fmk  in  water,  but  v'hen  the  parts  thereof  are  dif-
united  and  feparated  one  from  another,  they  are  eafily
fuftained  thereby :  and  the  quantity  of  Salt  that  is1
fwimming  in  the  waters  of  the  Ocean  is  inconceivably
great,  and  if  collected  in  one  mafs  would  be  immenfe-
ly  weighty.  Then  too,  there  is  no  water  whatever,
even  the  moil  limpid,  but  what  contains  a  great  va-
riety of  earthy  particles,  a?  chymical  experiments  un-
deniably mew  :  Nay,  that  there  is  a  fpecies  of  water
Or  of  a  fluid  (Aqua  regia)  that  will  difiblve  and  fup-
port  the  dirlblved  parts  of  the  heavieft  of  terreftrial
bodies,  Gold;  and  though  the  particles  of  the  gold
fhall  be  fwimming  in  or  difperfed  through  every  pare
of  this  fluid,  yet  the  whole  mail  be  as  clear  as  chryftal.
Or,  wh.lt  is  more  to  the  purpofe,  a  Thunder-cloud.,
big  with  a  deluge  of  rain,  and  containing  a  vaft  varie-
ty of  terreftrial  fubftances,  is  yet  fupported,  at  a  con-
fiderable  diftance  from  the  earth,  by  fuch  a  thin  fluid
as  the  air  :  now  according  to  Scripture,  at  the  time
of  the  deluge  there  was  a  large  body  of  expanding
T


[274]

air"  in  the  infide  of  the  earth,  acting  or  prelling  from
beneath  upwards,  i.  e.  from  the  centre  to  the  circum-
ference, which  therefore  would  counter-act  and  in
fome  degree  abate  the  force  of  the  perpendicular
preffure  of  the  air  or  expanfe  upon  the  furface  of
the  earth^  and  by  this  means  leflen  the  power,  of,
what  is  called,  the  Gravity  of  bodies ,  and  fo  make  them
lighter ;  as  is  the  cafe  in  rainy  or  mifty  weather,  when
bodies  do  not  weigh  fo  heavy  as  at  other  times,  and
when,  on  account  of  thcfe  afcending  fleams  impeding
the  preffure  of  the  atmofphere,  the  mercury  alfo  irr
the  barometer  fubfides  and  finks..  Such  being  the
ftate  of  the  earth  during  the  time  of  the  deluge,  it
was  really  no  more  wonderful,  that  the  water  of  the
terraqueous  globe  (which  in  all  probability  exceeds  in.
bulk  feveral  thoufand  times  the  quantity  of  earth)
fhould  fuftain  all  the  diffolved  ftrata  thereof,  with
the  exuviae  of  animals  and  vegetables  then  deftroyed,
than  that  a  thunder- cloud  fhould  contain  and  fupport
a  vaft  variety  of  mineral  and  metallic  effluvia,  inter-
mixt  with  hail-ftones  of  various  fizes  •,  for  in  both
cafes  a  body  of  expanding  air  was  the  bafis  and  prop :
and  Air,  as  i  have  already  mewed  (p.  34),  will  keep
water  above  as  well  as  under  it.  That  the  ftate

of  the  Earth  and  Air,  during  the  time  of  the  deluge,
was  really  different  from  what  it  is  at  prefent,  is  very
manifeft  from  feveral  effects,  then  tranfacted,  and  now
viable,  in  the  terraqueous  globe.  Certain  it  is,  that
neither  the  ftrata  of  the  earth,  nor  the  heterogeneous
bodies  enclofed  therein,  do  lie  according  to  the  Lawz
of  fpecific  Gravity^  or  as  bodies  would  fettle  at  prefent.
It  is  as  common  to  find  heavier  ftrata  above  lighter
as  lighter  above  heavier :  and  the  fame  kind  of  ftrata
(after  the  interpofition  of  both  heavier  and  lighter.
ones)  repeated  ;  and  remitting  the  whole  in  a  retro-
grade order.  So  that  this  phenomenon  feems  plainly


[  275  i

to  point  out  the  actions  of  two  Agents,  one  that  acted
from  above  downwards,  the  other,  from  beneath  up-
wards :  from  whence  it  mould  follow,  that  at  the  fame
time  as  the  downright  perpendicular  preffure  of  the
Air  feparated  and  precipitated  any  fpecies  of  terreftrial
atoms  through  the  waters  of  the  deluge  and  formed
them  into  a  ftratum,  the  fame  alfo  did  the  Air  from
beneath,  with  refpect  to  the  fame  fpecies  on  the'  op-
pofite  fide.  ,  To  effect  which  alfo  there  muft  have
been  a  total  diffolution  of  the  terreftrial  Globe,  other-
wife  there  could  never  have  been  fuch  a  free  and  eafy
accefs  for  the  Air  to  and  from  the  Center.  And
what  further  mews,  that  there  was  a  body  of  Air  or
fome  Agent  at  the  center  of  the  earth  during  the  time
of  the  deluge,  which  counter- acted  the  force  of  Gra-
vity, is,  the  manner  in  which  the  diluvian  Spars  and
Cryftals  are  at  prefent  found ;  the  moots  of  fuch  be-
ing in  fome  places  perpendicularly  upright,  in  others
varied  in  all  kinds  of  direction,  but  generally  fpeaking
they  are  in  an  horizontal  pofition^  fo  that  the  angles
and  columns  meet  in  and  interfect  each  other  from  the
fides  of  the  vein  or  fiffure.  But  as  the  Spar  that  has
been  formed  fince  the  deluge,  or,  as  the  Miners  call
it,  that  is  forming  at  this  day,  is  always  pointed  down-
wards,  (unlefs  where  the  rock  intervenes,  and  diverts
its  natural  courfe)  hanging  like  icicles  from  the  tops
and  arches  of  caverns,  grotto's,  &c.  in  form  of  Sta-
laftitx ;  it  is  evident  that  the  preffure  Of  the  Air  down-
ward is  at  prefent  ftronger  than  it  was  at  the  time  of
the  Deluge :  and  as  many  of  the  diluvian  Spars  and
Cryftals  are  pointing  perpendicularly  upright,  it  mews
that  the  force  of  the  air  from  beneath  upwards  was
then  ftronger  than  it  is  now :  and  of  courie  that  the
gravity  of  bodies  Was  lefs,  and  fo  more  eafily  fuitain-
able  in  the  waters  of  the  flood  than  fuch  bodies  would
be  now.

T  2


FOURTHLY,

HAVING  thus  proved  that  all  the  folid  ftructure  of
the  earth  has  been  diffolved,  and  the  diffolved  parts'
thereof  affumed  up  into,  and  fupported  by,  a  large
iphere  of  water.

I  AM  now  to  mew,  that  all  this  diffolved  matter,  to-
gether with  the  animal  and  vegetable  bodies  indofed  within
it,  fubjided  again,  and  formed  the  prefent  folid  ftrata  of
the  earth.

I  HAVE  obferved  already  (p.  156)  that  there  is  fuch
a  clofe  Connection  between  the  feveral  parts  of  the
Subject  I  have  been  treating,  or  the  Heads  I  have
been  naturally  led  to  divide  it  into,  that  very  often
one  and  the  fame  argument  would  prove  feveral  of
thefe  heads ;  and  fo  it  has  come  to  pafs  that  the  dif-
cuffion  of  the  former  articles  of  this  Section  has  in  a
manner  exhaufted  thisiaft.  For,  infhortthis  laft  de-
pends entirely  upon  the  truth  of  the  Cafe  as  repre-
fented  in  the  former.  All  the  arguments  that  1  have
there  brought  in  proof  of  the  Hood,  the  Dijfolution,
&c.  were  entirely  taken  from  the  prefent  ftate  of  the
earth.  If  therefore  the  foundation,  on  which  thofe
arguments  were  built,  was  found,  or  the  ftate  of  the
Earth  juftly  given,  little  more  need  be  faid  in  this
place.  And  in  order  that  the  reader  mould  not  rely
barely  upon  my  teftimony,  I  have  fubjoined,  under
each  of  the  former  articles,  the  teftimonies  of  a  variety
of  authors,  who  lived  in  different  times,  and  in  very
diftant  places :  fo  that  in  a  manner  the  voice  of  all
mankind,  and  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  fpeaks  the
truth  of  what  I  have  endeavoured  to  prove.

'  WHAT  weight  thefe  teftimonies  ought  to  have  (to
*  fpeak  in  the  words  of  the  celebrated  Author  of  Reve-
'  lation  examined  with  Candour)  the  reader  will  beft
'  Jac^Se: — Teftimonies  fo  numerous,  fo  various,  fo
'  difconcerted,  and  yet  fo  connected,  is  it  poifible,


[  *77  3

-that  they  can  deceive  ?  Could  all  nations  confpire
with  all  nations,  and  all  ages  with  all  ages,  to  im-
pofe  upon  themfelves,  and  their  pofterity  ?  Could
the  religion  of  the  true  GOD,  and  the  religion  of
the  Syrian  goddefs  !  the  Jews  and  the  Heathens,
that  hated  them  !  Mofes  and  Melo  his  enemy  !  tra-
dition confpire  with  hiftory,  and  hiftory  with  my-
thology !  men  of  all  characters,  complexions,  con-
ditions, and  perfuafions  !  Plutarch  with  Berofus^
Benjamin  the  Jew  with  Chryfoftom^  and  Lttcian  with
both  !  Plato  with  Pliny,  and  Dio  with  Fakonerius  !
the  imaginations  of  poets,  and  the  experiments  of
naturalifts  !  antiquity,  poetry,  philoibphy,  and
philology  !  wifdo-m,  and  folly  !  truth,  and  fiction  !
regions  unknown  ta'  one  another  !  and  regions  that
never  heard  of  one  another  !  the  Greeks  ,  and  the  Hot-
tentots!  the  Perfians,  and  the  Banians!  Afia,  with  the
ides  of  the  G.entilcs  !  and  America  with  both  !  all  con-
fpire to  eflabiim  one  univerfal  delufion!  —  And  ALL
NATURE  join  in  the  atteftation  •,  produce  all  her  ani-
mals, and  all  her  vegetables,  all  her  heights,  and  all
her  depths,  her  mountains,  her  vales,  her  levels,
to  vouch  one  univerfal  lye,  with  all  the  IRRESISTIBLE

EVIDENCE  OF  TRUTH.'

SURELY  thofe  who  fee  not  the  Force  of  the  Evidence
in  this  particular  muft  wilfully  ftiut  their  eyes  againft
the  truth  ;  and  may  juftly  be  characterifed  with  a  fet  of
people  (if  they  are  not  themfelves  the  very  •people)
fpoken  of  by  St.  Peters—In  the  LAST  DAYS/M//  come
SCOFFERS  walking  after  their  own  lufls,  and  faying,
where  is  the  promife  of  bis  (Chrift'jJ  Coming;  for  fince
[or  as  it  mould  be  rendered,  except  that'1}  the  fathers


2  Epift.  iii.  3.

See  Hammond  on  the  text.


i  278  3

fell  ajleep,  [faye  only-,  that  our  fathers  or  all  the  men
.that  have  lived  upon  the  earth  are  dead,  and  others
now  live  in  their  fteacf]  all  things  continue  as  they
were  from  th:  beginning  of  the  Creation-,  i.  e.  there  ha_th
been  no  material  alteration  in  heaven  or  earth  that
can  evidence  the  Interpofition  of  Providence  in  the
affairs  of  men,  either  to  puniih  the  wicked  or  reward
the  good,  and  therefore  we  may  do  as  we  pleafe,
walk  after  our  own  lufts,  &c.  For  this  (continues  the
Apoille)  they  are  WILLINGLY  IGNORANT  OF,  T'hat  by
the  Word  of  GOD  the  heavens  were  of  old,  and  the  earth
ftanding  out  qf  the  water  and  in  the  water:  whereby  the
World  that  then  was,  being  overflowed  with  water,  pe-
rijhed:  that  is,  the  Eyes  of  their  underflandings  are  fo
blinded  by  a  wilful  purfuit  after  their  pajjions  and  lufts
that  they  cannot  fee,  or  will  not  acknowledge,  (if
they  do)  the  plaineft  truths  in  Nature  -,  they  will  not
own,  what  all  the  world  befides  confefleth,  what  all
ages  have  maintain'd,  what  is  faithfully  recorded  in
the  written  word  of  GOD,  and  what  is  engraven  in  the
deepeft  characters  all  over  the  face  of  the  earth,  and
what  they  may  have  (which  infidels  fo  often  demand)
ocular  demonjlration  of  the  truth  of,  viz.  THAT  THERE
HAS  BEEN  AN  UNIVERSAL  DELUGE,  and  that  the  Threat-
fling  pronounced  by  GOD,  four  thoufand  years  ago,
on  a  wicked,  race  of  mortals  was  really  accomplished,
viz.'  And  GOD  faid  unto  Noah,  the  end  ofallflejh  is  come
before  me,  for  the  earth  is  filled  with  violence  through  them,
'and  I  will  deftroy  them*  i.  e,  the  inhabitants,  -with  the
earth  that  bare  them  :  and  which  through  its  abundant
Fertility  (abufed  by  them)  furnifhes  provifion  only  For
their  lufts,  luxury,  and  idolatry.  The  Evidences  of
this  Deflruction  are  fuch,  that  the  very  bodies  or
bones  of  the  perfons  thus  deftroyed,  together  with  the

*  Gen.  vi.  13.


[  279  !

animal  creation  that  perimed  with  them,  are  flill  re-
maining as  {landing,  ftriking  Monuments  of  this  ex-
ecution of  Divine  Wrath  upon  a  wicked  world,  and
.are  to  be  feen  in  every  part  of  the  Earth,  not  only
upon  the  furface,  hut  in  die  very  folid  fubftance
of  it,  not  only  in  vallies  and  dales,  but  upon  the
•tops  of  the  higheft  mountains  and  eminences,  and
buried  alfo  to  the  greateft  depths  that  human  art
or  labour  has  ever  penetrated.  Certain  then  it  is

that  this  whole  earth  has  been  deflroy'd,  all  the  folid
ftructure  of  it  unhinged,  broken  to  pieces,  and  re-
duced to  its  original  loofe  chaotic  flate,  and  afterwards
formed  anew  into  its  prefent  folid,  beautiful  and  con-
venient fhape.  Effects  thefe  fo  great !  that  they  could
never  have  happened  of  themfelves,  never  have  been
the  performance  of  blind  inanimate  matter.  Matter
cannot  even  deftroy  itfelf,  much  lefs,  when  deftroyed,
form  itfelf  anew.  Thefe  tranfactions  therefore  muft
have  been  effected  by  a  Being  fuperior  to  all  the
Powers  of  Nature  :  and  they  carry  in  themfelves  fuch
.evident  marks  of  Wifdomy  Power,  Goodnefs  and  Jufltce^
that  they  not  only  prove  that  there  is  a  GOD,  but
alfo  that  He  GOVERNS  the  World.


IT  may  not  be  unentertaining  nor  uninftructive  to
the  reader,  with  refpect  to  the  fubject  of  this  book,
if  (before  I  conclude)  I  prefent  him  with  a  paraphrafe
in  verfe  of  the  iO4th  Pfalm,  as  compofed  by  my  fa-
ther from  the  true  fenfe  of  the  Original  *,  fince  that
Pfalm  contains,  among  other  things,  a  defcription  of
the  two  principal  Particulars  difcufled  in  this  Tract,
viz.  tbe  Manner ',  in  which  the  Earth  was  at  firjl  formed^
and  tbe  Manner  in  which  it  was  deftroyed  and  formed
anew-,  at  the  time  of  the  Deluge.
T  ?


The  Hundred and Fourth  PSALM

PARAPHRASED

By the late  Rev. Mr. A. S. CATCOTT.

TT^XERT  thy  reas?ning  powers,  my  vital  Frame,
•*-'  And  grateful  praife  the  great  JEHOVAH's  name ;
Hail  thou  who  ART !  refiftlefs  in  thy  might,
Array'd  in  glory  and  majeftick  light  !

As  a  wide  tent,  extended  over -head,
Thy  forming  hands  the  vaft  Expanfe  out-fpred,
Whofe  binding  force  the  fluid Orb  reftrain'd,
And  reach'd  thofe  atoms  the  loofe  ma-fs  contain'd.
Whence  the  firm  ftrata,  which  the  Globe  compofe,
Each  over  each  in  mounting  flories  rofe.
Onward  it  mov'd,  impell'd  by  grains  of  air ;
The  wings  of  winds  the  floating  Orb  upbare.
With  J  double  impulfe  pufh'd  the  Spirit's  force,
And  Light  primeval  fteer'd  it  in  its  courle.


1  As  mnn  being  in  the  plural  number,  indicates.  The

Wind  or  Spirit  and  the  Light  or  a  Flame  of  Fire  were  the  Agents  or
Ministers  that  GOD  made  ufe  of  in  garni/hing  the  Heavens  and  in
forming  the  Earth,  as  I  have  <hewed  p.  26,  &c.  of  this  Tract.
As  the  Works  6f  Nature  are  here  fpoken  of,  it  is  certainly  more
natural  to  fuppofe  the  material  Angds  or  Agents  are  here  meaijt
than  immaterial  'j&dfh-iiual  Beins.


[ 28l ]

On  th'  Airs,  as  bafes,  he  machin'd  the  Sphere,
And  firmly  bid  the  folid  parts  cohere.
As  yet  the  Shell  beneath  the  waters  lay,
And  future  mountains  had  not  leen  the  day.
At  thy  command  th'  affrighted  waters  fled,
And  fought,  tumultous,-  their  appointed  bed.
O'er  hills  they  roll'd,  and  followed  the  defcent,
Deep  channels  tore,  and  the  fplit  valleys  rent.
There  lodg'd,  in  Earth's  capacious  Womb,  they  reft,
By  the  ftrong  Heav'n's  expanfivepow'r.comprefs'd.
Their  bound'ries  ftill  their  raging  waves  confine,
Bound'ries  unmov'd  by  any  pow'r  but  thine.
Hence  rais'd  in  {team,  they  work  their  fecret  way,  -*
In  lowly  vales  thro'  openings  meet  the  day,
Or  trickling  'twixt  the  winding  mountains  ftray. ••
Here  haunt  the  Beafls,  and  find  a  cool  retreat, -  ,-
And  parch'd  wild  Aflfes  quench  their  thirfly  heat.
In  neighb'ring  trees,  amidft  the  leafy  fprays,
Birds  build  their  nefts,  and  chaunt  their  chearful  lays.
The  oozing  fprings  bedew  the  moffy  hills,
And  thence  glide  down  the  fertile  vale  in  rills  :
Hence  new  in  ftrength  the  fatu rated  Soil
With  verdant  grafs  fupports  the  cattle's  toil ;
With  various  herbs  for  human  ufe  is  crown'd,
Or  yellow  harveftsload  the  fruitful  ground,


[ 282 ]

Hence  'rife  th*  effects  of  induftry  and  art ;
Hence  bread  is  form'd  the  ftrength'ner  of  the  heart.
From  fwelling  grapes  the  foaming  wine  is  prefs'd,
Diffufmg  gladnefs  o'er  the  penfive  bread.
Oil  with  youth's  bloom  renews  each  fading  grace.
And  iheds  frefh  glories  o'er  the  beauteous  face.
Trees,  facred  emblems,  and  once  Edtn\  pride,
From  the  fame  ftorehoufe  are  with  fap  fupply'd  \
Cedars,  which  Lebanon's  high  fummits  grace,
Set  there  by  GOD,™  coeval  with  their  place  :
Lodg'd  in  whofe  branches  Fowls  fecurely  reft ;
And  tow'ring  firs  which  yield  the  ftork  a  neft.
On  higheft  hills  the  fhy  Chamois  are  found  ;
And  delving  Conies  bore  the  rocky  ground.
The  Moon's  fair  Light  (her  Orb  by  dated  force
Impell'd)  determines  periods  by  its  courfe :
The  Sun  more  glorious  runs  its  known  career.
And  gilds  by  turns  each  mifting  hemifphere.
The  light  goes  off,  and  night  fucceeds  the  day  ;
The  beafts  come  forth,  and  proul  in  fearch  of  prey.
With  hunger  pinch'd  the  whelps  of  lions  roar,
And  from  their  Maker's  hand  their  meat  implore.
Again  the  Light  irradiates  on  the  Sphere  ;
The  Beafts  retire  to  dens, and  difappear.

m  i.  e . Set  there  by  Nature  or  the  Author  of  Naturey  in  oppoft-
tion  to  thofe//a«/^  by  the  Art  of  Man.


f  283  3

Men  -iffuing  forth  their  daily  toils  attend,
'Till  ev'ning-twilight  bids  their  labours  end,

O  great  JEHOVAH  1  dreadful,  glorious  name!
What  wonders  fill  this  univerfal  frame !
In  ALL  thy  fovereign  wifdom  mines  exprefs'd  j
But  thou  profufely  kind  this  globe  haft  blefs'd :
How  yaft  the  Sea !  magnificently  fpred !
Of  Creatures  numberlefs  the  fpacious  bed !
.O'er  the  wide  level  mips  purfue  their  way,
And  huge  fea-monfters  tofs  the  deep  in  play.
All  wait  on  thee,  and  thou  fupremely  good,
In  proper  feafon  giv'ft  to  all  their  food  :
Thou  giv'ft,  They  take,  thine  hand  thou  open'ft  wide,
Whence  all,  that  live,  with  plenty  are  fupply'd.

When  once  from  earth  thy  prefence  difappear'd,
Man's  impious  race  impending  vengeance  fear'd.
The  world's  great  courfe  was  chang'd  j  no  more  fupply'd
With  vital  fpirit;  all  expir'd,  and  dy'd.
Ev*n  Nature's  adamantine  chain  was  loos'd,
And  things  to  their  primaeval  ftate  reduc'd.
Soon  as  thou  bad'ft  the  Spirit  work  again,
And  as  at  firft  the  fluid  Orb  reftrain;
New  forms  appear'd  refemblant  of  the  old,
And  Earth  was  cloath'd  with  vegetable  Mold.


t 2*4 ] .

But  he  whofe  mbkm  GLORY  is,  whole  name
JEHOVAH  is,  for  ever  IS  the  fame.
When  e'er  his  works  propitious  he  furveys,
Nature  proceeds  fuccefsful  in  her  ways  ;
But  when  in  wrath  his  flaming  bolts  are  hurl'd,
The  mountains  fmoke,  and  tremblings  make  the  world,

So  long  as  Life  fupports  this  breathing  frame,
I'll  fing  my  Saviour,  great  JEHOVAH'S  Name.
When  Thought  of  him  my  ravifh'd  foul  employs,
I  feel  a  foretafte  of  immortal  joys.
While  fliort  on  earth  the  pleafures  are,  that  flow
From  Sin,  and  lollow'd  by  eternal  Woe :
My  vital  frame !  the  great  JEHOVAH  blefs,
Adore  his  Goodnefs,  and  his  Pow'r  confefs.


* *


APPENDIX.

JUST  after  I  had  printed  the  fheet,  relating  to  the
manner  in  which  I  apprehend  America  was  >y£
peopled,  I  had  occafion  to  go  to  Oxford^  and  took  that
opportunity  of  carrying  the  fheet  with  me,  in  order
to  have  the  opinion  of  a  friend  upon  it.  He  deferred
reading  it  while  I  was  prefent,  and  promifed  to  fend
me  an  anfwer  by  the  poft.  In  the  mean  time  he  fent
it  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Jones,  of  Wadenho  in  Nortbampton-
Jhire,  (a  common  friend  to  us  both)  as  having  heard
that  that  gentleman  had  particularly  confidered  the
fubjeft,  and  had  difcovered  a  method  of  fblving  the
difficulty.  Soon  after  which  I  received  the  following
letter  from  Mr.  Jones,  containing  a  folution  of  the
affair  in  the  very  fame  manner  as  that  propofed  in  this
Tradt  :  and  as  his  letter  has  feveral  corroborating  proofs,
I  thought  proper  to  affix  it  here,  as  alfo  an  extract
from  a  Spanijb  Writer,  containing/^*  other  Jlrengthen-
ing  circumftances,  which  I  did  not  difcover  'till  I  had
printed  the  above-mentioned  meet.


The  Rev.  Mr.  JONES'S  Letter.
s  I  R,

T  HAVE  lately  been  favoured  with  a  fight  of  fome

printed  Pages,  containing  that  part  ot  your  work,

in  which  you  account  (or  the  peopling  of  the  American

Continent. The  point  docs  well  deierve  to  be  ex-


[286  1

amined  and  cleared  up;  many  writers,  of  little  know-
kdge  and  lefs  Faith,  having  made  the  obfcufe  ftate  in
which  that  part  of  the  globe  remained  for  fo  many
Ages*  an  handle  for  perplexing  weak  minds  with
doubts  about  the  authenticity  of  fome  Articles  related
in  the  Holy  Scripture.

I  WAS  much  pleafed  to  find,  that,  without  knowing
it,  you  are  come  to  the  fame  conclufion  with  myfelf,
and,  in  part,  by  the  fame  premifes  too.  A$  we  have
both  fallen  upon  the  fame  fcheme,  without  confulting
one  another,  it  is  to  be  prefumed,  that  neither  of  us
can  be  very  far  from  the  truth.

THAT  the  Weftern  Continent  did  once  communicate
more  nearly  with  Europe  and  Africa,  than  it  does  at
prefent,  I  was  firft  inclined  to  believe  on  reading  the
following  account  of  Teneriffe,  one  of  the  Canary
Iflands. That  the  whole  Ifland  is  deeply  impreg-
nated with  Brimftom,  and  is  fuppofed  in  former  ages  to
have  taken  fire,  and  blown  up  all  at  the  fame  time. —
That  many  mountains  of  huge  Stones,  calcined  and
burnt,  which  appear  every  where  about  the  Ifland,
were  raifed  and  heaved  up  out  of  the  bowels  of  the
Earth  at  the  time  of  that  general  conflagration ;  and
that  even  the  Pico  Teneriffe  itfelf  was  raifed  up  by  this
means  to  that  amazing  height  at  which  it  is  now  feen.
Huge  heaps  of  thefe  calcined  rocks,  or  pumice  {tones,
are  fpread  for  three  or  four  miles  round  the  bottom  of
the  Pico,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  perfuade  any  be-
holder that  it  muft  have  been  generated  by  the  fudden
eruption  of  a  Volcano:  and  even  to  this  day,  the
mountain  fmoaks  and  burns  perpetually,  and  there  re-
main the  very  tracts  of  the  burning  rivers  of  Sulphur,
as  they  ran  all  over  the  South- weftern  parts  of  the
Ifland,  and  deftroyed  the  ground  pait  recovery.
There  is  a  Volcano  in  another  of  the  Canaries,  called
the  Palme  Ifland,  which  raged  fo  about  twelve  years


before  this  account  was  written,  that  it  caufed  a  vio-
lent Earthquake  in  Teneriffe,  though  at  the  dtiiance  of
near  twenty  leagues,  and  the  people  ran  out  of  their
houfes,  fearing  they  would  have  fallen  upon  their
heads/

Now  as  it  appeared  to  me,  from  this  relation,  that
the  Pico  was  certainly  thrown  up  by  the  eruption  of  a-
Volcano,0  and  an  Earthquake,  in  all  probability  the
moil  violent  that  ever  happened  in  the  world,  and
fuch  as  muft  have  made  ftrange  havock.  The  monu-
ment of  this  Cataftpophe  being  ib  fingular  in  its  height,
— a  Thought  fuddenly  ftruck  me,  that  in  fome  very
remote  age,  a  great  alteration  might  have  been  made
in  this  part  of  the  globe,  and  a  vaft  tract  of  land  fw al-
lowed up  in  doe  Ocean,  of  which  the  -Canaries,  Azores.,
and  perhaps  the  great  banks  of  Newfoundland  alfo,  are
fo  many  remaining  fragments,  Handing  like  pieces  of
a  wreck  above  the  waves,  and  ftill  exhibiting  to  us
fome  foot-fteps,  as  it  were,  of  the  ancient  path  that
once  led  from  Africa  to  the  Weft-Indies.  I  was  fo
poffeffed  with  this  notion,  that  I  could  not  help  propof-
ing  it  to  fome  learned  friends,  long  before  I  had
heard  of  Plato's  tradition,  as  a  probable  conjecture*

n  For  thefe  particulars,  fee  Dr.  Sprat's  Hift.  of  the  Royal  So-
ciety, p.  200.

0  This  Suppojition  will  not  at  all  invalidate  the  Account  given  of
the  Formation  of  Mountains,  p.  159;  for  the  Pico  is  no  other  than  a
formlefs  Maj's  or  huge  Heap  of  Rubbijb,  confifting  of&urnt  Stones  and'
Cinders,  and  was  as  certainly  thrown  out  by  a  Volcano  as  the  fa-
mous Monte  di  Cinere  in  the  Lucrine  Lake  was,  or  as  thofe  little^
Iflands  or  rather  Moles  in  the  bay  of  Sant-Erini  in  the  Archipelago,
were  raifed  by  fubterranean  fires  and  combuftible  Explofions  in
the  year  1707  [fee  N°'  314.  of  Pbilof.  Tranf,}.  As  neither  of
thefe  Eminences  have  any  thing  fimilar  to  the  horizontal  Jhata  or
internal  Conftitution  of  Mountains ;  fo  they  cannot  come  under  the
denomination  of  fuch,  nor  ought  they  to  be  called  Mountains  or
IJla.ndsy  as  fome  writers  have  named  them.


whereb^  the  peopling  of  America  might  be  accouhtea
for  i  and  endeavoured  to  recommend  it  to  their  con-
fideration,  by  placing  a  terreftrial  Globe  before  them.
You  may  imagine  then,  with  what  fatisfaclion  I
found  this  opinion  confirmed  even  beyond  my  hopes,
when  the  paffage  you  have  extracted  from  Plato's  Ti-
m<£us  firft  occurred  to  me.  This  paftage  is  referred  to
by  Pliny  the  natural  hiftorian,?  and  it  is  hafdly  to  be
imagined,  that  fuch  a  curiofity  in  its  kind  mould
efcape  the  notice  of  fo  indefatigable  a  Compiler;
though  it  was  of  much  lefs  value  to  him  then,  than
to  us  now.  America  was  then  unknown  ;  and  there
was  no  profpect,  that  the  tradition,  which  Solon  pickt
up  in  Egypt,  would  ever  be  confirmed  as  an  article
ot  true  hiftory  by  the  difcovery  of  a  new  world.
Therefore  Pliny  fpeaks  of  it  with  fome  doubt,  inferring
the  words— -fi  Platoni  credimus :  and  fome  of  the  anci-
ent Commentators  on  the  works  of  Plato,  did  for  thd
fame  reafon  convert  the  whole  into  an  Allegory.  And
fome  excufe  may  be  made  for  the  Critics  who  did  ic
in  thofe  days,  but  none  at  all  for  thole  who  would  do
it  now  ;  as  it  muft  appear  to  any  perfon  that  will  con-
fult  the  judgment  of  Serranus  in  this  matter,  who,  in
in  his  preface  to  the  Tim^us,  is  very  fevere  upon  thefe
unfeafonable  allegorizers,  and  refutes  them  copioufly
from  the  words  of  P/tf/0himfelf.  It  was  very  ill-judged
in  Acofta,  therefore  to  mention  this  (lory  from  Plato,
and  put  it  off  with  the  obfolete  pretence  of  it's  being
an  allegorical  difcourfe.i  He  hath  indeed  urged  fome
reafons  in  defence  of  what  he  fays,  but  they  are  too
trivial  to  deferve  any  particular  confideration.  We


p  Intotum  (mare  fcil.)  abftulit  terras,  primurn  omnium  uii  Atlan-
ticu:;i  mare  eft,  Ji  Platoni  credimus,  immenfo  fpatio.  Plin.  Nat.
Hift.  Lib.  2.  cap.  90.

Cs  Nat,  and  Moral  Htf.  of  the  Indies,  p.  72.


fa??]

are  obliged  then  to  underftand  it  as  an  hiftorical  tradi-
tion. Thofe  who  are  inclined  to  flight  it,  and  think
the  Earthquake  Plato  has  defcribed  is  incredible,  be-
caufe  fome  fabulous  circumftances  are  blended  with
the  account,  Ihould  endeavour  to  (hew  us,  what  could
pofiibly  give  rile  to  fuch  a  Report  in  the  eafterrt
world  :  for  that  Plato  fhould  fo  exprefly  defcribe  an
oppofite  continent  '1w  KoclocflMgv  rpru^bv}  fuch  as  is  aclu*
ally  now  difcovered,  together  with  the  way  that  led
to  it  from  the  Streights  of  Gibraltar^  and  that  this
ftrange  report  fhould  be  grounded  on  no  antient  know-
ledge of  the  American  continent,  and  prove  to  be  true
afterwards  only  by  accident — all  this  would  be  more
incredible  than  the  matter  reported,  which,  if  the
natural  monuments  of  this  great  Earthquake,  frill
fubfifting,  are  taken  into  the  account^  has  all  the  ap-
pearance of  truth  that  can  be  defired.

The  celebrated  Abbe  le  Plufche,  Author  of  the  Spefta-
cle  de  la  Nature?  tells  us,  it  has  been  aflerted  by  many
learned  men,  that  there  was  formerly  a  communication
between  Africa  and  America:  but  he  unfortunately
fuppofes  this  opinion  to  have  been  wholly  derived
from  a  miftake  in  Ptolomy\  antient  Chart  of  the  then-
known  world,  which  ftretches  out  the  continent  of
Africa  too  far  to  the  Weft;  and  obferves  withal,  -that
the  pretenfion  is  defeated  by  what  Herodotus  relates,  of
the  voyage  that  was  frequently  made  from  the  Red  Sea,
round  the  Cape  of  good  hope,  to  the  Pillars  of  Hercules  5
which  could  not  have  been,  had  the  continent  of
Africa  been  extended  to  the  Weft-Indies.  This  Objec-
tion will  not  in  the  leaft  affect  any  thing  you  have  laid
upon  the  Subject :  ior  Herodotus  is  fpeaking  of  what
was  done  long  after  the  Divifion  of  the  continents  had
U

I  Vol.  4.  p.  43-


[ 290 ]

taken  place ;  and  even  before  that  divifion,  according
to  the  Geography  of  Plato  ^  there  was  a  gulf  which  af-
forded a  pafiage  round  the  weftern  coaft  of  Africk,  to
the  mouth  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea.

No  reaibnable  Objection,  therefore,  can  be  made  to
your  Solution  of  this  difficulty.  Every  candid  In-
quirer into  Antiquity  and  Phyfical  Knowledge,  will
hold  himielf  obliged  to  you  for  the  curious  Obferva-
tions  you  have  thrown  in  by  the  way ;  and  the  piety
of  your  defign  muft  recommend  it  to  every  fmcere
friend  of  Divine  Revelation.

BEFORE  I  conclude,  it  may  not  be  impertinent  to
add,  that  although  the  more  Southerly  parts  of  the
continent  of  America  were  originally  peopled,  in  your
way,  from  the  countries  that  lie  near  the  Mediterra-
nean ;  it  is  by  no  means  improbable,  that  the  Northern
parts  may  have  received  inhabitants  from  fome  other
quarters  of  the  Globe,

IN  a  Natural  Hiftory  of  Greenland,  written  fo  lately
as  the  year  1 741,  by  Hans  Egidius,  a  Danijh  Miflionary,
we  are  informed,  that  it  is  yet  undetermined  whether
Greenland  does  not  join  to  America,  on  the  North-  well
fide,  round  Da-vis's  Streights.  The  Hiftorian  himfelf
inclines  to  the  affirmative.  He  adds  moreover,  that
the  Norwegians,  who  difcovered  it  in  982,  were  not
the  firft  inhabitants  -,  fcr  that  they  found  'wild people  on
the  Weft-fide  of  the  country,  whom  he  takes  to  have  been
Americans.  Now  the  Country  of  Greenland,  to.  the
South- eafl,  is  not  fo  far,  either  from  Iceland,  Lapland,
or  Norway,  but  that  various  accidents  in  former  ages
may  have  occafioned  fome  communication  between
them.  And  thus  much  for  the  Norib-wefterly  parts  of
America.  If  we  go  to  the  North-eajlerly  parts,  it  is  ftill
more  probable,  that  fome  colonies  may  have  been
transplanted  thither  from  Tartary.  Father  Avril^  a
Jefuit-Miffionary  of  France,  who  with  fome  others


[ 29I

undertook  the  difcovery  of  a  new  way  by  land  into
China,  met  with  a  famous  Naturalift  among  the  Muf-
covites,  who  gave  him  the  following  account.

*  That  in  the  extreme  parts  ofTartary,  to  the  North-

*  eaft,  there  is  a  great  River,  called  Kawoina,  at  the

*  mouth  of  which  is  a  fpacious  Ifland  well  peopled.
4  The  Inhabitants  go  frequently,  with  their  wives  and
4  families,  upon  the  frozen  Sea,  to  hunt  the  Behemoth,

*  an  amphibious  animal,  whofe  Teeth  are  in  great  re-
4  queft. It  happens  many  times,  that  being  furprized
4  by  a  fudden  Thaw,  they  are  cut  off  from  all  commu-

*  nication  with  the  land,  and  carried  away,  no-body
4  knows  whither,  on  huge  floating  Iflands  of  Ice, For

*  my  own  part  (added  this  philofopher)  I  am  perfuaded,
4  feveral  of  thefe  Hunters  have  been  carried  to  the

*  mod  Northern  parts  of  America,  which  are  not  far
4  off:  and  what  confirms  me  in  this,  the  Americans  of
4  thofe  parts  have  the  fame  countenance and  com-
4  plexion  with  thofe  unfortunate  Iflanders, whom  a
4  violent  thirft  after  gain,  expofesin  that  manner  to  be

*  tranfported  into  a  foreign  region.'1 The  Hiftorian
adds  trom  his  own  Oblervation,  that  there  are  alfo,
in  that  part  of  America, feveral  of  thofe  creatures
which  are  fo  common in  Mufeovy, and  efpecially
Beavers,  which  might  have  been  conveyed  by  the  fame
means. But  to  determine  a  matter  of  fuch  impor-
tance, it  mould  be  enquired,  whether  there  is  any  af-
finity between  their  languages  ;  for  if  that  fhould  ap-
pear, there  would  remain  no  farther  doubt.

As  to  the  Author  you  have  undertaken  to  confute,

he,  itfeems,  would  have  America  to  have  been  exempt

from  that  Deluge,  by  which  the  reft  of  the  world  was

overflowed. This, as  you  juftly  obfcrve, is  con-

T  2

»  d-vril's  Travels,  p.  176,


[ 292 ]

futed  by  a  tradition  among  the  Americans  themfelves
concerning  the  Flood  :  and  it  is  certainly  put  out  of
all  difpute  by  the  natural  Evidence  afforded  by  the
country  itlelf,  in  which  the  fpoils  of  the  Sea  are  found
as  plentifully  as  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  If  I  re-
member right,  I  once  communicated  to  you  fome
fpecimens  ot  Fofill  bodies  that  came  from  thence.
Since  that  time,  you  muft  undoubtedly  have  enriched
your  Collection  wifh  a  great  many  more  from  the


I  am,  Sir,
(Heartily  wifhing  you  all  fuccefs  in  your  laudable  Undertaking,)

Tour  very  fine  ere  Friend,

W  A  D  E  N  H  o,  Jlnd  obedient  bumble  Servant,

June  20, I/6l,  W. y.


AN EXTRACT FROM

L'Hifloiredela  Decouverte  et  dela  Conquet

Traduite  de  L'Elpagnol  D'Aucusriw  DE  ZARATE,

Par.  S.  D.  C.
A  AMSTERDAM;  Ann.  1700.

ANY  doubts  and  objections  have  been  formed
'  concerning  the  firft  people  who  fome  ages

*  fince  dwelt  in  Peru^  and  it  has  been  often  afk'd,
'  How  could  they  get  thither,  feeing  this  country  is
'  (as  it  really  is)  parted  by  luch  an  extent  of  ocean
"from  that  where  the  firft  inhabitants  of  this  world
'lived?  It  feerns  to  me  that  this  difficulty  may  be

*  folv'd  by  an  account  given  by  Plato  in  his  Tiat<eMS  or
c  Dialogue  on  Nature,  and  which  he  fets  down  more
'  fully in the following (the  Atlantic)  Dialogue.


T%  /T
J[VJL


[293  ]

*  There  he  relates,  that  '  the  ^Egyptians  faid  in  honour
"  of  the  Athenians,  that,  after  the  defeat  of  fome  cer-
<l  tain  kings  who  carne  by  fea  with  a  numerous  army,
"  they  had  part  of  a  vaft  ifland  called  Atlantique,  juft
"  beyond  the  pillars  of  Hercules. That  this  ifland  was
<c  larger  than  all  AJia  and  Africa  together,  and  that
"  it  was  divided  into  ten  kingdoms  by  Neptune,  one
*'  of  which  he  allotted  to  each  of  his  ten  fons,  beftow-
<c  ing  the  largeft  and  bed  on  his  eldeft  fon  Atlas.' To
c  this  he  adds  divers  particulars  concerning  the  cuf-

*  toms  and  the  wealth  of  this  ifle,  but  above  all  about

*  a  fumptuous  temple  in  the  metropolis,  the  walls  of
c  which  were  entirely  deck'd  and  covered  with  gold

*  and  filver,  and  the  roof  covered  with  copper,  with

*  many  other  particulars  too  long  to  enumerate  here,
'  and  which  may  be  feen  in  the  original. It  is  certain
4  that  many  of  the  cuftoms  and  ceremonies  mention'd
'  by  this  author  are  yet  to  be  feen  in  the  provinces  of

*  Peru. From  this  ifle  one  may  pafs  to  other large

*  iflands  beyond,  and  which  are  not  far  from  the  firm
c  land,  near  which  is  the  true  fea. But  hear  the  words
4  of  Plato  in  the  beginning  of  his  Timteus,  where  So-
'  crates  thus  harangues  the  Athenians,  '  It  is  look'd  OH
"  as  a  faft  that  in  times  paft  your  city  refilled  a  great
"  number  of  enemies  who  came  from  the  Atlantic  Sea,
"  and  had  taken  and  poffeffed  almoft  all  Europe  and
"  Afia  ;  for  then  this  flrait  was  navigable,  and  near
"  it  was  an  ifland  juft  beyond  the  pillars  of  Hercules^
"  which  they. faid  was  larger  than  Afia  and  Africa  put
*'  together :  from  this  ifland  was  an  eafy  paflage  to
*'  others  that  were  near  it,  and  oppofite  the  Continent
"  or  the  main  land  bordering  on  the  true  fea  •,  for  one
"may  juftly  call  that  fea  the  true  fea  or  ocean,  and
"  the  land  I  mentioned  the  Continent  or  main  Land.'

*  Juft  below  Plato  adds, '  Nine  thoufand  years  ago
"  happened  a  great  change,  the  fea  furrounding  this


L  294  J

•*  ifle  fwell'd  fo  high  by  a  prodigious  increafe  of  water,
*fc  that  in  one  day  and  night  it  cover'd  the  whole  ifland,
"  and  fwallow'd  and  totally  cngulph'd  it  •,  and  that
"  the  fea  in  this  place  has  been  ever  fmce  fo  filPd
"  with  mud  and  fands,  that  no  one  can  fail  over  it,
*c  or  pafs  by  it  to  thofe  other  iflands  on  the  firm  land.'

*  Some  deem  this  relation  an  allegory  as  Marftlius  Ft-

*  cinus  tells  us  in  his  notes  on  Tim^us. Neverthelefs

*  mod  commentators  on  Plato,  even  Platinus  and  Fi-

*  «»ttj  himfdf  look  on  this  account  not  as  a  fiction  but
'  an  bifterical  Truth. Befides  ;  one  can  by  no  means

*  think  that  the  9000  years  which  he  mentions  is  a

*  proof  of  its  being  a  fable,  becaufe  according  to  Eu-
«  doxus  one  muft  count  them  after  the  ^Egyptian  man-

<  ner,  not  as  folar,  but  as  lunar  years,  that  is  to  fay,
«  9000  months,  anfwering  to 750  years. On  this

<  fubject  one  may  obferve,  that  all  Hiftorians  and  Col-
«  mographers  antient  and  modern,  call  that  Sea  in
«  which  this  ifland  was  engulph'd  the  ATLANTIC  O-
«  CEAN,  retaining  even  the  very  Name  the  ifland  bore ;
«  which  feems  a  fufficient  proof  that  there  had  been
«  fuch  an  ifland. Admitting  then  the  truth  of  this

*  hiftory,  no  one  can  deny  this  ifland  (beginning  near

*  the  ftraits  of  Gibraltar)  to  have  been  of  that  extent,

*  from  the  north  fouthward  and  from  the  eaft  weft-
c  ward,  as  to  be  more  than  as  large  as  Afia  and  Africa.
4  By  the  other  neighbouring  iflands  are  doubtlefs  meant

*  Hifpaniola,  Cuba,  Jamaica,  St.  Johns,  and  thofe  on

*  the  Coaft. By  the  Continent  or  Firm-land,  (oppofite

*  to  thofe  ifles)  mentioned  by  Plato,  is  certainly  meant
«  That  land  which  is  even  to  this  day  called  Terra  Fir-

*  ma,  with  the  other  provinces,  which  from  Magellan

<  northward  comprife  Peru,  Popfiyan,  Cas-del-oro,  Pa-
'  raguay,  Nicaragua, Guatimala, New-Spain, Se-ven-
'  towns,  Florida,  the  Bacullaos,  and  north  up  to  Nor-

*  way. Without  doubt  this vail tract  of  land is


1 295]

c  larger  than  the  three  quarters  of  the  then  known
«  world.  And  one  mufl  not  be  furprized  at  this  new
c  world's  not  having  been  difcover'd  by  the  Rowans,
'  or  any  of  thofe  other  nations  that  at  different  times
6  abode  in  Spain  •,  becaufe  one  may  reafonably  imagine
'  that  the  'fore- mentioned  fuppofed  difficulty  of  na-
«  vigating  this  fea  then  remained.  This  indeed  I
c  have  heard  faid,  and  can  fee  no  difficulty  in  believ-
«  ing  that  this  mould  eafily  prevent  the  difcovery  of

<  this  new-world  mentioned  by  Plato. The  authority
c  of  this  philolbpher  is  enough  to  convince  me  of

<  the  truth  of  this  affair, and  I  make  no  queflion

*  but  our  new  found  world  is  the  fame  as  that  main
«  Land  or  Continent  of  which  he  fpeaks  •,  as  whatever
c  he  has  faid  of  it  perfectly  correfponds  with  our  mo-

*  dern  Difcoveries  ;  particularly  in  what  he  fays  of
c  this  land,  that  it  is  adjacent  to  the  true  feay  which
'  is  what  we  now  call  the  Great  South  Sea  ^  in  com-
1  parifon  of  the  vail  extent  of  which,  the  Mediterranen

*  Sea  and  Northern  Ocean  are  but  as  rivers. Having
'  cleared  up  this  difficulty  thus  far  it  feems  no  way

*  hard  to  fuppofe,  that  men  could  eafily  pafs  from  the
c  Atlantic  and  its  neighbouring  TJles  to  what  we  call  the
c  Continent  or  Terra  Firma,  and  thence  by  land  or
'  even  by  the  South  Sea  to  Pent.

'  THUS  I  have  declared  what  feems  to  me  tnoft
c  probable  on  a  fubjecl  fo  perplexed,  on  account  of  its

*  antiquity,  and  alfo becaufe  one  can  get  no  intelli-
'  gence  from  the  inhabitants  of  Peru  •,  who  know  not

*  the  ufe  of  letters  or  writing  to  preferve  the  memory
c  of  things  paft. In  New  Spain  indeed  they  have
'  certain  pictures  which  ferve  them  for  letters  and
'  books  ;  but  in  Peru  they  have  nothing  but  knotted

' «  firings  of  various  colours  :  It  is  true,  by  means  of
«  thefe  knots,  and  the  diftance  they  are  fet  at  from
'  each  other  they  comprehend  (though  butconfufedly)


[296]

*  any  thing,  as  I  fhall  mew  at  large  in  this  hiftory  of

*  of  Peru. In  regard  to  the  difcovery  of  thefe  vafb

*  tracts  of  land,  what  Seneca  fays,  as  it  were  in  a  pro-
«  phetical  fenfe,  in  his  Medea,  feems  to  me  to  be  not

*  unapplicable,

"  Venient  annis  Ssecula  feris,

"  Quibus  Oceanus  vincula  rerum

"  Laxet,  novoique  Tiphys  detegat  orbes.

"  Atque  ingens  pateat  tellus,

"  Nee  fit  terris  ultima  Thule.*

"  In  lateft  times  our  hardy  fons  mall  brave
"  Stern  Oceans'  rage,  and  ftem  the  diftant  wave,
"  In  them  reviv'd  lhall  Vtybys  wond'ring  fee
"  The  new-found  world,  emerging  from  the  fea ;
"  No  more  (hall  fhule  be  the  utmoft  bound,
*'  But  earth  from  pole  to  pole  be  fearched  round."

FINIS.


* A I


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

305  De  Neve  Drive  -  Parking  Lot  17  •  Box  951388

LOS  ANGELES,  CALIFORNIA  90095-1388
Return  this  material  to  the  library  from  which  it  was  borrowed.


t

Ui
FNTI

TWO\


iivf?


OCT  0  2  2001

SHLF
QUARTER  LOAN


•  I  *


A 000112930 3


.


£  - '


mam
