Cato on Farming (De Agri Cultura)
=================================
Marcus Porcius Cato — On Farming (De Agri Cultura), translated by Fairfax Harrison in Roman Farm Management (New York: Macmillan, 1913), public domain. Harrison's English rendering of the oldest surviving Latin prose work. Scan via Internet Archive.

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 



i by Google 



i by Google 



i by Google 



i by Google 



i by Google 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 



i by Google 



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 



MACMILLAN * CO.. I 



TBS MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Lb. 



i by Google 



ROMAN 

FARM MANAGEMENT 

THE TREATISES OF 

CATO AND VARRO 



DONE INTO ENGLISH, WITH NOTES OF MODERN 
INSTANCES 



A VIRGINIA FARMER 



9fan flnrk 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

1913 



1 by Google 



> 7 A 



»5lH*« 



Bt the hacullan company 

« up lod rlwtcotyped. Publlihed Jao,, , 0Ifc 



i by Google 




PREFACE 

'. present editor made the acquaint- 
1 ance of Cato and Varro standing at a 
I book stall on the Quai Voltaire in Paris, 
| and they carried him away in imagma- 
I tion, during a pleasant half hour, not 
to the vineyards and olive yards of Roman Italy, 
but to the blue hills of a far distant Virginia where 
the corn was beginning to tassel and the fat cattle 
were loafing in the pastures. Subsequently, when 
it appeared that there was then no readily availa- 
ble English version of the Roman agronomists, this 
translation was made, in the spirit of old Piero 
Vettori, the kindly Florentine scholar, whose por- 
trait was painted by Titian and whose monument 
may still be seen in the Church of Santo Spirito: 
in the preface of his edition of Varro he says that 
he undertook the work, not for the purpose of dis- 
playing his learning, but to aid others in the study 
of an excellent author. Victorius was justified by 
his scholarship and the present editor has no such 
claim to attention: he, therefore, makes the confes- 
sion frankly (to anticipate . perhaps such criticism 
as Bentley's "a very pretty poem, Mr. Pope, but 
M 



77940 



PREFACE 

don*t call it Homer") and offers the little book to 
those who love the country, and to read about the 
country amidst the crowded life of towns, with the 
hope that they may find in it some measure of the 
pleasure it has afforded the editor. 

The texts and commentaries used have been those 
of Schneider and Keil, the latter more accurate but 
the former more sympathetic. 

F. H. 

Belvoir, 
Fauquier County, 
Virginia. 

December, 1912. 



[vi] 

aatized by GoOgk 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Note upon the Roman Agronomists, I 

Note on the Obligation of Virgil to Varro, 15 



CATO'S DE AGRICULTURA 
SYNOPSIS 

Introduction : Of the Dignity of the Farmer, 19 

Of Buying a Farm, 20 

Of the Duties of the Owner, 23 

Of Laying out the Farm, 27 

Of Stocking the Farm, 31 

Of the Duties of the Overseer, 32 

Of the Duties of the Housekeeper, 35 

Of the Hands, 36 

Of Draining, 37 

Of Preparing the Seed Bed, 38 

Of Manure, 40 

Of Soil Improvement, 41 

Of Forage Crops, 42 

Of Planting, 43 

Of Pastures, 43 

Of Feeding Live Stock, 43 

Of the Care of Live Stock, 45 

Of Cakes and Salad, 48 

Of Curing Hams, 49 
[vii] 



1 by Google 



VARRO'S RERUM RUSTICARUM 
LIBRI TRES 

SYNOPSIS 

BOOK I 

The Husbandry of Agriculture 
chapter page 

I. Introduction: the literary tradition of coun- 
try life, Si 
Of the definition of Agriculture: 
II. a. What it is not, 57 

III. b. What it is, 72 

IV. The purpose* of Agriculture are profit and 

pleasure, 73 

V. The four-fold division of the study of Agri- 
culture, 76 
1° Concerning the farm itself: 
VI. How conformation of the land affects 

Agriculture, 78 

VII. How character of soil affects Agriculture, 82 
VIII. (A digression on the maintenance of vine- 
yards), 8s 
IX. Of the different kinds of soils, 88 
X. Of the units of area used in measuring 

land, 92 

Of the considerations on building a shead- 
ing: 
XI. a. Size, 93 

b. Water supply, 93 

XII. c. Location, with regard to health, 94 

XIII. d. Arrangement, 96 

t viii 1 



1 by Google 



CONTENTS 



XIV. 
XV. 
XVI. 



XVIII. 
XIX. 

& 

XX. 
XXI. 
XXII. 

XXIII. 
XXIV. 
XXV.] 

XXVI. 1 

XXVII. 1 

XXVIII. 



Of the protection of farm boundaries: 

a. Fences, 

b. Monuments, 

Of the considerations of neighbourhood, 
>° Concerning the equipment of a farm: 

Of agricultural labourers, 



Of draught animals, 

Of watch doga, 
Of farming implements, 
3° Concerning the operation of a farm: 
Of planting field crops, 
Of planting olives, 

Of planting vines, 

f Concerning the agricultural reasons: 

Of the solar measure of the year, 
illustrated by 



A Calendar of Agricultural Operations 



throughout the year, in eight seasons, viz: 
XXIX. 1° February 7-Mareh 24, 
2° March 24-May 7, 
3° May 7-June 24, 



XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 



° June 24-July 21, 
"July 2 -" 



y 2 1 -September 26, 
September 26-October 28, 
7° October 28-December 24, 
8° December 24-February 7, 
Of the influence of the moon on Agriculture 137 
to which is added 
[iR] 



118 
118 



"5 
126 
126 



129 
131 
r 3 2 
■34 
135 

136 

137 



1 by Google 



CONTENTS 



Another Calendar op Six Agricultural Seasons 



withe 


l commentary on their several occupations, viz: 




CHAPTER 


1° Preparing time: 


FACE 




Of tillage, 


139 


XXXVIII. 


Of manuring, 


140 


XXXIX. 


3° Planting time: 

Of the four methods of propagating plants, 






viz: 


■*■ 


XL. 


a. Seeding and here of seed selection, 


I«2 




b. Transplanting, 


144 




c. Cuttage, 


■44 




d. Graftage, and 


■45 




e. A "new" method, inarching, 


146 


XLI. 


Of when to use these different methods, 


146 


XLII. 


Of seeding alfalfa, 


■49 


XLIII. 


Of seeding clover and cabbage, 


■SI 


XLIV. 


Of seeding grain, 


■5' 




J° Cultivating time: 


■53 


XLV. 


Of the conditions of plant growth, 
Of the mechanical action of plants. 
Of tile protection of nurseries and mead- 


■S3 


XLVI. 


■S5 


XLVII. 






ows, 


■55 


XLVIII. 


Of the structure of a wheat plant, 


■56 


XLIX. 


4"° Harvest time: 


■57 




Of the hay harvest, 


■57 


L. 


Of the wheat harvest, 


■58 


LI. 


The threshing floor, 


161 


LII. 


Threshing and winnowing, 


162 


LIII. 


Gleaning, 


163 


LIV. 


Of the vintage, 

Of the olive harvest, 


164 


LV. 


■65 




y Housing time: 


167 


LVI. 


Of storing hay, 


167 


LVII. 


Of storing grain, 
Of storing legumes, 


167 


LVIII. 


169 


LIX. 


Of storing pome fruits, 


169 


LX. 


Of storing olives, 


171 



byGoogle 



CONTENTS 



LXI. 


Of storing; amurca, 


171 


LXII. 


6"° Consuming time: 


■71 


LXIIL 


Of cleaning grain, 


■72 


LXIV. 


Of condensing amurca, 


172 


LXV. 


Of racking wine, 


■73 


LXVL 


Of preserved olives, 


173 


LXVII. 


Of nuts, dates and figs, 


■74 


LXVIII. 


Of stored fruits, 


■74 


LXIX. 


Of marketing grain, 


■74 




Epilogue: the dangers of the streets of 
Rome, 


■75 




BOOK II 






The Husbandry of Live Stock 






Introduction: the decay of country life, 


■77 


I. 


Of the origin, the importance and the econ- 
omy of live stock husbandry, 






181 


II. 


Of sheep, 


■97 


III. 


Of goatB, 


207 


IV. 


Of swine, 


212 


V. 


Of neat cattle, 


22S 


VI. 


Of asses, 


234 
236 


VII. 


Of horses, 


VIII. 


Of mules, 


244 


IX. 


Of herd dogs, 
Of shepherds, 
Of milk and cheese and wool, 


247 


X. 


'15 


XI. 


262 




BOOK III 






The Husbandry of the Steading 




I. 


Introduction: the antiquity of country life, 


269 


II. 


Of the definition of a Roman villa, 


273 


III. 


Of the Roman development of the industries 






of the steading, 


283 


IV. 


Of aviaries, 


286 



1 by Google 



CONTENTS 



V. 


a. for profit, 

b. for pleasure (including here the descrip- 


288 




tion of Varro's own aviary), 


291 


VI. 


Of pea-cocks, 


297 


VII. 


Of pigeons, 


299 


VIII. 


Of turtle doves, 


305 


IX. 


Of poultry, 


306 


X. 


Of geese, 


3"5 


XI. 


Of ducks, 


319 


XII. 


Of rabbits, 


320 


XIII. 


Of game preserves, 


324 


XIV. 


Of snails, 


325 


XV. 


Of dormice, 


3*7 


XVI. 


Of bees, 


329 


XVII. 


Of fish ponds, 


347 


Index, 




353 



[xii] 



byGoogle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 



i by Google 



i by Google 



NOTE UPON THE ROMAN 
AGRONOMISTS 

Quaecunque autem propter dudplinam rurii nottrorum 
temporum cum priscia discrepant, con deterrere debcnt a lec- 
tione disc en tern. Nam multo plura reperiuntur, apud veteres, 
quae nobis probanda Bint, quam quae repudianda. 

COLiniBLU I, I. 

9HE study of the Roman treatises on 

Tl farm management is profitable to the 
I modern farmer however practical and 
scientific he may be. He will not find 
in them any thing about bacteria and 
the "nodular hypothesis" in respect of legumes, nor 
any thing about plant metabolism, nor even any 
thing about the effects of creatinine on growth and 
absorption; but, important and fascinating as are the 
illuminations of modern science upon practical ag- 
riculture, the intelligent farmer with imagination 
(every successful fanner has imagination, whether or 
not he is intelligent) will find, some thing quite 
as important to his welfare in the body of Roman 
husbandry which has come down to us, namely: a 
back-ground for his daily routine, an appreciation 
that two thousand years ago men were studying the 
same problems and solving them by intelligent rca- 
hi 



i by Google 



ROMAN : FARM MANAGEMENT 

soiling. ' Columella well says that in reading the 
ancient writers we may find in them more to approve 
than to disapprove, however much our new science 
may lead us to differ from them in practice. The 
characteristics of the Roman methods of farm man- 
agement, viewed in the light of the present state of 
the art in America, were thoroughness and patience. 
The Romans had learned many things which we are 
now learning again, such as green manuring with 
legumes, soiling, seed selection, the testing of soil for 
sourness, intensive cultivation of a fallow as well as 
of a crop, conservative rotation, the importance of 
live stock in a system of general farming, the preser- 
vation of the chemical content of manure and the 
composting of the rubbish of a farm, but they brought 
to their farming operations some thing more which 
we have not altogether learned — the character which 
made them a people of enduring achievement. Varro 
quotes one of their proverbs "Romanus sedendo 
vincit," which illustrates my present point. The 
Romans achieved their results by thoroughness and 
patience. It was thus that they defeated Hannibal 
and it was thus that they built their farm hpuses 
and fences, cultivated their fields, their vineyards 
and their oliveyards, and bred and fed their live 
stock. They seem to have realized that there are no 
short cuts in the processes of nature, and that the 
[2] 

:> :l :ieci : yGo0gle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

law of compensations is invariable. The foundation 
of their agriculture was the fallow * and one finds them 
constantly using it as a simile — in the advice not to 
breed a mare every year, as in that not to exact too 
much tribute from a bee hive. Ovid even warns a 
lover to allow fallow seasons to intervene in his court- 
ship. 

While one can find instruction in their practice 
even today, one can benefit even more from their 

1 "The manner in which the ancients managed their fallow 
is certainly most worthy of our attention: their care in plough- 
ing, according to the situation of the land, and nature of the 
climate, and their manner of adapting the kind of ploughing 
to answer the purposes intended by the operation, are also most 
worthy of our imitation. Their exactness in these things ex- 
ceeds any thing of the kind found amongst the moderns, and is 
even beyond what any practical writer on agriculture has pro- 
posed. This is an evidence that tillage is not even in this age 
brought to that perfection of which it is capable: and that, 
notwithstanding all the improvements lately introduced, we 
may yet receive some instruction from a proper attention to 
the precepts and practices of the ancients. I am desirous to add 
that this attention may be useful by preventing improvers 
from running into every specious scheme of agriculture pro- 
duced by a lively imagination and engaging them to study the 
great variety of soils and even climates in this island, and to 
be careful in adapting to these their several operations. Dick- 
son Husbandry of the Ancients, XXIII. 

The Rev. Andrew Dickson, who died in 1776, was minister 
of Aberlady in the county of East Lothian, the son of a pro- 
gressive and successful Scots farmer, and had experience in 
practical agriculture, as well as in scholarship, as his book 
shows. 

[3] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

agricultural philosophy, for the characteristic of the 
American fanner is that he is in too much of a hurry. 

The ancient literature of farm management was 
voluminous. Varro cites fifty Greek authors on the 
subject whose works he knew, beginning with Hesiod 
and Xenophon. Mago of Carthage wrote 'a treatise 
in the Punic tongue which was so highly esteemed 
that the Roman Senate ordered it translated into 
Latin, but, like most of the Greeks, 1 it is now lost to 
us except in the literary tradition. 

Columella says that it was Cato who taught Agri- 
culture to speak Latin. Cato's book, written in the 
middle of the second century B. G, was the first on 
the subject in Latin; indeed, it was one of the very 
first books written in that vernacular at all. Of the 
other Latin writers whose bucolic works have sur- 
vived, Varro and Virgil wrote at the beginning of the 
Augustan Age and were followed by the Spanish 
Columella under Tiberius, and by Pliny (with his 
Natural History) under Titus. After them (and " a 
long way after," as Mr. Punch says) came in the 
fourth century the worthy but dull Palladius, who 

. "The compilation of rural lore, known as the Gtoponica, 
which exists in Greek, was made at Byzantium for the Em- 
peror Constantine VII about the middle of the tenth century 
A. D. It is very largely a paraphrase of the Roman authors, 
and is useful principally in elucidating their textual difficulties. 

U1 

:> :l :ieci : yGo0gle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

supplied the hornbook used by the agricultural 
monks throughout the Dark Ages. 

Marcus Porcius Cato (B. C. 234-149), known in 
history as the elder Cato, was the type of Roman 
produced by the most vigorous days of the Republic. 
Born at Tusculum on the narrow acres which his 
peasant forefathers had tilled in the intervals of 
military service, he commenced advocate at the 
country assizes, followed his fortunes to Rome and 
there became a leader of the metropolitan bar. He 
saw gallant military service in Spain and in Greece, 
commanded an army, held all the curule offices of 
state and ended a contentious life in the Senate de- 
nouncing Carthage and the degeneracy of the times. 

He was an upstanding man, but as coarse as he 
was vigorous in mind and in body. Roman literature 
is full of anecdotes about him and his wise and witty 
sayings. 

Unlike many men who have devoted a toilsome 
youth to agricultural labour, when he attained fame 
and fortune he maintained his interest in his farm, 
and wrote his De re rustics in green old age. It tells 
what sort of farm manager he himself was, or wanted 
to be thought to be, and, though a mere collection 
of random notes, sets forth more shrewd common 
sense and agricultural experience than it is possible 
[5] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

to pack into the same number of English words. It 
remains today of much more than antiquarian 
interest. 

Marcus Terentius Varro (B. C. i 16-28) whom 
Quintilian called "the most learned of the Romans/' 
and Petrarch "il terzo gran lume Romano," ranking 
him with Cicero and Virgil, probably studied agricul- 
ture before he studied any thing else, for he was born 
on a Sabine farm, and although of a well to do family, 
was bred in the habits of simplicity and rural industry 
■ with which the poets have made that name synony- 
mous. All his life he amused the leisure snatched 
from his studies with intelligent supervision of the 
farming of his several estates : and he wrote his trea- 
tise Return Rusticarum in his eightieth year. 1 

He had his share of active life, but it was as a 
scholar that he distinguished himself.* Belonging 
to the aristocratic party, he became a friend and 

1 Donald G. Mitchell made an interesting collation, in hii 
Wet Days at Edgewood, of the large number of books on agricul- 
ture which have been written in old age and by men of affairs, 
in many lands and many languages. 

1 It is interesting to record, however, that Varro received the 
Navalis Corona for personal gallantry in the war against the 

Rirates. This distinction was even more rare than our modern 
fedal of Honor or Victoria Cross, and was awarded only to a 
commander who leapt under arms on the deck of an enemies' 
ship and then succeeded in capturing her. 
[6] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

supporter of Pompey, and, after holding a naval com- 
mand under him in the war against the Pirates in 
B. C. 67, was his legatus in Spain at the beginning of 
the civil wars and there surrendered to Caesar. He 
was again on the losing side at the battle of Pharsalia, 
but was pardoned by Caesar, who selected him to be 
librarian of the public library he proposed to estab- 
lish at Rome. 1 From this time Varro eschewed poli- 
tics and devoted himself to letters, although his trou- 
bles were not yet at an end: after the death of Caesar, 
the ruthless Antony despoiled his villa at Casinum 
(where Varro had built the aviary described in book 
Three), and like Cicero he was included in the pro- 
scriptions which followed the compact of the trium- 
virs, but in the end unlike Cicero he escaped and 
spent his last years peacefully at his villas at Cumae 
and Tusculum. 

His literary activity was astonishing: he wrote 
at least six hundred books covering a wide range of 
antiquarian research. St. Augustine, who dearly 

1 Ciesar did not live to accomplish this, but some years after 
his death a public library was established at Rome by Asinius 
PoIIio, which Pliny says (H. N. VII, 31) was the first ever built, 
those at Alexandria and Pergamus having been private insti- 
tutions of the kings. 

In a land where public libraries have been every where 
founded out of the accumulations of Big Business, it is interest- 
ing to note that Pollio derived the funds with which this the 
first of their kind was endowed, from the plunder of the Illyrians I 
[7] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

loved to turn a balanced phrase, says that Varro had 
read so much that it is difficult to understand when 
he found time to write, while on the other hand he 
wrote so much that one can scarcely read all his 
books. Cicero, who claimed him as an intimate 
friend, describes {Acad. Ill) what Varro had written 
before B. C. 46, but he went on producing to the 
end of his long life, eighteen years later: "For," 
says Cicero, "while we are sojourners, so to speak, in 
our own city and wandering about like strangers, 
your books have conducted us, as it were, home again, 
so as to enable us at last to recognize who and whence 
we are. You have discussed the antiquities of our 
country and the variety of dates and chronology 
relating to it. You have explained the laws which 
regulate sacrifices and priests: you have unfolded the 
customs of the city both in war and peace; you have 
described the various quarters and districts: you have 
omitted mentioning none of the names, or kinds, or 
functions, or causes of divine or human things: you 
have thrown a flood of light on our poets and alto- 
gether on Latin literature and the Latin language: 
you have yourself composed a poem of varied beau- 
ties and elegant in almost every part: and you have 
in many places touched upon philosophy in a manner 
sufficient to excite our curiosity, though inadequate 
to instruct us." 

[81 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of Varro's works, beside the Rerum Rusticorum, 
there have survived only fragments, including a 
considerable portion of the treatise on the Latin 
language: the story is that most of his books were 
deliberately destroyed at the procurement of the 
Church to conceal St. Augustine's plagiarism from 
them; yet the De Ctvitate Det y which is largely de- 
voted to refuting Varro's pagan theology, is a peren- 
nial monument to his fame. St. Augustine says 
(VI, 2): "Although his elocution has less charm, he 
is so full of learning and philosophy that ... he 
instructs the student of facts as much as Cicero de- 
lights the student of style." 

Varro's treatise on farm management is the best 
practical book on the subject which has come down 
to us from antiquity. It has not the spontaneous 
originality of Cato, nor the detail and suave elegance 
of Columella. Walter Harte in his Essays on Hus- 
bandry (1764) says that Cato writes like an English 
squire and Varro like a French academician. This 
is just comment on Cato but it is at once too much 
and too little to say of Varro: a French academician 
might be proud of his antiquarian learning, but 
would balk at his awkward and homely Latin, as in- 
deed one French academician, M. Boissier, has since 
done. The real merit of Varro's book is that it is the 
well digested system of an experienced and success- 
/ [9] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

ful farmer who has seen and practised all that he 

records. 

The authority from which Virgil drew the prac- 
tical farming lore, for which he has been extolled in 
all ages, was Varro: indeed, as a farm manual the 
Georgia go astray only when they depart from Varro. 
It is worth while to elaborate this point, which Pro- 
fessor Sellar, in his argument for the originality of 
Virgil, only suggests. 1 

After Philippi the times were ripe for books on ag- 
riculture. The Roman world had been divided be- 
tween Octavian and Antony and there was peace 
in Italy: men were turning "back to the land." 

An agricultural regeneration of Italy was impend- 
ing, chiefly in viticulture, as Ferrero has pointed out. 
With far sighted appreciation of the economic ad- 
vantages of this, Octavian determined to promote 
the movement, which became one of the completed 
glories of the Augustan Age, when Horace sang 

Tua, Cesar, aetas 
Fruges ct agris rettulit uberes. 

' Cf. Sellar, Roman Poets of the Augustan Are. Virgil Ch. V. 
Boissier, Etudes sur M. T. Farron, Ch. IX. Servius Comtn. in 
Vert. Georg. I, 43. 

It does not appear that man/ of the commentators on Virgil 
have taken the trouble to study Varro thoroughly. They are 
usually better scholars than farmers. 
I10I 



byGoogle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

"Varro's book appeared in B. C. 37 and during 
that year Maecenas commissioned Virgil to put into 
verse the spirit of the times; just as, under similar 
circumstances, Cromwell pensioned Samuel Hartlib. 
Such is the co-incidence of the dates that it is not 
impossible that the Rerum Rusticarum suggested 
the subject of the Georgics t either to Virgil or to 
Maecenas. 

There is no evidence in the Bucolics that Virgil 
ever had any practical knowledge of agriculture 
before he undertook to write the Georgia. His father 
was a farmer and Virgil perhaps had tended his 
father's flock, as he pictures himself doing under 
the guise of Tityrus; certainly he spent many hours 
of youth "patulse recubans sub tegmine fagi" steep- 
ing his Celtic soul with the beauty and the melancholy 
poetry of the Lombard landscape: and so he came 
to know and to love bird and flower and the external 
aspects of 

wheat and woodland 
tilth and vineyard, hive and hone and herd, 

but it does not appear that he ever followed the 
plough, or, what is more important, ever laid off a 
ploughgate. As a poet of nature no one was ever 
better equipped (the highest testimony is that of 
Tennyson), but when it came to writing poetry 
around the art of farm management it was necessary 
[11] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

for him to turn to books for his facts. He acknowl- 
edges (Geo. I, 176) his obligation only to veterum 
pracepta without naming them, but as M. Gaston 
Boissier says he was evidently referring to Varro 
"le plus moderne de tous les anciens." ' Virgil evi- 
dently regarded Varro's treatise as a solid foundation 
for his poem and he used it freely, just as he drew 
on Hesiod for literary inspiration, on Lucretius for 
imaginative philosophy, and on Mago and Cato and 
the two Sasernas for local colour. 

Virgil probably had also the advantage of personal 
contact with Varro during the seven years he was 
composing and polishing the Georgics. He spent 
them largely at Naples (Geo. IV, 563) and Varro was 
then established in retirement at Cumae: thus they 
were neighbours, and, although they belonged to 
different political parties, the young poet must have 
known and visited the old polymath; there was every 
reason for him to have taken advantage of the oppor- 
tunity. Whatever justification there may be for this 
conjecture, the fact remains that Varro is in the back- 
ground every where throughout the Georgics y as 
the "deadly parallel" in the appended note will in- 
dicate. This is perhaps the most interesting thing 

1 It is not remarkable that Virgil failed to make acknowledg- 
ment to Varro in the Georgics when he failed to make acknowl- 
edgment to Homer in the Mneii. See Petrarch's Epistle to 
Homer for a loyal but vain attempt to justify this neglect. 
[12] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

about Varro's treatise: instructive and entertaining 
as it is to the farmer, in the large sense of the effect 
of literature on mankind, Virgil gave it wing* — the 
useful cart horse became Pegasus. 

As a consequence of the chorus of praise of the 
Georgia, there have been those, in all ages, who have 
sneered at Virgil's farming. The first such advocatus 
diaboli was Seneca, who, writing to Lucilius (Ep. 86) 
from the farm house of Scipio Africanus, fell foul of 
the advice {Geo. I, 2i6) to plant both beans and 
millet in the spring, saying that he had just seen at 
the end of June beans gathered and millet sowed on 
the same day: from which he generalized that Virgil 
disregarded the truth to turn a graceful verse, and 
sought rather to delight his reader than to instruct 
the husbandman. This kind of cheap criticism does 
not increase our respect for Nero's philosophic minis- 
ter. 1 Whatever may have been Virgil's mistakes, 

1 Cf. F. W. H. Myers' Classical Essays, p. no: 
"For in the face of some German criticism it is necessary to 
repeat that in order to judge poetry it is, before all things, 
necessary to enjoy it. We may all desire that historical and 
philological science should push her dominion into every recess 
of human action and human speech, but we must utter some 
protest when the very heights of Parnassus are invaded by a 
spirit which surely is not science, but her unmeaning shadow; 
a spirit which would degrade every masterpiece of human 
genius into the mere pabulum of hungry professors, and which 
values a poet's text only as a field for the rivalries of sterile 
pedantry and arbitrary conjecture." 

h3l 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

every fanner of sentiment should thank God that 
one of the greatest poems in any language contains 
as much as it does of a sound tradition of the practical 
side of his art, and here is where Varro is entitled to 
the appreciation which is always due the school- 
master of a genius. 



tl4l 

aatized by GoOgk 



NOTE ON THE OBLIGATION OF 
VIRGIL TO VARRO 

-..- the beginning of the first Georgic 

Ifl (i _ S) Virgil lays out the scope of the 
|| poem as dealing with three subjects, 
agriculture, the care of live stock and 
the husbandry of bees. This was 
Varro's plan (R. R. I, I, 2, and I, 2 passim) except 
that under the third head Varro included, with bees, 
all the other kinds of stock which were usually kept 
at a Roman steading. Varro asserts that his was the 
first scientific classification of the subject ever made. 
Virgil (G. I, 5-13) begins too with the invocation of 
the Sun and the Moon and certain rural deities, as 
did Varro (R. R. I, I, 4). The passages should be 
compared for, as M. Gaston Boissier has pointed out, 
the difference in the point of view of the two men is 
here illustrated by the fact that Varro appeals to 
purely Roman deities, while Virgil invokes the 
literary gods of Greece. Following the Georgics 
through, one who has studied Varro will note other 
passages for which a suggestion may be found in 
Varro, usually in facts, but some times in thought 
and even in words, viz: Before beginning his agri- 
cultural operations a farmer should study the char- 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

acter of the country (G. I, 50: R. R. 1, 6), the prevail- 
ing winds and the climate (G. I. 5 1 : R. R. I, 2, 3), the 
farming practice of the neighbourhood (G. I, 52: 
R. R. 1, 18, 7), "this land is fit for corn, that for vines, 
and the other for trees," (G. I, 54: R. R. I, 6, 5). He 
should practise fallow and rotation (G. I, 71 : R. R. 
I, 44, 2), and compensate the land by planting 
legumes (G. I, 74: R. R. I, 23); he should irrigate his 
meadows in summer (G. I, 104: R. R. I, 31, 5), and 
drain off surface water in winter (G. I, 113 : R. R. I, 
36). Man has progressed from a primitive state, 
when he subsisted on nuts and berries, to the domes- 
tication of animals and to agriculture (G. 1, 121-159: 
R. R. II, i, 3). The threshing floor must be protected 
from pests (G. I, 178: R. R. I, 51). Seed should be 
carefully selected (G. I, 197: R. R. 40, 2); the time 
for sowing grain is the autumn (G. I, 219: R. R. I, 
34). "Everlasting night" prevails in the Arctic 
regions (G. I, 247: R. R. I, 2, 5); the importance to 
the farmer of the four seasons (G. I. 258; R. R. I, 27) 
and the influence of the Moon (G. I. 276: R. R. I, 37). 
The several methods of propagating plants de- 
scribed (G. II, 9-34: R. R. I, 39), but here Varro fol- 
lows Theophrastus (H. P. II, 1); trees grow slowly 
from seed (G. II, 57; R. R. I, 41, 4); olives are propa- 
gated from truncheons (G. II, 63; R. R. I, 41, 6). 
"The praise of Italy" (G. II, 136-176: R. R. I, 2, 6), 
[16] 

:> :l :ieci : yGo0gle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

where trees bear twice a year (G. II, 150: R. R. I, 7, 
6). Certain plants affect certain soils (G. II, 177: 
R. R. I, 9). A physical experiment (G. II, 230; R. 
R. I, 7) ; the advantage of the quincunx in planting 
(G. II, 286: R. R. I, 7). Fence the vineyard to keep 
out live stock (G. II, 371 : R. R. I, 14) ; the goat a 
proper sacrifice to Bacchus (G. II, 380: R. R. I, 2, 
19). Be the first to put your vine props under cover 
(G. II, 409: R. R. I, 8, 6). 

The points of cattle (G. Ill, 50: R. R. II, 5, 7); 
their breeding age (G. Ill, 61 : R. R. II, 5, 13); segre- 
gate the bulls before the breeding season (G. Ill, 212: 
R. R. II, 5, 12). Recruit your herd with fresh blood 
(G. Ill, 69: R. R. II, 5, 17). How to break young 
oxen (G. Ill, 163: R. R. I, 20). 

Of breeding live stock, the males should be fat, 
the females lean (G. Ill, 123-129: R. R. II, 5, 12). 

The points of a horse (G. Ill, 79: R. R. II, 7, 5). 
Mares fecundated by the wind (G. Ill, 273 : R. R. II, 

I, 19). The care of the brood mare (G. Ill, 138: 
R. R. II, 7, 10). The bearing of a spirited colt in the 
field (G. Ill, 75: R. R. II, 7, 6); the training of a 
colt, "rattling bridles" in the stable (G. Ill, 184: 
R. R. II, 7, 12). 

Supply bedding for the sheep (G. Ill, 298: R. R. 

II, 2, 8), the goat stable should face southeast (G. Ill, 
302: R. R. II, 3, 6). Goats' hair used for military 

[i7l 

:> :l :ieci : yGo0gle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

purposes (G. Ill, 3I3:R.R. II, II, II.) Goats affect 
rough pasture (G. Ill, 314: R. R. II, 3, 6). A shep- 
herd's daily routine (G. Ill, 322; R. R. II, 2, 10-11). 
The life of shepherds in the saltus (G. Ill, 340: R. R. 
II, 10, 6). Beware of a ram with a spotted tongue 
(G. Ill, 387: R. R. II, 2, 4). Anoint sheep as a pre- 
caution against scab (G. Ill, 448: R. R. II, 11, 7). 

The location of the bee-stand: a drinking pool with 
stones in it (G. IV, 26: R. R. Ill, 16, 27); planted 
round with bee plants (G. IV, 25: R. R. Ill, 16, 13), 
and free from an echo (G. IV, 50: R. R. Ill, 16, 12). 
When saving a swarm sprinkle bees balm and beat 
cymbals (G. IV, 62: R. R. Ill, 16, 7 and 30). Bees at 
war obey their leaders ' as at the sound of a trumpet,' 
but may be quelled by the bee-keeper (G. IV, 70-87: 
R. R. Ill, 16, 9 and 35). Keep the mottled king and 
destroy the black one (G. IV, 90: R. R. Ill, 16, 18); 
the "old Corycian" and the brothers Veiani (G. IV, 
125: R. R. Ill, 16, 10): the bees' care of their king 
(G. IV, 212: R. R. Ill, 16, 8). Take off the honey 
twice in the season (G. IV, 221: R. R. Ill, 16, 34); 
the generation of bees from the carcase of an ox 
(G. IV, 281: R. R. II, S, 5) and cf. the wisdom on 
this subject attributed to Varro by the Geoponica 
(XV, 2). 



[18] 

Din tized by GoOgk 



CATO'S DE AGRICULTURE 
Introduction: of the dignity of the farmer 



HE pursuits of commerce would be as 

T| admirable as they are profitable if they 
I were not subject to so great risks: and 
so, likewise, of banking, if it was always 
honestly conducted. For our ancestors 
considered, and so ordained in their laws, that, while 
the thief should be cast in double damages, the 
usurer should make four-fold restitution. From this 
we may judge how much less desirable a citizen they 
esteemed the banker than the thief. When they 
sought to commend an honest man, they termed him 
good husbandman, good farmer. This they rated 
the superlative of praise. 1 Personally, I think highly 

1 It was perhaps this encomium upon the farmer at the expense 
of the banker which inspired Horace's friend Alfius to withdraw 
his capital from his banking business and dream a delicious idyl 
of a simple carefree country life: but, it will be recalled (Epode 
II, the famous "Beatus ille qui procul negotiis") that Alfius, 
like many a modern amateur farmer, recruited from town, 
soon repented that he had ever listened to the alluring call of 
"back to the land" and after a few weeks of disillusion in the 
country, returned to town and sought to get his mosey out 
again at usury. 

Columella (I, praef.) is not content with Cato's contrast of 

the virtue of the farmer with the iniquity of the banker, but he 

I I9l 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

of a man actively and diligently engaged in com- 
merce, who seeks thereby to make his fortune, yet, 
as I have said, his career is full of risks and pitfalls. 
But it is from the tillers of the soil that spring the 
best citizens, the stanchest soldiers; and theirs are the 
enduring rewards which are most grateful and least 
envied. Such as devote themselves to that pursuit 
are least of all men given to evil counsels. 

And now, to get to my subject, these observations 
will serve as preface to what I have promised to dis- 
cuss. 

Of buying a farm 

(I) l When you have decided to purchase a farm, 
be careful not to buy rashly; do not spare your visits 
and be not content with a single tour of inspection. 

brings in the lawyer's profession for animadversion also. This, 
he says, the ancient Romans used to term a canine profession, 
because it consisted in barking at the rich. 

1 The Roman numerals at the beginning of the paragraphs 
indicate the chapters of Cato from which they are translated. 
If Cato had not pretended to despise every thing which smacked 
of Greek literary art he might have edited and arranged his 
material, in which event his book would have been easier to read 
than it is, and no less valuable. Modern scholarship would not 
now venture to perform such an office for such a result, because 
it involves tampering with a text (as who should say, shooting 
a fox!) and yet modern scholarship wonders at the decay of 
classical studies in an impatient age. At the risk of anathema 
the present version has attempted to group Cato's material, 
and in so doing has omitted most of those portions which are 
now of merely curious interest. 

[20] 

I^iectyGoOglc 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

The more you go, the more will the place please you, 
if it be worth your attention. Give heed to the ap- 
pearance of the neighbourhood, — a flourishing coun- 
try should show its prosperity. "When you go in, 
look about, so that, when needs be, you can find your 
way out." 

Take care that you choose a good climate, not sub- 
ject to destructive storms, and a soil that is naturally 
strong. If possible, your farm should be at the foot 
of a mountain, looking to the South, in a healthy 
situation, where labour and cattle can be had, well 
watered, near a good sized town, and either on the 
sea or a navigable river, or else on a good and much 
frequented road. Choose a place which has not often 
changed ownership, one which is sold unwillingly, 
that has buildings in good repair. 

Beware that you do not rashly contemn the ex- 
perience of others. It is better to buy from a man 
who has farmed successfully and built well. 1 

1 This, of course, means buying at a high price, except in ex- 
traordinary cases. There is another system of agriculture which 
admits of the pride of making two blades of grass grow where 
none was before, and the profit which comes of buying cheap 
and selling dear. This is farming for improvement, an art 
which was well described two hundred years before Cato. 
Xenophon ((Economicut XX, 22) says: 

"For those who are able to attend to their affairs, however, 
and who will apply themselves to agriculture earnestly, my 
father both practised himself and taught me a most successful 

[21] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

When you inspect the farm, look to see how many- 
wine presses and storage vats there are; where there 
are none of these you can judge what the harvest is. 
On the other hand, it is not the number of farming 
implements, but what is done with them, that counts. 
Where you find few tools, it is not an expensive farm 
to operate. Know that with a farm, as with a man, 
however productive it may be, if it has the spending 
habit, not much will be left over. 1 

method of making profit; for he would never allow me to buy 
ground already cultivated, but exhorted me to purchase such 
as from want of care or want of means in those who bad pos- 
sessed it, was left untitled and implanted. He used to say that 
well cultivated land cost a great sum of money and admitted of 
no improvement, and he considered that land which is unsus- 
ceptible of improvement did not give the same pleasure to the 
owner as other land, but he thought that whatever a person had 
or bought up that was continually growing better afforded him 
the highest gratification." 

1 Every rural community in the Eastern part of the United 
States has grown familiar with the contrast between the in- 
telligent amateur, who, while endeavoring earnestly to set an 
example of good agriculture, fails to make expenses out of his 
land, and the born fanner who is self-supporting in the practice 
of methods contemned by the agricultural colleges. Too often 
the conclusion is drawn that scientific agriculture will not pay; 
but Cato puts his finger on the true reason. The man who does 
not depend on his land for his living too often permits his farm 
to get what Cato calls the "spending habit. Pliny (H. N. 
XVIII, 7) makes some pertinent observations on the subject: 

" I may possibly appear guilty of some degree of rashness in - 
making mention of a maxim of the ancients which will very 
probably be looked upon as quite incredible, 'that nothing is 
[22] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 



Of the duties of the owner 

(II) When you have arrived at your country house 
and have saluted your household, you should make 
the rounds of the farm the same day, if possible; if 
not, then certainly the next day. When you have 
observed how the field work has progressed, 1 what 

so disadvantageous as to cultivate land in the highest style of 
perfection.' " 

And he illustrates by the example of a Roman gentleman, 
who, like Arthur Young in eighteenth century England, wasted a 
large fortune in an attempt to bring his lands to perfect cultiva- 
tion. "To cultivate land well is absolutely necessary," Pliny 
continues, "but to cultivate it in the very highest style is mere 
extravagance, unless, indeed, the work is done by the hands 
of a man's own family, his tenants, or those whom he is obliged 
to keep at any rate." 

1 In this practice has been the delight of men of affairs of all 
ages who turn to agriculture for relaxation. Horace cites it 
with telling effect in the ode (III, in which he describes the 
noble serenity of mind with which Regulus returned to the tor- 
ture and certain death which awaited him at Carthage: and 
Homer makes an enduring picture of it in the person of the King 
supervising his fall ploughing, which Hepluestus wrought upon 
the shield of Achilles {Iliad, XVIII, 540). "Furthermore, he 
set in the shield a soft fresh ploughed field, rich tilth and wide, 
the third time ploughed, and many ploughers therein drove 
their yokes to and fro as they wheeled about. Whensoever 
they came to the boundary of the field and turned, then would 
a man come to each and give into his hands a goblet of sweet 
wine: while others would be turning back along the furrows, 
fain to reach the boundary of the deep tilth, . . . and among 
them the King was standing in silence, with his staff, rejoicing 
in his heart." 

U3l 



byGoogle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

things have been done, and what remains undone, 
you should summon your overseer the next day, and 
should call for a report of what work has been done 
in good season and why it has not been possible to 
complete the rest, and what wine and com and other 
crops have been gathered. When you are advised on 
these points you should make your own calculation 
of the time necessary for the work, if there does not 
appear to you to have been enough accomplished. 
The overseer will report that he himself has worked 
diligently, but that some slaves have been sick and 
others truant, the weather has been bad, and that it 
has been necessary to work the public roads. When 
he has given these and many other excuses, you 
should recall to his attention the program of work 
which you had laid out for him on your last visit 
and compare it with the results attained. If the 
weather has been bad, count how many stormy days 
there have been, and rehearse what work could have 
been, done despite the rain, such as washing and 
pitching the wine vats, cleaning out the barns, sort- 
ing the grain, hauling out and composting the manure, 
cleaning seed, mending the old gear, and making 
new, mending the smocks and hoods furnished for 
the hands. On feast days the old ditches should be 
mended, the public roads worked, briers cut down, 
the garden dug, the meadow cleaned, the hedges 
(Hi 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

trimmed and the clippings collected and burned, the 
fish pond cleaned out. On such days, furthermore, 
the slaves' rations should foe cut down as compared 
with what is allowed when they are working in the 
fields in fine weather. 

When this routine has been discussed quietly and 
with good humour and is thoroughly understood by 
the overseer, you should give orders for the comple- 
tion of the work which has been neglected. 

The accounts of money, supplies and provisions 
should then foe considered. The overseer should 
report what wine and oil has been sold, what price 
he got, what is on hand, and what remains for sale. 
Security should be taken for such accounts as ought 
to be secured. All other unsettled matters should 
be agreed upon. If any thing is needed for the com- 
ing year, it should foe bought; every thing which is 
not needed should be sold. Whatever there is for J 
lease should be leased. Orders should be given (and 
take care that they are in writing) for all work which 
next it is desired to have done on the farm or let to 
contract. You should go over the cattle and deter- 
mine what is to foe sold. You should sell the oil, if 
you can get your price, the surplus wine and corn, 
the old cattle, the worn out oxen, and the cull sheep, 
the wool and the hides, the old and sick slaves, and 
if any thing else is superfluous you should sell that. 
[»5l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

The appetite of the good farmer is to sell, not to 
buy. 1 

(IV) Be a good neighbour. Do not roughly give 
offence to your own people. If the neighbourhood 
regards you kindly, you will find a readier market for 
what you have to sell, you will more easily get your 
work done, either on the place or by contract. If 
you build, your neighbours will aid you with their 
services, their cattle and their materials. If any mis- 
fortune should overtake you (which God forbid!) 
they will protect you with kindly interest. 1 

1 This advice to sell the worn out oxen and the sick slaves 
justly excited Plutarch's generous scorn, and has been made 
the text of a sweeping denunciation by Mommsen of the practice 
of husbandry by men of affairs in Cato's time. "The whole 
system," says Mommsen, "was pervaded by the utterly unscru- 
pulous spirit characteristic of the power of capital." And he 
adds, "If we have risen to that little-to-be-envied elevation of 
thought which values no feature of an economy save the capital 
invested in it, we cannot deny to the management of the Roman 
estates the praise of consistency, energy, punctuality, frugality 
and solidity." Without any desire to defend Cato, one may 
suggest, out of an experience in a kind of farm management 
not very different from that Cato pictures, that it is doubtful 
whether even Cato himself was quite as economical and efficient, 
and so as capitalistic in his farming, as he advises others to be: 
certainly a whole race of contemporary country gentlemen was 
not equal to it. It is much easier to write about business-like 
farming than to practise it. 

1 Hesiod (W. & D. 338) had already given this same advice 
to the Greek farmer: 

" Invite the man that loves thee to a feast, but let alone thine 

enemy, and especially invite him that dwelleth near thee, for 

[26I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 



Of laying out ike farm 

(I) If you ask me what is the best disposition to 
make of your estate, I would say that should you 
have bought a farm of one hundred jugtra (about 66 
acres) all told, 1 in the best situation, it should be 
planted as follows: I ° a vineyard, if it promises a 
good yield, z° an irrigated garden, -f an osier bed, 4 

if, mark you, any thing untoward shall have happened at home 
neighbours are wont to come ungirt, but kinsfolk gird them- 
selves first." This agreement of the Socialist Hesiod with the 
Capitalist Cato is remarkable only as it illustrates that both 
systems when wisely expounded rest on human nature. That 
upon which they here agree is the foundation of the modern 
European societies for rural co-operative credit which President 
Taft recommended to the American people. These societies, 
says the bulletin of the International Institute of Agriculture 
published at Rome in 1912, rest on three chief safeguards: 

(a) That membership is confined to persons residing within 
a small district, and, therefore, the members are personally 
known to one another; 

(b) That the members, being mutually responsible, it will be 
to the interest of all members to keep an eye upon a borrower 
and to see that he makes proper use of the money lent to him; 

(c) That in like manner, it is to the interest of all members 
to help a member when he is in difficulties. 

1 This was an estate of average size, probably within Virgil's 
precept, (Gtorgic II, 412). "Laudato ingentia rura, eziguum 
colito." Some scholars have deemed this phrase a quotation 
from Cato, but it is more likely derived from Mago the Cartha- 
ginian who is reported to have said: " Imbeculiorem agrum 
rim agricolam, esse debere," — the fanner should be bigger 
n his farm. 

[27] 



byGoogle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

an olive yard, 5° a meadow, 6°a corn field, 7° a wood 
lot, 8° a cultivated orchard, and 9° a mast grove. 1 

(Ill) In his youth, the fanner ought, diligently 
to plant his land, but he should ponder before he 
builds. Planting does not require reflection, but de- 
mands action. It is time enough to build when you 
have reached your thirty-sixth year, if you have 
fanned your land well meanwhile. When you do 
build, let your buildings be proportioned to your 
estate, and your estate to your buildings.* It is 

1 The philosophy of Cato's plan of laying out a farm is found 
in the agricultural history of the Romans down to the time of 
the Punic wars. Mommsen (II, 370) gives the facts, and Ferrero 
in his first volume makes brilliant use of them. There is sketched 
the old peasant aristocrat living on his few acres, his decay and 
the creation of comparatively large estates worked by slaves in 
charge of overseers, which followed the conquest of the Italian 
states about B. C. 300. This was the civilization in which Cato 
had been reared, but in his time another important change was 
taking place. The Roman frontier was again widened by the 
conquest of the Mediterranean basin: the acquisition of Sicily 
and Sardinia ended breadstuff farming as the staple on the 
Italian peninsular. The competition of the broad and fertile 
acres of those great Islands had the effect in Italy which the 
cultivation of the Dakota wheat lands had upon the grain farm- 
ing of New York and Virginia. About 150 B. C. the vine and 
the olive became the staples of Italy and corn was superseded. 
Although this was not accomplished until after Cato's death, 
he foresaw it, and recommended that a farm be laid out accord- 
ingly, and his scheme of putting one's reliance upon the vine 
and the olive was doubtless very advanced doctrine, when it 
first found expression. 

1 Pliny quotes Cato as advising to buy what others have built 
[28] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

fitting that the farm buildings should be well con- 
structed, that you should have ample oil cellars and 
wine vats, and a good supply of casks, so that you 
can wait for high prices, something which will re- 
dound to your honour, your profit and your self- 
respect. 

(IV) Build your dwelling house in accordance with 
your means. If you build well in a good situation 
and on a good property, and furnish the house suit- 
ably for country life, you will come there more often 
and more willingly. 1 The farm will then be better, 
fewer mistakes will be made, and you will get larger 
crops. The face of the master is good for the land. 1 

rather than build oneself, and thus, as he says, enjoy the fruits 
of another's folly. The cacoethes adificandi is a familiar disease 
among country gentlemen. 

1 Columella (I, 4) makes the acute observation that the coun- 
try house should also be agreeable to the owner's wife if he 
wishes to get the full measure of enjoyment out of it. Mago, the 
Carthaginian, advised to, " if you buy a farm, sell your house in 
town, lest you be tempted to prefer the cultivation of the urban 
gods to those of the country.' 

* According to German scholarship the accepted text of 
Cato'B version of this immemorial epigram is a model of the 
brevity which is the test of wit, " Frons occipitio prioreat." Pliny 
probably quoting from memory, expands it to "Frons domini 
plus prodest quam occipitium." Palladius (I, 6) gives another 
version: "Presentia domini provectus est agri." - It is found in 
some form in almost every book on agriculture since Cato, until 
we reach the literature in which science has taken the place of 
wisdom— in the Byzantine Gtoponica, the Italian Crescenzi, the 
Dutch Heresbach, the French Maison Rustique, and the English 
[29l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

(VI) Plant elm trees along the roads and fence 
rows, bo that you may have the leaves to feed the 
sheep and cattle, and the timber will be available if 
you need it. If any where there are banks of streams 
or wet places, there plant reeds; and surround them 
with willows that the osiers may serve to tie the vines. 

(VII) It is most convenient to set out the land 
nearest the house as an orchard, whence fire wood 
and faggots may be sold and the supply of the master 
obtained. In this enclosure should be planted every 
thing fitting to the land and vines should be married 
to the trees. 1 

Gemote Markkam. Poor Richard's Almanack gives it twice, as 
" the foot of « matter is the best manure" and "the eye of a 
master will do more work than both his hands." It is perennial 
in its appeal. The present editor saw it recently in the German 
comic paper FlUgtndt Blatter. But the jest is much older than 
Cato. It appears in Aschylus, Peria, 171 and Xenophon em- 
ploys it in (Economicus (XII, 20): 

The reply attributed to the barbarian," added Ischomachus, 
"appears to me to be exceedingly to the purpose, for when the 
King of Persia having met with a fine horse and wishing to have 
it fattened as soon as possible, asked one of those who were con- 
sidered knowing about horses what would fatten a hone soonest, 
it is said that he answered 'the master's eye.'" 

'The English word "orchard" scarcely translates arhvitum, 
but every one who has been in Italy will recall the endless pro- 
cession of small fields of maize and rye and alfalfa through 
which serried ranks of mulberry or feathery elm trees, linked 
with the charming drop and garland of the vines, seem to dance 
toward one in the brilliant sunlight, like so many Greek maidens 
on a frieze. These are arbuita. 
(30 1 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

(VIII) Near the house lay out also a garden with 
garland flowers and vegetables ' of all kinds, and 
set it about with myrtle hedges, both white and 
black, as well as Delphic and Cyprian laurel. 

Of stocking the farm 

(X) An olive farm of two hundred and forty 
jugera (160 acres) ought to be stocked as follows: an 
overseer, a house keeper, five labourers, three ox 
drivers, one swineherd, one ass driver, one shepherd; 
in all thirteen hands: three pair of oxen,* three asses 

1 Cato was a strong advocate of the cabbage; he called it the 
best of the vegetables and urged that it be planted in every 
garden for health and happiness. Horace records (Odes. Ill, 
21, Ii) that old Cato's virtue was frequently warmed with wine, 
and Cato himself explains (CLVI) how this could be accom- 
plished without loss of dignity, for, he says, if, after you have 
dined well, you will eat five cabbage leaves they will make you 
feel as if you had had nothing to drink, so that you can drink 
as much more as you wish— "bibesquc quantum voles!" 

This was an ancient Egyptian precaution which the Greeks 
had learned. Cf. Athenseus, I, 62. 

1 Henry Home, Lord Karnes, a Scots judge of the eighteenth 
century, whom Dr. Johnson considered a better farmer than 
judge and a better judge than scholar, but who had many of 
the characteristics of our prtscus Cato, argues (following an 
English tradition which had previously been voiced by Walter of 
Henley and Sir Anthony Fitzherbert) in his ingenious Gentleman 
Farmer against the expense of ploughing with horses and urges a 
return to oxen. He points out that horses involve a large orig- 
inal investment, are worn out in farm work, and after their 
prime steadily depreciate in value; while, on the other hand, the 
ox can be fattened for market when his usefulness as a draught 
[31] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

with pack saddles, to haul out the manure, one other 
ass to turn the mill, and one hundred sheep. 1 

Of the duties of the overseer * 

(V) These are the duties of the overseer: He should 
maintain discipline. He should observe the feast 
days. He should respect the rights of others and 
steadfastly uphold his own. He should settle all 
quarrels among the hands; if any one is at fault he 
should administer the punishment. He should take 
care that no one on the place is in want, or lacks food 
or drink; in this respect he can afford to be generous, 

animal is over, and then sell for more than his original cost; 
that he is less subject to infirmities than the horse; can be fed 
per tractive unit more economically and gives more valuable 
manure. These are strong arguments where the cost of human 
labour is small and economical farm management does not re- 
quire that the time of the ploughman shall be limited if the 
unit cost of ploughing is to be reasonable. The oz is slow, but 
in slave times he might reasonably have been preferred to the 
horse. Today Lord Kames, (or even old Hesiod, who urged 
that a ploughman of forty year and a yoke of eight year steers 
be employed because they turned a more deliberate and so a 
better furrow) would be considering the economical practica- 
bility of the gasolene motor aa tractive power for a gang of 
"crooked" ploughs. 

1 Cato adds a long list of implements and other necessary 
equipment. 

'The Roman overseer was usually a superior, and often a 
much indulged, slave. Cf. Horace's letter (fipist. I, 14) to his 
overseer. 

[32] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

for he will thus more easily prevent picking and steal- 
ing. 1 

Unless the overseer is of evil mind, he will himself 
do no wrong, but if he permits wrong-doing by others, 
the master should not suffer such indulgence to pass 
with impunity. He should show appreciation of 
courtesy, to encourage others to practise it. He 
should not be given to gadding or conviviality, but 
should be always sober. He should keep the hands 
busy, and should see that they do what the master 
has ordered. He should not think that he knows 
more than his master. The friends of the master 
should be his friends, and he should give heed to those 
whom the master has recommended to him. He 
should confine his religious practices to church on 
Sunday, or to his own house. 1 

He should lend money to no man unbidden by the 
master, but what the master has lent he should col- 
lect. He should never lend any seed reserved for 

1 This was the traditional wisdom which was preached also 
in Virginia in slave times. In his Arator (1817) Col. John Taylor 
of Caroline says of agricultural slaves: 

"The best source for securing their happiness, their honesty 
and their usefulness is their food. . . . One great value of es- 
tablishing a comfortable diet for slaves is its convenience as an 
instrument of reward and punishment, so powerful as almost to 
abolish the thefts which often diminish considerably the owner's 
ability to provide for them." 

9 Reading " compitalibus in compito," literally "the cross 
roads altar on festival days." 

I 33 1 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

sowing, feed, corn, wine, or oil, but he should have 
relations with two or three other farms with which 
he can exchange things needed in emergency. He 
should state his accounts with his master frequently. 
He should not keep any hired men or day hands 
longer than is necessary. He should not sell any 
thing without the knowledge of the master, nor 
should he conceal any thing from the master. He 
should not have any hangers-on, nor should he con- 
sult any soothsayer, fortune teller, necromancer, or 
astrologer. He should not spare seed in sowing, for 
that is bad economy. He should strive to be expert 
in all kinds of farm work, and, without exhausting 
himself, often lend a hand. By so doing, he will 
better understand the point of view of his hands, 
and they will work more contentedly; moreover, he 
will have less inclination to gad, his health will be 
better, and he will sleep more refreshingly. 

First up in the morning, he should be the last to 
go to bed at night; and before he does, he should see 
that the farm gates are closed, and that each of the 
hands is in his own bed, that the stock have been 
fed. He should see that the best of care is taken of 
the oxen, and should pay the highest compliments 
to the teamsters who keep their cattle in the best 
condition. He should see to it that the ploughs and 
plough shares are kept in good repair. Plan all the 
(34) 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

work in ample time, for so it is with farm work, if 
one thing is done late, every thing will be late-. 

(XXXIX) When it rains try to find some thing to 
do indoors. Clean up, rather than remain idle. Re- 
member that while work may stop, expenses still 
goon. 

Of the duties of the housekeeper 

(CXI ,111) The overseer should be responsible for 
the duties of the housekeeper. If the master has 
given her to you for a wife, you should be satisfied 
with her, and she should respect you. Require that 
she be not given to wasteful habits; that she does not 
gossip with the neighbours and other women. She 
should not receive visitors either in the kitchen or 
in her own quarters. She should not go out to parties, 
nor should she gad about. 1 She should not practise 

1 It is evident that Cato's housekeeper would have welcomed 
a visit from Mr. Roosevelt's Rural Uplift Commission. We / 
may add to this Sir Anthony Fitzherbert'e description of the / 
duties of a farmer's wife in sixteenth century England: ' 

"It is a wyues occupation to wynowe all maner of cornea, 
to make make, to wasshe and wrynge, to make heye, shere 
come, and in tyme of nede to helpe her husbande to fyll the 
mucke-wayne or dounge-carte, dryue the ploughe, to loode hey, 
corne and suche other. And to go or ride to die market, to set 
butter, cheae, mylke, egges, chekyns, capons, henries, pyggea, 
gese, and all maner of comes. And also to bye all maner of 
neccGsarye thynges belongynge to houssholde, and to make a 
trewe rekenynge and acompte to her husbande what she hath 
payed." 

[351 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

religious observances, nor should she ask others to 
do so for her without the permission of the master 
or the mistress. Remember that the master practises 
religion for the entire household. She should be neat 
in appearance and should keep the house swept and 
garnished. Every night before she goes to bed she 
should see that the hearth is swept and clean. On 
the Kalends, the Ides, the Nones, and on all feast 
days, she should hang a garland over the hearth. 
On those days also she should pray fervently to the 
household gods. She should take care that she has 
food cooked for you and for the hands. She should 
have plenty of chickens and an abundance of eggs. 1 
She should diligently put up all kinds of preserves 
every year. 

Of the hands 

(LVI) The following are the customary allowances 
for food: For the hands, four pecks of meal for the 

Sir Anthony Fitzherbert (1470-1538) was the English judge 
whose law books are, or should be, known to all lawyers. His 
Soke of Husbandry, published in 1534, is one of the classics of 
English agriculture, and justly, for it is full of shrewd observa- 
tion and deliberate wisdom expressed in a virile style, with 
agreeable leaven of piety and humour. Fitzherbert anticipated 
a modern poet, Henley, in one of his most happy phrases: 
"Ryght so euery man is capitayne of his owne soule . The 
Husbandry is best available to the modern reader in the edition 
by Skeat published for the English Dialect Society in 1882. 

1 Cato is careful not to undertake to say how this may be as- 
sured; another evidence of his wisdom. 
I 36] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

winter, and four and one-half for the summer. For 
the overseer, the housekeeper, the wagoner, the 
shepherd, three pecks each. For the slaves, four 
pounds of bread for the winter, but when they begin 
to cultivate the vines this is increased to five pounds 
until the figs are ripe, then return to four pounds. 

(LVII) The sum of the wine allowed for each hand 
per annum is eight quadrantals, or Amphora, but 
add in the proportion as they do work. Ten quad- 
rantals per annum is not too much to allow them to 
drink. 

(LVZII) Save the wind fall olives as much as pos- 
sible as relishes for the hands. Later set aside such 
of the ripe olives as will make the least oil. Be 
careful to make them go as far as possible. When 
the olives are all eaten, give them fish pickles and 
vinegar. One peck of salt per annum is enough for 
each hand. 

(LIX) Allow each hand a smock and a cloak every 
other year. As often as you give out a smock or 
cloak to any one take up the old one, so that caps 
can be made out of it. A pair of heavy wooden shoes 
should be allowed every other year. 

Of draining 
(Xl.nl) If the land is wet, it should be drained 
with trough shaped ditches dug three feet wide at 
[371 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the surface and one foot at the bottom and four feet 
deep. Blind thes.e ditches with rock.- If you have 
no rock then fill them with green willow poles braced 
crosswise. If you have no poles, fill then with fag- 
gots. Then dig lateral trenches three feet deep and 
four feet wide in such way that the water will flow 
from the trenches into the ditches. 

(CLV) In the winter surface water should be 
drained off the fields. On hillsides courses should be 
kept clear for the water to flow off. During the 
rainy season at the beginning of Autumn is the great- 
est risk from water. When it begins to rain all the 
hands should go out with picks and shovels and clear 
out the drains so that the water may flow off into 
the roads, and the crops be protected. 

Of preparing the seed bed 

(LXI) What is the first principle of good agricul- 
ture? To plough well. What is the second? To 
plough again; and the third is to manure. When you 
plough corn land, plough well and in good weather, 
lest you turn a cloddy furrow. The other things of 
good agriculture are to sow seed plentifully, to thin 
the young sprouts, and to hill up the roots with earth. 

(V) Never plough rotten land 1 nor drive flocks 
or carts across it. 

1 In his instructive discourse on ploughing, Columella (II, 4) 
[381 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

If care is not taken about this, the land so abused 

will be barren for three years. 

gives the key to Cato's warning against ploughing land when it 
u in the condition he calls rotten (cariosa): 

"Rich land, which holds moisture a long time, should be 
broken up (prtucindere) at the season when the weather is be- 
ginning to be warm and the weeds are developing, so that none 
of their seed may mature: but it should be ploughed with such 
close furrows that one can with difficulty distinguish where the 
plough share has been, for in that way all the weeds are uprooted 
and destroyed. 

"The spring ploughing should be followed up with frequent 
stirring of the soil until it is reduced to dust, so that there may 
be no necessity, or very little, of harrowing after the land is 
seeded: for the ancient Romans said that a field was badly 
ploughed which had to be harrowed after the seed had been 

"A farmer should himself make sure that his ploughing has 
been well done, not alone by inspection, for the eye is often 
amused by a smooth surface which in fact conceals clods, but 
also by experiment, which is less Likely to be deceived, as by 
driving a stout stick through the furrows: if it penetrates the 
soil readily and without obstruction, it will be evident that all 
the land there about is in good order: but if some part harder j 
than the rest resists the pressure, it will be clear that the plough- ( i 
ing has been badly done. When the ploughmen see this done 
from time to time they are not guilty of clod hopping. 

"Hence wet land should be broken up after the Ides of April, 
and, when it has been ploughed at that season, it should be 
worked again, after an interval of twenty days, about the time 
of the solstice, which is the eighth or ninth day before the Ka- 
lends of July, and again the third time about the Kalends of 
September, for it is not the practice of experienced farmers to 
till the land in the interval after the summer solstice, unless the 
ground shall have been soaked with a heavy down-pour of sud- 
den rain, like those of winter, as does some times happen at this 
[39l 

:> :l :ieci : yGo0gle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 



Of manure 

(V) Plan to have a big compost heap and take the 
best of care of the manure. When it is hauled out see 
that it is well rotted and spread. The Autumn is the 
time to do this. 

(XXXVII) You can make manure of litter, lupine 
straw, chaff, bean stalks, husks and the leaves of ilex 
and of oak. 1 

season. In that event there is no reason why the fallow should 
not be cultivated during the month of July. But when you do 
tilt at this season beware lest the land be worked while it ia 
muddy: or when, having been sprinkled by a shower, it is in the 
condition which the country people call porta and cariosa, that 
is to say, when, after a long drought, a light rain has moistened 
the surface of the upturned sod but has not soaked to the bottom 
of the furrow. 

"Those plough lands which are cultivated when they are 
miry are rendered useless for an entire year— they can be neither 
seeded nor harrowed nor hoed— but those which are worked 
when they are in the state which has been described as varia, 
remain sterile for three years on end. We should, therefore, 
follow a medium course and plough when the land neither lacks 
moisture nor yet is deep in marsh. 

1 Columella (II, 13) justly says about manure, "Wherefore 
if it is, as it would seem to be, the thing of the greatest value to 
the farmer, I consider that it should be studied with the greatest 
care, especially since the ancient authors, while they have not 
altogether neglected it, have nevertheless discussed it with too 
little elaboration." He goes on (II, 14) to lay down rules about 
the compost heap which should be written in letters of gold in 
every farm house. 

"I appreciate that there are certain kinds of farms on which 

it is impossible to keep either live stock or birds, yet even in such 

[40] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

(XXX) Fold your sheep on the land which you 
are about to seed, and there feed them leaves. 1 

Of soil improvement 

(XXXVII) The things which are harmful to corn 
land are to plough the ground when it is rotten, and to 
plant chick peas which are harvested with the straw 
and are salt. Barley, fenugreek and pulse all exhaust 
corn land, as well as all other things which are har- 
vested with the straw. Do not plant nut trees in the 

E laces it is a lazy farmer who lacks manure: for he can collect 
:aves, rubbish from the hedge rows, and droppings from the 
highways: without giving offence, and indeed earning gratitude, 
he can cut ferns from his neighbour's land: and all these things 
he can mingle with the sweepings of the courtyard: he can dig a 
pit, like that we have counselled for the protection of stable 
manure, and there mix together ashes, sewage, and straw, and 
indeed every waste thing which is swept up on the place. But 
it is wise to bury a piece of oak wood in the midst of this com- 
post, for that will prevent venomous snakes from lurking in it. 
This will suffice for a farm without live stock." 

One can see in Flanders today the happy land smiling its 
appreciation of farm management such as this, but what Amer- 
ican farmer has yet learned this kind of conservation of his 
natural resources. 

1 The occupants of the motor cars which now roll so swiftly 
and so comfortably along the French national highway from 
Paris to Tours, through the pleasant pays de Btauct, can see 
this admirable and economical method of manuring still in prac- 
tice. The sheep are folded and fed at night, under the watchful 
Se of the shepherd stretched at ease in his wheeled cabin, on 
e land which was ploughed the day before. 
[41 1 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

) corn land. On the other hand, lupines, field beans 

} and vetch manure corn land. 1 

(VI) Where the soil is rich and fertile, without 
shade, there the corn land ought to be. Where the 
land lies low, plant rape, millet, and panic grass. 

Of forage crops 

(VIII) If you have a water meadow you will not 
want forage, but if not then sow an upland meadow, 
so that hay may not be lacking. 

(.LIII) Save your hay when the times comes, and 
beware lest you mow too late. Mow before the seed 
is ripe. House the best hay by itself, so that you may 

'These of course are all legumes. The intelligent farmer 
today sits under his shade tree and meditates comfortably upon 
the least expensive and most profitable labour on his farm, the 
countless millions of beneficent bacteria who, his willing slaves, 
are ceaselessly at work during hot weather forming root tubercles 
on his legumes, be it clover or cow peas, and so fixing for their 
lord the free atmospheric nitrogen contained in the soil. As 
Macaulay would Bay, "every school boy knows" now that le- 
guminous root nodules are endotrophic mycorrhiza, — but the 
Romans did not! Nevertheless their empirical practice of soil 
improvement with legumes was quite as good as ours. Varro 
(I, 23) explains the Roman method of green manuring more 
fully than Cato. Columella (II, 13) insists further that if the 
hay is saved the stubble of legumes should be promptly ploughed 
for he says the roots will evaporate their own moisture and 
continue to pump the land of its fertility unless they are at once 
turned over. 

If the Romans followed this wise advice they were better 
farmers than most of us today, for we are usually content to 
let the stubble dry out before ploughing. 
[4*1 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

feed it to the draft cattle during the spring plough- 
ing, before the clover is mature. 

(XXVII) Sow, for feed for the cattle, clover, 
vetch, fenugreek, field beans and pulse. Sow these 
crops a second and a third time. 

Of planting 

(XXXIV) Wherever the land is cold and wet, 
sow there first, and last of all in the warmest places. 

Of pastures 

(L) Manure the pastures in early spring in the 
dark of the moon, when the west wind begins to 
blow. When you close your pastures (to the stock) 
clean them and root out all weeds. 

Of feeding live stock 

(XXX) As long as they are available, feed green 
leaves of elm, poplar, oak and fig to your cattle and 
sheep. 

(V) Store leaves, also, to be fed to the sheep before 
they have withered. 1 

(XXX) Take the best of care of your dry fodder, 

1 Was this ensilage? The ancients had their alio pits, but 
they used them chiefly as granaries, and as such they are de- 
scribed, by Varro (I, 57, 63), by Columella (I, 6), and by Pliny 
(XVIII, 30, 73)- 

(431 

I^iectyGoOglc 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

which you house for the winter, and remember always 
how long the winter may last. 

(IV) Be sure you have well constructed stables 
furnished with substantial stalls and equipped with 
latticed feed racks. The intervals between the bars 
of the racks should be one foot. If you build them 
in this way, the cattle will not waste their food. 

(LIV) This is the way that provender should be 
prepared and fed : When the seeding is finished, gather 
mast and soak it in water. Feed a measure of it 
every day to each steer; or if they have not been 
worked it will be sufficient to let them pasture the 
mast beds. Another good feed is a measure of grape 
husks which you shall have preserved in jars. By 
day turn the cattle out and at night feed twenty-five 
pounds of hay to each steer. If hay is short, feed 
the leaves of the ilei and ivy. 1 Stack the straw of 
wheat, barley, beans, vetch and lupine, indeed all 
the grain straws, but pick out and house the best of it. 
Scatter your straw with salt and you can then feed 
it in place of hay. When in the spring you begin to 
feed (more heavily to prepare for work), feed a meas- 
ure of mast or of grape husks, or a measure of ground 
lupines, and fifteen pounds of hay. When the clover 

1 The extravagant American fanner has not vet learned to 
feed the leaves of trees, but in older and more economical civili- 
zations the practice ia still observed. 
[44] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

is ripe, feed that first. Gather it by hand so that it 
will bloom a second time, for what you harvest with 
the sickle blooms no more. Feed clover until it is 
dry, then feed vetch and then panic grass, and after 
the panic grass feed elm leaves. If you have poplar, 
mix that with the elm so that the elm may last the 
longer. If you have no elm feed oak and fig leaves. 

Nothing is more profitable than to take good care 
of your cattle. 

Cattle should not be put out to graze except in 
winter when they are not worked; for when they eat 
green stuff they expect it all the time, and it is then 
necessary to muzzle them while they plough. 

Of the care of live stock 

(V) The flocks and herds should be well supplied 
with litter and their feet kept clean. If litter is short, 
haul in oak leaves, they will serve as bedding for 
sheep and cattle. Beware of scab among the sheep and 
cattle. This comes from hunger and exposure to rain. 

(LXXII) To prevent the oxen from wearing down 
their hoofs, anoint the bottom of the hoof with liquid 
pepper before driving them on the highroad. 

(LXXIII) Take care that during the summer the 
cattle drink only sweet and fresh water. Their 
health depends on it. 

(XCVI) To prevent scab among sheep, make a 
U5l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

mixture of equal parts of well strained amurca, 1 of 
water in which lupine has been steeped, and of lees 
of good wine. After shearing, anoint all the flock with 
this mixture, and let them sweat profusely for two 
or three days. Then dip them in the sea. If you have 
no sea water, make salt water and dip then in that. 
If you will do this they will suffer no scab, they will 
have more and better wool and they will not be 
molested by ticks. 

(LXXI) If an ox begins to sicken, give him with- 
out delay a raw hen's egg and make him swallow it 
whole. The next day make him drink from a wooden 
bowl a measure of wine in which has been scraped 
the head of an onion. Both the ox and his attendant 
should do these things fasting and standing upright. 

(CII) If a serpent shall bite an ox, or any other 
quadruped, take a cup of that extract of fennel, 
which the physicians call smyrnean, and mix it with 
a measure of old wine. Inject this through his nos- 
trils and at the same time poultice the wound with 
hogs' dung. 1 You can treat a man the same way. 

, * Amurca was the dregs of olive oil. Cato recommends its 
use for many purposes in the economy of the farm, for a moth 
proof (XCVIII), as a relish for cattle (ail), as a fertilizer 
(CXXX), and as an anointment for the threshing floor to kill 
weevil (XCI). 

* There is a similar remedy for scratches in horses, which is 
traditional in the cavalry service today, and is extraordinarily 
efficacious. 

[46] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

(CLX) If a bone is dislocated it can be made 
sound by this incantation. Take a green reed four 
or five feet long, cut it in the middle and let two men 
hold the pieces against your hips. Begin then to 
chant as follows: 

"la Alio. S. F. Mous Vaeta, 
Danes Dardaries Astataries Dissunapiter" 

and continue until the free ends of the reed are 
brought slowly together in front of you. Meanwhile, 
wave a knife above the reeds, and when they come 
together and one touches the other, seize them in 
your hand and cut them right and left. These pieces 
of reed bound upon a dislocated or fractured bone 
will cure it. 

But every day repeat the incantation, or in place 
of it this one: 

"Huat Hanat Huat 
lata Plata Sista 
Domiabo Damnaustra " * 

1 These examples will serve to illustrate how far Cato's vet- 
erinary science was behind his agriculture, and what a curious 
confusion of native good sense and traditional superstition there 
was in his method of caring for his live stock. On questions of 
preventing malady he had the wisdom of experience, but malady 
once arrived he was a simple pagan. There was a notable ad- 
vance in the Roman knowledge of how to treat sick cattle in the 
century after Cato. Cf. Varro, II, 5. 

The words of the incantations themselves are mere sound 
and fury signifying nothing, like the "counting out" rhythms 
used by children at their games. 

[47] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of cakes and salad 1 

(LXXV) This U the recipe for cheese cake (libum) : 
Bray well two pounds of cheese in a mortar, and, 
when this is done, pour in a pound of corn meal (or, 
if you want to be more dainty, a half pound of flour) 
and mix it thoroughly with the cheese. Add one egg 
and beat it well. Pat into a cake, place it on leaves 
and bake slowly on a hot hearth stone under a 
dish. 

(CXIX) This is the recipe for olive salad {epity- 
rum) : Select some white, black and mottled olives and 
stone them. Mix and cut them up. Add a dressing of 
oil, vinegar, coriander, cumin, fennel, rue and mint. 
Mix well in an earthen ware dish, and serve with oil. 

(CXXI) This is the recipe for must cake (m-usta- 
ceus) : Sprinkle a peck of wheat flour with must. Add 
anise, cumin, two pounds of lard, a pound of cheese 
and shredded laurel twigs. When you have kneaded 
the dough, put laurel leaves under it and so bake. 

1 Cato gives many recipes of household as well as agricultural 
economy. Out of respect for the pure food law most of them 
have been here suppressed, but these samples are ventured 
because Varro mentions them and the editor is advised that 
some enterprising young ladies in Wisconsin have recently 
had the courage to put them to the test, and vow that they ate 
their handiwork! As they live to tell the tale, it is assumed 
that the recipes are harmless. 

[+8J 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of curing hams 

(CLXII) This is the way to cure hams in jars or 
tubs: When you have bought your hams trim off the 
hocks. Take a half peck (semodtus) of ground Roman 
salt for each ham. Cover the bottom of the jar or 
tub with salt and put in a ham, skin down. Cover 
the whole with salt and put another ham on top, 
and cover this in the same manner. Be careful that 
meat does not touch meat. So proceed, and when 
you have packed all the hams, cover the top with 
salt so that no meat can be seen, and smooth it out 
even. When the hams have been in salt five days, 
take them all out with the salt and repack them, put- 
ting those which were on top at the bottom. Cover 
them in the same way with salt and press them down. 

After the twelfth day remove the hams finally, 
brush off the salt and hang them for two days in the 
wind. On the third day wipe them off clean with a 
sponge and rub them with (olive) oil. Then hang 
them In smoke for two days, and on the third day 
rub them with a mixture of (olive) oil and vinegar. 

Then hang them in the meat house, and neither 
bats nor worms will touch them. 1 

1 Cf. the following traditional formula as practised in Virginia: 

A VIRGINIA RECIPE FOR CURING HAMS 

"Rub each ham separately with yi teaspoonful of saltpetre 

(use a small spoon); then rub each ham with a large tablespoon- 

t49l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

ful of best black pepper; then nib each ham with a gill of mo- 
lasses (black strap is best). 
Then for 1,000 lbs. of ham take 

3 l /i pecks of coarse salt, 

2>£ lbs. of saltpetre, 

2 qts. hickory ashes, 

2 qts. molasses, 

2 teacupfuls of red pepper. 
Mix all together on the salting table. Then rub each ham with 
this mixture, and, in packing, spread some of it on each layer of 
ham. Use no more salt than has been mixed. Pack skin down 
and let stand for five weeks, then hang in the smoke house for 
five or six weeks, and smoke in damp weather, using hickory 
wood." 

As a ham, however well cured, is of no use to civilized man 
until it is cooked, and as this crowning mystery is seldom re- 
vealed out of Virginia, it may not be out of place to record here 
the process: 

A VIRGINIA RECIPE FOR COOKING HAMS 
Soak over night in cold water, having first scrubbed the ham 
with a small brush to remove all the pepper, saltpetre, etc., 
left from the curing process. 

Put on to boil next morning in tepid water, skin downwards, 
letting it simmer on back of stove, never to boil hard. This 
takes about four hours (or until it is done, when the ham is 
supposed to turn over, skin upwards, of its own accord, as it 
will if the boiler is large enough). Set aside over another night 
in the water it has boiled in. 

The following day, skin and bake in the oven, having cov- 
ered the ham well with brown sugar, basting at intervals with 
cider. When it is well baked, take it out of the oven and baste 
another ten to twenty minutes in the pan on top of the stove. 
The sugar crust should bo quite brown and crisp when done. 

To be thoroughly appreciated a ham should be carved on the 
table, by a pretty woman. A thick slice of ham is a crime 
against good breeding. 

[Sol 



i by Google 



VARRO'S RERUM RUSTICARUM 
LIBRI TRES 

BOOK I 

THE HUSBANDRY OF AGRICULTURE 

Introduction: the literary tradition of country life 
I 
AD I leisure, Fundania, this book 

H would be more worthy of you, but I 
write as best I may, conscious always 
of the necessity of haste: for, if, as the 
saying is, all life is but a bubble, the 
more fragile is that of an old man, and my eightieth 
year admonishes me to pack my fardel and prepare 
for the long journey. 

You have bought a farm and wish to increase its 
fertility by good cultivation, and you ask me what 
I would do with it were it mine. Not only while I 
am still alive will I try to advise you in this, but I 
will make my counsel available to you after I am 
dead. For as it befel the Sibyl to have been of service 
to mankind not alone while she lived, but even to 
the uttermost generations of men after her demise 
(for we are wont after so many years still to have 
solemn recourse to her books for guidance in inter- 
pretation of strange portents), so may not I, while 
I still live, bequeath my counsel to my nearest and 
l5i] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

dearest. 1 I will then write three books for you, to 
which you may have recourse for guidance in all 
things which must be done in the management of a 
farm. 

And since, as men say, the gods aid those who 
propitiate them, I will begin my book by invoking 
divine approval, not like Homer and Ennius, from 
the Muses, nor indeed from the twelve great gods 
of the city whose golden images stand in the forum, 
six male and as many female, but from a solemn 
council of those twelve divinities who are the tute- 
laries of husbandmen. 

First: I call upon Father Jupiter and Mother 

1 It U interesting that Varro has realized the hope, here ex- 
pressed, that his wisdom might survive for the benefit of the 
"uttermost generations of men" only in the case of this treatise 
on Husbandry among the many monuments of his industry and 
learning. Petrarch in hia Epistle to Varro in that first delightful 
book of Letters to Dead Authors (de rebus familiaribus XXIV, 6) 
rehearses the loss of Varro's boobs and, adapting the thought 
here expressed in the text, regrets for that reason that Varro 
cannot be included in that company of men "whom we love even 
after their death owing to the good and righteous deeds that 
live after them, men who mold our character by their teaching 
and comfort us by their example, when the rest of mankind 
offends both our eyes and our nostrils; men who, though they 
have gone hence to the common abode of all (as Plautus says 
in Casina), nevertheless continue to be of service to the living." 
If Petrarch had been a farmer he might have saved some of his 
regret, for Varro is surely, by virtue of the Return Rustiearum, a 
member of the fellowship Petrarch describes. 
Is*] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Earth, who fecundate all the processes of agriculture 
in the air and in the soil, and hence are called the 
great parents. 

Second: I invoke the Sun and the Moon by whom 
the seasons for sowing and reaping are measured. 

Third: I invoke Ceres and Bacchus because the 
fruits they mature are most necessary to life, and 
by their aid the land yields food and drink. 

Fourth: I invoke Robigus and Flora by whose 
influence the blight is kept from crop and tree, and 
in due season they bear fruit (for which reason is the 
annual festival of the robigalia celebrated in honour 
of Robigus, and that of the fioralia in honour of 
Flora). 1 

Next: I supplicate Minerva, who protects the olive; 
and Venus, goddess of the garden, wherefore is she 
worshipped at the rural wine festivals. 

And last: I adjure Lympha, goddess of the foun- 
tains, and Bonus Eventus, god of good fortune, since 
without water all vegetation is starved and stunted 
and without due order and good luck all tillage is in 



And so having paid my duty to the gods, I pro- 
ceed to rehearse some conversations 1 concerning 

1 Varro was essentially an antiquary and it is amusing to ob- 
serve that he is unable to suppress his learning even in his prayers. 
One is reminded of the anecdote of the New England minister, 
who, in the course of an unctuous prayer, proclaimed, with magis- 
terial authority, "Paradoxical as it may appear, O Lord, it is 
nevertheless true, etc" 

1 Following Plato and Xenophon and Cicero, Varro cast his 
[53l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

agriculture in which I have recently taken part. 
From them you will derive all the practical instruc- 
tion you require, but in case any thing is lacking and 
you wish further authority, I refer you to the treatises 
of the Greeks and of our own countrymen. 

The Greek writers who have treated incidentally 
of agriculture are more than fifty in number. Those 
whom you may consult with profit are Hieron of 
Sicily and Attalus Philometor, among the philos- 
ophers; Democritus the physicist; Xenophon the 
disciple of Socrates; Aristotle and Theophrastus, the 
peripatetics; Archytas the pythagorean; likewise the 
Athenian Amphilochus, Anaxipolis of Thasos, Apollo- 
dorus of Lemnos, Aristophanes of Mallos, Antigonus 
of Cyme, Agathocles of Chios, Apollonius of Per- 
gamum, Aristandrus of Athens, Bacchhis of Miletus, 
Bion of Soli, Chaeresteus and Chsereas of Athens, 
Diodorus of Priene, Dion of Colophon, Diophanes 
of Nicsea, Epigenes of Rhodes, Evagon of Thasos, 

books into the form of dialogues to make them entertaining 
("and what is the use of a book," thought Alice in Wonderland, 
"without pictures or conversations."): for the same reason he 
was careful about his local colour. Thus the scene of this first 
book, which relates to agriculture proper, is laid at Rome in the 
temple of Earth on the festival of the Seed Sowing, and the 
characters bear names of punning reference to the tilling of the 
soil. Varro was strong on puns, avowing (Cicero Acad. I, 2) 
that that form of humour made it easier for people of small 
intelligence to swallow his learning. 
[54] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Euphronius of Athens, and his name sake of Amphip- 
olis, Hegesias of Maronea, the two Menanders, one 
of Priene, the other of Heraclsea, Nicesius of Maro- 
nea, Pythion of Rhodes. Among the rest whose 
countries I do not know, are Andiotion, jEschrion, 
Aristomenes, Athenagoras, Crates, Dadis, Dionysius, 
Euphiton, Euphorion, Eubulus, Lysimachus, Mna- 
seas, Menestratus, Plentiphanes, Persia, and Theoph- 
ilus. ^» 

All those whom I ha'^s^Hamed wrote in prose, but 
there are those also who have written in verse, as 
Hesiod of Ascra and Menecrates of Ephesus. 

The agricultural writer of the greatest reputation 
. is, however, Mago the Carthaginian ' who wrote in 

1 The story is that when Scipio captured Carthage he dis- 
tributed the Punic libraries among the native allies, reserving 
only the agricultural works of Mago, which the Roman Senate 
subsequently ordered to be translated into Latin, so highly were 
they esteemed. Probably more real wealth was brought to 
Rome in the pages of these precious volumes than was repre- 
sented by all the other plunder of Carthage. "The improving a 
kingdom in matter of husbandry is better than conquering a 
new kingdom," says old Samuel Hartlib, Milton's friend, in 
his Ltgacie. It is a curious fact that as the Romans derived , 

agricultural wisdom from their ancient enemies, so did the / 
English. Cf. Thorold Rogers' Six Centuries of Work and Wages. V 
"We owe the improvements in English agriculture to Hol- 
land. From this country we borrowed, at the beginning of 
the seventeenth century, the cultivation of winter roots, and, 
at that of the eighteenth, the artificial grasses. The Dutch had 
practised agriculture with the patient and minute industry of 
market gardeners. They had tried successfully to cultivate 
[551 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the Punic tongue and collected in twenty-eight books 
all the wisdom which before him had been scattered 
in many works. Cassius Dionysius of Utica trans- 
lated Mago into Greek in twenty books (and dedi- 
cated his work to the praetor Sextilius), and not- 
withstanding that he reduced Mago by eight books 
he cited freely from the Greek authors whom I have 
named. Diophanes made a useful digest of Cassius 
in six books, which he deJifctted to Deiotarus, King 
of Bithynia. I have vef^Jed to compress the sub- 
ject into the still smaller compass of three books, 
the first on the husbandry of agriculture, the second 
on the husbandry of live stock and the third on the 
husbandry of the steading. 

From the first book I have excluded all those 
things which I do not deem to relate immediately to 
agriculture: thus having first limited my subject I 

every thing to the uttermost, which could be used for human 
food, or could give innocent gratification to a refined taste. 
They taught agriculture and they taught gardening. They 
were the first people to surround their homesteads with flower 
beds, with groves, with trim parterres, with the finest turf, to 
improve fruit trees, to seek out and perfect edible roots and 
herbs at once for man and cattle. We owe to the Dutch that 
scurvy and leprosy have been banished from England, that 
continuous crops have taken the place of barren fallows, that 
the true rotation of crops has been discovered and perfected, 
that the population of these islands has been increased and that 
the cattle and sheep in England are ten times what they were 
in numbers and three times what they were in size and quality." 
[56] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

proceed to discuss it, following its natural divisions. 
My information has been derived from three sources, 
my own experience, my reading, and what I have 
heard from others. 

Of the definition of agriculture 
a. What it is not 

II. On the holiday which we call Sementivse I 
came to the temple of Tellus at the invitation of the 
Sacristan (I was taught by my ancestors to call him 
JEditumus but the modern purist tells me I must say 
JFdituus). There I found assembled C. Fundanius, 
my father-in-law, C. Agrius, a Roman Knight and 
a disciple of the Socratic school, and P. Agrasius, 
of the Revenue service: they were gazing on a map 
of Italy painted on the wall. "What are you doing 
here?" said I. "Has the festival of the seed-sowing 
drawn you hither to spend your holiday after the 
manner of our ancestors, by praying for good crops?" 
"We are here," said Agrius, "for the same reason 
that you are, I imagine— because the Sacristan has 
invited us to dinner. If this be true, as your nod 
admits, wait with us until he returns, for he was 
summoned by his chief, the sdile, and has not yet 
returned though he left word for us to wait for him." 

"Until he comes then," said I, "let us make a 
[571 

:> :l :ieci : yGo0gle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

practical application of the ancient proverb that 
'The Roman conquers by sitting down.'" 

"You're right," cried Agnus, and, remembering 
that the first step of a journey is the most difficult, 1 
he lead the way to the benches forthwith and we fol- 
lowed. When we were seated Agrasius spoke up. 
"You who have travelled over many lands," said he, 
"have you seen any country better cultivated than 
Italy?" 

"I, for one, don't believe," replied Agrius, "that 
there is any country which is so intensely cultivated. 
By a very natural division Eratosthenes has divided 
the earth into two parts, that facing South and that 
facing North; and as without doubt the North is 
healthier than the South, so it is more fertile, for a 
healthy country is always the most fertile. It must 
be admitted then that the North is fitter for cultiva- 
tion than Asia, and particularly is this true of Italy; 
first, because Italy is in Europe, and, second, because 
this part of Europe has a more temperate climate 
than the interior. For almost everlasting winter 
grips the lands to the North of us. Nor is this to be 

1 The Roman proverb which Agrius had in mind reminds one 
of the witty French woman's comment upon the achievement of 
St. Denis in walking several miles to Montmartre, after his 
head had been cut oft, (as all the world can still see him doing in 
the verriereB of Notre Dame de Chartres): "en pareil cas, ce 
n'est que le premier pas qui coute." 
[58] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

wondered at since there are regions within the Arctic 
Circle and at the pole where the sun is not seen for 
six months at a time. Yea, it is even said that it is 
not possible to sail a ship in those parts because the 
very sea is frozen over.** 

"Would you think it possible," said Fundanius, 
"for any thing to grow in such a region, and, if it 
did grow, how could it be cultivated f The tragedian 
Pacuvius has spoken sooth where he says: 

* Should sun or night maintain e'er lasting reign, 
Then all the grateful fruits of earth must die, 
Nipped by the cold, or blasted by the heat.' 

Even here in this pleasant region, where night 
and day revolve punctually, I am not able to live in 
summer unless I divide the day with my appointed 
midday nap. How is it possible to plant or to culti- 
vate or to harvest any thing there where the days and 
nights are six months long. On the other hand, what 
useful thing is there which does not only grow but 
flourish in Italy? What spelt shall I compare with 
that of Campania ? What wheat with that of Apulia ? 
What wine with that of Falernum? What oil with 
that of Venafrum? Is not Italy so covered with fruit 
trees that it seems one vast orchard? Is Phrygia, 
which Homer calls nfimKxrrrra, more teeming with 
vines, or is Argos, which the same poet calls iroXwrupos, 
t59l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

more rich in corn? 1 In what land does one jugerum 
produce ten, nay even fifteen, cullei of wine, as in 
some regions of Italy? Has not M. Cato written in 
his book of Origines 'That region lying this side of 

'To this glowing description of agricultural Italy in the 
Augustan age may be annexed that of Machiavelli on the state 
of Tuscany in his youth: " Ridotta tutta in soinma pace e tran- 
quillita, coltivata non meno tie' luoghi piu montuosi e piu 
sterili che nelle pianure e regioni piu fertili. . . ." It is our 
privilege to see the image of this fruitful cultivation of the 
mountain tops not only in Machiavelli's prose, but on the walls 
of the Palazzo Riccardi in Gozzoli's Journey of the Magi, where, 
like King Robert of Sicily, the Magi crossed 
" Into the lovely land of Italy 
Whose loveliness was more resplendent made 
By the mere passing of that cavalcade." 
It seems almost a pity to contrast with these the comment of a 
careful and sympathetic student of the agricultural Italy of the 
age of King Umberto: "To return to the question of the natural 
richness of agricultural Italy," says Dr. W. N. Beauclcrk in his 
Rural Italy (1888), "we may compare the words of the German 
ballad: 'In Italy macaroni ready cooked rains from the sky, and 
the vines are festooned with sausages,' with the words today 
rife throughout the Kingdom, ' Rural Italy is poor and miserable, 
and has no future in store for her.' The fact is that Italy is 
rich in capabilities of production, but exhausted in spontaneous 
fertility. Her vast forests have been cut down, giving place to 
sterile and malarious ground: the plains and shores formerly 
covered with wealthy and populous cities are now deserted 
marshes: Sardinia and other ancient granaries of the Roman 
Empire are empty and unproductive: two-thirds of the Kingdom 
are occupied by mountains impossible of cultivation, and the 
remainder is to a large extent ill-farmed and un remunerative, 
lb call Italy the 'Garden of Europe' under these circumstances 
seems cruel irony." 

[60] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Ariminium and beyond Picenum, which was allotted 
to colonists, is called Roman Gaul. There in several 
places a single jugerum of land produces ten cullei 
of wine.* Is it not the same in the region of Faventia 
where the vines are called ire centaria because a 
jugerum yields three hundred amphorae of wine/' and, 
looking at me, he added, "indeed L. Martius, your 
chief engineer, said that the vines on his Faven- 
tine farm yielded that much. 1 The Italian farmer" 
looks chiefly for two things in considering a farm, 
whether it will yield a harvest proportioned to the 
capital and labour he must invest, and whether the 
location is healthy. Whoever neglects either of these 
considerations and despite them proposes to carry 
on a farm, is a fool and should be taken in charge by 
a committee of his relatives. 1 For no sane man is. 

1 As we may assume that the yields of wine of which Funda- 
nias boasts were the largest of which Varro had information in 
the Italy of his time, it is interesting to compare them with the 
largest yields of the most productive wine country of France 
today. Fifteen cullei, or three hundred amphora per jugerum, 
is the equivalent of 2700 gallons per acre: while according to 
P. Joigneaux, in the Livre de la Ferme, the largest yields in 
modern France are in the Midi (specifically Herault), where in 
exceptional cases they amount to as much as 250 hectolitres to 
the hectare, or say 2672 gallons per acre. It may be noted that 
the yields of the best modern wines, like Burgundy, are less than 
half of this, and it is probable that the same was true of the 
vinum Setinum of Augustus, if not of the Horatian Massic. 

1 The modern Italian opinion of farming in a fertile but un- 
healthy situation is expressed with a grim humour in the Tuscan 
[61] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

willing to spend on an agricultural operation time 
and money which he knows he cannot recoup, nor 
even if he sees a likely profit, if it must be at the risk 
of losing all by an evil climate. 

"But there are here present those who can dis- 
course on this subject with more authority than I, for 
I see C. Licinius Stolo and Cn. Tremelius Scrofa 
approaching. It was the ancestor of the first of these 
who brought in the law for the regulation of land- 
holding; for the law which forbade a Roman citizen 
to own more than 500 jugera of land was proposed 
by that Licinius who acquired the cognomen of 
Stolo on account of his diligence in cultivating his 
land: he is said to have dug around his trees so thor- 
oughly that there could not be found on his farm a 
single one of those suckers which spring up from 
the ground at the roots of trees and are called siolones. 
Of the same family was that other C. Licinius who, 
when he was tribune of the people, 365 years after 
the expulsion of the Kings, first transferred the 
Sovereign function of law making from the Comitium 
to the Forum, thus as it were constituting that area 
the 'farm' of the entire people. 1 The other whom 

proverb: "in Maremma s'arricchUce to un anno, si muore in 
sei mesi." 

1 This is Keif's ingenious interpretation of an obscure passage. 

We may compare the English designation of a church yard as 

"God's acre. What Licinius Crassus actually did was, while 

[62] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

I see come hither is Cn. Tremelius Scrofa, your 
colleague on the Committee of Twenty for the 
division of the Campanian lands, a man distinguished 
by all the virtues and considered to be the Roman 
most expert in agriculture. 1 

"And justly so," I exclaimed, "for his farms are a 
more pleasing spectacle to many on account of their 
clean cultivation than the stately palaces of others; * 

haranguing from the rostra, to turn his back upon the Comitium, 
where the Senators gathered, and address himself directly to 
the people assembled in the Forum. The act was significant aa 
indicating that the sovereignty had changed place. 

1 Tremelius Scrofa was the author of a treatise on agriculture, 
which Columella cites, but which has not otherwise survived. 

1 " It was a received opinion amongst the antients that a large, 
busy, well peopled village, situated in a country thoroughly 
cultivated, was a more magnificent sight than the palaces of 
noblemen and princes in the midst of neglected lands. Harte's 
Essays an Husbandry, p. II. This is a delightful book, the ripe 
product of a gentleman and a scholar. In the middle of the 
eighteenth century it advocated what we are still advocating— 
that agriculture, as the basis of national wealth, deserves the 
study and attention of the highest intelligence; specifically it 
proposed the introduction of new grasses and forage crops (al- 
falfa above all others) to enable the land to support more live 
stock. It was published in 1764, just after France had ceded - 
to England by the Treaty of Paris all of her possessions in 
America east of the Mississippi River; and not the least in- 
teresting passages of Harte's book are those proposing an agri- 
cultural development of the newly acquired territory between 
Lake Illinois (Michigan) and the Mississippi, which he suggests 
may be readily brought under cultivation with the aid of the 
buffaloes of the country. He shrewdly says: "Maize may be 
raised in this part of Canada to what quantity we please, for it 
[63] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

when one goes to visit his country place, one sees 
granaries and not picture galleries, as at the 'farm* 
of Lucullus. 1 Indeed," I added, "the apple market 
at the head of the Sacred Way is the very image of 
Scrofa's fruit house." 

As the new comers joined us, Stolo inquired: "Have 
we arrived after dinner is over, for we do not see 
L. Fundilius who invited us." 

"Be of good cheer," replied Agrius, "for not only 
has that egg which indicates the last lap of the chariot 
race in the games at the circus not yet been removed, 
but we have not even seen that other egg which is 

grows there naturally in great abundance." It happened, how- 
ever, that a few years later, in 1778, Col. George Rogers Clark 
of Virginia made a certain expedition through the wilderness 
to the British outpost at Vincennes, which saved England the 
trouble of taking Harte's advice, but that it has not been neg- 
lected may be evident from the fact that less than a century 
and a half later, or in 1910, the State of Illinois produced 415 
million bushels of maize, besides twice as much oats and half 
as much wheat as did old England herself in the same year of 
grace. 

Harte was the travelling governor of that young Mr. Stan- 
hope, to whom my lord Chesterfield wrote his famous worldly 
wise letters. He was the author also of a Life of Gustaous 
Adolpkus, which was a failure. Dr. Johnson, who liked Harte, 
said; "It was unlucky in coming out on the same day with 
Robertson's History of Scotland. His Husbandry, however, 
is good." (Bostoell, IV, 91). With this judgment of Dr. John- 
son there has been, and must be, general concurrence. 

1 Pliny records (H. N. XVIII, 7) that at Lucullus* farm there 
was less ground for ploughing than of floor for sweeping. 
[64] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the first course of dinner. 1 And so until the Sacris- 
tan returns and joins us do you discourse to us of the 
uses or the pleasures of agriculture, or of both. For 
now the sceptre of agriculture is in your hands, which 
formerly, they say, belonged to Stolo." 

"First of all," began Scrofa, "we must have a 
definition. Are we to be limited in discussing agri- 
culture to the planting of the land or are we to touch 
also on those other occupations which are carried on 
in the country, such as feeding sheep and cattle. For 
I have observed that those who write on agriculture, 
whether in Greek or Punic or Latin, wander widely 
from their subject." 

"I do not think that those authors should be imi- 
tated in that," said Stolo, "for I deem them to have 
done better who have confined the subject to the 
straitest limits, excluding all considerations which 
are not strictly pertinent to the subject. Wherefore 
the subject of grazing, which many writers treat as 
a part of agriculture, seems to me to belong rather 
to a treatise on live stock. That the occupations 
are different is apparent from the difference in the 
names of those we put in charge of them, for we call 
one the farmer (viliicus) and the other the herdsman 
(magister pecoris). The farmer is charged with the 

1 Eggs were the first course, as apples were the last, at a 
Roman dinner, hence the saying "ab ovo usque ad mala." 
[6 5 1 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

cultivation of the land and is so called from the villa 
or farm house to which he hauls in the crops from the 
fields and from which he hauls them away when they 
are sold. Wherefore also the peasants say vea for 
via, deriving their word for the road over which they 
haul from the name of the vehicle in which they do 
the hauling, vectura, and by the same derivation vella 
for villa, the farm house to and from which they haul. 
In like manner the trade of a carrier is called vellatura 
from the practice of driving a vectura, or cart." 

"Surely," said Fundanhis, "feeding cattle is one 
thing and agriculture is another, but they are related. 
Just as the right pipe of the tibia is different from the 
left pipe, yet are they complements because while 
the one leads, it is to carry the air, and the other 
follows, it is for the accompaniment." 

"And, to push your analogy further, it may be 
added," said I, "that the pastoral life, like the tibia 
dextra, has led and given the cue to the agricultural 
life, as we have on the authority of that learned man 
Dicxarchus who, in his Life of Greece from the earliest 
times, shows us how in the beginning men pursued 
a purely pastoral life and knew not how to plough nor 
to plant trees nor to prune them ; only later taking up 
the pursuits of agriculture; whence it may be said that 
agriculture is in harmony with the pastoral life but is 
subordinate to it, as the left pipe is to the right pipe.'* 
[66] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

"Beware," exclaimed Agnus, "of pushing your 
musical analogy too far, for you would not only rob 
the farmer of his cattle and the shepherd of his liveli- 
hood, but you would even break the law of the land 
in which it is written that a fanner may not graze a 
young orchard with that pestiferous animal which 
astrology has placed in the heavens near the Bull." 

"See here, Agnus," said Fundanius, "let there be 
no mistake about this. The law you cite applies only 
to certain designated kinds of cattle, as indeed there 
are kinds of cattle which are the foes and the bane 
of agriculture such as those you have mentioned — ■ 
the goats — for by their nibbling they ruin young 
plantations, and not the least vines and olives. But, 
because the goat is the greatest offender in this re- 
spect, we have a rule for him which works both ways, 
namely: that victims of his family are grateful offer- 
ings on the altar of one god but should never come 
near the fane of another; since by reason of the same 
hate one god is not willing even to see a goat and 
the other is pleased to see him killed. So it is that 
goats found among the vines are sacrificed to Father 
Bacchus as it were that they should pay the penalty 
of their evil doing with their lives; while on the con- 
trary nothing of the goat kind is ever sacrificed to 
Minerva, because they are said to make the olive 
sterile even by licking it, for their very spittle is 
[671 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

poison to the fruit. For this reason goats are never 
driven into the Acropolis of Athens, except once a 
year for a certain necessary sacrifice, lest the olive 
tree, which is said to have its origin there, 1 might be 
touched by a goat," 

"No kind of cattle,** said I, "are of any use to 
agriculture except those which aid in the cultivation 
of the land, as they do when they are yoked to the 
plough." 

"If this was so," said Agrasius, "how could we 
afford to take cattle off the land, since it is from our 
flocks and herds that we derive the manure which 
is of the greatest benefit to our purely agricultural 
operations." 

"On your argument of convenience," said Agrius, 
"we might claim that slave dealing was a branch of 
1 Cf. Gilbert Murray's version of Euripides' Troades, 799: 
In Salamis, filled with the foaming 
Of billows and murmur of bees, 
Old Telainon stayed from his roaming, 

Long ago, on a throne of the seas; 
Looking out on the hills olive laden, 

Enchanted, where first from the earth 
The gray-gleaming fruit of the Maiden 
Athena had birth. 

The physical reason why the olive flourished in Attica, as 
Theophrartus points out (C. P. V. II, 2), was because it craves 
a tbin soil, and that of Attica, with its out-croppings of calcare- 
ous rock, suits the olive perfectly, while fit for little else agri- 
cultural. 

[68] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

agriculture, if they were agricultural slaves which we 
dealt in. The error lies in the assumption that be- 
cause cattle are good for the land, they make crops 
grow on the land. It does not follow, for by that 
reasoning other things would become part of agricul- 
ture which have nothing to do with it: as for example 
spinsters and weavers and other craftsmen which 
you might keep on your farm." 

"Let us then agree," said Scrofa, "to exclude live 
stock from our consideration of the art of agriculture. 
Does any one want to exclude any thing else?** 

"Are we to follow the book of the two Sasemas," 
I inquired, "and discuss whether the manufacture of 
pottery is more related to agriculture than mining 
for silver or other metals? Doubtless the material 
comes out of the ground in both cases, but no one 
claims that quarrying for stone or washing sand has 
any thing to do with agriculture, so why bring in 
the potter? It is not a question of what comes out of 
the land, nor of what can be done profitably on a 
farm, for if it were it might as well be argued that 
had one a farm lying along a frequented road and a 
site on it convenient to travellers, it would be the 
farmer's business to build a cross-roads tavern. But 
surely, however profitable this might prove, it would 
not make the speculation any part of agriculture. 
It is not, I repeat, whether the business is carried on 
I69I 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

on account of the land, nor out of the land, that it 
may be classed as a part of agriculture, but only if 
froin planting the land one gains a profit." 
i "You are jealous of this great writer," interrupted 
Stolo. "Because of his unfortunate potteries you 
rebuke him captiously and give him no credit for all 
the admirable things which he says about matters 
which certainly relate to agriculture." 

At this sally, Scrofa, who knew the book and justly 
contemned it, smiled, whereupon Agrasius, who 
thought that he and Stolo alone knew the book de- 
manded of Scrofa a quotation from it. 
• "Here is his recipe for getting rid of bugs," said 
Scrofa. " ' Steep a wild cucumber in water and where- 
ever you sprinkle it the bugs will disappear,' and 
again, 'Grease your bed with ox gall mixed with 
vinegar.'" 

Fundanius looked at Scrofa. "And yet Saserna 
gives good advice even if it is in a book on agri- 
culture," he said. 

"Yes, by Hercules," said Scrofa, "and especially 
in: his recipe for removing superfluous hair, in which 
he bids you take a yellow frog and stew it down to a 
third of its size and then rub the body with what is 
left." » 

1 In the Geoponica (XIII, i j) there has been preserved a 

remedy for a similar evil, which, in all fairness, should be credited 

[7ol 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

"I would rather cite," said I, "Sascrnas' prescrip- 
tion for the malady from which Fundanius suffers, 
for his corns make wrinkles on his brow." 

"Tell me, pray, quickly," exclaimed Fundanius, 
"for I had rather learn how to root out my corns 
than how to plant beet roots." 

"I will tell you," said Stolo, "in the very words 
he wrote it, or at least as I heard Tarquenna read it: 
'When a man's feet begin to hurt he should think 
of you to enable you to cure him.'" 

"I am thinking of you," said Fundanius, "now 
cure my feet." 

"Listen to the incantation," said Stolo. 

'May the earth keep the malady, 
May good health remain here.' 

Saserna bids you chant this formula thrice nine 
times, to touch the earth, to spit and be sure that 
you do it all before breakfast." 

"You will find," said I, "many other wonderful 
secrets in Saserna, all equally foreign to agriculture, 
and so all to be left where they are. But it must be 
admitted that such digressions are found in many 
other authors. Does not the agricultural treatise of 

to Saserna. In any event, it is what the newspapers used to call 
"important, if true," viz: "If ever you come into a place where 
fleas abound, cry Ochl Och! («% Six) and they will not touch 
you." 

[7i] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the great Cato himself fairly bristle with them, as 
for instance his instructions how to make must cake 
and cheese cake, and how to cure hams?" 

"You forget," said Agnus, "his most important 
precept: 'If you wish to drink freely and dine well 
in company, you should eat five leaves of raw cabbage 
steeped in vinegar, before sitting down to the table.' " 

b. What agriculture is 

III. "And so," said Agrasius, "as we have agreed 
upon and eliminated from the discussion all those 
things which agriculture is not, it remains to discuss 
what it is. Is it an art, and, if so, what are its prin- 
ciples and its purposes?" 

Stolo turned to Scrofa and said: "You are our 
senior in age, in reputation and in experience, you 
should speak." And Scrofa, nothing loath, began 
as follows: 

"In the first place, agriculture is not only an art 
but an art which is as useful as it is important. It is 
furthermore a science, which teaches how every kind 
of land should be planted and cultivated, and how 
to know what kind of land will produce the largest 
crops for the longest time. 1 

1 The editor of an Iowa farm journal, who has been making 
a study of agricultural Europe, has recently reported an inter- 
esting comparison between the results of extensive farming as 
[72] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

The purposes of agriculture are profit and pleasure 

IV. The elements with which this science deals 
are the same as those which Ennius says are the ele- 
ments of the universe — water, earth, air and fire*. 
Before sowing your seed it behooves you to study 
these elements because they are the origin of all 
growing things. So prepared, the farmer should 
direct his efforts to two ends: profit and pleasure, 1 

practised in Iowa and intensive farming as practised in Bavaria. 
He begins with the thesis that the object of agriculture is to put 
the energy of the sun's rays into forms which animals and human 
beings can use, and, reducing the crop production of each 
country to thermal units, he finds "that for every man, woman 
and child connected with fanning in Iowa 14,200 therms of sun's 
energy were imprisoned, while for every man, woman and child 
connected with farming in Bavaria only 2,600 therms were 
stored up. In other words, the average Iowa farmer is six times 
as successful in his efforts to capture the power of the sun's rays 
as the average Bavarian farmer. On the other hand,'the average 
acre of Iowa land is only about one-seventh as successful as the 
average acre of Bavarian land in supporting those who live on 
it. If we look on land as the unit, then the Bavarians get better 
results than we in Iowa, but if we look on human labor as the 
unit, then the Iowa farmers are far ahead of those of Bavaria." 

It may be remarked that if the Iowa farmer, who gets his 
results by the use of machinery, was to adopt also the intensive 
practice of the Bavarian farmer, he would secure at once the 
greatest efficiency per acre and per man, and that is the true 
purpose of agriculture. 

1 It is one of the charms of Varro's treatise that he always 

insists cheerfully on the pleasure to be derived from the land. 

It is the same spirit which Connington has remarked cropping 

[73J 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

one solid the other agreeable: but he should give the 
preference to the pursuit of profit. 1 And yet those 
out in many place* in Virgil's Georgia — the joy of the husband- 
man in his work, as in the "iuvat of 

"iuvat Ismara Baccho 
Conaerere, atque olea magnum vestire Taburaum." 
This is the blessed "surcease of sorrow" of which the crowded 
life of the modern city knows nothing: but, as the practical 
Roman indicates, it will not support life of its own mere motion. 
Cf. Dr. Johnson s picture of Shenstone: "He began from this 
time to entangle his walks and to wind his waters: which he did 
with such judgment and such fancy as made his little domain 
the envy of the great and the admiration of the skillful. His 
house was mean, and he did not improve it: his care was of his 

f rounds. ... In time his ezpences brought clamours about 
im, that overpowered the lambs' bleat and the linnets' song; 
and his groves were haunted by beings very different from 
fawns and fairies." 
J 1 Walter of Henley, in thirteenth century England, drove home 
a shrewd comment on the country gentleman who farms with- 
out keeping accounts and thinks ne is engaged in a profit- 
able industry. "You know surely," he says, "that an acre 
sown with wheat takes three ploughings, except lands which 
are sown yearly, and that one with another each ploughing is 
worth six pence, and harrowing a penny, and on the acre it is 
necessary to sow at least two bushels. Now two bushels at 
Michaelmas are worth at least twelve pence, and weeding a 
half penny and reaping five pence, and carrying in August a 
penny: the straw will pay for the threshing. At three times your 
sowing you ought to have six bushels, worth three shillings; and 
the cost amounts to three shillings and three half pence, and 
the ground is yours and not reckoned." 

Of Walter of Henley little is known, but it is conjectured 
that he was the bailiff of the manors near Henley which be- 
longed to the Abbey of Canterbury. His curious and valuable 
Ditt dt Hosebondrif, which is as original in its way as Cato's 
[74l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

who have regard for appearances in their farming, 
as for instance by planting their orchards and olive 
yards in orderly array, often add not only to the pro- 
ductiveness of the farm but as well to its saleability, 
and so doubly increase the value of their estate. For 
of two things of equal usefulness, who would not 
prefer to buy the better looking? 

The farm which is healthiest is the most valuable, 
for there the profit is certain. On the other hand, on 
an unhealthy farm, however fertile it may be, mis- 
fortune dogs the steps of the farmer. For where the 
struggle is against Death, there not only is the profit 
uncertain, but one's very existence is constantly at 
risk: and so agriculture becomes a gamble in which 
the farmer hazards both his life and his fortune. 
And yet this risk can be diminished by forethought, 
for, when health depends upon climate, we can do 
much to control nature and by diligence improve 
evil conditions. If the farm is unhealthy by reason 
of the plight of the land itself, or of the water supply, 
or is exposed to the miasma which breeds in some 
localities, or if the farm is too hot on account of the 
climate, or is exposed to mischievous winds, these 
discomforts can be mitigated by one who knows what 
treatise, being entirely free from mere literary tradition, is now 
available to the modem reader in a translation, from the orig- 
inal barbarous English law French, by Elizabeth Lamond, 
made for the Royal Historical Society in iSoo. 
[751 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

to do and is willing to spend some money. What is 
of the greatest importance in this respect is the situa- 
tion of the farm buildings, their plan and convenience, 
and what is the aspect of their doors and gates and 
windows. During the great plague, Hippocrates the 
physician saved not merely one farm but many cities 
because he knew this. But why should I summon 
him as a witness : for when the army and the fleet lay 
at Corcyra ' and all the houses were crowded with 
the sick and dying, did not our Varro here contrive 
to open new windows to the healthy North wind and 
close those which gave entrance to the infected 
breezes of the South, to change doors and to do other 
such things, and so succeed in restoring his comrades 
safe and sound to their native land? 

The fourfold division of the study of agriculture 

V. I have rehearsed the elements and the purposes 
of agriculture, it now remains to consider in how many 
divisions this science is to be studied." 

"I have supposed these to be without number," 
said Agrius, "when I have read the many books 
which Theophrastus wrote on The History of Plants 
and The Causes of Vegetation. 

1 This was just before Phanalia, and the array was that of 
Pompey which Varro had joined after surrendering to Caesar 
in Spain. 

[76] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

"These books," said Stolo, "have always seemed to 
me to be fitter for use in the schools of the philosophers 
than in the hands of a practical farmer. I do not 
mean to say that they do not contain many things 
which are both useful and practical. However that 
may be, do you rather explain to us the divisions in 
which agriculture should be studied." 

"There are four chapters for the study of agricul- 
ture, of the highest practical importance," resumed 
Scrofa, "namely: 

i° What are the physical characteristics of the land 
to be cultivated, including the constitution of the 
soil; 

2° What labour and equipment are necessary for 
such cultivation; 

3° What system of farming is to be practised; 

4° What are the seasons at which the several farm- 
ing operations are to be carried out. 

Each of these four chapters may be divided in 
at least two subdivisions : 

The first into (a) a study of the soil, and (b) a 
survey of the buildings and stabling. 

The second into an enquiry as to (c), the men who 
will carry on the farming operations, and (d) the 
implements they will require. 

The third into (e) the kind of work to be planned, 
and (/) where that work is to be done. 
[771 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

The fourth into what relates (g) to the annual 
revolution of the sun, and (A) the monthly revolution 
of the moon. 

I will speak of the four principal parts first, and 
then in detail of the eight subdivisions 



I" CONCERNING THE FARM ITSELF 

How conformation of the land affects agriculture 

VI. Four things must be considered in respect of 
the physical characteristics of the farm: its conforma- 
tion, the quality of the soil, its extent, and whether 
it is naturally protected. The conformation is either 
natural, or artificial as the result of cultivation, and 
may be good or bad in either case. I"wifi speak first 
of natural conformation, of which there are three 
kinds: plain, hill and mountain — although there is a 
fourth kind made up of a combination of any two or 
all three of those mentioned, as may be seen in many 
places. A different system of cultivation is required 
for each of these three kinds of farms, for without 
doubt that which is suited for the hot plain would 
not suit the windy mountain, while a hill farm en- 
joys a more temperate climate than either of the 
other two kinds and so demands its own system of 
cultivation. These distinctions are most apparent 
[78] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

when the several characteristic conformations are of 
large extent, as for example the heat and the humidity 
are greater in a broad plain, like that of Apulia, 
while on a mountain like Vesuvius the climate is 
usually fresher and so more healthy. Those who 
cultivate the lowlands feel the effects of their climate 
most in summer, but they are able to do their planting 
earlier in the spring, while those who dwell in the 
mountains suffer most from their climate in winter, 
and both sow and reap at later seasons. Frequently 
the winter is more propitious to those who dwell in 
the plains because then the pastures are fresh there 
and the trees may be pruned more readily. On the 
other hand the summer is more kindly in the moun- 
tains for then the upland grass is rich when the pas- 
tures of the plains are burnt, and it is more com- 
fortable to cultivate the trees in a keen air. 

A lowland farm is best when it is gently sloping 
rather than absolutely flat, because on a flat farm 
water cannot run off and so forms swampy places. 
But it is a disadvantage to have the surface too roll- 
ing because that causes the water to collect and form 
ponds. 

Certain trees, like the fir and the pine, flourish 

most in the mountains on account of the eager air, 

while in this region where it is more temperate the 

poplars and the willows thrive best. Again the arbute 

179] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and the oak prefer the more fertile lands, while the 
almond and the fig trees love the lowlands. 1 The 
growth on the low hills takes on more of the character 
of the plains, on the high hills that of the mountains. 
For these reasons the kind of crops to be planted 
must be suited to the physical characteristics of the 

1 la this enumeration of trees Varro does not include the 
chestnut which is now one of the features of the Italian moun- 
tain landscape and furnishes support for a considerable part of 
the Italian population, who subsist on need, those indigestible 
chestnut flour cakes, just as the Irish peasants do on potatoes. 
The chestnut was late in getting a foothold in Italy but it was 
there in Varro's day. He mentions the nuts as part of the diet 
of dormice (III, 15). 

By the thirteenth century chestnuts had become an estab- 
lished article of human food in Italy. Pietro Creacenzi (1230- 
1307) describes two varieties, the cultivated and the wild, and 
quoteB the Arabian physician Avicenna to the effect that chest- 
nuts are "di tarda digestione ma di buono nuttimento." It is 
perhaps for this very reason that chestnut bread is acceptable 
to those engaged in heavy labor. Fynes Moryson says in his 
Itinerary (1617) that maslin bread made of a mixture of rye 
and wheat flour was used by labourers in England because it 
"abode longer in the stomach and was not so soon digested with 
their labour." 

Crescenzi, who was a lawyer and a judge, says in his preface 
that he had left his native Bologna because of the civil strifes, 
bad taken foreign service in several parts of Italy, and so had 
opportunity to Bee the world. He wrote his book on agriculture 
because, as he says, of all the things he learned on his travels 
there was nothing "piu a bondevole, niuna piu dolce, et niuna 
piu degna de l'huomo libero," a sentiment which Socrates had 
expressed sixteen hundred years earlier and which was echoed 
six hundred years later by another far-sighted Italian, the states- 
man Cavour. 

[80] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

farm, as grain for the plains, vines for the hills and 
forests for the mountains. 

All these considerations should be weighed sepa- 
rately with reference to each of the three kinds of con- 
formation." 

VII. "It seems to me," said Stolo, "that, so far, 
as concerns the natural situation of a farm, Cato's 
opinion is just. He wrote, you will recall, that the 
best farm was one which lay at the foot of a moun- 
tain looking to the South." 

Scrofa resumed: "So far as concerns the laying 
out of the farm, I maintain that the more appear- 
ances are considered the greater will be the profit, as, 
for instance, orchards should be planted in straight 
lines arranged in quincunxes and at a reasonable 
distance apart. It is a fact that, because of their 
unintelligent plan of planting, our ancestors made 
less wine and corn to the acre than we do. The 
point is that if each plant is set with due reference to 
the others they occupy less land and are less likely 
to screen from one another the influence of the sun 
and the moon and the air. This may be illustrated 
by an experiment: you can press a parcel of nuts with 
their shells on into a measure having only two thirds 
of the capacity of what is required to contain them 
after they have been cracked, because the shells 
keep them naturally compacted. When trees are 
[81] 



byGoogle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

planted in rows the sun and the moon have access 
to them equally from all sides, with the result that 
more raisins and olives are developed and then ma- 
ture more quickly, a double result with the double 
consequence of a larger crop of must and oil and a 
greater profit. 

How character of soil affects agriculture 
We will now take up the second consideration in 
respect of the physical characteristics of a farm, 
namely: the quality of the soil, which partly, if not 
entirely, determines whether it is considered a good 
or a bad farm: for on this depends what crops can be 
planted and harvested and how they should be cul- 
tivated, as it is not possible to plant everything suc- 
cessfully on the same soil. For one soil is suitable 
for vines, another for corn, and others for other things. 
In the island of Crete, near Cortynia, there is said 
to be a plane tree which does not lose its leaves even 
in winter — a phenomenon due doubtless to the quality 
of the soil. There is another of the same kind in 
Cyprus, according to Theophrastus. Likewise within 
sight of the city of Sybaris (which is now called 
Thurii) stands an oak having the same characteristic. 
Agaiif at Elephantine neither the vines nor the fig 
trees lose their leaves, something that never hap- 
pens with us. For the same reason many trees bear 
[82] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

fruit twice a year, as do the vines near the sea at 

Smyrna, and the apples in the fields of Consentinium. 
The effect of soil appears also from the fact that 
those plants which bear most profusely in wild places 
produce better fruit under cultivation. The same 
explanation applies to those plants which cannot 
live except in a marshy place, or indeed in the very 
water: they are even nice about the kind of water, 
some grow in ponds like the reeds at Reate, others in 
streams like the alders in Epirus, some even in the 
sea like the palms and the squills of which Theophras- 
tus writes. When I was in the army, I saw in Transal- 
pine Gaul, near the Rhine, lands where neither the 
vine, nor the olive, nor the pear tree grew, where they 
manured their fields with a white chalk which they 
dug out of the ground: 1 where they had no salt, 

1 The white chalk which Scrofa saw used as manure in Trans- 
alpine Gaul, when he was serving in the army under Julius 
Caesar, was undoubtedly marl, the use of which in that region 
as in Britain was subsequently noted by Pliny (H. N. XVII, 4). 

There were no deposits of marl in Italy, and so the Romans 
knew nothing of its use, from experience, but Pliny's treatment 
of the subject shows a sound source of information. In England, 
where several kinds of marl are found in quantities, its use was 
probably never discontinued after the Roman rimes. Walter 
of Henley discusses its use in the thirteenth century, and Sir 
Anthony Fitzherbert continues the discussion in the sixteenth 
century. In connection with the history of the use of marl in 
agriculture may be cited the tender tribute which Arthur Young 
recorded on the tombstone of his wife in Bradfield Church. The 
lady's chief virtue appears to have been, in the memory of her 
[83] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

either mineral or marine, but used in place of it the 
salty- ashes obtained from burning a certain kind of 
wood." 

Stolo here interrupted. "You will recall," he said, 
"that Cato in comparing the different kinds of soil, 
ranked them by their merit in nine classes according 
to what they would produce, of which the first was 
that on which the vine would grow a plentiful sup- 
ply of good wine; the second that fit for an irrigated 
garden; the third for an osier bed; the fourth for an 
olive yard; the fifth for a meadow; the sixth for a corn 
field; the seventh for a wood lot; the eighth for a 
cultivated orchard, and the ninth for a mast grove." 

"I know he wrote that," replied Scrofa, "but every 
one does not agree with him. There are some who 
put a good pasture first, and I am among them. 

husband, that she was "the great-grand-daughter of John Allen, 
esq. of Lyng House in the County of Norfolk, the first person 
according to the Comte de BoulainvUliers, who there used 
marl." 

The Romans did not have the fight against sour land which 
is the heritage of the modern farmer after years of continuous 
application to his land of phosphoric and sulphuric acid in the 
form of mineral fertilizers. What sour land the Romans had 
they corrected with humus making barnyard manure, or the 
rich compost which Cato and Columella recommend. They 
had, however, a test for sourness of land which is still prac- 
tised even where the convenient litmus paper is available. Virgil 
(Georgic II, 241) gives the formula: "Fill a basket with soil, and 
strain fresh water through it. The taste of water strained 
through sour soil will twist awry the taster's face." 
[84] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Our ancestors were wont to call them not prata, as 
we do, but parata (because they are always ready for 
use). The aedile Caesar Vopicus, in pleading a cause 
before the Censors, once said that the prairie of 
Rosea was the nurse of Italy, because if one left his 
surveying instruments there on the ground over night 
they were lost next day in the growth of the grass. 1 

(A digression on the maintenance of vineyards) 
VIII. There be those who assert that the cost of 
maintaining a vineyard eats up the profit. What 

1 This sounds like the boast of the modern proprietor of an 
old blue grass sod in Northern Virginia or Kentucky. On the 
general question of pasture vs. arable land, cf. Hartlib's Lega- 
cit: "It is a misfortune that pasture lands are not more im- 
proved. England abounds in pasturage more than any other 
country, and is, therefore, richer. In France, acre for acre, the 
land is not comparable to ours: and, therefore, Fortescue, chan- 
cellor to Henry VI, observes that we get more in England by 
standing still (alluding to our meadows) than the French do by 
working (that is, cultivating their vineyards and corn lands)." 

We may permit Montesquieu {Esprit dts Lois II, 23, 14) to 
voice the French side of this question. "Les pais de paturage 
sont peu peuples. Les terres a bled occupent plus d'hommes et 
les vtgnobles infiniment d'avantage. En Angleterre on s'est 
souvent plaint que l'augmentation des paturage diminuoit les 
habitant* 

In the introduction to his Book Two {post, p. 179) Varro 
states the sound conclusion, that the two kinds of husbandry 
should be combined on the same land. Sir Anthony Fitz- 
herbert knew this: "An housbande can not well thryue by his 
come without he haue other cattell, nor by his cattell without 
come. For els he shall be a byer, a borrower or a beggar." 
[85I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

kind of vineyard? I ask. For there are several: 
in one the vines grow on the ground without props, 
as in Spain; in another, which is the kind common 
in Italy, the vines climb and are trained either 
separately on props or one with another on a trellis, 
which last is what is called marrying the vine. There 
are four kinds of trellis in use — made out of poles, 
of reeds, of ropes and of vines themselves, which 
are in use respectively in Falerum, in Arpinum, in 
Brundisium and in Mediolanum. There are two 
methods of training the vine on trellises, one upright, 
as is done in the country of Canusium; the other 
crossed and interwoven, as is the practice generally 
throughout Italy. If one obtains the material for 
his trellises from his own land, the expense of main- 
taining that kind of vineyard is negligible, nor is it 
burdensome if the material is procured from the 
neighbourhood. Such trellis material, as has been 
described, can be grown at home by planting willows, 
reeds and rushes, or some thing of that kind; but if 
you propose to rely on the vines to form their own 
trellis, then you must plant an arbustum where the 
vines can be trained on trees, such as maples, which 
the inhabitants of Mediolanum use for that purpose; 
or fig trees, on which the people of Canusium train 
their vines. Likewise there are four kinds of props 
used for the cultivation of unwedded vines; first, 
(861 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the planted post, which is called ridicum and is best 
when fashioned out of oak or juniper; second, poles 
cut in the swamp, and the more seasoned they are 
the longer they will last, but it is the practice to reset 
them upside down when they rot out in the ground; 
third, for lack of some thing better, a bundle of reeds 
tied together and thrust into a pointed tube of baked 
clay, which is then planted in the ground and serves 
to preserve the reeds from water rot; the fourth is 
what may be called the natural prop, when vines are 
swung from tree to tree. Vines should be trained to 
the height of a man and the interval between the 
props should be sufficient to give room for a yoke of 
' oxen to plough. The least expensive kind of a vine* 
yard is that which brings wine to the jug without the 
aid of any sort of prop. There are two of this kind, 
one in which the earth serves as a bed for the grapes, 
as in many places in Asia, and where usually the 
foxes share the crop with man; * or, if mice appear, 
it is they who make the vintage, unless you put a 
mouse trap in every vine, as they do on the island of 
1 This is the explanation of why JEsop's fox found the grapes 
to be sour which grew on a trellis, for he had expected to find 
them of easy access on the .ground. JEeop was a Phrygian, .and, 
while Bentley has proved that JEaop never wrote the existing 
fables which go by that name, yet it is recognized that they are 
of Oriental origin and it is evident that that of the Fox and the 
Grapes came out of Asia, where, as Varro says, the grapes were 
usually allowed to grow on the ground. 
[871 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Pandataria. The other kind of vineyard, is that 
where each shoot which promises to bear grapes is 
lifted from the earth and supported about two feet 
off the ground by a forked stick: by this means the 
grapes, as they form, learn to hang as it were from a 
branch and do not have to be taught after the vintage ; 
they are held in place with a bit of cord or by that 
kind of tie which the ancients called a cestui. As soon 
as the farmer sees the vintagers turn their backs he 
carries these props under cover for the winter so that 
he may use them another year without expense for 
that account. In Italy the people of Reate practise 
this custom. 

Thus there are as many methods of cultivating 
the vine as there are kinds of soil. For where the 
land is wet the vine must be trained high because 
when wine is being made and matured on the vine, 
it needs sun, not water — as when it is in the cup! 
For this reason it was, I think, that first the vine 
was made to grow on trees. 

Of the different kinds of soil 
IX. It is expedient then, as I was saying, to study 
each kind of soil to determine for what it is, and for 
what it is not, suitable. The word terra is used in 
three senses: general, particular and mixed. It is a 
general designation when we speak of the orb of the 
{88] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

earth, the land of Italy or any other country. In 
this designation is included rock and sand and other 
such things. In the second place, terra is referred to 
particularly when it is spoken of without qualifica- 
tion or epithet. In the third place, which is the 
mixed sense, when one speaks of terra as soil — that 
in which seeds are sown and developed; as for ex- 
ample, clay soil or rocky soil or others. In this sense 
there are as many kinds of earth as there are when 
one speaks of it in the general sense, on account of 
the mixtures of substances in it in varying quantities 
which make it of different heart and strength, such 
as rock, marble, sand, loam, clay, red ochre, dust, 
chalk, gravel, carbuncle (which is a condition of soil 
formed by the burning of roots in the intense heat 
of the sun) ; from which each kind of soil is called by 
a particular name, in accordance with the substances 
of which it is composed, as a chalky soil, a gravelly 
soil, or what ever else may be its distinguishing qual- 
ity. And as there are different varieties of soil so 
each variety may be subdivided according to its 
quality, as, for example, a rocky soil is either very 
rocky, moderately rocky or hardly rocky at all. So 
three grades may be made of other mixed soils. In 
turn each of these three grades has three qualities: 
some are very wet, some very dry, some moderate. 
These distinctions are of the greatest importance 
[89] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

in respect of the crops, for the skilled husbandman 
plants spelt rather than wheat in wet land, and on 
dry land barley rather than spelt, in medium land 
both. Furthermore there are still more subtle dis- 
tinctions to be made in respect of all these kinds of 
soil, as for example it must be considered in respect 
of loam, whether it is white loam or red loam, because 
white loam is unfit for nursery beds, while red loam 
is what they require. But the three great distinc- 
tions of quality of soil are whether it is lean or fat, 
or medium. Fat soils are apparent from the heavy 
growth of their vegetation, and the lean He bare; as 
witness the territory of Pupinia (in Latium), where 
all the foliage is meagre and the vines look starved, 
where the scant straw never stools, nor the fig tree 
blooms, while for the most part the trees are as cov- 
ered with moss as are the arid pastures. On the 
other hand, a rich soil like that of Etruria reveals 
itself heavy with grain and forage crops and its 
umbrageous trees are clean of moss. Soil of medium 
strength, like that near Tibur, which one might 
say is rather hungry than starved, repays cultiva- 
tion in proportion as it takes on the quality of rich 
land." 

"Diophanes of Bithynia," said Stolo, "was very 
much to the point when he wrote that the best indi- 
cation of the suitability of soil for cultivation can be 
I90] 

Oatizedb, 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

had either from the soil itself or from what grows 
in it: so one should ascertain whether it is white or 
black, if it is light and friable when it is dug, whether 
its consistency is ashy, or too heavy: or it can be 
tested by evidence that the wild growth upon it is 
heavy and fruitful after its kind. 1 

But proceed and tell us of your third division, which 
relates to the measurement and laying out of the 
farm." 

1 One is tempted to include here Pliny's observations upon 
the tests of good soil if only for the sake of his description of one 
of the sweetest sensations of the fanner every where, the aroma 
of new ploughed fertile land: — 

"Those unguents which have a taste of earth are better," 
says Cicero, "than those which smack of saffron," it seeming to 
him more to the purpose to express himself by the word taste 
than smell. "And such is the fact no doubt, that soil is the best 
which has the savour of a perfume. If the question should be 
put to us, what is this odour of the earth that is held in such 
estimation; our answer is that it is the same that is often to be 
recognized at the moment of sunset without the necessity even 
of turning up the ground, at the spots where the extremities of 
the rainbow have been observed to meet the earth: as also, when 
after long continued drought, the rain has soaked the ground. 
Then it is that the earth exhales the divine odour that is so 
peculiarly its own, and to which, imparted to it by the sun, 
there is no perfume however sweet that can possibly be com- 
pared. It is this odour which the earth, when turned up, ought 
to emit, and which, when once found, can never deceive any 
person: and this will be found the best criterion for judging 
of the quality of the soil. Such, too, is the odour that is usually 
perceived in land newly cleared when an ancient forest has been 
just cut down; its excellence is a thing that is universally ad- 
mitted. 

(91] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of the units of area used in measuring land 

X. Scrofa resumed: "Every country has its own 
system for measuring land. In Further Spain the 
unit of area is the jugum, in Campania the versus^ 
here in the Roman country and among the Latins 
it is the jugerum. They call a jugum the area which 
a pair of oxen can plough in a day. The versus is one 
hundred feet square: the jugerum is the area contain- 
ing two square actus: the actus quadratus or acnua, 
as it is called by the Latins, measuring 120 feet in 
width and as much m length. 1 The smallest fraction 
of a jugerum is called a scripulum and is ten feet 
square. From this base the surveyors some times 
call the butts of land which exceed a jugerum uncia 
(twelfths) or sextantes (seventy seconds) or some other 
such duodecimal division, for the jugerum contains 
288 scripula, like the ancient pound weight which 
was in use before the Punic wars. Two jugera, which 
Romulus first made the headlight and which thus 
became the unit of inheritance, are called an hare- 

1 The actus was the head land or as much land as a yoke of 
oxen could plough at a single spell without stopping, and meas- 
ured 120 feet in length ana four feet in width. Cf. Pliny, H. N. 
XVIII, 3. Hence the square of the head land became the basis 
of the Roman land measure. With the derivation of the actus 
may be compared that of the English furlong (furrow-long) and 
the French arptnt (literally, head land). 
[9*1 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

dium: l later one hundred hseredia were called a 
centuria, which is 2,400 unciee square. Four centuriae 
adjoining, so that there are two on each side, are 
called a saltus in the distribution of the public lands. 

Of the considerations on building a steading 
a. Size 

XL As the result of faulty surveys of the farm it 
often happens that the steading is constructed either 
too small or too large for the farm, a mistake which in 
either case is of prejudice both to the property and 
its revenue. If one builds too large or too many 
buildings he is eaten up by the expense of mainte- 
nance, while if one builds less than the farm requires 
the harvest is lost, for there is no doubt that the larg- 
est wine cellar must be provided for that farm on 
which the vintages are largest, or granary, if it is a 
grain farm. 

b. Water supply 

If possible, the steading should be so built that it 
shall have water within the walls, or certainly near 
at hand: it is preferable that this should be derived 
from a spring, or, if not, then from an unfailing 

1 On the socialistic principle of Strepsiades in Aristophanes' 
Clouds that the use of geometry is to divide the land into equal 
parts. 

[93 1 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

stream. If no running water is available a cistern 
should be constructed within doors, and a pond in 
the open, the one for the use of the men, the other for 
the use of the cattle. 

c. Location, with regard to health 
XII. When you plan to build, try your best to 
locate the steading at the foot of a wooded hill where 
the pastures are rich, and turn it so as to catch the 
healthiest prevailing breeze. The best situation is 
facing the east so to secure shade in summer and sun 
in winter. But if you must build on the bank of a 
river, take care that you do not let the steading face 
the river, for it will be very cold in winter and un- 
healthy in summer. Like precautions must be taken 
against swampy places for the same reasons and par- 
ticularly because as they dry, swamps breed certain 
animalcule which cannot be seen with the eyes and 
which we breathe through the nose and mouth into 
the body where they cause grave maladies." ■ 

1 As it is difficult to appreciate that the Roman Campagna 
was formerly populous with villas, when one contemplates its 
green solitudes today, so when one faces the dread malaria which 
there breeds, one wonders how the Romans of the Republic 
maintained so long their hardy constitutions. It is now agreed 
that there was no malaria in the Land of Saturn so long as the 
volcanos in the Alban hills were active, because their gases 
purified the air and kept down the mosquitoes, and geology tells 
us that Monte Pila was in eruption for two or three centuries 
[94] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

"But," said Fundanius, "suppose I inherited a 
farm like that, what should I do to avoid the malady 
you describe?" 

"The answer to that question is easy," said Agnus. 
"You should sell the farm for what you can get for it: 
and if you can't sell it, give it away." 

Scrofa resumed: "Take care to avoid having the 
steading face the direction from which disagreeable 
winds blow, yet you should not build in a hollow. 
High ground is the best location for a steading: for 
by ventilation all noxious gases are dissipated, and 
the steading is healthier if exposed to the sun all day: 
with the further advantage that any insects which 
may be bred in or brought upon the premises are 
either blown away or quickly perish where there is 
no damp. Sudden rains and overflowed streams are 

after the foundation of Rome. By the beginning of the second 
century B. C. the fever seems to have become endemic. Plautus 
and Terence both mention it and Cato (CLVII) describes its 
symptoms unmistakably. In his book on the effect of malaria 
in history, W. H. Jones expresses the opinion that the milady 
was brought into Italy from Africa by Hannibal's soldiers, but 
it is more probable that it was always there. See the discussion 
in Lanciani's Wanderings in the Roman Campagna. In Varro's 
time the Roman fever had begun to sap the vitality of the 
Roman people, and the "animalia minuta" in this passage sug- 
gests that Van© had a curious appreciation of what we call the 
modem science of the subject. Columella (I, 5, 6) indeed 
specifically mentions mosquitoes (infestis aculeis armata aui- 
malia) as one of the risks incident to living near a swamp. 
[951 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

dangerous to those who have their steadings in low 
or hollow places, and they are more at the hazard of 
the ruthless hand of the robber because he is able to 
take advantage of those who are unprepared. Against 
either of these risks the higher places are safer. 

d. Arrangement 
XIII. In arranging the steading, see that the cattle 
are put where they will be warm in winter. Such 
crops as wine and oil should be housed below ground 
in cellars, or rather in jars placed in such cellars, 
while dry crops like beans, and hay, are best stored on 
high board floors. A rest room should be provided 
for the comfort of the hands where they can gather 
after the day's work or for protection from cold or 
heat and there recruit themselves in quiet. The room 
of the overseer should be near the entrance to the 
farm house so that he may know who comes in and 
who goes out during the night, and what they bring 
in or out, especially if there is no gate-keeper. The 
kitchen also should be near the overseer's room be- 
cause there in winter is great activity before day- 
light when food is being prepared and eaten. Good 
sized sheds should be built in the barn yard for the 
wagons and other implements which might be dam- 
aged by the rain. For while they may be kept safe 
from the thief within the gates, yet if they are exposed 
(961 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

to the weather they will be lost nevertheless. It is 
better to have two barn yards for a large farm. The 
inner court should contain a cistern like a little fish 
pond into which the drainage from the eaves may 
collect: as here the cattle and swine and geese can 
drink and bathe in summer when they are driven in 
from work or pasture. In the outer court there 
should be another pond where you can handle lupines 
and such other things as must be soaked In water. 
This exterior court yard should be strewn thick with 
straw and chaff, which, by being trampled under 
the feet of the cattle, becomes the handmaid of the 
farm by reason of the service it renders when it is 
hauled out. Every farm should have two manure 
pits, or one divided into two parts; into one division 
should be put the new manure from the barn, in the 
other the old manure which is ready for use on the 
farm: for new manure is not as good as that which 
is well rotted. 1 The manure pit is more serviceable 

1 Id the thirteenth century Ibn-al-Awam, a learned Moor, 
wrote at Seville his Kitab al-felahak, or Book of Agriculture, 
which has preserved for us not only the wisdom of the Moorish 
practice in agriculture and gardening which made Spain an 
enchanted paradise, but also the tradition of the Arab* in such 
matters, purporting to go back, through the Nabataeans to the 
Chaldaean books, which recorded the agricultural methods that 
obtained "by the waters of Babylon. Ibn-al-Awam's book 
has, therefore, a double interest for us, and we are fortunate in 
having it available in an admirable French translation from the 
Arabic by J. J. Clement-Mullet (Paris, Librairie A. Franck, 
[97] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

when its sides and top are protected from the sun by 
leaves and branches, for the sun draws out from the 
manure those elements which the land requires; for 
this reason experienced farmers sprinkle water on their 
manure pits, and so largely preserve its quality: here 
too some establish the privies for the slaves. One 
should build a barracks (what we call a nubilarium 
because it affords protection from the weather) and 
it should be large enough to contain under its roof 
the entire crop of the farm: this should be placed 
near the threshing floor and left open only on the 
side of the threshing floor, so that while threshing 
you may conveniently throw out the corn and if it 
begins to cloud up then quickly throw it back again 
under shelter. There should be windows in this 
barracks on the side most fitted for ventilation." 

"A farm would be more of a farm," said Fundanius, 
"if the buildings were constructed with reference to 

1864). Not the least profitable chapters in this book are those 
devoted to the preparation of manure in composts, to be ripened 
in pits as Varro advises in the text. They show a thoroughness, 
a care and an art in the mixing of the various animal dungs, 
with straw, woodsearth and cinders, which few modern gar- 
deners could equal. German scholarship has questioned the 
Chaldaean origin of the authorities quoted, but there is internal 
evidence which smacks of an oriental despotism that might well 
be Babylonian. In a recipe for a rich compost suitable for 
small garden plants, we are advised (I, 2, I, p. 95), without a 
quiver, to mix in blood — that of the camel or the sheep if 
necessary — but human blood is to be preferred! 
[98] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the diligence of our ancestors rather than the luxury 
of their descendants. For they built for use, while 
we build to gratify an unbridled luxury. Their barns 
were bigger than their houses, but the contrary is 
often the case today. Then a house was praised if 
it had a good kitchen, roomy stables and a cellar for 
wine and oil fitted, according to the custom of the 
country, with a floor draining into a reservoir, into 
which the wine can flow when, as often happens after 
the new wine has been laid by, the fermentation of the 
must bursts both Spanish butts and our own Italian 
tuns. In like manner our ancestors equipped a coun- 
try house with whatever other things were necessary 
to agriculture, but now on the contrary it is the effort 
to make such a house as vast and as elegant as pos- 
sible, and we vie with those palaces which men like 
Metellus and Lucullus have built, to the detriment 
of the very state itself: in them the effort is to con- 
trive summer dining rooms fronting the cool east, 
and those designed for use in winter facing the west- 
ern sun, rather than, as the ancients did, to adjust 
their windows with regard chiefly to the cellars, since 
wine in casks keeps best when it is cool, while oil 
craves warmth. For this reason also it would seem 
that the best place to put a house is on a hill, if noth- 
ing obstructs it." 

[99l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of the protection of farm boundaries 
a. Fences 
XIV. "Now," resumed Scrofa, "I will speak of 
fences, which are constructed for the protection of the 
farm or for dividing the fields. There are four kinds 
of such barriers: natural, dead wood, military and ma- 
sonry. The first is the natural fence of live hedge, 
consisting of planted shrubs or thorns, and, as it has 
roots, runs no risk from the flaming torch of the pass- 
ing traveller who may be inclined to mischief. The 
second kind is built of the wood of the country, but 
is not alive. It is made either of palings placed close 
together and wattled with twigs, or posts placed at 
some distance apart and pierced to receive the ends 
of rails, which are generally built two or three to the 
panel, or else of trunks of trees laid on the ground 
and joined in line. The third, or military fence, 
consists of a ditch and a mound: but such a ditch 
should be so constructed to collect all the rain water, 
or it should be graded to drain the surface water off 
the farm. The mound is best when constructed close 
adjoining the ditch, or else it should be steep so that 
it will be difficult to scale. It is customary to con- 
struct this kind of fence along the public roads or 
along streams. In the district of Crustumeria one 
can see in many places along the via Salaria ditches 

[100] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and mounds constructed as dikes against damage 
by the river (Tiber). 1 Mounds are some times built 
without ditches and are called walls, as in the country 
around Reate. The fourth and last kind of fence is 
of built up masonry. There are usually four varie- 
ties: those of cut stone, as in the country around 
Tusculum; those of burned brick, as in Gaul; those of 
unburncd brick as in the Sabine country; those of 
gravel concrete, 1 as in Spain and about Tarentum. 

1 What Varro describes as the military fence of ditch and 
bank was doubtless the typical Herefordshire fence of modern 
England which Arthur Young, ia The Farmer? Letters, recom- 
mends so highly as at once most effective and moet economical. 
The bank is topped with a plashed hedge of white thorn in 
which sallow, ash, hazel and beech are planted for "firing." 
The fencing practice of the American farmer has followed the 
line of least resistance and is founded on the lowest first cost: 
the original "snake" fences of split rails, upon the making of 
which a fonder generation of pioneer American boys qualified 
themselves for Presidential campaigns, being followed by woven 
wire "made by a trust" and not the most enduring achieve- 
ment of Big Business. The practical farmer, as well as the 
lover of rural scenery, has cause for regret that American agri- 
cultural practice has not yet had the patience to enclose the 
land within live hedges and ditches. 

*The kind offence which Varro here describes as "ex terra 
et lapillis compositis in formis " is also described by Pliny (H. N. 
XXXV, 169), as formaceos or moulded, and he adds, "levis 
durant. It would thus clearly appear to have been of gravel 
concrete, the use of which the manufacturers of cement are 
now telling us, is the badge of the modern progressive farmer. 
Cato (XXXVIII) told how to bum lime on the farm, and these 
concrete fences were, of course, formed with lime as the matrix. 
{101] 



1 by Google 



ROMANFA&M MANAGEMENT 

b. Monuments 
.XV. Lacking fences, the more discreet establish 
the boundaries of their property, or of their sowings, 
by blazed trees, and so prevent neighbourhood quar- 
rels and lawing about corners. Some plant pines 
around their boundaries, as my wife did on her 
Sabine farm, or cypresses, as I have on my property 
on Vesuvius. 1 Others plant elms, as many have done 
in the district of Crustumeria: indeed, for planting 
ih plains where it flourishes there is no tree which 
can be set out with such satisfaction or with more 
profit than the elm, for it supports the vine and so 
fills many a basket with grapes, yields its leaves to 
be a most agreeable forage for flocks and herds, and 

When only a few years ago, Portland cement was first pro- 
duced in America at a cost and in a quantity to stimulate the 
development of concrete construction, engineers began with 
rough Woken stone and Band as the constituents of what they 
call the aggregate, but some one soon " discovered " that the use 
of smooth natural gravel made more compact concrete and 
" gravel concrete" became the last word in engineering. practice. 
But it was older even than Varro. A Chicago business man 
visiting Mycense picked up and brought home a bit of rubbish 
from Schliemann s excavations of the ancient masonry: lying 
on his office desk it attracted the attention of an engineering 
friend who exclaimed, "That is one of the best samples of the 
new gravel concrete I have seen. Did it come out of the Illi- 
nois tunnel?" "No," replied the returned traveller, "it came 
out of the tomb of Agamemnon!" 

' Varro here seems to forget the unities. He speaks in his 
own person, when Scrota has the floor. 
[102I 

Dig (zed by G00gk 






ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

supplies rails for fences and wood for hearth and 
oven. 

And now," said Scrofa, "I have expounded my four 
points upon the physical characteristics of a farm, 
which were, its conformation, the quality of the soil, its 
extent and layout, its boundaries and their protection. 

Of the considerations of neighbourhood 
XVI. It remains to discuss the conditions outside 
the farm itself, for the character of the neighbour- 
hood is of the utmost importance to agriculture on 
account of the necessary relations with it. There 
are four considerations in this respect also, namely: 
whether the neighbourhood bears a bad reputation; 
whether it affords a market to which our products 
can be taken and whence we can bring back what 
we may require at home; whether there is a road 
or a river leading to that market, and, if so, whether 
it is fit for use; and fourth whether there is in our 
immediate vicinity any thing which may be to our 
advantage or disadvantage. Of these four considera- 
sions the most important is whether the neighbour- 
hood bears a bad reputation : for there are many farms 
which are fit for cultivation but not expedient to 
undertake on account of the brigandage in the neigh- 
bourhood, as in Sardinia those farms which adjoin 
CEIium, and in Spain those on the borders of Lusitania. 
[103J 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

On the second point those farms are the most 
profitable which have opportunities in the vicinity 
for marketing what they raise and buying what they 
must consume: for there are many farms which must 
buy corn or wine or what ever else they lack, and not 
a few which have a surplus of these commodities for 
sale. So in the suburbs of a city it is fitting to cul- 
tivate gardens on a large scale, and to grow violets 
and rosea and many other such things which a city 
consumes, while it: would be folly to undertake this 
on a distant farm with no facilities for reaching the 
market. So, again, if there is nearby a town or a 
village or even the well furnished estate of a rich man 
where you can buy cheap what you require on the 
farm, and where you can trade your surplus of such 
things as props and poles and reeds, your farm will 
be more profitable than if you had to buy at a dis- 
tance; nay, more profitable even than if you were 
able to produce all you require at home: because in 
this situation you can make annual arrangements 
with your neighbours to furnish on hire the services 
of physicians, fullers and blacksmiths to better ad- 
vantage than if they were your own: for the death 
of a single such skilled slave wipes out the entire 
profit of a farm. In carrying on the operation of a 
vast estate, the rich can afford to provide such serv- 
ants for every department of the work: for if towns 
[104] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and villages are far distant from the farm, they sup- 
ply blacksmiths and all other necessary craftsmen 
and keep them on the place, in order to prevent the 
hands from leaving the farm and spending working 
days in going leisurely to and from the shop when 
they might more profitably be engaged on what 
should be done in the fields. So Saserna's book lays 
down the rule that "No one may leave the farm 
except the overseer, the butler, or such a one as the 
overseer sends on an errand. If any one disobeys this 
rule, he shall be punished for it, but if he disobeys a 
second time the overseer shall be punished." This 
rule may be better stated that no one should leave 
the farm without the approval of the overseer, and, 
without the consent of the master, not even the 
overseer, for more than a day at a time, but in no 
event more frequently than the business of the farm 
requires. 

On the third point, conveniences of transportation 
make a farm more profitable, and these are whether 
the roads are in such condition that wagons can use 
them smoothly, or whether there are rivers nearby 
which can be navigated. We know that each of 
these means of transportation is available to many 
farms. 

The fourth point, which is concerned with how 
your neighbour has planted his land, also relates to 
[105I 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

your profits: because if he has an oak forest near 
your boundary, you cannot profitably plant olives 
in that vicinity, for the oak is so perverse in its effect 
upon the olive that not only will your trees bear less 
but they will even avoid the oaks and bend away 
from them until they are prostrate on the ground, 
as the vine is wont to do when planted near vege- 
tables. Like the oak, a grove of thickly planted full 
grown walnut trees renders sterile all the surround- 
ing land. 

2° CONCERNING THE EQUIPMENT OF A FARM 

XVII. I have spoken of the four points of hus- 
bandry which relate to the land to be cultivated and 
also of those other four points which have to do with 
the outside relations of that land: now I will speak of 
those things which pertain to the cultivation of the 
land. Some divide this subject into two parts, men 
and those assistants to men without which agricul- 
ture cannot be carried on. Others divide it into 
three parts, the instruments of agriculture which are 
articulate, inarticulate and mute: the articulate 
being the servants, 1 the inarticulate the draught 
animals, and the mute being the wagons and other 
such implements. 

1 It will be recalled that Aristotle described slaves as living 
tools. Id Roman law a slave was not a persona but a res. Cf. 
Gaius II, le. 

Iib6]- - 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of agricultural labourers 
All men carry on agriculture by means of slaves or 
freemen or both. The freemen who cultivate the 
land do so either on their own account, as do many 
poor people with the aid of their own children, or for 
wages, 1 as when the heaviest farm operations, like 
the vintage and the harvest, are accomplished with 
the aid of hired freemen: in which class may be in- 
cluded those bond servants whom our ancestors 
called obarati, a class which may still be found in 
Asia, in Egypt and in Illyricum. With respect to 
the use of freemen in agriculture, my own opinion 
is that it is more profitable to use hired hands than 
one's own slaves in cultivating unhealthy lands, and, 
even where the country is salubrious, they are to be 
preferred for the heaviest kind of farm work, such 
as harvesting and storing grapes and corn. Cassius 
has this to say on the subject ; ' Select for farm hands 
those who are fitted for heavy labour, who are not 
less than twenty-two years of age and have some 
aptitude for agriculture, which can be ascertained 

1 One of the most interesting of these freemen labourers of 
whom we know is that Ofellus whom Horace (Satire II, 2) tells 
us was working with cheerful philosophy as a hired hand upon 
his own ancestral property from which he had been turned out 
in the confiscations following the battle of Philippi. This might 
have been the fate of Virgil also had he not chanced to have 
powerful friends. 

[107 1 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

by trying them on several tasks and by enquiring as 
to what they did for their former master.' Slaves 
should be neither timid nor overconfident. The 
foreman should have some little education, a good 
disposition and economical habits, and it is better 
that they should be some what older than the hands, 
for then they will be listened to with more respect 
than if they were boys. It is most important to 
choose as foremen those who are experienced in 
agricultural work, for they should not merely give 
orders but lend a hand at the work, so that the la- 
bourers may leam by imitation and may also appre- 
ciate that it is greater knowledge and skill which 
entitles the foreman to command. The foreman 
should never be authorized to enforce his discipline 
with the whip if he can accomplish his result with 
words. 

Avoid having many slaves of the same nation, for 
this gives rise to domestic rows. 

The foremen will work more cheerfully if rewards 
are offered them, and particularly pains must be 
taken to see that they have some property of their 
own, and that they marry wives among their fellow 
servants, who may bear them children, some thing 
which will make them more steady and attach them 
to the place. 1 On account of such relationships 

1 "Mais lorsque, malgre le degout de la chaihe domestique, 
[108] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

families of Epirote slaves are esteemed the best and 
command the highest prices. 

Marks of consideration by the master will go far 
in giving happiness to your hands: as, for instance, 
by asking the opinion of those of them who have 
done good work, as to how the work ought to be 
done, which has the effect of making them think 
less that they are looked down upon, and encourages 
them to believe that they are held in some estimation 
by the master. -. 

Those slaves who are most attentive to their work 
should be treated more liberally either in respect 

nous voyons naitre entre lea males et les femelles ces sentiments 
que la nature a partout fondcs sur un libre choix: lorsque l'amour 
a commence a unir ces couples captifs, alors leur esclavage, 
devenu pour euz aussi doux que la douce liberie, leur fait oublier 
peu a peu leur droits de franchise naturelle et les prerogatives 
de leur Stat aauvage; et ces lieux des premiers plaisirs, des 
premieres amours, ces lieux si chers & tout Stre sensible, devien- 
nent leur demeure de predilection et leur habitation de choix: 
l'education de la famille rend encore cette affection plus pro- 
fonde et la communique en meme temps aux petits, qui s'ctant 
trouves citoyens par oaiasance d'un sejour adopte par leur 
parents, ne cherchent point a en changer: car ne pouvant avoir 

3ue peu ou point d'idee d'un etat different ni d'un autre sejour 
s s attachent au lieu ou ils sont nee comme a leur pa trie; et 
Ton sait que la tcrre natale est chere a ceux meme qui 1'habitent 
en esclaves." 

One might assume that this eloquent and comfortable essay 
on contentment in slavery had been written to illustrate Varro's 
text at this point, but, as a matter of fact, it is Buffon's observa- 
tion (VIII, 460) on the domestication of wild ducks ! 
[109] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

of food or clothes, or in holidays, or by giving them 
permission to graze some cattle of their own on the 
place, or some thing of that kind. Such liberality 
tempers the effect of a harsh order or a heavy punish- 
ment, and restores the slaves' good will and kindly 
feeling towards their master. 

XVIII. On the subject of the number of slaves 
one will require for operating a farm, Cato lays down 
the two measures of the extent of the farm and the 
kind of farming to be carried on. Writing about the 
cultivation of olives and vines he gives these formulas, 
viz.: 

For carrying on an olive farm of two hundred and 
forty jugera, thirteen slaves are necessary, to-wit: an 
overseer, a housekeeper, five labourers, three team- 
sters, an ass driver, a swineherd and a shepherd: for 
carrying on a vineyard of one hundred jugera, fifteen 
slaves are necessary, to-wit: an overseer, a house- 
keeper, ten labourers, a teamster, an ass driver and a 
swineherd. 

On the other hand Saserna says that one man is 
enough for every eight jugera, 1 as a man should 

1 Saserna's rule would be the equivalent of one hand to every 
five acres cultivated. With slave labour, certainly with negro 
slave labour, the experience of American cotton planters in the 
nineteenth century very nearly confirmed this requirement, but 
one of the economic advantages of the abolition of slavery is il- 
lustrated by this very point. In Latimer's First Sermon preached 
[no J 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

cultivate that much land in forty-five days: for while 
one man can cultivate a jugerum in four days, yet 
he allows thirteen days extra for the entire eight 
jugera to provide against the chance of bad weather, 
the illness or idleness of the labourer and the indul- 
gence of the master.* 1 ' 

before King Edward VI, animadverting on the advance in farm 
rents in his day, he says that his father, a typical substantial 
English yeoman of the time of the discovery of America, was 
able to employ profitably six labourers in cultivating 120 acres, 
or, say, one hand for each twenty acres, which was precisely 
what Arthur Young_ recommended as necessary for high farming 
at the end of the eighteenth century. At the beginning of the 
twentieth century the American farmer seldom employs more 
than one hand tor every eighty acres cultivated, but this is 

fiartly due to the use of improved machinery and partly to the 
act that his land is not thoroughly cultivated. 

1 This example- of Roman cost accounting is matched by 
Walter of Henley in thirteenth century England. 

" Some men will tell you that a plough cannot work eight 
score or nine score acres yearly, but I will show you that it can. 
You know well that a furlong ought to be forty perches long 
and four wide, and the King's perch is sixteen feet and a half: 
then an acre is sixty-six feet in width. Now in ploughing go 
thirty-six times round to make the ridge narrower, and when 
the acre is ploughed then you have made seventy-two furlongs, 
which are six leagues, for be it known that twelve furlongs 
are a league. And the horse or ox must be very poor that can- 
not from the morning go easily in pace three leagues in length 
from his starting place and return by three o'clock. And 1 
will show you by another reason that it can do as much. You 
know that there are in the year 6fty-two weeks. Now take 
away eight weeks for holy days and other hindrances, then are 
there forty-four working weeks left. And in all that time the 
plough shall only have to plough for fallow or for spring or 
[III] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

At this Licinius Stolo put in. 

"Neither of these writers has given us an adequate 
rule," he said. " For if Cato intended, as he doubtless 
did, that we should add to or subtract from what he 
prescribes in proportion as our farm is of greater or 
less extent than that he describes, he should have 
excluded the overseer and the housekeeper from his 
enumeration. If you cultivate less than two hun- 
dred and forty jugera of olives you cannot get along 
with less than one overseer, while if you cultivate 
twice or more as much land you will not require two 
or three overseers. It is the number of labourers and 
teamsters only which must be added to or diminished 
in proportion to the size of the farm: and this applies 
only if the land is all of the same character, for if 
part of it is of a kind which cannot be ploughed, as 
for example very rocky, or on a steep hillside, there 
is that much less necessity for teams and teamsters. 
I pass over the fact that Cato's example of a farm of 
two hundred and forty jugera is neither a fair nor a 
comparable unit. 1 The true unit for comparison of 
winter sowing three roods and a half daily, and for second 
fallowing an acre. Now see if a plough were properly kept and 
followed, if it could not do as much daily." 

1 Stolo is quibbling. Cato's unit of 240 jugera was based on 
the duodecimal system of weights and measures which the 
Romans had originally derived from Babylon but afterwards 
modified by the use of a decimal system. The enlightened and 
progressive nations of the modern world who have followed the 

[ml 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

farms is a centuria, which contains two hundred 
jugera, but if one deducts forty jugera, or one-sixth, 
from Cato's two hundred and forty jugera, I do not 
see how in applying this rule one can deduct also 
one-Bixth of his thirteen slaves; or, even if we leave 
out the overseer and the housekeeper, how one can 
deduct one-sixth of eleven slaves. Again, Cato says 
that one should have fifteen slaves for one hundred 
jugera of vineyard, but suppose one had a centuria 
half in vines and half in olives, then, according to 
Cato*s rule, one would require two overseers and two 
housekeepers, which is absurd. Wherefore it is neces- 
sary to find another measure than Cato's for deter- 
mining the number of slaves, and I myself think bet- 
ter of Saserna's rule, which is that for each jugerum 
it suffices to provide four days work of one hand. 
Yet, if this was a good rule on Saserna's farm in Gaul, 
it might not apply on a mountain farm in Liguria. 
In fine you will best determine what number of slaves 
and what other equipment you will require if you dili- 
gently consider three things, that is to say, what kind 
of farms are there in your neighbourhood, how large 
are they, and how many hands are engaged in culti- 
vating them, and you should add to or subtract from 
Romans in adopting a decimal system may perhaps approve 
Stolo'a remarks, but it behooves those of us who still cling to 
the duodecimal system to defend Cato, if only to keep up out 
own courage. 

[113] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

that number in proportion as you take up more or 
less work. For nature gave us two schools of agricul- 
ture, which are experience and imitation. The most 
ancient fanners established many principles by exper- 
iment and their descendants for the most part have 
simply imitated them. We should do doth these 
things : imitate others and on our own account make 
experiments, following always some principle, not 
chance: * thus we might work our trees deeper or not 
so deep as others do to see what the effect would be. 
It was with such intelligent curiosity that some 
fanners first cultivated their vines a second and a 
third time, and deferred grafting the figs from spring 
to summer. 

Of draught animals 
XIX. In respect of those instruments of agricul- 
ture which are called inarticulate, Saserna says that 
two yokes of oxen will be enough for two hundred 

1 Here, in a few words, is the whole doctrine of intelligent 
agriculture. Cf. Donaldson's Agricultural Sigoraphy, tit, Jethro 
Tull. "The name of Tull will ever descend to posterity as one 
of the greatest luminaries, if not the very greatest benefactor, 
that British agriculture has the pride to acknowledge. His 
example furnishes the vast advantages of educated men directing 
their attention to the cultivation of the soil, as they bring en- 
lightened minds to bear upon its practice and look at the object 
in a naked point of view, being divested of the dogmas and 
trammels of the craft with which the practitioners of routine 
are inexpugnably provided and entrenched." 
[u 4 ] 

I^iectyGoOglc 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

jugera of arable land, while Cato prescribes three 
yokes for two hundred and forty jugera in olives: 
thus if Sasema is correct, one yoke of oxen is required 
for every hundred jugera, but if Cato is correct a 
yoke is needed for every eighty jugera. My opinion 
is that neither of these standards is appropriate for 
all kinds of land, but each for some kind: for some 
land is easy and some difficult to plough, and oxen 
are unable to break up some land except by great 
effort and often they leave the ploughshare in the 
furrow broken from the beam: wherefore in this re- 
spect we should observe a triple rule on every farm, 
when we are new to it, namely: find out the practice 
of the last owner; that of the neighbours, and make 
some experiments of our own." 

"Cato adds," resumed Scrofa, "that on his olive 
farm there are required three asses to haul out the 
manure and one to turn the mill, and on his hundred 
jugera vineyard a yoke of oxen and a pair of asses for 
the manure, and an ass for the wine press. 

In respect of cattle kept for all these purposes, 
which it is customary to feed in the barn yard, it 
should be added that you should keep as many and 
only as many as you need for carrying on the work of 
the farm, so that more easily you can secure diligent 
care of them from the servants whose chief care is of 
themselves. In this connection the keeping of sheep 
[»Sl 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

is preferable to hogs not only by those who have 
pastures but also by those who have none, for you 
should keep them not merely because you have pas- 
ture, but for the sake of the manure. 

Watch dogs should be kept in any event for the 
safety of the farm. 

XX. The most important consideration with re- 
spect to barn yard cattle is that the draft oxen should 
be fit for their work: when bought unbroken they 
should not be less than three years old nor more than 
four, strong, but well matched, lest the stronger wear 
out the weaker: with large horns, black rather than 
any other color, broad foreheads, flat noses, deep 
chests and heavy quarters. Old steers which have 
worked in the plains cannot be trained to service in 
rough and mountain land; a rule as applicable when 
reversed. In breaking young steers it is best to begin 
by fastening a fork shaped yoke on their necks and 
leaving it there even when they are fed; in a few days 
they will become used to it and disposed to be docile. 
Then they should be broken to work gradually until 
they are accustomed to it, as may be done by yoking 
a young ox with an old one, so that he may learn 
what is expected of him by imitation. It is best to 
work them first on level ground without a plough, 
then with a light plough, so that their first lessons 
may be easy and in sand and mellow soil. 
["61 

aatized by GoOgk I 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Oxen intended for the wagon should be broken in 
the same way, at first by drawing an empty cart, if 
possible through the streets of a village or a town, 
where they may become quickly inured to sudden 
noises and strange sights. You should not work an 
ox always on the same side of the team, for an occa- 
sional change from right to left relieves the strain 
of the work. 

Where the land is light, as in Campania, they do 
not plough with heavy steers but with cows or asses, 
as they can be driven more easily to a light plough. 
For turning the mill and for carrying about the farm 
some use asses, some cows and others mules: a choice 
determined by the supply of provender. For an ass 
is cheaper to feed than a cow, though a cow is more 
profitable. 1 

In the choice of the kind of draft animals he is to 
keep, a farmer should always take into consideration 
the characteristics of his soil: thus on rocky and 
difficult land the prime requirement is doubtless 
strength, but his purpose should be to keep that kind 
of stock which under his conditions yields the largest 
measure of profit and still do all the necessary work. 

1 Pliny quotes Cato: "What ever can be done by the help of 

the ass costs the least money," which is the philosophy of modern 

power machinery on the farm, as elsewhere. It is largely a 

question of the cost of fuel, as Varro says. 

[il7l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of watch dogs 

XXI. It is more desirable to keep a few dogs and 
fierce ones than a pack of curs. They should be 
trained to watch by night and to sleep by day chained 
in the kennel [so that they may be the more alert 
when set loose.] 

It remains to speak elsewhere of unyoked cattle, 
like the flocks, but if there are meadows on the farm 
and the owner keeps no live stock, it is the business 
of a good farmer after he has sold his hay to graze 
and feed another's cattle on his land. 

Of farming implements 

XXII. Concerning the instruments of agriculture 
which are called mute, in which are included baskets, 
wine jars and such things, this may be said: Those 
utensils which can be produced on the farm or made 
by the servants should never be bought, among which 
are what ever may be made out of osiers or other 
wood of the country, such as hampers, fruit baskets, 
threshing sledges, mauls and mattocks, or what ever 
is made out of the fibre plants like hemp, flay, rushes, 
palm leaves and nettles, namely: rope, twine and 
mats. Those implements which cannot be manufac- 
tured on the farm should be bought more with refer- 
ence to their utility than their appearance that they 

1 118] 

aatized by GoOgk 



i 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

may not diminish your profit by useless expense, a 
result which may be best secured by buying where 
the things you need may be found at once of good 
quality, near at hand and cheap. The requirement 
of the kind and number of such implements is meas- 
ured by the extent of the farm because the further 
your boundaries lie apart the more work there is 
to do." 

"In this connection," put in Stolo, "given the size 
of the farm, Cato recommends with respect to im- 
plements as follows:/hc who cultivates 240 jugera\ 
in olives should have five sets of oil making imple- 
ments, which he enumerates severally, such as the 
copper utensils, including kettles, pots, ewers with 
three spouts, etc.; the implements made out of wood 
and iron, including three large wagons, six ploughs 
with their shares, four manure carriers, etc./ So of 
the iron tools, what they are and how many are 
needed, he speaks in great detail, as eight iron pitch 
forks, as many hoes and half as many shovels, etc. 
/in like manner he lays down another formula of 
implements for a vineyard, viz. : if you cultivate 100 
jugera you should have three sets of implements 
for the wine press and also covered storage vats of a 
capacity of eight hundred culleiJaa well as twenty 
harvesting hampers for grapes and as many for corn, 
and other things in like proportion. 
I»9l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Other writers advise a smaller quantity of such 
conveniences, but I believe Cato prescribed so great 
a capacity in order that one might not be compelled 
to sell his wine every year, for old wine sells better 
than new, and the same quality sells better at one 
time than another. Cato writes further in great de- 
tail of the kind and number of iron tools which are 
required for a vineyard, such as the fabx or pruning 
hook, spades, hoes. So also several of these instru- 
ments are of many varieties, as for instance the falz, 
of which this author says that there must be pro- 
vided forty of the kind suitable for use in a vine- 
yard, five for cutting rushes, three for pruning trees 
and ten for cutting briers." 

So far Stolo, when Scrofa began again. "The 
owner should have an inventory of all the farm im- 
plements and equipment, with a copy on file both at 
the house and at the steading, and it should be the 
duty of the overseer to see that everything is checked 
against this inventory and is assigned its appropriate 
keeping place in the barn. What cannot be kept 
under lock and key should be kept in plain sight, and 
this is particularly necessary in respect of the utensils 
which are used only at intervals, as at harvest time, 
like the grape baskets and such things, for what 
ever one sees daily is in the least danger from the 
thief." 

[120I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

3° CONCERNING THE OPERATION OF A FARM 

XXIII. "And now," interposed Agrasius, "as we 
have discussed the two first parts of the four-fold 
division of agriculture, namely: .concerning the farm 
itself and the implements with which it is worked, 
proceed with the third part." 

Qf planting field crops 
"As I hold," said Scrofa, "that the profit of a farm 
is that only which comes from sowing the land, there 
are two considerations which remain for discussion, 
what one should sow and where it is most expedient 
to sow it, for some lands are best suited for hay, 
some for corn, some for wine and some for oil. So 
also should be considered the forage crops like basil, 
mixed fodder, vetch, alfalfa, snail clover and lupines. 
All things should not be sown in rich land, nor should 
thin land be left unsown, for it is better to sow in 
light soil those things which do not require much 
nourishment, such as snail clover and the legumes, 
except always chick peas (for this also is a legume 
like the other plants which are not reaped but from 
which the grain is plucked) because those things 
which it is the custom to pluck (legere) are called 
legumes. In rich land should be sown what ever 
require much nourishment, such as cabbage, spring 
[i«l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and winter, wheat and flax. Certain plants are cul- 
tivated not so much for their immediate yield as 
with forethought for the coming year, because cut 
and left lying they improve the land. So, if land 
is too thin it is the practice to plough in for manure, 
lupines not yet podded, and likewise the field bean, 
if it has not yet ripened so that it is fitting to harvest 
the beans. 1 

Not less should you make provision for cultivating 
what yields you profit in mere pleasure, like arbours 
and flower gardens: and those plantations which do 
not serve either for the support of man or the delight 
of the senses, but are not the less useful in the econ- 
omy of the farm. Thus suitable places must be set 
aside for growing willows and reeds and other such 
things which affect wet places. On the other hand, 
you should sow field beans as much as possible in 
your corn land. There are other plants which seek 
dry places, and still others demand shade, like as- 
paragus, both when wild and cultivated: while violets 
and garden flowers, which flourish in the sun should 
be set out in the open. 

1 Green manuring is one of the oldest, as it is one of the best, 
of agricultural practices. Long before Varro, Theophrastus 
(H. P. 9, i) had recorded what the agricultural colleges teach 
today — that beans are valuable for this purpose because they 
rot readily, and, he adds, in Macedonia and Tbessaly it has 
always been the custom to turn them under when they bloom. 

[122] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

So other things demand other planting conditions, 
like the osiers from which you derive your material 
for making basket ware, for wagon frames, winnow- 
ing baskets and grape hampers. Elsewhere you 
might plant and cultivate a forest for cut wood and 
a spinney for fowling. 

So you should reserve ground for planting hemp, 
flax, rush and Spanish broom (spartum) which serve 
to make shoes for the cattle, thread, cord and rope. 
Other situations are suitable for still other kinds of 
planting, as, for example, some plant garden truck 
and some plant other things, in a nursery, or between 
the rows of a young orchard before the roots of the 
trees have spread far out, but this should never be 
done when the trees have grown lest the roots be 
injured." 

"In this respect," said Stolo, "what Cato says 
about planting is in point, that a field which is rich 
and in good heart and without shade should be 
planted in corn, while a low lying field should be set 
in turnips, radishes, millet and panic grass." 

Of planting olives 

XXIV. Scrofa resumed: "The varieties of olives 

to plant in rich and warm land are the preserving 

olive radius major, the olive of Sallentina, the round 

orchis, the bitter posea, the Sergian, the Colminian, 

[«3l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and the waxy albicera: which ever of these does best 
in your locality, plant that most extensively. An 
olive yard is not worth cultivating unless it looks to 
the west wind and is exposed to the sun; if the soil is 
cold and thin there you should plant the Licinian 
olive, for if you set out this variety in a rich and warm 
soil it will never make a hosius and the tree will ex- 
haust itself in bearing and will become infected with 
red moss. (Hostus is the country name for the yield 
of oil from a single tree at each foetus or pressing: 
some claim this should amount to 160 modii, while 
others reduce it to 120 modii, and even less in propor- 
tion to the size and number of their storage vats.) 

Cato advises you to plant elms and poplars around 
the farm so as to obtain from them leaves to feed the 
sheep and cattle as well as a supply of lumber: while 
this is not necessary on all farms, nor in some for 
the forage alone, it may be done with advantage 
as a wind break against the north where the trees 
will not shut out the sun." 

Stolo added the following advice from the same 
author: 'If you have a piece of wet ground there 
plant cuttings of poplars, and also reeds which are 
set out as follows: having turned the sod with a hoe 
plant the scions of reed three feet one from the other. 
Wild asparagus (from which you may cultivate gar- 
den asparagus) should also be set out in such a place 
["♦1 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

because the same kind of cultivation is suitable for it 
as for reeds. You should set out Greek willows around 
the reed bed to supply ties for your vines.' 

Of planting vines 

XXV. "In respect of planting vines," resumed 
Scrofa, "it should be observed that the varieties 
fitted for the best land and exposure to the sun are 
the little Aminean, the twin Eugeneam and the little 
yellow kind: while on rich or wet land the best 
varieties are the large Aminean, the Murgentine, the 
Apician and the Lucanian. Other vines, and es- 
pecially the mixed varieties, do well in any kind of 
land. 

XXVI. In all vineyards care is taken that the prop 
should shelter the vine against the north wind. And 
if live cypresses are used as props they are planted 
in alternate rows and are not allowed to grow higher 
than is necessary for use as a prop. Cabbages are 
never planted near vines because they do each other 
damage." 

"I fear," said Agrius, turning to Fundanius, "that 
the Sacristan may get back before we have reached 
the fourth head of our subject, that of the vintage, 
for I am looking forward thirstily to the vintage." 

"Be of good cheer," said Scrofa, "and prepare the 
grape baskets and the ewer. 
£"5) 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

4° CONCERNING THE AGRICULTURAL SEASONS 

XXVII. We have two standards of time, the first 
that of the revolution of the year, because in it the 
sun completes his circuit, the other the measure of 
the month, because it includes the waxing and the 
waning of the moon. 

Of the solar measure of the year 
First I will speak of the sun, whose recurring jour- 
ney is divided with reference to the pursuits of agri- 
culture into four seasons of three months each, or 
more accurately into eight seasons of a month and a 
half each. The four seasons are Spring, Summer, 
Autumn and Winter. In Spring certain crops are 
sown and the sod fields are broken up, 1 so that the 
weeds in them may be destroyed before they have 
seeded themselves again, and the clods, by drying 
out in the sun, may become more accessible to the 

1 Although Varro advises the first ploughing in the spring, 
the ancients were not unmindful of the advantages of winter 
ploughing of stiff and heavy clay. Theophrastus, who died in 
B. C 287, advises it "that the earth may feel the cold." Indeed, 
he was fully alive to the reasons urged by the modern professors 
of agronomy for intensive cultivation. "For the soil," he says 
(C. P. Ill, 25), "often inverted becomes free, light and clear of 
weeds, so that it can most easily afford nourishment." 

King Solomon gives the same advice, "The sluggard will not 
plough by reason of the winter, therefore shall he begin harvest 
and nave nothing." Proverbs, XX, 4. 
[126 J 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

rain and when broken down by its action easier to 
cultivate. Such land should be ploughed not less 
than twice, but three times is better. 1 The Summer 

1 The Romans understood the advantages of thorough culti- 
vation of the soil. As appears from the text, they habitually 
broke up a sod in the spring, ploughed it again at midsummer, 
and once more in September before seeding. Pliny prescribes 
that the first ploughing should be nine inches deep, and says 
that the Etruscans some times ploughed their stiff clay as many 
as nine times. The accepted Roman reason for this was the 
eradication of weeds, but it also accomplished in some measure 
the purpose of " dry fanning"— the conservation of the moisture 
content of the soil, as that had been practised for countless 
generations in the sandy Valley of Mesopotamia. Varro makes 
no exception to this rule, but Virgil was here, as in other in- 
stances, induced to depart from Varro's wisdom, with the result 
that he imposed upon Roman agriculture several thoroughly bad 

f iractices. Thus, while he applies Varro ploughing rules to rich 
and and bids the farmer "exercetque frequens tellurem atque 
imperat arvis," he says (Geo. I, 62) that it will suffice to give 
sandy land a single shallow ploughing in September immediately 
before seeding, for fear, forsooth, that the summer suns will 
evaporate whatever moisture there is in it! Again, Virgil recom- 
mends, what Varro does not, cross-ploughing and burning the 
stubble and Virgil's advice was generally followed. 

In William Benson's edition (1725) of the Georgia "with 
notes critical and nistick," it is stated that "the husbandry of 
England in general is VirgUian, which is shown by paring and 
burning the surface: by raftering and cross-ploughing, and that 
in those parts of England where the Romans principally in- 
habited all along the Southern coast Latin words remain to this 
hour among shepherds and ploughmen in their nistick affairs: 
and what will seem more strange at first sight to affirm though 
in fact really true, there is more of Virgil s husbandry put in 
practice in England at this instant than in Italy itself." That 
this was the fact in the thirteenth century is clear from the 
[127] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

is the season of the grain harvest; the Autumn, when 
the weather is dry, that of the vintage: and it is also 
the fit time for thinning out the woods, when the 
trees to be removed should be cut down close to the 
ground and the roots should be dug up before the 
first rains to prevent them from stooling. In Winter 
the trees may be pruned, provided this is done at a 
time when the bark is free from frost and rain and ice. 
XXVIII. Spring begins when the sun is in Aqua- 
rius, Summer when it is in Taurus, Autumn when 
it is in Leo, and Winter when it is in Scorpio. Since 
the beginning of each of the four seasons is the twenty- 
third day after the entrance of the sun in these signs 
respectively, it follows that Spring has ninety-one 
days, Summer ninety-four, Autumn ninety-one and 
Winter eighty-nine: which, reduced to the dates of 
our present official calendar, 1 makes the beginning 
of Spring on the seventh day before the Ides of 
February (February 7), of Summer on the seventh 
day before the Ides of May (May 9), of Autumn on 

quotations we have made from Walter of Henley's DiU de Hose- 
bondrit. Cf. also Sir Anthony Fitzherbert and the account of 
the manorial system of farming in England in Prothero'a 
English Farming Past and Present. 

It remained for Jethro Tull of the Horseshoeing Husbandry 
to unloose in England the long spell of the magic of Virgil's 
poetry upon practical agriculture. 

1 The Julian calendar, which took effect on January I, B. C. 
45, had been in use only eight years when Varro was writing. 
[128) 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the third day before the Ides of August( August 1 1 ), 
and of Winter on the fourth day before the Ides of 
November (November 10). 

A CALENDAR OF AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS 

By a more exact definition of the seasons, the year 
is divided into eight parts, the first of forty-five days 
from the date of the rising of the west wind (Feb- 
ruary 7) to the date of the vernal equinox (March 24), 
the second of the ensuing forty-four days to the ris- 
ing of the Pleiades (May 7), the third of forty-eight 
days to the summer solstice (June 24), the fourth of 
twenty-seven days to the rising of the Dog Star 
(July 21), the fifth of sixty-seven days to the Autumn 
equinox (September 26), the sixth of thirty-two days 
to the setting of the Pleiades (October 28), the 
seventh of fifty-seven days to the winter solstice 
(December 24), and the eighth of forty-five days to 
the beginning of the first. 1 

1° February j-March 24 
XXIX. These are the things to be done during the 

1 Schneider and others have attempted to emend the enumera- 
tion of the days in this succession of seasons, but Keil justly 
observes: "As we do not know what principle Varro followed in 
establishing these divisions of the year, it is safer to set them 
down as they are written in the codex than to be tempted by 
uncertain emendation." I have accordingly followed Keil here. 
[129J 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

first of the seasons so enumerated: AH kinds of nurs- 
eries should be set out, the vines should be first 
pruned, then dug, and the roots which have pro- 
truded from the ground should be cut out, the mead- 
ows should be cleaned, willows planted and the 
corn hoed. We call that corn land {seges) which 
has been ploughed and sowed as distinguished from 
plough land (arva) which has been ploughed but 
not yet sowed, while that land which was formerly 
sowed and lies awaiting a new ploughing is called 
stubble (novalis). When land is ploughed for the 
first time it is said to be broken up (proscindere), and 
at the second ploughing to be broken down (offringeri) 
because at the first ploughing large clods are turned 
up and at the second ploughing these are reduced. 
The third cultivation, after the seed has been sown, 
is called ridging (lirare), that is, when by fastening 
mould boards on the plough, the sown seed is cov- 
ered up in ridges ' and at the same time furrows 
1 The practice of ridging land seeded to grain was necessary 
before the invention of the modern drill. Dickson, in his Hus- 
bandry of the AnctetvU, XXIV, argues that, while wasteful of 
land, it had the advantage of preventing the grain from lodging. 
Walter of Henley, who followed the Roman methods by tradi- 
tion without knowing it, advises with them that to be success- 
ful in this kind of seeding the furrow at the last ploughing of the 
fallow should be so narrow as to be indistinguishable. "At 
sowing do not plough large furrows," he says, "but little and 
well laid together that the seed may fall evenly: if you plough 
a large furrow to be quick you will do harm. How? I will tell 
1 130] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

are cut by means of which the surface water may 
drain off. Some farmers who cultivate small farms, 
as in Apulia, are wont to harrow their land after it is 
ridged, if perchance any large clods have been left 
in the seed bed. The hollow channel left by the 
share of the plough is called the furrow, the raised 
land between two furrows is called the ridge (porca,) 
because there the seed is as it were laid upon an altar 
(porricere) to secure a crop, for when the entrails are 
offered to the gods this word porricere is used to de- 
scribe the oblation. 

2° March 24-May 7 
XXX. These are the things to be done during the 
second season between the vernal equinox and the 
rising of the Pleiades. Weed the corn land, break 
up old sod, cut the willows, close the pastures (to the 
stock) and complete any thing left undone in the 
preceding season. Plant trees before the buds shoot 

you. When the ground is sown then the harrow will come and 
pull the corn into the hollow which is between the two ridges 
and the large ridge shall be uncovered, then no com shall grow 
there. And will you see this? When the corn is above ground 
go to the end of the ridge and you wilt see that I tell you truly. 
And if the land must be sown below the ridge Bee that it is 
ploughed with small furrows and the earth raised as much as 
you are able. And see that the ridge which is between the two 
furrows is narrow. And let the earth, which lies like a crest in 
the furrow under the left foot after the plough, be over-turned, 
and then shall the furrow be narrow enough.'' 
[131] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and they begin to blossom, for deciduous trees are 
not fit to transplant after they put forth leaves. 
Plant and prune your olives. 

3° May 7- June 24. 
XXXI. These are the things to be done during 
the third season between the rising of the Pleiades 
and the summer solstice. Dig the young vines or 
plough them, and afterwards put the land in good 
order; that is to say, fine the soil so that no clods 
shall remain. This is called fining the soil (occare) 
because it breaks down (occidare) the clods. Thin 
out the vines, but let it be done by one who knows 
how, for this operation which is considered of great 
importance is performed only on vines and not on 
the orchard. To thin a vine is to select and reserve 
the one, two and some times even three best new 
tendrils sprung from the stem of the vine, cutting off 
all the others, lest the stem may be unable to furnish 
nourishment for those which have been reserved. 
So in a nursery it is the custom to cut it back at first 
so that the vine may grow with a stronger stem and 
may have greater strength to produce fruitful tend- 
rils: for a stem which grows slender like a rush is 
sterile through weakness and cannot throw out 
tendrils. Thus it is the custom to call a weak stem 
a flag, and a strong stem, which bears grapes, a palm. 
[i3*l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

The name flagellum, indicating something as unstable 
as a breeze, is derived from flatus, by the change of 
a letter, just as in the case of the word flabellum, 
which means fly fan. The name palma, which is 
given to those vine shoots which are fruitful in grapes, 
was it seems, at first, parilema, derived from farire 
(to produce), whence by a change of letters, such as 
we find in many instances, it came to be called palma. 

From another part of the vine springs the cap- 
reolus, which is a little spiral tendril, like a curled 
hair, by means of which the vine holds on while it 
creeps towards the place of which it would take pos- 
session, from which quality of taking hold of things 
(capere) it is called capreolus. 

All forage crops should be saved at this season; 
first, basil, then mixed fodder (farrago) 1 and vetch, 
and last of all the hay. Our name for basil is ocinum, 
which is derived from the Greek word a»x««>s and 
signifies that it comes quickly, like the pot herb of 
the same name. It has this name also because it 
quickens the action of the bowels of cattle and so is 
fed to them as a purgative. It is cut green from a 
bean field before the pods are formed. On the other 
hand that forage which is cut with a sickle from a 

1 Farrago was a mixture of refuse far, or spelt, with vetch, 
sown thick and cut green to be fed to cattle in the process now 
called soiling. The English word "forage" comes from this 
Latin original. 

[I33l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

field in which barley and vetch and other legumes 
have been sown in mixture for forage, is called far- 
rago from the instrument (Jerro) with which it is cut, 
or perhaps because it was first sown in the stubble 
of a field of com (far). It is fed to horses and other 
cattle in the spring to purge and to fatten them. 

Vetch (vicia) is so called from its quality of con- 
quering (vincirc) because this plant, like the vine, 
has tendrils by means of which it creeps twisting 
upward on the stalks of lupines or other plants where 
it clings until it over-tops its host. 

If you have irrigated meadows, proceed to water 
them at this season, as soon as you have saved the hay. 

During droughts water your grafted fruit trees 
every evening. They probably derive their name, 
(poma), from their appetite for drink (potus). 

4° June 24-July 21 

XXXII. During the fourth season between the 
summer solstice and the rising of the Dog Star most 
farmers make their harvest, because it is claimed that 
to mature properly corn should be allowed fifteen 
days to germinate and shoot, fifteen days to bloom 
and fifteen days to ripen. 

Finish your ploughing: it will be more profitable 
in proportion as the earth is ploughed warm, when 
the land is broken up, fine it, that is, work it again 
1 134] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

in order that all the clods may be reduced, for at 
the first ploughing large clods are always turned up. 
This is the time also to sow vetch, lentils, the small 
variety of chick peas, pulse (etvilia) and the other 
things which we call legumes, but which others, as 
for example the Gauls, call legarica, both of which 
names come from the practice of picking their fruit 
(legere) because they are not cut but gathered. 

Work the old vines a second time and the young 
ones thrice, especially if there are any clods left. 

5° July 21-September 26 

XXXIII. During the fifth season between the 
rising of the Dog Star and the autumn equinox thresh 
your straw and rick it, continue the harrowing 
of your fallow land, prune your fruit trees, and mow 
your irrigated meadow the second time. 

6° September 26-October 28 

XXXIV. The authorities advise you to begin to 
sow at the commencement of the sixth season im- 
mediately after the autumn equinox and to keep it 
up for the following 91 days, but not to attempt to 
sow any thing after the winter solstice, unless it is 
absolutely necessary, because seed sown before the 
winter solstice germinates in seven days, while that 
sown later hardly ever sprouts for 40 days. 

h35l 



byGoogle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

In like manner the authorities say that you should 
not begin your sowing before the equinox, lest con- 
tinued rains cause the seed to rot in the ground. 
The best time to plant beans is at the setting of the 
Pleiades, but gather the grapes and make the vint- 
age between the equinox and the setting of the 
Pleiades. Immediately afterward begin to prune the 
vines, to propagate them and plant fruit trees, but 
in those regions where the frost comes early it is 
better to postpone these operations until the follow- 
ing spring. 

7° October 28-Deeember 24 

XXXV. These are the things to do during the 
seventh season between the setting of the Pleiades 
and the winter solstice. Plant lilies and crocuses 
and propagate roses, which may be done by making 
cuttings about three inches in length from a stem 
already rooted, set these out and later, after they 
have formed their own roots, transplant them. TTie 
cultivation of violets has no place on a farm be- 
cause they require elevated beds for which the soil 
is scraped up and these are damaged or even washed 
away by heavy rains, thus wasting the fertility of 
the land. At any time of the year between the rising 
of the west wind and the rising of Arcturus (February 
-September) it is proper to transplant from the seed 
[136] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

beds thyme, an herb, which owes its name, serpyllum, 
to its creeping habit {quod serpit). This is the season 
also to dig new ditches, clean the old ones, and to 
prune the trees in the arbustum and the vines which 
are married to them, but be careful that you suspend 
most of your work during the fifteen days before and 
after the winter solstice: it is fitting, however, to 
set out some trees during this period, as, for example, 
elms. 

8° December 24-Febntary 7 

XXXVI. These are the things to do during the 
eighth season between the winter solstice and the 
rising of the west wind. Drain the fields, if any 
water is standing on them, but if they are dry and 
the land is friable, harrow them.* Prune the vines 
and the orchard. When it is not fitting to work in 
the fields then those things should be done which 
can be done under cover during the winter twilight. 

All these rules should be written out and posted in 
the farmstead and the overseer especially should 
have them at the tip of his tongue. 

Of the influence of the moon on agriculture 

XXXVII. The lunar seasons also must be consid- 
ered. They are divided into two terms, that from 
the new moon to the full, and that from the full 

[137! 

. Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

moon to the next moon, or until that day which we 
call intervunstruvs, or the last and the first of a 
moon, whence at Athens this day is called an) «u via. 
(the old and the new), though the other Greeks call 
it Tpwucdf the thirtieth day. Some agricultural op- 
erations may be undertaken with more advantage 
during the increase of the moon, others during the 
decrease, 1 as, for example, the harvest or cutting of 
wood." 

"I observe a practice which I learned from my 
father," said Agrasius, "not only never to shear my 
sheep, but not even to have my own hair cut on the 
decrease of the moon, for fear that I might become 
bald." 

"What are the quarters of the moon," said Agrius, 
"and what bearing have they on agriculture?" 

"Have you never heard in the country,** said 
Tremelius, "the lore about the influence of Jana 
(Diana) on the eighth day before her waxing, and 

* The rural confidence in the influence of the moon upon the 
life of a farm still persists vigorously: thus as Pliny (H. N. XVIII, 
75) counselled that one wean a colt only when the moon is 
on the wane, so it will be found that the moon is consulted be- 
fore a colt ts weaned on most American farms today: for that 
may be safely done, says the rural oracle, only when the moon's 
sign, as given in the almanack, corresponds with a part of the 
almanack's "moon's man" or "anatomic" at or below the 
knees, i. e., when the moon is in one or the other of the signs 
Pisces, Capricornus or Aquarius: but never at a time of day 
when the moon is in its Southing." 
1 138] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

again cm the eighth day before her waning; how cer- 
tain things which ought to be done during the in- 
crease can be done to better advantage In the second 
quarter than the first, and that what ever is fitting 
to do on the wane of the moon can be better done 
when her light is less? This is all I know about the 
effect of the four quarters of the moon upon agricul- 
ture." 

ANOTHER CALENDAR OP SIX AGRICULTURAL SEASONS 

"There is another division of the year," said Stolo, 
"which takes account of both the sun and the moon, 
namely: into six seasons, because almost all the cul- 
tivated fruits of the earth come to maturity and 
reach the vat or the granary after five successive 
agricultural operations and are put to use by a sixth, 
and these are, first* the preparing (jtraparandum); 
second, the planting {serendum); third, the cultivat- 
ing of the growing crop (nutricandum); fourth, the 
ingathering (legendum); fifth, the storing (conden- 
dum), and sixth, the consuming (promtndum). 

1° PREPARING TIME 

Of tillage 
In the matter of preparation there are different 
things to be done for different crops, as, if you wish 
i'lWl 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

to make an orchard or an arbustum, you trench and 
grab and plough; if you plant grain, you plough and 
narrow; while, if you cultivate trees, you mulch their 
roots by breaking the earth with a mattock, more or 
less according to the nature of the tree, for some 
trees, like the cypress, have a small, and others like 
the plane tree have a large, root system (for example, 
that in the Lyceum at Athens described by Theo- 
phastus, which, when it was still a young tree, had a 
spread of roots to the extent of 33 cubits). If you 
break the ground with a plough and cattle, it is well 
to work the land a second time before you sow your 
seed. So, if you are making a meadow the prepara- 
tion is to close it to the stock, and this is usually done 
when the pear tree is in bloom: if it is an irrigated 
meadow the preparation is to turn in the water at 
the proper time. 

Of manuring 
XXXVIII. As part of this same operation should 
be considered what places in a field need manure and 
what kind of manure you can use to the greatest 
advantage, for the several kinds have different quali- 
ties. Cassius says that the best manure is that of 
birds, except swamp and sea birds, 1 but the best of 

1 Modern agricultural chemistry has contradicted this judg- 
ment of Cassius, for the manure of sea birds, especially that 
brought from the South American islands in the Pacific, known 
1 140] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

all is, he claims, the manure of pigeons because it is 
the hottest and causes the land to ferment. This 
ought to be sown on the land like seed, not distrib- 
uted in heaps like the dung of cattle. I myself, 
think the best manure is that from aviaries in which 
thrushes and blackbirds are kept, because it is not 
only good for the land but serves as a fattening food 
for cattle and hogs: for which reason those who farm 
aviaries pay less rent when the owner stipulates 
that the manure is to be used on the farm, than those 
to whom it is a perquisite. Cassius advises that the 
manure next in value to that of doves is human 
feces, and third that of goats and sheep and asses. 
The manure of horses is of the least value on corn 
land, but on meadows it is the best, because, like the 
manure of other draught animals fed on barley, it 
brings a heavy stand of grass. The manure pit 
should be near the barn in order that it may be avail- 
able with the least labour. If you plant a stake of 
oak wood in the manure pit it will not harbour ser- 
pents. 

2° PLANTING TIME 

Of the four methods of propagating plants 
XXXIX. The second operation, namely that of 

commercially as Peruvian guano, is found on analysis to be 
high in the elements which are most beneficial to plant life. 
1 141] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

propagating, must be considered in relation to the 
proper time for sowing each kind of seed, for this 
concerns the aspect of the field you are to sow and 
the season fitting for what you are to plant. Do we 
not see some things grow best in the spring, others 
in summer, some in autumn, and others again in 
winter? For each plant is sowed or propagated 
or harvested in season according to its nature: so 
while most trees are grafted most successfully in 
spring, rather than the autumn, yet figs may be 
grafted at the summer solstice, and cherries even in 
winter. 

And since there are four methods of propagation of 
plants, by nature and by the several processes of 
art, namely: transplanting from one place to another, 
as is done in layering vines, what is called cuttage or 
propagating quick sets cut from trees, and graftage, 
which consists in transferring scions from one tree to 
another, let us consider at what season and in what 
locality you should do each of these things. 

a. Seeding, and here of seed selection 
XL. In the first place, the seed, which is the prin- 
ciple of all germination, is of two kinds, that which 
is not appreciable by our. senses and that which is. 
Seed is hidden from us when it is disseminated in the 
air, as the physicist Anaxagoras holds, or is distrib- 
[14a] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

uted over the land by the surface water, as Theo- 
phrastus maintains. The seeds which the farmer 
can see should be studied with the greatest care. 
There are some varieties, like that of the cypress, 
which are so small as to be almost invisible, for those 
nuts which the cypress bears, that look like little 
balls covered with bark, are not the seed but contain 
it. Nature gave the principle of germination to seed, 
the rest of agriculture was left for the experience of 
man to discover, for in the beginning before the inter- 
ference of man plants were generated before they were 
sown, afterwards those seeds which were collected 
by man from the original plants did not generate 
until after they had been sown. 

Seed should be examined to ascertain that it is 
not sterile by age, that it is clean, particularly that 
it is not adulterated with other varieties of similar 
appearances: for age has such effect upon seed as in 
some respects to change its very nature, thus it is 
said that rape will grow from old cabbage seed, and 
vice versa. 1 

1 Seed selection, which is now preached bo earnestly by the 
Agricultural Department of the United States as one of the 
things necessary to increase the yield of wheat and corn, has 
ever been good practice. Following Varro Virgil (Georgic I, 
197) insists upon it: "I have seen those seeds on whose selection 
much time and labour had been spent, nevertheless degenerate 
if men did not every year rigorously separate by hand all the 
largest specimens." 

[143] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

b. Transplanting 

In respect of transplanting, care should be taken 
that it is done neither too soon nor too late. The fit 
time, according to Thcophrastus, is spring and au- 
tumn and midsummer, but the same rule will not 
apply in all places and to all kinds of plants: for in 
dry and thin clay soil, which has little natural mois- 
ture, the wet spring is the time, but in a rich and fat 
soil it is safe to transplant in autumn. Some limit 
the practice of transplanting to a period of thirty 
days. 

c. Cuttage 

In respect of cuttage, which consists in planting 
in the ground a live cutting from a tree, it behooves 
you especially to see that this is done at the proper 
time, which is before the tree has begun to bud or 
bloom: that you take off the cutting carefully rather 
than break it from the parent tree, because the 
cutting will be more firmly established in proportion 
as it has a broad footing which can readily put out 
.roots : and that it is planted promptly before the sap 
dries out of it. 

In propagating olives select a truncheon of new 
grown wood about a foot in length and the same size 
at each end: some call these clavolee and others call 
them talea. 

[i44l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

d. Graftage 

In reaped of graftage, which consists in transfer- 
ring growing wood from one tree to another, care 
must be taken in selecting the tree from which the 
scion is taken, the tree on which it is grafted, and the 
time and the manner in which it is done: for the 
pear cannot be grafted on an oak, even though it 
may upon the apple. In this operation many men 
who have great faith in the sayings of the soothsayers 
give heed to their warning that as many kinds of 
grafts there may be on a tree so many bolts of light- 
ning will strike it, because a bolt of lightning is gen- 
erated by each graft (jctu). 1 

If you graft a cultivated pear upon a wild pear 
tree no matter how good it may be, the result will 
not be as fortunate as if you had grafted on another 
cultivated pear. Having regard for the result, on 
what ever kind of tree you graft, if it is of exactly the 
same kind, as, for instance, apple on apple, you 
should take care that the scion comes from a better 
tree than that on which it is grafted. 

1 Cicero (de Div. II, 24) records a mot of Cato's that he won- 
dered that an haruspex did not laugh when he saw another— 
"qui mirari se aiebat, quod non rideret aruspex, arospicero 
quum vidisset." 



[I45l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

e. A " new " method — inarching 
There is another operation recently suggested, 1 for 
propagating one tree from another, when the trees 
are neighbours. From the tree from which you wish 
to take a scion a branch is trained to that on which 
you wish to make the graft and the scion is bound 
upon an incision in a branch of the stock. The place 
of contact of both scion and stock is cut away with 
a knife so that the bark of one joins evenly with the 
bark of the other at the point of exposure to the 
weather. Care should be taken that the growing 
top of the scion is pointed straight upwards. The 
following year when the graft has knitted, the scion 
may be cut from its parent tree. 

Of when to use these different methods 
XLI. The most important consideration in prop- 
agating is, however, the time at which you do it: 
thus things which formerly were propagated in the 
spring now are propagated in summer, like the fig, 
whose wood is not heavy and so craves heat, as a 

1 This process of propagation which Varro describes as "new" 
is still practised by curious orchardists under the name "in- 
arching." The free end of a growing twig is introduced into a 
limb of its own tree, back of a specimen fruit, thus pushing its 
development by means of the supplemental feeding so provided. 
Cf. Cyc. Am. Hort. II, 664. 

[146] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

consequence of which quality figs cannot be grown in 
cold climates. For the same reason water is dan- 
gerous to a new fig graft because its soft wood rots 
easily. For these reasons it is now considered that » 
midsummer is the best season to propagate figs. On / 
the other hand it is the custom to tie a pot of water 
above a graft of hard wood trees so that it may drip 
on the graft and prevent the scion from drying up 
before it has been incorporated with the stock. Care 
must be taken that the bark of the scion is kept in- 
tact, and to that end it should be sharpened but so 
that the pith (medulla) is not exposed. To prevent 
the rain or the heat from injuring it from without, 
it should be smeared with clay and bound with bark. 
It is customary to take off the scion of a vine three 
days before it is to be grafted so that the superfluity 
of moisture may drain out before the scion is in- 
serted, or, if the graft is already in place, an incision 
is made in the stock a little below the graft from 
which the adventitious moisture may drain off: but 
this is not done with figs and pomegranates, for in 
all trees of a comparatively dry nature the graft is 
made immediately. Indeed, some trees, like the fig, 
are best grafted when the scion is in bud. 

Of the four kinds of propagation which I have 
discussed, that of graftage is preferred in respect of 
those trees which, like the fig, are slow in developing: 
[H7l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

for the natural seeds of the fig are those grains seen 
in the fruit we eat and are so small as scarcely to be 
capable of sprouting the slenderest shoots. For all 
seeds which are small and hard are slow in germinat- 
ing, while those which are soft are more spontaneous, 
just as girls grow faster than boys. Thus by reason 
of their feminine tenderness the fig, the pomegranate 
and the vine are quicker to mature than the palm, 
the cypress and the olive, which are rather dry than 
humid by nature. Wherefore we some times prop- 
agate figs in nurseries from cuttings rather than 
attempt to raise them from seed: unless there is no 
other way to secure them, as happens when one 
wishes to send or receive seed across the sea. For 
this purpose the ripe figs which we eat are strung 
together and when they have dried out are packed 
and shipped wheresoever we wish, and thereafter 
being planted in a nursery they germinate. In this 
way die Chian, the Chalcidian, the Lydian, the 
African and other foreign varieties of figs were im- 
ported jnto Italy. 

For the same reason olives are usually propagated 
in nurseries from truncheons such as I have described, 
rather than from its seed, which is hard like a nut and 
alow to germinate. 



[148] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of seeding alfalfa 

XLII. You should take care not to plant alfalfa ' 

1 Alfalfa is the Moorish name which the Spaniards brought 
to America with the forage plant Medicago Sativa, Linn., which 
all over Southern Europe is known by the French name lucerne. 
It is proper to honour the Moon by continuing in use their name 
for this interesting plant, because undoubtedly they preserved 
it for the use of the modern world, just as undoubtedly they 
bequeathed to us that fine sentiment known as personal honour. 

Alfalfa was one of the standbye of ancient agriculture. Accord- 
ing to Pliny, it was introduced into Italy from Greece, whence 
it had been brought from Asia during the Persian wars, and 
so derived its Greek and Roman name Mcdica. As Cato does 
not mention it with the other legumes he used, it is probable 
that the Romans had not yet adopted it in Cato's day, but by 
the time of Varro and Virgil it was well established in Italy. In 
Columella's day it was already a feature of the agriculture of 
Andalousia, and there the Moors, who loved plants, kept it 
alive, as it were a Vestal fire, while it died out of Italy during 
the Dark Ages: from Spain it spread again all over Southern 
Europe, and with America it was a fair exchange for tobacco. 
Alfalfa has always been the subject of high praise wherever it 
has been known. The Greek Amphilocnus devoted a whole 
book to it, as have the English Walter Harte in the middle of 
the eighteenth century and the American Coburn at the begin- 
ning of the twentieth century, but none of them is more instruc- 
tive on the subject of its culture than is Columella in a few 
paragraphs. Because of the difficulty of getting a stand of it 
in many soils, it is important to realize the pains which the 
Romans took with the seed bed, for it is on this point that most 
American farmers fail. Says Columella (II, 10): 

" But of all the legumes, alfalfa is the best, because, when once 
it is sown, it lasts ten years: because it can be mowed four times, 
and even six times, a year: because it improves the soil: be- 
cause all lean cattle grow fat by feeding upon it: because it is 
a remedy for sick beasts: because a jugerum (two-thirds of an 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

in soil which is neither too dry or half wet., 1 but in 
good order. The authorities say that if the soil is in 
proper condition a modius (peck) and a half of alfalfa 
seed will suffice to sow a jugerum of land. This seed 
is sowed broad-cast on the land like grass and grain. 

acre) of it will feed three horses plentifully for a year. We will 
teach you the manner of cultivating it, as follows: The land 
which you wish to set in alfalfa the following spring should 
be broken up about the Kalends of October, so that it may 
mellow through the entire winter. About the Kalends of Feb- 
ruary harrow it thoroughly, remove all the stones and break 
up the clods. Later, about the month of March, harrow it 
for the third time. When you have so got the land in good 
order, lay it off after the manner of a garden, in beds ten feet 
wide and fifty feet long, so that it may be possible to let in water 
by the paths, and access on every side may be had by the weeders. 
Then cover the beds with well rotted manure. At last, about 
the end of April, sow plentifully so that a single measure (cyan- 
thus) of seed will cover a space ten feet long and five wide. 
When you have done this brush in the seed with wooden rakes: 
this is most important for otherwise the sprouts will be withered 
by the sun. After the sowing no iron tool should touch the 
beds; but, as I have said, they should be cultivated with wooden 
rakes, and in the same manner they should be weeded so that 
no foreign grass can choke out the young alfalfa. The first cut- 
ting should be late, when the seed begins to fall: afterwards, when 
it is well rooted, you can cut it as young as you wish to feed to 
the stock. Feed it at first sparingly, until the stock becomes 
accustomed to it, for it causes bloat and excess of blood. After 
cutting, irrigate the beds frequently, and after a few days, when 
the roots begin to sprout, weed out all other kinds of grass. Cul- 
tivated in this way alfalfa can be mowed six times a year, and 
it will last for ten years." 

1 See the explanation of what the Romans meant by terra 
varia in the note on Cato V. ante, p. 40. 
[ISO] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of seeding clover and cabbage 
XLIII. Snail clover (cytisus) and cabbage is sowed 
in beds well prepared and is transplanted from them 
and set out so that the plants are a foot and a half 
apart, also cuttings are taken from the stronger plants 
and set out like those which were raised from seed. 

Of seeding grain 
XLIV. The quantity of seed required for one 
jugerum is, of beans, four modii, of wheat five modii, 
of barley six modii, and of spelt ten modii: in some 
places a little more or a little less; if the soil is rich, 
more; if it is thin, less. Wherefore you should ob- • 
serve how much it is the custom to sow in your 
locality in order that you may do what the region 
and the quality of the soil demands,. which is the more 
necessary as the same amount of seed will yield in 
some localities ten for one, and in others fifteen for 
one, as in Etruria. In Italy also, in the region of 
Sybaris it is said that seed yields as much as one 
hundred for one, and as much is claimed for the soil 
of Syria at Gadara, and in Africa at Byzacium. 1 

1 It U interesting to note from the statements in the text that 
in Varro'a time the Roman farmer in Italy both sowed and 
reaped substantially the same amount of wheat as does the 
American farmer today. Varro says that the Romans sowed 
five modii of wheat to the jugerum and reaped on the maximum 
fifteen for one. As the modius was nearly the equivalent of 
1 151] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

It is also important to consider whether you will 
sow in land which is cropped every year which we 
our peck, the Roman allowance for sowing corresponds to the 
present American practice of sowing seven pecks of wheat to 
the acre: and on this basis a yield of 26 bushels to the acre, which 
is not uncommon in the United States, is the equivalent of the 
Roman harvest of fifteen for one. 

It is fair to the average Italian farmer of the present day who 
is held up by the economists to scorn because he does not pro- 
duce more than eleven bushels of wheat to the acre, to record 
that in Columella's time, when agriculture had declined as com- 
pared with Varro'a experience, the average yield of grain in 
many parts of Italy did not exceed four for one (Columella, 
III, 3), or say seven and a half bushels to the acre. 

Varro's statement that at Byzacium in Africa wheat yielded 
100 for one, which Pliny (H. N. XVIII, 23} increases to 150 for 
one, means from 175 to 260 bushels per acre, seems incredible 
to us, but is confirmed by the testimony of agricultural practice 
in Palestine. Isaac claimed to reap an hundred fold, and the 
parable of the Sower alludes to yields of 30, 60 and 100 fold. 

Harte Essays on Husbandry, 91, says that die average yield 
in England in the middle of the eighteenth century was seven 
for one, though he records the case of an award by the Dublin 
Society in 176] to an Irish gentleman who raised 50 bushels 
of wheat from a single peck of seedl Harte was a parson, but 
apparently he did not bring the same unction into his agricul- 
ture as did the Rev. Robert Herrick to the husbandry of his 
Devonshire glebe, a century earlier. In Herrick's Thanksgiving 
to God for his House he sings: 

" Lord, 'tis thy plenty dropping hand 

That sous my land 
And giv*st me for my bushel sown 

Twice ten for one. 
Thou makfit my teeming hen to lay 

Her egg each day: 
Besides my healthful ewes to bear 
Me twins each year." 
[15*1 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

call resttbilis, or in fallow land (vervactum), which is 
[ploughed in the spring and so] allowed an interval 
of rest." 

"In Olynthia," said Agnus, "they are said to crop 
the land every year but to get a greater yield every 
third year." 

"A field ought to lie fallow every other year,** said 
Stolo, "or at least be planted with some crop which 
makes less demand upon the soil." 

3* CULTIVATING TIME 

"Tell us/' said Agnus, "about the third opera- 
tion which relates to the cultivation and the nourish- 
ment of the crops." 

Of the conditions of plant growth 
"All things which germinate in the soil,*' replied 
Licinius, "in the soil also are nourished, come to 
maturity, conceive, are pregnant and in due time 
bear fruit or ear, so each fruit after its kind yields 
seed similar to that from which it is sprung. Thus 
if you pluck a blossom or a green pear from a pear 
tree, or the like from any other tree, nothing will 
grow again in that place during the same year, be- 
cause a tree cannot have two periods of fruition in 
the same season.* They produce only as women bear 
children, when their time has come. 
[iS3] 

D. n tz™ by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

XLV. Barley usually sprouts in seven days after 
it has been sowed, and wheat not much later, while 
the legumes almost always sprout in four or five 
days, except the bean, which is somewhat later. 
Millet and sesame and the other similar grains sprout 
in the same time unless some thing in the nature of 
the soil or the weather retards them. If the locality 
is cold, those plants which are propagated in the 
nursery and are tender by nature ought to be pro- 
tected from the frosts by coverings of leaves or straw, 
and, if rains follow, care should be taken that water 
is not permitted to stand any where about them, for 
ice is a poison to tender roots under ground, as to 
sprouts above, and prevents them from developing 
normally. In autumn and winter the roots develop 
more than does the leaf of the plant because they 
are nourished by the warmth of the roof of earth, 
while the leaf above is cut down by the frosty air. 
We can learn this by observation of the wild vegeta- 
tion which grows without the intervention of man, 
for the roots grow more rapidly than that which 
springs from them, but only so far as they are actu- 
ated by the rays of the sun. There are two causes of 
the growth of roots, the vitality of the root itself by 
which nature drives it forward, and the quality of 
the soil which yields a passage more easily in some 
conditions than in others. 

[i54 1 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of the mechanical action of plants 
XLVI. In their effect upon plants such natural 
forces as I have mentioned produce some curious 
mechanical results. Thus it is possible to determine 
the time of the year from the motion of the leaves of 
certain trees like the olive, the white poplar and the 
willow, for when the summer solstice has arrived their 
leaves turn over. Not less curious is the habit of 
that flower which is called the heliotrope, which in 
the morning looks upon the rising sun and!, following 
its journey to its setting, never turns away its face. 

Of the protection of nurseries and meadows 
XL VII. Those plants, which, like olives and figs, 
are grown in the nursery from cuttings and are of a 
tender nature, should be protected by sheds built 
of two planks fastened at each end: moreover they 
should be weeded, and this should be done while 
the weeds are still young, for after they have be- 
come dry they offer resistance, and more readily 
break off in your hand than yield to your pull. On 
the other hand the grass which springs in the mead- 
ows and gives you hope of forage not only should 
not be rooted out while it is growing, but should not 
even be walked upon; hence both the flock and the 
herd should be excluded from the meadow at this 
l»55l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

time and even man himself should keep away, for 
grass disappears under the foot and the track soon 
becomes a path. 

Of the structure of a wheat plant 
XLVIII. A com plant consists of a culm bearing 
at its head a spike, which, when it is not mutilated, 
has, as in barley and wheat, three parts, namely: 
the grain, the glume and the beard, not to speak of 
the sheath which contains the spike while it is being 
formed. The grain is that solid interior part of the 
spike, the glume is its bull and the beard those long 
thin needles which grow out of the glume. Thus as 
the glume is the pontifical robe of the grain, the 
beard is its apex. The beard and the grain are well 
known to almost every one, but the glume to very 
few: indeed I know only one book in which it is men- 
tioned, the translation which Ennius made of the 
verses of Evhemerus. The etymology of the word 
gluma seems to be from glubere, to strip, because the 
grain must be stripped from this hull: and by a like 
derivation the hull of the fig which we eat is called a 
glume. The beard we call arista because it is the first 
part of the corn to dry (arescere), while we call the 
grain granum from the fact that it is produced (gerere), 
for we plant corn to produce grain, not glumes or 
beards, just as vines are planted to produce grapes, 
[156 1 

aatized by GoOgk 






ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

not tendrils. The spike, which, by tradition, the 
country people call speca, seems to get its name from 
spes t hope. r?or men plant with hope of the harvest. 
A spike which has no beard is called polled (mvticus), 
for, when the spike is first forming, the beard, like 
the horns of a young animal, is not apparent but 
lies hid like a sword in its scabbard under a wrapping 
of foliage which hence is called the sheath. When 
the spike is mature its taper end above the grain is 
called the frit, while that below, where the spike 
joins the straw culm, is called the urruncum." 

XLZX. When Stolo drew breath, no one asked 
any questions, and so, believing that enough had been 
said on the subject of the care of the growing crops, 
he resumed. 

4° HARVEST TIHB 

" I will now speak about the gathering of the crops. 

Of the hay harvest 
And first of the meadows: when the grass ceases 
to grow and begins to dry out with the heat, then it 
should be cut with scythes and, as it begins to cure, 
turned with forks. When it is cured it should be tied 
in bales and hauled into the steading; then what hay 
was left lying should be raked together and stacked, 
and, finally, when this has all been done, the meadow 
[i57l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

should be gleaned, that is, gone over with the sickle 
to save what ever grass escaped the mowing, such as 
that left standing on tussocks. From this act of 
cutting (sectare) I think that the word sicUire (to 
glean with a sickle) is derived. 

Of the wheat harvest 
L. The word harvest (messis) is properly used with 
respect to the ingathering of those crops which are 
reaped, and from this action (metere) its name is de- 
rived, but it is mostly used in respect of corn. There 
are three methods of harvesting corn, one as in Um- 
bria, where they cradle the straw close to the earth 
and shock up the sheaves as they are cut: when a 
sufficient number of shocks has been made, they go 
over them again and cut each sheaf between the 
spikes and the straw, the spikes being thrown into 
baskets and sent off to the threshing floor, while 
the straw is left in the field and stacked. A second 
method of harvesting is practised in Picenum, where 
they have a curved wooden header l on the edge of 

1 As the Gallic header here described by Varro is the direct 
ancestor of our modern marvellous self-binding harvester, it is 
of interest to rehearse the other ancient references to it. 

Pliny (ff. N. XVIII, 72) says: 

"In the vast domains of the provinces of Gaul a large hollow 

frame armed with teeth and supported on two wheels is driven 

through the standing corn, the beasts being yoked behind it, 

[158] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

which is fixed an iron saw: when this instrument 
engages the spikes of grain it cuts them off, leaving 
the result being that the ears are torn off and fall within the 
frame." 

Palladius (VII, 2) goes more into detail; 

"The people of the more level regions of Gaul have devised 
a method of harvesting quickly and with a minimum of human 
labour, for thereby a single ox is made to bear the burden of the 
entire harvest. A cart is constructed on two low wheels and is 
furnished with a square body, of which the side boards are ad- 
justed to slope upward and outward to make greater capacity. 
The front of the body is left open and there across the width of 
the cart are set a series of lance shaped teeth spaced to the 
distance between the grain stalks and curved upward. Behind 
the cart two short shafts are fashioned, like those of a litter, 
where the ox is yoked and harnessed with his head towards the 
cart: for this purpose it is well to use a well broken and sensible 
ox, which will not push ahead of his driver. When this machine 
is driven through the standing grain all the heads are stripped 
by the teeth and are thrown back and collected in the body of 
the cart, the straw being left standing. The machine is so con- 
trived that the driver can adjust its height to that of the grain. 
Thus with little going and coming and in a few short hours the 
entire harvest is made. This method is available in level or prairie 
countries and to those who do not need to save the straw." 

That ingenious Dutchman Conrad Heresbach refers, in his 
Husbandry, to Palladius' description of the Gallic header with 
small respect, which indicates that in the sixteenth century it 
was no longer in use. I quote from Bamaby Googe's translation 
of Heresbach (the book which served Izaak Walton as the model 
for his Compleat Angler) : "This tricke might be used in levell and 
champion countries, but with us it would make but ill-favoured 
worke." 

Dondlinger, in his excellent Book of Wheat (1908), which 
should be in the hands of every grain farmer, gives a picture 
reproducing the Gallic header and says: 

"After being used during hundreds of years the Gallic header 
[159] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the straw standing in the field, where it is afterwards 
cut. A third method of harvesting, which is used 
in the vicinity of Rome and in most places, is to cut 
the straw in the middle and take away the upper 
part with the left hand (whence the word to reap 
(metere) is, I think, derived from the word medium — 
connoting a cutting in the middle). The lower part 
of the straw which remains standing is cut later, 1 

disappeared, and it seems to have been completely forgotten for 
several centuries. Only through literature did it escape the fate 
of permanent oblivion and become a heritage for the modem 
world. The published description of the machine by Pliny and 
Pa.lla.dius furnished the impulse in which modern harvesting 
inventions originated. Its distinctive features are retained iu 
several modern inventions of this class, machines which have 
a practical use and value under conditions similar to those 
which existed on the plains of Gaul. Toward the close of the 
eighteenth century, the social, economic and agricultural con- 
ditions in England, on account of increasing competition and 
the higher value of labour, were ripe for the movement of in- 
vention that was heralded by the printed account of the Gallic 
header. The first header was constructed by William Pitt in 
1786. It was an attempted improvement on the ancient ma- 
chine in that the stripping teeth were placed in a cylinder which 
was revolved by power transmitted from the wheels. This 
' rippling cylinder 1 carried the heads of the wheat into the box 
of the machine, and gradually evolved into the present day reel." 

It may be added that the William Pitt mentioned was not 
the statesman, but a contemporary agricultural writer of the 
same name. 

1 According to Sir Anthony Fitzherbert it was the custom in 

England to shear wheat and rye and to leave the straw standing 

after the third method described by Varro, the purpose being to 

preserve the straw to be cut later for thatching, as threshing 

iico] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

while the rest, which goes with the grain, is hauled off 
in baskets to the threshing floor and there in an airy 
place is winnowed with a shovel {paid) from which 
perhaps the chaff {paled) takes its name. Some 
derive the name of straw (stramentvm) from the fact 
that it stands (stare), as they think the word stamen 
is also derived, while others derive it from the fact 
that it is spread (strare), because straw is used as 
litter for cattle. 

The grain should be harvested when it is ripe: it is 
considered that under normal conditions and in an 
easy field one man should reap almost a jugerum a 
day and still have tune to carry the grain in baskets 
to the threshing floor. 

The threshing floor 
LI. The threshing floor should be on high ground 
so that the wind can blow upon it from all directions. 
It should be constructed of a size proportioned to 
your crops, preferably round and with the centre 
slightly raised so that if it rains the water may not 
stand on it but drain off as quickly as possible, and 
there is no shorter distance from the centre to the 
circumference of a circle than a radius: 1 it should be 

it would necessarily destroy its value for thatching. It was the 
custom in England, however, to mow barley and oats. 

1 Pliny advises that the grain which collects on the circum- 
[161] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

paved with well packed earth, best of all of clay, so 
that it may not crack in the sun and open honey- 
combs in which the grain can hide itself, and water 
collect and give vent to the burrows of mice and ants. 
It is the practice to anoint the threshing floor with 
amurca, 1 for that is an enemy of grass and a poison 
to ants and to moles. Some build up and even pave 
their threshing floor-with rock to make it permanent, 
and some, like the people of Bagiennse, even roof it 
over because in that country storms are prevalent 
at the threshing season. In a hot country where the 
threshing floor is uncovered it is desirable to build a 
shelter near by where the hands can resort in the 
heat of the day. 

Threshing and winnowing 
LIT. The heaviest and best of the sheaves should 
be selected on the threshing floor and the spikes laid 
aside for seed. The grain is threshed from the spikes 
on the threshing floor, an operation which some per- 
form by means of a sledge drawn by a yoke of oxen: 
this sledge consisting of a wooden platform, studded 
underneath with flints or iron spikes, on which either 

ference of a threshing floor of this description be saved for seed 
because it is evidently the heaviest. 

1 In the Apennines today the threshing floor, or aja, is anointed 
with cow dung smeared smooth with water, doubtless for the 
same reason that the Romans so used amurca. 
[162] 

■Dintized by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the driver rides or some heavy weight is imposed in 
order, as it is drawn around, to separate the grain 
from the chaff: others use for this purpose what is 
called the punk cart, consisting of a series of axle 
trees, equipped with toothed rollers, on which some 
one sits and drives the cattle which draw it, as they 
do in hither Spain and other places. Others cause 
the grain to be trodden out under the hoofs of a herd 
of driven cattle, which are kept moving by goading 
them with long poles. 

When the grain has been threshed it should be 
tossed from the ground by means of a winnowing 
basket or a winnowing shovel when the wind is blow- 
ing gently, and this is done in such way that the 
lightest part, which is called the chaff, is blown away 
beyond the threshing floor, while the heavy part, 
which is the corn, comes clean into the basket. 1 

Gleaning 

LIII. After the harvest is over the grain fields 

should be gleaned of shattered grain, and the straw 

left in the field should be gathered and housed, but 

if there is little to be gained by such work, and the 

1 Between harvests the winnowing basket is quite generally 

used in Italy today for a cradle, as it was from the beginning 

of time, for there is an ancient gem representing the infant 

Bacchus asleep in a winnowing basket. 

[l63l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

expense is disproportionate, the stubble should be 
grazed: for in farming it is of the greatest importance 
that the expense of an operation shall not exceed the 
return from it. 

Of ike vintage 

LIV. In vineyards the vintage should begin when 
the grape is ripe, but care must be taken with what 
kind of grapes and in what part of the vineyard 
you begin: for the early grapes and the mixed variety, 
which is called black, ripen some time before the 
others and should be gathered first, like the fruit 
grown on the side of the arbustum, or of the vine- 
yard, which is exposed to the sun. During the gather- 
ing those grapes from which you expect to make 
wine should be separated from those reserved for the 
table: the choicer being carried to the wine press and 
collected in empty jars, while those reserved to eat 
are collected in separate baskets, transferred to 
little pots and stored in jars packed with marc, though 
some are immersed in the pond in jars daubed with 
pitch and some raised to a shelf in the store room. 

The stems and the skins of the grapes which have 
been trodden out should be put under the press so 
that any must left in them may be added to the 
supply in the vat. When this marc ceases to yield 
a flow, it is chopped with a knife and pressed again, 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and the must expressed by this final operation is 
hence called circumcisitum 1 and is kept by itself 
because it smacks of the knife. The marc finally 
remaining is thrown into jars, to which water is 
added, thus preparing a drink which is called after- 
wine or grape juice, and is given to the hands in the 
winter instead of wine. 

Of ike olive harvest 
LV. And now of the harvest of the olive yard.* 
You should pick by hand, rather than beat from the 
tree, all the olives which can be reached from the 
ground or from a ladder, because this fruit becomes 
arid when it has been struck and does not yield so 
much oil: and in picking by hand it is better to do so 
with the bare fingers rather than with a tool because 
the texture of a tool not only injures the berry but 
barks the branches and leaves them exposed to the 
frost. So it is better to use a reed than a pole to 
strike down the fruit which cannot be reached by 

1 What the French call, from the same practice, tin de rognure. 

1 Varro does not mention the season of the olive harvest, but 
Virgil tells us (G. II, 5 19) that in their day as now it was winter. 
Cato (XX-XXII) described the construction and operation of 
the trapetus in detail. It can still be seen in operation in Italy, 
turned by a patient donkey and Bowing with the new oil of an 
intense blue-green colour. It is always flanked by an array of 
vast storage jars {Cato's dolii now called orci), which make one 
realize the story of Alt Baba and the Forty Thieves. 
[i65l 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

hand, for (as the proverb is) the heavier the blow 
the more need there is for a surgeon. He who beats 
his trees should beware of doing injury, for often an 
olive when it is struck away brings down with it 
from the branch a twig, and when this happens the 
fruit of the following year is lost; and this is not the- 
least reason why it is said that the olive bears fruit, 
or much fruit, only every other year. 

Like the grape, the olive serves a two-fold function 
after it is gathered. Some are set aside to be eaten 
and the rest are made into oil, which comforts the 
body of man not only within but without, for it fol- 
lows us into the bath and the gymnasium. Those 
berries from which it is proposed to make oil are 
usually stored in heaps on tables for several days 
where they may mellow a little. Each heap in turn 
is carried in crates to the oil jars and to the trapetus, 
or pressing mill, which is equipped with both hard 
and rough stones. If the olives are left too long in 
the heap they heat and spoil and the oil is rancid, so 
if you are unable to grind promptly the heaps of 
olives should be ventilated by moving them. The 
yield of the olive is of two kinds, oil which is well 
known and amurca, of the use of which many are so 
ignorant that one can often see it streaming from 
the mill and wasting upon the ground where it not 
only discolours the soil, but in places where it collects 
[166] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

even makes it sterile: while if applied intelligently 
it has many uses of the greatest importance to agri- 
culture, as, for instance, by pouring it around the 
roots of trees, chiefly the olive itself, or wherever it is 
desired to destroy weeds." ! 

5° BOUSING TIME 

LVI. "Up to this moment," cried Agrius, "I have 
been sitting in the barn with the keys in my hands 
waiting for you, Stolo, to bring in the harvest." 

"Lo, I am here at the threshold," replied Stolo. 
"Open the gates for me. 

Of storing hay 
In the first place, it Is better to house your hay than 
to leave it stacked in the field, for thus it makes more 
palatable provender, as may be proven by putting 
both kinds before the cattle. 

Of storing grain 

LVII. But corn should be stored in an elevated 

granary, exposed to the winds from the east and the 

1 The Roman waste of amurca, through ignorance of its value, 
was like the American waste of the cotton seed, which for many 
years was thrown out from the gin to rot upon the ground, even 
its fertilizing use being neglected. Now cotton seed has a 
market value equivalent to nearly 20 per cent of that of the 
staple. It is used for cattle feed and also is made into lard and 
"pure olive oil," being exported in bulk and imported again in 
bottles with Italian labels. 

[167I 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

north, and where no damp air may reach it from 
places near at hand. The walls and the floors should 
be plastered with a stucco of marble dust or at least 
with a mixture of clay and chaff and amurca, for 
amurca will serve to keep out mice and weevil and 
will make the grain solid and heavy. Some men 
even sprinkle their grain with amurca in the propor- 
tion of a quadrantal to every thousand modii of 
grain: others crumble or scatter over it, for the same 
purpose, other vermifuges like Chalcidian or Carian 
chalk or wormwood, and other things of that kind. 
Some farmers have their granaries under ground, 
like caverns, which they call silos, as in Cappadocia 
and Thrace, while in hither Spain, in the vicinity of 
Carthage, and at Osca pits are used for this purpose, 
the bottoms of which are covered with straw: and 
they take care that neither moisture nor air has ac- 
cess to them, except when they are opened for use, 
a wise precaution because where the air does not 
move the weevil will not hatch. Corn stored in this 
way is preserved for fifty years, and millet, indeed, 
for more than a century. 

On the other hand again, in hither Spain and in 
certain parts of Apulia they build elevated granaries 
above ground, which the winds keep cool, not only 
by windows at the sides but also from underneath 
the floor. 

[168] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of storing legumes 
LVIII. Beans and other legumes keep safe a long 
time in oil jars covered with ashes. Cato says the 
little Aminnean grape, as well as the large variety 
and that called Apician, keep very well when buried 
in earthen pots: or they may be preserved quite as 
well in boiled new wine, or in fresh after-wine. The 
varieties which keep best when hung up are the hard 
grapes and those known as the Aminnean Scantian. 

Of storing pome fruits 

LIX. The pome fruits, like the preserving sparrow 
apples, quinces and the varieties of apples known as 
Scantian, and 'little rounds' (orbiculata) and those 
which formerly were called winesap (mustea), and 
now are called honey apples (melimela), can all be 
kept safely in a cold and dry place when laid on straw, 
and so those who build fruit houses take care to have 
the windows give upon the north wind and that it 
may blow through them: but they should not be left 
without shutters for fear that the fruits should lose 
their moisture and become shrivelled by the effect 
of the continuous wind. 

The vaults, the walls and the pavements of these 

fruiteries are usually laid in stucco to keep them cool: 

thus rendering them such pleasant resorts that some 

[169] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

men even spread there their dining couches: as well 
they may, for if the pursuit of luxury impels some 
of us to turn our dining rooms into picture galleries 
in order to regale even our eyes with works of art 
[while we eat], should we not find still greater grati- 
fication in contemplating the works Of nature dis- 
played in a savory array of beautiful fruits, especially 
if this was not procured, as has been done, by setting 
up in your fruitery on the occasion of a party a sup- 
ply of fruit purchased for the purpose in town? 

Some think best to dispose their apples in the 
fruitery on concrete tables, others on beds of straw, 
and some even on flocks of wool. 

Pomegranates are preserved by sticking their twigs 
in jars of sand, quinces and sparrow apples are 
strung together and hung up, but the late maturing 
Anician pears are best preserved in boiled must. 
Sorbs and pears also are some times cut up and dried 
in the sun, though the sorb may be easily preserved 
intact by keeping them in a dry place: turnips are 
cut up and preserved in mustard, while walnuts keep 
well in sand, as I have explained with respect to ripe 
pomegranates. There is a similar way of ripening 
pomegranates: put the fruit, while it is still green 
and attached to its branch, in a pot without a bottom, 
bury this in the earth and scrape the soil around the 
protruding branch so as to keep out the air, and 
[170] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

when the pomegranates are dug up they will be found 
to be not only intact but larger than if they had hung 
all the time on the tree. 

Of storing olives 
LX. With respect to preservingolives,Cato advises 
that table olives, both the round and the bitter berried 
kinds, keep best in brine both when they are dry 
and when they are green, but if they are bruised it 
is well to put them in mastich oil. Round olives 
will retain their black colour if they -are packed in 
salt for five days, and then, the salt having been 
brushed away, are exposed for two days in the sun: 
or they may be preserved in must boiled down to 
one-third, without the use of salt. 

Of storing amurca 
LXL Experienced farmers do well to save their 
amurca as they do their oil and their wine. The 
method of preserving it is this: immediately after 
the oil has been pressed out, draw off the amurca 
and boil it down to one-third and, when it has cooled, 
store it in vats. There are other methods also, as 
that in which must is mingled with the amurca. 

6° CONSUMING TIME 

LXII. Since no one stores his crops except to bring 
them out again, it remains to make a few observa- 
[171] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

tions upon the sixth and last operation in our round 
of agriculture. 

Crops which have been stored are brought out 
either to care for them, to consume them or to sell 
them, and as all crops are not alike there are different 
times for caring for them and for consuming them. 

Of cleaning grain 
LXIII. Grain is taken out of store to be cleaned, 
when the weevil begins to damage it. When thia is 
apparent the grain should be laid out in the sun and 
bowls of water placed nearby and the weevil will 
swarm on this water and drown themselves. Those 
who store their grain in the pits which are called silos 
should not attempt to bring out the grain for some 
time after the silo has been opened because there is 
danger of suffocation in entering a recently opened 
silo. The corn which, during the harvest time, you 
stored in the ear and which you contemplate using 
for food, should be brought out during the winter to 
be crushed and ground in the grist mill. 

Of condensing amurca 

LXIV. When it flows from the oil mill, amurca is 

a watery fluid full of dregs. It Is the custom to store 

it in this state in earthen jars and fifteen days later 

to skim off the scum from the top and transfer this 

[172] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

to other jars, an operation which is repeated at 
regular intervals twelve times during the following 
six months, taking care that the last skimming is 
done on the wane of the moon. Then it is boiled in a 
copper kettle over a slow fire until it is reduced two- 
thirds, when it may be drawn off for use. 

Of racking wine 
LXV. When the must is stored in the vat to make 
wine, it should not be racked off while it is fermenting 
nor until this process has advanced so far that the 
wine may be considered to be made. If you wish 
to drink old wine, it is not made until a year is com- 
pleted; when it is a year old, then draw it out. But 
if your vineyard contains that kind of grape which 
turns sour early, you should eat the fruit, or sell it 
before the succeeding vintage. There are kinds of 
wine, like that of Falemum, which improve the 
longer you keep them. 

Of preserved olives 
LXVL If you attempt to eat white olives immedi- 
ately after you have put them up and before they 
are cured your palate will reject them on account 
of their bitterness (and the same is true of the black 
olive) unless you dip them in salt to make them 
palatable. 

[i73l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of nuts, dates and figs 

LXVII. The sooner you use nuts, dates and figs 
after they have been stored, the more palatable they 
will be, for by keeping figs lose their flavour, dates rot 
and nuts dry up. 

Of stored fruits 

LXVIII. Fruits which are strung, such as grapes, 
apples and sorbs show by their appearance when 
they may be taken down for use, for by their change 
of colour and shrinking they reveal themselves as 
destined to the garbage pile unless they are eaten in 
time. Sorbs which have been laid by when they are 
already dead-ripe should be used promptly, but those 
which were picked green are slower to decay: for green 
fruit in the store house must there go through the 
process of ripening which was denied it on the tree. 

Of marketing grain 
LXIX. The spelt which you wish to have prepared 
for food should be taken out in the winter to be 
ground in the mill: but your seed corn should not be 
taken out until the fields are ready to receive it, a 
rule which obtains in respect of all kinds of seed. 
What you have for sale should be taken out at the 
appropriate time also, for some things which cannot 
be kept long without spoiling should be taken out 
U74l 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and sold promptly, while others which keep should 
be retained so that you may sell when the price is 
high, for often commodities which are kept on hand 
a long time, will, if put on the market at the proper 
time, not only yield interest for the time you held 
them but even a double profit." 

As Stolo was speaking, the freedman of the Sacris- 
tan ran up to us with his eyes full of tears and, beg- 
ging our pardon for having kept us waiting so long, 
invited us to come to the funeral on the following 
day. We all sprang up and cried out together " What ? 
To the funeral? Whose funeral? What has hap- 
pened?" 

The freedman, weeping, told us that his master 
' had been struck down by a blow with a knife, but 
who did it he had been unable to discover by reason 
of the crowd, all that he heard being an exclamation 
that a mistake had been made. He added that when 
he had carried his master home and had sent the serv- 
ants to call a doctor, whom they brought back with 
them quickly, he trusted that it might seem reason- 
able to us that he had waited to attend upon the doc- 
tor rather than come to notify us at once, and while 
he had not been able to be of any service to his mas- 
ter, who had given up the ghost in a few minutes, yet 
he hoped we might approve his conduct. 
[i75 I 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Accepting these excuses as amply justified, we 
descended from the temple bewildered more by the 
hazard of human life than surprised that such a fate 
should be possible at Rome: 1 and so we went our 
several ways. 

1 Cf. Fowler, Socio/ Life at Rome in the Age of Cicero. "Let 
us consider that io a large city today the person and property 
of all, rich or poor, are adequately protected by a sound system 
of police and by courts of first instance which are sitting every- 
day. Assault and murder, theft and burglary are exceptional. 
It might be going too far to say that at Rome they were the 
rule: but it is the fact that in what we may call the slums of 
Rome there was no machinery for checking them. ... It is 
the great merit of Augustus that he made Rome not only a city 
of marble but one in which the persons and property of all 
citizens were fairly secure." 

There are several contemporary references to the crowded 
and dangerous condition of the streets of Rome at the end of 
the Republic. Cicero (Ptancius, 7) tells how he was pushed 
against the arch of Fabtus while struggling through the press 
of the Via Sacra, and exonerates from blame the man who was 
the immediate cause of his inconvenience, holding that the one 
next beyond was more responsible: in which judgment Cicero 
was of the opinion of Mr. Justice Blackstone in the famous 
leading case of Scott p. Shepherd (1 Smith's L. C, 480), where 
the question was who was liable for the damage eventually done 
by the burning squib which was passed about the market house 
by successive hands. The majonty of the court held, however, 
against Blackstone and Cicero, and established the doctrine of 
proximate cause. 



1 176] 

aatized by GoOgk 




BOOK II 

THE HUSBANDRY OF LIVE STOCK 

Introduction: the decay of country life 

rIOSE great men our ancestors did 
I well to esteem the Romans who lived 
1 in the country above those who dwelt 
I in town. For as our peasants today 
fl contemn the tenant of a villa as an 
idler in comparison with the busy life of an agricul- 
tural labourer, so our ancestors regarded the sedentary 
occupations of the town as waste of time from their 
habitual rural pursuits: and in consequence they so 
divided their time that they might have to devote 
only one day of the week to their affairs in town, 
reserving the remaining seven for country life. 1 

So long as they persisted in this practice they ac- 
complished two things both that their farms were 

1 The Roman week {nundinum, or more properly inter nun- 
dinum) was of eight days, the last being the market day on which 
the citizens rested from agricultural labour and came into town 
to sell and buy and talk politics. Cf. Pliny, XVIII, 3. This 
custom which Varro regrets had fallen into desuetude so far 
as Rome was concerned was in his day still practised in the 
provinces. Thus the five tenants on Horace's Sabine farm were 
wont to go every nundinum to the market town of Varia (die 
modern Vicovara) to transact public business (Epist. 1, 14, 2). 
[177] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

fertile through good cultivation and that they them- 
selves enjoyed the best of health: they felt no need 
of those Greek gymnasia which now every one of us 
must have in his town house, nor did they deem that 
in order to enjoy a house in the country one must give 
sounding Greek names to all its apartments, such as 
npoKoiTav (antechamber) vaXatarpa (exercising room) 
am&vr^ptav (dressing room) mpum/\av (arcade) ipvir 
0dv (poultry house) vepurrepetSv (dove cote) 6wt»po&i]Kt] 
(fruitery) and the like. 

Since now forsooth most of our gentry crowd into 
town, abandoning the sickle and the plough and prefer 
to exercise their hands in the theatre and the circus 
rather than in the corn field and the vineyard, it has 
resulted that we must fain buy the very corn that 
fills our bellies and have it hauled in for us, yea, out 
of Africa and Sardinia, while we bring home the 
vintage in ships from the islands of Cos and Chios ! 

And so it has happened that those lands which 
the shepherds who founded the city taught their 
children to cultivate are now, by their later descend- 
ants, converted again from corn fields back to pas- 
tures, thus in their greed of gain violating even the 
law, since they fail to distinguish the difference be- 
tween agriculture and grazing. 1 For a shepherd is 

1 Varro here refers to the great economic change which was 

coming over Italian husbandry in the last days of the Republic, 

[178] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

one thing and a ploughman another, nor for all that 
he may feed his stock on farm land is a drover the 
same as a teamster: herded cattle, indeed, do nothing 
to create what grows in the land, but destroy it with 
their teeth, while the yoked ox on the contrary con- 
duces to the maturity of grain in the corn fields and 
forage in the fallow land. The practice and the arO 
of the fanner is one thing, I say; that of the shepherd 
another; the farmer's object being that what ever 
may be produced by cultivating the land should 
yield a profit; that of the shepherd to make his profit 
from the increase of his flock; and yet the relation 
between them is intimate because it is much more 
desirable for a fanner to feed his forage on the land 
than to sell it, and a herd of cattle is the best source 
of supply of that which is the most available food 
of growing plants, namely, manure: 1 so it follows s 
that whoever has a farm ought to practise both arts, 
that of agriculture and that of grazing cattle, indeed, 
also that of feeding game, as is done at our country 

the disappearance of the small farms, the " septem jugcra " which 
nurtured the early Roman heroes like Cincinnatus and Dentatus, 
and even the larger, but still comparatively small, farms which 
Cato describes, and the development of the latifundia given over 
to grazing. 

1 The tradition is, says Pliny, that King Augeas was the 

first in Greece to use manure, and that Hercules introduced the 

practice into Italy. To the wise farmer the myth of the Augean 

stables is the genesis of good agriculture. 

[I79l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

houses, since no little profit may be derived from 
aviaries and rabbit warrens and fish ponds. And 
since I have written a book concerning the first of 
these occupations — that of the husbandry of agri- 
culture — for my wife Fundania because of her in- 
terest in that subject, now, my dear Turranius Niger, 
I write this one on the husbandry of live stock for 
you, who are so keen a stock fancier that you are 
a frequent attendant at the cattle market at Macri 
Campi, where, by your fortunate speculations, you 
have found means to make provision for many crying 
expenses. 

I could do this on my own authority because I am 
myself a considerable owner of live stock with my 
flocks of sheep in Apulia and my stud of horses at 
Reate, but I will run through the subject, briefly and 
summarily rehearsing what I gathered from conversa- 
tion with certain large stock feeders in Epirus at the 
time when, being in command of the fleet in Greece 
during the war with the pirates, I lay between Delos 
and Sicily. 1 

1 This was the " crowded hour" in Varro's life, and, as M. Bois- 
ster has pointed out, he loved to dwell upon its episodes. It 
will be recalled that Pompey divided the Mediterranean into 
thirteen districts for the war with the Pirates and put a re- 
sponsible lieutenant in command of each, thus enabling him by 
concurrent action in all the districts to clear the seas in three 
months. Appian gives the list of officers and the limits of their 
commands, saying: "The coasts of Sicily and the Ionian sea 
[180] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of the origin, the importance and the economy of live 
stock husbandry 

I. l When Menates had gone, Cossinhis said to me: 
"We shall not let you go until you have explained 
those three points which you began to discuss the 
other day when we were interrupted." 

"What three points," said Muirius. "Are they 
those concerning feeding cattle, of which you spoke 
to me yesterday?" 

"Yes," replied Cossinius, "they are the considera- 
tions of what was the origin, what the importance, 

as far as Acarnania were entrusted to Plotius and Varro." It 
is difficult to understand Varro's own reference to Delos, but 
Appian makes clear how it happened that Varro was stationed 
on the coast of Epirus and so fell in with the company of "half 
Greek shepherds who are the dramatis persona of the second 
book. As the scene of the first book was laid in a temple of 
Tellus, so this relating to live stock is cast in a temple of Pales, 
the goddess of shepherds, on the occasion of the festival of the 
Parma, and the names of the characters have a punning refer- 
ence to live stock. 

1 The codices here contain an interpolation of the words 
"HIC INTERMISIMUS," to indicate that a part of the text 
is missing, with which judgment of some early student of the 
archetype Victorius, Scaliger and Ursinus, as well as their suc- 
cessors among the commentators on Varro, have all agreed. 
It is a pleasure to record the agreement on this point, because 
it is believed to be unique: but many precedents for plunging 
the reader in medias res, as does the surviving text, might be 
found in the modern short story of the artist in style. As M. 
Boissier points out Varro might have cited the beginning of the 
Odyssey as a precedent for this. 

[i8i] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and what the economy of the husbandry of live stock. 
Varro here had begun to discourse upon them while 
we were calling on Petus during his illness, when the 
arrival of the physician interrupted us." 

"Of the three divisions of the Urroputfo or inter- 
pretation of this subject, which you have mentioned, 
I will venture," said I, "to speak only of the first 
two, of the origin and of the importance of this indus- 
try. The third division, of how it should be prac- 
tised, Scrofa shall undertake for us, as one, if I may 
speak Greek to a company of half Greek shepherds 
os irtp pav voKKbv ifxeivay (who is better qualified 
than I am), 1 for Scrofa was the teacher of C. Lucilius 
Hirrus, your son-in-law, whose flocks and herds in 
Bruttii have such reputation." 

"But," interrupted Scrofa, "you shall hear what 
we have to say only on condition that you, who come 
from Epirus and are masters of the art of feeding 
cattle, shall recompense us and shall give public 
testimony of what you know on the subject: for none 
of us knows it all." 

1 This is a paraphasc of a favorite locution of Homer's heroes, 
whose characteristic modesty does not, however, permit them 
to apply h to themselves, as Varro does. Thus in Iliad, VII, 
114, Agamemnon advises Menelaos not to venture against 
Hector, whom "even Achillea dreadeth to meet in battle, 
wherein is the warrior's glory, and Achilles is better far than 
thou," 

Ii8a] 



byGoogle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Having thus assumed that my share of the discus- 
sion should be the first or theoretical part of the 
subject (which I did, although I have a stock farm 
in Italy, because, as the proverb is, not every one 
who owns a lyre is a musician), I began: 

"Doubtless in the very order of nature both man 
and cattle have existed since the beginning of time, 
for whether we believe that there was a First Cause 
of the generation of animals, as Thales of Miletus and 
Zeno of Citium maintained, or that there was none 
as was the opinion of Pythagoras of Samos and Aris- 
totle of Stagira, it is, as Dicaearchus points out, a 
necessity of human life to have descended gradually 
from the earliest time to the present day: thus in 
the beginning was the primitive age when man lived 
on whatever the virgin soil produced spontaneously; 
thence he descended to the second or pastoral age, 
when, as he had formerly gathered for his use acorns, ' 
strawberries, mulberries and apples by picking them 
from trees and bushes, so now, to satisfy a like need, 
he captured in the woods such as he could of the wild 
beasts of the field, and, having enclosed, began to 
domesticate them. Among these it is considered 

1 Virgil {.Mn. VII, 314) made a fine line out of this tradition, 
endowing the sturdy race of Fauns and Nymphs who inhabited 
the land of Saturn before the Golden Age, with the qualities of 
the trees on whose fruit they subsisted, gensque virum truncis 
et dura robore nata." 

1 183] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

not without reason that sheep were foremost, both 
because of their utility and because of their docile 
nature, for this animal is the gentlest of all and most 
readily accommodated to the life of man, and supplies 
him with milk and cheese for food, and skins and 
wool to clothe his body. 

Finally, by the third step, man descended from 
the pastoral age to that of agriculture. In this there 
have persisted many relics of the two preceding ages, 
which, long remaining in their original state, are 
found even in our day: for in many places may yet be 
seen some kinds of our domestic cattle still in their 
wild state, such as the large flocks of wild sheep in 
Phrygia, and in Samothrace a species of wild goats 
like those which are called " big horns " (platycerotes) 
and abound in Italy on the mountains of Fiscellum 
and Tetrica. Every body knows that there are wild 
swine, unless you maintain that the wild boar is 
not a true member of the swine family. 

There are still many cattle running at large in 
Dardania, Medica and Thrace, while there are wild 
asses in Phrygia and Lycaonia, and wild horses in 
certain regions of hither Spain. 

I have now told you of the origin of the industry 
of feeding cattle. As to its importance, I have this 
to say: 

The most important persons of antiquity were 
[18+] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

all keepers of live stock, as both the Greek and Latin 
languages reveal, as well as the earliest poets, who 
describe their heroes some as irokvapvos (rich in 
lambs), some as iroXwjnjXos (rich in sheep), and 
others as iroXu/Jovnjs (rich in herds), and tell of flocks 
which on account of their value were said to have 
golden fleeces, like that of Atreus in Argos which he 
complained that Thyestes stole away from him: or 
that ram which iEetes sacrificed at Colchis, whose 
fleece was the quest of those princes known as the 
Argonauts: or again like those so called golden apples 
(mala) of the Hesperides that Hercules brought back 
from Africa into Greece, which were, according to 
the ancient tradition, in fact goats and sheep which 
the Greeks, from the sound of their voice, called 
ftTJka: indeed, much in the same way our country 
people, using a different letter (since the bleat of a 
sheep seems to make more of the sound of bee than 
of me) say that sheep "be- alare," whence by the eli- 
sion of a letter as often happens, is derived the word 
before (or balare), to bleat. 

If cattle had not been held in the highest esteem 
among the ancients the astrologers would not have 
called the signs of the zodiac by their names in 
describing the heavens: and they not only did not 
hesitate to place them there but many even begin 
their enumeration of the twelve signs with these 
[•85] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

animal names, thus giving Aries and Taurus pre- 
cedence over Apollo and Hercules, whose signs, very 
gods as they are, are subordinated under the name of 
Gemini: nor did they deem that a sixth of these 
twelve signs was a sufficient proportion for the names 
of cattle, but they must even add Capricornus and . 
make it a quarter. Furthermore, in naming the ,. 
constellations they selected other names of cattle, 
as the goat, the kid, and the dog. And in like manner 
have not certain parts both of the sea and of the 
land taken their names from cattle, as witness the 
yEgean Sea, which is called after the Greek name for 
goat (ofyeos), and Mount Taurus in Syria after 
the bull, and Mount Cantherius in the Sabine coun- 
try after the horse, and the Thracian, as well as the 
Cimmerian, Bosphorus, after the ox: and again many 
place names on land like the town in Greece known 
as soma* "Apyos, or horse breeding Argos. Yea, 
Italy itself derives its name, according to Piso, from 
vitula, our word for heifer. 

Who can deny that the Roman people themselves 
are sprung from a race of shepherds, for every one 
knows that Faustulus, the foster father of Romulus 
and Remus, who brought them up, was a shepherd. 
Is it not proof that they were shepherds that they 
chose the Parilia, or feast of the goddess of the shep- 
herds, in preference to all other days, for the found- 
[186I 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

ing of the city; that a penalty even to this day is 
assessed in terms of cattle or sheep, according to the 
ancient custom; that our most ancient money, the 
as of cast copper, always bore the effigy of some 
domestic animal; that whenever a town was founded 
the limits of the walls and the gates were laid off with 
.p. plough drawn by a bull and a cow yoked together; 
that when the Roman people are purified it is done 
by driving around them a boar, a ram and a bull, 
whence the sacrifice is known as the Suovetaurilia; 
that we have many family names among us derived . 
from both the great and small cattle: thus from small 
cattle Porcius, Ovinius, Caprilius, and from great 
cattle Equitius, Taurius, and some of our families 
have received from cattle cognomens which signify 
for what they are esteemed, as, for instance, the 
Annius family are called Capra, the Statilius family 
are called Taurus aud the Pomponius family are 
called Vitulus, and so many others are derived from 
cattle. 

It remains now to discuss the art of animal hus- 
bandry, and on this subject our friend Scrofa, to 
whom this age has awarded the palm for excellence 
in all branches of farm management, will say what 
ever is to be said, as he is better qualified than am I." 
When all eyes had been turned upon him, Scrofa 
began: 

(187) 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

" Doubtless the art of breeding and of feeding cattle 
consists in getting the maximum profit out of those 
things from which the very name of money is derived, 
for our word for money tyecunia) comes from ptcus, 
cattle, which is the foundation of all wealth. 

Our enquiry may be divided into nine subjects, 
or three parts each with three subdivisions, namely: 
(i) concerning small cattle, of which the three kinds 
are sheep, goats and swine: (2) concerning large 
cattle, which are likewise divided by nature into 
three species, neat cattle, asses and horses: and (3) 
concerning those instruments of animal husbandry 
which are not kept for profit but for convenience, 
namely: mules, dogs and shepherds. Each of these 
nine subjects must be considered under nine heads: 
(a) four relating to the acquisition of cattle, (b) four 
to the care of them, and (c) one which has to do with 
all the others. So there are at least eighty-one chap- 
ters for discussion of the subject, all indispensable 
and all of great importance. 

Under the head (a) of acquisition, it is first of all 
necessary, to enable you to buy good live stock, that 
you should know at what age it is best to buy and 
to keep each different kind. For instance, you may 
buy neat cattle for less money before they are a year 
old and after they are ten, because they begin to 
breed at two or three years and leave off soon after the 
[188 1 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

tenth year, the beginning and the end of the life of 
all live stock being sterile. The second consideration 
under this head is- a knowledge of the conformation 
of each kind of cattle and what it should be, for this 
is of great importance in determining the value of 
all animals. Thus experienced stockmen buy cattle 
with black horns rather than white, large goats 
rather than small, and swine with long bodies and 
short heads. The third consideration under this 
head is to make sure of the breeding. On this ac- 
count the asses of Arcadia are celebrated in Greece, 
as are those of Reate in Italy, so that I remember 
an ass that brought sixty thousand sesterces, and a 
four-in-hand team at Rome that was held at four 
hundred thousand. The fourth consideration is of 
the legal precautions to be observed in buying live 
stock, for in order that title may pass from one to 
another certain formalities must intervene, since 
neither a contract nor even the payment of the pur- 
chase money suffices in all cases to transfer a title: 
thus in buying you some times stipulate that the 
animal is in good health, some times that it comes 
out of a healthy flock or herd, and some times no 
stipulation at all is made. 

Under the head (b) of the care of live stock, the 
four considerations are what should be done, after 
you have bought your cattle, in respect of feeding, 
[189] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

of breeding, of raising them, and of maintaining their 
health. In the matter of feeding, which is the first 
of these considerations, the three things to be ob- 
served are where and how much, when, and on what 
your cattle will graze: thus it suits goats better to 
graze on rough and mountain land than in fat pas- 
tures, while the contrary is true of horses. Nor are 
the same places fit for grazing for all kinds of cattle 
both in summer and winter: thus flocks of sheep are 
driven from Apulia a long distance into Samnium to 
spend the summer, and are reported to the tax farmer 
to be registered lest they violate the regulations of 
the censor. 1 

In the same way mules are driven in the summer 
from the prairie of Rosea to the high mountains of 
Gurgures. 

The rules for feeding each kind of live stock in the 
barn yard must also be studied, as, for instance, 
that hay is fed to the horse and the ox, while it will 
not do for swine which require mast, and that barley 
and beans should at intervals be fed to some kinds 
of stock, lupines to draft cattle and alfalfa and clover 
to milch cows. Furthermore, it is desirable to feed 

1 In the registers of the censors every thing from which the 
public revenues were derived was set down under the head of 

iiascua, or "pasture lands," because for a long time the pasture 
ands were the only source of such revenue. Cf. Pliny, H. N. 
XVIII, 3 

[190] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the ram and the bull more heavily for thirty days 
before admitting them to the flock and the herd, the 
purpose being to increase their strength, while on 
the other hand the feed of the cows is cut down at 
that time because it is deemed that they breed most 
successfully when they are thin. 

The next consideration is concerning breeding, 
which I call the period between conception and birth, 
for these are the beginning and the end of pregnancy. 
First of all then we should consider the stinting and 
the season at which this should be accomplished, 
for as the season from the rising of the west wind 
to the vernal equinox (February-March) is con- 
sidered best for swine, so that from the setting of 
Arcturus to the setting of Aquila (May-July) is best 
for sheep. Furthermore, a rule should be made that 
the male animals are kept apart from the females 
for some time before they are bred, a period which 
neatherds and shepherds usually fix at two months. 
The next consideration is of the rules to be observed 
while the animal is pregnant, because the periods of 
gestation differ in the several domestic animals : thus 
the mare goes twelve months, the cow ten, the ewe 
and the goat five and the sow four. 

In Spain is reported a phenomenon of breeding 
which seems incredible, but is nevertheless true, 
namely: that on Mount Tagnus on that part of the 
[191] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

coast of Lusitania near the town df Olisippo, mares 
are some times impregnated by the wind, 1 some thing 
which often happens with respect to chickens, whence 
their eggs are called vrr^v^utt (conceived by the 
wind), 1 but the foals born of such mares never live 
more than three years. 

When lambs are born in due season, or what we 
call chordi (that is to say those lambs which are born 
late and have remained beyond their season in the 
■ belly of the dam, the name chordi, being derived from 

'Olisippo is the modern Lisbon. This tradition about the 
mares of the region is repeated by Virgil (Geo. Ill, 272) by 
Columella (VI, 27) and by Pliny (VIII, 67). Professor Ridge- 
way in The Origin and Influence of the Thoroughbred Hone 
describes it as "an etiological myth to explain the swiftness 
of horses" for the fleetest horses came out of the West; thus 
Pegasus was born at the springs of the ocean, and there is the 

Sassage in Homer {Iliad, XVI, 149) about the horses "that 
ew as swift as the winds, the horses that the harpy Podarge 
(Swift Foot) bare to the West Wind as she grazed on the mead- 
ows by the stream of the Ocean." Hence wc may conclude 
that there was a race of swift horses in Portugal in the earliest 
times, which Professor Ridgeway would doubtless like very 
much to prove, in support of his interesting thesis, were derived 
from Libya. 

1 Hypenemia, or barren eggs, are described intelligently by 
Aristotle (H. A. V. i ; 4, VI. 2, <;), and, with Varro's confidence 
in the country traditions, by Pliny, H. N. X, 80. 

If he had known it, Varro might have here cited the fact that 

the unfertilized queen bee is part henogene tic, though producing 

only male bees; i. e., drones: but it remained for a German 

clergyman, Dzierzon, to discover this in the eighteenth century. 

1 192] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Xoptov the Greek name for the membrane which is 
called the after birth), care must be taken to clean 
them and set them gently on their feet and to prevent 
the dam from crushing them. 

On the third consideration with respect to raising 
young animals, you must consider for how long they 
should be permitted to suck the dam and when and 
where, and if the mother has an insufficient supply 
of milk, how you may put the young one to nurse 
at the udder of another: in which case they are called 
subrumi, that is to say, under the udder, for I think 
that rumis is an old word for udder. 

Lambs are weaned usually at the end of four 
months, kids in three, pigs in two. Weanling pigs, 
from the fact that they are considered fit to be offered 
for sacrifice at that age, were formerly called sacres, 
as Plautus calls them when he says," What's the price 
of sacred pigs?" 1 In like manner stall fed cattle, 

1 Cf. Plautus Menachmi, II, 2, 279. One of the two Me- 
nsechmi is, on his arrival at Epidamnus, mistaken for his brother, 
of whose existence he does not know, and much to his amaze- 
ment is introduced into the brother's life and possessions. At 
first he expostulates, accusing the slave of the brother, who has 
mistaken his identity, of being crazy and offers to exorcise him 
by a sacrifice of weanling pigs, wherefore he asks the question 
quoted in the text. Varro was evidently fond of this passage, 
as he quotes it again, pott p. 221. The Menachmi is one of the 
immortal comedies and has survived in many forms on the 
modern stage all over Europe. From it Shakespeare derived 
the plot of the Comedy of Errors. 
[193) 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

which are being fattened for the public sacrifices, 
are called ofimi. 

The fourth consideration relates to the health of 
the cattle, a subject as important as it is complex, 
for a single beast which may be sick or infected and 
ailing often brings a great calamity on an entire herd. 
There are two degrees of the healing art, one which 
requires consultation with a surgeon, as for men: 
the other which the skilful shepherd can himself 
practise, and this consists of three parts, namely: 
the consideration of what are the causes, the symp- 
toms and the treatment which should be followed in 
relation to each malady. The common causes of 
disease in cattle are excess of heat or of cold, over- 
work, or its opposite lack of exercise, or, if when they 
have been worked, you give them food and drink at 
once without an interval of rest. The symptoms of 
fever due to heat or overwork are a gaping mouth, 
heavy humid breath and a burning body. The cure 
when such is the malady is this : bathe the animal with 
water, rub it with a warm mixture of oil and wine, 
put it on a nourishing diet, blanket it as protection 
against chills and give it tepid water when it is 
thirsty. 1 If this treatment does not suffice, let the 
blood, chiefly from the head. 

1 It is interesting to compare these sane therapeutics with 

Cato's practice less than two hundred years previous {ante, 

[I94J 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

So there are different causes and different symp- 
toms of the maladies peculiar to each kind of cattle, 
and the flock master should have them all written 
down. 

It remains to speak of the ninth head (c), which I 
mentioned, and this relates to the number of cattle 
to be kept and so concerns both of the other heads. 

For whoever buys cattle must consider the number 
of herds and how many in each herd he can feed on 
his land, lest his pastures prove short or more than 
he need, as so in either case the profit be lost. Further 
more, one should know how many breeding ewes 
there are in the flock, how many rams, how many 
lambs of each sex, how many culls to be weeded out. 
Thus, if a ewe has more lambs at a birth than she 
can nourish, you should do what some shepherds 
practise — take part of them away from her, which is 
done to the end that those remaining may prosper." 

"Beware!" put in Atticus, "that your generalisa- 
tions do not lead you astray, and that your insistence 
on the rule of nine does not contradict your own 
definition of small and large cattle: for how can all 
your principles be applied to mules and to shepherds, 
since those with respect to breeding certainly cannot 
be followed so far as they are concerned. As to dogs 

P- 47)i which was characteristic of the superstitious peasant 
who in Italy still seeks the priest to bless his ailing live stock. 
h95l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

I can see their application. I admit even that men 
may be included in them, because they have their 
wives on the farm in winter, and indeed even in their 
summer pasture camps, a concession which is deemed 
beneficial because it attaches the shepherds to their 
flocks, and by begetting children they increase the 
establishment and with it the profit on your invest- 
ment." 

"If Scrofa's number cannot be measured with a 
carpenter's rule," said I, "neither can many other 
generalisations, as, for instance, when we say that a 
thousand, ships sailed against Troy, or that a certain 
court of Rome consists of a hundred judges (centum- 
viri). Leave out, if you wish, the two chapters relat- 
ing to breeding in so far as mules are concerned." 

"But why should we,'* exclaimed Vaccius, "for 
it is related that on several occasions at Rome a mule 
has had a foal." 

To back up what Vaccius had said, I cited Mago 
and Dionysius as writing that when mules and mares 
conceive they bear in the twelfth month. "If," I 
added, "it is considered a prodigy in Italy when a 
mule has a foal, it is not necessarily so in all countries. 
For is it not true that swallows and swans breed in 
Italy, which do not lay in other lands, and don't you 
know that the Syrian date palm, which bears fruit 
in Judea, does not yield in Italy?" 
I196I 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

"If you prefer," said Scrofa, "to make out the en- 
tire eighty-one chapters without any on the care of 
mules during the breeding season, there are subjects 
with which you can fill this double vacancy by add- 
ing those two kinds of extraordinary profit which is 
derived from live stock. One of these is the fleece 
which men shear or pull from sheep and goats, the 
other, which is more widely practised, that from milk 
and cheese: the Greek writers indeed actually treat 
this separately under the title rvpoiroUa, and have 
written extensively about it. 

Of sheep 

II. And now, since I have completed my task 
and the economy of live stock husbandry has been 
defined, do you, men of Epirus, requite us by ex- 
pounding the subject in detail, so that we may see 
of what the shepherds of Pergamis and Maledos are 
capable.*' 

At this challenge, Atticus (who then was known 
as T. Pomponius but now as Q. Gecilius retaining 
the same cognomen) ' began as follows: 

1 This Atticus was Cicero's intimate friend to whom he ad- 
dressed so many of his charming letters. He changed his name 
as stated in the text, the new name being that of an uncle who 
adopted him, as we learn from his life by Nepos. As is well 
known to all students of Cicero, Atticus had dwelt in Athens 
[1971 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

" I gather that I must make the beginning since you 
seem to turn your eyes upon me: so I will speak of 
those cattle which you, Varro, have called primitive, 
for you say that sheep were the first of the wild beasts 
of the field which were captured and domesticated 
by man. 

In the first place you should buy good sheep, and 
they are so judged primarily in respect of their age, 
that they are not what is known as aged nor yet 
undeveloped lambs, because neither can yield you 
any profit, the one no longer, the other not yet: but 
you may deem that age which holds out a promise 
preferable to that whose only future is death. So 
far as concerns conformation, a sheep should have a 
round barrel, wool thick and soft and with long fibre, 
and, while heavy all over the body, it should be thick- 
est on the back and neck, and yet the belly also 
should be covered, for unless the belly was covered 
our ancestors were wont to call a sheep apica and 
throw it out. They should have short legs, 1 and, 

many years and derived his income from estates in Epirus, which 
is the point of Scrofa's jest. 

' This requirement of short legs is the more remarkable be- 
cause of the long journeys which Varro says the Roman sheep 
were required to make between their summer and winter pas- 
tures. A similar necessity and bad roads created in England, 
before the eighteenth century, a demand for long legged sheep. 
Prothero {English Farming Past and Present) quotes a descrip- 
tion of the "true old Warwickshire ram" in 1789: "His frame 
[198] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

if they are of the Italian breed, long tails, or short 
tails if they come from Syria. The most important 
point to guard is that your flock is headed by a good 
sire. The quality of a ram can usually be determined 
from his conformation and from his get. So far as 
concerns conformation, a ram should have a face 
well covered with wool, horns twisted and converging 
on the muzzle, tawny eyes, woolly ears, a deep chest, 
wide shoulders and loin, a long and large tail. You 
should see also whether he has a black or a spotted 
tongue, 1 for such rams usually get black or spotted 
lambs. You may judge them by their get, if their 
lambs are of good quality. In buying sheep we 
practise the formalities which the law requires, 
following them more or less strictly in particular 
cases. Some men in fixing a price per head stipulate 
that two late lambs or two toothless ewes shall be 
counted as one. In other respects the traditional 
formula is employed thus: the buyer says to the 

large and remarkably loose. His bone throughout heavy. His 
legs long and thick, terminating in large aplaw feet." 

One of the things which Bakewell accomplished was to shorten 
the legs as well as to increase the mutton on his New Leicesters. 
Of Bakewell, Mr. Prothero justly says, " By providing meat for 
the million he contributed as much to the wealth of the country 
as Arkwright or Watt." 

1 Shepherds still look for the black or spotted tongue in the 
mouth of the ram, for the reason given by Varro, but the warn- 
ing is no longer put in the shepherds* manual. 
[199] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

seller, "Do you sell me these sheep for so much?" 
And the seller answers, "They are your sheep," 
and states the price. Whereupon the buyer stipu- 
lates according to the ancient formula: "Do you 
guarantee that these sheep, for which we have bar- 
gained, are in such good health as sheep should be; 
that there is none among them one-eyed, deaf or bare- 
bellied; that they do not come out of an infected flock 
and that I will take them by good right and title?'* 

Even when this is done the title to the flock does 
not pass until they have been counted, but, never- 
theless, the purchaser can hold the seller to the bar- 
gain if he does not make delivery, even though the 
purchase money has not passed, and by a like right 
the seller can hold the buyer if he does not pay up. 

I will next speak about those other four subjects 
which Scrofa outlined, namely: the feeding, breeding, 
raising and physicking of sheep. In the first place, 
one should see that provision is made for feeding the 
flock throughout the entire year, as well indoors 
as out. The stable should be in a suitable location, 
protected against the wind, looking rather to the 
East than the South, on cleared and sloping ground 
so that it can be easily swept out and kept clean, for 
moisture not only rots the wool of the sheep but 
their hoofs as well and causes scab. When sheep 
have stood for several days you should strew the 
I200I 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

stable with new bedding, so that they may be more 
comfortable and be kept cleaner, and thus eat with 
more appetite. You should also contrive stalls 
separated from the others in which you may segre- 
gate the ewes about to yean, as well as any which 
may be ailing. This precaution is practicable, how- 
ever, only with sheep fed at the steading, but those 
who graze their sheep in the mountain pastures and 
far from cover, carry with them wicker hurdles or 
nets, and other such conveniences with which they 
contrive folds for such separation. Sheep indeed 
are grazed far and wide so that often it happens that 
their winter quarters are many miles from their 
summer pastures." 

"I know that to be true," said I, "for my flocks 
winter in Apulia and spend the summer in the moun- 
tains above Reate: thus the public cattle drifts be- 
tween these two localities balance the separated 
pastures, as a yoke balances two baskets." ' 

1 Varro would still feel at home in Apulia, for there the sheep 
industry is carried on much as it was in his time, and thence the 
calUs publica, to which he refers, still lead to the summer pas- 
tures in the Apennines. Cf. Beauclerk Rural Italy, chap. V. 
"The extensive pasturages of the 'Tavoliere di Puglia ' (Apulia) 
are of great importance and have a history of their own. This 
vast domain covers 750,000 acres: its origin belongs to the time 
of the Roman Conquests and the protracted wars of the Re- 
public, which were fought out in the plains, whence they be- 
came deserted and uncultivated, fit only for public pastures in 
[201] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Atticus resumed: "When sheep are fed continu- 
ally in the same locality distinction must be made in 
the times of feeding them according to the seasons: 
thus in summer they are driven out ' to pasture at 
day break because then the dewy grass is more 
appetizing than at midday, when it is dry. At sun- 
rise they are driven to water, to make them more 
winter time . . . the periodical emigrations of the flocks con- 
tinue as in the paBt times: they descend from the mountains 
into the plains by a network of wide grassy roads which traverse 
the region in every direction and are called tratturi. These 
lanes are over loo yards in width and cover a total length of 
940 miles. . . . Not less than 50,000 animals are pastured 
on the Tavoliere, requiring over 1,500 square miles of land for 
their subsistence. . . . Five thousand persons are employed 
as shepherds. 

1 Varro quite uniformly uses words which indicate that he 
was accustomed to see sheep driven (abigtre, propellere, adpellere) 
but we can see the flocks led in Italy today, as they were in 
Palestine soon after Varra's death, according to the testimony 
of that beautiful figure of the Good Shepherd {St. John, X, 4): 
" And when he putteth forth his own sheep he goeth before them, 
and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice." R. Child, in 
his "Large Letter" in Hartlib's Legacie, gives the explanation 
of the difference in the custom: 

"Our sheep do not follow their shepherds as they do in all 
other countries: for the shepherd goeth before and the sheep 
follow like a pack of dogs. This disobedience of our sheep doth 
not happen to us, as the Papist Priests tell their simple flocks, 
because we have left their great shepherd the Pope; but because 
we let our sheep range night and day in our fields without a 
shepherd : which other countries dare not for fear of wolves and 
other ravenous beasts, but are compelled to guard them all day 
with great does and to bring them home at night, or to watch 
them in their folds. 

(km] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

lickerish on their return. About noon and during 
the heat of the day they are permitted to He in the 
shade of rocks or under broad spreading trees until 
the fresher evening air invites them to feed again 
until sunset. 1 A sheep should always graze with the 
sun behind it, because its head is very sensitive to 
heat. At sunset the flock should be given a short 
rest and then driven again to water, and so brought 
back to feed again until it is dark, for at that time 
of day the grass has renewed its pleasant savour. 
This routine is usually followed from the rising of the 
Pleiades until the autumn equinox. 

After the harvest it is of two-fold advantage to 
turn the flock in on the stubble, as they will fatten 
on the shattered grain and improve the land for next 
year's planting by spreading their manure in the 
trampled straw. 

The rules for pasturing sheep in winter and spring 
differ from the summer rules in this, that at those 
seasons the flock is not driven to pasture until the 
hoar frost has evaporated and they feed all day long, 
one watering about noon being enough. 

1 0. Dante, Purg. XXVII, 79. 

"Le caprc 
Tacite all' ombra mentre che'I sol ferve 
Guardate dal pastor che'n bu la verga 
Poggiato s'e, e lor poggiato serve." 
I203I 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

This is about all there to say on the subject of 
feeding sheep, so I pass to the consideration of breed- 
ing. The rams which you are about to use for breed- 
ing should be separated from the flock for two months 
before the season, and fed heavily by giving them a 
ration of barley when they come into the stable from 
the pasture: it will make them stronger for their 
duty. 

The best breeding season is from the setting of 
Arcturus to the setting of Aquila, (May-July) be- 
cause lambs begotten later are apt to be born small 
and weak. As a ewe is pregnant for one hundred 
and fifty days, this arrangement causes her to drop 
her lambs at the end of autumn when the tempera- 
ture is mild and the grass is renewed by the first 
rains. During the breeding season the flock should 
drink only the same kind of water, since a change 
not only makes spotted wool but injures the offspring. 
When all the ewes have been stinted, the rams should 
be separated from them again, because it injures 
ewes to be teased while they are pregnant. Ewe 
lambs should never be bred before they are two years 
old, as they cannot earlier produce strong Iamb.s, 
but will themselves degenerate: indeed, it is better 
to keep them until the third year. To this end some 
shepherds protect their ewe lambs from the ram by 
tying baskets made of rushes or something of that 
(204I 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

kind over their rumps, but it is better to feed them 
apart from the flock. 

I come now to the consideration of how lambs 
should be raised. 

When the ewes begin to yean they are driven into 
a stable which has stalls set apart for the purpose, 
where the new born lambs can be placed near a fire 
to strengthen them, and there the ewes are kept 
two or there days until the lambs know their dams 
and are able to feed themselves. Thereafter the 
lambs are still kept up but the ewes are driven out 
to pasture with the flock, being brought back to them 
in the evening to be suckled and then once more 
separated, lest the lambs be trampled by the ewes 
at night. In the morning before the ewes go out to 
pasture they are given access to their young again 
until the lambs are satisfied with milk. After about 
ten days have elapsed the lambs are picketed out of 
doors, being tethered with fibre or such other light 
material, to stakes planted some distance apart so 
that the little fellows may not injure themselves as 
they frisk together all day. 

If a lamb will not suck, it should be held up to the 
teat and its lips greased with butter or suet, and so 
made to smell at the milk. A few days later some 
soft vetch or tender grass may be given them be- 
fore they go out to pasture and after they come in. 
[205] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

And so they are nursed until they are four months 
old. 

There are some shepherds who do not milk the 
ewes during the nursing period, but those who do 
not milk them at all do better, as thus they bear more 
wool and more lambs. 

When the lambs are weaned great attention is 
necessary to prevent them from wasting away in 
their longing for the dam: they should be tempted 
to eat by giving them appetizing food, and care should 
be taken that they do not suffer from cold or heat. 
When at last they have forgotten the taste of milk 
and no longer yearn for the dam, they may be driven 
out with the flock. 

A ram Iamb should not be altered until he is five 
months old, nor yet in very hot or very cold weather. 
Those which you wish to keep for rams should be 
chosen as far as possible from dams who are in the 
habit of having twin lambs. 

Most of these recommendations apply equally to 
those fine wool sheep which are called pellita, because 
they are jacketed with skins, as is done at Tarentum 
and in Attica, to protect their wool from fouling, 
for by this precaution the fleece is kept in better 
plight for dyeing, washing or cleaning. Greater dili- 
gence is required to keep clean the folds and stables 
of such sheep than is necessary for the ordinary 
[206] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

breeds: so they are paved with stone to the end that 
no urine may stand anywhere in the stable. 

Sheep eat whatever is put before them — fig leaves, 
marc, even straw. Bran should be fed to them in 
moderation, lest they eat either too much or too 
little of it, in either of which cases it is bad for the 
digestion, but clover and alfalfa agree with them 
best and make both fat and milk with the utmost 
facility. 

So far as concerns the health of the flock, there 
are many things I might add, but, as Scrofa has said, 
the flock master keeps his prescriptions written down 
in a book and carries with him what he needs in the 
way of physic. 

It remains to speak of the number of sheep in a 
flock. Some make this more, some less, for there is 
no natural limit. In Epirus almost all of us have a 
rule not to allow more than one hundred short wool 
sheep or fifty fine wool jacketed sheep to a shepherd.'* 

Of goats 

III. As Atttcus stopped, Cossinius took him up. 
"Come, my dear Faustulus," he cried, "you have 
bleated long enough. Take now from me, as from 
a late born Homeric Melanthius, 1 a small offering 

1 It will be recalled that when Odysseus, disguised as a beggar, 

was making his way to his house in company with the faithful 

[207] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

from my flock of goats, and at the same time learn 
a lesson in brevity. He who wishes to form a flock 
of goats should consider in choosing them: first of 
all that they are of an age capable of breeding, and 
that for some time to come, for a tiro is more useful 
for that purpose than a veteran. As to conforma- 
tion, see to it that they are strong and large, with a 
smooth body and thick coat: but beware of the short 
haired goat, for there are both kinds. The she goat 
should have two excrescences, like little teats, hang- 
ing under the muzzle: those which have them are 
fecund : ' the larger the udder the more milk and 
butter fat she will yield. The qualities of a buck are 
that his coat should be largely white: his crest and 
neck short and his gullet long. You will have a 
better flock if you buy at one time goats which have 
been accustomed to run together, rather than by 
putting together a lot of goats picked up here and 
there. 

Concerning breeding, I refer to what Atticus has 
said about sheep, with this difference: that while 

swineherd Eumseus, they met the goatherd Melanthius "lead- 
ing his goats to feast the wooers, the best goats that were in 
all the herds." (Odyssey, XVII, 216), and that subsequently 
he suffered a terrible punishment for this unfaithfulness to his 
master's interests. 

1 Pliny (VIII, 76) calls these excrescences lancinia, or folds, 

and attributes them exclusively to the she goat, as Varro seems 

to do also, but Columella (VII, 6) attributes them to the buck. 

[208] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

you select a breed of sheep which are slow of foot, 
because they are of quieter disposition, all goats are 
as excitable as they are agile. Of this last charac- 
teristic Cato records in his book Origi-nes: 'In the 
mountains of Socrate and Fiscellus there are wild 
goats which leap from rock to rock a distance of 
more than sixty feet.' For as the sheep which we 
feed are sprung from wild sheep, so the goats which 
we herd are sprung from wild goats: and it is from 
them that the island of Caprasia, near the coast of 
Italy, gets its name. 

As it is recognized that the best breed of goats is 
one which bears two kids at a birth, breeding bucks 
are chosen from such a race whenever possible. Some 
fanciers even take the trouble to import bucks from the 
island of Melia, where are bred what are considered 
the largest and most beautiful specimens of the race. 

I hold that the formula for buying sheep cannot 
altogether apply to goats because no sane man ever 
guaranteed that goats are without malady, for the 
fact is that they are forever in a fever. For this 
reason the usual stipulation has had a few words 
cut out of it for use in respect of goats, and, as Manil- 
ius gives it in his treatise on the law of Sales, runs 
as follows: 'Do you guarantee that these goats are 
well today; that they are able to drink, and that I 
will get good title to them?' 

[209] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

There is a wonderful fact concerning goats which 
has been stated by certain ingenious shepherds and 
is even recorded in the book of Archelaus, namely, 
that they do not breathe through their nostrils, like 
other animals, but through their ears. 1 

Upon Scrofa's four considerations which relate to 
the care of goats I have this to say. The flock is 
better stabled in the winter if its quarters look toward 
the Southeast, because goats are very sensitive to 
cold. So also, as for most cattle, the goat stable 
should be paved with stone or brick that the flock 
may be less exposed to damp and mud. When the 
flock passes the night out of doors, a place should 
be selected having the same exposure and the fold 
strewn with leaves to protect the flock from fouling 
themselves. 

There is not much difference in the method of 
handling goats in the pasture from sheep, but goats 
have this characteristic, that they prefer the moun- 
tain woodland pastures to meadows, for they feed 
eagerly on the brushwood and in cultivated places 
crop the shrubbery; indeed, their name capra is 
derived from carpere, to crop. For this reason it is 
customary to stipulate in farm leases that the tenant 
shall not graze any goat on the leased land, for their 

1 Aristotle (H. A. I, 9.1) refers to this opinion and denounces 
it as erroneous. 

[210] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

teeth are the enemies of all planted crops : wherefore 
the astrologers were careful to station them in the 
heavens outside of the pale of the twelve signs of 
the zodiac, but there are two kids and a goat not far 
from Taurus. 

So far as concerns breeding, it is the custom to 
separate the bucks from the pastured flock at the 
end of autumn and confine them apart, as has been 
said with respect to rams. The nannies which con- 
ceive at this time drop their kids in four months, 
and so in the spring. In what regards rearing the 
kids, it is enough to say that when they are three 
months old they are raised and may join the flock. 
What shall I say of the health of these animals who 
never have any? yet the flock master should have 
written down what remedies are used for certain of 
their maladies and especially for the wounds which 
often befall them by reason of their constant fighting 
among themselves and their feeding in thorny places. 
It remains to speak of number: this is less to the 
herd in the case of goats than with sheep because of 
the wantonness and wandering habit of the goat: 
sheep, on the other hand, are wont to flock together 
and keep in one place. 

For another reason it is the custom in Gaul to di- 
vide the goats into many flocks rather than concen- 
trate them in large ones, because a pestilence quickly . 

[ 211 J 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

takes possession of a large herd and sweeps it to de- 
struction. About fifty goats is considered to be a 
large enough flock: 

The experience of Gaberius, a Roman of the eques- 
trian order, will illustrate the reason for this: for he, 
who had a thousand jugera of land near Rome, met 
one day a certain goatherd leading ten goats to town, 
and heard him say that he made a denier * a day 
out of each goat, whereupon Gaberius bought a 
thousand goats, hoping that he might thereby derive 
from his property an income of a thousand deniers 
a day: but so it fell out that he lost all his goats after 
a brief illness. On the other hand, among the Sallen- 
tini and near Casinum they graze their goats in flocks 
of one hundred. 

Almost the same difference of opinion exists as to 
the relative number of bucks to nannies, for some, 
and I am among them, allow a buck to every ten 
nannies, but others, like Menas, make it fifteen, and 
some even twenty, like Murriue. 

Of swine 

IV. "And now," concluded Cossinius, "which of 
you Italian swine breeders will stand forth and tell 

1 The Roman denarius, which has been here and later trans- 
lated denier, may be considered for the purpose of comparing 
values as, roughly, the equivalent of the modern franc, or lira, 
say 20 cents United States money. 

I 212 J 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

us of his herd? Surely he should be able to speak 
with the most authority whose cognomen is Scrofa." 
At this pleasantry, Tremelius turned upon Cos- 
sinius and said: "You seem to be ignorant why I am 
called Scrofa, but, in order that our friends sitting 
beside you may understand, you should know my 
family did not always bear this swinish cognomen, 
nor am I of the race of Eumseus. The first of us to 
be called Scrofa was my grandfather who, when he 
was qusestor under the praetor Licinius Nerva, and was 
left in command of the army in the province of Mace- 
donia during the absence of the praetor, it so happened 
that the enemy thought they had an opportunity to 
gain a victory and began to attack the camp. My 
grandfather, in exhorting the soldiers to take up their 
arms and go out against the enemy, exclaimed that he 
would soon scatter them as a sow (scrofa) does her 
pigs, and he was as good as his word. For in that bat- 
tle he so overwhelmed and discomfited the enemy, 
that on account of it the praetor Nerva was hailed Im- 
perator and my grandfather obtained his cognomen 
and so was called Scrofa. 1 So, while neither my great 

1 Macrobius {Saturn. I, 6} tells another story of the origin 
of this cognomen, which, if not so heroic as that in the text, is 
entertaining. It is related that a neighbour's sow strayed on 
Tremelius' land and was caught and killed as a vagrant. When 
the owner came to claim it and asserted the right to search the 
premises Tremelius hid the carcass in the bed in which his wife 
(213I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

grandfather nor any of my ancestors of the Tremel- 
ian family was ever called Scrofa, yet as I am not 
less than the sixth of our family in succession who 
has attained praetorian rank, it ill becomes me to 
run away in the face of your challenge, so I will 
tell you what I know about swine. Indeed from my 
youth I have been devoted to agriculture, so that I 
am perhaps as well acquainted with that animal as 
is any of you great stockmen: for who of us culti- 
vates a farm but keeps hogs, and who has not heard 
his father say that that man is either lazy or a spend- 
thrift who hangs in the meat house a flitch of bacon 
obtained from the butcher rather than from his own 
farm. 

He who wishes to have a proper herd of swine 
ought to choose them, in the first place, of the right 
age, and in the second place, of good conformation: 
which means large everywhere except in the head 
and feet and of a solid colour rather than spotted: 
but the boar should have without fail a thick neck 
in addition to these other qualities. Swine of good 
breed may be known from their appearance, if both 
boar and sow are of good conformation; from their 
get, if they have many pigs at a birth; and from their 
origin, if you buy them in a place with a reputation 

was lying and then took a solemn oath that there was no sow 
in his house except that in the bed. 
[214I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

for producing fat rather than lean hogs. The usual 
formula for buying runs thus: 'Do you warrant that 
these hogs are in good health; that I shall take good 
title to them; that they have committed no tort, and 
that they do not come out of a diseased herd?' 

Some add a particular stipulation that they are 
not affected with cholera. 

In the matter of pasture, a marshy place is well 
fitted for hogs, because they delight not only in 
water, but in mud, the reason for which appears in 
the tradition that when a wolf has fallen upon a hog 
he always drags the carcass into the water because 
his teeth cannot endure the natural heat of hog flesh. 

Swine are fed mostly on mast, though also on 
beans, barley and other kinds of corn, which not 
only make them fat but give the meat an agreeable 
relish. In summer they go out to pasture early in 
the morning and before the heat of the day: at mid- 
day they are brought into some shady place, pref- 
erably where there is water: in the afternoon, when 
the heat has abated, they are fed again. In the 
winter time they do not go out to pasture until the 
hoar frost has evaporated and the ice has melted. 

In the matter of breeding, the boar should be 

separated from the herd for two months before the 

season, which should be arranged between the rising 

of the west wind and the vernal equinox, for thus it 

UiSl 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

will befall that the sows (which are big for four 
months) will have their litters in summer when forage 
is plenty. Sows should not be bred under a year old, 
but it is better to wait until the twentieth month 
so that they may have pigs at two years. They are 
said to breed regularly for seven years after the first 
litter. During the breeding season they should be 
given access to muddy ditches and sloughs, so that 
they may wallow in the mud, which is the same 
relaxation to them that a bath is to a man. When 
all the sows are stinted, the boars should be segre- 
gated again. A boar is fit for service at eight months 
and so continues until his prime, after which his vigor 
decreases until he is fit only for the butcher to make 
of his flesh a dainty offering for the people. Our 
name for the hog, sus, is called 5s in Greek, but 
formerly it was 08s, derived from 0vav, meaning 
to offer as a sacrifice, for it seems that victims were 
chosen from the race of swine for the earliest sacri- 
fices; evidence of which remains in the tradition 
that pigs are sacrificed at the initiation to the mys- 
teries of Ceres, that when a' treaty is ratified peace 
begins with the slaughter of a pig, and that in solem- 
nizing a marriage the ancient kings and mighty men 
of Etruria caused the bride and the bridegroom to 
sacrifice a pig at the beginning of the ceremony, a 
practice which the earliest Latins and the Greek oolo- 

[«6] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

nists in Italy seem also to have followed: nam et nos- 
tra mulieres, maxime nutrices, naturam qua feminre 
sunt in virginibus appellant porcum, et grsecse x o *P ov t 
significantes esse dignum tnsigni nupttarum. 1 

The hog is said to be created by nature for the food 
of man * and so life and salt perform the same func- 
tions for him, as they both preserve his flesh. 

The Gauls ' are reputed to put up not only the larg- 

1 It would seem, as Gibbon says of the Empress Theodora, 
that this passage could be left "veiled in the obscurity of a 
learned language"; but it may be noted that the locus classical 
for the play on the word is the incident of the Megarian "mys- 
tery pigB" in Aristophanes' Acharnians, 728 ff. Cf. also Athe- 
nseus, IX, 17, 18. 

1 Cf. Pliny (H. N. VIII, 77): "There is no animal that affords 
a greater variety to the palate of the epicure: all the others have 
their own peculiar flavour, but the flesh of the hog has nearly 
fifty different Savours." 

* In his stimulating book, Comment la route tree le type Social, 
Edmond Desmolins submits an ingenious hypothesis to explain 
the pre-eminence of the Gauls in the growing and making of 
pork, and how that pre-eminence was itself the explanation of 
their early success in cultivating the cereals. He describes their 
migrating ancestors, the Celts, pushing their way up the Danube 
as hordes of nomad shepherds with their vast flocks and herds 
of horses and cattle, on the milk of which they had hitherto 
subsisted. So long as they journeyed through prairie steppes, 
the last of which was Hungary, they maintained their shepherd 
character, but when they once passed the site of the present city 
of Vienna and entered the plateau of Bavaria, they found new 
physical conditions which caused them to reduce and to separate 
their herds of large cattle — an unbroken forest affording little 
pasture of grass. Here they found the wild boar subsisting upon 
the mast of the forest, and him they domesticated out of an 
[217 1 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

est quantity but the best quality of pork: evidence 
of its quality being that even now hams, sausage, 1 
bacon and shoulders are imported every year from 
Gaul to Rome: while Cato writes concerning the 
amount of pork cured by the Gauls: 'In (northern) 
Italy the Insubres are wont to put up three or four 
thousand cuts of pork [the bulk of which can be 
appreciated from the fact that among that people] * 

economic necessity, to take the place of their larger cattle as a 
basis of food supply. Until then they had not been meat eaters, 
and bo had known no necessity for cereals, for milk is a balanced 
ration in itself. But this change of diet required them also to 
take to agriculture and bo to abandon their nomad life. 

'By reason of the habits of the animal, swine husbandry has 
a tendency in itself to confine those engaged in it to a more or 
lesa sedentary life, but we are about to see bow the Celts were 
compelled to accomplish this important evolution by an even 
more powerful force. Meat cannot be eaten habitually except 
in conjunction with a cereal . . . and of all the meats pork is 
the one which demands this association most insistently, because 
it is the least easily digested and the most heating of all the 
meats. ... So that is how the adoption of swine husbandry 
and a diet of pork compelled our nomad Celts to take the next 
step and settle down to agriculture.' 

'This Gallic tomacina was doubtless the ancestor of the morta- 
della now produced in the Emilia and known to English speak- 
ing consumers as "Bologna" sausage. 

*The Gaul of which Cato was here writing is the modem 
Lombardy ; one of the most densely populated and richest agri- 
cultural districts in the world. Here are found today those 
truly marvellous "marchite" or irrigated meadows which owe 
the initiative for their existence to the Cistercian monks of the 
Chiaravalle Abbey, who began their fruitful agricultural labours 
in the country near Milan in the twelfth century. There is a 
[218] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the hog some times grows so fat that it is not able 
to stand on its feet or to walk, so that it is necessary 
to put it on a cart to move it any where.* Atilius the 
Spaniard, who is a truthful man and teamed in many 
things, tells of a hog which was killed in further 
Spain or Lusitarua from which two chops, sent to 
the Senator L. Volumnius, were found to weigh three 
and twenty pounds, the fat on them being so thick 
that it measured a foot and three fingers from the 
skin to the bone." 

"I can testify to some thing not less extraordinary 
than what you have related," said I, "for in Arcadia 
I saw with my own eyes a hog which was so fat that 
not only was it unable to get up but a shrew mouse 
having eaten a hole in its back had there made its 
nest and was rearing a family. I have heard that 
this same thing happened in the country of the 
Veneti." 

recorded instance of one of these meadows which yielded in a 
single season 140 tons of grass per hectare, equal to 75 tons of 
hay, or 30 tons per acre! The meadows are mowed six times 
a year, and the grass is fed green to Swiss cows, which are kept 
in great numbers for the manufacture of " frommaggio di grana," 
or Parmesan cheese. This system of green soiling maintains the 
fertility of the meadows, while the by-product of the dairies is 
the feeding of hogs, which are kept in such quantity that they 
are today exported as they were in the times of Cato and Varro. 
There is no region of the earth, unless it be Flanders, of which 
the aspect so rejoices the heart of a farmer as the Milanese. 
Well may the Lombard proverb say, "Chi ha prato, ha tutto." 
[ 219 ] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

"Usually," resumed Scrofa, "the fecundity of a 
sow may be learned from her first litter, for in later 
litters she does not vary much from the number of 
pigs in the first. 

In the matter of rearing young swine, which we 
call forculatio it is customary to leave pigs with the 
sow for two months, and then when they are able 
to feed themselves to separate them. Pigs born in 
the winter are apt to be runts on account of the cold 
and because the sow refuses to suckle them, partly 
by reason of her lack of milk at that season and partly 
to protect her teats from the teeth of the hungry pigs. 

Each sow should suckle her pigs in her own stye, 
because a sow will not drive strange pigs away from 
her, and it results that if the litters are mingled 
the breed deteriorates. The year is naturally divided 
for the sow into two parts, because they breed twice 
a year, being heavy in pig for four months and suck- 
ling for two. The stye should be built about three 
feet deep and a little more in width and such a height 
from the ground as will permit a pregnant sow to 
get out without straining herself, as that might cause 
her to abort. A good measure of the proper height 
from the ground is what Is necessary to enable the 
swineherd to keep watch that no little pigs are crushed 
by the sow, and to clean out the bedding easily. 
There should be a door to the stye with. the lower 
[220] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

sill elevated a foot and a palm high so as to prevent 
the pigs from following the sow when she goes out. 
As often as the swineherd cleans out the stye he 
should strew the floor with sand, or some thing else 
to absorb moisture. 

When a sow has had her pigs she should be fed 
liberally to enable her to make milk: for this the 
ration is usually two pounds of boiled barley, indeed 
some feed this both at morning and at night if other 
feed is lacking. When pigs are taken from their 
dam they are sometimes called delict or weanlings 
being then no longer lactantes or sucklings. 

Pigs are considered to be clean ten days after 
birth, and for that reason were then called by the 
ancients sacred, as being then first fit for sacrifice: 
and so in the Menachmi of Plautus, when a character 
thinking some one in Epidamnus to be out of his 
wits and seeking to purify him, asks: 'How much 
are sacred pigs here.' 

If the farm affords them, pigs should be fed grape 
husks and stalks. 

After they have lost the name of lactantes the shoats 
are called nefrendes because they are not yet able to 
break down (frendere that is frangere) the bean stalks. 
Porcus is the ancient Greek name for them but is 
fallen into disuse, for the Greeks now call them x°V os - 

While she is giving suck the sow should be watered 
1 221 J 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

twice a day to promote the flow of milk. A sow 
should bear as many pigs as she has teats: if she has 
less it is considered that she is unprofitable, but if 
more, a prodigy. In this respect there is the ancient 
tradition that the sow of iEneas bore thirty white 
(albos) pigs at Lavinium, ' which' portended that 
after thirty years the inhabitants of Lavinium would 
found the town of Alba: indeed, vestiges of this 
sow and of her pigs may still be seen at Lavinium 
where there is a brazen image of them now in the 
public square, and the true body of the sow is shown 
by the priests, preserved in pickle. 

Sows are able at first to suckle eight little pigs, 
but as they grow larger half of them are usually 
taken away by experienced swineherds, because the 
sow cannot supply milk enough for all, and too many 
pigs fed together do not prosper in any event. A 
sow should not be driven out of the stye for ten days 
after having her litter except for water, but after 
that time she is permitted to graze in a paddock so 
conveniently near at hand that she may return to 

1 Virgil (&n. VII, 26) subsequently made good use of this 
tradition of the founding of Lavinium, the sacred city of the 
Romans where the Penates dwelt and whither solemn proces- 
sions were wont to proceed from Rome until Christianity be- 
came the State religion. The site has been identified as that of 
the modern village of Practica, where a few miserable shepherds 
collect during the winter months, fleeing to the hills at the ap- 
proach of summer and the dread malaria. 
[222] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the stye frequently to suckle the pigs. When the 
pigs are large enough they are permitted to follow 
the sow to pasture, but at home they should be 
penned apart from the sow and fed by themselves 
until they overcome their yearning for the dam, 
which usually happens in ten days. The swineherd 
should train his shoats to do every thing at the sound 
of the trumpet. This training is begun by letting 
the shoats hear the trumpet outside their pens and 
then at once come out to a place where barley has 
been scattered broad cast (for thus less is wasted 
than if the feed is put in heaps and more of the shoats 
can get to it easily). By such education it is possible 
to collect pasturing hogs at the sound of a trumpet 
and prevent their being lost when scattered in the 
woods. 1 

1 Cf. Polybius, XII, 4: 'For in Italy the swineherds manage 
the feeding of their pigs in the same way. They do not follow 
close behind the beasts, as in Greece, but keep some distance in 
front of them, sounding their horn every now and then: and the 
animals follow behind and run together at the sound. Indeed, 
the complete familiarity which the animals show with the par- 
ticular horn to which they belong seems at first astonishing and 
almost incredible. For, owing to the populousness and wealth 
of the country, the droves of swine in Italy are exceedingly 
large, especially along the sea coast of the Tuscans and Gauls: 
for one sow will bring up a thousand pigs, or some times even 
more. They, therefore, drive them out from their night styes 
to feed according to their litters and ages. When if several 
droves are taken to the same place they cannot preserve these 
distinctions of Utters: but they, of course, get mixed up with 
[223] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Boars are altered most successfully when they 
are a year old, but in no case should this be done 
when they are less than six months old. After the 
operation they are no longer called boars, but barrows. 

Concerning the health of swine, I will say one thing 
only by way of example: if the sow is not able to 
supply milk the sucking pigs should be fed, until 
they are three months old, on roasted wheat (for 
when it is raw it loosens the bowels) or on barley 
boiled in water. 

As to number: it is considered that ten boars to 

each other both as they are being driven out and as they feed, 
and as they are being brought home. Accordingly, the device 
of the horn blowing has been invented to separate them when 
they have got mixed up together, without labour or trouble. For 
as they feed one swineherd goes in one direction sounding his 
horn, and another in another and thus the animals sort them- 
selves of their own accord and follow their own horn with such 
eagerness that it is impossible by any means to stop or hinder 
them. But in Greece when the swine get mixed up in the oak 
forests in their search for the mast, the swineherd who has most 
assistants and the best help at his disposal, when collecting his 
own animals drives off his neighbours' also. Some times, too, a 
thief lies in wait and drives them off without the swineherd 
knowing how he has lost them, because the beasts straggle a 
long way from their drivers in their eagerness to find acorns, 
when they are just beginning to fall.' 

Bishop Latimer in one of Bis sermons quotes the phrase used 
in his youth, at the time of the discovery of America, in calling 
hogs: Come to thy minglemanglc, come pur, come pur.' It 
would be impossible to transcribe the traditional call used in 
Virginia. One some times thinks that it was the original of the 
celebrated 'rebel yell' of General Lee's army. 
[«4l 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

an hundred sows is enough; some even reduce this 
proportion. 

The practice varies as to the number to a herd, 
but my judgment is that a hundred is a moderate 
number: some make it more, say 150: some feed two 
herds together, and some do even more than that. 
A small herd is less expensive than a large one be- 
cause the swineherd requires less assistance. A 
swinefeeder should fix the number to be fed as a herd 
on a principle of utility, not by the number of boars 
he may happen to have, for that is determined by 
nature." 

So far Scrofa. 

Of neat cattle 

V. At this point we were joined by the Senator Q. 
Lurienus, a man as learned as he is agreeable and in- 
timate with us all. "Hail, my fellow citizens of 
Epirus," he exclaimed in Greek, 1 "and you, my dear 

1 The use of the Greek salutation was esteemed by the more 
austere Romans of the age of Scipio an evidence of preciosity, 
to be laughed at: and so Lutienus' jesting apology for the use 
of it here doubtless was in reference to Lucilius' epigram (which 
Cicero has preserved, de Finibus, 1, 3.) 

" Graccc ergo praetor Athenis 
Id quod maluisti te, quum ad me accedi, saluto 
jpipt inquam, Titer lictores turma omni cohorsque 
X&pt Titel Hinc hostis mi Albucius, bine inimicus." 
It was the word which the Romans taught their parrots. Cf. 
PersiuB, Prolog. 8. 

[225] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Varro, 'shepherd of men,' for I have already greeted 
Scrofa this morning." 

While one saluted him, another reproached him 
for having come so late to our club. 

"I will see to that, my merry men, for I am about 
to offer you my back and a scourge: or else, Murrius, 
you who are my friend : come with me while I pay a 
forfeit to the goddess Pales, so that you may bear 
me witness if our friends here seek to make me do it 
again." , 

"Tell him," said Atticus, turning to Murrius, 
"what we have been talking about and what is still 
on the programme, so that when his turn comes he 
may be prepared. In the meantime we will take up 
the second order of domestic live stock and proceed 
to a discussion of the larger cattle." 

"In this," said Vaccius, "my name would seem to 
assign me a part, since cows (vacca) are included In 
that category. Wherefore I will tell what I know 
about neat cattle, so that he who knows less may 
learn, while he who knows more may correct me when 
I fall down." 

"Be careful what you do, Vaccius," said I, "for 
the genus Bos is of the first importance among cattle, 
certainly in Italy, which is thought to have taken 
its very name from that family, for, as Timjeus 
records, in ancient Greece a bull was called iraAos, 
[226] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

whence is derived our word vttula, and from this 
Italy is supposed to have taken its name because of 
the number and beauty of its breed of cattle (pituli). 
Others claim that the name comes from that of the 
famouB bull Italus which Hercules drove out of 
Sicily into this country. 

The ox is indeed the companion and fellow la- 
bourer of man and the minister of Ceres : wherefore 
the ancients, holding him inviolable, made it a capital 
offence to kill an ox. 1 Both Attica and Peloponnesus 
bear witness of the regard in which the ox was held: 
for he who first yoked oxen to the plough is celebrated 
at Athens under the name Buzyges and at Argos 
under that of Homogyros." 

"I know," replied Vaccius, "the importance of the 
ox and that his very name is used to signify that 
1 The working ox was respected by the ancient Romans as a 
fellow labourer. Valerius Maximus (VIII, 8 ad fin.) cites a case 
of a Roman citizen who was put to death, because, to satisfy 
the craving of one of his children for beef to eat, he slew an ox 
from the plough. Ovid puts this sentiment in the mouth of 
Pythagoras, when he agrees that pigs and goats are fit subjects 
for sacrifice, but protests against such use of sheep and oxen. 
(Metamor.XV, 139.) 

"Quid meruere boves, animal sine fraude dolisque 
Innocuum, simplex, natum tolerare labores? 
Immemor est demum, nee frugum manere dignus 
Qui potuit curvi demto modo pondere arati 
Runcolam mactare suum: qui trita la bore 
Ilia quibus tottea durum renovaverat arvum 
Tot dederse messes, percussit colla sccuri." 
[227I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

quality, as in words like $o6<tvkov (big fig), jSmWs 
(a big boy), /}oi?Xjp>c (a ravenous hunger), /Sowms 
(large eyed), and again that a certain large grape is 
called bumamma (cow teat). Furthermore, I know 
it was the form of a bull that Jupiter assumed when 
he wooed Europa and bore her across the sea from 
Phoenicia: that it was a bull which protected the 
children of Neptune and Melanippe from being 
crushed in a stable by a herd of cattle: I know too 
that the bees which give the sweetest honey are 
generated from the carcase of an ox, whence the 
Greeks call them fiovytvels (bora of an ox), an expres- 
sion which Plautius latinized on the occasion where 
the praetor Hirrius, was accused at Rome of having 
libeled the Senate. 'But be of good cheer, I will give 
you at least as great satisfaction as did he who wrote 
the Bugonia.' * 

In the first place there are said to be four ages of 
cattle, during which they are known by the succes- 

1 The learned commentators have been able to discover noth- 
ing about either this Plautius or this Hirrius, but it appears that 
ArchclauB wrote a book under the title Bugonia, of which noth- 
ing survives. It may be conjectured, however, on the analogy 
of Samson's riddle to the Philistines, "Out of the eater came 
forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness, " (Judges, 
XIV, 14), that Plautius meant to imply that some good might 
be the consequence of the evil Hirrius had done: and that Vac- 
cius cited the allusion to suggest to Varro that, while he might 
know nothing much about cattle, his attempt to deal with the 
subject might provoke some useful discussion. 
[MS] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

sive designation of calf (vitvlus), yearling (juoencus), 
prime (nooellus) and aged (petulus). These designa- 
tions are further divided according to sex, as bull- 
calf and heifer-calf, or bull and cow. 

A cow which is sterile is called taura: when preg- 
nant, korda, from which last name a certain festival . 
is called the hordicalia (Fordicidia) because cows in 
calf are sacrificed upon it. 

He who wishes to buy a herd of neat cattle should 
take care first that they are of an age to produce, 
rather than past breeding; that they are well set up, 
clean limbed, square bodied, large, with black horns 
and broad brows, large black eyes, hairy ears, fiat 
cheek bones, snub-nosed, not hump-backed but 
rather with the back bone slightly roached, wide 
nostrils, blackish lips, a neck muscular and long with 
dew laps hanging from it, the barrel large and well 
ribbed, the shoulders broad and the quarters good, 
a tail sweeping the heels, the end being frizzled in a 
heavy brush, the legs rather short and straight with 
knees projecting a little and well separated, the feet 
narrow and not inclined to spread in walking, the 
hoofs not being splayed but consisting of light and 
even bones, and a hide which is not rough and hard 
to the touch. The best colour is black, next red, third 
chestnut and last white: for a white coat indicates 
weakness, as black indicates endurance: of the other 
[229I 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

two colours red is more common than chestnut, and 
both than black and white. In addition you should 
be particular that the bull is of good breed, which is 
determined from his conformation and his get, as 
calves usually reproduce the qualities of their sire. 
And, finally, it is of importance whence they come. 
Gallic cattle are considered in Italy to be the best 
for work, while on the other hand Ligurian cattle are 
worthless. The foreign cattle of Epirus are not only 
better than all the Greek cattle but even than the 
Italian: nevertheless, there are those who choose 
Italian cattle for victims and to serve as offerings 
to the gods on account of their size: and without 
doubt they may be preferred for such holy offices, 
so great is the distinction of their majestic bulk and 
their candid coats: and they are the more suitable 
for such use because white cattle are not so common 
in Italy as in Thrace at the gulf of Melas, where 
there are few of any other colour. 

When cattle are bought already broken for work 
we stipulate thus: 'Do you guarantee these cattle 
to be in good health and warrant me against liability 
for any tort committed by them?* 

When we buy them unbroken, we say: 'Do you 
guarantee these yearlings to be in good health and to 
come out of a healthy herd, and warrant me against 
liability for tort?* 

[230] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

When butchers buy for the shambles they use a 
fuller formula recommended by Manilius: but those 
who buy for the altar do not usually stipulate for 
health in their victims. 

Neat cattle pasture best in groves where there is 
brushwood and much leafage: and so when they are 
wintered by the sea they are driven up to pasture 
in summer in the hills where shrubbery abounds. 

These are my breeding rules: 

For a month before breeding I cut down the food 
and drink of the cows because it is deemed that they 
breed more certainly when they are thin. On the 
other hand, I fatten the bulls up on grass and straw 
and hay for two months before the breeding season, 
and during that time I keep them apart from the 
cows. Like Atticus, I have two for seventy cows, 
one a yearling, the other two years old. When that 
constellation has risen which the Greeks call Lyra, 
and we Romans, Fides, I turn the bull into the herd 
again. The bull indicates whether a male or a female 
calf has been conceived by the side on which he leaves 
the cow: if male, on the right; if female, on the left. 
"Why this is so," said Vaccius, turning to me, " I leave 
to you who read Aristotle. 

A cow should not be served under two years, so 
that she may have her first calf in the third year: 
it would be better in the fourth. Most cows bear for 
[231 1 

:> :l :ieci : yGo0gle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

ten years, some even more. The most suitable time 
for stinting cows is during the forty days following 
the rising of the Dolphin, or even a little later, for 
thus they will drop their calves at the most temperate 
season of the year, for a cow goes ten months preg- 
nant. On this subject I have come upon an extraor- 
dinary statement in a book that a bull which has just 
been altered can get a cow with calf. 

Breeding cows should be pastured where there is 
abundant grass and plenty of water, and care should 
be taken to protect them from crowding too close 
together, and from being struck, or from fighting 
with one another: moreover, to protect them against 
being worried in summer by cattle flies and those 
minute insects which get under their tails, some 
farmers shut them up during the heat of the day in 
pens, which should be strewn with leaves or some 
other bedding on which they can rest comfortably. 
In summer they are driven to water twice a day, in 
winter once. Against the time when they are due to 
drop their calves you should arrange to give them 
access to fresh forage near the stable which they can 
eat with appetite as they go out, for at that time they 
are very dainty about their food. A watch out must 
be kept to prevent their frequenting chilly places, 
for cold depresses the vitality as much as hunger. 

These are the rules for raising neat cattle: the suck- 
[232] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

ling calves should not be suffered to sleep with their 
dams, for they might crush them, but should be 
given access to them in the morning and when they 
return from pasture. When the calves are weaned 
the dams should be comforted by having green stuff 
thrown into their stalls for them to eat. The floor of 
a calf stable, like most others, should be paved with 
stone to keep their hoofs from rotting. The calves 
may be pastured with their dams after the autumn 
equinox. Bull calves should not be altered before 
they are two years old, as they recover with difficulty 
if the operation is performed sooner, while if it is 
done later they are apt to be stubborn and useless. 

As in the case of other cattle, the herd should 
be gone over every year and the culls' thrown out be- 
cause they occupy the room of those which might be 
profitable. If a cow loses her calf she should be 
given another to nurse, taken from a cow which has 
not a sufficient supply of milk. Calves six months 
old are fed wheat bran and barley meal and young 
grass, and care should be taken that they are watered 
morning and evening. 

The rules for taking care of the health of neat 
cattle are many. I have those which Mago has 
recorded written out and I take care that my herds- 
man reads them frequently. 

I have already said that a yearling and a two-year 
[2331 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

old bull should be provided for every sixty cows, 
though some have more or less cows in the herd: 
thus Atticus has two bulls for every seventy cows. 
Some observe one rule as to the number of cattle to 
the herd, some another. I am among those who 
think that one hundred is enough, but Atticus here, 
like Lucienus, has one hundred and twenty." 
So far Vaccius. 

Of asses 

VI. While Vaccius was speaking, Murrius had 
returned with Lucienus and now began: 

"I propose to tell about asses as well I may, be- 
cause I am from Reate where the best, and the largest 
are found; indeed, I have sold to the Arcadians them- 
selves asses of this race and of my own breeding. 
He who wishes to establish a good herd of asses 
should see in the first place that he procures jacks and 
jennies of prime age so that they may breed as long 
as possible, strong, well made in all parts, of full 
body and of a good breed, that is to say derived 
from those localities whence the best specimens 
come; thus the Peloponnesians, so far as possible, 
buy asses bred in Arcadia and we in Italy those from 
the valley of Reate. For if the best of those deli- 
cious fish we call murana fluke are taken on the 
coast of Sicily and the best sturgeons at Rhodes, it 
t*34l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

does not follow that they are of equal delicacy in all 
seas. 

There are two kinds of asses, one wild, which is 
called the onager, of which there are many herds 
in Phrygia and Lycaonia; the other domestic, as 
they are all over Italy. The onager is fit for use for 
breeding because he is easily tamed and once domes- 
ticated never reverts to a wild life. 1 

Because their young take after their parents, it is 
important to choose both jack and jenny of good 
conformation. The conditions of buying and selling 
asses are much the same as for other kinds of cattle 
and include stipulations as to their health and against 
tort. They are best fed on corn and barley bran. 
The jennies are bred before the solstice so that they 
may have their foals at the same season in the follow- 

1 Darwin, Animals and Plants, II, 20, cites this passage and 
says that "at the present day the natives of Java some time* 
drive their cattle into the forests to cross with the wild Ban- 
teng." The crossing of wild blood on domestic animals is not, 
however, always successful. A recent visitor to the German 
agricultural experiment station at Halle describes "a curious 
hairy beast with great horns, a wild look in his eye, a white 
streak down his back and a bumpy forehead, which had in it 
blood from cattle which had lived on the plains of Thibet, 
which had grazed on the lowland pastures of Holland, which 
had roamed the forests of northeast India and of the Malay 
Peninsular, and had wandered through the forests of Germany. 
We Americans had sympathy for this beast. He was some thing 
like ourselves, with the blood of many different races flowing 
through his veins." 

[235] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

ing year, for their period of gestation is twelve months. 
The jennies should be relieved from work while in 
foal for fatigue at that time injures the offspring: but 
the jacks, on the contrary, are worked all the time, 
because it is lack of exercise which is bad for them. 

In the matter of rearing, practically the same rules 
apply to asses as to horses. The foals are not sep- 
arated from their dams for the first year after they 
are born: during the second year they are permitted 
to stay with their dams at night, but they should then 
be tied with a loose halter or some other such re- 
straint. In the third year you begin to break them 
for whatever service they are intended. 

As to the number: they are not usually kept in 
herds unless it may be for transport service; gener- 
ally they are used to turn the mill, or for carrying 
about the farm, or even for the plough where the 
soil is light, as in Campania. Herds of asses are 
some times employed by merchants, like those who 
transport wine, or oil, or corn, or any other com- 
modity, from Brundishim or Apulia to the sea, by 
pack trains." 

Of horses 
VII. Here Lucienus took up the discourse. 
"It is my turn," he said, "to open the barrier and 
drive in my horses: and they are not only stallions, 
[236] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

of which, like Atticus, I keep one for every ten breed- 
ing mares, but mares as well, such as Q. Modius 
Equiculus, that gallant soldier, was wont to esteem 
for use even in war nearly as much as stallions. 1 

He who wishes to have such studs of stallions and 
mares as may be seen in Peloponnesus and in Apulia 
should first consider age and see that he obtains them 
not less than three nor more than ten years old. The 

1 Pliny (VIII, 66) cites the fact that the Scythians always 
preferred mares to stallions for war, and gives an ingenious reason 
for the preference. Aristotle (H. A. VI, 22) says that the Scyth- 
ians rode their pregnant mares until the very last, saying that 
the exercise rendered parturition more easy. Every breeder of 
heavy draft horses has seen a mare taken from the plough and 
have her foal in the field, with no detriment to either: and the 
story of the mare Kehcilet Ajuz, who founded the best of the 
Arab families, is well known, but bears repetition. I quote from 
Spencer Borden, The Arab Horse, p. 44: "It is related that a 
certain Sheik was flying from an enemy, mounted on his favourite 
mare. Arab warriors trust themselves only to mares, they will 
not ride a stallion in war. The said mare was at the time far 
along toward parturition ; indeed she became a mother when the 
flying horseman stopped for rest at noonday, the new comer 
being a filly. Being hard pressed the Sheik was compelled to 
remount his mare and again seek safety in flight, abandoning 
the newborn filly to her fate. Finally reaching safety among 
his own people, great was the surprise of all when, shortly after 
the arrival of the Sheik on his faithful mare, the little filly less 
than a day old came into camp also, having followed her mother 
across miles of desert. She was immediately given into the 
care of an old woman of the tribe (Ajuz ■ an old woman), hence 
her name Keheilet Ajuz, ' the mare of the old woman,' and grew 
to be the most famous of all the animals in the history of the 
breed." 

[2371 

I^iectyGoOglc 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

age of a horse, as also of nearly all animals whose 
hoofs are not cloven, even homed animals, may be 
known from the condition of the teeth: thus at thirty 
months of age a colt is said to lose the milk incisors 
from the middle of his mouth, two above and two 
below. At the beginning of the fourth year, in like 
manner he sheds the same number, being the incisors 
adjoining those previously lost, and at that age also 
the teeth called canine begin to appear. At the 
beginning of the fifth year he loses two more incisors, 
and at that time the new teeth show hollow. In 
the sixth year the new teeth begin to fill out their 
cavities, and by the seventh usually all have been 
renewed and the permanent mouth is made. What 
is the age of a horse beyond this point it is not pos- 
sible to determine accurately, except that when the 
teeth project and the eye brows are white and have 
hollows under them, it is considered that a horse is 
sixteen years old. 

A breeding mare should be of medium size, for it 
is not fitting that they should be either very large or 
very small, but the. quarters and belly should be 
broad. 

A breeding stallion on the other hand should be 

chosen with a large body, well made and all his parts 

in harmony. What sort of horse it will turn out to 

be can be determined from the points of the foal, 

[238] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

for it should exhibit a small head: limbs well knit 
together: a black eye, wide nostrils: ears well pricked: 
a mane which is thick, dark and curly, of fine hairs 
and falling on the right side of the neck: a breast 
broad and well developed: strong shoulders: a mod- 
erate belly: the loins flat and rising to the quar- 
ters: long shoulder blades: a back bone well doubled 
[with ridges of meat] but if these are not prominent 
in no event should the bone itself stand out: a tail 
large and curly: legs straight and even and rather 
long: knees round and small and not turned in as 
you look at them: hard hoofs: veins visible all over 
the body (for a horse of this kind is fit for treatment 
when he is sick). 

The breed is of the greatest importance, for there 
are many. In this respect the celebrated breeds 
take the names of the countries from which they 
come: thus in Greece we have the Thessalian breed: 
in Italy the Apulian from Apulia, and the Rosean 
from Rosea. 1 

1 Varro does not describe the livery of the horses of his day, 
as he does of cattle, but Virgil (Georg. Ill, 81) supplies the de- 
ficiency, asserting that the beat horses were bay (spadices) and 
roan (glauct) while the least esteemed were white {albi) and 
dun (gi/m), which is very interesting testimony in support of 
the most recent theory of the origin of the thoroughbred horse. 
Professor Ridgeway who, opposing Darwin's conclusion, con- 
tends for a multiple origin of the historic and recent races of 
horses, has collected a mass of information about the marking 
[239] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

It is a sign that they will make good horses if, 
when at pasture with the herd, the colts contend 
with one another for superiority in running or in any 
thing else, or if when a stream is to be crossed they 
leap it at the head of the herd and do not look back 
for the others. 

Horses are bought in almost the same manner as 
cattle or asses, because they change ownership by 
similar formalities, all of which are set forth in the 
book of Manilius. 

Horses should be pastured whenever possible in 
meadows of grass, and in the stable and stall they 
are fed on hay. 

When a mare has foaled she should be fed on 
barley and watered twice a day. 

In the matter of breeding, the period of service 
is from the vernal equinox to the solstice so that the 

of famous horses of all ages in his Origin and Influence of the 
Thoroughbred Horse. He maintains that a bay livery, with a 
white star and stocking*, the development of protective colora- 
tion from an originally striped coat, such as has gone on more 
recently in the case of the quaggas, is absolute evidence of the 
North African origin of a horse, and he shows that all the swiftest 
horses mentioned in history are of that race, while the heavier 
and less mettlesome horses of Northern origin have been, when 
pure bred, dun coloured or white. 

Of the Italian breeds mentioned by Varro, Professor Ridgeway 
conjectures that the Etruscan (or Roseau) was probably an im- 

f roved Northern horse, while the Apulian, from the South of 
taly, represented an admixture of Libyan blood. 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

foal may come at a suitable season, for they are sup- 
posed to be bom on the tenth day of the twelfth 
month after the mare was stinted. Those which 
are born after the time are usually defective and 
unfit for use. When the season has come the stallion 
should be admitted to the mare twice a day, in the 
morning and in the evening, under the direction of 
the origa (so the studgroom is called), for a mare 
held in hand is stinted more quickly, nor does the 
stallion waste his seed by excess of ardor. When a 
mare is stinted she makes it known by defending 
herself. If the stallion shows an aversion for a mare, 
her parts should be smeared when she is in heat with 
the marrow of a shrimp macerated in water to the 
consistency of honey, and the stallion allowed to 
smell of it. 

Although it may seem incredible, what I am about 
to relate is true and should be remembered. Once 
upon a time a studgroom tried to make a stallion 
cover his mother, but could never get him to come 
near her: so one day the groom muffled the stallion's 
head and put him to his mother successfully: but 
when the bandage was removed and the stallion saw 
what he had done, he fell upon the groom and killed 
him with his teeth. 

When the mares have been stinted it must be 
seen to that they are worked only in moderation and 
[241] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

are kept out of cold places, because cold is of the 
greatest prejudice to a mare in that condition. For 
this reason the floor of their stable should be kept 
dry and the windows and doors should be kept shut: 
and furthermore the mares should be separated one 
from another by long poles fastened back from the 
manger so that they may not fight. 

Mares in foal should neither be over-fed nor 
starved. 

There are some who breed their mares only every 
other year and claim they get better colts, on the 
same principle that as corn land is exhausted by 
continuous cropping, so is a mare which is bred 
every year. 1 

The foal should be led out to pasture with its dam 
on the tenth day after it is born, so to avoid burning 
its tender hoofs by standing on manure in the stable. 
When five months old a colt should be fed, whenever 
he is brought into the stable, a ration of barley meal 
whole with its bran, or any other product of the 
earth which he will eat with appetite. When they 
are a year old they may be fed barley in the grain 
mixed with bran, and this should be kept up as long 

1 Aristotle (H. A. VI, 22) preceded Varro with this good ad- 
vice, saying that a mare "produces better foals at the end of 
four or five years. It is quite necessary that she should wait 
one year and should pass through a fallow, as it 

oxTmp vu6v." 

[242] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

as they suckle, for they should not be weaned until 
they have completed the second year. From time to 
time while they are still with their dams they should 
be handled so that they may not be wild after they 
are separated. To the same end it is well to hang 
bridles in their stalls so that while they are still colts 
they may become accustomed to the sight of them 
and the sound of their clanking as well. When a colt 
has learned to come to an outstretched hand you 
should put a boy on his back, for the first two or 
three times stretched out flat on his belly, but after- 
wards sitting upright. The lime to do this is when 
the colt is three years old, for then he has bis full 
growth and is beginning to develop muscles. 

There are those who say that a colt may be broken 
at eighteen months, but it is better to wait until the 
third year. Then is the time too to begin to feed him 
that mixture of grain in the milk which we call far- 
rago, for this is very good for a horse as a purgative. 
It should be fed for ten days to the exclusion of all 
other food. On the eleventh day and until the four- 
teenth you should feed barley, adding a little to the 
ration every day for four days and then maintaining 
that quantity for the ten days succeeding: during 
this period the horse should be exercised moderately, 
and when in a sweat rubbed down with oil. If it is 
cold a fire should be lit in the stable. 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

As some horses are suitable for military service, 
some for the cart, some for breeding, some for racing, 
and others for the carriage, it follows that the methods 
of handling and looking after them all are not the 
same. Thus the soldier chooses some and rears and 
trains them for his particular use, and so in turn does 
the charioteer and the circus rider. Nor does he 
who wishes a cart horse choose the same conformation 
or give the same training as to a horse intended for the 
saddle or the carriage: for as the one desires mettle 
for military service, the other prefers a gentle dis- 
position for use on the road. It was to provide for this 
difference of use that the practice of castrating 
horses was inaugurated, for horses that are altered 
are of a quieter disposition: they are called geldings, 
as hogs in the same state are called barrows and 
chickens are called capons. 

As to medicine for the horse, there are so many 
symptoms of their maladies and so many cures that 
the studgroom must have them written down: in- 
deed, on this account in Greece the veterinarians 
are mostly called Unrwrpot (horse leeches)." 

Of mules 

VIII. While we were talking a freedman came 

from Menas and said that the sacrificial cakes 

were cooked and every thing ready for the sacri- 

[244] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

fice; that whoever wishes to take part had only to 
come. 

"But I will not suffer you to go," I protested, 
"until you have fulfilled your promise and given me 
the third chapter of our subject, that concerning 
mules and dogs and shepherds." 

"What is to be said about mules," 1 replied Mur- 
rius, "may be said briefly. Mules and hinnies are 
mongrels and grafts as it were on a stock of a different 
species, for a mule is got by an ass out of a mare, 
and a hinny by a horse out of a she ass. Both have 
their uses, but neither is fit to reproduce its kind. 
For this purpose it is the custom to put a new-born 
ass colt to nurse to a mare because mares* milk will 
make it more vigorous: it is considered better than 
asses' milk, or indeed than any other kind of milk. 
Later they are fed on straw, hay and barley. The 
foster mother must be given good attention also, as 

1 Moles were employed in antiquity from the earliest times. 
In Homer they were used for drawing wagon* : thus Nausicaa 
drove a mule team to haul out the family wash, and Priam made 
his visit to Achilles in a mule litter. Homer professes to prefer 
mules to oxen for ploughing. There were mule races at the 
Greek games. Aristotle (Rhetoric, III, 2) tells an amusing story 
of Simonides, who, when the victor in the mule race offered him 
only a poor fee, refused to compose an ode, pretending to be 
shocked at the idea of writing about "semi-asses." but, on re- 
ceipt of a proper fee, he wrote the ode beginning: 'Hail, daugh- 
ters of storm-footed mares," although they were equally daugh- 
ters of the asses. 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

she must bring up her own colt in addition to her 
service as a wet nurse. An ass raised in this way is 
fit to get mules when he is three years old, nor will 
he contemn the mares because he has become used 
to their kind. If you use him for breeding earlier 
he will quickly exhaust himself and his get will be 
poor. 

If you have no ass foal to have brought up by a 
mare and you wish a breeding jackass, you should 
buy the largest and handsomest you can find; the 
best breed, as the ancients said, was that of Arcadia, 
but nowadays we who know maintain that the breed 
of Reate is best: where breeding jacks have brought 
thirty and even forty thousand sesterces ($1,800- 
£2,000). 

Jacks are bought like horses, with the same stipu- 
lations and guarantees. We feed them principally 
on hay and barley, increasing the ration at the breed- 
ing season so as to infuse strength into their get by 
means of their food. The breeding season is the 
same as for horses, and, like them again, we have the 
jack handled by a studgroom. 

When a mare has dropped a mule colt or filly we 
bring it up with care. Those which are born in 
marshy and swampy country have soft hoofs, but 
if they are driven up into the mountain in summer, 
as we do at Reate, their hoofs become hardened. 
[246] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

In buying mules you must consider age and con- 
formation, the one that they may be able to work 
under a load, the other that the eye may have pleas- 
ure in looking at them: for a team of two good mules 
is capable of drawing any kind of a wagon on the 
road. 

You, my friend from Reate," Murrius added, turn- 
ing to me, "can vouch for what I have said, as you 
yourself have herds of breeding mares at home and 
have bred and sold many mules. 

The get of a horse out of a she ass is called a hinny : 
he is smaller in the body and usually redder in colour 
than a mule, and has ears like a horse, but mane and 
tail like an ass. Hinnies are carried by the dam 
twelve months, like a horse, and, like the horse too, 
they are raised and fed, and their age can be told by 
their teeth." 

Of herd dogs 
IX. "It remains,** said Atticus, "to speak of the 
last of the quadrupeds on our programme, that is to 
say, of dogs, which are of the greatest importance 
to us who feed the woolly flock, for the dog is the 
guardian of such cattle as lack the means to defend 
themselves, chiefly sheep and goats. For the wolf is 
wont to lie in wait for them and we oppose our dogs 
to him as defenders. Hogs can defend themselves, 
I H7] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

as well pigs, boars, barrows and sows, for they are 
near akin to the wild boar, which we know often 
kills dogs in the woods, with their tusks. What 
shall I say of large cattle? I know of an instance of 
a herd of mules pastured together, which, when they 
were attacked by a wolf, joined in forming a circle 
about him and killed him with blows of their hoofs : 
and again, bulls often stand together, rump to rump, 
and drive off wolves with their horns. But of dogs 
there are two kinds, hunting dogs, which are used 
against wild beasts and game, and herd dogs, which 
are used by the shepherd. I will discuss the latter 
methodically, following Scrofa's nine heads. 

Of the first importance is the choice of dogs of 
suitable age, for puppies and old dogs cannot protect 
themselves, much less the sheep, and so often become 
themselves the prey of wild beasts. 

In appearance they should be handsome, of good 
size, with black or tawny eyes: a symmetrical nose: 
Hps blackish or ruddy, neither drawn back above nor 
hanging underneath: a short muzzle, showing two 
teeth on either side, those of the lower jaw projecting 
a little, those above rather straight and not so ap- 
parent, and the other teeth, which are covered by 
the Hps, very sharp: a large head, ears large and 
turned over: a thick crest and neck: long joints: 
straight legs, rather bowed than knock-kneed: feet 
U48I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

large and well developed, so that in walking they 
may spread out: toes slightly splayed: claws hard 
and curved: the pad of the foot neither horny nor 
hard, but as it were puffed and soft: short-coupled: 
a back bone neither projecting nor reached: a heavy 
tail: a deep bark, and wide gaping chops. The colour 
to be preferred is white because it gives the dog a 
lion like aspect in the dark. 1 Finally, the females 
should have large teats equally distributed. Care 
should be taken that they are of good breed, such as 
those called for their place of origin, Laconian, Epirot 
and Sallentian. Be careful not to buy a sheep dog 
from a professional hunter or a butcher, because 
the one is apt to be lazy about following the flock, 
while the other is more likely to make after a hare 
or a deer which it might see, than to tend the sheep. 
It is better either to buy, from a shepherd, dogs 
which are accustomed to follow sheep or dogs which 
are without any training at all. While a dog does 
readily whatever he has been trained to do, his affec- 
tion is apt to be stronger for the shepherds than for 
the flock. 1 

1 The breed of Maremma sheep dogs, still preferred in Italy, 
is white. He is doubtless the descendant of the large woolly 
"Spitz" or Pomeranian wolf dog which is figured on Etruscan 
coins. 

* In his essay, Notre ami U chitti, Maeterlinck maintains elo- 
quently that the dog alone among the domestic animals has 
[M9l 

I^iectyGoOglc 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Once P. Aufidius Pontianus of Amiteraum bought 
certain flocks of sheep in further Umbria, the dogs 
which herded them being included in the bargain, 
but not the shepherds, who were, however, to make 
the delivery at the Saltus of Metapontum and the 
market of Heraclea: when these shepherds had re- 
turned home, their dogs, longing for their masters, 
a few days later of their own will came back to the 
shepherds in Umbria, having made several days 
journey without other food than what the fields 
afforded. Nor had any one of those shepherds done 
what Saseraa advises in his books on agriculture, 

given his confidence and friendship to man. "We are alone, 
absolutely alone, on this chance planet: and amid all the forms of 
life that surround us not one excepting the dog has made alliance 
with us. A few creatures fear us, most are unaware of us, and 
not one loves us. In the world of plants, we have dumb and 
motionless slaves: but they serve us in spite of themselves. . . . 
The rose and the corn, had they wings, would fly at our ap- 
proach, like birds. Among the animals, we number a few serv- 
ants who have submitted only through indifference, cowardice 
or stupidity: the uncertain and craven horse, who responds only 
to pain and is attached to nothing . . . the cow and the ox 
happy so long as they are eating and docile because for centuries 
they have not had a thought of their own. ... I do not speak 
of the cat, to whom we are nothing more than a too large and 
uneatable prey: the ferocious cat whose side long contempt 
tolerates us only as encumbering parasites in our own homes. 
She at least curses us in her mysterious heart: but all the others 
live beside us as they might live beside a rock or a tree." 

The effective use of this thesis in the scene of the revolt of 
the domestic animals in the Blue Bird will be remembered. 
[2Sol 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

'Whoever wishes to be followed by a dog should 
throw him a cooked frog.' l 

It is of importance that all your dogs should be 
of the same breed, for when they are related they are 
of the greatest aid to one another. 

Now as to Scrofa's fourth consideration, that con- 
cerning the manner of buying: this is accomplished 
by delivery by the former owner to the purchaser. 

The same stipulations as to health and against 
liability for tort are made as in the case of cattle, 
leaving out whatever is inapplicable to dogs. Some 
make a price on dogs at so much per head, others 
stipulate that the puppies shall go with the mother, 
others that two puppies shall count as one dog — as 
two lambs usually count as a sheep. Usually it is 
provided that all the dogs which have been accus- 
tomed to be together should be included in the 
bargain. 

The food appropriate for dogs is more like that of 
man than of sheep, for they are fed on scraps and 
bones rather than on grass and leaves. Care must 
be taken that they are fed regularly, for, if food is 
not provided, hunger will lead them in search of it 
away from the flock, unless, indeed, they shall find 

1 This method of securing the faithful affection of a dog is 
solemnly recommended, without acknowledgment to Sasema, 
in the seventeenth century editions of the Maison Rustique 
(I, 27). 

[>5il 

Din tized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

it in one another, thereby contradicting the old 
proverb, 1 or perchance they may realize the fable 
of Actaeon and turn their teeth against their master 
himself. You would do well to feed them on barley 
bread soaked in milk, because when they have become 
accustomed to that diet they will not readily desert 
the flock. They should never be suffered to taste the 
flesh of a carrion sheep lest the relish should tempt 
them to indulge in such food again. They may be 
fed also broth made out of bones, or bones themselves 
when broken up, for that makes their teeth stronger 
and the mouth wider: and thereby the jaws are 
stretched, while the zest of the marrow makes the 
dog fiercer. They should be accustomed to take their 
food in the day time where the flock is feeding and 
at night where the flock is folded. 

In the matter of breeding it is the practice to line 
the bitch at the beginning of spring, for then she is 
said to be in heat, that is to say, to show a readiness 
for breeding. When they are lined at this season 
they pup about the solstice, for they go three months. 
While they are in pup they should be fed barley 
bread rather than wheat bread, for it is more nourish- 
ing and makes more milk. 

1 Kcil happily points out that in his book on the Latin lan- 
guage (VII, 31), Varro quotes the "ancient proverb" to which 
he here refers, viz.: "canis caninam non est" dog doesn't eat 
dog. 

[252] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

In the matter of bringing up the puppies after 
birth: if there are many in the litter you should 
choose those you wish to keep and destroy the others: 
the fewer you keep the better they will be nourished, 
for then their portion of the mother's milk will be 
larger. 

Chaff or some thing else of that sort should be 
spread under them, because the better they are 
bedded the more easily they are brought up. Puppies 
open their eyes twenty days after birth. 1 During 
the first two months they are not separated from 
their mother, but wean themselves gradually. A 
number of puppies should be kenneled together, 
where they may be encouraged to fight, which will 
make them fiercer, but they should never be suffered 
to tire themselves since weariness develops cowardice. 
They should also be accustomed to be tied, at first 
with a light leash, and if they attempt to gnaw it 
they should be punished by whipping, so that they 
may not get the habit. On rainy days their kennels 
should be bedded with leaves or grass, for two reasons : 
that they may not soil themselves or suffer from cold. 
Some castrate their puppies thinking them less 
likely to leave the flock, but others do not, thinking 

1 Aristotle (H. A. VI, 20) says that puppies are blind from 

twelve to seventeen days, depending upon the season of the year 

at which they are born. Pliny (H. N. VIII, 62) Bays from seven 

to twenty days, depending upon the supply of the mother's milk. 

[*53l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

that the operation makes them less fierce. Some 
rub their ears and between their toes with a suffusion 
of bitter almonds steeped in water because flies, 
ticks and fleas usually develop sores in those parts, 
unless it is your practice to so anoint them. To 
protect them from wounds from wild beasts we place 
collars on them, of the kind which we call milittm, 
which is a girth around the neck made from strong 
leather studded with nails and lined with soft leather 
, to protect the neck from being chafed by the hard 
iron heads of the nails: for if a wolf or other wild 
beast is once wounded by these nails all the other 
dogs are safe from his attack, even if they have no 
collars. 

The number of dogs to be kept is determined by 
the size of the flock, usually one dog for every shep- 
herd is considered enough, but the practice varies. 
Thus there should be more in localities where wild 
beasts are plentiful, and those increase the number 
also who are wont to drive their flocks over the long 
forest drift ways to their summer or their winter 
feeding grounds. 

But two dogs are enough for a flock kept on a 
farm: in which case they should be male and female, 
for they are more attached and, by emulation, fiercer, 
and if one is sick for a protracted time the flock will 
not be without a dog." 

U54l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Here Atticus looked around as if to enquire whether 
he had omitted any thing. 

"This is the silence," said I, "which summons 
another player on the boards. 

Of shepherds 

X. "The rest of this act," I added, "relates to how 
many and what kind of shepherds are necessary." 

Cossinius took the cue. "For large cattle," he 
said, "men of full age are required; for small cattle 
boys will do: but in either case those who drive their 
flocks and herds on the drift ways must be stouter 
than those who remain on the farm and return to 
the steading every day. 

So in the wood pastures (sallus) it behooves one to 
have young men and usually armed men, while on 
the farm boys or even girls may tend the flock. Those 
who use the distant feeding grounds should require 
their shepherds to feed their flocks together all day, 
but at night to remain each one with his own flock. 
They should all be under the supervision of one flock 
master, who should be older and more experienced 
than the others, because they will obey more cheer- 
fully one who surpasses them in age and knowledge; 
and yet the flock master should be of such years that 
he may not be prevented by age from hard work: 
for neither old men nor boys can endure the steeps 

UssJ 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

of the drift ways, nor the ardours and roughness of 
the mountains, which must be suffered by those 
who follow flocks, especially cattle and goats, to 
whom the rocks and the forests are pleasant grazing 
places. 

So far as concerns the conformation of the men 
chosen for these occupations, they should be strong 
and swift and active, with ready limbs not only able 
to follow the cattle but to defend them from the in- 
cursions of wild beasts and of brigands: men who 
can load the packs on the sumpter beasts: can run 
and throw a javelin.' 

Every nation is not fit for tending cattle, especially 
the Basculi and the Turduli [of Spain]. The Gauls 
are the best of all, particularly for draught cattle. 

In the matter of the purchase of shepherds, there 
are six usual methods of obtaining lawful title to a 
slave: (i) by inheritance, (2) by due form of mancipa- 
tion, which is delivery of possession by one who has 
the legal right, (3) by the legal process called sur- 
render in court (cessio in jure) from one who has 
that right, the transfer taking place where it should, 
(4) by prescriptive use (usucapion), (5) by 'purchase 
of a prisoner of war "under the crown" (6) by auc- 

1 It was among these hardy shepherd slaves that Spartacus 
recruited his army in 72-71 B. C, as did Caelius and Milo in 
48 B. C, while their descendants were the brigands who in- 
fested Southern Italy even in the nineteenth century. 
[256] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

tion at the distribution of some one's property by 
order of court under the process known as bonorum 
emptio. 1 

The peculium or personal property of the slave 
usually passes with him to a new master unless it is 
specially excepted in the terms of sale: there is also 
the usual guaranty as to the health of the slave and 
that he has committed no theft or tort for which his 
master is legally responsible, and, unless the pur- 
chase is by mancipation, the bargain is bound by an 
obligation of double indemnity, or in the amount of 
the purchase price alone, if that is the agreement. 

The shepherds should take their meals separately 
during the day, each one with his flock, but in the 
evening they should meet at a common supper under 
the supervision of the flock master. 1 It should be 

'Gains, I, 119, II, 24, 41, describes in detail the processes 
here referred to by which a slave was acquired under the Roman 
law. 

* Dennis, in his Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria, draws a pic- 
ture of modern Italy which may serve to illustrate Varro's 
sketch of the mountain life of the shepherds of his day: 

"Occasionally in my wanderings on this site (Veii) I have 
entered, either from curiosity or for shelter, one of the capanne 
scattered over the downs. These are tall conical thatched huts 
which the shepherds make their winter abode. For in Italy, 

' >cks 



the lowlands being generally unhealthy in summer, the flocks 
are driven to the mountains about May, and as soon as the great 
heats are past are brought back to the rich pastures of the 
plains. It is a curious sight, the interior of a capanna, and affords 
an agreeable diversity to the antiquity hunter. A little bold- 
1*571 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the duty of the flock master to see that every thing 
is provided which may be required by the flock or 

ness is requisite to pass through the pack of dogs, white as new 
dropt lambs, but large and fierce as wolves, which, were the 
shepherd not at hand, would tear in pieces whoever might ven- 
ture to approach the hut: but with one of the pecoraj for a 
Teucer, nothing is to be feared. The capanne are of various 
sizes. One I entered not far from Veil was thirty or forty feet 
in diameter and fully as high, propped in the centre by two rough 
masts, between which a hole was left in the roof for the escape 
of smoke. Within the door lay a large pile of lambs, there might 
be a hundred, killed that morning and already flayed, and a 
number of shepherds were busied in operating on the carcases 
of others: all of which were to be dispatched forthwith to the 
Roman market. Though a fierce May sun blazed without, a 
huge fire roared in the middle of the hut: but this was for the 
sake of the ricotia, which was being made in another part of 
the capanna. Here stood a huge cauldron, full of boiling ewes' 
milk. In a warm state this curd is a delicious jelly and has 
often tempted me to enter a capanna in quest of it, to the amaze- 
ment of the pecoraj, to whom it is vilior alga. Lord of the 
cauldron, stood a man dispensing ladlefuls of the rich simmering 
mess to his fellows, as they brought their bowls for their morn- 
ing allowance: and he varied his occupation by pouring the 
same into certain small baskets, the serous part running off 
through the wicker and the residue caking as it cooled. On the 
same board stood the cheeses, previously made from the cream. 
In this hut lived twenty-five men, their nether limbs clad in 
goat skins, with the hair outwards, realizing the satyrs of ancient 
Fable: but they had no nymphs to tease, nor shepherdesses to 
woo, and never 

'sat all day 

Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love 

To amorous Phillida.' 

They were a band of celibates without the vows. In such huts 

they dwell all the year round, flaying lambs or shearing sheep, 

1258] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

by the shepherds, chiefly the victuals for the men and 
medicine for the flock: for which the master should 
provide beasts of burden, either horses or some thing 
else, which can carry a load on its back. 

As to what relates to the breeding of shepherds, 
it is easy, so far as concerns those who remain on 
the farm all the time because they can have a fellow 
servant to wife at the farmstead, for Venus Pastoralis 
demands no more. Some hold that it is expedient 
also to furnish women l for those who pasture the 
flocks in the Saltus and the forests and have no resi- 
dence but find their shelter from the rain under im- 
provised sheds: that such women following the flocks 
and preparing the food for the shepherds keep the 
men better satisfied and more devoted to their duty. 
But they must needs be strong though not deformed, 
and not less capable of work then the men them- 
selves, as they are in many localities and as may 
be seen throughout Illyricum, where the women feed 
the flocks or carry in wood for the fire and cook the 
food, or keep watch over the household utensils in 
their cottages. 

living on bread, ticotta and water, very rarely tasting meat or 
wine and sleeping on shelves ranged round the hut, like berths 
in a ship's cabin. Thus are the dreams of Arcadia dispelled by 
realities." 

1 la modern Italy the shepherds do not take their women 
with them to the saltus, but, as Dennis says, lead there the life 
of "celibates, without the vows." 
[259] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

As to the method of raising their children, it suf- 
fices to say that the shepherd women are usually 
both mothers and nurses at the same time." 

At this Cossinius looked at me and said: "I have 
heard you relate that, when you were in Liburnia, 
you saw women big with child bringing in fire wood 
and at the same time carrying a nursing child, or 
even two of them, thus putting to shame those slender 
reeds, the women of our class, who are wont to He 
abed under mosquito bars for days at a time when 
they are pregnant." 

"That is true," I replied, "and the contrast is 
even more marked in IUyricum, where it often hap- 
pens that a pregnant woman whose time has come 
will leave her work for a little while and return with 
a new born child which you would think she had 
found rather than borne. 1 

Not only this, the custom of that country permits 
the girls as much as twenty years of age, whom they 
call virgins, to go about unprotected and to give 
themselves to whomever they wish and to have 
children before marriage." 

1 In the Venitian provinces of Italy today the women are 
still seen at work in the harvest and rice fielde with their babes 
in their bosoms: but the most amazing modern spectacle of this 
kind is that of women coaling ships in the East, carrying their 
unhappy youngsters op and down the coal ladders throughout 
the work. 

[260] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

"As to what pertains to the health of man and 
beast," resumed Cossinius, "and the leech craft 
which may be practised without the aid of a physi- 
cian, the flock master should have the rules written 
down: indeed, the flock master must have some edu- 
cation, otherwise he can never keep his flock accounts 
property. 1 

As to the number of shepherds, some make a nar- 
row, some a broad, allowance. I have one shepherd 
for every eighty long wool sheep: Atticus here has 
one for every hundred. One can reduce the number 
of men required in respect of large flocks (like those 
containing a thousand head or more) much more 
readily than in respect of comparatively small flocks, 
like Atticus' and mine, for I have only seven hundred 
head of sheep, and you, Atticus, have, I believe, 
eight hundred, though we are alike in providing a 
ram for every ten ewes. Two men are required to 
care for a herd of fifty mares: and each of them should 
have a mare broken for riding to serve as a mount in 
those localities where it is the custom to drive the 

1 The author of Mauon Riutique did not agree with Varro in 
this opinion. I quote from Surflet't translation of 1606 (I, 7): 

"And for writing and reading it skillcth not whether he be 
able to doe it or no, or that he should have any other charge 
to looke unto besides that of yours, or else that be should use 
another to set downe in writing such expences as he hath laid 
out; for paper will admit any thing." 
[261] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

mares to pasture, as often happens in Apulia and 
Lucania." 

Of milk and cheese and wool 

XL "And now that we have fulfilled our promise, 
let us go," said Cossinius. 

"Not until you have added some thing," I cried, 
"concerning that supplemental profit from cattle 
which was promised; namely, of milk and cheese and 
the shearing of wool." 

So Cossinius resumed: 

"Ewes' milk, and, after it, goats* milk, is the most 
nourishing of all liquids which we drink. As a purga- 
tive, mares' milk ranks first, and, after it, in order, 
asses' milk, cows' milk and goats' milk, but the 
quality depends upon what has been fed to the cattle, 
upon the condition of the cattle, and upon when it is 
milked. 

So far as concerns the food of the cattle, milk is 
nourishing which is made from barley and stover and 
other such kinds of dry and hard cattle food. 

So far as concerns its purgative qualities, milk 
is good when made from green stuff, especially 
if it is grass containing plants which, taken by 
themselves, have a purgative effect upon the human 
body. 

So far as concerns the condition of the cattle, 
[262] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

that milk is best which comes from cattle in vigorous 
health and from those still young. 

So far as concerns the time of milking, that milk 
is best which comes neither from a 'stripper' nor 
from a recently fresh dam. 

The cheese made of cows' milk is the most agree- 
able to the taste but the most difficult to digest: 
next, that of ewes' milk, while the least agreeable in 
taste, but the most easily digested, is that of goats' 
milk. 

There is also a distinction between cheese when it 
is soft and new made and when it is dry and old, for 
when it is soft it is more nourishing and digestible, 
but the opposite is true of old and dry cheese. 

The custom is to make cheese from the rising of 
the Pleiades in spring to their rising in summer, and 
yet the rule is not invariable, because of difference 
in locality and the supply of forage. 

The practice is to add a quantity of rennet, equal 
to the size of an olive, to two congii of milk to make it 
curdle. The rennet taken from the stomachs of the 
hare and the kid is better than that from lambs, 
but some use as a ferment the milk of the fig tree 
mixed with vinegar, and some times sprinkled with 
other vegetable products. In parts of Greece this is 
called dwos, elsewhere fyucpvo?" 

"I am prepared to believe," I said, "that the fig 
E263] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

tree standing beside the chapel of the goddess Ru- 
mina ' was planted by shepherds for the purpose 
you mention, for there is it the practice to make 
libations of milk rather than of wine or to sacrifice 
suckling pigs. For men used to use the word rumis 
or ruma where we now say mamma, signifying a 
teat: hence even now suckling lambs are called sub- 
rumi from the teat they suck, just as we call suckling 
pigs lactantes from lac, the milk that comes from the 
teat." 

Cossinius resumed: 

"If you sprinkle your cheese with salt it is better 
to use the mineral than the marine kind. 

Concerning the shearing of sheep, the first thing 
to be looked into before you begin is that the sheep 
are not suffering from scab or sores, as it is better to 
wait, if necessary, until tliey are cured before shearing. 

The time to shear is between the vernal equinox 
and the summer solstice, when the sheep begin to 
sweat (it is the sweat which gives new clipped wool 
its name sucida). As soon as the sheep are sheared 
they are smeared with a mixture * of wine and oil, 

1 This temple and fig tree stood in Rome at the foot of the 
Palatine hill, in the neighbourhood of the Lupercal. It was 
under this fig tree that Romulus and Remus were supposed to 
have been Buckled by the wolf. 

1 'That is the beste grease that is to a shepe, to grease hym in 
the mouthe with good meate,' says Sir Anthony Fitzherbert. 
[264] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

some add white wax and hogs' grease. If they are 
sheep which are kept blanketed, the inside of the 
blanket should be anointed with this mixture before 
it is put on again. 

If the sheep has suffered any wound during the 
shearing, it should be treated with liquid tar. 

Long wool sheep are usually sheared about the 
time of the barley harvest: in some places before the 
hay harvest. 

Some men shear their sheep twice a year, as in 
hither Spain, investing double work because they 
think they get more wool, just as some men mow their 
meadows twice a year. Careful shepherds are wont 
to shear on a mat so as not to lose any of the wool. 
A clear day should be chosen for the shearing and 
it is usually done between the fourth and the tenth 
hours (10 a. m-4 p. m.) since wool sheared in the 
hot sun is softer, heavier and of better colour by rea- 
son of the sweat of the sheep. Wool which has been 
collected and packed in bags is called vellera or 
velamina, words derived from vellere, to pull, whence 
it may be concluded that the practice of pulling wool 
is older than shearing. Those who pull the wool 
today make a practice of starving their sheep for 
three days before, because when they are weak the 
wool yields more readily.*' 

"Speaking of shearing," I said, "it is reported that 
t*65l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the first barbers were brought into Italy from Sicily 
in the year 453 after the foundation of Rome (B. C. 
300) by P. Ticinius Menas, as appears from the in- 
scription in the public square of Ardca. The statues 
of the ancients show that formerly there were no 
barbers because most of them have long hair and a 
heavy beard.*' l 

Cossinius resumed: 

"As the wool of the sheep serves to make clothes, 
so the hair of goats is employed: on ships, in making 
military engines and certain implements of industry. 
Certain nations, indeed, are clad in goat skins, as 
in Gaetulia and Sardinia. Their use for this purpose 
by the ancient Greeks is apparent, because old men 
in the tragedies are called S«£#e/>«u., from the fact 
that they were clad in goat skins: and it is the cus- 
tom also in our comedies to dress rustic characters 
in goat skins, like the youth in the Hypobolimaus 
(the Counterfeit) of Qecilius, and the old man in the 
Heautontimorumenos (the Self Tormentor) of Terence. 

It is the practice to shear goats in the greater part 
of Phrygia because there the goats have heavy coats, 
of which cilicia (so called because the practice of 

1 Pltny (VII, 50) says that most nations leam the use of bar- 
bers next after that of letters, but that the Romans were late 
in this respect. Varro himself wore a beard, as appears on the 
coin he struck during the war with the Pirates. It is reproduced 
in Smiths Diet. Gr. and Rom. Biog., Ill, p. 1227. 
[266] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

shearing goats began in the city of that name) and 
other hair cloth materials of that kind are made." 

With this Cossinius stopped, and, while he was 
waiting for criticism of what he had said, Vitulus' 
freedman, coming into town from the gardens [of 
his master] turned to us and said, "I was on my way 
to your house to invite you to come early so as not 
to shorten the holiday." 

And so, my dear Turranius Niger, we separated: 
Scrofa and I going to the gardens of Vitulus; the 
others, some home and some to see Menas. 



1267] 

aatized by GoOgk 



J¥ Google 



BOOK III 

THE HUSBANDRY OF THE STEADING 

Introduction: the antiquity of country life 

I 

are two modes of human life, 

ar Pinnius, which are manifestly 

erent in the time of their origin 

y are in their habitat, that of the 

y and that of the town. Country 

life is much the more ancient, for time was when 

men lived altogether in the country and had no 

towns: indeed, the oldest town in Greece, according 

to the tradition, is the Boeotian Thebes, which was 

founded by King Ogyges, and in our own land that 

of Rome, founded by King Romulus (of which now it 

may be affirmed with confidence, as was not possible 

when Ennius wrote: 

" Tis seven hundred years, or more or less, 
Since first illustrious Rome began her sway, 
With hallowed augury.") 
Now, if it is admitted that Thebes was founded 
before the deluge, which is known by Ogyges' name, 
its age is not more than about twenty-one hundred 
years: and if that period is compared with the lapse 
of time since men began to cultivate the land and to 
{269] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

live in huts and hovels, knowing naught of city walls 
and gates, it is evident that life in the country pre- 
ceded life in town by a tale of immemorial years. 
Nor is this to be wondered at since 'God made the 
country and man made the town.' l While the tra- 
dition is that all the arts were invented in Greece 
within a thousand years, there never was a time 
when the earth could not be cultivated. And, as 
life in the country is the more ancient, so it is the 
better life: for it was not without good reason that 
our ancestors Were wont to plant colonies of citizens 
in the country, because by them they were both fed 
in times of peace and protected in times of war: nor 
was it without significance that they called both the 
Earth and Ceres by the common name of Mother 
and esteemed that those who worshipped her lead a 
life at once pious and useful and were the sole repre- 
sentatives left on earth of the race of Saturn. A proof 
of this is that the mysteries peculiar to the cult of 
Ceres were called Initio, the very name indicating 
that they related to the beginning of things. 
A further proof that country life was earlier than 

1 Cowper*8 verse in The Task seems to be all that is happy in 
the way of translation of Varro's text, " divina natura dedit agros, 
are humana sdificavit urbes": but Cowley's "God the first 
garden made, and the first city Cain" was probably Cowper's 
source. Cowley was a reader of Varro, as his pleasant and sane 
essay Of Agriculture shows. 

[270] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

that of town is found in the name of the town of 
Thebes, which was bestowed from the character of 
its situation rather than from the name of its founder: 
for in the ancient language, and among the iEoIians 
who had their origin in Bceotia, a small hill is called 
tebas without the aspirate; and in the Sabine country, 
where Pelasgians from Greece settled, they still have 
the same locution: witness that hill called Tebse which 
stands in the Sabine country on the via Salaria not 
far from the mile stone of Reate. At first agriculture 
was conducted on so small a scale that it had little 
distinction, since those who followed it, being sprung 
from shepherds, at once sowed their corn and pas- 
tured their flocks on the same land, but as later this 
art grew in importance the husbandry of live stock 
was separated, and it befel that some men were called 
farmers and others shepherds. 

The art of feeding live stock should really be di- 
vided into two branches, as is not yet fully appre- 
ciated, one relating to the stock kept at the steading, 
the other to the stock pastured in the fields. The 
latter, which is designated by the name fecuaria, is 
well known and highly esteemed so that rich men, 
either lease or buy much pasture land in order to 
carry it on: the other, which is known as villatice, 
has, because it seemed to be of less importance, been 
treated by some as an incident of the husbandry of 
[271] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

agriculture, when in fact it should be made a part of 
the husbandry of live stock: nor has it been de- 
scribed separately and at length by any one, so far 
as I know. 

And so, as I think that there are three branches of 
farm management which are undertaken for profit, 
namely: agriculture, live stock and the industries 
peculiar to the steading, I have planned three books, 
of which I have already written two, the first con- 
cerning the husbandry of agriculture, which I dedi- 
cated to my wife Fundania, and the second concern- 
ing the husbandry of live stock to Turranius Niger: 
the third, relating to the profits of those industries 
which are carried on at the steading, I now send 
herewith to you; for the fact that we are neighbours 
and entertain a mutual affection seems to demand 
that it should be dedicated to you above all others. 

Although you have a villa, which is remarkable 
for the beauty of its workmanship within and with- 
out, and for the splendour of its mosaic pavements, 
still you deem it to be bare unless you have the walls 
decorated also with books: so in like manner that 
your villa may be more distinguished by the profits 
you derive from it than by the character of its con- 
struction, and that I may be of assistance to that 
end, so far as may be, I have sent you this book, 
which is a summary of some conversations which we 
[272I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

have had on the subject of what makes the perfectly 
equipped villa: and so I begin as follows: 

Of the definition of a Roman villa 
II. The Senator Q. Axius, my fellow tribesman, 
and I had cast our votes at the comitia for the elec- 
tion of aediles, and, although it was the heat of the 
day, we wished to be on hand when the candidate 
whom we were supporting should go home. So Axius 
said to me: "What would you think of taking shelter 
in the villa publica l while the votes are being sorted 
rather than in the booth of our candidate." " I hold," 
said I, "not only with the proverb that bad advice 
is worst for him who gives it, but that good advice is 
good for both the giver and the taker." 

And so we made our way to the villa publico, where 
we found Appius Claudius, 1 the Augur, seated on a 
bench waiting for any call for his services by the 
Consul : on his left was Cornelius Merula (black-bird) 

1 Following the precedent of the first and second books in the 
matter of local colour, the scene of this third book, relating to 
villas and the "small deer," which were there reared, is laid 
in the villa publica at Rome, and the characters of the dialogue 
are selected for the suggestion which their names may make of 
the denizens of the aviary, the barn yard and the bee-stand. 

'This Appius Claudius Pulcher served in Asia under his 
brother-in-law Lucullus, was Augur in B. C. 59, Consul in 54 
and Censor in 50. He wrote a hook on augural law and the 
habits of birds at which Cicero poked some rather mean fun. 
He fixes the date of the dialogue. 
U73] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

of the Consular family of that name, and Fircellius 
Pavo (pea-cock) of Reate, and on his right Minutius 
Pica (mag-pie) and M. Petronius Passer (sparrow). 
When we had approached them Axius, smiling, said 
to Appius: "May we come into your aviary where 
you are sitting among the birds ?" 

"By all means," replied Appius, "and especially 
you who set before me such birds as still make my 
mouth water, when I was your guest a few days ago 
at your Reatine villa on my way to lake Velinus 
to settle the controversy between the people of 
Interamna and Reate. 1 

1 In Varro'e time, as today, the river Velinus drained the 
fresh pastures of the Umbrian prairie of Rosea, "the nurse of 
Italy, which lay below the town of Reate (the modern Rieti), 
and was originally the bed of a lake. Its waters are so strongly 
impregnated with carbonate of lime .that by their deposit of 
travertine they tend to block their own channel. The drainage 
of Rosea has, therefore, always been a matter of concern to the 
live stock industry of Reate, and in B. C. 272 M. Curius Den- 
tatus opened the first of several successful artificial canals 
(the last dating from the sixteenth century, A. D.), which still 
serve to lead the Velinus into the Nar at the renowned Cascate 
delte Marmore. For two hundred years the people of Interamna 
(the modern Terni) had complained that their situation below 
the falls was endangered by Curius' canal, and finally in B. C 
54 the Roman Senate appointed the commission to which Ap- 
pius Claudius refers in the text, to hear the controversy. Cicero 
was retained as counsel for the people of Reate, and during: the 
hearing stopped, as Appius Claudius did, with our friend Axius 
at his Reatine villa, and wrote about the visit to the same At- 
ticus whom we met in Varro's second book, as follows (ad Aui- 
[2741 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

But," he added, "is not this villa, which our an- 
cestors constructed, simpler and so better than that 
elaborate one of yours at Reate : do you see any where 
here any furniture of citrus wood or ormolu, any 
decorations of vermillion or blue, any tessellations or 
mosaic work, all of which on the other hand were 
displayed in your house? And while this is open to 
the entire people, yours is available to you alone: 
this is the resort for the citizens after the comitia 
in the Campus Martius, and for all alike, while yours 
is reserved for mares and asses. And furthermore 
it should be considered that this building is useful 
in carrying on the public business, for here the consuls 
review the army on parade, here the arms are in- 
spected, here the censors enumerate the people." 

"Tell me," retorted Azius, "which is useful, this 

cum, IV, 15): "After this was over the people of Reate sum- 
moned me to their Tcmpc to plead their cause against the people 
of Interamna, before the Consul and ten commissioners, the 
question being concerning the Veline lake, which, drained by 
M. Curius by means of a channel cut through the mountain, now 
flows into the Nar: by this means the famous Rosea has been 
reclaimed from the swamp, though still fairly moist. I stopped 
with Azius, who took me also to visit the Seven Waters." What 
was once deemed a danger is a double source of profit to the 
modem folk of Interamna. Tourists today crowd to see the 
same waterfall which Cicero visited, taking a tram from the 
busy little industrial town of Terni: and the waters which flow 
from Velinus now serve to generate power with which armour 
plates are manufactured for the Julian navy on the site of the 
ancient Interamna. 

[275! 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

villa of yours giving on the Campus Martius, more 
extravagantly arrayed with objects of art than all 
Reate put together, so bedizened is it with pictures 
and garnished with statues, or mine where there is 
no trace of the artists Lysippus or Antiphilus, but 
there are many of the farm hand and the shepherd? 
And since there can be no villa where there is no 
farm and that well cultivated, how can you call this 
house of yours a villa which has no land appurtenant 
to it and no cattle or horses ? Again, tell me, pray, 
how does your villa compare with that of your grand- 
father and great grandfather, for one cannot see at 
yours, as one could always see at theirs, cured hay 
in the mows, the vintage in the cellar, and the harvest 
in the granary? Because, forsooth, a house is situ- 
ated out of town, it is no more a villa for that reason 
than the houses of those who dwell beyond the Porta 
Flu merit aria or in the iEmiliana suburb." 

"Since it appears that I do not know what a 
villa is," replied Appius, smiling, "I wish you would 
be good enough to instruct me, so that I may not 
make a fool of myself, as I am planning to buy from 
M. Seius his villa at Ostia: for if a mere house is not 
a villa unless it is equipped with a jackass costing forty 
thousand sesterces ($2,000), like that you showed 
me at your place, I fear that I would be making a 
mistake in buying Seius* house on the shore at Ostia 
[276I 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

in the belief that it is a villa. But it was our friend 
Merula here who put me in mind of buying this 
house, for he told me that he had spent several days 
there and that he had never seen a more delightful 
villa, and yet he saw there no paintings, nor any 
bronze or marble statues, neither did he see any wine 
press, or oil mill, or oil jars." 

"And what kind of a villa is this," said Axhis, 
turning to Merula, "where there are neither the 
ornaments of a town house nor the utensils of a 
farm?" 

"Do you consider," said Merula, "that your house 
on the bank of Velinus, which neither painter nor 
architect has ever seen, is any less a villa than the 
one you have in Rosea so elegantly decorated with 
the work of an architect and which you share" with 
your famous jackass?" 

Axius admitted, with a nod, that a simple farm 
house was as much entitled to be called a villa as 
any house which united the characteristics of both 
town and country, and asked what, he deduced from 
this. 

"What?" said Merula. "Why, if your estate in 
Rosea is to be approved by reason of the husbandry 
which you carry on, and is properly called a villa 
because there cattle are fed and stabled, then, by 
the same reasoning, all those houses should be called 
[277 J 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 
villas in which large profits are derived from hus- 
bandry: for what difference does it make whether 
you derive your profit from sheep or from birds? Is 
the income any sweeter which comes from cattle, 
in which bees are generated, than from the bees them- 
selves, such as work in their hives at the villa of Seius ? 
Do you sell to the butcher the hogs which you raise 
at your farm for more than Seius sells bis wild boars 
to the meat market?" 

"Am I any less able," replied Azius, "to have these 
things at my farm at Reate: is Sicilian honey made 
at Seius* place and only Corsican honey at Reate, 1 
and does the mast which he buys for his wild boars 
make them fat while that which I get for nothing 
from my woods makes mine lean?" 

"But," said Appius, "Merula does not deny that 
you can carry on at your villa the kind of husbandry 
which Seius does at his, yet I myself have seen that 
you don't. 

For there are two kinds of husbandry of live stock: 
one in the fields, as of cattle; and the other at the 
steading, as of chickens and pigeons and bees and 
other such things which are usually kept at a villa. 

1 Sicilian honey was famous for its flavour because of the bee 
pasture of thyme which there abounded, especially at Hybla. 
Theophrastus (H. P. Ill, 15, 5) explains that the honey of 
Corsica had an acrid taste, because the bees pastured there 
largely on box trees. 

[278] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

About the latter, Mago the Carthaginian, and Cassius 
Dionysius and others have treated specially in dif- 
ferent parts of their books, and it would seem that 
Seius has read their precepts and so has learned how 
to make more profit from his villa alone by such hus- 
bandry than others make out of an entire farm." 

"Certainly," agreed Merula, "for I have seen there 
great flocks of geese, chickens, pigeons, cranes and 
pea-cocks: also dormice, fish, wild boars and other 
such game. 1 The freedman who keeps his books 
which Varro has seen, assured me when he was doing 
the honours in the absence of his master, that Seius 
derives an income of more than fifty thousand ses- 
terces (£2,500) per annum from his villa." 

As Axius seemed astonished, I asked him: "Surely 
you know the estate of my aunt in the Sabine coun- 
1 These denizens of the Roman villa are all enumerated by 
Martial in his delightful verses (III, 38) upon Faustinus' villa 
at Bate. The picture of the barn yard is very true to life in al) 
ages, especially the touch of the hungry pigs sniffing after the 
pail of the farmer's wife: 

"Vagatur omnia tnrba sordidss cortis 
Argutus anser, gemmeique pavones 
Nomenque debet quae rubentibus pcunis, 
Et picta pcrdix, Numidicaeque guttata; 
Et impiorum pnasiana Colcnorum. 
Rhodias superbi femtnas prement galli 
Sonantque turres plausibus columbarum, 
Gemit hinc pahimbus, tnde cereus turtur 
Avidi sequuntur villicas sitium porci: 
Matremque plenam mollis agnus eiapcctat." 

[a»l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

try which is at the twenty-fourth mile stone from 
Rome on the via Salaria." 

"Of course, I do," Axius replied, "for it is there 
that I am wont to divide the day in summer on my 
way from Reate to town and to spend the night when 
I come thence in winter." 

"Well," I continued, "in that villa there is an 
aviary from which I know that there were taken in 
one season five thousand thrushes, which, at three 
deniera apiece, means that that department of the 
establishment brought in a revenue of sixty thousand 
sesterces that year, or twice the yield of the entire 
two hundred jugera of your farm at Reate." ' 

"What, sixty thousand," exclaimed Axius, "sixty 
thousand: you are making game of me!" 

"Sixty thousand," I affirmed, "but in order that 
you might realize such a lucky throw you will require 
either a public banquet or a triumph on the scale of 
that of Scipio Metellus, or club dinners, which indeed 

1 The sestertius was one quarter of a denarius, or, My, the 
equivalent of five cents. It was also called nummus, as we say 
"nickel." The ordinary unit used by the Romans in reckoning 
considerable Bums of money was 1,000 sesterces, which may 
accordingly be translated as the equivalent of (say) $50. Axius" 
jackass thus cost $2,000, while Seius* income from his villa 
was $2,500 per annum, that of Varro's aunt from her aviary 
was $3,000, and that of Alius from his farm $1,500. Cicero 
records that Axius was a money lender, which explains the 
fun here made of his avarice. 

[280 J 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

have now become so frequent as to raise the price 
of provisions of the market." 

"You will perchance expect this return every year," 
said Merula, "so I trust that your aviary may not 
lead you into a loss. But surely in such good times 
as these it could not happen that you would fail, 
except rarely, for what year is there that does not see 
such a feast or a triumph, or club dinners, such as now- 
a-days consume victuals without number. Nay," 
he added, "it seems that in our habit of luxury such 
a public banquet is a daily occurrence within the 
gateB of Rome. 1 

To supplement the examples of such profits : L. Al- 
butius, a learned man and, as you know, the author 
of certain satires in the manner of Lucilius, has 
said that the returns from feeding live stock on his 
Alban farm are always less than his income from 
his villa, for the farm yields less than ten thousand 
sesterces and the villa more than twenty. He even 
maintains that if he should establish a villa near 
the sea in such a place as he might choose he could 
derive from it an income of more than a hundred 
thousand sesterces. Did not M. Cato recently sell 

1 Columella, writing about one hundred years after Varro, 
refers to this passage and Bays that luxury had so developed 
since Varro's time that it no longer required an extraordinary 
occasion, like a triumph, to bring the price of thrushes to three 
denarii a piece, but that that had become a current quotation. 
[*8i] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

forty thousand sesterces worth of fishes from the 
fish ponds of Lucullus after he had accepted the 
administration of his estate?" 

"My dear Merula," exclaimed Axius, "take me, 
I begof you, as your pupil in the art of the husbandry 
of the steading." 

"I will begin," replied Merula, "as soon as you 
promise me a minerval in the form of a dinner." 1 

"You shall have it," said Axius, "both today, and 
hereafter as well, off those delicacies you will teach 
me to rear." 

"I fear," replied Merula, "that what you may 
offer me at the beginning of your experience with 
villa feeding will be dead geese or deceased pea- 
cocks." 

"And what difference will it make to you," retorted 
Axius, "if I do serve you fish or fowl which has come 
to an untimely end: for in no event could you eat 
them unless they were dead: but I beg you," he 
added, "matriculate me in the school of villa hus- 
bandry and expound to me the theory and the prac- 
tice of it." 

Merula accepted the invitation cheerfully. 

1 A minerval was the fee (of Minerva) paid to a school teacher. 



[382] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of the Roman development of the industries of the 
steading 

III. "In the first place," he said, "you should 
know what kind of creatures you may raise or feed 
in or about a villa, either for your profit or for your 
pleasure. There are three divisions for this study: 
poultry houses, warrens and fish ponds. 

I include under the head of poultry houses the 
feeding of all kinds of fowls which are usually kept 
within the walls of a steading: under the head of 
warrens not merely what our great grandfathers 
meant — places where rabbits were usually kept — 
but any enclosure adjoining a villa in which game 
animals are enclosed to be fed. In like manner I 
include under the head of fish ponds all those places 
in which fish are kept at a villa either in fresh or salt 
water. 

Each of these divisions may be separated into at 
least two parts: thus the first, that with respect to 
poultry houses, should be treated with reference to a 
classification of fowls as between those which are 
content on land alone, such as pea-cocks, turtle 
doves, thrushes; and those which require access to 
water as well as land, such as geese, widgeons and 
ducks. So the second division, that relating to game, 
has two different classifications: one which includes 
[283] 

:> :l :ieci : yGo0gle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

the wild boar, the roe buck and hares; the other 
bees, snails and dormice. 

The third, or aquatic division, likewise has two 
classifications, one including fresh water fish, the 
other salt water fish. 

In order to secure and maintain a supply of these 
six classes of stock it is necessary to provide a force 
of three kinds of artificers, namely: fowlers, hunters 
and fishermen, or else you may buy breeding stock 
from such men, and trust to the diligence of your 
servants to rear and fatten their offspring until they 
are ready for market. Certain of them, such as 
dormice, snails and chickens, may, however, be ob- 
tained without the aid of a hunter's net, and doubt- 
less the business of keeping them began with the 
stock native to every farm: for the breeding even of 
chickens has not been a monopoly of the Roman 
augurs, to make provision for their auspices, but has 
been practised by all farmers from the beginning of 
time. 1 From such a start in the kind of husbandry 
we are now discussing, the next step was to provide 
masonry enclosures near the steading to confine game, 
and these served as well for shelter for the bee-stand, 
for originally the bees were wont to make their hives 
under the eaves of the farm house itself. 

I The Inventor of the auspices ex tripudtif or the feeding of 
chickens was evidently an ingenious poultry fancier who suc- 
ceeded in securing the care of his favourites at the public charge. 
[284] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

The third division, that of keeping fish, had its 
origin in simple fresh water ponds in which fish 
taken in the streams were kept. 

There have been two steps in the development of 
each of these three conveniences; the earlier distin- 
guished by the ancient simplicity, the later by our 
modern luxury. The earlier stage was that of our 
ancestors, who had but two places for keeping poul- 
try: one the court yard of the steading in which 
chickens were fed and their profit derived from eggs 
and pullets, the other above ground, for their pigeons 
were kept in the dormers or on the roof of the farm 
house. 

Now-a-days, on the contrary, what our ancestors 
called hen-houses are known as ornithones, and serve 
to house thrushes and pea-cocks to cater to the deli- 
cate appetite of the master: and indeed such struc- 
tures now have larger roofs than formerly sufficed 
to cover an entire farm house. 

Such has been the progress in respect of warrens 
also: your father, Alius, never saw any game but 
rabbits, nor did there exist in his time any such ex- 
tensive enclosures as now are made, many jugera in 
extent, to hold wild boars and roe bucks. You can 
witness," he said, turning to me, "that you found 
many wild boars in the warren of your farm at Tus- 
culum, when you bought it from M. Piso. 
[*8 5 J 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

In respect of the third class, who was there who 
used to have any kind of a fish pond, except of fresh 
■water, stocked merely with cat fish and mullets, 
while today our elegants declare that they would 
as soon have a pond stocked with frogs as with those 
fish I have named. You will recall the story of 
Philippus when he was entertained at Casinum by 
Ummidius: a pickerel caught in your river, Varro, 
was put before him, he tasted it and forthwith spat 
- it out, exclaiming "May I perish, but I thought it 
was fish!" l 

As the luxury of this age has enlarged our war- 
rens, so has it carried our fish ponds even to the sea 
itself and has herded shoals of sea fish into them. 
Have not Sergius Orata (goldfish) and Licinius 
Murena (lamprey) taken their cognomens from fishes 
for this reason? And who does not know the fame 
of the fish ponds of Philippus, of Hortensius, and of 
the brothers LucuIIus ? 

Where} then, Axius, do you wish me to begin?" 

Of canaries 
IV. "I prefer," replied Axius, "that you should 

1 This was L. Marcius Philippus, the orator mentioned by 
Horace (Efist. I, 7, 46), who was Consul in B. C. 91, and was 
celebrated for his luxurious habits, which his wealth enabled 
him to gratify. His son married the widow of C. Octavius and 
so became the step-father of the Emperor Augustus. 
[286] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

begin with the sequel — posiprincipia, as they say in 
the camps — that is, with the present day rather than 
with the past, because the profits from pea-cocks are 
greater than those from hens. I will not dissemble 
that I wish to hear first of ornitkotus because the 
thrushes which are kept in them make the very 
name sound like money: indeed, the 60,000 sesterces 
of Fircelina have consumed me with avarice." 

"TTiere are two kinds of ornitkotus" replied 
Mcrula ; "one for pleasure, like that so much admired 
which our friend Varro here has at his villa near 
Casinum: the other for profit, such as are maintained 
commercially, some even indoors in town, but chiefly 
in the Sabine country which abounds in thrushes. 
TTiere is a third kind, consisting of a combination 
of the two I have mentioned, such as Lucullus main- 
tained at his Tusculan villa, where he contrived a 
dining room under the same roof as his aviary to 
the end that he might feast delicately, satisfying two 
senses, now by eating the birds cooked and spread 
on a platter, now by seeing them flying about the 
windows: but the truth is that he was disappointed, 
for the eyes did not take as much pleasure from the 
sight of the flying birds as the nostrils were offended 
by their odour. 



[187] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

a. For profit 

V. But, as I gather you would prefer, Axius, I 
will speak of that kind of ornitkon which is estab- 
lished for profit, whence, but not where, fat thrushes 
are served. 

For this purpose is built a dome, in the form of a 
peristyle, with a roof over it and enclosed with 
netting, sufficiently large to accommodate several 
thousand thrushes ' and blackbirds; indeed, some 
also include other kinds of birds, such as ortolans 
and quail, which sell for a good price when fat. Into 
this enclosure water should be conducted through a 
conduit and so disposed as to wind through the 
aviary in channels narrow enough to be cleaned 
easily (for if the water spreads out it is quickly pol- 
luted and rendered unfit to drink) and draining like 
a running stream to find its vent through another 
conduit, so that the birds may not be exposed to the 
risk of mud. The door should be low and narrow and 
well balanced on its hinges like the doors they have 
in the amphitheatres where bulls are fought: few 
windows and so placed that the birds cannot see 
trees and wild birds without, for that makes the 
prisoners pine and grow thin. The place should 

1 This was tardus pilaris, the variety of thrush which is called 
field fare. 

[388] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

have only so much light as may be necessary to en- 
able the birds to see where they are to perch and to 
eat and drink. The doors and the windows should 
be lightly stuccoed round about to keep out rats and 
other such vermin. 

Around the wall of the building on the inside are 
fastened many perches where the birds can sit, and 
another such convenience should be contrived from 
poles set on the ground and leaning against the walls 
and tied together with other poles fastened trans- 
versely at regular intervals, thus giving the appear- 
ance of the rising degrees of a theatre. Down on 
the ground near the drinking water you should place 
the birds' food, which usually consists of little balls 
of a paste made out of figs and corn meal: but for 
twenty days before you intend to market your 
thrushes it is customary to feed them more heavily, 
both by giving them more food and that chiefly of 
finer meal. 

In this enclosure there should also be cages with 
wooden floors which may serve the birds as resting 
places supplementing the perches. 

Next to the aviary should be contrived a smaller 
structure, called the seclusorium, in which the keeper 
may array the birds found dead, to render an ac- 
count of them to his master, and where he may drive 
the birds which are ready for market from the larger 
U89I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

aviary: and to this end this smaller room is connected 
with the main cage by a large door and has more 
light: and there, when he has collected the number he 
wishes to market, the keeper kills them, which is 
done secretly, lest the others might despond at the 
sight and themselves die before they are ready for 
market. 

Thrushes are not like other birds of passage which 
lay their eggs in particular places, as the swan does in 
the fields and the swallows under the roof, but they 
lay anywhere: for, despite their masculine name 
(turdus) there are female thrushes, just as there are 
male blackbirds, although they have a purely fem- 
inine name (mtrula). 

All birds are divided as between those which are 
of passage, like swallows and cranes, and those which 
are domestic, like chickens and pigeons: thrushes 
are birds of passage and every year fly from across 
the sea into Italy about the time of the autumn 
equinox, returning about the spring equinox. At 
another season doves and quail do the same in im- 
mense numbers, as may be seen in the neighbouring 
islands of Pontia, Palmaria and Pandataria, for 
there they are wont to rest a few days on their arrival 
and again before they set out across the sea from 
Italy." 

[290] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

b. For pleasure 

"So," said Appius to Axius, "if you enclose five 
thousand thrashes in such an aviary as Morula has 
described and there happens to be a banquet or a 
triumph, you will gain forthwith that sixty thousand 
sesterces which you so keenly covet and be able to 
lend the money out at good interest." And then, 
turning to me, he added, " Do you tell us of that other 
kind of ornithon, namely: for pleasure merely, for 
it is said that you have constructed one near Casinum 
which surpasses not only the original built by the 
inventor of such flying cages, our friend M. Lamius 
Strabo of Brundisium (who was the first to keep 
birds confined in the chamber of a peristyle and to 
feed them through the net), but also the vast struc- 
tures of Lucullus at Tusculum." 

"You know," I said, "that there flows through 
my estate near Casinum * a stream which is both 

1 The traveller by railway from Rome to Naples passes near 
Varro's estate of Casinum, and if he stops at the mediaeval town 
of San Germano to visit the neighbouring Badia di Monte 
Cassino, where the "angelic doctor" Thomas Aquinas was 
educated, he will find Varro's memory kept green: for he will 
be entertained at the Albergo Varrone ("very fair but bargain- 
ing advisable," sagely counsels Mr. Baedeker) and on his way 
up the long winding road to the Abbey there will be pointed 
out to him the river Rapido, on the banks of which Varro's 
aviary stood, and nearby what is reputed to be the site of the 
old polymath's villa which Antony polluted with the orgies 
[291 1 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

deep and clear and fifty-seven feet wide between the 
masonry embankments, so that it is necessary to 
use bridges to get from one part of the property to 
the other. On the upper reach of this stream is 
situated my Museum ' and at a distance of 950 feet 
below is an island formed by the confluence of an- 
other stream. Along the bank for this distance is 
an uncovered walk ten feet broad and between this 
walk and the field ts the location of my aviary en- 
closed on both sides, right and left, with high masonry 
walls. The ornithon itself is built in the shape of a 
writing tablet with a capital on it, the main quad- 
Cicero described in the second Philippic. Antony's destruction 
of his library was a great blow to Varro, but one likes to think 
that his ghost can take satisfaction in the maintenance, so near 
the haunts of his flesh, of such a noble collection of books as is 
the continuing pride of the Abbey on the mountain above. 

1 Varro' a Museum, or study where he wooed the Muses, on his 
estate at Casinum was not unlike that of Cicero at his native 
Arpinum, which he described (de Leg. II, 3) agreeably as on an 
island in the cold and clear Fibrenus just above its confluence 
with the more important river Liris, where, like a plebeian 
marrying into a patrician family, it lost its name but contributed 
its freshness. The younger Pliny built a study in the garden of 
his Laurentine villa near Ostia, which he describes (II, 17) with 
enthusiasm: "horti diseta est, amores mei, re vera amores": and 
here he found refuge from the tumult of his household during 
the festivities of the Saturnalia, which corresponded with our 
Christmas. In the ante bellum days every Virginia gentleman 
had such an "office" in his house yard where he pretended to 
transact his farm business, but where actually he was wont to 
escape from the obligations of family and continuous hospitality. 
(292] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

rangle being forty-eight feet wide and seventy-two 
feet long, the capital semi-circular with a radius of 
twenty-seven feet. To this a covered walk or portico 
is joined, as it were across the bottom of the page of 
the tablet, with passages leading on either side of the 
orniikon proper which contains the cages, to the 
upper end of the interior quadrangle [adjoining the 
capital]. This portico is constructed of a series of 
stone columns between which and the main outside 
walls are planted dwarf shrubs, a net of hemp being 
stretched from the top of the walk to the architrave 
of the portico, and thence down to the stylobate or 
floor. The exterior spaces thus enclosed are filled 
with all kinds of birds which are fed through the net, 
water being provided by a small running stream. On 
the interior sides of the porticos, and adjoining them 
at the upper end of the interior quadrangle, are 
constructed on both sides two narrow oblong basins. 
Between these basins a path leads to the tkolus, or 
rotunda, which is surrounded with two rows of 
columns, like that in the house of Catulus, except 
that I have substituted columns for walls. Beyond 
these columns at the end is a grove of large trans- 
planted trees forming a roof of leaves, but admitting 
light underneath, as that is entirely cut off by the 
high walls on the sides. Between the exterior row 
of columns of the tkolus, which are of stone, and the 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

interior row, which are of pine, there is a narrow 
space, five feet in width. The exterior columns are 
filled in with a transparent net instead of walls, thus 
permitting the birds to look out upon the grove and 
the wild birds there but without escaping: the in- 
terior columns being filled in with the net of the 
main aviary. The space between the two rows of 
columns thus enclosed is equipped with perches for 
the birds in the form of many rods let into all the 
columns in ascending array like the degrees of a 
theatre; and here are enclosed all kinds of birds, but 
chiefly singing birds, like nightingales and black- 
birds, for whom water is conducted by means of a 
small canal and food is supplied under the net. 
[Under the lantern of the tkolus is a basin of water: 
and around this] a foot and nine inches below the 
stylobate or pedestal of the interior row of columns, 
runs a stone platform. This is five feet in width 
and two feet above the level of the basin, thus afford- 
ing a space on which my bird guests may hop about 
from the cushions to the little columns [which are 
there provided for them]. 1 

1 Th« commentators on this interesting but obscure descrip- 
tion of Varro's aviary have at this point usually endeavoured to 
explain the arrangements of the chamber under the lantern of 
the tkolus with respect to its use as a dining room which Varro 
frequented himself, and hence have been amused into all kinds 
of difficulties of interpretation. The references to the cotmoa 
I*94l 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

The basin is immediately surrounded with a quay 
a foot in width adjoining [but below the level of] the 
platform and has a little island in the middle. Around 
the platform and the quay are contrived docks for 
ducks. On the island is a little column arranged to 
turn on its axis and carrying a wheel-shaped table 
with hollow drum-like dishea fashioned at the ends 
of the spokes two and a half feet wide and a palm in 
depth. This is turned by a boy whose business that 
is, so that meat and drink is put before all my bird 
guests in turn. From the elevation of the platform, 
where mats are usually placed, the ducks go out to 
swim in the basin, and from this streams flow into the 
two basins I have already described, and little fish 
may be seen darting from one to the other, while 
warm or cold water may be turned on the guests from 
the circumference of the revolving table, which I have 
described as equipped with spokes. 

Within the dome is an arrangement to tell the 
hours by marking the position in the heavens of the 
sun by day and Hesperus by night: and furthermore, 
as in the clock which [Andronicus] Cyrrestes con- 
structed at Athens, the eight winds are depicted 

are what lead them astray, and it remained for Keil to suggest 
that this was a playful allusion to the birds themselves, a conclu- 
sion which is strengthened by Varro's previous statement of 
the failure of Lucullus' attempt to maintain a dining room in his 
aviary, 

[295] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

on the dome, and, by means of an arrow connecting 
with a vane, the prevailing wind is indicated to those 
within." 1 

As we were talking an uproar was heard on the 
Campus Martius. While this did not astonish 
old parliamentary hands * like ourselves, who knew 
the enthusiasm of an election, yet we were anxious 
to know what it meant, and at this moment Pan- 
tuleius Parra came up and told us that while the 
votes were being sorted some one was caught stuffing 
the ballot box * and had been haled before the consul 
by the supporters of the rival candidate. Pavo 
rose to go, for it was understood that he who had 
been arrested was the campaign manager of Pavo*s 
own candidate. 

1 Cf. Vitruvius, I, 6: "Andronicus Cyrrhestes built at Athens 
an octagonal marble tower, on the sides of which were carved 
images of the eight winds, each on the side opposite that from 
which it blew. On the pyramidal roof of this tower he placed a 
bronze Triton holding a rod in his right hand, and so contrived 
that the Triton, revolving with the wind, always stood opposed 
to that which prevailed, and thus pointed with his rod to the 
image on the tower of the wind that was blowing at the moment." 
The ruins of this Tower of the Winds may still be seen in 
Athens. There is a picture of it in Harper's Dictionary of 
Classical Antiquities in the article Andronicus. 

1 One ventures to translate atkletas comitiomm by Mr. Glad- 
stone's famous phrase. 

* Reading "tesserulas coicientem in locuhim." 

U961 

I^iectyGoOglc 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of peacocks 

VI. "Now that Fircellius is gone you can speak 
freely of pea-cockB," said Axiua, "for if you should 
say any thing to their disadvantage in his presence, 
you might perchance have a crow to pluck with him 
on account of his relationship." 1 

"Within my memory," said Merula, "the practice 
of keeping commercial flocks of pea-cocks has largely 
developed and it has so developed that M. Aufidius 
Lurco is said to derive an income of sixty thousand 
sesterces per annum from them. If you keep them 
for profit it is well to have somewhat fewer males 
than females; while the contrary is true if you keep 
them for pleasure, for the pea-cock far surpasses 
his hen in beauty. With us they are fed in the coun- 
try, but abroad it is said that they are kept on islands, 
as at Samos in the grove of Juno and at Planasia, 
the island of M. Piso. In setting up a flock age and 
beauty must be considered, for nature has given the 
palm of beauty to the pea-cock among all the birds. 
The hens are not fit for breeding under two years of 
age, nor when they are aged. They are fed all kinds 
of grain but chiefly barley. Seius makes a practice 
of feeding them a modius of barley apiece for the 

1 A French translator might better convey the intention of 
the pun, contained in the ducere terrain of the text, by the 
locution, une prise de bet. 

[*97l 

I^iectyGoOglc 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

month before they begin to breed, his purpose being 
to make them more productive. He expects his 
overseer to raise three pea fowl for every hen, and he 
sells them when matured for fifty deniers (£10) 
a piece, a price such as one never obtains for a sheep. 1 
Furthermore, he buys eggs and sets them under 
dunghill hens, transferring the young pea fowls so 
hatched to the shelter set apart for their kind. This 
house should be built large enough for the number of 
pea fowl to be kept and should be equipped with 
separate roosting places smoothly stuccoed, so that 
snakes and such vermin may not be able to get into 
it: and, furthermore, it should have attached to it a 
run in which the pea fowl may feed on sunny days, 
and both these places should be kept clean, as this 

1 It probably will not comfort the ultimate consumer who 
holds in such odium the celebrated " Schedule K" of the Payne- 
Aldrich tariff, to realize that the American wool grower puts 
no higher value on his sheep than did his Roman ancestor, as 
revealed by this quotation from the stock yards of Varro's time. 
It is interesting, however, to the breeder to know that a good 
price for wool has always stimulated the production of the best 
stock. Strabo says that the wool of Turdetania in Spain was 
so celebrated in the generation after Varro that a ram of the 
breed (the ancestors of the modem Merino) fetched a talent, 
Bay $1,200; a price which may be compared with that of the 

{>rize ram recently sold in England for export to the Argentine 
or as much as a thousand pouuds sterling, and considered a 
good commercial investment at that. Doubtless the market for 
Rosean mules comforted Axius in his investment of the equiva- 
lent of £400 in a breeding jack. 

(298I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

kind of fowl demands. The keeper should make the 
rounds often with a shovel to collect and preserve 
their manure, which is not only fit for use in agricul- 
ture but serves also as bedding for your pea chicks. 

It is said that Q. Hortensius was the first to serve 
pea-cocks at dinner, on the occasion of his inaugura- 
tion as an augur, an evidence of prodigality which 
was more approved by the luxurious than by good 
men of simple manners: but many others quickly 
followed his example, so that the price of pea fowl 
was raised until an egg sold for five deniers (£i) and 
a pea fowl itself readily for fifty ($10), thus a flock 
of an hundred of them easily yields an income of 
forty thousand sesterces, ($2,000), or even sixty 
($3,000), if, as Abuccius advises, one obtains three 
chickens from every pea hen." 

Of pigeons 
VII. In the meanwhile an apparitor came to Ap- 
pius from the Consul and said that the augurs were 
summoned. As Appius went out from the villa pub- 
lica, a flock of pigeons flew in, whereupon Merula 
said to Axius : " If you had established a v€purrtporpo- 
fautv you would think that these were your 'pigeons, 
although they are wild, for it is the custom to keep 
both kinds in a ircpurrtporpo<f>€iov. One is the wild 
dove (or, as some call them the rock dove, or 
[299] 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

saxatilis), such as live in the towers and dormers 
(columines) of a farm house, whence they get the 
name columbes, because, on account of their natural 
timidity, they seek the highest places on the roof. 
On this account wild doves usually frequent towers, 
to which they may fly from the fields of their own 
accord, and return. 1 The other kind of pigeons Is 
tamer and are wont to seek their food at the very 
threshold of a house. This kind is usually white 
in colour, the wild variety being mottled but without 
any white. From these two stocks a third or mixed 
variety has been developed for commercial profit 
and these are collected in the place which some 
call a mpujTepew> (pigeon house), and others a 
■nepuTTtporpo^ftov (place for raising pigeons), where 
there are often confined as many as five thousand 
at a time. 

1 In feudal timet the right to maintain a dove cote was the 
exclusive privilege of the lord of the manor. According to their 
immemorial custom, which Varro notices, the pigeons preyed 
on the neighbourhood crops and were detested by the com- 
munity in consequence. During the French revolution they 
were one of the counts in the indictment of the land-owning 
aristocracy, and in the event the pigeons as well as their owners 
bad the sine of their forefathers justly visited upon them. The 
American farmer who has a pigeon-keeping neighbour and is 
restrained by the pettiness of the annoyance from making a 
point on their trespasses, feels something of the blind and im- 
potent wrath of the French peasant agauut the whole pigeon 
family. 

[300I 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

A pigeon house is made like a great dome, with 
an arched roof, a narrow entrance, and grilled win- 
dows or with wider lattices on all sides so that the 
interior may be well lighted and yet no snake or 
other such pest may have access. The walls and the 
dome within and the edges of the windows without 
should be smeared with light stucco to keep out 
rats and lizards, for nothing is so timid as a pigeon. 
A round nest should be provided for each pair of 
pigeons and these should be arranged in close order 
so that there may be established as many as pos- 
sible of them ranked from the ground to the very 
dome. Each nest should have a door no bigger than 
necessary to enable the pigeons to go in and out but 
within should be of three palms in diameter. Under 
each rank of nests should be fastened planks two 
palms broad for the use of the pigeons as a vestibule 
on coming out. Water should be led into the pigeon 
house, both for them to drink and to bathe in, for 
pigeons are very clean birds. For this reason the 
keeper of the pigeons should sweep out the house 
several times a month, for that which soils it has so 
great a value in agriculture that some writers even 
claim that it is the best of all manures. Further- 
more, the keeper in these rounds may tend any pigeon 
which is ailing, remove any which are dead, and take 
out such squabs as are fit for market. Likewise, 

hoii 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

those which are setting should be transferred to a 
particular place, separated from the others by a net 
but from which the mothers may be free to get out 
of doors: which is done for two reasons: first, because 
if they become weary or decrepit from being cooped 
too long, they will be refreshed by the free air when 
they go abroad: secondly, because they serve as 
decoys for other pigeons, for their squabs will always 
bring them home themselves unless they are struck 
down by a crow or cut off by a hawk. Pigeon breeders 
rid themselves of the last mentioned pests by plant- 
ing in the ground two rods smeared with birdlime 
and bent in one upon the other, and then tie on some 
bait so disposed that when the hawk falls upon his prey 
he finds himself entangled in the birdlime and is taken. 

It may be noted that the pigeon has a homing 
instinct, as is proved by the practice of many in let- 
ting pigeons loose from their bosoms in the theatre 
expecting them to return home, for If they did not 
return the practice would not persist. 

The food for pigeons is placed in mangers fas- 
tened around the walls and filled from the outside 
by means of conduits. They thrive on millet, wheat, 
barley, peas, beans and vetch. This regimen should 
be followed also, as far as possible, in the care of 
the wild pigeons, which live on the towers and the 
roofs of the barn. 

[301 1 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

la equipping a vepurrepewv pigeons of good age 
should be secured, neither squabs nor veterans, and 
as many males as females. Nothing is more pro- 
lific than the pigeon, for in forty days they con- 
ceive, lay, hatch and raise a brood, and they keep 
this up nearly all the year, stopping only from the 
winter solstice until spring. Squabs are hatched in 
pairs, and as soon as they have grown up and have 
strength breed with their own mothers. Those who 
fatten squabs in order to sell them dearer, make a 
practice of isolating them as soon as they are covered 
with feathers, then they cram them with white bread 
which has been chewed: * in winter this is fed twice 
a day, in summer three times a day, morning, noon 
and night, the midday meal being omitted in winter. 
Those which are just beginning to have feathers are 
left in the nests, but their legs are broken, and, in 
order that they may be crammed, the food is put 

1 It appears that the Romans actually hired men to chew the 
food intended for cramming birds, so as to relieve the unhappy 
victims even of such exercise as they might get from assimilat- 
ing their diet. Columella (VII, 10) in discussing the diet of 
thrushes deprecates this practice, sagely saying that the wages 
of the chewera are out of proportion to the benefit obtained, 
and that any way the chewers swallow a good part of what they 
are given to macerate. 

The typical tramp of the comic papers who is forever looking 

for occupation without work might well envy these Roman 

professional chewers. Not even Dr. Wiley's poison squad" 

employed to test food products could compare with them. 

l3°3l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

before the mothers, for they will feed themselves 
and their squabs on it all day long. Squabs which 
are reared in this way become fat more quickly than 
others and have whiter flesh. 

A pair of pigeons will commonly sell at Rome 
for two hundred nummi, if they are well made, of 
good colour, without blemish, and of good breed: 
some times they even bring a thousand nummi, and 
there is a report that recently L. Axius, a Roman of 
the equestrian order, declined that sum, refusing to 
sell for less than four hundred deniers." ' 

"If I could procure a fully equipped mpump€vv" 
cried Axius, "as readily as I have bought a supply 
of earthen ware nests, I would have had it already 
on the way to my farm." 

"As if," remarked Pica, "there were not many of 
them here in town. But perhaps those who have 
pigeon houses on their roofs do not seem to you to be 
justified in calling them mpumpcavas even though 
some of them represent an investment of more than 
one hundred thousand sesterces. I advise you to 

1 These prices of $10 and $$o and even $80 a pair for pi- 
geons, large as they seem, were surpassed under the Empire. 
Columella says (VIII, 8): "That excellent author, M. Varro, 
tells us that in his more austere time it was not unusual for a 
pair of pigeons to sell for a thousand sesterces, a price at which 
the present day should blush, if we may believe the report that 
men have been found to pay for a pair as much as four thousand 
nummi." ($200.) 

[304] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

buy out one of them and learn how to pocket a profit 
here in town, before you build on a large scale in the 
country." 

Of turtle doves 

VIII. "So much for that then," said Axius. "Pro- 
ceed, please, to the next subject, Merula." 

" For turtle doves," said Merula, " in like manner a 
house should be constructed proportioned to the num- 
ber you intend to feed, and this, like the pigeon house, 
I have described, should have a door and windows 
and fresh water and walls and a vaulted roof, but in 
place of breeding nests the mutules should be ex- 
tended through the walls or poles set in them in 
regular order with hempen mats on them, the lowest 
rank being not more than three feet from the floor, 
the rest at intervals of nine inches, the top rank six 
inches from the vault, and of equal breadth as the 
mutule stands out from the wall. On these the doves 
are fed day and night. For food they are given dry 
wheat, usually a half modius for every one hundred 
and twenty doves. Every day the house should be 
cleaned out, that they may not be injured by the 
accumulation of manure, and because also it has its 
place in the economy of the farm. The best time for 
fattening doves is about the harvest, for then the 
mothers are in their best condition and produce young 
[3°sl 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

ones not only in the largest number but the best for 
cramming: so that is the time when they are most 
profitable." 

Of poultry 

IX. "Tell me now, if you please, Merula," said 
Axius, "what I should know of raising and fattening 
poultry and wood pigeons, then we can proceed 
to the discussion of the remainder of our programme.' 1 

"There are three kinds of fowls usually classed as 
poultry," replied Merula, "dunghill fowl, jungle fowl 
and guinea fowl. The dunghill fowl are those which 
are constantly kept in the country at farms. 

He who wishes to establish an opwBofiotriauiv from 
which, by the exercise of intelligence and care, he 
can take large profits, as the people of Delos do 
with such great success, 1 should observe five prin- 
cipal rules: i° in regard to buying, what kind and 
how many he will keep: 2° in regard to breeding: 
3° in regard to eggs, how they are set and hatched: 
4° in regard to chicks, how and by whom they are 

'The market for chickens and eggs in the United States 
would doubtless astonish the people of Delos as much as the 
statistics do us (ipsa suas mirantur Gargara messes!). It is 
solemnly recorded that the American hen produces a billion 
and a quarter dozen eggs per annum, of a value greater than 
that of either the wheat or cotton crops, and yet there are many 
of us who cannot get our hens to lay more than a hundred eggs 
a year I 

(306] 

Dig (zed by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

reared, and s°, which is a supplement of all the fore- 
going, how they are fattened. 

The females of the dunghill fowl are called hens, 
the breeding males cocks, and the males which have 
been altered capons. Cocks are caponized by burn- 
ing the spurs ' with a hot iron until the skin is 
broken, the wound being poulticed with potters' 
clay. 

He who wishes to have a model hpmBofiotTKaov 
should equip it with all three kinds of fowls, though 
chiefly the dunghill variety. In purchasing these 
last it is important to choose fertile hens, which are 
indicated by red feathers, black wings, unequal toes, 
large heads, combs upstanding and heavy, for such 
hens are more likely to lay. 

A lusty cock may be known by his muscular 
carriage, his red comb, a beak short, strong and 
sharp, eyes tawny or black, wattles a whitish red, 
neck spotted or tinged with gold, the second joint 

1 Reading ad infirma crura. This practice is explained more 
at length by Columella (VIII, 2, 3) who specifies the spurs, 
calcaneus inustis. 

Buffou, who describes a practice of trimming the combs of 
capons, adds (V, 302) an interesting account of an experiment 
which he says he had made "unc espece de greffe animale": 
after trimming the comb of a growing cockerel his budding spurs 
were cut out and grafted on the roots of the comb, where they 
took root and flourished, growing to a length of two and a half 
inches, in some cases curving forward like the horns of a ram, 
and in others turning back like those of a goat. 
[307] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

of his legs well covered with feathers, short legs, 
long spurs, a heavy tail, and profuse feathers, also 
by his spirit and his frequent crowing, his readiness 
to fight, and that he is not only not afraid of such ani- 
mals as do the hens harm, but even goes out to fight 
them. You must be careful, however, not to buy for 
breeding any fowls of the breeds known as Tanagran, 
Medean and Chalcidean, for, while they are beautiful 
to look at and are fit for fighting with one another, 
they are practically sterile. 

If you wish to keep a flock of two hundred, choose 
an enclosed place and there construct two large 
poultry houses side by side and looking to the East, 
each about ten by five feet and a little less than five 
feet in height, and furnished with windows three by 
four feet in which are fitted shutters of wickerwork, 
which will serve to let in plenty of fresh air and light 
and yet keep out such vermin as prey upon chickens. 

Between the two houses should be a door by which 
the gallinarius who takes care of them, may have 
access. Within the houses enough poles are arranged 
to serve as roosts for all the chickens: opposite each 
roost a nest should be set in the wall. In front of 
the house should be an enclosed yard to which the 
fowls may have access in the day time and where 
they can dust themselves, 1 and there should be 

'The dusting yard which Varro here describes was in the 
[308] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

constructed the keeper's house, which should be 
equipped all about with nests, either set into the 
walls or firmly fastened to them, for the least dis- 
turbance injures eggs when they are setting. 

When the hens begin to lay, straw should be spread 
in their nests and this should be renewed when they 
begin to set, for in such bedding are bred mites and 
other insects which will not suffer the hen to be quiet, 
with the result that the eggs are hatched unequally 
or rot. 

A hen should, not be allowed to set on more than 
twenty-five eggs, although such is her fecundity that 
open, but Columella (VIII, 3) advises what modem poultry 
farmers pride themselves upon having recently discovered, — a 
covered scratching pen strewn with Utter to afford exercise for 
the hens in rough weather. It will be observed that, so far as 
ventilation is concerned, Varro recommends a hen house open 
to the weather: this is another standard of modern practice 
which has had a hard struggle against prejudice. Columella 
adds two more interesting bits of advice, that for the comfort 
of the hens the roosts should be cut square, and for cleanliness 
their water trough should be enclosed leaving only openings 
large enough to receive a hen's head. With so much enlighten- 
ment and sanitation one would expect one or the other of these 
Romans to tell us of some "teeming hen" like Herrick's who 
laid "her egg each day." 

We are proud to be able to cite the eminent Roseburg Indus- 
trious Biddy who, in the year of grace 1912, achieved the cham- 
pionship of America with a record of 266 eggs in ten months and 
nineteen days, and was sold for $800: but Varro is content to 
suggest that a hen will lay more eggs in a season than she can 
hatch, and the conservative Columella (VIII, 5) that the number 
of eggs depends upon diet. 

t309l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

she lays more than that in a season. The best time 
for hatching is from the spring to the autumn equinox. 
Eggs laid before or after this season, or the first eggs 
laid by a pullet, should never be set. Hens used for 
setting should be old rather than young, without 
sharp beaks and claws, for those so equipped are 
better employed in laying than in setting. Hens a 
year or two years old are better fitted for laying. 

If you set pea-cock eggs under a hen, you should 
wait ten days before adding hen eggs to the nest, 
to insure them all hatching together, for the period 
of incubation of chicken eggs is thrice seven days and 
that of the eggs of pea-fowl is thrice nine. Sitting 
hens should be shut up day and night, except for a 
time in the morning and evening, when they are 
let out to eat and drink. 

The keeper should make the rounds every few 
days and turn the eggs, so that they may be kept 
warm all over. It is said that you can tell whether 
an egg is fertile or sterile by putting it in water: for 
if it is sterile it will float, while if it is fertile it will 
sink. Those who shake their eggs to ascertain this 
fact make a mistake for thereby they destroy the 
germ in them. It is also said that you can tell a 
sterile egg by the fact that it is transparent when 
held against the light. 

To preserve eggs they should be rubbed with fine 
[310] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

salt or soaked for three or four hours in brine, and 
then cleaned off or packed in chaff or straw. Care 
should be taken to set eggs only in uneven num- 
bers. The keeper can tell whether an egg is fertile 
or not four days after it is set, by holding it to the 
light, when he should throw it out if it is found to be 
empty and substitute another for it. 

The new hatched chickens should be taken from 
every nest and given to a hen who has only a few to 
care for. When in this way a setting hen has less 
than half her eggs left unhatched, they should be 
taken from her and put under another hen which has 
eggs still unhatched. It is not well to give more 
than thirty chicks to a hen. Chicks should be fed 
for the first fifteen days in the dust to protect them 
from injuring their tender beaks on the hard ground: 
their diet being crushed barley mixed with cress 
seed and soaked in wine, for prepared in this way 
the grain is digestible. They should be kept away 
from water in the beginning. When they begin to 
have feathers on their legs the mites should be care- 
fully picked off their heads and necks, for these 
banes often destroy them. Deer's horn should be 
burnt around their coops to keep snakes away, for 
the very smell of those vermin is fatal to young 
chickens. They should be 'allowed to run in the sun 
and to scratch in a dung heap, which serves to de- 
l3«) 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

velop them. This rule applies not only to young 
chickens but also to the entire 6pviBofkHrKeu)v t and 
should be practised all summer and even in winter 
on mild and sunny days. A net should be stretched 
over the chicken yard to keep the fowls them- 
selves from flying out and to protect them from 
hawks and other birds of prey. Fowls should be 
protected from heat as well as cold, for both are 
harmful to them. When the chicks have got their 
feathers it is best to accustom them to follow one or 
two hens, leaving the other hens free to go to laying, 
in which occupation they are more useful than in 
rearing chicks. 

A hen should be set after the new moon, for those 
which begin earlier seldom hatch many chicks. 

They hatch usually m twenty days. 

And now since I have discussed the dunghill fowl 
at some length, I will make up to you by brevity with 
respect to the other kinds of fowls. 

Jungle fowl are rarely seen at Rome, and then 
usually in cages. They resemble guinea chickens 
more than dunghill fowls. When perfect in form and 
appearance they are often carried in the public pro- 
cessions with parrots and white blackbirds and other 
such rarities. They do not usually lay or raise their 
chickens on a farm, but in the forests. The island 
of Gallinaria, which lies in the Tuscan sea off the 

h»l 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

coast of Italy, opposite the Ligurian mountains (and 
the towns of Intermelii and Alba Ingannua) derives 
its name from them, though some maintain that 
the name comes from dunghill fowl which were car- 
ried to that island by sailors and have there run wild. 
Guinea fowl (gallina qfricana) are large, mottled 
and have their humps in their backs. The Greeks 
call them p&eaypfc. 1 They are the last fowls which 
the culinary art has introduced to our dining tables, 
on account of their gamy flavour. 1 By reason of their 
rarity they sell for a high price. 

Of the three kinds of fowls, the ordinary dunghill 
fowl is used chiefly for cramming. For this purpose 
they are shut up in a small confined and darkened 
coop, because both exercise and light are enemies of 
fat. Any large chickens may be selected for this 
operation, not necessarily of that breed which the 
peasants call Melica incorrectly, for as the ancients 
said Thelis when they meant Thetis, so the country 

1 The guinea fowl got their Greek name, meleagrides, because 
the story was that the sisters of Meleager were turned into 
guinea henB. Pliny (ff. N. X, 38) says that they fight every 
year on Meleager's tomb. It is a fact that they are a pugnacious 
fowl. Buffon says that guinea fowl disappeared from Europe 
in the Dark Ages and were not known agam until the route to 
the Indies via. the Cape of Good Hope was opened when they 
were imported anew from the west coast of Africa. 

* Reading, " propter fastidium hominum." Cf. Pliny (X, 38), 
whose explanation is "propter ingratum virus." 
[3i3l 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

people still say Melica for Medica. This name was 
given at first to the fowls which were imported from 
Medea on account of their great size and then to all 
of that breed, but now the name is given indiscrimin- 
ately to all large fowls by reason of their general 
resemblance. After the feathers have been pulled 
from their tails and wings they are crammed with 
balls of barley paste, with which may be mixed 
darnel meal, or flax seed soaked in soft water. They 
are fed twice a day but care must be taken to see that 
the last meal is digested before another is put before 
them. After they have been fed and their heads 
have been cleaned of mites, they are shut up again. 
This process is kept up for twenty-five days, when 
they will be fat. 

Some cram them on wheat bread soaked in water, 
or even in wine of good flavour and bouquet, claiming 
that they are thereby made fat and tender in twenty 
days. 1 

If in the process of cramming the fowls lose their 
appetite from too much food, the ration should be 

1 There is a Virginia practice of feeding a fat turkey heavily on 
bread soaked in wine or liquor just before he is killed, the re- 
sult being that as the turkey gets into that condition which used 
to put our ancestors under the table, he relaxes all his tendons 
and so is sweeter and more tender when he conies above the 
table. There is a humanitarian side to the practice which 
should recommend it even to the W. C. T. U. as well as to the 
epicure. 

[3H] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

reduced daily during the last ten days in the same 
proportion as it was increased during the first ten 
days, so that the ration will be the same on the twen- 
tieth as on the first day. 

Wood pigeons are crammed and fattened in the 
same way." 

Of geese 

X. "Let us now pass," said Alius, "to that tribe 
which cannot live in the barn yard all the time, or 
even on land, but requires access to ponds. I mean 
those whom you philhellenes call amphibia. I under- 
stand that you call the places in which geese are kept 
by the Greek name x f } vv fi WTK £° v > aQ d that Scipio 
Metellus and M. Seius have several large flocks of 
geese." 

"It is Seius* practice," said Merula, "to maintain 
his flocks of geese 1 in accordance with the five rules 
I have laid down for poultry, namely: with respect 
to choice of individuals, breeding, eggs, goslings and 
the process of cramming. 

1 Many thousands of geese used to be driven every year to 
Rome from the land of the Morini in Northern Gaul, but the 
Germans are the modern consumers. A British consular report 
says that in addition to the domestic supply a special "goose 
train" of from fifteen to forty cars is received daily in Berlin 
from Russia. It would seem that the goose that lays the golden 
egg has emigrated to Muscovy. Buffon says that the introduc- 
tion of the Virginia turkey into Europe drove the goose off the 
tables of all civilized peoples. 

[315] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

On the first point he requires the slave who buys 
his geese to select them of good size and of white 
plumage, because they reproduce their own qualities 
in their goslings. This is necessary for there is an- 
other kind of geese of variegated plumage, which 
are called wild, and do not flock freely with the other 
kind and are domesticated with difficulty. 

The best time for breeding geese is at the end of 
winter and for laying and hatching from the be- 
ginning of February or March until the summer 
solstice. They breed usually in the water, diving 
to the bottom of the stream or pond. 1 A goose lays 
only three times a year: and each one should be fur- 
nished with a coop about two and a half feet square 
and bedded with straw: each of their eggs should be 
marked for identification, for they will not hatch any 
eggs but their own. They are usually set on nine or 
eleven eggs, never more than fifteen, nor less than 
five. In cold weather they set for thirty days, in 
warm weather twenty-five. When they are hatched 
the goslings are suffered to remain with their mother 
for five days, and then daily, when the weather is 
fine, they are driven out to the meadows or to the 
ponds or some swampy place. The gosling houses 

1 Columella (VIII, 14) repeats thia myth, but Aristotle (ff. A. 

V, 2, 9) says that geese bathe after breeding. BufTon gives a 

Gallic touch, "ces oiseauz preludent aux actes de l'amour en 

allaut d'abord s'egaycr dans l'eau." 

[31° I 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

may be built either above or below ground, but 
never more than twenty should be housed together 
and care must be taken lest the floor be damp and 
that they are bedded on chaff or some thing of that 
kind, and that the house is so constructed as to keep 
out weasels and other beasts which prey on goslings. 
Geese are fed in wet places and it is the practice to 
sow especially for their food supply, using for this 
purpose any kind of grain, but particularly that 
salad plant called endive ' which keeps green wher- 
ever there is water, freshening at the mere contact of 
water however dry it may be. This is gathered to 
be fed to them, for if they have access to the place 
where it is growing they will destroy the plant by 
trampling on it, or else kill themselves by eating too 
much of it, for they are greedy by nature. For this 
reason they must be watched, as often in feeding 
their greediness leads them to seize a root and to 
break their own necks in attempting to pull it from 
the ground : for the neck is weak, as the head is soft. 
If there is none of this plant they should be fed 
barley or some other grain. When the farrago season 
is on, feed that to them, but in the same manner as 
I have described in respect of endive. While they 
are setting they may be fed ground barley soaked in 

1 Reading sens. It is the Cichorium endivia of Liniueus. Cf . 
Pliny (ff. N. XX, 32.) 

[3171 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

water. The goslings may be fed for the first two 
days on barley cake (poUenta) or raw barley, and 
for the next three days fresh water cress chopped 
fine in a dish. When they are of an age to be kept 
by themselves in flocks of twenty, in the kind of 
house I have described, they are fed on barley meal 
or farrago or some kind of young herbage cut up. 

For cramming, goslings are picked out when they 
are about six months old, and are shut up in the 
fattening pen and there are fed three times a day 
as much as they will eat, of crushed barley and flour 
dust mixed with water, and after meals they should 
be made to drink copiously. Kept on this diet they 
will be fat in about two months. 1 After every meal 
the feeding place must be cleaned, for, while geese 
like a clean place, they never leave any place clean 
in which they have been. 

1 Varro does not mention it, but the Romans knew and prized 
pati de fote gras under the name fieatum, which indicates that 
they produced it by cramming their geese with a diet of figs. 
Cf. Horace's verse ' pinguibus et ficis pastum iccur anscris albi." 

In Toulouse, whence now comes the best of this dainty of 
the epicure, the geese are crammed daily with a dough of corn 
meal mixed with the oil of poppies, fed through a tin funnel, 
which is introduced into the esophagus of the unhappy bird. 
At the end of a month the stertorous breathing of the victim 
proclaims the time of sacrifice to Aptcius. The liver is expected 
to weigh a kilogram, (say two pounds), while at least two kilo- 
grams of fat are saved in addition, to garnish the family plat of 
vegetables during the remainder of the year. 
I3IS] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of ducks 

XI. Whoever wishes to keep a flock of ducks and 
to establish a vr}<r<rorpo<$&ov, should choose for it, 
above all others if it is possible, a swampy loca- 
tion, because that is most agreeable to the ducks, 
but, if not, then a situation sloping to a natural lake 
or pool, or to an artificial pond, with steps leading 
down to it, practicable for the ducks. The enclosure 
where they are kept should have a wall fifteen feet 
high, such as you saw at Seius' villa, with only one 
door opening into it. All around the wall on the 
inside should run a broad platform on which are 
built against the wall the duck houses, fronting on a 
level concrete vestibule in which is constructed a 
permanent channel in which their food can be placed 
in water, for ducks are fed in that way. The entire 
wall should be given a smooth coating of stucco to 
keep out polecats L and other animals of prey, and 
the enclosure should be covered with a net of large 
mesh to prevent eagles from pouncing in and the 
ducks themselves from flying out.* 

1 Reading fales, which Keller, En his account of the fauna of 
ancient Italy in the Cambridge Companion to Latin Studies, 
identifies with Maries vulgaris. Sir Anthony Fitzherbert calls 
them fullymartes. It does not appear that the Romans had in 
Varro's time brought from Egypt our household cat, F. man- 
iculata. They used weasels and tame snakes for catching mice. 

1 Darwin (Animals and Plants, I, 8) cites this passage and 
[319] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

For food they are given wheat, barley, grape marc, 
and some times even lobsters and other such aquatic 
animals. The pond in the enclosure should be fed 
with a large head of water so that it may be kept 
always fresh. 

There are other kinds of similar birds, like teals 
and coots which may be fed in the same way. 

Some even keep partridges, which, as Archelaus 
writes, conceive when they hear the voice of the 
male bird. By reason of the natural abundance and 
the delicacy of their flesh, these last are not crammed 
like those domestic fowls I have described, but they 
are fattened by feeding in the ordinary way. 

And now, as I think that I have completed the 
first act of the drama of the barn yard, I am done." 

Of rabbits 

XII. At this point Appius returned and, after an 

exchange of questions and answers as to what had 

been said and done during his absence, he said: 

"Here beginneth the second act of those industries 

argues that Varro's advice to cover the duck yard with netting 
to keep the ducks from flying out is evidence that in Varro's 
time ducks were not entirely domesticated, and hence that the 
modem domestic duck is the same species as the wild duck. It 
may be noted, however, that Varro gives the same advice about 
netting the chicken yard, having said that chickens had been 
domesticated from the beginning of time. 
[320] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

which are wont to be practised at a villa, namely 
of those enclosures which are still known as leforaria 
from their ancient special designation. Today a 
warren no longer means an acre or two in which hares 
are kept, but some times forests of vast extent in 
which troops of red deer and roe deer are enclosed. 
Q. Fulvius Lippinus is said to have forty jugera 
enclosed in the neighbourhood of Tarquinii l where 
he keeps not only those animals I have named but 
wild sheep as well. Parks of still larger extent are 
found in the territory of Statonia (in Etruria) and 
in certain other places : indeed, in transalpine Gaul T. 
Pompeius has so great a game preserve that the en-'. 
closure is about four miles in extent. 1 

It is the practice to keep in such enclosures not 
only the animals I have named, but also snail houses 
and bee hives and jars in which dormice are fed, but 
the care and the increase and the feeding of all these 
things are easy, except in the case of bees. Who does 

1 The ancient Etruscan city of Tarquinii is now known as 
Coraeto. The wild sheep which Lippinus there kept in his game 
preserves were probably the mouflon which are still hunted in 
Sardinia and Corsica, though they may have been the Phrygian 
wild sheep {Miaceros argalt) which Varro mentions in Book II. 
Pliny (H. N. VIII, 21 1) says that this Lippinus was the first of 
the Romans to keep wild animals enclosed; that he established 
his preserves shortly before the Civil Wars, and that he soon had 
imitators. 

1 Reading » » » « possum. The Roman mile, milU pas- 
tuum, was 142 yards less than the English mile. 
[3«] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

not know that a Uporarium should be enclosed with 
masonry walls which are at once smooth and high, 
the one to keep out wild cats and badgers and other 
such beasts : the other to prevent wolves from getting 
over. Within should be coverts where the hares may 
lurk in the day time under bushes and grass, and 
trees with broad spreading branches to ward off the 
attacks of the eagle. 

Who does not know also that if he introduces only 
a few hares of both sexes in a short time the place 
will be full of them, for such is the fecundity of 
this quadruped that two pair are enough to stock 
an entire warren in a short time. Often a mother 
who has just had her Utter is found to be big with 
another: indeed, Archelaus says that if you want 
to know how old a hare is you have only to count the 
number of openings in her belly, for without doubt 
there is one for every year of her life. 

It has recently become the practice to cram hares 
as well as poultry, and for this purpose they are 
taken out of the warren and shut up in small hutches 
where they are fattened. There are three kinds of 
hares: the first, our common Italian kind, which 
has short front legs and long hind legs, the upper 
part of the body dark coloured, the belly white, and 
long ears. Some say that our hare conceives a sec- 
ond time while it is still big. In transalpine Gaul 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and Macedonia they grow to a great size, but in 
Spain and in Italy they are not so large. The second 
kind is native in Gaul near the Alps, and is white all 
over the body: these are brought to Rome, but rarely. 
The third kind is native in Spain and is like our hare 
in every way except that it is smaller and is called 
rabbit (cuniculus). 1 L. ^Elius thinks that the hare 
(Upus) gets his name from his swiftness, as it were 
that he is light of foot (letnpes), but I think the name 
is derived from the ancient Greek, because the 
JEolians of Bceotia call him Xen-o/n?. The rabbits 
derive their latin name of cuniculi from the habit of 
making underground burrows to hide in [for cunt- 
cuius is a Spanish word for mine]. If possible you 
should have all these three kinds in your warren. I 
am sure you already have the first two kinds," Apius 
added, turning to me, " and, as you were so many years 
in Spain doubtless some rabbits followed you home." 

1 Of the three kinds of hares mentioned by Varro the "com- 
mon Italian kind" was L. timidus, a roast shoulder of which 
Horace vaunts as a delicacy: the Alpine hare was L. variabilis, 
which grows white on the approach of winter: and the cunicvlus 
was the common rabbit known to our English ancestors as the 
coney. Strabo records (Casaub, 144) that the inhabitants of the 
Gymnesian (Balearic) Islands in Spain sent a deputation to 
Augustus to request a military force to exterminate the pest of 
rabbits, for such was their multitude that the people were being 
crowded out of their homes by them, in which their plight was 
that of modern Australia. They were usually hunted in Spain 
with muzzled ferrets imported from Africa. 
1323] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of game preserves 

XIII. Then addressing himself again to Axius, 
Appius continued: 

"You know, of course, that wild boars are kept in 
game parks, and that those which are brought in 
wild are fattened with as little trouble as the tame 
ones which are bom in the park, for you have doubt- 
less seen at the farm near Tusculum, which Varro 
here bought from M..Pupius Piso, wild boars and 
roe bucks assemble at the sound of the trumpet to 
be fed at regular hours, when from a platform, the 
keeper scatters mast to the wild boars and vetch 
or some such forage to the roe bucks." 

"I saw this done," put in Axius, "more dramat- 
ically when I was a visitor at the villa of Q. Horten- 
sius in the country near Laurentum. He has there 
a wood of more than fifty jugera in extent, all en- 
closed, but it might better be called a Ortpurrpo^ov 
than a warren; there on high ground he caused his 
dinner table to be spread, and while we supped Hor- 
tensius gave orders that Orpheus be summoned : when 
he came, arrayed in his long robe, with a cithara in 
his hands, he was desired to sing. At that moment 
a trumpet was sounded and at once Orpheus was 
surrounded by a large audience of deer and wild 
boars and other quadrupeds: it seemed to be not less 
[3Ml 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

agreeable a spectacle than the shows of game, with- 
out African beasts, which the iEdiles provide in the 
Circus Mazimus." 

Of snails 

XIV. And turning to Merula, Axius continued: 
"Appius has lightened your task, my dear Merula, 
so far as concerns the matter of game, and briefly the 
second act of our drama may be brought to an end, 
for I do not seek to learn any thing about snails and 
dormice, which is all that is left- on the programme, 
for there can be no great trouble in keeping them." 

"It is not so simple as you seem to think, my dear 
Axius," replied Merula, "for a place suitable for keep- 
ing snails ' must be not only in the open air but 

1 The edible snail, helix pomatia, L., is still an article of com- 
merce in France and Italy. They prey upon vines and give 
evidence of their appreciation of the best by abounding in the 
vineyards of the Cote tTor, the ancient Burgundy. There at the 
end of summer they are. gathered for the double purpose of pro- 
tecting the vines and delighting the epicure: are then stored in 
a safe place until cold weather, when they considerately seal up 
their own shells with a calcareous secretion and so are shipped 
to market. 

Here is the recipe for ' escargots a la bourguignonne,' which 
despite the prejudice engendered by Leviticus (XI, 30.) may be 
recommended to the American palate jaded by beefsteak and 
potatoes and the high cost of living; Mcttre les escargots a 
bouillir pendant 5 a 10 minutes dans de l'eau salee, les reUrer de 
leur coquille, les laver a l'eau f roide pour les debarrasser du limon, 
les cuire dans un court-bouillon fortement aasaisonne. Apres 
[3*51 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

entirely surrounded by water, otherwise you will 
be kept running not only after the children but 
also the parents which you have supplied for 
breeding." 

"In other words," said I, "they must be enclosed 
by water to save the maintenance of a slave catcher.** 

"A place which is not baked by the sun and on 
which the dew remains is preferable," continued 
Merula. "If the place you use for your snails is not 
supplied with dew naturally, as often is the case in 
sunny situations, and there is no available shady 
recess, such as is found under rocks or hills whose 
feet are laved by a lake or a stream, then you must 
supply dew artificially. This may be done by leading 
into the snailery a pipe on the end of which is fixed 
a rose nozzle, through which water is forced against 
a rock so that it scatters in spray. The problem of 
feeding snails is small, for they supply themselves 
without help, finding what they require as they creep 
over the level ground and also while clinging to the 
sides of a wall, if no running water prevents their 
access to it. On the hucksters' stands they keep alive 
a long time, as it were chewing their own cud, all that 
is done for them being to supply a few laurel leaves 
cuisson lea replacer dans le coquille bien nettoyee, en lea garnis- 
sant au fond et par dessus d'une farce de beurre frais m ampule 
avec un fin hachis de persil, cerfeuil, ail, ecbalotc, sel et poivre. 
Avant de servtr, faire chauffer au four." 
[326] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

and scatter a little bran over them: so a cook never 
knows whether he is cooking them alive or dead. 

There are many kinds of snails, such as the small 
white ones, which come from Reate: the large variety 
which are imported from IUyricum, and the medium 
size which come from Africa: but they vary in size 
in certain localities of each of those countries. Thus, 
there is found in Africa a variety which are called 
solitanna of so great size that their shells will hold 
ten quarts: 1 and so in the other countries I have 
named they are found together of all sizes. They 
produce an innumerable progeny, which at first are 
very small and soft but develop their hard shell with 
time. If you have large islands in the enclosure you 
may expect a rich haul from your snails. 

Snails are fattened by placing them in a jar smeared 
with boiled must and corn meal, on which they feed, 
and pierced with holes to admit the air, but they are 
naturally hardy. 

Of dormice 
XV. Dormice ' are preserved on a different sys- 
1 Reading LXXX quadrantes. A comparison may be made 
of this capacity with that of the ordinary snail known to the 
Romans, for their smallest unit of liquid measure was called a 
cochlear, or snail shell, and contained .02 of a modern pint, or, 
as we may say, a spoonful: indeed the French word cuiller is 
derived from cochlear. 

1 It is perhaps well to remind the American reader that the 
t3»7l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

tern than snails, for while the one is confined by 
barriers of water, the other is kept in by a wall which 
must be coated on the inside with smooth stone or 
stucco to prevent their escape. Young nut trees 
should be planted in the enclosure, and when these 
are not bearing, mast and chestnuts should be thrown 
in to the dormice, for that is what makes them fat. 
Roomy cages should be provided for them in which 
to rear their young. 1 Little water is necessary, for 
dormice do not require much water, but on the con- 
trary affect dry places. They are fattened in jars 
which are usually kept indoors. The potters make 
these jars in different shapes, but with paths for the 
dormice to use contrived on the sides and a hollow to 
hold their food, which consists of mast, walnuts and 
chestnuts.' Covers are placed on the jars and there 
in the dark the dormice are fattened." 

European dormouse (Myoxus glis. Ft. loir. Ger. siebenschlajer) 
is rather a squirrel than a mouse, and that he is still esteemed a 
dainty edible, as he was by the Romans: indeed when fat, just 
before he retires to hibernate, he might be preferred to 'possum 
and other strange dishes on which some hospitable Americans 
regale themselves and the patient palates of touring Presidents. 
In his treatise De re culinaria Apicius gives a recipe for a ragout 
of dormice which sounds appetizing. 

1 Darwin (Animals and Plants, XVIII) says: "I have never 
heard of the dormouse breeding in captivity. 

3 Varro makes no mention of tea and bread and butter as part 

of the diet of a dormouse; so we are better able to understand 

his abstinence at the mad tea party in Alice in Wonderland. 

[328] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Of bees 

XVI. "It remains now," said Appius, "to rehearse 
the third and last act of our drama of the husbandry 
of the steading and to discuss the keeping of fishes." 

"The third, indeed," exclaimed Axius, "shall we 
deprive ourselves of honey because in your youth 
you never drank mead in your own house, such was 
your practice of frugality?" 

"He speaks the truth," said Appius, to us, "for 
I was indeed left a poor orphan with two brothers 
and two sisters to provide for, and it was not until 
I had married one of them to Lucullus without por- 
tion and he had named me his heir that I began to 
drink mead in my own house and to supply it to my 
household: but there never was a day when I did not 
offer it to all my guests. But apart from that, it has 
been my fortune, not yours, 1 Axius, to have known 
these winged creatures whom nature has endowed so 
richly with industry and art, and that you may ap- 
preciate that I know more than you do of their al- 
most incredible natural art, listen to what I am 

As Martial (III, 58) calls him somniculosus, it is probable that 
his table manners on that occasion were nothing new and that 
his English and German names were always justified. 

1 This is one of Varro's puns which requires a surgical opera- 
tion to get it into one's head. Appius is selected to talk about 
bees because his name has some echo of the sound of apis, the 
word for bee. 

[329 J 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

to say. It will then be for Merula to develop the 
practice of the bee keeper, or, as the Greeks call 
it, fieXiTTovpyux, as methodically as he has his other 
subjects. 

To begin then, 1 bees are generated partly by other 
bees and partly from the decaying carcase of an ox: 
so Archelaus in one of his epigrams calls them 

* flitting offspring of decaying beef,' 
and else where he says, 

' wasps spring from horses, bees from calves.' 

Bees are not of a solitary habit like eagles, but 
are of a social nature, like men, a characteristic they 
share with daws, but not for the same reason, for 
bees live in colonies, the better to work and build, 
while daws congregate for gossip. Thus the life of a 
bee is one of intelligence and art, for man has learned 
from them to manufacture, to build, and to store his 
food : three occupations which are not the same but are 
diverse in their nature, for it is one thing to provide 
food, another to manufacture wax and honey, and 
still another to build a house. Has not each cell in a 

1 The Btudy of bees was as interesting to the ancients as it is 
to us. There have survived from among many others the trea- 
tises of Aristotle, Varro, Virgil, Columella and Pliny, but they 
are all made up, as Maeterlinck has remarked, of "erreurs char- 
mantes," and for that reason the antique lore of bees is read per- 
haps to best advantage in the mellifluous verses of the fourth 
Georgtc, which follow Varro closely. 
[330 1 



Btzeo by G00gk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

honey comb six sides, or as many as a bee has feet, 
the art of which arrangement appears in the teaching 
of the geometricians that of all polygons the hexagon 
covers the largest area within a circle. 1 Bees feed 
out of doors, but it is at home that they manufac- 
ture that which is the sweetest of all things, accept- 
able to gods and men alike: for honey comb is offered 
on the altars and honey is served at the beginning 
of a dinner and again at dessert. 

1 He might have said also that the hexagonal form of construc- 
tion employed by bees produces the largest possible result with 
the least labour and material. Maeterlinck rehearses (La Vie 
des Abeilles, 138) the result of the study of this problem in the 
highest mathematics: 

" Reaumur avait propose au celebre mathematicien Koenig le 
problem suivant: 'Entre toutes les cellules hexagonales a fond 
pyramidal compose de trois rhombes semblables et egaux, deter- 
miner celle qui peut etre construite avec le moina de matiere?' 
Koenig trouva qu'une telle cellule avait son fond fait de trois 
rhombes dont chaque grand angle etait de 109 degres, 26 
minutes et chaque petit de 70 degres, 34 minutes. Or, un autre 
savant, Maraldi, ayant mesure aussi exactement que possible 
lea angles des rhombes construits par les abeilles fixa les grands 
a 109 degres, 28 minutes, et les petits a 70 degres, 32 minutes. 
II n'y avait done, entre les deux solutions qu'une difference de 
2 minutes. II est probable que l'erreur, s'il y en a une, doit 
etre imputee a Maraldi plutot qu'aux abeilles, car aucun instru- 
ment ne permet de mesurer avec une precision infaillible les 
angles des cellules qui ne sont pas assez nettlemeut definis." 

Maclaurin, a Scotch physicist, checked Koenig'a computa- 
tions and reported to the Royal Society in London in 1743 that 
he found a solution in exact accord with Maraldi's measure- 
ments, thereby completely justifying the mathematics of the 
bee architect. 

[33lJ 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Bees have institutions like our own, consisting of 
royalty, government and organized society. Cleanli- 
ness in all things is their aim: and so they never alight 
in any place where there is filth or an evil odour, or 
even where there is a strong savour of such an unguent 
as we may consider agreeable. For the same reason 
if one who approaches them is covered with perfume, 1 
they do not lick him as flies do, but they sting him, 
and by the same token no one ever sees bees crawling 
on meat and blood and grease, as flies do. And so 
they only settle in places of sweet savour. They do 
a minimum of damage because in their harvesting 
they leave what they touch none the worse.* They 
are not so cowardly as not to resist who ever attempts 
to disturb them, and yet they are fully conscious of 
their own weakness. They are called the Winged 
Servants of the Muses, because when they swarm 
they are quickly brought together by the music of 
cymbals and the clapping of hands : and as men as- 
sign Helicon and Olympus to be the haunts of the 
Muses, so nature has attributed the flowery and 

1 The Romans were as curious and as constant in the use of 
perfumes as we are of tobacco. It is perhaps well to remember 
that they might find our smoke as offensive as we would their 
unguents. 

2 Indeed one of the marvels of nature is the service which 
certain bees perform for certain plants in transferring their 
fertilizing pollen which has no other means of transportation. 
Darwin is most interesting on this subject. 

(332] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

uncultivated mountains to the bees. They follow 
their king * wheresoever he goes, supporting him when 
he is tired and even taking him upon their backs 
if he is unable to fly, so do they wish to serve him. 1 
As they are not idlers themselves, so do they hate 
those who are, and thus driving out the drones, they 
exclude them from the hive, because they are of no 
service but merely consume honey: and it happens 

1 The ancients, even Aristotle, did not know that the queen 
bee ib the common mother of the hive. They called her the lung, 
and it remained for Swammerdam in the seventeenth century 
to determine with the microscope this important fact. From 
that discovery has developed our modern knowledge of the bee; 
that the drones are the males and are suffered by the (normally) 
sterile workers to live only until one of them has performed his 
office of fertilizing once for all the new queen in that nuptial 
flight, so dramatically fatal to the successful swain, which 
Maeterlinck has described with wonderful rhetoric, whereupon 
the workers massacre the surviving males without mercy. This 
is the "driving out" which Varro mentions. 

'This picture of the queen bee is hardly in accord with 
modern observations. It seems that while the queen is treated 
with the utmost respect, she is rather a royal prisoner than a 
ruler, and, after her nuptial flight, is confined to her function of 
laying eggs incessantly unless she may be unwillingly dragged 
forth to lead a swarm. Maeterlinck thus pictures \ta VU des 
Abeilles, 174) her existence with a Gallic pencil: 

"Elle n aura aucune des habitudes, aucunes des passions que 
nous croyons inherentes a l'abeille. Elle n'eprouvera ni le desir 
du soleil, ni le besoin de l'espace et mourra sans avoir visite une 
fleur. Elle passera son existence dans l'ombre et l'agitation 
de la foule a la recherche infatigable de berceaux a peupler. £0 
revanche, elle connaitra seule 1 inquietude de l'amour. 
[333] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

that a few bees, buzzing with wrath, will drive out a 
number of drones. 

They smear every thing about the entrance to the 
hive with a gum which is found between the cells 
which the Greeks call iptSataj. They live under the 
discipline of an army, taking turns in resting and 
all doing their equal share of work, and they send 
out colonies and carry out the orders of their leaders, 
given with the voice, but as it were with a trumpet: 
and in like manner they have signs of peace and of 
war. 

But, Merula, now in my course I pas6 on the torch 
to you, as our Axius here is doubtless languishing 
while he has listened to all this natural history, for I 
have said nothing of profit." 

"I do not know," said Merula, "whether what I 
can say on the subject of the profit to be derived from 
bees will satisfy you, Axius, but I have as my authori- 
ties not only Seius, who takes five thousand pounds 
of honey every year from the hives he leases, 1 but 
also our friend Varro here, for I have heard him tell 
of two brothers Veiani, from the Falerian territory, 

1 It would have interested Axius to know that the annual 
consumption of honey in the United States today is from 100 to 
125 million pounds and that the crop has a money value of at 
least ten million dollars. To match Seius, we might put forward 
a bee farmer in California who produces annually 150,000 
pounds of honey from 2,000 hives. 
(334 1 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

whom he had under his command in Spain and who, 
although their father left them only a small house 
with a curtilage of not exceeding a jugerum in ex- 
tent, nevertheless made themselves rich. They set 
bee hives all about the house and planted part of the 
land in a garden and filled up the rest with thyme 
and clover and that bee plant known to us as api- 
astrum, though some call it fukufwWav, others 
fickkuro-tyvkkov and still others meliitana: and by 
this means they were wont to derive, as they esti- 
mated, an average income of not less than ten thou- 
sand sesterces per annum from honey; but they did 
this by being willing to wait until they could sell at 
their own time and price rather than by forcing the 
market." 

"Tell me," exclaimed Axius, "where and how I 
should establish a bee-stand to make such a hand- 
some profit." 

"The apiary," replied Merula, "which some call 
by the Greek names ^eXirrw and /lehirrorpo^aovy and 
others mellarium, should preferably be placed near 
the house ' in a location where there is no echo (for 

1 Maeterlinck has made a charming picture of this habit of 
propinquity of the bee-stand to the human habitation. He 
describes {La Vie des Abeillts, 14.) the old man who taught him 
to love bees when he was a boy in Flanders, an old man whose 
entire happiness "consistait auz beautes d'un jardin et parmi 
ces beautes la mieux aimee et la plus visitees etait un roucher, 
compose de douze cloches de paille qu'il avait peint, les unes 3e 
[3351 

aatized by GoOglc 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

such sounds are deemed to put them to flight, as 
timid men are by the din of a battle) and where the 
temperature is mild, exposed neither to the heat of 
summer nor the cold of winter, giving preferably to 
the Southeast and near of access to places where 
their food is abundant and there is a supply of fresh 
water. If there is no natural supply of food available 
you should plant such things as best serve bees for 
pasture, namely: roses, thyme, bee balm, 1 poppies, 
beans, lentils, peas, basil, gladiolus, alfalfa, and es- 
pecially clover which is of great service to the bees 
which are sick, for it begins to bloom at the vernal 
equinox and lasts until that of autumn. As clover is 
the best food for sick bees, so thyme is the best for 
making honey, and it is because Sicily abounds in 
good thyme that it takes the palm for producing 
honey. On this account some men bruise thyme in 
a mortar and mix warm water with it and then spray 

rose vif, les autre* de jaune clair, la plupart d'un bleu tendre, car 
il avait observe, bien avaut lee experiences de Sir John Lubbock, 
que le bleu est la couleur preferee des abeilles. II avait installs 
ce roucher contre le mur blanchi de la maison, dans l'angle que 
ibrmai t une des ces s a vou reuses et fraiches cuisines hollondaises 
auz dressoirs de faience ou etincalaient les etains et les cuivres 
qui, par la porte ouverte, se rcfietaicnt dans un canal paisible. 
Et l'eau charges d'images familieres, sous un rideau de peupliers, 
guidatt les regards jusqu'au repos d'un horizon de moubas et 
de pres." 

1 Reading Apiastro. This is the Melissa officinalis of Ltn- 
nssus. Cf. Pliny, XX, 45 and XXI, 86. 
[3361 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

all their nursery plants with it for the sake of the 
bees. 

The hives should be set as near the house as con- 
venient: some men even put them under the very 
portico for greater safety. Hives are made in various 
shapes and sizes and of different material; 1 thus 
some make them round out of wicker work: others 
of frame covered with bark: others use hollow tree 
trunks: others vessels of pottery: some even build 
them square out of rods, allowing about three feet in 
length and a foot in height, but these dimensions 
should be reduced where you have not enough bees 
to fill a hive of that size, for fear that the bees might 
become discouraged by too large an empty space. 

The bee hive derives its name alvus, which is the 
same as our word for belly, from the fact that it 
holds food, that is to say, honey; and it is on this 
analogy that hives are usually shaped to imitate the 
form of the belly, small in the waist and bulging out 
below. When the hives are made of wicker work 
they should be coated evenly within and without 

1 Bee keepers attribute to Reaumur the Invention of the 
modern glass observation hive, which has made possible so 
much of our knowledge of the bee, but it may be noted that 
Pliny (ff. JV. XXI, 47) mentions hives of "lapis specularis," 
some sort of talc, contrived for the purpose of observing bees 
at work. The great advance in bee hives is, however, the sec- 
tional construction attributed to Langstroth and developed in 
America by Root. 

[3373 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

with ox dung 1 so that the bees may not be driven 
away by the roughness of their roof. The hives 
should be so ordered under the shelter of a wall that 
they may not be disturbed nor touch one another 
when arranged in ranks, for it is the practice to place 
hives in two and some times three separated ranks, 
but the opinion is that it is better to reduce the ranks 
to two than to increase them to four. In the middle 
of the hive small openings are made on the right and 
the left to serve as entrances for the bees, and on 
top is placed a practicable cover, which may be re- 
moved to give access to the honey comb. This is 
best when made of bark, and worst of pottery, be- 
cause that is strongly affected both by the cold of 
winter and the heat of summer. In spring and sum- 
mer the bee keeper should inspect each hive at least 
three times a month, fumigating them lightly, clean- 
ing and throwing out dirt and worms. At the same 
time he should take precautions to keep down the 
number of princes, for they keep the bees from work 
by stirring up sedition. There are said to be three 

1 Columella, (IX, 14) referring to the myth of the generation 
of bees in the carcase of an ox (out of which Virgil made the 
fable of the pastor Aristteus in the Fourth Georgic), explains 
the practice mentioned in the text with the statement "hie 
enim quasi quadam cognatione generis maxime est apibus 
aptus.' The plastering of wicker hives with ox dung persisted 
and is recommended in the seventeenth century editions of the 
Maison Rustique. 

[338 J 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

kinds of royalties among the bees: the black, the 
red and the mottled, or, as Menecrates writes, two: 
the black and the mottled: and as the latter is the 
better it behooves the bee keeper, when he finds 
both kinds in a hive, to kill the black one, as he is 
forever playing politics 1 against the other king, 
whereby the hive must suffer, for inevitably one of 
the kings will flee or be driven out, in either case 
taking his party with him. 

Of working bees the small round mottled variety 
is considered the best. The drone, or, as some call 
him, the thief, 1 is black with a large belly. The wasp, 
which has some resemblance to a bee, is not, however, 
a fellow labourer, but attacks the bees with his sting, 
wherefore the bees keep him at a distance. 

Bees are themselves distinguished as wild and 
tame. I call those wild which feed in the forests, and 
those tame which feed in cultivated places. The 
forest bees are smaller in size and hairy but better 
workmen. 

In buying bees it behooves the purchaser to see 
whether they are well or ailing. The signs of health 
are a thick swarm, well groomed appearance and a 
hive being filled in a workmanlike manner. The 

1 Reading seditiosvm. 

1 This is a mistake upon which Aristotle could have corrected 
Varro. 

I 3391 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

signs of lack of condition on the other hand are a 
hairy and bristling appearance and a dusty coat, 
unless this last is caused by a pressure of work, for 
under such circumstances they often wear them- 
selves down and become thin. 

If the hives are to be transferred from one place 
to another it is necessary to choose a fit time to make 
the move and a suitable place to receive them. As 
to time, spring is preferable to winter because in 
winter they have difficulty in adjusting themselves 
to a new location and so often run away, as they do 
also if you move them from a good location to a 
place where proper pasture is not available. Nor 
is a transfer from one hive to another in the same 
place to be undertaken carelessly, but that to which 
the bees are to be transferred should be rubbed with 
bee balm, which will serve as a bait for them, and 
some pieces of honey comb should be placed in it, 
not far from the entrances, for fear that the bees 
might run away if they found the larder of their new 
home empty. 

Menecrates says that bees contract a malady of 
the bowels from their first spring pasture on the 
blossoms of the almond and the cornel cherry and are 
cured by giving them urine to drink. 1 

1 After studying the commentators on this obscure passage, 

I have elected to follow the emendation of Ursinus, which, al~ 

[34o] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

That gummy substance which the bees use, chiefly 
in summer to construct a sort of curtain between 
the entrance and the hive, is called propolis, and 
by the same name is used by physicians in making 
plasters: by reason of which use it sells in the Via 
Sacra for more than honey itself. That substance 
which is called eritkacen, and is used to glue the cells 
together, is different from both honey and propolis: 
it is supposed to have a quality of attraction for bees 
and is accordingly mixed with bee balm and smeared 
on the branch or other place on which it is desired to 
have a swarm light. The comb is made of wax and 
is multicellular, each cell in it having six sides or as 
many as nature has given the bee feet. It is said 
that bees do not gather from the same plants all the 
materials which enter in these four substances which 
they manufacture, namely: propolis, erithacen, wax 
and honey. Thus from the pomegranate and the 
asparagus they gather food alone, wax from the 
olive tree, honey from the fig, but not of good quality: 
other plants like the bean, the bee balm, the gourd 
and the cabbage serve a double purpose and yield 
both wax and food: while the apple and the wild pear 
serve a similar double purpose but for food and 
honey and the poppy again for wax and honey. 

though Keil sneers at its license, has the advantage of making 
sense. 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

Others again provide material for three purposes, 
food, honey and wax, such as the almond and the 
charlock. 1 In like manner there are flowers from 
each of which they derive a different one of these 
substances, and others from which they derive several 
of them: while they make distinctions in respect of 
plants according to the quality of the product they 
yield, — or rather the plants make the distinction for 
them — as with respect to honey, some yield liquid 
honey, like the skirwort, * and others thick honey 
like the rosemary. So again honey of insipid flavour 
is made from the fig, good honey from clover, and the 
best of all from thyme. 

And since drink is part of a bee's diet and water 
is the liquid they use, there should be provided near 
the stand a place for them to drink, which may be 
either a running stream or a reservoir not more than 
two or three fingers deep in which bricks or stones are 
placed in such a way as to project a little from the 
water, and so furnish a place for the bees to sit and 
drink; but the greatest care must be taken to keep 
this water fresh, as it is of high importance to the 
making of good honey. 

As the bees cannot go out to distant pasture in 
all weathers, food must be prepared for them, as 



1 Sinapis arvensis, Linn. 
* Sium sis arum, I ' 



aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

otherwise they will live on their supply of honey and 
so deplete the store in the hive. For this purpose 
ten pounds of ripe figs may be boiled in six congii of 
water and bits of the paste thus prepared should be 
set out near the hives. Others provide honey water 
in little dishes and float flocks of clean wool on them 
through which the bees may suck without risk of 
either getting more than is good for them or of being 
drowned. One such dish should be provided for 
each hive and they should be kept filled. Others 
again bray dried grapes and figs together and, mix- 
ing in some boiled must, make a paste of which bits 
are exposed near the hives during such part of the 
winter as the bees are still able to go forth in search 
of food. 

When a swarm is about to come out of the hive 
(which happens when a number of young bees have 
matured, and the hive determines to send their youth 
out to found a colony, as formerly the Sabines often 
were compelled to do on account of the number of 
their children) 1 there are two signs by which the 

1 The philosophy of the bee is not as selfish as that human 
principle which Varro attributes to them. The hive does not 
send forth its "youth" to found a colony, but, on the contrary, 
abandons its home and its accumulated store of wealth to its 
youth and itself ventures forth under the leadership of the old 
queen to face the uncertainties of the future, leaving only a 
small band of old bees to guard the hive and rear the young 
until the new queen shall have supplied a new population. 
[3431 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

intention may be known: one that for several days 
before hand, and especially in the evening, many 
bees weave themselves together and hang upon the 
entrance of the hive like grapes: the other that when 
they are about to go forth or have already begun 
to go they buzz together lustily, as soldiers do when 
they break camp. Those who have come forth first 
fly about the hive waiting for the others, who have 
not yet collected, to join them. When the bee keeper 
notices this he has only to throw dust on them and 
at the same time beat upon some copper vessel to 
collect them, thoroughly frightened, where he desires 
in some nearby place on which he has smeared eritha- 
cen and bees* balm and other things in which they 
delight. When they have settled down he should 
place near them a hive smeared within with the same 
baits, and then, by blowing a light smoke around 
them, compel them to enter the hive. When thus 
introduced into their new abode the swarm makes 
itself at home cheerfully, so that even if placed next 
to the parent hive they will prefer their new colonial 
settlement. 

And now, having told you all I know about the 
care of bees, I will speak of that for which the in- 
dustry is carried on, that is to say, of the profit. 

The honey is taken off when the hive is full, as 

may be determined by removing the cover of the 

[344] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

hive, for if the openings of the combs are seen to be 
sealed, as it were with a skin, then the hive is full of 
honey: but the bees themselves give notice of this 
condition by keeping up a loud buzzing within, by 
their agitation when they go in and out and by driv- 
ing out the drones. 

In taking off honey some say that you should be 
content with nine parts, leaving the tenth, because 
if you take it all the bees will desert the hive: others 
leave a still larger proportion than I have mentioned. 

As those who crop their corn land every year ob- 
tain good yields only at intervals, so it is with bee 
hives : you will have more industrious and more profit- 
able bees if you do not exact of them the same tribute 
every year. 

It is considered that honey should be taken off 
for the first time at the rising of the Pleiades, for the 
second time at the end of summer before Arcturus 
has reached the zenith, and for the third time after 
the setting of the Pleiades, but this last time be- 
ware not to take more than one-third of the store 
even if the hive is full, leaving the other two-thirds 
for the winter supply, but if the hive is only partially 
filled nothing should be taken off. In any event, 
when a large amount of honey is to be taken off a 
hive it should not be done all at once or ostentatiously 
less the bees be discouraged. ThoBe combs which, 
[3451 



i by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

on being taken off, are found to be partly unfilled 
with honey or to be soiled, should be pared with a 
knife. 

Care must be taken that the weaker bees in a 
hive are not oppressed by the stronger, for this 
diminishes the profit: to this end the minority party * 
may be colonized under another king. When bees 
are given to fighting with one another, you should 
sprinkle them with honey water, upon which they 
will not only cease fighting but will crowd together 
and kiss one another: and this will prove the case 
even more if they are sprinkled with mead, for the 
savour of the wine in it will cause them to apply them- 
selves so greedily that they will fuddle themselves 
in sucking it. If the bees seem lazy about coming 
out to work and any part of them get the habit of 
remaining in the hive, they should be fumigated and 
odoriferous herbs, like bees' balm and thyme, should 
be placed near the hive. Watchful care is necessary 
to protect them from ruin by heat or cold. If the 
bees are overtaken by a sudden rain or cold while at 
pasture (which rarely happens for they usually fore- 
see such things) and are stricken down by the heavy 
rain drops and laid low and stunned, you should 
gather them in a dish and place them under cover in 
a warm place until the weather has cleared, when 
1 Reading imbeciUiorts. 
(346] 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

they should be sprinkled with ashes of fig wood 
(making sure that the ashes are rather hot than warm) 
the dish should then be shaken gently without touch- 
ing the bees with your hand, and placed in the sun. 
When the bees feel this warmth they revive and get 
on their feet again, just as flies do after they have 
been apparently drowned. This should be done 
near the hive so that when the bees have come to 
themselves they may return home and to work.'* 

Offish ponds 

XVII. Here Pavo returned and said: "You may 
weigh anchor now if you wish. The drawing of the 
lots of the tribes to determine a tie vote is over and 
the herald is announcing the result of the election." 

Appius arose without delay and went to congratu- 
late his candidate, and escort him home. 

Merula said: "I will leave the third act of our 
drama of the husbandry of the steading to you, 
Axius," and went out with the others, leaving Alius 
with me to wait for our candidate whom we knew 
would come to join us. Axius said to me: "I do not 
regret Merula's departure at this point, for I am quite 
well up on the subject of fish ponds, which still re- 
mains to complete our programme. 

There are two kinds of fish ponds, of fresh water 

and salt water. The former are commonly main- 

13471 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

tained by farmers and without much expense, for 
the Lymphse, the homely goddesses of the Foun- 
tains, supply the water for them, while the latter, 
the sea ponds, are the play things of our nobles and 
are furnished with both water and fishes, as it were 
by Neptune himself: serving more the purposes of 
pleasure than of utility, their accomplishment being 
rather to empty than to fill the exchequers of their 
lords. For in the first place they are built at great 
expense, then they are stocked at great expense, and 
finally they are maintained at great expense. 

Hirrus was wont to derive an income of twelve 
thousand sesterces from the buildings surrounding 
his fish ponds, all of which he spent for food for his 
fishes: and no wonder, for I remember that on one 
occasion he lent two thousand muretta to Caesar 1 
by weight (stipulating for their return in kind), so 
that his villa (which was not otherwise extraordinary) 
sold for four million sesterces on account of the stock 
of fish. 

In sooth, the inland ponds of our fanner folk may 
well be called dulcis, and those other amara.' 

1 Pliny (H. N. IX, 81) relates that this loan was made to 
supply the banquet on the occasion of one of the triumphs of 
Caesar the dictator, but Pliny puts the loan at six thousand 
fishes. 

1 It is impossible to translate this pun into English, dttUit 

being the equivalent of both "fresh and "agreeable," and 

[348] 



1 by Google 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

A single fish pond suffices us simple folk, but 
those amateurs must have a series of them linked 
together: for as Pausias and other painters of his 
school have boxes with as many compartments as 
they have different coloured wax, so must they fain 
have as many ponds as they have different varieties 
of fish. 

These fish are furthermore sacred, more sacred, 
indeed, than those fish which you, Varro, say you 
saw in Lydia, (at the same time that you saw the 
dancing isles) 1 which came to the shore, where the 
altar was erected for a sacrifice, in shoals at the sound 
of the Greek pipe, because no one ever ventured to 
molest them; so no cook has ever been known to 
have 'sauced' one of these fishes. 1 

"When our friend Hortensius had those fish ponds 
at Baulii, which represented so large an investment, 
he was wont to send to Puteoli to buy the fish he 
served on his table, as I have often seen when I was 

amara of "salt" and "disagreeable." A French translator 
would have at his command doux and amer. 

1 Cf. Pliny (H. N. II, 96): "In Lydia the islands called Cala- 
mine are not only driven about by the wind, but may even be 
pushed at pleasure from place to place, by which means many 
people saved themselves in the Mithridatic war. There are 
some small islands in the Nymphaeus called the Dancers, be- 
cause, when choruses are sung, they move in tune with the 
measure of the music.'* 

* Reading in ius vocare, with the double entendre of service in a 
sauce and bringing to justice. 

t349l 

aatized by GoOgk 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

visiting him. And it was not enough that his fishes 
did not supply his table, but he was at pains to sup- 
ply theirs, taking greater precautions lest his mullets 
(mtdli) should go hungry than I do for my mules in 
Rosea, and it was not at less cost that he supplied 
meat and drink to his stock than I do to mine. For 
I raise my asses, which bring such fancy prices, at 
the cost of one servant, a little barley and the water 
which springs from my land, while Hortensius must 
needs maintain a fleet of fishermen to keep him sup- 
plied with small fry to feed to his fish, or, when the 
sea runs high and such deep sea forage is cut off by a 
storm, and it is not possible even to draw live bait 
ashore in a net, he is fain to buy in the market for 
the delectation of the denizens of his ponds the very 
salt fish which is the food of the people." 

"Doubtless," said I, "Hortensius would prefer to 
have you take the carriage mules out of his stable 
than one of his barbel mules from the fish pond." 

"Yes, indeed," agreed Alius, "and he would 
rather have a sick slave drink cold water than that 
his beloved fish should be risked in that which is 
fresh. On the other hand, M. Lucullus was reputed 
to be so careless and neglectful of his fish ponds that 
he did not provide any suitable quarters for his fishes 
in hot weather, but permitted them to remain in ponds 
which were unhealthy with stagnant water: a practice 
[350 J 

:> :l :ieci : yGo0gle 



ROMAN FARM MANAGEMENT 

very different from that of his brother L. Lucullus, 
who yielded nothing to Neptune himself in his care 
of his fishes, for he pierced a mountain at Naples, 
and so contrived that the sea water in his fish ponds 
should be renewed by the action of the tides. Further- 
more, he has arranged that his beloved fishes may be 
driven into a cool place during the heat of the day, 
just as the Apulian shepherds do when they drive 
their flocks along the drift ways to the Sabine moun- 
tains: for so great was his ardour for the welfare of 
his fishes that he gave a commission to his architect 
to drive at his sole cost a tunnel from his fish ponds 
at Baise to the sea, and by throwing out a mole con- 
trived that the tide should flow in and out of his 
fish ponds twice a day, from moon to moon, and so 
cool them off." 

At this moment, while we were talking, there 
was a sound of foot steps on the right and our candi- 
date came into the villa publico, arrayed in the broad 
purple of his new rank as an sedile. We went to 
meet him and, after congratulations, escorted him 
to the Capitol, whence he departed for his home and 
we to ours. 

So there, my dear Pinnius, is the brief record of 
our discourse on the husbandry of the steading. 



[35i] 

aatized by GoOgk 



J¥ Google 



INDEX 



Actus {actus auadratus), unit 
of area in land measure- 
ment, 92. 

/Egean Sea, derivation of name, 
186. 

iKsop's fable of the fox, 
87 a. 

Agriculture, distinguished 
from grazing, pottery-mak- 
ing, etc., 65-7 1 ; definition of 
scope of, 72; purposes of, are 
profit and pleasure, 73—76; 
four divisions for the study 
of, 76-78; effect of con- 
formation of the land on, 
78-81; effect of character of 
soil, 82-85, 88 ff. 

Albutius, L., 281. 

Alfalfa, advice concerning, 149 
-150. 

Alfius, Roman farmer banker, 
19 a. 

Alpine hares, 323. 

Amurca, farm uses of, 46; 
used for anointing threshing 
floors, 162; waste of, by 
Romans, 167 n.; method of 
preserving, 171; condens- 
ing, 172-173. 

Apiaries, location of, 335-337. 
See Bees. 



E 353 I 



Apicius, recipe for ragout of 
dormice by, 328 n. 

Appian, quoted, 180 n. 

Appius Claudius Pulcher, 
273 n. 

Apples, storing, 160-170. 

Apulian breed of horses, 239, 
2400. 

Aquinas, Thomas, 291 d. 

Arbusta, the Italian, 30 n., 86. 

Arista, etymology of word, 
156. 

Aristotle, on blindness of pup- 
pies, 25 n.; cited, 183; on 
goats' breathing through 
their ears, 210 n. ; on exercis- 
ing of pregnant mares, 237; 
on breeding of mares, 242 n.; 
story related by, 245 n. 

Arpent, derivation of, 92 n. 

Asparagus planting, 124-125. 

Asses, use of, as compared with 
other draught animals, 117; 
manure of, 141 ; certain 
choice breeds of, 189; buy- 
ing, breeding, care of, etc., 
234-236; milk of, 262. 

AtticUs, T. Pomponius, 197. 

Augeas, King, tradition con- 
cerning, 179 n. 

Augustine, St., on Varro, 7-8; 
indebtedness of, to works 
of Varro, 9. 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



281; two classes of, 287; 
those kept for profit, 288 - 
290; those kept for pleasure, 
291-296. 
Aviary, Varro's, at Casinum, 
291-296. 



Bakewell, breeding of sheep 
by, 199 n. 

Barbers, the first, in Italy, 266. 

Barn yards, arrangement of, 
96-97- 

Barrows, hogs called, 224. 

Bavaria, agriculture in Iowa 
contrasted with that in, 
72 n. 

Beans, use of, for green manur- 
ing, 122 n.; storing, 169. 

Beauclerk, W. N-, on agricul- 
ture in modern Italy, 60 n.; 
quoted, 201 n. 

Bees, eggs of unfertilized 
queen, 192 n.; the keeping 
of, 329 ff.; theories concern- 
ing generation of, 330; trea- 
tises on, by ancient writers, 
330 n.; habits and houses 
of, 330-334; money to be 
made from, 334-335; loca- 
tion of stands for, 335-336; 
food for, 336-337, 341-343; 
structure and care of hives, 
337-338; kinds of, 338-339; 
selection of, 339-340; mov- 
ing, 340; swarming of, 343- 



(3S4l 



344; removal of honey, 344- 

346; general care of, 346- 

347- 
Benson, William, edition of 

Georgia by, quoted, 127 n. 
Birds, manure of, 140-141. 
Blackbirds, houses for keeping, 

288-290. 
Blackstone, opinion by, cited, 

176 n. 
Bleat, etymology of word, 185. 
Blood, use of, in composts, 

98 n. 
Boars, advice concerning. 215- 

217; altering, 224; wild, 324. 
Boissier, Gaston, 9; quoted and 

cited, 12, 15, 180, 181 n. 
Bake of Husbandry, Fitzher- 

bert's, 35 n. 
Bologna sausages, 218 n. 
Bones, remedy for injuries to, 

Borden, Spencer, The Arab 

Hone by, quoted, 237. 
Boundaries, protection of 

farm, 100-103. 
Button, quotations from, 108 

n., 307; cited, 313 n., 315 n. 
Bugs, recipe for exterminating, 

70. 
Buildings on farm, 28. 



Cabbage, Cato's advocacy of 
the, 30 11., 72; planting, 121, 
125; seeding, 151. 

Cakes, recipes for, 48. 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



Calendar of agricultural opera- 
tions, 129-139. 

Capons, chickens called, 244; 
method of canonizing cocks, 
307. 

Caprtt, goats, derivation of 
word, 210. 

Capreolus, a spiral tendril, 
133- 

Cascate delle Marmore, 274 n. 

Casinum, Varro'e estate of, 
291, 292 n. 

Cassius, quoted, 107-108. 

Cassius Dionysius, 56. 

Cat, the modem household, 
unknown to Varro, 319 n. 

Cato, Marcus Porcius, 4, 5-6; 
the De re ntstica of, 5-6; 
literary style of, compared 
with Varro, 9. 

Cats, contrasted with dogs 
in relations with man, 250 n. 

Cattle, leaves as fodder for, 
30, 43, 44, 124; feeding of, 
43-45; care of, 45-47; num- 
ber and selection of, for a 
farm, 114-117; honour paid 
to, in naming Zodiacal signs 
and the constellations, 185— 
186; advice on breeding and 
feeding, 188 ff.; number of, 
to be kept, 195-196; advice 
on neat cattle, 225-233. 

CeiUuria, defined, 93, 113. 

Chaff, derivation of word, 161. 

Cheese, varieties and qualities 
of, 263-264. 

Cheese cake, 48. 



[355] 



Chestnuts as food in Italy, 
80 n. 

Child, R., quoted, 202 n. 

Cicero, quoted concerning 
Varro, 8; verse from, 225 n. 

Cleaning grain, 172. 

Clement-Mullet, J. J., transla- 
tion by, 97 n. 

Climate, choice of, in buying 
a farm, 21; connection be- 
tween conformation of land 
and, 79. 

Dover, advice on seeding, 
151. 

Cobura, book on alfalfa by, 
149 n. 

Colours of horses, significance 
of, 230 n. 

Columella, 4; cited, 19 n., 29 n., 
281 n., 303, 309, 316 n.; on 
ploughing, 38 n.; rules about 
the compost heap, 40 n.; on 
soil improvement with leg- 
umes, 42 n. ; on dangers from 
mosquitoes, 95 n.j on alfalfa, 
149 n.; quoted, 304 n. 

Comedy of Error t, origin of, 
193 n. 

Compost heap, rules concern- 
ing the, 40, 98 n. 

Concrete, fences of, 101. 

Conformation of land, effect 
of, on agriculture, 78-81. 

Constellations, names of cattle 
given to, 186. 

Coots, 320. 

Corn, structure of plant, 156; 
storing, 167-168. See Grain. 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



Com land as distinguished 

from plough land, 13a 
Coroican honey, 278. 
Cotton seed, utilization of, 

167 n. 
Country life, antiquity of, 

269-271. 
Cowper and Cowley, lines by, 

270 n. 
Crescenzi, Pietro, cited, 80 n. 
Cultivating time, 153 ff. 
Curing hams, 49-50. 
Outage of plants, 144. 
Cyrrhestes, Tower of the 

Winds built by, 295-296. 



Dante, quotation f ram, 203 n. 

Darwin, Charles, Animals and 
Plants by, quoted, 235 n., 
319 n.; on dormice, 328 n. 

Dates, eating preserved, 174. 

Denarius, value of the, 212 n. 

Dennis, Cities and Cemeteries 
of Etruria by, quoted, 257 n. 

De re rustica, Cato's, 5-6. 

Desmolins, Edmond, cited, 
217 n. 

Dickson, Andrew, quoted, 3 n.; 
cited, 130 n. 

Diophanes of Bithynia, 90. 

Disease in cattle, and reme- 
dies, 194. 

Dislocations of bones, remedy 
for, 47. 

Dogs, watch, 116, 118; herd, 
*47-*54- 



[356] 



Donaldson's Agricultural Bi- 
ography, quoted, 114. n. 

Dondlmgcr, Book of Wheat by, 
quoted, 159 n. 

Dormice, enclosures for, feed- 
ing, etc., 327-328. 

Draining, 37-38; period for, 
1 37- 

Dra ught animals on farm, 31- 
32; number and choice of, 
114-117. 

Dry farming, 127 n. 

Ducks, housing, care of, etc., 
319-320. 

Dunghill fowl, 306-312. 

Dusting yard for poultry, 308. 



Eggs, the first course in Roman 

dinners, 65 n.; barren, 192; 

number for setting, 309-3 10; 

preserving, 310-311. 
Elm trees, planting of, 30; 

for marking boundaries, 102. 
Endive, as food for geese, 317. 
Ensilage, question of use of, 

by ancients, 43 n. 
Equipment of a farm, 106 ff. 



Fallow, as managed by the 
Romans, 3. 

Farm, buying a, 20-22; laying 
out of the, 27-31; stocking 
the, 31-32; as a source of 
both profit and pleasure, 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



73-76; effect of conforma- 
tion of the land, 78-81; 
effect of character of the 

soil, 82-85. 

Farm hands, allowances for, 
35-37; selection, treatment, 
number of, etc., 107-114. 

Farrago, mixed fodder, 133; 
as food for geese, 317, 318. 

Feast days, observance of, 

36. 

Feed racks, construction of, 
44. 

Fences, 100-101. 

Ferrero, cited, 10, 27 n. 

Field crops, planting of, 121- 
123. 

Figs, season for propagating, 
146-147; eating preserved, 
174. 

Fining the soil, 132. 

Fishes, feeding and care of, 
349-351- 

Fish ponds, 97, 283, 284-285, 
286; fresh-water and salt- 
water, 347-348; number of, 
on one estate, 340. 

Fitzherbert, Sir Anthony, 31 n; 
quoted, 35 n.; cited, 83 n., 
319 n.; on combining two 
kinds of husbandry, 85 n.; 
on greasing of sheep, 204 n. 

FlageUvm, flag, 132-133. 

Flock masters, duties of, 257— 
259. 

Forage, derivation from far- 
rago, 133 n. 

Forage crops, 42-43, 133 



[3S7l 



Foremen of farm hands, quali- 
fications of, 108. 

Fowl. See Poultry. 

Fowler, Socio/ Life at Rome by, 
quoted, 176 n. 

France, yields of wine in, 61 n. 

Freemen as agricultural la- 
bourers, 107. 

Fruits, preserving, 169-171; 
time for using stored, 174. 

Furlong, derivation of, 92 n. 



Game preserves, 321, 324-325. 

Gauls, pre-eminence of, in 
growing and making of pork, 
217-218; high qualities as 
shepherds, 256. 

Geese, selection of, breeding, 
care, etc., 315-318. 

Geldings, horses called, 244. 

Geoponica, the, 4 n.; cited, 
70 n. 

Georgics, Virgil's, passages 
based on information from 
Varro, 10 ff. 

Gestation, periods of, 191. 

Gleaning of grain fields, 163- 
164. 

Gluma, etymology of word, 
156. 

Goats, as foes of agriculture, 
67-68 ; characteristics, breed- 
ing, and handling, 207-212; 
mflk of, 262; use of hair and 
akins of, 266; shearing of, 
266-267. 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



Googe, Barnaby, translation 
of Hcreabach by, 1 59 n. 

Graftage of plants, 145, 147- 
148. 

Grain, advice on seeding, 151- 
153; storing of, 167-168; 
cleaning, when taken out of 
storage, 172; time for mar- 
keting, 174-175. 

Granaries, varieties of, 168. 

Granum, etymology of word, 
IS6. 

Grapes, harvesting of, 164- 
105; advice on storing, 
169. 

Grapevines, trellises and props 
for, 86-88. 

Grazing, to be distinguished 
from agriculture, 65-69, 178 
-180. 

Greek writers on agriculture, 

^4,54- 

Green manuring, 2, 122, 219 n. 

Guano, 141 n. 

Guinea fowl, 313. 

H 

Haredium, defined, 92-93. 

Hair, removal of superfluous, 
70. 

Hams, recipes for curing and 
cooking, 49^-50. 

Hares, varieties of, 322-323. 
See Rabbits. 

Harte, Walter, Essays on Hus- 
bandry by, 9, 63 11.; on 
alfalfa, 149 11.; quoted, 152. 



[J5«l 



Hartlib, Samuel, 11; quoted, 

;;S n.; on pasture vs. arable 
and, 85 n. 

Harvester, ancient forerunners 
of the modern, 158 n. 

Harvest time, 157 ff. 

Hay, harvesting the, 157-158; 
storing of, 167. 

Haymaking, 42. 

Health, location of farm stead- 
ing with regard to, 94-96. 

Healthfulncss of farms, im- 
portance of, 75—76. 

Hedges, myrtle, 3 1. 

Heliotrope, habits of the, 155. 

Hens, 306-312. 

Herd dogs, 247-254. 

Heresbach, Conrad, cited, 
159 n. 

Hernck, Robert, quoted, 152. 

Hestod, 4; quoted and cited, 
26 n., 31 n. 

Hinnies, 245, 247. 

Hives for bees, location and 
structure, 337; inventors of 
modern devices, 337 n. 

Hogs, 212-225. 

Homer, quoted, 23 u.; on use 
of mules, 245 n. 

Honey, Sicilian and Corsican, 
278; profits from, 334-335; 
removal of, from hive, 344- 
346- 

Honeycomb, structure of the, 
330-331, 341. 

Horace, cited, 23 n., 30 n., 
32 n.; quoted, 318 n. 

Horses, oxen vs., 31 n.; ma* 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



nure of, 141; breeding, feed- 
ing, care of, etc., 236-244. 
House for residence on farm, 

Housekeeper, duties of the, 
35-36. 



Ibn-al-Awam, book of agri- 
culture by, 97 n. 
Implements, fanning, 118-120. 
Inarching, propagation by, 

Incantations as cures, 47. 
Interamna, town of, 271 n. 
Iowa, farming in Bavaria and, 

72 n. 
Italy, agriculture in modern, 

60 n. 



Johnson, Samuel, on Harte's 

Husbandry, 64 n.; quoted 

on Shenstooe, 74 n. 
Joigneaux, P., on yields of 

wine in France, 61 n. 
Jones, W. H., on malaria in 

the Roman Campagna, 95 n. 
Jugerum, defined, 92. 
Jugum, defined, 92. 
Jungle fowl, sia-313. 



Karnes, Lord, quoted, 31 n. 
Keil, quoted, 129 n.; cited, 
252 n., 295 11., 319 n. 



I 359 1 



Keller, cited, 31 

Kitab al-felaha 
Awam, 97 n. 



Labourers, agricultural, 36- 
37, 107-114- 

Lanriani, cited, 95 n. 

Land, effect of conformation 
of, on agriculture, 78-81. 

Leaves as fodder for cattle, 30, 
43. 44, "4- . 

Legumes, soil improvement 
with, 41; storing, 169. 

Leporaria, 321. 

Library, public, at Rome, 7 n. 

Literature of farm manage- 
ment, ancient, 4. 

Live stock, feeding, 43; care 
of, 45-47; origin ana impor- 
tance of husbandry of, 1S1 ft. 
See Cattle. 

Lombardy, agriculture in an- 
cient and modern, 218 n. 

M 

Machiavelli, quoted, 60. 

Maeterlinck, quoted on dogs, 
249 n.; on the antique lore 
01 bees, 330 n.; on the math- 
ematics of the honeycomb, 
Ml n.; on the queen bee's 
e, 333 n.; on the nearness 
of the bee-Btand to the 
dwelling-house, 335 n. 

Mago the Carthageman, trea- 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



tisc on farm management 

t>7) 4; quoted, 27 n., 29 n.; 

Varro's account of, 55-56. 
Mais on Rustique, cited and 

quoted, 251 n., 261 n. t 338 n. 
Malaria in Roman Campagna, 

940. 
Manure, preparation of, 40, 

98 n.; beat kinds of, 140 

141. 
Manure pits, arrangement of, 

97-98, 141. 
Manuring, importance of, 38; 

green, 2, 122, 219 n. 
Maremma sheep dogs, 249 n. 
Mares, use of, for war horses, 

237; milk of, 262. 
Market day among the Ro- 
mans, 177. 
Marl, use of, as manure, 83. 
Marrying the vine, 86. 
Martial, quotation from, 279 n. 
Meadows, protection of, 155- 

156; irrigated, of Lombardy, 

218 n. 
Measurement of land, unite 

of area used in, 92-93. 
Mile, the Roman, 321 n. 
Military fences, 100-101. 
Milk and milking, advice on, 

262-263. 
Minerval, a, 282. 
Mitchell, Donald G., 6 n. 
Mommsen, quoted, 25 n., 27 n. 
Montesquieu, quoted, 85 n. 
Moon, influence of, on agri- 
culture, 137-139. 
Moryson, Fynes, quoted, 80 n. 



Mosquitoes, perception by 

Varro of damages from, 94. 
Mules, remarks on foaling by, 

196; uses, care of, etc., 244- 

247. 
Murray, Gilbert, translation 

of Euripides by, 68 n. 
Must cake, 48. 
Myers, F. W. H., cited, 13. 

N 

Neat cattle, buying, breeding, 

feeding, etc., 225-233. 
Neighbourhood, considerations 

of, in locating farm, 20, 103— 

106. 
Neighbours, treatment of 

one's, 26. 
Nummus, a "nickel," 280 n. 
Nundinum, the Roman week, 

177 n. 
Nurseries, protection of, 155. 
Nuts, eating preserved, 174, 



Oaks, effect of, on olive trees, 

100. 
Obarati, class of bondservant* 

called, 107. 
Ocinum, basil, 133. 
Oil, manufacture of, from 

olives, 166. 
Oil-making implements, 119. 
Olive farm, number of hands 

for working an, 110. 
Olives, allowances of, for 



[360] 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



farm bands, 37; reasons for 
growth in Attica, 68 n.; 
effect of oaks in neighbour- 
hood of, 106; advice on 
planting, 123-125; propa- 
gating from truncheons, 144, 
148; harvesting of, 165-167; 
methods of preserving, 171; 
eating preserved, 173. 

Olive salad, 48. 

Onager, wild ass, 235. 

Orchards, laying out and plant- 
ing of, 30, 81; olive, 123- 
125- 

Ornithones, 285, 287, 288 ff. 
See Aviaries. 

Ortolans, houses for keeping, 
288-290. 

Overseer, duties of the, 32-34; 
location of room of, 90. 

Ovid, quoted, 227 n. 

Oxen, selling of worn-out, 25; 
comparison of horses and, 
31 n.; care of hoofs of, 45; 
treatment of sick, 46; num- 
ber of, suitable for a farm, 
II4-II5; qualities of, to be 
considered, 1 16; breaking of, 
117; respect in which held 
by ancient Romans, 227. 



Palladius, 4-5; quoted, 29 n.; 
Gai"' 



on the Gallic harvester, 



Palma, palm, 132-133. 
Partridges, 320. 



[36: 



Pastures, care of, 43 ; vs. arable 

land, 84-85. 
Pate de foie eras, known 

and prized by Romans, 

318 n. 
Peacocks, discussion of, 297- 

Perfumes among the Romans, 
332 n. 

Persius, cited, 225 °- 

Petrarch, on Varro, 6; on 
the loss of Varro's books, 
52 n. 

Philippus, L. Marcius, 286. 

Pigeon bouses, 300-301. 

Pigeons, manure of, 151; kinds 
and care of, 299-305. 

Pigs, weanling, called "sa- 
cred," 193. 

Planting, 43; field crops, IM- 
123; olives, 123-125; vines, 
125; time of, 141-153. 

Plants, four methods of prop- 
agating, 141— 142; trans- 
planting, 144; cuttage, 144; 
graftage, 145, 147-148; in- 
arching, 146; time for using 
different methods of propa- 
gation, 146-148; mechanical 
action of, 155. 

Plautus, Menachmi of, 193 n.; 
quoted, 221. 

Plautius, 228. 

Pleasure as a main purpose of 
agriculture, 73. 

Pliny, 4; quoted, 22 n., 29 n., 
217 n., 349 n.; use of marl 
as manure noted by, 83 n.; 
I] 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



on the Gallic harvester, 
158 a.; cited, 179 n., 190 n., 
237 Q-, 253 n-, 266, 313 n., 
317 n., 321, 337 n., 348 n. 

Pliny the Younger, study in 
garden of, 292 n. 

Ploughing, importance of 
thorough, 38, 127 a.; of 
rotten land, 38-39. 

Plough land, as distinguished 
from com land, 13a 

Polecats, 319. 

Pollio, Asinius, library at 
Rome founded by, 7 n. 

Polybiua, quoted, 223 n. 

Pome fruits, storing, 169- 

Pomegranates, preserving, 

1 70-171. 
Poultry, kinds, feeding, and 

care of, 306-315. 
Poultry houses, 283, 285, 308- 

309, 316-37. 319- 
Protection of nurseries and 

meadows, 155-156. 
Prothero, quoted, 198 n. 
Punning, Varro *s use of, 54 n., 

329n- 
Pythagoras, 183. 

Q 

Quail, houBes for keeping, 288; 
migrations of, 290. 

Queen bees, recency of knowl- 
edge about, 333 a. 

Quinces, storing, 169. 

Quint ilia n, on Varro, 6. 



[36'] 



Rabbits, warrens for, 283, 285, 
321-322; breeding and feed- 
ing of, 322-323; derivation 
of Latin name for, 323. 

Racking wine, 173. 

Reate, asses from, 234, 246. 

Recipes, 48-50. 

Rerum Rwttcarum of Varro, 
6, 9 ff.; Virgil's indebted- 
ness to, 10 ff. 

Rest room for farm hands, 96. 

Ridgeway, quoted, 192 n.; 
on markings of horses, 239 n. 

Ridging land, custom of, 130. 

Rogers, Thorold, quoted, 55 n. 

Roman fever, 94 n. 

Rome, insecurity of life in 
ancient, 176 n. 

Rosea, drainage of, by arti- 
ficial canals, 274 n. 

Roseau breed of horses, 239, 
240 a. 

Rotten land, precautions re- 
garding, 38. 



Sacred pigs, 193, 221. 

Salad, olive, 48. 

Salt, allowance of, for farm 
hands, 37. 

Saltui, defined, 93. 

Salutations, Greek, as used 
by Romans, 225 u. 

Saserna, as a writer on agri- 
culture, 69-71; quoted, 105; 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



on number of farm hands 
necessary, no-ill; on se- 
curing allegiance of dogs, 
450-251. 

Sausages, 218. 

Scab among sheep and cattle, 

Scratches in horses, remedy 

for, 46 n. 
Scratching pen for hens, 309 n. 
Scripulum, defined, 92. 
Scrofa, Tremelius, 63 n.; origin 

of name, 213. 
Sea birds, manure of, 140-141. 
Seasons, agricultural, 126-129. 
Seed, selection of, 142-143. 
Seed bed, preparing the, 38- 

Sellar, cited, 10. 

Seneca^ on Virgil's farming, 13. 

Sejttrttus, value of the, 280 n. 

Sheep, value of, for their 
manure, 41, 115-116, 141; 
buying of, 198-200; feeding, 
breeding, and care of, 200- 
207; shearing of, 264-266. 

Sheep dogs, 247-254. 

Shepherds, distinguished from 
farmers, 178—180; number 
and kind of, requisite, 255, 
261-262; purchase of slaves 
for, 256-257; life of, 257- 
261. 

Sicilian honey, 278. 

Silos, 168, 172. 

Size of farm, 27. 

Slaves, selling of old and sick, 
25; importance of food to 



[363] 



contentment of, 34; selec- 
tion of, for farm hands, 108; 
number of, for operating a 
farm, 1 10-114; buying, to 
act as shepherds, 256-257. 

Snails, recipe for preparing 
cooked, 325 n.; method of 
keeping in enclosures, 325- 
326; varieties of, 327; fatten- 
ing of, 327. 

Snakebite, remedy for, 46. 

Soil, improvement of, 41-42; 
effect of character of, on 
agriculture, 82-85; different 
kinds of, 88-91; fining the, 
132. 

Solar measure of year, 126 ff. 

Solomon, quotation on plough- 
ing from, 126 n. 

Sour land, treatment of, 
84 n. 

Sowing, period for, 135-136. 

Spring ploughing, 126-148. 

Squabs, 303-304. 

Stables for live stock, 44. 

Steading, building a, 93-99; 
husbandry of the, 469 a.; 
development of the indus- 
tries of the, 283-286. 

Stamen, etymology of, 161. 

Stocking a farm, 31-32. 

Storing crops, 167-171. 

Strabo, inventor of aviaries, 
291; cited, 325 n. 

Straw, derivation of word, 
161. 

Swine, selecting, feeding, 
breeding, etc., 212-245. 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



Tarquinii, ancient Etruscan 

city, 321. 
Taylor, John, Araior by, 

quoted, 32 n. 
Teals, 320. 
Teeth, telling age of animals 

by the, 238. 
Terra, different senses of word, 

88-90. 
Thales of Miletus, 183. 
Thebes, derivation of name, 

271. 
Theophrastus, works by, 76- 

77; cited, 122 n., 143, 144; 

quoted, 126 n.; on honey of 

Corsica, 278 n. 
Thessalian horses, 239. 
Thinning vines, 132. 
Threshing, 162-163. 
Threshing floor, the, 161-162. 
Thrushes, profits from, 280; 

houses for keeping, 288—290, 
Tillage, advice on, 139-140. 
Time, standards of, 126-129; 

the Roman week, 177 n. 
Tools, fanning, 1 18-120. 
Toulouse, production of pate 

de foie gras in, 318 n. 
Transplanting, 144. 
Transportation, importance of 

ease of, 105. 
Trellises in vineyards, 86. 
Trumpet, training hogs to 

obey sound of, 223; as- 
sembling wild boars and 

roebucks by the, 324. 



[364] 



Tull, Jethro, 114 n., 128 n. 

Turkeys, fattening, 314 n.; 
effect of introduction into 
Europe, on geese, 315 n. 

Turtle doves, housing and care 
of, 305-306. 



Varro, Marcus Terentius, 4, 
6 ff.; the Rtrum Rusticarum 
of, 6, 9 ff.; works of, besides 
Return Rusticarum, 9; activi- 
ties of, in war against pi- 
rates, 180 n.; estate and 
museum of, 291, 292 n. 

Vegetable gardens, 30. 

Versus, the, defined, 92. 

Vetch, derivation of name, 

'M: . 

Veterinary science of ancient 

Romans, 47, 194. 
Villa, discussion of the Roman, 

273-282. 
Vines, for marking farm 

boundaries, 102; advice on 

planting, 125; thinning, 132. 
Vineyards, the maintenance 

of, 85-88; implements for, 

1 19-120. 
Vintage, work of the, 164- 

165. 
Virgil, 4; indebtedness of, to 

Varro, 10 ff.; formula for 

testing sour land by, 84 n.; 

advice on ploughing, 127 n.; 

cited, 222 n.; on colours of 

horses, 239 n. 



1 by Google 



INDEX 



Vitruvius, quoted on Cyr- 
rhestes' Tower of the Winds, 
29611. 

W 

Walnut trees, effect of, on 
surrounding land, 106. 

Walter of Henley, 31 n.; quot- 
ed, 74 n., in n., 130 n.; 
on use of marl as manure, 
83 n. 

Warrens, defined, 283, 285, 
321. 

Watch doge, 116, 118. 

Water for cattle, 45. 

Water supply for a steading, 

Weaning, of young cattle, 193 ; 

of lambs, 206. 
Weanling pigs, 193- 
Week, the Roman, 177 n. 
Wheat, seeding, 151; yields of, 

151 n.; structure of plant, 

156-157; harvesting of, 158. 
Wild asses, 235. 
Wild boars, keeping of, in 

game preserves, 324. 
Wtnd, impregnating of mares 

by the, 192. 
Wind breaks for olive orchards, 

124. 
Wine, cabbage as an offset to 

effects of, 3$ n., 72; allow- 
3r 



ances of, for farm hands, 37; 

yields of, in ancient Italy, 

61; racking, 173; used in 

cramming fowls, 314. 
Winnowing, 163. 
Winnowing basket, use of, for 

a cradle, 163 n. 
Winter ploughing, 126 n. 
Wood pigeons, cramming and 

fattening, 315. 
Wool, shearing sheep for, 264- 

265. 



Xenophon, as a writer on 
agriculture, 4; quoted, 21 n., 
29 n. 



Year, solar measure of the, 
126-128. 

Young, Arthur, 22 n.; inscrip- 
tion on tombstone of wife, 
83; fences recommended by, 
101 n. ; on necessary number 
of farm labourers, m n. 



Zenoof Citium, 183. 
Zodiacal signs, honour paid to 
cattle in, 185-186. 



[365] 



1 by Google 



J¥ Google 



i by Google 



i by Google 



i by Google 



GLNERAL LIBRAKV 



> S t zed by GoOglC 



i by Google 



i by Google
