UFOs and Related Subjects: An Annotated Bibliography (Lynn E. Catoe, 1969)
Lynn E. Catoe, Library of Congress Science and Technology Division, for USAF Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR 68-1656), 1969

US Government work — public domain. The standard USAF-commissioned annotated UFO bibliography: thousands of entries covering books, articles, and reports. Complete (417 pages).
Transcription source: Defense Technical Information Center (AD0688332) via the Black Vault

================================================================

magnitude better than that calculated for the tun by Schwartz and Townes.

     Cameron, A. G. W., ed. Interstellar commu'iication. New York, W. A.
        Benjamin, Inc., 1963. 320 p.



                                            271
    Publication contains monographs and reprints on specialized aspects of inter-
    stellar communication with critical commentary.

   -- Stellar life zones. In Cameron, A. G. W., ed. Interstellar communication.
    New York, W. A. Benjamin, Inc. 1963. p. 107-110.
    Conclusion is reached that all single stars in space (except those with very low
    heavy-element contents) have a life zone containing an average of about 1.4
    planets of undetermined size.

Cocconi, Guiseppe and Philip Morrison. Searching for interstellar communications.
    Nature, v. 184, Sept. 19, 1959: 844-846.
    Speculates on optimum channel that might be used by an intelligent extrater-
    restrial civilization to contact earth. Concludes that the most promising radio
    emission line to search for would be at 1420 Mc/s (v 21cm) of neutral hydrogen.

Creighton, Gordon W. What the Soviets are saying. Flying saucer review, v. 10,
    Sept.-Oct. 1964: 26.
    Summary of articles in Soviet press 1960-1964 about probable existence of ex-
    traterrestrial civilizations and possible means of communicating with them.

Crenshaw, James. What can we expect of "civilization" in outer space? Fate,
    v. 20, Jan. 1967: 79-89.
    Thought-provoking views on what may happen when and if earth's scientists put
    us in contact with an outer-space civilization superior, inferior, or equivalent
    to ours.

Ja Silva, Renato I. No espaco nao estamos sos.     Öao Paulo, Edart, 1966. 213 p.

    Theories relating to possibility of life on the moon and other planets are sum-
    marized. Parapsychological phenomena of mental telepathy, precognition,
    ESP, premonition, and astral projection are discussed as they might relate to
    contact with extraterrestrial entities or intelligences.

Drake, Frank D. Intelligent life in space. New York, Macmillan, 1962. 128 p.
    Summary of facts that seem to indicate existence of many civilizations in space
    and discussion of ways in which men on earth might contact such civilizations.

   -- Project Ozma. Jn Cameron, A. G. W. Interstellar communication. New
    Yo-.k, W. A. Benjamin, Inc., 1963. p. 176-177.

    First systematic, high sensitivity search for manifestations of extraterrestrial
    intelligent life are described. Tau Ceti and Epsilon Eridani were chosen as
    subjects because they are the nearest single sunlike stars observable from tele-
    scope site. Preliminarv observations uncovered no signals of extraterres-
    trial origin, but radar frequencies still appear to offer the greatest hope for
    success in the search.


                                     272
Drake, Frank D. Project Ozma. Physics today, v. 14, Apr. 1961: 40-46.
    Theory of the origin of life is given and possibilities of contact with intelligent
    extraterrestrial life discussed. Author hypothesizes that frequencies near
    1420.405 Mc/sec may be used by an extraterrestrial civilization attempting to
    signal earth.

      Radio emission from the planets. Physics today, v. 14, Apr. 1961: 30-34.
    Predictions based on optical infrared studies of Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and
    Saturn are compared with radio emission data. Biological significance of in-
    frared surface conditions--based on radio emission data--is assessed.

   -- The radio search for intelligent extraterrestrial life. Jn Mamikunian, Gregg
    and M. H. Briggs. Current aspects of exobiology. Pasadena.. Calif., Jet Pro-
    pulsion Laboratory, 1965. p. 323-345.
    It is concluded that microwave radio signals are the most common means of in-
    terstellar communication; that terrestrial technology is capable of carrying on
    a successful search for signals but that the project, if it is to cope with all the
    reasonable possibilities, must be one of very great expense, complexity, and
    duration. It is also suggested that there are many other possible ways in which
    manifestation of intelligent life might be found, but at present few, if any, ap-
    pear to offer enough hope of success to justify their active pursuit.

Dreyer, H. R. The man who knows the languages of the stars. Fate, v. 12, Aug.
    1959: 78-79.

    An inmate in a psychiatric institute in Prague, Czechoslovakia, believes he is
    in continual contact with other planets and records their speech in fine detail.

Dye, Clarkson. Radio to other worlds. Fate, v. 8, Mar. 1955: 88-96.
    Account of the experiments of David Henry Wilson (London, England, circa
    1915) with a specially-constructed wireless set and of messages he received
    from entities that were not inhabitants of earth.

Dyson, F. J. Search for artificial stellar sources of infrared radiation. Science,
    v. 131, June 3, 1960: 1667.

    If extraterrestrial intelligent beings exist and have reached a high level of tech-
    nical development, one by-product of their energy metabolism is likely to be the
    large-scale conversions of star-light into infrared radiation. It is proposed
    that a search for sources of infrared radiation should accompany the search for
    intcrsteUar communications.

Flammarion, Camille, Inter-astral communication, American review of reviews,
    v, 5, Feb. 1892: 90.

Fuller, Curtis. Porpoise research: exploring an alien iiitelligence. Fate. v. 16,
    Nov. 1963: 52-60.


                                       273
    Scientists have been investigating the porpoise as the representative ot an alien
    intelligence, seeking to communicate with it, seeking to understand what alien
    intelligence can be like. The porpoise's deeply convoluted brain is larger than
    man's.

Golay, M. J. E. Coherence in interstellar signals. IRE Proceedings, v. 49, 1961:
    958-959.
    It is stated it would appear there are four likely spectral regions within which
    a search should be made for coherent signals before any intelligent messages
    can be received: at half or at twice the hydrogen frequency, and with or with-
    cat correction for nebular drift. When factors such as easier power genera-
    tion and greater space coverage are considered, the two half-frequency regions
    appear more favorable.

     Note on the probable character of intelligent radio signals from other plane-
    tary systems. In Proceedings of the IRE, v. 49, May 1961: 959.
    Discussed are the spectral location and the character of raäio signals that might
    be aimed at the earth from other planets of other solar systems.

Golomb, Solomon W. Extraterrestrial linguistics. Astronautics, v. 6, May 1961:
    46-47, 96.
    Author discusses what space travelers from earth might say--if they can find
    a way to say it--to alien intelligent beings they might discover in ihe universe.

Handelsman, M. Considerations on communication with intelligent life in outer
   space. In Wescon convention record. Proceedings, v. 6, pt. 5; 1962. Los
   Angeles, Wescon, 1962. 15 p. (Paper no. 4.4.)
    Estimate of the probability of communication with intelligence in outer spate is
    beset with many unknown factors, the author postulates. Sifting through these,
    the probability that a ccmaumicating civilization has existed at some time is
    assigned a value of between 2 X 10~2 and 10'^ for any star. To receive a sig-
    nal from at least one civilizatioii within 1,000 light years, it is estimated that
    examination of some 2 X 10^ likely stars in a field of about 10^ stars is re-
    quired, a longevity of 50,000 years, and no previous intercommunication. The
    recommended < gnal to search for is a high-intensity, narrow-band transmis-
    sion at or near the 21 cm, hydrogen frequency.


Hicks, Clifford B. We're listening for other worlds. Popular mechanics, v. 114,
     Sept. 1960: 81-85.

Huang, Su-Shu. Problems of transmission in interstellar communication. In
    Cameron, A. G. W., ed. Interstellar communication. New York, W. A.
    Benjamin, Inc., 1963. p. 201-206.

    It is stated that beings who are transmitting signals to other worlds, in order
    to increase their changes of contacting civilizations in other worlds, must di-
    vide the antenna time and beam the signals successively to all stars which are



                                      274
        within reach and which are believed to be able to support life of an advanced
        form. Since our present technology is perhaps inferior to that of others who
        can communicate with us, it is suggested that our ti:r smitting station be used
        solely, at least for the next hundred years or so, for responding to intelligent
        messages from outer space that have been detected.

    Jackson, CD. and R. E. Hohmann. An historic report on life in space. New Yorl^
        American Rocket Society, 1962. 7 p. (ARS Paper no. 2730-62)
        Investigations and experimental data of Nikola Tesla, Guglielmo Marconi, and
        Dc:vid Todd are presented. During the years 1899-1924 these experimental
        scientists, working independently of each other, observed laboratory dai.i and
        related phenomena which suggested they were monitoring interplanetary com-
        munications. During the same period, the Russian theorist Konstantin
        Tsiolkovsky deduced a model of an intelligence existing independently of ter-
        restrial influence. Data are first brought together in an historical model (1899-
        1924) and then are shown to be the natural complement of a current theoretical
        model (1959-1962).


    Krasovskiy, lu. Astronautics and extraterrestrial civilizations. Flying saucer re-
        view, v. 7, Sept.-Oct. 1961: 3-5.

        Author discusses earth's objectives in the conquest of extraterrestrial space;
        possibility of life in other worlds; possibility of communicating with extrater-
        restrial civilizations; and the possibility of receiving intelligent signals from
        other worlds.

    Lamb, Peter. Pictures from outer space. Spacelink, v. 4, Summer 1967: 13-17.
        Details are given of what may have been the first recorded reception of picture
        transmission between planets.


    McClain, Edward F. The 600-foot radio telescope. Scientific American, v. 202,
       Jan. 1960: 45-51,

        The "/Grid's largest steerable telescope, under construction near Sugar Grove,
        W. Va., provides power to gather radio waves and resolve celestial radio
        sources.

    Miles, Max B. Scientists track space radio signals. Fate, v. 12, June 1959: 57-
        58.

        Mysterious radio signals vvhose absence of Doppler effect indicated travel away
        from the earth were monitored on frequencies of 20 and 40 megacycles for three
        hours in late November, 1958, from an Air Force Missile Test Center instal-
        lation at Cape Canaveral.

    Miller, E. Conrad and J. L. Smith. Some considerations regarding the possibility
        of contact with intelligent extraterrestrial beings. BUFORA journal and bul-
        letin, v. 1, Winter 1964: 4-7.


                                           275


i
    Article states it is possible that contact will be made in the relatively near fu-
    ture with extraterrestrial intelligences and that this contact may occur as a
    ship to ship meeting in Interplanetary space. Earth's crews should be briefed
    to take nc possible action that could be deemed hostile and to take defensive
    measures only in the last resort for self-preservation. An effort should be
    made to determine whether it is possible to develop messages suitable for ini-
    tial contact with an alien intelligence.

Mysterious broadcast from space ship? Flying saucers, Feb. 1959: 35-37, 46.
    A mysterious broadcast was allegedly received on Aug. 3, 1958, on 75 meter
    international band in which the voice of a man said he "'as "Necoma" from the
    planet Jupiter and was broadcasting from a space ship 50,000 miles from earth.
    Incident was reported in a southeast U. S. newspaper.

TTie mystery of other worlds revealed. Greenwich, Conn., Fawcett Publications,
     1952. 144 p.
    Chapter headings include: life on other worlds; communication with other
    worlds; the expanding universe; possibilities for an invasion base on the moon:
    a case for flying saucers; investigation of the Carolina saucer; are the flying
    saucers Russian owrned?

Oakley, C. O. Math, our link with space people. Science digest, v. 49, June 1961:
    7-13.

Oberth, Hermann. Katechismus der Uranidem. Wiesbaden-Schierstoin, Ventla-
    Verlag, 1966. 160 p.
    Communication with an extraterrestrial being through a psychic medium has
    caused Oberth to adopt th?s view: there is a soul which outlives the body; this
    world serves as a training-ground for the soul; the soul will continue life (on
    u planet where conditions are in keeping with its degree of development) after
    death.


Pascalis, Bernardino. Werkelijkheid of fantasie? Panorama, Feb. 21-27, 1967:
    31-38.

    Feature article en UFO reports in which there was alleged communication with
    the occupants or crew of the objects.

Pearman, J. P. T. Extrcterrestrial intelligent life and interstellar communication:
    an informal discussion. In Cameron, A. G, W., ed. Interstellar communica-
    tion. New York, W. A. Benjamin, Inc., 1963. p. 287-293.

    From consideration of the prospers for existence of other societies in our
    galaxy and the problems involved in establishing communication with them, it
    is concluded that, if the more optimistic values of communicative lifetime are
    chosen, the number of civilizations becomes 10^ to 10^ and the distance of the
    nearest civilization is estimated at ten to a few hundred light-years.


                                       276
                                                                                         r

Pelley, William D. Earth comes.. .design for materialization. Indianapolis,
     Fellowship Press, 1941. 303 p.

    Author postulates that '^residing spirits" were obstructed in their work of pro-
    jecting a perfect earth by ''mischievous spirits"; this accounts for the apparent
    dissimilarity in peoples, inadvertent cataclysms, interrupted or capricious
    harvests, and intermittent phenomena tending to displace terrain and change
    polar rotations. "Great Ministering Overlords" were appointed to minister the
    world and are doing so at this moment.

   -- Star guests... design for mortality. Nobleville, Ind., Soulc raft Press, 1950.
    318 p.

    Description of experiments in clairaudient writing and psychical contact with
    beings "of the more harmonious planes.. .above the planes of earth. "

Pi in the sky. Newsweek, v. 67, Apr. 4, 1966: 22, 27.
    Details of UFO sightings in the area around Ann Arbor, xMich,, during late
    March 1966. One night a University of Michigan scientist blinked the "pi"
    equation in code, explaining that this could be understood by extraterrestrial
    creatures.

Pierce, J. R. and C. C, Cutler. Interplanetary communications. In Advances in
    space science, v. 1. Edited by Frederick I. Ordway, III. New York and
    London, Academic Press, 1959. p. 55-109.
                                                                                         %   a
    Suggests that a simple space probe, radiating a watt of RF power, could trans-
    mit about 3 bits/sec per watt of information when Mars comes within 50 X 10°
    miles of earth. This minimal probe would be capable of transmitting 65,000
    bits/sec from the moon, wluch is enough for high quality speech.

Posin, Daniel O. Life beyond our planet. New York, MacGraw-Hill, 1962. 128 p.
    Non-technical discussion of planets of our solar system, consideration of
    whether life or any kind exists on them, and discussion of ways of communi-
    cating with these or planets of other solar systems.

Price, George R. U.S. begins search for beings in other worlds. Popular science,
    v. 176, Apr. 1960: 66-69, 209.
    Detailed description is given of Project Ozma--U. S. attempt to establish radio
    contact with extraterrestrial civilizations. Scientific justification for the pro-
    ject is reviewed.

Purcell, E. Radioastronomy and communication through space. In Cameron,
    A. G. W., ed.. Interstellar communication. New York, W. A. Benjamin, Inc.,
    1963. 1?M43.


                                     277
I
            Contributions to knowledge of distant grüaxies by radioastronomy are reviewed
            and followed by a discussion of modes of travel beyond the solar system. After
            postulating there are other habitable non-solar planets, author discusses trans-
            mission of coded messages and the analysis of messages received, and suggests
            that a sequence of prime numbers be both sent and listened for over the period
            of centuries, not fiscal years.

        Reeve, Bryant. TIJU advent of the cosmic viewpoint. Amherst, Wis., Amherst
            Press, 1967. 256 p.
            Postulating that earth's traditional cosmic isolationism is ending, the author
            discusses the implications of changes that are portended. He speculates on
            the effect that the landing of • xtraterrestrial spacecraft will have on man's
            concept of reality, his civilization, institutions, way of life, and manner of
            thinking and acting.

        Revelle, R. Sailing in new and old oceans. A. I. B. S. Bulletin, v. 12, Oct. 1962:
            45-47.
            If modern theories about the formation of stars are correct, probably the great
            majority of stars have planets around them. On at least some of these, life
            may have evolved in a benpficent realm of light and liquid water and in an at-
            mosphere of oxygen and nitrogen to a level as high and perhaps much higher,
            than the highest life Known on earth. Communication with intelligent beings
            of planets of other stars would be almost impossible because of the distance
            involved.

        Richards, Sam. Seme philosophical implications of UFOs. Spacelink, v. 4, Sum-
    !       mer 1957: 4-11.
    i
            It is pointed out that once we can comprehend and admit that there couid be an
            intelligence superior to our own, it requires very little furtlier thought to ap-
            preciate the difficulty of communication. Of the various types of apparently
            extraterrestrial beings visiting earth, it could be significant that they appear
            not only incapable of contact with us but there is no evidence of their contact-
            ing each other.

        Rodgers, Philip. Spacemen speaking. Flying saucer review, v. 4, Sept.-Oct. 1958:
    i       20-21.
            Author gives details of sounds and voices that he has recorded on tape and be-
            lieves to be extraterrestrial.

        Rosenberg, Paul. Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence. Aerospace
            engineering, v. 21, Aug. 1962: 63-69, HI.
            Author states that prevailing cosmological theory and laboratory experiments
            support the hypothesis that life exists outside earth's solar system. Electro-
            magnetic signaling seems to be the only moans now at our disposal for attempt-
            ing to communicate with any extraterrestrial intelligence that may exist. Meth-
            ods for communicating and receiving such signals, and speculation as to the
            type of message an extraterrestrial might transmit are reviewed.



                                              278
Rowe, Kelvin. A call at dawn. El Monte, Calif., Understanding Publishing Co.,
   1958. 198 p.
    Author expounds ideas and principles allegedly transmitted to him telepathically
    by beings from the planets Pluto and Jupiter and describes his trip into outer
    space in a flying saucer.

Sanford, Ray. Contact with a flying saucer. Fate, v. 9, May 1956: 12-18.
    An experiment on Nov. 6, 1954, to contact a flying saucer through mental con-
    centration allegedly succeeds.

Saunders, Alex. Alien life contemplation. Flying saucers, Oct. 1966: 21-22.
    Speculates on the possibility of sentient life on other planets and on the impli-
    cations for man of contact with such beings.

Schwartz, R. N. and C. H. Townes. Interstellar and interplanetary communication
    by optical masers. Nature, v. 190, Apr. 15, 1961: 205-208.
    Possibility is examined of broadcasting an optical beam from a planet associ-
    ated with a star some few or some tens of light-years away at sufficient power
    levels to establish communications with earth.

Shklovskii, losef S. and Carl Sagan. Intelligent life in the universe. Authorized
    translation by Paula Fern. San Francisco, Holden-Day, 1966. 509 p.
    Extension and revision by Sagan of Shklovskii's Vselennala, zhizn', razum
    [Universe, Life, Mind] (Moscow, 1963). Tu^udes study of earth's solar sys-
    tem, discussion of nature of life and its possible occurrence on other planets,
    treatment of possibility that advanced communicative technical civilizations
    exist on planets of other stars, and discussion of problems in establishing con-
    tact with civilizations separated from earth by interstellar distances.

Smith, Bernard. People from outer space contact earth man by radio. Flying
    saucer review, v. 4, July-Aug. 1958: 28-29.
    Report that voices and sounds from either extraterrestrial spacecraft or beings
    have been recorded on tape by blind musician.

That prospective communication with another planet. Current opinion, v. 66, Mar.
    1919: 170-171.

Three undiscovered planets. Los Angeles, DeVorss & Co., 1967. 15 p.
    Telepathic communication from pjanets supposedly on the etheric plane is
    transmitted by their alleged rulers. Peace and love are postulated to be
    earth's most urgent needs.


                                       279
   Von Hoerner, Sebastian. The general limits of space travel. Science, v. 137,
       July 6, 1962: 18-23.
       It is postulated that space travel, even in the most distant future, will be con-
       fined to our own planetary system; a similar conclusion is said to apply to any
       other civilization, no matter how advanced it may be. The only means of com-
       munication between different civilizations thus seems to be electromagnetic
       signals.

       -- The search for signals from other civilizations. Science, v. 134, Dec. 8,
        1961: 1839-1843.
       The search for extraterrestrial signals from an intelligent source should be
       guided by two estimates, one of the probable nature of such signals and the
       other of the distance from which they might come. Three different types of
       signals are considered: local broadcast, long-distance cal?s, and contacting
       signals. The nature of the signals will be defined entirely by the purpose they
       serve and by the most economical way to achieve this purpose. Several sets
       of conclusions are drawn as to the type of civilizations sending signals, the
       longevity of a technical civilization, and the nature of signals transmitted.

   Wickland, Carl A. Thirty years among the dead. Los Angeles, National Psycholog-
       ical Institute, 1924. 390 p.
       Report on psychical research demonstrating intermingling and intercommunica-
       tion between the spiritual (invisible) and physical (visible) worlds.

   Whittington, George. What's true about the disc? The journal of spaceflight and
       the rocket news letter, Apr. 1950: 2-5.
        Author speculates on whether U. S. armed forces have succeeded in contacting
        UFO crew members and whether representatives of U. S. armed forces and/or
        the State Department are now in communication with extraterrestrial beings.

    Williamson, George Hunt and Alfred C. Bailey. The saucers speak. Los Angeles,
         New Age Pub. Co., 1954. 127 p.
        Documentary report of communication by radiotelegraphy between August 1962
        and mid-1953 with extraterrestrial spacecraft in earth's atmosphere.


IMPLICATIONS


    Barton, Michel X. Flving saucer revelations. Los Angeles, Futura Press, 1957.
        38 p.
        Discusses role of interplanetary beings in man's origin and evolution. Consid-
        ers stories of contact between extraterrestrials and earth men and implications.
        Reports on flying saucer sighting at Giant Rock Airport, Yucca Valley, Calif.,
        on Mar. 12, 1955, during Interplanetary Spacecraft Convention.



                                          280
Brookings Institution. Proposes studies on the implications of peaceful space activ-
    ities. Washington, D. C, U.S. Govt. Print. Off,, 1961, 272 p. (37th Cong.j
    J^tSess. House. Report no. 242)
    "The implications of a discovery of extraterrestrial life, " p. 215-216, warns
    that the discovery of intelligent life in the universe could have profound con-
    sequences for earth attitudes and values. It is pointed out that many societies
    have disintegrated when they had to associate with previously unfamiliar soci-
    eties espousing different ideas and different ways of life; others that survived
    such an experience usually did so by paying the price of changes in values and
    attitudes, and behavior. Continuing studies are recommended to determine
    emotional and intellectual understanding, and attitudes -- and successive alter-
    rations of them if any -- regarding the possibility and consequences of discover-
    ing intelligent extraterrestrial life. The report was prepared for the National
    Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Cade, C. Maxwell. Other worlds than ours. London, Museum Press, 1966. 248p.
    Consideration of possibility and implications of other worlds in space and other
    worlds in time.

Carrouges, Michel. Les apparitions de martiens. Paris, Fayard, 1963. 275 p.
    Study of UFO sightings reported during September-October 1954 as a sociolog-
    ical phenomenon.


Cleary-Baker, John, The significance of the UFO era. BUFORA journal and bul-
    letin, v. 1, Autumn 1966: 9-10.
    Discussion of the implications of alien visitation in human affairs.

Crenshaw, James. What can we expect of "civilization" in outer sapce? Fate,
    v. 20, Jan. 1967: 79-89.
    Thought-provoking views on what may happen when and if earth's scientists put
    us in contact with an outer-space civilization superior, inferior, or equivalent
    to ours.

Danger from the stars: a warning from the Space Administration. Flying saucer
    review, v. 7, Man-June 1961: 7.

    Article summarizes report prepared by Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.,
    in 1961 for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on ramifications
    of discovery of intelligent life on other planets.

Drake, W. R. Man on the threshold of space. Flying saucer review, v. 6, Nov. -
    Dec. 1960: 22-24.

    The author considers the prospects that await man as he prepares to travel to
    other planets.


                                      281
   Fuller, B. A. G. Flying saucers. The journal of philosophy, v. 49, Aug. 14, 1952:
        545-559.
       Postulating that intelligent life exists in forms quite different from ours and is
       dispersed throughout the universe, the author speculates on proceedings of a
       "cosmic Congress" including all kinds of "Saucerians". Delegates of every
       imaginable aspect--"not to speak of others defying terrestrial biological clas-
       sification"--would compare their religious, moral, social, economic, and po-
       litical ways of life. He expresses hope that once the myth of a superior race
       was exploded, constants would appear in the various ways of life and points of
       view and all planetary thinking would become interplanetary in scope and scale.

   Miller, E. Conrad and J. L. Smith. Some considerations regarding the possibility
       of contact with intelligent extraterrestrial beings. BUFOP.A journal and bulletin
       v. 1, Winter 1964: 4-7.
       Article states it is possible that contact will be made in the relatively near fu-
       ture with extraterrestrial intelligences and that this contact may occur as a
       ship to ship meeting in interplanetary space. Earth's crews should be briefed
       to take no possible action that could be deemed hostile and to take defensive
       measures only in tho last resort for self-preservation. An effort should be
       made to determine whether it is possible to develop messages suitable for ini-
       tial contact with an alien intelligence.

   Reeve, Bryant. The advent of the cosmic viewpoint. Amherst, Wis., Amherst
       Press, 1967. 256 p.

       Postulating that earth's traditional cosmic isolationism is ending, the author
       discusses the implications of changes that are portended. He speculates on the
       effect that the landing of extraterrestrial spacecraft will have on man's concept
       of reality, his civilization, institutions, way of life, and manner of thinking and
       acting.


   Richards, Sam. Some philosophical implications of UFOs. Spacelink, v. 4, Sum-
       mer 1967: 4-11.

       It is pointed out that once we can comprehend and admit that there could be an
       intelligence superior to our own, it requires very little further thought to ap-
       preciate the difficulty of communication. Of the various types of apparently
       extraterrestrial beings visiting earth, it could be significant that they appear
       not only incapable of contact with us but there is no evidence of their contact-
       ing each other.



INTELLIGENCE


   Aharon, Y. N. ibn. The recent literature of extraterrestrialism. Saucer news,
       v. 12, Mar. 1965: 11-12.

       Evaluates works on extraterrestrialism by Desmond Leslie and Dr. M. K.
       Jessup.


                                         282
r



    Ascher, Robert and Marcia Ascher. Interstellar communication and human evolu-
        tion. Nature, v. 193, Mar. 10, 1962: 940-941.
        The authors postulate that the » otential of a search for signals from other civi-
        lizations is largely dependent on the adequacy of guesses about the probability
        of the existence of extraterrestrial technical civilizations, the probable stage
        of development of a civilization which we might contact, the longevity of attempts
        at contact following success or failure, and the result of possible contact and
        exchange. Article indicates steps in increasing the reasonableness of the
        guesses.

    Asimov, Isaac. Is anyone there? Garden City, N. Y., Doubleday & Co., 1967.
        320 p.
        Collection of articles on science, speculation and science fiction that have ap-
        peared in popular magazines. The probability of intelligent life on worlds
        other than ours is the general theme.

    Berrill, Norman John. Worlds without end: a reflection on planets, life, and time.
        New York, Macmillan, 1964. 240 p.
        Speculative investigation of possibilities of life on other planets: nearest and
        best-known planets are compared with earth; hypothetical planets similar to
        earth but with one or another feature altered in some manner are examined in
        order to predict how familiar living things might be affected; liie on earth is
        evaluated to determine which characteristics may be regarded as universal un-
        der certain circumstances and which are special; and imaginative efforts of
        speculative writers to conceive and describe creatures different from those
        known to us on earth are presented.

    Bieri, Robert. Humanoids on other planets? American scientist, v. 52, Dec. 1964:
        542-458.

        Arguments are presented to support the view that if life has evolved on other
        planets in other solar systems and if some population has reached the level of
        conceptual thought, it is highly probable that the organisms so endowed will
        bear a strong resemblance to homo sapiens.

    Bradbury, Ray. A serious search for weird worlds. Life, v. 49, Oct. 24, 1960:
        116-118, 12G, 123-124, 126-128, 130.
        Sketches are shown of strange creatures who may represent what creatures on
        other inhabited planets look like. Explanation is made that although grotesque
        by earth standards, they could develop this way in response to different envi-
        ronments of other worlds. Project Ozma, the radio-telescope search for life
        on other worlds, is discussed.

    Breig, Joseph A. Are there rational beings on planets far away? Avc Maria,
        v. 89, Mar. 7, 1959: 19.

    Brewster, David. More worlds than one. New York, Robert Carter & Bros., 1854.
       265 p.


                                         283
    Autbor defends doctrine of plurality of inhabited worlds by citing current astro-
    r.oii ical discoveries and by analyzing and refuting objections.

Briggs, Michael H. Other astronomers in the universe? Southern stars, v. 18,
    Sept. 1960: 147-151.
    Author considers problems raised by the hypothesis that some cosmic radio
    signals are imelligeutly produced.

       Superior galactic communities. Spaceflight, v. 3, May 1961: 109-110.
    Author suggests that if there are intelligent extraterrestrials on planets in this
    galaxy, they may be scientifically and technologically advanced enough to know
    of both earth and of man as an intelligent life form. Attempt by them to es-
    tablish contact might be by radio transmissions, space probes, and emission
    of radiation in the far infrared.

       Terrestrial and extraterrestrial life. Spaceflight, v. 2, Oct. 1959: 120-121.
    Hypothesis for origin of life on earth is given based on three assumptions: (1)
    intelligent life existed somewhere in t1 ? universe prior to the beginning of life
    on earth; (2) interplanetary flight is possible by these intelligences; and (3) life-
    less earth was visited by extraterrestrials who either deliberately and accident-
    ally left microbes behind when they departed. Variations of and objections to
    hypothesis are given.

Cade, C, Maxwell. Are we alone in space? Discovery, v. 24. Apr. 20, 1863:
    27-29.


   — A long, cool look at alien intelligences: Part I -- the non-uniqueness of man.
    Flying saucer review, v. 13, Mar.-Apr. 1967: 24-25.
    Author states that while there is a high probability for the existence of intelli-
    gences ir other parts of the universe, it does not follow that they must bear
    any resemblance to ourselves. If man is non-unique, it is because he is one
    of many intelligent races, not because he is one of many humanoid, or even
    biological species.

   -- A long, cool look at alien intelligences: Part 11 -- the forms of intelligent
    organisms. Flying saucer review, v. 13, May-June 1967: 13-15, 19.

    Three classes of possible intelligent organism are considered in detail: (1)
    humanoid or non-humanoid biological organisms; (2) mechanical intelligences
    such as self-programming computers; and (3) stable intelligent plasmoids.

      Other worlds than ours. London, Museum Press, 1966. 248 p.
   Consideration of possibility and implications of other worlds in space and
   other worlds in time.


                                      284
Can astronomy ever say positively that other planets are inhabited? Current litera-
    ture, v. 52, Jan. 1912: 64-66.

Chamberlin, Ralph V. Life on other worlds. Bulletin of the University of Utah,
   v. 22, Feb. 1932: 1-52.
    A study in the history of opinion on life in other worlds from 600 B. C. to 1931
    A.D.

Civilization on other planets? U.S. S. R., v. 1, Jan. 1964: 46-47.
    In a series of four articles, V. Fesenkov, I. Shklovskii, A. Pasinskii, and
    B. Liapunov discuss current theories and Soviet research in the field of
    exobiology.

Clarke, Arthur C. '"•le planets are not enough. The Saturday review, v. 38, Nov.
    26, 1955: 11-12, 34-36.
    Postulating that the evidence seems to indicate earthmen are the only thinking
    inhabitants of the solar system, the author speculates on how man could sur-
    vive a journey which may last for several thousand years to the planets of other
    suns.

Cooper, John. Cities in the sky. Science digest, v. 28, Nov 1950: 78-80.

Copland, Alexander. The existence of other worlds, peopled with living and intel-
    ligent beings, deduced from the nature of the universe. London, J. G. & F.
    Rivington, 1834. 210 p.

     Presents reasons for believing the fixed stars and the planets are habitations
    lor living beings. Cites writings of men who have believed in a oluralit/ of in-
    habited worlds and states grounds for their beliefs in their own words.

Coupe, Charles. Are the planets inhabited? American Catholic quarterly, v. 124,
    Oct. 1906: 699-72Ö.

Creighton, Gordon W. What do the Russians know? Flying saucer review, v. 8,
    Jan.-Feb 1962: 20-21.

     Translations from Krasnaya Zvezda, Ekonomich Gazeta, arid Ko^somolskaya
     Pravda expressing Soviet views about possible life beyond the earth.

    -- What the Soviet press is saying. Flying saucer review, v. 7, Nov.-Dec.
     1961: 18-19.

    Translation of article from Krasnaya Zvezda by Vladimir Lvov stating that in-
    telligent and even human life exists in outer space.


                                     285
Creighton, Gordon W. What the Soviets are saying. Flying saucer review, v. 10,
    Sept.-Oct. 1964: 26.
    Summary of articles in Soviet press 1960-1964 about probable existence of ex-
    traterr^rtrial civilizations and possible means of communicating with them.

Crenshaw, James. What can we expect of "civilization" in outer nace? Fate,
    v. 20, Jan. 1967: 79-89.
    Thought-provoking views on what may happen when and if earth's scientists put
    us in contact with an outer-space civilization superior, inferior, or equivalent
    to ours.

Cyr, Guy J. Are there humanoids in space? Flying saucers, Aug. 1967: 12-14.
    Author hypothesizes that the moon's so-called "crust" is actually the filamen-
    tous, closely knitted, microphyllous foliage of various flourishing florae held
    up to the sun for energy and meteoritic fertilizer. This "crust" also serves
    aa a global, protective roof for the super-intelligent sentient beings who live
    under it and who are among the various kinds of extraterrestrials exploring
    our world.

Da Silva, Renato I. No espa^o nao estamos sos. Säo Pa'ilo, Edart, 1966. 213 p.
    Theories relating to possibility of life on the moon and other planets are sum-
    marized. Parapsychological phenomena of mental telepathy, precognition,
    ESP, premonition, and astral projection are discussed as they might relate to
    contact with extraterrestrial entities or intelligences.

Do other humans live? Newsweek, v. 52, Nov. 17, 1958: 56.

Dole, Stephen H. Habitable planets for man. New York, Blaisdeli Publishing Co..
    1962. 158 p.
    Outlines necessary requirements for planets on which human beings as biologi-
    cal species (Homo sapiens) can live, and essential properties required of stars
    that would provide heat and light to such planets. Suggests that probability of
    finding indigenous intelligent life on other habitable planets is remote.

Dole, Stephen and Isaac Asimov. Planets for man. New York, Random House,
    1964. 242 p.

    A less technical presentation of ideas detailed in Habitable Planets for Man by
    Dole. Predicts possible consequences of eventual interstellar trips by man.

Drake, Frank D. Intelligent life in space. New York, Macmillan, 1962. 128 p.
    Summary of facts that seem to indicate existence of many civilizations in space
    and discussion of ways in which men on earth might contact such civilizations.


                                      286
Drake, W. R. Man oa the threshold o*'space. Flying saucer review, v. 6, Nov.-
    Dec. 1960: 22-24.

    The author considers the prospects that await man as he prepares to travel to
    other planets.

   -- Mercury, Jupiter, and others: can life exist ? Flying saucer review, v. 6,
    Sept.-Oct. 1960: 18-22.

    Survey of .fact and speculation on possibility of life on Mercury, Jupiter and
    lesser known bodies in earth's solar system.

Edwards, Frank. Arthur C. Clarke looks at the universe. Fate, v. 12, May 1959:
   68-75.

    Astronomer and science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke expresses his belief
    that intelligent beings unquestionably exist in other parts of the universe and
    might visit our solar system.

Ehrensvard, Gösta C. Man on another world. Chicago and London, University of
    Chicago Press, 1965. 182 p.
    Some common factors o! -fe as a universal phenomenon are suggested, espe-
    cially the expansive oxpression of life that involves a certain degree of aware-
    ness. Translation of Expansion: liv i Universum (Stockhom, Aldus/Bonniers,
    1961).                 '

Eiseley, Loren C. Is man alone in space ? Scientific American, v. 189, July 1953:
     80-82, 84, 86.
    The author, an anthropologist, considers whether--in the light of what we know
    about evolution--another genus Homo may have arisen on a planet similar to
    the earth.

Ewing, Ann. Life in all solar systems? Science newsletter, v. 86, Sept. 26, 1964:
     199.


Fears, Francis R. Silicon and extraterrestrial life forms. Journal of space flight,
    v. 2, Nov. 1950: 5-6.

    A life form based on silicon metabolism which would remotely resemble the
    life on our planet cannot exist under such environmental conditions as are
    found on earth. It might exist in an entirely alien set of circumstances which
    are at present beyond our conception.

Ferber, Adolph C. The secret of human life on other worlds. New York. Pageant
    Press, 1957. 105 p.


                                      287
    Spiritual origin and nature of life are explained, not only on our world but also
    on the other worlds in our solar system. Writings of Emanuel Swedenborg,
    who claimed to have visited the moon and planets of our solar system by astral
    projection, are freely quoted.

Flrsoff, Valdemar A. An ammonia-based life. Discovery, v. 23, Jan. 1963: 36-
    42.
    Development of inorganic polymers which bear a resemblance to organic com-
    pounds but have, wholly or partly, a different chemical oasis has led to specu-
    lations on various alternative life schemes. When liquid ammonia replaces
    water as a universal solvent, ammonoiysis of the analogue compounds in an
    am mono-organic chemistry can replace hydrolysis in the process of digestion.
    The same reaction.«, of chemical degradation which yield energy by oxidation in
    our system would be performed in that of ammonia through the agency of nitro-
    gen. Instead of v/ater and carbon dioxide as final products, ammonia and cyano-
    gen C2N2 which is the ammonia analogue of CO2, would be produced. Equiva-
    lent organic compounds in a nitrogen-based life system are given.

       Life beyond the earth. New York, Basic Books, Inc., 1963. 320 p.
    Origin of life on earth and elsewhere is discussed, its subsequent evolution and
    present condition, and such forn-.s of it as deviate most from human standards
    and thereby promise insight into alien structures that may exist on other worlds.
    Range of environments are examined within which life as we know it is possible
    as well as organic chemistries that would be viable in environments where ter-
    restrial life could not exist.

       Life, mind and galaxies. Edinburgh and London, Oliver & 3oyd, 1967. Ill p.
    Evidence is presented to show that life is not a freak occurrence in the universe
    of stars and nebulae, but an integral part of its general pattern, and will arise
    naturally from the inorganic substratum wherever and whenever conditions be-
    come suitable for it, and, that these may be suitable for life of a different chem-
    ical order even vhough unfit for our type of carbohydrate biology. It is postulat-
    ed that no definite boundary can be fixed between the organic and the inorganic
    world, wbirh shade into each other by imperceptible degrees. Nor can the
    emergence ol mind be pinpointed in biological evolution. There is unity in
    nature -- one encompassing reality.

Flammarion, CamiUe. Stories of infinity: Lunen--history of a comet--in infinity.
    Boston, Roberts Brothers, 1873. 287 p.
    Discourse on the possibility of living forms throughout the universe that are un-
    known on earth. The universe is postulated as an infinity and earthly life as
    but a phase of infinity. Translated from the French by S. R. Crocker.


Friedman, Bruno. Millions of inhabited planets. Flying saucer review, v. 10,
    May-June 1964: 7-10.


                                       288
         The following questions are considered: (1) What makes scientists so sure
         today that there is intelligent life in space ? (2) Where do we locate such living
         beings? (3) Are they more intelligent, just as, or less intelligent than we are?
         (4) How can we communicate with them, considering that they are likely to be
         completely different from us, have a completely different kind of language,
         and even completely different patterns of f ght ?
                                                                                               I
     Fuhs, Allen E. Visual sensitivity o^ residents of other planets. ARS Journal, v. 30,      I
         June 1960: 577.                                                                       |
         Visual sensitivity of hypothesized intelligent beings outside our solar system is     I
         discussed.                                                                            {

     Fuller, B. A. G. Flying saucers. The journal of philosophy, v. 49, Aug. 14, 1952:
         545-559.                                                                              I
         Postulating that intelligent life exists in forms quite different from ours and is
         dispersed throughout the universe, the author speculates on proceedings of a
         "cosmic Congress" including all kinds of "Saucerians. " Delegates of every
         imaginable aspect--"not to speak of others defying terrestrial biological
         classification "--would compare their religious, moral, social, economic, and
         political ways of life. He expresses hope that once the myth of a superior race
         was exploded, constants would appear in the various ways of life and points of
         view and all planetary thinking would become interplanetary in scope and scale.
                                                                                               :
                                                                                               5
                                                                                                .
     Gatland, Kenneth W. and Dere^D. Dempster. The iniiabited universe. London,                I
          AlanWingate, 1957. 182 p.                                                            1 .
                                                                                               I '
         The theme throughout the book is that evolution is constantly bringing new forms      i
         of life into existence and that creation is a continuous process. Man is depicted     |.
         as the product, not merely of a limited biological development, but of an in-         I
         he rent facet of cosmic evolution.
                                                                                               -:
     Gauroy, Pierre. Les mondes du ciel: tenvt: Vivantes on cimetieres? Paris,
il       Librarie Artheme Fayard, 1960. 303 p.                                                 :
         Inquiry into whether intelligent life could exist on other planets in our solar        ;
         system based on current scientific data.


     Greenstein, Jesse L. Speculation on man and ihe universe. Pasadena, Calif., The
         Author, 1967. lip.

         Speculating that organic evolution throughout the universe would lead to life first
         in the water and then on land, the author suggests the common later develop-
         ment of miad everywhere, because of the inevitable growth of organic complex-
         ity. We have to be ready to accept the emotional impact on our scheme of val-
         ues of accepting an odd extraterrestrial form of life as brother or sister. The
         green, three-eyed creatures of some distant world may have lived civilized
         lives for billions of years longer than there has been life on earth. If all are
         part of the common, natural evolution which concentrates into mind, we must
         expect them to be probably like ourselves, yet unimaginably different.


                                            289
    Harford, J. Rational beings in other worlds. Jubilee, May 1962: 17-21.

    Heintze, Carl. Search among the stars. Princeton, Van Nostrand, 1966. 175 p.
        Non-technical speculative discussion cf whether there is intelligent life in the
        universe.

    Heuer, Kennetii. Men of other planets. London, Victor Gallancz, Ltd., 1951.
        160 p.
        Text combines science and fancy in speculation about plurality of inhabited
        worlds. Author hypothesizes that there are worlds without end of every con-
        ceivable description in the universe; they are inhabited by intelligent beings
        whose forms, organs, and number of senses are infinitely diverse as result of
        physical conditions peculiar to their particular worlds.

    Holmes, David C. The search for life on other worlds. New York, Sterling Pub-
        lishing Co., 1966. 240 p.
        Non-technical discussion of man's place in the cosmos and possibility of intel-
        ligent life throughout the universe.

    Howei s, W. Would other humans look like us? In Mankind in the making, New
j      York, Doubleday & Co., 1959. p. 53-58.
I
1       Speculations are made on the probable form of extraterrest: ial intelligent life.
        This life would be similar to man in many respects: a supporting structure,
j       a liquid nutrient system, a nervous system, a large brain. Two sexes seem
I       likely; beings would be land dwelling. Symmetry and coordination dictate pro-
        bability of two arms each with multiple fingers, but there may be four legs in-
!       stead of two. If man were eradicated, it is likely that intelligent life would have
!       to evolve all over again since present animals have passed the point of
j       differentiation.


    Hoyle, Fred. Man in the universe. New York and London, Columbia University
        Press, 1966. 81 p.

        In astronomy, the author says, we are faced by contradictions. Not all the ap-
        parent data of the moment can be correct, we do not know which fragments are
        right and which are wrong. Because we cannot experiment with the universe,
        we live in a kind of shifting uncertainty, shifting because as the years pass the
        balance of certainty of a given piece of data changes.

    Huang, Su-shu. Occurrence of life in the universe. American scientist, v. 47,
        Sept. 1959: 397-402.
        Prerequisites for the occurrence of life, especially in an advanced form, are
        discussed in the light of current knowledge of the stars and their evolution.


                                          290
         f
         I,                                                                                                        ;
         }■
         I
                      Huang, Su -Shu ai«d R. H. Wilson, Jr. Astronomical aspects of the emergence of
         |                intelJige:ice. ilew York, Institute of the Aerospace Sciences, 1963. 15 p.
         I                (LiS P?.per no. 63-48)
          »                                                                                                        j
                          The astronomical background which makes possible the emergence and develop-
                          ment of intelligence in the universe is discussed. Stellar populations are re-
                          lated to the occurrence of life, and criteria art» given for the life-supporting    !
              j           ability of a star. Environmental conditions necessary for life on planets are       ?
                          presented.                                                                          '

                      Jackson, Francis L. md Patrick Moore. Life in the universe. New York, W. W.
                          Norton, 1962. 140 p.                                                                1
                          Applies current knowledge in astronomy, biology, botany, and chemistry to
                          consideration of theories about extraterrestrial life. Concludes that in observ-
                          able universe there must be millions of planets supporting carbon-based life        !
                          similar in principle to terrestrial forms but greatly varied in detail.
                                                                                                              ii

                      King, George. Life on the planets. Hollywood, Calif., The Aetherius Society,            |
                          1958. 29 p.                                                                         j
                          Series of lectures dealing with life in general on the planets Mars, Venus,
                          Jupiter, and Saturn. There is also a lechire dealing with the system of govern-
                          ment--Interplanetary Parliament--adoptt i by residents of these planets. Infor-
                          mation allegedly transmitted telepathically to author.
                                                                                                              i

                      Last, Cecil E. Man in the universe. Lomion, Werner Laurie, 1954. 166 p.                 |
                                                                                                               j
                          The universe is conceived as a non-mechanical reality. In association with
                          such a universe, the idea is elaborated that mind .'s the supreme factor in the
                          economy of the universe and that matter is derived from consciousness and           ^
                          not consciousness from matter, in accordance with the suggestions of Jean, de
                          Broglie, and Planck, supported by Einstein and Schrodinger.                         I

                      Leiber, Fritz. Homes for men in the stars. Science digest, v. 58, Sept. 1965:
i                         53-57.
 i
!
 j                    Lewellen, John. You and space neighbors. Chicago, Children's Press, 1953. 58 p.
[j                        Discussion for juveniles of probable conditions on planets in our solar system
[t                [       and whether these conditions would support intelligent life of the species homo
>!                        sapiens.
    ;i            :
    i             i
                      Ley, Willy. The mighty invaders from outer space. Catholic digest, v. 22, Apr.
                          1958: 25-29.

                          "Portrait" of the man from planet X: (1) he breathes air; (2) he eats both plants
                          and meat; (3) he is probably not much larger than the largest human being; (4)
                          he weighs at least 40 pounds and probably more; (5) he has a skull of some
                          kind; (6) he has two eyes and ears; (7) his eyes and ears are near the brain; and
                          (8) he has hands and feet. Condensed from This Week, Nov. 10, 1957.



                                                           291
Life on other planets ~ what are the possibilities? Flying saucers, Oct. 1966:
     8-11.
    Summary of current scientific data on the possibility of intelligent life on other
    planets in our solar system. Reprinted from the BU FORA (England) Journal
    and Bulletin.

Lönnqvist, C. Maaniskan pd Världsteatern. Stockholm. Ljus, AB, 1947. 218 p.
    Discussion of the possibility of intelligent life on other worlds.

McCol^ey, Grant and H. W. Miller. Saint Bonaventure, Francis Mayron, William
   Vorilong and the doctrine of a plurality of worlds. Speculum, v, 12, July 1937:
   386-389.

MacGowan, Roger A.and Frederick I. Ordway, UJ. Intelligence in the universe.
   Englewood Cliffs, N. J., Prentice-Hall 1906. 402 p.

    Subject of extra-solar intelligence is analyzed by survey of the existing litera-
    ture, original interpretations of established facts, and conjectures based on
    theory and observation.

McHugh, L. C. Others out yonder. America, v. 104, Nov. 26, i960: 295-297.

Macvey, JohnW. Alone in the urn verse? New York, Macmillan, 1963. 273 p.
    Author considers speculatively and at length the types of beings that may exist
    in space in extra-solar systems. Suggests that appearance of mankind on earth
    may have been result of colonization by another planet or star-system, and
    that appearance of UFOs could harbinger second coming of a race from outer
    space.

Margaria, Rodolfo. On the possible existence of intelligent living beings on other
   planets. In Xllth International Astronautical Congress, Washington, D. C,
   1961. Proceedings. Edited by Robert M. L. Baker, Jr., and Maude W.
   Makemson. Vienna, Springer-Verlag, New York and London, Academic Press,
   1963. p. 556-563.

    On a statistical basis, the author rules out the possibility that superior forms
    of life have developed on other planets that would lead finally to living beings
    that have the same type of intelligence as man and with whom man might
    communicate.

Maunder, E. Walter. Are the planets inhabited? London and New York, Harper &
   Bros., 1913. 165 p.
    Discussion of the controversy on the plurality of inhabited worlds.


                                       292
Mugler, C. Deux themes de la cosmologie grecque: devenir cyclique pluralite
    des mondes. Paris, Librarie C. Klincksieck, 1953. 192 p.
    Survey of Greek literature for indications of a belief in the extraterrestrial
    origin of man and the existence of intelligent life throughout the universe.

Munitz, Milton K. Theories of the universe from Babylonian myth to modern sci-
   ence. Glencoe, 111., The Free Press, 1957. 437 p.
    Survey of current trends in scientific cosmology against the background of
    earlier efforts and achievements. Beginning with one of the earliest ventures
    in the form of myth, materials are included exhibiting the principal stages of
    progress in cosmological inquiry from antiquity up to the present time.

The mystery of other worlds revealed. Greenwich, Conn., Fawcett Publications,
    1952. 144 p.
    Chapter headings include: life on other worlds; communication with other
    worlds; the expanding universe; possibilities of an invasion base on the moon;
    a case for flying saucers; investigation of the Carolina saucer; are the flying
    saucers Russian-owned'

Ordway, Frederick I., III. Life in other solar systems. New York, E. P. Dutton,
    Inc., 1965. 96 p.
    Reviews growing indirect and direct evidence of life-supporting extra-solar
    planetary system? with intf lligent communities and speculates on the nature of
    extra-solar beings.

Pearman, J. P. T. Extraterrestrial intelligent life and interstellar communication:
    an informal discussion. In Camerrm, A. G. W., ed. Interstellar communica-
    tion. New York, W. A. Benjamin, Inc., 1963. p 287-293.
    From consideration of the prospects for existence of other societies in our
    galaxy and the problems involved in establishii.g communication with them, it
    is concluded that, if the more optimistic values of communicative lifetime are
    chosen, the number of civilizations becomes lö5 to 10^ and the distance of the
    nearest civilization is estimated at ten to a few hundred light-years.

Perego, Angelo. Rational life beyond the earth? Theology digest, v. 7, Fall 1959:
    177-178.

Posia, Daniel Q. Life beyond our planet. New York, MacGraw-Hill, 1962. 128 p.
    Non-technical discussion of planets of solar system, consideration of whether
    life of any kind exists on them, and discussion of ways of communicating with
    these or planets of other solar systems.


Quarnstrom, Guimar. Dikten och CM uya vetenskapen. Lund, Sweden, C. W. K.
   Gleerup, 1961. 300 p.



                                      293
     Menzel, Donald H. Life in the universe. [n.p., 1965] 219 p.
         The chances of finding intelligent life within our own solar system are discus-
         sed and it is concluded that they appear "vanishingly small. " It is suggested
         that the Milky Way might contain up to a million planets inhabited by intelligent
         life; however, the chances are that the nearest such inhabited planet is so far
         away that if we were to send out a radio signal, we should have to wait 2,000
         years for the reply. Reprinted from The graduate journal, v. 7, Winter 1965:
         195-219.

        -- The universe inaction. Birmingham, Ala., The Rushton Lectures Founda-
         tion, 1962. 71 p. (The Rushton lectures, 1957)
         Discussion of the universe as it was, is now, and will be in the far distant fu-
         ture through evolution. The belief is expressed that life, even human or super-
         human, may exist in millions of places in the universe.

     Moore, Patrick. The worlds around us. New York, Abelard-Schuman, 1956.
        157 p.
         Outlines conditions under which carbon-based life can survive and applies them
         to sun, moon, planets, satellites, and asteroids in the solar system. Hypothe-
         sizing that this is the only kind of life possible in the universe, author concludes
         that men on earth are alone in the solar system. Asserts that reports about
         visits to earth by extraterrestrial spacecraft are only good stories.

     Moreux, Theophile. Les autres mondes, sont-ils habites? Paris, Editions Seien-
i       tifica, 1912. 134 p.
j
j        Analyzes current information and theories bearing on existence of human life
         forms on other planets of the solar system. New edition published in Paris
         (G. Doin) 1950.

!;
     Motz, Lloyd. Extra-terrestrial intelligence and stellar evolution. New York,
         Institute of the Aerospace Sciences, 1963. 16 p. (IA3 Paper no. 63-49)
1        Author postulates that in view of modern theories on the origin of the solar sys-
         tem, it is reasonable to conclude that all stars like the sun that are not binary
         systems are the centers of planetary systems like our own. Analysis of the
         role that density distribution in the original solar nebula and the solar tidal
         action and turbulence played in the formation of the planets leads to the con-
         clusion that in each of the stellar planetary systems there are planets like the
         earth, Mars, and Venus that are capable of supporting intelligent life.

     Müller, Wolfgang D. Man among the stars. New York, Criterion Books, 1957.
         307 p.

         Mental tour of the solar system and speculation about the living beings that
         may reside in other worlds. Translation of Du wirst die Erde sehn als Stern
         (Stuttgart, Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 1955).


                                           294
    Question of inhabited planets and the plurality of worlds is reviewed in connec-
    tion with the astronomical revolution. The idea and the wishful dream connect-
    ed throughout the centuries with the conception of other celestial bodies are ex-
    amined: the idea of a flying man, "homo volans, " and the dream of reaching
    other planets, especially the moon.

Raible, D. C. Men from other planets? Catholic digest, v. 25, Dec. 1960: 104-108.


Revelle, R. Sailing in new and old oceans. A.I. B.S. Bulletin, v. 12, Oct. 1962:
    45-47.

    If modern theories about the formation of stars are correct, probably the great
    majority of stars have planets around them. On at least some of these, life
    may have evolved in a beneficent realm of light and liquid water and in an atmo-
    sphere of oxygen and nitrogen to a level as high and perhaps much higher, than
    the highest life known on earth. Communication with intelligent beings of plan-
    ets of other stars would be almost impossible because of the distance involved.

Rich, Valentin and Mikhail Chernenko. Tracks that lead to space. Flying saucer
    review, v. 6, May-June 1960: 3-6.
    Translation of article in Literaturnaya Gazeta of Moscow in which Soviet scien-
    tist M. A. Agrest advances hypothesis that intelligent life exists in outer space
    and earth has been visited by space travelers for aeons.

Robinson, Jack and Mary Robinson. The case for extraterrestrial little men. Sau-
    cer news, v. 13, Fall 1966: 7-9.
    Presents scientifically feasible biological hypothesis for existence of humanoid
    extraterrestrial beings.

Robinson, Louis. Are there men in other worlds? Current literature, v. 44,
    June 1908: 672-677.


Rocha, Hugo. Outrus mundos outras humanidades. Porto, Editora Educacao
    Nacional, 1958. 37> p.

    First part of book presents arguments from the literature and from scientific,
    philosophical, and religious writings supporting and opposing the the* ry of a
    plurality of inhabited worlds. Second part gives reports of individuaio claiming
    contact with extraterrestrials, including Adamski, Bethurum, Fry, Allingham,
    Jorge and Napy Duclout, Kraspedon, and Ramatis and de Freitas Guimai^fes.

Rosenberg, Paul. Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence. Aerospace
    engineering, v. 21, Aug. 1962: 68-69, 111.


                                      295
    Author states that prevailing cosmological theory and laboratory experiments
    support the hypothesis that life exists outside earth's solar system. Electro-
    magnetic signaling seems to be the only means now at our disposal for attempt-
    ing to communicate with any extraterrestrial intelligence that may exist. Meth-
    ods for communicating and receiving such signals, and speculation as to the type
    of message an extraterrestrial might transmit are reviewed.

Ross, John C. A scientist looks at life on other worlds. Fate, v. 12, Apr. 1959:
    86-89.
    Nobel prize winner Dr. Melvin Calvin asserts that life is inevitable on other
    worlds throughout the universe and that we may expect to find life forms more
    intellectually developed than man.

Sagan, Carl. Direct contact among galactic civilizations by relativistic interstellar
    spaceflight. Planetary and space science, v. 11, May 1963: 485-498.
    Author postulates that there exists in the galaxy a loosely integrated community
    of diverse civilizations, cooperating in the exploration and sampling of astro-
    nomical objects and their inhabitants. There is therefore the likelihood that
    earth was visited at least once during historical times by an advanced civilization.

   -- The quest for life beyond the earth. In Smithsonian Institution. Annual re-
    port of the board of regents for the year ending June 30, 1964. Washington,
    D. C, U.S. Gcvt. Print. Off., 1965. p. 297-306.

    Questions on the possibility of extraterrestrial life and the origin of life are dis-
    cussed and alternative interpretations of available data given.

Saunders, Alex. Alien life contemplation. Flying saucers, Oct. 1966: 21-22.
    Speculates on the possibility of sentient life on other planets and on the implica-
    tions for man of contact with such beings.

Schatzman, Evry. La vie existe-t-elle sur les autres planetes? [Paris, Universite
    de Paris, Palais de la Dicouverte, 1963] 15 p.
    Argument favoring hypothesis of intelligent life on planets throughout the galaxy.

Schiaparelii, G. V. Mars den g^defulde planet. Randers [Oversat af E. Slej J
    Denmark, UFO-NYTs Forlag, 1965. 73 p.

    Surface features of Mars, especially its "canals, " are discussed as possible
    indications of intelligent life on that planet. Translation of article entitled
    "Ueber die beobachteten Erscheinungen auf der Oberfläche des Planeten Mars,'
    in Himmel und Erde, v. 1, 1888: 85-302, 147-159.

Serviss, Garrett P. Curiosities of the sky. New York, Harper & Bros., 1909.
    268 p.


                                       296
    A broad general view of the chief mysteries and problems of astronomy is
    given; possibility of life and intelligence on the moon and on Mars is discussed.

Sewall, Frank. Life on other planets as described by Sweu^iiliorg. Ph-adelphia,
    Swedenborg Scientific Association, 1911. 20 p.
    Discussion of Swedenborg's description of planets in the solar system and their
    inhabitants which he claimed to have visited by astral projection.

bhapley, Harlow. Extraterrestrial life. Astronautics, v. 5, Apr. 1960: 32-33,
    50, 52.
    It is postulated that homo sapiens as a species may be unique, but there is good
    reason to expect that there are habitable planets with higher forms of life in
    other soJar systems.

       Riddle of God, man and outer space. Coronet, v. 49, Feb. 1961: 40-44.

Shklovskii, losef S. and Carl Sagan. Intelligent life in the universe. Authorized
    translation by Paula Fern. San Francisco, Holden-Day, 1966. 509 p.
    Extension and revision by Sagan of Shklovskii's Vselennalä, zhizn', razum
    [Universe, Life, Mind] (Moscow, 1963). Includes study oi earth's solar sys-
    tem, discussion of nature of life and its possible occurrence on other planets,
    treatment of possibility that advanced communicative technical civilizations
    exist on planets of other stars, and discussion of problems in establishing con-
    tact with civilizations separated from earth by interstellar distances.

Simpson, George G. The nonprevalence of humanoids. Science, v. 143, Feb. 21,
    1964: 769-775.
    States following conclusions: (1) there are certainly no humanoids elsewhere in
    the solar system of which earth is part; (2) there is probably no extraterrestrial
    life in the solar system of which earth is part, but the possibility is not wholly
    excluded as regards Mars; (3) there probably are forms of life on other plane-
    tary systems somewhere in the universe, but if so it is unlikely that we can
    learn anything whatever about them, even as to the bare fact of their real exis-
    tence; (4) it is extremely improbable that such forms of life include humanoids,
    and apparently as near impossible that we could ever communicate with them in
    a meaningful and useful way if they did exist.


Slater, Alan E. The probability of intelligent life evolving on a planet. In Vlllth
     International Astronautical Congress, Barcelona, 1957. Proceedings. Vienna,
     Springer-Verlag, 1958. p. 395-402.
    Report traces briefly the evolution of the human species from primitive life
    forms and shows that the differentiation thai eventually led to man was far from
    inevitable. Concludes that it seems improbable that other forms of intelligent
    life will be found by voyagers through spacr.


                                      297
'loan, Eugene A. Artificial biosphere. Science, v. 132, July 22, 1960: 252.
    Author supports suggestion of investigating solar far-infrared radiations as
    one way to detect extraterrestrial intelligence and hypothesizes that intelligent
    beings most probably have detected us.

Smith, S. L. The problems of exobiology. Part I: the origin v7f life. BUFORA
    journal and bulletin, v. 1, Winter 1965: 13-16.
    Examination of the possibility of life existing beyond earth at a level of develop-
    ment compatible with the possession of interplanetary spaceships.

   -- The problems of exobiology. Part II: life in the solar system. BUFORA
    journal and bulletin, v. 1. Spring 1966: 13-18.
    Article discusses whetner the processes that led to the evolution of man could
    have occurred beyond the solar system.

   -- The problems of exobiology. Part IE: life beyond the solar system. BUFORA
    journal and bulletin, v. 1, Summer 1966: 10-14.
    Considers whether a process similar to that which led to the evolution of man
    could have occurred beyond the solar system; and if not, are there any other
    possible chemical processes that could lead to an alien form of life.

Sullivan, Walter. We are not alone. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1964. 325 p.
    Traces evolution of man's concept of the cosmos and his place in it and discus-
    ses possibility and implications of universality of intelligent life. Rev. ed.
    1966.

Suspect human life on millions of planets. Science newsletter, v. 74, Nov. 22,
    1958: 328.

Warder, George Woodward. The cities of the sun. New York, G. W. Dillingham,
   1901. 320 p.

    Argues that the suns of the universe are not hot or burning globes but are self-
    luminous perfected worlds--the personal residence of Deity and the future abode
    of man. Housed in the "heavenly mansions and beautiful cities" of the sun are
    the former citizens of the solar planets, including earth's departed spirits.


White, George S. A book of revelations: a true narrative of life on many planets.
    Los AngelDS, The Author, 1945. 198 p.
    History of the earth and planets from creation to the present time (1945) as re-
    corded in the "Master Book of Life" and revealed by "cosmic teachers. "


                                       298
   Williams, Henry S. Are the planets inhabited? Hearst's magazine, v. 24, Aug.
       1913: 284-286.

   Younghusband, Francis. Life in the stars. London, John Murray, 1927. 222 p.
       An exposition of the view that on some planets of some stars exist beings that
       are higher on the evolutionary scale than man and that on one of them exists
       "the supreme embodiment of the eternal spirit which animates the whole. "


PHILOSOPHY


   Adamski, George. Cosmic philosophy. [San Diego,        Calif.] The Author, 1961.
      87 p.

       Author expounds doctrine of man's unity with all life taught by extraterrestrial
       beings with whom he has allegedly been in contact.

         Flying saucers farewell. London, New York, Abelard-Schuman, 1961. 190 p.
       Adamski discusses the reasons spacecraft from other planets are visiting earth
       and mans place in the universe as reportedly revealed to him through contact
       with beings from Venus, Mars, and Saturn. Published also with title Behind
       the Flying Saucer Mystery by Paperback Library (53-439), Ntew York.

   Barton, Michael X. Release your cosmic power. Los Angeles, Futura Press,
       1961. 33 p.
       A "way of life" based on the "cosmic secret of balance" is described. Informa-
       tion allegedly transmitted to author telepathically by extraterrestrial being];.

         Secrets of higher contact. Los Angeles, Futura Press, 1959. 30 p.
       Technique by which human beings may "reach up into ihe high conscioasness of
       the Interplanetary Beings and contact them" is revealed. Information trans-
       mitted telepathically to author by "space brothers."

          The spacemasters speak. Los Angeles, Futura Press, 1960. 34 p.
       Messages from beings on Mars, Venus, and Antares allegedly transmitted tele-
       pathically to author for delivery during the Harmony Grove (Escondido, Calif.)
       Spacecraft Convention, July 2-4, 1960.

          Venusian health magic. Los Angeles, Futura Press, 1959. 59 p.
       The "space brothers "--the Venusians--reveal how to use Lifetrons to rid the
       human body of its ills and assure radiant health and vitality.


                                         299
Darton, Michael X. Venusian st-:• ret-science. Los Angeles. Futura Press, 1958.
    76 p.
    Seven-lesson course to reveal secret-science allegedly formulated on Venus 33
    million years ago and designed to speed earth-maa's evolution by stimulating
    'tne total mind as well as the soul," Information transmitted to author
    telepathically.

      V/orld secret of Fatima. Los Angeles, Futura Press, 1962. 35 p.
    Fatima message teaches that there exists in the universe one law in three parts:
    (1) be a life spirit; (2) do love all of }He. and (3) have wisdom, knowingness and
    the truth. Law is fulfilled only by dt.nonstrating affinity for all life.

      Your part in the great plan. Los Angeles, Futura Press, 1960. 30 p.
    Discusses what man's purpose is and how he may fulfill it. Suggests that we
    are now living at the end of an age and predicts that earth will undergo big geo-
    logical changes.

Bethurum, Truman. The voice of the planet Clarion. Prescott, Ariz., The Author,
    [195-] 88 p.
    Collection of poetry and prose written by Bethurum while he was allegedly un-
    der the telepathic control of Aura Rhanes, the female captain of a spacecraft
    from the planet Clarion.

The book of spaceships and their relationship with earth, by the god of a planet near
    the earth and others. Clarksburg, W. Va., Saucerian Publications, 1966. 70 p.
    Alleged communications from rulers of Mars, Pluto, Neptune, Uranus, Saturn,
    Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, and three undiscovered planets describing their in-
    habitants, civilization, and philosophy. Messages reportedly received on earth
    through 'psychic channeling.?'

Danger from the stars: a warning from the Space Administration. Flying saucer
    review, v. 7, May-June 1961: 7.
    Article summarizes report prepared by Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.,
    in 1961 for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on ramifications
    of discovery of intellige^c life en other planets.
Dewey, Mark. A man from space speaks. Houston, Texas, The Author, 196G.
   38 p.
    A philosophy of life allegedly dictated to author by Ariano, a teacher on the
    planet Mars, during direct contact over a five-year period. Postulates that
    Martians are the ancestors of terrestrials.

Ferguson, William. A message from outer space. Oak Park, III., Golden Age
    Press, 1955. 54 p.



                                     300
            A translation decoding the Book of Revelations allegedly given to author tele-
            pathicaily by "Khauga, the angel who gave it to St. John. " Flying saucers are
            said to be the spacecraft of "perfected beings" who are 'progressed to a four
            dimensional state of reality' and who are "preparing earth for the second com-
            ing of Jesus."

        From Jupiter, planet of joy. Los Angeles, DeVorss & Co., 1967. 15 p.
            Message from the alleged ruler of the planet Jupiter who gives the history of
            the planet, describes its inhabitants, and invites earth-men to visit that planet.

        From planet Pluto with brotherly love. Los Angeles, DeVross & Co., 1967. 32 p.
            Ways in which life on earth differs frcm that on other planets are described by
            alleged ruler of Pluto and method of effecting a reform suggested. Civilization
            of Pluto is discussed.

        Fry, Daniel W. The curve of development. Lakemont, Ga., CSA Printers and
            Publishers, 1965. 75 p.
           Outlines development of the human soul "through stages of increasing ability
           and manifestation. " Speculates that there may be other planets where life,
           intelligence and spiritual development have orogrcssed beyond the average level
           achieved on earth; the earth human may at some stage of his development take
           up residence on such an advanced planet where the environment is more con-
           ducive to rapid progress.

        Culowin, Sergius. Götter der Atom-Zeit: moderne Sagenbüdung um Raumschiffe
            und Sternenmenschen. Bern und München, Francke Verlag, 1967. 128 p.
            The book represents a collection of the "new stories and fairy tales" of our age.
            By citing actual reports (references included) the author shows the results of
            an unscientific approach to the UFO question: fantastic stories describing
            spaceships, beings from other planets, interviews conducted with them, reports
'           of their family and lovelife, their work, attempts to sabotage terrestrial atom-
            ic plants, attempts to better mankind, warnings of the harmful effects of foods,
i           and other problems.

I       Halsey, Wallace C. Cosmic end-time secrets. Los Angeles, Futura Press, 1965.
|           102 p.

I           Contains collected writings, lectures, and charts of the author. UFOs, their
\           origin and purpose, are discussed, as well as the story of creation; the Tower
I           of Babel; our solar system's imbalance; functions of the Pyramids; the Infinite
[           Light; squaring the body; pineal gland or "third eye" development; teleportation;
j   <       the work of the Melchizedek Order; cosmic high noon; the transitor beam; the
i           White Stone; and the Solar Tongue.


        Howard, Dana. Over the threshold. Los Angeles, Llewellyn Publications, 1957.
           140 p.


    i
                                             301
    Subjective report of paranormal contact between author and a being from Venus
    who, in mission to "guide men in the ways of perfection, " discourses on such
    subjects as: The Intuitions; Disease and Destruction; Reincarnation; Religion;
    The Subworlds; The Alchemy of Finance; The Secret of Youth; and The Meaning
    of Consciousness.

Invitation from the planet Venus. Los Angeles, DeVorss & Co., 1967. 20 p.
    Culture and philosophy of the inhabitants of the planet Venus are described and
    the mission of Venusian spacecraft to eai^h discussed. Material was allegedly
    dictate'! by the ruler of Venus.

King, George. A cosmic message of divine opportunity. Hollywood, Calif., The
    Aetherii s Society, 1964. 9 p.
    From a spaceship in earth s atmosphere, a message is allegedly delivered to
    author through telepathic communication with a "Cosmic Master": all right-
    thinking people must coordinate their efforts in such a manner that as much
    spiritual power and divine energy as possible can be radiated to the rest of
    mankind.

      The day the gods came. Los Angeles, The Aetherius Society, 1965. 71 p.
    Text is comprised of a move-by-move account of how on July 8, 1964, a "great
    Hierarchal Being manipulated tremendous energies in order to perform the
    Cosmic Initiation of Earth. " Earth is represented as the living, breathing god-
    dess "Terra" who "must shortly take her rightful place in the cosmic scheme
    of evolution. " Information allegedly transmitted telepathically to author by
    "cosmic intelligences."


      Join your ship. Hollywood, Calif., The Aetherius Society, 1964. 16 p.
    Details are given of a meeting of the Supreme Tribunal of cosmic intelligences
    allegedly held on the planet Saturn on May 29, 1964; decisions affecting earth
    are discussed. Author claims to have received transmissions telepathically.

      Life on the planets. Hollywood, Calif., The Aetherius Society, 1958. 29 p.
    Series of lectures dealing with life in general on the planets Mars, Venus,
    Jupiter, and Saturn. There is also a lecture dealing with system of government
    --Interplanetary Parliament--adopted by residents of these planets. Informa-
    tion allegedly transmitted telepathically to author.

      The nine freedoms. Los Angeles, The Aetherius Society, 1963. 200 p.
    Gives a concise account of man's coming to earth, why he is here, and why he is
    at the bottom of the evolutionary ladder in this solar system. Outlines the ex-
    act path through evolution that man must take in order to become a "God-man. "
    Reveals the way in which man will eventually attain the "glorious state of inter-
    planetary existence. " Information allegedly delivered to author telepathically
    in nine consecutive transmissions by "a prominent Master of unquestionable
    Cosmic Status."


                                      302
King, George. You are responsible. London, The Aetherius Press, 1961. 173 p.
    Author claims to be in complete telepathic rapport with people living on other,
    more evolved planets and provides detailed information from these entities re-
    garding the dangers of radioactivity in its uncontrolled state such as atomic
    bomb experimentation.

Macvey, JohnW. Journey to Alpha Centauri. New York, Macmillan, 1965. 256 p.
    Speculative consideration of interstellar travel, its prospects, and implications.
    Study--in series of extracts from diaries--of human, moral, and sociological
    problems that could confront first stellar astronauts on 215-year expedition to
    Alpha Centauri during the seven generations the trip would take.

Menger, Howard. From outer space to you. Clarksburg, W. Va., Saue er ian Books,
   1959. 256 p.

    Report of contacts with visitors from other planets and discussion of their
    philosophy.

Miller, Will and Evelyn Miller. We of the new dimension. Los Angeles, The
    Authors, fl95-] 115 p.
    Intelligences from other worlds and dimensions allegedly dictate the book tele-
    pathically to the authors. The role of the individual in the universe and how he
    can advance into a well-balanced, fuller life is discussed.

Mustapa, Margit. Book of brothers. New York, Vantage Press, 1963. 196 p.
    Allegedly in telepathic contact with "brothers' from Venus, av    communi-
    cates their messages to aid mankind "grow inwardly, spiritually, and mentally
    toward extraplanetary dimensions in thinking. "

The mystery of other worlds revealed. Greenwich, Conn. Fawcett Publications,
    1952. 144 p.

    Chapter headings include: life on other worlds; communication with other
    worlds; the expanding universe; possibilities of an invasion base on the moon;
    a case for flying saucers; investigation of the Carolina saucer; are the flying
    saucers Russian-owned.

Neptune from experience gives advice. Los Angeles, DeVorss & Co., 1967. 16 p.
    Manner -n which Neptune has managed to rid itself of the manipulators of the
    money system and their following dark forces is described by the alleged ruler
    of that planet.

Pestalozzi, Rudolph H. Letters to you from Baloran. San Francisco, Kay Publish-
    ing Co., 1965. 154 p.


                                     303
    Baloran--an etheric being not confined to a single planet--allegedly transmits
    22 letters telepathically through Pestalozzi. Subjects discussed are: (1) efforts
    to start, sustain, and develop civilization on th"? planet earth; (2) incidents de-
    scribed in the Bible; (3) cause of the tragedy that has befallen man in this age;
    (4) man's perverted and distorteo doctrine of thought and conduct; and (5) end
    of the present age and what man should do to adjust to the new age.

Planet Mercury sends greetings. Los Angeles, DeVorss & Co., 1967. 32 p.
    Description of the topography of the planef Mercury, its cities, and inhabitants
    by the alleged ruler of the planet. Mission of spacecraft sent from Mercury to
    earth is discussed.

Fritchett, E. Blanche. Transcripts of "44.'' Arlington, V      , Marcap Council,
     1966. 66 p.
    Transcribed calls by "44,, to a Salt Lake City, Utah, radio station. Subjects
    discussed include solar and galactic government and the Solar and Galactic
    Councils; the twelve planets of this solar system; the principle of temporal
    harmonics and the principle of universal balance and their application to the
    concepts of reincarnation and Karma; concept resolution and the higher levels
    of existence; formation of the Planetary Council and the return of Christ; galac-
    tic zones; space ships and the Galactic Communication Center; and the galactic
    central sun.

Sumner, F. W. The coming golden age. Los Angeles, New Age Publishing Co.,
   1957. 206 p.
    Five part treatise: (1) presentation of cosmic changes now in progress; (2)
    messages from the spirit world confirming these changes; (3) forces from
    other planets offered to assist man through this crisis; (4) beginning of the
    New Age; and (5) interpretation of New Age objectives.

Troxwell, Hope. The Mohada teachings. Independence, Calif., School of Thought,
    1964. 43 p.
    Messages to "elevate man on his path through this world" allegedly transmitted
    telepathicaiiy to author by an "intergalactic" being.

Uranus, lover of man, speaks. Los Angeles, DeVorss & Co., 1967. 29 p.

    Invitation to earth men to visit the planet Uranus is issued by the alleged ruler
    of the planet and the history and explanation oi astrology given.

White, George S. A book of revelations: a true narrative of life on many planets.
    Los Angeles, The Author, 1945. 198 p.
    History of the earth and planets from creation to the present time (1945) as re-
    corded in the "Master Book of Life" and revealed by "cosmic teachers.'


                                      304
Wilcox, Kai. Zemkla, interplanetary avatar. Los Angeles, Galaxy Press, 1966.
    57 p.

    Advanced metaphysical wisdom is allegedly transmitted to author personally by
    Zemkla--from the planet Celo—for enlightenment of mankind. Author describes
    trip to Celo aboard flying saucer.


                                    305
                   Extraterrestrial Visitors


Adamski, George. How to Know a spaceman, if you see one. Probe, v. 3,
  Mar.-Apr. 1966: 5-6.
  Autnor describes his rationale for recognizing "space people. "Re-
  printed from September 1962 Cosmic Science News Letter.

Ancient records of UFO in Japan. Australian saucer record, v. 2, June
  1962: 15-17.
  Material in ancient Japanese history books that may be interpreted as
  meaning tnat earth has had extraterrestrial visitors from the very
  earliest times is listed in chronological order from 637-1714 A. D.
  Reprinted from Flying Saucer News of Japan published by the Cosmic
  Brotherhood Association.

Barker, Gray. The case for non-human space visitors. Flying saucers,
  Feb. 1959: 18-23.
  Cites landing/contact reports that would seem to indicate that some flying
  saucers either contain or are piloted by non-humanoid entities. Mentions
  speculation that alien animals might be deposited on earth, then taken up
  again to undergo laboratory examination to determine how the atmosphere,
  disease germs, and other environmental factors on earth had affected them.

Bible. Old Testament Apocryhal Books. Enoch. Transl. by R. H. Charles.
   London, Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1917. 154 p.

  Book of Enoch, especially verses VI - XI, is often cited as an historical
  account of extraterrestrial influences in man's origin.


                                    306
Burr, FraiiK. Visitors from afar. Flying saucer review, v. 9,
  Mar.-Apr. 1963: 19-20.
  Commenting on the theory that we have persons from outer space living
  amongst us, the author suggests that a port of entry by space people could
  be through the mountains of the north of India and other territories of the
  East where the people believe in the occult and where controls governing
  the movement of individuals are not stringent.

Calvin, Melvin. Round trip from space. Evolution, v. 3, September 8, 1959:
  362-377.

Carr, Aidan M. Take n« to your leader. Homiletic and pastoral review, v. 65,
  Dec. 1964: 255-256.

Crandall, L. The Venusians. Los Angeles, New Age Publishing Co., 1955.
  76 p.

Drake, W. Raymond. Gods or spacemen? Amherst, ^is., Amherst Press,
  1964. 176 p.
  Author suggests that present theology may be based on false premises since
  the experiences aid visions of saints are phenomena that might be associated
  with UFOs and their extraterrestrial crews. He reviews the mythological
  and religious traditions of the countries of the MID rid to demonstrate worldwide
  "race memories" of spacemen visiting earth. He suggests that terrestrial
  destruction in ages past may have been caused by interplanetary warfare rather
  than by collision of celestial bodies with earth.

Drake, W. Raymond. Spacemen in antiquity. Sunderland, England, The Author,
  [196- ] 1 v.

  Typescript is composed of the following monographs: Spacemen in Antiquity;
  UFOs over Ancient Rome; Space Gods in Ancient Britain; Spacemen in
  Saxon Times; UFOs Fought for Charlemagne; Spacemen in Norman Times; A
  Bride from Space; Spacemen in the Middle Ages; Spacemen in Ancient India;
  Spacement in Old Tibet; Spacemen in Old China; Spacemen in Old Japan;
  Semiramis, Space-Queen of Babylon.


Drake, W. Raymond. Spacemen in tiie ancient ^ast. London, Neville
  Spearman, 196b.

  Traditions are cited ^icn tell of "supermen, " from the skies, "Divine
  Dynasties, " who ruled on earth in India, Tibet, China, Japan, and Babylonia.


                                      307
Drury, Neville. Flying ships in "Oahspe." Australian flying saucer review,
  no. 9, Nov. 1966: 40-41.
  Author cites portions of Oahspe that provide details on space visitations.

Edwards, Allan ^. An angel unawares? Flying saucer review, v. 7, Jan.
  Feb. 1961: 7-10.
  Description of contact with "extraordinary" beings that author suggests
  could be visitors from other planets who are living on earth among us.

Finch, Bernard. The ark of the Israelites was an electrical machine. Flying
   saucer review, v. 11, May-June 1965: 18-19.
  On examination of the Ark of the Covenant in terms of modern physics, the
  author suggests that what is described is an electric storage machine
   resembles the Leyden jar of today. He says accounts in the Bible of the
  association of Moses, the high prlestr», and others with lightning bolts, balls
  of fire, and luminous clouds in the sky would make it seem that the secret
  of the electro-static machine was obtained from extraterrestrials; it was used
  as a method of terrorizing the people and diverting their worship from idols
  to higher ideals and philosphies.

Fouere, Rene. Surhumains ou sous-humains, anges ou demons, que sont les
  extra-terrestres? Phenomenes spatiaux, Mar. 1966: 5-11.

  Speculation on the nature of the extraterrestrial beings apparently visiting
  earth based in part on reports of "contactees. "

Golowin, Sergius. Götter der Aiom-Zeit; moderne Sagenbildung um
  Raumschiffe und Sternenmenschen. Bern und München, Francke Verlag, 1967.
   128 p.
  The book represents a collection of the "new stories and fairytales" of our age.
  By citing actual reports (references included) the author shows the results of
  an unscientific approach to the UFO question: iantastic stories describing
  spaceships, beings from other planets, interviews conducted with them, re-
  ports of their family and lovelife, their work, attempts to sabotage
  terrestrial atomic plants, attempts to better mankind, warnings of the harmful
  effects of foods, and other problems.

Hapgood, Charles H. The Piri Reis map of 1513. Keene, N. H., The Author,
  1962. 48 p.


                                      308
  The accuracy of both latitude and longitude throughout the Plrl Reis map of
  1513 is inexplicable in terms of our present ideas of the extent of
  geographical knowledge and cartographic science in ancient times or in the
  Renaissance, the author contends. It has been speculated that data used were
  from aerial survey by an extraterrestrial spacecraft

Hunt, Douglas. The miracles of Apollonius of Tyana. Fate, v. 9, June 1956:
  67-73.
  De materialization of chains and instant transportation of the human body are
  "miraclcd" attributed to Apollonius—thought by some to be an extra-
  terrestrial being.

Le Poer Trench, Brinsley. Men among mankind. London, Neville Spearman,
   Ltd., 1962. 199 p.

  The fact that the course of history has been changed abruptly by certain unusual
  men, extraordinary in their abilities, is discussed by author. Since these men
  demonstrated marked differences from ordinary people of any period in time,
  it is suggested they may have been extraterrestrials.

       The sky people. London, N. Neville Spearman, 1960. 224 p.

  Develops idea that a race of extraterrestrial beings with superior wisdom and
  technology have visited earth periodically through the ai;os to show humanity
  the way to realize its manhood and potential galactic status. Cites references
  in the Bible, ancient manuscripts, folklore, and other literature to support
  theory.

Misraki, Paul. Les extraterrestres, par Paul Thomas [pseud. ] Paris, Plon,
  1962. 224 p.

  Develops hypothesis that from earliest antiquity to modern times, extra-
  terrestrial beings have kept earth under surveillance, have at times visited
  this planet, and have frequently modified the course of history by means of
  spectacular appearances. Cites biblical passages and ancient manuscripts.

Moselev, James W. Peruvian desert: map for saucers ? Fate, v. 8, Oct. 1955:
  28-33.

   Describes complex markings recently discovered on the desert near Nasca,
   Peru, by airliners passing over the area. Markings may be 1, 000 years old
   and zve clearly visible and meaningful only from the air. It is speculated that
   they may have been constructed as signals to interplanetary visitors or to some
   ad/anced earth race that occasionally visited the peoples of the region.

Rich, Valentin and Mikhail Chernenko. Tracks that lead to spa^e. Flying saucer
   review, v. 6, May-June I960: 3-6,


                                     309


                                                                                     _J
  Translation of article in Literaturnaya Gazeta of Moscow in which Soviet
  scientist M. A. Agrest advances hypothesis that intelligent life exists in
  outer space and earth has been visited by space travelers for aeons.

Sagan, Carl. Direct contact among galactic civilizations by relativistic
   interstellar spaceflight. Planetary and space science, v. 11, May 1963:
   485-498.
  Author postulates that there exists in the galaxy a loosely integrated
  community of diverse civilizations, cooperating in the exploration and
  sampling of astronomical objects and their inhabitants. There is therefore
  the likelihood that earth was visited at least once during historical times
  by an advanced civilization.

Sendy, Jean. Les dieux nous sent nes. Paris, Bernard Grassei, 1966. 343 p.
  Citing the Bible as a prime authority, the author postulates that the "gods"
  were extraterrestrial beings wiio came to earth to create mankind and
  promote civilization and who continue to exercise manipulative influence.
  Flying saucers, the miracle of Fatima, evocations, premonition, precognition,
  and other psychic and hallucinatory experience are discussed in this context.


Space visitors: From \&ich planets do they originate? Is there life on them?
   Newnes practical meclianics, v. 24, Jan. 1957:203-204, 207.

  Known information on the planetary atmospheres and physical conditions of
  the planets is summarized for the purpose of establishing whether or not life
  could be sustained on them. It is concluded that even the worst apparent
  location as an abode of life cannot be dismissed as entirely impossible.

Stranges, Frank E, Danger from the stars. Venice, Calif., International
   Evangelism Crusades, Inc., 1960. 14 p.
  Author postulates that planet earth has been host to generations of inter-
  stellar visitors who can travel with or without what we call flying saucers and
  who fall into four classifications: ministering angels; guardian angels;
  angel reapers; and fallen angels. He discusses their characteristics and traits
  and then warns against "counterfeit" flying discs causing crashes, near
  collisions, near-havoc, and all manner of fear and superstition. He lists
  occurrences 1945-1960 that seem to indicate a pattern of violence and
  deliberate interference.


                                     310
Stranges, Frank £. oranger at the Pentagon. Van Nuys, Calif., International
   Evangelism Crusades, 1967. 201 p.
  Account, as allegedly told to author, of visit to earth by Valiar* Thor of
  Venus and his address to a special group at the United Nations and meeting
  with higi: officials at the Pentagon.

Sykes, £gerton. The extra terrestrials. London, Markham House Press, 1967.
  20 p.
  Postulating that although our planetary system is but one of hundreds of
  millions within our galaxy, the Milky Way, author says it is inevitable that
  on various occaaons we have been visited by exploration teams from other
  planets whose technology is a few thousand years in advance of our own.
  Impact which these earlier visits had upon our culture may have been small,
  but in some cases it was just enough to enable one race to assume a
  technological supremacy over others and thus advance the course of history.
  These visitors from other planetary systems correspond to the Elohim of
  of the Old Testament. Also discussed in the context of the UFO phenomenon
  are the Taselli frescoes; Baalbek; the Book of Ezekiel; the Bayan Kara Ula
  discs; the Star of Bethlehem; the Honshu figurines; and Baba Yurga.

Vyner, J. The mystery of Springheel Jack. Flying saucer review, v. 7,
  May-June 1961: 3-6.
  Author suggests that Springheel Jack, a notorious figure that terrorized
  the English countryside in 1838, may have been a visitor from outer space.
  Facts in article were taken from contemporary accounts and checked against
  all available records for accuracy.

Vyner, J. The mystery of Springheel Jack. Fate, v. 14, Oct. 1361:27-33.
  Account of a peculiarly costumed being, who could leap incredible dfetances,
  used a sort of "ray gun" on occasion, and terrorized many responsible citizens
  in Middlesex, England, 1837-1838. Reprinted from Flying Saucer Review.

Williamson, George Hunt. Road in the sky. London, N. Spearman, 1959. 248 p.
  Develops hypothesis that there is a connection between the flying saucers of
  the past and present and the legends of mankind that attempt to explain God and
  the supernatural. Cites instances of past extraterrestrial visitations records
  in legends and myths of ancient civilizations and of the American Indians.


                                     311
Williamson, George Hunt. Secret places of tne lion. Amtierst, Wis.,
  Amherst Press, 1958. 230 p.
  Autnor cites Biblical passages and material in ancient manuscripts
  to support theory tnat many leaders of the past were men and women
  from other worlds in timt and space who had migrated to earth in what
  today are called UFOs to assist mankind in i's climb from beasthood
  to manhood. He discloses discoveries suggesting that ancient civiliza-
  tions in South America, especially, had continuing contact with extra-
  terrestrial visitors.

Z'isev, Vyacheslav. Visitors from outer space. Sputnik, v. 1, Jan
  1967: 162-179.
  Author reports on thirty years research to substantiate theory that
  intelligent beings from outer space have had contact with earth. Among
  evidence cited are hieroglyphics deciphered by Chinese srcheologist
  revealing that extraterrestrial spacecraft landed on earth 12,000 years
  ago; legends supporting information in the hieroglyphics and vestiges
  of graves and skeletons that seem to confirm the legends; myths,
  Biblical passages, and apocryphal legends; and frescoes dating from
  1350 at Dechaney Monastery, Yugoslavia.


                                    3J2
                    Ball Lightning and Fireballs


Arnold, Kenneth. Are space visitors here? Fate, Summer 1948: 4-21.
  Reports of apparent meteor and fireball activity during 1948 are examined.
  Author suggests that they are not aerial phenomena but extraterrestrial
  spacecraft.

Benedicts, Carl. Theory of the lightning-balls and its application to tne
  atmosphere pnenomenon called "flying saucers. " Arkiv for geofysik,
  v. 2, no. i, 1954: 1-11.

  Author theorizes that reported UFO sightings are in reality ball lightning
  and gives data supporting his position.

Brand, Walther. Der Kugelblitz. Hamburg, Henri Grand, 1923. 170 p.

  Theories in explanation of ball lightning are given. Characteristics tnat
  distinguish ball lightning from other meteorological phenomena (sucn as
  line lightning and meteors) are noted.

Cade, C. Maxwell. Fireballs and flying saucers. Flying saucer review,
  v. 13, Jan.-Feb. 1967: 10-12.
   Case histories are given of sightings which very probably were due to
   ball lightning. Author warns, however, that it is more "unscientific" to
   try to dismiss all unexplained aerial phenomena than it is to hold tue open-
   minded view that some of them may be the artefacts of extraterrestrial
   communities.

Constance. Arthur. The inexplicable s&y. London, W. Laurie, 1^56: 308 p.


                                     313
  Discusses sky phenomena, including meteors, fireballs, mirages, and
  things that fall from the heavens. Cites cases of reported extraterrestrial
  visitations and advances theory with supporting arguments that non-
  terrestrial intelligences are coming to, or emerging from other dimen-
  sions into, earth's atmosphere. American ed. (New York, Citadel Press)
  published 1957.


Creighton, Gordon W.   Foo fignters.     Flying saucer review, v. 8, Mar. -Apr.
   1962: 11-15.

  Author relates what is known about strange balls of fire that dogged tne
  paths of allied pilots on operation over enemy territory during World War II.


Evenson, K. M. Ball lightning research at Hignland Lookout, Montana.
  Santa Monica, Calif., Douglas Aircraft Co., 1968. 16 p.

  Report on site survey of possible locations where ball lightning activity
  might be high enough to guarantee some success in ma.ang physical measure-
  ments.


Gaddis, Vincent H. Mysterious lights and fires.     New YorK, David McKay
  Co., 1967. 280 p.

  In three sections, "Earth's Glowing Ghosts, " "Electro-Dynamic Man,' and
  "Premature Cremations, " the book deals with the enigmatic aspects of fires
  and lights. UFOs are treated in the first section. Agreeing that some of
  these objects appear to be metallic craft piloted by humanoid beings, the
  author points out that many reported sightings could be what he calls
  "electro-animals"-- a form of upper-atmospheric life perhaps feeding on
  pure energy. Firefalls, ball ligntning, fireballs and similar phenomena
  are also treated in the first section.


Gaddis, Vincant H. UFO mystery: fire bolts from space.       Saga, v. 34, May
  1967: 25-27, 78-80; 82, 84, 86.

  It is suggested that fireballs and fire falls that seemingly drop from unxnown
  heights as spheroids or masses of illuminated gas or condensed energy re-
  gardless of weather conditions might be generated in the Van Allen radiation
  belts and might account for some of the world's most disastrous fires.


Galus, Henry S. The mystery of the crawling fireballs.     Fate, v. 5, Feb. -
   Mar. 1952: 37-40.

  Incidents in France involving "crawling fireballs" between 1898 and the
  early 1900^.


Hunt, Richard. Canadian fireballs.      Flying saucer review, v. 12, Mar.-Apr.
  1966: 33-34.


                                       314
  Summary of newspaper clippings relating to brilliant balls of fire tnat
  lit tiie SKies and landscape across British Columbia and parts of the
  northwestern U. S. on Mar. 31, 1965.

Klass, Philip J. Many UFOs are identified as plasmas. Aviation week
  & space technology, v. 85, Oct. 3, 1966: 54-55, 57, 59, 61, 65, 67,
  69, 71, 73.
  Evidence is presented in support of theory that nxgh-level UFOs could be
  created by electric discharge between clouds or between invisible layers of
  charged dust/ice particles. Occasional daylight sightings of what have been
  reported as »ell-structured or silhouetted objects are explainable as plasmas
  that give the illusion of metal structures possibly due to whirling dust or
  ice particles. Conclusions based on analysis of reports collected by National
  Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena.

Klass, Philip, Plasma theory may explain many UFOs. Aviation weeK &
   space technology, v. 85, Aug. 22, 1966: 48-50, 55-56, 60-61.
  Theory is advanced that many low-altitude UFOs are a form of ball
  lightning (plasma), also called Kugelblitz, that is generated by lightning or
  by corona discharge along high-voltage power lines under appropriate con-
  ditions. Idea was prompted by numerous UFO sightings observed on or
  near high-tension lines, especially at Exeter, N. H., during 1965, and the
  similarity of tneir characteristics to those reported for some kugelblitz
  sightings.

Klass, Philip J. UFOs -- identified. New York, Random House, 1968.
   290 p.
  Theory is advanced that most UFOs seem to be "uatural plasmas of
  ionized air, sometimes containing charged dust particles or tiny charged
  ice particles. " These plasmas may be closely related to St. Elmo^ fire
  and ball lightning. They appear to whirl and float, sometimes maneuvering
  as though they were controlled by an intelligent being; they can also give off
  light. Hypothesis is applied to explain reported UFO sightings near Exeter,
  New Hampshire, and to an elleged saucer landing in Socorro, New Mexico.

Lauritzen, Hans. Flying saucers -- superconducting whirls of plasma.
  Flying saucers, Mar. 1967: 10-11.
  Author hypothesizes that UFOs are super-conducting ring-shaped wnirls
  ol plasma trapped by earth's magnetic lines of force. Phenomena accom-
  panying UFO sightings are explained in this context.

Miles, H. G. and A. J, Meadows. Fireballs associated with the Harwell
   meteorite. Nature, v. 210, June 4, 1966: 983-986.


                                     315
  On Dec. 24, 1965, meteoritic fragments fell in a restricted area in and
  about the village of Barwell, Leicestershire, England. Sighting of three
  bright fireballs and the associated sonic effects were recorded over t-n»
  area. One of these resulted in the fall at Barwell. No evidence has >et
  been found for meteoritic falls associated witn tue other two lireballs.

Miles, h. G. and A. J. Meadows. Fireballs associated with the Barwell
  meteorite. Nature, v. 212, Dec, 17, 1966: 3339.
  Article contains additional information on the fireballs associated with
  the meteorite fall at Barwell, Leicestershire, England, on December 24,
  1965. Original report indicated existence of two fireballs; additional data
  imply existence of a third.

Rayle, Warren D. Ball lightning characteristics. Washington, D. C., NASA,
  1966. 38 p. (NASA TN D-3188)
  Surveys of NASA Lewis Research Center personnel were conducted to ob-
  tain information about ball lightning occurrences. Comparison of the
  frequency of observation of ball lightning with that of ordinary lightning im-
  pact points reveals that ball lightning is not a particularly rare phenomenon.
  Contrary to widely accepted ideas, the occurrence of ball lightning may be
  nearly as frequent as that of ordinary cloud-to-ground strokes.

Romig, Mary F. and Donald L. Lamar, Anomalous sounds and electromagnetic
  effects associated with fireball entry. Santa Monica, The Rand Corp., 1963.
  60 p. (Rand Corp. Memorandum RM-3724-ARPA)
  Memorandum describes nature of certain hissing sounds and electromagnetic
  effects associated with the passage of very bright meteors or fireballs and
  discusses their possible origin from the standpoint of atmospheric electricity
  and reentry physics. Study was motivated by possibility that a better under-
  standing of these phenomena will lead to new techniques for determining the
  size, nature, and path of any large body entering earth's atmosphere.

Ruppelt, Edward J. Mystery of the green fireballs. Fate, v. 10, June 1957.
   Fireball activity in New Mexico during winter 1954 is discussed and theories
   as to its possible nature outlined.

S'agissait-il de foudre globulaire? Phfenomfenes spatiaux, June 1969: 17-23.
   Newspaper accounts of unusual atmospheric phenomena that may have been
   ball lightning.

Sykes, Egerton. Flying saucers and negative matter. Atlantis, v. 5, Sept.
   1952: 49-51.


                                     316
  It has been established, asserts the autaor, tnat if heavy matter can be
  volatized instantaneously, it may under certain circumstances recombine
  on the negative side of the scale. Tnis secondary stage will be shortlived,
  but will have cnaracteristics similar to those of fireballs.

Teletov, G. S. Sharovala molniia [Ball iigntning],   Priroda, no. 9, 1966;
   84-92.
  Article reviews the nature and properties of ball lightning and discusses
  the hypotheses that have been advanced to explain tnem.

U. S. Library of Congress. Science and Technology Division. Ball lightning
   bibliography, 1950-1960. Prepared under the sponsorship of the USA
   Signal Missile Support Agency, Missile Electronic Warfare Division in
   cooperation with Technical Library Branch, White Sands Missile Range,
   N. M. Washington, 1961. 15 p.
   Contains 43 annotated references, mostly foreign.

Wilkins, Harold T. The strange mystery of the foo fighters. Fate, v. 4,
  Aug.-Sept. 1951: 98-106.
   Weird colored balls of fire of fantastic and variable speeds that were en-
   countered by U. S. and British pilots over Truk Lagoon, Japan; the West
   Rhine area of Alsace Lorraine; and over the Bavarian Palatinate during
   World War II are described.


                                      317
                      Disc-like Aircraft


Avro Canada's Omega. The aeroplane, v. 84, May 1, 195G: 568.
  Article discusses the unusual aerodynamic, thermodynamic, and
  structural problems posed by the disc-type aircraft under con-
  struction by Avro Canada, Ltd.

Barker, Gray. Has man conquered gravity? Flying saucers, July-Aug.
  1958: 8-11.
  Discussion of Otis T. Carr's circular-foil design OTC-X1 aircraft de-
  signed for flight to within 1,000 miles away from earth and to be
  powered by "utron" energy derived from "natural environmental sources.

Barton, Michael X. We want you. Los Angeles, Futura Press, 1960.
  34 p.

  Author suggests that no^ all UFOs come from outside or inside the planet
  earth but that some of them are Nazi-built (from the blueprints of Vikton
  Schauberger) at an armed fortress in Patagonia (Argentina) to which Adolph
  Hitler fled in July 1945. He speculates that the story of Hitler's suicide
  was fraudulent and that Hitler is still alive. The unfulfilled predictions of
  Karl Michalek between 1958 and 19^0 are also analyzed.

Canada builds a flying saucer. Fate, v. 6, Oct. 1953: 14-17.
  A disc-like aircraft under development by Avro Canada, Ltd., is described.

Disc aircraft inadequate to explain UFOs. The UFO investigaior, v. 2, Dec. -
   Jan. 1963-1964: 6-8.


                                     318
  Descriptions of disc-like aircraft: Couzinet "aerodyne", Adrian
  PhilUps, "Saucercraft"; Chance Vought XF5U-1 "Flying Pancake";
  Chance Vought V-HS "Flying Flapjack"; Otis T. Carr "OTC-X";
  Hilton Re-entry Vehicle; Hil'er "Flying Platform"; National Research
  Associates' "Flying Saucer :lide"; Weygers' "Discopter"; Swedenborg
  Saucer; Ryan Disc; General Dynamics'Lenticular Re-Entry Vehicle;
  V-7.


Du Soir, W. E.    The saucer that didn't fly.     Fate, v. 12, Aug. 1959:
   32-34.

  Account of Otis T. Carr's unsuccessful attempt in April 1958 to launch
  a prototype model of a saucer-shaped aircraft. Propulsion was to have
  been by "utron" energy.


Fry, Daniel W. Steps to the stars. Lakemont, Ga., CSA Publishers,
   1956. 83 p.

  The basic physical concepts underlying the construction and operation of
  a vehicle that could undertake interplanetary travel are discussed.


Fuller, Curtis.   Canada builds a saucer.       Fate, v. 12, Sept. 1959: 70-73.

  Avro Canada, Ltd., is preparing to test-fly a saucer-shaped craft which
  reportedly can move sidewise, hover, or skim close to the ground to avoid
  radar detection.


Haggerty, James J. and Cornelius Ryan. The Navy comes up with a real
  flying saucer. Collier's, v. 135, Apr. 29, 1955: 30-35.


   Description of a circular one-man aircraft that can hover, climb, and
   dart sideways using the "ducted fan" propulsion principle; a propeller
   operating in a shallow cylinder sucks air through the vehicle, generating
   a downward thrust force which supplies vertical lift. Aircraft was built
   by Hiller Helicopters, Palo Alto, Calif., under direction of the Office
   of Naval Research in 1954.


Is this the real flying saucer?   Look, v. 19, June 14, 195i: 44-46.

   Design study for a flying-saucer fighter prepared for Look by Republic
   Aviation Corp. engineer Thomas Turner. Sketches indicate appearance
   of a craft that would fulfill following requirements: (1) ability to take off
   and land vertically; (2) high speed of over Mach 2.; (3) high rate of climb;
   (4) exLellent maneuverability; (5) heavy armament; (6) ability to operate
   at 60.000 ft.


John^ Cornelius. Flying saucers swamp the Vietcong.           Argosy, v. 366,
   Jan. 1968: 30-31, 66, 68-69.

   Role of air-cushion vehicles in the Vietnam war is discussed.



                                       319
Nollet, A. R. Flying saucers.. .a hard looic. Marine corps gazette, v. 43,
  Dec. 1959: 20-25.
  States that hopes for a U.S. scientific breakthrough based on Apr. 29,
  1959, article in U. S. News and World Report entitled "Flying Saucer Age
  for the U.S. --It's Getting Nearer" were misplaced since the saucers
  turned out to be Ground Effect Vehicles. Describes the different types of
  GEV's worldwide and suggests military uses.

One man's flying saucer. Pace, v. 11, Aug. 1966: 62-63.

  A flying-saucer-shaped personal commuter aircraft designed by Univ. of
  California aerodynamics professor Paid Möller is discussed. Eignt feet,
  in diameter, it weighs 400 lbs., will reach 5,000 ft. altitude, and attain
  speed of 150 mph.

Russia claims "flying saucer. " The UFO investigator, v. 2, Dec.-Jan. 1963-
  1964: 1-2.
  Krasnava Zvezda is cited in article as having reported early in 1963 that
  Soviet engineers had successfully tested a "flying saucer" aircraft. State-
  ments from U. S. S. R. on UFOs 1952-1961 are listed.

Saucer blue book. Time, v. 66, Nov. 7, 1955: 52.
  Secretary of the Air Force Donald A. Quarles released information about
  a vertically rising jet aircraft soon to be tested by Ryan Aeronautical Co.
  that might be mistaken for a flying saucer. He also released a Project
  Blue Book analysis of 4,965 reported flying saucer sightings.

Saucer-eyed dragons. Time, v. 55, Apr. 17, 1950: 52-54.
   Discussion of controversy surrounding statement in U. S. News & World
   Report (Apr. 7, 1950) that the Navy had developed a revolutionary air-
   craft, a combination of helicopter and jet plane, capable of outflying any
   other. This plane was said to be "the ilying saucer. "

Stine, G. Harry. The prowling mind of Henri Coandu, Flying, v, 80, Mar.
   1967: 64-68.
   Among inventions of Henri Coanda was ?. lenticular aerodyne (flying saucer)
   designed in 1935. Coanda effect (tendency of a moving jet of air or water
   to adhere to an adjacent surface) would be used to create vertical lift without
   forward motion and to control aircraft. Although aerodyne was never built,
   tests on critical portions of it were made in France and results indicate it is
   practical.


                                      320
     Taylor, Henry J. The "flying saucer" is good news. Reader's digest, v. 57,
       July 1950: 14-16.
       Condensed from a radio broadcast. Author claims that so-called flying
       saucers are U. S. Navy experimental jet fighters and are a military secret.
       He says that Navy sources at Patuxent, Md., confirm his allegations.


1
1i

1
f
i
                                         321
|
    I


                         Unidentified Submarine Objects


        Binder, Otto O. The mystery of flying saucers at sea. Rudder, v. 84, Feb. 1968:
            21-23, 75.
            Account of UFOs observed at sea and suggestions of how boatmen can help solve
            the phenomenon.

        Bowen, Charles. A South American trio. Flying saucer review, v. 11, Jan.-Feb.
           1965: 19-21.
            Three UFO sighting cases from South America: (1) In April 1957, a resident of
            Cordoba, Argentina, allegedly encountered a landed flying saucer and was
            invited by one of *he crew members to enter for an inspection tour; (2) On
            Jan. 10, 1958, an unidentified floating objacc was viewed off the coast of S^o
            Paulo, Brazi^ by several witnesses before sinking out of sight; (3) During
            a fire near Sao Bernado do Campo, Brazil, in 1963, a flying caucer landed
            amid the flames, and several tall, good-looking "people" emerged from it
            and picked up pieces of burnt material, stones, and other debris.

        Fouere, Rene. Existe-t-il des bases sous-marines de soucoupes volantes?
I           Phenomenes spatiaux, Feb. 1965: 16-25.
!           Lists instances 1345-1960 where disc-like or wheel-like glowing objects were
            seen entering the oceans, in or on the oceans, or leaving the oceans. Gives
            reasons the ocean depths would be ideal flying saucer bases.

        Galindez, Oscar A. Crew of Argentine ship see submarine UFO. Flying saucer
            review, v. 14, Mar.-Apr. 1968: 22.

            A "submergible UFO with its own illumination" allegedly paced the Argentine
            steamer, Naviero, for 15 minutes on July 30, 1967. Article taken from press
            reports in the Argentine newspapers La Razon, Cordoba, and Los Principios.


                                             322
      Hinfelaar, H. J. Submarine craft in Australian waters. Hying saucer review,
          v. 12, July-Aug. 1966: 28-30.
          Reports appearances of Unidentified Submarine Objects (USOs) in New Zealand
          and Australian waters in 1965.

      Ley, Willy. The wheels of Poseidon; and Too much imagination. In For ycur
          informal;onr on earth and in the sky. New York, Doubleday & Co., 1967.
          p. 69-88, 157-168.
          A phenomenon is described that occurs in the Indian Ocean and that has been
          described by several eyewitnesses: a pulsating near-circular disturbance
          roughly 1,000-1, 500 feet in diameter is seen with streaks of light like the
          beams of a searchlight radiating from i ts center and revolving counter-
          clockwise. Views are given supporting speculation that the Fodkamennaya
          Tiinguska Meteorite of Central Siberia (190b) was in fact an exploded extra-
          terrestrial spacecraft.

S i
      Lorenzen, Coral. Diving for lost UFO. Fate, v. 17, May 1964: 62-65.
          Efforts are being made to salvage a flying saucer which seemed in mechanical
          difficulty when it allegedly sank in the Peropava River, Brazil, on October 31,
          1963.

      Luminous wheels puzzle seamen. New scientist, Mar. 9, 1967, v. 33:447-448.

          In March 1966, three merchant ships in the Gulf of Pnailand independently
          observed the apparently unexplained phenomenon known as the phosphorescent
          wheel: bands of luminosity skimming across the surface, apparently radiating
          from a central bright source. The wheels can rotate in either direction and
          there have been reports of two wheels, one above the other, rotating in
          opposite directions. Professor Kurt Kalle of Hamburg, authority on phosphores-
          cent wheels, attributes the phenomenon to bioluminescence.


      Luminous wheels puzzle seamen, Spaceiink, v. 4, Summer 1967: 12-13.
          In the Gulf of Thailand and waters to the south-east during March i96r7, three
          merchant ships independently observed the unexplained phenomenon known as
          the phosphorescent wheel: bands of luminosity apparently radiating from a
          central bright source. Professor Kurt Kalle of Hamburg, authority on lumi-
          nescent wheels, attributes them tc bioluminescence. From New Scientist,
          March 9, 1967.


      Ribera, Antonio. More about UFOs and the sea. Flying saucer review, v. 11,
          Nov.-Dec. 1965: 17-18.
          Author summarizes events which may indicate underwater reconnaissance by
          UFOs of submarine bases.


                                            323
Ribera. Antonio. UFOs and the sea. Flying saucer review» v. 10, Nov.-Dec. 1964:
    8-10.

    Account of strange happenings at sea that might support hypothesis that the
    bodies of water covering three-quarters of earth's surface are providing a
    hiding place for UFOs.

Robertson, W. S. UFOs and the Scottish seas. Flying saucer review, v. U, May-
   June 1965: 36-37,
    Account from newspaper sources of UFO sightings in the waters off the coast
    of Scotland, 1961-1965.

Steiger, Brad ;r«d Joan Whritenour. Unidentified underwater saucers. Saga, v. 36,
     Jime 1968: 34-37, 54-57.
    Instances are cited in which UFC. seen hovering over oceans, lakes, and rivers
    have submerged in the water. It is suggested that the objects may have under-
    water "bases,"

Turner, Richard. Some unfamiliar 'PSUFOs': the phosphorescent wheels. Flying
    saucer review, v. 13, Sept.-Oct. 1967: 7-9.
    Account of unusual bioluminescent phenomena that may be mistaken for UFOs.
    Usts sightings by seamen (1875-1910) of "phosphorescent wheels" that may fall
    into this category.


                                      324
                                 Fortean Phenomena


        Constance, Arthur. The inexplicable sky. London, W. Laurie, 1956. 308 p.
            Discusses sky phenomena, including meteors, fireballs, mirages, and things
            that fall from the heavens. Cites cases of reported extraterrestrial visita-
            tions and advances theory with supporting arguments that non-terrestrial
'   i       intelligences are coming to, or emerging from other dimensions into, earth's
            atmosphere. American ed. (New York, Citadel Press) published 1957.

        Fort, Charles. The books of Charles Fort. Introd. by Tiffany Thayer. New York,
            HemyHolt, 1941. 1125 p.
j   i       Contents: The book of the damned; New lands; Lo!; Wild talents. Collection
            of mysterious and unexplained events gleaned from newspaper reports. Accounts
            of strange things falling from the sky, the appearance of unidentified flying
            objects, showers of frogs and various animals, teleportations, disappearing
            people, and other odd phenomena. It is stated that since these events fall within
            the province of no known science, they have never been properly investigated.

        Gallegos, Faustin. The pulsing honeycomb from space. Fate, v. 11, Sept. 1958:
            40-43.
            A football-shaped object of cells resembling those of a honeycomb reportedly
            fell in a Miami, Fla., yard on Feb. 28, 1958. It pulsated, was translucent and
            intangible, and had completely vanished--by "melting"--within 45 minutes from
            the time it was seen to fall from the sky.

        Gardner, Martin. In the name of science. New York, G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1952.
            320 p.

            Survey of "quasi-scientific" theories. Chapters are included on the flat and
            hollow earth theories; Fortean phenomena; Atlantis and Lemuria; flying saucers;
            poltergeist phenomena, extrasensory perception; and pneumokinesis.


                                              325
Gould, Rupert T. Enigmas. New Hyde Park, N. Y., University Books, 1965. 248 p.
    Information about mysteries which have not been resolved up to the present day.
    Evidence that there were once giants on the earth and relating to the probability
    of intelligent life on Mars is disc issed.

      Oddities. New Hyde Park, N. Y., University Books, 1965. 228 p.
    Collection of facts relating to incidents and phenomena which have not at
    present been satisfactorily explained. Among the topics mentioned are ''the
    devil's hoofmarks, " Orffyreus's wheel, and the planet Vulcan.

Jessup» Morris K. The case for the UFO, unidentified flying objects. Introd, by
     Frank Edwards. New York, Citadel Press, 1955. 239 p.
    Author analyzes and correlates many paranormal phenomena of scientific
    record and theorizes that objects such as stones, ice, water, colored rain,
    organic matter, living organisms, and vegetable matter that have fallen to
    earth from the heavens come from intelligently operated extraterrestrial
    spacecraft or are in some way formed, guided, or influenced by the operators
    of such spacecraft.

Splitter, Henry W. Wonders from the sky. Fate, v. 6, Oct. 1953: 33-40.
    Typically 'Fortean" phenomena of strange things that have fallen from the sky,
    including toads, green rain, mud, rocks, angleworms, fish, blood and meat
    are reported.

Towner, Cliff R. Silver chaff from the sky. Fate, v. 10, Mar. 1957: 94-98.
    Apparent fall from the sky on Aug. 27, 1956, of metallic shreds concomitant
    with reports of strange lights in the sky. Chickens consuming the material
    died.

Weideman, June E. Mysterious foam in St. Louis. Fate, v. 9, Dec. 1956: 20-21.
    Fall from the sky of a strange, warm, odorless, foa. y, white substance is
    described. Incident allegedly occurred ever St. Louis on Aug. 20, 1956.

Wilkins, Harold T. "Damned" phenomena--fire and monsterc. Fate, v. 6, Dec.
    1953: 68-73.
    Descriptions of mysterious flames, phantom ships, and huge sea serpents
    given by pre-Fortean historians and annalists (209 B. C. -17th century) are
    listed.

      Did ancients see flying saucers? Fate, v. 6, Oct. 1953: 28-32.


                                      326
    Mysterious aerial fire and similar phenomena on the earth and sea noted by
    old Roman authors (including Julius Obsequcns, Pliny, and Titus Livius) and
    medieval writer» (including Geoffrey Gaimer and Lycosthenes) are cited.

Wilkins, Harold T. Mystery of the falling ice. Fater v. 4, May-June 1951: 22-27.
    Summary of phenomena of ice falling from the skies since 1811. Author postu-
    lates concomitant UFO activity.

      When the skies rained blood. Fate, v. 6, Apr. 1953: 58-63.
    Rcpcrte cases of blood falling from the heavens that were noted by historians
    in the days of the Roman empire (265 B. C. -759 A. D.).


                                                                                    \ 9


                                     327
                             ÜFOs and Religion


    Are "contact group" sightings metapn^sical? Flying saucers, July-Aug.
      1958: 12-15, 19.
      Referring to the group of UFO investigators who place a mystic; J,
      religious, or metaphysical interpretation on the entire UFO pr omenon,
      author states these concepts cannot oe rejected but must be considered.
      They could comprise a facet of the overall picture.

    Blaher, Damian J.   Is anybody there? Friar, Sept. 1963: 15-17.
      Discussion of the theological implications of space travel and the dis-
      covery of extraterrestrial people.

    Brandt, Ivan. The stumbling block of orthodoxy.    Flying saucer review,
      v. 8, July-Aug. 1962: 26-29.
I     The fiercest opposition to hypotheses supporting the reality of flying saucers
j     has always come from those who adopt a materialistic view of the universe,
i     the author states. It would seem that those who have closed their minds
      against the mystery of religion have automatically rejected any other mystery,
I     and this may explain both the conspiracy of silence and the policy of conven-
j     tionalizing as many as possible of the otherwise inexplicable UFO sightings,
I     he adds.

    Brasington, Virginia F. Flying saucers in the Bible. Claricsburg, W. Va.,
      Saucerian Books, 1963. 78 p.

      Study of flying saucers and related phenomena in the Bible. Quotes pas-
      sages from Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numoers, Deuteronomy, Joshua,
      Books of Samuel, Books of Kings, Job, Psalms, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel,
      Matthew, MarK, Luke, and Revelations.

    Cassens, Kenneth H. UFOs and the modern Bible. Fate, v. 8, Aug. 1955:
      51-53.


                                         328
Cove, Gordon. Who pilots the flying saucers? London, The Autnor,
  1955. 80 p.
  Flying saucers, according to the author, are celestial warnings of an im-
  pending Divine interruption of the course of world events: they are to
  warn men of the coming judgement and to encourage tne believer.

Dean, John W. Flying saucers and the Scriptures. New York, Vantage
  Press, 1964. 173 p.
  Text is an amplification of illustrated lecture bearing same title; uses
  scriptural passages and recent documentation of reported UFO sightings
  to support theory that earth has received visitors from space since earli-
  est times whose missions are peaceful and who are "messengers of God. "

Downing, Barry H. The Bible and flying saucers. Philadelphia, J. B.
  Lippincott Co., 1967. 221 p.
  Author, a minister and Biblical scholar, postulates that many of the
  phenomena in the skies which are described in the Bible were what we
  term as UFOs today.

Drake, W. R. Gods or spacemen? Amherst, Wis., Amherst Press, 1964.
  176 p.
  Author suggests that present tl jlogy may be based on false premises
  since the experiences and visions of saints are phenomena that might be
  associated with UFOs and their extraterrestrial crews. He reviews the
  mythological and religious traditions of the countries of tne world to
  demonstrate worldwide "race memories" of spacemen visiting earth.
  He suggests that terrestrial destruction in ages past may nave been
  caused by interplanetary warfare rather than by collision of celestial
  bodies with earth.


Easton, W. B. Space travel and space theology,      Theology today, v. 17,
  Jan. 1961: 428-429.


Ferguson, William. A message from outer space. Oak ParK, 111.,
  Golden Age Press, 1955. 54 p.
  A translation decoding the Book of Revelations allegedly given to
  author telepathically by "Khauga, the angel who gave it to St. John. "
  Flying saucers are said to be the spacecraft of "perfected beings" who
  are "progressed to a four dimensional state of reality" and who are
  "preparing earth for the second coming of Jesus. "

Gaspa, Pietro, Monito all'umanita. Sassari, Italy, Arti Grafiche
  Editoriali S. p. A., 1962. 127 p.
  Author relates the UFO phenomenon to the Thomistic concept of the
  nature and attributes of superior spiritual entities. Photographic illus-
  trations of thesis included.

                                     329
Gofi, Kenneth. The flying saucers. Englewood, Colorado, The Author,
   195D. 32 p.
  Appearance of ''flying saucers" in the heavens is said to be according to
  schedule and in line with God's divine plan: they are the battle chariots
  of God, destined to play an important part in tne destruction of Godless
  alliances prophesied by Enoch to laKe place at the second coming of Christ.


Grant, W. V. Men from the moon in America. Dallas, Texas, The Author,
  [195- ] 31 p.

  "Space men" who have allegedly contacted certain humans are supernatural
  beings from an evil (anti-Christ) source ana are not from the moon, other
  planets, or a Russian satellite, the author postulates. Their goal of ruling
  the world is to be accomplished by deceiving and thereby influencing man-
  kind.

Grant, W. V. Men in the flying saucers identified. Dallas, Tex., The
  Author, (195- ] 32 p. '

  Author postulates that flying saucers are real and that there are super-
  natural entities in them; however, he claims that these spirits are demoniac
  anti-Christ forces attempting to dupe man and take over our world.

Jack, Homer A. Religion and the saucers. Fate, v. 8, Mar. 1955: 20-23.
   Discussing the religious implications of flying saucers if they should herald
   intelligent life on other planets of our sun or of other suns. Dr. Jack says
   that Christianity would be hardest hit: "... if Christ was born and crucified
   on these other planets so that those races also could know God..., Christ's
   life here would lose all divine meaning.'

James, Trevor. Scientists, contactees and equilibrium. Flying saucer review,
  v. 6, Jan.-Feb. 1960: 19-21.

   Author suggests that review of stories of perr is allegedly contacted by
   extraterrestrial beings reveals a struggle between Christ and anti-Christ
   forces. Allegations should be evaluated not so much in the light of whether
   they are possible or valid but in the light of who contacted these people:
   were they forces of good or forces of evil ?

Jessup, Morris K. UFO and the Bible. New York, Citadel Press, 1956.
   126 p.
   Book purports to show that (1) there is a causal common denominator for
   many of the Biblical wonders, and (2) that this common cause is related
   to the phenomenon of the UFO, both directly and indirectly.

Kleinz, John P. Theology of outer space. Columbia, v. 40, Oct. 1960:
   27-28, 36-37.


                                      330
Reeve, Bryant and Helen Reeve. Flying saucer pilgrimmage. Amherst,
  Wis., Amherst Press, 1957. 304 p.
  Account of two-year private research by authors into UFO phenomenon
  which involved 23,000 miles of travel to interview individuals claiming
  contact with extraterrestrial beings. Religious, philosophic, and
  prophetic implications of UFO appearances are also discussed.

Ribera, Antonio. What happened at Fatima? Flying saucer review, v. 10,
   Mar,-Apr. 1964: 12-14.

  Resum6 of the miracle at Fatima. north of Lisbon, Portugal, which ex-
  tended from May 13 to Oct. 7, 1917, in context of the TJ^O phenomenon.
  Author suggests that UFO occupants may present themselves in terms
  familiar to "contactees, " usually as divine manifestations.

The saucer question. The Catholic digest, v. 16, Oct. 1952: 121.
  Father Francis J. Connell, dean of Catholic university's School of Sacred
  Theology, summarizes the Church's position on the question of invaoers
  from outer space. Theologically speaking, outer space dwellers might
  fall into four principal classes: (1) they might have received a super-
  natural destiny from God; (2) God could have created them with a natural
  but eternal destiny; (3) they might be rational beings who sinned against
  God but were never given the chance to regain grace; and (4) they might
  have received supernatural gifts and kept them, leading the paradisical
  existence of Adam and Eve before they ate the forbidden fruit.

The theology of saucers. Time, v. 60, Aug. 18, 1952: 62.
  Father Francis J. Connell, dean of Catholic University's School of
  Sacred Theology, summarized his church's position on the question of
  invaders from outer space. He noted that "the principles of [Catholic]
  faith are entirely reconcilable with even the most astounding possibilities
  regarding life on other planets. "

Viney, Basil. Invasion worn space. The contemporary review, v. 1GG, Oct. 1955:
   257-260.

  After briefly reviewing what is known and what is speculated about flying
  saucers, the author says it does not appear that interplanetary or inter-
  stellar or inter-gaiaxial communication could have any effect on the genuine
  religious fundamentals. He believes the vision of the being of God would be
  magnified and that the prospect of human brotherhood on a cosmic scale
  never before conceived would uplift us from ail petty world-parochial
  quarrels.
                           üFOs and Time


Another speech by Wilbert B. Smith. Flying saucer review, v. 9, Nov. -Dec.
  1963: 11-14.
  Author, head of Canadian Project Magnet, imparts information allegedly
  obtained from extraterrestrial sources that casts serious doubt on validity
  of some basic concepts of our science and on our ideas of time. He men-
  tions having made "hardware that worKs" from information given him by
  extraterrestrial intelligences. Extracts from speech delivered to
  Vancouver (Canada) Flying Saucer Ciub in March 1961.

Cadman, A. G. A layman's time and space. Flying saucer review, v. 10,
  Nov.-Dec. 1964: 19-21.
  Theories are advanced regarding time measurement. It is suggested that
  the penalty or advantage of exceeding the speed of light might be invisibility,
  and that UFOs could well be vehicles which only become visible when they
  decelerate from their conventional speed which is greater than the speed of
  light. Reprinted from June 13, 1964, Sphere.

Cox, Adrian R. A question of time. Flying saucer review, v. 10, Mar. -Apr.
  1964: 18-21, 34.
  Time is one of the two aspects of speed. Vast distances in space can be
  minimized by an increase in speed. Are there any limits to speed? This
  article attempts an answer, and has implications for interstellar flight.

Cox, Adrian. A question of time. Flying saucer review, v. 10, July-Aug.
   1964: 7-9.
   Time factor in covering interstellar distances is basic reason for unwill-
   ingness of scientists to accept existence of interplanetary spacecraft,
   author postulates. He suggests reasons an advanced extraterrestrial
   civilization may have surmounted tnis apparent difficulty.



                                     332
De Arujo, Hernani Ebecken. Einstein, espa^o-temp^       Rio de Janeiro,
   The Author, 1965. 89 p.
  Einstein's "clock paradox" which suggests tha^ at speeds approaching that
  of light man would travel into the past or into the future is confirmed, accord-
  ing to author, by existe ^e of UFOs whose speed has been clocked on radar
  as thousands of kilometers an hour. He refers to 11,500 yr. -old cave in-
  scriptions of flying saucers and motner ship discovered in Varzelandia,
  Brazil, in 1963, and suggests they prove man is travelling or will travel
  through space-time that is "continuous at four dimensions. "

Fouferfe, Rene. Seraient-ils des revenants du futur? Pnönomfenes spatiaux.
   JU:*J 1966: 11-14.

  Author speculates on an explanation for the faci that UFO occupants do not
  attempt widespread contact with humans: they might be time travelers re-
  turning to the past from the future.


                                     333
                     Gravity and Anti-gravity


Barker, Gray. Has man conquered gravity? Flying saucers, July-Aug. 1958:8-11.
    Discussion of Otis T. Carr's circular-foil design OTC-Xl aircraft designed for
    flight to within 1,000 miles away from earth and to be powered by "utron"
    energy derived from "natural environmental sources. "

Burridge, Gaston. Townsend Brown and his anti-gravity discs. Fate, v. 11, Nov.
    1958: 40-48.
    Propulsion principle based on the Biefeld-Brown effect was successfully used
    by Brown to fly saucer-like discs. Method has definite anti-gravitic potentials.

Cordonnier, Gerard. Polarization de la masse levitation et antigravitation.
    Ph&iomfenes spatiaux, Sept. 1966: 21-24.
    Author suggests that the phenomenon of levitation be investigated in depth for
    clues as to how the force of gravity is overcome.

Cramp, Leonard G. Space, gravity, and the flying saucer. Introd hy Desmond
   Leslie. London, T. Werner Laurie, Ltd., 1954. 182 p.
    Postulating that UFOs are intelligently controlled extraterrestrial spacecraft,
    author introduces theory and supporting arguments that they are propelled by
    a controlled gravitational field.

Edwards, Frank. Frank Edwards' report. Fate, v. 10, Aug. 1957: 51-57.

    Notes alleged discovery in 1926 by Dr Charles F. Bush that the substance
    lintz basalt seemingly defies the laws of gravity by not accelerating in free
    fall. Notes that in April of 1957 five major aeronautical companies may have
    been engaged In anti-gravity research projects. Alleges that the Air Force
    has a multimillion dollar plant equipped especially for investigation of anti-
    gravity and counter-gravitational forces. Suggests that research activity
    relates to determining propulsion mode of UFOs.

                                     334
Fed!, Remo. Un grande enigma: il mistero dell'attrazione. Clypous, v. 5, Feb.             %
    1968: 2-6.
                                                                                          i
    Discussion of theories relating to gravitational attraction between celestial
    bodies.                                                                           I

Sharp, Peter F. A look at gravitation. Flying saucer review, v. 3, July-Aug.          f
    1962: 29-31, 33.                                                                  f
    Examination of theories and recent speculation about gravitation as it relates
    to the UFO phenomenon.                                                            )

Sykes, Egerton. Negative or contra terrene matter. Atlantis, v. 5, July 1952:         \
    25-29.                                                                            I
                                                                                      :
    Article on the subject of negative mass and whether its properties will neutra-
    lize gravity.

Van As, I. A. Anti-gravity: the science of electrogravitics. Flying saucer review,
    v. 8, Jan.-Feb. 1962: 22-24.
    Principle is proposed for an anti-gravity dia-magnetic spacecraft of aluminum
    and bismuth that would travel along the lines of force of the planets.

Van den Berg, Basil. My discovery will prove Adamski's claim. Flying saucer
    review, v. 8, Nov.-Dec. 1962: 3-5.

    Author claims to have deciphered the hieroglyphics on a photographic plate
    allegedly given Adamski by Venusians and to have constructed an anti-gravity
    device based on them.

Veldman, James S. Saucers, gravity, and men. Flying saucers, July-Aug. 1958:
    72-76.

    Author speculates that the Government may be searching for means to control
    gravity in effort to develop aircraft whose performance can match the reported
    behavior of UFOs.


                                       335
                         Hollow Earth Theory


Barton, Michael X. Rainbow City and the inner earth people. Los Angeles, Futura
    Press, 1960. 31 p.
    Suggests that legendary Rainbow City--owned by a race of people living inside
    the earth and used as a base for their flying saucers--is in Antarctica near its
    eastern coast. Flying saucers in our skies may therefore be coming from
    inside the earth instead of from other planeis.

Beckley, Timothy G. The Shaver mystery and the inner earth. Clarksburg, W. Va.f
    Saucerian Publications, 1967. 118 p.
    Review of the Shaver mystery and succinct overview of the whole tradition of
    underground races.

Bernard, Raymond. Flying saucers from the earth's interior. Joinville, Santa
    Catarina, Brazil, The Author, [1966?] 89 p.
    Author presents evidence from Arctic explorers concerning the existence of a
    hollow earth with openings at the poles. Admiral Byrd reportedly penetrated
    this region for 2, 300 miles, entering a land of mountains, forests, lakes, rivers,
    greenery, and animal life.

       The hollow earth. Mokelumne Hill, Calif., Health Research, 1963. 105 p.

    Book purports to present scientific evidence that the earth is hollow with openings
    at its poles rather than solid with a fiery center of molten metal. It also argues
    that in earth's interior exists an advanced ci'ilization which is the creator of
    the flying saucers. Published also in 1964 edition (New York, Distributed by
    Fieldcrest Pub. Co., 1964).

"Byrd did make North Pole flight in Feb., 1947! " --Giannini. Flying saucers, Feb.
    1961: 4-11.



                                      336
            S' ries of letters between Richard Ogden and Amadeo Giaimini, author of
            V orlds beyond the Poles discussing whether or not Admiral Byrd actually
            flew over the North Pole in February 1947 and whether or not he "penetrated
            1,700 miles beyond it."

        Dickhoff, Robert £. Agharta. Boston, Bruce Humphries, Inc., 1951. 106 p.                |
                                                                                                i

            Author asserts that Agharta in central China is one of seven underground cities     |
            built by Martians who had come to colonize earth and later settled by them to       \
            escape radioactivity following an atomic war between Atlantis and Lemuria.
            Openings to subterranean tunnels giving access to these cities--and through
            which Martian interplanetary spacecraft can still enter and exit--are in Tibet,     =,.
            Siberia, North and South America, and some remote mountain peaks.

I            Homecoming of the Martians. Ghaziabad, India, Bharti Assn. Publications,
I           1958. 175 p.
\                                                                                               i
            Hidden "mystery cities, " above and below the earth could well be the habitat       I
            in which the original esrth colonizers, the Martians, live a secluded, protected,   |
            scientific existence, tl e author suggests. These cities may be Lhasa, Agharta      [
|           (Tzangpo Valley, TibeU, and Rainbow City, Antarctica. He believes that
|           flying saucers are MarLan spaceships whose pilots manipulate a power principle      '{
            of planetary, magnetic cu/rents. Mankind and its destiny is supervised by
            these beings. Book also published by Health Research, Mokelumne Hill, Calif.,
\           1964.                                                                               j
I
        Emerson, Willis George. The smoky god. New York, Fieldcrest Pubushing Co.,
I          1964. 186 p.                                                                         i
I                                                                                               I
            Evidence is presented in support of the hollow earth theory and the existence of
;           a superior civilization in the earth's interior.                                    I
t
|       Gardner, Marshall B. A journey to the earth's interior. Aurora, HI., The Author,
j           1913. 69 p.                                                                         '
                                                                                                )
    I
    I       Author expounds the theory of a central sun within the earth's interior.            f
    I
    I
        Gardner, Martin. In the name of science. Nev York, G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1952.
    |       320 p.
    j       Survey of "quasi-scientific" theories. Chapters are included on the flat and
    [       hollow earth theories, Fortean phenomena, Atlantis and Lemuria, flying
    j       saucers, poltergeist phenomena, and ESP and PK.
    I
        Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world, No. A-l. Amherst, Wis., Palmer
            Publications, 1961. 192 p.


                                               337
.      Stories of Richard Shaver, who believes the earth is inhabited underground,
       in gigantic caves whose area is more extensive than the surface land area,
       by the "dero"--an idiot people governed by degenerate forces, and the "tero"
       --who are governed by constructive forces. Both groups are descendants of
       an immortal Titan-Atlan race that fled earth when the sun started giving
       off poisonous radiation that caused them to age and then die. Included are:
        A witch in the night; The tormenting voices; Flight into futility; I enter the
       caves; A taste of heaven; The living library; I remember Lemuria; Disaster
       and escape; The ancient alphabet; A dictionary of the Mantong language; Why
       the caves are secret.

       — Saucers from earth: a challenge to secrecy. Flying saucers, Dec. 1959:
       8-21.
        Author suggests that the most logical origin for flying saacers is our own
        earth and that the hollow earth theory, which suggests the interior of the
        earth is populated by a highly evolved race with great technological skill,
        merits serious attention.

    Shaver, Richard S. The elder world. Jn Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world.
        No. A-6. Amherst, Wis., Palmer Publications, 1962. p. 964-977.
        Lore of the Shaver mystery and life in earth's inner world.

       -- Fiction-fact; theory-science. In Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world,
        No. A-5. Amherst, Wis., Palmei Publications, 1962 p. 884-911.
        Author expands on his theory that the groups secretly manipulating mankind
        and world history are the evil nderos" and the beneficent "teros" who reside
        in caverns inside the earth.

       -- How to make a portrait of dero activity. In Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden
        world, no. A-8. Amherst, Wis., Palmer Publications, 1962. p. 1349-1353.
        Step-by step instructions for obtaining photographic proof of dero activity.

       -- In the beginning. In Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world, No. A-5.
        Amherst, Wis., Palmer Publications, 1962. p. 931-949.
        Author writes that the first race to inhabit earth was very diverse in form and
        was the product of intermingling of many extraterrestrial races. This race
        perished when the sun sent out an unpredicted wave of heat that destroyed all
        life in our solar system. The second race to inhabit earth, also of extra-
        terrestrial origin, was the Titan-Atlan under whose rule Atlantis flourished.
        Destruction of this civilization was by flood.

       -- The invisible interview, or, what do you know about flying saucers ? In
        Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world. No. A-8. Amherst, Wis., Palmer
        Publications, 1962. p. 1526-1532.


                                         338
    Relationship between UFOs and their pilots and the "dero" and "tero" is
    discussed.

Shaver, Richards. Lo, the wonder of the occult explanation! Jh Palmer, Ray,
    ed. The hidden world, No- A-5. Amherst, Wis., Palmer Publications,
    1962. p. 912-928.
    Article attempts to disprove the existence of spirits and poltergeists as living
    things of an interpenetrating or co-existent "etherean" world and postulates
    the existence in caverns within the earth of machines which can be used to
    produce phenomena similar in every way to spirit phenomena.

   -- The lorelei. In Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world, No. A-6. Amherst,
    Wis., Palmer Publications, 1962. p. 978-992.
    Greek and Roman myths are interpreted in modern terms. Author postulates
    that the "gods" existed and were the "front" the cavern people erected between
    themselves and discovery by the vigorous races that lived on earth's surface
    early in her history.

   -- Mand^rk.. .postscript, 1948. Jn Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world. No.
    A-4. Amherst, Wis., Palmer Publications, 1961. p. 588-632.
    Story about the caves under Jerusalem as they exist in modern times--
    inhabited by the "deros" and "teros. "

   -- Return of Sathanas. In Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world. No. A-4.
    Amherst, Wis., Palmer Publications, 1961. p. 663-765.
    Legend of Sathanas, generally called Satan, and much of the lore of the "deros"
    and "teros" and of their life inside the earth.

   -- La soretf?re. In Palmer, Ray. ed. The hidden world, No. A-5. Amherst,
    Wis., Palmer Publications, 1962. p. 839-883.

    Tale of sorceresses living on the surface of the earth who find ways to be useful
    to the cavern-dwelling "dero" of the earth's inner world to the detriment of
    mankind.

   -- What I am trying to say. In Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world, No. A-16.
    Amherst, Wis., Palmer Publications, 1964. p. 2695-2700.
    Author summarizes what he has tried to accomplish in his writings: (1) explain
    all early history of man as being wrong deductions based on false premises
    and give a truer picture of man's past; (2) show what originated the God legend;
    (3) explain witchcraft; (4) explain spiritualism; (5) show that all religions have
    been used in the past, are still used, and will be used in the future towards
    ends of which we have no knowledge or understanding; (6) show that deep in the
    rock under nearly every nation of earth lie scientific secrets of an "Elder"


                                       339
    race which would make "modern" science obsolete; (7) show that modern
    scientists are obstructed in their work by a class of people resident within
    the earth to an extent that robs us of 90% of the progress they would bring
    us; (8) show that our vast wars are started and kept going by these beings;
    (9) show that age is caused by radioactives throwa off from the sun; and
    (10) show that all the race called modern man is exploited, fooled, and
    destroyed, kept from all real progress, by a race that considers them
    enemies for the most part or cattle.

Wentworth, Jim. Clarifying the Shaver mystery. In Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden
   world. No. A-13. Amherst, Wis., Palmer Publications, 1964. p. 2123-2149.
    Article summarizes the basic principles of "Shaveritm, " which postulates
    an inner world of evil "deros" and good "teros" who manipulate mankind and
    world events through use of machines in their possession.

   -- Spiritualism and the Shaver mystery. In_Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden
    world, No. A-B. Amherst, Wis., Palmer Publications, 1962. p. 1404-1415.
    Author questions whether all forms of occult or Fortean phenomena could
    indeed be caused by Shaver's material, flesh-and-blood cavern dwellers and
    suggests that it is unlikely.


                                     340
                          Disappearances


Cornelia, Tom. Have UFOs "swallowed" our aircraft? Fate, v. 14, May
  1961: 32-37.
  Master Sergeant O. D. Hill of Project BluebooK allegedly related instances
  whore aircraft being tracked on radar mysteriously disappeared after
  "merging" with liFOs also being tracked.

The depily Bermuda triangle. Flying saucer review, v. 10, July-Aug. 1964:
   14-...

  Summary of mysterious disappearances of aircraft between !94b and 1963
  in airspace over triangle formed by drawing a line from Florida to Bermuda,
  from Bermuda to Puerto Rico, and from Florida through the Banamas.

Disappearances of aeroplanes. LUFORO bulletin, v. 3, Sept. -Oct. 1962: 5-6.
  List of aircraft disappearances 1913-1955, giving pilot's name, point of
  departure, and region of disappearance.

Foss. William O. The missing crew of the airsnip L-8. Fate, v. 12, Nov.
  1959: 74-78.
  Two naval aviators disappeared from the USN blimp L-8 on Apr. 18. 1958,
  while on routine submarine patrol over the California coastline.

Gaddis, Vincent H. [Survey of mysterious disappearances] In his Invisible
  horizons. Philadelphia, Chilton Co., 1965, p. 161-225.
   Describes disappearances of men and aircraft under circumstances that
   would suggest Kidnapping by extraterrestrials.


                                    341
Sanderson, Ivaa T. The spreading mystery of the Bermuda triangle.
   Argosy, v. 367, Aug. 1968: 35-37, 71, 73.
  Author discusses a pattern revealed in the disappearance of ships,
  planes, and submarines.


                                    342
                             Related Subjects


GENERAL REFERENCES


   Baker, James. The exteriorization of the mental body. New York, The William-
       Frederick Press, 1954. 32 p.
       A scientific interpretation of the out-of-the-body experience known as
       pneumakinesis.

   Baroja, Julia C. The world of the witches. Chicago, University of Chicago Press,
       1964. 313 p.
       Examines the question of the nature of reality in a world where there are witches
       and sorceresses believed to have tne power to perform certain acts connected
       with night, the moon, and nocturnal spirits.

   Bessor, John P   Mysterious lights of Australia. Fate, v. 6, Aug. 1953: 87-90.
       The "min-min light" phenomenon of Australia is described. Characteristically
       visible only at night, "a huge globe of brilliant light soars up from the wooded
       horizon, travels rapidly over the treetops for some distance and then hovers,
       stationary for some time, giving the observer the eerie impression it is watch-
       ing him. "

   Cade, Cecil Maxwell. Other worlds than ours. London, Museum Press, 1966.
       248 p.

       Consideration of possibility and implications of other worlds in space and other
       worlds in time.

   Coates, James. Seeing the invisible. London, New York, Fowler & Co., 1909.
       315 p.



                                        343
    Studies in psychometry, thought transference, telepathy, and allied phenomena
    that attest to reality of forces and powers that cannot be measured by physical
    means.

Corrall, Alice Enid. Witchcraft: the sixth sense and us, by Justine Glass [pseud.
    London, Neville Spearman, 1966. 205 p.
    Witches and witchcraft are evaluated in terms of extrasensory perception and
    as the reservoir of "Know-how" of the psychic faculties. Contact with forces
    beyond the world of form is suggested as axiomatic.

Da Silva, Renato I. No espaco nao estamos sos. Säo Paulo, Edart, 1966. 213 p.
    Theories relating to possibility of life on the moon and other planets are sum-
    marized. Parapsychological phenomena of mental telepathy, precognition,
    ESP, premonition, and astral projection are discussed as they might relate
    to contact with extraterrestrial entities or intelligences.

Donnelly, Joseph W. Diary of a psychic. Hollywood, Fla., The Author, 1966.
   60 p.
    Anecdotes and personal experiences of author in the development of extrasen-
    sory perception allegedly written under guidance of "spirit mentors. " Includes
    discussion of psychic-occult-UFO matters.

Dunne, JohnW. An experiment with time. London, Faber and Faber, 1934. 288 p.
    Analysis of the "time regress": author proves to his own satisfaction that the
    human mind, or memory, can move forward in time as well as backward.

Eddington, Arthur S. The nature of the physical world, London, J. M. Dent Sons,
    1935. 345 p.
    Summary of the philosophy of the new physics: (1) The symbolic nature of the
    entities of physics is generally recognized and the scheme of physics is formu-
    lated in such a way as to make- it almost self-evident that it is a partial aspect
    of something wider; (2) Strict causality is abandoned in the material world;
    (3) Recognizing that the physical world is entirely abstract and without 'actual-
    ity' apart from its linkage to consciousness, we restore consciousness to the
    fundamental position instead of representing it as an inessential complication
    occasionally found in the midst of inorganic nature at a late stage of evolution-
    ary history; (4) The sanction for correlating a 'real' physical world to certain
    feelings of which we are conscious does not seem to differ in any essential re-
    spect from the sanction for correlating a spiritual domain to another side of
    our personality.

Flammarion, Camille. Mysterious psychic forces. Boston, Small, Maynard and
    Co., 1907. 466 p.


                                      344
    Study of psychical phenomena. Author concludes that man has in himself a
    fluidic and psychic force whose nature is still unknown, but which is capable
    of acting at a distance upon matter and of moving the same. This force, the
    expression of our will, is both psychical and physical.

      The unknown. New York and London, Harper & Bros., 1900. 487 p.
   A collection of psychic facts that shows that we live in the midst of an invisible
   world in which forces are at work of which we know very little. There are
   mental transmissions, communications of thoughts, and psychic currents be-
   tween human souls. We may see without eyes and hear without ears "not by
   unnatural excitement of our sense of vision or of hearing,... but by some in-
   terior sense, psychic and mental. "

Fuller, Curtis. A psychiatrist looks at psychic doubles» Fate, v. 12, Jan. 1959:
    67-75.
    The psychic double (autoscopic phenomenon) is defined in medical terms by
    Dr. Narcyz Lukianowicz of Barry Hospital, Bristol, England, as a "complex
    psycho-sensorial hallucinatory perception of one's own body image projected
    into external visual space. " Detailed studies of phenomenon appeared in
    August 1958 issue of Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry.

Geier, Chester S. Ghost light of Hornet. Fate, v. 9, Apr. 1956: 58-61.
    A strange luminous glow that appears each night in the Joplin-Neosho area of
    Missouri and that defies scientific explanation is described.
                                                                                         1 /
Geley, Gustave. From the unconscious to the conscious. New York and London,
    Harper & Bros., 1921. 327 p.
    Interpretation of the evolution of the individual and the universe. Continuous
    development of the conscious is postulated as an evolutionary fact; this con-
    scious, grown to its full stature, will be able to transcend all its limitations,
    to attain what is now inaccessible, to understand what is now incomprehensible.

Giannini, Amadeo. Worlds beyond the poles. New York, Vantage Press, 1959.
    218 p.

    Author attempts to prove his contention that there are no northern or southern
    limits to the earth; celestial land areas appearing "up" or out from the earth
    constitute physical land routes from the earth to every land area of the universe.

Hampton, Wade T. How to h/n \otize by telepathy. Fate, v. 9, Nov. 1956: 88-94.
    Tests indicate that a subjeci may be entranced by mental command.

       Mystery of hypnotic "ecstacy. " Fate, v. 10, Jan. 1957: 94-99.


                                      345
    Discussion of the 'Visions'* of ecstatics and the bearing that the phenomenon
    might have on the existence of a "spirit world" and on communication with be-
    ings on another plane of existence.

Kapp, R. O. Toward a unified cosmology. New York, Basic Books, 1960. 303 p.
    Hypothesis is defended that the laws of physics are not restrictive in the sense
    in which laws in statute books are. The laws of physics, it is claimed, neither
    require nor prohibit any specific number, event, condition, property, configu-
    ration, or other feature. They permit everything to occur that is logically con-
    sistent with all observable facts and that is, in this sense, logically possible.
    It is shown that our understanding of gravitation is more defective than that of
    most natural phenomena and eight questions of major significance are listed to
    which answers cannot yet be provided.

Krafft, CarlF, Ether and matter. Richmond, Va. Dietz Printing Co., 1945. 117p.
    Defending the dynamic ether and vortex atom theory, the author believes that
    all phenomena of the physical universe are only different manifestations of the
    various modes of motion of the all-pervading ether. He refers to th3 pan-
    psychic doctrine that the consciousness has its origin in the ether. The ether
    would then be the common substrate of both mind and matter and would have
    psychical as well as physical attributes, both of which would kk? governed by
    similar or analogous laws and principles.

Last, Cecil E. Man in the universe. London, Werner Laurie, 1954. 166 p.
    The universe is conceived as a non-mechanical reality. In association with
    such a universe, the idea is elaborated that mind is the supreme factor in the
    economy of the universe and that matter is derived from consciousness and
    rot consciousness from matter, in accordance with the suggestions of Jean,
    de Broglie, and Planck, supported by Einstein and Schrodinger.

Lawrence, Lincoln. Were we controlled? New Hyde Park, N. Y., University Books,
   1967. 173 p.
    Evidence is presented indicating that Lee Harvey Oswald and Jack Ruby played
    the roles of mere robots and were manipulated without their knowledge through
    a new technique of mental programming called R. H.I.C. and E. D. O. M.
     (Radio-Hypnotic Intracerebral Control and Electronic Dissoultion of Memory).

Loftin, Bob. Spooksville's ghost lights. Tulsa, Okla, The Author, 1967. 28 p.
    Compilation of stories, news items, and testimonials concerning strange "lights
    in the sky" seen at Spooksviile, 11 miles southwest of Jop'in, Mo.

Mamontoff, Nicholas. Can thoughts have form ? Fate, v. 13, June 1960: 41-46.
    Experiment is described in which a thought form (egrigor) - a red-haired cat
    wearing Russian boots - was created through intense concentration by psychic
    researchers. It is suggested that many cases of "visions" are actually egrigors.



                                     346
Manning. Henry P. The fourth dimension simply explained. New York, Dover
    Publications, 1960. 251 p.
    A collection of essays selected from those submitted in the Scientific American's
    prize competition.

MiHer, E. C. Correspondence: ethics and space travel. Spaceflight, v. 4, July
   1962: 139.
    With the a priori assumption that intelligent extraterrestrial life may exist,
    three statements of ethical conduct are urged for discussion and adaptation:
    (1) no contact would be made with intelligent life not possessing spaceflight
    capability; (2) no sectarian or belligerent views or acts would be made without
    common understanding; (3) no artifact or specimen not within the technical com-
    petence of both parties wouk be exchanged.

O'Brien, Barbara. Operators and things: the inner life of a schizophrenic. Cam-
    bridge, Arlington Books, Inc. [1959] 166 p.
    In her effort to understand how she suddenly entered a world of hallucinatory
    characters in which the reasoning mechanism had been fogged and the uncon-
    scious mind was in control, the author presents an account of our present
    state of knowledge and ignorance about schizophrenia. Account has same
    similarities to reports by UFO "contactees."

Oehler, Pauline. The psychic photography of Ted Seriös. Fate, v. 15, Dec. 1962:
    67-82.
    Ted Seriös has apparent ability to produce photographs of places he has never
    been, never seen, and of which he has no previous knowledge under strictly
    controlled conditions that preclude fraud.

Parkes, A. S. and A. U. Smith. Transport of life in the frozen or dried state.
    British medical journal; May 16, 1959: 1295-1297.

Pendergast, R. Terrestrial and cosmic polygenism. Downside review, v. 82,
    July 1964: 189-198.


Pierce. J. R. Relativity and space travel. Institute of Radio Engineers, Proceed-
    ings, v. 47, June 1959: 1053-1061,

Puri, Omananda. The boy and the brothers. London, Victor Gallancz Ltd., 1959.
    303 p.
    An allegedly factual account of a young man who, while in a trance state--
    apparently "possessed" by superior "beings" or entities--perfornn i miracles
    of healing and served as an evangelist.

Rampa, T. Lobsang. The third eye. Garden City, N. Y., Doubleday & Co., 1956.
   256 p.



                                     347
    Case in which a Tibetan entity allegedly took possession of the body of Cyril
    Hoskin so that he lost all memory of his past life and had instead the full
    memory of a Tibetan from babyhood onwards. Novel is the account of the con-
    trolling entity's life in a lamasery and psychic powers imparted to him by open-
    ing of the '>hird eye. "

Ross, John C. Dr. Hyden's psychic horror drug. Fate, v. 14, Aug. 1961: 25-27.
    Dr. Holger Hyden, professor of histology at the University of Göteborg, Sweden,
    has discovered a tasteless drug--tricyano-amino-propene (TAP)--that can be


Rowland, John. Mysteries of science. London, Werner Laurie, 1955. 214 p.
    The problem considered is whether science as a whole really has limitations
    which are inherent in the very nature of sci^nc^ itself and, if so, what these
    limitations actually are. Also discussed is the corollary problem of deciding
    what part of human life and thought can be expected to deal adequately with
    those things which lie well outside the scientific sphere. The UFO phenomenon
    is cited as an example of ^be real reluctance on the part of orthodox scientists
    to examine facts that lie outside the more or less arbitrary limits of ordinary
    scientific investigations.

Shirley, Ralph The mystery uf the human double: the case for astral projection.
    New Hyde Park, N. Y., University Book, 1965. 189 p.
    Postulating that the physical body and the consciousness are separable, book
    deals with both the voluntary and involuntary exteriorization of the etheric body
    and treats the methods vv Mch have been adopted for the etheric body to leave the
    physical body at will and the value of the results so obtained.

Stumbough, Virginia. Fairies were real. Fate, v. 10, Nov. 1957: 83-90.
    Author claims thai fairies did live, that they were the last of the Neolithic
    peoples in Europe. Short, stocky, dark-skinned, they came from the region
    of the Mediterranean, were dominant in Europe for 500 years and had dis-
    appeared as a pure race by the end of the 'Middle Ages. Dr. Margaret Murray's
    The God of the Witches (London, Faber and Faber, 1952) is one of the sources.

Tassi, Dan. The mind and time and space. Philadelphia, Dorrance & Co., 1962.
    114 p.
    Proposes thesis that time and space are not limitations to extrasensory per -
    ception; all knowledge and information within the universe throughout eternity
    is therefore available to consciousness with proper prodding inside the mind.
    Discusses how these concepts were applied to the study of the planets and
    describes experiments in which the evolutionary history of a given planet was
    sought by the experimenter from a subject under hypnosis.

Thornton, Ronald C. The unified field: an extension of the general theory of
    relativity to date. Oxford, England, Vincent-Baxter Press, 1951. 23 p.


                                     348
       Explanation of how the unified field theory collates every singl« occurence of any
       type in one unitary conception. Author assrrts that such a unity is the true
       nature of the universe.

    Tyrrell, George N. Apparitions. London, Gerald Duckworth & Co., 1953. 172 p.
       Reformulates in a concrete and detailed manner the theory that apparitions are
       telepathic hallucinations and attempts to meet the obvious objections to it.

    Velikovsky, Immanuel. Worlds in collision. Garden City, N. Y., Doubleday & Co.,
        1950. 401 p.
        Author's research among the ancient records of man ranging from unequivocal
        statements in written documents, through remembrances expressed in myth
        and legend, to archeolorical evidence in the form of obsolete calendars and
        sundials led him lo a three-fold thesis: (1) there were global catastrophes in
        historical times; (2) these catastrophes were caused by extraterrestrial
        agents; and (3) these agents, in the most recent of catastrophes, can be
        identified as the planets Venus and Mars, Venus playing the dominant role.

    Warder, George Woodward. The cities of the sun. New York, G. W. Dillingham,
       1901. 320 p.
        Argues that the suns of the universe are not hot or burning globes but are self-
        luminous perfected worlds--the personal residence of Diety and the future abode
        of man. Housed in the "heavenly mansions and beautiful cities" of the sun
        are the former citizens of the solar planets, including earth's departed spirits.

    Wilkins, G. Hubert and Harold M. Sherman. Thoughts through space. New York,
        Creative Age Press, 1942. 421 p.
f
        Authenticated record of the Wilkins-Sherman experiments in long-distance
        telepathy.

    Young, John R. The negative universe. Fate, v. 11, Apr, 1958: 87-by.
        Hypothesizes that intelligent beings may exist in a "negative universe" that
        interpenetrates and coexists with ours without our being conscious of it.
        Suggests that this might explain poltergeist manifestations and flying saucers.

    Younghusband, Francis. Life in the stars. London, John Murray, 1927. 222 p.
        An exposition of the view that on some planets of some stars exist beings that
        are higher on the evolutionary scale than man and that on one of them exists
        "the supreme embodiment of the eternal spirit which animates the whole. "

    Zubek, T. J. Theological questions on space creatures. American ecclesiastical
        review, v. 145, Dec. 1961: 393-399.


                                          349
ATLANTIS AND LEMURIA


   Churchward, James. Cosmic forces as they were taught in Mu. New York, The
       Author, 1934. 246 p.
       Translations of fragments of the "Sacred Inspired Writings- Scientific Section'
       written over 70,000 years ago on the lost continent of Mu.

         The lost continent of Mu. New York, Ives Washburn, 1931. 335 p.

       Information about Mu based on translations of two se's of ancient tablets:
       (1) the Naacal tablets discovered in India, and (2) store tablets discovered by
       William Niven in Mexico. Some of the subjects embodied are an account of
       the creation in minute detail; life and its origin; the origin and workings of
       the 'four Great Cosmic Forces, " and the creation of woman. Author asserts
       that both sets of tablets establish that at one time earth had ?.n ancient civili-
       zation which was superior to our own and far in advance of us in important
       essentials.

         The sacred symbols of Mu. New York, I. Washburn, 1939. 296 p.

       Evidence is presented that all religions have common origin in Lemuria's
       sacred writings: Moses condensed ' The 42 Questions" of the Osirian religion
       into our Ten Commandments; the Lord's Prayer and our Proverbs are in
       the sacred writings of Mu.

   De Camp, L. Sprague. Lost continents: the Atlantis theme in history, science, and
       literature. New York, Gnome Press, 1954. 362 p.
       Legends concerning Atlantis, Mu, and other "lost continents" are explored and
       the literature concerning the topic, including fiction, analyzed.

   Donnelly, Ignatius. Atlantis: the antediluvian world. New York, Gramercy
      Publishing Co., 1949. 355 p.
       An attempt to demonstrate several propositions: (1) that there once existed in
       the Atlantic Ocean, opposite the mouth of the Mediterranean Sea, a large
       island--the remnant of an Atlantic continent--known to the ancient world as
       Atlantis; (2) that the description of this island given by Plato is not fable but
       history; (3) that Atlantis was the region where man first rose from a siate of
       barbarism to civilization; (4) that the gods and goddesses of the ancient Greeks,
       the Phoenicians, the Hindus, and the Scandinavians were simply the kings.
       queens, and heroes of Atlantis--the acts attributed to them being a confused
       recollection of real historical events; (5) that the mythologies of Egypt and
       Peru represented the original religion of Atlantis, which was sun-worship;
       (6) that the oldest colony formed by the Atlanteans was probably Egypt, whose
       civilization was a reproduction of that of the Atlantic island; (7) that the
       implements of the Bronze Age were derived from Atlantis and that the
       Atlanteans were the first manufacturers of iron; (8) that the Phoenician alphabet.


                                          350
               p rent of all the European alphabets» was derived from an Atlantis alphabet;
               (&} that Atlantis perished in a terrible convulsion of nature, in which the whole
               island was submerged by the ocean with nearly ?li its inhabitants: and (10)
               that a few persons escaped in ships and on rafts, and carried to the nations
               east and west the tidings of the catastrophe, which has survived to our own
               time in the Flood and Deluge legends of the different nations of the Old and
               New worlds.

           Globe, H. C. Atiantis sank later than you think. Fate, v. 10, Aug. 1957: 19-24,
               Records indicating that some remnants of the Atlantean continent may have
               existed near the Arctic Circle as late as the 16th century are cited by the
               author. He also suggests that the Greek navigator Pythias, the only man
               to sail to the North Country between 400 B. C. and 500 A. D., witnessed
               the final death throes of the sinking Atlantis.

           Murray, Jacqueline. Flying saucers and Atlantis. Flying saucer review, v. 5,
              May-June 1959: 18-19, 25.
               Author postulates that certain beings who had been incarnate on the pianei
               Venus elected to reincarnate on earth to assist with its evolution and thus
               started the civilization of Atlantis. When Atlantis was destroyed by
               cataclysms, these Venusians may have been evacuated by flying saucers.

           Oliver, Frederick S. A dweller on two planets, or The dividing of the way by Phylos
               the Tibetan. Los Angeles, Baumgardt Publishing Co., 1905. 423 p.
               High attainments of the Atlanteans before engulfment of their continent are
               discussed. Rediscovery of Atlantean secrets is predicted and it is promised         if
               that mankind will surpass Atlantis' greatness. Phylos the Tibetan allegedly
               dictates manuscript telepathically to author.
!   I
           Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world, No. A-l. Amherst, Wis., Palmer
               Publications, 1961. 192 p.
               Stories of Richard Shaver, who believes the earth is inhabited underground, in
               gigantic caves whose area is more extensive than the surface land area, by the
               "dero"--an idiot people governed by degenerate forces, and the 'tero'—who
               are governed by constructive forces. Both groups are descendants of an immortal
               Titan-Atlan race that fled earth when the sun starting giving off poisonous
               radiation that caused them to age and then die. Included are: A witch in the
               night; The tormenting voices; Flight into futility; I enter the caves; A taste of
               heaven; The living library; I remember Lemuria; Disaster and escape; The
               ancient alphabet; A dictionary of the Mantong language; Why the caves are
               secret.


        MIRACLE AT FATIMA


           Alexander, M. UFO - seen by 60.000 witnesses. Flying saucers from other
               worlds, May 1958: 83-85.

                                                  351
       It is speculated that a silvery disc viewed by a crowd of 60,000 on October 13,
       1917, at Fatima, Portugual, concomitant with appearance of a vision of the
       Virgin Mary, was a UFO. Reprinted from Flying Saucer Review.

   Inglefield, Gilbert S. Fatima: the three alternatives. Flying saucer review, v. 10,
        May-June 1964: 5-6.
       Events at Fatima, Portugal, on Oct. 13, 1917, must have one of three explana-
       tions, claims the author: (1) the dancing sun was a phenomenon that science
       can explain; (2) it was a pure miracle; or, (3) it was due to UFO intervention
       either on its own or with the liaison of Christian agency.

   Ribera, Antonio. Whai happened at Fatima? Flying saucer review, v. 10, Mar. -
       Apr. 1964: 12-14.
       Resume of the miracle at Fatima, north of Lisbon, Portugal, which extended
       from May 1? to Oct. 13,1917, in context of the UFO phencmenon. Author
       suggests .that UFO occupants may present themselves in terms familiar to
       "contactees, " usually as divine manifestations.

   Stone, Fred P. The visions at Fatima and the flying saucers. Australian saucer
       record, v. 2, Second quarter, 1956: 7-11.
       Author expresses his views of the remarkable similarity between the account
       of the miracle at Fatima, Portugal, on Oct. 13, 1917, and descriptions given by
       eye witnesses all over the world of flying saucer sightings.

   Walsh, William T. Our Lady of Fatima. New York, Macmillan, 1947. 227 p.
       Three shepherd children from Serra da Aire, Portugal, reported six times
       in 1917 that they had seen a circular gloDe of light descend from the heavens
       and had spoken with a lady.--later thought to be? the Virgin Mary--who had
       stepped from inside it.


POLTERGEISTS


   Cade, C. Maxwell. A long, cool look at alien intelligence: It's all in the mind.
       Flying saucer review, v. 14, Mar.-Apr. 1968: 7-9.
       Author suggests the possibility that UFOs and poltergeists are among phenomena
       which could be "experienced," with completely convincing realism, due to
       effects of electromagnetic fields. He also suggests that this electromagnetic
       radiation could be either terrestrial or extraterrestrial in origin; it could be
       either a stochastic natural process or the planned product of an alien intelligence.

   Fodor, Nandor. On the trail of the poltergeist. New York, Citadel Press, 1958.
       222 p.


                                         352
       Poltergeist manifestations are believed by author to be due to pvofound cleavage
       of personality in which part of the mental system is "torn loos«?, " like a dis-
       embodied entity, but is still capable of personality development, as any
       autonomous complex would be, though on a different, apparently fourth-
       dimentional plane of activity.

   Owen, A. R. G. Can we explain the poltergeist ? New York, Garrett Publications,
      1964. ^36 p.
       Various mutually exclusive possible approaches to the ' supernatural" m 2
       discussed. The viewpoint adopted for poltergeist happenings is that o;
       regular naturalism, which seeks to explain phenomena in terms of processes
       which operate in conjuction with, and without nullifying, known laws of natJre.
       No evidence is found in poltergeist cases reviewed to support assumption
       that any role is played by a discarnate entity or "spirit" other than at most
       an extension of the personality of the "medium. " Data suggest that polter-
       geist activity is a "psychic" phenomenon in the sense of being associated with
       the higher human brain centers when these are not fully inhibited by sleep, nor
       deranged by epileptiform discharge, nor imperfectly developed as in mental
       defect. The association with adolescence may be psychological rather than
       directly physiological.

   Windes, V. M. Flying rocks and bouncing lights in Llano, New Mexico. Fate,
      v. 20, Nov. 1967: 96-99.
       Account of apparent poltergeist phenomena accompanied by bouncing bluish r
       grayish lights about the size of a golf ball.


PROPHESIES


   Barton, Michael X. D-day seers speak. Los Angeles. Futura Press, 1959. 35 p.
       Describes a "sudden, catastrophic cleansing" of earth due to take place before the
       end of the 20th century and marked by the shift of the earth upon its axis.

          The seven golden prophesies. Los Angeles, Futura Press, 1960. 30 p.

       Book is based on treatise Comte de Gabalis by French mystic Abbe de Villars.
       Interprets prophesies of world peace by (1) the Magi; (2) the Sibylline oracles;
       (3) Enoch; (4) Micah; (5) Elder Edda; (6) Isaiah; and (7) Merlin the Magician.

          The weeping angel prediction. LOJ Angeles, Futura Press, 1964. 32 p.
       An angel in a picture in Worthing, England is reported (1961) to "weep. " Author
       suggests that manifestation is a sign to humanity--comparable to sightings of
       flying saucers--that "the One who is presenting the phenomenon.. .will have
       revealed himself to the vniverse through a process of nuclear evolution" by 1967.


                                         353
   Barton, Michael X. Your part in the great plan. Los Angeles, Futuru Press,
       1960, 30 p.

       Discusses what rain's purpose is and how he may fulfill it. Suggests that we
       are now living at the end of an age and predicts that earth will undergo big
       geological changes.

   Brown, Hugh A, The coming Antarctica disaster. Fate, v. 9, May 1956: 28-34.
       Author believes that Antarctic ice, growing at the rate of seven trillion tons
       a year, may cause the earth to careen on its axis, causing floods that will
       en^alf the continents.

   Cleary-Baker, John. UFCs and the Antarctic icecap. BUFORA journal and bulletin,
       v. 1, Summer 1965: 14-16.

       Critique of theory that growth of the icecap at the South Pole will cause the axis
       of the earth to tilt, resulting in a worldwide flood. (UFOs are said by some
       to be in our skies to serve as a rescue squad during this catastrophe.)

   Cleaver, A. V. Astronautics--its deve. jpment during the second century of the
       RAeS (1966-2066). The aeronautical journal, v. 72, May 1968: 373-384.
        Forecasting the course of astronautics in the next 100 years, the author pre-
       dicts: "By AD 2066, I would expect to find many hundreds, and probably
       thousands, of men and women living semipermanently on the Moon, Mars..
       on the moons of Jupiter and Saturn, and in large orbiting space stations. "

   Stumbough, Virginia. The coming West Coast disaster. Fate, v. 16, June 1963:
       40-47.

       Psychics predict that catastrophic earthquakes and tidal waves are due on the
       West Coast, along the .Andreas Fault, anytime from the present to 1999.


TELEPORTATION


   Creighton, Gordon. Teleportations. Flying saucer review, v. 11, Mar.-Apr.
       1965: 14-16.
       Examination of some of the evidence in cases in which a UFO may have picked
       a person up in one place and set him down again elsewhere.


   Fodor, Nador. Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; apported through
      disintegration. Fate, v. 10, Feb. 1957: 87-93.


                                          354
    Fourth dimensional theory is advanced to explain the vanishing and reappearing
    of both living and inanimatf? objects with complete disregard for material and
    spatial barriers: apported objects are, by an act of will on the part of the
    operators, disintegrated into their molecular elements without altering form,
    then passed through the interstices of matter that would normally block pene-
    tration, and reintegrated by a second exercise of the power of the will.

Fodor, Nador. Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; borne by the polter-
    geist. Fate, v. 9, Sept. 1956: 79-96.
    Mysterious appearances and re-appearances attributed to poltergeists.

     Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; carried by the devil. Fate,
    v. 9, Aug. 1956: 89-96.
    Account of medieval belief in the devil's role in teleportation.

     Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; conveyed by spirits. Fate,
    v. 9, Oct. 1956: 85-96.
    The poltergeist as tho agent in teleportation.

     Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; falling into the fourth dimension.
    Fate, v. 9, Dec. 1956: 84-95.
    Instances are cited where individuals were apparently translated into another
    space-time dimension.

      Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation. Fate, v. 9, Apr. 1956:81-91.
    Passages in the Bible are cited which might be considered accounts of
    teleportation.

     Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; kidnapped by fairies. Fate,
    v. 9, July 1956: 82-87.

    Case of levitation and teleportation attributed to fairies.

      Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; Mrs. Guppy and the "apport
    post." Fate, v. 10, May 1957: 83-94.
    Discussion of circumstances surrounding teleportation of Mrs. Guppy on
    June 23, 1871, over a three-mile distance in England.

       Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; shifted through demateriali-
    zation. Fate, v. 10, Mar. 1957: 82-91.
    Cases of teleportation of the human body are cited.



                                        355
  Fodor, Nador. Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; snatched up in the
      spirit net. Fate, v. 10, June 1957: 93-98.
      Account of instances where psychic mediums were apparently carried from
      place to place by "beings from the spirit world. "

       MinJ c er space: the mystery of teleportation; spirits—or the unconscious?
      Fate, v. 10, Aug. 1957: 89-108.
      Discussion of whether a genuine mystery is concealed behind ancient and
      modern records of teleportation or whether all is myth, illusion, and fraud.

       Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; the flight of Mrs. Guppy.
      Fate, v. 10, Apr. 1957: 90-98.
      A remarkable instance of human teleportation took place on June 23, 1871, in
      London, when a Mrs. Guppy was teleported ove: a distance of three milts.

       Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; the marquis vanishes. Fate,
      v. 10, July 1957: 89-98.
      Teleportation of a medium during a seance is described.

       Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; transported by ecstacy.
      Fate, v. 9, June 1956: 89-96
      Records of teleportation in 14th-18th century historical documents are cited.

       Mind over space: the mystery of teleportation; traveling by magic. Fat ,
      v. 9, May 1956: 87-94.
      References to teleportation in pre-Christian mythology are cited.

  Sanderson, Ivan T. Atta the telepathic teleporting ant. Fate, v. 16, May 1963:
      45-52.
      Teleportation of the huge queen from one cell in the community to another in
      an emergency is apparently possible to the Atta ant. Experiments in which the
      queen was marked with dye sprayed on in an intricate pattern seem to confirm
      this.


TUNGUSKA METEORITE


  Barker, Gray. Chasing the flying saucers. Flying saucers, Oct. 1959: 20-30.


                                         356
    Mentions theory of Prof. B. Liapunov of the U. S. S, R. Academy of Science that
    a "cosmic ship" intended to land in Mongolia crashed in Siberia because ol
    mechanical difficulties. Statement was made after analysis of report by 1957
    Russian expedition to site of devastating explosion (1908) previously thought to
    be caused by big meteor impact.

Dempster, Derek. Does Siberia hold the proof ? Flying saucer review, v. 8,
   Jan.-Feb. 196,2: 4-6.
    Summarizes the history of the Tungus (Siberia) meteorite of June 30, 1908--
    videly thought to be a nuclear-powered spacecraft--and reports the latesf
    news on the subject from the U. S. S. R.

Edwards, Frank. Did a space ship explode over Siberia? Fate, v. 12, Oct. 1959:
   44-51.
    On the basis of a 1958 scientific expedition to the Tunguska region of Siberia,
    Soviet scientist Alexander Kazantsev has developed the theory that the 1908
    explosion there was an atomic-powered spacecraft which disintegrated at an
    altitude of 1.2 miles.

Kazantsev, Alexander. Gosti iz kosmosa [Guests from space] Moscow, Moskovskii
    Rabochii, 1963. 612 p.
    A collection of science-fiction stories which present Kazantsev's ideas of
    purported invaders from other planets. A series of 23 photographs is included
    mostly of paintings on rocks found in the Sahara Desert, one from Delhi, and
    three from Siberia which show the fallen trees following the Tunguska catas-
    trophe which the author claims was caused by a nuclear explosion or by an
    extraterrestrial space ship.

   -- The Martian. In A visitor from outer space, science fiction stories by
    Soviet writers; Violet L. Dutt, translator. Moscow, Foreign Languages
    Publishing House, 1961, p. 149-162.

    Fiction. An electronic computer deciphers the diary written on earth by a
    Martian left behind when his spacecraft exploded in the Tunga taiga, Siberia,
    on June 30, 1908.


   -- A visitor from outer space. In^ A visitor from outer space, science fiction
    stories by Soviet writers; Violet L. Dutt, translator. Moscow, Foreign
    Languages Publishing House, 1961, p. 110-148.
    Fiction. Exploits the hypothesis of an extraterrestrial spacecraft explosion
    in Tunga, Siberia, on June 30, 1908. While many scientists believe that
    devastation of a forest there over an area with a ndius of about 50 kilometers
    was due to explosion of a bolide, the meteor was uot recovered and no crater
    was discovered.


                                      357
Ley, Willy. The wheels of Poseidon; and Too much imagination. In For your
    information: on earth and in the sky. New York, Doubleday & Co., 1967.
    p. 69-88, 157-168,

    A phenomenon is described that occurs in the Indian Ocean and that has been
    described by several eyewitnesses: a pulsating near-circular disturbance
    roughly 1,000-1,500 feet in diameter is seen with streaks of light like the
    beams of a searchlight radiating from its center and revolving counter-
    clockwise. Views are given supporting speculation that the Podkamennaya
    Tunguska meteorite of Central Siberia (1908) was in fact an exploded extra-
    terrestrial spacecraft.

Plekanov, G. F. and others. O vliiamii vzryva tungusskogo meteorita na geomagni-
    tnoe pole. [The effect of the Tunguska meteorite explosion on the magnetic
    field ]. Geologiya i geofizika, no. 6, 1961: 94-96.
    Analysis of magnetograms shows that the fall of the Tunguska meteorite on
    June 30, 1008, produced magnetic effects similar to those that would be
    produced by a nuclear explosion. English translation published December 1961
    by U. S. Joint Publications Research Service, its translation JPRS- 11608.

Report from tfte Soviet Union: Did the Tungus meteorite contain anti-matter? Flyint»;
    saucers, Dec. 1966: 29-30,
    Hypothesis to the effect that the Tungus meteorite "explosion" on the Siberian
    taiga in 1908 was the result of annihilation of anti-matter has been supported
    in article Ly Soviet specialists Konstantinov, Brcdov, Beliavsky, and Sokolov,
    printed in the Cosmic Research Bulletin.

Sharp, P. F. The search for life beyond the earth. Flying saucer review, v. 7,
    Nov.-Dec. 1961: 12-15.
    Arguments are advanced on the possibility of life existing throughout the
    galaxy; ways in which man can attempt to detect it positively are suggested.
    Mentions that the Tunguska n eteorite of 1908 may have been an exploded
    extraterrestrial spacecraft.

Tungusskoe divo [ Tunguska wonder ]. Tekhnika molodezhni, no. 2, 1966:10-13.
    Summary of opinions expressed by reputable Russian scientists regarding the
    Tunguska explosion; a map shows the devasted area. The consensus is that
    the explosion was neither a meteorite nor a cornet but an unknown phenomenon
    resembling a nuclear blast.


Zigel'. Felix Yu. ladernii yzryvf Nuclear explosion over the taiga] . Znaniye-sila,
    Dec. 1961: 24-27.

    Evidence is presented to support author's view that the cause of the explosion
    in the Tunguska taiga on June 30, 1908, could not have been a meteorite, not
    even one of very great mass.


                                      358
    Zigel', Felix Yu. Manevr tungusskogo te*a [Maneuvering of the Tunguska object ]
        Smena, Feb. 1967: 30.
        Summary of a lecture delivered by the author before the Sternberg State
        Astronomical Ii^itute's Section on Interstellar Communications. Author
        cites testimony of a number of witne- > that shortly before the Tunguska
        explosion, the object made a 90° turn, corroborating his theory that the
        Tunguska body was artificial.

       — Pocherk tungsskogo vzryva f Handwriting of the Tunguska explosion ]. Smena.
       No. 1C, May 1966: 22-25.
        In the article the author shows and compares three microbarograms: one from
        a chemical explosion, one from a nuclear explosion, and that from Ihe
        Tunguska explosion. He states that the microbarogram of the Tunguska
        explosion is unlike that of the first two. He concludes that the Tunguska
        explosion was not caused by a meteorite or by a comet. He speculates whether
        the Tunguska object may be an artificial or man-made body, anti-matter, or a
■
        spaceship from another planet.


                                         359
                          Selected Fiction


Angelucci, Orfeo. Son of the sun. Los Angeles, DeVorss & Co., 1959. 211 p.

   Imaginative account of experiences among Alpha Centaurians spiritually, moral-
   ly, technologically superior to earthmen and of trip into sun's interior on one
   of their spacecraft.

Asimov, Isaac. The naked sun. New York, Doubleday & Co., 1957. 187 p.
   Science-fiction detective mystery. Earth has come under the domination of un-
   derpopulated, roboticized, powerful "Outer Worlds. " A member of the New
   York City police force becomes the first earthman to set foot on another planet
   when he is invited to help solve a political murder.

      The stars, like dust. Garden City, New York, Doubleday & Co.. 1951. 218p.
   Science fiction involving a plot tc overthrow the race that has subjugated all
   planets in 50 galaxies, including earth.

       Triangle. Garden City, New York, Doubleday & Co., 1952. 516 p.
    Three science fiction stories: The currents of space; Pebble in the sky; and
    The stars. All concern the machinations of aggressive civilizations bent on
    conquering the planets inhabited by humans in all the galaxies.

Bott, Henry A. Is there life on earth? Fate, v. 15, Oct. 1962: 64-71.
    Fiction. The Martian Academy of Science presents arguments on "The Improb-
    ability of Life on Earth. "

Burroughs, Edgar Rice. At the earth's core; Pellucidar; Tanar of Pellucidar.
    New York, Dover Publications, 1963. 433 p.


                                      360
   Three science fiction novels based on the "hollow earth' theory and describing
   an inner world 500 miles beneath earth's crust--accessible through openings at
   the poles--where evolution of flora and fauna progressed somewhat differently
   than on earth's surface.

Burroughs, Edgar Rice. Carson of Venus. New York, Canaveral Press, 1963.
    312 p.
   Fiction. Adventures of an American, Carson Napier, on Venus as allegedly
   narrated teJepathically to author. In a country called Korva, Carson helps
   depose a mad dictator. Fi"st published by Edgar Rice Burroughs, Inc.,
   Tarzana, Calif., in 1938.

   -- Escape on Venus. Tarzana, Calif , Edgar Rice Burroughs, Inc., 1946.
    347 p.

   Fiction. Further adventures of Carson Napier of California on Venus during
   which he and his mate are captured successively by several subhuman tribes.

   -- The gods of Mars. New York, Canaveral Press, 1962. 348 p.
   Science-fantasy adventure. Captain John Carter of Virginia, miraculously tele-
   ported to Mars, finds himself among peoples whose evolution passed by degrees
   from true plant life to a combination of plant and animal.

   -- John Carter and the giant of Mars. New York, Canaveral Press, 1964. 208p.
   In final volume of Martian science-fantasy series, John Carter of Virginia, for-
   mer Confederate officer, successfully copes with the wicked machinations of a
   synthetic man. In Skeleton Men of Jupiter, he foils the warlike race on that
   planet that is bent on conquering Mars and enslaving its population.

   -- Liana of Gathol. Tarzana, Calif., Edgar Rice Burroughs, Inc., 1948. 317 p.
    Four loosely intertwined science-fiction novelettes about Mars, a dying planet
    on which natural resources have almost vanished and where air and water are
    barely sufficient to meet the requirements of the population.

   -- The master mind of Mars. New York, Grosset & Dunlap, 1929. 312 p.
    Science fiction. Capt. Ulysses Paxton, U.S. Army, finds himself on Mars in
    his astral body. He is forced to serve a mad surgeon who has learned to trans-
    fer successfully the brain of one individual to the brain pan of another.

   -- Pirates of Venus. New York, Canaveral Press, 1962. 314 p.
    Science-fantasy adventure. Carson Napier, son of an English officer and his
    American wife, takes off from Guadalupe Island, Mexico, for Mars in a rocket
    ship he personally constructed. Through an error in calculation, he lands on
    Venus instead.



                                     361
Burroughs, Edgar Rice. A princes3 of Mars. New York, Dover Publications, 1964.
    356 p.
   Science-fantasy adventure in which John Carter of Virginia, former Confederate
   officer, is miraculously transported to the planet Barsoom (Mars) and through
   a series of daring military exploits becomes a prince of the leading city and
   marries its princess.

   — Synthetic men of Mars. Tarzana, Calif., Edgar Rice Burroughs, In™., 1940.
   315 p.
   A brilliant but mad Martian surgeon attempts to create artificial life. He suc-
   ceeds, but produces only monsters, who revolt and attempt to take over the en-
   tire planet. John Carter of Virginia, who has been teleported to Mars, sees to
   it that "good" triumphs.

      Tales of thres planets. New York, Canaveral Press, 1964. 282 p
   Three science-fantasy adventure novelettes. Beyond the Farthest Star relates
   the adventures of Tangor, an American shot down behind the German lin^s in
   1939, who awakens to find himself on the planet Poloda. A man from 50,000
   B.C. is restored to life from a frozen condition and searches for his lost sweet-
   heart in The Resurrection of Jimber-Jaw. The Wizard of Venus relates the ad-
   ventures of Carson Napier who landed on that planet accidentally while enroute
   to Mars from the U. S. and outwits a sorcerer who allegedly turns Venusians
   into cattle.

      Three Martian novels. New York, Dover Publications, 1962. 499 p.
   Science-fantasy adventure. John Carter, a Confederate officer mustered out of
   service at the close of the Civil War, is miraculously tele-transported to the
   planet Mars where he encounters strange races of men and beasts, weird na-
   tions and weirder peoples.

Campbell, JohnW. The mightiest machine. Providence, R. 1., Hadley Publishing
   Co., 1935. 228 p.
   Mighty spaceships move at speeds faster than light from star system to star
   system, warping themselves through another dimension at the whim of Aarn
   Munro, a mental and physical superman, descendant of earthmen raised on
   the surface of the planet Jupiter.

Chipman, DeWitt C. Beyond the verge: home of the ten lost tribes of Ifrac1. Parti.
    In Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world, No. A-6. Amherst, vv'is., Palmer
    Publications, 1962. p. 993-1134.
    Fiction. Taking with them the Ark of the covenant, the Ten Tribes of Israel
    enter the North Pole entrance to earth's inner world to await the time "when
    the Lord calls them all back to Jerusalem. "
Chipman, Dewitt C. Beyond the verge: home of the ten lost tribes of Israel. PartU.
    In Palmer, Ray, ed. The hidden world. No. A-7. Amherst, Wis., Palmer
    Publications, 1962. p. 1154-1213.
    Fiction. Earth's inner world is described as the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel
    make it their home "until God calls them back to Jeruslem in fulfillment of all
    his prophesies. "

Clarke, Arthur C. Childhood's end. New York, Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc.
    1953. 216 p.
    Fiction. Omnipotent creatures from out of space stop all wars on earth and
    get mankind to behave. Mankind unifies into a single intelligence and ascends
    the next step of the ladder of evolution.

      Prelude to Mars. New York, Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1965. 497 p.
    Two complete fiction novels. Prelude to Space relates preparation for the first
    trip to the moon. Sands of Mars concerns a science-fiction writer's trip to
    Mars and his efforts to win the confidence of the pioneers (from earth) there.

      The sands of Mars. New York, Gnome Press, 1952. 216 p.
    A science fiction journalist visits Mars and attempts to win the confidence of the
    colonists (from earth) there in order to acquire material for a novel.

Conklin, Groff, ed. Invaders of earth. New York, Vanguard Press, Inc., 1952.
    333 p.
    Science fiction anthology. Antareans planning to colonize earth's oceans con-
    duct experiment in artifical ecological imbalance in This Star Shall be Free,
    by Murray Leinster. An extraterrestrial visitor to earth disguises his identity
    in Robert M. Williams' Castaway. A parasitical, intelligent virus from another
    galaxy seeks human bodies to inhabit and control in Impulse, by Eric F. Russell.
    In Allan Lang's An Eel by the Tail, a polymorphous, "extra-galactic being mate-
    rializes in a high school physics class. A Date to Remember, by William F.
    Temple, hypothesizes that wise extraterrestrials are leading earthmen forward
    subtly and almost imperreptably to an improved future. A gaseous extrater-
    restrial space animal functioning like a storm front attempts to take over earth
    in Storm Warning, by Donald Wollheim. In Margaret St. Clair's A Child of
    Void, immaterial aliens from another space-time continuum who can produce
    material phenomena, plan to colonize earth, A visiting extraterrestrial with
    nü desire to be on earth, but in desperate need of a pürt for his spacecraft that
    is not manufactured here, finds a solution to his problem in Tiny and the Mons-
    ter, by Theodore Sturgeon. Theme of The Discord Makers, by Mack Reynolds,
    is that extraterrestrials on the verge of taking over earth have already infiltrat-
    ed key positions in governments and communications and education systems.
    An invader comes to earth for the sole purpose of being listened to and admired
    in Milton Lesser's Pen Pal. Saurian visitants are in troubJe and land their
    spacecraft on earth near a whaling vessel peacefully pursuing its maritime af-
    fairs; the spacecraft is fleeing another alien--a true monster that is a threat to
    both human and saurian in Not only Dead Men, by A. E. Van Vogt. Enemies in
    Space, by Karl Grunert, is the tale of a planned invasion of earth that is affect-
    ed by political conflict among the invaders. Invasion from Mars: radio script


                                      363
   version of H. G. Wells' novel, The War of the Worlds, adapted by Howard
   Koch and presented by Orson Welles on Mercury Theater of the Air over CBS
   on Oct. 30, 1938. A form of life resembling radio waves and dependent on
   the movement of the ether, invades earth in The Waveries, by Frederic Brown.
   Extraterrestrials hoping to meet earthmen as equals and colleagues conclude
   that earth's life class is too primitive and full of hostilities and aggressions
   for contact to be feasible in Edward Grendon's Crisis. Creatures from a
   highly-advanced planet are eager to help promote advancement of earth's
   civilization in Angel's Egg, by Edgar Panghorn. In William Tenn's Will You
   Walk a Little Faster ? an alien civilization assigned to inhabit earth after
   humanity extinguishes itself makes a proposition designed to expedite matters.
   A polymorphous creature from Mercury that devours metal invades first the
   earth and then the moon in Henry Norton's The Man in the Moon. In Pictures
   Don't Lie, by Katherine McLean, submicroscopic aliens evolved on a high-
   gravity planet with thin atmosphere that is situated near a blue-white star,
   can only see objects in the ultra-violet range. The Greatest Tertian is Anthony
   Boucher's burlesque on the scholarly efforts of a posthuman race to understand
   earth's vanished civilization.


Craigie, Dorothy. The voyage of the Luna I, by David Craigie[ pseud]     London,
    Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1948. 272 p.
    Science fiction. Twin teenagers -- stowaways on a rocket launched to the moon-
    explore the lurain. They encounter half-bat, half-fish creatures and uncover
    evidence there was once human life on the moon with technological capability.


Cyrano de Bergerac, Savinien. Other worlds. London, New York, Toronto,
    Oxford University Press, 1965. 232 p.

    Author is the hero of two vayages in space, first to the moon and then to the
    sun. Original French edition with title Histoire Comique published in 1950.


De Camp, L. Sprague. Divide and rule. Reading, Pa. Fantasy Press, 1948.
    231 p.

    Rodent-like oviparous invaders from outer space conquer earth and maintain
    their supremacy by keeping men ignorant and split into small, quarreling,
    feudal states.


DerJeth, August W., ed.   Beachheads in space. New York, Pellegrini & Cudahy,
    1952. 320 p.

    Science fiction anthology on theme of interplanetary exploration. In The Star,
    by David Keller, citizens of a nearby star receive information that earth is
    planning an invasion and find a means to save their nation. Earth is under
    surveillance from a vantage point on the moon in Jack Williamson's The Man
    from Outside. In Beachhead, by Clifford Simak, an intergalactic scientific
    mission discovers that although they were protected against the obvious and
    imaginable, taey wrp defenseless against the unknowable and unimaginable.
    The Years Draw Nigh by Lester del Rey, depicts a dying cosmos, A vast


                                      364
       interlocking system of interplanetary systems is described by Eric F. Russell
       in Metamorphoslte. L. Sprague de Camp in The Ordeal of Professor Klein
       and A. E. Van Vogt in Repetition ironically postulate that interplanetary worlds
       might duplicate tne pattern of human civilization. In Breeds There a Man,
       Isaac Asimov suggests that extraterrestrial beings whose life span might be
       thousands of years are studying the life cycle of Homo sapiens as they might
       bacteria in a test tube. Invasion by extraterrestrials in various physical forms,
       from multi-dimensional worlds, with differing motives Is foreseen in John B.
       Harris' Meteor; John Wyndham's And the Walls Came Tumbling Down; and
       and Donald Wandrei's The Blinding Shadows.


          The other side of the moon. New York, Pellegrini & Cudahy, 1949.       461 p.

       Science fiction anthology. The effect that outer stars have on earth is theme
       of The Star, by H. G. Wells. The Thing on Outer Shoal, by P. Schuyler Miller,
       is a tale of animal mutations. A sorcerer from another planet — exploring the
       mysteries of time, space, and other dimensions -- comes to earth in Frank B.
       Long's The World of Wulkins. Mysterious monoliths form the gateway between
       three-dimensional earth and a civilization on a higher plane of vibration --
       The City of the Singing Flame, by Clark A. Smith. A cosmic entity attempts
M      to make the adjustment between ethereal life and planet life in H. P. Lovecraft's
       Beyond the Wall of Sleep. An extraterrestrial creature is encountered by a
       bum in The Devil of East Lupton, by Murray Leinster. Existence on earth
       today of a race of mutants representing the next step in man's evolution beyond
       Homo sapiens is postulated in Nelson Bond's Conqueror's Isle. Attempted in-
       vasion of earth by plant-animal-mineral creatures from another world Is the
       theme of Something from Above, by Donald Wandrei. An invading force is
       killed off by an organism living in a symbiotic relationship with the planet's
       native population in Will F. Jenkins' Symbiosis. As part of an invasion scheme,
       an android is sent to earth from Mars in The Vault of the Beast, by A. E. Van
       Vogt. The Earth Men, by Ray Bradbury, speculates that Martians are so
       much like earthlings that they have completely satisfied themselves tho'-e is
       i") life on any sister planet and have evolved a comprehensive plan for aealing
       with ail self-styled visitors from other planets. Spiro, by Eric F. Russell,
       concerns a spy by that name from Mars who is able to assume any plant,
       animal, or mineral form at will. In Resurrection, by A. E. Van Vogt, in-
       vaders from another galaxy seeking to colonize earth, find no surviving life
       on the planet and are destroyed by a human they revive in attempt to discover
       nature of catastrophe that had occurred.


    Dikty, T. E., ed. Great science fiction stories about Mars. New York, Frederick
         Fell, Inc., 1966. 187 p.

        Science fiction based on hypothesis that life exists on Mars. Development
        of an extra brain lobe enables Martians to manipulate matter in The Sound
        of Bugles, by Robert M. Williams. Invaders from Mars are robbing earth
        of its atmosphere for use on their own planet in Nonstop to Mars, by Jack
        Williamson. The First Martians, by A. E. Van Vogt is based on the adapt-
        ability of Indians from the Andes Mountains to the Martian environment.
        Martian animal life is reported as an admixture of mamilian and insect attri-
        butes in Via Etherlin by Eando Binder. Interstellar expedition in Tin Lizzie,


                                        365
   by Randall Garrett, discovers that a microscopic life form, akin to bacteria
   and thriving on hydrocarbon compounds, was responsible for converting
   Mars' atmosphere to N203 and its seas to nitric acid, thereby making the
   planet uninhabitable for carbon-based life forms. Scientific expedition to
   is assaulted by a semi-intelligent form of life resembling prairie tumble-
   weed in Under the Sand Seas, by Oliver E. Saari. Key to the language of
   vanished Martian civilization is discovered in Omnilingual, by H. Beam
   Piper.


Drake, W. Raymond. I come from tomorrow. Sunderland, England, The Author,
   [196-] 272 p.

   Typescript. Fiction. Tallus, a young prieet-scientist from the year 4168 A. D.,
   travels back through time to the year 1980 A. D. He makes an intensive study
   of the philosophy and way of life of the twentieth century to try to discover why
   this civilization deserved destruction. Late in 1980, earth was to be struck
   by a comet: the Soviet Union, the United States, and China would be engulfed;
   Atlantis would arise; the earth's axis would be displaced; Great Britain would
   become an archipelago in the tropics.


      Miss Venus. Sunderland, England, The Author, [196-] 69 p.

    Typescript. Three-act comedy. An exhilarating blonde from Venus lands on
    earth to help the women of Great Britain persuade the government to outlaw
    the hydrogen bomb.


      The stolen bride. Sunderland, England, The Author, [196-] 5 p.

    Typescript of a love poem. A flying saucer is the vehicle used by a lover
    killed in an accident to rescue his beloved from a loveless marriage.

French, Paul. David Starr, Space ranger. Garden City, N. Y., Doubleday & Co.,
    1952. 186 p.

    Science fiction. Organisms on Mars as intelligent as men attempt to gain
    control of earth through a unique form of bacteriological warfare.


   -- Lucky Starr and the big sun of Mercury. Garden City, Doubleday & Co.,
    N. Y., 1956. 191 p.

    Science fiction. A project based on Mercury to Intercept sunlight, push it
    through hyperspace, and distribute it evenly over earth so that earth's sea-
    sons could be rearranged at will is sabotaged by a raiding party from another
    galaxy.

   -- Lucky Starr and the oceans of Venus. Garden City, N. Y., Doubleday &
    Co., 1954. 186 p.


                                    366
    Science fiction. Creatures possessing power of complete mental domination
    over others exert this power under control of invaders from Sirius in effort
    to subjugate planets of earth's solar system.


   -- Lucky Starr and the rings of Saturn. Garden City, N. Y., Doubleday & Co.,
    1958. 179 p.

    Science fiction and interstellar political intrigue. Invaders from Sirius attempt
    take-over of inhabited planets in earth's soUr system.


Carver, Ronald G. The saucer people. Boston, Meador Publishing Co., 1957.
     132 p.

    Fiction. Extraterrestrial beings impart supernatural powers to an earth man
    on condition that he use them to advance mankind but not to destroy it.


Garvin, Richard M. and Edmond Addeo. The FORTEC conspiracy. Los Angeles,
    Sherbourne Press, 1968. 181 p.

    UFO "thriller" based on "clasic" UFO sighting cases.


Gibson, Edmund H. A.D. 2018: recollections of the chaplain of a space ship.
    New York, Greenwich Book Publishers, 1958. 62 p.

    Fiction. A trip to Venus is the means through which the crew gains knowledge
    of intelligent life throughout the universs and of cosmic Christianity.


Cuttridge, Len. The biggest news in the world. Flying saucers from another
    world, June 1957: 70-75.

    Fiction. Invasion by UFOs anH benevolent crew.


Harris, John B. The Midwich cuckoos, by John Wyndham [pseud.] New York,
    Ballantine Books, 1957. 247 p.

    Fiction. A flying saucer lands on the British town of Midwich and twenty-
    four hours are blotted from the memories of everyone in the community.
    As of the following day, every woman in town turns out to be pregnant.
    When the children are born, they are distinguished by great golden eyes.
    By the time they are nine they have developed a community mind and a
    community will, special powers which they admit will untimately doom
    mankind. They are destroyed through ther trust in the man who educated
    them.


                                     367
»I   i
ii   l
         Harris, John B. Out of the deeps, by John Wyndham pseud.         New York,
             Bailantine Books, 1953. 182 p.
             Fiction. Chronicles in detail the attempts of an alien race who have settled
             in earth's ocean depths to destroy mankind.


         Heinlein, Robert A. The menace from earth. London, Dobs on, Books Ltd.,
             1959. 255 p.
             Science fiction stories. Flying saucer landings in The Year of the Jackpot
             harbinger worldwide catastrophes and ultimately the end of the world. In
             By His Bootstraps, a i^.n nomes back from the future to meet himself, fights
             himself, while himself stands by and watches; a man from 30,000 years hence
             is sent back to obtain certain itmes for a resident of the future who also
             turns out to be himself.


               The puppet masters. Garden City, N. Y., Doubleday & Co., 1951. 219 p.

             Fiction. Each member of a race of slugs from out of soace akes complete
             physical and mental control of a human being.


         Hoyle, Fred and Johü Elliot. A for andromeda. New York, Harper & Bros.,
             1962. 206 p.
             Fiction. Radio signals are received containing assembly instructions for a
             human being. They were transmitted from a now dead world in our nearest
             neighboring galaxy, the Andromeda nebula, two million light years distant.


         Jenkins, William F. Sidewise in Time, by Murray Leinster [pseud]. Chicago,
             Shasta Publishers, 1950. 211 p.

             Collection of fiction stovies. Sidewise in time suggests that the past, future
             and present travel not in a straight line, but like a curving river; not only
             are events of the actual past, present, and future blended, but also time
             tracks that never happened. Proxima Centauri is the tale of an interstellar
             spaceship that is a world in itself as well as one presenting a civilization of
             carnivorous plants. A Logic Named Joe deals with the time when a device
             would be present in every home, linked in with a central univac-type "tank, "
             which would contain all man's knowledge and would dispense information to
             subscribers. De Profundis relates the inability of intelligent life inhabiting
             the ocean depths to comprehend that intelligent life can exist on earth's sur-
             face. In The Fourth Dimensional Demonstrator, a machine is built which,
             by moving back in time, will bring into being a replica of an object placed
             upon it. The Power is the story of the member of an extraterrestrial race,
             stranded on earth, who wishes to impart his wisdom to mankind but is in-
             stead killed because of their incomprehension.

         Kazantsev, Alexander. A visitor from outer space, Ito A Visitor from outer
             space, science fiction stories by Soviet writers; Violet L. Dutt, translator.
             Moscow, Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1?61. p. 110-148.


                                               368
    Fiction. Exploits the hypothesis of an extraterrestrial sapcecraft explosion
    In Tunga, Siberia, on June 30, 1908. While many scientists believe that
    devastation of a forest there over an area with a radius of about 50 kilometers
    was due to explosion of a bolide, the meteor was not recovered and no crater
    was discovered.


Kim-Nicklasson, Lars. Erotikvisslarna. Vanersborg, Vanerforlagec, 1967.
    123 D.

    Fictional account of the landing of a spaceship carrying space creatures whose
    primary concern seems to be with sex and who proceed to investigate the
    sexual habits of humans. The sexual habits of both are described in detail.
    Based in part on the experiences of a Brazilian farmer, Antonio Villas Boas,
    and the Americans, Barney and Betty Hill, as reported in James G. Fuller's
    The Interrupted Journey: Two Lost Hours 'Aboard a Flying Saucer" (New
    York, Dial Press, 1966).


Knight, Damon. Three novels. Garden City, N. Y., Doubleday & Co., 1967.
    189 p.

    Three stories dealing with invasion of earth by alien beings: Rule Golden,
    Natural State, and The Dying Man.


Lewis, Clive S. Out of the silent planet. London, John Lane, 1938. 182 p.

    Fiction. Hero is accidentally involved in a trip to Malacandra (Mars) and
    learns that the universe -- except for earth -- exists in harmony and peace,
    having a common language and a common interplanetary religion and
    government.


       Perelandra. London, John Lane, 1943. 256 p.
    Ficiion. Temptation comes to an Unfällen world, Perelandra (the planet Venus),
    through a demon-possessed visitor from earth; through the good offices of
    another visitor from earth, however, it remains Unfällen.


       That hideous strength. London, John Lane, 1945. 474 p.

    Fiction, Earth is the scene of a cosmic struggle between the dominant forces
    of darkness and the struggling forces of good.

Lindsay, David. A voyage to Arcturus. New York, Macmillan, 1963. 244 p.

    Interplanetary fiction. Main character journeys via spaceship to a planet
    circling around the star Arcturus. He has a series of adventures, usually
    involving spiritual temptation and most often culminating in murder. God
    is represented as a vulgar, selfish beint; who creates life for the sensual
    pleasure it gives Him, and by His act inflicts untold misery on spirit thus
    imprisoned in flesh.


                                      36*
Loveciaft, Howard P. Hie call of Cthulhu, In his The Dunwich horror and others.
   Sank City, Wis., Arkham House, 1963. p r30-159.
    Tale of a cult that worships the "Great Old ones" who lived ages before there
    were any men, who "came to the young world out of the sky, " and who are now
    inside the earth and under the sea. TTie mode of speech of these beings is
    transmitted thought and they "speak to the sensitive among mankind by mold-
    ing their dreams."


   — The colour out of space. In his The Dunwich Horror and others. Sauk
   City, Wis., Arkham House,T963. p. 60-88.

    An amorphous globule of color from another world or plane of existence sub-
    sists on terrestrial life forms.


   — The Dunwich horror. In his The Dunwich horror and others. Sauk City,
   Wis., Arkham House, 1963. p. 160-202.

    A feature jartly resembling man but from another plane of existence plans
    extirpation of entire human race and all animal and vegetable life from earth
    to a dimension outside the material universe.


   -- The shadow out of time. In his The Dunwich horror and others. Sauk City,
    Wis-, Arkham House, 1963. p. 370-431.

    Fantasy based on the premise that mankind is only one -- perhaps the least --
    of the highly evolved and dominant races of this planet's long and largely
    unknown career.


   — The whisperer in darkness. In his The Dunwich horror and others. Sauk
   City, Wis., Arkham House, 1963. p. 212-277.

    Tale of "outer space beings" more vegetable than animal that traverse inter-
    stellar space in corporeal form to obtain metals from mines on earth and
    then transport them to the i own worlds.


Macvey, JohnW. Journey to Alpha Centauri. New York, Macmillan. 1965.
   256 p.

    Speculative consideration of interstellar travel, its prospects, and implications.
    Study --in series of extracts from diaries -- ul human moral, and socio-
    logical problems that could confront first stellar astro/iauts on 215-year ex-
    pedition to Alpha Centauri during the seven generations the trip would take.

Newman, Bernard. The flying saucer. New York, Macmillan, 1950. 250 p.


                                      370
   — The Dumvich horor. I» his The Dunwich horror and others, Sauk City,
   Wis., Arkham House, igföTp, 160-202.
    A creature partly resembling man but from another plane of existence
    plans extirpation of entire human race and all animal and vegetable life
    from earth to a dimension outsiae the material universe.

   — The shadow out of time. In his The Dunwich horror and others. Sauk City,
   Wis., Arkham House, 1963. p. 370-431.
    Fantasy based on the premise that mankind is only one — perhaps the
    least — of the highly evolved and dominant races of this planet's long
    and largely unknown career.

   — The whisperer in darkness. In his The Dunwich horror and others.
   Sauk City, Wis., Arkham House, 1963. p. 212-277.
    Tale of "outer space beings" more vegetable than animal that traverse
    interstellar space in corporeal form to obtain metals from mines on
    earth and then transport them to their own worlds.

Macvev, John W. Journev to Alpha Centauri. New York, Macmillan, 1965.
   256 p.
    Speculative consideration of interstellar travel, its prospects, and
    implications. Study — in series of extracts from diaries — of human,
    moral, and sociological problems that could confront lirst stehar astronauts
    on 215-year expedition to Alpha Centauri during the seven generations the
    trip would take.

Newman, Bernard. The flying saucer. New York, Macmillan, 1950, 250 p.
    Fictitious account of effectiveness of a hoax in uniting nations of the world
    against threat of invasion by Martians.

Russell, Eric F. Sinister barrier. Reading, Pa., Fantasy Press, 1948.
    253 p.

    Fiction, Humans come to the realization that the planet earth is "owned"
    by alien globes of light called Vitons who "breed" us like cattle and
    influence our hisiory for their own purposes.

Santesson, Hans S., ed. Flying saucers in fact and fiction. New York, Lancer
    Books, 1968. 224 p.


                                    371



                                                                  »>■,- - .,.^v^v,;»..   »^j-»;-   •,vi,.-.v.f.^_,
   Anthology of science fiction stories in which the central themes revolve
   around ''flying saucers" and imaginative solutions to the mystery. Two
   non-fiction essays» one pro-UFO by Ivan T. Sanderson, and one anti-
   ÜFO by Lester Dei Key, are included. Other outstanding science
   fiction writers such as Robert Bloch, Judith Merril, Theodore Sturgeon,
   John Stephens, Miriam Allen de Ford, Bertram Chandler, Edward D. Hoch,
   Aidan van Aim, John Nicholson, and Richard Wilson are represented.


Short, Gertrude. A visitor from Venus. New York, William-Frederick Press,
    1949. 43 p.
    Fiction. A woman from Venus indicates the possibility of world peace
    based on organized action by women everywhere.


Smith, Edward E. The first lens man. Reading, Pa., Fantasy Press, 1950.
    306 p.
    Fiction. The lensman are a group of men and women from many worlds,
    trained to mental and physical attainment so high as to mark them
    as beginning of a superior race. Ultimately, through selective mating,
    they will achieve a point of development where they can become guardians of
    the galaxy. The lens itself is a communication device worn on the wrist of a
    lensman; if worn by anyone but its owner it proves deadly.


       Galactic patrol. Reading, Pa., Fantasy Press, 1950. 273 p.
    Fiction. The Galactic Patrol is an interstellar police force organized
    to combat the piracy and lawlessness threatening the structure of galactic
    civilization. Behind the scenes are prime movers. The Arisians, whose spores,
    projected through the galaxy, caused life to form in their image on many
    worlds, manipulate events for good. The Eddorians, creatures from another
    space continuum, in their lust for power are the cause of most ills.


Van Vogt, Alfred E. Slan. New York, Simon and Schuster, 1951. 247 p.

    Fiction. Slan is the story of a nine-year-old boy who is a member of
    a superhuman race. His people possess both mental and physical
    superiority, being capable of reading minds through the aid of
    antenna-like tendrils in their hair; two hearts invest them with extra-
    ordinary stamina. His parents killed, the boy fights to survive in a
    society where organized hunts are conducted against slansby the humans
    and where tendrilless slans — born without the ability to read minds —
    are even more dangerais enemies.


                                    372
   - The voyage of the space beagle. New York, Simon and Schuster, 1950,
    240 p.

    Interplanetary fiction. During colonization of a galactic-wide system,
    interstellar scientific expedition encounters creatures whc^e drives
    and needs are based on nonhuman metabolism and who have ability to
    control energy fields and the minds of humans. New science of nexialism,
    providing techniques for speeding up processes of absorbing knowledge and of
    using effectively what has been learned, is applied to same humans in the
    expedition from annihilation.


       The world of A. New York, Simon and Schuster, 1948, 246 p.
    Fiction. The protagonist, a mutant with a double mind, doesn't know who
    he is and tries to find out. Selected as one of the most advanced
    intellects on earth, he goes to Venus for special training and is told the
    secret of immortality.


Vasse, Cornelie (Wouters) [baronne de], Le char volant ou voyage dans la iune.
    Paris, Veuve Ballard & Fils, 1783. 203 p.

    Fictitious account of trip by philosopher Erastus to the moon, the sun, and
    other planets, with descriptions of their climates, customs, and
    inhabitants.

Verne, Jules. A journey to the center of the earth, London, New York, G.
    RouUedge, 1887. 254 p.
    Fiction, Finding instructions on a piece of parchment for rear »g the
    center of the earth through an Icelandic volcano. Professor .  vigg of
    Hamburg goes on the journey, taking along his nephew. Henry Lawson,
    and an Icelander names Hans Bjelke.


Wells, Herbert George. The first men on the moon. Longdon, G. Newnes, Ltd.,
    1901. 342 p.

    Fictitious account of discovery of substance opaque to gravity and its use in
    constructing spacecraft which lands first men on the moon. Voyage,
    landing, and exploration of moon described in detail; human society
    criticized through depiction of a non-human culture.

Wilhelm, Kate, The killer thing. Garden City, New York, 1967, 190 p.

    Fiction. A malfunctioning robot programed to kill with the laser becomes
    a threat to the galaxy.


                                    373
                                    MIRAGES



The first four references are among the most useful standard texts on physical
meteorology. AU contain adequately detailed treatment of the general theory of
mirages.



    Fleagle, Robert G. and Joost A. Businger. An introduction to atmospheric
       physics. New York, Academic Press, 1963, pp. 272-302.

    Humphreys, W. J. Physics of the air. New York, McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
      3rd edition, 1940, pp. 455-475.

    Johnson, John C. Physical meteorology. New York, The Technology Press of
       M.I.T. and John Wiley & Sons, 1954, pp. 1-30.

    Tverskoi, P.N. Physics of the atmosphere. Jerusalem, Israel Program for
      Scientific Translations, 1965, pp. 457-478.



    Durst, C.S. and G. A. Bull. An unusual refraction phenomenon seen from a high-
      flying aircraft. Meteorological Magazine, London, 85 (1010), August 1956:
      237-242.
       Discusses the rarely seen mirage caused by refraction ol light through an
       elevated layer of warm air. The optical effects of such layers have often been
       invoked to explain UFO sightings. This article clarifies the severe restrictions
       on elevation angle at which such mirages are possible.


                                         374
Fleagle, Robert G. The optical measurement of lapse rate. Bulletin of the
   American Meteorological Society, 31(2), February 1950: 51-55.
  The author develops a method to measure the change of temperature with
  height by optically measuring the apparent change in elevation of a light source.
  Nomograms are provided which show the difference between apparent and true
  elevations as a function of lapse rate and length of optical path.

Gordon, J.H, Mirages. Washington, D. C., Smithsonian Institution Publication
  4398, 1959, pubUshed 1960.
  A non-technicai article that describes mirage formation as dependiKg on a lens
  of air similar in function to lenses in cameras.

Haug, Odd. On the theory of superior mirages. Meteorologiske Annaler, Oslo,
  3(12), 1953: 295-310.
  A full discussion of light passing through a strong inversion.

ten Kate, H. Luchtspiegelihgen, Hemel en Dampkring, 49(5), 1951: 91-94.
  Clear explanations, with good illustrations, of the theory of mirages.

Kohl, G. Erklärung einer luftspiegelung nach oben aus radiosondierungen,
  Zeitschrift fur Meteorologie, 6(11), November 1952: 344-348.
  A mirage in Fichtelgebirge is explained quantitatively from radiosonde data.

Minnaert, M. Light and colour in the open air. New York, Dover Publication,
  1954.

  A superb example ol non-technical exposition covering not only mirages but
  also nearly every other aspect of visual and optical phenomena in the sky and
  the landscape, from rainbows to the spoke-patterns in bicycle wheels.

Ozorai, Zoltan. Legkroi tlikrozodesek nullamgeluteken (Mirages on wave surfaces)
  Idojaras, 58(3), May-June 1954: .143-153.
  Classical mirage theory on)y handles the formation of three images. The
  author proposes to handle more than three images by considering reflections
  from wave surfaces on inversions.

Pernter, J.M. andF. M. Exner. Meteorologische optik. Leipzig and Vienna,
  Wilhelm Braumuller, 2nd edition, 1922, pp. 57-238.
  The classical work on meteorological opti ' The theory of mirages is
  developed in great detail and a number of striking cases are carefully examined.


                                      375
Raman, Sir C. V. The optics of mirages. Current science, Bangalore, 29(8),
  August 1959: 309-313,

  The author explains the basic concepts of inferior and superior mirages.

Wood, Robert W. Physical optics. New York. Dover Publications, 3rd edition,
  1961, pp. 64-98.
  A classical work in the field. Wood, a gifted experimentalist, produced
  mirages in the laboratory by heating sand-covered iron plates. His careful
  measurements are witness to the essential validity of present-day mirage
  theory.


Menkello, Frederick. Quantitative aspects of mirages. ETAC Report 6112,
  Environmental Technical Applications Center, Military Air Command,
  USAF, Washington, D.C. , March 1969. 15 p.
  Even under unusual meteorological conditions, mirages only take place at
  angles very near the horizon. This report presents graphs and nomograms for
  determining the angles under which mirages can be seen. Drawings and graphs
  are given to scale.


                                    376
                               ADDENDA



U.S. Air Force officers' briefing on UFOs. Proceedings.    Boulder, University of
  Colorado, 1967. 36 p.

  Summary of discussions and presentations that were tape recorded during
  June 12-13, 1967 meeting. Included are: The UFO Problem by Robert J. Low;
  Identification of Flying Objects by Franklin E. Roach; Problems of Human
  Perception as Related to the UFO Phenomenon by Michael A. Wertheimer;
  Investigating Sightings by David R. Saunders; and Instrumentation by Joseph H.
  Rush.


Barry, J. Dale. Bali lightning. Journal of atmospheric and terrestrial physics,
  v, 29, 1967: 1095-1101.

  Results are presented of extensive survey of reported ball lightning observations
  during the last 300 years. A statistical description of the phenomenon was
  obtained in terms of its properties and characteristics. The description is
  discussed and various relationships between the properties and characteristics
  of the phenomenon are established. In addition, several properties previously
  attributed to ball lightning are shown to be erroneous.


Boffey, Philip M. UFO project: trouble on the ground. Science, v. 161, July 26,
  1968: 339-342.

  Discussion of problems and controversy surrounding the University of Colorado
  study of UFOs directed by Edward U. Condon.


Calkins, Ken. America has closed the credulity gap.   Boeing magazine, v. 38,
  May 1968: 15.


                                    377
  Postulating that the public has become accustomed to readily accepting the
  incredible, the author says it is difficult to find a scientist who will publicly
  dispute what appears to be patently ridiculous. He discusses in this context
  circumstances surrounding the death of the horse, Snippy, in Colorado during
  September 1967.

Capparella, Angelo, m. Letters: French UFOs. Science, v. 161, August 16,
  1968: 631.
  Author challenges statement by Thornton Page of Wesleyan University (Science,
  v. 160, June 14, 1968: 1258) that no telescope or observatory has taken a
  picture of a UFO. He notes that Jacques VaUee mentions in Challenge to
  Science (Chicago. Henry Regnery, 1966) that two images were recorded by the
  trajectory analyzers at Forcalquier Observatory, France, May 3-4, 1957.


U.S. Congress. House. Committee on Science and Astronautics. Symposium on
  unidentified flying objects. /Washington, U.S. Govt. Printing Office, 1968/
   247 p. (90th Congress, 2d session. House. Report no. 7).
  Contains statements by Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Dr. James E. McDonald, Dr. Carl
  Sagan, Dr. Robert L. Hall, Dr. James A. Harder and Dr. Robert M.L Baker
  Prepared papers are included by Dr. Donald H. Menzel, Dr. R. Leo Sprinkle,
  Dr. Garry C. Henderson, Dr. Stanton T. Friedman, Dr. Roger N. Shepard
  and Dr. Frank B. Salisbury.

Cote, Alfred J. UFO study credibility cloud? Industrial research, June 1968:
  26-28.
  Following conclusions emerged as the result of Industrial Research inquiry into
  status of University of Colorado UFO study: (1) the project does not stress
  investigation of the people doing the observing, rather than of physical
  phenomena; (2) there appears to be no effort in the study directed at a serious
  evaluation of extraterrestrial hypotheses; (3) a follow-on investigation apparently
  will be proposed in the final report, in a chapter that treats future government
  handling of UFOs.

Fowler, Raymond E. Engineer involvement in UFO investigations         American
  engineer, May 1968: 29-31.
  The Massachusetts Investigating Subcommittee of the National Investigations
  Committee on Aerial Phenomena (NICAP) has enlisted engineering talent to
  assist in solving the UFO phenomenon. During 1967, approximately 100 UFO
  sightings were investigated in Massachusetts under engineer supervision.

(U.S.) GAO investigating contract on UFOs. Scientific research, June 10, 1968: 18.
  Details are given of U.S. General Accounting Office scrutiny of the University
  ol Colorado contract requested by Congressman J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.).


                                      378
Hynek, J. Allen. UFOs and the numbers game. Natural history, v. 77, March
 ' 1968: 24, 25, 66, 70.
  Tvo UFO books are revieved: Uninvited Visitors, by Ivan T. Sanderson and
  Flying Saucers -- Here and Now1, by Frank Edwards.

Jones, R.V. The natural philosophy of flying saucers. Physics bulletin, July
   1968: 225-230.
  Author reviews the "character of the evidence regarding flying saucers," and
  concludes that if known natural phenomena are insufficient to explain every-
  thing that has been genuinely seen, the alternative to the intelligently controlled
  vehicles hypothesis is an as yet unrecognized phenomenon.

Keel, John A. New flying saucer crime wave they can't cover up. Male, v. 18,
  December 1968: 28, 54, 56.
  Cases throughout the world are reported (1953-1967) in which people have
  allegedly been pursued, injured, kidnapped and killed by UFOs.

Konecci, Eugene B. Bioastronautics review- 1963. Washington, D.C., National
  Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1963. 82 p.

  Author notes interest of both U.S. and U.S. S. R. in phenomenon of electro-
  magnetic communication between living organisms and possible applications in
  space. He says: "To the Soviets, these applications mean a'thought register,1
  an 'electronic hypnotizer,' and 'thought transfer over distance'; and to Western
  scientists and engineers the results of valid experimentation in energy and
  information transfer could lend to new communications media and advanced
  emergency techniques ... Presented at *;he 14th International Astronautics
  Federation meeting in Paris, September 26-October 1, 1963. ^ome alleged
  "contactees have claimed that communication with UFO occupants was by
  thought transfer^

Langmuir, Irving. Pathological science. Transcribed and edited by R. N. Hall.
  Schenectady, N. Y., General Electric Research and Development Center, 1968.
  13 p. /Report no. G8-C-0357.


  Transcript of talk given by author at G. E. Research Laboratory, Schenectady,
  N. Y., on December 18, 1953. Examples are given of cases in which there was
  no dishonesty involved, but where false conclusions were reached because the
  researchers did not understand the extent to which human beings can delude
  themselves due to subjective effects, wishful thinking, or threshold interactions.
  The Davis-Barnes experiment, Blondlot's N-rays, and Gurwitsch's mitogenetic
  rays are discussed in this context.


McDonald, James E. Does Congress have a responsibility to investigate the UFO
  problem? Tucson, Arizona, The Author, 1968. 4 p.


                                     379
  In talk to the Burro Club luncheon meeting on June 3, 1968, Rayburn Building,
  Washington, D.C., author asks for a Congressional inquiry into the UFO
  phenomenon. He emphasizes that the inquiry should be assigned to a committee
  primarily concerned with matters of science and technology.

Mayfield, Melburn R. The rise of gravity in the 17th century; or a life in the day
  of Isaac Newton. Physics today, June 1968: 42-46.
  Satirical verse purporting to "bring a powerful new insight into some of the long-
  standing mysteries concerning the personal and professional life of Sir Isaac
  Newton": the source of his "philosophical innovations" and "mathematical
  elegancies" was a beautiful female flying saucer occupant.

Moller, P.S. Engineering professor teaches UFO course at the University of
  California. American engineer, May 1968: 32-34.
   Students discuss social and technical implications of worldwide UFO sightings
   in an experimental course, "Flying Saucers: The Social and Technological
   Implications," given at the University of California at Davi«.

Morse, Robert F. UFOs and the technological community. American engineer.
  May 1968: 24-28.
   Noting that reports of unidentified flying objects have been with us for at least
   two decades, the author says the time has come to enlist the full resources of
   the technological community, worldwide, in an examination of these persistent
   and as yet unexplained sighting reports.

Natural lasers cause UFOs? The laser weekly, v. 1, no. 25: 2.
   According to Victor T. Tomberg of the Biophysics Research Lab at New York
   Medical College, natural laser action in space may be responsible for UFO
   phenomena. Tomberg maintains that natural laser and maser action should
   exist in outer space. He also claims that this concentrated radiation may be
   aimed at our sky and might explain some of the unidentified flying objects that
   have been reported.

Page,Thorton.   Letters: French UFOs. Science, v. 161, August 16, 1968: 631.
   Author insists on the accuracy of his claim that no telescope or observatory has
   taken a picture of ? UFO. He says that photographs taken at Forcalquier
   Observatory, France, May 3-4, 1957, described by Jacques Vallee in Challenge-
   to Science (Chicago, Henry Regnery, 1966) do not fit the hypothesis of extra-
   terrestrial bodies entering our atmosphere at 5 to 7 miles per second.


           —. Photographic sky coverage for the detection of UFOs? Science,
   v. 160, June 14, 1968: 1258-1260.


                                       380
  Author says that in connection with a course on flying saucers that he taught at
  Wesleyan University, it was determined that over a period of 20 year«, during
  which there were at least 11,000 visual sightings of UFOs, no astronomical
  photograph has recorded one, even though artifical satellites, meteors, and
  asteroids are frequently noted. Article speculates on what frequency of random
  UFO tracks could be missed by astronimical telescopes ^ow in use.

Powers, William T. UFO in 1800: mefeor? Science, v. 160, June 14, 1968: 1260.
  Article contains reprint of William Dunbar's report in Transactions of the
  American Philosopical Society (v. 6, no. 25, 1804) of an aerial object that was
  never positively identified. Powers comments that Dunbar's drawing of the
  object was not very different in shape from some of the phenomena reported
  currently.

ileview of the University of Colorado report on unidentified flying objects by a
   panel of the National Academy of Sciences, NAS, 1969. 6 p.
  NAS panel headed by Dr. Gerald M. Clemence, Yale University, concurs with
  scope, methodology and findings of the Colorado Project (Condon) report.
  Concludes "On the basis of present knowledge the least iike.ly explanation of
  UFOs is the hypothesis of extraterrestrial visitations by intelligent beings."
  Reprinted in News Report. National Research Council (NAS-NAE), XiX(2), Feb.
  1969: 6-8. Also printed by the Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and
  Technical Information in hard copy and microform.

Salisbury, Frank B. Exobiology. Fort Collins, Colorado, The Author, 1964. 9 p.
  Author outlines the kinds of evidence for extraterrestrial life and comments
  briefly on some of the more pertinent points. He cites testimony of witnesses
  who claim to have experienced or seen a visitation by an extraterrestrial
  intelligent being. Paper delivered at the First Annual Rocky Mountain Bio-
  engineering Symposium held at the U.S. Air Force Academy, Colorado, May 4-
  5, 1964, sponsored by the USAF Academy and the Committee on Electrical
  Techniques in Medicine and Biology of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
  Engineers.

Saun der s, David R. and R. Roger Harkins. UFOs? yes'., where the Condon
   Committee went wrong. New York, Signet Books, 1968. 256 p.
   Bias and mis-direction of the Condon investigation at the University of Colorado
   is alleged by an ex-member of the group and collaborator, with introduction by
   John Fuller.

Scientific Study of unidentified flying objects, conducted by the University of
   Colorado under contract No. F44620-67-C-0035. Dr. Edward U. Condon,
   scientific director. Daniel S. Gillmore, editor. Boulder, 1968, three volumes,
   1,465 p. 80 plates.


                                      381
  Final report of the University of Colorado project studying UFOs under support
  provided by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, OAR, at the direction
  of the Secretary of the Air Force, Two-year project concluded (a) that about
  90 percent of all UFO reports prove to be quite plausibly related to ordinary
  phenomena, (b) that little ?i anything has come from the study of UFOs in the
  past 21 years that has added to scientific knowledge, and (c) that further
  extensive study of UFO sighting is not justified in the expectation that science
  will be advanced thereby. At the same time it is emphasized that (c) is an
  opinion based on evidence now availaMe. Also printed in liard copy and micro-
  form by Clearinghouse for Federal ScienLfic and Technical Information, vol. 1,
  AD 680 &?;; vol. 2, AD 680 976; vol. 3, AD 680 977. Also printed complete by
  Bantam Books, New York, 1969, with introduction by Walter Sullivan, New York
  Times. >lo printed by E.P. Dutton, ii3W York, 1969.

Syiem, S. Sand. A flying saucer? Hindustan standard, November 12, 1967: 5.
  Two eyewitness report sighting a whirling cylindrically-shaped UFO 200-300
  feet high near Dympep Village, India, on October 18. 1967.

Walker, Sydney, in. Establishing observer creditability: a proposed method.
  Journal of the astronautical sciences, v. 15, March-April 1968: 92-96.
  B_iei review of critical chain of linked processes — anatomic, phipiolocir. and
  psychological -- which operate to determine the nature of the observations made
  by an Individlal, whether of an accident, a planned experiment, or a phenomenon
  such as a UFO. Purpose of review is to demonstrate how, through the use of
  proper medical examination, the integrity of the observer system can be
  established in such a way that eye witness creditability does not have to be left
  to the kind of speculation that is so frequent.

Wertheimer, Michael. A case of "autostasis" or reverse autokinesis. Perceptual
  and motor skills, 26, 1968: 417-418.
  Three of five observers of a light in the night sky that was actually moving
  continuously along a linear course reported it as stationary as long as the light
  was on. The phenomenon,' autostatis," seems to be opposite to the well-known
  phenomenon of autokinesis, or apparent motion of an actually stationary light
  in an undifferentiaied field.

Communication with extraterrestrial inteJiigtnce.   IEEE Spectrum, v. 3, m . 3,
  March 1966: 153-163.

   A condensation of Session 1-5 of the 1965 IEEE Military Electronics Conference
   (MIL-E-CON 9), Washington, D. C., Sept. 22-24, 1965, based on the questions
   of recognizing and communicating with extraterrestrial intelligence. Harold
   Wooster, moderator, Paul L. Garvin, Lambros D. Callimahos, John C. Lilly,
   William O. Davis and Francis J. Heyden.


                                     382
                                     AUTHOR INDEX


                    -A-                                               -B-

Abbott, C. G.     238, 252                         Babcock, Edward J.         2, 195
Abelson, Philip H.       249, 255                  Bailey, Alfred C.      280
Adamski, George        1, 51, 60, 68, 83,          Baker, James       343
     89, 139, 299, 306                             Baker, Robert M. L.         2, 140
Addeo, Edmond       367                            Ball, Robert     256
Adler, Billy    1, 40                              Barker, Gray      2, 19, 55, 61, 87, 89,
Aharon, Y. N.      255, 282                             99, 100, 110, 137, 152, 179, 195,
Aho, Arthur C.      75                                  306, 318, 334, 356
Aitken, R. G.     238, 252                         Barnes, Sam      256
Albanesi, Renate       60                          Baroja, Julia C.      343
Aleman Velasco, Miguel         1                   Barton, Michel X.       62, 110, 152, 230,
Alexander, M.      351                                  268, 269, 280, 299, 300, 318, 336,
Allemann, T.      178, 194                              353, 354
Allen, Thomas      255                             Bauchau, A. 256
Allen, W. Gordon       47, 109, 151                Beach, David      145
Allingham, Cedric       I, 60, 79                  Beckley, Timothy G.        2, 336
Anders, Edward       249                           Becquerel, P.      230
Anderson, Carl      179                            Beer, Lionel     3
Anderson, Dave       194                           Beischer, Dietrich E.        224
Anderson, Paul      255                            Belgisch - UFO
Angelucci, Orfeo M.        2, 60, 145, 360           Waarnemingen        47
Antoncadi, E. M.       238                         Beller, William      269
Archers' Court Research                            Benard, Paul C.       19, 179
  Group 140                                        Bender, Albert K.       3, 62, 87, 180
Arnold, Kemv fh A.        2, 173, 313              Benedicks, Carl       313
Arrhenius, Svante       233, 256                   Bennett, Dorothy A.       238
Ascher, Marcia       268, 283                      Bergamini, David       256
Ascher, Robert      268, 283                       Bergendahl, P. E.        195
Ashtar     89                                      Berger, Ranier       233, 256
Asimov, Isaac      151, 212, 238, 283,             Berget, Alphonse       224, 257
     286, 360                                      Bergier, Jacques       269
Avenel, Antony,      224, 228                      Berland, Theodore        257
Avignon, Andre,       110                          Bernal, J. D.      257
                                             383
Bernard, Raymond         336                        Calvillo Madrigal, Salvador 3, 173,
Berril, John N.      233                                 181
Berrill, Norman J.        233, 257, 283             Calvin, Melvin      225, 239, 259, 260,
Berry, Bruce D.        173                               271, 307
Besser, John P.       110, 180, 343                 Cameron, A. G. W.           260, 271
Bethurum, Truman         62, 300                    Campbell, John W. Jr.           Ill, 362
men, Robert       283                               Campione, Michael J.          3, 76, 111
Binder, Otto O.      19, 40, 55, 76, 322            Cappa, Fidel A.        197
Birch, A.     140                                   Caputo, Livio     20, 100, 158, 170, 197
Blaher, Damian J.        328                        Carnell, John      181
Bloecher, Ted      173                              Carpenter, Mark         197
Blum, Harold F.       228, 257                      Carr, Aidan M.        307
Boehm, George A. E.          269                    Carrouges, Michel         181, 281
Bok, B. J.     257                                  Carter, Joan F.        152
Boncompagni, Solas        47                        Cassens, Kenneth H.          328
Bongers, Leonard H.         238                     Chaikin, G. L.       260
Booth, Leon     40                                  Chaloupek, Henri        172, 174, 197
Bott, Henry A.      360                             Chamberlin, Ralph V.           260, 265
Bowen, Charles       62, 79, 80, 84, 100,           Chambers, Howard V.            3, 63
     110, 140, 169, 180, 195, 196, 322              Chartrand, Robert L.          4, 41, 159
Bowman, Norman J.          19, 20, 80, 158,         Chase, Frank M.          145
     257                                            Chernenko, Mikhail         295, 309
Boyd, Lyle G.      122                              Chipman, De Witt C.         362, 363
BraceweU, R. N.         258, 269, 270               Churchward, James           231, 350
Bradbury, Ray      258, 270, 283                    Clark, Jerome       20, 63, 80, 89, 101,
Brandt, Ivan     100, 328                                170, 197
Brand, Walther C.        89, 111, 285, 363          Clarke, Arthur C.         89, 111, 285, 363
Brasington, Virginia F.        328                  Cleary-Baker, John          76, 80, 131, 152,
Bray, Arthur, 3                                          198, 281, 354
Bray, Derek R. M.          Ill                      Cleaver, A. V.       354
Breig, Joseph A.       283                          Clendenning, John R.          242
Brewster, David       258, 283                      Coates, James       343
Briggs, MichaelH.         224, 258, 270,            Cocconi, Guiseppe         272
     284                                            Coelho Netto, Paulo 4
Brooks, Angus      74, 196                          Cohen, Daniel      4, 20, 40, 112, 137,
Brown, Hugh A.       354                                 159
Brown, William F.        4, 159                     Cornelia, Thomas M.           21, 38, 135,
Browning, Keith A.        156                            145, 181, 341
Bryant, Larry W.        40, 41, 55: 99, 196         Conklin, Groff      363
Buck, Richard M.        228                         Conniff, James G.         260
Buckner, H. T.       137                            Constance, Arthur         112, 181, 313, 325
Buckle, Eileen     3, 62, 196                       Conway, J.      260
BUFORA       196, 20                                Cooper, John      285
Bull, F. Malcolm       3, 111                       Copland, Alexander         260, 285
Bun, Thomas P.        234, 259                      Cordonnier, Gerard          334
Burr, Frank      307                                Cor rail, Alice E.       344
Bur ridge, Gaston      145, 334                     Cort, David     21
Burroughs, Edgar R.         360, 361, 362           Coughlin, William J.         112
Busson, Bernard       173, 180                      Coupe, Charles        285
                                                    Couten, Francois         181
                    -C-                             Cove, Gordon       90, 329
                                                    Cox, Adrian      63, 90, 332
Cade,C. M.     76, 234, 239, 252, 259,              Cox, Donald W. 4
    270, 271, 281, 284, 313, 343, 352               Craigie, Dorothy        364
Cadman, A. G.     332                               Cramp, Leonard G.           146, 198, 234,
Cahn, J. P.    41, 80, 100                               260, 334
Caldbeck, David    181                              CrandaU, L.       307


                                              384


                                                                                                „   ± ...
Creighton, Gordon W.      38, 39, 47, 63,           Drury, Neville      19, 308
    64, 77, 80, 81, 90, 101, 140, 168,              Duchene, J. L.      81, 132
    169, 172. 181, 182, 198, 260, 272,              Due lout. Jorge A.      64, 91, 112
    285, 286, 314, 354                              Duclout, Napy      64, 91, 112
Cremaschi, Inisero     4, 141                       Duckwell, W. E.        239
Crenshaw, James      64, 272, 281, 286              Dufour, Jean C.       199
Cross, C. A.     239                                Dunn, William J., Jr.       81, 199
Crum, Norman J.      21                             Dunne, John W.       344
Cruttwell, Norman E. G.       182                   Duplantier, Gene       199
Cutler, C. C.    277                                Durham, Anthony        135
Cyr, Donald L.     239                              DuSoir, W. E.       319
Cyr, GuyJ.     249, 286                             Dye, Clarkson      273
Cyrano de Bergerac, Savinien      364               Dyson, F. J.     273
                    -D-                                                -E-
Da Silva, Renato L        4, 234, 249, 272.         Earley, George W.       5
    286, 344                                        Easley, Robert S.      88
Dagenis, Arleigh J.        21, 174, 182             Easton, W. B.      329
Daniel-Hops     21                                  Eddington, Arthur S.       344
Darby, Christian       220                          Edwards, Allan W.       308
Darden, Mona       199                              Edwards, Frank       5, 21, 22, 23, 42,55,
Darwin, Charles G.         228                          56, 77, 91, 99, 101, 137, 141, 146,
David, Jay    4                                         156, 159, 172, 174, 182, 183,199,
Davidson, Leon       41, 59, 159                        200,213, 214, 239, 240, 249, 252,
Dauvillier, Alexandre        234                        261, 287, 334, 357
Davis, G.    246                                    Ehrensvard,GostaC.          287
Day, Langston      21, 112                          Eiseley, Loren C.       101, 287
Dean, John W.       329                             Ellerby, Christopher       240
De Arujo, Hemani E.          333                    Elliot, John    368
De Camp, L. S.        350, 364                      Emerson, Willis G.        337
De Grazia, Alfred       234                         Enquete a Valensole       81
Demoulin, Maurice         260                       Erkskine, Allen L.       5
Dempster, Derek D. 225,289,357                      Evans, Gordon H.       49, 102, 146, 221,
Deneault, Haioid H.         10, 171                     240
Derleth, August W.        364                       Evenson, K. M.       314
De Tastelero, Mira        220                       Everett, Eldon K.      159, 174
Dethier, Vincent G.        261                      Everson, Vincent      23
Dewey, Mark      231, 300                           Ewing, Ann      261, 287
Dick, William     64
Dickhoff, Robert E.        337                                          -F-
Digard-Combet, Simonne           112
Dikshitar, W. R.       47                           Farish, Lucius     49, 91, 170
Dikty, T. E.     365                                Farris, Joseph      55
Dixon, William A.        182                        Fawcett, George D.      23, 24, 81, 91,
Dole, Stephen H.       286                              102, 112, 141, 159, 200
Donnelly, Ignatius      350                         Fears, Francis R.      261, 287
Donnelly, Joseph W.         152, 344                Fedi, Remo     335
Dowding, Hugh C.        213                         Ferber, Adolph C.      287
Dowling, J.     182                                 Ferguson, William      91, 113, 300, 329
Downing, Barry H.         329                       Fernere, Joseph L.       141
Drake, Frank D.        272, 273, 286                Feryer, R.     5
Drake, W. Raymond          48, 49, 235,             Fesenkov, V.     243, 253
    261, 281, 287, 307, 329, 366                    Finch, Bernard E.      77, 136, 146, 308
Draper, Hal     137                                 Firsoff, V. Axel     225, 250, 261, 262,
Drawert, Friedrich        261                           288
Dreyer, H. R.       273                             Fitch, C. W.     57


                                              385
Flammarion, Camille          229f 273, 288,         Glover, Kenneth M         156
    344                                             Goble, H. C.      26, 171, 231
Flanders, CM.          92                           Goddard, J.     132, 241
Flick, David     24                                 Goff, Kenneth     330
Fodor, Nandor       352, 354, 355, 356              Golay, M. J. E.       274
Foght, Paul     65, 157                             Golomb, Solomon W,         274
Pogl, T.     141                                    Golowin, Sergius,       301, 308
Fontenelle, B. B.        262                        Gonzales Ganteaume, Horacio         184
Fontes, Olavo T.       24, 77, 92, 102,             Goodwin, Harold       7
     132, 141, 142, 159, 169, 183, 200              Gordon, Samuel       250
Fort, Charles      325                              Gossner, Simone D.        241
Foss, William O.        341                         Gould, Rupert T.       241, 326
Fouere, Francine        201                         Goupil, Jean     104, 147
Fouere, Rene      25, 54, 65, 82, 103,              Gradecak, Vjekoslav        147
     113, 114, 160, 200, 201, 250, 308,             Grant, W. V.      93, 104, 330
    322, 333                                        Gray, Grattan      26, 221
French, Paul      366                               Green, Gabriel      7, 115, 201
Friedman, Bruno         288                         Green, Vaughn M.        115
Fry, Daniel W.       6, 65, 74, 229, 301,           Greenbank, Anthony        7, 82, 104
     319                                            Greenfield, Irving A.       7, 42, 160, 201
Fuhs, Allen S.       136, 289                       Greenstein, Jesse L.        289
Fuller, B. A. G.        282, 289                    Gregg, Doris D.       175
Fuller, Curtis      25, 65, 103, 114, 183,          Grescoe, Paul      138
     184, 201, 214, 218, 273, 319, 345,             Guieu, Jimmy       115
Fuller, Jean     25                                 Guttridge, Len      367, 368
Fouler, John G.       7, 25, 65, 114, 218                               -H-
                    -G-                             Hall, Richard H.      8, 12, 42, 57, 121,
                                                         184, 201
Gaddis, Vincent H.      39, 92, 114, 314,           Haggerty, James J.        319
    341                                             Halpern, L. A.      246
Gaündez, Oscar A.        142. 201, 322              Halsey, Wallace C.       115, 201
Gallegos, Faustin      325                          Hamilton, Jared      185
Gardner, James P.        265                        Hampton, Wade T.        153, 345
Gardner, Marshall B.        337                     Handels man, M.      274
Gardner, Martin      325, 337                       Hanlon, Donald B.       171, 202
Garreau, Charles       184                          Hansen, L. Taylor       49, 116
Garver, Ronald G.       367                         Hapgood, Charles H.        93, 308
Garvin, Richard M.       367                        Hardner, James A.        147
Gaspa, Pietro     329                               Harford, J.    290
Gaston, Henry A.       240                          Harney, John     26
Gatland, Kenneth W.        225, 229, 289            Harris, John B.      367, 368
Gauroy, Pierre      289                             Harrison, Philip      235
Gearhart, Livingston       25, 172                  Hatcher, Judi A.      250
Geier, Chester S.      74, 345                      Hatvany, Edgar A.       160, 214
Geley, Gustave      229, 345                        Hayatsu, Ryoichi      262
Giannini, Amadeo       345                          Haythornthwaite, P. K.        132, 157
Gibbons, Gavin      66, 184                         Heard, Gerald      8, 175, 185
Gibbons, Rüssel W.        160                       Heard, J. F.     235
Gibbs-Smith, Charles H.         26, 214             Heath, David     142
Gibson, Edmund H.        367                        Hecker, Randall C.       93
Giles. Gordon A.      92                            Heim, Allen H.      242
Gilman, Peter      66, 103, 241                     Heinlein, Robert A.       368
Gilvarry, J. J.     250                             Heintze, Carl     262, 290
Girvan, Ian W.      7, 82, 115                      Heline, Corinne      93
Girvin, Calvin C.      66, 152                      Heiland, Albert E.      49, 104
Giumarro, C.      246                               Herrmann, Joachim         8, 221
Globe, H. C.     351                                H*rvey, Michael       158

                                              386
Heuer, Kenneth      290                                               -K-
Hewes, Hayden C.        202
Hickman, Warren 161                               Kaempffert, Waldemar          27, 117
Hicks, CÜff. dB.        274                       Kapp, R. O.      346
Hiestand, Edgar A.       214                      Kasantsev, Aleksandr        36
Hilberg, Rick R.      12, 88, 171                 Kavanau, J. L.       263
Hinfelaar, H. J.     323                          Kazantsev, Alexander        36, 50, 129,
Hinman, Grace       142                                357, 368
Hoag, Amey      186                               Keel, John A.      27, 28, 39, 57, 67, 82,
Hohmann, H. E.        275                              83, 88, 94, 105, 161, 203
Holden, A. R.      147                            Kellogg, W. W.       237, 245
Holledge, Jumes       82                          Kelly, Peter J.      203
Holmes, David C.       262, 290                   Keyhoe, Donald E.        9, 10, 28, 42, 57,
Hornet, Marcel      50                                 94, 117, 147, 148,185, 215, 250
Horowitz, Norman       241,253,262                Kim-Nicklasson, Lars         369
Howard, Dana       153, 301                       Kind, S. S.     263
Howells, W.      290                              King, George      231, 250, 29], 302, 303
Hoyle, Fred     235, 290, 368                     Klarer, Elizabeth      65, 81
Huang, Su-Shu      225, 235, 253, 262,            Klass, Philip J.      117, 118, 156, 315
     263, 274, 290, 291                           Kleinz, John P.      330
Hudson, Jan      66, 169                          Klemin, Alexander        28, 118
Hughes, F. P.       136                           Knaggs, Oliver      10, 50
Hugill, Joanna     66, 104                        Knight, Damon       369
Hull, Joe    116                                  Knight, Oscar F.       105, 185
Hunt, Douglas      309                            Kobler, John     68, 138
Hunt, Richard      202, 314                       Kor, Peter     28, 118, 154, 161, 162
Hynek, J. Allen      8, 26, 27, 116, 161,         Korcsmaros, Jesse         148
     215                                          Kowalezewski, Stanislaw         142
                                                  Krafft, Carl F.      148, 229, 346
                    -I-                           Kraspedon, Dino       10, 68, 148
                                                  Krasovskiy, lu.      275
Ibson, Jack 104                                   Kunkel, Wallace      83
Inglefield, Gilberts.      153, 352
                                                                     -L-
                    -J-
                                                  Lafonta, Paul      75, 149
Jack, Homer A.       330                          Latfaire de Valensole       79
Jackson, CD.        275                           Laine, Juliette      241
Jackson, Francis L.       241, 263, 291           Lamar, Donald L.         78, 316
James, Trevor      8, 67, 116, 153, 154,          Lamb, Peter       275
    330                                           Lambert, Richards.          50                I *
Jansen, Clare J.      105, 202                    Lang, Daniel      28, 29, 175, 185
Jansen, John H.      175                          Larson, Kenneth L.         50,94, 171
Jenkins, William F.       368                     Lascoe, Jack       57
Jessup, Morris K.       9, 117, 326, 330          Last, Cecil E.      291, 346
Jones, Harold S.      27, 215, 263                Lauritzen, Hans       148, 149, 315
Johns, Cornelius      319                         Lawrence, Lincoln        346
Johnson, DeW. B.        9                         Layne, Meade 94, 118
Johnson, R. Dean       203                        Layne, Stan      251
Jones, Bob    147                                 Lear, John      29, 58, 59, 215, 218
Jones, HaroldS.       27, 215, 263                Ledger, Joseph R.        50
Jones, R. V.     27                               Lee, Ben S.      42
Jones, S. F.     175, 221                         Lee Gloria 154
Jonsson, Ake      203                             Leiber, Fritz      291
Jung. Carl G.    154                              Lemaitre, Jules       68


                                            387
Leonard, Frederick C.         263                 Meadows, A. J.        31S, 316
Le Poer Trench, Brinsley         10, 29,          Meerloo, Joost A.        121, 155
     118, 119, 309                                Menger, Howard        69, 303
Leroy, Gerard      173, 180                       Menzel, Donald H.        55, 121, 122, 133,
Leslie, Desmond       10, 51, 68, 83, 138            264, 294
Levin, Gilbert V.      242                        Merker, Donald       221
Lewellen, John      291                           Mesnard, Joel      205
Lewis, CliveS.       370                          Michael, Cecil      69, 155
Ley, Willy     105, 242, 291, 323, 358            Michel, Aime 12, 78, 83, 84, 106,
Liddel, Urner     119                                122, 133, 134, 162, 175, 186, 187,
LighthaU, W. D.       264                            242
Lindsay, David      369                           Micheil, John F.       51
Lindsay, Gordon       68, 95, 119                 Miles, H. G.      315, 316
Liss, Jeffrey G.      204, 242                    Miles, Max B.       275
Lloyd, Dan     75, 105, 204                       Miller, Evelyn      155, 303
Loftin, Robert 10, 119, 346                       Miller, E. C.      275, 282, 347
Lonnqvist, C.     264, 292                        Miller, H. W.      264, 292
Lore, Gordon      10, 171                         MiUer, Max B.        30, 43, 51, 70, 106,
Lorenzen, Coral E.        11, 39, 68, 83,             162, 187
     106, 119                                     MiUer, R. DeWitt        122
Lovecraft, Howard P.         370                  Miller, Robert W.        12, 171
Lovitch, A.    51                                 MiUer, Stewart       30, 163
Lowell, Percival      242                         MiUer, Will      155, 303
Luciano, Gain      68                             Misraki, Paul      51, 96, 309
Luckiesh, Matthew        136                      Mitchell, Betty     69
L^na, Walter F.       95, 186                     Mitchell, Helen      69
Lyustiucrg. Villen      29                        Moffat, Samuel      264
                                                  Mollohan, Hank       187
                   -M-                            Moore, Patrick       236, 241, 251, 263,
                                                     264, 291, 294
MacGowan, Roger A.         292                    Moo rehouse, Frederick G.         31, 122,
Macvey, John W.       292, 303, 370, 371             149
Magee, Judith     204                             Moreux, Theophile        294
Mallan, Lloyd     29, 157, 162                    Morgan, Dean       187
Mamontoff, Nicholas       346                     Morrison, Philip       272
Manas, John H.      120                           Moseley, James W.          12, 52, 122, 309
Mandel, Siegfried     30                          Motz, Lloyd      294
Maney, Charles A.      12, 30, 42, 77,            Mugler, C.      232, 293
    121,132, 162, 186, 205, 253                   Mulholland, John       123
Mann, Mary      186                               Müller, Hermann J.         230
Manning, Henry P.       347                       Müller, Wolfgang D.         294
Marais, D.     30, 96                             Munday, John C.        163
Margaria, Rodolfo      292                        Mundo, Laura       70, 242
Margolis, Howard       30, 162, 219               Munitz, Milton K.       226, 236, 293
Markowitz, William       30, 216                  Murray, Jacqueline        232, 351
Marshall, James S.       242                      Mustapa, Margit       303
Martin, D. M.      69
Martin, Mitch     154                                                 -N-
Mauer, Edgar F.       121                         National Investigations Commute on
Maunder, E. W.       292                             Aerial Phenomena         13, 175, 188,
Mayher, Ralph      142                                205
McClain, Edward F.        275                     Nebel, Long John      13, 70
McColley, Grant 264, 292                          Needham, A. E.       226
McCoy, John      18, 99                           Nelson, Albert F.      243
McDonald, James E.        11, 12, 29,95,          Nelson, Buck     70, 85
    119, 120, 162, 215, 216                       Newman, Bernard        370, 371
McHugh, L. C.       292                           Nicolson, Majorie H.       251


                                            388
NoUet, A. R.   31,320                             Pottage, Barrie    53
Norkin, Israel  70                                Powers, W. T.      143
Norman, Ernest L.     243                         Pravda 1 vynsysel     33
Norman, Marke A.     243                          Price, George R.     277
Norman, Paul   78, 149                            Priestly, Lee    33, 163
Norman, Samuel     188                            Pritchett, E. B.    304
                                                  Proctor, Richard A.      265
                   -O-                            Prytz, John    33, 43
Oakley, C. O.      276                            Purcell, E.    277
Oberth, Hermann       31, 32, 70, 96,107,         Puri, Omananda     347
    123, 150, 155, 163, 216, 276
O'Brien, Barbara      347                                             -Q-
Oehler, Pauline     347
Oge-Make      52                                  Quarnstrom, Gunnar      293
Ogden, RichardC.        138, 150, 236             Quimby, F. H.      251, 265
Ogles, George W.       32, 43                     Quintanilla, Hector    43
Oliver, Fredericks.        232, 351               Qulroga, R. A.     244
Olsen, Thomas M.        13, 176, 188, 206
Oparin, A. I.     226, 243, 253, 265                                  -R-
Ordway, Frederick I. .Ill       265, 292,
    293                                           Raible, D. C.      295
Ormond, Ron      32, 54, 107                      Rampa, R. Lobsang         71, 347
Ottesen, Eric A.      245, 267                    Rankow, Ralph       33, 143
Ovenden, Michael       236                        Rathbun, Mabel       208
Owen, A. R. G.       353     #                    Rayle, Warren D.        316
Owens, Ted      71                                Rea, D. G.      244
                                                  Reeve, Bryant      71, 278, 282, 331
                   -P-                            Reeve, Helen      71, 331
                                                  Rehn, K. Gosta       14, 163
Pace, A. R.       15                              Rember, Winthrop A.         244
Pack, Warren E.         32                        Renwick, G.      246
Page, H. M.       223                             Retour sur Valensole       107
Palmer, Ray       2, 33, 123, 143, 173,           ReveUe, R.      266, 278, 295
     176, 188, 206, 243, 251, 337, 351            Reynolds, O, E.       251
Parkes, A. S.       347                           Ribera, Antonio      14, 54, 85, 96, 107,
Pascalis, Bernardino         71, 276                   134, 143, 155, 171, 176, 189, 208,
Pastorino, Luiz P.       33                           217, 323, 324, 331, 352
Pay, Red      248                                 Rich, Valentin     295, 309
Pearman, J. P. T.         243, 276, 293           Richards, Sam       278, 282
Pederiali, Guiseppe        4, 141                 Rifat, Alain    85
Pelley, William D.        155, 277                Roberts, August C.        139, 143, 144, 189
Pendergast, R.       265, 347                     Roberts, Keith      107
Perego, Alberto       85, 176, 189, 207,          Robertson, W. S.       324
     293                                          Robinson, Jack      108, 295
Pereira, Flavio A.         13, 107, 234,          Robinson, Louis      295
     259                                          Robinson, Mary       108, 295
Perret, Jacques       124, 136                    Rocha, Hugo      71, 295
Pestalozzi, Rudolph H.         303                Rodgers, Philip      278
Petersen, Clarence        222                     Rogers, Warren        164, 219
Philip, Brother      96                           Roming, Mary F.        78, 316
Pierce, J. R.      277, 347                       Rosenberg, Paul       278, 295
Pinotti, Roberto      52                          Ross, John C.      34, 46, 144, 150, 190,
Pittendrigh, Colin S.       243                        266, 296, 348
Pittenger, Norman W.          244                 Rougeron, Camille        124
Plantier, Jean      150                           Roussel, Robert       190, 209
Plekanov, G. F.       358                         Rowe, Kelvin      279
Posin, DanQ.        33, 216, 237, 265,            Rowland, John      348
     277, 293

                                            389
Rublowsky, John    266                               Silvano, Ceccarelli       72
Ruppelt, Edward J.     14,34, 43, 164,               Sinton, William M.        246
    190,316                                          Simoes, Auriphebo B.          14, 72
Rush, Joseph H.    237, 266                          Simons, Herbert        219
Russell, Eric F.    371                              Simons, Howard         164
Ryan, Cornelius    319                               Simons, Rodger L.         34
                                                     Simpson, George G.          267, 297
                    -S-                              Sklarewitz, Norman         191
                                                     Slaboda, Emil      158, 191
Sable, Martin H.       223                           Slater, Alan E. 230, 297
Sacksteder, Fred V.         209                      Slater, Robert M.        150
Sagan, Carl     34, 226, 237, 244, 245,              Sloan, Eugene A.        298
     26^, 279, 296, 297, 310                         Smith, Alson J.       158
Salisbi ry, Frank B.        34, 245                  Smith, A. U.      347
Sanderson, Ivan T.         14, 86, 124, 209,         Smith, Bernard       279
     342, 356                                        Smith, Edward E.         372
Sanctillean    96, 124                               Smith, E. R.      35, 136
Sanford, Ray     279                                 Smith, J. L.     275, 282
Santesson, Hans S.         124, 371                  Smith, Stephen L.        210, 222, 230, 298
Saunders, Alex       191, 279, 296                   Smith, Warren        7, 115, 201
Schang, Casimiro        209                          Smoluchowskl, R.         246
Schatzman, Evry        296                           Sondy, Dominic        191
SchiapareUi, G. V.         245, 296                  Soule, Gardner       15
Schmidt, Reinhold        71, 72                      Splitter, Henry W.        326
Schoenherr, Luis        125, 144                     Spraggett, Allen       40, 72
Schopfer, Siegfried        126                       Sprinkle, R. Leo        15, 97, 126, 165,
Schroeder, W.       74                                    222
Schwartz, R. N.        279                           Stanford, Rex G.        14, 35, 127
Scully, Frank      14, 58, 108                       Stanley, Neil    74
Seaman, E. A.        191                             Stanton, L. Jerome         15. 219
Seevior, Peter M.         134                        Stanway, R. H.        15
Sendy, Jean     232, 310                             Starr, David     367
Senelier, Jean      86                               Steiger, Brad      15, 40, 54, 58, 88, 97,
Serpas, Paul F.       191                                 108, 127, 324
Serviss, Garrett P.         245, 251, 253,           Steiner, Ralph      144
     29C                                             Stevens. Stuart      35, 246
Settime, Gianni      97                              Stine, G. H.     320
Sewall, Frank      237, 297                          Stone, Fred P.       352
Shalett, Sidney     44, 126                          Stranges, Frank E.         16, 72, 127, 3T0,
Shapley, Harlow       237, 245, 253, 266,                 311
     297                                             Strauch, Arthur A.        144
Sharp, Alan W.       26                              Strentz, Herb     99
Sharp, Peter F.       34, 54, 126, 164,              Stringfield, Leonard H.        16, 44
     267, 335, 358                                   Strong, James G.         150
Sharpe, Mitchell R. , Jr.        265                 Strughold, Hubertus        226, 237, 238,
Shaver, Richards.          338, 339                       246, 247, 254
Sheldon, Jean      169                               Stumbough, Virginia         127, 348, 354
Sherman, Carl       217                              Sullivan, Walter       298
Sherman, Harold M.           349                     Summer, F. W.          304
Sherwood, John C.         210                        Sykes, Egerton       128, 311, 316, 335
Shirley. Ralph      348                              Sytinskaia, N. N.        247, 267
Shklovftkii, losef S.       279, 297                 Szachnowski, Antoni         35, 165
Shneour, EU A.        245, 264, 267
Short, Gertrude       372                                                  -T-
Shuldiner, Herbert         164, 219
Shuttlewood, Arthur         210                      Tacker, Lawrence J.     16, 45, 165
Siegal, S. M.      246                               Tassi, Dan    340
Siguret, E.     246                                  Taylor, Henry J.    321


                                               390
  Teletov, G. S.    317
  Thomas, Andrew        97                          Veldman, James S.       335
  Thomas, Dorothy       247, 254                   Velikovsky, Immanuel       349
  Thomas, Franklin       73, 86                    Verne, Jules      373
  Thomas, Robert B.        86                      Vezina, Allan K.      168, 212
  Thompson, T. A.        76                        Viney, Basil     331
  Thompson, William C.        108                  Vinther, Lawrence W.        192
 Thornton, Ronald C.        348                    Vishniac, Wolf      243
 Tikhov, G. A.     248                             Vogt, Cristian     18, 73, 79, 192
 Tomas, Andrew       97                            Volkman, Frank       193
 Toulet, Francois      134                         Von Braun, Wernher       248
 Touquet, Robert      227                          Von Hoerner, Sebastian       280
 Towner, Cliff R.      192, 326                    Vonkeviczky e gli 37
 Towner, Larry E.        192                       Voorname, Kronologie       52
 Townes, C. H.      279                            Vyner, J.    311
 Trevor, James      67, 330
 Troxwell, Hope     304                                                  -W-
 Tsung, Thomas      267
 Tufty, i3arbara    128                           Waithman, Robert          37, 218
 Turner, Eric     161                             Waithman, Walter          218
 Turner, Richard      324                         Wald, George       227
 Twichell, Cleve     16, 73                       Walling, Theodore L.          193
 Tyler, Steven    16, 45                          Walsh, William T.          156, 352
 Tyrrell, George N.       349                     Warder, George W-           298, 349
                                                  Wassilko-Serecki, Zoe          129
                                                  Watkins, Keith       135
                     -U-                          Watson, S. H.       232
Unger, George      128, 156                       Watson, W. R         151, 171
Unidentified Flying Objects Research              Webster, Robert N.          46, 54, 130, 168,
     Committee     17                                  193
U. S. Air Force     45, 46                        Weideman, June E.          326
U. S. Air Force. Air Material                     Weiss, Sara     248
     Command      45, 166, 176, 177               Wellman, Wade 97, 130, 248
U. S. Air Force. Air Technical                    Wells, Herbert G.        252, 373
                                                  Wells, Leslie E.       40
    Intelligence Center    46, 166, 177           Wentworth, Jim 340
U. S. Congress. House. Committee                  Weor, Samuel       18
    on Armed Services       17, 46, 166
United Press International     17                Wertheimer, Michael           137
Uriondo, Oscar A.      17, 129                   White, GeorgeS.         298, 304
                                                 Whittington, George         280
                    -V-                          Whritenour, Joan        40, 54, 58, 97, 108,
                                                      127, 324
Vaeth, J. Gordon       129                       Wickland, Carl A.        280
                                                 Wilcox, Hal     305
Vallee, Jaques      17, 18, 36, 37, 109,
                                                 Wilhelm, Kate      373
      129, 135, 166, 167, 171, 177, 192,         Wilkins, G. H.     349
     211, 223, 248
Vallee, Janine     17, 18, 36, 37, 129,          Wilkins, H. Percy        87, 109
     167, 192, 211, 223, 248                     Wilkins, Harold T,        18,37, 52, 53, 98,
Van As, I. A.      151, 335                           130, 177, 193, 317, 326, 327
Van den Berg, Basil       73,335                 Wilks, Willard     248
Van Sommers, Tess 139                            Willems, Louis       37, 98
Van Tassel, George       73                      Williams, Henry S.        268, 299
Van Vogt, Alfred E.      372                     Williamson, George H.          18, 53, 98, 99,
Vasse, Cornelie        373                           280, 311, 312
Veestrae^en, Door J.       144                   Wilson, Harlan      144, 193
Veit, KarlL.      37, 73, 139, 107, 192,         Wilson, Harvey       37, 130
     211, 267                                    Wilson, Richard       130
                                                 Wilson, R. H. , Jr.       291


                                           391
Winder, R. H. B.      74,75, 79, 109,
    151, 212
Windes, V. M.     353
Wölk, George 40
Wood, Robert H.      131
Woodley, Morris      194
Wright, Eric    222
Wylie, C. C.     131
Wylie, Phiüp    131
                   -Y-
Young, JohnR.     131, 349
Young, Mort    58, 158
Young, Richard S.    268
Younghusband, Francis     227, 268, 299,
   349
                   -Z-

Zaitsev, Vyacheslav     53, 312
Zenabi, J.    18, 73, 249
Zigel, Felix    38, 168, 212, 359
Zinsstag, Lou     38, 139, 178, 194
Zubek, T. J.     349
Zully, Alphones 87


                                           392
i   ?


        'Well, isn't there any other agency that we can confacf
                        that DOES believe in us?"


           "Well, isn't there any other agency that we can contact that DOES
           believe in us?"
           —GRIN AND BEAR IT by George Lichty, from Washington Post
           and Publishers- Hall Syndicate, March 3, 1968.


                                         393
"Earths surface temperature is under 100 degrees. In that frigid climate,
there couldnft possibly be life as we Venusians know it."

—SCIENCE WORLD, copright 1963 by Scholastic Magazines, Inc.; by
Joseph Farris.


                                   394
    "Its another of those flying saucer things."
Copyright, PUNCH. By S. McMurtry. Sept. 13, 1967.

                     395



                                                    J
 sworn, v*. owe**/— uvrr -nw, mgM «fr/ DowV ttuevr ä/ mew /


"Stay calm, Dr. Condon -- Juit tell them you don't believe in them'. "

— The Denver Post, Oct. 16, 1967, by Oliphant.


                                 396
^FINITELY SWAMP 6A6r


"Definitely swamp gas1.''


-- Boulder Daily Camera, 1968, by Neil Fisk.



                       397
\*jj


 "... Attributable to swamp gas and other like phenomena creating illusions
 which to the untrained seem.,."

 — TRUE, The Man's Magazine.


                                    398
'If you ask me, they know more about UFOs than they're telling.'

— TRUE, The Man's Magazine.


                              399
"I don't get a lot of their art, but they know how to do a realistic nude."
--LOCK Magazine, by Joseph Farris.

                                   400
-><M/v


   "Near as I can make out, they're on their honeymoon.'

   --LOOK Magazine, by Jack Markow.


                           401       'us covtftNMiNt PitiNTiNb ornct   m«o-ni-t47
                         mo
                       $»-r:int\ f!.issif;ration
                                                                 DOCü^f       ^CONTROL DATA; R> P
4
4   i
                       Sitcunlt. \}***HU*iia>, ol liiia, ftody utmbthmrfinb
             oft. ji*. A - •. i   A c   •
                                                                               \jfiimgmmolmli^mm^ £^*M^'wiiinlh» oraNtti P0ß9H4« cimaHHul) ■
                                                                                                       I«. REPORT SECURtTV CLASSIFICATION
                                                                                                                                                                     ^


                      Library of Congress                                                                   UNO
                      Science and Technology Div.                                                      2b. CROUP
                      V.'ashin^lon, D.C. 20540


                      UFOs AIID ^UT50 SU3J3CTS! A!,' Ai^OTATED BIBLIOGRAPHT


                      scientific                               Special
    E        AUTrtORiS.       f'tr»t name», middle mitiul, last nttmet

                      Lynn E# Catoe

             ^EPO^T O- rt                                                             7«. TOTAL NO. OF PAGES           76. NO. OF REFS

                      July 1969                                                           401
    8«. CONTRAC" OR G «< 4 N T NO.                                                    9«. ORIGINATOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S)
                       AFOSR project orders 67-0002 and                                   Library of Congress Card Catalog
        h. PROJEC T :.■-■       68-0003                                                            No. 68-62196
                        9730
                        6U4501F                                                       9b. OTHER REPORT NOIS) (Any other numben that may bo aaalgned
                                                                                          this report)

                         6^1310                                                          AF0SR 68-1656
        lv     Z-S 'Pii^U^lOU •"'"ATEMErjT

                       1, This docment has been approved for public release and sale;
                          its distribution is unlimited.
        li. suPPLE'.-e'; * A=ry :.oT!:S                                               n. SPONSORING MILITARY ACTIVITY

                                                                                      A.F. Office of Scientific Research (SRPS)
                      TECH, OTHER                                                     1400 Wilson Blvd.
                                                                                      Arlington, Va, 22209
v
                     -An annotated bibliography of books, journal articles, pamphlets, conference
                      proceedings, tapes, original manuscripts, books of photographs, cartoons,
                      motion picture films and other such material on the subject of unidentified
                      flying objects (UFOs), totaling more than 1,600 separate items, with author
                      index, Compiled by the Library of Congress under AF0SR project orders in
                      support of AF0SR contract F44620-67-C-0035 with tne University of Colorado,
                      entitled "A Scientific Stucjy of Unidentified Flying Objects.» >Major cate-
                      gories include: UFOs, origin of life, mankind, solar system, extraterrestrial
                      life, e.t, visitors, ball lightning and fireballs, disc-like aircraft, uniden-
                      tified submarine objects, Fortaan phenomena, UFOs and religion, UFOs and
                      time, gravity and anti-gravity, hollow earth theory, disappearances, cartoons,
                      miraf.os, and related subjects.



                         14, Keywords

                         UFOs
                         Colorado UFO project



■•L
                         Condon report



  00^.1473                                                                                                   UNC
                                                                                                               Spcuriiv ClMfiHificMtion .
                                                                                                                          i miiiV •immmi\m**imi* i" t i» i»1-i^tr#iifJffi*r>i»t*1r-fr-
