Exemplary Novels (Miguel de Cervantes, 1613)
==========================================================
The founding collection of the modern novella — twelve tales that invented short fiction's art. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (exemplarynovels00kellgoog).

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


1


i


k


4


-f-r-«


I '


4


r


U


F


1


BOHFS STANDARD LffiRARY.


THE EXEMPLARY NOVELS


OF


CERVANTES.


i


y"


THE


EXEMPLARY NOVELS


or


MIGUEL DE CERVANTES SAAVEDEA.


TBANSLATED FROM THE SPANISH


BT


WALTER K. KELLY.


LONDON: GBOEGE BELL AND SONS, YOBK STBEET,

COVENT GABDEN.

1881.


868


LOhdov :

PBINTED BT WILUAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITBD,
STAUFOBD STSBKT AMD CRARIKO CROOB.


J


PEBPACE.


— <«»■


It seems to be generally admitted that in rendering the
title of a book from one language into another, the form of
the original should be retained, even at the cost of some
deviation from ordinary usage. Cicero's work De Offidis is
never spoken of as a treatise on Moral Daties, but as Cicero's
Ofi&ces. Upon the same principle we have not entitled the
following collection of tales, Instructive or Moral ; though it
is in this sense that the author applied to them the epithet
exemplares, as he states distinctly in his preface. The Spanish
word exemjplo, from the time of the archpriest of Hita and
Don Juan Manuel, has had the meaning of instruction^ or
instructive story.

The " Novelas Exemplares " were first published in 1613,
three years before the death of Cervantes. They are all
original, and have the air of being drawn from his personal
experience and observation. Ticknor, in his "History of
Spsiiii'sn Literature," says of them, and of the " Impertinent
-' Curiosity," inserted in the first part of Don Quixote : —

" Their value is different, for they are written with dif-
ferent views, and in a variety of style greater than he has
elsewhere shown ; but most of them contain touches of what
is peculiar in his talent, and are fall of that rich eloquence
and of those pleasing descriptions of natural scenery which
always flow so easily from his pen. They have little in
common with the graceful story-telling spirit of Boccaccio
and his followers, and still less with the strictly practical


Tl PBEFACB.

tone of Don Juan Mannel's tales ; nor, on the other hand,

do thej approach, except in the case of the ' Impertinent

Curiosity,' the class of short novels which have been freqnent

in other countries within the last century. The more,

therefore, we examine them, the more we shall find that

they are original in their composition and general tone, and

that they are strongly marked with the original genius of

their author, as well as with the more peculiar traits of the

national character, — ^the ground, no doubt, on which they

have always been favourites at home, and less valued thaa

they deserve to be abroad. As works of invention, they

rank, among their author's productions, next after Don

Quixote ; in correctness and grace of style they stand before

it They are all fresh from the racy soil of the

national character, as that character is found in Andalusia ,<

and are written with an idiomatic richness, a spirit, and a

grace, which, though they are the oldest tales of their class

in Spain, have left them ever since without successful rivals."

The first three tales in this volume have merely undergone

the revision of the editor, having been translated by another

before he was engaged on the work. For the rest he alone

is responsible^

W. K. K.


DEDICATION

TO DON PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE CASTRO, COUNT
OF LEMOS, ANDRADE, AND VILLALBA, &o.


Those who dedicate their works to some prince
commonly fall into two errors. The first is, that in
their dedicatory epistle, which ought to be brief and
succinct, they dilate very complacently, whether moved
by truth or flattery, on the deeds not only of their
fathers and forefathers, but also of all their relations,
friends, and benefactors. The second is, that they tell
their patron they place their works under his protection
and safeguard, in order that malicious and captious
tongues may not presume to cavil and carp at them.
For myself, shunning these two faults, I here pass over
in silence the grandeur and titles of your excellency's
ancient and royal house, and your infinite virtues both
natural and acquired, leaving it to some new Phidias and
Lysippus to engrave and sculpture them in marble and
bronze, that they may rival time in duration. Neither
do I supplicate your Excellency to take this book under
your protection, for I know, that if it is not a good one,
though I should put it under the wings of Astolfo's


h


Viii DEDIOATION.


liippogrif, or beneath the club of Hercules, the Zoili,
the cynics, the Aretinos, and the bores, will not abstain
from abusing it, out of respect for anyone. I only beg
your Excellency to observe that I present to you, without
more words, thirteen tales,* which, had they not been
wrought in the laboratory of my own brains, might
presume to stand beside the best. Such as they are,
there they go, leaving me here rejoiced at the thought
of manifesting, in some degree, the desire I feel to serve
your Excellency as my true lord and benefjActon Our
Lord preserve, &c.

Your Excellency's servant,
MIGUEL DE CERVANTES SAAVEDEA.


Madrid, ISth of July, 1613.]


* There are out twelve of them. Possibly when Cervantes wrote
this dedication he intended to include "£1 Curioso Impertinente,"
which occurs in chapters xxxiii.-zzxv. of the first part of '<Don
Quixote.**


AUTHOR'S PREFACE.


I WISH it were possible, dear reader, to dispense with
writing this preface ; for that which I put at the beginning
of my " Don Quixote " did not turn out so well for me as to
give me any inclination to write another. The fault lies with
a friend of mine — one of the many I have made in the course
of my life with my heart rather than my head. This friend
might well have caused my portrait, which the famous Don
Juan de Jauregui would have given him, to be engraved and
put in the first page of this book, according to custom. By
that means he would have gratified my ambition and tbe
wishes of several persons, who would like to know what sort
of face and figure has he who makes bold to come before the
world with so many works of his own invention. My friend
might have written under the portrait — " This person whom
you see here, with an oval visage, chestnut hair, smooth open
forehead, lively eyes, a hooked but well-proportioned nose, a
silvery beard that twenty years ago was golden, large mous-
taches, a small mouth, teeth not much to speak of, for he has
but six, in bad condition and worse placed, no two of them
corresponding to each other, a figure midway between the twc
extremes, neither tall nor short, a vivid complexion, rather
fair than dark, somewhat stooped in the shoulders, and not
very lightfooted : this, I say, is the author of * Galatea,*
* Don Quixote de la Mancha,' * The Journey to Parnassus,'
which he wrote in imitation of Cesare Caporali Perusino,
and other works which are current among the public, and
perhaps without the author's name. He is conmionly called
Miguel db Cervantes Saavedra. He was for many years
a soldier, and for ^yb years and a half in captivity, where he
learned to have patience in adversity. He lost his left hand

b


Z AUTHOBS PBEFACX.

by a mnsket-sbot in the battle of Lepanto : and ngly as this
wound may appear, he regards it as beautiful, having received
it on the most memorable and sublime occasion which past
times have ever seen, or future times can hope to equal,
fighting under the victorious banners of the son of that
thunderbolt of war, Charles V., of blessed memory." Should
the friend of whom I complain have had nothing more to say
of me than this, I would myself have composed a couple of
dozen of eulogiums, and communicated them to him in secret,
thereby to extend my fame and exalt the credit of my genius ;
for it would be absurd to expect the exact truth in such
matters. We know well that neither praise nor abuse is
meted out with strict accuracy.

However, since this opportunity is lost, and I am left in
the lurch without a portrait, T must have recourse to my own
tongue, which, for all its stammering, may do well enough
to state some truths that are tolerably self-evident. I assure
you then, dear reader, that you can by no means make a
fricassee of these tales which I here present to you, for they
have neither legs, head, bowels, nor anything of the sort ; I
mean that the amorous intrigues you will find in some of
them, are so decorous, so measured, and so conformable to
reason and Christian propriety, that they are incapable of
exciting any impure thoughts in him who reads them with
or without caution.

I have called them exemplary^ because if you rightly
consider them, there is not one of them from which you may
not draw some useful example; and were I not afraid of
being too prolix, I might show you what savoury and whole-
some fruit might be extracted from them, collectively and
severally.

My intention has been to set up, in the midst of our com-
munity, a billiard- table, at which every one may amuse him-
self without hurt to body and soul ; for innocent recreations
do good rather than harm. One cannot be always at church,
or always saying one's prayers, or always engaged in one's
business, however important it may be ; there are hours for
recreation when the wearied mind should take repose. It is
to this end that alleys of trees are planted to walk in, waters
are conveyed from remote fountains, hills are levelled, and
gardens are cultivated with such care. One thing- 1 boldly


author's preface. xi

declare : could I by any means suppose that these novels
could excite any bad thought or desire in^ those who read
them, I would rather cut off the hand with which I write
them, than give them to the public. I am at an age when it
does not become me to trifle with the life to come, for I
am upwards of sixty-four.

My genius and my inclination prompt me to this kind of
writing ; the more so as I consider (and with truth) that I
am the flist who has written novels in the Spanish language,
though many have hitherto appeared among us, all of them
translated from foreign authors. But these are my own,
neither imitated nor stolen from anyone; my genius has
engendered them, my pen has brought them forth, and they
are growing up in the arms of the press. After them, should
my life be spared, I will present to you the Adventures of
Persiles, a book which ventures to compete with Heliodorus,
But previously you shall see, and that before long, the con-
tinuation of the exploits of Don Quixote and the humours of
Sancho Panza; and then the Weeks of the Garden. This is
promising largely for one of my feeble powers ; but who can
curb his desires ? I only beg you to remark that since I
have had the boldness to address these novels to the great
Count of Lemos, they must contain some hidden mystery
which exalts their merit.

I have no more to say, so pray God to keep you, and
give me patience to bear all the ill that will be spoken of
me by more than one subtle and starched critic. Vale.


[
<


CONTENTS.


^T) ^ PAGE

(j V' The Lady Cornelia^ 1

*- t\ KiNCONETE AND CORTADILLO ; OB, PeTEB OF THE COBNER AND

THE Little utter ..,.., 42

. , .^^ The Licentiate Vidriera ; or, Doctor Glasb-case . . 86

y The Deceitful Marriage 112

,^ Dialogue between Scipio and Berganza, Dogs of the
Hospital of the Resurrection in the City of Valla-

DOLID, commonly CALLED TBE DoGS OF MaHUDES . 124

^ * The Little Gipsy Girl 178

~\ The GENEjaonaXovBR- , 236

s/^ V The SpANi s g-TlNai.TRH Lady \ .... 278

f\0 I ' The Force of Blood 314

^ The Jealous Estramaduran 331

. , The Illustrious Scullery-maid . • . . . 365

f^o I The Two Damsels 410


CEEVANTES' EXEMPLAET TALES,


THE LADY COBNELIA.

DoK Antonio de Isnnza and Don Jnan do Gamboa, gentlemen
of high birth and excellent sense, both of the same age, and very
intimate friends, being students together at Salamanca, deter-
mined to abandon their studies and proceed to Flanders. To
this resolution they were incited by the fervour of youth,
their desire to see the world, and their conviction that the
profession of arms, so becoming to all, is more particularly
suitable to men of illustrious race.

But they did not reach Flanders until peace was restored,
or at least on the point of being concluded ; and at Antwerp
they received letters from their parents, wherein the latter
expressed the great displeasure caused them by their sons
having left their studies without informing them of their
intention, which if they had done, the proper measures might
have been taken for their making the journey in a manner
befitting their birth and station.

Unfiling to give further dissatisfaction to their parents,
the yoimg men resolved to return to Spain, the rather as
there was now nothing to be done in Flanders. But before
doing BO they determined to visit all the most renowned cities
of Italy ; and having seen the greater part of them, they were
80 much attracted by the noble university of Bologna, that
they resolved to remain there and complete the studies aban-
doned at Salamanca.

They imparted their intentions to their parents, who tes-
tified their entire approbation by the magnificence with which
they provided their sons with every thing proper to their
rank, to the end that, in their manner of living, they might
show who they were, and of what house they were born.
From the first day, therefore, that the young men visited the

^ } B


2 CERYANTE8* EXEMPLARY TALES.

schools, all perceived them to be gallant^ sensible^ and well-
bred gentlemen.

Don Antonio waA at this time in his twenty-fourth year, and
Don Juan had not passed his twenty-sixth. Tliis fair period
of life they adorned by various good qualities ; they were
handsome, brave, of good address, and well versed in music
and poetry; in a word, they were endowed with such
advantages as caused them to be much sought and greatly
beloved by all who knew them. They soon had numerous
friends, not only, among the many Spaniards belonging to
the university,* but also among people of the city, and
of other nations, to all of whom they proved themselves
courteous, liberal, and wholly free from that arrogance which
is said to be too often exhibited by Spaniards.

Being young, and of joyous temperament, Don Juan and
Don Antonio did not fall to give their attention to the
beauties of the city. Many there were indeed in Bologna,
both married and unmarried, remarkable as well for their
virtues as their charms ; but among them all there was none
who surpassed the Signora Cornelia Bentivoglia, of that old
and illustrious family of the Bentivogli, who were at one time
lords of Bologna,

Cornelia was beautiful to a marvel ; she had been left undei
the guardianship of her brother Lorenzo Bentivoglio, a brave
and honourable gentleman. They were orphans, but inheritors
of considerable wealth — and wealth is a great alleviation of
the evils of the orphan state. Cornelia liv^in complete seclu-
sion, and her brother guarded her with imwearied solicitude.
The lady neither showed herself on any occasion, nor would
her brother consent that any one should see her ; but this
very fact inspired Don Juan and Don Antonio with the most
lively desire to behold her face, were it only at church. Yet
all the pains they took for that purpose proved vain, and the
wishes they had felt on the subject gradually diminished,
as the attempt appeared more and more hopeless. Thus,
devoted to their studies, and varying these with such amuse-
ments as are permitted to their age, the young men passed
a life as cheerful as it was honourable, rarely going out at night,
but when they did so, it was always together and well armed.

* Cardinal Albornoz founded a college in the uniyersity of Bq«
logna, eiqpresslj for the Spaniards, his country meu.


THE LADY CORNELIA. ^

One evening, however, when Don Juan was preparing ta
go out, Don Antonio expressed his desire to remain at home
for a short time, to repeat certain orisons : but he requested
Don Juan to go without him, and promised to follow him.

"Why should I go out to wait for you ?" said Don Juan.
** I will stay ; if you do not go out at all to-night, it will be
of very little consequence." " By no means shall you stay,''
returned Don Antonio : " go and take the air ; I will be wit>
you almost immediately, if you take the usual way."

" Well, do as you please," said Don Juan : " if you come
you will find me on our usual beat." With these words Do*
Juan left the house.

The night was dark, and the hour about eleven. Don
Juan passed through two or three streets, but finding himself
alone, and with no one to speak to, he determined to return
home. He began to retrace his steps accordingly ; and was
passing through a street, the houses of which had marble
porticoes, wh(xi he heard some one call out, " Hist ! hist V*
from one of the doors. The darkness of the night, and the
shadow cast by the colonnade, did not permit him to see the
whisperer ; but he stopped at once, and listened attentively,
He saw a door partially opened, approached it, and heard these
words uttered in a low voice, " Is it you, Fabio ?" Don Juan,
on the spur of the moment, replied, " Yes !*' ** Take it, then,*
returned the voice, " take it, and place it in security ; but
return instantly, for the matter presses." Don Juan put out
his liand in the dark, and encountered a packet. Proceeding tc
take hold of it, he found that it required both hands; in-
stinctively he extended the second, but had scarcely done so
before the portal was closed, and he found himself again alone
m the street, loaded with, he knew not what.

Presently the cry of an infant, and, as it seemed, but
newly born, smote his ears, fiUing him with confusion and
amazement, for he knew not what next to do, or how to pro*
ceed in so strange a case. If he knocked at the door he was
almost certain to endanger the mother of the infant ; and if
ho leit his burthen there, he must imperil the life of the babe
Itself. But if he took it home he should as little know what
to do with it, nor was he acquainted with any one in the city
to whom he could entrust the care of the child ; yet reraem-
boriug that hs had been required to come back quickly, after

b2


CBRVAHTEB EXEMPLARY TALES,

"•r tu3 charge in aafety, he determined to take the inlant
leave it in the hands of hia old housekeeper, and retimi
if his aid was needed in any way, taace he perceived
that the person who had been expected to come for
ild had not arrived, and the latter had been given to
f in mistake. With this determination, Don Juan soon
d his home ; but found that Antonio had already left it.
m went to hia chamber, and calling the housekeeper,
;red the infant, which was one of the most beauti-
er seen ; whilst, as the good woman remarked, the
ce of the clothes in which the little creature waa
ed, proved him — for it was a boy — to be the boh of
irents.

fou must, now," said Don Juan to his housekeeper,
some one to nurse this infant ; but first of all take
these rich coverings, and put on him others of the
it kind. Having done tha^ you must carry the babe,
it a moment's delay, to the house of a midwife, for there
lat you will be most likely to find all that is requisite in
, case. Take money to pay what may be needful, and
le child such parents as you please, for I desire to bide
ith, and not let the manner in which I became possessed
le known," The woman promised that she would obey
I every point; and Don Juan returned in all haste to
eet, to see whether he should receive another mysterious
But just before he arrived at the hou^e whence the
had been delivered to him, the clash of swords struck
, the sound being as that of several persons engaged in
He listened carefully, but could hear no word ; the
t was carried on in total silence ; but the sparks cast
the swords as they struck agdnst the stones, enabled
» perceive that one man was defending himself against
I assailants ; and he was confirmed in this belief by an
lation which proceeded at length from the last person
ed. " Ah, traitors ! you are many and I am but one)
ur baseness shall not avail you."

iaring and seeing this, Don Juan, listening only to tl^
IBS of his brave heart, sprang to the side of the person
d, and opposing the buckler he carried on his arm to
rords of the adversaries, drew his own, and speaking in
I that h« might not be knowa as a Spaniard, ho said- •


TUE LADY CORNELIA. O

** Fear not, Signor, help has arrived that will not fail you
while life holds ; lay on well, for traitors are worth but little
however many there may be." To this, one of the assailants
made answer — " You lie ; there are no traitors here. He who
seeks to recover his lost honour is no traitor, and is permitted
to avail himself of every advantage.*'

No more was said on either side, for the impetuosity of
the assailants, who, as Don Juan thought, amounted to not
less than six, left no opportunity for further words. They
pressed his companion, meanwhile, very closely ; and two of
them giving him each a thrust at the same time with the
point of their swords, he fell to the earth. Don Juan believed
they had killed him ; he threw himself upon the adversaries,
nevertheless, and with a shower of cuts and thrusts, dealt
with extraordinary rapidity, caused them to give way for
several paces. But all his e£fbrts must needs have been vain
for the defence of the fallen man, had not Fortune aided him,
by making the neighbours come with lights to their win-
dows and shout for the watch, whereupon the assailants ran
off and left the street clear.

The fallen man was meanwhile beginning to move ; for
Ihe strokes he had received, having encountered a breast-
plate as hard as adamant, had only stunned, but not wounded
him.

Now, Don Juan's hat had been knocked off in the fray,
and thinking he had picked it up, he had in fact put on that of
another person, without perceiving it to be other than his own.
The gentleman whom he had assisted now approached Don
Juan, and accosted him as follows : — ^* Signor Cavalier, who-
ever you may be, I confess that I owe you my life, and I am
bound to employ it, with all I have or can command, in your
service : do me the favour to tell me who you are, that I may
know to whom my gratitude is due.**

" Signor," replied Don Juan, "that I may not seem dis-
courteous, and in compliance with your request, although I
am wholly disinterested in what I have done, you shall know
that I am a Spanish gentleman, and a student in this city ; if
you desire to hear my name I will tell you, rather lest you
should have some future occasion for my services than for any
other motive, that I am called Don Juan de Gamboa."

** You have done me a singular service^ Signor Don Juan


6 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

de Ghunboa,** replied the gentleman who had fallen, ''but I
will not tell you who I am, nor my name, which I desire
that you should learn from others rather than from myself;
yet I will take care that you be soon informed respecting
these things."

Don Juan then inquired of the stranger if he were wounded,
observing, that he had seen him receive two furious lunges in
the breast ; but the other replied that he was unhurt ; adding,
that next to God, a famous plastron that he wore had defended
him against the blows he had received, though his enemies
would certainly have finished him had Don Juan not come
to his aid.

While thus discoursing, they beheld a body of men
advancing towards them ; and Don Juan exclaimed — '' If
these are enemies, Signor, let us hasten to put ourselves on our
guard, and use our hands as men of our condition should do."

" They are not enemies, so far as I can judge," replied the
stranger. ''The men who are now coming towards us are
friends."

And this was the truth ; the persons approaching, of whom
there were eight, surrounded the unknown cavalier, with
whom they exchanged a few words, but in so low a tone
that Don Juan could not hear the purport. The gentleman
then turned to Don Juan and said — " If these friends had
not arrived I should certainly not have left your company,
Signor Don Juan, until you had seen me in some place
of safety ; but as things are, I beg you now, with all kind-
ness, to retire and leave me in this place, where it is of
great importance that I should remain." Speaking thus, the
stranger carried his hand to his head, but finding that he was
without a hat, he turned towards the persons who had joined
him, desiring them to give him one, and saying that his
own had fallen. He had no sooner spoken than Don Juan
presented him with that which he had himself just picked
up, and which he had discovered to be not his own. The
stranger having felt the hat, returned it to Don Juan, saying
that it was not his, and adding, '* On your life, Signor Don
Juan, keep this hat as a trophy of this afiray, for I believe it
to be one that is not unknown."

The persons around then gave the stranger another hat,
and Don Juan^ after exchanging a few brief compliments


THE LADY CORNELIA* 7

with Ills companion, left him, in compliance with his desire,
without knowing who he was : he then returned home,
not daring at that moment to approach the door whence
he had received the newly^bom infant, because the whole
neighbourhood had been aroused, and was in movement.

Now it chanced that as Don Juan was returning to his
abode, he met his comrade Don Antonio de Isunza ; and
the latter no sooner recognised him in the darkness, than
he exclaimed, '^ Turn about, Don Juan, and walk with me
to the end of the street ; I have something to tell you, and
as we go along will relate a story such as you have never
heard before in your life."

** I also have one of the same kind to tell you," returned
Don Juan, ^^ but let us go up the street as you say, and do you
first relate your story." Don Antonio thereupon walked
forward, and began as follows : — ^^ You must know that in
little less than an hour after you had left the house, I left it
also, to go in search of you, but I had not gone thirty paces
from this place when I saw before me a black mass, which I
soon perceived to be a person advancing in great haste. As
the figure approached nearer, I perceived it to be that of a
woman, wrapped in a very wide mantle, and who, in a voice
interrupted by sobs and sighs, addressed me thus, ^ Are you,
sir, a stranger, or one of the city ? ' ' I am a stranger,' I re-
plied, * and a Spaniard.' * Thanks be to God!' she exclaimed,
* he will not have me die without the sacraments/ ' Are you
then wounded, madam ?' continued I, 'or attacked by some
mortal malady V ^ It may well happen that the malady from
which I suffer may prove mortal, if I do not soon receive aid/
returned the lady, ' wherefore, by the courtesy which is ever
found among those of your nation, I entreat you, Signer
Spaniard, take me from these streets, and lead me to your
dwelling with all the speed you may ; there, if you wish it, you
shall know the cause of my sufierings, and who I am, even
though it should cost me my reputation to make myself
known.*

*' Hearing this," continued Don Antonio, ''and seeing that
the lady was in a strait which permitted no delay, I said
nothing more, but offering her my hand, I conducted her by
the by-streets to our house. Our page, Santisteban, opened
the door, but, commanding him to retire« I led the lady in


8 CERVANTKS' EXEMPLARY TALES.

without permitting him to see her, and took her into my room,
where she had no sooner entered than she fell fainting on my
bed. Approaching to assist her, I removed the mantle which
had hitherto concealed her face, and discovered the most asto-
nishing loveliness that human eyes ever beheld. She may
be about eighteen years old, as I should suppose, but rather less
than more. Bewildered for a moment at the sight of so
much beauty, I remained as one stupified, but recollecting
myself, I hastened to throw water on her face^ and, with a
pitiable sigh, she recovered consciousness.

" The first word she uttered was the question, * Do you
know me, Signor ?' I replied, * No, lady! I have not been so
fortunate as ever before to have seen so much beauty.* * Un-
happy is she,' returned the lady, ' to whom heaven has given
it for her misfortune. But, Signer, this is not the time to
praise my beauty, but to mourn my distress. By all that you
most revere, I entreat you to leave me shut up here, and
let no one behold me, while you return in all haste to the place
where you found me, and see if there be any persons
fighting there. Yet do not take part either with one side
or the other. Only separate the combatants, for whatever
injury may happen to either, must needs be to the
increase of my own misfortunes.' I then left her as she
desired," continued Don Antonio, " and am now going to put
an end to any quarrel which may arise, as the lady has
commanded me."

" Have you anything more to say ?" inquired Don Juan

" Do you think I have not said enough," answered Don
Antonio, ** since I have told you that I have now in my
chamber, and hold under my key, the most wonderful beauty
that human eyes have ever beheld."

" The adventure is a strange one, without doubt," replied
Don Juan, **but listen to mine ;" and he instantly related to
his Mend all that had happened to him. He told how the
newly-born infant was then in their bouse, and in the care
of their housekeeper, with the orders he had given as to
changing its rich habits for others less remarkable, and for
procuring a nurse from the nearest midwife, to meet the pre-
sent necessity. *^ As to the combat you come in quest of,"
lie added, "that is already ended, and peace is made."
Don Juan further related that he had himself taken part


THE LADY CORNELIA. 9

in the strife ; and concluded by remarking, that he believed
those whom he had found engaged were all persons of high
quality, as well as great courage.

Each ot the Spaniards was much surprised at the
adventure of the other, and they instantly returned to the
house to see what the lady shut up there might require. On
the way, Don Antonio told Don Juan that he had promised
the unknown not to suffer any one to see her ; assuring her
that he only would enter the room, until she should herself
permit the approach of others.

" I shall nevertheless do my best to see her," replied Don
Juan ; ^' after what you have said of her beauty, I cannot but
desire to do so, and shall contrive some means for effecting it.''

Saying this they arrived at their house, when one of their
three pages, bringing lights, Don Antonio cast his eyes on the
hat worn by Don Juan, and perceived that it was glittering
with diamonds. Don Juan took it off, and then saw that
the lustre of which his companion spoke, proceeded from
a very rich band formed of large brilliants. In great
surprise, the friends examined the ornament, and concluded
that if all the diamonds were as precious, as they appeared
to be, the hat must be worth more than two thousand
ducats. They thus became confirmed in the conviction en-
tertained by Don Juan, that the persons engaged in the
combat were of high quality, especially the gentleman whose
part he had taken, and who, ts he now recollected, when
bidding him take the hat, and keep it, had remarked that it
was not unknown.

The young men then commanded their pages to retire, and
Don Antonio, opening the door of his room, found the lady
seated on his bed, leaning her cheek on her hand, and
^.eeping piteously. Don Juan also having approached the
door, the splendour of the diamonds caught the eye of the/
weeping lady, and she exclaimed, '^ Enter, my lord duke,
enter! Why afford me in such scanty measure the happi-
ness of seeing you ; enter at once, I beseech you."

*^ Signora," replied Don Antonio, ^< there is no duke here
who is declining to see you."

** How, no duke !'* she exclaimed. " He whom 1 have just
seen is the Duke of Ferrara ; the rich decoration of his hat
does not permit him to conceal himself/'


10 Cervantes' exemplary tales.

** Of a truth, Signora, he who wears the hat you spenk of
is no duke ; and if you please to undeceive yourself by seeing
that person, you have but to give your penmssion, and he
shall enter/'

" Let him do so," said the lady ; *^ although, if he be not
the duke, my misfortune will be all the greater."

Don Juan had heard aU this, and now finding that
he was invited to enter, he walked into the apartment
with his hat in his hand ; but he had no sooner placed himself
before the lady than she, seeing he was not the person she
had supposed, began to exclaim, in a troubled voice and
with broken words, ^' Ah ! miserable creature that I am, tell
me. Signer — ^tell me at once, without keeping me in suspense,
what do you know of him who owned that sombrero ? How is
it that he no longer has it, and how did it come into your pos-*
session ? Does he still live, or is this the token that he sends
me of his death ? Oh ! my beloved, what misery is this I
I see the jewels that were thine. 1 see myself shut up here
without the light of thy presence. I am in the power of
strangers ; and if I did not know that they were Spaniards
and gentlemen, the fear of that disgrace by which I am
threatened would already have finished my life."

"Calm yourself, madam," replied Don Juan, **for the
master of this sombrero is not dead, nor are you in a place
where any increase to your misfortimes is to be dreaded. We
think only of serving you, so far as our means will permit,
even to the exposing our lives for your defence and succotu*.
It would ill become us to suffer that the trust you have in the
faith of Spaniards should be vain ; and since we are Spaniards,
and of good quality — for here that assertion, which might
otherwise appear arrogant, becomes needful — be assured that
you will receive all the respect which is your due."

"I believe you," replied the lady; "but, nevertheless,
tell me, I pray you, how this rich sombrero came into your
possession, alid where is its owner ? who is no less a personage
than Alfonso d'Este, Duke of Ferrara."

Then Don Juan, that he might not keep the lady longer
in suspense, related to her how he had found the hat in tho
midst of a combat, in which he had taken the part of a
gentleman, who, from what she had said, he could not now
doubt to be tho Duke of Ferrara. He further told her how.


THE LADT CORNELIA. 11

having, lost his own hat in the strife, the gentleman had
bidden him keep the one he had picked up, and which
belonged, as he said, to a person not unknown ; that neither
the cavalier nor himself had received any wound ; and that^
finally, certain friends or servants of the former had arrived,
when he who was now believed to be the duke had requested
Don Juan to leave him in that place, where he desired for
certain reasons to remain.

''This, madam," concluded Don Juan, ''is the whol«
history of the manner in which the hat came into my pos-
session ; and for its master, whom you suppose to be the Duke
of Ferrara, it is not an hour since I left him in perfect safety.
Let this true narration suffice to console you, since you are
Anxious to be assured that the Duke is unhurt."

To this the lady made answer, "That you, gentlemen,
may know how much reason I have to inquire for the duke,
and whether I need be anxious for his safety, listen in your
turn with attention, and I will relate what I know not yet if
I must call my unhappy history."

While these things were passing, the housekeeper of Don
Antonio and Don Juan was occupied with the infant, whose
mouth she had moistened with honey, and whose rich habits
she was changing for clothes of a very humble character.
When that was done, she was about to carry the babe to
the house of the midwife, as Don Juan had recommended,

I but as she was passing with it before the door of the room
wherein the lady was about to commence her history, the
little creature began to cry aloud, insomuch that the lady
heard it. She instantly rose to her feet, and set herself to
listen, when the plaints of the infant arrived, more distinctly
to her ear.

" What child is this, gentlemen ? " said she, '' for it appears
CO be but just bom.''

Don Juan replied, " It is a little fellow who has been laid
at the door of our house to-night, and our servant is about to
seek some one who will nurse it."

" Let them bring it to me, for the love of G-od !" exclaimed
the lady, " for I will offer that charity to the child of others,
since it has not pleased Heaven that I should be permitted to
nourish my own."

Don Juan then called the housekeeper, and taking the


12 CERVANTES EXEMPLARY TALES.

infant from hor arms he placed it in those of the lady, saying,
^* Behold, madam, this is the present that has been made to U9
to-night, and it is not the first of the kind that we have
received, since but few months pass wherein we do not find
such God-sends hooked on to the hinges of our doors."

The lady had meanwhile taken the infant into her arms,
and looked attentively at its face, but remarking the poverty
of its clothing, which was, nevertheless, extremely clean, she
could not restrain her tears. She cast the kerchief which she
had worn around her head over her bosom, that she might
succour the infant with decency, and bending her face over
that of the child, she remained long without raising her head,
while her eyes rained torrents of tears on the little creature
she was nursing.

The babe was eager to be fed, but finding that it could
not obtain the nourishment it sought, the lady returned the
babe to Don Juan, saying, '*I have vainly desired to be
charitable to this deserted infant, and have but shown that I
am new to such matters. Let your servants put a little honey
on the lips of the child, but do not suffer them to carry it
through the streets at such an hour ; bid them wait until the
day breaks, and let the babe be once more brought to me
before they take it away^ for I find a great consolation in the
sight of it."

Don Juan then restored the infant to the housekeeper,
bidding her take the best care she could of it until daybreak,
commanding that th« rich clothes it had first worn should be
put on it again, and directing her not to take it from the
house until he had seen it once more. That done, he returned
to the room ; and the two friends being again alone with the
beautiful lady, she said, " If you desire that I should relate
my story, you must first give me something that may restore
my strength, for I feel in much need of it." Don Antonio
fiew to the beaufet for some conserves, of which the lady ate
a little ; and having drunk a glass of water, and feeling some-
what refreshed, she said, ^' Sit down, Signers^ and listen to
my^i;^."

The gentlemen seated themselves accordingly, and she,
arranging herself on the bed, and covering her person with
the folds of her mantle, suffered the veil which she had kept
about her head to fall on her shoulders, thus giving her face


THE LADT CORDELIA. 13

to view, and exhibiting in it a lustre equal to that of the moon,
or rather of the sun itself, when displayed in all ita splendour.

Liquid pearls fell from her eyes, which she endeavoured to dry
with a kerchief of extraordinary delicacy, and with hands so
white that he must have had much judgment in colour who
eould have found a difference between them and the cambric.
Finally, after many a sigh and many an effort to calm her-
self, with a feeble and trembling voice, she said —

" I, Signers, am she of whom you have doubtless heard
mention in this city, since, such as it is, there are few tongues
that do not publish the fame of my beauty. I am Cornelia
Bentivoglio, sister of Lorenzo Bentivt^lio ; and, in saying
this, I have perhaps affirmed two acknowledged truths, — the
one my nobility, and the other my beauty. At a very early
age I was left an orphan to the care of my brother, who was
most sedulous in watching over me, even from my childhood,
although he reposed more confidence in my sentiments of
honour than in the guards he had placed around me.
In short, kept thus between walls and in perfect solitude,
having no other company than that of my attendants, I grew
to womanhood, and with me grew the reputation of ray lovfr-
lineaa, bruited abroad by the servants of my house, and by
such as had been admitted to my privacy, as also by a portrait
which my brother had caused to be taken by a famous painter,
to the end, as he said, that the world might not be wholly
deprived of my features, in the event of my being-early sum-
moned by Heaven to a better life.

"All this might have ended well, had it not chanced that
the Duke of Ferrara consented to act as sponsor at the
nuptials of one of my cousins ; when my brotiier permitted
me to be present at the ceremony, that we might do the
greater honour to our kinswoman. There I saw and was
seen ; there, aa I believe, hearts were subjugated, and the wilt
of the beholders rendered subservient ; there I felt the
pleasure received from praise, even when bestowed by flatter-
ing tongues'; and, finally, I there beheld the duke, and was
seen by him ; in a word, it is in consequence of this meeting
that you see me here.

"I will not relate to you, Signers (for that would needlessly
protract my story), the various stratagems and contrivances
by whict lie duke and myself, at the end of two years, were


14 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

at length enabled to bring about that union, our desire for
which had received birth at those nuptials. Neither guards,
nor seclusion, nor remonstrances, nor human diligence of any
kind, sufficed to prevent it, and we were finally made one ;
for without the sanction due to my honour, Alfonso would
pertainly not have prevailed. I would fain have had him
publicly demand my hand from my brother, who would not
have refused it; nor would the duke have had to excuse
himself before the world as to any inequality in our marriage,
since the race of the Bentivogli is in no manner inferior to that
of Este ; but the reasons which he gave for not doing as I
wished appeared to me sufficient, and 1 suffered them to pre-
vail.

" The visits of the duke were made through the interven-
tion of a servant, over whom his gifts hud more influence than
was consistent with the confidence reposed in her by my
brother. After a time I perceived that I was about to become
a mother, and feigning illness and low spirits, I prevailed on
Lorenzo to permit me to visit the cousin at whose marriage it
was that I first saw the duke ; I then apprised the latter of my
situation, letting him also know the danger in which my life
was placed from that suspicion of the truth which I could not
but fear that Lorenzo must eventually entertain.

" It was then agreed between us, that when the time for
my travail drew near, the duke should come, with certain
of his friends, and take me to Ferrara, where our marriage
should be publicly celebrated. This was the night on which
I was to have departed, and I was waiting the arrival
of Alfonso, when I heard my brother pass the door with
several other persons, all armed, as I could hear, by the noise
of their weapons. The terror caused by this event was such
as to occasion the premature birth of my infant, a son, whom
the waiting-woman, my confidant, who had made all ready
for his reception, wrapped at once in the clothes we had
provided, and gave at the street-door, as she told me, to a
servant of the duke. Soon afterwards, taking such measures
as I could under circumstances so pressing, and hastened by
the fear of my brother, I also left the house, hoping to find
the duke awaiting me in the street, I ought not to have
gone forth until he had come to the door ; but the armed band
of my brother, whose sword I felt at my throat, had cause^l


THE LADT CORNELIA. 15

me such terror that I was not in a state to reflect. Almost
out of my senses I came forth, as you behold me ; and what
has since happened you know. I am here, it is true, without
my husband, and without my son ; yet I return thanks to
Heaven which has led me into your hands — ^for from you I
promise myself all that may be expected from Spanish courtesy,
reinforced, as it cannot but be in your persons, by the nobility
of your race."

Having said this, the lady fell back on the bed, and the
two friends hastened to her assistance, fearing she had again
fainted. But they found this not to be the case ; she was only
weeping bitterly. Wherefore Don Juan said to her, " If up
to the present moment, beautiful lady, my companion Don
Antonio, and I, have felt pity and regret for you as being a
woman, still more shall we now do so, knowing your quality ;
since compassion and grief are changed into the positive
obligation and duty of serving and aiding you. Take|,
courage, and do not be dismayed ; for little as you are formed ;!
to endure such trials, so much the more will you prove your- j
self to be the exalted person you are, as your patience and
fortitude enable you to rise above your sorrows. Believe me^
Signora, I am persuaded that these extraordinary events are/
about to have a fortunate conclusion ; for Heaven can never
permit so much beauty to endure permanent sorrow, nor suffer
your chaste purposes to be frustrated. Go now to bed, Signora,
and take that care of your health of which you have so much
need ; there shall presently come to wait on you a servant of
ours, in whom you may confide as in ourselves, for she will
maintain silence respecting your misfortunes with no less
discretion than she will attend to all your necessities."

" The condition in which I find myself," replied the lady,
** might compel me to the adoption of more difficult meastires
than those you advise. Let this woman come, Signors ; pre*
Bented to me by you, she cannot fail to be good and service-
able ; Jbut I beseech you let no other living being see me."

" So shall it be," replied Don Antonio; and the two
friends withdrew, leaving Cornelia alone.

Don Juan then commanded the housekeeper to enter the
room, taking with her the infant, whose rich habits she had
already replaced. The woman did as she was ordered, having
been previously told what she should reply to the questions


16 Cervantes' exemplary tales.

of the Signora respecting the infant she bore in her arms
Seeing her come in, Cornelia instantly said, ^* Tou come in
good time, my friend ; give me that infant, and place the
light near me."

The servant obeyed; and, taking the babe in her arms,
Cornelia instantly began to tremble, gazed at him intently,
and cried out in haste, " Tell me, good woman, is this child the
same that you brought me a short time since?" ** It is the
same, Signora," replied the woman. " How is it, then, that his
clothing is so different ? Certainly, dame housekeeper, either
these are other wrappings, or the infant is not the same/' " It
may all be as you say," began the old woman. " All as I
say ! " interrupted Cornelia, " how and what is this ? I conjure
you, friend, by all you most value, to tell me whence you
received these rich clothes ; for my heart seems to be bursting
in my bosom ! Tell me the cause of this change ; for you
must know that these things belong to me, if my sight do not
deceive me, and my memory have not failed. In these robes,
or some like them, I entrusted to a servant of mine the
treasured jewel of my soul ! Who has taken them from him ?
Ah, miserable creature that I am! who has brought these
things here? Oh, unhappy and woeful day!"

Don Juan and Don Antonio, who were listening to all
this, could not suffer the matter to go further, nor would
they permit the exchange of the infant's dress to trouble the
poor lady any longer. They therefore entered the room, and
Don Juan said, " This infant and its wrappings are yours,
Signora ;" and immediately he related from point to point how
the matter had happened. He told Cornelia that he was
himself the person to whom the waiting woman had given the
child, and how he had brought it home, with the orders he
had given to the housekeeper respecting its change of clothes,
and Ills motives for doing so. He added that, from the
moment when she had spoken of her own infant, he had felt
certain that this was no other than her son ; and if he had
not told her so at once, that was because he feared the effects
of too much gladness, coming immediately after the heavy
grief which her trials had caused her.

The tears of joy then shed by Cornelia were many and
long-continued ; infinite were the acknowledgments she offered
to Heaven, innumerable the kisses she lavished on her son,


THE LADY CORNELIA. 17

and profuse the thanks which she offered from her near! to the
two friends, whom she called her guardian angels on earth,
with other names, which gave abundant proof of her gratitude.
They soon afterwards left the lady with their housekeeper,
whom they enjoined to attend her well, and do her all the
service possible — having made known to the woman the posi-
tion in which Cornelia foimd herself, to the end that she?
^ might take all necessary precautions, the nature of which, she,
I being a woman, would know much better than they could do.
' They then went to rest for the little that remained of the
* night, intending to enter Cornelia's apartment no more, imless
summoned by herself, or called thither by some pressing
need.

The day having dawned, the housekeeper went to fetch a
woman, who agreed to nurse the infant in silence and secrecy.
Some hours later the friends inquired for Cornelia, and their
servant told them that she had rested a little. Don Juan and
Don Antonio then went to the Schools. As they passed by
the street where the combat had taken place, and near the
house whence Cornelia had fled, they took care to observe
whether any signs of disorder were apparent, and whether the
matter seemed to be talked of in the neighbourhood : but they
could hear not a word respecting the afi&ay of the previous
night, or the absence of Cornelia. So, having duly attended
the various lectures, they returned to their dweDing.

The lady then caused them to be summoned to her
chamber ; but finding that, from respect to her presence, they
hesitated to appear, she replied to the message they sent her,
with tears in her eyes, begging them to come and see her,
which she declarec^ to be now the best proof of their respect
as well as interest ; since, if they could not remedy, they
might at least console her misfortunes.

Thus exhorted, the gentlemen obeyed, and Cornelia re-
ceived them with a smiling face and great cordiality. She tlien
entreated that they would do her the kindness to walk
about the city, and ascertain if anything had transpired con-
cerning her affairs. They replied, that they had already done
sOt with all possible care, but that not a word had been said
n;«|)ecting the matter.

At this moment, one. of the three pages who served the
gentlemen approached the door of the room telling his masters

c


Id CERVJiNTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

from Without, that there was then at the street door,
attended by two servants, a gentleman, who called himself
Lorenzo Bentivoglio, and inquired for the Signor Don Juan de
Gamboa. Hearing this message, Cornelia clasped her handa,
and placing them on her mouth, she exclaimed, in a low
and trembling voice, while her words came with difficulty
through those clenched fingers, " It is my brother. Signers !
it is my brother ! Without doubt he has learned that I am
here, and has come to take my life. Help and aid, Signers !
help and aid V

" Calm yourself, lady," replied Don Antonio ; ** you are
in a place of safety, and with people who will not suffer the
smallest injury to be oiFered you. The Signor Don Juan
will go to inquire what this gentleman demands, and I will
remain to defend you, if need be, from all disturbance.''

Don Juan prepared to descend accordingly, and Don
Antonio, taking his loaded pistols, bade the pages belt on
their swords, and hold themselves in readiness for whatever
might happen. The housekeeper, seeing these preparationa,
began to tremble, — Cornelia, dreading some fearful result,
was in grievous terror, — Don Juan and Don Antonio alone
preserved their coolness.

Arrived at the door of the house, Don Juan found Don
Lorenzo, who, coming towards him, said, " I entreat your
Lordship" — for such is the form of address among Italians-*
" I entreat yoiu* Lordship to do me the kindness to accom-
pany me to the neighbouring church ; I have to speak to you
respecting an affair which concerns my life and honour."

" Yery willingly," replied Don Juan. " Let us go, Signor,
wherever you please."

They walked side by side to the church, where they seated
themselves on a retired bench, so as not to be overheard. Don
Lorenzo was the first to break silence.

" Signor Spaniard," he said, " I am Lorenzo Bentivoglio ;
if not of the richest, yet of one of the most important families
belonging to this city ; and if this seem like boasting of myself,
the notoriety of the fact may serve as my excuse for naming
it. I was left an orphan many years since, and to my guardian-
ship was left a sister, so beautiful, that if she were not nearly
connected with me, I might perhaps describe her in terms
that^ while they might seem exaggerated, would yet not


•■■■


THE LADY CORNELIA.


19


by any means do justice to her attractions. My honour being
very dear to me, and she being very young, as well as beautiful,
I took all possible care to guard her at all points ; but my
best precautions have proved vain ; the self-will of Cornelia^
for that is her name, had rendered all useless. In a word, and
not to weary you, — for this story might become a long one, — '
I will but tel] you, that the Duke of Ferrara, Alfonso d'Este,
vanquishing the eyes of Argus by those of a lynx, has rendered
all my cares vain, by carrying off my sister last night from the
bouse of one of our kindred ; and it is even said that she has
already become a mother.

" The misfortune of our house was made known to me
last night, and I instantly placed myself on the watch ; nay,
I met and even attacked Alfonso, sword in hand ; but he waa
succoured in good time by some angel, who would not permit
me to efface in his blood the stain he has put upon me. My
relation has told me, (and it is from her I have heard all,) that
the duke deluded my sister, under a promise to make her his
wife ; but this I do not believe, for, in respect to present station
and wealth, the marriage would not be equal, although, in
point of blood, all the world knows how noble are the Benti-
vogli of Bologna. What I fear is, that the duke has done, what
is but too easy when a great and powerful Prince desires to
win a timid and retiring girl : he has merely called her by the
tender name of wife, and made her believe that certain con«
siderations have prevented him from marrying her at once>—
a plausible pretence, but false and perfidious.

" Be that as it may, I see myself at once deprived of my
sister and my honour. Up to this moment I have kept the
matter secret, purposing not to make known the outrage
to any one, until I see whether there may not be some
remedy, or means of satisfaction to be obtained* It is better
that a disgrace of this kind be supposed and suspected, than
certainly and distinctly known — seeing that between the yes
and the no of a doubt, each inclines to the opinion that most
attracts him, and both sides of the question find defenders.
Considering all these things, I have determined to repair to
Ferrara, and there demand satisfaction from the duke himself.
If he refuse it, I will then offer him defiance. Yet my de-
fiance cannot be made with armed bands, for I could neither
get them together nor maintain them but as from man to

c 3


V


so CERVANTES' EXEMPLaRT TALES.

man* For this it is, theii, that I desire your aid. I hope yon
will accompany me in the journey ; nay, I am confident that
you will do so, being a Spaniard and a gentleman, as I am
told you are.

*^I cannot entrust my purpose to any relation or friend oi
my family, knowing well that from them I should have nothing
more than objections and remonstrances, while from you I may
hope for sensible and honourable counsels, even though there
should bo peril in pursuing them. Tou must do me die favour
to go with me, Signor. Having a Spaniard, and such as you
appear to be, at my side, I shall account myself to have the
armies of Xerxes. I am asking much at your hands ; but the
duty of answering worthily to what fame publishes of your
nation, would oblige you to do still more than I ask.'*

" No more, Signor Lorenzo," exclaimed Don Juan, who
had not before interrupted the brother of Cornelia ; " no
more. From this moment I accept the office you propose to
jne, and will be your defender and counsellor. I take upon
puyself the satisfaction of your honour, or due vengeance for
Ithe affront you have received, not only because I am a Spaniard,
/but because I am a gentleman, and you another, so noble,
as you have said, as I know you to be, and as, indeed, all the
world reputes you. When shall we set out? It would be
better that we did so immediately, for a man does ever well
to strike while the iron is hot. The warmth of anger increases
courage, and a recent afiront more effectually awakens ven-
geance."

Hearing this, Don Lorenzo rose and embraced Don Juan,
saying to him, " A person so generous as yourself, Signor Don
Juan, needs no other incentive than that of the honour to be
^^gained in such a cause : this honour you have assured to your-
i self to-day, if we come out happily from our adventure ; but
I offer you in addition all I can do, or am worth. Our depar-
ture I would have to be to-morrow, since I can provide all
things needful to-day."

"This appears to me well decided," replied Don Juan,
** but I must beg you, Signor Don Lorenzo, to permit me to
make all known to a gentleman who is my friend, and of
whose honour and silence I can assure you even more cer-
tainly than of my own, if that were possible."

^ Since you, Signor Don Juan," replied Lorenzo^ " have


THE LADY CORNELIA* 21

taken charge, as yoa say, of my honour, dispose of this
matter as you please ; and make it known to whom and in
what manner it shall seem best to you ; how much more, then,
to a companion of your own, for what can he be but every*
thing that is best."

This said, the gentlemen embraced each other and took
leave, after having agreed that on the following morning
Lorenzo should send to summon Don Juan at an hour fixed
on, when they should mount their horses and pursue their
journey in the disguise that Don Lorenzo had selected.

Don Juan then returned, and gave an account of all that
bad passed to Don Antonio and Cornelia, not omitting the
engagement into, which he had entered for the morrow.

" Good heavens. Signer 1" exclaimed Cornelia; " what cour-i
tesy! what confidence! to think of your committing yourself
without hesitation to an undertaking so replete with difficulties !
How can you Know whether Lorenzo will take you to Ferrara,
or to what place indeed he may conduct you ? But go with
him whither you may, be certain that the very soul of honour
and good faith will stand beside you. For myself, unhappy
creature that I am, I shall be terrified at the very atoms that
dance in the sunbeams, and tremble at every shadow ; but how
can it be otherwise, since on the answer of Duke Alfonso
depends my life or death. How do 1 know that he will reply
with sufficient courtesy to prevent the anger of my brother
from passing the limits of discretion ? and if Lorenzo should
draw the sword, think ye he will have a despicable enemy to
encounter ? Must not I remain through all the days of your
absence in a state of mortal suspense and terror, awaiting the
favourable or grievous intelligence that you shall bring me ?
Do I love either my brother or the duke so little as not to
tremble for both, and not feel the injury of either to my

BOUl V

"Your fears affect your judgment, Signora Cornelia,"
replied Don Juan ; " and they go too far. Amidst so many
terrors, you should give some place to hope, and trust in God.
Put some faith also in my care, and in the earnest desire I
feel to see your affairs attain to a happy conclusion. Your
brother cannot avoid making this journey to Ferrara, nor can
I excuse myself from accompanying him thither. For the
present we do not know the intentions of the duke, nor even


22 CBRTANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES

whether he be or be not acquainted witli your elopement. All
this we must learn from his own mouth ; and there is no one
who can better make the inquiry than myself. Be certain,
Signora, that the welfare and satisfaction of both your brother
and the Signor Duke are to me as the apples of my eyes, and
that I will care for the safety of the one as of the other."

** Ah Signor Don Juan," replied Cornelia, "if Heaven grant
you as much power to remedy, as grace to console misfortune,
I must consider myself exceedingly fortunate in the midst of
my sorrows ; and now would I fain see you gone and returned ;
for the whole time of your absence I must pass suspended
between hope and fear."

The determination of Don Juan was approved by Don
Antonio, who commended him for the justification which he
had thereby given to the confidence of Lorenzo Bentivoglio.
He furthermore told his friend that he would gladly accom-
pany him, to be ready for whatever might happen, but Don
Juan replied — " Not so; first, because you must remain for the
better security of the lady Cornelia, whom it will not be well
to leave alone; and secondly, because I would not have
Signor Lorenzo suppose that I desire to avail myself of the
arm of another." " But my arm is your own," returned Don
Antonio, " wherefore, if I must even disguise myself, and can
but follow you at a distance, I will go with you ; and as to
Signora Cornelia, I know well that she will prefer to have me
accompany you, seeing that she will not here want people who
can serve and guard her." " Lideed," said Cornelia, " it will
be a great consolation to me to know that you are together.
Signers, or at least so near as to be able to assist each other
in case of necessity ; and since the undertaking you are going
on appears to be dangerous, do me the favour, gentlemen, to
take these Relics with you." Saying this, Cornelia drew from
her bosom a diamond cross, of great value, with an Agnus of
gold equally rich and costly. The two gentlemen looked at the
magnificent jewels, which they esteemed to be of still greater
value than the decoration of the hat ; but they returned them
to the lady, each saying that he carried Belies of his own,
which, though less richly decorated, were at least equally effi-
cacious. CorneHa regretted much that they would not accept
those she offered, but she was compelled to submit.

The housekeeper was now informed of the departure of


THE LADY CORNELIA. 23

her masters, though not of their destination, or of the purpose
for which they went. She i^roinised to take the utmost care of
the lady, whose name she did not know, and assured her
masters that she would be so watchful as to prevent her
suffering in any manner from their absence.

Early the following morning Lorenzo was at the door,
where he found Don Juan ready. The latter had assumed
a travelling dress, with the rich sombrero presented by the
duke, and which he had adorned with black and yellow plumes,
placing a black covering over the band of brilliants. He went
to take leave of Cornelia, who, knowing that her . brother
was near, fell into an agony of terror, and could not say one
word to the two friends who were bidding her adieu. Don
Juan went out the first, and accompanied Lorenzo beyond the
walls of the city, where they found their servants waiting
with the horses in a retired c^arden. They mounted, rode on
before, and the servants guided their masters in the direction
of Ferrara by ways but little known. Don Antonio followed
on a low pony, and with such a change of apparel as sufficed
to disguise him ; but fancying tliat they regarded him with
suspicion, especially Lorenzo, he determined to pursue the
highway, and rejoin his friend in Ferrara, where he was cer-
tain to find him wi^h but little difficulty.

The Spaniards had scarcely got clear of the city before
Cornelia had confided her whole history to the housekeeper,
informing her that the infant belonged to herseli' and to the
Duke of Ferrara, and making her acquainted with all that has
been related, not concealing from her that the journey made
by her masters was to Ferrara, or that they went accompanied
by her brother, who was going to challenge the Duke Alfonso.

Hearing all this, the housekeeper, as though the devil
had sent her to complicate the difficulties and defer the
restoration of Cornelia, began to exclaim — **Alas! lady
of my soul ! all these things have hapi>ened to you, and you
remain carelessly there with your limbs stretched out, and
doing nothing ! Either you have no soul at all, or you ha\ o
one so poor and weak that you do not feel it ! And do
you really suppose that your brother has gone to Ferrara f
Believe nothing of the kind, but rather be sure that he has
carried off* my masters, and wiled them from the houso,
that he may return and take your life^ for he can now do it


24 C£RVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

as one would drink a cup of water. Consider only under
what kind of guard and protection we are left — that of three
pages, w^ho have enough to do with their own pranks, and
are little likely to put their hands to any tiling good. I, for
my part, shall certainly not have courage to await what must
follow, and the destruction that cannot but come upon this
house. The Signer Lorenzo, an Italian, to put his trust
in Spaniards, and ask help and favour from them ! By the light
of my eyes, I will believe none of that ! " So saying, she made
a fig* at herself. " But if you, my daughter, will take good
advice, I will give you such as shall truly enlighten your way."

Cornelia was thrown into a pitiable state of alarm and
confusion by these declarations of Qie housekeeper, who
spoke with so much heat, and gave so many evidences of terror,
that all she said appeared to be the very truth. The lady
pictured to herself Don Antonio and Don Juan as perhaps
already dead ; she fancied her brother even then coming in
at the door, and felt herself already pierced by the blows of
his poniard. She therefore replied, "What advice do you
then give me, good friend, that may prevent the catastrophe
which threatens us V*

" I will give you counsel so good," rejoined the house-
keeper, " that better could not be. I, Signora, was formerly
in the service of a priest, who has his abode in a village not
more than two miles from Ferrara. He is a good and holy
man, who will do whatever I require from him, since he is
under more obligations to me than merely those of a master to
a faithful servant. Let us go to him. I will seek some one who
shall conduct us thither instantly ; and the woman who comes
to nurse the infant is a poor creature, who will go with us
to the end of the world. And, now make ready, Signora ;
for supposing you are to be discovered, it would be much
better that you should be found under the care of a good
priest, old and respected, than in the hands of two young
students, bachelors and Spaniards, who, as I can myself bear
witness, are but little disposed to lose occasions for amusing
themselves. Now that you are unwell, they treat you with
respect ; but if you get well and remain in their clutches,
Heaven alone will be able to help you ; for truly, if my

* A gesture of contempt or playfulness, as the case may be, and
which consists in a certain twist of the fingers and thumb.


THE LADT COKXELIA. 25

cold disdain and repulses had not been my safeguard, they
would long since have torn my honour to rags. All is
not gold that glitters. Jtien say one th inp r^ hut think
^^Stft Qther; hap pily, it is with me that tney have to ao ; and
I am not to be deceived, but know well when the shoe
pinches my foot. Above all, I am well born, for I belong
to the Crivellis of Milan, and I carry the point of honour ten
thousand feet above the clouds; by this you may judge,
Signora, through what troubles I have had to pass, since, being
what I am, I have been brought to serve as the housekeeper
of Spaniards, or as, what they call, their gowsemante. Not
that I have, in truth, any complaint to make of my masters,
who are a couple of half-saints* when they are not put into
a rage. And, in this respect, they would seem to be Biscayans,
as, indeed, they say they are. But, after all, they may be
Galicians, which b another nation, and much less exact than
the Biscayans ; neither are they so much to be depended on as
the people of the Bay.*'

By all this verbiage, and more beside, the bewildered
lady was induced to foUow the advice of the old woman, inso-
much that, in less than four hours after the departure of the
friends, their housekeeper making all arrangements, and Cor-
nelia consenting, the latter was seated in a carriage with the
niirse of the babe, and without being heard by the pages they
set off on their way to the curate's village. All this was
done not only by the advice of the housekeeper, but also
with her money ; for her masters had just before paid her a
year^jjEagfis, and therefore it was not needful that she should
taEe a jewel which Cornelia had offered her for the purposes
of their journey.

Having heard Don Juan say that her brother and himself
would not follow the highway to Ferrara, but proceed thither
by retired paths, Cornelia thought it best to take the high
road. She bade the driver go slowly, that they might not
overtake the gentlemen in any case ; and the master of the
carriage was well content to do as they liked, since they had
paid him as he liked.

We will leave them on their way, which they take with

♦ The original is henditos, which sometimes means simpleton, but
is here equivalent to the Italian beato, and must be rendered as in the
text.


t


tl


26 Cervantes' exemplary tales

as much boldness as good direction, and let us soe whal
happened to Don Juan de Gamboa and Signor Lorenzo
Bentivoglio. On their way they heard that the duke had not
gone to Ferrara, but was still at Bologna, wherefore, aban-
doning the round they were making, they regained the high
road, considering that it was by this the duke would travel
on his return to Ferrara. Nor had they long entered thereon
before they perceived a troop of men on horseback coming as
it seemed from Bologna.

Don Juan then begged Lorenzo to withdraw to a little
distance, since, if the duke should chance to be of the com-
pany approaching, it would be desirable that he should speak
to him before he could enter Ferrara> which was but a short
distance from tbem. Lorenzo complied, and as soon as he
had withdrawn, Don Juan removed the covering by which
he had concealed the rich ornament of his hat ; but this was
pot done without some little indiscretion, as he was himself the
first to admit some time after.

Meanwhile the travellers approached ; among them came
a woman on a pied-horse, dressed in a travelling habit, and
her face covered with a silk mask, either to conceal her fea-
tures, or to shelter them from the effects of the sun and air.

Don Juan pulled up his horse in the middle of the
road, and remained with his face uncovered, awaiting the
arrival of the cavalcade. As they approached him, the height^
good looks, and spirited attitude of the Spaniard, the beauty
of his horse, his peculiar dress, and, above all, the lustre of the
diamonds on his hat, attracted the eyes of the whole party
but especially those of the Duke of Ferrara, the principal per-
sonage of the group, who no sooner beheld the band of bril-
liants than he understood the cavalier before him to be Don
Juan de Gamboa, his deliverer in the combat frequently
alluded to. So well convinced did he feel of this, that, without
further question, he rode up to Don Juan, saying, ^' I shall
certainly not deceive myself, Signor Cavalier, if I call you
Don Juan de Gamboa, for your spirited looks, and the deco-
ration you wear on your hat, alike assure me of the fact."

" It is true that I am the person you say," replied Don
Juan. " I have never yet desired to conceal my name ; but
tell me, Signor, who you are yourself, that I may not be sur-
prised into any discourtesy."


THE LADY CORNELIA. 27

** Discourtesy from you, Signor, would be impossible,"
rejoined the duke. " I feel sure that you could not be dis-
courteous in any case ; but I hasten to tell ycu, nevertheless,
that I am the Duke of Ferrara, and a man who will be bound
to do you service all the days of his life, since it is but a few
nights since you gave him that life which must else have
been lost."

Alfonzo had not finished speaking, when Don Juan,
springing lightly from his horse, hastened to kiss the feet of
the duke ; but, with all his agility, the latter was already out of
the saddle, and alighted in the arms of the Spaniard.

Seeing this, Signor Lorenzo, who could but observe these
ceremonies from a distance, believed that what he beheld was
the effect of anger rather than courtesy; he therefore put
his horse to its speed, but pulled up midway on per-
ceiving that the duke and Don Juan were of a verity
clasped in each other's arms. It then chanced that Alfonso,
looking over the shoulders of Don Juan, perceived Lorenzo,
whom he instantly recognised; and somewhat disconcerted
at Lis appearance, while still holding Don Juan embraced,
he inquired if Lorenzo Bentivoglio, whom he there be-
held, had come with him or not. Don Juan replied,
" Let us move somewhat apart from this place, and
I will relate to your excellency some very singular circum-
stances."

The duke having done as he was requested, Don Juan said
to him, '^ My Lord Duke, I must tell you that Lorenzo Benti-
voglio, whom you there see, has a cause of complaint against
you, and not a light one ; he avers that some nights since you
took his sister, the Lady Cornelia, from the house of a liidy,
her cousin, and that you have deceived her, and dishonoured
his house; he desires therefore to know what satisfaction
you propose to make for this, that he may then see what
it behoves him to do. He has begged me to be his aid and
mediator in the matter, and I have consented with a good
will, since, from certain indications which he gave me, I per-
ceived that the person of whom he complained, and yourself,
to whose liberal courtesy I owe this rich ornament, were one
and the same. Thus, seeing that none could more effectually
mediate between you than myself, I offered to undertake that
office willingly, as I have said ; and now I would have you


28 CERVANTBS' EXEMPLARY TALE8»

tell me, Signor, if you know aught of this matter, and whether
what Lorenzo has told me be true."

** Alas, my friend, it is so true," replied the duke, " that I
durst not deny it, even if I would. Yet I have not deceived
or carried oft' Cornelia, although I know that she has dis-
appeared from the house of which you speak. I have not
deceived her, because I have taken her for my wife ; and I
have not carried her off, since I do not know what has be-
come of her. If I have not publicly celebrated my nuptials
with her, it is because I waited until my mother, who is now
at the last extremity, should have passed to another life, she
desiring greatly that I should espouse the Signora Livia,
daughter of the Duke of Mantua. There are, besides, other
reasons, even more important than this, but which it is not
convenient that I should now make known.

'* What has in fact happened is this : — on the night when
you came to my assistance, I was to have taken Cornelia to
Ferrara, she being then in the last month of her pregnancy,
and about to present me with tliat pledge of our love with
which it has pleased God to bless us ; but whether she
was alarmed by our combat or by my delay, I know not;
all I can tell you is, that when I arrived at the house, I met
the confidante of our affection just coming out. From her I
learned that her mistress had* that moment left the house,
after having given birth to a son, the most beautiful that ever
had been seen, and whom she had given to one Fabio, my
servant. The woman is she whom you see here. Fabio is
also in this company ; but of Cornelia and her child I can
learn nothing. These two days I have passed at Bologna, in
ceaseless endeavours to discover her, or to obtain some clue
to her retreat, but I have not been able to learn anything."

" In that case," interrupted Don Juan, " if Cornelia and
her child were now to appear, you would not refuse to admit
that the first is your wife, and the second your son ?"

" Certainly not," replied the duke ; " for if I value
myself on being a gentleman, still more highly do I prize
the title of Christian. Cornelia, besides, is one who well
deserves to be mistress of a kingdom. Let her but come,
and whether my mother live or die, the world shall know
that I maintain my faith, and that my word, given in pri«
vate, shai^ be publicly redeemed."


THE LADY CORNELIA. SO

** And what you have now said to me you are willing to
repeat to your brother, Signer Lorenzo?" inquired Don
Juan.

<< My only regret is," exclaimed the duke, *' that he has
not long before been acquainted with the truth."

Hearing this, Don Juan made sign to Lorenzo that he
should join them, which he did, alighting from his horse and
proceeding towards the place where his friends stood, but far
from hoping for the good news that awaited him.

The duke advanced to receive him with open arms, and
the first word he uttered was to call him brother. Lorenzo
scarcely knew bow to reply to a reception so courteous and a
salutation so affectionate. He stood amazed, and before he
could utter a word, Don Juan said to him, ** The duke,
8ignor Lorenzo, is but too happy to admit his affection for
your sister, the Lady Cornelia; and, at the same time, be
assures you, that she is his legitimate consort. This, as he
now says it to you, he will affirm publicly before all the
world, when the moment for doing so has arrived. He con-
fesses, moreover, that he did propose to remove her from the
house of her cousin some nights since, intending to take her
to Ferrara, there to await the proper time for their public
espousals, which he has only delayed for just causes, which he
has declared to me. He describes the conflict he had to main-
tain against yourself; and adds, that when he went to seek
Cornelia, he found only her waiting-woman, Sulpicia, who is
the woman you see yonder : from her he has learned that her
lady had just given birth to a son, whom she entrusted to a
servant of the duke, and then left the house in terror, be-
cause she feared that you, Signer Lorenzo, had been made
aware of her secret marriage : the lady hoped, moreover, to
find the duke awaiting her in the street. But it seems that
Sulpicia did not give the babe to Fabio, but to some other
person instead of him, and the child does not appear, neither
is the Lady Cornelia to be found, in spite of the duke's
researches. He admits, that all these things have happened
by his fault; but declares, that whenever your sister shall
appear, he is ready to receive her as his legitimate wife.
Judge, then, Signer Lorenzo, if there be any more to say or
to desire beyond the discovery of those two dear but unfor-
tunate ones — the lady and her infant.''


30 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

To this Lorenzo replied by throwing himself at the feet
of the duke, who raised him instantly. ^* From your greatness
and christian uprightness, most noble lord and dear brother,"
oaid Lorenzo, '^my sister and I had certainly nothing less
than this high honour to expect." Sa3ring this, tears came tc
his eyes, and the duke felt his own becoming moist, for both
were equally affected, — ^the one with the fear ot' having lost
his wife, the other by the generous candour of his brother-in-
law ; but at once perceiving the weakness of thus displaying
their feelings, they both restrained themselves, and drove back
those witnesses to their source ; while the eyes of Don Juan,
shining with gladness, seemed almost to demand from them
the aUbriciag* of good news, seeing that he believed himself
to have both Cornelia and her son in his own house.

Things were at this point when Don Antonio de Isunza,
whom Don Juan recognised at a considerable distance by his
horse, was perceived approaching. He also recognised Don
Juan and Lorenzo, but not the duke, and did not know what
he was to do, or whether he ought to rejoin his fnend or not.
He therefore inquired of the duke's servants who the gentle-
man was, then standing with Lorenzo and Don Juan. They
replied that it was the Duke of Ferrara ; and Don Antonio,
knowing less than ever what it was best for him to do,
remained in some confusion, until he was relieved from it
by Don Juan, who called him by his name. Seeing that all
were on foot, Don Antonio also dismounted, and, approaching
the group, was received with infinite courtesy by the duke,
to whom Don Juan had already named him as his friend ;
finally, Don Antonio was made acquainted with all that had
taken place before his arrival.

Bejoicing greatly at what he heard, Don Antonio then
said to his comrade, " Why, Signer Don Juan, do you not
finish your work, and raise the joy of these Signers to its
acm^, by requiring from them the albricias for discovering
the Lady Cornelia and her son ?"

" Had you not arrived, I might have taken those albricias
you speak of," replied Don Juan ; " but now they are yours,
Don Antonio, for I am certain that the duke and Signot
Lorenzo will give them to you most joyfully."

• Albricias : ** Largess !" " Give reward for good tidings.^'


THE LADY CORNELIA. SI

The duke and Lorenzo hearing of Cornelia being found,
and of albrieias, inquired the meaning of those words.

" What can it be," replied Don Antonio, " if not that
I also design to become one of the personages in this happily
terminating drama, being he who is to demand the albricias
for the discovery of the Lady Cornelia and her son, who
are both in my house." He then at once related to the
brothers, point by point, what has been already told, in-
telligence which gave the duke and Lorenzo so much pleasure,
that each embraced one of the friends with all his heart,
Lorenzo throwing himself into the arms of Don Juan, and
the duke into those of Don Antonio — the latter promising his
whole dukedom for albricias, and Lorenzo his life, soul, and
estates. They then called the woman who had given the
child to Don Juan, and she having perceived her master,
Lorenzo Bentivoglio, came forward, trembling. Being asked
if she could recognise the man to whom she had given the
infant, she replied that she could not ; but that when she had
asked if he were Fabio, he had answered " yes," and that
she had entrusted the babe to his care in the faith of that
reply.

** All this is true," returned Don Juan ; " and you further-
more bade me deposit the child in a place of security, and
instantly return."

*'I did so," replied the waiting-woman, weeping. But
the duke exclaimed, "We will have no more tears; all
is gladness and joy. I will not now enter Ferrara, but return
at once to Bologna ; for this happiness is but in shadow until
made perfect by the sight of Cornelia herself." Then,
without more words, the whole company wheeled round, and
took their way to Bologna.

Don Antonio now rode forward to prepare the Lady Cois
nelia, lest the sudden appearance of her brother and the duke
might cause too violent a revulsion ; but not finding her as

ihe expected, and the pages being unable to give him any
intelligence respecting her, he suddenly found himself the
saddest and most embarrassed man in the world. Learning
that the gouvemante had departed, he was not long in con-
jecturing that the lady had disappeared by her means. The
pages informed him that the housekeeper had gone on the
same day with himself and Don Juan, but as to that Lady


83 Cervantes' exemplary tales.

Comeliay respecting whom he inquired^ they had uever
seen her. Don Antonio was almost out of his senses
at this unexpected occurrence, which, he feared, must
make the duke consider himself and Don Juan to be
mere liars and boasters. He was plunged in these sad
thoughts when Alfonso entered with Lorenzo and Don
Juan, who had spurred on before the attendants by re^
tired and unfrequented streets. They found Don Antonio
seated with his hea<i on his hand, and as pale as a man
who has been long dead, and when Don Juan inquired what
ailed him, and where was the Lady Cornelia, he replied,
** Bather ask me what do I not ail, since the Lady Cornelia
is not to be found. She quitted the house, on the same
day as ourselves, with the gouvemante we left to keep her
company."

This sad news seemed as though it would deprive the
duke of life, and Lorenzo of his senses. The whole party
remained in the utmost consternation and dismay ; when one
of the pages said to Don Antonio in a whisper, " Signor,
Santisteban, Signor Don Juan's page, has had locked up in
his chamber, from the day when your worships left, a very
pretty woman, whose name is certainly Cornelia, for I have
heard him call her so.'* Plunged into a new embarrassment,
Don Antonio would rather not have found the lady at all
— for he could not but suppose it was she whom the page had
shut up in his room — than have discovered her in such a
place. Nevertheless, without saying a word, he ascended
to the page's chamber, but found the door fast, for the young
man had gone out, and taken away the key. Don Antonio
therefore put his lips to the keyhole, and said in a low voice,
" Open the door, Signora Cornelia, and come down to receive
your brother, and the duke, your husband, who are waiting
to take you hence."

A voice from within replied, " Are you making fun of
me ? It is certain that I am neither so ugly nor so old but
that dukes and counts may very well be looking for me: but
this comes of condescending to visit pages." These words
quite satisfied Don Antonio that it was not the Lady Cornelia
who had replied.

At that moment Santisteban returned and went up to his
chamber, where he found Don Antonio, who had just com*


THE LADT CORNELIA. S3

manded that all the keys of the house should be brought, to
see if any one of them would open the door. The page fell
on his knees, and held up the key, exclaiming, '* Have mercy
on me, your worship : your absence, or rather my own villainy,
made me bring this woman to my room; but I entreat your
grace, Don Antonio, as you would have good news from Spain,
that you suffer the fault I have committed to remain unknown
to my master, Don Juan, if he be not yet informed of it ; I
will turn her out this instant."

"What is the name of this woman?" inquired Don
Antonio. " Cornelia," replied Santisteban. Down stairs at
once went the page who had discovered the hidden woman,
and who was not much of a friend to Santisteban, and entered
the room where sat the duke, Don Juan, and Lorenzo, and,
either from simplicity or malice, began to talk to himself,
3aying, " Well caught, brother page ! by Heaven they have
made you give up your Lady Cornelia ! She was well hidden,
to be sure ; and no doubt my gentleman would have liked
to see the masters remain -away that he might enjoy himself
some three or four days longer."

" What is that you are saying ? " cried Lorenzo, who had
caught a part of these words. " Where is the Lady Cornelia ?"
" She is above," replied the page ; and the duke, who sup-
posed that his consort had just made her appearance, had
scarcely heard the words before he rushed from the apart-
ment like a flash of lightning, and, ascending the staircase at
a bound, gained the chamber into which Don Antonio was
entering.

"Where is Cornelia ? where is the life of my life ? " he ex-
claimed, as he hurried into the room.

" Cornelia is here," replied a woman who was wrapped
in a quilt taken from the bed with which she had concealed
her face. " Lord bless us !" she continued, " one would
think an ox had been stolen! Is it a new thing for a
woman to visit a page, that you make such a fuss about

it?"

Lorenzo, who had now entered the room, angrily snatched
off the sheet and exposed to view a woman still young and
no^ ill-looking, who hid her face in her hands for shame,
while her dress, which served her instead of a pillow,
luificiently provod her to be some poor castaway.


34. CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALE9.

The duke asked her, was it true her name was Cornelia f
It was, she replied — adding, that she had very decent parents
in the city, but that no one could venture to say, ^* Of this
water I will never drink."

The duke was so confounded by all he beheld, that he was
almost inclined to think the Spaniards were making a fool
of him; but, not to encourage so grievous a suspicion, he
turned away without saying a word. Lorenzo followed him ;
they mounted their horses and rode off, leaving Don Juan
and Don Antonio even more astonished and dismaved than
himself.

The two friends now determined to leave no means un-
tried, possible or impossible, to discover the retreat of the
Lady Cornelia, and convince the duke of their sincerity
and uprightness. They dismissed Santisteban for his mis-
conduct, and turned the worthless Cornelia out of the house.
Don Juan then remembered that they had neglected to
describe to the duke those rich jewels wherein Cornelia
carried her relics, with the agnus she had offered to them ;
and they went out proposing to mention that circumstance,
so as to prove to Alfonso that the lady had, indeed, been in
their care, and that if she had now <£sappeared, it was not
by any fault of theirs.

They expected to find the duke in Lorenzo's house ; but
the latter informed them that Alfonso had been compelled
to leave Bologna, and had returned to Ferrara, having com-
mitted the search for Cornelia to his care. The friends
having told him what had brought them, Lorenzo assured
them that the duke was perfectly convinced of their recti-
tude in the matter, adding, that they both attributed the
flight of Cornelia to her great fear, but hoped, and did not
doubt, that Heaven would permit her re-appearance before
long, since it was certain that the earth had not swallowed
the housekeeper, the child, and herself.

With these considerations they all consoled themselves,
determining not to make search by any public announcement,
but secretly, since, with the exception of her cousin, no per-
son was yet acquainted with the disappearance of Cornelia ;
and Lorenzo judged that a public search might prove injuri-
ous to his sister's name. among such as did not know the
whole circumstances of the case, since the labour of efOEU^ing


THE LADY CORNELIA. 35

rach suspieiouA m might arise would be infinite, and bj
no means certain of success.

The duke meanwhile continued his journey to Ferrara,
and favouring Fortune, which was now preparing his happiiiCss,
led him to the village where dwelt that priest in whose
house Cornelia, her infant, and the housekeeper, were con-
cealed. The good Father was acquainted with the whole
history, and Cornelia had begged his advice as to what it
would be best for her to do. Now this priest had been the
preceptor of the duke ; and to his dwelling, which was fur-
nished in a manner befitting that of a rich and learned clerk,
the duke was in the habit of occasionally repairing from
Ferrara, and would thence go to the chase, or amuse him-
self with the pleasant conversation of his host, and with the
knowledge and excellence of which the good priest gave
evidence in all he did or said.

The priest was not surprised to receive a visit from the
duke, because, as we have said, it was not the first by
many; but he was grieved to see him sad and dejected,
and instantly perceived that his whole soul was absorbed
in some painful thought. As to Cornelia, having been
told that the duke was there, she was seized with re-
newed terror, not knowing how her misfortime» were to
terminate. She wrung her hands, and hurried from one side
of her apartment to the other, like a person who had lost her
senses. Fain would the troubled lady have spoken to the
priest, but he was in conversation with the Duke, and
could not be approached. Alfonso was meanwhile saying to
him, " I come to you, my father, full of sadness, and will not
go to Ferrara to-day, but remain your guest ; give orders for
all my attendants to proceed to the city, and let none re-
main with me but Fabio."

The priest went to give directions accordingly, as also
to see that his own servants made due preparations; and
Cornelia then found an opportunity for speaking to him. She
took his two hands and said, *' Ah, my father, and dear sir,
what has the duke come for ? for the love of God see what
can be done to save me ! I pray you, seek to discover what
he proposes. As a friend, do for me whatever shall seem
best to your prudence and great wisdom."

The prie;it replied, *'Duke Alionso has come to me in

d2


96 CERVANTES' BXEMPLARV TALES.

deep sadness, but up to this moment he has not told me the
cause. What I would have you now do is to dress this
infant with great care, put on it all the jewels you have with
you, more especially such as you may have received from the
duke himself; leave the rest to me, and I have hope that
Heaven is about to grant us a happy day." Cornelia em-
braced the good man, and kissed his hand, and then retired to
dress and adorn the babe, as he had desired.

The priest, meanwhile, returned to entertain the duke
with conversation while hb people were preparing their
meal; and in the course of their colloquy he inquired if
he might venture to ask him the cause of his grief, since it
was easy to see at the distance of a league that something
gave him sorrow.

^'Father," replied the duke, ^4t is true that the sadness
of the heart rises to the face, and in the eyes may be read the
history of that which passes in the soul ; but ^or the present
I cannot confide the cause of my sorrow to any one."

" Then we will not speak of it further, my lord duke,"
replied the priest; "but if you were in a condition per-
mitting you to examine a curious and beautiful thing, I have
one to show you which I cannot but think would afford you
great pleasure."

" He would be very unwise," returned Alfonso, " who,
when offered a solace for his suffering, refuses to accept it.
Wherefore show me what you speak of, father ; the object
is doubtless an addition to one of your curious collections, and
they have all great interest in my eyes."

The priest then rose, and repaired to the apartment where
Cornelia was awaiting him with her son, whom she had
adorned as he had suggested, having placed on him the relics and
agnus, with other rich jewels, all gifts of the duke to the babe's
mother. Taking the infant from her hands, the good priest
then went to the duke, and telling him that he must rise
and come to the light of the window, he transferred the babe
from his own arms into those of Alfonso, who could not but
instantly remark the jewels ; and perceiving that they were
those which he had himself given to Cornelia, he remained in
great surprise. Looking earnestly at the infant, meanwhile,
he fancied he beheld his own portrait ; and full of admiration,
be asked the priest to whom the child belonged, remarking,


J


THE LADY CORNELIA. 37

that from its decorations and appearance one might take it to
be the son of some princess.

" I do not know," replied the priest, " to whom it belongs ;
all I can tell you is, that it was brought to me some nights
since by a cavalier of Bologna, who charged me to take good
care of the babe and bring it up heedfully, since it was the
son of a noble and valiant father, and of a mother highly
bom as well as beautiful. With the cavalier there came
also a woman to suckle the infant, and of her I have
inquired if she knew anything of the parents, but she tells
me that she knows nothing whatever ; yet of a truth, if the
mother possess but half the beauty of the nurse, she must
be the most lovely woman in Italy."

" Could I not see her ?" asked the Duke. " Yes, certainly
you may see her," returned the priest. " You have only to
come with me; and if the beauty and decorations of the
child surprise *you, I think the sight of the nurse cannot fail
to produce an equal effect."

The priest would then have taken the infant from the
duke, but Alfonso would not let it go ; he pressed it in his
arms, and gave it repeated kisses; the good father, mean-
while, hastened forward, and bade Cornelia approach
to receive the duke. The lady obeyed ; her emotion
giving so rich a colour to her face that the beauty she
displayed seemed something more than human. The duke,
on seeing her, remained as if struck by a thunderbolt, while
she, throwing herself at his feet, sought to kiss them.
The duke said not a word, but gave the infant to the priest,
and hurried out of the apartment.

Shocked at this, Cornelia said to the priest, " Alas, dear
father, have I terrified the duke with the sight of my face ?
am I become hateful to him ? Has he forgot the ties by which
he has bound himself to me ? Will he not speak one word to
me ? Was his child such a burden to him that he has thus
rejected him from his arms ? "

To all these questions the good priest could give no reply,
for he too was utterly confounded by the duke's hasty depar-
ture, which seemed more like a flight than anything else.

Meanwhile Alfonso had but gone out to summon Fabio.
*^ Ride Fabio, my friend," he cried, " ride for your life to
Bologna^ and tell Lorenzo Bentivoglio that he must come with


88 CERVAliTES* EXBMPLART TALES.

all speed to this place ; let him make no excuse, and bid him
bring with him the two Spanish gentlemen, Don Juan de
Gamboa and Don Antonio de Isunza. Return instantly,
Fabio, but not without them, for it concerns my life to see
them here/'

Fabio required no further pressing, but instantly carried
his master's commands into effect. The duke returned at once
to Cornelia, caught her in his arms, mingled hb tears with hers,
and kissed her a thousand times ; and long did the fond pair
remain thus silently locked in each other's embrace, both
speechless from excess of joy. The nurse of the infant and
the dame, who proclaimed herself a Crivella, beheld all this

. from the door of the adjoining apartment, and- fell into such
ecstasies of delight that they knocked their heads against the

il wall, and seemed all at once to have gone out of their wits.

f The priest bestowed a thousand kisses on the infant, whom he
held on one arm, while with his right hand h^ showered no
end of benedictions on the noble pair. At length his rever-
ence's housekeeper, who had been occupied with her culinary
preparations, and knew nothing of what had occurred, entered
to notify to her master that dinner was on the table, and so
put an end to thb scene of rapture.

The duke then took his babe from the arms of the priest,

• and kept it in his 0¥m during the repast, which was more
remarkable for neatness and good taste than for splendour.
While they were at table, Cornelia related to the duke all that
had occurred until she had taken refuge with the priest, by the
advice of the housekeeper of those two Spanish gentlemen,
who had protected and guarded her with such assiduous and
respectful kindness. In return the duke related to her all that
had befallen himself during the same interval ; and the two
housekeepers, who were present, received from him the most
encouraging promises. All was joy and satisfaction, and
nothing more was required for the general happiness, save the
arrival of Lorenzo, Don Antonio, and Don Juan.

They came on the third day, all intensely anxious to know
if the duke had received intelligence of Cornelia, seeing that
Fabio, who did not know what had happened, could tell them
nothing on that subject.

The duke received them alone in the antechamber, but gave
no sign of gladness in his face, to their great grief and disa[r


THE LADY CORNELIA. 39

pointment. Bidding them be seated, Alfonso himself sat
down, and thus addressed Lorenzo : —

'^ You well knowy Signor Lorenzo Bentivoglio, that I never
deceived your sister, aa my conscience and Heaven itself can
bear witness ; you know also the diligence with which I have
sought her, and the wish I have felt to have my marriage with
her celebrated publicly. But she is not to be found, and my
I word cannot be considered eternally engaged to a shadow. I
ram a young man, and am not so blasS as to leave ungathered
I such pleasures as I find on my path. Before I had ever seen
Cornelia I had given my promise to a peasant girl of this
village, but whom I was tempted to abandon by the superior
charms of Cornelia, giving therein a great proof of my love for
the latter, in defiance of the voice of my conscience. Now,
therefore, since no one can marry a woman who does not
appear, and it is not reasonable that a man should eternally
run after a w^e who deserts him, lest he should take to his
arms one who abhors him, I would have you consider, Signoc
Lorenzo, whether I can give you any further satisfaction fo '
an affront which was never intended to be one ; and further ,
I would have you give me your permission to accomplish m^
first promise, and solemnise my marriage with the peasant girl ,
who is now in this house,"

While the duke spoke this, Lorenzo's frequent change of
colour, and the difficulty with which he forced himself to retain
his seat, gave manifest proof that anger was taking possession of ^
all his senses. The same feelings agitated Don Antonio and
Don Juan, who were resolved not to permit the duke to fulfil
his intention, even should they be compelled to prevent it by
depriving him of life. Alfonso, reading these resolves in their
faces, resumed : "Endeavour to calm yourself, Signer Lorenzo ;
and before you answer me one word, I will have you see the
beauty of her whom I desire to take to wife, for it is such that
you cannot refuse your consent, and it might suffice, as you
will acknowledge, to excuse a graver error than mine."

So saying, the duke rose, and repaired to the apartment
where Cornelia was awaiting him in all the splendour of her
beauty and rich decorations. No sooner was he gone than Don
Juan also rose, and laying both hands on the arms of Lorenzo*s
chair, he said to him, " By St. James of Galicia, by the true
faith of a Christian, and by my honour as a gentleman, Signer


40 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY tALES.

Lorenzo, I will as readily allow the duke to fulfil his project
as I will become a worshipper of Mahomed. Here, in this
spot, he shall yield up his life at my hands, or he shall redeem
the promise given to your sister, the lady Cornelia. At the
least, he shall give us time to seek her; and until we know to
a certainty that she is dead, he shall not marry."

** That is exactly my own view," replied Lorenzo. " And
I am sure," rejoined Don Juan, ^'that it will be the determi-
nation of my comrade, Don Antonio, likewise."

While they were thus speaking, Cornelia appeared at
the door between the duke and the priest, each of whom led
her by one hand. Behind them came Sulpicia, her waiting
woman, whom the duke had summoned from Eerrara to attend
her lady, with the infant's nurse, and the Spaniards' house-
keeper. When Lorenzo saw his sister, and had assured him-
self it was indeed Cornelia, — ^for at first the apparently im-
possible character of the occurrence had forbidden his belief, —
he staggered on his feet, and cast himself at those of the
duke, who, raising him, placed him in the arms of his delighted
sister, whilst Don Juan and Don Antonio hastily applauded
the duke for the clever trick he had played upon them all.

Alfonso then took the infant from Sulpicia, and, presenting
it to Lorenzo, he said, " Signer and brother, receive your
nephew, my son, and see whether it please you to give
permission for the public solemnisation of my marriage with
this peasant girl — the only one to whom I have ever been
betrothed."

To repeat the replies of Lorenzo would be never to make
an end, and the rather if to these we added the questions of
Don Juan, the remarks of Don Antonio, the expressions of
delight uttered by the priest, the rejoicing of Sulpicia, the
satisfaction of the housekeeper who had made herself the
counsellor of Cornelia, the exclamations of the nurse, and the
astonishment of Fabio, vrith the general happiness of all.

The marriage ceremony was performed by the good priest,
and Don Juan de Garaboa gave away the bride ; but it was
agreed among the parties that this marriage also should be
kept secret, until he knew the result of the malady under
which the duchess-dowager was labouring ; for the present,
therefore, it was determined that Cornelia should return
to Bologna with her brother. All was done as thus agreed


THE LADY CORNELIA. 41

on ; and when the duchess-dowager died, Cornelia made
her entrance into Ferrara, rejoicing the eyes of all who
beheld her : the mourning weeds were exchanged for festive
robes, the two housekeepers were enriched, and Sulpicia was
married to Fabio. For Don Antonio and Don Juan, they
were sufficiently rewarded by the services they had rendered
to the duke, who offered them two of his cousins in marriage,
with rich dowries. But they replied, that the gentlemen of
the Biscayan nation married for the most part in their own
country ; wherefore, not because they despised so honourable
a proffer, which was not possible, but that they might not
depart from a custom so laudable, they were compelled to
decline that illustrious alliance, and the rather as they were
still subject to the will of their parents, who had, most pro-
bably, already affianced them.

The duke admitted the validity of their excuses, but, availing
himself of occasions warranted by custom and courtesy, he found
means to load the two friends with rich gifts, which he sent
from time to time to their house in Bologna. Many of these
were of such value, that although they might have been refused
for fear of seeming to receive a payment, yet the appropriate
manner in which they were presented, and the particular
periods at which Alfonso took care that they should arrive,
caused their acceptance to be easy, not to say inevitable ; such,
for example, were those despatched by him at the moment of
their departure for their own country, and those which he
gave them when they came to Ferrara to take their leave of
him.

At this period, the Spanish gentlemen found Cornelia
the mother of two little girls, and the duke more enamoured
of his wife than ever. The duchess gave the diamond cross to
Don Juan, and the gold agnus to Don Antonio, both of
whom had now no choice but to accept them. They finally
arrived without accident in their native Spain, where they
married rich, noble, and beautiful ladies ; and they never ceased
to maintain a friendly correspondence with the duke and
duchess of Ferrara, and with Lorenzo Bentivoglio, to the great
satisfaction of all parties.


Ej><I» of the I.ADT COBNELIA.


42 CERTANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.


fimCONETE AND CORTADILLO :

@T, ^tUx of i\jit Comer anb i^e ITittle Ctttter.

At the Yenta or hostelry of the Mulinillo, which is situate
on the confmes of the renowned plain of Alcudia, and on
the roa d from CgstUe t o Andalusia, two striplings met By
chance on one oi the hdttesrSays oT'summer. One of them
was about fourteen or fifteen years of age ; the other could
not have passed his seventeenth year. Both were well formed,
and of comely features, but in very ragged and tattered plight.
Cloaks they had none ; their breeches were of linen, and their
stockings were merely those bestowed on them by Nature. It
is true they boasted shoes; one of them wore alpargates,*
or rather dragged them along at his heels; the other had
what might as well have been shackles for all the good they
did the wearer, being rent in the uppers, and without soles.
Their respective head-dresses were a monteraf and a miserable
sombrero, low in the crown and wide in the brim. On his
shoulder, and crossing his breast like a scarf, one of them
carried a shirt, the colour of chamois leather; the body of
this garment was rolled up and thrust into one of its sleeves :
the other, though travelling without incumbrance, bore on
his chest what seemed a large pack, but which proved, on
closer inspection, to be the remains of a starched ruff, now
stiffened with grease instead of starch, and so worn and
frayed that it looked like a bundle of herop.

Within this collar, wrapped up and carefully treasured,
was a pack of cards, excessively dirty, and reduced to an
oval form by repeated paring of their dilapidated corners.
The lads were both much burned by the sun, their hands
were anything but clean, and their long nails were edged
with black; one had a dudgeon-dagger by his side; the
other a knife with a yellow handle.

* The alpargates are a kind of sandal made of cord.

f MwUei^a^ a low cap, without visor or front to shade the eyes.


y


RIN'CONETE AND CORTADILLO. 43

•

Tli^se gentlemen had selected for their siesta the porch
or penthouse commonly found before a Y enta ; and, finding
themselves o pposite e ach other, he who appeared to be the
elder said to the younger, " Of what country is your worship,
noble Sir, and by what road do you propose to travel?"
•'What is my country, Senor Cavalier," returned the other, "I
know not ; nor yet which way my road lies."

" Your worship, however, does not appear to have come
from heaven," rejoined the elder, " and as this is not a place
wherein a man can take up his abode for good, you must, of
necessity, be going further." "That is true," replied the
younger ; " I have, nevertheless, told you only the veritable
fact ; for as to my country, it is mine no more, since all that
belongs to me there is a father who does not consider me his
child, and a step-mother who treats me like a son-in-law.
With regard to my road, it is that which chance places before
me, and it will end wherever I may find some one who will
give me the wherewithal to sustain this miserable life of


mme."


"Is your worship acquainted with any craft?" inquired
the first speaker. ** With none," returned the other, " except
that I can run like a hare, leap like a goat, and handle a pair
of scissors with great dexterity."

" These things are all very good, useful, and profitable,"
rejoined the elder. " You will readily find the Sacristan of
some church who will give your worship the offering-bread
of All Saints' Day, for cutting him h& paper flowers to
decorate the Monument* on Holy Thursday."

"But that is not my manner of cutting," replied the
younger. " My father, who, by God's mercy, is a tailor and
hose maker, taught me to cut out that kind of spatterdashes
properly called Polainas, which, as your worship knows, cover
the fore part of the leg and come down over the instep.
These I can cut out in such style, that I could pass an
examination for the rank of master in the craft ; but my ill
luck keeps my talents in obscurity."

" The common lot, Senor, of able men," replied the first
speaker, " for I have always heard that it is the way of the

* The Monument is a sort of temporary theatre, erected in the
churches during Passion Week, and on which the passion of tiM
Saviour is represented.


44 CERTANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

world to let the finest talents go to waste ; but your worship
is still at an age when this evil fortune may be remedied,
and the rather since, if I mistake not, and my eyes do not
deceive me, you have other advantageous qualities which it is
your pleasure to keep secret/' " It is true that I have such,"
returned the younger gentleman, "but they are not of a
character to be publicly proclaimed, as your worship has very
judiciously observed."

" But I," rejoined the elder, " may with confidence assure

you, that I am one of the most discreet and prudent persons

to be found within many a league. In order to induce your

_ worship to open your heart and repose your faith on my

^ honour, I will enlist your sympathies by first laying bare my own

bosom ; ^r I imagine that fate has not brought us toge-

'Sr ther without some hidden purpose. Nay, I believe that we

(^ are to be true friends from this day to the end of our lives. /

) /^- " I, then, Senor Hidalgo, am a native of Jlugofciday. a place

^^' very well known, indeed renowned for thelllustrious travellers

who are constantly passing through it. My name is Pedro del^

Bincpn;* my fethe rjs a person of quality, and a Minister of

the Holy Crusade, since he holds the important charge of

a Bulero or Buldcro , t as the vulgar call it. I was for

some time his assistant in that office, and acquitted myself so

well, that in all things concerning the sale of bulls I could

hold my own with any man, though he had the right to consider

himself the most accomplished in the profession. But one day,

having placed mj afieetions on the money produced by the

bulls, rather than on the bulls themselves, I took a bag^

of crowns to my arms, and we two departed together for

Madrid.

"In that city, such are the facilities that offer themselves,
I soon gutted my bag, and left it with as many wrinkles as

* Peter of the Corner; Hncon meaning a corner, or obscure
nook.

f The Spanish authorities, under the pretext of being at perpe-
tual war with Infidels, still cause "Bulls of the Crusade," to the
possession of which certain indulgences are attached, to be publicljT
sold in obscure villages. The product of these sales was originally
expended on the wars with the Moors, but from the time when
Granada fell into the hands of the Spaniards, it has been divided
between the church and state. The bulls are carried about by
hawkers, who are called "Buleros." — Viardot,


. RINCONETB AND CORTADILLO. 42

a bridegroom's pocket-handkerchief. T he perso n who was
charged with the collection of the mppe.yi!!ESSL,lilJUcack
"^yJS^Sil^was^l??®.^! anS met with but scant indulgence ;
only, in^nsideration of juy^jfiutb? their worships the judges
contented themselves with introducing me to the acquaintance
of the whipping::post, to have the flies whisked from my shoul«
ders for a cert^n time, and commanding me to abstain fro m
revisiting the Court and Capitaljiuring a period of four years.
I took the matter coolly,^ Wnt my shoulders to the operaJTon'
performed at their command, and made so much haste to
begin my prescribed term of exile, that I had no time to pro-
cure sumpter mules, but contented myself with selecting from
my valuables such as seemed most important and useful.

" I did not fail to include this pack of cards among them,**
—■here the speaker exhibited that oviform specimen already
mentioned — " and with these I have gaiQ^ jaiy^ bread among
thejnns and t^vemd between fladrid and this place, by play-
ing at Yingt-et-un. It is true they are somewhat soiled and
worn, as your worship sees ; but for him who knows how to
handle them, they possess a marvellous virtue, which is, that
you never cut them but you find an ace at the bottom ; if
your worship then is acquainted with the game, you will
see what an advantage it is to know for certain that you have
an acejto begin with, smce you may count, it either for one
or eleven ; and so you may^ be pretty sure that when the stakes
Bre laid a t twenty-one, your money will be much disposed to

stay athflnift* —

" In addition to this, I have acquired the knowledge of
certain mysteries regarding Lansquenet and Eeversis, from the
cook of an ambassador who shall be nameless, — ^insomuch
that, even a s your worship might pass as master in the
cutting'Of spatterda£ih^s» so could 1^ too*, take my degrees in
the art of flat-catching«

" With all these acquirements, I am tolerably sure of not
dying from hunger, since, even in the most retired farm-house"
I come to, there is always some . one to be found who will
not refuse himself the recreation of a few moments at cards.
We have but to make a trial where'^we are; let us spread
the net, and it will go hard with us if some bird out of all
the Muleteers standing about do not fall into it. I mean to
say, that if we two begin now to play at Yingt-et-un as though


vv


'V


i


46 CEBYANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

we were in eamesty some one will probably desire to make
a third, and, in that case, he shall be the man to leave his
^ money behind him."
\\^^ "With all my heart/' replied th^ yff tt Pg^'' lad t "and T
consider that your excellency has done me a great favour
by communicating to me the histoiy of your life. You have
thereby made it impossible for me to conceal mine, and I will
hasten to relate it as briefly as possible. Here it is, then : —
^fP^ '^I was born at Pedrqsp, a village situate between Sala-

^^ ^ manca and Medina del Oampo. My fathe r i« «• tm'lnf, as I

have said, and taught me his trade ; but from cut^igg with the
scissors I^roceeded — my natural abilities coming in aid-::^to
^e cutting of purses. The dull, mean life of the village, and
the unloving conduct of my mother-in-law, were besides but
little to my taste. I quitted my birthplace, therefore, ^^
paired to Toledo to exercise my art. and succeeded in it to
aamiration ; lor there is not a reliquary suspended to the
dress, not a pocEet, however ■ carefully concealed, but ffly
fingers shall probe its contents, or ny scissors snip it oBT,
though the owner were ^guarded by the eyes of Argus.

"During four months I spent in Toledo, I was never
trapped between two doors, nor caught in the fact, nor pur-
sued by the runners of justice, nor blown upon by an informer.
It is true that, eight days ago, a double spy* did set forth
my distinguished abilities to the Corregidor, and the latter,
taking a fancy to me from his description, desired to make my
acquaintance ; but I am a modest youth, and do not wish to
frequent the society of personages so important. Wherefore
I took pains to excuse myself from visiting him, and departed
in so much haste, that 1^ like yourself, had no time to pro«
cure sumpter-mules or small change, — nay, I could not even
find a return-chaise, nor so much as a cart."
f " Console yourself for these omissions," replied Pedro del
^ Bincon; "and since we now know each other, let us drop
. these grand and stately airs, and confess frankly that we have
> not a blessed farthing between us, nor even shoes to our
feet."

" Be it so," returned Diego Cortado, for so the younger

* An cUguazU, who, while in the service of justice, is also in that
of the thieves He betrays them, nevertheless, whenever ^t suits hii
purpose to do so:


AINCONETB AND COBTADILLO. 47

^boy called himself. " Be it so; and since our friendship, m , \^ "
your worship Sefior Rincon is pleas ed to say, is to last our '
whole iives^.lfiOiO^®gP^.^!15Ifi5Ifimn--i cere-

monies," — saying which, Uiego rose to his feet, and embraced
THieSenor Rincon^ who returnedjthe_conapUinfiiit .with equaT
tenderness and emotion. ^

They then began to play at Yingt-et-un with the cards
above described, which were certainly "free from dust and
straw," * as we say, but by no means free from grease and
knavery; and after a few deals, Cortado could turn up an
ace as well as Rincon his master. When things had attained
this point, it chanced that a Muleteer came out at the porch,
and, as Rincon had anticipated, he soon proposed to make Zy/
third in their game. ^ '

To this they willingly agreed, and in less than half an hour
they had won from him twelve reals and twenty-two mara-
ve<Us, which he felt as sorely as twelve stabs with a dagger
and twenty-two thousand sorrows. Presuming that the young
chaps would not venture to defend themselves, he thought to
get b ackJiisL BPLQuey Jby,.force ;, but the two friends laying
handspromptly, the one on his dudgeon dagger and the other
oh his yellow handled knife, gave t he Mu l eteer s o much to do,
that if his companions had notliasTened to assistliim, he would
have come badly out of the quarrel.

At that moment there chanced to pass by a company of
travellers on horseback, who were going to make their siesta
at the hostelry of the Alcalde, about half a league farther
on. Seeing the a ffray between the Muleteer with two boys,
they interposed, and offered to take the latter in their com.-
pany to Seville, if they were going to that city.

"JThat is exactly where we desire to go, "exclaimed Rincon,
" and we wilT serve your worships in all that it shall please
you to command." Whereupon, without more ado, they
sprang before the mules, and departed with the travellers,
leaving the Muleteer despoiled of his money and furious with
rage, while the hostess was in great admiration of the finished
education and accomplishments of the two rogues, whose
dialogue she had heard from beginning to end^ while they
were not aware of her presence.

t ** Clean from dust and straw" — limpios de polvo y paj'Jt-^U ■
phrase equivalent to ** free of the king's dues."


48 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

When the hostess told the Muleteer that she had heard
tne boys say the cards they played with were false, the man
tore his beard for rage, and would ha\'e followed them to
the other Venta, in the hope of recovering his property ; for
he declared it to be a serious affront, and a matter touching
his honour, that two boys should have cheated a grown man
like him. But his companions dissuaded him from doing what
they declared would be nothing better than publishing his
own folly and incapacity ; and their arguments, although they
did not console the Muleteer, were sufficient to make him
remain where he was.

Meanwhile Cortado and Rincon displayed so much zeal
and readiness in the service of the travellers, that the latter

fgave them a lift behind them for the greater part of the way.
They might many a time have rifled the portmanteaus of their
temporary masters, but did not, lest they should thereby lose
the happy opportunity of seeing SevillCvin which city they
greatly desired to exercise their talentsT^ Nevertlieless, as
they entered Seville — which they did at the hour of evening
prayer, and by the gate of the custom-house, pn account of
the dues to be paid, and the trunks to be examined — fiortAfln
could not refrain from making an examination, on his own
account, of the valise which a Fre n chman of the company
carried with him on the croup of his mule. With his yellbw-
"h'andled^weapon, therefore, he gave it so deep and broad a
woifn^^ tbe side that its very entrails were exposed to view ;
and hedextfirgusly^drew forth two. good shirts, a sun-dial, and
a memorandum, boot, thTngs that did not greatly please him
when he had leisure to examine them. Thinking that since
the Frenchman carried that valise on his own mule^ it must
needs contain matters of more importance than those he had
captured, Cortado would fain have looked further into it, but
he abstained, as it was probable that the deficiency had been
already discovered, and the remaining effects secured. ^Before

f performing this feat the friends had taken leave of those who
had fed them on their journey, and the following day they
sold the two shirts/in the old clothes' market, which is held
at the gate of the Almacen or arsenal, obtaining twenty reals
for their booty.

^.^Jiayin^ despatched this business, they went to see the city,
and admired the great maghiHcence und vast size of Its prin-


RINCONETE AND CORTADILLO. 49

cipal church, and the vast concourse of people on the quays,
for it happened to be the season fpr loading the fleet. There
were also six galleys on the water, at sight of which the
friends could not refrain from sighing, as they thought the
day might come when they should be clapped on board one of
those vessels for the remainder of their lives. They remar ked
the large nttmbet .of basket-bojs, porters, &c., who went '?o
and fro about the ships, and inquired of one among them
what sort of a trade it was — whetlier it was very laborioiis^^^^
and what were the gains.

An Asturi an^ of whom thev made the inquir y, gave answer
to the eflfect that the trade was a very pleasant one, since
they had no harbour-dues to pay, and often found themselves
at t he €ndl)f^t he day with six or seven re als Iri their pockety
with whicn they might eat, drink, and enjoy themselves like
kings. Those of his calling, he said, had no need to seek a
master to whom security must be given, and you could dine
when and where you please, since, in the city of Seville, there
is not an eating-house, however humble, where you will not
find all you want at any hour of the day.

The account .giyeii. by the Asturian was by no means^
discour aging to the two friends, neither did his calling i^em-
amiss to them; nay, rathe r, "It appeared to be invented for
'Ithe very purpose of enabling^hOHrtlT'exei'cise fheir own pro-
fession in secresy and safety, on account of the facilities it
ofiered t'or'"ehTering hTJiIS^JST" TKey consequently determined
to buy such things as were required for the instant adoption
^' the new trade, especially as they could enter upon it with-
out undergoing any previous scrutiny.

In reply to their further inquiries, t he Asturian t old them
that it would be sufficient if each had a small porter's bag of
linen, either new or second-hand, so it was but clean, with
three palm-baskets, two large and one small, wherein to carry
the meat, fish, and fruit purchased by their employers, while
the bag was to be used for carrying the bread. He took them
to where alLthese things were sold ; they suppliedTihemselves
out of the plunder of the Frenchman, and Tn less than two
hours they might have been taken for regular graduates in
their new profession, so deftly did they manage their baskets,
and so jauntily carry their bags. Their instructor furthermore
informed them of the different places at which they were to


60 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

luake their appearance daily: in the morning at the shamblefl,
and at the market of St. Salvador ; on fast-days at the fish-
market ; every afternoon on the quay, and on Thursdays at
the fair.

All these lessons the two friends carefully stored in their #
memory, and the following morning both repaired in good F
time to the market of St. Salvador. Scarcely had they arrived '
before they were remarked by numbers of young fellows of »
the trade, who soon perceived, by the shining brightness of [
their bags and baskets, that they were new beginners. They
were assailed with a thousand questions, to all which they
replied with great presence of mind and discretion. Ereafintly
up came two.custpui^C§a-.9I}? of whom had the appearance of a
Student, the other was a Soldier ; both were attracted by the
clean and new appearance of their baskets ; and he.i£ha^emed
to be a student beckoned Cortado, while the soldier engaged
Rincon. " In God's name be it !" * exclaimed both the novices
in a breath — Eincon adding, " It is a good beginning of the
trade, master, since it is your worship that is giving me my
hansel.'^ " The hansel shall not be a bad one/' replied the
soldier, " seeing that I have been lucky at cards of late, and am
in love. I propose this day to regale the friends of my lady with
a feast, and am come to buy the materials." " Load away,
then, your worship," replied Ilincon, " and lay on me as much
as you please, for I feel courage enough to carry off the whole
market ; nay, if you should desire me to aid in cooking what
I carry, it shall be done with all my heart."

The soldier was pleased, with the boy's ready good-will^ and
told him that if he felt disposed to enter his service he would
relieve him from the degrading office he then bore ; but Rincon
declared, that since this was the first day on which he had
tried it, he was not willing to abandon the work so soon, or
at least until he had seen what profit there was to be made
of it ; but ifjt.did not suit him, he gave the gentleman hia
-^ word that he would prefer the service offered him even to
, / ^ that of a Canon.

J ^ ^ -^ >/ The soldier laughed, loaded him well, and showed him the

house of his lady, bidding him observe it well that he might

V know it another time, so that he might be able to send him


v' -


r '


(


* This is a formula used in Spain by those who do a thing for tha
first time. — Viardot,


"v ;


RINCONBTB AND COBTADILLO.. 51

Ihere again without being obliged to accompany bim. Rincon
promised fidelity and good conduct; the soldier gave him
three quartos,* and the lad returned like a shot to the market,
that he might lose no opportunity by delay. Besides, he had>
been well advised in respect of diligence by the Asturian,
who had likewise told him ' that when he was employed to
carry small fish, such as sprats, sardines, or flounders, he
might very well take a few for himself and have the first taste
of them, were it only to diminish his expenses of the day, »
but that he must do this with infinite caution and prudence,
lest the confidence of the employers should be disturbed ; for
to maintain ccmfidenoe was above all things important in tlieir
trade.

But whatever haste Rincon had made to return, he found
Cortado at his post before him. The latter instantly inquired;
how he had got on. Rincon opened his band and showed
the three quartos; when Cortado. thrusting his arm into his
bosom» drew forth a little purse which a^ear^d to liaye onoe
been of "amber-coloured silk, and was not badly filled. " It
was wiflr this^'' said he, " that my service to his reyerence the
St uden t has been rewarded-— with this and two quartos besides.
Do you take it, Rincon, for fear of what may follow."

Cortado had scarcely given the purse in secret to his com-
panion, before the Student returned ir } ^ grf^aff ^ofl>^ and Icfok-
ing in mortal alarm. He no sooner set eyes on Cortado,
than, hastening towards him, he inquired if he had by chance
seen a purse with such and such marks and tokens, and which
had disappeared, together with fifteen crowns in gold pieces,
three double reals, and a certain number of maravedis in
quartos and octavos. i*.D id you tak^ jt froiP ^^ ycarpne^f^^' bia.
^ded, " while I .waa.bu^ing in the marfcei^ .idtltifiu. gtafidin& .

Toibi9J3iMdadii.xfipliiii.3irith j^^^ "All I ^x^"*"' ~^^^\

can tell you of your purae is, that it cannot be lost^ ^??j9ss, . ^ cv ^
Indeed, your worship ha&.le£t it, in. bad hands." y-^ • •"

" That is the very thing, sinner that I am," returned
the Student. " To a certainty I must have left it in bad
hands, since it has been stolen from me." " I say the same,"
rejoined Cortado, "but there is a remedy for every mis-
fortune excepting death. The best thing your woi-ship can da
* The Quarto cotttains four Maravedis.

X 2


y ->


52 CEBYAKTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

now is to have patience, for after all it is God who has made
us, and after one day there comes another. If one hour gives
us wealth, another takes it away ; but it may happen that
the man who has stolen your purse may in time repent, and
may return it to your worship, with all the interest due on
the loan."

" The interest I will forgive him," exclaimed the Student ;
and Cortado resumed : — ^' There are, besides, those letters of
excommunication, the Paulinas ;* and there is also good dili-
gence in seeking for the thief, which is the mother of success.
fOi a truth, Sir, I would not willingly be in the place of him
I who has stolen your purse ; for if your worship have received
any of the sacred orders, I should feel as if I had been guilty
of some great crime — nay of sacrilege— in stealing from your
person."

" Most certainly the thief has committed a sacrilege," replied
the Student, in pitiable tones; '^for although I am not in
orders, but am only a Sacristan of certain nuns, yet the money
in n^y purse was the third of the income due from__a^
chapelry, which I had been commissioned to receive by a
priest, who is one of my friends, so that the purse does^ in
fact, contain blessed and sacred money." ~^

" Let him eat his sin with his bread," exclaimed Eincon
at that moment; "I should be sorry to become bail for
the profit he will obtain from it. There will be a day ol
judgment at the last, when all things will have to pass, as
they say, through the holes of the colander, and it will then
be known^who was the scoundrel that has had the audacity to
plunder and make off with the whole third of the revjenue^ a^
chapelry ! But tell me, Mr. Sacristan, on your life, what is
the amount of the whole yearly income?"

** Income to the devil, and you with it,f" replied the
Sacristan, with more rage than was becoming; "am I in a
humour to talk to you about income ? Tell me, brother, if
you know anything of the purse ; if not, God be with you — I
must go and have it cried."

" That does not seem to me so bad a remedy," remarked
Oortado ; "but I warn your worship not to forget the precise

* Paulinas are the letters of excommunication despatched hy the
ecclesiastical courts for the discovery of such thing^s as are supposed
to be stolen or maliciously concealed*


BIHCOMETE AKD CORTADILLO, 53

<IescriptioD of the pune, nor the esact sum that it contains ;
for if you commit the error of a single mite, the money will
never he suffered to appear again whDe the world is a world,
And that you may take for a prophecy." a\^

" I am not afraid of committiDg any mistake in describing \ r P I- '
the purse," returned the Sacristan, "for I remember it better V^p'
than I do the ringing of my bells, and I shall not commit the ^--V ^j o
error of an atom." Saying ihia, hedrew a laced, handkerchief
from his p ocket to wipg mgi^Y iT"* pgi^pitytir"! which rained
down his face as from an alembic ; but no sooner had'.Cor-
tado set eyes on the handkerchief, TEah lie marked it for
liis own.

When the Sacristan had got to a certain distance, therefore,
Onrtado fo llowed, and having overtaken him as he was mounting
the steps of a church, he took him apart, and poured forth so
interminabl e, ft string.fif .EJiyn^oleLall about tUaJkeitJ^^lho
pmae. and the jrrapeet of recQ.vering.it, that the poor Sacris-
tan could do nothing but listen with open mouth, unable to
make head or tail of what he said, although he made him
repeat it two or three times.

Oo rtado mean while cootinued to JoflkiiBdljjBtp the eyes
.. pf t^" Sf'^'St"", whose o wn were rivetted on the face of the
boy, and seemed to hang, aa St were, on his words, .This
gave Cortado. an_i)|4)0jtunity_to finish his job, and having
cleverly whipped the handkerchief out of the pocket, he took
Jeave nf tlip Smria^Brij appninting to meet him in the evening
at t^e same.place, for he suspected that a certain lad of hia
own height and the same occupation, who waa a bit of a thief,
had stolen the purse, and he should be able to ascertain the
fiict in a few days, moro or less. ^___.

Somewhat consoled by this promise, the Sacristan took his \
leave of Cortado, who then returned to the place where Bincoa
had privily witnessed all that had passed. But a littlo
behind him stood another basket-boy, who had also seen
the whole transaction; and at the moment when Cortado
passed the handkerchief to Bincon, the stranger accostt^ tb«
pair, "

'MeU me, pliant ggnti^nm^- sai^ ho, "are fou admitted
to the.M alaE ntrada.* nrijftt.i"

* Mala EKtraiit, the evil wsj.


r-


94 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

'^ We do not understand your meaning, noble Sir/^ replied
Rineon.

" How! not entered, brave Murcians?" replied the other.

" We are neither of Murcia* nor of Thebes," replied Cor-
tado. '' If you have anything else to say to us, speaic ; if not,
go your ways, and God be with you."

" Oh, your worships do not understand, don't you?^' said
the porter ; '^ but I will soon make you understand, and even
sup up my meaning with a silver spoon. I mean to ask you,
gentlemen, are your worships thieves? But why put the
question, since Ise e well t hatxQlL>r£-thi^.fiai. and it \% xajj^gr
' for you to tell rue How it li^ that you have not presented your-
selves' artlle'custom-house of the Senor Monipodio."

" Do they then pay duty on the right of tliieving^ in this
country, gallant Sir V* exclaimed Rincon.

"If they do not pay duty, at least they make them
register themselves with the Senor Monipodio, who is the father,
paster, and protector of thieves ; and I recommend you to
come with me and pay your respects to him forthwith, or,
if you refuse to do that^ make no attempt to exercise your
trade without his mark and pass-word, or it will cost_you
dearly.^

" I thought, for my part," remarked Cortado, " that the
profession of thieving was a free one, exempt from all taxes
and po % dues ; or, at least, that if we must pay, it is some-
thing to be levied in the lump, for which we give a mortgage
upon our shoulders and our necks ; but since it is as you say,
and every land has its customs, let us pay due respect to
this of yours ; we are now in the first country of the world,
and without doubt the customs of the place must be in the
highest degree judicious. Wherefore your worship may be
pleased to conduct us to the place where this gentleman of
whom you have spoken is to be found. I cannot but sup-
pose, from what you say, that he is much honoured, of great
power and influence, of very generous nature, and, above all,
highly accomplished in the profession."

" Honoured, generous, and accomplished ! do you say ?'*
replied the boy : " aye, that he is ; so much so, that during
the four years that he has held the seat of our chief and

* In the slan? dialect of Spain, Murcian and Murcia mean tbie(
and the land of uiieves.


RINCONETE ANT> CORTADILLO. 55

father, only foar of U8 have suffered at Finibusterry ; • some
thirty or so, and not more, have lost leather ; and but sixty-
two have been lagged/'

" Truly, Sir," rejoined Bincon, ** all this is Hebrew to us;
we know no more about it than we do of flying/'

" Let us be joggiPja^> th en," replied the new-comer, ** and
on the way i will explain to you these and other things,
which it is requisite you should know as pat as bread to
mouth;" and, accordingly, he_^xplain^!<Lta..tb?ni a whole
vocabulary of that thieyeslXaiuiL which they^call Germanesco,
"of txeriyonza . and which their guide used in the course of his
lecture, — ^by no means a short one, for the distance they had
to traverse was of considerable length.
\^ Q aihg road^JRincon said to his new acquaintance, "Does
your wp]rshipiawliSii51>e V*5^ " - -— - - —

" Yes," replied the lad, " I have that honour, for the ser- /
vice of. God and gf ^.good people; but I cannot boast of y\
being among the most distinguished, since I am as yet but ^ .\
in the year of my novitiate." ^ ^

" It is news to me" remarked Cortado, " that there are
thieves for the service of God and of good people."

" Sefior," the other replied, " 1 don't meddle with theology;
but this I know, that every one may serve God ijLhia uooationy
the more so a s daddy Monipodio ke^p? w^^ g^pd n^^r in
^baljespect among all his children."

"His must needs be a holy and edifying command,"
rejoined Rincon, " since it enjoins thieves to serve God."

"It is so holy and edifying," exclaimed the stranger,
*Hhat I don't believe a better will ever be known in our trade.
His orders are that we give something by way of alms out ot
all we steal, to buy oil for the lamp of a highly venerated
image, well known in this city; and we have really seen
great things result from that good work. Not many days
ago, one of our miatreros had to take three ansicu for hav-
ing come the Murcian over a couple of roznosy and although
he was but a poor weak fellow, and ill of the fever to boot,
he bore them all without singing out, as though they had
been mere trifles. This we of the profession attribute to his
particular devotion to the Virgin of the Lamp, for he was so

♦ Injflnilmg terrcB, that is to say, at th© gallows, or garotte, which
to the thief is the end of the earth and all things.


56 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

weak, that, of his own strength, he could not have endured
the first desconcierto of the hangman*s wrist. But now, as I
guess, you will want to know the meaning of certain words
just used ; I will take physic before I am sick — ^that is to say,
give you the explanation before you ask for it.

" Be pleased to know then, gentlemen, that a cuatrero is a
itealer of cattle j the ansia is the question or torture. Roznos-^
saving your presence — are asses, and the first de9Concierto is
the first turn of the cord which is given by the execationer
when we are on the rack. But we do more than bum oil
to the Virgin. There is not one of us who does not recite
his rosary carefully, dividing it into portions for each day of
the week. Many will not steal at all on a Friday, and on
Saturdays we never speak to any woman who is called Mary."

" All these things fill me with admiration," replied Cortado ;
" but may 1 trouble yoiu* worship to tell me, have you no other
l^enance than this to perform ? Is there no restitution to make?"

" As to restitution," returned the other, " it is a thing not
to be mentioned ; besides, it would be wholly impossible, on
account of the numerous portions into which things stolen
have to be divided before each one of the agents and con-
tractors has received the part due to him. When all these
have had their share, the original thief would find it difficult
to make restitution. Moreover, there is no one to bid us do
anything of that kind, seeing tiiat we do not go to confession.
And if letters of excommunication are out against us, they
rarely come to our knowledge, because we take care not to go
into the churches while the priests are reading them, unless,
indeed, it be on the days of Jubilee, for then we do go, on
account of the vast profits we make from the crowds of people
assembled on that occasion."

"And proceeding in this manner," observed Cortado,
** your worships think that your lives are good and holy ?"

" Certainly ! for what is there bad in them ? '' replied the
other lad \ " Is it not worse to be a heretic or a renegade ?
or to kill your father or mother ? "

" Without doubt," admitted Cortado ; " but now, since our
fate has decided that we are to enter this brotherhood, wHl
your worship be pleased to step out a little, for I arfl iAying.
to behold this Senor Monipodio, of whose virtues you relate
such fine things.^


r^


RINCONETE AKD COBTADILLO. 67

** That wish shall soon be gratified/' replied the stranger,

•*nay even f rom this plac e we can Derceive his^I^Quaa: j)ut

your worshipslriust remain at "the 3oor until 1 have gone in

to s eeTTTie be disengaged, since these are the hours at which

lie gives audience.**"

^^So be it/' replied Eincon; and the thief preceding
them for a short distance, they saw him enter a house whick,
80 far from being handsome, had a very mean and wretched
appearance, ^e tw o friends remained at the door to await,
their guide, who soolTreappeared, and called tO them to come
in. He then bade theiu remain for the present in a little
j)aved court, or patio,* so clean and carefully rubbed that the
red bricks shone as if covered with the finest vermilion. On
one side of the court was a three-legged stool, before which
stood a large pitcher with the lip broken off, and on the
top of the pitcher was placed a small jug equally dilapidated*
On the other side lay a rush mat, and in the middle was a
fragment of crockery which did service as the recipient of
some sweet basil.

The two boys examined these moveables attentively while
awaiting the descent of the Senor Monipodio, but finding
that he delayed his appearance, Eincon ventured to put his
head into one of two small rooms which opened on the courts
There he saw two fencing foils, and two bucklers of cork
hung upon four nails; there was also a great chest, but
without a lid or anything to cover it, with three rush
mats extended on the floor. On the wall in face of him
was pasted a figure of Our Lady — one of the coarsest of
prints — and beneath it was a small basket of straw, with
a little vessel of white earthenware sunk into the wall.
The basket Eincon took to be a poor box, for receiving alms,
and the little basin he supposed to be a receptacle for holy
water, as in truth they were.

While the friends thus waited, there came into the court
two young men of some twenty years each ; they were clothed
as students, and were followed soon afterwards by two of the
basket boys or porters, and a blind man. Neither spoke a
word to the other, but all began to walk up and down in the

* The Patio, familiar to all who have yisited SeyiUe, as forming
thti centre of the houses, and which serves in summer as the gencru
sitting-room, so to speak, of the famiW


68 CCBTANTES' EXEMPLART TALUS.

court. No long time elapsed before there also came in two old
men clothed in black serge, and with spectacles on their
noses, which gave them an air of much gravity, and made
them look highly respectable: each held in his hand a
rosary, the beads of which made a ringing sound. Behind
these men came an old woman wearing a long and ample
gown, who, without uttering a word, proceeded at once to the
room wherein was the figure of Our Lady. She then took
holy water with the greatest devotion, placed herself on
her knees before the Virgin, and after remaining there a
considerable time, iirst kissed the soil thrice, and then rising, -
lilted her arms and eyes towards heaven, in which attitude she
remained a certain time longer. She then dropped her alms
into the little wicker case — and that done, she issued forth
among the company in the patio.

. Finally there T^rere assembled in the qourt us many_|i»
four^en persons of various costumes and different professions.
Among the latest arrivals were two dashing and el^ant youtha
with long moustachios, hats of immense brims, broad collars,
stiffly starched, coloured stockings, garters with great bows
and fringed ends, swords of a length beyond that permitted
by law, and each having a pistol in his belt, with a buckler
banging on his arm. No sooner had these men entered, than
they began to look askance at Eincon and Cortado, whom they
were evidently surprised to see there, as persons unknown to
themselves. At length the new-comers accosted the two
friends, asking if they were of the brotherhood. " We are so,"
replied Eincon, " and the very humble servants of your wor^
•hips besides."

At this moment the Senor Monipodio honoured the re-
spectable assembly with his welcome presence. He appearea
to be about five or six-and-forty years old, tall, and of dark
complexion ; his eyebrows met on his forehead, his black beard
was very thick, and his eyes were deeply sunk in his head.
He had come down in his shirt, through the opening of which
was seen a hairy bosom, as rough and thick set as a forest of
brushwood. Over his shoulders was thrown a serge cloak,
reaching nearly to his feet, which were cased in old shoes, cut
down to make slippers ; his legs were covered with a kind
of linen gaiters, wide and ample, which fell low upon his '
ankles. His hat was that worn by those of the Hampa, bell--


RINCOTETE AND CORTADILLO. 69

formed in the crown, and very wide in the brim.* Across
his breast was a leather baldric, supporting a broad, short
sword of the perrillo fashion. f His hands were short and
eoarse, the fingers thick, and the nails much flattened : bis legs
were concealed by the gaiters, but his feet were of immoderate
size, and the most clumsy form. In short, he was the coarsest
and most repulsive barbarian ever beheld, y^h ^JIE L^^p^^
the qoiiductitr at >thft- tmo. immh ;. whty JakingL^Bincon and
T^Qirtad o each by a hand^ presented thcmiq Monipodio, saying,
•* These^^KfiZt&jya^.gflQdJt^ whom I spoke to your woor^-

Senor Monipodio. May it please your worship to examine
them, and you wiltfi^e'how well they are prepared to enter
our brotherhood.'* " That I will do willingly," replied v I
Monipodio. '-X

iif T }jpfl fnr|Qrnff,on fri say, that when Monipodio bad (( *
first it ppeared^ _^ those who were waitiag for him, inada
Sr3eq) arid long reverence, the two dashing cavaliers alone
^cepted, who did but just touch their hats, and then continued
their walk up and down the court.

Monipodio also began to pace up and down the patio,
and, as he did so, he questioned the new disciples as to
their trade, their birthplace, and their parents. To this
Bincon replied, " Our trade is sufficiently obvious, since
we are here before your worship ; as to our country, it does,
not appear to me .essential to the matter in hand that we.
should declare it, any more than the names of our parents,;
since we are not now stating our qualifications for admission *
into some noble order of knighthood.''

"What you say, my son, is true, as well as discreet,"
replied Monipodio ; *^ and it is, without doubt, highly prudent
to conceal those circumstances; for if things should turn out
badly, there is no need to have placed upon the books of
register, and under the sign manual of the justice- clerk, ' So
and so, native of such a place, was hanged, or made to dance
at the whipping-post, on such a day,' with other announce-
ments of the like kind, which, to say the least of them, do not

* The Bravos of the Hampa were a horde of ruffians principally
Andalusians ; they formed a society ready to commit every species of.
wrong and violence.

t The perriUo, or "little dog," was the mark of Julian del Rey, a
noted armourer of Toledo, by birth a Morisco.


V'


>\


o


60 CERVANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

sound agreeable in respectable ears. Thus, I repeat, that to
conceal the name and abode of your parents, and even to
change your own proper appellation, are prudent measures.
Between ourselves there must, nevertheless, be no conceal-
ment : for the present I will ask your names only, but these
you must give me"

Bjncon then ^oldJ iia naiQe^ an4 JO did Cortado: where-
upon Monipodio said, " henceforward I request and desh*o
that you, Rincon, call yourself Rinconete, and you, Cortado, " '
"Cqrtadttlor'tlrcse being names which accord, as though made
m a mould, with your age and circumstances, as well as with
our ordinances, which make it needful that we should also
know the names of the parents of our comrades, because it
is our custom to have a certain number of masses said every
^"yeaf for'the souls 6r our dead, and of the benefactors of o^lT'
society ; and we provide for the payment of the priests who
say them, by setting apart a share of our swag for that
purpose.

*' These masses, thus said and paid for, are of great service
to the souls aforesaid. Among our benefactors we count the
Alguazil, who gives us warning ; the Advocate, who defends
us ; the Executioner, who takes pity upon us when we have
to be whipped, and the man who, when we are running along
the street, and the people in full cry after us bawling * Stop
thief,' throws himself between us and our pursuers, and checks
the torrent, saying, ^ Let the poor wretch alone, his lot is hard
enough ; let him go, and his crime will be his punishment.'
We idso count among our benefactors the good wenches who
aid us by their labours while we are in prison, or at the
galleys; our fathers, and the mothers who brought us into
the world ; and, finally, we take care to include the Clerk of
the Court, for if he befriend us, there is no crime which he
will not find means to reduce to a slight fault, and no fault
which he does not prevent from being punished. For all
these our brotherhood causes the sanctimonies (ceremonies)
I have named to be solecised (solemnised) every year, with all
possible grandiloquence.

" Certainly," replied Einconete (now confirmed in that
name), " certainly that is a good work, and entirely worthy
of the lofty and profound genius with which we have heard
that you^ Senor Monipodio, are endowed. Our parents still


RiyCONETE AND COBTABILLO. CI

enjoy life ; but should they precede us to the tomb, we will
instantly give notice of that circumstance to this happy and
highly esteemed fraternity, to the end that you may have
* sanctimonies solecised' for their souls, as your worship is
pleased to say, with the customary * grandiloquence/

" And so shall it be done," returned Monipodio, " if there
be but a piece of me left alive to look to it.'*

He then called their conductor, sayings J*.E[allo J there,
GanchueloT* Is^thejv'atcjLjSet.?'*^ "Yes/* replied the boy ;
" three sentinels are on guard, and there is no fear of a
^§urprise»" " Let us reliirh to business, then," said Monipodio.
" I would fain kn ow from jou, jpy sons, what you are able to
dOj t hat 1 may assign you ah employment in conformity with
.. .your. inclinations and accomplishments."

" I," replied Rinconete, "know a trick or two to gammon
a bumpkin ; I am not a bad hand at hiding what a pal has
prigged ; I have a good eye for a gudgeon ; T play well at
most games of cards, and have aU the best turns of the
pasteboard at my finger ends; I have cut my eye teeth,
and am about as easy to lay hold of as a hedgehog ; I
can creep through a cat-hole or down a chimney, as I
would enter the door of my father's house ; and will muster a
million of tricks better than I could marshal a regiment of
soldiers ; and flabbergast the knowingest cove a deal sooner
than pay back a loan of two reals.*'

" These are certainly the rudiments," admitted Moni-
podio, '* Dutlill Sticllthings are no better Than old lavender
flowers, so completely worn out of all savour that there is
not a novice who may not boast of being a master in them,
^hey ai!fi--goodiQr nothing but to catch simpletons who are
stupid enough to run their "heads against the church steeple;
but time will do much for you, and we must talk fur-
ther together. On the foundation already laid you shall
have half a dozen lessons ; ~and' I ''then trust in God that
*y6ii"Wift ttrm out a famous craftsman, and even, mayhap, *a
master." """

" My. abilities shall always be at your service, and that
of the gentlemen who are our comrades," replied Binconete ;
and Monipodio then turned towards CortadiUo.

* Ganchuelo is the diminudve oi ganclio, a crimp.


69 CERTANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

•'And you, Cortadillo, what may you be good forf " he In-
quired ; to which Cortadillo replied, " For my part I know tho
trick called * put in two, and take out five/ and I can dive
to the bottom of a pocket with great precision and dexterity.'^'
Do you know nothing more?" continueil Monipodio. "Alas,
no, for my sins, that is all I can do," ailmitted Cortadillo,
" Do not afflict yourself, nevertheless," said the master ; " you
are arrived at a good port, where you will not be drowned,
and you enter a school in which you can hardly fail to learn all
that is requisite for your future welfare. And now as to
courage : how do you feel yourselves provided lii tKaE
Tespecl," njy: dbildren?" **How should we be provided^'*
returned Rinconete, " but well and amply ? We have cou-
rage enough to attempt whatever may be demanded in our
art and profession." " But I would have you to possess a share
of that sort which would enable you to suffer as well ' SSTVi
darcj^" replied Monipodio, " which would carry you, if need
were, through a good half dozen of ansias without opening
your lips, and without once saying * This mouth is mine.* "
" We already know what the ansias are, Senor Monipodio,"
replied Cortadillo, " and are prepared for all ; since we are not
so ignorant but that we know very well, that what the tongue
says, the throat must pay for ; and great is the grace heaven
bestows on the bold man (not to give him a different name),
in making his life or death depend upon the discretion of
his tongue, as though there were more letters in a No than
an Aye/'

" Halt there, my son ; you need say no more," exclaimed
Monipodio at this point of the discourse, " ThfiLWi^rds, y^ou
have just uttered suffice to convince, oblige, persuade, and
constrath me at once to admit you both to full brotherhood,
and dispense with your passing through the year of novitiate.**
■ " *^I also am of that opinion,'* said one of the gaily-dressed
Bravos ; and this was the unanimous feeling of the whole
assembly. They therefore requested that Monipodio would
immediately grant the new brethren the enjoyment of all" fKe
mimunities of their confraternity, seeing that their good mien
and judicious discourse proved them t6T)e entirely deserving
of tliat drstinclion.

"Monipodio replied, that, to satisfy the wishes of all, he at
once conferred on those new-comers all the privileges desired,


RINCONETE AND CORTADILLO. 63

liut he exhorted the recipients to remember that they were t9
hold the favour in high esteem, since it was a very great one :
consisting in the exe mption fr om pay"*^"^ ^f the medjq^ anata^
or tax levied on the nrstTEett. they shoiUiLcosunit, and xea-
"^aering them free of all the inferior ocuaipatiQQd otihek office
JSaOBSientire year*. They were jmLfiiiliged, that is to say, to
bear messages to a brother of higher^grade/ whether in prison
w at his own residence. They were permitted to drihlc^thejr


wine without water, and to make a feast wheiTSTnt where they
•l>ie^ed7 without first demanding permission' oTtlieir principal.
They were, furthermore, to enter at once on a full share of
whatever was brought .in-bfl the superior brethr enjS^^
_themselyes-^with many other pri v3egei, whiclf the new comers
accepted as most signal favours, and on the possession of which
they were felicitated by all present^ in the most polite and
complimentary terms.

While these pleasing ceremonies were in course of being
exchanged, aboyjan in, panting far hrftath, and cried out^
**,The Alguazil' of the vagabonds is coming direct to the house,
but He has none of the Marshalsea men with him."

"Let no one disturb himself," said^JVIonipodio*.. ''.This
_ia a friend j never does he come here for our injury. Calm
your anxiety, and I will go out to speak with him." At
these words all resumed their self-possession, for they had
been considerably alarmed; and Monipqd io went_ forth to jfcbe
door of his house, where he found the Alguazil, with whom he
TgnratfifiSTsome nriinnt-ps ia. conversation, and then returned to
the company. " Who was on guard to-day,'* he asked, " in
the market of San Salvador?" "I was," replied the con-
ductor of our two friends, the estimable Ghmchuelo. " You !"
replied Monipodio. "How then does it happen that you
have not given notice of an amber-coloured purse which has
gone astray there this iiporningrsild has /airried* with it fifteen
croWHSTingold, two dduble reals, and I know not how many
quartos?" \ %_

"It is true," re^li^ Ganchuelo, "that this purse has
disappeared, but it was not I took it, nor can I imagine who
has done so." " Let there be no tricks with me," exclaimed
Monipodio; " the purse mus t be fqun^, since the Alguazil
demands Jt, and ne is a frlenJ wTio finds meaiis^fo do u§_a
thousanc["8ervices in the course of the year.*^ The youth agsun


64 CERTANTES' EXEMPLART TALES.

8wore that he knew nothing about it, while Monipodio*8
choler began to rise, and in a moment flames seemed to dart
from his eyes. "Let none of you dare," he shouted, " to ven-
ture on infringing the most important rule of our order, for he
who does so shall pay for it with his life. Let the purse be ^
found, and if any one has been concealing it to avoid paying 1
the dues, let him now give it up. I will make good to him
all that he would have been entitled to, and out of my own
pocket too ; for, come what may, the Alguazil must not be
suffered to depart without satisfaction." But Ganchuelo could
do no more than repeat, with all manner of oaths and impre-
cations, that he had neither taken the purse, nor ever set eyes
on it.

All this did but lay fuel on the flame of Monipodio's
anger, and the entire assembly partook of his emotions;
the honourable members perceiving that their statutes
were violated, and their wise ordinances infringed. Seeing,
therefore, that the confusion and alarm had now got to such a
height, Ein££tQfite^ began to think it time to allay it, and to
calm the anger of his superior, who was bursting with rage.
He took counsel for a moment with Cortadillo, and receiving
his assent, drew forth the purse of the Sacristan^ saying: —

" Let aJL Qjljestions cease, gentlemen : here is tho^urse,
from which nothing is missing that the Alguazil has described,
since my comrade Cortadillo prigged it this very day^ with a
pocket-handkerchief into the bargain, which he borrowed from
the same owner." Thereupon Cortadillo produced the hand-
kerchief before the assembled company.

Seeing this, Monipodio e^olaiaied " Cortadillo the Good !
for by that title and surname shall you henceforward be
distinguished. Keep the handkerchief, and I take it upon
myself to pay you duly for this service ; as to the purse, the
Alguazil must carry it away just as it is, for it belongs tojl"
Sacristan who happens to be his relation, and we must make
good in his case the proverl), which says, ' To him who gives
thee the entire bird, thou canst well afford a drumstick of
the same.' This ^ood Alguazil can save us from morejninicblel
in one daj thanwe can do him^ood m_a hundred:"^

AlTthe brotherhood with one voice approved the spirit
and gentlemanly proceeding of the two new comers, as well as
the judgment and decision of then* superior, who went out tp


RINCONETE AXD CORTADILLO. 65

*g!JLTfi f^^ P"*^^ *^ ^^*^ Als\m<if As to Cortadillo, he was
confirmed in his title of the Goody much as if the matter had
concerned a Don Alonzo Perez de Guzman, sumamed the
Good, who from the walls of Tarifa threw down to his enemy
the dagger that was to destroy the life of his only son.*

Wlien Monipodio returnedto the assembly he was accom-
pamjd. by two ff^''^'^ with rouged faces, lips reddened' with
rmine, and necks plastered with white. They wore short
camlet cloaks, and exhibited airs of the utmost freedom
and boldness. At the first glance Bi nconete and Cortadillo

Ti T — rfc» . « TTtTftY i T .^ -- „, . ,||,, ,,

coulq L^a.ignaJt> waa im numfliMORgf jth^se, women. Tliey had
no sooner entered, than they hurried with ^en arms, the one
to Chiquiznaque^he other to Maniferro ; these were the two
bravos, one of whom bore the latter name because he had an
iron hand, in place of one of his own, which had been cut off
by the hand pf justice. These two men embraced the girlS
with great glee, and inquired if t^f^y hml brft^^iyhf. ^ho whprA-

^'t.hal, tn mniatifi;n^jtbeJr.ih£.Qa.t3>. " How could we thlnF^

neglecting that, old blade !" replied one of the girls, who
was called Gananciosa.f *l&il«atUlOj^your scout, wi^JjfiJbfiJ*©^
beforaJk^n g with ^leclothes-basket, crammed with whatever
good luck has senTusT' ^ ' ""

And true it was ; for an jnstant afterwards^j a boyjjntered
'Sj^^T^^SQ^^S^SSL^QVQS^yf\\K\ sheet'.', '

The whole company renewed their rejoicings on the arrival
of Silvatillo, and Monipodio instantly ordered that one of the
mats should be brought from the neighbouring chamber, and
laid out in the centre of the court. Furthermore he com-

* Our readers will perceive that this relates to the atrocity com-
mitted by the Infant Don Juan of Castille, who, while in revolt against
his brother, Sancho IV., appeared before the city of Tarifa with an
army, chiefly composed of Mahometans; finding the infant son of
the governor, Don Alonzo Perez de Guzman, at nurse in a neighbour-
ing village, he took the child, and bearing him to the foot of the
walls, called on Ouznian to surrender the place on pain of seeing his
infant slaughtered before his eyes in case of refusal. The only reply
vouchsafed bv Don Alonzo was the horrible one alluded to in the text.
He detached his own dagger from its belt, and threw it to Don Juan«
when the sanguinary monster, far from respecting the fidelity of his
opponent, seized the weapon, and pierced the babe to the heart as he
had threatened to do This anecdote is related, with certain varia-
tions, in Conde, ''La Dominacion de los Arabes en Espana." — See
English Translation, vol. iii.

f The winner.


C6 CEBVAKTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

manded that all the brotherhood should take places around it,
in order that while they were taking the wrinkles out of their
stomachs, they might talk about business.

To this proposal the old woman, who had been kneeling
before the image, replied, '^Monipodio, my son, I am not
in the humour to keep festival this morning, for during the
last two days I have had a giddiness and pain in my head,
that go near to make me mad ; I must, besides, be at our
Lady of the Waters before mid-day strikes, having to accom-
plish my devotions and offer my candles there, as well as at
the crucifix of St. Angus tin ; for I would not fail to do either,
even though it were to snow all day and blow a hurricane.
What I came here for is to tell you, that last night the
EeiiegatTe and' CentipecIeTirought to my house a basket so9fe*»
Avhat larger than that now before us ; it was as full as it
t;ould hold of fine linen, and, on my life and soul, it was
still wet and covered with soap, just as they had taken it from
under the nose of the washerwoman, so that the poor fellows
were perspiring and breathless beneath its weight. It would
have melted your heart to see them as they came in, with
the water streaming from their faces, and they as red as a
couple of cherubs. They told me, besides, that they were
in pursuit of a cattle-dealer, who had just had some sheep
weighed at the slaughter-house, and they were then hastening
off to see if they could not contrive to grab a great cat*
which the dealer carried with him. They could not, there-
fore, spare time to count the linen, or take it out of the basket,
but they relied on the rectitude of my conscience; and so may
God grant my honest desires, and preserve us all from the power
of justice, as these fingers have refrained from touching the
basket, which is as full as the day it was born."

" We cannot doubt it, good mother," rej^Iifid-Monipodio,
" Let tha basket remain where it is ; I will comg^at nightfall
to fetch it away, and will then ascertain the <juantity and
jgtmlity of its contents, giving to every one the portion due
to liim, faithfully and truly, as it is my habit to do.*^ -— - -

"Let tr b6 as you shall command," rejoined the old
woman; **and now, as it is getting late, give me something
to drink, if you have it there — something that will comfort
this miserable stomach, w^hich is almost famishing for want,"

* A large purse made of cat* skin.


"I

t


BINCONETE AND COBTADILLO. 67

"That you shall have, and enough of it, mother/* ex-
claimed Escalanta, the companion of Gananciosa; and,
uncovering the basket, she displayed a great leather bottle,
containing at least two arrobas* of wine, with a cup made of
cork, in which you might comfortably carry off an azumbre,|
or honest half-gallon of the same. This Escalanta now filled,
and placed it in the hands of the devout old woman, who took
it in both her own, and, having blown away a little froth from
the surface, she said, —

'^ You have poured out a large quantity, Escalanta, my
daughter ; but God will give me strengthc" Whereupon,
without once taking breath, and at one draught, she poured
the whole from the cup down her throat. " It is real Guadal-
canal,":!: said the old woman, when she had taken breath;
" and yet it has just \tmy smack of the gypsum, God
comfort you, my daughter, as you have -comforted me; I
am only afraid that the wine may do me some mischief, seeing
that I have not yet broken my fast."

" No, mother ; it will do nothing of the kind," returned
Monipodio, " for it is three years old at the least."

" May the Virgin grant that I find it so," replied the
old woman. Then turning to the girls, "See, children,"
she said " whether you have not a few maravedis to buy the
candles for my offerings of devotion. I came away in so
much haste, to bring the news of the basket of linen, that
I forgot my purse, and left it at home."

"Yes, Dame Pipota," — such was the name of the old
woman, — " I have some," replied Gananciosa ; " here are
two cuartos for you, and with one of them I beg you to
buy a candle for me, which you will offer in my name to
the Seiior St. Michael, or if you can get two with the money,
you may place the other at the altar of the Sefior St. Bias,
for those two are my patron-saints, I also wish to give one
to the Senora Santa Lucia, for whom I have a great devotion,
on account of the eyes;§ but I have no more change

♦ The arroba holds about thirty- two pinter.

{The azumbre is two quarts.
A favourite wine, grown on the shore of the Manzanares.
§ The Virgin Martyr, Santa Lucia, had her eves burnt out of
her head^ and is regarded, in the Catholic Church, as particularly
powerful in the cure of all diseases of the eves. She is usually
represented as bearing her eyes on a salver, which she holds in her
iuuid.

F 2


N.


68 CEBTANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

to-day, BO it must be put off till another time, when I
will square accounts with all."

'^ And you will do well, daughter/' replied the old woman.
** Don't be niggard, mind. It is a good thing to carry one's
own candles before one dies, and not to wait until they are
offered by the heirs and executors of our testament."

^^ You speak excellently. Mother Pipota," said Escalanta;
and, putting her hand into her pocket, she drew forth a cuarto,
which she gave the old woman, requesting her to buy two
candles for her likewise, and offer them to such saints as she
considered the most useful and the most likely to be grateful.
With this old Pipota departed, saying,

" Enjoy yourselves, my dears, now while you have time, for
old age wUl come and you will then weep for the moments
you may have lost in your youth, as I do now. Commend me
to God in your prayers, and I will remember you, as well as
myself, in mine, that he may keep us all, and preserve us in this
dangerous trade of ours from all the terrors of justice." These
words concluded, the old woman went her way.

Dame Pipota "Raving dfsappeared, all seated themselves
rounS the mat, which Gananciosa covered with the sheet,
in place of a table-cloth. The first thing she drew from the
basket was an immense bunch of radishes ; this was followed
by a couple of dozens or more of oranges and lemons ; then
y^ ^ came a great earthen pan filled with slices of fried ling, half a

^^ ^ Dutch cheese, a bottle of excellent olives, a plate of shrimps,

> ^ and a large dish of craw-fish, with their appropriate sauce of

{ * capers, drowned in pepper-vinegar : three loaves of the whitest

bread from Gandul completed the coUation. The number
of guests at this breakfast was fourteen, and not one of
them failed to produce his yellow-handled knife, Binconete
alone excepted, who drew his dudgeon dagger instead. The
two old men in serge gowns, and the lad who had been the
guide of the two friends, were charged with the office of cup-
bearers, pouring the wine from the bottle into the cork cup.

But scarcely had the quests taken their places, bdTore
they were ^ all . atartlfid, and sprang iip in haste aniTe
sound of rep eated knocks at the door. Bidding them remain
quiet, Monipodlo went into one of the lower rooms, unhooked
a buclder, took his sword in his hand, and, going to the door,
inquired, in a rough and threatening voic«, ** Who ts thereP


c*-


;1


^

A


BINCONETE AND CORTADILLO. 69

** All right Senor! it is I, Tagarote,* on sentry this morn-
ing," replied a voice from without. " I com e to tell you that
Juliana de Carihartat ia.£oming, withTieTTTair "all about Tier
face, and cryin^her eyes out, a3 though some greafmisfortune

had happened to hep*" ""^

He had scarcely spoken when the girl he had named ^
came sobb ing to the door, which IVfonippdio opened for her,
"commancGng Tagarote to return to his post; and ordering him,
moreover, to make less noise and uproar when he should next
bring notice of what was going forward, — a command to which
th e bov p romised attention.

rCariharta, a girl of the same class and profession withX
those already in presence, had meanwhile entered the court, \
her hair streaming in the wind, her eyes swollen with tears, \
and her face covered with contusions and bruises. She had |
no sooner got into the Patio, than she fell to the ground I
in a fainting fit. Gananciosa and Escalantaf sprang to her /
assistance, unfastened her dress, and found heY breast and /
shoulders blackened and covered with marks of violenceiy
After they had thrown water on her face, she soon came to
• herself, crying out as she did so, " The justice of God and
the king on that shameless thief, that cowardly cut-purse,
and dirty scoundrel, whom I have saved from the gibbet more
times than he has hairs in his beard. Alas ! unhappy creature
that I am ! see for what I have squandered my youth, and
spent the flower of my days ! For an unnatural, worthless,
uad incorrigible villain !"

" Recover yourself, and be calm, Cariharta," said Moni*
podio ; " I am here to render justice to you and to all. Tell
me your cause of complaint, and you shall be longer in
relating the story than I will be in taking vengeance. Let
me know if anything has happened between you and your
respeto;^ and if you desire to be well and duly avenged*
You have but to open your mouth."

« Prnt^^;(^r \ " ^Mlftiy ed. jhg girl. « What kind of a

♦ The quill-driyer.

f Fat-face, puff-cheeks, or any other term describing fulness
of face, in the least complimentary manner.

X The clamherer.

§ Protector, or more exactly " bully," — ^to defend and uphold in
acts of fraud and violenoe.


70 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

protecto rjs-he ? It were better for me to be protected
m hell than to remain any longer with that lion among
sheep, and sheep among men! Will I_eyer eat again with
him at the same table, or live under'the same roof? Rather
"would I give this flesh of mine, which he has put into the
state you shall see, to be devoured alive by raging beasts.''
'^o saying, she pulled up her petticoats to her knees, and even
a little higher, and showed the wheals with which she was
covered. "That's the way," she cried, "that I have been
treated by that ungrateful Repolido,* who owes more to me
than to the mother that bore him.

"And why do you suppose he has done this? Do you
think I have given him any cause? — no, truly. Hi s only
reason for serving me so jwasj^that being at^lay and los ing hi s
money, he sent Cabrillas, his scout, to me for thirty reals, and
'T^couU only send him twenty-four. May the pjuns and
troubles with wTiTch I earned them be counted to me by
heaven in remission of my sins ! But i n return for this
civility and kindness, fancying that I had kept back part of
what he chose to think I had got, the blackguard lurednnro*
out to the fields this morning, beyond the king's garden, •
and there, having' stripped me among the olive trees^ n"e took
off iis_belti not even removing the iron buckle-r-oh that I
may see him clapped in irons and chains ! — and with that he
gave me such an unmerciful flogging, that he left me for dead;
and that's a true story, as the marks you see bear witness."

Here Cariharta once more set up her pipes and craved for
justice, which was again promised to her by Monipodio and all
the bravos present.

The Gananciosa then, tried her hand at consoling the
vjctim^.saymg to her, among other things — "I would freely
p;ivemy best gow n that my fancy man had done, as mucir"by
_me ; for I would have you know, sister Cariharta, if you
don't know it yet, that he who lov fis best i brashes Jbestj and
when these scoundrels whack us and kick us, it is then they
most devoutly adore us. Tell me now, on our life, after
having beaten and abused you, did not Repolido make much
of you, and give you more than one caress ? "

" More than one !" replied the weeping girl ; " he gave

• Dandy.


^


niNCOX£T£ AXD CORTADILLO. 71

me more than a hundred thousmidy and would have given
a finger off his hand if I would only have gone with him
to his posada ; nay, I even think that the tears were almost
starting from his eyes after he had leathered me."

" Not a doubt of it," replied Gananciosa ; " and lie would
weep now to see the state he has put you into : for men like
him have scarcely committed the fault before repentance begins.
You will see, sister, if he does not come here to look for you
before we leave the place ; and sec if he does not beg you
to forgive what has passed, and behave to you as meek and
as humble as a lamb."

"By my faith," observed Monipodio, "the cowardly
ruffian shall not enter these doors until he has made
full reparation for the offence he has committed. How
dare he lay a hand on poor Cariharta, who for cleanliness
and industry is a match for Gananciosa herself, and that is
saying everything."

not speak too sever^] [y_ of the y^i'^er^M*^. fellQw; for, ijacd^as^
^he i s, 1 cann ot but love him as I do the very folds of my heart;
and the words spoken in his behalf by my friend Gananciosa
have restored the soul to my body. Of a truth, if I consulted
only my own wishes, I should go this moment and look for him."

"No, no," rep lied Ganancio sa, (*you shall not do so by
my counsel ; for to do' tliat would make him proud ; he
would think too much of himself, and would make expe-
riments upon you as on a dead body. Kggg^uiet, sister,
and in a short time you will see him here repenlaht^ "as I
Tjave^aid; an d ifnotj we wHI writ e verses on hi m th at shall
make him roar with rage ."

"Let us write by all means," returned Juliana, "for I
have a thousand things to say to him."

" And I will be yoiur secretary, if need be,'* re join ed,
MoT^^pndjn . " for although I am no poet, yet a man has but
to tuck up the sleeves of his shirt, set well to work, and
he may turn off a couple of thousand verses in the snapping
of a pair of scissors. Besides, if the rhymes should not come
so readily as one might wish, I have a friend close by ,a barber,
who is a great poet, and will trim up the ends of the verses
at an hour's notice. At present, h owever, let us go finish our
rejiast^alUhe rest cm be done afterwards.*'


\


\


^.y


72 CEBVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALKS.

Juliana was not unwilling to obey her superior, so they
all fell to again at the 0-be-joyful with so much goodwill
that they soon saw the bottom of the basket and the dregs of
the great leather bottle. The old ones drank tinefine^ the
younger men to their hearts* content, and the ladies till they
could drink no more. When all was consum eda_Jhe twojold
men beg g ed pe rmiaaion fo t^lte their l^ave, which Hpnipodia
allowed: tnem to do^^^l^ut charged them to return punctually,*
for the purpose of reporting all they should see or hear that
could be useful to the brotherhood ; they assured him they
would by no means fail in their duty, and then departed.

After these gentlemen had left the company, Binconete,
who was of a very inquiring disposition, begged leave to ask
Monipodio in what way two persons so old, grave, and formal
as those he had just seen, could be of service to their commu-
nity. Monipodio replied, that such were called " Hornets" in
their jargon, and that their office was to poke about all parts
of the city, spying out such pla ces a s mj^ht be..filigible for
j attemj^ts Jo be afterwards made in the night- time. ^* They
watch people whoj*eceive money from the bank of treasury/'
he, " observe where they go with it, and, if possible, the
very place in which it is deposited. When this is done, they
make themselves acquainted with the thickness of the walls,
marking out the spot where we may most conveniently make
our guzpataroSy which are the holes whereby we contrive to
force an entrance. In a word, these persons are among the
most useful.of the brotherhood : and they receive a fifth of all
that the community obtains by their intervention, as his
majesty does, on treasure trove. They are, moreover, men of
singular integrity and rectitude. They lead a respectable life,
and enjoy a good reputation, fearing God and regarding the
voice of their consciences, insomuch that not a day passes over
their heads in which they have not heard mass with extraor-
dinary devotion. There are, indeed, some of them so con-
scientious, that they content themselves with even less than by
our rules would be their due. Those just gone are of this
number. We have two others, whose trade it is to remove
furniture ; and as they are daily employed in the conveyance
of articles for persons who are changing their abode, they know
all the ins and outs of every house in the city, and can tell
exactly where we may hope for profit and where not#


RINCONETB AND CORTADILLO. ^3

" That is all admirable/' replied Binconete, *' and greatly
do I desire to be of some use to so noble a confraternity."

" Heaven is always ready to favour commendable desires,"
replied Monipodio.

While the two we re thus diypuraiTiy,^ k pQ£^ was heard
at the^door^ and MonipodiQ vent Jo see, who might be tliere.
^Upen, 5or* Monipodio — open/' said a voice without ;""**'Tr
is I, Repolido."

Cariharta hearing this voice, began to lift up her own to
heaven, and cried out, " Don't open the door, Sefior Moni-
podio; don't let in that Tarpeian mariner — that tiger of
Ocana." f

Monipod io opened the door, nevertheless, in despite of
her cries ; wne n XJariharta, starting to her fefit^Jbilitried away,-
and hid hersel? in tKe room where the bucklers were "Bung
\ip. Tfl ^yfi, b^ltlftfi^ fflfi dCSfT she "Bawled from BSTTBTOg^
" Lirive out that biack-visaged coward, that murderer of inno-
cents, that white-livered terror of house-lambs, who durst not
look a man in the face."

Repolido was meanwhile kept back by Maniferro and
Chiquiznaque, as he struggled with all his might to get
into the room where Cariharta was hidden. But when he saw
that to be impossible, he called to her from without, " Come,
come, let us have done with this, my little sulky ; by your
life, let us have peace, as you would wish to be married."
** Married !" retorted the lady, " married to you too ! Don't
you wish you may get it ? See what kind of a string he's
playing on now. I would rather be married to a dead noto-
my." " Oh, bother !'* exclaimed Repolido ; ** let us have done
with this, for it is getting late ; take care of being too muck
puffed up at hearing me speak so gently, and seeing me so
meek; for, by the light of heaven, if my rage shotdd get
steeple-high, the relapse will be worse than the first fit. Come"
down from your stilts, let us all have done witb our tantrums,
and not give the devil a dinner."

* 8or the contraction of Senor.

t " Ocafia *' is a city at no ffreat distance from Madrid ; and if
the lady has placed her tiger there, instead of in Hyrcania, as she
doubtless intended, it is of course because her emotions had troubled
her memory. The " Tarpeian mariner" is a fine phrase surely, but
its meaning is not very clear.


74 CERTAKTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

'^I will give him a supper to boot, if he will take you
from my sight to some place where I may never set eyes on
you more," exclaimed the gentle Juliana from within.

'' Haven't I told you once to beware, Madame Hemp-sack ?
By the powers, I suspect I must serve out something to you
by the dozen, though I make no charge for it."

Here Monipodio interposed: '^In my presence," he said,
*^ there shall be no violence. ' Cariharta will come out, not for
your threats, but for my sake, and all will go well. Quarrels
between people who love each other are but the cause of
greater joy and pleasure when peace is once made. Listen to
me, Juliana, my daughter ; listen to me, my Cariharta* Come
out to us, for the love of your friend Monipodio, and I will
make Repolido beg your pardon on his knees."

'^ Ah ! if he will do that," exclaimed Escalanta, ^^ we shall
then be all on his side, and will entreat Juliana to come out/'

" If I am asked to beg pardon in a sense of submiHnon
that would dishonour my person," replied Bepolido^ " an army
of lansquenets would not make me consent; but if it be
merely in the way of doing pleasure to Cariharta, I do not say
merely that I would go on my knees, but I would drive a nail
into my forehead to do her service."

At these words Chiquiznaqueand Maniferro began tolaugh^
and Bepolido, who thought they were making game of him,
cried out in a transport of rage, " Whoever shall laugh or think
of laughing at anything whatsoever that may pass between
Cariharta and myself, I say that he lies, and that he will have
lied every time he shall laugh or think of laughing.''

Hearing this, Chiquiznaque and Maniferro looked at each
other and scowled so sternly, that Monipodio saw things
were likely to come to a crisis unless he prevented it. Throw-
ing himself, therefore, into the midst of the group, he cried out,
'^No more of this, gentlemen ! have done with all big words;
grind them up between your teeth; and since those that
have been said do not reach to the belt, let no one here
apply them to himself."

"We are very sure," replied Chiquiznaque, "that such
admonitions neither have been nor will be uttered for our
benefit ; otherwise, or if it should be imagined that they
were addressed to us, the tambourine is in hands that
would well know how to beat it."


EIXCON'ETE AND COllTADILLO. 75

** We also, Sor Chiquiznaqite, have our drum of Biscay,"
retorted Repolido, " and, in case of need, can make the bells
ring as well as another. I h&vo already said, tljat whoever
lests in our matters is a liar: and whoever thinks otherwise, let
him follow me ; with a palm's length of my sword I will show
him that what is said is said." Having uttered these words,
Repolido turned towards the outer door, and proceeded to
leave the place.

Cariharta had meanwhile been listening to all this, and
when she found that Repolido was departing in anger, she
rushed out, screaming, " Hold him, hold him, — don't let him
go, or he will be showing us some more of his handiwork ;
can't you see that he is angry ? and he is a Judas Macarelo
in the iftatter of bravery. Come here, Hector of the world
and oi my eyes ! " With these words, Cariharta threw herself
upon ihe retiring bravo, and held him with all her force by
his cloak. Monipodio lent her his aid, and between them they
contrived to detain him.

Chiquiznaque and Maniferro, undetermined whether to

resume the dispute or not, stood waiting apart to see what

/ niApn]ifl/> would do, and the latter perceiving himself to be in

the hands of Monipodio and Cariharta, exclaimed. ^^ Fr iends

should nftyfti^T]oj^friftnda^ TinrjnftV^ ga^^ (>f frjfjpfly^ mnrft

especially wlyn thex.s ee t]aa^> frifindfl aro^Vfiyftd .!!....

" There is not a friend here," replied . Maniferro, " who
has any desire to vex a friend ; and since we are all friends, let
j us give each other the hand like friends." " Your worships
i have all spoken like good friends," added Monipodio, " and as
\ such friends should do ; now finish by giving each other your
Vhands like true friends."

All obeyed instantly, ^hereupon Escalanta. whippin jy o ff
jrcork-soled clog, began to play upon it as if it had been a
tambourine! Q anancig ^sa^m her turn, caught up b brooniy
and, scratchigg^tfe rijabes "with her fogers, drew forth a
sound which, if nol'sofd or sweelTyet agreed very well with
the beating of the slipper. Mppipod ip^th.enJxrgke aplatej the
t;:£ofragments of which he rattled toffether in such" fashion
as to maKe a very praiseworthy accompaniment to the slipper
and the broom.

Rinconete and Cortadillo stood in much admiration of that
new invention of the broom, for up to that time they had seen


76 CEBYAKTES' EXEMPLAllT TALES.

nothing like it. Maniferro perceived their amazement, and
said to them, ''The broom awakens your admiration, — and
well it may, since a more convenient kind of instrument was
never invented in this world, nor one more readily formed,
or less costly. Upon my life, I heard a student the other day
affirm, that neither the man who fetched his wife out of hell —
Negrofeo, Ogrofeo, or what was he called — ^nor that Marion
who got upon a dolphin, and came out of the sea like a
liian riding on a hired mule — ^nor even that other great
musician who built a city with a hundred gates and as many
posterns — ^never a one of them invented an instrument half so
easy of acquirement, so ready to the touch, so pleasing and
simple as to its frets, keys, and chords, and so far from
troublesome in the tuning and keeping in accord ; and by all
the saints, they swear that it was invented by a gallant of this
very city, a perfect Hector in matters of music."

" I fully believe all you say," replied Binconete, " but let
us listen, for our mu sicians are about to sing. Gananciosa
is blowing her nose, which is a certain sign that she means
to sing,"

And she was, in fact, preparing to do so. Monipodio had
requested her to give the company some of the Seguidillas
most in vogue at the moment. But the first to begin was
Escalanta, who sang as follows, in a thin squeaking voice: —

*' For a boy of Sevilla,
Red as a Dutchman,
All my heart's in flame."

To which Gananciosa replied, taking up the measure as

she best might*^

** For the little brown lad,
With a good bright eye.
Who woidd not lose her name?'*

Then Monipodio, making great haste to perform a symphony
with his pieces of platter, struck in —

•* Two lovers dear, fall out and fight,

But soon, to make their peace, take leisure;
And all the greater was the row.

So much the greater is the pleasure."

But Cariharta had no mind to enjoy her recovered
happiness in silenco and fingering another clog^ she also


RINCONETB AND COBTADILLO.


entered the dance, joining her voice to those of her friends,
in the following words


^ Pause, angry lad ! and do not beat me more,

For 'tis thine own dear flesh that thou dost baste,
If thou but well consider, and-^ "

**Fair and soft," exclaimed Bepolido, at that moment^
** give us no old stories, there's no good in that. Let
bygones be bygones ! Choose another gait, girl ; we've had
enough of that one."

The canticle, for a moment interrupted by these words,
was about to recommence, and ^oiild not, apparently, have
soon come to an end. had not the performers been disturbed
by vi^if^nf. irnocto ^ ^*^ Tf^fHL Monipodio hastened to see
who was th ere, and found one o f lua sentoels^ who informed
5lSIS^a^ ^e'end of the street was th^aloaJdaiitprimlna^
ji[}gJticfi»^ith theuttle Jfiebald and the Kestrel (two catchpolls,
who were called neutral, since they did the community of
robbers neither good nor harm), marching before him.

The joyous company within -h eard the report of their
scout, and were.in a iern ble t'rightr Escalanta and Cariharta
put on their clogs in "greaThaste, Gananciosa threw down her
broom, and Monipodio his broken plate, every instrume nt
s inking at on ce into silence. Chiquiznaque Ml his joyous
gnn, ana stoo^^'*3iiinB'" as a fish ; Bepolido trembled with
fear, and Maniferro looked pale with anxiety. But these
various demonstrations were exhibited only for a moment, —
in the next, all that goodly brotherhood liad disappeared.
Some rushed across a kind of terrace, and gained another
iiourt ; others clambered over the roof, and so passed into a
neighbouring alley. ^^everjdid^itbft.flnillMi.^, ^ fesiJflS pteee,
iSLJ^ suddfi© peal of thunder, more effectually disperse a flock
)f car eless pigeons^ than did the news of the alcalde g arriv^)
l^^^eet .company assem bled in the house of the Sefior
fompodioi Kinconete and CortaSiUo, not knowing whither to
jflSe, siood in their places waiting to see what would be the
end of that sudden storm, which flnished simply ^lough
by the return of the sentinel, who came to say that the alcaldj
had passed through the whole Jfiijgth jc^ the s tre et without
s eeming to have_any troublesome gtu^picions respecting them,
or even appearmg to think of their house at all.

While Monipodio was in the act of receiving this last report,

~^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^*'*^"~~ ~~" ■ I i n I ' I 1 11 m il ^>iiiTi IP urn III! I n'ni^i i^iiii»>p i w iiiiM ^i nj _j i^*M» —


78 CEBVANTES' EXEMPLART TALES,

there came to ^ }] p door g. p ^ftntleman in the prime of youth, and
dressed in the half-rustic manner^suitable to the morning, or
to one residing in the country, Monipodio caused this person
to enter the house with himself; he then sent to look for
Chiquiznaque, Kepolido, and Maniferro, with orders that
they should come forth from their hiding places, but that
such others as might be with them should remain where they
were.

Jlinconete and Cortadillo h aving remained in the . gfiUCli
could hear all the conversation which took place ,l)et\veeil —
MonipodTo aril the gentleman wHoTiad^ust arrived, and who
'b^egaii Tjy inquiring, how it happened that the job heHaCt*^

"tJrdered b^id Jbeea^^so. badly . done. At this point of^the
colloquy, Chiquiznaque appeared, and Monipodio asked him
if he had accomplished the work with which he had been
entrusted — ^namely, the knife-slash of fourteen stitches,*

*^ Which of them "was li'^ inquired Chiquiznaque " that
of the merchant at the Cross-ways ?" "Exactly," replied the
gentleman. "Then I'll t«ll you how the matter went,"
responded the bravo. "Last night, as I watched before
the very door of his house, and the man appeared just
before to the ringing of the Ave Matia, 1 got near
him, and took the measure of his face with my eyes ;
but I perceived it was so small that it was impossible,
totally impossible, to find room in it for a cut of
fourteen stitches. So that, perceiving myself unable to fulfil
my destructions" — "Instructions you mean," said the gentle-
man; — "Well, well, instructions if you will," admitted
Chiquiznaque, — "seeing that I could rrot fin^l room for th^
nu mber^ of stitchfia. Ibadia niake» .because of the n arrow ness,
Isay^jand.want of space in the visage of the merchant, l,gaye
the cut tq_ a lacqugy, Jbfi.had witk him, to the end that I
might not have my journey for nothing; and certainly his

, allowance may pass for one of the best quality."

" I would rather you had given the master a cut of seven
stitches than the servant one of fourteen," remarked the
gentleman. " You have not fulfilled the promise made me, but
the thirty ducats which I gave you as earnest money, will be

* "At that time," remarks Viardot, "while wounds were stiU
sewed up by the surgeons, the importance or extent of the cut made
was estimated by the number of the stitches."


niNCONETE AND CORTADILLO. 7fc

HO great loss." This said, he saluted the two ruffians and turned
to depart, but Monipodio detained him by the cloak of mixed
cloth which he wore on his shoulders, saying : " Be pleased to
stop, Seiior cavalier, and fulfil your promise, since we have kept
our word with strict honour and to great advantage. JTwenty
ducats are still wantini^ to our bargain, and your 'worship

-WTall not go irom thk place 4UitiI yoxL hay^^aid them, or left
as som etlirng nf oqiiftl vftln^ in pledge/'

"" ^o yo" fi ^^ll tl^is Wp^n£j_9^!^ wqrd^lsaid thfiLgeptleman,
« TYii^^^jppp a 5>nt ^*^ t^i^ s'^rvanti when you should have made it

on the niastfitJ "
""■""^^'How well his worship understands the business," re^

marked Chiquiznaque. " One can easily see that he does hot

remember the proverb which says : • * He who loves Beltitin,


f n


loves his dog likewise.* I -h

"But what has this proverb to do with the matter ?"\ (^r '^''^Hr^'
inquired the gentleman, / "] ^

"Why, is it not the same thing as to say, *He who loves » ^^^ h
Beltran ill, loves his dog ill too ? Now the master is Beltran,
whom you love ill, and the servant is his dog ; thus in giving
the cut to the dog I have given it to Beltran, and our part
of the agreement is fulfilled; the work has been properly done,
and nothing remains but to pay for it on the spot and without
further delay."

" That is just what I am ready to swear to,*' cried Moni*
podio; "and you, friend Chiquiznaque, have taken all that
you have said from my mouth ; wherefore let not your wor*
ship, Seiior gallant, be making difficulties out of trifies with
your friends and servants. Take my g^dvi y^ apd W¥ "^ ^h^^- ^^
,our due. After^tliat|if^ur.y\rorshij3LT?o^^^
cul'given to the masf^*^ of a^ jgj&ftX-Stitches^a the^pafieuaA
contain, consider that thfiy.jM:e already fteaiijigjip the wound."

"If it he sn." aa.id tl^^ ^pTitlem3 % "X:g iliyery^iKillingly
pa y the whole sum .

" Make no more doubt of it than of my being a good
Christian, for Chiquiznaque will set the mark on his face so
neatly, that he shall seem to have been bom with it."

" On this promise, then, and with this assurance/' replied the
gentleman, "receive this chain in pledge for the twenty ducats
before agreed on, and for forty other ducats which I will give
you for the cut that is to come. The chain weighs a thou-


80 qSRYAKTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

sand reals, and it may chance to remain with you altogetheiv
as I have an idea that I shall want fourteen stitches more
before long."

Saying this, he took a chain from his neck, and put it into
the hands of Monipodio, who found immediately by the weight
and touch that it was not gold made by the chemist, but the
irue metal. He received it accordmgly with great pleasure
and much courtesy, for Monipodio was particularly well-bred.
The execution of the work to be done for it was committed to
Ohiquiznaque, who declared that it should be delayed no
longer than till the arrival of night. TJig^^^ntlenuHi. tbfift^
departed, well satisfied with his bargain.

onipodio now summoned the confraternity from the
hiding places into which their terror had driven them.
When all had entered, he placed himself in the midst of them,
drew forth a memorandum book from the hood of his doak,
and as he himself could not read, be handed it to Einconete,
who opened it, and agad.jaL9>fQlJowa : — ^ " * *^

" Memoranda of the cuts to be given this week.

" The first is to the merchant at the Cross- ways, and is
worth fifty crowns, thirty of which have been received on
account. Secutor,* Ohiquiznaque.

" I believe there are no others, my son," said Monipodio ;
** go on and look for the place where it is written, * Memo-
randa of blows with a cudgel.' " Rinconete turned to that
heading, and found under it this entry : — " To the keeper of
the pot-house called the Trefoil, twelve blows, to be laid oa
in the best style, at a crown a-piece, eight of which
crowns have been received ; time of execution, within six days.
tSecutoTy Maniferro."
• " That article may be scratched out of the account," re-
marked Maniferro, ^^ for to-night I shall give the gentleman
his due."

**Is there not another, my son ?" asked Monipodio.

" There is," replied Rinconete, and he read as follows : —

" To the hunch-backed Tailor, called by the nick-name
Silguero, f six blows of the best sort for the lady whom he
compelled to leave h^ necklace in pledge with him. JSecutor^
the Desmochado." J

* Secutor for executor. f The goldfinch.

t The lop-eared, or mutilated; alludiog, generally,.to losses sufiDered
at the hands of justice.


RINCONETE AND CORTADILLO. 81

•* 1 am surprised to find this article still ou tlie account,"
observed Monipodio, ** seeing that two days have elapsed since
it ought to have been taken off the book ; and yet the secutor
has not done his work. Desmochado must be indisposed.*'

<* I met him yesterday," said Maniferro. " He is not ill
himself, but the Hunchback has been so, and being confined to
the house on that account, the Desmochado has been unable
to encounter him."

" I make no doubt of it," rejoined Monipodio, " for I con-
sider the Desmochado to be so good a workman, that but for
some such reasonable impediment he would certainly before
this have finished a job of much greater importance. Is there
any more, my boy?" "No, Senor," replied Binconete.
" Turn over, then, till you find the * Memorandum of miscel-
laneous damages.' "

Rinconete found the page inscribed "Memorandum oi
miscellaneous damages," namely, Badomagos,* greasing with
oil of juniper, clapping on sanbenitosf and horns, false
alarms, threatened stabbings, befoolings, eahmeUfX &c. &c.

" What do you find lower down ? " inquired Monipodio.

" I find, * Greasing with oil of juniper at the house in ' "

** Don't read the place or name of the house," interrupted Moni-
podio, " for we know where it is, and I am myself the tuautem
and secutor of this trifling matter ; four crowns have already
been given on account, and the total is eight." "^hat is exactly
what is here written," replied Einconete. "A little lower
down," continued the boy, " I find, ' Horns to be attached to

the house ' " " Bead neither the name nor the place where,"

interrupted Monipodio. " It is quite enough that we off*er
this outrage to the people in question ; we need not make it
public in our community, for that would be an unnecessary
load on your consciences. I would rather nail a hundred
horns, and as many sanbenitos, on a man's door, provided I
were paid for my work^ than once tell that I had done so^

* Radomagos, phials or bottles of ink, vitriol, and other injurious
matters, cast on the face, person, or clothes.

t Most of our readers will remember that the "saubenito " is the
long coat or robe, painted oyer with flames, which is worn by heretics
whom the Inquisition has condemned and given over to the civil
power.

X Calomels, for calumnies

a


82 ckrVamtes' exemplary tales.

were it to the mother that bore me." " The executor of thw

IS Nariqueta,"* resumed Binconete. " It is already done and

paid for/' said Monipodio ; '* see if there be not something

else, for if my memory is not at fault, there ought to be a

fright of the value of twenty crowns. One half the money

V ; has already been paid, and the work is to be done by the

. \o^'- whole community, the time within which it is to come

/^' ^ "^ ^ ^ off being all the current month. Nor will we fail in our

/* ) duty; the commission shall be fulfilled to the very letter

) ^ without missing a tilde,f and it will be one of the finest

^ ^^- things that has been executed in this city for many years.

^ -) Give me the book, boy. I know there is nothing more,

y and it is certain that business is very slack with us just now ;

I. \ \^* but times will mend, and we shall perhaps have more to do

J than we want. There is not a leaf on the tree that moves

without the will of God, and we cannot force people to

avenge themselves, whether they will or not. Besides,

many a man has the habit of being brave in his own cause,

and does not care to pay for the execution of work which

he can do as well with his own hands."

" That is true," said Repolido ; " but will your worship,
Senor Monipodio, see what you have for us to do, as it
is getting late, and the heat is coming on at more than a
foot-pace."

^* What you have now to do is this," rejoined Monipodioi:
" Every one is to return to bis post of the week, and is not
to change it until Sunday. We will then meet here again,
and make the distribution of "alTThaT sKall have "C^ftie; in,
w ithout defrauding any one. To Rineonete and Cortadillo
assign for their district, until Sunday, n*om the Tower
of Gold, a lTwIthout the city, and to the postern of the Alcazar,
where they can work with their fine flowers.J I have known
those who were much less clever than they appear to be,
come home daily with more than twenty reals in small money,
to say nothing of silver, all made with a single pack,
and that four cards short. Ganchuelo will show them the
limits of their district, and even though they should extend

* The flat-nose.

t The Hide is the mark placed over the Spanish letter n, as In
8enor.

I Tricks of cheatery at cards.


I


RINCONETB AND CORTADILLO. 83

it as far as to San Sebastian, or Santelmo, there will be no
great harm done, although it is perhaps of more equal justice
that none should enter on the domain of another/'

TJie tw o boys kissed his hand in acknowledgment of the
favour he was . OQing^Tliem';' and ^oifi! s(M" ' tU [JBiUjhii thljh
parts ze al ously and fait hfully, and with alF possib le c^To n
aiiorprudence.

Monipodio then drew from the hood of his cloak a folded
paper^ on which was the list of the brotherhood, desiring
Rinconete to inscribe his name thereon, with that of Cor-
tadillo ; but as there was no escritoire in the place, he gave
them the paper to take with them, bidding them enter the
first apothecary's shop they could find, and there write what
was needful : '^ JBiffifflnf^tfii and fiortadillo/' namely^ " com-
rades; novitiate, none; Rinconete, gt flprist; Cortadillo, a
JjaaaOfip-pIayerr*" Jo this was to be added th^,^£ar^month,
andLda]^ but not the parents or birthj^lace.
'^ ^ At tills m oifl.eut-.Qne of the. oli liornets. oam .in ..and
said, *^1 come to tell your worships that I have just now [y^iri
met on the steps, Lobillo f of Malaga, who tells me that he >. > *^^
has made such progress in his art as to be capable of cheating - f r o.^r }
Satan himself out of his monev, if he have but clean cards, ^^y j-l •><■
He is so ragged and out oi condition at this moment, that he ^/ rcf
dares not instantly make his appearance to register himself,
and pay his respects as usual, but will be here without fail
on Sunday."

" I have always been convinced," said Monipodio, " that
LobiUo would some day become supereminent in his art, for
he has the best hands for the purpose that have ever been
seen ; and to be a good workman in his trade, a man should
be possessed of good tools, as well as capacity for learning."

" I have also met the Jew," returned the hornet ; " he
wears the garb of a priest, and is at a tavern in the Street
of the Dyers, because he has learned that two PerulerosJ are
now stopping there. He wishes to try if he cannot do business
with them, even though it should be but in a trifling way to
begin ; for from small endeavours often come great achieve*
ments. He, too, will be here on Sunday, and will then give
an account of himself."

* Cutpurse. t The wolf-cub.

X For Peruyians, which the American merchants were then called.

g2


84 CERVANTES* EXEMPJJLBT TALES.

** The Jew is a keen hawk too," observed Monipodio, ** but
it is long since I have set eyes on him, and he does not do
well in staying away, for, by my faith, if he do not mend, I
will cut his crown for him. The scoundrel has received orders
as much as the Grand Turk, and knows no more Latin than
my grandmother. Have you anything further to report ? "

The old man replied that he had not. " Very well," said
Monipodio ; " Take this trifle among you," distributing at the
same time some forty reals among those assembled, *' and do
not fail to be here on Sunday, when there shall be nothing
wanting of the booty." All returned him thanks. Bepolido
and Cariharta embraced each other ; so did Maniferro and
Escalanta, and Chiquiznaque and Gananciosa ; and all agreed
that they would meet that same evening, when they left off
work at the house of Dame Fipota, whither Monipodio
likewise promised to repair, for the examination of the linen
announced in the morning, before he went to his job with the
juniper oil.

The master finally embraoed Binconete and Cortadillo,
giving them his befliedlcticai;..he then diamlsaed them, exhort-
ing them to hav^ no fixed dwelling or known habitation^"
since that w^as a precaution most important to the safety^of
all. Ganchuelo accompanied the friends for the purpose of ^
guiding them to their districts, and pointing out the limits
thereof. He warned them on no account to miss the assembly
on Sunday, when it seemed that Monipodio intended to give
them a lecture on matters concerning their profession. That
done, the lad went away, leaving the two novices in great
astonishment at all they had seen.

Now Binconete, although very young, had a good under-
standing, and much intelligence. Having often accompanied
his father in the sale of his bulls, he had acquired the know-
ledge of a more refined language than that they had JiTSt
been hearing, and laughed with aDTliis heart as he recalled
the expressions used By Mompodio, and the other members of
the respectable community they had entered. He was espe-
cially entertained by the solecising sanctimonies; and by
Cariharta calling Bepolido a Tarpeian Mariner, and a Tiger of
Ocana. He was also mightily edified by the expectation of
Oariharta that the pains she had taken to earn the twenty-four
reals would be accepted in heaven as a set-off against her


niKCONETE AND CORTABILLO* 8(1

sins, and was amazed to see with what security they all counted
on going to heaven by means of the devotions they performed,
notwithstanding the many thefts, homicides, and other offences
against God and their neighbour which they were daily com-
mitting. The boy laughed too with all his heart, as he thought
of the good old woman Pipota, who suffered the basket of
stolen linen to be concealed in her house, and then went to
place her little wax candles before the images of the saints,
expecting thereby to enter heaven full dressed in her mantle
and clogs.

But he was most surprised at the respect and deference
which all these people paid to Monipodio, whom he saw to be
nothing better than a coarse and brutal barbarian. He re-
called the various entries which he had read in the singular
memorandum-book of the burly thiei, and thought over all
the various occupations in which that goodly company was
hourly engaged. Pondering all these things, he could not
but marvel at the carelessness with which justice was admi-
nistered in that renowned city of Seville, since such pernicious
hordes and inhuman ruffians were permitted to live there
almost openly.

^ He jietermined to dissuade his companion from continuing
long in such a reprobate course ofHfe. Nevertheless, led away
Jbyms ^treme y outli, and want of experience, he remained with
these people for some months, during whicfi the re Ttap pened
to him adventures which would require mucH .writmg""to
detair them ; wherefore I propose to remit the description o f
his li fe and adventures to some other occasion^ when l will
&ls6 relate those of his master, Monipodio, with other circum-
stances connected with the members of that infamous academy^
which may serve as warnings to those who read them.


QUO or PVTBK 07 THE COBVEB AND THS LITZLB CUlTAAt


86


THE LICENTIATE VIDRIERA; on, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE.

Two students were one day passing along the banks of the
Tormes, when they found a boy, about eleven years old,
dressed as a labourer, and sleeping under a tree. They sent
a servant to wake him, and when he had well opened his eyes,
they asked him whence he came, and what he was doing, to
be lying asleep and defenceless in that lonely place. The
boy replied, that he had forgotten the name of his birthplace,
but was going to Salamanca, there to seek a master whom he
might serve, on condition of being permitted and aided to
pursue his studies.

The gentlemen then asked if he could read, and he
replied that he could, and write also.

" It is not from want of memory, then, that you have
forgotten the name of your country," remarked the students.

" Let the cause be what it may," replied the boy, " neither
that nor the name of my parents shall be known to any one
until I can do honour to them both."

" But in what manner do you propose to do them honour ?"
inquired the gentlemen.

"By the results of my studies," said the boy, "and
when I have rendered myself famous by the learning I mean to
acquire; for I have heard that some men have made themselves
bishops by their studies."

This reply moved the two gentlemen to receive the lad
into their service, and take him with them to Salamanca,
giving him* such facilities for studying as it is not unusual
for masters to afford in that university to those who serve
them.

The youth subsequently informed his masters, that they
might call him Thomas Kodaja; whence the students judged
him to be the son of some poor labourer. A day or two after
their meeting, they caused him to be clothed in a suit of
black ; and, in the course of a few weeks, he gave proof of


THE LICENTIATE YIDRIERV ; OB, DOCTOB GLASS-CASE. 87

extraordinary talent. He was, besides, very grateful, and
laboured so earnestly in the service of his masters, that
although in fact exceedingly attentive to his studies, it might
well have been thought that he did nothing but wait upon
those he served.

Now the good service of the valet led the masters to treat
Kim well ; Thomas soon became their companion rather than
servant, and, during eight years, all of which he passed with
them, he acquired for himself so high a reputation in the uni-
versity, by his great ability and excellent conduct, that he
was beloved and esteemed by those of every rank.

The principal object of Rodaja's study was the law, but
16 was almost equally distinguished in polite learning, and
his memory was matter of marvel to all ; and the correctness
rf his views on all subjects was not less remarkable.

The time had now arrived when the studies of his masters
were completed, and they returned to their birthplace, which
was one of the most important cities of Andalusia. They took
Bodaja with them, and he remained in their company for
some time; but, assailed by a perpetual longing to return to his
studies at Salamanca, — a city that enchains the will of all who
have tasted the amenities of life in that fair seat of learning —
he entreated permission of his masters to depart for that
purpose. With their usual kindness, they accorded him the
favour he desired, and took such measures in his behalf that
by their bounty he was supplied with a suflSciency to support
him in the university for three years.

Bodaja took his leave with manifest proofs of gratitude,
and departed from Malaga, for that was the native city of his
masters, without further delay. Descending the declivity of
the Zambra on the road to Antequera, he chanced to encounter
a gentleman on horseback, gaily accoutred in a rich travelling
dress, and attended by two servants, also on horseback,
whose company he joined ; their journey thenceforward
lay in the same direction, and the gentleman accepted
Thomas as his comrade.* They discoursed of various matters,
and, in a short time, Bodaja gave such proof of his quality


* Don Augustin de Arrieta, a Spanish commentator of our author,
jlfc^Tma us that the camarada not only journeyed and lived with his
•>?mpanion of the way, but even slept in the same chamber, and not
4&irequeQtly in the same bed*


88 CEBVAKTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

much delighted his fellow-traveller ; while the latter, on hia
part, soon proved himself to be a kind and courteous man.
He told Bodaja that he was a captain of infantry in the service
of the king, and that his ensign was then completing their
company at Salamanca. He praised the life of a soldier in
the liighest terms, describing, with much encomium, the many
cities and other places visited by those who lead that life.
Among other themes of which he spoke were the beauty of
Naples, the feasting and pleasures of Palermo, the rich abun-
dance of Milan, and the frequent festivals held in other parts of
Lombardy — not omitting the good cheer of the numerous
hostelries — ^in the description of which he broke forth raptu-
rously in the Tuscan language, discoursing of Maaarela, Mac^
arronif and Polastri, with the most cordial goodw^ill. He
expatiated largely on the free enjoyment of life in Itiily, and
on the pleasures of the soldier's life in general, which he
exalted to the skies ; but he did not say a word of the chilling
night-watch, the perils of the assault, the terrors of battle, the
hunger and privation endured in blockades and sieges, or the
ruin caused by mines, with other matters of similar Icind
whereof he might have spoken, but which he passed over in
silence — although there are those who would consider such
things as having something to do with the life of the soldier,
not to call them its principal features. In a word, he said so
much on the subject, that the resolution of our Thomas Bodaja
began to waver, and his inclination went near to fix itself
on that life, which is so near a neighbour to death.

The captain, whose name was Don Diego de Yaldivia,
charmed, on his part, with the handsome looks, cheerful
manners, and admirable abilities of Bodaja, entreated him to
accompany the march into Italy, were it only for the purpose
of seeing the country. He offered him his table, and even, if
he would adopt the military life, he proposed to procure
him a pair of colours ; nay, he assured him that those of
his own regiment would soon be vacant, and should be at his
service.

But little persuasion was required to induce Bodaja's
acceiptance of a part of this offer. Weighing it in his mind,
he considered that it would be well to see Italy and
Flanders, to say nothing of other countries, since travel con-
tributes to increase knowledge and discretion. He thought^


THE LICENTUTE YIBRIERA; OB, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 89

loo, that although he should spend three, or even four years in
that occupation, yet these, added to the few he then counted^
would not make him so old but that he might afterwards
return to his studies. These and other considerations had
their weight, and the opportunity being so much to his taste^
Eodaja finally told the captain that he would go with him
into Italy ; but it must be on condition of being left at perfect
liberty* He would not consent to enlist under his banner, nor
to have his name enrolled in the books of the regiment, that
he might not be subjected to the restraints of service. The
captain represented that his being inscribed on the lists was
a matter which involved no duty, and that he would thereby
obtain all the appointments, with the regular pay accorded
to his rank ; while he, Don Diego, would take care that he
should have leave of absence whenever he might demand it*
Yet Bodaja was not to be moved from his determination. " For
this," said he, " would be to act against the dictates of my
conscience and of yours, senor captain ; I would, besides, much
rather go free than be attached to military service in any
manner."

'^ A conscience so scrupulous is more suitable to the cowl
of a monk than the helmet of a soldier," said Don Diego^
laughing; ^^but let it be as you will, so we but remain
comrades."

The first night of their journey they had passed at
Antequera, and making long stages each day, they speedily
arrived at the place where the captain was to join his com-
pany. All arrangements being completed, the company began
its march with four others to Carthagena, quartering at such
places as fell in their way.

And now Bodaja could not fail to remark the authority
assumed by the commissaries; the intractable character of
many among the captains; the rapacity of the quarter-
masters, and the unreasonable nature of their demands ; the
fashion in which the paymasters managed their accounts;
the complaints of the people; the traffic in and exchange
of billets; the insolence of the undisciplined troops;
their quarrels with the other guests at the inns; the
requisition of more rations and other stores than were
rightful or necessary; and, finally, the almost inevitable
consequences of all this. Much besides came under his obser-


90 CERVANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

vation, which he could not but see to be in every way vfTOUg
and injurious.

For Bodaja himself, he had now abandoned the garb of
a student, and dressed himself parrot-fashion (as we say),
oonforming to such things as the life around him presented.
The many books he had pc^sessed were now reduced to the
" Orisons of Our Lady," and a " Garcilaso without Comments,"
which he carried in two of his pockets.

The party with which he travelled arrived at Carthag3na
much earlier than he desired, for the varied life he led was
very pleasant, and each day brought something new and
agreeable. At Carthagena the troops embarked in four g-al-
leys for Naples ; and in his cabin, also, Bodaja made m in}*
observations on the strange life passed in those maritime hc'jses,
where, for the most part, a man is devoured by vermin and
destr6yed by rats, vexed by the sailors, robbed by the galley-
slaves, and tormented by the swell of the waters. He en-
dured terrible fear from violent storms and tempests, ::iore
especially in the Gulf of Lyons, where they had two, by one
of which they were cast on the Island of Corsica, while the
other drove them back upon Toulon, in France. At 'last,
weary and half-drowned, they reached land in the darkness
of the night, and with great difficulty arrived at the most
peaceful and beautiful city of Genoa.

Having disembarked, and hastily visited a church to return
thanks for their safety, the captain with all his comrades
adjourned to a tavern, where they quickly forgot past storms
and tempests in present rejoicing and feasting.

Here they learned to appreciate the respective merits of
the different wines presented to them by their active and
voluble host ; the delicacy of Trebbiano, the fine body of
Montefiascone^ the purity of Asperino, the generous spirit
of the wines from Candia and Soma, and the strength of
those from the Cincovinas, or Five Vineyards, Neither did they
disregard the sweetness and amenity of the Senora Guarnacha,
or the rustic bloom of the Centola, not forgetting even in
this bright array the humble Bomanesco, which likewise came
in for its meed of praise.

The host having passed in review all these and other
wines, of many various qualities, offered besides to place
before his guests, without having any recourse to magic, and


THE LICENTIATE VIDRIERA; OR, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 91

not as one marks down places on a map, but in all their vivid
reality, Madriga, Coca, Alaejos, and the imperial, rather than
royal city — that favourite, abode of the god of smiles —
Ciudad Real. He furthermore offered Esquibias, Alanis,
Cazalla, Guadalcanal, and Membrilla, without forgetting the
wines of Ribadavia or of Descargamaria. At a word, the
host offered and even gave them more wines than Bacchus
himself could have stored in all his cellars.

Nor was the good Thomas unmindful of the admiration
due to the radiant locks of the Genoese maidens, renowned
for those fair tresses, while he h'kewise appreciated the obliging
and cheerful disposition of the male inhabitants, and was
never weary of expatiating on the beauty of the city itself,
which, as you look at it from the sea, appears to hold the
houses enchased amidst the rocks, as diamonds are set in gold.

The day after their arrival, such of the companies as were
destined for Piedmont were disembarked ; Rodaja, however,
had no wish to proceed thither, but determined to go from
Genoa by land to Rome and Naples, and return by the way
of Our Lady of Loretto to the great and magnificent Yenice,
and thence to Milan and Piedmont, where it was agreed that
he should rejoin Don Diego, if the latter had not previously
been compelled to set off for Flanders, as was expected.

Two days after these arrangements were made, Rodaja
took leave of the captain, and in five days from that time he
reached Florence, having first seen Lucca, a city which is small
but very well built, and one where Spaniards are more kindly
received and better treated than in any other part of Italy.

With Florence Rodaja was infinitely delighted, as well for
the pleasantness of its position as for its sumptuous buildings,
its fine river, agreeable streets, and cleanliness of aspect. He
remained there but four days, and then departed for Rome,
the queen of cities and mistress of the world, whose temples
he visited, whose relics he adored, and whose grandeur he
admired : and as from the claws of the lion you may judge of
its mass and force, so did Rodaja infer the greatness of Rome
from the fragments of her marbles — her statues, broken or
entire — her arches, fallen or fractured — her baths, crumbled
to ruin — her magnificent porticos and vast amphitheatres — her
renowned and holy river, which ever fills the banks with
water to the brim, while it blesses them with innumerable re-


02 CEBYANTBS^ EXEMPLABT TALES.

mains of the martyrs whose bodies have found a burial beneath
its waves. Nor did our traveller fail to estimate the beauty
of the bridges, which one might fancy to be admiring each
other, or the streets, which, by their very names alone, claim
authority and pre-eminence over those of all other cities in
the world: the Yia Flaminia, for example, the Yia Julia,
the Appia, and others of the same character.

No less was Bodaja satisfied with the division of those
hills which exist within the city itself, the Cselian, the Quirinal,
the Vatican, and the other four, whose very names bear evi-
dence to the Boman greatness and majesty. He took careful
note, moreover, of that authority which attaches to the College
of Cardinals, and of the dignity represented in the person of
the Supreme Pontiff; nor did he suffer to pass unnoticed that
great concourse and variety of men from all nations ever
congregated within the walls of the city.

All these things Bodaja admired, reflected on, and arranged
in the order of their importance ; and having made the station
of the Seven Churches, confessed to a Penitentiary, and
kissed the feet of his Holiness, he departed, well loaded with
Agnus Deis and legends, determining thence to proceed to
Naples.

But the time was one of important changes and much
disorder ; this rendered the roads dangerous for all desiring
to enter or travel out of Bome ; and as he had come to the
city by land, so he now resolved to depart by sea, where-
fore, proceeding to the port of Ostia, he there embarked, and
having reached Naples, added to the satisfaction which he had
previously felt at seeing Bome, that of finding himself in a
city, in his estimation, and in the opinion of all who have seen
it, the finest in Europe, or even in the whole world.

From Naples, Bodaja proceeded to Sicily, where he visited
Palermo and Messina ; the first of these cities he admired
for the advantages of its position and its beauty, and the
second for the convenience of its port ; while to the whole
island he could not but offer the tribute of his praise for
that abundance which causes it to be justly denominated the
granary of all Italy. ^

Betuming from Sicily to Naples and Bome, Bodaja
thence proceeded to Our Lady of Loretto, in whose Holy
Temple he could see neither walls nor partitions, since every


*


ti


THE LICENTIATE VIDRIERA ; OR, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 93

part was covered with enitches, biers, shrouds, chains, padlocks,
fetters, and locks of hair ; with arms, hands, legs, or busts in
wax, to say nothing of pictures and prints, all giving manifest
indication of the mercies and favours innumerable which
hundreds of men have received in that place from the hand
of God, by the intercession of his Divine Mother, whose sacred
Image (there preserved) He has been pleased to exalt and
sanction by a vast number of miracles, which have been
performed in recompense of the devotion of her votaries ; for
by them it is that the walls of her house have been adorned
in the manner described.*

Here Rodaja beheld that very chamber of the Yirgin,
wherein was delivered the most stupendous embassy ever
heard or witnessed by all the heavens, all the angels, and all the
archangels, or other inhabitants of the everlasting abodes.

From thb place our traveller proceeded to Ancona, whei e
he embarked and repaired to Venice, a city which, had
^j Columbus never appeared in the world, would certainly be
still supposed to have no equal ; but, by the favour of heaven,
and thanks to the great Fernando Cortez who conquered
Mexico, the magnificent Yenice has now found a city that
may be compared to herself. The streets of these two re-
nowned capitals, which are almost wholly of water, make them
the admiration and terror of all mankind — ^that of Europe
dominating the old world, and that of America the new. For
of the former it would appear that her riches are infinite,
her position impregnable, her government most wise, the
abundance of her products inexhaustible ; in a word, she is
herself, as a whole, and in all her parts, entirely worthy of
that fame for greatness and majesty which has penetrated to
all the regions of the world : the justice of the praise bestowed
on Venice is, besides, accredited by her renowned arsenal,
wherein are constructed her potent galleys, with other vessels
of which the number is not to be told.

To our curious traveller the delights and pastimes found
in Venice had almost proved fatal as those of Calypso, since
they had nearly caused him to forget his first intentions. Yet
when he had passed a month in that enchanting place, he
f found resolution to continue his journey, passing by Ferrara,

' ?.'^^® ^^'"votos, or pictures and figures here described, are tor

fiuniliar to the visitor of Catholic churches to need any explanationr


I

I


94 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

Parma, and Flacentia, to Milan, that workshop of Yulcan-^
that grudge and despair of France — ^that superb city of which
more wonders are reported than words can tell, her own
grandeur being increased by that of her famous Temple, and
by the marvellous abundance of all things necessary to human
life that are to be found therein.

From Milan, Rodaja journeyed to Asti, where he arrived
in very good time, since the regiment of Don Diego was to
depart for Flanders on the following day. He was received
very kindly by his friend the captain, with whom he passed
into Flanders, and arrived at Antwerp, a city no less worthy
of admiration than those which he had seen in Italy. He
visited Ghent and Brussels likewise, finding the whole country
preparing to take arms, and well disposed to enter on the
campaign of the following year.

Bodaja having now seen all that he had desired to behold,
resolved to return to his native Spain, and to the city of
Salamanca, there to complete his studies. He had no soonei
determined than he instantly put his purpose into execution,
to the great regret of his friend, who, finding him resolved to
depart, entreated him at least to write him word of his safe
arrival, and likewise of his future success. This Bodaja pro-
mised to do, and then returned to Spain through France, but
he did not see Paris, which was at that time in arms. At ;
length he arrived at Salamanca, where he was well received [
by his friends, and with the facilities which they procured
him^ he continued his studies until he finally attained to the
degree of doctor of laws.

Now it chanced that, about this time, there arrived in
Salamanca one of those ladies who belong to all the points of
the compass ; she was besides well furnished with devices of
every colour. To the whistle and bird-call of this fowler there
instantly came flocking all the birds of the place ; nor was
there a vade m&cwm* who refrained from paying a visit to that
gay decoy. Among the rest our Thomas was informed that
the Sefiora said she had been in Italy and Flanders when \
he, to ascertain if he were acquainted with the dame, like- |
wise pfud her a visit. She, on her part, immediately fell in ]

* Student: they are so called from the name g^ren to the portfolio
in which they carry their books and papers to the university, and
which they always have with them.


I


THE licentiate: VIDRIEBA ; OR, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 95

love v^ith Eodaja, but he rejected her advances, and never
approached her house but when led thither by others, and
r almost by force. Attending much more zealously to his studies
I th&n his amusements, he did not in any manner return her
afiection, even wlien she had made it known to him by the
ofier of her hand and all her possessions.

Seeing herself thus scorned, and perceiving that she could
not bend the will of Bodaja by ordinary means, the woman
determined to seek others, which in her opinion would be
more efficacious, and must, as she thought, ensure the desired
effect. So, by the advice of a Morisca woman, she took a Tole-
dan quince, and in that fruit she gave him one of those con-
trivances called charms, thinking that she was thereby forcing
him to love her ; as if there were, in this world, herbs, enchant*
ments, or words of power, sufficient to enchain the free-will of
any creature. These things are called charms, but they are
in fact poisons: and those who administer them are actual
poisoners, as has been proved by sundry experiences.

In an unhappy moment Rodaja ate the quince, but had
scarcely done so when he began to tremble from head to
foot as if struck by apoplexy, remaining many hours before
he could be brought to himself. At the end of that time
he partially recovered, but appeared to have become almost
an idiot. He complained, with a stammering tongue and
feeble voice, that a quince which he had eaten had poisoned
him, and also found means to intimate by whom it had been
given, when justice at once began to move in quest of the
criminal ; but she, perceiving the failure of her attempt^ took
care to hide herself, and never appeared again.

Six months did Thomas remain confined to his bed ; and
during that time he not only became reduced to a skeleton,
but seemed also to have lost the use of his faculties. Every
remedy that could be thought of was tried in his behalf ; but
although the physicians succeeded in curing the physical
malady, they could not remove that of the mind ; so that
when he was at last pronounced cured, he was still afflicted
with the strangest madness that was ever heard of among the
many kinds by which humanity has been assailed. The
unhappy man imagined that he was entirely made of glass ;
and, possessed with this idea, when any one approached him
he would utter the most terrible outcries, begging and


96 CEllVANTES' EXEMPLART TALES. V


beseeching them not to come near him, or they would
assuredly break him to pieces, as he was not like other men,
but entirely of glass from head to foot.

In the hope of rousing him from this strange hallucination,
many persons, without regard to his prayers and cries, threw
themselves upon him and embraced him, bidding him observe
that he was not broken for all that. But all they gained by
this was to see the poor creature sink to the earth, uttering
lamentable moans, and instantly fall into a fainting fit, from
which he could not be recovered for several hours ; nay, when
he did recover, it was but to renew his complaints, from
which he never desisted but to implore that such a misfortune
might not be suffered to happen again.

He exliorted every one to speak to him from a great
distance ; declaring that on this condition they might ask him
what they pleased, and that he could reply with all the
more effect, now he was a man of glass and not of flesh
and bones, since glass, being a substance of more delicate
subtlety, permits the soul to act with more promptitude and
efHcacy than it can be expected to do in the heavier body
formed of mere earth.

Certain persons then desiring to ascertain if what he had
said were true, asked him many questions of great difficulty
respecting various circumstances ; to all these he replied with
the utmost acuteness, insomuch that his answers awakened
astonishment in the most learned professors of medicine and
philosophy whom that university could boast. And well they
might be amazed at seeing a man who was subject to so
strange an hallucination as that of believing himself to be
made of glass, still retain such extraordinary judgment on
other points as to be capable of answering difficult questions
with the marvellous propriety and truth which distinguished
the replies of Bodaja.

The poor man had often entreated that some case might
be given to him wherein he might enclose the brittle vase of
his body, so that he might not break it in putting on
the ordinary clothing. He was consequently furnished with
a surplice of ample width, and a cloth wrapper^ whi(}h he
folded around him with much care, confining it to his waist
with a girdle of soft cotton, but he would not wear any kind of
ahoos. The method he adopted to prevent any one from


THE LICENTIATE VIDRIERA; OR, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 97

upproaching him when they brought him food, was to fix ati
earthen pot into the cleft of a stick prepared for that purpose,
and in this vessel he would receive such fruits as the season
presented. He would not eat flesh or fish ; nor would he
drink anything but the water of the river, which he lapped
from his hands.

In passing through the streets, Bodega was in the habit
of walking carefully in the middle of them, lest a tile
should fall from the houses upon his head and break it. In
the summer he slept in the open air, and in the winter he
lodged at one of the inns, where he buried himself in straw to
his throat, remarking that this was the most proper and secure
bed for men of glass. When it thundered, Rodaja trembled
like an aspen leaf, and would rush out into the fields, not
returning to the city until the storm had passed.

His friends kept him shut up for some time, but perceiv-
ing that his malady increased, they at last complied with his
earnest request that they would let him go about freely;
and he might be seen walking through the streets of the city,
dressed as we have described, to the astonishment and regret
of all who knew him.

The boys soon got about him, but he kept them off with
liis staff, requesting them to speak to him from a distance,
lest they should break him, seeing that he, being a man of
glass, was exceedingly tender and brittle. But far from
listening to his request, the boys, who are the most perverse
generation in the world, soon began to throw various missiles
and even stones at him, notwithstanding all his prayers and
exclamations. They declared that they wished to see if he
were in truth of glass, as he affirmed ; but the lamentations
and outcries of the poor maniac induced the grown persons
who were near to reprove and even beat the boys, whom they
drove away for the moment, but who did not fail to return
at the next opportunity.

One day, that a horde of these tormentors had pursued
him with more than their usual pertinacity, and had worn out
his patience, he turned to them, saying — " What do you want
with me you varlets? more obstinate than flies, more dis-
gusting than Chinches,"^ and bolder than the boldest fleas.

* The reader will be pleased to guess the name of that insufferable
insect which the S;)amards denominate Chinches and with the English

H


98 CEBVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

<

Am I) perchance^ the Monte Testacio* of Borne, that you
cast upon me so many potsherds and tiles?" But Bodaja
was followed by many who kept about him for the purpose of
hearing him reply to the questions asked, or reprove the
questioner, as the case might be. And after a time, even the
boys found it more amusing to listen to his words than to
throw tiles at him ; when they gave him, for the most part>
somewhat less annoyance.

The maniac Bodaja* was one day passing through the
Eopery at Salamanca, when a woman who was working there
accosted him, and said, " By my soul, Sefior Doctor, I am
sorry for your misfortune, but what shall I do for you, since,
try as I may, I cannot weep?" To which Bodaja, fixedly
regarding her, gravely replied, ^'FUice Jerusalem^ plorate super
vos et super JUios vestros" The husband of the ropeworker
was standing by, and comprehending the reply, he said to
Bodaja, ^^ Brother Glasscase, for so they tell me you are
to be called, you have more of the rogue than the fool
in you ! " " You are not called on to give me an obolus,"
rejoined Bodaja, ** for I have not a grain of the fool about
me ! ^ One day that he was passing near a house well known
as the resort of thieves and other disorderly persons, he saw
several of the inhabitants assembled round the door, and
called out, " See, here you have baggage belonging to the
army of Satan, and it is lodged in the house of hell accor-
dingly."

A man once asked him what advice he should give to a
friend whose wife had left him for another, and who was in
great sorrow for her loss. " You shall bid him thank God,"
replied Bodaja, " for the favour he has obtained, in that his
enemy is removed from his house."

<< Then you would not have him go seek her ?" inquired
the other."

equivalent of which I am nnwUling to offend his eyes. Happy, in-
deed, if he cannot guess ; but then he cannot have seen either Seyille
or Granada, and one might almost encounter an acquaintance with
the animal called Chinche rather than renounce them,

* Such of our readers as have visited Rome, will remember that
enormous mound which is seen rising on the right hand as you leave
the city, by the Porta Salaria, and is said to have been formed by
the numberless fragments of pottery cast on the spot from time iui-
mfjnoriaU


(t


THE LICENtlATB VIDRIERA ; OB, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 99

" Let him not even think of doing so," returned Rodaja,
"for if he find her, what will he have gained but the
perpetual evidence of his dishonour ? '*

<* And what shall I do to keep peace with my own wife ?"
inquired the same person.

" Give her all that she can need or rightfully claim," said
the maniac, " and let her be mistress of every person and
thing thy house contains, but take care that she be not
mistress of thyself.*'

A boy one day said to him, " Senor Glasscase, I have a
mind to run away from my father, and leave my home
for ever, because he beats me." " I would have thee beware,
boy," replied Bodaja ; *^ the stripes given by a father are no
dishonour to the son, and may save him from those of the
bangman, which are indeed a disgrace.^'

Intelligence of his peculiar state, with a description of
the replies he gave, and the remarks he uttered, was
much spread abroad, more especially among those who had
known him in different parts, and great sorrow was expressed
for the loss of a man who had given so fair a promise of
distinction. A person of high rank then at Court wrote
to a friend of his at Salamanca, begging that Bodaja might be
)»ent to him at Yalladolid, and charging his friend to make all
needful arrangements for that purpose. -The gentleman coiise*
quently accosted Yidriera the next time he met him, and said,
" Senor Glasscase, you are to know that a great noble of the
Court is anxious to have you go to Yalladolid;" whereupon
Bodaja replied, " Your worship will excuse me to that noble-
man, and say that I am not fit to dwell at Court, nor in
the Palace, because I have some sense of shame left, and do
not know how to flatter." He was nevertheless persuaded to
go, and the mode in which he travelled was as follows : a
large pannier of that kind in which glass is transported was
prepared, and in this Bodaja was placed, well defended by
straw, which was brought up to his neck, the opposite pannier
being carefully balanced by means of stones, among which
appeared the necks of bottles, since Bodaja desired it to
be understood that he was sent as a vessel of glass. In
this fashion he journeyed to Yalladolid, which city he en*
tered by night, and was not unpacked until he had first been
carefully deposited in the house of the noble who had
requested his presence.

u 2


100 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

By this gentleman he was received with much kindness,
and the latter said to him, '* You are extremely welcome;
Doctor Glasscase ; I hope you have had a pleasant journey."
Bodaja replied, that no journey could be called a bad one if
t took you safe to your end, unless indeed it were that which
led to the gallows.

Being one day shown the Falconry, wherein were nume-
rous falcons and other birds of similar kind, he remarked
that the sport pursued by means of those birds was entirely
suitable to great nobles, since the cost was as two thou-
sand to on^ of the profit.

When it pleased Bodaja to go forth into the city, the
nobleman caused him to be attended by a servant, whose
office it was to protect him from intrusion, and see that he
was not molested by the boys of the place, by whom he was
at once remarked ; indeed but few days had elapsed before
he became known to the whole city, since he never failed
to find a reply for all who questioned or consulted him.

Among those of the former class, there once came a
student, who inquired if he were a poet, to which Bodaja
replied, that up to the moment they had then arrived at, he
had neither been so stupid nor so bold as to become a poet.
" I do not understand what you mean by so stupid or so bold,
Senor Glasscase," rejoined the student; to wliich Bodaja made
answer, ^' I am not so stupid as to be a bad poet, nor so bold
as to think myself capable of being a good one." The student
then inquired in what estimation he held poets, to which he
answered that he held the poets themselves in but little
esteem ; but as to their art, that he esteemed greatly. His
hearer inquiring further what he meant by that, Bodaja said
that among the innumerable poets, by courtesy so called, the
number of good ones was so small as scarcely to count
at all, and that as the bad were not true poets, he could not
admire them : but that he admired and even reverenced
greatly the art of poetry, which does in fact comprise every
other in itself, since it avails itself of all things, and purifies
and beautifies all things, bringing its own marvellous produc-
tions to light for the advantage, the delectation, and the
wonder of the world, which it fills with its benefits. He added
further, ** I know thoroughly to what extent, and for what
qualities, we ought to estimate the good poet, since I perfectly
well remember those verses of Ovid, wherein he says : —


THE LICENTIATE VIDRIERA ; OR, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 101

** * Cura duciim fuerunt olim regumque poetse,
Prsemiaque antiqui magna tulere chori.
Sanctaque majestas, et erat venerabile nomen
Vatibus; et largse ssepe dabantur opes.'

And still less do I forget the high quality of the poets whom
Plato calls the inteipreters of the Gods, while Ovid says of
them —

'^ ' Est deus in nobis; agitante calescimus illo.*

And again —

" 'At sacri rates et divum cura vocamnr.*

" These things are said of good poets ; but, as respects the
bad ones — the gabbling pretenders — what can we say, save
only that they are the idiocy and the arrogance of the world.

" Who is there that has not seen one of this sort when he
is longing to bring forth some sonnet to the ears of his
neighbours? How he goes round and round them with —
* Will your worships excuse me if I read you a little sonnet,
which 1 made one night on a certain occasion ; for it appears
to me, although indeed it be worth nothing, to have yet a
certain something — a je ne scai qttoi of pretty, and pleasing**
Then shall he twist his lips, and arch his eyebrows, and make
a thousand antics, diving into his pockets meanwhile and
bringing out half a hundred scraps of paper, greasy and torn,
as if he had made a good million of sonnets ; he then recites
that which he proffered to the company, reading it in a
chanting and affected voice.

" If, perchance, those who hear him, whether because of
their knowledge or their ignorance, should fail to commend
Lim, he says, * Either your worships have not listened to the
verses, op I have not been able to read them properly, for
indeed and in truth they deserve to be heard;' and he
begins, as before, to recite his poem, with new gestures and
varied pauses.

"Then to hear these poetasters censure and teiir one
another to pieces! And what shall I say of the thefts
committed by these cubs and whelps of modern pretence
on the grave and ancient masters of the art, or of tlicir
malevolent carpings at those excellent persons of their own
day in whom shines the true light of poetry; who, making


102 CERVANTES^ EXEMPLABT TALES*

a solace and recreation of their arduous labours, prove
the divinity of their genius and the elevation of their
thoughts to the despite and vexation of these ignorant
pretenders, who presume to judge that of which they know
nothing, and abhor the beauties which they are not able to
comprehend ? What will you have me esteem in the nullity
which seeks to find place for itself under the canopy spread for
others — in the ignorance which is ever leaning for support on '
another man's chair?"

Rodaja was once asked how It happened that poets are
always poor ; to which he replied, " That if they were poor,
it was because they chose to be so, since it was always in
their power to be rich if they would only take advan-
tage of the opportunities in their hands. For see how
rich are their ladies," he added ; " have they not all a very
profusion of wealth in their possession ? Is not their hair of
gold, their brows of burnished silver, their eyes of the most
precious jewels, their lips of coral, their throats of ivory and
transparent crystal ? Are not their tears liquid pearls^ and
where they plant the soles of their feet do not jasmine and
roses spring up at the moment, however rebellious and
sterile the earth may previously have been ? Then what is
their breath but pure amber, musk, and frankincense ? Yet
to whom do all these things belong, if not to the poets?
They are, therefore, manifest signs and proofs of their great
riches."

In this manner he always spoke of bad poets ; as to the
good ones, he was loud in their praise, and exalted them aboTd
the horns of the moon.

Being at San Francisco, he one day saw some very
indifferent pictures, by an incapable hand ; whereupon he
remarked that the good painters imitate nature, while the bad
ones have the impertinence to daub her face.

Having planted himself one day in frontof a bookseller's shop
with great care, to avoid being broken, he began to talk to the
owner, and said, " Tliis trade would please me greatly, were it
not for one fault that it has." The bookseller inquiring what
that might be, Eodaja replied, " It is the tricks you play on
the writers when you purchase the copyright of a book, and
the s])ort you make of the author if, perchance, he desire to
print at his own cost. For what is your method of pro-


THE LICENTIATE VIDRIERA; OR, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 103

oeeding ? Instead of the one thousand five hundred copies
which you agree to print for him, you print three thousand ;
and when the author supposes that you are selling his books,
you are but disposing of your own."

One of those men who carry sedan-chairs, once standing
by while Rodaja was enumerating the faults committed by
various trades and occupations, remarked to the latter, " Of
us, Senor Doctor, you can find nothing amiss to say."
"Nothing," replied Eodaja, " except that you are made
acquainted with more sins than are known to the confessor ;
but with this difference, that the confessor learns them to keep
all secret, but you to make them the public talk of the taverns."

A muleteer who heard this, for all kinds of people were
continually listening to him, said aloud, ^* There is little or
nothing that you can say of us, Senor Phial, for we are people
of great worth, and very useful servants to the common-
weadth." To which the man of glass replied, " The honour
of the master exalts the honour of the servant. You, there-
fore, who call those who hire your mules your masters, see
whom you serve, and what honour you may borrow from
them ; for your employers are some of the dirtiest rubbish
that this earth endures.

" Once, when I was not a man of glass, I was travelling
on a mule which I had hired, and I counted in her master
one hundred and twenty-one defects, all capital ones,
and all enemies to the human kind. All muleteers have a
touch of the ruffian, a spice of the thief, and a dash of the
mountebank. If their masters, as they call those they take
on their mules, be of the butter-mouthed kind, they play
more pranks with them than all the rogues of this city
could perform in a year. If they be strangers, the muleteers
rob them ; if students, they malign them ; if monks, they
blaspheme them ; but if soldiers, they tremble before them.
These men, with the sailors, the carters, and the arrieros oi*
pack carriers, lead a sort of life which is truly singular^ and
belongs to themselves alone.

" The carter passes the greater part of his days in a space
not more than a yard and a half long, for there cannot be
much more between the yoke of his mules and the mouth of
his cart. He is singing for one half of his time, and blas-
pheming the other ; and if he have to drag one of his wheels


104 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

out of a hole in the mire, he is more aided, as it might seem,
by two great oaths than by three strong mules.

'^ The mariners are a pleasant people, but little like those of
the towns, and they can speak no other language than that
used in ships. When the weather is fine they are very diligent,
but very idle, when it is stormy. During the tempest they
order much and obey little. Their ship, which is their mess-
room, is also their god, and their pastime is the torment
endured by sea-sick passengers.

" As to the mule-carriers, they are a race which has taken
out a divorce from all sheets, and has married the pack-saddle.
So diligent and careful are these excellent men, that to save
themselves from losing a day, they will lose their souls. Their
music is the tramp of a hoof; their sauce is hunger; their
matins are an exchange of abuse and bad words ; their mass is
—to hear none at all."

While speaking thus, Kodaja stood at an apothecary's
door, and turning to the master of the shop, he said,
" Your worship's occupation would be a most salutary one if
it were not so great an enemy to your lamps."

** Wherein is my trade an enemy to my lamps?" asked
the apothecary.

^*In this way," replied Kodaja; "whenever other oils
fail you, immediately you take that of the lamp, as
being the one which most readily comes to hand. But
there is, indeed, another fault in your trade, and one that
would suffice to ruin the most accredited physician in the
world." Being asked what that was, he replied that an
apothecary never ventured to confess, or would admit, that
any drug was absent from his stock ; and so, if he have not the
medicine prescribed, he makes use of some other which, in
his opinion, has the same virtues and qualities ; but as that is
very seldom the case, the medicine, being badly compounded,
produces an effect contrary to that expected by the physician.

" Bodaja was then asked what he thought of the physicians
themselves, and he replied as follows: ^^ Honora medicum
propter necessiiatem, etenim creavit eum (dtisHmus : aDeo enim
est omnia medela, et a rege accipiet donationem: disciplina
medici exaltamt caput illiiLSf et in compectu magnatum
collaudcibitur, Altissimus de terra creavit medicinam, et vir
prudem non ahhorrehit Ulam. Thus," he added, *' speaketb


THE LICENTIATE VIDBIEBA: OB, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 105

the Book of Ecclesiasticus, of Medicine, and good Physicians ;
but of the bad ones we may safely affirm the very contrary,
since there are no people more injurious to the commonwealth
tlian they are. The judge may distort or delay the justice
which he should render us ; the lawyer may support an unjust
ilemand ; the merchant may help us to squander our estate,
and, in a word, all those with whom we have to deal in
common life may do us more or less injury; but to kill us
without fear and standing quietly at his ease ; unsheathing
no other sword than that wrapped in the folds of a
recipe, and without being subject to any danger of pun-
ishment, that can be done only. by the physician; he alone
can escape all fear of the discovery of his crimes, because at
the moment of committing them he puts them under the
earth. When I was a man of flesh, and not of glass, as I
now am, I saw many things that might be adduced in support
of what I have now said, but the relation of these I refer to
some other time."

A certain person asked him what he should do to avoid
envying another, and Kodaja bade him go to sleep, for, said
he, "While you sleep you will be the equal of him whom you
envy."

*^ It happened on a certain occasion that the Criminal Judge
passed before the place where Bodaja stood. There was a great
crowd of people, and two alguazils attended the magistrate, who
was proceeding to his court, when Rodaja inquired his name.
Being told, he replied, " Now, I would lay a wager that this
judge has vipers in his bosom, pistols in his inkhom^ and
flashes of lightning in his hands, to destroy all that shall
come within his commission. I once had a friend who in-
flicted so exorbitant a sentence in respect to a criminal
commission which he held, that it exceeded by many carats
the amount of guilt incurred by the crime of the delinquents.
I inquired of him wherefore he had uttered so cruel a sentence,
and committed so manifest an injustice ? To which ho replied
that he intended to grant permission of appeal, and that in
this way he left the field open for the Lords of the Council
to show their mercy by moderating and reducing that too
rigorous punishment to its due proportions. But I told him
^t would have been still better for him to have given such a
sentence as would have rendered their labour unnecessary, by


106 CERVANTES* KXEMPLAUT TALES.

-which means he would also have merited and obtained the re-
putation of being a wise and exact judge."

Among the number of those by whom Kodaja, as I have
said, was constantly surrounded, was an acquaintance of
his own, who permitted himself to be saluted as the Senor
Doctor, although Thomas knew well that he had not taken
even the degree of bachelor. To him, therefore, he one day
said, '' Take care, gossip mine, that you and your title do not
meet with the Fathers of the Bedemption, for they will cer-
tainly take possession of your doctorship as being a creature
unrighteously detained captive."

" Let us behave well to each other, Senor Glasscase," said
the other, " since you know that I am a man of high and pro-
found learning."

*' I know you rather to be a Tantalus in the same," replied
Rodttja ; " for if learning reach high to you, you are never
able to plunge into its depths."

He was one day leaning against the stall of a tailor, who
was seated with his hands before him, and to whom he said-^

" Without doubt, Senor Maeso,* you are in the way to
salvation."

" From what symptom do you judge me to be so, Sefior
Doctor ?" inquired the tailor.

" From the fact that, as you have nothing to do, so you
have nothing to lie about, and may cease lying, wluch is a
great step."

Of the shoemakers he said, that not one of that trade ever
performed his office badly; seeing that if the shoe be too
narrow, and pinches the foot, the shoemaker says, " In two
hours it will be as wide as an alpargate ;" or he declares it
right that it should be narrow, since the shoe of a gentleman
must needs fit closely ; and if it be too wide, he maintains
that it still ought to be so, for the ease of the foot, and lest
a man should have the gout.

Seeing the waiting-maid of an actress attending her
mistress, he said she was much to be pitied who had to serve
so many women, to say nothing of the men whom she also
had to wait on ; and the bystanders requiring to know how
the damsel, who had but to serve one, could be said to wait on
so^many, he replied, ^* Is she not the waiting-maid of a queen^

* Master*


THE LICENTIATE VIDRIERA; OR, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 107

a nymph, a goddess, a scullery-maid, and a shepherdess?
besides that she is also the servant of a page and a lackey ?
for all these, and many more, are in the person of an
actress."

Some one asked Bodaja, who had been the happiest man
in the world ? To which he answered — "iVmo, seeing that
Nemo nomt patrem — Nemo sine crimine vivit — Nemo stta sorte
contentus — Nemo ascendit in codum," &c. &c.

Of the fencing masters he said, that they were professors of
an art which was never to be known when it was most wanted,
since they pretended to reduce to mathematical demonstra*
tions, which are infallible, the angry thoughts and movements
of a man's adversaries.

To such men as dyed their beards, Bodaja always exhibited
a particular enmity; and one day observing a Portuguese^
whose beard he knew to be dyed, in dispute with a Spaniard,
to whom he said, " I swear by the beard that I wear on my
face," Rodaja called out to him, "Halt there, Mend ; you should
not say that you wear on your face, but that you dye on your
face."* To another, whose beard had been streaked by an
imperfeiet dye, Doctor Glasscase said, " Your beard is of the
true dust-coloured pieball." He related, on another occasion,
that a certain damsel, discreetly conforming to the will of her
parents, had agreed to marry an old man with a white beard,
who, on the evening hefore his marriage was to take place,
thought fit to have his beard dyed, and whereas he had taken
it from the sight of his betrothed as white as snow, he pre*
sent^ it at the altar with a colour blacker than that of pitch.

Seeing this, the damsel turned to her parents and requested
them to give her the spouse they had promised, saying that
she would have him, and no other.

They assured her, that he whom she there saw was the
person they had before shewn her, and given her for her
spouse: but she refused to believe it, maintaining, that he
whom her parents had given her was a grave person, with
a white beard : nor was she, by any means, to be persuaded

* Here Rodaja spoke mockingly, an impure Portuguese, and not
Spanish {olhay, homen, naon, digais, teno, sino tino). The spirit of
the remark (as in some other passages omitted for that reason) con-
sists in a play on words resembling each other in sound, though not
in sense, and is necessarily lost in translation.


108 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

that the dyed man before her was her betrothed, and tha
marriage was broken ofl*.

Towards Duennas he entertained as great a dislike as
towards those who dyed their beards — uttering wonderful
things respecting their falsehood and affectation, their tricks
and pretences, their simulated scruples and their real wicked-
ness, — reproaching them with their fancied maladies of
stomach, and the frequent giddiness with which they were
afflicted in the head ; nay, even their mode of speaking, was
made the subject of his censure ; and he declared that there
were more turns in their speech than folds in their great togas
and wide gowns ; finally, he declared them altogether useless,
if not much worse.

Being one day much tormented by a hornet which settled
on his neck, he nevertheless refused to take it off, lest in
seeking to catch the insect he should break himself ; but he
still complained woefully of the sting. Some one then re-
marked to him, that it was scarcely to be supposed he would
feel it much, since his whole person was of glass. But Bodaja
replied, that the hornet in question must needs be a slanderer,
seeing that slanderers were of a race whose tongues were
X^apable of penetrating bodies of bronze, to say nothing of
glass.

A monk, who was enormously fat, one day passed near
where Bodaja was sitting, when one who stood by ironically
remarked, that the father was so reduced and consumptive, as
•scarcely to be capable of walking. Offended by this, Bodaja
exclaimed, "Let none forget the words of Holy Scripture,
* Nolite tangere Christos meos;' and, becoming still more
heated, he bade those around him reflect a little, when they
would see, that of the many saints canonised, and placed
among the number of the blessed by the Church within a
few years in those parts, none had been called the Captain
Don Such a one, or the Lawyer Don So and So, or the
Count, Marquis, or Duke of Such a Place; but all were
brother Diego, brother Jacinto, or brother Baimundo : all
monks and friars, proceeding, that is to say, from the monastic
orders." "These," he added, "are the orange-trees of
heaven, whose fruits are placed on the table of God." Of
evil-speakers Bodaja said, that they were like the feathers of
the eagle which gnaw, wear away, and reduce to nothing^


THE LICENTIATE VIDRIERA ; OR, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. 109

whatever feathers of other birds are mingled with them in
beds or cushions, how good soever those feathers may be.

Concerning the keepers of gaming-houses he uttered
wonders, and many more than can here be repeated — com-
mending highly the patience of a certain gamester, who would
remain all night playing and losing ; yea, though of choleric
disposition by nature, he would never open liis mouth to com-
plain, although he was suffering the martyrdom of Barabbas,
provided only his adversary did not cut the cards. At a word,
Bodaja uttered so many sage remarks, that, had it not been
for the cries he sent forth when any one approached near
enough to touch him, for his peculiar dress, slight food, strange
manner of eating,, and sleeping in the air, or buried in straw,
as we have related, no one could have supposed but that he
was one of the most acute persons in the world.

He remained more than two years in this condition ; but,
at the end of that time, a monk of the order of St. Jerome,
l^ho had extraordinary powers in the cure of lunacy, nay, who
even made deaf and dumb people hear and speak in a certain
manner ; this monk, I say, undertook the care and cure of
Rodaja, being moved thereto by the charity of his disposition.
Nor was it long before the lunatic was restored to his original
state of judgment and understanding. When the cure was
effected, the monk presented his patient with his previous
dress of a doctor of laws, exhorting him to return to his earlier
mode of life, and assuring him that he might now render
himself as remarkable for the force of his intellect, as h^had
before done for his singular folly.

Thomas returned accordingly to his past pursuits ; but,
instead of calling himself Bodaja, as before, he assumed the
name of Bueda. He had scarcely appeared in the street, be-
fore he was recognised by the boys; but seeing him in a dress
so different from that he had before worn and been known
by, they dared not cry after him or ask him questions, but
contented themselves with saying, one to another, " Is not
this the madman. Doctor Glasscase ? It is certainly he ; and
though he now looks so discreet, he may be just as mad in
this handsome dress as he was in that other. Let us ask him
some questions, and get rid of omr doubts.''

All this was heard by Thomas, who maintained silence,
but felt much confused, and hurried along more hastily than


110 CEBYANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

he had been wont to do before he regained his senses. The
men at length made the same remarks as the boys and be«
fore he had arrived at the courts he had a train of more
than two hundred persons of all classes following him, being
more amply attended than the most popular professor of the
university.

Having gained the first court, which is that of the entrance,
these people ended by surrounding him completely;, when,
perceiving that he was so crowded on as no longer to have the
power of proceeding, he finally raised his voice, and said —

*' Senores, it is true that I am Doctor Glass-case, but not
h« whom you formerly knew. I am now Doctor Bueda.
Misfortunes such as not unfrequently happen in this world,
by the permission of heaven, had deprived me of my senses,
but the mercy of God has restored them ; and by those things
which you have heard me say when 1 was mad, you may judge
of what I shall say now that I am become sane. I am a
doctor in laws of the university of Salamanca, where I studied
in much poverty, but raised myself through all the degrees to
that I now hold ; but my poverty may serve to assure you
that I owe my rank to industry and not to favour. I have
come to this great sea of the Court, hoping to swim and get for-
ward and gain the bread of my life ; but if you do not leave
me I shall be more likely to sink and find my death. For the
love of God, I entreat that you follow me no further, since, in
doing so, you persecute and injure me. What you formerly
enquired of me in the streets, I beg you now to come and ask
me at my house, when you shall see that the questions to
which I before replied, impromptu, shall be more perfectly
answered now that I shall take time to consider."

All listened to him, many left him as he desired, and he
returned to his abode with a much smaller train. But it was
every day the same : his exhortations availed nothing ; and
Thomas finally resolved to repair to Flanders, there to support
himself by the strength of his arm, since he could no longer
profit by that of his intellect.

This resolution he executed accordingly, exclaiming as he
departed — "Oh, city and court! you by whom the expectations
of the bold pretender are fulfilled, while the hopes of the
modest labourer are destroyed; you who abundantly sus-
tain the shameless bufioon^ while the worthy sage is left to


THE LICENTIATE VIBBIERA; OR, DOCTOR GLASS-CASE. Ill

die of hunger ; I bid you farewell/' That said, he proceeded
to Flanders, where he finished in arms the life which he might
have rendered immortal by letters, and died in the company of
his friend the Captain Don Diego, leaving behind him the
reputation of a most valiant soldier and upright man*


112


THE DECEITFUL MARRUGE

From the Hospital of the Resurrection, which stands just
beyond the Puerto del Campo, in Yalladolid, there issued one
day a soldier, who, by the excessive paleness of his coun-
tenance, and the weakness of his limbs, which obliged him to
lean upon his sword, showed clearly to all who set eyes on
him that, though the weather was not very warm, he must
have sweated a good deal in the last few weeks. He had
scarcely entered the gate of the city, with tottering steps,
when he was accosted by an old friend who had not seen him
for the last six months, and who approached the invalid,
making signs of the cross as if he had seen a ghost. " What
is all this?" he cried; "do I, indeed, behold the Senor
Alferez* Campuzano ? Is it possible that I really see you in
this country ? Why, I thought you were in Flanders trailing
a pike, instead of hobbling along with your sword for a walk-
ing-stick. How pale — how emaciated you look !"

" As to whether I am in this country or elsewhere, Sigfior
Licentiate Peralto, the fact that you now see me is a sufficient
answer," replied Campuzano ; "as for your other questions,
all I can tell you is, that I have just come out of that hos-
pital, where I have been confined for a long time in a dreadful
stote of health, brought upon me by the conduct of a woman
I was indiscreet enough to make my wife."

" You have be6n married, then ?" said Peraltu*

"Yes, Senor."

^* Married without benefit of clergy, I presume. Mar-
riages of that sort bring their own penance with them."

"Whether it was without benefit of clergy I cannot say,"
replied the Alferez ; " but I can safely aver that it was not
without benefit of physic. Such were the torments of body
and soul which my marriage brought upon me^ that those of

* Alferez, Ensign.


THE DECEITFUL MARBIAGE. 113

the body cost me forty sudations to cure them, and, as for
those of the soul, there is no remedy at all that can relieve
them. But excuse me, if I cannot hold a long conversation
in the street; another day I will, with more convenience,
relate to you my adventures, which are the strangest and
most singular you ever heard in all the days of your life."

"That will not do," said the licentiate; "I must have
you come to my lodgings, and there we will do penance
together.* You will have an oUa, very fit for a sick man ;
and though it is scantly enough for two, we will make up the
deficiency with a pie and a tev slices of Bute ham, and,
above all, with a hearty welcome, not only now, but when-
ever you choose to claim it."

Campuzano accepted the polite invitation. They turned
into the church of San Lorente and heard mass, and then
Feral ta took his friend home, treated him as he had promised,
repeated his courteous ofiers, and requested him after dinner
to relate his adventures. Campuzano, without more ado,
began as follows : —

You remember, Sefior Licentiate Peralta, how intimate I
was in this city with Captain Pedro de Herrera, who is now in
Flanders. "I remember it very well," replied Peralta. Well,
one day when we had done dinner in the Posada della Solana,
where we lived, there came in two ladies of genteel appearance,
with two waiting women : one of the ladies entered into con-
versation with the Captain, both leaning against a window ;
the other sat down in a chair beside me, with her veil low
down, so that I could not see her face, except so far as the
thinness of the texture allowed. I entreated her to do me
the favour to unveil, but 1 could not prevail, which the
more inflamed my desire to have sight of her ; but what
especially increased my curiosity was that, whether on pur-
pose, or by chance, the lady displayed a very white hand,
with very handsome rings.

At that time I made a very gallant appearance with that
great chain you have seen me wear, my hat with plumes and
bands, my flame-coloured military garments, and, in the eyes
of my own folly, I seemed go engaging that I imagined all

* A common form of Inyitation, meamng we will partake of a poo?
repast.

I


114 THE DECEITFUL MARRIAOE.

the women must fall in love with mo ! Well, I implofeit het
to unveil. " Be not importunate," she replied ; " I have a
house ; let a servant follow me ; for though I am of more
honourable eondition than this reply of mine would indicate, yet
for the sake of seeing whether your discretion corresponds to
your gallant appearance, I will allow you to see me with less
reserve." I kissed her hand for the favour she granted me, in
return for which I promised mountains of gold. The cap-
tain ended his conversation, the ladies went away, and a ser-
vant of mine followed them. The captain told me that what
the lady had been asking of him was to take some letters to
Flanders to another captain, who she said was her cousin,
though he knew he was nothing but her gallant.

For my part I was all on fire for the snow-white hands I
had seen, and dying for a peep at the face ; so I presented
myself next day at the door which my servant pointed out to
me, and was freely admitted. 1 found myself in a house very
handsomely decorated and furnisiied, in presence of a lady
about thirty years of age, whom I recognised by her hands.
Her beauty was not extraordinary, but of a nature well suited
to fascinate in conversation ; for she talked with a sweetness
of tone that won its way through the ears to the soul. I had
long tete-a-tetes with her, in which I made love with all my
might : I bragged, bounced, swaggered, offered, promised, and
made all the demonstrations 1 thought necessary to work
myself into her good graces ; but as she was accustomed to
such offers and protestations, she listened to them with an
attentive, but apparently far from credulous ear. In short,
during the four days I continued to visit her, our intercourse
amounted only to talking sofc nonsense, without my being able
to gather the tempting fruit.

In the course of my visits I always fuund the house free
from intruders, and without a vestige of pretended relations
or real gallants. She was waited on by a girl in whom there
was more of the rogue than the simpleton. At last resolving
to push my suit in the style of a soldier, who is about to shift
his quarters, I came to the point with my fair one. Dona
Estefania de Caycedo (for that is the name of my charmer)^
and this was the answer she gave me : —

"Senor Alferez Campuzano, I should be a simpleton if I
sought to pass myself off on you for a saint ; I have been a sin-'


THE DECEITFUL MARBIAGE. 115

n«r, ay, and am one still, but not in a manner to become a sub*
)ect of scandal in the neighbourhood or of notoriety in public.
I have inherited no fortune either from my parents or any other
relation ; and yet the furniture of my house is worth a good
two thousand five hundred ducats, and would fetch that sum
it put up to auction at any moment. With this property I
look for a husband to whom I may devote myself in all
obedience, and with whom I may lead a better life, whilst I ap-
ply myself with incredible solicitude to the task of delighting
and serving him ; for there is no master cook who can boast
of a more refined palate, or can turn out more exquisite ragouts
and made-dishes than I can, when I choose to display my
housewifery in that way. I can be the major domo in the
house, the tidy wench in the kitchen, and the lady in the draw-
ing room : in fact, I know how to command and make myself
obeyed. I squander nothing and accumulate a great deal ;
my coin goes all the further for being spent under my own
directions. My household linen, of which I have a large and
excellent stock, did not come out of drapers' shops or ware-
houses ; these fiugers and those of my maid servants stitched
it all, and it would have been woven at home had that been
possible. If I give myself these commendations, it is because
I cannot incur your censure by uttering what it is absolutely
necessary that you should know. In fine, I wish to say that
I desire a husband to protect, command, and honour me, and
not a gallant to flatter and abuse me : if you like to accept
the gift that is offered you, here I am, ready and willing to put
myself wholly at your disposal, without going into the public
market with my hand, for it amounts to no less to place one-
self at the mercy of match-makers' tongues, and no one is so fit
to arrange the whole afiair as the parties themselves."

My wits were not in my head at that moment, but in
my heels. Delighted beyond imagination, and seeing before
me such a quantity of property, which I already beheld by
anticipation converted into ready money, without making any
other reflections than those suggested by the longing that
fettered my reason, I told her that I was fortunate and blest
above all men since heaven had given me by a sort of miracle
•uch a companion, that I might make her the lady of my
aflections and my fortune, — a fortune which was not so small>
but that with that chain which I wore round my neck, and

I 2


116 THE DECEITFUL MABAIAGE.

other jewels wliich I had at home, and by dispoiuQf^ of some
military finery, I could muster more than two thousand ducats,
which, with her two thousand five hundred, would be enough
for us to retire upon to a village of which I was a native, and
where I had relations and some patrimony. Its yearly increase,
helped by our money, would enable us to lead a cheerful and
unembarrassed life. In fine, our union was at once agreed on;
the banns were published on three successive holidays (which
happened to fall together), and on the fourth day, the
marriage was celebrated in the presence of two fi-iends of
mine, and a youth who she said was her cousin, and to
whom I introduced myself as a relation with words of
great urbanity. Puch, indeed, were all those which hitherto
I had bestowed on my bride — with how crooked and treacher-
ous an intention I would rather not say ; for though I am
telling truths, they are not truths under confession which
must not be kept back.

^ My servant removed my trunk from my lodgings to my
wife's house. I put by my magnificent chain in my wife's
presence; showed her three or four others, not so large, but of
better workmanship, with three or four other trinkets of
various kinds ; laid before her my best dresses and my plumes,
and gave her about four hundred reals, which I had, to defray the
household expenses. For six days I tasted the bread of wed-
lock, enjoying myself like a beggarly bridegroom in the house
of a rich father-in-law. I trod on rich carpets, lay in hoUand
sheets, had silver candlesticks to light me, breakfasted in bed,
rose at eleven o'clock, dined at twelve, and at two took my
siesta in the drawing-room. Dona Estefania and the servant
girl danced attendance upon me ; my servant, whom I had
always found lazy, was suddenly become nimble as a deer.
If ever Dona Estefania quitted my side, it was to go to the
kitchen and devote all her care to preparing fricassees to please
my palate and quicken my appetite. My shirts, collars, and
handkerchiefs were a very Aranjuez of flowers, so drenched
they were with fragrant waters. Those days flew fast, like the
years which* are under the jurisdiction of time ; and seeing
myself so regaled and so well treated, I began to change for
the better the evil intention with which I had begun this
afifair.

At the end of them^ one morning, whilst I was still in bed


THE DECEITFUL MABBIAGE« 117

^ith Dona Estefania, there was a loud knocking and calling
at the street door. The servant girl put her head out of the
window, and immediately popped it in again, saying, — " There
she is, sure enough ; she is come sooner than she mentioned
in her letter the other day, but she is welcome !'*

" Who's come, girl ?" said I.

"Who?" she replied; "why, my lady Dofia Clementa
Bueso, and with her senor Don Lope Melendez de Almendarez,
with two other servants, and Hortigosa, the duena she took
with her."

"Bless me! Run, wench, and open the door for them,"
t)o&a Esteionia now exclaimed ; " and you, senor, as you love
me, don't put yourself out, or reply for me to anything you
may hear said against me."

" Why, who is to say anything to offend you, especially
when I am by ? Tell me, who are these people, whose arrival
appears to have upset you ?"

" I have no time to answer," said Dona Estelania; " only be
assured that whatever takes place here will be all pretended,
and bears upon a certain design which you shall know by and
by."

Before I could make any reply to this, in walked Dona
Clementa Bueso, dressed in lustrous green satin, richly laced
with gold, a hat with green, white, and pink feathers, a
gold hat-band, and a fine veil covering half her face. With
her entered Don Lope Melendez de Almendarez in a travel-
ling suit, no less elegant than rich. The duena Hortigosa was
the first who opened her lips, exclaiming, " Saints and angels^
what is this ! My lady Dona Clementa's bed occupied, and
by a man too ! Upon my faith, the senora Dona Estefania
has availed herself of my lady's friendliness to some purpose !"

"That she has, Hortigosa," replied Dona Clementa; "but
I blame myself for never being on my guard against friends
who can only be such when it is for their own advantage."

To all this Dona Estefania replied : " Pray do not be angry^
my lady Dona Clementa. I assure you there is a mystery in
what you see ; and when you are made acquainted with it
you will acquit me of all blame."

During this time I had put on my hose and doublet, and
Dona Estefania, taking me by the hand, led me into another
room. There she told me that this fHend of hers wanted


118 THE DECEITFUL MARRIAGE.

to play a trick on that Don Lope who was come with her,
and to whom she expected to be married. The trick was
to make him believe that the house and everything in it be-
longed to herself. Once married, it would matter little that
the truth was discovered, so confident was the lady in the great
love of Don Lope ; the property would then be returned ; and
Ivho could blame her, or any woman, for contriving to get an
honourable husband, though it were by a little artifice ? I
replied that it was a very great stretch of friendship she thought
of making, and that ?he ought to look well to it beforehand, for
very probably she might be constrained to have recourse to
justice to recover her effects. She gave me, however, so many
reasons, and alleged so many obligations by which she was
bound to serve Dona Clement a even in matters of more
importance, that much against my will, and with sore mis-
givings, I complied with Dona Estefania's wishes, on the
assurance that the affair would not last more than eight days,
during which we were to lodge with another friend of hers.

We finished dressing ; she went to take her leave of the
senora Dofia Clementa Bueso and the senor Lope Melendez
Almendarez, ordered my servant to follow her with my lug-
gage, and I too followed without taking leave of any one.
Dona Estefania stopped at a friend's house, and stayed talking
^ith her a good while, leaving us in the street, till at last a
girl came out and told me and my servant to come in. We
went up stairs to a small room in which there were two beds
so close together that they seemed but one, for the bed-clothes
actually touched each other. There we remained six days,
during which not an hour passed in which we did not quarrel ;
for I was always telling her what a stupid thing she had done
in giving up her house and goods, though it were to her own
mother. One day, when Dona Estefania had gone out, as she
feaid, to see how her business was going on, the woman of the
house asked me what was the reason of my wrangling so much
with my wife, and what had she done for which I scolded her
so much, saying it was an act of egregious folly rather than
of perfect friendship. I told her the whole story, how I
had married Dona Estefania, the dower she had brought
me, and the folly she had committed in leaving her house
and goods to Dona Clementa, even though it was for the good
purpose of catching such a capital husband as Don Lope;


THE DECEITFUL MARRIAGE. 119

Thereupon the woman began to cross and bless herself at
such a rate, and to cry out, " O, Lord ! O, the jade !" that she
put me into a* great state of uneasiness. At last, " Seiiop
Alferez," said she, ** I don't know but I am going against my
conscience in making known to you what I feel would lie
heavy on it if I held my tongue. Here goes, however, in the
name of God, — ^happen what may, the truth for ever, and lies
to the devil ! The truth is, that Doila Clementa Bueso is the
real owner of the house and property which you have had
palmed upon you for a dower ; the lies are every word that
Dona Estefania has told you, for she has neither house nop
goods, nor any clothes besides those on her back. What gave
her an opportunity for this trick was that Dona Clementa went
to visit one of her relations in the city of Plasencia, and there
to perform a novenary in the church of our Lady of Guadalu])e,
meanwhile leaving Dona Estefania to look after her house, for
in fact they are great friends. And after all, rightly con-
sidered, the poor senora is not to blame, since she has had
the wit to get herself such a person as the Senor Alfcrcz for
a husband,"

Here she came to an end, leaving me almost desperate ;
and without doubt I should have become wholly so, if my
guardian angel had failed in the least to support me, and
whisper to my heart that I ought to consider I was a Chris-
tian, and that the greatest sin men can be guilty of is despair,
since it is the sin of devils. This consideration, or good in-
spiration, comforted me a little ; not so much, however, but
that I took my cloak and sword, and went out in search of
DoiXa Estefania, resolved to inflict upon her an exemplary
chastisement ; but chance ordained, whether for my good or
not I cannot tell, that she was not to be found in any of the
places where I expected to fall in with her. I went to the
church of San Lorente, commended me to our Lady, sat
down on a bench, and in my affliction fell into so deep a
sleep that I should not have awoke for a long time if others
had not roused me. I went with a heavy heart to Dona
Clementa' s, and found her as much at ease as a lady should
be in her own house. Not daring to say a word to her,
because Senor Don Lope was present, I returned to my land-
lady, who told me she had informed Dona Estefania that I
was acquainted with her whole roguery ; that she bad asked how


120 THE DECEITFUL MARBIAGB.

I had seemed to take the news ; that she, the landlady, said I
had taken it very hadly, and had gone out to look for her, appa-
rently with the worst intentions ; whereupon DoSa Estefania
had gone away, taking with her all that was in my trunk,
only leaving me one travelling coat. I flew to my trunk, and
found it open, like a coffin waiting for a dead body ; and weU
might it have been my own, if sense enough had been left me
to comprehend the magnitude of my misfortune.

*^ Great it was, indeed,'' observed the licentiate Peralta ;
'^ only to think that Dona Estefania carried off your fine chain
and hat-band ! Well, it is a true saying, * Misfortunes never
come single.

I do not so much mind that loss, replied the Alferez,
since I may apply to myself the old saw, *^ My father-in-law
thought to cheat me by putting off his squinting daughter
upon me ; and I myself am blind of an eye."

*' I don t know in what respect you can say that? " replied
Peralta.

Why, in this respect, that all that lot of chains and gew-
gaws might be worth some ten or twelve crowns.

*^ Impossible ! " exclaimed the licentiate ; " for that which
the Senor Alferez wore on his neck must have weighed more
than two hundred ducats."

So it would have done, replied the Alferez, if the
reality had corresponded with the appearance ; but " All b
not gold that glitters," and my fine things were only imita-
tions, but so well made that nothing but the touchstone or the
fire could have detected that they were not genuine.

*^ So, then, it seems to have been a drawn game between
you and the Senora Dona Estefania," said the licentiate.

So much so that we may shuffle the cards and make a
fresh deal. Only the mischief is, Senor Licentiate, that she
may get rid of my mock chains, but I cannot get rid of the
cheat she put upon me ; for, in spite of my teeth, she remains
my wife.

" You may thank God, Senor Campuzano," said Peralta,
" that your wife has taken to her heels, and that you are no^
obliged to go in search of her."

Very true; but for all that, even without looking for
her, I always find her — in imagination ; and wherever I am^
my disgrace is always present before me*


THE DECEITFUL MAHRIAGS* 121

** I know not what answer to make you, except to remind
you of these two verses of Petrarch : —

** * Che qui prende diletto di far frode,
Non slia di lamentar s'altro ringanna.*

That is to say, whoever makes it his practice and his pleasure
to deceive others, has no right to complain when he ia himself
deceived."

But I don't complain, replied the Alferez; only I pity
myself — ^for the culprit who knows his fault does not the
less feel the pain of his punishment. I am well aware that I
sought to deceive and that I was deceived, and caught in my
own snare ; but I cannot command my feelings so much as
not to lament over myself. To come, however, to what more
concerns my history (for I may give that name to the narra-
tive of my adventures), I learned that Dona £stefania had
been taken away by that cousin whom she brought to our
wedding, who had been a lover of hers of long standing.
I had no mind to go after her and bring back upon myself an
evil I was rid of, I changed my lodgings and my skin too
within a few days. My eyebrows and eyelashes began to
drop ; my hair left me by degrees ; and I was bald before my
time, and stripped of everything ; for I had neither a beard
to comb nor money to spend. My illness kept pace with my
want ; and as poverty bears down honour, drives some to the
gallows, some to the hospital, and makes others enter their
enemies' doors with cringing submissiveness, which is one of
the greatest miseries that can befall an unlucky man ; that I
might not expend upon my cure the clothes that should cover
me respectably in health, I entered the Hospital of the Resur<^
rection, where I took forty sudations. They say that I shall
get well if I take care of myself. I have my sword; for the
rest I trust in God.

The licentiate renewed his friendly offers, much wondering
at the things he had heard.

If you are surprised at the little I have told you, SeSof
Peralta, said the Alferez, what will you say to the other
things I have yet to relate, which exceed all imagination, sinc6
they pass all natural bounds ? I can only tell you that they
are such that 1 think it a full compensation for all my disas*
ters that they were the cause of my entering the hospital.


122 THE DECEITFUL MABRIAGE.

where I saw what I shall now relate to you ; and what you
can never believe ; no ; nor anybody else in the world."

All these preambles of the Alferez so excited Peralta's
curiosity, that be earnestly desired to hear, in detail, all that
remained to be told.

You have no doubt seen, said the Alferez, two dogs
going about by night with lanterns along with the Capuchin
brethren, to give them light when they are collecting alms.

" I have," replied Peralta.

You have also seen, or heard tell of them, that if alms
are thrown from the windows, and happen to fall on the
ground, they immediately help with the light and begin to look
for what has fallen ; that they stop of their own accord before
the windows from which they know they are used to receive
alms ; and that with all their tameness on these occasions, so
that they are more like lambs tlian dogs, they are lions in the
hospital, keeping guard with great care and vigilance.

" I have heard that all this is as you say," said Peralta ;
** but there is nothing in this to move my wonder."

But what I shall now tell you of them, returned the
Alferez, is enough to do so ; yet, strange as it is, you must
bring yourself to believe it. One night, the last but one of
my sudation, I heard, and all but saw with my eyes those two
dogs, one of which is called Scipio, the other Berganza,
stretched on an old mat outside my room. In the middle of
the night, lying awake in the dark, thinking of my past
adventures and my present sorrows, I heard talking, and set
myself to listen attentively, to see if I oould make out who
were the speakers and what they said. By degrees I did
both, and ascertained that the speakers were the dpgs Scipio
and Berganza.

The words were hardly out of Campuzano's mouth, when
the licentiate jumped up and said : " Saving your favour,
Sefior Campuzano, till this moment I was in much doubt
whether or not to believe what you have told me about your
marriage ; but what you now tell me of your having heard
dogs talk, makes me decide upon not believing you at alL
S'or God's sake, Senor Alferez, do not relate such nonsense to
any body, unless it be to one who is as much your friend as I


am.


Do not suppose I am so ignorant, replied CampuzanOi


THE DECEITFUL MARRIAGE. 123

as not to know that brutes cannot talk unless by a miracle.
I well know that if starlings, jays, and parrots talk, it is only
such words as they have learned by rote, and because they
have tongues adapted to pronounce them ; but they cannot,
for all that, speak and reply with deliberate" discourse as those
dogs did. Many times, indeed, since I heard them I have
been disposed not to believe myself, but to regard as a dream
that which, being really awake, with all the five senses which
our Lord was pleased to give me, I heard, marked, and finally
wrote down without missing a word ; whence you may derive
proof enough to move and persuade you to believe this verity
which I relate. The matters they talked of were various and
weighty, such as might rather have been discussed by learned
men than by the mouths of dogs ; so that, since I could not
have invented them out of my own head, I am come, in spite
of myself, to believe that I did not dream, and that the dogs
did talk.

" Body of me!" exclaimed the licentiate, "are the times
of ^sop come back to us, when the cock conversed with the
fox, and one beast with another ? "

I should be one of them, and the greatest, replied the
Alferez, if I believed that time had returned; and so f
should be, too, if I did not believe what I have heard and
seen, and what I am ready to swear to by any form of oath
that can constrain incredulity itself to believe. But, sup^
posing that I have deceived myself, and that this reality was
a dream, and that to contend for it is an absurdity, will it not
amuse you, Senor PeraJta, to see, written in the form of a
dialogue, the matters talked of by those dogs, or whoever the
speakers may have been ?

" Since you no longer insist on having me believe that
you heard dogs talk," replied Peralta, " with much pleasure
I will hear this colloquy, of which I augur well, since it is
reported by a gentlemen of such talents as the Senor Alferez."

Another thing I have to remark, said Campuzano, is, that,
as I was very attentive, my apprehension very sensitive, and
my memory very retentive (thanks to the many raisins and
almonds I had swallowed), I got it all by heart, and wrote
it down, word for word, the next day, without attempting to
colour or adorn it, or adding or suppressing anything to make
it attractive* The conversation took place not on one night


124 DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS.

only, but on two consecutive nights, though I have not writ*
ten down more than one dialogue, that which contains the
life of Berganza. His comrade Scipio's life, which was the
subject of the second night's discourse, I intend to write out.
if I find that the first one is believed, or at least not despised.
I have thrown the matter into the form of a dialogue to
avoid the cumbrous repetition of such phrases as, saidScipio,
replied Berganza.

So saying, he took a roll of paper out of his breast pocket,
and put it in the hands of the licentiate, who received it with
a smile, as if he made very light of all he had heard, and was
about to read.

I will recline on this sofa, said the Alferez, whilst you
are reading those dreams or ravings, if you will, which have
only this to recommend them, that you may lay them down
when you grow tired of them.

" Make yourself comfortable," said Peralta ; " and I will
soon despatch my reading."

The Alferez lay down ; the licentiate opened the scroll^
and found it headed as follows :— »


DIALOGUE BETWEEN SCIPIO AND BERGANZA,

DOGS OF THE HOSPITAL OF THE BESUBBECTIOST IN THE CITY OF TALLA*
DOLIB, COMMONLY CALLED THE DOGS OF MAHUDES.

Scip. Berganza, my friend, let us leave our watch over
the hospital to-night, and retire to this lonely place and these
mats, where, without being noticed, we may enjoy that unex-
ampled favour which heaven has bestowed on us both at the
same moment.

Berg. Brother Scipio, I hear you speak, and know that
I am speaking to you ; yet cannot I believe, so much does
it seem to me to pass the bounds of nature.

JScip. That is true, Berganza; and what makes the miracle
greater is, that we not only speak but hold intelligent dis-
course, as though we had souls capable of reason ; whereas we
are so far from having it, that the difference between brutes
and man consists in this, that man is a rational animal and the
brute is irrational.

Berg. I hear all you say, Scipio ; and that you say it| and


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 125

ihttt I hear it, causes me fresh admiration and wonder. It is
very true that in the course of my Kfe I have many a time heard
tell of our great endowments, insomuch that some, it appears,
have been disposed to think that we possess a natural instinct,
so vivid and acute in many things that it gives signs and
tokens little short of demonstrating that we have a certain
sort of understanding capable of reason,

JSdp. What I have heard highly extolled is our strong
memory, our gratitude, and great fidelity ; so that it is usual
to depict us as symbols of friendship. Thus you will have
seen (if it has ever come under your notice) that, on the
alabaster tombs, on which are represented the figures of those
interred in them, when they are husband and wife, a figure of
a dog is placed between the pair at their feet, in token that
in life their affection and fidelity to each other was inviolable.

Derff» I know that there have been grateful dogs who
have cast themselves into the same grave with the bodies of
their deceased masters; others have stood over the graves
in which their lords were buried without quitting them or
taking food till they died. I know, likewise, that next to the
elephant the dog holds the first place in the way of appearing
to possess understanding, then the horse, and last the ape.

tScip. True ; but you will surely confess that you never saw
or heard tell of any elephant, dog, horse, or monkey having
talked : hence I infer, that this fact of our coming by the gift
of speech so unexpectedly falls within the list of those things
which are called portents, the appearance of which indicates,
as experience testifies, that some great calamity threatens the
nations.

Berg. That being so I can readily enough set down as a
portentous token what I heard a student say the other day aa
I passed through AlcaU de Henares.

fSdp, What was that ?

Berg. That of five thousand students this year attending
the university — two thousand are studying medicine.

Scip, And what do you infer from that ?

Berg, I infer either that those two thousand doctors will
have patients to treat, and that would be a woful thing, or
that they must die of hunger.

JScip. Be that as it may, let us talk, portent or no portent;
for what heaven has ordsoned to happen^ no human diligence


126 l^IALOGUB BETWEEN TWO DOGS.

or wit qan prevent. Nor is it needful that we should fall to
disputing as to the how or the why we talk. Better will it
be to make the best of this good day or good night at home ;
and since we enjoy it so much on these mats, and know not
how long this good fortune of ours may last, let us take
advantage of it and talk all night, without suffering sleep to
deprive us of a pleasure which I, for my part, have so long
desired

Berg, And I, too ; for ever since I had strength enough
to gnaw a bone I have longed for the power of speech, that
J might utter a multitude of things I had laid up in my
memory, and which lay there so long that they were growing
musty or almost forgotten. Now, however, that I see myself
so unexpectedly enriched with this divine gift of speech,
I intend to enjoy it and avail myself of it as much as I can,
taking pains to say everything I can recollect, though it be
confusedly and helter-skelter, not knowing when this blessing,
which I regard as a loan, shall be reclaimed from me.

Sc't'p, Let us proceed in this manner, friend Berganza:
to-night you shall relate the history of your life to me, and
the perils through which you have passed to the present hour.;
and to-morrow night, if we still have speech, I will recount
mine to you ; for it will be better to spend the time in narrating
our own lives than in trying to know those of others.

Berg, I have ever looked upon you, Scipio, as a discreet
dog and a friend, and now I do so more than ever, since, as a
friend, you desire to tell me your adventures and know mine ;
and, as a discreet dog, you apportion the time in which we
may narrate them. But first observe whether any one over-
hears us.

Sdp, No one, I believe ; - since hereabouts there is a
goldier going through a sweating-course ; but at this time of
night he will be more disposed to sleep than to listen to
anything.

Berg. Since then we can speak so securely, hearken ; and
if I tire you with what I say, either check me or bid me hold
my tongue.

Sdp, Talk till dawn, or till we are heard, and I will
listen to you with very great pleasure, without interrupting
you, unless I see it to be necessary.

Berg. It appears to me that the first time I saw the sun


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO BOGS. 127

was in Seville, in its slaughter-houses, which were outside the
Puerta de la Came ; wenee I should imagine (were it not
for what I shall afterwards tell you) that my progenitors were
some of those mastiffs which are bred by those ministers of
confusion who are called butchers. The first I knew for a
master, was one Nicholas the Pugnosed, a stout, thick-set, pas-^
sionate fellow, as all butchers are. This Nicholas taught me
and other whelps to run at bulls in company with old dogs
and catch them by the ears. With great ease I became an
eagle among my fellows in this respect.

Scip. I do not wonder, Berganza, that ill-doing is so easily
learned, since it comes by a natural obliquity.

Ber^, What can I say to you, brother Scipio, of what I
saw in those slaughter-houses, and the enormous things that
were done in them ? In the first place, you must understand
that all who work in them, from the lowest to the highest, are
people without conscience or humanity, fearing neither the
king nor his justice ; most of them living in concubinage ;
carrion birds of prey; maintaining themselves and their
doxies by what they steal. On all flesh days, a great number
of wenches and young chaps assemble in the slaughtering
place before dawn, all of them with bags which come empty
and go away full of pieces of meat. Not a beast is killed
out ot which these people do not take tithes, and that of the
choicest and most savoury pickings. The masters trust im-
plicitly in these honest folk, not with the hope that they will
not rob them (for that is impossible), but that they may use
their knives with some moderation. But what struck me as
the worst thing of all, was that these butchers make no more
of killing a man than a cow. They will quarrel for straws,
and stick a knife into a person's body as readily as they would-
fell an ox. It is a rare thing for a day to pass without brawls
and bloodshed, and even murder. They all pique themselves
on being men of mettle, and they observe, too, some punctilios
of the bravo ; there is not one of them but has his guardian
angel in the Plaza de San Francesco, whom he propitiates
with sirloins, and beef tongues.

Scip. If you mean to dwell at such length, friend Ber-
ganza, on the characteristics and faults of all the masters you
have had, we had better pray to heaven to grant us the gift
of speech for a year ; and even then I fear, at the rate you


128 DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS.

are going, you will not get through half your story. One
thing I beg to remark to you, of which you will see proof
when I relate my own adventures ; and that is, that some
stories are pleasing in themselves, and others from the manner
in which they are told ; I mean that there are some which
give satisfaction, though they are told without preambles and
verbal adornments ; while others require to be decked in that
way and set off by expressive play of features, hands, and
voice; whereby, instead of flat and insipid, they become
pointed and agreeable. Do not forget this hint, but profit by
it in what you are about to say.

Berg, I will do so, if I can, and if I am not hindered by
the great temptation I feel to speak ; though, indeed, it ap«
pears to me that I shall have the greatest difficulty in con-
straining myself to moderation.

Scip. Be wary with your tongue, for from that member
flow the greatest ills of human life.

Berg, Well, then, to go on with my story, my master
taught me to carry a basket in my mouth, and to defend it
against any one who should attempt to take it from me. He
also made me acquainted with the house in which his mistress
lived, and thereby spared her servant the trouble of coming
to the slaughter-house, for I used to carry to her the pieces of
meat he had stolen over night. Once as I was going along
on this errand in the gray of the morning, I heard some one
calling me by name from a window. Looking up I saw an ex-
tremely pretty girl ; she came down to the street door, and
began to call me again. I went up to her to see what she
wanted of me ; and what was it but to take away the meat I
was carrying in the basket and put an old clog in its place ?
" Be off with you," she said, when she had done so ; " and tell
Nicholas the Pugnosed, your master, not to put trust in
brutes." I might easily have made her give up what she had
taken from me ; but I would not put a cruel tooth on those
delicate white hands.

Sciv* You did quite right; for it is the prerogative of
beauty always to be held in respect.

IJerg, Well, I went back to my master without the meat
and with the old clog. It struck him that I had come back
very soon, and seeing the clog, he guessed the trick, snatched
up a knife, and flung it at me ; and if I had not leaped aside.


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGB* 129

you would not now be listening to my story. I took to my
heels, and was off like a shot behind St. Bernard's, away over
the fields, without stopping to think whither my luck would
lead rae. That night I slept under the open sky, and the
following day I chanced to fall in with a flock of sheep. The
moment I saw it, I felt that I had found the very thing that
suited me, since it appeared to me to be the natural and pro«
per duty of dogs to guard the fold, that being an office which
involves the great virtue of protecting and defending the
lowly and the weak against the proud and mighty. One
of the three shepherds who were with the flock immediately
called me to him, and T, who desired nothing better, went up
at once to him, lowering my head and wagging my tail. He
passed his hand along my back, opened my mouth, examined
my fangs, ascertained my age, and told his master that I had
all the works and tokens of a dog of good breed. Just
then up came the owner of the flock on a gray mare with
lance and surge, so that he looked more a coast-guard than a
sheep master.

"What dog is that!" said he to the shepherd; "he seems
a good one." " You may well say that," replied the man ;
" for I have examined him closely, and there is not a mark
about him but shows that he must be of the right sort. He
came here just now ; I don't know whose he is, but I know
that he does not belong to any of the flocks hereabouts."

" If that be so, ' said the master, " put on him the collar
that belonged to the dog that is dead, and give him the same
rations as the rest, treat him kindly that he may take a liking
to the fold, and remain with it henceforth." So saying he
went away, and the shepherd put on my neck a collar set
with steel points, after first giving me a great mess of bread
sopped in milk in a trough. At the same time I had a name
bestowed on me, which was Barcino. I liked my second master,
and my new duty very well ; I was careful and diligent in watch-
ing the flock, and never quitted it except in the afternoons,
when I went to repose under the shade of some tree, or rock, or
bank, or by the margin of one of the many streams that watered
the country. Nor did I spend those leisure hours idly, but
employed them in calling many things to mind, especially tho
life I had led in the slaughter-house, and also that of my mas -
ter and all his fellows, who were bound to satisfv the inordi-


130 CERVANTES' EXEJfPLART TALES.

nate humours of their mbtresses. O how many things I could
tell you of that I learned in the school of that she-butcher,
my master's lady ; but I must pass them over, lest you should
think me tedious and censorious.

JScip, I have heard that it was a saying of a great poet
among the ancients, that it was a difficult thing to write satires.
I consent that you put some point into your remarks, but not
to the drawing of blood. You may hit lightly, but not wound
or kill ; for sarcasm, though it make many laugh, is not good
if it mortally wounds one ; and if you can please without it, I
shall think you more discreet.

Berg, I will take your advice, and I earnestly long for the
time when you will relate your own adventures ; for seeing
how judiciously you correct the faults into which I fall in my
narrative, I may well expect that your own will be delivered
in a manner equally instructive and delightful. But to take
up the broken thread of my story, I say that in those hours of
silence and solitude, it occurred to me among other things,
that there could be no truth in what I had heard tell of the
life of shepherds — of those, at least, about whom my master's
lady used to read, when I went to her house, in certain books,
all treating of shepherds and shepherdesses ; and telling how
they passed their whole life in singing and playing on pipes
and rebecks, and other old fashioned instruments. I remember
her reading how the shepherd of Anfriso sang the praises of
the peerless Belisarda, and that there was not a tree on all the
mountains of Arcadia on whose trunk he had not sat and
sung from the moment Sol quitted the arms of Aurora, till he
threw himself into those of Thetis, and that even after black
night had spread its murky wings over the face of the earth,
he did not cease his melodious complaints. I did not forget
the shepherd Elicio, more enamoured than bold, of whom it
was said, that without attending to his own loves or his flock,
he entered into others' griefs ; nor the great shepherd Filida,
unique painter of a single portrait, who was more faithful than
happy ; nor the anguish of Sireno and the remorse of Diana,
and how she thanked God and the sage Felicia, who, with
her enchanted water, undid that maze of entanglements and
difficulties. I bethought me of many other tales of the samo
lort, but they were not worthy of being remembered.
^ The habits and occupations of my masters, and the rest of.


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 131

the shepherds in that quarter, were very different from those
of the shepherds in the books. If mine sang, it was no tune-
ful and finely composed strains, but very rude and vulgar
songs, to the accompaniment not of pipes and rebecks, but to
that of one crook knocked against another, or of bits of tile
jingled between the fingers, and sung with voices not melo-
dious and tender, but so coarse and out of tune, that whether
singly or in chorus, they seemed to be howling or grunting.
They passed the greater part of the day in hunting up their
fleas or mending their brogues ; and none of them were named
Amarillis, Filida, Galatea, or Diana ; nor were there any Lisar-
dos, Lausos, Jacintos, or Biselos ; but all were Antones, Domin-
gos, Pablos, or Llorentes. This led me to conclude that all
those books about pastoral life are only fictions ingeniously
written for the amusement of the idle, and that there is not a
word of truth in them ; for, were it otherwise, there would
have remained among my shepherds some trace of that happy
life of yore, with its pleasant meads, spacious groves, sacred
mountains, handsome gardens, clear streams and crystal foun-
tains, its ardent but no less decorous love-descants, with here
the shepherd, there the shepherdess all woe-begone, and
the air made vocal everywhere with flutes and pipes and
flageolets.

Sdp, Enough, Berganza; get back into your road^ and
trot on.

Berg. I am much obliged to you, friend Scipio ; for, but for
your hint, I was getting so warm upon the scent, that I should
not have stopped till I had given you one whole specimen of
those books that had so deceived me. But a time will come
when I shall discuss the whole matter more fully and more
opportunely than now.

Scip, Look to your feet, and don't run after your tail,
that is to say, recollect that you are an animal devoid of reason ;
or if you seem at present to have a little of it, we are already
agreed that this is a supernatural and altogether unparalleled
circumstance.

Berg, That would be all very well if I were still in my
pristine state of ignorance ; but now that I bethink me of
what I should have mentioned to you in the beginning of our
conversation, I not only cease to wonder that I speak, but I
am terrified at the thought of leaving off.

3 2


132 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

Scip. Can you not tell me that somethiDg now that you
recollect it ?

Berg. It was a certain affair that occurred to me with a
somtess, a disciple of la Camacha de Montilla.

Scip. Let me hear it now, before you proceed with the
story of your life.

Berg, No, not till the proper time. Have patience and
listen to the recital of my adventures in the order they
occurred, for they will afford you more pleasure in that
way.

Scip, Very well ; tell me what you will and how you will,
but be brief.

Berg. I say, then, that I was pleased with my duty as a
guardian of the flock, for it seemed to me that in that way late
the bread of industry, and that sloth, the root and mother of
all vices, came not nigh me ; for if I rested by day, I never
slept at night, the wolves continually assailing us and calling
us to arms. The instant the shepherds said to me, " The wolf!
the wolf! at him, Barcino/' I dashed forward before all the
other dogs, in the direction pointed out to me by the shep-
herds. I scoured the valleys, searched the mountains, beat
the thickets, leaped the gullies, crossed the roads, and on the
morning returned to the fold without having caught the wolf
or seen a glimpse of him, panting, weary, all scratched and
torn, and my feet cut with splinters ; and I found in the fold
either a ewe or a wether slaughtered and half eaten by the
wolf. It vexed me desperately to see of what little avail were
all my care and diligence. Then the owner of the flock would
come ; the shepherds would go out to meet him with the skin
of the slaughtered animal : the owner would scold the shep-
herds for their negligence, and order the dogs to be punished
for cowardice. Down would come upon us a shower of sticks
and revilings ; and so, finding myself punished without fault,
and that my care, alertness, and courage were of no avail to
keep off the wolf, I resolved to change my manner of pro-
ceeding, and not to go out to seek him, as I had been used
to do, but to remain close to the fold ; for since the wolf
came to it, that would be the surest place to catch him. Every
week we had an alarm ; and one dark night I contrived to
get a sight of the wolves, from which it was so impossible to


PIALOOUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 133

guard the fold. I crouclied behind a bank ; the rest of the
dogs ran forward ; and from my lurking-place I saw and
heard how two shepherds picked out one of the fattest
wethers, and slaughtered it in such a manner, that it really
appeared next morning as if the executioner had been a
wolf. I was horror-struck, when I saw that the shepherds
themselves were the wolves, and that the flock was plun-
dered by the very men who had the keeping of it. As
usual, they made known to their master the mischief done
by the wolf, gave him the skin and part of the carcase, and
ate the rest, and that the choicest part, themselves. As usual,
they had a scolding, and the dogs a beating. Thus there
were no wolves, ye£ the flock dwindled away, and I was
dumb, all which filled me with amazement and anguish. O
Lord! said I to myself, who can ever remedy this villany?
Who will have the power to make known that the defence is
oflensive, the sentinels sleep, the trustees rob, and those who
guard, you kill you ?

Sdp. You say very true, Berganza ; for there is no worse
or more subtle thief than the domestic thief ; and accordingly
there die many more of those who are trustful than of those
who are wary. But the misfortune is, that it is impossible
for people to get on in the world in any tolerable way with-
out mutual confidence. However, let us drop this subject :
there is no need that we should be evermore preachings
Go on.

Berg, I determined then to quit that service, though it
seemed so good a one, and to choose another, in which well-*
doing, if not rewarded, was at least not punished. I went
back to Seville, and entered the service of a very rieh mer-
chant.

Scip. How did you set about getting yourself a master }
As things are now-a-days, an honest man has great difficulty
in finding an employer. Very difierent are the lords of the
earth from the Lord of Heaven ; the former, before they will
accept a servant, first scrutinise his birth and parentage, ex-
amine into his qualifications, and even require to know what
clothes he has got ; but for entering the service of God, the
poorest is the richest, the humblest is the best tK>rn ; and
whoso is but disposed to serve him in purity of heart is at
once entered in his book of wages, and has such assigned to


134 CEBTANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

him as his utmost desire can hardly compass, so ample are
they.

Berg. All this is preaching, Scipio.

Sdp, Well, it strikes me that it is. So go on.

Berg, With respect to your question, how I set about
getting a master : you are aware that humility is the base
and foundation of all virtues, and that without it there are
none. It smooths inconveniences, overcomes difficulties,
and is a means which always conducts us to glorious ends ; it
makes friends of enemies, tempers the wrath of the choleric,
and abates the arrogance of the proud : it is the mother ot
modesty, and sister of temperance. I availed myself of this
virtue whenever I wanted to get a place in any house, after
having first considered and carefully ascertained that it was
one which could maintain a great dog. I then placed myself
near the door ; and whenever any one entered whom I guessed
to be a stranger, I barked at him ; and when the master
Altered, 1 went up to him with my head down, my tail wag-
ging, and licked his shoes. If they drove me out with sticks,
I took it patiently, and turned with the same gentleness to
fawn in the same way on the person who beat me. The rest
let me alone, seeing my perseverance and my generous beha-
viour; and after one or two turns of this kind, I got a foot-
ing in the house. I was a good servant : they took a liking
to me immediately ; and I was never turned out, but dis-
missed myself, or, to speak more properly, I ran away ; and
sometimes I met with such a master, that but for the persecu-
tion of fortune I should have remained with him to this
day.

Scip, It was just in the same way that I got into the
houses of the .masters I served. It seems that we read men*s
thoughts.

Berg. I will tell you now what happened to me after I left
the fold in the power of those reprobates. I returned, as I
have saia, to Seville, the asylum of the poor and refuge for
the destitute, which embraces in its greatness not only the
rude but the mighty and flourishing. I planted myself at
the door of a large house belonging to a merchant, exerted
myself ai^ usual, and after a few trials gained admission.
They kept me tied up behind the door by day, and let me
loose at night. I did my duty with great care and diligence,


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 135

barked at strangers, and growled at those who were not well
known. I did not sleep at night, but visited the yards, and
walked about the terraces, acting as general guard over our
own house and those of the neighbours ; and my master was
so pleased with my good service, that be gave orders I should
be well treated, and have a ration of bread, with the bones
from his table, and the kitchen scraps. For this I showed
my gratitude by no end of leaps when I saw my master,
especially when he came home after being abroad ; and such
were my demonstrations of joy that my master ordered me to
be untied, and left loose day and night. As soon as I was
set free, I ran to him, and gambolled all round him, without
venturing to lay my paws on him ; for I bethought me of
that ass in ^sop's Fables, who was ass enough to think of
fondling his master in the same manner as his favourite lap-
dog, and was well basted for his pains. I understood that
fable to signify, that what is graceful and comely in some is
not so in others. Let the ribald flout and jeer, the mounte-
bank tumble, — ^let the common fellow, who has made it his
business, imitate the song of birds and the gestures of
animals, but not the man of quality, who can deserve no
credit or renown from any skill in these things.

Scip, Enough said, Berganza ; I understand you ; go on.

Berg, Would that others for whom I say this understood
me as well ! For there is something or other in my nature
which makes me feel greatly shocked when I see a cavalier
make a buffoon of himself, and taking pride in being able to
play at thimblerig, and in dancing the ckacona to perfec-
tion. I know a cavalier who boasted, that he had, at the
request of a sacristan, cut out thirty-two paper ornaments,
to stick upon the black cloth over a monument ; and he was
so proud of his performance that he took his friends to see
it, as though he were showing them pennons and trophies
taken from the enemy, and hung over the tombs of his fore-
fathers. Well, this merchant I have been telling you of had
two sons,, one aged twelve, the other about fourteen, who
were studying the humanities in the classes of the Company of
Jesus. They went in pomp to the college, accompanied by
their tutor, and by pages to carry their books, and what they
called their Yademecum. To see them go with such parade,
on horseback in fine weather^ and in a carriage when it


136 CEBYANTEB EZEMPLABT TALES.

rainedy mac^e me wonder at the plain manner in which their
father went abroad upon his business^ attended by no other
servant than a negro, and sometimes mounted upon a sorry
mule.

Scip. You must know, Berganza, that it is a customary
thing with the merchants of Seville, and of other cities also,
to display their wealth and importance, not in their own per-
sons, but in those of their sons : for merchants are greater in
their shadows than in themselves ; and as they rarely attend
to anything else than their bargains, they spend little on
themselves ; but as ambition and wealth bum to display them-
selves, they show their own in the persons of their sons,
maintaining them as sumptuously as if they were sons of
princes. Sometimes too they purchase titles for them, and
set upon their breasts the mark that so much distinguishes
men of rank from the commonalty.

Berg, It is ambition, but a generous ambition that seeks
to improve one's condition without prejudice to others.

Scip. Seldom or never can ambition consist with absti-
nence from injury to others.

Berg, Have we not said that we are not to speak evil of
any one?

Scip, Ay, but I don't speak evil of any one.

Berg. You now convince me of the truth of what I have
often heard say, that a person of a malicious tongue will
utter enough to blast ten families, and calumniate twenty good
men ; and if he is taken to task for it, he will reply that he
said nothing; or, if he did, he meant nothing by it, and
would not have said it if he had thought any one would take it
amiss. In truth, Scipio, one had need of much wisdom and
w^ariness to be able to entertain a conversation for two hours,
without approaching the confines of evil speaking. In my
own case, for instance, brute as I am, I see that with every
fourth phrase I utter, words full of malice and detraction
come to my tongue like flies to wine. I therefore say again
that doing and speaking evil are things we inherit from our
first parents, and suck in with our mother's milk. This is
manifest in the fact, that hardly is a boy out of swaddling
clothes before he lifts his hand to take vengeance upon those
by whom he thinks himself offended ; and the first words he
articulates are to call his nurse or his mother a jade.


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO D006. ]37

Scip. That is true. I confess my error, and beg you
will forgive it, as I have forgiven you so many. Let us pitch
ill-nature into the sea — as the boys say — and henceforth
backbite no more. Go on with your story. You were talk-
ing of the grand style in which the sons of your master the
merchant went to the college of the Company of Jesus.

Berg, I will go on then ; and though I hold it a sufficient
thing to abstain from ill-natured remarks, yet I propose to
• use a remedy, which I am told was employed by a great
swearer, who repenting of his bad habit, made it a practice to
pinch his arm, or kiss the ground as penance, whenever an
oath escaped him ; but he continued to swear for all that. In
like manner, whenever I act contrary to the precept you have
given me against evil speaking, and contrary to my own in-
tention to abstain from that practice, I will bite the tip of
my tongue, so that the smart may remind me of my fault,
and hinder me from relapsing into it.

Seip, If that is the remedy you mean to use, I expect
that you will have to bite your tongue so often, that there
wiU be none of it left, and it will be put beyond the possi-
bility of oifending.

Berg. At least I will do my best ; may heaven make up
my deficiencies. Well, to resume : one day my master's sons
left a note-book in the court-yard where I was ; and as I had
been taught to fetch and carry, I took it up, and went after
them, resolved to put it into their own hands. It turned out
exactly as I desired ; for my masters seeing me coming with
the note-book in my mouth, which I held cleverly by its
string, sent a page to take it from me ; but I would not let
him, nor quitted it till I entered the hall with it, at which all
the students fell a laughing. Going up to the elder of my
masters, I put it into his hands, with all the obsequiousness
I could, and went and seated myself on my haunches at the
door of the hall, with my eyes fixed on the master who was
lecturing in the chair. There is some strange charm in vir-
tue ; for though I know little or nothing about it, I at once
took delight in seeing the loving care and industry with which
the reverend fathers taught those youths, shaping their tender
minds aright, and guiding them in the path of virtue, which
they demonstrated to them along with letters. I observed
how they reproved them with suavity, chastised them with


138 CERYANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

mercy, animated them with examples, incited them with
rewards, and indulged them with prudence ; and how they
set be'fore them the loathsomeness of vice and the beauty oi
virtue, so that abhorring the one and loving the other, they
might achieve the end for which they were created.

Scip. You say very well, Berganza; for I have heard tell
of this holy fraternity, that for worldly wisdom there are none
equal to them ; and that as guides and leaders on the road to
heaven, few come up to them. They are mirrors of integrity,
catholic doctrine, rare wisdom, and profound humility, the
base on which is erected the whole edifice of beatitude.

Berg, That is every word true. But to return to my
story: my masters were so pleased with my carrying them the
note-book, that they would have me do so every day ; and
thus I enjoyed the life of a king, or even better, having no-
thing to do but to play with the stud^its, with whom I grew
so tame, that they would put their hands in my mouth, and
the smallest of them would ride on my back. They would
fling their hats or caps for me to fetch, and I would put them
into their hands with marks of great delight. They used to
give me as much to eat as they could ; and they were fond of
seeing, when they gave me nuts or almonds, how I cracked
them like a monkey, let fall the shells, and ate the kernels. One
student, to make proof of my ability, brought me a great
quantity of salad in a basket, and I ate it like a human being.
It was the winter season, when m^nchets and mantequillas
abound in Seville ; and I was so well supplied with them,
that many an Antonio was pawned or sold that I might
breakfast. In short, I spent a student's life, without hunger
or itch, and that is saying everything for it ; for if hunger
and itch were not identified with the student's life, there
would be none more agreeable in the world ; since virtue and
pleasure go hand in hand through it, and it is passed in
learning and taking diversion. This happy life ended too
soon for me. It appeared to the professors that the students
spent the half-hour between the classes not in studying their
lessons, but in playing with me; and therefore they ordered
my masters not to bring me any more to the college. I was
left at home accordingly, at my old post behind the door ;
and notwithstanding the order graciously given by the head
of the family, that I should be at liberty day and nighty I was


\


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOOS. 139

again confined to a small mat, with a chain round my neck.
Ah, friend Scipio, did you but know how sore a thing it is to
pass from a state of happiness to oiie of wretchedness ! When
sorrows and distresses flood the whole cour-e of life, either
they soon end in death, or their continuance begets a habit
of endurance, which generally alleviates their greatest rigour ;
but when one passes suddenly and unexpectedly from a
miserable and calamitous lot to one of prosperity and enjoy-
ment, and soon after relapses into his former state of woe and
suffering : this is such a poignant affliction, that if it does not
extinguish life, it is only to make it a prolonged torment.
Well, I returned to my ordinary rations, and to the bones
which were flung to me by a negress belonging to the house ;
but even these were partly filched from me by two cats, who
very nimbly snapped up whatever fell beyond the range of
my chain. Brother Scipio, as you hope that heaven will
prosper all your desires, do suffer me to philosophise a little
at present ; for unless I utter the reflections which have now
occurred to my mind, I feel that my story will not be com-
plete or duly edifying.

Scip, Beware, Berganza, that this inclination to philo-
sophise is not a temptation of the flend ; for slander has no
better cloak to conceal its malice than the pretence that all it
utters are maxims of philosophers, that evil speaking is moral
reproval, and the exposure of the faults of others is nothing
but honest zeal. There is no sarcastic person whose life, if
you scrutinise it closely, will not be found full of vices and
improprieties. And now, after this warning, philosophise as
much as you have a mind.

Berg. You may be quite at your ease on that score,
Scipio. What I have to remark is, that as I was the whole
day at leisure — and leisure is the mother of reflection — I
conned over several of those Latin phrases I had heard when I
was with my masters at college, and wherewith it seemed to me
that I had somewhat improved my mind ; and I determined
to make use of them as occasion should arise, as if I knew
how to talk, but in a different manner from that practised by
some ignorant persons, who interlard their conversation with
Latin apophthegms, giving those who do not understand them
to believe that they are great Latinists, whereas they can hardly
decline a noun or conjugate a verb.


140 CEBYANTES' EXBMPLABT TALBS.

Scip. That b not so bad as what is done by some wh«
really understand Latin ; some of whom are so absurd, that
in talking with a shoemaker or a tailor, they pour out Latin
like water.

Berg. On the whole we may conclude, that he who talks
Latin before persons who do not understond it, and he who
talks it, being himself ignorant of it, are both equally to
blame.

Scip. Another thing you may remark, which is that some
persons who know Latin are not the less asses for all that.

Berg. No doubt of it ; and the reason is clear ; for when
in the time of the Eomans everybody spoke Latin as his
mother tongue, that did not hinder some among them from
being boobies.

Scip. But to know when to keep silence in the mother
tongue, and speak in Latin, is a thing that needs discretion,
brother Berganza.

Berg, True ; for a foolish word may be spoken in Latin
as well as in the vulgar tongue ; and I have seen silly literati,
tedious pedants, and babblers in the vernacular, who were
enough to plague one to death with their scraps of Latin.

Scip. No more of this: proceed to your philosophical
remarks.

Berg. They are already delivered.

Scip. How so ?

Berg. In those remarks on Latin and the vulgar tongue^
which I begin and you finished.

Scip. Do you call railing philosophising ? Sanctify the
unhallowed plague of evil speaking, Berganza, and give it
any name you please, it will, nevertheless entail upon us the
name of cynics, which means dogs of ill tongue. In God's
name, hold your peace, and go on with your story.

Berg, How can I go on with my story, if I hold my peace ?

Sdp. I mean go on with it in one piece, and don't hang
on so many tails to it as to make it look like a polypus.

Berg. Speak correctly, Scipio: one does not say the tails
but the arms of a polypus. But to my story : my evil for-
tune, not content with having torn me from my studies, and
from the calm and joyous life I led amid them ; not con-
tent with having fastened me up behind a door, and trans*
ferred me from the liberality of the students to the stinginess


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 141

of the negress, resolved to rob me of the little ease and com-
fort I still enjoyed. Look ye, Scipio, you may set it down
with me for a certain fact, that ill luck will hunt out and find
the unlucky one, though he hides in the uttermost parts of
the earth. I have reason to say this ; for the negress was in
love with a negro, also belonging to the house, who slept in
the porch between the street-door and the inner one behind
which I was fastened, and they could only meet at night, to
which end they had stolen the keys or got false ones. Every
night the negress came down stairs, and stopping my mouth
with a piece of meat or cheese, opened tlie door for the
negro. For some days, the woman's bribes kept my con-
science asleep ; for but for them, I began to fear that my
ribs would come together, and that I should be changed
from a mastiff to a greyhound. But my better nature coming
At last to my aid, 1 bethought me of what was due to my
master, whose bread I ate ; and that I ought to act as becomes
not only honest dogs, but all who have masters to serve.

Scip, There now, Berganza, you have spoken what I call
true philosophy ; but go on. Do not make too long a yarn
— not to say tail of youi history.

Berg. But, first of all, pray tell me if you know what is
the meaning of the word philosophy ? For though I use it,
I do not know what the thing really is, only I guess that it is
something good.

Scip. I will tell you briefly. The word is compounded
of two Greek words, philoy love, and sophia, wisdom ; so
that it means love of wisdom, and philosopher a lover of
wisdom.

Berg. What a deal you know, Scipio. Who the deuce
taught you Greek words ?

Scip. Truly you are a simpleton, Berganza, to make so
much of a matter that is known to every schoolboy ; indeed,
there are many persons who pretend to know Greek, though
they are ignorant of it, just as is the case with Latin.

Berg. I believe it, Scipio ; and I would have such persons
put under a press, as the Portuguese do with the negroes of
Guinea, and have all the juice of their knowledge well
squeezed out of them, so that they might no more cheat the
world with their scraps of broken Greek and Latin.

Scip. Now indeed, Berganza, you may bite your tonguey


142 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

and I may do the same ; for we do nothing but rail in every
word.

Berg, Ay, but I am not bound to do as I have heard
that one Charondas, a Tyrian, did, who published a law that
no one should enter the national assembly in arms, on pain of
death. Forgetting this, he one day entered the assembly girt
with a sword ; the fact was pointed out to him, and, on the
instant, he drew his sword, plunged it into his body, and thus
he was the first who made the law, broke it, and suffered its
penalty. But I made no law ; all I did was to promise that
1 would bite my tongue, if I chanced to utter an acrimonious
word ; but things are not so strictly managed in these times
as in those of the ancients. To-day a law is made, and to*
morrow it is broken, and perhapi^ it is fit it should be so.
To-day a man promises to abandon his fault, and to-morrow
he falls into a greater. It is one thing to extol discipline, and
another to inflict it on one's self; and indeed there is a wide
difference between saying and doing. The devil may bite
himself, not I ; nor have 1 a mind to perform heroic acts of
self-denial here on this mat, where there are no witnesses to
commend my honourable determination.

Scip. In that case, Berganza, were you a man you would
be a hypocrite, and all your acts would be fictitious and
false, though covered with the cloak of virtue, and done only
that men might praise you, like the acts of all hypocrites.

Berg, I don't know what I should do if I were a man ;
but what I do know is that at present 1 shall not bite my
tongue, having so many things yet to tell, and not knowing
how or when I shall be able to finish them ; but rather fear-
ing that when the sun rises we shall be left groping without
the power of speech.

Sdp, Heaven forbid it ! Go on with your story, and do
not run off the road into needless digressions; in that way
only you will come soon to the end of it, however long it
may be.

Berg, I say, then, that having seen the thievery, impu-
dence, and shameful conduct of the negroes, I determined,
like a good servant, to put an end to their doings, if possi-
ble, and I succeeded completely in my purpose. The negress,
as I have told you, used to come to amuse herself with the
l^egroy making sure of my silence on account of the pieces of


X

DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOaS."*^S ^^^

iiieat, bread, or cheese she threw me. Gifts have much
Scipio.

Scip. Much. Don't digress : go on.

Ber^. I remettiber, when I was a student, to have heara
from the master a Latin phrase or adage, as they call it, which
ran thus : hahet hovem in lingua.

Scip, O confound your Latin ! Have you so soon for*
gotten what we have said of those who mix up that language
with ordinary conversation ?

Berg. But this bit of Latin comes in here quite pat ; for
you must know that the Athenians had among their coin one
which was stamped with the figure of an ox ; and whenever a
judge failed to do justice in consequence of having been cor-
rupted, they used to say,/' He has the ox on his tongue."

Scip. I do not see the application.

Berg. Is it not very manifest, since I was rendered mute
many times by tlie negress's gifts, and was careful not to
bark when she came down to meet her amorous negro?
Wherefore I repeat, that great is the power of gifts.

Scip. I have already admitted it; and were it not to
avoid too long a digression, I could adduce many instances
in point ; but I will speak of these another time, if heaven
grants me an opportunity of narrating my life to you.

Berg. God grant it ! meanwhile I continue. At last my
natural integrity prevailed over the negress's bribes ; and one
very dark night, when she came down as usual, I seized her
without barking, in order not to alarm the household ; and
in a trice I tore her shift all to pieces, and bit a piece out of
her thigh. This little joke confined her for eight days to her
bed, for which she accounted to her masters by some pre-
tended illness or other. When she was recovered, she came
down another night: I attacked her again; and without
biting, scratched her all over as if I had been carding wool.
Our battles were always noiseless, and the negress always had
the worst of them; but she had her revenge. She stinted my
rations and my bones, and those of my own body began to
show themselves through my skin. But though she cut
short my victuals, that did not hinder me from barking ; so
to make an end of me altogether, she threw me a sponge
fried in grease. I perceived the snare, and knew that what
•he offered me was worse than poison^ for it would swell


142 ^^^ CERVANTE8' EXEMPLART TALES.

and ^^^6 stomach, and never leave it with life. Judging
^that it was impossible for me to guard against the in-
sidious attacks of such a base enemy, I resolved to get out of
her sight, and put some space between her and me. One
day, I found myself at liberty, and without bidding adieu to
any of the family, I went into the street ; and before I had
gone a hundred paces, I fell in with the alguazil I men-
tioned in the beginning of my story, as being a great friend
of my first master Nicholas the butcher. He instantly knew
me, and called me by my name. I knew him too, and went
up to him with my usual ceremonies and caresses. He took
hold of me by the neck, and said to his men, '^ This is a
famous watch-dog, formerly belonging to a friend of mine :
let us bring him home." The men said, if I was a watch-
dog, I should be of great use to them all, and they wanted to
lay hold on me to lead me along ; but the alguazil said, it
was not necessary, for I knew him, and would follow him.
I forgot to tell you, that the spiked collar I wore when 1 ran
away from the flock was stolen from me at an inn by a gipsy,
and I went without one in Seville ; but my new master put
on me a collar all studded with brass. Only consider, Scipio,
this change in my fortune-^, Yesterday I was a student, and
to-day I found myself a bailiff.

/Scip. So wags the world, and you need not exaggerate
the vicissitudes of fortune, as if there were any difference
between the service of a butcher and that of a bailiff. I have
no patience when I hear some persons rail at fortune, whose
higliest hopes never aspired beyond the life of a stable-boy.
How they curse thoir ill-luck, and all to make the hearers
believe that they have known better days, and have fallen
from some high estate.

Berg, Just so. Now you must know that this alguazil
was on intimate terms with an attorney; and the two were
connected with a pair of wenches not a bit better than they
ought to be, but quite the reverse. They were rather good
looking, but full of meretricious arts and impudence. These
two served their male associates as baits to fish with. Their
dress and deportment was such that you might recognise thera
for what they were at the distance of a musket shot ; they
frequented the houses of entertainment for strangers, and th^
period of the Mrs in Cadiz and Seville was their harvest


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 145

time, for there was not a Breton with whom they did not
grapple. Whenever a bumpkin fell into their snares they
apprised the alguazil and the attorney to what inn they were
going, and the latter then seized the party as lewd persons,
but never took them to prison, for the strangers always paid
money to get out of the scrape.

One day it happened that Colendres — this w^as the name
of the alguaziFs mistress — picked up a Breton, and made
an appointment with him for the night, whereof she informed
her friend; and they were hardly undressed before the
alguazil, the attorney, two bailiffs, and myself entered the
room. The amorous pair were sorely disconcerted, and the
alguazil, inveighing against the enormity of their conduct,
ordered them to dress with all speed, and go with him
to prison. The Breton was dismayed, the attorney inter-
ceded from motives of compassion, and prevailed on the
alguazil to commute the penalty for only a hundred reals.
The Breton called for a pair of leather breeches he had
laid on a cliair at the end of the room, and in which there
was money to pay his ransom, but the breeches were not to
be seen. The fact was, that when I entered the room, my
nostrils were saluted by a delightful odour of ham. 1 fol-
lowed the scent, and found a great piece of ham in one of the
pockets of the breeches, which 1 carried oiF into the street, in
order to enjoy the contents without molestation. Having
done so, I returned to the house, where I found the Breton
vociferating in his barbarous jargon, and calling for his
breeches, in one of the pockets of which he said he had fifty
gold crowns. The attorney suspected that either Colendres or
the bailiffs had stolen the money ; the alguazil was of the same
opinion, took them aside, and questioned them. None of
them knew anything, and they all swore at each other like
troopers. Seeing the hubbub, I went back to the street
where I had left the breeches, having no use for the money
in them ; but I could not find them, for some one j)assing by
had no doubt picked them up.

The alguazil, in despair at finding that the Breton had no
money to bribe with, thought to indemnify himself by extort-
ing something from the mistress of the house. He called fop
her, and in she came half dressed, and when she saw and heard
the Breton bawling for his money^ Colindres crying in her

k


146 CERTANTES' BXEMPLART TALES.

shift, the alguazil storming, the attorney in a passion, and the
bailiff:^ ransacking the room, she was in no very good humour.
The alguazil ordered her to put on her clothes and be off with
him to prison, for allowing men and women to meet for bad
purposes in her house. Then indeed the row grew more
furious than ever. " Senor Alguazil and Senor Attorney,"
said the hostess, " none of your tricks upon me, for I know a
thing or two, I tell you. Give me none of your blustering,
but shut your mouth, and go your ways in God's name,'other-
wise by my faith I'll pitch the house out of the 'windows, and
blow upon you all ; for I am well acquained with the Senora
Colendres, and I know moreover that for many months past
she has been kept by the Senor Alguazil ; so don*t provoke
me to let out any more, but give this gentleman back his
money, and let us all part good friends, for I am a respectable
woman, and I have a husband with his patent of nobility with
its leaden seals all hanging to it, God be thanked ! and I carry
on this business with the greatest propriety. I have the table
of charges hung up where everybody may see it, so don't
meddle with me, or by the Lord I'll soon settle your business.
It is no affair of mine if women come in with my lodgers ;
they have the keys of their rooms, and I am not a lynx to see
through seven walls."

My masters were astounded at the harangue of the landlady,
and at finding how well acquainted she was with the story of
their lives ; but seeing there was nobody else from whom they
could squeeze money, they still pretended that they meant to
drag her to prison. She appealed to heaven against the unrea-
sonableness and injustice of their behaving in that manner when
her husband was absent, and he too a man of such quality.
The Breton bellowed for his fifty crowns ; the bailiffs persisted
in declaring that they had never set eyes on the breeches, God
forbid ! The attorney privately urged the alguazil to search
Golindres' clothes, for he suspected she must have possessed
herself of the fifty crowns, since it was her custom to grope
in the pockets of those who took up with her company. Go-
lindres declared that the Breton was drunk, and that it was
all a lie about his money. All in short was confusion, oaths^
and bawling, and there would have been no end to the ujiroar
if the lieutenant corregidor had not just then entered the
room, having heard the noise as he was going his rounds. He


DIALOQUfi BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 147

asked what it was all about, and the landlady replied with
great copiousness of detail. She told him who was the damsel
Colindres (who by this time had got her clothes on), made
known the connection between her and the alguazil, and ex-
posed her plundering tricks; protested her own innocence, and
that it was never with her consent that a woman of bad repute
had entered her house ; cried herself up for a saint, and her
husband for a pattern of excellence ; and caUed out to a servant
wench to run and fetch her husband's patent of nobility out of
the chest, that she might show it to the Seflor Lieutenant.
He would then be able to judge whether the wife of so respect-
able a man was capable of anything but what was quite cor-
rect. If she did keep a lodging-house, it was because she
could not help it. God knows if she would not rather have
some comfortable independence to live upon at her ease. The
lieutenant, tired of her volubility and her bouncing about the
patent of gentility, said to her, ** Sister hostess, I am willing
to believe that your husband is a gentleman, but then you
must allow he is only a gentleman innkeeper.'* The landlady
replied with great dignity, "And where is the family in the
world, however good its blood may be, but you may pick some
holes in its coat V " Well, all 1 have to say, sister, is, that
you must put on your clothes, and come away to prison." This
brought her down from her high flights at once ; she tore
her hair, cried, screamed, and prayed, but all in vain ; the
inexorable lieutenant carried the whole party off to prison, that
is to say, the Breton, Colindres, and the landlady. I learned
afterwards that the Breton lost his fifty crowns, and was con-
demned besides to pay costs ; the landlady had to pay as
much more. Colindres was let off scot free, and the very day
she was. liberated she picked up a sailor, out of whom she made
good her disappointment in the affair of the Breton. Thus
you see, Scipio, what serious troubles arose from my gluttony.

/Sdp. Say rather from the rascality of your master.

Berg, Nay but listen, for worse remains to be told, since
I am loth to speak ill of alguazH and attorneys.

Seip. Ay, but speaking ill of one is not speaking ill of
all. There is many and many an attorney who is honest
and upright. They do not all take fees from both parties
in a suit ; nor extort more than their right ; nor go p]*ying
about into other people's business in order to entangle them

k2


148 CERYANTES' EZEMPLABT TALES.

in the webs of the lajr ; nor league with the justice to flecot
one side and skin the other. It is not every alguazil that is
in collusion with thieves and vagabonds, or keeps a decoy-
duck in the shape of a mistress, as your master did. Very
many of them are gentlemen in feeling and conduct ; neither
arrogant nor insolent, nor rogues and knaves, like those who
go about inns, measuring the length of strangers' swords^
and ruining their owners if they find them a hair's breadth
longer than the law allows.*

Berg, My master hawked at higher game. He set himself
up for a man of valour, piqued himself on making famous
captures, and sustained his reputation for courage without risk
to his person, but at the cost of his purse. One day at the
Puerta de Xeres he fell in, single-handed, with six famous
bravoes, whilst I could not render him any assistance, having
a muzzle on my mouth, which he made me wear by day and
took off at night. I was amazed at his intrepidity and head-
long valour. He dashed in and out between the six swords
of the ruffians, and made as light of them as if they were so
many osier wands. It was wonderful to behold the agility
with which he assaulted, his thrusts and parries, and with
what judgment and quickness of eye he prevented his enemies
from attacking him from behind. In short, in my opinion and
that of all the spectators of the fight, he was a very Khodomont,
having fought his men all the way from the Puerta de Xeres
to the statues of the college of Maese Rodrigo, a good hundred
paces and more. Having put them to flighty he returned to
collect the trophies of the battle, consisting of three sheaths,
and these he carried to the corregidor, who was then, if I
mistake not, the licentiate Sarmiento de Yalladares, renowned
for the destruction of the Sauceda.t As my master walked
through the streets, people pointed to him and said, " There
goes the valiant man who ventured, singly, to encounter the
flower of the bravoes of Andalusia."

He spent the remainder of the day in walking about the
city, to let himself be seen, and at night we went to thd
suburb of Triana, to a street near the powder-mill, where my
master, looking about to see if any one observed him> entered

* When Geryantes wrote this, a decree had recently been issued
limiting the len^h of the sword.
f An old prom.eiiade of the citj.


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 149

% house, myself following him, and in the court-yard we found
the six rogues he had fought with, all untrussed, and without
cloaks or swords. One fellow, who appeared to be the land-
lord, had a big jar of wine in one hand and a great tavern
goblet in the other, and, filling a sparkling bumper, he drank
to all the company. No sooner had they set eyes on my
master than they all ran to him with open arms. They all
drank his health, and he returned the compliment in every
instance, and would have done it in as many more had there
been occasion — so affable he was and so averse to disoblige
finy one for trifles. Were I to recount all that took place
there — the supper that was served up, the fights and the rob-
beries they related, the ladies of their acquaintance whom
they praised or disparaged, the encomiums they bestowed on
each other, the absent bravoes whom they named, the clever
tricks they played, jumping up from supper to exhibit their
sleight of hand, the picked words they ifsed, and, finally, the
figure of the host, whom all respected as their lord and father,
f— were I to attempt this, I should entangle myself in a maze,
from which I could never extricate myself. I ascertained that
the master of the house, whose name was Monipodio, was a
regular fence, and that my master's battle of the morning had
been preconcerted between him and his opponents, with all its
circumstances, including the dropping of the sword-sheaths,
which my master now delivered, in lieu of his share of the
reckoning. The entertainment was continued almost till
breakfast time ; and, by way of a final treat, they gave my
master information of a foreign bravo, an out-and-outer, just
arrived in the city. In all probability he was an abler blade
than themselves, and they denounced him from envy. My
master captured him the next night as he lay in bed ; but had
he been up and armed, there was that in his face and figure
which told me that he would not have allowed himself to be
taken so quietly. This capture, coming close upon the heela
of the pretended fight, enhanced the fame of my poltroon of a
master, who had no more courage than a hare, but sustained
his valorous reputation by treating and feasting ; so that all
the gains of his office, both fair and foul, were frittered away
upon his false renown.

I am afraid I weary you, Scipio, but have patience and
listen to another afiair that befel him^ which I will tell you


150 CSBTANTES' EXEHPLABT TALES.

without a tittle more or less than the truth. Two thieves
stole a fine horse in Antequera, brought him to Seville, and
in order to seU him without risk, adopted what struck me as
being a very ingenious stratagem. They put up at two dif-
ferent inns, and one of them entered a plaint in the courts of
law, to the e£fect that Pedro de Losada owed him four hun-
dred reals, money lent, as appeared by a note of hand, signed
by the said Pedro, which he produced in evidence. The lieu-
tenant corregidor directed that Losada should be called upon
to state whether or not he acknowledged the note as his own,
and if he did, that he should be compelled to pay the amount
by seizure of his goods, or go to prison. My master and his
friend the attorney were employed in this business. One of
the thieves took them to the lodgings of the other, who at
once acknowledged his note of hand, admitted the debt, and
offered his horse in satisfaction of the amount. My master
was greatly taken with the animal, and resolved to have it if
it should be sold. The time prescribed by the law being
expired, the horse was put up for sale ; my master employed
a friend to bid for it, and it was knocked down to him for
five hundred reals, though well worth twelve or thirteen
hundred. Thus one thief obtained payment of the debt
which was not due to him, the other a quittance of which he
had no need, and my master became possessed of the horsey
which was as fatal to him as the famous Sejanus* was to his
owners.

The thieves decamped at once ; and two days afterwards
my master, after having repaired the horse's trappings, ap-
peared on his back in the Plaza de San Francisco, as proud
and conceited as a bumpkin in his holiday clothes. Every*
body complimented him on his bargain, declaring the horse
was worth a hundred and fifty ducats as surely as an egg was
worth a maravedi. But whilst he was caracolUng and curvet-
ting, and showing off his own person and his horse's paces,
two men of good figure and very well dressed entered the
square, one of whom cried out, " Why, bless my soul ! that is
my horse Ironfoot, that was stolen f^om me a few days ago
in Antequera." Four servants, who accompanied him, s^aid

* l*he successiye owners of this animal were Seius, Dollabella,
Cassius, and Anthony. The first of them was executed, the rest con^
mitted suicide.


DIALOGUE BETWEEN IWO DOOS. 151

tha same thing. My master was greatly ehopfallen; the
gentleman appealed to justice, produced his proofs, and they
were so satisfactory that sentence was given in his favour,
and my master was dispossessed of the horse. The impostiu*e
was exposed ; and it came out how, through the hands of
justice itself, the thieves had sold what they had stolen ; and
almost everybody rejoiced that my master's covetousness had
made him burn his fingers.

His disasters did not end there. That night the lieutenant
going his rounds, was informed that there were robbers abroad
as far as San Julian's wards. Passing a cross-road he saw a
man running away, and taking me by the collar, ^' At him,
good dog !'' he said, " At him, boy !" Disgusted as I was
with my master's villanies, and eager to obey the lieutenant's
orders, I made no hesitation to seize my own master and pull
him down to the ground, where I would have torn him to
pieces if the thief-takers had not with great difficulty sepa-
jrated us. They wanted to punish me, and even to beat me
to death with sticks ; and they would have done so if the lieu-
tenant had not bade them let me alone, for I. had only done
what he ordered me. The warning was not lost upon me, so
without taking my leave of anybody, I leaped through an
opening in the wall, and before daybreak I was in Mayrena, a
place about four leagues from Seville.

There by good luck I fell in with a party of soldiers, who,
as I heard, were going to embark at Cartagena. Among
them were four of my late master's rufiian friends ; one of
them was the drummer, who had been a catchpole and a great
bufibon, as drummers frequently are. They all knew me and
spoke to me, asking after my master as if I could reply ; but
the one who showed the greatest liking for me was the drum-
mer, and so I determined to attach myself to him, if he would
lot me, and to accompany the expedition whether they were
bound for Italy or Flanders. For in spite of the proverb, a
blockhead at home is a blockhead all the world over, you
must agree with me that travelling and sojourning among
various people makes men wise.

Scip, That is so true that I remember to have heard from
A master of mine, a very clever man, that the famous Greek,
Ulysses, was renowned as wise solely because he had travelled
much and seen many men and nations. I therefore applaud


152 CERVANTES' EXEMPLART TALES,

your determination to go with the soldiers, wherever they
might take you.

Berg. To help him in the display of his jugglery, the
drummer began to teach me to dance to the sound of the
drum, and to play other monkey tricks such as no other dog
than myself could ever have acquired. The detachment
marched by very short stages ; we had no commissary to
control us ; the captain was a mere lad, but a perfect gen-
tleman, at)d a great christian ; the ensign had but just left
the page's hall at the court; the serjeant was a knowing
blade, and a great conductor of companies from the place
where they were raised to the port of embarkation. The
detachment was full of ruffians whose insolent behaviour, in
the places through which we passed, redounded in curses
directed to a quarter where they were not deserved. It is
the misfortune of the good prince to be blamed by some of
his subjects, for faults committed by others of them, which
he could not remedy if he would, for the circumstances atten-
dant on war are for the most part inevitably harsh, oppressive,
and untoward.

In the course of a fortnight, what with my own clever-
ness, and the diligence of him I had chosen for my patron,
I learned to jump for the king of France, and not to jump for
tlie good-for-nothing landlady ; he taught me to curvet like a
Neapolitan courser, to move in a ring like a mill horse, and
other things which might have made one suspect that they were
performed by a demon in the shape of a dog. The drummer
gave me the name of the wise dog, and no sooner were we
arrived at a halting place, than he went about, beating his
drum, and giving notice to all who desired to behold the
marvellous graces and performances of the wise dog, that they
were to be seen at such a house, for four or eight maravedis
a head, according to the greater or less wealth of the place.
After these encomiums everybody ran to see me, and no one
went away without wonder and delight. My master exulted
in the gains I brought him, which enabled him to maintain
six of his comrades like princes. The envy and covetousness
of the rogues was excited, and they were always watching for
an opportunity to steal me, for any way of making money by
sport has great charms for many. This is why there are so
many puppet showmen in Spain, so many who go about with


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 153

peep shows, so many others who hawk pens and balladsy
though their stock, if they sold it all, would not be enough to
keep them for a day ; and yet they are to be found in taverns
and drinking-shops all the year round, whence I infer that the
cost of their guzzling is defrayed by other means than tho
profits of their business. They are all good-for-nothing vaga-
bonds, breadweevils and winesponges.

Scip. No more of that, Berganza ; let us not go over the
same ground again. Continue your story, for the night is
waning, and I should not like, when the sun rises, that wo
should be left in the shades of silence.

Berg. Keep it and listen. As it is an easy thing to
extend and improve our inventions, my master, seeing how
well I imitated a Neapolitan courser, made me housings of
gilt leather, and a little saddle, which he fitted on my back ;
he put on it a little figure of a man, with lance in hand, and
taught me to run straight at a ring fixed between two stakes.
As soon as I was perfect in that performance, my master
announced that on that day the wise dog would run at the
ring, and exhibit other new and incomparable feats, which,
indeed, I drew from my own invention, not to give my
master the iie. We next marched to Montilla, a town be*
longing to the famous and great christian. Marquis of PriegOi
head of the house of Aguilar and Montilla. My master was
quartered, at his own request, in a hospital; he made his
usual proclamation, and as my great fame had already reached
the town, the court-yard was filled with spectators in less
than an hour. My master rejoiced to see such a plenteous
harvest, and resolved to show himself that day a first-rate
oonjuror. The entertainment began with my leaping through
a hoop. He had a willow switch in his hand, and when he
lowered it, that was a signal for me to leap ; and when ho
kept it raised, I was not to budge.

On that day (for ever memorable in my life) he began by
saying, " Come, my friend, jump for that juvenile old gentle*
man, you know, who blacks his beard; or, if you won't,
jump for the pomp and grandeur of Donna Pimpinela de
Plafagonia, who was the fellow servant of the Galiciaa
kitchen wench at Yaldeastillas. Don't you like that, my
boy ? Then jump for the bachelor Pasillas, who signs him-
•elf licentiate without having any degree. How lazy you


154 eERYANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

are ! Why don't you jump ? Oh ! I understand ! I am tip
to your roguery ! Jump, then, for the wine of Esquivias, a
match for that of Ciudad Real, St. Martin, and Hivadavia.''
He lowered the switch, and I jumped in accordance with the
signal. Then, addressing the audience, ^' Do not imagine^
worshipful senate," he said, '' that it is any laughing matter
what this dog knows. I have taught him four-and-twenty
performances, the least of which is worth going thirty leagues
to see. He can dance the zaraband and the chacoua better
than their inventor; he tosses off a pint of wine without
spilling a drop ; he intones a sol, fa, mi, re, as well as any
sacristan. All these things, and many others which remain to
be told, your worships shall witness during the time the com-
pany remains here. At present, our wise one will give another
jump, and then we will enter upon the main business/'

Having inflamed the curiosity of the audience, or senate, as
he called them, with this harangue, he turned to me and
said, '' Come now, my lad, and go through all your jumps
with your usual grace and agility ; but this time it shall be
for the sake of the famous witch who is said to belong to this
place." The words were hardly out of his mouth, when the
matron of the hospital, an old woman, who seemed upwards
of seventy, screamed out, ** Kogue, charlatan, swindler, there
is no witch here. If you mean Camacha, she has paid the
penalty of her sin, and is where God only knows ; if you mean
me, you juggling cheat, I am no witch, and never was one in
my life ; and if I ever was reputed to be a witch, I may
thank false witnesses, and the injustice of the law, and a pre-
sumptuous and ignorant judge. All the world knows the
life of penance I lead, not for any acts of witchcraft, which I
have never done, but for other great sins which I have com-
mitted as a poor sinner. So get out of the hospital, you
rascally sheep-skin thumper, or by all the saints Til make
you glad to quit it at a run." And with that she began to
screech at such a rate, and pour such a furious torrent of
abuse upon my master, that he was utterly confounded. In
fine, she would not allow the entertainment to proceed on
any account. My master did not care much about the row,
as he had his money in his pocket, and he announced that he
would give the performance next day in another hospitaU
The people went away cursing the old woman, and calling


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 155

her a witch, and a bearded hag into the bargain. We remained
for all that in the hospital that night, and the old woman
meeting me alone in the yard, said, '^ Is that you, Montiel,
my son ? Is that you V I looked up as she spoke, and
gazed steadily at her, seeing which, she came to me with
tears in her eyes, threw her arms round my neck, and would
have kissed my mouth if I had allowed her ; but I was dis-
gusted, and would not endure it.

Sdp. You were quite right, for it is no treat, but quite
the reverse, to kiss or be kissed by an old woman.

Berg, What I am now going to relate I should have told
you at the beginning of my story, as it would have served to
diminish the surprise we felt at finding ourselves endowed
with speech. Said the old woman to me, '' Follow me,
Montiel, my json, that you may know my room ; and be sure
you come to me to-night, that we may be alone together, for
I have many things to tell you of great importance for you
to know." 1 drooped my head in token of obedience, which
confirmed her in her belief that I was the dog Montiel whom
she had been long looking for, as she afterwards told me.
I remained bewildered with surprise, longing for the night
to see what might be the meaning of this mystery or pro-
digy, and as I had heard her called a witch, I expected won-
derful things from the interview. At last the time came, and
I entered the room, which was small, and low, and dimly
lighted by an earthenware lamp. The old woman trimmed
it, sat down on a chest, drew me to her, and without speaking
a word, fell to embracing me, and I to taking care that she
did not kiss me.

'' I did always hope in heaven,'' the old woman began,
" that I should see my son before my eyes were closed in the
last sleep ; and now that I have seen you, let death come
when it will, and release me from this life of sorrow. You
must know, my son, that there lived in this city the most
famous witch in the world, called Camacha de Montilla. She
was so perfect in her art, that the Erichtheas, Circes, and
Medeas, of whom old histories, I am told, are full, were not to be
compared to her. She congealed the clouds when she pleased,
and covered the face of the sun with them ; and when the
whim seized her, she made the murkiest sky clear up at once.
Bhe fetched men in an instant from remote lands ; admirably


156 CEBVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

relieved the distresses of damsels who had forgot them-
selves for a moment ; enabled widows to console themselves
without loss of reputation ; unmarried wives, and married
those she pleased. She had roses in her garden in December,
ftnd gathered wheat in January. To make watercresses grow
in a handbasin was a trifle to her, or to show any persons
whom you wanted to see, either dead or alive, in a looking-
glass, or on the nail of a newborn infant. It was reported
that she turned men into brutes, and that she made an ass of
a sacristan, and used him really and truly in that form for
six years. I never could make out how this was done ; for as
for what is related of those ancient sorceresses, that they
turned men into beasts, the learned are of opinion that this
means only that by their great beauty and their fascinations,
they so captivated men and subjected them to their humours,
as to make them seem unreasoning animals. But in you, my
son, I have a living instance to the contrary, for I know that
you are a rational being, and I see you in the form of a dog ;
unless indeed this is done through that art which they call
Tropelia, which makes people mbtake appearances and take
one thing for another.

** Be this as it may, what mortifies me is that neither your
mother nor myself, who were disciples of the great Camacha,
ever came to know as much as she did, and that not for
want of capacity, but through her inordinate selfishness,
which could never endure that we should learn the higher
mysteries of her art, and be as wise as herself. Your mother,
my son, was called Montiela, and next to Camacha, she was the
most famous of witches. My name is Canizares ; and, if not
equal in proficiency to either of these two, at least I do not
yield to them in good will to the art. It is true that in bold-
ness of spirit, in the intrepidity with which she entered a
circle, and remained enclosed in it with a legion of fiends,
your mother was in no wise inferior to Camacha herself;
while, for my part, I was always somewhat timid, and con-
tented myself with conjuring half a legion ; but though I say
it that should not, in the matter of compounding witches'
4)intment, I would not turn my back upon either of them, no,
nor upon any living who follow our rules. But you must
know, my son, ever since I have felt how fast my life is has-
tening away upon the light wings of time, I have sought to


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 157

withdraw from all the wickedness of witchcraft in which I
was plunged for many years, and I have only amused myself
with white magic, a practice so engaging that it is most diffi-
cult to forego it. Your mother acted in the same manner ;
she abandoned many evil practices, and performed many
righteous works ; but she would not relinquish white magio
to the hour of her death. She had no malady, but died by
the sorrow brought upon her by her mistress, Camacha, who
hated her because she saw that in a short time Montiela would
know as much as herself, unless indeed she had some other
cause of jealousy not known to me.

"Your mother was pregnant, and her time being come,
Camacha was her midwife. She received in her hands what
your mother brought forth, and showed her that she had
borne two puppy dogs. * This is a bad business,* said Cama-*
cha ; * there is some knavery here. But, sister Montiela, I am
your friend, and I will conceal this unfortunate birth ; so have
patience and get well, and be assured that your misfortune
shall remain an inviolable secret.' I was present at this ex«
traordinary occurrence, and was not less astounded than your
mother. Camacha went away taking the whelps with her,
and I remained to comfort the lying-in woman, who could not
bring herself to believe what had happened. At last Camacha's
end drew near, and when she felt herself at the point of death,
she sent for her and told her how she had turned her sons
into dogs on account of a certain grudge she bore her, but
that she need not distress herself, for they would return to
their natural forms when it was least expected ; but this
would not happen * until they shall see the exalted quickly
brought low, and the lowly exalted by an arm that is mighty
to do it.'

** Your mother wrote down this prophecy, and deeply en-
graved it in her memory, and so did I, that I might impart it
to one of you if ever the opportunity should present itself.
And in hopes to recognise you, I have made it a practice to
^11 every dog of your colour by your mother's name, to see
if any of them would answer to one so unlike those usually
given to dogs ; and, this evening, when I saw you do so many
things, and they called you the wise dog, and also when you
looked up at me upon my calling to you in the yard, I be-
lieved that you were really the son of Montiela. It is with


168 CBBYANTBS' EX^IMPLABT TALES.

extreme pleasure I acquaint you with the history of youf-
birth, and the manner in which you are to recover your
original form. I wish it was as easy as it was for the golden
ass of Apuleius, who had only to eat a rose for his restoration ;
but yours depends upon the actions of others, and not upon
your own efforts. What you have to do meanwhile, my son,
is to commend yourself heartily to God, and hope for the
speedy and prosperous fulfilment of the prophecy ; for since
it was pronounced by Camacha it will be accomplished with-
out any doubt, and you and your brother, if he is alive, will
see yourselves as you would wish to be. All that grieves me
is that I am so near my end, that I can have no hope of wit*
nessing the joyful event.

** I have often longed to ask my goat how matters would
turn out with you at last ; but I had not the courage to do
so, for he never gives a straightforward answer, but as crooked
and perplexing as possible. That is always the way with
our lord and master ; there is no use in asking him anything,
for with one truth he mingles a thousand lies, and from what I
have noted of his replies it appears that he knows nothing for
certain of the future, but only by way of conjecture. At the
same time he so be-fools us that, in spite of a thousand
treacherous tricks he plays us, we cannot shake off his in-
fluence. We go to see him a long way from here in a great
field, where we meet a multitude of warlocks and witches,
and are feasted without measure, and other things take
place which, indeed and in truth, I cannot bring myself to
mention, nor will I offend your chaste ears by repeating
things so filthy and abominable. Many are of opinion that
we frequent these assemblies only in imagination, wherein the
demon presents to us the images of all those things which we
afterwards relate as having occurred to us in reality ; othe]:s,
on the contrary, believe that we actually go to them in body
and soul ; and for my part I believe that both opinions are
true, since we know not when we go in the one manner or in
the other ; for all that happens to us in imagination does so
with such intensity, that it is impossible to distinguish be-
tween it and reality. Their worships the inquisitors have had
sundry opportunities of investigating this matter, in the cases
of some of us whom they have had under their hands, and
I believe that they have ascertained the truth of what I statei


DIALOGUE BETUVXEN TWO DOGS. 159

<' I should like, my son, to shake off this sin, and I have
exerted myself to that end. I have got myself appointed
matron to this hospital ; 1 tend the poor, and some die who
afford me a livelihood either by what they leave me, or by
what I find among their rags, through the great care I always
take to examine them well. I say but few prayers, and only
in public, but grumble a good deal in secret. It is better for
me to be a hypocrite than an open sinner ; for my present
good works efface from the memory of those who know me
the bad ones of my past life. After all, pretended sanctity
injures no one but the person who practises it. Look you,
Montiel, my son, my advice to you is this : be good all you
can ; but if you must be wicked, contrive all you can not to
appear so. I am a witch, I do not deny it, and your mother
was one likewise ; but the appearances we put on were always
enough to maintain our credit in the eyes of the whole world.
Three days before she died, we were both present at a grand
sabbath of witches in a valley of the Pyrenees ; and yet when
she died it was with such calmness and serenity, that were it
not for some grimaces she made a quarter of an hour before
she gave up the ghost, you would have thought she lay upon
a bed of flowers. But her two children lay heavy at her
heart, and even to her last gasp she never would forgive
Camacha, such a resolute spirit she had. I closed her eyes
and followed her to the grave, and there took my last look
at her ; though, indeed, I have not lost the hope of seeing her
again before I die, for they say that several persons have met
her going about the churchyards and the cross-roads in
various forms, and who knows but I may fall in with her some
time or other, and be able to ask her whether I can do any-
thing for the relief of her conscience ? "

Every word that the old hag uttered in praise of her she
called my mother went like a knife to my heart ; I longed to
fall upon her and tear her to pieces, and only refrained from
unwillingness that death should find her in such a wicked
state. Finally she told me that she intended to anoint her-
self that night and go to one of their customary assemblies,
and inquire of her master as to what was yet to befal me. I
should have liked to ask her what were the ointments she
made use of; and it seemed as though she read my though ts,
for she replied to my question as though it had been uttered.


160 CRRYANTES' EXEMPLART TALES*

** This ointment/* she said, *^ is composed of the juices of ex«
oeedingly cold herbs, and not, as the vulgar assert, of the
blood of children whom we strangle. And here you may be
inclined to ask what pleasure or profit can it be to the devil
to make us murder little innocents, since he knows that being
baptised they go as sinless creatures to heaven, and every
Christian soul that escapes him is to him a source of poignant
anguish. I know not what answer to give to this except by
quoting the old saying, that some people would give both
tiieir eyes to make their enemy lose one. He may do it for
sake of the grief beyond imagination which the parents suffer
from the murder of their children ; but what is still more im«*
portant to him is to accustom us to the repeated commission
of such a cruel and perverse sin. And all this God allows by
reason of our sinfulness ; for without his permission, as I know
by experience, the devil has not the power to hurt a pismire ;
and so true is this, that one day when I requested him to de-
stroy a vineyard belonging to an enemy of mine, he told mo
that he could not hurt a leaf of it, for God would not allow
him. Hence you may understand when you come to be a
man, that all the casual evils that befal men, kingdoms, and
cities, and peoples, sudden deaths, shipwrecks, devastations,
and all sorts of losses and disasters, come from the hand of the
Almighty, and by his sovereign permission; and the evils
which fall under the denomination of crime, are caused by
ourselves. God is without sin, whence it follows that we
ourselves are the authors of sin, forming it in thought, word,
and deed ; God permitting all this by reason of our sinfulness^
as I have already said.

" Possibly you will ask, my son, if so be you understand
me, who made me a theologian ? And mayhap you will say
to yourself. Confound the old hag ! why does not she leave off
being a witch since she knows so much ? Wiiy does not she
turn to God, since she knows that he is readier to forgive sin
than to permit it ? To this I reply, as though you had put the
question to me, that the habit of sinning becomes a second
nature, and that of being a witch transforms itself* into flesh
and blood ; and amidst all its ardour, which is great, it brings
with it a chilling influence which so overcomes the soid as to
freeze and benumb its faith, whence follows a forgetfulness of
itself, and it remembers neither the terrors with which God


DilALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS, 161

threatens it, nor the glories with which he allures it. In fact,
as sin is fleshly and sensual, it must exhaust and stupefy all the
feelings, and render the soul incapable of rising to embrace
any good thought, or to clasp the hand which God in hia
mercy continually holds out to it. I have one of those souls
I have described ; I see it clearly ; but the empire of the
senses enchains my will, and I have ever been and ever shall
be bad.

'^ But let us quit this subject, and go back to that of our
unguents. They are of so cold a nature that they take away
all our senses when we anoint ourselves with them ; we
remain stretched on the ground, and then they say we
experience all those things in imagination which we suppose to
occur to us in reality. Sometimes after we have anointed and
changed ourselves into fowls, foals, or deer, we go to the place
where our master awaits us. There we recover our own
forms and enjoy pleasures which I will not describe, for they
are such as the memory is ashamed to recal, and the tongue
refuses to relaO. The short and the long of it is, I am a
witch, and cover my many delinquencies with the cloak of
hypocrisy. It is true that if some esteem and honour me as
a good woman, there are many who bawl in my ear the name
imprinted upon your mother and me by order of an ill-
tempered judge, who committed his wrath to the hands of
the hangman; and the latter, not being bribed, used his
plenary power upon our shoulders. But that is past and
gone ; and all things pass, memories wear out, lives do not
renew themselves, tongues grow tired, and new events make
their predecessors forgotten. I am matron of a hospital ; my
behaviour is plausible in appearance ; my unguents procure
me some pleasant moments, and I am not so old but that I
may live another year, my age being seventy- five. I cannot
fast on account of my years, nor pray on account of the swim-
ming in my head, nor go on pilgrimages for the weakness of
my legs, nor give alms because I am poor, nor think rightly
because I am given to back-biting, and to be able to back-
bite one must first think evil. I know for all that that God
is good and merciful, and that he knows what b in store for
me, and that is enough ; so let us drop this conversation
which really makes me melancholy. Come, my son, and see
me anoint myself; for there is a cure for every sorrow ; and

L


162 (CEBYANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

though the pleasures which the devil affords us are illusive and
fictitious, yet they appear to us to be pleasures ; and sensual
delight is much greater in imagination than in actual fruition^
though it is otherwise with true joys/*

After thb long harangue she got up, and taking the
lamp went into another and smaller room. I followed her,
filled with a thousand conflicting thoughts, and amazed at
wh it I had heard and what I expected to see. Canizares
hung the lamp against the wall, hastily stripped herself to her
shift, took a jug from a corner, put her hand into it, and,
muttering between her teeth, anointed herself from her feet
to the crown of her head. Before she had finished she said
to me, that whether her body remained senseless in that room,
or whether it quitted it, I was not to be frightened, nor fail
to wait there till morning, when she would bring me word of
what was to befal me until I should be a man. I signified
my assent by drooping my head ; and she finished her unction,
and stretched herself on the floor like a corpse. I put my
mouth to hers, and perceived that she did not breathe at all.
One thing I must own to you, friend Soipio, that I was
terribly frightened at seeing myself shut up in that narrow
room w^ith that figure before me, which I will describe to you
as well as I can.

She was more than six feet high, a mere skeleton covered
with a black wrinkled skin. Her dugs were like two dried
and puckered ox-bladders ; her lips were blackened ; her long
teeth locked together ; her nose was hooked ; her eyes starting
from her head ; her h«'ar hung in elf-locks on her hollow
wrinkled cheeks ; — in short, she was all over diabolically
hideous. I remained gazing on her for a while, and felt my-
self overcome with horror as I contemplated the hideous spec^
tacle of her body, and the worse occupation of her soul, I
wanted to bite her to sec if she would come to herself, but
I could not find a spec on ner whole body that did not fill
me with disgust. Nevertheless, I seized her by one heel, and
dragged her to the yard, without her ever giving any sign of
feeling. There seeing myself at large with the sky above me,
my fear left me, or at least abated, so much sls to give me
courage to await the result of that wicked woman's expedition,
and the news she was to bring me. Meanwhile, I asked my-
self, how comes this old woman to be at once so knowing and


PIALOOUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 163

BO wicked ? How is it that she can so well distinguish be*
tween casual and culpable evils ? How is it that she under*
stands and speaks so much about God^ and acts so much from
the prompting of the devil ? How is it that she sins so much
from choice^ not having the excuse of ignorance ?

In these reflections I passed the night. The day dawned
and found us both in the court, she lying still insensible, and I
on my haunches beside her, attentively watching her hideous
countenance. The people of the hospital came out, and seeing
this spectacle, some of them exclaimed, " The pious Canizares
is dead ! See how emaciated she is with fasting and penance.''
Others felt her pulse, and finding that she was not dead, con-
cluded that she was in a trance of holy ecstacy ; whilst others
said, '^ This old hag is unquestionably a witch, and is no doubt
anointed, for saints are never seen in such an indecent con-
dition when they are lost in religious ecstacy; and among us
who know her, she has hitherto had the reputation of a witch
rather than a saint." Some curious inquirers went so far as to
stick pins in her flesh up to the head, yet without ever awaking
her. It was not till seven o'clock that she came to herself;
and then finding how she was stuck over with pins, bitten in
the heels, and her back flayed by being dragged from her
room, and seeing so many eyes intently fixed upon her, she
rightly concluded that I had been the cause of her exposure,
." What, you thankless, ignorant, malicious villain," she cried,
" is this my reward for the acts I did for your mother and those
I intended to do for you ?*' Finding myself in peril of my
life under the talons of that ferocious harpy, I shook her off,
and seizing her by her wrinkled flank, I worried and dragged
her all about the yard, whilst she shrieked for help from the
fangs of that evil spirit. At these words, most present believed
that I must be one of those flends who are continually at
enmity with good Christians. Some were for sprinkling me
with holy water, some were for pulling me off the old woman,
but durst not ; others bawled out words to exorcise me.
The witch howled, I tightened my grip with my teeth, the
confusion increased, and my master was in despair, hearing it
said that I was a flend. A few who knew nothing of exor-
cisms caught up three or four sticks and began to baste me*
Not liking the joke, I let go the old woman ; in three bounds
I was in the street, and in a few more I was outside the towi^

L 2


164 CERYANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

pursued by a host of boys, shouting, " Out of the way! the
wise dog is gone mad." Others said " he is not mad, but he
is the devil in the form of a dog." The people of the place
were confirmed in their belief that I was a devil by the
tricks they had seen me perform, by the words spoken by the
old woman when she woke out of her infernal trance, and by
the extraordinary speed with which I shot away from them,
so that I seemed to vanish from before them like a being of
the other world. In six hours I cleared twelve leagues ; and
arrived at a camp of gipsies in a field near Granada. There
I rested awhile, for some of the gipsies who recognised me
as the wise dog, received me with great delight, and hid me in
a cave, that^I might not be found if any one came in search of
me ; their intention being, as I afterwards learned, to make
money by me as my master the drummer had done. I
remained twenty days among them, during which I observed
their habits and ways of life ; and these are so remarkable that
I must give you an account of them.

Scip. Before you go any further, Berganza, we had better
consider what the witch said to you, and see if there can
possibly be a grain of truth in the great lie to which you give
credit. Now, what an enormous absurdity it would be to
believe that Camacba could change human beings into brutes,
or that the sacristan served her for years under the form of
an ass. All these things, and the like, are cheats, lies, or illu-
sions of the devil ; and if it now seems to ourselves that we
have some understanding and reason — since we speak^ though
we are really dogs or bear that form — we have already said
that this is a portentous and unparalleled case ; and though it
is palpably before us, yet we must suspend our belief until
the event determines what it should be. Shall I make this
more plain to you? Consider upon what frivolous things
Camacha declared our restoration to depend, and that what
seems a prophecy to you is nothing but a fable, or one of
those old woman's tales, such as the headless horse, and the
wand of virtues, which are told by the fireside in the long
winter nights; for were it anything else it would already
have been accomplished, unless, indeed, it is to be taken in
what I have heard called an allegorical sense : that is to say,
a sense which is not the same as that which the letter imports,
but which, though differing from it, yet resembles it. Now


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 165

for your prophecy : — " They are to recover their true forms
when they shall see the exalted quickly brought low, and
the lowly exalted by a hand that is mighty to do it." If
we take this in the sense I have mentioned, it seems
to me to mean that we shall recover 6ur forms when we
shall see those who yesterday were at the top of fortune's
wheel, to-day east down in the mire, and held of little
account by those who most esteemed them ; so, likewise, when
we shall see others who, but two hours ago, seemed sent into
the world only to figure as units in the sum of its population,
and now are lifted up to the very summit of prosperity. Now,
if our return, as you say, to human form, were to depend on
this, why we have already seen it, and we see it every hotir.
I infer, then, that Camacha's words are to be taken, no6 in an
allegorical, but in a literal, sense ; but this will help us out no
better, since we have many times seen what they say, and we
are still dogs, as you see. And so Camacha was a cheat,
Caiiizares an artful Lag, and Montiela a fool and a rogue — be
it said without offence, if by chance slje was the mother of us
both, or yours, for I won't have her for mine. Furthermore,
I say that the true meaning is a game of nine-pins, in which
those that stand up are quickly knocked down, and the fallen
are set up again, and that by a hand that is able to do it.
Now think whether or not in the course of our lives we have
ever seen a game of nine-pins, or having seen it, have there-
fore been changed into men.

Berg, I quite agree with you Scipio, and have a higher
opinion of your judgment than ever. From all you have said,
1 am come to think and believe that all that has happened to
us hitherto, and that is now happening, is a dream ; but let us
not therefore fail to enjoy this blessing of speech, and the
great excellence of holding human discourse all the time we
may ; and so let it not weary you to hear me relate what befel
me with the gipsies who hid me in the cave.

Scip. With great pleasure. I will listen to you, that you in
your turn may listen to me, when I relate, if heaven pleases,
the events of my life.

Berg, My occupation among the gipsies was to contemplate
their numberless tricks and frauds, and the thefts they all commit
from the time they are out of leading-strings and can walk
alone. You know what a multitude there is of them dispersed


166 CEBVAXTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

allo/er Spain. They all know each other, keep up a constant
intelligence among themselves, and reciprocally pass off and
carry away the articles they have purloined. They render less
obedience to their king than to one of their own people whom
they style count, and* who bears the surname of Maldonado,
as do all his descendants. This is not because they come of
that noble line, but because a page belonging to a cavalier cf
that name fell in love with a beautiful gipsy, who would not
yield to his wishes unless he became a gipsy and made her
his wife. The page did so, and was so much liked by the
other gipsies, that they chose him for their lord, yielded
kim obedience, and in token of vassalage rendered to him a
portion of everything they stole, whatever it might be.

To give a colour to their idleness the gipsies employ
themselves in working in iron, and you may always see them
hawking pincers, tongs, hammers, fire-shovels, and so forth,
the sale of which facilitates their thefts. The women are all
midwives, and in this they have the advantage over others,
for they bring forth without cost or attendants. They wash
their new-born infants in cold water, and accustom them
from birth to death to endure every inclemency of weather.
Hence they are all strong, robust, nimble leapers, runners,
and dancers. They always marry among themselves, in
order that their bad practices may not come to be known,
except by their own people. The women are well behaved
to their husbands, and few of them intrigue except with
persons of their own race. When they seek for alms, it is
rather by tricks and juggling than by appeals to charity ;
and as no one puts faith in them, they keep none, but own
themselves downright vagabonds; nor do I remember to
have ever seen a gipsy-woman taking the sacrament, though
I have often been in the churches. The only thoughts of
their minds are how to cheat and steal. They are fond of
talking about their thefts and how they effected them. A
gipsy, for instance, related one day in my presence how ho
had swindled a countryman as you shall hear :

The gipsy had an ass with a docked tail, and he fitted
a false tail to the stump so Well that it seemed quite natural.
Then he took the ass to market and sold it to a countryman
for ten ducats. Having pocketed the money, he told the
countryman that if he wanted another ass^ own brother to


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 167

the one he had bought, and every bit as good, he might have
it a bargain. The countryman told him to go and fetch it,
and meanwhile he would drive that one home. Away went
the purchaser; the gipsy followed him, and some how or
other, it was not long before he had stolen the ass, from
which he immediately whipped off the false tail, leaving
only a bare stump. He then changed the halter and saddle, and
had the audacity to go and offer the animal for sale to the
countryman, before the latter had discovered his loss. The
bargain was soon made ; the purchcser went into his house
to fetch the money to pay for the second ass, and there
he discovered the loss of the first. Stupid as he was, he
suspected that the gipsy had stolen the animal, and
he refused to pay him. The gipsy brought forward as
witness the man who had received the alcabala* on the
first transaction, and who swore that he had sold the country-
man an ass with a very bushy tail, quite different from the
second one; and an alguazil, who was present, took the gipsy's
part so strongly that the countryman w^as forced to pay for
the ass twice over. Many other stories they told, all about
(Stealing beasts of burden, in which art they are consum-
mate masters. In short, they are a thoroughly bad race, and
though many able magistrates have taken them in handy
they have always remained incorrigible.

After I had remained with them twenty days, they set
out for Murcia, taking me with them. We passed through
Granada, where the company was quartered to which my
master the drummer belonged. As the gipsies were aware
of this, they shut me up in the place where they were lodged.
I overheard them talking about their journey, aiid thinking
that no good would come of it, I contrived to give them the
slip, quitted Granada, and entered the garden of a Morisco,t
who gladly received me. I was quite willing to remain
with him and watch his garden, — a much less fatiguing
business in my opinion than guarding a fiock of sheep ; and
as there was no need to discuss the question of wages, the
Morisco soon had a servant and I a master. I remained
with him more than a month, not that the life I led with him
was much to my liking, but because it gave me opportunities

* A tax on sales and transfers.
i" A Christian of Moorish descent.


168 CERYANTES' EXEMPLART TALES

of observing that of my master, which was like that of ail
the other Moriscoes in Spain. O what curious things I
could tell you, friend Scipio, about that half Faynim rabble,
if I were not afraid that I should not get to the end of my
story in a fortnight ! Nay, if I were to go into particulars,
two months would not be enough. Some few specimens,
however, you shall hear.

Hardly will you find among the whole race one man who is
a sincere believer in the holy law of Christianity. Their only
thought is how to scrape up money and keep it; and to this
end they toil incessantly and spend nothing. The moment
a real falls into their clutches, they condemn it to perpetual
imprisonment ; so that by dint of perpetually accumulating
and never spending, they have got the greater part of the
money of Spain into their hands. They are the grubs, the
magpies, the weasels of the nation. Consider how numerous
they are, and that every day they add much or little to their
hoards, and that as they increase in nmnber so the amount of
their hoarded wealth must increase without end. None of
them of either sex make monastic vows, but all marry and
multiply, for thrifty living is a great promoter of fecundity.
They are not wasted by war or excessive toil ; they plunder
us in a quiet way, and enrich themselves with the fruits of
our patrimonies which they sell back to us. They have no
servants, for they all wait upon themselves. They are at no
expense for the education of their sons, for all their lore is
but how to rob us. From the twelve sons of Jacob, who
entered Egypt, as I have heard, there had sprung, when
Moses freed them from captivity, six hundred thousand
fighting men, besides women and children. From this we
may infer how much the Moriscoes have multiplied, and how
incomparably greater must be their numbers.

Soip, Means have been sought for remedying the mischiefs
you have mentioned and hinted at ; and, indeed, I am sure
that those which you have passed over in silence, are even more
serious than those which you have touched upon. But our
commonwealth has most wise and zealous champions, who,
considering that Spain produces and retains in her bosom
such vipers as the Moriscoes, will, with God's help, provide a
sure and prompt remedy for so great an evil. Go on.

Berg, Ikly master being a stingy hunks, like all his


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS, 169

caste, I lived like himself chiefly on maize bread and buck*
wheat porridge ; but this penury helped me to gain paradise,
in the strange manner you shall hear. Every morning, by
daybreak, a young man used to seat himself at the foot of
one of the many pomegranate trees. He had the look of a
student, being dressed in a rusty suit of threadbare baize, and
was occupied in writing n^ a note book, slapping his forehead
from time to time, biting his nails, and gazing up at the sky.
Sometimes he was so immersed in reverie, that he neither
moved hand nor foot, nor even winked his eyes. One day I
drew near him unperceived, and heard him muttering between
his teeth. At last, after a long silence, he cried out aloud,
" Glorious ! The very best verse I ever composed in my
life!" and down went something in his note book. From
all this, it was plain that the luckless wight was a poet. I
approached him with my ordinary courtesies, and when I had
convinced him of my gentleness, he let me lie down at his feet,
and resumed the course of his thoughts, scratching his head,
falling into ecstacies, and then writing as before.

Meanwhile there came into the garden another young man,
handsome and well dressed, with papers in his hand, at which
he glanced from time to time. The new comer walked up to
the pomegranate tree, and said to the poet, "Have you finished
the first act V

''I have just this tnoment finished it in the happiest
manner possible," was the reply.

" How is that T

" I will tell you ! His Holiness the Pope comes forth in
his pontificals, with twelve cardinals in purple canonicals^ for
the action of my comedy is supposed to take place at the season
of mutatio eaparum, when their eminences are not dressed in
scarlet but in purple — therefore propriety absolutely requires
that my cardinals should wear purple. This is a capital point,
and one on which your common run of writers would be sure to
blunder ; but as for me I could not go wrong, for I have read
the whole Roman ceremonial through, merely that I might be
exact as to these dresses."

" But where do you suppose," said the other, " that our
manager is to find purple robes for twelve cardinals ?"

" If a single one is wanting," cried the poet, " I would
as soon think of flying, as of letting my comedy be repre*


170 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALElS.

Bented without it. Zounds ! is the public to h.ie that xiiagiu«i
ficent spectacle ! Just imagine the splendid efiect on the stage
of a supreme Pontiif and twelve grave cardinals, with all the
other dignitaries, who will of course accompany them ! By
heavens, it will be one of the grandest things ever seen on the
stage, not excepting even the nosegay of Duraja !"

I now perceived that one of these young men was a poet,
and the other a comedian. The latter advised the former that
he should cut out a few of his cardinals, if he did not want
to make it impossible for the manager to produce the piece.
The poet would not listen to this, but said they might be
thankful that he had not brought in the whole conclave, to be
present at the memorable event which he proposed to immor-
talise in his brilliant comedy. The player laughed, left him
to his occupation, and returned to his own, which was studying
a part in a new play. The poet, after having committed to
writing some verses of his magnificent comedy, slowly and
gravely drew from his pocket some morsels of bread, and about
twenty raisins, or perhaps not so many, for there were some
crumbs of bread among them, which increased their apparent
number. He blew the crumbs from the raisins, and ate themi
one by one, stalks and all, for I did not see him throw any-
thing away, adding to them the pieces of bread, which had got
such a colour from the lining of his pocket, that they looked
mouldy, and were so hard that he could not get them down,
though he chewed them over and over again. This was lucky
for me, for he threw them to me, saying, " Catch, dog, and
much good may it do you." Look, said I to myself, what
nectar and ambrosia this poet gives me ; for that is the food
on which they say these sons of Apollo are nourished. In short,
great for the most part is the penury of poets ; but greater
was my need, since it obliged me to eat what he left.

As long as he was busy with the compositior ;f his comedy,
he did not fail to visit the garden, nor did I want crusts, for
he shared them with me very liberally ; and then we went to
the well, where we satisfied our thirst like monarchs, I lapping,
and he drinking out of a pitcher. But at last the poet came
no more, and my hunger became so intolerable, that I resolved
to quit the Morisco and seek my fortune in the city. As I
entered it, 1 saw my poet coming out of the famous monastery
ot San Geronimo. He came to me with open arms, and I was


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 171

no less delighted to see him. He immediately began to empty
bis pockets of pieces of bread, softer than those he used to
carry to the garden, and to put them between my teeth
Tithout passing them through his own. From the softness of
the bits of bread, and my having seen my poet come out of
the monastery, I surmised that his muse, like that of many of
his brethren, was a bashful beggar. He walked into the city,
and I followed him, intending to take him for my master if he
would let me, thinking that the crumbs from his table might
serve to support me, since there is no better or ampler purse
than charity, whose liberal hands are never poor.

After some time, we arrived at the house of a theatrical
manager, <^alled Angulo the Bad, to distinguish him from
another Angulo, not a manager but a player, one of the best
ever seen. The whole company was assembled to hear mv:
master's comedy read; but before the first act was half,
finished, all had vanished, one by one, except the manager
and myself, who formed the whole audience. The comedy
was such that to me, who am but an ass in such matters, it
seemed as though 8atan himself had composed it for the utter,
ruin and perdition of the poet ; and I actually shivered with,
vexation to «ee the solitude in which his audience had left
him. I wonder did his prophetic soul presage to him the dis-*
grace impending over him ; for all the players— and there
were more than twelve of them — came back, laid hold on the
poet, without saying a word, and, had it not been for the
authoritative interference of the manager, they would have
tossed him in a blanket. I was confounded by this sad turn
of affairs, the manager was incensed, the players very merry ;
and the poor forlorn poet, with great patience, but a some^
what wry face, took the comedy, thrust it into his bosom,:
muttering, " It is not right to cast pearls before swine," and
sadly . quitted the place without another word. I was so
mortified and ashamed that I could not follow him, and the
manager caressed me so much that I was obliged to remain ;
and within a month I became an excellent performer in inter-
ludes and pantomimes. Interludes, you know, usually end
with a cudgelling bout, but in my master's theatre they ended
with setting me at the characters of the piece, whom I worried
and tumbled one over the other, to the huge delight of the
ignorant spectators, and my master's great gain.


172 CERYANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

Ohy Scipio! what things I could tell you that I saw
among these players, and two other companies to which I
belonged; but I must leave them for another day, for it
would be impossible to compress them within moderate limits.
All you have heard is nothing to what I could relate to you
about these people and their ways, their work and their idle-
ness, their ignorance and their cleverness, and other matters
without end, which might serve to disenchant many who
idolise these fictitious divinities.

Scip. I see clearly, Berganza, that the field is large ; but
leave it now, and go on.

Berg, I arrived with a company of players in this city of
Yalladolid, where they gave me a wound in an interlude that
was near being the death of me. I could not revenge myself
then, because I was muzzled, and I had no mind to do so
afterwards in cold blood ; for deliberate vengeance argues a
cruel and malicious disposition. I grew weary of this em-
ployment, not because it was laborious, but because I saw in
it many things which called for amendment and castigation ;
and, as it was not in my power to remedy them, I resolved to
see them no more, but to take refuge in an abode of holiness,
as those do who forsake their vices when they can no longer
practise them ; but better late than never. Well, then, seeing
you one uight carrying the lantern with that good Christian
Mahudes, I noticed how contented you were, how righteous
and holy was your occupation. Filled with honest emulation,
I longed to follow your steps ; and, with that laudable inten-
tion, I placed myself before Mahudes, who immediately
elected me your companion, and brought me to this hospital.
What has occurred to me since I have been here would take
some time to relate. I will just mention a conversation I
heard between four invalids, who lay in four beds next each other.
It will not take long to tell, and it fits in here quite pat.

Scip, Very well ; but be quick, for, to the best of my
belief, it cannot be far from daylight.

Berg, The four beds were at the end of the infirmary,
and in them lay an alchemist, a poet, a mathematician, and
one of those persons who are called projectors.

Scip. I recollect these good people well.

Berg, One afternoon, last summer, the windows being
closed, I lay panting under one of their beds, when the poe!


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 173

began piteously to bewail his ill fortune. The mathematician
asked him what he complained of.

"Have I not good cause for complaint ?" he replied. "I
have strictly observed the rule laid down by Horace in his
Art of Poetry, not to bring to light any work until ten years
after it has been composed. Now, I have a work on which I
was engaged for twenty years, and which has lain by me for
twelve. The subject is sublime, the invention perfectly novel,
the episodes singularly happy, the versification noble, and the
arrangement admirable, for the beginning is in perfect corres-
pondence with the middle and the end. Altogether it is a
lofty, sonorous, heroic poem, delectable and full of matter ;
and yet I cannot find a prince to whom I Qiay dedicate it — a
prince, I say, who is intelligent, liberal, and magnanimous.
Wretched and depraved age this of ours V*

** What is the subject of the work ?" inquired the alche-
mist.

" It treats," said the poet, " of that part of the history of
king Arthur of England which archbishop Turpin left un-
written, together with the history of the quest of the San-
greal, the whole in heroic measure,— part rhymes, part blank-
verse; and in dactyles moreover, that is to say, in dactylic
noun substantives, without any admission of verbs."

*' For my part, I am not much (If a judge in matters of
poetry," returned the alchemist, " and therefore I cannot pre-
cisely estimate the misfortune you complain of ; but in any
case it cannot equal my own in wanting means, or a prince to
back me and supply me with the requisites, for prosecuting the
science of alchemy ; but for which want alone I should now
be rolling in gold, and richer than ever was Midas, Crassus,
or Croesus."

"Have you ever succeeded, Senor Alchemist," said the
mathematician, " in extracting gold from the other metals ? "

" I have not yet extracted it," the alchemist replied, " but
I know for certain that the thing is to be done, and that in
less than two months more I could complete the discovery of
the philosopher's stone, by means of which gold can be made
even out of pebbles,"

" Your worships," rejoined the mathematician, " have both
of you made a great deal of your misfortunes ; but after all,
one of you has a book to dedicate, and the othar is on the


174 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

point of discovering the philosopher's stone, by means of which
he will be as rich as all those who have followed that course.
But what will you say of my misfortune, which is great beyond
compare ? For two and twenty years I have been in pursuit
of the fixed point ; here I miss it, there I get sight of it as^ain,
and just when it seems that I am down upon it so that it can
by no means escape me, I find myself on a sudden so far away
from it that I am utterly amazed. It is just the same with the
quadrature of the circle. I have been within such a hair's
breadth gf it, that I cannot conceive how it is that I have not
got it in my pocket. Thus I suffer a tciment like that of
Tantalus, who starves with fruits all round him, and burns
with thirst with water at his lip. At one moment I seem to
grasp the truth, at another it is far away from me ; and, like
another Sisyphus, I begin again to climb the hill which I have
just rolled down, along with all the mass of my labours."

The projector, who had hitherto kept silence, now struck
in. "Here we are," he said, "four complaibants, brought
together by poverty under the roof of this hospital. To the
devil with such callings and employments, as give neither
pleasure nor bread to those who exercise them ! I, gentlemen,
am a projector, and have at various times offered sundry
valuable projects to his majesty, all to his advantage, and
without prejudice to the realm ; and I have now a memorial
in which I supplicate his majesty to appoint a person to whom
I may communicate a new project of mine, which will be the
means of entirely liquidating all his debts. But from the fate
which all my other memorials have had, I foresee that this one
also will be thrown into the dust-hole. Lest, however, your
worships should think me crack-brained, I will explain my
project to you, though this be in some degree a publication of
my secret.

"I propose that all his majesty's vassals, from the age of
iburteen to sixty, be bound once a month, on a certain ap-
pointed day, to fast on bread and water ; and that the whole
expenditure, which would otherwise be made on that day for
food, including fruit, meat, fish, wine, eggs, aad vegetables,
be turned into money, and the amount paid to his majesty,
w^ithout defrauding him of a doit, as each shall declare on
f/ath. By this means, in the course of twenty years the king
will be freed from all debts and incumbrances. The calcu*


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS. 175

lation is easily made. There are in Spain more than three
millions of persons of the specified age, exclusive of invalids,
old, and young, and there is not one of these but spends at
least a real and a half daily ; however, I am willing to put it
at a real only, and less it cannot be, even were they to eat
nothing but leeks. Now does it not strike your worships
that it would be no bad thing to realise every month three
millions of reals, all net and clear as if they were winnowed
and sifted? The plan, moreover, instead of a loss to his
majesty's subjects, would be a real advantage to them ; for by
means of their fasts they would make themselves acceptable to
God and would serve their king, and some of them even might
find it beneficial to their health. The project is in every way
admirable, as you must confess ; the money too might be col-
lected by paiishes, without the cost of tax gatherers and
receivers, those plagues and bloodsuckers of the realm."

The others all laughed at the projector's scheme, and even
he himself joined in the laugh at last. For my part I found
tnuch matter for reflection in the strange conveisntion I had
heard, and in the fact that people such as these usually end
their days in a hospital.

jScip. That is true, Berganza. Have you anything more
to say ?

Berg, Two things more and then I shall have done, for I
think day is beginning to dawn. One day I accompanied
Mahudes to ask for alms in the house of the corregidor of this
city, who is a great cavalier and a very great Christian. We
found him alone, and 1 thought fit to take advantage of that
opportunity to give him certain counsels which I had gathered
from the lips of an old invalid in this hospital, who was dis-
cussing the means of saving from perdition those vagabond
girls who take to a life of vice to avoid labour, — an intolerable
evil demanding an immediate and eflfectual remedy. Wish-
ing to impart what I had heard to the corregidor, I lifted up
my voice, thinking to speak ; but instead of articulate speech
I barked so loudly that the corregidor called out in a passion
to his servants to drive me out of the room with sticks;
whereupon one of them caught up a copper syphon, which
was the nearest thing at hand, and thrashed me with it so^
that I feel it in my /ibs to this hour.

iScip. And do you complain of that, Berganza ?


176 CERVANTES* EXEMPLART TALES.

Berg. Nay ; have I not reason to complain, since I feel the
psdn even now ; and since it appears to me that mjr good in-
tentions merited no such chastisement?

Scip, Look you, Berganza, no one should interfi re where
he is not wanted, nor take upon himself a business that in no
wise is his concern. Besides, you ought to know, that the
advice of the poor, however good it may be, is never taken ;
nor should the lowly presume to offer advice to the great,
who fancy they know everything. Wisdom in a pocr man
lies under a cloud, and cannot be seen ; or if by chance it
shines through it, people mistake it for folly, and treat it with
contempt.

Berg. You are right, Scipio ; and having had the lesson
well beaten into me, I will henceforth act accordingly. That
same night I entered the house of a lady of quality, who had
in her arms a little lap-dog, so very diminutive that she could
have hid it in her bosom. The instant it saw me, it flew at
me out of its mistress's arms, barking with all its might, ard
even went so far as to bite my leg. I looked at it with dis-
gust, and said to myself, " If I met you in the street, paltry
little animal, either I would take no notice of you at all, or 1
would make mince meat of you." The little wretch was an
example of the common rule — that mean-souled persons when
they are in favour are always insolent, and ready to offend
those who are much better than themselves, though inferior
to them in fortune.

Scip. We have many instances of this in worthless fellows,
who are insolent enough under cover of their masters' protection ;
but if death or any other chance brings down the tree against
which they leaned, their true value becomes apparent, since
they have no other merit than that borrowed from their
patrons ; whilst virtue and good sense are always the same,
whether clothed or naked, alone or accompanied. But let us
break off now ; for the light beaming in through those chinks
shows that the dawn is far advanced.

Berg. Be it so ; and I trust in heaven that to-night we
ehall And ourselves in a condition to renew our conversation.

The licentiate finished the reading of this dialogue, and
the Alferez his nap, both at the same time. ^' Although this
ccUoquy is manifestly fictitious," said the licentiate, " it is, in


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO DOGS.


177


my opinion, so well composed, that the Senor Alferez may
well proceed with the second part."

" Since you give me such encouragement, I will do so,'*
replied the alferez, " without further discussing the question
with you, whether the dogs spoke or not."

" There is no need that we should go over that ground
again," said the licentiate. " I admire the art and the inven-
tion you have displayed in the dialogue, and that is enough.
Let us go to the Espolon,* and recreate our bodily eyes, as we
have gratified those of our minds."

" With all my heart," said the alferez^ and away they
went.


* A promeDade on the banks of the Arlozoro at Valladolid.


178 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TA1.E8.


THE LITTLE GIPSY GIRL.

It would almost seem that the Gitanos and Gitanas, or male
and female gipsies, had been sent into the world for the sole
purpose of thieving. Bom of parents who are thieves, reared
among thieves, and educated as thieves, they finally go forth
perf ected in their vocation , accomplished at all points, and
ready for every species of roguei^^. In th^ the love of
thieving, and the ability to exercise it, are qualities insepar"
ab le from their ex istence^ and never lost until the hour of
their death.

Now it chanced that an old woman of this race, one who

had merited retirement on full pay as a veteran in the ranks

of Cacus, brought up a girl whom she called Preciosa, and

declared to be her granddaughter. To this child she im-

paTted^l her own acquirements, all the various tricks of her

art. Little Preciosa became the most admired dancer in all

the tribes of Gipsydom ; she was the most beautiful and dis-

^ creet of all their maidens ; nay she shone conspicuous not only

S amoi ig the gipaicuy but ev e n as compared with the most lovely

7 and accomplished damsels whose praises were at that time

sounded forth by the voice of fame^ Neither sun, nor wind,

nor all those vicissitudes of weather, to which the gipsies are

more constantly exposed than any other people, could impair

the blgffl of he r complexi on or embrown her hands ; and

what is m6re r^biarkable, the rude manner in which she was

reared only served to reveal that she must have sprung from

^ something better than the liitano stock; for she was eX"

( tremely pleasing and jjourtepus in conversation, and lively

I though she was^yet in no wise did shiB display thfiJeaatJirLp

J see mly levity; on the contrary, amidst all her sprightliness, there

\ was at the same time so much genuine dec orum in her manner,

that in the presence of Preciosa no gi^na, oU or young, ever

dared to sing lascivious songs , or utter unbecoming words.

The gran dmother fujly. perceived w hat ^a treasure .she


THK UTTLB GIPSY GIRL, 179

bad in her grandchild ; and the old eagle determined to set
her young eaglet flying, having been careful to teach her how
to Uve by her talons. Preciosa was rich in hymns, ballads,
seguidillas, sarabands, and other ditties, especially romances,
which she sang with peculiar grace ; for the cunning grand-
mother knew by experience that such accomplishments, added
to the youth and beauty of her granddaughter, were the
best means of increasing her cap ital , and therefore she failed
not to promote th^ c uluvatiQ p in^very way she could. Nor
was the aid of poets wanting ; for some there are who do not
disdain to write for the gipsies, as there are those who invent
miracles for the pretended blind, and go snacks with them
in what they gain from charitable believers.

During her childhood, Preciosa lived in different parts of
Ca atilej but in her si xteenth yea r her grandmother brought
her to M adrid, to the usual camping- ground of the gipsies, in
the fields o? Santa Barbara. Madrid seemed to her the most
likely place to find customers ; for there everything is bought
ttnd sold. Preciosa made her first appearance in the capital
on the festival of Santa Anna, the patroness of the city, when
she took part in a dance performed by eight gitanas, with
one gitano, an excellent dancer, to lead them. The others
were all very well, but such was the eleg ance of Preciosa, that
she fascinated the eyes of all the spectators! Amidst the
sound of the tambourine and castanets, in the heat of the
dance, a murmur of admiration arose for the beauty and grace
of Preciosa ; but when they heard her sing — ^for the dance
was accompanied with song — ^the fame of the gitana reached
its highest point ; and by common consent the jewel offered
as the prize of the best dancer in that festival was adjudged
to her. Aiter the usual dance in the church of Santa Maria,
before the image of the glorious Santa Anna, Preciosa caught
up a tambourine, well furnished with bells, and having cleared a
wide circle around her with pirouettes of exceeding lightness,
slie sang a hymn to the patroness of the day. It was the admira-^
tion of all who heard her. Some said, " God bless the girl !" 1
Others, " 'Tis a pity that this maiden is a gitana : truly she L
d eserves to be the daughter of some great lord !" Others (
more coarsely observed, "Let the wench grow up, and she will J
show you pretty tricks; she is closing the meshes of a very
Bice net to fish for hearts." Another more good-natured but

M 2


180 CEBYANTES' EXElfPLABT TALES,

ill-bred and stupid, seeing her foot it so lightly, ** Keep it up !
keep it up ! Courage, darling ! Grind the dust to atoms !"
" Never fear,** she answered, without losing a step ; " I'll grind
it to atoms."

At the vespers and feast of Santa Anna Preciosa was
somewhat fatigued ; but so celebrated had she become for
beauty, wit, and discretion, as well as for her dancing, that
nothing else was talked of throughout the capital. A fort-
night afterwards, she returned to Madrid, with three other
girls, provided with their tambourines and a new dance, be-
sides a new stock of romances and songs, but all of a m oral
/ character ; for PreciosawoulTnever permit those in her.com- )
J pany to sing immodest songs, nor would she ever sing them /
L herself. The old gitana came with her, for she now watched
her as closely as Argus, and never left her side, lest some one
should carry her off. She called her granddaughter, and the
girl believed herself to be her grandchild.

The young gitanas began their dance in the shade, in
the Calle de Toledo, and were soon encircled by a crowd of
spectators. Whilst they danced, the old woman gathered
money among the bystanders, and they showered it down
like stones on the highway; for beauty has such power
that it can awaken slumbering charity. The dance over,
Preciosa said, " If you wilj^ive me four quartos, I will sing
by myself a beautiful romance about the churching of our
lady the Queen Dona Margarita. It is a famous composition,
by a poet of renown, one who may be called a captain in the
battahon of poets.'' No sooner had she said this, than almost
every one in the ring cried out, " Sing it, Preciosa ; here are
my four quartos ;" and so many quartos were thrown down
for her, that the old gitana had not hands enough to pick
them up. When the gathering was ended, Preciosa resumed
her tambourine, and sang the promised romance, which was
loudly encored, the whole audience crjdng out with one voice,
** Sing again, Preciosa, sing again, and dance for us, girl : thou
shalt not want quartos, whilst thou hast the ground beneath
thy feet."

Whilst more than two hundred persons were thus looking
on at the dance, and listening to the singing of the gitana,
one of the lieutenants of the city passed by ; and seeing so
many people together, he asked what was the occasion of the


THE LITTLE OIPST GIRL. 181

crowd. Being told that the handsome gitana was singing
there, the lie utenan t, who was not without curiosity, drew
near also to Itstbn, TJUt in consideration of his dignity, he did
not wait for the end of the romance. The gitanilla, how^
ever, pleas ed him j omuch. that he sentjiis ^page to tell the
old c rone to com eJiO^ lirmgP} jh at evening with her troop,
as lie wished hiswife Dona Claialo hear them. Ttie page
delivered the message, and the old gitana promised to attend.

After the performance was ended, and the performers were
going elsewhere, a very well-dressed page came up to Pre-
ciosa, and giving her a folded paper, said, ^^ Pretty P^eciosa, will
you si njg this romance ? It is a very good one, and I will
give you others from time to time, by which you will acquire
the fame of having the best romances in the world."

« I will learn this one with much willingness," replied
Preciosa ; " and be sure, senor, you bring me the others you
speak of, but on condition that there is nothing improper in
them. If you wish to be paid for them, we will agree for
them by the dozen ; but do not expect to be paid in advance ;
that will be impossible. When a dozen have been sung,
the money for a dozen shall be forthcoming/'

" K the Seiiora Preciosa only pays me for the paper," said
the page, ^' I shall be content. Moreover, any romance which
does not turn out so well shall not be counted."

** I will retain the right of choice," said Preciosa ; and
then she continued her way with her companions up the
street, when some gentlemen called and beckoned to them from
a latticed window. Preciosa went up and looked through the
window, which was near the ground, into a cheerful, well-
furnished apartment, in which several cavaliers were walking
about, and others playing at various games. **^Will you give
me a share of your winnings, senors ?" said Preciosa, in the
lisping accent of th e gipsies, ^ hv^h «1^a spoke not bv nature
buiUf^A-eh^iM. At the sight of Preciosa, and at the sound
of her voice, the players quitted the tables, the rest left off
lounging, and all thronged to the window, for her fame had
already reached them. '' Come in ! Let the little gipsies
come in," said the cavaliers, gaily ; " we will certainly give
them a share of our winnings."

** But you might make it cost us dear, se£[ors,"said Preciosa.

*'5ro, on the honour of gentlemen," said one, "you may


182 CERVANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

come in, nif(a, in full security that no one will touch the sole
of your shoe. I swear this to you by the order I wear ofi
my breast ;" and as he spoke he laid his hand on the cross of
the order of Ciilatrava which he wore.

" If you like to go in, Preciosa," said one of the gita-
nillas who were with her, '^ do so by all means ; but I do
not choose to go where there are so many men."

"Look you, Christina," answered Preciosa, "what you
have to beware of is one man alone ; where there are so
many there is nothing to fear. Of one thing you may be
sure, Christina ; the woman who is resolved to be upright
may be so amongst an'army of soldier s. It is weTlT Indeed, lo
"avoid occasions of temptation, but it is not in crowded rooms
like this that danger lurks."

" Well then, let us go in, Preciosa," said her companion,
"you know more than a witch."

The old gipsy also encouraged them to go in, and that
decided the question. As soon as they had entered the room,
the cavalier of the order, seeing the paper which Preciosa
carried, stretched out his hand to take it. " Do not take it
from me,'' she said : "It b a romance but just given to me,
and which I have not yet had time to read."

" And do you know how to read, my girl V said one of
the cavaliers. ^

** Ay, a nd to jm te too," said the old woman. " I have
brought up my grS35hild as if she wfiA a lawyer's daughte r."

The cavalier opened th'^ paper, and finding a gold crown
inclosed in it, said, "Truly, Preciosa, the contents of this
letter are worth the postage. Here is a crown inclosed in
the romance."

"The poet has treated me like a beggar," said Pre-
ciosa; "but it is certainly a greater marvel for one of his
trade to give a crown than for one of mine to receive it.
If his romances come to me with this addition, he may trans-
scribe the whole Bomancero General and send me every piece
in it one by one. I will weigh their merit; and if I find
there is good matter in them, I will not reject them. Bead
the paper aloud, senor, that we may see if the poet is as
wise as he is liberaL" The cavalier accordingly read as
follows :—


THE LITTLE 6IPST GIRL. 183

8weet gipsy girl, whom envy'8 self ^

Must own of all fair maid!s the fairest^
Ah! well befits thy stony heart

The name thou, Preciosa/ bear est.

If as in beauty, so in pride

And cruelty thou grow to sight,
Woe worth the land, woe worth the a?e

Which brought thy fatal charms to light.

A basilisk in thee we see,

Which fascinates our gaze and kills.
No empire mild is thine, but one

That tyrannises o'er our wiUs.

How grewjujdudMffmaJaMdjjpaxtnb^

Trom roughest blasts without a shield r
How such a perfect chrysolite

Could humble Manzanares yield?

River, for this thou shalt be famed.

Like Tagus with its golden show.
And more for Preciosa prized

Than Ganges with its lavish flow.

In telling fortunes who can say

What dupes to ruin thou begailest?
Good luck thou speak'st with smiling lip%

But luckless they on whom thou smilestt

Tis said they're witches every one.

The women of the gipsy race;
And all men may t oo plainly s ee

That thou hastrintchcraftjh thy face.

A thousand differenTmodes are thine

To turn the brain ; for rest or move,
Speak, sing, be mute, approach, retire.

Thou kindlest still l^e fire of love.

The freest hearts bend to thy sway.

And lose the pride of liberty;
Bear witness mine, thy captive thrall,

Which would not, if it could, be free*

These lines, thou precious gem of love,

Whose praise all power of verse tranacendi^

lie who for thee will live or die.
Thy poor and humble lover sends.

* Pledra preciosa, precious stone.


i


\


184 Cervantes' exemplart tales.

*' The poem ends with ' poor ' in the last line," said Pre* ;

ciosa ; '^ and that is a bad sign. Lovers should never begin by 2

saying that they are poor^ for poverty, it strikes me, isa_great I

enemy to love." ' I

' "Who t ea ches you these things, girl ?* said one of the

cavaliers.

"Who should t each m e?'* she replied. **Have I not a
s6ul in my body? Am I not fifteen years of age ? I am ,

^neither lame, nor halt, nor maimed in my understanding. l

.jsjf/ The wit of a gipsy girl steers by a different compass from
\93f^ that which guldus ulhei* people. They are always forward
^ f or their years . There is no such thing as a stupid gi£an5;'or

C>^ a silly gitana. Since it is only by being sharp and ready that

they can earn a livelihood, they polish their wits at every
step, and by no means let the moss grow under their feet.
You see these girls, my companions, who are so silent. You
may think they are simpletons, but put your fingers in their
mouths to see if they have cut their wise teeth ; and then
you shall see what you shall see. There is not a gipsy girl
of twelve who does not know as much as one of another race 1

at five-and-twenty, for they have the devil and much practice
for instructors, so that they learn in one hour what would
otherwise take them a year."

The company were much amused by the gitana's chat, and
all gave her money. The old woman sacked thirty reals, and
went off with her flock as merry as a cricket to the house of
the sefior lieutenant, after promising that she would return
with them another day to please such liberal gentlemen. Dona
Clara, t h e lieutenant^s lady, had been apprised of the intended"
visit of the gipsies, and she and her doucellas and duefias, as
well as those of another sefiora, her neighbour, were expect-
ing them as eagerly as one looks for a shower in May. They
had come to see Preciosa. She entered with her companions,
shining among them like a torch among lesser lights, and all
the ladies pressed towards her. Some kissed her, some gazed ^

at her; others blessed her sweet face, others her graceful
carriage. " This, indeed, is what you may call golden hair,"
cried Dona Clara ; " these are truly emerald eyes." * llie

* It is hard to say what ** exquisite reason " Ceryantes can have
had for likening a girl's eyes to emeralds above all other gems. He
uses the phrase elsewhere, apparently without an:ir ironical meanicg.


THE LITTLB GIPSY GIRL, 185

Befiora, her neighbour, examined the gitanilla piecemeal. She
made a pepetoria'* of all her joints and members, and coming
at last to a dimple in her chin, she said, " Oh, what a dim-
ple ! it is a pit into which all eyes that behold it must fall."
Thereupon an esquire in attendance on Dona Clara, an elderly
gentleman with a long beard, exclaimed, " Call you thb a
dimple, senora ? I know little of dimples then if this be one.
It is no dimple, but a grave of living desires. I vow to God
the gitanilla is such a dainty creature, she could not be bet-
ter if she was made of silver or sugar paste. Do you know
how to tell for tunes, nina ? "

" Thai 1 do, and in three or four different manners," re-
plied Preciosa.

" You can do that too ? " exclaimed Dona Clara. " By the
life of my lord the lieutenant, you must tell me mine, nina
of gold, nifia of silver, nina of pearls, nina of carbuncles, nina
of heaven, and more than that cannot be said."

" Give the nina the palm of your hand, senora, and some-
thing to cross it with," said the old gipsy ; " and you will see
what things she will tell you, for she knows more than a doc-
tor of medicine."

The senor^ ^enienta ^ put her hand in her pocket, but
found it empty ; she asked for the loan of a quarto from her
maids, but none of them had one, neither had the senora her
neighbour. Preciosa seeing this, said, '^For the matter of
crosses all are good, but those made with silver or gold are
best. As for making the sign of the cross with copper money,
that, ladies, you must know lessens the luck, at least it does
min;. I always like to begin by crossing the palm with a good
gold crown, or a piece of eight, or at least a quarto, for, I am
like the sacristans who rejoice when there is a good collection."

" How witty you are," said the lady visitor ; then turning
to the squire, " Do you happen to have a quarto about you,
Senor Contreras ? if you have, give it me, and when my hus-
band the doctor comes you shall have it again."

" I have one," replied Contreras, " but it is pledged for
two-and> twenty maravedis for my supper ; give me so much
and I will fly to fetch it."

*^ We have not a quarto amongst us all," said Dona Clara,

* A dish, in which a fowl is served up disjointed,
t The wife of the UnienUf or lieutenant.


186 Cervantes' exemplabt tales.

**and you ask for two-and-twenty maravedis? Go your
ways, Contreras, for a tiresome blockhead, as you always weret"

One of the damsels present, seeing the penury of the house,
said to Preciosa, *' Nina, will it be of any use to make the
cross with a silver thimble ? "

" Certainly," said Preciosa; " the best crosses in the world are
made with silver thimbles, provided there are plenty of them."

** I have one,'* said the doncella ; *' if that is enough, here
it is, on condition that my fortune be told too." <

" So many fortunes to be told for a thimble ! " exclaimed
the old gipsy. " Make haste, granddaughter, for it will soon
be night." Preciosa took the thimble, and began her sooth
saying.

Pretty lady, pretty lady,

With a hand as silver fair,
How thy husband dearly loves thee

'Tis superfluous to declare.

Thou'rt a dove, all milk of kindness; J

Tet at times too thou canst be -^

Wrathful as a tiger, or a
Lioness of Barbary.

Thou canst show thy teeth when jealous:

Truly the lieutenant's sly;
Loves with furtive sports to vary

Magisterial gravity.

What a pity ! One worth having

Woo*a thee when a maiden fair.
Plague upon all interlopers!

You*d have made a charming pair.

Sooth, I do not like to say It,

Yet it may as well be said ;
Thou wilt be a buxom widow ; i

Twice again shalt thou be wed.

Do not weep, my sweet senora } ^

We gitanas, you must know, "^

Speak not always true as gospel | '
Weep not then sweet lady so.

If the thought is too distressing,

Losing such a tender mate.
Thou hast but to die before hinip

To escape a widow's fate.


THE LITTLE GIPSY GIRL. 187

Wealth abundant thoult inherit,

And that quickly, never fear:
Thou shalt have a son, a canon,

— Of what church does not appear^

Not Toledo; no, that can't be;

And a daughter — let me see^
Ay, she'll rise to be an abbess;

— That is, if a nun she be.

If thy husband do not drop off

From this moment in weeks four,
Burgos him, or Salamanca,

Shall behold corregidor.

Meanwhile keep thyself from tripping :

Where thou walkest, many a snare
For the feet of pretty ladies

Naughty gallants lay: beware!

Other things still more surprising

Shall on Friday next be told.
Things to startle and delight thee,

When I've crossed thy palm with gold.

Preciosa having finished tliis oracular descant for the lady
of the house, the rest of the company were all eager to have
their fortunes told likewise, but she put them off till the next
Friday, when they promised to have silver coin ready for
crossing their palms. The senor lieutenant now came in, and
heard a glowing account of the charms and accomplishments
of the leading gitana. Having made her and her companions
dance a little, he emphatically confirmed the encomiums be*
stowed on Preciosa ; and putting his hand in his pocket he
groped and rummaged about in it for a while, but at last drew
his hand out empty, saying, " Upon my life I have not a doit.
Give Preciosa a real, Dona Clara ; I will give it you by and
by."

" That is all very well, senor," the lady replied ; " but
where is the real to come from ? Amongst us all we could
not find a quarto to cross our hands with."

"Well, give her some trinket or another, that Preciosa
may come another day to see us, when we will treat her
better."

" No,'* said Dona Clara, " I will give her nothing to-day,
and I shall be sure she will come again."


188 Cervantes' exemplary tales.

*• On the contrary," said Preciosa, '* if you give me nothing;
I will never come here any more. Sell justice, sefior lieu-
tenant, sell justice, and then you will have money. Do not
introduce new customs, but do as other magistrates do, or you
will die of hunger. Look you, senor, I have heard say that
money enough may be made of one's office to pay any mulcts
that may be incurred,* and to help one to other appoint-
ments."

''So say and do those who have no conscience," said the
lieutenant ; " but the judge who does his duty will have no
mulct to pay ; and to have well discharged his office, will be
his best help to obtain another."

" Your worship speaks like a very saint," replied Preciosa ;
" proceed thus, and we shall snip pieces off your old coats for
relics."

'' You know a great deal, Preciosa," said the lieutenant ;
'' say no more, and I will contrive that their majesties shall
see you, for you are fit to be shown to a king."

" They will want me for a court fool," said the gitanilla,
'' and as I never shall learn the trade, your pains will be all
for nothing. If they wanted me for my cleverness, they
might have me ; but in some palaces fools thrive better than
the wise. I am content to be a gitana, and poor, and let
Heaven dispose of me as it pleases."

" Come along, nina," said the old gipsy ; " say no more,
you have said a great deal already, and know more than I
ever taught you. Don't put too fine a point to your wit for
fear it should get blunted ; speak of things suitable to your
years ; and don't set yourself on the high ropes, lest you
should chance to have a fall."

'' The deuce is in these gitanas," said the delighted lieu-
tenant, as they were taking their leave. The doncella of the
thimble stopped them for a moment, saying to Preciosa, '' Tell
me 'my fortune, or give me back my thimble, for I have not
another to work with."

" Sefiora doncella," replied Preciosa, " count upon your
fortune as if it were already told, and provide yourself with

* It was formerly the custom in Spain that a ciTil officer on giving
up his post, should remain for a certain time in the place where he
had served, to answer any charges of maladministration that might
be brought against him.


-^5^


THE LITTLE GIPSY 6IBL. 189

another ; or else sew no more gussets until I come again on
Friday, when I will tell you more fortunes and adventures
than you could read in any book of knight errantry."

The gipsies went away, and falling in with numerous work-
women returning from Madrid to their villages as usual at the
Ave Maria, they joined company with them, as they always did
for the greater security ; for the old gipsy lived in perpetual
terror lest some one should run away with her granddaughter.

One morning after this as they were returning to Madrid
to levy black mail along with other gitanas, in a little valley
about five hundred yards from the city, they met a handsome
young gentleman richly dressed ; his sword and dagger were
a blazo of guld ; hiu L^l was looped with a jewelled band, and
was adorned with plumes of various colours. The gitanas
stopped on seeing him, and set themselves to observe his
movements at their leisure, wondering much that so fine a
cavalier should be alone and on foot in such a place at that
early hour. He came up to them, and addressing the eldest
gitana, said, " On your life, friend, I entreat you do me the
fevour to let me say two words in private to you and Preciosa.
It shall be for your good."

" With all my heart," said the old woman^ " so you do not
take us much out of our way, or delay us long ; " and calling
Preciosa, they withdrew to some twenty paces distance, where
they stopped, and the young gentleman thus addressed them :
"lam so subdued by. the wijLand beauty of Preciosa, that
after having in vain endeavoured to overcome ihyaSmiration,
I have at last found the effort impossible. I, senoras (for I
shall always give you that title if heaven favours my preten-
sions), am a knight, as this dress may show you;" and open-
ing his cloak he displayed the insignia of one of the highest
orders in Spain ; ** I am the jon^of " (here he men-

tioned a personage whose name we suppress for obvious rea-
sons), " and am still under tutelage im d^conunand ^ I am an
only son, and expect lo mhent a conSderable^state. My
father is here in the capital, looRing for a certain post which
by all accounts he is on the point of obtaining. Being then
of the rank and condition which I have declared to you, I
should yet wish to be a great lord for the sake of Preciosa, that
I mi ght raise h er^^ip t.n my ow n level, and make hCT mvequal
tndmy laay. "TTdo not seek to deceive ; the love 1 bear h^


190 CERVAJTTES' EXEMPLARY T^LES.

is too deep for any kind of deception ; I only desire to serve
her in whatever way shall b8 most agreeable to her ; her will
is mine ; for her my heart is wax to be moulded as she pleases,
but enduring as marble to retain whatever impression she
shall make upon it. If you believe me I shall fear no dis-
couragement from any other quarter, but if you doubt me, I

shall despond. My name is ; my father's I have

already given you ; he lives in such a house in such a street,
and you may inquire about him and me of the neighbours,
and of others also ; for our name and quality are not so ob-
scure but that you may hear of us about the court, and every-
where in the capital. I have here a hundred crowns in gold
to present to you, as earnest of what I mean to give you here-
after ; for a man will be no niggard of his wealth who has
given away his very soul."

Whilst the cavalier was speaking, Preciosa watched him
attentively, and doubtless she saw nothing to dislike either in
his language or his person. Turning to the old woman, she
said, " Pardon me, grandmother, if I take the liberty of an-
swering this enamoured senor myself."

"Make whatever answer you please, granddaughter," said
the old woman, " for I know you have sense enough for any-
thing." So Preciosa began.

"Senor cavalier," she said, "though I am but a poor
gitana and humbly born, yet I have a certain fantastic little
spirit within me, which moves me to great things. Promises
do not tempt me, nor presents sap my resolution, nor obse-
quiousness allure, nor amorous wiles ensnare me ; and although
by my grandmother's reckoning I shall be but fifteen next
Michaelmas, I am already old in thought, and have more
understanding than my years would seem to promise. This
may, perhaps, be more from nature than from experience ; but
be that as it may, I know that the passion of love is an im-
petuous impulse, which violently distorts the current of the
will, makes it dash furiously against all impediments, and
recklessly pursue the desired object. But not unfrequently
when the lover believes himself on the point of gaining the
heaven of his wishes, he falls into the hell of disappointment.
Or say that the object is obtained, the lover soon becomes
wearied of his so much desired treasure, and opening the eyes
of ius understanding he finds that what before was so devoutly


THE LITTLE GIPST GIRL. 191

adored is now become abhorrent to him. The fear of such a
result inspires me with so great a distrust, that I put no faith
in words, and doubt many deeds. One sole jewel I have,
which I prize more than life, and that is my virgin purity,
which I will "not sell for promises or gifts, for sold it would be
in that case, and if it could be bought, small indeed would be
its value. Nor is it to be filched from me by wiles or artifices ;
rather will I carry it with me to my grave, and perhaps to
heaven, than expose it to danger by listening to specious tales
and chimeras. It is a flower which nothing should be allowed
to sully, even in imagination if it be possible. Nip the rose
from the spray, and how soon it fades! One touches it,
another smells it, a third plucks its leaves, and at last the
flower perishes' in vulgar hands. If you are come then,
sefior, for this booty, you shall never bear it away except
bound in the ties of wedlock. If you desire to be my spouse,
I will be yours ; but first there are many conditions to be ful-
filled, and many points to be ascertained.

^ In the first place I must know if you are the person
you declare yourself to be. Next, should I find this to
be true, you must straightway quit your father's mansion,
and exchange it for our tents, where, assuming the garb
of a gipsy, you must pass two years in our schools, during
which I shall be able to satisfy myself as to your disposition,
and you will become acquainted with mine. At the end of
that period, if you are pleased with me and I with yqu, I
will give myself up to you as your wife ; but till then I will
be your sister and your humble servant, and nothing more.
Consider, seflor, that during the time of this novitiate you
may recover your sight, which now seems lost, or at least dis-
ordered, and that you may then see fit to shun what now you
pursue with so much ardour. You will then be glad to regain
your lost liberty, and having done so, you may by sincere
repentance obtain pardon of your family for your faults. K
on these conditions you are willing to enlist in our ranks, the
matter rests in your own hands ; but if you fail in any one of
them, you shall not touch a finger of mine."

The youth was astounded at Preciosa's decision, and re-
mained as if spell-bound, with his eyes bent on the ground, ap-
parently considering what answer he should return. Seeing
this, Freciosa said to him, '^ This is not a matter of such light


11)2 CERVANTES' EXSMPLABT TALES.

moment that it can or ought to be resolved on the spot.
Return, senor, to the city, consider maturely what is best for
you to do ; and you may speak with me in this same place any
week-day you please, as we are on our way to or from Madrid."

" When Heaven disposed me to love you, Preciosa," replied
the cavalier, ** I determined to do for you whatever it might
be your will to require of me, though it never entered my
thoughts that you would make such a demand as you have
now done ; but since it is your pleasure that I should comply
with it, count me henceforth as a gipsy, and put me to all the
trials you desire, you will always find me the same towards
3'ou as I now profess myself. Fix the time when you will
have me change my garb. I will leave my family under
pretext of going to Flanders, and will bring with me money
for my support for some time. In about eight days I shall
be able to arrange for my departure, and I will contrive some
means to get rid of my attendants, so as to be free to accom-
plish my purpose. What I would beg of you (if I might
make bold to ask any favour) is that, except to-day for the
purpose of inquiring about me and my family, you go no
more to Madrid, for I would not that any of the numerous
occasions that present themselves there, should deprive me of
the good fortune I prize so dearly."

" Not so, sefior gallant," said Preciosa : " wherever I go
I must be free and unfettered ; my liberty must not be re-
strained or encumbered by jealousy. Be assured, however, that
I will not use it to such excess, but that any one may see from
a mile off that my honesty is equal to my freedom. The first
charge, therefore, 1 have to impose upon you is, that you put
implicit confidence in me; for lovers who begin by being
jealous, are either silly or deficient in confidence."

" You must have Satan himself within you, little one,!'
said the old gipsy; "why you talk like a bachelor of
Salamanca. You know all about love and jealousy and con-
fidence. How is this ? You make me look like a fool, and I
stand listening to you as to a person possessed, who talks
Latin without knowing it."

" Hold your peace, grandmother," replied Preciosa ; ** and
k;iow that all the things you have heard me say are mere
trifles to the many greater truths that remain in my breast."

All that Preciosa said, and the sound sense she displayedp


THE lilTTLE GIPSt GIRL. 193

ftdded fuel to the flame that burned in the breast of the
enamoured cavalier. Finally, it was arranged that they should
meet in the same place on that day sennight, when he would
report how matters stood with him, and they would have had
time to inquire into the truth of what he had told them.
The young gentleman then took out a brocaded purse in which
he said there were a hundred gold crowns, and gave it to the
old woman ; but Freciosa would by no means consent that she
should take them.

" Hold your tongue, nina," said her grandmother ; " the
best proof this senor has given of his submission, is in thus
having yielded up his arms to us in token of surrender. To
give, upon whatever occasion it may be, is always the sign of a
generous heart. Moreover, I do not choose that the gitanaa
should lose, through my fault, the reputation they have had
for long ages of being greedy of lucre. Would you have me
lose a hundred crowns, Freciosa ? A hundred crowns in gold
that one may stitch up in the hem of a petticoat not worth
two reals, and keep them there as one holds a rent-charge on
the pastures of Estramadura ! Suppose that any of our children,
grandchildren, or relations should fall by any mischance into
the hands of justice, js there any eloquence so sure to touch
the ears of the judge as the music of these crowns when they
fall into his purse ? Three times, for three different offences,
I have seen myself all but mounted on the ass to be whipped ;
but once I got myself off by means of a silver mug, another
time by a pearl necklace, and the third time with the help of
forty pieces of eight, which I exchanged for quartos, throwing
twenty reals into the bargain. Look you, nina, ours is a very
perilous occupation, full of risks and accidents ; and there is
no defence that affords us more ready shelter and succour
than the invincible arms of the great Fhilip : nothing beats
the plus ultra,* For the two faces of a doubloon, a smile
comes over the grim visage of the procurator and of all the
other ministers of mischief, who are downright harpies to us
poor gitanas, and have more mercy for highway robbers than
for our poor hides. Let us be ever so ragged and wretched
in appearance, they will hot believe that we are poo^, but say

* After the discoyery of America the Spanish dollar was marked
with the pillars of Hercules and the ^egend ,^'flus ultba.**

N


194 CERTANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

that we are like the doublets of the gavachOs of Belmont,
ragged and greasy and full of doubloons."

"Say no more, for heaven's sake, grandmother," said
Preciosa ; '' do not string together so many arguments for
keeping the money, but keep it, and much good may it do
you. I wish to God you would bury it in a grave out of which
it may never return to the light, and that there may never
be any need of it. We must, however, give some of it to
these companions of ours, who must be tired of waiting so
long for us."

" They shall see one coin out of this purse as soon as they will
see the Grand Turk," the old woman replied. " The good senor
will try if he has any silver coin or a few coppers remaining,
to divide amongst them, for they will be content with a little."

"Yes, I have," he said, and he took from his pocket
three pieces of eight which he divided among the gitanas, with
which they were more delighted than the manager of a
theatre when he is placarded as victor in a contest with a
rival. Finally it was settled that the party should meet there
again in a week, as before mentioned, and that the young
man's gipsy name should be Andrew Caballero, for that was
a surname not unknown among the gips^^s. Andrew (as we
shall hehceforth call him) could not find courage to embrace
Preciosa, but darting his very soul into her with a glance,
he went away without it, so to speak, and returned to
Madrid. The gipsies followed soon after ; and Preciosa, who
4ilready felt a certain interest in the handsome and amiable
<^ Andrew, was anxious to learn if he was really what he said.

They had not gone far before they met the page of the
verses and the gold crown. " Welcome, Preciosa," he said,
coming up to her. " Have you read the lines I gave you the
other day?"

"Before I answer you a word," said she, "you must, by
all you love best, tell me one thing truly."

" Upon that adjuration," he replied, " I could not refuse
an answer to any question, though it should cost me my
head."

"Well, then, what I want to know is this: are you,
perchance, a poet?"

" If 1 were one, it would certainly be perchance," said the
page ; " but you must know, Preciosa, that the name of poet


THE LITTLE GIPST GIRL. 195

is one which very few deserve. Thus I am not a poet, but
only a lover of poetry ; yet for my own use I do not borrow
of others. The verses I gave you were mine, as are these
also which I give you now ; but I iim not a poet for all that —
God forbid.*

'^ Is it such a bad thing to be a poet ?" Preciosa asked.

'^ It is not a bad thing,'' he answered ; " but to be a poet
and nothing else I do not hold to be very good. We should use
poetry like a rich jewel, the owner of which does not wear it
every day, or show it to all people, but displays it only at
suitable times. Poetry is a beautiful maiden, chaste, honest,
discreet, reserved, and never overstepping the limits of perfect
refinement. She is fond of solitude; she finds pleasure and
recreation among fountains, meadows, trees, and flowers ; and
she delights and instructs all who are conversant with her."

" I have heard for all that," said Preciosa, " that she is
exceedingly poor ; something of a beggar in short." .

" It is rather the reverse," said the page, " for there is no
poet who is not rich, since they all live content with their
condition ; and that is a piece of philosophy which few under-
stand. But what has moved you, Preciosa, to make this

* * 0*9
inqmry r

** I was moved to it, because, as I believe all poets, or most
of them, to be poor, that crown which you gave me wrapped
up with the verses caused me some surprise ; but now that
I know that you are not a poet, but only a lover of poetry,
it may be that you are rich, though I doubt it, for your
propensity is likely to make you run through all you have got.
It is a well-known saying, that no poet can either keep or
make a fortune.''

" But the saying is not applicable to me," said the page.
5* I make verses, and I am neither rich nor poor ; and without
feeling it or making a talk about it, as the Genoese do of their
invitations, I can afford to give a crown, or even two, to whom
I like. Take then, precious pearl, this second paper, and this
second crown enclosed in it, without troubling yourself with
the question whether I am a poet or not. I only beg you to
think and believe that he #ho gives you this would fain have
the wealth of Midas to bestow upon you."

Preciosa took the paper, and feeling a crown within it, she
said, '< This paper bids fair to live long, for it has two souls

N 2


196 CERYANTBS' EXEMPLART TALES.

within it, that of the crown and that of tho verses, which, of
course, are full of souls and hearts as usual. But please to
understand, Senor Page, that I do not want so many souls ;
and that unless you take back one of them, I will not receive
the other on any account. I like you as a poet and not as a
giver of gifts ; and thus we may be the longer friends, for
your stock of crowns may run out sooner than your verses."

** Well," said the page, " since you will have it that I am
poor, do not reject the soul I present to you in this paper, and
give me back the crown, which, since it has been touched by
your hand, shall remain with me as a hallowed relic as long as
I Uve.*'

Preciosa gave him the crown, and kept the paper, but
would not read it in the street. The page went away exulting
in the belief that Preciosa's heart was touched, since she had
treated him with such affability.

It being now her object to find the house of Andrew's
father, she went straight to the street, which she well knew,
without stopping anywhere to dance. About half way down
it, she saw the gilded iron balcony which Andrew had men-
tioned to her, and in it a gentleman of about fifty years of
age, of noble presence, with a red cross on his breast. This
gentleman seeing the gitanilla, called out, '^ Come up here,
ninas, and we will give you something." These words brought
three other gentlemen to the balcony, among whom was the
enamoured Andrew. The instant he cast his eyes on Preciosa
he changed colour, and well nigh swooned, such was the
effect her sudden appearance had upon him. The girls went
up stairs, whilst the old woman remained below to pump the
servants with respect to Andrew. As they entered the room,
the elder gentleman was saying to the others, ^* This is no
doubt the handsome gitanilla who is so much talked of in
Madrid."

^' It is," said Andrew ; " and she is unquestionably the
most beautiful creature that ever was seen."

" So they say," said Preciosa, who had overheard these
remarks as she came in; '^but indeed they must be half out
in the reckoning. I believe I am pretty well^ but as hand*
some as they say — ^not a bit of it !''

" By the life of Don Juanico, my son," said the elder gen«
tlemaUi ^' you are &r more so, fair gitana."


THE LITTLE GIPST GIRL. 197

* And who is Don Juanico, your son ?'* said Preciosa.

** That gallant by your side," said the cavalier.

" Truly, I thought your worship had sworn by some bant-
ling of two years old," said Preciosa, " What a pretty little
pet of a Don Juanico !* Why he is old enough to be married ;
and by certain lines on his forehead, I foresee that married
h^ wiU be before three years are out, and much to his liking
too, if in the meantime he be neither lost nor changed/'

"Ay, ay/' said one of the company; "the gitanilla
can tell the meaning of a wrinkle."

During this time, the three gipsy girls, who accompanied
Preciosa, had got their heads together and were whispering
each other. " Girls," said Christina, " that is the gentleman
that gave us the three pieces of eight this morning."

" Sure enough," said they ; " but don't let us say a word
about it unless he mentions it. How do we know but he may
wish to keep it secret ?"

Whilst the three were thus conferring together, Preciosa
replied to the last remark about wrinkles. " What I see with
my eyes, I divine with my fingers. Of the Sefior Don
Juanico, I know without lines that he is somewhat amorous,
impetuous, and hasty ; and a great promiser of things that
seem impossible. God grant he be not a deceiver, which
would be worse than all. He is now about to make a long
journey ; but the bay horse thinks one thing, and the man
that saddles him thinks another thing. Man proposes and
God disposes. Perhaps- he may think he is bound for Onez,
and will find himself on the way to Gaviboa.

" In truth, gitana," said Don Juan, " you have guessed
right respecting me in several points. I certainly intend,
with God's will, to set out for Flanders in four or five days,
though you forebode that I shall have to turn out of my
road; yet I hope no obstacle will occur to frustrate my
purpose."

" Say no more, sefiorito," the gipsy replied ; " but com-
mend yourself to God, and all will be' well. Be assured I
know nothing at all of what I have been saying. It is no
wonder if I sometimes hit the mark, since I talk so much and
always at random. I wish I could speak to such good pur«

* Juanico; diminutive of Juan ; Johnny.


198 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALEB.

pose as to persuade you not to leave home, but remain quietly
with your parents to comfort their old age ; for I am no friend
to these Flanders expeditions, especially for a youth of your
■ tender years. Wait till you are grown a little more and
better able to bear the toils of war ; and the rather as you
have war enough at home, considering all the amorous conflicts
that are raging in your bosom. Gently, gently with you,
madcap ! Look what you are doing before you marry ; and
now give us a little dole for God's sake and for the name
you bear ; for truly I believe you are well born, and if along
with this you aTe loyal and true, then I will sing jubilee for
having hit the mark in all I have said to you."

"I told you before, niiia," said Don Juan, otherwise
Andrew Caballero, "that you were right on every point
except as to the fear you entertain that I am not quite a
man of my word. In that respect you are certainly mistaken.
The word that I pledge in the field I fulfil in the town, or
wherever I may be, without waiting to be asked ; for no man
can esteem himself a gentleman, who yields in the least to
the vice of falsehood. My father will give you alms for
God's sake and for' mine ; for in truth I gave all I had this
morning to some ladies, of whom I would not venture to
assert that they are as obliging as they are beautiful, one of
them especially."

Hearing this, Christina said to her companions, "May I
be hanged, girls, if he is not talking of the three pieces of
eight he gave us this morning."

" No, that can't be," one of them observed ; " for he said
they were ladies, and we are none ; and being so true-spoken
as he says he is, he would not lie in this matter."

" Oh, but," said Christina, " that is not a lie of any mo-
ment that is told without injury to anybody, but for the advan-
tage and credit of him who tells it. Be that as it may, I see he
neither gives us anything, nor asks us to dance."

The old gipsy now came into the room and said, " Make
haste, granddaughter; for it is late, and there is much to be
done, and more to be said."

" What is it, grandmother ?" said Preciosa, " A boy or a
girir

" A boy, and a very fine one. Come along, Preciosa, and
vou shall hear marvels,"


THE LITTLE 6IFST GIRL. 199

** God grant the mother does not die of her after pains,"
said the granddaughter.

** We will take all possible care of her. She has had a
very good time, and the child is a perfect beauty."

" Has any lady been confined ?" said Andrew's father.

** Yes, sefior," replied the old Gitana : " but it is such a
secret, that no one knows of it except Preciosa, myself, arid one
other person. So we cannot mention the lady's name."

" Well, we don't want to know it," said one of tbe gen-
tlemen present ; " but God help the lady who trusts her
secret to your tongues, and her honour to your aid."

" We are not all bad," replied Preciosa ; " perhaps there
may be one among us who piques herself on being as trusty
and as true as the noblest man in this room. Let us begone,
grandmother ; for here we are held in little esteem, though in
truth we are neither thieves nor beggars."

" Do not be angry, Preciosa," said Andrew's father. " Of
you at least I imagine no one can presume anything ill, for
your good looks are warrant for your good conduct. Do me
the favour to dance a little with your companions. I have
here a doubloon for you with two faces, and neither of them
as good as your own, though they are the faces of two
kings."

The moment the old woman heard this she cried, " Come
along, girls : tuck up your skirts, and oblige these gentle-
men." Preciosa took the tambourine, and they all danced with
so muct^ ^ace and freedom, that the eyes of all the spectators
were riveted upon their steps, especially those of Andrew,
who gazed upon Preciosa as if his whole soul was centred
in her ; but an untoward accident turned his delight into an-
guish. In the exertion of the dance, Preciosa let fall the
paper given her by the page. It was immediately picked up
by the gentleman who had no good opinion of the gipsies.
He opened it, and said, " What have we here ? A madrigal ?
Good ! Break oflf the dance, and listen to it ; for, as far as
I can judge from the beginning, it is really not bad." Prcr
eiosa was annoyed at this, as she did not know the contents of
the paper; and she begged the gentleman not to read it,
but give it back to her. All her entreaties, however, only
made Andrew more eager to hear the lines, and his friend
read them out as follows : —


200 CEBYANTES' EXEHPLABT TALB8.

Who hath Preciosa seen

Dancing like the Fairy Queen f

Ripplets on a sunlit river

Like her small feet glance and quiver.

When she strikes the timhrel featly.

When she warbles, oh how sweetly!

Pearls from her white hands she showers^

From her rosy lips drop flowers.

Not a ringlet of her hair

But doth thousand souls ensnare.

Not a glance of her bright eyes

But seems shot from Lovers own skiea.
He in obeisance to this sovereign maid,
His bow and quiver at her feet hath laid.

" Por dios !" exclaimed the reader, " he is a dainty poet
who wrote this."

" He is not a poet, senor," said Preciosa, " but a page^
and a very gallant and worthy man."

" Mind what you say, Preciosa," returned the other ; ** for
the praises you bestow on the page are so many lance-thrusts
through Andrew's heart. Look at him as he sits aghast,
thrown back on his chair, with a cold perspiration breaking
through all his pores. Do not imagine, maiden, that he loves
you so lightly but that the least slight from you distracts him.
Go to him, for God's sake, and whisper a few words in his
car, that may go straight to his heart, and recall him to him-
self. Go on receiving such madrigals as this every day, and
just see what will come of it."

It was just as he had said. Andrew had been racked by a
thousand jealousies on hearing the verses ; and was so over-
come that his father observed it, and cried out, " What ails
you, Don Juan ? You are turned quite pale, and look as if you
were going to faint."

" Wait a moment," said Preciosa, " let me whisper certain
words in his ear, and you will see that he will not faint."
Then bending over him she said, almost without moving her
lips, " A pretty sort of gitano you will make ! Why, An-
drew, how will you be able to bear the torture with gauze,*
when you are overcome by a bit of paper ?" Then making half-

* One of the ways in which the torture was formerly administered
in Spain, was by making the patient swallow pieces of gause in
^^ater.


t


THE LITTLE CIPST GIRL. 201

a-dozen signs of the cross over his heart, she left him, aflter
which Andrew breathed a little, and told his friends that
Freciosa*s words had done him good.

Finally, the two-faced doubloon was given to Preciosa,
who told her companions that she would change it, and share
the amount honourably with them. Andrew's father intreated
her to leave him in writing the words she had spoken to his
son, as he wished by all means to know them. She said she
would repeat them with great pleasure ; and that though they
might appear to be mere child's play, they were of sovereign
virtue to preserve from the heartache and dizziness of the
head. The words were these :—

Silly pate, silly pate.

Why run on at this rate?
No tripping, or slipping, or slidiDgl

Have tmsty assurance.

And patient endarance
And ever oe frank and confiding.

To ngly suspicion

Refuse all admission,
Nor let it your better sense twist over.

All this if you do

You'll not rue,

For excellent things will ensue.
With the good help of God and St. Christopher.

'* Only say these words," she continued, "over any person
who has a swimming in the head, making at the same time
six signs of the cross over his heart, and he will soon be as
sound as an apple."

When the old woman heard the charm, she was amazed at
the clever trick played by her granddaughter ; and Andrew
was still more so when he found that the whole was an
invention of her quick wit. Preciosa left the madrigal in the
hands of the gentleman, not liking to ask for it, lest she
should again distress Andrew; for she knew, without any
one teaching her, what it was to make a lover feel the pangs
of jealousy. Before she took her leave, she said to Don Juan^
" £very day of the week, senor, is lucky for beginning a
journey : not one of them is black. Hasten your departure,
therefore, as much as you can ; for there lies before you a free
life of ample range and great enjoyment, if you choose to
accommodate yourself to it"


202 CERVANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

** It strikes me that a soldier's life is not so free as you say,"
replied Andrew, ''but one ot submission rather than liberty.
However, I will see what I can do."

** You will see more than you think for," said Freciosa ;
** and may God have you in his keeping, and lead you to hap-
piness, as your goodly presence deserves."

These farewell words filled Andrew with delight; the
gitanas went away no less gratified, and shared the doubloon
between them, the old woman as usual taking a part and a half,
both by reason of her seniority, as because she was the com-
pass by which they steered their course on the wide sea of
their dances, pleasantry, and tricks.

At last the appointed day of meeting came, and Andrew
arrived in the morning at the old trysting place, mounted on
a hired mule, and without any attendant. He found Freciosa
and her grandmother waiting for him, and was cordially wel-
comed by them. He begged they would take him at once to
the rancho,* before it was broad day, that he might not be
recognised should he be sought for. The two gitanas, who
had taken the precaution to come alone, immediately wheeled
round, and soon arrived with him at their huts. Andrew
entered one of them, which was the largest in the rancho,
where he was forthwith assisted by ten or twelve gitanos, all
handsome strapping young fellows, whom the old woman had
previously informed respecting the new comrade who wa$
about to join them. She had not thought it necessary,
to enjoin them to secrecy; for, as we have already said,
they habitually observed it with unexampled sagacity and
strictness. Their eyes were at once on the mule, and said one
of them, " We can sell this on Thursday in Toledo."

" By no means," said Andrew ; " for there is not a hired
mule in Madrid, or any other town, but is known to all the
muleteers that tramp the roads of Spain."

" For dios, SeSor Andrew," said one of the gang, " if
there were more signs and tokens upon the mule than are to
precede the day of judgment, we will transform it in such a
manner that it could not be known by the mother that bore
ity or the master that owned it."

•* That may be," said Andrew ; " but for this time you

* Gipsy encampment.


s^e-


THE LITTLE 6IPST GIRL. 203

jnust do as I recommend. This mule must be killed, and
buried where its bones shall never be seen.

" Put the innocent creature to death !** cried another gipsy.
*' What a sin ! Don't say the word, good Andrew ; only do
one thing. £xamine the beast well, till you have got all its
marks well by heart ; then let me take it away, and if in two
hours from this time you are able to know it again, let me be
basted like a runaway negro."

" I must insist upon the mule's being put to death," said
Andrew, " though I were ever so sure of its transformation.
I am in fear of being discovered unless it is put under
ground. If you object for sake of the profit to be made
by selling it, I am not come so destitute to this fraternity but
that I can pay my footing with more than the price of four
mules."

"Well, since the Senor Andrew Caballero will have it so,"
said the other gitano, '^ let the sinless creature die, though
God knows how much it goes against me, both because of
its youth, for it has not yet lost mark of mouth, a rare thing
among hired mules, and because it must be a good goer, for
it has neither scars on its flank nor marks of the spur."

The slaughter of the mule was postponed till night, and
the rest of the day was spent in the ceremonies of Andrew's
initiation. They cleared out one of the best huts in the
encampment, dressed it with boughs and rushes, and seating
Andrew in it on the stump of a cork tree, they put a hammer
and tongs in his hands, and made him cut two capers to the
sound of two guitars. They then bared one of his arms,
tied round it a new silk ribbon through which they passed a
short stick, and gave it two turns gently, after the manner of
the garotte with which criminals are strangled. Preciosa
was present at all this, as were many other gitanas, old and
young, some of whom gazed at Andrew with admiration,
others with love, and such was his good humour, that even
the gitanos took most kindly to him.

These ceremonies being ended, an old gipsy took Preciosa
by the hand, and setting her opposite Andrew, spoke thus :
" This girl, who is the flower and cream of all beauty among
the gitanas of Spain, we give to you either for your wife or
your mistress, for in that respect you may do whatever shall be
most to your liking, since our free and easy life is not subject to


204 CEBVANTBS EXEMPLAAT TALEg.

squeamiBh scruples or to much ceremony. Look at her well,
and see if she suits you, or if there is anything in her you
dislike ; if there is, choose from among the maidens here present
the one you like best, and we will give her to you. But bear
in mind that once your choice is made, you must not quit it <

for another, nor make or meddle either with the married
women or the maids. We are strict observers of the law of
good fellowship ; none among us covets the good that belongs
to another. We live free and secure from the bitter plague
of jealousy ; and though incest is frequent amongst us there
is no adultery. If a wife or a mbtress is unfaithful, we do
not go ask the courts of justice to punish ; but we ourselves
are the judges and executioners of our wives and mistresses,
and make no more ado about killing and burying them in
the mountains and desert places than if they were vermin.
There are no relations to avenge them, no parents to call us
to account for their deaths. By reason of this fear and dread,
our women learn to live chaste ; and we, as I have said, feel
no uneasiness about their virtue.

" We have few things which are not common to us all,
except wives and mistresses, each of whom we require to be
his alone to whom fortune has allotted her. Among us divorce
takes place, because of old age as well as by death. Any
man may if he likes leave a woman who is too old for him, and
choose one more suitable to his years. By means of these and /
other laws and statutes we contrive to lead a merry life. We <
are lords of the plains, the corn fields, the woods, mountains,
springs, and rivers. The mountains yield us wood for nothing,
the orchards fruit, the vineyards grapes, the gardens vegeta-
bles, the fountains water, the rivers fish, the parks feathered
game ; the rocks yield us shade, the glades and valleys fresh
air, and the eaves shelter. For us the inclemencies of the
weather are zephyrs, the snow refreshment, the rain baths,
the thunder music, and the lightning torches. For us the
hard ground is a bed of down ; the tanned skin of our bodies
is an impenetrable harness to defend us; our nimble limbs
submit to no obstacle from iron bars, or trenches, or walls ;
our courage is not to be twisted out of us by oordsy or choked
by gauze,* or quelled by the rack*

* See note, p. 200.


\


^


THE LITTLE GIPST GIRL. 205

** Between yes and no we make no difference when it suits
DTxr convenience to confound them ; we always pride ourselves
more on being martyrs than confessors. For us the beasts of
burden are reared in the fields, and pockets are filled in the
pities. No eagle or other bird of prey pounces more swiftly
on its quarry than we upon opportunities that oiFer us booty.
And finally, we possess many qualities which promise us a
happy end ; for we sing in prison, are silent on the rack, work
by day, and by night we thieve, or rather we take means to
teach all men that they should exempt themselves from the
trouble of seeing where they put their property. We are
not distressed by the fear of losing our honour, or kept awake
by ambition to increase it. We attach ourselves to no parties ;
we do not rise by day- light to attend levees and present
memorials, or to swell the trains of magnates, or to solicit
favours. Our gilded roofs and sumptuous palaces are these
portable huts ; our Flemish pictures and landscapes are
those which nature presents to our eyes at every step in
the rugged cliffs and snowy peaks, the spreading meads and
leafy groves. We are rustic astronomers, for as we sleep
almost always under the open sky, we can tell every hour
by day or night. We see how Aurora extinguishes and
sweeps away the stars from heaven, and how she comes forth
with her companion the dawn, enlivening the air, refreshing
the water, and moistening the earth ; and after her appears
the sun gilding the heights, as the poet sings, and making the
mountains smile. We are not afraid of being left chilly by
his absence, when his rays fall aslant upon us, or of being
roasted when they blaze down upon us perpendicularly. We
turn the same countenance to sun and frost, to dearth and
plenty. In conclusion, we are people who live by our
industry and omr wits, without troubling ourselves with the
old adage, ^ The church, the sea, or the king's household/
We have all we want, for we are content with what we have.

" All these things have I told you, generous youth, that
you may not be ignorant of the life to which you are come,
and the manners and customs you will have to profess, which
I have here sketched for you in the rough. Many other par-
ticulars, no less worthy of consideration, you will discover for
yourself in process of time."

Here the eloquent old gitano closed his discourse, and the


206 CEBYANTES' EXEMPLAST TALES.

novice replied, that he congratulated himself much on having
been made acquainted with such laudable statutes ; that he
desired to make profession of an order so based on reason and
politic principles ; that his only regret was that he had not
sooner come to the knowledge of so pleasant a life ; and that
from that moment he renounced his knighthood, and the vain
glory of his illustrious lineage, and placed them beneath the
yoke, or beneath the laws under which they lived, forasmuch as
.they so magnificently recompensed the desire he had to serve
them, in bestowing upon him the divine Preciosa, for whom he
would surrender many crowns and wide empires, or desire
them only for her sake.

Preciosa spoke next : " Whereas these senores, our law-
givers,*' she said, " have determined, according to their laws,
that I should be yours, and as such have given me up to you,
I have decreed, in accordance with the law of my own wiU,
which is the strongest of all, that I will not be so except upon
the conditions heretofore concerted between us two. You
must live two years in our company before you enjoy mine,
so that you may neither repent through fickleness, nor I be
deceived through precipitation. Conditions supersede laws ;
those which I have prescribed you know; if you choose to
keep them, I may be yours, and you mine ; if not, the mule
is not dead, your clothes are whole, and not a doit of your
money is spent. Your absence from home has not yet ex-
tended to the length of a day ; what remains you may employ
in considering what best suits you. These seiiores may give
up my body to you, but not my soul, which is free, was born
free, and shall remain free. J£ you remain, I shall esteem
you much ; if you depart, I shall do so no less ; for I hold that
amorous impulses run with a loose rein, until they are brought
to a halt by reason or disenchantment. I would not have you
be towards me like the sportsman, who when he has bagged
a hare thinks no more of it, but runs after another. The
eyes are sometimes deceived ; at first sight tinsel looks like
gold ; but they soon recognise the difference between the
genuine and the false metal. This beauty of mine, which
you say I possess, and which you exalt above the sun, and
declare more precious than gold, how do I know but that
at a nearer \iew it will appear to you a shadow, and when
tested will seem but base metal ? I give you two years to


THE LITTLE GIPSY GIBL. 207

weigh and ponder well what will be right to choose or
reject. Before you buy a jewel, which you can only get rid of
by death, you ought to take much time to examine it, and
ascertain its faults or its merits. I do not assent to the bar-
barous licence which these kinsmen of mine have assumed, to
forsake their wives or chastise them when the humour takes
them ; and as I do not intend to do anything which calls for
punishment, I will not take for my mate one who will aban*
don me at his own caprice."

" You are right, Preciosa/' said Andrew ; " and so if you
would have me quiet your fears and abate your doubts, by
swearing not to depart a jot from the conditions you pre-
scribe, ohoose what form of oath I shall take, or what other
assurance I shall give you, and I will do exactly as you
desire."

" The oaths and promises which the captive makes to ob-
tain his liberty are seldom fulfilled when he is free," returned
Preciosa ; " and it is just the same, I fancy, with the lover,
who to obtain his desire will promise the wings of Mercury,
and the thunderbolts of Jove ; and indeed a certain poet pro-
mised myself no less, and swore it by the Stygian lake. I
want no oaths or promises, Senor Andrew, but to leave
everything to the result of this novitiate. It will be my
business to take care of myself, if at any time you should
think of offending me."

" Be it so," said Andrew. " One request I have to make
of. these senores and comrades mine, and that is that they
will not force me to steal anything for a month or so ; for it
strikes me that it will take a great many lessons to make me a
thief."

" Never fear, my son," said the old gipsy ; " for we will
instruct you in such a manner that you will turn out an eagle
in our craft ; and when you have learned it, you will like it
so much, that you will be ready to eat your hand, it will so
itch after it. Yes, it is fine fun to go out empty-handed in
the morning, and to return loaded at night to the rancho."

*' I have seen some return with a whipping," said Andrew.

** One cannot catch trouts dry shod," the old man replied:
** all things in this life have their perils : the acts of the thief
are liable to the galleys, whipping, and the scragging-post ;
but it is not because one ship encounters a storm, or springs


y


208 OEBVANTBS' EXEMPLARY TALES.

a leak, that others should cease to sail the seas. It would be a
fine thing if there were to be no soldiers, because war con-
sumes men and horses. Besides, a whipping by the hand of
justice is for us a badge of honour, which becomes us better
worn on the shoulders than on the breast. The main point is
to avoid having to dance upon nothing in our young days,
and for our first offences ; but as for having our shoulders
dusted, or thrashing the water in a galley, we don't mind that
a nutshell. For the present, Andrew, my son, keep snug in
the nest under the shelter of our wings ; in due time, we
will take you out to fly, and that where you will not return
without a prey ; and the short and the long of it b, that by
and by you will lick your fingers after every theft." -

" Meanwhile," said Andrew, " as a compensation for what
I might bring in by thieving during the vacation allowed me,
I will divide two hundred gold crowns among all the members
of the rancho."

The words were no sooner out of his mouth, than several
gitanos caught him up in their arms, hoisted him upon their
shoulders, and bore him along, shouting, ** Long life to the
great Andrew, and long life to Preciosa his beloved !" The
gitanas did the same with Preciosa, not without exciting the
envy of Christina, and the other gitanillas present ; for envy
dwells alike in the tents of barbarians, the huts of shep«
herds, and the palaces of princes ', and to see another thrive
who seems no better than oneself is a great weariness to the
spirit.

This done, they ate a hearty dinner, made an equitable
division of the gift money, repeated their praises of Andrew,
and exalted Preciosa's beauty to the skies. When night fell,
they broke the mule's neck, and buried it, so as to relieve An-
drew of all fear of its leading to his discovery ; they likewise
buried with it the trappings, saddle, bridle, girths and all,
after the manner of the Indians, whose chief ornaments are
laid in the grave with them.

Andrew was in no small astonishment at all he had seen
and heard, and resolved to pursue his enterprise without med-
dling at all with the customs of his new companions, so far
as that might be possible. Especially he hoped to exempt
himself, at the cost of his purse, from participating with them
in any acts of injustice. On the following day, Andrew


THEf LITTLE GIPSY GIKL, 209

requested the gipsies to break up the camp, and remove to a dis-
tance from Madrid ; for he feared that he should be recognised
if he remained there. They told him they had already made
ap their minds to go to the mountains of Toledo, and thence
to scour all the surrounding country, and lay it under contri-
bution. Accordingly they struck their tents, and departed,
offering Andrew an ass to ride ; but he chose rather to travel
on foot, and serve as attendant to Preciosa, who rode trium-
phantly another ass, rejoicing in her gallant esquire ; whilst he
was equally delighted at finding himself close to her whom he
had made the mistress of his freedom.

O potent force of him who is called the sweet god of
bitterness — a title given him by our idleness and weakness —
how effectually dost thou enslave us ! Here was Andrew, a
knight, a youth of excellent parts, brought up at court, and
maintained in affluence by his noble parents ; and yet since
yesterday such a change has been wrought in him that he has
deceived his servants and friends ; disappointed the hopes of
his parents ; abandoned the road to Flanders, where he was
to have exercised his valour and increased the honours of his
line ; and he has prostrated himself at the feet of a girl, made
himself the lackey of one who, though exquisitely beautiful, is
after all a gitana! Wondrous prerogative of beauty, which
brings down the strongest will to its feet, in spite of all its
resistance !

In four days' march, the gipsies arrived at a pleasant vil-
lage, within two leagues of the great Toledo, where they
pitched their camp, having first given some articles of silver
to the alcalde of the district, as a pledge that they would steal
nothing within all his bounds, nor do any other damage that
might give cause of complaint against them. This done, all
the old gitanas, some young ones, and the men, spread them-
selves all over the country, to the distance of four or five
leagues from the encampment. Andrew went with them to
take his first lesson in thievery ; but though they gave him
many in that expedition, he did not profit by any of them.
On the contrary, as was natural in a man of gentle blood,
every theft committed by his masters wrung his very souj;
and sometimes he paid for them out of his own pocket,
being moved by the tears of the poor people who had been
despoiled. The gipsies were in despair at this be^awttii : it


o


V


r


210 OEBVAirrEs' bxemplabt tales.

was in <Mitravention, they said, of their statutes and ordin«
ances, which prohibited the admission of compassion into their
hearts ; because if they liad any they must cease to be thieves,
— a thing which was not to be thought of on any account.
Seeing this, Andrew said he would go thieving by himself;
for he was nimble enough to run from danger, and did not
lack courage to encounter it ; so that the prize or the penalty
of his thieving would be exclusively his own.

The gipsies tried to dissuade him from this good purpose,
telling him that occasions might occur in which he would
have need of companions, as well to attack as to defend ; ^nd
that one person alone could not make any great booty. But
in spite of all they could say, Andrew was determined to be
a solitary robber ; intending to separate from the gang, and
purchase for money something which he might say he had
stolen, and thus burden his conscience as little as possible.
Proceeding in this way, in less than a month, he brought more
gain to the gang than four of the most accomplished thieves
in it. Preciosa rejoiced not a little to see her tender lover
become such a smart and handy thief; but for all that she
was sorely afraid of some mischance, and would not have seen
him in the hands of justice for all the treasures of Yenice ;
such was the good feeling towards him which she could not
help entertaining, in return for his many good offices and pre-
sents. After remaining about a month in the Toledan districti
where they reaped a good harvest, the gipsies entered the
wealthy region of Estramadura.

Meanwhile Andrew frequently held honourable and loving
converse with Preciosa, who was gradually becoming en-
amoured of his good qualities ; while, in like manner, his love
for her went on increasing, if that were possible : such were
the virtues, the good sense and beauty of his Preciosa.
Whenever the gipsies engaged in athletic games, he carried off
the prize for running and leaping: he played admirably at
skittles and at ball, and pitched the bar with singular strength
and dexterity. In a short while, his fame spread through all
Estramadura, and there was no part of it where they did not
speak of the smart young gitano Andrew, and his graces and
accomplishments. As his fame extended, so did that of Pre-
ciosa's beauty ; and there was no town, village, or hamlet, to
which they were not invited, to enliven their patron saints'


THE LITTLB GIPSY GIRL. 211 X

daySy or other festivities. The trihe consequently became
rich, prosperous, and contented, and the lovers were happy in
the mere sight of each other.

It happened one night, when the camp was pitched
among some evergreen oaks, a little off the highway, they heard
their dogs barking about the middle watch, with unusual
vehemence. Andrew and some others got up to see what was
the matter, and found a man dressed in white battling with
them, whilst one of them held him by the leg. " What the
devil broaght you here, man,'' said one of the gipsies, after
they had released him, " at such an hour, away from the high
road ? Did you come to thieve ? If so, you have come to
the right door V

** I do not come to thieve ; and I don't know whether or
not I am off the road, though I see well enough that I am
gone astray," said the wounded man. " But tell me, senores,
is there any venta or place of entertainment where I can get
a night's lodging, and dress the wounds which these dogs
have given mo?"

" There is no venta or public place to which we can take
you," replied Andrew ; " but as for a night's lodging, and
dressing your wounds, that you can have at our ranchos. Come
along with us ; for though we are gipsies, we are not devoid
of humanity."

"God reward you!" said the man: "take me whither
you please, for my leg pains me greatly." Andrew lifted him
up, and carried him along with the help of some of the other
compassionate gipsies ; for even among the fiends there are
some worse than others, and among many bad men you may
find one good.

It was a clear moonlight nighty so that they could see
that the person they carried was a youth of handsome face
and figure. He was dressed all in white linen, with a sort of
frock of the same material belted round his waist. They
arrived at Andrew's hut or shed, quickly kindled a fire, and
fetched Preciosa's grandmother to attend to the young man's
hurts. She took some of the dogs' hairs, fried them in oil,
and after washing with wine the two bites she found on the
patient's left leg, she put the hairs and the oil upon them, and
over this dressing a little chewed green rosemary. She then
bound the leg up carefully with clean bandages, made the

o 2


212 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

sign of the cross over it, and said, " Now go to sleep, friendi
and with the help of God your hurts will not signify."

Whilst they were attending to the wounded man, Preciosa
stood by, eyeing him with great curiosity, whilst he did the
same by her, insomuch that Andrew took notice of the eager-
ness with which he gazed ; but he attributed this to the ex-
traordinary beauty of Preciosa, which naturally attracted all
eyes. Finally, having done all that was needful for the youth,
they left him alone on a bed of dry hay, not caring to ques-
tion him then as to his road, or any other matter.

As soon as all the others were gone, Preciosa called Andrew
aside, and said to him, " Do you remember, Andrew, a paper
I let fall in your house, when I was dancing with my com-
panions, and which caused you, I think, some uneasiness ?"

" I remember it well," said Andrew ; " it was a madrigal
in your praise, and no bad one either."

" Well, you must know, Andrew, that the person who
wrote those verses is no other than the wounded youth we
have left in the hut. I cannot be mistaken, for he spoke to
me two or three times in Madrid, and gave me too a very
good romance. He was then dressed, I think, as a page, — ^not
an ordinary one, but like a favourite of some prince. I
assure you, Andrew, he is a youth of excellent understand-
ing, and remarkably well behaved; and I cannot imagine
what can have brought him hither, and in such a garb,"

" What should you imagine, Preciosa, but that the same
power which has made me a gitano, has made him put on the
dress of a miller, and come in search of you ? Ah, Preciosa !
Preciosa! how plain it begins to be that you pride yourself on
having more than one adorer. If this be so, finish me first,
and then kill off this other, but do not sacrifice both at the
same time to your perfidy."

" God's mercy, Andrew, how thin-skinned you are ! On
how fine a thread you make your hopes and my reputation
hang, since you let the cruel sword of jealousy so easily
pierce your soul. Tell me, Andrew, if there were any arti-
fice or deceit in this case, could I not have held my tongue
about this youth, and concealed all knowledge of him ? Am
I such a fool that I cannot help telling you what should
make you doubt my integrity and good behaviour? Hold
your tongue, Andrew, in God*s name, and try to-morrow to


THE LITTLE GIPSY GIUL. 213

extract from this cause of your alarm whither he is bound,
and why he is come hither. It may be that you are mistaken
in your suspicion, though I am not mistaken in what I told
you of the stranger. And now for your greater satisfaction
•—since it is come to that pass with me that I seek to satisfy
you — whatever be the reason of this youth's coming, send
him away at once. All our people obey you, and none of
them will care to receive him into their huts against your
wish. But if this fails, I give you my word not to quit
mine, or let myself be seen by him, or by anybody else from
whom you would have me concealed. Look you, Andrew,
I am not vexed at seeing you jealous, but it would vex me
much to see you indiscreet."

" Unless you see me mad, Preciosa," said Andrew, " any
other demonstration would be far short of showing you what
desperate havoc jealousy can make of a man's feelings. How-
ever, I wi^l do as you bid me, and find out what this senor
page-poet wants, whither he is going, and whom he is in
search of. It may be, that unawares he may let me get hold
of some ^nd of thread which shall lead to the discovery of the
whole snare which I fear he is come to set for me."

" Jealousy, 1 imagine," said Preciosa, " never leaves the
understanding clear to apprehend things as they really are4
Jealousy always looks through magnifying glasses, wliich
make mountains of molehills, and realities of mere suspicions.
On your life, Andrew, and on mine, I charge you to proceed V

in this matter, and all that touches our concerns, with pru-
dence and discretion ; and if you do, I know that you will
have to concede the palm to me, as honest, upright, and true
to the very utmost."

With these words she quitted Andrew, leaving him im-
patient for daylight, that he might receive the confession of
the wounded man, and distracted in mind by a thousand
various surmises. He could not believe but that this page
had come thither attracted by Preciosa's beauty ; for the thief
believes that all men are such as himself. On the other hand,
the pledge voluntarily made to him by Preciosa appeared so
highly satisfactory, that he ought to set his mind quite at
ease, and commit all his happiness implicitly to the keeping
of her good faith. At last day appeared : he visited the
wounded man ; and after inquii'ing how he was, and did his


214 CERYANTES^ EXEMPLABT TALES.

bites pain him, he asked what was his name, whither he was
going, and how it was he travelled so late and so far off the
road. The youth replied that he was better, and felt no pain^
so that he was able to resume his journey. His name was
Alonzo Hurtado ; he was going to our Lady of the Pena de
Francia, on a certain business ; he travelled by night for the
greater speed ; and having missed his way, he had come upon
the encampment, and been worried by the dogs that guarded it.
Andrew did not by any means consider this a straight-
forward statement : his suspicions returned to plague him ;
and, said he, '^ Brother, if I were a judge, and you had been
brought before me upon any charge which would render neces-
sary such questions as those I have put to you, the reply you
have given would oblige me to apply the thumb-screw. It is
nothing to me who you are, what is your name, or whither
you are going : I only warn you, that if it suits your con-
venience to lie on this journey, you should lie with more
appearance of truth. You say you are going to La Fefia de
jPrancia, and you leave it on the right hand more than thirty
leagues behind this place. You travel by night for sake of
speed, and you quit the high road, and strike into thickets
and woods where there is scarcely a footpath. Get up^
friend, learn to lie better, and go your ways, in God's name.
But in return for this good advice I give you, will you not
tell me one truth ? I know you will, you are such a bad
hand at lying. Tell me, are you not one I have often seen in
the capital, something between a page and a gentleman ? One
who has the reputation of being a great poet, and who wrote a
romance and a sonnet upon a gitanilla who some time ago went
about Madrid, and was celebrated for her surpassing beauty ?
Tell me, and I promise you, on the honour of a gentleman
gipsy, to keep secret whatever you may wish to be so kept. Mind
you, no denial that you are the person I say will go down
with me ; for the face I see before me is unquestionably the
same I saw in Madrid. The fame of your talents made me
often stop to gaze at you as a distinguished man, and there-
fore your features are so strongly impressed on my memory,
though your dress is very different from that in which I for-
merly saw you. Don't be alarmed, cheer up, and don't sup-
pose you have fallen in with a tribe of robbers, but with an
asylum, where you may be guarded and defended from all the


THE LITTLE 6IPST QIBL. 215

i^rorld. A thought strikes me ; and if it be as I conjecture,
you have been lucky in meeting me above all men. What I
conjecture is, that being in love with Preciosa — that beautiful
young gipsy, to whom you addressed the verses — you have
come in search of her ; for which I don't think a bit the worse
of you, but quite the reverse : for gipsy though I am, expe-
rience has shown me how far the potent force of love reaches,
and the transformations it makes those undergo whom it
brings beneath its sway and jurisdiction. If this be so, as I
verily believe it is, the fair gitanilla is here."

** Yes, she is here ; I saw her last night," said the stranger.
This was like a death-blow to Andrew ; for it seemed at
once to confirm all his suspicions.

" I saw her last night," the young man repeated ; " but I
did not venture to tell her who I was, for it did not suit my
purpose.'*

" So, then," said Andrew, " you are indeed the poet of
whom I spoke."

" I am : I neither can nor will deny it. Possibly it may
be that where I thought myself lost I have come right to
port, if, as you say, there is fidelity in the forests, and hospi-
tality in the mountains."

' "That there is, beyond doubt," said Andrew; "and
among us gipsies the strictest secrecy in the world. On
that assurance, senor, you may unburden your breast to me :
you will find in mine no duplicity whatever. The gitanilla
is my relation, and entirely under my control. If you desire
her for a wife, myself and all other relations will be quite
willing ; and if for a mistress, we will not make any squeamish
objections, provided you have money, for covetousness never
departs from our ranches."

" I have money," the youth replied ; ** in the bands of this
frock, which I wear girt round my body, there are four hun-
dred gold crowns."

This was another mortal blow for Andrew, who assumed
that the stranger could carry so large a sum about him for no
other purpose than to purchase possession of .the beloved ob-
ject. With a faltering tongue he replied, " That is a good
lump of money ; you have only to discover yourself, and go
to work : the girl is no fool, and will see what a good thing
it will be for her to be yours."


216 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

" O friend," exclaimed the youth, " I would have you
know that the power which has made me change my garb is
not that of love, as you say, nor any longing for Preciosa ;
for Madrid has beauties who know how to steal hearts and
Aubdue souls as well as the handsomest gitanas, and better;
though I confess that the beauty of your kinswoman surpasses
any 1 have ever seen. The cause of my being in this dress,
on foot, and bitten by dogs, is not love but my ill luck."

Upon this explanation, Andrew's downcast spirit began to
rise again ; for it was plain that the wind was in quite a different
quarter from what he had supposed. Eager to escape from
this confusion, he renewed his assurances of secrecy, and the
stranger proceeded thus: —

" I was in Madrid, in the house of a nobleman, whom I
served not as a master but as a relation. He had an only son
and heir, who treated me with great familiarity and friend*
ship, both on account of our relationship, and because we
were both of the same age and disposition. This young gen-
tleman fell in love with a young lady of rank, whom he
would most gladly have made his wife, had it not been for his
dutiful submission to the will of his parents, who desired him
to marry into a higher family. Nevertheless, he continued
furtively to pay court to the lady of his choice, carefully con-
cealing his proceedings from all eyes but mine. One nighty
which ill luck must have especially selected for the adventure
I am about to relate to you, as we were passing by the lady's
house, we saw ranged against it two men of good figure appa-
rently. My kinsman wished to reconnoitre them, but no
sooner had he made a step towards them than their swords
were out, their bucklers ready, and they made at us, whilst
we did the same on our side, and engaged them with equal
arms. The fight did not last long, neither did the lives of
our two opponents; for two thrusts, urged home by my
kinsman's jealousy and my zeal in his defence, laid them
both low — an extraordinary occurrence, and such as is rarely
witnessed. Thus involuntarily victorious, we returned home,
and taking all the money we could, set off secretly to the
church of San Geronimo, waiting to see what would happen
when the event was discovered next day, and what might be
the conjectures as to the persons of the homicides.

<< We learned that no trace of our presence on the scene


THE LITTLE GIPST GIRL. 217

had been discovered, and the prudent monks advised us to
return home, so as not by our absence to arouse any sus-
picion against us. We had already resolved to follow their
advice, when we were informed that the alcaldes of the court
had arrested the young lady and her parents; and that
among their domestics, whom they examined, one person, the
young lady's attendant, had stated that my kinsman visited
her mistress by night and by day. Upon this evidence they
had sent in search of us ; and the officers not finding us, but
many indications of our flight, it became a confirmed opinion
throughout the whole city, that we were the very men who
had slain the two cavaliers, for such they were, and of very
good quality. Finally, by the advice of the count, my rela-
tion, and of the monks, after remaining hid a fortnight in the
monastery, my comrade departed in company with a monk,
himself disguised as one, and took the road to Aragon, in-
tending to pass over to Italy, and thence to Flanders, until
he should see what might be the upshot of the matter. For
my part, thinking it well to divide our fortunes, I set out on
foot, in a different direction, and in the habit of a lay bro-
ther, along with a monk, who quitted me at Talavera. From
that city I travelled alone, and missed my way, till last night
I reached this wood, when I met with the mishap you know.
If I asked for La Pena de Francia, it was only by way of
making some answer to the questions put to me ; for I know
that it lies beyond Salamanca."

" True," observed Andrew, " you left it on your right,
about twenty leagues from this. So you see what a straight
road you were taking, if you were going thither."

*^ The road I did. intend to take was that to Seville ; for
there I should find a Genoese gentleman, a great friend of
the count my relation, who is in the habit of exporting large
quantities of silver ingots to Genoa ; and my design is^ that
he should send me with his carriers, as one of thefnselves, by
which means J may safely reach Carthagena, and thence
pass over to Italy ; for two galleys are expected shortly to
ship some silver. This is my story, good friend : was I not
right in saying it is the result of pure ill luck, rather than
disappointed love ? Now if these senores gitanos will take
me in their company to Seville, supposing they are bound
thither, I will pay them handsomely; for I believe that I


218 CEBVAXTES EXEMFLART TALES.

should travel more safely with them, and have some respita
from the fear that haunts me."

" Yes, they will take you," said Andrew; ** or if you cannot
go with our band — for as yet I know not that we are for
Andalusia — ^you can go with another which we shall fall in with
in a couple of days ; and if you give them some of the money
you have about you, they will be able and willing to help you
out of still worse difficulties." He then left the young man^
and reported to the other gipsies what the stranger desired>
and the offer he had made of good payment for their services.

They were all for having their guest remain in the camp ;
but Preciosa was against it ; and her grandmother said, that
she could not go to Seville or its neighbourhood, on account
of a hoax she had once played off upon a capmaker named
Truxillo, well known in Seville. She had persuaded him to
put himself up to Ids neck in a butt of water, stark naked,
with a crown of cypress on his head, there to remain till
midnight, when he was to step out, and look for a great trea«
dure, which she had made him believe was concealed in a
certain part of his house. When the good cap-maker heard
matins ring, he made such haste to get out of the butt, lest
he should lose his chance, that it fell with him, bruising his
flesh, and deluging the floor with water, in which he fell to
swimming with might and main, roaring out that he was
drowmng. His wife and his neighbours ran to him with
lights, and found him striking out lustily with his legs and
arms. "Help! help!" he cried; "I am suffocating;" and
he really was not far from it, such was the effect of his ex-
cessive fright. They seized and rescued him from his deadly
peril. When he had recovered a little, he told them the
trick the gipsy woman had played him ; and yet for all that,
he dug a hole, more than a fathom deep, in the place pointed
out to him, in spite of all his neighbours could say ; and had
he not been forcibly prevented by one of them, when ho
was beginning to undermine the foundations of the house, he
would have brought the whole of it down about his ears.
The story spread all over the city ; so that the little boys in
the streets used to point their fingers at him, and shout in
his ears the story of the gipsy's trick, and his own credulity.
Such was the tale told by the old gitana, in explanation of
her unwillingness to go to Seville.


THE LITTLE OIPST 61BL 219

The gipsies, knowing from Andrew that the youth had a
large sum of money about him, readily assented to his accom-
panying them, and promised to guard and conceal him as
long as he pleased. They determined to make a bend to the
left, and enter La Mancha and the kingdom of Murcia. The
youth thanked them cordially, and gave them on the spot a
hundred gold crowns to divide amongst them, whereupon they
became as pliant as washed leather. Freciosa, however, was
not pleased with the continuance among them of Don Sancho,
for that was the youth's name, but the gipsies changed it to
Clement. Andrew too was rather annoyed at this arrange-
ment ; for it seemed to him that Clement had given up his
original intention upon very slight grounds ; but the latter, as
if he read his thoughts, told him that he was glad to go to
Murcia, because it was near Carthagena, whence, if galleys
arrived there, as he expected, he could easily pass over to
Italy. Finally, in order to have him more under his own eye, to
watch his acts, and scrutinise his thoughts, Andrew desired to
have Clement for his own comrade, and the latter accepted
this friendly offer as a signal favour. They were always to-
gether, both spent largely, their crowns came down like rain ;
they ran, leaped, danced, and pitched the bar better than any
of their companions, and were more than commonly liked by
the women of the tribe, and held in the highest respect by
the men.

Leaving Estramadura they entered La Mancha, and gra-
dually traversed the kingdom of Murcia. In all the villages
and towns they passed through, they had matches at ball-
playing, fencing, running, leaping, and pitching the bar; and
in all these trials of strength, skill, and agility Andrew and
Clement were victorious, as Andrew alone had been before.
During the whole journey, which occupied six weeks, Clement
neither found nor sought an opportunity to speak alone with
Freciosa, until one day when she and Andrew were conversing
together, they called him to them, and Freciosa said, ** The
first time you came to our camp I recognised you, Clement,
and remembered the verses you gave me in Madrid ; but I
would not say a word, not knowing with what intention you
had come among us. When I became acquainted with your
misfortune, it grieved me to the soul, though at the same
time it was a relief to me ; for I had been much disturbed.


220 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

thinking that as there was a Don Juan in the world who had
become a gipsy, a Don Sancho might undergo transformation
in like manner. 1 speak this to you, because Andrew tells me
he has made known to you who he is, and with what intention
.he turned gipsy." (And so it was, for Andrew had acquainted
Clement with his whole story, that he might be able to con-
verse with him on the subject nearest to his thoughts.) " Do
not think that my knowing you was of little advantage to you,
since for my sake, and in consequence of what I said of you,
our people the more readily admitted you amongst them,
where I trust in God you may find things turn out according
to your best wishes. You will repay me, I hope, for this good
will on my part, by not making Andrew ashamed of having set
his mind so low, or representing to him how ill he does in per-
severing in his present way of life; for though I imagine that his
will is enthralled to mine, still it would grieve me to see
him show signs, however slight, of repenting what he has
done."

Do not suppose, peerless Preciosa," replied Clement,
that Don Juan acted lightly in revealing himself to me. I
found him out beforehand : his eyes first disclosed to me
the nature of his feelings ; I first told him who I was, and
detected that enthralment of his will which you speak of; and
he, reposing a just confidence in me, made his secret mine.
He can witness whether I applauded his determination and
his choice ; for I am not so dull of understanding, Preciosa,
as not to know how omnipotent is beauty ; and yours, which
surpasses all bounds of loveliness, is a sufiicient excuse for all
errors, if error that can be called for which there is so irre-
sistible a cause. I am grateful to you, senora, for what you
have said in my favour ; and I hope to repay you by hearty
good wishes that you may find a happy issue out of your
perplexities, and that you may enjoy the love of your Andrew,
and Andrew that of his Preciosa, with the consent of his
parents; so that from so beautiful a couple there may come into
the world the finest progeny which nature can form in her
happiest mood. This is what I shall always desire, Preciosa ;
and this is what I shall always say to your Andrew, and not
anything which could tend to turn him from his well-placed
affections."

With such emotion did Clement utter these words, that


THE LITTLE 6IPST OIBL. 221

Andrew was in doubt whether they were spoken in courtesy
only, or from love ; for the infernal plague of jealousy is so
susceptible that it will take ofifence at the motes in the sun-
beams ; and the lover finds matter for self-torment in every-
thing that concerns the beloved object. Nevertheless, he
did not give way to confirmed jealousy; for he relied more
on the good faith of his Preciosa than on his own fortune,
which, in common with all lovers, he regarded as luckless,
so long as he had not obtained the object of his desires. In
fine, Andrew and Clement continued to be comrades and
friends, their mutual good understanding being secured by
Clement's upright intentions, and by the modesty and pru-
dence of Preciosa, who never gave Andrew an excuse for
jealousy. Clement was somewhat of a poet, Andrew played
the guitar a little, and both were fond of music. One night,
when the camp was pitched in a valley four leajgues from
Murcia, Andrew seated himself at the foot of a cork-tree, and
Clement near him under an evergreen oak. Each of them
had a guitar ; and invited by the stillness of the night, they
sang alternately, Andrew beginning the descant^ and Clement
responding.

ASDBEW.

Ten thousand golden lamps are lit on high,

Making this chilly night

Riyal the noon-day's ught;
Itook, Clement, on yon star-bespangled sky,

And in that image see,

If 80 divine thy fancy be.

That loyely radiant nice.
Where centres all of beauty and of grace.


GLEMENlr.

Where centres all of beauty and of grace,
And where in concord sweet
Goodness and beauty meet,

And purity hath fixed its dwelling-plaoe.
Creature so heayenly fair,
. May any mortal genius dare.
Or less than tongue divine.

To praise in lofty, rare, and sounding line?


222 CEBVANTES' EXEMPLART TALES.


ANDBEW.

To prabe in lofty, rare, and sounding line

Thy name, gitana bright !

Earth's wonder and delight.
Worthy above the empyrean vault to shine |

Fain would I snatch from Fame

The trump and voice, whose loud acclaini
^ Should startle every ear,
And lift Preciosa*s name to t^e eighth sphere.


CLEMEirr*

To lift Preciosa's fame to the eighth sphere
Were meet and fit, tliat so
The heavens new joy might know

Through all their shining courts that name to hear.
Which on this earth doth sound
Like music spreading gladness round.
Breathing with charm intense

Peace to the soul and rapture to the sense.


It seemed as though the freeman and the captive were in
no haste to bring their tuneful contest to conclusion, had
not the voice of Freciosa, who had overheard them, sounded
from behind in response to theirs. They stopped instantly,
and remained listening to her in breathless attention.
Whether her words were delivered impromptu, or had been
composed some time before, I know not; however that
may be, she sang the following lines with infinite grace, as
though they were made for the occasion.


While in this amorous emprise
An eq^ual conflict I maintain,
'Tis higher glory to remain

Pure maid, than boast the brightest eyes.

The humblest plant on which we tread.
If sound and straight it grows apace^ ^
By aid of nature or of grace

May rear aloft towards heaven its head.


^


r


THE LITTLE OIPST GIBL« 229

In this my lowly poor estate*

By maiden honour digniiied.

No good wish rests misatisfied ;
Their wealth I envy not the greatt


I find not any grief or pain
In lack of love or of esteem ;
For I myself can shape, I deem^

My fortunes happy in the main.


Let me but do what in me lies
The path of rectitude to tread ;
And then be welcomed on this head

Whatever fate may please the skies.


I fain would know if beauty hath
Such hieh prerogative^ to raise
My mind above the common waySy

And set me on a loftier path.


If equal in their souls they be,
The humblest hind on earth may vie
In honest worth and virtue high

With one of loftiest degree.


What inwardly I feel of mine
Doth raise me all that's base above |
For majesty, be sure, and love

Do not on common soil recline.


Predosa having ended her song, Andrew and Clement
rose to meet her. An animated conversation ensued l^tween
the three; and Preciosa displayed so much intelligence^
modesty, and acuteness, as fully excused, in Clement's opinion,
the extraordinary determination of Andrew, which he had be«
fore attributed more to his youth than his judgment. The
next morning the camp was broken up, and they proceeded
to a place in the jurisdiction of Murcia, three leagues from
the city, where a mischance befel Andrew, which went near
to cost him his life.


224 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

After they had given security in that place, according to
custom, by the deposit of some silver vessels and ornaments,
Preciosa and her grandmother, Christina and two other
gitaniUas, Clement, and Andrew, took up their quarters in an
inn, kept by a rich widow, who had a daughter aged about
seventeen or eighteen, rather more forward than handsome.
Her name was Juana Carducha. This girl having seen the
gipsies dance, the devil possessed her to fall in love with
Andrew to that degree that she proposed to tell him of it,
and take him for a husband, if he would have her, in spite
of all her relations. Watching for an opportunity to speak
to him, she found it in a cattle-yard, which Andrew had
entered in search of two young asses, when she said to him,
hurriedly, " Andrew *' (she already knew his name), " I am
single and wealthy. My mother has no other child : this inn
is her own; and besides it she has large vineyards, and
several other houses. You have taken my fancy ; and if you
will have me for a wife, only say the word. Answer me
quickly, and if you are a man of sense, only wait, and you
shall see what a life we shall lead."

Astonished as he was at Carducha's boldness, Andrew
nevertheless answered her with the promptitude she desired,
"Senora doncella, I am under promise to marry, and we
gitanos intermarry only with gitanas. Many thanks for the
favour you would confer on me, of which I am not worthy.

Carducha was within two inches of dropping dead at this
unwelcome reply, to which she would have rejoined, but that
she saw some of the gitanos come into the yard. She rushed
from the spot, athirst for vengeance. Andrew, like a wise
man, determined to get out of her way, for he read in her
eyes that she would willingly give herself to him with matri-
monial bonds, and he had no wish to find himself engaged
foot to foot and alone in such an encounter ; accordingly, he
requested his comrades to quit the place that night. Com-
plying with his wishes as they always did, they set to work
at once, took up their securities again that evening, and
decamped. Carducha, seeing that Andrew was going away
and half her soul with him, and that she should not have time
to obtain the fulfilment of her desires, resolved to make him
stop by force, since he would not do so of good will. With
all the cunning and secrecy suggested to her by her wicked


THE LITTLE GIPSY GIRL. 225

intentions, she put among Andrew's baggage, which she knew
to be his, a valuable coral necklace, two silver medals, and other
trinkets belonging to her family. No sooner had the gipsies
left the inn than she made a great outcry, declaring that the
gipsies had robbed her, till she brought about her the officers
of justice and all the people of the place. The gipsies halted,
and all swore that they had no stolen property with them,
ofiferiirg at the same time to let all their baggage be searched.
This made the old gipsy woman very uneasy, lest the proposed
scrutiny should lead to the discovery of Preciosa's trinkets and
Andrew's clothes, which she preserved with great care. But
the good wench Carducha quickly put an end to her fears on
that head, for before they had turned over two packages, she
said to the men, "Ask which of these bundles belongs to that
gipsy who is such a great dancer. I saw him enter my room
twice, and probably he is the thief."
] Andrew knew it was himself she meant, and answered

i with a laugh, " Senora doncella, this is my bundle, and that is

my ass. If you find in or upon either of them what you miss,
I will pay you the value sevenfold, beside submitting to the
/ punishment which the law awards for theft."

^ The officers of justice immediately unloaded the as«, and

I in the turn of a hand discovered the stolen property, whereat

t Andrew was so shocked and confounded that he stood like a

i stone statue, "I was not out in my suspicions," said Carducha;

• **see with what a good looking face the rogue covers his

I villany." The alcalde, who Avas present, began to abuse

[ Andrew and the rest of the gipsies, calling them common

thieves and highwaymen. Andrew said not a word, but
stood pondering in the utmost perplexity, for he had no sur-
mise of Carducha's treachery. At last, an insolent soldier,
nephew to the alcalde, stepped up to him, saying "Look at
the dirty gipsy thief ! I will lay a wager he will give himself
airs as if he were an honest man, and deny the robbery, though
the goods have been found in his hands. Good luck to who-
ever sends the whole pack of you to the galleys. A fitter
place it will be for this scoundrel, where he may serve his
Majesty, instead of going about dancing from place to place,
and thieving from venta to mountain. On the faith of a soldier,
I have a mind to lay him at my feet with a blow."

So saying, witliout more ado he raised his baud, and gave

p


226 cebvanteb' exemplary tales.

AndreiKT such a buffet as roused him from his stupor, and made
him recollect that he was not Andrew Caballero but Don
Juan and a gentleman ; therefore, flinging himself upon the
soldier with sudden fury, he snatched his sword from its
sheath, buried it in his body, and laid him dead at his feet.
The people shouted and yelled ; the dead man's uncle, the
alcalde, was frantic with rage ; Preciosa fainted, and Andrew,
regardless of his own defence, thought only of succouring her.
As ill luck would have it, Clement was not on the spot, having
gone forward with some baggage, and Andrew was set upon
by so many, that they overpowered him, and loaded him with
heavy chains. Tlie sJcalde would gladly have hanged him on
the spot, but was obliged to send him to Murcia, as he belonged
to the jurisdiction of that city. It was not, however, till the
next day that he was removed thither, and meanwhile he was
loaded with abuse and maltreatment by the alcalde and all the
people of the place. The alcalde, moreover, arrested all the
rest of the gipsies he could lay hands on, but most of them
had made tlieir escape, among others Clement, who was afraid
of being seized and discovered. On the following morning
the alcalde, with his officers and a great many other armed
men, entered Murcia with a caravan of gipsy captives, among
whom were Preciosa and poor Andrew, who was chained on
the back of a mule, and was handcuffed and had a fork fixed
under his chin. All Murcia flocked to see the prisoners, for
the news of the soldier's death had been received there ; but
so great was Preciosa's beauty that no one looked upon her
that day without blessing her. The news of her loveliness
reached the corregidor s lady, who being curious to see her,
prevailed on her husband to give orders that she should not
enter the prison to which all the rest of the gipsies were com-
baitted. Andrew was thrust into a dark narrow dungeon,
where, deprived of the light of the sun and of that which
Preciosa's presence diffused, he felt as though he should leave
it only for his grave. Preciosa and her grand-mother were
taken to the corregidor's lady, who at once exclaiming, "Well
might they praise her beauty," embraced her tenderly, and
never was tired of looking at her. She asked the old woman
what was the girl's age. "Fifteen, witliin a month or two,
more or less," was the reply. " That would be the age of my
poor Constantia," observed the lady. "Ah, amigas ! how the


THS LITTLE 6IPST GIBL. 227

right of this youn^ girl has brought my bereavement back
afresh to my mind."

Upon this, Preciosa took hold of the corregidora'a
hands, kissed them repeatedly, bathed them with tears, and
aaid, ** Senora mia, the gitano who is in custody is not in
fault, for he had provocation. They called him a thief, and
he b none; they gave him a blow on the face, though his
is such a face that you can read in it the goodness of his soul.
I entreat you, senora, to see that justice is done him, and
that the senor corregidor is not too hasty in. executing upon
him the penalty of the law. If my beauty has given you any
pleasure, preserve it for me by preservirfg the life of the
prisoner, for with it mine ends too. He is to be my husband,
but just and proper impediments have hitherto prevented our
union. If money would avail to obtain his pardon, all the
goods ot our tribe should be sold by auction, and we would
give even more than was asked of us. My lady, if you know
what love is, and have felt and still feel it for your dear
husband, have pity on me who love mine tenderly and
honestly."

All the while Preciosa was thus speaking she kept fast
hold of the corregidora's hands, and kept her tearful eyes
fixed on her face, whilst the lady gazed on her with no less
wistfulness, and wept as she did. Just then the corregidor
entered, and seeing his wife and Preciosa thus mingling their
tears, he was surprised as much by the scene as by the
gitanilla's beauty. On his asking the cause of her affliction,
Preciosa let go the lady's hands, and threw herself at the
corregidcMr's feet, crying, "Mercy, mercy, senor! If my
husband dies, I die too. He is not guilty ; if he is, let me
bear the punishment ; or if that cannot be, at least let the
trial be delayed until means be sought which may save him ;
for as he did not sin through malice, it may be that heaven in
its grace will send him safety." The con-egidor was still more
surprised to hear such language from the gitanilla*s lips, and
but that he would not betray signs of weakness, he could have
wept with her.

While all this was passing, the old gitana was busily
turning over a great many tilings in her mind, and after all
this cogitation, she said, ** Wait a little, your honour, and I
will turn these lamentations into joy, though it should cost me

p2


228 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES,

my life ;'* and she stepped briskly out of the rooniv tJntil she
returned, Preeiosa never desisted from her tears and entreaties
that they would entertain the cause of her betrothed, being
inwardly resolved that she would send to his father that he
might come and interfere in his behalf.

The old gipsy woman returned with a little box under her
arm, and requested that the corregidor and his lady would retire
with her into another room, for she had important things to
communicate to them in secret. The corregidor imagined
she meant to giye him information respecting some thefts com-
mitted by the gipsies, in order to bespeak his favour for the
prisoner, and he instantly withdrew with her and his lady to
his closet, where the gipsy, throwing herself on her knees
before them both, began thus :

" If the good news I have to give to your honours be not
worth forgiveness for a great crime I have committed, I am
here to receive the punishment I deserve. But before I make
my confession, I beg your honours will tell me if you know
these trinkets ;" and she put the box which contained those
belonging to Preeiosa into the corregidor 's hands. He
opened it, and saw those childish gewgaws, but had no idea
what they could mean. The corregidora looked at them, too,
with as little consciousness as her husband, and merely ob-
served that they were the ornaments of some little child.
" That is true," replied the gipsy, " and to what child
they belonged is written in this folded paper." The corregidor
hastily oj^ened the paper, and road as follows : —

" The child's name was Doha Constanza de Acevedo y de
Menesis ; her mother^s, Dofla Guiomar de Menesis ; and her
fathers, D, Fernando de Acevedo, knight of the order of
Calatrava, She disappeared on the day of the Lords Ascen-*
sion, at eight in the morning, in the year one thousand five
hundred and ninety-five. The child had upon her the trinkets
which are contained in this box"

Instantly, on hearing the contents of the paper, the cor-
regidora recognised the trinkets, put them to her lips, kissed
them again and again, and swooned away ; and the corregidor
was too much occupied in assisting her to ask the gitana for his
daughter. ** Good woman, angel rather than gitana,'* cried
the lady when she came to herself, "where is the owner ol
these baubles?"


THE LITTLE GIPSY GIRL. 22?

*' Where, senora ?" was the reply, " She is in your own
house. That young gipsy who drew tears from your eyes is
their owner, and is indubitably your own daughter, whom I
stole from your house in Madrid on the day and hour named
in this paper,"

On hearing this, the agitated lady threw off her clogs, and
rushed with open arras into the sala, where she found Preciosa
surrounded by her doncellas and servants, and still weeping
and wailing. Without a word she caught her hurriedly in her
arms, and examined if she had under her left breast a mark in
the shape of a little white mole with which she was born, and
she found it there enlarged by time. Then, with the same
haste, she took off the girl's shoe, uncovered a snowy foot,
smooth as polished marble, and found what she sought ; for
the two smaller toes of the right foot \f ere joined together by
a thin membrane, which the tender parents could not bring
themselves to let the surgeon cut when she was an infant. The
mole on the bosom, the foot, the trinkets, the day assigned for
the kidnapping, the confession of the gitana, and the joy and
emotion which her parents felt when they first beheld her,
confirmed with the voice of truth in the corregidora's soul that
Preciosa was her own daughter : clasping her therefore in her
arms, she returned with her to the room where she had left the
corregidor and the old gipsy, Preciosa was bewildered, not
knowing why she had made all those investigations, and was
still more surprised when the lady raised her in her arms, and
gave her not one kiss, but a hundred.

Dona Guiomar at last appeared with her precious burthen
in her husband's presence, and transferring the maiden from
her own arms to his, " Receive, Senor, your daughter Con-
stanza," she said; "for your daughter she is without any
doubt, since I have seen the marks on the foot and the bosom ;
and stronger even than these proofs is the voice of my own
heart ever since 1 set eyes on her."

" I doubt it not," replied the corregidor, folding Preciosa
in his arms, " for the same sensations have passed through my
heart as through yours ; and how could so many strange par-
ticulars combine together unless it were by a miracle ?"

The people of the house were now lost in wonder, going
about and asking each other, "What is all this?" but erring
wideV in their conjectures ; for who would have imagined


t


230 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

that the gitanilla was the daughter of their lord ? The cor-
regidor told his wife and daughter and the old gipsy that he
desired the matter should be kept secret until he should
himself think fit to divulge it. As for the old gipsy, he
assured her that he forgave the injury she had done him
in stealing his treasure, since she had more than made atone-
ment by restoring it. The only thing that grieved him was
that, knowing Preciosa's quality, she should have betrothed
her to a gipsy, and worse than that, to a thief and murderer,
"Alas, senor mio," said Preciosa, "he is neither a gipsy nor a
thief, although he has killed a man, but then it was one who
had wounded his honour, and he could not do less than show
\yho he was, and kill him."

" What ! he is not a gipsy, my child ?" said Dona Guiomar,

" Certainly not," said the old gitana ; and she related the
story of Andrew Caballero, that he was the son of Don
Francisco de C&rcamo, knight of SantLigo ; that his name
was Don Juan de Cdrcamo, of the same order ; and that she
had kept his clothes after he had changed them for those of a
gipsy. She likewise stated the agreement which Preciosa
and Don Juan had made not to marry until after two years
of mutual trial ; and she put in their true light the honourable
conduct of both, and the suitable condition of Don Juan.

The parents were as much surprised at this as at the
recovery of their daughter. The corregidor sent the gitana
for Don Juan's clothes, and she came back with them ac-
companied by a gipsy who carried them. Previously to her
return, Preciosa's parents put a thousand questions to her,
and she replied with so much discretion and grace, that even
though they had not recognised her for their child, they must
have loved her. To their inquiry whether she had any
affection for Don Juan, she replied, not more than that to
which she was bound in gratitude towards one who had
humbled himself to become a gipsy for her sake ; but even
this should not extend farther than her parents desired.
" Say no more, daughter Preciosa," said her father ; " (for I
wish you to retain this name of Preciosa in memory of your
loss and your recovery); as your father, I take it upon myself
to establish you in a position not derogatory to your birth."

Preciosa sighed, and her mother shrewdly suspecting that
the sigh was prompted by love for Don Juan^ said to th^cor*


THB LITTLE GIPSY 6IBL. 23l

regidor, "Since Don Juan is a person of such rank, and is so
much attached to our daughter, I think, senor, it would not
be amiss to bestow her upon him."

** Hardly have we found her to-day/' he replied, *'and
already would you have us lose her? Let us enjoy her
company for a while at least, for when she marries she will
be ours no longer but her husband's."

**You are right, senor," said the lady, "but give orders to
bring out Don Juan, for he is probably lying in some filthy
dungeon."

"No doubt he is," said Preciosa, "for as a thief and
homicide, and above all as a gipsy, they will have given him
no better lodging,"

"I will go see him," said the corregidor, "as if for the
purpose of taking his confession. Meanwhile, senora, I again
charge you not to let any one know this history until I clioose
to divulge it, for so it behoves my office." Then embracing
Preciosa he went to the prison where Don Juan was con-
fined, and entered his cell, not allowing any one to accom-
pany him.

He found the prisoner with both legs in fetters, hand-
cuffed, and with the iron fork not yet removed from beneath
his chin. The cell was dark, only a scanty gleam of light
passing into it from a loop-hole near the top of the wall.
"How goes it, sorry knave?" said the corregidor, as he
entered, "I would I had all the gipsies in Spain leashed here
together to finish them all at once, as Nero would have
beheaded all Rome at a single blow. Know, thou thief, who
art so sensitive on the point of honour, that I am the cor-
regidor of this city, and come to know from thee if thy
betrothed is a gitaiulla who is here with the rest of you ? "

Hearing this Andrew imagined that the corregidor had
surely fallen in love with Preciosa ; for jealousy is a subtle
thing, and enters other bodies without breaking or dividing
them. He replied, however, "If she has said that I am her
betrothed, it is very true; and, if she has said I am not
her betrothed, she has also spoken the truth ; for it is not
possible that Preciosa should utter a falsehood."

" Is she so truthful then ?" said the corregidor, " It is
no slight thing to be so and be a gitana. Well, my lad,
she has said that she is your betrothed, but that she has no^


232 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.


1


yet given you her hand; she knows that you must die for
your crime, and she has entreated me to marry her to you
before you die, that she may have the honour of being the
widow of so great a thief as yourself." ^

"Then, let your worship do as she lias requested," said ^

Andrew ; " for so I be married to her, I will go content to
the other world, leaving this one with the name of being ^

hers.''

"You must love her very much?"

"So much,'' replied the prisoner, "that whatever I could
say of it would be . nothing to the truth. In a word, senor
corregidor, let my business be despatched. I killed the man
who insulted me; I adore this young gitana; I shall die
content if I die in her grace, and God's I know will not be
wanting to us, for we have both observed honourably and
strictly the promise we made each other."

"This night then I will send for you," said the corregidor,
" and you shall marry Preciosa in my house, and to-morrow
morning you shall be on the gallows. In this way I shall have ^|

complied with the demands of -justice and with the desire of
you both." Andrew thanked him ; the corregidor returned
home, and told his wife what had passed between them.

During his absence Preciosa had related to her mother
the whole course of her life ; and how she had always believed
she was a gipsy and the old woman's grand-daughter ; but that
at the same time she had always esteemed herself much more
than might have been expected of a gitana. Her mother
bade her say truly, was she very fond of Don Juan ? With
great bashfulness and with downcast eyes she replied that,
having considered herself a gipsy, and that she should better
her condition by marrying a knight of Santiago, and one of
such station as Don Juan de C^rcamo, and having, moreover,
learned by experience his good disposition and honourable
conduct, she had sometimes looked upon him with the eyes
of affection ; but that as she had said once for all, she had no
other will than that which her parents might approve.

Night arrived; and about ten they took Andrew out
of prison without handcuffs and fetters, but not without a
great chain with which his body was bound from head to
foot. In this way he arrived, unseen by any but those who
had charge of him, in the corregidor's house, was silently


THE LITTLE 6IPST GIRL. 233

and cautiously admitted into a room, and there left alone,
A confessor presently entered and bade him confess, as he
was to die next day. " With great pleasure I will confese.*
replied Andrew; "but why do they not marry me first?
And if I am to be married, truly it is a sad bridal chamber
that awaits me."

Dona Guiomar, who heard all this, told her husband^
that the terrors he was inflicting on Don Juan were exces-
sive, and begged he would moderate them, lest they should
cost him his life. The corregidor assented, and called out to
the confessor that he should first marry the gipsy to Preciosa,
after which the prisoner would confess, and commend him-*
self with all his heart to God, who often rains down his
mercies at the moment when hope is most parched and
withering. Andrew was then removed to a room where
there was no one but Dona Guiomar, the corregidor, Pre-
ciosa, and two servants of the f-imily. But when Preciosa
saw Don Juan in chains, his face all bloodless, and his eyes
dimmed with recent weeping, her heart sank within her, and
she clutched her mother's arm for support. " Cheer up, my
child," said the corregidora, kissing her, " for all you now see
will turn to your pleasure and advantage." Knowing nothing
of what was intended, Preciosa could not console herseK;
the old gipsy was sorely disturbed, and the bystanders-
awaited the issue in anxious suspense.

" Senor Vicar," said the corregidor, " this gitano and.
gitana are the persons whom your reverence is to marry."

" That I cannot do," replied the priest, " unless the
ceremony be preceded by the formalities required in such
cases. Where have the banns been published? Where is
the license of my superior, authorising the espousals T*

" The inadvertanee has been mine," said the corregidor ;
"but I will undertake to get the license from the bishop's
deputy."

" Until it comes then, your worships will excuse me,"
said the priest, and without another word, to avoid scandal,
he quitted the house, leaving them all in confusion.

** The padre has done quite right," said the corregidor,
** and it may be that it was by heaven's providence, to the
end that Andrew's execution might be postponed ; for mais
ried to Preciosa he shall assuredly be, but first the banns


234 CEBYANTES' EXEMPLABY TALES.

must be published, and thus time will be gained, and time
often works a happy issue out of the worst difficulties. Now
I want to know from Andrew, should matters take such a
turn, that without any more of those shocks and perturba-
tions, he should become the husband of Preciosa, would he
consider himself a happy man, whether as Andrew Cabal-
lero, or as Don Juan de C&rcamo ?"

As soon as Don Juan heard himself called by his true
name, he said, " Since Preciosa has not chosen to confine
herself to silence, and has discovered to you who I am, I say
to you, that though my good fortune should make me
monarch of the world, she would still be the sole object of my
desires ; nor would I aspire to have any blessing besides, save
that of heaven."

" Now for this good spirit you have shown, Senor Don
Juan de CSrcamo, I will in fitting time make Preciosa your
lawful wife, and at present I bestow her upon you in that
expectation, as the richest jewel of my house, my life, and
my soul ; for in her I bestow upon you Dona Constanza de
Acevedo Menesis, my only daughter, who, if she equals you
in love, is nowise inferior to you in birth."

Andrew was speechless with astonishment, while in a few
words Dona Guiomar related the loss of her daughter, her
recovery, and the indisputable proofs which the old gipsy
woman had given of the kidnapping. More amazed than
ever, but filled with immeasurable joy, Don Juan embraced
his father and mother-in-law, called them his parents and
senores, and kissed Preciosa's hands, whose tears called forth
his own. The secret was no longer kept; the news was
spread abroad by the servants who had been present, and
reached the ears of the alcalde, the dead man's uncle, who
saw himself deban*ed of all hope of vengeance, since the
rigour of justice could not be inflicted on the corregidor's'
son-in-law. Don Juan put on the travelling dress which the
old woman had preserved; his prison and his iron chain
were exchanged for liberty and chains of gold ; and the sad-
ness of the incarcerated gipsies was turned into joy, for they
were all bailed out on the following day. The uncle of the
dead man received a promise of two thousand ducats on'
eondition of his abandoning the suit and forgiving Don Juan«
The latter, not forgetting his comrade Clement, sent at onco


THE LITTLE GIPSY GIRL. 235

in quest of him, but he was not to be found, nor could any-
thing be learned of him until four days after, when authentic
intelligence was obtained that he had embarked in one of
two Genoese galleys that lay in the port of Cartagena, and
had already sailed. The corregidor informed Don Juan, that
he had ascertained that his father, Don Francisco de Cdr-
camo, had been appointed corregidor of that dity, and that it
would be well to wait until the nuptials could be celebrated
with his consent and approbation. Don Juan was desirous to
conform to the corregidor's wishes, but said that before all things
he must be made one with Preciosa. The archbishop granted
bis license, requiring that the banns should be published only
once.

The city made a festival on the wedding-day, the corre-
gidor being much liked, and there were illuminations, bull-
fights, and tournaments. The old woman remained in the
house of her pretended grandchild, not choosing to part from
Preciosa. The news reached Madrid, and Don Francisco de
C^x*camo learned that the gipsy bridegroom was his son, and
that Preciosa was the gitanilla he had seen in his house. Her
beauty was an excuse in his eyes for the levity of his son„
whom he had supposed to be lost, having ascertained that he
had not gone to Flanders. Besides, he was the more recon-
ciled when he found what a good match Don Juan had made
with the daughter of so great and wealthy a cavalier as was
Don Fernando de Acevedo. He hastened his departure in.
order to see his children, and within twenty days he was in
Murcia. His arrival renewed the general joy ; the lives of
the pair were related, and the poets of that city, which
numbers some very good ones, took it upon them to celebrate
the extraordinary event along with the incomparable beauty
of the gitanilla ; and the licentiate Pozo wrote in such wise,
that Preciosa's fame will endure in his verses whilst the
world Lists. I forgot to mention that the enamoured damsel
of the inn owned that the charge of theft she had preferred
against Andrew was not true, and confessed her love and
her crime, for which she was not visited with any punish-
ment, because the joyous occasion extinguished revenge and
resuscitated clemency*


BIBUPLAEI TALE9,


IROUS LOTER.

r the ill-fated Niooaia,* still moirt
rou3 and unfortunate defenders',
g, we might jointly bewail oui
. perhaps find some relief for our
Qg them. A hope may temaln
may rUe !igaiD, thougli not for so
3h they fell ; but I, unfortunate!
my wretched distress, even should
Such is my hard fate, that in
pineas, and in captivity I have no

«d by a captive Christian as lie
the ruined walls of ^Nicosia ; and
jmparing hia miseries with theirs,

him, — a common habit with the
by their imaginations, say and do

sense and reason. Meanwhile
Q or tent, of which there were
young Turk, of good-humoured
who approached the Christian,
friend Rieardo, that the gloomy

ruminating have led you to this

cardo, for that was the captive's
since, gfo where I will, 1 find no
ntrary, the sight of yonder ruins

Nicosia?"

lerc are no others vbible here.**

ght well move you to tears," said

■om Uie Venetians by the Turks in


THE GENEROUS LOVER. 23*7

the Turk; *'for any one who saw this famous and plenteous
isle of Cyprus about two years ago, when its inhabitants
enjoyed all the felicity that is granted to mortals, and who
now sees them exiled from it, or captive and wretched, how
.would it be possible not to mourn over its calamity ? But let
us talk no more of these thing's, for which there is no remedy,
and speak of your own, for which I would fain find one. Now
I entreat you, by what you owe me for the good-will I have
shown you, and for the fact that we are of the same country,
and were brought up together in boyhood, that you tell me
what is the cause of your inordinate sadness. For even, ad-
mitting that captivity alone is enough to sadden the most
cheerful heart in the world, yet I imagine that your sorrows
have a deeper source ; for generous spirits like yours do not
yield to ordinary misfortunes so much as to betray extraor-
dinary grief on account of them. Besides, I know that you
are not so poor as to be unable to pay the sum demanded for
your ransom ; nor are you shut up in the castles of the Black
Sea as a captive of consideration, who late or never obtains the
liberty he sighs for. Since, then, you are not deprived of the
hope of freedom, and yet manifest such deep despondency, I
cannot help thinking that it proceeds froin some other cause
than the loss of your liberty. 1 entreat you to tell me what is
that cause, and I offer you my help to the utmost of my means
and power. Who knows but that it was in order that I might
serve you that fortune induced me to wear this dress which I
abhor.

" You know, Bicardo, that my master is the cadi (which
is the same thing as the bishop) of this city. You know, too^
how great is his power, and my influence with him. More-
over, you are not ignorant of the ardent desire I feel not to
die in this creed, which I nominally profess ; but if it can be
done in no other way, I propose to confess and publicly cry
aloud my faith in Jesus Christ, from which I lapsed by reason
of my youth and want of understanding. Such a confession
I know will cost me my life, which 1 will give freely, that
I may not lose my soul. From all this I would have you
infer, and be assured, that my friendship may be of some
use to you. But that I may know what remedies or pallia-
tions your case may admit of^ it U necessary that you explain
it to me, as the sick man does to the doctor, taking my


\


r


$38 CEPVAKTES' EXEHPLABT TALES.

word for it, that I will inaiiitaiQ the strictest secrecy con*
ceming it."

Bicardo, who had listened in silence all this while, finding
himself at last obliged to reply, did so as follows : *^ If, as you
have guessed rightly, respecting my misfortune, friend Mah-
moud," (that was the Turk's name,) " so also you could hit
upon the remedy for it, I should think my liberty well lost,
and would not exchange my mischance for the greatest ima-
ginable good fortune. But I know that it is such, that though
all the world should know the cause whence it proceeds, no
one ever would make bold to find for it a remedy, or even an
alleviation. That you may be satisfied of this truth, I will
relate my story to you, as briefly as I can ; but before I enter
upon the confused labyrinth of my woes, tell me what is the
reason why my master, Hassan Pasha, has caused these pavi-
lions to be pitched here in the plain, before he enters Nicosia,
to which he has been appointed pasha, as the Turks call their
viceroys."

"I will satisfy you briefly," replied Mahmoud. "You must
know, then, that it is the custom among the Turks, for those
who are sent as viceroys of any province, not to enter the city
in which their predecessor dwells until he quits it, and leaves
the new comer to take up his residence freely ; and when the
new pasha has done so, the old one remains encamped beyond
the walls, waiting the result of the inquiry into his adminis-
tration, which is made without his being able to interfere,
and avail himself of bribery or afiection, unless he has done
so beforehand. The result of the inquiry, enrolled on a
sealed parchment,, is then given to the departing pasha, and
this he must present to the Sublime Porte, that is to^ say,
the court in front of the grand council of the Turk. It is
then read by the vizier pasha and the four lesser pashas, (or,
as we should say, by the president and members of the royal
council,) who punish or reward the bearer according to its
contents ; though, if these are not favourable^ he buys off
his punishment with money. If there is no accusation
against him^ and he is not rewarded, as commonly happens,
he obtains, by means of presents the post he most desires ;
for, at that court, oflices are not bestowed by merit, but
for money ; everything is bought and sold. The bestowers
of office fleece the receivers ;. but he who purchases a post,


THE GENEROUS XOYEB, 239

makes enough by it to purchase another which promises more
profit.

" Everything proceeds as I tell you ; in this empire all
is violence: a fact which betokens that it will not be durable;
but, as I full surely believe, it is our sins that uphold it, the
sins, I mean, of those who imprudently and forwardly offend
God, as I am doing : may he forgive me in his mercy!

" It is, then, for the reason I have stated that your master,
Hassan Pasha, has been encamped here four days, and if the
Pasha of Nicosia has not come out as he should have done,
it is because he has been very ill. But he is now better, and
he will come out to-day or to-morrow without fail, and lodge
in some tents behind this hill, which you have not seen, after
which your master will immediately enter the city. And
now 1 have replied to the question you put to me."

" Listen, then, to my story," said Kicardo, " but I know
not if I shall be able to fulfil my promise to be brief, since my
misfortune is so vast that it cannot be comprised within any
reasonable compass of words. However, 1 will do what I
may and as time allows. Let me ask you, in the first place, if
you knew in our town of Trapani, a young lady whom fame
pronounced to be the most beautiful woman in Sicily ? A
young lady, I say, of whom the most ingenious tongues, and
the choicest wits declared that her beauty was the most
perfect ever known in past ages or the present, or that may
be looked for in the future. One, of whom the poets sang
that she had hair of gold, that her eyes were two shining
suns, her cheeks roses, her teeth pearls, her lips rubies, her
neck alabaster ; and that every part of her made with the
whole, and the whole with every part, a marvellous harmony
and consonance, nature diffusing all over her such an ex-
quisite sweetness of tone and colour, that envy itself could
not find a fault in her. How is it possible, Mahmoud, that
you have not already named her ? Surely you have either not
listened to me, or when you were in Trapani you wanted
common sonsibilit3\"

"In truth, llicardo," replied Mahmoud, "if she whom
you have depicted in such glowing colours, is not Leoiiisa, the
daughter of Rodolfo Florencio, I know not who she is, for
that lady alone was famed as you have described."

" Leonisa it is, Mahmoud," exclaimed Eicardo ; " Leonisa


240 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.


^


the sole cause of all my bliss and all my sorrow ; it is for
her, and not for the loss of liberty, that my eyes pour forth
incessant tears, my sighs kindle the air, and my waitings
weary heaven and the ears of men. It is she who makes me
appear in your eyes a madman, or at least a being devoid of
energy and spirit. This Leonisa, so cruel to me, was not so
to another, and this is the cause of my present miserable
plight. For you must know that, from my childhood, or at
least from the time I was capable of understanding, I not
only loved, but adored and worshipped her, as though I knew
no other deity on earth. Her parents and relations were
aware of my affection for her, and never showed signs of
disapproving it, for they knew that my designs were honour-
able and virtuous ; and I know that they often said as much
to Leonisa, in order to dispose her to receive me as her be-
trothed; but she had set her heart on Cornelio, the son of
Ascanio Rotulo, whom you well know — a spruce young
gallant, point-device in his attire, with white hands, curly
locks, mellifluous voice, amorous discourse — made up, in
short, of amber and sugar-paste, garnished with plumes and
brocade. She never cared to bestow a look on my less dainty
face, nor to be touched in the least by my assiduous court-
ship ; but repaid all my affection with disdain and abhorrence ;
whilst my love for her grew to such an extreme, that I should
have deemed my fate most blest if she had killed me by her
scorn, provided she did not bestow open, though maidenly,
favours on Cornelio. Imagine the anguish of my soul, thus
lacerated by her disdain, and tortured by the most cruel
jealousy. Leonisa's father and mother winked at her pre-
ference for Cornelio, believing, as they well might, that the
youth, fascinated by her incomparable beauty, would chose
her for his wife, and thus they should have a wealthier son-
in-law than myself. That he might • have been ; but they
would not have had one (without arrogance, be it said) of
better birth than myself, or of nobler sentiments or more
approved worth.

" Well, in the course of my wooing, I learned one day
last May, that is to say, about a year ago, that Leonisa and
lier parents, Cornelio and his, accompanied by all their re-
lations and servants had gone to enjoy themselves in Aseanio'i
garden, close to the sea shore on the road to the Saltpits.


THE GENEROUS LOVER. 241

"I know the place well," interrupted Mahnioud, "and
bave passed many a merry day there in better times. Go on,
Kieardo."

" The moment I received information of this party, such
an infernal fury of jealousy possessed my soul that I was
utterly distraught, as you will see, by what I straightway
did ; and that was to go to the garden, where I found the
whole party taking their pleasure, and Cornelio and Leonisa
seated together under a nopal-tree, a little apart from the
rest.

" What were their sensations on seeing me I know not,
all I kuQw is that my own were such that a cloud came over
my sight, and I was like a statue without power of speech or
motion. But this torpor soon gave way to choler, which
roused my heart's blood, and unlocked my hands and my
tongue. My hands indeed were for a while restrained by respect
for that divine face before me ; but my tongue at least broke
silence.

" *Now hast thou thy heart's content,' I cried, *0 mortal
enemy of my repose, thine eyes resting with so much com-
posure on the object that makes mine a perpetual fountain of
tears ! Closer to him ! Closer to him, cruel girl I Cling
like ivy round that worthless trunk. Comb and part the
locks of that new Ganymede, thy lukewarm admirer. Give
thyself up wholly to the capricious boy on whom thy gaze is
fixed, so that losing all hope of winning thee I may lose too
the life I abhor. Dost thou imagine, proud, thoughtless girl,
that the laws and usages which are acknowledged in such
cases by all mankind, are to give way for thee alone ? Dost
thou imagine that this boy, puffed up with his wealth, vain
of his looks, presuming upon his birth, inexperienced from
his youth, can preserve constancy in love, or be capable of
estimating the inestimable, or know what riper years and
experience know? Do not think it. One thing alone is
good in this world, to act always consistently, so that no one
be deceived unless it be by his own ignorance. In extreme
youth there is much inconstancy ; in the rich there is pride ;
in the arrogant, vanity; in men who value themselves on
their beauty, there is disdain; and in one who unites all
these in himself, there is a fatuity which is the mother of all
mischief.

Q


242 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY tALES.

" * As for thee, boy, who thinkest to carry off so safely a
prize more due to ray earnest love than to thy idle phil-
andering, why dost thou not rise from that flowery bank, and
tear from my bosom the life which so abhors thine ? And that
not for the insult thou puttest upon myself, but because thou
knowest not how to prize the blessing which fortune bestows
upon thee. 'Tis plain, indeed, how little thou esteemest it,
since thou wilt not budge to defend it for fear of rufliing
the flnical arrangement of thy pretty attire. Had Achilles
been of as placid temper as thou art, Ulysses would certainly
have failed in his attempt, for all his show of glittering arms
and burnished helmets. Go, play among thy mother's maids ;
they will hel p thee to dress thy locks and take care of those dainty
hands that are fitter to wind silk than to handle a sword/

" In spite of all these taunts Cornelio never stirred from
his seat, but remained perfectly still, staring at me as if he
was bewitched. The loud tones in which I spoke had brought
round us all the people who were walking in the garden, and
they arrived in time to hear me assail Cornelio with many
other opprobrious terms. Plucking up heart, at last, from
the presence of numbers, most of whom were his relations,
servants, or friends, he made a show as if he would rise ;
but before he was on his feet my sword was out, and I
attacked not him only but all who were before me. The
moment Leonisa saw the gleam of my sword she swooned
away, which only exasperated my frantic rage. I know not
whether it was that those whom I assailed contented them-
selves with acting on the defensive as against a raving
madman, or that it was my own good luck and adroitness,
or Heaven's design to reserve me for greater ills, but the
fact was that I wounded seven or eight of those who oame
under my hand. As for Cornelio, he made such good use-
of his heels that he escaped me.

"In this imminent danger, surrounded by enemies
who were now incensed to vengeance, I was saved by au
extraordinary chance ; but better would it have been to have
lost my life on the spot than to be saved in order to suffer
hourly death. On a sudden the garden was invaded by a
great number of Turkish corsairs, who had landed in the
neighbourhood without being perceived by the sentinels in
the castles on the coast, or by our cruisers. As soon an


THE GENEROUS LOVER. 243

iny antagonists descried them they left me, and escaped
with all speed. Of all the persons in the garden the Turks
captured only three, besides Leonisa, who was still in her swoon.
As for me, I fell into their hands after receiving four ugly
wounds, which, however, I had revenged by laying four Turks -^
dead upon the ground,

"The Turks having effected this onslaught with their usual
expedition, returned to their galleys, ill-satisfied with a success
which had cost them so dccor. Having set sail they quickly
arrived at Fabiana, where mustering their hands to see who
was missing, they found that they had lost four Levantine
soldiers whom they esteemed their best men. They resolved
to revenge the loss on me, and the commander of the galley
immediately ordered the yard-arm to be lowered in order to
hang me. Leonisa was present at all this. She had como
to her senses, and seeing herself in the power of the corsairs,
she stood weeping and wringing her delicate hands, with-
out saying a word, but listening if she could understand
what was said by the Turks. One of the Christian slaves
at the oar told her in Italian that the captain had ordered
that Christian to be hanged, pointing to me, because he had
killed in his own defence four of the best soldiers belonging
to the galley. On hearing this, Leonisa (it was the first
time she showed any pity for me) bade the captive tell the
Turks not to hang me, for they would lose a large ransom,
but return at once, to Trapani, where it would be paid them.
This, I say, was the first, as it will also be the last mark
of compassion bestowed on me by Leonisa, and all for my
greater woe.

" The Turks believed what the captive told them :
interest got the better of their resentment, and they returned
next morning with a flag of peace. I passed a night of
the greatest anguish, not so much from the pain of my
wounds, as from thinking of the danger in which my fair
and cruel enemy was placed among those barbarians. When
we arrived at the town one galley entered the port, the
other remained in the offing. The Christian inhabitants
lined the whole shore, and the effeminate Cornelio stood
watching from a distance what was going on in the galley.
My steward immediately came to treat for my ransom, and

Q 2


244 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

I told him on no account to bargain for it but for that of
Leonisa, for which he should offer all I was worth. I fur-
thermore ordered him to return to shore, and tell Leonisa*s
parents that they might leave it to him to treat for their
daughter's liberation, and give themselves no trouble about
the matter.

" The chief captain, who was a Greek renegade named
Yusuf, demanded six thousand crowns for Leonisa and four
thousand for me, adding that he would not give up the one
without the other. He asked this large sum, as I afterwards
ascertained, because he was in love with Leonisa, and did not
wish to ransom her, but to give me and a thousand crowns to
boot to the other captain, with whom he was bound to share
equally whatever prizes they made, and to keep Leonisa for
himself as valued at five thousand crowns. It was for this
reason that he appraised us both at ten thousand.

" Leonisa's parents made no offer at all, relying on my
promise, nor did Comelio so much as open his lips on the
matter. After much bargaining my steward agreed to pay
five thousand crowns for Leonisa and three for me, and Yusuf
accepted this offer at the persuasion of the other captain and
of all his men. But as my agent had not so large an amount
in ready money, he asked for three days to get it in, being
resolved to expend all I possessed rather than fail to rescue
us. Yusuf was glad of this, thinking that something might
possibly occur in the interval to prevent the completion of
the bargain, and he departed for the isle of Fabiana, saying
that in three days he would return for the money. But
fortune, never weary of persecuting me, ordained that a
Turkish sentinel descried from the highest point of the island,
far out at sea, six vessels which appeared to be either the
Maltese squadron or one belonging to Sicily. He ran down
to give warning, and as quick as thought the Turks who were
on shore, some cooking their dinners, some washing their
linen, embarked again, heaved anchor, got out their oars,
hoisted sail, and heading in the direction of Barbary, in less
than two hours lost sight of the galleys. I leave you to
conjecture, friend Mahmoud, what 1 suffered in that voyage,
so contrary to my expectation, and more when we arrived
the following day at the south-west of the isle of Pantanale^


THE GENEROUS LOVER, 245

There the Turks landed, and the two captains began to
divide all the prizes they had made. All this was for me a
lingering death.

" When Leonisa's turn and mine came, Yusuf gave Fatallah
(the other captain) myself and six other Christians, four of
tiiem fit for the oar, and two very handsome Corsican boys,
as an equivalent for Leonisa, whom he himself retained ;
Fatallah being content with that arrangement. I w^as present
at all this, but knew not what they said, though I saw what
they did, nor should I have then understood the nature of
the partition, had not Fatallah come up to me and said in
Italian, * Christian, you now belong to me ; you have cost me
two thousand crowns ; if you desire your liberty you must
pay me four thousand, or else die here.' I asked him if the
Christian maiden was his also. He said she was not, but that
Yusuf had kept her with the intention to make her a Moor
and marry her ; and this was true, for I was told the same
thing by one of the Christian rowers, who understood Turkish
very well, and had overheard the conversation that had passed
between Yusuf and Fatallah. I told my master to take
measures for possessing himSelf of the maiden, and that I
would give him for her ransom alone ten thousand gold
crowns. He replied that it was impossible, but he would let
Yusuf know the large sum I had offered for the Christian
girl, and perhaps he would be tempted to change his intention
and ransom her. He did so, and ordered all his crew to go on
board again immediately, for he intended to sail to Tripoli,
to which city be belonged. Yusuf also determined to make
for Biserta, and they all embarked with as much speed aa
they use when they discover galleys to give them cnase oi
merchant craft to plunder. They had reason for this haste,
for the weather seemed to be changing, and to threaten a
storm.

"Leonisa was ashore, but not where I could see her,
until just as we were embarking we met at the water side.
Her new master and newer lover led her by the hand, and
as she set foot on the ladder that reached from the shore to
the galley, she turned her eyes upon me. Mine were fixed
on her, and such a pang of mingled tenderness and grief came
over me that a mist overspread my eyes, and I fell senseless
on the ground. I was told afterwards that Leonisa was


246 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALCS.

affected in the same way, for she fell off the ladder into the
sea, into which Yusuf plunged after her and brought her out
in his arms. This was told me in my master s galley into
which I had been carried insensible. When I came to my
senses, and found myself there, and saw the other galley
steering a different course and carrying off the half of my
soul or rather the whole of it, my heart sank within me again;
again I cursed my unhappy fate, and clamorously invoked
death, till my master, annoyed by my loud lamentations,
threatened me with a great stick if I did not hold my tongue.
I restrained my tears and groans, believing that the force
with which I compressed them would make them burst a
passage for my soul, which so longed to quit this miserable
body. But my misfortune did not end here. The storm
which had been foreseen suddenly burst upon us. The wind
veered round to the south and blew in our teeth with sucli
violence that we were forced to quit our course and run
before it.

" It was the captain's intention to make for the island and
take shelter under its northern shore, but in this he was dis-
appointed ; for such was the fury of the storm that although
before it we had been making way continually for two days
and nights, yet in little more than fourteen hours we saw
ourselves again within six or Seven miles of the island, and
driving helplessly against it, not where the shore was low, but
just where the rocks were highest and threatened us with in-
evitable death. We saw near us the other galley, on board
of which was Leonisa, and all its Turk and captive rowers
straining every nerve to keep themselves off the rocks. Ours
did the same, but with more success than the crew of our
consort, who, spent with toil, and vanquished in the desperate
struggle with the elements, let fall their oars, and suffered
themselves to drift ashore, where the galley struck with such
violence that it was dashed to pieces before our eyes.

*^ Night began to close in, and such were the shrieks ot
those who were drowning, and the alarm of those on board
our galley, that none of our captain's orders were heard or
executed. All the crew did, was to keep fast hold of their
oars, turn the vessel's head to the wind, and let go two
anchors, in hopes to delay for a little while the death that
Beemed certain, ^IfWhilst all were in dread of dying, with me


THE OENEBOUS LOYEH. 247

it was quite tlie reverse ; for in the fallacious hope of seeing ^
in the other world her who had so lately departed from this,
every instant the galley delayed to founder or drive ashore
was to me an age of agony. I watched every billow that
dashed by us and over us, to see if they bore the body of the
unfortunate Leonisa. I will not detain you, Mahmoud, with
a recital of the tortures that distracted my soul in that long and
bitter night ; it is enough to say that they were such that had
death come, it would have had little to do in bereaving me of life.

" Day broke with every appearance of worse weather than
ever, and we found that our vessel had shifted its course
considerably, having drifted away from the rocks and ap-
proached a point of the island. Setting all of us to work,
both Turks and Christians, with renewed hope and strength,
in six houts wo doubled the point, and found ourselves in
calmer water, so that we could better use our oars; and the
Turks saw a prospect of going on shore to sec if there were
any remains of the galley tliat had been wrecked the niglit
before. But Heaven denied me the consolation I Loped for
in seeing in my arms the body of Leonisa. I asked a renegade,
who was about to land, to look for it and see if it had been cast
on the strand. But, as I have said. Heaven denied me this
consolation, for at that moment the wind rose with such fresh
fury that the shelter of the island was no longer of any avail
to us.

" Seeing this, Fatallah would no longer strive against the
fortune that so persecuted him. He oidered some sail to be
spread, turned the prow to the sea and the poop to the wind,
and himself taking the helm, let the vessel run over the wide
«ea, secure of not being crossed in his way by any impedi-
ment. The oars were all placed in their regular positions,
the whole crew was seated on the benches, and no one else
was seen on foot in the whole galley but the boatswain, who
had lashed himself strongly amidship for his greater security.
The vessel flew so sTviftly that in three days and nights, passing
in sight of Trapani, Melazo, and Palermo, she entered the
straits of Messina, to the dismay of all on board, and of the
spectators on shore. Not to be as long-winded as the storm
that buffeted us, I will only say that wearied, famishing, and
exhausted by such a long run, almost all round the island of
Sicily, we arrived at Tripoli, where my master, before he had


248 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

divided the booty with his partners, and accounted to tho
king for onc-fiftli part, according to custom, was seized with
such a pleurisy that in three days it carried him off to hell.

"The king of Tripoli, and the alcayde of tho Grand
Turk, who, as you know, is heir to all those who die without
natural heirs, immediately took possession of all Fatallah's
effects. I became the property of the then viceroy of Tripoli,
who a fortnight afterwards received the patent appointing him
viceroy of Cyprus, and hither I am come with him without
any intention of redeeming myself. He has often told me to
do so, since I am a man of station, as Fatallah's soldiers
informed him ; I have never complied, but have declared that
he was deceived by those who had exaggerated my means. If
you would have mo tell you my whole purpose, Mahmoud,
you must know *that I desire not to turn in any direction in
which I may find any sort of consolation, but that the sad
thoughts and memories which have never left me since the
death of Leonisa may become so identified with my captive
life that it may never afford me tJie least pleasure. And if it
is true that continual sorrow must at last wear out itself, or
him who suffers it, mine cannot fail to wear me out, for I am
resolved to give it such free scope that in a few days it shall
put. an end to the wretched life 1 endure so unwillingly,

" This is, brother Mahmoud, my sad story ; this is the
cause of my sighs and tears ; judge now if it is enough to
draw them forth from my inmost vitals, and to engender
them in the desolation of my afflicted heart. Leonisa is dead,
and with her all my hope ; and though whilst she lived it
hung by the merest thread, yet, yet — "

Here the speaker's voice faltered, so that he could not
utter another word, or restrain the tears which coursed each
other down his cheeks so fast that they bedewed the ground.
Mahmoud mingled his own with them; and when the
paroxysm had somewhat abated, he tried to console Ricardo
with the best suggestions he could offer ; but the mourner
cut them short, saying, " What you have to do, friend, is to
advise me how I shall contrive to fall into disgrace with my
master, and with all those I have to do with, so that, being
abhorred by him and by them, I may be so maltreated and
^persecuted that I may find the death I so much long for."

" I liave now," said Mahmoud, " experienced the truth of


THE GENEROUS LOVER. 249

the common saying, that what is deeply felt is well ex-
pressed, though it is true that sometimes excess of feeling
paralyses the tongue. Be that as it may, friend Bicardo, —
whether your woes inspire your language, or your language
^ exalts your woes, — you shall always find in me a true friend, to

aid or to counsel, though my youth, and the folly I committed
in assuming this garb, cry aloud that I am little to he relied
on in this capacity. I will try, however, to prove that such
/ a conclusion is unfounded; and though you do not desire

J either counsel or help, I will not the more desist from doing what

your case requires, just as people give a sick man not what he
asks for, but what is good for him. There is no one who has
more power and influence in this city than my master, the
Cadi ; not even your own master, who comes to it as viceroy,
will have so much. This being the case, I may say that I am
the most powerful person here, since I can do what I please
with my master. I mention this because it may be that I shall
so contrive with him that you shall become his property, and
being constantly with me, time will tell us what we had best
do, both for your consolation, if you will or can be consoled,
and to enable me to exchange the life I lead here for a better
one."

" I thank you, Mahmoud, for the friendship you offer me,*'
replied Bicardo, " though I well know that, do what you may,
it will avail nothing. But let us quit this subject, and go to
the tents, for, as I perceive, great numbers of people are com-
ing forth from the city ; no doubt it is the old viceroy who is
quitting it to give place to my master."

"It is so," said Mahmoud. " Come then, Bicardo, and
you will seo the ceremony of the reception."

" Come on," said Bicardo ; ** perhaps I shall have need of
you, if the superintendent of my master's slaves have missed
me, for he is a Corsican renegade of no very tender heart."

Here the conversation ended, and the two friends reached
the tents, just as the new pasha was coming out to receive his
predecessor, Ali Pasha. The latter came attended by all the
janissaries who have formed the garrison of Nicosia ever since
the Turks have had possession of it, in number about five
hundred. They marched in two divisions, the one armed
with guns, the other with drawn scimetars. Arrived at the
tent of Hassan, the new Pasha, they all surrounded it. Ali


252 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

see, Hassan, a man without employment, I must seek means
for obtaining one; Avhereas, you are secure in that respect
for three years, since to-day you enter upon the govern-
ment of this rich realm of Cyprus. On these grounds, and
as I was the first to offer the price demanded for the
slave, it stands to reason, Hassan, that you should yield her
to me."

" The satisfaction I shall feel in purchasing and sending
her to the Sultan,*' said Hassan, " is so much the greater, as I
shall do it without being prompted by any motives of interest
whatever. And as for a convenient means of sending her to
Constantinople, she shall go thither in a galley manned only
by my own slaves."

Ali now started up in wrath, and, clutching. his scimetar,
cried out, " Since we both intend the same thing, Hassan,
namely, to present this Christian to the Grand Signor, and
since I was the first purchaser, reason and justice require that
you should leave her to me ; if you will not, this blade in my
hand shall defend my right, and punish your audacity."

The cadi, who had been closely watching this contest, and
who was himself no less inflamed with desire than either of the
pashas, bethought him how he might remain possessor of the
prize, without giving any cause to suspect his insidious
designs. Rising therefore to his feet, he stepped between the
two angry pashas. " Be quiet, Hassan," he said ; " calm
yourself, Ali ; here am I who can and will arrange your dif-
ferences in such wise that you shall both have your intentions
fulfilled, the Sultan shall be gratified as yoii desire, and shall
be under obligations to you both alike for your loyal and
acceptable homage."

The two pashas submitted at once to the cadi, as they
would have done even had the terms he imposed appeared
harder to them, such is the respect which is paid to their
elders by those of that accursed sect. The cadi then con-
tinued his address to them. " Ali," said he, " you say that
you want this Christian to present her to the Grand Signor;
and Hassan says the same. You allege that, having been the
first to offer the price required, she ought to be yours ; but
Hassan denies this ; and though he does not know how to
assign valid grounds for his claim, yet I find that ho has the
same as yourself, namely, the intention, which doubtless must
have arisen within him at the same time as within yourselfi to


i>


THE GENEROUS LOVER. 253

purchase the slave for the self-same purpose ; only you had
the advantage of him in being the first to declare yourself.
This, however, is no reason why he should be out and out
defrauded of the benefit of his good-will, and therefore I am
of opinion that it will be well to arrange matters between you
in this wise : let the slave be bought by you both ; and since
she is to belong to the Grand Signer, for whom you buy her,
it will be for him to dispose of her. Meanwhile, you Hassan
shall pay two thousand doblas, and you Ali another two
thousand, and the slave shall remain in my custody; so that I
may send her in the name of you both to Constantinople, and
thus I too shall not be without some reward for my presence
and aid on this occasion. Accordingly, I undertake to send
her at my own cost in a style worthy of the great sovereign
to whom she is to be presented; and I will write to the
Grand Signer a true account of all that has occurred here,
and of the good-will you have shown in his service."

The two enamoured pashas could find no pretext for gain-
saying this decision; and though it thwarted their desires,
they were constrained to submit, each of them comforting him-
self with the hope, however doubtful, that he would succeed at
last. Hassan, who was to remain viceroy of Cyprus, resolved
to make such presents to the cadi as would induce him to
give up the slave. Ali formed other plans, and as he flattered
himself that he should carry them into successful operation,
they both professed themselves satisfied, and paid the Jew
two thousand doblas each on the spot. The Jew then said
that he had sold the slave, but not the clothes she wore,
which were worth another two thousand doblas ; and this
indeed was true, for her hair which she wore partly loose on
her shoulders, and partly braided on her forehead, was most
gracefully interwoven with strings of pearls; her bracelets
and anklets too were set with very, large pearls, and her
green satin robe was heavily fiounced and embroidered with
gold. In short, all agreed that the Jew had set a low price
on the dress, and the cadi, to show himself no less liberal than
the two pashas, said that he would pay for it, that the slave
might appear before the Grand Signer as she then stood.
The two competitors agreed in approving of this, each of
them believing that slave, dress, and all would soon be his '
own.


254: CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

It is impossible to describe Bicardo's feelings, when he
saw the treasure of his soul thus put up for sale, and found
that he had regained it only to lose it more cruelly. He knew
not whether he was asleep or awake, and could not believe his
own eyes ; for it seemed incredible that they should have so
unexpectedly before them her whom he had supposed to have
disappeared for ever. " Do you know her ?" he whispered iii
Mahmoud*s ear.

" No ! I do not," was the reply.
Then I must tell you that it is Leonisa."
What do you say, Bicardo V* exclaimed Mahmoud«

" I say it is Leonisa."

" Say no more ; fortune is proving your friend, and all is
turning out for the best, for she is to remain in my master's
custody."

" What think you ? Shall I place myself where I may be
seen by her V

" By no means, lest you give her a sudden shock ; nor
must you let it be known that you have seen her, for that
might disconcert the plan I have in view."

" I will do as you advise," said Bicardo, turning away
his eyes, and carefully avoiding those of Leonisa, which were
meanwhile bent upon the ground. Presently the cadi went
up to her, and taking her by the hand, delivered her to
Mahmoud, ordering him to take her into the city and give her
up to his lady, Halema, with directions to keep her as a slave
of the Grand Signer. Mahmoud obeyed and left Bicardo
alone, following with his eyes the star of his soul, until
it disappeared behind the walls of Nicosia. He then went up
to the tfew, and asked him where he had bought that Christian
slave, or how he had become possessed of her. The Jew re-
plied that he had bought her in the island of Pantanalea, of some
Turks who had been shipwrecked there. Bicardo would have
pursued his inquiries, but the Jew was called away to give
the pashas the very same information which Bicardo so much
longed to obtain.

During the long walk from the tents to the city Mahmoud
conversed with Leonisa in Italian, and asked her whence she
came. She replied that she belonged to the illustrious city
of Trapani, and that her parents were noble and wealthy,
though as for herself she was utterly unfortunate. Mahmoud


THE GENEROUS LOYEB. 255

then asked her if she knew a gentleman of birth and fortune
in that city, named Kicardo. On hearing that name a sigh
escaped her that seemed to come from the bottom of her
heart. " I know him/' she replied, ** to my sorrow/'

" Why to your sorrow ? "

" Because it was to his sorrow that he knew me, and for
my misfortune."

" Perhaps," said Mahmoud, " you may also know in the
same city another gentleman of very amiable disposition, the
son of very wealthy parents, and himself a person of great
spirit, liberality, and discretion. His name is Comelio."

" Him too I know, and of him still more than Bicardo I
may say that I know him to my sorrow. But who are you,
sir, who know these gentlemen and inquire of me respecting
them ? Doubtless, Heaven, in compassion for the trouble and
mischances I have undergone, has sent me to a place where, it
they do not cease, at least I may find a person to console me
for them."

" I am a native of Palermo," said Mahmoud, " brought by
various chances to wear this garb, and to be in appearance so
diflferent from what I am in my secret soul. I know the
gentlemen in question, because not many days ago they were
with me. Comelio was captured by some Moors of Tripoli,
and sold by them to a Turk who brought him to this island^
whither he came to traded for he is a merchant of Bhodes,
and so highly satisfied was he with Cornelio, and such was the
confidence he reposed in his truth and integrity, that he en-
trusted him with his whole property."

"He will be sure .to take care of it," said Leonisa, *^for
he takes very good care of his own. But tell me, senor, how
or with whom did Bicardo come to this island ? "

"He came," said Mahmoud, "with a corsair who had
captured him in a garden on the coast near Trapani, and
along with him a damsel, whose name I never thought of
asking, though the corsair often spoke to me in praise of her
beauty. Bicardo remained here some days with his master
until the latter went to visit the tomb of Mahomet^ which is
in the city of Almedina,* and then Bicardo fell into such a
sickness that his master left him with me, as being my country-

* A mistake. The prophets tomb is in Mecca. Medina was hit
birthplace.


256 CEBYANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

man, that I might take care of him until the return of the
pilgrim to Cyprus, should that happen ; or else I was to send
Ricardo to Constantinople, when his master should advise me
of his arrival there. But heaven ordered it otherwise; for
the unfortunate Ricardo died in a few days, always invoking
to the last the name of one Leonisa, whom he had told me he
loved more than his life and soul. She had been drowned,
he said, in the wreck of a galley on the coast of the island of
Pantanalea ; and he never ceased to deplore her death till his
grief destroyed him, for that in fact was the only malady I
discovered in him."

" Tell me, senor," said Leonisa, " in the conversations
you had with the other young man, did he sometimes name
this Leonisa ? Did he relate the manner in which he and
she and Bicardo were captured ?'*

" He did name her," replied Mahmoud, " and asked me if
there had been brought to this island a Christian of that
name, of such and such appearance ; for if so he should like
to ransom her, provided her owner had been undeceived as to
his notion that she was richer than she really was, or should
it chance that having enjoyed her, he held her in less esteem.
If her price did not exceed three or four hundred crowns, he
would pay it gladly, because he had once had some regard
for her."

" It must have been very little," said Leonisa, " since it
was worth no more than four hundred crowns. Bicardo was
more generous. Heaven forgive her who was the cause of
his death, and that was myself ; for I am the unhappy maiden
whom he wept as dead, and God knows how I should rejoice
were he alive, that I might repay him by letting him see how
I felt for his misfortunes. Yes, senor, I am the little loved
of Comelio, the truly wept of Bicardo, whom various chances
have brought to the miserable state in which I now am ; but
through all my perils, by the favour of Heaven, I have pre-
served my honour unsullied, and that consoles me in my
misery. I know not at this moment where I am, nor who is
my master, nor what my adverse fates have determined is to
become of me. I entreat you, therefore, senor, by the Chris-
tian blood that flows in your veins, that you will advise me in
my difficulties; for though they have already taught me


THE GENEROUS LOVER. 257

something by experience^ yet they are so great and never-
ending, that I know not what to do."

Mahmoud assured her he would do what he could to help
her to the best of his understanding and his power. He
acquainted her with the nature of the dispute there had been
between the pashas concerning her, and how she was now in
the keeping of his master the cadi, who was to send her to
Constantinople to the Grand Turk Selim ; but that he trusted
that the true God, in whom he, though a bad Christian,
believed, would dispose of her otherwise. He advised her to
conciliate Halima, the wife of his master the cadi, with whom
she was to remain until she was sent to Constantinople, and
of whose character he gave her some details. Having given
her this and other useful counsel, he arrived at the cadi's
house, and delivered her over to Halima along with his mas-
ter's message.

The Moorish woman received her well, seeing her so
beautiful and so handsomely dressed, and Mahmoud returned
to the tents, where he recounted to Ricardo, point by point,
all that had passed between himself and Leonisa; and the
tears came into his eyes when he spoke of the feeling dis-
played by Leonisa, when he told her that Ricardo was dead.
He stated how he had invented the story of Cornelio's
captivity, in order to see what impression it made on her ;
and in what disparaging terms he had spoken of him. All
this was balm to Ricardo's afflicted heart.

** I remember, friend Mahmoud," he said, " an anecdote
related to me by my father ; you know how ingenious he was,
and you have heard how highly he was honoured by the
emperor, Charles V., whom he always served in honourable
posts in peace and war. He told me that when the emperor
was besieging Tunis, a Moorish woman was brought to him
one day in his tent, as a marvel of beauty, and that some
rays of the sun, entering the tent, fell upon her hair, which
vied with them in its golden lustre ; a rare thing among the
Moorish women, whose hair is almost universally black.
Among many other Spanish gentlemen present on that occa-
sion, there were two of distinguished talent as poets, the one
an Andulusian, the other a Catalan. Struck with admiration
at the sight before him, the Andalusian began to extemporise
some verses, but stopped short in the middle of the last line,

B


258 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

unable to finish them for want of a rhyme ; whereupon the
Catalan, who saw his embarrassment, caught the lire as it
were out of his mouth, finished it, continued the thought, and
completed the poem. This incident came into my mind when
I saw the exquisitely beautiful Leonisa enter the pasha's tent,
obscuring not only the rays of the sun, but the whole firma-
ment with aU its stars."

'* Gently, gently, friend Ricardo,** said Mahmoud ; " I am
afraid if you praise your mistress at that rate you will seem
to be a heathen rather than a Christian."

" Well, tell me then," said Ricardo, " what you think of
doing in our business. Whilst you were conducting Leonisa
to Halima, a Venetian renegade who was in the pasha's tent,
and who understands Turkish very well, explained to me all
that ha4 passed between them. Above all things, then, we
must try to find some means of preventing Leonisa's being
sent to the Grand Signer."

" The first thing to be done is to have you transferred to
my master," said Mahmoud, " and then we will consider what
next."

The keeper of Hassan's Christian slaves now came up
and took Ricardo away with him. The cadi returned to the
city with Hassan, who in a few days made out the report on
All's administration, and gave it to him under seal that he
might depart to Constantinople. Ali went away at once,
laying strict injunctions on the cadi to send the captive with-
out delay to the sultan, along with such a letter as would be
serviceable to himself. The cadi promised all this with a
treacherous heart, for it was inflamed for the fair Christian.
Ali went away full of false hopes, leaving Hassan equally
deluded by them. Mahmoud contrived that Ricardo should
pass into the possession of his master ; but day after day stole
on, and Ricardo was so racked with longing to see Leonisa,
that he could have no rest. He changed his name to Mario,
that his ow^ might not reach her ears before he saw her,
which, indeed, was a very difficult thing, because the Moors
are exceedingly jealous, and conceal the faces of their women
from the eyes of all men ; it is true they are not so scrupu-
lous with regard to Christian slaves, perhaps, because being
slaves they do not regard them is men.

Now it chanced that one day the lady Halima saw her


f

I

I


THE GENEROUS LOYEB. 259

slave Mario, and gazed so much upon him that his image re-
mained printed on her heart. Not very well satisfied with
the languid embraces of her old husband, she readily gave ad-
mission to a reprehensible desire, and as readily communicated
it to Leonisa, whom she liked much for her agreeable temper,
and treated with great respect as a slave of the Grand Signor.
She told her how the cadi had brought home a Christian cap-
tive of such graceful manners and appearance, that she had
never set eyes on a more engaging man in all her life ; she
understood that he was a chilidi (that is, a gentleman) of the
same country as her renegade Mahmoud, and she knew not
how to make known to him her inclination, so that the
Christian might not despise her for her voluntary declaration.
Leonisa asked what was the captive's name, and being told
that it was Mario, she replied, " If he was a gentleman, and
of the place they say, I should know him ; but there is no
one of that name in Trapani. But let me see him, and speak
with him, lady, and I will tell you who he is, and what may
be expected of him."

" It shall be so," said Halima. " On Friday, when the
cadi is at prayers in the mosque, I will make Mario come in
here where you may speak to him alone, and if you can
give him a hint of my desires you will do so in the best way
you can."

Not two hours after this conversation the cadi sent for
Mahmoud and Mario, and with no less earnestness than
Halima had unbosomed herself to Leonisa, the amorous gray-
beard opened his own to his two slaves, asking their advice as
to what he should do to enjoy the Christian and cheat the
Grand Signor, to whom she belonged, for he would sooner die
a thousand deaths, than give her up to him. So earnestly did
the reverend Turk declare his passion that he inspired his
two slaves with no less earnestness, though their purposes
were quite the reverse of his. It was settled between them
that Mario, as a countrvman of the fair Christian's, should
take it in hand to solicit her on the cadi's part ; and that if
that failed, the latter should use force, since she was in his
power, and afterwards account for not sending her to Con-
stantinople by pretending that she was dead. The cadi was
highly delighted with the advice of his two slaves, and with
all imaginable alacrity he gave Mahmoud his freedom on th«

b2


260 CERVANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

spot, and promised to bequeath him half his property when
he (Hed. To Mario likewise he promised, in case of success,
his liberty and money enough to enable him to return home a
wealthy man.

K he was liberal in promises, his slaves were prodigal ;
they would bring down the moon to him from Heaven, much
more Leonisa, if only he gave them an opportunity of speaking
with her. " Mario shall have one whenever he pleases," said
the cadi, " for I will make Halima go for some days to the
house of her parents, who are Greek Christians, and when she
is away I will order the porter to admit Mario into the house
as often as he pleases, and I will tell Leonisa that she may
converse with her countryman whenever she has a mind."
Thus did the wind begin to shift in Kicardo's favour, his
master and mistress working for him without knowing it; and
the first who began was Halima, as was to be expected of her,
for it is the nature of women ever to be prompt and bold
where their pleasures are concerned.

That same day the cadi told Halima that she might pay a
visit to her parents, and stay with them some time if she liked;
but elated as she was with the false hopes given her by
Leonisa, she was so far from wishing to visit her parents, that
she would not have cared to go to the imaginary paradise of
Mahomet. She replied then that she had no such wish at
that moment ; when she had she would mention it, and then
she would take the Christian maiden with her. " That you
must not," replied the cadi, "for it is not right that the Grand
Signor's slave should be seen by any one, much less should
she converse with Christians ; for you know that when she
comes into the Sultan's possession she will be shut up in
the seraglio, and must become a Turk whether she will or
not."

" As she will be in my company," said Halima, " there will
be no harm in her being in the house of my parents, or con-
versing with them. I do so myself, and I am not less a good
Turk for all that. Besides, I do not intend to remain with
them more than four or five days at most, for my love for you
will not allow me to be so long without seeing you." Here
the conversation dropped, the cadi not venturing to make any
further objection, for fear of rousing her suspicions.

Friday being come^ he went to the mosque^ from which


THE. GENEROUS LOVER. 261

he was sure not to return for about four hours. He was no
sooner gone than Halima sent for Mario ; but a Corsican
slave who acted as porter, would not have admitted him into
the court-yard if Halima had not called out to let him pass^
whereupon he came in confused and trembling as if he were
going to encounter a host of enemies. Leonisa was seated
at the foot of a great marble staircase, in the dress in which
she had appeared before the pashas. Her right arm resting
on her knee supported her head^ and her back was towards the
door by which Mario entered, so that though he advanced to
where she sat, she did not see him.

Bicardo cast his eyes all round the place when he entered;
all was silence and solitude till he turned his gaze to where
Leonisa sat. Instantly he was seized with a thousand con-
flicting emotions. He was within twenty paces of the object
of his soul's desire ; but he was a captive, and the glory of his
Hfe was in the power of another. Thus agitated with fear and
exultation, joy and sadness, he advanced towards her slowly,
until Leonisa suddenly turned round and her eyes met his
earnest gaze. He stopped, unable to move another step.
Leonisa, who believed him to be dead, was struck with awe
and consternation at seeing him so unexpectedly before her.
With her eyes still fixed upon hhn and without turning her
back, she retreated up four or five stairs, took a little cross
from her breast, kissed it again and again, and crossed her-
self repeatedly, as though a being from the other world stood
before her. Eicardo presently recovered himself, and
perceiving from Leonisa's gestures what was the cause of
her terror, he said, " It grieves me, beautiful Leonisa, that
the news which Mahmoud gave you of my death was not true,
so that I might be free from the fear I now feel lest the
rigour you have also shown towards me still subsists entire.
Set your mind at ease, lady, and come down ; and if you will
do what you have never yet done — approach me — you will
see that I am not a phantom. I am Bicardo, Leonisa, — Bicardo
the happy, if you will bid him be so."

Here Leonisa put her finger to her lips, giving Bicardo
to understand that he should be silent or speak more low.
Gathering a little courage, he drew near enough to hear her
whisper thus: "Speak softly, Mario (for so I hear you are now
called) : talk of nothing but what I talk of, and bear in mind


262 CEBYAKTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

that if we are overheard it will be the cause of our never
meeting again. I believe that Halima, our mistress, is
listening to us : she has told me that she adores you, and has
sent me here as her intercessor. If you will respond to her
desires, you Will consult the interest of your body more than
of your soul ; and if you will not, you must feign to do so,
were it only because I request it, and for sake of what is due
to the declared desires of a woman.**

" Never did I think, never could I imagine, beauteous
Leonisa," replied Bicardo, *' that you could ever ask anything
of me with which I should find it impossible to comply ; but
this present request of yours has undeceived me. Is the in-
clination so slight a thing that it can be moved this way or
that at pleasure? Or would it become a man of truth
and honour to feign in matters of such weight ? If you think
that such things can or ought to be done, be it as you will,
since it is for you to command and for me to obey; and
that it may not be said I failed to do so with regard to the
first order you laid upon me, I will impose silence on the voice
of my honour, and will pretend to return Halima's passion, as
you desire, if I may thereby secure the blessing of seeing
you ; and you have only to signify as much to her in such
terms as you shall think proper. Li return for this sacrifice,
to me the greatest possible, I entreat you to tell me briefly
*;ow you escaped from the hands of the corsairs, and fell into
those of the Jew who sold you."

"The recital of my misfortunes," Leonisa answered, "de-
mands more time than we have now at our disposal ; never-
theless, I will tell you some particulars. The day after we
parted company, Yusuf 's galley was driven back by a contrary
wind to the island of Pantanalea, where we also saw your
galley, but ours, in spite of all efforts, was driven upon the
rocks.. My master, seeing death so near, quickly emptied two
water-casks, closed them tiffhtly, lashed them together with
ropes, and placed me betwefn th^m. Then stripping off his
clothes he took another cask in his arms, and passing round
his body a rope attached to the casks on which I was placed,
he boldly plunged into the sea. I had not the courage to
follow his example, but another Turk pushed me in. I fell
senseless into the water, and did not recover until I found
myself on land, in the arms of two Turks, who held me with


THE GENEROUS LOVER. 263

my mouth downwards, dischargiDg a great quantity of water
which I had swallowed. I opened my eyes, and looking
wildly round me, the first thing I saw was Yusuf lying beside
me with his skull shattered, having, as I afterwards learned,
been dashed head foremost against the rocks.

" The Turks told me that they had hawled me ashore by the
rope, more dead than alive. Only eight persons escaped out
of the unfortunate galley. We remained eight days on the
island, during which the Turks treated me with as much re-
spect as if I were their sister. We lay hid in a cave, the
Turks being afraid of being captured by some of the
Christian garrison of a fort in the island, and we supporte
ourselves with biscuits from the foundered galley which the
waves cast ashore, and which the men collected by night. It
happened for my misfortune that the commandant of the fort
had died a few days before, and that there were in it only
twenty soldiers ; this fact we learned from a boy whom the
Turks captured as he was amusing himself gathering shells on
the shore. At the end of eight days a Moorish vessel, of the
kind which the Turks call caramuzal, hove in sight ; the Turks
quitted their hiding-place, and made signals which were
recoenised by the crew of the caramuzal. They landed, and
hearing from their countrymen an account of their di^a^ters,
they took us all on board, where there was a very rich Jew,
to whom the whole cargo, or the greater part of it, belonged,
consisting of carpets, stuflfs, and other wares, which are com-
monly exported by the Jews from Barbary to the Levant. The
vessel carried us to Tripoli, and during the voyage I was sold
to the Jew, who gave two thousand doubloons, an excessive
price ; but the Jew was made liberal by the love he con-
ceived for me. *

** After leaving the Turks in Tripoli, the vessel continued
its voyage, and the Jew began to importune me with his
solicitations, which I treated with the scorn they deserved.
Despairing, therefore, of success, he resolved to get rid of me
upon the first opportunity ; and knowing that the two pashas,
Ali and Hassan, were in this island, where he could sell his
goods as well as in Scio, whither he had been bound, he
landed here in hopes of disposing of me to one of the two
pashas, with which view he had me dressed as you now see me.
I find that I have been purchased by the cadi, for the purpose


264 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

of being presented to the Grand Turk, which causes me no
little dread. Here I heard of your pretended death, which,
if you will believe me, grieved me to the soul ; yet I envied
rather than pitied you, not from ill will towards you, for,
if insensible to love, I am yet neither unfeeling nor un-
grateful, but because I believed that your sorrows were all at
an end."

" You would be right, lady," said Ricardo, " were it not
that death would have robbed me of the bliss of seeing you
again. The felicity of this moment is more to me than any
blessing that life or death could bring me, that of eternityjf^
alone excepted. My master, the cadi, into whose hands I
have fallen by as strange a series of adventures as your own,
is just in the same disposition towards you as Halima is
towards me, and has deputed me to be the interpreter of his
feelings. I accepted the office, not with the intention of
serving his wishes, but my own in obtaining opportunities to
speak with you. Only see, Leonisa, to what a pass our mis-
fortunes have brought us ; you to ask from me what you know
to be impossible ; and me to propose to you what I would
give my life not to obtain, dear as that life is to me now, since
I have the happiness to behold you."

" I know not what to say to you, Ricardo," replied Leonisa,
« nor what issue we can find from the labyrinth in which we
are involved. I can only say that we must practise, what
would not be expected from us, dissimulation and deceit. I
will repeat to Halima some phrases on your part which will
rather encourage than make her despair ; and you may tell the
cadi whatever you think may serve, with safety to my honour,
to keep him in his delusion. And since I place my honour in
your hands, yoif may be assured that I have preserved it intact,
in spite of all the perils and trials I have undergone. Oppor*
t unity to converse together will be easily afforded us, and to me
this will be most pleasing, provided you never address me on
the subject of your suit ; from the moment you do so, I shall
cease to see you; for 1 would not have you suppose that
my spirit is so weak as to be swayed by captivity. With the
favour of heaven, I hope to prove like gold which becomes the
purer the more it is passed through the furnace. Be content
with the assurance I have given you, that I shall no longer
look upon you with repugnance, as I used to do ; for I must tell


THE GENEROUS LOVER. 265

you, Ricardo, that I always found you somewhat more arro-
gant and presumptuous than became you. I confess, also, that
I was deceived, and that my eyes being now opened, if the ex-
periment were to be made over again, perhaps I should be
more humane to you, within the bounds of honour. Go now,
and God be with you ; for I am afraid lest Halima may have
been listening to us, and she understands something of our
language."

** I fully acknowledge the propriety of all you have said,
lady," replied Ricardo. "I am infinitely obliged for the expla-
nation you have given me, and perhaps time will show you
how profoundly respectful is the adoration I profess for you.
Rely upon me that I will deal in the best manner with the
cadi, and do you do the same with Halima. Believe me, lady,
since I have seen you, there has sprung up in my heart an
assured hope that we shall soon achieve our freedom ; and so
I commend you to God's keeping, deferring to another time
to tell you the events by which fortune brought me to this
place, after we were parted."

They now separated, Leonisa well pleased with Ricardo's
modest behaviour, and he overjoyed at having heard from her
lips words unmixed with harshness. Halima, meanwhile, had
shut herself up in her room, and was praying to Mahomet for
Leonisa's success in the commission she had given her. The
cadi was in the mosque, burning, like his wife, with desire,
and anxiously awaiting the answer to be brought him by the
slave he had sent to speak to Leonisa, and whom Mahmoud
was to admit to her presence for that purpose, even though
Halima was at home. Leonisa inflamed Halima's impure
desires, giving her very good hopes that Mario would do all
she wished, but telling her that two months must elapse before
he could consent to what he longed for even more than
herself ; and that he asked that delay that he might complete
a course of devotion for the recovery of his freedom. Halima
was satisfied with this excuse, but begged Leonisa to tell her
dear Mario to spare himself the trouble and her the delay he
proposed, for she would give him, at once, whatever the cadi
required for his ransom.

Before Ricardo went with his answer to his master, he
consulted Mahmoud as to what it should be. They agreed
between them that it shoul^i be as discouraging as possible.


266 CERVANTES EXEMPLABT TALES.

and that he should advise the cadi to take the girl as soon as
possible to Constantinople, and accomplish his wishes on the
way hy fair means or by force. Moreover, that in order to
prevent the unpleasant consequences that might ensue from
supplanting the sultan, it would be well to purchase another
slave, then pretend, or contrive on the voyage, that Leonisa
should fall sick, and throw the newly-purchased Christian
woman into the sea by night, with all possible secrecy, giving
out that the person who had died was Leonisa, the sultan's
slave. All this might be done in such a manner that the
truth should never be known, and the cadi would remain
blameless in the sultan's eyes, and have the full enjoyment of
his desires. The wretched old cadi, who was so blinded by
his passion that he would have listened to any absurdity they
proposed, eagerly fell in with this scheme as one full of promise;
and so indeed it was, but not as he imagined ; for the inten-
tion of his two advisers was to ^make olf with the boat, and
pitch the old fool into the sea.

But a difficulty occurred to the cadi, one of the greatest
in his eyes that could possibly be. It occurred to him that
his wife would not let him go to Constantinople without her ;
but presently he got over this obstacle by saying, that instead
of buying a Christian woman to put to death in Leonisa's
name, he would make Halima serve his turn, for he longed
with all his heart to be rid of her. Mahmoud and Ricardo
agreed to this expedient as readily as he proposed it, and this
being finally settled, the cadi that same day imparted to his wife
his design of setting out at once for Constantinople, to present
the Christian captive to the Sultan, who, he expected would, in
his munificence, make him grand cadi of Cairo or Constanti-
nople. Halima, with great alacrity, expressed her approval of
his intention, believing that Mario would be left at home ; but
when the cadi told her that he would take both him and
Mahmoud along with him, she changed her mind, and began
to dissuade him from what she had before advised; and
finally, she told him that unless she went with him she would
not allow him to go at all. The cadi had great satisfaction in
complying with her desire, for he thought he would soon get
rid of a burden that hung like a millstone round his neck.

All this while Hassan Pasha was indefatigable in pressing
the cadi to give up the slave girl to him, in return for which


THE GENEROUS LOVER. 267

he ofiered him mountains of gold, and had already made him
a present of Eicardo, whose ransom he valued at two thousand
crowns. Moreover, to facilitate the transfer, he suggested to
the cadi the same expedient which the latter had himself
devised, namely, that when the Grand Turk sent for Leonisa
he should pretend she was dead. But all the pasha's gifts,
promises, and entreaties, had no other effect on the cadi than
to increase his eagerness to hasten his departure. Tormented
therefore by his own desires, by Hassan's importunities, and
by those of Halima (for she, too, was amusing herself with
vain hopes) he made such despatch that in twenty days he had
equipped a brigantine of fifteen benches, which he manned
with able Turkish mariners and some Greek Christians. He
put all his wealth on board it ; Halima, too, left nothing of
value behind her, and asked her husband to let her take her
parents with her that they might see Constantinople. Halima
entertained the same designs as Mahmoud and Bicardo ; she
intended, with their help, to seize the brigantine, but would
not make this known to them until she found herself actually
embarked. Afterwards she proposed to land among Chris-
tians, return to her old creed, and marry Bicardo ; for she had
reason to suppose that bringing so much wealth with her, he
would not fail to take her to wife on her again becoming a
Christian.

Bicardo had another interview with Leonisa, and made
known to her the whole scheme they had projected ; and she
in return apprised him of the designs of Halima, who kept no
secret from Leonisa. After mutual injunctions of secrecy,
they bade each other adieu until the day of embarkation.
When it arrived, Hassan escorted the party to the shore with
all his soldiers, and did not leave them until they had set sail.
Even then he never took his eyes off the brigantine until it
was out of sight. It almost seemed as if the sighs heaved by
the enamoured mussulman swelled the gale, and impelled with
more force the sails that were wafting away his soul. But as
love had allowed him no rest, but plenty of time to consider
what he should do to escape being killed by the vehemence of
his unsatisfied desire, he immediately put in operation a plan
he had long matured. He put fifty soldiers, all trusty men,
bound to him by many favours received and expected, on
board a vessel of seventeen benches, which he had secretly


268 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

fitted out in another port ; and he ordered them to pursue
and capture the brigantine with all its wealth, and put every
soul on board to the sword, with the exception of Leonisa,
whom he desired to have as his own sole share of the immense
booty. He also ordered them to sink the brigantine, so that
no trace of her fate might remain.

Animated with the hope of plunder the soldiers proceeded
with the utmost alacrity to execute the pasha's orders, which
seemed the more easy as the crew of the brigantine were un-
armed, not anticipating any such encounter. It had been
now two days under sail, which seemed two centuries to the
cadi, who would fain, on the very first of them, have carried
his design into effect. But his two slaves represented to him
the absolute necessity that Leonisa should first fall sick in
order to give colour to the report of her death, and that the
feigned malady ought to last some days. The cadi was much
more disposed to say that she died suddenly, finish the whole
job at once, despatch his wife, and allay the raging fire that
was consuming his vitals ; but he was obliged to submit to the
advice of his two counsellors.

Meanwhile, Halima had declared her design to Mahmoud
and Bicardo, who had signified their readiness to accomplish
it when passing the Crosses of Alexandria, or entering the
castles of Anatolia ; but so intolerably did the cadi importime
them, that they made up their minds to do so upon the first
opportunity that offered. After they had been six days at sea
the cadi thought that Leonisa's feigned malady had lasted
quite long enough, and was very urgent with them that they
should finish wfth Halima on the following day, and to quiet
him they promised that they would do so. But when that
day came, which, as they expected, was to witness the accom-
plishment of their own secret plans, or to be the last of their
lives, they suddenly discovered a vessel giving chase to them,
with all speed of sails and oars. They were afraid it was a
Christian corsair, from which neither party had any good to
expect ; for if it were one, the mussulmans would be made
captive, and the Christians, though left at liberty, would be
plundered of everything. Mahmoud and Bicardo, however,
took comfort in the prospect of freedom for Leonisa and them-
selves ; nevertheless, they were not without fear of the inso-
lence of the corsairs, for people who abandon themselves to


THE GBNEBOUS LOTEB. 269

such practices, whatever bo their religion or law, are invariably
cruel and brutal. The cadi's crew made preparation to defend
themselves, but without quitting their oars, and still doing all
in their power to escape ; but the vessel in chase gained upon
them so fast that in less than two hours it was within cannon-
shot. Seeing her so close, they lowered their sails, stood to
their arms, and awaited the assault, though the cadi told them
they had nothing to fear, for the stranger was under Turkish
colours and would do them no harm. He then gave orders
to hoist the white flag of peace.

Just then Mahmoud chanced to turn his head, and espied
another galley of some twenty benches apparently, bearing
down upon them from the west. He told the cadi, and some
Christians at the oar said that this was a vessel of their own
people. The confusion and alarm was now doubled, and all
awaited the issue in anxious suspense, not knowing whether
to hope or fear it. I fancy the cadi, just then, would have gladly
foregone all his amorous hopes to be safe again in Nicosia, so
great was his perplexity. It did not last long however ; for
the first galley, without paying the least regard to the flag of
peace, or to what was due to a community in religion, bore
down upon his brigantine with such fury as nearly to send it
to the bottom. The cadi then perceived that the assailants
were soldiers of Nicosia, and guessing what was the real state
of the case, he gave himself up for lost ; and had it not been
for the greed of the soldiers, who fell to plundering in the
first instance, not a soul would have been left alive. Sud-
denly, however, while they were busy with all their might in
pillaging, a voice cried out in Turkish, "To arms! to arms!
Here's a Christian galley bearing down upon us ! " And this in-
deed was true, for the galley which Mahmoud had descried to
the westward was bearing furiously down upon Hassan's under
Christian colours; but before it came to close quarters it
hailed the latter.

"What galley is that?"

" Hassan Pasha's, viceroy of Cyprus."

" How comes it, then, that you, being mussulmans are
plundering this brigantine, on board of which, as we know,
is the cadi of Nicosia?"

The reply to this was that they only knew that the pasha
had ordered them to take it, and that they, as his soldiers,


270 CEBYANTflS' EXEMPLABT TALES*

had done his bidding. The commander of the galley under
Christian colours having now ascertained what he wanted to
know, desisted from attacking Hassan's and fell upon the
cadi's brigantine, killed ten of its Turkish crew at the first
volley, and immediately boarded it with great impetuosity.
Then the cadi discovered that his assailant was no Christian,
but Ali Pasha, Leonisa's lover, who had been laying wait to
carry her off, and had disguised himself and his soldiers as
Christians, the better to conceal his purpose.

The cadi, finding himself thus assailed on all sides, began
loudly to exert his lungs. " What means this, Ali Pasha, thou
traitor?" he cried. "How comes it that, being a mussul-
man, thou attackest me in the garb of a Christian? And
you, perfidious soldiers of Hassan, what demon has moved you
to commit so great an outrage ? How dare you, to please
the lascivious appetite of him who sent you, set yourselves
against your sovereign V At these words, the soldiers on
both sides lowered their arms, looked upon and recognised
each other, for they had all served under one captain and one
flag. Confounded by the cadi's words, and by their con-
scious criminality, they sheathed their blades, and seemed
quite discomfited. Ali alone shut his eyes and his ears to
everything, and rushing upon the cadi, dealt him such a
stroke on the head with his scimetar, that, but for the
hundred ells of stuff that formed his turban, he would cer-
tainly have cleft it in two. As it was, he knocked the cadi
down among the rower's benches, where he lay, exclaiming
amid his groans, " O cruel renegade ! Enemy of the Pro-
phet ! Can it be that there is no true mussulman left to
avenge me ? Accursed one ! to lay violent hands on thy cadi,
on a minister of Mahomet !"

The cadi's denunciations made a strong impression on the
minds of Hassan's soldiers, who, fearing besides that Ali's
men would despoil them of the booty they already looked
upon as their own, determined to put all to the hazard of
battle. Suddenly they fell upon Ali's men with such vehe-
mence that, although the latter were the stronger party, they
soon thinned their numbers considerably ; the survivors, how-
ever, quickly rallied, and so well avenged their slaughtered
comrades, that barely four of Hassan's men remained alive,
and those too badly wounded. Eicardo and Mahmoud^ who


THE GENEROUS LOVEB. 271

had been watching the fight, puttmg their heads out every
now and then at the cabin hatchway, seeing now that most of
the Turks were dead, and the survivors all wounded, and
that they might very easily be mastered, called upon HaH-
ma's father and two of his nephews to aid them in seizing the
vessel. Then arming themselves with the dead men's sci-
metars, they rushed amidships, shouting "Liberty! Liberty !"
and with the help of the stout Christian rowers, they soon
despatched all the Turks. Then they boarded Ali Pasha's
galley. He had been one of the first slain in the last conflict,
a Turk having cut him down in revenge for the cadi, and the
galley being defenceless, they took possession of it with all
its stores.

By Bicardo's advice, all the valuables on board the
brigantine and Hassan's galley were transhipped to All's,
that being the largest of the three vessels, with plenty of
stowage room, and a good sailer. The rowers, too, were
Christians, and being highly delighted with the acquisition of
their freedom, and with the gifts which Bicardo liberally
divided amongst them, they offered to carry him to Trapani,
or to the end of the world, if he desired it. After this,
Mahmoud and Bicardo, exulting in their success, went to
Halima, and told her that if she desired to return to Cyprus
they would give her her own brigantine, with its full com-
plement of men, and half the wealth she had put on board it ;
but as her aflection for Bicardo was unabated, she replied
that she would rather go with them to Christian lands,
whereat her parents were exceedingly rejoiced.

The cadi having by this time got upon his legs again, ne,
too, had his choice given him either to go into Christendom
or return to Nicosia in his own vessel. He replied that, " as
fortune had reduced him to his present situation, he thanked
them for the boon of his liberty ; and that he desired to go
to Constantinople to complain to the Grand Signor of thq
outrage he had received at the hands of Ali and Hassan."
But when he heard that Halima was leaving him, and intended
to go back to Christianity, he was almost beside himself.
Finally, they put him on board his own vessel, supplying him
abundantly with all accessories for his voyage, and even
giving hi^ back some of his own sequins; and he took leave
of them aU with the intention of returning to Nicosia ; but


272 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

first he entreated that Leonisa would embrace him, declaring
that if she would graciously grant him that favour, it would
wipe out the recollection of all his misfortunes. All joined
in entreating Leonisa to grant him what he so earnestly
desired, since she might do so without prejudice to her honour.
She complied, and the cadi besought her to lay her hands on
his head, that he might have hopes of his wound being
healed.

These adieus concluded, and having scuttled Hassan's
galley, they sailed away with a favouring breeze and soon
lost sight of the brigantine, on the deck of which stood the
unlucky cadi, watching with swimming eyes how the wind
was wafting away his property, his delight, his wife, and his
whole soul. With very different feelings did Bicardo and
Mahmoud pursue their way. They passed in sight of
Alexandria, and without shortening sail, or needing to have
recourse to their oars, they touched at Corfu, where they
took in water ; and then without more delay they left behind
them the ill-famed Acroceraunian rocks, and descried afar
off Paquino, a promontory of the most fertile Trinacria, at
sight of which, and of the illustrious island of Malta,* their
prosperous barque seemed to fly across the waters. In fine,
fetching a compass round the island, in four days afterwards
they made Lampadosa, and then the island where Leonisa
had been shipwrecked, at sight of which sl^e almost swooned.

On the following day the beloved native land they so
longed for gladdened their eyes and their hearts. Their
spirits rose tumultuously with this new joy, one of the
greatest that can be known in this life, to return safe and
sound to one's country after long captivity ; and one which
may compare with it is that of victory achieved over its
enemies. There was in the galley a chest full of flags and
streamers of various colours, with which Bicardo had the
rigging adorned. Soon after daybreak they were within less
than a league of the city, when taking to their oars, and
uttering every now and then joyous cries, they advanced to
the harbour, the shore of which was immediately lined by a
great concourse of people ; for the gaily adorned galley had
been so long in sight, that the whole town had come down to
observe it more closely.

Meanwhile, Bicardo had entreated Leonisa to dress herself


TUB GENEROUS LOYEIU 273

just as she had appeared m the tent before the two pashas,
for he wished to play off a pleasant trick upon his relations.
She did so, adding jewels to jewels, pearls to pearls, and
beauty to beauty (for it increases with the satisfaction of the
heart), to the renewed admiration and astonishment of all.
Ricardo and Mahmoud also dressed themselves in the Turkish
costume, and made the crew put on the garments of the dead
Turks. It was about eight o'clock when they entered the
harbour, and the morning was so calm and clear that it seemed
as though it were intent on beholding this joyful arrival.

Before coming into port, Bicardo fired a salute with the
three pieces belonging to the galley, which were one gun
amidships, and two falconets ; the town returned the salute
with an equal number. The whole shore was in lively com-
motion, watching the approach of the gaily decked galley; but
when they had a nearer view of it, and saw by the white
turbans of the pretended mussulmans that it was a Turkish
craft, there was a general alarm. Suspecting some stratagem,
the people flew to arms, all the soldiers in the town were
marched down to the port, and the cavalry scoured the coast.
Highly amused at all this, the navigators held on their course,
entered the port, and anchored close to the shore. Then
running out a plank they all stepped ashore one after the
other as if in procession, and falling on their knees kissed the
ground with tears of joy — a clear proof to all who witnessed
their proceedings that they were no Turks. When all the
crew were out of the vessel, Halima with her father and
mother, and her two nephews, followed next, all dressed as
Turks ; and the beautiful Leonisa, her face covered with a
crimson veil, and escorted on either side by Mahmoud and
Bicardo, closed the procession, while the eyes of the whole
multitude were fixed upon her. They too did as the othen
bad done, and knelt and kissed the ground.

Presently the captain and governor of the city advanced
towards them, perceiving that they were the principal persona
belonging to the vessel. The moment he set eyes on Bicardo
he recognised him, ran to him with open arms, and embraced
him with the liveliest demonstrations of joy. With the
governor came Cornelio and his father, Leonisa's parents and
relations, and those of Bicardo, all of whom were among the
principal persons in the city. Bicardo returned the governor s

B


274 CERVANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

embrace and his cordial greeting ; held out his hand to Cor«
nelio (who had changed colour at sight of him, and almost
quaked for fear), and, holding Leonisa also by the hand, thus
addressed the bystanders: "Under yoinr favour, gentlemen,
I beg that, before we enter the city and the temple to return
the thanks so justly due to our Lord for the great mercies
vouchsafed to us in our distresses, that you will listen to a
few words I have to say to you." The governor bade him
say on, for all present would listen to him with pleasure and
in silence. All the principal people then formed a circle
round him, and he addressed them as follows : —

" You must well remember, gentlemen, the misfortune
which befel me some mouths ago in the garden of the Salt Pits,
and the loss of Leonisa : nor can you have forgotten the
exertions I made to procure her liberation, since, regardless of
my own, I offered all I was worth for her ransom. But this
seeming generosity is not to be imputed to me as a merit,
since I did but offer my fortune for the ransom of my soul.
What has since happened to us both requires more time to
relate, a more convenient season, and a speaker less agitated
than myself. For the present, let it suffice to tell you that
after various extraordinary adventures, and after a thousand
disappointments of our hopes of relief, merciful Heaven has^
without any merit of ours, restored us to our beloved country^
with hearts full of joy and with abundance of wealth. It is
not from this, nor from the recovery of my freedom, that
springs the incomparable pleasure I now experience, but fronv
that which I imagine this sweet enemy of mine in peace and
in war enjoys on seeing herself restored to freedom and to her
birth-place. Yet, I rejoice in the general joy of those who
have been my companions in misery ; and though grievous
disasters are apt to alter the disposition and debase worthy
minds, it has not been so with the fair destroyer of my hopes^
for with more fortitude and invincibility than can well be told,
sLe has passed througlr the wrecking sea of her disasters^
and the encounters of my ardent though honourable impor*
tunities.

"But to return to the point from which I set out ; I offered
my fortune for her ransom, and with it the surrender of my
soul's desires ; I strove for her liberation, and ventured more
for her than for my own life. All these things might seem tot


YHE GENEROUS LOTEB. 375

be obligations of some moment, but I will not have them
regarded in that light ; what I would have so considered, is
that which I now do;" and so saying, he raised his hand
and respectfully withdrew the veil from Leonisa's face — it
was like removing a cloud from before the sun — and then he
continued : '^ See, Comelio ; here I present to you the prize
which you should value above all precious things on earth ;
and. here, beauteous Leonisa, I present to you him whom
you have always borne in memory. This is what I would
have you all esteem as generosity, in comparison with which
to give fortune, life, and honour, is nothing.

<' Take her, O fortunate youth, take her ; and if your
understanding can reach the height of comprehending the
greatness of her worth, esteem yourself the most fortunate
of mankind. With her I will also give you my whole share
of what Heaven has bestowed on us sUl ; it mil exceed, as
I fully believe, thirty thousand crowns. You may enjoy it
all freely and at your ease, and Heaven grant you to do
so for many happy years. For my hapless self, since I am
teft without Leonisa, it is my pleasure to be poor. To
want Leonisa, is to find life superfluous."
^ Here he ceased speaking, as if his tongue clove to the
roof of his mouth, but soon afterwards, before any one else
had spoken, he exclaimed, '^ Qood heavens I how toil and
trouble confuse the understanding ! Li the eagerness of my
desire to do right, I have spoken inconsiderately, for no one
can be generous in disposing of what is not his own. What
authority, have I over Leonisa to give her to another? Or
how can I bestow what is so far from being mine ? Leonisa
is her own mistress, and so much so, that failing her parents
(long and happily may they live), her wishes could have no
opposition to encounter. Should they meet an imaginary
obstacle in the obligations which she, in her good feeling,
)nay think she is under to me, from this moment I cancel
them, and declare them null and void. I unsay, then, what
I have said, and I give Coiiielio nothing, for I cannot ; only
I confirm the transfer of my property made to Leonisa,
without desiring any other recompense than that she will
believe in the sincerity of my honourable sentiments towards
her, and be assured that they never had an aim unbecoming
her incomparable virtue, her worth, and hei* infinite beauty."

k2


276 CEBYAKTES EXElfPLABT TALES.

Bicardo closed his speech with these words, and Leonisa
thus replied, ** If you imagine, Bicardo, that I bestowed any
favour on Oomelio during the time when you were ena*
moured of me and jealous, think that it was in all honour, as
being done by the express desire of my parents, who wished
to have him for their son-in-law. If you are satisfied with
this explanation, I am sure you are no less so with what you
have yourself experienced as to my virtue and modesty. I
say this, Bicardo, that you may know that I have always been
mistress of myself, and subject to no one else except my
parents, whom I now entreat humbly, as is meet, to grant me
leave and license to dispose of what your magnanimous
generosity has given me."

Her parents said she might do so, for they relied on her
great discretion that she would make such use of it as would
always redound to her honour and advantage. *^ With that
permission, then," said Leonisa, ** I beg it may not be taken
amiss if I choose rather to seem overbold than ungrateful ;
and so, worthy Bicardo, my inclination, hitherto coy, per-
plexed, and dubious, declares in your favour, that the world
may know that women are not all ungrateful. I am yours,
Bicardo, and yours I will be till death, unless better know-
ledge move you to refuse me your hand."

Bicardo was almost beside himself to hear her speak thus,
and could make no other reply than by falling on his knees
before her, grasping her hands, and kissing them a thousand
times, with delicious tears. Comelio wept with vexation,
Leonisa's parents for joy, and all the bystanders for admira-
tion and sympathy.

The bishop, who was present, led them with his blessing ta
the church, and dispensing with the usual forms, married
them at once. The whole city overflowed with gladness,
which it testified that night by a splendid illumination, and
for many days following in jousts and rejoicings given by the
relations of Bicardo and Leonisa. Halima, who had lost all
hope of having Bicardo for her husband, was content to
become the wife of Mahmoud, having returned with him to
the bosom of the church. Her parents and her two nephews
were, by Bicardo's bounty, presented with so much out of his
share of the spoil as sufficed to maintain them for the rest of
then* lives. In a word, all were happy to their heart's


THB GENEROUS LQVEB^ ._ \277

content; and the fame of Bicardoi spreading beyond the
limits of Sicily, extended throughout all Italy and beyond it.
He was universally known as the Generous Lover, and his
renown is still prolonged in the persons of the many sons
borne to him by Leonisa, who was a rare example of discre-
tion, virtue, modesty, and beauty.


k


V


278 cbbtakteb' exemplabt tales.


THE SFANISH-ENGLISH LADT.

Ahono the spoils which the English carried off from the
city of Cadiz,* was a little girl of about seven years old. An
English gentleman, named Clotald, commander of a squadron
of vessels, took her to London without the knowledge of
the Earl of Essex, and in defiance of his general orders. The
parents complained to the earl of the loss of their child, and
implored him, since he had declared that property alone
should be seized, and the persons of the inhabitants should be
left free, they should not, besides being reduced to poverty,
suffer the additional misery of being deprived of their
daughter, who was the very light of their eyes. The earl
caused it to be proclaimed throughout his whole army, that
whoever had possession of the child, should restore her on
pain of death ; but no threatened penalties could constrain
Clotald to obey; in spite of them, he kept the child concealed
in his ship, being fascinated, though in a Christian manner,
with the incomparable beauty of Isabella, as she was called.
In fine, her inconsolable parents were left to mourn her loss,
and Clotald, rejoicing beyond measure, returned to London,
and presented the pretty child to his wife, as the richest prize
he had brought home from the war.

It happened fortunately that all the members of Clotald's
household were catholics in secret, though in public they
affected to follow the religion of the state. Clotald had a
son about twelve years old, named Eichard, who was brought
up by his parents to love and fear Q-od, and to be very sted-
fast in the truths of the catholic faith. Catherine, the wife
of Clotald, a noble, Christian, and prudent lady, conceived
such an affection for Isabella, that she reared her as if she

* In the year 1596, when the city was taken by Elizabeth's com«
manders. Admiral Howard and the £arl of Essex.


TBB SPANISH-ENGLISH LADT, 27$

wfts her own daughter ; and the child was so well endowed
by nature, that she readily learned all they taught her. Time
and the kind treatment she received, gradually wore out from
her recollection that which her parents had bestowed upon
her ; not so much so, however, but that she often thought of
them with a sigh. Though she learned English, she did not
forget her native tongue, for Clotald took care to bring
Spaniards secretly to his house to converse with her, and
thus it was, that without ceasing to speak Spanish, she
became as proficient in English as if she had been bom in
London.

After having learned all kinds of work becoming a young
lady of good birth, she was taught to read and write more
than passably well ; but what she excelled in above all, was
in playing all sorts of instruments suitable to her sex, with
extraordinary perfection of musical taste and skill, and with
the accompaniment of a voice which Heaven had endowed
with such melody that when she chanted she enchanted. All
these graces, natural and acquired, gradually inflamed the
heart of Bichard, whom she loved and respected as the son
of her lord. At first his affection for her was like that of a
brother for a sister, but when she reached her twelfth year,
thb feeling had changed into a most ardent desire to possess
her, but only in the honourable way of becoming her lawful
spouse ; for Isabella's incomparable virtue made it hopeless to
obtain her in any other way, nor would he have done so even
if he could, for his own noble disposition, and the high esti-
mation in which he held her, forbade any bad thought to take
root in his soul.

A thousand times he determined to make known his passion
to his father and mother, and as often broke his resolution,
knowing that they had destined him to be the husband of a
young Scotch lady of great wealth and good family, who, like
themselves, secretly professed the catholic faith ; and it seemed
clear to him, that after having betrothed him to a lady of
rank, they would not think of bestowing him on a slave, if
that name could be applied to Isabella. Agitated by these
distressing reflections, not knowing what course to pursue or
whom to consult, he fell into a melancholy that nearly cost
him . his life. But thinking it was a very cowardly thing to
let himself die without making any kind of effort for his own


280 CEBVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

relief, he strove to gather up courage enough to declare hb
feelings to Isabella.

Everybody in the house was grieved for Richard's illness^
for he was beloved by them all, and by his parents to the
utmost degree, both because he was their only child, and
because his virtues, his worth, and good sense deserved all
their affection. The physicians could not make out the nature
of his complaint, nor could he himself venture to declare it.
At last, one day when Isabella entered his room alone, to
attend upon him, he said to her, with a faltering voice and
stammering tongue, " Lovely Isabella, your worth, your great
virtue, and exceeding beauty, have brought me to the state
you see ; if you would not have me perish in the worst agonies
that can be imagined, say that you return the love I feel for
you, and consent to my fondest desire, which is to make you
secretly my wife ; for I fear that my parents, not knowing
your merits as I do, would refose me a blessing to me so
indispensable. If you will give me your word to be mine, I
here pledge you my own, as a true catholic Christian, to be
yours ; and though our union be deferred, as deferred it shall
be until it can take place with the church's sanction and that of
my parents, yet the thought that you will surely be mine, will
be enough to restore me to health, and to keep my spirits
buoyant until the happy day arrives."

Whilst Richard was speaking, Isabella stood with downcast
•eyes, and when he had ceased, she replied with equal modesty
and good sense, " Ever since Heaven, in its anger or its
mercy (I know not which), withdrew me from my parents,
Senor Richard, and gave me to yours, I have resolved, in
gratitude for the infinite kindness they have bestowed upon
me, never to act in opposition to their wishes ; and without
their consent, I should regard the inestimable boon you desire
to confer upon me, not as a good but as an evil fortune.
Should it ever be my happy destiny to be acknowledged by
them as worthy of you, be assured that my heart shall be
yours ; but till that time comes, or should it never come, let
it console you to know that the dearest wish of my soul will
ever be that you may know every blessing which Heaven can
be^itow upon you." She said no more, but from that moment
began the convalescence of Richard, and the revival of his
parents' drooping hopes.


.THE SPANISH-EKGLISH LADT. 281

The youthful pair took courteous leave of each other, he
^ith tears in his eyes, and she wondering in her soul to see
that of Richard captive to her love. As fbr him, having been
raised from his sick bed by a miracle, as it seemed to his
parents, he would no longer conceal from them the state of
his feelings, but disclosed it one day to his mother, and ended
a long conversation by declaring that they might as well put
him to death as refuse him Isabella, for it amounted to the
same thing. He extolled the virtues of Isabella in such terms,
that he almost brought his mother to think that in becoming
her son's wife she would have the worst of the bargain.
Accordingly she gave Bichard good hopes that she would
prevail on his father to assent to hb wishes, as she herself
did; in this she succeeded, for by repeating to her hus-
band all Bichard*s arguments, she easily induced him to
approve of the young man's design, and to find excuses for
breaking off the match with the Scotch lady.

At this time Isabella was fourteen and Richard twenty ;
but even in that early spring time of their youth, they were
old in sense and judgment. It wanted but four days of the
time appointed by Richard's parents when he should bend his
neck to the holy yoke of matrimony ; and wise and fortunate
did they deem themselves in choosing their prisoner to be their
daughter, esteeming her virtues to be a better dower than
the great wealth of the Scotch lady. The preparations for
the wedding were all made, the relations and friends of the
family were invited, and nothing remained but to make known
-the intended match to the Queen, no marriage between
persons of noble blood being lawful without her knowledge
and consent ; but making no doubt of obtaining the royal
licence, they put off applying for it to the last. Things
being in this state, their joy was disturbed one evening by the
appearance of one of the Queen's servants with an order to
Clotald from her Majesty, requiring his appearance before her
next morning with his Spanish prisoner. He replied that he
would cheerfully obey her Majesty's command. The mes«
senger retired, and left the family^ in great perturbation*
/'.AJas," said dame Catherine, '^what if the Queen knows
that I have brought up this girl as a Catholic, and thence
infers that we are all of us Christians in this house ! For, if
ber Majesty aaks her what she has learned during the eight


282 C£BYANT£S' EXEMPLABT TALES,

years she has been with us, what answer can she give with
all her discretion, poor timid girl, that will not condemn
us?"

^^Be under no fear on that account, dear lady/' said
Isabella; ''for I trust in the divine goodness and mercy
of Heaven, that it will put such words into my mouth
as will not only not condemn you, but redound to your
advantage."

Richard trembled as if he foreboded some calamity.
Clotald cast about for some encouragement to allay his
grievous fears, and found none but in his great trust in God
and in the prudence of Isabella, whom he earnestly entreated
to try in every possible way to avoid convicting them of being
Catholics ; for, though their spirits were willing to encounter
martyrdom, yet their flesh was weak and recoiled from the
bitter trial. Isabella assured them over and over again that
they might set their minds at rest ; what they apprehended
should not befal them through her instrumentality; for though
she knew not then what answer she should make to the
questions that should be put to her on the morrow, she had
a lively and confident hope that she would reply in such a
manner as would be for their good.

Many were the comments and surmises they made that
night on this unwelcome incident, and especially it occurred
to them that, if the Queen knew they were Catholics, she
would not have sent them so mild a message; it seemed
reasonable to infer from it, that she only desired to see
Isabella, the fame of whose incomparable beauty and accom-
plishments, known to every one in the capital, must have
reached her Majesty's ears. Clotald and his wife confessed to
themselves, however, that they had done wrong in not pre-
senting her at court, and they thought the best excuse they
could make for this, was to say that ever since she had come
into their hands, they had destined her to be the wife of their
son. But even this would be acknowledging themselves
culpable, since it would appear that they arranged the mar-
riage without the Queen's leave ; but such an oflfence would
probably not incur any severe punishment. In this way,
they comforted themselves, and they resolved that Isabella
should not be dressed humbly like a prisoner, but in rich
bridal attire^ such as became the betrothed of a gentleman ol


THE SPANISH-ENGLISH LABT, 2S5

importance IIkg their son. Next day accordingly they dressed
Isabella in the Spanish style, in a robe of green satin with ^
long train, and slashes lined with cloth of gold and looped
with the pearls, the whole being adorned with precious
stones; a diamond necklace and girdle, with a fan such
as is carried by Spanish ladies; and for head dress
her own luxuriant golden hair entwined with diamonds and
pearls.

In that sumptuous attire, with her sprightly air and mar-
vellous beauty, she made her appearance in London in a
handsome coach, fascinating the eyes and souls of all who
beheld her. Clotald, his wife, and Richard rode with her in
the coach, and many noble relations of the family escorted
her on horseback, Clotald desiring that all these honours
should be paid to his prisoner, in order that the queen might
treat her as his son's betrothed. When they arrived at the
palace, and entered the vast hall in which her majesty was
seated, Isabella's escort halted at the lower end, and she
herself advanced alone in all her inconceivable beauty, pro-
ducing an effect like that of a brilliant meteor shooting
through the sky on a calm clear night, or of a sunbeam
darting at the first dawn of day through a mountain gorge,
A comet she seemed, portending a fiery doom to the hearts of
many in that presence hall. ITull of meekness and courtesy,
she advanced to the foot of the throne, knelt before the
queen, and said to her in English, '^May it please your
Majesty to extend your royal hands to your servant's lips,
who will henceforth esteem herself exalted, since she has been
80 fortunate as to behold your grandeur."

The queen remained a good while gazing on her without
saying a word, figuring to herself, as she afterwards told her
lady of the bed-chamber, that she had before her a starry
heaven, the stars of which were the many pearls and diamonds
worn by Isabella ; her fair face and her eyes its sun and moon,
and her whole person a new marvel of beauty. The queen's
ladies would fain have been all eyes, that they might do
nothing but gaze on Isabella; one praised her brilliant
eyes, one her complexion, another her fine figure, another
her sweet voice; and one there was who said in pure
eny-jf " The Spaniard is good looking, but I do not like her
dress."


28i Cervantes' exemplabt tales.

At last the queen motioned to Isabella to rise, and said
to her, " Speak to me in Spanish, maiden, for 1 understand
it well, and shall lite to hear it." Then turning to Clotald,
" You have done me wrong, Clotald," she said, " in keeping
this treasure so many years concealed from me; but it is
such a one as may well have excited you to avarice. You are
bound however to restore it to me, for by right it is mine."

" My liege," replied Clotald, " what your majesty says is
quite true ; I confess my fault, if it is one, to have kept this
treasure until it arrived at the perfection suitable for appear-
ing before your majesty's eyes. Now that it has done so, I
had it in mind to enhance it still more, by asking your
majesty's leave for Isabella to become the wife of my son
Richard."

" I like her name, too," returned the queen. " Nothing
was wanting to the fulness of her perfection but that she
should be called Isabella the Spaniard. But, mark you,
Clotald, I know that, without my leave, you have promised
her to your son."

^^ That is true, my liege, but it was in the confident hope
that the many eminent services which my ancestors and I
have rendered to the crown, would obtain from your majesty
favours stiU more difScult to grant than the leave in question,
the more so as my son is not yet .wedded."

^^ Nor shall he be wedded to Isabella," said the queen,
** until he has merited it in his own person. I mean that I will
not have him avail himself to that end of your services or those
of his forefathers. He must himself prepare to serve me, and
win by his own deserts this prize which I esteem as if she
were my daughter,"

The queen had no sooner uttered these last words than
Isabella again fell on her knees before her, saying in Spanish,
^^ Such thwartings as these, most gracious sovereign, are
rather to be esteemed auspicious boons than misfortunes.
Your majesty has given me the name of daughter ; after that
what can I have to fear, or what may I not hope ?"

Isabella uttered this with so winning a grace, that the
queen conceived an extreme affection for her, desired that she
should remain in her service, and committed her to the care
of a great lady, her keeper of the robes, who was to instruct
her in the duties of her new position.


THE SPAmSH-CKGUSH LIDT* 385

Bidisrd, who aa w lumself thus, as it w&t^ d^Hived of hb
life in losing Isabella^ was almost at his wits' ^ad. Agitated
and discomfited, he Imelt before the queen, and said, ** I need
no other rewards to induce me to serve your mijesty than
such as my ancestors have obtained in the aarice of your
royal predecessors; but since it is your migesty's pleasure
that I should have new motives and incentives for my teal, I
would crave to know in what way I may fulfil your mijesty'a
behest ?**

** There are two ships ready to set out on a cruise,'* said
the queen, ''of which I have made the Baron de Lansao
generaL I appoint you captain of one of them, being assured
that the qwdities you derive from those whose blood is in
your veins will supply the defect of your years. Mark what
a fiivour I confer upon you, since I give you an opportunity
to signalise yourself in the service of your queen, to display
your capacity and your valour, and to win the highest
reward, methinks, which you yourself could desire. I my-
self will be Isabella's guardian, though she manifests that her
own virtue will be her truest guardian, Qo in God^s name ;
for since you are in love, as I imagine, I expect great things
from your prowess. Fortunate were the king who in time of
war had in his army ten thousand soldiers in love, expecting
to obtain their mistresses as the reward of their victories,
Bise, Richard, and if you have anything to say to Isabella,
say it now, for to-morrow you must sail.''

Eichard kissed the queen's hands, highly prizing the
favour she had conferred upon him, and went and knelt
before Isabella. He tried to speak to her, but could not,
for he felt as if there was a knot in his throat that paralysed
his tongue. He strove with all his might to keep down the
tears that started into his eyes, but he could not conceal
them from the queen. ** Shame not to weep, Bichard," said
her majesty, '' nor think less of yourself for allowing such
evidence of a tender heart to escape you, for it is one thing to
fight the enemy, and another to take leave of one who is
dearly loved. Isabella, embrace Bichard, and give him your
blessing : his affection well deserves it/'

Isabella's heart ached to see Bichard so cast down. She
could not understand what her majesty said. Conscious ot
Dothing but her grief, motionless, and blinded by her tearsi


286. CEHTANTES" EXEMPLABT TALES.

she looked lik6 a weepiDg statue of alabaster. The anguish
of the two lovers drew tears from most of the beholders. In
^ne, Richard and Isabella separated without exchanging a
word ; and Clotald and his friends, after saluting the queen,
left the hall full of grief and pity. Isabella felt like an
orphan whose parents have just been buried, and dreaded
lest her new mistress should make her abandon the rule of
life in which she had been brought up.

Two days afterwards, Richard put to sea, distracted
ainong many other sources of incertitude by two reflections —
one was that be had to perform exploits by which he might
merit Isabella's hand ; and the other, that he could perform
none without violating his conscience as a catholic, which
forbade him to draw his sword against those of his own faith,
but unless he did so, he should be denounced as a catholic,
or as a coward, to the peril of his life and his hopes. But, in
fine, he determined to postpone his inclinations as a lover to
his duty as a catholic, and in his heart he prayed heaven to
send him occasions in which he might show himself at once
valiant and a true Christian, — might satisfy his queen and
merit Isabella.

For six days the two vessels sailed with a prosperous
wind, shaping their course for the Western Islands, for, in
that direction they could not fail to fall in with Portuguese
East India men, or vessels returning from the West Indies ^
but on the seventh day the wind became contrary and con-,
tinned that way so long that they could not make the islands,
but were forced to run for the coast of Spain. On nearing it
at the entrance of the straits of Gibraltar, they discovered
three vessels, one very large and two small. Richard steered,
towards his commander^s ship to know if it was his intentioa
they should attack the three vessels just discovered ; but oa
nearing it, he saw them hoist a black flag, and presently he
beard a mournful sound of trumpets, indicating that either,
the general or one of his chief officers was dead. When he
came within hail, which had not before been the case since:
they put to sea,, there was a call from the leading, ship for
Captain Richard to come on board, as their general had died-
of apoplexy the preceding night. Sad as this news was,
Richard could not help being glad, not of his admiral's
4eathy but at. finding .himself in command of both shipn^


.THE SPAKISH-ENaLISH LABT. 287

iccording to the Queen's orders for the contingency which
had occurred. He went on board the flag-ship where he found
some lamenting the old commander, and some rejoicing over
the new one ; but all promised him obedience, yet proclaimed
him general with short ceremony, not having time for

^ longer, for two out of the three vessels they had disco-

vered had quitted the third and were bearing down upon
them.

They at once made them out by the crescents on their
flags to be Turkish galleys, to the great delight of Richard,

{ who believed that with the help of Heaven he should make

/ an important capture without prejudice to his religion. The

two galleys came up to reconnoitre the English ships, which;

I had not shown their national colours but those of Spain, m

order to baffle those who might overhaul them, and prevent
their recognising them as war cruisers. The Turks mistook
them for trading vessels from India, and made sure of
capturing them with ease. Richard took care to let them
approach till they were well within range of his guns,

' which he let fly at them so opportunely, that with a single

broadside he disabled one of' the galleys, sending five balls
through her middle and nearly cutting her in two. She im-
mediately heeled over and began to founder; the other galley
made haste to take her in tow, in order to get her under the
lee of the large ship ; but Richard, whose ships manoeuvred
as rapidly as if they were impelled by oars, having reloaded-
his guns, pursued the retreating galleys, pouring upon them
an incessant shower of balls. The crew of the crippled
galley having clambered on board the large ship, Richard
poured such a cross fire from his two ships on her consort, that
she could neither use sails nor oars, and the Turks on board
her, following the example of their comrades, took refuge
in the large ship, not with the intention of defending her, but
for the momentary safety of their lives. The Christian galley*
slaves broke their chains, and mingling with the Turks also
boarded the large ship, but as they were in danger from the
musquetry of Richard's two ships as they were swarming up
the side, he gave orders to cease firing on Turks and Christians
alike. The former, however, had already lost the great part
of their numbers, and the rest were cut to pieces with their
own weapons by the revolted slaves^ who, thinking, the two.


2B& CEBYANTBS' EXEliPLART TALES,

English ships were Spanishy did marvels for the recovery of
their freedom.

At last, when nearly all the Turks were killed, some
Spaniards shouted from the deck to their supposed country*
men to come on board and enjoy the fruits of their victory.
Bichard asked them in Spanish what ship was that ? They
replied that she was a Portuguese ship from the West Indies,
freighted with spices, and with such a quantity of diamonds
and pearls that she was worth a nullion. She had been driven
into those latitudes by a storm, much damaged, with all her
guns thrown overboard, and her crew almost perishing of
hunger and thirst. In that condition, being unable to make
any resistance, she had been captured the day before by these
two galleys, which belonged to the corsair Amaut Mami,*
and which not having stowage room for her great cargo, had
taken her in tow to convey her to the river Larache. Richard
apprised them, in return, that if they supposed his two vessels
were Spanish, they were greatly mistaken, for they belonged
to the Queen of England. This information astonished and
alarmed them, making them fear that they had escaped from
one rock to founder on another ; but Bichard told them they
had nothing to fear, and that they might rely on obtaining
their liberty, provided they did not make any defence. "It
would be impossible for us to do so," they said, " for as we have
told you, we have neither cannon nor other arms, and have
no choice but to throw ourselves upon the generosity of your
general. Since he has freed us from the intolerable yoke
of the Turks, let him enhance his good work by an act
which will exalt his fame all over the world wherever
the news reaches of this memorable victory and his magna«>
nimity."

Bichard lent a favourable ear to this request, and im«
mediately called a council of his officers to consider what
might be the best means of sending all the Christians to
Spain, without incurring any risk from them, should their
numb^ encourage them to rise and attempt to overpower his
crews. There were some who suggested that they should be
brought on board one by one, and put to death as they
entered. "No," said Bichard; "since by God's grace we

* Under whom Cenrantes himself was for four years in slavery
at Algiers


THE SPANISH-ENGLISH LADY. 283

have obtained so rich a prize, I will not betray my ingratitude
by such an act of cruelty. It is never well to have recourse
to the sword, when, with a little forethought, the end may be
secured by other means. I will, therefore, not have any
Catholic Christian put to death, not that I care so much
for them, but for my own sake and for yours, for I would
not have the honour of our victory tarnished by cruelty. My
orders are, then, that the crew of one of our ships, with ail
her guns and arms and the greater part of her stores, be put
on board the large Portuguese vessel, which we will tlien
take to England, and leave the Spaniards to return home on
ours.'*

No one ventured to contravene this proposal, which to
some appeared equally magnanimous and judicious, whila
others in their hearts condemned it as showing an undue lean-
ing towards the Catholics,

Taking with him fifty arquebusiers Richard went on board
the Portuguese ship, in which he found about three hundred
persons, who had escaped out of the galleys. He immediately
had the vessel he intended to discharge brought alongside,
and had its guns brought on board. Then making a short
speech to the Christians, he ordered them to pass into
the discharged vessel, where they found stores enough for
more than a month and for a greater number of people ; and
as they embarked he gave each of them four Spanish crowns,
which he sent for to his own ship, in order partly to relieve
their wants when they reached land, which was not far off;
for the lofty mountains of Abyla and Calpe were in sight.
They all thanked him heartily for his generous behaviour,
and when they were nearly all embarked, the same person
who had first spoken to him from the deck of the ship, ad«
dressed him, " You would do me a greater service, valorous
sir, in taking me with you to England than in sending me
to Spain ; for, though it is my country, and it is but six days
since I left it, I have nothing to look for there but grief and
desolation.

" You must know, senor, that at the sack of Cadiz which
happened about fifteen years ago, I lost a daughter, whom the
English carried away with them to England, and with her
I lost the comfort of my age and the light of my eyes, which
since she passed from their sight, have never seen anything

T


290 Cervantes' exemplart tales.

to gladden tbem. Grief for this calamity and for the loiii
of my property, of which I was also despoiled, so overcame
me that I was no longer able or willing to apply myself to
commerce, in which I had been so successful that I was
commonly reputed to be the richest merchant in our whole
city ; and so indeed I was, for, besides my credit, which was
good for many hundred thousand dollars, my estate was worth
more than fifty thousand ducats. I lost all ; yet all my losses
would have been nothing had I not lost my daughter. After
the general calamity and my own, want pressed me so hard«
that not being able to bear up against it, myself and my wife
— that woe-begone creature sitting yonder — determined to
emigrate to the Indies, the common refuge of the well-bom
poor. We embarked six days ago in a packet-ship, but just
outside the harbour of Cadiz we were captured by those
two corsairs. This was a new addition to our affliction ; but
it would have been greater had not the corsair taken this
Portuguese ship, which fortunately detained them until you
came to our rescue."

In reply to Richard's question what was his daughter's
name, the Spaniard said it was Isabella. This confirmed the
suspicion which Bichard had all along entertained, that the
person before him was the father of his beloved mistress.
Keeping this fact to himself, he told the Spaniard that he
would willingly take him and his wife to London, where
possibly they might obtain some intelligence about their
child.

Taking them both on board his flag-ship, and having
sufficiently armed and manned the Portuguese galleon, ho
set S'lil that night, avoiding the coast of Spain as much as
possible, lest he should be intercepted in consequence of
information given by the liberated captives. Among the
latter there were some twenty Turks, to whom also Hichard
granted freedom, to show that his conduct had been the
result simply of his generous disposition, and not of any
secret leaning to the Catholics : and he asked the Spaniards
to set the Turks at liberty upon the first opportunity. The
wind, which had blown fresh and fair at first, died away into
a calm, to the dismay of the English, who murmured against
Richard's unseasonable sfenerosity, saying, that the liberated
captives might give information of wliat had happened, and


TUB SPANISH-ENGLISH LABT, 291

that if there chanced to be armed galleons in port, they might
sally out and intercept them.

Bichard knew that this was quite true, but strove to allay
their fears in the best way he could. But what availed with
them more than all his arguments, was that the wind sprang
up again, so that they crowded all sail, and in nine days
reached London, from which they had been only a month
absent on their cruise. Bichard would not enter the port
with only joyous demonstrations, on account of the death of
his late commander, but mingled signs of grief with them.
At one moment bugles rang out cheerily, at the next they
were answered by melancholy trumpet notes, and the wailing
fife was heard at intervals between the lively rattle of the
drum and the clash of arms. From one mast-head hung a
Turkish banner reversed, and from another a long black
streamer, the ends of which dipped in the water. In this
manner he entered the river of London in his English ship,
leaving the Portuguese ship at sea, for want of depth of water
in the river to float it.

These conflicting demonstrations puzzled the vast multi-
tudes, who observed them from the shore. They easily
recognised the smaller vessel as the flag-ship of Baron Lansac ;
but they could not make out how it was that his second vessel
had been exchanged for the large and powerful ship which lay
out at sea. But the problem was solved when they saw the
valorous Bichard jump into his boat, fully equipped in rich
and splendid armour. Without waiting for any other escort
than that of a vast multitude of the people who followed him,
he proceeded on foot to the palace, where the queen was
standing in a balcony, waiting for news of the ships, and
surrounded by her ladies, among whom was Isabella, dressed
in the English style, which became her as well as the Castilian.
A messenger, who had anticipated Bichard's arrival, had
startled her by the announcement of his coming, and she
stood watching for him with feelings that fluttered between
hope and fear, not knowing whether he had sped well or ill
upon his expedition,

Bichard was a young man of noble presence, tall and
finely proportioned, and he looked to great advantage in a
complete suit of Milanese armour all graven and gilded, and
instead of a helmet, a wide -leafed fawn coloured hat with

t2


\


292 CKBYANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

Walloon plumes. ^Thus equipped, and with his spirited
bearing, to some he seemed like Mars the god of battles ;
others, struck by the beauty of his face, compared him to
Venus sportively disguised in the armour of that god. When
he came before the Queen he knelt, and gave a brief account
of his expedition.

<* After the sudden death of general de Lansac," he
said, ^'I took his place in pursuance of your Majesty's
gracious orders. Shortly afterwards we discovered two
Turkish galleys towing a large ship, which we have
brought home with us. We attacked them ; your Majesty's
soldiers fought with great spirit, as they always do, and the
corsair galleys went to the bottom. I liberated in your
Majesty's royal name the Christians who had escaped out of
the hands of the Turks, and sent them away in one of our
vessels ; and have only brought with me one Spaniard and
his wife, who desired of their own accord to come and behold
your Majesty's gFeatness. The great ship we took, is one of
those which come from the Portuguese possessions in India ;
being damaged by a storm, it fell into the power of- the
Turks, who took it without any difficulty. According to the
account given by some of the Portuguese on board the ship,
her cargo of spices, and the pearls and diamonds she carries,
are worth more than a million. All is untouched, the Turks
not having had time to lay hands on anything, and I have
given orders that the whole should be presented to your
Majesty. There is one jewel alone which, if your Majesty
will bestow it upon me, will leave me your debtor for ton
other ships. That jewel your Majesty has promised me : it is
my Isabella, in obtaining whom I shall be richly rewarded,
not only for this service, such as it is, which I have rendered
your Majesty, but for many others which I intend to perform
in order to repay some part of the incalculable amount which
your Majesty will bestow upon me in that jewel."

" Eise, Eichard," replied the queen, " and believe me that
were I to deliver Isabella to you in the way of bargain at the
price at which I value her, you could not pay for her with
all the wealth of your prize-ship, nor with what remains in
the Indies. 1 give her to you because I promised to do so,
and because she is worthy of you, and you of her; your
valour alone entitles you to have her. If you have kept the


THE SPANISH-ENGLISH LADT. 293

jewels in the ship for me, I have kept your jewel for you ;
and though it may seem to you that I do not do much for
you in returning to you what is your own, I know that I
confer upon you a boon the worth of which is beyond all
human computation. Isabella is yours; there she stands j
you may claim her when you will, and I believe that it will
be with her own consent, for she has the good sense to prize
your affection as it deserves. I shall expect you again to-
morrow to give me a more detailed account of your exploits,
and bring me those two Spaniards who wish to see me, that
I may gratify their desire/' Bichard kissed the queen's
hand, and her majesty retired.

The ladies now gathered round Richard, and one of them,
the lady Tansi, who had taken a great liking to Isabella, and
who was the liveliest and most facetious lady of the court,
said to him, " What is all this, sir ? Why these arms ? Did
you, perhance, imagine thai you were coming here to fight
your enemies ? Believe me, you have none but friends here,
unless it be the lady Isabella, who, as a Spaniard, is bound to
bear you no good will."

** Let her only vouchsafe. Lady Tansi, to have me a little
in her thoughts, and I am sure she will not think of me with
ill will ; for ingratitude can have no place in the heart of one
80 good, so wise, and so exquisitely fair."

" Since I am to be yours, sefior Bichard," said Isabella,
** claim from me what you will in recompense for the praises
you bestow upon me."

Whilst Isabella and the other ladies were thus conversing
with Bichard, there was a little girl present who did nothing
but gaze at him, lift up his cuishes to see what was beneath
them, touch his sword, and, with childlike simplicity, peep at
her own image reflected in his bright aimour. When Bichard
was gone away, she said, turning to the ladies, " Now I see
what a fine thing war must be, since armed men look to such
advantage even among ladies." " Look to advantage ! ^'
exclaimed Lady Tansi; ^'one might take Bichard for the
sun, come down from Heaven, to walk the streets in that
garb." Every one laughed at the little girl's remark, and at
Lady Tansies hyberbole; and there lacked not back-biters,
who thought his appearing in arms at the palace was an act of
great impropriety ; but others excused him, saying that it was


294 CEBVANTES' EXEHPLART TALES.

a very natural and pardonable act of vanity on the part of .a
gallant young soldier.

Kichard was most cordially welcomed by his parents,
relations, and friends, and that night there were general
rejoicings in London. On his return home, he found Isa-
bella's parents already there, and told his father and mother
who they were, but begged they would give no hint of the
matter to Isabella till he should make it known to her him-
self. His desire was punctually observed. That night they
began with a great number of boats and barges, and in
presence of a multitude of admiring spectators, to unload the
great galleon, but eight days were consumed in the work
before they had disembowelled it of its aromatic and precious
freight. On the following day, Hichard went again to the
palace, taking with him Isabella's father and mother, dressed
in the English style, telling them that the queen wished to
see them. They found the queen surrounded by her ladies,
with Isabella by her side, wearing, by the queen's desire, for
Bichard's special gratification, the same dress in which she
had made her first appearance at court. Isabella's parents
were filled with admiration and astonishment at such a
display of grandeur and gaiety combined. They looked at
Isabella, but did not recognise her, though their hearts, pro-
phetic of the happiness so near at hand, began to throb, not
anxiously, but with an emotion of joy for which they could
not account.

The queen would not allow Richard to kneel before her,
but made him rise and be seated on a chair which was placed
for him alone, an unusual favour, which provoked many
envious comments. " It is not on a chair he sits," said one,
" but on the pepper he has brought." " It is a true saying,"
remarked another, " that gifts can soften rocks, since they
have mollified the hard heart of our queen." " He sits at his
ease,'* said a third, " but there are those who will make bold
to push him from his seat." In fact, that new mark of honour
which the queen bestowed on Richard gave occasion to many
to regard him with envy and malice ; for there is no favour
which the sovereign bestows on a subject but pierces the
heart of the envious like a lance. In obedience to the queen's
command, Richard narrated more minutelv the details of his
conflict with the corsairs, attributing the victory to God, and


THE SPANISH'ENGLlSn LADY, 295

to the arms of her valiftnt soldiers. He extolled them all
collectively, and made special mention of some who had par-
ticularly distinguished themselves, in order that the queen
might reward th^n all and singly. When he came to speak
of his havings in her majesty's name, set the Turks and
Christians at liberty^ he said, pointing to Isabella's parents,
** These are the persons of whom I spoke yesterday to your
majesty^ who, desiring to behold your greatness, earnestly
besought me to bring them away with me. They are from
Cadic, and from what they have told me, and from what I
iuKve myself observed, I am assured that they are persons of
worth and quality."

The queen commanded them to approach her. Isabella
raised her eyes to look at persons who she heard were
Spaniards, and, above all, from Cadiz, longing to know if
perchance they were acquainted with her parents. Her
mother first encountered her gaze, and as she looked atten-
tively at her, there rose on her mind some shadowy confused
reminiscences that seemed to intimate she had seen that fkce
before. Her father was in the same wavering state of mind,
not daring to believe the evidence of his eyes, whilst Richard
watched intently the workings of their perplexed and dubious
souls. The queen too noticed the emotion of the two
strangers, and also Isabella's uneasiness, for she saw her often
raise her hand to her forehead, which was bedewed with
perspiration. Whilst Isabella was longing that the person
she imagined to be her mother would speak, thinking that
the sound of her voice would resolve her doubts, the queen
commanded her to ask the strangers in Spanish what had
induced them voluntarily to forego the freedom which Richard
had offered them, since freedom was the thing most prized,
not only by reasonable creatures, but even by irrational
animals. Isabella put this question to her mother, who,
without answering a' word, rushed abruptly and almost tot-
teringly to Isabella, and forgetting all respect of place or
circumstances, put her hand to her daughter's right ear, and
discovered a dark mole behind it. Assured now beyond all
doubt that Isabella was her daughter, she cried out, " Child
of my heart! treasure of my soull" and swooned in her
arms. The father, no less tender hearted but with more self-
command, gave no other token of his feelings than the tears


t?96 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

that streamed down his venerable face and beard. With her
lips pressed upon her mother's, Isabella bent her eyes upon
her father, with looks that spoke the gladness of her soul.

The queen was greatly affected by this touching scene^
and said to Richard, *^ I know not whether you have done wisely
in contriving this meeting, for sudden joy, it is known, can
kill as well as grief." Then, turning to Isabella, she with-
drew her from her mother, who, after her face had been
sprinkled with water, came to her senses, and recollecting
herself a little better, fell on her knees before the queen,
entreating her majesty's pardon. Elizabeth graciously replied,
and commanded that the two strangers should take up their
F.bode in the palace, that they might have the more oppor-
tunity of rejoicing in their daughter's society. Bichard then
1 enewed his request that the queen would fulfil her promise,
snd bestow Isabella upon him, if so it were that he had
deserved her, but if not, he begged to be sent where he might
find opportunities of doing so.

The queen was well aware that Bichard was well satisfied
with himself, and that there was no need of putting him to
further proof; she told him, therefore, that in four days he
should obtain the object of his desires, and that she would
honour their union with her royal countenance. Bichard
then took his leave of her majesty, his heart swelling with
joy at the near prospect of Isabella becoming his own for
ever. Time sped, but not with the nimbleness he desired ;
for those who live on the hopes of pleasure to come, always
imagine that time does not fly, but hobbles on the feet of
sloth itself. At last the day came on which Bichard expected,
not to end his desires, but to find in Isabella new graces
T;hich should make him love her more, if more was possible.
But in that brief space of time, in which he thought the bark
of his fortunes was running with a prosperous gale towards
the desired haven, it encountered such a'feaiful tempest, as a
thousand times threatened it with wreck.

The queen's keeper of the robes, who had charge of
Isabella, had a son aged two-and-twenty, named Count
Ernest, whom his great wealth, his high blood, and his
mother s great favour with the queen, made too arrogant and
overbearing. He fell most violently in love with Isabella,
and, during Bichard's absence, he had made some overtures


THE SPANISH-ENGLISH LADT.

to her which she had coldly disregarded. Although repugn
nance and disdain manifested at the outset usually make the
enamoured desist from their suit, yet Isabella's notorious
disdain had the contrary effect on Ernest, for it fired his
passion, and consumed his sense of honour. He was almost
distracted when he found that the queen had adjudged Isa«
bella to Bichard, and that she was so soon to become his ;
but before he committed himself to the infamous and das*
tardly course which he ultimately adopted, he first besought
his mother to use her influence with the queen on his behalf,
declaring that his death was at hand unless he obtained
Isabella for his wife.

The countess, well knowing her son's violent and arrogant
disposition, and the obstinacy with which he pursued his
desires, had reason to fear that his passion would lead to.
some unhappy result. With a mother's natural anxiety to
gratify her son's wishes, she promised to speak to the queen,
not with the hope of succeeding in the impossible attempt to
make her majesty break her word, but in order not to sit down
in despair, while any remedy remained to be tried. .That
morning Isabella was dressed by the queen's orders with a
magnificence which defies description. With her own hands
her majesty put on her neck a string of the largest pearls
found in the galleon, valued at twenty thousand ducats, and
a diamond ring on her finger worth six thousand crowns.
But whilst the ladies were in great glee anticipating the glad
time so near at hand, the keeper of the robes presented herself^
before the queen, and implored her on her knees to postpone
Isabella's wedding for two days longer, declaring that if her
majesty would only do so, it would more than reward her for
all her past services. The queen desired to know, in the
first instance, why she made that request, so directly at
variance with the royal promise given to Bichard ; but the
countess would not explain until the queen, urged by cu-
riosity to discover the cause of this strange request, promised
that she would grant it. Having thus succeeded in her
immediate object, the lady keeper made the queen acquainted
vrith her son's passion, and how, fearing that unless he ob«
tained Isabella he would commit some desperate deed agaicst
himself or others, she had asked for that delay of two days in
order that her majesty might devise the best means of saving


*«7« ^^ CERVANTES EXEMPLABT TALES.

The life of her son. The queen replied that had she not
pledged her royal word, she would have found a way to
smooth over that difficulty, but that, for no consideration,
could she retract her promise or defraud Eichard of the hope
she had given him.

The lady keeper reported the queen's answer to her son,
but nothing could overcome his headstrong presumption.
Arming himself at all points he mounted a powerful charger,
and presented himself before Clotald's house, and shouted for
Bichard to come to the window. Eichard was dressed as a
bridegroom, and was on the point of setting out for the
palace with his friends, but hearing himself thus summoned,
he went with some surprise and showed himself at an open
window, " Hark you, Eichard ; I have something to say to
you," said Count Ernest. "Our lady the queen ordered
you to go forth on her service and perform exploits that should
render you worthy of the peerless Isabella. You set out, and
returned with ships laden with wealth, with which you think
you have bought your title to Isabella. But though our lady
the queen promised her to you, it was under the belief that
there was no one at her court who could serve h«r better than
you, or more justly aspire to the fair Spaniard's hand ; but in
this it may be that her majesty was mistaken. Being of that
opinion, and holding it for very truth, I say that you have
done no such deeds as can make you worthy of Isabella, nor
can you ever perform any to raise you to that honour ; and if
you dare to maintain tite contrary, I defy you to the death."

" I am in no wise called upon to take up your defial," re-
plied Eichard; ** because I confess not only that I do not
merit Isabella, but that no man living does so. Confessing,
th^*efore, the truth of what you allege, I say again, that your
defial touches not me ; nevertheless, I accept it in order to
chastise your insolence." So saying, he left the window and
called for his arms.

Eichard's family and the friends who had assembled to
escort him to the palace were thrown into confusion by this
untoward incident. The challenge having been so publicly
given, it could not be but that some one should report it to
the queen. This was done accordingly, and her majesty
ordered the captain of her guard to arrest Count Ernesto
The captain made such good speed that he arrived just as


THE SPANISU-EN6LISH LADT, 299

Richard was riding out from his father's house, mounted on a
handsome steed, and equipped with the magnificent arms in
which he had gone to pay his respects to the queen on his re-
turn from his expedition. The moment the count saw the
captain of the queen's guard, he guessed his purpose, and re-
solving not to let himself be caught, he shouted out, " You
see, Richard, how we are interrupted. If you are bent upon
chastising me, you will look for me as I will look for you.
Two people surely meet when they have a mind." "The
sooner the better," said Richard. Meanwhile, the captain of
the guards came up and, in the queen's name, arrested the
count, who surrendered, requesting to be taken into the
queen's presence. The captain complied, and carried Ernest
before the queen, who, without entering into any discourse
with him, ordered that he should surrender his sword and be
committed to the Tower.

All these things were torture to the heart of Isabella and
to her parents, who saw their new-found happiness so soon
disturbed.- The lady keeper advised the queen that to pre-
vent the mischief which might break out between her own
family and Richard's, the possible cause of it should be with*
drawn, by sending Isabella to Spain. In support of this
suggestion she added that Isabella was a Catholic, and so
rooted in that faith, that all the arguments and persuasions she
had used to withdraw her from it, and they were many, were
of no avail. The queen replied that she esteemed her the
more, since she was steadfast to the law taught her by her
parents ; and that as for sending her to Spain, it was not to be
thought of, for she was charmed with her lovely presence and
her many graces and virtues. In fine, the queen was resolved
that Isabella should become Richard's wife, if not that day,
on another, without fail. The lady keeper was so mortified
by this reply that she withdrew without saying a word ; and
having already made up her mind that unless Isabella was re-
moved there could be no hope of relief for her son or of peace
between him and Richard, she determined to commit one of
tiie most atrocious acts that could enter the mind of a lady of
her exalted station.

Women being, for the most part, rash and sudden in the
execution of their resolves, the lady keeper that evening gave
Isabella poison in a conserve which she oressed her to take.


300 CBRVANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

under the pretence that it was good for the sinking ami
oppression of the heart which she complained of. A short
while after Isabella had swallowed it her throat and tongue
began to swell, her lips turned black, her voice became hoarse,
her eyes fixed and glassy, and her breathing laboured and
stertorous : in short, she exhibited all the symptoms of having
been poisoned. The queen's ladies hastened* to inform her
majesty, assuring her that the lady keeper had been the author
of the nefarious deed.

The queen had no great difficulty in coming to the same
conclusion, and went at once to see Isabella, who seemed to be
almost at the last gasp. Sending with all speed for her
physicians, she, meanwhile, ordered that the sufferer should be
given a quantity of powdered unicorn's horn and several other
antidotes, with which great princes are usually provided
against such casualties. The physicians arrived and begged
the queen to make the lady keeper declare what kind of
poison she had used (for no one doubted that she was the
poisoner). This information having been obtained from the
criminal, the physician applied the proper remedies with such
good effect that, with God's help, Isabella's life was saved^ or
at least there was a hope that it would be so.

The queen ordered that the lady keeper should be
arrested and confined in a chamber of the palace, intending to
punish her as her crime deserved ; whilst the guilty woman
thought to excuse herself by saying that in killing Isabella she
offered an acceptable sacrifice to heaven by ridding the world
of a Catholic, and removing with her the cause of affliction to
her son. Finally, Isabella did not die ; but she escaped only
with the loss of her hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes, her face
swollen, her bloom gone, her skin blotched and blistered, and
her eyes red and humid. In a word, she was now become an
object lis loathsome to look at as she had before been sur-
passingly beautiful. The change was so frightful that those
who knew her thought it would have been better had the
poison killed her. But notwithstanding all this, Bichard sup-
plicated the queen to let him take her home with him, for the
great love he bore her comprehended not only her body but her
soul, and if Isabella had lost her beauty, she could not have
lost her infinite virtues. '^ Be it so," said the queen. << Take
her, Bichard, and reckon that you take in her a most precioui


THE SPANISH-ENGLISH LABT. 8C1

j^wel, in a rough wooden casket. Gkxl knows how ghidly I
would give her to you as I received her; but since tiiat
b impossible, perhaps the punishment I will inflict on the
|>erpetrator of the crime will be some satisfaction to your
feelings."

Bichard spoke earnestly in the culprit's behalf, and be-
sought her majesty to pardon her. Finally, Isabella and her
parents were consigned to his care, and he took them home
to his father's house, the queen having added to the fine pearls
and the diamonds she had bestowed on Isabella other jewels
and rich dresses, such as manifested the great affection she felt
for her. Isabella remained for two months in the same state,
without the least sign appearing that her beauty would ever
return ; but at the end of that time her skin began to peel
ofl^, and she gradually recovered the natural bloom of her
lovely complexion. Meanwhile, Bichard's parents, thinking it
impossible that Isabella should ever again be what she had
been, determined to send for the Scotch lady, to whom they
had at first intended to unite him. They did not doubt
that the actual beauty of the new bride would make
their son forget the lost beauty of her rival, whom they in-
tended to send to Spain with her parents, giving them so
much wealth as would compensate them for their past losses*
All this was settled between them without Bichard's know-
ledge, and soon after the new bride entered their doors,
duly accompanied, and so beautiful that none could com-
pare with her in London, now that Isabella's charms were
gone.

Bichard was astounded at this unexpected arrival, and
fearing that it would have a fatal efiect upon Isabella, he
went to her bedside, and said to her, in presence of her
parents, " Beloved of my soul, my parents, in their great love
for me, but ill conceiving how great is mine for you, have
brought hither a Scotch lady, to whom they arranged to marry
me before I knew your worth. They have done so, I believe,
upon the supposition that her great beauty will efface from my
soul the image of yours, which is deeply impressed upon it.
But from the moment I first loved you, Isabella, it was with a
different love from that which finds its end attained in the
gratification of the sensual appetite : for though your great
beauty captivated my senses, your, infinite virtues enthralled


v


302 CERVANTES EXEMPLABT TALES.

my soul, so that if I loved you in your beauty, I adore you in
your plainness. That I may confirm that truth, put your
hand in mine."

She held out her right hand; he took it in his, and
continued :

"By the Catholic faith which my Christian parents have
taught me ; or, if that is not as pure and perfect as it ought,
then, by that held by the Boman pontiff, and which in my heart
I confess, believe, and hold, do I swear, and by the true God
who hears us, I promise you, Isabella, soul of my soul ! to be
your husband ; and your husband I am from this moment, if
you will raise me up so high."

Isabella could only kiss Bichard's hand again and again,
and tell him in a voice broken by her tears, that she accepted
him as hers, and gave herself to him as his slave. Bichard
kissed her disfigured face, which he had never ventured to
kiss in its beauty ; and her parents, with tears of afiection,
ratified their solemn betrothal. Bichard told them that he
would find a way to postpone his marriage with the Scotch
lady, and that when his father proposed to send them to Spain
they were not to refuse, but were to go to Cadiz and wait for
him there or in Seville for two years, within which time he gave
them his word he would be with them, if God spared his life.
Should he not appear within that time, they might be assured
that he was prevented by some insuperable impediment, and
most probably by death. Isabella replied that she would wait
for him not only two years, but all the years of her life, until
she knew that he was no longer alive ; for the moment that
brought her that news would be her last.

Bichard having at length quitted Isabella, went and told
his parents that on no account would he marry the Scotch
lady until he had first been to Bome for the satisfaction of
his conscience ; and he represented the matter in such a light
to them and to the relations of Clestema (that was the name
of the Scotch lady), that as they were all Catholics, they
easily assented, and Clestema was content to remain in het
father-in-law's house until the return of Bichard, who proposed
to be away a year. This being settled, Clotald told his son
of his intention to send Isabella and her parents to Spain, if
the queen gave them leave ; perhaps her native air would con-
firm and expedite her incipient recovery. Bichard^ to avoid


/

}


THE SPANISH-ENGLISH LADT. 303

betraying his secret intentions, desired his father, with seeming
indifterenee, to do as he thought best ; only he begged him
not to take away from Isabella any of the presents which the
queen had given her. Clotald promised this, and the sam^
day he went and asked the queen's leave both to marry his son
to Clesterna, and to send Isabella and her parents to Spain.
The queen granted both requests, and without having recourse
to lawyers or judges, she forthwith passed sentence on the
lady keeper, condemning her to lose her ofHce, and to pay
down ten thousand crowns for Isabella. As for Count Ernest,
she banished him from England for six years.

Four days afterwards Richard set out on his exile, and the
money had been already paid. The queen, sending for a rich
merchant, resident in London, who was a Frenchman, and had
correspondents in France, Italy, and Spain, put the ten
thousand crowns into his hands, and desired him to let
Isabella's father have bills for the amount on Seville or some
other place in Spain. The merchant having deducted his
profit, told the queen he would give good and safe bills on
another French merchant, his correspondent in Seville, in the
following manner : — He would write to Paris that the bills
might be drawn there by another correspondent of his, in
order that they should be dated from France and not from
England, because of the interdicted communication between
that country and Spain. It would only be necessary to have
a letter of advice from him, with his signature and without
date, in sight of which the merchant of Seville would imme-
diately pay the money, according to previous advice from the
merchant of Paris.

In fine, the queen took such securities from the merchant
as made the payment certain ; and not content with this, she
sent for the master of a Flemish vessel who was about to sail
for France, only to obtain a manifest from some French port,
in order to be allowed to land in Spain ; and she begged him
to take Isabella and her parents, treat them well, and land
them safely at the first Spanish port he reached. The master,
who desired to please the queen, said he would do so, and
would land them at Lisbon, Cadiz, or Seville. After this the
queen sent word to Clotald not to take from Isabella any of
the presents she had given her, whether jewels or clothes.

The next dav Isabella and her oarents came to take leave

/
I
f

I

I


304 CERTANTES' EXEHPLART TALES.

of the queen, who received them with great affection. The
queen gave them the merchant's bills, besides many other
presents, both in money and in things suitable for their voyage.
Isabella expressed her gratitude in such terms as to increase
the queen's gracious disposition towards her. She took leave
of the ladies of the court, who, now that she had become plain,
would rather have had her remain among them, having no
longer reason to envy her beauty, and being willing to enjoy
her society for the sake of her good qualities of mind and dis-
position. The queen embraced the three, and took leave of
them, commending them to good fortune and to the master of
the vessel, and asking Isabella to inform her of her arrival in
Spain, and of her health at all times through the French
merchant. That evening they embarked, not without tears on
the part of Clotald, his wife, and his whole household, by
whom Isabella was exceedingly beloved. Bichard was not
present at the departure, for, in order to avoid betraying his
feelings, he had gone with some of his friends to the chase;

Many were the dainties which the lady Catherine gave
Isabella for use on the voyage ; endless were her embraces,
her tears, and her injunctions that she should write to her ;
for all which Isabella and her parents returned suitable thanks.
That night the vessel set sail, and having reached France with
a fair wind, and obtained the necessary papers to enable them
to enter Spain, they crossed the bar of Cadiz thirty days after-
wards, and there Isabella and her parents disembarked. Being
known to the whole city, they were joyfully welcomed, and
warmly congratulated on their recovery of Isabella, and on
their liberation from their Turkish captors (for that fact had
been made known by the captives whom Bichard generously
released), and also from detention in England. By this time
Isabella began to give great hopes that she would quite recover
her original beauty.

For more than a month they remained in Cadiz, recruiting
themselves after the toils of their voyage ; and then they went
to Seville, to see if they should obtain payment of the ten
thousand crowns upon the French merchant's bill. Two days
after their arrival they called upon the person on whom it was
drawn. He acknowledged it, but said that, until the arrival of
advices from Paris, he could not pay the money. Isabella's
lather hired a large house facing St. Paul's^ because there was


THE SPANISH-ENOUSH LADT. 305

in that holy convent a nun who was remarkable for rare
musical talents, and who was his own niece. They chose the
house to be near her for that reason, and because Isabella had
told Bichard that if he came to look for her he would find
her in Seville, and her cousin, the nun of St. Paula's, would
tell him where : he had only to ask for the nun who had the
best voice in the convent ; every one would know her by that
description.

It was forty days more before the advices came from
Paris, and two days after their arrival the French merchant
paid Isabella the ten thousand- crowns, which she handed over
to her parents. With that sum, and something more made by
the sale of part of Isabella's numerous jewels, her lather again
began business as a merchant, to the surprise of those who
were cognisant of his great losses. After a few months his
lost credit began to return ; so, .too, did his daughter's good
looks, so that, whenever female beauty was the subject of dis-
course, the palm was universally conceded to the Spanish-
English lady ; for by that ;iame, as well as for her great beauty,
she was known throughout the city. Through the French
merchant of Seville, Isabella and her parents wrote to the
queen of England, announcing their arrival in such grateful
and dutiful terms as the many favours received at her Majesty's
hands required. They also wrote to Clotald and Catherine,
whom Isabella addressed as her revered parents.

Their letters to the queen remained unanswered, but from
Clotald and his. wife they received a reply, congratulating
them on their safe arrival, and informing them that their son
Bichard had set out from France the day after their departure,
and thence to other countries, which it behoved him to visit
for the tranquillity of his conscience. Isabella immediately con-
cluded that Bichard had left England for no other purpose
than to seek her ; and cheered by this hope, she was as happy
lus she could be, and strove to live in such a manner that,
T^hen Bichard arrived in Seville, the fame of her virtues
should reach his ears before he learned where she lived.

S.he seldom or never qiutted the house, except to go to
the convent, and attended no other church services than those
performed there. She never went near the river, or to
Triana, or witnessed the general rejoicings at, the Campo de
^ablada* pr the Puerta do Xcrcs on San Sebastian's day,

u


306 cebtantbb' exemplary tales.

celebrated liy an almost innumerable multitude ; in short, she
never went abroad for any kind of amusement in Seville ; her
whole time was spent in her devotions, and in praying and
hoping for Richard's arrival. The consequence of this strict
retirement was a great increase of the general interest about
her; thence came serenades in her street by night, and
promenades by day. The desire which so many felt to see
her, and the difficulty of accomplishing it, was a great source of
gain to the professional go-betweens, who severally professed
that they alone had the ear of Isabella, and some there were
who had recourse to what are called charms, which are nothing
but deceits and follies ; but in spite of all this, Isabella was
like a rock in the ocean, which the winds and waves assail in
^^in. A year and a half had now passed, and her heart began
to yearn more and more as the end of the period assigned by
Richard drew near. Already, in imagination, she looked upon
him as arrived ; he stood before her eyes ; she asked him what
had caused his long delay ; she heard his excuses ; she for-
gave him, embraced and welcomed him as the half of her
soul ; and then there was put into her hands a letter from the
lady Catherine, dated from London fifty days before. It was
as follows : —

"Daughter of my heart, — You doubtless recollect Richard's
page, GuiUart. He accompanied Richard on his journey the
day after you sailed, to France and other parts, whereof I
informed you in a former letter. This said Guillart, after we
had been sij^teen months without hearing news of my son,
yesterday entered our house with news that Count Ernest
had basely murdered Richard in France. Imagine, my
daughter, the effect upon his father, myself, and his intended
wife, of such news as this, coming to us in such wise as left
no doubt of our misfortune. What Clotald and myself beg
of you once more, daughter of my soul, is that you will pray
heartily to God for the soul of Richard, for well he deserves
this service at your hands, he who loved you so much as you
know. Pray also to our Lord to grant us patience, and that
we may make a good end ; as we will pray for long life for you
and your parents."

This letter and the signature left no doubt in Isabella's
mind of the death of her husband. She knew the page
Ouillart very well^ and knew that he was a person of veracity^


THE SPANISH-ENGLISH LADT« 307

md that he could have had no motive for publishing false
news in such a matter ; still less could the lady Catharine
have had any interest in deceiving her so painfully. In fine,
in whatever way she considered the subject, the conclusion at
which she invariably arrived was, that this dismal intelligence
was unquestionably true. When she had finished reading the
letter, without shedding tears or showing any outward tokens
of grief, with a composed face and apparently tranquil breast,
she rose from her seat, entered an oratory, and kneeling before
a crucifix, made a vow to become a nun, thinking herself free
to do so, as she was no longer a betrothed maiden, but a
widow. Her parents studiously concealed the grief which
this afiecting news caused them, in order that they might the
better console their bereaved daughter ; whilst she, as if
mistress over her sorrow, having subdued it by the holy
Christian resolution she had made, became their comforter.
She made her intention known to them, and they advised her
to postpone its execution, until the two years were elapsed
which Bichard had assigned as the duration of his absence.
That delay would sufiice for confirming the news of his death,
and then she might with more security change her condition.
Isabella followed their advice ; and the six months and a half
which remained to complete the term of two years were spent
by her in devotional exercises, and in arranging for her entrance
into the convent of Santa Paula, in which her cousin was a
nun.

The remainder of the two years elapsed, and the day
arrived when she was to take the veil. The news having spread
through the city, the convent, and the space between it
and Isabella's abode, was thronged by those who knew her by
eighty or by report only ; and her father having invited her
friends, and these having invited others, Isabella had for her
escort one of the most imposing retinues ever seen in Seville
on such occasions. It included the chief justice of Seville,
the vicar-*general, and all the titled personages of both sexes in
the city, so great was the desire of all to behold the sun of
Isabella's beauty, which had been for so many months eclipsed.
And as it is customary for maidens about to take the veil to
dress themselves in their very gayest attire on the day when
they are to renounce for ever the pomps and vanities of the
world, Isabella wore the same splendid dress in which she

u2


308 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

was presented to the queen of England, with her necklace and
girdle of lustrous pearls, her diamond ring, and all her other
sumptuous jewels. Thus gorgeously attired, Isabella set out
from home on foot, for the short distance to the c:>nvent
seemed to render carriages superfluous ; but the concourse
was so great that the procession could hardly advance, and its
members regretted too late that they had not chosen to ride
instead of walking. Some of the spectators blessed the
father and mother of that lovely creature ; ^others praised
Heaven that had endowed her with so much beauty. Some
strained forward to see her ; others, having seen her once, ran
forward to have a second view of her. Among those who
were most eager to behold her, was a man who attracted the
notice of many by his extraordinary efforts. He was dressed
in the garb of a slave lately ransomed, and wore on his breast
the emblem of the Holy Trinity, by which it was known that
he had been redeemed by the charity of the Bedemptorist
fathers.

Already Isabella had set one foot on the threshold of the
convent gate, where the prioress and the nuns stood ready to
receive her with the cross, when this ransomed captive cried
out, '^ Stop, Isabella, stop ! " Isabella and her parents turned
at this cry, and saw the man cleaving his way towards them
through the crowd by main strength. The blue hat he wore
having fallen oft through the violence of his exertions, dis-
closed a profusion of flaxen hair, and a clear red and white
complexion, which showed him at once to be a foreigner.

Struggling, stumbling, and rising again, he at last reached
the spot where Isabella stood, caught her hand in his, and
said, " Do you know me, Isabella ? I am Bichard, your be-
trothed." " Well do I know you," said Isabella, " if indeed
you are not a phantom come to trouble my repose." Her
parents also examined his features attentively, and saw that
this captive was indeed Bichard. As for him, weeping at Isa-
bella's feet, he implored her not to let the strange garb he
wore prevent her recognising him, nor his low fortune impede
the fulfilment of the pledges exchanged between them. In
spite of the impression which the letter from Bichard's mother
had made on her memory, Isabella chose rather to believe the
living evidence before her eyes ; and embracing the captive,
«he said, '^ Without doubt, my lord and master, you are he


THB SPANISH-ENGLISH LADT. 309

who alone could hinder the fiilfilment of ray Christian detep-
inination ; you are without doubt the half of my soul ; my
own betrothed ! your image is stamped upon my memory,
and treasured in my heart. The news of your death, sent mo
by your lady mother, not having killed me on the spot, I re*-
solved to dedicate myself to religion, and I was just about to
enter this convent for the rest of my days ; but since God has
shown us by so just an impediment that he wills otherwise, it
is not for me to refuse obedience. Come, senor, to the house
of my parents, which is yours, and there I will give myself to
you in the way which our holy catholic faith prescribes."

This dialogue, overheard by the spectators, struck them
all with amazement. The chief justice and the vicar-general
immediately demanded what was all this ado, who was this
stranger, and what marriage was this they talked about. Isa-
bella's Mher replied, that what they had seen was the sequel
of a story which required a different place for the telling of
it ; therefore, he begged that all who desired to hear it should
turn back to his house, which was close by, and there he would
fully satisfy their curiosity, and fill them with wonder at the
strange things he should relate.

Just then one of the crowd cried out, " Senors, this
young man is the great English corsair. It is not much
more than two years since he took from the Algerine corsairs
the great Portuguese galleon from the Indies. There is not
the least doubt that he is the very man ; I know him, because
he set me at liberty, and gave me money to carry me to
Spain, and not me only, but three hundred other captives
likewise^" These words increased the general excitement,
and the desire to see all these intricate matters cleared up.
FinaUy, the principal persons of the city, with the chief
justice and the vicar-general, went back with Isabella to her
father's house, leaving the nuns sorely discomfited, and crying
with vexation at the loss they had sustained in not having the
beautiful Isabella to grace their nunnery. The company
being arrived at the house of Isabella's father, she made
them be seated in a long hall, and though Eichard would
willingly have taken it upon himself to tell his story, yet had
thought it better to trust it to Isabella's tongue than to his
own, which was not very expert in speaking Spanish. Ac-
cordingly she began her narration in the midst of profound
silence and attention.


310 CEBYAVTBS' EXEMPLARY TALES.

She related all that happened to her from the day ifbeo
Glotald carried her off from Cadiz until her return thither ;
also Richard's engagement with the Turks ; his liberality to
the Christians ; the promise they had given each other to be
husband and wife ; the two years' delay agreed on, and the
news she had received of his death, which seemed to her so
certain, as to have nearly occasioned her taking the veil I
She extolled the liberality of the queen of England, the
Christian faith of Eichard and his parents, and she concluded
by saying, that Eichard would relate what had happened to
him since he left London until that moment, when he stood
before them in the dress of a captive, and with the mark of
having been ransomed by charity. " I will do so," said Eichard,
" and briefly relate the hardships I have undergone.

" I quitted London to avoid marrying Clistema, the Scottish
Catholic lady, to whom Isabella has told you that my parents
wished to unite me, and I took with me Guillart, my page,
the same who carried the news of my death to London, as my
mother stated in her letter. Passing through France, I
arrived in Eome, where my soul was gladdened, and my
faith fortified. I kissed the feet of the supreme pontiff, con-
fessed my sins to the grand penitentiary, obtained absolution,
and received the necessary certiflcates of my confession and
penance, and of the submission I had paid to our holy
mother, the church. This done, I visited the numberless
holy places in that sacred city, and out of two thcmsand
crowns I had with me in gold, I deposited one thousand six
hundred with a money-changer, who gave me a letter of
credit for them on one Eoqui, a Florentine^ in this city«
With the four hundred that remained, I set out for Spain, by
way of Genoa, where I had heard that there were two galleys
of that signory bound for this country. I arrived with Gtdllart
at a place called Aquapendente, which is the last town in the
pope's dominions on the road to Florence, and in au inn tJi
which I alighted, I met Count Ernest, my mortal enemy*
He had four servants with him, he was disguised, and was
going, as I understood, to Eome, not because he was a
Catholic, but from motives of curiosity. I thought he had not
recognised me, and shut myself up in a room with my servant
Guillart, where I remained on my guards intending to shift
m^ (Quarters at nightfall. I did not do soj howeveri for the


TH£ SPANISH-ENGLISH LADT. 311

perfect indifference shown by the count and his servants
made me confident that they had not recognised me. I supped
in my room, locked the door, looked to my sword, commended
myself to God, but would not lie down.

*^ My servant lay asleep, and I sat on a chair between
asleep and awake; but a little after midnight, I was near put
to sleep for eternity by four pistol shots fired at me, as I
afterwiu*ds learned, by the count and his servants. They left
me lor dead, and their horses being in readiness, they rode
ofi^ telling the innkeeper to bury me suitably, for I was a
man of quality. My servant, awaking in terror at the
noise, leaped out of a window, and ran away in such mortal
fear, that it seems he never stopped till he got to London, for
it was he brought the news of my death.

** The people of the inn came up and found I had been
struck by four balls and several slugs, but none of the wounds
in any vital part. Calling for a confessor, I received all the
sacraments as became a Catholic Christian ; but I gradually
recovered, though it was two months before I was able to
continue my journey. I then proceeded to Genoa, but found
no other means of passage than two feluccas, which were
hired by myself and two Spanish gentlemen. One of them
we employed to go before and pilot the way, and in the
other we ourselves embarked. In this way we pursued our
voyage, closely hugging the shore ; but when we came to a
spot on the coast of France, called the Three Marias, two
Turkish galleys suddenly came out upon us from a creek, and
one keeping to seaward of us, the other more in shore, they
cut off our escape to the land and captured us. The corsairs
stripped us to the skin, plundered the feluccas, and having
completely emptied them, let them drift ashore, instead of
sinking them, saying that they might serve to bring them
more pickings another time.

" You may well believe how bitterly I felt my captivity,
and above all, the loss of the certificates from Rome, which I
carried in a tin case, with the bill for the sixteen hundred
ducats ; but, by good fortune, they fell into the hands of a
Christian slave, a Spaniard, who kept them, for if the Turks
had got hold of them, they would have required for my
ransom at least the amount of the bill. They carried us to
Algiers, where I found that the fathers of the Most Holy


312 C:^RYANTBS' EXEMPLARY TALES.

Trinity were redeeming Christian slaves. I spoke to them,
told them who I was, and they, moved by charity, ransomed
iiie, though I was a foreigner. The price set upon me was
three hundred ducats ; they paid down one hundred on the
spot, and engaged to pay the remaining two hundred as soon
as the ship should return Mrith the contributions for the release
of the Redemptorist father who remained in Algiers in pledge
for four thousand ducats, which he had spent over and above
the amount he had brought in hand ; for so extreme is the
charity of these compassionate fathers, that they give their
liberty for another's, and remain in captivity that others may
go free. In addition to the happiness of obtaining my liberty,
I recovered the case with the certificates and the biH. I
showed its contents to the good father, and promised him five
hundred ducats, iu addition to the amount of my ransom, as
a contribution towards the payment of the sum for which he
was a hostage.

" It was nearly a year before the ship returned with the
redemption money. What befei me in that year would, of
itself, fumbh matter for another history too long to relate at
present. I will only say, that I was recognised by one of the
twenty Turks whom I liberated with the Christians on the
occasion already mentioned ; but he was so grateful and so
honest, that he would not betray me, for had the Turks known
me to be the person who had sunk two of their galleys, and
despoiled them of the great Indian galleon, they would either
have put me to death, or presented me to the Grand Turk,
in which case I should never have recovered my liberty.
Finally, the Redemptorist father came to Spain with me, and
fifty other ransomed Christians. We made a general pro-
cession in Yalentia, and from that place we dispersed and
took each his own several way, wearing this garb in token of
the means by which we had been released. For myself, I
arrived to-day in this city, burning with desire to see Isa-
bella, my betrothed, and asked my way at once to the con-
vent, where I was to hear of her. What happened there you
all know. It now only remains for me to exhibit these certi-
ficates to satisfy you of the truth of my strange story."

So saying, he produced the documents from a tin case,
and placed them in the hands of the vicar-general, who exa-
mined them along with the chief justice, and found nothing in


THE SPANISH-ENGLISH LABT. 313

them to make him doubt the truth of what Richard had stated.
Moreover, for the fuller confirmation of his story, Heaven
ordained that among the persons present should be that very
Florentine merchant on whom the bill for sixteen hundred
ducats was drawn. He asked to see it, found it genuine, and
accepted it on the spot, for he had received advice of it
several months before. Thereupon Richard confirmed the
promise he had made of contributing five hundred ducats to
the funds of the Redemptorist fathers. The chief justice
embraced him, Isabella, and her parents, and complimented
them all in the most courteous terms. So, too, did the vicar-
general, who requested Isabella to commit this whole story to
writing, that he might lay it before his superior, the arch*
bishop, and this she promised to do.

The deep silence in which the audience had listened to
this extraordinary narrative was broken by thanksgivings to
God for his great marvels ; and all present, from the highest
to the lowest, congratulated Isabella, Richard, and their
parents, and prayed for their happiness as they took leave of
them. Eight days afterwards, Richard and Isabella were
united before the altar, their marriage being honoured by the
presence of the chief justice, and all the persons of distinc-
tion in Seville. Thus, after so many vicissitudes, Isabella's
parents recovered their daughter, and re-established their
fortune; and she, favoured by heaven, and aided by her
many virtues, in spite of so many crosses and troubles, o1>
tained for her husband a man so deserving as Richard, with
whom it is believed that she lives to this day, in the house
facing Santa Paula, which her father had hired, and which
they subsequently bought of the heirs of a gentleman of
Burgos, named Hernando Cifuentes.

This tale may teach us what virtue and what beauty can
effect, since they are sufficient together, or either singly, to
win the love even of enemies ; and how Heaven is able to
bring forth our greatest happiness even out of our heaviest
misfortunes^


314 CERVANTES' EXBMPLABT TALES.


THE FORCE OF BLOOD.


One night, after a sultry srammer's day, an old hidalgo of
Toledo walked out to take the air by the river's side, along with
his wife, his little boy, his daughter aged sixteen, and a
female servant. Eleven o'clock had struck : it was a fine
clear night : they were the only persons on the road ; and
they sauntered leisurely along, to avoid p&ying the price of
fatigue for the recreation provided for the Toledans in their
valley or on the banks of their river. Secure as bethought
in the careful administration of justice in that city, and the
character of its well-disposed inhabitants, the good hidalgo
was far from thinking that any disaster could befal his family.
But as misfortunes commonly happen when they are least looked
for, so it chanced with this family, who were that night
visited, in the midst of their innocent enjoyment, by a calamity
which gave them cause to weep for many a year.

There was in that city a young cavalier, about two-and-
twenty .years of age, whom wealth, high birth, a wayward
disposition, inordinate indulgence, and profligate companions
impelled to do things which disgraced lus rank. This young
cavalier — ^wbose real name we shall, for good reasons, conceal
under that of Hodolfo*— was abroad that night with four of
his companions, insolent young roisterers like himself, and
happened to be coming down a hill as the old hidalgo and
his family were ascending it. The two parties, the sheep and
the wolves, met 'each other. Rodolfo and his companions,
with their faces muified in their cloaks, stared rudely and
insolently at the mother, the daughter, and the servant-maid«
The old hidalgo indignantly remonstrated ; they answered
him with mocks and jeers, and passed on. But Eodolfo had
been struck by the great beauty of Leocadia, the hidalgo's
daughter, and presently he began to entertain the idea of
enjoying it at all hazards. In a moment he communicated his


THE FORCE OF BLOOD. 315

thoughts to his companions, and in the next moment they
resolved to turn back and carry her off to please Bodolfo ;
for the rich who are open-handed always find parasites ready to
encourage their bad propensities ; and thus to conceive this
wicked design, to communicate it, improve it, resolve on
ravishing Leocadia, and to carry that design into effect was
the work of a moment.

They drew their swords, hid their faces in the flaps of
their cloaks, turned back, and soon came in front of the little
party, who had not yet done giving thanks to God for their
escape from those audacious men. Bodolfo laid hold on
Leocadia, caught her up in his arms, and ran off with her,
whilst she was so overcome with surprise and terror, that far
from being able to defend herself or cry out, she had not even
sense or sight left to see her ravisher, or know whither he was
carrying her. Her father shouted, her mother shrieked, her
little brother cried, the servant-maid tore her own face and
hair ; but the shouts and shrieks were disregarded, the wailings
moved no pity, the clawing and scratching was of no avail ;
for all was lost upon the loneliness of the spot, the silence of
the night, and the cruel hearts of the ravishers. Finally, the
one party went off exulting, and the other was left in desola-
tion and woe.

Bodolfo arrived at his own house without any impediment,
and Leocadia's parents reached theirs heart-^broken and
despairing. They were afraid to appeal for justice to the
laws, lest thereby they should only publish their daughter's
disgrace ; besides, though well born they were poor, and had
not the means of commanding influence and favour ; and
above all, they knew not the name of their injurer, or of
whom or what to complain but their luckless stars. Mean-
while Bodolfo had Leocadia safe in his custody, and in his
own apartment. It was in a wing of his father's house^ of
which he had the keys, a groat imprudence on the part of
any parent. When Leocadia fainted in his arms, he4iad Imn*
daged her eyes, in order that she might not notice the ^streets
through which she passed, or the house into which he took
her; and before she recovered her senses, he effected his
guilty purpose.

Apathy and disgust commonly follow satiated lust*
Uodolfo was now impatient to get rid of Leocadia, and made


316 CERYAMTES' EXEMPLART TALES.

Up his uind to lay her in the street, insensible as she was.
He had set to work with that intention, when she came to
herself, saying, " Where am I ? Woe is me ! What darkness
is this ? Am I in the limbo of my innocence, or the hell of
my sins ? Who touches me ? Am I in bed ? Mother ! dear
father ! do you hear me ? Alas, too well I perceive that you
cannot hear me, and that I am in the hands of enemies. Well
would it be ior me if this darkness were to last for ever, and
my eyes were never more to see the light ! Whoever thou art,**
she exclaimed, suddenly seizing Rodolfo's hand, '' if thy soul
is capable of pity, grant me one prayer : having deprived me
of honour, now deprive me of life. Let me not survive
my disgrace! In mercy kill me this moment! It is
the only amends I ask of you for the wrong you have done
me.

Confliised by the vehemence of her reproax^hes, Rodolfo
knew not what to say or do, and answered not a word. This
silence so astonished Leocadia, that she began to fancy she
was dreaming, or haunted by a phantom ; but the hands she
grasped were of flesh and blood. She remembered the vio-
lence with which she had been torn from her parents, and she
became but too well aware of the real nature of her calamity.
After a passionate burst of tears and groans, ^'Inhuman
youth !" she continued, ** for your deeds assure me that your
years are few, I will forgive the outrage you have done me,
on the sole condition that you promise and vow to
conceal your crime in perpetual silence, as profound aa
this darkness in which you have perpetrated it. This is but a
small recompense for so grievous a wrong; 'but it is the
greatest which I can ask, or you can grant me. I have never
seen your face, nor ever desire to see it. It is enough for me
to remember the injury I have sustained, without having be-
fore my mind's eye the image of my ravisher. My complaints
shall be addressed only to Heaven : I would not have them
heard by the world, which judges not according to the cir-
cumstances of each case, but according to its own preconceived
notions. You may wonder to hear me speak thus, being so
young. I am surprised at it myself ; and I perceive that if
great sorrows are sometimes dumb, they are sometimes elo-
quent. Be this as it may, grant me the favour I implore : it
will cost you little. Put me at once into the street, or at


THE FORCE OP BLOOD. 317

least near the great church ; for I shaU know my way thence
to the house of my parents. But you must also swear not to
follow me, or make any attempts to ascertain my name or that
of my £miily, who if they were as wealthy as they are noble,
would not have to bear patiently such insult in my person.
Answer me, and if you are afraid of being known by your
voice, know, that except my father and my confessor, I have
never spoken with any man in my life, and that I should
never be able to tell who you were, though you were to speak
ever so long,"

The only reply Rodolfo made to the unhappy Leocadia
was to embrace her, and attempt a repetition of his offence ;
but she defended herself with hands, feet, and teeth, and with
a strength he could not have supposed her capable of exerting,
*' Base villain," she cried, *^ you took an infamous advantage
of me when I had no more power to resist than a stock or a
stone ; but now that I have recovered my senses, you shall
kill me before you shall succeed. You shall not have reason
to imagine, from my weak resistance, that I pretended only to
laint when you effected my ruin.*' In fine, she defended her-
self with such spirit and vigour as completely damped Ro-
dolfo's ardour. Without saying a word he left the room,
locked the door behind him^ and went in quest of his com-
panions, to consult them as to what he should do.

Finding herself left alone, Leocadia got out of bed, and
groped about the room, and along the walls, feeling for a
door or window through which she might make her escape.
She found the door, but it was locked outside. She succeeded
in opening the window ; and the moonlight shone in so
brightly, that she could distinguish the colour of some damask
hangings in the room. She saw that the bed was gilded, and
so rich, that it seemed that of a prince rather than of a
private gentleman. She counted the chairs and the cabinets,
observed the position* of the door, and also perceived some
pictures hanging on the walls, but was not able to distinguish
the subjects. The window was large, and protected by a
stout iron grating: it looked out on a garden, surrounded
by high walls, so that escape in that direction was as impossi-
ble as by the door.

Everything she observed in this sumptuous apartment


3^18 CERVANTES' £XEMP.J^T TALES.

showed her that its master was a person of quality, and of ez»
traordinary wealth. Among other things on which she cast her
eyes was a small crucifix of solid silver, standing on a cabinet
near the window. She took it, and hid it in the sleeve of '
her gown, not out of devotion, nor yet with a felonious in«
tention, but with a very proper and judicious deiugn. Having
done this, she shut the window as before, and returned to the
bed, to see what would be the end of an aftair which had
begun so badly. In about half an hour, as it seemed to her,
the door was opened ; some one came in, blindfolded her, and
taking her by the arm, without a word spoken, led her out of
the room, which she heard him lock behind him.

This person was Rodolfo, who though he had gone to look
for his fi'iends, had changed his mind in that respect, not
thinking it advisable to acquaint them with what hsid passed
between him and the girl. On the contrary, he resolved to
tell them, that repenting of his violence, and moved by her
tears, he had only carried her half-way towards his house,
and then let her go. Having come to this resolution, he has-
tened back to remove Leocadia before daylight appeared,
which would compel him to keep her in his room all die fol-
lowing day. He led her then to the Plaza del Ayuntamiento,
and there, in a feigned voice, speaking half Portuguese and
half Spanish, he told her she might go home without
fear, for she should not be followed; and he was already
out of sight before she had taken the bandage from her
eyes.

Leocadia looked all round her : she was quite alone : no
one was in sight ; but suspecting that she might be followed
at a distance, she stopped every now and then on her way
home, which was not far, and looked behind her. To baffle
any spies that might perchance be watching her, she entered a
house which she found op^i ; and by and by she went from it
to her own, where she found her parents stupefied with grief.
They had not undressed, or thought of taking any rest.
When they saw her, they ran to her with open arms, and
welcomed her with tears.^ Choking with emotion, Leocadia
made a sign to her parents that she wished to be alone with
them. They retired with her, and she gave them a suodnct ao-
•otmt of all that had befallen her. She described the room in


THE FORCE OF BLOOD. 319

which she had been robbed of her honour, the window, the
grating, the garden, the cabinets, the bed, the damask hang-
ings, and, last of all, she showed them the crucifix which she
had carried off, and before which the three innocent victims
renewed their tears, imprecated Heaven's vengeance on the
insolent ravisher, and prayed that he might be miraculously
punished. She told her parents, that although she had no
wish to know the name of him at whose hands she had
received such cruel wrong, yet if they thought fit to make
such a discovery, they might do so by means of the crucifix,
by directing the sacristans of the several parishes in the city
to announce from the pulpits that whoever had lost such an
image would find it in the hands of a certain monk whom
he should name. By this means, they would discover their
enemy in the person of the owner of the crucifix.

" That would be very well, my child," replied her father,
" if your plan were not liable to be frustrated by ordinary
cunning ; but no doubt this image has been already missed by
its owner, and ho will have set it down for certain that it was
taken out of the room by the person he locked up there. To
give him notice that the crucifix was in the hands of a certain
monk would only serve to make known the person who de-
posited it in such keeping, but not to make the owner declare
himself; for the latter might send another person for it, and
furnish him with all the particulars by which he should
identify it. Thus you see we should only damage ourselves
without obtaining the information we sought ; though to be
sure we might employ the same artifice on our side, and de-
posit the image with the monk through a third hand. What
you had best do, my child^ is to keep it, and pray to it, that
since it was a witness to your undoing, it will deign to vindi
oate your cause by its righteous judgment. Bear in mind, my
child, that an ounce of public dishonour outweighs a quintal
of secret infamy ; and since, by the blessing of God, you can
live in honour before the public eye, let it not distress you so
much to be dishonoured in your ownself in secret. Real dis-
honour consists in sin, and real honour in virtue. There are
three ways of offending God ; by thought, word, and deed ;
but since neither in thought, nor in word, nor in deed have
you offended, look upon yourself as a person ot unsullied


320 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

honour, as I shall always do, who will never cease to regard
you with the affection of a father."

Thus did this humane and right-minded father comfort
his unhappy daughter ; and her mother embracing her again,
did all she could to soothe her feelings. In spite of all their
tenderness her anguish was too poignant to be soon allayed ;
and from that fatal night, she continued to live the life of a
recluse under the protection of her parents.

Rodolfo meanwhile having returned home, and having
missed the crucifix, guessed who had taken it, but gave him-
self no concern about it. To a person of his wealth such a
loss was of no importance; nor did his parents mako any
inquiry about it, when three days afterwards, on his depar-
ture for Italy, one of his mother's women took an inventory of all
the effects he left in his apartment. Bodolfo had long contem-
plated a visit to Italy ; and his father, who himself had been there^
encouraged him in that design, telling him that no one could
be a finished gentleman without seeing foreign countries. For
this and other reasons, Rodolfo readily complied with the
wishes of his father, vho gave him ample letters of credit on
Barcelona, Genoa, Rome, and Naples. Taking with him two
of his companions, he set out on his travels, with expectations
raised to a high pitch, by what he had been told by some
soldiers of his acquaintance, concerning the good cheer in the
hostelries of Italy and France, and the free and easy life en-
joyed by the Spaniards in their quarters. His ears were
tickled with the sound of such phrases as these : ecco U baoni
polastri, picioni, vresuto, scdcide, and all the other fine things
of the sort, which soldiers are fond of calling to mind whei\.
they return from those parts to Spain. In fine, he went away
with as little thought or concern about what had passed be«
tween him and the beautiful Leocadia as though it had never
happened. She meanwhile passed her life with her parents'
in the strictest retirement, never letting herself be seen, but
shunning every eye lest it should read her misfortune in her
face. What she had thus done voluntarily at first, she'
found herself,, in a few months, constrained to do by necessity ;
tor she discovered that she was pregnant, to the grievous
renewal of her affliction.

lime rolled on ; the hour of her delivery arrived: it took;


THB FORCE 01* BLOOD. 321

place in tlie utmost secrecy, her mother taHng upon her the
office of midwife ; and she gave birth to a son, one of the
most beautiful ever seen. The babe was conveyed, with the
same secrecy, to a village, where he remained till he was four
years old, when his grandfather brought him, under the name
of nq>hew, to his own house, where he was reared, if not in
affluence, at least most virtuously. The boy, who was named
Luis after his grandfather, was remarkably handsome, of a
sweet docile disposition ; and his manners and deportment,
even at that tender age, were such as showed him to be the
son of some noble father. His grandfather and grandmother
were so delighted with his grace, beauty, and good behaviour,
that they came at last to regard their daughter's mischance as
a happy event, since it had given them such a grandson.
When the boy walked through the streets, blessings were
showered upon him by all who saw him — blessings upon his
beauty, upon the mother that bore him, upon the father that
begot him, upon those who brought him up so well. Thus
admired by strangers, as well as by all who knew him, he grew
up to the age of seven, by which time he could already read
Latin and his mother tongue, and write a good round hand ;
for it was the intention of his grandparents to make him
learned and virtuous, since they could not make him rich,
learning and virtue being such wealth as thieves cannot steal,
or fortune destroy.

One day, when the boy was sent by his grandfather with
a message to a relation, he passed along a street in which there
was a great concourse of. horsemen. He stopped to look at
them ; and to see them the better, he moved from his position,
and crossed the street. In doing so, he was not rapid enough
to avoid a fiery horse, which its rider could not pull up in time,
and which knocked Luis down, and trampled upoh him. The
poor child lay senseless on the ground, bleeding profusely
from his head. A moment after the accident had happened,
an elderly gentleman threw himself from his horse with sur*
prising agiHty, took the boy out of the arms of a person who
had raised him from the ground, and carried him to his own
kouse, bidding his servants go fetch a surgeon.

Many gentlemen followed him, greatly distressed at the
sad accident which had befallen the general favourite; for it
was soon on everybody's lips that the sufferer was little Luis*

V


322 CERVANTES' EXEMFLABT TALES.

The news speedily reached the can of his grandparents and
his supposed cousin, who all hurried in wild dismay to look
for their darling. The gentleman who had hiunanely taken
charge of him being of eminent rank, and well known, they
easily found their way to his house, and arrived there just as
Luis was under the surgeon's hands. The master and mistress
begged them not to cry, or raise their voices in lamentation ;
for it would do the little patient no good. The surgeon, who
was an able man, having dressed the wound with great care
and skill, saw that it was not so deadly as he had at first sup-
posed. In the midst of the dressing, Luis came to his senses,
and was glad to see his relations, who asked him how he felt.
" Pretty well," he said, only his head and his body pained
him a good deal. The surgeon desired them not to tslk to
him, but leave him to repose. They did so, and the grand-
father then addressed himself to the master of the house,
thanking him for the kindness he had shown to his nephew.
The gentleman replied that there was nothing to thank him
for ; the fact being, that when he saw the boy knocked down,
his first thought was that he saw under the horses* heels the
face of a son of his own, whom he tenderly loved. It was
this that impelled him to take the boy up, and carry him to
his own house, where he should remain all the time he was ia
the surgeon's hands, and be treated with all possible care.
The lady of the house spoke to the same effect, and with no
less kindness and cordiality.

The grandfather and grandmother were surprised at meet-
ing with so much sympathy on the part of strangers ; but far
greater was the surprise of their daughter, who, on looking
round her, after the surgeon's report had somewhat allayed
her agitation, plainly perceived that she was in the very room
to which she had been carried by her ravisher. The damask
hangings were no longer there ; but she recognised it by other
tokens. She saw the grated window that opened on the
garden : it was then closed on account of the little patient ;
but she asked if there was a garden on the outside, and was
answered in the affirmative. The bed she too^vell remem-
bered was there; and, above all, the cabinet, on which had
stood the image she had taken away, was still on the same spot.
Finally, to corroborate all the other indications, and confirm
the truth of her discovery beyond all questiou, she counted


THE FORCE OF BLOOD. S23

the steps of the staircase leading from the room to the street,
and found the number exactly what she had expected ; for
she had had the presence of mind to count them on the former
occasion, when she descended them blindfold. On her return
home, she imparted her discovery to her mother, who imme-
diately made inquiries as to whether the gentleman in whose
house her grandson lay ever had a son. She found he had
one son, Rodolfo — as we call him — who was then in Italy ;
and on comparing the time he was said to have been abroad
with that which had elapsed since her daughter's ravishment,
she found them to agree very closely. She made all this
known to her husband ; and it was finally settled between
the three that they should not move in the matter for the
present, but wait till the will of Heaven had declared itself
respecting the little patient.

Luis was out of danger in a fortnight ; in a month he
rose from his bed ; and during all that time he was visited
daily by his mother and grandmother, and treated by the
master and mistress of the house as if he was their own
child. DoSa Estafania, the kind gentleman's wife, often ob-
served, in conversation with Leocadia, that the boy so strongly
resembled a son of hers who was in Italy, she never could
look at him without thinking her son was actually before her.
One day, when Dofia Estafania repeated this remark, no one
being present but herself and Leocadia, the latter thought it
a good opportunity to open her mind to the lady, in the man-
ner previously concerted between herself and her parents.

" Senora," she said, " when my parents heard of the
terrible accident that had befallen their nephew, they felt as
if the sky had fallen upon their heads. For them it was
losing the light of their eyes, and the staff of their age, to
lose their nephew, their love for whom far surpasses that
which parents commonly bear towards their sons. But, as
the proverb says, with the disease God sends the remedy.
The boy found his recovery in this house ; and I found in it
reminiscences of events I shall never forget as long as I live.
I, seiiora, am noble, for so are my parents, and so were all my
ancestors, who, though but moderately endowed with the gifts
of for^i'iie, always happily maintained their honour where-
ev3r they lived."

Dona Estafania listened attentively to Leocadia, and was

V 2


324 GEBYANTBI^ EXEMPLABT TALES.

astonished to hear her speak with an intelligence beyond her
years, for she did not think her more than twenty; and with-
out interrupting her by a single word, she heard her relate
her whole story, how she had been forcibly carried into that
chamber, what had been done to her there, and by what
tokens she had been able to recognise it again. In confirma-
tion of all this, she drew forth from her bosom the crucifix
she had taken away with her, and thus addressed it : ** Lord,
who wast witness of the violence done to me, be thou the
judge of the amends which are my due. I took thee from off
this cabinet, that I might oontlnuaUy remind thee of my
wrong, not in order to pray to thee for vengeance, which I
do not invoke, but to beiseech thee to inspire me with some
counsel which may enable me to bear it with patience." Then
tumiDg to Dona Estafania, *^ This boy, sefiora," she said, ^' to-
wards whom you have manifested the extreme of your great
kindness and compassion, is your own grandson. It was by the
merciful providence of Heaven that he was run over, in order
that being taken to your house, I should find him in it, as I
hope to find there, if not the remedy most appropriate to. my
misfortune, at least the means of alleviating it." Thus say-
ing, and pressing the crucifix to her breast, she fell fainting
into the arms of Dona Estafania, who as a gentlewoman, to
whose sex pity is as natural as cruelty is to man, instantly
pressed her lips to those of the fainting girl, shedding over
her so many tears that there needed no other sprinkling of
water to recover Leocadia from her swoon.

Whilst the two were in this situation, Dofia Estafania's
husband entered the room, leading little Lub by the hand.
On seeing his wife all in tears, and Leocadia fainting, he
eagerly inquired the cause of so startling a spectacle. The
boy having embraced his mother, calling her his cousin, and
his grandmother, calling her lus benefitctress, repeated his
grandfather's question. ^^I have great things to tell you,
senor,*' said Dona Estafania to her husband, ^^ the cream and
substance of which is this : the fainting girl before you is
yoor daughter, and that boy is your grandson. This truth
which I have learned from her lips is confirmed by his face^
in which we have both beheld that of our son.''

^' Unless you speak more fiilly, sefiora^ I cannot under*
stand yoU|^ replied her husband«


THS POBCB OF BLOOD, 325

Just then Leocadia came to herself^ and embracing the
cross seemed changed into a sea of tears^ and the gentleman
remained in utter bewilderment, until his wife had repeated
to him, from beginning to end, Leocadia's whole story ; and
he believed it, through the blessed dispensation of Heaven,
which had confirmed it by so many convincing testimonies.
He embraced and comforted Leocadia, kissed his grandson,
and that same day he despatched a courier to Naples, with a
letter to his son, requiring him to come home instantly, for
his mother and he had concluded a suitable match for him
with a very beautiful lady. They would not allow Leocadia
and her son to return any more to the house of her parents,
whO; overjoyed at her good fortune, gave thanks for it to
Heaven with all their hearts.

The courier arrived at Naples ; and Bodolfo, eager to
become possessed of so beautifiil a wife as his father had
described, took advantage of the opportunity offered by
four galleys which were ready to sail for Spain ; and two
days after the receipt of the letter he embarked with his two
comrades, who were still with him. After a prosperous run
of twelve days, he reached Barcelona, whence he posted in
seven to Toledo, and entered his father^s house, dressed in the
very extreme of fiishionable bravery. His parents were beyond
measure rejoiced at his safe arrival, after so long an absence ;
and Leocadia was filled with indescribable emotions, as she
beheld him, herself unseen, from a secret place in which she
had been stationed by Dofia Estafisinia's contrivance. Bodolfo's
two comrades proposed to take leave of him at once, and
retire to their own homes ; but Estafania would not sufier
them to depart, for their presence was needful for the ezecu^
tion of a scheme she had in her head.

It was nearly night when Bodolfo arrived; and whilst
preparations were making for supper, Estafania took her son's
companions aside, believing that they were two of the three
whom Leocadia mentioned as having been with Bodolfo on
the night of her abduction. She earnestly entreated them to
tell her, if they remembered that her son had carried ofi* a
young woman, on such a night, so many years ago ; for the
honour and the peace of mind of all his relations depended
on their knowing the truth of that matter. So persuasive
were her entreaties, and so strong her assurances that no


326 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

harm whatever could result to them from the information she
sought, they were induced to confess that one summer's night,
the same she had mentioned, themselves aiid another friend
being out on a stroll with Bodolfo, they had been concerned
in the abduction of a girl whom Bodolfo carried off, whilst
the rest of them detained her family, who made a great
outcry, and would have defended her if they could. They
added that Bodolfo told them, on the following day, that
he had carried the girl to his own apartment ; and this was
all they knew of the matter.

All doubts which could possibly have remained on the case
having been removed by this confession, Estafania determined
to pursue her scheme. Shortly before supper she took her
son in private into a room, where she put the portrait of a lady
into his hands, saying, '' Here is something to give you an
appetite for your supper, Bodolfo ; this is the portrait of
your bride; but I must tell you that what she wants in
beauty is more than made up for in virtue. She is of good
family, and tolerably wealthy; and since your father and
I have made choice of her, you may be assured she will suit
you very well."

" Well," said Rodolfo, staring at the portrait, " if the
painter of this portrait has flattered the original as much as
painters usually do, then beyond all doubt the lady must be
the very incarnation of ugliness. Truly, my lady mother, if
it is just and right that sons should obey their parents in all
things, it is no less proper that parents should have regard to
the inclinations of their sons ; and since matrimony is a bond
not to be loosed till death, they ought to take care that it
shall press as smoothly and equably as possible. Virtue, good
birth, prudence, and the gifts of fortune, are all very good
things, and may well gladden the heart of whoever may have
the lot to obtain this lady for a wife ; but that her ugliness
can ever gladden the eyes of her spouse, appears to me an im-
possibility. I am a bachelor to be sure, but I perfectly com-
prehend the coincidence there should be between the sacrament
of marriage and the just and due delight mutually enjoyed by
the married pair, and that if that be wanting, the object of
marriage is frustrated ; for to imagine that an ugly face which
one must have before his eyes at all hours, in the hall, at table,
and m bed, I say once more that is impossible. For God's


THE FORCE OF BLOOD. 327

sake, my lady mother, give me a wife who would be an agree-
able compaDion, not one who will disgust me, so that we may
both bear evenly, and with mutual good-will, the yoke im-
posed on us by Heaven, instead of pulling this way and that
way, and fretting each other to death. If this lady is well-
born, discreet, and rich as you say, she will easily find a
husband of a different humour from mine. Some look for
noble blood in a wife, some for understanding, others for
money, and others again for beauty, and of the latter class I
am one. As for high birth, thank Heaven and my ancestors I
am well enough off in that respect ; as for understanding, pro-
vided a woman is neither a dolt nor a simpleton, there is no
need of her having a very subtle wit ; in point of wealth, I
am amply provided by my parents ; but beauty is what I
covet, with no other addition than virtue and good breeding.
If my wife brings me this, I will thank Heaven for the gift, and
make my parents happy in their old age.''

Estafania was delighted to hear Rodolfo speak thus, for the
sentiments he expressed were just such as best accorded with
ihe success of the scheme she had in hand. She told him that
she would endeavour to marry him in conformity with his in-
clination, and that he need not make himself uneasy, for there
would be no difficulty in breaking off the match which seemed
so distasteful to him. Bodolfo thanked her, and sup})er being
ready they went to join the rest of the party at table. The
father and mother, Rodolfo and his two companions had
already seated themselves, when Dona Estafania said, in an
off-hand way, " Sinner that I am, how well I behave to my
guest ! Go," she said to a servant, ''and ask the senori
Dona Leocadia to honour our table with her presence, and tell
her she need not stand on any punctilio, for all here are my
sons and her servants." All this was part of her scheme, with
the whole of which Leocadia had been previously made
acquainted.

The lady soon appeared, presenting a most charming spec-
tacle of perfect beauty, set off by the most appropriate adorn-
ments. The season being winter, she was dressed in a robe
and train of black velvet, with gold and pearl buttons ; her
girdle and necklace were of diamonds; her head was un-
eovered, and .the shining braids and ringlets of her thick
ehestnuthair, spangled with diamonds, daz^ed the eyes of the


328 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

beholders. Her bearing was graceful and animated ; she led
her son by the hand, and before her walked two maids with
wax-lights and silver candlesticks. All rose to do her
reverence, as if something from heaven had miraculously
appeared before them; but gazing on her, entranced with
admiration, not one of them was able to address a single word
to her. Leocadia bowed to them all with courteous dignity,
and Estafania taking her by the hand led her to a seat next
herself and opposite to Bodolfo, whilst the boy was seated
beside his grandfather. " Ah,*' said Bodolfo to himself, aa
he gazed on the lovely being before him, " could I find but
lialf that beauty in the wife my mother has chosen for me, I
should think myself the happiest man in the world. Good
God ! what is it I behold ? Is it some angel in human shape
that sits before me ?" Whilst his eyes were thus making his
soul captive to the lovely image of Leocadia, she, on the other
hand, finding herself so near to him who was dearer to her
than the light of those eyes with which she furtively glanced at
him from time to time, began to revolve in her mind what had
passed between her and Bodolfo. The hopes her mother had
given her of being his wife began to droop, and the fear came
strong upon her that such bliss was not for one so luckless as
herself. She reflected how near she stood to the crisis which
was to determine whether she was to be blessed or unhappy
for ever, and racked by the intensity of her emotions, she
suddenly changed colour, her head dropped, and she fell
forward in a swoon into the arms of the dismayed Estafania.

The whole party sprang up in alarm and hastened to her
assistance, but no one showed more earnest sympathy than
Bodolfo, who fell twice in his haste to reach her. They un-
laced her, and sprinkled her face with cold water ; but hr
from coming to her senses, the fulness of her congested
bosom, her total insensibility, and the absence of all pul&e
gave such mortal indications, that the servants began impru-
dently to cry out that she was dead. This shocking news
reached the ears of her parents, whom Dona Estafania had
concealed in another room that they might make their ap-
pearance at the right moment. They now rushed into the
supper room, and the parish priest, who was also with them,
went up to the prostrate lady to see if she could by any
signs make known that she renented of her sins in order


THE FORCB OF BLOOD. 329

that lie might give her absolution ; but instead of one faint^
ing person he found two, for Rodolfo lay with his face on
L^adia's bosom. His mother had left her to him as being
her destined protector ; but when she saw that he too was
insensible, she was near making a third, and would have done
so had he not oome to himself. He was greatly confused at
finding that he had betrayed such emotion ; but his mother,
who guessed his thoughts, said to him, " Do not be ashamed,
my son, at having been so overcome by your feelings ; you
would have been so still more had you known what I will no
longer conceal from you, though I had intended to reserve it
for a more joyful occasion. Know then, son of my heart, that
this fainting lady is your real bride : I say real, because she
is the one whom your father and I have chosen for you, and
the portrait was a pretence.''

When Rodolfo heard this, carried away by the vehemence
of his passion, and on the strength of his title as a bridegroom
disdaining all conventional proprieties, he clasped Leocadia in
his arms, and with his lips pressed to hers, seemed as if he
was waiting for her soul to issue forth that he might absorb
and mingle it with his own. Just at the moment when the
tears of the pitying beholders flowed fastest, and their ejacu*
lations were most expressive of despair, Leocadia gave signs
of recovery, and brought back gladness to the hearts of all.
When she came to her senses, and, blushing to find herself in
Bodolfo's arms, would have dbengaged herself, ''No, sefiora,"
he said, << that must not be ; strive not to withdraw from the
arms of him who holds you in his soul." There needed
no more than these words to complete her revival ; and Delia
Estafania having no further need of stratagem, requested the
priest to marry her son to Leocadia on the spot. This was
done ; for the event took place at a time when the consent of
the parties was sufficient for the celebration of a marriage,
without any of the preliminary formalities which are now so
properly required. I leave it to a more ingenious pen than
mine to describe the gladness of all present ; the embraces
bestowed on Rodolfo by Leocadia's parents ; the thanks they
offered to Heaven, and to his father and mother ; the congrat-
ulations on both sides ; the astonishment of Rodolfo's com-
panions who saw him so unexpectedly married to so charming
a bride on the very night of his arrival ; and above all, when


330 CEBVANTES' EXEBfPLART TALES.

they learned from the statement openly made by Dona Esta-
fania, that Leocadia was the very person whose abduction her
son had effected with their aid. Nor was Rodolfo less sur«
prised than they ; and the better to assure himself of so won-
derful a fact, he begged Leocadia to give him some token
which should make perfectly clear to him that which indeed
he did not doubt, since it was authenticated by his parents.

" Once when I recovered from a swoon," replied Leocadia,
** 1 found myself, senor, in your arms without honour ; but for
that I have had full compensation, since on my recovery from my
this day's swoon I found myself in the same arms, but honoured.
If this is not enough for you, let it suffice to mention a cruci-
fix which no one could have purloined from you but myself, if
it be true that you missed it in the morning, and that it is the
same that is now in the hands of your mother, my lady/'

" You are mine, the lady of my soul, and shall be so as
long as God grants me life," cried Rodolfo ; embracing her
again, amidst a fresh shower of benedictions and congratula-
tions from the rest of the party.

At last they sat down to a merry supper to the sound of
music, for the performers, who had been previously engaged,
were now arrived. Bodolfo saw his own likeness in his son's
face as in a mirror. The four grandparents wept for joy :
there was not a comer of the house but was full of gladness ;
and though night was hurrying on with her swift black wings,
it seemed to Eodolfo that she did not fly, but hobble on
crutches, so great was his impatience to be alone with his be-
loved bride. The longed-for hour came at last : every one
retired to rest : the whole house was buried in silence ; but
not so shall be the truth of this story, which will be kept
alive in the memory of men by the many children and de-
scendants of that illustrious house in Toledo, where that happy
pair still live, and have, for many prosperous years, enjoyec
the society of each other, their children, and their grand-
children, by the blessing of Heaven, and through the force of
that blood which was seen shed on the ground by the
valorous, illustrious^ and Christian grandfather of the little
Luis.


THE JEALOUS ESTBAMADUBAN. 331


THE JEALOUS ESTRAMADURAN.

Not many years ago there issued from a town in Estra-
madura a hidalgo nobly bom, who, like another prodigal son,
went about various parts of Spain, Italy, and Flanders,
squandering his years and his wealth. At last, after long
peregrinations, his parents being dead and his fortune spent,
he made his appearance in the great city of Seville, where he
round abundant opportunity to get rid of the little he had left
Finding himself then so bare of money, and not better pro-
vided with friends, he adopted the remedy to which many a
spendthrift in that city has recourse ; that is, to betake them-
selves to the Indies, the refuge of the despairing sons of Spain,
the church of the homeless, the asylum of homicides, the haven
of gamblers and cheats, the general receptacle for loose women,
the common centre of attraction for many, but effectual
resource of very few. A fleet being about to sail for
Tierrafirma, he agreed with the admiral for a passage, got
ready his sea-stores and his shroud of Spanish grass cloth,
and embarking at Cadiz, gave his benediction to Spain, in-
tending never to see it again. The fleet slipped from its
moorings, and, amidst the general glee of its living freight,
the sails were spread to the soft and prosperous gale, which
soon wafted them out of sight of land into the wide domains
of the great father of waters, the ocean.

Our passenger now became very thoughtful, revolving in
his memory the many and various dangers he had passed in
the years of his peregrinations, and the thriftless conduct he
had pursued all his fife long. The result of the account to
which he thus called himself was a firm resolution to change his
way of life, to keep a much better hold of whatever wealth
God might yet be pleased to bestow upon him, and to behave
with more reserve towards women than he had hitherto done.

The fleet was nearly becalmed whilst the mind of Felipe


S32 CEBYAirrBs' bzemflabt f ales.

de Carrizales was actuated by these reflections. The wind
soon after rose and became so boisterous that Carrizales had
enough to do to keep on his legs, and was obliged to leave off
his meditations, and concern himself only with the affairs of
his voyage. It was so prosperous that they arrived without
check or accident at the port of Cartagena. To shorten the
introduction of my narrative and avoid all irrelevant matter, I
content myself with saying that Felipe was about eight-and-
forty years of age when he went to the Indies, and that in
the twenty years he remained there he succeeded, by dint of
industry and thrift, in amassing more than a hundred and fifty
thousand crowns. Seeing himself once more rich and
prosperous, he was moved by the natural desire, which all
men experience, to return to his native country. Rejecting
therefore great opportunities for profit which presented them-
selves to him, he quitted Peru, where he had amassed his
wealth, turned all his money into ingots, and putting it on
board a registered ship, to avoid accidents, returned to Spain,
landed at San Lucar, and arrived at Seville, loaded alike with
years and riches.

Having placed his property in safety, he went in search of
his friends, and found they were all dead. He then thought
of retiring to his native place, and ending his days there,
although he had ascertained that death had not left him
one survivor of his kindred ; and if, when he went to the
indies poor and needy, he had no rest from the thoughts that
distracted him in the midst of the wide ocean, he was now no
less assailed by care, but from a different cause. Formerly
his poverty would not let him sleep, and now his wealth dis-
turbed his rest ; for riches are as heavy a burden to one who
is not used to them, or knows not how to employ them, as
indigence to one who is continually under its pressure.
Money and the want of it alike bring care ; but in the one
case the acquisition of a moderate quantity affords a remedy ;
the other case grows worse by further acquisition. Carrizales
contemplated his ingots with anxiety, not as a miser, for,
during the few years he had been a soldier, he had learned to
be liberal ; but from not knowing what to do with them ; for
to hoard them was unprofitable, and keeping them in his
house was offering a temptation to thieves. On the other
hand, all inclination for resuming the anxious life of traffic


THE JEALOUS BSTBAMABUBAN. 333

bad died out in him, and at his time of life his actual wealth
was more than enough for the rest of his days. He would
fain have spent them in his native place, put out his mon^
there to interest^ and passed his old age in peace and quiet,
giving what he could to Qod, since he had given more than
he ought to the world. He considered, however, that the
penury of his native place was great, the inhabitants very
needy, and that to go and live there would be to offer himself
as a mark for all the importunities with which the poor
usually harass a rich neighbour, especially when there is only
one in the place to whom they caa have recourse in their
distress.

He wanted some one to whom he might leave his pro*
perty after his death, and with that view, taking measure of
the vigour of his constitution, he concluded that he was not
yet too old to bear the burthen of matrimony. But imme*
diately on conceiving this notion, he was seized with such a
terrible fear as scattered it like a mist before the wind. He
was naturally the most jealous man in the world, even without
being married, and the mere thought of taking a wife called
up such horrible spectres before his imagination that he
resolved by all means to remain a bachelor.

That point was settled ; but it was not yet settled what
he should do with the rest of his life, when it chanced that,
passing one day through a street, he looked up and saw at a
window a young girl apparently about thirteen or fourteen,
with a face so very handsome and so very pleasing in its
expression, that poor old Carrizales was vanquished at once,
and surrendered without an efiS^rt to the charms of the
beautiful Leonora, for that was the girl's name. Without
more ado, he began to string together a long train of argu-
ments to the following effect : — *^ This girl is very handsome,
and to judge from the appearance of the house, her parents
cannot be rich. She is sdmost a child too ; assuredly a wife
of her age could not give a husband any uneasiness. Let me
see : say that I marry her ; I will keep her close at home, I
will train her up to my own hand, and so fashion her to my
wishes that she will never have a thought beyond them I I
am not so old but that I may yet hope to have children to
inherit my wealth. Whether she brings me any dower or not
is a matter of no consideration, since Heaven has given me


334 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

enough for both, and rich people should not look for money
with a wife, but for enjoyment, for that prolongs life, whereas
jarring discontent between married people makes it wear out
faster than it would do otherwise. So be it then ; the die
is cast, and this is the wife whom heaven destines me to
have."

Having thus soliloquised, not once but a hundred times
on that day, and the two or three following, Carrizales had
an interview with Leonora's parents, and found that, although
poor, they were persons of good birth. He made known
his intention to them, acquainted them with his condition
-and fortune, and begged them very earnestly to bestow their
daughter upon him in marriage. They required time to
consider his proposal, and to give him also an opportunity to
satisfy himself that their birth and quality was such as they
had stated.

The parties took leave of each other, made the necessary
inquiries, found them satisfactory on both sides, and finally
Leonora was betrothed to Carrizales, who settled upon her
twenty thousand ducats, so hotly enamoured was the jealous
old bridegroom. But no sooner h&d he pronounced the con-
jugal " yes," than he was all at once assailed by a host of
rabid fancies ; he began to tremble without cause and to find
his cares and anxieties come thicker and faster upon him than
ever. The first proof he gave of his jealous temper was, in
resolving that no tailor should take measure of his betrothed
for any of the many wedding garments he intended to present
her. Accordingly, he went about looking for some other
woman, who might be nearly of the same height and figure
as Leonora. He found a poor woman, who seemed suitable
for his purpose, and having had a gown made to her measure,
he tried it on his betrothed, found that it fitted well, and
gave orders that it should serve as a pattern for all the other
dresses, which were so many and so rich that the bride's
parents thought themselves fortunate beyond measure,
in having obtained for themselves and their daughter a
son-in-law and a husband so nobly munificent. As for
Leonora, she was at her wit's end with amazement at the
sight of such gorgeous finery, for the best she had ever
worn in her life had V>een but a serge petticoat and a silk
jacket.


THE JEALOUS ESTRAMADURAN. 335

The second proof of jealousy given by FeKpe was, that he
would not consummate his marriage until he had provided a
house after his own fancy, which he arranged in this singular
manner. He bought one for twelve thousand ducats, in one
of the best wards of the city, with a fountain and pond,
and a garden well stocked with orange trees. He put screens
before all the windows that looked towards the street, leaving
them no other prospect than the sky, and did much the
same with all the others in the house. In the gateway next
the street, he erected a stable for a mule, and over it a straw
loft, and a room for an old black eunuch, who was to take
care of the mule. He raised the parapets round the flat
roof of the house so high, that nothing could be seen above
them but the sky, and that only by turning one's face up«
wards. In the inner door, opening from the gateway upon the
quadrangle, he fixed a turning box like that of a convent, by
means of which articles were to be received from without.
He furnished the house in a sumptuous style, such as would
have become the mansion of a great lord ; and he bought
four white slave girls, whom he branded in the face, and two
negresses. For the daily supplies of his establishment he
engaged a purveyor, who was to make all the necessary pur-
chases, but was not to sleep in the house or ever enter it
further than to the second door, where he was to deposit
what he had brought in the turning box. Having made these
arrangements, Carrizales invested part of his money in sundry
good securities ; part he placed in the bank, and the rest he
kept by him to meet any emergencies that might arise. He
also had a master key made for his whole house; and he
laid up a whole year's store of all such things as it is usual
to purchase in bulk at their respective seasons ; and every-
thing being now ready to his mind, he went to his father-in-
law's house and claimed his bride, whom her parents delivered
up to him with no few tears, for it seemed to them as if they
were giving her up for burial.

Leonora knew not, poor young creature, what was before
her, but she shed tears because she saw her parents weep, and
taking leave of them with their blessing, she went to her new
home, her husband leading her by the hand, and her slaves
and servants attending her. On their arrival Carrizales
harangued all his domestics, enjoining them to keep careful


SS6 CSBVANTSB* EZBHPI^ABT TAXiBf.

watch ov« Leonora, and by no means, on any pretence what«
soever, to allow anybody to enter within the second gate, not
even the black eunuch. But the person whom above all
others he charged with the safe keeping and due entertain-
ment of his wife was a dueiia of much prudence and gravity,
whom he had taken to be Leonora's monitress, and superin-
tendent of the whole house, and to command ihe slaves and
two other maidens of Leonora's age whom he had also added
to his family, that his wife might not be without companions
of h^ own years. He promised them all that he would treat
them so weU, and take such care for their comfort and gratifi-
cation, that they should not feel their confinement, and that
on holidays they should every one of them without exception
be allowed to go to mass ; but so early in the morning that
daylight itself should scarcely have a chance of seeing
them. The servant maids and the slaves promised to
obey all his orders cheerfully and with prompt alacrity '
and the bride, with a timid shrinking of her shoulders*
bowed her head, and said that she had no other will than
that of her lord and spouse, to whom she always owed
obedience.

Having thus laid down the law for the government of his
household, the worthy Estramaduran began to enjoy, as well
as he could, the fruits of matrimony, which, to Leonora's in-
experienced taste, were neither sweet-flavoured nor insipid.
Her days were spent with her duena, her damsels, and her
slaves, who, to make the time pass more agreeably, took to
pampering their palates, and few days passed in which they
did not make lots of things in which they consumed a great
deal of honey and sugar. Their master gladly supplied them
with all they could wish for in that way without stint, for by
that means he expected to keep them occupied and amused, so
that they should have no time to think of their confinement
and seclusion. Leonora lived on a footing of equality with
her domestics, amused herself as they did, and even in her
simplicity took pleasure in dressing dolls and other childish
pastime. All this afibrded infinite satisfaction to the jealous
husband ; it seemed to him that he had chosen the best way
of life imaginable, and that it was not within the compass of
human art or malice to trouble his repose: accordingly his
whole care was devoted to anticipating his wife's wishes by all


i


THE JEALOUS ESTRAMADURAN. 337

lorts of presents, and encouraging her to ask for whatever
came into her head, for in everything it should be his pleasure
to gratify her.

On the days she went to mass, which as we have said was
before daylight, her parents attended at church and talked
with their daughter in presence of her husband, who made
them such liberal gifts as mitigated the keenness of their com-
passion for the secluded life led by their daughter. Carri-
cales used to get up in the morning and watch for the arrival
of the purveyor, who was always made aware of what was
wanted for the day by means of a note placed over-night in
the turning box. After the purveyor had come and gone,
Carrizales used to go abroad, generally on foot, locking both
entrance doors behind him — ^that next the street, and that
which opened on the quadrangle, — and leaving the negro shut
up between them. Having despatched his business, which
was not much, he speedily returned, shut himself up in his
house, and occupied himself in making much of his wife and
her handmaids, who all liked him for his placid and agreeable
humour, and above all for his great liberality towards them.
In this way they passed a year of novitiate, and made pro-
fession of that manner of life, resolved every one of them to
continue in it to the end of their days ; and so it would have
been, if the crafty perturber of the human race had not
brought their chaste purposes to nought, as you shall pre-
sently hear.

Now, I ask the most long-headed and wary of my readers,
what more could old Felipe have done in the way of taking
precautions for his security, since he would not even allow
that there should be any male animal within his dwelling ?
No tom-cat ever persecuted its rats, nor was the barking of a
dog ever heard within its walls ; all creatures belonging to it
were of the feminine gender. He took thought by day, and
by night he did not sleep ; he was himself the patrol and sen-
tinel of his house, and the Argus of what he held dear. Never
did a man set foot within the quadrangle ; he transacted his
business with his friends in the street; the pictures that
adorned his rooms were all female figures, flowers, or land-
scapes ; his whole dwelling breathed an odour of propriety,
seclusion, and circumspection ; the very tales which the maid
servants told by the fireside in the long winter nights, being

w


338 cebvanteb' exbmplabt tales

told in his presence, were perfectly free from the least tinge
of wantonness. Her aged spouse's silver hairs seemed in
Leonora's eyes locks of pure gold ; for the first love known
by maidens imprints itself on their hearts like a seal on melted
wax. His inordinate watchfulness seemed to her no more than
the due caution of an experienced and judicious man. She
was fully persuaded that the life she led was the same as that
led by all married women. Her thoughts never wandered be*
yond the walls of her dwelling, nor had she a wish that was
not the same as her husband's. It was only on the days she
went to mass that she set eyes on the streets, and that was so
early in the morning, that except on the way home she had
not light to look about her. Never was there seen a convent
more closely barred and bolted ; never were nuns kept more
recluse, or golden apples better guarded ; and yet for all his
precautions poor Felipe could not help falling into the pit he
dreaded, — or at least believing that he had so fallen.

There is in Seville an idle pleasure-seeking class of people
who are commonly called men on town,* a sauntering, spruce-
ly dressed, mellifluous race, always finding means to make
themselves welcome at rich men's feasts. Of these people,
their manners and customs, and the laws they observe among
themselves, I should have much to say, but abstain from it for
good reasons. One of these gallants, a bachelor, — or a virotey
as such persons are called in their jargon, the newly married
being styled matones, — took notice of the house of Carrizales,
and seeing it always shut close, he was curious to know who
lived there. He set about this inquiry with such ardour and
ingenuity, that he failed not to obtain all the information he
desired. He learned the character and habits of the old man,
the beauty of Leonora, and the singular method adopted by
her husband in order to keep her safe. All this inflamed him with
desire to see if it would not be possible, by force or stratagem,
to effect the reduction of so well-guarded a fortress. He im-
parted his thoughts to three of his friends, and they all agreed
that he should go to work, for in such an enterprise no one
lacks counsellors to aid and abet him. At first they were at *
a loss how to set about so difficult an exploit ; but after many
consultations they agreed upon the following plan : — ^Loaysa

* *'Men on toym,'^ gente de barrio, literally, people of the ward or
quarter.


THB JEALOUS ESTBAlfABUBAK. 339

(80 the virote was named) disappeared from among his friends,
giving (Tut that he was leaving Seville for some time. Then
drawing on a pair of linen drawers and a clean shirt, he put
over them a suit of clothes so torn and patched, that the
poorest beggar in the city would have disdained to wear such
rags. He shaved off the little beard he had, covered one of
his eyes with a plaster, tied up one of his legs, and hobbling
along on two crutches, appeared so completely metamorphosed
into a lame beggar, that no real cripple could have looked less
of a counterfeit than he.

In this guise he posted himself closely at the hour of
evening prayer before the door of Carrizales* house, which
was fast shut, and Luis the negro locked up between the two
doors. Having taken up his position there, Loaysa produced
a greasy guitar, wanting some of its strings, and as he was
flomething of a musician, he began to play a few lovely airs,
and to sing Moorish ballads in a feigned voice, with so much
expression that aU who were passing through the street stopped
to listen. The boys all made a ring round him when he sang,
and Luis the negro, enchanted by the virote's music, would
have given one of his hands to be able to open the door^ and
listen to him more at his ease, such is the fondness for music
inherent in the negro race. When Loaysa wanted to get rid
of his audience, he had only to cease singing, put up his
guitar, and hobble away on his crutches.

Loaysa four or five times repeated this serenade to the
negro, for whose sake alone he played and sang, thinking that
the way to succeed in his sap and siege was to begin by
making sure of old Luis ; nor was his expectation disappointed.
One night when he had taken his place as usual before the
door, and had begun to tune his guitar, perceiving that the
negro was already on the alert, he put his lips to the key -hole
and whispered, " Can you give me a drop of water, Luis ?
I am dying with thirst, and can t sing/'

" No," said the negro, *' for I have not the key of this
door, and there is no hole through which I can give you
drmk."

«< Who keeps the key, then r

** My master, who is the most jealous man in the world ;
and if he knew that I was now talking here with any one, it

w 2


340 CBBTANTB8' EXEMPLABT TALES.

were pity of my life. But who are you who ask me for
water V

^< I am a poor cripple, who get my bread by askmg alma
of all good people in God's name ; besides which I teach the
guitar to some moriscoes, and other poor people. Among my
pupib I have three negroes, slaves to three aldermen, whom I
have taught so well that they are fit to sing and play at any
dance or in any tavern, and they have paid me for it very well
indeed."

" A deal better would I pay you to have the opportunity
of taking lessons ; but it is not possible, for when my master
goes out in the morning he locks the door behind him, and
he does the same when he comes in, leaving me shut up
between two doors."

" I vow to God, Luis, if you would only contrive to let
me in a few nights to give you lessons, in less than a fort-
night I would make you such a dabster at the guitar, that you
need not be ashamed to play at any street comer ; for I would
have you to know that I have an extraordinary knack in
teaching ; moreover, I have heard tell that you have a very
promising capacity, and from what I can judge from the tone
of your voice, you must sing very well."

" I don't sing badly ; but what good is that since I don't
know any tunes, except the * Star of Venus,' or, * In the
green meadow,' or the tune that is now so much in vogue^
* Clinging to her grated window, with a trembling hand ? '"

" All these are moonshine to what I could teach you, for
I know all the ballads of the Moor Abendaraez, with those of
his lady Xarifa, and all those comprising the history of the
grand sofi Tomunibeyo, and the divine sarabands which
enchant the souls of the Portuguese themselves, among whom
they are most in vogue ; and all these I teach by such methods
and with such facility, that almost before you have swallowed
three or four bushels of salt, you will find yourself an out-
and-out performer in every kind of guitar music."

"What's the good of all that," (here the negro sighed
heavily,) ** since I can't get you into the house ? "

" There's a remedy for all things : contrive to take the
keys from your master, and I will give you a piece of wax,
with which you may take an impression of the wards * for I


THE JEALOUS ESTBAMADURAK. 341

have taken such a liking to you, I will get a locksmith, a
friend of mine, to make new, keys, and then I can come in at
night and teach you to play better than Prester John in the
Indies. It is a thousand pities that a voice like yours should
be lost for want of the accompaniment of the guitar ; for I
would have you to know, brother Luis, that the &iest voice in
the world loses its perfection when it is not accompanied by
some instrument, be it guitar or harpsichord, organ or harp ;
but the instrument that will suit your voice best is the guitar,
because it is the handiest and the least costly of all."

" All that is very good ; but the thing can't be done, for
I never get hold of the keys, nor does my master ever let
them out of his keeping ; day and night they sleep under
his pillow.'*^ -

*' Well, then, there's another thing you may do, if so be
you h^ve made up a mind to be a first-rate musician ; if you
haven't, I need not bother myself with advising you."

"Have a mind, do you say? Ay, and to that degree
that there is nothing I wouldn't do, if it were possible any-
how, for sake of being able to play music."

** Well, if that's the case, you have only to scrape away a
little mortar from the gate-post near the hinge, and I will
give you, through that opening, a pair of pincers and a
hammer, with which you may by night draw out the nails of
the staple, and we can easily put that to rights again, so that
no one will ever suspect that the lock was opened. Once
shut up with you in your loft, or wherever you sleep, I will
go to work in such style that you will turn out even better
than I saidy to my own personal advantage, and to the
increase of your accomplishments. You need not give your-
self any concern about what we shall have to eat. I will
bring enough to last us both for more than a week, for I
have pupils who will not let me be pinched."

** As for that matter we are all right ; for with what my
master allows me, and the leavings brought me by the slave-
girls, we should have enough for two more besides ourselves.
Only bring the hammer and pincers, and I will make an
opening close to the hinge, through which you may pass
them in, and I will stop it up again with mud. I will take
the fastenings out of the lock, and even should it be neces-
sary to give some loud knocks, my master sleeps so -far off


342 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALKS.

from this gate, that it must be either a miracle or our extra-'
ordinary ill luck if he hears them/'

" Well, then, with the blessing of God, friend Luis, in
two days from this time you shall have everything necessary
for the execution of your laudable purpose. Meanwhile, take
care not to eat such things as are apt to make phlegm, for
they do the voice no good, but a deal of harm/'

'* Nothing makes me so hoarse so much as wine, but I
would not give it up for all the voices above ground."

"Don't think I would have you do so; God forbid!
Drink, Luis my boy, drink ; and much good may it do you,
for wine drunk in measure never did any one harm/'

<^ I always drink in measure. I have a jug here that
holds exactly three pints and a half. The girls fill this for
me unknown to my master, and the purveyor brings me on
the sly a bottle holding a good gallon, wluch makes up for
the deficiency of the jug."

" That's the way to live, my boy, for a dry throat can
neither grunt nor sing."

"Well, go your ways now, and God be with you; but
don't forget to come and sing here every night until such
time as you bring the tools for getting you within doors. My
fingers itch to be at the guitar/'

"I'll come, never fear, and 111 bring some new tunes
too."

"Ay, do; but before you go away now, sing me some-
thing that I may go to sleep pleasantly ; and for the matter
of payment, be it known to the sehor pohre that I will be
more liberal than many a rich man."

*' Oh, I ain't uneasy on that score. If you think I teach
you well, I will leave it to yourself to pay me accordingly.
And now I'll just sing you one song, but when I am inside
you will see wonders."

Here ended this long dialogue, and Loaysa sang a
sprightly ditty with such good eftect, that the negro was
in ecstacies, and felt as if the time for opening the door would
never arrive.

Having finished his song, Loaysa took his departure, and
set ofi" at a rounder pace than might have been expected of a
man on crutches, to report to his friends what a good be-
ginning he had made. He told them what he had concerted


THE JEALOUS ESTBAMADURAN. 343

with the negro, and the following day they procured tools of
the right sort, fit to break any fastening as if it was made of
straw. The virote failed not to serenade the negro, nor the
latter to scrape at the gate-post till he had made a sufficiently
wide hole, which he plastered up so well, that no one could
perceive it unless he searched for it on purpose. On the
second night Loaysa passed in the tools, Luis went to work >
with them, whipped off the staple in a trice, opened the door, ,
and let in his Orpheus. Great was his surprise to see him }
on his two crutches, with such a distorted leg, and in such a
tattered plight. Loaysa didnot wear the patch over his eye,
for it was not necessary, and as soon as he entered he em*
braced his pupil, kissed him on the cheek, and immediately
put into his hand a big jar of wine, a box of preserves, and
other sweet things, with which his wallet was well stored.
Then throwing aside his crutches, he began to cut capers, as
if nothing ailed him, to the still greater amazement of the -
negro.

" You must know, brother Luis," said Loaysa, " that my
lameness does not come of natural infirmity, but from my own
ingenious contrivance, whereby I get my bread, asking alms
for the love of God. In this way, and with the help of my
music, I lead the merriest life in the world, where others, with
less cleverness and good management, would be starved to
death. Of this you will be convinced in the course of our
friendship."

" We shall see," said the negro ; " but now let us put
this staple back in its place, so that it may not appear that it
has been moved."

" Yery good," said Loaysa, and taking out some nails from
hb wallet, he soon made the lock seem as secure as ever, to
the great satisfaction of the negro, who, taking him at once to >
his loft, made him as comfortable there as he could. Luis f
lighted a lamp ; Loaysa took up his guitar, and began to I
strike the chords softly and sweetly, so that the poor negro
was transported with delight. After he had played awhile,
he drew forth a fresh supply of good things for a collation,
which they partook of together, and the pupil applied himself
so earnestly to the bottle that it took away his senses still
more than the music had done. Supper over, Loaysa pro*
posed that Luis should take his first lesson at once; and


344 CERVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

though the poor negro was too much fiiddled to distingubh
one string from another, Loaysa made him believe that he had
already learnt at least two notes. So persuaded was the poor
fellow of this, that he did nothing all night but jangle and
Btrum away. They had but a short sleep that night. In the
morning, just on the strike of six, Carrizales came down,
opened both entrance doors, and stood waiting for the pur-
veyor, who came soon afterwards ; and after depositing the
da/s supplies in the turning-box, called the negro down to
receive his ration and oats for the mule. After the purveyor
was gone, old Carrizales went out, locking both doors after
him, without having seen what had been done to the lock
of one of them, whereat both master and pupil rejoiced not a
little.

No sooner was the master of the house gone, than the
negro laid hold on the guitar, and began to scrape it in such
a manner, that all the servant maids came to the second door,
and asked him, through the turning-box, "What is this,
Luis? How long have you had a guitar? Who gave it
you?"

" Who gave it me ? The best musician in the world, and
one who is to teach me in six days more than six thousand
tunes !"

" Where is he, this musician ?'' said thQ dueiia.

" He is not far off," replied the negro ; ** and if it were not
for fear of my master, perhaps I would tell you where at once,
and I warrant you would be glad to see him."

" But where can he be for us to see him,-' returned the
duena, "since no one but our master ever enters this house ?"

" I will not tell you any more about the matter till you
have heard what I can do, and how much he has taught me in
this short time."

" By my troth, unless he is a demon who has taught you,
I don't know how you can have become a musician all at


once."


" Stop a bit and you shall hear him, and mayhap you will
see him too some day."

" That can't be," said another of the women, " for there
are no windows on the street through which we could hear or
see anybody."

"Never mind" said the negro; "there's a remedy for


THE JEALOUS ESTBAMADURAN. 345

everything but death. If you only could or would keep
silence "

" Keep silence ! Ay that we will, brother Luis, as if we
were bom dumb. I give you my word, friend, I am dying to
hear a good voice, for ever since we have been shut up here
we have not even heard the birds sing."

Loaysa listened with great inward glee to this conversa*
tion, which showed how readily the women were taking the
very bent he would have given them. The negro was afraid
lest his master should return and catch him talking with
them ; but they would not go away until he had promised
that, when they least expected it, he would call them to hear
a capital voice. He then retreated to his loft, where he
would gladly have resumed his lessons, but durst not do so
by day for fear of detection. His master returned soon after
and went into the house, locking both doors behind him as
usual. When Luis went that day to the turning-box for his
victuals, he told the negress, who brought them, to let her fellow*
servants know that when their master was asleep that night,
they should all of them come down to the tnrning-box, when he
would be sure to give them the treat he had promised. He
was enabled to say so much, having previously entreated his
music-master to condescend to sing and play that night before
the inner door for the amusement of the women. The
maestro suffered himself to be pressed very hard to do the
thing he most desired, but after much seeming reluctance he
at last yielded to the solicitations of his esteemed pupil, and
said he would be happy to oblige him. The negro embraced
him cordially, in testimony of his grateful sense of the
promised favour, and treated him that day to as good cheer
as he could possibly have had at home, or perhaps better.

Towards midnight Luis knew, by the signsds cautiously
given at the turning-box, that the women were all there;
whereupon he and Loaysa went down from the loft with the
guitar, complete in all its strings and well tuned. The
maestro asked how many were there to hear him, and
was told that all the women in the house were there, except
their lady, who was in bed with her husband. This was not
what Loaysa wished for, nevertheless, by way of miking a
beginning and obliging his pupil, he touched the guitar
softly, and drew from it such tones as ravished the ears of his


316 cebvanteb' bxsmplaby tales.

audience. But who could describe the delight of the women
when he sang Pesafne de eUOf and followed it up with the
magic strains of the sarabandi then new in Spain ? There
was not one of them that did not keep time to the music as
if she were dancing like mad, but all noiselessly and with ex-
treme caution, keeping scouts on the watch to warn them if
the old man awoke. Loaysa finally played them several
seguidillas, and so put the climax to his success, that they all
eagerly begged the negro to tell them who was this marvel-
lous musician. Luis replied that he was a poor beggar, but
the most gallant and genteel man in all the back slums of
Seville. They conjured the negro to contrive some means
that they might see him, and not to let him quit the house
for a fortnight, for they would take care to supply him with
the best of good cbeer, and plenty of it. They were curious
to know how Luis had managed to get him into the house ;
but to this the negro made no reply. For the rest he told
them that if they wanted to see the maestro, they might bore
a small hole in the turning-box and afterwards stop it up
with wax; and that as for keeping him in the house, he would
do his best.

Loaysa then addressed them, and offered them his services
in such obliging and polite terms, that they were sure such
fine language never came out of the head of a poor beggar.
They entreated he would come the next night, and they would
prevail on their lady to come down and hear him, in spite of
the light sleep of her lord and master — the result not so
much of his age as of his extreme jealousy. Loaysa replied
that if they wished to hear him without fear of being sur«
prised by the old man, he would give them a powder to put
in his wine, which would make him sleep more soundly.
" Good heaven ! " cried one of the damsels, " if that were true,
what a blessing would have come home to us without our
knowing or deserving it ! It would not be a sleeping powder
for him so much as it would be a powder of life for all of us,
and for my poor dear lady, Leonora his wife, to whom he
sticks as close as her shadow, never losing sight of her for a
moment. Ah, sefior of my soul ! bring that powder, and may
God reward you with all the good you can desire. Go ! don't
lose a moment — bring it, senor mio ; I will take it upon me
to put it in his wine and to be his cupbearer. Oh^ that it


THB JEALOUS ESTBAMADURAN, 347

«

might please God that the old man should sleep three days
and nights ! Three glorious days and nights they would be
for us."

" Well, FU bring it then," said Loaysa. " It is of such
a nature that it does no harm to the person who takes it;
the only effect of it being to cause a most profound sleep/'

They all entreated him to bring it without delay, and then
they took their leave of him, after agreeing that on the foU
lowing night they would make a hole in the turning-box with
a gimlet, and that they would try and persuade their mistress
to come down. By this time it was nearly daylight, yet the
negro wished to take a lesson. Loaysa complied with his
desire, and assured him that among all the pupils he had ever
taught, he had not known one with a finer ear ; and yet the
poor negro could never, to the end of his days, have learned
the gamut.

Loaysa's friends took care to come at night to Carrizales^
door to see if their friend had any instructions to give them,
or wanted anything. On the second night, when they had
made him aware of their presence by a preconcerted signal,
he gave them, through the key-hole, a brief account of the
prosperous beginning he had made, and begged they would
try and get him something to be given to Carrizales to make
him sleep. He had heard, he said, that there were powders
which produced that effect. They told him they had a
friend, a physician, who would give them the best drug for
that purpose if he happened to have it; and after encouraging
him to persist in the enterprise, and promising to return on
the following night, they left him.

Presently the whole flock of doves came to the lure of
the guitar, and among them was the simple Leonora, trem*
bling for fear her husband should awake. So great was her
dread of his discovering her absence, that her women had
great difficulty in persuading her to make the hazardous
venture. But they all, especially the duena, told her such
wonderful things of the sweetness of the music, and the
engaging manners of the poor musician, whom, without
having seen him, they extolled above Absalom and Orpheus,
that they persuaded her to do what she would never have
done of her own accord. Their first act was to bore a hole
in the turning-box through which they might peep at the


348 CXBVAKTB8' EXSMPLABT TALES.

musician^ who was no longer clad in rags, but in wide breeches
of buff silky cut sailor fashion, a jacket of the same material,
a satin cap to match, and a starched double-pointed ruff, all
which he had brought in his wallet, expecting that he would
have to show himself on an occasion which would require
him to change his costume. Loaysa was young, good-looking,
and of pleasing deportment ; and as the eyes of idl the women
had been so long accustomed only to the sight of old Carri-
Kales, they fancied as they looked at Loaysa that they beheld
an angel.

Each of them took her turn at the peephole, and that they
might see him the better, the negro stood by him with a
lighted flambeau, which he moved up and down before the
maestro's body. After all the women, from the lady of the
house down to the two negresses, had thus gratified their
eyes, Loaysa took his guitar, and played €Uid sang more
bewitchingly than ever. Leonora's women were bewildered
with delight, and all besought Luis to contrive so that the
sefior maestro should come in through the inner door, so that
they might hear and see him better, instead of squinting at
him through a gimlet-hole, and without the risk they ran of
being caught in the fact by their master, which would not be
80 great if they had the musician concealed inside. Their
lady strenuously opposed this proposition, declaring she
would not permit any such thing. She was shocked to hear
them mention it, for they could hear and see him well enough
as it was, without danger to their honour. " Honour," ex-
claimed the duena ; ^Hhe king has plenty. Your ladyship ma;^
shut yourself up with your Methusalem, if you have a mind,
but leave us to amuse ourselves as well as we can ; the more
so since this senor appears to be too much the gentleman to
ask anything of us but what would be pleasing to ourselves."

"Never!" interposed Loaysa. "I came hither, ladies,
with no other intention than to offer you my humble services,
with all my heart and soul, moved by commiseration for the
unparalleled rigour of your confinement, and for the precious
moments that are lost to you through this recluse way of life.
By the Mfe of my father, I- am a man so artless, so meek, so
tractable and obedient, that I will never do more than I am
bidden. If any one of you should please to say, * Maestro,
sit down here; Maestro, step this way, step that way, go


THB JEALOUS ESTRAMABURAK. 349

yonder^' I will do just as you bid me, like the tamest and
best trained dog that jumps for the king of France/'

''Well, if that be so," said the inexperienced Leonora,
^'what is to be done, so that the seilor maestro may
come in ?"

" Nothing can be easier," said Loaysa. " So please you,
ladies, just take the trouble to make an impression on
wax with the key of this door ; and I will take care that by
to-morrow night another shall be made exactly like it, which
will answer our purpose."

" With that key," one of the women remarked, " we shall
have those of the whole house, for it is a master-key.**

" So much the better," said Loaysa.

" That is true," said Leonora ; " but this senor must first
of all swear, that when he is inside here he will not attempt
to do anything but sing and play when he is asked, and that
he will keep close and quiet wherever we may put him/'

** I swear to this," said Loaysa.

"That oath is good for nothing," replied .Leonora: "the
sefior must swetir by the life of his father, and by the cross,
which he must kiss in sight of us all."

"I swear by the life of my father," said Loaysa, "and
by this sign of the cross, which I kiss with my unworthy
mouth ;" and crossing two of his fingers, he kissed them three
times.

"That will do," said one of the women; "and now,
sefior, be sure you don't forget the powder, for that is the
main thing of fdl."

Here the conversation ended for that night, and all parties
retired highly satisfied with the interview. Good luck had
evidently declared in favour of Loaysa ; and just then, about
two o'clock in the morning, it brought his friends to the door*
On their giving the usual signal by blowing a French honii
he went to the door, told them what progress he had made,
and asked had they brought the powder or other drug to put
Carrizales to sleep. At the same time, he spoke to them
respecting the master-key. They told him that on the fol-
lowing night they would bring the powder, or else an oint-
ment of such virtue that one had only to rub the patient's
wrists and temples with it to throw him into such a profound
■leep, that he would not wake for two days, unless the


350 CEBTAHTES' EXEHPLABY TALES.

anointed parts were well washed with yin^;ar. As to the
kejy he had only to give them the impression in wax, and
they would have a false one made forthwith. Having said this,
the friends retired, and Loaysa and his pnpil went to rest for
the short remainder of the night. The next day hung heavily
on handy as always happens to those who are filled with eager
expectation; but the longest' day must have an end, and
LcMiysa's impatient desire was at last gratified*

The appointed hour having arrived, all the domestics,
great and small, black and white, repaired to the turning-box,
longing to see the sefior musico fairly within their seraglio ;
but no lieonora was there. When Loaysa inquired for her,
they said she was in bed with her good man,, who had locked the
bed-room door, and put the key under his pillow; and that their
lady had told them, that when the old man had fallen asleep she
would take the key, and they were to go to her by and by for
the wax impression she would take from it, and pass to them
through a trap-hole in the door. Loaysa was astonished at
the old man's extreme wariness, in spite of which he by no
means despaired of baffling his precautions. Just then the
French horn was heard : Loaysa hastened to the door, and
received from his friends a pot containing the promised oint-
ment. Bidding them wait awhUe, and he would bring them
the mould of the key, he went back to the turning-box, and
told the duena, who seemed the most eager of all the women
for his admission, to give the ointment to her lady, bid her
anoint her husband with it so cautiously that he should not
be aware of what she was doing, and she would soon see
wonders. The duena took the pot, stole up to her mistress's
door, and found her waiting on the inside, stretched full length
on the floor, with her face to the trap-hole. The duena laid
herself down in the same manner, and putting her mouth to
her mistress's ear, whispered that she had brought the oint-
ment, telling her at the same time how to apply it. Leonora
took the ointment, but told the duena that she could by no
means get the key, for her husband had not put it under the
pillow as usual, but between the mattresses, just under where
he lay. However, she was to tell the maestro, that if the
ointment operated as he said, she could easily get the key as
often as she pleased, and so there would be no need of coj^ying
it in wax. Having delivered this message at once, the dueua


THE JEALOUS BSTRAMADURAK. 351

was to come back, and see how the ointment worked, for she
mtended to apply it forthwith. The duefia having reported
all this to Loaysa, he sent away his friends who were waiting
without for the mould of the key.

Trembling in every limb, and scarcely daring to breathe,
Leonora began to rub the wrists of her jealous husband.
Next she smeared his nostrils ; but as she did so, the old
man jerked his head, and Leonora was petrified with terror,
believing that he was awake, and had caught her in the fact.
It was a false alarm, however, and she went on with her task
the best way she could, till she had completed it according to
her instructions. It was not long before its effects manifested
themselves ; for presently the old man began to snore loud
enough to be heard in the street. This was music more
delightful to Leonora's ears than the maestro's voice or guitar ;
but still hardly trusting what she saw, she ventured to shake
him, a very little at first, to see if he would wake ; and then
a wee bit more and more, till finding that he still snored on,
she made bold to turn him over from one side to the other,
without his showing any signs of waking. Seeing this, she
stepped joyfully to the door ; and in a voice not so low as
before, called out to the duena, who was waiting with her ear
to the trap-hole. ^'Good news, sister; Carrizales is sleeping
more soundly than the dead."

'^ What stops you then from taking the key, senora V said
the duena. ^^ The musico has been waiting for it this hour
and more."

'* Stay a moment, sister ; I am going for it," said Leonora ;
and stepping back to the bed, she put her hand between the
mattresses, and drew out the key without the old man's per-*
ceiving it. No sooner was the key in her hands, than danc-
ing with delight she unlocked the door, and gave it to the
exulting duena, bidding her let in the maestro, and bring him
into the gallery ; but as for herself, she durst not stir from that
spot, for fear of what might happen. But before all things
she insisted that the maestro should ratify anew the oath he
had taken not to do more than thev should order him ; and if
he would not give this renewed pledge, he was not to be let
in on any consider<ation.

'^ Never fear," said the duena ; ** not a bit shall he come


352 CERVAKTBa' XXEMPLABT TALES.

in until Le has sworn, and sworn again, and kissed the cross
at least six times/'

** Don't bind him to any fixed number/' said Leonora ;
^^but let him kiss the cross as many times as he pleases; but
be sure that he swears by the life of his father, and by all he
holds dear ; for then we shall be safe and sure, and we may
take our fiU of hearing him sing and play ; and exquisitely
he does so, upon my word. There now, get you gone with-
out more delay, and let us not waste the night in words/'

The good duefia caught up her petticoats, and ran with
all her speed to the turning-box, where the whole party was
impatiently awaiting her ; and no sooner had she shown them
the key in her hand, than they hoisted her upon their shoul-
ders, and paraded up and down with her, crying " Yiva !
viva !" But still greater was their joy when she told them
there was no need to have a false key made ; for so soundly
did the old man sleep after being anointed, that they might
have the house-key as often as they required it.

** Quick then, good friend," said one of the troop, *^ open
the door, and let in this gentleman who has been waiting so
long, and let us have a jolly bout of music, for that is all we
have now to do."

" Nay, but there is more to be done," replied the duena ;
'* for we must exact another oath of him ; the same as last
night."

** He is so good," said one of the slave girls, '^ that he
won't grudge taking as many oaths as we like."

The duena now unlocked the door, and holding it ajar
called to Loaysa,. who had been listening at the aperture to
all that had passed. He was for springing in at a bound ;
but the duena stopped him, laying her hand on his breast,
and said, " Fair and softly, seiior ; I would have you to know,
as God is my judge, we are all of us virgins here as truly as
the mothers that bore us, except my lady ; and I am one too,
the Lord forgive me, though you would take me for forty years
old ; but I am not thirty all out, wanting two months and a
fortnight of my thirtieth birthday ; and if I look older, it is that
cares, and troubles, and vexations tell upon one more than
years. Now this being so, it does not stand to reason, that
for the sake of hearing two or three songs we should risk the


THE JEALOUS ESTBAHADUBAK. 353

loss of 80 much virginity as is here collected together. And
80 you see, my sweet sir, before you enter our domain, you
must first take a very solemn oath, that you will do nothing
beyond our orders. If you think it is much we ask of you,
do but consider how much more it is we risk ; and if your
intentions are good and proper, you will not be loth to swear ;
for a good paymaster does not mind giving security."

^'Well said, Marialonso," cried one of the damsels;
" spoken like a person of sense, and who knows what's what.
If the sefiior won't swear, then let him not come in here."

" Tell you what," said Guiomar, the negress, in her
broken jargon, ^^ s'ppose him no swear, let him in all the
same, in devil's name ; for s'ppose him swear, once him in,
him forget eberyting."

Loaysa listened very demurely to the Senora Maria*
lonso's harangue, and replied with great gravity, '^ Be assured,
ladies, my charming sisters and companions, my intention
never was, is, or shall be other than to gratify and content
you to the utmost of my powers ; and therefore I make
no difficulty with regard to this oath which is required of
me, though I could have wished that some confidence had
been reposed in my simple word, which, given by such a person
as I am, would have been as good as a bond signed and
sealed ; for I would have you to know, ladies, that under a
bad cloak there is often a good drinker. But to the end that
you may all be assured of my upright intentions, I will take
the oath as a catholic and a man of parts. I swear then by
the immaculate efiicacy, wherever it abides in greatest sanctity
and fulness, by all the entrances and exits of the holy mount
Libanus, and by all that is contained in the preface to the
true history of Charlemagne, with the death of the giant
Fierabras, not to swerve or depart from the oath I have
taken, or from the commands which may be laid upon me by
the least of these ladies, under penalty, should I do other-
^ wise, or attempt to do otherwise, that from this time forth till

then, and from thenceforth till now, the same shall be null
and void and of 'no effect whatsoever."

When honest Loaysa had got so far in his oath, one of the

young maidens, who had listened to him with wrapt attention,

cried out, " Well, if that is not what you may call an oath !

1 it is enough to melt the heart of a stone. Plague take me if

X


354 CERVANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

you shall swear any more for me ; for after such an oath as
that you might enter the very cave of Cabra." So saying,
she caught hold of him by the breeches, and drew him within
the door, where the rest immediately gathered close round
him. One of them ran off with the news to her mistress,
who stood watching her husband ; and who, when she heard
that the musico was actually within doors, was moved almost
at the same moment by joy and fear, and hiuriedly asked if he
had sworn. The girl told her he had done so, and with the
most singular form of oath she had ever heard in her life.

"Well, since he has sworn, we have him fast," said
Leonora. " Oh, what a good thought it was of mine to make
him swear !"

They were now met by the whole party advancing in
procession, with the musico in the midst of them, and the
negro and Guiomar lighting the way. As soon as Loaysa
saw Leonora, he threw himself at her feet to kiss her hands ;
but without saying a word, she made signs to him to rise,
and he obeyed. Observing then that they all remained as
mute as if they had lost their tongues, Loaysa told them
they might talk, and talk aloud too ; for there was no fear
that their lord-master would wake and hear them, such being
the virtue of the ointment, that without endangering life it
made a man lie like one dead.

" That I fully believe," said Leonora ; " for were it not
so, he would have been awake twenty times before this, such
a light sleeper he is, in consequence of his frequent indisposi-
tions ; but ever since I anointed him, he has been snoring
like a pig.'*

" That being the case," said the duena, " let us go into the
saloon, where we may hear the gentleman sing, and amuse
ourselves a little."

" Let us go," said Leonora ; " but let Guiomar remain
here on the watch, to warn us if Carrizales wakes."

" Ay," said Guiomar, " black woman stay, white woman
go : God pardon all."

Leaving the negress behind, the rest all went to the
saloon, where they seated themselves on a rich (jarpet, with
Loaysa in the centre of the group. Marialonso took a cau-
dle, and began to examine the figure of the musician from
head to foot. Every one had something to say in his com-


THE JEALOUS ESTBAMABURAN. 355

mendation : ** Ob, what a nice curly head of hair he has !"
said one. "What nice teeth!" cried another; "blanched
almonds are nothing to them." " What eyes ! ' exclaimed a
third ; " so large and full, and so green ! By the life of my
mother, they look for all the world like emeralds." Leonora
alone said not a word ; but as she looked at the maestro, she
could not help thinking that he was better looking than her
good man. Presently the dueiia took the guitar out of the
negro's hands, and putting it into Loaysa's, begged he would
sing to it a villanetta then in high fashion at Seville. He
complied ; the women all jumped up, and began to dance ;
whilst the due&a sang the words of the song with more good
will than good voice.

Close you watch me, mother mine,

Watch me, and immure me :
Don*t you know without my help

You can not secure mef

Appetite, 'tis said with truth,

By privation eroweth ;
Thwarted love, like flame confined,

All the fiercer gloweth.
Better therefore 'twere, methinks.

You should not immure me:
Don't you know without my help

You can not secure me ?
Close you watch me, &o.

Moths will to the taper fly.

Bees on flowers will cluster ;
Keep a loving maid who can

From love^ solden lustre!
Fear you lest that beacon light

From your arms should lure ma f
Well I know without my help

You can not secure me.
Close you watch me, &c.

There's a way where there's a will :

Keep the will from straying.
Wayward hearts will have their (XSsiQf

Spite of all gainsaying.
If you'd have me very good.

Don't be hard on poor me ;
Sure I am without my help

You can not secure me.
Close you watch me, &c.

X 2


356 CEBYANTSS* EXEMPLARY TALES.

The song and the dance were just ended, when in rushed
Guiomar in wild affright, gesticulating as if she was in a fit,
and in a voice between a croak and a whisper, she stam-
mered out, " Master wake, senora ; sefiora, master wake : him
getting up, and coming." Whoever has seen a flock of pigeons
feeding tranquilly in the field, and has marked the fear and
confusion with which they take flight at the terrible sound of
the gun, may picture to himself the fluttering dismay of the
dancers at the unexpected news blurted out by Guiomar. Off
they ran in all directions, leaving the musico in the lurch, and
in a pitiable state of perplexity. Leonora wrung her beautiful
hands; and the Senora Marialonso beat her face, and tore
her hair, but not with great violence. In short, all was panic
and confusion ; but the duena, who had more cunning and
presence of mind than the rest, directed that Loaysa should
go into her own room, whilst she and her mistress remained
where they were, never doubting but they should find some
excuse or another to put off upon Carrizales.

Loaysa hid himself, and the duena bent her ear to listen
for her master's footsteps ; but hearing nothing, she took cou-
rage by degrees, and stealing on tip-toe to his bed-room, she
found him snoring there as soundly as ever. Back she ran,
at her best speed, to gladden her mistress's heart with the
joyful intelligence ; and then discreetly resolving not to lose
so lucky an opportunity of being the first to enjoy the good
graces of the musico, she told Leonora to wait there whilst
she went and called him. Hastily entering the room where he
was concealed, she found him sorely discomfited by the unto-
ward issue of his adventure, cursing the inefficiency of the
ointment, the credulity of his friends, and his own want of
forethought in not making an experiment with the ointment
on some other person before he tried its effect on Carrizales.
But when the duena assured him that the old man was sleep-
ing as soundly as ever, there was an end to all his uneasiness,
and he lent a complacent ear to the very liquorish language in
which Marialonso addressed him. "Oho," said he to him-
self, " that's what you would be at, is it ? Well, you will do
capitally as a bait to fish with for your lady,"

Whilst this tete-ct'tete was pending, the rest of the women
had one by one crept out of their several hiding-places, to see
if it was true that their master was awake ; and finding all


>


THE JEALOUS ESTRAMADURAK. 351

stiU in the house, they returned to the saloon where they
had left their mistress. Having learnt from her that the
alarm had been a false one, they asked what had become of
the musico and the duena. Leonora told them that Maria-
lonso had gone to fetch the miaestro, whereupon they all stole
out of the room as noiselessly as they had entered it, and set
themselves to listen at the door to what was passing between
the pair. Guiomar was one of the party, but the negro was
not among them ; for upon the first alarm he had run off,
hug^ng his guitar, and hid himself in his loft, where he
lay huddled up under the bed-clothes, sweating with terror ;
in spite of which he could not forbear from tinkling the
guitar from time to time, so inordinate — may Satanas
confound him ! — was his love of music. The soft speeches
of the amorous duefia were distinctly heard by the group
outside the door; and there was not one of them but
bestowed a blessing upon her from the wrong side of the
mouth, with the addition of sundry epithets which I had
rather not repeat. The result of the confabulation between
the pair was that Loaysa would comply with the duena's
desires, provided that first of all she brought her mistress to
consent to his. It cost the duena something to subscribe to
these conditions ; but, after all, there was nothing she would -
not have done to compass the gratification of the desires that
had laid hold on her soul and body, and were undermining
her very bones and marrow. The bargain was struck ; and
quitting the room to go and speak to her mistress, she found
all the rest of the women assembled round the door. Putting
a bold face on the matter, she bade them all go to bed, and
next night they should be able to enjoy themselves without
any such false alarm as had spoiled their sport for that time.
The women all knew well that the old duena only wanted to
be left alone ; but they could not help obeying her, for she
had command over them alL

Having got rid of the servants, the duena went back to the
saloon, and began to exercise her powers of persuasion upon
Leonora. She made her a long and plausible harangue, so well
put together that one might have supposed she had composed it
beforehand. She extolled the good looks of the gentle musico,
the elegance of his manners, his wondrous suavity, and his
countless other good qualities ; represented how infinitely more


358 CEBYANTES' EXBMPLART TALES.

agreeable must be the caresses of such a charming young
gallant than those of the old husband ; assured her the affair
would never be discovered, and plied her with a thousand other
arguments which the devil put into her mouth, all so specious
and so artfully coloured, that they might have beguiled the
firmest mind^ much more that of a being so artless and unwary
as poor Leonora. O duenas, bom and used for the perdition
of thousands of modest, virtuous beings ! O ye long plaited
coifs, chosen to impart an air of grave decorum to the sdlas
of noble ladies, how do you reverse the functions of your
perhaps needful office ! In fine, the duena talked with such
effect, that Leonora consented to her own undoing, and to
that of all the precautions of the wary Carrizales, whose sleep
was the death of his honour. Marialonso took her mistress by
the hand, led the weeping lady almost by force to Loaysa, and
wishing them much joy with a diabolical leer, she left them
both shut in together, and laid herself down in the saloon to
sleep, or rather to await the reward she had earned. Overcome,
however, by the loss of rest on two successive nights, she
could not keep her eyes open, but fell fast asleep on the carpet.

And now, if we did not know that Carrizales was asleep,
it would not be amiss to ask him, where now were all his
jealous cares and precautions ? What now availed the lofty
walls of his house, and the exclusion from it of every male
creature ? What had he gained by his turning-box, his thick
walls, his stopped up windows, the enormously strict seclu-
sion to which he had doomed his family, the large jointure he
had settled on Leonora, the presents he was continually making
her, his liberal treatment of her attendants, and his unfailing
alacrity in supplying them with everything he imagined they
could want or wish for ? But as we have said, he was asleep.
Had he been awake, and disposed to reply, he could not have
given a better answer than by saying, as he shrugged his
shoulders and arched his eyebrows, that all this had been
brought to nought by the craft of an idle and vicious young
man, and the wickedness of a faithless duena, working upon
the weakness of an artless and inexperienced girl. Heaven
save us all from such enemies as these, against whom the
shield of prudence and the sword of vigilance are alike impotent
to defend us !

Such, nevertheless, was Leonora's rectitude, and so oppor^


THB JEALOUS ESTRAMADURAN. 359

tuncly did she manifest it, that all the villanous arts of the
crafty seducer were of no avail ; till both of them, wearied by
the contest, the baffled tempter and the victorious defender of
her own chastity, fell asleep almost at the moment when it
pleased Heaven that Carrizales should awake in spite of the
ointment. As usual he felt all about the bed, and not finding
his dear wife in it, he jumped up in the utmost consternation,
and with strange agility for a man of his years. He looked
all over the room for her, and when he found the door open,
and the key gone from between the mattresses, he was nearly
distracted. Recovering himself a little, he went out into the
gallery, stole softly thence to the saloon, where the duefia was
asleep, and seeing no Leonora there, he went to the duena's
own room, opened the door gently, and beheld Leonora in
Loaysa's arms, and both of them looking as if the soporific
ointment was exerting its influence over themselves instead
of upon the jealous husband.

Carrizales was petrified with horror ; his voice stuck in
his throat ; his arms fell powerless by his sides, and his feet
seemed rooted to the ground ; and though the fierce revulsion
of his wrath presently aroused his torpid senses, he yet could
scarcely breathe, so intense was his anguish. Thirsting for
vengeance as terrible as his monstrous wrong, but having no
weapon at hand, he returned to his chamber as stealthily as
he had quitted it, in search of a dagger, with which he would
wash out the stain cast upon his honour in the blood of the
guilty pair, and then massacre his whole household ; but he
had no sooner reached his room than his grief again over-
powered him, and he fell senseless on the bed.

Day broke now, and found Leonora still in the arms of
Loaysa. Marialonso awoke, and thinking it time to receive
what she counted was due to her, she awoke Leonora, who was
shocked to find it so late, and bitterly accused her own impru-
dence and the due&a's negligence. With trembling steps the
two women crept up to Felipe's bedroom, praying inwardly td
Heaven that they might find him still snoring ; and when they
saw him lying on the bed, apparently asleep, they made no
doubt that he was still under the efiect of the opiate, and cm-
braced each other in a transport of joy. Leonora went up to
her husband, and taking him by the arm, turned him over on
his side to see if he would wake without their being obliged


3(50 CEBVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

to wash him with vinegar according to the directions ^ven
with the ointment ; but the movement roused Carrizales from
his swoon, and heaving a deep sigh, he ejaculated in a faint
and piteous tone, *^ Miserable man that I am ! to what a woeful
pass I am come !"

Leonora did not distinctly hear what her husband said ;
but seeing with surprise that the effect of the opiate was not
so lasting as she had been led to expect, she bent over him,
put her cheek to his, and pressing him closely in her arms,
said, " What ails you, dear senor ? You seem to be com-
plaining?"

Carrizales opened his eyes to their utmost width, and
turning them full upon her, stared at her a long while with
a look of profound amazement. At last he said, " Do me
the pleasure, seiiora, to send instantly for your parents in my
name, and ask them to come hither, for I feel something at my
heart which distresses me exceedingly. I fear I have but a
short time to live, and I should like to see them before I die."

Leonora immediately despatched the negro with this mes-
sage to her parents. She fully believed what her husband
had told her, and attributing his danger to the violence of
the opiate instead of to its real cause, she put her arms round
his neck, caressed him more fondly than ever she had done
before, and inquired how he felt, with such tender solicitude,
as if she loved him above everything in the world ; while he,
on the other hand, continued to gaze upon her with the same '
unvarying look of astonishment, every endearing word or
caress of hers being like a dagger to his heart. The duena
had, by this time, acquainted Loaysa and the domestics with
her master's illness, which, she remarked, was evidently very
serious, since he had forgotten to give orders that the street
door should be locked after the negro's departure to summon
her lady's parents. The message was itself a portentous
occurrence, for neither father nor mother had ever set foot
within that house since their daughter's marriage. In short,
the whole household was in anxiety, though no one divined
the true cause of the old man's illness. He lay sighing at in-
tervals, so heavily that every sigh seemed like the parting of
soul and body. Leonora wept to see him in such a state,
whilst he beheld her feigned tears, as he deemed them, with
a bitter smile, that looked like the grin of insanity.


THE JEALOUS ESTRAMABURAN. 361

LeoDora*s parents now arrived, and were struck with no
little misgivings when they found both entrance doors open
and the house all lonely and silent. They went up to their
son-in-law's room, and found him in the posture he had all
along maintained, with his eyes immovably fixed on his wife,
whom he held by the hands, whilst both were in tears ; she,
because she saw his flow, and he at seeing how deceitfully she
wept. As soon as they entered the room, Carrizales begged
them to be seated, ordered all the domestics to withdraw ex-
cept Marialonso, then wiped his eyes, and with a calm voice
and an air of perfect composure addressed them thus : —

" I am sure, my respected father and mother-in-law, I
need no other witnesses than yourselves to the truth of what
I have now to say to you in the first place. You must well
remember with how much love and what tender affection I
received your daughter when you bestowed her upon me one
year, one month, five days, and nine hours ago, as my lawful
wife. You know, also, with what liberality I behaved to her,
for the settlement I made upon her would have been more
than enough to furnish three young ladies of her quality with
handsome marriage portions. You must remember the pains
I took to dress and adorn her with everything she could
desire or I could think of as suitaUe to her. It is known to
you likewise how, prompted by my natural disposition, fearful
of the evil to which I shall surely owe my death, and taught
by the experience of a long life to be on my guard against
the many strange chances that occur in life, I sought to guard
this jewel which I had chosen and you had bestowed upon me,
with all possible care and caution. I raised the walls of this
liouse higher, blocked up all the windows that looked on
the street, doubled the locks of the doors, »et up a turning-
box as in a nunnery, and perpetually banished from my
dwelling every vestige of the male sex. I gave my wife
female servants and slaves to wait upon her : I denied neither
her nor them anything they chose to ask of me. I made her
my equal, communicated my most secret thoughts to her, and
put my whole property at her disposal. Having done all this,
I thought I might fairly expect to enjoy securely what had
cost me so much, and that it would be her care not to afford
me cause for conceiving any kind of jealous fear whatever.
But it is not within the power of human efforts to present


362 CEBVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

the chastisement which Heaven is pleased to inflict on those
who do not rest their whole hopes and desires upon it alone.
No wonder then if mine have been deceived, and I have myself
prepared the poison of which I am now dying. But I see
how anxiously you hang upon the words of my mouth. I
will therefore keep you no longer in suspense, but conclude
this long preamble by telling you, in one word, what no
words were adequate to describe, were I to speak for ever.
This morning I found this woman/' (here he pointed to his
wife,) " who was born for the ruin of my peace and the de-
struction of my life, in the arms of a young gallant, who is
now shut up in the bed-chamber of this pestilent dueSa."

Carrizales had no sooner uttered these words than Leonora
swooned, and fell with her head upon his lap. Marialonso
turned as white as ashes, and Leonora's parents were so
astounded that they could not utter a word. After a short
pause, Carrizales continued thus : —

'* The vengeance I intend to take for this outrage shall be
no common one. As I have been singular in all my other
actions, so will I be in this. My vengeance shall fall upon
myself, as the person most culpable of all, for I ought to have
considered how ill this girl's fifteen years could assort with
my threescore and ten. I have been like the silkworm, which
builds itself a house in which it must die. I do not reproach
you, misguided girl " — here he bent down and kbsed his still
insensible wife—" for the persuasions of a wicked old woman,
and the wheedling tongue of an amorous youth, easily prevail
over the little wit of a green girl ; but that all the world may
see how strong and how true was the love I bore you, I shall
give such a proof of it here on my death-bed, as the world
has never seen or heard of; — one that shall remain an un-
paralleled example, if not of goodness, at least of singleness
of heart. I desire that a notary be immediately sent for to
make my will, wherein I will double Leonora's jointure, and
recommend her, after my death, which will not be long
delayed, to marry that young man whom these gray hairs
have never offended. Thus she will see that, as in life I
never departed in the slightest particular from what I thought
could please her, so I wish her to be happy when I am no
more, and to be united to him whom she must love so much.
The rest of my fortune I will bequeath to pious uses, after


THE JEALOUS ESTRAMADURAN: S63

leaving to you both wherewith to live honourably for the rest
of your days. Let the notary come instantly, for the anguish
I am now suffering is such that, if it continues, my time here
will be very short."

Here Carrizales was seized with a terrible swoon, and sank
down so close to Leonora that their feces touched. During
this scene the dueSa stole out of the room, and went to
apprize Loaysa of all that had happened. She advised him to
quit the house immediately, and she would take care to keep
him informed of all that was going on, for there were no locked
doors now to hinder her from sending the negro to him when-
ever it was necessary. Astounded at this news, Loaysa took
her advice, put on his beggar's rags again, and went away to
make known to his friends the strange issue of his amour.

Leonora's father, meanwhile, sent for a notary, who arrived
soon after both husband and wife had recovered their senses.
Carrizales- made his will in the manner he had stated, without
saying anything of his wife's transgressions ; he only declared
that, for good reasons, he advised, and begged her to marry,
should he die, that young man of whom he had spoken to her
in private. When Leonora heard this, she threw herself at
her husband's feet, and cried, while her heart throbbed as if
it would burst, " Long may you live, my lord and my only
joy ; for though you may not believe a word I say, indeed,
indeed I have not offended you, except in thought."

More she would have said, but when she attempted to ex-
culpate herself by a full statement of what had really occurred,
her tongue failed her, and she fainted away a second time.
The poor old man embraced her as she lay ; so, too, did her
parents — all three weeping bitterly ; and even the notary
could not refrain from tears. Carrizales gave the negro and
the other slaves their liberty, and left all the servants enough
to maintain them ; the perfidious Marialonso alone was to have
nothing beyond the arrears of her wages. Seven days after-
wards Carrizales was laid in his grave.

Leonora remained a mourning though wealthy widow;
and whilst Loaysa expected that she would fulfil the desire
which he knew her husband had expressed in his will, he
learned that within a week she had become a nun in one ol
the most austere and rigid convents in all Seville. Mortified
by this dbappointment, he left the countiy and went to the


364 CERVANTES EXEMPLABT TALES.

Indies. Leonora's father and mother were deeply grieved,
but found consolation in the wealth which their son-in-law
had bequeathed them. The two damsels likewise consoled
themselves, as did the negro and the female slaves, the former
being well provided for, and the latter having obtained their
freedom ; the wicked duena alone was left to digest, in poverty,
the frustration of her base schemes. For my part I was long
possessed with the desire to complete this story, which so
signally exemplifies the little reliance that can be put in locks,
turning-boxes, and walls, whilst the will remains free; and
the still less reason there is to trust the innocence and simpli-
city of youth, if its ear be exposed to the suggestions of your
demure duenas, whose virtue consists in their long black
gowns and their formal white hoods. Only I know not why
it was that Leonora did not persist in exculpating herself, and
explaining to her jealous husband how guiltless she had been
in the whole of that unhappy business. But her extreme
agitation paralysed her tongue at the moment, and the haste
which her husband made to die, left her without another
opportunity to complete her justification.


TBB ILLUSTBIOTTS SCULLEBT-MAID. S6ff


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERY-MAID.

In the famous city of Burgos there lived two wealthy
cavaliers, one of whom was called Don Diego de Carriazo,
and the other Don Juan de Avendaflo. Don Diego had a son
called after himself, and Don Juan another, whose name was
Don Tomas de Avendafio. These two young gentlemen being
the principal persons of the following tale, we shall for the
sake of brevity call them Carriazo and Avendano.

Carriazo might be about thirteen or little more, when,
prompted by a scampish disposition^ without having had any
cause to complain of bad treatment at home, he ran away from
bis father's house, and cast himself upon the wide world. So
much did he enjoy a life of unrestricted freedom, that amidst
all the wants and discomforts attendant upon it, he never missed
the plenty of his father's house. He neither tired of trudging
on foot, nor cared for cold or heat. For him all seasons of the
year were genial spring. His sleep was as sound on a heap
of straw as on soft mattresses^ and he made himself as snug
in a hayloft as between two Holland sheets. In short, he
made such way in the profession he had chosen, that he could
have given lessons to the famous Guzman de Alfarache.

During the three years he absented himself from home, he
learned to play at sheepshanks in Madrid, at rmtoy in the
public-houses of Toledo, and at presa y pinta in the barbacans
of Seville. In spite of the sordid penury of his way of life,
Carriazo showed himself a prince in his actions. It was easy
to see by a thousand tokens that he came of gentle blood. His
generosity gained him the esteem of all his comrades. He
seldom was present at drinking bouts ; and though he drank
wine, it was in moderation, and he carried it welL He was
not one of those unlucky drinkers, who whenever they exceed
a little, show it immediately in their faces, which look as if
they were painted with vermilion or red ochre. In short, the
world beheld in Carriazo a virtuous, honourable, well-bred.


866 CERVANTES EXEMFLABT TALES.

rogue, of more than common ability. He passed through all the
degrees of roguery till he graduated as a master in the tunny
fisheries of Zahara, the chief school of the art. O kitchen- wal-
loping rogues, fat and shining with grease ; feigned cripples ;
cutpurses of Zocodober and of the Plaza of Madrid ; sanctimoni-
ous patterers of prayers; Seville porters; bullies of the Hampa,
and all the countless host comprised under the denomination
of rogues ! never presume to call yourself by that name if you
have not gone through two courses, at least, in the academy
of the tunny fisheries. There it is that you may see con-
verging as it were in one grand focus, toil and idleness, filth
and spruceness, sharp set hunger and lavish plenty, vice
without disguise, incessant gambling, brawls and quarrels
every hour in the day, murders every now and then, ribaldry
and obscenity, singing, dancing, laughing, swearing, cheating,
and thieving without end. There many a man of quality
seeks for his truant son, nor seeks in vain ; and the youth
feels as acutely the pain of being torn from that life of licence
as though he were going to meet his death. But this joyous
life has its bitters as well as its sweets. No one can lie down
to sleep securely in Zaliara, but must always have the dread
hanging over him of being carried off to Barbary at any
moment. For this reason, they all withdraw at night into
some fortified places on the coast, and place scouts and
sentinels to watch whilst they sleep ; but in spite of all
precautions, it has sometimes happened that scouts, sentinels,
rogues, overseers, boats, nets, and all the posse comitatus of the
place have begun the night in Spain and have seen the dawn
in Tetuan. No apprehensions of this kind, however, could
deter Carriazo from spending three successive summers at the
fisheries for his pastime ; and such was his luck during his
third season, that he won at cards about seven hundred reals,
with which he resolved to buy himself good clothes, retiu^n
to Burgos, and gladden the heart of his sorrowing mother.

He took a most affectionate leave of his many dear friends,
assuring them that nothing but sickness or death should pre-
vent his being with them in the following simuner', for his
heart was in Zahara, and to his eyes its parched sands were
fresher than all the verdure of the Elysian fields. Ambling
merrily along on shanks' mare, he arrived at Valladolid, where
he stopped a fortnight to get rid of the mahogany hue of his


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLEBT-MAID. 367

complexion, and to change his rogue's costume for that of a
gentleman. Having equipped himself properly, he had still a
hundred reals left, which he spent on the hire of a mule and
a servant, that he might make a good figure when he pre*
sented himself to his parents. They received him with the
utmost joy, and all the friends and relations of the family
came to congratulate them on the safe arrival of their son
Don Diego de Carriazo. I had forgotten to mention that,
during his peregrination, Don Diego had taken the name of
Yidiales, and by that name alone he was known to his new
acquaintances.

Among those who came to see the new arrival were Don
Juan de Avendafio and his son Don Tomas, with the latter
of whom, as they were both of the same age and neighbours,
Carriazo contracted a very close friendship. Carriazo gave his
parents a long and circumstantial account of all the fine
things he had seen and done during the three years he had
been from home, in all which there was not one word of
truth ; but he never so much as hinted at the tunny fisheries,
though they were constantly in his thoughts, more especially
as the time approached in which he had promised liis friencU
he would return to them. He took no pleasure in the chase,
with which his father sought often to divert him, nor in any
of the convivial meetings of that hospitable city. All kinds
-of amusements wearied him, and the besc enjoyments that
could be offered to him were not to be compared, he thought,
with those he had known at the tunny fisheries. His friend
Avendano, finding him often melancholy and musing, ventured
to inquire after the cause, at the same time professing his
readiness to assist his friend in any way that might be
requisite, and to the utmost of his power, even at the cost of
his blood. Carriazo felt that it would be wronging the great
friendship subsisting between him and Avendano if he con-
cealed from the latter the cause of his present sadness ; and
therefore he destcribed to him in detail the life he had led at
Zahara, and declared that all his gloom arose from his strong -
desire to be there once more. So attractive was the picture he
drew, that Avendano, far from blaming his taste, expressed his
entire sympathy with it. The end of the matter was that
Avendano determined to go off with Carriazo, and enjoy for
one summer that delicious life of w^hich he had iust heard


368 CEBYANTES* EXSHPLABT TALES.

Moh a glowing description ; and in this detennination he was
strongly encouraged to persist by Carriazo, who was glad to
be so countenanced in his own low propensities. They set
their wits to work to see how they could scrape together as
much money as possible, and the best means that occurred to
them was that suggested by Avendano^s approaching departure
for Salamanca, where he had ab*eady studied for three years,
and where his father vdshed him to complete his education,
and take a degree in whatever faculty he pleased. Carriazo
now made known to his father that he had a strong desire to
go with Avendafio and study at Salamanca. Don Diego
gladly fell in with his son's proposal; he talked with his
friend Don Juan on the subject, and it was agreed between
them that the two young men should reside together at Sala-
manca, and be sent thither weU supplied with all requisites,
and in a manner suitable to the sons of men of quality.

The time for their departure being arrived, they were
furnished with money, and with a tutor who was more
remarkable for integrity than for mother wit. Their fathers
talked much and impressively to their sons about what they
should do, and how they should govern themselves, in order
that they might become fraught with virtue and knowledge,
for that is the fruit which every student should aspire to reap
from his labours and his vigils, especially such as are of good
family. The sons were all humility and obedience; their
mothers cried; both parents gave them their blessing, and
away they went, mounted on their own mules, and attended
by two servants of their respective housefiolds, besides the
tutor, who had let his beard grow, to give him a more im-
posing air of gravity, as became his charge.

When they arrived at Valladolid, they told their tutor
they should like to remain there a couple of days to see the city,
having never been in it before. The tutor severely reprimanded
them for entertaining any such idle notion, telling them
they had no time to lose in silly diversions; that their business
was to get as fast as possible to the place where they were to
pursue their studies ; that he should be doing extreme vio-
lence to his conscience if he allowed them to stop for one
hour, not to speak of two days ; that they should continue
their journey forthwith, or, if not, then brown bread should
be their portion.


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERT-MAID. 369

Such was the extent of the ability in his office possessed
^y this tutor, or major-domo, as we should rather call him.
The lads, w^ho had already gathered in their harvest, since
they had laid hands upon four hundred gold crowns which
were in the major-domo's keeping, begged that he would let
them remain in Valladolid for that day only, that they might
see the grand aqueducts, which were then in course of con-
struction, for the purpose of conveying the waters of Argales
to that city. He consented at last, but with extreme reluc-
tance, for he wished to avoid the expense of an additional
(lay on the road, and to spend the night at Yaldiastellas,
whence he could easily reach Salamanca in two days. But
the bay horse thinks one thing, and the man on his back
another thing, and so it proved in the major-domo's case.
The lads, mounted on two excellent mules, and attended by
only one servant, rode out to see the fountain of Argales,
famous for its antiquity and the abundance of its water. On
^their arrival there, Avendano gave the servant a sealed paper,
bidding him return forthwith to the city, and deliver it to
his tutor, after wliich the servant was to wait for them at the
Puerta del Campo. The servant did as he was bid, and went
back to the city with the letter; and they, turning their
mules' heads another way, slept that night in Mojados, and
arrived two days afterwards in Madrid, where they sold their
mules.

They. dressed themselves like peasants in short jerkins,
loose breeches, and gray stockings. An old clothes dealer,
to whom they sold their handsome apparel in the morning,
transformed them by night in such a manner that their own
mothers would not have known them. Lightly equipped, as
suited their purpose, and without swords, for they had sold
them to the old clothes dealer, they took to the road to Toledo.
There let us leave them for the present, stepping out briskly
with merry hearts, while we return to the tutor, and see him
open the letter delivered to him by the servant, which he read
as follows : —

" Your worship, senor Pedro Alonso, will be pleased to
have patience and go back to Burgos, where you will say to
our parents that we, their sons, having with mature delibera-
tion considered how much more arms befit cavaliers than
do letters, have determined to exchange Salamanca for Brussels^

r


370 GEBVANTE8* EXEMPLART TALES,

and Spain for Flanders. We liave got the four hundred
crowns ; the mules we intend to sell. The course we have
chosen, which is so worthy of persons of our quality, and the
length of the journey before us, are sufficient .to excuse our
fault, though a fault it will not be deemed by any one but a
coward. Our departure takes place now ; our return will be
when it shall please Go<1, to whose keeping, we, your humble
pupils, heartily commend you. Given from the fountain of
Argales, with one foot in the stirrup for Flanders.

^ CARRIAZOy
" AVENDANO.**

Aghast at the contents of this letter, Pedro Alonso hurried
to his valise, and found that the paper spoke but too truly,
for the money was gone. Instantly mounting the remaining
mule, he returned to Burgos to carry these tidings to his
patrons, in order that, they might take measures to recover
possession of their sons' persons. But as to how he was
received, the author of this tale says not a word, for the mo-^
ment he has put Pedro Alonso into the saddle, he leaves him
to give the following account of what occurred to Avendano
and Carriazo at the entrance of Illescas.

Just by thetown gate they met two muleteers, Andalusians
apparently, one of whom was coming from Seville, and the
other going thither. Said the latter to the former, " If my
masters were not so far ahead, I should like to stop a little
longer to ask you a thousand things I want to know, for
I am quite astonished at what you have told me about the
conde's having hanged Alonzo Gines and Bibera without
giving them leave to appeal."

'' As I'm a sinner," replied the Sevillian, " the conde laid
a trap for them, got them under his jurisdiction — for they
were soldiers, and once having them in his gripe, the court of
appcui could never get them out of it. I tell you what it is,
friend, he has a devil within him, that same conde de Pufion-
robtro. Seville, and the whole country round it for ten leagues,
is swept clear of swash-bncklers ; not a thief ventures within
his limits ; they all fear him like fire. It is whispered, how-
ever, that he will 'soon give up his place as corregidor, for he
is tired of being at loggerheads at every hand's turn with the
aciiores of the court of appeal."

^ May they live a thousand years !" exclaimed he who waa


THB ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERT-MAID.. 371

going to Seville; "for tlieyare the fathers of the miserable,
and a refuge for the unfortunate. How many poor fellows
must eat dirt, for no other reason than the anger of an arbitrary
judge of a corregidor, either ill-informed or wrong-headed !
Many eyes see more than two ; the venom of injustice cannot
80 soon lay hold on many hearts as on one alone."

" You have turned preacher ! " said he of Seville ; " but I
am afraid I can't stop to hear the end of your sermon. Don't
put up to night at your usual place, but go to the Posada del
Sevillano, for there you will see the prettiest scullery- wench I
know. Marinilla at the Ycnta Tejada is a dishclout in com-
parison with her. I will only tell you that it is said the son
of the corregidor is very sweet upon her. One of my masters
gone on ahead there, swears, that on his way back to Andalusia,
he will stop two months in Toledo, and in that same inn, only
to have his fill of looking at her. I myself ventured once to give
her a little bit of a squeeze, and all I got for it was a swinginp^
box on the ear. She is as hard as a fiint, as savage as a
kestrel, and as touch-me-not as a nettle ; but she has a face
that does a body's eyes good to look at. She has the sun in
one cheek, and the moon in the other ; the one is made of
roses and the other of carnations, and between them both arc
lilies and jessamine. I say no more, only see her for yourself,
and you will see that all I have told you is nothing to what
I might say of her beauty. I'd freely settle upon her those
two silver gray mules of mine that you know, if they
would let me have her for my wife ; but I know they won't,
for she is a morsel for an ardibishop or a conde. Once
more I say, go and see her ; and so, good-bye to you, for 1
must be off."

The two muleteers went their several ways, leaving the
two friends much struck by what they had overheard of the
conversation, especially Avendano, in whom the mere relation
which the muleteer had given of the scullery-maid's beauty
awoke an intense desire to see her. It had the same effect on
Carriazo, but not to an equal degree, nor so as to extinguish
his desire to reach his beloved tunny fisheries, ftom which he
would not willingly be delayed to behold the pyramids of
Egypt, or any or all of the other seven wonders of the world.

Bepeating the dialogue between the muleteers, and
mimicking their tones and gestures^ served as pastime to


372 CBRVANTF4' EXEMPLARY TALES.

beguile the way until they reached Toledo. Oarriazo, who
had been there before, led the way at once to the Posada del
Scvillano ; but they did not venture to ask fcr accommodation
there, their dress and appearance not being such as would have
gained them a ready welcome. Night was coming on, and
though Carriazo importuned Avendaiio to go with him in
search of lodging^s elsewhere, he could not prevail on him to
quit the doors of the Sevillano, or cease from hanging about
them, upon the chance that the celebrated scullery-maid
might perhaps make her appearance. When it was pitch dark
Carriazo was in despair, but still Avendano stuck to the spot ;
and, at last, he went into the courtyard of the inn, under pre-
tence of inquiring after some gentlemen of Burgos who were
on their way to Seville. He had but just entered the courtyard,
when a girl, who seemed to be about fifteen, and was dressed in
working clothes, came out of one of the side doors with a lighted
candle. Avendano's eyes did not rest on the girl's dress, but
on her face, which seemed to him such as a painter would give
to the angels ; and so overcome was he by her beauty, that he
could only gaze at it in speechless admiration, without being
Hble to say one word for himself.

" What may you please to want, brother ?" said the girl.
" Are you servant to one of the gentlemen in the house?"

" I am no one's servant but yours," replied Avendano,
trembling with emotion.

" Go to, brother," returned the girl disdainfully, " we who
are servants ourselves have no need of others to wait on us ; "
and calling her master, she said, *' Please to see, sir, what this
lad wants."

The master came out, and, in reply to his question, Aven-
dano said that he was looking for some gentlemen of Burgos
who wore on their way to Seville. One of them was his
master, and had sent him on before them to Alcal4 de Henares
upon business of importance, bidding him, when that was done,
to proceed to Toledo, and wait for him at the Sevillano ; and
he believed that his master would arrive there that night or the
following day at farthest.

So plausibly did Avendano tell this fib that the landlord was
quite taken in by it. "Very well, friend," said he, "you
may stop here till your master comes."

"Many thanks, senor landlord," replied Avendano; "and


THE UiLUSTRIOUS SCULLERT-MAID. 373

will your worship bid them give me a room for myself, and a
comrade of mine who is outside ? We have got money to pay
for it, as weU as another."

" Certainly," said the host, and turning to the girl he said,
^^Costanza, bid la ArgUello take these two gallants to the
comer room, and give them clean sheets."

" I will do so, sefior," and curtsying to her master she
went away, leaving Avendafio by her departure in a state of
feeling like that of the tired wayfarer when the sun sets and
he finds himself wrapt in cheerless darkness. He went, how-
ever, to give an account of what he had seen and done to
Carriazo, who very soon perceived that his friend had been
smitten in the heart; but he would not say a word about
the matter then, until he should see whether there was a fair
excuse for the hyperbolical praises with which Avendano
exalted the beauty of Costanza above the stars.

At last they went in doors, and la ArgUello, the chamber
maid, a woman of some five-tind-forty years of age, showed
them a room which was neither a gentleman's nor a servant's,
but something between the two. On their asking for supper,
la ArgUello told them they did not provide meals in that inn ;
they only cooked and served up such food as the guests
bought and fetched for themselves ; but there were eating-
houses in the neighbourhood, where they might without
scruple of conscience go and sup as they pleased. The two
friends took la ArgQello's advice, and went to an eating-house,
where Carriazo supped on what they set before him, and
Avendano on what he had brought with him, to wit, thoughts
and fancies. Carriazo noticed tliat his friend ate little or
nothing, and, by way of sounding him, he said on their way
back to the inn, '^ We must be up betimes to-morrow morning,
so that we may reach Orgez before the heat of the day."

" I am not disposed for that," replied Avendafio, " for I
intend, before I leave this city, to see all that is worth seeing
in it, such as the cathedral, the waterworks of Juanelo, tho
view from the top of St. Augustine's, the King's garden^ and
the promenade by the river."

" Very well, we can see all that in two days.**

** What teed of such haste ? We are not posting to Eome
to ask for a vacant benefice."

^'Ha! ha I friend, I see how iti*, I'll be hanged if yoii


374 CEBTANTEA' EXEMPLART TALES.

are not more inclined to stay in Toledo than to continie our
journey."

** That's true, I confess; it is as impossible for me to forego
the sight of that girl's face, as it is to get into heaven without
good works."

** Gallantly spoken, and as becomes a generous breast like
yours ! Here's a pretty story ! Don Tomas de Aven(1ano,
son of the wealthy and noble cavalier, Don Juan do AvendaSo,
over head and ears in love with the scullery-maid at the
Posada del Sevillano !"

**It strikes me, I may answer you in the same strain.
Here's Don Diego de Carriazo, son and sole heir of the noble
knight of Alc&ntara of the same name, a youth finely gifted
alike in body and mind, and behold him in love — with whom,
do you suppose ? With queen Ginevra ? No such thing,
but with the tunny fisheries of Zahara, and all its rogues and
rascals, — a more loathsome crew, I suspect, than ever beset St.
Anthony in his temptations."

" You have given me tit for tat, friend, and slain me with
my own weapon. Let us say no more now, but go to bed, and
to-morrow who knows but we come to our senses?"

"Look ye, Carriazo, you have not yet seen Costanza;
when you have seen her, I will give you leave to say what
you like to me."

" Well, I know beforehand what will be the upshot of
the matter."

"And that is?"

" Tiiat I shall be oflf to my tunny fisheries, and you will
remain with your scullery- maid."

" I shall not be so happy."

" Nor I such a fool as to give up my own good purpose
for the sake of your bad one."

By this time they reached the inn, where the conversation
was prolonged in the same tone, half the night long. After
they had slept, as it seemed to them, little more than au
hour, they were awakened by the loud sound of clarions in
the street. They sat up in bed, and after they had listened
awhile, " I'll lay a wager," said Carriazo, " that it is already
day, and that there is some feast or other in the convent of
Nostra Senora del Carmen, in this neighbourhood, and that is
why the clarions are pealing."


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERT-MAID. 375

•* That can't be," said Avendaiio ; ** we have not been
long asleep. It must be some time yet till dawn."

While they were talking, some one knocked at th^ door>
and called out, *^ Young men, if you want to hear some fine
music, go to the window of the next room, which looks on th$
street ; it is not occupied/'

They got up and opened the door, but the person who
had spoken was gone. The music still continuing, however^
they went in their shirts, just as they were, into the front
room» where they found three or four other lodgers, whd
made place for them at the window ; and soon afterwards an
excellent voice sang a sonnet to the accompaniment of the
harp. There was no need of any one to tell Carriazo and
Avendafio that this music was intended for Costanza, for this
was very clear from the words of the sonnet, which grated
so horribly on Avendano's ears, that he could have wished
himself deaf rather than have heard it. The pangs of jea-
lousy laid hold on him, and the worst of all was, that he knew
not who was his rival. But this was soon made known to
him when one of the persons at tiie window exclaimed, ^' What
a simpleton is the corregidor's son, to make a practice of
serenading a scullery-maid. It is true, she is one of the most
beautiful girls I have ever seen, and I have seen a great many;
but that is no reason why he should court her so publicly."

" After all," said another, " I have been told for certain
that she makes no more account of him than if he never
existed. I warrant she is this moment fast asleep behind hei^
mistress's bed, without ever thinking of all this music."

" I can well believe it," said the first speaker, " for she is
the most virtuous girl I know ; and it is marvellous that
though she lives in a house like this, where there is so much
traffic, and where there are new comers every day, and
though she goes about all the rooms, not the least thing in
the world is known to her disparagement."

Avendaiio began to breathe more freely after hearing this,
and was able to listen to many fine things which were sung to
the accompaniment of various instruments, all being addressed
to Costanza, who, as the stranger said, was fast asleep all the
while.

The musicians departed at the approach of dawn. Aven-
dauo and Carriazo returned to their room, where one of them


376 CERVANTKB* EXEMPLARY TALES.

slept till morning. They then rose, both of them eager to
see Oostanza, but the one only from euriosityy the other
from love. Both were gratified ; for Costanza came out of
her master's room looking so lovely, that they both felt that
all the praises bestowed on her by the muleteer, fell immea-
surably short of her deserts. &he was dressed in a green
bodice and petticoat, trimmed with the same colour. A
collar embroidered with black silk set off the alabaster white-
ness of her neck. The thick tresses of her bright chestnut
hair were bound up with white ribbon ; she had pendents in
her ears which seemed to be pearls, but were only glass ; her
girdle was a St. Francis cord, and a large bunch of keys hung
at her side. When she came out of the room she crossed
herself, and made a profound reverence with great devotion
to an image of our Lady, that hung on one of the walls of the
quadrangle. Then looking up and seeing the two young men
intently gazing on her, she immediately retired again into the .
room, and called thence to Arguello to get up.

Carriazo, it must be owned, was much struck by Costanza's
beauty ; he admired it as much as his companion, only he did
not fall in love with her ; on the contrary, he had no desire to
spend another night in the inn, but to set out at once for the
fiblicries.

La Arguello presently appeared in the gallery with two
young women, natives of Gallicia, who were also servants in
the inn ; for the number employed in the Sevillano was con-
siderable, that being one of the best and most frequented
houses of its kind in Toledo. At the same time the servants
of the persons lodging in the inn began to assemble to receive
oats for their masters' beasts ; and the host dealt them out, all
the while grumbling and swearing at his maid-servants who
had been the cause of his losing the services of a capital
hostler, who did the work so well and kept such good reckon-
ing, that he did not think he had ever lost the price of a grain
of oats by him. Avendano, who heard all this, seized the
opportunity at onoe. " Don't fatigue yourself, senor host,"
he said ; " give me the account-book, and whilst I remain here
I will give out the oats, and keep such an exact account of it
that you will not miss the hostler who you say has left you.'*

" Truly I thank you for the offer, my lad," said the host,
" for I have no time to attend to this business ; I have too


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLEBT-MAID. 377

much to do, both indoors and out of doon. Come down and
I will give you the book ; and mind ye, these muleteers are
the very devil, and will do you out of a peck of oats under
your very nose, with no more conscience than if it was so
much chaff.''

AvendaSo went down to the quadrangle, took the book,
and began to serve out pecks of oats like water, and to note
them down with such exactness that the landlord, who stood
watching him, was greatly pleased with his performance. ^* I
wish to God," he said, " your master would not come, and that
you would make up your mind to stop with me ; you would
lose nothing by the change, believe me. The hostler who has
just quitted me came here eight months ago all in tatters, and
as lean as a shotten herring, and now he has two very good
suits of clothes, and is as fat as a dormouse ; for you must
know, my son, that in this house there are excellent vails to be
got over and above the wages."

** If I should stop,'' replied Avendafio, ** I should not stand
out much for the matter of what I should gain, but should be
content with very little for sake of being in this city, which,
they tell me, is the best in Spain."

*' At least it is one of the best and most plentiful," said
the host. ** But we are in want of another thing, too, and
that is a man to fetch water, for the lad that used to attend to
that job has also left me. He was a smart fellow, and with
the help of a famous ass of mine he used to keep all the tanks
overflowing, and make a lake of the house. One of the rea
sons why the muleteers like to bring their employers to my
house is, that they always find plenty of water in it for their
beasts, instead of having to drive them down to the river."

Carriazo, who had been listening to this dialogue, and who
saw Avendafio already installed in ofiice, thought he would
follow his example, well knowing how much it would gratify
him. "Out with the ass, sefior host," he said j" I'm your
man, and will do your work as much to your satisfaction as my
comrade."

" Aye, indeed," said Avendafio, " my comrade. Lope Astu*
riano will fetch water like a prince, I'll go bail for him."

La Arguello, who had been all t]ie while within earshot, here
put in her word. " And pray, my gentleman," said she to
Avendafio^ " who is to go bail for you ? By my faith, you


378 eEB7ANTE8' EXBMPLART TALES.

look to me as if you wanted some one to answer for yon
instead of your answering for another/'

" Hold your tongue, Argiiello," said her master ; " don't
put yourself forward where you're not wanted. Til go bail
for them, both of them. And mind, I tell you, that none of
you women meddle or make with the men-servants, for it is
throup^h you they all leave me."

" So these two chaps are eng^aged, are they ?" said another
of the servant-women ; " by my soul, if I had to keep them
company I would never trust them with the wine-bag."

" None of your gibes, senora Gallega," cried her master ;
" do your work, and don't meddle witli the men-servants, or
1*11 baste you with a stick."

** Oh, to be sure ! " replied the Gallician damsel ; " a'nt
they dainty dears to make a body's mouth water ? I'm sure
master has never known me so frolicksome with the chaps in
the house, nor yet out of it, that he should have such an opinion
of me. 'The blackguards go away when they take it into their
heads, without our giving them any occasion^ Very like
indeed thery're the right sort to be in need of any one's putting
them to bidding their masters an early good morning, when
they least expect it."

" You've a deal to say for yourself, my friend," said the
landlord ; ^' shut your mouth and mind your business."

While this colloquy was going on Carriazo had harnessed
the ass, jumped on his back, and set off to the river, leaving
Avendano highly delighted at witnessing his jovial resolution^

Here then, we have Avendano and Carriazo changed, God
save the mark! into Tomas Pedro, a hostler, and Lope
Asturiano, a water-carrier : transformations surpassing those
of the long-nosed poet. No sooner had la Argiiello heard
that they were hired, than she formed a design upon Asturiano,
and marked him for her own, resolving to regale him in such
a manner, that, if he was ever so shy, she would make him as
-pliant as a glove. The prudish Gallegan formed a similar
design upon Avendano, and, as the two women were great
friends, being much together in their business by day, and
bed-fellows at night, they at once confided their amorous pur?-
poses to each other ; and that night they determined to begin
the conquest of their two unimpassioned swains. Moreover
they agreed that they must, in the first place, beg tjiem not to


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERY-MAID, S79

be jealous about anything they might see iliem do wivh tlieir
persons; for girls could hardly regale tbeir friends within doors,
unless they put those without under contribution. ''Hold
your tongues, lads," said they, apostrophising their absent
lovers, " hold your tongues and shut your eyes ; leave the
timbrel in the hands that can play it, and let those lead the
dance that know how, and no pair of canons in this city wiU be
better regaled than you will be by our two selves."

While the Gallegan and la Argiiello were settling matters
in this way, our good friend. Lope Asturiano, was on his way
to the river, musing upon his beloved tunny fisheries and on his
sudden change of condition. Whether it was for this reason,
or that fate ordained it so, it happened that as he was riding
down a steep and narrow lane, he ran against another water-
carrier s ass, which was coming, laden, up-hill; and, as his own
was fresh and lively and in good condition, the poor, half-
starved, jaded brute that was toiling up hill, was knocked
down, the pitchers were broken, and the water spilled. The
driver of the fallen ass, enraged by this disaster, immediately
flew upon the offender, and pommelled him soundly before poor
Lope well knew where he was. At last, his senses were roused
with a vengeance, and seizing his antagonist with both hands
by the throat, he dashed him to the ground. That was not
all, for, unluckily, the man's head struck violently against a
stone ; the wound was friglitful, and bled so profusely, that
Lope thouglit he had killed him. Several other water-carriers
who were on their way to and from the river, seeing their
comrade so maltreated, seized Lope and held him fast, shouting,
" Justice ! justice ! this water-carrier has murdered a man.'*
And all the while they beat and thumped him lustily. Others ran
to the fallen man, and found that his skull was cracked, and
that he was almost at the last gasp. The outcry spread all up
the hill, and to the Plaza del Carmen, where it reached the
ears of an alguazil, who flew to the spot with two police-
runners. They did not arrive a moment too soon, for they
found Lope surrounded by more than a score of water-carriers,
who were basting his ribs at such a rate that there was almost
as much reason to fear for his life as that of the wounded man.
The alguazil took him out of their hands, delivered him and his
ass into those of his followers, had the wounded man laid like
a sack upon his own ass, and marched them all off to prison


«S80 0BB7AKTE8* EXEMPLARY TALES.

attended by such a crowd that they could hardly make way
through the streets. The noise drew Tomas Pedro and bis
master to the door, and, to their great surprise, they saw
Asturiano led by in the gripe of two police-runners, with his
face all bloody. The landlord immediately looked about for
his ass, and saw it in the hands of another catchpoll, who had
joined the alguazil's party. He inquired the cause of these
captures, was told what had happened, and was sorely distressed
on account of his ass, fearing that he should lose it, or have
to pay more for it than it was worth.

Tomas followed his comrade, but could not speak a single
word to him, such was the throng round the prisoner, and the
strictness of the catchpolls. Lope was thrust into a narrow
cell in the prison, with a doubly grated window i and the
wounded man was taken to the infirmary, where the surgeon
pronounced his case extremely dangerous.

The alguazil took home the two asses with him, besides
five pieces of eight which had been found on Lope. Tomas
returned greatly disconcerted to the inn, where he found the
landlord in no better spirits than himself, and gave him an
account of the condition in which he had left his comrade,
the danger of the wounded man, and the fate of the ass.
*' To add to the misfortune," said he, ^' I have just met a gentle-
man of Burgos, who tells me that my master will not now
come this way. In order to make more speed and shorten
his journey by two leagues, he has crossed the ferry at Aceca ;
he will sleep to-night at Orgaz, and has sent me twelve
crowns, with orders to meet him at Seville. But that cannot
be, for it is not in reason that I should leave my friend and
comrade in prison and in such peril. My master must excuse
me for the present, and I know he will, for he is so good-
natured that he will put up with a little inconvenience rather
than that I should forsake my comrade. Will you do me the
favour, scfior, to take this money, and see what you can do in
this business. While you are spending this, I will write to
my master for more, telling him all that has happened, and J
am sure he will send us enough to get us out of any scrape."

The host opened his eyes a palm wide in glad surprise to
find himself indemnified for the loss of his ass. He took the
money and comforted Tomas, telling him that he could make
interest with persons of great influence in Toledo^ especially •


I


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERT-MAID. 381

ntm, a relation of the corregidor's, wha could do anything she
pleased with him. Now the washerwoman of the convent in
which the nun lived had a daughter, who was very thick
indeed with the sister of a friar, who was hand and glove
with the said nun's confessor. All he had to do, then, was to get
the washerwoman to ask her daughter to get the monk's sister
to speak to her brother to say a good word to the confessor,
who would prevail on the nun to write a note to the corregidor
begging him to look into Lope's business, and then, beyond a
doubt, they might expect to come off with flying colours ; that
is provided the water-carrier did not die of his wound, and pro-
vided also there was no lack of stuff to grease the palms of all
the officers of justice, for unless they are well greased they
creak worse than the wheels of a bullock cart.

Whatever Tomas thought of this roundabout way of
making interest, he failed not to thank the innkeeper, and to
assure him that he was confident his master would readily send
the requisite money.

Argiiello, who had seen her new flame in the hands of
the officers, ran directly to the prison with some dinner for
him ; but she was not permitted to see him. This was a
great grief to her, but she did not lose her hopes for all that.
After the lapse of a fortnight the wounded man was out of
danger, and in a week more, the surgeon pronounced him
cured. During this time, Tomas Pedro pretended to hav6
had fifty crowns sent to him from Seville, and taking them
out of his pocket, he presented them to the innkeeper, along
with a fictitious letter from his ra{»ster. It was nothing to
the landlord whether the letter was genuine or not, so he gave
liitiiself no trouble to authenticate it; but he received the
fifty good gold crowns with great glee. The end of the matter
was, that the wounded man was quieted with six ducats, and
Asturiano was sentenced to the forfeiture of his ass, and a fine
of ten ducats with costs^ on the payment of which he was
liberated.

On his release from prison, Asturiano had no mind to go back
to the Sevillano, but excused himself to his comrade on the
ground that during his confinement he had been visited by
Argiiello, who had pestered him with her fulsome advances,
which were to him so sickening and insufferable, that he
would rather be hanged than comply with the desires of so


383 CERTAKTfiS* EXEMPLART TALES.

odious a jade. Hia intention was to buy an ass, and to do
business as a water carrier on his own account as long as they
remaine<l in Toledo. This would protect him from the risk of
being arrested as a vagabond ; besides, it was a business he
could carry on with great ease and satisfaction to himself, since
with only one load of water, he could saunter about the city-
all day long, looking at silly wenches.

^ Looking at beautiful women, you mean,'' said his friend^
<< for of all the cities in Spain, Toledo has the reputation of
being that in which the women surpass all others, whether in
beauty or conduct. If you doubt it, only look at Costanza,
who could spare from her superfluity of loveliness charms
enough to beautify the rest of the women, not only of Toledo^
but of the whole world."

" Gently, senor Tomas ; not so fast with your praises of the
sefiora scullion, unless you wish that, besides thinking you a
fool, I take you for a heretic into the bargain."

" Do you call Costanza a scullion, brother Lope ? God
forgive you, and bring you to a true sense of your error."

*^ And is not she a scullion?"

** I have yet to see her wash the first plate."

•' What does that matter, if you have seen her wash the
ajBCond, or the fiftieth ?"

" I tell you brother she does not wash dishes, or do any-
thing but look after the business of the house, and take care
of the plate, of which there is a great deal."

" How is it, then, that throughout the whole city they call
her the illustrious scullery-maid, if so be she does not wash
dishes ? Perhaps it is because she washes silver and not
crockery that they give her that name. But to drop this sub-
ject, tell me, Tomas, how stand your hopes V

" In a state of perdition ; for during the whole time you
were in gaol, I never have been able to say one word to her'.
It is true, that to all that is said to her by the guests in the
house, she makes no other reply than to cast down her e^es
and keep her lips closed ; such is her virtue and modesty ; so
that her modesty excites my love, no less than her beaUty,
But it is almost too much for my patience, to think that the
eorregidor's son, who is an impetuous and somewhat licentious
youth, is dying for her; a night seldom passes but he
serenades her, and that so openly, that she is actually named


TU£ ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERT-MAI0» 389

in the songs sung in her praise. She never hears them to be
sure, nor ever quits her mistress's room from the time she
retires until morning ; but in spite of all that, my heart cannot
esca])e being pierced by the keen shaft of jealousy."

'* What do you intend to do, then, with this Portia, this
Minerva, this new Penelope, who, under the form of a scullery -
maid, has vanquished your heart V

" Her name is Costanza, not Fortia, Minerva, or Pene-
lope. That she is a servant in an inn, I cannot deny ; but
what can I do, if, as it seevls, the occult force of destiny,
and the deliberate choice of reason, both impel me to adore
her ? Look you, friend^ I cannot find words to tell you how
love exalts and glorifies in my eyes this humble scullery^maid,
as you call her, so that, though seeing her low condition, I am
blind to it, and knowing it, I ignore it. Try as I may, it is
impossible for me to keep it long before my eyes ; for that
thought is at once obliterated by her biaauty, her grace, her
virtue, and modesty, which tell me that, beneath that plebeian
husk, must be concealed some kernel of extraordinary worth.
In short, be it what it may, I love her, and not with that
common-place love I have felt for others, but with a passion
so pure that it knows no wish beyond that of serving her, and
prevailing on her to love me, and return in the like kind
what is due to my honourable affection.''

Here Lope gave a shout, and cried out in a declamatory
tone, " O Platonic love ! illustrious scuUery-maid ! O
thrice-blessed age of ours, wherein we see love renewing the
marvi*ls ot the age ot gold ! O my poor tunnies, you must
pass this year without a visit from your impassioned admirer,
but next year be sure I will make amends, and you shall no
longer find me a truant."

" I see, Asturiano," said Tomas, '* how openly you mock
me. Why don't you go to your fisheries ? There is nothing*
to hinder you. I will remain where I am, and you will find
ijae here on your return. If you wish to take your share of
the money with you, take it at once ; go your ways in peace,
and lot each of us .follow the course prescribed to him by his
own destiny."

" I thought you had more sense," said Lope. " Don't you
know that I was only joking ? But now that I perceive you
are in earnest, I will serve you in earnest in everything I can


384 CEBTANTBS' EXEMPLARY TALES.

do to please you. Only one thing I entreat in return for tlie
many I intend to do for you : do not expojie me to ArgQello'a
persecution, for I would rather lose your friendship than have
to endure hers. Good God, friend ! her tongue goes like the
clapper of a mill ; you can smell her breath a league off; all
her front teeth are false, and it is my private opinion that she
does not wear her own hair, but a wig. To crown all, since
she began to make overtures to me, she has taken to painting
white, till her face looks like nothing but a mask of plaster."

« True, indeed, my poor comrade ; she is worse even than
the Gallegan who makes me suffer martyrdom. I'll tell you
what you shall do ; only stay this night in the inn, and to-
morrow you shall buy yourself an ass, find a lodging, and so
secure yourself from the importunities of Argiiello, whilst I
remain exposed to those of the Gallegan, and to the fire of my
Costanza's eyes."

This being agreed on, the two friends returned to the inn,
where Asturiano was received with great demonstrations of
love by Argiiello. That night a great number of muleteers
stopping in the house, and those near it, got up a dance before
the door of the Sevillano. Asturiano played the guitar : the
female dancers were the two Gallegans and ArgUellOy and
three girls from another inn. Many persons stood by as spec-
tators, with their faces muffled, prompted more by a desire
to see Costanza than the dance ; but they were disappointed,
for she did not make her appearance. Asturiano played for
the dancers with such s]nrit and precision of touch that they
all vowed he made the guitar speak; but just as he was doing
his best, accompanying the instrument with his voice, and the
dancers were capering like mad, one of the muffled spectators
cried out, " Stop, you drunken sot ! hold your noise, wine-
skin, piperly poet, miserable catgut scraper !" Several others
followed up this insulting speech with such a torrent of abuse
that Lope thought it best to cease playing and singing ; but
the muleteers took the interruption so much amiss, that had it
not been for the earnest endeavours of the landlord to appease
them, there would have been a terrible row. In spite indeed
of all he could do, the muleteers would not have kept their
hands quiet, had not the watch happened just then to come up
and clear the ground. A moment afterwards the ears of all
who were awake in the quarter were greeted by an admirable


TUB ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERIl-MUD. 38o

yoke proceeding from a man who had seated himself on a
stone opposite the door of the Sevillano. Everybody listened
with rapt attention to his song, but none more so tlian Tomaa
Pedro, to whom every word sounded like a sentence of excom-
municatioDy for the romance ran thus :

In what celestial realms of space
Is hid that beauteous, witching face?
Where shines that star, whi< h, boding ills,
My trembling heart with torment fills?

Why in its wrath should Heaven decree
That we no more its light should see?
Whv bid that sun no longer cheer
With glorious beams our drooping sphere t

Tes, second sun! 'tis true you shine^
But not for us, with light divine!
Yet gracious come from ocean's bed;
Why hide from us your radiant headt

Constance! a faithful, dying swain
Adores your beauty, though in vain;
For when his love lie would impart,
Tou fly and scorn his proffered hea.tl

O let his tears your pity sway,

And quick he'll bear you hence away$

For shame it is this sordid place,

Should do your charms sucn foul disgrace

Here you*re submissive to control.
Sweet mistress of my doating soul !
But altars youths to you should raise,
And passioned vot'ries sound your praise I

Quit then a scene which must consume
Unworthily your early bloom!
To my soft vows your ear mcline.
Nor frown, but be for ever mine!

His gladsome torch let Hymen light.
And let the god our hearts unite!
This day would then before its end.
See me your husband, lover, friend.

The last line was immediately followed by the flight of two
brick-br.ts, which fell close to the singer's feet ; but had they
come in contact with his head, they would certainly have
knocked all the music and poetry out of it. The poor
irightened musician took to his heels with such speed that a
gifeyhound could not have caught him« Unhappy fate of

z


386 OERVAinRB* EXEMPLARY TALES.

night-birds, to bo always subject, to such showers ! All who-
had heard the voice of the fugitive admired it, but most of
all, Tomas Pedro, only he would rather the words had not
been addressed to Costanza, although she had not heard one
of them. The only pei'son who found fault with the romance
was a muleteer, nicknamed Barrabas. As soon as this man
saw the singer run off, he bawled after him, '* There you go,
you Judas of a troubadour ! May the fleas eat your eyes out !
Who the devil taup^l^t you to sing to a scullery-maid about
celestial realms, and spheres, and ocean-bods, and to call her
stars and suns and all the rest of it ? If you had told her she
was as straight as asparagus, as white as milk, as modest as
a lay-brother in his novitiate, more full of humours and un-
manageable than a hired mule, and harder than a lump of dry
mortar, why then she would have understood you and been
pleased ; but your fine words are titter for a scholar than for
a scullery-maid. Truly, there are poets in the world who
write songs that the devil himself could not understand ; for
my part, at least, Barrabas though I am, I cannot make head
or tail of what this fellow has been singing. What did he
suppose Costanza could make of them ? But she knows better
than to listen to such stuff, for she is snug in bed, and cares
no more for all those cater waulers than she does for Prester
John. This fellow at least, is not one of the singers belonging
to the corregidor's son, for they are out and out good ones,
and a body can generally understand them ; but, by the Lord,
this fellow sets me mad."

The f)ystanders coincided in opinion with Barrabas, and
thought his criticism very judicious. Everybody now went
to bed, but no sooner was the house all still, than Lope heard
some one calling very softly at his bed-room door. " Who's
there ? " said he. " It is we," whispered a voice, " Argiiello
and the Gallegan, Open the the door and let us in, for we
arc dying of cold."

" Dying of cold indeed," said Lope, " and we are in the
middle of the dog days."

*' Oh, leave off now, friend Lope," said the Gallegan ;
^* get up and open the door ; for here we are as fine as arch-
duchesses."

" Archduchesses, and at this hour ? I don't believe a
word of it, but rather think you must be witches or something


TUB ILLUSTRIOUS BCULLERT-MAID. 387

worse. Get out of that this moment, or, by all that's daniuable»
if you make me get up I'll leather you with my belt till your
hinder parts are as red as poppies."

Finding that he answered them so roughly, and in a manner
80 contrary to their expectations, the two disappointed damsels
returned sadly to their beds ; but before they left the door,
ArgQello put her lips to the key-hole, and hissed through it,
*' Honey was not made for the mouth of the ass ;" and with
that, as if she had said something very bitter indeed, and taken
adequate revenge on thescomer, she went off to her cheerless bed,

" Look you, Tomas/' said Lope to his companion, as soon
as they were gone, " set me to fight two giants, or to break
the jaws of half a dozen, or a whole dozen of lions, if it be
requisite for your service, and I shall do it as readily as I would
drink a glass of wine ; but that you should put me under the
necessity of encountering Argdello, this is wliat I would never
submit to, no, not if I were to be flayed alive. Only think,
what damsels of Denmark * fate has thrown upon us this night.
Well, patience ! To-morrow will come, thank God, and then
we shall see."

" I have already told you, friend," replied Tomas, " that
you may do as you please — either go on your pilgrimage, or
buy an ass and turn water-carrier as you proposed."

^* I stick to the water-Qarrying business," said Lope. "My
mind is made up not to quit you at present."

They then went to sleep till daylight, when they rose ;
Tomas Pedro went to give out oats, and Lope set off to the
cattle- market to buy an ass. Now it happened that Tomaa
had spent his leisure on holidays in composing some amorous
verses, and had jotted them down in the book in which he
kept the account of the oats, intending to copy them out fairly,
and then blot them out of the book, or tear out the page.
But, before he had done so, he happened to go out one day
and leave the book on the top of the o«it-bin. His master
found it there, and looking into it to see how the account of the
oats stood, he lighted upon the verses. Surprised and annoyed,
he went off with them to his wife, but before he read them to
her, he called Costanza into the room, and peremptorily
commanded her to declare whether Tomas Pedro, the hostler,
had ever made love to her, or addressed any improper language

* See the romance of Amadis of Gaul.

z2


PtSS CER7ANTES' EXEMPLART TALBB*

to her, or any that gave token of his being partial to her.
Costanza vowed that Tomas had never yet spoken to her in
any such way, nor ever given her reason to ftuppi>ee that he
had any bad thoughts towards her.

Ilcr niastiT and mistress believed her, because they had
.always found her to speak the truth. Having dismissed her,
the host turned to his wife and said, ** I know not what to say
of the matter. You must know, sefiora, that Tomas has
written in this book, in which he keeps the account of the
oats, verses that give me an ugly suspicion that he is in love
with Costanza."

^^ Let me see the verses," said the wife, '' and Til tell yon
what we are to conclude."

*' Oh, of course ; as you are a poet you will at once see
into his thoughts."

" I am not a poet, but you well know that I am a woman of
understanding, and that I can say the four prayers in Latin."

" You would do better to say them in plain Spanish ; you
know your uncle the priest has told you that you make no
end of blunders when you patter your Latin, and that what you
say is p-ood for nothing."

" That was an arrow from his niece's quiver. She is
jealous of seeing me take the Latin hours in hand, and make
my way througli them as easily as through a vineyard after the
vintage."

" Well, have it your own way. Listen now, here are the
verses;" and he read some impassioned lines addressed to
Costanza.

** Is there any more ? " said the landlady.

** No. But what do you think of these verses ? "

** In the first place, we must make sure that they are by
Tomas.''

" Of that there can be no manner of doubt, for the hand-
writing is most unquestionably the same as that in which the
account of the oats is kept."

^ Look ye, husband,' it appears to me that although Cos«
tanza is named in the verses, whence it mny be supposed that
they were made for her, we ought not for that reason to set the
fact down for certain, just as if we had seen them written,
for there are other Costanzas in the world besides ours. But
even supposing they were meant for her, there is not a word


TUE ItLTJSTRIOUS SCULLERT-MAID. 389

in thetn that could do her discredit. Let us be on the watcli,
and look sharply after the girl ; for if he is in love with her, wc
may be sure he will make more verses, and try to give them to
her/'

" Would it not be better to get rid of all this bother by
turning him out of doors?"

" That is for you to do if you think proper. But really,
by your own account, the lad does his work so well that it
would go against one's conscience to turn him off upon such
slight grounds/'

** Very well ; let us be on the watch as you say, and time
will tell us what we have to do/' Here the conversation
ended, and the landlord carried the book back to the place
where he had found it.

Tomas returned in great anxiety to look for his book, found
it, and that it might not occasion him another fright, ho
immediately copied out the verses, effaced the original, and
made up his mind to hazard a declaration to Costanza upon
the first opportunity that should present itself. Her extreme
reserve, however, was such that there seemed little likelihood
of his finding such an opportunity ; besides, the great concourse
of people in the house made it almost impossible that he should
have any private conversation with her, — to the despair of her
unfortunate lover. That day, however, it chanced that Cos*
tanza appeared with one cheek muffled, and told some one who
asked her the reason, that she was suffering from a violent
face ache. Tomas, whose wits were sharpened by his passion,
instantly saw how he might avail himself of that circumstance.
** SeSora Costanza," he said, '* I will give you a prayer in
♦writing, which you have only to recite once or twice, and it will
take away your pain forthwith/'

" Give it me, if you please," said Costanza, " and I will
recite it ; for I know hoyr to read/'

" It myst be on condition, however," said Tomas, ** that
you do not show it to anybody ; for I value it highly, and I
should not wish it to lose its charm by being made known to
many.'*

^* I promise you that no person .«hall see it ; but let me
have it at once, for I can hardly bear this pain."

" I will write it out from memory, and bring it you
immediately."


390 CBRVANTES' BXEMPLABT TALES*

This was the very first conversation that had ever taken
))lace between Tomas and Costanza during all the time he had
been in the house, which was nearly a month. Tomas withdrew,
wrote out the prayer, and found means to deliver it, unseen by
any one elde, into Costanza's hand ; and she, with great eager-
ness, and no less devotion, went with it into a room, where
she shut herself up alone. Then, opening the paper, she read
as follows : —

*^ Lady of my soul, I am a gentleman of Burgos ; and if I
survive my father, I shall inherit a property of six thousand
ducats yearly income. Upon the fame of your beauty, which
spreads far and wide, I left my native place, changed my dress,
and came in the garb in which you see me, to serve your
master. If you would consent to be mine in the way most
accordant with your virtue, put me to any proof you please, to
convince you of my truth and sincerity ; and when you have
fully satisfied yourself in this respect, I will, if you consent,
become your husband, and the happiest of men. For the pre->
sent, I only entreat you not to turn such loving and guileless
feelings as mine into the street ; for if your master, who has no
conception of them, should come to know my aspirations, he
would condemn me to exile from your presence, and that would
be the same thing as sentencing me to death. Suffer me,
seiiora, to see you until you believe me, considering that he
does not deserve the rigorous punishment of being deprived of
the sight of you, whose only fault lias been that he adores you.
You can reply to me with your eyes, unperceived by any of
the numbers who are always gazing upon you ; for your eyes
are such that their anger kills, but their compassion gives ne^
life."

When Tomas saw that Costanza had gone away to read
his letter, he remained with a palpitating heart, fearing and
hoping either his death-doom, or the one look that should bid
him live. Presently Costanza returned, looking so beautiful
in spite of her muffling, that if any extraneous cause could havef
heightened her loveliness, it might be supposed that her sur-«>
prise at finding the contents of the paper so widely different
from what she had expected, had produced that effect. In
her hand she held the pai>er torn into small pieces, and return-
ing the fragments to Tomas, whose legs could hardly bear him
up, <* Brother Tomas," she said, " this prayer of yours seems to


THB ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERY-MAID. 391

mo to savour more of witchcraft and delusion tlian of piety,
therelore I do not choose to put faith in it or to use it, and
I have torn it up that it may not be seen by any one more
credulous than myself. Learn other prayers, for it is impos-
sible that this one can ever do you any good."

So saying, she returned to her mistress's room, leaving
Tomas sorely distressed, but somewhat comforted at finding
that his secret remained safe confined to Costanza's bosom ;
for as she had not divulged it to her master, he reckoned that at
least he was in no danger of being turned out of doors. He
considered also, that in having taken the first step, he had
overcome mountains of difficulties, for in great and doubtful
enterprises the chief difficulty is always in the beginning.

VVbilst these things were happening in the posada, Asturi-*
ano was going about the market in search of an ass. He ex-*
amined a great many, but did not find one to his mind ; though
a gipsy tried hard to force upon him one that moved briskly
enough, but more from the effects of some quicksilver which
the vendor had put into the animal's ears^ than from its natural
spirit and nimbleness. But though the pace was good enough.
Lope was not satisfied with the size, for he wanted an ass big
and strong enough to carry himself and the water vessels,
whether they were full or empty. At last a young fellow came
up, and whispered in his ear, *^ If you want a beast of the right
sort for a water-carrier's business, I have one close by in a
meadow ; a bigger or a better you will not find in Toledo.
Take my advice, and never buy a gipsy's beast, for though they
may seem sound and good, they are all shams, and full of hid-
den defects. If you want to buy the real thing, come along
with me, and shut your mouth."

Lope consented, and away went the pair shoulder to
shoulder, till they arrived at the King's Gardens, where they
found several water-carriers seated under the shade of a water
wheel, whilst their asses were grazing in an adjoining meadow.
The vendor pointed out his ass^ which took Lope's fancy im->
mediately, and was praised by all present^ as a very strong
animal, a good goer, and a capital feeder. The bargain was
soon struck, and Lope gave sixteen ducats for the ass, with all
its accoutrements. The bystanders congratulated him on his
purchase, and on his entrance into the business, assuring him
that he had bought aa exceedingly lucky ass, for the man who


392 CERVAXTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

had sold him had, in less than a year, without over- Working*
himself, made enough to buy two suits of clothes, over and
above his own keep, and that of the ass, and the sixteen ducats,
with which he intended to return to hi» native place, where a
marriage had been arranged with a half kinswoman of his.
Besides the water-carriers who assisted at the sale of the ass,
there was a group of four stretched on the ground, and play-
ing at primera, the earth serving titcm for a table, and their
cloaks for a table cloth. Lope went up to watch their game,
and saw that they played more like archdeacons than like
water-carriers, each of them having before him a pile of more
than a hundred reals in cuartos and in silver. Presently two
of the players, having lost all they had, got up ; whereupon
the seller of the ass said, that, if there was a fourth hand,
ho would play, but he did not like a three-handed game.''

Lope, who never liked to spoil sport, said that he would
make a fourth. They sat down at once, and went at it so
roundly that, in a few moments. Lope lost six crowns which
he had about him, and finding himself without coin, said if
they liked to play for the ass he would stake him. The pro*
posal was agreed to, and he staked one quarter of the ass, say-
ing they should play for him, quarter by quarter. His luck
was so bad, that in four consecutive games he lost the four
quarters of his ass, 'and they were won by the very man wha
had sold him. The winner got up to take possession, but Lope
stopped him, observing that he had only played for and lost
the four quarters of his ass, which the winner was welcome
to take, but he must leave him the tail. This queer demand
made all present shout with laughter ; and some of them, who
were knowing in the law, were of opinion that his claim was
unreasonable, for when a sheep or any other beast is sold, the
tail is never separated from the carcass, but goes as a matter
of course with one of the hind quarters. To this Lope replied
that in Barhary they always reckon five quarters to a sheep,
the tail making the fifth, and being reckoned as valuable as
any of the other quarters. He admitted that when a beast
was sold alive, and not quartered, that the tail was included
in the sale ; but this was not to the point in question, for he
had not sold his ass, but played it away, and it had never been
his intention to stake the tail ; therefore he required them
forthwith to give him up the same« with everything thereto


TOE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERT-MAID. 303

annexed, or pertaining, that is to' say, the whole series of
spinal bones, from the back of the skull to where they ended
in the tail, and to the tips of the lowest hairs thereof.

'* Well," said one, " suppose it be as you say, and that
your claim is allowed ; leave the tail sticking to the rest of
the ass, and hold on by it."

" No," said Lope, " give me up the tail, or all the water-
carriers in the world shall never make me give up the ass.
Don't imagine because there are so many of you, that I will
let you put any cheating tricks on me, for I am a man who
can stand up to another man, and put two handbreadths of
cold steel into his guts without his being able to tell how he
came by them. Moreover, I won t be paid in money for the
tail at so much a pound, but I will have it in substance, and
cut off from the ass, as I have said."

The winner of the four quarters and the rest of the com-
pany began to think that it would not be advisable to resort
to force in this business, for Lope seemed to them to be a man
of such mettle, that he would not be vanquished without some
trouble. Nor were they mistaken ; for, aa became a man who
had spent three seasons at the tunny fisheries, where all sorts
of rows and brawls are familiar things, he rattled out a few of
the most out of the way oaths in vogue there, threw his cap
into the air, whipped out a knife from beneath his cloak, and
put himself into such a posture as struck the whole company
with awe and respect. At last, one of them, who seemed the
most rational, induced the rest to agree that Lope should be
allowed to stake the tail against a quarter of the ass at a game
of quinola. So said, so done. Lope won the first game ; the
loser was piqued and staked another quarter, which went the
way of the first ; and in two more games the whole ass was
gone* He then proposed to play for money : Lope was un-
willing, but was so importuned on all hands, that at last he
consented ; and such was his run of luck that he left his
opponent without a maravedi. So intense was the loser's
vexation, that he rolled and writhed upon the ground and
knocked his head against it. Lope, however, like a good-^
natured, liberal gentleman, raised him up, returned all the
money he had won, including the sixteen ducats the price oi
the ass, and even divided what he had left among the by<«
(tanders. Great was the surprise of them all at this extra-


394 CEUVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

ordinary liberality ; and had they lived in the time of the
great Tamerlane, they would have made him king of the
water-carriers.

Accompanied by a great retinue, Lope returned to the city,
where he related his adventure toTomas, who in turn recounted
to him -his own partial success. There was no tavern, or
eating house, or rogues' gathering, in which the play for the
ass was not known, the dispute about the tail, and the high
spirit and liberality of the Asturian ; but as the mob are for
the most part unjust, and more prone to evil than to good,
they thought nothing of the generosity and high mettle of the
great Lope, but only of the tail ; and he had scarcely been
two days carrying water about the city, before he found him-
self pointed at by people who cried, ** There goes the man of
the tail ! " The boys caught up the cry, and no sooner had'
Lope shown himself in any street, than it rang from one end
to the other with shouts of *' Asturiano, give up the tail !*
Give up the tail, Asturiano ! " kt first Lope said not a word,
thinking that his silence would tire out his persecutors ; but
in this he was mistaken, for the more he held his tongue the
more the boys wagged theirs, till at last he lost patience, and
getting off his ass began to drub the boys ; but this was only
cutting off the heads of Hydra, and for every one he laid low
by thrashing some boy, there sprang up on the instant, not
seven but seven hundred more, that began to pester him more
and more for the tail. At last he found it expedient to
retire to the lodgings he had taken apart from his companion
in order to avoid ArgQello, and to keep close there until the*
influence of the malignant planet which then ruled the hours
should have passed away, and the boys should have forgotten
to ask him for the tail. For two days he never left the house
except by night to go and see Tomas, and ask him how he got on*
Tomas told him that since he had given the paper to Costanza
he had never been able to speak a single word to her, and
that she seemed to be more reserved than ever. Once he had
found as he thought an opportunity to accost her, but before he
could get out a word, she stopped him, saying, " Tomas, I am
in no pain now, and therefore have no need of your words or
of your prayers. Be content that I do not accuse you to the
Inquisition, and give yourself no further trouble." But she
made this declaration without any expression of anger in her


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERY- MAID. 395

countenance. Lope tlien related how the boys annoyed hini,
calling after him for the tail, and Tomas advised him not to
go abroad, at least with his ass, or if he did that he should
choose only the least frequented streets. If that was not
enough, he had an unfsiiiing remedy left, which was to get rid
of his business and with it of the uncivil demand to which
it subjected him. Lope asked him Lad the Gallegan come
again to his room. He said she had not, but that she per-
sisted in trying to ingratiate herself with him by means of
dainties which she purloined out of what she cooked for the
guests. After this conversation Lope went back to his
lodgings, intending not to leave them again for another six
days, at least in company with his ass.

It might be about eleven at night, when the corregidor
most unexpectedly entered the Posado del Sevillano, at the
head of a formidable posse. The host and even the guests
were startled and agitated by his visit ; for as comets, when
they appeor, always excite feai*s of disaster, just so the
ministers of justice, when they suddenly enter a house, strike
even guiltless consciences with alarm. The unwelcome visitor
walked into a room, and called for the master of the house^
who came tremblingly to know what might be the senor
corregidor*s pleasure. " Are you the landlord ? " said the
magisitrate with great gravity. " Yes, se&or, and your wor-
ship's humble servant to command," was the reply. The
corregidor then ordered that every one else should quit the
room, and leave him alone with the landlord. This being
done, he resumed his questions.

'* What servants have you in your inn, landlord ?"

'^ Sciior, I have two Gallegan wenches, a housekeeper^
and a young man who gives out the oats and straw, and keeps
the reckoning."

"No more?''

" No, sefior."

" Then tell me, landlord, what is become of a girl who is
said to be a servant in this house, and so beautiful that she is
known all over this city as the illustrious scullery-maid ? It
has even reached my ears that my son Don Perequito is in love
with her, and that not a night passes in which he does not
serenade her."

^ Senor^ it is true that this illustrious scullery- maid, as


396 CERVANTBS* EXEMPLARY TALES.

they call her, is in my house, but she neither is my servant^
nor ceases to be so."

" I do not understand you. What do you mean by saying
that she is and is not your servant V

" It is the real truth, and if your worship will allow me,
I will explain the matter to you, and tell you what I have never
told to any one,"

" Before I hear what you have to say, I must first see this
scullery-maid.^'

Upon this the landlord went to the door and called to his
wife to send in Costanza. When the landlady heard that,
she was in great (fismay, and began to wring her hands, say-
ing, " Lord, have mercy on me ! What can the corregidor
want with Costanza, and alone ! Some terrible calamity must
surely have happened, for this girl's beauty bewitches the men."

** Don't be alarmed, senora," said Costanza, "I will go
and see what the senor corregidor wants, and if anything bad
has happened, be assured the fault is not mine;" and without
waiting to be called a second time, she took a lighted candle
in a silver candlestick, and went into the room where the
corregidor was* As soon as he saw her, he bade the landlord
shut the door, and then taking the candle out of her hand,
and holding it near her face, he stood gazing at her from
head to foot. The blush which this called up into Costanza's
cheeks, made her look so beautiful and so modest that it
seemed to the corregidor he beheld an angel descended on
earth. After a long scrutiny, '^ Landlord," he said, *^ an inn
is not fit setting for a jewel like this, and I now declare that
my son Don Perequito has shown his good sense in fixing
his affections so worthily. I say, damsel, that they may well
call you not only illustrious, but most illustrious: but it
should not be with the addition of scullery-maid, but with
that of duchess,**

"She is no scullery-maid, sefior," said the host; "her
only service in the house is to keep the keys of the plate, of
which, by God's bounty, I have some quantity for the service
of the honourable guests who come to this inn."

" Be that as it may, landlord," returned the corregidor ;
** I say it is neither seemly nor proper that this damsel should
live in an inn. Is she a relation of yours ? "

** She is neither my relation nor my servant ; and if your


Tn£ illusthious scullebt-maid. 397

worship would like to know who she is^ your worship shall
hear, when she is not present, things that will both please and
surprise you."

'* I should like to know it« Let Costanza retire, and be
assured she may count on me in all things, as she would upon
her own father ; for her great modesty and beauty oblige all
who see her to offer themselves for her service.'*

Costanza replied not a word, but with great composure
made a profound reverence to the corregidor. On leaving
the room she found her mistress waiting in great agitation.
She told her all that had passed, and how her master remained
with the corregidor to tell some things, she knew not what,
which he did not choose her to hear. All this did not quite
tranquilise the landlady, nor did she entirely recover her
equanimity until the corregidor went away, and she saw her
husband safe and free. The latter meanwhile had told the
corregidor the following tale : —

*' It is now, by my reckoning, scfior, fifteen years, one
month, and four days, since there came to this house a lady
dressed in the habit of a pilgrim, and carried in a litter. She
vras attended by four servant-men on horseback, and two
dueiias and a damsel who rode in a coach. She had also
two sumpter mules richly caparisoned, and carrying a fine
bjd and all the necessary implements for cooking. In short,
the whole equipage was first rate, and the pilgrim had all the
appearance of being some great lady ; and though she seemed
to be about forty years of ago, she was nevertheless
beautiful in the extreme. She was in bad health, looked pale,
and was so weary, that she ordered her bed to be instantly
made, and her servants made ic in tliis very room. They
asked me who was the most famous physician in this city.
I said Doctor de la Fuente. They went for him instantly ;
he came without delay, saw his patient alone, and the result
was that he ordered the bed to be made in some other part
of the house, where the lady might not be disturbed by any
noise, which was immediately done. None of the men-servants
entered the lady's apartment, but only the two dueiias and
the damsel. My wife and I asked the men-servants who was
this lady, what was her name, whence she came, and whither
she was going ? Was she wife, widow, or maid, and why
the wore that pilgrim's dress ? To all these questions, which


393 CERYAKTES' EXEMPLART TALES*

we repeated many and many a time, we got no other answer
than that this pilgrim was a noble and wealthy lady of old
Castile, that she was a widow, and had no children to inherit
her wealth ; and that having been for some months ill of the
dropsy, she had made a vow to go on a pilgrimage to our
Lady of Guadalupe, and that was the reason for the dress she
wore. As for her name, they were under orders to call her
nothing but the lady pilgrim.

" So much we learned then ; but three days after one of
the duenas called myself and my wife into the lady's presence,
and there, with the door locked, and before her women, she
addressed us with tears in her eyes, I believe in these very
words : —

** * Heaven is my witness, friends, that without any fault
of mine, I find myself in the cruel predicament which I shall
now declare to you. I am pregnant, and so near my time,
that I already feel the pangs of travail. None of my men-
servants are aware of my misfortune, but from my women
here I have neither been able nor desirous to conceal it. To
escape prying eyes in my own neighbourhood, and that this
hour might not come upon me there, I made a vow to go to
our Lady of Guadalupe ; but it is plainly her will that my labour
should befal me in your house. It is now for you to succour
and aid me with the secrecy due to one who commits her
honour to your hands. In this purse there are two hundred
gold crowns, which I present to you as a first proof how grate-
ful I shall be for the good offices I am sure you will render
me ;' and taking from under her pillow a green silk purse, em-
broidered with gold, she put it into the hands of my wife, who,
like a simpleton, stood gaping at the lady, and did not say so
much as a word in the way of thanks or acknowledgment. For
my part I remember that I said there was no need at all of that,
we wore not persons to be moved more by interest than by
humanity to do a good deed when the occasion offered. The
lady then continued, * You must immediately, my friends,
look out for some place to which you may convey my child
as soon as it is born, and also you must contrive some story
10 tell to the person in whose charge you will leave it. At first
I wish the babe to remain in this city, and afterwards to bo
taken to a vil'age. As for what is subsequently done, I will
give you instructions on my return from Guadalupe, if it if


n


THB ILLtJSTRIOUS SCULLEBT-MAID. S99

God*8 will that I should live to complete my pilgrimage, for
in the meantime I shall have had leisure to consider what
may be my best course. I shall have no need of a midwife ; for
as I know from other confinements of mine, more honourable
than this, I shall do well enough with the aid of my women
only, and thus I shall avoid having an additional witness to my
misfortune/

" Here the poor distressed pilgrim ended what she had to
say, and broke out into a ilood of tears, but was partly com-
posed by the soothing words spoken to her by my wife, who
had recovered her wits. I immediately went in search of a
woman to whom I might take the child when it was born ;
and, between twelve and one o'clock that night, when all the
people in the house were fast asleep, the lady was delivered of
.the most beautiful little girl that eyes ever beheld, and the
very same that your worship has just seen. But the wonder
was that neither did the mother make any moan in her labour,
jior did the baby cry ; but all passed off quietly, and in all
the silence that became this extraordinary case. The lady
kept h^r l>ed for six days, during which the doctor was con-
stant in his visits ; not that she had informed him of the cause
of her illness, or that she took any of the medicines he pre-
scribed ; but she thought to blind her men-servants by his
visits, as she afterwards informed me when she was out of
danger. On the eighth day she left her bed, apparently as
big as she had been before her delivery, continued her pil-
grimage, and returned in three weeks, looking almost quite
well, for she had gradually reduced the bulk of her artificial
dropsy. The little girl had been christened Costanza, in
accordance with the order given me by her mother, and was
already placed with a nurse in a village about two leagues
hence, where she passed for my niece. The lady was pleased
to express her satisfaction with all I had done, and gave me
when she was going away a gold chain, which is now in my
possession, from which she took off six links, telling me that
they would be brought by the person who should come to
claim the child. She also took a piece of white parchment,
wrote upon it, and then cut zigzag through what she had
written. Look, sir, here are my hands locked together with
the fingers interwoven. Now suppose your honour were to
write across my fingers, it is easy to imagine that one could


400 eSRVANTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

read the writing whibt the fingers were joined, but that the
meaning would be lost as soon as the hands were separated,
and would appear again as soon as they were united as
before. Just so with the parchment ; one half serves as a key
to the other ; when they are put together the letters make
sense, but separately they have no meaning. One-half of the
parchment and the whole chain, short of the six links, were
left with me, and I keep them still, always expecting the
arrival of the person who is to produce the counterparts ;
for the lady told me that in two years she would send for
her daughter, charging me that I should have her brought up
not as became her mother's quality, but as a simple villager ;
and if by any chance she was not able to send for the child
so soon, I was on no account to acquaint her with the secret of
her birth, even should she have arrived at years of discretion.
The lady moreover begged me to excuse her if slie did not tell
me who she was ; having for the present important reasons to
conceal her name. Finally, after giving us four hundred gold
crowns more, and embracing my wife with tears, she departed,
leaving us filled with admiration for her discretion, worth,
beauty, and modesty.

" Costanza remained at nurse in the village for two years.
At the end of that time I brought her home, and have kept
her ever since constantly with me, in the dress of a girl who
had to work for her bread, as her mother directed. Fifteen
years, one month, and four days I have been looking for the
|)erson who sliould come and claim her, but the length of time
that has elapsed makes me begin to lose all hope of his coming.
If he does not make his appearance before this year is out, it is
my determination to adopt her and bequeath her all I am
worth, which is upwards of sixteen thousand ducats, thanks
be to God. It now remains for me, senor Corregidor, to
enumerate to you the virtues and good qualities of Costanza,
if it be possible for me to express them. First and foremost,
ehe is most piously devoted to our Lady ; she confesses and
communicates every month ; she can read and write ; there's
not a better lace maker in all Toledo ; she sings without
accompaniment like an angel ; in the matter of behaving with
propriety she has not her equal; as for her beauty, your
worship has seen it with your own eyes. Seiior Don Pedro,
your worship's son, has never exchanged a word with her in


t


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLEBT-MAID. 401

ler life. It is true that from time to time he treats her to
some music, which she never listens to. Many seiiors, and
men of title too, have put up at this house, and have delayed
their journey for several days solely to have tlieir fill of looking
at her ; but I well know there is not one of them can boast
with truth that she ever gave them opportunity to say one
word to her either alone or before folk. This, senor, is the
real history of the illustrious scullery-maid, who is no scullion,
in which I have not oreparted one tittle from the truth."

The host had long ended his narrative before the corre-
gidor broke silence, so mu£h was he struck by the strange facts
he had heard. At last he desired to see the parchment and
the chain ; the host produced them without delay, and they
corresponded exactly to the description he had given of them.
The chain was of curious workmanship, and on the parchment
were written, one under the other, on the projecting portions
of the zigzag, the letters, tiitebeoe which mani-
festly required to be joined with those of the counterpart
to make sense. The corregidor admi]*ed the ingenuity of the
contrivance, and judged from the costliness of the chain, that
the pilgrim must have been a lady of great wealth. It was
his intention to remove the lovely girl from the inn as soon as
he had chosen a suitable c<mvent for her abode ; but for the
present hQ contented himself with taking away the parchment
only, desiring the innkeeper to inform him if any one came for
Costanza, before he showed that person the cbain> which he
left in his custody. And with this parting injunction the
corregidor left the house, much marvelling at what he had seen
and heard.

Whilst all this affair was going on, Tomas was almost beside
himself with agitation and alarm, and lost in a thousand con*
jectures, every one of which he dismissed as improbable the
moment it was formed. But when he saw the corregidor go
away, leaving Costanza behind him, his spirits revived and he
began to recover his self-possession. He did not venture to
question the landlord, nor did the latter say a word about what
had passed between him and the corregidor to any body but
his wife, who was greatly relieved thereby, and thanked God
for her delivery out of a terrible fright.

About one o'clock on the following day, there came to the
inn two elderly cavaliers of venerable presence, attended by


409 /CERVANTBS' BXEMPLART TALES.

four servants on horseback and two on foot. Having inquired
if that was the Posada del Sevillano^ and being answered in the
affirmative, they entered the gateway, and the foiur mounted
servants, dismounting, first helped their masters out of their
saddles. Costanza came out to meet the new-comers with her
wonted propriety of demeanour, and no sooner had one of the
cavaHers set eyes on her, than, turning to his companion, he
said, '^ I believe, sefior Don Juan, we have already found the
very thing we are come in quest of." Tomas, who had come
as usual to take charge of the horses aQd mules, instantly recog-
nised two of his father's servants ; a moment after he saw his
father himself, and found that his companion was no other than
the father of Carriazo. He instantly conjectured that they were
both on their way to the tunny fisheries to look for himself and
his friend, some one having no doubt told them that it was there,
and not in Flanders, they would find their sons. Not daring
to appear before his father in the garb he wore, he made a bold
venture, passed by the party with his hand before his face, and
went to look for Costanza, whom, by great good luck, he found
alone. Then hurriedly, and with a tremulous voice, dread-
ing lest she would not give him time to say a word to her,
" Costanza,'' he said, " one of those two elderly cavaliers is my
father — ^that one whom you will hear called Don Juan de
Avendano. Inquire of his servants if he has a son, Don
Tomas de Avendano by name, and that is myself. Thence
you may go on to make such other inquiries as will satisfy you
that I have told you the truth respecting my quality, and
that I will keep my word with regard to every offer I have
made you. And now farewell, for I will not return to this
house until they have left it."

Costanza made him no reply, nor did he wait for any, but
hurrying out, with his face concealed as he had come in^ he
went to acquaint Carriazo that their fathers had arrived at the
Sevillano. The landlord called for Tomas to give out oats,
but no Tomas appearing, he had to do it himself.

Meanwhile, one of the two cavaliers called one of the Galr
4egan wenches aside, and asked her what was the name of the
beautiful girl he had seen, and was she a relation of the land-
lord or the landlady. " The girl's name is Costanza," replied
the Gallegan; " she is no relation either to the landlord or the
landlady, nor do I know what she is. All I can say is, I wish


THE ILLtSTRIOUS SCULLEBT-MAID. 403-

Ae murrain had her, for I don't know what there is about her,
that she does not leave one of us girls in the house a single
chance, for all we have our own features too, such as God made
them. Nobody enters these doors but the first thing he does
is to ask, Who is that beautiful girl ? and the next is to saj all
sorts of flattering things of her, while nobody condescends to
tay a word to the rest of us, not so much as ' What are you
doing here, devils, or women, or whatever you are V"

** From your account, then," said the gentleman, " I suppose
she has a fine time of it with the strangers who put up at this
house."

" You think so. Well, just you hold her foot for the
shoeing, and see how youll like the job. By the Lord, seiior,
if she would only give her admirers leave to look at her, she
might roll in gold ; but she's more touch-me-not than a hedge-*
hog ; she's a devourer of Ave Marias, and spends the whole
day at her needle and her prayers. I wish I was as sure of a
good legacy as she is of working miracles some day. Blesd
you, she's a downright saint; my mistress says she wears
hair-cloth next her skin."

Highly delighted with what he had heard from the
Gallegan, the gentleman did not wait till they liad taken off
his spurs, but called for the landlord, and withdrew with him
into a private room. " Senor host," said he, " I am come to
redeem a pledge of mine which has been in your hands for
some years, and I bring you for it a thousand gold crowns,
these links of a chain, and this parchment."

The host instantly recognised the links and the parchment,
and highly delighted with the promise of the thousand crowns,
replied, "Senor, the pledge you wish to redeem is in this
house, but not the chain or the parchment which is to prove
the truth of your claim ; I pray you therefore to have patience,
and I will return immediately." So saying, he ran off to
inform the corregidor of what was happening. . .

The corregidor, who had just done dinner, mounted
his horse without delay, and rode to the Posada del Sevillano,
taking with him the tally parchment. No sooner had he
entered the room where the two cavaliers sat, than hastening
with open arms to embrace one of them, " Bless ipy soul ! my
good cousin Don Juan de Avendano ! This is indeed a wel-
come surprise." ^


404 CEBYAKTES' EXEMPLABT \i£ES.

" I am delighted to see you, my good cousin," said Don
Juan, " and to find you as well as I always wish you. Embrace
this gentleman, cousin ; this is Don Diego de Camazo, a great
seilor and my friend."

*^ I am already acquainted with the senor Don Diego,"
replied the corregidor, " and am his most obedient servant."

After a further interchange of civilities they passed into
another room, where they remained alone with the innkeeper,
who said as he produced the chain, " The senor corregidor
knows what you arc come for, Don Diego de Garriazo. Be
pleased to produce the links that are wanting to this chain ;
his worship will show the parchment which he holds, and let
us come to the proof for which I have been so long waiting/*

" It appears, then," said Don Diego, " that it will not bQ
necessary to explain to the senor corregidor the reason of our
coming, since you have done so already, senor landlord.'*

** He told me something," said the corregidor, " but he
has left much untold which I long to know. Here is the
parchment."

Don Diego produced that which he had brought ; the two
were put together and found to fit accurately into each other ;
and between every two letters of the innkeeper's portion, which
as we have said were tiitebeoe there now appeared one
of the following series hsshtutkn, the whole making
together the words, This is the true token. The six links of
the chain brought by Don Diego were theli compared with the
larger fragment, and found to correspond exactly.

" So far all is clear," said the corregidor ; " it now remains
for us to discover, if it be possible, who are the parents of tliis
very beautiful lady."

"Her father," said Don Diego, "you see in me; her
mother is not living, and you must be content with knowing
that she was a lady of such rank that I might have been her
servant. But though I conceal her name, I would not have
you suppose that she was in any wise culpable, however
manifest and avowed her fault may appear to have been. The
story I will now briefly relate to you will completely exonerate
her memory.

" You must know, then, that Costanza's mother, being
left a widow by a man of high rank, retired to an estate of
hers> where she lived a calm sequestered life among her ser-


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERT-MAH). 405

v&ntfl and vassals. It chanced one day when I was hunting,
that I found myself very near her house and determined to
pay her a visit. It was siesta time when I arrived at her
palace (for I can call it nothing else) : giving my horse to one
of my servants^ I entered, and saw no one till I was in th6
very room in which she lay asleep on a black ottoman. She
was extremely handsome ; the silence, the loneliness of the
place, and the opportunity, awakened my guilty desires, and
without pausing to reflect, I locked the door, woke her, and
holding her firmly in my grasp said, ^ No cries, seSora ! they
would only serve to proclaim your dishonour ; no one has
seen me enter this room, for by good fortune all your servants
are fast asleep, and should your cries bring them hither, they
can do no more than kill me in your very arms ; and if they
do, your reputation will not be the less blighted for all that.'
In fine, I effected my purpose against her will and by main
force, and left her so stupefied by the calamity that had be-
fallen her, that she either could not or would not utter one
word to me. Quitting the place as I had entered it, I rode
to the house of one of my friends, who resided within
two leagues of my victim's abode. The lady subsequently
removed to another residence, and two years passed without
my seeing her, or making any attempt to do so. At the end
of that time I heard that she was dead.

*^ About three weeks since I received a letter from a man
who had been the deceased lady*s steward, earnestly entreating
me to come to him, as he had something to communicate to
me which deeply concerned my happiness and honour. I
went to him, very far from dreaming of any such thing as I
was about to hear from him, and found him at the point of
death. He told me in brief terms that his lady on her death-
bed had made known to him what had happened between her
and me, how she had become pregnant, had made a pilgrimage
to our Lady of Guadalupe to conceal her misfortune, and had
been delivered in this inn of a daughter named Costanza.
The man gave me the tokens upon which she was to be
delivered to me, namely the piece of chain and the parchment,
and with them thirty thousand gold crowns, which the lady
had left as a marriage portion for her daughter. At the same
time, he told me that it was the temptation to appropriate that
money which had so long prevented him from obeying


406 tHEBYANTES' EXEHPLABT TALES.

the dying behest of his mistress, but now that he was about
to be called to the great account, he was eager to relieve his
conscience by giving me up the money and putting me in the
way to find my daughter. Returning home with the money
and the tokens, I related the whole story to Don Juan de
Avendano, and he has been kind enough to accompany mc to.
this city,"

Don Diego had but just finished his narrative when somo
one was heard shouting at the street-door, ^' Tell Tomas Pedro,
the hostler, that they are taking his friend the Asturiano to
prison." On hearing this the corregidor immediately sent
orders to the alguazil to bring in his prisoner, which was forth-
with done. In came the Astiuian with his mouth all bloody.
He had evidently been very roughly handled, and was held
with no tender grasp by the alguazil. The moment he entered
the room he was thunderstruck at beholding his own father
and Avendano's, and to escape recognition he covered his face
with a handkerchief, under pretence of wiping away the
blood. The corregidor inquired what that young man had
done who appeared to have been so roughly handed. The
alguazil replied that he was a water-carrier, known by the
name of the Asturian, and the boys in the street used to
shout after him, " Oive up the tail, Asturiano ; give up the
tail." The alguazil then related the story out of which that
cry had grown, whereat all present laughed not a little. The
alguazil further stated that as the Asturian was going out at
the Puerta de Alcantara, the boys who followed him having
redoubled their cries about the tail, he dismounted from his
ass, laid about them all, and left one of them half dead with
the beating he had given him. Thereupon the officer pro-<
ceeded to arrest him ; he resisted, and that was how he came
to be in the state in which he then appeared. The corregidor
ordered the prisoner to uncover his face, but as he delayed to
do so the alguazil snatched away the handkerchief. " My son^
Don Diego!" cried the astonished father. "What is the
meaning of all this ? How came you in that dress ? What,
you have not yet left off" your scampish tricks?" Carriazo fell
on his knees before his father, who, with tears in his eyes, held
him long in his embrace. Don Juan de Avendafio, knowing
that his son had accompanied Carriazo, asked the latter where
he was^ and received for answer the news that Don Tomas de


THE ILLUSTBIOUS BCULLEBT-MAIP. 407

Avcndaflo was the person who gave out the oats and straw la
that inn.

This new revelation made by the Asturiano put the climax
to the surprises of the day. The corregidor desired the inn-
keeper to bring in his hostler. " I believe he is not in the
house, but I will go look for him/' said he» and he left the
room for that purpose. Don Diego asked Garriazo what was
the meaning of these metamorphoses, and what had induced
him to turn water-carrier, and Don Tomas hostler ? Garriazo
replied, that he could not answer these questions in public, but
he would do so in private. Meanwhile Tomas Pedro lay hid in
his room, in order to see thence, without being himself seen,
what his father and Carriazo's were doing ; but he was iu
great perplexity about the arrival of the corregidor, and the
general commotion in the inn. At last some one having told
the landlord where he was hidden, he went and tried half by
fair means and half by force to bring him down ; but he would
not have succeeded had not the corregidor himself gone out
into the yard, and called him by his own name, saying, *^ Come
down, sefior kinsman ; you will find neither bears nor lions in
your way." Tomas then left his hiding place, and went and
knelt with downcast eyes and great submission at the feet of
his father, who embraced him with a joy surpassing that of
the Prodigal's father when the son who had been lost was
found again.

The corregidor sent for Gostanza, and taking her by the
hand, presented her to her father, saying, ^* Receive, Senor
Don Diego, this treasure, and esteem it the richest you could
desire. And you, beautiful maiden, kiss your father's hand,
and give thanks to heaven which has so happily exalted your
low estate." Gostanza, who till that moment had not even
guessed at what was occurring, could only fall at her father's
feet, all trembling with emotion, clasp his hands in hers, and
cover them with kisses and tears.

Meanwhile the corregidor had been urgent with his cousin
Don Juan that the whole party should come with him to his
house ; and though Don Juan would have declined the invi-
tation, the corregidor was so pressing that he carried his point,
and the whole party got into his coach, which he had previously
sent for. But when the corregidor bade Gostanza take her
place in it» her heart sank within her ; she threw herself into


\


408 CERTAITTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

the landlady's arms, and wept so piteously, that the hearts of
all the beholders were moved. " What is this, daughter of my
soul ? " said the hostess ; '* Going to leave me f Can you part
from her who has reared you with the love of a mother f*
Costanza was no less averse to the separation ; but the tender-
hearted corregidor declared that the hostess also should enter
the coach, and that she should not be parted from her whom
she regarded as a daughter, as long as she remained in Toledo.
So the whole party, including the hostess, set out together for
the corregidor's house, where they were well received by \aA
noble lady.

After they had enjoyed a sumptuous repast, Carriazo re-
lated to his father how, for love of Costanza, Don Tomas had
taken service as hostler in the inn, and how his devotion to
her was such that, before he knew her to be a lady, and the
daughter of a man of such quality, he would gladly have mar-
ried her even as a scullery-maid. The wife of the corregidor
immediately made Costanza put on clothes belonging to a
daughter of hers of the same age and figure, and if she had
been beautiful in the dress of a working girl, she seemed
heavenly in that of a lady, and she wore it with such ease and
grace that one would have apposed she had never been used
to any other kind of costume from her birth. But among so
many who rejoiced, there was one person who was full of
sadness, and that was Don Pedro, the corregidor's son, who at
once concluded that Costanza was not to be his ; nor was he
mistaken, for it was arranged between the corregidor, Don
Diego de Carriazo, and Don Juan de Avendano, that Don
Tomas should marry Costanza, her father bestowing upon her
the thirty thousand crowns left by her mother ; that the water-
carrier Don Diego de Carriazo should marry tlie daughter of
the corregidor, and that Don Pedro the corregidor's son, should
receive the hand of Don Juan de Avendano's daughter,
his father undertaking to obtain a dispensation with regard to
their relationship. In this manner all were finally made happy.
The news of the three marriages, and of the singular fortune
of the illustrious scullery-maid, spread through the city, and
multitudes fiocked to see Costanza in her new garb as a lady,
which became her so well. These persons saw the hostler
Tomas Pedro changed into Don Tomas de AvendaiSo, and
dressed as a man of quality. They observed, too, that Lope


THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCULLERY-MAID. 409

Asturiano looked very much the gentleman since he had
changed his costume^ and dismissed the ass and the water-
vessels ; nevertheless, there were not wanting some who, as he
passed through the streets in all his pomp, still called out to
him for the tail.

After remaining a month in Toledo most of the party went
to Burgos, namely, Don Diego de Carriazo, his wife, and his
father; Costanza, and her husband, Don Tomas, and the
corregidor*s son, who desired to visit his kinswoman and des-
tined bride. The host was enriched by the present of the
thousand crowns, and by the many jewels which Costanza
bestowed upon her senora, as she persisted in calling her who
had brought her up. The story of the illustrious scullery-
maid afforded the poets of the golden Tagus a theme on
which to exercise their pens in celebrating the incomparable
beauty of Costanza, who still lives happily with her faithful
hostler. Carriazo has three sons, who, without inheriting
their father's tastes, or caring to know whether or not there
are any such things as tunny fisheries in the world, are all
pursuing their studies at Salamanca ; whilst their father never
bees a water-carrier's ass but he thinks of the one he drove
in Toledo^ and is not without apprehension that, when he least
expects it, his ears shall be saluted with some squib having for
its burden, ^< Give ua the tail, Asturiano ! Asturiano, give oa
the tail r


410 CEBYANTES' BXEHriiART TALES,


THE TWO DAMSELS.

Five leagues from the citj of Seville there is 'a town
called Castelblancb. At one of the many inns belonging td
that town there arrived at nightfall a traveller, mounted on
a handsome nag of foreign breed. He had no servant with
him, and, without waiting for any one to hold his stirrup, he
threw himself nimbly from the saddle. The host, who was a
thrifty, active man, quickly presented himself, but not until
the traveller had already seated himself on a bench under
the gateway, where the host found him hastily unbuttoning
his breast, after which he let his arms drop and fainted. The
hostess, who was a good-natured soul, made haste to sprinkle
his face with cold water, and presently he revived. Evidently
ashamed of having been seen in such a state, he buttoned
himself up again, and asked for a room to which he might
retire, and, if possible, be alone. The hostess said they had
only one in the house and that had two beds, in one of
which she must accommodate any other guest that might arrive.
The traveller replied that he would pay for both beds, guest
or no guest ; and taking out a gold crown he gave it to the
hostess, on condition that no one should have the vacant bed.
The hostess, well satisfied with such good payment, promised
that she would do as he required, though the Dean of
Seville himself should arrive that night at her house. She
then asked him if he would sup. He declined, and only
begged they would take great care of his nag. Then, taking
the key of the chamber, and carrying with him a large pair of
leathern saddle-bags, he went in, locked the door, and even,
as it afterwards appeared, barricaded it with two chairs.

The moment he was gone, the host, the hostess, the hostler,
and two neighbours who chanced to be there, held a council
together, and all extolled the great comeliness and graceful
deportment of the stranger, agreeing that they had never seen


THE TWO DAMSELS. 411

liny one so handsome. They discussed his age, and came to
the conclusion that it was between sixteen and seventeen.
They speculated largely as to what might have been the cause^
of his fainting) but could make no plausible guess at it. The:
neighbours after a while went home, the host went to look aflber
the nag, and the hostess to prepare supper in case any other
guest should arrive ; nor was it long before another entered,
not much older than the first, and of no less engaging mien,
80 that the hostess no sooner saw him than she exclaimed,
^' God bless me! how is this? Are angels coming to stop here
to-night?"

" Why does the lady hostess say that ? '* said the cavalier*
" It is not for nothing I say it. Only I must beg your
honour not to dismount, for I have no bed to give you ; foi*
the two I had have been taken by a cavalier who has paid for
both, though he has no need of more than one ; but he does
that because no one else may enter the room, being, I suppose,
fond of solitude ; though upon my conscience I can't tell
why, for his face and appearance are not such that he need be
ashamed of them or want to hide them, but quite the con*
trary.**

*^ Is he so good-looking, seSora hostess ?"
" Good-looking ? Ay, the best of good-looking."
" Here, my man, hold my stirrup," said the cavalier to a
muleteer who accompanied him ; '* for though I have to sleep
on the floor, I must see a man of whom I hear such high
encomiums;" and then dismounting he called for supper^
which was immediately placed before him. Presently an
alguazil dropped in — ^as they commonly do at the inns in
small towns — ^and taking a seat, entered into conversation
with the cavalier while he supped ; not forgetting at intervals
to swallow three large glasses of wine, and the breast and leg
of a partridge, which the cavalier gave him. He paid hift
flcot meanwhile by asking news of the capital, of the wars
in Flancters, and the decay of the Turk, not forgetting the
exploits of the Transylvanian, whom God preserve. The
cavalier supped and said nothing, not having come from k
place which would have supplied him with the means of satis-
fying these inquiries. By and by, the innkeeper, having seen
to the nag, came in and sat down to make a third in the con-
versation, and to taste his own wine no less copiously than the


412 CEBYANTES' BXEMPLABT TALES.

algiiazil ; and at every gulp he leaned his head back over his
left shoulder, and prised the wine, which he exalted to the
clouds, though he did not leave much of it there, for fear it
should get watered.

From one subject to another, the host fell at last upon the
praises of the first comer ; told how he had fainted, how he
had gone to bed without supper, and had locked himself in ;
and spoke of his well-filled saddle-bags, the goodness of his
nag, and the handsome travelling-dress he wore, all which
made it strange that he travelled without any attendant.
The cavalier felt his curiosity piqued anew, and asked the
landlord to contrive that he might sleep in the second bed,
for which he would give him a gold crown. The landlord's
fingers itched to take the money ; but he said the thing was
impossible, for the door was locked inside, and he durst not
wake the sleeper, who had paid so well for both the beds.
The alguazil, however, got over the difficulty. " I'll tell you
what is to be done," said he. " I will knock at the door,
and say that I am an officer of justice ; that I have orders
from the senor alcalde to see this cavalier accommodated in
this inn ; and that as there is no other bed, he must have
one of those two. The landlord will cry out against this, and
say it is not fair, for the second bed is already engaged and
paid for; and so he will clear himself of all responsibility,
while your honour will attain your object." This scheme of
the alguazil's was unanimously approved, and the cavalier
rewarded him for it with four reals. It was carried into
effect at once ; the first guest was compelled, with manifest
reluctance, to open the door ; the second entered the room
with many apologies for the intrusion, to which the first
made no reply, nor did he even show his face ; for instantly
hastening back into bed, he turned to the wa41, and pretended
to be asleep. The last comer also went to bed, hoping to
have his curiosity satisfied in the morning when they both
got up.

The night was one of the long and weary ones of Decem-
ber, when the cold and the fatigues of the day should natu-
rally have disposed the two travellers to sleep ; but they had
not that effect on the first of the pair, who not long after
midnight began to sigh and moan as if his heart would break.
His lamentations awoke the occupant of the other bed, who


THE T>fO DAMSELS. 413

distinctly overheard the following soliloquy, though uttered
in a faint and tremulous voice, broken by sighs and sobs.

<< Wretch that I am ! Whither is the irresistible force of
my destiny hurrying me ? What a path is mine ; and what
issue can I hope for out of the labyrinth in which I am en-
tangled? O my youth and inexperience! Honour disre-
garded! Love ungratefully repaid! Regard for honoured
parents and kindred trampled under foot! Woe is me a
thousand times to have thus given the reins to my inclina-
tions ! O false words which I have too trustingly responded
to by deeds ! But of whom do I complain ? Did I not wil«
fully betray myself? Did not my own hands wield the knife
that cut down my reputation, and destroyed the trust which
my parents reposed in my rectitude? O perjured Marco
Antonio ! Is it possible that your honeyed words concealed
80 much of the gall of unkindness and disdain ? , Where art
thou, ingrate ? Whither hast thou fled, unthankful man ?
Answer her who calls upon thee ! Wait for her who pursues
thee ; sustain me, for I droop ; pay me what thou, owest me ;
succour me since thou art in so many ways bound to me V

Here the sorrowing stranger relapsed into silence, broken
only by sobs. The other, who had been listening attentively,
inferred from what he had heard that the speaker was a woman.
The curiosity he had before felt was now excited to the highest
degree : he was several times on the point of approaching the
lady's bed ; and he would have done so at last, but just then
he heard her open the door, call to the landlord^ and bid him
saddle the nag, for she wanted to go. It was a pretty long
time before she could make the landlord hear her; and
.finally, all the answer she could obtain was a recommendation
to go to sleep again, for there was more than half the night
yet to come, and it was so dark that it would be a very rash
thing to venture upon the road. Upon this she said no more,
but shut the door, and went back to bed, sighing dismally.

The other stranger now thought it would be well to
address her, and offer her his aid in any way that might be
serviceable, as a means of inducing her to say who she was,
and relate her piteous story. *^ Assuredly, senor gentleman,"
said he, '^ I should think myself destitute of natural feeling —
nay, that I had a heart of stone and a bosom of brass — ^if your
sighs and the words you have uttered did not move me to


414 CEBTAlfTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

sympathy. If the compassion I feel for you, and the earnest
desire I have conceived to risk my life for your relief — ^if
your misfortunes admit of any — ^may give me some claim upon
your courtesy, I entreat you to manifest it in declaring to
me the cause of your grief without reserve.''

** If that grief had not deprived me of understanding,"
said the person addressed, ** I ought to have remembered that
I was not alone in this room, and have bridled my tongue
and suppressed my sighs ; but to punish myself for my im«
prudent forgetfulness, I will do what you ask ; for it may be
that the pangs it will cost me to relate the bitter story of my
misfortunes will end at once my life and my woes. But first you
must prombe me solemnly, that whatever I may reveal, you will
not quit your bed nor come to mine, nor ask more of me than
I choose to disclose ; for if you do, the very moment I hear
you move I. will run myself through with my sword, which
lies ready to my hand."

The cavalier, who would have promised anything to ob-
tiun the information he so much desired, vowed that he would
not depart a jot from the conditions so courteously imposed*
^' On that assurance, then," said the lady, ^' I will do what I
have never done before, and relate to you the history of my
life. Hearken then.

*^ You must know, senor, that although I entered this inn,
as they have doubtless told you, in the dress of a man, I am
an unhappy maiden, or at least I was one not eight days ago,
and ceased to be so, because I had the folly to believe the
delusive words of a perjured man. My name is Teodosia ;
my birth-place is one of the chief towns of the province of
Andalusia, the name of which I suppress, because it does not
import you so much to know it as me to conceal it. My
parents, who are noble and wealthy, had a son and a daughter ;
the one for their joy and honoiur, the other for the reverse!^
They sent my brother to study at Salamanca, and me they
kept at home, where they brought me up with all the scrupu-
lous care becoming their own virtue and nobility ; whilst on
my part I always rendered them the most cheerful obedience^
"and punctually conformed to all their wishes, until my unr
happy fate set before my eyes the son of a neighbour of ours,
wealthier than my parents, and no less noble than they. Th^
first time I saw him, I felt nothing more than the pleasure


THE TWO DAMSELS. 415

one feels at making an agreeable acquaintance ; arid this I
might well feel^ for his person, air, manners, disposition, and
understanding were the admiration of all who knew him. But
why dwell on the praises of my enemy, or make so long a pre-
face to the confession of my infatuation and my ruin ? Let
me say at once that he saw me repeatedly from a window
opposite to mine ; whence, as it seemed to me, he shot forth
his soul towards me from his eyes, whilst mine beheld him
with a pleasure very different from that which I had expe-
rienced at our first interview, and one which constrained me
to believe that everytbtng I read in his face was the pure
truth.

** Seeing each other in this way led to conversation ; he
declared his passion, and mine responded to it, with no mis-
giving of his sincerity, for his suit was urged with promises^
oaths, tears, sighs, and every accompaniment that could make
me believe in the reality of his devoted attachment. Utterly
inexperienced as I was, every word of hb was a cannon shot
that breached the fortress of my honour ; every tear was a
fire in which my virtue was consumed; every sigh was a
rushing wind that fanned the destructive flame. In fine, upon
his promise to marry me in spite of his parents, who had
another wife in view for him, I forgot all my maidenly reserve,
and without knowing how, put myself into his power, having
no other witness of my folly than a page belonging to Marco
Antonio— for that is the name of the destroyer of my peace —
who two days afterwards disappeared from the neighbourhood,
without any person, not even his parents, having the least idea
whither he was gone. In what condition I was left, imagine
if you can ; it is beyond my power to describe it.

" I tore my hair as if it was to blame for my fault, and
punished my face as thinking it the primary occasion of my
ruin ; I cursed my fate, and my own precipitation ; I shed an
infinity of tears, and was almost oboked by them and by my
sighs ; I complained mutely to heaven, and pondered n thou-
sand expedients to see if there was any which might afford
me help or remedy, and that which I finally resolved on was
to dress myself in male apparel, and go in quest of this per-
fidious ^neas, this cruel and perjured Bireno, this defraruder
of my honest affections and my legitimate and well-founded
hopes. Having once formed this resolution, I lost no time in


416 CERVANTES' BXBHPLABT TALES,

putting it in execution, I pat on a travelling suit belonging
to my brother, saddled one of my father's horses with my
own hand, and left home one very dark night, intending to
go to Salamanca, whither it was conjectured that Marco
Antonio might have gone ; for he too is a student, and an
intimate friend of my brother's. I did not omit to take at
the same time a quantity of gold sufficient for all contingencies
upon my journey. What most distresses me is the thought
that my parents will send in pursuit of me, and that I shall be
discovered by means of my dress and the horse ; and even
had I not this to fear, I must dread my brother's resentment ;
for he is in Salamanca, and should he discover me, I need not
say how much my life would be in peril. Even should he
listen to my excuses, the least scruple of his honour would
outweigh them all.

" Happen what may, my fixed resolve is to seek out my
heartless husband, who cannot deny that he is my husband
without belying the pledge which he left in my possession —
a diamond ring, with this legend: 'Marco Antonio is the
husband of Teodosia/ K I find him, I will know from him
what he discovered in me that prompted him so soon to leave
me ; and I will make him fulfil his plighted troth, or I will
prove as prompt to vengeance as I was easy in sufiering myself
to be aggrieved, and will take his life ; for the noble blood
that runs in my veins is not to be insulted with impunity.
This, senor cavalier, is the true and sad history you desired to
hear, and which you will accept as a sufficient apology for the
words and sighs that awoke you. What I would beseech of
you is, that though you may not be able to remedy my mis-
fortune, at least you may advise me how to escape the dangers
that beset me, evade being caught, and accomplish what I so
much desire and need."

The cavalier said not a syllable in reply, and remained so
long silent that Teodosia supposed he was asleep and had not
heard a word she had been saying. To satisfy herself of this,
she said, " Are you asleep, senor ? No wonder if you are ; for
a mournful tale poured into an unimpassioned ear is more
likely to induce drowsiness than pity."

" I am not asleep," replied the cavalier ; ** on the contrary,
I am so thoroughly awake, and feel so much for your calamity,
that I know not if your own anguish exceeds niine. For tins


THE TWO DAMSELS. 41


f


•eason I will not only give you the advice you jsk, but my
personal aid to the utmost of my powers ; for though the man-
ner in which you have told your tale proves that you are
gifted with no ordinary intelligence, and therefore that you
have been your own betrayer, and owe your sorrow to a per*
verted will rather than to the seductions of Marco Antonio,
nevertheless J would fain see your excuse in your youth and
your inexperience of the wily arts of men. Compose your-
self, senora, and sleep if you can during the short remainder
of the night. When daylight comes we will consult together,
and see what means may be devised for helping you out of
your affliction."

Teodosia thanked him warmly, and tried to keep still for
a while in order that the cavalier might sleep ; but he could
not close an eye ; on the contrary he began to toss himself
about in the bed, and to heave such deep sighs that Teodosia
was constrained to ask him vhat was the matter? was he
suffering in any way, and could she do anything for his
relief?

" Though you are yourself the cause of my distress,
sefiora," he replied, "you are* not the person who can relieve
it, for if you were I should not feel it."

Teodosia could not understand the drift of this perplexed
reply ; she suspected, however, -that he was under the influence
of some amorous passion, and even that she herself might be
the object of it; for it might well be that the fact of his being
alone with one he knew to be a woman, at that dead hour of
the night, and in the same bed-room, should have awakened
in him some bad thoughts. Alarmed at the idea, she hastily
put on her clothes without noise, buckled on her sword and
dagger, and sat down on the bed to wait for daylight, which
did not long delay to appear through the many openings there
were in the sides of the room, as usual in inn-chambers« The
cavalier on his part, had made ready exactly as Teodosia had
done ; and he no sooner perceived the first rays of light, than
he started up from his bed, saying, " Get up, senora Teodosia,
and let us be gone ; for I will accompany you on your journey,
and never quit your side until I see Marco Antonio become
your lawful husband, or until he or I shall be a dead man ;"
and so saying, he opened the windows. and the doom of the
room.

B »


118 Cervantes' exemplary tales.

Teodosia had longed for daylight that she might see what
manner of man he was with whom she had been conversing all
night ; but when she beheld him, she would have been glad
that it had never dawned, but that her eyes had remained in
perpetual darkness, for the cavalier who stood before her was
her brother I At sight of him she was stupefied with emotion,
her face was deadly pale, and she could not utter a word. At
last, rallying her spirits, she drew her dagger, and presenting
the handle to her brother, fell at his feet, and gasped out,
'* Take it, dear senor and brother, punish the fault I have
committed, and satisfy your resentment, for my offence deserves
no mercy, and I do not desire that my repentance should be
accepted as an atonement. The only thing I entreat is that
you will deprive me of life, but not of my honour ; for though
I have placed it in manifest danger by absenting myself from
the house of my parents, yet its semblance may be preserved
before the world if my death be secret."

Her brother regarded her fixedly, and although her wan-
tonness excited him to vengeance, he could not withstand this
affecting appeal. With a placable countenance he raised her
from the ground, and consoled her as well as he could, telling
her, among other things, that as he knew of no punishment
adequate to the magnitude of her folly, he would suspend the
consideration of that matter for the present ; and as he thought
that fortune had not yet made all remedy impossible, he
thought it better to seek one than at once to take vengeance
on her for her levity. These words restored Teodosia to life ;
the colour returned to her cheeks, and her despair gave way to
revived hope. Don Rafael (that was the brother's name)
would speak no more on the subject, but bade her change her
name from Teodosia to Teodoro, and decided that they should
both proceed at once to Salamanca in quest of Marco Antonio,
though he hardly expected to find him there ; for as they were
intimate friends, they would have met had he been at the
university, unless indeed Marco Antonio might have shunned
him from a consciousness of the wrong he had done him.
The new Teodoro acquiesced in everything proposed by her
brother ; and the innkeeper coming in, they ordered break-
fast, intending to depart immediately.

Before all was ready another traveller arrived. This was
a gentleman who was known to Don Rafael and Teodoro^ and


VHB TWO DAMSELS. 419

tlie latter, to avoid being seen by him, remained in the cham-*
ben Don Bafael, having embraced the newcomer, asked him
what news he brought. His friend replied that he had just
come from the port of Santa Maria, where he had left four
galleys bound for Naples, and that he had seen Marco Antonio
Adomo, the son of Don Leonardo Adorno, on board one of
them. This intelligence rejoiced Don Bafael, to whom it
appeared that since he had so unexpectedly learned what it
was of such importance for him to know, he might regard this
an omen of his future success. He asked his friend, who knew
his father well, to exchange the hired mule he rode for his
father's nag, giving him to understand, not that he was coming
from Salamanca, but that he was going thither, and that he
was unwilling to take so good an animal on so long a journey.
The other obligingly consented, and promised to deliver the
pag to its owner. Don Bafael and he breakfasted together,
imd Teodoro alone ; and finally the friend pursued his journey
to Cazallo, where he had an estate, whilst Don Bafael excused
himself from accompanying him by saying that he had to
return that day to Seville.

As soon as the friend was gone, and the reckoning paid,
Don Bafael and Teodoro mounted and bade adieu to the
people of the inn, leaving them all in admiration of the come-
liness of the pair. Don Bafael told his sister what news he
had received of Marco Antonio, and that he proposed they
should make all haste to reach Barcelona; for vessels on
their way to or fro between Italy and Spain usually put in
at that port ; and if Marco Antonio's ship had not yet arrived
there, they would wait for it, and be sure of seeing him'. His
sister said he should do as he thought best, for Ins will was
hers. Don Bafael then told the muleteer who accompanied
him to have patience, for he intended to go to Barcelona, but
would pay him accordingly, The muleteer, who was one of
the merriest fellows of his trade^ and who knew Don BafaeFs
liberality, declared that he was willing to go with him to the
end of the world.

Don Bafael asked his sister what money she had. She
told him she had not counted it ; all she knew was that she
had put her hand seven or eight times into her father's strong
box, and had taken it out full of gold crowns. From this
Don Bafael calculated that she might have something about

B B 2


420 CERVAKTES' EXEMPLABT TALES.

f5ve hundred crowns, which, with two hundred of his own,
and a gold chain he wore, seemed to him no bad provision
for the journey ; the more so, as he felt confident of meeting
Marco Antonio in Barcelona. They pursued their journey
rapidly without accident or impediment until they arrived
within two leagues of a town called Igualada, which is nine
leagues from Barcelona, and there they learned that a cavalier
who was going as ambassador to Rome, was waiting at Bar-
celona for the galleys, which had not yet arrived. Greatly
cheered by this news, they pushed on until they came to the
verge of a small wood, from which they saw a man running,
and looking back over his shoulder with every appearance of
terror. " What is the matter with you, good man ?" said Don
Rafael, going up to him. "What has happened to you,
that you seem so frightened and run so fast V*

" Have I not good cause to be frightened and to nin
fast," said the roan, " since I have escaped by a miracle from a
gang of robbers in that wood ?"

" Malediction ! Lord save us ! " exclaimed the muleteer.
" Robbers at this hour ! By my halidom, they'll leave us as
bare as we were born."

" Don't make yourself imeasy, brother," replied the man
from the wood, " for the robbers have by this time gone away,
after leaving more than thirty passengers stripped to their
shirts and tied to trees, with the exception of one only, whom
they have left to unbind the rest as soon as they should have
passed a little hill they pointed out to him."

"If that be so," said Calvete, the muleteer, "we may
proceed without fear, for where the robbers have made an
attack, they do not show themselves again for some days. I
say this with confidence, as a man who has been twice in
their hands, and knows all their ways."

This fact being confirmed by the stranger, Don Rafael
resolved to go on. They entered the wood, and had not
advanced far, when they came upon the persons who had
been robbed, and who were more than forty in number. The
man who had been left free, had unbound some of them ; but
his work was not yet complete, and several of them were
still tied to the trees. They presented a strange spectacle,
some of them stripped naked, others dressed in the tattered
garments of the robbers ; some weeping over their disaster,


THE TWO DAMSELS. 421

tome laughing at the strange figure the others made in their
robber's costume; one dolorously reciting the list of the
things he had lost, another declaring that the loss of a box of
Agnus Dei he was bringing home from Borne afflicted him
more than all besides. In short, the whole wood resounded
with the moans and lamentations of the despoiled wretches.
The brother and sister beheld them with deep compassion,
and heartily thanked heaven for their own narrow escape
from so great a peril. But what affected Teodoro more than
anything else was the sight of a lad apparently about fifteen,
tied to a tree, with no covering on him but a shirt and a pair of
linen drawers, but with a face of such beauty that none could
refrain from gazing on it. Teodoro dismounted and unbound
him, a favour which he acknowledged in very courteous
terms ; and Teodoro, to make it the greater, begged Calvete
to- lend the gentle youth his cloak, until he could buy him
another at the first town they came to. Calvete complied,
and Teodoro threw the cloak over his shoulders, asking him
in Don Bafael's presence to what part of the country he
belonged, whence he was coming, and whither he was going.
The youth replied that he was from Andalusia, and he named
as lus birthplace a town which was but t^o leagues distant
from that of the brother and sister. He said he was on his
way from Seville to Italy, to seek his fortune in arms like
many another Spaniard ; but that he had had the misfortune
to fall in with a gang of thieves, who had taken from him a
considerable sum of money and clothes, which he could not
replace for three hundred crowns. Nevertheless he intended
to pursue his journey, for he did not come of a race which
was used to let the ardour of its zeal evaporate at the first
check.

The manner in which the youth expressed himself, the
fact that he was from their own neighbourhood, and above
all, the letter of recommendation he carried in his face,
inspired the brother and sister with a desire to befriend
him as. much as they could. After they had distributed some
money among such of the rest as seemed in most need of it,
especially among monks and priests, of whom there were
eight, they made this youth mount Calvete's mule, and went
on without more delay to Igualada. There they were
informed that the galleys had arrived the day before at


423 CERVANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES.

Barcelona, whence they would sail in two days, unless the
insecurity of the roadstead compelled them to make an
earlier departure. On -account of this news, they rose next
morning before the sun, although they had not slept all
night in consequence of a circumstance which had occurred
at supper, and which had more surprised and interested the
brother and sister than they were themselves aware. As
they sat at table, and the youth with them whom they had
taken under their protection, Teodoro fixed her eyes intently
on his face, and scrutinising his features somewhat curiously,
perceived that his ears were bored. From this and from a
certain bashfulness that appeared in his looks, she suspected
that the supposed youth was a woman, and she longed for
supper to be over that she might verify her suspicion. Mean->
while Don Eafael asked him whose son he was, for he knew
all the principal people in the town he had named as his
birth place. The youth said he was the son of Don Enrique
de Cardenas. Don Eafael replied that he was well acquainted
with Don Enrique, and knew for certain that he had no son ;
but that if he had given that answer because he did not choose
to make known his family, it was of no consequence, and he
should not be questioned again on that subject.

" It is true," said the youth, " that Don Enrique has no
children, but his brother Don Sancho has."

" He has no son either," replied Don Bafael, " but an
only daughter, who, by the bye, they say is one of the hand-*
somest damsels in Andalusia ; but this I know only by report ;
for though I have been often in her town I have never seen
her."

'^ It is quite true, as you say, senor, that Don Sancho has
only a daughter, but not one so handsome as fame reports ;
and if I said that I was the son of Don Enrique it was only
to give myself some importance in your eyes ; for in fact, I
am only the son of Don Sancho*s steward, who has been many
years in his service, and I was born in his house. Having
displeased my father, I carried off a good sum of money from
him, and resolved to go to Italy, as I have told you, and
follow the career of arms, by which men even of obscure birth
have been known to make themselves illustrious."

Teodoro, who listened attentively to all this conversation,
Was more and more confirmed in her suspicion^ both by th^


tnE TWO DAMSELS. 423

inanner and the substance of what the youth said. Afler the
cloth was removed, and while Don Rafael was preparing for
bed, she made known to him her surmise, and then, with his
permission, took the youth aside, and, going out with him
upon a baJeony which looked on the street, addressed him
thus : — ^

" Don Francisco," for that was the name he had given
himself, ** I would fain have done you so much service that
you could not help granting me anything that I should ask
of you ; but the short time we have known you has not
permitted this. Hereafter perhaps you may know how far I
deserve that you should comply with my desires ; but if you
do not choose to satisfy that which I am now about to express, I
will not the less continue to be your faithful servant. Further-*
more, before I prefer my present request, I would impress
upon you that although my age does exceed yours, I have
more experience of the world than is usual at my years, as
you will admit when I tell you that it has led me to suspect
that you are not a man, as your garb imports, but a woman,
and one as well-bom as your beauty proclaims, and perhaps
as unfortunate as your disguise implies, for such transforma-*
tions are never made willingly, or except under the pressure
of some painful necessity. If what I suspect is the case,
tell me so, and 1 swear to you on the faith of a cavalier to
aid and serve you in every way I can. That you are a woman
you cannot make me doubt, for the holes in your ears make
that fact very clear* It was thoughtless of you not to close
them with a little flesh-coloured wax, for somebody else as
inquisitive as myself, and not so fit to be trusted with a
secret, might discover by means of them what you have so ill
concealed. Believe me, you need not hesitate to tell me who
you are, in full reliance on my inviolable secrecy."

The youth had listened with great attention to an Teodoro
Said, and, before answering her a word, he seized her hands,
carried them by force to his lips, kissed them with great
fervour, and even bedewed them copiously with tears*
Teodoro could not help sympathising with the acute feelings
of the youth, and shedding tears also. Although, when she
had with difficulty withdrawn her hands from the youth's lips,
he replied with a deep-drawn sigh, " I will not, and cannot
deny, seuora^ that your suspicion is true ; I am a womaui


426 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY tALES.

inviolable, they all fell to the ground when I remembered ill
what company Marco Antonio had departed. I beat my face,
tore my hair, and cursed my fate ; but what was most irksome
to me was that I could not practise these self-inflictions at all
hours in consequence of my father's presence. In fine, that I
might be free to indulge my woe without impediment, I
resolved to quit my home. It would seem that the execution
of a bad purpose never fails for want of opportunity, I boldly-
purloined a suit of clothes belonging to one of my father s
pages, and from himself a considerable sum of money ; then
leaving the house by night I travelled some leagues on foot,
and reached a town called Osuna, where I hired a car. Two
days afterwards I entered Seville, where I was quite safe from
all pursuit.

^' There I bought other clothes, and a mule, and set out
with some cavaliers who were travelling with all speed to
Barcelona, that they might be in time for some galleys that
were on their way to Italy. I continued my journey until
yesterday, when the robbers took everything from me, and
among the rest, that precious thing which sustained my soul
and lightened my toils, the written engagement given me by
Marco Antonio. I had intended to carry it with me to Italy,
find Marco Antonio there, and present it to him as an evidence
of his faithlessness and my constancy, and constrain him to
fulfil his promise. At the same time I am conscious that he
may readily deny the words written on this paper, since he
has made nought of the obligations that should have beed
engraved on his soul ; besides, it is plain that if he is accom-
panied by the incomparable Teodosia he will not deign to
look upon the unfortunate Leocadia. But happen what may,
I am resolved to die or present myself before the pair, that the
sight of me may trouble their joy. This Teodosia, this enemy
of my peace, shall not so cheaply enjoy what is mine. I will
seek her out^ I will find her, and will take her life if I can."

" But how is Teodosia in fault,*' said Teodoro, " if, as id
very probably the case, she too has been deluded by Marco
Antonio, as you, sefiora, have been ? "

" How can that be so," returned Leocadia, " if he has hef
with him ? Being with the man she loves, what question can
there be of delusion ? They are together, and therefore they
are happy, and would be so, though they were in the burning


THE TWO DAMSELS. -427

deserts of Lybia, or the dreary wastes of Scythia. She is
blest in his arms wherever she is, and therefore she shall pay
for all I shall suffer till I find her."

" It is very likely you are mistaken," said Teodoro ; " I am
very well acquainted with this enemy of yours, as you call her,
and I know her prudence and modesty to be such, that she
never would venture to quit her father s house and go away
with Marco Antonio. And even had she done so, not knowing
you, nor being aware of any claim you had on him, she has
not wronged you at all, and where there is no wrong, ven-«
geanoe is out of place."

*^ Tell me not of her modesty, sefior *, for I was as modest
and as virtuous as any maiden in the world, and yet I have
done what I have told you. That he has carried her off there
is no doubt. I acknowledge, looking on the matter dispassion-i
ately, that she has not wronged me ; but the pangs of jealousy
which she occasions me make me abhor her. If a sword were
thrust through my vitals, should I not naturally strive to
pluck it out and break it to pieces?"

" Well, well, sefiora Leoc^ia, since the passion that sways
you makes you speak so wildly, I see it is not the fit time to
offer you rational advice. I shall therefore content myself
with repeating that I am ready and willing to render you
every service in my power, and I know my brother's generous
nature so well, that I can boldly make you the same pro-*
mise on his part. We are going to Italy, and it rests only
with yourself to accompany us. One thing only I entreat,
that you will allow me to tell my brother what I know of
your story, that he may treat you with the attention and
respect which is your due. I think you had better continue
to wear male attire, and if it is to be procured in this place, 1
will take care that you shall be suitably equipped to morrow*
For the rest, trust to time, for it is a great provider of remedies
even for the most desperate cases."

Leocadia gratefully thanked the generous Teodoro, saying
he might tell his brother whatever he thought fit, and be-
seeching him not to forsake her, since he saw to what dangers
she was exposed, if she was known to be a woman. Here the
conversation c^^ded, and they retired to rest, Teodosia in her
brother's room, and Leocadia in another next it. Don Bafael
was still awake> waiting for his sister to know what had passed


428 CERVANTES* EXEMPLABT TALES,

between her and the suspected woman ; and before she Inj
down, he made her relate the whole to him in detail. ** Well,
sister/' he said when she had finished, *^ if she is the person
she declares herself to be, she belongs to the best family in her
native place, and is one of the noblest ladies of Andalusia*
Her father is well known to ours, and the fame of her beauty
perfectly corresponds with the evidence of our own eyes. My
opinion is, that we must proceed with caution, lest she come
to speak with Marco Antonio before us, for I feel some un-
easiness about that written engagement she speaks of, even
though she has lost it. But be of good cheer, sister, trnd go
to rest, for all will come right at last."

Teodosia complied with her brother's advice so far as to go
to bed, but it was impossible for her to rest, so racked was
she by jealous fears. Oh, how she exaggerated the beauty of
Leocadia, and the disloyalty of Marco Antonio ! How often
she read with the eyes of her imagination his written promise
to her rival ! What words and phrases she added to it, to
make it more sure and binding! How often she refused to
believe that it was lost! And how many a time she repeated
to herself, that even though it were lost, Marco Antonio would
not the less fulfil his promise to Leocadia, without thinking of
that by which he was bound to herself I In such thoughts aS
these she passed the night without a wink of sleep ; nor was
her brother Don Rafael less wakeful ; for no sooner had he
heard who Leocadia was, than his heart was on fire for her.
He beheld her in imagination, not tied to a tree, or in tattered
male garments, but in her own rich apparel in her wealthy
father's house. He would not suffer his mind to dwell on that
which was the primary cause of his having become acquainted
with her ; and he longed for day that he might continue his
journey and find out Marco Antonio, not so much that he
might make him his brother-in-law, as that he might hinder
him from becoming the husband of Leocadia. In fact, he was
so possessed, by love and jealousy, that he could have borne
to see his sister comfortless, and Marco Antonio fairly
buried, rather than be himself without hope of obtaining
Leocadia.

Thus with different thoughts, they all quitted their beds at
break of day, and Don Rafael sent for the host, and asked him
if he could purchase a suit of clothes in that place for a page


THB TWO DA1CSEL8* 429

who had been stripped by robbers. The host said he happened
to have one for sale which he would dispose of at a reasonable
price. He produced it, Leocadia found that it fitted her very
welly she put it on, and girt herself with sword and dagger
with such sprightly grace that she enchanted Don Rafael, and
redoubled Teodosia's jealousy. Calvete saddled the mules,
and about eight in the morning, they started for Barcelona,
not intending to take the famous monastery of Monserrate on
their way, but to visit it on a future occasion, whenever it
might please God to send them home again with hearts more
at ease.

Words are not adequate to describe the feelings of the two
brothers, or with what difierent eyes they severally regarded
Leocadia; Teodosia wishing for her death, and Don Rafael for
her life ; Teodosia striving to find faults in her, in order that
she might not despair of her own hopes ; and Don Rafael
finding out new perfections, that more and more obliged him
to love her. All these thoughts, however, did not hinder
their speed, for they reached Barcelona before sunset. They
admired the magnificent situation of the city, and esteemed it
to be the flower of the world, the honour of Spain, the terror
of all enemies near and far, the delight of its inhabitants, the
refuge of strangers, the school of chivalry, the model of
loyalty, in a word, a union of all that a judicious curiosity
could desire in a grand, famous, wealthy, and well-built city.
Upon their entering it they heard a great uproar, and saw a
multitude of people running with loud cries. They inquired
the cause, and were told that the people of the galleys in the
port had fallen upon those of the town. Don Rafael desired
to see what was going on, though Calvete would have dis-
suaded him ; for, as the muleteer said, he knew well what
mischief came of interfering in such frays as this, which
usually occurred in Barcelona when galleys put in there.

In spite of this good advice, Don Rafael and his fellow-
travellers went down at once towards the beach, where they
saw many swords drawn, and numbers of people slashing at
each other without mercy, and they approached so near the
scene without dismounting, that they could distinctly see the
faces of the combatants, for the sun was still above the horizon;
The number of townspeople engaged was immense, and great
crowds issued from the galleys, although their commander.


430 CEBTAHTES* EXEHPLABT TALES.

•

Don Pedro Yique, a gentleman of Yalencia, stood on the prow
of the flag-ship, threatening all who entered the boata to
succour their comrades. Findmg his commands disregarded,
he ordered a gun to be fired without ball, as a warning that if
the combatants did not separate, the next gun he fired would
be shotted. Meanwhile, Don Bafael, who narrowly watched
the fray, observed among those who took part with the seamen
a young man of about two-and-twenty, dressed in green, with
a hat of the same colour, adorned with a rich loop and buttons
ap[)arently of diamonds. The skill and courage with which he
fought, and the elegance of his dress, drew upon him the
attention of all the spectators, and Teodosia and Leocadia both
cried out, as if with one voice, " Good heavens ! either my
eyes deceive me, or he in green is Marco Antonio." Then^
with great nimbleness, they dismounted, drew their sworda
and daggers, cleared their way through the crowd, and placed
themselves one on each side of Marco Antonio. '^Fear
nothing, Senor Marco Antonio," cried Leocadia, " for there U
one by your side who will defend your life at the cost of hi^
own." " Who doubts it," ejaculated Teodosia, on the other
side, ** since I am here T* Don Bafael, who had seen and
heard all tliis, followed his two companions, and took sides a^
they did.

Marco Antonio was too busy smiting and defending him-^
self to heed what his two seconds had said ; he could think of
nothing but fighting, and no man ever fought more bravely ;
but as the party of the town was every moment increasing in
numbers, the people of the galleys were forced to retreat and
take to the water. Marco Antonio retreated with the resty
much against his will, still attended on either side by his two
valiant Amazons. By this time a Catalonian knight of the
renowned House of Cardonas, made his appearance on a noble
charger, and, throwing himself between the two parties,
ordered the townspeople to retire. The majority obeyed, but
some still continued to fling stones, one of which unluckily
struck Marco Antonio on the breast with such force that he
fell senseless into the water, in which he was wading up to his
knees. Leocadia instantly raised and supported him in her
arms, and Teodosia aided her.

Don Bafael, who had turned aside a little to avoid a shower
9f stones^ saw the accident which had befallen Marco Antonio^


THE TWO DAMSELS, 431

find was hastening forward to his aid, when the Gatalonian
knight stopped him, saying, " Stay, senor, and do me the
favour to put yourself by my side. I will secure you from the
insolence of this unruly rabble."

^* Ah, senor I '* replied Bafael, ** let me pass, for I see that
in great danger which I most love in this world."

The knight let him pass, but before he could reach the
spot, the crew of the flagship's boat had already taken on board
Marco Antonio and Leocadia, who never let him out of
her arms. As for Teodosia, whether it was that she was
weary, or overcome with grief to see her lover wounded, or
enraged with jealousy to see her rival with him, she had not
strength to get into the boat, and would certainly have fallen
in a fainting fit into the water, if her brother had not
opportunely come to her aid, while he himself felt no less
torment than his sister at seeing Leocadia go away with
Harco Antonio.

The Catalonian knight being very much taken with the
goodly presence of Don Bafael and his sister (whom he
supposed to be a man), called them from the shore, and
requested them to go with him, and they were constrained tp
accept his friendly ofier, lest they should suffer some injury
from the people, who were not yet pacified. Thereupon, the
knight dismounted, and with his drawn sword in his hand,
led them through the tumultuous throng, who made way at.
his command. Don Bafael looked round to see if he could dis-
cover Calvete with the mules ; but he was not to be seen, for
the moment his employers dismounted, he had gone off to an
inn where he had lodged on previous occasions. On their
arrival at the knight's abode, which was one of the principal
houses in the city, he asked them in which of the galleys they
had arrived. Don Rafael replied that they had not come in any,
for they had arrived in the city just as the fray began ; and
it was because they had recognised the gentleman who was
wounded with a stone that they had involved themselves in
danger. Moreover, he entreated the knight would have the
gentleman brought on shore, as he was one on whom his own
dearest interests depended. '^I will do so with great pleasure,"
replied the knight, ^^ and I am sure the general will allow it,
for he is a worthy gentleman and a relation of mine." There-
upon he went at ojice to the galley, where he found Marco


433 CERVANTES' BXEICPLABT TALEfl.

Antonio under the hands of the surgeon, who pronounced his
wound dangerous, being near the heart. With the general's
consent he had him brought on shore with great care,
accompanied by Leocadia, and carried to his own house in a
litter, where he entertained the whole party with great
hospitality.

A famous surgeon of the city was now sent for, but he
would not touch the patient's wound until the following day,
alleging that it had no doubt been properly treated already,
army and navy surgeons being always men of skill, in con-
sequence of their continual experience in cases of wounds. He
only desired that the patient should be placed in a quiet room
and left to rest. Presently the surgeon of the galley arrived,
and had a conference with his colleague, who approved of
what he had done, and agreed with him in thinking the case
highly dangerous. Leocadia and Teodosia heard this with as
much anguish of heart as if it had been a sentence of death
upon themselves ; but not wishing to betray their grief, they
strove to conceal it in silence. Leocadia, however, determined
to do what she thought requisite for her honour, and as soon
as the surgeons were gone, she entered Marco Antonio's room,
where, going up to his bed- side, and taking his hand in pre-
sence of the master of the house, Don Rafael, Teodosia, and
others, "Seiior Marco Antonio Adorno," she said, "it is now
no seasonable time, considering your condition, to utter many
words ; and therefore I shall only entreat you to lend your
ear to some few which concern, if not the safety of your body,
at least that of your soul. But I must have your permission
to speak ; for it would ill become me, who have striven never
to disoblige you from the first moment I knew you, to disturb
you now in what seems almost your last."

At these words Marco Antonio opened his eyes, looked
steadfastly at Leocadia, and recognising her rather by the tone
of her voice than by her face, said with a feeble voice,
like one in pain, " Say on, senor, what you please, for I am
not so far gone but that I can listen to you ; nor is that voice
of yours so harsh and unpleasing that I should dislike to
hear it."

Teodosia hearkened most attentively, and every word that
Leocadia spoke pierced her heart like an arrow, and at the
same time harrowed the soul of Don Rafael. " If the blow you


THE TWO DAMSELS. 433

have received," continued Leoeadia, " or rather that which
has struck my heart, has not effaced from your memory, seiior
Marco Antonio, the image of her whom not long ago you called
your glory and your heaven, you must surely call to mind
who Leocadia was, and what was the promise you gave her in
writing under your own hand ; nor can you have forgotten
the worth of her parents, her own modesty and virtue, and
the obligation you are under to her for having always gratified
you in everything you desired. If you have not forgotten
all this, you may readily know, in spite of this disguise, that
I am Leocadia. As soon as 1 heard of your departure from
home, dreading lest new chances and opportunities should
deprive me of what is so justly mine, I resolved, in defiance
of the worst miseries, to follow you in this garb, and to search
the wide world over till I found you. Nor need you wonder
at this, if you have ever felt what the strength of true love
is capable of, or know the frenzy of a deceived woman. I
have suffered some hardships in my quest, all of which I
regard as pastime since they have resulted in my seeing
you ; for, though you are in this condition, if it be God's
will to remove you to a better world, I shall esteem myself
more than happy if before your departure you do what be-
comes you, in which case I promise you to live in such a
manner after your death that I shall soon follow you on that
last inevitable journey. I beseech you then, for the love of
heaven, for your own honour, and for my sake, to whom you
owe more than to all the world, receive me at once as your
lawful wife, not leaving it to the law to do what you
have so many righteous motives for doing of your own
accord."

Here Leocadia ceased speaking. All present had listened
to her in profound silence, and in the same way they awaited
the reply of Marco Antonio. " I cannot deny, sefiora," he
said, "that I know you ; your voice and your face will not
jsuffer me to do that. Nor yet can I deny how much I owe
to you, nor the great worth of your parents and your own
incomparable modesty and virtue. I do not, and never shall,
think lightly of you for what you have done in coming to
seek me in such a disguise; on the contrary, I shall alvrays
esteem you for it in the highest degree. But since, as you
say, I am so near my end, I desire to make known to you a

CO


i34 CERVANTES* EXEMPLARY TALES.

truth, the knowledge of which, if it be unpleasant to you
now, may hereafter be useful to you.

" I confess, fair Leocadia, that I loved you, and you loved
me; and yet I confess also that my written promise was given
more in compliance with your desire than my own ; for before
I had long signed it my heart was captivated by a lady named
Teodosia, whom you know, and whose parentage is as noble
as your own. If I gave you a promise signed with my hand,
to her I gave that hand itself in so unequivocal a manner that
it is impossible for me to bestow it on any other person in the
world. My amour with you was but a pastime from which I
culled only some flowers, leaving you nothing the worse ;
from her I obtained the consummate fruit of love upon my
plighted faith to be her husband. That I afterwards deserted
you both was the inconsiderate act of a young man who
thought that all such things were of little importance, and
might bo done without scruple. My intention was to go to
Italy, and after spending some of the years of my youth there,
to return and see what had become of you and my real wife ;
but Heaven in its mercy, as I truly believe, has permitted me
to be brought to the state in which you see me, in order that
in thus confessing my great faults, I may fulfil my last duty
in this world, by leaving you disabused and free, and ratifying
on my deathbed the pledge I gave to Teodosia. If there is
anything, se&ora Leocadia, in which I can serve you during
the short time that remains to me, let me know it ; so it be not
to receive you as njy wife, for that I cannot, there is nothing
else which I will not do, if it be in my power, to please
you."

Marco Antonio, who had raised himself on one arm while
he spoke, now fell back senseless. Don Rafael then came for-
ward. "Recover yourself, dear sefior," he said, embracing
him affectionately, " and embrace your friend and your brother,
since such you desire him to be."

Marco Antonio opened his eyes, and recognising Don Ra-
fael, embraced him with great warmth. " Dear brother and
senor," he said, " the extreme joy I feel in seeing you must
needs be followed by a proportionate affliction, since, as they
say, after gladness comes sorrow ; but whatever befals me now
I will receive with pleasure in exchange for the happiness of
beholding you."


THE TWO DAMSELS. 43d

** T J make your happiness more complete," replied Don
Bafael, " I present to you this jewel as your own." Then,
turning to look for his sister, he found her behind the rest of
the people in the room, bathed in tears, and divided between
joy and grief at what she saw and what she had heard.
Taking her by the hand, her brother led her passively to the
bed-side, and presented her to Marco Antonio, who embraced
her with loving tears.

ITie rest of those present stared in each others' faces in
speechless amazement at these extraordinary occurrences ; but
the hapless Leocadia, seeing her whom she had mistaken for
Don Rafael's brother locked in the arms of him she looked on
as her own husband, and all her hopes mocked and ruined,
stole out of the room unperceived by the others, whose atten-
tion was engrossed by the scene about the bed. She rushed
wildly into the street, intending to wander over the world, no
matter whither ; but she was hardly out of doors before Don
Rafael missed her, and, as if he ha4 lost his soul, began to
inquire anxiously after her ; but nobody could tell what had
become of her. He hastened in dismay to the inn where he
was told Calvete lodged, thinking she might have gone thither
to procure a mule; but, not finding her there, he ran like a mad-
man through the streets, seeking her in every quarter, till the
thought struck him that she might have made for the galleys,
and he turned in that direction. As he approached the shore
he heard some one calling from the land for the boat belonging
to the general's galley, and soon recognised the voice as that
of the beautiful Leocadia. Hearing his footsteps as he hastened
towards her, she drew her sword and stood upon her guard ;
but perceiving it was Don Rafael, she was vexed and confused
at his having found her, especially in so lonely a place ; for she
was aware, from many indications, that he was far from
regarding her with indifference ; on the contrary, she would
have been delighted to know that Marco Antonio loved her as
well. How shall I relate all that Don Rafael now said to
Leocadia? I can give but a faint idea of the glowing
language in which he poured out his soul.

" Were it my fate, beautiful Leocadia," he said, " along
with the favours of fortune to lack also at this moment the
courage to disclose to you the secret of my soul, then would
there be doomed to perpetual oblivion the most ardent and

cc 2


436 CERYAKTBS' EXEMPLARY TALES

genuioe affection that ever was harboured In a lover s breast.
But not to do it that wrong, I will make bold, sefiora, come of
it what may, to beg you will observe, if your wounded
feelings allow you, that in nothing has Marco Antonio the
advantage of me, except the happiness of being loved by you.
My lineage is as good as his, and in fortune he is not much
superior to me. As for the gifts of nature, it becomes me not
to laud myself, especially if in your eyes those which have
fallen to my share are of no esteem. All this I say, adored
senora, that you may seize the remedy for your disasters which
fortune offers to your hand. You see that Marco Antonio
cannot be yours, since Heaven has already made him my
sister's ; and the same Heaven which has taken him from you is
now willing to compensate you with me, who desire no higher
bliss in this life than that of being your husband. See how
good fortune stands knocking at the door of the evil fortune
you have hitherto known. And do not suppose that I shall
ever think the worse of .you for the boldness you have shown
in seeking after Marco Antonio; for from the moment I
determine to match myself with you, I am bound to forget
all that is past. Well I know that the same power which has
constrained me so irresistibly to adore you, has brought you
also to your present pass, and therefore there will be no need
to seek an excuse where there has been no fault."

Leocadia listened in silence to all Don Bafael said, only
from time to time heaving a sigh from the bottom of her heart.
Don Eafael ventured to take her hand ; she did not withdraw
it ; and kissing it again and again, he said, '< Tell me, lady of
my soul, that you will be so wholly, in presence of these starry
heavens, this calm listening sea, and these watery sands. Say
that yeSy which surely behoves your honour as well as my
happiness. I repeat to you that I am a gentleman, as you
know, and wealthy ; that I love you, which you ought to
esteem above every other consideration ; and that whereas I
find you alone, in a garb that derogates much from your
honour, far from the home of your parents and your kindred,
without any one to aid you at your need, and without the
hope of obtaining what you were in quest of, you may return
home in your own proper and seemly garb, accompanied by
as good a husband as you had chosen for yourself, and be
wealthy, happy, esteemed, and even applauded by all who


THE TWO DAMSELS. 437

may become acquainted with the events of your story. All
this being so, I know not why you hesitate. Say the one
word that shall raise me from the depth of wretchedness to
the heaven of bliss, and in so doing, you will do what is beet
for yourself; you will comply with the demands of courtesy
and good sense, and show yourself at once grateful and
discreet."

"Well," said the doubting Leocadia, at last, "since
Heaven has so ordained, and neither 1 nor any one living can
oppose its will, be it as Heaven and you desire, senor. I take
the same power to witness with what bashfulness I consent
to your wishes, not because 1 am unconscious of what I gain
by complying with them, but because I fear that when I am
yours you will regard me with other eyes than those with which
hitherto perhaps you have mistakingly beheld me. But be it
as it may, to be the lawful wife of Don Rafael de Villavicencio
is an honour I cannot lose, and with that alone I shall live
contented. But if my conduct after I am your wife give me
any claim to your esteem, I will thank Heaven for having
brought me through such strange circumstances and such great
misfortunes to the happiness of being yours. Give me your
hand, Don Rafael, and take mine in exchange ; and, as you
say, let the witnesses of our mutual engagement be the sky, the
sea, the sands, and this silence, interrupted only by my sighs
and your entreaties."

So saying, she permitted Don Rafael to embrace her, and
taking each other's hand they solemnised their betrothal
with a few tears drawn from their eyes by the excess of joy
succeeding to their past sorrows. They immediately returned
to the knight's house, where their absence had occasioned
great anxiety, and where the nuptials of Marco Antonio and
Teodosia had already been celebrated by a priest, at the
instance of Teodosia, who dreaded lest any untoward chance
should rob her of her new-found hopes. The appearance of
Don Rafael and Leocadia, and the account given by the
former of what had passed between them, augmented the
general joy, and the master of the house rejoiced as if they
were his own near relations ; for it is an innate characteristie
of the Oatalonian gentry to feel and act as friends towards
such strangers as have any need of their services. '

The priest, who was still present, desired that Leocadia


438 CERVANTES' EXEMPLARY TALES.

should Change her dress for one appropriate to her sex, and
the knight at once supplied both the ladies with handsome
apparel from the wardrobe of his wife, who was a lady of the
ancient house of the Granolliques, famous in that kingdom.
The surgeon was moved by charity to complain that the
wounded man talked so much and was not left alone ; but it
pleased God that Marco Antonio's joy, and the little silence
he observed, were the very means of his amendment, so
that when they came to dress his wound next day, they found
him out of danger, and in a fortnight more he was fit to
travel. During the time he kept his bed he had made a vow
that if he recovered he would go on a pilgrimage on foot to
Santiago de Galicia, and in the fulfilment of that vow he was
accompanied by Don Bafael, Leocadia, Teodosia, and even by
the muleteer Calvete, unusual as such pious practices are with
men of his calling ; but he had found Don Bafael so liberal
and good-humoured that he would not quit him till he had
returned home. The party having to travel on foot as
pilgrims, the mules were sent on to Salamanca.

The day fixed for their departure arrived, and equipped
in their dalmaticas and with all things requisite, they took
leave of their generous and hospitable friend, the knight Don
Sancho de Cardona, a man of most illustrious blood and per-
sonally famous ; and they pledged themselves that they and
their descendants, to whom they should bequeath it as a duty,
should perpetually preserve the memory of the singular
favours received from him, in order that they might not
be wanting at least in grateful feeling, if they could not repay
them in any other way. Don Sancho embraced them all, and
said it was a matter of course with him to render such services or
bthers to all whom he knew or supposed to be Castilian
hidalgos. They repeated their embraces twice, and departed
with gladness, mingled with some sorrow. Travellmg by
easy stages to suit the strength of the lady pilgrims^ they
reached Monserrate in three days, remained as many more
there, fulfilling their duties as good Catholic Christians, and
resuming their journey, arrived without accident at Santiago^
where they accomplished their vows with all possible devotion*
They determined not to quit their pilgrim garbs until thfiy
reached their homes. After travelling towards them leisurelyi
they came at last to a rising ground whence Leocadia


THE TWO DAMSELS. 439

and Teodosia looked down upon their respective birth-places,
nor could they restrain their tears at the glad sight which
brought back to their recollection all their past vicissitudes.

From the same spot they discovered a broad valley, which
divided the two townships, and in it they saw under the
shades of an olive a stalwart knight, mounted on a powerful
charger, armed with a strong keen lance and a dazzlingly white
shield. Presently they saw issuing from among some olive
trees two other knights similarly armed, and of no less gallant
appearance. These two rode up to the first, and after remaining
awhile together they separated. The first knight and one of
the two others set spurs to their horses, and charging each other
like mortal enemies, began mutually to deal such vigorous
thrusts, and to avoid or parry them with such dexterity, that
it was plain they were masters in that exercise. The third
knight remained a spectator of the fight without quitting his
place. Don Rafael, who could not be content with a distant
view of the gallant conflict, hurried down the hill, followed
by the other three, and came up close to the two champions
just as they had both been slightly wounded. The helmet of
one of them had fallen off, and as he turned his face towards
Pon Bafael, the latter recognised his father, and Marco
Antonio knew that the other was his own, whilst Leocadia dis-
covered hers in the third knight who had not fought.
Astounded at this spectacle, the two brothers instantly rushed
between the champions, crying out " Stop, cavaliers ! Stop !
We who call on you to do so are your own sons ! Father, I
am Marco Antonio, for whose sake, as I guess, your honoured
life is put to this peril. Allay your anger ; cast away your
weapons, or turn them against another enemy ; for the one
before you must henceforth be your brother."

The two knights instantly stopped ; and looking round
they observed that Don Sancho had dismounted and was
embracing his daughter, who briefly narrated to him the
occurrences at Barcelona, Don Sancho was proceeding to
make peace between the combatants, but there was no need
of that, for he found them already dismounted and embracing
their sons with tears of joy. There now appeared at the
entrance of the valley a great number of armed men on foot
and on horseback : these were the vassals of the three knights,
who had come to support the cause of their respective lords ;


440 CEBVANTES' BXEHPLART TALKS.

but when they saw them embracing the pilgrims they halted,
and knew not what to think until Don Sancho briefly
recounted to them what he had learned from his daughter.
The joy of all was unbounded. Five of the vassals im-
mediately mounted the pilgrims on their own horses, and the
whole party set out for the house of Maroo Antonio^s father,
where it was arranged that the two weddings should be cele-
brated. On the way Don Rafael and Marco Antonio
learned that the cause of the quarrel which had been so
happily ended was a challenge sent to the father of the latter
by the fathers of Teodosia and Leocadia, under the belief
that he had been privy to the acts of seduction committed by
his son. llie two challengers having found him alone would not
take any advantage of him, but agreed to fight him one after
the other, like brave and generous knights 1 he combat, never-
theless, must have ended in the death of one or all of them
but for the timely arrival of their children, who gave thanks
to God for so happy a termination of the dispute.

The day after the arrival of the pilgrims, Marco Antonio's
father celebrated the marriages of his son and Teodosia,
Don Bafael and Leocadia, with extraordinary magnificence.
The two wedded pairs lived long and happily together, leaving
an illustrious progeny which still exists in their two towns,
which are among the best in Andalusia. Their names, how-
ever, we suppress, in deference to the two ladies, whom
malicious or prudish tongues might reproach with levity of
conduct. But I would beg of all such to forbear their sen-
tence, until they have examined themselves and seen whether
they too have not been assailed some time or other by what
are called the arrows of Cupid, weapons whose force is truly
irresistible. Calvete was made happy with the gift of the
mule which Don Bafael had left at Salamanca, and with many
other presents ; and the poets of the time took occasion to
employ their pens in celebrating the beauty and the adven-
tures of the two damsels, as bold as they were virtuous, the
heroines of this strange story.


LONQON: TaXJXJED BT WILLIAH CXOWES and SOKS, UUITED, 8TAMFOBO 8TBEET

AKD CHABIKa CB06S.


v^


/


1


1

\


^


f


-s
