The Chahar Maqala (Four Discourses) of Nizami-i-Arudi (Nizami Arudi (trans. Edward G. Browne), 1921)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1921 Gibb Memorial revised translation (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.536223). Browne's revised translation: the 12th-century mirror of the four courtly professions.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

E. J.. W. GIBB MEMORIAL

SERIES


<1


REVISED TRANSLATION " 1

*

<*>F THE

CHAHAR MAOALA

*

(“FOUR DISCOURSES ”) *

OF •

. f NIZAMI-I- £ ARUCII

01* SAMARQAND,

FOLLOWED BY AN ABRIDGED TRANSLATION OF
M1RZA MUHAMMAD’S NOTES TO l'f-IE
PERSIAN TEXT


BY


?■ :>i !


EDWARD G. BROWNE,

M.A., M.B., F.B.A., F.R.C.P.

. » -


PRINTED BY THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
FOR THE TRUSTEES OF THE “E. J. W. GIJBB -MEMORIAL”
AND PUBLISHED BY MESSRS LUZAC & CO.,

46, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, LONDON, W.C.

1921


“£. % W. GIBB MEMORIAL” PUBLICATIONS.

%

OLD SERIES. (25 works, 37 published volumes.)

I. Babur-nama (Tu?ki text, fac-simile), ed. Beveridge, 1905.
Out of print. , .

II. History of Tabaristan of Ibn Isfandiyar, abridged transl.
Browne, 1905, 8s.

III, 1-5. History of Rasiili dynasty ofVaman by al-Khaz-
raji j 1, 2 transl. of Sir James Redhouse, 1907-8, p. each;
3, Annotations by the same, 1908, 5s. ; 4, 5, Arhbic text ed.
Muhaftimad ‘Asal, 1908-19x3, 8.x. each. „

IV. Omayyads and ‘Abb&sids, transl. Maigoliouth from the

Arabic ofTI. Zaijlan, 1907, 5^. „

V. Travels of Ibn Jubayr, Arabic text, ed. de Goeje, 1907,

• ros.

VI, 1, 2f3, 5, 6. Yaqiit’s Diet, of learned men (Irshddu-
' l-Arlb ), Arabic text, ed. Margoliouth, 1908-J913; 20 s., 12s.,
10 s., 13s., 13s. respectively.

VII, 1, 5, 6. Tajaribu’l-Umam of Miskawayhi (Arabic
text, fac-simile), ed. le Strang^ and others, 1909-19x7, ’js.
each vol.

VIII. Marzuban-nama (Persian text), ed. WTirzd Muljammad,
I9Q9, I2J.

IX. Textes Houroufis (French and Persian), by Huart and
Riza Tevfiq, 1909, xor.

X. Mu‘jam, an old Persian system of prosody, by ShamVi-Qays,
ed. Mirzd Muhammad, 1909, 13s.

XI, 1,2. Qhahar Maqala ; 1, Persian text, £d. and annotated
by Mirza. Muhammad, 1910, 12^. ; 2, English, transl. and,
notes by groy ne, tqgi, I5i__ •

XII. IntrcrtWcQKn ^TH istOTre des l^Sbngols, by Blochet,
1910, XOJ.

XIII. Dfwan of Hassan b. Th&bit (Arabic text), ed. Hirsch-
feld, 19x0, 7 s. 6 d.

XIV, 1, 2. Ta’rikh-i-Guzida of Hamdu’Mh Mustawfi; l,»
Persian text, fac-simile, 1911, 155.; 2, Abridged translation
and Indices by Browne, 1914, xor.

XV. Nuqtatu’l-Kaf (History of the Babis) by Mfrz* Jani
(Persian text), ed. Browne, 1911, 12s.

XVI, 1, 2, 3. Ta’rikh-i-Jahan-gushay of Juwayni, Persian
text, ed. Mirza Mulmmmad; 1, Mongols, 1^13, 15J.; 2,
Khwarazmshdhs, 1917, 15s. ■ 3, Assassins, in preparation.

XVII. Kashfu’l-Mahjiib (Sufi doctrine), trg.nsl.'Nicholson, 19x1,
1 5 s -

XVIII, 2 (all hit! ’ " T'imi‘u’t-Tawarikh of Rashi-

du d-Din . . text), ed. and annotated by

Blochet, 1912, 1 sr.


f


XIX. Kifabu’l-Wutet of al-Kindi (Arabic text), ed. Guest, 1912,
*5* r .

XX. Kitabu’l-Ansab of as-Sanrani (Arabic text, fac-simile),

I9I3, 20.5. ■

XXI. Dfwans of ‘Amir b. at-Tufayl and ‘Abfd b. al-Abras
(Arabic text and trail?!, by Sir •Charles J. Lyall), 1914, i2.f.

XXII. Kit&bud-Lum‘a (Arabic text), ed. Nicholson, 1915, 15^-
XXIII, 1, 2. NpTzhatu-’l-Qultib of Hamdu’llah Mustawfi; I,
Persian text, ed. le Strange, 1915, 8 s.; 2, English transl.
Ie Strange, 1918, 8.r.

XXIV. Snamsu’l-‘Ulum of Nash wan al-Himyari, extracts from the
Arabic Itfxt with German Introduction and Note?, by ‘Azimu'd-
Din Al?mad, 1917, 5-f. r

[XXV. Dfwa'is of at-Tufayl b. ‘Awf ancf at-Tirimmah b.
Hakfm (Arabic text), ed. Krenkow, in preparation.]

NEW SERIES .

Raha'tu’s-^udur (History of Saljdqs) of ar-Rawandi,
Persian text, ed. Muhammad Iqbal (in the Press).
Fars-nama of Ibnu’l-Balkht, Persian text, ed. le Strange
and Nicholson (in the Press).

LetteqS of Rashfdu’d-Dfn Fadlu’llah, abridged English
transl. by Muhammad ShafP, followed by transl. of
Tansuq-nama (on Precious stones) by the late Sir A.
Houtum-Schindler (in preparation).

, Mazandaran, topography of, and travels in, by H. L.
Rabino, with Map.


This Volume is one

» , *

« of a Series

published by the Trustees of the

“E. y. W. GIBB MEMORIAL.'’

The Funds of this Memorial are derived frovi the Interest accruing
from a Sum of money given by th$ late MRS GIBB of Glasgow, to
perpetuate the Memory of her beloved son h

ELIAS JOHN WILKINSON GIBB,

and to promote those researches into the History , Literature, .Philo-
sophy and Religion of the Turks, Persians and Arabs, to which, from
his Youth upwards, until his premature and deeply lamented Death
in his forty-fifth year, on December j, ityoi, his life wctf devoted.

* ui; !)1 : v$\ ik

“ These are our works, these works our souls display ;

Behold our works when we have passed away '


f


t,


"rE. y. w. GIBB MEMORIAL" :

" ORIGINAL TRUSTEES. '

n r *

^ ft

[JANE GIBB , November 26, 1909.]

E . G. BRO WNE,

G. LE STRANGE,

[II. E AAIE.DROZ, died March 17, 19/7.]

A. G. ELLIS, r,

R. A. NICHOLSON,

SIR E. Dll NISON ROSS,

ADDITIONAL TRUSTEE.

IDA w. E. 0 G 1 LVY GREGORY, appointed 1905.
CLERK OF TIIE TRUST.

* r r

IV. LlRAYNES,

ij, Sidney Street,

CAMBRIDGE.

PUBLISHER FOR THE TRUSTEES .
MESSRS LUZAC Sr Co.,

,/6, Great Russell Street,

* LONDON, IV.C.


#-


#


#


1


%

PREFACE

HP WO reasons have led me to publish this revised translation
of the Chahdr Maqdla, oi-“Four Discourses,” of Nizamf-i-
‘Arudf of Samarqand. The first is that the translation which I
originally published in the July and October numbers of the
Journal of "the Royal Asiatic Society for 1899, *and which also
appeared as a separate •reprint, is exhausted, anfl is now hardly
obtainable. The second is that that translation contains many
defects and e*rors which it is now possible to amend and correct,
partly through the learning and critical acumen brought to bear
on the text by Mfrza Muhammad of Qazwin, whose admirable
edition, accompanied by copious critical and historical notes in
Persian, was published in this Series (xi, 1) in 1^10; and partly
from the fact that the most ancient and correct MS. of the work
St present discovered l , that preserved in the Library of ‘Ashir
Efendi at Constantinople (No. 285), was not available jvhen I
made my original translation, while it has*served as the basis for
Mfrza Muhammad’s text. Hence my old translation is not only
practically unobtainable, but, apart frejm the defects inherent in
a first attempt of this sort, no longer entirely corresponds with
what is now the accepted Persian text, so that it is at times
liable to confuse and puzzle, rather than to help, the student * The
old translation has been carefully revised throughout, and the*
proofs have all been read by Mfrza Muhammad, who supplied
many valuable criticisms, together with a good deal ofamew
material in the notes. They have also been diligently read by
Muhammad Iqbal, one of the Government of Inciia Research
Students at Cambridge, who has made many useful suggestions
and saved me from numerous small errors. Te these and to other
friends who have helped me in a lesser degree I am deeply in-
debted, but special thanks are due to Mr Ralph Shirley,- editor

1 It was copied in Herat in 835/1431-2.


X


r


Preface


of the Occult Review, and to Mr W! Gornold for the valuable
astrological notes with which they ^iave been kind enough to
supply me 1 . To facilitate comparison,. the points in the translation
corresponding with the beginning of each page of the Penman
text are indicated" by the appropriate Arabic numbers. Mfrza
Muhammad’s notes, which in the original partake of the nature
of a running commentary on the text, though materially sepa-
rated from it, and occupy 200 pages (r — m), I r have, from
considerations of space, rearranged and greatly compressed. The
shorter ones appear as foot-notes on the pages to which, they
refer, while the substance of_the longer ones, reduced to a mini-
mum, and shorn of many of the pieces justificatives which serve
to illustrate them in the original, has been divided according to
subject-matter under thirty-twq, headings, fully enumerated in
the following Ttyjale of Contents. But although the English notes
embody the more important results of Mfrzd Muhammad’s re-
searches, it has been necessary, in order to effect the required
condensation, to omit many interesting details and quotations of
texts accessible only in rare manuscripts, so that those who read
Persian with any facility are strongly recommended to study the
original commentary. «-

A full account of this work and its author is given both in the
Persian and English Prefaces to the companion volume containing
* the text, and it will be sufficient here to summarize the facts set
forth more, fully in that place.

The Author.

Ahmad pan 'Umar ibn ‘AH of Samarqand, poetically named
Nizfimf and further entitled ‘Arudf (the “ Prosodist ”) flourished
in the first half of phe sixth century of the hijra (twelfth of the
Christian era), and seems to have spent most of his life in Khu-
rdsan and T ransoxiana, What we know of him is chiefly derived
1 See Notes xxiv and xxxn, pp. (30-4 and 164-7,


3


. Preface xi

%

from this book, which contains a good deal of autobiographical
material. The events in hi^ life to which he refers lie between
the years 504/1110^1111 apd S 47 ll 1 5 2 ~ 3 > and we find him suc-
cessively at Samarqand, Balkh, Herat, Tiis and Nishapur, He
was primarily a poet and courtier, but, as we le2rn from Anecdotes
XXXI (p. 74) and XLIII (p. 96), he also practised Astrology
and Medicine yhen occasion arose. His poetry, in spite of the
complacency displayed by him in Anecdote ftxi (pp. 59-61),
was not, if we may judge by the comparatively scanty fragments
which have survived, of the highest order, and is far inferior to
his prose, which is admirable, and^ in my opinion, almost un-
equalled in Persian. It is by virtue of the Chahtir Magdla, and
that alone, that Nizhmf-i-'Arudf of Samarqand deserves to be
reckoned amongst the great names oi* Persian literature.

The Book. *

At the present day, apart from the text printed eleven years
ago in this series and the rare and bad lithographed pdition 1
published at Tihran in 1305/1887-8, th&Ckahdr Maqdla, so far
as at present lyiown, is ^represented only by thgee or four MSS.,
two in the British Museum (Or. 2955, cj^ted 1 274/1 85/-8, and Or.
3507, dated 1017/1608-9), and one in Constantinople transcribed
at Herat in 835/ 143 1 — while a fourth, of which no particulars
are available to me, is said to exist in India. During the thirteenth,
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries of our era it seems to have been,
better known than during the four succeeding centuries, for it is
mentioned or cited in the thirteenth century by ‘Awfi (i» the
Lubdbu'l-A Ibdb) and Ibn Isfandiydr (in his History of Tabaris tin);
in the fourteenth century by Hamdu’lMh Mustawff of Qazwfn
(in the Tdrikh-i-Gtizidd)\ in the fifteenth century by Dawlatshdh
and Jami (in the Silsilatu dh-Dhahab)\ and,in the sixteenth by
the Qddi Ahmad-i-Ghaffari {Nigdristan). It is often referred to
as the Mcijma'u'n- Nawuddir (“ Collection of Rarities ”), which the
1 Indicated, by the letter L in a few of the foot-notes.


r

<r

xii . Preface

Turkish bibliographer Hdjji Khalifa fupposes to be distinct from
the Chahdr Maqdla , though, as IVJirza Muhammad has con-
clusively proved, these are hut two different names for the same
book. * r

Not less remarkable than the style of the Chahdr Maqdla is
the interest of its contents, for it contains the only contemporary
account of ‘Umar Khayyam, and the oldest kn®wn account of

+ * f

Firdawsi, while„many of the anecdotes are derived from the

0 *

author’s own experience, or were orally communicated to him
by persons who had direct knowledge of the facts. The bpok is
therefore one of the most ^important original sources for our
knowledge of the literary and scientific conditions which prevailed
in Persia for the two or three centuries preceding its composition,
which may be placed with certainty between, the years 547/1152
and 552/1 157, sTid with great probability in the year 551/1156 1 .
Against this twofold excellence, however, must be set the extra-
ordinary historical inaccuracies of which in several places the
authordias been guilty, even in respect to events in which he
claims to have participated in person. Fifteen such blunders,
some of them of the grossest character, have been enumerated
by Mirza Muhammad in 'the Preface to the text 2 , and some of
these are fully discussed in Notes iv, v, vm and XXI at the
end of this volume. Nor can all these blunders be charitably
ascribed to a careless or officious copyist, since the point of the
"story is in several cases dependent on the error.

Here at all events is the translation of the book, of the value
and interest of which the reader, aided if necessary by the notes,
can form his own judgement.

* 1 See p. xvi of the English Preface to the text.

2 Pp. xx-xxiii of the English Preface.


April 11, 1921.


EDWARD G. BROWNE.


n


TABLE OF CONTENTS

Translator’s Preface ......

Author’s Preface, including Doxology and Dedica-
tion *

beginning of the Book. On the dignity oT oKingship
* Section ill, on Cosmography . . * .

Section III, on the Evolution of the Mineral and
. Vegetable Kingdoms .....

Section IV, on the Animal Kingdom and the Five

External Senses . *

Section V, on the Five Internal Senses
Anecdote I, on the Nasnds or Wild Man, and the
Ascent of Man . A

FIRST DISCOURSE. ON SECRETARIES.

Anecdotic

The nature of the Secretarial Art and qualifications

of the Secretary

II. Iskdfi’s skilful citation of the Qurdn . . , t

III. Isk&fi’s despatch on the defeat ofiMdkan

IV. The secretary must be free from domestic worries

V. Laconic dismissal of an unjust judge of (Jum .

VI. Importunity of the people of ibamghan .

VII. Marriage of al-Ma’mdn with Pit ran

VIII. Al-Mustarshid’s denunciation of the Saljdqs .

IX. The Gdr-Khan’s warning to Atmatigln . . . i

X. Supernatural eloquence of the Qur’dn .

IX. Bughra Khan’s secretary Muhammad ibn Abduh

SECOND DISCOURSE. ON POETS.

(

XII. Al-Khujistani’s ambition stirred by a verse of poetry i
The most notable poets of the principal Royal
Houses of Persia ... »

Excursus. On the .quality of the Poet and his verse

XIII. Rudagi’s celebrated improvisation .

XIV. Mahmdd and Ayaz, and ‘Unsuri’s improvisation .

XV. Farrukhi’s success at Court

XVI. Mn'izzf encourages the Author, and describes bis
own early struggles and first success


PAGE

ix


3

4

5

7

8

9


12

*5

16

18

19

20
21

23

24

2 5
25*


27

29

3 1

33

37

39

45


xiv


f


Table of Contents


«

Anecdote j page

XVII. Azraqfs happy improvisation .... 48

XVIII. The imprisonment of Mas‘/d-i-Sa‘d-i-Salman . 49

XIX. Rashidi and ‘Am ‘aq, the Poet-Laureate . . 52

XX. Firdaw^and Sultan Mahmiid .... 54

XXI. Autobiographical 59

' THIRD DISCOURSE. ON ASTROLOGERS.

* -
How'to study Astronomy and Astrology . . 62

XXII. Al-Ktindi and Abu Ma'shar * . f . . 64

XXIII. Al-Birtini provokes Sultin Mahmiid by too correct

a prediction . . . . . . , ' 65

XXIV. Al-Birdni and the illiterate soothsayer . 66

r

XXV. A correct prediction by a servant of the Author . 67

XXVI. The crazy Dd’iid^ makes a correct prediction . 68

XXVII. NizAmu’l-Mulk and the-astrologer of NishApiir . 70

XXVIII. ‘Umac-i-Khayyam describes his burial-place . . 71

XXIX. ‘Umar Khayyam forecasts fine weather . . 72

XXX. An unprincipled soothsayer of Ghazna . . . 72

XXXI. The Author makes a successful prognostication . 74

r

FOURTH DISCOURSE. ON PHYSICIANS.

r B

TIow to study Medicine ..... 75

Characteristics of the good physician , t . . 76

XXXII. Healing by prayer, and further remarks on medical

. study 77

XXXIII. A heroic cure wrought by Bukht-Yishii' . . 81

XXXIV. A case of Psycho-Therapeusis related by Avicenna 82

XXXV. Another case of Psycho-Therapeusis by RAzi . 83

XXXVI, A sick lover cured by Avicenna .... 85

XXXVII. A heroic cure wrought by al-Majdsi ... 90

XXXVIII. jlVcase of Melancholia cured by Avicenna . . 91

XXXIX. Remarkable prognosis and cure by Adib Isma ‘11 . 93

XL. The fanaticism of the Shaykh ‘Abdu’llah Ansari . 94

XLI. Galen ‘‘treats the root to cure the branch ” . . 95

XLII. The acumen of the Catholicos of Pars . . . 95

XLIII. The Author’s successful treatment of a young girl 96


0

Table of Contents

0

I

->

XV


^ NOTES.


PAGF.


I.

The Dynasty of Ghtlr or House of Shansab .

IOI


II.

The meaning of Tamghaj and Tapghach^

ro2


* III.

Writers adduced as models of style , 9 ,

103


IV.

Historical errors in Anecdote II .

1 06


V.

Historical errors in Anecdote III ....

107


VI.

The Sdhib Isma ‘11 ibn ‘Abbad . , . ** ,

107


VII.

fabrics and Materials mentioned in AnSsdote VII

107


VI IN Another historical error in Anecdote VII} .

108


IX.

The Gtir-Khdri»and the Q&ra-Khit&'f dynasty

ro8


. X ‘

Atmatigin, Amir Bayablnf and Atsiz .,

109


*XI.

Thp House of Burhin

no


XII.

Bughrd Khan and the flak Khan in Aneccjpte XI

1 12


XIII.

Ahmad ibn ‘Abdu’llih al-Khujistani

113 -


XIV.

Poets and writers mentioned in Anecdote XII

113

*

. XV.

The vengeance of Sgjtdn ‘XldVd-Din Husayn


J ahan-siiz .

120


XVI.

Notes on Anecdote XIII . . . * .

121 ,


XVII.

Note on Anecdote XIV

122


XVIII.

Note on the House of Mulrtaj of Chaghaniykn

122


XIX.

Note on Tugh&nshah and the arbitrary methods of *


some Persian editors ..*...

123


XX.

Azraqi. (Anecdote XVII)

124


XXI.

Anotfter instanoe of the Author’s inaccuracy # .

I2 5


XXII.

The Khaqant, Khani or Afrasiyabi Kings . .

126


XXIII.

Five notable Astronomers

I2 7


XXIV.

Certain astrological terms .....

130


XXV.

‘Umar-i-Khayyam

* 134


XXVI.

On certain medical terms in the Preface to the


J,


Fourth Discourse

140 *


XXVII.

Physicians and their works mentioned in Anecdote


XXXII

i 44


XXVIII.

J ami’s rhymed versions of Anecdotes XXXIV and


XXXVIII

*59

i

XXIX.

The Ma’miini Khwarazmshahs . . . #

i6x

|

XXX.

The Shahinshdh ‘Ala’u’d-Dawla ....

162

1

XXXI.

The Shaykh ‘Abdu’llah Ansiri ....

163

§

XXXII.

Additional Note by Mr W. Gornold o*n the “Part


;;


of the Unseen ” and other astrological terms .

164

§


General Index

168

si

%


Index of Technical Terms ....

•

182

I

1

;> . ;
»

•

•

•

•

m

•


0


\


* In the name of God the. Merciful th § Clement.

PRAISE, thanks and gratitude to that King who, by the
intervention 1 2 3 of the Cherubic and Angelic Spirits, bought into
being the World of Return and Restoration, and, by means of
that World*, created and adorned the World* of Growth and
Decay, Maintaining it by the commands and prohibitions of the
Prophets and Saints, arfd restraining it by the swords and pens
of Kings and Ministers. And blessings upon [Muhammad] the
Lord of both # worlds, who was the most perfect of the Prophets ;
and invocations of grace upon his Family and Companions, who
were the most excellent of Saints. And honour to fhe King of this
time, that learned, just, divinely-strengthened, heaven-aided and
ever-victorious monarch Ifusamii d-Btaivla wa'd-Din, Help of
Islam and the Muslims, Exterminator of the infidels and poly-
theists, Subduer of the heretical and the frowar^, Chief of hosts '
in the worlds, Pride of Kings and Emperors, Succourer of these
days, Protector of mankind, Arm of the Caliphate, Beauty of the
Faith and Glory of the Nation, Controller of the Arabs and the
Persians, noblest of mankind, S hamsii l- MahUl, Maliku' l-Jfmard,
Abu’l-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Mas'ud®, Helper of fthe Prince of Believers,
may his life be according to his desifes, may the greater part of
the world be assigned to, his name, and may the-orderly govern-
ment of the human race be directed bv his care ! For to-day he
is the most excellent of the kings of the age in nobility, pedigree,
judgement, statesmanship, justice, equity, valour and generosity,
as well as in the enriching of his territory, the embellishment of
his realms, the maintenance of his friends, the subjugation of his
foes, the raising of armies, the safe-guarding of the people, the
securing of the roads, and the tranquillizing of the realms 8 , by?
virtue of upright judgement, clear understanding, strong resolve
and firm determination ; by whose excellence the concatenation
of the House of Shansab 4 * is held together and maintainSfl in
order, and by whose perfection the strong arm of that Dynasty’s
fortune is strengthened and recognized. May God Almighty

1 L. lias Jxwjj “without the intervention.” '

2 /.«. Husamu’d-Din Abu’l-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Fakhru’d-Din Mashid. See Note I
at the end.

3 L. has jl “from perils,” instead of

4 See Note I at the end, and the r /'a6aqdt-i-N’d{irl (ed. Nassau Lees), pp. xoi elseqq.

Instead of Shtmsab , the correct reading, B. has Lo 1 and L. (Jl-


2 r CiiahAr MaqAla. — Exordium

#

vouchsafe to him and to the other kings of that line a full portion
of dominion and domain, throne any fortune, fame and success,
command and prohibition, by His Favour and universal Grace !


. Section I.

It is an old cul£om and ancient convention, which custom is
maintained and observed, that an author (r) or compiler, in the
introductiqp to his discourse and preface of his book, should
commemorate somewhat of his patron’s praise, and record some
prayer on behalf of the object of his eulogy. Bift I, a loyal
servant, instead*of praise and prayer for this, prince, will make
mention in this book of the favours dtdained and vouchsafed
by God Most High and Most Holy to this King of kingly parent-
age, that, these being submitted to his world-illuminating judge-
ment, he may betake himself to the expression of £is thanks for
them. For in'the uncreated Scripture and unmade Word God
says, “ Verily if ye be thankful I will give you increase 1 ” ; for the
gratitude of the servant p an alchemy for the favours of the
Munificent Lord. Briefly, then, ft behoves this great King and
puissant Lord to know that to-day, upon the whole of this globe
of dust, and within the circle of this green parasol 2 , there is no
king in more ample circumstances than this monarch, nor any
potentate enjoying more abundant good than this sovereign. He
hath tl;e gift of youth and the blessing of constant health ; his
father and mother archive ; congenial brothers are on his right
hand and on his left. And what father is like his sire, the
mighty, divinely-strengthened, ever-vic(prious and heaven-aided
Fakhru' d-Dawla wa'd-Dln *, Lord of Irdn, King of the Moun-
tains (may God prolong ffis existence and continue to the heights
his exaltation!), who is the most puissant Lord of the age and
the most excellent Prince of the time in judgement, statecraft,
knowledge, courtesy, swordsmanship, strength of arm, treasure
and equipment ! Supported by ten thousand men bearing spears
“ and handling reins he hath made himself a shield before his sons,
so that not even the zephyr may blow roughly on one of his
servants. In her chaste seclusion and unassailable abode is a
pra^rful lady (may God perpetuate her exaltation !) whose evety
invocation, breathed upwards at earliest dawn to the Court of
God, works with the far-flung host and wheeling army. Where
again is a brother like the royal Prince Shamsti d-Dawla wa'd-
Dtn\ Light of Isldm and the Muslims (may his victories be

1 Qur'an, xiv, 7. •

* ' n ' e variant (wheel, firmament), though more attractive than jla. (parasol,
umbrella), rests on weaker manuscript authority,

\ J**h.hrttd-Din Mas hid Ibn ‘Izzu’d-Din IJasan. See Note T at the end,

Shamsti d-Dln Muhammad ibn FakWd-Din Mas‘ud, See Note I at the end.


Prophets and Kings


3


6

glorious !), who reaches the.extreme term and limit in the service
of this my Lord (whose exaltation may God perpetuate!)? Praise
be to Goa that this my Lord falls short neither in reward nor retri-
bution ; yea, by his face the world enjoys clear vision, and life
passes sweetly by his beauty ! And a blessing yet greater is this,
that the All-Perfect Benefactor and Unfailipg" Giver hath be-
stowed on him an uncle like the Lord of the Wbrld and Sovereign
of the East, ‘A let' u'd- Dunya zva'd-Din Abii ‘All al-Husayn ibnu’l-
Husayn 1 , 'lkhtiydru Amiri' l- Mil minin (may God prolong his life
and cause his kingdom to endure !), who, with fifty thousand mail-
clad men, strenuous in-endeavour, hurled back afl»the hosts of the
world (r^and set a corner all the kings of tlufage. May God
(blessed and exalted is*He!) long vouchsafe all to one another,
gran to all abundant enjoyment of one another’s company, and
fill the world^ with light by their achievements, by His Favour,
and Bounty, and Grace ! «

Beginning of the Book.

This loyal servant and favoured retainer Ahmad ibn ‘Umar
ibn ‘All an-Nizamf al-‘Anidf as-Samarqandf, w&o for forty-five
years hath been devoted to the service of this House and inscribed ,
in the register of service of this Dynasty,, desire th to” 'dedicate to
the Supreme Imperial Court (may God exalt it!) some work
equipped according to the canons of Philosophy with decisive
proofs and trenchant arguments, and to%et forth therein what
kingship truly is, who is truly king, whence is derived this
honourable office, to whom rightly appertaineth this favour, and
in what manner such an one should sfcew his gratitude for, and
after what fashion accept, this privilege, so that he may become
second to the Lord of the sons of men 2 and third to the Creator
of the Universe. For even so hath God, in His Incontrovertible
Scripture and Eternal Word, co-ordinated on one threacf and
shewn forth on one string the pearls represented by these three
exalted titles. Obey God" saith He, “ and obey the Apostle , and *
such as possess authority amongst yourselves*?

For in the grades of existences and the ranks of the intelligjjales,
after the Prophetic Function, which is the supreme limit of man’s
attainment, there is no rank higher than kingship, which is naught
else than a Divine gift. God, glorious and exalted, is He, hath
accorded this position to the King of this age, and bestowed on
him this degree, so that he may walk after the way of former
kings and maintain the people after the manner of bygone ages,

1 ‘AU’u’d-Dln Plusayn, called Jah&n-s&z, “the world -consumer,” a.h, 5j.4~c.i6
(a.d, 1149-1161). See Notes I and XV at the end, and p. 31, n. 1 ad calc.

2 I.e. to the Prophet, who is subordinate only to God, as the king is to him.

s Qur’an, iv, 61 .


4


'CiiahAr Maqala. — Cosmography


Section

The Royal Mind (may God exaft it!) should deign to know
that all existing beings fall necessarily into one of two categories.
Such being is either self-existent, or it exists through some other.
That Being which isgelf-existent is called "the Necessarily Existent'
which is God most High and most Holy, who existeth by virtue
of Himself, and who, therefore, hath always existed, .since He
awaiteth none other ; and who (t) will always exist, since He sub-
sisted by Himself, not by another. But that ekist^nce whose
being is through another is called “ Contingent Being l’ # ancl this
is such as we a»\e, since our being is frory the Seed, and the seed
is from the blood, and the blood is from food, and food is from the
water, the earth and the sun, whose existence is in turn derived
from something else ; and all these are such as yesterday were
not, and to-morrow will not be. And on profound reflection [it
appeared that] this causal nexus reached upwards to a Cause
which derived not its being from another, but existed necessarily
in itself ; which is the Creator of all, from Whom all derive their
existence and subsistence. So He is the Creator of all these
things, and all c<Kne into being through Him and subsist through
Him. And a little reflection on this matter will make it clear
that all Phenomena consist of Being tinctured with Not-being,
while He is Being characterized by a continuance reaching from
Eternity past to Eternity to come. And since the origin of all
creatures lies in Not-biing, they must inevitably return again to
nothing, and the most clear-sighted amongst the human race
have said, “Everything shall return unto its Origin more
especially in this world <jf Growth and Decay. Therefore we,
who are contingent in our being, have our origin in Not-being ;
while He, who existeth necessarily, is in His Essence Being, even
as He (glorious is His Praise and high His Splendour) saith in the
Perspicuous Word and Firm Hand-hold, “ All things perish save
His Countenance

* Now you must know that this world, which lies in the hollow
of the Heaven of the Moon 8 and within the circle of this first
Splujfe, is called “the World of Growth and Decay.” And you
must thus conceive it, that within the concavity of the Heaven of
the Moon lies the Fire, surrounded by the Heaven of the Moon ;
and that within the Sphere of the Fire is the Air, surrounded by
the Fire; and within the Air is the Water, surrounded by the Air,
while within the Water is the Earth, with the Water round about
it. And in the middle of the earth is an imaginary point, from

1 Qur’dn, xxviii, 88.

a 'lliis is the lowest or innermost of the nine celestial spheres which environ the
earth. Concerning the Muslim Cosmogony, see XOletmci'^Makrokosmos, pp. 178 it seqq.„


The Terrestrial Globe


5


which all straight lines d|awn to the Pleaven of the Moon are
equal ; and when we spea* of “ down,” we mean this point or
what lies nearest to it ; and when we speak of “ up,” we mean the
remotest heaven, or what Jies nearest to it, this being a heaven 1
above the Zodiacal Heaven, having naught bey.ond it, for with it
thh material world terminates, or comes to a $ end 2 .

Now when God most Blessed and most High, by His effective
Wisdom, desired to produce in this world minerals, plants, animals
and men, He created the stars, and in particular the sun and
moon, wheredli He made the growth and decay of these to
depend. And the special property of the sun Is that (•) by its
reflectioli it warms all things when it stands opposite to them,
and draws them up, tfrat is attracts them, by the medium of
heat. So, by its opposition, it warmed the water ; and, by
means of the warmth, attracted it for a long while, until one
quarter of the earth’s surface was 1 * laid bare, by reason of the
much vapour which ascended and rose up therefrom. Now it is
of the nature of water to be capable of becoming stone, as it is
admitted to do in certain places, afSd as may be actually wit-
nessed 8 . So mountains were produced from the water by the
glow of the sun ; and thereby the earth bSfcame somewhat
elevated above what it had been, while the water retreated from
it and dried up, according to that fashion which is witnessed.
This portion, therefore, is called the “ Uncovered Quarter,” for the
reason above stated ; and is also called the “ Inhabited Quarter,”
because animals dwell therein. *

* Section III. " ,

When the influences of these stars had acted on the peripheries
of these elements, and had been reflected back from that
imaginary [central] point, there were produced from the midst
of the earth and water, by the aid of the wind and tlfe fire,
the products of the inorganic world, such as mountains, mines,
clouds, snow, rain, thunder, lightning, shooting stars, comets?
meteors, thunder-bolts, halos, a ~;' r ’-' •' earth-
quakes, and springs of all kind -, , . Tin its

proper place when discussing the effects of the celestial bodies,
but for the explanation and amplification of which there is no
room in this brief manual. But when time began, ^nd the cycles
of heaven became continuous, and the constitution of this lower
world matured, and the time was come for the fertilisation of

1 This outermost, or ninth, celestial sphere is the Primum mobile of the Ptolemaic
system, called al-Falaku’l-Allas or Falahi'l-AJldk by the Muslim philosophers.

2 That the material universe is finite and bounded by the Empyrean, or Falaku’l-

AJldk, is generally accepted by Persian philosophers. See my Year amongst the
Persians , pp. J43-144. . •

8 The author apparently alludes to petrifaction and the formation of stalactytes.


6 # ChahAr MaqAla. — Physiology

•

that interspace which lies between the water and the air, the
vegetable kingdom was manifested!; Then God, blessed and
exalted is He, created for that substance wherefrom the plants
were made manifest four subservienj forces and three faculties.
Of these four subservient forces one is that which draws to itself
whatever is suitablg for its purpose, and this is called “the Fcfrce
Attractive” {JddlBba), Another retains what the first may have
attracted, and this is called “the Force Retentive” ( Mdsika ).
The third* is that which assimilates what has been attracted,

• and transmutes ij; from its former state until it becomes like unto
itself, and this is' called “ the Force Assimilative” {Hadima). The
fourth is that gfhich rejects what is not appropriate, find it is
called “the Force Expulsive” (Delft a). And of its three faculties
one is that which increaseth it (a) by diffusing throughout it
nutritious matters with a proportionate and equable diffusion.
The second is that which rfccompanies this nutriment until it
reaches the extremities. The third is that which, when the
organism has attained perfection and begins to tend towards
decline, appears and produces ova, in order that, if destruction
overtake the parent in this worfd, this substitute may take its
place, so that tfae order of the world may be immune from
injury, and the species may not become extinct. This is called
“ the Reproductive Faculty” ( Quwwat-i-Muwallida ).

So this Kingdom rose superior to the inorganic world in these
several. ways which have been mentioned ; and the far-reaching
Wisdom of the Creato# so ordained that these Kingdoms should
be connected one with another successively and continuously, so
that in the inoi^anic world the first material, tfhich was clay,
underwent*a process of evplution and became higher in organi-
sation until ft grew to coral ( marjdn , bussad), which is the ultimate
term of the inorganic world 1 and is connected with the most
primitive stage of plant-life. And the most primitive thing in the
vegefhble kingdom is the thorn, and the most highly developed
the date-palm and the grape, which resemble the animal kingdom
'in that the former needs the male to fertilise it so that it may
bear fruit 2 , while the latter flees from its foe. For the vine flees
frorr^the bind-weed 3 , a plant which, when it twists round the vine,
causes it to shrivel up, wherefore the vine flees from it. In the
vegetable kingdom, therefore, there is nothing higher than the
date-palm ai^l the vine, inasmuch as they have assimilated them-
selves to that which is superior to their own kingdom, and have
subtly overstepped the limits of their own world, and evolved
themselves in a higher direction.

1 The Pearl, however, seems generally to be placed higher. See Dieterici’s
Mikrokosmos, p, ri,

a See Dieterici’s Mikrokomm , p. 15.

3 ‘ Ashtuja , a species of Dolichos. See Lane’s Arabic Lexicon, s.v.


The External and Internal Senses 7

9

SECTION IV. ^he Five External Senses,

Now when this kingdom had attained perfection, and the
influence of the “Fathers” (5f the upper world had reacted on the
“Mothers 1 ” below, and the interspace between the air and the fire
in its turn became involved 2 , a finer offspring resulted and the
manifestation of the animal world took place. This, bringing
with it the faculties already possessed by the vegetable kingdom,
added thereunto two others, one the faculty of discovery, which
is called the “Perceptive Faculty” ( Mudrika ), whpreby the animal
discerns^things ; tjie second the power of voluntary movement,
by the help of which the animal moves, approaching that which
is congenial to it and retreating from that which is offensive,
which is called the “Motor Faculty” (. Muharrika ).

Now the ^ Perceptive Faculty” is„subdivided into ten branches,
five of which are called the “External Senses*” and five the
“Internal Senses.” The former are “Touch” (y), “Taste,” “Sight,” ,
“Hearing,” and “Smell.” Now Touch is a sense distributed
throughout the skin and flesh qf the 'animal, so that the nerves
perceive and discern anything which comes in contact with them,
z such as dryness and moisture, heat and cold*, roughness and
smoothness, harshness and softness. Taste is a sense located
in that nerve which is distributed over the surface of the tongue,
which detects soluble nutriments in those bodies which come
in contact with it ; and it is this sense which discrfminates
between sweet and bitter, sharp and sour, and the like of these.
Hearing is a sense located in the nerve whicji is distributed
about the auditory meatus, so that it detects any sound which
is discharged against it by undulations of the air, compressed
between two impinging bodies, that is to say two bodies striking
against one another, by the impact of which the air is thrown
into waves and becomes the cause of sound, in that it imparts -
movement to the air which is stationary in the auditory meatus,
comes into contact with it, reaches this nerve, and gives rise,
to the sensation of hearing. Sight is a faculty, located in the
optic nerve which discerns images projected on the crystalline
humour, whether of figures or solid bodies, variously colored,
through the medium of a translucent substance which extends
from it to the surfaces of reflecting bodies. Smell is a faculty
located in a protuberance situated in the fore par£ of the brain
and resembling the nipple of the female breast, which apprehends

1 By the “ Seven Fathers above ” and the “ Four Mother^ below,” the seven planets
and the four elements are intended.

* Th- f m •’ *• ’•<;•. • ..-.eous, aerial and igneous) present 1

three i ;- - :■/ ■' ■. :u ■' » ■ produced the mineral kingdom, in j

these, ■<>!'! r. V. r. i ■ . 1 ' i ■, ■■ :: ! .>■ :■ ihnal. These three are called the j

“threefold offspring.”


8


ChahAr MaqAla.— Physiology


what the air inhaled brings to it of odours mingled with the
vapours wafted by air-currents, or impressed upon it by diffusion
from the odorific body. *

Section V. The Five Internal Senses >.

Now as to the*Internal Senses, some are such as perceive the
forms of things sensible, while others are such as apprehend their
meanings.# The first is the “Composite Sense” ( Hiss-i-mushtarik ),
which is a faculty located in the anterior ventricles pf the brain,
and in its nature receptive of all images perceived by the
external sensei and impressed upon tfypm tcfbe communicated
to it, such perception being apprehended only when received by
it. The second is the Imagination (Khaydl), a faculty located (a)
in the posterior portion of the anterior ventricle of thre brain, which
preserves whaf the “ Composite Sense ” has apprehended from
the external senses, so that this remains in it after the subsidence
of the sense-impressions. '/The third is the “Imaginative Faculty”
{Mit takhayyild), thus call«fo when animals are under discussion,
but, in the case of the humafi soul, named the “Cogitative
Faculty” ( Mutc^hkkira ). This is a faculty located in the middle
ventricle of the brain, whose function it is to combine or separate,
as the mind may elect, those particular percepts which are stored
in the Imagination. The fourth is the “Apprehensive Faculty ”
( Wahin), which is a faculty located in the posterior portion of
[the middle ventricle of the brain, whose function is to discover
Ithe supra-sensual ideas existing in particular percepts, such as
that faculty whSreby the kid distinguishes between its dam and
a wolf, and the child between a spotted rope and a serpent. The
fifth is the “Retentive Faculty” (Hdjfiza), also called the “Memory”
(. Dhdkira ), which is a faculty located in the posterior ventricle of
the brain. It preserves those supra-sensual ideas discovered by
the "^Apprehension”; between which and itself the same relation
subsists as between the “Imagination” and the “Composite
'Sense,” though the latter preserves forms, and the former ideas.

Now all these are the servants of the “Animal Soul,” a sub-
stance having its well-spring in the heart, which, when it acts in the
heart, is called the “Animal Spirit,” but when in the brain, the
“Psychic Spirit,” and when in the liver, the “Natural Spirit.” It
is a subtle vapour which rises from the blood, diffuses itself to the
remotest arteries, and resembles the sun in luminosity. Every
animal which possesses these two faculties, the Perceptive and
the Motor, and these ten subordinate faculties derived therefrom,
is called a perfect animal ; but if any faculty is lacking in it,
defective. Thus the ant has no eyes, and the snake, which is


1 See my Year amongst the Persians, pp. 144-145.


The Missing Link


9


*


called the deaf adder, no ears ; but none is more defective than
the maggot, which is a redworm found in the mud of streams 1 * 3 ,
called therefore gil-khwdrdS (“ mud-eater ”), but in Transoxiana
ghdk-kirma' 1 . This is the lqwest annual, while the highest is the
satyr ( nasndsf , a creature inhabiting the plains ^of Turkistan, of
ereCt carriage and vertical stature, with wide flat nails. It cherishes
a great affection for men; wherever it sees men, it halts on their
path and examines them attentively ; and when it finds a solitary
man, it carries him off, and it is even said that it wjjl conceive
from him. ^Thts, after mankind, is the highest of animals,
inasmuch as in several respects it resembles rftan; first in its
erect stature ; secondly in the breadth of its nat^s ; and thirdly
in the hair of its head. *


* Anecdote I.

I heard as follows from Abu Rida ibn ‘ABdu’s-Salam of
Nishapur in the Great Mosque at Nishapur, in the year 510/

1 1 16-1117: — “We were travelling towards Tamghaj 4 , and in
our caravan were several thousand camels. One day, when we
were marching in the mid-day heat, we saw gn a sand-hill a
woman, bare-headed and quite naked, extremely beautiful in '
form, with a figure like a cypress, a face like the moon, and long
hair, standing and looking at us. Although we spoke to her, she
made no reply ; and when we approached her, she fled, running so
swiftly in her flight that probably no hors* could have overtaken
her. Our muleteers, who were Turks, said that this was a wild
man, such as they call tyzsnds.” And you must»know that this
is the noblest of animals in these three respects which* have been
mentioned. * •»

So when, in the course of long ages and by lapse of time,
equilibrium became more delicately adjusted, and the turn came
of the interspace which is between the elements and the heavens 5 ,
man came into being, bringing with him all that existed in
the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms, and adding there- •»
unto the capacity for abstract concepts. So by reason of in-

1 Cf. Dieterici’s Mikrokosmos, p. 43. ***

a The correct reading of this word, which appears in a different form in each MS.,
is doubtful, and it is probably a local term only. Mirza Muhammad takes ghak-kirma
as equivalent to kirm-i-khtUk, “earthworm.” ^

3 The term nasnds either denotes a real animal or a fabulous monster. In the
first sense it is used of various kinds of monkeys, e.g. the orang-outang and marmoset ;
in the latter it is equivalent to the SAiqq or Half-man (which resembles a man cut in
two vertically) of the Arabs, and the Div-mardvm of the'Persians. See Qazwini’s
1 Ajii'ihu' l-Makhldqdt, p. 449; and my Year amongst the Persians, pp. 165, 267.

4 See Qazwini’s Atharu' l-Bildd, p. 275. China or Chinese Turkistan appears to
be meant. See Note II at the end.

5 See n. a at the foot of p, 7 supra. This fourth interspace (ftrja) lies outside the
“ Igneous Sphere ” and inside the “ I-Icaven of the Moon.”


io *ChahAr MaqAla. — Anthropology

•

telligence he became king over all animals, and brought all
things under his control. Thus front the mineral world he made
jewels, gold and silver his adornment; from iron, zinc, copper,
lead and tin he fashioned ^his uteijsils and vessels; from the
vegetable kingdom he made his food, raiment and bedding ; and
from the animal wprld he obtained for himself steeds and bdhsts
of burden. And mom all three kingdoms he chose out medica-
ments wherewith to heal himself. Whereby did there accrue to
him such .pre-eminence ? By this, that he understood abstract
ideas, and, by ipeans of these, recognized God? i^nd whereby
did he know Gbd ? By knowing himself; for "He who knoweth
himself, knowe§i his Lord!' • ®

So this kingdom [of man] became divided into three classes.
The first is that which is proximate to the Animal Kingdom,
such as the wild men of the waste and the mountain, whose
aspiration doth not more than suffice to secure their own liveli-
hood by seeking what is to their advantage and warding off
what is to their detriment. The second class compriseth the
inhabitants of towns anc/'cities, who possess civilisation, power
of co-operation, (»•). and aptitilde to discover crafts and arts;

. but whose sciefStific attainments are limited to the organisation
of such association as subsists between them, in order that the
different classes 1 may continue to exist. The third class com-
priseth such as are independent of these things, and whose
occupation, by night and by day, in secret and in public, is to
reflect, “Who are we, f»r what reason did we come into existence,
and Who hath brought us into being?” In other words, they
hold debate cdhcerning the real essences of tflings, reflect on
their comfng, and anxiously consider their departure, saying,
“ How havd we come ? Whither shall we go ? ”

This class, again, is subdivided into two sorts ; first, those
who reach the essence of this object by the help of masters and
by laborious toil, voracious study, reading and writing ; and such
are called “ Philosophers.” But there is yet another sort who,
# without master or book, reach the extreme limit of this problem,
and these are called “ Prophets.”

* ^Jow the peculiar virtues of the Prophet are three: — first,
that, without instruction, he knows all knowledges 2 ; secondly,
that he gives information concerning yesterday and to-morrow
otherwise tljan by analogical reasoning; and thirdly, that he
hath such psychical power that from whatever body he will he
taketh the form and produccth another form, which thing none
can do save such as'are conformed to the Angelic World. There-
fore in the Human World none is above him, and his command

1 Or perhaps “ races.” The word is , plural of “species.”

2 This is what is called ‘ Hm-i-Ladunnl , or knowledge directly derived from God.


Prophets, Priests and Kings * n

i

is effective for the well-being of the world ; for whatever others
have, he has, while possestllng also an additional qualification
which they have not, that ^s to say communication with the
Angelic World. This additional ‘qualification is in brief termed
the “Prophetic Function,” and is m detail such as we have
explained. ^

Now so long as such a man lives, he points out to his people
what things conduce to well-being in both worlds, by the Com-
mand of God, glorious is His Name, communicated £ o him by
means of thg Aftgels. But when, by natural dissplution, he turns
his face towards the other world, he leaves behind him as his
representative a 6ode derived from the indications of God
Almighty and his own sayings 1 . And assuredly he requires, to
maintain his Law and Practice, a vice-gerent who must needs
■ be the most excellent of that community and the most perfect
product of that age, in order that he In ay maintain this Law and
give effect to this Code; and such an one is called an “Imam.”
But this Imfim cannot reach the horizons of the East, the West,
the North and the" South in such wise%at the effects of his care
may extend alike to the most femote and the nearest, and his
command and prohibition may reach at once thSP intelligent and
the ignorant. Therefore must he needs have vicars to act for
him in distant parts of the world, and not every one of these will
have such power that all mankind shall be compelled to acknow-
ledge it. Hence there must be an administrator and corapeller,
which administrator and compeller is called a “Monarch,” that
is to say, a king; and his vicarious function “Sovereignty.” The
king, therefore, is the lieutenant of the Imdm, tl?e Imam of the-
Prophet, and the Prophet of God (mighty and glorious is Pie !).
Well has Firdawsf said on this subject : — (u) "

‘ 3 * 1 3 oB CjBj-

“ Then learn that the functions of Prophet and King *

Are set side by side like two stones in one ring.”

The Lord of the sons of men 2 himself hath said, “ Church and
State are twins,” since in form and essence neither differs from
the other, either as regards increase or defect. So, by virtue of
this decree, no burden, after the Prophetic Office, is weightier
than Sovereignty, nor any function more laborious than that of
governing. Hence a king needs round about him, * as men on
whose counsel, judgement and deliberations depend the loosing
and binding of the world, and the well-being and ill-being of the
servants of God Almighty, such as are in every respect the most
excellent and most perfect of their time.

1 I.e. the Scripture and the Traditions, in the case of the Prophet Muhammad the
Qur’an and the Hadlth.

2 I.e. the Prophet Muhammad.


12 * Plan of the ChahAr MaqAla

*

Now of the servants essential takings are the Secretary, the
Poet, the Astrologer and the Phylician, with whom he can in
no wise dispense. For the mainterfence of the administration is
by the Secretary; the perpetuation, of immortal renown by the
Poet; the ordering of affairs by the Astrologer; and the health
of the body by thjg Physician. These four arduous function^ and
noble arts are amongst the branches of the Science of Philosophy;
the functions of the Scribe and the Poet being brancnes of the
Science c*f Logic; that of the Astrologer, one of the principal
subdivisions of lyiathematics ; while the Physiciarfs f\rt is amongst
the branches of Natural Science. This book, therefore^comprises
Four Discourses, to wit : — * *

First Discourse , on the essence of the Secretarial Art, and the
nature of the eloquent and perfect Secretary. «

Second Discourse , on thp essence of the Poetfc Art, and the
aptitude of the Poet.

Third Discourse , on the essence of the Science of Astrology,
and the competence of tlje Astrologer in that'Science.

Fourth Discourse , on the essence of the Science of Medicine,
and the direction and disposition of the Physician.

Such philosophical considerations as are germane to this Book
will therefore be advanced at the beginning of each Discourse;
and thereafter ten pleasing anecdotes, of the choicest connected
with that subject and the rarest appropriate to that topic, of what
hath befallen persoifs of the class under discussion, will be
adduced, in order that it may become plainly known to the King
that the Secretarial Office is not a trivial matter*; that the Poetic
Calling is* no mean occupation ; that Astrology is a necessary
Science; that Medicine is an indispensable Art; and that the
wise King cannot do without these four persons, the Secretary,
the Poet, the Astrologer, and the Physician.

ft

(iv) First Discourse.

On the essence of the Secretarial A rt, and the naUire of the perfect
« Secretary and what is connected therewith.

The Secretarial Function is an art comprising analogical
methods of^'hetoric and communication, and teaching the forms of
address employed amongst men in correspondence, consultation,
contention, eulogy, condemnation, diplomacy, conciliation and
provocation, as well as in magnifying matters or minimising them;
contriving means of excuse or censure; imposing covenants;
recording precedents ; and displaying in every case orderly
arrangement of the subject matter, so that all may be enunciated
in the best and most suitable manner.


13


Qualifications of the Secretary*

«

Hence the Secretary must be of gentle birth, of.refined honour,
of penetrating discernment, olf profound reflection, and of piercing
judgement ; and the amplestjportion and fullest share of literary
culture and its fruits must be his. Neither must he be remote
from, or unacquainted witlf, logical analogies ; and he must
know the ranks of his contemporaries, and be familiar with the
dignities of the leading men of his time. Moreover he should not
be absorbed in the wealth and perishable goods of this world ;
nor concern himself with the approval or condemnation of persons
prejudiced in his favour or against him, or be inisled*by them ;
and he should, when exercising his secretarial functions, guard
the honour of his master from degrading situations and humi-
liating usages. And in the course of his letter ant? tenour of his
correspondence he should not quarrel with honourable and
powerful personages ; and, even though enmity subsist between
his master ari*d the person whom h£ is addressing, he should
restrain his pen, and not attack his honour, save 4n the case of
one who may have overstepped his own proper limit, or advanced
his foot beyond the circle of respect, fo* they say : — “ One for one ,
and he who begins is most in the wrong*”

Moreover in hisforms of address he should observe moderation,
writing to each person that which his family pedigree, kingdom,
domain, army, and treasure indicate ; save in the case of one who
may himself have fallen short in this matter, or made display of
undue pride, or neglected some point of courtesy, or manifested
a familiarity which reason cannot regard otherwise than as
misplaced in such correspondence, and unsuitable to epistolary
communications# In such cases it is permitted §nd allowed to
the Secretary to take up h*s pen, set his best foot forward, ( i r) and
in this pass go to the extreme limit afid utmost bound, for the
most perfect of mankind and the most excellent of them (upon
him be the Blessings of God and His Peace) says: — “ Haughtiness
towards the haughty is a good work s .” But in no case musyt he
suffer any dust from the atmosphere of recrimination in this
arena of correspondence to alight on the skirt of his master’s „
honour ; and in the setting forth of his message he must adopt
that method whereby the words shall subserve the ideas and
the matter be briefly expressed ; for the orators of the Arabs kave
said, “ The best speech is that which is brief and significant , [not
long and wearisomefd For if the ideas be subordinated to the

•

Tit for tat, and the aggressor is most
to blame.” ,

3 1 Jl

3 ‘ ^ 3 Ji 3 <J* L* >0^1 The printed text omits the

last words.


14


'First Discourse.— On Secretaries


words, the discussion will be protracted, and the writer will be
stigmatised as prolix, and 11 He whelks prolix is a babbler V’

Now the words of the Secretary frill not attain to this elevation
until he acquires some knowledge of every science, obtains some
hint from every master, Ileal's some" aphorism from every philo-
sopher, and borrows some elegance from every man of letters.
Therefore he must accustom himself to peruse the Scripture of
the Lord of Glory, the Traditions of Muhammad the Chosen
One, the Memoirs of the Companions, the proverbial sayings of
the Arabs, and the wise words of the Persians ;.and to read the
books of the ancients, and to study the writings of thdir successors,
such as the Correspondence of the Sahib [Iqfna’fl, ibn»‘Abbad] 2 ,
Sib! and Qabiis 3 ; the compositions ^>f FI amid i', Imdrm and
Quddma 4 ibn Ja‘far; the Gests of Badf'jVz-Zamin al- Ham ad am'] 0 ,
al-Harfrf 5 and al-Hamfdf 0 ; the Rescripts of al-Bal'amf 7 , Ahmad-
i-Hasan 8 and Abu Nasr Kundurf 8 ; the Letters of Muhammad
'Abduh, ‘Abdti’l-FIamfd, and the Sayyidu’r-Ru’asi ; the Seances
of Muhammad-i-Mansiir 10 , Ibn ‘Abbddf 11 and Ibnu’n-Nassiba the
descendant of ‘All ; and,jof the poetical works of the Arabs, the
Diwdns of Mutanabbf 12 , AbfwardP 8 and Ghazzf 14 ; and, amongst
the Persian poets, the poems of Rudagf 18 , the Epic of Firdawsf 10 ,
and the panegyrics of ‘Unsurf 17 ; since each one of these works
which I have enumerated was, after its kind, the incomparable
and unique product of its time ; and every writer who hath these
bookstand doth not fail to read them, stimulates his mind,
•

I * jttM

3 See the_ Ya/hntUu 'd-Dakr (ed. Damascus), v<A iii, pp. ; de S lane's Ibn

Khalltkdn, vbl. i, pp. 2x2-317, and Note III at the end. L. omits §ib(.

8 The Taressul, or Corresporftlence, of Qabiis ibn Washmgfr, the Ziyi rid Prince
of Tabaris tdn, who was killed in 403/1013-13. See p. 95 of the Persian notes.

4 See von Kremer’s Cul/ttrgach. , i, pp. 269-270.

8 See von Kremer’s Culiurgesch., ii, pp. 470-476; Brockelmann’s Gesch. d. Arab.
Lrt/.f i, pp. 93-94 and 376-278.

8 See Kiev’s Persian Catalogue, vol. ii, pp. 747-748, where a very fine old MS. of
the Maq&mit-i-Hamidt is described, written in the 13th cent, of our era.

7 Abd ‘All Muhammad al-Bal'ami (d. 386/996).

8 The Ghaanawi minister, Ahmad ibn Hasan of Maymand (d. 424/1033).

8 See de Slane’s Ibn Khallikdn , vol. iii, pp. 390-205.

“^Probably Muhammad ibn Mansur al-IIaddad. See H. Kh., No. 17*9.

II Abd ‘Ajirn Mtihatnmad ibn Ahmad al-'Abbidi (see Ri'eu’s Arabic Suppl., p. 755),
who died in 458/1066, is probably intended.

12 See von Kremer’s Cullurgesch., ii, pp. 380-381; Brockelmann’s Gesch. d. Arab.
Lilt., i, pp. 86*80.

18 See Brockefmann’s Gesch. d, Arab. Lift., i, p. 253; and the Yailma, vol. iv,
pp. 35 and 62-64, where mention is made of this well-known Abiwardi (whose Dl-wan
has been printed at Beyrout) and another.

14 Brockelmann, op. cit., i, p. 353. A., however, reads

18 See EtM’s monograph and also his article s.v. in the Encyclopaedia Sritannica.

18 See especially Nolcfeke's Das Iratiischt Nationalepcs in vol. ii (pp. 130-21 1)
of Geijjer and Kuhn’s Grundriss der Imnisehen Philologu.

17 See Ethd in the same Grundriss, pp'. 324-225.


IskAfI’s Felicitous Quotation % 15

•

polishes his wit, enkindles his fancy, and ever raises the level of
his diction, whereby a Secretary becomes famous.

Now if he be well acquainted with the Qur'an , with one verse
therefrom he may discharge his obligation to a whole realm, as
did IskdfP.

Anecdote II. ^

Iskafp was one of the secretaries of the House of Saman
(may God have mercy on him), and knew his craft fight well,
so that he coufd cunningly traverse the heights, and emerge
triumphant from the most difficult passes. He ^discharged the
duties of secretary*in th£ Chancellery of Ntih ibif Manstir 1 2 3 , but
they did not properly recognize his worth, or bestow on him
favour commensurate with his pre-eminence (it). He therefore
fled from Bukhara to Alptagin at Herat. Alptagin, a Turk, wise
and discerning, made much of him* and confided to him the
Chancellery, and his affairs prospered. Now because there had
sprung up at the court a new nobility who made light of the old
nobles, Alptagin, though he patientl^ bore their presumption
[for a while], was finally forced into rebellion, by reason of some
slight put upon him at the instigation of a par^ of these new
nobles. Then Amir Nfih wrote from Bukhdrd to Zdbulistdn that
Subuktigin should come with that army, and the sons of Simjur 3
from NisMpfir, and should oppose and make war on Alptagin.
And this war is very celebrated, and this momentous battlfc most
famous. *

So when th^se armies reached Herat, the Amir Nuh sent
‘Ali ibn Muhtdj 4 al-Kashani, who was the Chiel' Chamberlain
( Hdjibul-Bdb), to Alptagin with a letter [fluent] like water and
[scathing] like fire, all filled with threats and fraught with
menaces which left no room for peace and no way for concilia-
tion, such as an angry master might write from a distance tg his
disobedient servants on such an occasion and in such a crisis,
the whole letter filled with such expressions as “ I will come,”
“I will take,” “I will slay.” When the Chamberlain Abu’l-Hasan
‘All ibn Muhtdj al-Kashdnl submitted this letter and delivered this
message, withholding nothing, Alptagin, who was already ve*ed,

1 Abu’l-Q&sim ‘All ibn Muhammad al-Iskafi. See Yattma, vol. iv, pp. 29-33,
and iii, <j..

2 This seems to be an error (though it stands thus in all three copies) for Manstir

ibn Nvili (Mansrir I), who reigned a.h. 350-366 ; for Ntih ibn Man§tir (Ntih II) reigned
A.H. 366-387, — J V“‘ — ‘ ” “ --2 or 354. Concerning the Dlwanu'r-
RasA'il see voi . >. 174, 200; and A. de B. Kazimirski’s

MenotUchehri , . > Ibnu’l-Athir (Bulaq ed. of A.H. 1303,

vol. viii, p. 17c ■ in a.h. 351, when.Isktifi was already

dead. See p. i • r of the Persian notes and Note IV at end of this volume.

8 See Defrtimery’s Hist, des Samanides, pp 160-261.

4 Concerning this general, see Defremery's Hist. 4 c r Samanides, pp. 247-148.


'First Discourse.— On Secretaries


16

grew more vexed, and broke out in anger, saying, “ I was his
father’s servant, but when my mast<# passed from this transitory
to that eternal abode, he entrustec|jhim to me, not me to him.
Although, to outward seeming, I should obey him, when you
closely examine this matter' a contrary conclusion results, seeing
that I am in the last stages of old age, and he in the first stages
of youth. Those vfho have impelled him to act thus are destroyers
of this Dynasty, not counsellors, and are overthrowers of this
House, not supporters.”

Then *in extreme ill-temper he instructed Iskdff saying,
“When thou apswerest this letter omit no detail of disrespect;
and I desire that thou shouldst write the answer on the back of
the letter.” 3 b I .shaft answered it on «the spur of the moment,
and first wrote as follows :

“In the Name of God the Merciful the Clement. 0 Nti% , thou
hast contended with us and made great the contention with us.
Produce , then p that wherewith thou threatenest us, if thou art of
those who speak truly'!'

When this letter rctfched Nuh ibn Martsur the Amir of
Khurdsdn, he read it, and was astonished ; and all the gentlemen
of the Court vtfere filled with amaze, and the scribes bit their
fingers [in wonder]. And when the affair of Alptagfn was dis-
posed of, Iskdff fled away privily, for he was fearful and terrified ;
until suddenly Nuh sent a messenger to summon him to his
presence, and conferred on him the post of Secretary (»•). So
his affairs prospered^ and he became honoured and famous
amongst the votaries of the Pen. Had he not known the Qiidan
well, he would mot have hit upon this verse on that occasion, nor
would his°position have risen from that degree to this limit.

Anecdote III.

When Iskftff’s affairs waxed thus prosperous, and he became
established in the service of the Amfr Nuh ibn Mansur, Mdkdn
son of Kdkuy 3 rebelled at Ray and in Khhistdn, withdrew his
neck from the yoke of obedience, sent his agents to Khw&r and
Simnak, captured several of the towns of Kumish 3 , and paid no
heet} to the Sdm^nids. Nuh ibn Mansur was afraid, because this
was a formidable and able man, and set himself to deal with this
matter. He therefore ordered Tash, the Commander-in-chief, to

1 Qur'dn, xi, 34.

a T !v , i. ,: . ■■ ".v mV. 1 in these two stories are considerable, for

the re'« IT ■■ : : V < i! ■. V-. . . ::•••! i- : 329/940-1, towards the end of the reign

of Najr II ibn Ahmad, i.e. long before the rebellion of Alptagfn (see n. 1 on p. 15
supra). See Defrfmery’s Samanides, pp. 248 and 263-264. See Notes IV and V at
the end.

* Better known as Qumis, the arabicised form of the name. See B. de Meynard’s
Dict. Glegr., Histor.,et Litt. dc la Perse, pp. 454-455. For the three other towns
mentioned, see the same work, pp. 213, 317 and 318.


f


IsicAfi’s Concise Despatch % 17

■9

march against him with seven thousand horsemen, suppress this
rebellion, and put an end to mis formidable insurrection in what-
ever way he deemed most expedient.

Now Tdsh was mighty ^sagacious and clear in judgement,
rashly involving himself in and skilfully extricating himself from
the Straitest passes ; ever victorious in warfare, ^nd never turning
back disappointed from any enterprize, nor defeated from any
campaign. While he lived, the dominion of the House of SAmdn
enjoyed the greatest brilliancy, and their affairs the utmost
prosperity. * *

On this occasion, then, the Amir, being mightily preoccupied
and distressed in mind, sent a messenger to summon Iskdff, and
held a private interview* with him. “ I am greatly troubled,”
said hg, “ by this business ; for Mdkdn is a brave man, endowed
with courage wd manhood, and hath both ability and generosity,
so that there have been few like him ffmongst the Dsylamfs. You
must co-operate with Task, and whatever is lacking to him in
military strength at this crisis, you must make good by your
counsels. And I will establish myself %t Nfshdpur, so that the
army may be supported from the base, and the foeman dis-
couraged. Every day a swift messenger with a concise despatch 1
from you must come to me and in this you must set forth the
pith of what may have happened, so that my anxieties may be
assuaged.” Iskdff bowed and said, “ I will obey.”

So next day Tdsh unfurled his standard, sounded his drums,
and set out for the front from Bukhara, crossing the Oxus with
seven thousand horsemen; while the Amfr followed him with the
remainder of thenar my to Nishdpuf. There he invested Tdsli and
the army with robes of honour; and Tash marched* out and
entered Bayhaq, and went forth into Kumish setting 1ms face (a)
towards Ray with fixed purpose and firm resolve.

Meanwhile Mdkdn, with ten thousand mailed warriors, was
encamped at the gates of Ray, which he had made his base.
Tdsh arrived, passed by the city, and encamped over against
him. Then messengers began to pass to and fro between them,
but no settlement was effected, for Mdkdn was puffed up with
pride on account of that high-hearted army which he had gathered
together from every quarter. It was therefore decided that they
should join battle.

Now T ash was an old wolf who for forty years hgd held the
position of Commander-in-chief, and had witnessed many such
engagements; and he so arranged it that when the two armies
confronted one another, and the doughty warriors and champions

1 Mirza Muhammad (p. > -1 of the Persian notes) has investigated the precise
meaning of the word mulattafa , here translated “concise despatch,” and shews by
quotations that it is used for a minutely and concisely written note capable of being
easily concealed and secretly carried.


B.


18


^Fikst Discourse.— Res Angusta Domi


of the army of Transoxiana and Khurasdn moved forward from
the centre, only half of Mdkdn’s Army was engaged, while the
rest were not fighting. Mdkdn was'slain, and Tdsh, when he had
ceased from taking and bipding apcl slaying, turned to Iskd.fi
and said, “A carrier-pigeon must be sent in advance, to be
followed later bjj a courier ; but all the main features of the
battle must be summed up in one sentence’ which shall indicate
all the circumstances, yet shall not exceed what a pigeon can
carry, an£l shall adequately express our meaning.”

Then Iskdfr took so much paper as two fingers; would cover
and wrote : — “T.r for Makdn , he hath become as his name 1 ” [Md
ban = “ He lyith not been” in, Arabic]. By this “ tfia ” he in-
tended the negative, and by "ban” tire preterite of the verb, so
that the Persian of it would be, “ Mdkdn hath become like his
name,” that is to say, hath become nothing. r

When the carrier-pigedh reached the Amir Nuh, he was not
more delighted at this victory than at this despatch, and he
ordered Iskdfi’s salary to be increased, saying, “ Such a person
must maintain a heart ffee from care in order to attain to such
delicacies of expression 11 .” *


Anecdote IV.


One who pursues any craft which depends on reflection
ought to be free from care and anxiety, for if it be otherwise
the ffrrows of his thought will fly wide and will not be con-
centrated on the targ'et of achievement, since only by a tranquil
mind can one arrive at such diction. 0

It is ^elated that a certain secretary of the ‘Abbdsid Caliphs
was writing a letter to the governor of" Egypt; and, his mind
being tranquil and himself submerged in the ocean of reflection,
was forming sentences precious as pearls of great price and
fluent as running water. Suddenly his maid-servant entered,
saying, “ I here is no flour left.” The scribe was so put out and
disturbed in mind (>v) that he lost the thread of his theme, and
was^so affected that he wrote in the letter « There is no flour
left. ’ When he had finished it, he sent it to the Caliph, having
noTmowledge of these words which he had written.

When the letter reached the Caliph, and he read it, and
arrived at this sentence, he was greatly astonished, being unable
to accountffor so strange an occurrence So he sent a messenger
to summon the scribe, and enquired of him concerning this. The
scribe was covered with shame, and gave the true explanation of
the matter. The Caliph was mightily astonished and said, “ The

1 * j LaJ hot


0f th i* a rT- Cd ?^ is .R iv f" in tlle TdrM-i-Guuda, and is cited by
Delremery at pp. 547-348 of his Histoire ties Satnanides (Paris, 1845).


Dismissal of a Dishonest Judge * 19

beginning of this letter surpasses and excels the latter part by
as much as the stir a ‘ Say, Me is God, the One 1 ’ excels the siira
‘ The hands of Abil Lahab ' shall perish s / and it is a pity to
surrender the minds of eloquent me.n like you into the hands of
the struggle for the necessaries of life.” Then he ordered him to
be given means sufficiently ample to prevent such an announce-
ment as this ever entering his ears again. Naturally it then
happened that he could compress into two sentences the ideas
of two worlds. *

* »

* Anecdote V. •

A ^

The Sahib Ism&'tl ib» ‘Abbad 8 , entitled al-KdjH (“the Com-
petent ”) of Ray was minister to the Shdhanshdh 4 . He was most
perfect in his accomplishments, of which fact his correspondence
and his poetry are two sufficient witnesses and unimpeachable
arbiters. *

Now the Sahib was a Mu'tazilite 5 , and such are wont to be
extremely pious and scrupulous in their religious duties, holding
it right that a true believer should abide eternally in hell by
reason of a grain of unrighteousness ; and his servants, retainers
and agents for the most part held the same opinion that he did.

Now there was at Qum a judge appointed by the Sahib in
whose devoutness and piety he had a firm belief, though one after
another men asserted the contrary. All this, however, left the
§dhib unconvinced, until two trustworthy persons of Qum,Vhose
statements commanded credence, declared’ that in a certain suit
between So-and-so and Such-an-one this judge jjad accepted a
bribe of five hundred dlndrs. This was mightily displeasing to
the Sdhib for two reasons, first on account of the greatness of
the bribe, and secondly on account of the shameless* unscrupu-
lousness of the judge. He at once took up his pen and wrote:

“ In the Name of God the Merciful the Clement. O fud^e of
Qum ! We dismiss you, ( \ a ) so Come' 1 ' ! ”

Scholars and rhetoricians will notice and appreciate the high
merit of this sentence in respect to its concision and clearness, and
naturally from that time forth rhetoricians and stylists have in-
scribed this epigram on their hearts, and impressed it on theirminds.

1 Qur’dn, cxii. 2 Qur’dn, cxi.

3 For an account of this great minister and generous patron of literature, see
de Slane’s translation of Ibn Khallikdn, vol. i, pp. aia-217, and Note ®VI at end.

4 This old Persian title “ King of Icings” was borne by several of the House of
Buwayh. Here either Mu’ayyidu’d-Dawla or his brother Fakhru’d-Dawla is intended.

5 This, as Mired Muhammad points out on p. M of the Persian notes, is the
meaning of 'adli madhhab. The followers of this doctrine, called by their adversaries
al-Mu'tazila, “ the Seceders,” called themselves “ Partisans of the Divine Justice and
Unity.” See my Lit. Hist, of Persia, vol. i, p. s8r,

8 <i&l I have en-

deavoured to preserve, feebly enough, the word-play in the original.


20 First Discourse.— -The Taxes of Lamgi-iAn


ANECDOT|f VI.

Lamghdn 1 is a city in the district of Sind, one of the depen-
dencies of Ghazna ; and at this present time one lofty mountain
separates its inhabitants from the heathen, so that they live in
constant dread oft the attacks and raids of the unbelievers. Yet
the men of Lamghdn are of good courage, hardy and thrifty, and
combining with their hardiness no small truculence, to such a
degree tMt they think nothing of lodging a corpplaint against a
tax-gatherer op account of a maund of chaff or a r single egg ;
while for eventless than this they are ready to come pj Ghazna
to complain $f exactions, and to remain there* one or two months,
and not to return without having accomplished their object. In
short they have a strong hand in obstinacy, and much back-bone
in importunity. ' , -

Now in the reign of Sultcln Mahmud Yaminu' d-Dnwla (may
God illuminate his proof!), the heathen one night attacked them,
and damage of every sort befel them. But these were men who
could roll in the dust a without S9il ; and when this event happened
several of their„chiefs and men of note rose up and came to the
court of Ghazna, and, with their garments rent, their heads
uncovered, and uttering loud lamentations, entered the bazaar
of Ghazna, went to the King’s Palace wailing and grieving, and
so described their misfortune that even a stone would have been
moved to tears. As their truculence, impudence, dissimulation
and cunning had not yet become apparent, that great minister,
Ahmad-i-Has;j,n of Maymand*, took pity upon them, and forgave
them that year’s taxes, exempting them from all exactions, and
bidding them return home, strive more strenuously, and spend
less, so that by the beginning of next year they might recover
their former position.

So the deputation of Lamghdnfs returned with great content-
ment and huge satisfaction, and continued during that year
in the easiest of circumstances, g* T >”rg n >!b*r.g Jo any one** ''
When the year came to an end, the same dcptum mn returned to
present another petition to the minister, simply setting forth that
in the past year their lord the great minister had brightened their
country by his grace and clemency and had preserved them by


* ° 1 , I r llI Pe hAn ; See B. de Meynard’s Diet. Giogr. de la Perse , p. 50* ; Pavet de

Courteilles Mini, de Baber, u, pp. xao-iji. 1 5 a ’

» See the Editor's note on ** 1 ^, onp.wtof the text. This expression appears
to denote extreme cunning and resourcefulness, as though one should say “to wash with-
out water. An attractive if bold emendation would be—, rjupnb <tL| — YL ,

M shamelessly evaded their obligations.” ^ * L 5 * *

* See n. 8 on p. 1 4 supra.


4 This is Mini Muhammad’s explanation of the expression ju>l Jd


al-Ma’mi)n’s Marriage with P^rAn 21

his care and protection, (\ a) so that through that bounty and
beneficence the people of kamghAn had reached their proper
position and were able to dwell on that border ; but that, since
their prosperity was still somewhat shaken, they feared that,
should he demand the contribution on their possessions that year,
some of them would-be utterly ruined, and that* as a consequence
of this, loss might/accrue to the royal coffers.

The ministej, Ahmad-i-Idasan, therefore, extending his
favour, excused them the taxes of yet another yea^ During
these two years’ the people of Lamghan grew rich, but this did
not sufifim them, for in the third year their gjeed reasserted
itself, and, hoping*agair^ to be excused, the same deputation
again appeared at Court and made a similar representation.
Then- it became apparent to all the world that the people of
Lamghan were in the wrong. So the Prime Minister turned the
petition over and wrote on the back of it : — A l-hhardju khurd-
jun , add'uhu dawd'uhu ” — that is to say, “ The tax is a running
sore 1 : its cure is tip discharge!’ And from the time of this great
statesman this saying has become pfbverbial, and has proved
useful in many cases. May the ’earth rest lightly on this great
man !


Anecdote VII.

There arose great statesmen under the ‘Abbasid dynasty, and
indeed the history of the Barmecides is well known and famous,
and to what extent and degree were thSir gifts and rewards.
Hasan [ibn] Sahl, called Dhu’r-R iyasatayn 2 (“tjie lord of two
commands ”), and his bro’ther Fadl were exalted above the very
heavens, so much so that Ma'mun espaused Fadl’s daughter and
asked her in marriage. Now she was a damsel peerless in beauty
and unrivalled in attainments ; and it was agreed that Ma’miin
should go to the bride’s house and remain there for a month, and
after the lapse of this period should return home with his bride.
On the day fixed for their departure he desired, as is customary,
to array himself in better clothes. Now Ma’mun always wore *
black ; and people supposed that he wore it because black was
the distinctive colour of the ‘Abbdsids ; till one day Yahyd ibn
Aktham 8 enquired of him, “ Why is it that the Prince of Believers
prefers black garments ? ” Ma’mfin replied to the judge, “ Black
garments are for men and for the living ; for no womtfri is married
in black, nor is any dead man (v-) buried in black.” Yahyfi was

1 Literally “a wound ol a thousand fountains,” probably a carbuncle.

2 There appears to be a confusion here between the two brothers. Hasan ibn
Sahl was the father of IhiHn, al-Ma’mtln’s bride, while Fadl bore the title of Dhu'r-
Riydsatayn, See de Slane’s Ibn Khallikdn , vol. i, pp. 268-272, and 408-409 ;
vol. ii, pp. 472-476. Also the Lafd’ifu'l-Ma'drif oi Ath-Tha'dlibi (ed. de Jong),

PP- 73 i ~74> where a full account is given of this marriage.

3 See de Slane’s Ibn Khallikdn, iv, pp, 33-51.


22 First Discourse. — al-Ma’mtJn’s Marriage

greatly surprised by this answer. Then on this day Ma’mun
desired to inspect the wardrobe; butf of a thousand coats of satin,
ma‘dint, mciliki, tainivi, hand-woven, i'loth of gold, miqradi^ and fine
black silk 1 , he approved nonp, but cl$d himself in his [customary]
black, and mounted, and turned his face towards the bride’s
house. Now on tjjtat day Fadl had decked out his palace in £uch
wise that the nobles were filled with wonder thereat, for he had
collected so many rare things that words would fail to describe
or enumerate them. So when Ma’mfin reached the gate of this
palace he saw a curtain suspended, fairer than a Chinese temple 2 3
yet withal more precious than the standards of the true F'aith,
whereof the ensign charmed the hearty and <-he colour- mingled
with the soul. He turned to his courtiers and said, “Whichever of
those thousand coats I had chosen, 1 should have been shamed
here. Praise be to God and thanks that I restricted myself to
this black raiment.”

Now of all the elaborate preparations made by Fadl on that
day, one was that he had a dish filled with [pieces of] wax in the
form of pearls, each in cir£umference like a hazel-nut, and in each
one a piece of paper on which w&s inscribed the name of a village.
These he poured out at Ma’rruin’s feet, and whosoever of Ma’mun’s
attendants obtained one of these pieces of wax, to him he sent
the title-deeds of that village.

So when Ma’mun entered the bride’s house, he saw a mansion
plastered and painted, with a dado of china tiles 8 , fairer than the
East at the time of sunrise, and sweeter than a garden at the
season of the rose ; and therein spread out a full-sized mat of
gold thread 4 * * Embroidered with pearls? rubies and turquoises ;
and six Cushions of lik§ design placed thereon ; and seated
there, in tire place of honour, a beauteous damsel sweeter than
existence and life, and pleasanter than health and youth ; in
stature such that the cypress of Ghdtafar 0 would have subscribed
itself her servant ; with cheeks which the brightest sun would
have acknowledged as suzerain ; with hair which was the envy
of musk and ambergris ; and eyes which were the despair of the
onyx and the narcissus. She, rising to her feet like a cypress, and
walking gracefully, advanced towards Ma’mfin, and, with a pro-
found obeisance and earnest apologies, took his hand, brought
him forward, seated him in the chief seat, and stood before him
in service. Ma’mun bade her be seated, whereupon she seated

1 The exact nature of most of these fabrics I have been unable to ascertain. See
Note VII at the end.

2 This, not “spring,” seems to be the meaning of bahdr in this passage.

3 fziir or iidra appears to denote a kind of lower half-wall or dado against which
one can lean while sitting.

4 Khdnawdr seems to mean “large enough for [covering the floor of] a house,”

and Shush a ■ i- zar- tashf da “spun” or “ thread-drawn gold.”

8 A quarter of Samarqand mentioned in the first story in Book i of the Mathnawl.


al-Mustarshid’s Eloquence


23


herself on her knees 1 * hanging her .head, and looking down at the
carpet. Thereupon Ma’miin was overcome with love: (n) he had
already lost his heart, and nlv he would have added thereunto
his very soul. He stretched „ out hisjtand and drew forth from
the opening of his coat eighteen pearls, each one as large as a
spar?ow’s egg, brighter than the stars of heaven, more lustrous
than the teeth of the fair, rounder, nay more luminous, than
Saturn or Jupiter, and poured them out on the surface of the
carpet, where, by reason of its smoothness and their roundness,
they continued In motion, there being no caus« for their qui-
escence. But the girl paid no heed to the pearls, nor so much
as raised fter head.* Thereat was Ma’mun’s gasstop further in-
creased, and he extended his hand to open the door of amorous
dalliance and to take her in his embraces. But the emotion of
shame overwhelmed her, and the delicate damsel was so affected
that she was overtaken by that state peculiar to woijien. Thereat
the marks of shame and abashed modesty appeared in her cheeks
and countenance, and she immediately exclaimed : — “ 0 Prince of
Believers! The command of God cometh , saek not then to hasten it!""

Thereat Ma’mun withdrew his hand, and was near swooning
bn account of the extreme appositeness of thisiverse, and her
graceful application of it on this occasion. Yet still he could not
take his eyes off her, and for eighteen days he came not forth
from this house and concerned himself with naught but her. And
the affairs of Fadl prospered, and he attained to that high petition
which was his. ,


Anecdote VIII. *

Again in our own time one of the ‘Akbdsid Caliphs, al-Mustar-
shid bi’lldh 3 , the son of al-Mustazhir bi’lldh, the ’Prince of
Believers (may God render his dust fragrant and exalt his rank
in Paradise !), came forth from the city of Baghdad with a well-
equipped army in full panoply, treasure beyond compute, Imd
many muniments of war, marching against Khurdsdn, seeking to
establish his supremacy over the King of the World Sanjar 4 .

Now this quarrel had been contrived by interested persons,
and was due to the machinations and misrepresentations of
wicked men, who had brought matters to this pass. When the
Caliph reached KirmAnshah, he there delivered on a Friday
a homily which in eloquence transcended the highest zenith
of the sun, and attained the height of the Heavenly Throne

1 J.e. in the Persian fashion, on the heels, with the knees together in front.

s Qur'dn, xvi, r. Cf. de Slane’s Ibn Kkallikdn, vol. i, p. 270.

3 The 20th ‘AbbAsid Caliph, reigned A.H. 512-520 (a.d. 1x18-1135).

4 This happened in 529/1 134-5. See Houtsmahs Reateil de Tcxtes relatifs d
t Histoire des Seldjoucides , vol, ii (1889), pp. 174-178. Sanjar is, however, a mistake
for Mas ‘ud ibn Muhammad ibn Malikshih. See Note VIII at end.


24


First Discourse.— The G(jr-KhAn


and the Supreme Paradise. In the course of this harangue, in his
great distress and extreme despairxhe complained of the House
of Saljiiq, in such wise that the orators of Arabia and the rhe-
toricians of Persia are fain Jo confegs that after the Companions
of the Prophet (God’s blessing rest on all of them), who were the
disciples of the J^oint of the Prophetic Function (rr) and the
expounders of his pithy aphorisms, no one had composed a
discourse so weighty and eloquent. Said al-Mustarshid: — “We
entrustedvour affairs to the House of Saljiiq, but they rebelled
against {is : — ‘ and the time lengthened over them* an j their hearts
were hardened^ and most of them are sinners' 1 ,”' that is to say,
withdrew thejf 'necks from our commands in '[matters appertain-
ing to] Religion and IslAm.

Anecdote IX. *

The Gur-fGvAn of Klrita fought a battle with the King of the
World Sanjar, the son of Malikshdh, at the gates of Samarqand,
wherein such disaster b§fel the army of IslAm as one cannot
describe, and Transoxiana passed into his power 2 . After putting
to death the Inadm of the East Husamu’d-Dfn 3 (may God make-
bright his example, and extend over him His Peace 1), the Ghr
Khdn bestowed Bukhara on Atmatigin 4 , the son of the Amir
BayAbanP and nephew of Atsiz Khwarazmshdh, and, when he
retired, entrusted him to the Imam Tdjii l- Islam Ahmad ibn
‘Abdu’l-Aziz, who was the Imdm of Bukhdrd and the son of
Burhdn 3 , so that whatever he did he might do by his advice, and
that he should-do nothing without his, orders, ffor take any step
without his knowledge. Then the Ghr-Khan turned back and
retired to jdarskhdn 7 . '

Now his justice had no bounds, nor was there any limit to
,/ the effectiveness of his commands; and, indeed, in these two

1 r Qur'dn, lvii, 15. The meaning of the Arabic is repeated in Persian in the text.

3 See MirkhwAnd’s History of the SaljAqs, ed. Vnllers, pp. 176-180. Sir E.
Denison Ross has pointed «ut to me that Gur-KhAn is a generic title. (See History
' c/ the Moghuls of Central Asia by Elias and Ross, pp. 187 et seqq., and also Schefer’s
Chrestomathie Persane, vol. i, pp. 34 et seqq.) See also MirzA Muhammad’s note
on p. u t of the text, and Note IX at the end.

3 HusAmu’d-Dln ‘Umaribn BurhAnu'd-Din ‘Abdu’l-'Aziz ibn MAza. See Note XI
at the end.

4 The correct form of this name is uncertain, but Alftigin, the reading of the
lithographed edition and of Schefer, op. cit., p, tS, is certainly wrong. See note
on p. u i of the text, and Note X at the end.

5 This name also is uncertain, and there are almost as many variants as there are
texts. See Note X at the end.

8 I.e. BurhAnu’d-Din ‘Abdu’l-'Azlz mentioned in the last footnote but two. See
Note XI at the end.

7 The name of a city in Eastern TurkistAn near Khulan. See G. le Strange’s
Lands of the Eastern Caliphate, p. 489, and Barthold in vol. i, part 4, p. 89, of the
ZapisH , or Mini . de P Acad. Imp. des Sciences de St Pilersbourg , viir Sirie. Classe
hist.-phllo/., 1893-4.


Miraculous Eloquence of the Qur’An 25

things is comprised the essence of kingship. But when Atmatigin
saw a clear field, he turned |his hand to oppression, and began
to levy contributions on BuxlidrA So several of the people of
Bukhdrd went as a deputation to BEprskhdn to seek redress. The
Gur-Khan, when he heard this, wrote a letter to Atmatigin
[beginning] in the Muslim fashion : 4

“ In the Name of God the Merciful the Clement. Let Atmatigin
know that although far distance separates us, our approval and
displeasure are near at hand. Let Atmatigin do tjiat which
[ Tdju' l-Isldyi] Ahmad commands, and Ahmad* that which [the
ProphetJJVfuhammad commands. Farewell.” *

Again and agahi we have considered this ana reflected on it.
A thousand volumes or even more might be written to pnlarge
on this letter, yet its purport is extremely plain and clear, needing
no explanation. Seldom have (rr) I seen anything like it.

•

Anecdote X.

The extreme eloquence of the Qufan lies in its concision of
words and inimitable presentation of ideas; and such citations as
those above given which have occurred to orators and eloquent
writers are of a kind to inspire awe, so that the wise and eloquent
man is moved from his [former] mental attitude. And this is a
clear proof and trenchant argument to establish the fact that this
Word did not proceed from the mouth of any created beihg, nor
originate from any [human] lips or tongue? but that the stamp of
Eternity is impressed on its prescriptions and sentences.

It is related that onb of the Muslims was reciting before
Walid ibnu ’l-Mughira this verse : — ‘'And it was saitf/O Earth ,
gulp down thy waters , and O Heaven , draw them uf ’ : and the
water abated. Thus was the matter effected. And it [i.e. the Arh]
rested upon Mount fi'uii V’ “By God,” said Walid ibnu ’l-Mughira,

“ verily it hath beauty and sweetness ; its highest part is fruitful,
and its lowest part is luxuriant; nor is it thejvord of man!” When
even enemies reached on the plane of equity such a level of*
enthusiasm concerning the eloquence of the Qur’&n and its
miraculous quality, see to what degree friends will attain.


Anecdote XL ,

Jt was formerly customary with the kings of old time and the
autocrats of past ages, such as the PfshdddI, Kaydni and Sdsd-
nian monarchs and the Caliphs, to vaunt themselves and compete
with one another both in justice and erudition, and with every
ambassador whom they despatched they used to send wise sayings,

1 Qur ' dn , xi, 4 6 .


• *


2 6 ChahAr MaqAla.—End of First Discourse

riddles, and enigmatical questions. So the king, under these
circumstances, stood in need of peasons of intelligence and dis-
crimination, and men of judgement and statesmanship ; and
several councils would be held and, adjourned, until they were
unanimous as to their answers, and these problems and enigmas
were plain and apparent, when they would despatch the am-
bassador.

This practice was maintained until the time of that just king
Mahmud jj)n Subuktigfn Yamimi' d-Daivla (may God have mercy
upon him !). ButVhen (ct) the Saljhqs succeeded 'him, they being
nomads, ignorapt of the conduct of affairs and the high achieve-
ments of kings, most of these royal customs became obsolete in
their time, and many essentials of dominion fell into disuse. One of
these was the Ministry of Posts, from which one can judge of the
remainder. It is related that one day SultAn Mahtm'id Yamtnu'd-
■Dawla despatched an ambassador to BughrA Khan in Transoxiana,
and in the letter which had been drafted occurred this passage : —
“ God Almighty saith , ‘ Verily the most honourable of yon in God’s
sight is he who is most pious of you 1 .’ Investigators and critics
are agreed that here he \i.e. the Prophet] guards himself from
ignorance; for Che souls of men are subject to no more grievous
defect than this .of ignorance, nor is there aught lower than the
blemish of folly. To the truth of this proposition and the sound-
ness of this a- Vi n r God’s] uncreated word also bears witness: —

‘ [God noil, 1 1 its, up v< of you who believe ] and those to whom
hath been given knowledge to \superior\ degrees V Therefore we
desire that the ImAms of the land of Transoxiana and the
doctors of the feast and scholars .of the KhAqAn’s Court should
impart [to" us] this much information as to matters essential [to
Salvation]. * What is the Prophetic Office, what Saintship, what
Religion, what IslAm, what Faith, what Well-doing, what Godli-
ness, what the Approbation of Right, what the Prohibition of
Wrcfiig, what the Path, what the Balance, what Mercy, what Pity,
what Justice, and what Excellence?”

When this letter reached the Court of BughrA KhAn, and
he had acquainted himself with its purport and contents, he
summoned the ImAms of Transoxiana from the different towns
and districts, and took counsel with them on this matter. Several
of the greatest and most eminent of these ImAms agreed that
they should" severally compose a treatise on this subject, and
in the course of their dissertation introduce into the text a reply
to these interrogations. They craved a delay of four monthsffor
this purpose ; which respite was fraught with all sorts of detri-
ments, theworst of which were the disbursements from the treasury
for the expenses of the ambassadors and king’s messengers, and


Qur'Ju, xlix, [3.


Qur’dn, Iviii, ia.


»


Second Discourse.— On the Poetic Art 27

the maintenance of the Imdms, until, at length Muhammad ibn
‘Abduh 1 the scribe, who was JBughrd Khan’s secretary, and was
deeply versed in learning and Highly distinguished in scholarship,
besides being profoundly skilled in vprse and prose, and one of
the eloquent and distinguished stylists of the Muslims, said,
“ I will reply to these questions in two words, if 1 such wise that
when the scholars of Isldm and the most conspicuous men of
the East shall see my answer, it shall command their approval
and admiration.” So he took up his pen and wrote (*>°) under
the questions, after the fashion of a legal decision ( fatwd ) : —
“ Saith Gog's Apostle ( upon whom be the Blessirtg of God, and
His Peace') ‘Revere) fee for God's Command and Losing-kindness
towards God's people!" Ail the Imams of Transoxiana bit their
finders [in amazement] and expressed their admiration, saying,
“ Here indeed «is an answer which is perfect and an utterance
which is comprehensive!” And the Khdqdn was mightily pleased
because the difficulty had been overcome by a scribe and there
was no further ne.ed for the divines. And when the answer
reached Ghazna, all applauded it. •

It therefore results from these premises that an intelligent
and accomplished secretary is the greatest ornanffent to a king’s
magnificence and the best means to his exaltation. And with
this anecdote we conclude this Discourse, and so farewell.


“ (n) Second Discourse.

M * -
On the essence of the Poetic Art and the aptitude of the Poet.

Poetry is that art whereby the poet arranges imaginary
propositions and blends fruitful analogies, in such wise that he
can make a little thing appear great and a great thing small,
or cause good to appear in the garb of evil and evil in the farm
of good. By acting on the imagination, he excites the faculties of
anger and concupiscence in such a way that by his suggestion
men’s temperaments become affected with depression or exalta-
tion ; whereby he conduces to the accomplishment of great things
in the order of the world.


Anecdote XII.

Thus they relate that Ahmad ibn ‘Abdu’lldh al-Khujistanf 2
was asked, "How didst thou, who wert originally an ass-herd,

* See p. 14 supra , Note III at the end, and p. as, of the Persian notes. t
2 “ Khujistan. — In the mountains near Herat. From this country issued Ahmad ibn


• %


28


Second Discourse.— On Poets


become Amir of Khurasan ? ” Pie replied, “One day I was
reading the Diwdn of Hanzala of ^Iddghfs 1 , in Badghfs of Khu-
jist&n, when I chanced on these two. couplets : —

• r *

‘ J*r $ JsKSs j _j ti ‘ J y-s-w jS

' LSiJ^~i3j OUI iyt l— j _} jU $ b

* ‘ If lordship lies within the lion's jaws,

* Go*) risk it, and from those dread portals S\f ize
Such straight-confronting death as men desir ?,

Of riches , greatness, rank and lasting^ ease.' •

An itppulse stirred within me such *that I could in no wise
remain content with that condition wherein I was. I therefore
sold my asses, bought a horse, and, quitting my ceuntry, entered
the service of*AH ibn Laytli, the brother of Ya'qub and 'Amr. (sw)
At that time the falcon of fortune of the Saffarids 2 still hovered
at the highest zenith of its prosperity. Of Jhe three brothers,

‘ Alf was the youngest, afid Ya'qub and ‘Amr had complete pre-
cedence over him. When Ya'qub came from Khurasan to Ghazna
over the mouiTtains, ‘All ibn Layth sent me back from Ribdt-i-
Sangln 3 (‘ the Stone Rest-house ') to act as agent to his feudal-
estates in KhurdsAn. I had a hundred horsemen of that army
on the road, and had with me besides some twenty horsemen of
my own. Now of the estates held in fief by ‘Alf ibn Layth one
was Karukh 4 of Hei€t, a second Khwaf 6 of Nfshdpur. When
I reached Karukh, I produced my warrant, ai^l what was paid
to me I divided amongst the army and gave to the soldiers.
My horsemen now numbered three hundred. When I reached
Khwdf 6 a fid again produced my warrant, the burghers of Khwaf
contested it, saying, ‘ We want a prefect with [a body-guard
of only] ten men.’ I therefore decided to renounce my allegiance
to the $affdrfs, looted Khw&f, proceeded to the village of Busht 0 ,

‘Abdu’llah al-Khujistdni, who revolted at Nishdpiir and died in 264/877-8.” (Barbier
de Meynard’s Diet. Giogr., Hist., et Lite, de la Perse, p. 197.) The editor points out
(Persian notes, p. itr, and Note XIII at the end) that, according to Ibnu’l-Athlr,
Ahmad was assassinated in Shawwdl, 268/882, after having reigned at Nishdpiir six
six years. See the Journal Asiatique for 1845, pp. 345 et sei/q. of the second half.

* See Kthe’s Rudagt's Vorldufer und Zeilgenossen, pp. 38-40, where these verses
and others by the same poet are cited.

2 The shortlived Saffdrid dynasty was founded by Ya'qub ibn Layth in 254/867.
On his death in 265/878 he was succeeded by his brother ‘Amr, who was overthrown
by Isma'fl the Samdnid in 287/900 and was subsequently put to death.

3 This place, evidently situated between Ghazna and Khurasan, has not been
identified, unless, as Muhammad Iqbdl suggests, it be identical with the Ribdt-i-Sang-
bast twice mentioned by Dawlatshdh (pp. in and • -3 of my edition).

4 A town situated at ten parasangs from Herat. See Barbier de Meynard’s Diet.
Giogr., Hist., et Litt. de la Perse, p. 487, and p. 33 infra.

6 Ibid., pp. 213-214.

0 Busht or l’usht is also in the district of Nishdpiir.


P %


Great Deeds Inspired by Poetry* 29

m

and came to Bayhaq 1 , where two thousand horsemen joined me.

I advanced and took Nfsh&oiir, and my affairs prospered and
continued to improve until I hid subdued all Khurdsan to myself.

Of all this, these two vetoes of poetry were the original cause.”

Sall&ml 2 relates in his history that the affairs of Ahmad ibn
‘Abcftt’Mh prospered so greatly that in one njght in NisMpur
he distributed in largesse 300,000 dinars , 500 head of horses, and
IOOO suits of clothes, and to-day he stands in history as one of
the victorious monarchs, all of which was brought aboufr by these
two verses of pdetry. Many similar instances are to be found
amongst both the Arabs and the Persians, but we 4 iave restricted
ourselves f 5 the mention of this one.J So a king c&gnot dispense
with a good poet, who slfkll provide for the immortality of his
name, and shall record his fame in diwans and books. For* when
the king receives that command which none can escape 3 , no
traces will remain of his army, his tfeasure, and lys store ; but
his name will endure for ever by reason of the poet’s verse, as
Sharff-i-Mujallidi of Gurgan says 4 : —

* ^ # •

‘ijUL/ Jl (jfwLi Jl jl a £> o' jl

“ From all the treasures hoarded by the Houses
Of lids An and of SAman, in our days
Nothing survives except the song of BArbad 6 ,

Nothing is left save RiidakPs sweet lays." *

•

The names o| the monarchs- of each age and the princes of
all time are immortalized* by the admirable vers’e and widely-
diffused poetry of this company 6 ; (va) ag, for example, ttie names
of the House of Sdman through Master Abti ‘Abdi’lldh Ja'far ibn
Muhammad ar-Rudakt, Abu’l-'Abbas ar-Ribanjani, Abu’l-Mathal
al- Bukhari, Abu Ishaq-i-Juybdrf, Abu’l-Hasan Aghajl, TaMwf,

»

1 Baylmq, also near Nishdpi.tr, was according to Ydqiit (who gives an unsatisfactory
etymology) the ancient Khusrawjird and the later Sabzawar.

2 I.e. AbU ‘Ali as-Sallami al-Bayhaqi, who died in 300/912-3. See p. 1 of the ’ .
Persian notes, and Note XIV at the end.

8 i.e. the summoifts of the Angel of Death.

4 ‘Awfi, who mentions this poet (Lubdb, i, pp, 13-14), calls him Ahu Sharif
Ahmad ibn ‘Ali.

” ' ’ ad, the celebrated minstrel of Khusraw Parwiz, see my Ltt.

. pp. 14-18 and foot-notes., and Noldeke’s new- edition of his
. 1 , , p. 43, n.' 2 ad calc.

6 Of the poets included in this long list some account will be found in Note XIV at
the end of this volume (derived in almost all cases from MirzA Muhammad’s notes to
the Persian text) save in the case of a few who are too well known to need further
mention (such as ‘Unsuri, ‘Asjadi, Farrukhi and Minuchihri) and a rather larger
number concerning whom no information is obtainable from the sources at present
available, such as Lii’lri’i, Guldbi, ‘Ali Sipihri, Sughdi, Pisar-i-Tfsha, KafA’i,
Kusa-i-Falf, Ptir-i-Kalah, Abu’l-QAsim Rafi‘i, Abu Bakr Jawhari and ‘Ali Stiff
Concerning Ja'far of Hamadan, see vol. ii of my Lit. Hist, of Persia, p. 260.


• \


30 Second Discourse. — Great Persian Poets

Khabbdzf of Nfshdpbr, and Abu’l-Hasan al-Kisd’f; the names of
the kings of the Plouse of Ndsiru’d-Dfn 1 through such men as
‘Unsurf, ‘Asjadf, Farrukrhf, Bahrdmf, Zfnatf, Buzurjmihr of Qd’in,
Muzaffarf, Manshdrf, Minhchihrf, Mas'udjj, Qasdrdmf, Abb Hanffa-
i-Iskdf, Rdshidf, Abu’l-Faraj of Rama, Mas‘bd-i-Sa‘d-i-Salmdn,
Muhammad ibn Ndsir, Shdh AM Rijd, Ahmad-i-Khalaf, ‘Uthmdn
Mukhtdrf, and Majdbd as-Sand'f ; the names of the House of
Khacjan through Ld’lu’f, Guldbf, Najfbf of Farghdna, ‘Am'aq
of Bukhird, Rashfdf of Samarqand, Najjdr (“the Carpenter”) of
Sdgharj,*‘Alf Bdnfdhf, Pisar-i-Darghdsh, ‘Alf *Sipihrf, Jawharf,
Sughdf, Pisar-r-Tfsha, and ‘Alf Shatranjf (“the Chess-player”);
the names qf’the House of Buwayh by Master MaTitiqf, Kiyd
Ghadd’irf, and Bunddr; the names of the House of Saljuq by
Farru'khf of Gurgdn, Ldmi'f of Dihistdn, Ja‘far of Flamaddn,
Dur-Ffruz-i-Fakhrf, Burhdnf, Amfr Mu'izzf, Abu’ljMa'dlf of Ray,
‘Amfd-i-Kanjdlf and Shihdbf ; the names of the kings of Taba-
ristdn through Qamarf of Gurgdn, Rdff‘1 of Nfshdpbr, Kafd’f of
Ganja, Kusa-i-Fdlf, and Pur-i-Kalah ; and the names of the
kings of Ghdr or House of Shansab (maj' God cause their
kingdom to endure !) through Abu’l-Qdsim Raff'f, Abb Bakr
Jawharf, this feast of mankind Nizdmf-i-‘Arbdf, and ‘Alf Stiff.

’ The diwtins of these poets are eloquent as to the perfection,
splendour, equipment, military strength, justice, bounty, nobility,
excellence, judgement, statecraft, heaven-sent success and in-
fluence of these former kings and bygone rulers (may God
illuminate their torqjjs and enlarge unto them their resting-
places 1). How many princes there were who enjoyed the favours
of kings, and«made great gifts which, they bSstowed on these
eminent poets, of whom to-day no trace remains, nor of their
hosts and, retinues any survivor, though many were the painted
palaces and charming gardens which they created and embellished,
but which to-day are levelled with the ground and indistinguish-
able from the deserts and ravines ! Says the author

1 i L*.j a£=>

* [>-<> c-* ij jl

^ ^ olj ^ («)

‘“How many a palace did great Mahmud raise,

At whose tall towers the Moon did. stand at gas e,

Whereof one brick remaineth not in place,

Though still re-echo ‘ Unfurl 7 s sweet lays.’’

The Monarch of the World, Sultdn ‘A laud-dunya tva'd-Din
Abu ‘Alf al-Husayn ibnu’l-Husayn, the Choice of the Prince of

1 f.e, the House of Ghazna.


P- •


31


Qualifications of the Poet

*


Believers (may his life be long, and the umbrella of his dynasty
victorious !), marched on Ghazna to avenge those two kings, the
Prince-martyr and the Laudable Monarch 1 , and Sultan Bahram-
shah fled before him. In vengeance for those two royal victims,
whom they had treated witfi. such indignity, and of whom they
had Spoken so lightly, he sacked the city of Gha^ia, and destroyed
the buildings raised by Mahmtid, Mas'iid and Ibrahim, but he
bought with gold the poems written in their praise, and placed
them in his library. Alike in the army and in theacity none
dared call j^herrt king, yet the Conqueror hiroeelf wbuld read

from the Shdhndma what Abu’l-Qasim Firdawsf»says : — ■

- m , m

‘ JU af j ‘ j.jLo j !V> ^>^=>

1 iJJ ‘ y

“ Qf the child in its cot , ere its lips yet are dry
From the nittk of its mother , ‘ Mahm/id l ’ is the cry !

A mammoth in strength and an angel in style ,

With a bounty like Spring and a heart like the Ftyle,

Mahmud, the Great King, who stick order doth keep
That in peace from one pool drink the wolf and the sheep /”


All wise men know that' herein was no reverence for Mahmdd,
but only admiration of Firdawsi and his verse. Had Sultdn
Mahmdd understood this, he would presumably not have left
that noble man disappointed and despairing.

•

EXCURSUS. On the quality of the Poet and his nurse.

•

Now the poet must be of tender temperament-, profound in
thought, sound in genius, a powerful thinker, subtle of insight.
He must be well versed in many divers sciences, and eclectic
amidst divergent customs ; for as poetry is of advantage in (Aery .
science, so is every science of advantage in poetry. And the poet
roust be of pleasing conversation in social gatherings, of cheerful *
countenance on festive occasions ; and his verse must have attained
to such a level as to be written on the page of Time (r.) and
celebrated on the tongues of the noble, and be such that they
transcribe it in books and recite it in cities. For the richest -
portion and most excellent part of poetry is immortal fame, and
until it be thus recorded and recited this idea will not be realized.
And if poetry does not rise to this level, its influence is ineffectual,
for it will die before its author. So, being impotent for the im-

1 Qutbu’d-Din Muhammad and Sayfu’d-Dln Stiri, both killed by Bahr&mshah the
Ghaznawi towards the middle of the sixth century of the Flight. From his devastation
of Ghazna (550/1155-6) their brother ‘Ala’u’d-Din Husayn the Ghtlri received the title
of fahdn-sils (“the World-consumer ”). See Note XV at the end.


*


• ♦


0


32 Second Discourse. — The Poet’s Training

•

mortalizing of its own name, how can it confer immortality, on
the name of another ? .

But to this rank a poet cannot* attain unless in the prime of
his life and the season of^his yopth he commits to memory
20,000 couplets of the poetry of the Ancients, keeps in view [as
models] 10,000 ^erses of the works of the Moderns, and "con-
tinually reads and remembers the diwdns of the masters of his
art, observing how they have acquitted themselves in the strait
passes and delicate places of song, in order that thus the different
styles atici varieties of verse may become ingrain’ed yi his nature,
and the defects 1 and beauties of poetry may be inscribed on the
tablet of his ^understanding. In this way hi# style wITl improve
' and his genius will develop. • Then, when his genius has thus
been firmly established in the power of poetical expression, and
his verse has become even in quality, let him address himself
seriously to tihe poetic art^ study the science of Prosody, and
familiarize himself with the works of Master Abu’l-Hasan
Bahraini of Sarakhs, such as the “Goal of Prosodists” ( Ghdyatu'l
‘A rudiyyin ) 1 and the “Treasure of Rhyme A (Kansu’ l- Qdfiyd).
Then let him make a critical £tudy of poetic ideas and phrase-
ology, plagiaries, biographies, and all the sciences of this class,
with such a Master as knows these matters, so that he in turn
may merit the title of Master, and his name may appear on the
page of Time like the names of those other Masters whom we
have mentioned, that he may thus be able to discharge his debt
to his patron and lord for what he obtains from him by immor-
talizing his name.

Now it behbves the King to patronize such a poet, so that he
may enlist in his service and celebrate his praise. But if he fall
below this Jevel, no money should be wasted on him and no heed
paid to his poetry, especially if he be old ; for I have investigated
this matter, and in the whole world have found nothing worse
than an old poet, nor any money more ill spent than what is
given to such. For one so ignoble as not to have discovered in
fifty years that what he writes is bad, when will he discover it ?
But if he be young and has the right talent, even though his
verse be not good, there is some hope that it may improve, (r»)
and according to the Code of Nobility it is proper to patronize
him, a duty to take care of him, and an obligation to look after
him.

Now in the service of kings naught is better than improvisa-
tion, for thereby the king’s mood is cheered, his receptions are
made brilliant, and the poet himself attains his object. Such
favours as Rfidag/ obtained from the House of Sdmdn by his im-
provisations and readiness in verse, none other hath experienced.

1 Or perhaps ‘ArAdayn, “ the two Prosodies,” viz. Arabic and Persian. See the
Editor’s note on p. t • v


I •


The Charms of BAdghis and Hei^It


33


Anecdote XIII.

They relate thus, that Nasr ibn Ahmad, who was the most
brilliant jewel of the Sdmanicf galaxy* whereof the fortunes reached
thei£ zenith during the days of his rule, was^most plenteously
equipped with every means of enjoyment and material of
splendour — well-filled treasuries, a far-flung army and loyal
servants. In winter he used to reside at his capital,. Bukhara,
while in summer he used to go to Samarqand or som<? other of
the cities of ‘Khurdsdn. Now one year it was "Ilia turn of Herdt.
He spent# the spriyg season at Bddghls, when? are the most
charming pasture-ground# of Khurdsdn and ‘Iraq, for there are
nearly a thousand water-courses abounding in water and pasture,
any one of which would suffice for an army.

When the Beasts had well enjoyed their spring .feed, and had
regained their strength and condition, and were fit for warfare or
to take the field, Nasr ibn Ahmad turned his face towards Herat,
but halted outside* the city at Margh-iW3apId and there pitched „
his camp. It was the season offspring; cool breezes from the
north were stirring, and the fruit was ripening in 'the districts of
Mdlin and Karukh 1 — such fruit as can be obtained in but few
places, and nowhere so cheaply. There the army rested. The
climate was charming, the breeze cool, food plentiful, fruit
abundant, and the air filled with fragrant scents, so th^t the
soldiers enjoyed their life to the full during the spring and summer.

When Mihrgdn 2 arrived, and the juice of the grape came into
season, and the basil 3 , rocket 4 * and fever-few 6 7 were in bloom, they
did full justice to the delights of youth, and took tribute of their
juvenile prime. Mihrgdn was protracted, ‘for the cold dyd not wax
severe, and the grapes ripened with exceptional sweetness. For
in the district of Herdt one hundred and twenty different varieties
of the grape occur, each sweeter and more delicious than ^he
other; and amongst them are in particular two kinds which are
not to be found in any other region of the inhabited world,
(yv) one called Parniyan 6 and the other KalanjarP , thin-skinned,

1 See Barbier de Meynard’s Diet. de la Perse , pp. 487, 511-512, according to
which the former village is distant from Herat two parasangs, the latter ten.

8 The festival of the autumnal equinox, which fell in the old Persian month of
Mihr.

8 Shdkisfaram (Arabic Rayhdri) — Ocytnum basilicum. See Schlimmer’s Termino-
logic, p. 404; Achundow, pp, 226, 381.

* t/amdhim, said to be equivalent to the Persian Dnstnn-a/nh.

0 Uqhtrwdn (Persian Babi'ina-i- Gww-chcishm), Matricaria or Pyretlirum. See
Schlimmer, p. 364.

8 The Tihr&n iithograph has Tarniydn , of which the usual meaning appears to be
a sieve or basket made of osiers. See Horn’s Asad/, p. 99, 1 . 1 ; Salemann’s Shams
i Fachrti Lexicon, p. 9 6, 1 . 13 and note ad calc.

7 This word, in the form Kalanjar , is given in the £urhdn-i-Qdti‘. The descrip-
tion seems to be based on this passage.


34 „ Second Discourse.— On Poets

small-stoned, and luscious, so that you would say they contained
no earthly elements. A cluster of Kalanjari grapes sometimes
attains a weight of five maunds, and each individual grape five
dirhams’ weight, they are black as pitch and sweet as sugar, and
one can eat many by reason of the lusciousness that is in them.
And besides thea - * there were all sorts of other delicious fruits.

So the Amir Nasr ibn Ahmad saw Mihrgdn and its fruits,
and was mightily pleased therewith. Then the narcissus began
to bloorrq and the raisins were plucked and stoned 1 in Maliti,
and hung up orf dines, and packed in store-rooms ; ajid the Amir
with his army iftoved into the two groups of hamlets called Ghfira
and Danvaz. - 1 here he saw mansions of which each one was like
highest paradise, having before it a garden or pleasure ground
with a northern aspect. There they wintered, while the Mandarin
oranges began to arrive from Sfst&n and the sweet oranges from
Mdzandardn p and so they passed the winter in the most agree-
able manner.

When [the second] spring came, the Amir sent the horses to
Bddghis and moved his Tamp to Mdlin [to a" spot] between two
streams. And when summer came and the fruits again ripened,
Amir Nasr ibn'Ahmad said, “Where shall we go for the summer ?
For there is no pleasanter place of residence than this. Let us
wait till Mihrgdn.” And when Mihrgdn came, he said, “ Let us
enjoy Mihrgdn at Iierdt and then go”; and so from season to
season he continued to procrastinate, until four years had passed
in this way. For it was then the heyday of the Sarndnian pro-
sperity, and the land was flourishing, the kingdom uhmenaced by
foes, the^army loyal, fortune favourable, and heaven' auspicious ;
yet withal the Amir’s attendants grew weary, and desire for home
arose within them, while' they beheld the king quiescent, the air
of Herdt in his head and the love of Herdt in his heart; and in
the course of conversation he would compare, nay, prefer Herdt
to the Garden of Eden, and would exalt its charms above those
of a Chinese templet

So they perceived that he intended to remain there for that
summer also. Then the captains of the army and nobles of the
kingdom went to Master Abfi ‘Abdi’llah Rudagi*, than whom
there was none more honoured of the king’s intimates, and none
whose words found so ready an acceptance. And they said to
him, “We will present thee with five thousand dfndrs if thou wilt
contrive some artifice whereby the king may be induced to depart

°J wwaqqa the editor refers to the article Zalnb in the
J vnfath t-mu mmin of Muhammad Mit’min al-Husayni. For an account of this
work, which was completed in A.D. 1669, see'Fonahn’s Zur Quetlenkunde def
Jrerstscaen Medium, pp, 89-91.

! 9 * “f’hinese Spring.” See n. i on p. 21 supra.

a r monograph and his article in the Encyclopaedia BHtannica\

p. 03 of the J.R.A.S. for January, 1899 ; and Note XIV at the end, second paragraph.


♦


, f*.

Rudagi and the Amir Nasr 35

hence, for our hearts are craving for our wives and children, and
our souls (vt) are like to leave us for longing after Bukhard.”
Rudagi agreed ; and, since^he had felt the Amir’s pulse and
understood his temperament, he perceived that prose would not
affect him, and so had recourse to verse. He therefore composed
a qasida ; and, when the Amir had taken his rooming cup, came
in and sat down in his place ; and, when the musicians ceased,
he took up the harp, and, playing the “ Lover’s air,’’ began this
elegy 1 : — *

jy* d}i ‘ ij** O?** L&'J-

“ The J ti-Ji-M id^ydn 2 we call to mind . ,

We long for those dear friends long left behind.

Then he strikes a lower key, and sings : —

A-a I

‘ AjI 0 IjLo 12&A.

* AjT y j&«

‘ LT** ajI i «L>

AjI

“ The sands of Oxus, toilsome though they be ,

Beneath my feet were soft as silk to vie.

Gladytt the friends' return , the Oxus deep ■»

Up to our girths in laughing waves shall leap. %

Long live Bukhdrd J Be thou oj,good cheer!
foyous towards thee hasteth our Amir ! *

The Moods the Prince , Bukhdrd is the sky;

O Sky, the Moon shall light thee by and by /

Bukhdrd is the mead , the Cypress he; %

Receive at last \ O Mead . , thy Cypress-tree !"

When Riidagi reached this verse, the Amir was so much affected
that he descended from his throne, all unbooted bestrode the
horse which was on sentry-duty 3 , and set off for Bukhdrd so
precipitately that they carried his leggings and riding-boots

1 This poem is very well known, being cited in almost all notices of Rildagl’s life
(eg. by Dawlatshali), in Forbes’ Persian Grammar, pp. £•, 161-163, an< l in
Blochmann’s Prosody of the Persians, pp. 2-3. See Note XVI at the end.

3 The original name of this stream and the farms on its banks was, according to
Narshakhi’s History] of Bukhdrd, Jd-yi-Mawdliydn, “the Clients’ Stream.” See
Note XVI at the end of this volume.

3 Kit ing-i- naivbati. To provide against any sudden emergency a horse, ready
saddled and bridled, was kept always at the gate of the king’s palace, and it is this
“sentry-horse” to which reference is here made. See my Lit. Hist, of Persia, vol. i,
p. 317, and n. r ad calc.

3-2


o\j

‘ C— JsLLi jl Ct f)** * '■r’l

1 iSJ J

1 g ll— ..a ' IjLakO ^ -Cl— -jS l — 0 j * a
* !j Ui — j j CU*yjj.w js-a


• %


Second Discourse— On Poets


3 6

after him for two parasangs, as far as Bunina 1 , and only then
did he put them on ; nor did he draw rein anywhere till he
reached Bukhara, and Rudagi' received from the army the double
of that five thousand dlndrs. r

At Samarqand, in the year A.II. 504 (=A.D. iiio-iiii), I
heard from the Dihqdn Abu Rijd Ahmad ibn ‘Abdu’s-Samad
al-‘Ahidf as follows : “My grandfather Abu Rija related that on
this occasion when Riidagf reached Samarqand, he had four
hundred £amels laden with his baggage.” And indeed that
illustrious man fym worthy of this splendid equipment, for no
one has yet produced a successful imitation of that elegy, nor
found means -to’ surmount triumphantly the* difficulties [which
the subject presents]. Thus the Poet-laureate Mu'izzl was one
of the sweetest singers and most graceful wits in Persia, for his
poetry reaches the highest level in beauty and freshness, and
excels in fluency and charm,' Zaynu’l-Mulk Abii Sa‘d [ibn] Hindii
ibn Muhammad ibn Hindu of Isfahan 2 requested him to compose
an imitation of this qasida. Mu'izzf declared his inability to do so,
but, being pressed, produced a few verses of which this is one : —

‘ Ojt j' o-ij ‘ ^•oA “hi' J' jr-'J ( n )

(ft) “Now advanceth Rustam from Mdzandardtt ,

Now advanceth Zayn-i-Mulk from Isfahdn .”

All wise men will perceive how great is the difference between
this poetry and that ; for who can sing with such sweetness as
does Rudagi when he' 1 says : —

t cukfjf A.J l Aj 1 J 1

*>“ Surely are renown and praise a lasting gain.,

Ellen though the royal coffers loss sustain /”

For in this couplet are seven admirable touches of art ; first, the
verse is apposite ; secondly, antithetical ; thirdly, it has a refrain ;
fourthly, it embodies an enunciation of equivalence; fifthly, it
' has sweetness ; sixthly, style ; seventhly, energy®. Every master
of the craft who has deeply considered the poetic art will admit,
after a little reflection, that I am right.

1 L. has ajjjj U, and in a marginal note explains buruna as meaning turban or
handkerchief; but A. has djjjj dj , and I suspect that it is really a place-name.
Cf. Sachau’s remarks on the derivation of al-Birtini’s name at p, 7 of his translation of
the Chronology of Ancient Nations.

2 See Houtsma’s ed. of al-Bundari’s History of the Saljitqs , pp. 93, lot, 105 ; and
Ibnu’l-Athir under the year 506/012-13, in which Zaynu’l-Mulk was put to death by
his master Sultan Muhammad ibn Malikshih the Saljiiq.

3 Mirza Muhammad points out in his note on this passage (p. iy\) that the first
three artifices are denoted by adjectives and the last four by substantives, and that the
first and second (mutabiq and mutadddd) are identical. Finally he justly observes
that “style” or “elegance” ( fafdhat ) is not a rhetorical artifice but an indispensable
attribute of all good writing, whether prose or verse.


4


SultAn Mahmtjd and AyAz 37


Anecdote XIV.

The love borne by Sultdp ’ Tr ' 1 “ r ihmiid to Aydz

the Turk is well-known and ■ that Aydz was

not remarkably handsome, but was of sweet expression and olive
complexion, symmetrically formed, graceful in his movements,
sensible and deliberate in action, and mightily endowed with all
the arts of pleasing, in which respect, indeed, he had fdjv rivals in
his time, h^ow all these are qualities which e^Jte love and give
permanence to friendship. *

Now Staltdn Yaminu' d-Dawla Mahmud was a pious and God-
fearing man, and he wrestled much with his Jove for Ayaz.so that
he should not diverge by so much as a single step from the Path
of the Law and the Way of Honour. One night, however, at a
carousal, when the wine had begun tf> affect him asid love to stir
within him, he looked at the curls of Aydz, and saw, as it were,
ambergris rolling over the face of the moon, hyacinths twisted
about the visage of the sun, ringlet u]?on ringlet like a coat of
mail ; link upon link like a chafh ; in every ringlet a thousand
hearts and under every lock a hundred thousand souls. There-
upon love plucked the reins of self-restraint from the hands of
his endurance, and lover-like he drew him to himself. But the
watchman of “ Hath not God forbidden you to transgress against
Him l f” thrust forth his head from the collar of the Law, ’Stood
before SultAn [Mahmiid] Yaminu' d-Dawla, t»nd said, “O Mahmiid,
mingle not sin with love, nor mix the false with the true, for such
a slip will raise TTie Realm of Love in revolt against thee, and
like (r») thy first father thou wilt fall from Love’s Paradise, and
remain afflicted in the world of Sin.” ’The ear -of his fortunate
nature being quick to hear, he hearkened to this announcement,
and the tongue of his faith cried from his innermost soul, “ We
believe and we affirm!' But he feared lest the army of his self-
control might be unable to withstand the hosts of Aydz’s locks, so,
drawing a knife, he placed it in the hands of Aydz, bidding him *
take it and cut off his curls. Aydz took the knife from his hands
with an obeisance, and, having enquired where he should sunder
them, was bidden to cut them in the middle. He therefore
doubled back his locks to get the measurement, executed the
king’s command, and laid the two tresses before Mahmiid.

It is said that this ready obedience became a fresh cause of love;
and Mahmiid called for gold and jewels and gave to Aydz beyond
his usual wont and custom, after which he fell into a drunken
sleep.

1 Here and in the next sentence I have preferred the alternative reading of the
MSS. to the printed text, which has “ I'Ve believe and ive affirm ” in this place, and
omits these and the preceding eleven words below.


• %


38


Second Discourse. — On Poets


jT


When the morning breeze blew upon him, and he arose from
sleep to ascend the Royal Throne, he remembered what he had
done. He summoned Ayaz and saw the clipped tresses. The
army of remorse invaded his heartf and the peevish headache
born of wine vanquished his brain. He kept rising up and sitting
down [aimlessly], and none of the courtiers or men of rank dared
to address to him any enquiry as to the cause, until at length
H&jib ‘AH [ibn] Qarfb, who was his Chief Chamberlain, turned
to ‘UnsurAmd s^id, " Go in before the King and shew thyself to
him, and seek way whereby he may be restored to good
temper.” So ‘Unsurf fulfilled the Chamberlain’s command, came
in and did obeisance. Sul tin Yaminu’/i-Da\frla raised his head
and said, “ 0 ‘Unsurf; I was just thinking of you. You see what
has happened : say something appropriate for us on this subject.”
‘Unsuri did obeisance and extemporized as follow?:—

‘ Cwl jt odj j~j

‘ 1 ft >im

r ‘Ctwl upt _j jsUo 3 w Jjda

W h w**i) I i * V. * .i ‘. ' b ■ 1 1 d Ij t

“ Why deem it shame a fair one's curls to shear,

<• Why rise in wrath or sit in sorrow here f

Rather rejgicc, make merry, call for wine j
When clipped the Cypress doth most trim appear.”

r

Mahmud was highly pleased witli this quatrain, and bade
them bring precious stores wherewith he twice filled the poet’s
mouth. Then he summoned the minstrels before him, and all that
day until nightfall drank wine to [the accompaniment of] those
two„verses, whereby his melancholy was dissipated and he became
mighty good-tempered.

Now you must know that improvisation is the chief pillar of
the Poetic Art ; and it is incumbent on the poet to train his
talents to such a point as (n) to be able to improvise on any
subject, for thus can money be extracted from the treasury, and
thus can the statement of any matter be adapted to the king’s
mood. All this is necessary to please the heart of one’s master
and the humour of one’s patron ; and whatever poets have earned
in the way of great rewards has been earned by improvisations
adapted to the occasion.


f *•


FarruiciiI’s Success


39


4


<r*


Anecdote XV.

Farrukhf was a native of Sfstfin, and was the son of J i'll ugh,
the slave of Amir Khala?-i-Banu\ He possessed excellent
talents, composed pleasing verses, and was a dexterous performer
on the harp ; and he was retained in the service of one of the
dihqdns of Sfstan, who gave him a yearly allowance of two
hundred measures of corn, each containing five mausds, and a
hundred dirhams in silver coinage of Nith, wh ich amply sufficed
for his needs. But he sought in marriage a wofiian of Khalaf’s
clientage, "whereby ^his expenses were increased'and multiplied
in all directions 1 2 3 , so that Farrukhf remained without sufficient
provision, nor was there in Sfstan anyone else save his 8 nobles.
Fie therefore appealed to the dihqdn saying, “ My expenses have
been increased ; how would it be if the dihqdn , haying regard to
his generosity, should make my allowance of corn three hundred
measures, and make my salary one hundred and fifty dirhams , so
that my means mfty perhaps be equal tc* my expenditure ? ” The
dihqdn wrote on the back of the appeal, “ So much shall not be
refused you, but there is no possibility of any further increase.”

Farrukhf, on hearing this, was in despair, and made enquiries
of such as arrived and passed by to hear of some patron in some
region or part of the world who might look upon him with favour,
so that he might chance on a success ; until at length thpy in-
formed him that the Amfr Abu’l-Muzaffiy-i-Chaghdnf in Cha-
ghfiniydn 4 * was a munificent patron of this class, conferring on
them splendid presents a»d rewards, and was at Shat period un-
rivalled in this respect amongst the kings of the age a«d nobles
of the time. So Farrukhf set out thitHfer, having composed the
qasida beginning : —

“ With caravan for Hilla bound from Sistdn did I start ,

With fabrics spun within my brain and woven by my heart."

In truth it is a fine rhapsody in which he has admirably described
the Poetic Art, while as a panegyric it is incomparable.

So Farrukhf, having furnished himself with what was neces-
sary for the journey, set out for Chaghaniydn. And when he

1 I.e. the Amir AM Ahmad Khalaf ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalaf ibn

I.ayth a§-^affAri, King of Sistdn, whose mother, called Banit (“the Lady was the
daughter of ‘Amr ibn Layth. He died in captivity in 399/1008-9.

3 See the Farhang-i-Atijuman-Ari-yi-NAfrl, s.v. , where 3 ujy

is said to mean 3 jji-

3 l.e. Khalaf’s."

4 Or, in its Arabicized form, SagMnidn, a place in Transoxiana, near Tirmidh and

Qubadliiyan. See de Goeje’s Bibl. Geogr. Arab., where it is mentioned repeatedly.


• *


4 o


Second Discourse. — On Poets


arrived at the Court of Chaghdniydn, it was the season of Spring
and the Amir was at the branding-ground. Abu’l-Muzaffar, as I
have heard, had 18,000 breeding mares 1 , each one of which was
followed by its colt. And eyery ye^r the Amir used to go out
to brand (rv) the colts, and [at this moment he happened to be at
the place where Mie branding was done ; while 2 ] ‘Amid A's'ad,
who was his steward, was at the court preparing provisions to be
conveyed to the Amir. To him Farrukhi went, and recited a
qasida , an£ submitted to him the poem he had composed for the
Amir. P

Now ‘Amfd*As‘ad was a man of parts and a patrori of poets,
and in Farrukhi’s verse he recognized poetry at once fresh, sweet,
pleasing and masterly, while seeing the man himself to be an ill-
proportioned Sagzi, clothed in a torn jubba worn anyhow s , with
a huge turban on his head after the manner of the Sagzis, with
the most unpteasing feet and shoes ; and this poetry, withal, in
. the seventh heaven. He could not believe that it had been com-
posed by this Sagzi, and, to prove him, said, “ Tbe Amir is at the
branding-ground, whithefl go to wait upon him : and thither I
will take thee also, for it is a mighty pleasant spot —

“ World within world of verdure wilt thou see ” —

full of, tents and lamps like stars, and from each tent come the
strains of the lute, anpl friends sif by.clker. drinking wine and
making merry, while before the Amir - pavilion a great fire is
kindled, in size like unto several mountains, whereat they brand
the colts. rAnd the Amir, with the goblet in one hand and the
lassoo in tl^e other, d rinks? 1 wine and gives away horses. Compose,
now, a qasida , suitable to the occasion, describing the branding-
ground, so that I may take thee before the Amir.”

That night Farrukhi went and composed a very fine qasida,
which next morning he brought before ‘Amid As'ad. This is the
„ qasida 4 : —

‘j l£5j '

1 ij \ j** jjj I C-Jub

1 The variant is explained in the margin of L. its meaning ejJ j sJJs

whicit I originally translated “roadster.” The verb from which L 5 *J

seems to be derived, appears to be a variant of

2 These words are omitted in the printed edition.

a Pish u fas, “hind before.”

4 See pp. m-nv of the lithographed edition of Farrukhi’s works published at
Tihran for Mirzd Mahdf Khdn Baddy i'-nigdr , poetically surnamed Mukhlis, in
A.H. 1301, Of the 52 bayts there given, only 22 are cited in the Chahdr Maqdla,
The poem is also given by Dawlatshih (pp, 00— oy of my edition). Only the more
important variants are given here.


4i


Farrukhx’s Success


‘ julj aXJLo _jaI t_jlj d^r

u£f> ji dif

‘it ij3 t jtyJ (_£$J 1 w4l C-.SJ
( j Ly-j L<jA* ^JI'O 111 il-J l^e®"

‘ ^JLjI jjj \ jjlj si^w liLi^a iW

. *■ *

‘jU£> ji ijli «>U- oU**3 » *

^ •

• ' '% <2 <»JL/j^ jjJl ijli L&*j i^.§J§J yji-o^*)

‘jl>Wj^ Jjj) ijli f ■ '

• * ^«Lj jj^ ^^1 yi ^

‘jU*. jl ij£s> _jjj yj v»ij-« C^»0 3 Oi^ lAAa»,<j

• ‘ O.i-o-'' 5 34 5 0>«^ &

‘jW Jt 1 ' J d^ '^i)bj~ c V 1 ' *

f da^J t £\ yZ x X & m rt^*> ^ ^ ) I jCj wlwlj

* J Ll j^-W illiftli jl jLCj y . fc Lj

1 )jy* J*jm- yU»« d ^ ^ ^ I jl-Jj—v— w a *^-^li.

<jl(jjj *OUj

J^aw jbX«>l _j>yAW 6j-*w j|w^>) dJ-j-w

‘ j*v3 1 jUsu>. d- o-it**" jwX3 1 d >++» * *

( CU—..6 Cw^) U ^giLwlp dXA±» wAwl^d^*.

* jLj jl J»j> j! ^jJjU Cwl £j»w ^jk

* Cw) ^ li^^U ^»J l^dJ^W

‘ wjUc j jO ^

'jU^jyl^A yUdUi. j Olj>la-<>

1 The printed text has for >_^w .

2 A gloss in the lithographed Tihran edition explains this word as meaning
“necklace” (jJJ d>J)y which meaning is also given in the Ghiy&thu'l-Lughat.

8 Variant ...C-«wi |^U«ka~^.

4 The printed text has jLoo- d**** 1 dlt“

6 The printed text has U for jj and om. j after


42


Second Discourse.— On Poets


JSJ-s-t j> >*.

£b j'

*jjj ^Igi 0>^ yJ

‘ jV jj O^- >jj fOl**- O^f^J *

* w^sLj *y~*j t Oif- v^b

l J^ ti'i Jf'j' “E— <Eb jU Ci>^ >* , ,„*, :

* 0 ^ '* ”' > a **"‘

' 1 Jlcu j jjl tiLcu> »jui 0 z £>b>>J (vt)

‘ jUai jUaJ 4 i>% 0 ^lj 4.

‘jjJ’ Uji «jb >_J j-e— £>i

1 w>^ 8a ^ oW^

^mw oLwj>Lj ^ j,a^^w j lj^,y

L-^^b O ^^gy Ub.*JI]

* ^-Wj^ <£-V«jO j} O^'y'

r ( wX^Ci CUa 36 > x ».fr£a j»>3 1 lji=>^.A>

i,' ‘ 8 >b <4 >aa J l ■b - ^ 3 £b >« cwJ ■*»->*

i ■ „ ^ b.

i jVm 3 U bob^b _j V&IXJ bj b^b^tLit

1 The Majma‘u'I-Fnfahd, as pointed out by the Editor (p. ivt), arbitrarily

substitutes jJkUa for , in order to support the theory that the poem was com-

posed in honour of No. 6 not No. 7 of the House of Chaghaniyan. See Note XVIII
at the end.

2 The printed text has (JjlijL ij explained as “slave-boys” ((JjIVao ^»yLc).

The TihrAn ed, has , “ eyes.”

3 The printed text has y**& jy-e ^j\^L } .

4 The Hi’ ,;i i‘- ’■ '■.i’-ih .■■- “ /■':</; 1 ■’■ Daw/at.”

6 Both ;.. :-ri:ii <: s . '. :'■« ': ': ■ ,r.r :h. , ! editions have: —

j J % (jloUv

8 This verse only occurs in the TihrAn lithographed edition (L.).

7 The lithographed edition has b •

8 A., B. and L. have


r


r t


#


FarrukhI’s Success <> 43

j “ Since the meadow hides its face in satin shot with greens and blues,

And the mountains wrap their brows in silken veils of seven hues ,

Earth is teeming like the musk-pod with aromas rich and rare,

Foliage bright as parrot's plumage doth the graceful willow wear,
Yestere'en the midnight breezes brought tht tidings of the spring:

Welcome , 0 ye northern gales, for this glad promise which ye bring!

'■ Up its sleeve the wind , meseemetlt, pounded musk hath Stored away,

While the garden fills its lap with shining dolls, as though for play.
r On the branches of syringa necklaces of pearls we see,

Ruby ear-rings of Badaklish&n sparkle on the Judas-tree. „

", Since the branches of the rose-bush carmine cups and bearers bor&
Human-like Jkue-fingered hands reach downwards fr om iii e sycamore.

'/ Gardens all chameleon-coated \ branches with chameleon idhorls,

P early -lusBous pools qgottnd us, clouds above us raining pearls !

/ On the gleaming plain this cOUt of many colours doth, appear
Like a robe of honour granted in the court of our gpnlr. '

1 For our Prince's Camp of Branding siirreth in these joyful days
So that all this %ge of ours in joyful wonder stands agaze.

Green within the green you see, like skies iSithin the firmament ;

Like a fort within a fortress spreads the army tent on tent.

" Every tent contains a lover resting in his sweetheart's arms,

Every pate 1 ~ r r ' v J - - ■ r —'-nd a favourite's charms.

'■Harps are >, ■ ■ minstrels sing their lays divine,

Tents resauna wun cunn uj glasses us'/he pages pour the wine.

' Kisses, claspings from the lovers j coy reproaches from thl fair ;

Wine-born slumbers for the sleepers , while the minstrels wake the air.

' " Branding-fires, like suns ablaze , are kindled at the spacious gate
Leading to the state-pavilion of our Prince so fortunate.

' i Leap the flames like gleaming standards draped with vellow-hued brocade,
Hotter than a young man's temper, yellower than gold assayed. >

/ ' Branding tools like coral branches ruby -tinted glo^ amain
In the fire, as in the ripe pomegranate glows the crimson grain.

Rank on rank ofacjjpe boys, whose watchful eyes no slumber know;

Steeds which still await the branding, rank on rank and row on row.

>j On his horse, the river-forder, roams our genial Prince afar, *

Ready to his hand the lasso o, like a young Isfifndiydr. ,

! } Like the locks of pretty children see it how it curls and bends,

Yet be sure its -v— .«•-*- /i.-.. • i H t of friends.

Bu'l-Muzajfar • • ■ • • ■ noble band . >

King and conq ■ • . • ■■ . c the land. *

1 ' Serpent-coiled •• . ■ . ■ . • • whirling noose doth take,

Like unto the t • • • e snake.

Whosoever hath been captured by that noose and circling line.

On the face and flank and shoulder ever bears the Royal Sign,
if, But, though on one side he brands , he giveth also rich rewards ,

Leads his poets with a bridle, binds his guests as though with cords.”

When ‘Amid As‘ad heard this rhapsody, he was overwhelmed
with amazement, for never had the like of it reached his ears.
He put aside all his business, mounted Farrukhi on a horse, and
set out for the Amir, whose presence he entered about sun-down,
saying, “ 0 Sire, I bring thee a poet the like of whom no one
hath seen since Daqiqi’s face was veiled in the tomb.” Then he
related what had passed.

Then the Amir accorded Farrukhi an audience, and when he
came in he did reverence, and the Amir gave him his hand and


• ^


*


%

44 • Second Discourse.— -On Poets

assigned him an honourable place, enquiring after his health,
treating him with kindness, and inspiring him with hopes of
favours to come. When the wine had gone round several times 1 ,
Farrukhi arose, and, in a sweet asd plaintive voice, recited his
elegy beginning^: — ^

‘ j ~ o-p— 1 b ‘ t_* k- Ot 3J l£> b

“ With caravan for JJilla bound from Sistdn did I start ,

\¥ith fabmcs spun within my brain and woven by heart."

When he had jinished, the Amir, who appreciated poejfry and was
himself something of a poet, express|d hisfestonishment at this
rhapsody. ‘Amid J^'ad said, “ O Sire, wait till you see something
still better! ” Farrukhi was silent and held his peace until the wine
had produced its full effect on the Amir, then he arose and recited
this rhapsody (s ■) on the branding-ground. TheAmir was amazed,
and in his admiration turned to Farrukhi, saying, “ They have
brought in a thousand colts, all with white foreheads, fetlocks and
feet, bred in Khatldn 2 . * The way is [open] to thee ! Thou art a
cunning rascal, a Sagzi ; catch as many as thou art able, that
they may be thine.” Farrukhi, on whom the wine had produced
its full effect, came out, straightway took his turban from his
head, hurled himself into the midst of the herd, and chased, a
drove of them before him across the plain ; but, though he caused
them to gallop right and left in every direction, he could not
catch a single one . r At length a ruined rest-house situated on
the edge of the camping-ground came into vjgw, and thither the
colts fled. Farrukhi; being utterly tfred out, placed his turban
under his head in the pprch of the rest-house, and at once went
to sleep, by reason of his extreme weariness and the effects of
the wine. When they counted the colts, they were forty-two in
number. They went and told the Amir, who, greatly surprised,
laCghed heartily and said, “ He is a lucky fellow, and will come
to great things. Look after him and the colts as well, and when
he awakes, waken me too.” So they obeyed the King’s orders.

Next day, at sunrise, Farrukhi arose. The Amir had already
risen, and, when he had performed his prayers, he gave Farrukhi
an audience, treated him with great consideration, and handed
over the colts to his attendants. Fie also ordered Farrukhi to be
given a horse and equipments suitable to a man of rank, as well
as two tents, three mules, five slaves, wearing apparel and carpets.
So Farrukhi prospered in his service, and enjoyed tin- gioaLs!
circumstance. Then he waited upon Sultdn Y.vn.nu'd- i )aw ! a
** * *

1 I prefer the reading to , and Mlrzi Muhammad concurs.

E The Editor shews in a note (pp. ill -ft a, of the text) that Khatlin is the Persian
and Khuttai the Arabic name of a place in Transoxiana celebrated for its fine horses,
called Khatlt.


«


Early Struggles of Mu'izzf " 45

Mahmud, who, seeing him thus magnificently equipped, regarded
him with the same regard, and his affairs reached such a pitch
of prosperity that twenty servants girt with silver girdles rode
behind him.

• '

Anecdote XVI.

In'the year A.H. 510 (a.d. 11 16-1117) the iCing of Islam,
Sanjar the son of Malikshah the Saljuq (may God prolong his
existence and continue his exaltation to the heights !), ^chanced
to be encamped at the spring season within the marchea»of Tiis,
in the plain of* T uruq J , where he remained for tv^^jonths. There
I, in hopes (if obtaining some favour, joined his Count from Herat,
having then nothing *in thf way of equipment (t') or provision.
I composed a qasida and went to Mu'izzl Poet-laureate, to
seek an opening through him. Having looked at my poem, he
tested me in several ways, and I satisfied .his expectations. He
then behaved in the most generous manner, and deemed it his
duty to act in the way befitting so great a man.

One day I expressed in his presence a hope that fortune
would be more favourable to me* and complained of my luck.
He encouraged me, saying, “Thou hast laboured Iwird to acquire
this science, and hast fully mastered it : surely this will have its
effect. My own case was precisely similar ; and good poetry has
never yet been wasted. Thou hast a goodly share in this art:
thy verse is even and melodious, and is still improving. Wait
and see the advantages which thou wilt reap from this science.
For though Fortune should at first be grudging, matters will
eventually turn ou**as thou wishest. *

“ My father Burhani', the*Poet-laureate (may God be merciful to
him !) passed away from this transitory tcnthat eternal world in the
town of Qazwin in the early part of the reign of Malilishah, en-
trusting me to the King in this verse, since then become famous 2 : —

j Ijjt 1 oUji. Jw«t JojyA j -A+i)

“ I am flitting ; but I leave a son behind me,

And commend him to my God and to my King A

1 This place is not mentioned in the geographies, but the Editor (p. a a of the
notes) believes it to be identical with the modern Turuq, a large village distant two
parasangs from Mashhad on the road to Tihran.

2 This verse, to which are added several others, is commonly ascribed to the
Nizdmu’l-Mulk, e.g. by Dawlatslidh (p. it of my edition). Apart from the im-
probability that one who lay dying of a mortal wound would be in the mood to
compose verses, we learn from this anecdote that the Nizdmu’l-Mulk “ had no opinion
of poets because he had no skill in their art." The verse which gives his age as 94 at
the time of his death, when he was in reality some fifteen or twenty years younger
(born 408/1017, assassinated 485/1091), is alone enough to discredit the legend, while
the authority of the Chahdr Maqdla , of which the author derived his information
directly from Mu‘izzi, the son of Burhani, is far superior to any other source of the
story. Compare my Lit, Hist, of Persia, vol. ii, pp. 188-193, and the Persian notes,
pp. WK — VIV


t


46 * Second Discourse.— On Poets

*

“So my father’s salary and allowances 1 * were transferred to me,
and I became Malikshdh’s court-poet, and spent a year in the
King’s service; yet during this time I was unable to see him
save once from a distance, nor did I get one dindr of my salary
or one maund of my allowances, \Wiile my expenditure was in-
creased. I became involved in debt, and my brain was perplexed
by my affairs. For that great Minister the Nizamu’l-Mulk (may
God be merciful to him!), had no opinion of poetry, because he
had no rekill in it ; nor did he pay any attention to any one
except feiigio wjg aders and mystics. #

“ One dayTmt was the eve of the day on wliich [the new
moon of] Rarfiadan was due [to appear], and I had net a farthing
for all the expensc^sincidental to thaKmonth and the feast which
follows it — I went mus sad at heart to the Amir ‘AH ibn Fard-
marz 3 ‘Ald’u’d-Dawla, a man of royal parentage, a lover of poetry,
and the intonate companion of the King, with whom he was
connected by marriage and enjoyed the highest honour, and
before whom he could speak boldly, for he held high rank under
that administration. And he had already been my patron.
I said, ‘ May my lord’s life be long ! Not all that the father
could do (*r) ban the son do, nor does that which accrued to the
father accrue to the son. My father was a bold and energetic
man, and was sustained by his art, and the martyred King Alp
Arsldn, the lord of the world, entertained the highest opinion of
him- But what he could do that can I not, for modesty forbids
me, and my retiring^disposition supports it. I have served [this
prince] for a year, and have contracted debts to the extent of a
thousand dhfdrs , and have not received a MTfhing. Crave per-
mission, •'then, for thy servant to go to Nfshdpur, and discharge
his debts? and live on that which is left over, and pray for this
victorious Dynasty.’

“ ‘ Thou speakest truly,’ replied Amir ‘All : ‘ We have all
been at fault, but this shall be so no longer. The King, at the
time of Evening Prayer, will come out to look for the new moon.
Thou must be present there, and we will see what chance Fortune
will offer.’ Thereupon he at once ordered me to receive a hundred
dindrs to defray my Ramaddn expenses, and a purse 3 containing

1 According to the Editor’s note (p. ns of the text) jdmagl is equivalent to the

modem ma-mdjib or mustamirri, and means wages in cash, while ijrd (the modern
jird) means allowances, especially in kind.

3 ‘All ibn Faramarz the Kdkwayhid is intended. See S. Lane- Poole’s Muhammadan
Dynasties, p. 145, and Muza Muhammad’s note on pp. t H— i Y • of the text. He is
called Dimid (“son-in-law,” but here in the wider sense of “sib”) because in
469/ 1076-7 he married Malikshdh's paternal aunt, Arsldn Khdtiin, widow of the
Caliph al-Qa’im biamri'llah. He ultimately fell in battle in 488/1095.

3 Mukr ordinarily means a seal, but Mirza Muhammad (p. \ Y • of the Persian
notes) quotes other passages shewing that it was also used in the sense of a sealed
■ purse, containing a definite and certified sum of money.


r -


Early Struggles of Mu'izzi


47


this sum in Nishapur coinage was forthwith brought and placed
before me. So I returned mightily well pleased, and made my
preparations for Ramaddn, and at the time of the Evening Prayer
went to the entrance of the King’s pavilion. It chanced that
‘Al&’u’d-Dawla arrived at the* very same moment, and I paid my
respects to him. ‘Thou hast done excellently w^ll/said he, ‘and
hast come punctually.’ Then he dismounted and went in before
the King.

“At sun-down the King came forth from his pavilion, with
a cross-bow in his hand and ‘Ala’u’d-Dawla^onv his rf£ht side.
I ran forward to do obeisance. Amir ‘Ali continued his kind-
nesses, and*they ther^ busied themselves in looking for the moon.
The King, however, was thi first to see it, whereat he was mightily
pleased. Then 'Ala’u’d-Dawla said to me, ‘ (§ son of Burhdtif, say
something original about this moon,’ and I at once recited these
two couplets : — • ,

1 L ifir lP ' L 0^3Jd^ 34?

‘ ,‘l s 3 ^* LfijW* JJ j'

“ Methinks, 0 Moon, thou art our Prince's bow ,

Or his curved eyebrow, which doth charm us so.

Or else a horse-shoe wrought of gold refined.

Or ring from Heaven's ear defending low,"

“ When I had submitted these verses, Amir ‘AH applauded
much, and the King said, ‘ Go, loose from file stable whichever
horse thou pleasest’; for at that moment we were standing close
to the stable. ArfPTr ‘All designated a horse which was brought
out and given to my attendants, and which proved to fee worth
three hundred dinars of Nishapur. Th<* King then went to his
oratory, and I performed the evening prayer with him, after
which we sat down to meafi At the table Amir ‘Ali said, ‘ O son
of Burhani ! Thou hast not yet said anything about this favour
conferred on thee by the lord of the world, (or) Compose a
quatrain at once!’ I thereupon sprang to my feet, did obeisance
and immediately recited these two verses just as they came
to me: —

1 A. *--> }—}) j~l AHA. jl

“ The King beheld the fire which in me blazed;

Me from low earth above the. moon he raised :

From me a verse, like water fluent, heard.

And swift as wind a noble steed conferred."


48


Second Discourse.— On Poets


“When I recited these verses ‘Ala’u’d-Dawla warmly ap-
plauded me, and by reason of his applause the King gave me
a thousand dindrs. Then 'Ala’u’d-Dawla said, ‘ He hath not
yet received his salary and allowances. To-morrow I will sit
on the Minister’s skirt until he writes a draft for his salary on
Ispahan, and orders his allowances to be paid out of the treasury.’
Said the King, ‘Thou must do it, then, for no one else has
sufficient assurance. And call this poet after my title.’ Now -
the King’s title was Mu ‘ izzu'd-I) tiny d wa’d-Din, so Amfr ‘AH
called rrffib 1 M aster . Mu'izzi.’ ‘Amir Mu'izzi,’ said tl^e King, [cor-
recting him]. Smd this noble and noblyborn lord so wrought for me
that next day,*by the time of the afternoon prayer, I Mhd received
a thousand dindrS ^, s a gift, twelve hundred more as allowances,
and likewise an ora® for a thousand maunds of corn. And when
the month of Ramadan was past, he summoned pie to court, and
caused me tcvbecome the King’s boon-companion. So my fortune
began to improve, and thenceforth he made continuing provision
for me, and to-day whatever I have I possess by the favour of
that Prince. May God? blessed and exalted is He, rejoice his
dust with the lights of His "Mercy, by His Favour and His
Grace ! ” *


Anecdote XVII,

The House of Saljuq were all fond of poetry, but none more
so than TugMnshah ibn Alp Arslan 1 , whose conversation and
intercourse was entirely with poets, and whose favourite com-
panions were almost all of this class— men such as Amir Abii
‘Abdu’Mh Qorashi, Abii Bakr Azraq( J , Abil%Tansiir the son of
Abii Yii-suf 3 , Shujd'f of Nasfi, Ahmad Badihi 4 , Haqiqi and Na-
simi, all of whom were hanked in his service, while many others
kept coming and going, all departing with gifts and joyful
countenances.

..One day the King was playing backgammon with Ahmad
Badihi. They were finishing a game for [a stake of] ten thousand
[? dirhams], (a) and the Amir had two pieces in the sixth house and

1 His full names and titles were Shamsu' d-Dawla Abu'l-Fawdris Tughdnshdh ibn
Alp Arsldn Muhammad ibn Chaghrt Beg ibn Mikd'll ibn Saljuq. During the reign of
Alp Arslan he governed Khurasan from Ilerdt. By Ridd-quli Khdn [Majma'u'l-
Fufaha, i, 139) and other biographers he has been confused with T ughinshdh ibn
Mu’ayyad Ay-aba. See the Editor’s note on the text, pp. \ Y ■ — \ Yr, where many
passages from poems in his praise by Azraqi are cited.

2 See Note XX at the end, and the Editor’s long note on pp. lYt— iya, of the
text; ‘Awfi’s Lubdb , ch. X, No. 3; Dawlatshah (pp. 72-73 of my ed.), Tabaqa II,
No. 1; and Majma'u'l- Fttfahd, vol. i, pp. i V*\— 1 0 C.

s Abvl Mansur ‘Abdu’r-Rashid ibn Ahmad ibn Abi Ydsuf al-Hirawl. See ‘Awfi’s
Lubdb, vol. ii, p. n . A few lines lower in this story the author mentions having met
him at Herat in 509/1115-6.

4 Majma'ti l-Fusahd, i, p. nt. His laqab was Majdu’d-Dln and his nisba
Sajdwandf.


1


s

AzraqI’s Happy Improvisation * 49


Ahmad Badlhl two pieces in the first house 1 2 ; and it was the
Amir’s throw. He threw with the most deliberate care, in order
to cast two sixes, instead of which he threw two ones, whereat
he was mightily vexed and lost his temper (for which, indeed, he
had good cause), while his anger rose so high and reached such
a pitch, that each moment he was putting his hamd to his sword,
while his courtiers trembled like the leaves of a tree, seeing that
he was a King, and withal a boy angered at such spite of Fortune,
Then Abii Baler AzraqI arose, and, approaching the minstrels,
recited this quatrain : — ^ * ***


^ ^ 1 Cw ^ b bj

‘ ibj Uj [ 4b o'


‘ >lyj JS) la. jj «Uli ji


“ Reproach not Fortune with discourteous tricks ,

If by the* King, desiring double si%.

Two ones were throw nj for w horns Oder he calls
Face to the earth before him prostrate falls." „

When, I was at HeHt in the year A.H. 509 (a.d. ui 5-1 116),
Abu Mansur the son of Abii Yiisuf related to me that the Amir
Tughanshfih was so charmed and delighted with these two verses
that he kissed AzraqI on the eyes, called for gold, and succes-
sively placed five hundred dindrs in his moqth, continuing thus
to reward him so long as one gold piece was left. Thus "did he
recover his good hSffinour ajjd such largesse did hm bestow, and
the cause of all this was one quatrain. May God Almighty have
mercy on both of them, by His Favour aad Grhce 1


Anecdote XVIII.

In the year A. II, 472 (A.D.*io 79 -io 8 o) 3 a certain spiteful person
laid a statement before Sultan Ibrdhlm to the effect that his son,
Amir Mahmtid Sayfu’d-Dawla, intended to go to ‘Iraq to wait on
Malikshah. The King's jealousy was aroused, and it so worked
on him that suddenly he had his son seized, bound, and interned

1 For the explanation of this passage I am indebted to my friend Mirzil ‘Abdu’l-

Ghaffar of the T •* rrn “ houses ” on each side of the backgammon

board are naim ■ . right) as follows : (i) khal-khdn or yak-gdh ,

(2) dA-khdn, (; • • ■ (5) bdf-dar , (6) shish-khdn or shish-dar-

gdh, The numbers contained in these names allude to the numbers which must be
thrown with the dice to get the pieces which occupy them off the board.

2 The MSS- and L. all have “572,” an evident error, for (1) Sultdn Ibrahim the
Ghaznawl reigned a.h. 451-492 (a.d, 1059-1099); (2) Malikshdh reigned A.H. 465-
485 (a.d. 1072-1092); (3) the poet in question died in A.H. 515 or 525 (a.d. i 121 or

1 r 3 °) i (4) the Chahdr Maqdla. as we have already seen, was written during the life-
time of Sultan ‘Altfu’d-DIn I;Iusayn fahdn-siix , i.e. before A.H. 556 (a.D. x 161).


Second Discourse. — On Poets


50

in a fortress, His son’s intimates (t°) also he arrested and in-
terned, amongst them Mas'ud-i-Sa'd-i-Salman, whom he sent to
Waji'ristan 1 , to the Castle of Nay 2 ; whence he sent the following
quatrain to the King : — r e

‘julw (jfr p ^ 1 a*1i lAbL* ol.it ^-5 tXO jjt

‘ lp Jpi jAj jS f t C-io j a£s ^jl

^ fv “ 0 King, ’t is Malik Shah should wear thy chain,

TkqJ^PJal limbs might fret with captive's palm;
ButhSa'd-i-Salmin' s offspring could not hurt ,

Thfhigh venomous as poison , thy domajjt / ” *

'Ah' Khass brougmsthis quatrain to *the King, but it produced
no effect on him, though all wise and impartial critics will
recognize what rank Mas'yd’s “Songs of Prison” hold in lofty
feeling, and ft hat degree -in eloquence. Sometimes, when I read
his verses, the hair stands on end on my body, and the tears are
like to trickle from eyes. All these verges were read to the
King, and he heard them, yet they affected him not at all, and
not one particle of his being was warmed to enthusiasm, so that
he departed from this world leaving that noble man in prison.
Khwdja Salman says 8 : —

jl^ A ^ « f**l ft

‘ o'p^ jys*v* ilP Chi' S u~*°~ y!

* 1 * '

* oW^^-0 cP o o * 6 ^

( rw - w j } jJ jA

* j-* W

xl—i jJ t^bb

* ajLj j\ js£> s->Uil

j\ jstjti <Uat.Lj a£s

‘ O*- - dw' j»y“- O. Sytl

1 1>° AJtXs ji ^ ji\ b>

5

1 MirzA Muhammad (Persian notes, p. 1 Y\) at first failed to identify Waji’ristan,
but now believes it to be identical with the modern Waziristan.

s The only mention of Nay hitherto discovered in Persian geographical works
occurs in the Nushaitil-Qithlb, where it is briefly mentioned in the section dealing
with Marw-i-Shihjan.

* These verses are inserted in the margin of A. (f. 10*) only. They are omitted in
the printed text.


1


Mas'ud-i-Sa‘d’s Imprisonment „ 51

‘ A djyKa* ^yJ

1 jyw Ck*

“ Naught served the ends of statesmen save that I,

A helpless exile , should in fetters lie ,

Nor doth ’ '■■'’■ ''dr cells, a

' Unless ;

Which ten sit ever by the gates and i walls ,

And ever one unto his comrade calls;

‘Jdo there! On guard! This cunning rogue is one
To t fashion bridge and steps from shade mubsun !W
Why, grant I stood arrayed for such afgnff^

And suddenly sprang forth, attempting flignfa,

Could elephmt or raging lion hope.

Thus cramped ift prison-cage, with ten^o cope ? ,

Can I, bereft of weapons, take the field,.f ■

Or }>iake of back and bosom bow and shield?"

So, by reason of his relation to Sayfu’d-Dawla, *he remained
imprisoned for twelve 1 years in the days of Sultan Ibrahim, and,
on account of his like relation to Abu Nasr of Pars 2 , for eight
years more in the reign of Sultan Mas"ud ibn Ibrahim, though
none hath been heard of who hath produced so jjaany splendid
elegies and rare gems of verse as were born of his brilliant genius.
After eight years Thiqatu’l-Mulk Tahir ibn ‘All ibn Mushkdn 3
brought him forth from his bondage, so that, in short, during
these two reigns this illustrious man spent all his life in captivity,
and the ill repute of this deed remained on this noble House.
I hesitate as to the motives which are to be*assigned to this act,
and whether it is tojoe ascribed to strength of purpose, reckless-
ness, hardness of heart, or "a malicious disposition. In any case
it was not a laudable deed, and I ha^e never met $ith any
sensible man who was prepared to praise that administration for
such inflexibility of purpose or excess of caution. And I heard
it remarked by the King of the world Ghiyathu’d-D unyd wa’d-


1 As Mfrzi Muhammad has pointed out (Persian notes, pp. t Yv-t A •) there is some
confusion of facts here. Mas'tid suffered two separate periods of imprisonment, the
first for ten years, of which seven were spent in Sti and Dahak (between Zaranj and
Bust in Sistan), the second for seven or eight years in Maranj in India. Sultan
Ibrahim’s death took place in a.h. 49a (a.d. 1098-9), so that, if he was still suffering
his first imprisonment at that time, it cannot have begun earlier than a.h. 48s
(a.d. 1089-1090), We have Mas'dd’s own authority for fixing the duration of his
imprisonment at ten (not twelve) years. See his verses quoted at the top of p. 1 A • of
the Persian notes.

2 Qiwdmu’l-Mulk Nizdmu’d-Din Ahii Nasr Hibatu’lldh al-Farsi, a leading states-
man during these two reigns and a friend and patron of our poet, fell into disgrace in
the reign of Sultdn Mas ‘dd, together with his clients and protdges. He died about
510/111 6.

2 He was prime minister to Sultdn MasV : .■ I' iff "':". . ! of many poets,

including, besides Mas‘iid-i-Sa'd-i-Salmdn, \ : i;-' ■ i : . V and Sana’!,

all of whom have sung his praises. His u- ■' \ . V ; - ■ ; : Mushkdn was

secretary to Sultdn Mahmtid and Sultdn Mas‘dd, author of a volume of Memoirs and
teacher of the historian Abu’l-Fadl-i-Bayhaqi.


4—2


52


Second Discourse.-— On Poets


Din Muhammad 1 , the son of Malikshdh, at the gates of
Ham ad dn, on the occasion of the rebellion of his son-in-law
(may God make fragrant their dust, and exalt their station in
Paradise !) Amir Shihdbu’cTDfn Q^itulmush Alp Ghdzi, “ It is
the sign of a malicious heart to keep a foe imprisoned ; for one
of two things, either he is loyal or seditious. Then, if the farmer,
it is an injustice to keep him in prison ; and if the latter, it is
again an injustice to suffer an ill-doer to live.” (n) In short that
misery of Mas'iid passed, while this ill repute will endure till the
Resurrection. * r

%

* Anecdote XIX. <•

In. the time ofSiultdn Khidr ibn Ibrdhfm 2 the power of the
Khdqam's 3 was at itsmnost flourishing period, while the strength
of their administration and the respect in which it was held were
such as could* not be surpassed.

Now he was a wise and just ruler and an ornament to the
throne, and to him appertained the dominion of Transoxiana and
Turkistdn, while he enjoyed the most complete security on the
side of Khur^dn, wherewith Be was allied by friendly relations,
kinship, and firm treaties and covenants. And of the splendour
maintained by him one detail was this, that when he rode out
they carried before his horse, besides other arms, seven hundred
maces of gold and silver. He was, moreover, a great patron of
poets, and in his service were Amir ‘Am‘aq 4 5 , Master Rashidi,
Najjdr-i-Sdgharchi, *Ali Pdnidhi, the son of Darghush, the son
of MsfiviSyitti.^ Vf Slpihrf and Najibi of Far^Mna, all of whom
obtained rk.lMvwaius and vast honours. The Ppet-Laureate was
Amir ‘AWaq, who had profited abundantly by that dynasty and
obtained >r • ■' ' ". . •• dance, comprising Turkish slaves,
fair dams olden vessels, sumptuous apparel,

and servants, biped and quadruped 6 , innumerable. He was greatly
honoured at the King’s Court, so that of necessity the other poets

1 The seventh Saljdq king, who reigned A.H. 498-511 (a.I), 1104-1117). There
is, as pointed out by Mirzd Muhammad (pp. 1 At— 1 Ai of the Persian notes) an extra-
ordinary confusion of dates and persons in this story. See also Note XXI at the end.

2 SultAn Khidr KhAn ibn TafghAj Khan IbrAhim ibn Nasjr AraUn (known as Ilak)
ibn ‘Al( ibn MiisA ibn Sutuq succeeded his brother Shamsu’I-Mulk Nasr ibn IbrAhim
in a.h. 474 (a.d. 1081-2), but died shortly afterwards. See Ibnu’l-Athir sub anno
A.H. 408, and the Ta'rikh-i-Jahdn-ard (Or. 141 of the British Museum, f. 133 s ).

3 This Turkish Muslim dynasty, also known as KMniyya, Ilak KMns, and Al-i-
AfrAsiyAb, reigned for about 130 luitar years (a.h. 380-609 = a.d. 990-12x2) in
Transoxiana, and was finally overthrown by the KhwArazmshihs. See S. Lane- Poole's
Muhammadan Dynasties, pp. 134-135; Note XXII at the end; and pp. tAt-UA
of the Persian notes.

4 Mention has already been made of all these poets on p. V A of the text (=pp. 29-30
of this translation) with the exception of “the son ef IsferAyinf.” See pp. to 1— t»r
of the Persian notes, and Note XIV at the end.

5 Literally, “speaking and silent,” or “articulate and dumb.”


t


Rashidi’s Retort to ‘Am'aq , S3

must needs do him reverence. Such homage as from the others
he desired from Master Rashidi also, but herein he was dis-
appointed, for Rashidi, though still young, __ was nevertheless
learned in his art. The Lady Zayr*ab was the special object of
his panegyrics, while all Khidr Khan’s women were at his com-
mand, and he enjoyed the fullest favour of tf?e King, who was
continually praising him and asserting his merits, so that Rashidi’s
affairs prospered, the title of “ Prince of poets 1 ” was conferred on
him, he continued to rise higher in the King’s opinion^ and from
him received gifts of great value.

One day, in Rashfdf’s absence, the King aske^ ‘Am'aq, “What
thickest tlrou of the verse of Rashidi, ‘ the Prince of poets ’ ? ”
“ His verse,” replied he,** “is extremely jmjocI and chaste and
correct, but it wants a little spice.” v

After som* while had elapsed, ILashidi (*y) came in and did
obeisance, and was about to sit down when the King called him
before himself, and said, teasing him as is the way of Kings,
“I asked the Poet-Laureate just now, ‘How is Rashidi’s poetry?’
He replied that it was good, but wanted spice. Now you must
compose a couple of verses on this subject.” Rashidi, with a bow,
sat down in his place and improvised the following fragment : —

iy) ijj ‘ 4 ->

‘ jjU uLp 3 1 3 y&i

‘ -xa b 1^3 (^1 ‘ S'* 9 Ij _j

“ You stigmatise>my verse as ‘ wanting spice ,

And possibly, my friend, you may be right. y

My verse i " 1 ” ■ " i •■-sweet,

And spice , • cause delight.

Spice is for you, you blackguard, not for me,

For beans and turnips is the stitff you write l ”

When he submitted these verses the King was mightily pleased.
And in Transoxiana it is the custom and practice to place in the
audience-chambers of kings and others gold and silver in trays,
which they call stm-tdqd or juft ; and in this audience of Khidr
Khdn’s there were set for largesse four trays of red gold, each
containing two hundred ancf fifty dinars ; and these he used to
dispense by the handful. On this day he ordered Rashidi to
receive all four trays, so he obtained the highest honour, and
became famous. For just as a patron becomes famous by the
verse of a good poet, so do poets likewise achieve renown by
receiving a great reward from the King, these two things being
interdependent.


1 Sayyidu’sh-Shu ‘ard.


54


t

*

„ Second Discourse.— On Poets


Anecdote XX.


Master Abu’l-Qdsim FirdawsP was one of the Dihqdns (land-
owners) of Ttis, from a village calied Bazh 1 2 in the district of
Tabarfin 3 , a larg^ village capable of supplying a thousand men.
There Firdawsl enjoyed an excellent position, so that he was
rendered quite independent of his neighbours by the income
which he ^derived from his lands, and he had but one child, a
daughter, *!j*H is one desire in putting the Book of Kings ( Shd/i -
ndma) into vei«C^tvas, out of the reward which he might obtain
for it, to supply &er with an adequate dowry. He was engaged for
twenty-five years this work ere he (/a) finished the book, and
to this* end he left niching undone, raising his verse as high as
heaven, and causing It in sweet fluency to resemble running
water. What genius, indeed? could raise verse to sflch a height as
he does in the letter written by Z&l to Sfim the son of Nariman
in M&zandardn when he desired to ally himself with Rfiddba the
daughter of the King of .Kdbul 4 5 ; —


i _} 3)ji A-oLi


n

* ^ I j i* i j^A. *0


‘ >3J> 3J3

‘ »LJ>3j2\ jl_j 1 . j\j—i

‘ AiiSL, jXb Ji j-A-fc


“Then to Sdm straightway sent he a letter.

Filled with fair praises, prayers and good greeting.
First made he mention of the World-Maker,

Who doom dispenseth and doom fulfdlcth.

‘ On Nlranis son Sdm,’ wrote he, * the sword-lord,
Mail-clad and inace-girt, may the Lord's peace rest!


1 This anecdote is cited by Ibn Isfandiydr in his History of fabaristdn (a.H. 613,
A.D. urfi. See Rieu’s Persian Catalogue, pp. 502-204 and 533 b J , whence it was
excerpted and published, with a German translation, by Ethe ( Z.D.M.G. , vol. xlviii,
pp. 89-94). It was also utilized by Noldeke in 1896 in his Iranische Hationalepo's
(i Grundriss d. Iran. Philologie, vol. ii, pp. 150 et seqq.). A revised edition of this
valuable monograph has just appeared (Berlin and Leipzig, 1920). The references
here given are, unless otherwise specified, to the original edition.

2 The Purkdn-i-Qdtf is the only Persian or Arabic book of reference which
makes mention of this place as situated near This.

* See Noldeke, toe. cit., p. 151 (p. 15 of the new edition), and Yaqut, s.v. The
city of Tils comprised the two districts of Tabanin (or Tabaran) and Niiqan.

4 These verses (with some variants) will be found on pp. 1 24-1 25 of vol. i of
Turner Macan’s edition of the Shdhndma (Calcutta, 1829).

5 The printed text has for jtP) Lw.

0 The text has for


i


4

FirdawsI 55

<s

Hurler of horse-troops in hot-contested fights.

Feeder of ■ ‘ 1 foemen's flesh-feast,

Raising ■ ■ ■ the red war-field,

From the grim war-clouds grinding the gore-shower.

Who, by his manly might meri{ on merit
Heaps, till his merit merit outmeasures V ”

In el&quence I know of no poetry in Persian vAich equals this,
and but little even in Arabic.

When Firdawsi had completed the Shdhndma, it was tran-
scribed by ‘AH Daylam 2 and recited by Abu ^Dulafi both of
whom he mentions by name in tendering his to "Huyayy-i-

Qutayba 3 ,4he governor of Tbs, who had confeifpd on Firdawsi
many favours : — ^ %

i * 1 1 rv . I jyXjl

j\ ids

1

“Of the men of renown of this city ‘ All Daylam and? A bit Dulaf have
participated in this book.

From them my portion was naught save ‘ Well done!'

My gall-bladder was like to burst with their 1 Well dones i .'

Ifuyayy the son of Qutayba is a nobleman who asks me not for unrewarded
verse.

I know nothing either of the root nor the branches of the land-tax;

I lounge [at ease ] in the midst of my quilt 6 . ”

Huy ay y the son of Qutayba was the revenue-cohector of T us,
and deemed it his duty at least to abate the taxes payable by
Firdawsi ; hence naturally his name will endure till the Resur-
rection and Kings will read it.

So ‘All Daylam transcribed the Shdhndma in seven volumes,
and Firdawsi, taking with him Abb Dulaf, set out for the Court
of Ghazna. There, by the help of the great Minister Ahmad ibn
Hasan®, the secretary, he presented it, and it was accepted, Suit hi

1 Poor as this rendering is, I am strongly of opinion that for an English rendering
of the Shdhndma (which always seems to me very analogous in aim, scope, and
treatment to that little-read English Epic, the Brut of Layamon) tile old English
alliterative verse would be the most suitable form.

2 See Noldeke, of. cit., p. 153 (p. 27 of the new edition), and n. 2 ad calc.

8 So A. and L. B. has the more usual “ Husayn b. Qutayba.” Cf. Noldeke, toe. cit.

4 I.e. 1 am sick of their barren and unprofitable plaudits. As these poor men
rendered him material service in other ways, Firdawsi’s remarks seem rather un-
grateful.

6 What follows is evidently an explanation of this couplet. Firdawsi means that
being no longer vexed with the exactions of the tax-gatherer, he can now repose in
peace.

6 This celebrated minister had the title Shamsd l-Kufdt and the nisba of al-
Maymandf. He died in 424/1033 after twenty years’ service as Minister to Sultdn
Mahmild.


j\ Owl 4***$

‘ 3 Q«el jl


Second Discourse. — On Poets


56


Mahmud expressing himself as greatly indebted to his Minister.
But the Prime Minister had enemies who were continually
casting the dust of misrepresentation into the cup of his rank,
and Mahmiid (i\) consulted,. with tl\em as to what he should give
Firdawsi, They replied, "Fifty thousand dirhams, and even that
is too much, seeing that he is in belief a Rdfidf and a Mu'tazilite.
Of his Mu'tazilite views this verse is a proof : —


‘ I Asp £ O^*A**0^

the Creator can never descry / f

ThenXwherefore, by gazing , dost weary thine eye ? f

while to his proclivities these ^verses of his witness : —


>L» jjj jl 1 jj

JtJ <£— o-A

\j*3/*- y»*-«A Aiwtjl yj

i_j-b 3 urf -1

ijV ur°3 3 L5-H

s tflj 0 Ij (JjI 3 Ob

^ d)b


‘iV 5 [ -iJ> 3^ l_5^

ft

1 Ol)3 ittiJk ym*.

‘ u*3s e ‘ ‘Chr*

‘ W OSJ^ 1 3^1

‘ yKs jj f I

oU£ jol JJ ^yjj •ZjjS

3 Ckijd


' The wise man conceive $ the world as a sea , wherefro?n the fierce wind has
stirred up waves.

Thereon are seventy ships ’ 1 afloat , all with sails set ^

And amongst them one vessel, fair as a bPide , decked with colour like the
eye of the cock ,

Wherein qpe the Prophet afld ‘Alt, with all the Family of the Prophet and
his Vicar.

If thou desire st Paradise in the other World, take thy place by the Prophet
and his Trustee.

If dll accrues to thee thereby, it is my fault : know this, that this way is my
way.

In this I was born, and in this I will pass away; know for a surety that I
am as dust at feet of ‘Alii ”


Now Sultdn Mahmiid was a zealot, and he listened to these
imputations and caught hold of them, and in all only twenty
thousand dirhams were paid to Hakim Firdawsi. He was
bitterly disappointed, went to the bath, and, on coming out,
bought a draft of sherbet 4 , and divided the money between the
bath-man and the sherbet-seller. Knowing, however, Mahmiid’s

1 That is the seventy (or seventy-two) sects of Isldm “all of which are doomed to
Hell-fire save one which shall be saved.”

a Fuqa‘< described as a kind of beer. See Schlimmer’s Terminologie Pharmactu-
lique (lith. Tihrrfn, 1874), p. 7S, and Atxlul-Chalig Akhundow’s German translation,
with notes, of the Pharmacology of Abti Manjitr MuwalTaq ibn ‘All al-Hirawi, pp. 241
and 388-389.


Firdawsi’s Satire


57


severity, he fled from Ghazna by night, and alighted in Herat at
the shop of Azraqf’s father, Isma'fl the bookseller ( Warrdq),
where he remained in hiding for six months, until Mahmud’s
messengers had reached Tu$ and had turned back thence, when
Firdawsf, feeling secure, set out from Herat for T us, taking the
Shdlmama with him. Thence he came to Tlibaristan to the
Sipahbad Shahriyar 1 of the House of Bawand, who was King
there ; and this is a noble house which traces its descent from
Yazdigird 2 the son of Shahriy&r. % *

Then Fittdawsf wrote a satire of a hundrecteouplefson Sultdn
Mahmud in the Preface, and read it to Shahrjfbcir 3 , saying, “ I
will dedicate this baok to you instead of to Sjjitan Mahmtid, for
this book deals wholly with the legends ap A deeds of thy fore-
bears.” Shahriydr treated him with honourfand shewed him many
kindnesses, and said, “ O Master, Mahmdd was induced to act
thus by others, who did not submit your book "to him under
proper conditions, (« .) and misrepresented you. Moreover you
are a Shf'ite, and whosoever loves the Family of the Prophet his
worldly affairs will prosper no more than theirs. Mahmud is my
liege-lord : let the Shdhndma stand in his name, ayid give me the
satire which you have written on him, that I may expunge it
and give you some little recompense ; and Mahmdd will surely
summon thee and seek to satisfy thee fully, for the labour spent on
such a book must not be wasted.” And next day he sent Firdawsf
100,000 dirhams , saying, “ I buy each couplet at a thousand
dirhams , give me those hundred couplets, "and be reconciled to
Mahmdd.” So Fitdawsf sent him these verses', a|id he ordered
them to be expunged ; a fid Firdawsf also destroyed his rough
copy of them, so that this satire was dpne away with ’and only
these six verses of it remained 4 : — "


‘ i 3 ijs* 5 Jhr+t

1 J9&> * 5*.

c ilkj [ CfcXJ Ltj j*) djjS ^


‘ (>=*-*' H !>•«

CuUa. >^1

[


1 The MSS. have Shahrzdd and the lithographed edition Shirzad, both of wliich
readingsare erroneous. The correct reading Shahriydr is given by Ibn Isfandiyar in
his citation of this passage. His full genealogy, with references to the histories in
which mention is made of him, is given on p. w of the Persian notes.

2 .The last Sdsanian king. 3 Cf. Noldelce, loc. cit., p. 155, and n. 4 ad calc.

4 This is a remarkable statement, and, if true, would involve the assumption that

the well-known satire, hs we have it, is spurious. Cf. Noldeke {op. cit.), pp, 155-156,

and n. 1 on the latter, and pp. 30-31 of his new edition of Das Iran. NaHonalspos.


58


Second Discourse.— On Poets


“ They cast imputations on me, saying, ‘ That man of many words
Hath grown old in the love of the Prophet and * Alii
If I speak of my love for these
/ can protect a hundred such as Mahmud.

\r„ a „c *7, , S01t 0 f a slaye,

■ hath ruled as King.

Mow tong snfyt J spea/e on this subject ? r

Like the sea I know no shore.

The King had no aptitude for good'.

Else would he have seated me on a throne.

Sine!; in his fatnily there was no nobility

He clfPid nofbejjp to hear the names of the noble." r

In truth good s^fwice was rendered to Mahmbd by Shajtriyar, and
Mahmud was greatly indebted to him. <•

When I was atNfehdpbrin theyearA.H. 5I4 (a.D. 1120-1121),
I heard Amir Mu'izzi Say that he had heard Amir ‘Abdu’r-Razzaq
at Tbs relate as follows: “Mahmud was once inrlndia, and was
returning thefice towards Ghazna. On the way, as it chanced,
there was a rebellious chief possessed of a strong fortress, and
next day Mafrtnbd encamped at the gates pf it, and sent an
ambassador to him, bidding him come before him on the morrow,
do homage, pay his respects at the Court, receive a robe of honour
and return to his place. Next day Mahmud rode out with the
Prime Minister 1 on his right hand, for the ambassador had turned
back and was coming to meet the King. * I wonder,’ said the
latter to the Minister, ‘ what answer he will have given ? 1 There-
upon the Minister recited this verse of Firdawsfs
*

‘ s )J> s 1 vl>»- >*»-

‘ Should the answer come contrary to my wish.

Then Jor me the mace , anfi the field [pf battle j, and A frdsiydb." (.\)

‘ Whose verse,’ enquired Mahmbd, ‘ is that, for it is one to inspire
courage? ’ ‘ Poor Abu’l-Qbsim Firdawsi composed it,’ answered
the^. Minister ; ‘he who laboured for five and twenty years to
complete such a work, and reaped from it no advantage.-’ ‘You
have done well,’ said Mahmbd, ‘ to remind me of this, for I deeply
regret that this noble man w r as disappointed by me. Remind me
at Ghazna to send him something.’

“So when the Minister returned to Ghazna, he reminded
Mahmud, who ordered Firdawsi to be given sixty thousand
dindrs ’ worth of indigo, and that this indigo should be carried
to Tbs on the King’s own camels, and that apologies should be
made to Firdawsi. For years the Minister had been working
for this, and at length he had achieved his work ; so now he
despatched the camels, and the indigo arrived safely at Tabardn 2 .

1 Kh wdja-i- Bimurg. This was the title commonly given to Shamsu’l-Kufdt Ahmad
ibn JIasan al-Maymandi. See n. 6 at the foot of p. 55 supra.

‘ l Tabaran is the name of a portion of the city of Tus, See B. de Meynard’s Diet,
de la Perse, pp. 374-375, and p. 54 supra , n. 3 act calc.


Death of FirdawsI


59


But as the camels were entering through the Rbdbbr Gate, the
corpse of FirdawsI was being borne forth from the Gate of Razdn 1 .
Now at this time there was in Tabar&n a preacher whose fanati-
cism was such that he declare^! that he would not suffer Firdawsf’s
body to be buried in the Musulmbn Cemetery, because he was a
Rdfidi (Shf'a) ; and nothing that men could sa>$served to move
this doctor. Now within the Gate there was a garden belonging
to Firdawsf, and there they buried him, and there he lies to this
day.” And in the year A.H. 5 10 (A.D. 1 1 16-1 1 1 7) I visited his tomb 2 .

They say that Firdawsf left a daughter, *f very tSTty spirit,
to whom they would have given the King’s gift^Tbut she would
not accept *!t, sayings" I need it not.” The J 3 of£-master wrote to
the Court and represent® this to the Ring, who ordered that
doctor to be expelled from Tabardn as'” S' punishment for his
officiousness, aijd to be exiled from his home, and the money to
be given to the Imdm Abb Bakr ifin Ishdq-i-Krrdmf 3 for the
repair of the rest-house of Chaha, which stands on the road
between Merv and N fshdpur on the boundaries of Tbs. When
this order reached’ Tus it was faithfully carried out; and the
restoration of the rest-house of Cffeha was effected^by this money.


Anecdote XXI.

At the period when I was in the service of my Lord the King
of the Mountains 4 (may God illuminate («v) his tomb and exalt
his station in Paradise !), that august personage had a high opinion
of me, and shewedjhimself a most generous patron towards me.
Now on the Festival of the Breaking of the Fdst one of the
nobles of the city of Balkh (may God maintain its prosperity !),
Amfr ‘Amfcl Safiyyu’d-Dln Abb Bakr Mtihammad ibn al-Rusayn
Rawdnshdhf, came to the Court. He was a young man, accom-
plished and highly esteemed, an expert writer, a qualified secretary
of state, well endowed with culture and its fruits, popular with
all, whose praises were on all tongues. And at this time I was
not in attendance,

1 See Noldeke’s new edition of his Pen. Nationalepos, p. 31, n. 2 ad calc. There

are several places called RudbAr , of which one situated near Tabanln is probably
meant. See B. de Meynard’s Did. de la Perse , p. 266. A Jiazdn in Siltan is mentioned
by al-Baladhurl (pp. vvt-raY), and another in the district of Nasa in Kliurisan

(Did. de la Perse , p. 259),

2 I am not sore at what point the inverted commas should be inserted, but the last
sentence of this paragraph is certainly Nizami’s.

8 This divine, Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ish&q ibn Mahmashdd, was the head of
the Kirdmi sect at Nishapur, and his biography is given in the Ta'rlkha'l- Yamlnl
(ed. Cairo, pp. r . a-rr • ). The Kirdml sect inclined to anthropomorphism. A full
account of their doctrines will be found in ShahristAnf’s Kildbu'l-Milai wa' n-Nihal.

1 This, as already stated, was the title assumed by the kings of Ghur generally,
and by the first of them, Qutbu’d-Din Muhammad ibn ‘Izzu’d-Dln Husayn, especially.
He it was whose death was avenged by his brother Sultdn ‘Ala’u’d-Dln Jah&n-st'tz in
the sack of Ghazna, and who was our author’s patron. See Note XV at the end.


6o


I

, Second Discourse— On Poets

Now at a reception the King chanced to say, “ Call Nizami.”
Said the Amir ‘Amid Safiyyu’d-Dfn, "Is Nizftmf here?” They
answered “ Yes.” But he supposed that it was Nizami-Muniri 1 .
“ Ah,” said he, “ a fine poet and a, man of wide fame ! ” When
the messenger ari'ived to summon me, I put on my shoes, and, as
I entered, did dbeisance, and sat down in my place. When the
wine had gone round several times, Amir ‘Amid said, “ Nizdmi
has not come.” “ He is come,” replied the King ; “see, he is seated
over thefe.” “ I am not speaking of this Nizdmf,” answered Amir
‘Amid, “mat Hizrmf of whom I speak is another one, and as for
this one, I do^ot even know him.” Thereupon I saw that the
King was vexech^he at once turned to me and said, “ Is there
somewhere else another Nizami besiQes thee?” “Yes, Sire,” I
answered, “there are tevo other Nizfimfs, one of Samarqand, whom
they call N‘ ■' ' ' " r ■ ' ' ’ one of N{shdpiir,«whom they call

Nizdmf-i- call Nizdmi-i-‘Arudi.” “ Art thou

better, or they ? ” demanded he. Then Amir ‘Amid perceived
that he had made an unfortunate remark and that the King was
annoyed. “Sire,” said lie, “ those two Nizfimfs are quarrelsome
fellows, apt to break up and” spoil social gatherings by their
quarrelsomeness." “ Wait,” said the King jestingly, “ till you see
this one drain five bumpers of strong wine 2 and break up the
meeting: but of these three Ni?&mfs which is the best poet?”
“ Of those two,” said the Amir ‘Amid, “ I have personal know-
ledge, having seen them, while this one I have not previously
seen, nor have I heafd his poetry. If he will compose a couple of
verses on this subject which we have been discussing, so that I
may see his talents and hear his veme, I will tell you which of
these three is best.”

Then the King turned to me, saying, “ Now, O Nizdmf, do not
shame us, (*r) and when thou speakest say what ‘Amid desires.”

Now at that time, when I was in the service of this sovereign,
I possessed a prolific talent and a brilliant genius, and the favours
and gifts of the King had stimulated me to such a point that my
improvisations came fluent as running water ; so I took up a pen,
and, ere the wine-cup had gone twice round, composed these five
couplets ; —

I— 4 j h* ‘ dt ti

‘ dfi S

1 The reading of this nisba is very doubtful in all three texts, both here and lower.
In some it appears to read Minbari.

2 The correct reading, si-yaki , is that given in the text, not sangi, which most of
the MSS. have. It is wine reduced by evaporation to one-third of its original bul(c;
in Arabic it is similarly called mulhallath. See the Atijuman-drdyi-Ndgirt, s.v.


Autobiographical


6i


1

‘ juJb o , r *' u i ‘ o- 5 * -- ' O bj d »V"’

‘ ^*3L« }y*- jl jJk jJ O^ 1 * ^b-“> O'®

“ We are three Nizdmh in the woxld, O Kfttg, on account of whom a whole
world is filled with outcry.

/ am%it Warsdd 1 before the Kings throne , while thosd two others are in
Merv before the Sultdn.

To-day , in truth , in verse each one is the Pride of KhurAs&n.

Although''' " " as spirit, and although they understand the

Art <? ■ n

I atn the ~ » . hold of Hum, both demst fganifneir work.”

When $ submitted these verses, the Amir Safiyyu’d-

Din bowed and said, “ O King, let alone the Xfzdmis, I know of
no poet in all Transoxiana, ‘Irdq, or Khur^dn capable of impro-
vising five such verses, more especially in respect of strength,
energy, and sweetness, conjoined with such grace of diction and
filled with ideas so original. Be of good cheer, O Nizami, for
thou hast no peer on the face of the earth. O Sire, he hath a
graceful wit, a min’d strong in apprehension, and a finished art.
The good fortune of the King of the age and his generosity (may
God exalt them !) hath increased them, and he ”111111 become a
unique genius, and will become even more than this, for he is
young, and hath many days before him."

Thereat the countenance of my King and Lord brightened
mightily; a great cheerfulness appeared in his gracious tempera-
ment, and he applauded me, saying, “ I giv^ thee the lead-mine
of Warsdd from this Festival until the Festival of the Sheep-
sacrifice 3 . Send at? agent, there.” I did so, sending Ishaq the
Jew. It was the middle of summer and the time of active work,
and they melted much of the ore, so that in seventy dqys twelve
thousand maunds of lead appertaining to the tithe 8 accrued to
me, while the King’s opinion of me was increased a thousand-fold.
May God (blessed and exalted is He) illuminate his august ashes
with the light of His approval and rejoice his noble soul by the
accumulation of wealth, by His Favour and Grace !

1 Warsid or Warshad was the residence of this king, Qutbu’d-Din Muhammad, in
Ghiir, as mentioned in the 'fabaqdt-i-Nd^iri (Kaverty’s translation, p. 339).

a 7. e. from the end of Ramadan until the 10th of Dhu’l-Hijja, a period of two
months and ten days.

8 The exact meaning of this sentence is not clear even to the learned editor Mirza
Muhammad (p. WX of the Persian notes). He suggests that our author, Ni?am(, was
a Sayyid, or descendant of the Prophet, and that the khums , or fifth part of flie
profits, to which Sayyids are entitled, was in this case made over wholly to him. If
this be the meaning, we should probably read dar izd'i khums for az dn-i-khums. An
alternative conjecture is to read bi-dim-i-khums , and to translate “not counting the
khums!' i.e. that the net profit, after deducting the khums or tithe, was 12,000
maunds of lead.


62


On Astronomers


(.*) Third Discourse.

On the Lore of the Stars and the excellence of the Astronomer in
tfyat Science. .

Abtl RayMu al-Birunf 1 says, in the first chapter of his
“ Explanation or the Science of Astronomy” (Kitdbu't- Tex f him
ft sind'ati’t- Tanjinif : — “A man doth not merit the title of
Astronomer until he hath attained proficiency in four sciences ;
first, Geometry,; secondly , Arithmetic; thirdly , Cosmography;
and fourTnly, Judicial Astrology.” •

Now GeomjAry is that science whereby are kno^u the dis-
positions of lindLand the shapes of plaint surfaces and solid
bodies^ the general relations existing ^between determinates and
determinants, and tfite relation between them and what has
position and form. Its principles are included «n the book of
Euclid the Geometrician 3 in the recension of Thdbit ibn Qurra 4 .

Arithmetic is that science whereby are known the nature of all
sorts of numbers, especially each species thereof in itself ; the
nature of their relation to one another ; their generation from
each other ; and the applications thereof, such as halving, doubling,
multiplication, division, addition, subtraction, and Algebra. The
principles thereof are contained in the book of the ’Apt0/r,7?Tt«?7,
and the applications in the “Supplement” ( Takmila ) of Abu
Mansiir of Baghdad", and the “Hundred Chapters” (Sad Bdb)
of as-Sajzf 8 .

Cosmography is tftat science whereby are known the nature of
the Celestial %nd Terrestrial Bodies, their shapes and positions,
their relations to one another, and the measurements and dis-
tances which are betweeji them, together with the nature of the
movemenfs of the stars and heavens, and the co-ordination of
the spheres and segments whereby these movements are fulfilled.

*,The best account of this great scholar is that given by Dr Edward Sachau in the
German Introduction to his edition of al-Athdni'l-Bdqiya (Leipzig, 1876), and, in a
shorter form, in his English translation of the same (London, 1879). The substance of
this is given by MlrzA Muhammad on pp. wr-ws of the Persian notes. See Note
XXIII at the end.

3 This book was composed simultaneously in Arabic and Persian in A.H. 420
(A.D. 1029). There is a fine old MS. of the Persian version dated A.H. C85 (a.d. 1286),
and bearing the class-mark Add. 7697, in tire British Museum. See Rieu’s Persian
Catalogue, pp. 451-452.

3 Najjar, literally, “ the Carpenter.”

4 I take this to be the sense of ‘Owl Oji 0*^0

Concerning Thabit ibn Qurra, see Wtlstenfeld’s Gesch. d. Arabischen Aerate, pp. 34-36 ;
Brockelmann’s Gesch. d, Arab. Litleratur, vol. i, pp. 217-218, etc. He was bom in
'■ r ' ty 4 '— J -u-'-l a.h. 288 (A.D. 901).

■ - ibn TAhir al-Baghdadl, d. A.H. 429 (a.d. 1037). See

Ami Oa iu A,.,.™., 4 iu„ Muhammad ibn ‘Abdu’l-Jalil as-Sajzi (or Sijazi, i.e. of
Sajistan or SlstAn). See Brockeimann, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 219, and Note XXIII at
the end.


* ?

Judicial Astrology 63

This science is contained in [Ptolemy’s] Almagest , whereof the
best commentaries (..) and elucidations are the Commentary of
Nayrlzf 1 2 and the Almagest in the Shifd 3 . And amongst the
applications of this science is the science of Astronomical Tables
and Almanacs.

Judicial Astrology is a branch of Natural /Science, and its
special use is prognostication, by which is meant the deducing
by analogy from the configurations of the stars in relation to one
another, and from an estimation of their degrees in tho zodiacal
signs, the fulfilment of those events which a n^bfou gH*’ a bout by
their movements, such as the conditions of the* world-cycles,
empires, kingdoms, cjties, nativities, changes, transitions, decisions,
and other questions. It is contained, as above defined by us, in
the writings of Abu Ma'shar of Balkh®, Atqnad [ibn Muhammad]
ibn ‘Abdu’l-Jal(J-i-Sajz{ 4 * , Abu Rayhdn BlrunP.and Kushydr-i-Jfll 0 .

So the astrologer must be a mah of acute mind, approved
character, and great natural intelligence, though apparently [some
degree of] folly, madness and a gift for soothsEiying are amongst
the conditions and'bssentials of this branch [of the subject]. And
the Astrologer who would pronounce prognostications must have
the Part of the Unseen 17 in his own Ascendant, or in a position
which stands well in relation to the Ascendant, while the Lord of
the Mansion of the Part of the Unseen must be fortunate and
in a favourable position, in order that such pronouncements as he
gives may be near the truth. And one of the conditions of being
a good astrologer is that he should know by heart the whole of
.the “Compendium of Principles" (. MujmahC l-Ustil ) of Kushydr 6 7 8 * 10 ,
and should continually study the “ Opus Major",” and should
look frequently into the Qdmln-i-Mas'ildi " and the* Jdmi‘-i-
Shdhi 10 , so that his knowledge and concepts may be, refreshed.

1 Abu’l-'Abbds al-Fadl ibn Hatam of Nayriz (near Darabjird in Fdrs). He
flourished in the latter half of the third century of the Flight (late ninth and early
tenth of the Christian era).

2 Presumably Avicenna’s great philosophical work of this name is intended.

8 See Brockelmann’s Gesck. d. Arab. Lilt ., vol. i, pp. 221-222, pp. 1 \A-\
of the Persian notes, and Note XXIII at the end.

4 See n. 6 on p. 62 supra. s See n. 1 on p. 62 supra.

s See Ibid., pp. 222-223. Kiyd Abu’l-Hasan Kiishydr ibn Labbdn ibn Bashahrf
al-Jlli (of Glldn) was a very notable astronomer who flourished in the second half of

the fourth century of the Flight (tenth of the Christian era). A fine MS. of his Mujmal
(Add. 7490) exists in the British Museum. See also p. V • r of the Persian notes, and
Note XXIII at the end.

7 For this and other Astrological terms see Note XXIV at the end.

8 Kdr-i-Mihtar by Hasan ibnu’l-Khasib, a notable astronomer of the second
century of the Flight.

* Composed about A.D. 1031-6 for Sultdn Mas’dd, to whom it is dedicated, by
al-Birunf. A fine MS. transcribed at Baghcidd in 570/1174-5 is described in Ricu’s
Arabic Supplement, pp. 513-519,

10 A collection of fifteen treatises by Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abdu’l-Jalfl
as-Sajzi, a notable astronomer who flourished in the latter half of the tenth century of
the Christian era. See p. 62 supra, n. 6 ad calc.


\


c


64


Third Discourse.— On Astrologers


Anecdote XXII.

Ya'qiib ibn Ishaq al-Kindi 1 , though he was a Jew, was the
philosopher of his age and the wisest man of his time, and stood
high in the service of al-Ma’mtin. 'One day he came in before
al-Ma’miin, and| sat down above one of the prelates of ^Jsldm.
Said this man, “ Thou art of a subject race ; why then dost thou
sit above the prelates of Isldm?” “Because,” said Ya'qiib, “I
know wh/it thou knowest, while thou knowest not what I know.”

Now fckjjs praise knew of his skill in Astrology, but had no
knowledge or*his other attainments in science. “I will write
down,” said hC,^" something on a piece of paper, tfnd if thou
canst divine whatM have written, I wiri admit thy claim.” Then
they laid a wager, on Jdie part of the prelate a cloak, and on the
part of Ya'qiib («i) a "mule and its trappings, worth a thousand
dindrs, which,, was standing at the door. Then tire former asked
for an inkstand and paper, wrote something on a piece of paper,
placed it under the Caliph’s quilt, and cried, “ Out with it ! ”
Ya'qiib ibn Ishdq asked for a tray of earth; rose up, took the
altitude, ascertained the Ascendant, drew an astrological figure
on the tray of earth, determined the positions of the stars and
located them in the Signs of the Zodiac, and fulfilled all the con-
ditions of divination and thought-reading 2 . Then he said, “ O
Commander of the Faithful, on that paper he has written some-
thing which was first a plant and then an animal.” Al-Ma’miin
put his hand under tjje quilt and drew forth the paper, on which
was written ‘‘The Rod of Moses.” Ma’mtin was filled with wonder,,
and the prelate expressed his astonishment. *Then Ya'qub took
the cloak of his adversary, and cut it in two before al-Ma’mun,

■ saying, “ ^ will make it into two putties.”

This matter became generally known in Baghdad, whence it
spread to ‘Irdq and Khurdsdn, and became widely diffused. A
certain doctor of Balkh 5 , prompted by that fanatical zeal which
characterises the learned, took a knife and placed it in the middle
of a book on Astrology, intending to go to Baghdad, attend the
lectures of Ya'qub ibn Ishdq al-Kindi, make a beginning in Astro-
logy, and, when he shouid find a suitable opportunity, suddenly
kill him. Stage by stage he advanced in this resolve, until he
reached Baghdad, went in to the hot bath and came out, arrayed
himself in clean clothes, and, placing the book in his sleeve, set
out for Ya'qub’s house.

1 See Wiistenfeld’s Gesch. d. Arab. Aerzlt , pp. 11-11. He died about A.H. 260
(a.I). 873). The author’s assertion that the celebrated al-Kindi, called par cxctlimcc
“ the Philosopher of the Arabs,” was a Jew, is, as the Editor has pointed out (Persian
notes, pp. r ■ r-r ."t), so absurd as to go near to discrediting the whole story.

’ i nature of a hidden object and flamir of a hidden
Tafklm. See Note XXIV at the end.

* J.e. A Du Ma'sttar, as appears from the conclusion of the story.


al-BirtInI’s Prognostication


65


When he reached the gate of the house, he saw standing
there many handsomely-caparisoned horses belonging to de-
scendants of the Prophet 1 and other eminent and notable persons
of Baghddd. Having made enquiries, he went in, entered the
circle in front of Ya'qfib, greeted him, and said, “ I desire to
study jjomewhat of the Science of the Stars wiYh our Master.”
“ Thou hast come from the East to slay me, not to study
Astrology,” replied Ya'qfib, “but thou wilt repent of thine
intention, study the Stars, attain perfection in that science, and
become one pf the greatest Astrologers amoragst^ies^People of
Muhammad (on whom be God’s Blessing and feace).” All the
great men there assembled were astonished atjTfese words ; and
Abd Ma'shar® confessed arfd produced the knife from the middle
of the book, broke it, and cast it away. Then he bent his knees
and studied foj; fifteen years, until he attained in Astrology
that eminence which was his. (»v) ’

„ Anecdote XXII}*

It is related that once when Yaminu’ d-Dawla „ Sultdn Mah-
mdd ibn Ndsiru’d-Din 3 was sitting on the roof of a four-doored
summer-house in Ghazna, in the Garden of a Thousand Trees,
he turned his face to Abd RayMn 4 and said, “By which of these
four doors shall I go out ? ” (for all four were practicable). “ De-
cide and write the decision on a piece of paper, and put it under
my quilt.” Abd RayMn called for an astrolabe, took the altitude,
determined the Ascendant, reflected for a while, and then wrote
down his decision on a pie«e of paper, and placed* it under the
quilt. “Hast thou decided?” asked Mahmud. He aftswered,
“ I have.” * ’ »

Then Mahmud bade them bring a navvy with pick-axe and
spade, and in the wall which was on the eastern side they dug
out a fifth door, through which he went out Then he bade them
bring the paper. So they brought it, and on it Abu RayMn had
written, “ He will go out through none of these four doors, but
they will dig a fifth door in the eastern wall, by which door he
will go forth.” Mahmud, on reading this, was furious, and bade
them cast Abd RayMn down in the midst of the palace, and so
they did. Now there was stretched a net from the middle floor,
and on it Abu RayMn fell. The net tore, and he subsided gently
to the ground, so that he received no injury. “ Bring him in,”
said Mahmud. So they brought him in, and Mahmdd said, “ O
Abu RayMn, at all events thou didst not know about this event!”

1 Literally, “of the Banu Hashim.”

2 See n. 3 ^ J vvm -1 .1 2

4 l , he 8 ■ 388-421, A. D. 998-1030).

* Al-fJlmm. oee u, 1 ou p. 02 supra, ana Note aaui at the end.


66 T^hikd Discourse.— On Astrologers

“ I knew St, Sire,” answered he. Said Mahmud, “ Where 'is the
proof?” So Abii Rayhan called for his servant, took the Almanac
from him, and produced the prognostications out of the Almanac;
and amongst the predictions of that day was written: — “To-day
they will cast me down from a high place, but I shall reach the
earth in safety, Lnd arise sound in body.” r

All this was not according to Mahmiid’s mind. He waxed
still angrier, and ordered Abfi Rayhin to be detained in the
citadel. Bo Abu Rayhdn was confined in the citadel of Ghazna,
where he Teuton for six months. ,

V Anecdote X3£IV. <"

It is said that during that period of six months none dared
speak to Mahmud about Abd Rayhdn ; (°A)„but one of his
servants was deputed to ‘'wait upon him, and go out to get
what he wanted, and return therewith. One day this servant
was passing through the Park {Marghzdr) of Ghazna when a
fortune-teller called Kftn and said, “ I perceive several things
worth mentioning in your fcfrtune : give me a present, that I
may reveal them to you.” The servant gave him two dirhams ,
whereupon the Sooth-sayer said, “ One dear to thee is in
affliction, but ere three days are past he will be delivered from
that affliction, will be invested with a robe of honour and mark
of favour, and will again become distinguished and ennobled.”

The servant proceeded to the citadel and told this incident
to his master as a piece of good tidings. Abu RayMn laughed
and said, “ C ? foolish fellow, dost thou not know that one ought
not to loiter in such places? Thou hast wasted two dirhams .”
It is said that the Prime Minister Ahmad ibn Hasan of May-
mand (may God be merciful to him!) was for six months seeking
an opportunity to say a word on behalf of Abd Rayhdn. At
length, when engaged in the chase, he found the King in a good
humour, and, working from one topic to another, he brought the
conversation round to Astrology. Then he said, “ Poor Abd
Rayhin uttered two such good prognostications, and, instead
of decorations and a robe of honour, earned only bonds and
imprisonment.” “ Know, my lord,” replied Mahmdd, “ for I have
discovered it, and all men admit it, that this man has no equal in
the world save Abu ‘All [ibn] Sind (Avicenna). But both his
prognostications were opposed to my will ; and kings are like
little children; in order to receive rewards from them, one should
speak in accordance with their views. It would have been better
for him on that day if one of those two prognostications had
been wrong. But to-morrow order him to be brought forth, and
to be given a horse caparisoned with gold, a royal robe, a satin
turban, a thousand dindrs, a boy slave and a handmaiden.”


Good Predictions by Illiterates


67


So, on the very day specified by the sooth-sayer, they brought
forth Abii .Rayhdn, and the gift of honour detailed above was
conferred upon him, and the King apologized to him, saying,
“ O Abu RayMn, if thou desirest to, reap advantage from me,
speak according to my desire, not according to the dictates of
thy science.” So thereafter Abu Rayhan altered his practice ;
and this is one of the conditions of the king’s service, that one
must be with him in right or wrong, and speak according to
his wish 1 . ' **

Now whep Abii RayMn went to his housp find jiae learned
came to congratulate him, he related to them, the incident of the
sooth-sayer, '•whereat £hey were amazed, (°\) andjfsht to summon
him. They found him quite illiterate, knowing nothing. ,Then
Abii Rayhfin said, “Hast thou the horoscope of thy nativity?”
“ I have,” he replied, Then he brought tire horoscope and Abii
Rayhan examined it, and the Part cTf the Unseen fell directly
on the degree of his Ascendant, so that whatever he said, though
he spoke blindly, came near to the truth.

Anecdote' XXV.

I had in my employment a woman-servant, who was born on
the 28th of Safar, A.H. 5 1 1 2 (July 1st, A.D. in 7), when the Moon
was in conjunction with the Sun and there was no distance be-
tween them, so that in consequence of this the Part of Fortune
and the Part of the Unseen both fell on, the degree of the
Ascendant. When she reached the age of fifteen years, I taught
her Astrology, in which she became so skilful that she could
answer difficult questions in this science, and her prognostica-
tions came mighty near the truth. Ladifcs used to corpe to her
and question her, and the most part of what she said coincided
with the pre-ordained decrees of Fate.

One day an old woman came to her and said, “ It is npw
four years since a son of mine went on a journey and I have no
news of him, neither of his life nor of his death. See whether he
is of the living or the dead, and wherever he is acquaint me with
his condition.” So the woman-astrologer arose, took the altitude,
worked out the degree of the Ascendant, drew out an astrological
figure, and determined the positions of the stars ; and the very
first words she said were, “ Thy son hath returned!”

The old woman was annoyed and said, “ O child, I have no
hopes of his coming : tell me this much, is he alive or dead ? ”

1 Cf. Gulistdn, ed. Platts, p. 40, last two lines.

5 A. and B. have “511,” and L. "510.” Although the text has
‘Jan old woman,” I have substituted "a woman-servant” as more appropriate,’ for
since she was born in A.H. 511 and the Chahdr Maqdla was composed about a.h. 551
or 552, she can only have been at most about forty years of age, even if the incident
described took place shortly before it was here recorded.

5-2


68 'J'hird Discourse. — On Astrologers

“ I tell you," said the other, "thy son hath come. Go, and if
he hath not come, return that I may tell thee how he is,”

So the old woman went to her house, and lo, her son had
arrived and they were unlpading his ass. She embraced him,
took two veils, and brought them to the woman-astrologer, saying,
“ Thou didst sp&ak truly ; my son hath come,” and gavq her a
blessing with her present. When I came home and heard tidings
of this, I enquired of her, “ By what indication didst thou speak,
and frorfl what house didst thou deduce this “ ’ '

She answWe^^ Ldiad not reached so far as 1 . . : id

finished the figure of the Ascendant, (a • ) a fly came and settled
on the numberN^f the degree of the Asceqdant, wherefore it so
seemqd in my mind that this young "man had returned. When
I had thus spoken, rand the mother had gone to find out, it
became as certain to me that he had come as though I actually
saw him unloading his ass!”

Then I perceived that it was the Part of the Unseen which
had effected all this on the degree of the Ascendant, and that
this [success of hers] aTose from nothing else' but this.


Anecdote XXVI.

Mahmiid Dd’udf, the son of Abu’l-Qdsim Da’iidf, was a great
fool, nay, almost a madman, and had no great amount of know-
ledge of the stars ; though of astrological operations he could
cast a nativity, and in his note-book were figures, declaring
“ it is ” or “ ih is not.” He was in the servi<!te of Amfr-Ddd Abu
Bakr ibp Mas'ud at Panj-dih; and Iris prognostications mostly
came nearly right. *

Now'his madness was such that when my master the King
of the Mountains 1 sent Amfr-Ddd a pair of Ghun' dogs, very
large and formidable, he fought with them of his own free will,
and escaped from them in safety. Years afterwards we were
sitting with a number of persons of learning in the Druggists’
Bdzdr at Her/it, in the shop of Muqri the surgeon -barber, and
discussing all manner of subjects. One of these learned men
happening to remark, “What a great man was Avicenna (Ibn
Sina) ! ” I saw Da’iidf fly into such a passion that the veins of
his neck became hard and prominent, and all the symptoms
of anger appeared in him, and he cried, “ O So-and-so, who was
Abii ‘Alf ibn Sfnd. ? I am worth a thousand Abu ‘Alls, for he
never even fought with a cat, whilst I fought before Armr-Dad
with two Ghun dogs.” So on that day I knew him to be mad ;
yet for all his madness, I witnessed the following occurrence.

1 I.e. Qutbu’d-Dfn Muhammad ibn ‘Izzu’d-Din Ilusayn, the first king of the Ghiiri
dynasty, poisoned by Bahrain Shah. See Note I at the end.


1

DA’fol the Crazy Astrologer * 69

In the year A.H, 508 (A.D. 1114-1 1 15), when Sultdn Sanjar
encamped* in the Plain of Khuzdn 1 , on his way to Transoxiana
to fight with Muhammad Khdn 2 , Amir-Dad made a mighty great
entertainment for the King, at Panj-dih. On the third day he
came to the river-brink, and entered a boat to ary use himself (n)
with fishing. In the boat he summoned Dd’fiul before him to
talk in that mad way of his, while he laughed, for Da’iidi would
openly abuse Amfr-Ddd.

Presently the King said to Da’ licit, "Prognosticate how many
maunds the fish which I shall catch this time will y£«tgft.” Dd’tidf
said, “ Draw up your hook.” So the King ck'ew^it up ; and he
took the altitude, pa+tsed for a while, and thejsafeaid, “Now cast
it.” The King cast, and Re said, “ I prognosticate that this fish
which you .will draw out will weigh ■five^naunds.” “ O knave,”
said Amfr-Ddd, "whence should fish of five maunds’ weight come
into this stream ? ” “ Be silent,” said £)d’udf ; “what do you know
about it ? ” So Amir-Ddd was silent, fearing that, should he insist
further, he would only get abuse.

After a while there was a pull on the line, indicating that a
fish had been taken captive. The King drew in* the line with
a very large fish on it, which, when weighed, scaled six 3 maunds.
All were amazed, and the King of the World expressed his astonish-
ment, for which, indeed, there was good occasion. “ Dd’udf,” said
the King, “what dost thou wish for?” “O King of the face of the
Earth,” said he with an obeisance, “I desire but a coat of mail,
a shield and a spear, that I may do battle « 5 vith Bdwardf.” And
this Bdwardf was a$ officer attached to Amir-Dad’s Court, and
Dd’udi entertained towards him a fanatical hatred, because the
title of Shuja'u'l-Mulk (“ the Champion of the Kingdtfm ”) hac
been conferred on him, while Dd’udi liimself bore the title of
Shnjd'ti l-Hukamd (“ the Champion of the Philosophers ”), and
grudged that the other should also be entitled Shujd *. And
Amir-Ddd, well knowing this, used continually to embroil DdYtdf
with him, and this good Musulmdn was at his wit’s end by reason
of him.

In short, as to Mahmud Dd’udf’s madness there was no doubt,
and I have mentioned this matter in order that the King may
know that as regards astrological predictions folly and insanity
are amongst the conditions of this craft.


1 See Barbier de Meynard’s Diet, tie la Perse, pp. 215-216.

3 The person meant is Muhammad Khdn (known as Arslan Khdn) ibn Sulayman
ibn Ita’iid ibn Bughra Khdn of the Khaniyya dynasty. The event alluded to in the
text took place in A.H. 507 (a.d. 11x3-1114).

3 L. has “five,” which corresponds better with the prognostication, but the MS.
authority is in favour of the reading here adopted.


70


Third Discourse.— On Astrologers


Anecdote XXVII. *

Hakfm-i-Mawsilf was one of the order of Astrologers in
Nfshdpur, and was in the service of that Great Minister Nizamu’l-
Mulk of Tiis, wlfo used to consult with him on matters of import-
ance, and seek his advice (ir) and opinion. Now when Mciwsilf’s
years were drawing to a close, and failure of his faculties began
to manifest itself, and feebleness of body began to appear, so
that he wm no- longer able to perform these longjourneys,. he
asked the Minister's permission to go and resident Nfshdptir,
and to send ^h.ence, annually, an almanac and forecast for
the year. v 0 r

N6w the Minister Nizdmu’l-Mulk was also in the decline of
life and near the ternTof existence ; and he said, “ Calculate the
march of events and see when the dissolution c7f my elemental
nature will occur, and at what date that inevitable doom and
unavoidable sentence will befall.”

Hakfm-i-Mawsilf answered, “ Six months after my death.”
So the Minister bestowed on him in increased measure all things
needful for hiff comfort, and Mawsilf went to Nfshdpur, and there
abode in ease, sending each year the forecast and calendar. And
whenever anyone came to the Minister from Nfshdpur, he used
first to enquire, “How is Mawsilf?” and so soon as he had
ascertained that he was alive and well, he would become joyous
and cheerful.

At length in the year A.H. 485 (A.D. 1092-3) one arrived from
Nfshdpur, ansi the Minister enquired of him*concerning Mawsilf.
The map replied, with an obeisance,* “ May he who holdeth the
chief seat in Isldm be the heir of many life-times ! Mawsilf hath
quitted this mortal body.” “When?” enquired the Minister. “In
the middle of Rabf‘ the First” (April 11 — May II, A.D. 1092),
answered the man, “he yielded up his life for him who sitteth in
the chief seat of Isldm.”

The Minister thereat was mightily put about ; yet, being
thus warned, he looked into all his affairs, confirmed all his pious
endowments, gave effect to his bequests, wrote his last testa-
ment, set free such of his slaves as had earned his approval,
discharged the debts which he owed, and, so far as lay in his
power, made all men content with him, and sought forgiveness
from his adversaries, and so sat awaiting his fate until the month
of Ramaddn (a.H. 485 = Oct. 5 — Nov. 4, A.D. 1092), when he fell
a martyr at Baghddd 1 at the hands of that Sect (i.e. the Assassins) ;
may God make illustrious his Proof, and accord him an ample
approval !

1 This is an error of the author’s, for the evidence that Nizamu’l-Mulk was assas-
sinated at Nihawand is overwhelming.


1

‘Umar Khayyam’s Prognostication? 71

Since the observed Ascendant of the nativity, the Lord of the
House, and the dominant influence ( hayldj ) were rightly deter-
mined, and the Astrologer was expert and accomplished, naturally
the prognostication came true 1 . Antf. He [God] knoweth best.

1

' Anecdote XXVIII.

In the year a.H. 506 (A.D. ,1112-1113) Khwdja Imdm ‘Umar-
i-Khayyami 2 and Khwaj'a Imdm M u z a f f a r - i - Is fi z a ri 3 had alighted
in the city wf Balkh, in the Street of the Siave-seJiers, in the
house of Amfr (vr) Abu Sa‘d Jari'ah, and I had joined that
assembly, in the midst of our convivial gath|sS?ig I heard that
Argument of Truth (Hujjhtu' l-Haqq) ‘Umar say, “ My gr%ve will
be in a spot where the trees will shed their, blossoms on me twice
a year 4 .” This* thing seemed to me impossible, though I knew
that one such as he would not speak 'idle words.

When I arrived at Nlshapdr in the year A.H. 530 (A.D. 1135-6),
it being then four 5 6 years since that great man had veiled his
countenance in the dust, and this nether World had been bereaved
of him, I went to visit his grave on the eve of a JAiday (seeing
that he had the claim of a master on me), taking with me one to
point out to me his tomb. So he brought me out to the Hira"
Cemetery ; I turned to the left, and found his tomb situated at
the foot of a garden-wall, over which pear-trees and peach-trees
thrust their heads, and on his grave had fallen so many flower-
leaves that his dust was hidden beneath *the flowers. Then I
remembered that saying which I had heard from him in the city
of Balkh, and I fell to weeping, because on the fac'e of the earth,
and in all the regions of the habitable globe, I nowhere saw one
like unto him. May God (blessed and exalted is He!) have mercy

1 I confess that these astrological terms are beyond me. Several of them [e.g.
haylij and kadkhudd ) are explained in th? section of the Mafdtfhu' l-'ultlni which
treats of Astrology (ed._ van Vloten, pp. -225-232). See, however, Note XXfV at
the end.

2 The MSS. have Khayydml, the form usually found in Arabic books. See Note
XXV at the end.

8 A notable astronomer who collaborated with ‘Umar-i-Khayydm and others in
a.h. 467 ( a . d . 1674-1075) in the computation of the Jalali era by command of
MalikshAh. Ibnu’l-Athir mentions him under the above year by the name of Abu’l-
Muzaffar al-Isfizdri.

4 The editor of the text has adopted the reading of the Constantinople MS.,

“ every spring-tide the north wind will scatter blossoms on me,” but the reading here
adopted seems to me preferable, for there would be nothing remarkable in the grave
being covered with fallen blossoms owe a year; what was remarkable was that it
should happen twice.

6 The Constantinople MS., which is the oldest and most reliable, alone has this
reading, the others having ‘‘some years.” If “four” be correct, it follows that
‘Umar-i-Khayydm died in a.h. 526 (a.d. ii32) and not, as stated by most authorities,
in a.h. 515 (a.d, ri2i-im) 01*517 (A.d. 1123-1124).

_ e Hlra, according to as-Sam‘ani and Ydqdt, was a large and well-known quarter
lying outside Nlshapur on the road to Merv.


72


(

Third Discourse.— On Astrologers

f

upon him 1 , by His Grace and His Favour! 2 Yet although I
witnessed this prognostication on the part of that Proof of the
Truth ‘Umar, I did not observe that he had any great belief in
astrological predictions ; nor have I seen or heard of any of the
great [scientists| who had such belief.

r

Anecdote XXIX.

In the: winter of the year A.IL 508 (A.D, 1114-1115) the King
sent a messenger ^o Merv to the Prime Minister r Sadru’d-Dfn
[Abii Ja'farf'Wuhammad ibn al-Muzaffar 3 (on whom be God’s
Mercy) biddingrfcjm tell Kbwdja Imdm ‘Umar to select a favour-
able time for him to go hunting, such«that therein should be no
sno\vy r or rainy days. For Khwdja I main ‘Umar was in the
Minister’ • - ■ ■"ad to lodge at his house.

The , ■ ! sent a messenger to” summon him,

and told him what had happened. So he went and looked into the
matter for two days, and made a careful choice; and he himself
went and superintended the mounting of "the King at the
auspicious moment. When the King was mounted and had gone
but a short distance 4 , the sky became over-cast with clouds, a
wind arose, ( it ) and snow and mist supervened. All present fell
to laughing, and the King desired to turn back ; but Khwdja
Imdm [‘Umar] said, “ Let the King be of good cheer, for this
very hour the clouds will clear away, and during these five days
there will not be a dr^p of moisture.” So the King rode on, and
the clouds opened, and during those five days there was no
moisture, and no one saw a cloud. *

But prognostication by the stars, though a recognized art, is
not to be relied on, non- should the astronomer have any far-
reaching faith therein ; and whatever the astrologer predicts he
must leave to Fate.


Anecdote XXX.

It is incumbent on the King, wherever he goes, to prove such
companions and servants as he has with him ; and if one is a
believer in the Holy Law, and scrupulously observes the rites
and duties thereof, he should make him an intimate, and treat

1 A. and C. have — “cause him to dwell in Paradise,”

2 In the printed text “ Anecdote XXIX ” begins herewith the following sentence,
which is omitted in the Tihrin lithographed edition.

3 He was the grandson of the great Nizdmu’l-Mulk. His father, Eakliru’l-Mulk

Abu’I-Fath al-Muzaffar, was put to death by Sultan Sanjar, whose Minister he was,
in A.II. 500 (A. I). 1106-1107). Sadni’d-Din himself was murdered by one of Sanjar’s
servants in a. h. fir (a.d. 1117-1118). ^

4 I suppose this to lie the meaning of the words tsWL dL _j,

which is the reading of all the texts. It perhaps means the distance which the human
voice will carry when raised to its highest pitch.


A Roguish Sootii- Sayer


73


him with honour and confide in him ; but if otherwise, he should
drive him away, and guard even the outskirts of his environment
from his very shadow. Whoever does not believe in the religion
of God (great and glorious is He !) and the law of Muhammad
the Chosen One, in him can no man trust, ancL he is unlucky,
both tq himself and to his master.

In the 1 ‘ - r ’ ;n of the King Sultdn Glriydthii d-

Dunya wc. ' ibn Malikshah, styled Qasnmi

A m in l- Mtim in in (may God illuminate his tomb!) 1 , th3 King of
the Arabs Sadaqa 2 revolted and withdrew his weckfoim the yoke
of allegiance, and with fifty thousand Arabs marched on Baghdad
from Hilla^ The Prince of Believers al-MusTtzlur bi’llah had
sent off letter after letter'and courier after courier to I^fahdn,
summoning the Sultan, who sought from the astrologers the
determination qf the auspicious moment. But no such determi-
nation could be made which would suit the Lord of the King’s
Ascendant, which was retrograde. So they said, “ O Sire, we
find no auspicious moment.” “ Seek it, then,” said he ; and he
was very urgent in’the matter, and muci? vexed in mind. And
so the astrologers fled. „

Now there was a man of Ghazna who had a shop in the
Street of the Dome and who used to practise sooth-saying, and
women used to visit him, and he used to write them love-charms,
but he had no profound knowledge. By means of an acquaintance
with one of the King’s servants he brought himself to the King’s
notice’, and said, “I will find an auspicious* moment ; depart in
that, and if (t«) thou dost not return victorious, then cut off my
head.” -* ’

So the King was pleased, and mounted his horsfc at the
moment declared auspicious by him, and gave him two hundred
ch'ndrs of Nfshdpur, and went forth, fought with Sadaqa, defeated
his army, took him captive, and put him to death. And when he
returned triumphant and victorious to Isfahdn, he heaped favours
on the sooth-sayer, conferred on him great honours, and made
him one of his intimates. Then he summoned the astrologers
and said, “You did not find an auspicious moment, it was this
Ghaznawi who found it ; and I went, and God justified his fore-
cast. Wherefore did ye act thus ? Probably Sadaqa had sent you
a bribe so that you should not name the auspicious time." Then
they all fell to the earth, lamenting and exclaiming, “No astro-
loger was satisfied with that choice. If you wish, write a message


1 Reigned A.li. 498-511 (a.d. 1104-1117).

a For an account of this event and the doings of Sadaqa ibn Mazy ad, the “ Ring of
the Arabs ” here mentioned, see Ibnu’l-Athir’s Chronicle sub anno a.h. 501 (a.d.
iio7-uo8).

* This is an error, for Sadaqa never attacked Baghdad nor quarrelled with the
Caliph al-Musta?hir bi’lUh, his quarrel being with Muhammad ibn Malikshah.


f

74 Third Discourse.— On Astrologers

and send it to Khurasan, and see what Khwaja Imam ‘Umar-i-
Khayydml says.” 0

The King saw that the poor wretches did not speak amiss.
He therefore summoned one of h(g accomplished courtiers and
said, “Hold a wine-party at your house to-morrow. Invite this
astrologer of Gnazna, give him wine, and, when he is overcome
with wine, enquire of him, saying, ‘ That moment determined by
thee was not good, and the astrologers find fault with it Tell me
the secret of this.’ ”

Then fcfe^couirtier did so, and, when his guest was drunk,
made this enquiry of him. The Ghaznawf answered, “I knew
that one of two things must happen ; either that army would be
defeated, or this one. If the former, tlfen I should be loaded with
honours; and if the latter, who would concern himself about me?”

Next day the courtier reported this conversation to the King,
who ordered the Ghaznawf sooth-sayer to be expelled, saying,
“ Such a man holding such views about good Musulmdns is
unlucky.” Then 1 * he summoned his own astrologers and restored
his confidence to themf saying, “ I myself held this sooth-sayer
to be an energy, because he never said his prayers, and one who
agrees not with our Holy Law, agrees not with us.”


Anecdote XXXI.

In the year A.H. 547 (A.D. 1 1 52-3) 3 a battle was fought between
the King of the World Sanjar ibn (11) Malikshdh, and my lord
the King ‘Al^u’d-Dunyd wa’d-Din at the Crates of Awba 8 ; and
the army of Ghur was defeated, and my lord the King of the
East (may God perpetuate his reign I) was taken prisoner, and
my lord’s son the Just King Shamsu’ d-Dawla wa'd-Din Mu-
hammad ibn Mas'ud 4 * * * was taken captive at the hands of the
Copimander-in-Chief (A mir-i-sipahsdlAr ) Y aranqushHarlwa. The
ransom was fixed at fifty thousand dinars^ and a messenger from
him was to go to the court at Bdmiydn to press for this sum ;
and when it reached Herat the Brince was to be released, being
already accorded his liberty by the Lord of the World (Sanjar)',
who, moreover, at the time of his departure from Herdt, granted
him a robe of honour. It was under these circumstances that
I arrived to wait upon him.

1 A. adds: — ‘‘they killed him, and....”

3 This is the correct date, but the Ta'rikh-i-Guzida gives A.H. 544 (a.D. 1x49-
1150).

3 A village near IlerSt.

4 The second of the Kings of Shansab or Ghur who ruled over Bdmiydn, and the

son of Fakhru’d-Din Mas'iid. See p. of the Persian notes and Note I at the end.

8 The meaning appears to be that a ransom was demanded by the Amir Yaranqush,

the Prince’s actual captor, but not by his over-lord Sanjar.


Autobiographical


75


I


One day, being extremely sad at heart, he signed to me, and
enquired Mien this deliverance would finally be accomplished,
and when this consignment would arrive. So I took an observa-
tion that day with a view tp making this prognostication, and
worked out the Ascendant, exerting myself to^he utmost, and
[ascertained that] there was an indication of a satisfactory solution
to the question on the third day. So next day I came and said,
“To-morrow at the time of the afternoon prayer the messenger will
arrive.” All that day the Prince was thinking about -tfcfis matter.
Next day I hastened to wait on him. “ To-day,’ * he, “is the
time fixed. ^ “Yes,” I replied; and continued in # attendance on
him till the afternoontprayer. When the call to prayer was sounded,
he remarked reproachfully, “ The afternoon prayer has arrived,
but still no news ! ” Even while he was thus speaking, a courier
arrived bringing the good tidings that the consignment had come,
consisting of fifty thousand dinars, sheep, and other things, and
that 'Izzu’d-Din Mahmud Ifhjji, the steward of Prince Husamu’d-
Dawla wa’d-Din, w^s in charge of the convoy. Next day my lord
Shamsu’d-Dawla wa’d-Dfn was invested with the King’s dress of
honour, and released. Shortly afterwards he regained his beloved
home, and from that time onwards his affairs have prospered more
and more every day (may they continue so to do !). And it was
during these nights that he used to treat me with the utmost
kindness and say, “Niz&ml, do you remember making such a
prognostication in Herdt, and how it came true? I wanted to fill
thy mduth with gold, but there I had r to gold, though here
I have.” Then he-^alled for gold, and twice filled my mouth
therewith. Then he said, ‘Mt will not hold enough; hole! out thy
sleeve.” (iy) So I held it out, and he filled it also Mh gold.
May God (blessed and exalted is He!)*maintain this dynasty in
daily-increasing prosperity, and long spare these two Princes to
my august and royal Master, by His favour, Bounty and Grace !


(va) Fourth Discourse.

On the Science of Medicine, and the right direction
of the Physician,

Medicine is that art whereby health is maintained in the
human body ; whereby, when it wanes, it is restored ; and whereby
the body is embellished by long hair, a clear complexion,
fragrance and vigour 1 .


1 The ordinary definition of Medicine ends at the word “restored,” but the whole
of Book VIII of the Dhakhira-i-Khiudrazmshdhi deals with the care of the hair,
nails, complexion, etc.


76


t

Fourth Discourse.— On Physicians
[Excursus.]

The physician should be of tender disposition and wise
nature, excelling in acumen* this being a nimbleness of mind in
forming correct- views, that is to say a rapid transition to the
unknown from me known. And no physician can be of Render
disposition if he fails to recognize the nobility of the human
soul ; nor of wise nature unless he is acquainted with Logic, nor
can he ejfcel in acumen unless he be strengthened by God’s aid ;
and he what-not ecute in conjecture will not arrivo at a correct
understanding of any ailment, for he must derive his indications
from the pul.sdj which has a systole, a diastole, affH a pause
intervening between these two movements 1 .

Now here there is a difference of opinion amongst physicians,
one school maintaining that it is impossible tjy palpation to
gauge the movement of contraction ; but that most accomplished
of the moderns, that Proof of the Truth Abii ‘AH al-Husayn ibn
‘Abdu’lldh ibn Sind (Avicenna) 2 3 * * * * , says in his book the Qdm'tn 8
that the movement ofTiontraction also can Be gauged, though
with difficulty^ in thin subjects. Moreover the pulse is of ten
sorts, each of which is divided into three subordinate varieties,
namely its two extremes and its mean ; but, unless the Divine
guidance assist the physician in his search for the truth, his
thought will not hit the mark. So also in the inspection of the
urine, the observing of its colours and sediments, and the deducing
of some special condition from each colour (vt) are no easy
matters ; for all these indications depend qp Divine help and
Royal patronage. This quality [of discernment] is that which we
have indicated under the name of acumen. And unless the
physician knows Logic, dhd understands the meaning of genus
and species, he cannot discriminate between that which appertains
to the category, that which is peculiar to the individual, and that
which is accidental, and so will not recognize the cause [of the
disease]. And, failing to recognize the cause, he cannot succeed in
his treatment. But let us now give an illustration, so that it may
be known that it is as we say. Disease is the genus ; fever, head-
ache, cold, delirium, measles and jaundice are the species, each of
] from the others by a diagnostic sign, and in
1 '■ ■ ■ a genus. For example, “Fever” is the genus,-

wherein quotidian, tertian, double tertian and quartan are the

1 Some notes on the varieties of pulse recognized I>y the Arabian physicians will

be found in Note XXVI at the end.

3 See de Slane’s translation of /fin Kkallikdn, vol. i, pp. 440-446; von Kremer’s

Culturgesc hichte d. Orients, vol. ii, pp. 455-456; Wilstenfeld’s Gesch. d. Arab.

Aerzte, pp. 64-75; and Note XXVII, No. to, at the end.

3 The Qdntin was printed at Rome, a.d. 1595, and the Latin translation at Venice

in a.d. 1544. According to .Steinschneider, Gerard of Cremona’s Latin translation

was printed more than thirty times, and fifteen times before a.d. 1500.


Healing by Prayer


77


species, each of which is distinguished from the other by a special
diagnostic sign. Thus, for instance, quotidian is distinguished
from other fevers by the fact that the longest period thereof is a
day and a night, and that in it the/e is no languor 1 , heaviness,
lassitude, nor pain. Again Inflammatory fever 2 is distinguished
from other fevers by the fact that when it attfcks it does not
abate for several days ; while tertian is distinguished by the fact
that it comes one day and not the next ; and double tertian by
this, that one day it comes with a higher temperature and a
shorter interval, and another day in a mildei^fotmwith a longer
interval ; while lastly quartan is distinguished b'^the fact that
it attacks 9 ne day, does not recur on the secondhand third days,
but comes again on the fourth. Each of these in turn becomes a
genus comprising several species ; and if the physician be versed in
Log' . ’ 'of acumen and knovfs which fever it is, what

the ■ < is, and whether ♦t is simple or compound, he

can then at once proceed to treat it. But if he fail to recognize
the disease, then let him turn to God and seek help from Plim ;
and so likewise, if* he fail in his treatment, let him have recourse
to God and seek help from Him, seeing that all issues are in
His hands. „ "*

Anecdote XXXII.

In the year A.H. 512 (A.D. 1118-19), in the Druggist’s Bazaar
of Nishapur, at the shop of Muhammad (v.) ibn Muhammad the
Astrologer-Physician *, I heard Khwdja Im^m Abu Baler Daqqaq
saying, “In the year A.H. 502 (A.D. 1108-9) a certain notable
man of Nishapur 'vas sejzed with the colic anc> called me in.
I examined him, and proceeded to treat him, trying every remedy
suggested in this malady; but no improvement in^his health
took place. Three days elapsed. At the time of evening prayer
I returned in despair, convinced that the patient would pass
away at midnight. In this distress I fell asleep. I11 the morping
I awoke, not doubting that he had passed away. I went up on
to the roof, and turned my face in that direction to listen, but
heard no sound [of lamentation] which might indicate his decease.
I repeated the Fdtiha, breathing it in that direction and adding,
‘ O my God, my Master and my Lord, Thou Thyself hast said
in the Sure Book and Indubitable Scripture, “And we will send

1 Perhaps “ languor” is hardly strong enough. The original is takassur, literally
“ contrition," “ being broken to pieces."

See Schlimmer’s Terminologie Midico-Pharmaceutique (litho-
graphed at Tihr&n, A.D. 1874), pp- 192-197 and 285. Perhaps, however, it should
here be translated “remittent” or even “continuous.” See Note XXVI at the end.

a I.e. whether it be primary or secondary, from which of the four humours it
arises, etc.

1 The readings vary, A. has— ; B. J uo only.

The reading adopted in the text is no doubt correct.


78


Fourth Discourse.— On Physicians


down in the Qurdn what shall be a Healing and a Mercy to true
believers 1 ."' For I was filled with regret, seeing that, he was a
young man, and wealthy, and in easy circumstances, and had
all things needful for a pleasant life. Then I performed the
minor ablution, went to the oratory'and acquitted myself of the
customary pra^br 2 , One knocked at the door of the house.
I looked and saw thaf it was one of his people, who gave good
tidings, saying, ‘ Open ! ’ I enquired what had happened, and
he replied, ‘This very hour he obtained relief.’ Then I knew
that this wtothruugh the blessing of the Fdtiha of tj^e Scripture,
and that this draught had been issued from the Divine Dis-
pensary. For t have put this to the proof, administering this
draught in man} 7 cases, in all of whick it proved beneficial, and
resulted in restoration to health.” Therefore the phj'sician should
be of good faith, and Should venerate the commands and pro-
hibitions of the Holy Law. <

On the Science of Medicine the student should procure and
read the “Aphorisms” ( Fusdl ) of I-Iippocrates, the “Questions”
(Masd'il) of Hunayn 4bn Ishaq 3 , the “Guide” (Mur s hid) of
Muhammad ibn Zakariyya. of Ray (ar-Razl) 4 , and the Commentary
of Nil! 5 , who iTas made abstracts of these. After he has carefully
read [these works] with a kind and congenial master, he should
diligently study with a sympathetic teacher the following inter-
mediate works, to wit, the “ Thesaurus ” (Dhakhird) of Thfibit ibn
Qurra“, the \K itabu' t-Tibbi' A] Alansuri of Muhammad ibn
Zakariyya of Ray 7 ;, the “Direction” (Hiddya) of Abu Bakr
Ajwinf, or the “Sufficiency” (Kifdya) of Ahmad [ibn] Faraj and
the “Aims” (Aghrdd) of Sayyid I§ma‘ll 7urjfi.nl 8 . Then he

1 QuSdn, xvii, 84.

2 Each pix.yer consists of three parts, what is obligatory (far//), what is customary
after the Prophet’s example ( sunnat ), and what is supererogatory .( ndfila ). The
sunnat portion comes first, so that, in the story the narrator was interrupted before he
had performed the obligatory prostrations.

3 -See Wllstenfeld’s Geschichtc d. Arab. Aerzle, No. 69, pp. 26-19. He was born
a.h. 194 (a.d. 809) and died a.h. 260 (a.d. 873). A fuller account of all these
writers and their works will be found in Note XXVII at the end.

4 Ibid., No. 98, pp. 40-49. He is known in Europe as Rasis or Rhazes. The
Murshid here mentioned is identified by the Editor with the work properly entitled
al-Fusul fit-'tibb, or “Aphorisms in Medicine.” See p. fP. of the Persian notes,
and Note XXVII at the end.

5 See p. CPI of the Persian notes. His full name was Abii Sahl Sa'id ibn
‘Abdu’l-'Aziz, and he was a native of Nlshipiir. The nisba “Nili” is explained in
Sam’Ani 'sAnsdb (Vol. xx of the Gibb Series, f. 574 11 ) as referring to a place called
Nil between Baghdad and Kt'ifa, or to connection with the trade in indigo (nil). Here
the latter sense is evidently required. Mention is made of the brother of our physician,
a poet and man of letters named Abit ‘Abdi’r-Rahman ibn ‘Abdu’l-'Aziz, who died
about 440/1048-9.

8 Al-Qifti in his I'a' rikhu' l-Hukamd (ed. Lippert, p. 120) mentions this work, but
expresses a doubt as to its authorship.

7 See Wtistenfeld, op. cit., p. 43, No. 2. This celebrated work was composed for
Mansur ibn Ishaq, Governor of Ray, A.D. 903-9.

8 See Wiistenfeld, op. cit.. No. 163, p. 93.


I

Praise of Avicenna 79

should take up one of the more detailed treatises, such as the
“Sixteen ^Treatises,” Sitta ‘ ashar ) of Galen, or the “Continens”
(Hdwiy-To f Muhammad ibn Zakariyyd, or the “ Complete Prac-
titioner” (Kdm ilii s- Sina'at) 2 , or the “Hundred Chapters” (Sad
Bab) of Abu Sahl Mas flu 3 , df the Qdmin of Abu ‘All ibn Sind
(Avicenna) 4 , or the Dhakhira-i-Khwdrazm-shdW‘ , and read it in
his leijfhre moments ; or, if he desires to be independent of other
works, he may content himself with the Qdntin,

The Lord (vi) of the two worlds and the Guide o-f the two
Grosser Races says: “Every kind of game is^in-the belly of the
wild ass 0 ”: all this of which I have spoken is found in

the Qdmin?* with much in addition thereto ; anti whoever has
mastered the first volume <of the Qdmin, to him nothing will be
hidden of the general and fundamental principles of Mddicine,
for could Hippocrates and Galen return) to life, it were meet
that they should do reverence to thisibook. Yet have I heard a
wonderful thing, to wit that one hath taken exception to Abu
‘All [ibn Sind] in respect of this work, and hath embodied his
objections in a book, which he hath namod “the Rectification of
the Qdmin'’’'-, and it is as though I looked at both, and perceived
what a fool the author was, and how detestable is the book
which he has composed f For what right has anyone to find fault
with so great a man when the very first question which he meets
with in a book of his which he comes across is difficult to his
comprehension ? For four thousand years the wise men of an-
tiquity travailed in spirit and melted their very souls in order to
reduce the Science of Philosophy to some faxed order, yet could
not effect this, untii7 after the lapse of this period, that incom-
parable philosopher and most powerful thinker Aristotlq weighed
this coin in the balance of Logic, assayed it with the touchstone
of definitions, and measured it by the scale of analogy ,730 that all
doubt and ambiguity departed from it, and it became established


1 This, known to mediaeval Europe as the “ Continens,” is the most detailed and
most important of ar-Razi’s works. The original Arabic exists only in manuscript,
and that partially. The Latin translation was printed at Brescia in a.d. 1486, and in
1500, 1506, 1509 and 1542 at Venice. See Note XXVII at the end, No. 4.

2 This notable work, also known as ul-Kitabu' l-Maliki (“ Liber Regius ”) was com-
posed by *Ali ibnu’l-’Abbds al-Majdsi (“ Haly Abbas ” of the mediaeval physicians of
Europe), who died in a.h. 384 (a.d, 994). The Arabic text has been lithographed
at Lahore in A.H. 1283 (a.’d. 1866) and printed at Bulaq in A.H. 1294 (A.D. 1877).
There are two editions of the Latin translation (Venice, a.d. 1492, amj Lyons,
A.D. 1523).

8 Avicenna’s master, d. a.h. 390 (a.d. 1000). See Wiistenfeld, loc. at., pp. 59-
do, No. iiB; p. f of the Persian notes; and Note XXVII, No. 9, at the end.

4 See Note XXVII, No. 10, at the end.

6 See Rieu’s Persian Catalogue, pp. 466-467.

6 Meaning that every kind of game is inferior to the wild ass. It is said proverbi-
ally of any one who excels his fellows. See Lane’s Arabic Lexicon, p. 2357, s.v. tji.


8o


Fourth Discourse.— On Physicians


on a sure and critical basis. And during these fifteen centuries
which have elapsed since his time, no philosopher hath won to
the inmost essence of his doctrine, nor travelled the high road
of his method, save that most excellent of the modems, the
Philosopher of the East, the Proof of God unto His creatures,
Abii ‘All al-Plftsayn ibn ‘Abdu’lidh ibn Sfna (Avicenna). He
who finds fault with these two great men will have cut himself
off from the company of the wise, placed himself in the category
of madtwen, and exhibited himself in the ranks of the feeble-
minded. IV^y Goc^blessed and exalted is He!) keep„us from such
stumblings aud vain desires, by His Favour and His Grace !

So, if the physician hath mastered the first vclThme of the
Qrfm'in , and hath attained to forty years of age, he will be worthy
of confidence ; yet even if he hath attained to this degree, he
should keep ever with |>im some of the smaller treatises composed
by proved masters, such Cls the “Gift of Kings” ( Tnhfatu'l -
Mitlilk) 1 of Muhammad ibn Zakariyya [ar-Razij, or the Kifdya
of Ibn Manduya of Isfahan 3 , or the “ Provision against all sorts
of errors in Medical ^Treatment” ( TaddruRu anwa'i’ l-khata fi
’t-tadbiri't-tibbi ) 3 of which Abu ‘Ah' (Avicenna) is the author;
or the Khufftyy-i-'Ala'i 4 , or the “Memoranda” ( Yddigarf of
Sayyid Isma'fi Jurjdni. For no reliance can be placed on the
Memory, which is located in the most pb§tqrior (vr) part of the
brain", and when it is slow in its operatioh^hese books may
prove helpful. '

Therefore every JCing who would choose a physician must
see that these conditions which have been enumerated are found
in him ; for if is no light matter to commit one’s life and^oul
into the hands of any ignorant quack, or to entrust the care' of
one’s health to any reckless charlatan.

1 No mention of such a work«is made in any of the biographies of ar-Rdzi.

AM ‘All Ahmad ibn ‘Abdu’.r- Rahman ibn Manduya of Isfahan was a notable
physician of the fourth century of the hijra (tenth of the Christian era). He was one
of the four aud twenty physicians appointed by ‘Adudu’d-Dawla to the hospital which
he founded at Baghdad. The proper title of the work to which our author here refers
appears to be al-Kdfl , not al- Kifdya.

3 This book was printed in 1305/1887-8 at Buldq in the margins of the Mandfitt-

Aghdhiya via Maddrru-hA (“Beneficial and injurious properties of Foods”) of
ar-Rdzi. '

4 A small manual of Medicine in Persjan by the author of the JDhakhira-i-
Khviarazm-shdhl, written by command of Atsiz Khwdrazm-shdh (succeeded to the
throne 1* 511/1127) and called after him, his title being ‘Ala’u’d-Dawla.

0 Another small manual by the same author as the last. See Adolf Fonahn’s
lur Qucllenkunde der Persiscken Medisin (Leipzig, 1910), p. 105, No. 280, and

6 Concerning the Five Internal Senses and their supposed location in the brain,
see p. 8 supra, and also my Year amongst the Persians , pp. 144-145.

CSS


I

•>

Heroic Treatment by Bukht-Yish£‘ 8i


^ Anecdote XXXIII. '

Bukht-Yishu' 1 , a Christian of Baghdad, was a skilful physician
and a true and tender man ; and he was attached, to the service
of al-Ma’mun [the Caliph], Now one of the Hohse of Htishim,
a kinsman of al-Ma’mun, was attacked with dysentery, and
al-Ma’mhn, being greatly attached to him, sent Bukht-Yishu' to
treat him. So he, for al-Ma’mun’s sake, rose up, girt himself
with his soul 2 , and treated him in various-, w&ys^-but to no
purpose, and tried such recondite remedies as he knew, but to no
advantage, air the case had passed beyond his powers. So Bukht-
Yishti' was ashamed before al-Ma’mun, who, divining thi§, said
to him, “ 0 Bukht-Yishu', be Hot abashed, for thou didSt fulfil
thine utmost endeavour, and rendered good service, but God
Almighty doth not desire [that thou sbbuldst succeed]. Acquiesce
in Fate, even as we have acquiesced.” Bukht-Yishu', seeing al-
Ma’mun thus hopeless, replied, “ One other remedy remains, and
it is a perilous one ? but, trusting to the fortune of the Prince of
Believers, I will attempt it, and perchance God Mpst High may
cause it to succeed.”

Now the patient was going to stool fifty or sixty times a day.
So Bukht-Yishu' prepared a purgative and administered it to
him ; and on the day whereon he took the' purgative, his diarrhcea
was still further increased ; but next day it stopped. So the
physicians asked him, “ What hazardous -treatment was this
'Which thou didst adppt?” He answered, "The materies inorbi
of this diarrhcea was from -the brain, and until it wias dislodged
from the brain the flux would not cease. I feared that, if I
administered a purgative, the patient’s 1 strength might not be
equal to the increased diarrhoea; but, when all despaired, I said
to rrtySelf, ‘ After all, there is hope m giving the purgative,
but none in withholding it.’ So I gave it, relying on God, for
He is All Powerful; and God Most High vouchsafed a cure and
the patient recovered ; and my opinion was justified, namely
that if the purgative were withheld, only the death of the patient
was to be expected, (re) but that if it were administered, there
was a possibility of either life or death. So I deemed it best to
administer it”

1 See Wttstenfeld, op. tit., p. 17, No. 30, and Note XXVII, No. 1, at the end.
Concerning this and similar names, seeNdldeke’s Geschichle d. ArtakhsMr-i- Pdpakin,
p. 40, n. 4.

*,/.#, “ Put his whole heart into his task.


B.


6


82


Fourth Discourse.— On Physicians


Anecdote XXXIV.

The great Shaykh and Proof of the Truth Abu ‘AH ibn Sind
(Avicenna) relates as follows in the “Book of the Origin and the
Return” {Kitdkii l-Mabda wa ’ l-Ma'adf , at the end of the section
on “ the possibility of the production of exceptional psychical
phenomena”: — He says “A curious anecdote hath reached me
which I (have heard related, A certain physician was attached
to the court oft- one of the House of Saman, and there attained
so high a^tesition of trust that he used to enter'the women’s
apartments ar?d feel the pulses of its carefully-guarded and
closely-veiled inmates. One day he r was sitting with the King
in thfimj/omen’s apartments in a place where it was impossible
for any [other] male creature to penetrate. The King demanded
food, and it was brought „by the hand-maidens. One of these
who was laying the table took the tray off her head, bent down,
and placed it on the ground. When she desired to stand upright
again, she was unable to do so, but remained as she was, by
reason of a rheumatic swelling of *the joints 1 2 3 * * * . The King turned
to the physician and said, “You must cure her at once in what-
ever way yon can.” Here was no opportunity for any physical
method of treatment, for which no appliances were available, no
drugs being at hand. So the physician bethought himself of a
psychical treatment, and bade them remove the veil from her
head and expose her hair, so that she might be ashamed and
make some movement, this condition being displeasing to her,
to wit that a>ll her head and face should Ufc thus exposed. As,
however, she underwent no change, Ire proceeded to something
still more shameful, at\d ordered her trousers to be removed.
She was overcome with shame, and a warmth was produced
within her such that it dissolved that thick rheum and she stood
up straight and sound, and regained her normal condition 8 .

"Had this physician not been wise and capable, he would
never have thought of this treatment and would have been
unable to effect this cure; while had he failed he would have
forfeited the King’s regard. Hence a knowledge of natural
phenomena and an apprehension of the facts of Nature form
part of this subject. And God knoweth best!

1 The original passage is cited by Mirzd Muhammad (on p. ft • of the Persian
notes) from Add. 16,659 of the British Museum, f. 488.

* Literally, “ by reason of a thick rheum which was produced in her joints.”

3 This anecdote is told by al-Qifti (p. ort) and Ibn Abi Usaybi'a (Vol. i, p. \ CY) of

the physician Bukht-YishiS‘ and the Caliph Hardnu’r- Rashid. A versified rendering of

it is given in Jaml’s “ Chain of Gold ” (Silsilatu’d/i-D/iahad), composed in A.D. 1485.

The text of this version is given in Note XXVIII at the end.


PSYCHOTHERAPEUSIS


7


83


, (vi) Anecdote XXXV.

Another of the House of Sam&n, Amfr Mansur ibn Ntih ibn
Nasr 1 , became afflicted with nn ailmSnt which grew chronic, and
remained established, and the physicians were u 'Table to cure it.
So tha Amir Mansdr sent messengers to summon Muhammad
ibn Zakariyya ar-Razi to treat him. Muhammad ibn Zakariyyd
came as far as the Oxus, but, when he reached its shores and
saw it, he said,' “I will not embark in the boatyAtr God Most
High saith— ‘Do not cast yourselves into pePil mOTi your own
hands*') and again it is surely a thing remote* from wisdom
voluntarily to place *ne’s ^elf in so hazardous a position.” Ere
the Amir’s messenger had gone to Bukhdrd and retold, he
had composed the Kitab-i-Mansilrt whicji he sent by the hand
of that person, ■'saying, “I am this b$ok, and by this book thou
canst attain thine object, so that there is no need of me.”

When the book reached the Amir he was grievously afflicted,
wherefore he sent a thousand dindrs andr*one of his own private
horses fully caparisoned, saying, “Show him every kindness, but,
if this proves fruitless, bind his hands and feet, pHce him in the
boat, and fetch him acrOss.” They did so, but their entreaties
moved him not at all. Then they bound his hands and feet,
placed him in the boat, and, when they had ferried him across
the river, released his limbs. Then they brought the led-horse,
fully caparisoned, before him, and he mounted in the best of
humours, and set out for Bukhara. So they enquired of him,
saying, “We feared test, when we should cross thewater and set
thee free, thou wouldst cherish enmity against us, but thou didst
not so, nor do we see thee annoyed <?r vexed in heart.” He
replied, “I know that every year twenty thousand persons cross
the Oxus without being drowned, and tfciat I too should probably
not be drowned ; still, it was possible that I might perish, and if
this had happened they would have continued till the Resurrec-
tion to say, ‘A foolish fellow was Muhammad ibn Zakariyyd, in
that, of his own free will he embarked in a boat and so was
drowned.’ So should I be one of those who deserve blame, not
of those who are held excused.”

1 That is Mansur I, who reigned A.H. 350-366 (a.d. 961-976). This anecdote
is given in the AkhUq-i-JaldU (ed. Lucknow, A.H. 1283), pp. 168-170. It is,
however, a tissue of errors, for this Mansdr came to the throne at least thirty years
after the death of the great physician ar-R 4 zi, who died either in A.H. 311 or 320
(A.D. 923-4 or 932). The Mansdr to whom his Kit Abu' l-Man flirt was dedicated was
an entirely different person. See Note XXVII, No. 4, at the end, s.v, Al-Kitdbu' l-
Manfiiit. This anecdote, as Mirza Muhammad has pointed out to me, appears to be
based, so far as the refusal to cross the Oxus is concerned, on an incident in the life of
the geographer Abu Zayd al-llalkhi. See al-Maqdisi’s Ahsanu't- Tatjdstm fi matrifatfl-
Acjaltm , p. 4.

3 Qupdn 1 ii, 191.


V-


♦


6—2


84 Fourth Discourse.— On Physicians

When he reached Bukhara, the Amfr came in and they saw
one another and he began to treat him, exerting hi.'f powers to
the utmost, but without relief to the patient. One day he came
in before the Amir and said, “To-njorrow (v«) I am going to try
another method of treatment, but for the carrying out of it you
will have to sacrifice such-and-such a horse and such-andrsuch a
mule,” the two being both animals noted for their speed, so that
in one night they would go forty parasangs.

So next day he took the Amfr to the hot bath of Jii-yi-
Muliydn 1 2 , dfctside'Zhe palace, leaving that horse and mule ready
equipped and Rightly girt in the charge of his own servant at
the door of the bath; while of the King’s retinue ana attendants
he suffered not one to enter the bath. Then he brought the King
into the middle chamber of the hot bath, and poured over him
tepid water, after which h£ prepared a draught, tasted it, and
gave it to him to drink. And he kept him there till such time
as the humours in his joints had undergone coction.

Then he himself w^pt out and put on his clothes, and, [taking
a knife in his hand] 3 , came in, and stood for a while reviling the
King, saying* “O such-and-such, thou didst order thy people
to bind and cast me into the boat and tcrthreaten my life. If I do
not destroy thee as a punishment for this, I am no true son of
[my father] Zakariyya !”

The Amir was furious and rose from his place to his knees.
Muhammad ibn Zakariyyfi drew a knife and threatened him yet
more, until the Amfr, partly from anger, partly from fear, com-
pletely rose to his feet. When Muhamma4 ibn Zakariyya saw
the Amir on his feet, he turned rouftd and went out .from the
bath, an3 both he and Jiis servant mounted, the one the horse,
the other the mule, and turned their faces towards the Oxus.
At the time of the afternoon prayer they crossed the river, and
halted nowhere till they reached Merv. When Muhammad ibn
Za"kariyya alighted at Merv, he wrote a letter to the Amfr,
saying, “May the life of the King be prolonged in health of body
find effective command! I your servant undertook the treatment
and did all that was possible. There was, however, an extreme
failure in the natural caloric, and the treatment of the disease by
ordinary means would have been a protracted affair. I therefore
abandoned it in favour of psychical treatment, carried you to the
hot bath, administered a draught, and left you so long as to bring
about a coction of the humours. Then I angered the King, so as to
aid the natural caloric, and it gained strength until those humours,
alreadysoftened.weredissolved. But henceforth it is not expedient
that a meeting should take place between myself and the King.”

1 See n. 'i on p. 35 supra, and Note XVI at the end.

2 This sentence, though omitted in the printed text, seems on the whole to be an

improvement.


*


0


7


PSYCHOTHERAPEUSIS 8 $

Now after the Amfr had risen to his feet and Muhammad
ibn ZakaJiyyd had gone out and ridden off, the Amfr at once
fainted. When he came to himself he went forth from the bath
and (n) called to his servants, saying, “Where has the physician
gone?” They answered, “He came out from* the bath, and
mounted the horse, while his attendant mounted the mule, and
went off.”

Then the Amfr knew what object he had had in viqw. So he
came forth on his own feet from the hot bath,; and tidings of
this ran through the city. Then he gave %udia*:e, and his
servants ajjd retainers and people rejoiced greatly, and gave
alms, and offered sacrifices, and held high festival. But they
could not find the physician, seek him as they might^nd on
the seventh day Muhammad ibn Zakariyyd’s servant arrived,
riding the mult* and leading the horse, aAd presented the letter.
The Amfr read it, and was astonished, and excused him, and
sent him an honorarium consisting of a horse fully caparisoned,
a cloak, turban an$ arms, and a slake-boy and a handmaiden ;
and further commanded that there should be assigned to him in
Ray from the estates of al-Ma’mun 1 * a yearly allowance of two
thousand dinars in gold and two hundred ass-loads of corn.
This honorarium and pension-warrant he forwarded to him at
Merv by the hand of a man of note. So the Amfr completely
regained his health, and Muhammad ibn Zakariyyd attained his
object.

-Anecdote XXXVI. ,

Abu’l-'Abbds Ma’mun Khwdrazmshah 3 4 had a Minister named
Abu’l-Husayn Ahmad ibn Muhammad a?-Suhaylf s . He was a man
of philosophical disposition, magnanimous nature and scholarly
tastes, while Khwdrazmshdh likewise* was a philosopher and
friend of scholars. In consequence of this many philosophers
and men of erudition, such as Abu ‘All ibn Sfnd, Abu Sahl-i-
Masfhf, Abu’l-Khayr ibnu’l-Khammdr, Abii Nasr-i-'Arrdq and
Abu Rayhdn al-Bfrunf ', gathered about his court.

Now Abii Nasr-i-'Arrdq was the nephew of Khwarazmshah,


1 The precise meaning of these words has not yet been determined.

8 See p. viii of the Preface to Sachau’s translation of al-Biruni’s Chronology of the
Ancient Nations , and the same scholar’s article Zur Geschichte und Chronologic von
Chwarezm in the Sitmngsberichte d. Wiener Akademie'lor 1863. See also Note XXIX
at the end, and pp. xi\~i of the Persian notes. Ma’miin II, to whom this
anecdote refers, was the third ruler of this House, and was killed in 407/1016-17.

8 Or "as-Sahli,” but Mirza Muhammad considers “Suhayli” to be the correct
form. Pie died at Surra man ra’a in 418/ 1027-8.

4 The first, second, and last of these learned men have been already mentioned.
The third is Abu’l-Khayr al-PIasan ibnu’l-Khammar (Wtislenfeld’s Geschichte d. Arab,
Aersste, No. 115, pp. 58-59) who died A.H. 381 (a.D. 991). See also Note XXVII
at the end, Nos. 5, 6, 9 and xo.


»


%


86


Fourth Discourse. — On Physicians


and in all branches of Mathematics he was second only to
Ptolemy; and Abu’l-Khayr ibnu’l-Khammdr was the third after
Hippocrates and Galen in the science of Medicine ; and Abd
Rayhan [al-Biruni] in Asifronomyc held the position of Abu
Ma'shar and Alfinad ibn ‘Abdu’l-Jalil ; while Abu ‘AH [ibn Sind]
and Abd Sahl Masihi were the successors of Aristotle rin the
. Science of Philosophy, which includes all sciences. And all these
were, in jthis their service, independent of worldly cares, and
maintained with one another familiar intercourse and pleasant
corresponde'ftee. r *

But Fortuiys disapproved of this and Heaven fallowed it;
their pleasure was spoiled and their happy life was marred,
(vv) A*^otable arrived from Sultdn j^Iahmud Yaminu’d-Dawla
with a letter, whereof the purport was as follows. “ I have heard
that there are in attendance on Khwarazmshdh«several men of
learning who are beyond compare, such as so-and-so and so-
and-so. Thou must send them to my court, so that they may
attain the honour of attendance thereat, while we may profit by
their knowledge and skill. So shall we be much beholden to
Khwdrazmshifh.”

Now the bearer of this message was Khwaja Husayn ibn
‘Ah' ibn M/ka’il, who was one of the most accomplished and
remarkable men of his age, and the wonder of his time amongst
his contemporaries, while the affairs of Sultdn Mahmdd Yaminu’d-
Dawla were at the zenith of prosperity, his Kingdom enjoyed
the utmost splendoGr, and his Empire the greatest elevation,
so that the Ki*igs of the time used to treat him with every respect,
and at night lay down in fear oP him. So Khwdrazmshdh
assigned'to Husayn [ibij ‘AH] ibn Mlkd’Il the best of lodgings,
and ordered him the most ample entertainment; but, before
according him an audience, he summoned the philosophers and
laid before them the King’s letter, saying: “ Mahmud hath a strong
hafid and a large army: he hath annexed Khurasan and India
and covets 1 Iraq, and I cannot refuse to obey his order or execute
his mandate. What say ye on this matter?”

Abu ‘AH ibn S/na and Abu Sahl answered, “We will not
go”; but Abd Nasr, Abu’l-Khayr and Abu Rayhan were eager
to go, having heard accounts of the King’s munificent gifts and
presents. Then said KhwdrazmsMh, “ Do you two, who have no
wish to go, take your own way before I give audience to this
man.” Then he equipped Abii ‘AH [ibn SIna] and Abd Sahl,
and sent with them a guide, and they set off by the way of the
wolves 1 towards Gurgan,

1 I imagine that a word-play is here intended between Gurgan (the old Hyrcania,
of which. the present capital is Astaribdd) and as rdh-i-gurgdn (“by the Wolves’
Way”), i.e, “across the desert.” This is the reading of C.; the other texts have
“ across the desert to Mazandartln.”


?

Avicenna’s Flight from KhwArazm 87

Next day KhwArazmshAh accorded Husayn ibn ‘Alf ibn
MfkA’fl ar» audience, and heaped on him all sorts of favours.
“I have read the letter,” said he, “and have acquainted myself with
its contents and with the King’s command. Abii ‘All and Abii
Sahl are gone, but Abu Nasr, Abh Ray ban arV Abu'l-Khayr
are majcing their preparations to appear at [Mahmud’s] court,”
So in a little while he provided their outfit, and despatched them
in the company of KhwAja Husayn ibn ‘Alf ibn MfkA’fl And in
due course they came into the presence of SuJtAn Y amfnu’d-
Dawla Mahmud at Balkh, and there joined his court?

Now it^vas Abu ‘AH [ibn SfnA] whom th^ King chiefly
desired. He commanded Abii Nasr-i-‘ArrAq, who was a painter,
to draw his portrait on pa|5er, (ya) and then ordered othej^artists
to make forty copies of the portrait, and these he despatched
with proclamations in all directions^ and 1 made demand of the
neighbouring rulers, saying, “There is a man after this likeness,
whom they call Abii ‘AH ibn SfnA. Seek him out and send him
to me,”

Now when Abu ‘AH and Abii Sahl departed from Khwarazm-
shAh with Abu’l-Husayn as-Suhaylf’s man, they so wrought that
ere morning they had travelled fifteen parasangs, When it was
morning they alighted at a place where there were wells, and
Abii ‘AH took up an astrological table to see under what
Ascendant they had started on their journey. When he had
examined it he turned to Abii Sahl and said, “Judging by this
Ascendant under which we started, we shall lose our way and
experience grievous-hardships.” Said Abii Sahl, “,We acquiesce
in God’s decree. Indeed i know that I shall not come safely
through this journey, for during these two days the passage of
the degree of my Ascendant 1 falls in Capricorn, which is *he sector,
so that no hope remains to me. Henceforth only the intercourse
of souls will exist between us.” So thej' rode on.

Abii ‘AH relates that on the fourth day, a wind arose and
stirred up the dust, so that the world was darkened. They lost
their way, for the wind had obliterated the tracks. When the wind
lulled, their guide was more astray than themselves; and, in the
heat of the desert of KhwArazm, Abii Sahl-i-Masflif, through lack
of water and thirst, passed away to the World of Eternity, while
the guide and Abii ‘All, after experiencing a thousand hardships,
reached BAward. There the guide turned back, while Abu ‘Alf
went to T us, and finally arrived at NfshApur.

There he found a number of persons who were seeking for
Abii ‘Alf. Filled with anxiety, he alighted in a quiet spot, where
he abode several days, and thence he turned his face towards

1 The term tasylr is explained at p. VT • of Van Vloten’s ed. of the Ma/dtihu ' ’/*.
'ultim.


88


Fourth Discourse.— On Physicians


Gurgdn, for Qdbds 1 , who was King of that province, was a great *
and philosophically-minded man, and a friend of scholars. Abii
‘AH knew that there no harm would befall him. When he reached
Gurgdn, he alighted at a caravanseray. Now it happened that
one fell sick i^ his neighbourhood, and Abu 'AH treated him,,
and he got better. Then he treated another patient, w^o also
got better, and so people began to bring him their water in the.
morning for him to look at, and he began to earn an income,
which continued to increase day by day. Some time elapsed
thus, until lllrxcss befell one of the relatives of Qdbds ibn
Washmgir, who was the King of Gurgdn. The physicians set
themselves to fireat him, (va) striving and everting memselves to
the utmost, but the disease was not' cured. Now Qdbus was
greatlyconcerned about this, till one of his servants said to him,

“ Into such-and-such a'-caravanscray a young m;pi hath entered
who is a great physician, ancl whose efforts are singularly blessed,
so that several persons have been cured at his hands.” So Qdbus
bade them seek him out and bring him to the patient, that he,
might treat him, seeiifg that the effort of one may be more
blessed than that of another.

So they sought out Abu ‘AH and brought him to the patient,
whom he beheld to be a youth of comely countenance, whereon
the hair had scarcely begun to shew itself, and of symmetrical
proportions, but now laid low. He sat down, felt his joulse, asked
to see his urine, inspected it, and said, “ I want a man who.
knows all the houses: and districts of Gurgdn.” So they brought
one, saying, "Here you are”; and Abu ‘AH,placed his hand on
the patient’s pulse, and bade the otbei» mention the names of the
different "districts of Gurgdn. So the man began, and continued
to name the districts until he reached one at the mention of
which the patient’s pulse gave a strange flutter. Then Abu ‘AH
said, “Now give the streets in this quarter.” The man gave
them, until he arrived at the name of a street whereat that
strange flutter recurred. Then Abd 'AH said, “ We need some-
one who knows all the houses in this street.” They brought such
an one, who proceeded to give out the houses till he reached
a house at the mention of which the patient’s pulse gave the
same flutter. “ Now,” said Abet 'AH, " I want «someone who
knows the names of all the household and can repeat them.”'
They brought such an one, and he began to repeat them until
he reached a name at the mention of which that same flutter
was apparent,

Then said Abu ‘AH, “ It is finished.” Thereupon he turned
to the confidential advisers of Qabus, and said, “ This lad is in

1 Shamsu'l-Ma‘dl{ Qabus ibn Washmgir reigned A. H, 366-371 (a.d: 976-981)
and again a.h. 388-403 (A.D. 998-ioia), .To him al-Biruni dedicated his Chrotlology
of Ancient Nations. See Sachau’s English translation of that work, Preface, p..vjii.. <


0


. Avicenna’s Diagnosis of iIove 89

4 love with such-and-such a girl, so-and-so by name, in such-and-
such a hquse, in such-and-such a .street, in such-and-such a
quarter: union with that girl is his remedy, and the sight of her
his cure.” The patient, who was listening, and heard all that
Abii ‘Ah' said, hid his face "in shame beneath Wie bed-clothes.
When ^they made enquiries, it was even as Abu Alt had said 1 .
Then they reported this matter to Qdbus, who was mightily
amazed thereat and said, “ Bring him before me.” So Abb ‘ Alf
ibn Sind was brought before 'Qabus 2 . *

Nbw Qdbus had a copy of Abii ‘AH’s portrait, ^hich Sultdn
Yaminu’d-Dawla had sent to him. (a-) “Art thou Abu ‘Ali?”
enquired heT “Yes, p most puissant Prince,” replied the other.
Then Qdbus came down ftom his throne, advanced several paces
to meet Abri ‘All, embraced him, sat beside him on a^ushion
before the throve, heaped favours upon him, and enquired of him
graciously, saying, “That most illustfious and accomplished man
and most perfect philosopher must without fail explain to me
the rationale of this treatment.” “O Sire,” answered Abu ‘Ali,
“When I inspected’ his pulse and urine, P became convinced that
his complaint was love, and that he had fallen thu§ sick through
keeping his. secret. H.acJ I questioned him, he would not have
told me the truth; so I placed my hand on his pulse while they
repeated in succession the names of the different districts, and
when it came to the region of his beloved, love stirred him, the
movements of his pulse altered, and I knew that she was a
dweller in that quarter. Then I bade them *ame the streets, and
when he heard the street of his beloved the same thing occurred
again, so that I knew the same of the street also* Then I bade
them mention the names of the households in that street, and
the same phenomenon occurred when Ahe house of hgi beloved
was named, so that I knew the house also. Then I bade them
mention the names of its inhabitants* and when he heard the
name of his beloved, he was greatly affected, so that 1 knewjrhe

1 Compare the precisely similar narrative in the first story of the first book of the
Malhnawi of JalAlu’d-Dln RiSmi, and also a passage in the section of the Dhakh(ra-i-
Klm&rami-sh&M (Book vi, Guftar i, Juz’ a, ch. 3) dealing with the malady of love,
pf which this is a translation : — “ Now the lover’s pulse is variable and irregular,
especially when he sees the object of his affections, or hears her name, or gets tidings
of her. Ih this Way one can discover, in the case of one who conceals his love and the
name of his beloved, who is the object of his passion, and that in the following way.
The physician should place his finger on the patient’s pulse, and unexpectedly order
the names of those persons amongst whom it may be surmised that his sweetheart is
to be found to be repeated, whereupon it will appear from the patient’s behaviour who
his beloved is, and what her name is. Avicenna (upon whom be God’s Mercy) says:

‘ I have tried this plan, and have succeeded by it in finding out who the beloved
object was.’ ” Avicenna’s actual words are quoted from the Qdmln on pp. nv-r» . of
the Persian 'notes.

‘ 2 We have it on Avicenna’s own authority that he arrived in Jurjan just too late to

see QT ’ , * ’ ’’ ’ ■ ’ cast into prison, where he was soon afterwards

put to . pp. v» .-r» i of the Persian notes.)


go Fourth Discourse.— On Physicians

name of his sweetheart also. Then I told him my conclusion,
and he could not deny it, but was compelled to confess the
truth.”

Qabiis was greatly astonished this treatment and was filled
with wonder, aifd indeed there was good reason for astonishment,
“O most glorious, eminent and excellent one,” said he, “bpth the
lover and the beloved are the children of my sisters, and are
cousins to one another. Choose, then, an auspicious moment
that I may uni^e them in marriage.” So Master Abb Ah' chose
a fortunate hour, and in it the marriage-knot was tied, and lover
and beloved were united, and that handsome young prince was
delivered fro nr an ailment which had brought him to death’s
door. And thereafter Qabiis maintained Abu ‘Ah' in the best
mannerpossible, and thence he went to Ray, and finally became
minister to the Shdhitishah ‘Ala’u’d-Dawla 1 , a$. indeed is well
known in the history of Abu ‘Ah' ibn Sina’s life.

Anecdote XXXVII. -

The authgr of the Kdmilu’s-Sina'at 2 was physician to' ‘Adu-
du’d-Dawla :l in Pars, in the city of Shiri.z. Now in that (a\) city
there was a porter who used to carry loads of four hundred and
five hundred maunds on his back. And every five or six months
he would be attacked by headache, and become restless, remain-
ing so for ten days or a fortnight. One time he was attacked by
this headache, and when seven or eight days had elapsed, and
he had several times determined to destroy himself, it finally
happened that one day this great physician passed by the door
of his house, The porter’s brothers ran to meet him, did reverence
to him, and, conjuring him by God Most High, told him about
their brother’s condition and headache. “ Show him to me,” said
the physician. So they brought him before the physician, who
saw that he was a big man, of bulky frame, wearing on his feet
a pair of shoes each of which weighed a maund and a half. Then
the physician felt his pulse and asked for and examined his
urine; after which, “Bring him with me into the open country,”
said he. They did so, and on their arrival there, he bade his
servant take the porter’s turban from his head, cast it round his
neck, and twist it tight. Then he ordered another servant to
take the shoes off the porter’s feet and strike him twenty
blows on the head, which he accordingly did. The porter’s sons
lamented loudly, but the physician was a man of consequence

1 He was the son of Dushmanziyar, ruler over Isfahan from A.H. 398 to 433
(A.D. 1007-1041), and is commonly ’■ - v -- ” ”” ■’ ’ ' KAkilya.

a See Brockelmann’s Gesck, d. . \ 19. His name was

‘AH ibnu’b'Abbds al-Majusi, and he died in a.h. 384 (a.d.’ 994). For some account
of his life and work see Note XXVII at the end, and also p. 79 supra, n. 1 ad calc.

a The second prince of the House of Bsiya, reigned a.h. 338-372 (a.d. 949-982).


91


1

al-Majusi cures a Plethoric Porter

and consideration, so that they could do nothing. Then the
physician (Ordered his servant to take hold of the turban which
he had twisted round his neck, to mount his horse, and to drag
the porter after him round thg plain. '•The servant did as he was
bid, and made him run far afield, so that blood 4>egan to flow
from hi-g nostrils. “Now,” said the physician, “let him be.” So
he was let alone, and there continued to flow from him blood
stinking worse than carrion. The man fell asleep amidst the
blood which flowed from his nose, and three hupdred dirhams'
weight of blood escaped from his nostrils erothe haemorrhage
ceased. Thqy then lifted him up and bore him thence to his
house, and he never $roke, but slept for a day and a night, and
his headache passed away ’’find never again returned or required
treatment.

Then ‘Adud«’d-Dawla questioned tin? physician as to the
rationale of this treatment. “ O King,” he replied, “ that blood
in his brain was not a matter which could be eliminated by an
aperient of aloes 1 , ryid there was no other method of treatment
than that which !• adopted.”

(av) Anecdote XXXVIII.

Melancholia is a disease which physicians often fail to treat
successfully, for, though all* diseases arising from the black bile
are chronic, melancholia is a pathological condition which is
especially slow to pass ( Abu’l- Hasan ibn Yahyd 2 in his work
entitled the “ Hippocratic Therapeutics ” ( Mu'dlaja-i-Buqrdti ),
a book the like of which Jiath been composed by no one on
the Art of Medicine, hath enumerated the leaders of ^thought,
sages, scholars and philosophers who ha$e been afflicted by this
disease.

My master the Shaykh Abu Ja'far ibn Muhammad Abu
Sa‘d s [al-Nashawf] 4 , commonly known as Sarakh 5 , related to me,
on the authority of the Imfim Shaykh Muhammad ibn ‘Aqil al-
Qazwfnf, on the authority of the Amfr Fakhru’d-Dawla Abu
Kfilanjar the Buyid as follows :

“One of the princes of the House of Btiya was attacked by
melancholy, and was in such wise affected by the disease that

1 Aydraj or Yarn is a compound medicine of a purgative or alterative character.
The kind called Jlqrd (from the Greek iratpa) has aloes as its principal active in-
gredient.

2 See Brockelmann’s Gesch. d. Arab. Lilt., vol. i, p. 237, and p. r 0 f of the Persian
notes. He gives his own name in full as Abu’l-IIasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad at-
Tabari. He was court physician to the Buyid prince Ruknu’d-Dawla from A.H. 332
(a.d. 943-4) onwards. MSS. of the work cited exist at Oxford, Munich, and in the
India Office.

3 A. has Sa'di.

4 This nisba occurs only in L.

3 So all texts, a I 01 ' 131 hitherto unexplained.


%


92


Fourth Discourse.— On Physicians


he imagined himself to have been transformed into a cow. All
day he would cry out to this one and that one saying, ‘ Kill me,
so that a good stew may be prepared from my flesh until matters
reached such a pass that -he would eat nothing, and the days
passed and he^continued to waste away, and the physicians were
unable to do him any good. „

“Now at this juncture Abii ‘All (Avicenna) was prime
minister, and the Shdhinshdh 'Ald’u’d-Dawla Muhammad ibn
Dushina'nziyarj favoured him greatly, and had entrusted into his
hands all the affairs of the kingdom, and left all matters to his
judgement and discretion. And indeed since Alexander the
Great, whose 'minister was Aristotle, no JCing hacT had such a
minister as Abu ‘AH. And during thd time that he was minister,
he useuAo rise up every morning before dawn and write a couple
of pages of the Shifdh. Then, when the true dgwn appeared, he
used to give audience to - his disciples, such as Kiyd Ra’ls
Bahmanydr 8 , Abu Mansur ibn Zfla 1 * * 4 , ‘Abdu’l-Wdhid Jfizjanf 5 ,
Sulayman of Damascus, and me, Abii Kdlanjdr. We used to
continue our studies till the morning grew bright, and then per-
form our prayers behind him ; and as soon as we came forth we
were met at "the gate of his house by a* thousand mounted men,
comprising the dignitaries and notables, as well as such as had
boons to crave or were in difficulties. Then the minister would
mount, and this company would attend him to the Government
Offices. By the time he arrived there, the number of horsemen
(av) had reached two thousand. And there he would remain
until the noon-tide prayer, and when he retired for refreshment
a great company ate with him. Then? he took his mid-day siesta,
and when he rose up from this he would perform his prayer,
wait on the King, and ffemain talking and conversing with him
until the afternoon prayer; and in all matters of state importance
there was no third persofl between him and the King.

- “ Our object in narrating these details is to shew that the
minister had no leisure time. Now when the physicians proved
unable to cure this young man, the case was represented to that
puissant 'Prince ‘AMVd-Dawla, and his intercession was sought,
so that he might bid his minister take the case in hand. So

1 See Note XXX at end.

a One of Avicenna’s most celebrated works. See the British Museum Arabic
Catalogue, p. 745®, and the Supplement to the same, No. 71 1, pp. 484-485.

8 Abu’l-Hasan Bahmany&r ibn Marzub&n al-Adharbdyjdni al-Majrisf. He was
one of Avicenna’s most notable disciples, and died about a.h. 458 (a. 1). 1066). See
pp. V ° V-V » V of the Persian notes.

4 Alut Mansdr al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Umar ibn Zila aWsfahani. He
died in A.H. 440 (a.d. 1048-49). See p. of the Persian notes.

5 His kunya was Abii ‘Ubayd and his father’s name Muhammad. He attached
himself to Avicenna in JurjAn in A.H. 403 (a.d. 1010-1013) and continued with him
as long as he lived, viz. for about 25 years. He not only inspired and encouraged
Avicenna during his lifetime, but collected and arranged his works after his death.


93


Avicenna cures a Melancholic

‘AM’u’d-DawIa spoke to him to this effect, and he consented.
Then said»he, ‘Give good tidings to the patient, and say, “the
butcher is corning to kill thee ! ” ’ When the patient was told
this, he rejoiced. Then the minister mounted his horse, and
came with his usual retinue ’to the gate of the rodent's house,
which ^re entered with two others. Taking a knife in his hand,
he said, ‘Where is this cow, that I may kill it?’ The patient
made a noise like a cow, meaning, ‘ It is here.’ The minister
bade them bring him into the middle of the house, Bind him
hand and foot, and throw him d*>wn. When ^the patient heard
this, he ran forward into the middle of the house and lay down
on his right Tide, and # they bound his feet firmly. *Then Abu ‘Ah'
came forward, rubbing the'knives together, sat down, and placed
his hand on the patient’s ribs, as is the custom of butchers.

‘ O what a lean^cow ! ’ said he; ‘ it is not fit to be killed: give it
fodder until it gets fat.’ Then he roSe up and came out, having
bidden them loose his hands and feet, and place food before him,
saying, ‘Eat, so that thou mayst speedily grow fat,’ They did as
Avicenna had directed and set food btfforc him, and he ate.
After that they gave him whatever draughts and drjjgs Avicenna
prescribed, saying, ‘ Eat well, for this is a fine fattener for cows,’
hearing which he would eat, in the hope that he might grow fat
and they might kill him. So the physicians applied themselves
vigorously to treating him as the minister had indicated, and in
a month’s time he completely recovered and was restored to
health.” »

All wise men will perceive (At) that one cannot heal by such
methods of treatment sa\je by virtue of extrente excellence,
perfect science, and unerring acumen 1 . »

»

Anecdote XXXIX.

In the reign of Malikshdh and during part of the reign, of
Sanjar there was at Her&t a philosopher na‘m£d Adib Isma‘i'1,
a very great, learned and perfect man, who, however, derived his
income and livelihood from his receipts as a physician 3 . By him
many rare cures of this class were wrought.

One day he was passing through the sheep-slayers’ market.
A butcher was skinning a sheep, and from time to time he
would thrust his hand into the sheep’s belly, take out some of
the warm fat, and eat it. KhwAja Isma'il, noticing this, said to a

1 This story also occurs in a versified form in Jimi’s SiUilatu'dh-Dhahab, The text
will be found in Note XXVIII at the end.

3 This story in substantially the same form, is told of Thibit ibn Qurra in al-Qifti’s
Ta'Hkhu’l-flukamd (ed. Lippert), pp. tio-rei, and in the Tabaqdtu 'l-Alibba of
Ibn Abi Usaybi'a (ed. Cairo), vol. i, pp. 1 16-117. From the account there given
Mirzi Muhammad has restored (in brackets) a sentence which has fallen out in the
Chah&r Manila,


• *


94 FourI'ii Discourse.— On Physicians

green-grocer opposite him, “ If at any time this butcher should die,
inform me of it before they lay him in his grave.” “^Willingly,”
replied the green-grocer. When five or six months had elapsed,

■ - — rumoured abroad that such-and-such a butcher

«, without any premonitory illness. The green-
grocer also went to offer his condolences. He found a number of
people tearing their garments, while others were consumed with
grief, for the dead man was young, and had little children. Then he
remembered the words of Khwaja Isma‘11, and hastened to bear
the intelligence tq him. Said the Khwdja, “ He has been a long
time in dying,” Then he took his staff, went to the dead man’s
house, raised Che sheet from the face of the co^ise, [felt his
pulse, and ordered some one to strike £he scfles of his feet with the
staff, ^After a while he said to him, “ It is enough.” Then he]
began to apply the remedies for apoplexy, and on the third day
the dead man arose, and, though he remained paralytic, he lived
for many years, and men were astonished, because that great
man had foreseen that the man would be stricken by apoplexy.


^ Anecdote XL.

The Shaykhu’l-Islam ‘Abdu’lldh Ansarf 1 (may God sanctify
his spirit!) conceived a fanatical hatred of the above-mentioned
man of science, (a») and several times attempted to do him an
injury, and burned his books. Now this fanatical dislike arose
from religious motives, for the people of Herdt believed that he
could restore the dead to life, and this belief was injurious to the
common people 2 . f

Now„the Shaykh fell ill, and in the course of his illness
developed a hiccough few the cure of which all the methods of
treatment tried by the physicians availed nothing. They were
in despair, and finally se»t a sample of his urine to the Khwdja
under the name of another, and requested him to prescribe.
When Khwaja IsTna'fi had inspected it, he said, “ This is the
urine of so-and-so, who has developed a hiccough which they
are unable to cure. Bid him tell them to pound together an
istdr 3 of the skins of pistachio-kernels, and an istdr of the sugar
called ‘askarl, and administer [the mixture] to him, so that
he may recover ; and give him also this message: ‘You should
study science, and not burn books.’”

1 Concerning this celebrated mystic see pp. Too-A of the Persian notes, and Note
XXXI at the end. He was born ip a.h, 396 (A. I). 1006) and died in A.H. 481 (a.D.
io8y). He was the author of numerous works, some of which are extant, including the
welf-known Persian quatrains in which he calls himself Plr-i- Ansar, and

AtisdH. Though a mystic, he was a fanatical Ilanbali.

* Instead of the reading adopted in the text, B. and L. have 1 ) ,

“ to [his own] pretensions."

8 A weight consisting of 4J mithqals .


Instances of Medical AciAmen


95


So they made a powder of these two ingredients, and the
patient at| it, and immediately the hiccough ceased, and the
patient was relieved.


Anecdote XLI. ^

In fhe time of Galen one of the notables of Alexandria was
attacked by pain in the finger-tips, and suffered great restlessness,
being debarred from all repose. They informed Gaien, who
prescribed ap unguent to be applied to his shoiflders. As soon
as they did as Galen commanded; the patients pain ceased and
he was cured* The physicians were astonished, «nd questioned
Galen, saying, “ Wlftit w%s [the rationale of] this treatment
which thou didst adopt?” He replied, “The nerve whichrfrtipplies
the aching finger-tips has its origin in tjie shoulder. I treated
the root and thS branch was cured.”*

Anecdote XLII. 1

• •

Some traces of leprosy appeared on the chest of Fadl ibn
Yahyd al-Barmakf (the Barmecide), whereat he was greatly dis-
tressed, and put off going to the hot bath until night-time in
order that no one might become aware of this. Then he as-
sembled his courtiers and said, “ Who is considered to-day the
most skilful physician in ‘Ink], Khurdsdn, Syria and Pdrs, (ai)
and who is most famous in this respect ? ” # They replied, “ Paul
the Catholicos in Shfrdz.” He therefore sent a messenger and
brought the Catholicos frotji Pars to Baghdad. Tllfcn he sat with
him privately, and by way of proving him said, “There^is some-
thing amiss with my foot ; you must devise some treatment for
it.” The Catholicos said, “ You must abstain from all milky foods
and pickles and eat pea-soup with th« flesh of chickens a year
old, with sweets made of the yolk of eggs with honey. When
the arrangements for this diet have been confpletely established,
I will prescribe the proper drugs.” “ I will do so,” said Fadl ;
but that night he ate everything, according to his custom. They
had prepared thick broth flavoured with carroway seed, all of
which he consumed ; neither did he abstain from highly-flavoured
relishes or spiced beans cooked in oil 2 3 .

Next day the Catholicos came and asked to inspect the
patient’s urine. When he looked at it his face flushed, and he
said, “ I cannot treat this case. I forbade thee pickles and milky
foods, but thou dost partake of carroway broth and dost not

1 This anecdote occurs only in C., but is given in the printed text, which is

based on that MS.

3 The description of these dishes, so far as it goes, is given on p. t » A of the Persian
notes.


;


g6 FourtA Discourse.— On Physicians

Avoid relishes and preserves 1 , so that the treatment cannot suc-
ceed.” Then Fadl ibn Yahyd applauded the acumep'and dis-
cernment of that great man, and revealed to him his real complaint,
saying, “ It was for this that I summoned thee, and what I did
was for a prooC” ”

Then the Catholicos applied himself to the treatment of the
case, and did all that was possible in this matter. Whefi some
time had elapsed and there was no improvement, the .Catholicos
writhed rnwardly, for this had appeared no great matter, yet it
was thus protracted. At last one day when he was sitting with
Fadl ibn Yahya, he said, “Honoured Sir, I have tried every
available remedy without effect. Perchance thy fcther is dis-
pleased with thee. Satisfy him, and /I wilt remove this disease
from tiiee.”

So that night Fadl arose, went to [his father] Y ahya, fell at
his feet, and asked for his forgiveness. His old father forgave
him, [and the Catholicos continued to treat him after the same
sort as before, and he began to improve, and ere long was com-
pletely cured].

Then Fadl asked the Catholicos, “ How didst thou know that
the cause of my complaint was my father’s displeasure ? ” The
Catholicos answered, “ I tried every known remedy without
effect. So I said to myself, ‘ This great man has received a blow
from some quarter.’ (ay) I looked about, but could find no one
who lay down at night dissatisfied and afflicted through thee ;
on the contrary, many were those who lived in comfort through
thy alms, gifts and marks of favour. At length I was informed
that thy fat life r was vexed with thcg, and that there had been
an altercation between thee and him, and I knew that [thine
ailment] ^arose from thK So I adopted this treatment and it
passed away, and my conjecture was not at fault.”

After this Fadl ibn Yahya enriched the Catholicos and sent
him back to Pdrs.

Anecdote XLIII.

In the year A.H. 547 (=A,D. 1 152-3) 2 , when a battle took place
at the gates of Awba 9 between the King of the World Sanjar ibn
Malikshdh and my master ‘Ald’u’d-Dunyd wa’d-Dfn al-Husayn
ibnu’l-Husayn (may God immortalise their reigns and domains 1 ),
and the Ghurid army sustained so grievous a reverse, I wandered
about Herat in the guise of a fugitive, because I was connected
with the House of Ghur, against whom enemies uttered all

1 For the meaning of antmjdt (pi. of anba or anbaja ), see p. r 0 a of the Persian notes.

3 L. has “447," both in figures and writing, an evident error, since Sanjar
reigned A.H. 511-552, and ‘Ala’u’d-Din Ilusayn “JaMn-suz” a.H. 544-556. A 1
omits the figures, and only has “ in the year forty-seven.”

3 See p. 74 supra and note 3 ad calc ,


Autobiographical


97


a

manner of railing accusations, rejoicing malignantly over their
reverse. I^i the midst of this state of things, I chanced one night
to be in the house of a certain great man. When we had eaten
bread, I went out to satisfy a need. . That nobleman by reason
of whom I came to be there'happened to praise,\ne during my
absence, saying, “ Men know him as a poet, but, apart from his
skill in'poetry, he is a man of great attainments, well skilled in
astrology, medicine, polite letter-writing, and other accomplish-
ments.”

When I .returned to the company, the master of the house
shewed me increased respect, as do those who are in need of
some favourj^ind in a little while came and sat b£ me, and said,

“ O so-and-so, I have'one anly daughter, and, save her, no other
near relative, and she is my treasure. Lately she has" fallen a
victim to a malady such that during the* days of her monthly
courses ten or fifteen maunds 1 of sar&uineous matter come from
her, and she is greatly weakened. We have consulted the
physicians, several of whom have treated her, but it has availed
nothing, for if fhis'issue be checked, slid is attacked with pain
and swelling in the stomach, and if it be encouraged, it is in-
creased in amount, and sfre is much weakened, so that I fear lest
her strength may wholly fail.” “Send me word,” said I, “when
next this state occurs.”

When (aa) ten days had passed, .the patient’s mother came
to fetch me, and brought her daughter to me, I saw a girl very
comely, but despairing of life and stricken with terror. She at
once fell at my feet^ saying, “ O my father ! For God’s sake
help me, for I am young,, and have not yet seen the world.”
The tears sprang to my eyes, and I said, “ Be of good cheer, this
is an easy matter.” Then I placed my Angers on her pulse, and
found it strong, and her colour and complexion normal, while
most of the ten indications were present, such as a robust habit
of body, a strong constitution, a healthy temperament, a clear
complexion, a favourable age. season and climate, suitable habit,
propitious accessories and skill. Then I summoned a phlebotomist
and bade him open the basilic vein in both her arms ; and -
I sent away all the women. The bad blood continued to flow,
and, by pressure and manipulation, I took from her a thousand
dirhams' weight of blood, so that she fell down in a swoon. Then
I bade them bring fire, and prepared roasted meat beside her,
and put a fowl on the spit, until the house was filled with the
steam of the roasting meat, and it entered her nostrils. Then
she came to her senses, moved, groaned, and asked for a drink.
Then I prepared for her a gentle stimulant agreeable to her
taste, and treated her for a week until the loss of blood was


■»


"S


B.


1 B. has sirs .


7 ,


I


98 Autobiographical

made good, and that illness passed away, and her monthly courses
resumed their normal condition. And I called her my daughter,
and she called me her father, and to-day she is to me as my
other children. .

•

4

Conclusion. .

■My purpose in composing this treatise and inditing this dis-
course is not t<8 flaunt my merits or recall my services, but rather
to guide the begiifner, and alsd to glorify my master, the august,
divinely favoured, triumphant and victorious King Husdmu’d-
Dawla wa’d-Dunya wa’d-Din, defender of Iyldm and the Muslims,
Lord hosts in the worlds, pride d? kings and sovereigns, ex-
terminator of heathens and infidels, subduer of heretics and
innovators, guardian t>f the days, protector of yhe people, fore-
arm of the Caliphate, beauty of the church, glory of the state,
organizer of the Arabs and Persians, noblest of the world,
Shamsu'l-Ma'dli, Mafcku'l-Umard, Abu’l-I^asan 'All ibn (w)
Mas'fld ibnu’l-Husayn Nasiru Amiri' l-Mic’minin (may God con-
tinue his gfciry and increase his progress in prosperity !), by
whose high station the Kingly Function is magnified, and for
whose service Fortune hastens !

May God (blessed and exalted is He!) continue to embellish
the Empire with his beauty, and the Kingdom with his per-
fection ! May the eyes of my Lord’s son, that divinely aided,
victorious and triumphant Prince Shaw su'd- 1) aw la wa'd-Din be
brightened his excellent conduct and haart ! May the Divine
Protection and Royal Favour be as a buckler to the majestic
staturesf and virtuous forms of both ! And may the heart of my
Lord and Benefactor, that august, learned, just, divinely-aided,
victorious and triumphant King Fakhru'd-Dawla wa'd-Din,
Bahd'iil-Isldm wa’l-Muslimin, King of the kings of the Moun-
tains, be gladdened, not for a period but for ever, by the con-
tinuance of both 1 !

Fov an account of the House of Shansab or Kings of Ghiir and their genealogy
Nt)te I at the end* I' akhru’d-Din Mas hid, whom the author praises in the con-
eluding sentence of his book, was the first of the Kings of Bamiyan and the father of
Shamsu’d-DIn Muhammad and I.Iusamu’d-Dln Abu’l-Itasan ‘All, of whom the latter
was our author’s special patron.


FINIS.


3


*


I *

* %

, NOTES .

Mirza Muhammad has elucidated his critical edition of the Chahdr
Maqdla by copious, and valuable Persian # notes following the text
(pp. s- — r°s). Instead of translating them in extenso , it has seemed better
to incorporate the shorter ones as footnotes on the pages to which they
refer, and to distribute the longer ones, with considerable rearrangement
and condensation, under the topics of which they treat. A little fresh
matter has been added by the translator, especially in the Fourth Dis-
course dealing with Medicine, and a great deal more by Mirza
Muhammad, who carefully read and richly annotated the proofs in slip.
For the astrological ncftes (XXIV and XXXII) contributed by Mr Ralph
Shirley and Mr W. Gornold’the translator desires to express his deep
gratitude. «


7—2


• »


i


NOTES

I. The Dynasty of Ghdr or House of Shansab.

» (Text, pp. 1-2; Persian notes, pp. 90-2.)

The kings of Ghtir, under whose patronage our author flourished)
claimed descent from IDahhak (Dahak, Azhidahaka) tfye legendary tyrant
of ancient Persia, who, after a reig| of a thousand years, was finally
overthrown by Firfdun. Shansab, the more proximate ancestor from
whom they derived their name, is said to have been contemporary with
the Prophet’s cousin aild sor^in-law ‘Ah' ibn Abu Talib, to have accepted
Islam at his hands, and to have received from him a standard and
recognition of his rule. It was a source of pride to the family that during
the Umayyad period they refused to conform to the order for the public
cursing in the pulpits of the House of ‘All.

Our principal source of information concerning this dynasty is the
Tabciqdt-i-Ndsirl 1 , but the history of Herat entitled Rawddtu' l-Janndt
by Mu‘mu’d-Din of Isfizar also contains a pretty full account of them.
This, however, was composed nearly three centuries latdr (in the latter
part of the fifteenth century), and, moreover, exists only in manuscript.

The independent sway of the House of Shansab endured only about
67 years (a.d. 1148-1215) 2 , from the time when they shook off the yoke
of the House of Ghazna to the time when they succumbed to the power
of the Khwarazmshahs. They were divided into two branches, who
ruled respectively over Ghtir with their capital ^it Firuz-kuh, and over
Tukharistan with their capital at Bamiyan. The relationship existing
between the chief members of the dynasty mentioned'in this book is
shewn in the following table. ,

‘Izzu’d-Din Husayn * .

‘AlAVcl-Pm Bah&'u'd-D(n Sam * Fakhru’d-Din Mas' tid

Husayn, called ~

JahAn-suz, the
“ World-consumer”

Ghiyithu’d-Dtn Shihabu’d-Dln Shamsu’d-Dln Husdmu’d-Dln
(or Mu‘izzu’d-Din) Muhammad ‘AH

Of these ‘Ala’u’d-Dfn Husayn of Ffrtiz-ktih was the most powerful
and important, and raised the glory of his House to its highest point.
To avenge the death of his two brothers Qutbu’d-Din Muhammad and
Sayfu’d-Dfn Stiri he made war on Bahramshah, entered and occupied
his capital Ghazna, and looted, massacred and burned it for seven days,
thus earning the title of Jahdn-suz , the “ World-consumer.” He reigned
from a.h. 545 to 556 (a.d. 1x50-1161).

1 Published in the Bibliotheca Indica , and translated by Major H. G. Raverty
with copious notes. Sections xvii-xix (pp. 300-507) of vol. i of the translation are
devoted to this dynasty.

2 See Stanley Lane-Poole's Mohammadan Dynasties , pp. 291-294.


« 0


102


r

Notes on the First Discourse

Fakhru’d-Din Mas'tid, first of the Bamiydn line, brother of plusayn
Jahdn-stiz and father of our author’s special patron Husdmif’d-DIn ‘All,
outlived the year 558/1x63, in which, according to the Tabaqdt-i-N&sirf ,
he made war on his nephews Ghiyathu’d-Dfn and Shihab [or Mu‘izz]u’d-
Dfn. The ‘uA&^4aliku’l-Jibdl (“King of the Mountains”) given to him
in the text was common to all the rulers of this dynasty.

Shamsu’d-Din Muhammad, son of the above-mentioned' Fakhru
’d-Dfn and second of the Bamiyan line, survived at any rate until the year
586 /tioo» when he aided his cousins Ghiyathu’d-Din and Shihdb [or
Mu‘izz]u’d-Di'n fei their struggle against Sultan-shah ibn ifl-arsldn ibn
Atsiz Khwarazm-slufn 2 . '

Husdmu’d-IJin Abu’l-Hasan ‘All, brother of the abpve-mentioned
Shamsu’d-Din, was our author's patron to whory the Chahdr Maqdla is
dedicate^, and who must therefore have*been living in 551-2/1156-7
when it was written. He is only mentioned in the Tabaq&t-i-N&sirl
(p. 104) amongst the children of Fakhru’d-Din M^s'ud, and further
particulars of his life are lacking.

II. The mea/iing of Tamghaj or Tapghdch.

(Text, p. 9; Persian notes, pp. 92-4.)

Tamghaj is generally explained as the name of a city or district in
China or Chinese Turkistan. In illustration of this view Mfrzd Muham-
mad cites three passages from Arabic writers and some verses by the
Persian poet Mukhtari, An-Nasawi, the biographer of Sultdn Jalalu’d-
Din Khwdrazm-shah 3 , says that it is the custom of the Great Khan to
spend the summer “i# Tamghdj, which is the centre of China, and its
environs”; and this statement is quoted by Abu’l-Fida (who, however,
writes the worcf Tilmhaj or Turnkhaj) in his Geography. Al-Qazwini in
his Atharji‘l-£ildd i describes Tamghaj as “a great and famous city in
the land o( the Turks, c«mprising many villages lying between two
mountains in a narrow defile by which only they can be approached.”
Finally Mukhtari of Ghazna*in the course of a panegyric on Arslan Khan
of the Khaniyya dynasty of Transoxiana, speaks of “nimble Tamghaji
miTistrels, quick at repartee.”

It seems possible, however, that Tamghaj and Tafghach 0 are merely
variants of the Eastern Turkish word Tapghach , meaning “worshipful,”
“renowned,” and used repeatedly in the 'sense of “Chinese” in the
Orkhon inscriptions of the eighth century of our era. In this case the
title “Tamghaj (or Tapghach) Khan" commonly assumed by rulers of
the Khaniyya dynasty really signifies “the worshipful Khdn,” not “the
Khan of Tamghdj”; and the prevalent belief that there was a country
called Tamghdj arose from a misunderstanding, and from a false analogy
with such titles as Khwdrazm-shdh, which does actually mean “King of
Khwdrazm,” Mirza Muhammad, however, in a lengthy and learned

1 Ed. Calcutta, pp. 29 et stqq.

2 Ibnu’l-Athfr (ed. Tornberg), xiii, 28 ; TabaqtU-i-Nafirl, p. 52 ; LubAbtt'l-Alb&b
(ed. Browne], i, 321.

3 Ed. Houdas, pp. 4-5. 4 Ed. Wustenfeld, p. 275.

0 For this form see the Persian notes to the text, pp. 151, 1. 3, 189, 1 . 12, etc.


t


tr


# »


Note III. Great Stylists


103


note which he has been good enough to send me, proves that the name
Tamghdj w|s applied by early Muhammadan writers to a definite and
real city, identified by him on the strongest evidence with.Khdn Baligh
(“Cambaluc”) or Pekin, also called (“the Middle Capital”)

andjjula (“the Great Capital ^

See also F. W. K. Muller’s Uigimca / (Berlin, 1908), p. 13, n. 1 ad calc.

%

III. Writers adduced as models of style.

(Text, p. 13- Persian notes, pp. 95-10*.)

The Sahib Abu’l-Qasim Isiia ‘11 ibn ‘Alobad at-Talaq&nl
died in 385/9^5-6. Yaqdt, who consecrates a long notice to him in his
Irshddu'l-Arlb, or “ Difctionajy of Learned Men 1 ,” says that there are
two places called Talaqan, one in Khurasan, and the other, f*om which
the Sdhib came, between Qazwin and Abhar. Mirza Muhammad,
however, in a long manuscript note on tjiis passage, proves conclusively
that he was a native of Isfahan,

ShamsuT-Ma‘dlI Qabtis ibn Washmgfr ibn Ziyar, Prince
of Tabaristdn, was pht to death by his son •Mindchihr and nobles in
403/1012-3. Of him also Yaqdt gives a fairly lengthy notice®. He
corresponded with the Sahib above mentioned, and was very celebrated
for his skill in this form of composition. Many of his letters were
collected by Abu’l-tlasan ‘All ibn Muhammad al-Yazdadi, and extracts
are given by Muhammad ibn Isfandiyar in his History of fabaristdn as
well as by Yaqdt. I have recently acquired a MS. of Yazdadfis com-
pilation entitled Kamdlu'l-Baldgha (the “ Perfection of Eloquence ”).

Abu’l-Faraj Qryldma ibn Ja'far ibn Qudima ibn Ziyad
al-Baghdadf was born and brought up a Christian, btft was converted
to Islam by the Caliph al-Muktafi, and died in 337/948-t^ A short
notice of him also occurs in Yaqdt’s Irshdd s , where some dozen of his
works are enumerated, of which three, the Kitdbu' l-Kkardj , fhe Naqdu
’ n-Nathr and the Kitdbu' sh-Shi'r are noticed by Brockelmann (vol. i,
p, 228). Hariri mentions him in his Maqdmdt as a model of eloquence.

M : IT W ere composed m 551/1156-7 by the
ri'id, entitled Hamidu’d-Din al-Maljmddi
al-Balkhi, who died in 559/1163-4. This work has been lithographed
at Kanpdr (Cawnpore) in 1268/1851-2, and at Tihran in 1290/1873-4.
There is a very fine MS. of the 13th century of the Christian era in the
British Museum (Add. 7620).

The mention of the Maqamdt of Hamid! in this place is of great
importance in fixing the date of composition of the Chahdr Maqdla as
posterior to 551/1x56-7, for since Sultan Sanjar, who is repeatedly ( e.g .
pp. 40 and 87 of the text) referred to as still living, died in 552/1157-8,
it is evident that this date lies between these two limits (a.h. 551-552;
A.D. II56-II57).

1 Vol. ii, pp. 273-343 of Prof, I), S. Margolioulh’s edition in the “ E. J. W. Gibb
Memorial” Series (vi, 2, London, Luzac and Co., 1909).

3 Ibid., vol. vi, pp. 143-152. 8 Ibid. , vol. vi, pp. 203-205.


104


Notes on the First Discourse


Abu ‘Alf Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abdu’llah
at-Tamfmi al-BaPami was minister to the Samani Kipg Manstir I
ibn Ni1h ibn Nasr (reigned A.h. 350-366; a.d. 961-976), for whom.he
translated Tabari’s great history from Arabic into Persian. This Persian
version was lithographed at Lucknow 1 * in 1291/1874" (800 pages), and
a French translation of it by Hermann Zotenberg was published in
Paris in four volumes (1867-1874). This Bal'ami (Abd ‘Alibis often
confused with his father Abu’l-Fadl, who also bore the name of Mu-
hammad,,, was minister to Isma‘11 the Sarmini, and died in. 329/940-1,
while the son, with whom we are here concerned, died in 386/996.
Bal'am, from which?" both derive (their nisba, is said to be a town in
Asia Minor. See Sam'anf’s A nsdb (Gibb Series, vol. xx,Jf. 90' 1 ), where,
however, an alternative statement represents B^Pam as a district in the
village of Balashjird near Merv. r

Ahmad ibnu’l-Hasan al-Maymandf, entitled Shamsu’l-
Kufat, was for twenty ^ears ^minister to Sultan Mathmdd of Ghazna
and his son Masffid, and died in 424/1033. He was a noted stylist, and
caused all official documents to be written in Arabic, not, as had pre-
viously been the case, in Persian. His biography is given by al-'Utbi,
Abu’l-Fadl Bayhaql, ‘Awfi in his Lubdbu' l-Albdb , Ibnu’l-A tbit, the
Athdru'l- Wuzgrd of Sayfu’d-Dfn al-‘Aqili and the Dastdru’l- Wuzard
of Khwandamir. For the references see tfee footnotes on pp. 98-9 of
the Persian text.

Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn Manstfr ibn Muhammad al-
Kundurf, entitled ‘Amfdu’l-Mulk, was for a long while Prime
Minister to the Saljitqs Tughril Beg and Alp Arslan, and was finally
put to death at the instigation of his yet more celebrated successor the
NizamuTMulk in 456/1064, or, according to Sa^nrinf ( Ansdb , f. 488’’),
about 460/1067^-8. ,

Muhtmmad [ibn] ‘Abduh is mentioned again on p. 24 of the
text as one, of the secretaries of Bughrd Khdn of the Khaniyya (Turkish)
dynasty of Transoxiana. He flourished in the latter part of the fourth
and beginning of the fifth Centuries of the hijra, and his poems are
frequently cited in evidence by Rashidu’d-Dfn Watwat in his Hadd'iqu\s-
Sinr , or “ Gardens of Magic,” a well-known work on Rhetoric.

The ‘AbduT-Hamid here mentioned is probably ‘Abdu’l-Hamld
ibn Yahya ibn Sa‘fd, who was secretary to Marwan II, the last
Umayyad Caliph (a.h. 127-132; a.d. 744-750), and perished with his
master in the year last mentioned. It is he to whom allusion is made
in the Arabic proverb: “The art of polite letter-writing opened with
‘Abdu’l-Hamid and closed with IbnuVAmid.”

By the Sayyidu’r-Ru’asa it is almost certain that allusion is
made to Abu’l-Mahasin Muhammad ibn Fadlu’Ilah ibn Muhammad,
who bore this title, and who was one of Malikshah’s under-secretaries
and favourites. He was subordinate to Sharafu’l-Mulk Abri Sa‘d
Muhammad ibn Mansur ibn Muhammad, his chief in the same
Ministry, and both were notable secretaries and officials of the Saljdq
dynasty. See al-Bundarl’s History of the Saljuqs (ed. Houtsma), p. 59.


r


r


v r


fj


<1

Note III. Great Stylists 105

Ibn ‘Abbadf, called by Ibnu’l Athlr (ed. Tornberg, xi, 77, 78, 88,
103) “the preacher” ( al Wti'ip), died at ‘Askar Mukram in Rabl‘ ii,
547 (July, r r52). See Ibn Khallikdn (Cairo ed., iii, 539-540 = de Slane’s
translation, iii, 365-3 66). A long notice*of his father Ardashir is given
in the M irdtii z-Zamdn sub anno 496 (a.d. 1x02-3).

By Abfwardf is meant Abu’l-Muzaffar Muhammad ibn '
Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Qurashf al-Umawf al-Abiwardf,
a notable poet and philologist who died in 507/1 113-4 at Isfahan.
Yaqdt gives a long notice of him in his Irshddu'l-Arib /ed. Margoliouth,
vol. vi, pp. 341-358). | •

By G-hazzf is meant Abd Islaaq Ibrahfm ibn Yahyd ibn
‘Uthman ilon Muhammad al-Kalbf, a notable Arabic poet who
travelled widely in "Persia and fung the praises of the nobles of Khurasdn,
where his poetry, as Ibn Khallikan informs us (de Slane’s translation,
vol. i, pp. 38-43), thus obtained a certain circulation. He died at
Balkh in 5 24/1 130. Rashidu’d-Din Wtftw&t frequently quotes him in
his Hcid&'iqitl s-Sihr. There is in the Bibliothfeque Nationale at Paris a
fine manuscript of his Diwdn (Fonds Arabe 3126) transcribed at
ICarkh, a quarter of Baghdad, in 590/1194. Cither more eminent poets
of Ghazza in Palestine bore the nisba al-Ghazzi, but t]jds one, being
nearly contemporary with our author and well known in Khurdsan, is to
him the most famous. *

Abu’l-Qasim ‘All ,ibn Muhammad al-Iskafl of Nishapdr,
with whom Anecdotes II and III are concerned, completed his studies
in his native town and at an early age entered the service of Abd ‘Ali
ibn Muhtaj-i-Chaghani, one of the Amirs in the service of the House of
Saman, who made him one of his chief secretaries and held him in high
honour. He achieved *a great reputation as a stylist, anS repeated but
unsuccessful attempts were ma*de to secure his services at the Samanid
Court at Bukhara. Finally, in 334/945-6, hjg master Abu ‘All rebelled
against his over-lord Ndli I ibn Nasr the Sdmanid, but was finally de-
feated near Bukhara and compelled to flee to his own country. Amongst
those of his followers who were taken prisoner was Iskafi, whom N txh
imprisoned at Quhandiz near Bukhard. Wishing to prove him and
ascertain his real sentiments, Nuh caused a forged letter, couched in
the most flattering terms and purporting to be from a certain notable
at the Court, to be sent to him, the letter expressing a hope that he
would enter the service of Abu’l- ‘Abbas i-Chaghani, the brother of his
late master Abu ‘Ali. Iskafi, possibly suspecting a snare, simply wrote
at the foot of the letter in Arabic; “O Lord l This prison is more-
acceptable to me than that whereunto they invite me V’ When this was
shewn to Amir Ndlx he was greatly delighted and at once released
Iskafi from prison, conferred on him a robe of honour, and made him
chief assistant- secretary to Abd ‘Abdu’llah in the department of Foreign
Correspondence, of which he subsequently became chief. When Amir
Ndh died in 343/954-5, his son and successor ‘Abdu’l- Malik" continued
and even increased the honours conferred by Ndh on Iskdff, who, how-
ever, did not long survive the opening of the new reign. His death was
1 Qur'dn xii, 33.


io6


Notes on the First Discourse


mourned by many poets, including Iiazimi of Abiward, three of whose
verses are quoted in the Persian notes (pp. 102-3). Tha'^libi says in
the Yatlmatu'd Dahr (vol. iv, pp. 29-33) that Iskafi had much greater
skill in official than in private and friendly correspondence, and that,
like the celebrjged writer al-Jahiz, he was as strong in prose as he was
weak in verse.

There can be little doubt that the anecdote of the forgGd letter
mentioned above forms the historical basis of a well-known story in
the Gulktdn of Sa'di (ed. Platts, pp. 35-6; Book I, Story 25). The
same anecdote is"given by Ydqdt in his notice of Iskdfi in the Irshddu'l-
Arib (ed. Margoliofflh, vol. v, pp.f , 329-33i).

r •

IV. Historical errors i* Anecdote II.
r (Text, pp. 13-15; Persian notes, pp. 103-105.)

This anecdote furniShes ^gveral striking instances of the glaring
anachronisms and historical inaccuracies which too often deface the
otherwise admirable work of our author.

(1) Iskafi could noU-possibly have been secretary to Ndh II ibn
Mansdr, who reigned from a.h. 366 to 387 (a.d. 976-997), since, as
we have seeif, he died soon after the accession of ‘Abdu’l-Malik in
343/954-5. Nor can we suppose that we ^ire confronted with a mere
scribe’s error as to the name of the reigning king, since the whole
point of the story lies in the king’s name being Ndh.

(2) Alptagin died, according to different authorities, in 351/962-3,
352/963, or 354/965, while Ndh II ibn Mansdr did not ascend the
throne until 366/976-*/, so that to represent the former as living in the
reign of the latter is an evident anachronism. The author has probably
either confused this king with his father Mansdr I ibn Ndh (reigned
from 35e/g6r-2 until 366/976-7), against whom Alptagin actually
rebelled, .and even concfuered Ghazna (not Herat, as the author
erroneously asserts); or (and this is perhaps more probable) has con-
fused Alptagin with Abu 'Mi Simjdr, who raised a formidable rebellion
against Ndh II ibn Mansur.

(3) It is true that in 383/993-4 the above-mentioned Ndh summoned
Subuktagin from Zabulistdn to help him, but not against Alptagin, who
at this date had been dead thirty years ; and not in conjunction with
but against Abd ‘All Simjdr, who had long been in rebellion against him.

(4) It is almost certain that by “ Abu’l-Hasan ‘All ibn Muhtaj al-
Kashani...the Chief Chamberlain” our author means the famous general
Amir Abd ‘Ali Ahmad ibn Muhtaj as-Saghani {i.e. of Chaghaniydn), who,
however, died in 344/955-6, i.e. 22 years before Ndh II succeeded to the
throne, and 39 years before Subuktagin led his army into Khurasan in
383/993-4.

According to that great scholar Abd Rayhan al-Biruni l , the occasion
when this verse of the Qur'dn (xi, 34) was so aptly quoted was quite
different, viz. by Abd Ahmad Khalaf ibn Ahmad the ruler of Sijistdn

1 Al-Athdru' l-Bdqiya (ed. Sachau), p. 332.


+ *■


107


Notes V, VI and VII


(or Sistan) in reply to a threatening letter addressed to him by Nilh II
ibn Mansur, the Samanid ; and this is no doubt the correct version
of the story, since al-Blriim was as remarkable for his accuracy as our
author is for his carelessness, andj moreover, wrote more than a century
and a half earlier. %


* V. Historical errors in Anecdote III.

(Text, pp. 15-17 ; Persian notes, pp. 105-106.)

In this anecdote also our author is guilty of two historical errors.

(1) He supposes that Makan’s rebellion took p?ace in the reign of
N iih II ibn I&tnsur, whereas it really occurred in Jjie reign of his
great-grandfather Nasr JI ibn Ahmad ibn Ism a 'll, and Makan was
defeated and killed in 329/945-1, sonje 37 years before Niih’s Recession.

(2) The general who defeated Makan was not TAsh, as our author
states, but the Armr Abri ‘All Ahmad ibij Muh 14 j.


VI. Anecdote V. The Sdhib Isma‘11 ibn ‘Abbad.

(Text, pp.. 17-18; Persian notes, pp. 107-109.)

The Sdljib Isma'il ibn ‘Abbad is, as we have seen, described by the
best authorities as “of Tajaqan ” ( Tdlaqdni), not “of Ray” (Razi).
Al-Mafarrdkhi, author of a notable but rare history of Isfahan, claims
him as a native of that city, and cites verses composed by him during a
campaign in Jurjan which lend colour to this assertion 1 . Al-Mafarrdkhi
wrote his history between a.h. 465 and 485 (a.o. 1072-1092)^1 Arabic,
and there is a MS. of it (Or. 3601) in the British Museum, while I
possess another from the library of the late Sir Albert Houtum-Schindler.
It was translated into Persian by Muhammad ibn» ‘Abdu’r-Ridd
al-Husayni about 730/1329-30*0^ dedicated to Ghiyathu’d-Din Muham-
mad ibn Rashidu’d-Din Fadlu’llah. Of this Persian version (ctf which I
have since myself obtained a MS. formerly in the possession of Sir
A. Houtum-Schindler) I published an abridged translation with extracts
in the J.R.A.S. for 1901, also obtainable as*a separate reprint.


VII. Fabrics and Materials mentioned in Anecdote VII.

(Text, pp. 19-21; Persian notes, pp. no-in.)

Mirzd Muhammad has kindly communicated to me the following
shorter version of this anecdote from the Kitdbu' l- Kindya wdt-Ta'rid
of ath-Tha‘alibi (Berlin Arabic MS. No. 7337, Petermann II, 59, f. 146®)’,
who wrote about a century and a half earlier than our author :


wt J st Of. M

V* 8 *"*-* _) lyj All! y* I ^1 OljS lylio ^jl tjj,

1 Cf. p. 103 supra.


• n


io8


Notes on the First Discourse


Three of the precious fabrics mentioned in this story are included in the
glossary added by Mirza Habib of Isfahan to his edition of, the Diwdn-i-
Albha (Constantinople 1303/1885-6) of Nizdmu’d-Din Mahmiid Qari of
Yazd, the poet of clothes. Af.as “is called by the Franks ‘satin’.” Akstin
is “a black bitgcade ( dibd ), like dabiq! (a fine silken stuff) worn by the
great for ostentation.” Naslj is “silk inwoven with gold.” See Yule’s
Marco Polo (ed. 1875), vol. i, pp. 65, 67, 276 and 285. 3

Of the remainder the exact nature is more doubtful. Mirzd Muliam-
mad makes the following remarks (notes, p. no) :

Mumazzaj Spjjears to mean n. garment made of gold ‘ mixed ’ with
some other substance. This faoric is mentioned by Ibnu’l-Athlr sub
anno 5 12/111 8^-9 (ed. Tornberg, vol. x, p. 382).

Miqrddl is some precious fabric of_whic£ the exact nature is hot
clear, bi^t it is also mentioned, tyitb the addition of the epithet Rtimi
(Greek or of Asia Minor) in a quaint passage in al-Mdfarrdkhi’s History
of Isfahan (see the latf note), cited on p. ito of the Persian notes,
where a dying nobleman requests that his shroud shall be made of this
material, not, as the bystanders suggest, of plain linen, because he is
unwilling to appear before God less sumptuously clad than it had been
his habit for sixty years 'fo appear before his fellow-men.

On the nature of Ma l dinl and Malik! no information is obtainable,
nor on Tamim, which the editor of the T,ihran lithographed edition has
seen fit to emend to Tumam (pi. of Tumma ), meaning a handful of wool
or hair plucked from a sheep or other animal, an emendation neither
plausible nor appropriate to the context, although the aforesaid editor
mentions it with especial pride and satisfaction in his concluding note.

VIII. AnotEer historical error in Anecdote VIII.

^(Text, pp. 21-2 ; Persian notes, ^). in.)

In this story the author has, according to Mirza Muhammad, con-
fused Sultan Mas hid with: Sultdn Sanjar, for all the historians agree that
it was against the former, not the latter, member of the House of Saljiiq
that the Caliph al-Mustarsfxid marched forth from Baghdad. When the
'two armies met near Kirmanshah most of the Caliph’s troops deserted
to Mas ‘lid, and he himself was taken prisoner. On his arrival at Mardgha
he fell a victim to the Assassins of Alamut in 529/1134-5.

IX. The Gur-Khan and the Qara-Khita’f dynasty.

(Text, p. 22 ; Persian notes, pp. 1x2-113.)

The battle to which reference is here made took place in 536/1141-2,
and is generally known as the Battle of Qapawan ', this place being
a suburb or quarter of Samarqand. The Muslims are said to have lost
100,000 men (of whom 12,000 were “turbaned,” i.e. belonged to the
learned or clerical classes), and Sultdn Sanjar’s wife was taken prisoner.
The power of this dynasty of unbelieving Turks, known as Qara-Khita’l
and Gur-Khani, which endured for more than eighty years, dates from
this battle. They were finally overthrown by Sultdn ‘Ala’u’d-Din Muham-
mad in alliance with the Tartar Kuchluk Khan ’in 607/1210-11.

1 See Ibnu’l-Athlr (ed. Tornberg), vol. xi, p. 57.


c


r


Notes IX and X *


109


For more than two centuries which elapsed between the fall of the
Sam&nid and the rise of the Mongol power there existed in Transoxiana
a Muslim Turkish dynasty variously known as “ flak-Khani,” “Khani”
and “ Afrasiyabi.” These the Q.ira-Khita’is suffered to remain, only
... ayment.of tribifte and the acceptance of a

t 1 1 , ■ . ; at their Court. From most of%e Khwarazm-

shahs als^ they received tribute until overthrown by them in 607/1210-ir
as mentioned above.

This ’collapse of the Qara-Khita’i power proved, in fact, to be a great
calamity for the Khwarazm-shahs in particular and the Muslims iff general,
for thereby was broken down a barrsfcr which had Jiff therto effectively
protected them from the Mongols arfa other predatory heathens who
dwelt further the north and east, and so was prepared that great
catastrophe which shortly afterwards laid waste the Muslim world; a
fact emphasized by Ibnu’l-Athir (ed. Tornberg, xii, p. 235) in » passage
translated in the second volume of my Literary History of Persia , p. 430.

The word Gut* Khan 1 (otherwise Ki/f-KIuPn, Kti-Khdn, Oz-Khdn ,
Ur-Khdn or Or-Khdn) was a generic title of these Kings, not the proper
name of any one of them. Ibnu’l-Athir says : “ Ku in the Chinese language
is a title given to the gteatest of their Kings, while Khan is a title of the
Kings of the Turks, so that it [the compound Ku-Khdn J means ‘Greatest
of Kings’.” In the Ta'rtkh-i-Jahdn-gushdy (vol. ii, p. 8&) and in the
Tatrtkh-i-Jahdn-drd also it if* explained as Khdn-i-Khdndn , i.e. “ Khan
of Khans ” or “ Great Khan ” ; and on the same authority the name
of this particular Giir-Khdn is said to have been Qilshqin TAyqd.
Dr Babinger has kindly called my attention to a note on Ibn ‘Arabshah’s
explanation of Gur-Khdn by S. de Sacy in the M'einoires de I'Acadhiie
for 1822, p. 476. *

X. Atmati^In, Amir Bay&b&nl and Atsriz.

(Text, p. 22 ;*Persian notes, p. 114.)

The correct form and signification of the? first and second, of these
three names is uncertain, and the MSS. differ in their readings. The
first has been found by Mirza Muliammad it* the History of Bukhara of
Muhammad ibn Zufar ibn ‘Umar, composed in 574/1178-9, only 38
years after the Battle of Qatawan, but here also (he MSS. differ, the
British Museum MS. (Add. 2777, f. 28*) having “Aymantigin” or
“Imantigin,” and the Bibliotheque Nationale MS. (Suppl. Pers. 1513,
f. 23 b ) “ Alftigin.” It is evidently one of the numerous Turkish names
ending in tight (like Subuktigin, Alptigin, etc.) but the first element
remains doubtful. The same uncertainty affects “the son of the Amir
Bayabani, on whose identity no satisfactory light has yet been thrown.”

1 Mirza Muhammad cites two passages which show, by the word-plays wherein
lies their point, that by the Persians at any rate the pronunciation Giir-Khdn was
adopted. Khaqani says :

‘jiff dp 0^ AH e!** 1 y! Ai

‘ Jut ij Cl? ** ' »■; *'

See also vol. ii, p. 93 of the Tatriih-i-Jahd n -gushdy \

‘ jJ* 3


■**.


• «►


no


Notes on the First Discourse


The name Atsiz, also Turkish, is compounded of at (Western Turkish
Ad) “name,” and the privative siz “without,” and consequently means
“ nameless.” According to Ibn Khallikan it was customary amongst the
Turks when a man lost several sons in childhood to give this name,
which was supposed to be a protection, to a newly-born son in the hope
that he might Survive.


XI. The House of Burhan (Al-i •Burhdti).

(Text, p. 22, bis ; Persian notes, pp. 1 14-121.)

The “Sons of furhan,” or Ba^ul Maza, were one of the great families
of Bukhara, celebrated for their splendour and bounty, awl were hereditary
leaders of the Hanafl school of Sunqt doctrine which prevailed in
Transo>dana. During the later Qara-Khita’i period they held an almost
regal position, and paid tribute to that dynasty. Qazwinl in his Athdru
’ IBildd (ed. Wiistenfelfl, p. 343), composed in 674/1275 -6, mentions
‘Umar ibn ‘Abdu’-l-‘Aziz ibn Marwdn as the head of the house in his
time, and it still flourished in the reign of Uljaytd (Khuda-banda)
the Mongol (a.h. 703-716] a.d. 1303-1316), after which all trace of it
is lost. Mfrza Muhammad has collected from various sources a mass of
information about fourteen of the most eminent members of this family,
which he embodied in the notes contributed by him to my edition of
‘Awfl's LubAbu'l-Alhdb (vol. i, pp. 332-6), and which he has reproduced
in his notes to the Chahar Maqala. These are as follows.

(x) The Imam Burhan u'drDin ‘Abdu’l-‘Aziz ibn Maza of Bukhara,
the first member of the family to attain celebrity.

(2) His son Husamu’d-Din ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdu’l-'Azfz, born in Safar
483 (April 1 <390) and put to death in 536/ 1 x'i(.x— 2 after the Battle of
Qatawan by the Gilr-Khdn, as mentioned^ by our author, and hence called
“the Martyr.” See Ibn„Qutlubugha’s Tdju't-Tarajim ft Tabaqati’l-
Hanaftyja (ed. Fliigel, Leipzig, 1862), p. 34, No. 139, where five or six
of his works are enumerated.

O

(3) Taju’l-Islam Ahmad ibn ‘Abdu’l-‘Aziz, who succeeded his brother
above mentioned, Us recorded by our author, and enjoyed the favour
and confidence of the Gdr-Khan.

(4) Shamsu’d-Dfn Sadr-i-Jahan Muhammad, son of Husamu’d-Din
“ the Martyr,” who in 559/ 1 1 63-4 saved Bukhdra from being looted by the
Qarluq Turks, and whose praises were sung by Siizani in verses of which
seven are given as a specimen on pp, 116-7 of the Persian notes.

(5) Sadru’s-Suddr Sadr-i-Jahan Burhaim’d-I)in ‘Abdu’l-‘Azfz, another
son of Uusamu’d-Dfn “the Martyr,” to whom Muhammad ibn Zufar ibn
‘Umar in 574/1178-9 dedicated his Persian version of an-Narshakhi’s
Arabic History of Bukhdra, composed in 332/943-4 for the Samanid
King Niih ibn Nasr. Instances of his magnanimity and generosity are
given by ‘Awfi in his vast, but unfortunately unpublished, collection of
stories, the Jawambii l-Hikdy&t wa Laivdmi'u'r-Rhvaydt, of which two
are given in the Persian notes (pp. 117-8).


Note XI. The House of BujuiAn


hi


(6) Burhdnu’d-Din Mahmtid ibn Taju’l-Islam Ahmad, author of
the JDhakhiratu'l-Fatdwd (also called adh-DhakMratu'l-Burhaniyyd)
mentioned Ify IJajji Khalifa.

(7-10) BurMnu’d-Din Muhammad Sadr-i-Jahan ibn Ahmad, brother
of the above ; his two sons Malikif 1 -Islam and ‘Azizu’l-Islifu, and another
brother, Iftikhar-i-Jahan. The first of these four was practically King
of Bukhara and paid tribute to the Khita’is, as indicated by a passage
in an-Nasawi’s Biography of Sultan Jalalu’d-Din Mankobirnih In
' - n his way to Mecca, he was received with great

rut on his return ihere, on account? of his behaviour
h •’ ■ ■ ’■ '■’•‘hathe earned for

himself the nickname o (pr “ President of

Hell”). 111613-614/12:, ,, ", imad Khwdrazm-

shah set out on his campaign figainst the Caliph an-Nasir li-Dini’llah, as
a precautionary measure he deported these four persons (Burhanu’d-Din
Muhammad and lijs brother and two sons) from Bukhari to Khwdrazm.
Two years later (in 616/1219), when KTiwarazmshah’s mother Turkan
Khatfin decided to flee thence for fear of the Mongol advance, she put
all four of them to death, together with other hostages resident at her
capital 2 . * *

(11) Sadr-i-Jahan Sayfu’d-Din Muhammad ibn ‘Abdul-'Azfz (son of
No. 5), who is repeatedly mentioned as still living in ‘Awfi’s Lubdbu'l-
Albdb , which was written in 618/1221.

(12) Burhanu’l-Islam Taju’d-Din ‘Umar ibn Mas hid ibn Ahmad ibn

‘Abdu’l-'Aziz ibn Maza (grandson of No. 3, nephew of Nos. 6, 7 and 8,
and cousin of Nos. 9 and 10). He was one of the teachers and masters
of ‘Awff, who makes mention of him also in thS Lubdb (ed. Browne,
vol. i, pp. 169-174). • ,

(13) Nizamu’d-Dfn Muhathmad, son of the above, also mentioned

by ‘Awfi (i, 176), who spent some days with him at the town*of Arm ! 3
on the Oxus about 600/1203-4. *

(14) Another Burhanu’d-Dfn (pedigree unspecified) is mentioned by

‘Ala’u’d-Dfn ‘Atd Malik-i-Juwayni in connection with the rebellion of
TArdbl in 636/1238-9 4 . •

The latest historical reference to any member of this family occurs
in the Ta'rlkh-i-Jahan-dra of the Qarit Ahmad-i-Ghaffari, who states
that tfljaytd (Khudi-banda, ' ’ - to

embrace the Shi‘a doctrine b> of

two Sunni theologians of difi ■ . 1 ' . the

Shafi‘ 1 , and Sadr-i-Jahan of Bukhara the Hanafi. The title, place of

1 This passage is cited in the Persian notes, p. 118, fourth line from the end to
p. 1 19, 1 . 6 . It occurs on pp. 33-4 of the edition of M. 0 . Houdas (Paris, 1891), and
on pp. 41-1 of his French translation (Paris, 1895).

2 An-I~ ' ' " ” ’ l = pp. 66-7 of the French translation.

3 See 1 vol. i, pp. 69-70, and G. le Strange’s Lands of

the Easier. own is also called Amul by the Arabs, like the

better-known town ot that name in Mazandaran.

4 See Mltzd Muhammad’s edition of the Ta'rikh-i-Jahdn-gush&y, vol. i, p. 88
(“E. J. W. Gibb Memorial” Series, xvi, j).


N>


X 12


NofES on the First Discourse


origin, and theological school of the last-named all point to the conclusion
that he belonged to the Al-i-Burhdn.

' " " ” ’ , ■ - ' ’ ’ ” ' idicates the relatidhship of the

In each case the corresponding
number is given for reference to what precedes, the proper name is given
in full, and file title in an abbreviated form, where 'A. = 1 Aziz ;
B. = Burhdn ; D. = Din ; H. -- Hus dm ; If. = Iftikhar ; Is.r= Islam ;
J. — Jahdn ; M. = Malik ; N. — Nizdm ; S. = Sayf ; S. = Sadr ;
Sk. - Shams ; and T. - Tdj.

- Maza

r- f

' (i) B. D. 'AMu’I-'Aziz

I — r 1 ler

(2) I.I. D. ‘Umar “the Martyr ” (3) T. Is. Ahmad

(4) Sh.D.A. J. (s)s!j.B.

Muhammad ‘Abdu’l-'Aziz

I n n

(11) S. J. S. D. MuhamSiad

(6) B. D. Mahmdd (7) B. D.^Muliammad ( 8)11 J. ~ Malud

(9) Mils. (10) ‘A.\. (12) B. Is. T. D. ‘Umar

(13) N. D. Muhammad

XII, Bughra Khan and flak Khan in Anecdote XI.

(Text, p. 24; Persian notes, pp. 121-3.)

Our author makes' an error here in substituting the name of Bughni
Khan for that^of Ilak Khan, who was Sultan Mahmud’s contemporary.
Bughra Khan was the first King known„to history of the Afrasiydbf or
Khani Turkish dynasty of Transoxiana. The origin of this dynasty and
the period at which they embraced Islam is involved in obscurity.
Bughra Khan’s proper name is said by Ibnu’l-Athlr 1 to have been
Hariln ibn Sulayman ; bit*, by Ibn Khalddn, Hartin ibn Farrukhan
(? Qara-Khan) ‘All, and Sir Henry Howorth in his article on the Af-
rdsiyaln Turks 2 prefers the latter; but as Bughrd. Khan appears to have
struck no coins, the question remains uncertain. Bughra Khan was his
Turkish title ; his Islamic title (probably conferred by the Caliph) was
Shihdbu’d-Dawla. His territories marched with China and included most
of Eastern Turkistan, with the cities of Kashghar and Balasaghdn, which
latter was his capital. He fought several campaigns against the Samanid
Kings, in the last of which he took their capital Bukhara, but died on
his homeward march in 383/993-4”, five or six years before Sultan
Maljmud ascended the throne of Ghazna.

He was succeeded by his nephew (or, according to Howorth, his
brother) flak Khan, whose proper name appears to have been Nasiru’l-
Haqq Nasr flak ibn ‘All ibn Musa ibn Satuq, while his coins,
bearing dates ranging from a.h. 390 to 400 (a.d. 1000 to xoxo) were

1 Ed. Tomberg, ix, 68. 2 J.R.A..S. for 1898, pp. , 467-502.

* Ibnu’l-Athlr, sub anno (ed. Tomberg), ix, 70.


Notes on the Second Discourse, Kill, XIV 113

struck at Bukhdra, Khujand, Farghana, Uzkand, Saghaniydn, Samarqand,
tlsh and llaq, i.e. in all the chief cities of Transoxiana and Turkistan 1 .
He reigned fBr twenty years (a.h. 383-403 = a.d. 993-1013), overthrew
the authority of the Samanids in Transoxiana, and quarrelled with
Sultan Mahmdd over the partition* of their territories, whj^h were finally
divided between them.

XIII. Ahmad ibn ‘Abdu’llah al-Khujistani.

(Text, p. 26 ; Persian notes, pp. 123-4.) »

Kliujistan is a district dependent ]bn Badghis a^id situated in the
mountains of Herat. This Ahmad was'originally an Amir in the service
of .the Tahirids/’but on their collapse he joined the Saffa#ids, and finally
exercised authority over Che greater part of Khurasan. Finally he fought
and defeated the Saffarid ‘Amr ibn Layth at Nishapfir, struck money in
his own name, and was contemplating the conquest of ‘Irdq, when he
was murdered by same of his own servants aftei* exercising more or less
independent authority for eight years (a.h. 260-8 ; A.ti. 874-82).

In the Ta'rikh-i-Guzida 3 Hainan, the ancestor of the Samanid Kings,
is represented as the person thus affected byjFese verses; but, apart
from the improbability that Persian verse existed in his time, at any rate
in the form in which it is known to us, Hanzala, the author o? these verses,
flourished under the Tahirid* dynasty, of which the founder was con-
temporary with Asad the son of Saman.

XIV. Poets and writers mentioned in Anecdote XII.

(Text, pp. 27-8; Persian notes, pp. 125-56.)

SallamL — Abu ‘Ali as-Sallaml al-Bayhaql of Nfshapur died in
300/912-3. According Jb ath-Tha‘alibi ( Yatima , iv, 29) h* was attached
as secretary to Abii Bakr MuhUmmad ibn al-Mu/.affar ibn Muhtaj and
his son Abii ‘Ah' Ahmad. He wrote many books, of which fhe most
famous is the “ history ” referred to in the text, viz. the History of the
Governors of Khurasan, which was used by Ibn Khallikan, especially in
his notice of Ya'qfib ibn Layth the Saffarid.* A short notice of Sallami
occurs in Ibn Funduq’s History of Bayhaq, composed in 563/1167-8 in
Persian, of which a good MS. (Or. 3587) exists in the British Museum.
The text of this article is given in the original by Mirzd Muhammad on
p. 125 of the Persian notes.

Sharlf-i-Mujallidi of Gurgan. — This poet is mentioned in
‘Awfi’s Lubdb (vol. i, pp. 13-14), where he is called Abii Sharif Ahmad
ibn ‘Ali, and where this same verse is cited.

Riidaki (or -gi). — One of the oldest and most authentic noticesof this
ancient and celebrated Persian poet occurs in the Ansdb of Sam ‘am 3 ,
who says that he derived his pen-name ( takhallus ) from his native place

1 See Sir Henry Howorth’s paper referred to in the last paragraph.

2 Ed. Jules Gantin (Paris, 1903), pp. io-ji ; Gibb Memorial facsimile ed. (xiv, t),
p. 379.

3 The text, given on pp. 125-6 of the Persian notes, occurs on f. 262'* of the
“E. J. W. Gibb Memorial’’ edition (vol. xx, published in 1912).


N


B.


8


Not^s on the Second Discourse


i 14

Riidak, a district situated near Samarqand. His full name was Abti
‘Abdu’lMh Ja‘far ibn Muhammad ; he was “the first to produce good
poetry in Persian,” and he died in 329/940-1. See the late'Dr Hermann
Ethe’s monumental paper Rtfdagi, der Sa man'iden dick ter x . The vocal-
ization Rawdhaki also occurs, with *he addition of the names of the
poet’s grandfather (Hakim), great-grandfather (‘Abdu’r-Rahman), and
great-great-grandfather (Adam). See my Hand-list of Muhammadan
Manuscripts (Cambridge, 1900), No. 701, pp. 125-6.

Abu’l-‘Abbas as-Ribanjanf’s full name was Fadl ibn ‘Abbas.
See ‘Awfi’s Ltcbdb, vol. ii, p. 9. ' B.ibanjan (the correct reading is due to
the late Professor Ge Goeje) is a|pity near Sughd.and Samarqand, given
by Yaqdt in the corrupt form “ Rabaykhan.” It is aj^p mentioned in
the Ansdb of as-Sam‘dm' (Gibb Series, vol. jpc, ff. 23 b and 24s 1 -*) as
Arbinjan and Rabinjan. Mirza MuharfTmad has furnished me with a
fresh reference to this Abu’l- ‘Abbas in the ThimAnil- Quliib (Cairo ed.,
p. 147) of ath-Tha‘alibi, where some Persian verses (a good deal
corrupted in the printed text^ from an unlucky qaslda which he com-
posed on the occasion of a festival in the thirty-first and last year of the
reign of his patron Nasr ibn Ahmad the Sdmdnid (a.h. 331 = a.d. 942-3)
are cited. *

Abu’l-Mathal of Bukhara is mentioned in the Lubdb (ii, 26)
and in Asadi’s Glossary (ed. P. Horn, p. 28). The vocalization “Mathal”
is proved by a verse of Minilchihri’s in which mention is made of ten old
Persian poets, all of whom are identified by Mfrzd Muhammad, who
cites the verse (pp. 127-9 of the Persian notes). Of these the most
interesting is Shahfd of Balk!?, who resembles ‘Umar Khayyam in this,
that his real fame as a philosopher has amongst his countrymen been
eclipsed by his fame as a poet, though he was much more notable in the
former than <in the latter capacity. He is mentioned in the Fihrist,
p. 299, as a doughty antagonist of Abu B&kr Muhammad ibn Zakariyya ar-
Rdzi (thS great physician) v who wrote a treatise in refutation of some of his
opinions; Yaqiit also mentions him in his article on Jahi'idhAnak near
Balkh, the village in which he was born, while Tha'alibf reckons him as
one of the four greatest men produced by that ancient city. The correct
reading in this las£. case is given in the Paris MS. of the YaUmattdd-
Dahr\ in the printed text it appears as “Sahl ibnu’l- Hasan ” instead of
“Shahidu ibnu’l- Plusayn.” That he predeceased Rtidaki, who died in
329/940-1, is proved by a verse in which that poet laments his death.
He is casually mentioned, as Mfrzi Muhammad points out to me, in
two passages in Yaqut’s “Dictionary of Learned Men” (Gibb Series, vi,
1, pp. 143 and 149), and an article on him was included in the lost
fourth volume of this work. ‘Awfi also relates a short and rather point-
less story about him in the Jawdmi'u' l-Hikdydt (Brit. Mus. MS.
Or. 2676, f. 235 b ).

Abu Ishaq-i-Juybarf’s personal name, according to the Lubdb
(ii, n)and Asadfs Glossary (p. 17), was Ibrahim, and his father’s name
was Muhammad, The Jvlybar from which he derived his nisba was
apparently situated near Bukhara.

1 GiUinger Nachrichtm, 1873, pp. 663-742.


Noth XIV. Poets and Writers in Anecdote XII 1 1 5

Abu’l-Hasan Aghajf was one of the nobles of the Sdmanid Court

byDaqlqi 1 . This celebrated poet, as appears from

' (! ■} and Asadi’s Lughat (p. 17), was contemporary

with Ndlr II ibn Mansiir the Samdnid, wljo reigned from a.h. 366 to 387
(a.d, 976-997). Aghajl’s full ltame was Abu’l-flasai^ ‘ All ibn Ilyds
al-Aghajt (or al-Aghjf) of Bukhara. His title Aghdjl (or one of its several
variants^ appears to be a Turkish word meaning a chamberlain or
personal servant of a king, serving as an intermediary between him and
his subjects 2 . There is a notice of him in ath-Tha‘alibi’s Supplement 3
to his Yathnaiti'd-Dahr, from which we learn that* he was fond of
translating his own Persian verses intoiArabic verse, *How he understood
the art of verse-translation may be seen by comparing the Persian
verses in ‘Awms Lubdb , i, 32, 11. 1-4 with the Araffic rendering on
p. 130, 11. 5-6, of the P'JrsiatV'notes to the Chahdr Maqdla.

About Tahawf (so in all three MSS.) nothing is known 4 . For
Khabbazi of Nfehaptir, see ‘Awfi’s T^abdb,* ii, 27, where, however,
except that he is included amongst the poets of the Samdnid period, no
particulars are given. The modern Maj ma‘u' l- Fumhd (i, 199) makes
him a contemporary 41 f Riidagf, Kisa’i, etc., ^nd gives the date of his
death as a.h. 342 (a.d. 953-4), but on what authority is not stated.

Abu’l-Hasan al-KisiPf was born, as stated by himself in one of
his poems*, "on Wednesday, Shawwal 26, a.h. 341 (March 16,' 953), and
had attained the age of fifty when he wrote" it. How much longer he
lived is unknown. The late Dr Hermann Ethe wrote a valuable mono-
graph on him ( Die Liederdes Kisa'i) in die Sitzungsberichte d. Milnc/uner
Ak'ad. (philos.-phi/o/. C/asse) for 1874, pp. 133-1^3-

Abu’l-Hasan ‘A^f Bahramf of Sarakhs was not only a poet but
composed several reputable \j[orks on Prosody and Rhyme, such as
the Ghdyatu’FA rudayn, Kanzu'l-QAfiya and Khujista , ofter\ cited by
Shams-i-Qays in his Mu'jam fl Ma'dyiri Ash' dri'FAj and. His date is
not exactly known, and the statements of the Majma'u'l-Fusahd (i, 173)
tend rather to obscure than to elucidate it.*

Zfnatf, called ‘Alawi “the descendant of ‘Ali,” was one of the
court poets of Ghazna under Sultan Mahrmid and his son Mas’dd, and»
is twice mentioned by Abu’l-Fadl of Bayhaq in his Ta'rihh-i-Madtidl
(Tihran ed., pp. 125 and 276) as receiving a handsome present for
his verse.

1 The only authority for this statement is the passage in ‘Awfi’s Lubab cited in the
next line, and, as Mlrzd Muhammad now thinks, it is not certain that it will bear so
precise an interpretation.

3 For the evidence for this see a note by MfrzA Muhammad in my edition ot

‘Awfi’s Lubdb, i, 297-8. . ,

a There is a fine MS. of this Tatimma, or Supplement, in the Bibhotheque
Nationale at Paris {Fonds Arabe, 3308). Unfortunately it still remains unpublished.

4 He is, perhaps, identical with the fukhdrt (or native of Tukharistan) mentioned
in the MajmaCu'l-Fiqahd as Khabbazi’s contemporary.

0 The first eight verses are cited in the Persian notes, pp. 131-2. Ine whole
aaftda is given in ‘Awfi’s Lubdb, ii, 38-9.

0 Vol, x of the “ E. J. W. Gibb Memorial” Series.

8—3


• l)


1 1 6 Note's on the. Second Discourse

The full name of Buzurjmihr of Qayin was Amir Abii Manstir
Qasim ibn Ibrahim, and he flourished during the same period as the
above-mentioned Zinati. Abd Manstir ath-Tha‘alibi mentions him in
the Tatimmn 1 , or Supplement to his Yatlmatu'd-Dahr , as one of the
bilingual poets, ^who wrote botfi in Arabic and Persian, and quotes some
of his Arabic verses, including some very shrewd satires on a miser.

By Muzaffarl is meant Muzaffar of Panjdih (see ‘Awffs Lubdb , ii,
63-65). Dr’ Paul Horn in his edition of Asadi’s Lughat has misread
“ Marwi ”* (of Merv) as “ Hirawi ” (of Herat), and has confused this
poet with a later Txamesake who died in a.h. 728 (a.d. 1327-8).

The proper name of Mansthur! was Abd Sa'id Ahmad ibn
Mul.rammad of fiamarqand (see ‘Awfi’s Lubdb , ii, 44-4^). He is men-
tioned by Rashidu’d-Dln Watwdt in the rLLadii’ ic/n's-Sihr as especially
skilful in composing verses of the kind called Mulawwan , capable of
being scanned in two or more metres.

Mas‘udf was one of the court poets of Sultan Tvfashld of Ghazna,
whose anger he incurred, as wo learn from Bayhaql’s history 2 , by some
admonitory verses in which he (with a foresight justified by subsequent
events) warned his sovereign against the growing power of the Saljdq
Turks. r

Qasaramf was one of the panegyrists of Sultan Abd Ahmad
Muhammad ibn Mahmdd of Ghazna. He is mentioned by Asadi in
his Lughat (p. 27). His name remains unexplained, nor is it known to
what this nisba refers.

Abu Hanlfa-i-Iskaf 3 was one of the court poets of Sultan Ibrahim
ibn Mas'dd of GhaznC, (reigned a.h. 451-492 = a.r. 1059-1099), and is
repeatedly so ^escribed, in terms of the wannest eulogy, by Abu’l-
Fadl-i-Bayhaql (ed. Tibran, pp. 276-331, 387-391 and 633-636).
‘Awfi, therefore, can hardly be correct in including him amongst the
poets of SuMn Sanjar the Saljdq (a.h. 511-552 r, a.d. 1117-1157).
The account of him given in the Majma'u’l-Fusahd is full of the most
astonishing confusions and chronological errors, fully set forlh by Mlrza
Mulxammad at the conclusion of his long note (pp. 136-140 of the
Persian text) on this e poet.

Rashid! is not mentioned by any of the biographers, but somewhat
detailed references are made to him by his contemporary and rival
Mas‘dd-i-Sa‘d-i-Salman (see below) in two of his qasidas cited by Mlrza
Mul.xammad in the Persian notes (pp. 140-142).

Abu’l-Faraj-i-Rdn! was a younger contemporary of the two poets
above mentioned, for he survived into the reign of Sultan Ibrahim’s son
MasMd III (a.h. 492-508 = a.d. 1099-1114), so that the biographer
Taqiyyu’d-Din-i-Kashl is evidently mistaken in placing his death in

1 See p. x 1 5 sttpm, n. 3 ad calc . 2 Tihran lithographed ed., p. dor.

3 This is the form given here and in ‘Awfi’s Lubdb (ii, 175-6), but Abu’l-Fadl

Iiayhaqi, his contemporary and friend, calls him “ IskAfi,” which is probably the
correct form. ( Ta'rtkh-i-Bayhaql , ed. Tihran, pp. 376—28 r.) Iskaf, according to
as*Sam‘ani, is a suburb of Baghdad, but, on the face of it, it is not likely that our
IskAfi can have been directly connected with that city.


Note XIV. Poets and Writers in Anecdote XII 117

a.h. 489 (a.d. 1096). Rtfna, from which he took his nisl/a, was a place
near Lahore^ not, as asserted in the Ta'rtkh-i-Guzlda , in Khawaran of
Khurasan, nor, as the Majma'u'l-Fusahd states, near Nishaptlr.

Mas‘tid-i-Sa‘d-i-Salman, — On flu's poet Mirza Muhammad
wrote a long critical notice, based on a careful studf'of his poems,
which I ^translated into English and published in the J.R.A.S. for 1905
(pp. 693-740) and 1906 (pp. 11-51). The substance of this, which he
has summarized in the Persian notes (pp. 142-150 and 178-182) to this
text, is here given in a still more condensed form. The ppet’s family came
originally from Hamadan in Persia, b%t he himself yas born at Lahore,
of which, in several passages in his pdems, he speaks as his native place.
Five Kings of the House of Ghazna were the objects of his panegyrics,
to wit Ibrdhfm, Mas‘iid*III, 4 >hirzad, ArsMn and Bahrdmshdh, whose
reigns extended over a period of 96 lunar or 93 solar years (a.h. 45 1—
547 = a.d. 1059-1152). His special patron was Sultan Ibrahim’s son
Mahmud, who was made governor of Ii^dia in* a.h. 469 (a.d. 1076-7),
an event which the poet asserts to have been foreshadowed fifty years
earlier by the great astronomer al-Birilni in his Tafhim *. This is the
earliest date explicitly* mentioned by Mashid-LSa’d. He was probably
born about a.h. 440 (a.d. 1048-9) and died about a.h. 515 (a.d. i 12 1-2).
In a.h. 480 (a.d. 1087-8) he shared the suspicion and’disgrace into
which his master fell and w*s imprisoned in different fortresses for ten
years. At the end of this period he was set free at the intercession of
Abu’l-Qdsim, one of Sultan Ibrahim’s courtiers, and returned to his
father’s estate in India. In a.h. 492 (a.d. 1098-9) Sultan Ibrahim died
and was succeeded by his son Mas‘dd I If, who conferred the government
of India on his son Shirzdd, with whom he sent, Qiwdmu’l-Mulk Abii
Nasr Hibatu’llah of Pars as commander-in-chief and adviser. This man,
being an old friend of* the poet, made him governor ftf Jalandar, a
dependency of Lahore; but soSn afterwards fell into disfavour in which
his clients were involved, and Mas‘ud-i-Sa‘c^ was again imprisoned in
the fortress of Maranj for another period of eight or nine years* Finally,
about a.h. 500 (a.d. 1106-7), he was released at the intercession of
Thiqatu’l-Mulk Tahir ibn ‘All ibn Mushkdn. Being now sixty years of
age and worn out by his long confinements, he retired from public life
and spent the remainder of his days in seclusion. Many contemporary
poets, such as ‘Uthman Mukhtarf of Ghazna, Mu’izzf and Sana’l (who
first collected and edited his poetry) bear witness to his pre-eminence
in their art.

Jamalu’d-Din Muhammad ibn Nasir al-‘Alawi and his brother
Sayyid Hasan ibn Ndsir of Ghazna were two well-known poets of the
court of Bahramsbah, as was also Shihabu’d-Din Shah ‘Ah Abu Rija.
See ‘Awfi’s Lubdbu’l-Albdb , vol. ii, pp. 267-282.

There is a faint probability that Ahmad-i-Khalaf may have been
the son of Khalaf ibn Alimad, the ruler of Sistan, a probability enhanced
by the fact that the latter bore the kunya of Abii Ahmad, although
there is no other record of the existence of such a son.

1 See the verses from this interesting poem cited on pp. 144-5 of the Persian notes,
and note 1 at tire foot of the latter.


I IS


Notes on the Second Discourse


‘UthmAn ibn Muhammad Mukhtarf of Ghazna died in a.h. 544
(a.d. 1149-1150) or a.h. 554 (a.d. 1159). He was the jjpiegyrist of
ArslAn and his brother and successor Bahramshah of the House of
Ghazna, whose reigns extended from a.h. 509-552 (a.d. 1x15-1x57);
of ArslAnshah Che Saljdq of KirmAn (a.h. 494-536 = a.d. 1100-X141);
and of Arslan KMn Muhammad of the Turkish Khaniyya dynasty of
Transoxiana (a.h. 495~524=a.d. 1101-1130). Mirza Muljammtfii (p. 151
of the Persian notes) calls attention to some extraordinary chronological
errors in the notice of this poet in the Majma‘u' l-Fusahd, and some
arbitrary alteratidhs of the text of pertain poems into which these errors
have misled the au(nor. A

Abu’l-Majd fMajdud ibn Adam as-Sana’f of Gtlkzna, the well-
known mystical poet, author of the Hadtfatu 'l-IEtaqlqa and an extensive
Diw&n , died, according to the most correct statement, in a.h. 545
(a.d. 1 150-1). The date given by Jami in his Nafahatu' l-Uns (p. 697),
viz. a.h. 525 (a.d. 1x31), is certainly much too early; since Sana’i com-
posed verses on the death of Mu'izzi, which took place in a.h. 542
(a.d. 1147-8).

Najibf of Fargh&fta (of whom further mention is made in Anec-
dote XIX) wajs one of the court poets of Khiqlr Khan ibn Tafghaj KhAn
(of the Khaniyya dynasty of Transoxiana) who succeeded to the throne
in a.h. 472 (a.d. 1079-1080) and died after a brief reign. ‘Am'aq of
BukharA, poet-laureate of the same king, died, according to Taqiyyu’d-
Dfn of KAshan, in a.h. 543 (a.d. 1148-9). Abd Muhammad ‘Abdu’llAh
(or ‘Abdu’s-Sayyid) RashfdHof Samarqand, Najj&r-i-Sagharjf
(from Sagharj, a village of Sughd), ‘All PAnfdhf and Pisar-i-
Darghush were potts attached to the same court, of whom little or
nothing is known. *

Abu’l-Maltainid Mahmiid ibn ‘Umar al-Jawharf (the Jeweller) '
as-$A’igh l '(the Goldsmith) gf Herat was contemporary with Farrukh-zAd,
SultAn of Ghazna (a.h. 444-451; a.d. 1052-9). A notice of him is
given in ‘Awfi’s Lubab (ii, 110-117).

The Dihqan ‘AH Shatranjf of Samarqand, another poet of Trans-
oxiana, is said by the Majma'u’ 1 -Fusaha to have been a pupil of the
celebrated satirist Srizani, who died, according to Taqiyyu’d-Dfn of
KAshan, in a.h. 569 (a.d. 1 173-4).

Mansur ibn ‘AH al-Mantiqf of Ray, whose verses are repeatedly
cited in evidence by Rashidu’d-Din WatwAt in his Hadd'iqu' s-Sihr, was
one of the poets attached to the Sahib Isma‘i '1 ibn ‘AbbAd ( Liibdb , ii,
16-18).

Abd Zayd Muhammad ibn ‘AH al-Ghada’irf of Ray was a con-
temporary of ‘Unsun and his circle, and died, according to the Majma'u'l-
Fusahd, in a.h. 426 (a.d. 1034-5). His nisba, GhadA’iri, is explained 1
as meaning “potter,” “tile-maker,” ghad&ir being the plural of ghaddra,
a kind of sticky, greenish clay used for making pottery. The form
GhadA’iri (not Ghadari, as the Majma'u' l-Fusahd has it) is proved cor-

1 See the A nsAb of as-Sam‘ani (Gibb Series, voi. xx), f. 409 b .


Note XIV. Poets and Writers in Anecdote XII 119

rect by verses of the poet himself and of his contemporary ‘Unsurf
(see Persian notes, p. 153). Miniichihrf, it is true, uses the form G had an,
but apparently only from the requirements of his metre.

Bundar of Ray, chiefly notable for* his Fahlawiyydt , or verses in
dialect 1 , was a contemporary of the Sahib Isma ‘11 ibrPAbbad and of
, ’ ' r ' '. and therefore flourished between a.h. 387

. ' . ■ ■ . 29).

Though all the MSS. have Farrukhf of Gurgan it seems probable
that it should be Fakhrf, i.e. Fakhr^’d-Din As‘ad of fturgan, author of
the well-known romantic poem on the loves of Wfe and Ramin. The
only well-known Farrukhi, to whom Anecdote XV is devoted, was from
Sistdn. * *

’ v 1

Abu’l-Uasan Muhammad ibn Isma'il al-L 4 mi‘f al-Jujjanf ad-
Dihistanf was one of the poets of Malikshdh the Saljilq and his
celebrated Minister Nizamu’l-Mulk, and was the contemporary, of
Burhani, the father of Mu'izzf. *

“BAba” Ja'far of Hamadan was a friend of Baba Tahir, and
contemporary with Sv.ltan Tughril the Saljv% See vol. ii of my Lit.
Hist, of Persia, p. 260.

The only other mention q£ Dur-Ffrtiz-i-Fakhrf at present noticed
occurs in al-Mafarritkhl’s “ Beauties of Isfahan,” composed in the fifth
century of the hijrd (eleventh of the Christian era), where he is described
as contemporary and is given the kunya of Abu’l-Fadl.

‘Abdu’l-Malik Burhanf of Nish&ptirt entitled Amiru’sh-Shu'ard, who
died at Qazwfn early in. the reign of Malikshah,*was the father of the
more celebrated Mu^zzf, whose early struggles are described in
Anecdote XVI and who was qpcidentally shot by SultdrrSanjar in a.h.
542 (a.d. 1147-8). ,

The Dih-Khuda AbuT-Ma‘alf of R&y was the panegyrist of
Mas ‘ud ibn Muhammad ibn Malikshah the Saljdq (reigned a.h. 527-
547; a.d. 1133-1152), and died, according to the Majtna ‘u'l-Fusahd,
in a.h. 541 (a.d. 1x46-7). See 'Awfi’s Lubdb, ii, 2^8-236.

The Amfr ‘Amid Kamdlu’d-Din of Bukhdrit, known as Kamalf, was
skilled in music as well as poetry, and was one of the favourites of
Sultan Sanjar. See ‘Awfi’s Lubdb, i, 86-91.

By Shihabf Shihabu’d-Din Ahmad ibnu’l-Mu’ayyad an-Nasafi as-
Samarqandf appears to be meant. The Majma'u’l-Pusahd quotes several
of his qcisjdas in praise of Ruknu’d-Din Qilij 'J’amghij Khan Mas'dd, of
the Khdniyya dynasty, who reigned from a.h. 488-494 (a.d. 1095-1101)

Abu’l-Qasim Ziyad ibn Muhammad al-Qamarf al-Jurjanf was a
contemporary of Shamsu’l-Ma'ali Qabds ibn Washmgfr, who was killed
in a.h. 403 (a.d. 1012-1013). See ‘Awfi’s Lubdl), ii, 19—20.

1 See my edition of Dawlatshdh, pp. 43-3; Majdlisu' 1 -MiV rnittln (Tihrdn lith. ed.,
A.H. 1268); Ta'Hkk-i-Gtizida (Gibb Series, xiv, 1), p. 8x6; and the Mu'jam of
Shams-i-Qays (Gibb Series, x), pp. 145 and 146.


120


Note's on the Second Discourse -


The only other mention of Rafi‘f of NfshApur occurs in the
Majma'u'l-Fufahd , from which it appears that he was a contemporary of
Sultdn Malimdd of Ghazna (a.h. 388-421 ; a.d. 998-103 oj.

XV. Th^.Vengeance of Sultan ‘Ala’u’d-DIn Husayn
Jahan-suz.

(Text, p. 29 ; Persian notes, pp. 156-9.) r

By “those two Kings, the Prince-martyr and the laudable Monarch”
are meant Qutbu’d-Din Muhammad ibn ‘Izzu’d-Din Husayn Mahku’l-
Jib&l and his brother Sayfu’d-DinfSdrl, the brothers of SultAn ‘Ald’u’d-
Din Husayn. Qutbu’d-Din, whos# capital was Flrdz-kdh, had quarrelled
with his brothers and gone to Ghazna, where BahMknshAh at first
treated him as an honoured guest, but su]j)sequ<K»tly, his suspicion being
aroused by intriguers, poisoned him. Sayfu’d-Dfn on hearing this
marched on Ghazna with a large army. Bahramshah fled to India, and
Sayfu’d-Din occupied th£ city 1( took possession of the> throne, and soon
disbanded a great part of his army. On the approach of winter, when the
roads to Ghur were blocked with snow and the arrival of reinforcements
was impossible, Bahramshah, at the instigation oQhis subjects, suddenly
returned to Ghazna, took^captive Sayfu’d-JMn and his followers, and put
them to deatlrin the year a.h. 544 (a.d. 1149-1150).

Sultan ‘Ala’u'd-Din Husayn, furious aWhe loss of a second brother,
sent a threatening quatrain 1 to the Chief Judge of Ghazna, and,
assembling a large army from Ghdr and Gharjislan, marched on Ghazna
and proceeded to make good his threats. Having thrice defeated
Bahrlmshah and compelled hftb again to retire to India, he occupied
Ghazna, and for sevep days and nights gave it up to slaughter, pillage
and destruction. He* killed the men, took captive the women and
children, and cftused the bodies of all the Kings of Ghazna, except those
of SuitAn Mahmud, Mas'ud and Ibrahlrfi, to be exhumed and burned.
During the seven days of^ massacre and pillage he was drinking and
making merry in the Royal Palace of Ghazna, and at the end of this
period, when he put a stop to the slaughter, he ordered his minstrels to
sing some rather fine and spirited verses which he had composed for the
occasion After speeding another week in mourning for his brothers, he
returned to Ghdr with their effects, destroying on his way all the fine
buildings erected by Sultan Mahmud of Ghazna. On reaching Firdz-kdh
he composed another fine but arrogant piece of poetry 3 which he bade
his minstrels sing. These events took place in a.h. 545 (a.d. 1150-1),
the year of his accession to the throne, or in the following year. Two or
three years later, in a.h. 547 (a.d. 1 152-3), he was himself defeated and
taken prisoner at Awba near Herat, by Sultan Sanjar the Saljuq, together
with our author, who refers to this event in Anecdote XXXI.

The chief authority for the history of the Kings of Ghdr is the
Ta bag at- i- Ndsirt of the Qadi Minhaju’d-Dfn ‘Uthman ibn Siraju’d-Din
Muhammad, who was their contemporary (born 589/1193 and survived
the year 658/1260). This valuable history has been published in the
Bibliotheca Indica Series, but the late Major H. G. Raverty’s English

1 Persian notes, p. 157, II. 7-8. 2 Ibid., p. T57, 1. 18 — p. 158, 1. 5.

3 Ibid . , p. 158, 1. n — p, 159, ]. 1,


Note XVI. The JB-yi-MijliyAn oi^ BukhArA 121

translation (2 vols. containing lxiv+i296+xxvi + 272 pp., London, 1881)
is even more valuable, being based on a careful and extensive collation
of fresh MS$., and furnished with numerous notes, critical, historical and
geographical. The first six of the twenty-three sections comprised in the
work are only given in brief epjtdme, but this is of littlerftonsequence, as
they deal with matterswhich can be better studied in older Arabic histories.

* XVI. Notes on Anecdote XIII.

* (Text, pp. 31-4 ; Persian notes, p. 160.)

This anecdote about Rudaki and his improvisation is very well
known and occurs in nearly all the biographies o(*poets, but nowhere
so fully as hes% A very interesting point, to which ^ have elsewhere
called attention 1 , is the^ wide divergence of opinion as to the merit of
the verses existing between ?he author of this work and Dawlatshah,
who lived some three centuries later, indicating a complete ’change in
the canons of tast^ during this period, and, it must be admitted, a change
for the worse. The late L)r Hermann Ethe’s monograph, published in
the Gottinger Nachrichten for 1873 (pp. 663-742), remains the best and
fullest account of Riidaki, concerning whom some further particulars
have already been gi^en (pp. 113-114 supra)*

The true explanation of the name of the stream Ji't-yi-Mftliydn has been
discovered by Mirza Muhammad in Narshakhi’s History of Bukhard.
This work, originally composed in Arabic in a.h. 332 (a.d. 943~4)> was
translated into Persian first by Abit Nasr-i-Qabawi in a.h. 522 (a.d.
1128), and again by Muhammad ibn Zufar in a.h. 574 (a.d. 1178-9).
It is this second translation which was published at Paris in 1892 by the
late M. Charles Schefer, and from which the information in question is
derived. In a section entitled “ Account of the’Ju-yi-Miiliydn and its
qualities ” the author twites as follows 2 : 0

“ In old times these estates of the Jii-yi-Mdliydn belonged to King
Tughshada, who gave a portion of them to each one of hit* sons and
sons-in-law. Amir Isma‘11 the Sdmant (may &od have mercy upon him 1)
bought these estates from Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn JAMt, who was a
captain of [the Caliph] al-Musta‘in ibnu’l-Mu'tasim, and made palaces
and gardens in the Jii-yi-Miiliydn, most of which he conferred on the
Mawalls 3 , and which are still endowments. His Reart was always pre-
occupied about his Afawdlts (clients), until one day he was gazing from
the fortifications of Bukhara towards the Jfi yi-Miiliyan. His father’s
client, Sfmd’u’l-Kabir, whom he greatly loved and held in high honour,
was standing before him. Amir Isma'il said, ‘Will it ever be that God
Most High will bring it to pass that I may buy these estates for you, and
grant me life to see these estates yours, for they are of greater value than
all the other estates of Bukhdrd, and pleasanter and of better climate? ’
And God Most High vouchsafed to him to buy them all and give them
to his MawdUs, so that the place was named Ju-yi-Mawdliydn, which
was commonly called Ju-yi-MuliydnP

1 Lit. Hist, of Persia, vol. i, pp. 16-17. See also my article on The Sources of
Dawlalshdh , etc., in the f.R.A.S. for January, 1899 (pp. 37-69).

8 The original passage is quoted on p. 13 ■ of the Persian notes.

8 Mawdlt being itself the plural of Matold (a client), Mwwdliydn, a Persian plural
of an Arabic plural, appears to be a solecism.


122


Notes on the Second Discourse


XVII. Note on Anecdote XIV.

(Text, pp. 34-6 ; Persian notes, 161-2.) r

‘AH ibn Qarib, known as “the Great Chamberlain” ( Hdjib-i-B uzurg)
was one of the principal nobles of Sul fan Malimild of Ghazna. On the
death of this monarch, he raised his youfl|;er son the Amir Abii Ahmad
Muhammad to the throne. A quarrel shortly arose between hinj, and his
brother Sultan Mas'ud, who was then at Isfahan. The latter marched on
Ghazna, and when he reached HerAt ‘AH ibn Qarib "deposed Abd
Ahmad Muhamrpad and imprisoned him in the Castle of Kdhshir
near Ghazna. On. phu’l-Qa'da 3,'A.H. 421 (Nov. 2, 1030) he waited at
Herat on Sultan Mas‘dd, who, hc/vever, seized him and his brother the
Chamberlain Menkltarak and cast them both into prifSn, after which
they were no more heard of. <r f

XVIll. Note on the House of Muhtaj of Chaghaniyan.

(Text, p. ; Persian notes, pp. 163-d.)

The noble and influential House of Muhtaj, which had its home at
Chaghaniydn in Transoxiana, produced many notable men during the
Samani and Ghaznawi periods, Concerning some^of the most famous of
these Mfrza Muhammad has collected from various sources the following
particulars.

(1) Abd Bakr Muliammad ibnu’l-MuzaR’ar ibn' Muhtaj was given the
chief command of the armies of Khurasan by the Amir Nasr II ibn
Ahmad the Samani in a.h. 321 (a.d. 933), which position he held until
the latter part of his life, when, being attacked by a chronic illness,
he resigned in favour of his son Abd ‘AH Ahmad, died in a.h. 329
(a.d. 941), and was bdried at Chaghaniydn.

(2) This sen, Abd ‘Ali Ahmad, defeated r and killed Makan ibn
Kakuy the Daylami in a.h. 329 (a.d. 945), and it was on this occasion
that the celebrated despatch of his secretary Abu’l-Qasim Iskafi (alluded
to in Anecdote III, pp. 10-18 supra ) was penned. He extended the
Samdnid authority over Jurjan, Tabaristan, Zanjdn, and Kirmanshah.
In a.h. 333 (a.ij, 944-5) Che Amir Nuh I ibn Nasr II ibn Ahmad
dismissed him from the Government of Khurasan, whereupon he rebelled,
deposed the Amir (who fled to Samarqand), overran Khurasan,., and
captured Bukhdrd. Finally in a.h. 344 (a.d. 955-6) he fell a victim to
the plague at Ray and was buried with his father at Chaghaniyan.

(3) Abu’l-‘Abbas FadI ibn Muhammad, brother of the above, who
appointed him in a.h. 333 (a.d. 944-5) Governor of the Jabal province
(modern Trdq-i-‘Ajam). He subdued Dinawar and Nihdwand. When his
brother rebelled against the Sdmanids, as above mentioned, he supported
them, in spite of which he incurred their suspicion in a.h. 336 (a.d. 947-8)
and was imprisoned at Bukhara, after which all future trace of him
disappears.

(4) Abu’l-Muzaflar ‘Abdu’llah ibn Ahmad, son of No. 2, who, in
a.h. 337 (a.d. 948-9), when his father made peace with Amir Ndh I
the Samanid, was sent as a hostage to Bukhara, where he dwelt as
an honoured gu,est until he was killed by a fall from his horse in a.h. 340
(95 1-2), and was buried at Chaghaniydn.


123


Note XIX. TughAnshAii the Saljt'jq

(5) Abti Mansdr ibn Ahmad, another son of No. 2, who appointed
him Governor of Chaghaniyin in a.h. 340 (a.d. 951-2) when he himself
was made Governor of Khurasan,

(6) Abu’l-Muzaffar Tahir ibn Fadl, Nephew of No. 2 and son of
No. 3, was Governor of Chaghaniyan until his death ft? a.h. 377 (a.d.
987-8). He was himself a poet and a generous patron of poets, Manjik
of TirmiSh being one of his proteges. See ‘Awfi’s Lubdb , i, pp. 27-29.

(7) Fakhru’d-Dawla Abu’l-Muzaffar Ahmad ibn Muhammad, the

person to whom reference is here rq^tde in the Chahir Maqdla , is be-
lieved by Mirza Muhammad to have been a son*or grandson of the
above mentioned Abd ‘All. Daqiqi Receded FarruV ■' !.

a fact to whicfT the latter alludes in three verses •' ■

portion of the qasida hdfre quoted, but given on pp. 165-6 of the Persian
notes. •

Of Farrukhi’s “ admirable description of the poetic art ” six verses,
besides the one given in the text, are Sited on p. 166 of the Persian
notes. The editor’s learned demonstration of the identity of Khuttal and
Khatldn , of which place the former is the Arabic and the latter the
Persian name, is meiftioned in note 2 at the^foot of p. 44 supra. The
details of the proof must be sought in the Persian notes, j>p. 166-8.

XIX. Note on Tughanshah, and the arbitrary methods
of some Persian editors.

(Text, p. 43 ; Persian notes, pp. 170-3.)

As pointed out in note 1 at the foot of p. 48 supra, this Tughanshih
the son of Alp Arslan the Saljiiq is a totally different person from the
Tughanshah ibn Mu’asyad Ay-Aba with whom the author of the Majma
‘ u’l-Fusahd and others have rashly identified him, regardless of the fact that
Azraqi (as shewn by three conclusive proofs on p. 173 of t^e Persian
notes) must have been dead long before the* latter ascended the throne
in a.h. 569 (a.d. 1 1 73-4). The curious thing about the first Tughanshah
(the Saljdq, to whom reference is here madg) is that he is not mentioned
by any of the historians of this period 1 except our author Nizami of
Samarqand in this passage and in ‘Awfi’s Lubdb\ ii, 87-8), and nearly
all that we know about him is derived from Azraqi’s poems in his honour.
The author of the Majma 1 u’l-Fusahd, starting from the misconception to
which allusion has been made, has deliberately and arbitrarily falsified
the text of Azraqi’s poems to make it support his erroneous theory, and
has changed (vol. i, p. 145) “Tughanshah ibn Mubammad” into
“Tughanshah ibn Mu’ayyad.” On these reprehensible methods Mirza
Muhammad justly remarks (pp. 172-3 of the Persian notes ad calc.) : —
“Such arbitrary emendations are not only an encouragement to
ignorance, but a betrayal of the trust committed to us by men of yore.
For it is evident that their books, compositions, writings and harangues
are a precious heritage which our forefathers have bequeathed to us

1 DawlatsMh, HAjji Khalifa and the Haft Iqllm do, indeed, speak of an older
TugMnshdh praised by Azraqi, but all the statements they make about him are
incorrect. See the Persian notes, p. tvr, second paragraph.


124


Notes on ti-ie Second Discourse


in trust, and which we in turn should transmit to our descendants
u'ntampered with and unaltered. For should it once be allowed that from
the time of Firdawsl until novv, a period of nearly a thousand years,
everyone should emend the verses of the Shdh-tidma in accordance with
his own whim* and fancies, no tract or sign would now remain of
this Royal Treasure, this Mine of Jewels and Coral, which constitutes
the greatest literary glory of Persia, and is the guarantee ofrihe per-
petuation of our national tongue.

“ I actually heard a certain Persian scholar in Paris say : ‘ My late
father, besides Hhving no rival if all -sciences and accomplishments,
possessed a special*talent whereii^ no one could equal him. This was
that any manuscript work of an ancient writer, from th^reginning, end
or middle of which some leaves had been logt, used to be given to
my father^ who, in the course of one or r two nights, would supply the
missing portion with a composition of his own in the same style and cast
■as the rest of the book,* and would add it to the original ; and it so
closely resembled the other chapters and sections of the book that no
scholar or savant could decide whether these leaves formed part of the
original book or were an addition to it.’

“ May God guide us toto the Way of Rectitudfe ! ”

r

Note XX. Azraqf (Anesdote XVII).

(Text, p. 43 ; Persian notes, pp. 174-178.)

Abit Bakr Zaynu’d-Dfn ibn IsmaTl al-Warraq (“the book-seller”) of
PI era t, poetically surnamed Azraqf, would appear from a verse in one of
his poems (p. 174 of the Persian notes) to have borne the proper name of
Ja'far. His father IsmahT was the contemporary of Firdawsf, who, when
he fled from Sfiltan Mali m fid’s wrath, was for six months in hiding in
his house at Herat. r

Most *6f Azraqi’s panegyrics are in praise of two Saljilq princes,
Tughanshtih ibn Alp Arslan, mentioned in the last note, and Amiranshah
ibn Qawurd. This Qawurd was the first of the Saljilq rulers of Kirman,
but, as his son Amiranshah n did not ascend the throne, the date of his
death is not recorded, though he predeceased his brother Sultansh&h,
who died a.h. 476 (a.d. 1083-4).

Taqiyyu’d-Din of Kashan gives a.h. 527 (a.d. 1132-3) as the date
of Azraqi’s death, which, however, must have taken place at least forty
years earlier. For in the first place ‘Awfi says that “ he was antecedent
to Mu'izzi,” and secondly he makes no mention in his poems of Malikshah
or Sanjar or their nobles and ministers, which omission would be almost
inconceivable if he lived in their time. Thirdly, Azraqi’s father w r as the
contemporary of Firdawsi, who died sometime before a.h. 421 (a.d. 1030),
and it is evidently extremely improbable that he could have had a son
who was still living a century later. It is probable that Azraqi died before
a.h. 465 (a.d. 1072-3).

Rashidu’d-Din Watwat in his Hadd'iqu's-Sihr (“Gardens of Magic”)
criticizes Azraqi for his far-fetched and fantastic comparisons, and
especially comparisons to non-existent things, so that, for example, he
compares burning charcoal to a sea of musk with golden waves.


Note XX. The Poet Azraqi


125

Hajji Khalifa and many of the biographers ascribe to Azraqi the
Sindibdd-ndma and the Alfiyya wa Shalfiyya. This is an error, for the
former of tltese two books was of Persian or Indian origin, and was
composed in pre-Islamic days, as elearly t appears from the statements
of Mashidi in the Muruju' dh-Bhabab 1 and of the Fijjrist Of this
Sindibdd-ndma the Pahlawi text was extant in the time of the Amir
Niih II *bn Mansiir the Sdmanid (a.h. 366-387; a.ij. 976-997), by
whose command it was translated into Persian by Khwaja ‘Amid Abu’l-
Fawaris-i-Qanawazf, whose translation, however, appears to be entirely
lost. This translation was, however^ revised and re-adited in a more
ornate form about a.h. 600 (a.d. 1203-4) by Bahd’u’oWDin Muhammad...
az-Zahiri of Samarqand, who was secretary to Sultan Tamghaj Khan of
the Khaniyya dynasty of Transoxiana. Of this rccensioi? one manuscript
exists in the British MusAim, fr»nn the preface of which Mirzfi. Muhammad
derived the information here given. It was apparently the older Persian
prose translation of Qanawazi which Azraqi versified or intended to
versify; a task whihh he evidently found far from easy, for in a passage
of a qasfda addressed to Tughanshah (quoted on p. 177 of the Persian
notes) he says: —

“ 0 Prince, Whoever regards tin' coun&ls of Sindibad
Knows well that to compose poetry thereon is difficult:

1 will render its ideas a help to learning
If thy fortune, 0 &ing, helps my mind.

This versified translation of Azraqi, if ever completed, seems to have
been entirely lost, though a later anonymous verse translation composed
in a.h. 776 (a.d. 1374-5) is preserve^ in the India Office Library 3 .
This, however, in Mirzd Muhammad’s opinion, is of very poor literary
quality. * *

The Alfiyya wa Skalfiyya is another ancient book 8 which existed
long before Azraqi’s time. The Fihrist mentions two recensions, a
greater and a lesser; and the Ta'rikh-i-Bayhaqi 4 mentions a» summer-
house which Prince Mas‘dd had built for himself secretly in the
Bagh-i-‘Adnanf on the walls of which were painted the pictures illustra-
tive of the Alfiyya. This book may have b#en versified or re-edited by
Azraqi, but was certainly not his original work.

Note XXI. Another instance of the Author’s inaccuracy.

(Text, p. 45; Persian notes, pp. 182-4.)

It is an extraordinary and inexplicable thing that Nizami of Samar-
qand, in recounting what professes to be a personal reminiscence, should
commit several grave historical and chronological errors. First, the real
name and genealogy of Qutulmush were Shihabu’d-Dawla [not -Din] ibn
Isra’il ibn Saljiiq, and he was first cousin to Tughril, the first of the
Great Saljuqs, and father of Sulaymdn, the first of the Saljiiqs of Rum.
In a.h. 456 (a.d. 1064) he rebelled against Tughril’s nephew Alp Arslan
and was killed in battle near Ray. Sultan Muhammad, the grandson of
Alp Arslan, was born in a.h. 473 (a.d. 1 080-1), seventeen years after

1 Ed. B. de Meynard, i, 162 and iv, 90. 3 Ed. FlUgel, pp. 304-3.

a See Dr H. KtluS’s Catalogue , No. 1236. 4 T‘hran ed., p. 116.


♦ %


126 Notes on the Second Discourse

the death of Qutulmush, who therefore obviously could not have rebelled
against him. Secondly , Qutulmush was not the son-in-law of Sultan
Muhammad, but the first cousin of his great-grandfather. f Thirdly, the
title of Qutulmush was Shihabu’d-Dawla, not Shihabu’d-Din. Fourthly,
he did not beg.r the name Alp Ghazr. Fifthly , the battle in which he
was killed was near Ray, not Hamadan; and sixthly, it took place
nearly a century before Nizami of Samarqand wrote the Chahdr, Maqala.

We are driven to suppose that in this passage the original text has
been tampered with. The real Alp Ghdzi was the nephew of Sultan
Ghiyathu’d-Din .Muhammad of f'A\ fir, and fell in battle with Sultan
Muhammad Khw?,razmshah near Herat in a.h. 600 (a.d. 1203-4),
fifty years after the Chahdr Maqdla was written. There were two
kings called GHyathu’d-Din Muhammad, the one of Chitr, mentioned
immediately above, who died in a.h. 599^.0. £202-3) and was actually
related ter the real Alp Ghazi ; and the other the grandson of Alp Arslan
the Saljiiq, to whom this anecdote refers, and who died in a.h. 511
(a.d. 1117-8). * r

Note XXII. The KMq&nl, Khdni or Afr&siyabI Kings.

(Text, p. 4 ®; Persian notes, pp. 1&4-189.)

This Turkish Muslim dynasty, also called flak-Kh&ni, ruled for
nearly 230 years (a.h. 380-609 = a.d. 1790-1212) over Transoxiana,
supplanting the Samdnid and succumbing to the Khwarazmshahi power.
They were sometimes practically independent, while at other times they
paid tribute to the Saljitqs, Qara-Khita’is or Khwarazmshahs. Their
history is confused and o'bscure, nor is it precisely known when their
power arose or when they embraced Islam. Hanin ibn Sulayman,
better known as Bughra Khan flak, and entitled Shibdbu’d-Dawla,
conquered Bokhara in a.h. 383 (a.d. ,993), and is the first of the
dynasty mentioned in history. His lieutenant Shams u’d-Dawla Nasr ibn
‘Ali ibn Mtlsa ibn Sutuq, abetter known as flak Khan, again subdued
BukhdraTin a.h. 389 (a.d. 999) and finally extinguished the Samanid
power in Transoxiana. TJje last of the line was Nusratu’d-Din Qilij
Arslan Khaqan ‘Uthman ibn Qilij Tamghaj Khan Ibrahim, who was
killed in a.h. 609 ^a.d. 1212-3) by Sultan ‘Ala’u’d-Din Muhammad
Khwarazmshah.

The first historian of this dynasty appears to have been the Imam
Sharafu’z-Zaman Majdu’d-Din Muhammad ibn ‘Adnan as-Surkhakati,
uncle of Ntlru’d-Dfn Muhammad ‘Awfi, the author of the often-quoted
Lubdiu'l-Albdb and of the vast collection of anecdotes entitled Jawdmi'iil-
Hikdydt wa Lawdmi‘u'r-Rhvdydl. This history, dedicated to Sultan.
Qilij Tamghaj Khan, the last ruler but one of the dynasty, is mentioned
by IJajji Khalifa, and ‘Awfi quotes from it in the seventeenth chapter
of the fourth part of his J awam i‘ii 1-HikdyAt, composed about a.h. 630
(a.d. 1232-3). Except for this quotation (of which the text is cited on
pp. 185-6 of the Persian notes) this work appears to be entirely lost.
The chief extant sources of information about them are as follows : —

(1) Scattered references in such Arabic general histories as Ibnu’l-
Athir and Ibn Khalditn.


Notes on the Third Discourse


127


(2) The Ta’rtkh-i-Jahdn-Ard of the Qadi Ahmad-i-Ghaffari has a short
chapter on this dynasty 1 , which, though it adds little to the particulars
given by thd above-mentioned historians, has the advantage of gathering
the details under one head and giving thgm a connected arrangement.

(3) A rare general history in Persian, of unknown authorship, entitled
Majma l u't- TawdrUrff , contains a chapter of seven large pages on this
dynasty, 'here called “ the House of Afrasiyab.”

(4) A long note by Major H. G. Raverty on pp. goo-911 of his
English translation of the Tabaqdt-i-Stfdsiri (vol. ii, London, 1881).

(5) An article by Sir Henry Howfrth on the AfrAsiyAM Turks in the

J.R.A.S. for 1 5^8, pp. 467-502. For this excellent article he obtained
new materials from a Tutjcf from Eastern Turkis tan entitled Tadhkira-
i-Bughra Khan. t

(6) Scattered references in such special histories as ‘Utbi’s Ta'rikh-i-

Yamlni, t 1 . "V/.'.V i P r 1 > N.v d , T •lrikh-i- Bukhara, ‘Imadu’d-
Dfn’s and A',,': ii. j' \v i ! - «,f the Saljiiqs, the TcArikh-

i-JahAngushdy of Juwayni, ‘Awfi’s LubAbu'l-AlbAb and JawAmi'u'l-
Hikdydt, the jfabaqdP-i-Ndsiri, and this book, etc ., the history of this
dynasty being intermixed to some extent with that of the Ghaznawis,
Saljiiqs and Khwarazmshahs.

(7) The verses of certair ” ‘ " ■ ' ■■ ' who were their pane-
gyrists, such as Rashid! and x Mukhtdri of Ghazna,

Radiyyu’d-Din of Nishdptlr, ‘Am‘aq of Bukhara, Shains-i-'l'abasi, etc.

In none of these books, however, except ‘Awfi’s Lubdb, is mention
made of Qilij Tamghaj Khan Ibrahim, the las? ruler but one of the
dynasty. He was a great patron of poetry and learning. # Radiyyu’d-Din,
the poet just mentioned, has ^specially celebrated his generosity to men
of letters, and several notable prose works were dedicated to hitp, amongst
others the SindibAd-namak and the A l rddu' r-RiyAsat ft AghradPs-Siydsat*
of Baha’u’d-Din az-Zabiri of Samarqand, and another work by the same
author entitled SamHA z-Zahlr f{ Jam' i'ts-Zaklr*.


Note XXIII. Five notable Astronomers.

(Text, pp, 54-5; Persian notes, pp. 193-206.)

Abri Rayljdn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-BIrdnf (or Btr&nl
or BayrAnf) was bom in a suburb or outer district {Inrun) of Khwarazm

1 Or. 141 of the British Museum, ff. I 32 a -r 34 b -

- Suppl. Persan 1331 in the Bibl. Nationale of Paris, ff. 1 33 1 '— 1 36 a .

8 See p. 125 supra.

* See Hajji Khalifa, s.v., and ‘Awfi’s Lubdb, i, 91. There is a MS. of the work in
the Leyden Library.

B See //. Kh,, s.v., and the Lubdb , i, 91.

“ Sachau quotes the Ansdb of as-Sam‘an( in favour of this latter pronunciation, but
in the facsimile of this work published by the “E. J. W. Gibb Memorial” (vol. xx,
f. g8 b ) the passage in question has btl-kasri (with the i vowel) instead of btlfathi ■
(with the a vowel).


128


Notes on the Third Discourse


(Khiva) 1 on Dhu’l-plijja 3, a.h. 362 (Sept. 4, a.d. .973), and died (probably
at Ghazna) on Rajab 2, a.h. 440 (Dec. 1 x, a.d. 1048) at the age of 77 lunar
years and 7 months. He was one of the greatest men of science produced
by Persia, and in him, as Dr S„achau says, “there is much of the modern
spirit and method of critical research/?’ in which respect “he is a phe-
nomenon in the history of Eastern learning and literature.” As a writer
his industry equalled his learning. In a.h. 427 (a.d. 1035-6), f when he
had reached the age of 65 lunar (63 solar) years, he drew up for a
correspondent a list of his writings, which has been fortunately preserved
to us, and of which the original Arabic text is included by Sachau in
the German Introduction to his edition of al-A thdni l-Baqiya (pp. xxxviii-
xlix). This list comprises over a hundred works, arranged in x 3 classes
as follows : — c , **


I.

- II.

III.

IV.
V.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

fx.

X.

XI.

XII.

XIII.


Geometry, Astronomy, cetc. i . .

18 works

Geography

IS

35

Arithmetic

8

33

Light ... f ...

'"4


The Astrolabe

s


Times and Seasons

s


Comet*... ... ...

s

33

Stations of the Moon ...

12

3)

Astrology

7

>3

Persian and other tales***

13

3}

Religion

6

33

Books of which the author re-


tained no cppy

5

33

Unfinished books

10

33

« Total:

113


He also enumerates 25 other works written by three other men of
learning and ascribed to him, vis. 12 by r Abd Nasr Mansdr ibn ‘All ibn
‘Arraq; 12 by Abu Sahl ibn Yahya al-Masfl.il) and one by Abrt ‘AH
al-Hasan ‘ibn ‘Ah' al-Jili. Further, Hajji Khalifa enumerates 15 more of
al-Birdni’s works not appeapng in the above list, though some of them
are no doubt included in it under slightly different titles, while others
are probably wrongly ascribed to our author. In Europe he is chiefly
known by his “ Chronology of Ancient Nations ” {al-Athdnt' l-Bdjiya
‘ani’ l-Quruni’ l-Khdliya) and his w T ork on India, editions and translations
of both of which we owe to the learning and industry of Dr Edward
Sachau. The former, unfortunately, presents many serious lacunae-.
“Many most essential parts,” says Dr Sachau 2 , “both large and small,
are missing, e.g. the chapter on Zoroaster, a most deplorable loss, arising
probably from Muslim bigotry,” On Nov. 12, 1912, however, I received
a letter from my colleague Professor Bevan in which he wrote : — “I have
just received from Salemann in St Petersburg an article which he has


1 Mirza Muhammad points out to me that the original capital city of Khwdrazm
was Rath on the eastern bank of the Oxus. Later (and probably already in al-Blninl’s
time) its place was taken by Urganj or Gurganj (called in Arabic Jurjaniyya) on the
western bank. , The modern city of Khiva is situated some distance to the south-west
of the older Urganj.

2 Preface to the English translation, p. xiii.


*


Note XXIII. Five Notable Astronomers


129


published in the Bulletin de PAcadhnie Imperials. You will be glad to
hear that another MS. of al-Biriini’s al-Athd.ru' l-BAqiya has turned up
and enables us to supply most of the gaps in Sachau’s edition, in par-
ticular the sections on Zoroaster ^nd Barflaisan.”

Al-Qifti has no article on al-Birfim' in his “ History of the Philoso-
phers,” and only once refers to him. Ibn Abi Usaybi'a gives him a
short no?ice in his “Lives of the Physicians” (ii, pp. 20-21). The short
articles consecrated to him by Zahiru’d-Din Abu’l-Iiasan ibn Abu’l-Qasim
(wrote about the middle of the twelfth century of pur era) and by
Shamsu’d-Di'n Muhammad ibn 1 f '' (early thirteenth
century) are quoted in full by ■■ 1 a long notice of

him in the mcriern Persian Ndma-i-Ddnhhwardn (voj. i, pp. 37-49)
composed in a.h. 1294 iy\.D. ^77), wllich is of little authority and does
not add much to our knowledge. «

Abu Ma'shar Ja'far ibn Muliammad ibn ‘Umar al-Balkhf
was one of the most celebrated astronomers of the third century of the
hijra (ninth of the Christian era), and, according to al-Qifti 2 , thu greatest
authority on the history of the ancient Persians. He dwelt in Baghdad,
in the western part, and was originally a traditjpnist ; and his fanaticism
led him to insult and molest Ya'qtib ibn Ishaq al-Kindi, the “ Philosopher
of the Arabs,” and to stir up the common people against him, Finally
al-Kindi induced some of 1«S friends to draw his attention to, and
arouse his interest in Mathematics and Geometry, so that he came to
seek instruction from al-Kindi, and was reconciled with him. He soon
passed on (at the age of forty-seven) to the study of Astronomy. On
one occasion he was scourged by command of the Caliph al-Musta‘in
(reigned a.h. 248-251; a.d. 862-5) because of a prognostication which
he had made and whiqji proved too correct. "*'d to

say: “I guessed right and was punished.” He , 28,

a.h, 272 (March 8, a.h. 886). Al-Qifti enumerates 38 of his ,works, of
which such as are still extant are enumerated fcy Brockelmann 0, 221-2)
Abii Sa‘fd Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘AbduT-Jalfl as-
Sajzf was a notable mathematician and astronomer of the fourth century
of the hijra. A mongst his numerous works is th eJdmi‘-i-Shdhi, or “ Royal
Compendium,” containing 15 treatises on astronomical subjects; of
which there is a fine MS. in the British Museum 3 , in the course of
this work, written at Shirdz, where he apparently spent rtiost of his life,
he refers to the years a.h. 351 (a.d. 962) and a.h. 380 (a.d. 990). The
Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris possesses a beautiful MSA, containing
41 mathematical and astronomical tracts, transcribed by him in Shiraz
during the years a.h. 358-361 (a.d. 969-972). I he colophons of such
of these tracts as have them are given by Mirza Muhammad on pp. 200-
201 of the Persian notes. Including the 15 trac ■

Tdmi'-i-Shdhl, 29 of his treatises are extant in , ■' >

besides the $ad BAb mentioned in the text, and a dissertation on the
Astrolabe.

1 German Introduction to the text, pp. lii and liii.

» Ta'rtkhu'l-HukamA , ed. Lippert, p. 132.

3 See Rieu’s Arabic Suppl., pp. ,528-53°. „ „ „ , ,

4 Ponds ^■ 457 ' Sc© Brockclniftnni J* $19* ^


130


Notes on the Third Discourse


Kiya Abu’l- Hasan Kfishyar ibn Labbfin ibn Bfi-shahrl
al-Jflam (of Gilan) was a notable astronomer who flourished in the
latter part of the fourth century of the hijra. In his Mujmalu'l- Ustil 1
he alludes to the year 321 of' Yazdijird ( a . h . 342 = a . d. 953-4)? and in
another passage of the same work 8 to r A.v. 361 ( a . h . 383= a . d . 993-4),
so that his active life appears to have lain between these two limits, and
the date given by plajji Khalifa ( a . h . 459 = a . d . 1066-7) under Zij-i-
Kushydr is certainly too late. See also Brockelmann, i, 222-3.

Abti Ydsujf Ya'qub ibn p Ish&q . . al-Kindf, entitled “the
Philosopher of thq,, Arabs,” traced his descent from Ma'di-ICarib, and
belonged to an Arabian family Equally notable for ancient and noble
lineage and horsourable achievements. How our autbcrt*can have repre-
sented him as a Jew is incomprehensible. The story about him and
Abd Mabhar, however, derives some confirmation from the Fihrisf.
He composed some 270 works on Logic, Philosophy, Geometry, Arith-
metic, Music, Astrology and, Medicine, of which rabout a score are
extant in European libraries 4 . The date of his death is not known, but
he flourished in the reigns of al-Ma’mfin and al-Mutawakkil ( a . h . 198-
247; a . d. 813-861). It^is not clear on what authority Dr Heinrich
Suter 5 gives a . h . 260 ( a . d . 873-4) as the date of his death. He was

noted for his r - r 4 ■' >ages are devoted to him in

the “Book of V /■ . ■ . ■> ' al-Jahiz“. A number of his

sayings in praise of this unattractive quality are quoted on p. 206 of the
Persian notes from Ibn Abl Usaybi'a’s “Lives of the Physicians”
(vol. i, pp. 208-9).

Note X£IV. Certain astrological terms.

(Text, pp. 56, 59 and 62; Persian notes, pp. 206-8.)

In these anecdotes about astrologers and their predictions there
occur a few technical terms which can be properly understood only by
those (fey/ in these days) 'who have made Astrology the special object
of their studies. Amongst such is Mr Ralph Shirley, editor of the
Occult Review, who has most kindly supplied me with the valuable
notes which I have placed after the explanations derived from Arabic
and Persian works. r

■ 1. Khaby and Damir 3 ^y«i»).

The explanation of these terms, which I have translated by “ divina-
tion and thought-reading,” is given by Abd Rayhan al-Blrdni in a passage
of his Tafhlm , quoted by Mlrza Muhammad in the Persian notes
(pp. 206-7), of which the translation is as follows: —

1 Brit. Mus. ftfS. Add. 7490, f. 22b.

2 Ibid. , f. 4“ For a description of this fine MS. see Rieu’s Arabic Supplement,
PP- 313 - 9 ’

s Ed. Flltgel, p, 277.

4 See FliigePs Al-Kindl genannt der Pkilasoph der Araber, in the Abhandlung f r
die Kunde dec Morgenlandes , vol. i, part 2 (Leipzig, 1857); the long notice in
al-Qiftl’s Ta'rikhu' l-Hukama, pp. 366-378; and Brockelmann, i, 209-2x0.

6 In his j Die Mathematiker und Astronmntn der Araber nnd ihre Werke (Leipzig-,
1900). \ r

8 Cairo ed. of 1323/1905-6, pp. 64-76.


Note XXIV. Certain Astrological Terms 13 i


"Q. * What are khaby and riantir ? ’

“A. ‘ Khaby is that which is hidden in the fist; and damlr is that
one should Think of something and [that the operator should] find it
out by questioning.' • »

“ Herein are astrologers speedily put to shame, and their mistakes
are more frequent than their successes.”


2. Sahmu’ s-Sa‘ddat and Sahmu' l-Ghayb i|

A full explanation of these terms* which I have translated “Part of
Fortune ” and “ Part of the Unseen,” is given in vol* i of the Dictionary
of the Technical Terms used in the Sciences of the Musalmdm\ pp. 698-9.
After defining T?ie pronunciation and| ordinary meaning (“arrow”) of
sahm, and its special sfcnse in Geomancy and Geometry, the article
proceeds : — . •

“ With astronomers tire term sahm means^a definite portion of the
zodiacal heaven. According to them, th«se ‘Parts’ (sahm-hd) are many,
e.g. the ‘Part of Fortune’ (or ‘Happiness’: Sahmu' s~Sa'ddat ), also
called by them the ‘ Part of the Moon ’ ; and the ‘ Part of the Unseen ’
(Sahmu' l-Ghayb), the V Part of Days’ ( Sahm#' l-Ayydm ), the ‘Part of
Men-servants and Maid-servants’ ( Sahm-i-Ghuldmdn wa Kanhakdn ),
and so forth. So by day they compute the ‘ Part of Happiness ’ from
the Sun to the degree of the ?rft>on, and add to it (that is to the degrees
between the Sun and the Moon) the degree of the Ascendant. Then
from the Ascendant's total they subtract thirty each [for the Sign
of the Ascendant and the mF.v-mg SV*], and w’.a-.t remains will be the
degree of the position of :hc ‘ i'.ii ! of 1 innj/im ,s,’ And by night they
compute from the degree of the Moon to the decree of the Sun, and
add thereto the degree gf the Ascendant.

'■''Example, Ascendant loVn Aries; the Sun 20° in £eo; the Moon
t 5 0 in Libra, leaving 40° [from the position of the Sun in Lep] to [the
beginning of] Libra. [To this] we add the #15° [already] traversed by
the Moon [in Libra], which gives us 55 0 . To this we add the ’degree of
the Ascendant, which gives us 65°, Of theje we give 30° to Aries and
30° to Taurus, and the 5° remaining to Gemini. So the place of the
‘ Part of Happiness ’ will be the fifth degree of Gemini.”


Pisces

Aquarius

Capricorn

Sagittarius

Scorpio

Libra


Aries

Taurus

Gemini

Cancer

Leo

Virgo


“As for the ‘Part of the Unseen,’ by day they compute it from the
Moon and by night from the Sun, adding thereto the degree of the
Ascendant, and subtracting thirty each from the Ascendant, as before;
then what remains over is the place of the ‘Part of the Unseen.’”

Then follow directions on similar lines for calculating the other ‘Parts,’
viz. the ‘ Part of Days ’ ( Sahmu'l-Ayydm ), the ‘ Part of Men-servants


1 Published in the Bibliotheca Irutica, Calcutta, 1862.


9-2


132 Notes on the Third Discourse

and Maid-servants,’ the ‘ Part of Wealth and Friends ’ ( SaJwi-i-Mdl u
Asdiqd), the ‘Marriage of Women’ ( Tazwij-i-Zandn ), and the ‘Parts’
of the Five Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Mercury and VAnus.


3. Kad-khudd and Hayl&j 3

These terms are applied in Astrology to two indications of the length
of life of the child. According to Abd Rayhan al-Birtini 1 2 , “the Hayldj
is one of five things: first, the Mgpter of the day- or night-shift ($dhib-i-
Nawbat-i-rtiz yd sfcab) ; secondly, the Moon by day and the Sun by
night; thirdly , the Degree of tfre Ascendant; fourthly , the ‘Part, of
Fortune ’; fifthty, the House offthe Conjunction or opposition which
shall have taken jtlace before birth. Onm of tftese five things they, call
the HaylRj- when it is conjoined with its own proper conditions described
in books on Astrology, apd the sum total they call Haydlij or Hayldjat.

“The Kad-khudd (‘Master of the House’) is the star which domi-
nates the place of the Hayldj in this sense, that it is the Lord of the
Mansion wherein the Hayldj is actually situated, or the Lord of its
exaltation (Sahib-i-Sharaf ), or the Lord of some *ther of its Parts which
stand in relation to that position.

“ If the Hqyldj be one which has no Kad-khudd, then they leave it
out and seek another of the five Haydlij hich has one; and if none of
them has a Kad-khudd, then the quality of being a Hayldj belongs to
the Degree of the Ascendant.

“ Example of the Hayldj anfi Kad-khudd. If at the time of the birth
of the child (by day) the Moon be in 19° of Aries, then the Moon will
be one of the five Haydlij (subject to the concurrence of the other
proper conditions which are set forth in books^f Astrology). Then,, in
this hypothetical example, the Kad-khnfid will be the Sun, for the Sun
dominates the place of the Hayldj, that is to say is the Lord of its
altitude, for the exaltation jsharaf) of (he Sun is in 19° of Aries.. And if,
in this hypothetical example, the degtfee of the Ascendant is in .19° of
Aries, this degree of the Ascendant will be the Hayldj, and again the
Sun will be the Kad-khudd, and so on.

“So from the admixture and combination of the sum-total of the
Hayldj and the Kad-khudd, they deduce (as they imagine) the duration
of the child’s life, its length or brevity, and its happiness or 'infelicity.

“The derivation of the word Hayldj is unknown 3 .”

Mr Ralph Shirley’s observations are contained in three letters, dated
May 22, May 31 and October 25, 1920, the first addressed to Professor
Margoliouth, to whom my enquiries were originally addressed, the others
to myself, the last one after reading the proofs containing the anecdotes
to which this note refers.


1 These particulars were derived by Mirzd Muhammad from the British Museum
MS. of the Tafhtm, Add. 7697, ff. 146“ and 154", and from Kushyar’s Mujmalu'l-
[/fill, Add. 7490, ff. 28-9.

2 It is said to he from the Greek Wu/c6s; see Sedillot’s Prolegomena, p, of the

text. See also Schefer's ChrestomathH Perscme, vol. i, p. 102 ad calc.


Note XXIV. Certain Astrological Terms 133


(. Extracts from first letter.)

.“The hyfeg ( hayldj ) in astrology is the vital point, or ‘ giver of life.’
This is considered to be either the sun, or the moon, or the ascendant.
In order to be hyleg, the sun or fhoon must occupy either the 9th, 10th,
or nth houses, or else the ascendant or 7th house. If, e.g., the sun
occupies one of these positions and the moon does not, then the sun is
hyleg or life-giver. If, on the other hand, they both occupy such a
position, then the one that is most predominant or most elevated, would
be hyleg, i.e., if the sun occupied the loth house and thi moon the nth,
the sun would be hyleg, and vice versa* If neither stfti nor moon occupy
any of these potions, it is usual to take the ascending degree as hyleg,
but some of the old astrologers woulA regard the dominant planet as
hyleg under such circumstance?. It must not be supposed from this that
when the sun is hyleg the moon has therefore no influence on the constitu-
tion. The moon in any case has to do with tfee digestion and various
matters of this kind, and the sun is in ally case the ruler of the heart
and therefore always important. The sun, however, might be violently
afflicted though the health might not be seriously endangered, if it did
not occupy the position of hyleg. The same ftould apply to the moon.
I think, other things being equal, the moon is to be regarded as having
more influence with a womankind the sun with a man. Alcohoden is
merely another name for hyleg, but is not used nowadays.

“ As regards the other words, I have never heard of them. I have
however little doubt that the last, sa/imu's-sa'ddat, is the Arabic term
for the 1 Part of Fortune.’ Some old astwdogers attached a good deal of
importance to this, without, I imagine, much justification. The 1 Part
of Fortune ’ is that part of the horoscope where the'Vnoon would be if the
sun were exactly rising. »The ‘Part of Fortune’ was suppled to refer to
the wealth and property of theV native.’ Ptolemy laid great stress on it,
but the author of the Text-book of Astrology remarks that ‘ i* must be
rejected from a rational system of genethlialdgy.’ ,

‘“Part of Mystery* ' no meaning, and I do not

think anything can be * to this in the astrological

books at present available. The only suggestion I can make is that it
might conceivably be the opposite point in the horoscope to the ‘ Part
of Fortune.’ But this is pure conjecture and may be entirely on the
wrong track. It looks as if the Arabs had some tradition here which
does not find its place in any astrological books extant.”

( Extract from second letter.)

“Thank you for yours of the 29th May. I think it might be a help
if you sent me a copy of the book in question. I have., however, read
so much on the subject of astrology that I question whether there is any
likelihood of my being able to throw light on the ‘ Part of the Unseen.’
I cannot think there is any reference to it in any known author on the
subject. Astrologers of the present day look upon Neptune as the
planet that gives psychic powers, and this is unquestionably correct.
In the case of people who have clairvoyant gifts, etc., or are mediumistic


134


Norss on the Third Discourse


in temperament, one constantly finds Neptune and the Moon pre-
dominant in the horoscope. But it is of course impossible to suppose
that the Arabian astrologers had any clue to the planet Neptune. The
* Part of Fortune ’ is merely the translation of the Latin Pars Portunae.
I cannot account for the origin of the idea, which seems quite
fantastic....

“The Ascendant is the degree rising at birth; i.e., at sunrise the sun
would be on the ascendant. The 1 Lord of the Ascendant ’ is the planet
that rules the ascending sign of the Zodiac. The two most important
positions in the «horoscope are tip; ascendant and the mid-heaven, and
any planets here a«e considered more powerful than any others. The
Ascendant has special relation to*che individual, and the mid-heaven to
the fortune.” r (\ **

*■ t

{Extract from third letter.')

“I am sorry to have kept your proofs so long,, but I have been
a good deal away "from the office lately, and consequently my work has
got into arrears.

“With regard to the ‘Part of the Unseen,’ this is evidently something
kindred in nature to the r Part of Fortune,’ and as the Part of Fortune
{pars fortunae) is always so called by astrologers, I think it woiild be
well to use the expression ‘Part’ and^jyot ‘Share.’ I have not yet
discovered what the ‘Part of the Unseen’ actually is. It obviously
cannot be the opposite position to that of the ‘Part of Fortune,’ as
I see that in one instance cited in your proofs the two are in conjunc-
tion on the Ascendant.” '

Note XXV. ‘Umar-i-Khayyam.

(Text, pp. 63-4, 65; Persian motes, pp. 209-228.)

Abu'l-Fath ‘Umar„ibn Ibrdhfm al-Khayyamf, commonly
called ‘Umar (or ‘Omar) Khayyam, is so much more celebrated in
the West, especially -in England and America, than in the East that
Mirza Muhammad has, for the benefit of his own countrymen, for whom
he is primarily writing, added a very long note on his biography, the
sources of our information about him, and the history of the “Omar
Khayyam Club,” founded in London in his honour in 1892. The
information contained in this note is mainly derived from Professor
Valentin Zhukovski’s masterly article on the “ Wandering Quatrains ” ot
‘Umar-i-Khayyam, which appeared in the Festschrift published in 1897 at
St Petersburg in honour of the late Baron Victor Rosen, by eleven of his
pupils, and entitled, in allusion to his Christian name, al-Muzajfariyya.
This article, written in Russian, was translated by Sir E. Denison Ross
and published in the J.R.A.S. for 1898 (vol. xxx, pp. 349-366), and
reproduced in its essentials by him in Methuen’s edition of FitzGerald’s
Quatrains , and by me in vol. ii of my Literary History of Persia,
pp. 246-9. It is therefore sufficient to summarize here the information
which can be found in greater detail in those places.


Note XXV. ‘Umar-i-Khay^Am


135


Persian and Arabic Sources of Information arranged chronologically.

$ 1. The ChahAr MaqAla.

This present work, the author of wljich was personally acquainted
with ‘U mar, and wrote only son?e thirty years after his death, contains
the oldest account of him yet discovered.

* 2. The Khaddatu’l-Qasr.

( Addition to Persian notes , p. r»r )

This book, composed by TmSdu’d-Din al-KaSb al-Isfahani in
572/1176-7, contains a notice of ‘Umari-Khayydtflt amongst the poets
of Khurasdn. £wo MSS. of this wo?k exist in the Leyden library (see
Dozy’s Catalogue , vol. ii, pp. 208-288I, viz. Warner '*348, f, 185, and
Gol. aib, f. 238. * *

3. Khaqanf.

A single reference to him occurs in a verse of the Persian poet
Khaqdni, who died about a.h. 595 (a.d. 1198-9).

<4. The Mirsadu’l-Tfead.

The Mirsadul-'lbad of Shaykh Najmu’d-Din Daya* composed in
a.h. 620 (a.d. 1223-4), contains a passage in which ‘Umar is denounced
as an atheist, and two of his quatrain:? are cited with disapproval. The
text of this important passage is quoted by Mir/A Muhammad (Persian
notes, p. 2 1 1) from Zhukovski’s article. I have collated this with a fine
old MS. of the Mirfdd transcribed jn a.h. 768 (a.d. 1367), which
presents the following variants, generally improvements.

2x1, 1, inserts ss^ after reads for s>

inserts yjJla after anjJ reads iJU. for ( _ J £»U.. iti 2ii, 5, inserts

S before : 1. 6 after substitutes for ifb at the end t>f the line

the following words : — 4

1 “oj+j s aj > oJ eSs yOjJ Ji )jy\ jiaj j» ^il U

211, 8, for reads _j lAjjjco, 2x1, 9, substitutes aL ji for j

before, and inserts \j^Js a f ter oJbLoj and after C-Ad adds U jlyJil j
Sya. . ail, io, inserts Jj«.w at beginning #f line. 211, 12,

omits [Cajt j]. 2X1, 11, Of the passage thus emended the

translation is as follows: —

“And it will become apparent for what reason this pure, celestial
and luminous spirit was drawn into the form of this lowly earthen
mould, and also why it must part therefrom, why the spirit must sever
its connection with this mould, why the form must perish, and what is
the reason for the restoration of this mould at the Resurrection and the
reinvestiture of the spirit therewith. Then will he [*'.«. the enquirer]
come forth from the company of ‘ these are like cattle , nay , they are yet
more misguided V attain to the rank of [true] humanity, escape from the

1 Qur'dn, xxv, 4 6.


136


Noras on the Third Discourse


veil of heedlessness of ‘ they know the outward appearance of this present
life , but are careless as to the life to come V and set his feet eagerly and
joyfully in the Pilgrim’s Path, so thal what he acquires by vision he may
translate into progress, seeing that the fruit of vision is Faith, while the
fruit of progress is Wisdom. Tut thos£ poor philosophers, atheists and
materialists, who are debarred from these two stations, err and go astray,
so that one of the most talented of them, who is known arjd noted
amongst them for scholarship, philosophical knowledge and judgement,
that is ‘Umar-i-Khayydm, in the extreme of bewilderment must needs
advertise his blindness in the desert of error by uttering the following
verses : „

‘ To that circle wherein is our coming and going ^

Neither begPnninf nor end is apparent.

No one breathes a true word in this world f
As tornyhence is our coming and whither our going!

1 Since [God the All-' IT • -u ■ • • ■; , ■ f men's] natures

Wherefore did He ag.i.r ■. < ■ ?

If these forms are ugly, whose is ihe fault ,

And if they are good , wherefore their destruction ’ 2 ? ”

r

5. Shahraztirf’s Tawarfkhu’l-Hukamd.

r

This “ History of the Philosophers, ’Improperly entitled Nuzhaiu'l-
Arwdh wa Rawdatu' l-Afrdh, composed by Shamsu’d-Din Muhammad
ibn Mahnnid of Shahrazdr between a.h. 586 and 61 1 (a.d. 1190 and
1214), exists in two recensions, one Arabic and one Persian 3 . Of the
latter there exists, besides the -MS. described by Rieu, another MS.
(No. 97) in the Pote Collection in the library of King’s College,
Cambridge. Both versions are given in the original by Zhukovski 4 ,
with a Russian r-translation of the Persian version, while Sir E. Denison
Ross’s English translation follows the -Arabic, of which the text is
reprinted <»n pp. 2 12-2 14 of Mirza Muhammad’s Persian notes. The
Arabic verses contained in' 1 it are, however, corrupt, and need emenda-
tion.

6 ? Ibnu’l-Athfr.

Mention of ‘Umar-i-Khayyam is made by this great historian, who
wrote in a.h. 628 (a.D. 1230-1), under the year a.h. 467 (a.d. 1074-5),
where he says : —

“ And in it the Nizamu’l-Mulk and Sultan Malikshah assembled
a number of the most notable astronomers, and fixed the Naw-rt’tz
(Persian New Year’s Day) in the first point of Aries, it having been
hitherto at the passage of the Sun through the middle point of Pisces;
and what the Sultan did became the starting-point of [all subsequent]
Calendars. In it also was constructed the Observatory for Sultan

1 Qur'an, xxx, 6 .

!l The second of these quatrains, which may be accounted amongst the most
certainly genuine of those ascribed to ‘Umar, is No. 1 26 in E. II. Whinfield’s edition,

3 See Sachau’s Introduction to his edition of al-Biruni’s al-Ath&rdl-BAqiya,
pp. I.— LI, and Rieu’s Persian Supplement, pp. fiS-o.

4 Op. cit., pp. 327-9.


S'


Note XXV. ‘U mar-i-Khayuam


137


Malikshah, for the making of which a number of notable astronomers
were assembled, amongst them ‘Umar ibn Ibrahim al-Khayyami, Abu’l-
Muzaffar al-Jsfizari, Maymiin ibnu’n-Najfb al-Wasifi, and others. A great
amount of wealth was expended upon it, and the Observatory remained
in use until the King died in a.w» 485 (a.‘d. 1092-3), but after his death
it was disused.”

* 7. Al-Qiftfs Ta’rikhu’l-Hukama.

The “ History of the Philosophers,” composed between a.h. 624 and
646 (a.d. 1227 and 1248-9) by Jspralu’d-Din AbuH-Hasan ‘Ali ibn
Ydsuf al-Qiftf, and edited by Dr Julius Lippert 1 , als*> contained a notice
of ‘Umar-i-Khayyam, of which a FreiUch translation is given by Woepcke
in his JO Algibr*? d' Omar Alkhayydmi% while later Russian and English
versions are given by Zh>ukovsJu and Ross respectively 3 .

8. Ta’rlkh-i-Jah&n-gusha. **

In the account of the massacre of the pebple of Merv perpetrated
by the Mongols early in the year 618/1221 one of ‘Umar’s quatrains is
said to have been recited by Sayyid ‘Izzu’d-Dfn Nassdba when he had
finished counting the bodies of the victims, ^of whom the number ex-
ceeded 1,300,060. This history was composed in 658/1260, and the
passage in question occurs in vol. i, p. 128 (“ E. J. W. Gibb Memorial”
Series, xvi, 1). — m

9. Qazwlnf’s Ath&ru’l-Bilad.

In his “Monuments of the Lands,” composed in a.h. 674 (a.d.

1 2 75-6), Zakariyya ibn Muhammad ibn Mali mild al-Qazwini gives,
under his notice of the city of Nishapilr, soine account of ‘Umar 4
containing certain new materials which I have summarized in my
Lit. Hist, of Persia (ii,»25i -2). *

xo. The Jami'u’t-Tawarikh. „

I believe that I was the first to call atteiftion 3 to an important notice
of ‘Umar in Rashidu’d-Din Fadlu’llah’s great history, compiled about
the beginning of the eighth century of the hijra (fourteenth of the
Christian era). The importance of this notice lies in the fact that it
professes to be copied from an Isnmhli biography of i;Iasan-i-Sabbah,
entitled Sar-guzasht-i-Sayyid-nd (“the Adventures of Our Master”),
found in the library of Alamdt, the Assassins’ chief stronghold in Persia,
where it was destroyed by Htllagd and his Mongols in the middle of the
thirteenth century of our era; and that it affords a much more respect-
able authority than any previously adduced for the famous “ Story of
the Three Friends, 1 ”i.e. the NizAmiil-Mulk, Hasan-i-Sabbafi, and ‘ Umar-i-
Khayyam 6 . The chronological difficulties involved in this story, how-

1 Leipzig, 1903. The notice of ‘Umar occurs on pp. 2+3-4.

2 Paris, 1851, pp. v-vi of the Preface and p. 52 of the text.

3 See also my Lit. Hist, of Persia, ii, pp. 250-1.

4 P. 318 of WUstenfeld’s edition.

6 In a paper entitled Yet more Light on ‘ Umar -i- Khayyam which appeared in the
J.R.A.S. for 1 899 (pp. 409-411). See my Lit. Hist, of Persia, ii, 252-3.

0 See, besides the passage in my Lit. Hist, of Persia cited in the previous note,
pp. 190-193 of the same volume.


I3 8


Notes on the Third Discourse


ever, render its acceptance very difficult. Muza Muhammad has com-
municated to me the ingenious suggestion that its historical basis is to
be found in a passage in Yaqdt’s Mu] amid l Udabd or “ Dictionary of
Learned Men 1 * ,” where it is stated on the authority of Abu’l-Hasan ibn
Abi’l-Qasim Zayd al-Bayhaqi, author of- the Masharibu’t- Taj drib, that in
the year 434/1042--3 the poet ‘All ibnu’l-Hasan al-Bakharzi and Abd
Nasr Muhammad ibn Mansdr al-Kundurl, who subsequently became
famous under the title of ‘ Amidu'l-Mulk as Minister to the Saljdq
Sultans Tughril Beg and Alp Arslan, were fellow-pupils of the same
Im 4 m Mu waffacj*- of Nishapdr at fvhose lectures the “Three Friends”
are supposed to have become acquainted. That the framework of a
story should be preserved with tlffe substitution of more interesting or
more celebrated personalities as^its heroes is a veryTTommon literary
phenomenon. If this has happened in Hie present case, the poet al-
Bakharzi <has simply been replaced by the poet ‘Umar-i-Khayyim, and
Alp Arslan’s earlier Minister l Ainidu' l-Mulk by his later Minister
Nh&mu'l-Mulk , the Im&m Muwaffaq remaining in both versions.

11. Ta’rfkh-i-Guzida.

This well-known histcry, composed in 730/13^9-1330, also contains
a brief notice of ‘Umar and cites one of his quatrains. (“E. J. W. Gibb
Memorial” Series, xiv, 1, pp. 817-818.)

*r-

12. Firdawsu’t-Tawarfkh.

This work, the “Paradise of Histories,” composed in a.h. 808
(a.d. 1405-6) by Mawland Khpsraw of Abarqdh, contains an* account
of ‘Urnar-i-Khayyam of which the Persian text is reproduced from
Zhukovski’s article orf pp. 217-2x9 of the Persian notes, and of which
the substance is given in my Lit, Hist., ii, 254. r

13. The Ta’rfkK-i-Alff.

This lg.te ' - ■’ ‘ ' 1000 (a.d. 1591-2)®

for the Emp ■. v of Tatta in India,

contains a very entertaining anecdote concerning ‘Umar-i- Khayyam’s
belief in Metempsychosis, which is given in English on pp. 254-5 of
vol. ii of my Lit. Hitt, of Persia, and of which the text will be found on
pp. 219—220 of the Persian notes.

The above lfet is far from exhaustive, but contains all the older and
more authentic as well as the more interesting of the modern notices of
this famous man.

1 Umar-i- Khayy&m’s Scientific Works.

These include —

(1) His treatise on Algebra, of which the Arabic text accompanied
by a French translation was published at Paris in 1851 by F. Woepcke.

(2) On the difficulties of Euclid’s Definitions, of which a manuscript
is preserved at Leyden (No. 967). See also Brockelmann, i, 471.

1 “E. J. W. Gibb Memorial ” Series, vi, 5, p. 124.

3 It extends, however, only to the year 997/1588-9.


Note XXV. ‘Umar-i-Khaytam


139

(3) The Zij , or Calendar, of Malikshah, to which, as noticed above
(s.v. Ibnu’l-Athir), ‘Umar contributed.

(4) A bftef treatise on Natural Philosophy.

(5) A Persian treatise on B«ing, composed for Fakhru’l-Mulk 1 ibn

Mu’ayyad, of which a MS. (Or. 6572, f. 51) is preserved in the British
Museunj. In another MS. (Suppl. Pers. 139, No. 7) in the Biblio-
theque Nationale in Paris, described by M. E. Blochet in his Catalogue
des Manuscrits Persons (Paris, 1905, vol. i, p. 108), the name of the
person to whom this work is dedicated is given -(as Fakhru’d-Din
Mu’ayyadu’l-Mulk, whom Mirza Muhammad is incjjned to identify with
the son of the Nizdmu’l-Mulk who !*ore this latter title. This treatise,
according to a'Tnanuscript note by M. Blochet, has been translated by
M. Christensen and published in tne Monde Oriental (Copenhagen,
I9°S)- **

(6) A treatise^on Growth and Obligation ( Kawn wa Takllf).

(7) Methods for ascertaining the respective proportions of gold and
silver in an amalgam or admixture containing both. A MS. of this
(No. 1158) exists in tjie library of Gotha.

(8) A treatise entitled Lawdzimu’l-A mkina on the Seasons and on
the causes of the diversity of climate in different places.

The Quatrains.

How many of the Rub&HyyAt or Quatrains attributed to ‘Umar-i-
Khayyam are really his it is impossible to determine, since no very
ancient manuscript collection of them has yet <t>een discovered 2 3 * * * * ; but
Zhukovski has enumerated more than fourscore which are ascribed on
at least equally good“*authority to other poets 8 . Altl&ugh they have
repeatedly been lithographed In Persia and India, they enjoy, thanks to
Edward FitzGerald’s translation, a far greater celebrity in the*West, and
especially in England and America, than in the land of their origin,
where no one would think of ranking ‘Umar as a poet in the same
category as Firdawsi, Sa'di or Hafiz. The’causes of ‘Umar’s popularity
in the West are manifold. First , he had the supreme good fortune
to find a translator like FitzGerald. Secondly , the beauty of his quatrains
depends more on their substance than on their form, whereas the converse

1 Perhaps Fakhru’l-Mnlk ibn Nizdmu’l-Mulk, the Prime Minister of Sultin

Barkiydruq.

3 The oldest MS. (Bodl. No. 525) was copied in A.H. 86j (a.». 1460-j) nearly

three centuries and a half after ‘Umar’s death. The text of this, in facsimile and
in print, with literal prose translation, was published by Mr Edward Heron Allen

(London : H. S. Nichols, Ltd.) in 1898. Mired Muhammad informs me that a year
or two before the War [i.c. in 191a or 1913) there was offered for sale by an Armenian
dealer in Paris a very fine autograph MS. of the Mu'irisu'I-Ahrdr of the Persian poet
Muhammad ibn Badr-i-Jajarmi, transcribed in the year 74°/l339 -I 3+°- It comprised
about 600 leaves, and contained extensive selections from the works of some two
hundred of the most celebrated Persian poets from the earliest times down to the date

of compilation. Amongst these poems were included some twenty of ‘Umar-i-Kbay-
yam’s quatrains, which were copied by Mirzi Muhammad into a note-book. I do not

know what has become of this precious manuscript. ^

3 For a list of these see my Lit. Hist, of Persia, ii, 256-7,


i4o Note® ok the Fourth Discourse

holds good of much Persian poetry. Thirdly, their gentle melancholy,
half sceptical mysticism and graceful pessimism are congenial to an age
which, like his own, has come to the conclusion that science can answer
almost every question save that r which most intimately concerns our own
hopes and happiness. <*

The information given by Mfrza Muhammad in the latter part of his
note (pp. 222-7) about the European renderings of ‘Umar-i-l£.hayyAm
and his admirers and imitators, and especially about the Club called by
his name, though new to most Persian readers, is familiar to all in this
country who take«an interest in sucfh matters, and may be found in great
detail in Nathan Plaskell Dole’s “ Multi-Variorum edition ” (Macmillan,
London, 1898). •>

r I

Note £XVI. On certain medical terms in the Preface
to the Fourth Discourse.

(Text, pp' 68-9^ Persian notes, p. 2^0.)

The Pulse ( Nabd ) is very fully discussed in all Arabic and Persian
works on Medicine, e.g. the Firdawsu’l-Hikmat of ‘Ali ibn Rabban
at-Tabari, Naw 1 iv, Maqdia xii, chs. 6-9 (Brit. Mus. Arundel Or. 41,
ff. x63“~i 65 1 ’)'; the K 4 milu’s-Sina‘at, also called al-Kitabu’l-
Malikf, of ‘All ibnu’l- ‘Abbas al-Majiisf,*^?-/ 1 , Maqdia vii, chs. 2-11
(Cairo cd. of 1294/1877, vol. i, pp. 254-281); the Q&mln of Avicenna,
Book /, Fann ii, Talltm iii,Jnmla 1(19 sections^), pp. 62-8 of the Rome
edition of a.d. 1593 (=ff. 49 b -53 b of the Latin translation printed at
Venice in 1544); and the Persian Dhakhfra-i-Khw&razmsh&hf,
Book II, Guftdr in, cfo. 1-23.

As our author chiefly follows Avicenna, we may conveniently do the
same, though isldeed the general views of all thdSe writers appear to be
almost identical. Each pulsation consists of four factors or elements,
two movefnents (harakat), 0. diastole ( inbisdt ) and a systole ( inqibdd ),
and two pauses ( sukiln ) separating the two movements. The ten kinds or
genera (jins) of pulse are determined by consideration of the following
features : — f '

(1) The amount Of the diastole (miqddru’ l-inbisdt, “ genus quod est
sumptum ex quantitate diastoles ’’). In this genus three elements are to
be considered, length ( till ), breadth ( l ard) and depth (jumq), each of
which supplies three simple varieties of pulse, two extremes and a mean,
besides composite varieties, which I shall not here enumerate. Thus we
have the long (tawll), the short (qasir, “curtus”) and the intermediate
(mu'tadil, “mediocris”); the broad (‘arid, “latus”), the narrow (dayyiq,
“ strictus ”) and the intermediate ; the depressed (mukhaffad, “ pro-
fundus”), the ascending, elevated or prominent (mushrif, “apertus”)
and the intermediate.

(2) The quality of the impact on the fingers of the observer
(hayfiyyalu qarH'l-harakati' l-asdbi‘a, “ genus quod est sumptum ex
qualitate percussionis venae in digitos ”). This also has three varieties,
the strong (qawi, “fortis”), the weak (da 1 If, “debilis”) and the inter-
mediate (muHadil, “ Eequalis ”).


Note XXVI. On the Pul(Ie


141

(3) The time or duration of each movement ( zamdnu kulli hara-
kat m , “quod ex tempore cujuscunque motionis sumptum est”). This
also comprises three varieties, the quick (sari 1 , “velox”), the slow
(bati' , “ tardus ”), and the intermediate (“ sequalis ”).

(4) Resistance to the touch Qiwdmu'l-dlat, “ quod ex essentia instru-
menti sumitur ”). Here also we have three varieties, the soft (layyin,
“ mollis ’*), the hard (salt, “ durus ”) and the intermediate (“ mediocris ”).

(5) Emptiness or fulness (hdlu md yahtawi 'alayhi min khald'ihi wa

’ mtild'ihi , “quod est sumptum ex eojquod continetur^’), three varieties,
the full (inumtati, “ plenus ”), the empty (khdli, “ vacuus ”) and the
intermediate (“ mediocris ”). ^ *

(6) Heat or cold ( harm malmasili | wa barduhu, “cfliod ex suo tactu
sumptum est ”), three tyariefcfes, the hot (hdrr, “ calidus ”), the cold
(bdrid, “frigidus”) and the intermediate (“ temperatus ”)• **

( 7 ) The duration of the pause (zamdnu' s-svkfm, “quod est sumptum
ex tempore quietis”), three varieties, the continuous ( nmtaw&tir , also
called muiaddrik and mutakdthif, “frequens,” “consequens” or “spissus ”),
the differentiated (mutajdivit, also called muiardkhi and muiakhalkhil ,
“rarus,” “lassus” or a resolutus”), and the iiftermediate (“mediocris”).

(8) The equality or diversity oT the pulse (isthvd'u'n-nabdi wa
' khtildfuhu , “quod est sumpt«"« ex sequalitate et diversitate,” “aut requale,
aut diversum seu intequale ”), two varieties, equal (mustaw 1 ", “aaqualis”)
and unequal (viukhtalif, “ diversus ”).

(9) The regularity or irregularity of^the pulse ( an-nizdm waghayru’n-

nizdm , “genus quod ex ordinatione et inordinatione sumptum est”),
two varieties, regularly different ( mukhialif muntatfm, “ diverse ordi-
natus”) and irregularly different (mukhtalif ghayru muntazim , “diverse
inordinatus ”). *

(10) Weight, harmony or measure ( wazn , “ quod ex puudere est
sumptum ”), which may be either good or bJuJ, each of which, comprises
three varieties.

It will thus be seen that 37 primary varfeties of pulse are recognized,
but there are many secondary and composite typep which it would take
too long to enumerate. Speaking of the latter in tne first group or genus
mentioned above Avicenna says that some only are named, such as
al-azim (“magnus”) and as-saghir (“parvus”), al-gnaliz (“grossus”)
and ar-raqiq (“ subtilis”) ; and the next section but one (§ iii) treats of
the different sorts of composite pulse which have proper names, such as
al-ghazdli (“gazellans”), al-mawjt (“undosus”), anW^/^'vermiculosus”),
an-namll (“ formicans ”), etc. Very full treatment is accorded to the
whole subject, and in particular it is explained why the pulse is felt at
the wrist preferably to any other place, and what precautions should
be observed in feeling it. The remarks about the observing of the
systole ascribed by our author to Avicenna appear to be really quoted
by him from Galen : “ Galenus quoque dixit 1 longo tempore non fui
sollicitus ex depressione : postea vero non quievi tangendo donee ex eo
aliquid percepi, et postea illud complevi. Nam postea portfe pulsus mihi
apertae fuerunt


142


Note! on the Fourth Discourse


Next in importance tQ the examination of the pulse came the
inspection of the urine as a means of diagnosis. This is called, as in the
text, Tafsira, a word thus defined in the great Dictionary ofi'he Technical
Terms used in the Sciences of the Musalmdns (p. 11x5) : “ This with the
physicians is the vessel wherein is the'patient’s urine [intended] to be
shewn to the physician ; and it is also called dalil (indication, guide). It
is only called tafsira because it explains ( tufassir ) and makes manifest to
the physician the patient’s physical condition.” The chief points to be
observed in it are the colour (lawn), consistency (qiwdni), smell ( rd’iha . ),
froth ( zubd ), sedirfient (rusilb), and copious or scanty quantity (kathratwa
qillat). Twelve sections are devoted to this subject in the Qdm'tn, and
twenty-nine in the Dhakhira-i-Klfmdrazmshdhi.

The word translated “deliriufc ” in tire text^is sarsdm, so explained
by Schlimjjner (pp. 179 and 460), with the equivalent of Phrenitis. This
latter word appears correctly as (farrdnitus) in a fine old

twelfth or thirteenth century M'S. of the Qdniin in my possession ; but
in the Rome edition of a.d. 1593 (p, 302) in the corrupt form
(qardnifus) 1 , and in the Latin version as “karabitus.” It is defined by
Avicenna as a “ hot swelling (or inflammation) oFthe pia mater or dura
mater not extending to” the substance of the brain,” and would therefore
appear to be equivalent to meningitis.

The general doctrine of Fever and its Varieties taught by “ Arabian
Medicine ” is most clearly and succinctly set forth in Book V of the
Persian Dhakhira-i-Khwdrazmshahi , of which I possess a very fine MS.
transcribed in the thirteenth cethtury of the Christian era. This Book
comprises six Guftdr f, or Discourses, of which the first, divided into
four chapters, treats “ of what Fever is, and of how many species, how it
appears and h«hv it passes away.” The first chapter, on “ What Fever
is,” may be translated in full on account sf its brevity.

“ You must know that ‘JFever is an abnormal 2 heat enkindled in the
heart, traxTsmitted by the intermediary of the spirit and the blood to the
blood-vessels and [thus] diffused throughout the whole body, which it
heats and inflames with an inflammation whereof the harmful effects
appear in all the natural functions.’ This sentence formulated above is
the definition (hadd) of Fever ; the word ‘ Heat ’ is the genus, while the
other words areothe specific differentiations (fasl-hd-yi dhdtl) whereby
the definition is completed. Further you must know that the heat of
Fever is not like the heat of anger, fatigue, grief and the like, because
these heats harmfully affect the natural functions without the intervention
of anything else, even as when water descends into the eye the hurtful
effect thereof on the vision becomes apparent without the intervention of
anything else ; and when the heat of anger, or the like thereof, reaches
that point where it will be injurious to the natural functions, it is but the
cause, and the injury thereof only becomes apparent by the intervention
of something else. Even so is the putridity \_‘ufdnat\ of fever, for the

1 This same corrupt form also occurs in most MSS. of the Dhakhtra-i-IChwdraem-
shdhi , Book VI, Guftir i, Part 1, ch. t, where, however, the word is specifically
recognized as Greek.

3 Gharlb, lit. “strange."


• Note XXVI. Fevers <1


M3


putridity is the cause, while the hurt thereof is through the intervention
of that heat which is produced from it. And the natural functions,
wherein the hurt of fever becomes apparent, are such as the appetite for
food and wine, digestion, rising up, sitting down, going, eating, sexual
intercourse, and the like thereof. 1 * .

The next (second) chapter deals with the different kinds of fever,
and is to?) long (3 pages) to be translated in full here. The human body
is compounded of three sorts of substances ; (1) basic tissues such as
the bones, nerves and blood-vessels ; (2} the marrow of the bones, the
blood,' and other liquids contained In the vessels and cavities of the
body, such as the phlegm, bile and black bile, knowft as the ‘humours’;

(3) -the natural<«*animal or vital, ana. psychic spirits, and the vapours
* diffused throughout the body. This composite body the ancients have
likened to a hot bath, whereof flie walls, bricks and stones are represented
by the bones, nerves and blood-vessels ; the water by the -flfarrow, the
blood, and the hiynours; and the steam by » the natural, animal and
psychic spirits, and the vapours. When the heat of the fever attacks the
basic tissues of the body, it is like the heat of the fire affecting the walls,
stones and bricks of the hot bath; and this kind of fever is called
< hectic ’ (diqq). Whet? it first attacks the hudburs and subsequently the
basic tissues, it is like the hot water being let into the chambers of the
bath and heating the walls ; aj*! this kind of fever is called ‘humoristic’
(khaltiyya). When it attacks the spirit and the vapours, which in turn
heat the humours and the tissues, it is like the hot air in the bath heating
in turn the water and the walls thereof ; and this kind of fever is called
‘quotidian’ (Pers . ' tab-i-yak-rdza \ Arab* hummd yawm"').

This is one classification. Another is into # ‘ simple ’ (iastf) and
‘ compound ’ ( murakkab ), according as one humour only is involved, or
more than one. Thirteen kinds of fever are recognized, viz . ■

(1) That which is in itself ^in independent disease.

(2) That which is the symptom of some,other disease.

(3) Very high fever called ‘acute’ ( h&dda ).

(4) The slower and heavier fever called* ‘ chronic 1 ( muzmina ).

(5) That which attacks by day. „

(6) Tl^t which attacks by night.

(7) That which passes away easily. ■»

(8) Fevers which are fierce in their onset and accompanied by
alarming symptoms.

(9) Continuous fevers ( Idzim or mutbiqa ).

(10) Non-continuous fevers (mufitra).

(n) Cold fevers.

(12) Fevers accompanied by rigors (Pers. larza ; Arab, ndfid, ra‘da).

(13) Fevers accompanied by ‘goose-skin’ (Pers. fardshd', Arab.
qash ‘arira ) .

These, says the author, are the broad general divisions, each of
which contains subdivisions which will be treated of in subsequent
chapters. Fevers of the type called “ putrid ” {'afin, in Persian ganda or


144


fJOTEg ON THE FOURTH DISCOURSE


piis(da) are of four kinds, corresponding to the four humours ( akhldt )
from the corruption of which they arise, and each of these is subdivided
into two varieties, according as the corruption arises within or without the
blood vessels. But since two„or more of these kinds may co-exist or
combine, a large number of compound or composite fevers ( tab-hd-yi
murakkab) arises, each presenting different and characteristic symptoms.
Thus two types of intermittent fever may co-exist, or two typ%s of con-
tinuous fever, or an intermittent with a continuous fever, so that the
diagnosis may be very difficult. Generally speaking, quotidian fever
(Arab, humma kttll 1 yawm"\ P ers Mab-i-har-rtha) arises from corruption
of the phlegm ( balgham ) ; tertian (Arab, ghibb ) from that of the bile
(■ safrd ) ; quartan is atrabilious ( taivddwt ) in origin ; and semi-tertian
(shatru’l-ghibb) fs from a combination of bilious ancTphlegmatic dis-
turbance. Fevers arising from corruption in rhe blood, on the other
hand, are«s«ontinuous ( mutbiqa , or Idzim). If the blood become over-
heated in the vessels without undergoing corruption, the resulting fever
is called si'mdklus (? o-we^tjs). r If there is corruption as well, it may
affect half the blood, or less, or more, in which last case the resulting
fever is called “burning” (Arab, muhriqa , Pers. ntzanda). But if all the
blood be so affected, therpatient will surely die. *A11 fevers arising from
the blood are continuous, whether the affection of the blood be primary
or secondary.* The latter may arise from a “bloody swelling” ( dmds-i -
kk&ni ) of one of the internal organs, suc’ff'as the stomach, liver, spleen,
gall-bladder, bowels, lungs, diaphragm, muscles or nerves. Such secondary
fever is not an independent disease but a symptom, and the treatment
must therefore be directed to thj^ cause. The aetiology of corruption of
the humours is discussed in a subsequent section of the book (Book V,
GuftAr iii, ch. i). *

It is to be noted that in the older Arabic medical treatises, such as
the Firdawsu'T-Hikmat (composed in A.p. 850), there is a tendency to
use the original Greek nomenclature transcribed into Arabic characters
instead of the Arabic translations which subsequently replaced these
foreign forms. Thus we find quotidian fever called (e^'^epos)

as well as hecticT fever called (ekti/co's) instead of

(Jj; tertian (rpiratos) instead of ; and semi-tertian

as (y/zo-pmuos) instead of JldUl

The student*s attention may also be directed to an excellent article
on Fever ( (> ^aj!) in vol. i of the Diet, of Tec/mical Terms , etc., pp. 381-3,
where a fourfold classification is adopted having regard to (1) causation,
primary or secondary ( marad or 'arad) ■, (2) point of attack, as explained
above (quotidian, hectic and putrid or humoristic) ; (3) simplicity or
complexity ; (4) occurrence or non-occurrence of rigors ( ndfid ).

Note XXVII. Physicians and their Works mentioned in
Anecdote XXXII.

(Text, pp. 70-71 ; Persian notes, pp. 230-8.)

It will be convenient to arrange the medical works here mentioned
under their authors, and these in turn, so far as possible, in chronological


Note XXVII. Certain Eminent Physicians 14s

order. For the authorities to which reference is most constantly made
the following abbreviations are used. By Barhebraeus is meant the
Mukhtasarii'd-Diiwal (Beyrout ed. of 1890) of ■' *’ ' ibn

Ahrrin commonly called Ibnu’l-Tbri or fj,arhe' I-':." of

Abu’l-Faraj Muhammad ibn Abi-»Ya‘qiib Ishaq an-Nadim al-Warraq is,
of course, quoted from HtigePs (the only) edition. Ibn Abi Usaybi'a
means tli^it author’s 1 UyunuJ-Inbd ft Tabaqdti' l-Atibl>a , Cairo edition of
1299/1882, two volumes. Qiftf means Jamalu’d-Din Abu’l-Easan ‘All
ibn Ydsuf al-Qiftfs Ta' rikhii l-Hukamd, ed. Lippert (Leipzig, 1903). The
chief European authorities quoted a)e Wustenfeld^s Geschichte der
Arabischen Aerzte und Naturforscher (Gottingen, 1.^40), a small book
but compact with useful information j'Lucien Leclerc’s Histoire de la
M'edecine A rabe T2 vols., Paris, 1876)^ Max Neuburger’s Geschichte
der Medizin (Stuttgart, *908)? especially vol. ii, pp. 142-228, “Die
Medizin beiden Arabern,” and the complementary Id terarhistartsche Uber-
sicht ; Pagel’s Einfuhrung in die Geschichte der Medizin (Berlin, 1898),
ninth lecture (pp. '46-160) on Arabian* Medicine ; Adolf Fonahn’s
Zur Quellenkunde der Persischen Medizin (Leipzig, 1910); E. T.
Withington’s Medical History from the earliest tunes (London, 1894);
and F. H. Garrison ’ 3. Introduction to the History of Medicine (London
and Philadelphia, 1917). As a rule, however, in these briqf notes refer-
ence will only be made to the original Arabic sources.

1. Bukht- YisMZ.

Ten members of this great medical family, which for three centuries
(eighth to eleventh of our era) produced some of the most eminent
physicians of that time, are enumerated by Wijstenfeld (pp. 14-18,
Nos. 26-35). They were Christians, as indicated "by the family name,
for the correct explanation of which (Bukht-Yishu 1 = “ j^esus hath de-
livered”) we _ are indebted to Noldeke 1 . The chief members of the
family, with their affiliation, so far as it is known, were as follows : —

1. Bukht- YisAti ‘ I * *


1. JurjtP I ^

(physician to al-Manjdr, d. 152/769)

3. Bukht- Yishil' II

(physician to -Mahdi, -Hddf and Harunu’r- Rashid, d. 185/801)

1 1 — 1 J

4. Jibrd'tl (physician to Hardnu’r- Rashid, 5- Jurjls II

-Amin and -Ma’mitn, d. 213/828-9)

I I

6. Bukht-Yishu' III (physician to 7 - ‘ Ubaydn'llah

-Mu'tazz, d. 256/870) (physician to -Muttaqi)


8. Yahyd or Yuhannd 9. Jibrd'tl (physician to ‘Adudtt’d*

'| ‘ Dawla, d. 3(17/1006-9)

10. Bukht- Yis/rn' IV (physician to u. Abu Sa'id ‘Ubaydtilldh

•Muqtadir, d. 329/940-1) (d. +50/1058-9)


1 See p. 8r supra, n. 1 ad calc.

* Wiistenfeld (p. i+), following Ibn Abi U?aybt‘a (1, 123), inserts a Jibra il between
Jurjls and Bukht- Yishd‘, but Qifti (p. 158 etc.) represents Jurjls I as the son, not the
grandson, of Bukht- Yishtl‘ I.


2 »


146


NotJs on the Fourth Discourse


Concerning the original Bukht-Yishfi‘ I can find out nothing, but it
may be supposed that he, like his son Jurjis, was attached to the great
hospital ( Blmdristdn ) and medical school of his native'^ town Jundi-
SAbdr. This once famous Persian city, of which hardly a trace now
remains, though its site has been idenfified by Rawlinson 1 2 as the modem
Shah-abad, about mid-way between Dizful and Shdshtar, was originally
founded by Shapdr I, and named, according to Tabari 3 , Beh-a-z-Andew-
i-Shapur, or “Shapdr’s ‘Better than Antioch,’” a name gradually
shortened to GundAShapdr, or, in its Arabic form, Junday-Sabdr. “It
was enlarged into a great city,” "says Rawlinson, “ by his seventh suc-
cessor Shapdr II '*Dhu’ l-Akt&f' (a.d. 309-379).. .and during his reign
became the see of a bishop of tpe Nestorian ChurcRwhich had been
instituted in Susiana a centuryPbefore ; and when Jundi-Sabdr soon
afterwards rose to be the chief city oRthe province, the seat of the
metropolitan, which had been formerly fixed at Ahwaz, or, as it is called
by the Syrians, Beth Lapat 3 , was transferred to it. The School of Jundi-
Sabdr was renowned, during rhe reign of Amish ar wan (a.d. 531-578),
through the East and West] and the city continued, to the time of the
Arab conquest, one of the great capitals of Susiana. It appears to have
sunk before the rising gffeatness of Shdshtar in 'the thirteenth century;
and it is little mentioned in Oriental History after that time.”

On the destruction of the great Persism school of Edessa in a.d. 488-9
by order of the Emperor Zeno 4 5 many of its learned Nestorian professors
and physicians sought refuge from Byzantine fanaticism under the more
tolerant rule. of the Sasdnians at Jundi-Sabdr, and gave a fresh impulse
to its activity. During the Arab invasion of Persia (a.h. 15-17;
a.d. 636-8) it surrendered on terms to the Muslims®, and its school
apparently continued unmolested until the early ‘Abbasid period, when
the Caliph al^VIansdr (a.h. 136-158; a.d. 754-775), being grievously
ill, summoned Jurjis I, son of Bukht-yishd‘ I, to Baghdad, where he
remained, greatly trusted and honoured, in spite of his refusal to forsake
the Christian for the Muhammadan faith, until a.h. 152 (a.d. 769),
when, being himself sick unto death, he obtained the Caliph’s permission
to return home. From thatdime onwards until the middle of the eleventh
century some member of the family was always one of the chief phy-
sicians of the Couft at Baghdad. Lengthy notices of most of those
enumerated above, with lists of their medical and other works, are given
by Qifti, Ibn Abi Usaybi'a and other medical biographers. For such
as do not read Arabic the information given by Wiistenfeld (pp. 14-18)
and Leclerc (i, pp, 95-103) will probably suffice. It is uncertain whether
the Bukht-Yishd* mentioned in the text (Anecdote XXXIII) is intended
to be the father or the son of Jibra’fl. The former died twelve years
before al-Ma’mdn’s accession, while the latter survived him thirty-seven
years.

1 Notes on a March from Zohdb to KhAzistdn in the J.R. Geogr. Soc. for 1839,
vol. ix, pp. 71-72. See also Layard’s remarks in vol. xvi, p. 86, of the sarfie Journal.

2 See Noldeke’s Gesch. d. Pers. u. Arab, smr Zeit d. Sasaniden (Leyden, 1879),
pp. 40-42.

3 See Noldeke, lac. cit.

4 See Dr VY. Wright’s Syriac Literature , pp. 46-47.

5 See Balidhuri’s FtttAkn’ l-Bulddn (ed. de Goeje), pp. 382-383.


Note XXVII. Certain. Eminent Physicians 147


An anecdote in the KitAbu'l-Bukkald (“Book of Misers”) 1 * * of
al-Jlhiz in which an Arab physician, Asad ibn Jani, complains that
patients will* not consult him because, amongst other reasons, “ his
language is Arabic, and it should have, been the language of Jundi-
Sabtfr,” shews how great was *the repute of that famous school of
Medicine in early ‘Abbasid times, Exactly what this language was is
uncertain. Ibn HawqaP says that, besides Arabic and Persian, the people
of Jundi-Sabdr have another speech of Khiizistan which is neither
Hebrew, nor Syriac, nor Persian ; while in the Mandhiju'l-Fikar it is
said that they have' a language peculiar to themselves, resembling a
jargon ( ratanct ), though the Persian language is*prevalent amongst
them 8 . Speaking^of their religion al-^fuqaddasi 4 * says that in his time
(middle of the tenth century of thq Christian era)*there were few
Christians and not many*Jews%nd Zoroastrians, and that of the Muslims
many were Mu'tazilites, Shf‘a (especially at Ahwaz) and Ha*#alites.

^ %

2. Hunayn ibn Ishchj al-'Jbddi,

This was another Christian scholar, well known to mediaeval Europe
under the name of Joannitius, who rendered signal services to Arabian
science, together with his sons Dd’dd and Ishaq and his nephew
Hubaysh, all of whom were skilful and industrious translators of Greek
books into Arabic. He was a^estorian of Hfra, where his father was
an apothecary, and early in the ninth century of the Christian era came
to Baghdad, where he studied under the celebrated Yaliyd (or Yuljanna)
Masawayh (Mesue senior) of Jundi-Sdbijr, a pupil of Jibra’il ibn Bukht-
YishiP. Offended at some real or fancied slight, he went off to study
Greek amongst the Greeks 6 , and some years later v?as seen by one of his
former acquaintances (y the guise of a long-haired wandering bard
reciting Plomer in the streets.^ Later he returned to Baghdad, having
perfected his knowledge of Greek, and applied himself to the^ study of
Arabic under Khalil ibn Ahmad. He then became so excellent as a trans-
lator from Greek into Arabic that Jibra^il ibn Bukht-Yishii 4 saia of him,
“ By God, if his life be prolonged he wilL assuredly put Sergius to
shame ! ” He attracted the notice, and finally, after undergoing a cruel
test of his professional honour 7 , won the confidence of the Caliph al-
Mutawakkil (a.d. 847-851), but finally succumbed to the intrigues of lus
rivals, was excommunicated by Bishop Theodosius, andwlied in ah. 260
(a.d. 873). Wiistenfeld (pp. 28-9) enumerates 33 of his original works
and a number of his translations from the Greek, including the Aphor-
isms (Fustil) of Hippocrates. His son Ishaq died in a.d. 910 or 91 1,
and his nephew Plubaysh about the same time.


1 Ed. Van Vloten (Leyden, 1900), pp. 109-1 10.

3 De Goeie’s Bibl . Gcogr, Arab*) vol* ii* pp« 1 73 _I 74\ * , ,

8 Ibn Abi Usaybi'a specially mentions that both Jurjis I (vol. 1, p. 1*4) awl his
son Bukht-Yishd' (vol. i,p. 116), on being presented to the Caliphs al-Mansdr and
HarunuV-Rashid respectively, prayed for them m Arabic and Persian.

4 De Goeje’s Bibl. Geogr. Arab., vol. 111, pp. 414-4‘S- , t CfC: -i.-l*

6 Sergius of R

into Syriac. See' 1 ■ ‘ ‘ ‘ - ■

7 Qiftfi P- t 7 6> ^


10 — 1'


1 43


Not^ on- the Fourth Discourse


3. Thdbit ibn Qurra of Harrdn.

Thabit ibn Qurra was the chief of another group ofi, non-Muslim
scholars to whom Arabic science is deeply indebted. These were the
so-called Sabeans (fdbi) 1 of' liar ran? a town so devoted to Greek
culture that it was known as Hellenopolis. The following were the most
notable members of the family : — „

Qurra

t Thdbit I (d. Feb. if, 901 A.D.)

l—m ' "F ,

JbrdMm I , Sman

^ Td. a.h. 331 ; a.d. 942-3^,

Thdbit H ff JbrdMm II

^ (d. A.H. 363; A.D. 973-4) \

^ Jshdq

Thabit ibn Qurra, to VhonvQifti devotes a long notice (pp. 1 15-122),
was a most prolific writer on logic, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy,
medicine, etc. He was born at Harrdn in a.h. 221 (a.d. 836) but spent
most of his life at Baghdad, wh^re he enjoyed the favour of the Caliph
al-Mu‘tadid (a.d. 892-902). Qifti gives a very full and authoritative
list of his writings compiled by Abil ‘All al-Muhassin 5 ihn Ibrahim ibn
Hilal as-Sabi, including some in Syriac ^5 n the Sabean religion and on
music which were never translated into Arabic. The almost miraculous
cure of the butcher related in Anecdote XXXIX of this book is by
Qiffi (pp. 1 20— 1) and Ibn Abf Usaybi'a (i, 216) ascribed to Thabit ibn
Qurra. The Dhakhlra (“Thesaurus”) mentioned in the text was, accord-
ing to Qifti (p. 1 20), declared by Thdbit’s homonymous grandson to be
unauthentic, though a good book enjoying a wide circulation.


4. Abii Bakr MuJiammad ibti Zakariyyd ar-lidzi.

This ^famous Persian "physician, known to mediaeval Europe as
Bubikir, Abu-beter, Errasis, Rasis and Rbazes, was probably the greatest
practitioner of the so-called-: Arabian Medicine who ever lived 3 , and as a
clinical observer far surpassed his later and more celebrated countryman
Avicenna, whose refutation rests more on his philosophical than on his
medical attainments, while the contrary holds good of ar-Razf. Indeed
Qiffl says (p. 2 fi) that though he devoted a good deal of attention to
Metaphysics he did not understand its ultimate aim, so that his judge-
ment was disturbed, and he adopted untenable opinions and objectionable
doctrines. In Medicine, on the other hand, he was incomparable, and


1 The true Sabeans of Chaldaea are the Mughtasila of the Arabs, the so-called
“Christians of St John the Baptist” of some European writers. The heathens of
Harrdn only adopted this name in the time of al-Ma’indn for a curious reason fully
explained by Chwolson in his great work Ssabier und Ssabwnus (vol. i, ch. vi,
PP- i 39 ~J 57 )-

2 This name, being unpointed, might equally be read “Muhsin,” but Mirzd
Muhammad, in the course of a long note, has pointed out to me that, though common
in later times, Muhsin was in early days a very rare name compared with Muhassin ;

statement which he amply substantiates.

3 Compare the enthusiastic but judicious estimate of his talents given by Neuburger

168 et seqq.).


Note XXVII. Certain Eminent IPhysicians 149

his great work the Hdwi (or “ Continens ” of mediaeval Europe), so far
as I can judge from the portions of it accessible to me in the original
Arabic, staflds on an altogether different plane, from the Qdnitn of
Avicenna or any other Arabic system of .Medicine.

The year of Razl’s birth is n 3 t recorded, but he seems to have spent
the first thirty years of his life in his native town of Ray (situated near
the modern Persian capital TihrAn), from which he derived the name by
which he is generally known, without becoming famous for anything
except an unusual skill in music and singing. He was then seized with
a desire to study Medicine and Philosophy, went to Baghdad, and there
became the pupil of ‘Ah ibn Rabban 1 at-Tabari, formerly physician to
the unfortunate^Persian rebel MAzy.% and afterwards to the Caliph al-
Mutawakkfl, for whom in a.d, 850 composed his Remarkable work
the “ Paradise of WiscSbm ” \Firdawsn' l-Hikmat). Having completed
his medical studies he became director first of the hospitai^t Ray and
then at Baghdad 8 . He also devoted some attention to Alchemy, on
which he composed 12 books®, but the»study brought him no luck, for,
being unable to translate his theories into practice, he was struck on the
head by his disappointed patron Mansdr, governor of Ray, in consequence
of which he became blind. He refused to urfclergo an operation on his
eyes on ascertaining that the surgeon who was to perform jt was ignorant
of the anatomy of the eye, adding afterwards that he had looked on the
world until he was tired of it'.

The marvellous acumen displayed and the wonderful cures effected
by him form the subject of numerous anecdotes similar in character to
No. XXXV in this book in such collections of stories as the Arabic
al-Faraj ba‘ da’ sh-Shidda (“Joy after Sorrow”) of at-Tandkhi 4 and the
Persian Jaw&mi'u' l-Hikciydt of ‘Awfi. *

Razf was a most prolific writer, and Qifti (pp. 274^7) enumerates
more than a hundred of his,works, most of which, unfortunately, are
lost, while only a very few have been printed in the original, to wit his
celebrated treatise on small-pox and measles 6 , his work on stone in the
kidneys and bladder 0 , and the anatomical portion of the 'Mansurs’ ,
Latin versions of the Hdwi (“ Continens ”), Mansiiri (“Liber ad
Almansorem ”), and various smaller works were made and widely read
in mediaeval Europe, and were in many casdS printed during the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. They are enumerated by Dr Ludwig
Choulant in his Handbuch der Biicherkunde fUr dip Altere Median
(Leipzig, 1841), pp. 340-5. One of the most interesting of RAzi’s minor
works, in which he discusses the reasons why quacks often enjoy

1 His father’s name is often wrongly given as Zayn (t >.j)’ but he explicitly states
in the Introduction to his Firdawsu'l-Hikmai, or “Paradise of Wisdom,” that he was
called Rabban “that is to say, our master and teacher.” Ibn AW Usaybi'a

(i, r86) explains the title in precisely the same sense.

a Qifti, p. 271. 3 Ibid., p. 272.

4 See the edition of this work printed at the Hildl Press, Cairo, in 1903, vol. it,
p. 96. The author was born in 327/938-9 and died in 384/994-5. _

0 De Variolis et Morbillis, arabict et latine, curajohn Charming London, 1700).
0 Traitt sur le Calcul dans les Reins et dans / a Vessie... traduction accompagnit da
texts par P. de Koning (Leyden, 1896). , ’

7 Trois Trait is cf Anatomic arabes...texte et traduction par P. de Koning (Leyden,
1903). PP- 5 “ 8 9 -


NOTEfe ON THE FOURTH DISCOURSE


150

greater popularity than properly qualified physicians, has been translated
into German by the learned Moritz Steinschneider and published in
Virchow’s Archiv (vol, xxxvi, 1865, pp. 570-586). This is entitled “ Wis-
senschaft und Charlatanerie urtfer den Araben im neunten Jahrhundert,”
and appears to be identical with the trSct described by Qifti (p. 274) as
Kit&b ft l- A sbdbil-m umayyila li-qulilbfn-Nds 'an af ddili’l-A tibbd’i ila
akhissd’ihim, on “the causes which incline men’s hearts from ghe most
eminent of physicians to the vilest of them.”

Only four of Rdzi’s numerous works are mentioned in the Chah&r
Maq&la. One o Ft hem, the Tuhfaht'l-Muluk (p. 71, 1 . 22 of the text), is
nowhere else mentioned by this title, and cannot be identified. Another,
here called the Murshid{“ Guide ”f, is properly entitledjzl-Fupil ftt-Tibb
(“Aphorisms in r Medicine ”)b Tf he two remaining works, the Mansiiri
and the Hdwi, are more important (especially the last named), and
deserve stffcHiwhat fuller mention.

Al-Kiiabii l-Manmft (“ Liber ad Almansorem ”).

A great deal of confusion exists, even amongst Oriental writers, as to
the identity of the Manser to whom Razf dedioated this work, and at
whose hands (as narrated above) he finally suffered such indignity.
Yaqfit 3 alone correctly identifies him as Mansfir ibn Ishaq ibn Ahmad
ibn Asad, who was appointed Governor*" of Ray in a.h. 290 (a.d. 903)
by his cousin Ahmad ibn Isma'il ibn Ahmad ibn Asad ibn Sdman, the
second King of that Royal House, held that position until a.h. 296
(a.d. 908-9), and rebelled agaipst Nasr II ibn Ahmad ibn Isma'il in
a.h. 302 (a.d. 914-915). All other authorities, even those generally
most trustworthy, seetn, as M (rza Muhammad points out (Persian notes,
pp. 231-3 an$ 240-1), to have fallen into epror. Thus the Fihrist
(pp, 299-300), Qiffi (p. 272, 11 . 21-2) aqfl Ibn Abl Usaybi'a (i, p. 310,
1 . 29) cal] Rdzi’s patron “ Mansfir ibn Isma'il,” a person unknown to
history; or (Ibn Abi Usaybi'a in another passage, viz. i, p. 313, 1 . 20)
“ Mansfirhiti Isma'il ibn Khaqan, lord of Khurasan and Transoxiana
or (Ibn Abi Usaybi'a, i, p. 317, II. 17-18) “Mansfir ibn Ishaq ibn
Isma'il ibn Ahmad.” Ibn Khallikan in one passage identifies him with
Abfi Salih Mansfir fon Ishdq ibn Ahmad ibn Nfih (which is correct
if we substitute “Asad” for “Nfih” in the genealogy), and in another
falls into the sc. me error as the author of the Chahdr Maqdla by
identifying him with the sixth Sdmanid ruler Mansfir ibn Nfih ibn Nasr,
who reigned from a.h, 350 to 366 (a.d. 961-976-7), long after the
death of Razi, which is generally placed either in the year a.h. 311
(a.d. 923-4), or in a.h. 320 (a.d. 932), though one MS. of Qifti (p. 272)
puts it as late as a.h. 364 (a.d. 974-5).

The Arabic text of the Mansdrl has, so far as I know, never been
published in its entirety, nor are MSS. common. For his edition of the
anatomical portion of the work Dr P. de Koning made use of a MS. in
the Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris (No. 2866 of de Slane’s Catalogue).
The Latin version, as already noted, has been repeatedly printed 3 .

1 See Choulant’s Handbach , pp. 341 and 343.

2 Mu'/amu'l-Bnlddn , vol. ii, p. 901. 8 See Choulant, op. laud 1 , p. 343


Note XXVII. Certain Eminent Physicians i 5 i


Al-Kitdbu’l-Hdwi (“Continens”).

This is t]je largest and most important of the works of Rizi. It is,
moreover, a posthumous work, for after Rdzi’s death Muhammad ibnu’l-
‘Ami'd, the Minister of Sultin ,Ruknu J d-Dawla ibn Buwayh, bought
the materials and notes left by the author from his sister for a high
price ancj placed them in the hands of a committee of his pupils to be
arranged and edited. It therefore lacked the finishing touch of the
Master’s hand, which fact, perhaps, accounts for its somewhat inchoate
character and confused arrangement.* The original Arabic text has never
been published; MSS. are rare and widely scattered, and it is doubtful
if those which exist in the British Museum, the Bodleian, Munich and
the Escorial re] 5 ?fesent in all more tl%n half of the entire work. The
Latin version, first publ^shed^n 148$* and subsequently in 1500, 1506
and 1509, is rare, and has been accessible to me only^ft the copy
marked XV. 4. 2 in the Library of King’s College, Cambridge; nor do
its contents agree -well either with the %ccouift of the original given in
the Fihrist (pp. 299-302) or with the manuscript volumes which I have
examined in London and Oxford.

The Fihrist (p. 3410) and Qifti describe, the book as comprising
twelve parts, thus enumerated by the former: —

(i) The treatment of disease and of the sick.

(ii) The preservation of health.

(iii) Fractures, dislocations and surgical operations.

(iv) Materia medica and diet.

(v) Compound medicaments.

(vi) The Art of Medicine. ,

(vii) Apothecariurfl; colours, tastes and smells of dsugs.

(viii) Bodies. *

(ix) Weights and measures. ,

(x) The anatomical structure and uses of the different Members.

(xi) Natural causes in Medicine. •

(xii) Introduction to the study of Medicine^ medical names and
first principles of Medicine.

The Latin version, on the other hand (Brixiae, October 18, i486),
comprises twenty-five parts 1 entitled as follows: —

(1) De morbis cerebri.

(2) De oculis.

(3) De auribus, naribus, lingua et gula.

(4) De asmate, peripleumonia et pleuresi.

(5) De passionibus stomachi.

(6) De evacuationibus.

(7) De passionibus cordis et epatis et splenis.

1 But according to Choulant (p. 3+3) the Venice edition of A.D. 1509 is divided
into 37 books. In the following table I have retained the original spelling, except in
the case of ligatures and contractions.


NOTEfS ON THE FOURTH DISCOURSE


IS2


De passionibus intestinorum.

De clisteribus et morbis matricis.

De passionibus renum.

De-passionibus vesice^hernia, vermibus et cabbo(?) emorroidibus
et spermate.

De arthetica et varicibus. *

De squirros et aliis apostematibus.

De eo qpod dissolvit samjem.

De disloctyfione et minutione.

De prognosticis et summfi febrium.

De effiffiera et ethica (fq fl ectica). w

De quotidiana, quartana, rigore et alii§.

De’crisi.

De urina et ven’enis. , r

De simplicibus medicinis, incipiendo a Camomille usque ad
Dausar.

(22) De simplicibus ^medicinis, incipiendo "a Dausar usque ad
CorcLnmeni.

(23) De simplicibus medicinis, incipiendo a Cordumeni complet
totum.

(24) De electionibus et sophisticationibus medicinarum simplicium
tabula

(25) De regimine sanitatis.

f,

Since the Hawt or “Continens” must be regarded as the most
important worlC of the greatest of “Arabian” pfhysicians, access to the
original text would be an essential condition of success in any detailed
and comprehensive study of “Arabian” Medicine. This condition,
unfortunately, is unlikely to be fulfilled, for who would undertake the
labour of editing, or pay the cost of printing, for so large and so crabbed
an exposition of an obsolete science? And even were the difficulty of
finding an editor ancj.a publisher overcome, it is doubtful if the manu-
script materials are sufficient; if, indeed, more than half the work is
still extant. Of Jthe MSS. I have only been able to examine cursorily
those in the British Museum and the Bodleian. Laud 289 in the
latter is described as containing Part (or Book) I of the work; but
since it deals not only with the diseases of the Brain, but also of the
Throat, Lungs and Stomach it would appear to correspond with Books
I-V of the Latin translation. Marsh 156 in the same library is
described as containing Books VI and VII, but, to judge by the con-
tents, appears rather to contain Books XVI and XVII. The third
Bodleian MS., Or. 561, is described by Uri (ii, 162), apparently
correctly, as containing Books XXIV and XXV, and deals chiefly with
drugs and diet; but beginning with a glossary, alphabetically arranged,
of the different organs and the diseases to which they are subject,
followed by the KitAbu hallVr-Rumuz wa Saydalati’t-Tibb on Materia
Medica, and “Rules for the use of foods and drinks for the preservation


(8)

(9)

(10)

(»)

(12)

(13)

(H)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)


Note XXVII. Certain Eminent Physicians 153

of Health,” etc. The British Museum MS. Arundel Or. 14 contains
Books VIII, IX and X; while Books IV, V, VI and XI are said to be
preserved ir? the Escorial ; Book XI I (? XIX) at Munich ; and another
MS. of Book IV in the Khedivial Library at Cairo. Should these
identifications prove correct, Bdbks I-VI, VIII-XI, XVI-XVII, and
XXIV-XXV (i.e, 14 out of the 25 Books) would appear to be extant,
while others, still undescribed and unidentified, probably exist elsewhere.

One very important and interesting feature of the Bodleian MS.
Marsh 156 is that six leaves of ,jt (ff. z39 l> ~245 1 ') contain clinical
reports of some two dozen of Rdzl’s own cases which presented some
unusual features rendering the diagnosis difficult, * The name of the
patient, the sigrgs and symptoms oflthe disease, the initial and final
diagnosis and treatment, with the termination of thl case, are fully
described with great cfearneJS and acumen; and these cases, which
certainly deserve publication, quite bear out Razfis high«Apute as a
clinical observer 1 . „ ,

’ *

5. Abu'l-Khayr ibn Khammdr.

This was another eminent philosopher, physician and logician, born
at Baghdad in a.h. ^31 (a.d. 942-3), with*whom the author of the
Fihrist was personally acquainted 2 . The date of his death is unknown,
but from Anecdote XXXVI it js clear that he survived the year a.h. 408
(a.d. 1017-8) in which Sultan Mahmiid conquered Khwirazrn. His full
name was Abu’l-Khayr al-Hasan ibn Suwdr ibn Baba ibn Bahrain (or,
according to Ibn Abl Usaybi'a, Bihnam), and he was a Christian,
apparently of Persian ancestry. He n*ade translations from Syriac into
Arabic. Fifteen of his works are enumerated by Ibn Abl Usaybi'a 6 , but
it is uncertain whether any of them still exist. *

• ft

6 . Abu^Nasr ibn ‘Arrdq.

He was another contemporary of al-Birdni, in whose name he com-
posed twelve astronomical and mathematical tracts 4 . His .full name
was Abu Nasr Mansur ibn ‘All ibn ‘Arrdq Mawld Amiri’ l-Mu'minin.
He was descended from the old kings of Khwarazm, who claimed
descent from the legendary Kay-Khusraw, and who maintained a quasi-
independent sovereignty until the tenth Christian century. The penulti-
mate king or prince of this line, A bu Sa'id Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
‘Arraq, revised and corrected the Khwarazmian Calendar, while the
last of- them, Abu ‘Abdi’llah Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn ‘Arrdq, is entitled by al-Blninl “ Shahid ” (“the Martyr”) 6 , This,
like so many other ancient and noble Persian families, seems to have
been destroyed or dispersed by Sultan Mahmiid of Ghazna. There is no
justification for our author’s assertion that Abii Nasr ibn ‘Arraq was
the nephew of Khwarazmshah.

1 Cf. Neuburger, ii, pp. 168-175. 2 See pp. 145 and 265 of that work,

4 See p. x'lviifof the Einleitung ol Sachau’s edition of the Athdru'l-Bdqiya, where
they are enumerated; and also pp. 246-249 °f *e Persian notes to the ChaMr

^ a 'l Al-Birdnl’s references to these two kings occur on pp. 241 and 35-36 of al-
Athdni l-Bdqiya.

\


154


Notes on the Fourth Discourse


7. Abti Sahl SaHd ibn ‘ Abdu'l-Aziz an-NilL

He was a poet as well as a physician, and is consequently mentioned
by Tha 'alibi in his Yatimatu'd-Dahr as well as by Ibn Abi Usaybi'a in
his Talmqdtii'l-A tibbd ' . His brother Abr. ‘Abdu’r-'Rahman was as eminent
in Jurisprudence as he was in Medicine. Only two or three of his
medical works (commentaries on Hippocrates and Galen, an epitome of
Hunayn’s “Questions" or Masd'il, and extracts from Razfis commen-
taries) are mentioned. ^

*8. ‘ AH ibnu' l-'Abbds al-Majiisi.

fi

This ' 1 ‘ > mediaeval Europe Ss “Haly Abbas,"

and bear u . . 1 (“the Magia^i,” presumably because

his father ^grandfather was converted to Islam from the Zoroastrian
religion 2 ), the nisbas of al-Ahwazi and al-Arrajani, was the pupil of
Abil Mahir Mdsa ibn Ytfsuf ityi Sayyar and afterwards court-physician
to ‘Adudu’d-Dawla, and died in a.h. 384 (a.d. 994-5). The notices of
him given by Qiffi (p. 232) and Ibn Abi Usaybi'a (i, pp. 236-7) are
very meagre, and he is chfefly known through his> great work the Kdmi-
lu's-Sinda (“Perfect Practitioner”) or Kitdbu'l-MaliM (“Liber Regius"),
of which therfi is a good edition of the original Arabic text printed at
Cairo in 2 vols. in 1294/1877, besides an Edition lithographed at Lahore
in 1283/1866. This book enjoyed a great reputation, though it was, as
Qifti tells us, to some extent eclipsed by Avicenna’s Qdmin, which was
deemed stronger on the theoretical, though less strong on the practical
side. It was translated into Latin, and this translation was printed at
Venice in a.d. 1492 rnd again at Lyons in a.d. 1523. The title-page
of the latter edition bears the following legend

Liber totius Medecince necessaria contiqens quem sapientissimus Haly
filius Abbqs discipulus abimeher moysi filii seiar edidit : regique inscrip sit.
unde et regalis dispositionisr nomen assumpsit el a Stephano philosophies
distipulo ex arabica lingud in Latinam satis ornatam reductus necnon
a domino Michcele de Cape/lp, artium et medecince doc/ore, fecundis sino-
nomis a multis et diversis autoribus ab eo collectis illustratur , summaque
cum diligentid impresses.

Each volume, the first dealing with the theory and the second with
the practice of Medicine, contains ten Discourses ( Maqdldt ), which are
subdivided into numerous chapters. The anatomical portion of the first
volume ( Maqalas ii and iii), comprising 53 chapters, has, as already
been mentioned, been published with a French translation by Dr P. de
Koning in his Trots Traitds d' 'Anatomic arabes (Leyden, 1903).

1 Vol. i, pp. 253-254.

2 M(rza Muhammad (Persian notes, p. 234) thinks that he himself was a Magian,
but if so how could he have been called ‘Ali and his father al-‘Abb 4 s? In the Cairo
edition of his KdmiMs-Sin&'at ‘ ‘ Majtfsi ” has been wantonly pointed as “ Mujawwisi ”
or “ Mujawwasi,” in order, I suppose, to attempt to conceal his Zoroastrian origin.
Mirza Muhammad, however, after reading this note, has supplied me with many
instances derived from such respectable authorities as as-Sabi, Qifti, Ibn Khallikin,
Ibn Abi Usaybi'a, etc., of Jews, Christians and other non-Muslims bearing Muham-
madan names, titles and kunyas.


Note XXVII. Certain Eminent Physicians 15s

The Kdmilu's-$ind'a is, in my opinion, far superior in style, arrange-
ment and interest to Avicenna’s Qdmin, and the author’s estimate of
his predecessors, both the “Ancients” (i.e. the Greeks, especially
Hippocrates, Galen, Oribasius and Paul qf Aegina) and the “Modems”
(i.e. the Syrians and Arabs, suclt as Ahnln, Ibn Serapion, Razi, etc.) is
admirable, as is the model description of Pleurisy which he gives as
a specimen of the method he proposes to employ in the descriptiop of
each disease. "Dr Lucien Leclerc ( Hist, de la Midecine Arabe, vol. i,
pp. 383-8) gives a French translation of the opening portion.

9. Ain't Sahl-i-Maslhi. m

This writer’s^full name is Abit Sbhl ‘Isa ibn Yahva al-Masihi (the
Christian) al-Jurjani (of Gurgan, Jui|an or Hyrcaniaj, and his work,
here called .Sad Bdb (the “'•Hundred Chapters”), properly bears the
Arabic title of Kitdbu’l-Mi’a fit- Tibb (the “Book of the ifhndred on
Medicine”), or al-Mi’aUi MaqAla (the “Hundred Discourses”). Bom
in Jurjan, the author studied chiefly*at Baghdad, and was one of
Avicenna’s teachers, and one of the numerous men of learning who
' ’ 1 2 3 ■ protection at the Court of Ma’miln ibn Muhammad

, his son Abu’l- ‘Abbas M^rndn ibn Ma’mhn, killed

in 407/1016-7. His friend Abd Rayhan al-Birdni enumerates twelve
books and treatises which AJpd Sahl composed in his honour and
dedicated or ascribed to him 1 . Wiistenfeld gives 390/1000 as the year
of Abd Sahl’s death, but it is not clear on what authority.

10. Avicenna ( Shaykh AJ)ii ‘Ali ibn Sind).

So much has been written about this celebi^ted philosopher and
physician that it will be sufficient here to recapitulate the chief facts of
his life. These are parficularly well authenticated by hi. ^autobiography,
which carries the narrative down to the time of his father’s death, when
he was twenty-one years of age, and its continuation by his friend and
pupil Abd ‘Ubayd al-JdzjanP. An excellent summary, together with
a list of nearly one hundred of his books, will be found in Brockelmann’s
Gesch. d. Arab. Lift., vol. i, pp. 452-8, Ad there is an independent
work on him (considered rather as a philosopher than a physician) by
Baron Carra de Vaux 8 . Accounts of him, of varying degrees of com-
pleteness and accuracy, are naturally to be found in m<j|st Muhammadan
biographical works composed subsequently to the eleventh century of
our era. His intellectual influence, not only in the Islamic world, but,
until the Renaissance, in Europe also, was immense- Brockelmann
(op. laud., i, 453) well says:— “He displayed an extraordinarily fruitful
activity in the most varied fields of learning, especially in Philosophy
and Medicine. His works, indeed, la ’■ -hout; but,

because they set forth in an elegant and . ■ ;• ". almost all

the profane learning of his time, they have exercised an enduring
influence on scientific studies, not only in the East, but also in Europe.”

1 See pp. xlvii-xlviii of the Preface to Sachau’s edition of al-Blrdni’s Athdru

’l-Bdqiya (Leipzig, 1876). _ ...

2 For the Arabic text of them, see ai-Qifti (ed. Lippert, Leipzig, 1903), pp. +^3-4 w.

3 Les Grands Pkilosophes : Avicenna (Paris, 1900).


i S 6


Notis on the Fourth Discourse


Abil ‘All al-Husayn ibn ‘Abdullah ibn Si'na (better known in the
West by the Europeanized form of his name Avicenna, and commonly

called in Pe 1 ' Shaykhu’r-Ra'fst, “the Chief

Doctor,” or :.! M. ■ , “the Second Great Teacher ”)

was born in August, a.d. 980, in a "village near Bukhari, where he
received his earlier education, the philosopher an-Natili and the phy-
sician ‘Isa ibn Yahya being amongst his teachers. At the early-age of 17
he achieved medical renown by his successful treatment &f the Samanid
prince Ndh ibn Mansitr (reigned £.d. 976—997). On his father’s death,
when he was abdbt 2 1 years of age, he went to Khwarazm, the circum-
stances of his departure from which are described in Anecdote XXXVI.
Attracted to Tabaristan by the fatfie of Qabiis ibn Wa^Jimgir, he arrived
there, as he hinftelf says 1 , only tqffind that that talented but unfortunate
prince had been deposed and cast into prison, where he was soon after-
wards munAered (403/1 01 2-3). Avicenna subsequently became minister
to Shamsu’d-Dawla at Hajnadhn,

"■■■■' escapedto fef ,, ■

» 1 1 ■ Muhammad ibn Dushmanziyar of the so-called Kaka-

wayhid dynasty 2 , for whom he wrote his Persian Encyclopaedia of the
Sciences called in his honour Ddnish-ndma-i- 'Add'P. He died of colic
on the march to Hatnadan (where his tomb still exists) in 428/1037, at
the age of 58 lunar years, after a short illness for which he treated himself
with less than his usual success, so that it was said of him by a contem-
porary satirist 4 : —

a + * $ ✓ # uj j oe-

1 I J 2 i, 1

1 5 1 *** U i

“ 1 saw Ibn Sfn£ (Avicenna) contending with men, Pout he died in prison (or,
of constipation) the most ignoble death ;

“ What he attained by the Shifd (or, by healing) did not secure his health,
nor did he escape d^ath by his Najdt (or ‘Deliverance’).”

In these verses there are three ingenious word-plays, for habs means
both “ imprisonment ” and H constipation,” while two of his most famous
works are entitled Shifd (“ Healing ”) and Najdt (“ Deliverance ”).

Besides his mediSal and philosophical works, Avicenna wrote a good
deal of fine poetry in Arabic and a few quatrains (some of which are
often ascribed t 0 > ‘Umar-i-Khayyam) in Persian. The latter have been
collected by the late Dr Hermann Ethe'’’, and of the former a consider-
able number are given by Ibn Abi Usaybi'a 6 . Of his beautiful Arabic
qasida on the descent of the soul into the body a translation will be
found in vol. ii of my Literary History of Fersia (pp. x 1 0-1 x 1). Another
remarkable qajida 7 ascribed to him foretells with extraordinary prevision
the Mongol invasion, the sack of Baghdad, the murder of the Caliph,

1 See the note on p. 79, 1. 23 of the text (Persian notes, pp. 230-251).

2 See S. Lane-Poole’s Mahammadan Dynasties , p. 143.

3 See Rieu’s Persian Catalogue, pp. 433-434. A lithographed edition of this book
was published at Ilaydarabhd in the Deccan in 1309/1891-2.

4 See Ibn Abi Usaybi'a’s Tabaqdt, vol. ii, p. 6.

5 A vicenna als fersischer Lynker in the Gottmger Nachrich ten for 1 87 5, pp. 5 5 3-56 7 .

0 Vol. ii, pp. 1 o-i 8. ? Ibid., pp. 16-18.


Note XXVII. Avicenn^ 157

and the victory of the Egyptians led by Qutuz al-Maliku’l-Muzaffar over
the Tartars at ‘Ayn Jaltlt in a.d. 1260, these predictions being based on
astrological considerations connected with the conjunction of Jupiter and
Saturn in Capricorn “ the Mansion of Sajurn.” Another poem contains
medical advice as to the treatment of an ulcer on the forehead addressed
to the Wazir Abu Talib al-‘Alawi, who had consulted Avicenna on this
subject, ^n similar verses 1 . There are also some remarkable verses in
praise of wine, which is compared to “ blood of gold,” the Christian
Trinity, and the First Cause. His literary activity was prodigious and
varied, extending to almost every branch of letters and learning, as may
be seen by glancing at the lists of his works given by Ibn Abl Usaybi'a 2
and Brockelmanji. Of these only thtte are specifically mentioned in the
Chahdr Maqdla , namely the Kitdm'l-Mabda'wa’ l-Mtfdd, quoted by
Mirza Muhammad" from the»British 'Museum MS.; the book entitled
“ How to guard against various mistakes in medical treatnjpat,” printed
at Biilaq in the margins of ar-R 1 '* ‘f, ,r ‘ " ’ wa daf'u

maddrri-hd under*the title of Daf' . 1 " , •£ l-abddnil-

tnsdniyya i ; and the Qdm'en, the largest and most famous of Avicenna’s
medical writings. In the preparation of the FitzPatrick lectures on
“ Arabian Medicine ”»which I delivered at the Royal College of Physi-
cians in November 1919 and 1920, and which will I hope be published
in the course of 1921, 1 made use of the fine but not very'correct edition
printed at Rome in a.d. -1593* but there is also a Biilaq edition in two
volumes. A good account of the various editions and Latin translations
will be found in Dr Ludwig Choulant’s Handbuch der Bticherkunde fur
die Alters Median (Leipzig, 1841), pp. ^59-368. See also Morilz Stein-

schneider’s V ' ^ rri -. ' Arabisehen bis Mitte

des x 7 Jahrh . ■ > ■ *

In Anecdote XXX 3 /III the narrator, Abd Kalanja^ mentions four
other disciples of Avicenna, concerning three of whom Mirza Muham-
mad gives some valuable information in the Persian notes qp pp. r»x-
r 0 0. Bahmanyar’s full name was Abu’l-Pfesan Bahmanyar ibn Mar-
zuban al-Adharbayjani al-Majxisi, and he died in 458/1066. A few of his
writings exist in manuscript, and two of hjy metaphysical treatises were
- 1 - T ■- 1851. Abd Mansur al-Husayn ibn Muhammad
fahanl died in 440/1048-$. The assertion that
he was a Zoroastrian is unsupported by evidence, and, in view of the
names of his father and grandfather, appears very improbable”. There
exist in the British Museum MSS. of two of his treatises, one on Music,
entitled al-Kdfi (Or. 2361), and the other a Commentary on Avi-
cenna’s Story of Hayy ibn Yaqzdn.

Par more important than these two was Abd ‘Ubayd Abdul-Waljid ibn
Muhammad al-Juzjani, who first became acquainted with Avicenna in
Jurjin in 403/10x2-3 7 . Avicenna was then about thirty-two years old, and

1 Vol.,ii, p. 14. 5 Loc. cit,, pp. 18-20.

3 See p. XX- of the Persian notes. * Ibid., p. XTY.

6 Published in two parts with separate pagination in the Sitzungsberichte d. Hats,
AUad. d. mssensch. (Philos. -histor. Klasse ), Vienna, 1904 and 1905.

3 Compare, however, note 2 at the foot of p. 154 supra.

7 Mirzi Muhammad has established this date from the writings of both Avicenna and
al-Jdzjani. See Persian notes, pp. f «V — ad tale.


158 Notf^ on the Fourth Discourse

al-Jtizjanf was thenceforth constantlywith him until his death in 428/1037,
always urging him to record his knowledge in books while he lived, and
preserving these writings from destruction after his death. E«r Avicenna,
as recorded in the Chahdr Matjdla (p. 92 supra), distracted by the rival
claims of learning, pleasure and statecraft, enjoyed little leisure and
tranquillity, and when he wrote a book would often give the original to
the person who had asked him to write it without keeping a r copy for
himself. After his death al-Jilzjani sought out these scattered writings
wherever they could be found and arranged and edited them, while in
other cases he. actually assisted in tbeir composition. Thus the Damsh-
udma-i-'A/a'i 1 * , Aviisenna’s most important Persian work, composed for
' and dedicated to ‘Ala’u’d-Dawla Abd Ja'far Kakdya, was designed to
treat of Logic, Metaphysics, Natdral Science, Mathematics, Astronomy,
Music and Arithmetic; but after his dearth onJ,y the first three. sections
could be fijjynd. The missing portions were therefore compiled and
translated by al-Jdzjanf from the Shi/d and other Arabic works of his
master, and the lacuna thus filled. We also owe to%l-Jdzj£nf the con-
tinuation of Avicenna’s autobiography from the time of . their first
meeting in Jurjdn down to his death. The full text of this is given by
Ibn Abi Usaybi'a 3 4 and at* abridgement of it by aFQifti 8 .

ix. Sayyid IsmaHlJfurjdnl.

This is probably the first Muslim physician who used the Persian
language chiefly or exclusively in writing on scientific subjects, or at
least the first whose works have come down to us. Pie gives his name
and genealogy as follows in Che Introduction to his Dhakhlra-i-
JChwdrazmshdhi* : — lsma ‘0 ibnu’l-Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad
al-PIusayni al-Jurjani. Fonahn 5 6 gives his father’s name as Ahmad
instead of al-Ipasan, his laqab as Zaynu’d-Din, and his kunya as Abd
Ibrihim; while Rieu“ transposes Mul.tadimad and Ahmad in his pedi-
gree; and"Leclerc 7 calls hi pi AbuTFada’il and Sharafu’d-Din. Little is
known ofr his life except that he came to Khwarazm (Khiva), and
entered the service of Qutbu’d-Din Muhammad Khwarazmshah in
504/1 1 10-1 1 1 1, composed tne four medical works ( Aghrad , Dhakhirtx ,
Khuffl and Yadgdr) ^mentioned in the Chahdr Maqdla , and died at
Merv in or about the year 531/1136-7.

The contents^f the Aghrddii t-dfibb (“Aims of Medicine”), composed
for the Minister of Atsiz Khwarazmshdh (reigned a.d. 1127-1156), and
the manuscripts of it existing in different libraries are fully described by
Fonahn 8 , as are the Khufft-i- 1 Aid' P (composed in a.d. 1113) and the
Yddgar-i- Tibb (“Medical Memoranda”) 10 , which deals with Pharmaco-

1 As already noted, the text was lithographed in India in 1309/1891-2, but is
rare. Mr A. G. Ellis most kindly placed his copy at my disposal. Mlrza Muhammad

mentions two MSS. in the British Museum, viz. Add. 16,830 and Add. 16,659,
ff. 258 tl -342 b , and there is another, Or. 16,830. See Rieu’s Pets. Cat., pp. 433"434-

5 fabaqdtu'l-Atibbi , ii, pp. 4-9 3 Pp. 417-4^6 or Lippert’s edition.

4 In an old thirteenth century MS. of Books I-IU of this work in my possession.

5 Zur Quellenkande d. Pets- Med., p. 1 29.

6 Pets. Cat., p. 466. 7 Hut. (ie la Midecine Arale, vol. ii, pp. 18-20.

s Op. tit., No. 16, pp. 11-13. 9 Ibid. , No. 39, p. 35.


Note XXVI 1 1 . J Aid's Version of twj Anecdotes 159

logy and Therapeutics. These I have not seen, and they are completely
overshadowed by his magnum opus the Dhakhira-i-Khw&razmsh&kt, or
“Thesaurus»of Khwarazmshah,” of which I have collected several fine
manuscripts and which I have studied with some care. Before speaking
of it, however, I must observe that the Khuffi was so called from khuff,
a boot, because it was written in two elongated narrow volumes, one of
which tl^e traveller could carry in each of his riding-boots, and that its
name is not Khaft (“Hidden,” “Secret”), as stated by Fonahn and
Leclerc 1 .

The general contents of the Dftakhira-i-KhwAra%mshAhi are pretty
fully stated by Fonahn 3 , and in particular the cqptents of Book IX,
dealing with poisons and antidotes, kites and stings of animals, etc. He
also enumeratesThe MSS. of the worn, which has nev*r been published
in the original Persian, tfoougl^an Urdti translation has been lithographed
in India. The complete work, of which I possess one manuscript, while
another, wanting only a few leaves, and bearing the class-mark Mm. 2. 6,
is preserved in the Cambridge University Library, originally comprised
9 Books 3 , 75 Discourses, 1107 chapters, and 450,000 words. I also
possess three fine old MSS., transcribed in the thirteenth or fourteenth
century, containing portions of the work, m#(r) Books I, II and part
of III; (2) Book III, Maqala iv, Bakhsh 1 to the end of Book V;
(3) Book VI, Guftar xi to the end. I also possess a morelnodern MS. of
the whole work, and another <?f the whole of Book VI, Guftars i-xxi. I
have discussed this book more fully in my FitzPatrick lectures, delivered
before the Royal College of Physicians in November 19x9 and 1920,
which are now in the press, so that I need say no more of it in this place.

Note XXVIII. •

J ami's rhymed versions of Anecdotes XXXIV (iL'ext, p. 73) and
XXXVIII (Text, pp. 8alp|n the Silsilatu’dh-Dhahab.

, (The text is taken from a MSrnated 997/15^9 in my own possession, and
Or. 425, ff. 75 b and 7 6 a in the Cambridge University Library.)

Anecdote XXXtfV.

^Lwl >y>ry ^7 sit O'

Osytd Oljil 3 o-nJI ^ 3

* Ml Ji} ^ — rO j\

JhU. {J) $ 3 w^jl iJJjj

1 Mirza Muhammad has pointed out to me that, as we learn from Qifti (p. 80) and
Ibn Abi Usaybi'a (i, p. 201), one of Ishaq ibn Hunayn’s works was similarly entitled
Ktmndshtfi-JChuff, i and that Sayyid Isma'il probably got the idea from him.

a Op. cit., No. 15, pp. 7-1 1.

8 Book X on Compound Medicaments was subsequently added by the author.


l J>) * 3U1 t-Ajlj d-o -J>

‘ ^U. O3I*- 3I Lj


i6o Notes on the Fourth Discourse

r

* j\ jjL la»j) j\ U

* * dLo jjSsh d^L3

C > *'Q | '^ - y J t ^I x Ufc» w<»a f J j * ^y> j >X»yJ Uj

* hXjl^j JLwjjj < ^ j L i ^«j ^J!j g itow dli v jJ 1

j r *

* taX^wvJ Cvwt^>, AAjLi*>^Jb ^! S»h S—m L»^ 1 J U w L ) O-wlj J^j <x5w> I y) w U» “

^».lj-e jA (*Aa»^ LLw ^ ,‘_^jj^» <>lw ^jl l_J

' g-lj-* jt.««.. a iA— J l-*j 1 .AS CHjb >r*

S*jL-J l— j « I — £- J 3 — J f: ‘wjLwl ^jlj^A- Jw»jl— <

* j f C?J^ j Jj W-. . Q

*jt^Xw jl c j \ jl .J.— .*— J Aj^jl j I

‘ LS) jS CUA. 1 jSsj iajjk. 1 Jjjl OOLfcji. ^_)lj Jl& ASjjC

* OmoI^ C>TS^i j^ j'j '*5 3j^ ‘C~Jj ijjLLXi _ 5 j — j j a^-a> c^>«Ls

'by-! jL£> jr 1 y^ <J --t-i ‘ by!f,j^~* y-^ ji

1 i_j—^-*".)J * jS Sj C *.*0 ‘ ^yjUr-^a. ^^' e ‘ »>-j L-o— J CJyt"

Anecdote XXXVIII.

4_£» IjU^.l^' w.»-Ld ^jl U*~/ (*!* j^l ^-sA OJy ^ 9
^ 1 S>iy> j**.te l_ 5[3 P <*«»dtjC4 jl

1 ^^ *■ . 1^ y_ I Ai ... i. j ^)1 £ 1 m * ’*—’—1 5"! ji J>^j

jJULjj-J L^Jj-A-I—* ,i Jk£ ‘,JL«att» OijI-r ^-X-J -A-J^-J vJt j
^ ^ y— * ■& O ji ^t~—‘

‘CM> j **“*£> ^ -j ' Lb—^ J A— ..■■■ * JwJb jj^J j.*»W>l

j-J rt . “ -i^-A ib ^.— I 1 ^..Jj__i (jA-»- 3 J..*.^iL) JJjj

JUL* (jUbjjfc L» ‘ >yi (J>jI 3 I Jl»- U £«m 0

*L5^W 3 -»- A jfi a

3 J3J j

(_j>« 4 -£=‘ ^>j~t~£-£-) ‘j-sw-i. Lj ijlJLj i^ajjj a_£»

‘ I 3 J <i3 (_,»£» Cw) jl 1 1 j-£ <*-3 3 -^a Lj

; ^jmXmG ^.J l . I * JUjJlJ^AwM^J C- 5 I^J yA ^jjbl

; al^J j!**»«Li a£? !jL; 3 -X dlj J| _v£fcX»5 ^mJ^wW Ci^


Note XXIX. The Ma 5 mt)ni KhwArazmshAhs


161


{ ^ Uft9 C<ww)

J^l

( Cwla»^ l£ 3 ~*

{ lA^ 3 3 ^

‘ 3 jwJ >jI£d ^ ,}jlf=>


;.a jw}>

^ j^Uj ,^-j
£ j 5 jjt £»**-jA ^3 m *' J

( ljt ^ ^ tjcL-oA

‘ ‘S’ j\ 3 1


- 1 * 1 ^"" u J*ir^


< '“-V-sH'j-^ J)j »>>-» O-dj' l ^*-^)

‘oaAa. jj y *&> (^jlaljwilj
j> O JbL j juol

f 0 *aa^ O C ^ ft NW ^ W-s-O ^jXfr

■‘‘ 1 ^*0 ^. .w Cw> w^Lm*£U5 ,5j*-J

_)(J i^sfis oil

f \X-j»A .t. J iwA-X-C

‘ £-*-J !j~J ,> ^-il >»■ U

c j ^ o.«o

^ lii j! u^-k-jib *-»•>-*

‘ AJji >>A i^)l jt >■*■ b3


Note XXIX. The Ma’mtinf Khwarazmshahs.

(Text, p. 76; Persian notes, pp. 194 and 241-4.)

This older dynasty of Khwdrazmsshihs was originally tributary to
the Sdm&nids, but, during the interval (a.h. 380-407 =a.d. 990-10x6)
which separated the decay of these latter rulers fro?n the final ascendency
of the House of Ghazni it enjoyed a quasi-independence* The following
are those of its rulers whose names occur in history.

•>

1, Ma’mun ibn Muhammad Kfiwdrazmshdh. a

He was originally governor of Gurganj (Jurjaniyya), and in 385/995
captured and killed Abu ‘Abdi’llah Khwdlazmshih, the lord of Kath,
and annexed his realms. He himself died in 38,4/997 \ He was suc-
ceeded by his son —

2. 'AM ibn Ma’mzhi ibn Muhammad Khwdrawishdh,

who succeeded his father in the year last mentioned and married
the sister of Sultan Mahmdd of Ghazna. Avicenna came to Khwarazm
during his reign, and met with much honour at his hands 2 . The date of
his death is not exactly known. Abu’l-Husayn Ahmad ibn Muhammad
as-Suhayli, a great patron of learning, to whom Avicenna dedicated at
least two of his works 8 , was Minister to him and afterwards to his
brother and successor—

1 Ibnu’l-Athir, vol. ix, pp. 7 6 and 93. 5 Al-QiftI, p. 417.

3 See p. ri.t of the Persian notes. He fled from Khwarazm to Baghdad in
404/1013-4 and died in 4 r8/ro27 at Surra-man-ra’a.


162


Notes on the Fourth Discourse


r

3. Abu’l-‘Abbds Ma'mt'm ibn Ma'mun ibn Muhammad Khwdrazmshdh,
the hero of Anecdote XXXVI, who was likewise a generous friend to
men of learning, and, like his brother, was married to one of Sultan
Malimiid’s sisters. He continued for some time on friendly terms with
this ambitious potentate, who, fiowever*. finally ordered him to recognize
him as his over-lord and insert bis name in the khutba. This Abu
’ 1 - ‘Abbas Ma’mrin consented to do, but after the departure of the envoy
to Ghazna his nobles rose and murdered him in 407/1016-7 when he
was only thirty-two years of age.

e *

4. Abu'l-Hdrith Muhammad ibn ‘ All ibn Ma'mun ibn Muhammad
* Khwdrazmshdh.

He succeeded to the throne 0/ the murder of his uficle, but no long
while had elapsed when Sultan MKhmtid, pn thg pretext of avenging his
murdered brother-in-law, invaded and annexed Khwarazm and carried
off as hostages or captives the survivors of the family. This happened
in 408/1017-8, and the event \yas celebrated by ‘Ugsuri in a qasida of
which the opening lines are quoted by the editor 1 . The historian Abu
’ 1 -Fadl-i-Bayhaql in his Ta'rikh- i-Mas Hidid gives an account of these
events based on 1 ' ' r V"‘ Ts . .’ the “Notables

of Khwarazm” ! : appears that

al-Birdni spent seven years (a.h. 400-407 =a.d. 1010-1017) at the
Court of Abu’l-'Abbas, where he held various offices, and was conversant
with all the circumstances which led up to his death.

In conclusion MirzA Muhammad observes that the Qadx Alimad-i-
Ghaffari, probably misled by the Ta’rikh-i- Guzida (p. 389 of the Gibb
facsimile), in his Nusakh-i- f alidtt-d rd confuses the dynasty discussed in
this note with the Farightfni family who acted as viceroys first for the
SAmAnids and then for the Ghaznawis in J fizjan.

<• r
Note XXX. Shahinshfih^Ala’u’d-Dawla.

■> (Text, p. 82; Persian notes, p. 251.)

The Amir ‘AkVu'd-Dawla Husamu’d-Din Abd Ja'far Muhammad ibn
Dushmanziyar ruled over Isfahan and the adjacent districts from
398/1007-8 to 433/1041-2^ in which latter year he died. His father
Dushmanziyar was the maternal uncle of Sayyida, the spirited mother
of Majdu’d-Dawla 3 ibn Fakhru'-Dawla, the Daylami or Buwayhid prince,
and since in the Paylami dialect “ Kdkd ,” or “ Kdkilya ” signifies “uncle,”
he is often called by this title, and his son ‘Ala’u’d-Dawla by the title of
"Ibn Kdkdyaf while the dynasty to which they belonged is called by

S. Lane-Poole 4 “Kakwayhid.”

1 Persian notes, p. nr.

3 Tihrdn lith. ed., pp. 663-677 ; Cairo ed. of ‘Utbi’s history with Manini’s com-
mentary, p. 258. Yaqdt in his “ Dictionary of Learned Men ” (vol. vi, p. 311 of the
Gibb edition) mentions amongst al-Binini’s works a Kitdbii l-Musamara ft Akhbdri
Khwarazm, which, as Mirzd Muhammad points out, is probably identical with this
work. He suggests, indeed, with great probability, that Bayhaqi’s Mashdhfr
is probably a corrupt reading for Musdmara

8 See pp. 43-44 of my edition of Dawlatshah.

* Muhammadan Dynasties, p, 145. See also the references at the foot of p. Tot
of the Persian notes.


Note XXXI. Si-iaykh ‘Abdu’llAii AnsAri

1


163


In this Anecdote (XXXVIII) two errors occur, for Avicenna acted
as Minister to Shamsu’d-Dawla ibn Fakhru’d-Dawla (brother of the
above-mentjjpned Majdu’d-Dawla) at HamadAn, not to Ala’u’d-Dawla,
whom he never served in this capacity, and who, moreover, lived not at
Ray, but at Isfahan, whithf \ - 1 -- ‘ •- ' “ich himself to his

Court in 412/1021-2 on the ■ and the accession

of his son SamA’u’d-Dawla.

’Note XXXI. The Shaykh ‘Abdu’lldh Ansari.

(Text, p. 84; Persian notes, pp. 255-$.)

The Shaykh u’l-I si Am Abii Ismael ‘Abdu’llAh iljn Abl Mansur Mu-
hammad... al- AnsAri al-Khazraji al-Hirawi traced his pedigree to Abii
Ayydb, a well-Khown companion o 5 the Prophet. Jle was born on
Sha'ban 2, 396 (May /L ioofi), and lied towards the end of a , h . 481
(March, 1088). He was a notable traditionist and theologian, and, in
spite of his fanatical attachment to the narrow and anthropomorphic
doctrines of the Nan ball school and ljis hatred of philosophers, who
stood in terror of him, was accounted a leading Stiff In Persia he is
generally known as Khwaja ‘Abdu’llah AnsAri. In his Persian poems
and quatrains, which^are highly esteemed apd have been repeatedly
lithographed in Persia, he calls himself Ansar!, Pir-i-Ansar, and Pfr-i-
Hiri. The prayers ( Mnndjdt ) which he composed in Persian are also
greatly admired. He used to lecture on the lives of the Saints, taking
as his text the Tabaqdtu's-Sufiyya of as-Sulamf, and adding observations
of his own. One of his disciples took down these lectures in the
ancient language of Herat, and on this version JAmi based his well-
known Hagiography the Nafahdtu' l-Uhs\ Of his numerous works there
still exist, besides those already mentioned, a condemnation of Scholastic
Philosophy {Dhamimi l-Kaldm) in Arabic 2 , a less rare treatise in the same
language entitled Manhzilu' 's-Sd’irln ilci l-Haqqi'l-Mubitf, and in Persian
a tract entitled Zddu'l-‘ArifW\ and another, of which extracts are
preserved 1 , called the “Book of Mysteries " [Kitdb-i-Asrdr). ’ _

Mirza Muhammad gives, on the authority of the historian adh*
Dhahabi, two narratives of attempts to discredit the Shaykh made by the
philosophers whom he persecuted. On orJfe occasion, when Sultan Alp
Arslan the Saljiiq and his great Minister Nizamu^l-Mulk visited Herat,
they asked him why he cursed Abu’l-Hasan al-Ash'ari, whose doctrines
the NizAmu’l-Mulk professed. After some hesitation £ie replied, I do
not recognize al-Ash'ari; him only I curse who does not believe that
God is in Heaven.” On another occasion they produced a little copper
image, which, as they told the King, AnsAri’s anthropomorphism led
him to worship, but he, being summoned and accused, so vehemently
denied this calumny that the King, convinced of his innocence, dis-
missed him with honour and punished his detractors.

1 See nn, "1—3 of Nassau Lees’s edition of this work. MlrzA Muhammad informs
me that a MS. of these lectures in their ancient original form existe m^the Nurd-
‘Uthmaniyya Library at Constantinople, and the ' 1 ■ .

the copy he had made of the portion referring to ... ■

pose that this is the MS. (No. 2500) to which M. ,,

on the Kitdbn't- Tawdsin of al-Hall4j (Paris, 1913). P> 94. 11 • 4 ad calc.
a Add. 27,520 of the British Museum.

3 Rieu’s Pen. Cat., p. 738. P 774 ‘

1 1-»2


164 Note XX^IT. The “Part of the Unseen


XXXII. Additional Note by Mr W. Gornold on the

“Part of the Unseen” and other Astrological terms.

“It appears to me quite patent that all theories as to what the Part
of the Unseen may be are dispelled by the text *of your work which
clearly gives the rule (p. 131 supra)-.

‘“As for the Part of the Unseen, by day they compute it/rom the
Moon and by night from the Sun, adding thereto the degree of the
Ascendant, and subtracting thirty (for) each (whole sign) from the
Ascendant, as before : then what remains over is the place of the Part
of the Unseen.’ «

“In the case cited, 28 Safar, ^.h. 511 (1 July, a.d^ 1117), the time
of birth being Nhw Moon (here jjhown to be at 5.32 p.m. local mean
time) when both the luminaries were above the horizon, we have to deal
with a day* horoscope. Therefore we count from the Moon’s place to
that of the Sun, which i$ twelve whole Signs and nothing over. The
Part of the Unseen must therefore be on the Ascendant, and this must
be the case at the time of every New Moon, whether it happens by day
or by night. Only we have to note that as the Moon separates from the
Sun the Part, of Fortune ^is carried from the Ascendant downward to
the nadir, whil£ the Part of the Unseen is carried upward towards the
midheaven, and this converse motion gogs forward in each case at the
rate of about 12 degrees per day until they meet again, this time in
opposition to the Ascendant, at the full of Moon.

“ I. had the pleasure of seeing Mr Shirley yesterday and conferred
with him in regard to his use of the term 1 Alcochoden ’ as synonymous
with ‘Hyleg’ or JTayldj, and he informed me that he derived his
information from WilSbn’s Dictionary of Astrology, a work of which I
am extremely, auspicious, as on many occasional have found that he
treats of subjects about which he has evidently no practical experience.
But I thiijtk the matter must be settled by reference to some of the
Arabic or Persian works in which the term is used. The context would
undoubtedly give any astrological student the clue to interpretation.
If, as I think, Alcochoden is r Ruler of the 12th House then its influence
would be associated in the text with enemies, capture, imprisonment,
etc., which would cleCtrly indicate its evil repute, while Almuten, con-
versely, would be associated with friends and supporters, favours and
wishes granted, etc., indicating its beneficent influence. Probably you
can turn up some reference in support, or otherwise, of this view.
I hope so.”

“P. 6, 1 . 4. ‘The four subservient forces’ appear to answer to
mental as well as physical processes thus :

The ‘ Force Attractive ’ = Absorption = Perception,

„ 1 Force Retentive ’ = Circulation = Cogitation,

„ ‘ Force Assimilative ’ = Secretion = Memory,

„ 1 Force Expulsive ’ = Excretion = Expression.

“P. 63, 11 . 1 and 3. The Almagest of Claudius Ptolemy appears,
from observations recorded by him, to have been compiled about the
year a.d. 140, for it contains no account of observations made after the


Note XXXII. The “Part of Fortune” 165

year a.d. 138. It was translated into Arabic in the ninth century by
command of the Caliph Al-Ma’miin. Persian, Hebrew, and Greek
versions ara also mentioned. The best English translation is that of
Ashman d. Ptolemy’s astrological work, the Tetrabiblos, or Quadrapartite,
is a standard work on the subject in general use among modern students.
Ihe Almagest , Syntax is and Tetrabiblos are works of extreme interest
to astronomers and students of astrology.

P. 67, 1 . 23. Ihe ‘Part of Fortune,’ depending on the elongation of
the Moon referred to the Ascendant of the horoscope, would of course
be on the Ascendant at the time of New Moon. At First Quarter it is
on the nadir, at Full Moon on the descendant, at <She Last Quarter on
the midheaven. % Some authors confute its place by longitude in the
Zodiac and others by oblique ascension or descensfbn. The rule of
Ptolemy is that it correspond! with the place held by the Moon at the
time_ of sunrise, but he does not say whether it is locaUof equatorial
sunrise, nor whether the ‘place’ of the moon i§ to be taken by longitude,
right ascension, oP oblique ascension. »

“P. 67, 1 . 21. July 1st, a.d, 1117 is equivalent to Safar 28, a.h. 511.
Ihis appears evident from reference to other dates occurring in the
course of your pages. * ■»

“This da.te, July 1st, is O.S. and corresponds with Jyly 8th N.S.
“By adding 760 years (0^40 cycles of 19 years each) to the date
1 1 17 we get equivalent year of cycle a.d. 1877, and to the date we
must add two days due to the omission of leap year days in the 12th
and 1 6th century-years, which brings us to July 10th, 1877, when
it is seen that there was a New Mopn. Hence the date is correctly
taken.

“As to the ‘Part of the Unseen,’ this appeal from the context to
be derived from a reversal of the method employed jpr the ‘ Part of
Fortune.’ The former is counted from the Moon to the Sun, and the
latter from the Sun to the Moon, and the distance in the Zpdiac is set
off from the Ascendant. »

“Unlike all the planetary Points to which I have drawn your
attention, and which are determined by thqjr solar elongations, the ‘ Part
of the Unseen’ appears to be a lunar Point, determined from the Sun’s
elongation in respect of the Moon. *

“The date of birth having been fixed, we are left to find the time
of birth by the reference to the positions of the Sun%nd Moon, which
it is said were so situated that there was no space at all between them.
It is not presumed that this was an observation made at the time of
birth, but one that was afterwards calculated and found to be correct.
The New Moon of Safar 28, a.h. 51 i, took place locally in longitude
68° E. at 5.32 p.m. (G.M.T. 1 o’clock) when the luminaries were in
ecliptic conjunction in Cancer 15° 8'. The Moon was then only about
11° past the S. Node, and therefore had about 57' of S. latitude. It was
a partial eclipse of the Sun. The fact that this is not mentioned goes to
prove that the calculation was retrogressive and that the observation
was not made at the time of birth.

“ The following is the horoscope set for lat. 35° N. and long. 68° E.
The planets’ places are put into the nearest whole degree. I do not


1 66 Note XXXH. The Horoscope in Anecdote XXV

know what symbol was used for the ‘Part of the Unseen,’ and if it
occurs in any of the works to which you have access, I should be glad
to have it. The others, belonging. to the planets, I have put fn according
to their traditional use among the moderns. To these we have recently
added the Lightning Flash, due to Unfhus, and the Web or Grille due
to Neptune. They are found in the same way as the others, by the
planet’s distance from the Sun in the order of the signs. r


// /e> x

yv\ /% "SN y &\


\\\

c.\


I lt* L2.I * ^ r >?t.4l/i'ween /< 2 /


ForLu.uA _


' / A\

J * ,

/ i ^)0\

A"' A* ^


f r i\

l v \


""A

A*


The Map of the Heavens

Date i July, A.u. 1 1 r7 ; Hour 5.32 p.m. (local); Long. 68° E., Lat. 35° N.

“The symbol for the ‘Part of the Unseen,’ when found, should be
placed on the Ascendant with Fortuna, and the figure will then be
complete. I do not think that it will be found very far out of the true,
but I am of course relying on Lunation Tables which are not quite up to
date. The secular equation due to these may be as much as 5 minutes
for seven centuries, as they were constructed about a.d. 1800, and are
here applied to a date about 700 years previous.

“P. 64, 1 . 22, and pp. 130-131. Khaby and Damir — The Hindus
have systems of horary astrology, called Salyana and Arudha , by which
they are able to determine what is hidden and where lost property may


Note XXXII. HaylAj and Ka^-khuda 167


be found. Things held in the hand concealed have often been well
described to me by Indian Jyoshis.

“ ‘ Hyleg’ or Hayldj — This term is in common use among astrological
students, and the rules for finding it ar§ contained in Ptolemy’s work
on Astrology, and also in Placidus de Titus’ 1 ‘Primum Mobile.’ Both
these authorities differ from the Arabic authors in their method of
location!

“P. 132, 1. 17. 'Exaltation. 1 The planets, also the Sun and Moon,
are held to be ‘exalted’ in certain. Signs, and especially in certain degrees
of those signs. Thus the Sun is ‘exalted’ in the sign Aries and the 19th
degree thereof. ‘Altitude’ 2 is an astronomical term which signifies
distance above j,he horizon and should preferably not be used in this
connection. 9

“The term Almuten * refers to theTlanet which has dominion in the
x rth House, or the House of Friends and Allies. Alchocoden ^ or Alcochoden
(whichever may be the correct form) refers to the planet which has
dominion in the ?2th House, or House of Enemies. It has not any
connection with the Hyleg, as Mr Shirley seems to think.

“The term Kad-khudd (Lord of the House) refers to the Planet
which rules the Sign in which the Hyleg is fCUnd at birth. Thus if the
Sun were so qualified as Hyleg and were in the sign Scorpio, then the
planet Mars would be the Ka^-kkuda.


1 Mr Govnold sends me the following note : “ Of Placidus de Titus, who first

rendered a studied version of Ptolemy’s work on Astrology, we have very little in-
formation. It appears that he was known as Didacus Placidus, and was a native of
Bologna, became a monk, and was appointed mathematician to tire Archduke be oj raid
of Austria. He wrote in the early part of the seventeenth century a work entitled the
“ Primum Mobile,” in which he gives a thorough digest the teaching of Ptolemy.
The • " by Cooper. Placidus showed that Ptolemy recognized

, v0 , * of two sets of planetary position®, one in the Zodiac

and J in Vie prime vertical. To Placidus remains the credit

of having elaborated that part of directional Astrology which has regard to all di-
rections in mundoA » , ..... ... .

2 I originally translated SharaJ by this term, but have corrected it -according to

Mr Gornold’s suggestion.


GENERAL INDEX


In this Index I have followed the same plan as that adopted in my Persian
Literature under Tartar Dominion. Where numerous references occur under one
heading the more important are ' CV ■ ' 'ch is also need for the

first entry under each letter of . under which two or

more homonymous persons are grouped together, either in chronological order, or in
order of importance, «ar in classes (rulers, men of learning, poets, etc.). The letter b.
between two names stands for Ibn (“Son of...”), and n. after the number of a page
indicates a foot-note. fKie addition in parentheses of a number after a name, book,
battle, or the like, indicates, if Roman, thtf century, if Arabic, the j(ear of the Christian
exu in which the mars was born (b.), flourished (fl.) or (d.) died, or in which the book
was written or the battle fought. Prefix^ like Al^i (“Father of...”) and Ibn (“Son
of,..”) in Muhammadan, and de, le, von in European tffimes are disregarded in the
alphabetical arrangement, so that names like Abxi Sa‘id, Ibn Sind, le Strange, de
Slane, etc., must be sought under S, and von Kremer under K. Titles of books
and foreign words are printed italics., and an asterisk is prefixed to the former when
they are quoted at any length in the translation or notes. A hyphen preceding a word
indicates that the Arabic definite article al- should be prefixed to it.


Abawardt (fl, 1115), 69
Ibnu’l-'Abbddi, $.bti ‘Ajim Muhammad
b. Ahmad — (d. 1066), 1411.; orlbnu’l-
‘Abb'adi-Wa'iz (“the Preacher ”) (d.
1152). i°5

Abu'l-'Abbas b. Muhtdj-i-Chaghdni (x),
105; — Kadi b. ‘Abbds-Ribanjani (x),
29, 1 14; — 'Ma’mxin b. Ma’miin Khw$-
razmshdh (d. 1016), 85-7, 262
‘Abbdsid Caliphs, 18, at, <53, 146-7
‘Abdu’l-'Azfz b. Mdza (xi), 1x0, 112;

— b. Ilusamu’d-fcXn ‘Umar (xii), xoo,
in

‘Abdu’l-Ghaffdr Khan (xix-xx), 40 n.

‘ Abdu’l-IIarfitd b. Yahya b. Sa‘i$ (viii),
14, 104 -

'Abdu’lldh b. Ahmad . . b. Muhtdj (x),
122; — Ansari, Shaykh — (xi), 94, 163
Abxi ‘Abdu’lldh Khwiirazmshah, lord of
Kdtli (d. 995), 161 ; ir (secretary to
Nulj I b. Nasr the Sdxnanid, x), 105 ; —
Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Muhammad
b. ‘Arrdq, king ofCChwdrazm (xi), 153,
161 ; — Qurashi (boon-companion of
Tughanshah the Saljxiq, xi), 48
‘Abdu’l-Malik b. Nxxh (Sdmdnid, x),
105, xo6; — (Shdfi'ite doctor, xiv), rxx
Abxi‘Abdu’r-Rahmdn-Nflf (d. 1048), 78 n.,
tfi4

‘Abdu’r-Razzaq, Amir — (fl. 1120), 58
‘Abdu’l-Wdhid-Jxizjani (disciple of Avi-
cenna, xi), 92, 155, 157-8
Abhar, 103

Abiward (Bdward), 87, 106
-Ablwardi, Abu’l - Muzaffar Muhammad

— (x), 14, ro5. See also Bawardi
Achundow, Abdul-Chalig — aus Baku,


‘Achxdu’d-Dawta (Buwayhid, x), Son., 90
and n., 91, 154

Afrxjsiydb, 58; House of — , see Khd-
myya and Khdqdn, House of —

Aghaji, Aghji, Abu’l-IIasan ‘All b. Ilyas
(poet, x), 29, 1 15

Aghrddu't-Tibb by Sayyid Isma‘il Jurjdni
(xii), 78, 158

Ahmad b. ‘Abdu’IIdh-Khujistdni (ix),
27-29, 113; — b. Muhammad b. ‘Ab-
du’l-jalil-Sijzi (astronomer, x), 63, 86,
129; — b. fstna'il b. Ahmad b. Asad
(Sdmdnid, ix-x), 150; — b. Abxi Bakr
Muhammad b. Muzaffar b. Muhtdj (x),
1 22, 1 1 3 ; — b. Muhammad , Fakh ni’d-

Dawla Abu’l-Muzaffar (of the House of
Muhtdj, xi), 123; — b. Hasan-i-May-
mandi S/iatnsit'l- k'ufdt (Minister to
Sultan Mahmtid of Ghazna, xi), 14,
20-21, 55-6, 58 n., 66, 104; — 1>.
Khalaf (poet, xi), 30, 117; — b. Mu-
hammad Suhayli (xi), x6r ; — b, ‘Ab-
du’l-‘Aziz, Tdju’l-Isldm (of the House
of Buihan, xii), 24-25, iro, 112; — b.
Faraj (physician), 78; — b. ‘Umar b.
‘Ali (xn), the author of this book, see
N izdmi-i- 1 Arxidi-i-Samarqandi ; —
Gliaflari, Qadi — (author of the Ni-
garistan and Ntmkh-i-Jahan-drd, xvi),
J 1 r , r 2 7, 162; — b. Nasru’lldh of Tatla
(author of the Ta'rlkh-i-Al/l, xvi), 138

Ahrxln (physician), 155

Ahsanu't- Taqdslm by -Mas'udl, 83 n.

Ahwaz, 146-7

' Aj&'ibtt' 1 -MakhlAqAt of -Qazwini (xiii),
9 n.

Akbar (Emperor, xvi), 138

Akhldq-i-JaMU (xv), 83 n.

Alamxit, 108, 137. See also Assassins


r


»


Index


‘Ala’u’d-Dawla Abu Ja'far Muhammad
b. Dttshmanziyar, called Ibn Kaktiya
and Shdhingjiah (1007-1041), go, 92-3,
1 58, 162-3 ; — ‘ Alib. Fardmarz (d, 1095) ,
46-8

‘ Ald’u’d-Din Husayn b. Husayn “ Jahtfri-
stiz” (Ghtirid, 1149-1161), 3 and n.,
30-1 an$l n., 49 n., 59 n., 74', 96, 101,
102, 120-1 ; ■ — Muhammad Khwdrazm-
shdh (xii), 108, in, 126
Alcohoclen, Alcochodcn, Alchocoden (as-
trological term), 133, 164, 167
Alexander the Great, 92
Alexandria, 95
Alfiyya wa ShalfiyfSt, 125
Algebra, 62

‘All b. AM Talib (vii), 56,1*57, 58? 101 ;
\ • — b. Layth (Salfdrid, ix), 28 ; — b.
Rabban-Tabari (physician, ix), 140,
149 ; — b. ‘AbbaSijVfajilsi (physician,
the “ HalyAbbas”ofmediaevalEurope,
d. 994), 79 n., 154-5 ! — 6. Muht&j-
Kashani (described as Chamberlain of
Alptagin, x), 15 ; — b. J^ta’mun b. Mu-
hammad Khwarazmshah (x-xi), 1 61 ; — —
b. Faramarz, see above under ‘ Al&’u’d-
Dawla ; — b. Qavib, called Hd#b-i-
Buaurg (“the Great Chamberlain”),
38, 122 ; — Daylam (xi), 55 ; — IChdss
(xi), 50 ; — Pdnfdhi (poet), 30, 52, 118 ;
— Shatranji (poet), 30, 118; — Sipihri
(poet), 29 n., 30, 52 ; — Stiff (poet),
29m, 30

Abti ‘AH ibn Sind, see Avicenna ; —
Muhammad, see -Bal'ami ; — Ahmad
b. Muhtdj (d. 955), 105,^06, 107, 122
Allen, Edward Heron — , 139 n. ,
Almagest (of Claudius Ptolemy), 63, 164,
165

Almuten (astrological term), 164, 167
Alp Arslan (Saljtiq, xi), 46, 48 n., 104,
125, 126, 138, 163

Alp Ghazi, Shihabu'd-Dawla Qutulmush
(Saljtiq, xi), 52, 125, 126; but the text
transmitted to us has apparently con-
founded two different people
Alptagin (x), 15, 16, 24 n., 106, 109
‘Am'aq of Bukhara (poet, xii), 30, 52, 53,
118, 127

‘Amld-i-As‘ad (patron of the poet Far-
rukhf), 40, 43, 44

‘Amid Safiyyu’d-Dln Abu Bakr Muham-
mad b. -Husayn Rawanshahi (xii), 59,
60-61

‘Amidu’l-Mulk. See -Kundurl
Ibnu’l-‘Amld, 104

Amirdnshdhb. Qawurd (Saljtiq of Kirmdn,
xi), 124

Amlr-Ddd Abd Bakr b. Mas‘ud (fl. 1114),
68-9

‘Amr b. Layth (Saffarid, ix), 28 and n.,
39 n., ti3

Amu, Amul (town on Oxus), rn and n.


*


169


Ansdb. SeeSam'ani
Ansari. See ‘Abdu’llah — , Shaykh — ,
and Pir
Antioch, 146

Antisharwan, Khusraw — (Sasdnian king,
vi), 146

-‘Aqili, Sayfu’d-Din — (author of the


Alluiru’l- IVuzard), 104


■ * ■■ ■ . ■ -oiyastu uy

i>aiia'u'ri-Dln-X.ahlri of Samarkand, 127
Ardashir (father t*f Ibn ‘Abbadl, fl.
* 1102), 105

’Aristotle, 79, 86, 9 2 9


. ,7


. -7, 128, 153
u8


Arsiansnaii (Saljtiq of K.irmdn, xu), 118
Arudha (Hindii astrology), x66
Asad b. iani (physician), 147; — b. Sa-
mdn (ix), 113

Asadi’s lexicon (Lnghalei-Furs, ed. Horn),
33 , n6

Ascendant (definition of — in astrology),
134

-Ash'ari, Abu’l-Hasan— , 163
Ashmand (translator of Ptolemy’s Alma-
-tgest), 165

‘Asjacli (poet, xi), 2911., 30
Abti ‘Asim Mohammad b. Ahmad, 14,
105. See Ibn ‘Abbddi
‘Askar Mukram, 105 *

Assassins, 70, 108, 137. See also Alamiit
Astardbdd, 86 n. n

- Athdmi l-Baqiya of -Uirtini (ed. and
transl. by Ed. Sachau), 6a n., 88 n.,
128, I2g, 136 m, 1530., 155 n.
Athdrnil-Bilad (of -Qazwini, 1276, ed.

Wllstenfeld), 9n., 102, no, 137
Athdru'l- Wuzcyd (of Sayfu’d-Din -‘Aqili),
104

Ibnu’l-Athfr (Arab historian, xiii), 15 n.,

28 n., 36 n., 52 it?, 71 n., 73 n., 104,
105, 108 n., 109, inn., 126, *136-7,
139, 161 n.

Atmatigin (name uncertain), 24-5, 109
Atsiz (Khwarazmshah, xii), 24, 80 n., toy,
no, 158

Avicenna (Abti ‘Ali-Husayn b. ‘Abdu
’lldh b. Sind, b. 980, d. 1037), 63 n.,
66, 68, 76, 79-80, 82, 85-90, 92-3,
140-1, 142, 148, 149, 154, 155-8, 160,
161, 163

Awba, Battle of — (1152), 74 , 96, 120
*Awfi, Muhammad — (author of the Lu-
bdbu'l-Albab and the Jawdmi'u'r-Hi-
kdyAt wa Lawdmi'u'r-Riwiyit , xiii),

29 m, 48 n., 104, no, in, 113, ri4,
1 15, 116, 126, 127, 149


Index


170 o


Ayr? V'. ;,r «

■ V . ■’ n6o), 157

\ , Or; . ■■ of the Prophet),

163 "

‘Azfzu’l-Islam b. BurhAnu’d-Din Muham-
mad (xiii), 1 1 1

Azraql (poet, xi), 48-g, 57, 123, 124-5

BAba Ydhir {mystic and poet, xi), 119
Ballinger, Dr F. H — , 109
Bdbur-ndma (xvi), jon.

Badakhshan, 41, 43 r
Badghis, 28, 33, 34, ill
Badihl, Ahmad — (xi), 48-9
BadiVz-ZamAn-HamadAnf, 14 (•

Baghdad, 23, 63 11. *64, 65, 70, 73, 78 n.j
80 n., 81, 95, 105, 108, nr, 116 n.,
129, 146, 147, 14S, 1+9. 153 . r 55 > 156,
161

BAgh-i-‘AdnAni, 125 * 1

BahmanyAr, Iiiya Ra’is — (disciple of
Avicenna, d. 10 66), 92, 157
BahrAml of Sarakhs (poet), jo, 3 2, 1x5
BalirAmshAh (Ghaznawi, xii),„3i, 68 n.,
101, 1 1 7, 118, 120

-Baklmrzi, ‘All 1 ), -Hasan — (xi), 138
Abii Bakr Ajwini (physician, dale un-
known), 78; — b, Ishaq-Kiraml (theo-
logian), 59 and n , ; — DaqqAq (physician,
xii), 77 ; — h. Mashid Amir (xii), 68-9
-BalAdliuri (author of the Futiikn'l-
Bulddn), 59 n., 146 n.

Bal'am, 104

-Bal'ami, Abu’l-Fadl Muhammad (d.
940-1), 104; — , Abit ‘All Muhammad
(son of the preceding and translator of
Tabari’s history into Persian), 14, 104
Baiits'aglnin, 112
BalAshjird (hear Merv), 104
Balkh, 59, £4, 71, 87, 105, 114 "
BAmiyAn, 74, 98, 101, 102
Barbad (minstrel of Khtisraw Par^iz), 29
BardaisAn (heresiarch), 129
Barltebraeus, Gregorius ^.bu’l-Faraj (his-
torian, physician, etc. xiii), 145
BarkiyAruq (Saljtiq), 139 n.

Barmak, Al-i- — (Barmecides), 21, 95
BarskhAn, 4 and n., 25
Barthold, 24 n.

Bawand, House of — , 57
Edward, 87
Bawardi, 09

BayAbAni, Amir — , 24, 109
Bayhaq, 17, 29, 1 1 3

Bayhaqi, Abu’l-Fadl — (author of the
Ta'rfkh-i-Mas'&di), 51 n., 104, 115,

1 16, 125, 127, 162; — , Abu’l-Hasan
b. Abi’l-QAsim Zayd (author _ of the
Mashdribu't- TajariS), 138
Bazh, 34

Beh-az-Andew-i-Shapur, 146. See Jundi
Sabiir

Beth LApdt, 146


Bevan, Professor A. A. — , 1 28

t ?:. . ' 1 : a . i.s

1 i : , \ 1 X. . ■ " ^ ■ and

historian, x-xi), 36 n., 62 and n., 63,

6411., 65-7, 85-7, 88 n., 106-7, XI 7>
*127-9, 130-1, 13611., 153, 155 and n.,

162 and n.

Blochet, E. — , 139

Blochmann’s Prosody of the Persians, 35 n.
Bodleian Library, 131-3
Brockelmann’s Gesc/i. d. Arab. Lilt,,
i4n., 62m, 6311., 9011., 9rn., 103,
m, * 155 . 167
Brut of Layamon, 53 11.

“Bubikir.” See -RrAzi
BughrA KhAn, 26-27, 69 n., 104, 112, 126
Bukhara, ijj, 17, 24, 25, 33, 35, 36, 83,
84, 105, 109, no, in, 112, 1 13, 114,
113, 121, 122, 126, 136
Bukht-Yishd* (family of physicians, viii-
xi), 81, 82 n., 145-7
BundAr of Ray (poet, x-xi), 30, 119
-BundAri’s History of the Saljdqs, 36 n.,
104

BuqrAl. Sec Hippocrates
Burhan, House of — (xi-xiii), 24, no-
12

Buiftanf (poet, father of Mu‘izz. 1 ), 30, 45,
47 . r 19

Burhanu’d-Din ‘Abdu’I-'Aziz b. MAza
aud four of his descendants (xii-xiii),

2411., xio-n

Burhdn-i- Qdti ‘ (Persian Lexicon), 33 n.,
54 n>

Bunina, 36 and n.

Busht, 28 anri n.

Bust, s r n.

Buwayh, or Buya, House of — , 19 n., 30,
90m, 91, 160, 162
Buzurjmihr of QAyin, 30, n6
Byzantine fanaticism, 146

Cairo, 133

“Cambaluc" (KhAn BAligh, Pekin), 103
Carra de Vaux, Baron — ,135
CliaghAnl, Amir Abu’l-Muzafifar — , 39-
40, 42 n.

ChaghAniyAn (Saghaniyan), 39, 40, 42 11..,
105, ro6, 122-3
ChAha, 59
Chaldaea, 14811.

China, 9 n., 22, 102, 109, 112
Choulant’s Handbuch d. Biicherkunde
.u.s.w., 149, ison., 13111., 137
Christensen, 139

Christians, 81, 145, 146, 147, 148 n., 133,
134 n.

Chwolson’s Ssabierund Ssabismus, 148 n.
Claudius PLolemy, 164, 163
Constantinople, 163 n.

Coniinens. See -HAwi, -Razi
Cosmography, 62-3
de Courteille, Pavet — , 3011.


Index


Daf'uH-Mail&rrV l- Kulliyya (a medical
work), 157

Dahdk, Dahlia^ (Azhidahaka), iox
D ahak (prison), 5m.

Ddn ish - ndma- i- ‘ A Id 1 1 (by Avicenna, xi),
156, 168 and n. a

Daqfqi (poet, x), 43, ns, 113
Daqqdq, Abu Bakr — (xii), 77
Ddrdbjird, n,

Darghtish, Pisar-i , 30, 52, 118

Darwaz, 34

Dastd.ru' l- iVumrd (byKhwandam(r), 104
Dti’ud b. Hunayn (translation from Greek
into Arabic, ix-x), [47
Da’tidf, Mahmiid b. ^bu'l-QAsim, 68-9
Dawlalshdh’s “Memoirs of the Poets”
(xv), 2811., 35 n., 40 n., 44 n., 48 n,,
i*i, 123 n., 162
Daylam, ‘Ah — (xi), 55
Daylam, House of — , 17, 122, [62. See
also Buwayh, BuyS supra
Defremery, 150., 16 n., 18 n.

-Dhahabl (historian), 163
DhaliMra (medical work ascribed to
Thabit b. Qurra, q.v.), 78 and n., 148
Dhakhlra - i - Khmirazmshdht (Persian
System of Medicine by Sayyid Isma'd
Jurjani, xii), 7511., 79, 80 n., *8(7n.,
rqo, 142 n., 138-g

Dhakhlratu' l-Fatthoa [or 'l-Burhdniyya,
xii-xiii], 11 1

Dhammu' l- KalAm (a condemnation of
Scholastic Philosophy by the Shaykh
‘Abdu’llah Ansari, xi), 163
Dhu’r-Riydsatayn (title of Fadl b. Sahl,
ix), 2t and n. 1

Dictionary of Technical Terms... of the
Musalmdns , 231 and n., 142, 144*
Dielerici, 4m, 6n., 911.

Dihistdn, 30
Dinawar, 122
Div-mardum , 9 11.

Diwdn-i-Albisa, 108
Dhvdmi r-Rasd' il,-\ 5 n.

Dizful, 146

Dole, Nathan Haskell — ■, 140

Dozy, 135

Abu Dulaf (xi), 55

Dur-Firuz-i-Fakhr( (poet of Saljuqs), 30,
119

Dushmanziydr, 90 n., 92, 102
Edessa, 146

Egypt, Egyptians, 18, 157 .

Elias, Ney — , 24 n.

Ellis, A. G. — , 158
Escorial (Library), 151, 153
Eth6, Hermann — , 14m, 28 n,, 34 m,
54 n., 114, 115, 121, 125 n,, 156
Euclid, 62

Fa<Jl b. YahyA-Barmaki (viii-ix), 95-6 ;
— b. Sabi (ix), 21-2; — b. Mujiam-


4 171

mad, Abu’l-‘Abbds (of the House of
Muhtdj, x), 122

‘ ' ’ ’ in. See-Bayhaqi

dialect), 119

raiu+n (01 cmrgan, poet), 119
Fakhru’d-Dawla Abu Kalanjdr (Biiyid,
xi), 19 n., 91

Fakhru’d-Din Mas hid b. Tzzu’d-D(n
Hasan (Ghiirid, xii), 2 and n., 74 n.,
98, 101-2 ; — Mu’ayyadu’l - Mulk
1% (? Falchru’l-Mulk b. Nizamu’l-Mnlk),
'39 *

Fakhru’l - Mulk Abu’l-Fath-Mu?affar b.
Nizdmu’l ■ Mulf? (d. 1 106-7), 7* n.,
139 n.

Falaku'l-Atlas or 'l-Jhfldk, 5 n.
v 'Farajlalda 'sh-Shidda (by-Tamikhi, x),
149 and n.

Abu’l-Faraj of Rdna (pdSt, xi-xii), 30,

Sin., 11^-7
Fnrghdna, 30, 113

Farhang-i-A njitman-drd-yi- Ndpri (Per-
sian Lexicon), 39 m, 60 n.

Farigluini dynasty (x, xi), 162
Farrukhi (poet, xi), 29 n., 30, 39*-45,

1 19 (?), 123

Farrukhzad (Ghaznawf, reigned 1052-9),
118

Firs, 63 n.

Fevers, classification of — , 76-7, 142-4
Ahu’l-Fida, 102

F/hrisl (x), 114, 125, 130, 145, [50, *151,
*'53

P'lrdawsi, 11, u, 31,54-9, 124, 139
Firdawsii l-ilikmat (work on Medicine
composed in 850 I47 ‘AH b. Kabban
-Tabari), 140, 144, 149
Firdawsu't- T. r .’r." ( . • .

6 by Khusv. v , ' ■ j .

Firiddn* 101
Finiz-kdh, ioi, 120
FitzGerald, Edward—, 134, 139
FitzPaTrick Lectures, 157, 159
FlUgel. See FjJirist
Fonalm’s Zur Quellenkunde tier Persist hen
Medhin, 340., 80 n., 145, 158, 159
Forbes’ Persian Grammar, 35 n.

Ibn Funduq’s Ta'rlkh-i-Bayhatj( 1 167-8),
"3

Fuyiil-i-Buqnlt. See Hippocrates, A-
phorisms of —

Fuluhu'l-Btdddn (of -Baladhnri), 146 if.

Galen (Jdlimis), 79, 86, 95, *141, 154,
155

Ganja, 30

Gan tin, Jules — , 1x3 n,

Garrison’s Introduction to the History of
Medicine, 145

Geiger and Kuhn’s Grundriss der Iran-
ischtn Philologie, 14 n.

GhacM’iri of Ray (poet, d. 1034-5), 30,

1 18-9


172


Index


Ghak-Kirma (mud-worm), g and n.
Gharjistan, 120

'■'/ 1 ■ . r I

1 " '■ 5 I 1 £ •

Ghazna, City of — , 20, 28, 31, 57, 58,
59 n., 65, 66, 74, tot, 106, 1 12, 115,

1 1 6, 1 r 7i 118, 120, r 22, 162
Ghazna, House of —, r+n., 30, 73, 101,

117, it8, 127, 128, 16 1, T 62

Ghazza (Palestine), 105 f

-Ghazzf, Abu Isha^ Ibrdhlm b. Yahya
— (xii), 14 and n., 105
Ghiy&thu’d-Din MiShammad b. Ma-
likshdh (Saljuq, d. 1117), 36 n., 51 f
5211., 7311., 74,»ii25-6; — of Glidr
(d. 1202), ior-2, 126; — b. Rashidu’c?-
Dfn (xiv), 107


. 68 n., 74, 96, 98, 101-2. See Also
Shansab, House of —

Ghdra, 34

Gil-khwdra (mud-worm), 9
de Goeje, 39 n., 114, 147 n. *

Gornold, W. — ,99, 164-7*

Greek Science, 447, 148

r- . .. v- ” • c .n.. a


GnHsldn of Sa'di, 67 n., 106
Gunde-Shapur, 146. See Jundi-Sabur
Gurgdn (Jurjdn), 86, 88, 89 n., 92 n., 107,
m, 1 5 . 5 i 158 r

Gurgdnj (Urgdnj, Jurjdnivya), 12811., 1 61
Gur-IChan, 24-5, 108-9, 'no
Giishydr. See Kijshydr


Habib of Isfahan, Mirzd — , 108
HadA'iqu's-jiihr (by Rashidu’d-Din Wat-
Wiit), 104, 105, 116, 1 18, 124^
-Hadddd, A, uhammad b. Mansur — , 140.
Hadiqaht’ l-llaqlqa (by Sana’f, q.v., d.

1150), 1 18
Ildfiz, 139

Jlafl Iqllm (of , \ 1 7;: " . ..

tti . 1 *, 1 | . .

■ ■ [25,126,128

— , 163 n.

"itaiy Annas - (‘Ail n. -‘Abbds-Majtisi,
q.v.), 154

Hamadan, 52, 117, 126, 156, 163
•tllamadani. See Badi'u’z-Zamdn
I.iamddi, 14

Ifamidi, i4andn. See following entry
Ifamidu’d-Din-Mahmildi-Balklii (author
of the Maqdmat-l-Ham ld{, composed in
1156-7), 103

Hanafi's, no *

Hanbalfs, 94 n., 147, 163

Hanzala of Badghfs (poet, ix), 28, 113

Abu Hanffa Iskaf (poet, xi), 30, 116

Jxlaqfqf (poet), 48

-Hariri, 14, 103


Harran, 148

Hdriin-Rashid (Caliph, ix), 82n.; 147m;

— b. Farrukhan, orb. Sulaymdn, better
known as Buglira KhaiT, q.v,, 112, 126

Hasan b. ‘Ali-Jili (scientist, xi), 128 ;
* — b. Khasib (astronomer, viii), 63 n. ;

— b. Muhammad b. Titbit (officer of
the Caliph -Musta'in, ix), 121; — b,
Ndsir (poet of Ghazna, xii)pn7; — b.
Sabbah (xi), 137; — b.Sahl (ix),2i, 107

Abu'l-Hasan Ahmad b. Muhammad
-Tabari (physician, x), 91 n. ; — - -Aghaji
(patron of Daqiqi, x), 29, 115; — ‘Ali
b. Fakhru’d-Din Mas'iid, see under
Husamu’d-Din^, — Kisa’i (poet, b.
953), 3°, 1 15 1 — ‘Ali Bahrdmi of Sa-
rajkhs, sge Bahrdmi ; — b. Yahyit
(apparently a mistake for the first entry
under this heading), 91 and n.

Hdshim, House of — , 81
Hdw{ (the “ Confinens” of -Razi, q.v.),
79, 149-153

Ibn I.Iawqal (geographer), r47
Hayy b. Yalczan, 157
Hazimi of AlJlward (poet, x), 106
Hebrew language, 147
Hellenopolis (Harran), 148
Hefdt, 15, 27 n., 28, 33, 34, 45, 48 11.,
49> 57> 68, 74, 75, 93' 94, 9 6 < Iofi >
113, ii 8, 120, i22, 124, 129, 163;
ancient language of — , 163
Ilibatu’lldh. See Qiwdmu’i-Mulk
Hiddya (medical work by Abi'i Bakr
Ajwinf), 78

t r : 1 1 „


Hippocrates (Buqrdt), 78, 79, 86, 91, 147,
I S4i 155

Hira, 147 ; Cemetery of — at Nishdpur, 71

Homer, 147

Horn, Paul — , 33 n.

Houdas, O. — , in n.

Houtsma, 23 n., 36 n.

Houtum-Schindler, Sir Albert — , 107
Howorth, Sir Henry — , 112, 113, 127
Hubaysh {ix— x), 147
Huldgii Khdn (xiii), 137
piunayn b. Ishriq (physician and trans-
lator from Greek, ix), 78, 147, 154
Husdmu’d-Din Abu’l-Hasan ‘All b.
Fakhru’d-Din Masb'id (Gln'trid Prince,
xii), 1, 75, 98, 101-2; — ‘Umar b.
Burlianu’d-Din (Im&m, d. 1141-2), 24,
„ no, 112

Husayn, Abii ‘Ali — Jahan-sdz, see
under ‘Ald’u’d-Din supra) — b. ‘Ali
b. Mfkd’il (xi), 86-7

Abu’l- Husayn Ahmad b. Muhammad-
Suhayli (d. 1027-8), 85 and n. , 87
Huyayy b. Qutayba (governor of Tus in
Firdawsi’s time), 55

Hyleg (Hayldj, astrological term), 71 n.,
i3*-3, 164, 167


Index


Ibrahim b. Mas'iid (Ghaznawi Sultan,
1059-1099), 31, 49, 31, 116, 117, 120 ;
Sibl, 148

Jftikhdr-i-Jahin (xii-xiii), m
Ildk Khdns, 112-113. See Khdniyya
and KhdqAn, House of —

Ildq (town in Transoxiana), 113 n
‘Imddu’d-Dln-Kdtib-Isfahdnl, 127, 135
India, 51 %, 58, 86, r'17, 120, 128
‘frdq, 33, 49, 61, 64, 86, 95, 113
Irshadn'l-Arib , 103, 105, 106. See also
, under Ydqdt

‘Isd b. YahyA (physician and teacher of
Avicenna), 156

Isfahan, 36, 48, 73, 103, 105, 107, ro8,
122, 156, 162, 163*

IsfandiyAr, 43 ; Muhammad b. — (author
of History of Tabaristdn), 34 n., ?03
Isfarayini, the son of (poet), 52

Isfizarl, ImAm Muzaffar-i (astronomer,

xi), 71 and n. n
IshAq b. Hunayn (d. 910 or 91 1), 147
and n., 159 n. ; — the Jew (contem-
porary with author), 6r
Abii IshAq-i-JiiybArl (poet)* 29, 1 14
IskAf, Abu Hanlfa — (poet, xi), 30,
116

IskAfi, Abu’I-QAsim ‘All b. Muhammad
(stylist and secretary, x), 15 and n.,
16-18, 105-6, 122

Islah - i ■ Qdmi/t (“Rectification of the
Qant'm” of Avicenna, by an anonymous
critic), 79

Isma‘11 b. Ahmad h. Asad (the SAmAnid,
ix-x), 28 n., 104, 12 1 ; — b. ‘Abbdd,
the SAhib, 14, 19, 103, 107, ri8, nq;
Adib' — (physician, xi), 93-+; — Jur-
jAnl, Sayyid (physician, xii), 78,* 80,
158-9 ; — ■ Warrdq (father of Azraqi,
xi), 57> i2 4
Isma‘111 sect, 137

‘Izzu’d-Din Husayn (Ghiirid, xii), tor ;
— Mahmud HAjji, 75 ; — NassAha,
Sayyid (fl, 122 r), 137

Jabal (province), 122
Ja'far b. Muhammad, see Riidaki ; —
i-HamadAnl, 29 n., 30, 119
Abii Ja‘far b. Muhammad Abu Sa‘d
-Nashawl “Sarakh,”«9i and n.
Tahdn-suz. See supra, under ‘AlA’u’d-
Dln

-JAhiz, 106, 130, I47
Jahddhanak (near Balkh), 1 14
JAlandar (near Lahore), 117 •

Jald.ll era, 71m

Jalalu’d-Din KhwArazmshAh, 102, Tit;

— Rumi, 89 n.

Jdllnus. See Galen

Jam! (poet, xv), 82 n., 93 m, tl8, 159-
161*, 163

Jdmi'-i-Sh&ht (astronomical work by Abu
Sa'id Ahmad... -Sajzl, x), 63, 129


173

Jdmi'u' t-Tawdrlkh (history by Rashfdu’d-
Din Fadlu’IlAh, xiv), 137-8
Jawdmt'u'l-Hikdydl (by Muhammad
‘Awfl, xiii), 100, 126, 127, 149
Jawhari, Abu Bakr — , 29 n., 30; —
Ziftgar, 30, 1 18
Jews, 64, 130, 147, 154
Jibrd’ll, 145, 146, 147. See Bukht-
Yishti'

Joannitius. See Hunayn b. Ishdq
John the Baptist, Christians of — , 1480.
Judl, Mount — , 25 1,

[itliigh (father of the poet Farrukhi), 39
Jundi-Sabiir, 14637
JurjAn. See Gurgan
jurjdniyya (UrgAnj GurgAnj), 128 n.,
n 161

Jurjis, 145, 146. See Bukht-Yishii 1
Juwayni, ‘AlA’u’d-Din 'A(4 Malik (author
of the Ta'rlkh-i-JahAngushAy , xiii),
ijfi , *

Ju-yi-MiiliyAn, 35, 84, 12 1
JuzjAn, 162

-JiizjAnf, Abii ‘Ubayd ‘Abdu’l-Wiihid b.
Muhammad — (disciple of Avicenna),
9 J > 155. '57-8
Jyoshis, 167 ^

Kdbul, Riiddba princess of — , 54
KafA’i of Ganja (poet), 29 n., 30
Kdft (treatise on Music by Abii Mangltr-
Husayn..b. Zila, xi), 157
-I^dfi, 19. See Isma'il b. ‘AbbAd

Kalanjari grapes, 33, 34
Abii Kalanjdr (disciple'of Avicenna), 92,
'57

KamAli, ‘Am(d-i- — (poet), 3p, 1 19
KamdlutJ- Baldgha of Yazdddi, 103
Kdmihi' s-Sina'at (System erf Medicine
by ‘All b. -‘Abbds -Majilsf, x), 79, 90,
14°, *54, ‘55

Kainu'l-QAJiya (treatise on Prosody by
Bahr&ml), 32I* 1 1 5
“ Karabitus,” 142

Kdr-i-Mihiar (treatise on Astronomy, by
Hasan b. -Khasfb); 63 n.

Karkh, 105
Karukh, 28, 33 and n.

Kashghar, 112
KAth, 128, ifii

Kaydni (ancient dynasty of Persian Kings),

15

Kay-Khusraw, 153
Kazimirski, A. de B. — , 15 n.

IChabbAzi (poet), 30, 1 1 5
Khalaf b. Ahmad, or Khalaf-i-Bdnit
(Kaflari, d. 1008-9), 39 and n., 106-7,
"7

Ibn Khaldiin (historian, fl,. about 1400),
ir2, 126

Khalil b. Ahmad (philologist, ix), 147


174


Index


Ibn Khallikdn. (biographer, xiii), 14 n.,
19, 2in,, ros, rio, 113, 154
-Khammar, Abu’l-Khayr b. — (physician,
b. 942-3, cb about 1018), 85-7, 153
KMn Baligh (“Cambaluc,” Pekin), 103
Khiiniyya dynasty (House of Afrdsfyab,
or — ofKhdqdn, 990-1212), 30, 52n.,
690., 102, 104, 109, 112-3, n8, 119,
125, 126-7. Sec also Bughrd Khan,
Gtir-Khdn

lvhdqani (poet, d. IT98-9), 135
Khardj, Kitdbu'l - by Abu’l-Faraj*
Quddma (d. 948-9), 103
Khaiidatu'l- Qasr (b»i ‘Imddu’d-Din
-Kdtib-Isiahani, 1176-7), 135 »

Ibn Khasili, Hasai^ — (astronomer, viii-f
r ix), 63 n. #,

Khatldn, or Khuttal (in Transoxiana), 44
and 11., 123 n
Khawardn, 117

Khayydm, -Khayydmi. See ‘Umar
■■ ! , KMn Hindi Im


Wj b't-Ai no


Khitd’is, in *

Khiva, 128 and n. See also Khwarazm
Khudd-banda (Jlljdylil, reigned 1303-
1316), no, 11 r

Khtiff, Khttfli, 80 and n., 158-9
Khujand, 113

Khujista (work on Prosody by Bahrdmi),
US

Khujistdn, 27 n., 28, r 13 <•>

Khurdsdn, 16, r8, 23, 28, 29, 33, 48 n,,
52, 59 n,, 60, 6r, 64, f4, 86, 95, 103,


105, 113, 117, 122, 123, 135, ‘5°
Khusraw Parwif (Sdsdnian king, vii),
29 n. ; — of Abarquh (author of the
FirdatvmU- TaioArlkh, 1405-6), 138
Khusrawjim, 29 n. r '

Khutan, 24m,

Khiizdn, 69 and 11.

Ivhiizistdn (Susiana), 146 and n.,i-47
Khwdf, 28

Khwdndamlr’s Dasturu' tlVuzard, 104
Khwdr, 16

Kliwdrazm, 87, 102, nt, 127, 12811.

r S3, 156, 158, i(S, 162
Khwarazmshahs. There were three dis
tinct dynasties who ruled over Kliwa
razm with this title, viz. : — (i) an ancient
dynasty claiming descent from the le-
gendary Kay-Khusraw, 153 ; (ii) the
Ma’muni dynasty (995- 1017), 85-7,
155, 161-2 ; (iii) the latest and most
celebrated dynasty (founded by Amish-
1077 : " 1 xtinguished

if , " ■ "'' ■■* , > 1 52 n., 101,

102, 109, iii, 126, 127, 158, 159
Kifdya (work on Medicine, by Ahmad b
Faraj), 78; (do., by Ibn Mandilya)
80

-Kindi. See Ya'qub b. Ishdq


King’s College, Cambridge, Library of — ,

Kirami sect, 59 and 11.

Kirmdn, 1 18, 124 r

Kirmdnsliah, 23, 108, 122
iysd’l, Abu’l-IIasan — (poet, b. 953), 30,
t *5

Kitdbu 'l-Asrdr ("Book of Mysteries,”
by the Shaykh ‘Abdu’lldh-^.nsdr(, xi),
163 ; — ’l-Bukhald (“Book of Misers,”
by -Jdhiz), 130, 147; — 'l-Kindya wa
’ t-Ta‘rid (by -Tha'libi, xi), 107; —
'l-Mi'a ft 't- Tibb (by Abu Sahl-Masihi,
x )i 1 55 J — ’ l-Milalmdv-Nihal (“Book
of Sects,” by -Shahristdni), 59 n.
de Koning, Dr P.— * 149 n., 150, 154
von Kremer, Alfred — , Cnlhirgesch. d.

Often Is tMer d. Chalifen, 14 n., 1511.
Kiichluk Khan (xiii), 108
ICdfa, 78 n.

Kiihistdn, 16 «,

Ktlhshir, Castle of — , near Ghazna, 122
Kiimlsh (Qtiuiis), 16, 17
-Kunduri, Abu’n-Na§r Muhammad b.
Man^dr, entitled ‘AmlduT-Mulk (d.
1064 or 1068), 14, 104, .138
Kunndshu ’/- Khuff (medical work by
1*1, ldq b. I.Iunayn, d. 910 or 911), 159
Ktlsa-i-FAH (poet), 2911., 30
Kilshyar-Jili (astronomer, x), 63 and 11.,
130, 132 n.

Abci Lahab, rq
Lahore, 117
Lamghdn, 20, 21

LAmi'i of Dihistdn (poet, xi), 30, 1 19
Lane’s Arabic-English Lexicon , 6 11. , 79 11.
Lane-Poole, Stanley — , 46, 5211., 101 11.,
162

Latd'ifu' l-Ma'drif { by -Tha'dlibi), 21 n,
Layamon, Brut of — , 55 n.

Layard, 1460,

Layth, 39 n. See Saffarids
Lawdssimu' l-Amkinu (by ‘Umar-i-Khny-
ydm), 139

Leclerc, Dr Lucien — , Hist, de la Mt-
. decine Arabe), 145, 146, 155, 158, 159
Liber A Imansoris. See -Manstiri and
-Rdzl

Lippert. See -Qifti, Ta’rikhu’l-Hu-
kamd

Lubdbu'l-Albdb. See under ‘Awfl supra
Lil’hl’l (poet), 29 n., 30

Abu’l-Ma'dli of Ray (poet, xii), 30,

Matda wa'l-Ma'dd, Kitdbu’ l- — (by
Avicenna), 82*, 157

Macan, Turner — , 54 n . See Shdh-
ndma

Ma'di-Karib, 130

-Mdfarrtikhl (historian of Isfahdn, xi), 107,
108, 1 19


Index


Mafdtlhidl - 1 UlAm (ed. VanVloten), 71 n.,
87

Abti MAhir MdsA b. Ytisuf b. SayyAr
(physician, iij), 154

M ahmvid, Sultan Yamlnu’d - Dawla —
Ghaznawi (958-1030), 20, 26, 30, 31,
37 ~ 8 . 4 S> 51 n., 55 n., 56-8, 65-7, 88'-
7, 89, 104, 112, 113, 1 r 5, 120, 122,
124, 153, 161, 162; — Say fu’d- Dawla
b. Ibramhi-i-Gliaznawi (fl, ro8o), 45,
51, 117; — ■ b. TAju’l-IslAm Ahmad,
in; — DA’iidI (circ. 1 r 1 5), 68-g ; —
QAri-Yazdi, NizAmu’d-Din — , 108

Majdlim’l-Mii’miniu (by the QAdl Nii-
ru’llAh Shushtari, circa 1385), 119 a.

Majdu’d-Dawla b. Fyikhru’d-Dawla (Bu-
wayhid, x-xi), 1 19, 162, 163


4011., ni, iiu, ny, no
127

KushyAr the astro-
132 n.’

-Alajiisi, ‘All b. -‘Abbas — (physician, x),

79 n., 90 and n., 91, 140, 154-5
MAkAn (d. 940-1), ifl, 17, 18, 107, 122
-Maliki, -Kitdb — (“Liber Regius”).

See Kdmilu’s-SinA‘at
MaliksliAh (Saljviq, 1072-92), 24, 45-8,
49 1 So. 5®. 7'n., 93, 104, 119, 124,
136, i 37

Maliku’l-IslAm b. Burliinu’d-DIn Mu-
hammad (xiii), nr

Maliku’l-JibAl (“ King of the Mountains,”
title of — ), 102
MAlin (near HerAt), 33, 34 ->

Ma’miin (‘AbbAsid Caliph, 813-33),
21-3, 64, 81, 85, 107, 130, 146, 165 ; —
b. Muhammad IChwArazmshAh (995-7),
x 55, 161 ; — b. Ma’miin (son of pre-
ceding, d. 1016-7), 85-7, 155, 162
Ma’milnf KhwArazmshAhs, 161-2
ManAji'u' l- Aghdhiya wa Maiidrm-hd
(work on diet), 80 n,, 157
Manahiju' l-Fikar, 147
Mandmlu's-Sd'irln ila' l-Haqqt l- Mubin
(by the Shaykh ‘Abdu’llAh AnsAri (396—
481)), 163

Ibn Mandiiya (physician of IsfahAn, x),

80 and n.

Manjik of Tirmidh (poet, x), 123
Mankitarak (d. about 1030), 122
-Maninl’s commentary on -‘Utbl’s Kitd-
bu'l- Yamini, 1620. .

Manshiiri (poet), 30, 116
Manstir (‘AbbAsid Caliph, 754-775),
14(1, 147 m ; — I b. Ndh (SAmAnid, 96 r—
976), 15 n., 83 and n., 104, 106, 150;
— b. Ishaq b. Ahmad b„ Asad (SA-
mAnid governor of Ray in 903-8) , 78 n.,
149, 150; — b. Isma’fl (“a person un-
known to history”), 150; — b. Isma‘11


175

b. KhAqAn, 150; — b. IshAq b. Isma'il
b. Ahmad, 150; — -b. MushkAn, Abil
Nasr — (xi), 51 n.

Abti Mansiir Muwaffaq b. ‘All-Hirawl
(author of the oldest known Persian
pharmacology, x), 560. ; — b. Ahmad
(of the House of MuhtAj, fl, 950), 123 ;
— ‘Abdu’l-QAhir b. TAhir-BaghdAdi
(mathematician, d. 1037), 62 and n. ;
— Husayn b. Muhammad h. 'Umar b.
Zila-IsfahAnl (d. 1048-9), 92 and n.,
ft 157 ! — b. Abl Yd^uf SajAwandi (poet,
xi), 48, 49

-Manpiri, -Kilah — (the “Liber Al-
mansoris ” of -R.Azi, q.v.), 78, 83, 149,

ft 150

Mantiql of Ray (poet 7 , 30, 118
Maq AmAt of -Hariri, 103 ; — of Ilamfdi
(composed in 1156-7), 14 m, 103
-Maqdisf (or -MuqaddasI), geographer,

83 n. „

MaJAgha, 108

Maranj (in India), 51 n., 117
Marco Polo, 108
Margh-i-Sapid (near HerAt), 33
Margoliouth, Prof. D, S. — , 10311., 105
Marw-i-ShAhjAn, 50 n. See also Merv
MarwAn II (Umayyad Caliph, 744-750),
104

Masd'il (“Questions” on Medicine) by
Hunayn b. IshAq (q.v.), 78


65, 86, 129, 130
Mashdribu't-Tajdrib , £38
Mashhad, 45 n.

Maslhf. See Abii Sahl
Massignon, L. — , 1630. '

Mas'dcfb. Mahmud-i-Ghazipawi, SultAn
— , 6311., 104, 1 15, 116, 120, 122, 125;
— IH b. IbrAhfm-i-Ghaznawi (1099-
1114), 51 n.; 116,117; — b. Muham-
mad b. MalilqjhAh (Saljiiq, 1133-1152),
23 n., 108, up; — b. ‘Izzu’d-Dfn I.Iu-
sayn (Ghdrid, fl. 1163), see under
Fakhru’d-Din ; "v- i-Sa‘d-l-SalmAn
(poet, xi-xii), 30, 50-52, 116, 117
Mas'udf (Arab geographer, author of
Muruju dh-Dhahab, etc.), 125 ; — (poet
of Ray, xi), 30, 1 16

Abu’l-MathalofBukhArA(poet, x), 29, 114
Mathnacui of JalAlu’d-Din Ritml, 22 n.,
89 n.

MA warA’a’n-Nabr. See Transoxlana

Mawsili, I,Iakfm-i (astrologer, xi), 70

Maymandi. See Ahmad b. Hasan
May m tin b, -Najlb-WAsiti (astronomer,

*i). 137

MAza, 24 n., 1 10-) 12. See BurhAn,
House of —

MAzandarAn, 34, 36, 54, 86 m, mu,


176


Index


Mdzydr (ix), 149
Mecca, 1 ti

MessuB. See supra Xbn Mdsawayh
Merv, 59, 60, 61, 71 n., pi, 84, 104, 137,
158

de Meynard, Barbier — , 1611., 20m, *8n.,
33n., 59m, 6911,, 125)1.

Mia Maqdla (the “ Hundred Discourses
on Medicine, by Abxi Sahl-Masihi, x),
155

Michael de Capella, 154
Mihrgdn (festival qf Autumn Solstice)^
33 > 34

Mirihdju’d-Din ‘Utlui^n (author of the
'f'abaqdt-i-Ndsirl, xhi), 120
Mindchihr b. Qdbils b.Washtnglr (xi), io{
Mintichihri (poet, xi), 29m, 30, 114, 119
Mirdtii'z-Zamdn, 105
Mirkhwdnc :t '-, : 1 ><•.'■ ■ ■, "

Mirsddiil-’ " I ■■ V 1 ' ■ ■ D ■■ ■ ■■

1223-4), 135-b'

Mongols, 109, iii, 137, 150 '

Moses, 64

Mu'dlaja-i-Buqrdti\vj Abu’l-Hasan Ah-
mad (x), 91 r

MiCallim-i-thd.nl (the “ Second Master”).
See Avicenna

Mu’ayyidu’d-Dawla (Buwayhid, xi), 19 n.
Muhammad the Prophet, r, irn., 14,
56) 57 , 58 ) 73 , 163; — b. Mahmdd of
Ghozna,* Sultan Abil Ahmad — (1030),
116; 122; — b.Malikshah, Ghiyathu’d-
D(n — (Saljfiq, 1080-1117), 3611., 51-2,
73 - 4 , 125-6 ; — b. Fakliru’d-Din Mus-
‘ild (Ghiirid, xii), 74<3-nd n., 75, 98,
101, 102 ; — b. Sim, Ghiydthu’d-Din
(Glnlrid, d. icon), 126 ; — Khwdrazm-
slidh, ‘Ald’u’d-Dln (xiii), 126; — b.
‘Abduh (Secretary of Bughri Khdn, x-
xi), 14, Q7, 104 ; — b. ‘Abdu’l-‘Aziz
Sadr-i-JqJidn (xiii), in; — b. Abdu’r-
ftidd-Husayni (fl. 1330), 107; — . b.
Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Arrfc] (king
of Khwdrazm, x), 153; — b. ‘Amid
(minister of Ruknu’cUiDawla the Bu-
wayhid), 1 51 ; — b. Ahmad, Burhdnu’d-
Dfn (d. 1219), in ; — b. ‘Aqil-Qazwini,
91 ; — b. ‘Ali bCMa’rmin Khwdrazm-
shih (xi), 162 b. Badr Jajarmi (poet),
130 n. ; — Dushmanziydr, Ain't Ja'far

— (xi), 156; — b. Fadlu’lldh, Abu’l-
Mahdsin — , see Sayyidu’r-Ru’asd;

— b. Husamu’d- Dfn, Shamsu’d-Din
Sadr-i-Jahdn (fl. 1163), no; — Iqbdl
(fl. 192 r), 28 n.; — Mansiir-Hadddd,
14 and n.; — b. Muhammad (astro-
loger, fl. nr8-9), 77; — Mu’min-Hu-
saynf, see Tuhfatu’l-Mii’minin ; —
b. Muzaffar b.' Muhtdj (d. 941), 113,
122; — b. Ndsir-‘Alawi (poet, xii), 30,
117; — b. ‘Umar, Nizdmu’d-Din (fl.
1203), in; — b. Suleyman b. Da’ud
b. Bughra Khdn (fl. 1114), 69 and n. ;


— b. Zufar b. ‘Umar (author ofahistory
of Bukhara, 1178-9), 109, no, 121*;
b. Zakariyya, Abil Bakr — , see -Rizi

Muljassin, Abil 'Ali S£bi, 148 and n.

Muhtdj, House of — , 122-3
Mu'inu’d-Din (author of the history of
eHerdt entitled Raivdatiil-Jaimdt, xv),
101

Mu‘izzi (poet, xii), 30, 36, 45 - 8 ) 58, 1 17,
118, 119, 124 r

Mujallidi of Gurgdn (poet), 29, 113
-Mttjam fl Ma'dylri Ask'ar/’l-' Ajam
(by Shams-i-Qays, xiii), 115, 119 n.
Mu jamii l-Bulddn , see Ydqiit
Mu'jamiil - Udabd, or Irshddu'l-Arlb, see
Yiqtit r

Mujmalu’l- UsAl (or Astrology) of Ktish-
yif, q.v.Mri

Mukhlis, Mfrzd Mahdi Khin Baddyi 1 -
nigar (fl. 1884), 40 n.

Mukhtdri, ‘Uthmdn (poet, xii), 30, 51 n.,
102, 117, 118, 127

Mukhtasanid-Duwal, 145. See Barhe-
braeus

Muktafi (‘Abbdsid Caliph), 103
Miiller, F. WT K. — , 103
Munich Library, 151
Mu'nisu'l-Ahrdr (MS. selections of verses
ify the poet Muhammad b. Badr-i-
Jdjarml), 139 n.

-Muqad ’ 1 '";' HI

Muqrl

Mursh , with the

FusAl or Aphorisms), 78, 150
Murhjudh- Dhahab (of - Mas'iidl ), 125
Musdmara ft Akhbdr-i- Khwdrazm (by
-Binlni, xi$, 162 n.

-Musta‘in (‘Abbdsid Caliph), 121, 129
-Mifstarsliid (‘Abbdsid Caliph), 23-4, 108
-Mustazhir (‘Abbdsid Caliph), 23, 73
-Mu'tadid (‘Abbdsid Caliph), 148
-Mutanhbbi (the poet), 14
-Mutawakkil (‘Abbdsid Caliph), 130, 147,
149

Mu‘tazilites, 19 and n., 56, T47
Muwaflfaq, Imdm — , of Nishdptir, 138
-Muzaffariyya (Baron Victor Rosen’s
Festschrift, 1897), 134


Ffafahdtu'l- Uns (by Jdmi, xv), Ii8, 163
-Naj’dt (of Avicenna), 156

■ - - ’ - ' — - *o, 52, 118

\ ,, r 18

\ 5

\ iosed in

1887), 129

Naqdu'n-Nathr (by Abu’l-Faraj Quddma,
x), i °3

Nariman (father of Sdm and great-grand-
father of Rustam), 54
Narshakhi (author of Arabic History of
Bukhdrd composed in 943-4)) 35 n ->
no, 121*, 127


Index


i 77


Nasa, 59 n. ; — Nasawl, 102, in
-Nashawl, Shaykh Abu Ja'far — , 91
Nasimi (poet), 48

-Nasir K-Dini’lJAh (Caliph, xiii), in
Na^iru’d-Dfn Subukligfn (Ghaznawl), 30
Ndsfru’l-Haqq Nasr. See flak Khhn
Nasnds, 9 and n.

Nasr II b. Ahmad (Sdmanid, 913-942),
16 n. , 33-6, 107, 114, 122, 150; — b.
‘Alfb. Musa, 126, see flak Khan ; —
b. Ibrdhlm (xi), 52 n.

Abli Nasr b. -‘Arrdq (asLronomer, xi),
85—7, 128, 153 j — Kundilrl, entitled
‘Amfdu’l-Mulk (d. 1064), 14, 104; —
Mansiir b. Mushkstn (teacher of the
historian-Bayhaqipxi), sin.; — Ilib-
atu’lldh of Pdrs (d. 11 16), 51 n., 117
J' X l...” i 14 *

- V .h 1 ,! ■ , i- teacher of Avi-

cenna), 156

Ndy (Castle), 50 andn>

-Nayrfzl, Abu’l-'Abbas-Fadh b. Ildtam
(astronomer, ix-x), (>3 and n.

Neptune (planet), 133, 134 *

Nestorians, 146, 147
Neuburger, Dr Max — , 145, 148, 153 n.
Nihil wand, 7011., 122
Nile, 31 o

-Nllt, Abu Sahl Sa‘(d (physician, xi), 78,
154

Nfshdpiir, 9, 15, 17, 28, 29, 46, 47, 58, 59,
60, 70, 71, 73, 77, 87, 106, 113, 115,
117, 119, 120, 137

Nizami -‘Ariidf (the authovof this work),
3, 30, 60-61’, 74-5, 123, 125, 126; —
Athiri of Nishapur (poet, contemporary
with author), 60; — Munlriof Samar-
kand (poet, contemporary with author),

Nizdmu’l-Mulk (minister to Alp Arslan
and Malikshdh, xi), 45 n,, 46, 70, 72 n.,
104, no, 136, 137-138, I39> i6 3
Noldeke, Prof. Th. — , 14 n., 29 n., 54 n.,
55 n., 57 n -> 59. 81 n -> *45, H 6 n - ,
Ndh (the Patriarch Noah), 16 ; — I b.
Nasr (Sdmdnid, 942-954), 105, no,
122 j — * II b. Mansur (Sdmdnid, 976—
997). 15-18, 39. 106, 107, 1 15, 125, 156
Nuqdn, 54 n.

Niir-i- 1 U thmdniyya Library (Constanti-
nople), 163 n. nj-it a. 1

JSluztiatii l-yuiuo (oi xiamuu mill taus-
tawfi of Qazwin, xiv), 50 m ’

Occult Review, 130
“ Omar Khayyam Club,” 134. See
‘Umar-i-Khayydm
Oribasius, 155
Orkhon inscriptions, 102
Oxford, 151

Oxus, 17, 35, 83, 84, in, 128


Pagel, 145

Piinidhi, ‘All — (poet), 30, 52, 118
Panj-dih, 68

Parniydn (kind of grapes), 33 ; (silk), 35
Paris, 124

Piirsi(province), 90, 95, 96
Pars Fortume (“ Part of Fortune,” astro-
logical term), 67, 131, 164-5
“Part of the Unseen,” 67, 68, 164-7
Paul of Aegina, 155
Paul the Catholicos of Pdrs, 90, 95, 96
TPekin (Khdn-bdligh^Cambaluc), 103
Persian language, 147
Pfr-i-Ansdrl Pir-kHirl (xi), 94 and n.,
163. See also f Abdu’llah Ansdri
iPisar-i-Darghiish. See Darghiish
Pisar-i-Tisha, see TiSha
rlshdlidi dynasty, 25
Placidus de Titus, 167
Primum Mobile, 5 m, 16)

Ptolemy, Claudius — , 63, 86, 133, 164,

rSs

Pulse, varieties of — , 76, 140-141
Pdrdn (married to the Caliph -Ma’mtin),
21 - 3 ,

Pur-i-Kalah (poet), 29 n., 30
%

Qabdwi, Abii Nasr (translator of Nar-
shakhi’s History of Bukhdrd, 1128),
r2i

Qdbds b. Washmgir (Ziydrid, 976-1012),
14,88-90,103,119,156
-QS'im bi-amri’lldh (‘Abbdsid Caliph),
46 n.

Qamari of Gurgdn (poet, xi), 30, 119
Qandwazi, ‘Amid Alm’l-Fawdris, x), 125
Qdniln (of Avicenna), 99, 80, 89 n., 140,
142, 149, 154, '55. 157 i 7* -t-Mas'Adi
(on astronomy, by -Birujjl, 1031-6),
63 and n.

Qard-Khdn (or Farrukhdn), '12
Qdra-Khitd’f (or Gur-Khdnf) dynasty,
108-9, 110,126
Qarluq Turks, no
Qa?dramf (poetpxi), 30, 116
Abu’l-Qdsim Dd’udi, see Dd’iidi; ■ —
(courtier of Sultdn Jbrdhfm-i-Ghaznawf ,
xii), 1 17

Qashnu Amfri'l-Mu’minfn, 73. See Mu-
hammad b. Malikshdh (Saljuq)
Qatawdn, Battle of — (1141-2), 108-9,
no

Qdwurd (first of the Saljdqs of Kirmdn,
xi), 124

qazwin.^oj^no ^ ^ ^


"ed. Lippert), 78 n., 82 n., 93 n., 129,
137, 145, 146, 148, 149, 150, 151, 154,
155, 158, 159, t6i n.

Qilii Arslan Khaqan ‘Uthmdn (d. 1212-
3), 1 26


■» ■*


i 7 8


Index


*

Qilij Tamghdj Khdn (reigned 1095-1101),
1 19, no, 1 17

Qiwdmu’I-Mulk Nizdmu’d-Din Abu Nasr
Hibatu’lldh (xi), Jin., 117
Quadraparlite of Ptolemy, 165
Qubddhiydn, 39 n. *

Quddma b, Ja'far (stylist, d. 948-9), 14,

103

Quhandiz (near Bukhdrd), 105
Qum, 19
Qdmis, idn.

-Qur’an, a n,, 30., ^n., 11 n., 14, 15, 16,
i9 n -> 2 3> H> *5, 26 . 77— 8 » 8 3> io S>
106, 107, 135 n-
Qurasht, Amir Abti ‘Abdu’llah — , 48
Qurra (of Harran), 148 '

Qdshqln Tdyqu, Gur-Khdn, 109 r

Qu(bu’d-Din Muhammad Khwarazm-
shdh, 158 ; — b. ‘Izzu’d-Dln Husayn
(Ghririd, xii), 31 and n., 59 n.,’ 61 n.,
08 n., 101, 120 *>

Ibn Qutldbugha, xxo '

Qutuimush, Amir Shihabu’d -Din — (Sal-
jdq, d. x 064) , 52, 125-6
Qutuz-Malik-Muzaflfar (xiii), 1*7


Rabban-Tabarf^ ‘All b. — (teacher of
* Razl and author of Fir daw su' l-Hikmat,
ix), 149 and n.

Radiyyu’d-Dln ofNlshapdr (poet), 127
Rdfidls, 56, 59. See ShPites
Rdfi‘ 1 , Abu’l-Qdsim of Nfshdpur (poet),
eg n., 30, 120 ,

Rdshidi (poet), 30, 116
Rashldl of Samarqand (pbet), 30, 52-3,
ix8, 127

Rashldu’d - Din dFadlu’Ildh (minister,
physician, historian and patron of
learning, xiv), 137

Rashidu’d-l 5 ln Walwdt (poet ajid pro-
sodist], 1*4, 105, ri6, xi8, 124
Rasis, See -Rdzi
Ra’su’l-'Ayn, 147 n. See Sergiu^
Ratdna (a jargon), 147
Raverty, Major H. G. -», din., 101 n,,
120-1, 127

Rawandi’s history of the Saljiiqs, entitled
Rdhaiu’s-Sudur, ft 7
Rawdnshdhi, 59. See ‘Amid Safiyyli’d-
Dln

Raivdatiil-Janndl ft Ta'rikhi Herdt by
Mu'inu’d-Dln oflsfizdr (xv), 101
Rawlioson, 146

Ray, id, 17, 19, 48, 85, 107, 122, 125,
i2 d, 149, 150, xd3
Abti Rayhan. See -Blrtinl
Kazan, Gate of — at Tus, 59
-Rdzi, AbdBakr Muhammad b. Zakariyyd
(the greatphysician, known to mediaeval
Europe as Rasis, Rhazes, etc.), 78,
79. 80, 83-5, 114, 148-153, r£ 4 , 155
Rtbanjani, AbuVAbbds (poet, x), 29,
ir4


Ribat-i-Sangln, 28

Abd Ridd b. ‘Abdu’s-Saldm of Nishdptfr
(fl. xn6-7), 9

Ridd-quli Khan Hiddyat (xix). See
Farhang-i-Anjuman-ard, Majma-
‘u’l-Fusahd

Rleu, Dr Ch. — (British Museum Arabic,
Persian and Turkish Catalogues), 14 n.,
54m, 62 n., 63 n., 79 n., 129, 13 6n.,
158, 163

Abii Rijd, Shah — - (poet), 30, 1x7;
— Ahmad b. ‘Abdu’s-Samad-'Abidl
(fl.iixo-nix : his grandfather was also
called Abu Rijd), 36
Rosen, Baron Victor — , 134
Ross, Sir E. Denisoff — , 24 n., 134, 137
Rudagl, (the earliest celebrated Persian
poSt, x), «4, 29, 32, 34-6, 113-4, I2X
Rudbdr, Gate of — at Tus, 59
Ruknu’d-Dawla (Buwayhid, x), 91 n.,
/Si *

Rum (Asia Minor), Saljiiqs of — , 125
Rdna, 117
Rustam, 36

Sabeeans, 148 and n.

-Sdbi, 14, 154 n.

Sabjfktigin. See Subuktigin
Sabzawdr, 29 n.

Sachau, Dr E. — , 36 n., 62 n., 85 n.,
88n., 128, 129, 15311. See also under
-Athdru’l-Baqiya and -Binini
de Sacy, S. — , 109

§adaqa b. Mazyad, “King of the Arabs,”

Sad Bab of -Sajzi (on Astronomy), 62,
129; — oPAbu Sahl-Masihl (onMedi-
ci»e), 79. JS5

Abii Sa‘d b. Hindi! of Isfahan, Zaynu’l-
Mulk (d. 1112-3), 36; — Jarrah, Amir
— (fl. r 1 12-3), 71
Sa'di of Shlrdz, rod, 139
Sadr-i-Jahdn, no-112. See Burhdn,
House of — , several of whom bore
this name, while one (tn, 1. 12) was
nick-named Sadr-i-Jahannam
Sadru’d-Din Muhammad b. Mu?affar
(grandson of Nizaniu’l-Mulk, d. 1117-
8), 72

Saffdrid dynasty (8d7~9oo), 28 and n.,
ti3. See also under ‘Amr, Layth and
Ya'qiib

Saghdni, Saghdniydn, See Chaghdni,
Chaghdmybn

Sdgharchi. See under Najjdr supra
Sagzi (or Sajzi or Sijazi, a native of
Sistdn, g.v.), 40
§dhib. See Isma’il b. ‘Abbbd
Sahib. -Hasan, 114. Probably an error
for Shahid b. -Husayn of Balkh, g.v.
Abti Sahl -Masihi (Avicenna’s master,
d. 1000), 79 and n., 85-7, J28, 155;
— Sa‘id, see -Nil!


Index


179


Abu Sa‘fd Ahmad -Sajzi (astronomer,
d. 886), 62 and,n., 63, 129; — ‘Ubay-
du’lldh (physician, d. 1058-9), 145
St Petersburg? 128

Sajzi. See above' under Sagzi and Abd
Sa‘id and below under Sistan ,
Salemann, 33 n., 128
Salyana, Hindu system of Astrology, 1 66
Salldmi, 4 *bii ‘All — -Bayhaqi (d. 912-
3), 26 and n., 113

Saljuq, House of — , 23-4, 26, 48, 104,
116, 118, 125, 126, 127
Salmdn, grandfather of the poet Ma'stid-
i-Sa‘d, q.v. ; Khwdja — , 50
Sdm (legendai'y hero of Persia), 54 ; — ,
Bahd'u’d-Din (Gmirid), 101
Sdmdn, House of — , 15-17, 28 n., 29,
32, 33, 34, 82, 83, 104, i(?5, 107* 109,
no, ri2, 159, i< 5 i, 162
-Sam‘dni’s Ansab , 7m., 78 n., 104, 113,

114, ir6n., n8n.,!*27n.

Samarqand, 24, 33, 36, 60, xo8, 113, 114,

1 1 5, ir6, 118, 122, 126, 150
Samd’u’d-Dawla (ICakwayhid, xi), 163
Sain'u’z-Zahl r, by Baha’u’d-Din-Zahiri

(xi-xii), 127

Sand’i, Abu’l Majd Majdiid — (poet, d.

1150), 30, 51m, 117, 118 •»

Sanjar b. Malikshah (Saljtiq, 1117-1157),
23, 24, 45, 69, 72 n., 74, 93, 96, 103,
108, t 16, 119, 120, 124
Sarakh (?), Shaykh Abtc Ja'far — , 91
Sarakhs, 115

- . ..r.j j,.t (Biography of

Sasanian dynasty (m-vii), ^5, 29, 57 n.,
146

Sayfu’d-Dawla Mahmxid b. Sultan ibrd-
him (Ghaznawi, fl. 1080), 49, 51
Sayfu’d-Din Sdri (Ghiirid, xii), 31 n., 101,
120

Ibn Sayydr (physician), 154
Sayyida (mother of Majdu’d-Dawla the
Buwayhid prince of Tabaristdn), 162
Sayyidu’r-Ru’asd (secretary, xi), 14, 104
Schefer, M. Ch. — , 24 n., 121, 132 n.
Schlimmer’s Tenninologie, 56 n., 77 n.
S6dillot, 132 a.

Ibn Serapion, 155

Sergius of Ra’s ‘Ayn (fl. 536), 147 and n.
Shoh-dbdd (modern site of Jundi-Sdbur),
146

Shdhanshdh, Shdhinshdh (ancient title re-
vived by Buwayhids), 19, 90, 92, 162-3
Shahid b. Husayn of Balkh (poet aftd
philosopher), 114

Shahna (prefect or political resident), 109
Shdhndma (of Firdawsi), 54, 55, 57, 124
-Shahrazdrl, Shamsu’d-Din Muhammad
— , author of a History of Philosophers
(xiii), 129, 136

-Shahristdni’s Kitdbu'l-Milalwa’n-Nihal,

59 n -


Shahriydr (of the House of Bawand), 57
and n., 58

Shahrzdd, error for Shahriydr, 57 n.
Shams-i-Fakhri (lexicographer), 33 n.
Shatjts-i-Qays (prosodist), 115
Shams-i-Tabasf (poet), 127
Shamsu’d-Dawla b. Fakhru’d-Dawla
(Kdkawayhid, patron of Avicenna, xi),

156, '63

Shamsu’d-Din Muhammad b. Fakhru’d-
j Din Mas'dd (Ghiirid, xii), 2 andn., 73-
5, 98, IOt-2 1

Shansab, House of — (1148-12x5), 1, 30,
74 n., 98, xoi-'i

^Shdpiir I (Sdsdnian king, iii), 146
Sharafu’l-Mulk Ab# Sa‘d Muhammad
■» (secretary to Malikshdh, xi), 104
Sharif-i-Mujallidi of Gurgan (poet), 29,

113 2

Abii Sharif Ahmad b. ‘Ali (name given to
t)ie poet’ mentioned above by ‘Awfi ip
his LtMb) y 29 m

Shatranji, ‘All — (poet, xii), 30, 118
-Shaykhu’r-Ra’is. See Avicenna
-Shifd (of Avicenna), 63, 92, 156, 158
Shihdbi (poet, xi-xii), 30, 119
Shihabu’d Dawla. See Hughra Khdn
Shihabu’d-Din (or Mu'iz/.u’d-DIn)
Ghliri (fl . 1163), xox-2 ; — Qutulmush
Alp Ghdzi, Amir — , 52, 125-6
ShPites, 57, iii, 147. See also Rdfidis
Shiqq (“Half-man”), 9 n.

Sfcirde, 90, 95, 129

Shirley, Ralph — , 99, 130, 132, 164, 167
- Shi'r , Kitdbftsh — , by Abu’l-Faraj
Quddma (x), 103

« " "" * ' error


(•fl.

1 1 14), 69 4

Slnishtar, 146

Silsildbu' dh-Dhahab (by Jdmi, 1485),
82 n., 93 n., 159, 161
Slmd’u’l-Kabir ^(client of Amir Isma'il-i-
■Sdmani), 12 1

Simjdr, Abu ‘Ali — „(x), 15, 106
Simnak, 16
Sim- Tdqd, 53
Ibn Sind. See Avicenna
Sindn b. Thdbit b. Qurra of Harrdn
(scholar and translator, d. 942-3), 148
Sind, 20

Stndibdd-ndma, 125, 127
Sipihri, ‘Ail — (poet), 290., 30, 52
Sfstdn, 34, 39, 44, 5m-i 59 n., 106, 117,
119

Stita ‘ashar (“the Sixteen Treatises” of
Galen), 79

de Slane, Baron McGuckin — , see Ibn
Khallikdn, who is cited throughout in
his translation

Steinschn eider, Moritz—, 150, 157


Index


r8o


Stephanus philosophus, 154
le Strange, Guy — , 24 n., inn.

Sit (fortress ancl prison), sr n.

Subuktigin (father of Sultdn Mahmdd-i-
Ghaznawi, x), 15, 106, 109 „

Stiffs, 163
Sughd, 1 14, 1 18
Sughdi (poet), 29 n., 30
Suhayli, Ahmad b. Muhammad — (patron
of Avicenna), 161

-Sulami (author of TabaqAt-i-Stifiyya ),f»
163 P

Sulaymdn (first Saljdq ruler of Asia
Minor), 125 ; — of Damascus (discipje '
of Avicenna), 92 r

Sultanshah b. fhawurcl (Saljdq of
Kirmdn, d. 1083-4), 124; — b. IF
Arsldn b. Atsiz Khwdrazmshdh, 102
Sunnis and ShPa, m-112
Surkhakati, Majdu’d-Din Muhammad b.

. ‘Adndn (unde of ‘Awfl and” author of
a lost history of the Khaniyya dynasty),
126

Surra man ra’a, 85 n., 161 n.

Susiana (Khdzistan), 146 *

Suter, Dr Heinrich — (author of Die
Mathemaiikerf und Astronomen der
Araber und ihre Werke), 130
Sdzani (poet, xii), no, 127
Syntaxis , 165
Syria, 95

Syriac language, 147, 148, 153

Tabaqat-i-Ad;iV/, in.,6in., loz, 102,
I2o— 1, 127 ; — -i~Sku‘c 9 d, see Sallami
and Dawlatshah ; — -i-Siifiyya (of
-Sulami), 163 9
Tabardn (Tils), 54, 58, 59
-Tabari {tfce historian), 104, 146; —
"(physician, teacher of -Rdzi). gee ‘All
b. Rabbin

Tabarlstdn, 14m, 30, 57, 103, 122, 156;
History of — by Xbn Isfandiyat? 103

*

work), 127 '

Tafhim (astronomical work by -Birdni),
62, 64 n., 117, 130, 132 n.

Tahawi (?Tukhari, poet), 29, 115
Tdhir, House of — (ix), 1 13 ; — b. Fadl,

’ Abu’l-Muzaffar — (d. 987), 123 ; — b.
‘Ali b. Muslikdn, Thiqatu’l-Mulk —
(fl. 1106), 51, 117

Tdju’l-Isldm. See Ahmad b. ‘Abdu’l-
‘Aziz

Tdju’l-Tardjim (by Ibn Qutlubugha), 1 10
Takmila (work on mathematics by Abd
Man$rir-Baghdddi, d. 1037), 62
Tdlaqdn, 103, 107

Abu Tdlib- ‘ Alawi (IVasir, patient of
Avicenna), 157

Tamghaj (place), 9, 102-3 > — Khan,

" I2S


-Taniikhi (author of - Faraj ba'da'sh-
Shidda), J49 «

Tapghach (“ worshipful ” = Chinese),
£ 02-3 r
Taqiyyu’d-Din Kashi (biographer of
* poets), 1 16, n8, 124
Tarassul (Epistolary models) of Qabds b.

Washmgir (d. 1012-3), 14 and n.
Tarabi (rebellion of — , 1238-9), 111
Ta’rikh -i-Al/l (1591-2), 138; — -i-
Bnkhdrd (Arabic original composed in
943-4, Persian translation in 1 1 78-9),
no; see also -Narshakhi ; — -i-
Guzlda (composed in 1330 by Ham-
du’llah Mustawfi # of Qazwin), 18 n.,

74n., 113, 117, 119m, 138, 162; z-

Hukamd of -Qifti (1227-1248), 78 n.,
93 m, 12^11., 137, 145; see also -Qifti,
Shahraziiri ; — -i-Jahdn-drd (by the
Qadi Ahmad-i-Ghaffdri), 52 n., 109,
in", 127', 162 i-Jahdn-gttshdy (by
Juwayni, 1260), 109, in, 127, 137;
— -i-MasHldi (by Abu’l-Fadl-i-Bay-
haqi), ns, 162; — i-Ycmiinl (by
-‘Utbi, xi),«;9 n., 127
Tartars, Tatars, 157 ; see Mongols
Task (general), 16-18
Tet*abiblos (by Ptolemy), 165


Dahr, ro6, 113, 115, rr6, 134
Thabit b. Qurra (scholar of Harrdn, b.
836, d. got), 62, 78, 93 n., 148; also
his grandson — b. Sindn (d. 942-3), 148
Theodosius, Bishop — (ix), 147
Thimaru'l-Qitlub (by -Tha'dlibi), 114*
Thicfatu’l-Mulk Tdhirb. ‘All b. Muslikdn,
5G n 7

Tibb-i-Mansdri (by -Razi), 78 and n.
Tiliran, 149
Tirmidh, 39 m

Tisha, the son of — (poet), 29 n., 30
Transoxiana ( Mdwara'a'n-Nahr ), 9, 18,
24, 26, 27, 39m, 52, S3, 61, 69, 102,
104, 109, no, 112-113, 1 18, £22, 125,
126-7

Tughdnshdh b. Alp Arsldn (Saljdq),
48-9, 123; — b. Mu’ayyad Ay-aba
(crowned 1173-4), 48 n., 123
Tughril (Saljuq), 104, 119, 125, 138
Tughshdda (King), 121
Tuhfalu’i-Muliik ( of -Rdzi), 80, 150
Tuhfatid l-MA’minin (by Muhammad
'Md’min-Idusayni, 1669), 34 n.
Tukhdristdn, 101

Turkdn Kbdtun (mother of Muhammad
Khwdrazmshdh), nr
Turkistdn, 9, 240., 52, 112-113, See
also Transoxiana
Turks, 9, no
Turuq (near Tus), 45
Tds, 45. 55. 57. 58, 59. 7°. 87


Index


i 8 i


‘Uhnydit'lldh '■■'•v .V . ' the family
'f II \’v \ ■ : V . 7 and n

At' - |TT1 J J ’ "'’••id, pupil and
‘55. ‘57-8

1 . '■ ■ ' ' Her), 103

Uljdytu (Khudd-banda, 1303-1316), i*,o,
in

‘Umar-i-Khayyam, or -Khayyam! (the
astronomer-poet, d. 1122 or 1132), 71,

72; 74, 1 1 4, 134-140,156 ; — b. ‘Abdu’l-
‘Aziz b. Marwan (of the House of q
Burhan, fl. 1275), no; — b. Mns'ud
(of the same family, xiii), in
Umayyads, tor, 104

‘Unsur! (poet, xi), ^4, 29 n., 30, 38, 118, -
, 119, 162

Urgdnj (Gurgdnj, Jurjiniyya), 128.9,

Uri’s Catalogue of Arabic TiiSS. in the
Bodleian Library, 152
Urinoscopy (tafsira), 142
Ibn Ab! Usaybi'a (biographer of physi-
cians, xiii), 82 n , 93 n., 129, 130, 145,
146, 147 n., 150, 153, 154, 156, 157,

, 158, 159 m

Ush, 113 *’

-‘Utb! (author of - Tdrlkhu'l-Yamlnl ),
104, 127, 162 n.

‘Uthmdn Mukhtdr! (poet), 30, 51 nr>

‘ Uytinu’l- Inbd. See above under Ibn
, Ab! Usaybi’a
Uzkand, 113


Van VI ft ' Uliu/i),

870. ( ■ 147

Virchow’

o

Wajiristdn, 50

Walfd b. Mughfra, 25 "•

Warsd, Warsdd, 60, 61

Whinfield, E. H. (ed. and transl. of
‘Umar-i-KhayySm’s Quatrains), 13611.

Wilson’s Dictionary of Astrology, 164

Wis u Ildmln (romantic poem by Fakhri
of Gurgdn), 119

Withington’s Medical History etc., 145

Woepcke’s VAlglbre d'Omar Alkhay-
y&mi , 137, 138

Wright, Dr W. — (Syriac Literature ),
146, 147

Wiistenfeld’s Gesch, d. Arab. Aerzte,
62 n,, 64 n., 78 n., 79 n., 81 n., 145,
146, 147. .‘55; ed. of -Qazwint’s
AtharuH-BilcUl, no


Yddigar (Medical “Memoranda” by
Sayyid Isma'il Jurjani, d. about 1136),
80, 158


Yaljyd b. Aktham (ix), 21 ; Bannak!

(ix), 96 ; — Mdsawayh (physician, ix),
147 ; — b. Bukht-YislnV III (ix), 145

Yamtnu’d-Dawla, see Mahmdd, Sultstn
-4- Ghaznaw!

Y a‘qubb. Ishaq -Kind! (the “Philosopher
of the Arabs, d. 873), 64-5, 129, 130 ;
— b. Layth (Saffdrid, 867-878), 28 n.,
“3

Ydqdt (Dictionary of Learned Men), 103,
105, 106, 114, ^62 n.; (Geographical
Dictionary), 29m, 54m, in, 150

Yaranqush Hartwa (general, fl. 1152), 74
and n. 0

Yaiimatu' d- Dahr (by -Tha'alibl, xi),
1411., 150., 1060113, 154; Supple-

"> ment ( Tatimma ) to the same, 1150.,
116

-Yazdddf, Abu’l-Hasan -fAH b. Muham-
mad (editor of the letters of Qdbiis b.
-Washmgfr, d. 1012), 103

Yazdigirdu-Shahriydr (the last Sdsanian
king), 57

Year amongst the Persians by E. G.
Brown3, 511., 8n., 9m, 80 n.

Yule’s Marco Polo , 108


Zabulistan, 15

ZAdu'l-'Arifln (by the Shaykh ‘Abdu’lldh
Ansiri, xi), 163

Zahiri, Baha’u’d-Din — of Samarqand
’ (fl. 1203), 125, 127
Zahiru’d Din Abu’l-IIasan b. Abi 1-
Qasim (xi),42g
Zal (father of Rustam), 54
Zanjan, 122 -,

Zaranj, 51 n.

Abu Zayd-Balkhi (geographer), 83 n.
Zaynab, the Lady — (xi), 53
Zaynu’?-Mulk, Abu Sa‘d b. Hindii (xii),

36

Zeno. Emperor — (fl. 488), 146
Zhuk Jvski, V. — , 134, 135, 137, 138, 139
Z ! j -i- Kt'tshyarJ^ x) , 130; — i-Malikshahl

(xi), 139

Zfla, Abu Mansur b. — (d. 1048), 92 and

n., 157 .

Zinatf (poet, xi), 30, 115, 116
Ziydrid dynasty of Tabaristdn (x-xi),
149. See also Qdbiis b. Washmglr
Zohdb, 146 n.

Zoroaster, 128, 129
Zoroastrians, 147, 154, 157
Zotenberg, Hermann — • (translator into
French of -BaPaml’s Persian version of
-Tabari), 104


7


* •


*


INDEX OF TECHNICAL TERMS EXPLAINED
OR DISCUSSED IN THE NOTES


4611. ‘ lj.a.1
* '

1

I 44 ‘

#1

7 ‘ cCl

33 n - ‘OV** 1

1 08 * U i*.iUr> \

*

9411. ‘jllwt

7

* xi *»UI

• 108 1

140 1

r * 0 »

140 ‘ LL-Jl

9611.

*

’ 2,2 ‘ 4 }ljjl

* gin. ‘^jCT

6 4 ^>11 M.J

1 *T* ( 'T J

< ’ .

49 n. ‘j A«Jb

33 n - Co-^. 3 ^

33 ‘Otyt

2 * jlyJ

33 n - O


O


108 ( j£i ‘ <43

•

* 142 ‘

33 n - ‘ d)Cjji

<$

Vc


49 ^‘O^jKt

53

c

46 n.


C

#>


33 n -


142 ‘jUfc.

*1

c

I 43

64, I30-I, l66

22

49 n - ‘

8 ‘JCi-

35^’ Xo-

143 ‘4-j.kjLL

142 ‘ J*L

J 43 > *44 ‘ &

108 ‘ L5 **>>

108 ‘ Ljj

141 ‘(u**)

I 4 gn. ‘ o'*-*!


9 COj-» a>


f


Index of Technical Terms 183

§


j‘j


143 1

I42 ‘ w! >_)*y

5 ‘ — d gjj


, 34 n. *Vtrfj

33 1 O^J

•

ur*

*

7811.

140

f 142

64, 131, 164‘SjUuJI

4911 . 1 ^U-iSUi „

144 1

6on. * 53 64, 67-8, 13T,

• •

i# 4~7 riiir


•

•

49 n. ( £

•

• ✓ ✓

132, 167 ‘kjj^

33 and n. ^o^iL-Jhiii

2 2 £ A , v ^ jj

9

144 ‘ wJdl jSxil


•* f \^jO


13 2 ‘ Wj^j

W^sJh-Ls

132 ‘ < — 9j_i i^^Lo


6411.5

•

, I30-I, 1 66


i»


•

•

* 22, 108


re •

•

144

19a : ^JkJ-o 4

l jL*AJt ^ 0>^'

ion. 142,

143 ‘CM* *

6n. ‘dXix

141 ‘(u^)

144

• 9 4)14.


1 18 ‘j5LaM ‘ejlai


7n., 9

• 142 ‘

143 ‘lilji

142 ‘ ,J-ai

36n. £ C*».Lai

780. £

5 n. ‘uJL^I iUi ‘ jyU’jll iUi

56 n. £ />Ui

gin.

4n M 5 ‘>*i)l >iUi

S


%


Index of Technical Terms


6, 164 ‘ajJU. P 4$S

141 j >\^3

!?3 ‘

8 ‘ *4^5

6, 164 ‘Sjiib

8 ‘ aiaiU- c 4ji

8 1 4 ^.La*wO * 4^5

8 ‘ *4^5

6, 164 ‘ afiwU e 4^s

6 ‘ 4jJ^> '4^5

7^ aibijjco *433

7 ‘ P 4 y


6, 164 [ a^U p 4y


J


5 ‘4)1^41*^

33 ‘ t ^ i ^ =3 7 1 1

132, 167 ‘ U«i.jk£s


" J


1 43; 144


, 6 ‘

60 n. ‘s£JLt«

36n. ‘,iU»£o

4611. ‘ ^ 4

144

■» / 0 J

4in. ‘aJUy

22, 108 1

^ y J ^ 0 J

. 143; 144 ^ ft * 1 t-0

3611 ‘(JjUsu*

1711* aaLLd

22, 108 ‘j^oljjLor.

Ml J - 6 J

T 43

108 ‘ gy *-«

1 16 ‘^ju

22, 108 t ( _ 5 £Lo

T 4 T ‘ fu*a*j) ^*-><0

17

34 n *


"

4611. ‘ j^,C


„o


9 (

78 ‘dAjU

143; 144

35 n.

141 c (u^-y)

I08 ^AamJ


i £'*‘3


91 n. ( 4 jD

7i» i3 z -3 . i6 4 i 167

8 ' j *3


CAMBRIDGE : PRICED BY J. B. PEACE, M.A., AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS


r


OTHER WORKS, INCLUDING TRANSLATIONS,
BY THE AUTHOR OF THIS BOOK


•

A Traveller’s Narrative written to illustrate the Episode of

the B&b. Edited in the original Persian, and translated into English, with an
Introduction and Explanatory Notes, in two volumes. Vol. I, Persian Text,
pp. vt\+iv. 5 s. net. Vol. n, English Translation and Notes, pp, lv + 447.
* (Out of print.) Cambridge University Press, 1891.

A Year amongst the Persians: Impressions as to the Life,
Character tind Thought of the People of Persia, rKqived during twelve months’
residence in that country in the years 1887-8. Pp. x + 594. Published at 2 u.
London: A. and C. Black, 1893. (Out of print, f


The Ta’*fkh-i-Jadfd or New History of # Mfrz& ‘Alf Muham-
mad the Bdb... translated fron» the Persian, with an Introduction, Illustrations
nnd Appendices Pp.^n + 459+41 Price m. 6 d. net. Cambridge University


Press, 1893. * 1

A Catalogue of the Persian Manuscripts in the Library of
the University of Cambridge.'* Pp. xl + 472. Price 17 s. net. Cambridge
University Press, 189G.

A Hand-list of the Muhammadan Manuscripts in the
Library of tITe University of Cambridge, Pp. xviii + 440. Price vjs. Get. net.
Cambridge University Press, 1900.

A Hand-list, arranged alphabetically under the titles, of
the Turkish and other printed and lithographed books presented by
Mrs E, J. W. Gibb to the Cambridge ■University Library. Pp, viii + 87.
Price 5 s. net. Cambridge University Press,, 1906.

A Literary History of Persia. Vol. i, from the earliest times
until Fivdawsl. Pp. xiv + 521. Vol. 11, from Firdawsl to Sa’di. Pp. xiv + 568.
Price i*j. Get. each. London: T. Fisher Umvifl, 1902 and 1906,


An Abridged* Translation of the History of Tabaristan .

of Muhammad ibn Hagut ibn Isfandiyar, being Vol. 11 of the “L. J. M. Cnbb
Memorial Series.” Pp. xv + 356. Price 8 j. London: Luaacand Co., 1905*

The Persian Revolution of xgdS-1909. Pp. xxvi + 47 °- With 46

illustrations. Priceior.net. Cambridge University Press, 1910. (Out of print.)

The Press and Poetry of Mtodern Persia, partly based on
the Manuscript Work of MlrzA Muhammad ‘All “Tarbiyat of Tabriz. Pp-
xl + 447+ » . Price 1 «. net. Part II, containing specimens of the Ioliticaland
Patriotic Poetry of modern Persia, separately, fif. net. Cambridge University
Press, 1914. * .

Materials for the Study of the Bdbf Religion. Pp. xxiy + 380,
S is illustadSs and Lsimiles. Price rfi, net. Cambridge University
Press, 1918. . .

A History of Persian Literature under Tartar Dominion

PAD 1265-1502), being the continuation of the Literary History of Persia
mentioned above. Pp. xvi+ 586. With r 2 illustrations. Price 35 r. net. Cam-
bridge University Press, 1920.

Revised Translation of the Chahar Maqala (“ Four Discourses )
of Nizami-i-’Ariidi of Samarqand, followed by an abridge^ translation of
Mirza ’Muhammad’s' Notes to the Persian Text, w w : ,£° n b ; Vol. xi/2.

Arabian Medicine, being the FteF.triek Lectures

College of Physicians in 1919 and 1920. Ip. vm+i 3 ». wun - v
Cambridge University Press, 1921. •
