GOVERNMENT  OR  INDIA
ARCH/€OLOGICAL  SURVEY  OP  INDIA
CENTRAL
ARCHEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY
ACCESSION  NO
CALL  N„.  ChlSL
DIALOGUES  OF  THE  BUDDHA
PART  V
^EOlRtCTO^
FURTHER
DIALOGUES  OF  THE
BUDDHA_^/J.  A
'TRAmi.ATETi  FROM  THE  PALI  OF
rUE  MAJJHIMA  NJKATA
BY
LORD  CHALMERS
O.C.B.
SOMSriMB  QOVBHOft  Of  CBTbW
9219
Dgsu  /
Y-Hif
IN  TWO  VOLUMES
VOL.  II
3Po-3
LONDON
HUMPHREY  MILFORD
OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  AMEN  CORNER,  B.C
1^7
Ci:NTRAL  ARCHAe:OLOGIGA%
UBRAKY.NLW
Aoc,  No. .  ..  . . .
lato... . V?rB:r^7  ...,
_
*•*  •!

P>n«T8»  IK  Gi»AT  BmtaW


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  II.


/

M

i

?


r

t

Gi


B.  Majjhima-i>a^hiXsa.

III.  Paribb&jaha  continued.

BOTT*

77.  MahA-Sakulud^yi  ....

The  to  pupils'  esteem.

78.  Samasa-ManpikA

The  suckliag.  •"  *'  *

7^.  Cupa-SakuludAyi  ....

SO'Cailed  perfection.

So.  Vekhawassa .

More  60'CAlled  perfection.

IV.  Raja  Vagga.

81.  GhaTJkARA  ...

The  potter’s  devotion,

82.  RaTTHAPAia .

Of  renouncing  the  world.

83.  MaKHAdeva  .  -  .  .  •

Of  cnaioceining  great  traditioos.

84.  . .

Brahmin  claims.

85.  Bor>iC-BLAjAKt?MARA  ,  .  •  '

Aptness  to  lean.

86.  Akgulimaxa .

The  baodlt'e'convereioo,

87.  PitX-jAttka  .  -

NulUoi  rei  affecrue.


rAce

I

12

16

21


23

28

39

43

46

50


.  •>

t


V


VI


PUKTIIER  D(AIX)(iUHS  OK  TltE  IlUt>l>HA.


8VTTA

88.

Baijitika .

PAoa

‘  59

8$.

On  demeanour.

DuAMMA'CI"J'1YA

4

62

9a

Monuments  of  the  I)CM:irine.

KaI^'IjJAKA’ITIIALA

%

66

9'*

Omoiscionce  and  omnipotence.

V.  Jirahmaifa

BkahMAVU  ....

•

.  70

92.

The  superinan,

Sei.a .

.

93*

The  real  superman.

Ass  ALA  YANA  ....

84

94*

BrabroiD  pretensions.

Ghotamukiia  ....

89

9.V

Against  torturing.

Canki  .  ’  .

%

93

y6.

Brahmin  pretensions.

EsokAri .

%

100

97'

Birth's  invidious  bar.

DhanaSjAni  ....

•

,  .  103

98.

The  world's  claims,

Vasettha .

•

.  108

99*

The  real  Itrahaiin.

SUBHA  .  .  -  .  .  .

•  H3

too.

Real  union  with  BrabmS.

SangArava  ....

.  120

Yes,  there  are  g>:»^s.


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  11


vn


C.  UpaRI-PAJ5HJASA.

(Tbe  third  ‘fifty'  Sattas,  in  five  V^fgas  or  sections,— the  pen*
ultimate  Vagga  coatamiog  not  ton  but  twelve  Suttas.)


I.  Devadaka  Vagga

SOTTA

lot.  Devaoaha

Jain  fatuities.

102.  PaS’CA-TTAYA  .

Warrifig  schools.

103.  Kinti  ....

Odium  theologicum.

104.  Samacawa

Unity  and  concord.

105.  SUNAKKHATTA  .

Leechcraft.

106.  AnaIJja-sappaya

Real  permanence.

toy.  Ga^aka-MoggallAna
Step  by  step.

to8.  Gopaka-MoggallAna
Gotama’e  successor.

109.  MAHA-PUItNAMA

Tbe  Personality  craze.

no.  C0LA“PUI?VAMA  .

Bad  men  and  good.

II.  Anttpada

111,  AnupaDA  ....

Tbe  complete  course.

112.  Chabbisodhana

The  sixfold  scrutiny.


PAoa

123
.  131
.  136

.  *39

.  145

•  *5'

•  154

•  '59

.  164
.  567


•  170


173


Viij  FURTHER  niALOGUES  OF  THE  BUDDHA.


SOTtA  FA6S

113.  Sappukisa . 177

Attitudes,  good  aod  bad.

1 14.  Sbvitabda-asevitabba  -  .  .180

Wbat  doM  it  lead  to  ?

115.  Bahu-dhAtuka . 188

Diverse  approaches.

116.  IsiGJLl . 192

A  nominal  list.

117.  Maha-cattarisaka . 194

Right  views  rank  (irst

118.  Anapana-sati . 199

On  breathing  exerdses.

119.  KxyaoatA-sati . 205

Meditation  on  the  bodj.

120.  SaNKHAR-UPPATTI . 21 1

Plastic  forces.


IH.  SuHflata  Vagga.


121.  C0;a-8URRata . 214

True  solitude. — I.

122.  MahX-SuSRata . 2t7

True  solitude.— II.

J23.  AcCHaRIY-ADBHUTA-DHAKUA  .222

Wonders  of  the  nativtff.

124.  Bakkula  226

A  saint’s  record.  •

125.  DAHTA-BHt^MI . 229

Diaoiplice.

126.  BhCmija . 236

Right  outlook  essential.

127.  Anuruddha  .  .  .  .  239

As  they  have  sown —


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  It.


IX


SOTTA

1 2$.  Upakkjlesa  ....

Strife  And  blemish

129.  B  Ala-fa  ?ii>iT A  ....

Wisdom  and  folly.

130.  Disvaduta  ....

Heaven’s  warning  znesseogecs.

iV.  Vihh&nga  Vagga.

131.  Biiaddekaratta

True  saint -^I.

132.  Ananda-bhaDDEKaratta  .

True  saint. — 11.

I  33.  M  AH  AK  ACC  AN  A-n  a  ADDE  JCARATTA
True  saint.— III.

1 34.  Lomas AKANtii  va-b  haddekaiiatt a

True  sainL — IV.

135.  CU^-A-KAMHA-VIBHANOA

Our  heritage  from  our  past. — 1-

136.  Maha-kamma-vibhanga

Our  heritage  from  our  past— 11.

137.  Salavatana-vibhanqa

Senses  and  objects  of  sense.

138.  U  DDES  A-VI  BHANG  A  .

A  summary  expanded.

139.  AftAftlA-VIBHANOA

Calm.

140.  DhAtu-vibhanga

The  six  dements  eicponoded.

14 1.  Sacca-vibhanca

The  synopsis  of  truth.

142.  Dakkhiva-vibhanga

Analyse  of  alm^visg.


244

245

255

261

263

263

267

268
272
278
283
236
290
296

-  299-


X


PORTHER  DIALOGUES  OP  THE  BUDDHA.


V.  Sal&vatana  Vofp-a.

SOTTA  '

143-  Anathai'iijidik-ovada
Aoathapin^ika’s  eod.

144.  Chann-OvAi>a  ....

Channa’s  suicide.

*45.  Pun^hDvAda  ....

CouD$e)  to

146.  Nandak-OVAIm

Kaodaka’s  bomjly  to  alms  women.

147.  Cola- Rahul- ov ADA  .

Tha  transitory,

148.  Cha-chakka  ....

Tba  six  sixes.

149.  MahA-sa;Ayatanika

Domains  of  sense.

150.  NaGARA'VWDEVYA  .

Cntidam  of  ‘  Wanderers. '

151.  Pi^papATa-pArisuddhi

Perils  of  tbe  daily  round.

152.  Ikdriva-bhAvahA

Culture  of  faculties.


MCI

.  302

•  305

•  307

•  30^

•  3*3

•  3*5

•  319

.  320

•  323

•  324


Index  (By  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids)


32S


LXXVII.  MAHA-SAKULUDAYI-SUTTA.


THE  KEY  TO  PUPILS*  ESTEEM.

[II.  I]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
wae  staying  at  I^jagaha  in  the  Bamboo  Grove  where
the  squirrSs  were  fed,  there  were  living  In  the  Wan¬
derers’  Pleasaunce  where  the  peacocks  were  fed  a
number  of  most  eminent  Wanderers, — such  as  Anu-
gara,  Varadhara  and  Sakulud&yi,  together  with  other
very  well-known  Wanderers.  In  the  morning  early,
duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  the  Lord  went  into
Rsjagaha  for  alms;  but,  deeming  the  hour  too  early
as  yet  for  this,  he  bethought  him  of  going  to  Saku-
ludiyi  in  Wanderers  Pleasaunce;  and  thither  he
repaired.  At  the  time,  Sakuludayi  was  sitting  with
a  great  company  of  Wanderers,  who  were  making  a

Sat  noise  ,  .  .  (eU.  as  in  SuUa  76,  ad  init.)  .  .  .
about  being  and  not-being.  When  from  some  way
Sakuludayi  saw  the  Lord  coming,  he  hushed  his
company  by  saying :  Be  quiet,  sirs ;  do  not  make  a
noise  ;  nere  comes  the  recluse  Gotama,  who  is  a  lover
of  silence  and  commends  the  silent ;  if  he  observes
silence  reigning  in  this  gathering,  he  may  decide  to
approach,  So  they  became  silent  and  the  Lord  came
up.  Said  Sakuludayi : — I  pray  the  Lord  to  join  us ;
he  is  truly  welcome ;  it  is  a  long  time  since  he  last
managed  to  come.  Pray,  be  seated;  here  is  a  seat
for  the  Lord.

The  Lord  sat  down  accordingly,  asking  Sakuludayi,
vrho  took  a  low  seat  to  one  side,  what  had  been  their
theme  and  what  was  the  discussion  which  had  been
interrupted.  Lei  that  pass  for  the  moment,  answered
^kuludayi ;  you  can  easily  gather  that  later  on.  Of
late,  when  recluses  and  brahmins  of  other  creeds  were
met  together  in  the  Discussion  Hal),  the  topic  was
mooted  what  a  good  thing,  what  a  very  good  thing,
11.  '  '


2


LXX  vn.  M  AliA-SAK  ULUD  A  Y  l-SU  TTA.


M.  U.  5.


for  the  Magadha  people  in  Anga  that  such  recluses
and  brahmins — all  at  the  head  of  confraternities  or
followings,  all  well-known  and  famous  teachers,  all
founders  of  saving  creeds,  held  in  high  repute  by  many
people — should  have  come  to  spend  the  rainy  season
at  Kajagaha. — There  was  I’Qrana  Kassapa,  Makkhali
Gosilia,  Ajita  Kesa  Kambali  Pakudha  Kaccayana,
Safijaya  BeIat^hi-potca,and  Nata*putta  the  Nigaiifha, —
[8]  all  men  of  this  distinction  and  all  of  them  here  for
the  rains ;  and  among  them  there  is  also  the  recluse
Gotama  here,  at  the  head  of  his  confraternity  and
following,  a  well-known  and  famous  teacher,  a  founder
of  a  saving  creed,  who  is  held  in  high  repute  by  many.
Now,  which  of  these  Lords*,  which  of  these  recluses
and  brahmins  of  such  eminence  as  teachers,  is
esteemed,  respected,  venerated  and  adored  by  his
disciples.^  And  on  what  terms  of  esteem  and  respect
do  they  live  with  him  ?

Said  some : — POra^a  Kassapa  gets  no  esteem  or
respect,  no  veneration  or  adoration,  from  his  disciples ;
they  live  with  him  on  no  terms  of  esteem  and  respect.
Time  was  when,  as  he  was  preaching  his  doctrine  to
some  hundreds  of  his  following,  a  disciple  broke  in
with — ‘Don’t  question  POraoa  Kassapa,  who  does  not
know  about  it ;  ask  me  who  do  ;  I  will  explain  every¬
thing  to  your  reverences.  With  arms  outstretched
Parana  Kassapa  tearfully  remonstrated,  saying — Do
be  quiet,  sirs ;  do  not  make  a  noise ;  the  question  is
addressed  not  to  those  persons  but  to  me,  who. will
e^lain  everything.  But  many  of  his  disciples  went
off  after  riddling  his  argument  You,  said  they,
know  nothing  of  this  Doctrine  and  Rule  ;  we  do  and
you  never  can ;  you  are  in  error,  we  in  the  right ;
there  is  sense  in  what  we  say,  none  in  what  you  say  ;
you  conclude  where  you  should  begin,  and  begin  with
whac  you  should  conclude  with ;  your  rigmarole  is


1  U  will  be  noted  that  beie  the  style  of  ‘  Lord  ’  (B  b  a  g  &  v  fi)->
commonly  appropriated  by  Gotama'e  disciples  for  their  master—
fs  conferred  opon  all  *  reefuees  and  brabmms  ’  wbo  were  masters
of  tbe  great  scbools  of  current  thought.


M.  ii,  4.


THE  KEV  TO  PUPILS*  ESTEEM.


exploded;  your  argument  is  riddled ;  you  are  refuted ;
go  away  and  learn  better  or  else  disentangle  yourself,
if  you  can.  Such  was  the  lack  of  esteem,  respect,
veneration,  and  adoration  shown  to  Purana  Kassapa  by
his  disciples,  who  lived  with  him  on  no  terms  of  esteem
and  reject,  but  scoffed  at  him  and  his  teachings.

[4]  6thers  said  .  .  .  (precisely  the  same  things
about  the  five  other  sophists).

Others  again  said  -There  is  the  recluse  Gotama  at
the  head  of  his  Confraternity  and  following,  a  well-
known  and  famous  teacher,  a  founder  of  a  saving
creed,  who  is  held  in  high  repute  by  many.  Him  his
disciples  esteem,  respect,  venerate  and  adore ;  and
with  him  they  live  on  terms  of  esteem  and  respect
Time  was  when,  as  the  recluse  Gotama  was  preaching
his  Doctrine  to  some  hundreds  of  his  following,  a
disciple  coughed.  One  of  his  fellows  in  the  higher
life  jc^ged  him  with  his  knee,  saying Keep  quiet,
[5]  your  reverence ;  do  not  make  a  noise ;  our  master,
the  Lord,  is  preaching  the  Doctrine!  When  the
recluse  Gotama  is  preaching  to  hundreds  at  once,  no
hawking  or  spitting  is  heard  among  them  ;  the  whole
assembi^e  is  on  the  tip-toe  of  expectancy,  intent  only
to  hear  what  he  shall  say.  It  is  just  like  a  man  at
cross-roads  pressing  out  pure,  clear  honey  from  a
small  honey-comb  amid  the  hopeful  expectancy  of  an
encircling  crowd, — even  so,  when  the  recluse  Gotama
Is  preaching  .  .  ,  hear  what  he  shall  say.  So  also
when,  after  a  corporate  life  with  their  fellows,  disciples
of  his  throw  up  their  course  of  training  and  revert
to  the  lower  state  of  the  layman, — even  they  laud  the
Master,  his  Doctrine  and  his  Confraternity ;  they
blame  not  others  but  simply  themselves,  saying  they
are  failures  of  little  worth,  in  that,  though  they  started
to  be  Pilgrims  in  the  Doctrine  and  Rule  so  well
preached,  they  are  incapable  of  life -long  persistence  in
the  perfection  and  purity  of  the  higher  life ;  and  so
these  frequent  the  precincts  or  become  lay-disciples
under  vow  to  observe  the  Five  Precepts.— This  is
how  the  recluse  Gotama  is  esteemed  and  respected.


M.  ii.  6.


4  Lxxvn.  mahasakuludAyi-sutta.

venerated  and  adored  by  his  disciples,  and  how  they
live  with  him  on  terms  of  .esteem  and  respect.

How  many  qualities,  Udiyi,  do  you  observe  in  me
CO  bring  this  about  ?

pive,  sir;— (i)  The  Lord  eats  but  sparingly  and
advocates  a  spare  diet ;  [6]  (ii)  the  Lord  is  concent
to  wear  any  raiment,  and  commends  the  like  content¬
ment  to  others ;  (iii)  the  Lord  is  content  to  accept
any  alms,  and  commends  the  like  contentment  to
others  r  (iv)  the  Lord  puts  up  with  any  lodging,  and
commends  the  like  contentment  to  others ;  and  (v)  the
Lord  lives  in  seclusion  himself  and  advises  others  to
be  secluded,— These  are  the  five  qualities  which  Inspire
the  esteem  of  his  disciples  for  the  recluse  Gotama.

If  their  esteem,  UdSyi,  turned  on  my  being  reputed
to  eat  but  sparingly  and  to  advocate  a  spare  diet  for
others,  why,  there  are  some  of  my  disciples  who  live
on  a  pipkin  of  food  a  day,  others  on  half  a  pipkin,
others  who  take  only  the  quantity  of  a  viiva-ioxii  or
just  half  that ;  [7]  whereas  1  myself  sometimes  eat
a  whole  bowlful  or  more.  So  that,  if  it  turned  on
my  eating  sparingly  and  advocating  a  spare  diet,  my
abstemious  disciples  would  not  esteem  me  or  hold  me
in  veneration.

If  s^ain  it  turned  on  clothing,  1  have  some  disciples
who  go  rudely  clad  in  rags  from  the  duslheaps,  who
piece  themselves  together  a  cloak  from  what  taacrs
they  can  scavenge  from  charnel-grounds  or  refiise-
heaps  or  mercers'  sweepings  j  whereas  1  myself  some¬
times  wear  lay*  clothes,  so  fine  in  web  that  the  down
on  the  gourd  is  coarse  to  comparison.  So  that,  if  it
turned  on  clothing,  my  disciples  whose  clothes  are
got  by  scavenging  would  not  esteem  or  venerate  me.

If  again  it  turned  on  taking  what  alms  come  along,
some  of  my  disciples  punctiliously  go  to  each  house  in
its  turn  and  delight  in  the  practice  of  gleaning  as  they
go^  and  will  not,  though  they  have  gone  indoors,

1  Resdiag uhchepake  vats  ratS  with  £u.  (la DbamcQ£*
iSma’s  edicioD),— vaC«  rati  being  axplained as  paka tivata
rati  The  conjecture  of  va  te  rata  U  wrong.


M.il.  8.


T»K  KEY  TO  pupils'  ESTEEM.


5


accept  an  invitation  to  take  a  seat whereas  1  m^elf,
on  invitation,  sometimes  fare  on  the  choicest  picked
rice  [8]  with  several  sauces  and  curries.  So  that,  if  it
turned  on  alms  from  door  to  door,  these  punctilious
disciples  of  mine  would  not  esteem  and  venerate
me.

Or,  if  it  turned  on  lodging,  I  have  disciples  who
lodge  under  trees  in  the  open  and  are  never  under
a  roof  for  eight  months  at  a  stretch ; — where^  I
myself  am  sometimes  housed  in  storied  mansions,
stuccoed  all  over,  which  keep  out  the  wind  with
barred  doors  and  closed  shutters.  So  that,  if  it  turned
on  lodging,  these  open-air  disciples  of  mine  would  not
esteem  or  venerate  me.

Lastly,  if  it  turned  on  seclusion,  I  have  disciples
who  dwell  in  the  wilds  and  afar  off  in  the  distant
depths  of  the  forest,  with  only  a  fortnightly  meeting  in
Confraternity  to  recite  the  Confession  (patimokkha); —
whereas  I  myself  am  at  times  beset  by  Almsmen,
Almswomen,  lay  disciples  of  both  sexes,  princes  and
lords,  securies  and  the  disciples  of  sectaries.  So  that,
if  it  turned  on  seclusion,  [d]  these  anchorite  disciples
of  mine  would  not  esteem  or  venerate  me,

No,  UdS,yi ;  these  five  qualities  would  not  make  me
esteemed  and  respected,  venerated  and  adored  by  my
disciples,  nor  would  these  five  qualities  make  them
live  with  me  on  terms  of  esteem  and  respect.  But
there  are  five  other  qualities  which  do  achieve  this  and
they  are  the  following  : —

(1)  First,  my  disciples  value  the  higher  virtue  and
believe  that  I  am  virtuous  and  endowed  with  virtue  in
its  perfection.  This  is  the  first  conviction  which  makes
me  esteemed  and  respected,  venerated  and  adored  by
my  disciples,  who  live  with  me  on  terms  of  esteem
and  respect

(2)  Secondly,  my  disciples  value  outstanding  ken
and  vision,  and  believe  that  I  say  1  know  and  see
just  because  I  do  know  and  see ;  they  believe  that
I  preach  my  Doctrine— not  without,  but— with  trans¬
cendent  knowledge,  with  origins,  and  with  assignable


6


LXXVn.  MAHA-SAKULUDAYI-SUTTA.


M.  ii.  to


conditions.  [10]  This  is  the  second  conviction  which
makes  me  esteemed  .  .  .  respect.

(3)  My  disciples  value  supereminent  intellect  and
believe  that  1  have  intellect  and  am  endowed  with  all
intellect  in  its  perfection,  and  that  it  Is  unthinkable
I  should  either  not  see  in  advance  the  future  trend
of  an  argument  or  fail  to  refute  the  unsound  arguments
of  opponents.  Knowing  and  seeing  this,  would  my
disciples  interrupt  discussion  ?

No,  sir.

Nor,  Udayi,  do  I  seek  instruction  from  my  disciples  5
it  is  thej;  who  seek  instruction  from  me.

All  this  breeds  the  third  conviction  which  makes  me
esteemed  .  .  .  respect

(4>  Fourthly,  when  my  disciples  are  beset  by  Ill
and  spent  with  Ill  in  any  particular  shape,  they  come
to  question  me  on  the  Noble  Truth  of  Ill ; — I  tell
them  and  win  their  hearts  by  my  answers.  The  same
takes  place  with  the  Noble  Truths  concerning  the
origin  of  Ill,  the  cessation  of  III,  and  the  way  leading
to  that  cessation.

This  breeds  the  fourth  conviction  [11]  which  makes
me  esteemed  .  .  .  respect.

(5)  Fifthly,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  develop  the  four  starting-points  for
mustering  up  mindfulness.  Herein,  an  Almsman
dwells — as  regards  the  body — in  the  realisation  of
what  the  body  is,  in  ardour,  in  self-awareness  and  in
mindfulness,  quit  of  all  worldly  distress  of  mind  and
body.  He  does  the  same  with  feelings,  and  with  his
heart,  and  with  stwes  of  consciousness, — In  this  way
many  of  my  disciples  have  come  to  dwell  in  the  attain¬
ment  of  intellect’s  consummate  perfection.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  develop  the  four  Right  Struggles. —
They  resolve,  they  strive,  they  persevere,  they  exert
and  strain  their  heart  for  the  fourfold  purposes  of
{a)  checking  the  rise  of  evil  and  wrong  states  of
consciousness  which  have  not  yet  arisen,  shedding
evil  and  wrong  states  which  have  already  arisen,


M>  I'i-


THE  KEV  TO  PUPtLS’  ESTEEM


(r)  encouraging  the  rise  of  right  states  which  have
not  yet  arisen,  and  (if)  ensuring  that  right  states
which  are  there  already  soall  be  stablished  and  ordered
aright,  multiplied,  and  developed,  shall  wax  apace  and
grow  to  perfection. — In  this  way,  too,  many  of  my
disciples  have  come  to  dwell  in  the  attainment  of
intellect’s  consummate  perfection.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  wa.y
whereby  they  develop  the  Four  Bases  of  Psychic
Power, — resolve,  exertion,  heart,  and  investigation,
each  informed  by  the  plastic  forces  of  concentration
and  struggle.— In  this  way,  too,  .  .  .  perfection.

Moreover,  i  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  develop  the  Five  Facultiw,— [IS]
faith,  exertion,  mindfulness,  concentration,  intellect,
each  leading  on  to  tranquillity  and  to  full  enlighten¬
ment — In  this  way,  too,  .  .  .  perfection.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  develop  the  Five  Strengths,— the
strengths  of  faith,  of  exertion,  of  mindfulness,  of  con¬
centration,  and  of  intellect,  each  leading  on  to  tran¬
quillity  and  to  full  enlightenment— In  this  way,  too,
.  .  .  perfection.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  develop  the  Seven  Factors  of  En¬
lightenment, — mindfulnes5>  research  into  the  Doctrine,
perseverance,  zest,  serenity,  concentration,  and  the

Cise  of  indifference,  each  based  on  seclusion,  passion-
sness  and  cessation,  and  merging  into  Renunciation.
In  this  way.  too,  .  .  .  perfection.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  develop  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path, —
right  outlook,  right  intention,  right  speech,  right
action,  right  mode  of  livelihood,  right  effor^  right
mindfulness  and  right  concentration.— In  this  way,
too,  .  .  .  perfection.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  develop  the  Eight  Deliverances.  Con¬
scious  of  his  own  bodily  form,  a  man  sees  external
forms;— this  is  the  first  Deliverance.  Inwardly  un-


S  LX  X vri,  M AH A-SA  Klf LUDA  YI-S  OTTA.  M  ,  n,  13.

conscious  of  his  own  bodily  form,  he  sees  external
forms  ; — this  is  the  second  Deliverance.  Appreciation
of  its  goodliness  is  the  third  Deliverance.  By  passage
wholly  beyond  [18]  all  perception  of  form,  by  extinc¬
tion  of  perceptions  of  sensory  reactions,  by  the  ignoring
of  perceptions  of  multiplicity,  the  thought  of  space  as
infinite  leads  him  to  enter  on,  and  abide  in,  the  sphere
of  Infinite  Space and  this  is  the  fourth  Deliverance.
By  passage  wholly  beyond  the  sphere  of  infinite  space,
the  thought  of  consciousness  as  infinite  leads  him  to
enter  on,  and  abide  in,  the  sphere  of  Infinite  Conscious¬
ness  and  this  is  the  fifth  Deliverance.  By  passage
wholly  beyond  the  sphere  of  infinite  consciousness,  the
thought  of  nothingness  leads  him  to  enter  on,  and
^ide  in,  the  sphere  of  Naught and  this  is  the  sixth
Deliverance.  By  passage  wholly  beyond  the  sphere
of  Naught,  he  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  sphere  of
neither  perception  nor  non- perception ; — and  this  is
the  seventh  Deliverance.  Lastly,  by  passage  wholly
beyond  the  sphere  of  neither  perception  nor  non-
perception,  he  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  cessation
^  the  feeling  of  perceptions,  which  is  the  eighth
Deliverance,— In  this  way,  too,  .  .  .  perfection.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  develop  the  eight  Spheres  of  Mastery.
Inwardly  conscious  of  possessing  bodily  form,  one
individual  sees  outside  himself  forms,  fair  or  foul,
which  are  small ;  these  he  masters  so  that  he  perceives
he  knows  and  sees  them.— This  is  the  first  Sphere  of
Mastery.  The  second  is  when  a  man  can  say  the  like
a^ut  external  forms  which  are  infinite.  The  third  is
when,  being  himself  unconscious  of  his  own  bodily
form,  a  man  can  say  the  like  about  small  external
objects;  and  the  fourth  is  when  these  external  objects
Lost  to  all  bodily  fprm  of  his  own,  an
individual  sees  external  objects  which  are  blue,  blue  in
colour,  blue  to  behold,  bine  of  sheen.— Just  as  the  flax-
flower  IS  blue,  blue  in  colour,  blue  to  behold,  blue  of
Sheen ;  or  just  as  Benares  muslin,  with  a  finish  on
both  front  and  back,  is  blue  ...  in  sheen so  blue


M.  ii.  14.


THE  KEY  TO  POPII.S’  ESTEEM.


9


are  the  excernal  objects  he  sees  ;  these  he  masters  so
that  he  perceives  that  he  knows  and  sees  them. — This
is  the  fifth  [14]  Sphere  of  Mastery.  The  sixth  is  when,
lost  to  consciousness  of  any  bodily  form  of  his  own,
an  individual  sees  external  objects  which  are  yellow,
yellow  in  colour,  yellow  to  behold,  yellow  of  sheen,
yellow  as  the  Kant^ikara  fiower  or  the  muslin  of
Benares  Is  yellow.  The  seventh  is  when  he  sees
red  things,  red  as  the  bandhu-jivaka  blossom  or
Benares  muslin  are  red.  Lastly,  ^ing  Inwardly  un^
conscious  of  possessing  bodily  form,  an  Individual  sees
things  which  are  white,  white  in  colour,  white  to
behold,  white  in  sheen, — white  as  the  morning  star  or
Benares  muslin  is  white ;  these  he  masters  so  that  he
perceives  he  knows  and  sees  them. — In  this  way,  too,

.  .  .  perfect.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  develop  the  Ten  Hypnotics.  One
individual  perceives  a  plot  of  earth  from  above,  from
below,  across,  in  unity,  and  Infinite.  Others  do  the
same,  with  water,  fire,  air,  blue,  yellow,  red,  and
white,  space  and  [15]  consciousness. —  In  this  way,
too,  .  ,  .  perfect.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way ,
whereby  they  develop  the  Four  Ecstasies.  Herein,
an  Almsman,  divested  of  pleasures  of  sense  and  of
wrong  states  of  mind  ...  (He.  as  in  Suita  39,
chifm  to)  .  .  .  [16  and  17]  not  wrapped  in  pure  and
clean  thoughts, — In  this  way,  too,  .  -  .  perfect.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  comprehend  that — This  corporeal  frame
of  mine  is  made  up  of  the  four  Elements,  starts  from
parents,  is  sustained  by  rice  and  other  foods,  Is  imper¬
manent  and  subject  to  attrition,  abrasion,  erasion,  dis¬
solution  and  disruption ;  and  this  consciousness  of  mine
is  tied  and  bound  up  therewith.  It  is  just  like  a
beautiful  sparkling  gem  of  the  purest  water  and  of
eight  facets,  excellently  cut,  clear,  translucent,  flawless
and  excellent  in  every  way,^ — through  which  there
passes  a  blue,  yellow,  red,  white,  or  yellowish  thread.


TO


LX  X  Vir.  M  AHA-S  AKULUD  Ay  I-SCITTA.


M.  ii.  (3.


Even  as  a  man  with  eyes  wherewith  to  see  has  only
to  take  it  in  bis  hand  to  mark  that  It  is  such  a  gem  and
is  on  such  a  threads — so  have  I  shown  my  disciples
the  way  whereby  to  have  this  comprehension  of  body
and  of  consciousness. — In  this  way,  too,  .  .  .  perfect.

Moreover,  1  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  call  into  being  out  of  this  body  another
body  of  the  mind’s  creation,  complete  in  all  its  limbs
and  members,  and  with  transcendental  faculties.  It  is
just  like  a  man  who  should  draw  a  reed  from  its  sheath
— or  a  snake  from  its  slough — or  a  sword  from  its
scabbard, — recognizing  that  the  reed,  the  snake,  or
the  sword  was  one  thing  and  the  sheath,  slough,  or
scabbard  was  another ;  the  one  being  drawn  out  of
the  other.  [18]  Just  in  the  same  way  have  1  shown
my  disciples  the  way  whereby  they  call  into  being  .  .  .
faculties. — ^In  this  way,  too,  .  .  .  perfect.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  develop  divers  psychic  powers, — from
being  one  to  become  manifold,  from  being  manifold  to
become  one ;  to  become  visible  or  invisible ;  to  pass
at  will  through  wall  or  fence  or  hill  as  if  through  air ;
to  pass  in  and  out  of  the  solid  earth  as  if  it  were
water ;  to  walk  on  the  water’s  unbroken  surface  as
if  it  were  the  solid  earth ;  to  glide,  as  they  sit  serene,
through  the  air  like  a  winged  bird  ;  to  touch  and  to
handle  the  sun  and  moon  in  their  power  and  might ;
and  to  extend  the  sovereignty  of  their  bodies  right  up
to  the  heavens  of  Brahma.  Just  as  a  skilful  potter  or
his  apprentice  can  make  and  fashion  any  shape  he  will
out  of  prep^ed  day,  or  an  ivory-worker  out  of  ivory,
or  a  goldsmith  out  of  gold  j— even  so  have  I  shown  my
disciples  the  way  whereby  they  develop  divers  psychic
powers  ,  .  ,  [19]  heavens  of  Brahma. — In  this  way,
too,  .  ,  .  perfect

Moreover,  T  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby,  with  the  Celestial  Ear,  which  is  pure  and
far  surpasses  the  human  ear,  they  hear  twofold  sounds,
both  the  celestial  and  the  human,  whether  far  or  near.
Just  as  a  mighty  conch -blower  can  with  ease  make  his


M.  ii.  20,


THE  KEY  TO  PUPILS*  ESTEEM.


11


blast  heard  in  all  the  four  directions, — so  have  !  shown
my  disciples  the  way  whereby  ...  far  and  near. — In
this  way,  too,  .  -  .  perfect.

Moreover,  I  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  their  hearts  read  the  hearts  of  others,—
knowing  the  heart  where  passion  dwells  as  passionate
.  .  .  {eic.  as  in  Suita  73)  ...  the  heart  undelivered
as  undelivered.  Just  as  a  woman  or  man  or  lad
young  and  dressy, — on  surveying  the  reflection  of
their  features  in  a  bright,  clean  mirror  or  in  a  bowl  of
clean  water,  and  on  seeing  reflected  there  a  smut  or
a  pimple — 'Would  know  from  the  reflection  either  that
there  was  a  smut  or  a  pimple  there  [20 j  or  that  there
was  none  at  all ; — just  in  the  same  way  I  have  shown
my  disciples  the  way  whereby  their  hearts  ...  as
undelivered. — In  this  way,  too,  .  .  .  perfect.

Moreover,  1  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby  they  recall  their  divers  existences  in  the
past  .  .  .  {eU.  as  in  SuUa  4)  ...  in  all  their  details
and  features.  Just  as  if  a  man  were  to  go  from  his
own  to  a  second  village  and  thence  to  a  third,  returning
thence  to  his  own  village,  and  were  to  bethink  him  on
his  return  how,  in  the  second  and  the  third  villages,  he
stood  [21]  and  sat,  talked  and  was  silent  ere  he  came
back  home  again even  so  have  I  shown  my  disciples
the  way  whereby  they  recall  ...  in  all  their  details
and  features. — In  this  way,  too,  .  .  .  perfect.

Moreover,  1  have  shown  mv  disciples  the  way
whereby,  with  the  Eye  Celestial,  whic&  is  pure  anS
far  surpasses  the  human  eye,  they  see  creatures  In  act
to  pass  hence  and  in  act  to  re^appear  elsewhere  .  .  .

as  in  Suiia  4)  ...  in  states  of  bliss  and  In
heaven.  Thus  do  they  with  the  Eye  Celestial  see
creatures  in  act  to  pass  hence  and  in  act  to  re*appear
else  where, ^creaturea  lowly  or  debonair,  fair  or  foul
to  view,  happy  and  unhappy,  all  seen  to  be  faring
according  to  their  deserts.  It  is  just  as  if  there  were
two  houses  with  doors  to  them,  and  as  if,  from  midway
between  them,  a  man  with  eyes  to  see  were  to  behold
people  going  in  and  coming  out,  and  passing  to  and  fro.


t2  LXXVJL  HAHA-SAKULUDAYI-SOTTA.  M- li,  23-


Just  in  the  same  way  have  I  shown  my  disciples  the
way  whereby,  with  the  Eye  Celestial,  .  .  .  faring
according  to  their  deserts. — In  this  way,  too,  .  .  .
perfect.

[22]  Moreover,  1  have  shown  my  disciples  the  way
whereby,  by  the  eradication  of  the  Cankers,  they—
here  and  now,  of  and  by  themselves — know,  realize,
enter  on,  and  abide  in  that  Deliverance  of  heart  and
mind  in  which  Cankers  are  no  more.  Just  as  if  on
a  mountain  there  were  a  lake  with  clear  pellucid  waters
as  of  crystal,  and  a  man  with  eyes  to  see  were  to
observe,  from  the  bank  where  he  was  standing,  oysters
and  other  shells,  with  gravel  and  pebbles  and  shoals  of
fish  swimming  about  or  lying  up  ; — Just  as  such  a  man
would  recognize  all  he  saw  before  him,  even  so  have  1
shown  my  disciples  the  way  whereby,  by  the  eradica^
tion  .  .  ,  Cankers  are  no  more. — In  this  way,  too,
many  of  my  disciples  have  come  to  dwell  in  the
attainment  of  the  intellect’s  consummate  perfection.

And  this  is  the  fifth  of  the  five  convictions  which
make  me  esteemed  and  respected,  venerated  and
adored  by  my  disciples,  who  live  with  me  on  terms  of
esteem  and  respect

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  Wanderer
SakuludSyi  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LXXVIII.  SAMANA-MAIjjpiKA-SUTTA.

THE  SUCKLING.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SSvaciht  in  /eta’s  grove  in  AnSthapipdika's
pleasaunce,  the  Wanderer  Ugglhamana,^  whose  mother
was  Sama^ja-MandikS,  was  living  in  Queen  MallikS’s

»  Bu-  says  this  was  a  oickoarae  given  bim  because  be  ‘was
always  leanung,’  his  original  name  b«ag  Sumana  (-Felix).  It
may  be  that  the  first  part  of  bis  motber^s  name  has  beco  altered
from  Suiuaua  to  Sama&l  (recluse),  juet  as  tbere  is  the  fiirther
(Mdeacy  to  read  -muQdikI  for  the  second  part  so  as  to  make  her
name  mean  •  abaveliog'recluae  ’  on  familiar  Pali  analogy.


M-  li.  33.


THE  SUCKLING


J3


pleasaunce,  where  the  original  Discussion  Hall  stood
among  the  DIospyros  trees ;  [28]  and  with  Ugga-
ham  ana  there  was  a  great  company  of  Wanderers
numbering  some  three  hundred.  Now,  Pancakanga
the  carpenter  had  left  the  city  in  the  early  morning  to
visit  the  Lord,  when  he  bethought  him  that  the  hour
was  too  early,  because  of  the  Lord's  private  medications
and  because  it  was  not  the  right  time  to  visit  Almsmen
when  absorbed  in  thinking,  for  Almsmen  are  given  to
meditation  and  thought.  So  he  thought  he  would  go
and  see  UggahamSna  in  Queen  MallikS’s  pleasaunce,
and  thither  he  repaired.  Ac  the  time  UggahamSna
was  sitting  with  his  great  company  of  Wanderers,  who
were  making  a  great  noise  .  .  .  {sic.  as  in  SuUa  76,
ad  inii^  ...  do  not  make  a  noise;  here  comes
Paheakanga  the  carpenter,  who  is  a  disciple  of  the
recluse  Gotama  and  has  been  here  all  the  time  the
white*robed  lay  disciples  of  Gotama  have  been  at
Ssvattbi.  These  reverend  men  are  lovers  of  silence
and  commend  the  silent;  if  he  observes  silence  reigning
in  this  gathering  he  may  decide  to  approach.  So  they
became  silent,  and  the  carpenter  came  up  and,  after
exchanging  civil  greetings  with  [24]  U^Sham&na,  took
a  seat  to  one  side  and  was  addressed  by  the  Wanderer
as  follows : —

In  my  view,  carpenter,  four  qualicies  characterize
the  triumphant  recluse  who  is  imbued  with  che  right,
who  excels  in  the  right,  and  has  won  all  that  is  to  be
won.  What  are  these  four  qualities  does  nothing

evil,  he  says  nothing  evil,  he  thinks  nothing  evil,  and
he  gets  his  living  in  no  evil  way.  These  are  my  four
characteristics  01  the  triumphant  recluse.

Expressing  neicher  sacisfaccion  nor  disagreement
with  this  pronouncement,  Paheakanga  got  up  and  went
away  to  tell  the  Lord,  who,  being  duly  told,  said  : —
On  U^Shatn ana's  showing,  carpenter,  a  tiny  babe  on
its  back  is  his  triumphant  recluse.  For,  as  yet,  the
babe  does  not  know  what  a  body  means,  much  less
will  it  do  evil  with  its  body,  beyond  kicking  about;  it
does  not  know  what  speech  is,  mueh  less  will  it  say


14  LXXVIir.  SAMA^A-MANPIKA-SUTTA.  M.ij-is-

anyihing  evil,  beyond  crying;  it  does  not  know  what
thought  is,  beyond  crowing  with  delight it  does  not
know  what  a  livelihood  is,  much  less  [25]  will  it  get
its  living  in  an  evil  way,  beyond  sucking  its  mother,

No,  carpenter  5  in  my  view,  these  four  qualities  do
not  characterize  the  triumphant  recluse,  but  only  define
the  tiny  babe  on  its  back.

In  my  view,  Carpenter,  there  are  ten  qualities  which
characterize  the  triumphant  recluse  who  is  imbued
with  the  right,  excels  in  the  right,  and  has  won  all  that
is  to  be  won,

1  premise  that  there  must  be  knowledge  of  what
wrong  conduct  is,  how  it  arises,  how  it  is  ended  with¬
out  leaving  a  vestige  behind,  and  how  a  man  walks  so
as  to  end  it.  There  must  be  the  like  knowledge  of
right  conduct  and  of  wrong  [26]  and  right  thoughts.

In  what  now  does  wrong  conduct  consist  ? — In
wrong  actions,  wrong  speech,  and  an  evil  mode  of
livelihood,— How  do  these  arise  ?  From  the  heart,  is
the  answer.— What  is  the  heart  ?  The  heart  is  mani¬
fold,  complex,  and  diverse,  tainted  by  emotions  (sa-
citta),  passion,  ill-will,  and  density.— What  becomes  of
wrong  conduct  when  it  ceases  without  leaving  a
vestige  behind  ?  Why,  when  an  Almsman,  discarding
wrong  behaviour — of  body — or  of  speech — or  of  mind
—develops  the  corresponding  right  behaviour,  and
similarly  discards  a  wicked  mode  of  livelihood  for  the
right  mode.— How  does  he  walk  to  end  wrong  con¬
duct  ?  When  he  brings  will  to  bear,  puts  forth
endeavour  and  energy,  struggles  and  strives  heartily
(i)  to  stop  the  rise  of  evil  and  wrong  states  of  conscious¬
ness  which  have  not  yet  arisen,  (il)  to  discard  those
which  have  already  arisen,  (iii)  to  breed  right  slates
not  yet  existing,  and  (iv)  to  statlish,  clarify,  multiply,
enlaw,  develop,  and  to  perfect  existing  good  sutes.
[27]  In  what  does  rectitude  consist  ? _ In  right


*  B«c&use  of  its  memories  of  the  heavens  which  it  hae  receaily
Iftfl,  says  Bu.  in  a  Wordsworthian  mood.  (It  cries,  be  adds
because  of  its  memories  of  purgatory.)  *


M.  ii.  2£.


THE  SUCKLING.


*5


^tions,  in  right  speech,  and  in  blameless  mode  of
livelihood, — How  do  these  arise  ?  From  the  heart  is
the  answer— What  is  the  heart?  The  heart  is  mani¬
fold,  complex,  and  diverse.  Rectitude  arises  from  the
heart  which  is  void  of  passion,  void  of  ill-will,  and  void
of  density. — What  becomes  of  rectitude  when  it  ceases
without  leaving  a  vestige  behind.  When  an  Alms¬
man  embodies  virtue  and  not  merely  virtuous  obser-
vances,  by  coming  to  know  Deliverance  of  heart  by
mind  aright  so  that  (mere)  rectitude  ceases  without
leaving  a  vestige  behind, — How  does  he  walk  co  end
rectitude  ?  When  he  brings  will  co  bear .  .  .  existing
good  states,

What  are  wrong  thoughts  ?  They  are  thoughts  of
pleasures  of  sense,  malevolence,  and  cruelty, — How  do
these  arise  ?  From  perception,  is  the  answer.— What
is  this  perception?  It  is  manifold,  complex,  and
diverse,  divided  into  perceptions  of  pleasure,  of  male¬
volence,  and  of  cruelty. — How  do  these  cease  without
leaving  a  vestige  behind.  Why,  when  divested  of
pleasures  of  sense,  [28]  an  Almsman  enters  on,  and
abides  in,  the  First  Ecstasy, — How  does  he  walk  to
end  wrong  thoughts?  Why,  he  brings  his  will  to
bear  .  ,  .  existing  good  states.

What  are  right  thoughts  ?  Thoughts  of  Renuncia-
tion,  thoughts  innocent  of  malevolence  and  of  cruelty.
— How  do  these  arise?  From  perception,  is  the
answer,- What  is  this  perception? — It  is  manifold,
complex,  and  diverse,  divided  into  perception  of
Renunciation,  perception  which  is  innocent  of  malevo>
lence,  and  perception  which  is  innocent  of  cruelty,—
How  do  these  perceptions  cease  without  leaving  a
vestige  behind  ?  Why,  when,  rising  above  observa-
tion  and  reflection,  ...  an  Almsman  enters  on,  and
abides  in,  the  Second  Ecstasy. — How  does  he  walk  to
end  right  thoughts  ?  Why,  he  brings  his  will  to  bear
.  .  .  existing  good  states.

What  now,  carpenter,  are  the  ten  qualities  which
characterize  the  [20]  triumphant  recluse  who  is  imbued
with  the  right,  excels  In  the  right,  and  has  won  all


1 6  •  LXXVIir.  SAMANA-MANpIKX-SUTTA,  M,  ii.  3P.


lhat  is  to  be  done?  Why;  when  the  Almsman  is
an  adept  in  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path,  and  in  utter
knowledge  and  in  utter  Deliverance  \—tAis  makes  the
triumphant  recluse.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart  the  tarpenter
Paftcakanga  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LXXIX.  cOva-sakuludAyi-sutta.

SO-CAtLED  PERFECTION.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Rijagaha  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where  the
squirrels  were  led,  the  Wanderer  Sakuludijri  was
living  with  a  great  company  of  Wanderers  in  the
Wanderers’  pleasaunce  where  the  peacocks  were  fed
Early  in  the  morning,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,
the  Lord  went  into  Rijagaha  for  alms  .  .  .  (etc.  as
in  Snlia  77)  .  .  .  [80]  you  can  easily  gather  lhat
later  on.

When,  sir,  said  the  Wanderer,  I  am  not  io  act  to
join  my  followers,  they  sit  talking  all  manner  of
beastly  talk ;  but  when  I  am  approaching,  they  sit
with  their  gaze  fixed  on  me  alone,  to  hear  what  Doc¬
trine  I  shall  expound.  But  when  [81]  the  Lord
approaches  us,  then  both  1  and  they  all  sit  with  gaze
fixed  on  the  Lord  alone,  to  hear  what  Doctrine  he  will
expound.

Be  it  yours,  UdSyi,  to  open  against  me.

Of  lace,  sir,  there  has  been  one  who,  professing  to
know  and  see  everything,  with  nothing  further  to
know  and  see,  declares  that,  whether  walking  or
standing  sull,  whether  asleep  or  awake,  bis  ken  and
vision  are  always  at  the  full  When  1  asked  him  a
question  about  the  past,  he  skipped  from  one  thing  to
another  and  dismissed  the  matter,  evincing  irritation,
bad  temper  and  resentment.  Thoughts  of  the  Lord
brought  me  satisfaction  as  1  said  to  myself  r — Ah,  the


M.  il  32.


SO-CALLED  PERFECTION.


17


Lord,  the  Blessed  One  1  Ne  knows  aright  these  states
of  mind)

And  who  was  that  person  ?

It  was  Nfl^taputta,  sir,  the  Jain.

If  a  man  recalls  his  own  past  existences,  from  one
onwards,  in  all  their  details  and  features,  he  either
questions  me  or  is  by  me  questioned  on  the  past,  and
either  his  exposition  satisfies  me  or  mine  him.  Or
if  a  man,  with  the  Eye  Celestial  which  is  pure  and  far
surpasses  the  human  eye,  can  observe  creatures  in  act
to  pass  hence  and  re-appear  elsewhere  according  to
their  respective  deserts,  [82]  he  either  questions  me  or
is  by  me  questioned  on  the  past,  and  either  his  exposi¬
tion  satisfies  me  or  mine  him.  But  let  past  and  future
alone.  1  will  preach  the  Doctrine  tp  you  : — If  tAai  is,
comes  about ;  the  rise  of  makes  arise;  if
(Aai  is  not,  iAis  comes  not  about ;  the  ceasing  of  iAai
makes  iAis  cease.

For  my  own  part,  sir,  I  cannot  recall  all  that  has
happened  to  me  in  this  present  life,  much  less  recall
my  past  existences  in  all  their  details  and  features,  as
the  Lord  can.  I  cannot  see  a  hot^oblin,  much  less
can  I  see  wifh  the  Eye  Celestial — as  the  Lord  can —
creatures  passing  hence  and  reappearing  elsewhere
according  to  their  respective  deserts,  And  I  am
wholly  at  a  loss  to  follow  the  Lord’s  utterance  about
iAu  and  I  should  like  to  satisfy  the. Lord  about

our  own  tenets  by  an  answer  to  a  question.

What  do  your  tenets  say  ?

Our  tenets  say : — Here  is  perfection  ;  here  is  perfec-
donl

What  is  this  perfection  ?

The  perfection  than  which  nothing  is  higher  or  more
excellent

And  what  is  this  perfection  than  which  nothing  is
higher  or  more  excellent  ?

[88]  The  perfection  than  which  nothing  is  higher  or
more  excellent.

This  argument  of  yours,  Ud5yi,  would  be  protracted.
You  affirm  perfection  but  never  define  it.  It  is  just  as

II.  2


1 8  LXXIX-  cClA-SAKULUDIYI-SUTTA.

if  a  man  were  to  say  his  longing  and  his  heart's  desire
was  for  the  belle  of  the  land  but  were  to  confess,  on
being  questioned,  that  he  did  not  know  what  rank  she
belonged  to ;  or  what  her  name  was ;  or  what  family
she  belonged  to ;  or  whether  she  was  tail,  short,  or
middle-sized ;  or  whether  she  was  black  or  brown  or
dusky ;  or  what  village  or  township  or  city  she  be¬
longed  to and,  finally,  that  he  did  not  know  her  nor
had  ever  seen  her.  In  such  a  case,  does  not  the  man’s
statement  prove  unhelpful  ?

Certainly,  sir,  it  would  be,-— In  such  a  ^e.

Just  in  the  same  way  you  affirm  perfection  but  never
define  it

Even,  sir,  as  a  gem— bright  and  of  the  purest  water,
with  eight  facets,  excellently  cut,  and  strung  on  a  yellow
thread — shines  anrf  glitters  and  sparkles,  with  the  like
perfection  shows  the  hale  Self  after  death.

Which  think  you  shines  and  sparkles  the  most,—
your  gem  [34]  or  the  fire-fiy  of  the  night  ?

The  fire-fiy.

How  does  a  lamp  compare?

Better  still.

And  a  conflagration  in  the  night  ?

Better  still.

And  the  morning  stars,  at  dawn  in  a  cloudless  sky  r

Better  sclll.

And  the  full  moon  in  a  clear  sky  at  midnight  ?

Better  stDl.

K*]  And  the  sun  at  his  zenith  at  the  end  of  the  rains  r
tier  scilL

Further,  it  is  within  my  personal  cognizance,  Udiyi,
that  many,  very  many,  deities  are  so  luminous  m
themselves  that  they  draw  no  light  from  sun  or  moon.
Yec  I  do  not  speak  a  perfection  than  which  nothing
is  higher  or  rhore  excellent,  whereas  you  declare  your
perfection  to  be  less  than,  and  inferior  to,  a  fire-fly,  but
never  define  it.

The  Lord  has  settled  iti  The  Blessed  One  has
settled  the  quesdon !

What  do  you  mean  ?  ...


M.  il.3^'  SOfCALLED  FERPECTION.  ,  19

I  mean  that  though  our  tenets  say ;  Here  is  per¬
fection,  here  is  perfection,  yet,  when  pressed,  examined
and  questioned  by  the  Lord  concerning  our  tenets,  we
prove  empty  and  vain  and  faulty.

Tell  me,  Ud5,yi ;  is  there  a  world  of  absolute  bliss?
Is  there  a  sure  way  to  realiac  it  ?

Our  tenets  so  declare.

What  is  that  sure  way  to  realize  the  world  of  abso¬
lute  bliss?

Take  a  man  who,  putting  from  him  all  slaying,
abstains  from  the  taking  of  life  j  who,  putting  from  him
the  taking  of  things  not  given  to  him,  abstains  from
such  taking ;  who,  putting  from  him  sensual  mis¬
conduct,  abstains  therefrom ;  [S6]  who,  patting  from
him  all  lying,  abstains  from  lies ;  or  who  practises
some  austerity  he  has  vowed  to  observe. — This  is  the
sure  way  to  realize  the  world  of  absolute  bliss.

Do  you  think  t^c,  when  the  man  puts  from  him  all
slaying  and  abstains  from  the  taking  of  life,  his  Self
finds  absolute  bliss  or  bliss  mingled  with  pain  ?

Bliss  mingled  with  pain.

And  is  the  same  true  of  ail  the  other  things  you
mentioned?

Yes,  sir.

Do  you  really  chink  It  is  by  mingled  bliss  and  pain
that  the  sure  way  to  absolute  bliss  is  found  ?

The  Lord  has  settled  Itl  The  Blessed  One  has
settled  the  question  I

What  do  you  mean  ?

I  mean  that,  though  our  tenets  say  there  is  a  world
of  absolute  bliss  and  a  sure  way  to  realize  it,  yet,  when
pressed,  examined  and  questioned  by  the  Lord  con¬
cerning  our  tenets,  we  prove  empty  and  vain  and
faulty-  Now,  is  there,  sir,  a  world  of  absolute  bliss?
Is  there  a  sure  way  to  realize  it?  .

[87]  Yes-

What  is  that  sure  way  ?  .  ,  i  •

.  Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  devetop?  m
succession  the  first  three  of  the  Ecstasie^— That  is
a  sure  way  to  realize  the  world  of  absolute  bliss.


30


LXXI X.  Cmj\-SAKULUDiYI-SUTTA.


M.  a.  38.


Thai  is  not  the  sure  way,  sir,  to  realize  the  world  of
absolute  bliss;  for  that  world  would  already  have  been
realized.

No,  Udayi only  the  sure  way  to  realize  it
At  this  point  Sakuludayi's  following  broke  into
tumult  and  uproar,  shouting  out  that  they  were  un¬
done,  they  and  their  master  too,  for  their  knowledge

ended  here,  ,  ,  .  i  j

Hushing  his  Wanderers  to  silence,  Sakuludiyi  asked
at  what  point  the  world  of  absolute  bliss  was  actually

realized.  ,  •  l

When  an  Almsman  enters  on,  and  abides  m,  ine
Fourth  Ecstasy,  when  he  stands  and  ulks  and  hol^
converse  with  the  deities  who  have  passed  to  a  world
of  absolute  bliss,  then  is  that  world  actually  realized.

Is  it  in  order  to  realize  this  world  of  absolute  bliss
that  the  Almsmen  lead  the  higher  life  with  the  Lord?

No,  UdSyi ;  there  are  other  sutes  of  consciousn^
beyond  and  above  that ;  and  it  is  in  order  to  realize
these  that  Almsmen  lead  the  higher  life  with  me.

S  What  are  they  ?

e  the  case  that  there  appears  in  the  world  a
Truth-finder,  Arahat  all-enlightened,  walking  by  know¬
ledge,  blessed,  understanding  all  worlds,  the  matchless
tamer  of  the  human  heart,  teacher  of  gods  and  men,
the  Lord  of  enlightenment— etc.  (ie.  as  in  SuUa  27)—
an  Almsman,  when  he  has  put  from  him  these  Five
Hindrances  and  has  understood  how  the  heart's  short¬
comings  weaken  it,  then,  divpted  of  pleasures  of  sense
^etc.^he  enters  on,  and  abides  in  the  First  Ecstasy.
—This  is  a  state  of  consciousness  beyond  and  above,
for  the  realization  of  which  Almsmen  lead  the  higher

life  with  me.  ....  •  .

Again,  the  Almsman  enters  on,  and  abides  m,  the
SeoSid  Ecstasy,  and  then  the  Third,  and  then  the
Fourth.— This  is  a  state  .  .  .  higher  life  with  me.

With  heart  thus  stedfast,  thus  clarified  and  purified
...  die  Almsman  ...  (as  in  Suiia  4)  .  .  .  succes¬
sively  (i)  recalls  his  past  existences,  and  (li)  observes
with  the  Eye  Celestial  creatures  passing  from  one


M.  u.  29-


SO-CALLED  PERFECTION.


21


existence  to  the  next.—Each  of  these  two  is  a  state
,  .  .  higher  life  with  me.

That  same  stedfast  heart  ...  he  next  applies  to
the  knowledge  of  Cankers-  He  comes  to  comprehend
Ill  as  it  really  is»  the  rise  of  Ill.  the  cessation  of  ill.
and  the  course  which  leads  to  the  cessation  of  111.  He
comes  to  know  Cankers  as  what  they  really  are,  [39],
to  know  their  rise,  their  cessation,  and  the  course
which  leads  to  their  cessation.  When  he  knows  and
sees  this,  his  heart  is  Delivered  from  the  Canker  of
pleasures  of  sense,  from  the  Canker  of  continuing
existence,  and  from  the  Canker  of  ignorance;  and  to
him  thus  delivered  comes  the  knowledge  of  his  De¬
liverance  in  the  conviction  that  rebirth  Is  for  him  no
more,  that  he  has  lived  the  highest  life,  that  his  task  is
done,  and  that  now  for  him  there  is  no  more  of  what  he
has  been.— This  too  is  a  state .  .  .  higher  life  with  me.

Hereon,  the  Wanderer  Sakulud&yi  said  to  the  Lord ;
Wonderful,  sir,  wonderful)  Just  as  a  man  might  set
upright  again  ,  .  .  (eU.) ...  and  to  his  Confraternity.
I  ask  to  receive  admission  as  a  Pilgrim,  with  con¬
firmation  therein.  .  ,

Hereon,  SakuludSyi's  company  of  Wanderers  be¬
sought  and  implored  him  not  to  lead  the  higher  life
with  the  recluse  Gotama ;  not  to  come  down  from
teacher  to  pupil, — from  pitcher  to  pipkin.  In  such
wise  did  the  Wanderer  Sakuludayi's  company  oppose
his  choice  of  the  higher  life  under  the  Lord.


LXXX.  VEKHANASSA-SUTTA.

MORS  SO-CALLED  PERFECTION.

[40]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  An£thapio4ikas
pleasaunce,  the  Wanderer  Vekhanassa*  came  to  the
Lord  and  after  an  exchange  of  courteous  greetings  took

‘  B«.  says  be  was  the  teacher  of  the  Sakuludayi  of  the  previous
Sottas.


22


LXXX.  VEJCHANAS5A-SUTTA.


M.  H.  4i>  4^


his  stand  to  one  side,  exclaiming  with  deep  emotion :
Here  Is  perfection  I  here  is  perfection  t  ...

Why  do  you  say  this  ?  What  is  this  perfection  ?

The  perfection  than  which  nothing  is  higher  or  more
excellent.

What  is  the  perfection  than  which  nothing  is  higher
or  more  excellent  ?

It  is  the  perfection  than  which  nothing  is  higher  or
more  excellent.

This  argument  of  yours,  Kacdina,  would  be  pro^  *
tract^.  YOU  a£firm  . .  .  as  at  pp.  ry  and  t8  supra)
...  [41  and  42]  inferior  to  a  fire- fly.  but  never  define  it.

Five  strands,  KaccSna,  make  up  pleasures  of  sense,
namely,  visible  shapes,  sounds,  odours,  tastes  and
touch,  [48]  all  of  them  pleasant  and  agreeable  and
delightful,  all  of  them  bound  up  with  pleasure  and
excltiDg.  The  pleasure  and  satisfaction  which  they
start  is  called  sensuous  pleasure,  built  up  from  the
foregoing  five,  and  culminating  in  that  r^nement  of
pleasure  which  is  accounted  the  highest  of  all.

Here  Vekhanassa  said : — It  is  wonderful,  sir,  it  Is
marvellous,  how  well  put  is  your  observation  that
pleasures  of  sense  build  up  sensuous  pleasure,  culmin¬
ating  in  that  refinement  of  pleasure  which  is  accounted
the  lighesi  of  all !

All  this  is  hard  for  you  to  grasp,  Kacdlna, — you
who  bold  difiereat  views  and  a  dinerent  creed,  who
have  a  different  objective,  a  difierent  allegiance  and  a
different  teaching.  But  it  would  be  known  to  those
Almsmen  who  are  Arahats,  in  whom  Cankers  are
dead,  who  have  greatly  lived,  whose  task  is  done,  who
have  cast  off  their  burthen,  who  have  won  their  weal,
whose  bonds  are  broken,  who  by  utter  Knowledge
have  won  Deliverance.

Here,  in  his  anrtoyance*and  rage,  the  Wanderer
Vekhanassa,  actually  daring  to  fiout  and  scoff  at  the
Lord  to  his  face,  said  to  the  Lord,  with  the  idea  that
‘  the  recluse  Gotama'  would  be  annoyed  : — So  this  is
how  some  '  recluses  and  brahmins/  koowii^  naught  of
what  has  been  before  and  seeing  nothing  of  what  shall


M.  \l  44.


MORE  SO-CALLED  PERFECTION.


23


come  hereafter,  yet  profess :  Rebirth  is  now  no  more ;

1  have  lived  the  highest  life ;  my  usk  is  done ;  and
now  for  me  there  is  now  no  more  of  what  I  have  been!
These  professions  of  theirs  prove  ridiculous,  mere
words,  empty  and  without  substance  j

[44]  Your  censure  is  quite  just,  Kaccina,  with
regard  to  such  recluses  and  brahmins  as,  knowing
naught  of  what  has  been  before  and  seeing  nothing
of  what  shall  come  hereafter,  yet  profess  all  this.
But  let  us  leave  what  has  been  and  what  will  be  here¬
after.  Let  there  come  along  a  man  of  intelligence,
guileless,  honest  and  straightforward,  who  avers  that
he  has  a  message  to  deliver  and  a  Doctrine  to  preach,
and  chat  any  man  who  walks  according  to  that  message
will  not  be  long  ere  of  himself  he  will  know  and  of
himself  will  see ;  for  thereby  comes  release  from  the
direst  of  bonds — namely  Ignorance.  It  is  just  like  a
tiny  babe  which  cannot  yet  sit  up  and  has  fivefold
swaddlings  round  its  neck  and  is  alf  bandages.  If,  as
he  grows  and  develops  his  faculties,  those  bandages  are
taken  off,  he  would  know  that  he  was  released  and  that
his  bandages  were  gone.  It  is  just  the  same  when  a
man  of  intelligencecomes  along,  guileless . ,  -  ignorance.

Hereupon,  the  Wanderer  Vekhanassa  said  to  the
Lord:— Wonderful,  Gotama;  wonderful  1— i  ask
the  reverend  Gotama  to  accept  me  as  a  lay-disciple  who
found  an  abiding  refuge  from  this  day  onwards.

LXXXr.  GHATiKARA-SUTTA.

THE  POTTER'S  DEVOTtON.

[45]  Tsus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  with
a  large  train  of  Almsmen  was  on  an  alms-pilgrimage
in  Kosala,  he  turned  off  the  road  and  at  a  certain  spoc
smiled.  Thought  the  reverend  Ananda What  is  the
cause,  what  are  ^e  reasons  for  the  Lords  snulingj
for.  Truth-finders  never  smile  without  cause  and
reason.  So,  with  one  shoulder  respectft^y  bated
and  with  folded  palms  reverently  extended  towards


24


LXm.  GHATIKaRA-SUTTA.


M.  a  46.


the  Lord,  Ananda  asked  what  made  him  smile,  seeing
that  Truth-finders  never  smile  without  cause  and  reason.

In  bygone  times,  Ananda,  a  market- town  stood
here,  named  Vehaline^a,  opulent  and  wealthy,  populous
and  thronged  with  folk ;  and  hard  by  lived  Kassapa
the  Lord,  Arahac  all -enlightened.  Just  here  was  his
pleasaunce ;  and  on  this  very  spot  he  sat  preaching  to
his  Confraternity.

Spreading  out  his  robe  folded  in  four,  Ananda  said : _

I  beg  the  Lord  to  seat  himself  here,  and  then  this
spot  will  have  been  frequented  by  two  Arahats  all-
enlightened.

Seating  himself  accordingly,  the  Lord  addressed
Ananda  as  follows  j — Yes,  ICassapa  the  Lord,  Arahat
all  -  enlightened,  lived  near  the  market- town  of
VehaJinga^  and  on  this  very  spot  he  sat  [46]  preaching
to  his  Confraternity,  In  the  town  there  was  a  potter
named  Gha^Ikara  who  ministered,  more  chan  anyone,
to  Kassapa  the  Lord,  Arahat  albenlighcened ;  and
Gba^Tkira  had  as  his  bosom-friend  a  young  brahmin
named  JotipSla,  whom  he  wanted  to  take  to  see
Kassapa  the  Lord,  Arahat  all- enlightened,  as  he  much
valued  going  there  himself.

A  truce  to  this,  my  dear  GhafTk3ra,  was  the  answer ;
what  is  the  good  of  seeing  that  shaveling  of  a  recluse?

A  second  time  and  yet  a  third  time  did  Ghatikftra
renew  his  appeal,  but  only  to  get  the  same  answer.
So  he  then  invited  JocipSla  to  come  with  him  to  the
river  to  bathe,  taking  with  them  their  strings  of  red
bath-balls  to  shampoo  themselves  with.  Jotipaia
readily  assenting,  down  the  two  went  to  the  nver
to  bathe,  and  here  Gha^kSra,  after  mentioning  that
the  Lord  Kassapa’s  pleasaunce  was  hard  by,  renew^
his  appeal  to  JotipSla,  [4^  repeating  it  thrice  and
thrice  reaving  the  same  refosal  as  before.  Then,  he
made  bis  ^peal  again,  this  lime  with  a  grip  on
JctipSla's  girdle ;  but  Jotipaia  shook  his  girdle  free
and  again  refused  to  come.  At  last,  GhatikSra  seized
JotipSa — whose  hair  was  down  after  bathing — by  die
hair  of  his  bead  and  made  a  final  appeal  to  him  to


M.  ii.  aS.


THE  potter's  DEVOTION-


25


come.  Thought  the  young  brahmin  :  —  This  is
wonderful  indeed  and  marvellous  that  this  potter,  my
inferior  in  birth,  should  be  impelled  to  seize  me  by  the
hair;  methinks  this  presses  great  things.  So  he
said  to  the  potter: — io  this  length  do  you  go,  friend
Gha^kara  ? — Yes,  to  this  length,  friend  Jotiplla,  so
highly  [48]  do  1  value  going  to  see  Kassapa  the  Lord,
Arahat  all-enlightened.

—  Let  go  then,  and  we  wjll  start  now.

So  to  Kassapa  the  Lord  the  two  went.  On  arrival,
the  potter  after  salutations  took  his  seat  to  one  aide,
as  also  did  the  young  brahmin  after  exchange  of  civil
greetings.  Ghafrk£ra  then  presented  his  friend  the

toung  brahmin  Jotiplla,  with  the  request  that  the
■ord  would  instruct  him  in  the  Doctrine.  Thereupon,
by  a  discourse  on  the  Doctrine,  the  Lord  Kassapa
instructed,  roused,  fired,  and  cheered  them  onwards,—
after  which  the  two  thanked  him  with  glad  hearts,
rose  up,  and  took  their  leave  with  deep  reverence.

Said  JotipSlato  Ghatikara Hearing  this  Doctrine,
are  you  not  for  becorning  a  Pilgrim  ?

Do  you  not  know,  my  dear  JotipSla,  that  1  have
aged,  blind  parents  to  support  ?

Well,  then,  I  will  go  from  home  to  homelessness  as  a
Pilgrim,

So  back  the  two  went  to  Kassapa  the  Lord,  [48]  to
whom,  when  after  salutations  they  were  both  seat^,
Gba^'kSra  presented  his  friend  for  admission  to  the
Order ;  and  JotipSla  was  admitted  and  confirmed  of  the
following  of  Kassapa  the  Lord,  Arabat  all^enlightened.
Soon — about  a  fortnight  after  JotipaJa’s  confirmation —
the  Lord  Kassapa,  having  stayed  as  long  as  he  wanted
at  Vehalinga,  proceeded  on  his  tour  towards  Benares,
where  he  resided  in  the  Sages'  grove  in  the  deer-park.

When  it  reached  the  ears  of  Kiki,  king  of  KSsi,
that  ^e  Lord  Kassapa  had  arrived  there,  he  ordered
bis  chariots  so  fair,  so  fair,  to  be  got  ready  and  in  one
of  these  drove  in  procession  out  of  Benares  in  royal
state  to  visit  the  Lord  Kassapa.  After  riding  in  his
chariot  as  far  as  the  ground  permitted,  and  then  con-


26


M.  {L  SOi


LXXXT.  GHATOiRA-SUTTA.


tinuing  his  way  on  foot,  the  king  came  to  the  Lord,
whom  he  first  saluted  and  then  took  a  seat  to  one  std^
there  to  be  instructed,  roused,  fired  and  checro
onwards  by  a  discourse  from  the  Lord  Kassapa.  The
instruction  over,  the  king  invited  the  Lord,  [50]  with
the  Confraternity,  to  take  his  meal  with  him  on  the
morrow.  By  silence  the  Lord  gave  assent,  whereon
the  king  rose  and  withdrew  with  deep  reverence.

When  night  was  gone,  the  king  ordered  an  excellent
meal  in  his  palace  of  food,  both  hard  and  soft,  rnade
of  specially  dried  golden- rice  without  speck,  and  divers
sauces  and  curries  therewith.  Then  he  order^
announcement  to  be  made  to  Kassapa  the  Lord,
Arahai  all-enlightened,  that  all  was  ready ;  and  in  th^
forenoon,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  the  Lord
came  to  the  palace  afid  sat  down  on  the  seat  sec
for  him,  with  his  Confraternity  round  ^  him.  There¬
upon,  with  his  own  royal  hands  the  king  served  that
excellent  meal  to  the  Confraternity  with  the  Buddha
at  its  head, — without  stint,  till  all  had  had  their  fill.
The  Lord's  meal  over,  the  king  took  a  low  seat  to
one  side  and  invited  the  Lord  to  spend  the  rainy
season  at  Benares,  where  the  Confraternity  would  be
ministered  to  as  they  bad  been  that  day.

Stay,  sire  ;  1  have  already  promised  co  be  elsewhere
For  the  rains.

After  repeating  his  invitation  a  second  and  yet  a
third  time,  and  still  being  met  by  the  same  answer,
the  king  [51],  upset  and  pained  by  this  cefusd,  asked
die  Lord  whether  there  was  anyone  who  minissered
more  chan  himself.

Yes.  sire;  at  Vebalinga  there  is  a  potter  named
Gbadkara  who  in  his  ministrations  surpasses  all  others.
Your  Majesty  was  upset  and  pained  by  my  refusal;—
fwc  so  Ghat^ikara  either  now  or  any  future  time.  He
has  found  his  refuge  in  the  Buddha,  the  Doctrine,  and
the  Confraternity;  he  slays  not;  he  steals  not;  no
sensual  misconduct  is  his;  he  lies  not;  he  indulges
not  In  arrack  or  spirits  or  strong  drink ;  perfect  faith
is  his  in  die  Buddha,  the  Doctrine,  and  Che  Confra-


M.  ii.  52.


THE  potter’s  devotion.


27


ternity ;  his  are  the  virtues  dear  to  the  Noble,  No
doubts  cloud  his  beliefs  concerning  Ill,  the  origin  of
111,  the  cessation  of  ID,  and  the  course  which  leads  to
the  cessation  of  III.  Eating  only  one  meal  a  day,  he
lives  the  higher  life  in  virtue  and  .goodness.  He  has
flung  aside  all  Jewels  and  golden  ornaments ;  no  gold
or  silver  has  he.  Neither  with  tool  nor  hand  does  he
dig  up*  ground,  resting  content  for  his  material  with
the  crumbling  soil  of  a  bank  or  with  the  earth  scratched
out  by  rats  and  dogs.  Of  his  pots  made  therewith  he
bids  folk  take  what  they  like  in  barter  for  rice  or  beans
or  pulse.  He  supports  [52]  his  blind  and  aged  parents.
By  destruction  of  the  five  bonds  which  tie  men  to  this
lower  world,  Ghatlkara  is  destined  to  translation  here¬
after  to  realms  above,  never  to  return  thence  to  this
world  any  more.  .  ,  *

Once,  sire,  when  I  was  at  Vehalinga,  I,  early  in  the
day,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  went  to  Ghatikara's
parents  and  asked  where  tbeir  son  was.  Your  minis-
tremt,  said  they,  is  out;  take  the  rice  from  the  pot
and  the  curry  from  the  dish.  1  did  so  and  a/terwaws
left  When  Gha^kSra  returned,  and  asked  bis  parents
who  had  gone  off  with  the  food,  and  was  told  that  it  was
Kassapa  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-enlighcene<t  his  only
thought  was  how  great  a  thing,  how  very  great  a
thing,  that  the  Lord  should  repose  such  confidence  in
him  I  And  gladness  and  satisfaction  lasted  on  for  a
fortnight  for  him,  and  for  a  week  for  his  parents-

Predsely  the  same  thit^  happened  another  time
when  I  had  the  junket  from  a  pan  with  the  curry
from  the  dish  .  .  .  [581  week  for  his  parents.

Another  time,  when  I  was  at  this  same  Vehalinga,
my  hut  ^  Almsmen  to  go

and  see  if  therelS^  any  thatching  material*  ac
Gha^-kSra’s  dwelUng.  No,  was  their  answer ;  there
is  only  the  thatch  on  roof..

Then  go  and  strip  it  said  I ;  and  they  did  sa
The  parents  asked  who  \?as  stripping  cheir  thatch  ott

»  To  aToid  taking  life,  in*  ^btaioiog  Ws  potter’s  eartii.


28


LXXX  I.  OHATiK  AR  A-SUTT  A.


M.  Ii-  54


and  received  the  answer  that  the  hut  of  the  Lord
Kassapa  was  letting  the  rain  in.  Take  it,  sirs,  s^d
they  ;  take  it,  dear  people.  When  the  potter  returned
and  on  enquiry  was  told  of  all  this,  his  only  thought
was  how  great  .  .  .  [54]  week  for  his  parents.  For
three  whde  months  the  dwelling  stood  bare  to  the
heavens,  and  yet  not  a  drop  of  rain  came  through  (
— Such,  sire,  is  GhatIkSra  the  potter.

Said  the  king:— It  is  a  great  thing,  sir,  a  very
great  thing  indeed,  for  this  potter  to  have  such
confidence  reposed  in  him  by  the  Lord.  Then,
Ananda,  KikI,  king  of  KSsi,  ordered  five  hundred
cartloads  of  the  choicest  golden-rice,  with  curry-stuffs
to  match,  to  be  despatched  to  the  potter,  to  whom  the
king's  servants  came  with  the  royal  present  for  accept¬
ance  accordingly.  The  king,  was  nis  response,  has
much  to  do  and  look  after;  1  have  nothing  to  do
with  him.

But,  if  you  were  to  imagine,  Ananda,  that  the  young
brahmin,  Joiipala,  of  those  days  was  someone  else,  that
would  be  erroneous ; — it  was  I  myself  who  was  Jotipala
then.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


Lxxxii.  ratthapAla-sutta.

OF  RENOUNCING  THE  WORLD.

Thus  have  I  beard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  on
an  alms-pilgfimage  in  the  Kuru  country  with  a  ^eat
company  of  Almsmen,  he  stayed  at  ^liullakot^co,
wbi^  is  a  township  of  the  Kurus.  It  came  to  the
ears  of  the  brahmin  heads  of  houses  there  that  the
reduse  Gotama,  a  Sakyan..  .  ,  (gic.  as  in  Snita  4t>
.  .  .  [55]  and  och^  again  in  silence.  When  they
were  seated,  the  Lord  instructed  and  roused  them
with  a  talk  on  the  Doctrine,  fired  them  and  cheered
them  onwards.


M.  ii.  5$.  or  RBNOUWCING  TTIE  WORLD.  39

‘Sealed  among  them  was  a  young  man  named
Ra'tthapSla,  a  scion  of  a  leading  family  of  the  place,  to
whom  this  thought  came  :^So  far  as  I  understand  the
Doctrine  which  the  Lord  has  preached,  it  is  no  easy
matter  for  one  who  lives  in  a  home  to  lead  the  higher
life  in  all  its  fulness,  puritv,  and  perfection;  what  if  1
were  to  cue  off  hair  and  lieard,  don  the  yellow  robes
and  go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim !

Having  received  their  instruction  from  the  Lord,
the  brahmin  heads  of  houses  of  Thullakofcthita  grate¬
fully  thanked  him,  rose  up  [50]  and  departed  with
deep  obeisance.  They  had  not  been  gone  long,  when
Rafthapala  came  up  and  after  salutations  told  the  Lord
the  thought  which  bad  come  to  him,  and  asked  to  be
admitted  to,  and  confirmed  in,  the  Confraternity  under
the  Lord.

Have  you  your  parents*  consent  for  this  step,
Raf^ap&la  P

No,  sir.

Truth-finders  do  not  admit  those  who  have  not  their
parents’  consent.

That  consent,  sir,  I  will  take  steps  to  obtain,  said
the  young  man,  who  rising  up  and  taking  a  reverential
leave  of  the  Lord,  went  off  to  his  parents,  told  them
his  thoughts  and  asked  their  consent  to  his  becoming
a  Pilgrim.

The  parents  made  answer  as  follows Dear  Rati^ha-
pala,  you  are  our  only  son,  very  dear  to  us  and  beloved;
you  live  in  comfort  and  have  been  brought  up  in
comfort,  with  no  experience  at  all  of  discomfort.  [Go
away;  eat,  [57]  drink,  enjoy  yourself,  and  do  good
works  in  all  happiness.  We  refuse  our  consent.]
Your  death  would  leave  lis  desolate,  with  no  pleasure
left  in  life ;  why,  while  we  have  you  still,  should  we
consent  to  your  going  forth  from  home  to  homeless¬
ness  as  a  Pilgrim?

A  second  and  yet  a  ibird  time  did  Rat^hapila  repeat


‘  Th©  sam©  story  is  toU,  ia  prtctically  tb©  sam©  words,  about
Sudianaat  Vinaya  Til,  tM5.


LXXXir.  R  ATT  H  APiXA-SUTT  A.


M.  fu


30


his  request,  only  to  be  met  by  the  same  refusal  from
his  parents.

Failing  thus  to  get  his  parents’  consent,  the  young
man  flung  himself  down  on  the  bare  ground,  declaring
that  he  would  either  die  there  or  become  a  Pilgrim.

[58]  His  parents  entreated  him  to  get  while
repeating  their  objections  to  his  becoming  a  Pilgrim ;
but  the  young  man  smd  nor  a  word-  A  second  and  a
third  time  they  entreated  him,  but  still  he  said  not  a
word.  [So  the  parents  sought  out  Ratthapfila’s  com¬
panions  whom  they  told  of  all  this  and  besou^t  them
to  ui^c.  as  from  themselves,  what  his  parents  had
to  him.]  [59]  Thrice  his  companions  appealed  to  him ;
but  still  be  said  not  a  word.  So  his  companions  came
to  the  parents  with  this  report;— There  on  the  bare

f round  he  lies,  declaring  that  he  will  either  die  there
60]  or  become  a  Pilgrim.  If  you  refuse  your  consent,
be  will  never  get  up  alive.  But,  if  you  give  your  con¬
sent,  you  will  see  fiim  when  he  has  become  a  Pilgrim.
Should  he  not  like  bdng  a  Pilgrim,  what  alternative
will  he  have  ?— Why,  only  to  come  back  here.  Do

give  your  consent !  .  i%.i  •  ^

Yes,  we  consent but  when  he  Is  a  Pilgrim,  he
must  come  and  see  us.

Off  now  went  his  companions  to  RaWhapIla,  whom
they  told  that  his  parents  gave  their  consent,  but  that
when  he  was  a  Pilgrim  he  was  to  come  and  see  them.

Thereupon  the  young  man  arose  and,  when  he  had
regained  his  strength,  betook  him  to  the  Lord,  aftd
after  salutations  seated  himself  to  one  side,  saying
1  have  got  my  parents’  consent  to  my  becoming  a
Pilgrim ;  I  ask  the  Lord  to  admit  me.

Admission  and  confirmation  were  granted  him  under
the  Lord ;  and  some  fortnight  afterwards  the  Lord,
having  stayed  at  ThuUakotthita  as  long  as  he  wanted,
proceeded  on  his  aicns-pilgrimage  tovwds  SSvatihi,
where  [61]  he  took  up  hb  abode  in  J eta’s  grove  la
Anithapi^dika’s  pleasaunce.

DweUing  alone  and  aloof,  strenuous,  ardent  and
purged  of  self,  the  reverend  Rati^hapl.la  was  not  long


OF  RBNOtJMaNO  THE  WORLD.


3*


before  he  won  the  prize  in  quest  of  which  young  men
go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as  Pilgrims,  that
prize  of  prizes  which  crowns  the  highest  life ; — even
this  did  he  think  out  for  himself,  realize,  enter  on,  and
abide  in,  here  and  now ;  and  to  him  came  the  know¬
ledge  that  for  him  rebirth  was  no  more ;  that  he  had
lived  the  highest  life  i  that  his  task  was  done ;  and
that  now  for  him  there  was  no  more  o£  what  he  had
been.  Thus,  the  reverend  RaWhapSla  was  numbered
among  the  Ajahats.

Then»  he  went  to  the  Lord  and,  seated  to  one  side
after  salutations,  smd  that,  with  the  Lord’s  permission,
he  wished  to  go  and  see  his  parents.  Scanning  with
his  own  heart  the  thoughts  of  Ra^thapala's  heart,  and
recognizing  thereby  that  he  was  incapable  of  abandoning
bis  training  and  reverting  to  the  lower  life  of  a  layman,
the  Lord  bade  him  go  when  he  would.  Hereupon,
rising  up  and  taking  nis  leave  of  the  Lord  with  deep
reverence,  Ratthapila,  after  duly  putting  away  his
bedding,  set  out,  with  his  robe  and  bowl,  on  an  alms-
pUgrim^e  to  ThullakoWhita  where  he  took  up  his
abode  in  the  deer-park  of  the  Kuru  kit^,  v^arly  next
morning,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  band,  he  went  into
the  town  for  alms  and  there,  as  he  passed  from  house
to  house  on  his  undiscriminattag  round,  be  came  to  bis
father’s  house.  Indoors,  in  the  ball  within  the  middle
door,  his  father  was  having  his  hair  combed  and,
seeing  Rat^hap ala  coming  in  the  distance  he  said  : —
It  was  tiese  shavelings  of  recluses  who  made  a
Pilgrim  of  my  dear  and  beloved  only  son-  [62]  So  at
bis  own  father's  house  Rat^apUa  was  given  nothing,
not  even  a  refusal ;  all  be  got  was  abuse.

At  this  moment  a  si  are-girl  the  family  was

about  to  throw  away  yesterday’s  stale  rice;  and  to
her  Ratthapala  said:— If,  sister,  that  is  to  be  ^rown
away,  put  it  in  my  bowl  here,  As  the  girl  was  doing
so,  sbe  recognized  his  hands  and  feet  and  voice,  ana,
going  straight  Co  her  mistress,  cried  out  :—Do  you
know,  madam  ? — The  young  master  is  back,

If  what  you  say  k  true,  you  are  a  slave  no  longer,


32


Lxxxir.  ratthapAla-sutta.


M.  ii.  63.


said  the  mother,  who  hurried  off  to  tell  her  husband
chat  she  heard  their  son  was  back.

Rat^ap&la  was  eating  that  stale  rice  under  the
hedge  when  his  father  arrived,  exclaiming  i—Can  it
be,  my  dear  son,  that  you  are  eating  stale  rice  ?
Should  you  not  have  come  to  your  own  house  ?

What  house  of  our  own,  householder,  can  we  have
who  are  homeless,  having  gone  forth  from  home  to
homelessness  as  Pilgrims?  1  did  come  [68]  to  your
house, — where  I  was  given  nothing,  not  even  a  refusal ;
all  I  got  was  abuse.

Come,  my  son  ;  let  us  go  indoors.

Not  so,  househi^der ;  I  have  finished  my  eating  for
to-day.

Well  then,  my  son,  promise  to  take  your  meaJ  here
to-morrow.

By  his  silence  the  reverend  Ratthapsla  gave  con¬
sent.  Noting  this,  the  father  went  indoors, — where
first  he  ordered  great  heaps  of  gold  and  bullion  to  be
piled  up  under  a  covering  of  macs  and  then  he  cold  his
daughcers-in-law,  who  had  been  the  reverend  Raf^ha-
p&la's  wives  aforetime,  to  deck  themselves  ouc  in  all
the  finery  their  husband  liked  to  see  them  In.  When
night  had  passed,  the  father,  having  ordered  an
excellent  to  be  got  ready  in  his  house,  told  his
son  when,Ht  was  ready,  Thereupon,  early  chat  fore-
noon,  the  reverend  Ra^thapfila,  duly  robed  and  bowl
in  hand,  came  and  cook  the  seat  set  for  him.  Here¬
upon,  ordering  the  heap  of  treasure  to  be  unveiled,  the
father  said 'This  is  your  mother’s  fortune,  th^t  is
your  father’s,  and  that  came  from  your  grandfather.
You  have  the  wherewithal  both  to  enjoy  yourself  and
to  do  good  works.  Come,  my  son ;  [64]  abandon
your  trajning ;  revert  to  the  lower  life  of  the  layman :
enjoy  your  substance  and  do  good  works.

If  you  will  take  my  advice,  householder,  you  will
cart  away  all  this  heaped-up  treasure  and  sink  It  10  the
middle  of  the  Ganges.  And  why  ?— Because  thence
you  will  only  derive  sorrow  and  lamentation,  ills,  pain
of  mind,  pain  of  body,  and  tribulation.


M.  ii.  6;.


OF  RBKOUNCINO  THE  WORLD.


33


Clinging  to  hIs  feet,  the  reverend  Ratthapala's  whilom
wives  asked  what  like  were  the  nymphs  divine  for
whose  sake  be  was  leading  the  higher  life.

For  the  sake  of  no  nymphs  at  all,  sisters,  said  he.

At  hearing  themselves  called  sisters,  the  ladies  all
fell  to  the  ground  in  a  faint.

Ssud  RaUha^a  to  his  father: — If  food  is  to  be
given,  householder,  give  it ;  trouble  me  not.

The  food  is  ready,  my  son  ;  begin  ; — said  the  father
as  he  served  that  excellent  meal  without  stint  till  his
son  had  had  his  fill.

His  meal  over  and  done,  the  reverend  Ra^hapala
uttered  these  verses,  standing  the  while  : —


TA^ts  pranked’OUt  simhlance  vi$w,  ikis  mass  corrupt
of  sores  and  cares ^  which  passes  soon  away.

Copte  view  this  pranked-out  frame  with  jewels  dight,
these  bones  skin-clad  which  borrow  charm  from  dotkes;
come  view  these  kenndd  feet^  this  powder'd  face.
Delusums  vain  the  fool  may  satisfy,
but  never  him  whose  quest  seeks  goals  Beyond.

[6^  Ah,  braided  hair!  Ah,  eyes  by  art  enhanced/
Delusions  vain  the  fool  may  satisfy,
but  never  Aim  whose  quest  seeks  goals  Beyond.
Adorned,  this  frame  like  rare  pomander  s/tows.
Delusions  vain  the  fool  may  satisfy,  *
but  never  him  w/wse  quest  seeks  ^oals  Beyond
The  trapper  set  /sis  gin ;  ike  stag  it  shunned: —

First  feed,  then  leave  the  trapper  to  kis  tears. «

When,  still  standing,  he  had  uttered- these  verses,
he  departed  to  the  deer-park  of  the  K urn  king,  where
he  sat  down  under  a  tree  during  the  noontide  neat.

Now  the  king  had  given  directions  to  his  huntsman
to  tidy  up  the  park  against  his  coming  to  see  it ;  &nd
the  obedient  huntsman  was  engaged  on  his  task  when
he  saw  Ra^apala  seated  under  his  tree  during  the
noontide  beat,  and  reported  to  the  king  that  the  park
was  in  .order  but  that  under  a  tree  there  was  seated
Ra^hapala,  die  young  gentleman  of  whom  his  majesty
had  often  beard  tell.  Never  mind  about  the  park  to¬
ri.  3


34


LX  XXtl.  KATTH  APALA-SU  TTA.


M.  \l  66.


day,  said  the  king;  1  will  pay  a  call  on  bis  reverence.
Ordering,  therefore,  all  the  repast  which  had  been  pre¬
pared  CO  be  left  behind,  and  his  chariots,  so  fair,  so
fair,  to  be  made  ready,  he  mounted  one  of  them  and
drove  forth  in  procession  in  royal  state  out  of  the  dty
to  see  RaWhapfila,  Riding  as  far  as  the  ground  was
passable  for  bis  chariot  and  proceeding  thence  on  foot
with  his  princely  train,  the  king  came  at  last  upon
the  reverend  Raifhaplla,  whom,  [66]  after  exchange  of
courteous  greetings,  the  king — still  standing — invited
to  be  seated  on  a  clump  of  Bowers.

Nay,  sire ;  sit  you  there ;  I  have  got  a  seat.

Seating  himseff  on  the  seat  indicated  to  him,  the
king  saia : — There  are  four  kinds  of  loss,  RatthapSla,
which  impel  men  to  cut  off  hair  and  beard,  don  the
yellow  robes,  and  go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness
as  Pilgrims, — namely,  (i)  old-age,  (ii)  failing  health,
(iii)  impoverishment,  and  (iv)  death  of  kinsfolK.

(i)  Take  a  man  who,  ^elng  aged  and  old,  hx
advanced  in  life,  stricken  in  years,  and  at  the  close
of  life,  recognizes  bis  position,  and  realizes  the  difficulty
either  of  acquiring  new  wealth  or  of  doing  well  with
what  he  has  got ; — so  he  decides  to  become  a  Pilgrim.
This  is  known  as  the  loss  which  old*^:e  entails.  But
here  are  you  in  the  prime  of  youth  and  early  manhood,
with  a  wealth  of  coal-black  hair  uncouch^  by  grey,
and  in  all  the  beauty  of  your  prime ; — not  yours  Is  the
loss  old-age  entails.  WHat  live  you  known  or  seen
or  heard  to  make  you  turn  Pilgrim  ?

(a)  Or  take  a  man  who,  being  in  ill-bealch  or  pain,
or  gravely  ill,  recognizes  his  position  and  realises
the  difficulty  either  of  acquiring  new  wealth  or  of
doing  well  with  what  he  has  already;  [67]  so  he
decides  to  become  a  Pilgrim.  This  is  known  as  the
loss  which  failing  health  entails.  But  here  are  you
neither  ill  nor  allir^,  with  a  good  digestion  m^tained
by  humours  neither  too  hot  tior  too  cold ; — not  yours
is  the  loss  which  failing  health  entails.  What  have

fou  known  or  seen  or  heard  to  make  you  turn
ilgrim  ?


M.  il  6S


OF  RENOyHClNG  THE  WOBiD-


35


(3)  Or  take  a  man  who,  after  being  rich  and  weaJihy
and  of  great  substance,  and  after  gradually  losing  it,
recogniees  his  position  and  realizes  the  difficulty  either
of  acquiring  new  wealth  or  of  doing  well  with  what  he
has  got ; — so  he  decides  to  become  a  Pilgrim.  This
is  known  as  the  loss  which  impoverishment  entails.
But  here  are  you,  the  heir  of  a  leading  family  in  our
Tbullako^fhita ; — not  yours  is  the  loss  which  im¬
poverishment  entails.  What  have  you  known  or  seen
or  heard  to  make  you  turn  Pilgrim  ?

(4)  Or,  ^ain,  take  a  man  who,  after  having  had  a
host  of  friends  and  relations,  and  after  having  gradually
lost  them  all,  recognizes  his  position  and  resizes  the
difficulty  either  of  acquiring  new  wealth  or  of  doing
well  with  what  he  has  got ; — [6S]  so  he  decides  to
become  a  Pilgrim.  This  is  known  as  the  loss  which
kinsfolk*s  death  entails.  But  here  are  you  with  a  host
of  friends  and  relations ; — not  yours  is  the  loss  which
kinsfolk’s  death  entails.  What  have  you  known  or
seen  or  heard  to  make  you  turn  Pilgrim  f

I  have  gone  forth,  sire,  from  home  to  homelessness
as  a  Pilgrim  because  I  have  known,  seen,  and  heard
the  following  four  propositions  enunciated  by  the  Lord
who  knows  and  sees,  the  Arahat  all-enlightened : —

(i)  The  world  is  in  continuaWux  and  change ;

(ii)  The  world  is  no  protector  or  preserver;

(iii)  The  world  owns  nothing ;  we  must  leave
everything  behind ;

(iv)  The  world  lacks  and  hankers,  being  enslaved
to  Craving.

(j)  When  you  say,  sir,  chat  the  world  is  in  continual
flux  and  change,  what  might  chat  mean  ?

When  you  were  twenty,  sire,  or  five  and  twenty,
could  you  handle  an  elephant,  a  horse,  a  chariot,  a
bow  and  a  sword  ?  Were  you  strong  of  leg  and  arm,
a  doughty  warrior  in  the  fight  ?

Indeed,  I  was: — at  times  inspired,  you  might  say;
1  never  met  my  match,

Are  you  to-day  what  you  were  then,  sire?

No,  Raflhap&la.  I  am  old  now  and  stricken  in


36


LXXXn.  RATTHAPiU^-SUTTA.


M.  li.  7a


years, — round  eighty  years  of  age ; — ac  times  when
I  want  to  step  in  one  direction,  I  step  in  another.

It  was  this  which  the  Lord  meant  when  he  said  the
world  is  in  continual  dux  and  change ;  and  it  was  this
which  1  knew  and  saw  and  heard,  and  so  became  a
Pilgrim.

It  is  wonderful,  sir,  it  is  marvellous,  how  right  in
this  the  Loi*d  was ;  for,  indeed,  the  world  is  in  a  con¬
tinual  dux  and  change.

(a)  Here  in  my  own  entourage  there  are  elephants,
horses,  chariots,  and  footmen  who,  in  our  hour  of  need,
would  [70]  rally  in  defence.  When  you  sav,  wr,  that
the  world  is  no  protector  or  preserver,  wnat  might
this  mean  P

Do  you  suffer  from  any  chronic  ailment,  sire?

Yes, — from  wind ;  Ani  so  badly  that  at  limes  mv
court  and  kinsfolk,  as  they  stand  round  me,  think
every  moment  I  am  going  to  expire.

Can  you  tell  them  to  ease  your  pain  by  parcelling  it
out  among  themselves?  Or  do  you  alone  have  to
bear  it?

I  alone  have  to  bear  it.  and  cannot  tell  them  to
parcel  it  out  among  themselves  so  as  to  relieve  me.

It  was  this  which  the  Lord  meant  when  he  said  the
world  is  no  protector  or  preserver;  and  it  was  this
which  I  knew  and  saw  and  heard,  and  so  became  a
PUgrim.

It  is  wonderful,  it  is  marvellous,  bow  right  in  this
the  Lord  was;  for,  indeed,  the  world  is  no  protector
or  preserver.

(3)  Here  in  my  own  wssession  I  have  a  vast  hoard
of  gold  and  silver.  When  you  said  chat  the  world
owns  nothing  and  that  we  must  leave  everything
behind,  what  might  that  mean  ?

Do  you  think,  sire,  that  [71]  it  will  be  yours  to
calculate  on  continuing  hereafter  che  gratihcadon  you
now  enjoy  of  the  fivefold  pleasures  of  sense  ?  Or,
will  others  come  into  your  belongings,  while  you  pass
away  to  fare  according  to  your  deserts  ?

1  can  calculate  on  no  such  continuance,  Ratthap&la,


M.  ii.  73.


OP  RENOUN  aNG  THE  WORLD.


37


Others  will  come  into  my  belong! ngs»  while  I  shall  pass
away  to  fare  according  to  my  deserts.

It  was  this  which  the  Lord  meant  when  he  said
that,  the  world  owns  nothing  and  that  we  must  leave
everything  behind;  and  It  was  this  which  1  knew  and
saw  and  beard  and  so  became  a  Pilgrim.

It  is  wonderful,  it  is  marvellous,  how  right  in  this
the  Lord  was ;  for>  indeed,  the  world  owns  nothing
and  we  must  leave  everything  behind.

(4)  When  you  said  that  the  world  lacks  and  hankers,
being  enslaved  to  Craving,  what  might  that  mean  ?

Is  this  Kuru  country  01  yours  prosperous,  sire  ?

Yes,  it  is.

Suppose  a  trustworthy  and  reliable  man  brought
you  from  the  east  a  report  that  there  he  had  seen
a  great  country  rich  and  prosperous,  populous  and
thronged  with  inhabitants ;  abounding  in  elephants,
horses,  chariots  and  footmen ;  rich  in  ivory,  rich  in
silver  and  gold  both  raw  and  wrought,  with  women  in
abundance.  Suppose,  further,  that  the  man  estimated
that  you  could  conquer  that  country  with  such  and
such  a  force,  and  counselled  you  to  conquer  it  accord¬
ingly, — What  action  would  you  take  ?

^2]  I  should  conquer  it  and  possess  it.

Suppose  you  received  like  reports  about  countries  in
tbe  west,  the  north,  and  the  south.  What  action  would
you  take  ?

1  should  conquer  them  and  possess  them  all.

It  was  this  which  the  Lord  meant  when  he  said
that  the  world  lacks  and  hankers,  being  enslaved  to
Craving ;  and  it  was  this  which  1  knew  and  saw  and
heard,  and  so  became  a  Pilgrim.

It  is  wonderful,  it  is  marvellous,  how  right  in  this
the  Lord  was ;  for,  indeed,  the  world  lacks  and  hankers,
being  enslaved  to  Craving,

After  saying  this,  the  reverend  Ratthapala  went  on
•to  say : —

J^uA  men  I  see  who,  folly 'led,  ne'er  give,
bul  sHU  amass,  athirst  for  pleasures  netv.


38


LX  XX II.  R  ATTH  APALA-Surr  A.


M.  n.  73.


Tk4  king  whose  conquests  to  the  sea  extendy
for  sway  o'er  empires  overseas  will  pine.

[73]  Still  craving,  kings  and  subjects  pass  away :
lot  king,  still  lackingy  they  their  bodies  qudt ;
never  on  earth  can  pleasure's  maw  be  fill'd.

Tearing  their  hair,  ike  kinsmen  mourn  their  dead,
wishing  their  own  folk  deathless  were.  In  shroud^
the  corpse  they  carry  to  the  pyre;  and  there,
in  that  sole  vestmenty  reft  of  all  besides,
he  bums  to  ashes,  hauled  about  with  prongs.

No  kin,  no  friends  can  save  the  dying  man ;
his  heirs  his  substance  take ;  he  passes  hence
to  fare  hereafter  as  his  life  deserved,

—sans  wealthy  sans  wife,  sans  children,  wealth,  and
realm.

Wealth  buys  not  length  of  days,  nor  staves  off  age.

The  wise  say  life  is  brief,  a  fleeting  'fiux.

One  equal  stroke  strikes  down  both  ruh  and  poor,
both  wise  and foolish.  Fools  in  folly  fall :
the  wise  without  a  tremor  meet  their  stroke.

More  excellent  than  riches  Wisdom  proves,
whieh  here  and  now  Perfection's  crown  secures.

If  imperfections  linger,  error  breeds
misdeeds  in  life  hereafter,  high  or  low  ;
in  transmigration's  round  man  whirls  along
from  birth  to  birth,  world  still  sueceeding  world,

— both  he  and  all  his  witless  followers.

[74j  Like  burglars  caught  in  act  of  breaking  in,
so  men — hereafter— espiaSe  their  crimes.

The  tempting  charms  of  pleasure's  varied  lure
Ckuen  up  the  heart  to  iuhnoil perilous.

—  This,  sire,  J  saw, — and  went  on  Pilgrimage.

I  saw  how  yoteng  and  old,  like  fruit  from  tree,
in  mortal  dissolution  fall, — and  went
on  Pilgrimage.  The  friar^s  life  is  best.


M.  li.  75.  OP  MAINTAINmC.  GREAT  TRAOinONS.


39


LXXXIII.  makhAdeva-sutta.

OF  MAIKTAINING  GREAT  TRADITIONS.

Thus  have  1  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Michi]&  in  the  Makhadeva  mango-grove,  at
a  certain  spot  there  he  smiled.  Thought  the  reverend
Ananda : — What  is  the  cause  {eU.  as  in  Su/Sa  81) .  . .
cause  and  reason.

In  bygone  times,  Ananda,  in  this  same  Mithila  there
was  a  king  named  Makh&deva,  a  righteous  monarch,
an  emperor  stablished  in  righteousness,  who  dealt
righteously  with  brahmins  and  householders  in  town
and  country,  and  observed  the  four  holy-days  of  each
month.  [75]  After  many  years,  after  many  hundreds
and  thousands  of  years,  this  king  told  his  barber  to
report  when  he  found  a  grey  hair  in  his  head.
Accordingly,  when  grey  hairs  had  appeared,  after
many  years,  after  many  hundreds  and  thousands  of
years,  the  barber  said  to  the  kingi-^The  messengers
of  the  gods  have  come  to  your  Majesty ; — grey  hairs
have  appeared.  Then,  at  the  kind's  bi^itng,  the
barber  plucked  out  those  grey  hairs  with  tweezers  and
laid  them  on  the  outstretcnea  palm  of  the  king,  who,
having  hrst  rewarded  the  barber  with  a  choice
village,  summoned  his  eldest  son  and  said  to  him
The  messengers  of  the  gods  have  come  to  me grey
hairs  have  appeared.  Of  human  pleasures  1  have  naa
iDV  61) ;  and  it  is  dme  now  for  me  to  seek  pleasures
celestial.  Be  It  yours  to  rule  this  realm,  while  I,
cutting  off  hair  and  beard,  and  donning  the  yellow
robes,  will  go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as  a
Pilgrim.  Whenever,  in  your  turn,  ray  son,  you  find
grey  hairs  appearing,  reward  your  barber  with  a
village,  hand  over  your  sovereignty  to  your  eldest  son,
cat  off  your  hair  and  beard,  don  the  yellow  robes,  and
go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim,
oee  to  it  you  maintain  this  high  tradition,  and  do  not
prove  die  last  of  the  line,  when,  among  any  two


40


LXXXIII .  M  AKHiDEVA-SUTTA.


M.  tl  76.


persons,  there  is  a  break  in  a  tradition  so  high,  he
who  breaks  ic  is  the  last  of  the  lin^  Therefore,  1
enjoin  you,  my  son,  to  maintain  this  high  [76]  tradition
and  not  to  prove  the  last  of  the  line.

Thereupon,  King  Makh&deva,  after  having  bestowed
the  village  on  his  barber  and  after  establishing  his
eldest  son  as  king,  here  in  this  very  Makhadeva
man  go -grove  cut  off  his  hair  and  beard,  donned  the
yellow  robes,  and  went  forth  on  Pilgrimage.  <  His
radiant  thoughts  of  love  pervaded  all  four  quarters  of
the  world,  pervaded  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of
the  world,  above,  below,  around,  everywhere, — with
thoughts  of  love  all-embraccng  and  vast  beyond
measure,  uncinged  by  hate  or  31- will.  And  as  with
thoughts  of  love,  so  too  did  he  pervade  the  whole
length  and  breadth  of  the  world  with  thoughts  of  com¬
passion  and  of  sympathy  and  of  poise.  For  eighty-
four  thousand  years  that  king  had  enjoyed  tM
pleasures  of  youth ;  for  a  like  term  be  was  viceroy ;
for  a  like  term  he  reigned  as  king;  and  for  a  further
eighty-four  thousand  years  he  lived  the  higher  life  as  a
Pilgrim  in  this  grove,  where  he  cultivated  the  four
excellent  states  ( brahma- vihara),  so  that  at  the  body’s
dissolution  after  death  he  passed  to  the  heavens  of
BrabmSL

After  many  years,  after  many  hundreds  and
thousands  of  years,  King  Makbldeva’s  son  in  turn
told  his  barber  to  report  when  he  found  a  grey  hair
,  .  .  as  abovi)  .  .  ,  [77-78]  he  passed  to  the
heavens  of  Brahmfi-  And  so  in  unbroken  succession
did  not  only  the  son  but  also  the  grandson  and  the
later  descendants  of  King  MakbSdeva,  to  the  number
of  eighty-four  thousand  in  all

The  last  of  three  kings  so  to  do  was  Nlmi,  a
righteous  monarch,  an  emperor  stablished  in  righteous¬
ness  who  dealt  righteously  with  brahmins  and  house¬
holders  in  town  and  country,  and  observed  the  four
holy-days  of  each  month.

A  dme  came  when,  as  the  Thirty-three  gods  were
[79]  met  together  in  assembly  b  their  Hall  of  Truth,


M.  K.  to.  OF  MAINTAINING  GREAT  TRADITIONS.


the  talk  turned  on  what  a  great  thing  it  was,  what  a
very  great  thing,  for  the  people  of  Videha  to  have  In
Nimi  a  monarch  of  such  signal  righteousness ;  and
Sakka,  king  of  gods,  asked  the  Thirty-three  gods
whether  they  would  like  to  see  King  Nimi ;  and
they  said  they  would.  It  was  then  the  mid-month
holy-day,  and  the  king,  having  bathed,  was  seated,
fasting,  in  the  upper  story  oi  his  goigeous  palace.
As  easily  as  a  strong  man  could  stretch  out  his  arm
or  draw  It  back,  Sakka  vanished  from  the  Thirty-three
and  appeared  before  King  Nimi,  saying:— It  is  a
great  thing  for  you,  sire,  a  very  great  thing,  that,  as
the  thirty- three  gods  sat  together  In  their  Hall  of
Truth,  thty  were  saying  how  fortunate,  how  very
fortunate,  t&e  people  of  videha  are  to  have  in  you  a
monarch  of  such  signal  righteousness  ;  and  they  would
like  to  sec  you,  I  will  send  a  chariot  drawn  by  a
thousand  steeds  to  fetch  you ;  get  into  it  without  any
qualms.  By  his  silence  Nimi  gave  consent  Then
Sakka  bade  his  charioteer  MS&li  yoke  a  thousand
steeds  to  the  chariot  and  go  to  the  King  Nimi  with
the  mess^  that  it  had  been  sent  for  him  by  Sakka,
king  of  gods,  and  that  the  king  was  to  get  into  that
celestial  [80]  chariot  without  qualms.  So  be  it,
answered  Matali  obediently,  and  bore  the  message  to
Nimi,  adding :  By  which  route  am  I  to  conduct  your
majesty  ?  Shall  it  be  by  the  route  travelled  by  evil¬
doers  to  reap  the  fruits  of  their  evil-doing,  or  by  the
route  of  foe  righteous  to  reap  foe  fruits  of  their
ri^teousness  ?

Take  me  by  both  routes,  Matali,  was  the  king’s
answer.

To  tbe  Hall  of  Truth  in  due  course  Matali  brought
foe  king,  to  whom,  as  he  saw  him  coming  some  way
off,  Sakka  said  Draw  near,  sire ;  welcome,  sire !
The  Thirty-three  gods  were  talking  of  your  signal
righteousness,  and  wished  to  see  you.  Rejoice,  sire,
among  foe  gods  in  heaven’s  glories.

Enough,  your  Excellency  I  Let  MlUali  take  me
home  ^in,  where  I  will  deal  righteously  with  my


43


LXXXII  I.  UAXK  A  DEV  A-9UTT  A .


M.


brahmins  and  householders  In  town  and  country,  and
observe  the  fourholy«-iays  in  each  month.

Sakka  gave  orders  to  Matali  accordingly,  and  back
in  the  chariot  King  Nimi  was  borne  to  Mithilil,  where
he  dealt  righteously  with  his  folk  and  [81]  duly
observed  the  holy-days  of  each  month.  After  many
years,  after  many  hundreds  and  thousands  of  years.
King  Nimi  in  his  turn  told  his  barber  to  report  when
he  found  a  grey  hair ,  .  .  {etc,,  as  above)  .  .  *  [82]  he
passed  to  the  heavens  of  Brahma.

Now  King  Nimi  had  a  son  named  Ka  3ra  Janaka
who  did  not  go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as  a
Pilgrim,  but  broke  that  high  tradition,  and  proved  the
last  of  the  line.

You  may  think,  Ananda,  that  someone  else  was  the
King  MakhSdeva  of  those  days  who  founded  that  high
tradition;  but  that  would  be  an  error.  It  was  1
myself  who  was  then  King  Makhadeva ;  and  it  was
I  who  then  founded  that  high  tradition  which  later
generations  continued.

That  high  tradition,  however,  conduces  not  to
aversion,  to  passionlessness,  to  stilling,  to  peace,  co
illumination,  to  enlightenment,  and  to  Nirvana,>-but
only  to  a  future  in  the  heavens  of  BrahmS.  Whereas
the  high  tradition  which  I  have  now  founded  does  so
conduce  ;  for,  it  is  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path  of  right
outlook,  right  aims,  right  speech,  right  action,  right
livelihood,  [88]  right  elfort.  right  mindfulness,  and
right  concentration. — This  is  the  high  tradjtion  which
I  have  founded  to-day.  I  enjoin  you,  Ananda,  to
continue  this  high  tradition  and  not  to  prove  the
last  of  the  line,  when,  among  any  two  persons,  there
is  a  break  in  a  tradition  so  high,  he  who  breaks  it  is
the  last  of  the  line.  Therefore,  I  enjoin  you,  Ananda,
to  maintain  this  high  tradition,  and  not  to  prove  the  last
of  the  line.

Thus  s^ke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  bad  said.


M.  ii.  S4


BRAHMJN  CLAIMS.


43


LXXXIV.  MADHURA-SUTTA.

BRAHMIN  CLAIMS.

Thus  have  I  heard,  Ooce  when  the  reverend  Mahi-
Kaccina  was  staying  at  Madhura  in  the  GundS  grove,
it  reached  the  ears  of  Avanti^pjcta,  King  of  Madhura,
that  there  was  staying  in  that  grove  the  recluse
KaccSna,  whose  reputation  stood  high  in  general
report  as  being  a  learned  and  wise  sage  of  lore,
a  brilliant  speaker  and  debater,  an  aged  man  and  a
sunt  (arahs)  such  as  it  was  good  to  go  and  see.  So
King  Avantiputta,  having  commanded  his  chariots  so
fair,  so  fair,  to  be  made  ready,  got  into  one  of  them
and  drove  forth  from  Madhura  in  royal  sute  with
his  princely  train  to  see  the  reverend  MahS-Kaccana.
Driving  as  far  as  a  chariot  could  go,  and  then  proceeding
on  foot,  the  king  came  at  last  to  M  aha- KaccSna,  [84]
with  whom  he  exchanged  courteous  greetings  before
seating  himself, to  one  side  and  saying: — Brahmins
maintain,  KaccSna,  that  they  alone  form  the  superior
class,  all  other  classes  being  inferior ;  that  brahmins
^one  form  the  white  class,  all  other  classes  being
black  i  that  purity  resides  in  brahmins  alone  and  not
ID  non- brahmins  ;  and  chat  brahmins  are  Brahma's
only  legitimate  sons,  born  from  bis  mouth,  offspring  of
his,  creations  of  his,  and  his  heirs.  What  do  you  say
to  that  ?

It  is  an  empty  assertion,  sire,  as  may  be  shown  as
follows  :  If  a  noble  grows  rich  and  wealthy,  can  he
have  as  his  servant  another  noble-^r  a  brahmin,  or  a
middle*  class  man,  or  a  peasant — to  get  up  early,  to  go
late  to  bed,  to  minister  assiduously  and  to  study  his
master  in  word  and  deed }

Yes.

And  if,  sire,  it  were  a  brahmin  who  had  thriven,
could  he  likewise  have  as  his  servant  a  brahmin,  a
•  middle-class  man,  a  peasant,  or  [85j  a  noble  ?

Yes.


44


LXXXIV.  MADHUKA-SUTTA-


K.  iJ.  87.


And  if  ic  were  either  a  middle- class  man  or  a  peasant
who  had  thriven,  could  he  likewise  have  as  his  servant
someone  from  any  of  the  three  other  classes  ?

Yes,

If  this  be  so,  sire,  do  you  think  all  four  classes  are
on  precisely  the  same  footing  herein,  or  not  ?  Or  how
does  it  strilce  you  ^

Undoubtedly,  if  this  be  so,  all  four  classes  are  on
precisely  the  same  footing,  and  I  see  no  difference  at
all  between  them.

The  emptiness  of  the  brahmin  claim  to  superiority
can  also  be  shown  in  the  following  way : — ^If  a  noble
kills,  robs,  fornicates,  lies,  slanders,  is  bitter  of  tongue,
tattles,  covets,  harbours  ill-will,  and  has  a  wrong
outlook, — will  he,  after  death  at  the  bod/s  dissolution
pass  to  a  state  of  misery  and  woe  or  to  pulsatory  P
Or  will  he  not  ?  Or  how  does  It  strike  you  ?

Such  a  noble  will  pass  to  a  doom  of  misery  and  woe
or  to  purgatory.  This  is  my  view,  and  this  is  whac  I
have  heard  from  saintly  men  (arahatam).

Quite  right ;  your  view  Is  right  and  you  have  been
told  aright  Dy  saintly  men.  Pray,  would  the  like  doom
await  a  brahmin,  or  middle-class  man,  or  peasant  of
like  disposition  ?

Yes,  it  would.

Quire  right  But,  if  this  be  so,  sire,  do  you  think
all  four  classes  are  on  precisely  the  same  footing
herein,  or  not  ?  Or  bow  does  it  strike  you  ?

[S7]  Undoubtedly,  if  this  be  so,  all  four  classes  are
on  precisely  the  same  footing,  and  1  see  no  difference
between  them.

Another  way  to  demonstrate  the  emptiness  of  the
brahmin  daim  Is  as  follows  If  a  noble  abstains  from
kdiing  and  robbing  and  so  forth,  will  he  at  death  pass
CO  bliss  in  heaven,  or  not?  Or  how  does  it  strike
you?

At  death  he  will  pass  to  bliss  in  heaven.  This  is  my
view,  and  this  is  what  I  have  beard  from  saintly  men.

Quite  right  And  would  the  same  apply  to  a
brahmin  or  to  a  middle- class  man  or  to  a  peasant  ?


M.ii.  88.


bRAHUIK  CIMUS.


45


Yes,  it  would.

Quite  right.  But,  if  these  be  so,  sire,  do  you  think
all  four  classes  are  on  precisely  the  same  footing  herein,
or  not  ?  Or  how  does  it  strike  you  ?

,  [8S]  Undoubtedly,  if  this  be  so,  all  four  classes  are
on  precisely  the  same  footing  herein,  and  1  see  no,
difference  between  them.

The  emptiness  of  the  brahmin  claim  can  further  be
demonstrated  as  follows: — If  a  noble  is  a  bui^Ur,
thief,  housebreaker,  footpad  or  adulterer,  and  if  your
oeople  catch  him  and  haul  the  malefactor  before  you
for  sentence,  what  would  you  do  to  him  ?

I  should  put  him  to  death  or  confiscate  his  goods
or  banish  him  or  otherwise  deal  with  him  as  circum¬
stances  required.  For  the  noble  is  now  merged  in
the  malefactor.

Would  the  same  apply  to  a  malefactor  from  any  of
the  three  other  classes^

Yes,  it  would.

[f  this  be  so,  sire,  are  all  four  classes  on  precisely
the  same  footing  herein,  or  not  ?  Or  how  does  it
strike  you  ?

Undoubtedly,  If  this  be  so,  all  four  classes  are  on
precisely  the  same  footing  herein,  and  I  see  no
difference  between  them.

The  emptiness  of  the  brahmin  claim  is  also  apparent
from  the  following : — If  a  noble  cuts  off  hair  and  beard,
doDs  the  yellow  robe,  and  goes  forth  from  home  to
homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim,  abstaining  from  killing  and
stealing  and  lying,  eating  but  one  meal  a  day,  and
living  the  higher  life  in  virtue  and  goodness, — what
would  you  do  to  him  ?

1  would  salute  him,  or  rise  to  meet  him,  or  invite
him  to  be  seated,  or  would  ask  him  to  accept  robes,
alms,  bedding  and  medicines,  or  would  extend  to  him
the  defence,  protection  aad  safeguards  which  are  his
due.  For,  the  noble  is  now  merged  in  the  recluse.

Would  the  same  reception  be  extended  to  Pilgrims
from  the  three  other  classes  ?

Yes,  it  would.


46


LXXXl  V,  M  ADH  UR  A*  8UTT  A


M.  j{.  90.


ir  this  be  so,  sire,  are  all  four  classes  on  precisely
the  same  footing  herein,  or  not  ?  Or  how  does  it
strike  you  ?

Undoubtedly,  if  this  be  so,  all  four  classes  are  on
precisely  the  same  footing  herein,  and  I  see  no
difference  between  them.

[90]  Hereupon,  Avanti-putta,  King  of  Madhura,
said  to  the  reverend  Mah&  Kaccana : — Wonderful,
wonderful  I  Just  as  a  man  might  set  upright  again  .  . .
even  so,  in  many  a  figure,  has  Kaccina  expounded
the  Doctrine.  To  him  I  come  as  my  refuge,  and
to  his  Doctrine,  and  to  his  Confraternity,  asking  him
to  accept  as  his  follower  me  who  have  found  an
abiding  refuge  from  this  dme  forth  while  life  shall  last.

Come  not  to  me,  sire,  as  your  refuge  (  Find  your
refuge,  as  1  have  found  mine,  in  none  but  the  Lord.

where  is  the  present  abode  of  that  Lord,  the
Arahat  alhenlightened  ?

He  has  passed  away.

If  1  could  but  hear  him  within  a  distance  of  ten
leagues  from  here,  ten  leagues  would  I  travel  to  visit
him  ;  yes,  I  would  travel,  twenty,  thirty,  forty,  fifty,  or
a  hundred  leagues  to  visit  chat  Lord,  the  Arahat  all-
enlightened.  But,  since  he  has  passed  away,  to  him,
even  though  he  have  passed  away,  do  I  come  as  my
refuge,  and  to  his  Doctrine,  and  to  his  Confraternity,

I  ask  Kacc&na  to  accept  as  (the  Lord’s)  follower  me
who  have  found  an  abi^g  refuge  from  this  time  forth
while  life  shall  last.


LXXiCV.  BODHI-RAJAKUMARA-SUTTA.

Ai'Tj^ESS  TO  LEARN.

[91]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  in  the  Bh^ga  country  at  Sumsumara-gira
in  the  BhesakaU  grove,  in  the  deer>park  there,  Prince
Bodhi’s  palace,  called  the  Lotus,  had  just  been  finished
but  had  not  as  yet  been  inhabited  by  recluse,  brahmin.


M.  ii.  9a.


APTNESS  TO  LEARN.


47


or  any  person.  Said  the  prince  to  a  young  brahmin
named  SaRjika-putia : — Go  to  the  Lord  and  in  my
name  bow  your  head  at  his  feet,  ask  after  his  health
and  invite  him  to  be  so  good  as  to  take  his  meal  with
me  to-morrow  and  to  Dring  his  Confraternity  with
him.  The  message  was  delivered  to  the  Lord  who,
by  silence,  signih^  acceptance. — as  was  duly  reported
to  the  prince.

[92]  When  night  had  passed,  the  prince,  having
ordered  an  excellent  meal  to  be  got  ready  in  his  palace
and  a  carpeting  of  white  cloth  to  be  laid  to  the  foot  of
the  stairs  of  the  Lotus  palace,  told  the  young  brahmin
to  announce  to  the  Lord  that  all  was  ready.  This
was  done ;  and  early  that  day  the  Lord,  duly  robed
and  bowl  in  hand,  came  to  the  palace  where  the  prince
was  awaiting  him,  outside  the  portals.  Seeing  the
Lord  approaching,  the  prince  advanced  and  sauted
him  and  moved  in  his  train  towards  the  palace.  At
the  foot  of  the  stairs  the  Lord  stood  still.  S^d  the
prince  beg  the  Lord  to  step  up  on  the  carpeting ;
1  beg  the  Blessed  One  to  do  this, — to  my  abiding
weal  and  welfare.  But  the  Lord  kept  silent.  A
second  time  did  the  prince  appeal,  and  still  the  Lord
kept  silent.  A  third  time  he  appealed,  and  now  the
Lord  looked  towards  Anaoda,  who  [98]  asked  that
the  carpeting  should  be  rolled  up  and  removed,  for,
the  Lord  would  not  tread  upon  carpeting  of  cloth
underfoot,  as  the  Truth-finder  is  looking  towards  those
that  shall  follow  hereafter.  So  the  prince  ordered  the
carpeting  to  be  rolled  up  and  removed,  after  which  he
ordered  seats  to  be  set  out  upstairs  (n  the  palace,  and
the  Lord,  proceeding  upstairs,  sac  down  on  the  seat
set  for  him,  with  the  Confraternity.  With  his  own
hwds  the  prince  served  that  exceUent  meal  without
seine  to  the  Confraternity  with  the  Buddha  at  its  head
till  all  had  had  their  fill.  The  Lord’s  meal  over  and
done.  Prince  Bodbi,  seating  himself  on  a  low  seat  to
one  side,  said  to  the  Lord ; — My  view,  sir,  is  that
true  We^  must  be  sought  not  through  things  pleasant
but  through  things  un^neasant.


46  LX  XXV.  bodhi-ra;akumara-sutta.  m.  li,94.

Iq  days  gone  by,  prince,  I  coo  held  the  same  view, —
in  the  days  before  my  enlightenment,  when  as  yet
1  was  but  a  Bodhisatta  without  full  enlightenment.
Time  was  when,  being  quite  young— with  a  wealth
of  coal'black  hair  untouched  by  grey,  and  in  all  cbe
beauty  of  my  early  prime — despite  the  wishes  of  my
parents  who  wept  and  lamented,  I  cut  off  h^r  and
beard,  donned  the  yellow  robes,  and  went  forth  from
home  CO  homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim.  A  Pilgrim  now,
in  quest  of  the  Good  and  in  search  for  the  road  to
that  utter  peace  which  is  beyond  all  compare,  I  came
to  A]ira  K§l&ma  .  .  .  {tU.  as  in  Sutia  a6)  .  .  .
So  there  1  sat  me  down,  needing  nothing  more  for
ray-  striving.

Spontaneously,  there  came  to  me  three  similitudes
till  then  unknown.  Just  as  there  might  be  a  green,
sappy  stick  flung  into  the  water  .  .  .  {€ic.  as  in
Susta  36)  .  .  .  puiged  of  self.

I  have  won,  thought  I,  this  Doctrine  .  .  .  (etc.  as
in  Sutta  36)  .  .  .  [94j  1  succeeded  in  convincing
those  five  Almsmen.  I  instructed  .  .  .  that  prize  of
prizes  in  quest  of  which  young  men  go  forth  from  home
to  homelessness  as  Pilgrims.

And  how  long,  sir,  would  it  take  an  Almsman,  with
the  Truth-finder  as  bis  guide,  to  win  this  prize  of  prizes  ?

I  must  ask  you  in  turn,  prince,  a  question,  which
please  answer  as  you  see  fit.  Are  you  expert  in
riding  and  drivii^  elephants  ?

Yes,  sir.

Suppose  a  man  came  to  learn  the  art  from  you,  as
knowing  all  about  it.  Suppose  now  be  lacked  confi¬
dence  and  therefore  failed  where  confidence  was
essential ;  and  lacked  health  and  strength  and  there¬
fore  failed  where  health  and  strength  were  essential;
and  was  dishonest  and  crooked  in  his  ways  and  there¬
fore  Imied  where  honesty  and  strsughtforwardness  were
essential ;  and  was  inert  and  therefore  failed  where
resolution  was  essential ;  and  lacked  wits  and  there¬
fore  failed  where  wits  were  essential. — Could  he  leam
from  you  how  to  ride  and  drive  an  elephant  ?


M.  iL  9$.


APTNESS  TO  LEARN.


49


Anyone  of  these  shortcomings,  sir,  would  be  fatal  to
his  ever  learning,  not  co  speak  of  the  whole  five  of
them  together.

Now  suppose  a  man  came  [95]  to  be  taught,  who
had  confidence  and  therefore  could  succeed  where
confidence  was  essential ;  who  had  also  health  and
strength,  honesty  and  straightforwardness,  resolution,
and  wits  and  dierefore  could  succeed  where  these
several  qualities  were  respectively  essential. — Could
he  learn  from  you  how  to  ride  and  drive  an  elephant  ?

Any  one  of  these  qualifications  would  ensure  his
learning, — not  to  speak  of  the  whole  five  of  them
together.

It  is  just  the  same  with  the  five  qualities  for  strivihg
after  the  truth. — (i)  An  Almsman  has  confidence,  is
confident,  is  sure  of  the  Truth-finder's  enlightenment,
namely  that  his  Lord,  Arahat  all -enlightened,  walks
by  knowledge,  is  blessed,  understands  all  worlds,  and
is  the  matchless  tamer  of  the  human  heart,  teacher  of
gods  and  men,  the  Lord  of  Enlightenment ;  (ii)  he  has
health  and  strength,  having  a  good  digestion  main¬
tained  by  humours  neither  too  not  nor  coo  cold  but
medium  and  apt  for  the  struggle;  (iii)  he  is  notdls-
honesc  nor  underhand,  but  reveals  his  true  nature  to
his  master  or  to  sage  brechren  in  the  higher  life ;
(iv)  he  is  resolute,  ever  discarding  wrong  states  of
mind  and  fostering  right  states,  ever  staunch  and  stout
of  purpose,  persistent  in  right  mindedness ;  and  (v)  he
has  a  wit  that  pierces  chroi^h  the  rise  and  fall /of
things,  that  is  noble  and  penetrating,  that  leads  to/the
utter  destruction  of  III.  \\nth  these  fivequalitiesysire,
an  Almsman  who  has  the  Truth-finder  as  his  yguide
will  win  this  prize  of  prizes  [96]— in  seven/years.
Nay,  waive  seven  years ;  he  will  succeed  wi^in  six,
five,  four,  three,  or  two  years,  or  in  a  single  year;  or
in  seven,  six,  five,  four,  three,  or  two  months,  or  in  a
single  mooch  or  half  a  month;  or  even  iry  as  many
days  or  a  single  day.  Nay,  waive  a  whole  ^ay  why,
with  these  five  qualities  within  him,  an^  with  the
Truth-finder  as  his  guide,  an  Almsman,  If  instructed


50  LXXX V.  BOD  i  tl-R A  JAK  0  mIrA-SUTTA.  M-  97«

at  sunset,  will  master  it  all  by  dawn,  or,  if  instructed
at  dawn,  will  master  it  all  by  sunset.

Said  the  prince  to  the  Lord  : — What  a  Buddha  I
What  a  Doctrine  1  What  an  exposition  of  Doctrine  I
— when  an  Almsman,  if  instructed  at  sunset,  can
master  it  all  by  dawn,  or,  if  instructed  at  dawn,  can
master  it  all  by  sunset.

Here  the  young  brahmin  SafljikS-putte  observed  to
the  prince  that,  though  he  had  testified  thus,  yet  he  had
not  eone  on  to  say  that  he  sought  as  a  refuge  the  Lord
and  his  Doctrine  and  his  Con/mternity.

Say  not  so,  my  friend ;  say  not  so  ;  for,  1  have  heard
from  the  lips  of  my  lady  mother  how,  [97]  when  once
the  Lord  was  staying  at  KosambI  in  the  Ghosita

{leasaunce,  she,  being  then  pregnant,  came  to  the
ord,  saluted  him,  and  took  a  seat  to  one  side,  saying :
— Be  it  a  boy  or  be  it  a  girl  that  I  carry  in  my  womb,
my  child  unborn  seeks  refuge  with  the  Lord  and  his
Doctrine  and  his  Confraternity ;  and  1  ask  the  Lord
io  accept  the  child  as  a  follower  who  has  found  an
abiding  refuge  from  this  time  forth  while  life  lasts.

Another  time,  when  the  Lord  was  staying  here
in  this  Bhagga  country  at  Sumsumira'^gua,  in  the
Bhesaka]S  grove  in  the  deer'park  there,  my  nurse
carried  me  to  the  Lord  and,  standing  before  him,
said : — Here  is  Prince  Bodbi  who  seeks  refuge  with
the  Lord  and  bis  Doctrine  and  his  Confraternity^

Now,  in  person,  for  the  third  time  I  seek  such
refuge  and  ask  the  Lord  to  accept  me  as  a  follower
who  has  found  an  abiding  refuge  while  life  lasts.


LXXXVI.  ANGULIMALA-SUTTA.

THE  BANDIT’S  CONVERSION.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SSvatthi  in  Jeta's  grove  in  An^thaplndika's
pleasauDce,  there  was,  in  we  realm  conquer^  by
Pasenadi,  king  of  Kosala,  a  robber  named  AnguU-


M.  ii.  98.


THE  bandit’s  conversion.


5»


mala,  a  ruffian  whose  hands  were  red  with  blood,  who
was  always  killing  and  wounding,  and  show^  do
mercy  to  any  living  creature.  Because  of  him,  what
had  been  villages  were  villages  no  more,  what  had
been  townships  [98}  were  townships  no  more,  and
what  had  been  countrysides  were  countrysides  no
more.  From  every  human  being  whom  he  slew,  he
cook  a  finger  to  make  him  a  necklace  (and  so  got  his
name  of  ‘Necklace  of  fingers’).

In  the  morning  early,  the  Lord,  duly  robed  and
bowl  in  hand,  went  into  the  city  for  alms  and  on  his
return  after  bis  meal  first  put  away  his  bedding  and
then,  with  robes  and  bowl,  set  out  on  his  journey  to
find  Che  robber  AngullmSla,  Seeing  him  journeying
thither,  neatherds,  goatherds,  ploughmen  and  way¬
farers  called  out: — Don't  go  that  way,  recluse  I  It
will  take  you  to  the  robber  named  Angulimila,  a
ruffian  .  .  .  make  him  a  necklace.  Why,  even  when

ten,  twenty,  thirty  or  forty  people  band  themselves
together  to  travel  this  road,  the  whole  company  falls
into  the  robber's  hands!

Thus  they;  but,  without  a  word,  the  Lord  held  on
bis  way.

A  second  time,  and  yet  a  third  time  these  neatherds
aod  the  rest  repeated  their  warning;  but  still,  without
a  word,  the  Lord  held  on  his  way,

From  some  way  off  the  robbecsaw  the  Lord  coming
and  marvelled  exceedingly  that,  where  even  companies
of  cen  to  [99]  fifty  travellers  all  fell  into  his  hands,  this
solitary  recluse  should  seem  to  be  forcing  bis
alone ;  and  the  robber  was  minded  to  slay  ‘  this
recluse.’  So,  armed  with  sword  and  buckler,  and
with  his  bow  and  quiver,  the  robber  followed  up  the
Lord's  trail.  Hereupon,  the  Lord  manifested  his
psychic  powers  so  that,  while  he  himself  was  proceed¬
ing  at  his  wonted  pace,  the  robber,  for  all  hts  efforts,
could  not  catch  him  tip.  Thought  the  robber This
is  a 'wonderful  and  marvellous  thing!  Heretofore,  I
could  always  overtake  an  elephant,  or  horse,  or
carriage,  or  deer,  when  going  full  speed ;  and  yet  here


9219


52


LXXXVl.  ANGULIMiLA-SUTTA.


M.  ii.  ica


am  I  unable,  despite  all  my  efforts,  to  overtake  this
recluse  while  he  proceeds  at  his  wonted  pace.  So  he
stopped  and  shouted  to  the  Lord  to  stop.

1  have  stopped,  Angulimala ;  >^ou  stop  too.

Thought  die  robber : — These  Sakvan  recluses  speak
tru  th  and  are  true  to  their  word-  Y  et  Kere  is  ih  Is  recluse
who,  while  he  still  walks  on,  says  he  has  stopped  and
bids  me  stop  too ;  I  had  better  ask  him  about  it.

So  the  robber  addressed  the  Lord  in  these  lines :


wAc  firo/tss  to  stop,  still  march  a/tsad;

/,  who  hav$  stopped,  am  told  by  you  I've  not :

— Explain  how  you  have  stopped  is^kile  I  have  not.

Yes,  1  hai/e  stopped;  for,  never  violence
do  I  to  any  ; — life  you  still  destroy.

— Thus  I  have  stopped  indeed,  but  you  stop  not !

[100]  At  last  this  sage  revered  has  tracked  me  down !
Ana  now  at  last  thy  hallow'd  utterance
makes  me  for  ever  evil  deeds  renounce  /

He  spoke,  and  into  deep  abyss  his  arms
the  robber  flung:  low  at  the  Master^ s  feet
he  craved  admission  to  the  Brotherhood.

The  Buddha,  sage  compassionate,  the  guide
of  gods  and  men,  said:  Almsman,  follow  me  ' ;
and  Almsman  on  that  summons  he  became!

With  Angulimala  as  his  Almsman  in  attendtmee,
the  Lord  now  proceeded  on  his  way  to  the  pleasaunce
in  SavatthL  At  this  very  time  the  portals  of  the
king’s  inner  palace  were  beset  by  a  huge  crowd  loudly
shouting  that  in  the  realm  he  had  conquered  there  was
a  robber  named  AugulimSla,  a  rufffan  .  .  .  make  him
a  necklace.  Suppress  him,  sire,  they  cried.

In  the  morning  early  Pasenadi,  king  of  Kosala,
with  five  hundred  horse,  left  the  city  for  the  pleasauace,
and,  after  driving  as  far  as  the  ground  was  passable
for  his  carriage,  proceeded  thence  on  foot  to  the  Lord
and  [101]  after  greetings  took  a  seat  to  one  side,  thus
to  be  addressed  by  the  Lord; — What  is  the  matter,
sire?  Is  there  trouble  with  Seniya  BimblsSra  of


M.  ii.  I03«


THE  bandit’s  conversion


53


Magadha,  or  with  the  Licchavis  of  VesSli  or  with  any
other  hostile  powers  ?

No  trouble  at  all  of  that  sort,  sir.  In  my  realms
there  is  a  robber  named  Angulimala  .  .  .  make  him  a
necklace;  and  I  shall  never  suppress  him.

If  now,  sire,  you  were  to  see  Angulimala  with  his
hair  and  beard  off,  in  the  yellow  robes,  as  a  Pilgrim
who  kills  not,  steals  not,  lies  not,  eats  but  one  meal
a  day,  and  leads  the  higher  life  in  virtue  and  good¬
ness, — what  would  you  do  to  him  ?

Sir,  I  would  salute  him,  or  rise  to  meet  him,  or
would  invite  him  to  be  seated,  or  invite  him  to  accept
robes  and  other  requisites,  or  I  would  extend  to  him
the  defence,  protection  and  safeguards  which  are  his
due.  But  how  could  the  sway  of  such  virtue  ever
extend  to  one  so  wicked  and  depraved  ?

At  that  moment  the  reverend  Angulimlla  was  seated
quite  close  to  the  Lord,  who,  stretching  forth  bis  right
arm,  said This,  sire,  is  Angulimala  I

Hereat  the  king  In  his  alarm  became  dumbfounded,
with  every  hair  of  his  body  standing  erect,  Seeing
this,  the  Lord  said: — Fear  not,  sire;  fear  not;  there
is  no  cause  for  fear  here.  So  the  king's  fears  [102]  and
alarms  abated ;  and  across  to  the  reverend  Angulimala
he  went,  saying :  Is  your  reverence  indeed  Angulimala  ?

Yes,  sire.

What,  sir,  was  your  father's  family,  and  your
mother’s  ?

My  fetber  was  a  Gagga,  sire,  and  my  mother  a
Mantani.

Be  of  good  cheer,  G^ga  MantanT-putta ;  I  will
take  care  to  supply  you  wi^  all  requisites.

Now  at  the  time  the  reverend  Angulimala  was  resi¬
dent  in  the  wilds,  subsisting  on  alms,  and  wearing
clothes  from  the  dust-heap  not  exceed!^  three  in
number.  So  he  declined  the  kin^s  offer  on  .the
^und  chat  he  had  already  got  his  full  three  robes.

Then  the  king  went  across  to  the  Lord  and  after
salutadons  seated  himself  to  one  side,  saying;^ It  fe
wonderful,  sir,  it  is  marvellous,  what  a  tamer  of  the


54


LXK  X  VI.  A  NC  U  LIJ4ALA-SUTT  A-


M.  li.  iO>


untamed  the  Lord  is,  how  be  quells  the  unquelled,  and
how  he  calms  the  uncalmed!  Here  Is  one  whom  1
could  not  subdue  with  cudgel  and  sword ;  but  without
either  cudgel  or  sword  the  Lord  has  subdued  him !
And  now,  sir,  I  must  be  going,  for  I  have  much  to
do  and  attend  to.

When  your  majesty  pleases.

Then,  rising  from  his  seat,  the  king  saluted  the
Lord  with  deep  reverence  and  withdrew.

Early  one  morning  the  reverend  Angulimala,  duly
robed  and  bowl  in  hknd,  went  Into  Sivatthi  for  alms
and  there,  in  the  course  of  his  round  for  alms,  saw
a  woman  in  dif^cult  and  protracted  labour.  The  sight
[108]  brought  him  the  thought  how  foul  humanity
was.  After  his  meal  he  came  back  to  tbe  Lord  to  cell
what  he  had  seen  and  what  he  had  thought,

*  Go  back  then  to  the  city,  said  the  Lord,  and  say  to
the  woman : — From  my  birch  onwards,  sister,  1  am
not  aware  that,  wittingly,  I  have  ever  robbed  of  life
aught  that  lives ;  may  this  my  solemn  protestation  ^
bring  weal  to  you  and  weal  to  your  child  unborn  I

But  that,  sir,  would  be  a  d<diberate  lie ;  for,  1  have
wittingly  taken  many  a  life.

Go  t«ck  then  to  the  city,  said  the  Lord,  and  say  to
the  woman  From  my  Noble  Birch  onwards,  sister,

I  am  not  aware  .  .  <  c^iild  unborn  \

Obediently,  he  went  back  to  the  woman  to  make
this  solemn  protestation ;  and  all  went  well  with
mother  and  child.

Ere  long,  the  reverend  Angulimala,  dwelling  alone
and  aloofl  strenuous  ardent  and  puiged  of  sdf,  won
the  prise  in  quest  of  which  young  men  go  forth  from
home  CO  homelessness  as  Pilgrims,  that  prize  of  prizes
which  crowns  the  highest  life ; — even  this  did  he,
here  and  now.  think  out  for  himself,  realize,  enter  on,
and  abide  in ;  and  to  him  came  the  copviction :  Rebirth
is  no  more;  1  have  lived  the  highe^  life;  my  task  is
done ;  and  now  [104]  for  me  there  is  no  more  of  wh^

I  have  beeoL  Thus  the  reverendl  Angulinuda  was
numbered  among  tbe  Arahats.  *  ^

i


M.  ii.  105.


THE  bandit's  conversion.


55


In  the  morning  early,  when,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in
hand,  AnguUmSla  had  gone  into  5§vactbi  for  alms,  he
was  hit  by  a  clod  dung  oy  one  man,  by  a  club  dung  by
a  second  and  by  a  potsherd  dung  by  a  third,  so  that  it
was  with  a  broken  head  screaming  with  blood,  with
hi$  bowl  smashed,  and  with  his  cloak  in  tatters,  that
he  presented  himself  before  the  Lord.  Seeing  him
drawing  near,  the  Lord  said  to  Angulimala ; — Endure
it  all,  brahmin ;  endure  it  all.  What  you  are  suffering
now  is  the  harvest  of  past  deeds  which  might,  other¬
wise  have  kept  you  in  the  torments  of  purgatory  for
many  a  year,  yea,  for  hundreds  and  thousands  of  years.

As  he  realized  in  solitary  meditation  the  bliss  of  his
Deliverance,  the  reverend  Angulimala  now  burst  into
this  heartfelt  utterance

Whoso  shows  zeal,  where  seal  was  none,
whoso  with  virtue  clokes  his  past,
whoso  in  youth  to  Buddha  cleaves,

—^hOi  like  ike  moon,  floods  earth  with  light

My  foes,  this  gospel  hear,  this  creed  embrace,
and  follow  wisdonts  sons  who  cleave  to  U,

[1053  Lovis  message,  meek  forbearance,  hear,  my  foes^
— in  season  hear,  and  let  your  lives  conform.

He  who  has  gamuf^d  Peace,  harms  neither  me
nor  any  man,  but  shields  both  weak  and  strong.

"^Ditchers  guide  rills ;  his  shaft  the  fieUher  shapes :
joiners  shape  wood ; — but  sages  shape  themselves.
Constraining  goad,  compelling  lash  tames  some;

•^-wiih  neither  club  nor  swoi^  our  Saint  tamed  me.

My  name  is  *  Harmless'  though  I  harmful  was ;
bni  rightfy  now  Pm  named,  for  I  harm  none.

As '  Finger-Necklace,'  I  a  bandit  lived,
and  whirled  down  Stream,  (itl  He  brtn/ght  me  to  Land.
As  ’Finger-Necklace!  I  was  steeped  in  blood;
saved  now,  no  teikers  bind  me  sltll  to  life.

My  whilom  guilt,  with  all  its  heritage

*  Thee  verses,  of— I  tfaink— later  date,  include  a  repetitioo  of
Pilinda  Vaceba’e  verses  from  TberagathS,  p.  a.


5^


LXXXVl .  ANGULIMiL  A-8UTTA.


M.  W.  tcA.


of future  woe,  has  found  iis  outcome  here  ;

— ^f  estate  Pm  lord;  no  debt  I  owe.

InstHsate  folly  ne'er  can  rise  to  zeal,
that  zeal  which  wisdoms  priceless  treasure  is.
Forget  not  zeal  in  pleasure's  hot  pursuit  /
for,  zeal  by  Ecstasy  to  bliss  attains,
fn  blessing  came,  and  still  abides,  my  Cali
when  'moHg  the  warring  creeds  I  chose  the  best.

In  blessing  came,  and  still  abides,  nty  Call ;

— thz  threefold  lore  is  mine :  I've  lived  His  creed.


LXXXVII.  piya.)Atika-sutta.

NULLIUS  RE  I  AFFECTUS.

[106]  Thus  have  1  heard.  Once  while  the  Lord
was  staying  at  SSvatchi  in  Jeta*s  grove  in  AnStha*
pleasaunce,  the  darling  only  son  of  a  certain
kouseholder  died,  and  the  loss  made  the  father  neglect
I  is  business  and  his  meals ;  he  was  always  going  to
the  charnel  ground,  wailing  aloud  i —Where  are  you,
my  son  ?  Where  are  you  ?

To  this  bereaved  father,  when  he  had  come'  and
taken  his  seat  to  one  side  after  due  salutations,  the
Lord  said ; — You  are  not  yourself  j  your  ipind  is  aJl
awry.

How  could  my  mind  not  be  awry,  sir,  when  I  have
lost  my  darling  only  son  ?  His  death  has  made  me
neglect  my  business  and  my  meals ;  time  and  again
I  go  to  the  charnel  ^ound,  wailing  aloud  : — Where
are  you,  my  son  ?  Where  are  you  ?

jts,  householder ;  our  dear  ones  bring  sorrow  and
lamentation,  pain,  suffering,  and  tribulation.

Who,  sir,  can  entertain  such  a  view?  Nay,  our
dear  ones  are  a  joy  and  happiness  to  us  I  And  with
these  words  the  householder,  rejecting  the  Lord’s  pro¬
nouncement,  indignantly  got  up  and  departed.

Hard  by,  there  were  a  number  of  gamblers  having
a  game  with  the  dice;  and  to  them  csune  the  house-


K.  il  107.


IIULLIU8  RKl  AFFECTU8.


57


holder  with  his  story  of  [107]  how  he  had  related  his
sorrows  to  the  recluse  Gotama,  how  he  had  been
received,  and  how  he  had  indignantly  departed.

You  were  quite  right,  said  the  gamblers;  for,  our
.dear  ones  are  indeed  a  joy  and  happiness  to  us,

So  the  householder  felt  he  had  got  the  gamblers  on
his  side.

Now  all  this,  in  due  course,  penetrated  to  the  private
apartments  of  the  royal  palace,  where  the  king  told
Qileen  MallikS  that  'her  recluse  Gotama’  had  stated
that  our  dear  ones  bring  sorrow  and  lamentation,  p^n,
sufferingi  and  tribulation.

Well,  sire,  if  the  Lord  said  so,  so  it  is.

Just  as  a  pupil  accepts  all  his  master  tells  him,  saying
‘So  it  is,  sir ;  so  it  is,’— just  in  the  same  way,
you  accept  all  the  recluse  Gotama  says^
flOSl  ‘  If  the  Lord  said  so,*  so  it  is.’  ,
and  begone  I  _  ^ ''  ...  "

Then  the  queen  f^aH-jangha  to  go

to  the  Lord^g^jjP^gffine,  to  bow  his  head  at  the
iTfifasking  after  his  health,  to  enquire
lUPnerlK  had  really  said  what  was  attributed  to  him.
/fnd  be  careful,  she  added,  to  tell  me  exactly  what  the
Lord  answers ;  for,  Truth-finders  never  tell  an  untruth.

In  obedience  to  the  queen’s  commands,  the  brahmin
went  off  and  duly  asked  the  Lord  whether  he  had
really  said  so.

Yes,  brahmin  ; — our  dear  ones  do  bring  sorrow  and
lamentation,  pain,  suffering,  and  tribulation,  Here  is
a  proof.  Once  on  a  time,  here  in  Ssvatthi,  a  woman’s
mother  died  and  the  daughter,  crazed  and  beside  her-
self,  went  about  from  street  to  street  and  from  cross¬
roads  to  cross-roads,  saying : — Have  you  seen  my
mother  ?  Have  you  seen  my  mother  >

[109]  Another  proof  is  a  woman  of  SSvatthr  who  ^
lost  her  father — a  brother — a  sister — a  son — a  daughter
-—a  husband,  Crazed  and  beside  herself,  the  woman
went  about  from  street  to  street  and  from  cross-roads
to  cross-roads,  asking  if  anyone  had  seen  the  dear  one
she  had  lost.


5S


LXXXVIf,  PlYA-jlTIKA-SUTTA.


H.  ti.  xio.


Another  proof  is  a  man  of  SivaCthi  who  lost  his
mother — his  father — a  brother — a  sister — a  son — a
daughter — a  wife.  Crazed  and  beside  himself  the  man
went  about  from  street  to  street  and  from  cross-roads
CO  cross-roads,  asking  if  anyone  had  seen  the  dear  one
he  had  lost.

Another  proof  is  the  SSvaithl  woman  who  visited
her  own  people’s  home ;  and  they  wanted  to  take  her
from  her  husband  and  marry  her  to  someone  else
whom  she  did  not  like.  She  cold  her  husband  about
this;  whereupon  he  cut  her  in  two  [HO]  and  then
dlled  himself  so  that  they  might  both  die  together.

the.,  brahmin  duly  reported  to  the  queen,
riM.yrdnr  away  with  the  question  : — Are

^6u  sire,  of  your  txnly  princess

jin?  *  ,

’***’  If  nS^Ril^JliWencd  to  your  Vajin,  woukl  you  Bel
lamerShtjl^Mig^'  ^Ttng.  andtrii>uIatlBi?
..  make  a  great

difference  to  my  life.  How  oewro^ft^ng

sorrow  and  lam entatlozL, pain,  suffering,  and  trtHMtxt?

Well,  that  is  what  was  meant  by  the  I^ord^. —
knows  and  sees,  the  Arahat  all-enlightened,  whffn  he
declared  that  our  dear  ones  bring  sorrow  and  lamenta-

icr  oain,  suffer!  njy,  indifibulation^

Are  yo’u  fond,  sTre,  of  your  queen  Vasabha?

Yes,  I  am.  {R^puU  <m  abov$.)

Are  you  fond,  sire,  of-VidtWabha,  your  general?
[Ill]  Yes,  1  am.  (Repeat  as  above.)

Are  you  fond,  sire,  of  roe?

Yes,  I  am.  (Repeat  as  above.)

Are  you  fond,  sire,  of  the  people  of  Kisi  and
Kosala  ?

Yes,  I  am.  It  is  my  sovereignty  over  them  which
clothes  roe  in  Benares  muslins  and  gives  me  my  gar¬
lands.  perfumes  and  unguents.

If  anything  happened  to  them,  would  you  fed  sorrow
and  lamentation,  pain,  sufferlt^,  and  tribulation.

If  anything  happened  to  them,  it  would  make  a


M<  ii  113


NULLrUS  RBI  AFFSCTUS.


great  diJference — how  could  it  be  otherwise? — to  my
owQ  life.

Well,  that*  sire,  Is  what  was  meant  by  the  Lord
who  know  aod  sees,  the  Arahat  all-enlightened,  when
he  declared  that  our  dear  ones  bring  sorrow  and
lamentation,  pain,  suffering,  and  tribulation.

It  is  wonderful,  Mallika,  it  is  marvellous,  how  [112]
the  Lord’s  insight  penetrates  and  discerns.  Bring  me
water  for  ablution,  Malliki

Thereafter,  Pasenadi,'  king  of  Kosala,  rose  up,
reverently  bared  one  shoulder,  and,  with  folded  palms
stretched  out  to  where  the  Lord  was,  thrice  burst
forth  with— All  honour  to  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-
enlightened  I


LXXXVIII.  BAHITIKA-SUTTA.

ON  I>EUEA^UR.

Mymg  sst  fidvatthi  (n  jeu’s  grove  ia  Anathac
pi^sauncfi*  the  reverend  Anaoda,  duly  [Jc


when*  fur  rest  durii^'  tbe  nodff
^yito  the  Old  Pluasaunce  at  the  palace
.HWher.  just  then,  Patf«adt,  \dt^  of  K
riding  out  of  town  on  his  elephantj  Lqtus

when  he  saw  Ananda  coming.  First  assuring  himself
that  it  was  indeed  Ananda,  by  asking  the  noble  lord
Sirivaddha,  the  king  sent  a  messenger  with  ordem  to
bow  down  in  his  name  at  Ananda’s  feet  and  to  ask
him,  If  he  bad  nothing  particular  to  do,  to  [113]  be  so
good  as  to  join  him  for  a  while.  The  message  was
duly  delivered  and  Ananda  by  silence  gave  consent.
Then  the  king  rode  on  as  far  as  there  was  good  going
for  ao  dephanc,  proceeding  thence  on  foot  till  he  came
up  CO  Ananda,  whom  he  saluted,  standing  to  one  side
as  he  said : — If  you  have  nothing  particular  to  do,


6o


LX  X  X  VIII .  BilllTI  K  A-S  UTTA-


M.  i\.  IT4.


reverend  Ananda^  be  so  good  as  co  come  to  the  bank
of  the  river  AciravatS,  By  silence  A  nan  da  gave  con¬
sent  and,  proceeding  thither,  sat  down  on  the  seat
awaiting  him  under  a  tree.  The  king  rode  on  as  far
as  there  was  good^going  for  an  elephant,  proceeding
thence  on  foot  co  Ananda>  whom  he  saluted,  standing
the  while  as  he  said : — Be  seated  on  this  clump  of
flowers,  your  reverence.

Nay,  sire ;  be  you  seated ;  1  have  got  a  seat  of  my
own  already.

Seating  fkimself  on  the  seat  awaiting  him,  the  king
asked  Ananda  whether  the  Lord  would  ever  do  what
sa^  recluses  and  brahmins  would  condemn.

No,  sire.

[114]  Would  he  ever  say  what  they  would  condemn  ?

No,  sire.

Would  he  ever  think  what  they  would  condemn?

No,  sire.

It  is  wonderful,  sir;  it  is  marvellous!  What  I  could
not  settle  in  a  question,  you  have  settled  by  your
answer.  When  uninstructed  fools  praise  or  dispraise
others  without  testing  the  evidence  and  without  weigh¬
ing  their  Judgment,  we  do  not  hark  back  to  that  as
flnal ;  but  we  do,  when,  the  wise

evidence  and

we^Smg  their  judgment.  Tell  me  now  what  be-
bavMur-*^in  act— -or  in  word— in  thought — is  con¬
demned  bv  s^e  recluses  and  brahmins?

The  benavjour  which  Is  wrong  sire.

Wh«  behaviour  Is  wrong  ?

That  which  is  blameworthy.

What  behaviour  is  blameworthy  ?

That  which  is  malevolent

What  behaviour  is  malevolent  ?

That  which  ripens  into  IIL

And  what  behaviour  ripens  into  III  ?

That  behaviour,  sire,  which  conduces  to  the  harm
either  of  one’s  -self  or  of  others  or  of  both  together,
wherein  wrong  states  of  consciousness  wax  apace  while
right  states  wane ;  this  is  the  kind  of  behaviour —


M.  ii.  ij;.


ON  OEUBANOUCL


6l


whether  of  act  or  of  word  or  of  thought — which  is  con¬
demned  ^  $age  recluses  and  brahmms.

[115]  Does  the  Lord  commend  the  discarding  of
each  and  every  wrong  state  of  consciousness,  without
reserve  ?

The  Truth-finder,  sire,  has  shed  all  wrong  states
and  possesses  every  right  one.

Tell  me  now  what  behaviour — In  act — or  in  word —
or  in  thought — escapes  condemnation  by  sage  recluses
and  brahmins?

The  behaviour  which  is  right,  sire.

What  behaviour  is  right  ?

That  which  is  blameless.

Wbat  behaviour  is  blameless  ?

That  which  is  benevolent.

What  behaviour  is  benevolent  ?

That  which  ripens  unco  weal.

What  behaviour  ripens  unto  weal  ?

That  behaviour,  sire,  which  conduces  to  the  harm
neither  of  one’s  self  nor  of  others  nor  of  both  together,
wherein  wrong  states  of  consciousness  wane  while
right  states  wax  apace ;  this  is  the  kind  of  behaviour —
whether  of  act  or  of  word  or  of  thought — which  escapes
condemnation  by  sage  recluses  and  brahmins.

[116]  Does  the  Lord  commend  the  acquisition  of
each  and  every  right  state  of  consciousness,  without
reserve?

The  Truth'finder,  sire,  has  shed  every  wrong  state
of  consciousness  and  possesses  every  right  one.

it  is  wonderful,  sir,  it  is  marvellous,  how  well  you
have  put  it,  gratifying  and  del^bting  me  so  greatly
that,  if  only  it  befitted  your  reverence  to  have  my
peerless  elephant,  you  should  have  him, — or  my  peer¬
less  charger— or  a  choice  village.  Yet,  I  know  none
of  these  inings  would  befit  you.  But  here  is  a  piece
of  foreign  fabric,  sixteen  cubits  long  and  eight  broad,
which  was  sent  to  me,  mounted  on  a  pole  as  a  royal
canopy,  by  the  king  of  Magadha,  Ajatasattu  Vldehi-
putta.  Be  so  good,  I  beg,  as  to  accept  this.

Nay,  sire ;  I  have  my  full  set  of  three  robes.


63


t.  X  XX  VII I .  BAH  m  KA-8UTT  A,


M.  U.  J17.


[I17j  You  and  I  have  seen  how,  when  a  storm  has
burst  on  the  heights,  this  river  Aciravat?  overflows  in
spate  both  its  banks.  In  like  manner,  you  will  use
this  foreign  fabric  to  make  yourself  a  new  set  of  robes,
dividing  up  your  old  ones  among  your  fellows  irt,the
higher  life,  so  that  my  gift,  methinks,  will  have  an
overflow.  Be  so  good,  I  beg,  as  Co  accept  this.

Ananda  having  taken  the  fabric,  the  king  said  he
must  now  be  going,  as  he  had  much  to  do  and
attend  to.

At  your  majesty's  pleasure,  said  Ananda.

After  expressing  his  satisfaction  and  thanks,  the
king  rose  up  and  with  salutations  took  a  reverential
departure.

The  king  had  not  been  gone  long:  before  Ananda
went  his  way  to  the  Lord,  to  whom  in  due  course  he
related  all  that  had  passed  and  handed  over  the  foreign
fabric.

Said  the  Lord  to  the  Almsmen : — It  was  a  good
thing,  a  very  good  thing,  for  King  Pasenadi  of  Kosala
to  be  privileged  to  see  Ananda  and  commune  with  him.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms*
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LXXXIX.  DHAMMA-CETIYA-SUTTA.

MONUMENTS  OF  THE  DOCTRINE,

{118]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  in  the  Sakyan  country, — Medacalumpa  is
a  township  of  tbeirs — ,  Pasenadi,  king  of  Kosala,  who
was  at  Nangaraka  on  some  business  or  other,  bade
Digha  Karayana  get  the  carriages  ready  and  drove
out  in  royal  state  to  see  the  beauties  of  the  pleasaunce,
riding  as  far  as  a  carriage  could  go  and  proceedii^
thence  on  foot  to  the  pleasaunce.  As  he  walked  up
and  down  in  the  woods,  the  kir^  observed  del^htful
and  attractive  nooks  at  the  foot  of  trees,  peacefd  and
quiet,  sheltered  from  winds,  very  haunts  of  solitude


H.  iL  X 19.


monumbnt?  op  the  doctrine.


and  homes  of  medication.  The  sight  reminded  him  of
the  Lord  and  inspired  the  thought  that  this  was  (he
,  spot  to  commune  with  the  Lord,  Arahac  all-enllghcened.
Imparting  his  thoughts  to  Digha  KSrSyana,  the  kine
the  Lord  was  then  staying.  Being
.  cold  that  he  was  at  Medatajumpa,  the  Sakyan  town¬
ship,  the  king  asked  how  far  away  it  was  and  was  told
that  It  not  far — only  some  three  leagues— and  that

j  ,  enough  left  to  get  there  chat  same  day.

^  Ordering  the  carnages  to  he  got  ready,  the  king  drove
out  to  Medaulumpa  that  same  day,  riding  as  far  as
^  me  c^nage  could  go  and  proceeding  thence  on  foot  to
me  plcasaunce.  From  a  number  of  Almsmen,  who
,  were  pacing  to  and  fro  in  the  open  air,  the  king
>  enquired  the  whereabouts  of  the  Lord,  whom  he  wish^

.  to  see.

Yonder,  sire,  is  his  cell,  with  the  door  shut.  If  you
.  will  go  silently  and  gently  to  the  fore-court,  and  there
1  cough  and  tap  on  the  bolt,  the  Lord  will  open  the  door
to  TOU.

.  Then  and  there  the  king  handed  his  sword  and
.  turban  to  Digha,— who  realized  that  the  king  did  not
;  ^fnpafly,  and  that  he  ought  to  stop  behind,

.  1  he  king  approached  as  directed  and  tapped  on  the
}  ^Ic,  whereupon  the  Urd  opened  the  door,  and  the
1  king,  entenng  his  cell,  [120^  bowed  hU  head  at  the
I  Lord  s  feet,  which  he  covered  with  kisses  and  stroked
‘  ^  name Pasenadi,  king  of  Kosala.

*  -  wherefore,  sire,  do  you  pay  such  respect

to  this  body  of  mine  and  show  me  such  marks  of
affection  ?

The  conclusion  with  regard  to  the  Lord  which  I
have  reached  is  that  he  is  the  all-enlightened  Lord
that  be  well  and  truly  preached  his  Doccrini  and
that  his  Confraternity  walks  aright.

On  one  side,  I  see  some  recluses  and  brahmins
walking  zQ  a  restricted  higher  life  for  anything  from
ten  to  forty  years  on  end,  who,  with  all  their  punctilio
m  bathing  and  anointing  and  braiding  of  hair,  indulge
in  the  fivefold  pleasures  of  sense  to  whi^h  they  are


64


LX  XX IX.  D  HAMM  A-CBTI V  A-SUTT  A.


M.  iU  til.


addicted.  On  the  other  side,  I  see  Almsmen  who  all
their  lives  long  live  the  higher  life  in  all  its  fulness
and  purity  till  meir  last  breath  is  drawn ;  nor  do  1  find
any  higher  life  outside  so  full  and  pure. — This  leads
me  to  my  conclusion  with  regard  to  the  Lord^hat
he  is  the  all-enlightened  Lord,  that  he  has  well  and  i|
truly  preached  his  Doctrine,  and  that  his  Confraternity
walks  aright.

Moreover,  there  is  always  strife  going  on  between
kings,  between  nobles,  between  brahmins,  between  /
householders,  between  mother  and  son,  between  son
and  mother,  between  father  and  son,  between  son  and  ^
father,  between  brother  and  brother,  between  brother
and  sister,  between  sister  and  brother,  between  com¬
panion  and  companion.  But,  here,  I  see  Almsmen
living  in  peace  and  concord,  without  strife,  blending  ,
t^euier  like  water  and  milk,  and  [121]  gazing  on  one  ;  i
another  with  eyes  of  affection ;  nor  do  I  nnd  such
concord  in  any  ocher  body.  This  too  leads  me  to  my  i
conclusion  .  .  .  walks  aright.

Again,  as  1  move  from  one  pleasaunce  to  another  '
and  from  one  close  to  another,  I  see  there  recluses
and  brahmins  who  are  lean  miserable  creatures,  ill*  *  ;
looking  and  jaundiced,  with  their  veins  standing  out  ^
like  wnipcor<3,  by  no  means  attractive  to  view,  me*
thinks.  I  wondered  whether  their  vocation  was  .
irksOme  to  them  or  whether  they  had  privQy  com*  *  \
mitted  some  crime,  chat  they  should  look  like  that,

But  when  I  asked  them  the  reason,  their  only  reply
was'tiftit  it  ran  in  the  family.  But,  here,  I  see  Alms*
men  joyous  and  joyful,  elated  and  exultant,  buoyant
and  ci.eerful  of  mind,  without  a  care  or  a  worry,  tran¬
quil,  rubsiscing  on  what  others  bestow,  with  hearts  as  i
tree  as  wild  creatures.  Surely,  thought  I,  it  is  because
they  find  in  the  Lord’s  teachings  a  high  excellence  not  j
elsewhere  discerned  fay  them  before,  that  they  live
a  life  so  joyous  and  joyful  ...  wild  creatures- — This  i

too  leads  me  to  my  conclusion  .  .  .  walks  aright.  ^

Further,  .as  a  Noble  anointed  king,  [122]  I  have
power  to  execute,  or  mulct,  or  banisK  the  guilty


M.il.  I83«  MONUMENTS  OF  THE  IJOCTRINE.  65


according  to  their  deserts ;  bat  while  I  am  hearing  a
case,  people  interrupt  the  proceedings.  To  stop  them
I  have  to  forbid  interruptions  while  a  case  is  on,  and
Co  tell  tnem  to  wait  till  it  is  settled,  Yes,  I’ have
interruptions  while  bearing  a  case;  but,  when  I  survey
the  Almsmen  while  the  Lord  is  preaching  to  hundreds
of  his  followers  at  a  time,  not  a  voice  is  raised  nor
a  cough  heard.  Once,  while  the  Lord  was  so  preach¬
ing,  an  Almsman  who  coughed  was  jogged  by  his
neighbour’s  knee  and  told  to  Keep  quiet  and  not  make
a  noise  while  their  master  the  Lord  was  preaching  the
Doctrine.  It  is  wonderful  and  marvellous,  thought
I  to  myself,  how  any  body  of  men  can  be  disciplined
CO  such  a  pilch  without  constraint  of  cudgel  or  sword  1
I  know  no  such  discipline  anywhere  outside. — This  too
leads  me  to  my  conclusion  •  .  .  walks  aright.

Further,  from  che  class  of  Nobles — or  brahmins — or
householders — or  recluses  and  brahmins — there  have
come  keen  and  tried  disputants— verbal  archers  .  .  .

its  in  Svtta  27)  .  .  .  [128]  much  less  non-plus
nim,  but  actually  become  disciples  of  the  Lord.  And
those  who  come  to  confront  him  from  among  recluses
and  brahmins  actually  ask  to  be  allowed  to  go  forth
from  home  to  homelessness  as  Pikrims  and  the  recluse
Gotama  admits  them  to  his  Confraternity  .  .  .  {etc.  as
in  StUiaij).  ...  Now  are  we  recluses,  brahmins  and
eaintly  men  indeed  i — This  too  leads  me  to  my  con¬
clusion  .  .  .  walk  aright.

Further,  there  are  the  carriage-builders  Isidatta  and
Pura^  whom  I  support,  who  make  my  carriages,  who
owe  to  me  their  livelihood  and  the  honours  they  enjoy.
Widial,  these  men  do  not  [124]  serve  me  as  whole¬
heartedly  as  they  do  the  Lord.  Time  was  when,  being
out  with  my  troops  on  active  service,  I,  to  test  these
two,  took  up  my  quarters  in  a  cramped  little  house, —
where  Isidatta  and  Pui^pa,  after  spending  the  best
part  of  the  night  in  discussing  the  Doctrine,  lay  down
to  rest  with  their  heads  in  the  direction  where^^hey
heard  the  Lord  was,  and  only  with  their  feet^wards
me.  It  is  wonderful  and  marvellous,  thorfht  I  to


66


LXXXIX.  DHAMMA-CZTI7A-SUTTA.


K.  K.  13$.


myself,  that  these  two  men  who  owe  everything  in  the
world  to  me,  yet  do  not  serve  me  as  they  serve  the
Lord.  Surely,  thought  1,  it  is  because  these  rtverend
men  find  in  the  Lonfs  teachings  a  high  excellence  not
elsewhere  discerned  by  them  before. — This  too  leads
me  to  my  conclusion  .  .  .  walks  aright.

Further,  the  Lord  is  a  Noble  like  me,  a  Kosalan
like  me,  and  eighty  years  old  like  me ;  and  this  in
itself  prompts  me  to  pay  such  respect  to  the  Lord  and
show  him  such  marks  of  affection.  But  now  I  must
be  going ;  I  have  much  to  do  and  attend  to.

At  your  pleasure,  sire.

Rising  up,  PasenadI,  king  of  Kosala,  saluted  the
Lord  and  with  deep  reverence  withdrew.

He  had  not  been  gone  long  when  the  Lord,  address¬
ing  the  Almsmen,  said : — Before  leaving,  the  king
commended  the  Doctrine  in  monumental  words.  Learn
and  master  those  words,  Almsmen;  [^25]  treasure
diem  in  your  memories ;  they  are  words  of  profit,
fundamental  to  the  higher  life.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XC.  KANNAKATTHALA-SUTTA.

OMNISCIENCE  AND  OMNIPOTENCE.

Thus  have  I  heard-  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Ujjufifta  in  the  deer-park  of  Katinakarthala,
Pasenadi,  king  of  Kosala,  who  was  at  Ujjuaas  on
some  business  or  ocher,  sent  a  messenger  to  bow  his
head  at  the  Lord’s  feet  as  he  asked  in  the  king’s  name
after  the  Lord's  health,  and  to  say  that  soon  after  his
meal  the  king  would  come  to  see  him.  This  message
was  duly  delivered.  On  hearing  of  his  projected
vi^t,  the  two  sisters,  Queen  Soma  and  Queen  SakulS
[126]  came  to  the  king  in  the  refectory  with  the
request  that  he  would  make — in  thdr  names — the  like
enquiry  about  the  Lord’s  health,


M.  iL  137.


OMNISCIENCE  AND  OMNIPOTENCE.


On  paying  his  visit  after  his  meal,  the  king,  after
saluting  the  Lord,  seated  himself  to  one  side  and
delivered  the  message  sent  by  the  two  sisters.

How  comes  it,  sire,  that  they  found  no  other
messenger  ?

As  they  heard  I  was  coming  here  to-day,  they  asked
me  to  convey  their  enquiries  in  person.

May  good  fortune  attend  them,  sire!

Then  said  the  king  1  have  heaixl  it  said  that  the
recluse  Gotama  declares  no  recluse  or  brahmin  can
ever,  in  the  plenitude  of  ken  and  vision,  claim  absolute
knowledge  and  insight,  [127]  Now,  is  this  witness
true, — not  misrepresenting  the  Lord  and  not  mis¬
stating  the  gist  ot  his  doctrine?

The  witness  is  not  true;  it  imputes  to  me  what  is
false  and  untrue.

Said  the  king  to  Vi^Qdahha  the  general : — Who  pot
this  story  about  in  the  p^jace  ?

The  brahmin  Safljaya  Akssagotta,  sire.

Sending  a  messenger  to  summon  the  brahmin  to  his
presence,  the  king  said : — Can  it  be  that,  though  origin¬
ally  uttered  about  something  else,  the  Lord’s  words
have  been  transferred  by  people  to  a  quite  different
subject?  In  what  sense  does  the  Lord  acknowledge
having  made  his  statement  ?

What  I  acknowledge  having  said  was  that,  at  one
and  the  same  time,  no  recluse  or  brahmin  can  know
and  see  everything.

Casually,  and  with  reference  to  causation,  the  Lord
has  said  this.  [12S]  Now,  sir,  is  there  any  distinction
or  difference  between  the  four  classes  of  Nobles,
brahmins,  middle-class  people  and  peasants?

Two  out  of  the  four  classes  take  precedence,  sire,  in
the  way  these  are  addressed,  received,  approached  and
created.

I  was  not  asking  the  Lord  about  things  here  and
now ;  my  question  relates  to  their  destinies  hereafter.

There  are  hve  qualities  for  striving  after  the  truth,
-^(i)  An  Almsman  has  confidence,  is  confident  .  .
{tic.  as  in  Sutia  85)  .  .  .  utter  destruction  of  Ill.


68


xc.  KAfJVAKATTHALA-SUTTA.


M.  ti.  Id9.


now  the  four  classes  possess  these  five  qualities,  it  will
be  to  their  abiding  weal  and  welfare.

If  all  four  classes  [129]  had  all  five  qualities,  would
there  be  any  distinction  or  difference  between  them  ?

I  premise,  sire,  differing  degrees  of  capacity.  It  is
just  as  though  there  were  one  pair  of  young  elephants
or  colts  or  steers  who  had  been  schooled  and  traine^
while  another  pair  had  not.  Would  the  first  pair,
being  trained,  att^n  to  trained  capacity  and  rank  as
trained  ?

Yes.

Would  the  second  pair,  being  untrained,  do  the
same  ?

No.

It  is  just  the  same,  sire,  with  what  an  Almsman  can
achieve  with  confidence,  health,  honesty,  strenuous
effort  and  understanding.  He  cannot  possibly  achieve
it  without  such  an  equipment.

Casually,  and  with  reference  to  causation,  the  Lord
has  said  this.  If,  now,  all  four  classes  had  all  five
qualities  and  had  them  to  the  full,  would  there  then
be  any  distinction  or  difference  between  them?

In  such  case,  I  recognise  no  difference, — that  ts
to  say,  in  Deliverance  as  against  Deliverance.  It  Is
just  like  one  man  lighting  a  fire  with  a  dry  stick  of
brushwood,  and  a  second  man  [180]  lighting  his  with
a  stick  of  sal-wood,  while  a  third  man  employs  a
mango  stick  and  the  fourth  a  stick  of  figwood.  Would
you  expect  any  difference  in  flame,  hue  or  brilliance
between  the  four  fires,  though  kindled  from  different
woods  ?

No.

It  is  just  the  same,  sire,  with  the  illumination  which
is  kindled  by  effort  and  fired  by  striving.  Tbereia,
I  recognize  no  difference,— that  is  to  say,  in  Deliver¬
ance  as  against  Deliverance.

Causally,  and  with  reference  to  causation,  the  Lord
has  said  this.— Are  there  gods,  sir  ?

Why  ask  such  a  question  ?

Do  gods  come  back  to  life  on  earth  or  not  ?


Ml  u.  131.


OUlJISCIBNCS  AND  OMNIPOTENCE.


69


The  maJign  do  ;  the  benign  do  not.

At  this  point  Vidtidabha  asked  the  Lord  whether
the  malign  gods  who  must  return  to  an  earthly  life  can
expel  or  banish  from  their  abodes  those  benign  gods
who  will  never  return  to  earth.

Thought  the  reverend  Ananda ; — This  VidQ<J^hha
is  the  son  of  Pasenadi,  king  of  Kosala  j  and  I  am  the
Lord’s  son.  Now  is  the  time  for  son  to  talk  with  son.
So  he  said  to  VidOdabha:— I  will  ask  you  a  question
in  return,  for  such  answer  as  you  may  see  fit  to  give.
In  the  kingdom  of  Kosala  and  within  the  range  oT  bis
.  sovereignty  and  sway,  [181]  has  the  king  power  to
expel  or  banish  any  recluse  or  brahmin,  anyone  either
virtuous  or  not  virtuous,  anyone  leading  or  not  leading
the  higher  life  ?

Yes.  my  good  sir ;  he  has  that  power.

Has  he  that  power  outside  his  own  dominions  ?

No.

Have  you  ever  heard  of  the  Thirty-three  gods  ?

Oh,  yes;  and  so  has  his  majesty.

Tell  me ;  can  the  king  of  Kosala  expel  or  banish
them  from  their  abodes  ?

Why.  he  cannot  even  see  them,  much  less  expel
or  banish  them.

Just  in  the  same  way,  general,  the  malign  gods
'-caftftvi  benign  gods,  much  less  expel

or  banish  them  /rcwoutj^ir  abodes.

What  is  the  namc^rjir,  of  this  Almsman  ?  asked  the
kinj.

Ananda,  sire.

Joyous  (ananda)  is  his  name,  and  joyous  is  his
nature.  He  s^ke  cau^lly  [182]  and  vrith  reference
to  causation. — -Does  Brsihma  exist  ?

Why  ask  such  a  quesjjon  ?

Does  he.  or  does  he  not,  return  to  life  on  earth  ?

A  malign  BrahmS  does ;  a  benign  Brahma  does  not.

At  this  point,  the  brahmin  Safijaya  AkSsagotta  was
'flpnounced  and  was  asked  by  the  king  who  put  that
story  about  In  the  palace.

It  was  Vidu^bha,  the  general,  said  the  brahmin.


70


XC.  K  Ali  y  AKATTH  ALA-Sy  TT  A-


W-iLi3s*


It  was  the  brahmin  Safijaya  AkSsagotta,  said  the
general.

The  king's  carriage  being  now  announced,  the  king,
said  to  the  Lord 1  asked  the  Lord  about  omniscience
and  he  explained  omniscience  to  me  in  a  manner  which
pleases,  satisfies  and  gladdens  me.  I  asked  him  about
the  purity  of  the  four  classes  and  he  explained  it  to
me  in  a  manner  which  pleases,  satisfies  and  gladdens
me.  I  asked  him  about  the  supreme  Brahma  and  he
explained  him  to  me  in  a  manner  which  pleases,  satisfies
and  gladdens  me.  The  Lord  has  explained  to  me
everything  about  which  I  asked,  in  a  manner  which
pleases,  satisfies  and  gladdens  me.  But  now  [188]  I
must  be  going,  sir ;  I  nave  much  to  do  and  attend  to.

At  your  pleasure,  sire.

Having  expressed  his  satisfactions  and  thanks  for
what  the  Lord  had  told  him,  Pascnadi,  king  of  Kosala,
saluted  the  Lord  and  with  deep  reverence  departed.


XCL  BRAHMAYU-SUTTA.

THE  SUPERMAN.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  with  a
great  company  of  some  some  fJuTAmen

was  on  an  alms-pilgrimage  iri  Vtdeha  country,
there  was  living  at  MithiJS  the  isrshmin  Brahmayu,  an
old  and  aged  man,  far  advanced  in  years  and  nearing
the  end  of  his  span,  being  oipe  hundred  and  twenty
years  old.  He  was  versed  in  ^11  three  Vedas ;  he  was
accomplished  in  the  ritual  with  the  glosses  thereon,  in
phonology  and  in  etymology,  ivith  chronicles  as  a  fifth
branch ;  he  knew  exegesis  aix^  was  learned  in  casuistry
and  in  the  signs  that  mark  th^  Superman.  It  came  to
his  ears  that  the  recluse  Gor.ama,  a  Sakyan  .  .  .  {^etc.
AS  2s  SuUas  4t  And  82).  .  .  ^  It  was  good  to  go  and
see  sdntly  men  like  him.  >

[184]  This  brahmin  Bralvm&yu  had  as  pupil  at  the
time  a  yotmg  brahmin  name41  Uttara,  who  was  likewise


1


M.  il.  X35


THE  SUPBUMAN.


versed  in  the  three  Vedas  .  .  .  mark  the  Superman.
To  this  pupil  the  brahmin  related  what  had  come  to
his  ears  about  this  recluse  Gotama,  bidding  the  young
man  go  and  find  out  whether  the  facts  tallied  with
popular  repute  or  not,  so  that  he  himself  might  feel

assured.  .

How  shall  I  know  whether  the  facts  tally  with
popular  repute  ?

In  our  runes,  Uttara,  there  are  recorded  the  two
and  thirty  marks  of  a  Superman.^for  whom,  if  he
bears  these  marks,  there  awaits  one  of  two  careers  and
no  ihid.  Should  he  live  a  home  life,  he  ^comes
Emperor  over  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth,  righteous
in  himself  and  ruling  righteously,  triumphant  abroad,
enforcing  law  and  order  at  home,  and  possessing  the
Seven  ^wels,— wheel,  elephant,  charger,  gem,  queen-
consort,  treasurer  and  counsellor.  More  than  a  thou^
s^d  sons  has  he,  heroes  of  might,  who  sweep  the
enemy's  hosts  before  them.  Over  all  the  earth,  to
the  shores  of  ocean,  be  extends  his  sway,  by  sheer
righteousness  alone,  and  not  by  cudgel  or  sword.  If,
Instead,  be  goes  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as  a
Pilgrim,  he  becomes  the  Arahat  all -enlightened  who
lifts  the  veil  from  the  world.  It  is  mine,  my  dear
Uttara,  to  impart  the  runes ;  ic  is  yours  to  receive
them.

Dudfully,  the  young  brahmin  rose  and  with  deep
reverence  departed  on  an  alms- pilgrimage  through  the
Videha  country  [18h]  till  in  due  course  he  found  the
Lord,  whom  he  greeted  before  taking  a  seat  to  one
side  Being  seated,  he  scanned  the  Ixprd's  body  for
the  two  and  thirty  marks  of  a  Superman  and  in  dme
ciserved  them  all  save  tw^,  namely  the  privities
hidden  in  a  sheath  and  the  big  tongue, — concerning
which  two  Uttara  was  in  doubt  and  perplexity,  not
feeling  certain  or  sure.  Realizing  exactly  the  young
man's  uncertainty  of  mind,  the  Lord  made  such  a
manifestation  of  psychic  power  that  Uttara  could  see
the  Lord’s  prlvides  within  their  sheath ;  and  then,
putting  forth  his  tongue,  he  passed  it  up  and  down  the


72


XCr.  BEAHMAYU-SITtTA.


M.ri.  136.


orifices  of  both  ears  and  of  both  nostrils,  and  covered
with  it  the  whole  expanse  of  his  forehead.

Quite  sore  now  about  the  presence  of  all  the  two
and  thirty  marks,  Uttara  resolved  to  dog  the  footsteps
of  the  recluse  Gotama  and  to  observe  his  carri^e  in
his  every  posture-  So  for  seven  months  on  end  he
dogged  the  Lord  like  his  shadow,  and  then  returned  to
the  brahmin  B  rah  may  u  at  MithilS-

In  answer  to  the  brahmin's  enquiries,  [186]  Uttara
spoke  as  follows  : —

Yes;  the  facts  tally  with  popular  repute  and  the
reverend  Gotama  is  all  that  is  reported  of  him.  He
has  got  all  the  two  and  thirty  marks  of  a  Superman,
to  wit —

(1)  His  tread  is  firmly  planted;  (2)  on  his  soles  are
the  wheels,  complete  with  a  thousand  spokes  and  with
felloes  and  hubs ;  (3)  his  heels  project ;  (4)  his  dints
are  long ;  {5)  he  has  soft  hands  and  feet  5  (6)  his
fingers  and  toes  spring  clean,  without  webbing  between
them ;  {7)  his  ankles  are  over  the  exact  middle  of  his
tread;  (8)  his  legs  are  like  an  antelope's ;  (9)  while
standing  bolt  upright,  he  can,  without  bendine,  touch
and  rub  his  knees  with  both  hands  at  once;  ^
privities  are  within  a  sheath ;  ( n)  golden  of  hue  is  he ;
(13)  so  fine  is  his  skin's  texture  that  no  dust  or  dirt
can  lodge  on  it;  (13)  each  several  hair  on  bis  body
grows  separate  and  distinct  each  from  its  own  in¬
dividual  pore;  {14)  each  hair  starts  straight,  is  blue-
black  like  collyrium,  and  curls  to  the  right  at  the  tip ;
(15)  he  is  as  strai^t  as  a  die;  (i6)  his  body  shows
the  same  con  vermes;  (17)  his  chest  is  like  a  lion's;
(t8)  his  back  is  flat  between  the  shoulders  (19)  bis
proportions  are  those  of  the  banyan-tree,— his  stret<^
oeing  the  same  as  his  he^bt ;  (ao)  the  curve  of  bis
shoulders  is  symmetrical;  <3i)  his  sense  of  caste  is
consummate ;  (aa)  he  has  the  jaw  of  a  lion;  (23)  he
has  [187]  forty  teeth ;  (24)  his  teeth  are  all  the  same
length ;  (25)  tii  ere  are  no  interstices  between  hb
teeth ;  (26)'  his  teeth  are  sparkling  white ;  (27)  his
tongue  is  ;  (28)  his  voice  is  melodious  as  the


M,  n.  13S.


THB  SUPERMAN.


73


cuckoo’s  note ;  (29)  the  pupils  of  his  eyes  are  intensely
dark;  (30)  his  eyelashes  are  like  a  cow's;  (31)  be¬
tween  his  eyebrows  grow  soft  white  hairs  like  cotton-
down  ;  and  (32)  his  head  is  shaped  like  a  turban.

As  he  walks, — he  always  leai  off  with  the  right  foot
first,  with  steps  neither  coo  long  nor  too  short,  and  at
a  pace  neither  too  hurried  nor  too  slow;  he  does  not
knock  his  knees  or  ankles  together ;  his  thichs  are  not
elevated  or  slouched,  not  turned  in  or  turned  out ;  only
his  lower  limbs  are  in  movement ;  he  does  not  put  his
whole  body  into  it.

When  he  stands  at  gaze,  he  turns  full  round  to  do
$0  ;  he  does  not  gaze  up  or  down  or  stare  about  him.
Three  yards  does  his  forward  glance  extend  ; — beyond
that  distance  his  boundless  ken  and  vision  comes  into
play.

When  entering  a  house,  he  does  not  bend  his  body
up  or  down,  or  to  [188]  or  fro.  He  turns  to  sit  down
neither  too  far  off  nor  too  near  his  seat ;  not  clutching
bold  of  it  nor  flinging  himself  down  on  it.  When
seated  indoors,  he  does  not  behave  wrongly  with  hands
or  feet ;  he  does  not  sit  with  l^s  and  ankles  crossed,
nor  does  he  prop  his  head  on  his  hand ;  he  is  not
terror*struck,  nor  does  he  shake,  tremble  or  quake;  he
sits  there  without  fear,  without  dread,  without  con-
ateroation, — aloof  within  himself.

When  receiving  water  to  wash  his  bowl,  he  does  not
move  his  bowl  up  and  down,  or  to  and  fro ;  he  takes
just  water  eootjgh,  neither  too  much  nor  too  little ;  he
does  not  swish  the  water  about,  as  he  washes  his  bowl,
nor  does  he  twirl  it  round  and  round ;  he  does  not  set
his  bowl  down  on  the  ground  before  be  begins  to  wash
his  hands  ;  by  the  time  his  hands  are  washed,  his  bowl
is  washed  too,  and  his  hands  are  washed  by  the  time
his  bowl  is ;  be  empties  the  water  from  hb  bowl  neither
too  far  away  nor  yet  too  near,  without  tossing  it  out

When  receiving  boiled  rice  in  his  bowl,  he  does  not
move  his  bowl  up  and  down  or  to  a^d  fro ;  he  takes
just  rice  enough,  neither  too  much  nor  too  little ;  with
hb  mouthful  of  rice  he  eats  the  proper  proportion  of


74


XCL  BR  AH  MAY  U-  SUTTA-


M.  iu  I39>


curries  (viz.  one-fourth),  without  neglecting  the  rice ;
twice  and  thrice  he  turns  over  in  his  mouth  each
mouthful,  nor  is  there  a  single  grain  of  rice  which
either  goes  down  whole  or  Is  left  unswallowed  before
he  proceeds  to  the  next  mouthful ;  he  appreciates  the
taste  of  his  food  without  being  passionatefy  fond  of  it;
his  eating  has  an  eightfold  character^ — he  eats  not  for
pleasure  or  for  delight  or  for  ostentation  or  for  display,
but  only  to  support  and  to  maintain  his  body,  to  save
it  from  harm  and  to  help  on  the  higher  life,  so  as  to

[139]  rid  himself  of  the  old  feelings  and  not  to  breed
any  new  feelings,  but  to  ensure  progress  and  the
blameless  lot  and  well-being.

After  his  meal,  when  receiving  water  to  wash  his
bowl,  he  does  not  move  . .  .  without  tossing  it  out ;  after
his  meal  he  sets  his  bowl  down  on  the  ground  not  too
far  off  nor  too  near,  not  negligently  nor  yet  holding  on
to  it  too  long;  after  his  meal,  he  sits  In  silence  for
a  little  while,  but  does  not  forget  when  to  return
thanks ;  and  in  returning  thanks  after  bis  meal,  he
does  not  complain  of  his  fare  nor  express  a  preference
for  something  else,  but  confines  himself  to  instructing,
rousing,  enlightening,  and  cheering  onwards  the  com¬
pany  there  present  with  a  doctrinal  discourse, — after
which  he  rises  up  and  departs,  not  too  fast  and  not
too  slow,  without  manifesting  the  desire  to  get  awa}^.
Gotama's  robe  is  neither  too  long  nor  too  short ;  it
is  not  skin-tight  nor  is  it  baggy ;  nor  does  the  wind
blow  it  up.  No  dust  or  dirt  adheres  to  his  body.
When  back  in  the  pleasaunce,  Gotaxna  sits  on  the  seat
set  for  him  and  washes  first  one  foot  and  then  the
other,— though  he  makes  no  study  of  the  appearance
of  his  feet.  His  feet  washed,  he  sits  cross-legged,
with  his  body  erect,  in  alert  mindfulness.  No  thought
of  harm— whether  to  himself  or  to  others  or  to  both —
ever  crosses  his  mind ;  hk  only  thoughts  as  he  sits
th^e  are  for  the  weal  of  himself,  and  of  others,  and  of
both  himself  and  others,  and  of  the  whole  wide  world.

[140]  In  the  pleasaunce  he  preaches  the  Doctrine  to
those  there,  neither  flattering  nor  denouncing  them,

I


M.  iS.  141.


THE  SUPERMAN.


75


but  simply  instructing,  rousing,  enlightening  and
heartening  them.  Eightfold  are  the  qualities  of
Goiaina’s  voice ;  it  is  frank,  clear,  melodious,  pleasant,
full,  carrying,  deep  and  resonant;  in  giving  instruction,
his  voice  does  not  travel  beyond  his  audience;  when
his  instruction  is  over,  his  hearers  rise  up  and  de¬
part  reluctantly,  with  their  gase  still  on  him.

1  have  seen  Gotama  walking ;  I  have  seen  him
standing  still ;  I  have  seen  him  sitting  silent  In  a
house;  I  have  seen  him  eating  in  a  house;  1  have
seen  him  sitting  silent  after  a  meal ;  I  have  seen  him
returning  thanks  after  a  meal ;  I  have  seen  him  on  his
way  back  to  his  pleasaunce ;  I  have  seen  him  sitting
silent  in  the  pleasaunce;  I  have  seen  him  preaching
the  doctrine  in  the  pleasaunce  to  the  assemblage. —
That  is  what  he  is  like,  only  more  so.

At  the  close  of  this  relation,  the  brahmin  BrahmSyu
rose  from  his  seat,  respectfully  bared  his  right  shoulder,
and  stretched  forth  his  folded  palms  reverently  towards
where  the  Lord  was,  exclaiming  thrice  with  deep
emotion : — Honour  be  to  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-
enlightened  1

May  It  be  mine,  added  the  brahmin,  to  meet  Gotama
at  some  time  somewhere  and  to  hold  converse  with
him  I

When,  in  the  course  of  bis  alms-pilgrimage  in  the
Videha  country  the  Lord  had  come  to  Mithlla  and
taken  up  his  abode  there  In  MakhSdeva’s  mango-
grove,  it  came  to  the  ears  of  the  brahmin  heads  of
houses  there  that  the  recluse  [1^1]  Gotama,  a  Sakyan
.  .  .  {4U.  as  in  Sutta  41)  ...  and  others  again  in
silence.

Hearing  of  the  Lord’s  coming  to  MithilS,  BrahmSyu
proceeded  to  the  mango-grove  with  a  number  of  young
Brahmins,  but  thought  to  himself,  as  he  drew  near,
that  he  ought  not  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  the
recluse  Gotama  as  a  quite  unknown  stranger.^  So  be
despatched  a  young  brahmin  to  precede  him,  with
civil  enquiries  in  his  name  and  to  announce  that  he
was  the  brahmin  BrahmSyif,  an  old  and  aged  man,  far


76


XCI,  DR  AHM  AVU-  SUTTA.


M.ii.  14^


advanced  in  years  and  nearing  the  end  of  his  span,
being  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  old,  versed  in  all
three  Vedas  .  .  .  and  in  the  signs  that  mark  the
Superman ;  that  he  was  foremost  in  MltHila  alike  in
substance,  in  knowledge  of  runes,  [142]  in  age,  and
in  repute ;  and  that  he  wished  to  see  Gotama.

This  message  was  duly  carried  by  the  young  brahmin
to  the  Lord,  who  sent  back  word  chat  he  awaited  the
brahmin’s  convenience.  On  this  intimation,  13rahm5>ni
advanced,  and  the  assemblage,  when  they  saw  him
coming  a  little  way  off,  made  way  to  receive  one  so
well-known  and  distinguished.  But  Brahmayu  begged
them  to  resume  their  seats,  for  he  would  sit  near
Gotama, — as  he  did  after  exchange  of  greetings.  As
he  sat  there,  the  brahmin  [148]  scanned  the  Lord’s
body  for  the  two  and  thirty  marks  of  a  Superman,  and
in  time  observed  all  of  them  save  two,  namely  the
privities  hidden  in  a  sheath  and  the  big  tongue, — con¬
cerning  which  two  Brahmayu  was  in  doubt  and  per¬
plexity,  not  feeling  certain  or  sure.  Thereupon,
Brahmlyu  addressed  the  Lord  in  these  lines  :

Of  two  and  thirty  marks  that  stamp,  ’tis  said
th$  Superman,  I  miss  in  thee  but  two.

Hast  thou  thy  parts  ensheatKd,  thou  prince  of  men  ?
Or  are  they  female  ?  Is  thy  tongue  not  short
Bui  large  and  long  ?  Pray,  let  me  know  the  truth.
Put  forth  Iky  tongue,  0  sage :  dispel  my  doubts ;
to  compass  welfare  here  and  bliss  beyond,
vouchsafe  to  answer  what  I  seek  to  learn.

Realizing  exactly  Brahmayu’s  uncertainty  of  mind,
the  Lord  made  such  a  manifestation  of  psychic  power
that  the  brahmin  could  see  the  Lord’s  privities  within
tbeir  sheath  ;  and  then,  putting  forth  his  tongue,  he

Cssed  it  up  and  down  the  orifices  of  both  ears  and  of
cb  nostrils  and  covered  with  it  the  whole  expanse  of
his  fwebead,  ending  by  replying  to  the  brahmin  in  the
following  lines : —

The  two  and  thirty  marks  that  stamp,  'its  said,
the  Supermani  are  mine  /  dispel  your  doubts  t


M.  U.  144.


THS  SUPERMAN.


77


/  know  what  mind  should  know  ;  /  ant  what  man
should  hs  ;  I'm  quit  of  all  man  should  renounce ;

— thus,  brahmin^  all  enlighienmoni  is  mine.

[144]  To  compass  welfare  here  and  bliss  beyond,

2 grant  permission  what  thou  wilt  to  ask.

Thought  the  brahmin  to  himself : — On  this  permis¬
sion,  sb^l  I  ask  about  things  here  and  now  or  about
the  hereafter  ?  As  I  am  versed  in  the  former,  and  am
referred  to  as  an  accepted  authority  thereon,  I  will  ask
Gotama  about  weal  hereafter.  So  he  made  rejoinder
CO  the  Lord  in  the  following  lines : — -

PVhai  makes  a  Brahmin  9  What  gives  holy  Lore  9
What  makes  a  Threefold  Seer  9  Who  is  th'  Elect  9
What  makes  an  Arakat  9  What  makos  a  Saint  9
What  makes  a  S^e  9  What  gives  Enlightenment  ?

To  the  Brahmin  the  Lord  made  answer  in  the
following  lines

Whoso  his  former  Iwes  can  call  to  mind,
descrying  /teaven  and  hell  with  eye  divine, —
whose  round  of  births  U  done,  with  Insight  won,
who  knows  his  heart  is  pure,  from  passten  free,-^
whoso,  o'er  birth  and  death  victorious,
the  higher  life  in  sanctity  fulfils
and  thought  transcends,  bis  ^  EnUghtenment.

•  Hereupon,  the  brahmin  Brahmayu  arose  and,  with
his  right  shoulder  respectfully  bared,  bowed  his  head
at  the  Lord’s  feet,  which  he  kissed  and  stroked  again
'  yand  again,  as  be  gave  his  name: — The  brahmin
Brabmiyu  am  I,  Gotama.

And  sJl  that  were  there  wondered  and  marvelled  at
the  power  and  might  of  ‘the  recluse,'  in  that  this
renowned  and  famous  brahmin  should  so  humble
r*  himself.

Said  the  Lord  Forbear,  brahmin.  Rise  up

and  resume  your  seat  now  that  your  heart  believes  In
me.  And  when  the  Brahmayu  was  seated  once  more
^  ^e  Lord  addressed  to  him  a  progressive  discourse,—
narmely  on  giving,  on  virtue,  on  heaven,  on  the  perils.


78


xci.  brahmIvu-sutta.


M.  11.  146.


variety  and  foulness  of  pleasures  of  sense,  and  tbe  gains
to  be  won  by  renouncing  worldly  things.  As  soon  as
the  Lord  rec^nized  BrahmSyu’s  heart  to  have  become
sound  and  mileable  .  .  .  {etc.  as  in  StUia  56)  -  .  .
direct  conviction  in  the  master’s  teachings, — Brahm5yu
said  to  the  Lord : — Wonderful,  Gotama ;  wonderful  1
Just  as  a  man  might  set  upright  again  ...  an  abiding
refuge,  from  this  day  forth  while  life  lasts  \  I  pray  the
reverend  Gotama,  with  his  Confraternity,  to  take  his
meal  with  me  to-morrow,

The  Lord  having  signified  his  silent  assent,  the
brahmin  with  deep  reverence  withdrew  to  order  an
excellent  meal  which  on  the  morrow  [146]  he  served
round  to  the  Lord  and  the  Almsmen  witl)  his  own  hands
till  all  had  had  their  fill.  For  a  whole  week  did
Brahmityu  entertain  them,  after  which  the  Lord
resumed  his  alms>pilgrimage  through  the  Vldeha
country.

Not  long  after  the  Lord's  departure,  the  Brahmin
died ;  and  a  number  of  Almsmen  reported  his  death  to
the  Lord,  asking  what  the  brahmin  had  passed  to  and
what  hereafter  would  be  his.

Said  the  Lord Learned  was  the  brahmin  Brah-
mSyu,  Almsmen ;  he  got  at  the  gist  of  the  Doctrine
but  had  difficulty  with  the  ninth  stage.  By  bursting
asunder  all  the  feonds  which  bind  men  to  this  lower
world,  BrahmSyu  has  been  translated  to  realms  above,
never  to  return  to  earth.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Clad  at  heart  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  eke  Lord  had  said.

XCI  I.  SELA-SUTTA-

THE  REAL  SUPERMAN.

^[SN  102]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the
Lord  was  on  an  alms-pilgrimage  In  the  Anga  country

I  For  teat  see  P.T.S.  edition  of  tbe  Sutta  Nipita  fzpz5).  Ct
ThrnfftM.  pp.  78^  (tranalated  at  p.  310  et  seqq.  of  Psums  of
tbe  Early  Bu^ista)  and  Vicaya  I.  245.


SN  lot


THE  REAL  SUPERMAN.


across  the  river,  with  agreat  train  of  Almsmen  number¬
ing  twelve  [SN  108]  hundred  and  fifty,  he  sojourned
in  the  Anga  township  of  Apana.  It  came  to  the  ears
of  Keniya  the  fire-worshipper  that  the  recluse  Gotama,
a  Sakyan  who  had  gone  forth  from  home  to  homeless¬
ness  as  a  Pilgrim,  was  reported  to  have  arrived  at
Apa^a  with  this  train  in  the  course  of  his  alms-
pilgrimage.  Such,  according  to  report,  was  the  high
repute  noised  abroad  concerning  this  Gotama  that  .  .  .
{6tc,  as  in  SuUa  41).  .  ,  .  h  was  good  to  go  and  visit
saintly  men  like  him,  So  Keniya  came  to  the  Lord
and,  seating  himself  after  greetings,  was  by  the  Lord
instructed,  roused,  fired  and  cheered  onwards  with  a

Ioctrinal  discourse, — at  the  close  of  which  he  invited
le  Lord  and  his  Almsmen  to  take  their  meal  with  him
i>n  the  morrow.

I  Said  the  Lord There  are  [SN  104]  no  less  than
wclve  hundred  and  fifty  Almsmen  with  me ;  and  you
Ire  an  adherent  of  the  brahmins.


anc

insi

n:


.rii  411?  luuiruw.

I  Said  the  Lord There  are  [SN  104]  no  less  than
wclve  hundred  and  fifty  Almsmen  with  me ;  and  you
an  adherent  of  the  brahmins.

.  A  second  time  did  Ke^iiya  tender  his  invitation,
^'laying  this  made  no  difference ;  and  a  second  time  did
it  receive  the  same  answer.  But  when  the  invitation
jvas  tendered  for  the  third  time,  the  Lord  by  his  silence
accepted  it.  Then  Keniya  got  up  and  went  off  to  his
^wa  hut,  where  he  told  his  friends  and  kinsfolk  Gotama
Vas  coming  and  asked  them  to  help.  Readily  enough
^they  Mt  to  work  digging  earth -ovens,  chopping  wood,
scouring  pans,  setting  out  water-jars,  and  placing  seats
ready,— while  Keniya  himself  marked  off  a  reserved
circle.

Now,  at  that  time  there  was  living  at  Apana  the
brahmin  Sela£SN  105],  who  was  versed  in  all  three
Vedas,  was  accomplished  in  ritual  with  the  glosses
thereon,  in  phonology,  and  in  etymolc^,  with  chronicles
^  a  fifth  branch  ;  he  knew  exegesis,  and  was  learned
in  casuistry  and  in  the  signs  that  mark  a  Superman  ;
be  had  three  hundred  young  brahmins  to  whom  he
Uught  the  runes.  At  this  time,  moreover,  Keniya  the
fire-worshipper  was  an  adherent  of  this  brahmin  Sela.

Accompanied  by  his  three  hundred  pupils,  the  brah-


V


8o


XCn.  SHIA-^UTTA.


$N  ro6.


min  came  in  the  course  of  his  walks  abroad  to  Keoiyd’s
hut  and  saw  all  the  h re* worshippers  there  busy  with
their  several  tasks,  with  Keqiya  himself  marking  off
the  reserved  circle.  At  the  sight,  the  brahmin  satd  to
Kepiya :  What  is  all  this?  Is  It  a  wedding-feast?  Or
is  there  a  great  sacrifice  afoot  ?  Or  have  you  invited
to  A  repast  to-morrow  Seniya  Bimbisfira,  king  of
Magadha,  with  all  his  host  ?

It  is  no  wedding-feast,  Sela,  nor  Is  the  king  coming
with  all  his  host.  But  I  have  got  a  great  sacrifice  ,
afoot.  For,  the  recluse  Gotama,  the  Sakyan  who  has  •
gone  forth  as  a  Pilgrim  from  a  Sakyan  home,  has  '
arrived  at  Apai^a,  in  the  course  of  an  alms-pilgrima^  r
with  twelve  hundred  and  fifty  Almsmen  in  his  traidr-^
Now,  [SN  106]  such,  according  to  report,  is  the  higl
repute  noised  abroad  concerning  this  Gotama  that  . .  t

iiic.  as  in  Sutta  41)  .  .  .  the  Lord  of  Enlightenment!
t  is  he  whom  I  have  invited  to  to-morrow’s  meal  herfj
together  with  his  Confraternity.  i

Did  you  attribute  to  him  Enlightenment,  Keniya
Yes,  I  did,  Sela.  f

Did  you  ?  '  t

Yes,  I  did.  i

Thought  the  Brahmin  to  himself : — This  is  rubbish. I
Rarely  indeed  do  the  Enlightened  appear  m  the  world/

In  our  mnes  there  have  been  handed  down  the  two  an(^
thirty  marks  of  the  Superman,  for  whom,  if  he  bears  \
these  marks,  there  awaits  one  of  two  careers  and  \
no  third.  Should  be  live  .  .  .  {eic.  as  in  StUia  91)

.  .  .  who  lifts  the  veil  from  the  world.

Where  is  Gotama  now  staying,  this  Arahat  all-
enlightened  ?

In  answer,  Keqiya  stretched  out  bis  right  arm  and
said: — [SN  107]  Yonder,  Sela,  in  that  stretch  of  dark
trees.

Then  the  brahmin  Sela  proceeded  to  the. Lord,
attended  by  his  three  hundred  young  brahmins,  to
whom  he  gave  the  following  instructions : — Move  .foN .
ward  in  suence,  in  one  another’s  footsteps  noiselessly  |
for,  these  Lords  are  hard  of  access,  like  solitary  iions»  '


SN  ro8k


THB  REAL  SU7BEMAK.


And  while  I  am  conferring  with  the  recluse  Gotama,
do  not  interrupt  but  wait  till  my  talk  with  him  is
over.

Arrived  in  the  Lord^s  presence,  the  brahmin,  seating
himself  after  greetings,  scanned  the  Lord’s  body  for
the  two  and  chirtv  marks  of  a  Superman,  and  in  time
observed  them  all  save  two  .  .  .  {6tc.  as  in  Sv/ia  91)
.  .  .  ^SN  lOd]  the  whole  expanse  of  his  forehead.

Quite  sure  now  about  the  presence  of  the  two  and
thirty  marks,  Sela  still  did  not  know  whether  or  not
he  had  Enlightenment.  But  he  remembered  hearing
from  old  ana  aged  brahmins,  teachers  of  teachers,  that
those  who  became  Arahais  all-enlightened,  reveal
themselves  when  their  praises  are  sung,  and  so  he
made  up  hts  mind  to  extol  the  Lord  to  his  face  in  the
following  lines  of  eulogy  j—

Psrfsct  o/b0<fy,  goodly y  Lord,  art  thou,

{^^^'iLgrown,  v>4tl‘Hking,  golden' kutd,  with  Usik
ck  gUam  wUk  lustre ;  tngour  fills  thy  /rams ;

M/s  full  perfection  manifests
'  single  sign  that  marks  a  Superman,
xr-eyed  and  handsome,  tall,  upright  art  thou,
tgent  as  a  sun  among  thy  train,  *

>  debonair,  so  golden~hued  /  Why  waste
beauty  s prime  as  homeless  anchorite  ?
xvor&zvide  monarch  thou  skouldst  ride  in  state :

'  Ind from  sea  fo  sea  should  pwn  thy  sway.
r  101^]  Proud  princes  shall  thy  village  headmen  be;
f  thou  ifMnkiw,  as  sovran  king  of  kings.

\  The  Lord  piade  ar^wer :  IHing  indeed  am  I,
mike  peerless  king  of  utter  righteousness  ;

Hn  righteousness  my  sovran  Wheel  of  Truth
mf  roll,  that  backwards  nevermore  shall  go.

Jr  If  A U-enlightedd  thou  dost  claim  to  be,

Wthe  peerless  king  of  utter  righteousness,

W. rolling  in  r^hUousness  your  sovran  Wheel,

I  ranks  as  Captain  next  to  you  to  keep

P  your  Wheel  still  rolling  onward  on  its  course  ?


82


XCIL  SELA-SUTTA.


SK  no.


The  Lord  made  answer  :  Ntxt  io  to  keep
my  sovran  Wheel  of  Truth  still  rolling  on,
stands  SaripuHa,  %n  my  image  shaped.

/  know  what  inind  should  know ;  I  am  what  man
should  be :  I'm  quit  of  all  man  should  renounce;

— thus,  brahmin,  all  enlightenment  is  mine.

All  doubts  of  me  dispel;  have  faith  in  me  ;
to  view  th'  Enlighten'd  is  a  boon  most  rare.

[SN  110]  and  that  rare  boon  thou  may' si  behold  in  me
who  Ali-EnlighUn'd  am,  of  Healers  chief,
perfect  and  peerless,  routing  MUrds  hosts,
o'er  foes  triumphant  ;^fear  clouds  7tct  my  bliss.


Sirs,  mark  him,  mark  how,  lion^like,  he  speaks,
this  Seer,  tkis  Healer,  this  great  Conqueror.

Lives  there  a  man  so  low  as  not  to  trust,
at  sight,  fell  MSra's  peerless  vanquisher  ?

Let  who  will  follow  ;  let  the  rest  cUpart ;

— be  mine  ihe  Pilgrimage  with  Wisdonds  lord  !

If  you,  sir,  th’  All-enlighiend  take  as  guide,
ours  too  be  Pilgrimage  with  Wisdom's  Lord!

As  thus  his  pupils  spoke,  the  brahmin  cried: —

Three  hundred  brahmins,  Lord,  with  hands  outstretch' d,\
here  pray  to  lead  the  higher  life  with  thee.

Thai  higher  the  Lord  made  answer  then —
stands  here  reveal d,  with  fruits  ripe  here  and  now
the  earnest  Pilgrim's  diligence  to  bless.

So  the  brahmin  Sela  and  all  his  following  wei
admitted  to  the  Lord’s  Confraternity  and  confirmedj
therein.

Now,  when  night  had  passed,  an  excellent  meal  w<
got  ready  by  Keoiya  the  fire-worshipper,  [SN  111]  who]
sent  to  tell  the  Lord  when  everything  was  ready,  and
vrith  his  own  hands  served  the  Lord  and  the  Almsmeo
without  stint  till  all  had  had  their  fill,  after  which  he
seated  himself  on  a  lower  seat  to  one  side  and  was
thanked  by  the  Lord  in  these  lines' — •


v>


&S  113.


THE  REAL  SUPERMAN.


83


0/  firt’oUaticns  sa4ri/Ui  ranks  first ;
of  Vodic  THOtrss  Sttvitrl  is  first;
a  king  ranks  'tnong  meny  'snong  streams  tke  sea ;
ike  moon  among  the  tamps  o/ntgki  ranks  first ;
and  first  of  luminaries  ranks  the  sun.

For  those  who  Merit  seek  by  sacrifice,
gifts  to  the  Almsmen  profit  most  of  all.

Having  thanked  Keoiya  the  fire-worshipper  in  these
lines,  the  Lord  arose  and  departed.

Dwelling  alone  and  aloof,  strenuous,  ardent  and
purged  of  self,  the  reverend  Sela  with  his  following
was  not  long  before  [SN  112]  he  won  the  prize  in
quest  of  which  young  men  go  forth  from  home  to
homelessness,  that  prize  of  prizes  which  crowns  the
highest  life even  this  did  he  think  out  for  himself,
resize,  and  attain,  here  and  now ;  and  co  him  came
the  conviction  that —^Rebirth  is  no  more,  I  have  lived
the  highest  life,  my  task  is  done,  and  now  for  me  there
is  no  more  of  what  I  have  been.*  And  so  the  reverend
Sela  too  was  numbered,  with  his  following,  among
the  Arahats,

To  the  Lord  came  the  reverend  Sela,  with  his
following,  and,  with  right  shoulder  respectfully  bared,
addressed  the  Lord  in  the  following  lines

We  who  a  week  ago  found  Refuge,  seer,
in  tkee,  remoulded  6y  iky  Doctrine  tome.

Enlighten'd  Master^  over  M&rds  host
tHumpkant  /  Thou  wko,  wrong  propensities
Excisis^,  for  thyself  salvation  found
and  others  taught  to  find  salvation  too  I
*  Thou  hast  surmounted  all  that  breeds  rebirth
and  extirpated  Canker-growths  within.

With  naught  to  bind  thee  thrall  to  lifty  thou'ri  free,
as  forest  lion,  from  all  fear  or  dread.

Three  hundred  Almsmen^  Lord,  with  outstretched  hands,
pray  thee,  great  Victor,  one  sole  grace  to  grant,

•^ihat  they,  thy  saints.,  may  how  down  at  tky  feet  f


«4


XCni.  ASSALAYAKA'SUTTA-


M.  a.  147.


XCIII.  assalAyana-sutta.

BRAHMIK  PRETBNSIOKS.

[147]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  ac  Savatthi  in  J eta’s  grove  in  AnStha-
piodika’s  ^easaunce,  some  five  hundred  biahmins
from  divers  countries  were  stopping  in  the  city  on
some  business  or  other.  Thought  they:— Here  is
this  recluse  Gotama  preaching  that  purity  extends  to
all  four  classes  alike.  Who  can  refute  him  ?

Now  in  the  city  at  the  time  there  was  a  young
brahmin  named  AssaUyana,  a  youth  of  sixteen,  with
shaven  head,  who  was  versed  in  all  three  Vedas,  ww
accomplished  in  ritual  with  the  glosses  thereon,  iq
phonology,  and  in  etymology,  with  chronicles  as  a
fifth  branch ;  he  knew  exegesis,  and  was  learned  in
casuistry  and  in  the  signs  that  mark  a  Superman.
This  is  he,  thought  chose  brahmins,  who  can  refute
the  recluse  Gotama.  So  they  asked  him  to  essay  tht
task  ;  but  he  replied  that  Gotama  was  a  thinker  with
a  Doctrine  of  his  own  and  that  thinkers  with  Doctrines
of  their  own  were  awkward  people  to  refute ;  nor  could
he  personally  refute  Gotama.

A  second  time  they  appealed  to  AssalSyana,  [148]
reminding  him  that  lie  had  been  a  Wanderer;  but  he
returned  the  same  answer  as  before.

A  third  time  Che  brahmins  appealed  to  him,  adding
that  he  ought  not  to  own  defeat  without  a  contest
And  this  time  AssaJayana  answered  that  he  did  not
share  their  view,  that  Gotama  was  a  thinker  with
a  Doctrine  of  his  own,  that  such  independent  thinkera
were  awkward  people  to  refute,  and  that  he  person^ly
could  not  tackle  Gotama, — but  that,  at  their  bidding,
he  would  go  forward.

So,  escorted  by  a  numerous  company  of  brahmins,
the  young  brahmin  AssaUyana  went  to  the  Lord,  ^d,
after  exchange  of  greetings,  sat  down  to  one  side,
saying : — Br^mins  maintain,  Gotama,  chat  only  brah*


M.-ii.  H9-


BRAHUIN.  FR£TENSlO&rS.  '


85


mins  form  the  superior  class,  all  other  classes  being
inferior ;  that  only  brahmins  form  the  white  class,  ^
other  classes  being  black  fellows ;  that  purity  resides
in  brahmins  alone  and  not  in  non-brahmins ;  and  that
only  brahmins  are  BrahmS’s  legitimate  sons,  born  from
his  mouth,  ofepring  of  his,  creations  of  his,  and  his
heirs. — What  does  uotama  say  hereon  ?

Albeit,  AssalSyana,  the  brahmin  wives  of  brahmins
are  known  to  have  their  periods,  and  to  conceive,  and
to  lie  in  and  give  suck,  do  brahmins  really  maintain  all
this,  though  they  are  themselves  born  of  woman  like
everybody  else?

[14d]  In  spite  of  what  you  say,  that  is  what  brahmins
think.

Have  you  ever  heard  chat  in  the  Yona  and
Kamboja  countries,  and  in  other  adjacent  countries,
there  are  only  two  classes,  namely  masters  ^d  slaves,
and  that  a  master  can  become  a  slave  and  vice  vers!  ?

Yes,  I  have  heard  so.

What  strength  or  support  does  this  lend  to  the
brahmins’  claim  ?

Despite  what  you  say,  brahmins  think  as  I  have  said.

Suppose  a  man  is  a  murderer,  or  a  thief,  or  a
fornicator,  or  a  liar,  or  suppose  he  is  a  slanderer,  or
violent  of  speech,  or  tattles,  or  covets,  or  is  malevolent
or  holds  wrong  views,— will  he  after  death  .at  the
body’s  dissolution  pass  to  a  state  of  misery  and  woe
only  if  he  be  a  noble  or  a  middle-class  man  or  a
peasant,  and  not  if  he  be  a  brahmin  ?

No,  Gotama;  with  such  a  record  the  same  doom
awaits  men  of  all  four  classes  alike.

[150]  What  strength  or  support  does  that  lend  to
the  brakmins*  claim  ?

Despite  what  you  say,  brahmins  think  as  1  have
said.

.  Suppose  .now  a  man  refrains  from  .murdermg  and
stealing  and  so  forth,  will  he,  after  death  it  the  body’s
dissolution,  only  paM  to  bliss  or  heaven  if  he  be  a
brahmin  and  not  if  he  be  a  noble  or  a  middle-class
man  OC'S  peasant  ?  ...


S6


XCI  n.  ASS  A  L  Ayana-sutta.


M.  ii.


No,  Gotama;  with  such  a  record,  the  same  guerdon
awaits  men  of  aJl  four  classes  alike.

What  strength  .  .  .  claim? — Despite  .  .  .  [151]  as
1  have  said.

Is  it  only  a  brahmin,  and  not  a  man  of  the  other
three  classes,  who,  in  this  country,  can  develop  in  his
heart  the  love  that  knows  no  hate  or  ill-will  ?

No,  Gotama ;  all  four  classes  alike  can  do  this.

What  strength  ...  as  I  have  said.

Is  it  only  a  brahmin,  and  not  a  man  of  the  other
three  classes,  who  can  go  down  to  the  river  with  his
string  of  red  bath-balls  to  shampoo  himself  with,  and
can  mere  rub  off  the  dust  and  dirt  ?

No,  Gotama;  all  four  classes  alike  can  do  this.

What  strength  ...  as  I  have  said.

Suppose  a  Noble  [152J  who  has  been  anointed  king,
were  to  assemble  a  hundred  men  of  mixed  origins  and
were  to  say  to  them : — All  of  you  who  are  nobles  or
brahmins  or  of  royal  birch,  take  kindling  wood  of  sll
or  pine  or  sandal  or  lotus  and  make  a  blazing  h re  with
it  And  you  that  come  of  low  stocks — trappers,  rush-
plaice  rs,  Cartwrights  and  vermin-killers — you  light  your
fires  with  cattle-troughs  or  hog-troughs  or  wash-cubs  or
bits  of  woodbine.  What  would  happen,  do  you  think  ?
Would  it  be  only  the  fire  kindled  by  the  high-bom
which  would  blaze  up  with  a  bright  fiame  and  serve  the
purposes  of  a  fire?  And  would  the  fire  of  the  low
people  fail  herein  ?

No,  Gotama ;  it  Would  be  just  the  same  with  high
and  low ;  every  fire  alike  [153]  would  blaze  up  with
the  same  bright  flame  and  equally  serve  the  purposes  of
a  fire.

What  strength  ...  as  1  have  said.

Suppose  a  young  noble  consorts  with  a  brahmin
maiden  and  a  son  is  bom  to  them.  Is  that  son  of
thedrs  like  both  parents  and  is  he  to  be  styled  both  a
noble  and  a  brahmin  t

Yes.

If  a  young  brahmin  consorts  with  a  noble  maiden  and
a  son  is  born  to  them,  is  that  son  of  theirs  like  bodi


M.  ii.  tS4<


BRAHMIN  PRETINSIONS.


87


parents  and  is  he  to  be  styled  both  a  noble  and  a
brahmin  ?

Yes.

If  a  mare  were  put  to  a  jackass  and  the  union
resulted  in  a  foal,  would  their  foal  be  like  both  parents
and  be  called  both  a  horse  and  an  ass  ^

Her  foal  would  be  a  mule.  [154]  This  difference  1
see,  but  no  other.

Suppose,  AssaJiyana,  there  were  two  young
brahmins,  uterine  brothers, — the  one  an  educated
(Vcdic)  s^olar,  the  other  uneducated  and  no  scholar
at  all.  Which  of  these  would  be  served  first  by
brahmins  with  rice  from  oblations  to  the  dead,  or  with
rice  cooked  in  milk  for  festivals,  or  with  a  portion  of  a
sacrifice,  or  with  hospitality  as  a  guest?

Why,  the  educated  scholar.  For,  what  benefits
could  accrue  from  gifts  made  to  the  uneducated  man  ?

Now  suppose  the  scholar  was  profligate  and  wicked,
whereas  his  uneducated  brother  was  virtuous  and  good.
Which  of  the  two  would  be  served  first  by  brahmms  ?

Why,  the  uneducated  one,  who  was  virtuous  and
good.  For,  what  benefits  could  accrue  from  gifts  made
to  a  wicked  profligate.

You  started  oR  with  birth,  AssalSyana;  then  you
passed  to  runes,  from  which  you  have  come  round  to  that
equal  purity  of  all  four  classes  alike  for  which  I  contend

At  this,  AssaJSyana  sat  silent  and  upset,  with  his
shoulders  hunched  up  and  with  eyes  downcast,  much
exercis^  in  mind  but  without  any  rejoinder  to  hand.

Seeing  the  young  brahmin’s  plight,  the  Lord  went
on  to  say  i — Once  oa  a  time  there  were  seven  brahmin
sages  in  thatch^  cabins  in  the  wilds,  who  conceived
the  erroneous  view  that  brahmins  were  the  superior
class  [156]  and  all  the  rest  of  it.  Hearing  of  this,  the
sage  Asita  Devala  arranged  his  hair  and  beard,  donn^
his  orange  attire,  got  into  bis  stout  sandals,  took  his
staff  and  made  his  appearance  in  the  precincts  of  these
seven  brahmins'  hermitage.  As  he  walked  about  the
precincts,  he  exclaimed : — Where  can  those  brahmin
sages  have  got  to  ?  Where  can  they  have  got  to  ?


88  XCm.  ASSALiYANA-SUTTA,  Jrf.nLii^.

Who,  thought  they,  is  this  chat,  like  a  neatherd,  trots
round  our  precincts  wondering  where  we  can  have  got
to  ?  Let  us  put  a  curse  on  him !

So  they  cursed  the  sage  Asita  Devala,  saying : —
Shrivel  to  a  vile  cinder  I  But  the  more  they  cursed
the  more  goodly  and  comely  and  handsome  grew  the
sage  Asita,  so  that  the  seven  brahmin  s^es  cried  r —
In  vain  have  been  our  austerities,  fruitless  our  higher
life !  For,  never  a  man  have  we  cursed  heretofore  who
did  not  shrivel  to  a  cinder, — whereas  the  more  we
curse  this  man,  the  more  goodly  and  comely  and
handsome  he  grows  I

No,  said  Asita;  your  aust^ties  have  not  been  in
vain  nor  your  higher  life  fruitless ;  but  1  urge  you  to
discard  the  delusion  which  besets  you  about  me.

[156]  Yes,  we  will.  Who,  sir,  are  you  ?

Have  you  ever  heard  of  the  sage  Asita  Devala?

Yes.

1  am  be.

Hereupon  the  seven  brahmin  sages  advanced  to
salute  Asita,  who  proceeded  to  tell  them  that  he  had
heard  how  in  their  cabins  they  had  conceived  the
erroneous  view  that  brahmins  were  the  superior  class
and  so  forth.

Yes,  they  admitted  it  was  so.

Do  you  know  for  certain  that  the  mother  wbo’bore
you  bad  commerce  with  a  brahmin  only  and  not  with  a
noo-brahmin  ?

No.

Do  ycu  know  for  certain  that  your  mother’s  mother
and  your  grandmothers  for  seven  generations  back  had
commerce  with  brahmins  only  and  never  with  non-
brahmins  ?

No.

Do  you  know  for  certain  that  the  father  who  begat
you  bad  commerce  with  a  brahmin-woman  only  and  ndt
with  noD*  brahmins  ?

No.

Do  you  know  for  certain  that  your  (axhtr'9  father  and
your  grandfathers  for  seven  generadons  back  had


it'iu  157.


BRAHMIK  PESXSNSIONS.


89


conihierce  with  brahmin- women  only  and  not  with  non?
brahmins  ?

No.

Do  you  know’ how  conception  comes  about?

Yes  ;  [167]  if  there  is  coitus  of  the  parents,  and  if
it  is  the  mother’s  period,  and  if  the  tutelary  deity  of
generation  be  present, — then  this  triple  conjunction
brings  about  conception.

Do  you  know  whether  the  tutelary  deity  there
present  is  a  noble,  or  a  brahmin,  or  from  the  middle
class,  or  from  the  peasantry  ?

No.

This  being  so,  do  you  know  who  you  are  ?

No,  we  do  not.

When,  Assalayana,  those  seven  brahmin  sages  were
pressed  and  examined  and  cross-questioned  about  their
pretensions  with  regard  to  lineage,  they  could  not  find
a  rejoinder.  And  what  rejoinder  have  you  when  I
press  you, — you  who  inherit  the  same  tradition  as  they
and  are  not  a  mere  server  to  hold  their  oblation  ladles
for  them?

At  this  point,  the  young  brahmin  Assalayana  said  to
the  Lord: — Wonderful,  Gotama;  wondemjl!  1  pray
you  to  accept  me  as  a  disciple  who  has  found  an
abiding  refuge  while  life  lasts.


XCIV.  GHOJAMUKHA-SUTTA.

AGAINST  TORTURING

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  reverend
Udena  was  stayu^  at  Benares  in  the  mango-grove
called  Tranquillity,  the  brahmin  Ghotamukba,  who  had
ceme  to  Benares' on  .some  business  Or  .oth«,  [158]
came,  in  the  course  of  his  yalks  abroad,  to  this  grove,
in  which  Udena  was  padng  up  and  down  in  the  open.
Having  approached  Udena  and  exchanged  greetings,
the  br5imin  walked  by  his  side,  saying Recluse,  chat
there  is  no  Pilgrim for  Doctrine’  sake,  is  my  idea;


90


XCIV .  GHOT  AMU  KH  A-SUTT  A.


M.  il  159.


but  it  is  &n  idea  informed  by  no  acquaintance  either
with  men  like  yourself  or  with  Doctrine.

At  this  point,  Udena  cut  short  his  walk  and  went
into  bis  cell,  where  he  sat  down  on  the  seat  awdting
him.  Likewise,  the  brahmin  cut  short  his  walk  and
dso  went  into  the  cell,  where  he  remained  standing,  till
Udena  said :  Here  are  seats,  sit  down  if  you  will.
Said  the  brahmin :  I  did  not  sit  down  till  1  was  bidden,
For,  how  could  a  man  of  my  position  sit  down  un¬
bidden?  So  the  brahmin  cook  a  low  seat  to  one  side
and  repeated  his  remark  that  there  was  no  Pilgrimage
for  Doctrine's  sake,  but  that  this  idea  of  his  was
informed  by  no  acquaintance  either  with  men  like
Udena  or  with  Doctrine.

Could  we  arrange  our  talk,  brahmin,  on  the  basis
that  you  will  assent  to  what  you  admit,  will  reject
what  you  object  to,  and  will  question  me  further,  for
reasons  or  explanations,  when  you  do  not  take  my
meaning  ?

Certainly.

[159]  Brahmin,  there  are  four  types  of  individuals  to
be  found  in  the  world.  First,  there  is  he  who  tortures
himself  and  is  set  on  self-torture.  Then  there  is  he
who  tortures  others  and  is  set  on  torturing  them.
Next,  there  is  he  who  tortures  both  himself  and  others
and  is  sec  on  torturing  both,  Lastly,  there  is  he  who
tortures  neither  himself  nor  others  and  is  set  on
torturing  neither.  And  this  last  individual,  who
tortures  neither  himself  nor  others,  dwells — here  and
now  —  beyond  appetites,  consummate,  unfevered,
blissful  and  inwardly  at  his  best.  Which  of  the  four,
brahmin,  commends  himself  most  to  you  ?

1  am  not  drawn,  sir,  to  either  the  self-torturer  or  the
torturer  of  others;  nor  do  1  approve  him  who  tortures
both  himself  and  others,  Tte  one  who  commends
himself  most  to  me  is  the  last  individual, — who  tortures
neither  himself  nor  others  and  dwells — here  and  now —
in  the  felicity  you  describe.

Why  do  not  the  first  three  commend  themselves
to  you  ?


M.  il  i6o.


AGAINST  TORTURING.


91


He,  sir,  who  is  sec  on  lorcurlng  himself,  tortures  his
own  natural  desires  for  happiness  and  bis  own  natural
repugnance  to  pain ;  and  so  he  does  not  commend
himself  to  me.  [160]  He,  again,  who  is  set  on
torcuring  others  tortures  ochers’  natural  desires  for
happiness  and  their  natural  repugnance  to  pain ;  and
so  he  does  not  commend  himself  to  me.  And  he  who
is  set  on  torturing  both  himself  and  others,  tortures
both  his  own  and  other  people’s  natural  desires  for
happiness  and  natural  repugnance  to  pain;  and  so  he
does  not  commend  himself  to  me.  But  he  who  is  set
on  torturing  neither  himself  nor  other  people,  and
dwells — here  and  now— in  the  felicity  you  describe,
he  it  is  who  commends  himself  to  me.

There  are  two  categories  of  men.  The  first,  in¬
flamed  with  a  passion  for  gems  and  jewelry,  wants
sons  and  wives,  wants  men  and  women  slaves,  wants
fields  and  lands,  wants  coins  of  silver  and  gold  bullion.
The  second  category  wants  none  of  these  things  but
discards  them  all  to  go  forth  from  home  to  homeless¬
ness  as  a  Pilgrim.  Now  in  which  category  do  you
expect  to  find  the  man  who  tortures  neither  himself
nor  others  but  dwells — here  and  now — beyond  appe¬
tites,  consummate,  uiifevered,  blissful  and  inwardly  at
his  best  ?

[161]  Why,  in  the  category  which  wants  none  of
these  things  but  discards  them  all  to  go  forth  from
home  CO  homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim.

But,  brahmin,  just  now  you  expressed  your  belief
that  there  was  no  such  thing  as  Pilgrimage  for
Doctrine's  sake, — without  acquaintance  either  with
men  like  me  or  with  Doctrine  1

Clearly,  Udena,  what  I  said  has  served  a  useful
purpose.  I  now  see,  and  you  may  cake  me  as  holding,
chat  there  is  such  a  thing  as  Pilgrim^  for  Doctrine's
sake ;  and  1  should  be  glad  if  you  would  be  so  good
as  to  set  out  in  detail  what  you  have  indicated  in  out¬
line  concerning  the  four  types  of  individuals.

Hearken  then,  brahmin,  and  give  me  your  atten¬
tion  ;  I  will  tell  you-  Then  to  the  listening  brahmin


I


9?


XCrV.  C?KOTA*(UKIlA‘'SUTTA.


M.


the  reverend  Udena  spoke  as  follows: — What  mannj^
of  man  is  he  who  tortures  himself  and  is  set  on  self-
torture  ?  Take  the  case  of  the  individual  who,  naked,
floucinff  the  decencies  of  life,  .  .  .  as  in  StUia  51)
[182]  un fevered,  blissful  and  inwardly  at  his

best.

At  the  close  of  these  words,  the  brahmin  Ghopa-
mukha  exclaimed  to  the  reverend  Udena  r— Wonder^
ful,  Udena,  wonderful!  Just  as  a  man  might  set
upright  again  .  .  .  expounded  his  doctrine.  To  him
I  come  as  my  refuge  and  to  his  Doctrine  and  to  his
Confraternity;  and  I  ask  him  to  accept  me  as  a
follower  who  has  found  an  abiding  refuge  from  this
day  onward  while  life  shall  last

Come  not  to  me,  brahmin,  as  your  refuge.  Find
your  refuge,  as  1  have  found  mine,  in  none  but  the

Where  is  the  present  dwelling-place  of  that  Lord,
the  Arahai  all-enlightened  ?

He  has  now  passed  away.

If  I  could  but  listen  to  him  within  ten  leagues  from
here,  ten  leagues  would  1  travel  to  visit  him ;  nay,
I  would  travel  twenty,  thirty,  forty,  fifty  or  a  hundr^
leagues  [168]  to  visit  Gotama,  the  Arahat  all-enlight¬
ened.  But  though  he  has  passed  away,  still  ii  is  W
Gotama  that  I  come  as  my  refuge,  to  him  and  to  his
Doctrine  and  to  his  Confraternity;  and  I  ask  you  to
receive  me  as  a  follower  who  has  found  an  abidir^
refuge  from  this  day  onward  while  life  shah  last.

Moreover,  Udena,  the  kbg  of  the  Anra  country
gives  me  a  regular  dailv  allowance. -rOUt  of  which  1
will  give  you  a  regular  allowance.

How  much  is  your  daily  allowance  from  the  kmg  (

Five  hundred  pence.

We  may  not  take  money.  „  .  ^

..  If  you  may  not,  then  I  will  have  a  cell  built  lor

you  want  »■  do  that,  you  might  buUdan  assembly.

haIl.foi-.the,CoDfratermtyai  Pst^ipiitta.  .

It  makes  me  still  more  pleased  and  delighted  with


M.  ii  (64.


AGAINST  TORTURING,


93


you,  Udena,  that  you  urge  me  to  bestow  my  benefac-
don  on  the  Confraternity  as  a  whole ;  and  i  wjU  do  so

out  of  this  and  further  allowances.

Accordingly,  the  brahmin  Ghotamukha  built  the
assembly-hall  at  Pataliputta  which  b«rs  his  name
to-day.


XCV.  CANKl-SUTTA-

BRAHMIN  PRETENSIONS.

ri64]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once,  in  the  course  of
an  alms-pilgrimage  through  the  Kosala  country  with  a
great  train  of  Almsmen,  the  Lord  came  to  a  brahmin
village  of  the  Kosalans  called  Opaaada,  where  he  took
up  his  abode  to  the  north  of  the  village  in  the  sai-tr^
wood  where  oblations  are  offered  fo  demes.  ^  In
Opasida  in  those  days  lived  the  brahmin  Canki,  on
a  royal  fief  granted  to  him  outright  in  full  seignory  bv
King  Pasenadi  of  Kosala, -a  demesne  teeming  with
life  and  abounding  in  grasslands,  woodlands,  water
and  cornlands.  It  came  to  the  ears  of  the  brahmin
heads  of  houses  in  Opasada  that,  in  the  course  ol
an  alms -pilgrimage  through  Kwala,  the
Gotama,  a  Sakyan  .  .  .  {iii-  as  Suitas  41  and  82).

It  was  good  CO  go  and  see  saintly  men  like

So  off  to  the  wood  by  the  north  approach  went  the
brahmins  in  companies  and  bands.  They  were  ob¬
served  by  Canki,  who  had  gone  upstairs  to  he  down
during  the  heat  of  the  day  in  his  verandah,— and  asked
his  ci^fidant  what  it  all  meant  Being  told  they  were
all  on  their  way  to  see  Gorartia,  he  sent  his  conhdani
to  ask  them  to  wsdt  for  him  and  he  would  come  toe  to
see  Gotama.  When  the  confidant  [16^
llvered  this  message,  some  five  hundred  brahmins
from  divers  parts  who  were  in  Opasada  on  spme
business  or  other,  at  once  went  to  Canki  to  ask  if  it
was  true  be  was  going  to  pay  a  visit  to  thr  recluse

'  Gotama.


94


xcv.  CANXi-aUTTA.


M.  ii.  i66i


Yes,  he  told  them,  it  was  quite  true  that  he  was
going  to  Gotama  with  the  others.

Do  not  do  so,  said  they  to  Cankl.  You  ought  not
to  pay  a  visit  to  the  recluse  Gotama  j  he  ought  to
come  and  see  you.  On  both  your  father’s  and  your
mother’s  side,  you  are  of  pure  descent  right  back  through
seven  successive  generations  without  break  or  blemish
in  your  lin^e.  That  is  one  point  why  you  should
not  go  to  him  but  he  should  come  to  you.  Another
point  is  that  you  are  rich  and  wealthy,  with  great  sub¬
stance.  And  another  point  is  that  you  are  versed  in
all  three  Vedas ;  are  accomplished  in  ritual  with  all
glosses  thereon,  in  phonology,  artd  in  etymology,  with
chronicles  as  a  dfth  branch ;  know  exegesis,  and  are
learned  in  casuistry  and  in  the  signs  chat  mark  a
Superman,  You  are  handsome,  goodly,  well-liking,  of
finest  complexion,  perfect  alike  in  complexion  and
stature,  and  of  noble  presence.  You  are  virtuous,
abundant  in  virtue,  in  which  you  abound.  You  have
a  fine  voice  and  are  a  ^ood  speaker;  [IfiO]  your
speech  is  urbane,  distinct,  unfaltering,  apt  to  express
your  meaning.  You  have  taught  many  a  teacher  of
teachers  and  have  three  hundred  young  brahmins
learning  the  runes  from  you.  You  are  honoured  and
reverenced  by  the  king  of  Kosala,  who  shows  you
devotion  and  worship.  You  live  on  a  royal  fief,  ,  .  .•
and  cornlands ;  and  this  adds  another  point  why  you
should  not  go  to  Gotama  but  he  should  come  to  you.

Now  listen  to  me,  said  Cankl,  and  I  will  tell  you
why  I  ought  CO  go  to  Gotama  instead  of  his  coming  to
me.  On  both  his  mother’s  and  his  father’s  side,
Gotama  is  of  pure  descent  right  back  through  seven
Recessive  generations  without  break  or  blemSb  in  his
lineage.  That  is  one  point  why  1  should  go  to  him
and  not  he  to  me.  To  go  on  Pilgrimage,  Gotama
gave  up  great  stores  of  gold,  wrought  and  un wrought,
buried  away  below  ground  or  housed  in  treasury
'  chambers.  When  he  went  forth  from  home  to  home¬
lessness  as  a  Pilgrim,  he  was  in  the  flush  of  youth  and
early  manhood,  with  a  wealth  of  coal-black  hair  ua-


M.  il  167.


SRAHMlt4  PRETENSIONS.


95


touched  by  grey,  and  in  all  the  beauty  of  his  prime.  He
went  forth  on  Pilgrimage,  despite  his  parents’  wishes,
leaving  them  in  tears  and  lamentation  when  he  cut  off
his  hair  and  beard  and  donned  the  yellow  robes  to  go
forth  from  home  to  homelessness-  Gotama  is  handsome,
goody,  well-liking,  of  finest  complexion,  [167]  perfect
alike  in  complexion  and  stature,  and  noble  of  presence.
He  is  virtuous,  abundant  in  virtue,  in  which  he  abounds.
He  has  a  fine  voice  and  is  a  good  speaker ;  his  speech
is  urbane,  distinct,  unfaltering,  apt  to  express  his
meaning.  He  has  taught  manjr  a  teacher  of  teaches.
In  him  all  pa.ssion  is  dead ;  frailty  abides  not  in  him.
He  preaches  the  consequences  of  acts  and  the  prin¬
ciples  of  action,  lauding  the  avoidant  of  evil  for
righteous  folk.  He  went  forth  as  a  Pilgrim  from  an
exalted  and  immemorial  sept  of  Nobles,  rich  ^d
wealthy,  abounding  in  substance.  From  far  r^lms
and  countries  men  come  to  consult  Gotama.  ^  Many
thousands  of  gods  have  found  life’s  refuge  in  him.
Of  him  is  the  high  repute  noised  abroad  that  he  is
said  to  be  the  Lord,  Arabat  all-enlightened,  walking
by  knowledge,  blessed,  understanding  all  worlds,  the
matchless  tamer  of  the  human  heart,  teacher  of  gods
and  men,  the  Lord  of  En%htenment.  He  is  scamp^
with  the  two  and  thirty  marks  of  a  Superman.  In
him  have  Senlya  BimbisSra,  king  of  Magad^,  and
Pasenadi,  king  of  Kosala,  and  the  brahmin  Pok-
kharasati,  found  life’s  refuge,— they  and  their  wives
and  their  children.  To  Opasada  has  the  reduse
Gotama  come  and  is  now  dwelling  in  our  northern
wood.  Now,  all  recluses  and  br^mins  who  come
within  the  precincts  of  our  village  are  our  guests,— to
be  created  with  honour  and  reverence,  with  devotion
and  worship.  As  our  guest,  Gotama  is  to  ^  w
treated  ;  [168]  and  this  is  another  count  why  !  should

fto  him,  instead  of  his  coming  to  me.  This  much
know  about  Gotama’s  excellences;  but  they  do  not
end  here,  for  indeed  they  are  beyond  all  measure.
On  each  several  count  it  is  not  Gotama  who  ought  to
come  to  me,  but  I  who  ought  to  go  to  him,  Conse-


9^  'XC7.  CANKI-SUTTA.  M.  b.  169,


□gently,  we  will  all  go  together  to  visit  the  recluse
Gotama.

Thereupon,  with  a  large  company  of  brahmins,
Cankl  came  to  the  Lord  and,  after  exchanging  greet¬
ings  with  hirp,  took  his  seat  to  one  side,  At  3je  time
the  Lord  was  sitting  down  after  exchanging  greetings
with  some  old  and  aged  brahmins ;  and  in  the  cirde
sat  a  young  brahmin  nairfed  Kspathika.  a  youth  of
sixteen  with  shaven  head,  who  was  versed  m  all  three
Vedas  .  .  .  signs  that  mark  the  Superman.  This
young  brahmin  broke  in  on  the  conversation  which
these  old  and  aged  brahmins  were  having  with  the
Lord,^wbo  rebAed  him  by  sa)nng  that  he  should  not
interrupt  his  elders  but  wait  hU  turn  when  they  had
finished.  Hereupon,  the  brahmin  Cankl  said  to  the
Lord : — Do  not  rebuke  Kspa^hika,  Gotama.  He
comes  of  a  good  stock,  is  well-informed,  a  good
speaker,  and  a  scholar  quite  able  to  hold  his  own  in
the  discussion.

Thought  the  Lord  to  himself  69]  This  young
brahmin  will  be  sure  to  be  a  master  of  Vedic  lore,  as
the  brahmins  have  such  a  high  opinion  of  him,

Thought  Kapathika  to  himself  r— As  soon  as  I  catch
the  eye  of  the  recluse  Gotama,  1  will  put  a  question  to
him.

Reading  with  his  own  heart  the  thoughts  in  the
young  brahmin’s  heart,  the  Lord  fixed  his  gate  in
Kspa^^iika's  direction,  so  that  the  latter,  feeling  that
he  had  secured  the  Lord's  attention,  bethought  him  of
putting  his  question  and  accordingly  said  to  the
Lord As  touching  the  runes  which  have  come  down
from  brahmins  of  old  along  the  line  by  unbroken  oral
tradition  and  mastery  of  the  Canon,  runes  in  which
brahmins  find  an  absolute  certitude  that  'here  alone
^ides  truth,  and  everything  else  is  vain,’ — what  does
Gotama  say  of  them  ?

Teh  me,  Bbaradvaja is  there  among  all  brahmins
a  $insle  brahmin  who  claims  that  he  personally  sets
ana  Ancws  that  ‘here  alone  resides  truth,  and  every¬
thing  else  is  vain  ?


iAi  ii.  170.


BRAHMIN  PRETENSIONS.


97


No.

Is  that  claim  preferred  by  a  single  teacher  or  teacher
of  teachers  of  brahmins  back  to  the  seventh  generation  ?

No.

Was  that  claim  preferred  by  those  brahmin  sages  of
yore  who  composed  and  promulgated  the  runes  and
whose  compositions  are  chanted  and  repeated  and
rehearsed  by  the  brahmins  of  to-day,*— such  as
At^haka,  Vamaka,  VSmadeva,  Vessamltta,  Yamataggi,
Angirasaj^BhSradvaja,  VSsetJha,  Kassapa  or  Bhagu  ?

^0,  Bharadvija,  no  claim  personally  to  have  seen
and  known  the  absolute  and  exclusive  truth  of  the
runes  has  been  preferred  either  by  a  single  living
brahmin  or  by  a  single  teacher  of  brahmins  for  seven
successive  generations  back,  or  by  those  brahmin  sages
who  actuary  composed  the  runes  which  are  repeated
by  brahmins  to-day.  It  is  like  a  string  of  blind  men
each  holding  on  to  his  neighbour,  the  first  of  whom
cannot  sec,  nor  can  the  one  in  the  middle,  nor  can  the
hindermost  Such  a  string  of  blind  men,  methinks,
exemplifies  the  brahmin  tradition, — wherein  the  first
never  saw,  nor  did  the  one  in  the  middle  see,  nor  does
the  last.  Tell  me,  BhSradvSja ;  is  not  the  brahmins’
belief  groundless,  on  this  showing?

It  is  not  faith  alone  which  inspires  brahmins  but  also
the  tradition  they  have  inherited.

At  the  outset  you  based  yourself  on  faith,  BhSra-
dvaja ;  now  you  are  shifting  to  authority, — There  are
five  separate  states  of  consciousness,  each  with  its  own
alternative  outcome;  and  the  five  are  as  follows: —
faith,  inclination,  audiority*  appreciation  and  intellectual
enthusiasm.  A  thing  may  either  evoke  faith  in  abun¬
dance  but  yet  in  itseff  prove  empty,  vain  and  false  r  or,
it  may  fail  to  inspire  faith  but  yet  in  itself  prove  real,
veritable  and  sure.  And  the  same  may  [171]  apply
to  inclination,  authority,  appreciation  and  intellectual
enthusiasm.  Maintenance  of  a  truth  does  not  entitle
an  intell^nc  man  to  aver  that  here  alone  resides  all
truth  and  that  everything  else  is  vain.

:i.  7


98


XCV.  CANKI8UTTA.


M.  n.  17*-


What  is  the  scope  of  this  maintenance  of  truth  and
of  his  maintenance  thereof?^  I  invite  the  reverend
Gotama  to  enlarge  on  the  maintenan«  of  truth.

If  a  man  has  Siih,  then  in  his  profession  of  faith  he
maintains  the  truth  he  has  but  does  not  daim  abso¬
lutely  chat  this  is  all  truth  and  that  everything  else  is
vain;  or  if  he  has  inclination  and  the  r«t,  and,  wmie
professing  what  he  has  got,  does  not  claim  that  this  is
all  truth  and  that  everything  else  is  vain;— then,  within
this  scope,  there  is  maintenance  of  truth  and  he  mam*
tains  truth,  as  1  affirm ;  but  this  does  not  give  him
enlightenment  in  truth.

I  quite  follow.— And  now  as  to  enlightenment  m

truth  ?  .  ,

Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman,  supported  by  a
village  or  township,  to  whom  there  comes  the  he^  ot
a  house  or  his  son  to  scan  him  with  r^ard  to  {172}
greed,  malevolence  and  delusion.  The  visitor  wonders
whether  the  reverend  man’s  heart  harbours  such  greed
as  to  make  him  profess  either  to  know  when  he  does
not  know,  or  to  see  when  he  does  not  see,  or  to  egg
another  on  to  do  what  would  conduce  to  the  I^tmg
barm  and  hurt  of  Other  people.  Convince  by  bis
scrutiny  that  no  such  greed  is  harboured  m  that  Alms¬
man's  heart,  he  concludes  that  his  behaviour  in  ^tion
and  in  speech  proclaims  him  void  of  greed.  Mor^
over,  the  Doctrine  the  Almsman  preaches  is  profound,
recondite,  hard  to  comprehend,  serene,  exceilenc,
beyond  dialectic,  subtle,  only  to  be  understood  by  the
instructed,  and  incapable  of  being  preached  by  a
greedy  man.  Convinced  on  this  first  point,  he  pro¬
ceeds  to  consider  whether  the  reverend  man  s
harbours  malevolence  or  [178]  delusion ;  and  Is  simii^ly
convinced  by  bis  scrutiny  that  the  Almsman  is  nei^er
wicked  nor  wrong-headw,  or  he  could  not  preach  as
he  does-  With  this  settled  conviction,  be  reposes
faith  in  him;  this  faith  leads  him  to  frequent  the
Almsman’s  company  where  he  listens  and  hears  the
Doctrine  preached  and  stores  it  in  his  memory,  study¬
ing  the  meaning  of  all  he  hears  till  he  grows  interested


M,  ii,  J74.


BRAHMIN  PRSTENSIONS.


99


and  so  grows  zealous  ;  Zeal  makes  him  energetic  and
weigh  things  and  strive  amain ;  discarding  self,  he
realizes  the  truth  physically  and  penetrates  it  with  his
understanding  till  he  sees  it  clearly. — So  far,  he
becomes  enlightened  in  truth  and  rec<^nize5  truth,  as
I  affirm  ;  but  this  does  not  give  him  the  attainment  of
truth.

I  quite  follow, — And  now  as  to  the  attainment  of
truth  ?

[174]  That  comes  by  the  practice,  development  and

growth  of  just  the  aforesaid  slates  of  mind _ So  far,

there  is  attainment  of  truth  and  he  attains  it,  as  I
affirm.

I  quite  follow. — And  now  what  attitude  fosters  this
attainment  ?

Striving  hard.  If  the  man  does  not  strive  hard,  he
will  not  attain ;  it  is  because  he  strives  that  he  atulns ;
and  therefore  striving  fosters  attainment.

What  attitude  fosters  striving?

Cogitation.  If  he  does  not  ct^itate,  he  will  not
strive  I  it  is  because  be  cogitates  that  he  strives ;  and
therefore  cogitation  fosters  strivincr.

What  fosters  cogitation  ?

Eneigy.  If  he  have  noteneigy.  .  .  .

What  fosters  energy?

Zeal.  If  he  have  not  zeal.  .  .  .

What  fosters  zeal?

[175]  Interest  in  the  Doctrine.  .  ,  .

what  fosters  interest  ?

Studying  the  meaning  of  all  he  hears.  .  .

What  fosters  this  study  ?

-Stored  knowledge  of  the  Doctrine.  .  .  ,

What  fosters  this  stored  kriowledce  of  the
Doctrine  ?

Hearing  it  preached.  ...

What  fosters  such  hearing.^,/

Listening.  ...

[176]  \^^ai  fostei’  lisjeAing?

Attendance.  ...

What  fosters  attendance  ?  X


ICO


XC7.  CAKKi-SOTTA.


M,fi- 177.


Failb.  If  faith  do  not  abound,  he
attend  the  Almsman;  it  is  because  he  has  faith  m
him  that  he  attends;  and  therefore  faith  fosters
attendance.

Gouma,  I  have  now  asked  you  about  maintenance
of  truth  about  enlightenment  in  truth,  about  atum-
ment  of  truth,  and  about  the  factors  which  promote
attainment ;  [177]  and  you  have  explained  it  all  to  me
Co  my  satisfaction,  pleasure  and  delight.  Up  nil  now,
Gotama,  my  attitude  used  to  be— ‘  Who  are  these
shavelings  of  recluses,  these  menial  black  f«l  ojfs.
sprung  from  the  feet  of  our  kinsman,  BrahmS?  Who
are  these  D  octrine-mongecs  ?  ’  B  ut  y ou ,  Gotama,  have
aroused  in  me  a  liking  for  recluses,  a  belief  in  recluses,
and  a  respect  for  them.  Wonderful,  Gotama;  wondertull

_ etc.— I  ask  you  to  accept  me  as  a  disciple  who

found  an  abiding  refuge,  from  this  day  forth,  while  life
lasts.

XCVI.  ESUKARI-SUTTA.

BlRTH^S  INVIDIOUS  BAR-

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  while  the  Lord
staying  at  Sivatthi  in  J eta's  grove  in  An5thapindika’s
pleasaunce,  the  brahmin  Esukifi  came  to  the  Lord,  by
whom  he  took  his  seat  after  exchange  of  the  greeting
of  friendliness  and  dvility,  saying Service,  Gotama,
is  divided  into  four  by  brahmins, — service  of  a  brahmin,
service  of  a  noble,  service  of  a  middle*class  man,  and
service  of  a  peasant  Any  member  of  all  four  classes
may  serve  a  brahmin ;  [1783  ^  noble  may  be  served
by  anoth^  noble  ‘or  by  a  middle-class  man  or  by  a
peasant ;  a  middle-class  man  may  be  served  by  another
middle-class  man  or  by  a  peasant ;  while  a  peasant  may
be  served  only  by  a  peasant,— for  who  else  could  ?
What  does  the  reverend  Gotama  say  hereon?

Is  the  whole  world  tn  accordjp'Jth  brahmins  in
fourfold  division  of  service^-^

No.


M.  il  t79.


BIRTHS  INVIDIOUS  BAR.


lOI


Ic  is  just  like  a  poor,  needy  and  destitute  wretch  for
whom  folk  should  reserve  a  joint  he  does  not  want,
telling  him  he  has  got  to  have  it — and  to  pay  for  it.
Just  in  the  same  way  it  is  without  the  assent  of  recluses
and  brahmins  that  brahmins  lay  down  the  law  about
service.  For  myself,  I  neither  assert  that  all  service  is
to  be  rendered  nor  chat  all  service  is  to  be  refused.
]f  the  service  makes  a  man  bad  and  not  good,  ic  should
not  be  rendered ;  but  if  it  makes  him  better  and  not
bad,  then  It  should  be  rendered.  This  is  the  guiding
consideration  which  should  decide  the  conduct  alike  of
nobles,  [179]  of  brahmins,  of  mlddle^lass  men  and  of
peasants ;  each  individual  should  refuse  service  which
makes  him  bad  and  should  accept  only  the  service
which  makes  him  a  better  man.  I  assert  that  lineage
does  not  enter  Into  a  man’s  being  either  good  or  bad ;
— nor  do  good  looks  or  wealth.  For,  you  will  find  a
man  of  noble  birth  who  Is  a  murderer,  a  thief,  a
fornicator,  a  liar,  a  slanderer,  a  man  of  bitter  tongue,
a  tattler,  a  covetous  person,  a  man  of  rancour  or  of
'  wrong  views ;  and  therefore  1  assert  that  noble  birth
does  not  make  a  good  man.  Or  again  you  will  hnd  a
man  of  noble  birth  who  is  Innocent  of  ail  these  vices  \
— and  therefore  I  assert  chat  ic  is  not  lineage  which
makes  a  man  bad.  Similarly,  it  Is  not  good  looks  or
wealth  which  make  a  man  either  good  or  bad ; — and
therefore  I  assert  that  neither  goi^  looks  nor  wealth
make  him  either  good  or  bad.  [180]  I  neither  assert
that  ail  service  Is  to  be  rendered  nor  that  all  service  is  to
be  refused.  If  the  service  rendered  breeds  faith  and
virtue  in  a  man,  increases  his  store  of  Information,
leads  to  K enunciation,  enriches  his  understanding,—
that,  I  assert,  is  service  which  may  be  rendered.

At  this  point  the  brahmin  Esukin  s^d  to  the  Lord:
w.— Brahmins  give  a  fourfold  classification  of  income,—
from  alms,  for  brahmins;  from  his  bow  and  arrows,  for
the  noble ;  from  ploughing  and  tending  cattle,  for  the
middle-class  man;  and  for  the  peasant,  by  thecarri^e
of  crops  on  the  pole  slung  over  his  shoulder.  If  any
one  of  these  deserts  his  vocation  for  something  else  he


102


XCVI.  BSlfKARlSUTTA.


M.  il.  iSt.


does  what  he  should  not  do, — not  less  than  a  guardian
who  appropriates  what  is  not  his. — What  does  the
reverend  Gotama  say  on  this  ?

Is  the  whole  world  in  accord  with  this  brahmin
classification  ?

[181]  No.

It  is  just  like  a  poor,  needy  .  .  .  your  brahmins  lay
down  the  law  about  wealth.

It  is  the  noble  transcendent  Doctrine  which  I,
brahmin,  affirm  to  be  true  wealth.  As  against  pride  of
ancestry^  the  station  into  which  a  man  happens  to  be
born  determines  only  his  designation — be  it  noble  or
brahmin  or  middle-class  or  peasant.  Even  as  a  fire  is
called  after  the  material  out  of  which  it  is  kindled,  and
may  thus  be  called  either  a  wood- fire,  or  a  chip-fire,  or
a  bracken-fire,  or  a  cowdung  fire, — just  in  the  same
way  the  noble,  transcendent  Doctrine,  I  aver,  is  the
source  of  true  wealth  for  every  man,  birth  merely
determining  his  designation  in  one  of  the  four  classes.'
Take  a  man — be  he  noble  or  brahmin  or  what  not-^
who  goes  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as  a
Pilgrim  and,  thanks  to  the  Doctrine  and  Rule  pro¬
claimed  by  the  Truth-finder,  abstains  from  mumer,
theft,  loose  living,  lying,  slander,  reviling,  tattling,
covetousness  and  malevolence,  gains  right  views,  and
attains  to  the  causal  method  and  to  Doctrine  and  to  the
right  [1 82]  Now,  if  a  man  of  each  class  accomplishes
this,  is  it  only  the  brahmin— and  not  any  one  of  the
three  other  classes— who  in  this  r^ion  can  develop  a
heart  of  love  innocent  of  all  hate  and  malevolence?

No,  Gocama ;  all  four  classes  alike  can  do  so.

Exactly  so  can  men  of  all  four  classes  alike  go  forth
from  home  .  ,  .  and  to  the  right.

What  think  you,  brahmin  >  Can  only  a  brahmin
take  shampooing  balls  down  to  the  river  with  him  and
SCOOT  oH  the  dust  and  dirt;  and  can  this  not  be  done
by  a  noble  or  a  middle-class  man  or  a  peasant  ?

No;  all  die  other  three  classes  [I88j  can  do  so  too.

Exactly  so  can  all  four  classes  alike  go  forth  .  .  .
and  to  the  right.  What  think  you  ?  Suppose  a  noble,


M.  iL  tii.


birth’s  invidious  bar.  105


anointed  king,  assembled  a  hundred  men  of  varied
birth  .  .  .  {fU.  as  in  Sutia  No.  93)  .  .  .  [184]  every
fire  alike  would  blaze  up  with  the  same  bright  flame
and  equally  serve  the  purposes  of  a  fire.

Exactly  so  can  men  of  all  four  classes  alike  go  forth
from  home  ,  .  .  attain  to  the  causal  method  and  to  the
Doctrine  and  to  the  right

At  the  close  of  these  words,  the  brahmin  Esuk&ri
said  to  the  Lord Wonderful,  Gotama;  wonderful!
.  .  .  accept  me  as  a  disciple  who  has  found  an  abiding
refuge,  from  this  day  forth,  while  life  shall  last.


XCVII.  dhanaRjani-sutta.

THE  WORLD'S  CLAIMS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Rsjagaha  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where  the
squirrels  were  fed,  the  reverend  SSriputta  was  making
an  alms-pilgrimage  with  a  great  train  of  Almsmen
among  the  Southern  Hills,  where  he  was  found  [185J
by  an  Almsman  who  had  spent  ihe  rainy  season  at
Rajagaha.  After  interchange  of  the  greetings  of
friendliness  and  civility,  SSriputia  enquired  after  the
Master's  health  and  was  told  he  was  well,  as  too  was
the  Confraternity,— and  also  the  brahmin  DhSnaftjanI
of  Taodula-pila  Gate  in  Rajagaha  concerning  whose
health  too  Sariputta  had  made  enquiries.

And  is  the  brahmin  zealous  and  earnest? — asked
Sariputta  further  of  the  Almsman.

How  could  earnest  zeal  possibly  dwell  in  Dhlnaft-
jani?  He  uses  the  king  to  fleece  the  brahmins  and
householders,  and  uses  them  to  fleece  the  king.  Also,
his  pious  wife  who  came  of  a  pious  stock  is  dead  now ;
and  he  has  taken  to  himself  another  wife  who  is  not
pious  and  comes  of  no  pious  stock.

This  is  bad  news,  very  bad  news,  to  hea.*  of  Dhanafi-
jani's  lack  of  zeal  Perhaps,  however,  it  some  time


104


XCVII.  DHIkaJ^JAOT'SUTTA.


M.  li.  )86-


and  place  J  may  meet  him  j  f  should  like  to  have
a  talk  with  him.

After  staying  as  long  as  he  wanted  in  the  Southern
Hills,  Sariputta  proceeded  on  his  aJ ms-pilgrimage  till
he  reached  Rajagaha,  where  he  took  up  his  abode  in
the  Bamboo  grove  Early  in  the  morning,  bowl  in
hand  and  duly  robed,  he  went  into  Rajagaha  or  alms,
[185]  at  a  time  when  the  brahmin  Dhanafi  ini  was
out  of  the  city  seeing  his  cows  milked  in  toe  byre.
On  his  return  after  nis  round  and  meal,  Sariputta
sought  out  the  brahmin,  who,  seeing  him  coming,
came  to  meet  him  with  the  remark  that  they  had  time
for  a  draught  of  milk  before  meal-time.

Not  so,  brahmin.  I  have  had  my  meal  to-day,  and
shall  be  resting  under  the  shade  of  a  tree  during  the
noontide.  Come  to  me  there.

Dhanafij&ni  ^reed  and  after  his  own  meal  joined
Sftrlputia,  seating  himself  by  him  after  friendly
greetings.

Said  Sariputta:— May  I  rest  assured,  Dhilnafijini,
that  zeal  and  earnestness  are  yours  ^

How  can  that  be,  when  I  have  to  support  my

S parents,  my  wife  and  family,  and  my  slaves  ana  serving
oik ;  and  have  to  entertain  my  acquaintances  and
friends,  my  kith  and  kin,  and  guests,  and  have  also  to
provide  for  my  kinsfolk  dead  and  gone,  and  for  the
deities,  and  for  the  king, — not  to  speak  of  supporting
myself  in  meat  and  drink?

What  think  you.  DbSnafijam?  If  we  suppose  a
man  who,  for  ms  parents*  sake,  has  departed  from
rigbc^usness  and  equity  and  is  being  hauled  off  to
purgatory  by  Its  wardens, — would  it  avail  him  either
to  ^ead  on  his  own  behalf  that  it  was  for  his  parents*
sake  that  he  had  departed  from  righteousness  and
equity  jand  that  therefore  they  should  not  haul  hito
off,  or  ;[187]  for  his  parents  to  plead  that  it  was
for  tbetj  sake  he  had  departed  (rora  righteousness
and  equity^

No  1  desire  all  appeals,  the  wardens  would  cast  him
into  purgatory.


M.  H.  iW.  THS  world’s  CLAIMS.  IO5

Would  it  avail  him  either  to  plead  on  his  own
behalf,  or  to  have  his  wife  and  family  plead  for  him,
that  it  was  for  their  sake  he  had  departed  from
righteousness  and  equity^

No ;  despite  all  appeals,  the  wardens  would  cast  him
into  puigatory.

Would  it  avail  him  if  he  pleaded  his  slaves  and
serving  folk  ?

Not  a  whit.

Or  if  he  pleaded  his  friends  and  acquaintances  ?

Not  a  whit

Or  if  he  pleaded  his  kith  and  kin,  or  his  guests.^

Not  a  whit.

[18S]  Or  if  he  pleaded  his  kinsfolk  dead  and  gone,
or  the  deities,  or  his  monarch’s  claims  on  him  ?

Not  a  whit.

Would  it  avail  him  to  plead  on  his  own  behalf  or  to
have  others  pleading  for  him  that  it  was  to  support
himself  in  meat  and  drink  that  he  departed  from
righteousness  and  equity  ?

No :  despite  all  ^peals,  they  would  cast  him  into
purgatory.

What  chink  you,  DhinanjSni  ?  Which  is  the  better
man? — He  cbac  for  the  sake  of  his  parents  departs
from  righteousness  and  equity  ?  Or  he  that  for  their
sake  walks  in  righteousness  and  equity?

The  latter.  For,  to  walk  in  righteousness  and
equity  is  better  chan  to  depart  therefrom.

Moreover,  DhanaftjSni,  there  are  other  courses  of
action  which  are  justined  and  righteous  in  themselves,
whereby  he  can  support  his  parents  and  yet  avoid
evil-doing  and  walk  uprightly.  Now,  does  the  same
reasoning  apply  to  the  support  of  wife  and  family,
[189  191]  and  ev^thiog  else  ?

It  does,  S&riputta.

Hereupon,  the  brahmin  rejoicing  in  what  the  rever¬
end  Sariputta  had  said,  thanked  him,  rose  up  and  went
his  way.

A  time  came  when  the  brahmin  Dh£naiijani,  being
ill  and  in  pain  and  in  grave  danger,  sent  a  man  [192]


io6  xcvii.  dkXnaJ^jxni-sutta.  m.  ».  r^a*


to  go  in  his  name  to  the  Lord  and,  bowing  his  head
at  the  Lord's  feet,  to  say  how  ill  he  was  and  how
he  bowed  his  head  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord ;  and
farther  to  carry  the  same  message  to  the  reverend
S&riputca.  with  the  added  request  to  the  latter  to  be  so
good  as  to  come  to  the  house.

The  two  messages  having  been  duly  delivered,
Sariputta  came  to  DhanarijSni's  house  and,  seating
himself  on  the  seat  set  for  him,  asked  the  brahmin
whether  he  was  getting  better  and  able  to  hold  on,
whether  his  pains  were  leaving  him  and  not  coming
on,  and  whetner  he  found  himself  progressing  and  not
losing  ground  with  his  pain.

N  ot  at  all,  $&riputta ;  I  am  getting  not  better  but
worse ;  my  pains  grow  worse  and  worse ;  I  am  losing
ground.  It  is  just  like  [198]  a  strong  man  boring  my
skull  with  a  sword’s  sharp  point,  so  violent  are  the
winds  which  rack  my  head.  I  am  getting  worse
and  not  better.  My  head  is  racked  with  violent
winds  as  though  a  strong  man  had  twisted  a  leather
thong  round  my  head.  I  am  getting  worse  and  not
better.  My  inwards  are  being  pierced  through  and
through  by  violent  winds,  just  as  if  a  butcher  or  his
man  were  hacking  them.  I  am  getting  worse  and  not
better.  So  violent  is  the  fire  within  me  that  it  is  just
as  though  a  couple  of  strong  men,  taking  a  weaker
man  by  both  arms,  were  to  roast  and  burn  him  up  in
a  fiery  furnace.  No.  SSriputtaj  I  am  not  getting
better  but  worse  5  I  am  losing  ground ;  my  pains  grow
on  me.

What  think  you  ?  Is  it  better  to  go  to  purgatory  or
to  be  reborn  as  an  animal  ?

The  latter.

Is  it  better  to  be  reborn  as  an  animal  or  as  a  ghost  ?

The  latter.

Is  it  better  to  be  reborn  as  a  ghost  or  as  a  human
being  ?

The  latter.

[194]  As  a  human  being  or  as  one  of  the  Four
Regents  of  the  world  ?


M.  it.  19$.


THE  WORLD^S  CLAIMS.


107


The  latter.

As  one  of  the  Four  Regents  or  as  one  of  the
Thirty-three  Gods?

The  latter.

As  one  of  the  Thirty-three  or  as  a  God  in  the
Yama  heaven  ?

The  latter.

As  a  God  in  the  YSma  or  in  the  Tusita  heaven  ?

The  latter.

As  a  God  in  the  Tusita  or  in  the  NimmSnaraii
heaven  ?

The  latter,

As  a  God  in  the  Ninuninarati  or  the  Paranimmita-
vasavatti  heaven  ?

The  latter.

As  a  God  in  the  Paranimmita-vasavatii  heaven  or
in  the  heaven  of  BrahmS  ?

You  speak  of  the  heaven  of  BrahmSl  Ah!  the
heaven  of  BrahmSl

Thought  Sarlputta  to  himself : — These  brahmins’
hearts  are  set  on  the  heaven  of  Brahmi;  I  might  do
well  to  indicate  the  path  to  union  with  BrahmSs.
Accordingly  he  said  he  would  indicate  it  to  the
brahmin  and  thus  began  :

[195]  What  is  the  path  to  union  with  the  Brahmas?
Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  dwells  with  radiant
thoughts  of  love  pervading  one  quarter  of  the  world —
a  second  quarter — a  third  quarter — the  fourth  quarter ;
who  dwells  with  radiant  thoughts  of  love  pervading
the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  world,  above,
below,  around,  everywhere. — with  thoughts  of  love
^•embracing  and  vast  beyond  measure,  untinged  by
hatred  or  malice. — This  is  a  path  to  union  with
the  Brahmas. — And  as  with  thoughts  of  love,  so  does
the  Almsman  pervade  the  whole  length  and  breadth
of  the  world  with  compassion, — This  is  the  path  to
union  with  Brahmas  I

Well,  SSriputta,  bow  down  your  head  in  my  name
at  the  Lord's  feet  and  tell  him  how  ill  I  am  and  that  I
bow  my  head  at  his  feet.


I03  XCVir.  DiUNAfJjXNI-SUTTA.  SN  I15.

After  thus  sUbliShing  the  brahmin’s  heart  not  in  the
highest  things  of  all  but  only  in  the  humble  heaven  of
BrahmS,  Sariputta  rose  and  went  his  way.  Nor  had
he  been  gone  Jong  before  the  brahmin  died  and  passed
away  to  a  heaven  of  BrahmS.

Said  the  Lord  to  the  Almsmen : — 'S&ripucta  has  risen
from  his  seat  and  gone  his  way,  after  stablishing  the
ht&rt  of  the  brahmin  DhSna5j5ni  not  in  the  highest
things  of  all  but  only  in  the  humble  heaven  of  BrahmL

When  Siriputta  came  up  and  delivered  the  brahmin's
message,  the  Lord  asked  him  to  state  why  [196]
it  was  not  in  the  highest  things  of  all  but  only  in  a
humble  heaven  of  Brahm&  that  he  had  stablished  the
brahmin’s  heart  before  leaving  him.

1  thought,  sir,  that,  as  these  brahmins'  hearts  are  set
on  the  heaven  of  BrahmS,  I  would  indicate  the  path
to  union  with  Brahmas,

Yes,  and  the  brahmin  has  died  since,  Sariputta,  and
has  passed  away  to  a  heaven  of  Brahmi.


XCVIII.  VASETTHA-SUTTA.'

THE  REAL  BRAHMIN.

[SN  115]  Thus  have  I  heard,  Once  when  the
Lord  was  staying  at  Icchinankala  in  the  forests  there,
a  Jaige  number  of  very  well-known  and  wealthy
brahmins  were  dwelling  there,  such  as  Cankt
Tarukkha,  PokkharasSti,  J&nussoi^i,  Todeyya*  and
other  well-known  and  wealthy  brahmins-

fs  the  young  brahmins  Vaseftha  and
Bharadvaja  were  walking^  and  strolling  up  and  down,
they  fell  to  discussing  what  makes  a  brahmin.


For  text,  p,  ri5  of  the  Suita  NipSta  edited  for  P.T.S.
ig  J3  {d.  Sutta  No.  gs).  For  metter,  cf.  Sutta  No.  1 3  of  Dlgha
NUM,  at  p.  a^8  et  seqq.  of  to!  I  of  Dutiegius  a/thd  Buddha.

Stated  by  Be.  to  be  five  purohitas  of  IGog  Baseaadi  of
iCoeela.


SN  1x6.


THE  REAL  BRAHUIN.


TO9


BharadvSja  maintained  that  what  made  a  brahmin
was  pure  descent  on  both  sides  right  back  for  seven
successive  generations  of  ancestors,  with  no  break  or
blemish  in  his  lineage ;  whereas  V&settha  contended
that  it  was  virtue  and  moral  behaviour  which  made  a
brahmin.

As  neither  could  convince  the  other  [SN  lid],
Vfisettha  proposed,  and  Bh&radvSja  agre^,  to  refer
the  matter  to  'the  recluse  Gotama’  who  was  now  staying
in  the  forest  of  Icch&nankala  and  of  whom  the  high
repute  noised  abroad  was  that  he  was  said  to  be  the
Lord  ,  .  .  {etc.  as  in  SuUa  No.  95)  .  .  .  the  Lord  of
Enlightenment,  So  together  they  went  to  the  Lord
and,  when  they  were  seated  after  greetings,  V&set|ha
addressed  the  Lord  in  the  following  verses:—

Pokkkarasat^s  p^il  1 :  my  friend

for  master  had  Tarvkkha;  both  alike

in  Threefold  Lore  have  passed  and  so  profess.

2n  all  Ike  Threefold  Lore  loe  perfect  are,
in  text  and  import  each  kis  master  5  peer.

[SN  117]  On  birth  we  differ.  Bhdrad’OSja  says
Wf  birth  that  makes  the  brahmin;  I  say  life.

Agree  we  cannot ;  so  an  answer  crave
from  you^  for  high  EnUgkienmeni  renowrCd
Tor,  as  with  hands  in  adoration  raised
men  kail  the  crescent  moon,  so  men  kail  you.

Of  Goiama,  whose  vision  views  the  xvorld,
we  ask  if  birth  or  life  the  brahmin  makes.

Tell  us :  we  know  not.  but  would  fain  feel  sure.

To  Vasellha  ike  Lord  this  answer  gave  : —

Types  manifold  of  divers  living  things
in  ordered  sequence  must  / first  unfold,
to  show  how  nature  stamps  them  diverse  breeds
Regard  the  grass  and  trees,  which  ne'er  proclaim,
but  prove,  how  nature  stands  them  diverse  breeds.

[^SN  11^  Pass  next  to  insects,  pass  from  moths  to  ants;
regard  four  footed  creatures,  great  and  small;
regard  the  inakes  whose  length  on  belly  goes ;
pass  MOW  to  fish  thai  dwell  in  walef^s  depths  ;


r  10


XC  Vin.  V  A5BTT  H  A-S  y  TTA.


tk^n  fiass  io  birds  tkai  ^ing  tk^ir  way  through  air ;
—a/?  skavf  how  nature  stamps  iium  diverse  breeds.
While  these  thus  widely  differ,  men  alone
show  not  that  nature  stamps  them  diverse  breeds.

They  differ  not  in  hair,  head,  ears,  or  eyes,
in  mouth  or  nostrils,  eyebrows,  lips,
throat,  shoulders,  belly,  buttocks,  bask,  or  chest,
nor  in  Ike  parts  of  shame,  female  or  male,
nor  yet  in  hands  or  feet,  in  fingers,  nails,
in  calves  or  thighs;  in  hue,  or  sound  of  voice :

^naught  shows  men  stamped  by  nature  diverse  breeds;
[SN  119]  Uwixt  one  man's  body  and  his  fellow-man'Si
except  in  name,  no  difference  exists.

The  man  that  lives  by  keeping  herds  of  cows,

— know  him  as  farmer,  not  as  brahmin  true.

The  man  that  lives  by  divers  handicrafts,

— know  him  as  tradesman,  not  as  brahfnin  true.

The  man  that  lives  by  selling  merchandise^

— know  him  as  merchant,  not  as  brahmin  true.

The  man  that  lives  by  service  done  for  hire,

^know  him  as  hireling,  not  as  brahmin  true.

The  man  tkai  lives  by  taking  other d  gear,

— know  him  as  robber,  not  as  brahmin  true.

The  man  that  lives  by  warlike  sword  and  bow,

— know  him- as  soldier,  twI  as  brahmin  true.

The  man  that  lives  by  sacrificial  riles,

—know  him  as  chaplain,  not  as  brahmin  true.

The  man  that  lives  by  kingsk^  and  demesne,

— knew  him  as  monarch,  not  as  brahmin  true.

^Noi  birth,  not  parentage,  my  Brahmin  makes;

— birth  breeds  the  haughty  heart  of  worldliness.
Unworldly,  trammeljreey  my  Brahmin  stands
dauntless,  unshacklfd,  passionless,  and  free.

[SN  120]  My  Brahmin  yoke  and  harness,  straps  and
pin,

hamper  no  more  ;  Enlightenment  is  kis.


*  From  tius  poist  to  p.  112,  Uoe  14,  infra,  tboM  lioes  de[nct(Q^
tbe  true  Brabmia  are  incorporated  lq  tbe  Dh&nmapada  fop.  ^7>6o
of  tije  P.T.S.  edifion  of  1914).  ^


SN  131.


THE  REAL  BRAKMIK.


( 1 1


Gvi^i/ess,  mj>  Brahmin  bans  both  strips  and  bonds,
Bndures,  luiik  meskness  armed,  in  meekness  strong.
Virltte's  strait  path  my  Brahmin  humbly  treads
in  love ;  this  life 's  his  last, — Self-mastered  nozv.

As  off  the  lotus’leaf  the  raindrop  rolls,
nor  rests  the  mustard-seed  on  needle's  point,
so  in  my  Brahmin  pleasure  finds  no  home.

My  Brahmin  knows  that,  here  aud  now,
his  /ll  is  o'er;  his  burthen  shed,  he's  free.

Profound  in  undersianeting,  deep  in  love,
of  true  and  false  Paths  fudge  impeceable,
my  Brahmin  gains  the  goal  supreme  of  Truth,

My  brahmin  worldlings  shuns  and  homeless  folk;
with  scanty  needs  to  meet,  he  dwells  aloof.

My  Brahmin  wreaks  no  harm  on  strong  or  weak ;
no  foe  'mong  foemen,  calm  in  broils  is  he,
among  the  trammePd  trammel-less  and free.

My  Brahmin  sheds  deceit,  lust,  hate  and  pride,
as  drops  the  mustard-seed from  needle's  point.

[SN  121]  My  Brahmirls  unoffending  helpful  speech,
in  truth  conceived,  can  never  wound  the  ear.

Unasked,  my  Brahmin  takes  naught  long  or  short,
naught  big  or  little,  nothing  choice  or  vtle.

No  yearnings  fill  my  Brahmin' s  placid  brectst;
he  yearns  for  naught  in  this  or  other  worlds.
Knowledge  has  purged  my  Brahmin's  mind  of  doubt ;
he  harbours  nothing;  DeathUssness is  his.
Transcending  good  and  evil  here  and  now,
my  cleans'd  and  stainless  Brahmin  grief  nier  knows.
Pure  as  th'  unclouded  moon's  clear  orb  on  high,
my  Brahmin  sheds  delights  and  love  of  life.

From  rebirth's  slough,  from  follfs  trackless  maee,
my  Brahmin  wins  a  passage,  crossifig  o'er
to  dwelt  in  rapture,  far  from  hankerings
and  doubts,  to  being  dead  in  Deathlessness.
Renouncing  pleasure  for  the  Pilgrims  way,
pjy  Brahmin  pleasures  sheds  and  love  of  life.
Renouncing  Cravings  for  the  Pilgrims  way,
my  Brahmin  Cravings  sheds  and  love  and  life.
Eschewing  human  iies^  celestial  ties


1  12


XCVUI.  ViSBTTKA'SUTTA


SK  T32.


iranscmdin^y  not  a  tie  my  Brahmin  owns.

From  likes  and  dislikes  purged^  unfever^d,  void
of  what  feeds  Hfty  nty  Brahmin  s  ford  of  All.

[SN  122]  He  knows  whence  creatures  come  and  whither
pass,

-^my  Brahmin  blest,  Bnlighlen'd,  wi-create;
yet  none — nor  men  nor  gods  nor  choir  on  hig/t^
can  tell  what  bourn  awaits  the  Arahat.

Quit  of  past,  present,  future  wortdlinesSs
unworldly,  trammel-free,  my  Brahmin  stands.

Leader  of  leaders,  hero,  conqueror
resistless,  sage  of  sages,  cleans  d  and  pure,
my  Brahmins  meed  of  high  EnlightenmeiU
has  shown  him  hell  and  heaven,  taught  him  whence
he  hither  came,  to  pass  to  birth  no  more.

By  general  consent  mens  names  and  clans
as  useful  designaHons  current  pass ;

'twos  long  ere  time  evolved  ike  novel  view,

HU  then  unheard,  that  birth  a  Brahmin  makes.

Birth  makes  no  Brahmin,  nor  non- Brahmin  makes  ;

'tis  life  and  doing  mould  the  Brahmin  ti'ue.

Their  lives  mould  farmers,  tradesmen,  merchants,
serfs;

their  lives  mould  robbers,  soldiers,  chaplains,  kings.

[SN  123]  E'en  so  ike  wise  Hfds  causal  outcome  su,
-discern  what  went  before,  what  follows  thence.
Perforce  Hfds  doings  drag  the  world  and  men
still  onward,  as  ike  linchpin  trails  the  cart.

'  Tis  self  denial,  holy  life,  control,
which  make  my  Brahntifi s  brakmin-kood.

He  thai  has  won  the  Threefold  Lore,  the  Saint
who  ne'er  rebirth  shall  see, — he  Brahmd  is
to  them  that  know,  and  Sakka  manifest.

Hereon  the  young  brahmins  Vaset{tha  and  Bbaradvija
ssdd  to  the  Lord: — Wonderfu],  Gouma;  wonderfui!
.  .  .  accept  us  as  disdples  who  have  found  an  abiding
refuge,  from  this  day  forth,  while  life  shall  last


•  M.  ii.  197.


REAL  LMOH  WITH  BRATIMA.


XCIX.  SUBHA-SUTTA.


REAL  UNION  WITH  JJRAHMA,

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
Slaying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeia's  grove  in  Anathapindika’s

Eleasaunce,  the  young  brahmin  Subha — son  of  the
rahmin  Todeyya — was  stopping  with  a  householder
of  that  city  on  some  business  or  other  and  he  told  his
host  he  had  heard  Sivatthl  was  not  lacking  in  Saints
{araAanUhi).  and  asked  what  recluse  or  brahmin  they
should  go  to ;  and  the  host  answered  that  the  Lord
was  staying  in  the  pleasaunce  and  Subha  should  go  to
him.  [1^  Accordingly,  Subha  went  to  the  Lord
and,  seating  himself  after  exchange  ofg'reetings,  said  r —
Brahmins  hold  that,  though  a  man  with  a  home  may,  a
Pilgrim  cannot,  attain  to  the  true  system  and  to
Doctrine  and  to  the  right  What  does  the  reverend
Gotama  say  on  this  ?

My  view  is  qualified,  not  absolute  \  I  condemn
wrong  conduct  alike  in  the  Pilgrim  and  in  the  man
with  a  home.  With  wrong  conduct  neither  can  attain
to  the  true  system  or  to  Doctrine  or  to  the  right,  but  1
commend  right  conduct  in  both  alike;  and  with  right
conduct  both  alike  can  succeed.

Brahmins  hold.  Gotama,  that,  while  there  is  great
fVuit  arising  from  the  life  of  a  man  with  a  house  and
« home,  whose  life  is  full  and  busy,  with  questions  to  solve
and  difficulties  to  overcome,  the  exact  converse  holds

K>d  of  a  Pilgrim's  life.  What  does  the  reverend
tama  say  of  this  ?

Here  again  my  view  is  qualified  and  not  absolute.
The  busy  life  may  be  a  feilure  and  bear  little  fruit ;  or
it  may  be  a  success  and  bear  much  fruit  So  too  the
life  without  bustle  may  be  either  a  failure  or  a  success,
bearing  either  little  or  much  fruit.  [1^8]  Take  first
the  busy  life.  Agriculture  however  busily  pursued,
may  fail  and  bear  liule  fruit ;  or  again  it  may  succeed
and  bear  much  fruit.  On  the  other  hand,  commerce  if

II.  8


114


XCIX,  SUBHA-SUTTA,


M.  n.  I99>


pursued  without  bustle*  may  either  fail  and  bear  but
little  fruit ;  or  again  it  may  succeed  and  bear  much
fruit.  Just  as  agriculture,  however  busily  pursued,
may  prove  a  failure,  so  may  the  life  of  the  busy  man
with  house  and  home  fail  and  bear  little  fruit,  or,  again
like  agriculture,  it  may  succeed  and  bear  much  fruit.
Just  too  as  commerce,  if  pursued  without  bustle,  may
either  fail  or  succeed,  so  too  the  Pilgrim's  life,  pursued
without  bustle,  may  either  fail  or  succeed,— may  bear
either  little  or  [199]  much  fruit.

Brahmins,  Gotama,  specify  five  qualities  for  the
attainment  of  merit  and  the  achievement  of  what  is
right.

If  it  is  agreeable  to  you,  would  you  please  slate  these
five  to  the  company  ?

It  is  quite  agreeable,  Gotama,  where  I  address  your
reverence  and  your  like.

Then  stale  these  five  qualities.

First,  they  rank  truth,  next  austerities,  then  chastity,
followed  next  by  study  and  lastly  by  munificence.
These  are  the  Brahmins’  five,  and  what  do  you  say
thereto  ?

Tell  me ; — is  there  one  single  brahmin  who  avers  that
he  has  discerned  and  realized  the  five  so  that  he  can
affirm  their  outcome  ?

No.

Is  there  one  single  teacher,  or  teacher  of  teachers,
of  brahmins  for  seven  generations  back  who  can
aver  it  ?

Na

[200]  Is  it  averred  by  A^thaka,  VSmaka,  Vamadeva,
VessSmitta,  Yamataggi,  Angirasa,  BharadvSja,
Vasettha,  Kassapa  or  Bhagu,— those  sages  of  yore
who  were  the  authors  and  uiterers  of  those  runes
which  are  chanted  and  repeated  and  rehearsed  by  the
brahmins  of  to-day  ?

No.

Then  it  is  averred  by  not  one  single  brahmin  of
to^ay,  by  not  a  single  teacher  of  brahmins  for  seven
generations  back,  and  not  by  a  single  one  of  the  sages


M.  ii.  201.


REAL  UNION  WITH  BRAHMA.


Its


of  yore  who  were  the  authors  of  the  runes.  So  the
brahmins’  pronouncement,  methinks,  resembles  a  string
of  blind  men,  of  whom  the  leader  sees  not  nor  the
middle  one  nor  the  last  of  the  line.

These  words  mightily  angered  and  Incensed  the
young  brahmin,  who— actually  daring  to  flout  and
scoff  at  the  Lord  in  person  and  to  say  it  to  the
Lord’s  own  face— said  to  the  Lord,  in  a  belief  that
the  recluse  Gotama  would  be  annoyed :  The  brahmin
Pokkharasati,  of  the  Upamaftfia  sept  and  lord  of
Subhaga-vana  (at  Ukkat^hS),  maintains  that,  as  for
those  recluses  and  brahmins  who  profess  to  transcend
ordinary  human  bounds  and  to  rise  to  the  heights  of
truly  Noble  Knowledge,  their  claims  [201]  prove
ridiculous, — mere  words,  empty  and  vain ;  for  how
could  a  human  being  possibly  transcend  human  limits
and  rise  to  the  heights  of  this  truly  Noble  Knowledge  ?

Tell  me ;  does  b’okkharasiti’s  heart  and  mind  read
the  hearts  and  minds  of  each  and  every  brahmin  that
exists!^

Why  he  cannot  do  that  as  regards  his  own  maid¬
servant  PunnikS,  much  less  can  he  read  the  hearts  of
all  recluses  and  brahmins  as  a  body  I

It  is  just  like  a  man  blind  from  birth  who  could  not
see  black  or  white,  blue  or  yellow,  or  red  or  pink
things,  who  could  not  see  level  or  rough  ground,  the
stars,  or  the  sun  and  moon,  and  who  should  affirm  that
there  were  no  such  things  and  that  no  one  could  see
them, — on  the  ground  forsooth  that,  as  he  himself  had
no  knowledge  or  vision  of  them,  therefore  they  were
non-existent.  In  so  saying,  would  he  say  aright?

No,  Gotama.  These  things  do  exist  and  there  are
those  who  can  see  them :  and  consequently  he  would  be
wrong  in  saying  [202]  they  were  non-existent  merely
because  he  could  not  see  them.

Just  as  blind  and  as  lacking  eyes  to  see  is  the  brahmin
Pokkharasati,  of  the  Upatnahila  sept  and  lord  of
Subh^a  •  vana ;  he  cannot  possibly  know  or  see  or
realize  the  Noble  Knowledge  which  transcends  all
human  bounds.


1 XCIX.  SUBH&-StrrTA| _  M»  "•

What  think  you.  Subha?  Among  the  wealthy
brahmins  of  Kosala,  such  as  Canki  or  T&rukkha  or
Pokkharasati  or  Japussoni  or  your  own  father  Todeyya,
—which  of  their  utterances  do  you  prefer  ?  The
utterance  which  is  the  accepted  truth  or  that  which  is
not  universally  accepted?

The  accepted.

_ The  utterance  which  is  weighed  or  that  which

is  not  ?

The  utterance  which  is  weighed.

_ The  utterance  which  embodies  thought  or  that

which  does  not  ?

That  which  embodies  thought.

—The  utterance  which  is  profitable  or  that  which  is
unprofitable  ?

The  utterance  which  is  profitable.

What  think  you  ?  On  this  showing,  has  the  brah¬
min  Pokkharasiti— of  the  Upamafifia  clan  and  lord  of
Subhaga-vana— delivered  an  accepted  utterance  or  one
which^  not  universally  accepted  ?

One  which  is  not  universally  accepted.

— A  welghe<i  utterance  or  one  which  is  not
weighed  ?

One  which  is  not  weighed.

_ An  utterance  which  embodies  thought  or  one

which  does  not  ?

One  which  does  not  embody  thought.

— A  profitable  or  an  unprofitable  utterance?

An  unprofitable  utterance.

[208]  Young  brahmin,  there  are  five  Hindrances,—
to  wit,  sensuality,  malevolence,  sluggishness,  flurry
and  worry,  and  a  wavering  mind  ;  and  by  these  five
Hindrances  is  PokUharasSti  cribbed,  cabined,  pent
and  shrouded,  so  chat  he  can  never  possibly  know  or
see  or  realize  that  Noble  Knowledge  which  transcends
all  human  bounds.

Five  strands,  loo,  make  up  pleasures  of  sense, — to
wit,  visible  shapes,  sounds,  odours,  tastes  and  touch,
all.  of  them  pleasant  and  agreeable  and  delightful,  all
of  them  bound  up  with  passion  and  lusts.  These


K.  ii.  304.


REAL  UNION  WITH  BRAHMA.


fivefold  pleasures  of  sense  the  brahmin  Pokkharasiti
enjoys,  being  enslaved  by  avid  infatuation,  and  neither
seeing  their  danger  nor  understanding  how  treacherous
they  all  are, — so  that  he  can  never  possibly  know  or
see  or  realize  this  Noble  Knowledge  which  transcends
all  human  bounds.

If  there  be  a  fire  kindled,  with  bracken  and  wood  to
feed  it,  and  if  another  fire  be  kindled  with  nothing  to
feed  it,  which  fire  will  burn  up  and  blaze?

If  it  be  possible,  Gotama,  to  kindle  a  fire  without
the  bracken  and  wood  to  feed  it,  the  fire  would  burn
up  and  blaze.

It  is  out  of  the  question  and  impossible  to  get  a  fire
to  blaze  up  without  fuel,  except  by  a  magican’s  art.
The  fire  that  is  kindled  with  fuel,  symbolizes  the  satis¬
faction  which  [204]  arises  from  pleasures  of  sense ;
while  the  fire  without  fuel  symbolizes  the  satisfi:tioti
which  arises  when  pleasures  of  sense  and  wrong  dis-

Eositions  are  not  Now,  what  is  the  nature  of  this
;tter  satisfaction  ?  Take  an  Almsman  who,  divested
of  pleasures  of  sense  and  divested  of  wrong  disposi¬
tions  develops  and  dwells  in  the  First  Ecstasy ; — this
is  a  satisfaction  wholly  remote  from  pleasures  of  sense
and  wrong  dispositions.  Or,  take  an  Almsman  who
develop  and  dwells  in  the  Second  Ecstasy ; — Uiis  too
is  a  satisfaction  In  which  pleasure  and  wrong  disposi¬
tions  find  no  place.  Tell  me  now;  which  of  the  five
qualities,  as  specified  by  brahmins  for  the  achievement
of  merit  and  the  attainment  of  what  is  right,  do  they
specify  as  more  effectual  than  the  rest  ?

Munificence,  Gotama.

What  think  you  ?  Suppose  that  a  brahmin  prepares
a  great  sacrifice  and  that  two  brahmins  come  to  cake
part,  of  whom  (be  first  looks  to  have  the  1:^1  rice,  the
best  seat,  the  best  water  and  the  best  piece  of  meat,
in  preference  to  any  other  brahmin.  Suppose,  how¬
ever,  that,  in  his  stead,  the  second  brahmin  is  pre¬
ferred,  [205]  to  the  indignation  and  mortification  cpf
the  first  brantnIn.T“Whac,  according  to  brahmins,  will
be  the  outcome  of  the  disappointed  man  ?


Il8  XCIX.  SUBKA-SUTTA.  M.il.

Whan  brahmins  distribute  gifts,  Gotama,  they  do
not  do  so  in  such  a  way  as  to  excite  indignation  and
mortification  i  their  giving  is  prompted  by  compassion.

On  this  showing,  br^mins  have  a  sixth  way  of
achieving  merit,  namely  by  compassion.

Yes,  on  this  showing.

Do  you  observe  that  the  brahmins’  five  qualities  for
achieving  merit  and  attaining  what  is  right  thrive  better
in  men  with  homes  or  in  Pilgrims  ?

Best  in  Pilgrims  and  but  little  in  men  with  houses
and  homes,  Gotama,  For  such  a  man's  life  is  so  full
and  busy  with  questions  to  solve  and  difficulties  to
overcome,  that  he  is  not  so  uniformly  and  consistently
truthful  as  the  Pilgrim  Is  who  is  immune  from  business
cares.  And  die  same  applies  to  the  four  other  quali¬
ties  too ;  for  a  roan  with  a  home  is  not  uniformly  and
consistently  ascetic,  chaste,  regular  in  repeating  the
mantras,  and  munificent, — whereas  a  Pilgrim  is.  So,
according  to  my  observation,  these  nve  qualities
thrive  best  in  the  Pilgrim.

In  my  view,  the  whole  of  the  five  do  but  implement
the  heart  [206]  to  free  a  man  from  wrath  and  malevo¬
lence.  Take  an  Almsman  who  professes  the  Truth
and,  in  the  assurance  thereon,  takes  in  import  and
doctrine  and  the  satisfaction  which  attends  the  doculne,
that  satisfaction  which  attends  the  right ; — all  this,  in
my  view,  does  but  implement  the  heart  to  raise  it  to
freedom  from  wrath  and  malevolence.  Or,  if  a  like
assurance  of  each  of  the  other  four  qualities  within
himsdf  ensures  the  same  result,  all  this,  in  my  view,
does  but  implement  the  heart  to  free  it  from  wrath  and
malevolence.  The  whole  of  the  five  qualities  do  but
implement  the  heart  so  as  to  free  it.

At  this  point  the  young  brahmin  Subha  said : — I
have  heard  that  you  know  the  way  to  union  vdth
Brahms.

Tel!  me  this.  Is  Najakara-gama  near  here,  not
very  far  away  ?

That  is  so.

Suppose,  now,  a  man,  who  had  been  born  there,


M.  ii.  207.  UNION  WITH  BRAHMA.  I  IQ

had  grown  up  there  and  had  always  lived  there,  were
asked  the  way  thither, — would  he  be  at  a  loss  or
perplexed  ?

No,  Gotama;  for,  having  been  bom  and  bred  there,
he  would  have  full  knowledge  of  every  road  to  the  place.

Whether  the  man  born  and  bred  in  the  place  would
be  at  a  loss  or  perplexed  by  an  enquiry  concerning
the  road  thither,  assuredly  the  Truth-finder  would  be
at  no  loss  and  in  no  perplexity  [207]  at  a  question
concerning  the  heaven  of  Brahmi  or  the  way  thither.
For  well  do  1  know  Brahma  and  his  heaven  and  Che
way  thither ;  well  too  do  1  know  what  path  he  has
trodden  who  is  reborn  in  the  heaven  of  BrahmS.

I  have  heard  that  you  teach  the  way  to  union  with
Brahma ;  and  1  would  ask  you  to  teach  me  it.

Then  listen  and  pay  attention ;  I  will  speak.

Subha  readily  assenting,  the  Lord  spoke  as  follows:
— What  is  the  way  to  union  with  BrahmS  ?  Take
the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  dwells  with  radiant
thoughts  of  love  pervading  one  quarter  of  the  world —
a  second  quarter — a  third  quarter — the  fourth  quarter
of  the  world ;  who  dwells  with  radiant  thouglits  of
love  pervading  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the
world,  above,  below,  around,  everywhere, —  with
radiant  thought  of  love  all-embracing  and  vast,  be¬
yond  measure,  un tinged  by  hatred  or  malice.  It  Is
with  such  infinite  love,  and  with  a  heart  so  enfran¬
chised,  that  he  transcends  the  finite  and  neither  abides
therein  nor  halts  there.  Just  as  a  mighty  conch*
blower  can  with  ease  make  his  blast'  heard  north,
south,  east  and  west. — so  does  the  Almsman  transcend
the  finite  and  neither  abides  therein  nor  halts  there.
This  is  a  way  to  union  with  BrahmS.  And  as  with
love,  so  it  is  also  with  pity,  compassion  and  poise ;
[208]  all  these  are  ways  to  union  with  BrahmS.

At  this  close,  the  young  brahmin  Subba,  son  of
Todeyya,  said  to  the  Lord: — Wonderful,  Gotama;
wonderful!  .  .  .  accept  me  as  a  disciple  who  has
found  an  abiding  refuge,  from  this  day  forth  while  life
shall  last.


iao  XCIX.  SUBHA-SyTTA.  M- *1.209.

And  now,  Goiaira,  I  must  be  going,  for  I  am  busjr
and  have  much  to  do.

At  your  pleasure,  answered  the  Lord,  from  whom,
with  grateful  thanks,  Subha  now  took  his  leave,  with
deep  reverence.

At  this  time  the  brahmin  JanussoQt  was  driving  out
of  Savatthx  at  noon  in  a  carriage  which  was  all  white
and  was  drawn  by  milk-white  mares,  when  at  a  dis¬
tance  he  espied  Subha  returning  to  that  city  and  asked
where  he  was  coming  from  so  early  in  the  day ;  and
was  told  he  had  been  with  the  recluse  Gotama.

And  wbai  is  your  view  of  him,  Bhiradvaja?  Has
he  got  depth  of  thought  ?  Is  he  learned,  do  you
think  ?

[209]  Who  am  1  to  comprehend  the  depth  of  the
recluse  Gotama’s  thought  ?  Only  his  peer  could  do
that.

It  is  lofty  praise  indeed  that  you  accord  him.

Who,  who  am  1  to  praise  him  ?  Naught  but  praise
upon  praise  is  his,  that  foremost  among  gods  and
men ;  and  as  for  the  five  qualities  which  brahmins
specify  for  the  achievement  of  merit  and  the  attainment
of  the  right, — why  the  recluse  Gotama  says  they
do  nothing  but  implement  the  heart  to  free  it  from
wmth  and  malevolence

Hereon  the  brahmin  JS^ussoni  alighted  from  his
carriage  so  white  and  with  right  shouSer  respectfully
bared  and  with  folded  palms  stretched  out  towards
the  Lord,  burst  forth  with  this  heartfelt  utterance
How  good  it  is,  how  very  c^d,  for  King  Pasenadi  of
Kosala  that  in  his  realm  there  is  dwelling  the  Truth-
finder,  the  Arahat  all-enlightened  I


c.  sangArava.sutta.

VES,  THERE  ARE  GOPS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
making  an  alms-pilgrimage  through  Kosala  with  a
great  train  of  Almsmen,  diere  was  living  at  Candala-


ii.  910.


YBS,  THERE  ARE  GODS.


121


kappa  the  brahmin  lady  DhSnajijanr,  who  was  a
steunch  believer  in  the  Buddha  and  his  Doctrine  and
bis  Confraternity.  Chancing  to  trip  up,  she  exclaimed
three  times:  Glory  be  to  the  Lord,  the  Arahat  all-
enlightened  j  Her  exclamation  was  heard  by

the  young  brahmin  San^rava,  then  living  in  Candala-
kap^  who  was  versed  in  all  three  Vedas,  accom¬
plished  in  the  ritual  with  the  glosses,  in  phonology
and  in  etymology,  with  chronicles  as  a  fifth  branch,  as
well  as  in  exegesis,  in  casuistry  and  in  the  signs  that
mark  the  Superman.  Hearing  her  exclamation,  he
said  she  was  low  and  degraded  to  extol  a  shaveling  of
a  recluse  when  there  were  brahmins  available.

Ah,  but  you  do  not  know  how  good  and  wise  the
Lord  is ;  if  you  did,  you  would  not  think  it  right  to
abuse  and  denounce  him.

Well,  madam ;  please  let  me  know  when  the  recluse
Gotama  visits  Can dala- kappa.

I  will,  said  she.

In  the  course  of  his  alms-pilgrimage  through  Kosala
the  Lord  came  to  Can^ala- kappa,  and  took  up  his
abode  in  the  mango-grove  of  the  Todeyya  brahmins.
.News  of  his  arrival  there  reached  the  brahmin  Jady,
who  duly  told  the  young  brahmin,  bidding  him  select
his  own  time.  Accordingly,  Sangftrava  went  to  the
Lord  and,  after  exchange  of  greetings,  [SI  1]  sat  down
to  one  side,  saying : — There  are  some  recluses  and
brahmins,  Gotama,  who  by  insight  here  and  now  claim
to  have  won  the  goal  and  achieved  perfection,  recog¬
nizing  the  foundations  on  which  the  hi^^her  life  is  based.
How  does  the  reverend  Gotama  stand  to  these  ?

^  There  are  differences,  in  my  view,  among  such.
Some  of  them  depend  on  tradition  and  claim  by
tradition  to  win  the  goal  and  the  foundations  of  the
higher  life, — such  as  the  brahmins  who  know  the
Three  Vedas.  Others  go  on  a  modicum  of  belief,—
such  as  sophists  and  researchers.  Beyond  these  are
those  recluses  and  brahmins  who  in  domains  till  then
unknown  have,  unaided,  discerned  a  Doctrine  and  so
have  by  insight  here  and  now  woo  the  goal  and


173


C.  SAN  GAR AVA-SUTTA.


M.  ii.


achieved  perfection,  recognizing  the  foundations  on
which  the  higher  life  is  based.  Of  these  latter  am  I ;
or,  you  may  put  it,  lam  of  them  in  so  far  as  they  are
truly  such.

In  the  days  before  my  Enlightenment,  when  as  yet  1
was  but  a  Bodhlsatta  without  full  Enlightenment,  I
bethought  me  that  a  hole-and-corner  life  is  all  a  home
can  give,  whereas  a  Pilgrim  is  free  as  air;  it  is  hard
for  the  home-keeping  man  to  follow  the  higher  life  in
all  its  completeness  and  purity  and  perfection ;  come
let  me  cut  off  hair  and  beard,  don  the  yellow  robe  and
go  forth  home  to  homelessness,  So  the  time

came  that,  while  I  was  quite  young — with  a  wealth  of
coal-black  hair  .  .  .  as  tn  Sutia  No.  36)  .  .  .  but
when  1  took  that  solid  food  they  left  me  in  disgust,
saying  that  iuxuriousness  had  claimed  me  and  that,
abamfoning  the  struggle,  I  had  reverted  to  luxurious¬
ness.  Regaining  strength  after  eating  solid  food,  I
developed  and  dwelt  successively  in  the  First,  Second
and  Third  Ecstasies,

With  thoughts  thus  stedfast,  thus  clarified  and
purified,  clean  and  cleansed  of  impure  things,  tempered
and  ape  to  serve,  stedfast  and  immutable, — It  was  thus
that  I  applied  my  thoughts  to  the  knowledge  of
recalling  my  earlier  existences.  I  called  to  mind  my
divers  existences  in  the  past  .  .  .  (itc.  as  in  Suiia
No.  4)  .  .  .  third  watch  of  the  night, — ignorance
dispelled  and  knowledge  won,  darkness  dispelled  and
illumination  won,  even  as  would  befall  one  who  lives
the  strenuous  and  ardent  life,  purged  of  self.

Hereupon  the  young  brahmin  Sangirava  said  : —
Fruitful  indeed  and  noble  was  your  striving,  worthy
of  an  Arahat  all-enlightened. — Now,  are  there  gods  ?

1  knew  offhand  there  were  gods.

Why  do  you  give  that  answer  to  my  question,
Gotama  ?  Is  it  not  false  and  untrue  ?

Anyone  who,  when  asked  if  gods  there  be,  answers
that  there  are  gods  [218]  and  that  he  knew  offhand
there  were, — wSy,  anyone  of  intelligence  must  come
irresistiUy  to  the  conclusion  that  there  a,Ft  gods.


M.  it.  214.


TE&,  THBRB  ARB  GODS.


12$


Why  did  you  not  make  this  clear  at  the  outset,
Gotama  ?

The  world  is  loud  in  agreement  that  there  are  gods.

Hereupon,  the  brahmin  Sandra va  said  to  the
Lordj — Wonderful,  Gotama;  wonderful!  Just  as  a
rnan  might  set  upright  again  .  .  .  accept  me  as  a
disciple  who  has  found  an  abiding  refuge  from  this  day
forth,  while  life  shall  last


Cr.  DEVADAHA.SUTTA.

JAIN  FATUITIES.

[214]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  dwelling  among  the  Sakyans  in  their  township  of
Devadaha,  ne  addressed  the  attentive  Almsmen  as
follows : — Some  recluses  and  brahmins  there  are  who
affirm  and  hold  the  view  that,  whatsoever  the  individual
experiences — he  it  pleasant  or  unpleasant  or  neither —
all  comes  from  former  actions.  Hence,  by  expiation
and  purge  of  former  misdeeds  and  by  not  committing
fresh  misdeeds,  nothing  accrues  for  the  future;  as
nothing  accrues  for  the  future,  the  misdeeds  die  away ;
as  misdeeds  die  away,  III  dies  away ;  as  Ill  dies  away,
feelings  die  away;  and  as  feelings  die  away,  all  III  will
wear  out  and  pass.— This  is  what  the  Nigan^has
affirm.

Consequently,  I  go  to  them  and,  after  being  assured
that  this  is  a  correct  version  of  their  view,  enquire
whether  they  really  know  that  they  were  In  existence
before  this  and  not  non-existent.

No,  they  don't  know,  is  their  answer.

Do  you  know,  I  ask  them  further,  that  in  former
existences  you  were  guilty  of  misdeed  and  were  not
guiltless  thereof?

No.

Do  you  know  that  then  you  were  guilty  of  such
and  such  a  specific  misdeed  and  were  not  guiltless
thereof?


D2VABAHA-SUTTA.


M.  M.  316.


INO.

Do  you  know  that  so  much  ID  has  already  been  out¬
worn,  or  that  so  much  more  remains  to  be  outworn »  or
chat,  when  so  much  lU  has  been  outworn,  all  111  will
have  passed  ?

No.

Do  you  know  that,  here  and  now,  wrong  dispositions
have  been  got  rid  of  and  right  dispositions  acquired  ?


So  I  understand,  sirs,  that  you  Niga^thas  have  no
knowledge  whether  or  no  you  existed  before  this ;  have
no  kno^edge  whether  or  no,  in  previous  existences,
you  were  guilty  of  misdeeds,  either  generally  or
specifically  ;  have  no  knowledge  how  much  Ill  within
you  is  already  outworn  or  how  much  remains  to
become  outworn  before  all  Ill  will  have  worn  out;  and
have  no  knowledge  that,  here  and  now,  wrong  disposi¬
tions  have  been  got  rid  of  and  right  dispositions
acquired.  This  being  so,  hwere  not  proper  for
explain  that,  whatsoever  feelings  the
individual  experiences  ...  will  wear  cut  and  pass.
Only  if  you  Niganthas  had,  as  you  have  not,  definite
knowledge  on  these  several  points,  would  it  be  proper
for  you  to  offer  the  explanation  you  do  offer.

[216]  it  is  just  as  if  a  man  were  pierced  by  an  arrow
thickly  smeared  with  poison,  and  his  friends  and  kins¬
folk  were  to  get  a  surgeon  skilled  in  arrow* wounds
who  should  cut  with  a  knife  the  external  wound,  next
pr^e  for  the  barb,  then  extract  the  barb,  and  finally
dress  the  external  wound  with  medicated  embers,—
causing  the  patient  at  each  stage  feeling  of  acute  pain
and  anguish;  but  later  on,  when  the  wound  has
healed  and  closed  up,  the  patient  recovers  and  is  quite
well  and  comfortable,  able  to  look  after  himself  and  go
where  he  will,  and  fully  alive  to  the  foregoing  stages  of
his  cure  [217]  and  recovery,

It  would  be  just  the  same,  Niganthas,  with  you  U
you  actually  knew  that  you  existed  before  this  and
were  not  non-existent ;  If  you  actually  knew  that,  in
previous  existences,  you  were  guilty  of  misdeeds,


M.  ».  3I&


JAIN  FATUITIES.


125


either  generally  or  specifically ;  if  you  actually  knew
how  much  Ill  is  already  outworn  and  how  much
remains  to  become  outworn  before  all  HI  will  have
worn  out  and  pass  away ;  If  you  actually  knew  that,
here  and  now»  wrong  dispositions  have  been  got  rid
of  and  right  dispositions  acquired then  indeed ’t were
proper  for  Ntgap^has  to  explain  that,  whatsoever
feelings  the  individual  experiences  .  ,  .  will  wear  out
and  pass.  But  as  you  have  not  that  knowledge,  'twere
not  proper  to  offer  the  explanation  you  do  offer,

Hereupon  those  Niganthas  told  me  that  [218]
N&taputta  the  Nigantha  was  all-knowing  and  all-seeing,
with  nothing  beyond  his  ken  and  vision,  and  that  he
affirmed  of  himself  that,  whether  walking  or  standing,
sleeping  or  awake,  he  was  always,  without  a  break,  at
his  spiritual  best.  These,  they  added,  were  his  words :
— You  have  done  misdee<is,  Niganthas,  in  past
existences ;  wear  it  out  by  severe  austerities ;  every
present  restraint  on  bodv,  speech  and  mind  will  undo  the
evil-doings  of  the  past  5  lienee,  by  expiation  and  purge  of
past  mis&eds  and  by  not  doing  fresh  misdeeds,  nothing
accrues  for  the  future ;  as  nodiing  accrues  for  the  future,
misdeeds  die  away ;  as  misde^s  die  away.  Ill  dies
away ;  as  Ill  dies  away,  feelings  die  away,  and  as
painful  feelings  die  away,  all  III  will  wear  out  and
pass  away.  This  doctrine,  they  added,  commends
Itself  to  us  and  has  our  approval,  and  we  rejoice  in  it.

Said  I  to  those  Niganthas  1 — Here  are  five  qualities
each  of  which  has  here  and  now  an  alternative  out¬
come, — namely  faith,  inclination,  authority,  appreciation
and  intellectual  enthusiasm.  Herein,  what  faith
have  Nigan^as  hitherto  shown  towards  their  teacher  ?
■^at  inclinatioD  towards  him?  What  authority  do
they  recognize  in  him  ?  What  is  their  appreciation  ?  Or
what  int^ectual  enthusiasm  have  they  ?

Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Niganthas;  I  got
nothing  from  them  in  the  way  of  an  effectual  answer.

Addressing  myself  again  to  those  Nigan^bas,  !
asked  them  whether,  when  they  were  violent  in  their
efforts  and  strivings,  they  concomitantly  experienced


126


Cl.  DE  VADAH  A-8  UTTA.


K-  i:.  319.


attendant  feelings  of  violent  pain  and  anguish,  and
whether,  when  they  ceased  from  violence  of  effort,  they
found  their  violent  pain  and  anguish  ceased  too.

Yes that  was  what  they  found  in  both  cases.

[219]  It  comes  to  this  then  that  the  one  goes  with
the  other ; — with  violence  of  effort  you  suffer  pain  and
anguish,  whereas  without  that  violence  you  do  not.
Now,  on  this  showing  it  would  be  quite  wrong  for  you
Nigan^has  to  explain  that,  whatsoever  feelings  the
individual  experiences  .  .  .  will  wear  out  and  pass
away.  And  the  same  would  equally  hold  good  if  the
violent  pain  and  anguish  still  went  on,  whether  you  were
then  violent,  or  had  ceased  to  be  violent,  in  your  efforts
and  5triving;s.  But  as  your  attendant  pains  start  with,
and  cease  with,  your  violent  efforts  and  strivings,  you
are  yourselves  the  authors  of  your  own  violent  pain
and  anguish,  and  it  is  through  ignorance,  lack  of
knowledge  and  delusion  that  [220]  you  torture  your*
selves  into  the  mistaken  belief  that,  whatsoever  fedings
the  individual  .  .  .  will  wear  out  and  pass  away.

Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  NIganthas ;  1  got
nothing  from  them  in  the  way  of  an  effectual  answer.

Addressing  myself  once  ^ain  to  chose  Nigaptbas,
I  asked  them  whether  it  was  feasible  for  effort  and
striving  to  postpone  to  a  future  state  the  fruits  of
action  which  ripen  here  and  now?

No,  they  answered.

Or  vice  versi?

No.

Or  to  turn  pleasant  fruits  of  action  into  unpleasant?
No.

Or  vice  versA  ?

No.

Or  to  change  ripe  fruits  of  action  into  unripe  ?

No.

Or  vice  versi  ?

No.

[221]  Or  to  make  big  fruits  of  action  into  small  ?

No.

Or  vice  vers4  ?


M.  ii.  222.


JAIN  FATUITIES.


127


No.

Or  to  cancel  them  ?

No.

Or  CO  fabricate  them  ?

No.

By  combining  your  negative  answers,  it  comes  co
this  then,  that  the  Nigaij^has’  [222]  efforts  and  strivings
are  fruitless.

Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Nigan^has,  ten  of  whose
operative  utterances,  maj'or  and  minor,  are  to  be  con¬
demned  I—

(i)  If  it  is  because  of  their  former  deeds  that
creatures  experience  pleasure  and  pain,  clearly  the
Nigao^has  have  a  guilty  past,  since  they  now  suffer
pain  and  anguish.

(ii)  If  it  is  because  of  a  creator  that  creatures  ex¬
perience  pleasure  and  pain,  cleariy  the  Nigarj^ha^  had
a  bad  creator,  since  they  now  suffer  pain  and  anguish.

(iif)  If  it  1$  because  of  companionship  that  creatures
experience  pleasure  and  pain,  clearly  the  Nigan^has
keep  bad  company,  since  they  now  suffer  pain  and
anguish.

(iv)  If  it  is  because  of  the  particular  environment
they  arft  born  into  that  creatures  experience  pleasure
and  pain,  clearly  the  Niga^fhas  have  found  a  bad
environment,  since  they  now  suffer  pain  and  anguish.

(v)  If  it  is  because  of  their  efforts  and  strivings  here
and  now  that  creatures  experience  pleasure  ana  pain,
clearly  the  Niganthas’  efforts  are  bad,  since  they  now
suffer  pain  and  anguish,

(vi)  If  it  is  because  of  their  former  deeds  that
creatures  experience  pleasure  and  pain,  the  Nigan^has
are  blameworthy,  and  they  are  ^$0  blameworthy  if
former  deeds  are  not  the  cause.

(vii)  If  it  is  because  of  a  creator  that  creatures
experience  pleasure  and  pain,  the  Nigaothas  are
blameworthy,  and  they  are  also  blameworthy  if  a
creator  is  not  the  cause.

(viii)  !f  it  is  because  of  companionshio  tlut  creatures
experience  pleasure  and  pain,  the  Nigauthas  are


128


Cl.  devaoaha-sutta.


M.  ru  123


blameworthy,  and  they  are  also  blameworthy  if  the
company  they  keep  is  not  the  cause.

(ix)  If  it  is  because  of  their  birth’s  environment  that
creatures  experience  pleasure  and  pain,  the  Niga^thas
are  blameworthy,  and  they  are  dso  blameworthy  if
environment  is  not  the  cause.

(x)  If  it  is  because  of  their  efforts  and  strivings  that
creatures  experience  pleasure  and  pain,  the  Nlgao^has
are  blameworthy,  [228]  and  they  are  also  blameworthy
if  efforts  and  strivings  are  not  the  cause.

Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Nigapthas,  ten  of  whose
operative  utterances,  major  and  minor,  invite  censure.
Thus  fruitless  are  their  efforts  and  strivings.

Now,  Almsmen,  how  do  efforts  and  strivings  prove
fruitful  Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  does  not
defile  with  111  his  undefiled  self,  nor  fritter  away  the
bliss  which  the  Doctrine  gives,  but  keeps  it  undefiled.
He  comes  to  know  how,  by  wrestling  with  one  con¬
stituent  of  Ill’s  sources,  he  can  induce  passionlessness,
and  how  he  can  induce  it,  as  r^ards  another  con¬
stituent,  by  fostering  indifference  of  mind ;  and  he
proceeds  to  induce  passionlessness  by  the  pertinent
method  accordingly  and  thus  Ill  becomes  outworri  and

passes  away.  ^  .  i

It  is  just  like  a  man  who,  being  violently  m  love
with  a  woman,  sees  her  standir^  about  and  chatting
and  laughing  and  talking  with  another  man.  Would
the  sight  p^n  him  and  m^ce  him  miserable  ?

Yes,  sir :  because  be  is  so  violently  in  love  with
her  that  he  [224]  would  be  very  much  pained  at  the

sighu  .  t  •

Suppose  now  this  man  were  to  reflect  that,  bein^
violently  in  love  with  the  woman,  he  bad  been  .much
distressed  by  seeing  her  with  another  man,  and  that
consequently  he  would  do  well  to  rid  himself  of  his
love  for  her.  Suppose  he  does  so  and  later  on  sees  her
latching  and  talking  with  another,  Would  the  sight
stiU  pain  him  and  make  him  miserable?

No,  sir}  because  he  has  lost  ail  his  old  passion
for  her  and  therefore  does  not  mind.


M.  il  a«5.


JAIN  PATUrriES.


129


It  is  just  the  same  with  the  Almsman  who  does  not
defile  with  III  .  .  .  [225]  III  becomes  outworn  and
passes  away. — And  this  is  how  efforts  and  strivings
prove  fruitful.

Again,  the  Almsman  refiects  that,  if  he  leads  a  care*
less  p‘e^ant  life,  wrong  dispositions  wax  apace  within
him  while  right  dispositions  wane ;  and  concludes  to
wrestle  with  his  Ill,  with  the  result  that  wrong  disposi¬
tions  now  wane  while  right  dispositions  wax  apace.
Henceforth  he  wrestles  no  more, — because  his  wrest*
ling  has  been  crowned  with  entire  success.

It  is  like  a  fletcher  who  heats  a  shaft  amain  with
two  brands  till  he  has  got  it  straight  and  serviceable,
but  stops  doing  so  when  his  purpose  is  served,  simply
because  it  is  served.  Just  in  the  same  way  the  Almsman
who  wrestles  down  the  111  which  besets  him,  wrestles  no
more,*  when,  and  because,  his  wrestling  has  been  [225]
crowned  with  entire  success. — This  too  is  how  efforts
and  striving  prove  fruitful.

Again,  Almsmen,  into  this  world  there  comes  a
Truth-finder,  Arab  at  all-enlightened,  walking  by  know¬
ledge  .  .  .  (sic.  as  m  Suiia  No.  27,  down  to)  ..  .  he
has  purged  his  heart  of  all  doubt.

When  he  has  put  from  him  these  five  Hindrances
and  has  understood  how  the  heart’s  shortcomings
weaken  it,  then,  divested  of  pleasures  of  the  senses
and  divested  of  wrong  dispositions,  he  develops  and
dwells  In  the  First  Ecstasy  with  all  its  aest  anj  satis-
fecdon, — a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness,  not  divorced
from  observation  and  reflection. — This  too  is  how
efforts  and  strivings  prove  fruitful

And  in  succession  he  develops  and  dwells  b  the
Second,  Third  and  Fourth  Ecstasies, -^each  of  which
,also  proves  how  efforts  and  strivbgs  prove  fruitful.

With  heart  thus  stedfast  -  .  .  (stc.  as  in  Suita
No.  4,  down  to)  .  divers  existences  in  the  past  in
all  cbeir  detaib  and  features. — This  coo  is  how  efforts
and  strivings  prove  fruitful.

That  same  stedfast  heart  he  now  applies  .  .  .  (eU.
as  in  Sutta  No.  4.  down  id)  ..  .  appeared  after  death


Cl.  CEVAOAHA.-SUTTA.


*30


M.  tu  227.


in  states  of  bliss  in  heaven.— This  too  is  how  efforts
and  strivings  prove  fruitful.

[227]  That  same  stedfast  heart  he  next  applies  to
the  knowledge  of  the  extinction  of  Cankers.  He  com¬
prehends  aright  111,  the  origin  of  Ill,  the  cessation  of
1)1  and  the  path  that  leads  to  the  cessation  of  llh  He
comprehends  aright  what  the  Cankers  are,  their  ongm,
their  cessation  and  the  path  that  leads  to  their  cess^
tion.  When  he  knows  and  sees  this,  his  heart  is
released  from  the  Canker  of  lusts,  from  the  Canker
of  continuing  existence  and  from  the  Canker  of  ignor¬
ance  ;  and  to  him  thus  Delivered  comes  the  know¬
ledge  of  his  Deliverance  in  the  conviction :  Rebirth  is
now  no  more ;  I  have  lived  the  behest  life  ;  and  now
(or  me  there  is  no  more  of  what  1  have  been. — This,
this,  is  how  efforts  and  strivi^s  prove  fruitful.

Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Truth-finder,  ten  of  whose
intrinsic  attributes  are  to  be  extolled

(i)  If  it  is  because  of  their  former  deeds  that
creatures  experience  pleasure  and  pain,  clearly  the
truth-finder  has  a  blameless  past,  since  his  present
feelings  are  pleasant  and  freed  from  all  Cankers.

(ii>  If  it  is  because  of  a  creator  that  creatures  ex¬
perience  pleasure  and  pain,  clearly  the  Truth-finder
had  a  good  creator,  since  his  present  feelings  are
pleasant  and  freed  from  all  Cankers.

(ui)  If  it  is  because  of  companionship  that  creatures
experience  pleasure  and  pain,  clearly  the  Truth-finder
keeps  good  company,  since  his  present  feelings  ace
pleasant  and  freed  from  all  Cankers.

(iv)  If  it  is  because  of  the  particular  environment
they  ,  have  been  born  into  that  creatures  experience
pleasure  and  pain,  clearly  the  Truth- finder  found
a  good  environment, 'since  his  present  feelings  are
pleasant  and  freed  from  all  Cankers.

(y)  If.it  is  because  of  efforts  and  .strivings  here  and
npw  tbac  cre&tures  experience  pleasure  and  pain,  clearly
the  Truth-finder’s  efforts  and  strivings  have  been  good,
since  his  present  feelings  are  pleasant  and  freed  from
all  Cankers.  *


M.  fi.  226.


JAIN  FATUITIES.


ijr


(vi)  If  it  is  because  of  their  former  deeds  that
creatures  experience  pleasure  and  pain,  praise  is  the
due  of  the  Truth-finder ;  as  praise  is  iso  hfs  due
if  former  deeds  are  not  the  cause.

(vil)  If  it  is  because  of  a  creator  that  creatures  ex>
perience  pleasure  and  pain,  praise  is  the  due  of  the
Trucb'finder ;  as  praise  is  also  his  due  If  a  creator  is
not  the  cause.

(viii)  If  It  is  because  of  companionship  that  creatures
experience  pleasure  and  pain,  praise  is  the  due  of  the
Truth-finder ;  as  praise  is  also  his  due  if  the  company
he  keeps  is  not  the  cause.

(ix)  If  it  is  because  of  their  birth's  environment  that
creatures  experience  pleasure  and  pain,  praise  is  the
due  of  the  Truth-finder ;  as  praise  Is  also  his  due
if  environment  is  not  the  cause.

{x)  If  it  is  because  of  their  efforts  and  strivings
chat  creatures  experience  pleasure  and  pain,  praise  is
the  due  of  the  Truth-finder ;  as  praise  is  also  bis  due
[228]  if  efforts  and  strivings  are  not  the  cause.

Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Truth-finder,  ten  of
whose  intrinsic  attributes  are  to  be  extolled.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  s^d.


CII-  PAfJCA-TTAYA-SUTTA.

WARRING  SCHOOLS.

Thus  have  I  heard,  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SSvatthi  in  J  eta’s  grove  in  AnSthapin^ika’s

fleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen  as  follows : —
ome  recluses  and  brahmins  there  are  who,  busying
themselves  about  ages  to  come  and  theorizing  about
the  future,  have  advanced  a  variety  of  assertions  about
futurity,  (i)  Some  assert  that  the  Self  is  conscious
and  hie  after  death,  fii)  Some  assert  that  It,  though
hale,  is  unconscious  alter  death,  (iii)  Some  assert
^at,  though  hale,  it  is  neither  conscious  nor  uncon-


Cn.  PAfSCA-TTAYA-SOTTA.


M.  iu


132


sclous  after  death,  (iv)  Or  they  affirm  the  break-up,
destruction  and  annihilation  of  the  existent  creature,
(v)  Some  again  assert  Nirvana  here  and  now.  inus
either  (a)  they  affirm  a  Self  after  death  ;  or  (d)  they
affirm  the  break-up,  destruction  and  annihilation  ol  the
existent  creature  j  or  {c)  they  affirm  Nirvana  here  and
now.  So  what  were  five  theories  become  three,  and
what  were  three  become  five.  This  is  the  ‘  Five  and

Three' proposition.  . ,  ,  .  u

Herein,  Almsmen,  those  recluses  and  brahmins  who
assert  that  the  Self  is  conscious  [229]  and  hale  after
death,  affirm  either  that  this  conscious  self  has  visible
shape,  or  that  it  has  no  visible  shape,  or  that  it  has
both,  or  that  it  has  neither;  they  affirm  f
consdousness  Is  either  unimodal  or  multimodal,  either
limited  or  boundless.  Or  else  they  a^ert  an  mtel-
j^ction _ boundless  and  permanent— which  goes  far

beyond  all  this.  ^  -

With  each  and  every  one  of  these  various  theories
about  consciousness  after  death  the  Truth-finder  is
familiar,  as  he  is  familiar  too  with  what  some  assert  to
stand  out  as  the  pure  and  paramount,  chief  and  utter,
form  of  consciousness— [230]  whether  with  or  without
form  whether  unimodal  or  multimodal—,  namely,  the
Realm  of  Naught,  boundless  and  permanent.  Realizing
that  all  this  is  composite  and  material,  and  that  com¬
ponents  can  in  very  truth  be  laid  to  rest,  the  Truth-
finder  discerns  an  escape  from  the  composite  and  leaves

it  all  behind.  ,  .  u  •  u

When  we  come  to  those  recluses  and  brahmins  wno

affirm  an  unconscious  but  hale  Self  after  death— with
or  without  form,  or  with  both  or  with  neither—,  here
some  exponents  of  the  conscious  Self  after  death  are
shocked  to  hear  that  consciousness  is  a  disease,  a
pustulence,  a  pang  and  that  unconsciousness  alone  is
^d  and  excellent.  The  Truth-finder  knows  that
these  severd  assertions  of  a  hale  but  unconscious  Self
^ter  death  are  impossible  in  themsdves;  no  recluse  or
brahmin  can  possibly  pretend  to  explain  either  a  return
hither  ora  going  hence,  departure  from  one  existence


WARRING  SCBOOLS.


*33


and  reappearance  in  another,  or  growth  increase  and
development, — apart  from  all  form,  feeling,  perception,
the  plastic  forces,  and  consciousness.  Seeing  that  all
this  is  composite  .  .  .  leaves  it  all  behind

When  we  come  to  those  recluses  and  brahmins  who
affirm  a  hale  Self  with  neiiher-consciousness-nor-
unconsciousness  after  death — with  or  without  form,  or
with  both  or  with  neither—,  here  some  exponents  of
.  the  unconscious  Self  after  death  are  shocked  to  hear
.  not  only  that  consciousness  is  a  disease,  a  pustulcnce,
a  pang,  but  also  that  unconsciousness  is  a  delusion  and
a  snare,  and  that  only  Neither-consciousness-nor-un-
consciousness  is  good  and  excellent.  With  each  and
every  one  of  these  various  theories  of  the  hale  Self
that  is  neiiher-conscious-nor-unconscious  after  death,
the  Truth- finder  is  familiar.  If  recluses  and  brahmins
affirm  that  this  stage  can  be  attained  by  mere  com¬
ponents  of  sight  hearing  and  thought,  it  is  recognized
as  fatal  to  its  attainment  j  [2S2]  for  this  is  a  stage
which  is  recognized  as  attainable  not  by  stages  of  rapt
meditation  in  which  such  components  are  present  but
by  stages  where  they  are  absent  and  gone.  Seeing
tliat  all  this  is  composite  .  .  .  leaves  it  all  behind.

When  we  come  to  those  recluses  and  brahmins  who
affirm  the  break-up  and  destruction  and  annihilation  of
the  existent  creature,  apostles  alike  of  consciousness,
of  unconsciousness  and  of  neither-consciousness-nor-
V  unconsciousness  after  death  are  all  shocked  together,
,  —because  the  other  good  ^ople  loudly  assert  their
i  ^  .  craving  for  existence  by  insbtiog  again  and  again  on
\  the  hereafter  in  score  for  them.  Just  as  a  huckster  in
the  course  of  trade  reckons  that  he  will  make  so  much
out  of  this  and  get  so  much  by  that, — just  in  the  same
'  ^  way  these  recluses  and  brahmins,  methinks,  show  up

like  hucksters,  with  their  reiterated  insistence  on  the
hereafter  in  store  for  them.  The  Truth-finder  knows
•  '  that,  for  all  their  dread  and  loathing  of  personality,  these
'  belie  vers  in  an  nih  ilation  still  keep  circl  ing  and  revol  vin  g
'  round  this  selfsame  personality — just  as  a  dc^.  tied  by  a
strap  to  a  stout  pillar  or  post,  [288]  runs  in  circles  round


J34


CTI.  paJJca-ttaya-sutta.


M.  a.  t3A-


and  round  that  selfsame  pillar  or  post.  Seeing  that  all
this  is  composite  .  .  .  leaves  it  all  behind.

As  regards  all  recluses  or  brahmins  who>  busying
themselves  with  the  ages  to  come  and  theorizing  about
the  future,  advance  a  variety  of  assertions  about  futurity,
all  of  them  without  exception  posit  these  five  stages  or
one  of  them.

Other  recluses  and  brahmins  there  are  who,  busy¬
ing  themselves  with  past  ages  and  theorizing  about
the  past,  advance  a  variety  of  assertions  about  the
past,— each  maintaining  that  naught  but  his  assertion
IS  true,  all  else  being  empty  and  vain.  They  severally
assert  that  (i)  Self  and  the  world  are  eternal,  (ii)  ye
not  eternal,  (iii)  are  both  eternal  and  not  eternal,  (iv)
are  neither  eternal  nor  not -eternal,  (v)  have  an
appointed  end,  (vi)  are  endless,  (vii)  have  an  end  and
are  endless,  (viii)  neither  end  nor  are  endless,  {«)
have  uni  modal  consciousness,  (x)  have  multimodal
consciousness,  (xi)  have  restricted  consciousness,  (xii)
have  boundless  consciousness,  (xiii)  are  very  pleasant,
(xiv)  are  very  unpleasant,  [284]  (xv)  are  both  pleasant
and  unpleasant,  or  (xvi)  are  neither  pleasant  nor
unpleasant.  Each  maintains  his  own  assertions  as  the
sole  truth,  all  else  being  scouted  as  empty  and  vain.

Now,  to  begin  with  those  who  assert  that  Self  and
the  world  are  eternal,  it  is  impossible  that,  without  faith,
inclination,  authority,  appreciation  and  intellectual  en¬
thusiasm,  clean  and  pure  and  true  vision  should  in¬
dividually  emerge  purified  and  cleansed ;  and  if  there  be
no  purified  arid  cleansed  tdsion  for  an  individual,  then
it  is  only  a  fraction  of  true  vision  which  these  recluses
and  brahmins  do  purify,  and  that  is  pronounced  (not
true  vision  but)  a  mere  aspiration.  Seeing  that  all
this  is  composite  .  ,  .  leaves  it  all  behind.

And  the  same  holds  good  of  the  other  views, —
that  Seif  and  the  world  are  not  eternal  and  so  forth.

[285]  Now  we  will  take  a  recluse  or  a  brahmin
who— quit  of  all  views  about  past  and  future,  and
unbiassed  by  the  bondage  of  pleasures  of  sense—
develops  and.  enters  on  the  joy  of  solitude,  feeling  it


M.  lu  336.


WARFIKG  SCHOOLS.


J35


to  be  excellent  and  good.  When  this  joy  of  solitude
dies  away,  distress  arises  ;  when  distress  dies  away,
there  arises  the  joy  of  solitude  once  again.  Just  as
shade  passes  off  and  leaves  the  place  to  the  blazing  heat,
or  as  tne  blazing  heat  passes  off  and  leaves  it  in  the
shade,  so  when  the  joy  of  solitude  dies  away,  distress
arises,  and  when  distress  dies  away  the  joy  of  solitude
arises  once  ^ain ;  and  the  Truth-finder  knows  well
the  ebb  and  flow.  Seeing  that  all  this  is  composite  .  .  •
leaves  it  all  behind.

Next  we  take  another  recluse  or  brahmin  who — quit
of  all  views  about  past  and  future,  unbiassed  by  the
bondage  of  pleasures  of  sense,  and  passing  beyond
solltu&’s  joys  —  develops  and  dwells  in  bliss
immaterial,  feeling  this  to  be  excellent  and  good.
When  this  immaterial  bliss  dies  away,  solitude's  joys
arise ;  when  they  die  away,  [236]  there  arises  the
immaterial  bliss  once  more, — again  like  the  alternation
of  shade  and  blazing  heat ;  and  the  Truth-finder
knows  well  the  ebb  and  flow.  Seeing  that  all  this  is
composite  .  .  .  leaves  it  ail  behind.

Next,  take  another  recluse  or  brahmin  who— quit
of  all  views  about  past  and  future,  unbiassed  by  the
bondage  of  pleasures  of  sense,  passing  beyond  solitude’s
joys  and  bliss  immaterial — develops  and  dwells  in  the
poise  which  knows  neither  pleasure  nor  pain,  and  feels
this  to  be  excellent  and  good.  When  this  poise  dies
away,  immaterial  bliss  arises  5  when  this  bliss  dies
away,  poise  arises  once  more, — again  like  the  alterna¬
tion  ol  shade  and  blazing  heat ;  and  the  Truth-finder
knows  well  [237]  the  ebb  and  flow.  Seeing  that  all
this  is  composite  .  .  .  leaves  it  all  behind.

Next,  we  come  to  another  recluse  or  brahmin  who—
quit  of  all  views  about  past  or  future,  unbiased  by  the
bondage  of  pleasures  of  sense,  passing  alike  beyond
solitude’s  joys,  immaterial  bliss  and  the  poise  that
knows  neither  pleasure  nor  pain— comes  to  the  vision
that  he  has  found  Peace,  is  dead  to  the  world  and

Sasps  at  nothing-  Knowing  w.ell,  what  his  vision  is,
e  Truth -finder  observes  that  this  reverend  Almsmao


CII.  PAffCA-TTiYA-  SUTTA


M.  it  238.


conceives  that  Nirvana  is  only  a  salutary  path  to  tread ;
he  grasps  either  at  views  about  the  past  or  the  future,
or  at  bondage  to  pleasures  of  sense,  or  at  the  joys  of
solitude,  or  at  immaterial  bliss,  or  at  the  poise  chat
knows  neither  pleasure  nor  pain  ;  and  that,  though  he
thinks  be  has  found  Peace,  and  is  dead  to  the  world,  and
grasps  at  nothing,  yet  grasping  is  alive  within  him.
Seeing  that  all  this  is  composite . . .  leaves  it  all  behind.

It  IS  into  the  perfect  way  of  utter  Peace  that  the
Truth-finder  has  won  full  Enlightenment,  to  wit  into
the  Deliverance  that  knows  no  grasping  and  has
thought  out  the  true  nature  of  the  rise,  the  fall,  the
satisfactions,  the  perils  and  the  outcome  of  the  six
oigans  of  sense  ;  this  is  the  Truth-finder’s  perfect  way
of  utter  Peace  [288]  and  his  Deliverance.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  ac  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said-


CIII.  KINTl-SUTTA.

*  ODIUM  THEOLOGICUM.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  KusinarS  in  the  Sacrificial  Wood,  he  ad¬
dressed  the  listening  Almsmen  as  follows : — Whac
.think  ye  of  me,  Brethren  ?  Is  it  to  gee  robes  or
alms,  is  it  to  get  lodging  or  to  secure  some  future
or  other  hereafter  that  the  recluse  Gotama  preaches
his  Doctrine?

No,  sir ;  it  is  not  for  such  reasons.

If  you  think  It  is  not  for  that,  what  is  it  you  think
of  me?

What  we  think,  sir,  is  that  the  Lord  is  compassionate
and  merciful  and  that  it  is  out  of  compassion  that  he
preaches  his  Doctrine.

Wtll  then,  Almsmen,  you  must  school  yourselves
m  the  higher  lore  which  1  have  taught  you,  to  wit  the
four  Themes  (sati-pa^ana),  the  four  Bases  of  psychic
power  (iddhi-pada),  the  fivefold  Sphere  of  sense  (in-


M.  iL  239.


ODIUK  THEOLOGICOM,


137


driya),  the  five  Forces  (bala),  the  seven  [2S9j  Factors
of  Enlightenment  (bojjhanga)  and  the  Noble  Eight¬
fold  Path.  In  this  higher  lore  you  must  school  your¬
selves  in  unity  and  harmony  without  strife.

So  schooling  yourselves,  you  may  find  two  Almsmen
maintaining  divergent  views  on  the  Abhldhamma.  In
the  first  case,  if  you  find  the  two  differing  both  as
to  the  meaning  and  as  to  the  letter,  first  send  for  the
Almsman  of  the  one  faction  whom  you  deem  the  more
amenable  and  tell  him  what  is  the  rigluful  view  on  the
points  at  issue,  bidding  him  not  to  stir  up  strife-  Next
send  for  that  Almsman  of  the  opposing  faction  whom
you  deem  the  more  amenable  an<f  tell  him  what  is  the
rightful  view  on  the  points  at  issue,  begging  him  not
to  stir  up  strife.  Thereby  what  is  erroneously  held
is  to  be  rect^nised  as  erroneous;  and  the  Doctrine
and  Rule  are  to  be  duly  set  forth  accordingly.  Pro¬
ceed  likewise  if  the  divergence  is  confined  either  to
the  meaning  or  [240]  to  the  letter,  or  if  there  be
really  no  divergence  at  all  but  real  agreement  be¬
tween  both  sides  on  both  aspects.  Thereby  what  is
erroneously  held  is  to  be  recognized  as  erroneous,
where  it  is  erroneous;  and  what  is  correctly  held  is
to  be  recognized  as  being  correct,  where  it  is  correct;
[241]  and  the  Doctrine  and  Rule  are  to  be  duly  sec
forth,  with  these  recognitions.

Also,  as  thus  you  school  vourselves  in  unity  and
harmony  without  strife,  an  Almsman  may  be  guilty  of
an  offence  or  a  transgression.  In  sucb  case  be  in  no
hurry  to  reprove; — the  individual  must  be  studied.
In  one  case  you  may  conclude  that  it  will  neither^
harass  you  nor  annoy  him, — inasmuch  as  he  is  not  a  mi
of  wrath  and  nasty  temper,  nor  is  he  dense,  but
to  convince;  and  you  see  your  way  to  make
out  of  wrong  things  and  to  establish  him  in
— if  such  be  your  conclusion,  it  is  proper  tj
In  another  case,  if  you  conclude  that
you  but  will  annoy  him; — inasmuch
wrath  and  nasty  temper,  and  is
ponvert ;  but  you  see  your  way  to


cm.  ICrNTI-SUTTA


of  wrong  things  and  to  establish  him  in  the  right,  then
his  annoyance  is  a  small  matter ; — it  is  a  much  greater
matter  to  convert  him  from  wrong  to  right.  If  such
be  your  conclusion,  ic  is  proper  to  soe^  out.  In  a
third  case,  if  you  conclude  that  it  wllf  harass  you  but
not  annoy  him, — inasmuch  as  he  is  not  a  man  of  wrath
and  nasty  temper,  nor  is  he  dense,  but  hard  to  con-
vert ;  yet  you  see  your  way  to  make  him  grow  out
of  wrong  things  and  to  establish  him  in  the  right ;
your  being  harassed  Is  a  small  matter -it  is  a  much

?reater  matter  to  convert  him  from  wrong  to  right,
f  such  be  your  conclusion,  it  is  proj^er  to  speak
out.  In  yet  another  case,  if  you  conclude  that  it
will  both  harass  you  and  annoy  him, ^inasmuch  as
[242]  he  is  a  man  of  wrath  and  bad  temper,  both
dense  and  hard  to  convert;  yet  you  see  your  way  to
make  him  grow  out  of  wrong  things  and  to  establish
him  in  the  right ;  your  being  harassed  and  his  being
annoyed  are  small  matters;— it  is  a  much  greater
matter  to  convert  him  from  wrong  to  right.  If  such  be
your  conclusion,  it  is  proper  to  speak  out.  In  a  final
case,  if  you  conclude  that  it  will  both  harass  you  and
ann  oy  h  im , — in  asm  u  ch  as  h  e  is  a  man  of  wrath  and  nasty
temper,  dense  and  hard  to  convert ;  and  you  cannot
see  your  way  to  convert  him  from  wrong  to  right ; —
with  such  a  man  you  miist  not  be  careless  of  your  own
poise  of  mind.

Herein,  as  you  school  yourselves  In  unity  and
harmony  without  strife,  there  may  arise  among  you
trends  of  converse,  aberrations  of  view,  malevolence,
hearibumings,  and  discontent.  In  such  a  case,  first
Send  for  that  Almsman  from  the  warring  factions
you  deem  the  more  amenable,  and  tell  him  that,
aster  knew  it,  he  would  condemn  all  this  that
in  a  united  Confraternity.  If  he  answered
'^ould  answer  that  the  Master  would  con-
that,  if  it  did  not  come  to  an  end,
Nnot  be  realiaed-  Thereafter  the  Alms-
Meem  most  amenable  in  the  opposite
^  it  put  to  him ;  and,  if  he  answered


M.  ii.  343-


ODIUM  THEOLOGICUM.


T39


aright,  he  too  would  answer  that  the  Master  would
condemn  it  all  and  that,  [248]  if  it  did  not  come  to  an
end,  Nirvana  could  not  be  realized.

(f  now  the  responsible  Almsman  were  asked  by  his
fellows  whether  in  his  hands  those  Almsmen  had

Sown  out  of  wrong  things  and  been  established  in
e  right,  his  best  answer  would  be  that  from  the
Lord  he  had  learned  the  Doctrine  and  taught  it  to
those  Almsmen,— who  had  subsequently  grown  out
of  wrong  and  had  stablished  themselves  aright,  By
such  an  answer,  he  would  neither  vaunt  himself  nor
disparage  others  ;  he  sets  forth  the  full  Doctrine ;  nor
is  there  any  operative  utterance,  major  or  minor,  which
excites  condemnation.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CIV.  SAMAGAMA-SUTTA.

UNITY  AND  CONCORU-

Thos  have  1  heard.  Once  while  the  Lord  was
^ylng  among  the  Sakyans  at  SSma^ma,  Nataputta
the  Nigaptha  had  died  recently  at  Pav5-  At  his  death
Uie  Nlganthas  were  broken  up;  they  split  into  two,
and  led  lives  of  quarrels,  strife  and  contentions,  assail¬
ing  one  another  with  shafts  of  wounding  speech,  such
as— You  know  nothing  of  this  Doctrine  and  Rule;
]  do,  ihou^  you  never  wilL  You  walk  in  error,  but
I  aright.  There  is  sense  in  what  (  say ;  none  in  what
you  say.  You  end  just  where  you  should  begin  [244]
and  begin  where  you  should  end.  Your  elaborate
‘  thesis  is  knocked  endwise  ;  your  argument  is  floored;
and  you  are  beaten.  Go  and  learn  better,  or  else  at
once  get  out  of  your  tangle  — if  you  can.  Wholesale
slaughter,  methinks,  was  afoot  among  NStaputia’s
Nigaij^has !  Even  the  white-clad  laity  who  followed
NStaputt?  evinced  the  disgust  and  displeasure  and


140


CIV.  SAMAGiMA-SUTTA.


M-  u.


repugnance,  that  must  result  from  a  Doctrine  and
Rule  so  inadequately  set  forth  and  expounded,  so
lacking  in  efficacy  and  prospect  of  peace  for  the
heart,  a  Doctrine  and  Rule  without  an  All-enlightened
founder,  and  now  reft  of  foundations  and  void  of
consolation.

Now  Cunda,  the  novice,  who  had  spent  the  rainy
months  at  PavS,  came  to  iher-teverend  Ananda
at  SSmagSma  and  reported  the  foregoing  to  him.
Ananda  said  the  story  was  one'  to  bring  oeforc  the
LqixJ,.— to  whom,  in  company^ with  Cunda,  he  pro¬
ceeded  and  to  whom,  after  salutations,  [245]  he  related
what  he  had  heard  from  Ct/nda, — adding  his  hope
that,  when  the  Lord  diedT^  quarrels  would  arise  in
the  Confraternity,  to  thygeneraf  grief  and  sorrow  and
hurt  of  many  folk  and  /o  the  grief  and  pain  alike  of
gods  and  men.  /

What  think  you,  Aianda  ?  Do  you  observe  even  a
couple  of  Almsmen  variance  about  the  higher  lore
i  have  taught  you,  to  ,wit  the  four  Themes,  the  four
Bases  of  psychic  pow^,  lui.  fivefold  Sphere  of  sense,
the  five  Forces,  the  seven  Fac'^rs  of  Enlightenment,
and  the  Noble  E^h^old  Path  Y  A

No.  But  chose  who  are  about  tM  Lord  might,  at
his  death,  stir  up  quhrrels  in  the  Coff.ratemitjr  respect¬
ing  rigours  of  the  regimen  or  of  the  Code  (pfttimokkha).

'  Such  quarrels  would  make  for  tha  general  grief  and
sorrow  and  hurt  of  many  folk,  and. the  grief  and  pain
dike  of  gods  and  men^  ;

Of  little  concern,  Ananda,  arty  quarrels  respecting
rigours  of  regimen  or  of  the  ^ode ;  it  is  possible
quarrels  in  the  Confraternity  attout  die  Path  or  the
course  of  training  which  really  matter.

There  are  six  roots  from  which  disputes  grow,
Ananda. — Take,  first,  a  maq^  of  wrath  and  nasty
temper,  who  shows  no  respech^r  obedience  to  the
Master  or  the  Doctrine  or  the  Confraternity,  and  does
not  carry  out  his  course  of  training  to  the  full.  This
is  the  kind  of  man  who  [246]  breeds  disputes,  to  the
general  grief  .  .  .  gods  and  men ;  and  if  you  detect —


M.  ii.447-  UNITY  AND  CONCORD,  I4I

within  yourself  or  without — such  a  root  of  quarrels,
then  strive  to  extirpate  the  evil  thing ;  for,  if  you
succeed  in  detecting  it,  that  particular  root  of  disputes
will  not  sprout  into  anything  to  trouble  your  lives
thereafter,  And  the  same  applies  to  the  five  other
roots  of  disputes,  in  men  that  are  hypocritical  and
fraudulent;  envious  and  jealous;  guileful  and  deceitful;
full  of  evil  desires  and  wrong  views ;  or  absorbed  in
temporal  ideas  which  they  hug  tightly  and  will  not
loose  their  hold. — [247]  These  are  the  six  roots  from
which  disputes  grow.

There  are  four  Adjudications  (adhikaratia),  relating
severally  to  disputes,  censure,  transgressions  and  obli'
gations ;  and  there  are  seven  settlements  of  Adjudica*
tions,  for  settling  and  deciding  Adjudications,  as  they
arise  from  time  to  time.  A  summary  verdict  with
parties  present  may  be  given;  or  an  innocence  verdict;
or  a  verdict  of  past  insanity ;  confession  may  be
admitted ;  a  Chapter's  decision  may  be  taken ;  also
there  is  specific  wickedness ;  and  there  is  cover-
•  ing  up.

now  does  a  summary  hearing  come  into  play  ? —
Suppose  there  is  a  dispute  between  Almsmen  as  to
what  is  and  what  is  not  the  Doctrine  or  Rule  The
whole  body  of  Almsmen  Is  to  meet  and  thresh  the
matter  out  In  the  light  of  the  Doctrine,  till  there  is
,  ^reement,  and  then  to  settle  it  conformably  with  such
agreement-  This  is  how  a  summary  hearing  comes
about  and  this  is  how  some  Adjudications  are  settled,
namely  by  summary  hearing.

How  does  a  Chapter's  decision  come  into  play  ?
—If  the  local  Almsmen  cannot  settle  the  matter
locally,  they  are  to  go  where  there  are  a  larger
Qumt^r  of  Almsmen  in  residence ;  and  there  the
whole  conjoint  body  is  to  assemble  and  thresh  the
matcer  out  in  the  light  of  the  Doctrine,  till  there  is
agreement  and  then  to  settle  it  conformably  with  such
agreement,  This  is  how  a  majority  agreement  comes
about  and  this  is  bow  some  Adjudications  are  settled,
namely  by  a  Chapter’s  decision.


142


dv.  samagAma-sittta.


M.  li.  34&


How  does  innocence  come  into  play  ? — Suppose
Almsmen  chaise  an  Almsman  with  this  or  that  grave
transgression  or  offence  meriting  expulsion  orbordering
on  it.  If  when  they  ask  him  to  remember  whether  he
has  been  guilty  of  this,  he  says  he  has  no  remembrance
of  it,  [S48]  he  may  be  given  a  verdict  of  innocence.
This  is  bow  a  protestation  of  innocence  comes  into
play,  and  this  ia  how  some  Adjudications  are  settled,
namely  by  a  verdict  of  innocence  of  conscience.

How  does  a  verdict  pf  past  insanity,  come  about?—
Suppose  Almsmen  charge  an  Almsman  ...  no  re¬
membrance  of  it ;  and  suppose  chat,  when  he  denies
it,  the  spokesman  presses  him  to  say  whether  he  is
quite  sure  he  has  no  remembrance  of  it,  he  replies
being  distraught,  he  had  perpetrated  much  in  act
and  spee^  which  did  not  beseem  a  recluse,  but  that
he  has  no  remembrance  of  it  and  that  this  particular
thing  was  done  when  he  was  out  of  his  mind.  In
that  event  he  must  be  given  a  verdict  of  past  insanity.
This  is  how  a  verdict  of  past  insanity  comes  about
and  this  is  how  some  Adjudications  are  settled,  namely
by  a  verdict  of  past  insanity.

How  does  confession  come  into  play? — Suppose  an
Almsman,  whether  reproved  or  not,  rememoers  his
offence,  discloses  it  and  lays  it  bare.  He  must  go,
wi^  his  robe  over  one  shoulder  only,  to  a  senior
Almsman,  bow  down  at  his  feet  and  then,  squatting
humbly  down  on  his  heels  and  with  folded  palms  out¬
stretched,  say  that  he  has  been  guilty  of  a  specified
offence  and  chat  he  acknowledges  it.  The  senior  will
then  ask  him  if  he  is  fully  aJive  to  his  guilt;  and.
on  his  replying  that  he  is,  will  ask  whether  he  will
keep  watch  and  ward  over  himself  in  future,  and  shall
receive  an  assurance  that  he  will.  This  is  how  con¬
fession  comes  about,  and  this  is  how  some  Adjudica¬
tions  are  settled,  namely  by  confession.

[249j  How  does  specific  wickedness  come  into
play  >«^gppo8e  Almsmen  charge  an  Almsman  with
this  or  that  grave  transgression  or  office  meriting
expulsion  or  bordering  .on  it,  and  ask  him  to  remember


M«  ii«  250.


UNITY  AND  CONCORD.


U3


whether  he  has  been  ^i!ty  of  this ;  and  suppose  he
says  he  has  no  remembrance  of  it  but,  being  pressed
by  the  spokesman  to  say  whether  he  is  quite  sure  he
has  no  remembrance  of  it,  replies  that,  without  being
asked,  he  will  acknowledge  having  committed  this  or
that  trivial  offence ;  and  therefore  could  not  conc&vably,
when  specifically  asked,  fail  to  acknowledge  so  grave
a  transgression  or  offence,  meriting  e:<pulsion  or  border^
ing  on  It  Suppose  the  spokesman,  taking  note  of  his
acknowledgment  of  the  trivial  offence  and  repudiation
of  the  major  chaige,  still  presses  him  to  remember
whether  he  is  quite  sure  he  has  no  remembrance  of
the  major  charge,  and  now  elicits  the  answer  that  he
does  remember  being  guilty  of  it  and  that  his  former
denials  were  hasty  and  did  not  express  his  meaning.
This  is  how  recalcitrancy  comes  about  and  this  is
how  some  Adjudications  are  settled,  namely  by  ex¬
tracting  admissions  from  the  recalcitrant,

[250]  How  does  covering  up  come  into  play  ?— Sup¬
pose  that  Almsmen  living  in  contentions  and  strife  and
disputes  collectively  perpetrate  much  in  act  and  speech
which  does  not  beseem  recluses.  The  whole  body  is  to
meet  and  a  sage  Almsman  from  among  one  of  the  two
factions  is  to  rise  up,  with  robe  over  one  shoulder  and
with  folded  palms  extended,  and  to  make  known  to  the
Confraternity  as  follows:— I  ask  to  be  heard  by  the
Confraternity.  Living  here  in  contentions  and  strife
and  disputes,  we  have  perpetrated  much  in  act  and
speech  which  does  not  beseem  recluses.  If  the
assembly  deems  it  proper  for  adoption,  1,  by  a  cover¬
ing  up  motion,  will,  in  full  conclave,  set  forth,  both  for
the  others  here  and  for  myself,  their  offences  and
my  own,— CTOss  sins  and  mundane  offences  always
excepted-  Then  a  sage  Almsman  from  the  opposite
faction  is  to  second  the  motion  in  like  terms.
This  is  how  the  motion  for  covering-up  comes  into
play  and  this  is  how  some  Adjudications  are  settled,
namely  by  covering  up  (collective  shortcomings  as
with  heaped  up  bracken).  ,

Six  in  number,  Ananda,  are  the  things,  in  them-


144  crv*  SXMAoXMA-strrTA-  M.  0.251.

selves  conciliatory  friendly  and  respectful,  which  con¬
duce  to  accord,  harmony,  concord  and  unity.  Firstly,
an  Almsman  Is  Instant  in  acts  of  love,  both  overtly
and  in  secret,  to  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life ;  this  is
a  thing,  in  itself  conciliatory  friendly  and  respectful,
which  conduces  to  accord  harmony  concord  and  unity.
Secondly,  an  Almsmen  is  instant  in  words  of  love
.  .  .  and  unity.  Thirdly,  an  Almsman  is  Instant  in
thoughts  of  love  .  .  .  [251]  and  unity,  Fourthly,
whatsoever  an  Almsman  receives  that  [$  lawful  and
lawfully  received,  this,  even  to  the  last  crumb  in  his
bowl,  fit  shar^  equally  and  without  favour  among  all
his  virtuous  fdlows  in  the  higher  life  ;  this  is  another
thing,  in  itself  conciliatory  friendly  and  respectful,
which  conduces  to  accord  harmony  concord  and  unity.
Fifthly,  an  Almsman  lives,  both  overtly  and  in  secret,
in  virtue  among  his  fellows  In  the  exercise  of  those
virtues  In  their  unbroken  entirety  without  flaw  or
blemish,  which  mark  the  freed  man,  which  have  been
lauded  by  the  wise,  which  are  embraced  for  their  own
sake  and  lead  to  rapt  concentration  ; — this  Is  another
thing,  in  itself  .  .  ,  and  unity.  Sixth,  an  Almsman
lives  among  his  fellows,  both  overtly  and  in  secret,  in
the  exercise  of  those  Noble  views  which  make
for  salvation  and  lead  the  man  who  acts  accordingly
unto  the  utter  destruction  of  all  111  This  is  the  sixth
and  last  tbingp  in  itself  .  .  .  and  unity.

If,  Ananda,  you  embrace  and  practise  these  six  con¬
ciliatory  things,  do  you  find  therein  anything  either
small  or  great  with  which  you  would  not  ^ree  ?

No,  sir,

Therefore,  Ananda,  embrace  and  practise  these  six
conciliatory  things ;  and  it  will  be  to  your  lasting  weal
and  welfare.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord-  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M.  il  254.


LEECaCRAFT.


H5


CV.  SUNAKKHATTA-SUTTA.

LEECH  CRAFT.

[252]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  in  VesfiU,  in  the  Hall  of  many  Storeys,
a  host  of  Almsmen  in  the  Lord's  presence  declared
their  progress  in  the  words  : — Rebirth  is  no  more  5
we  have  lived  the  highest  life ;  our  task  is  done  ;  for
us  there  is  now  no  more  of  what  we  have  been.

This  came  to  the  ears  of  Sunakkhatta  the  Licchavi,
who  came  to  the  Lord  and  after  salutations  sat  down
to  one  side,  saying  he  had  heard  of  these  numerous
Almsmen's  declaration  of  progress,  and  asking  the
Lord  whether  they  had  really  v?on  ail  they  prolessed
or  whether  some  of  the  Almsmen  were  extravagant
in  their  professions.  s

Some  of  them  have  really  won  what  they  profess,
whilst  others  are  extrav^ant  in  their  professions.  As
regards  the  latter,  the  Truth- finder  decides  to  instruct
them  in  the  Doctrine  and  deals  with  them  accordingly,
— as,  moreover,  he  does  with  foolish  persons  who  frame
questions  with  which  [258]  they  trouble  him.

Now  is  the  time  for  that,  Lord ;  now  is  the  time
for  that,  Blessed  One  The  lesson  the  Lord  teaches
will  be  listened  to  and  treasured  up  in  the  Almsmen’s
memories.

Then  listen  and  pay  attention,  Sunakkhatta ;  and  1
will  speak.

Yes,  sir,  said  Sunakkhatta  the  Licchavi,  to  whom  the
Lord  thus  began ; — Five  strands  make  up  pleasures
of  sense, — visible  shapes  to  be  discerned  by  the  eye,
sounds  to  be  discerned  by  the  ear,  odours  to  be  discerned
by  the  nostrils,  tastes  to  be  discerned  by  the  tongue,
and  touch  to  be  discerned  by  the  body  at  large,— all  of
them  delightful  pleasant  agreeable  and  attractive,  all  of
them  pleasurable  and  fraught  with  lusts.  It  maybe
that  an  individual’s  heart  is  set  on  material  things.


14^  CV.  SUNAKKH\TTA*SUTTA-  M.  H.  *54.

As  he  is,  so  is  his  conversation ;  to  this  pattern  his
thoughts  and  ideas  conform  ;  he  looks  up  to  a  kindred
soul  and  rejoices  in  him.  When  talk  turns  on  Perma¬
nence,  be  does  not  listen  or  give  ear,  nor  yearn  to
learn  about  it,  nor  does  he  look  up  to  or  rejoice  in  the
man  who  does.  It  Is  just  as  if  a  man  long  absent
from  his  village  or  township  were  to  meet  another  just
come  from  there  and  were  by  enquiry  of  him  to  be
assured  that  the  place  was  going  on  well  with  plenty
of  food  and  little  sickness  about  [254j  What  think
you,  Sunakkhatta?  Would  the  man  listen  and  give
ear  and  yearn  to  learn  ?  Would  he  look  up  to  and
rejoice  in  the  other  ?

Yes,  sir.

Even  so,  an  individual’s  heart  maybe  set  on  worldly
things.  As  he  is,  so  is  his  conversation  ...  or  rejoice
in  the  man  who  does.  He  is  to  be  known  as  a
worldling.

It  may  be  that  an  individual’s  heart  is  sec  on
Permanence.  As  he  is,  so  is  his  conversation ;  to  this
pattern  his  thoughts  and  ideas  conform  ;  he  looks  up
to  a  kindred  soul  and  rejoices  in  him.  When  calk
turns  on  worldly  things,  he  does  not  listen  or  give  ear,
nor  yearn  to  learn  about  them,  nor  does  he  look  up  to
and  rejoice  in  the  man  who  does.  Just  as  a  sere  and
yellow  leaf  loosed  from  its  stalk  can  never  be  green
^ain.  even  so  is  one  whose  heart  is  sec  on  Permanence
and  who  is  loosed  from  the  pursuit  of  worldly  things.
He  is  to  be  known  as  the  man  from  worldly  bond^e
free,  whose  heart  is  set  on  Permanence.

It  may  be  that  an  individual's  heart  is  sec  on  the
Realm  of  Naught.  As  be  is,  so  is  his  conversation ;
to  this  pattern  his  thoughts  and  ideas  conform ;  he
looks  up  to  a  kindred  soul  and  rejoices  [255]  in  him.
When  talk  turns  on  Permanence,  he  does  not  listen
or  give  ear,  nor  does  he  yearn  to  learn  about  it,  nor
does  be  look  up  to  and  rejoice  in  the  man  who  does.
Just  as  a  rock  that  is  broken  In  twain  can  never  be  put
together  again,  even  so  is  it  with  the  man  who  has
broken  Che  bonds  of  Pennanence,  and  cleaves  co  the


M.  K.  256.


LRECHCRAFT,


147


Realm  of  Naught.  He  is  to  be  known  as  the  man
from  Permanence  free,  whose  heart  is  set  on  the
Redm  of  Naught

It  may  be  that  an  individual’s  heart  is  set  on
Neither-pcrception- nor- non -perception.  As  he  is,
80  is  his  conversation;  to  this  pattern  his  thoughts
and  ideas  conform  ;  he  looks  up  to  a  kindred  soul  and
rejoices  in  him.  When  talk  turns  on  the  Realm  of
Naught  he  does  not  listen  or  give  ear,  nor  does  he
yearn  to  learn  about  it,  nor  does  he  look  up  to  and
rejoice  in  the  man  who  does.  It  is  like  a  man  who,
after  a  dainty  meal,  throws  away  the  scraps.  Think
you  he  would  long  to  return  thereto?

No,  sir,  because  it  is  thought  nasty.

Just  in  the  same  way  the  man  whose  heart  is  set
on  Neither-perception-nor- non-perception  has  thrown
away  the  bonds  of  the  Realm  of  Naught  and  is  to  be
known  as  the  man  free  from  the  Realm  of  Naught,
whose  heart  is  set  on  N  either*  percepcion-nor-non-
perception.

It  may  be  that  an  individual’s  heart  U  set  on
supreme  Nirvana.  As  he  is,  so  is  his  conversa¬
tion  ;  to  this  pattern  his  thoughts  and  ideas  con¬
form  ;  he  looks  up  to  a  kindred  soul  and  rejoices  in
him.  When  talk  turns  on  Neither-perception-nor-
non  perception,  [256 j  he  does  not  listen  or  give  ear,
nor  does  he  yearn  to  learn  about  it,  nor  does  he  look  up
to  and  rejoice  in  the  man  who  does.  As  a  palm-tree
with  its  crown  lopped  off  which  can  never  grow  c^ain,
so  is  the  man  whose  heart  is  set  on  supreme  Nirv&na
and  who  has  lopped  off  the  bonds  of  Neithcr-per-
ception-nor-non*percepclon, — a  thing  without  roots,
a  bare  site,  a  dung  that  once  has  been  and  now  can
be  no  more.  He  is  to  be  known  as  the  man  free
from  Neither  -perception- nor- non-  perception,  whose
heart  is  set  on  supreme  Nirvana.

It  may  be  that  an  individual  reflects  that: — The
Recluse  has  said  that  Craving  is  an  arrow,  and  chat  the
virus  of  ignorance  racks  a  man  with  lustful  desires  and
spite,  For  me  Craving^s  arrows  are  no  more ;  the


148  CV.  SUNAKSCHATTA-SUrPA.  M.  357.

virus  of  iterance  is  gone;  my  heart  is  set  on  suprenae
Nirvana!  If  he  is  thus  puffed  up  with  his  achievaj^
mencS)  he  will  lake  to  what  is  not  good  for  one  whose
heart  is  sec  on  supreme  Nirvana;— he  will  take  to
sights  and  sounds,  odours  and  tastes,  things  of  toudi
and  mental  objects  which  are  not  good  for  him  ;  and  in
the  end  passion  will  debase  his  heart  and  his  debase¬
ment  of  heart  will  bring  him  either  to  death  or  co
deadly  woe.  It  is  just  like  a  man  wounded  hy  an
arrow  thickly  smeared  with  poison,  to  whom  his  friends
and  kinsfolk  bring  a  leech  versed  in  arrow* wounds;  and
the  leech  opens  up  the  orifice  of  the  wound,- probes  it,
[257]  extracts  the  barb,  and,  in  the  mistaken  belief  that
there  is  nothing  poisonous  left  behind — chough  there
is, — tells  his  patient  that  he  has  got  the  barb  out  and
that  there  is  nothing  poisonous  left  behind.  But  you
are  not  out  of  danger,  he  adds ;  so  diet  yourself  properly
and  do  not  infiame  the  wound  with  improper  food,
Bathe  and  dress  the  wound  from  time  to  time,  and  by
doing  so  prevent  the  old  blood  from  caking  over  the
orifice.  Don't  be  out  in  the  wind  and  sun  so  as  to  let
the  dust  and  dirt  get  in,  but  tend  your  wound  with  care
so  as  to  get  it  healed  up.  Says  the  patient  co  himself ; —
The  barb  is  out  and  there  is  nothing  poisonous  left
behind,  and  I  am  in  no  danger.  So  he  sets  to  work  to
diet  himself  improperly,  with  the  result  that  his  wound
is  indamed  ;  he  does  not  bathe  or  dress  his  wound  from
time  to  time,  with  the  result  that  the  old  blood  cakea
round  the  orifice ;  he  is  out  and  about  in  wind  and
sun,  with  the  result  that  the  dust  and  dirt  get  in  ;  nor
does  he  nurse  and  tend  his  wound  to  heal  it  up.  The
joint  consequence  of  improper  diet  and  of  the  noisome
effects  of  the  poison  left  behind,  is  to  make  his  wound"
swell  up  and  bring  him  to  death  or  deadly  woe.

Precisely  in  the  same  way  an  Almsman  may  reflect
that:— The  Recluse  has  said  that  Craving  is  an  arrow
and  that  the  virus  of  ignorance  racks  a  man  with
lustful  desires  and  spite.  For  me  Craving's  arrows
are  no  more;  the  virus  of  ignorance  .  .  .  or  to  deadly
woe.  For  death  [258]  it  is,  Sunakkhatta,  In  the  Rule


M.  li.  259.


LEECHCSj^.


of  the  Noble  One,  if  an  Almsman  abandons  his  vocation
and  reverts  to  the  lower  state  (of  the  laity) ;  deadly  woe
it  is  if  an  Almsman  is  guilty  of  depravity.

Oran  Almsman  may  reflect  that: — The  Recluse  has
said  that  Craving  is  an  arrow  and  that  the  poisonous
effects  of  ignorance  rack  a  man  with  lustful  desires  and
spite.  For  me  Craving's  arrows  are  no  more;  the
poisonous  effects  of  ignorance  are  gone  *  and  my  heart
IS  sec  on  supreme  Nirvana!  With  his  heart  thus
set  on  Nirvana,  he  eschews  what  Is  not  good  for
one  whose  heart  is  so  set he  eschews  sights  and
sounds,  odours  and  tastes,  things  of  coach  and  mental
objects  which  are  not  good  for  him ;  and  in  the  end
[250]  passion  will  fail  to  debase  his  heart  and  there
is  no  debasement  of  heart  to  bring  him  either  to  death
or  to  deadly  woe.

It  is  just  like  a  man  wounded  by  an  arrow  thickly
smeared  with  poison,  to  whom  bis  friends  and  kinsfolk
bring  a  Ice^  versed  .  .  .  extracts  the  barb,  and,
knowing  there  is  nothing  poisonous  left  behind,  tells
his  patient  that  he  has  got  the  barb  out  and  that  there
is  nothing  poisonous  left  behind.  You  are  in  no
danger,  he  adds ;  but  diet  yourself  properly  and  do  not
inflame  the  wound  with  improper  food.  Bathe  and
dress  the  wound  from  time  to  ^e,  and  by  doing  so
prevent  the  old  blood  from  caking  over  the  orifice.
Don't  be  out  in  the  wind  and  sun  so  as  to  let  the  dust
and  dirt  get  in,  but  nurse  and’  tend  your  wound  with
care.  Says  this  patient  to  himself : — The  barb  is  out ;
there  is  nothing  poisonous  left  behind  ;  and  1  am  in  no
darker.  Nevertheless,  he  restricts  himself  to  a  diet
that  is  good  for  him,  and  his  wound  does  not  get
inflamed  ;  he  bathes  and  dresses  his  wound  and  carries
out  all  the  several  directions  of  the  leech, — with  the
joint  consequence  of  careful  diet  and  of  no  poison  being
left  behind,  that,  with  the  closing  up  and  healing  of  his
wound,  he  neither  dies  nor  cbmes  to  deadly  woe.

Precisdy  in  the  same  way  an  Almsman  may  reflect
that:  The  Recluse  has  said  that  Craving  is  an  arrow
[260]  and  chat  the  virus  of  ignorance  racks  .  .  .  and


150  CV,  SUNAKKKATTA-SUTTA.  M.  ilafit.

there  is  no  debasement  of  heart  to  bring  him  either  to
death  or  CO  deadly  woe.

I  have  used  this  illustration  to  explain  what  I  mean,
Sunakkhatca;  and  my  meaning  is  this: — The  wound
signifies  the  six  sense-organs  within ;  ignorance  is  the

fioison ;  Craving  is  the  arrow ;  the  probe  is  mind-
ulness ;  the  surgeon's  knife  is  Noble  Understanding ;
the  leech  is  the  Truth-finder,  Arahat  all-enllghten^.
An  Almsman  who  is  in  such  full  control  of  his  six
sense-organs  as  to  see  in  attachments  the  root  of  111,
and  therefore  to  detach  himself  and  to  find  Deliverance
in  eradicating  attachments, — such  an  Almsman  cannot
possibly  either  surrender  his  body  or  devote  his
thought  to  attachments  Suppose  there  were  a  goblet,
fragrant  and  fair  to  view,  which  was  charged  with

f)oison;  and  suppose  there  came  along  a  man  fond  of
(fe  and  anxious  to  avoid  death,  fond  of  pleasure  and
averse  from  pain ; — do  you  think  he  would  drink  of  the
goblet  if  he  knew  it  would  bring  him,  should  he  drink
of  it,  to  death  or  deadly  woe  ?

No,  sir,

[2dl]  Just  in  the  same  way,  Sunakkhatca,  an  Alms¬
man  who  is  in  such  full  control  .  .  .  thought  to
attachments.

Suppose  there  were  a  venomous  viper,  and  suppose
there  came  a  man  fond  of  life  and  anxious  to  avoid
death,  fond  of  pleasure  and  averse  from  pain ;  do  you
thipk  he  would  with  hand  or  toe  touch  the  viper  which
he  knew  would  bring  him,  if  it  bit  him,  to  death  or
deadly  woe  f
No,  sir.

Precisely  in  the  same  way,  if  an  Almsman  is  in
such  full  control  of  his  six  sense  oigans  as  to  see  in
attachments  the  root  of  Ill  and  therefore  to  detach  him-
selfand  to  find  Deliverance  in  eradicating  attachments,
— such  an  Almsman  cannot  possibly  either  surrender
his  body  or  devote  his  thought  to  attachments.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord  Glad  at  heart,  Sunakkhatca
the  Licchavi  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M,  ii.  263.


REAL  PERUANEKCE.


cvi.  anaSja-sappAya-sutta.

I;  REAL  PERMANENCE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
f  '  suying  in  the  Kuru  country, — a  township  of  theirs  is
i]  Kammassadhamma — he  addressed  the  listening  Alms-

I  men  as  follows : —

Fleeting  are  pleasures  of  sense,— empty,  false  and
vain,  the  creation  of  illusion  and  the  chatter  of  fools.
Pleasures  of  sense,  whether  here  and  now  or  hereafter,

I  and  the  [262]  perception  of  either  kind  of  such

i  pleasures  are  "both  under  Mara’s  sway ;  they  are  his

||  •  domain,  his  pasturage,  his  haunt  and  his  resort.  In

4  them  lurk  those  bad  and  wrong  dispositions  of  heart
which  breed  covetlse  and  spite  and  clamour,  and  so
hamper  the  progress  in  this  creed  of  the  disciple  of  the
Noble  that,  he,  recognising  all  this,  addresses  himself
to  the  task  of  developing  his  heart  so  as  to  overcome
the  World  by  concentrating  his  thought,  in  the  con¬
viction  that  thereby  covetise  and  spite  and  temper  will
not  come  into  being  and  that  by  their  extermination
his  heart  will  cease  to  be  dwarfed  and  will  develop
aright  and  beyond  measure.  Living  up  to  this  resolve
to  develop,  his  heart  is  satished  with  its  scope,  and
therewithal  be  either  now  wins  Permanence.— or  sets
his  heart  on  Understanding.  At  the  body’s  dissolution
after  death  it  comes  to  pass  that  this  trend  of  an
Almsman's  consciousness  may  get  him  to  Permanence.

_ This  is  deemed  the  first  path  to  Permanence.

Ag^n,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects  that  all
pleasures  of  sense,  both  here  and  hereafter,  and  the
^  .  perception  of  either  kind  of  pleasures, — these  and  all
visible  Form,  all  consist  of  the  four  primary  Elements
or  of  derivatives  therefrom.  Living  up  to  this  resolve
i  f*-  ...  gel  him  to  Permanence.  This  is  deemed  the

^  second  path  to  Permanence.

•  '  [268]  i^ain,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects  that

T‘  .  fleeting  and  transient  are  all  pleasures  of  sense,  both


152


CVT.


AI?  AiJ  JA-  S  AFPXVA-SUTTA.


M.  ii.  2^4<


Here  and  hereafter,  and  the  perception  of  either  kind
of  pleasure,  together  with  all  visible  Form,  present
or  to  be,  and  also  with  all  perception  of  Form,  present
or  to  be.  But  what  is  fleeting  and  transitory  may  not
evoke  joy  nor  dwm  a  welcome  nor  attract]  Living  up
to  this  resolve  .  .  .  get  him  to  Permanence. — This  is
deemed  the  third  path  to  Permanence.

Again,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects  that  fleet*
ing  and  transient  are  the  pleasures  of  sense,  both  here
and  hereafter,  as  also  is  the  perception  of  either  kind
of  pleasure, — together  with  all  visible  Form,  present
or  to  be,  and  with  all  perception  of  Form,  present  or
to  be,  and  also  with  all  perception  of  Permanence.
Yes,  where  all  perceptions  alike  pass  away  and  leave
no  trace  behind,  that  Is  excellent  and  gocxJ,  to  wit  the
Realm  of  Naught  (  Living  up  to  this  resolve,  his
heart  is  satisfied  with  its  scope  and  therewithd  he
either  now  wins  the  Realm  of  Naught, — or  sets  his
heart  on  Understanding.  At  the  body^s  dissolution
after  death  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  Almsman’s  mental
trend  may  get  him  to  the  Realm  of  Naught,— This  is
deemed  the  first  path  to  the  Realm  of  Naught.

Again,  in  the  wilds  or  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  the
disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects  that  all  this  is  void  of  a  Self
or  anything  like  a  Self.  Living  up  to  this  thought,
his  heart  (s  satisfied,  and  therewithal  be  now  wins  the
Realm  of  Naught,— or  sew  his  heart  on  Understand¬
ing.  At  the  b^y's  dissolution  after  deaxb  it  comes  to
pass  that  the  Almsman's  mental  trend  may  get  him  to
the  Realm  of  Naught. — This  is  deemed  the  second
path  to  the  Realm  of  Naught

Again,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects  chat  not
anywhere  Is  he  aught  of  anything  else  nor  is  [2C4J
aught  of  him  anywhere  in  anything  else.  Living  up
to  this  thought,  his  heart  is  satisfied  and  therewith^
be  now  wins  the  Realm  of  Naught, — Mor  sets  his  heart
oa  Understanding-  Ac  the  body's  dissolution  after
death  it  comes  to  pass  that  this  trend  of  the  Almsman’s
consciousness  may  get  him  co  the  Realm  of  Naught. —
This  is  deemed  the  third  path  to  the  Realm  of  Naught


M.  n.  265.


REAL  PERMANBl^CE.


153


*-


Again,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects  that  fleeting
and  transient  are  all  pleasures  of  sense,  both  here  and
hereafter,  as  also  is  the  perception  of  every  kind  of
pleasure,— together  with  all  visible  Form,  present  or
to  be,  and  with  all  perception  of  Form,  present  or  to
be,  and  with  all  perception  of  Permanence,  and  also
with  the  Realm  of  Naught.  Yes,  where  all  perception

Esses  away  and  leaves  no  trace  behind,  that  is  excel-
it  and  good,  to  wit  Nelther-Percepuon-nor-Non-
Perception!  Living  up  to  this  thought,  his  heart  is
satisfied  and  therewithal  he  now  wins  Neither- Percep¬
tion*  nor- Non-Perception, — or  sets  his  heart  on  Under¬
standing.  At  the  body's  dissolution  after  death  it
comes  to  pass  that  the  trend  of  this  Almsman's  con
sciousness  may  get  him  to  Neither-Percepcion-nor-
Non- Perception. — This  is  deemed  to  be  the  path  chat
guides  to  Neither- Percepiion-nor- Non- Perception.

At  this  point  the  reverend  Anaoda  said  to  the
Lord:— Suppose  the  Almsman  has  reached  the  stage
of  indifference  and  poise  which  tells  him  that,  if  the
past  had  not  been,  bis  present  would  not  now  be  his,
and  that,  if  the  future  were  not  to  come  about,  his
future  will  not  follow ;  and  suppose  that  consequently
he  discards  all  chat  is  and  all  that  has  come  about;—
has  that  Almsman  won  Nirvana  ?

It  may  or  may  not  be  his.

What  is  the  cause  and  what  are  the  conditions
determining  whether  Nirvana  is  or  is  not  his?

The  Almsman  who  has  reached  this  suge  of  in¬
difference  and  poise  [265]  may  rejoice  in  and  welcome
it  and  be  attracted  thereby;  but  if  he  does,  then  his
mind  4erives  therefrom  support  and  sustentaiion.
Now,  no  Almsman  who  is  dependent  on  susten  cation
wins  Nirvana.

Where  does  he  find  his  susteniation  ?

From  the^  sphere  of  Neither- Perception- no r-Non-
Percepcion,  Ananda.

The  Almsman,  it  might  be  said,  derives  his  susten-
tation  from  the  best  source  ?

Yes,  it  is  true  that  be  docs..  But,  take  an  Alms-


>  :


I


■J


•\ "


^54


CVl,  A^IAiSjA-SAPPAYA-SUTTA.


M.  li.


man  who,  having  reached  the  same  stage  of  indifference
and  poise,  rejoices  not  nor  welcomes  nor  is  attracted
thereby.  Inasmuch  as  he  does  not  feel  like  this,  his
mind  derives  therefrom  no  support  nor  sustentation.

It  is  the  Almsman  who  is  independent  of  sustentation
who  has  won  Nirvana,

Wonderful,  sir;  marvellous,  sir  I  Stage  by  stage
has  the  Lord  revealed  how  to  traverse  the  Flood.
And  what,  sir,  is  Noble  Deliverance?

Take  the  case,  Ananda,  of  the  disciple  of  the  Noble
who  reflects  that  all  these  pleasures  of  sense,  here  or  '
hereafter — with  all  perceptions  of  them,  all  Form,  here
or  hereafter,  with  all  perceptions  of  Form,  all  percep¬
tions  of  Permanence,  of  the  Realm  of  Naught,  and  of
Neither- Perception  -  nor-  Non  -  Perception,  —  all  mean
mere  Individuality,  whereas  one  thing  only  is  Death¬
less,  to  wit,  the  heart’s  Deliverance,  whidS  knows  no
sustentation.

And  now,  Ananda,  I  have  explained  the  several
paths  that  guide  to  Permanence,  to  the  Redm  of
Nau  ght,  to  N  ei  ther-  Perception-nor-  N  on-  P  erception,
to  traversing  the  Flood  stage  by  stage,  right  up  to
Noble  Deliverance.  All  that  a  fond  and  compassionate
teacher  can  do  for  his  disciples  out  of  his  compassion,
[260]  all  that  have  I  done  for  you.  Here,  Ananda,
are  trees  under  which  to  sit ;  here  are  abodes  of
solitude.  Ponder  deeply  and  never  flag ;  lay  not  up
remorse  for  yourself  hereafter ; — this  is  my  exhortation
to  you.

_  Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  In  what  the  Lord  had  said.


cvn.  ganaka-moggallana-sutta.

STEP  BY  STEP.

[HI.  1]  Thus  have  1  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  ad  Savatthl  in  the  Old  Pleasaunce  in  the
Palace  which  Migira’s  mother  gave,  there  came  to


.  Jill  2.


STEP  &Y  STEP.


1!£

him  the  brahmin  Ganalca-Mo£|;allana»  who»  after
exchange  of  greetings,  sealed  himself  to  one  side,
sayii^g  : — Just,  Goiama,  as  this  palace  gives  evidence
of  skill,  execution  and  progress  developing  right  up  to
the  final  stair, — so  brahmins  show  a  like  gradual  growth
of  skill,  execution  and  progress  both  in  learning  the
scriptures  and  in  skill  at  arms  and  also  in  the  mathe¬
matics  of  those  of  US  who  are  accountants  and  make
our  living  by  accountancy.  For  when  we  take  pupils
to  teach,  we  begin  by  making  them  count  like  this, —
one,  once;  two,  twice;  three,  thrice;  four,  four  times;
five,  five  times ;  six,  six  times ;  seven,  seven  times ;
eight,  eight  times ;  nine,  nine  times ;  ten,  ten  times  ;
and  we  take  them  to  a  hundred.  Can  this  Doctrine
and  Rule  of  yours,  Gotama,  show  a  like  gradual  growth
in  skill,  execution  and  progress  ?

[Ill,  2]  Yes,  it  can,  brahmin.  Just  as  a  skilful
horse- breicer  when  a  fine  thoroughbred  colt  is  put  in
his  hands,  b^ins  by  schooling  it  to  the  bit  and  then
proceeds  to  further  stages, — so  does  the  Truth -finder
begin  his  schooling  of  the  human  novice  in  his  charge
by  idling  the  Almsman  to  be  virtuous,  to  conirol  his
life  by  the  canon  law,  to  behave  aright,  to  be  fearful
of  little  faults  and  to  live  by  the  precepts.  This  done,
the  Truthfinder  proceeds  with  further  schooling  by
telling  him  to  guard  the  portals  of  sense  and,  when  his
eye  sees  a  thing,  not  to  be  carried  away  either  by  its
general  presentment  or  by  its  detailed  features  ;  and —
inasmuch  as,  without  control,  the  eye  might  overwhdm
a  man  with  appetites  and  dejection  ana  with  bad  and
wrong  dispositions — so  to  live  as  to  control  the  eye,  to
guard  It,  and  to  establish  control  over  it.  And  as  with
the  eye,  so  with  the  ear  and  the  other  five  organs
of  sense,  he  should  live  to  establish  control  over  each
of  them.  When  the  Almsman  can  guard  the  portals
of  sense,  the  Truth-finder  proceeds  with  a  further
schooling  by  telling  him  to  be  temperate  in  eating  and
to  take  food  purposely,  and  philosophically,  not  for
pleasure  or  for  delight  or  for  osienUtion  or  for  display,
but  only  to  support  and  maintain  his  body,  to  save


15^  evil-  GA|rAEA-MOGOiaiJL»A-$OTTA.


M.  ul  y


It  from  harm,  and  to  aid  the  higher  life, — his  object
herein  being  to  put  from  him  the  old  feelings  and  not
to  allow  any  new  feelings  to  arise»  to  the  end  that  the
blameless  lot  may  be  his  and  well-being-  When
[III.  8]  the  Almsman  is  temperate  in  his  eating,  the
Truth-finder  proceeds  with  a  further  schooling  by
telling  him  to  live  the  vigilant  life,  purging  his  heart
at  all  seasons  of  rebellious  thoughts,  whether— by  day
or  in  the  first  watch  of  the  night— fie  paces  to  and  fro
or  sits  down,  or  whether — in  the  middle  watch  of  the
night — be  lies  on  his  right  side  In  the  lion  posture
with  foot  on  foot,  mindful  and  purposeful,  having
appointed  when  he  will  arise.  When  the  Almsman
is  vigilant,  the  Truth-finder  proceeds  with  bis  further
schooling  by  telling  him  to  be  always  mindful  and
purposeful,  acting  mindfully  and  purposefully  whether
m  going  forward  or  back,  in  looking  before  or  behind,
in  drawing  in  or  stretching  out  his  fimbs,  in  conduct  of
cloak  bowl  and  robes,  in  eating  and  drinking,  in  chew¬
ing  and  tasting,  in  attending  to  the  needs  of  nature,
in  walking  or  standing  still,  in  sitting  or  lying  down,
asleep  or  awake,  speaking  or  silent,  w  hen  the  Alms¬
man  is  mindful  and  purposeful,  the  Truth-finder  pro¬
ceeds  with  his  further  schooling  by  telling  him  to
choose  for  himself  a  lonely  losing,— in  Sie  forest
under  a  tree,  in  the  wilds  in  cave  or  grot,  in  a  charnel-
ground,  in  a  thicket  or  on  bracken  in  the  open.  When
he  is  back  from  his  round  for  alms,  he  seats  himself
after  his  meal  cross-legged  and  with  body  erect,  with
bis  heart  set  on  mindfulness.  His  life  is  without
appetite  for  things  of  the  world,  for  he  has  purged
away  all  appetite.  He  has  put  away  all  spite  and  is
inspired  by  no  spiteful  thought  but  only  with  loving¬
kindness  and  compassion  for  all  chat  lives.  All  torpor
he  has  put  from  him;  all  torpor  has  gone  out  of  his
life;  by  insight,  by  mindfulness,  and  by  self-collected-
ness  he  has  purged  his  heart  of  torpor.  Worry  is  his
no  longer,  for  he  has  put  worry  out  of  his  life ;  his
heart  within  him  is  tranquil  and  quit  of  all  worry.
Misgivings  he  has  shed  and  outgrown ;  no  questions


M<  iti>  4>


STEP  BY  STEP.


15?


harass  him ;  by  right  dispositions  ho  has  purged  his
heart  of  aJl  misgivings  [III.  4]  When  he  has  put
from  him  these  five  Hiad  ranees  and  has  understood
how  the  heart's  shortcomings  weaken  it,  then,  divested
of  pleasures  of  sense  and  divested  of  wrong  disposi¬
tions,  the  Almsman  develops  and  dwells  in  the  First
Ecstasy  and  successively  ...  In  the  Second,  Third
and  Fourth  Ecstasies.

Such,  brahmin,  is  my  schooling  of  those  who  are
still  under  training  and  are  not  yet  emancipate,  but
are  in  quest  of  union  with  utter  Peace.  As  for  those
who  are  Arahats,  in  whom  the  Cankers  are  no  more,
who  have  lived  the  highest  life,  whose  task  Is  done,
who  have  won  their  weal  and  outworn  the  Fetters
that  bind  man  to  existence,  who  are  Delivered  by  the
plenitude  of  Knowing, — for  such,  these  qualities  con¬
duce  both  to  well-being  here  and  now  and  also  to  mind¬
fulness  and  self-coilectedness.

At  this  point  the  brahmin  asked  the  Lord  whether,
with  this  guidance  and  instruction  by  him,  all  his
disciples  or  only  some  of  them  won  the  ultimate  goal
of  Nirvana

Some  do,  brahmin,  and  some  do  not.

What,  Gotama,  is  the  cause  and  condition  why,
though  Nirvana  exists  and  the  road  to  it  exists  and
you  show  the  way,  it  is  only  some  and  not  all  disciples
who.  with  this  guidance  and  instruction,  succeed  in
winning  the  ultimate  goal  of  Nirvana?

That  leads  me  to  ask  you,  brahmin,  a  counter-
question,  which  please  answer  as  you  deem  fit  Do
you  think  you  know  the  road  to  Rsjagaha  ?

[III.  5]  Yes.  I  do.

What  think  you,  brahmin  ?  Suppose  there  came  to
you  a  man  who  wanted  to  go  to  ^jagaba  and  asked
you  to  tell  him  the  way  thither ;  and  suppose  you
cold  him  where  his  road  lay  and  that,  if  he  went  a  little
way  along  it,  he  would  first  see  a  certain  then

a  certain  township  a  little  further  on,  and  still  a
little  further  on  he  would  see  Rajagaba  with  all  Its
lovely  pleasaunces  and  lovely  woods  and  lovely  spaces


I5S  CVn.  GAIJIAKA-MOGGALLiNA-SUTTA-


M.  iii.  6


and  lovely  lak^ ;  and  suppose  further  that,  with  this
guidance  and  instruction  from  you,  that  man  cook  a
cross-road  and  went  west.  Suppose  now  a  second
man  came  to  you  who  wanted  to  go  to  Rajagaha  and
was  by  you  told  the  route  exactly  as  you  had  told  the
first  man ;  and  suppose  that,  with  this  guidance  and
instruction  from  you,  he  got  safely  to  Rijagaha.
What,  brahmin,  is  the  cause  and  condition  why,  while
RSja^ha  exists  and  the  road  to  it  exists  and  you
tell  them  the  way,  one  man  takes  a  cross-road  and
goes  west,  while  another  gets  safely  to  Rsjagaha  ?

[III.  6]  Where  is  my  responsibility,  Gotama  ? — I
only  indicate  the  way.

Just  in  the  same  way,  brahmin,  while  Nirvana  exists
and  the  road  to  it  exists  and  I  tell  them  the  way,  some
of  my  disciples  do,  and  others  do  not,  succeed,  with  this
guidance  and  instruction,  in  winning  the  ultimate  goal
of  Nirvana-  Where  is  my  responsibility,  brahmin  ?
The  Truth-finder  only  indicates  the  way.

Hereupon  the  brahmin  said  to  the  Lord : — The
reverend  Gotama  dwells  not  with  those  whom  not
faith  but  search  for  a  livelihood  impels  to  go  forth
as  Pilgrims  from  home  to  homelessness ;  dwells  not
with  cunning  and  deceitful  tricksters,  vain  and  pufied-
up,  raucous  and  babbling,  keeping  no  watch  over  the
portals  of  sense,  intemperate  in  their  eating,  devoid  of
vigilance,  taking  no  thought  of  their  vocation  nor
keen  in  its  discipline,  acquisitive  and  crafty,  foremost
in  backsliding,  intolerant  of  the  yoke,  indolent  and  slack,
bewildered  and  flustered,  unstable  and  wandering,
witless  and  drivelling.  Gotama  dwells  only  with  those
young  men  whom  faiih  leads  forth  as  Pilgrims  from
home  to  homelessness,  in  whom  the  aforesaid  short¬
comings  find  no  place  but  only  their  counterparts  in
virtue.  Just  as  black  anus&ri  j.s  accounted  chief
among  fragrant  roots  and  red  sandalwood  chief  among
fragrant  woods  and  [III.  7]  jasmine  chief  among
fragrant  flowers,— so  is  the  teaching  of  the  reverend
Gotama  in  the  van  of  to-day's  gospels,  Wonder¬
ful,  Gotama ;  wonderful !  Even  as  one  might  set


M.iii.  &


STEP  BY  STEP.


159


Upright  again  what  had  been  cast  down,  or  reveal  .  .  .
refuge  from  this  day  forth  while  life  lasts.


evil  I.  GOPAKA-MOGGALLANA-SUTTA.

GOTAMA'S  SUCCESSOR.

Tuns  have  I  heard.  Once  when,  soon  after  the
passing  of  the  Lord,  the  reverend  Ananda  was  staying
at  R&jagaha,  in  the  Bamboo-grove  where  the  squirrels
were  fed,  Ajatasattu,  King  of  M^adha»  son  of  the
Videha  princess,  was  putting  Rsjagaha's  defences  in
repair,  out  of  suspicions  of  King  Pajjoca.  Early  in  the
morning,  Ananda,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  went
into  Kfijagaha  for  alms,  but,  bethinking  him  that
the  hour  was  too  early  yet,  decided  to  go  to  the
works  which  the  brahmin  Gopaka-Mo^alllna  had  in
charge?  and  thither  he  betook  himself.  Seeing  him
coming  some  way  off,  the  brahmin  invited  him  to
approach  as  a  welcome  visitor  after  so  long  an  absence
and  put  out  for  him  a  seat  on  which  Ananda  seated
himself,  [III.  S]  while  the  brahmin  sat  down  on  a
lower  seat  and  said : — Is  there  a  single  Almsman  who
in  every  respect  and  in  every  particular  possesses  all  the
qualities  that  were  possessed  by  the  reverend  Gotama,
the  Arahac  all-en listened  ?

No,  Brahmin.  For  the  Lord  made  a  Path  where
path  there  was  none,  traced  out  a  Path  where  path
there  was  none,  and  revealed  a  Path  till  then
unrevealed ;  he  knew  and  saw  the  Path  ;  master  of
the  Path  was  he.  Today  his  disciples  follow  him  in
the  Path  which  has  come  to  them  from  him.

Their  talk  was  cut  short  by  the  arrival  of  the
brahmin  Vassak^ra.  a  minister  of  tbe  Magadka  court,
who  came>  in  the  course  of  an  inspection  of  the  works
at  R&jagaha,  to  the  works  which  Gopaka'Moggall&na
had  in  charae.  Seating  himself  after  courteous
greetings  to  A^nda,  Vassak&ra  asked  what  had  been
tne  topic  of  their  interrupted  conversation.  And


l6o  CVirr.  GOPAKA-MOGOALLiNA-SinTA.  M.  iil.  9

Ananda  repeated  Gopaka-MowallSna^s  question  and
[ill.  9]  his  own  answer,  whicn  had  been  followed  by
Vassakara'a  arrival.

Is  there  any  particular  Almsman,  Ananda,  who
designated  by  the  reverend  Gotama  to  be  at  h|s
decease  your  alternative  refuge,  and  to  whom,  in  his
place,  you  might  have  recourse  to-day  ?

No.

Is  there  any  such  Almsman  chosen  for  this  purpose
by  the  Confraternity  and  designated  as  such  by  Elders
and  Almsmen  ?

No.

Having  no  such  alternative  refuge,  how  come  you  to
be  in  such  unison?

We  lack  not  an  alternative  refuge,  brahmin ;  we  have
one  in  the  Doctrine

I  note  your  several  answers  to  my  several  questions
[III.  10]  and  can  only  ask  what  your  words  mean.

The  Lord  who  knew  and  saw,  the  Arahat  all-
enlightened,  prescribed  a  rule  of  life  and  laid  down  a
canon  law.  Every  sabbath  all  of  us  who  live  in  the
precincts  of  a  village  meet  as  a  body  and  in  meeting
enquire  what  each  is  doing.  If,  when  this  is  being  told
us,  an  offence  or  a  transgression  by  an  Almsman  is
disclosed,  we  make  him  act  according  to  the  Doctrine
and  according  to  book.  It  is  not  by  us,  we  hold,  but
by  the  Doctrine  that  he  is  constrain^-

Is  there  any  one  particular  Almsman  whom  to*day
you  respect  and  revere,  to  whom  you  show  honour  and
worship  and  to  whom  you  look  up  with  respect  and
reverence  ?

Yes-

In  answer  to  my  previous  questions,  you  have
already  told  me  that  Gotama  designated  no  Almsman
as  an  alternative  to  himself  as  your  refuge  at  his  death,
and  that  [11]  the  Confraternity  has  designated  no  one
since ;  but  now  you  tell  me  there  is  an  Almsman  whom
you  revere  and  in  dependence  on  whom  you  live  ia
respect  and  reverence.  What  can  your  words  mean  f

xhe  Lord  indicated  ten  blissful  qualities,  the


M.  iiK  iX  gotama’s  successor.  l6l


presence  of  which  impels  us  to  respect  and  revere  a
man,  to  honour  and  worship  him,  and  to  look  up  to
him  with  respect  and  reverence.  What  are  these  ten
qualities? — Take  an  Almsman  who  is  virtuous,  who
lives  conformably  to  the  canon  law,  who  behaves
aright,  who  is  fearful  of  little  faults  and  undertakes  a
training  according  to  the  precepts.  He  learns  much,
remembers  much,  stores  and  treasures  much.  All
doctrines  chat  are  fair  at  the  outset,  fair  in  the  middle
and  fair  in  their  close,  which  set  forth  with  text  and
meaning  the  higher  life  in  all  its  perfection  and  purity,
— all  these  are  heard,  learned  by  heart,  garnered  by
recital,  turned  over  and  over  in  his  mind  and  pene*
Crated  by  vision.  He  is  content  with  his  raiment
and  other  requisites.  Ac  will  and  readily  he  joys  in
the  Four  Ecstasies  in  all  their  pellucidlty  and  with  all
their  comfort  here  and  now.  He  develops  in  turn
each  several  psychic  power;— from  being  one  he
becomes  manifold,  from  being  manifold  he  becomes
one,  is  visible  or  invisible,  passes  at  will  through  wall
or  fence  or  hill  as  if  in  air,  passes  in  and  out  of  the
solid  earth  as  if  it  were  water,  walks  on  the  water's
unbroken  surface  as  if  it  were  the  solid  earth,  [12]
sitting  in  state  glides  through  the  air  like  a  bird  on  the
wing,  touches  and  handles  the  sun  and  moon  in  their

Kwer  and  might,  and  extends  the  sovereignty  of  his
iy  right  up  to  the  Brahmft  world.  By  the  ear
Celestial  which  is  pure  and  far  surpasses  ^e  human
ear,  he  hears  sounds  celestial  and  sounds  human,  both
far  and  near.  His  heart  knows  the  heart  of  other
creatures  and  other  men,  knows  them  for  what  they
are, — the  hearc  where  passion  dwells  as  passionate,
the  passionless  heart  as  passionless,  the  unkind  hearc
as  unkind,  the  kindly  heart  as  kmdly,  the  deluded
heart  as  deluded,  the  undeluded  heart  as  un deluded,
the  concentrated  heart  as  concentrated,  the  unconcen¬
trated  heart  as  unconcentrated,  the  great  heart  as  great
and  the  little  heart  as  little,  the  inferior  heart  as
inferior  and  the  superior  heart  as  superior,  the  stedfast
heart  as  stedfast  and  the  unstedfast  heart  as  unstedfast,


IL


II


l62  CVin.  GOPAK  A-MOOG  ALL  AN  A-SUTTA-  M.  ill  13.

the  heart  Delivered  as  Delivered,  and  the  heart
undelivered  as  undelivered.  He  recalls  his  own  divers
existences  of  the  past,  a  single  birth,  two  births  .  .  .
{€tc.  as  in  Suita  No.  4)  ...  in  all  their  details  and
features.  With  the  Eye  Celestial,  which  is  fjure  and
far  surpasses  the  human  eye,  he  sees  creatures  in  act  to
pass  hence  and  to  appear  elsewhere,  creatures  lowly  or
debonair,  fair  or  foul  to  view,  all  passing  to  fare
according  to  their  deserts.  By  the  eradication  of  the
Cankers,  he — here  and  now,  and  of  himself— knows,
realises,  develops  and  dwells  in  that  Ddiverance  of
heart  and  mind  in  which  the  Cankers  are  no  more.

These,  brahmin,  are  the  ten  blissful  qualities  indicated
by  the  Lord,  the  presence  of  which  impels  us  to
respect  and  revere  a  man,  to  honour  and  worship
him,  and  to  look  up  to  him  with  respect  and
reverence.

[18]  At  this  point  the  brahmin  Vassakira,  minister  or
the  Magadha  court,  said  to  Upananda,  the  Commander
in  Chief What  think  you  ?  If  it  be  thus  that  these
reverend  men  respect  the  man  worthy  of  respect,
revere  the  man  worthy  of  reverence,  honour  the  man
worthy  of  honour  and  worship  the  man  worthy  of
worship. — surely  they  are  right  herein.  If  they  did
not  give  to  such  a  man  their  respect  and  reverence,
their  honour  and  worship, — to  what  could  they  possibly
give  it  ?

Turning  to  Ananda,  the  brahmin  next  asked  where
he  was  living  and  was  told  it  was  in  the  Bamboo-
grove  ;  he  also  asked  whether  the  grove  was  pleasant
and  free  from  voices  and  noise,  sheltered  from  winds,
and  favourable  to  medication.

Yes,  indeed,  brahmin, — as  befits  rangers  and  wardens
(Gopak a)  like  yourself.

Yes,  indeed,  Ananda, — as  befits  reverend  men  who
practise  Ecstasies  and  engage  therein.  For,  such
men  engage  in  Ecstasy  and  practise  it  Once  when
the  reverend  Go  lama  was  staying  the  Gabled  Hall
in  the  Great  Wood  of  Vesali,  I  went  to  him  and  heard
him  speak  of  Ecstasy  in  many  a  figure.  He  both


M.  ill.  X4-  . .  ootama’s  succsssor.  163

practised  Ecstasy  and  engaged  in  it.  He  was  an
advocate  of  all  Ecstasy.

The  Lord,  brahmin,  did  not  advocate  all  Ecstasy
nor  did  he  contemn  all  Ecstasy.  What  kind  [14]  of
Ecstasy  did  he  contemn  ? — Take  the  case  of  a  man
whose  heart  is  swayed  and  dominated  by  passion  and
who  has  no  real  knowledge  of  a  true  refuge  from  the
passion  within  him.  Inside  bis  heart  he  hugs  passion,
as  in  Ecstasy  he  muses  and  bemuses,  un-muses  and
de-bemuses.  And  the  same  holds  good  if  his  heart  is
swayed  and  dominated  by  spile,  torpor,  flurry  and
worry,  or  doubt  It  was  this  kind  of  Ecstasy  that  the
Lord  contemned.  The  kind  of  Ecstasy  which  the
Lord  advocated  was  when,  divested  of  lusts  and  wrong
dispositions,  an  Almsman  develops  and  dwells  in  the
First — and  successively  in  the  Second,  Third  and
Fourth — of  the  Four  Ecstasies.

This  goes  to  show  that  he  blamed  blameworthy
Ecstasy  and  praised  the  praiseworthy.  And  now,
Ananda,  i  must  be  going;  for  1  am  busy  and  have
much  to  do.

At  your  own  good  time,  brahmin.

[15]  So  with  grateful  thanks  for  what  Ananda  had
said,  the  brahmin  Vassakira  rose  up  and  went  his  way.
He  had  not  been  gone  long  before  the  brahmin
Gopaka-Moggall&na  said : — The  reverend  Ananda  has
not  however  answered  the  question  I  put  to  him.

Did  I  not  tell  you,  brahmin,  chat  there  was  no  single
Almsman  who  in  every  respect  and  in  every  particular
possessed  all  the  qualities  possessed  by  the  Lord,  the
Arahat  all-enlightened  ?  And  that  because  the  Lord
made  a  Path  where  Path  there  was  none,  traced  out  a
Path  till  then  un revealed ;  he  knew  and  saw  the  Path  i
master  of  the  Path  was  he.  To-day  his  disciples
f<rilow  him  in  the  Path  which  has  come  down  to  them
from  him.


CIX .  M  AH  A-PU^l^I  AM  A-SU  TTA.


M.  Tu.  i6.


CIX.  MAHA-PUNNAMA-SUTTA.


THE  PERSONALITY  CRAZE,

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
slaying  in  the  palace  of  MigSra's  mother  in  the  Old
Pleasaunce  at  SSvacthI,  the  Lord  was  seated,  as  it  was
the  sabbath  of  the  full  moon,  with  the  Confraternity
around  him  m  the  moonlight,  when  an  Almsman  arose
and  respectfully  asked  if  he  might  put  a  question  to
the  Lord.  Bidden  to  resume  nis  seat  and  put  his
question,  that  Almsman  said  to  the  Lord : — Are  there,
sir,  five  factors  of  attachment,— [16]  to  wit,  form,
feeling,  perception,  the  constituents  and  consciousness.

Yes.

To  his  grateful  thanks  the  Almsman  added  the
further  question: — From  what  root  do  these  five
factors  grow  ?

From  desire,

Is  attachment  identical  with  the  factors  of  attach¬
ment.  Or  is  there  attachment  apart  from  the  factors  ?

The  answer  to  the  first  part  of  your  question  is  in
the  native,  and  in  the  affirmative  to  the  second
part.  The  passion  of  desire  in  the  factors  constitutes
attachment

Does  that  passion  of  desire,  sir,  vary  in  the  five
factors?

It  does.  Take  a  man  whose  thought  is  in  the  here¬
after  either  to  have  this  or  that  form,  or  these  or  those
feelings,  or  these  or  those  perceptions,  or  these  or
those  constituents,  or  this  or  that  consciousness. — this
is  how  the  passion  Cf  desire  varies  in  the  five  factors
of  attachment

How  far,  sir,  can  the  factors  be  defined?

The  form-factor  is  any  form — [17]  the  feeling-factor
is  any  feeling — the  perception-factor  is  any  perception
— the  constituents -factor  is  any  constituent— and  the
consciousness-factor  is  any  consciousness — belonging
to  past,  future  or  present,  internal  or  external,  gross


M.HI.  i8.  THE  PERSONALITY  CRAZE.  T65

or  delicate,  lowly  or  debonair,  far  or  near.  Thus  far,
Almsman,  can  the  factors  be  defined.

What  is  the  cause  and  condition  for  affirming  each
of  these  factors,  respectively  ?

The  four  prime  elements  (earth,  water,  fire  and
air)  are  the  cause  and  condition  for  affirming  the  form-
factor,  as  is  Contact  (phassa)  for  affirming  the  feeling-
factor,  the  perception-factor  and  the  constituenis-
factor,  The  Name-and-Form  of  the  individual  (nama-
rGpa)  are  the  cause  and  condition  for  affirming  the
con  sciousn  ess  -factor.

How  does  the  Personality  view  (sakkSya-di^thi)
come  about  ?

Take  the  case  of  the  un  instructed  everyday  man
who  has  no  vision  of  the  Noble  Ones  and  is  unversed
and  untrained  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Noble  Ones,  who
has  no  vision  of  the  Excellent  Ones  and  is  unversed  ^
and  untrained  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Excellent  Ones  ;
— such  a  one  views  form  as  Self,  or  Self  as  possessing
form,  or  form  in  Self,  or  Self  in  form.  He  does  the
same  with  feeling  and  perception,  with  the  constituents
and  with  consciousness.  [18]  This  is  how  the  Person¬
ality  view  comes  about.

How  does  it  not  come  about  ?

Take  the  case  of  aa  instructed  disciple  of  the  Noble
Ones,  who  has  got  vision  of  the  Noble  Ones  and  is
versed  and  trained  in  their  Doctrine,  who  has  got
vision  of  the  Excellent  Ones  and  is  versed  and  trained
in  their  Doctrine;  such  a  one  does  not  view  form  as
Self,  nor  Self  as  possessing  form,  nor  form  in  Self,  nor
Self  in  form.  He  behaves  similarly  with  feeling  and
perception,  with  the  constituents  and  with  conscious¬
ness.  This  is  how  the  Personality  view  does  not
come  about

What  is  the  satisfaction,  what  is  the  p^ril,  and
what  is  the  escape  in  the  case  of  each  oi  the  five,
respectively?

'the  satisfaction  in  form  is  the  pleasure  and  content
that  arises  from  form.  The  fact  that  form  is  fieeting,
charged  with  111  and  subject  to  change  is  form's  perd.


r66


CIX .  MAHA-PU  ^  ^  AM  A-8UTT  A.


M.  iii.  1$.


The  removal  and  discarding  of  the  passion  of  desire
for  form  is  the  escape  from  form.  And  the  same
applies  to  feeling  and  the  rest.

What  must  a  man  know  and  see  in  order  that,  alike
in  his  conscious  body  and  externally  in  phenomena  in
general,  there  should  not  come  about  a  trend  to  pride
in  *  1 '  and  ‘mine’  ?

He  sees  and  fully  knows,  causally  and  truly,  chat  no
form  whatsoever — past  present  or  future,  internal  or
external^  gross  or  delicate,  lowly  or  [191  debonair,  far
or  near^is  either  ‘mine’  or  ‘I’  or  ‘Self  of  mine/
And  this  too  he  sees  and  knows  equally  of  feelings,
perceptions,  Che  constituents  and  consciousness.  This
is  how  that  trend  to  pride  does  not  come  about,

Here  to  another  Almsman’s  mind  there  presented
itself  the  following  consideration  So  it  appears  that
there  is  no  Self  in  feeling  or  perception  or  the  con¬
stituents  or  in  consciousness.  With  what  Self  will
self-less  happenings  find  contact.^

Reading  with  hts  heart  that  Almsman’s  heart  and
thoughts,  the  Lord  went  on  to  say  to'ihe  Almsmen : —
But  the  case  may  arise  that  some  foolish  person,  with¬
out  knowledge  and  In  his  ignorance,  witb  a  heart
dominated  by  Craving,  may  imagine  the  Master’s
teaching  is  to  be  superseded  by  the  idea  that»  as  it
appears  there  is  no  Self  in  feeling  or  in  perception
or  in  the  constituents  or  in  consciousness,  with  what
Self  will  self-less  happenings  find  contact  ?  Now  you,
Almsmen,  who  have  been  by  me  trained  in  causal
sequence,  everywhere  and  in  every  thing, — what  do
you  say  ?  Is  form  permanent  or  transient  ?

Transient,  sir.

Is  the  transient  a  weal  or  an  III  ?

An  III,  sir.

Is  it  proper  to  regard  the  transient  ID  which  is  cRe
creature  of  change  as  'mine  ’  or  ‘  I '  or  ‘  my  Self  ’  ?

No,  sir.

Is  it  the  same  widi  feeling  and  the  rest

a  yes,  sir.

sequently,  you  have  to  see  and  fully  know,.


M.  iii.  31.


THE  PETISONALITY  CRAZE.


167


causally  and  truly,  that  no  form  whatsoever— no  feel¬
ing  whatsoever — no  perception  whatsoever — no  con¬
stituents  whatsoever — no  consciousness  whatsoever —
be  they  past  present  or  future,  internal  or  external,
gross  or  delicate,  lowly  or  debonair,  far  or  near, — is
either  '  mine’  or  ‘  I  ’  or  *Self  of  mine.’  Seeing  this
clearly,  the  instructed  disciple  of  the  Noble  Ones  is
aweary  of  form,  aweary  0/  feeling,  aweary  of  per¬
ception,  aweary  of  the  constituents,  and  aweary  of
consciousness;  and.  being  aweary,  comes  to  be

Eassionless  and  by  passionlessness  finds  Deliverance  ;

eing  Delivered,  he  comes  to  know  his  Deliverance
in  the  conviction  :• — Rebirth  is  no  more ;  I  have  lived
the  highest  life ;  my  task  is  done ;  and  now  for  me
there  is  no  more  of  what  I  have  been.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.

During  the  course  of  this  exposition,  the  hearts  of
full  sixty  Almsmen  were  by  detachment  Delivered
from  the  Cankers.


CX.  COLA-PUNNAMA-SUTTA.

BAD  MEN  AKX>  GOOD.

Thus  have  !  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  in  the  palace  of  Migara’s  mother  in  the  Old
Pleasaunce  at  Savatihi,  the  Lord  was  seated,  as  it  was
the  sabbath  of  the  [21]  full  moon,  with  the  Confra¬
ternity  around  him  in  the  moonlight.  Surveying  the
silent  Confraternity  of  silent  Almsmen,  the  Lord
addressed  them  as  follows :

Can  a  bad  man  tell  that  another  bad  man  is  bad  ?

No.  sir,

Quite  right.  Almsmen ;  it  is  impossible  and  in¬
admissible  Can  a  bad  man  tell  a  good  man  ?

No,  sir.

Quite  right,  Almsmen ;  this  too  is  impossible  and
inadmissible.  A  bad  man  is  bad  in  his  nature,


1 68  CX.  cCla-PUN^TAMA-SUTTA.  M.  lii.  22.

nurtured  on  bad,  bad  in  hia  thoughts,  bad  in  his
resolves,  bad  in  his  speech,  bad  in  his  doings,  bad
in  his  views,  bad  in  his  distribution  of  alms.  How  is
he  bad  in  his  nature  ? — The  bad  man  is  devoid  of
faith,  devoid  of  shame,  devoid  of  scruples,  uninstructed,
inert,  unmindful,  empty  of  wisdom.  How  is  the  bad
man  nurtured  on  bad  ? — He  finds  his  friends  and  bis
associates  among  such  recluses  and  brahmins  as  are
devoid  of  faith  .  .  .  empty  of  wisdom.  How  is  the
bad  man  bad  in  his  thoughts? — His  thoughts  are
malevolent  to  himself,  malevolent  to  others,  malevolent
to  both  himself  and  others.  How  is  he  bad  in  his
resolves? — In  his  resolves  he  is  malevolent  to  himself,
malevolent  to  others,  malevolent  to  both  himself  and
others.  [22]  How  is  he  bad  in  his  speech  ? — He  is  a
liar,  or  a  traducer,  violent  In  his  language  or  a  tattler.
How  is  he  bad  in  his  doings?— He  slays  or  robs  or
fornicates.  How  is  he  bad  in  his  views  I — He  holds
the  view  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  alms  or  sacrifice
or  oblations,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  fruit
and  harvest  of  deeds  good  or  bad,  that  there  is  no
such  thing  as  this  world  or  the  next,  that  there  are  no
such  things  as  either  parents  or  a  spontaneous  genera¬
tion  elsewhere,  that  there  are  no  such  things  as  re¬
cluses  and  brahmins  who  tread  the  right  path  and
walk  aright,  who  have,  of  and  by  themselves,  compre¬
hended  and  realised  this  world  and  make  it  all  known
to  others.  How  is  the  b^  man  bad  in  distributing
alms? — He  is  casual  in  his  giving,  gives  neither  with
his  own  hand  nor  with  consideration,  gives  only  the
scraps  away,  heedless  of  retribution  to  come.  Such  a
bad  man  at  the 'body's  dissolution  after  death  passes
away  to  fare  as  bad  men  fare,— In  purgatory  or  as  a
brute  beast.

Can  a  good  man  tell  a  good  man,  Almsmen  ?

Yes,  sir.

Quite  right ;  It  is  possible  for  a  good  man  to  teli
a  good  man.  Can  a  good  man  cell  a  bad  man  ?

Yes,  sir.

Quite  right ;  it  is  pos»ble  for  a  good  man  to  tel!


M.  ill  94.


SAD  MEN  AND  GOOD.


169


a  bad  one.  A  good  man  is  good  in  his  nature,
nurtured  on  good,  good  in  his  thoughts,  good  in  bis
alms,  good  in  his  speech,  good  in  his  doings,  good  in
his  views,  In  his  distribution  of  alms.  How  Is
he  good  in  his  nature  ? — The  good  man  has  faith,  has
conscience,  has  scruples,  is  instructed  zealous  mindful
and  wise.  How  Is  the  good  man  nurtured  on  good? —
He  finds  his  friends  and  his  associates  among  such
recluses  and  brahmins  as  have  faith  .  .  .  and  wise.
How  Is  the  good  man  good  in  his  thoughts? — His
thoughts  are  benevolent  to  himself,  benevolent  to
others,  benevolent  to  both  himself  and  others.  How
is  he  good  in  his  aims  ? — In  his  alms  he  is  benevo¬
lent  to  himself,  benevolent  to  others,  benevolent
to  both  himself  and  others.  How  is  he  good  in  his
speech  ?— He  eschews  lying  and  traducing,  he  eschews
violence  in  his  language  and  tattling.  How  is  he
good  in  his  doings? — He  eschews  slaying  and  robbing
[24]  and  fornicating.  How  is  be  good  In  his  views  ? —
He  holds  that  (here  is  such  a  thing  as  alms  and  sacri-
lice  and  oblations,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  the
fruit  and  harvest  of  deeds  good  and  bad,  that  there
Is  such  a  thing  as  this  world  and  the  next,  that  there
are  such  things  as  parents  and  a  spontaneous  genera-
tion  elsewhere,  that  there  are  such  things  as  recluses
and  brahmins  who  tread  the  right  path  and  walk
aright,  who  have,  of  and  by  themselves,  comprehended
and  realized  this  world  and  made  ic  all  known  to
others.  How  is  the  good  man  good  in  distributing
aims  ?-^He  is  circumspect  in  giving,  gives  with  bis
own  hand  and  with  proper  consideration,  heedful  of
retribution  to  come.  Such  a  good  man  at  the  bod/s
dissolution  after  death  passes  away  to  fare  as  good
men  fare, — exalted  among  gods  or  exalted  among
men.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


170


CXI.  AN  UPAD  A-SUTTA.


M.  iii.  ^5.


CXI.  ANUPADA.SUTTA.

THE  COMPLETE  COURSE.

[25]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
slaying  at  S&vatthi  in  J eta’s  grove  in  AnSthapindika’s
pleasaunce,  the  Lord  addressed  the  listening  Almsmen
as  follows Siriputta,  Almsmen,  has  learning  and
understanding.  SSriputta’s  understanding  is  vast  and
extensive,  joyous  and  swift,  acute  and  penetrating.
For  a  whole  fortnight  continuously  he  had  unbroken
insight  into  the  Doctrine,  with  the  following  experiences
therefrom. —

Divested  of  lusts  and  of  wrong  dispositions,  SSri«
putta  developed  and  dwelt  in  the  First  Ecstasy  and  all
its  zest  and  satisfaction. — a  state  bred  of  aloofness,  not
divorced  from  observation  and  reflection.  All  the  con-
comitants  of  the  First  Ecstasy — thought  and  reason,
zest  and  satisfaction,  unity  of  heart  and  mind,  contact,
feeling,  perception,  thinking,  heart,  zeal,  decision,  energy,
mindfulness,  poise  and  mentality, — all  these  qualities
were  his ;  he  saw  all  these  in  turn  arise,  play  their  part
and  pass  away.  There  came  to  him  the  knowledge  that
thus  all  of  these  were  not,  but  came  to  be,  and  make
themselves  known  by  coming  to  be.  So  without  any
learning  to  these  qualities  or  aversion  from  them,  with¬
out  dependence  on  them,  and  without  being  enamoured
of  them,  he  lived  detached  and  separate,  with  bis  heart
untrammelled.  He  knew  well  that  beyond  all  this
there  was  a  further  refuge, — to  be  found,  bethought  to
himself,  by  growth.

Again,  by  laying  to  rest  observation  and  reflection,
he  developed  and  dwelt  in  that  Inward  tranquillity  and
focussing  of  heart  [26],  beyond  observation  and  reflec¬
tion,  which  is  bred  of  rapt  concentration  and  is  the
Second  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction.  All
the  concomitants  of  the  Second  Ecstasy — inward  tran¬
quillity,  zest  and  sadsfacdon,  unity  of  heart  and  mind,
contact,  feeling,  percepdon,  thinking,  heart,  zeal,


M.  iil.  37.  THE  COMPLETE  COURSE.  171

decision,  energy,  mindfulness,  poise  and  mentality-
all  these  qualities  were  his ;  .  .  .by  growth.

A^in,  Sftriputta  losing  the  passion  for  satisfaction,
dwell  in  neutral ty,  mindful  and  alive  to  everything,  feel¬
ing  in  bis  frame  that  ease  which  the  Noble  Ones  mean
when  they  say : — He  that  has  poise  and  mindfulness
lives  at  ease ;  and  so  he  developed  the  Third  Ecstasy.
All  the  concomitants  of  the  Third  Ecstasy — poise  and
content  and  mindfulness  and  alertness,  unity  of  heart
and  mind,  contact,  feeling,  perception,  thinking,  heart,
seal,  decision,  energy,  poise  and  mentality,— all  these
qualities  were  there  continuously  ...  by  growth.

Again,  by  discarding  ease  and  unease,  by  the  disap¬
pearance  of  both  pleasant  and  unpleasant  emotions,
Silriputta  developed  and  dwelt  in  the  Fourth  Ecstasy
in  perfect  poise  and  mindfulness,  All  those  concomi¬
tants  of  the  Fourth  Ecstasy — poise,  feelings  neither  of
ease  nor  of  unease,  superiority  thereto  and  cessation
of  all  interest  therein,  unalloyed  mindfulness,  unity  of
heart,  .  .  .  and  mentality — all  these  qualities  were  his
.  ,  .  [87]  by  growth.

Again,  by  rising  at  every  point  above  all  perceptions
of  form,  by  the  disappearance  of  awareness  of  sensory
reaction,  and  by  dismissing  from  bis  mind  percep¬
tion  of  differences,  Sariputta,  reaching  the  idea  of  the
infinity  of  space,  developed  and  dwelt  in  the  Realm  of
Infinite  Space.  All  those  concomitants  of  the  Realm
of  Infinite  Space — perception  of  the  infinity  of  space,
unity  of  heart,  .  .  .  and  mentality — all  these  qualities
were  there  continuously  .  .  ,  by  growth.

Again,  by  rising  at  every  point  above  the  realm  of
infinite  space,  SSnputta,  reaching  the  idea  of  infitiity  of
mind,  developed  and  dwelt  in  the  Realm  of  Infinite
Mind,  All  those  concomitants  of  the  Realm  of  Infinite
Mind — perception  of  the  infinity  of  mind,  unity  of
heart,  ...  and  menulity— all  these  qualities  were
there  continuously  ...  by  growth.

[28]  Again,  by  rising  at  every  point  above  the  realm
of  infinity  of  mind,  Sariputta,  reaching  the  idea  that
nothing  exists,  developed  and  dwelt  in  the  Realm  of


f72


CXr.  ANUPADA-SUTTA-


M.  ui.  29.


Naught.  All  those  concomitants  of  the  Realm  of*
Naught — perception  of  the  realm  of  naught,  unity  of
heart,  .  .  .  and  mentality— all  these  were  his  ...  by
growth.

Again,  by  rising  at  every  point  above  the  Realm  of
Nauffht,  Sariputta  developed  and  dwelt  in  the  realm
of  Neither-  Perception-nor-  N  on-perception.  M  i  ndful,
he  moved  in  this  new  attainment ;  and,  moving  with
mindfulness  in  this  new  attainment,  his  vision  of  the
old  qualities,  now  extinguished  and  changed,  told  him
that  all  of  ^ese  were  not,  but  came  to  be,  and  made
themselves  known  by  coming  to  be.  So  without  any
leaning  to  these  qualities  or  aversion  from  them,  with¬
out  dependence  on  them,  and  without  being  enamoured
of  them,  S&riputta  lived  detaclied  and  separate,  with
his  heart  untrammelled ;  he  knew  that  beyond  all  this
there  was  a  sure  refuge,  and  he  thought  that  it  was
to  be  found  by  growth.

Again,  by  rising  ,  at  every  point  above  the  realm
ot  N  ei  th  er-  Perception-nor-S  on-percept  ion,  S  iripu  tta
developed  and  dwelt  in  the  extinction  of  feeling  and
perception.  When  he  had  seen  this  by  understand¬
ing.  his  Cankers  were  shed.  Mindful,  he  moved  in
this  new  attainment ;  and,  moving  with  mindfulness
in  this  new  attainment,  his  vision  of  the  old  qualities,
now  extinguished  and  changed,  told  him  that  all  of
these  were  not,  but  came  to  oe,  and  made  themselves
known  by  coming  to  be.  So,  without  any  leaning  to
those  qualities  or  aversion  from  them,  without  depend¬
ence  on  them  and  without  being  enamoured  of  them,
Sarlputta  lived  detached  and  separate,  with  bis  heart
untrammelled.  He  knew  now  that  there  was  no  further
refuge  beyond,  nor  was  it  to  be  found  in  growth.

To  describe  Saripu tta  aright  is  to  describe  aright  him
who  has  risen  to  mastery  [29 j  and  perfection  in  Noble
virtue,  in  Noble  concentration,  in  Noble  perception,  in
Noble  Deliverance.  To  describe  Siriputta  aright  is
CO  describe  aright  the  Lord’s  own  begotten  son,  bom
of  his  mouth,  begotten  and  created  by  the  Doctrine,
heir  of  the  Doctrine  not  of  the  flesh.  Sftripucta,


M.  iii.


THE  COMPLETE  COURSE.


173


Almsmen,  is  consummate  in  rolling  onwards  the’ peer¬
less  whe^  of  the  Doctrine  which  the  Truth-nnder
hrst  set  a  rolling.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Almsmen
rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXII.  CHABBISODHANA-SUTTA.
THE  SIXFOLD  SCRUTINY.


*


Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  the  Lord  was  slaying  at
$&vatthi  in  Jeta^s  grove  in  An&thapiQdika’s  pleasaunce,
where  he  addressed  the  Almsmen  as  follows: —

Suppose  an  Almsman  makes  profession  of  having
risen  to  fullest  Knowledge  in  the  words : — Rebirth  is
now  no  more;  1  have  lived  the  highest  life ;  my  task  is
done ;  and  now  for  me  there  is  no  more  of  what  I  have
been.  His  words  ought  to  be  received  alike  without
rejoicing  and  without  scorn  *,  and,  alike  without  reioic-
ing  and  without  scorn,  the  following  question  should  be
asked  of  him  The  Lord  who  knows  and  sees,  the
Arahat  all  enlightened,  has  deiioed  four  categories  of
discoveries, — namely,  the  man  who  has  discovered  by
vision  in  the  domain  of  vision,  die  man  who  has  dis¬
covered  by  hearing  in  the  domain  of  hearing,  the  man
who  has  discovered  by  sensing  in  the  domain  of  taste
smell  and  touch,  and  the  man  who  has  discovered  by
apprehending  [80]  in  the  domain  of  apprehending.  By
what  manner  of  ken  and  vision  under  these  four  heads
.  has  your  reverence’s  heart  been  absolutely  Delivered
from  the  Cankers?

The  Almsman  in  whom  the  Cankers  are  dead  and
gone,  who  has  greatly  lived,  who  has  cast  off  his
burthens,  who  has  won  his  weal,  whose  bonds  are  no
more,  who  by  utter  Knowledge  has  gained  final
Deliverance, — he,  consonantly  with  the  Doctrine,  makes
^wer: — In  the  domain  of  seeing,  and  in  each  of  the
three  other  domains  also,  I  dwell,  without  leanings  and
without  aversion,  without  dependence  and  without
being  enamoured,  but  with  heart  untrammelled.  This


»74


CXI  I.  CHAD  B  1S0I>H  AH  A*  SUTTA.


M.  iii.  Jl.


is  the  manner  of  ken  and  vision  whereby  under  these
four  heads  my  heart  has  been  absolutely  Delivered
from  the  Cankers.

Excellent,  you  will  say  to  him,  rejoicing  and  thank¬
ful  for  what  the  Almsman  has  said  ;  and  you  will  pro*
ceed  to  ask  the  following  question  : — The  Lord  who
knows  and  sees,  the  Arab  at  alUenlightened,  has  re¬
vealed  five  factors  of  attachment,  namely  form,  feeling,
perception,  the  constituents  and  consciousness.  By
what  manner  of  ken  and  vision  under  these  five  heads
has  your  reverence’s  heart  been  absolutely  Delivered
from  the  Cankers  ?

The  true  Arahat  as  aforesaid  makes  answer  con¬
sonantly  with  the  Doctrine  as  follows  :• — Having  come
to  see  that  form  is  a  weak,  evanescent  and  comfortless
thing,  I  know  that  my  heart  Is  delivered  from  the
heart’s  attraction  and  attachment  to  forms,  [81]  which
implant  obstinacy,  prejudice  and  bias, — Is  Delivered
therefrom  by  destroying  them,  by  losing  all  passion
for  them,  by  laying  them  to  rest,  by  renouncing  them
and  by  forsaking  them  altogether  And  the  like  De«
liverance  is  mine  from  the  other  four  factors  of  feeling,
perception,  the  constituents  and  consciousness.  This
is  the  manner  of  ken  and  vision  whereby,  in  respect  of
these  five  factors  of  attachment,  I  know  my  heart  to
be  absolutely  Delivered  from  Cankers.

Excellent,  you  will  say  to  him,  rejoicing  and  thankful
for  what  the  Almsman  has  said ;  and  you  will  proceed
to  ask  the  following  question  : — The  Lord  who  knows
and  sees,  the  Arahat  alb  enlightened,  has  revealed  six
elements,  namely  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  space  and
mentality.  By  what  manner  of  ken  and  vision,  in
respect  of  these  six  elements,  has  your  reverence’s
heart  been  absolutely  Delivered  from  the  Cankers.

The  true  Arahat  makes  answer  consonantly  with
tbe  Doctrine  as  follows: — 1  approach  the  earth-
eluent — and  in  turn  each  of  the  five  other  dements
— as  being  non-Sdf,  with  no  basing  of  Self  on  the
element,  so  that  I  know  that  my  heart  is  Ddivered
from  the  heart's  attractions  and  attachments  based  on


•M.  iii-  33.


THE  SIXFOLD  SCRUIIKY.


175


an  element,  which  implant  obstinacy,  prejudice  and
bias, — is  Delivered  therefrom  by  destroying  them,  by
losing  all  passion  for  them,  by  laying  them  to  rest,  by
renouncing  them  and  by  forsaking  them  altogether.
This  is  the  manner  of  ken  and  vision  whereby,  in
respect  of  these  six  elements,  1  know  my  heart  to  be
absolutely  Delivered  from  the  Cankers.

Excellent,  you  will  say  to  him,  [82]  rejoicing  and
thankful  for  what  the  Almsman  has  said ;  and  you
will  proceed  to  ask  the  following  question : — The
Lord  who  knows  and  sees,  the  Arahat  all* enlightened,
has  revealed  six  internal  sense-oigans  and  six  external
sense-objects,  namely  eye  and  forms,  ear  and  sounds,
nose  and  odours,  tongue  and  castes,  body  and  tangible
objects,  mind  and  mental  objects.  By  what  manner
of  ken  and  vision,  in  respect  of  these  six  pairs,  has
your  reverence's  heart  been  absolutely  Delivered  from
the  Cankers  ?

The  true  Arahat  makes  answer  consonantly  with
the  Doctrine  as  follows:  In  respect  of  the  eye  and
form,  of  visual  cognition  and  objects  visually  c<^-
ni sable,  I  know  ^at  my  heart  is  Delivered  from
desire,  passion,  delight,  craving,  and  from  the  heart’s
attractions  and  attachments  based  on  eye  and  form,
which  implant  obstinacy,  prejudice  and  bias, — is  De¬
livered  therefrom  by  destroying  them,  by  losing  all
passion  for  them,  by  laying  them  to  rest,  by  renouncing
them  and  by  forsaking  them  altogether.  And  the  like
holds  good  of  the  five  ocher  pairs  of  sense-organs  and
sense-objects.  This  is  the  manner  of  ken  and  vision
whereby,  in  respect  of  these  six  pairs,  I  know  my
heart  to  be  absolutely  delivered  from  the  Cankers.

Excellent,  you  will  say  10  him,  rejoicing  and  thankful
for  what  the  Almsman  has  said  ;  and  you  will  proceed
to  ask  this  further  question  : — By  what  manner  of  kei^
and  vision  has  the  bias  of  pride  in  ‘  1  ’  and  *  mine '
been  extirpated  in  respect  both  of  this  mind-informed
body  and  of  all  external  phenomena?

[88]  The  true  Arahat  makes  answer  consonantly
with  the  Doctrine  as  follows : —


176


CXII.  CHABBISODHAWA-SUTTA.


M.  lii.  361


Aforetime,  Almsmen,  when  I  had  a  house  and
home,  1  dwelt  in  ignorance.  To  me  the  Doctrine  was
expounded  by  the  Truth-finder  or  by  a  disciple  of  the
Truth-finder ;  and,  by  hearing  it,  I  came  to  faith  in
the  Truth-finder,  and  this  awakened  faith  in  him  led
me  to  bethink  myself  that — A  hole  and  corner  life
is  all  a  home  can  give,  whereas  the  Pilgrim  is  free  as
the  air  of  heaven.  It  is  hard  for  the  home-keeping
man  to  follow  the  higher  life  in  all  its  completeness
and  purity  and  perfection.  Come,  let  me  cut  off  hair
and  beard  and  go  fordi  lh>m  home  to  homelessness.
Thereafter,  parting  from  my  substance,  be  it  small  or
great,  parting  too  from  my  kith  and  kin,  be  they  few
or  many,  1  cut  off  my  hair  and  beard,  donned  the
yellow  robes  and  went  forth  from  home  to  homeless¬
ness.  A  Pilgrim  now,  schooled  as  an  Almsman  in
thought  and  conduct,  1  put  from  me  all  killing,  I  put
from  me  all  killing  and  abstained  from  killing  any¬
thing  ,  .  .  (eic.  as  trt  Suiia  27).  .  .  .  [86]  When
I  knew  this  and  saw  this,  my  heart  was  Delivered
from  the  Canker  of  lusts,  from  the  Canker  of  con¬
tinuing  existence,  and  from  the  Canker  of  ignorance ;
and  to  me  thus  Delivered  came  the  knowledge  of  my
Deliverance  in  the  thought — Rebirth  is  no  more ;  I
have  lived  the  highest  life  ;  my  task  is  done ;  and  now
for  me  there  is  no  more  of  what  I  have  been.

This  is  the  manner  of  ken  and  vision,  sirs,  whereby
the  bias  of  '  I  ’  and  '  mine  ’  has  been  extirpated  in
respect  both  of  this  mind-informed  body  and  of  all
external  phenomena.

Excellent,  you  will  say  to  him,  rejoicing  and  thankful
fur  what  the  Almsman  has  said;  and  you  will  proceed
to  tell  him  how  good  it  is,  how  very  good  it  is,  [87]  for
you  all  to  see  in  him  so  signal  an  example  of  the
higher  life.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M.  ill  33.


ATTITUDES,  GOOD  AKD  BAD.


177


CXI  1 1.  SAPPURISA-SUTTA.

ATTITUDES,  GOOD  AND  BAD.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatihi  in  Jeia’s  grove  in  Anithapiodika's
plcasaunce,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen  as  follows : —
J  will  tell  you  about  the  attitudes  of  the  good  man  and
of  the  bad  man.  Listen  and  pay  attention,  and  1  will
speak.  Then  to  the  listening  Almsmen  the  Lord  thus
b^n : —

what  is  the  good  man’s  attitude? — Suppose  a  bad
man  has  gone  forth  as  a  Pilgrim  from  a  family  of
distinction  and  reflects  that,  while  this  is  his  own  case,
other  Almsmen  have  not  come  from  families  of  dis¬
tinction, — so  that,  on  family  grounds,  he  exalts  himself
and  disparages  others.  This  is  the  attitude  of  the  bad
man.  Whereas  the  good  man  reflects  that  it  is  not  by
belonging  to  a  distinguished  family  that  the  qualities
of  green  spite  and  folly  pass  away  to  extinction ;
and  that,  even  if  an  Almsman  be  no  scion  racially,  but
yet  is  seized  of  the  Doctrine  and  what  flows  from  it,
is  of  approved  behaviour,  and  acts  consonantly  with
the  Doctrine,  [SS]  such  a  man  is  thereby  worthy  of
worship  and  ot  praise.  So,  safe  behind  the  principles
by  which  he  walks,  he  does  not,  on  grounds  of  family
distinction,  either  exalt  himself  or  dispars^e  others. —
This  is  the  attitude  of  the  good  man.

Suppose  a  bad  man  has  come  from  a  great  family,
or  from  a  family  of  great  substance,  or  a  family  famed
for  its  substance,  and  reflects  that,  while  ibis  is  his
own  case,  other  Almsmen  have  not  come  from  such
femilies, — so  that,  on  grounds  of  eminent  wealth,  he
^alts  himself  and  disparts  others.  This  is  a  quality
of  the  bad  man.  Whereas  the  good  man  reflects  that  it
"  is  not  by  belonging  to  a  rich  family  that  the  qualities
of  greed  spite  and  folly  pass  away  to  extinction;  and
that,  even  if  an  Almsman  is  not  so  descended,  but  yet
b  seized  of  the  Doctrine  and  what  flows  from  it,  is  of


178


CXIII.  SAPPURISA-SUTTA.


M.  ill


approved  behaviour,  and  acts  consonantly  with  the
Doctrine,  such  a  man  is  thereby  worthy  of  worship
and  of  praise.  So,  safe  behind  the  principles  by  which
he  walks,  he  does  not,  on  grounds  of  family  riches,
either  exalt  himself  or  dispar^e  others. — This  too  is
an  attitude  of  the  good  man.

i\gain.  the  bad  man  is  famed  and  renowned,  and
reflects  that,  while  this  is  so  in  his  case,  these  other
Almsmen  are  of  little  fame  and  little  authority, — so
that,  on  grounds  of  fame,  he  exalts  himself  and  dis¬
parages  others.  This  is  the  attitude  of  the  bad  man.
Whereas  the  good  man  reflects  it  is  not  by  fame  and
repute  that  ,  ,  .  even  if  an  Almsman  is  not  famed
and  renowned,  yet  is  seized  of  the  Doctrine  and
.  .  .  such  a  man  is  thereby  worthy  of  worship  and
of  praise.  So,  safe  behind  the  principles  by  which  he
walks,  he  does  not,  on  grounds  of  personal  fame,  either
exalt  himself  or  disparage  others. — This  too  is  an  atti¬
tude  of  the  good  man.

[8d]  Again,  the  bad  man  is  given  robes  and  other
requisites,  and  reflects  that,  while  this  is  so  in  his  case,
these  other  Almsmen  are  not  given  robes  and  other
requisites, — so  that,  on  grounds  of  what  is  given  him,
he  exalts  himself  ...  an  attitude  of  the  good  man.

Again,  the  bad  man  has  received  much  instruction,
and  reflects  that,  while  this  is  so  in  his  own  case,
these  other  Almsmen  are  less  instructed, — so  that,  on
grounds  of  instruction  received,  he  exalts  himself  .  .  .
an  attitude  of  the  good  man.

Again,  the  bad  man  is  a  repository  of  the  Rule,  and
reflects  that,  while  this  is  so  in  his  own  case,  these
other  Almsmen  are  not  repositories  of  the  Rule, — so
that,  on  grounds  of  being  a  repository  of  the  Rule,
heexalts  himself . .  .  [40]  an  attitude  of  the  good  man.

Again,  the  bad  man  is  a  preacher  of  the  Doctrine
and  reflects  that,  while  this  is  so  in  his  own  case,
these  other  Almsmen  are  no  preachers, — so  that,  on
grounds  of  preaching  capacity,  he  exalts  himself  .  .  .
an  attitude  of  the  good  man.


M.  iiL  4r.


ATTITUDES,  GOOD  AND  BAD.


I79‘


Again,  the  bad  man  lives  in  the  wilds,  and  reflects
that,  while  this  is  so  in  his  own  case,  these  other
Almsmen  do  not  live  in  the  wilds, — so  that,  on  grounds
of  being  a  dweller  in  the  wilds,  he  exalts  himself  .  .  .
an  attitude  of  the  good  man.

Again,  the  bad  man  is  clad  in  rags  from  the  dust-
heap,  [41]  and  reflects  that,  while  this  is  so  in  his  own
case,  these  other  Almsmen  are  not  so  clad, — so  that,
on  grounds  of  being  clad  in  rags  from  the  duscheap,  he
exalts  himself  ...  an  attitude  of  the  good  man.

Again,  the  bad  man  subsists  on  what  he  gets  from
door  to  door,  and  reflects  chat,  while  this  is  so  in  his
own  case,  these  ether  Almsmen  do  not  subsist  on  such
alms,— so  that,  on  grounds  of  subsisting  on  what  he
gets  from  door  to  door,  he  exalts  himself  ...  an  atti¬
tude  of  the  good  man.

Again,  the  bad  man  lives  under  a  tree,  and  reflects
that,  while  this  is  so  in  his  own  case,  these  other
Almsmen  do  not  live  under  trees, — so  that,  on  grounds
of  living  under  a  tree,  he  exalts  himself  .  .  .  [42]  an
attitude  of  the  good  man.

Again,  the  bad  man  lives  in  a  charnel^round* — or
in  the  open  air — or  sits,  but  will  never  lie  down — or
takes  whatever  quarters  are  allotted  to  him— or  refuses
to  eat  at  more  than  one  sitting ;  and  he  reflects  that,
while  this  is  so  in  his  own  case,  these  other  Almsmen
do  not  observe  his  particular  practice, — so  that,  on
grounds*  of  scrupulosity  of  practice,  he  exalts  himself
.  ,  .  an  attitude  of  the  good  man,

Again,  the  bad  man,  divested  of  lusts  and  wrong
disposition,  develops  and  dwells  in  the  First  Ecstasy  and
all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,— a  state  bred  of  aloofness,
not  divorced  from  observation  and  reflection,  And  he
reflects  that,  while  this  is  so  in  his  own  case,  these
other  Almsmen  have  not  reached  the  First  Ecstasy, —
so  that,  on  grounds  of  reaching  the  First  Ecstasy,
he  exalts  himself  and  disparages  others.  This  is  the
attitude  of  the  bad  man.  whereas  the  good  man
reflects  that  the  Lord  counselled  avoidance  of  satis¬
faction  in  the  attain  me  nc  of  the  First  Ecstasy,  inas-


cxirr<  SAPPURisA  sutta.


M.  in.  4J,


t8o

much  as,  imagine  as  they  may,  it  turns  out  quite
otherwise.  So,  [43]  safe  behind  the  avoidance  of
sacisfaccion.  he  does  not,  on  grounds  of  having  attained
the  First  Ecstasy,  either  exalt  himself  or  disparage
others. — This  too  is  an  attitude  of  the  good  man.

And  the  same  holds  good  of  the  other  three
Ecstasies  coo,  and,  in  succession,  of  Infinity  of  Space,
of  I  nfinity  of  Mind  [44],  of  the  Realm  of  Naught,  and  of
N  either-  Perception  •  nor-  N  on-percepcion.  S  afe  behind
the  avoidance  of  satisfaction,  he  does  not,  on  grounds
of  having  successively  attained  each  and  all  of  these,
either  exalt  himself  or  dlspar^  others. — These  too
are  severally  attitudes  of  the  good  mao.

[45]  Again,  having  in  every  respect  risen  above
Neither- Perception- nor- Non -perception,  the  good  man
develops,  and  dwells  in,  the  stilling  of  feeling  and
perception  ;  he  sees  with  the  eyes  of  understanding ;
and  the  Cankers  are  destroyed  within  him.  Such  an
Almsman  has  no  imaginings  of  the  individual  as  being
aught  or  anywhere  or  in  anything.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms^
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXrV,  SEVITABBA-ASEVITABBA-SUTTA.

WHAT  DOES  IT  tEAD  TO?

Tkus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  staying
at  Savacchi  in  Jeta‘s  grove  in  AnSthapindika’s  pfea^

aunce,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen  as  follows : _ I  will

expound  what  should  be  ensued  and  what  should  not
be  ensued.  Hearken  and  pay  attention,  and  I  will
speak-  Then  to  the  listening  Almsmen  the  Lord
began Behaviour  in  act — or  in  speech — or  in  thought
— is  twofold,  that  to  be  ensued  and  that  not  to  be
ensued,  each  being  alternative  to  the  other.  And  the
same  applies  to  mental  arisings,  to  [46]  the  admission
of  perceptions,  as  also  to  the  acquisition  of  views  and
the  entertainment  of  personality.


M.iH.  47.  WHAT  DOES  IT  LEAD  TO?  l8t

Said  the  venerable  Sariputta  to  the  Lord : — I  under^
stand  as  follows  the  expanded  meaning  of  the  Lord’s
succinct  and  unexpanded  utterance : —

I.  Behaviour  in  act  is  twofold,  that  to  be  ensued  and
that  not  to  be  ensued,  each  being  alternative  to  the
other : — these  were  the  Lord’s  words  and  they  proceed
from  the  following : — Behaviour  In  act  is  («)  not  to  be
ensued  if  thereby  wrong  dispositions  wax  apace  while
right  dispositions  wane,  but  (^)  to  be  ensued  if  thereby
wrong  dispositions  wane  while  right  dispositions  wax
apace.

Now,  first,  what  kind  of  behaviour  in  act  leads,  If
ensued,  to  wrong  dispositions  waxing  apace  while  right
dis|«sitions  wane  ? — Take  a  man  who  destroys  life, —
he  is  a  hunter,  with  hands  dyed  in  blood,  given  to
killing  and  slaying,  merciless  to  living  creatures.  Or
he  taxes  what  has  not  been  given  to  nim, — he  appro¬
priates  in  thievish  fashion  other  people’s  belongings  in
village  and  jungle.  Or  he  is  a  fornicator, — he  has
intercourse  with  women  under  the  care  of  mother  or
father  or  brother  or  sister  or  relations,  with  women
married  or  affianced,  or  even  with  women  wearing  the
very  garlands  of  betrothal. — This  is  the  kind  of  be¬
haviour  [4i7]  in  act  which,  if  ensued,  makes  wrong
dispositions  wax  apace  while  right  dispositions  wane.

Next,  what  kind  of  behaviour  in  act  leads  to  wrong
dispositions  waning  while  right  dispositions  wax  apace  r
^ Take  a  man  who,  putting  all  killing  from  him  and
abstaming  from  killing  anything,  laying  aside  cudgel
and  sword,  lives  a  life  of  innocence  and  mercy,  full  of
pity  and  compassion  for  everything  chat  lives.  He
puts  theft  from  him  and  abstains  from  theft,  taking  only
what  is  given  to  him  and  never  appropriating  to  him¬
self  in  thievish  fashion  other  people’s  belongings  in
village  anji  jungle,  that  have  not  been  given  to  him.  In
the  matter  of  fornication,  he  is  no  wrongdoer  but
abstains  from  all  such  wrongdoings  he  has  no  inter¬
course  with  women  under  the  care  of  mother  or  father
or  brother  or  sister  or  relations,  or  with  women
affianced  pledged  or  betrothed. — This  is  the  kind  of


i82


CXrv.  SBVrTABBA-ASEVITABBA-SUTTA.  M.  m.  48.


behaviour  in  acc  which  makes  wrong  dispositions  wane
while  good  dispositions  wax  apace.

Hence  proceeded  the  Lord's  utterance Behaviour
in  act  is  twofold,  that  to  be  ensued  and  that  not  to  be
ensued,  each  being  alternative  to  the  other.

11.  Behaviour  m  speech  .  .  .  alternative  to  the
other;— these  were  the  Lord's  words  and  they  proceed
from  the  following:— Behaviour  in  speech  is  {a)  not  to
be  ensued  if  thereby  wrong  dispositions  wax  apace
while  right  dispositions  wane,  but  (^)  to  be  ensued  if
thereby  wrong  dispositions  wane  while  right  dispositions
wax  apace.

Now,  first,  what  kind  of  behaviour  in  speech  leads,
if  ensued,  to  wrong  dispositions  waxing  apace  while
right  dispositions  wane?^Take  a  man  who  Is  a  Har,
who,  when  cited  to  give  his  testimony  [48]  before
assembly  or  village- meeting  or  among  his  kindred  or
his  guild  or  the  king’s  officers,  says  he  knows  when
he  does  not  know,  or  says  he  does  not  know  when
he  does  know,  or  says  he  saw  when  he  did  not  see,
or  says  he  did  not  see  when  he  did  see,  deliberately
lying  in  the  interests  either  of  him^lf  or  of  other  people
or  for  some  trifling  gain.  Or  he  is  a  slanderer ; — what
he  has  heard  here  he  tells  elsewhere  to  split  up  one
sec  of  people ;  what  he  hears  elsewhere  he  tells  here
to  split  up  another  set  j  so  that  he  is  a  dissolver  of
harmony  and  no  reconciler  of  them  that  are  at  variance  ;
discord  is  the  pleasure  and  delight  and  joy  and  motive
of  his  speech.  Or  be  is  a  reviler what  he  says  is
rough  and  harsh,  hurtful  and  wounding  to  others,
fraught  with  anger  and  discord,  Or  he  is  a  tattler
he  speaks  out  of  season,  without  regard  to  the  facts,  of
what  is  unprofitable ;  never  speaks  of  the  Doctrine
and  Rule;  his  talk  is  trivial  and  ill-iim^,  frivolous,
leading  nowhere  and  void  of  profit.— This  is  the  kind  of
behav^r  in  speech  which  if  ensued,  makes  wrong  dis¬
positions  wax  apace  while  right  dispositions  wane.

Next,  what  kind  of  behaviour  in  speech  leads,  if
ensued,  to  wrong  dispositions  waning  while  good  dis¬
positions  wax  apace  ?— Take  a  man  who  has  put  lying


M.  ill.  49.


WHAT  DOSS  IT  LEAD  TO?


1^3


from  him  and  abstains  from  lies.  When  cited  to  give
his  testimony  before  assembly  or  viil^e-meeting  or
among  his  kindred  or  his  guild  or  the  king’s  officcrs»  he
is  careful  not  to  say  he  knows  when  he  does  not,  or  to
say  he  does  not  know  when  he  does,  or  to  say  [49]  he
saw  when  he  did  not,  or  to  say  he  did  not  see  when  he
did, — never  deliberately  lying  in  the  interests  either  of
himself  or  of  other  people  or  for  some  trifling  gain,
All  slander  he  has  put  from  him  and  from  slander  he
abstains  ;  what  he  hears  here  he  does  not  repeal  else¬
where,  to  split  up  one  set  of  people,  nor  does  he  repeat
here  what  he  has  heard  elsewhere,  so  as  10  split  up
another  set  .He  is  a  promoter  of  harmony  and  a
restorer  of  amiy .  Concord  is  the  pleasure  and  delight
and  joy  and  motive  of  his  speech.  He  reviles  not ;
he  abstains  from  reviling.  What  he  says  is  without
gall,  pleasant,  Inendly,  hearty,  urbane,  agreeable  and
welcome  to  all.  \No  tattler,  he  abstains  from  all  tattle ;

_ he  speaks  in  s^on  and  accordii^  to  the  facts  ;  he

is  profitable  in  hk  speech,  ever  of  the  Doctrine  and
Rule ;  seasonable  and  memorable  are  his  words,
illuminating,  well-marshalled  and  of  great  profit — This
is  the  kind  of  behaviour  in  speech  which,  if  ensued,
makes  wrong  dispositions  wane  while  right  dispositions
wax  apace.  1

Hence  proceeded] the  Lord’s  utterance: — Behaviour
in  ^eech  is  twofJd  .  .  .  each  being  alternauve  to
the  other.  /

ni.  Behaviour  ltd  thought  .  .  .  alternative  to  the
other ; — these  were\he  Lord’s  words  and  they  proceed
from  the  following  i-^Behaviour  in  thought  is  (a)  not
to  be  ensued  if  thereEy'  wrong  dispositions  wax  apace
while  right  disposition^  wane,  but  (^)  to  be  ensued
if  thereby  wrong  dispositions  wane  while  right  disposi-
dons  wax  apace.  \

Now,  first,  what  kind  otf  behaviour  in  thought  leads,
if  ensued,  to  wrong  dispositions  waxing  apace  while
right  dispositions  wane  ?— T^he  a  man  who  is  covetous
and  covets  other  people’s  g<sar, — in  the  yearning  they
were  his.  Or  he  is  rancorouis  and  corrupt  of  intent ;  —


1 84  CXIV.  SEVITABBA-ASEVITABaA-SUTTA,  M.  iji.  50,

[50]  he  wishes  that  creatures  round  him  may  be  killed
or  destroyed  or  disappear  or  perish  or  not  exist — This
is  the  kind  of  behaviour  in  thoughts  which,  if  ensued,
mak«  wrong  dispositions  wax  apace  while  right  dis¬
positions  wane.  '

Next,  what  kind  of  behaviour  in  thoughts  leads,  if
ensued,  to  wrong  dispositions  waning  while  right  dis¬
positions  wax  apace? — Take  a  man  who  is  not
covetous  and  does  not  covet  other  people’s  gear,  in  the
yearning  they  were  his.  He  harbours  no  rancour,  nor
is  he  corrupt  of  intent his  wish  is  that  the  creatures
round  him  may  live  on  in  peace  and  happiness,  safe
from  all  enmity  and  oppression.

Hence  proceeded  the  Lord’s  utterance  Behaviour
in  thoughts  is  twofold  .  .  .  each  being  alternative  to
the  other.

IV.  Mental  arisings  -  .  .  alternative  to  the  other ; _

these  were  the  Lord's  words  and  they  proceed  from  the
following  : — Mental  arisings  are  (a)  not  to  be  ensued
if  thereby  wrong  dispositions  wax  ppace  while  right
dispositions  wane,  but  (6)  to  be  ensued  if  thereby  wrong
disMsicions  wane  while  right  dispositions  wax  apace.

Now,  first,  what  kind  of  men^  arisings  lead,  if
ensued,  to  wrong  dispositions  waxing  apace  while  good
dispositions  wane  ? — Take  a  mao  who  is  covetous  and
lives  with  a  heart  filled  with  covetousness,  who  is
rancorous  and  lives  with  a  heart  filled  with  rancour,
who  is  resentful  and  lives  with  a'  heart  filled  with
resentment — This  is  the  kind  of  mental  arising  which,
if  ensued,  makes  wrong  dispositions  wax  apace  while
right  dispositions  wane.

Next,  what  kind  of  development  of  heart  leads,  if
ensued,  to  wrong  dispositions  waning  [51]  while  right
dispositions  wax  apace  ? — Take  a  man  who  is  not
covetous  and  lives  with  an  uncoveting  heart,  who
knows  not  ranwur  and  lives  with  an  unrancorous
heart,  who  knows  not  resentment  and  lives  with  an
unresemfuJ  heart.— This  is  the  kind  of  development  of
heart  which,  if  ensued,  makes  wrong  dispositions  wane
and  right  dbpositions  wax^  apace.


M.  in,  5*.  WHAT  DOES  IT  LEAD  TO?  l85

Hence  proceeded  the  Lord's  utterance: — Mental
arisings  .  .  .  alternative  to  the  other.

V.  The  admission  of  perceptions  .  .  .  alternative  to
the  ocher ; — these  were  the  Lord's  words  and  they
proceed  .  .  .  {eU.  as  in  /ortgoing  para,  iv.)  .  .  .  It  is
from  all  this  chat  the  Lord's  utterance  proceeded  when
he  said:  The  admission  of  perceptions  .  .  .  alternative
to  the  other.

[52]  VI.  The  acquisition  of  views  .  .  .  alternative
to  the  other; — these  were  the  Lord's  words  and  they
proceed  from  the  following : — The  acquisition  of  views
is  {»)  not  to  be  ensued  if  thereby  wrong  dispositions
wax  apace  while  right  dispositions  wane,  but  \h)  to  be
ensued  if  thereby  wrong  dispositions  wane  while  right
dispositions  wax  apace.

Now,  first,  what  kind  of  acquisition  of  views  leads,
if  ensued,  to  wrong  dispositions  waxing  apace  while
right  dispositions  wane  ? — Take  a  man  whose  view
18  that  there  Is  no  such  thing  as  alms  or  sacrifice  or
oblations ;  chat  there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  fruit  and
harvest  oC  deeds  g:ood  and  t^d ;  that  there  is  no  such
thing  as  this  world  or  the  next ;  that  there  are  no  such
things  as  either  parents  or  a  spontaneous  generation
elsewhere ;  that  mere  b  no  such  thing  as  recluses  and
brahmins  who  tread  the  right  path  and  walk  aright,
who  have,  of  and  by  themselves,  comprehended  and
reali2ed  this  and  other  worlds  and  made  (t  all  known
to  others. — This  is  the  kind  of  acquisition  of  views
which,  if  pracdsed,  makes  wrong  dispositions  wax
apace  while  right  dbpositions  wane.'

Next,  what  kind  of  acquisition  of  views  leads,  if
ensued,  to  wrong  dispositions  waning  while  right  dis¬
positions  wax  apace  ? — Take  a  man  whose  view  is  that
there  are  such  things  as  alms  sacrifice  and  oblations ;
that  there  is  indeed  such  a  thing  as  the  fruit  and  har¬
vest  of  deeds  good  and  bad ;  that  there  are  really  such
things  as  this  world  and  the  next ;  that  there  are  really
Such  things  as  parents  and  a  spontaneous  generation
ebewbere ;  and  that  there  are  really  such  things  as
recluses  and  brahmins  who  tread  the  right  path  and


1 86  CXIV.  SBVITABBA-ASEVITABBA-SUTTA*  M.  HI.  53.


walk  aright,  who  have,  of  and  by  themselves,  compre¬
hended  and  realized  this  and  other  worlds  and  made  ic
all  known  to  others. — This  is  the  kind  of  acquisition  of
views  which  leads,  if  practised,  to  wrong  dispositions
waning  while  right  dispositions  wax  apace.

Hence  proceeds  the  Lord’s  utterance : — The  acquisi¬
tion  of  views  is  twofold  .  .  .  each  being  alternative  to
the  other.

VII,  The  entertainment  of  Personality  .  .  .  alterna¬
tive  to  the  other ; — these  were  the  Lord’s  views  and
they  proceed  from  the  following : — Entertainment  of
Personality  is  (*)  not  to  be  ensued  if  thereby  wrong
dispositions  wax  apace  while  right  dispositions  wane,
but  {^)  to  be  ensued  if  thereby  wrong  dispositions
wane  while  right  dispositions  wax  apace.

Now,  first,  what  kind  of  [58]  Entertainment  of  Per¬
sonality  leads,  if  ensued,  to  wrong  dispositions  waxing
apace  while  right  dispositions  wane? — If  Ill  attends
the  Entertainment  of  Personality  and  if  there  is  no
final  term  to  the  round  of  the  man’s  rebirths,  then
wrong  di^ositions  wax  apace  while  right  dispositions
wane,  if  however,  111  does  not  attend  the  Entertain¬
ment  of  Personality  and  if  therefore  there  is  a  final
term  to  the  round  of  the  man’s  rebirths,  then  wrong
dispositions  wane  while  right  dispositions  wax  apace.

Hence  proceeds  the  Lord’s  utterance; — The  Enter-
tainment  of  Personality  is  twofold  .  .  .  each  being
alternadve  to  the  other.

Such,  sir,— concluded  SSriputta — is  how  1  under¬
stand  the  expanded  meaning  of  the  Lord’s  succinct  and
unexpanded  utterance.

Quite  right,  SSriputta,  quite  right ;  you  have  quite
rightly  understood  the  expanded  meaning  of  my  succinct
and  unexpanded  utterance.  1  endorse  and  repeat  [64-
55]  each  word  you  have  said ;  and  the  meaning  of  my
utterance  is  thus  to  be  explained.

Furthermore.  Sirlputca,  I  lay  it  down  that  there  is  a
twofold  manner  for  practising  and  not  practising  the
empbyment  of  eye  and  ear,  smell  and  taste,  touch  and
mentality,  in  their  respective  spheres.


M.  iii.  $&•


WHAT  DOES  IT  LEAD  TO  ?


187


Hereupon,  Sariputta  said  to  the  Lord  that  he  under¬
stood  the  expanded  meaning  of  the  Lord  s  succinct  and
unexpanded  utterance  to  be.  . .  fwhat  be  then  proceeded
[56-8]  to  set  forth  for  each  of  tne  six  senses,  showing
how  in  each  case  the  practice  or  non- practice  should
respectively  depend  on  whether  or  not  the  result  was
to  make  wrong  dispositions  wane  and  right  dispositions
wax  apace).

Quite  right,  Ssriputta,  quite  right ;  you  have  quite
rightly  understood  the  expanded  meaning  of  my  succinct
and  unexpanded  utterance.  I  endorse  and  repeat
every  word  you  have  said ;  and  the  meaning  of  my
utterance  is  thus  to  be  explained.

Furthermore,  SSriputta,  I  lay  it  down  that  there  is  a
twofold  manner  for  practising  and  not  practising  the
use,  severally,  of  robes,  alms,  lodging,  villages,  town-
ships,  cities,  countries  and  individuals.

p9]  Hereupon,  SSriputta  said  to  the  Lord  that  be
understood  the  expanded  meaning  of  the  Lords
succinct  and  cnexpanded  utterance  to  be  (what  he  then
proceeded  to  set  forth  for  each  of  the  foregoing  eight
categories,  showing  how  in  each  case  the  practice  or
non-practice  should  respectively  depend  on  whether  or
not  the  result  was  to  make  wrong  dispositions  wane
and  right  dispositions  wax  apace).

Quite  right,  Ssriputta,  .  .  .  [60]  thus  to  be  explained.
If  the  expanded  meaning  of  my  succinct  utterance
were  thus  understood  by  every  noble,  every  brahmin,
every  middle-class  man,  every  peasant,  long  would  it
redound  to  their  good  and  well-being,  If  the  meaning
were  thus  understood  by  the  whole  universe  with  its
gods  its  Maras  and  Brahmas,  with  its  recluses  and
brahmins  and  gods  and  men,  long  would  it  redound  to
their  good  and  well-being.  '

[61]  Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the
reverend  S&ripuita  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said,


cxv.  BAHU-DHXTUXA-SUTTA.


M.  liL  62.


Ids


cxv.  BAHU-DHATUKA-SUTTA.

DIVERSE  APPROACHES.

Tnus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  staying  at  SSvatthI
in  Jeta’s  grove  in  AnSthapin^lika^s  pleasaunce,  the  Lord

thus  addressed  the  Almsmen Whatsoever  alarms _

whatsoever  perturbations — whatsoever  desolations _

arise,  all  proceed  from  the  fool,  not  from  the  informed.
Just  as  it  is  from  the  hut  of  bamboo  or  bracken  that  the
fire  breaks  out  which  consumes  even  storied  mansions
which  are  cased  in  plaster  and  keep  out  the  wind  with
doors  that  fit  and  casements  that  shut, — so  it  is  always
from  the  fool  and  never  from  the  informed  that  there
arise  those  alarms,  perturbations  and  desolations  which
are  present  in  the  fool  and  absent  in  the  informed.  For,
the  informed  have  neither  alarms,  nor  perturbations
nor  desolations.  Therefore,  Almsmen,  train  yourselves
up  to  become  informed  by  study.

[62]  At  what  stage,  sir,  asked  the  reverend  A nanda,
can  an  Almsman  be  rightly  described  as  informed  bv
study  ?

When,  Ananda,  Che  Almsman  has  mastered  (i)  the
Elements,  (2)  the  Senses,  and  (3)  the  Chain  of  Causa¬
tion,  together  with  (4)  the  rationally  possible  and  the
rationally  Impossible,— then  can  an  Almsman  be  rightly
described  as  informed  by  study.  ®  ^

When,  sir,  can  he  be  rightly  described  as  having
mastered  the  Elements  ^  *

There  are  eighteen  of  these  dements,  namely  the
sense-organ,  the  object  of  sense,  and  the  sense-cognition
for  each  of  the  six  senses  of  sight,  hearing,  smell,  taste,
touch  and  mentality.  When  the  Almsman  knows  and
sees  these  eighteen  elements,  then  he  can  rightly  be
described  as  having  mastered  the  elements.

Can  he  reach  this  mastery  in  another  manner  ?

Yes.  There  are  these  six  dements,  namdy  earth,
water,  air.  fire,  space,  mentality;  and  when  the


DIVERSE  APPROACHES.


M.  Hi.  63,


189


Almsman  knows  and  sees  these  six,  he  can  rightly  be
described  as  having  mastered  the  elements.

Can  he  reach  this  mastery  ia  yet  another  manner  ?

Yes.  There  are  these  six  elements,  namely  comfort
and  discomfort,  happiness  and  unhappiness,  poised
equanimity  and  ignorance ;  and  when  the  Almsman
knows  and  sees  these  six,  he  can  rightly  be  described  as
having  mastered  the  elements.

Can  he  reach  this  mastery  In  yet  another  manner  ?

Yes.  There  are  these  six  elements,  namely  passion,
renunciation,  rancour  and  non*rancour,  [68]  harmful  ness
and  harmlessness  ;  and  when  the  Almsman  knows  and
sees  these  six,  he  can  rightly  be  described  as  having
mastered  the  elements.

Can  he  reach  this  mastery  in  yet  another  manner?

Yes.  There  are  these  three  elements,  namely,
passion,  form  and  non-form  ;  and  when  the  Almsman
knows  and  sees  these  three,  he  can  rightly  be  described
as  having  mastered  the  elements.

Can  be  reach  this  mastery  in  yet  another  manner  ?

Yes-  There  are  these  two  elements,  the  derived
and  the  underived  ;  and  when  the  Almsman  knows  and
sees  these  two,  be  can  rightly  be  described  as  having
mastered  the  Elements.

When,  sir,  can  he  rightly  be  described  as  having
mastered  Sense?

There  are  six  internal  and  six  external  aspects  of
sense,  the  six  sense-organs  and  the  sense-objects  of
each  of  the  $bc.  When  the  Almsman  knows  and  sees
this  pair  of  sixes,  he  can  rightly  be  described  as  having
mastered  Sense.

When,  sir,  can  he  rightly  be  described  as  having
mastered  the  Chain  of  Causation  ?

Take,  Ananda,  an  Almsman  who  knows  the  follow¬
ing: — If  this  is,  then  chat  comes  about ;  if  this  is  not,
then  that  does  not  come  about ;  when  iAis  is  laid  to
rest,  then  tAai  passes  to  rest.  Factors  are  conditioned
by  ignorance,  consciousness  by  the  factors,  Name-and-
Form  by  consciousness,  organs  of  sense  by  Name-and-
Form,  contact  by  sense-organs,  feelings  by  sense*orgarts,


1 90  CX V.  BAHU  -DH ATU  K A-SUTTA-  M .  Ill-  64-

craving  by  feelings,  attachment  by  craving,  [64]
existence  by  attachment,  birth  by  existence ;  and  by
birth  come  old-age  and  death,  with  sorrow  and  lamenta¬
tion,  pain,  suffering  and  tribulation.  And  this  is  how  all
that  makes  up  III  is  laid  to  rest . — By  laying  ignorance
to  rest  with  no  trace  of  passion  left  behind  the  factors
are  laid  to  rest,  by  laying  factors  to  rest  consciousness
is  laid  to  rest,  by  laying  consciousness  to  rest  Name-
and-Form  are  laid  to  rest,  by  laying  Name-and-Form
to  rest  the  organs  of  sense  are  laid  to  rest,  by  laying  the
organs  of  sense  to  rest  contact  is  laid  to  rest,  by  laying
contact  to  rest  feelings  are  laid  to  rest,  by  laying  feelings
to  rest  craving  is  laid  to  rest,  by  laying  craving  to  rest
attachment  is  laid  to  rest,  by  laying  attachment  to  rest
existence  is  laid  to  rest,  by  laying  existence  to  rest
birth  is  laid  to  rest,  by  laying  birth  to  rest  old-age  and
death  are  laid  to  rest,  and  therewithal  disappear  sorrow
and  lamentation,  pain,  suffering  and  tribulation,  so  that
ail  that  makes  up  III  is  laid  to  rest.  At  this  point  an
Almsman  can  rightly  be  described  as  having  mastered
the  Chain  of  Causation.

When,  sir,  can  an  Almsman  be  rightly  described  as
having  mastered  the  rationally  possible  and  the
rationally  impossible  ?

Take,  Ananda,  an  Almsman  who  knows  clearly  as
follows : —

It  is  impossible  and  out  of  the  question  for  a  man  of
vision  to  approach  a  factor  as  everlasting;  but  it  is
possible  for  an  ordinary  man  to  do  so.

It  Is  impossible  for  a  man  of  vision,  but  possible  for
an  ordinary  man,  to  approach  a  factor  as  well-being.

It  is  impossible  for  a  man  of  vision,  but  possible
for  an  ordinary  man,  to  approach  a  mental  object  as
Self,

It  is  impossible  for  a  man  of  vision,  but  possible  for
an  ordinary  man,  to  take  his  mother's  [65]— or  his
father's — life.

It  is  Impossible  for  a  man  of  vision,  but  possible  for
an  ordinary  man,  out  of  wickedness  of  heart  to  cause
the  Truth-finder's  blood  to  flow.


M.  Hi  66.


DtVeRSE  APPROACHES.


191


It  is  impossible  for  a  man  of  vision,  but  possible  for
an  ordinary  man,  to  break  up  the  Confraternity.

It  is  impossible  for  a  man  of  vision,  but  possible  for
an  ordinary  man,  to  elect  another  Master.

It  is  impossible  that  in  one  universe  there  should
at  one  and  the  same  time  be  simultaneously  two
Arahats  all*enlightened  ;  but  it  is  possible  for  there  to
be  one.

It  is  impossible  that  in  one  universe  there  should  at
one  and  tfiesame  time  be  simultaneously  two  Emperors
of  the  World ;  but  it  is  possible  for  there  to  be
one.

It  is  impossible  for  a  woman  to  be  an  Arahat  all-
enlightened ;  but  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  be.

It  is  impossible  for  a  woman  to  be  an  Emperor  of
the  World  ;  but  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  be.

It  is  impossible  for  a  woman  to  be  a  Sakka  [66]  or
a  Mira  or  a  BrahmS ;  but  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  be
any  of  these.

It  is  impossible  for  the  fruit  of  bodily  misconduct —
or  of  misconduct  in  speech  or  thought— to  be  pleasant,
agreeable  and  pleasing  ;  but  it  is  possible  for  the  fruit
to  be  unpleasant,  disagreeable  and  unpleasing.

It  is  possible  ^at  the  fruit  of  right  conduct  of  body

_ _ or  of  speech  or  of  thought — ^ould  be  pleasant,

agreeable  and  pleasing ;  but  it  is  impossible  for  the
fruit  to  be  unpleasant,  disagreeable  and  unpleasIng.

It  is  possible  for  a  man  given  to  misconduct  of  body
or  of  speech  or  of  thought — by  reason  of  that
cause  and  condition  to  be  reborn,  at  the  body’s  dissolu¬
tion  after  death,  in  a  state  of  misery  and  suffering  and
CEdamity  or  in  purgatory ;  but  it  is  impossible  for  such
a  man  to  be  reborn  in  a  state  of  bliss  in  heaven.

It  is  impossible  fora  man  of  right  conduct  of  body —
or  of  speech  or  of  thought— by  reason  of  that  cause
and  condition  to  be  reborn,  at  the  body's  dissolution
after  death,  in  a  state  of  misery  and  suffering  and
calamity  or  in  purgatory ;  but  it  is  possible  for  such  a
man  to  be  reborn  in  a  state  of  bliss  in  heaven.

At  this  point,  Ananda,  an  Almsman  can  rightly  be


192


CXV.  BAHU-DEiTUBul-SirrTA.


U.iQ.^S.


described  as  having  mastered  the  rationally  possible  and
the  tationaily  impossible.

Hereupon,  the  reverent  Ananda  said  to  the  Lord  : —
Wonderful,  sir ;  marvellous  I  What  shall  be  the  name
of  this  exposition  ?

Well,  know  it  as  ‘  The  many  elements,*  or  ‘  The  four
in  succession/  or  ‘The  mirror  of  the  Doctrine/  or
‘The  drum  of'Deatblessness/  or  ‘Victory  in  the  fight*

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXVI.  ISIGILI-SUTTA
A  NOMINAL  LIST.

[68]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Fajagaha  on  Mount  Isigili,  addressing  the
Almsmen,  the  Lord  said  :  Do  you  see  Mount  VebhSra
there  ?

Yes,  sir.

It  used  to  have  a  different  name  and  designation.
Do  you  see  Mount  Pandava  there,  and  Mount  Vepulla
and  the  Vulture’s  Peak  yonder  ?

Yes,  sir.

They  too  all  used  to  have  different  names  and
desffinations.  Do  you  see  Mount  Isigili  here  P

YeSf  sir.

This  Mount  Isigili  retains  its  old  name  and  designa*
tion.  Time  was  when  five  hundred  Pacceka  Buddhas  had
1  oog  been  resident  on  this  Mou  nt  Isigili  T  hey  could  be
seen  entering  the  mount  but,  once  entered,  could  be
seen  no  more.  Observing  this,  men  said  the  mount
swallowed  up  chose  s^es  {tH  gilaH) ;  and  so  It  got
the  name  of  ‘  Mount  Swallow-s^e.’  I  will  tell  you,
Almsmen,  names  of  those  Paccesa  Buddhas ;  1  will
recoimt  and  relate  their  names.  [69]  Listen  and  (»y
attention  and  I  will  speak.  Then  to  the  attentive
Aln^nten  the  Lord  began

The  Pacceka  Buddha  named  Arit(ha  had  long  been


M.  iiL  70


A  NOMINAL  LI6T.


*93


resident  on  Mount  UigUi,  as  had  the  Pacceka  Buddha
named  Uparitrjrha.  Long  resident  there  too  were  the
Pacceka  Buddhas  named  respectively  Tagarasikhi»
Yasassi,  Sudassana,  Piyadassl,  Gandhara,  Piodola,
Up3sabba»  Nicha,  Tacha,  Sutav^  and  Bhivitatca.
Hear  me  the  stately  roll  0/  names  tell  o'er
0/  mankind's  saintly  sons  pre-eminent,
who,  high  above  all  turmoil,  all  desires,
each  /or  himself,  Enlightenmenl  attained: —

*Ari^ha>  UpaH^^ha,  Tagarasikhi,  Yasassi>  Sudassana,
Piyadass?  the  enlightened,  GandhSra»  Piu^ola  and
UpSsabha,  Nitha,  Tatha,  Suiavi,  BhSvitatta,  [70]
Sumbha»  Subha,  Methulaand  A^^hama,  Athassumegha,
Anigha,  Sudi^a, — passionless  Paccel^  Buddhas ;  and
majestic  HingQ  and  Hinga,  the  two  Jalis,  s^es  both,
and  At^haka,  with  Kosaia  the  Buddha  and  Su^ha,  and
Upanemi  and  Nemi  and  Santacltta  in  his  truth  and
verity,  stainless  and  informed,  the  black  and  swarthy
Vijita  and  Jiia,  and  Anga  and  Panga  and  Gutijjita ;
Pass!  too,  who  renounced  attachments  whence  springs
III,  and  AparSjita  who  triumphed  over  MSra*s  might,
with  Satthi,  PavatU,  Saxabhanga,  Lomahansa  and
Uccangamaya,  Asila,  AnSsava,  Manomaya,  and  Ban-
dhumi  who  banish^  pride,  and  Tadadhimutta  and
stainless  Ketuma, — with  KetumbarSga,  Matanga,  and
Any  a.  Then  there  were  Accuta  and  AccutagSmabyi*
maka,  Sumangala  Dabbila  Supacl^hlta  Asayha  and
KhemlbhirataandSorata  Duranoayaand  Sangha.  Also
there  wereUjjaya,  Apara  the  sage,  and  Sayha,  tireless  in
zeal,  together  with  four  Anandas,  four  Nandas  and  four
Upanandas,  making  twelve  in  all ;  BhSradvSja,  whose
last  birth  this  was,  and'  Bodhi  and  Mabinima ;  then
there  were  unrivalled,  sh^^  Sikh!  and  BhSxadvSja
the  good,  with  Tissa  and  Upatissa  who  had  sundered
the  ties  of  existence,  UpasidaxT  and  Sldari  who  had
sundered  the  ties  of  craving,  the  Buddha  Mahgala  from
passion  freed,  Usabha,  escaped  from  the  gins  of  the

^  i  leave  unveisiBed  (his  scring  of  names,  maoy  of  wbicb  may
well  be  mere  adjectives.

IJ.


194


CXVl.  ISIGILl-SOTTA-


M-  iii.  71*


root  of  Ill,  Upanrta,  who  found  the  excellent  way.
Uposatha,  Sundara,  SaccaiiSma,  Jeta,  Jayanta,  Paduma,
and  Uppala,  Padumuttara,  Rakkhita,  and  Pabbata,
[71]  Minatthaddha,  Sobhica,  Vitariigm  and  Kanha  the
BuSdha  whose  heart  had  found  Deliverance.

All  tktS6,  ivilk  otfur poUnt  conquerors
of  birth's  JtU  sway,  Paccc^n  Buddhas  •mere.

Laud  these  greab  sages  who  have  passed  (o  rest ;
land  these  whose  boundless  might  sundo^d  all  ties.


CXVn.  MAHA^CATTARISAKA-SUTTA.

RIGHT  VIEWS  RANK  FIRST.

Thus  have  1  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  staying
at  Savatthi  m  Jeta’s  grove  in  AnSthapliidika’s  pleas-
aunce,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen,  saying:—!  will
expound  to  you  Noble  Right  Concentration,  with  the
means  thereto  and  with  its  concomitants.  Listen  and
pay  attention  and  I  will  speak,  Then  to  the  attentive
Almsmen  the  Lord  thus  began

What  is  Noble  Right  Concentration,  with  the  means
thereto  and  its  concomitants  } — It  means  the  focussing
of  the  heart  with,  a  sevenfold  equipment  of  Right
Views,  Right  Thoughts,  Right  Speech,  Right  Action,  •
Right  Occupation,  Right  Effort  and  Right  Mind¬
fulness.

First  and  foremost  come  Right  Views,  which  consist
in  a  man’s  conviction  that  such  and  such  views  are
wrong,  and  chat  such  and  such  views  are  right.

Now  what  are  wrong  views  ^ — They  are  views

that _ there  is  no  such  thing  as  alms  or  sacrifice

or  oblations ;  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  the
fruit  and  harvest  of  deeds  good  and  bM ;  that
there  are  no  such  things  as  this  world  or  the  next;
that  there  are  no  such  things  as  either  parents  or  a


M.  ilK  73.


RIGHT  VIEWS  RANK  FIRST.


195


spontaneous  generation  elsewhere ;  [72]  that  there  are
no  such  things  as  recluses  and  brahmins  who  tread  the
right  path  and  walk  aright,  who  have,  of  and  by  them^
sdves,  comprehended  and  realized  this  and  other
worlds  and  make  ic  all  known  to  others.

What  are  right  views  ? — They  are  twofold,  say  I.
On  the  one  hand  there  are  right  views  which  are,
however,  accompanied  by  Cankers,  are  mixed  up  with
good  works,  and  lead  to  attachments.  On  the  other
fiand  there  are  Right  Views  which  are  Noble,  freed
from  Cankers,  transcending  mundane  things,  and  in*
eluded  in  the  Path.

Thoie  right  views  which  are  accompanied  by
Cankers,  are  mixed  up  with  good  works,  and  lead  to
attacbmeuts,  recognize  that  there  are  such  things  as
alms  and  sacrifice  and  oblations ;  that  there  is  indeed
such  a  thing  as  the  fruit  and  harvest  of  deeds  good  and
bad ;  that  there  are  really  such  things  as  this  world  and
the  next;  that  there  are  really  such  things  as  parents
and  spontaneous  generation  elsewhere ;  and  that  there
are  really  such  things  as  recluses  and  brahmins  who
tread  the  right  path  and  walk  aright,  who  have,  of
and  by  themselves,  comprehended  and  realized  this
and  other  worlds  and  make  it  all  known  to  others.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Noble  Right  Views  which
are  of  the  Path— embracing  comprehension,  the  faculty
of  comprehension,  the  mightof  comprehension,  thefactor
of  enlightenment  which  comes  from  a  critical  study  of
the  Doctrine,  in  the  man  whose  heart  is  noble  and  free
of  Cankers,  who  is  of  the  Noble  Path  and  who  is
imbued  with  it  and  has  devel^^ed  it  within  him—
these  Right  Views  are  styled  Right  Views  that  are
Noble,  freed  from  Cankers,  transcending  mundane
things  and  included  in  the  Path.

Right  Effort  is  his  whose  aim  is  to  eschew  wrong
views  and  to  foster  right  views.  Right  Mindfulness
is  his  as,  in  mindfulness,  he  eschews  wrong  views  and
fosters  right  views. — These  three  qualities  of  right
views,  ri^t  effort  and  right  mindfulness  revolve  round
Right  Views  and  move  cnem  on  and  on.


T  96  CX vn-  MAHi-CATTiKiSAK A-SUn:A.  M .  «l.  73.

In  thought  too  Right  Views  come  first,  with  their
conviction  that  such  and  such  a  thought  is  wrong  and
that  such  and  such  a  thought  is  right.

[78]  Now,  what  are  wrong  thoughts  ? — They  are
lustful  thoughts,  spiteful  thou^ts  and  cruel  thoughts.

What  are  right  thoughts  ?— They  too  are  twofold,
say  I.  On  the  one  hand,  there  are  right  thoughts
which  are,  however,  accompanied  by  Cankers,  are
mixed  up  with  good  works,  and  lead  to  attachments.
On  the  other  hand,  there  ace  Right  Thoughts,  which
are  Noble,  freed  from  Cankers,  transcending  mundane
thirds,  and  included  in  the  Path,

Those  right  thoughts  which  are  accompanied  by
Cankers,  are  mixed  up  with  good  works  and  tend  to
attachments,  include  thoughts  of  Renunciation,  thoughts
void  of  spite  and  thoughts  void  of  cruelty.

On  the  other  hand,  Noble  Right  Thoughts  which  are
of  the  Path — embracing  reason  and  reasoning ;  thought
with  its  conceivings  and  conceptions,  application  of  the
mind  and  utterance  of  speech,  in  the  man  whose  heart
is  noble  and  free  of  Cankers,  who  is  of  the  Noble
and  who  is  imbued  with  it  and  has  developed  it  within

him _ ,  these  Right  Thoughts  are  styled  Right

Thoughts  that  are  Noble,  freed  from  Cankers,  tran¬
scending  mundane  things  and  included  in  the  Path.  To
him  whose  aim  is  to  eschew  wrong  thoughts  and  to
foster  right  thoughts, — unto  him  comes  Right  Effort,
As  in  mindfulness  he  eschews  wrong  thoughts  and
fosters  ri^t  thoughts,  unto  him  comes  Right  Mind-
fulness.-^hese  three  qualities  of  right  views,  right
effort  and  right  mindfulness  revolve  round  Right
Thoughts  and  move  them  on  and  on,

In  speech  too  Right  Views  come  first,  with  their
conviction  that  such  and  such  speech  is  wrong  and  that
such  and  such  speech  is  right.

Now,  what  is  wrong  speech  ? — It  is  lying,  a  spiteful
tongue,  a  savage  tongue,  and  chatter,

what  is  right  speech  ?— It  too  is  twofold,  say  I.  On
the  one  hand,  there  is  right  speech  which  is,  however,
accompanied  by  Cankers,  is  mixed  up  with  good  works,


M.  lii.  74-  RIOHT  VIBWS  RANK  FIRST.  197

and  le^s  to  accRchmenis.  [74|  On  the  ocher  hand>
there  is  Right  Speech  which  is  Noble,  freed  from
Cankers,  transcending  mundane  things  and  included  in
the  Path-

That  right  speech  which  is  accompanied  by
Cankers,  Is  mixed  up  with  good  works,  and  leads  to
actachmencs^  includes  avoidance  of  lying,  of  spiteful
words,  of  savage  words  and  of  chatter.

On  the  other  hand,  Noble  Right  Speech  which  is  of
the  Path — embracing  abstinence  and  abstention  and
abstaining  and  avoidance  in  the  matter  of  the  four
forms  of  misconduct  of  speech,  on  the  part  of  the  man
whose  heart  is  noble  and  free  of  Cankers,  who  is  of  the
Noble  Path  and  who  is  imbued  with  it  and  has
developed  it  within  him — this  Right  Speech  is  styled
Right  Speech  chat  is  Noble,  freed  from  Cankers,  tran¬
scending  mundane  things  and  included  in  the  Path.
R^bt  Effort  is  his  whose  aim  is  to  eschew  wrong
speech  and  to  foster  right  speech.  Right  Mindfulness
is  his  as  in  mindfulness  he  eschews  wrong  speech  and
fosters  right  speech. — These  three  qualities  of  right
views,  right  effort  and  right  mindfulness  revolve  round
Right  Speech  and  move  it  on  and  on.

In  deeds  too  Right  Views  come  first,  with  their
conviction  that  such  and  such  an  action  is  wrong
and  that  such  and  such  an  action  is  right.

Now,  what  is  a  wrong  action? — It  is  taking  life,  not
giving  alms,  sensuality.  What  is  a  right  action  ? — It
is  twofold,  say  1.  On  the  one  hand  .  •  •  [75]  revolve
round  Right  Action  and  move  it  on  and  on.

In  livelihoods  too  Right  Views  come  first,  with  their
conviction  that  such  an  occupation  is  wrong  and  that
such  and  such  an  occupation  is  right.

Now,  what  is  a  wrong  occupation? — It  is  cozening
and  cajoling  people,  playing  on  their  dispositions  and
bamboozling  them,  it  is  insatiate  greed.

What  is  right  occupation  ? — It  is  twofold,  say  I.  On
the  one  hand  .  .  .  revolve  round  Right  Occupation
and  move  it  on  and  on.

Right  Views  come  first.  [76]  If  a  man  has  really


C98  CXVU.  KAHA-CATTARISAKA-SUTTA.  M.Ui,  77.

Right  Views,  Right  Thoughts  are  operative ;  if  he
has  really  Right  Thoughts,  Right  Speech  is  opera¬
tive  ;  if  he  has  really  Right  Speech,  Right  Action  is
operative ;  if  he  has  really  Right  Action,  Right  Occu-

Sation  is  operative;  if  he  has  really  Right  Occupation,
:ight  Mindfulness  is  operative;  if  he  has  really  Right
Mindfulness,  Right  Concentration  is  operative;  if  he
has  really  Right  Concentration,  Right  Knowledge  is
operative ;  and  if  he  has  really  Right  Knowledge,  then
Right  Deliverance  U  effectual.  Thus  the  Almsman
under  training  has  eight  stages  to  go  and  the  Arab  at
ten.

Right  Views  come  first.  If  a  man  has  really
Right  Views,  for  him  wrong  views  are  ended;  ended
too  for  him  are  the  hosts  of  bad  and  wrong  dis¬
positions  which  grow  up  in  the  train  of  wrong  views,
while,  as  the  train  of  right  views,  hosts  of  right  disposi¬
tions  march  on  to  perfected  development.  If  a  man
has  really  Right  Thoughts,  for  him  wrong  thoughts  are
ended ;  ended  too  for  him  are  the  hosts  of  bad  and
wrong  dispositions  which  grow  up  as  the  train  of
wrong  thoughts,  while  hosts  of  right  dispositions  march
on  to  perfected  development.  If  a  man  has  really
Right  Speech — Right  Actlon^ — -Right  Occupation —
[77]  Right  Effort — Right  Mindfulness — Right  Concen-
iraiion — Right  Knowledge — Right  Deliverance — ,  for
him  in  each  case  the  converse  is  ended ;  ended  too  for
him  are  the  hosts  of  bad  and  wrong  dispositions  which
respectively  grow  up  as  the  train  of  that  converse,
while  hosts  of  right  dispositions  march  on  to  perfected
development-  Thus,  if  we  add  its  train  to  each  of  the
preceding  tens  there  are  a  score  arrayed  for  the  right
and  a  score  for  the  wrong ;  and  so  there  has  been  set
afoot  the  Exposition  of  5e  Great  Forty,  which  could
never  be  set  afoot  by  any  recluse  or  brahmin,  by  any
god  or  MSra  or  BrahmS,  or  in  any  universe  whatso¬
ever,

If  any  recluse  or  brahmin  thinks  this  Exposition  of
the  Great  Forty  matter  for  contumely  and  scorn,  the
result  to  him  is  that,  here  and  now,  he  relegates  to  the


M.  >11.78.  RIGHT  VIEWS  RANK  FIRST.  199

Sphere  of  the  erroneous  ten  utterances,  major  and
minor,  of  the  Doctrine. — If  the  good  man  rejects
Right  Views,  he  reveres  and  extols  the  recluses  and
brahmins  with  wrong  views.  If  he  rejects  Right
Thoughts,  [78]  he  reveres  and  extols  the  recluses  and
brahmins  with  wrong  thoughts.  And  the  same  holds
good  for  right  and  wrong  speech,  action,  occupation,
effort,  mindfulness,  concentration,  Knowledge  and
Deliverance.  Such  is  the  result  to  him.  Not  so  the
men  of  Ukkala,  Vassa  and  BhaPlfta.  Albeit  these  two
believed  in  neither  cause  nor  consequence  and  were
nihilists,  they  would  not  regard  with  contumely  and
scorn  the  Exposition  of  the  Great  Forty.  And  why
not  ? — Through  their  fear  of  blame,  reproach  and
censure.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


cxvni.  anapAna-sati-sutta.

ON  BREATHING  EXERCISES.

Thus  have  1  heard.  Once  the  Lord  was  staying  at
Ssvatthi  in  the  Old  Pleasaunce  in  the  palace  of
Migara*s  mother,  with  numbers  of  well-known  Elders
and  disciples, — the  reverend  Sariputta,  Maha-M<^-
gall&na,  MahS-Kassapa,  Mahi-KaccSyana,  MahS-
kot^hita,  Maha- Kappina,  MahS-Cunda,  [79]  Anu-
ruddha,  Revata  and  Ananda,  together  with  other  well-
known  Elders  and  disciples.  At  the  time  the  Almsmen
wKo  were  Elders  were  instructing  and  teaching  the
novices, — some  taking  ten,  others  twenty  or  thirty  or
forty ;  and  under  this  instruction  and  teaching  the
novices  grew  to  higher  and  higher  specific  attain¬
ments.

On  the  Sabbath  of  the  full-moon  at  the  end  of  the
rains  the  Lord  was  sitting  in  the  open  in  the  moon-


2  OO  CXVItl.  A  NXpXn A'S ATI-S  U  TT A.  M*  UJ.  9c.

liffht,  with  the  Confraternity  gathered  around  him,
wnen,  observing  silence  to  reign  among  them  all,  he
addressed  the  Almsmen  in  these  words  I  find  content
in  this  vocation ;  in  it  I  find  contentment  of  heart.
Wherefore,  Almsmen,  strive  ever  more  and  more
zealously  to  attain  the  yet  unattained,  to  g^n  the  yet
ungained  and  to  realize  the  yet  unrealized.  1  look  to
be  back  here  again  in  SSvatthl  by  Komudi,  the  full-
moon  day  of  the  fourth  month.

When  it  reached  the  ears  of  the  Almsmen  belonging
to  chat  country  that  the  Lord  was  expected  bade  in
Sivatthl  at  this  date,  they  came  into  the  city  to  see  the
Lord;  the  Elders  grew  keener  and  keener  in  Instruct¬
ing  and  teaching  each  their  novices, — ten,  twenty,
thirty  or  forty  of  them  as  the  case  might  be ;  and  under
this  instruction  and  teaching  the  novices  [80]  ^ew  to
higher  and  higher  specific  atulnments.  On  the
sabbath  of  Komudi,  on  the  fifteenth,  the  full-moon  day
of  the  fourth  month,  the  Lord  was  sitting  in  the  open
in  the  moonlight,  with  the  Confraternity  gathered
around  him,  wnen,  observing  silence  to  reign  among
them  all,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen  in  these  words :
— There  is  no  calking,  all  talk  is  stilled  in  this  assembly
which  is  set  (as  it  were)  in  a  shining  mere.  Such  is
this  Confraternity  of  Almsmen — or  a  company  like  this,
— that  it  is  worthy  of  oblations,  offerings,  gifts  and
homage  and  is  the  richest  field  in  which  co  sow  the  seed
of  merit  Such  is  this  Confraternity  and  such  this
company  that  a  little  thing  given  to  it  thereby  becomes
great  and  a  great  thing  becomes  greater  still.  Such  a
Confraternity  or  Company  as  this  would  be  hard  co
find  in  the  whole  world  To  see  such  a  Confraternity
and  company  as  this  it  is  worth  journeying  many  a
league  carrying  the  burden  of  provisions  for  the
journey.  Such  is  this  Confraternity  and  such  is  this
company.  Within  this  Confraternity  there  are  Arahats,
— Almsmen  in  whom  the  Cankers  are  dead,  who  have
lived  the-  highest  life,  whose  task  is  done,  who  have
cast  off  their  burthen,  who  have  won  their  weal,  who
have  destroyed  sdl  bonds  that  bound  them  to  the


U.  uL  8(.


ON  BRC^tTHING  BXERCI8ES.


201


ceaseless  round  of  existence,  who  have  found  the
Deliverance  of  utter  Knowledge.  Within  thU  Confra¬
ternity  there  are  Almsmen  who,  by  destroying  the  five
bonds  which  bind  men  to  the  sensuous  world,  will  pass
hence  to  appear  spontaneously  elsewhere,  never  to
return  thence  to  earth.  Within  this  Confraternity  are
Almsmen  who,  by  destroying  the  three  bonds  and
also  by  minishing  passion  malice  and  delusion,  have
become  Once-returners  and,  on  their  last  return  to  this
world,  will  ffil]  make  an  end  of  III.  Within  this  Con¬
fraternity  tnere  are  Almsmen  who,  by  destroying  the
three  bonds,  are  launched  on  the  stream  of  salvation,
safe  from  any  evil  doom  hereafter,  assured  of  their
future,  destined  to  find  Enlightenment.  Within  this
Confraternity  there  are  Almsmen  who  live  in  the
practice  of  the  four  mindful  meditations,— of  the  four
exertions — of  the  four  bases  of  psychic  power— of  the
five  faculties  of  sense— of  the  five  forces— of  the  seven
factors  of  enlightenment — of  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path

_ of  friendliness  to  all— [8:^]  of  compassion  for  all-^f

rejoicing  with  all— of  poised  equanimity— of  pondering
on  foulness — and  on  the  perception  of  transiency.

Within  this  Confraternity  there  we  Almsmen  who
live  in  the  practice  of  cultivating  mindfulness  by
breathing  exercises.  If  cultivated  and  developed,
mindfulness  by  breathing  is  very  fruitful  and  profitable ;

_ It  perfects  the  four  bases  of  mindfulness,  which,  being

perfected,  perfect  the  seven  factors  of  enli^tenment,
which,  being  perfected,  perfect  in  turn  Deliverance  by
comprehension,

How,  Almsmen,  is  mindfulness  by  breathing  cultivated
and  developed  so  as  to  prove  very  fruitful  and  profitable  ?

_ Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  in  the  forest  or  at

the  foot  of  a  tree  or  in  an  abode  of  solitude,  sits  crws-
legged  with  body  erect,  with  mindfulness  as  the  objec¬
tive  he  sets  before  himself.  In  mindfulness  he  lakes  in
breath  and  in  mindfulness  he  exhales  it ;  he  knows
precisely  what  he  is  doing  when  he  is  inhaling  or  ex-
oaliog  either  a  long  breath  or  a  short  breath ;  he  schools
himself,  as  he  draws  his  breath  in  and  out,  to  be  alive


202


CX  vn  I.  AN  ApIn  A-  5ATI-SUTTA.


M.  iii(  83.


to  his  body  as  a  whole— or  co  still  bodily  factors— or  to
experience  contentment— or  [88]  to  experience  well¬
being  ;  he  schools  himself,  in  drawing  his  breath  m  and
out.  to  experience  the  heart’s  several  factors— or  to  still
them— or  to  experience  the  heart  as  a  whole— or  to
satisfy  the  hean— or  to  keep  the  heart  stedfast— or  to
set  the  heart  free.  He  schools  himself,  in  drawing  his
breach  in  and  out.  to  dwell  on  the  impermanence  of
things— or  on  passionlessness— or  on  the  cessation  of
things— or  on  eschewing  them.— This  is  how  mindful¬
ness  in  breathing  is  cultivated  and  developed  so  as  to
prove  vtty  fruitful  and  profitable.

How  is  mindfulness  by  breathing  cultivated  and
developed  so  as  to  perfect  the  four  bases  of  mindful¬
ness  ?— While  he  is  engaged  in  inhaling  or  exhaling,
With  a  precise  Itnowledge  0/  what  he  is  doing,  either
when  inhaling  or  when  exhaling  either  a  long  breath
or  a  short  breach,  when  schooling  himself  ^ther  to
«perience  the  body  as  a  whole  or  to  still  the  several
bodily  factors,— all  this  time,  in  his  contemplation  of
the  body  as  an  aggregation,  the  Almsman  dwells  ardent,
^“ve  to  all  he  is  doing,  and  mindful,— quit  of  all
worldly  wants  and  discontents.  Among  the  corporeal
elements  (earth,  water,  fire,  and  air)  I  classify  breath
inhaled  or  exhaled.  Therefore  the  Almsman  who
contemplates  the  body  as  an  aggregation,  dwells  the
while  ardent,  alive  to  what  he  is  doing,  and  mindful,-
quit  of  all  worldly  wants  and  discontent.  While  [84]
he  is  engaged  in  schooling  himself  in  his  breathing  to
experience  contentment  or  well-being,  or  to  experience
the  heart's  several  factors  or  co  still  them.— all  this
time,  m  his  contemplation  of  feelings  as  an  aggregation
the  Almsman  dwells  ardent,  alive  to  all  he  is  doing,
and  mindful,— quit  of  all  worldly  wants  and  discontent
Among  feelings  I  classify  thorough  attention  to  breath
inhaled  or  exhaled.  Therefore  the  Almsman  who
contempl^aies  feeling  as  an  aggregation,  dwells  the
while  ardent,  alive  to  all  he  is  doing,  and  mindful  —
quit  of  all  worldly  wants  and  discontent.  While  he  is
engaged  m  schooling  himself,  as  he  inhales  or  exhales


M.  ni.  Sj.


OH  BREATHING  EXERCISES.


20$


to  experience  ibe  heart  as  a  whole,  or  to  satisfy  the
heart,  or  to  keep  the  heart  s  ted  fast,  or  to  set  the  heart
free, — all  this  lime,  in  his  contemplation  of  the  heart  as
an  aggregution,  the  Almsman  dwells  ardent,  alive  to
all  he  is  doing,  and  mindful, — Quit  of  all  worldly  wants
and  discontent;  the  man  of  distracted  mind,  say  1,
cannot  develop  mindfulness  in  breathing.  While  he  is
engaged  in  schooling  himself,  as  he  inhales  or  exhales,
to  dwell  either  on  the  Impermanence  of  things  or  on
passionlessness  or  on  the  cessation  of  things  or  on
eschewing  them, — all  this  time,  in  his  contemplation  of
mental  objects  as  an  aggregation,  the  Almsman  dwells
ardent,  alive  to  every tMng,  mindful,  quit  of  all  worldly
wants  and  discontent.  Discerning  by  understanding  the
abandonment  of  all  wants  and  discontent,  [ii5j  he
surveys  this  theme  exhaustively,  Therefore,  in  his
contemplation  of  mental  objects  as  an  aggregation,  the
Almsman  dwells  ardent,  aJive  to  all  he  is  doing,  mind¬
ful,  quit  of  all  worldly  wants  and  discontent. — This  is
how  mindfulness  in  breathing  is  cultivated  and  de¬
veloped  so  as  to  perfect  the  four  bases  of  mindfulness.

How  are  the  four  bases  of  mindfulness  cultivated
and  developed  so  as  to  perfect  the  seven  factors  of
enlightenment  ? — While,  in  his  contemplation  of  the
body  as  an  aggregation,  the  Almsman  dwells  ardent,
alive  to  all  he  is  doing,  mindful,  quit  of  all  worldly
wants  and  discontent,  all  this  time  his  mindfulness  is
growing  fixed  and  undisiracted,  with  the  result  mean¬
while  that  the  factorofenlightenment  which  consists  of
mindfulness  is  implanted,  that  the  Almsman  develops
it,  and  that  It  moves  on  to  perfect  development.
Living  thus  mindful,  he  examines  and  scrutinizes,
and  analyzes  the  mental  object  with  his  understand¬
ing  ;  and  as  he  is  doing  so,  the  analytical  factor  of
enlightenment  is  meantime  being  implanted,  is  being
developed  by' the  Almsman,  and  is  moving  on  to  its
perfect  development,  with  the  concomitant  result  that
indomitable  zeal  is  implanted,  and  that  this  further
factor  of  enlightenment  Is  implanted,  is  developed  by
the  Almsman  and  moves  on  to  its  perfect  development.


_ ^N^P^NA-SATT-SUTTA.  M.  fit.  86.

To  the  man  with  zeal  implanted  in  him  comes  s^ls'
ration  without  alloy,  and  concomitantly  [861  the  factor
of  enlightenment  which  consists  in  satisfaction  is  im¬
planted,  js  develop^  by  the  Almsman,  and  moves  on
0  Its  perfect  development.  The  man  with  his  mind
satisfied  comes  to  enjoy  tranquillity  alike  of  body  and
fL  concomiuntly  the  factor  of  tranquillity  is

-mp  anted,  is  developed  by  the  Almsman,  and  mJvea
on  o  Its  perfect  development.  The  man  with  tran-
qmlliiy  and  well-bemg  of  body  finds  concentration  of
heart,  and  concomiunfly  the  concentration  factor  of  en¬
lightenment  IS  implanted,  is  developed  by  the  Alms¬
man,  and  moves  on  to  its  perfect  development  He
surveys  exhaustively  as  his  theme  his  heart  thus  sted-

the  factor  of  poised  equanimity
IS  implanted  IS  developed  by  the  Almsman,  and  moves  '
on  to  ICS  perfect  development-

ir  ""'e'hplation  of  the  body,  so

It  is  with  his  contemplation  of  ifelings-of  the  heart—
and  of  mental  objects  [87J.  each  resulting  in  the  oer-
development  of  the  several  factors  If  enlighwn-

•cuwl«7^n/.t^'‘“i  mihdfuln^s  are

cultivated  and  developed  so  as  to  perfect  the  seven
factors  of  enlightenment.

[88]  How  are  the  seven  factors  of  enlightenment
cultivated  and  develop^  so  as  to  perfect  D^eliverance
by  comprehension  ?— Take  an  Almsman  who  develops
in  turn  each  of  the  aforesaid  seven  factors  of  enlighteL
dependent  on  aloofness  passionl^ness
hnt  “'^5  maturing  by  Renunciation— This  is
anH  Ha  enlightenment  are  cultivated

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms-
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M.  liL  99.


MBniTATION  OH  THE  BODV.


205


CXIX.  KAYAGATA-SATI-SUTTA.

MEDITATION  ON  THE  BODY.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  S&vatthl  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  AnSthapindika’s
pleasaunce,  and  a  great  number  of  Almsmen  were
sitting  in  company  together  in  the  hall  af^er  their  meal
on  return  from  their  alms- round,  the  following  talk
arose  among  them  : — It  is  wonderful,  sirs,  ft  is  marvel>
lous,  to  what  a  pitch  the  Lord  who  knows  and  sees,
the  Arahat  all-enlightened,  has  cultivated  and  de¬
veloped  that  mindfulness  of  body  which  is  called  the
mindfulness  abundant  in  fruit  and  blessings  I  Here  the
talk  broke  off;  for,  when  evening  the  Lord  arose
from  his  meditations,  he  came  to  the  seat  set  for  him
in  hall,  and  asked  what  subject  had  engaged  them  in
their  conclave  and  what  talk  bad  been  broken  off.

'  They  told  him,  adding  chat  here  the  talk  had
broken  oft,  as  the  Lord  appeared.

How,  Almsmen,  is  mindfulness  of  body  cultivated
and  developed  so  as  to  abound  in  fruit  and  blessings?
— Take  an  Almsman  who,  in  the  forest  or  at  the
foot  of  a  tree  or  in  an  abode  of  solitude,  sits  cross-
legged  with  body  erect,  with  mindfulness  as  the  ob¬
jective  he  secs  before  himself.  In  mindfulness  he
takes  in  breath  and  in  mindfulness  he  exhales  it ;  he
knows  precisely  what  he  is  doing  when  he  is
inhaling  or  exhaling  either  a  long  breath  or  a  short
breath ;  he  schools  himself,  as  he  draws  his  breach  in
and  out,  to  be  alive  to  his  body  as  a  whole  or  to  still
bodily  factors.  As  he  dwells  thus  unflagging,  ardent,
and  purged  of  self,  all  worldly  thoughts  that  idly  come
and  go  are  abandoned,  and  with  thdr  abandonment
bis  heart  within  grows  stablished  and  planted  fast,
settled  and  concentrated. — In  this  way,  an  Almsman
develops  mindfulness  of  body.

Walking  or  silting  or  lying  down,  in  every  posture


206


CXIX .  KiY  AC  ATA-S  ATl-SUTT  A-


M.  ill.  90.


of  his  body,  he  knows  precisely  what  he  is  doing.  As
he  dwells  thus  undagging  .  .  .  mindfulness  of  body.

[90]  Again,  the  Almsman  is  always  mindful  and  pur¬
poseful  whether  in  going  forward  or  back,  in  looking
before  or  behind,  in  drawing  in  or  stretching  out  his
limbs,  in  conduct  of  cloak  bowl  and  robes,  in  eating  and
drinking,  in  chewing  and  tasting,  in  attending  to  the
needs  of  nature,  in  walking  or  standing  still,  in  sitting
or  in  lying  down,  asleep  or  awake,  speaking  or  silent.
As  he  dwells  thus  un  (lagging  .  .  .  mindfulness  of
body.

Again,  tiie  Almsman  reflects  on  this  self-same  body,
from  the  soles  of  the  foot  to  the  crown  of  the  head,  as
a  thing  bounded  by  skin  and  full  of  various  impurities.
There  Is  in  this  body,  says  he.  hair  of  head  or  body,  nails
and  teeth,  skin  and  flesh,  sinews  bones  and  marrow,
kidneys  heart  and  liver,  pleura,  spleen,  lungs,  inwards
and  ^weis,  stomach  and  faeces,  bile,  phlegm,  pus.
blood,  sweat,  fat,  tears,  serum,  saliva,  mucus,  synovial
fluid  and  urine.  Just  as  if  there  was  a  two-mouthed
sack  full  of  various  grains — such  as  rice  and  paddy,
beans  and  vetches,  sesame  and  husked  rice^,  and
a  man  with  eyes  to  see  were  to  reflect  as  he  emptied
the  sack  that  here  was  rice,  there  was  paddy,  here
were  beans,  there  were  vetches,  here  was  sesame  and
there  husked  rice; — In  just  the  same  way  does  the
Almsman  reflect  on  this  self-same  body,  from  the  sole
of  the  foot  to  the  crown  of  the  head,  as  a  thing  .  .  .
synovia]  fluid  and  urine.  As  he  dwells  thus  unflagging
.  .  .  mindfulness  of  body.

[91]  Again,  the  Almsman  reflects  on  this  self-same
body,  whatsoever  its  position  and  posture,  from  the
point  of  view  of  its  elements,  as  containing  within  it
the  four  elements  of  earth,  water,  Are  and  air.  Just  as
a  competent  butcher  or  his  apprentice,  when  Ke  has
killed  a  cow,  might  sic  at  the  cross-roads  with  the
carcase  and  cut  up  into  joints,  even  so  does  the  Alms¬
man  reflect  on  this  self-same  body,  whatsoever  its
position  or  posture,  from  the  point  of  view  of  its
elements,  as  containing  within  it  the  four  elements.


M  iil.  ?a.  MEDITATION  ON  THE  BODY.  20/

As  he  dwells  thus  unflagging  .  ,  ,  mindfulness  of
body.

Again,  just  as  if  the  Almsman  were  actually  looking
on  a  festering  corpse  after  one  two  or  three  days’
exposure  in  a  charnel-ground,  even  so  does  he  sum  up
this  self-same  body  as  having  these  properties  and  this
nature  and  this  future  before  ic.  As  he  dwells  thus
unflagging  .  .  .  mindfulness  of  body.

Again,  just  us  if  the  Almsman  were  actually  looking
on  a  corpse  exposed  in  the  charnel -ground  and  there
being  devoured  by  crows  or  falcons  or  vultures  or
dogs  or  jackals  or  divers  worms,  even  so  does  he
sum  up  this  self-same  body  .  .  .  {g/c.  as  in  prtv.
para.).

[92]  Again,  just  as  if  the  Almsman  were  actually
looking  on  a  corpse  exposed  in  the  charnel-ground,
showing  as  a  chain  of  bones  either  still  with  flesh  and
blood  and  sinews  to  bind  them  together,  or  with  only
smears  of  the  flesh  and  blood  left  with  the  bones  and
sinews,  or  with  the  Hesh  and  blood  entirely  gone,  or
with  sinews  gone  and  only  the  bones  left  scattered
around,  here  a  hand  and  there  a  foot,  here  a  leg  and
there  an  arm,  here  the  pelvis,  there  the  spine  and
there  the  skull, — even  so  does  be  sum  up  this  self-same
body  .  .  .  {tic.  as  in  pfnuUimaU  para.)  .  -  .  of  body.

Again,  just  as  if  the  Almsman  were  actually  looking
on  a  corpse  exposed  in  the  charael-ground,  with  the
bones'whitening  like  sea-shells  or  piled  in  a  heap  as
the  years  roll  by  or  crumbled  to  dust,— even  so  does
he  sum  up  this  self-same  body  .  .  .  {eU.  as  in  ante-
penuitimaU  para.) ...  of  body.

Again,  the  Almsman,  divested  of  lusts  and  of  wrong
dispositions,  devel(^s  in  succession  the  First.  [93]
Second,  Third  and  [94]  Fourth  Ecstasies  in  SuSta
No.  39,  eU).  As  he  dwells  thus  unflagging,  ardent,
and  purged  of  self,  all  worldly  thoughts  Uiat  idly  come
and  go  are  abandoned,  and  with  their  abandonment
his  heart  within  grows  stablished  and  planted  fast,
settled  and  concentrated. — In  this  way  too  the  Alms¬
man  devdops  mindfulness  of  body


208


CXIX.  KiYAGiTA-SATI-SUTTA.


M.  lit  9$.


If  any  Almsman  whatsoever  cultivates  and  develops
mindfulness  of  body,  deep  into  his  bosom  sink  all
right  dispositions  into  which  knowledge  enters, — even
as  streams  which  flow  down  to  the  sea  sink  into  the
bosom  of  the  ocean  which  the  mind’s  eye  surveys,
If  any  Almsman  does  not  cultivate  and  develop  mind¬
fulness  of  body,  MSra  gains  access ;  M£ra  can  enter
into  him,  It  is  just  as  if  a  man  ^ung  a  heavy  stone
into  a  mass  of  wet  clay.  Would  it  find  access  ?

Yes,  sir.

[95]  Just  in  the  same  way,  if  an  Almsman  dues  not
cultivate  and  develop  mindfulness  of  body,  M£ra  gains
access ;  Mira  can  enter  into  him.  It  is  Just  as  if
there  were  a  dry  and  sapless  stick  and  a  man  came
along  and  took  it  for  his  kindling  wood  to  light  a  fire
with  and  make  a  blaze.  If  he  did  so,  could  he  by
rubbing  it  make  his  fire  burn  up  ?

Yes,  sir.

In  just  the  same  way,  if  an  Almsman  does  not  culti¬
vate  and  develop  minofulness  of  the  body,  MSra  gains
access  ;  Mira  can  enter  into  him.  It  is  just  like  an
empty  water-jar  on  its  stand  with  nothing  in  it  and
a  man  coming  up  to  it  with  a  load  of  water.  Could  he
shoot  his  load  into  it  ?

Yes,  sir.

In  just  the  same  way,  if  an  Almsman  does  not  culti¬
vate  and  develop  mindfulness  of  body,  M&ra  gains
access ;  MSra  can  enter  into  him.

But  if  the  Almsman  does  cultivate  and  does  develop
mindfulness  of  body,  MSra  cannot  gain  access  or  enter
into  him,

It  is  just  like  a  man  throwing  a  light  ball  of  string
gainst  the  solid  timbers  of  the  door-posts-  Would  it
find  access  ?

No,  sir.

It  is  just  the  same  with  the  Almsman  who  has  culti¬
vated  and  has  developed  mindfulness  of  body  ; — Mara
cannot  gain  access  or  enter  into  him.  It  is  as  if  there
were  a  wet  stick  with  the  sap  still  in  it,  and  a  man
came  along  and  took  it  for  his  kindling  wood  to  light


M.  iii.  96.


MEOITATrON  OK  THE  BODY.


309


a  fire  and  make  a  blaze.  [96]  If  he  did  so,  could  he
hy  rubbing  it  make  his  fire  burn  up  ?

No,  sir.

It  is  just  the  same  with  the  Almsman  who  has
cultivated  and  has  developed  mindfulness  of  body ; —
MSra  cannot  gain  access  or  enter  into  him.  It  is  just
like  a  filled  water-pot  on  its  stand,  full  of  water  to  the
brim  so  that  a  crow  could  drink  out  of  It.  if  now
a  man  came  along  with  a  load  of  water,  could  he
shoot  his  load  into  it  ?

No,  sir.

It  is  just  the  same  with  the  Almsman  who  has  culti¬
vated  and  has  developed  mindfulness  of  body.' — Mdra
cannot  gain  access  or  enter  into  him.

If  any  Almsman  whatsoever  has  cultivated  and
developed  mindfulness  of  body,  then,  in  each  and
every  intellectually  realisable  mental  object  to  which
he  applies  his  mind  for  its  intellectual  realization,  in
every  case  he  comes  to  be  an  eye-witness  thereof  face
to  face,  if  there  be  an  exercise  of  mindfulness.  It  is
just  like  a  square  pond  in  a  level  expanse  of  ground,
with  embanked  sides  and  so  full  of  water  to  the  brim
that  a  crow  could  drink  out  of  it.  If  now  a  strong
man  were  to  break  the  containing  embankment  on
this  side  and  that,  would  the  water  run  away  through
the  breaches  ?

[97]  Yes.  sir.

Just  in  the  same  way,  if  any  Almsman  has  cultivated
and  has  developed  mindfulness  of  body,  then  .  .  .  exer¬
cise  of  mindfulness.  It  is  just  like  a  carriage  with  a
pair  of  thorough-breds  harnessed  to  it  and  with  the
goad  lying  ready  to  band,  on  level  ground  at  the  cross-
i^ads, — into  which  there  mounts  a  skilled  driver,  who
knows  how  to  manage  horses ;  with  his  left  band  he
takes  the  reins,  grasping  the  goad  in  his  right,  and
away  he  drives,  up  and  down,  where  he  likes.  Just  in
the  same  way,  if  any  Almsman  has  cultivated  and  has
developed  mindfulness  of  body,  then  .  .  .  exercise  of
.mindfulness.

If,  Almsmen,  mindfulness  of  body  be  practised.


Im


II.


2T0


cxtx.  kxvagatA-sati-sutta.


M.  ill  9&


cultivated,  developed,  assimilated,  made  a  basis,  kept
advancing,  accumulated  and  vigorously  pursued,  ten
blessings  may  be  anticipated  and  they  are  these : —

He  masters  likes  and  dislikes  ; — dislikes  do  not
master  him ;  he  is  always  victor  over  them  if  and
when  they  have  arisen.

He  masters  fear  and  dread ;  they  do  not  master
him :  he  is  always  victor  over  them  if  and  when  they
have  arisen.

He  endures  cold  and  heat,  hunger  and  thirst,  gad-
dies,  mosquitoes,  scorching  winds,  contact  with  creep*
ing  things,  abusive  and  hurtful  language ;  his  nature
is  to  bear  all  bodily  feelings  that  are  painful,  acute,
sharp,  severe,  wretched,  miserable,  or  deadly.

The  Four  Ecstasies  with  their  vivid  illumination,
which  here  and  now  [08]  bring  well-being  into  life, —
these  he  induces  at  will,  without  trouble  or  difficulty.

He  develops  the  divers  psychic  powers ; — from  being
one  to  become  manifold,  from  being  manifold  to  be¬
come  one,  to  be  visible  and  invisible,  to  pass  at  will
through  wall  or  fence  or  hill  as  if  in  air,,  to  pass  in
and  out  of  the  solid  earth  as  if  it  were  water,  to  walk
on  the  water’s  unbroken  surface  as  if  it  were  the  solid
earth,  seated  in  state  to  glide  through  the  air  like  a
bird  on  the  wing,  to  touch  and  to  handle  the  sun  and
moon  in  their  power  and  might,  and  to  extend  the
sovereignty  of  his  body  right  up  to  the  Brahma  world.

By  tf^  Ear  Celestial  chat  is  pure  and  far  surpasses '
the  human  ear,  he  hears  sounds  celestial  and  sounds
human  both  far  and  near.

His  heart  knows  the  hearts  of  other  creatures  and
of  other  men,  knows  them  for  what  they  are,— the
heart  where  passion  dwells  as  passionate,  the  passion¬
less  heart  as  passionless,  the  unkind  heart  as  unkind,
the  kindly  heart  as  kindly,  the  deluded  heart  as  de¬
luded,  the  undeluded  heart  as  undeluded,  the  concen¬
trated  hwt  as  coDcentraied,  the  un concentrated  heart
as  unconcentrated,  the  great  heart  as  great  and  the "
little  heart  as  little,  the  inferior  heart  as  inferior  and
the  superior  heart  as  superior,  the  stedfast  heart  as


M.  in'.  99.


MEDITATION  ON  THE  BODY.


2II


stedfast  and  the  unscedfast  heart  as  unstedfast,  the
heart  Delivered  as  Delivered,  and  the  undelivered
heart  as  undelivered.

He  recalls  his  own  divers  existences  in  the  past,— a
single  [9t>]  birth,  then  two — etc. — divers  existences  in
the  past  in  all  their  details  and  features.

With  the  Eye  Celestial  that  is  pure  and  far  surpasses
the  human  eye,  he  sees  creatures  in  act  to  pass  hence,
in  act  to  reappear  elsewhere, — creatures  either  lowly
or  debonair,  fair  or  foul  to  view,  happy  or  unhappy ;
and  he  knows  well  that  they  fare  according  to  their
past  deeds.

By  the  extinction  of  the  Cankers,  he  develops  and
dwells  in  that  Deliverance  of  heart  and  mind  where
Cankers  are  not,  a  Deliverance  which,  of  and  by  him¬
self.  here  and  now,  he  has  discerned  and  realized.

These  are  the  ten  blessings,  Almsmen,  that  may
be  anticipated,  if  mindfulness  of  body  be  cultivated  in
the  way  I  have  stated.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord,  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXX.  SANKHAR-UPPATTI-SUTTA.

PLASTIC  FORCES.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay-
•  Ing  at  SSvattbr  in  J  eta’s  grove  in  AnSthapiijdika’s
pleasauncC)  the  Lord  announced  to  the  Almsmen  that
he  would  expound  how  plastic  forces  arose ;  and  thus
began  r —

Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  possesses  faith
and  virtue,  instruction,  munificence,  and  understanding.
The  wish  comes  to  him  that,  at  the  body’s  dissolution
after  death,  he  may  be  reborn  a  wealthy  noble.  On
this  he  hxes  and  sets  his  heart,  to  this  [100]  he  tr^ns
bis  heart  The  possession  of  the  foregoing  five  plastic
forces,  coupled  with  this  wish  of  his,  conduce,  with


212


CXX .  S  AK  K  HiR-UPPATTI-SUTTA.


M.  iii.  101.


cultivation  and  development,  to  his  being  reborn  ac¬
cordingly. — This  is  the  road  and  way  to  such  rebirth,

Again,  possessing  the  same  five  plastic  forces,  the
Almsman  forms  the  wish  to  be  reborn  a  wealthy
brahmin —  etc.  —  or  householder.  On  this  he  fixes
...  to  such  rebirth.

Or  possessing  these  same  five  plastic  forces,  the
Almsman,  hearing  that  the  Four  Regents — the  Thirty-
three  gods — the  YSma  gods — the  Tusita  gods — the
Nimmfina-rati  gods — the  Paraniminita-vasavatti  gods
^-enjoy  long  life  and  beauty  and  abound  in  well-being,
forms  the  wish  that  he  may  be  reborn  one  of  them.
On  this  he  fixes  ...  to  such  rebirth.

Or,  possessing  those  [lOll  same  five  plastic  forces,
the  Almsman,  hearing  that  the  BrahmS  of  a  Thousand
worlds  enjoys  long  life  and  beauty  and  abounds  in  well¬
being,  forms  the  wish  that  he  may  be  reborn  in  com¬
munion  with  that  Brahma.  Now,  that  Brahmi  dwells
illumining  and  pervading  the  frame-work  of  a  thousand
worlds  and  also  all  the  creatures  that  are  reborn  there.
Just  as  a  man  with  eyes  to  see  might  take  in  his  hand
and  ga2e  upon  embnc  myrobalan,  even  so  does  this
Brahma  illumine  and  pervade  his  thousand  worlds  and
all  the  creatures  that  are  reborn  there,  On  this  the
Almsman  fixes  ...  to  such  rebirth.

Or,  in  like  manner,  be  forms  the  wish  that  he  may
be  reborn  in  communion  with  the  Brahmi  of  two —
three — four— or  five  thousand  worlds.  Now,  the
Brahmi  of  Five  thousand  worlds  illumines  and  pervades
five  thousand  worlds  and  also  all  the  creatures  that  are
reborn  there.  Just  as  a  man  with  eyes  to  see  might
uke  in  his  hand  and  gare  upon  five  emblic  myrobalans,
even  so  does  the  Brahmi  of  Five  thousand  worlds
illumine  and  pervade  his  five  thousand  worlds  and  all
the  creatures  that  are  reborn  there.  On  this  the  Alms¬
man  fixes  ...  to  such  rebirth.

Or,  possessing  those  same  five  qualities,  the  Alms-
roan,  hearing  that  the  Brahma  of  Ten  thousand  worlds
enjoys  long  life  and  beauty  and  abounds  in  well-being,
forms  the  wUb  that  he  may  be  reborn  In  communion


M.  lii.  iM.


PLASTIC  FORCES.


2x3


with  that  BrahmS.  Now  that  BrahmS  illumines  and
pervades  ten  thousand  worlds  [102]  and  all  the
creatures  that  are  reborn  there.  Just  as  a  rare
Veluriya  gem  of  finest  water,  chat  has  been  cut  with
eight  facets  and  marvellously  wrought,  when  laid  on  a
yellow  cloth,  diffuses  its  sparkling  radiance  around, —
even  so  does  the  Brahma  of  ten  thousand  worlds
illumine  and  pervade  his  ten  thousand  worlds  and  all
the  creatures  that  are  reborn  there.  On  this  the  Alms¬
man  fixes  ...  to  such  rebirth.

Or,  possessing  these  same  five  qualities,  the  Alms¬
man,  hearing  that  the  Brahma  of  a  Hundred  thousand
worlds  enjoys  long  life  and  beauty  and  abounds  in  well¬
being,  forms  the  wish  that  he  may  be  reborn  in  com¬
munion  with  that  Brahma.  Now  that  BrahmS
illumines  and  pervades  a  hundred  thousand  worlds  and
all  the  creatures  that  are  reborn  there.  Just  as  gold
from  the  river  Jambu's  bed  that  has  been  refined
in  the  crucible  of  a  skilled  goldsmith,  worked  to  a
brilliant  polish  by  his  art,  and  then,  when  laid  on  a
yellow  cloth,  diffuses  its  sparkling  radiance  around, —
even  so  does  the  Brahma  of  a  Hundred  thousand  worlds
illumine  and  pervade  his  hundred  thousand  worlds  and
all  the  creatures  that  are  reborn  there.  On  this  the
Almsman  fixes  .  .  .  such  rebirth.

Or,  again,  possessing  those  same  five  qualities,  the
Almsman,  hearing  0/  their  longlife,  beauty  and  abound¬
ing  well-being,  forms  the  wish  that  he  may  be  reborn
in  the  heaven  of  the  AbbS  gods,  among  either  the
PaVitt-abhis  or  the  Appam£ri-abhas, — or  of  the  Subha
gods,  among  either  the  Parltta-subhas  or  the  Appa-
ma^a-subhas  or  the  Subha-kio^as, — [108]  or  of  the
Vehapphala  gods, — or  of  the  Aviha  gods, — or  of  the
Atappa  gods.^^r  of  the  Sudassin  gods.^or  of  the
Akani^ha  gods,— K)r  of  the  Infinite  Space  gods,— or
of  the  Infinite  Mind  gods, — or  the  gods  of  the  Realm
of  Naught, — or  of  the  gods  of  the  Kealm  where  there
IS  N either. perception-nor-N on-perception.  On  this  the
Almsman  fixes  and  sets  his  heart,  to  this  he  trains  his
heart.  The  possession  of  the  foregoing  five  constituents,


2  J  4  CXX.  SAN  KH AR-UPl*Am-Sil  TTA,  M.  ill  104.

coupled  with  this  wish  of  his,  conduces,  with  cultivation
and  development,  to  his  being  reborn  accordingly. —
This  is  the  road  and  way  to  such  rebirth,

Again,  possessing  these  same  five  qualities,  the
Almsman  Ibrms  the  wish  that,  by  the  extinction  of  the
Cankers,  he  may  here  and  now  develop  and  dwell  in
the  Deliverance  of  heart  and  mind  without  Cankers
which  he  has  discerned  and  realized  of  and  by  himself.
And  by  the  extinction  of  the  Cankers  he  wins  this
goal* — This  Almsman,  sirs,  is  reborn  nowhere»  passes
no-whither  to  rebirth,

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXXL  cola-suMata-sutta.

TRUE  SOLITUDE.  I.

[104]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Savatthi  in  the  Old  Pleasaunce  in  the
palace  of  MigSras  mother,  the  reverend  Ananda,  rising
towards  evenmg^from  his  meditations,  went  to  the  Lord

and  after  salutations  took  his  seat  to  one  side,  saying : _

Once  while  you  were  staying  among  the  Sakyans,  in
their  township  of  Nagarnka,  I  beard  with  my  own  ears
from  your  own  lips  your  remark  that  you  were  then
<  living  with  the  Void '  a  great  deal.  Did  I  rightly  hear,
receive,  apprehend,  and  comprehend  youc  remark,  sir  ?

Yes,  quite  rightly.  Anaiida.  In  bygone  days  as
now,  1  have  lived  a  great  deal  with  the  Void.  Just  as
this  whilom  palace  is  emptied  of  elephants,  oxen,
horses  and  mares,  is  emptied  of  gold  and  coins  of
silver,  and  is  emptied  of  its  male  and  female  establish¬
ment,  and  yet,  because  of  the  presence  of  the  Coa fra¬
ternity,  is  not  an  empty  solitude j  use  in  the  same  way,
by  ^noting  ideas  of  vill^  or  of  inhabitants,  an  Alms¬
man  envisages  solitude  throu^  the  idea  of  a  forest.  To
this  idea  his  heart  goes  forth,  finding  therein  satis¬
faction  and  a  foothold  and  Deliverance.  He  is


M.  Hi.  !05.


TRUE  SOLITUDE.  1.


315


clear  that  the  agitation  which  would  attend  ideas  of  a
village,  or  of  people,  is  absent  in  this  conception,  but
yet  there  abides  some  agitation  in  the  solitude  which
attends  the  idea  of  a  forest.  Consequently,  he  realizes
that,  though  his  conception  is  emptied  of  all  ideas  of
village  or  inhabitants,  yet  nomemptiness  still  persists
in  the  conception  of  solitude  which  attends  the  idea
of  a  forest.  So  be  discerns  emptiness  in  whac  is  absent
therefrom  and  concludes  that  [105]  peace  abides  in  this
residuum.  Thus  it  is  that  there  arises  in  him  a  true
changeless  and  pure  conception  of  emptiness.

Again,  by  ignoring  ideas  both  of  people  and  of
forests,  he  conceives  of  solitude  through  the  idea  of
earth)  to  which  idea  his  heart  goes  forth,  finding  therein
satisfaction  and  a  foothold  and  Deliverance.  By  dis¬
missing  all  thoughts  of  earth’s  heights  and  valleys,  of
its  rivers  and  rugged  ground,  and  of  iis  snags  and
brakes,  and  towering  mountains,  and  by  viewing  earth
as  a  bull’s  hide  with  a  hundred  pegs  to  stretch  out  fiat
its  unmarred  .and  featureless  expanse,  he  discerns  of
solitude  through  the  idea  of  earth.  To  this  idea  his  heart
goes  forth,  finding  therein  satisfaction  and  a  foothold
and  Deliverance.  He  realizes  that,  although  he  is
now  quit  of  the  agitation  which  attends  ideas  of
people  and  of  forests,  yet  in  this  earth  Idea  there
still  survives  some  distress  in  the  solitude  which
accompanies  that  idea ;  for,  therein  non-emptiness
persists.  So  be  discerns  emptiness  in  what  is  absent
therefrom,  and  concludes  that  it  is  in  the  residuum  that
peace  abides.  Thus  too  it  is  that  there  arises  in  him
a  true  <^angele$$  and  pure  conception  of  emptiness.

(And  the  same  h^pens  to  him  with  the  successive
ideas  of  Infinite  Space  [106],  of  Infinite  Mind,  and  of
[107]  N  ei  ther-pe  rception-nor-  N on-percept  ion.)

Dismissing  in  turn  all  these  ideas,  and  envisaging
solitude  through  concentration  of  heart  beyond  attri¬
butes,  he  finds  nevertheless  that  therein  there  still  sur¬
vives  some  residual  agltailon,  namely  through  this  body
of  his  with  its  senses  [108]  as  a  consequence  of  being
alive ;  for  therein  non-emptiness  persists.  So  he


216  CXXL  C0;.A-SU5fiJATA«SUTTA.  M- HI.  10$.

discovers  emptiness  in  what  is  absent  therefrom,  and
concludes  that  it  is  in  this  residuum  that  peace  abides.
Thus  too  it  is  that  there  arises  in  him  a  true  changeless
and  pure  conception  of  emptiness.

Again,  still  envisaging  solitude  through  concentra¬
tion  of  heart  beyond  attributes,  he  realizes  that  even  this
absolute  concentration  of  heart  is  but  an  effect  and  a
mental  product,  and  consequently  is  transient  and  has
its  cessation.  When  he  knows  and  sees  this,  his  heart  is
delivered  from  the  Cankers  of  lust,  of  contlnuii^  exist¬
ence  and  of  ignorance.  The  knowledge  of  his  Deliver¬
ance  comes  to  him  in  the  thought  that  birth  is  no
more,  that  he  has  lived  the  highest  life,  that  his  task
is  done,  and  that  now  for  him  there  is  no  more  of
what  he  has  been.  He  realizes  that,  although  he  is
now  quit  of  the  ^itation  which  attends  those  three
Cankers  respective y,  yet  there  still  survives  some
residual  distress,  namely  through  this  body  of  his  with
its  senses  as  a  consequence  of  being  alive ;  for,  therein
non*emptiness  persists.  So  he  discovers  emptiness  in
what  is  absent  there,  and  concludes  that  it  is  in  this
residuum  that  peace  abides.  Thus  coo  it  is  chat
there  arises  in  him  a  true  [.109]  changeless  pure  and
ultimate  conception  of  emptiness,

Yes,  Ananaa ;  this  was  the  form  of  pure  and
ultimate  emptiness  that  all  recluses  and  brahmins  of
bygone  times  developed  and  dwelt  in ;  this  will  be  the
pure  and  ultimate  emptiness  that  future  recluses  and
brahmins  will  develop  and  dwell  in ;  and  this  is  the  pure
and  ultimate  emptiness  that  to-day  is  developed  by  all
those  recluses  and  brahmins  who  develop  and  dwell  in
pure  and  ultimate  emptiness. — Therefore,  Ananda,  you
should  train  yourselves  to  develop  and  dwell  in  pure
and  ultimate  emptiness.

^  Thus  spoke  the  Lord,  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  bad  said.


M.  ill.  tio,


TRUE  SOLITUDB.  II.


217


CXXII.  MAHA-SUSfSATA-SUTTA.

TRUE  SOLITUDE.  II.

Thus  have  I  heard,  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  among  the  Sakyans  at  Kapilavatthu  in  the
Banyan  pleasaunce,  early  in  the  morning,  duly  robed
and  bowl  in  hand,  he  went  for  alms  into  the  city  and
on  his  return  after  his  meal  betook  himself  to  rest
during  the  noontide  heat  at  the  cell  erected  in  that
pleasauncc  by  Kija-Khemaka  the  Sakyan.  Now  at
that  time  a  number  of  pallets  had  been  got  ready
there  and  at  the  sight  [110]  of  these  the  Lord  won-
dered  whether  there  were  a  number  of  Almsmen  in
residence.

At  the  time  the  reverend  Ananda  with  a  number  of
Almsmen  was  engaged  on  robe-making  at  the  (neigh¬
bouring)  cell  erected  by  Gha^Sya  the  Sakyan, — whither,
when  he  rose  from  his  meditations  towards  evening,
the  Lord  betook  himself,  enquiring,  as  he  took  the  seat
set  for  him,  whether  the  number  of  pallets  at  Ksla-
Khemaka’s  cell  betokened  a  number  of  Almsmen  in
residence  there.  Yes,  was  Ananda's  answer; — it  is
robe  making  time.

An  Almsman,  Ananda,  does  not  shine  by  delighting
in  fellowship,  by  finding  delight  in  fellowship  or  by
being  given  to  a  delight  in  fellowship ;  nor  does  he
shine  by  a  like  delight  in  company  at  large.  If  such
be  bis  delight,  it  is  impossible  that,  at  will  and  without
trouble  or  difficulty,  he  should  enjoy  the  well-being
which  attends  Kenunciation,  solitude,  tranquillity  and
Enlightenment.  But,  any  Almsman  who  lives  aloof
from  company  may  be  expected  to  enjoy  all  this.
Similarly,  if  an  Almsman  delights  in  fellowship  and
company,  it  is  impossible  that,  at  will  and  without
trouble  or  difficulty,  he  should  develop,  and  dwell  in,
Deliverance  of  heart  whether  DH]  as  a  passing  joy  or
as  an  enduring  possession,  out  any  Almsman  who
lives  aloof  from  company  may  be  expected  to  enjoy  all


2i8  CXXII.  UAHi'SUSi?ATA-SOTTA.  M.iK.  itJ.

this.  Not  a  single  visible  shape  do  I  discern,  Ananda,
delight  in  which  does  not  entail,  with  that  shape's
change  and  alteration,  sorrow  and  lamentation,  pain,
ills  and  despair.

The  Truth-finder  has  become  fully  aware  of  this
state,  namely  how,  in  dismissing  thoughts  of  all
attendant  phenomeiia,  to  develop  and  dwell  in  true
emptiness  within,  Therein,  Ananda,  if,  so  dwelling,
the  Truth-finder  is  approached  by  Almsmen  or  Alms-
women,  by  lay-disciples  male  or  female,  by  kings  or
their  ministers,  by  sectaries  or  their  followers, — then  it
is  with  a  heart  that  is  set  on  solitude,  that  trends  to
solitude  and  finds  a  fastness  in  solitude,  (t  is  with  a
heart  that  is  aloof,  that  finds  its  joy  In  renunciation  of
the  world,  and  has  laid  low  each  and  every  disposition
which  is  bred  of  Cankers,  it  is  with  such  a  heart  that,
being  in  company,  he  frames  his  sp«ch  so  as  to  be
left  alone  once  more.  Therefore,  if  an  Almsman's
desire  is  to  develop  and  dwell  in  true  emptiness
within,  he  should  calm,  tranquilliae,  focus  and  concen¬
trate  his  heart  internally.  How  is  he  to  accomplish
this? — Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  divested  of
lusts  and  of  wrong  dispositions,  successively  develops
and  dwells  in  the  Four  Ecstasies.  In  this  way  he
calms,  tranquillizes,  focusses  and  concentrates  his  heart
internally.  [112]  Suppose  now  that  his  mind  pon¬
ders  on  internal  emptiness,  but  that,  as  he  does  so,  his
heart  does  not  go  forth  to  it,  to  find  satis^ction  therein
or  a  foothold  or  Deliverance,  and  that  ultimately  he
recognizes  and  consciously  realises  this  inward  verdict
and  finding, — with  the  same  thing  happening  with
regard  to  external  emptiness,  to  both  internal  and
external  emptiness,  and  to  Permanence;  always  the
same  verdict.  What  that  Almsman  has  to  do  is  (to

Eersevere  in  his  efforts)  to  calm,  focus  and  concentrate
is  heart  internally  on  the  same  old  theme  of  concen¬
tration  rill— for  bwh  internal  and  external  emptiness
and  for  Permanence — the  inward  verdict  and  find¬
ing  is  reversed  and  his  heart  goes  forth  to  emptiness,
finding  therein  satisfaction,  a  foothold  and  Deliverance  j


M.  iii.  JJ3.


TRUE  SOLtTUDB.  II


219


and  ulcimately  he  recognises  and  consciously  realizes
this  verdict  of  satisfaction.

When,  living  in  this  plane,  he  applies  his  mlnd^
say — to  pacing  up  and  down,  he  does  so  with  the
conscious  conviction  that,  as  in  his  present  state  he
paces  up  and  down,  no  covetousness  and  discontent,
no  dispositions  that  are  evil  and  wrong  will  [118]
assail  him,

The  same  conviction  is  his  if,  while  living  in  this
plane,  he  applies  his  mind  to  standing  still  and  stands
still, sits  down, — or  lies  down ;  he  is  conscious
that  now  he  will  not  be  assailed  by  covetousness  and
discontent  or  by  dispositions  chat  are  evil  and  wrong,

If,  while  living  in  this  plane,  the  Almsman  applies
his  mind  to  speech,  he  is  conscious  that  his  tongue  vrill
utter  nothing  that  is  low  rustic  and  vulgar,  nothing
chat  is  not  noble  or  not  profitable,  nothing  that  fails  to
conduce  to  aversion,  passionlessness,  stilling,  peace,
illumination,  enlightenment  and  Nirvana. — nothing  by
way  of  talk  of  princes,  bandits,  great  lords,  armies,
terrors,  battles,  meet  and  drink,  clothes,  beds,  garlands,
perfumes,  relations,  carriages,  villages,  townships,
cities,  countries,  women,  heroes’  prowess,  gossip  at
street'Comers  or  at  wells,  tales  of  kinsfolk  departed,
other  chatter,  and  fables  about  the  origin  of  the  world
and  the  ocean  and  about  the  rise  and  fall  of  things.
He  is  conscious  on  the  contrary  that  his  speech  will
be  grave  and  heart- opening,  conducing  to  absolute
aversion,  to  passionlessness,  to  stilling,  peace,  illumina¬
tion,  eni^htenment  and  Nirvftna, — namely  talk  of
wanting  little  and  being  contented,  solitude,  with¬
drawal  from  the  world,  strenuous  endeavour,  virtue,
concentration,  understanding,  Deliverance,  and  clear
vision  of  Deliverance.

If,  while  living  in  thiR  plane,  the  Almsman  [114]
applies  his  mind  to  thinking,  he  is  conscious  that  his
tlkoughts  will  not  be  low  rustic  and  vulgar,  not  noble
and  not  profitable,  conducing  not  to  aversion,  passion-
lesshess,  stilling,  peace,  illumination,  enlightenment  and
Nirvana ;  he  is  conscious  that  his  thoughts  wiU  not  be


220  CX  XII .  M  AH  A  -SU  SfJAT  A-SUTTA,  M.  il  1. 1 1 5.

thoughts  of  lust,  malevolence  and  injury,  but  will  on
the  contrary  be  thoughts  that  are  noble  and  saving,
that  guide  him  who  lives  up  to  them  to  the  extinc¬
tion  of  all  11), — such  as  thoughts  of  renunciation  and
benevolence  and  innocency.

Five  strands,  Ananda,  make  up  the  pleasures  of  sense,
— namely,  visible  shapes,  sounds,  odours,  tastes  and
touch,  all  of  them  pleasant  and  agreeable  and  delight¬
ful,  all  of  them  bound  up  wim  passion  and  lusts.
Therein  an  Almsman  must  constantly  search  his  heart
to  see  whether,  in  this  or  that  relation,  his  heart  Is
coming  to  have  traffic  with  these  pleasures  of  sense.  If
his  search  tells  him  that  such  traffic  is  about,  then  he
becomes  conscious  that  he  has  not  yet  made  an  end  of
the  seductions  of  such  pleasures  ;  but  if  his  search  tells
him  there  Is  no  such  traffic  about,  he  becomes  conscious
that  these  seductions  are  ended.

Five  in  number,  Ananda,  are  the  factors  of  attach-
ment,  which  must  engage  an  Almsman  who  ponders
on  the  rise  and  fall  o?  things, — namely,  form,  feeling,
perc^tlon,  plastic  forces  and  consciousness,  [X15]
together  with  the  arising  and  the  passing  of  each  o?
the  hve.  If  he  so  ponders,  all  pride  of  personality  in
these  five  factors  quits  him  and  he  is  conscious  chat
he  is  quit  of  them.

The  foregoing  states  of  consciousness,  Ananda,  ensure
an  absolutdy  right  future  and  are  noble,  transcendent,
and  beyond  the  clutches  of  Mira,  the  Evil  One.

What  do  you  think,  Ananda  ?  On  what  grounds
ought  a  disciple  to  dog  his  master's  footsteps  even
though  hounded  away?

The  Lord,  sir,  is  the  root,  the  channel  and  the
refuge  of  all  our  doctrines.  We  pray  that  the  Lord
may  be  moved  to  declare  the  meaning  of  what  he  has
said^so  that  the  Almsmen  may  treasure  up  what  falls
from  his  lips.

The  disciple  ought  not  to  dog  his  master’s  footsteps
for  the  interpretation  of  canonical  scriptures.  And
why  not  ? — Because  from  of  old  their  doctrines  have
been  heard,  learned  by  heart,  garnered  by  recital,


M.  Ill  i]6.


TRUE  SOLITUDE.  II.


32t


turned  over  and  over  in  the  mind  and  fathomed  by
visi9n.  No ;  he  should  persist  in  dc^ging  his  master’s
footsteps  perforce,  solely  to  hear  words  that  are  grave
and  heart-opening,  conducing  to  absolute  aversion,  to

Eiassionle&sness,  to  stilling,  peace,  illumination,  en-
ightenmeni  and  NirvSna,  —  namely,  words  about
wanting  little,  about  contentment,  solitude,  withdrawal
from  the  world,  strenuous  endeavour,  virtue,  concen¬
tration,  understanding,  Deliverance  and  clear  vision  of
Deliverance.

Thus  comes  affiictlon  of  master  and  of  pupil,  and
affliction  in  living  the  higher  life,  How  comes  the
master's  affliction  ? — Take  the  case  of  a  master  who
chooses  out  a  solitary  lodging — in  the  forest  under  a
tree,  in  the  wilds  in  cave  or  grot,  in  a  charnel-ground
[116}  in  a  thicket,  or  on  bracken  in  the  open.  As  he
lives  aloof  thus,  he  Is  visited  by  a  constant  stream  of
brahmins  and  householders,  of  townsfolk  and  country¬
folk  ;  and  infatuations  hankerings  and  covetise  grow
upon  him,  so  that  he  is  a  backslider  to  luxury.  Such
is  an  afflicted  master  who,  in  his  affliction  is  laid  low  by
evil  and  wrong  dispositions  that  are  vicious  and  entail
re-birth,  are  fraught  with  anguish,  and  ripen  to  III,
with  a  heritage  of  birth,  old-age  and  death  in  their  train.
Such  is  the  affliction  of  a  master ;  and  exactly  the  same
is  the  affliction  which  comes  on  that  master’s  pupil  who
devotes  himself  to  solitude  after  his  master’s  example
and  chooses  out  his  solitary  lodging — in  the  forest .  . .
death  in  their  train.  Such  is  the  pupil’s  affliction.

What  is  affliction  in  living  the  highsf  lif«? —
Suppose  there  appears  in  the  world  a  Truth-finder,
Arahat  all-enlightened,  .  .  -  Lord  of  Enlightenment,
who  chooses  out  his  solitary  lodging  and  mere  in  his
life  aloof  is  visited  by  a  constant  stream  of  visitors ;
yet  infatuations  hankerings  and  covetise  never  grow
upon  him  nor  [U7]  is  he  ever  a  backslider  to  luxury.
B  ut  th  is  Master’s  pupil,  devoting  h  i  msel  f  co  sol  it  ude  after
his  Master’s  example,  chooses  out  his  solitary  lodging
where  in  his  life  aloof  he  is  visited  by  a  constant  stream
of  visitors ;  and  infatuations  hankerings  and  covetise


22S


CXXII.  MAH  A*  SUS‘f5 ATA-  SUTTA.


M>  ni.  ii8.


grow  i^on  him,  so  that  he  is  a  backslider  to  luxury.
Such,  Ananda,  Is  what  is  termed  affliction  in  living  the
higher  life.

It  is  such  affliction,  whether  of  master  or  of  pupil,
which  more  than  aught  else  proves  their  affliction  in
living  the  higher  life  which  ri|^ns  to  111  and  exceeding
bitterness  and  conduces  to  woe  hereafter.

Therefore,  comport  yourselves  towards  me  in  a
spirit  of  friendliness  not  of  hostility,  and  it  will  prove
your  lasting  happiness  and  welfare.  Now,  how  do
disciples  comport  themselves  towards  their  master  in  a
spirit  of  hostility  and  not  of  friendliness  ?—Take  the
case  of  a  master  who  out  of  compassion  and  affection
preaches  his  Doctrine  to  his  disciples  in  a  spirit  of  com¬
passion  to  ensure  their  happiness  and  welfare,  but
whose  disciples  do  not  listen  or  give  ear  or  try  to
learn,  but  turn  away  from  his  teach mgfs.  That  is  the
spirit  of  hostility  to  a  master.  The  spirit  of  friendliness
is  shown  when  his  disciples  listen,  give  ear  and  cry  to
learn,  and  turn  not  from  his  teachings,  as  he  seeks  to
ensure  their  happiness  and  welfare.  [I18j  Therefore,
Ananda,  comport  yourselves  towards  me  in  a  spirit  not
of  hostility  but  of  friendliness ;  and  it  will  prove  your
lasting  happiness  and  welfare.  I  do  not  deal  with  you
as  the  potter  with  mere  wet  clay.  I  shall  speak  to  ^ou
with  constant  admonish ings  and  with  constant  eradica¬
tion  of  faults  ; — that  which  is  excellent  will  stand  ikst.

Thus  spake  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  Ananda  re¬
joiced  in  what  the  X-cffd  bad  said.


CXXIII.  ACCHARIY-ABBHUTA-DHAMMA-

SUTTA.

WONDERS  OF  THE  NATIVITY.

Tffus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay¬
ing  at  SSvatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  AnSthapindika’s
pleasaunce,  there  arose  the  following  talk  among  a
large  mum  her  of  Almsmen  who  were  sitting  together  in


M.  Ijj,  119.  WONDERS  OF  THE  NATIVITY.  223

hall  after  their  alms-round  and  meal : — It  is  wonderful,
sirs,  it  is  marvellous  what  powers  and  might  belong  to
the  Truth -finder,  seeing  that  he  can  know  all  about
former  Buddhas  who  passed  away  with  all  lets  and
hindrances  excised,  with  nothing  to  tie  them  to  re¬
birth  and  the  round  of  existences,  and  in  triumph  over
all  111.  He  knows  the  families  from  which  they  came,
their  names  and  septs,  their  virtues  and  characters,
their  attainments  and  outlook,  and  the  five  modes  of
Deliverance  they  respectively  won.  Yes,  said  Ananda;
Truth-finders  are  wonderful  and  of  wonderful  nature,
marvellous  and  of  marvellous  nature.

[n&]  This  conversation  of  those  Almsmen  was
interrupted ;  for  tlie  Lord,  rising  up  towards  evening
from  his  meditations,  came  into  hall  and,  seating  him¬
self  on  the  seat  set  for  him.  asked  what  they  had  been
calking  about  and  what  discussion  had  been  broken
off.  Word  for  word,  they  cold  him  what  had  passed.
Then  turning  to  Ananda,  the  Lord  bade  him  expand
more  fully  the  wonders  and  marvels  of  a  Truth-finder’s
nature.

With  my  own  ears  and  from  the  Lord's  own  lips,  sir,
have  I  heard  and  received  the  Lord’s  testimony  to  me
that,  mindful  and  fully  aware  of  what  should  happen  to
him,  the  Bodhisacta  passed  to  don  form  in  the  Tusita
heaven  ;  and  this  I  hold  to  be  wonderful  and  a  marvel
in  the  Lord.

With  my  own  ears  and  from  the  Lord's  own  lips,  sir,
have  I  heard  and  received  the  Lord’s  own  testimony
to  me  chat,  mindful  and  fully  aware,  the  Bodhisatta
abode  in  bis  Tusita  form ;  and  this  too  I  hold  to  be
wonderful  and  a  marvel  in  the  Lord.

With  my  own  ears  and  from  the  Lord's  own  lips,  sir,
have  1  heard  and  received  the  Lord’s  own  testimony
to  me  that  the  Bodhisatta  abode  in  his  Tusita  form  for
the  whole  term  of  his  existence  there  ;  and  this  too  I
hold  to  be  wonderful  and  a  marvel  in  the  Lord

With  my  own  ears  and  from  the  Lord's  own  lips,  sir,
have  I  heard  and  received  the  Lord’s  own  testimonies
to  me  chat —


?  2  4  CXX  III.  ACCH ARIYA^-SUTTA.  M ,  IK,  tao.

Mindful  and  fully  aware  of  what  should  happen,  the
Bodhisatta  passed  from  his  Tusita  form  and  entered
his  mothers  womb ;

[1201  When  the  Bodhisatta  thus  passed  into  his
mo  therms  womb,  then,  throughout  the  entire  world  with
its  gods  and  Maras  and  BrahmSs,  there  appeared,  to
a]]  recluses  and  brahmins  and  to  all  gods  and  men,  a
measureless  vast  effulgence, — surpassing  the  gods’  own
celestial  splendour,  and  penetrating  even  those  vasty
and  murky  interspaces  between  worlds  where  gloomy
darkness  reigns  and  no  light  may  enter  of  sun  and
moon  for  all  their  power  and  might,  so  that  by  this
effulgence  the  denisens  of  those  interspaces  could  behold
one  another  and  recognize  that  other  creatures  dwell
with  them  there;  and  withal  the  ten  thousand  worlds
trembled  and  shook  and  quaked

As  soon  as  the  Bodhisatta  has  entered  his  mother's
womb,  four  deities  draw  nigh  him  to  guard  the  four
cardinal  points  so  that  no  one — human,  non-human  or
whatever  he  might  be— should  do  a  mischief  to  either
the  Bodhisatta  or  his  mother  ;

As  soon  as  the  Bodhisatta  has  entered  his  mother's
womb,  she  becomes  intrinsically  virtuous, — eschewing
the  taking  of  life  and  the  taking  of  anything  not  given
to  her,  eschewing  pleasures  of  sense  and  incontinence,
eschewing  lies  and  all  temptation  to  strong  drink ;

[121]  As  soon  as  the  bodhisatta  has  entered  into
his  mother’s  womb,  she  has  no  carnal  mind  for  any
man,  nor  can  she  yield  to  any  man's  passion  for
her ;

As  soon  as  the  Bodhisatta  has  entered  his  mother’s
womb,  all  the  five  pleasures  of  sense  become  hers ;
she  is  lapped  and  wrapped  in  all  the  enjoyment  they
can  bring ;

As  soon  as  the  Bodhisatta  has  entered  his  mother  s
womb,  no  ailments  can  come  upon  her ;  comfortable
and  unwearied  of  body,  she  views  within  bet  wbmb

*  Of,  Digka  H.  12  et  seqo.,  and  the  notes  to  DiaJogtus  II.  9-12,
for  thSs  and  toll,  paras,  relaug  to  the  physical  birth  of  a  fnture
Buddha.


K.  ili.  122.


WONDERS  OF  THE  NATIVITV.


225


the  Bodhlsd-tta  with  all  his  limbs  and  faculties  com*
plete;— just  as  a  sparkling  vejuriya  gem  of  finest  water,
which  has  been  cut  with  ei^ht  facets  and  marvellously
wrough^  and  chroui'h  which  passes  a  blue,  yellow,
red,  white,  or  yellowish  thread,  Is  seen  as  being  what  it
is  by  a  man  with  eyes  to  see  who  takes  it  in  his  hand
to  examine  It ;

[12s]  Seven  days  after  his  birth  the  mother  of  the
Bodhisatta  dies  and  passes  to  the  Tusita  heaven  ;

While  other  women  carry  their  child  some  nine  or
ten  months,  it  is  otherwise  with  a  Bodhisatta’s  mother,
who  brings  forth  her  child  after  exactly  ten  months ;

While  other  women  give  birth  to  their  child  silling
or  lying,  it  is  otherwise  with  a  Bodhisatta*s  mother,  who
gives  birth  standing  erect ;

When  the  Bodhisatta  issues  from  his  mother's
womb,  he  is  received  into  the  hands  first  of  gods
and  afterwards  of  human  beings ;

When  the  Bodhisatta  Issues  from  his  mother’s  womb,
he  never  couches  the  ground  but  is  received  by  the
four  deities  who  present  him  to  his  mother  with  these
words:  Rejoice,  o  queen!  you  have  borne  indeed  a
lordly  son !

When  the  Bodhisatta  issues  from  his  mother’s
womb,  he  issues  without  stain  and  without  defilement
from  waters  or  humours  or  blood  or  any  [128]  un¬
cleanness,  but  pure  and  stainless, — just  like  a  gem  on
Benares  muslin,  where  neither  defiles  the  omer  be¬
cause  both  are  pure ;

When  the  Bodhisatta  issues  from  his  mother’s  womb,
there  start  from  mid-air  two  jets  of  water,  one  cold
and  the  other  warm,  wherewith  they  bathe  the  Bodbi-
satta  and  bis  mother ;

As  soon  as  he  is  born,  the  Bodhisatta  firmly  plants
both  feet  flat  on  the  ground,  lakes  seven  strides  to
the  North,  with  a  white  canopy  carried  above  his  head,
and  surveys  each  quarter  of  the  world,  exclaiming  in
peerless  cones :  In  all  the  world  I  am  chief,  best  and
foremost ;  this  is  my  last  birth;  I  shall  never  be  born
again;

II.


15


2  26  CXXnt  ACCHARIYA^SUTTA.  M.  JH.  ia4*


As  soon  as  the  Bodhisatta  issues  from  his  mother's
womb,  'throughout  the  entire  world  with  its  gods  and
Maras  and  Brahmas  there  appears,  to  all  recluses
and  brahmins  and  to  all  gods  and  men,  a  measureless
and  vast  effulgence, — surpassing  the  gods*  own  celestial
splendour  ana  penetrating  even  those  vast  and  murky
Interspaces  between  worlds  where  gloomy  darkness
reigns  and  no  light  may  enter  of  sun  and  moon  for
all  their  power  and  might, — so  that  [124]  by  this  efful¬
gence  the  denizens  of  those  interspaces  can  behold
one  another  and  rec^nlze  that  other  creatures  dwell
wii  them  there,  and  withal  the  ten  thousand  worlds
tremble  and  sh^e  and  quake ;  and  this  too,  sir,  I
hold  to  be— like  all  the  foregoing — wonderful  and  a
marvel  in  the  Lord.

Add  this  too,  Ananda, — that  the  Truth-finder  has
full  knowledge  of  feelings — and  perceptions — and
thoughts — as  they  arise  and  appear  and  pass  away.
Add  this,  Ananda,  to  your  tale  of  the  Truth-finder's
wonders  and  marvels.

Inasmuch,  sir,  as  the  Lord  has  full  knowledge  of
feelings  and  perceptions  and  thoughts  as  (bey  arise
and  appear  and  pass  away, — this  too,  sir,  do  I  hold  to
be  wonderful  and  a  marvd  in  the  Lord.

Thus  spoke  the  reverend  Ananda  and  the  Master
approved.  Glad  at  heart,  chose  Almsmen  rejoiced
in  what  the  reverend  Ananda  had  said.


eXXIV.  BAKKULA-SUTTA.

A  SAINT’S  RECORD.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  reverend
Bakkula  was  staying  at  Rijagaha  in  the  Bamboo
grove  where  the  squirrels  were  fed,  an  ancient  friend
of  his  lay  days,  Ac^  Kassapa,  [125]  came  to  him  and
after  greetings  took  a  seat  to  one  side,  asking  how
long  he  had  been  an  Almsman.


M.  iii.  J26.


A  saint’s  record.


227


It  is  eighty  years,  sir,  since  I  first  became  an
Almsman.

In  the  course  of  those  eighty  years,  Bakkula,  how
often  have  you  Iain  with  women  ?

You  should  not  ask  your  question  like  chat,  Kassapa ;

fou  should  ask  how  often  in  the  past  carnal  desires
ave  arisen  within  me.

Weil,  Bakkula,  in  the  course  of  those  eighty  years
how  often  have  carnal  desires  arisen  within  you  ?

During  the  whole  of  my  eighty  years  as  an  Almsman
I  am  not  aware  of  their  once  ansing.

[This  too  we  Almsmen  in  conclave  assembled
account  a  wonder  and  a  marvel  in  the  reverend
Bakkula  that  he  is  not  aware  of  carnal  desires  having
once  arisen  within  him  during  eighty  years.]

During  the  whole  of  those  eighty  years  as  an  Alms¬
man  I  am  not  aware  that  malevolence  or  a  desire  to
hurt  has  once  arisen  within  me.

[This  too  we  Almsmen  in  conclave  assembled
account  a  wonder  and  a  marvel  In  the  reverend
Bakkula  that  be  is  not  aware  of  malevolence  or  a
desire  to  hurt  having  once  arisen  within  him  during
eighty  years

During  the  whole  of  those  eighty  years  as  an  Alms¬
man  I  do  not  admit  that  thoughts  of  lust — or  of  male-
volence-^r  of  hurt — have  once  arisen  within  me.

[126]  During  the  whole  of  those  eighty  years  as  an
Almsman  1  do  not  admit  having  once —
accepted  a  layman's  clothes,
cut  out  robes  with  shears,
sewn  robes  tcgether  with  a  needle,
dyed  robes  with  dye-stuff,
sewn  robes  tc^ether  on  the  frame,  for  niyself,
got  my  fellows  in  the  higher  life  to  work  at  my
robes  for  me,

accepted  an  invitation  (to  a  meal),

>  Tbis  rafruin _ iatwcalated  by  the  Elders  at  the  Recenuou.

according  to  the  Co^entary-^-occurs  in  tbe  text  after  each
affinnation  but  ^  be  omitted  hereafter  ia  traoslatiog  tbe  cata¬
log  vbicb  follows,  till  p.  tag  is  reached.


22$  CXXIV.  BAKKULA-SUTTA.  M,  in.  W?.

entertained  a  wish  that  someone  would  invite  me,
taken  a  seat  inside  a  dwellings
taken  a  meal  inside  a  dwellings
thought  about  the  conformation  of  women,
uugni  a  woman  the  Doctrine,  even  to  the  extent
of  a  couplet,

gone  to  the  Almswomen’s  quarters,
taught  the  Doctrine  to  an  Almswoman,  or  to  a
woman  probationer  or  to  a  woman  novice,

admitted  or  confirmed  or  been  answerable  for  an
Almsman,

prepared  a  novice  for  admission  to  the  Confraternity,
used  a  bathroom,  or  bath-powder  when  bathing,
got  my  fellows  in  the  higher  life  [127]  to  massage
my  limbs  for  me,

been  ill,  even  triflingly,

taken  medicine,  even  an  opening  dose  of  myrobalan,
used  a  head-rest,
lain  on  a  bed,  or

passed  the  rainy  season  within  the  precincts  of  a
village.

For  a  week  I  lived,  still  un regenerate,  on  what  the
country-side  furnished,  but  on  the  eighth  day  Know¬
ledge  came  I

Reverend  Bakkula,  1  ask  to  be  admitted  and  con¬
firmed  in  this  Doctrine  and  Rule.

Nor  was  it  long  after  his  confirmation  before  the
reverend  Kassapa,  dwelling  alone  and  aloof,  strenuous
ardent  and  purged  of  self  woo  the  prize  in  quest  of
which  young  men  go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness,
that  prize  of  prizes  which  crowns  the  highest  life  —
even  this  did  he  think  out  for  himself,  realize  and
attain  here  and  now ;  and  to  him  came  the  knowledge
clear:  Rebirth  is  no  more;  I  have  lived  the  highest
life ;  my  task  is  done ;  and  now  for  me  there  is  no  more
of  what  1  have  been.  Thus  the  reverend  Kassapa  too
was  numbered  among  the  Arahats.

Time  came  when  the  reverend  Bakkula  went  key
In  hand  from  cell  to  cell,  saying : — Come,  reverend
sirs,  come;  to*day  I  shall  pass  away.


M.  liL  13$.


A  saint’s  record.


229


[This  too  we  Almsmen  in  conclave  assembled
account  a  wonder  and  a  marvel  in  the  reverend
Bakkula  that  he  went  ke/  in  hand  from  cell  to  cell,
saying : — Come,  reverend  sirs,  come ;  to-day  I  shall
pass  away.]

[128]  Thereupon  amidst  the  Confraternity  the
reverend  Bakkula  passed  away  as  he  sat  (on  his  pyre).

[This  too  we  Almsmen  in  conclave  assembled
account  a  wonder  and  a  marvel  in  the  reverend
Bakkula  that  amidst  the  Confraternity  he  passed  away
as  he  sac.]


CXXV,  DANTA-BHDMI.SUTTA.

DISCIPLINE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  while  the  Lord  was
slaying  at  R&jagaha  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where  the
squirrels  were  fed,  there  was  living  in  the  Forest  Hut
there  the  novice  Aciravata,— to  whom  in  the  course  of
a  stroll  came  Prince  Jayasena  Sitting  down  after
greetings,  the  prince  otierved  that  he  had  heard  that,
in  this  faith,  an  Almsman  whose  life  was  strenuous
ardent  and  pui^d  of  self  could  find  peace  for  his
heart.

Quite  right,  prince,  quite  right ;  that  is  what  he
does  find  here.

Would  the  reverend  Aggivessana  be  so  good  as  to
teach  me  the  Doctrine  as  he  has  heard  it  preached
and  as  he  has  learned  it?

No,  prince,  I  cannot.  Were  I  to  teach  you,  you
would  not  understand  the  meaning  of  what  I  said ;  and
that  would  be  a  trouble  and  an  annoyance  for  me.

[129]  I  hope  you  will  teach  it  me ;  I  may  prove
capable  of  understanding  what  your  reverence  says.

Very  good,  I  will  teach  it  you.  If  you  understand
it,  so  well  and  good.  If  you  <lo  not  understand  it,
remain  as  you  are  and  ask  me  no  further  questions.

So  be  it  then,  said  the  prince.


230


cxxv.  danta-bhUmi-sutta.


M.  III.  J39.


Thereupon  Aciravata  taught  the  Doctrine  as  he  had
heard  it  preached  and  as  he  had  learned  it ; — but  at
the  close  of  liis  exposition  Prince  Jayasena  said  it  was
impossible  and  inconceivable  chat  an  Almsman  whose
life  was  strenuous  ardent  and  pui^ed  of  self  could  find
peace  for  his  heart  in  the  faith ;  and  with  this  protesta¬
tion  he  rose  and  withdrew.

Not  long  after  the  prince  had  gone,  Aciravata  went
to  the  Lord  to  whom>  after  seating  himself  after  salu¬
tations,  he  related  the  talk  he  had  nad  with  Jayasena.

Said  the  Lord  :  Where  was  the  good  of  chat  ?  It
is  wholly  impossible  for  Prince  Jayasena — who  lives  in
the  lap  of  enjoyment  and  pleasure,  who  is  devoured
bv  thoughts  of  pleasure,  consumed  by  the  fevers  of
pleasure  and  is  all  eagerness  [180]  In  pursuit  of  pleasure
— to  know  or  see  or  realize  what  is  to  be  known  by
renouncing  worldliness,  and  what  is  to  be  seen  and
attai  ned  thereby.  1 1  i  s  j  ust  li  ke  two  y 0  ung  elephants  or
colts  or  steers  who  have  been  schooled  and  trained,
and  another  pair  who  have  not-  been  schooled  or
trained.  Would  the  pair  that  have  been  schooled  and
trained  aright,  thereby  accomplish  their  schooling  and
thereby  be  trained  to  perfection  ?

Yes,  sir

And  would  the  other  untrained  pair  do  the  same  P

No,  sir.

It  is  just  the  same  here.  It  Is  wholly  Impossible
for  Prince  Jayasena  .  .  .  and  attained  thereby.

It  Is  just  like  a  great  mountain  bard  by  a  village  or
township  to  which  come  two  friends  hand  in  hand
tctf ether,  of  whom  the  first  climbs  to  the  top  while  the
other,  ^ill  standing  at  the  bottom,  asks  the  first  what
be  can  see  up  there.  The  first  says  he  can  see  from
the  top  delightful  pleasaunces  and  groves,  delightful
country  and  Takes.  But  bis  friend  at  the  bottom  says
it  is  impossible  [Idll  and  inconceivable  be  can  do  so.
Hereupon  the  climber  comes  down  to  the  bottom
and,  ts^ing  lus  friend  up  by  the  arm  to  the  top.  first
lees  him  recover  his  wind  and  then  asks  him  what
he  can  see  from  the  summit.  The  answer  is  that  he


M.  ill.  :$2,


D1SCIFUNE


23«


can  see  delightful  pleasaunces  and  groves,  delightful
country  and  Takes,  and  chat,  whereas  ne  had  begun  by
saying  it  was  impossible  and  inconceivable,  he  now
knew  it  was  all  as  reported,— though  the  great  moun¬
tain  had  blocked  his  view  of  what  could  be  seen.

Just  in  the  same  way,  Aggivessana,  Prince  Jayasena
is  blocked,  obstructed,  cribbed  and  cabined  by  a  mass
of  ignorance.  It  is  wholly  impossible  for  Prince
Jayasena.  .  .  and  attuned  thereby.  If,  Aggivessana,
these  two  comparisons  of  the  prince  had  occurred  to
you,  he  would  nave  been  converted  straightaway  and,
being  converted,  would  have  acted  accordingly.

How,  sir,  could  these  two  comparisons  occur  to  me,
as  they  have  to  the  Lord,  seeing  that  they  are
spontaneous  and  have  never  before  been  heard  by
man?

[182]  It  is  just  like  a  Noble  anointed  King,  who
telis  his  elephant-catcher  to  mount  the  royal  elephant
and  go  into  the  elephant- forests  and  there  find  a  wild
elephant  which  he  is  to  tie  up  to  the  neck  of  the  royal
elephant ;  and  the  elephant-catcher  does  as  he  is
orwred  and  in  the  result  the  royal  elephant  brings  the
wild  one  out  of  the  forest  into  the  open ;  into  the  open
he  has  been  brought  thus  far;  but  still  that  wild
elephant  pines  for  one  thing, — the  elephant-forest.
Then  the  elephant-catcher  informs  the  monarch  that  a
wild  elephant  has  been  brought  in  from  the  forest;
and  now  his  majesty  orders  bis  elephant-trainer  to
tame  it, — subduing  all  wild  ways,  all  wild  cendetictM
to  bolt  away,  and  all  wild  feverishness  of  distress  and
fretfulness,  making  him  feel  at  home  in  the  wiage,
and  used  him  to  human  ways.  Obedient  to  the  King  s
command,  the  trainer  proceeds  so  to  tame  that  wild
elephant,  first  tying  it  fast  by  the  neck  to  a  massive
post  planted  deep  in  the  ground,  with  a  view  both  to
subduing  all  wili  ways,  all  wild  tendencies  to  boh  away
and  all  wild  feverishness  of  distress  and  fretfulne^
and  also  to  making  the  elephant  feel  quite  at  home  m
.  the  village  and  used  to  human  ways.  TowanU  his
charge  the  trainer  addresses  words  that  are  without


23a


CXX  V.  DANTA-BHOM  I-8UTTA.


M.  ill  133*


gdll,  ple&SAnc,  friendly,  hearty,  urbane*  agreeable  and
welcome  to  all ;  and  the  elephant,  [188]  thus  addressed,
hearkens  and  ^ives  ear  and  seeks  to  learn.  Next,  the
trainer  offers  him  grass  fodder  and  water ;  and,  as  soon
as  the  elephant  takes  it,  the  trainer  Is  satisfied  it  will
live ;  and  he  proceeds  to  teach  It  to  take  up  and
put  down.  When  the  elephant  acts  as  it  2$  told  and
obeys  the  orders  to  take  up  and  put  down,  then  he
goes  on  to  teach  it,  at  the  proper  word  of  command,  to
advance  or  retire  and  to  stand  up  and  sit  down.
When  this  has  been  learned,  the  trainer  proceeds  to
teach  the  elephant  to  stand  his  ground,  as  it  is  called.
On  to  the  great  beast’s  trunk  he  ties  a  shield;  a  man
with  a  lance  in  his  hand  is  seated  on  its  neck ;  all
round  stand  men  with  lances  in  their  hands,  while  the
trainer  stands  in  front  with  a  very  long-shafted  spear.
When  the  elephant  Is  standing  his  ground,  he  never
moves  his  front  feet  or  his  hind  feet,  his  forequarters  or
his  hindquarters,  his  head  or  his  ears,  his  tusks  or  his
tail  or  his  trunk,  It  becomes  the  King's  own  elephant,
undismayed  by  stroke  of  javelin  or  sword  or  arrow  or
opposing  foemen,  undismayed  by  sound  of  tom-tom  or
kettle-drum  or  conch  or  drum  or  music,  (like)  gold
purified  and  cleansed  from  all  dross  and  impurity, — an
elephant  for  a  king  to  ride,  a  pride  to  his  royal  master,
and  is  styled  part  and  parcel  of  the  King.

[184]  Just  in  the  same  way,  Aggivessana,  there
comes  into  the  world  here  a  Truth-finder,  Arahat  all-
enKghiened,  walking  by  knowledge,  blessed,  under¬
standing  all  worlds,  the  matchless  tamer  of  the  human
heart,  teacher  of  gods  and  men,  the  Lord  of  Enlighten¬
ment.  This  world — with  its  gods  and  Maras  and
BrahmSs,  with  its  recluses  and  brahmins,  with  its  gods
and  men — all  this  he  has  discerned  and  realised  for
himself  and  reveals  to  others.  He  preaches  the
Doc  vine — that  is  so  fair  at  its  outset,  in  the  middle
and  in  its  close — with  its  text  and  its  meaning ;  he
announces  a  higher  life  that  is  wholly  completejand
pure.  This  Doctrine  is  heard  by  a  householder  or  his
son  or  by  one  of  lowly  birth,  who,  hearing,  believes  in


M.  551.  135.


DrSCIPUNB


233


the  Truth -finder,  and,  believing,  bethinks  him  that —
'A  hole  and  corner  life  is  all  that  a  home  can  give,
whereas  the  Pilgrim  is  free  as  the  air  of  heaven.  It  is
hard  for  the  home-keeping  man  to  follow  the  higher
life  in  all  its  completeness  and  purity  and  perfection,
Come,  let  me  cut  off  hair  and  beard,  don  the  yellow
robes  and  go  forth  fiom  home  to  homelessness.'
Thereafter,  parting  from  his  substance,  be  it  small  or
great,  parting  too  from  his  kith  and  kin,  be  they  few
or  many,  he  cuts  off  hair  and  beard,  dons  the  yellow
robes  and  goes  forth  from  home  to  homelessness.

Into  the  open  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  One  has
been  brought  thus  far ;  but  still  gods  and  men  pine  for
one  thing, — pleasures  of  sense.

The  Truth-finder  proceeds  with  his  training,  say¬
ing  : — Come,  Almsman ;  let  your  life  be  virtuous  and
controlled  by  the  canon  law ;  let  your  life  be  curbed
by  the  curb  of  the  canon  law ;  keep  to  the  plane  of
right  behaviour;  observe  scrupulously  the  precepts  of
Conduct,  seeing  danger  in  small  offen dings.  When
he  has  accomplished  this,  the  Truth-finder  proceeds
further  with  his  training,  bidding  him  guard  the  portals
of  sense  and  not  be  carried  away  when  his  eye  sees  a
thing,  either  by  its  general  presentment  .  .  .  {gU.iuin
SiUia  No.  107)  .  .  .  [IBS  and  186]  puiged  his  heart
of  all  misgivings.  When  he  has  put  from  him  these
five  Hind^nces  and  has  understood  how  the  heart’s
shortcomings  weaken  it,  then  he  dwells  ardent,  alive
to  everything,  mindful,  and  quit  of  all  worldly  wants
and  discontent,  contemplating  the  body  as  an  aggrega¬
tion,  feelings  as  aggregations,  the  heart  as  an  a^rega-
tion,  and  mental  objects  as  ^gregations.

Just  as  the  trainer  ties  his  depone  fast  by  the  neck
to  a  massive  post  planted  deep  in  the  ground  with  a
view  CO  subduing  dl  its  wild  ways  and  to  making  the
animal  feel  quite  at  home  in  the  village  and  used  to
human  ways, — just  in  the  same  way  the  fourfold
mustering  of  mindfulness  serves  to  tie  rast  the  heart  of
the  disciple  of  the  Noble  One,  both  for  the  subduing  of
worldly  conduct,  worldly  thoughts,  and  worldly  distress


234


CXX  V.  D  ANTA-B  H  OiCI-  SUTTA.


M.  Hi  136.


feverishness  &nd  fretfulness  and  also  for  the  attainment
of  Knowledge  and  the  realisation  of  NlrvSna.

Then  the  Truth-finder  proceeds  further  with  the
training,  saying  j — Come,  Almsman,  contemplate  the
bodv  but  entertain  no  thought  which  the  body  accom¬
panies  ;  contemplate  the  heart  but  entertain  no  thought
which  the  heart  accompanies ;  contemplate  mental
objects  but  entertain  no  thought  which  mental  objects
accompany.  By  laying  to  rest  observation  and  reflec¬
tion,  the  Almsman  develops,  and  dwells  in,  inward
serenity,  in  focussing  of  heart,  in  the  joy  of  the  Second
Ecstasy  which  is  divorced  from  observation  and  reflec¬
tion  and  is  bred  of  concentration, — passing  thence  to
the  Third  and  Fourth  Ecstasies.  With  heart  thus
stedfast,  thus  clarified  and  purified,  clean  and  cleansed
of  things  impure,  tempered  and  apt  to  serve,  stabltshed
and  immutable, — It  is  thus  that  he  applies  his  heart  to
the  knowledge  which  recalls  his  former  existences,
He  calls  to  mind  his  divers  existences  in  the  past, — a
single  birth,  then  two,  and  ...  [so  on,  ia)  ..  .  a
hundred  thousand  births,  many  an  ason  of  disintegra¬
tion  of  the  world,  many  an  son  of  its  redintegration,
and  again  many  an  son  both  of  its  disintegration  and
of  its  redintegration.  In  this  or  that  existence,  he
remembers,  such  and  such  was  his  name,  sept,  and  caste,
the  fare  lived  on,  the  pleasure  and  pain  he  had  in  each,
and  his  term  of  life  in  each.  When  he  passed  thence,
be  came  to  such  and  such  a  new  existence,  and  there
such  and  such  was  hb  name  and  so  forth.  Passing
thence,  he  came  to  life  here.  In  such  wise  does  he
call  to  mind  his  divers  existences  in  the  past  in  all  their
details  and  features.  The  same  stedfast  mind  he
now  applies  to  the  Knowledge  of  the  passs^e  hence
and  re-appearance  elsewhere  of  other  creatures.  With
the  Eye  Celestial  that  is  pure  and  far  surpasses  the
human  eye,  he  sees  creatures  in  act  to  pass  bence>  in
act  CO  re-appear  elsewhere,— creatures  either  lowly  or
debonair,  fiur  or  foul  to  view,  happy  or  unhappy ;  and
he  is  aware  that  they  fare  according  to  their  past
Here  are  creatures  given  to  evil  in  act  word  and


M,  jli  137.


DISaPlINE


235


thought,  who  decried  the  Noble  Ones,  held  false  views
and  became  what  flows  from  such  false  views;  these  at
the  body’s  dissolution  after  death  appear  in  states  of
suffering  misery  tribulation,  and  in  potatory.  Here
again  are  creatures  given  to  good  in  act  word  and
thought,  who  did  not  decry  the  Noble  Ones,  who  had

right  outlook  and  became  what  flows  from  such  a
right  outlook ; — these  at  the  body’s  dissolutbn  after
death  appear  in  states  of  bliss  in  heaven.  That  same
stedfast  heart  he  next  applies  to  the  knowledge  of  the
eradication  of  the  Cankers.  Causally  and  utterly  he
comes  to  know  III,  the  origin  of  111,  the  cessation  of
111,  and  the  course  that  leads  to  the  cessation  of  111 ;
causally  and  utterly  he  comes  to  know  what  the  Cankers
are. — their  origin,  their  cessation,  and  the  course  that
leads  to  their  cessation.  When  he  knows  and  sees  this,
then  his  heart  is  delivered  from  the  Canker  of  lusts,
from  the  Canker  of  continuing  existence  and  from  the
Canker  of  ignorance  ;  and  to  him  thus  delivered  comes
the  knowledge  of  his  Deliverance  in  the  conviction —
Re-birth  is  no  more ;  ]  have  lived  the  highest  life ;  my
task  is  done ;  and  now  for  me  there  Is  no  more  of  what
1  have  been.

Such  an  Almsman  endures  cold  and  heat,  hunger
and  thirst,  gadflies,  mosquitoes,  scorching  winds,  contact
with  creeping  things,  abusive  and  hurtful  language ;
[187]  he  has  grown  to  bear  all  bodily  feelings  that  are
painful,  acute,  sharp,  severe,  wretched,  miserable,  or
deadly.  Pushed  of  all  the  dross  and  alloy  of  passion
wrath  and  foUy,  he  is  worthy  of  oblations,  offerings,
gifts  and  homage,  and  is  the  richest  held  in  which  to
sow  the  seed  of  merit.

Aggivessana,  the  King's  elephant  dies  untamed
and  untrained,  whether  in  its  old-age  or  in  middle^ge
or  in  youth,  it  is  said  to  have  died  untamed;  and
rimilarly,  if  the  Cankers  are  not  extinct  in  an  Almsman
old  or  young,  he  at  death  is  said  to  have  died  untamed.
But  if  the  King's  elephant,  be  it  old  or  be  it  young,  dies
lamed  and  trained,  it  is  said  to  have  died  tamed;  and
similarly,  be  he  old  or  be  he  young,  the  Almsman  in


236  CXXV.  DANTA-BH  UMI-SUTTA .  M .  il  1.  X5S,

whom  the  Cankers  are  extinct,  is  said  at  death  to  have
died  tamed-

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  novice
Aciravata  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXXVI.  BHUMIJA-SUTTA.

RIGHT  OUTLOOK  ESSENTIAL.

[188]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  ^jagaha  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where  the
squirrels  were  fed,  the  reverend  Bhttmija,  duly  robed  and
bowl  in  hand,  went  to  the  abode  of  (his  nephew)  Prince
Jayasena  and  sat  down  on  the  seat  set  for  him.  To
him  came  the  prince  who  after  greetings  took  a  seat  to
one  side,  saying;— There  are  some  recluses  and
brahmins,  BhCmija,  who  affirm  and  hold  that,  if  a  man
conceives  longing;s  while  leading  the  higher  life,  he
cannot  win  the  fruits  of  the  higher  life,  nor  can  he  if
he  conceives  non4ongin«,  or  both  (alternately),  or
neither.  What  herein  aoes  the  reverend  Bhumlja’s
Master  affirm  and  teach?

1  have  never  heard  or  received  the  Lord’s  utterance
on  this  from  his  own  lips ;  but  he  might  possibly  take
the  following  line ; — It  all  depends  on  whether  with  the
longing  or  non-longing,  or  neither  or  both,  there  goes
a  true  and  causal  leading  of  the  higher  life if  it  does
not,  he  can  win  no  fruit;  if  it  does,  [18d]  he  can.
This  might  be  the  Lord’s  view ;  but  I  never  heard  him
say  so.

Well,  BhCmija,  if  this  be  what  your  master  affirms
and  teaches,  assuredly  your  master  stands  ahead  of  all
recluses  and  brahmins  there  be.  And,  so  saying,  the
prince  entertained  the  reverend  BhQmija  with  his  own
dish  of  rice.

Returning  after  his  meal,  Bhnmija  related  to  the
Lord,  word  for  word,  what  had  passed,  asking  at  the
end  whether  he  had  conveyed  the  Lord’s  views  without
misrepresentation,  and  had  expounded  the  Doctrine’s


M.  iii.  140.


RIGHT  OUTLOOK  ESSENTIAL.


237


gi5t  and  what  flows  from  it,  without  going  wrong  in
his  doctrinal  exposition.

[140]  Indeed  you  have  faithfully  represented  my
views,  BhQmija;  and  there  is  nothing  wrong  in  your
exposition.

If  recluses  or  brahmins  have  a  wrong  outlook  and  are
wrong  in  thoughts  words  and  deeds, — wrong  In  their
mode  of  livelihood,  wrong  in  their  endeavour,  in  their
mindfulness  and  in  their  concentration, — then,  if,  while
leading  the  higher  life,  they  conceive  a  longing— or  a
non -longing — or  both  (alternately) — or  neither, — they
cannot  win  the  fruits  of  that  higher  life.  And  why
not? — Because  this  Is  no  source  from  which  fruit¬
winning  can  come.

h  is  just  like  a  man  hunting  about  for  oil,  In  his
need  and  quest  of  oil,  who  should  heap  up  sand  in  a
trough  and  crush  it  up  thoroughly  with  water,  yet  for
all  his  pains  cannot  get  oil  therefrom, — whatever  may
be  his  longing,  or  non-longii^,  or  both,  or  neither.
And  why  not?— Because  this  is  no  source  from  which
oil  can  be  got  Just  in  the  same  way  if  recluses  or
brahmins  have  a  wrong  outlook  [141]  .  .  ,  no  source
from  which  fruit- winning  can  come.

It  is  just  like  a  man  hunting  about  for  milk,  in  his
need  and  quest  of  milk,  who  should  milk  a  young  cow
from  her  horn,  yet  for  all  his  pains  cannot  draw  milk
therefrom, — whatever  may  be  his  longing,  or  non-long-
mg,  or  both,  or  neither.  And  why  not? — Because
this  is  no  source  from  which  milk  can  come.  Just  in
the  same  way,  if  recluses  or  brahmins  have  a  wrong
outlook  ...  no  source  from  which  fruit- winning  can
come.

It  is  just  like  a  man  hunting  about  for  butter,  in  his
need  and  quest  for  butter,  who  should  chum  water  in
ajar,  yet  for  all  his  pains  cannot  get  butter  to  come, —
whatever  may  be  his  longing,  or  non- lording,  or  both,
or  neither.  And  why  not  ? — Because  this  is  no
source  from  which  butter  can  come.  Just  In  the  same
way,  if  recluses  or  brahmins  have  a  wrong  outlook  .  .  .
no  source  from  which  fruit-winning  can  come.


23S


CX  X  VI.  B  H  OM  IJ  A-SUTTA


M.  ill.  142.


It  is  just  like  a  man  hunting  about  for  hre  in  bis
need  and  quest  for  fire,  who  should  take  a  wet  stick
with  the  sap  still  in  it  for  his  [142]  kindling-wood  and
rub  awa/  at  it,  yet  for  all  his  pains  cannot  get  £re  to
come,— -whatever  may  be  his  longing,  or  non- longing,
or  both,  or  neither.  And  why  not? — Because  this  is
no  source  from  which  hre  can  come.  Just  in  the  same
way,  if  recluses  or  brahmins  have  a  wrong  outlook  .  . .
no  source  from  which  fruit-winning  can  come,

If  recluses  or  brahmins  have  the  right  outlook  and
are  right  in  thoughts  words  and  deeds,— right  in  their
livelihood,  in  their  endeavour,  In  their  mindfulness  and
in  their  concentration, — then  if,  while  leading  the
higher  life,  they  conceive  a  longing — or  a  non-longing
— or  both — or  neither, — they  can  win  the  fruits  of  that
higher  life.  And  why? — Because  here  is  a  source
from  which  fruit-winning  can  come,

It  is  just  like  a  man  hunting  about  for  oil,  in  his  need
and  ques$  of  oil,  who  should  heap  up  oil-seeds  in  a
trough  and  crush  them  up  thoroughly  with  water,  then,
whatever  may  be  his  longing,  or  non -longing,  or  both,
or  neither,  he  can  get  oil.  And  why  ? — Because  here
is  a  source  from  which  oil  can  be  got.  Just  in  the
same  way,  If  recluses  or  brahmins  have  the  right  out¬
look  .  .  .  [148]  fruit-winning  can  come.

It  is  Just  like  a  man  hunting  about  for  milk,  in  need
and  quest  for  milk,  who  should  milk  a  young  cow  from
the  teat,  then,  whatever  may  be  his  longing,  or  non-
longing,  or  both,  or  neither,  be  can  get  milk.  And
v^hy  ? — Because  here  is  a  source  from  which  milk  can
be  got.  Just  in  the  same  way,  if  recluses  or  brahmins
have  the  right  outlook  .  .  ,  fruit- winning  can  come.

It  is  just  like  a  man  hunting  about  for  butter,  in  his
need  and  quest  for  butter,  who  should  churn  in  a  jar
milk  that  has  set,  then,  whatever  may  be  his  longing,
or  non-longing,  or  both,  or  neither,  he  can  get  butter.
And  why  r — Because  here  is  a  source  from  which'
Iwiter  can  be  got.  Just  in  the  same  way,  if  recluses
or  br^mius  have  the  right  outlook  .  .  .  fruit- winning
can  come.


M.ni.  144.  RIGHT  OUTLOOK  ESSENTIAL.  2$^

It  is  just  like  a  man  hunting  about  for  fire,  in  his
need  and  quest  for  fire,  who  should  take  a  dry  sapless
stick  for  his  kindling  wood  and  rub  away  at  it,  then,
whatever  may  be  his  longing  or  non-longing,  or  both,
or  neither,  he  can  get  fire  [1^14]-  And  why? —
Because  here  is  a  source  from  which  fire  can  be  got.
Just  in  the  same  way,  if  recluses  or  brahmins  have
the  right  outlook  and  are  right  in  thoughts  words
and  deeds, — right  in  their  livelihood,  right  in  their
endeavour,  in  tKeir  mindfulness  and  in  their  concen¬
tration, — then,  if,  while  leading  the  higher  life,  they
conceive  a  longing — or  a  non^onging — or  both — or
neither — ,  they  can  win  the  fruits  of  that  higher  life.
And  why  ? — Because  here  is  a  source  from  which
fruit-winning  can  come.

Now,  if,  BhQmija,  these  four  illustrations  had
occurred  to  you  for  Prince  Jayasena,  straightaway  he
would  have  been  converted  and,  being  converted,
would  have  acted  accordingly.

How,  sir,  could  these  illustradons  occur  to  my  mind
for  the  prince,  as  they  have  to  the  Lord,  seeing  that
they  are  spontaneous  and  never  before  heard  by  man  ?

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
BhQmija  rejoiced  io  what  the  Lord  had  said.


eXXVIL  ANURUDDHA-SUTTA.

AS  THEY  HAVE  SOWN.

Thus  have  I  beard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stayir^
at  SSvaccbr  in  J  eta’s  grove  in  Anithapindika^
pleasaunce,  the  carpenter  Paficakanga  sent  a  mes-
seoger  [145] — as  he  was  himself  busy  and  engaged  on
the  King’s  business— respectfully  to  ask,  in  his  name,
the  venerable  Anuruddha  to  come  with  three  others  to
dinner  rire  next  day.  Anuruddha  silently  consented
and  early  next  morning,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,
•  betook  him  to  the  carpenter’s  abode  and  sat  down  on
the  seat  set  for  him.  Then  the  carpenter  with  his


2^0


CXXVir.  ANURUDDHA-SIJTTA.


M.  ill.  146.


own  hands  served  up  an  excellent  meaJ  and,  when
Anuruddha  had  had  his  hll,  sat  himself  on  a  lower  seat
to  one  side,  saying  ;“Some  Elders  have  told  me  here
to  develop  the  heart's  Deliverance  which  is  ‘  boundless,’
while  others  have  told  me  to  develop  the  heart's
Deliverance  which  Is  *  vast.'  Now  are  tlie  two  things
distinct  [140]  with  differing  attributes,  or  are  they  the
same  with  only  a  difference  in  attributes  ?

Say  what  strikes  you,  sir ;  it  will  clarify  your  ideas.

Wfiat  1  think  is  that  the  two  are  the  same,  differing
only  in  attributes.

They  are  two  distinct  things*  with  differing  attributes,
as  I  will  now  proceed  to  ex^ain

What  is  boundless  Deliverance  P — If  an  Almsman
dwells  with  radiant  thoughts  of  love  pervading  one
quarter  of  the  world — a  second  quarter — a  third  quarter
— the  fourth  quarter  of  the  world — ,  if  he  dwells  with
radiant  thoughts  of  love  pervading  the  whole  length
and  breadth  of  the  world,  above,  bdow,  around,  every¬
where,  with  radiant  thoughts  of  love  all-embracing  and
vast,  beyond  measure,  un tinged  by  hatred  or  malice ;
and  if,  as  with  thoughts  of  love,  so  he  has  radiant
thoughts  of  pity,  of  compassion,  of  poised  equanimity
all-embracing  and  abounding,  beyond  measure,  untinged
by  hatred  or  malice  ; — this  is  what  is  termed  the  heart’s
Deliverance  that  is  boundless.

And  what  is  vast  Deliverance  of  the  heart? — I  fan
Almsman  pervades  and  imbues  a  single  tr^  with  the
idea  of  vastness,  that  is  termed  vast  Deliverance  of
the  heart.  If  with  the  idea  of  vastness  he  pervades
and  imbues  two  or  three  trees, — or  a  field — [147]  or
two  or  three  fields— a  kingdom — or  two  or  three
kingdoms, — that  too  is  termed  vast  Deliverance  of  the
heart.  If  with  the  idea  of  vastness  he  pervades  and
imbues  the  earth  right  up  to  ocean's  shores,  that  too  is
termed  vast  Deliverance  of  the  heart.

Thus  you  will  understand  that  the  two  things  are
distinct,  with  differing  attributes.

Here  are  four  slates  of  re-birth. — If  a  man  absorbs
the  idea  of  lesser  brilliancy,  heat  the  body’s  dissolution


M.ili.  I4&


AS  THBY  HAVE  SOWN.


24t


after  death  [5  reborn  (accordingly)  among  the  Pariit4-
bhagods.  If  he  absorbs  the  idea  of  boundless  brilli¬
ancy,  he  is  reborn  accordingly  among  the  Appamanabhel
gods.  If  he  absorbs  the  ioea  of  tarnished  brilliancy,
he  is  reborn  accordingly  among  the  Sankili^abhi
gods.  If,  again,  he  absorbs  the  idea  of  pure  brilliancy,
then  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  deatn  he  is  reborn
accordingly  among  the  Parisuddhabh^  gods.

When  those  deities  are  assembled  together,  they
manifestly  differ  in  hue  though  not  in  brilliancy.  Just
as  there  is  a  difference  in  name  but  not  in  brilliancy
among  a  number  of  oihlamps  brought  into  a  house,  so,
when  those  deities  are  assembled  tcgether,  [148]  they
manifestly  differ  in  hue  though  not  in  briQiancy.  It
comes  to  pass,  when  those  deities  are  departing  on
their  several  ways,  that,  as  they  depart,  a  difference  is
manifest  both  in  their  hue  and  in  their  brilliancy.
Just  as  when  all  those  lamps  are  being  brought  out  of
that  house,  they  manifestly  differ  both  in  flame  and  in
brilliancy,  so,  when  those  deities  are  departing  on  their
several  ways,  there  is  a  difference  manifest  both  in
their  hue  and  in  their  brilliancy.  No  thought  have
they  whether  their  lot  to-day  will  continue  always,
without  change  and  everlastingly;  nay,  wheresoever
they  6nd  themselve^  there  they  are  glad  to  be.  Just
as  nies  borne  along  In  pingo  or  basket  have  no  thought
whether  thdr  lot  co-day  will  continue  always,  without
change  and  everlastingly  ;  nay,  wheresoever  they  find
themselves,  there  they  are  glad  to  be;— just  in  the
same  way  those  deities  take  no  thought  whether  their
lot  of  Co-day  will  continue  always,  without  change  and
everlastingly  ;  nay,  wheresoever  they  find  themselves,
there  they  are  glad  to  be.

At  this  point  the  reverend  Abhiya  Kaccana  said  to
the  reverend  Anuruddha :  — Good  indeed  ;  but  I  have
one  question  further  on  this.— Are  the  brilliant  ddties
all  of  lesser  brilliancy?  Or  are  some  of  them  of
boundless  brilliancy  ?

That  is  settled  by  their  state  of  rebirth ; — some  are
of  lesser  and  some  of  boundless  brilliancy.


CXXVU.  ANURUDDliA-SUTTA.


U.  lii.  r49>


S42


What  is  the  cause  and  condition  whereby,  though
those  deities  have  aJl  alike  been  reborn  into  a  single
class  of  gods,  [140]  some  are  of  lesser  and  some^f
boundless  brilliancy  ?

Let  me  in  reply  ask  you,  KaccSna,  a  question  to
which  you  will  give  such  answer  as  you  see  fit.
Which  do  you  think  gives  the  vaster  scope  of  the  two
trains  of  meditation,— the  Almsman  who  pervades  and
imbues  a  single  tree  with  the  idea  of  vastness,  or  the
Almsman  who  works  from  two  or  three  trees?

The  latter.

Which  train  of  meditation  gives  the  vaster  scope,—
the  Almsman’s  who  works  from  two  or  three  trees  or
the  Almsman’s  who  works  from  a  field  ?

The  latter.  ,

Which  train  gives  the  vaster  scope, — the  Almsman  s
who  works  from  a  single  field  or  the  Almsnmn’a  who
works  from  two  or  three  fields?

The  latter.

Which  train  gives  the  vaster  scope, — the  Almsman  s
who  works  from  two  or  three  fields  or  [150]  the  Alms¬
man’s  who  works  from  a  kingdom  ?  or  from  two  or
three  kingdoms  ?  or  from  the  whole  earth  right  up  to
ocean's  shores  ?

In  each  case,  the  latter  of  the  two.

This,  Kaccana,  is  the  cause  and  condition  whereby,
though  these  deities  have  all  alike  been  reborn  into
a  single  class  of  gods,  some  are  of  lesser  and  some
of  boundless  brilliancy.  .•

Good,  indeed  Anuruddha.  But  I  have  yet  another
question  to  ask-  Are  all  brilliant  deities  tarnished  in
brilliancy?  or  are  some  of  them  of  pure  brilliancy  ?

[151]  Assuredly,  the  brilliancy  of  some  is  tarnished
and  of  others  pure.

What,  Anuruddha,  is  the  cause  and  condition  why,
though  these  deities  have  all  alike  been  reborn  into  a
single  class  of  gods,  some  are  of  tarnished  and  others
of  pure  brilliancy  ?

I  will  give  you  an  illustration,  Kacc&na; — an  illus¬
tration  onen  aids  a  man  of  intelligence  to  comprehend.


M.  iil  I  $2.


AS  THEY  HAVE  SOWH.


243


It  Is  just  like  a  burning  olHamp  which  has  got  foul  oil
and  a  foul  wick  ;  iheir  combined  foulness  make  the
lamp  bum  dimly.  Just  in  the  same  way,  if  an  Alms¬
man  absorbs  the  Idea  of  tarnished  brilliancy,  his  cams!
desires  are  not  subdued,  his  obduracy  Is  not  banished,
his  flurry  and  worry  are  not  educated  out  of  him  ;  and
these  combined  shortcomings  make  the  Almsman’s
light  burn  dimly,  so  that  at  the  body’s  dissolution
after  death  he  is  reborn  among  the  gods  of  tarnished
brilliancy.  Or,  ^ain,  it  is  just  like  a  burning  oildamp
which  has  got  pure  oil  and  a  pure  wick;  their  com¬
bined  purity  make  the  lamp  burn  without  dimness.
Just  in  the  same  way,  if  an  Almsman  absorbs  the  idea
of  pure  brilliancy,  his  carnal  desires  are  subdued,  his
obduracy  is  banished,  bis  flurry  and  worry  are  edu¬
cated  out  of  him  ;  and  these  combined  refinings  make
that  Almsman’s  light  burn  without  dimness,  so  that  at
the  body’s  dissolution  after  death  he  is  reborn  among
the  gods  of  pure  brilliancy.

[152]  This.  Kacc&na,  Is  the  cause  and  condition
whereby,  though  these  deities  have  all  alike  been
reborn  into  a  single  class  of  gods,  some  are  of
tarnished  and  others  of  pure  brilliancy.

Hereupon,  Abhiya  Kaccfina  said  : — Good,  indeed ;
Anuruddna.  You  did  not  say — Thus  have  1  heard,  or
thus  ought  it  to  come  about ;  you  simply  declared  the
facts  about  those  deities.  V^y,  you  must  have  lived
long  with  those  deities  and  had  talk  and  converse  with
them  I

That  is  an  offensive  observation,  KaccSna;  but
nevertheless  I  will  give  you  your  answer. — I  Aaw
lived  long  with  those  deities  and  ^tfe  had  talk  and
converse  with  them.

Turning  to  the  carpenter  Paficakanga,  the  reverend
Abhiya  iGccSna  added  : — It  ia  a  great  thing  for  you,
householder,  a  very  great  thing,  that  you  have  got
rid  of  your  doubts  and  been  privileged  to  hear  this
exposition.


CX  XVI 1 1.  U  PAK  K1L2S  A-S  UTTA.


M.  iil  iil-


CXXVIII.  UPAKKILESA-SUTTA.

STRIFE  AND  BLEMISHES.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
staying  at  Kosambl  in  the  Ghosita  pleasaunce,  dis¬
putes  were  rife  there  among  the  Almsmen,  who  were
living  in  a  state  of  uproar  and  contention,  darting
taunts  at  one  another.  This  was  reported  by  an
Almsman  to  the  Lord,  with  the  prayer  that  he  would
vouchsafe  to  go  to  these  Almsmen  \  and  the  Lord,
giving  consent  by  silence,  went  thither  and  said :
Enough,  Almsmen  1  No  altercations,  no  contentions,
no  stnfe,  no  disputes  t  .  ,

Said  an  Almsman  to  the  Lord  :  Let  be,  o  author  of
the  Doctrine!  Let  the  Lord  dwell  in  the  enjoyment
of  his  bliss  here  and  now  I  Ours  will  be  the  notoriety
for  these  altercations,  contentions,  strife  and  disputes.

A  second  and  a  third  time  did  the  Lord  say  this  to
these  Almsmen ;  and  a  second  and  a  third  time  did
that  Almsman  beg  him  not  to  interfere.

In  the  morning  early,  duly  robed  and  bowl  m  hand,
the  Lord  went  into  Kosambi  for  alms.  After  his
meal,  on  his  return  from  his  round,  the  Lord  packed
up  his  bedding  and,  still  standing,  uttered  the  following
verses

n.54]  all  in  choms  bawl,  ncnif^els  a  foci;

nor,  though  tho  Order  fall,  thinks  otherwise;
misun^rsianding  wisaom^s  words,  they  bawl,
these  loud  word~mongert,  for — they  know  not  what.

Me  he  reviled',  he  beat,  robbed, plunde-r^d
— such  thoughts,  if  harboured,  ne'er  let  hatred  ate ;
but  hatred  dies,  when  these  no  harbour  find.

‘  For  these  Kosambl  disputes,  see  supra  I  end  fee  Via  I
341  et  seqq,  {SBE  XVU.  392)  for  a  fuller  version, -mcluding  aU
these  verses  and  lacludJog  Gotama's  reflection  that  ImlJ
these  fools  are  infatuate;  ii  is  no  easy  ta^  to  admits W
tioD  to  them/  Some  of  our  verses  <KCur  in  the  Suita  Nipata,  and
more  in  the  Dhammapada  compilation.


M.  ill.  155.


STRIPE  AND  ELEMtSHBS.


245


Halt  n$'er  stopped  hate;  th$  ancient  law  holds  goodf—
when  hate  na  longer  answers  hade,  hate  dies.

^me  cannot  see  their  broils  will  bring  them  low  ;

— others  perceive  the  danger  and  stop  strife.

Ruffians  who  maim  and  hilly  steal  cattle  steeds
and  pelf y  who  plunder  realms, — in  concord  dwell.

—  Why  should  not  you  ?

If  fortune  grant  a  trusty,  staunch,  true  friend,
with  Aim  face  dangers  gladly,  mindfully.

If  fortune  grant  you  no  suck  trusty  friend,
go  forth  alone, — as  monarcks  go  whose  realms^
are  lost,  as  elephant  in  lonely  glade ;
go  forth  (done,  iniquity  eschew,
carefree  as  elephant  i»  lonely  glade.


When  the  Lord,  sdll  standing,  had  uttered  these
verses,  he  departed  for  the  village  of  BaUka-loijaka
where  at  the  time  [155]  the  reverend  Bhagu  was
sojourning.  Seeing  the  Lord  coming  some  way
oft  Bhagu  set  out  a  seat  and  got  water  for  the
feet.  When,  with  due  salutations,  Bhs^u  had  sat
down  to  one  side,  the  Lord,  after  asking  him  whether
all  was  going  well  with  him  and  after  learning  chat  all
went  well,  proceeded  by  homily  to  instruct,  inform,
enlighten  and  hearten  Bh^u.  Then  he  up  and
departed  to  PicIna-varhsa-dSya,  where  at  the  time  the
reverend  Anuruddha,  Nandiya,  and  Klmbila  were
living.  The  forest-guard  who,  at  a  distance,  had  seen
ie  Lord  coming,  said  to  the  Lord :  Don't  go  in
there,  recluse  .  .  .  iptc.  as  in  Suita  No.  31,  down  to)

.  .  [156-7]  to  ask  the  three  whether,  in  leading
such  a  life,  iey  reached  any  other  sute  of  pure  weU-
being,  quite  out  of  the  ordinary  and  beyond  the  scope

of  man.  ,  a  j

Leading  a  life  that  is  strenuous,  ardent  and  purg^
of  self,  we  get,  sir  (in  our  Ecstasy  exercises),  the
aura  {pbhasds  and  the  apperception  {dassana)  ol
Form ;  but  they  soon  fade  away ;  and  we  cannot  get

the  mental  reflex  (nimitta).  u

But  you  must,  said  the  Lord.  1  myself  too,  m


246


CXKVIIL  UPAKKaESA-SUTTA,


M.  iiU  iSt.


the  days  before  Enlightenment,  when  I  was  only  a
Bodhisacta  without  Ml  Enlightenment,  got  the  aura
and  the  apperception  of  Form ;  but  they  [158]  soon
faded  away,  and  I  asked  myself  why  they  did.  Then
thought  I  : — Doubts  have  arisen  within  me  and  conse¬
quently  mental  concentration  has  passed  away  and
with  it  the  aura  and  the  apperception ;  I  will  cake
measures  10  stop  such  doubts  from  arising  in  future.
X/jading  the  strenuous  and  ardent  life  purged  of  self,

I  recovered  the  phenomena ;  but  soon  they  left  me

E in,  and,  on  asking  myself  why  they  left  me,  I  con-
led  that  it  was  because  intellecctiJ  shortcomings
had  occurred  and  consequently  mental  concentration
had  passed  away  and  the  phenomena  with  it,  and  that
I  must  take  measures  to  stop  such  doubts  and  such
intellectual  shortcomings  from  arising  in  future.  And
as  with  (i)  doubts  and  (2)  mtellectual  shortcomings,
so,  successively  and  cumulatively,  1  dealt  with —

(3>  flurry  and  worry,

(4)  palsied  fear,— Just  as  palsy  would  arise  in  a
traveller  on  a  long  journey  if  on  either  side  murderers
appeared,  so  that  palsy  came  on  him  from  right  and
from  left,— so  did  palsy  arise  within  me.

[159]  (5)  elation,— Just  as  elation  would  arise  in  a
man  hunting  for  a  buried  hoard  if  he  came  on  five
hoards  all  at  once,  so  did  elation  arise  within  me.

(6)  lewdness,

excessive  effort, — Just  as  a  man  grasping  a  quail
with  might  and  m^n  in  both  hands  would  kill  the
bird,  such  was  the  excessive  effort  which  arose
within  me.

(8)  slackness  [160],— Just  as  a  quail  would  slip  from
the  nand  of  a  man  who  held  it  in  a  loose  and  slack  -
grasp,  8u<i  was  the  slackness  which  arose  within
me.

(p)  aspirations,  and

(10)  multiplicity  in  sensory  perceptloa
(ji)  Leading  a  life  that  was  strenuous  ardent  and
purged  of  self,  1  got  die  aura  and  the  apperception  of
Form,  but  they  soon  faded  away,  and  1  asked  myself


M.  Ili.  t6t.


STftI?£  AND  BLKMI8EL&S.


H7


why  they  did.  Then  thought  1 ; — Meuculous  analysis
of  (he  phenomena  has  arisen  within  me  and  conse<
quently  concentration  has  passed  away  and  with  it  the
aura  and  apperception ;  I  will  take  measures  to  stop
this  meticulosity  of  analysis  too  from  occurring  in
future.

Realising  that  each  and  every  one  of  these  eleven
things  was  a  blemish,  I  got  rid  of  them  all.

[I6l]  Continuing  a  life  that  was  strenuous  ardent
and  purged  of  sell,  I  got  the  aura  but  could  not  see
Forms,  or  1  could  see  Forms  but  did  not  get  the  aura,
during  the  whole  of  the  night  or  day  or  both.  Think¬
ing  it  over,  I  concluded  that,  when  my  mind  was
engaged  on  the  mental  reflex  of  the  one,  it  neglected
the  other.  Continuing  the  life  chat  was  strenuous
ardent  and  purged  of  self,  1  succeeded  in  getting  aura
and  apperception  of  Form,  now  in  a  lesser  degree  now
in  a  boundless  degree.  Thinking  it  over,  I  concluded
rfiat  this  turned  on  the  d^ree  of  my  mental  concentra¬
tion  ; — when  my  mental  concentration  was  less,  my  eye
was  less,  and  with  that  lesser  eye  1  could  only  discern
a  lesser  aura  and  lesser  Forms ;  whereas,  when  my
mental  concentration  was  boundess,  boundless  too
was  my  discernment  of  these  things  by  night  or  day  or
both.

As  soon  as  [162]  I  had  got  rid  of  each  and  every  one
of  the  foregoing  eleven  things  which  I  perceived  to  be
blemishes,  then,  realuiog  that  they  were  all  ^one  from
me,  I  resolved  to  develop  mental  concentration  along

three  lines : _ I  dcvdoped  it  with  the  accompaniment

of  observation  and  reflection ;  I  developed  it  with  the
accompanlmeot  of  observation  but  not  of  reflection ;  I
devdoped  it  with  the  accompaniment  of  neither.  I
devdoped  mental  concentration  with  zest  and  without
it ;  1  devdoped  mental  concentratibn  in  association  with
a  sense  of  satisfaction ;  I  devdoped  it  in  association
with  poised  equanimity;  As  soon  as  1  had  devdoped
mental  concentration  in  these  several  modes,  there
arose  in  me  the  knowledge  and  the  vision  that  my
Ddiverance  was  assured,  that  this  was  my  last  exist-


248  cxxviir,  upakkilesa-sutta.  m.  i\\.  163.

ence,  and  that  there  was  now  no  more  of  what  1  had
been.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverepd
Anuruddha  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXXIX.  BALA-PANpITA-SUTTA,

WISDOM  AND  FOLLY.

[168]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SSvaithl  in  J eta’s  grove  in  Anathapitidika's
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen  as  follows : —

There  are  three  marks,  signs  and  attributes  of  a
fool.  He  thinks  what  he  should  not,  he  says  what  he
should  not,  and  he  does  what  he  should  not.  If  the  fool
were  not  thus  characterized,  how  could  the  msc
recognize  that  here  is  a  fool  and  a  bad  man  ?  It  is
because  he  is  so  characterized  that  they  can  recognize
him  for  what  he  is.

In  three  modes  does  the  fool,  here  and  now,  ex¬
perience  pain  and  anguish.  If  he  is  sitting  in  an
assembly  or  in  the  street  or  at  the  cross-roads,  then,  if
talk  turns  on  that  sort  of  thing,  the  fool,  should  he  be  a
murderer  or  a  thief  or  a  lecher  or  a  liar,  or  should
he  indulge  in  strong  drink,  bethinks  him  that  by  nature
he  is  just  what  they  are  discussing  and  that  be  will  be
branded  as  such  accordingly. — This  Is  the  first  mode  in
which,  here  and  now,  the  fool  experiences  pain  and
anguish.

Further,  the  fool  sees  how,  when  a  guilty  robber  is
arrested,  he  is  punished  by  the  authorities  in  divers
ways, — by  flogging  [164]  ...  (etc.  asin  Sutta  Nc.  13)
,  .  ,  are  impaled  alive  or  are  beheaded.  Hereon,  the
fool  bethinks  bimsel/  that  he  has  in  himself  all  the
^^ualities  which  entail  such  punishment  of  guilt  by  the
authorities,  and  that,  if  they  only  knew  him,  they  would
punish  him  too  in  just  ,  the  same  way. — This  is  the
second  mode  in  which,  here  and  now,  the  foot  ex¬
periences  pain  and  anguish.


M.  iii.  C65.


WISDOM  AJJD  FOLLY.


249


Further,  while  the  fool  is  upon  his  bench  or  bed,  or
is  lying  on  the  ground,  the  sense  of  his  wrongdoing  in
aqt  speech  and  thought  hangs  round  him,  rests  on  nim
and  envelops  him.  Just  as  at  eventide  the  fal  ing
shadows  from  the  great  mountain-peaks  rest  and  lie
upon  the  ground,  so  rests  the  sense  of  his  wrongdoing
upon  the  Tool  [165], — Herein,  the  fool  thinks  to  him¬
self  how,  while  he  has  not  done  what  was  good  and
right  and  reverent,  he  has  done  what  is  bad  and  cruel
and  wrong,  and  that  his  hereafter  will  tally  therewith.
Consequently,  mourning  and  distress  of  heart  is  his ;  he
laments  and  beats  his  breast  and  is  distraught.  This  is
the  third  mode  in  which,  here  and  now,  the  fool  ex¬
periences  pain  and  anguish,

At  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  that  foolish
Almsman,  whose  life  here  has  been  so  wrong  in  act  and
word  and  thought,  passes*  to  a  slate  of  woe  and  misery
or  to  purgatory.  Now  purgatory  is  all  that  is  called
gnpleasing.  unpleasant  and  disagreeable ; — it  is  far  from
easy  to  picture  the  pains  of  purgatory.

At  this  point  an  Almsman  asked  whether  an  illustra¬
tion  could  be  given.

Certainly  said  the  Lord,  who  then  proceeded  as
follows : — It  is  just  like  a  guilty  robber  who  is  hauled
before  the  king  for  punishment,  and  whom  the  king
orders  to  be  put  to  death  In  the  early  morning  by  a
hundred  javelins ;  and  his  people  proceed  accordingly.
At  mid-day  the  king,  on  asking,  is  told  the  man  is  still
alive  and  then  orders  him  to  be  put  to  death  by  a
hundred  more  javelins ;  and  his  people  proceed  accord¬
ingly.  Towards  evening,  he  is  again  told  the  man
is  still  alive  and  then  orders  him  to  be  put  to  death
by  a  hundred  more  javelins ;  [166]  and  his  people
proceed  accordingly.  What  think  you,  Almsmen  ?
Would  not  the  man  in  the  course  of  dying  by  the  three
hundred  javelins  experience  pain  and  anguish  there¬
from  ?

Yes,  sir ;  pain  and  anguish  would  be  his  even  with  a
hundred  javelins,  much  more  with  thrice  the  number.

Taking  up  a  small  scone  as  big  as  his  hand,  the


250  CXXTX.  BALA-PAJ^plTA-SUtTA.  M.ni.  l6?.

Lord  then  asked  which  was  the  bigger,— that  stone  or
Himavant,  king  of  mounuins.

The  stone  me  Lord  is  holding  is  but  small
compared  with  Himavant,  king  of  mountains,  that
stone  does  not  count;  it  is  an  inconceivabh  fraction ;
there  is  no  comparison  possible.  ^

lust  in  the  same  way,  Almsmen,  the  pain  and
anguish  the  man  fek  in  dying  by  the  three  hund^
javelins  does  not  count  as  compared  with  the  pains  felt
in  purgatory;  it  is  an  inconceivable  fraction  of  them;
there  is  no  comparison  possible.  Him  do  the  wardens
of  purgatory  subject  to  the  fivefold  pegging,— they
drive  a  red -not  peg  through  each  hand  and  each  foot,
and  a  fifth  through  his  chest.  Severe  and  acute  pmn
is  his,  but  death  comes  not  to  him  before  be  has
worked  off  his  evil-doing.  When  he  is  pegged  down,
those  wardens  trim  him  with  axes.  Severe  and  acute
.  .  .  evil-doing.  Next,  sparing  only  his  head  and
feet,  they  trim  him  with  raaors.  Severe  and  acute  .  .  .
evil-doing.  Then  they  harness  him  to  a  chariot  and
drive  him  to  and  fro  over  a  fiery  expanse,  all  aflame
and  ablate.  [167]  Severe  and  acute  .  .  .  cvil-domg.
Then  those  wardens  make  him  climb  up  and  down  a
huge  mountain  of  red*hot  embers,  all  afire  and  ^ame
and  ablaac.  Severe  and  acute  .  .  •  evil-doing.
Next  they  plunge  him  head  over  heels  into  the  glow¬
ing  Cauldron  of  Brass,  all  afire  and  aflame  and  ablaze,
where  he  is  boiled  in  the  seething  foam,— whirled  now
up  now  down,  now  to  this  side  now  to  that  Severe
and  acute  .  .  .  evil-doing,  Then  the  wardens  cast
him  into  Great  Purgatory,  which  is—

foursquare,  four- doored,  a  realm  quadrangular,
walled  all  around  wilk  steel  and  roofed  tsMk  steel,
wiik  incandescent  floor  of  molten  steel :
a  hundred  leagues  this  way  and  that  its  range
extends.

In  many  a  figure.  Almsmen,  could  I  tell  of  pur¬
gatory,  for  it  is  ter  from  easy  to  recount  all  the  p«ns
of  purgatory.


M.  ul  i6e.


WISDOM  AND  FOLLY.


25*


Creatures  there  are,  Almsmen,  in  the  animal  world
which  are  graminivorous  and  with  their  teeth  munch
clean  moist  grass, — like  horses  and  oxen,  donkeys  and
goats  and  deer,  and  all  other  grass-eating  animals. — “The
^l  who  in  this  world  was  mnd  of  castes  and  has  com¬
mitted  evil  deeds,  at  the  body's  dissolution  after  death
is  reborn  among  these.

Creatures  there  are  in  the  animaJ  world  which  live  on
dung  and  at  the  distant  scent  of  dung  hurry  up  to  enjoy
the  feast, — for  all  the  world  like  brahmins  scenting  a
sacri  fice  and  running  up  to  enj  oy  the  feast  [1 68]  S  uchare
cocks  and  swine,  dogs  and  jackals,  and  all  other  dung-
eating  animals. — The  fool  .  .  .  reborn  among  these.

Creatures  there  are  in  the  animal  world  which  are
born  in  darkness,  grow  up  In  darkness  and  in  darkness
die, — like  insects,  maggots,  delving  worms,  and  all
other  denizens  of  dadtness. — The  fool  .  .  .  reborn
among  these.

Creatures  there  are  in  the  animal  world  which  are
born  in  water,  grow  up  in  water  and  in  water  die,—
like  fish,  tortoises,  crocodiles,  and  all  other  aquatic
creatures. — The  fool  .  .  .  reborn  among  these,

Creatures  there  are  in  the  animal  world  that  are
born  In  filth,  grow  up  in  filth  and  die  in  filth, — like  the
Oiganisms  in  stinking  fish  or  in  festering  co^^ses  or
putrid  rice  or  standing  pond  or  pool.  [169]  The  fool
,  ,  .  reborn  among  these.

In  many  a  figure,  Almsmen,  could  I  tell  of  the
animal  world,  for  it  is  far  from  easy  to  recount  all  the
pain  of  rebirth  as  an  animal.

It  is  just  like  a  man  who  should  cast  into  the  sea
a  yoke  with  a  single  aperture  in  it,  carried  now  west
by  an  easterly  wind,  now  east  by  a  westerly  wind,
now  north  by  a  southern  wind,  and  now  again  south
by  a  northerly  blast ;  and  suppose  there  were  in  that
sea  a  blind  turtle  who  came  out  once  a  century.  What
think  you,  Almsmen  ?  Would  that  blind  turtle  get
his  neck  into  that  single  aperture  ?

He  might,  sir some  time  or  other,  after  the  lapse
of  a  very  long  time.


CXXIX .  B  ALA-PA^  PITA'S  UTTA.


M.iii.  170.


^52


Well ;  the  turtle  would  be  quicker,  and  find  less
difficulty,  in  doing  that,  say  I,  than  the  fool  in  his
after  misery  and  woe  can  become  a  human  beipg
once  again.  And  why?— Because  here  we  have  a
case  not  of  holy  and  righteous  life  and  of  right-doing,
but  of  mutual  devouring  and  of  mutual  slaughter.
Should  he — some  time  or  other,  after  the  lapse  of
a  very  long  time — become  a  human  being  again,  it
is  into  one  of  the  low  stocks — outcasces,  trappers,  rush-
platters,  Cartwrights  and  ratcatchers — that  he  is  reborn,
to  a  life  of  vagrancy  and  want  and  penury,  scarce  get¬
ting  food  and  drink  for  his  belly  or  dothes  to  his
ba«.  He  grows  up  ill-favoured  and  unsightly,  mis¬
shapen,  a  weakling,  blind,  or  deformed,  or  lame,  or
a  cripple ;  he  gels  no  food  drink  and  clothes,  [170]  nor
carriage,  garlands  scents  and  perfumes ;  he  miscon-
duct^imself  in  act  word  and  thought;  his  misconduct
brings  him  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death  to
a  state  of  misery  and  woe  or  to  purgatory.

It  is  just  as  if  a  gamester,  by  throwing  the  lowest
possible  cast  with  the  dice,  loses  son,  wife,  and
all  his  possessions,  and  finally  goes  into  bond^e  in
his  own  person.  His  ill-luck  and  loss  is  but  insignifi¬
cant  as  compared  with  the  ill-luck  and  loss  of  the  roan
who,  by  evil-doing  in  act  word  and  thought,  passes  at
death  to  a  future  of  misery  and  woe  or  to  purgatory, —
which  is  folly’s  consummation.

There  are  three  marks  and  signs  and  attributes  of  a
wise  man.  He  thinks  what  be  ought  to  think,  he
says  what  he  ought  to  say,  and  he  does  what  he  ought
to  do.  If  the  wise  man  were  not  thus  characteriaed,
how  could  the  wise  recognize  that  here  is  a  wise  and
good  man  ?  It  is  because  he  is  so  characterized  that
they  can  recognize  him  for  what  he  is.

In  three  modes  does  the  wise  man,  here  and  now,
experience  well-being  and  satisfaction.  If  he  be  seated
in  an  assembly  or  in  the  street  or  at  the  cross-roads,
then,  if  talk  turns  on  that  sort  of  thing,  the  wise  man,
should  he  be  guiltless  of  murder  theft  lechery  [171]
or  lying  or  indulgence  in  strong  drink,  bethinks  him


M.  liL  172.


WISDOM  AND  FOLLV.


253


that  he  is  just  the  ^iltless  man  whom  they  are  dis¬
cussing  and  that  ne  will  be  recognized  as  such
accordingly. — This  is  the  first  mode  in  which,  here
and  now,  the  wise  man  experiences  well-being  and
satisfaction.

Further,  the  wise  man  sees  how,  when  a  guil^
robber  is  arrested,  he  is  punished  by  the  authorities  in
divers  ways, — by  flogging  . . .  {etc.  as  tn  Suita  No.  \  3)
.  .  .  are  impaled  alive  or  are  beheaded.  Hereon,  the
wise  man  bethinks  himself  that  he  has  in  himself  none
of  those  evil  qualities  which  entail  such  punishment  of
guilt  by  the  authorities,  and  that  he  will  he  recognized
as  not  having  those  evil  qualities. — This  is  the  second
mode  in  which,  here  and  now,  the  wise  man  experi¬
ences  well-being  and  satisfaction.

Further,  while  the  wise  man  is  upon  his  bench  or
bed,  or  is  lying  on  the  ground,  the  sense  of  his  right-
doing  in  act  word  and  thought  hangs  round  him,  rests
on  him  and  envelops  him.  Just  as  at  eventide  the
falling  shadows  from  the  great  mountain-peaks  rest
and  ne  upon  the  ground,  so  rests  the  sense  of  his
right-doing  upon  the  wise  man. — Hereon,  the  wise
man  thinks  to  himself  how,  while  he  has  not  done
what  was  bad  cruel  and  wrong,  he  has  done  what
is  good  and  right  and  reverent,  and  that  his  hereafter
win  tally  therewith.  Consequently  no  mourning  or
distress  of  heart  is  his  ;  he  laments  not  nor  beats  his
breast  nor  is  he  distraught. — This  is  the  third  mode  in
which,  here  and  now,  the  wise  man  experiences  well¬
being  and  satisfaction.

Ac  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  chat  wise  man,
whose  life  here  has  been  so  right  in  act  and  word  and
thought,  [172]  passes  to  a  future  state  of  bliss  in
heaven.  Now  heaven  is  all  that  is  called  pleasing,
pleasant  and  agreeable  it  is  far  from  easy  to  picture
the  happiness  of  heaven.

At  this  point  an  Almsman  asked  whether  an  illustra*
don  could  be  given.

Certainly  said  the  Lord,  who  then  proceeded  as
follows :  It  is  just  like  a  king  of  kings  who  possesses


354


CXXIX .  BiLA-PANDITA-SUTT  A.


M.  »i).  I7J-


the  Seven  Treasures  and  the  Four  Gifts,  and  from
them  derives  well-being  and  satisfaction.

What  are  the  Seven? — In  the  first  place  when  that
Noble,  anointed  as  king,  on  the  sabbath  of  the  full
.  moon,  has  bathed  all  over  and  gone  up  into  the  upper
story  of  his  palace  to  keep  the  sacred  day,  there
appears  to  him  the  Treasure  of  the  Wheel,  with  its
nave,  its  tire,  and  all  its  thousand  spokes  complete.
When  he  beholds  it  that  Noble,  anointed  as  king,
thinks : — This  saying  have  I  heard, — When  a  king  of
the  warrior  race,  an  anointed  king,  has  purified  himsell
.  .  .  {ilc.  as  at  Diahgws  //,  mucatis  mutandis,
dcvm  to)  ..  .  [178-71  These  were  the  Four  Gifts
with  which  the  king  o{ kings  was  endowed.

What  do  you  think,  Almsm  en  P  W ould  a  ki  ng  o  f  kings
who  possessed  these  Seven  Treasures  and  these  Four
Gifts,  derive  from  them  well-being  and  satisfaction  ?

Any  single  one  of  them  would  be  sufficient  for  chat,
not  to  speak  of  the  whole  Seven  Treasures  and  all
Four  Gifts  together.

Taking  up  a  small  stone  in  his  hand,  the  Lord  then
asked  which  was  the  bigger, — that  scone  or  Himavanc,
kii^  of  mountains.

The  stone  the  Lord  is  holding  is  but  small ; — as
compared  with  Himavanc,  king  of  mountains,  that
stone  does  not  count ;  it  is  an  inconceivable  fraction ;
there  is  no  comparison  possible.

Just  in  the  same  way,  Almsmen,  the  well-being  and
satisfaction  which  the  king  of  kings  derives  from  the
Seven  Treasures  and  the  Four  Gifts  does  not  count  as
compared  with  pleasures  celestial ;  it  is  an  inconceivable
fraction  of  them;  there  is  no  comparison  possible.

Should  that  wise  man — some  time  or  other,  after
the  lapse  of  a  very  long  time — become  a  human  being
again,  it  is  into  one  of  the  higher  stocks — rich  nobles
or  brahmins  or  masters  of  houses — that  he  is  reborn,  to
a  life  of  affluence  riches  and  wealth,  with  abundance  of
gold  and  coins  of  silver,  and  with  abounding  subs  tan«
and  abounding  possessions.  H  e  grows  up  wdl-favoured
and  well-liking,  with  loveliest  complexion,  with  plenty


M.  til.  17&


WISDOM  AND  FOXJ.Y.


255


of  food  and  drink  and  clothes  and  carriages  and  gar¬
lands  and  scents  and  perfumes ;  he  conducts  him
arjght  in  act  word  and  thought  and  [178]  his  right
conduct  brings  him  at  the  body’s  dissolution  alter
death  to  well-being  and  satisfaction  In  heaven.

It  is  just  as  if  a  gamester  by  the  lucky  cast  of  the
dice  begins  by  winning  a  fortune.  His  good  luck  and
gain  are  but  insignificant  as  compared  with  the  good
and  gain  of  that  wise  man  who,  by  right  conduct  in
act  word  and  thought,  passes  at  death  to  a  future  state
of  bliss  in  heaven. — Such  is  wisdom’s  rich  and  ample
sphere.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXXX.  DEVADUTA-SUTTA.

K£AVEK'S  WARNING  MESSENGERS.

Thus  have  1  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  wm
staying  at  S&vaithI  in  J  eta’s  grove  in  AnSthapiodika’s
pleasaunce,  the  Lord  thus  addressed  the  Almsmen : —
Just  as  if  there  were  two  bouses  with  doors,  and
a  man  with  eyes  to  see  were  to  stand  between  them
and  see  men  going  in  and  out  and  passit^  to  and  fro,
— just  in  the  same  way  do  i  see,  with  the  Eye  Celestial
which  far  surpasses  the  human  eye,  creatures  in  act
of  passing  hence  and  of  re-appearing  elsewhere,—
creatures  lowly  or  debonair,  fair  or  foul  to  view,  happy
or  unhappy  ;  and  I  am  aware  that  they  fare  according
to  their  past  Here  are  creatures  given  to  good  in
act  word  and  thought,  who  did  not  decry  the  Noble
Ones,  who  had  a  right  outlook  and  became  what
results  from  such  a  right  outlook ; — these  at  the  body’s
dissolution  after  death  ^>pear  either  in  stares  of  bliss
in  heaven  [178]  or  as  human  bdngs.  Here  a^in  are
creatures  given  to  evil  m  act  word  and  thou^t  who
decry  the  Noble  Ones,  have  a  wrong  outlook  and
become  what  results  from  such  a  wrong  outlook


256


CXXX.  DEVADVTA-SUTTA.


M.  ill  180.


these  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death  appear
either  as  ghosts  or  as  animals  or  in  the  misery  and
woe  of  purgatory.  •

Him  do  the  wardens  of  purgatory  haul  by  the  arms
before  King  Yama,  saying — This  man,  sire,  lacked
filial  and  religious  piety  and  flouted  bis  clan  elders ;
appoint  him  his  punishment.

Him  does  King  Yama  examine  and  question  and
press  regarding  the  first  messenger  of  the  gods,  asking
the  man  whether  in  his  human  life  he  did  not  see  that
messenger  appearing*  On  the  man’s  saying  he  bad
not  seen  him,  Yama  says  : — My  man,  did  you  never
in  vour  human  life  see  a  tiny  new«born  babe  that  can
only  lie  on  its  back  in  its  own  filch  ?

Yes,  sir ;  I  did.

Did  you  never,  being  a  man  of  intelligence  and
years,  bethink  you  that  you  too  were,  and  still  con¬
tinued  to  be,  subject  to  birth,  and  that  you  should
conduct  yourself  aright  in  act  word  and  thought  ?

1  could  not  have  done  it ;  I  could  not  muster  up  the
resolution  to  do  so.

Through  lack  of  resolution,  my  man,  you  have  failed
to  conduct  yourself  aright  in  act  word  and  thought.
Yes,  my  man ;  they  will  deal  with  you  according  to
your  lack  of  resolutbn,  Your  misdeeds  were  not
committed  by  your  parents,  [180]  or  bv  your  brothers
and  sisters,  or  by  your  friends  or  kinsfolk,  or  by
recluses  and  brahmins,  or  by  the  gods ;  they  were  com¬
mitted  by  none  but  yourself ;  and  it  is  you  yourself
who  will  reap  the  fruits  thereof.

Passing  now  to  the  second  messenger  of  the  gods,
Yama  questions  the  man  as  to  his  having  seen  this
second  messenger.  On  the  man’s  replying  that  he
had  not  seen  him,  Yama  says : — My  man,  did  you
never  in  your  life  on  earth  see  an  old  woman  or  man
of  eighty  or  ninety  or  a  hundred, — bent  double  and
propping  their  bowed  frames  with  a  staff  as  they  totter
along,  decrepid,  with  youth  gone,  with  teeth  gone,
with  hair  grey  or  scanty  or  none  left,  all  wrinkled  and
blotchy?


K.  ih.  j8{.  HBAVSM'S  warning  MB&SeNGERS.


257


Yes,  sir ;  I  did.

Did  you  never,  being  a  man  of  intelligence  and
years,  bethink  you  that  you  too  were,  and  still  con¬
tinued  to  be,  subject  to  old-age,  and  that  you  should
conduct  yourself  aright  in  act  word  and  thought  ^

I  could  not  have  done  it  .  .  .  reap  the  fruits
thereof.

Passing  now  to  the  third  messenger  of  the  gods,
Yama  questions  [181]  the  man  as  to  his  having  seen
this  third  messenger.  On  the  man’s  replying  that  he
had  not  seen  him,  Yama  says : — My  man,  did  you
never  in  your  human  life  see  a  woman  or  a  man  ill  and
in  pain,  very  ill  Indeed,  lying  in  their  own  excreta,
ne^ing  others  to  lift  them  up  and  lay  them  down  P

Yes,  sir ;  1  did.

Did  you  never,  being  a  man  of  intelligence  and
years,  bethink  you  that  you  too  were,  and  still  con¬
tinued  to  be,  subject  to  disease,  and  that  you  should
conduct  yourself  aright  in  act  word  and  thought  ?

I  could  not  have  done  it  .  .  .  reap  the  fruits
thereof.

Passing  now  to  the  fourth  messenger  of  the  gods,
Yama  questions  the  man  as  to  his  having  seen  the
fourth  messenger.  On  the  man’s  replying  that  he  had
not  seen  him,  Yama  says : — My  man,  did  you  ne^er  in
your  human  life  see  how,  when  a  guilty  robber  is
arrested,  he  is  punished  by  the  authorities  in  divers
— by  flogging  .  . .  (etc.  as  in  Sutta  No.  13) ...  are
impaled  ^ive  or  are  beheaded  ?

Ves,  sir ;  I  did

Did  you  never,  being  a  man  of  intelligence  and
years,  bethink  you  that,  according  to  report,  all  evil¬
doers  are  thus  punished  in  divers  ways,  here  and  now,
and  why  not  [182]  hereafter  ? — and  accordingly  con¬
duct  yourself  aright  in  act  word  and  thought?

I  could  not  nave  done  it  .  .  .  reap  the  fruits
thereof.

Passing  next  to  the  fifth  messenger  of  the  gods,
Yama  questions  the  man  as  to  hb  having  seen  the  fifth
messenger.  On  the  man’s  replying  that  he  had  not

11.  *7


CXXX.  rEVADt^TA-SUTTA.


M.  ill.  189.


25S


seen  him,  Yama  says My  man,  did  yoj  never  tn
your  human  life  see  the  corpse  of  a  woman  or  of  a  man
bloated  and  blackened  and  festering  ?  ♦

Yes,  sir;  I  did.  .  .  .

Did  you  never,  being  a  man  of  intelligent  and
years,  bethink  you  that  you  loo  were,  and  still  con¬
tinued  10  be,  subject  to  death,  and  that  you  should
conduct  yourself  aright  in  act  word  and  deed  ?

I  could  not  have  done  it  .  ,  .  reap  the  fruits
thereof.

Having  examined,  questioned  and  pressed  the  man
regarding  die  fifth  messenger  of  the  gods.  King  Yama
says  no  more.

Him  do  the  wardens  of  purgatory  subject  to  the
fivefold  trussing, -^188]  they  drive  a  red-hot  pec
through  each  hand  and  each  foot,  and  a  fifth  through
his  chest,  Severe  and  acute  pain  is  his,  but  death
comes  not  to  him  before  he  has  worked  off  all  his  evil-
doing.  When  he  is  pegged  down  chose  wardens  trim
him  with  axes.  Severe  and  acute  .  .  .  evil-doing.
Next,  sparing  only  hU  head  and  feet,  they  trim  him
with  razors,  Severe  and  acute  .  .  .  evil-doing.  Then
they  harness  him  to  a  chariot  and  drive  him  to  and  fro
over  a  fiery  expanse,  all  adame  and  ablaze.  Severe
and  acute  .  .  .  evil-doing-  Then  those  wardens  make
him  climb  up  and  down  a  huge  mountain  of  red-hot
embers,  all  afire  and  aBame  and  ablaze.  Severe  and  acute
.  .  .  evil-doing.  Next  they  plunge  him  head  over  heels
into  the  glowing  ^uldron  of  Brass,  all  aBre  and  aBame
and  ablaze,  where  he  is  boiled  in  the  seething  foam, —
whirled  now  up  now  down,  now  to  this  side  now  to  that.
Severe  and  acute  .  .  .  evil-doing.

Then  the  wardens  cast  him  into  Great  Purgatory,
which  Is —


foursquare,  four  doored,  a  realm  quadrangular^
walled  all  around  with  steel  and  roofed  with  steely
with  incandescent  floor  of  moUen  steel;
a  hundred  leagues  this  ^ay  and  that  its  range  extends.


M.  Ill  184*  heaven's  warning  messengers.  259

In  Great  Pui^tory,  Almsmen,  the  flames  that  leap
up  by  the  eastern  wall  sui^e  right  across  to  dash
against  the  western  wall ;  the  flames  that  leap  up  by  the
western  wall  su^e  across  to  dash  against  the  eastern
wall ;  [184]  the  flames  that  dart  up  by  the  northern
wall  surge  across  to  dash  against  the  southern  wall  r  the
flames  that  dart  up  by  the  southern  wall  su^e  across  to
dash  aghast  the  northern  wall ;  the  flames  t^t  dart  up
below  surge  right  up  gainst  the  cop ;  and  the  flames
that  dart  from  the  top  suige  right  down  against  the
bottom.  Severe  and  acute  .  .  .  evil-doing.

A  time  comes— long,  long  after,  at  the  close  of  a  vast
period— when  Great  Purgatory’s  eastern  door  opens ;
and  cowards  it  nimbly  and  swiftly  he  runs, — burning  in
skin  and  hide,  burning  in  his  flesh,  burning  in  his
tendons,  with  his  bones  charring  within  him ;  such  is
his  plight  When  he  is  well  on  his  way  to  escape,  the
door  shuts.  Severe  and  acute  ..  .  evil-doing.

And  the  like  happens  when  in  the  fulness  of  time  the
western  and  the  northern  and  the  southern  doors  open
in  turn  and  close  again.

A  time  comes — long,  long  after,  at  the  close  of  a
vast  period — when  once  again  Great  Purgatory's
eastern  door  opens ;  and  towards  it  .  .  .  such  is  his
plight  Forth  by  that  door  he  goes.

Right  alongside  of  Great  Purgatory  is  [J88]  the

freac  Filth-Pvi^facory,  and  into  chat  he  plumps-  In
ilch- Purgatory  needle*mou6ed  creatures  successively
rip  away  his  skin  and  hide,  his  flesh,  his  tendons,  and
his  bones,  till  they  can  devour  his  marrow.  Severe  and
acute  .  .  .  evil-doing.

Rjgbc  alongside  of  Filch-Purgatory  is  the  great
Ember-Purgatory,  and  into  that  he  plumps.  Severe
and  acute  .  ,  .  evil-doing.

Right  alongside  of  Ember-Putgatory  is  the  great
Forest  of  Silk-cotton  Trees  towering  a  league  h^h  with
prickles  half  a  yard  long  (on  its  carpet  of  (alien  leaves),
all  aflre  and  aflame  and  ablaze ;  and  in  this  forest  they
avake  him  climb  up  and  down.  Severe  and  acute  . , .
evil-doing.


260


CX  X  X-  DEV  ADOtA-SUTTA.


M.  ill  I  $6.


Right  alongside  of  that  forest  is  the  great  Sword¬
leaved  forest,  the  leaves  of  which  under  stress  of  the
wind  cut  off  his  h^ds  and  feet  and  ears  and  nose  arid
nostrils.  Severe  and  acute  .  .  .  evil-doing.

Right  alongside  of  this  forest  is  the  great  Caustic
River,  and  into  that  he  plumps.  Now  up,  now  down
the  stream  he  is  borne,  and  now  up  and  down.  Severe
and  acute  .  .  .  evil-doing.

Landing  him  with  a  fish-hook,  the  wardens  of
purgatory  [186]  ask  him  what  he  wants ;  and  he  says
he  is  hungry.  Prising  his  mouth  open  with  a  red-hot
crowbar  ml  afire  and  afiame  and  ablaae,  the  wardens  of
purgatory  thrust  into  his  mouth  a  red-hot  ball  of  copper
all  afire  and  aflame  and  ablaze,  which  burns  his  Ups,
mouth,  throat  and  chest,  and  passes  out  below,  carrying
with  it  his  bowels  and  intestines.  Severe  and  acute
.  .  ,  evil-doing.

Again  the  wardens  ask  him  what  he  wants ;  and  he
says  he  is  thirsty.  Prising  his  mouth  open  as  before,
they  pour  into  Ins  mouth  molten  copper  and  bronze  all
afire  and  aflame  and  ablaze,  which  burns  his  lips,
mouth,  throat  and  chest,  and  passes  out  below,  carrying
with  it  his  bowels  and  Intestines.  Severe  and  acute
.  .  .  evil-doing.

Then  the  wardens  of  pu^atory  cast  him  once  more
into  Great  Purgatory.

Time  was  Almsmen,  when  ibis  thought  came  to
King  Yam  a ; — They  that  are  reported  to  do  evil  in  the
world  are  punished  in  these  divers  ways,  Would  that
1  might  become  a  human  being  and  that  there  might
then  arise  in  the  world  a  Truth-finder,  Arahat  all-
enlighcened,  to  whom  1  might  attach  myself  to  hear
the  Lord  preach  his  Doctrine  and  myi^lf  to  understand
the  Lord’s  Doctrine)

What  lam  telling  you,  Almsmen,  I  have  heard  from
no  other  lips  whether  of  recluse  or  of  brahmin ;  I  tell
you  only  what  1  have  for  and  by  myself  known  and
seen  and  discerned.

[187]  Thus  spoke  the  Lord;  and  the  Blessed  One
went  on  to  add  the  following ; —


M.  ill.  2^8.


heaven’s  warning  messengers.


361


Ifx  vainly  warn'd  by  heaven* s  fusss^ngtrsy
young  brahmins  carsUss  live^  long  tinu  iktir  sloth
•  they'll  tw,  in  lowly  shapes  condemned  to  live.

But  they,  the  good ^  who  warning  take  betimes
and.  sloth  eschewing,  grasp  ike  Doctrine  true,

— -these  from  Attachment's  perils  find  Release,
in  fetal  triumph  over  birth  and  death.

At  peace,  and  blissful,  here  and  now  they  find
Nirvdna,  p/urged  of  hatred,  purged  of  fear,
o’er  III  triumphant.


CXXXI.  BHADDEKARATTA-SUTTA.

TRUE  SAINT.  I.

Thus  have  1  heard  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Sftvacth!  in  J  eta's  grove  in  AnSchapiodika's
plea&aunce,  he  informed  the  Almsmen  that  he  would
instruct  them  In  the  exposition  and  analysis  of  the
True  Saint,  Their  attention  gained,  the  Lord  spoke
as  follows : —

Let  past  be  past ;  nor  future  longings  house;

— the  past  is  dead,  the  morrow  not  yet  bom.

Whoso  with  insight  scans  his  heart  to-day,
let  him  ensue  eternal  Chesngelessness  /

Toil  then  to-day.  To-morrow  death  may  come,

-~-auho  knows  ?  No  bargain  holds  deaths  hosts  at  bay.
Whoso,  by  night  and  day  unceasingly,
lives  still  to  struggle  onward,  he  it  ts
is  called  True  Saint; — the  Perfect  Sage  is  he.

[188]  How,  Almsmen,  does  a  man  hark  back  to  the
finding  delight  in  remembering  that  in  a
previous  birth  in  the  past  such  and  such  was  he  like,
such  and  such  were  his  feelings,  his  perceptions,  his
plastic  forces  and  his  mentality.

How  does  a  man  not  hark  back? — By  not  finding
delight  in  such  memories.

How  does  a  man  have  longings  for  the  future? — By


362  CXXXI.  BHADDBKARATTA-SUTTA.  M,  ill  189.

finding  'delight  in  the  longing  that  in  later  births  In
the  future  he  may  be  such  and  such,  with  such  and  such
feelings  and  so  forth.  •

How  does  a  man  not  have  longings  for  the  future  ?
— By  not  finding  delight  in  any  such  aspirations.

How  is  a  man  swept  away  by  present  states  of  con¬
sciousness? — Take  the  case  of  an  uninstructed  every¬
day  man  who  has  no  vision  of  the  Noble  Ones  and  is
unversed  and  untrained  in  ihelr  Doctrine,  who  has  no
vision  of  the  Excellent  Ones  and  is  unversed  and  un¬
trained  in  their  Doctrine such  a  man  either  conceives
Form  as  Self,  or  Self  as  having  Form,  or  Form  in
Self,  or  Self  in  Form ; — and  so  on  with  feelings,  per¬
ceptions,  the  plastic  forces  1X89]  and  the  mind. — T*hat
is  how  a  man  is  swept  away.

How  is  a  man  not  swept  away  by  present  states  of
consciousness?^ Take  the  case  of  an  instructed
disciple  of  the  Noble.  Ones,  who  has  vision  of  the
Noble  and  is  versed  and  trained  in  their  Doctrine,  who
has  vision  of  the  Excellent  and  is  versed  and  trained  in
their  Doctrine ; — such  a  man  neither  conceives  Form
as  Self,  nor  Self  as  having  Form,  nor  Form  in  Self,  nor
Self  in  Form ;  nor  does  he  entertain  like  conceptions
about  feelings,  perceptions,  the  plastic  forces,  or  the
mind. — -That  is  how  a  man  is  not  swept  away  by
present  States  of  consciousness.

Lit  past  bipast  .  ,  ,

.  .  .  Psr/ect  Sage  is  fu.

This  is  what  I  meant  when  I  said  I  would  instruct
you  in  the  exposition  of  the  True  Saint,

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M.  ill  190.


TRUE  SAINT.  II.


263


cxxxii.  Ananda-bhaddekaratta-

•  SUTTA.

TRUE  SAINT.  II.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay¬
ing  at  Savatthi  in  J  eta’s  grove  in  Anichapin(}ika's
pleasajnce,  the  reverend  Ananda  by  homily  in  Hall
instructed,  informed,  enlightened  [190]  and  heartened
the  Almsmen,  teaching  them  the  cxposidon  and  analysis
of  the  True  Saint

Rising  at  eventide  from  his  meditations,  the  Lord
came  to  Hall  and  there  sat  down  on  the  seat  set  for  him,
asking  who  had  been  giving  instruction  and  reciting  the
exposition  and  analysis  of  the  True  Saint.  Being  told
that  it  WAS  Ananda,  the  Lord  asked  him  how  exactly
he  had  proceeded.  Then  Ananda  repeated  to  him
word  for  word  [i/i4  pricsdii^  SuUa,  begiij/^ing  and
iiiding  with  tke  V€rses\

[191]  Right,  q  uite  rig  ht.  An  anda.  R  ighily  h  a ve  you
by  homily  instructed,  informed,  enlightened  and
heartened  the  Almsmen,  teaching  them  the  exposition
and  analysis  of  the  True  Saint.

And  word  for  word  the  Lord  repeated  it  himself
again  right  through.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said


cxxxni.  mahAkaccAna-bhaddeka-
RATTA-SUTTA.

TRUE  SAINT.  III.

[192]  Thus  have  I  beard-  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Rajagaha  in  the  Tapoda  (hot  springs)
pleasaunce  the  reverend  Samiddhi,  rising  up  at  day¬
break.  be  took  him  to  the  hot  springs  to  bathe  his  limbs,
and,  having  come  out  of  the  water,  was  standing  in  a
single  garment  drying  himself.  To  him  came  a  deity


264  CKXxm.  MAHilKACCAKA-BH*-SUTTA.  M,  iil.


of  surpassing  beauty  who,  as  night  waned,  illumined
all  the  place.  Standing  to  one  side,  the  deity  asked
Samiddhi  whether  he  knew  by  heart  the  exposition  and
analysis  of  the  True  Saint

No,  sir,  1  do  not  Do  you?

No,  Almsman.  Do  you  know  the  verses?

No,  sir,  I  do  not.  Do  you  ?

No,  Almsman.  Like  you,  I  do  not  know  the  verses-
Stu^,  learn  and  master  that  exposition  and  analysis  of
the  "frue  Saint,  Almsman ;  It  is  fruitful  for  good  and  is
fundamental  for  the  higher  life.  With  these  words  the
dei^  vanished  from  sight.

A^hen  night  had  passed  away,  Samiddhi  went  to  the
Lord  and  after  salutations  took  his  seat  to  one  side.
Then  he  related  all  that  passed  between  him  and  the
deity,  [193]  ending  with  the  request  that  the  Lord
would  teach  him  the  exposition  and  analysis  of  the
True  Saint,

Listen ^en  and  pay  attention,  Almsman,  and  I  will
speak,  said  the  Lord,  who  spoke  as  follows :

LH  past  b€  past :  nor  future  longings  house;

—the  past  is  dead,  the  morrow  not  yet  bom.

Whoso  with  insight  scans  his  heart  to-day,
lei  him  emue  eternal  Changelessness !

Toil  then  to-^iay.  To-morrow  death  may  come,

—who  knows  ?  No  bargain  holds  death's  hosts  at  bay.
Whoso,  by  day  and  night  unceasingly,
lives  still  to  struggle  onward,  he  it  is
is  called  True  Saint ; — the  Perfect  Sage  is  he.

At  this  point  the  Blessed  One  arose  and  went  to  his
cell.  He  had  not  been  cone  long  when  the  Almsmen,
realizing  that  the  Lord  had  left  them  with  a  terse
utterance  without  expository  presentment  and  without
elucidation  of  Import,  and  wondering  who  could  furnish
them  with  the  exposition  and  the  elucidation,  [194]  be*
thought  them  that  here  was  the  reverend  MahS>KaccSna
who  was  held  in  great  honour  and  esteem  alike  by  the
Master  and  by  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life,  and  who
could  elucidate  the  meaning  of  the  Lord’s  terse  utter-


M.  nl  19$.


TRUE  SAINT.  lU-


265


ance.  So  they  went  to  him  and  after  greetings  told
him  how  the  Lord  had  left  them  with  that  terse  utter¬
ance  and  that,  after  he  had  so  left  them,  they  bad
decided  to  turn  to  the  Elder  for  its  elucidation.

Said  he : — This  proceeding  is  just  like  a  man  In  need
and  quest  of  choice  timber,  who,  as  he  bunts  around  for
it,  comes  on  a  fine  upstanding  timber-tree,  [195]  but
passes  over  both  the  root  and  the  crunk  and  imagines
ne  will  find  what  he  wants  in  the  boughs  and  the
iwiggage.  Although  the  Master  is  present  among  you,
yet,  disregarding  the  Lord,  you  imagine  me  to  be  the
person  to  ask  for  the  explanation.  The  Lord,  sirs,
knows  with  all  knowing  and  sees  with  all  seeing ;  is  the
embodiment  of  vision,  of  knowledge,  of  the  Doctrine,
and  of  all  excellence ;  is  the  propounder,  expounder  and
the  unfolder  of  meaning;  Is  the  giver  of  Nirvana’s
ambrosia,  is  lord  of  the  Doctrine,  is  the  Truth-finder.
Clearly,  now  is  the  time  to  ask  your  questions  of  the
Lord  in  person,  with  intent  to  treasure  up  wbathe  may
reveal.

Admitting  this,  the  Almsmen  still  pressed  on  the
reverend  Mahi-Kaccina  their  request  that  he  would
expound  and  elucidate.  Consenting,  he  spoke  as
follows The  Lord's  pregnant  utterance  was


/as/  6s  past :  nor  futun  longings  housi ;

is  called  Tnu  Saint : — the  Perfect  Sage  is  he»

I  take  the  detailed  meaning  of  this  pregnant  utterance
CO  be  as  fdlows : —

How,  Almsmen,  does  a  man  bark  back  to  the  past?
— Ac  the  thought  that  In  the  past  such  and  such  was
his  eye,  sucii  and  such  were  [196]  the  visible  shapes  he
saw,  his  mentality  becomes  enchained  by  the  incite¬
ments  of  passion, — which  makes  him  delight  therein
and  thereby  hark  back  to  the  past.  And  the  same  is
equally  true  of  ear  and  smell,  of  taste  touch  and  mind,
and  c«  ihdr  several  objects  respectively.

How  does  a  man  not  hark  back  ? — By  keeping  his


266  CXXXni  UAHAKACCAHA-BK®-SDTTA.  M.  ul- 197 •

mentality  un-cbalned  by  the  incitements  of  passion  due
to  such  memories.

How  does  a  man  have  longing  for  the  future? — At
the  thought  that  in  the  future  his  eye  may  be  such  and
such,  and  that  such  and  such  may  be  the  visible  shapes
he  will  see,  he  turns  his  heart  to  getting  something  he
has  not  got, — which  makes  him  delight  therein  and
thereby  have  longings  for  the  future.  And  the  same  is
equally  true  of  ear  and  smell,  of  taste  touch  and  mind,
and  of  their  several  objects  respectively.

[Id^  How  does  a  man  not  have  longings  for  the
future? — By  not  turning  his  heart  to  any  such
aspirations.

How  is  a  man  swept  away  by  present  states  of  con¬
sciousness  ?  E^e  and  visible  shape  are  both  of  the
present,  and  it  js  just  with  this  present  that  his  men¬
tality  becomes  encliained  by  the  incitements  of  passion,
— which  makes  him  delight  therein  and  thereby  fail  to
stand  firm  in  the  present.  And  the  same  is  equally
true  of  ear  and  smell,  of  taste  touch  and  mind,  and  of
their  several  objects  respectively.

How  is  a  man  not  swept  away  by  present  stales  of
consciousness  ? — By  keeping  his  mentality  un-chalned
by  the  incitements  of  passion  due  to  such  memories.

[198]  This  then,  said  he  in  conclusion,  is  my  ex¬
position  and  elucidation  of  this  terse  utterance  of  the
Lord.  Should  your  reverences  be  in  any  doubt,  you
should  go  to  him  and  ask  him,  treasuring  up  in  your
memories  what  he  may  reveal.

Accordingly,  with  grateful  thanks  to  the  reverend
MahS-KaccSna,  those  Almsmen  betook  them  to  the
Lord,  to  whom  they  first  related  [199]  how  they  had
sought  for  an  exposition  and  elucidation  of  that  terse
utterance  of  the  Lord  from  the  reverend  Maha*Kac-
cSna,  and  then  narrated  how  he  had  expounded  it.

Learned,  Almsmen,  is  Mahs-Kaccana,  rich  in  lore.
Had  you  asked  me,  1  should  have  said  just  the  same;
for.  ihis  is  the  precise  meaning,  which  you  should
treasure  up  in  your  memories  accordingly.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  bad  said.


M.  lii.  200*


TRUE  SAINT.  IV,


267


CXXXIV.  LOMASAKANGIYA-BHADDE-
•  KARATTA-SUTTA.

TRUE  SAINT-  IV.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay¬
ing  at  SSvattht  in  J eta’s  grove  in  Anathapi];idiha*s
pleasaunce,  the  reverend  Lomasakangiya  was  living  in
the  Sakyan  couniry  at  Kapilavatchu  m  the  Banyan
grove.  To  him  came  the  god  Candana  in  his  sur¬
passing  beauty  who,  as  night  waned,  illumined  aJl  the

Sove.  Standing  to  one  side,  the  god  Candana  asked
e  venerable  Lomasakanglya  whether  he  knew  by
heart  the  exposition  and  analysis  of  (he  True  Saint
[200]  No,  sir,  I  do  not  £)oyou?

No,  Brother.  Do  you  know  the  verses?

No,  sir,  I  do  not.  Do  you  ?

Yes,  I  know  the  verses.

How  do  they  run  ?

Once,  Almsman,  when  the  Lord  was  staying  with
the  Thirty-Three  gods  at  the  foot  of  the  Coral-tree  by
the  Gem-throne  (of  Sakkha),  he  gave  the  exposition
and  analysis  of  the  True  Saint,  repeating  the  lines —

Lit  past  b$  past  .  .  .

.  .  .  Pirfict  Sags  is  k$.

That  is  my  version  of  the  True  Saint  verses.  Study,
learn  and  master  the  exposition  and  analysis  of  the
True  Saint ;  It  is  fruitful  for  good  and  is  fundamental
for  the  higher  life.  With  these  words  the  god
Candana  vanished  from  sight.

When  night  had  passed  away,  Lomasakanglya

Cked  up  his  bedding  and  sec  out,  duly  robed  and
I'l  in  hand,  on  an  alms- pilgrimage  to  SSvaithi,  [201]
and  in  the  pleasaunce  there  Tound  the  Lord  to  whom,
after  due  salutations,  he  related  all  that  had  passed
between  him  and  the  god,  ending  with  the  request  that
the  Lord  would  teach  him  the  exposition  and  analysis
of  the  True  Saint


268  CXXX IV.  LOM ASA  KAWGI VA-  BH*  SUTTA.  M.  ili-  JOa.


Do  you  know,  Almsman,  who  the  god  was  ?

No,  sir.

He  was  the  god  Candana,  who  listens  to  the  Doe-
trine  with  the  dosesc  attention  that  his  heart  and  mind
can  give  it  Listen  then  with  attention  and  I  will
speak.

Yes,  sir,  was  the  Almsman’s  dutiful  response;  and
the  Lord  began

Lit  past  bi  past  .  .  .

.  .  .  Per/eet  Sa^i  is  fu.

How,  Almsman,  does  a  man  hark  back  to  the  past  ?
— By  finding  delight  in  remembering  that  (id  a  previous
birth)  in  the  past  such  and  such  was  be  Ulce  .  .  .  (itc.
as  in  Suita  No.  1 3 1 ,  d/}wn  to  and  imludin^  the  virsis).

[202]  Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the
reverend  Lomasakangiya  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord
had  said.


CXXIV.  COLA-KAMMA-VIBHANGA-SUTTA.

OUR  HERITAGE  FROM  OUR  PAST.  L

Thus  have  1  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay¬
ing  at  Savacthl  in  J  eta’s  grove  in  An^thapiQ^ika’s
pleasaunce,  the  young  brahmin  Subba  Todeyya*putta
came  to  the  Lord  aud,  seatli^  himself  to  one  side  after
greetings,  asked  why  and  wherefore  it  was  that  among
human  beings  there  are  the  low  and  the  high.  For,
said  he,  we  nnd  in  mankind  chose  of  brief  life  and  those
of  long  life,  the  bale  and  the  ailing,  the  good-looking
and  the  ili -looking,  the  poor  and  the  rich,  the  low  and
the  high,  the  ignorant  and  [203]  the  well  informed.
Why  and  wherefore  is  it  that  among  human  bdngs
there  are  high  and  low?

Their  de^s  are  their  possessions  and  heritage,  their
parent,  their  kindred  and  their  refuge.  It  is  their
deeds  which  divide  people  into  high  and  low.

I  do  not  follow  this  terse  utterance  of  yours,  Gotama,


M.  iii.  204.


OUR  HERITAGE  ?ROM  OUR  PAST.  I.  269


without  the  addition  of  an  elucidating  exposition,  which
I  should  be  glad  to  receive.

« Inviting  and  receiving  the  young  brahmin’s  attention
the  Lord  spoke  as  follows : — Take  the  case  of  anyone
— man  or  woman — who  slays,  is  cruel,  dyes  hands  in
blood,  is  always  killing  and  wounding,  never  showing
mercy  to  any  living  creature. — Such  deeds,  if  persisted
in  of  deliberate  choice,  either  bring  that  person  at  the
body's  dissolution  after  death  to  misery  and  woe  or  to
puigacory;  or,  If  his  rebirth  is  again  among  mankind,
then  brief  life  is  here  his  portion  in  whatever  sution
he  is  born  into. — Such  murderous  courses  tend  to  brief
life  here.

Now  take  the  case  of  anyone — man  or  woman^who
— putting  all  killing  from  him  and  abstainiog  from
killing  anything,  laying  aside  cudgel  and  sword,  lives  a
life  01  innocence  and  mercy,  full  of  pity  and  compassion
for  everything  that  lives.  Such  deeds,  if  persisted  in
of  deliberate  choice,  either  bring  that  person  at  the
body’s  dissolution  after  death  to  bliss  in  heaven ;  or,  if
his  rebirth  Is  again  among  mankind,  then  length  of  days
is  his  portion  in  whatever  station  he  is  born  Into. — Such
merciful  courses  tend  to  length  of  days  here.

[204]  Take  the  case  of  anyone — man  or  woman —
who  is  given  to  assaulting  others  with  dst  or  clod,  with
cudgel  or  sword.  Such  deeds,  if  persisted  in  of
deli^rate  choice,  either  bring  that  personal  the  body’s
dissolution  after  death  to  misery  and  woe  or  puigatory ;
or,  If  his  rebirth  is  again  among  mankind,  he  is  always
ailing  in  whatever  station  he  is  born  into.  Such
assaults  tend  to  ailments  here. — But  the  person  who
eschews  such  assaults  on  others  either  passes  at  death
to  bliss  in  heaven ;  or,  if  born  a  man  again,  then  good
heaJdi  is  his  portion. — Such  harmlessness  ten£  to
ensure  good  health  here.

Take  the  case  of  anyone — man  or  woman — who  is
wrathful  and  turbulent,  who  is  moved  by  a  trivial  word
to  oirsing  rage  enmity  and  opposition,  who  evinces
indignation  ill-will  and  resentment.  Such  deeds,  if
persisted  in  of  deliberate  choice,  either  bring  that


270


CXXXV.  C0VA-KAMMA'VI®-SOTTA.  M.  m.  J05,


person  at  the  body's  dissolution  after  death  to  misery
aod  woe,  or  purgatory ;  or,  if  his  rebirth  is  again  among
mankind,  his  portion  is  to  be  ugly  in  whatever  station
he  is  born  into.  Such  angry  courses  tend  to  foul  looks
here. — But  the  person  who  is  not  of  that  turbulent
spirit  and  remains  unmoved  to  rAge  even  by  a  torrent

abuse,  either  passes  at  death  to  bliss  in  heaven ;  or,
if  bis  rebirth  is  again  among  mankind,  then  good  looks
are  his  portion  la  whatever  station  he  is  born  into. —
Such  good-tempered  courses  tend  to  good  looks  here.

Take  the  case  of  anyone — man  or  woman — who,
being  of  a  jealous  nature,  is  jealous  and  perverted  in
the  matter  of  presents  and  marks  of  respect  and  worship
shown,  who  stores  up  jealousy  in  his  heart.  Such  deeds,
if  persisted  in  of  deliberate  choice,  either  bring  that  ’
person  at  death  to  misery  and  woe  or  purgatory  ;  or,  if
his  rebirth  is  again  among  mankind,  then,  whatever
station  he  is  reborn  into,  no  notice  is  taken  of  him.
Such  jealous  courses  tend  to  no  account  being  taken
of  a  man  here. — [205]  But  the  person  who  is  of  no  such
jealous  disposition,  either  passes  at  death  to  bliss  in
heaven  ;  or  if  his  rebirth  is  again  among  mankind,  then,
great  account  of  him  is  taken  in  whatever  station  he  is
reborn  into. — Such  un-jealous  courses  tend  to  make  a
man  of  great  account  here.

Take  the  case  of  anyone— man  or  woman _ wlio

never  gives  anything — food,  drink,  clothes,  carri^e,
garlands,  scents,  penumes,  bed,  dwelling-place,  lamp
and  oil — to  recluse  or  brahmin,  Such  deeds,  if  per¬
sisted  in  of  deliberate  choice,  either  bring  that  person
at  death  to  misery  and  woe  or  puigatory ;  or,  if  his
rebirth  Is  again  among  mankind,  then,  whatever  station
he  is  reborn  into,  he  is  a  poor  mao.  Such  refusals  to
give,  tend  to  entail  poverty  here.  But  if  a  person  is
open-handed  to  recluses  or  brahmins,  his  destiny  is
dther  bliss  in  heaven  or  wealth  among  men. — Open-
handedness  tends  to  wealth  here.

Take  the  case  ol  anyone — man  or  woman — who,
being  bard  and  arrogant,  refuses  salutations  to  one
who  ought  to  be  saluted,  does  not  rise  for  one  who


K.  jji.  206.  OUR  HERITAGE  FROM  OUR  Pa5T.


371


IL

should  be  so  received,  does  not  give  up  his  seat  or  the
road  to  one  more  worthy,  shows  no  respect,  deference,
^nouf  or  worship  CO  those  who  should  be  shown  it,
Such  deeds,  if  persisted  in  of  deliberate  choice,  either
bring  that  person  at  death  to  misery  and  woe  in
purgaco^;  or,  if  his  rebirth  is  again  among  mankind,
then,  whatever  station  he  is  reborn  into,  he  is  of  low
and  unimportant  family.  Such  arrogant  courses  tend
to  lowliness  here. — But  if  a  person  (s  void  of  arrogance
and  shows  all  due  regard  to  those  who  deserve  it,  his
destiny  is  either  bliss  in  heaven  or  high  family  among
men. — Such  deference  tends  to  importance  of  family

Take  the  case  of  anyone — man  or  woman — who,
when  visiting  recluse  or  brahmin,  does  not  question
him  on  what  is  right,  what  is  wrong,  what  is  faulty,
what  is  faultless,  what  should  be  practised  and  what
not,  what  actions  of  his  will  conduce  to  his  lasting
well-being  and  welfare  and  what  to  the  reverse.  Such
courses,  if  persisted  in  of  deliberate  choice,  either  bring
that  person  at  death  to  misery  and  woe  in  purgatory ;
or,  if  his  rebirth  is  again  among  mankind,  then,  what-
ever  station  he  is  reborn  into,  he  is  ignorant.  Such

failure  to  seek  information  tends  to  ignorance  here,- _

[206]  But  if  a  person  seeks  information  by  such
questionings,  his  destiny  is  either  to  find  bliss  in  heaven
after  death  or  to  be  well-informed  here,  whatever  his
Btation. — An  enquiring  spirit  tends  to  make  a  man
wdl-informed  here.

Thus,  young  brahmin,  it  is  the  courses  that  respec¬
tively  tend  thereto,  which  result  in  brief  life  or  length
of  days,  In  health  or  ill-health,  in  ugliness  or  good
looks,  in  being  of  no  account  or  of  great  account,  in
being  poor  or  rich,  of  low  family  or  high.  Ignorant
or  well-informed. — Their  deeds  are  their  possessions
and  heritage,  their  parent  and  ihelr  kindred  and  their
r^uge.  It  is  their  deeds  which  divide  people  into
high  and  low.

At  the  close,  the  young  brahmin  Subha  Todeyya-
putta  said  to  the  Lord  : — Excellent,  Gotama,  excellent  1


2  CXXXV.  CU^A‘KAMMA-V1*-SUTTA.  M.  lii  M?.

Just  as  a  man  might  set  upright  again  what  had  been
cast  down,  or  reveal  what  had  been  hidden  away,  or
tell  a  man  who  had  gone  astray  which  was  his  way,
bring  a  lamp  into  darkness  so  that  chose  widi  eyes
might  see  the  things  about  them, — even  so,  in  many  a
hgure,  has  the  reverend  Gotama  made  his  Doctrine
clear.  I  come  to  the  Lord  as  my  refuge  and  to  his
Doctrine  and  to  his  Confraternity-  May  the  reverend
Gotama  accept  me  as  a  follower  who  has  found  an
abiding  refuge  from  this  day  onward  while  life  lasts.


CXXXVI.  MAHA-'KAMMA-VIBHANGA-
SUTTA.

OUR  HERITAGE  FROM  OUR  PAST.  JI.

[207]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Rajagaba  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where
the  squirrels  were  fed,  there  was  living  in  the  Forest
Hut  there  the  reverend  Samiddhi, — to  whom  in  the
course  of  his  walks  came  Potali-putta  the  Wanderer,
Silting  down  after  greetings,  Potali-putta  said  to
Samiddhi : — From  the  recluse  Gotama's  own  lips  1
have  heard  with  my  own  ears  his  statement  that :  All
you  do  is  vain,  and  all  you  say  is  vain ;  what  passes  in
your  mind  is  the  only  real  thing  that  matters,  A  stage
can  be  reached  in  which  there  is  no  feeling  whatever,  ’

Do  not  say  this,  reverend  Potali-putu ;  do  not  say
this ;  do  not  misrepresent  the  Lord ;  for  the  Lord
certainly  would  not  say  that.

How  long  have  you  been  a  Pilgrim,  reverend
Samiddhi  ?

Not  long,  sir ; — three  years.

Why  shall  we  speak  on  this  matter  with  Elders,  when
here  is  so  recent  an  Almsman  ready  to  defend  the
Master  against  criticism  ?  Tell  me,  revere  nd  Samiddhi,
— ^lat  does  a  man  experience  who  acts  with  body
voice  or  mind,  of  set  purpose  ?

He  experiences  what  is  unpleasant.


M.  ill  OUR  HERITAGE  FROM  OUR  PAST.  II.  8 73

Hereupon,  Potali-putta  the  Wanderer,  neither  ex¬
pressed  satisfaction  nor  dissent,  but  simply  rose  up  and
vent  away.

Not  long  after  Potali-putta  had  gone,  Samiddhi  went
to  the  reverend  Ananda  [208]  and,  after  greetings,  took
a  seat  beside  him.  Ananda,  after  hearing  the  whole  of
the  talk  with  Potali-putta,  said  this  was  a  thing  to  tell
the  Lord,  to  whom  accordingly  he  cook  Samiddhi  that
they  might  learn  the  Lord’s  view.  When  they  came  to
the  Lord’s  presence  and  had  taken  their  seats  beside
him  after  salutations,  Ananda  reported  the  whole  of
the  conversation  to  the  Lord,  who  rejoined  that  he  dis¬
approved  of  Pocali'putta’s  conclusion  and  still  more  of
such  an  ai^ument  as  this.  Why,  said  he,  this  foolish
Samiddhi  has  given  a  simple  direct  reply  to  a  question
by  Potali-putta  which  required  careful  qualifications  in
the  answer  t

At  this  point  the  reverend  (Lola)  UdSyi  said  to  the
Lord But  how,  sir,  if  the  purport  of  the  reverend
Samiddhi’s  words  was  that  Ill  in  general  was  always
the  outcome  of  feelings  experienced  ?

Said  the  Lord  to  Ananda: — Mark  this  foolish  UdSyi's
error  .;  I  knew  in  advance  that  this  foolish  person  would
pop  up  with  a  blunder.  Potali-putta^s  question  really
involved  three  distinct  secs  of  feelings.  If  foolish
Samiddhi,  [209]  when  confronted  with  that  triple
question,  had  made  the  following  ’ — If

purposeful  act  with  body  voice  or  tnmd  is  calculated  to
produce  a  pleasant  feeling,  his  experience  is  pleasant ;
if  the  act  is  calculated  to  produce  an  unpleasant  feeling,
hU  experience  is  unpleasant ;  if  the  act  is  calculated  to
produce  neither  a  pleasant  nor  an  unpleasant  feeling,
then  his  experience  is  neither  pleasant  nor  unpleasant;
— had  foolish  Samiddhi  given  this  answer,  he  would
have  been  giving  the  right  answer.  Yet  who,  Ananda,
among  the  blind  and  foolish  Wanderers  of  other  creeds,
will  comprehend  the  Trutb-hnder’s  detailed  Classihca-
tion  of  Acts,  if  you  were  to  hear  it  from  his  lips  ?

Now  b  the  time.  Lord,  now  is  the  time  for  the  Lord
to  expound  hb  classification.  The  Almsmen  will

IL  1$


274


CXXXVT.  '  MAHA-KAMMA-VI*-SUTTA.  M,«j.  StO,


treasure  in  their  memories  what  they  hear  from  the
Lord's  lips.

WeH  then,  Ananda,  listen  attentively  and  1  will  speak-

Yes,  sir,  was  the  reverend  Ananda’s  dutiful  response ;
and  the  Lord  spoke  thus There  are  four  (types  of)
individuals  living  and  existent  in  the  world.  What  are
the  four  ? —

(i)  Take  the  case  of  an  individual  here  who  slays,
gives  not,  fornicates,  lies,  traduces  others,  reviles  them,
tattles,  covets,  is  malevolent  of  heart  and  wrong  in  his
outlook, — He,  at  the  body's  dissolution  after  death,
passes  hence  to  misery  and  woe  or  to  pulsatory.

(ii)  Or,  again,  such  an  individual  may  pass  hence  to
bliss  in  heaven.

(iii)  Take  now  the  case  of  an  individual  who  never
slays,  who  gives  freely,  who  never  fornicates,  or  lies,  or
traduces,  [210]  who  never  reviles,  never  tattles  or
covets  or  ^s  malevolent  of  heart,  but  is  right  in  his
outlook- — He,  at  the  body's  dissolution  alter  death,
passes  hence  to  bliss  In  heaven.

(iv)  Or,  again,  such  an  individual  may  pass  hence  to
misery  and  woe  or  purgatory.

Take  the  case,  Ananda,  of  a  recluse  or  brahmin  who,
by  reason  of  ardour,  effort,  devotion,  perseverance  and
highest  intellection,  reaches  such  rapt  concentracton
that,  with  heart  thus  stedfast,  he  sees — by  tht  Eye  '
Celestial  that  is  pure  and  far  surpasses  the  human  eye
—our  hrst  individual,  who  was  of  murderous  habits  and
so  forth  and  who  had  the  wrong  outlook,  sees  him  now
in  a  state  of  misery  ^d  woe  or  in  purgatory  ;  and  the
sight  convinces  him  that  there  are  such  thmgs  as  evil  y-
deeds,  and  that  wrong  courses  come  to  their  ripening,

For,  with  his  own  eyes  he  has  seen  an  evil-doer  instaJi«i
after  death  in  purgatory  I  Accordingly,  the  only  sound
conclusion  to  his  mind  is  that  ail  such  evil-doers  come  •
I  to  this  doom  hereafter, — any  other  conclusion  being
Iwrong.  Thus'  it  is  with  obstinacy  tenacity  and  per¬
tinacity  that  he  insists  that  what  he  has  known  seen  and
discerned  for  himself  is  the  sole  truth,  all  else  being  false.

.  A  second  recluse  or  brahmin  [211]  similarly  comes  to


M.  iU.  4ir.


OUR  KERITAOft  FROM  OOR  PAST,  II,  275


see  our  second  Individ ur],  who  was  of  murderous  hablcs
and  so  forth  and  who  had  the  wrong  outlook,  now  in  a
acate  of  bliss  in  heaven  ;  and  the  sight  convinces  him
that  there  are  no  such  things  as  evil  deeds,  nor  do
wrong  courses  come  to  their  ripening.  For,  with  hb
own  ey«  he  has  seen  an  evil-doer  installed  after  death
in  bliss  in  heaven  I  Accordingly,  to  his  mind  the  only
sound  conclusion  {$  that  all  su^  evil-doers  are  similarly
rewarded  hereafter, — any  other  conclusion  being  wrong.
Thus  it  is  with  obstinacy  tenacity  and  pertinacity  that
he  insists  that  what  he  has  known  seen  and  discerned
for  himself  is  the  sole  truth,  all  else  being  false.

A  third  recluse  or  brahmin  similarly  comes  to  see  in
the  bliss  of  heaven  after  death  our  third  individual,
who  never  took  life  and  so  forth  and  had  the  right
outlook.  He  is  thereby  convinced  that  there  are  such
things  as  good  deeds  and  that  right  courses  come  to
their  riMnmg.  For  with  his  own  eyes  he  has  seen
a  good-liver  installed  after  death  in  bliss  in  heaven !
Accordingly,  to  his  mind  the  only  sound  conclusion
is  that  ml  such  good-livers  are  similarly  rewarded
hereafter, — any  other  conclusion  being  wrong.  Thus
it  is  with  obstinacy  tenacity  and  pertinacity  that  he
insists  that  what  he  has  known  seen  and  discerned  for
himself  is  the  sole  truth,  all  else  being  false.

A  fourth  recluse  or  brahmin  comes  to  see  [212]  in
misery  and  woe  or  in  purgatory  after  death  our  fourth
individual,  who  never  took  life  and  so  forth  and  had  the
right  outlook  ;  and  the  sight  convinces  him  that  there
are  no  such  things  as  good  deeds  nor  do  right  courses
come  to  their  ripening  I  For,  with  his  own  eyes  he
has  seen  a  good-liver  installed  after  death  In  misery
and  woe  or  puigatory.  Accordingly,  to  his  mind  the
only  sound  conduslon  is  that  all  such  good-livers  come
to  this  doom  hereafter.  Thus  it  is  with  obstinacy
tenacity  and  perdoacity  that  he  insists  that  what  he
has  known  seen  and  discerned  for  himself  Is  the  sole
truth,  all  else  being  false.

Now,  Ananda,  1  agree  with  that  recluse  or  brahmin
who  says  that  there  are  such  things  as  good  deeds  and


cxxxvr.  MAHA-KAMMA-VI^-SUTTA.

right  courses  coming  to  their  ripening;  1  agree  too  with
him  when  he  says  he  has  seen  in  purgatory  a  man  of
murderous  habits  and  so  forth  who  had  the  wrong  ou^
look;  1  disagree  with  him  when  he  asserts  chat  this  is
the  fate  of  all  such  persons  j  I  disagree  with  him
both  when  he  asserts  that  his  conclusion  is  the  only
sound  one, — any  other  conclusion  being  wrong, — and
dso  when  he  insists  so  obstinately  that  truth  resides
exclusively  in  what  he  has  personally  known  seen  and
discerned  for  himself.  And  why  ?  Because,  Ananda,
the  conclusion  is  different  in  the  Truth-finder’s  classifi¬
cation  of  acts.

1  am  in  disagreement  with  the  recluse  or  brahmin
who  says  there  are  no  such  things  as  evil  deeds,  cor  do
wrong  causes  come  to  their  ripening ;  but  I  agree  with
him  when  he  says  he  has  seen  in  heaven  a  man  of
murderous  habits  and  so  forth  who  had  the  wrong
outlook.  1  disagree  with  him  both  when  he  asserts
.  .  .  [218]  classification  of  acts.

1  am  in  agreement  with  the  recluse  or  brahmin  who
says  that  there  are  such  things  as  good  deeds  and  that
right  courses  come  to  their  ripening ;  and  I  am  in  agree¬
ment  with  him  when  he  says  he  has  seen  a  good^iver
in  heaven.  1  disagree  with  him  both  when  ne  asserts
.  .  .  classification  of  acts.

I  am  in  dis^freement  with  the  recluse  or  brahmin
who  says  there  are  no  such  things  as  good  deeds  nor
do  right  courses  come  to  their  ripening  ;  I  agree  with
him  when  he  says  he  has  seen  a  good- liver  In  purgatory;
I  disagree  with  him  when  he  asserts  that  this  is  the
fate  of  all  such  persons.  I  disagree  with  him  both
when  he  asserts  [214]  that  his  conclusion  is  the  only
sound  one.^any  other  conclusion  being  wrong ;  and
when  he  insists  so  obstinately  that  truth  resides  exclu¬
sively  in  what  he  has  personally  known  seen  and
discerned  for  himself.  And  why  ?  Because,  Ananda,
the  conclusion  is  different  in  the  Truth-finder’s  classifi¬
cation  of  acts.

Begin,  Ananda,  with  the  man  of  murderous  habits
here  and  so  forth  and  with  the  wrong  outlook,  who,  at


M.  HI  815.  OUR  HERITAOe  FROM  OUR  PAST.  II.

the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  is  reborn  into  a  state
of  misery  and  woe  or  in  purgatory.  This  man  either
aforetime  (in  a  previous  birth),  or  thereafter  (in  his
latest  existence  here),  did  evil  deeds  which  result  in
painful  experiences,  or  else  at  the  time  of  his  death  had
a  wrong  outlook  in  which  he  persisted  of  his  deliberate
choice; — and  that  is  why,  at  the  body's  dissolution  after
death,  he  is  reborn  into  a  state  of  misery  and  woe  or
in  purgatory.  Hia  murderous  habits  and  so  forth  and
his  wrong  outlook  are  experienced  in  their  ripening
either  here  and  now  or  in  his  rebirth  or  in  some  other
manner,

If,  with  murderous  habits  here  and  so  forth  and  with
the  wrong  outlook,  the  man  is  reborn  at  death  into  a
state  of  bliss  in  heaven,  that  is  because,  either  aforetime
or  thereafter,  he  had  done  good  deeds  which  result  in
happy  experiences,  or  else,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  he
bad  secured  and  chosen  the  right  outlook.  His
murderous  habits  and  so  forth  and  his  (previously)
wrong  outlook  are  experienced  in  their  ripening  either
here  and  now  or  in  his  rebirth  or  in  some  other  manner.

If,  with  non-murderous  habits  here  and  so  forth  and
with  the  right  outlook,  the  man  at  death  is  reborn  into
a  state  of  bliss  in  heaven,  chat  is  because,  either  afore¬
time  or  thereafter,  he  had  done  good  deeds  which
result  in  happy  experiences,  or  else,  at  the  time  of  his
death,  he  had  secured  and  chosen  the  right  outlook.
His  non-murderous  past  [215]  and  so  forth  and  bis
right  outlook  are  experienced  in  their  ripening  either
here  or  now  or  in  his  rebirth  or  in  some  other  manner.

If,  widi  non- murderous  habits  here  and  so  forth  and
with  the  right  outlook,  the  man  is  reborn  into  a  state
of  misery  and  woe  or  purgatory,  this  is  because,  either
aforetime  or  thereafter,  he  had  done  evil  deeds  which
result  in  painful  experiences,  or  else,  at  the  time  of  his
death,  he  had  secured  and  chosen  the  wrong  outlook.
His  non-murderous  habits  here  and  so  form  and  his
(previously)  right  outlook  are  experienced  in  their
ripening  either  here  and  now  or  in  his  rebirth  or  in
some  oiner  way-


27S  CXXXVI.  MAKil-KAMitA-Vl^-SUTTA.  M.  iil

Thus,  Ananda,  there  is  Karma  which  is—

(i)  not  only  inoperative  but  also  looked  like  being  so ;

(ii)  inoperative  though  it  did  not  look  like  it ;  ^

iiii)  not  only  operative  but  also  looked  like  it ;  and
(iv)  operative  though  it  did  not  look  like  it.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXXXVIl.  SAI.AYATANA-VIBHANGA-
SUTTA.

SENSES  AND  OBJECTS  OF  SENSE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay¬
ing  at  5£vattht  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  AnSthapindika*^
pleasaunce,  he  announced  to  the  Almsmen  chat  he
would  address  them  on  the  class!  hcation  of  sense-
relations,  and  proceeded  to  do  so  as  follows: — [216]
There  are  (i)  Six  internal  senses  to  be  recognized ;
(ii)  six  (sets  of)  external  sense-objects ;  (iii)  six  groups
of  consciousness;  (iv)  six  groups  of  contacts;  (v)
eighteen  mental  researches;  (vi)  thirty-six  tracks  for
creatures,  (vii)  Therein  'banish  this  by  that*  (viu)
There  are  tliree  bases  of  mindfulness,  which  the  NoWe
One  cultivates,  and  in  the  cultivation  of  which  the
Noble  One  as  Master  is  worthy  to  teach  his  following,
(lx)  He  is  called  the  Supreme  trainer  of  the  human
heart  for  disciples  who  are  being  sdiooled. — Such  is  the
summary  of  the  classi&cacion  of  sense-relations.

(i)  The  six  inward  senses  to  be  recognized  are
sight,  sound,  smell,  caste,  touch  and  mind.

(ii)  The  six  (sets  of)  external  objects  of  sense  are
things  seen,  things  heard,  odours,  savours^  things
touched,  and  mental  objects.

(iii)  The  six  groups  of  consciousness  respectively
relate  to  the  (foregoing)  things  seen,  things  heard,
odours,  savours,  things  couched  and  mental  objects.

(iv)  The  six  groups  of  contacts  respectivdy  relate


M,  Hi.  a  17-  SSNSB9  AND  0BJBCT8  OP  SENSE.  279

to  the  (foregoing)  things  visible,  things  heard,  odours,
savoiiTS,  things  touched  and  mental  objects.

,  (v)  The  eighteen  mental  researches  are  as  follows  :
— Having  seen  with  the  eye  a  visible  thing,  a  man
researches  into  the  visible  thing,  and  this  gives  rise
either  (a)  to  what  is  agreeable,  or  (^)  to  what  is  dis¬
agreeable,  or  U)  to  what  is  neither  agreeable  nor
disagreeable.  He  researches  similarly  into  the  like
three  types  of  things  heard,  of  odours,  savours,  [217]
thirds  couched  and  of  mental  objects.  Thus  there  are
six  i^reeable  researches,  six  disagreeable  researches,
and  SIX  neutral,  making  up  eighteen  researches  in  all.

(vi)  Of  the  thirty-six  traclb  for  creatures,  six  are
agreeable  and  belong  to  the  world,  while  six  areagree-
aole  and  belong  to  Kenunciacion ;  six  are  disagreeable
and  belong  to  the  world,  while  six  are  disagreeable
and  belong  to  Renunciation ;  six  are  indifferent  and
belong  to  the  world,  while  six  are  indifferent  and  belong
CO  Renunciation.

The  six  worldly  satisfactions  are  as  follows :  A  sense
of  satisfaction  arises  either  (a)  from  contemplation  of
the  fruition  of  things  seen,  of  which  the  sight  is  con¬
scious,— objects  that  are  pleasant  and  agre^ble,  grace¬
ful  and  pleasurable  to  the  mind,  but  bound  up  with
things  material — ,  or  (d)  from  contemplation  of  memories
of  what  is  now  past  and  gone,  vanished  and  ended—;
this  is  called  worldly  satis^tion.  The  same  applies  to
things  heard,  odours,  savours,  things  touch^  and
mental  objects,  making  in  aiJ  the  ^  worldly  satis¬
factions.

Renunciation’s  six  satisfactions  are  as  follows : — A
sense  of  satisfaction  arises  when,  on  discerning  the
transitory  nature  of  things  seen  and  their  mutability
insubilicy  and  aonibilauon,  satisfaction  arises  from
causally  understanding  and  seeing  that,  alike  in  the  past
and  in  the  present,  things  seen  are  transitory,  fraught
with  Ill  and  by  nature  mutable;— this  is  called  Renun¬
ciation’s  satl  sfacdoD.  The  same  appl  ies  to  things  heard,
odours,  savours,  things  touched  and  [21^  mental  ob¬
jects,  making  in  all  the  six  satisfactions  of  Renunciation*


aSo  CXXXVII.  SALAYATANA*Vr®*SUTTA.  M.  lii.  219.

The  six  worldly  dissatisfactions  are  as  follows : — A
sense  of  dissatisfaction  arises  either  (a)  from  contem¬
plation  of  the  absence  of  seen  objects  that  are  pleasant
and  so  forth,  or  (^)  from  contemplation  of  memories  of
the  absence  of  what  is  now  past  and  gone,  vanished
and  ended ; — this  is  called  worldly  dissatisfaction.  The
same  applies  to  things  heard,  odours,  savours,  things
touched  and  mental  objects,  making  in  ail  the  six
worldly  dissatisfactions.

Renunciation's  six  dissatisfactions  are  as  follows:  —
A  sense  of  dissatisfaction  arises  when,— on  discerning
the  transitory  nature  of  things  seen  and  their  mutability
impotence  and  annihilation,  and  after  causally  under¬
standing  and  seeing  that,  alike  in  the  past  and  in  the
present,  things  seen  are  transitory,  fraught  with  Ill  and
by  nature  mutable — he  summons  up  the  yearning  for
the  utter  Deliverances  in  the  cry  When,  o  when,  shall
J  develop  and  dwell  in  the  sphere  in  which  the  Noble
Ones  now  are  ?  and,  as  he  so  yearns,  his  yearning
brings  with  it  the  dissatisfaction  which  is  called  Renun¬
ciation's  dissatisfaction.  The  same  applies  to  things
heard,  odours,  savours,  things  touched  and  mental
objects,  [2193  making  in  all  Renunciation's  six  dissatis¬
factions.

The  six  worldly  indifferences  areas  follows : — There
is  the  indifference  on  seeing  a  thing,  which  appertains
to  the  ignorant  and  foolish  average  man,  who  has  not
triumphed  to  the  full, .who  has  not  triumphed  over  the
ripening  consequences  of  his  past,  who  has  not  realized
the  perils  which  beset  him  but  is  merely  an  uninstructed
averse  man ) — such  indifference  as  his  fails  to  tran¬
scend  the  chi^  seen,  and  therefore  is  called  worldly
indifference.  The  same  applies  to  things  heard,  odours,
savours,  things  touched  and  mental  objects,  making  in
all  the  six  worldly  indifferences.

Renunciation's  six  indifferences  are  as  foUows : — A
sense  of  indifference  arises  when,  on  discerning  the
transitory  nature  of  things  seen  and  their  mutability
insubility  and  annihilation,  indifference  arises  from
causally  understanding  and  seeing  that,  alike  in  the


M.  jiL  a»o.  SENSES  AND  OBJECTS  OT  SENSE.  2$}


past  and  in  the  present,  things  seen  are  transitory,
fraught  with  III  and  by  nature  mutable ; — such  in-
fh (Terence  as  this  transcends  the  thing  seen,  and  there¬
fore  is  called  Renunciation’s  indifference.  The  same
applies  to  things  beard,  odours,  savours,  things  touched
and  mental  objects,  making  in  all  Renunciation’s  six
indifferences-

This  completes  the  tale  of  the  six  and  thirty  tracks
for  creatures.

^(vii)  To  ^  banish  this  by  that  ’  means  that  by
mgh  Renunciations  six  satisfactions  you  should
banish  and  transcend  the  six  worldly  satisfactions ;  this
is  the  way  to  banish  and  to  transcend  them.  By  and
through  Renunciation's  six  dissatisfactions  and  indiffer¬
ences  you  should  similarly  banish  and  tran.scend  the
six  worldly  satisfactions  and  indifferences,  respectively.

Now,  Almsmen,  there  is  one  indifference  which  is
manifold  and  of  multiplicity:  there  is  another  Indiffer¬
ence  which  is  single  and  of  unity.  The  former  is  an
indifference  to  (particular)  things  seen  or  heard,  to
odours  or  savours,  to  things  touched  or  to  mental
objects.  The  latter  is  a  function  of  Infinite  Space,  or
of  Infinite  Mind,  or  of  Naught,  or  of  Neicher-Per-
cepcion- nor- Non- Perception.  By  and  through  unity
you  should  banish  and  transcend  multiplicity ;  this  is
the  way  to  banish  and  to  transcend  the  manifold.  By
and  through  the  entire  absence  of  all  cravings  you
should  banish  and  transcend  specific  cravings,  in  the
indifference  which  is  of  unity ;  this  is  the  way  to  banish
and  to  transcend  them.

This  then  [32X]  is  the  meaning  of  ‘banish  this
by  that.'

(viii)  There  are  three  Sases  of  mindfulness,  which
the  Noble  One  cultivates  and  in  the  cultivation  of
which  the  Noble  One  as  Master  is  worthy  to  teach  his
following.  In  a  compassionate  and  loving  spirit  and
out  of  Compassion  a  master  expounds  his  Doctrine  to
his  disciples,  telling  them  it  will  make  for  their  good
and  welfare.  (Three  things  may  happen.  In  the  first
case,)  his  disciples  neither  pay  attention  nor  give  ear


CXXXVll.  SALiYATANA-VI^-SUTTA.


M>  in.  333


nor  set  themselves  to  learn  but  fiout  their  masters
teaching.  In  such  case  the  Truth-finder  rejoices  not,
nor  experiences  rejoicing,  but  remains  unperturbed,
still  mindlul  and  alive  to  everything, — This  is  the  first
basis  of  mindfulness.

Secondly,  if,  on  his  expounding  the  Doctrine  for  their
behoof,  (only)  some  of  bis  disciples  neither  pay  atten¬
tion  nor  give  ear  nor  set  themselves  to  learn  but  flout
his  teaching,  the  Truth-finder  neither  rejoices  nor  does
not  rejoice,  experiences  neither  rejoicing  nor  its  con¬
verse  but,  quit  of  both  emotions  equally,  remains
indifferent,  still  mindful  and  alive  to  everything. — This
is  the  second  basis  of  mindfulness.

Thirdly,  if,  on  his  expounding  his  Doctrine  for  their
behoof,  all  his  disciples  pay  attention,  give  ear,  and
set  themselves  to  learn  without  flouting  his  teaching,'
the  Truth* finder  rejoices  and  experiences  rejoicing  but
remains  unperturbed,  still  mindful  and  alive  to  every-
thiog, — This  is  the  third  basis  of  mindfulness.

[222]  Such  then  are  the  three  bases  of  mindfulness
which  the  Noble  One  cultivates  and  in  the  cultivation
of  which  the  Noble  One  as  Master  is  worthy  to  teach
his  following.

(fx)  He  is  called  the  Supreme  Trainer  of  the  human
heart  for  disciples  who  are  being  schooled  When  a
young  elephant-s-or  col^-or  steer — is  being  driven  by'*
its  lamer,  it  runs  in  one  of  four  directions, — ahead
or  back  or  left  or  right;  but  the  human  steer,  when
driven  by  the  Truth-finder,  Arahat  all-enlightened,  runs
off  in  one  of  eight  directions : — (r)  Having  form  him¬
self,  he  sees  forms,  (a)  Being  inwardly  conscious  of
non-form,  he  sees  forms  ^ternally.  (3)  He  devotes
himself  to  happiness  alone.  (4)  By  passing  entirely
beyond  all  consciousness  of  material  forms  and  losing
all  consciousness  of  sense-reactions,  by  not  heeding
consciousness  of  multiplicity,  he  comes  to  think  of  space
as  infinite  and  so  develops  and  dwells  in  the  realm  of
Infinite  Space,  and  thereafter,  successively,  in  the
realms  of  (5)  Infinity  of  Mind,  (6)  Naught,  (yj  Neither-
Perceptioft-nor- Non- Perception,  and  (8)  extinction  of


^4


M.  iti.  323.  SBKseS  AND  OBJECTS  OF  SStfSE.  2S3  •

all  feeling  and  consciousness. — And  that  ts  why  he  b
called  the  Supreme  trainer  of  the  human  heart.

,  Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Almsmen
rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXXXVIll,  UDDESA-VIBHANGA-SUTTA.

A  SUMMARY  EX?AKDBi>,

[2fi8]  Thus  have  1  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  S&vatthl  in  J eta’s  grove  in  An£cha*
pTeasaunce,  he  announced  to  the  Almsmen
that  he  would  expound  to  them  a  summary  and  exposi¬
tion,  and  thus  b^an  : — An  Almsman’s  thinking  should
always  be  so  conducted  chat,  as  he  chinks,  his  mind
may  not  either  be  externally  diffused  and  dissipated  or
be  internally  set,  and  that  through  non -dependence
he  may  be  Imperturbed,  so  that,  with  his  mind  thus
secure,  birth,  old-age  and  death  and  the  arising  of  all
111  do  not  happen.  Having  said  this,  the  Lord  rose
and  withdrew  to  his  cell.

He  bad  not  been  gone  long  when  the  Almsmen
reflected  chat  the  Lord  had  left  them  with  this  terse
summary  without  giving  them  the  detailed  exposition.
Wondering  who  would  furnish  the  detailed  exposidon,
they  decided  [22 i]  to  go  to  the  reverend  Man&-Kao
cSna  and  he  ,  .  .  Lw  w  Sutia  No.  133)  .  . .  [225]
at  last  consented,  telling  them  that  he  took  the  detail^
meaning  of  the  Lord’s  pregnant  utterance  to  be  as
follows

The  mind  is  said  to  be  externally  diffused  and  dissi¬
pated  if.  when  his  eye  secs  a  form,  an  Almsman’s  mind
pursues  the  phenomena  of  form  with  avid  greed  and
passion  for  such  phenomena.  And  the  same  applies  to
things  heard,  odours  and  savours,  things  touched  and
mental  objects.

The  mind  that  escapes  being  externally  diffused  and
^sipated  on  any  such  phenomena  as  aforesaid  is  s^d
to  be  undiffused  and  undissipated.


284  CXXXVni.  UDDESA-VIBHAKGA-StJTTA.


M.  iii  397.


[226]  When,  divested  of  lusts  and  of  wrongs  disposi¬
tions,  the  Almsman  develops  and  dwells  in  the  rirsi
Ecstasy  and  all  its  zest  and  sadsfaciion,  a  state  bred  gt
aloofness  but  not  divorced  from  observation  and  reflec¬
tion,  then  his  mind,  pursuing  the  zest  and  sacisfactioa
of  such  aloofness  with  avid  greed  and  passion,  is  said
to  be  set  internally.  When,  by  shedding  observation
and  reflection,  he  develops  and  dwells  In  the  Second
Ecstasy  with  all  Its  zest  and  satisfaction, — in  that  inward
tranquillity  and  focussing  of  heart,  beyond  observation
and  reflection,  which  Is  bred  of  rapt  concentration,—
then  his  mind,  pursuing  rapt  concentration's  zest  and
satisfaction  with  avid  greed  and  passion 'therefor,  is  said
to  be  set  internally.  When,  losing  all  passion  for  zest,
he  develops  and  dwells  in  the  Third  Ecstasy  in  ptHsed
indifference,  mindful  and  alive  to  everything,  feefine  in
his  frame  chat  ease  which  the  Noble  Ones  mean  when
they  say  ;  He  that  has  poise  and  mindfulness  lives
at  ease, — then  bis  mind,  pursuing  with  avid  greed
and  passion  the  heart’s  ease  engendered  by  poise,  is
said  to  be  set  internally.  Lastly,  when,  by  discard¬
ing  ease  and  un-ease  and  by  the  disappearance  of
pleasant  and  unpleasant  emotions,  the  Almsman  both
develops  and  dwells  in  the  Fourth  Ecstasy  in  perfect
poise  and  mindfulness, — then  his  mind,  pursuing
poised  indifference  with  avid  greed  and  passion,  is  salS
to  be  set  internally,

f227]  The  mind  is  said  to  be  internally  unset,  when,
in  each  of  the  four  successive  Ecstasies,  there  is  no
such  pursuit  with  avid  greed  and  passion.

Next,  what,  sirs,  is  non-dependent  perturbation  ?
— Take  the  case  of  an  uninstructed  average  man
— who  has  no  vision  of  the  Noble  and  Is  unversed
and  untrained  in  their  Doctrine,  who  has  no  vision  of
the  Excellent  and  Is  unversed  and  untrained  in  their
Doctrine,  and  consequently  regards  form  as  Self,  or
Self  as  having  form,  or  form  as  in  Self,  or  Self  as  in
form-  The  form  alters  and  changes ;  its  alteration  and
change  engage  his  consciousness;  and  from  his  mind
being  eng^ed  with  the  alteration  and  change  there


M.  Kl.  9A


A  SUMMARY  SXPANl^ED.


285


are  bred  perturbations  and  growths  of  states  of  con¬
sciousness  which  take  possession  of  his  heart,  so  that
he  becomes  frightened  and  upset  and  loth  to  be  cut
i3rift,  and  suffers  perturbation  through  losing  the  old
dependence.  What  applies  to  form  applies  equally  to
flings — [228]  to  perception — to  the  plastic  forces
—and  to  consciousness- — This  is  how  there  arises
non-dependent  perturbation.

WhM  is  non-dependent  non-perturbation  ? — Take
the  case  of  an  instructed  disciple  of  the  Noble  who  has
vision  of  the  Noble  and  is  versed  and  trained  in  their
Doctrine,  who  has  vision  of  the  Excellent  and  is  versed
and  trained  in  their  Doctrine ; — he  does  not  regard
form  as  Self,  or  Self  as  having  form,  or  form  as  in
Self,  or  Self  as  in  form.  The  form  alters  and  changes ;
its  alteration  and  change  do  not  engage  his  conscious¬
ness  ;  and  no  perturbations  or  growths  of  (wrong)  dis-

Eositions  to  take  possession  of  his  heart  are  bred  from
is  mind  being  engaged  with  the  alteration  and  change
of  the  form  ;  and  in  consequence  he  does  not  become
frightened  or  upset  or  loth  to  be  cut  adrift ;  he  suffers
no  perturbations  through  losing  dependence.  What
appues  to  form  applies  equally  to  feelings — to  percep¬
tion — to  the  constituents  and  to  consciousness. — This
IS  bow  non-dependent  non-perturbation  comes  about.

This,  sirs,  is  what  I  uke  to  be  the  deuilcd  meaning
of  the  Lord’s  pregnant  utterance.  [229]  Should  you  so
desire,  however,  your  reverences  can  go  to  the  Lord
himself  and  ask  him,  treasuring  up  what  he  reveals.

After  expressing  their  delight  and  thanks  to  the
venerable  Maha-lfaccana,  those  Almsmen  went  off  to
the  Lord,  to  whom  they  related  what  had  passed  since
he  had  left  them  with  his  pr^nant  utterance,  and  to
whom  they  repeated,  word  for  word  and  syllable  for
syllable,  the  way  in  which  MabS-KaccSna  had  ex¬
pounded  its  meaning.

Learned,  Almsmen,  is  MahS*KaccSna ;  full  of  lore  is
he.  Had  you  asked  me  myself  the  meaning,  I  should
have  explained  it  exactly  as  he  has.  This  is  the  meao'
ing  and  you  should  treasure  it  up  accordingly.


2  8$  CXXXVIir.  U  ODES  A-VTB  H ANGA-SUTTA.  M.  Hi.  ajo.

Thus  Spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXXXIX  ARAIjiA-VlBHANGA-SUTTA.

CALM.

[280]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  S&vatthi  in  J eta’s  grove,  in  AnStba*
pindika’s  pfeasaunce,  the  Lord  announced  to  the  Alms¬
men  that  he  would  expound  to  them  the  detailed
exposidon  of  Calm,  and  thus  began : —

Let  a  man  neiier  give  himself  over  to  pleasures
of  sense — which  are  low,  p^an,  vulgan,  ignoble  and
unprofitable— nor  yet  let  him  give  himself  over  co
sdf-mortification, — which  is  painful,  ignoble  and  un¬
profitable.  To  the  exclusion  of  both  these  extremes,
the  Truth-finder  has  discovered  a  middle  course  which
gives  vision  and  understanding,  and  conduces  to  tran¬
quillity,  insight,  enlightenment  and  Nirvana.  Let  him
understand  ^ch  appreciation  and  depreciation,  and,
having  understood  them,  let  him  not  appreciate  or  de¬
preciate  but  preach  the  Doctrine.  Let  him  understand
the  appraisement  of  ease ;  and,  having  understood  it»  .  ,
let  him  pursue  inward  ease  of  heart.  Let  him  not  be  'K'
a  tale-teller  nor  confront  anyone  with  improper  remarks.
Slowly  let  him  speak,  not  hurriedly.  llet  him  neither
affect  provincialisms  In  speech  nor  depart  from  recog¬
nised  parlance. — This  is  the  summary  of  the  exposition
of  calm.

I  said  that  a  man  was  to  avoid  both  extremes  ?
Why? — Because,  in  the  one  case,  the  low,  pagan,  vulgar,
ignoble  and  unprofitable  pursuit  of  pleasures  of  sense
and  their  delights,  being  fraught  with  Ill,  hurt,  tribula¬
tion  and  distress.  Is  the  wrong  course, — the  right  course
being  [281]  to  eschew  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  and  to
escape  its  consequences ;  and  because,  in  the  second «
case,  painful,  ignoble  and  unprofitable  self-mortification,
being  fraught  with  Ill,  hurt,  tribulation  and  distress,  is


M.  \\i-  232.


calu.


287


the  wrong  course, — the  right  course  being  to  eschew
self-morcihcation  and  to  escape  its  consequences.  I
chat,  to  the  exclusion  of  both  these  extremes,  the
Truth-finder  had  discovered  a  middle  course.  How?
— In  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path, — namely,  right  out-
look,  right  aims,  right  speech,  right  action,  right  mode
of  livelihood,  right  endeavour,  right  mindrulness  and
right  rapture  of  concentration.

1  saia  that  a  man  should  understand  appreciation
and  depreciation  and  neither  appreciate  nor  depreciate
but  preach  the  Doctrine.  How  do  appreciation  and
depreciation  come  about  without  preaching  the  Doc¬
trine  ? — Well,  when  a  man  says  that  all  those  persons
who  are  devoted  to  the  low  ,  ,  .  and  unprofitable
pursuit  of  pleasures  of  sense  and  their  delights,  are  all
of  them  fraught  with  Ill,  hurt;  tribulation  and  distress
and  all  on  the  Wrong  course, — then  he  is  depreciating
a  class  of  individuals ;  while  he  is  appreciating  another
class  of  individuals  when  he  says  that  all  those  persons
who  eschew  the  pursuit  of  such  pleasures  of  sense  and
their  delights,  are  all  of  them  without  III,  hurt  tribula¬
tion  and  oistress,  and  are  all  on  the  right  course.  So
too  when  he  says  that  all  chose  persons  who  are
devoted  to  painful  ignoble  and  unprofitable  self-morri-
ficailon,  are  all  of  them,  [282]  fraught  with  III  .  .  .
distress  and  are  all  of  them  on  ie  wrong  course, — then
he  is  depreciating  a  class  of  individuds ;  while  he  is

S predating  another  class  of  individuals  when  he  says
it  all  who  eschew  self-mortification  are  all  of  them
without  Ill,  hurt,  tribulation  and  distress,  and  are  all  on
the  iwhi  course.  So  too  when  he  says  the  same  of
individuals  who  either  have  not,  or  have,  got  rid  of  the
bonds  that  tie  them  to  continued  existence,  it  is  a  class
of  individuaJs  that  he  Is  either  depreciating  or  appre¬
ciating,  without  teaching  the  Doctrine.

How,  now,  without  appreciatiorf  or  depreciation  is
the  Doctrine  preached? — By  not  making  any  such
Btatements  as  the  foregoing  (about  particular  classes  of
individuals),  but  by  teaching  the  truth  in  (abstract
terms  of  general  principle,  such  as) ; — Devotion  to  thb


2S8


CXXXIX ,  ARA^I  A- VI BH  AN  OA-$UTTA.


M.  Hi.  853.


is  fraught  with  Ill,  hurt,  tribulation  and  distress,  and  is
a  wrong  course.  Or  Non ‘devotion  to  this  is  without
111  .  ,  .  and  distress,  and  is  a  right  course  ?  •

[288]  I  said  that  a  man  should  understand  the  ap¬
praisement  of  ease  but  pursue  inward  ease  of  heart.
How  ? — Five  strands  make  up  pleasures  of  sense, —
forms,  sounds,  odours,  savours,  and  things  touched,—
all  of  them  desirable,  agreeable,  pleasant  and  attractive,
all  of  them  bound  up  with  lusts  and  exciting  passion.
The  ease/ulness  which  is  bred  of  these  five  is  called  the
sensual,  foul  and  ignoble  ease  of  the  everyday  mao.  I
lay  it  down  that  there  must  be  no  fostering  or  CTOWth  or
development  of  such  ease,  but  a  dread  of  A  Take  now
the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  divested  of  lusts  and  wrong
dispositions,  develops  in  succession  the  Four  Ecstasies.
This  it  is  which  is  called  the  heart’s  eas^  of  Renundar'  •
tion,  aloofness,  tranquillity  and  Enlightenment, — of
which  there  should  be  fostering,  growth  and  develop¬
ment,  without  any  dread  at  all.

[284]  !  said  that  a  man  should  not  be  a  tale-teller
nor  confront  anyone  with  improper  remarks.  How  ?
— If  he  knows  that  the  tale  is  false  and  untrue  and
unprofitable,  assuredly  he  should  not  tell  it}  also»  he
should  study  not  to  report  what,  though  true  and
not  false,  is  yet  unprofitable ;  but  he  should— at  a
seasonable  juncture — tell  what  be  knows  to  be  not
only  true  bu  t  also  profi  table.  P  recisely  th  e  same  appi  ies
also  to  making  improper  remarks  to  anyone.

I  said  that  he  should  speak  slowly  and  not  hurriedly.
Why?^Because  the  hurried  speaker’s  body  becomes
distressed,  his  mind  becomes  worn  out,  his  voice  becomes
worn  out,  and  his  throat  suffers,  while  his  speech  grows
incoherent  and  unintelligible.  But  none  of  these
results  attend  a  slow  and  measured  utterance.

I  said  that  a  man  should  neither  affect  provincialisms
in  speech  nor  depaft  from  recognised  parlance.  Why  ?

« — In  various  provinces  the  same  bowl  is  styled
[28$]  patiOy  vitiha,  sar&va,  dk&ropa,  pona  and  pisiia  :
and  it  is  with  obstinacy  tenacity  and  pertinacity  that
each  pvcicular  province  insists  that  theirs  is  the  only


M.  ill  356.


CALU.


389


right  word,  all  others  being  wrong.  The  proper  thing
is  frankly  to  use  in  each  particular  province  the  word
they  understand.

Now,^  Almsmen,  the  pleasure-lover’s  low,  pagan,
vulgar,  ignoble  and  unprofitable  pursuit  of  delight,  is
fraught  with  III,  hurt,  tribulation  and  distress  and  is  the
wrong  course;  and  that  is  why  it  is  not  attended  by
calm ;  whereas  to  eschew  such  pursuit  is  to  escape
Ill,  hurt,  tribulation  and  distress  and  is  the  right
course;  and  that  is  why  calm  attends  it.  The  same
applies  to  indulgence  in  self-mortification  and  to
eschewing  it.  [280]  The  middle  course  discovered  by
the  Truth-finder — which  gives  vision  and  understand¬
ing  and  conduces  to  tranquillity,  insight,  Enlightenment
and  Nirvana-— is  void  Of  111,  hurt,  tribulation,  or  dis¬
tress,  and  is  the  right  course;  and  that  is  why  it  gives
calm,  ^preciation  and  depreciation,  without  preach¬
ing  the  Doctrine,  are  fraught  with  III,  hurt,  tribulation
and  distress,  and  are  the  wrong  course;  and  that  is
why  no  cairn  is  present.  But.  when  the  Doctrine  is
prea^ed^  without  either  appreciation  or  depreciation,
this  is  without  III  ,  .  .  calm  is  present.  The  sensual,
foul  and  ignoble  ease  of  the  everyday  man  is
fraught  with  Ill  .  .  ,  calm  is  absent.  But  the  heart's
e^e  of  Renunciation,  aloofness  and  tranquillity  is
without  III  .  .  .  calm  is  present  When  tale-telling
is  false,  untrue  and  unprofitable,  it  is  fraught  with
in  .  .  .  calm  is  absent.  When  the  thing  told,
Uiough  true  and  not  false,  is  yet  uawofi  table,  it  is
frmu^t  with  III  .  ,  .  calm  is  absent-  *But  where  the
tlung  told  is  not  only  true  but  also  profitable,  it  is
mthout  III  .  .  .  calm  is  present  To  confront  any¬
one  with  improper  remarks  that  are  false  and  untrue
and  unprofitabfe,  is  fraught  with  III  .  .  .  calm  is
absent ;  as  it  is  also  if  the  remarks  though  true  and
not  false  are  yet  unprofitable ;  but  if  [287]  they  be  both
^e  and  profitable,  then  it  is  without  Ill  .  .  .  calm
is  present.  Hurried  speaking  is  fraught  with  111  .  .  .
^CQ  is  absent;  but  a  slow  and  measured  utterance
i$  without  III  .  .  .  calm  is  present.  To  affect  pro-


*290  CXXXrX.  ARA^TA-VIBHANGA-SUTTA.  M.  ill.  *58.

viocialisms  in  speech  and  to  depart  from  the  recognized
parlance  is  fraught  with  1)1  .  .  .  calm  is  absent.
Neither  to  affect  provincialism  in  speech  nor  to  depajt
from  recognized  parlance  is  without  Ill  .  calm  is
present.

Therefore,  Almsmen,  train  yourselves  to  understand
calm  and  turmoil,  and,  understanding  them,  to  walk
where  calm  dwells.

The  young  man  SubhQii  walks  where  calm  dwells.
Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXL,  DHATU-VIBHANGA-SUTTA,

THE  SIX  ELEMENTS. ,

Thus  have  1  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  on
an.  alms-pilgrimage  through  Magadha,  he  arrived  at
Rsjagaha  and  went  to  Bhaggava  the  potter,  to  whom
he  said  that,  if  it  was  not  inconvenient,  he  would  stay
the  night  there.

Bhaggava  answered:  Not  at  all  inconvenient,  sir;
there  is  a  Pilgrim  in  residence  already ;  but,  if  he
consents,  stay  here  as  long  as  you  like.

[238]  Now  at  that  time  there  was  a  young  man
named  PukkusSti  who  for  faith's  sake  had  gone  forth
from  home  to  homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim  to  follow  the
Lord  ;  and  he  it  was  who  was  already  in  residence  in
the  potter's  dwelling  and  to  whom  the  Lord  came  to
say  that,  if  it  was  not  inconvenient,  he  would  stay  the
night  there.

PukkusSti  answered :  The  potter’s  dwelling  is
spacious  ;  stay  as  long  as  your  reverence  likes.

Entering  the  house,  the  Lord  spread  a  grass-mat
and  sat  down  on  It  cross-legged,  with  body  erect,  and
with  mindfulness  as  the  objective  beset  before  himself.
For  the  great  part  of  the  night  the  Lord  remained
thus  sitting, — as  also  did  the  reverend  Pukkusad.
Wondering  whether  the  young  man  was  agreeable,  and


M.  iii.  239.


THE  SIX  ELEMENTS.


291


decidine  to  question  him,  the  Lord  asked  Whom  do
you  follow  ?  Who  is  your  master  ?  Whose  Doctrine
Eiave  you  embraced  ?

There  Is.  sir,  the  recluse  Gotama  the  Sakyan  who
leh  a  bakyan  family  to  become  a  Pilgrim.  Of  the  Lord
Ootama  js  this  high  repute  noised  abroad,  that  he  is
sard  to  be  the  Lord,  the  Arahat  all-enllghtened,  walking
by  knowledge,  blessed,  understanding  all  worlds,  the
matchless  tamer  of  the  human  heart,  teacW  of  deities
and  men,  the  Lord  of  Enlightenment.  That  Lord  do  I
follow  m  my  pilgrimage  ;  the  Lord  is  my  master  ?  it  is
that  Lords  Doctrine  which  1  have  embraced.

Where  at  the  present  time.  Almsman,  is  the  Lord,
the  Arahat  all* enlightened.

In  the  countries  to  the  North,  sir,  there  is  a  town
named  S&vatthi,  and  there  at  the  present  time  dwells
the  Lord,  Arahat  all-enlightened.

Have  you  ever  set  eyes  on  the  Lord,  Almsman?
It  you  saw  him,  would  you  recognize  him  ?

[28 No,  sir ;  I  have  never  seen  him,  nor  should  I
recognise  him.

Bethinking  him  that  this  young  man  was  a  Pilgrim
in  his  own  train,  resolving  to  preach  the  Doctrine  to
mm,  the  Lord  said : — i  will  preach  the  Doctrine  to  you,
Almsman.  Listen  and  pay  attention  and  I  will  speak

Ym,  sir,  said  the  reverend  Pukkusati  in  assent
^  Said  the  Lord  : — In  a  man  there  are  six  Elements
Contacts,  eighteen  mental  Researches,  four
Resolves,  established  in  which  he  has  no  outflow
of  unaginings  and,  having  it  not,  is  styled  the  tranquil
Sage.  Let  him  hold  fast  to  understanding;  saf^uard
truthfulness ;  foster  Renunciation  ;  and  work  for  naught
but  tranquillity.  This  Is  the  synopsis  of  the  exposinon
of  the  six  elements.

I  said  a  man  contained  six  elements ;  and  these  are
—earth,  water,  fire,  air,  space  and  consciousness.

I  said  a  man  had  six  spheres  of  contact ;  and  these
are— sight,  sound,  smell,  taste,  touch  and  mental
ot^ects.

I  said  there  were  mentel  researches;  and  these


293


CXL.  DHATU-VIBHANOA-SUTTA.


M.  240.


relate  to  agreeable,  to  disagreeable  and  to  neutral
research  into  the  objects  of  the  six  several  senses.

[240]  I  said  a  man  had  four  resolves ;  and  these  ate
the  resolves  to  understand,  to  be  truthful,  to  renounce,
and  to  win  tranquillity.

I  said  further  that  a  man  should  hold  fast  to  under¬
standing,  safeguard  truthfulness,  foster  Renunciation,
and  work  for  naught  but  tranquillity.

Now,  how  does  he  hold  fast  to  understanding  ? — (To
b^n  with,)  there  are  the  aforesaid  six  elemente,
the  nature  of  which  is  as  follows  1 — The  earth-element
may  be  internal  or  external  Whatsoever,  bdog
internal  and  personal,  is  solid  and  hard  or  derivative
therefrom  .  •  ■  {itc.  as  in  Suiia  62)  .  .  .  [241
and  242]  turns  from  the  space-element  in  disgust  and
with  loathing  of  heart.  (Over  and  above  these  five
elements),  consciousness  will  still  remain,  purified  and
cleansed,  whereby  a  man  knows  anything  and  can
distinguish  the  pleasant  and  the  unpleasant  both  from
one  another  and  from  what  is  neither  one.  nor  the
other.  By  pleasurable  contact  arises  a  pleasant
feeling.  While  experiencing  that  pleasant  feeling,  the
man  knows  precisely  that  he  is  experiencing  ic.  as  he  •
knows  also — when  the  pleasurable  contact  passes  away

_ that  the  pleasant  feeling  which  arose  from  the

particular  pleasurable  contact  is  passing  away  and
disappearing.  So  too  with  what  is  unpleasant  and
with  what  is  neither  pleasant  nor  unpleasant

Just,  Almsman,  as,  when  two  sticKS  are  brought  in
contact  and  rubb^  together,  heat  and  sparks  arise,  but,
when  they  are  separated  and  parted,  the  heat  passes
away  and  disappears,-— just  in  the  same  way  [248]  by
pleasurable  contact  a  pleasant  feeling  arises.  While
experiencing  that  .  -  .  nor  unpleasant.

t’oised  indi^erence  willstdl  remain,  which  is  purged
and  cleansed,  soft,  workable  and  resplendent  It  is
just  like  a  skilled  goldsmith  or  his  apprentice  who  sets
up  his  charcoal  me,  on  which  be  heats  his  crucible,
placing  therein  with  his  tongs  a  piece  of  gold.  Occa¬
sionally  be  uses  his  blowpipe,  occasionally  he  sprinkled


U.  tiL  344.


TKB  SIX  ELEMENTS.


293


water  on  it,  and  occasionally  he  looks  to  see  how  it  is
going  on,  until  at  the  last  the  gold  melts  and  is
thoroughly  melted  and  mollen,  refined  and  pure  of
all  dross,  so  that  it  is  soft,  workable  and  resplendent,
fit  for  any  jewellery  he  wants— be  it  a  trinket  or  ear¬
rings  or  necklet  or  wreath  of  gold—;  and  the  result
IS  good.— Just  in  the  same  way  poised  indifference
will  remain,  purified  and  cleansed,  soft,  workable  and
resplendent.

fiifi  is  the  clear  knowle<^e  that: — If  I  focus  this
purified  and  cleansed  indifference  on  the  sphere  of
Infinite  Space — or  Mind— or  Neither-perccption-nor-
Non-perception — and  develop  my  heart  in  iu  ana¬
logues,  in  that  way  this  indifference  of  mine,  so  resting
Md  so  supported,  will  persist  for  a  very  long  time
indeed [2441  but  still  it  is  only  a  product  and  a  pass¬
ing  effect  Therefore,  he  neither  (oils  at,  nor  ponders
on,  rises  and  falls  of  things ;  and  consequently  he  is
deoendent  on  nothing  whatever  in  the  world  and,  being
independent,  is  harried  by  no  fears,  and,  being  not
harried.dnly  passes  away,  sure  that  for  him  rebirth  is
no  more,  that  he  has  lived  the  highest  life  and  accom¬
plished  his  task,  with  no  more  now  of  what  he  has  been  I
If  he  feels  a  pleasant  feeling — or  an  unpleasant  feeling
—or  a  feeling  that  is  neither  pleasant  nor  unpleasant — ,
he  knows  wdl  that  such  feelings  are  transitory,  are  not
to  be  swallowed  whole,  and  are  not  to  be  made  into  a
joy ;  he  always  maintains  detachment  from  any  such
feelings.  When  he  has  a  feeling  of  his  bodily  eni
he  knows  it  as  such;  he  knows* — as  such — a  feeling
[2451  of  his  life’s  ending ;  he  knows  that,  at  the  body^
dissolution  after  life’s  dose,  all  feelings  and  joys  wiU
there  and  then  merge  in  calm.

It  is  just  like  an  oil-lamp  which  draws  its  light  from
.  oil  and  wick,  but,  when  oil  and  wick  give  out,  if  it  be
not  fed  afresh  but  goes  unfed,  then  it  goes  out.  Just
the  same  is  it  with  him  who  has  this  understanding  of
feelii^s  of  his  bodily  end  and  of  bis  life’s  end  and  of
the  merging  in  caJm  thereafter  of  all  feelings  and  joys.

Therefore  It  is  that  an  Almsman  so  endowed  is


294


CXL.  dkXtu-vib  h  ang  a-s  utt  a.


14,  ill.  346.


endowed  with  the  hlehesr  resolve  to  understand.  For
the  highest  noble  understanding  is  co  know  the  ending
of  all  III.  Assured  is  the  Deliverance  which  rests  on
Truth.  For,  falsehood  is  what  is  false  in  itself ;  Truth
is  Nirvana  where  no  falsehood  dwells.  Therefore  it  is
that  an  Almsman  so  endowed  is  endowed  with  the
highest  Resolve  for  truth.  For,  the  highest  noble  truth
is  Nirvana  where  no  falsehood  dwells.  In  the  days
before  his  eyes  were  opened,  his  ties  to  existence  were
strong  and  cherished ;  now*  they  are  gone, — grubbed
up  by  the  roots,  leaving  only  a  bare  cleared  site,  a
thing  that  once  has  been  and  now  can  be  no  more ;  and
therefore  it  is  that  an  Almsman  so  endowed  is  endowed
with  the  highest  Resolve  for  renunciation-  For,  the
highest  noble  renunciation  is  to  be  quit  of  all  ties
to  existence.  In  the  days  before  his  eyes  were  opened,
he  was  a  prey  to  covetise  lusts  and  passion  5  now  these
arc  all  gone, — grubbed  up  by  the  roots,  leaving  only  a
bare  cleared  site,  a  thing  that  once  has  been  and  now
can  be  no  more  ;  gone  too  for  ever  are  spite,  hatred,
and  malice,  with  ignorance  and  error, — [246]  grubbed
up  by  the  roots,  leaving  only  a  bare  cleared  site,  a
thing  chat  once  has  been  and  now  can  be  no  mor&
Therefore  it  is  that  an  Almsman  so  endowed  is
endowed  with  the  highest  Resolve  for  tranquillity.
For  the  highest  noble  tranquillity  is  to  tranquillUe  lust
hate  and  fdly.

1  said  further  that,  so  established,  a  man  has  no  out>
flow  of  imaginings  and,  having  it  not,  is  styled  the
tranquil  Sage.  This  is  what  that  means : — There  are
the  imaginings  that  I  am,  that  I  am  this  person,  May  I
be  reborn,  May  I  not  be  reborn,  May  I  be  reborn  with
form — without  form — with  perception^with out  percep¬
tion — neither  with  nor  without  perception.  These  are
the  imaginings  of  disease, — abscesses  and  pangs.  It
is  by  passing  beyond  aJl  imaginings  that  a  man  is  called
the  tranquil  Sage.  The  tranquil  Sage  knows  neither
rebirth  nor  decay,  neither  hopes  nor  fears.  There  is
nothing  to  entail  his  rebirth  and  so  how  should  he
decay  ?  or  die  ?  or  fear  ?  or  hope  ?


M.  lU.  247^


THE  SIX  BLBMSKTS.


295


This  synopsis  of  the  exposition  of  the  six  elements,
Almsman ►  you  should  treasure  up  in  your  memory.

.  Realizit^  chat  the  Master  himself  was  there,  the
Blessed  One,  the  All-enlightened,  the  reverend
PukkusSti  rose  from  his  seat,  bared  one  shoulder
reapectfullv,  bowed  down  his  head  at  the  Lord's  feet,
saying : — 1  have  transgressed  in  my  folly  and  error  and
wrongfulness,  in  that  I  presumed  to  address  the  Lord  as
‘  your  reverence.’  1  ask  the  Lord  to  accept  my  con¬
fession,  for  my  avoidance  of  transgression  in  future.

[247]  The  Lord  duly  accepted  the  confession  ten¬
dered,  concluding  with  the  words :  It  marks  growth  in
the  Rale  of  the  Noble  when,  recognising  his  transgres¬
sion  as  such,  a  man  makes  amends  and  keeps  watch
and  ward  against  future  lapses.

1  ask  to  receive  Confirmation  at  the  Lord's  hands.

Are  you  equipped,  Almsman,  with  bowl  and  robes  ?

No,  sir.

Truth-finders,  Almsman,  do  not  confirm  one  who  is
unequipped  with  bowl  and  robes.

Rejoicing  in  what  the  Lord  had  said,  the  reverend
PukkusSti  expressed  his  gratitude  Then,  rising  up,
with  deep  reverence  he  departed  to  get  bowi  and
robes.

But  on  his  way  a  mad  cow  cook  his  life.

Tbefeon,  a  number  of  Almsmen  came  to  the  Lord
with  the  news  that  the  young  man  Pukkusati  to  whom
he  had  given  that  concise  instruction  was  dead.  What,
th^  a»ed,  is  he  re-born  to,  and  what  is  his  destiny  ?

lastrucc^  was  the  young  man  Pukkus4d;  he
embraced  the  Doctrine  and  its  corollaries ;  he  gave  me
no  trouble  doctrinally.  By  destroying  the  five  Bonds
of  this  lower  sphere,  the  young  man  PukkusSd  has
been  translated  hence  to « realms  above,  never  to
return  thence  to  earth,

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Almsmen
rqjoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  aai<^.


2g6


CXtr.  SACCA-VIBHAUGA-StHTA.


M.  iiJ.  24».


CXLI.  SACCA-VIBHANGA-SUTTA.

THE  SYNOPSIS  OP  TRUTH.

[248]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  che  Lord
was  staying  at  Benares  in  the  Isipatana  deerpark,  ht
addressed  the  Almsmen  as  follows : — It  was  here  In
this  very  deerpark  at  Benares  that  the  Truth -finder,
Arahat  all- enlightened,  set  a-rolling  the  supreme
Wheel  of  the  Doctrine — which  shall  not  be  turned
back  from  its  onward  course  by  recluse  or  brahmin,  god
or  MSra  or  Brahma  or  by  anyone  In  the  uni  verse, —the
announcement  of  che  Four  Noble  Truths,  the  teaching,
declaration  and  establishment  of  those  Four  Truths,
with  their  unfolding,  exposition  and  manifestation

What  are  these  four  ? — The  announcement,  teaching
.  .  .  and  manifestation  of  the  Noble  Truth  of  III— of
the  origin  of  Ill— of  the  cessation  of  Ill — of  the  path
that  leads  to  che  cessation  of  III

Follow.  Almsmen,  SSripuctaand  Moggall4naand  be
guided  by  them ;  they  are  wise  helpers  unto  their
fellows  in  the  higher  life.  Like  a  mother  is  SSriputta ;
like  a  child’s  wet-nurse  is  Moggall&na.  S&riputta
trains  in  the  fruits  of  conversion ;  Moggall&na  trams  in
the  highest  good.  SSrlputta  is  ame  to  announce,
teach  .  .  .  and  manifest  the  Four  Noble  Truths  In  all
their  details.

Having  thus  spoken,  the  Blessed  One  arose  and  went
into  his  own  cell.

[249]  The  Lord  bad  not  been  gone  long  when  the
reverend  SSriputca  proceeded  to  the  exposition  of  the
Truth-finder’s  Four  Noble  Truths,  as  follows ; —

What,  reverend  sirs,  is  4he  Noble  Truth  of  111? —
Birth  is  an  III ;  decay  is  an  Ill;  death  is  an  111 ;  grief
and  lamentation,  pain,  misery  and  tribulation  are  Ills ;
ft  is  an  in  not  to  get  what  is  desired ; —  In  brief  all  the
factors  of  the  fivefold  grip  on  existence  are  Ills.

Birth  is,  for  living  creatures  of  each  several  class,
the  being  born  or  produced,  the  issue,  the  arising  or


THE  SYNOPSIS  OF  TRUTH.


2^7


M.  Hi.  2$o.


the  re-arising,  the  appearance  of  the  plastic  forces,  the
growth  of  faculties.

^  Decay,  for  living  creatjres  of  each  several  class,
IS  the  decay  and  decaying,  loss  of  teeth,  grey  hair,
wrinkles,  a  dwindling  term  of  life,  sere  faculties,

Death,  for  living  creatures  of  each  several  class,  is
the  passage  and  passing  hence,  the  dissolution,  dis¬
appearance,  dying,  dead),  decease,  the  dissolution  of
the  plastic  forces,  the  discarding  of  the  dead  body.

Grief  is  the  grief,  grieving  and  grievousness,  the
in  wild  grief  and  inward  anguish  of  anyone  who  suffers
under  some  misfortune  or  is  in  the  grip  of  some  type
of  III.

Lamentation  is  the  lament  and  lamentation  [350]  the
wailing  and  the  lamenting  of  anyone  who  suders  under
some  misfortune  or  is  in  the  grip  of  some  type  of  III

Pain  is  any  bodily  Ill  or  bomly  evil,  any  III  bred  of
bodily  contact,  any  evil  feeling.

Misery  is  ment^  III  and  evil,  any  evil  feeling  of  the
mind.

Tribulation  is  the  tribulation  of  heart  and  mind,  the
state  to  which  tribulation  brings  them,  in  anyone  who
suffers  under  some  misfortune  or  is  in  the  grip  of  some
type  of  Id,

There  remains  not  to  get  what  is  desired  In
creatures  subject  to  birth-^  decay— or  death — or
grief  and  lamentation,  pain,  misery  and  tribulatiou —
toe  desire  arises  not  to  be  subject  thereto  but  to  escape
them.  But  escape  Is  not  to  be  won  merely  by  desiring
it;  and  failure  to  win  it  is  another  Ill.

What  are  in  brief  all  the  factors  of  the  fivefold  grip  on  *
existence  which  arelds?— They  are:  The  factors  of  form,
feeling,  perception,  plastic  forces,  and  consciousness.'

The  foregoing,  sirs,  constitutes  the  Noble  Truth  of  III.

What  now  Is  the  Noble  Truth  of  the  Origin  of  111  ?
It  IS  any  craving  that  makes  for  re- birth  and  is  tied  up
with  passion’s  delights  and  culls  satisfaction  now  here
now  there; — such  as  the  Graying  for  sensual  pleasure,
the  craving  for  continuing  existence,  [351]  and  the
cravbg  for  annihilation.


CXU.  S  ACCA-VIB  HAW  G  A-SUTTA.


M.  iii.ssa.


acrS


Next,  what  is  the  Noble  Truth  of  the  Cessation  of
111? — It  is  the  utter  and  passionless  cessation  of  this
same  craving, ^the  abandonment  and  rejection  of
craving,  Deliverance  from  craving,  and  aversion  from
craving.

Lastly,  what  is  the  Noble  Truth  of  the  Path  that
leads  to  the  Cessation  of  Ill? — It  is  just  the  Noble
Eightfold  Path,  consisting  of — right' outlook,  right
resolves,  right  speech,  right  acts,  right  livelihood,
right  endeavour,  right  mindfulness  and  right  rap^ture
01 concentration.

Right  outlook  is  to  know  111,  the  origin  of  Ill,  the
cessation  of  Ill,  and  the  path  that  leads  to  the  cessation
of  Ill.

Right  resolves  are  the  resolve  to  renounce  the  world
and  to  do  no  hurt  or  harm.

Right  speech  is  to  abstain  from  lies  and  slander,
from  reviling,  and  from  uttJe.

Right  acts  are  to  abstain  from  taking  life,  from
stealing  and  from  lechery.

Right  livelihood  is  that  by  which  the  disciple  of  the
Noble  One  supports  himself,  to  the  exclusion  of  wrong
modes  of  Hvelmood.

Right  endeavour  is  when  an  Almsman  brings  his  will
to  bear,  puts  forth  endeavour  and  energy,  struggles  and
strives  with  all  his  heart,  to  scop  bad  and  wrong
qualities  which  have  not  yet  arisen  from  ever  arising,  to
renounce  those  which  have  already  arisen,  to  foster  good
qualities  which  have  not  yet  arisen,  [252],  and,  finally,
to  establish,  clarify,  multiply,  enlarge,  develop,  and
perfect  those  good  qualities  which  are  there  already.

R^ht  mindfulness  is  when  realizing  what  the  body  is,
— what  feelings  are—what  the  heart  is — and  what  the
mental  states  are, — an  Almsman  dwells  ardent,  alert
and  mindful,  in  freedom  from  the  wants  and  discon-
tenrs  attendant  on  any  of  these  things.

Right  rapture  of  concentration  is  when,  divested  of
lusts  and  divested  of  wrong  dispositions,  an  Almsman
develops,  and  dwells  in,  the  First  Ecstasy  with  all  its
zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state  bred  of  aloofness  and  not


M.iii.  as>


THE  SYNOPSIS  07  TRimT.


299


divorced  from  observation  and  reflection.  By  laying  to
rest  observation  and  reflection,  he  develops  and  dwells
.in  inward  serenity,  in  focussing  of  heart,  in  chez^tand
satisfaction  of  the  Second  Ecstasy,  which  is  divorced
from  observation  and  reflection  and  is  bred  of  concen¬
tration, — passing  thence  to  the  Third  and  Fourth
Ecstasies.

This,  sirs,  constitutes  the  Noble  Truth  of  the  Path
that  leads  to  the  Cessation  of  111.

Such,  reverend  sirs,  is  the  announcement  .  .  .  and
manifestation  of  the  Four  Noble  Truths,— the  supreme
Wheel  of  the  Doctrine  set  a-rolUng  in  the  deerpark  at
Benares  by  the  Truth*finder,  Arahat  all-enlightened,
that  Wheel  which  shall  not  be  turned  back  from  its
onward  course  by  recluse  or  brahmin,  god,  M£ra  or
BrahmS,  or  by  anyone  In  the  whole  universe.

Thus  spoke  the  reverend  Ssriputta,  Glad  at  heart,
those  Almsmen  rejoiced  in  what  the  reverend  SSri-
putta  had  ssud.

CXLII.  DAKKHINA.VIBHANGA-SUTTA.

ANALYSIS  OF  ALMSGIVING.

[258]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  living  in  the  Sakyan  country  at  Kapilavatthu  in
the  Banyan  grove  there,  MahSrpajSpafl  the  Gotamid
came  to  the  Lord  with  two  new  lengths  of  cbth  which
she  begged  the  Lord  to  be  so  good  as  to  accOTt  from
her,  a^dng  the  work  of  her  own  hands  at  the  loom
expressly  for  bim.  To  her  the  Lord  made  answer : —
Give  it  to  die  Confraternity,  Gotamf,  and  thereby  show
honour  both  to  me  and  also  to  the  Confraternity.  A
second,  and  a  third  time,  she  repeated  her  request,  only
to  receive  the  same  answer.  Then  said  the  reverend
Ananda  to  the  Lord  Pray  accept,  sir,  the  cloth  from
Mah5-pajapati  the  Gotamid !  She  was  of  great  service
to  the  Lojd  as  nurse  and  foster-mother,  suckling  her
nephew  when  his  own  mother  died.  Of  great  service
CO  her  too  has  the  Lord  been  all  through  the  Lord,


300


CXUl.  DAKKHWA-TIBKAliOA-SUTTA.  K.  W.  «JA


she  has  found  refuge  with  the  Buddha  and  with  his
Doctrine  and  his  Confraternity ;  all  through  the  Lord,
she  keeps  herself  from  taking  life,  from  taking  what  is.
not  given  her,  from  lechery,  from  lying  and  from  all
manner  of  strong  drink ;  all  through  the  Lord,  she
absolute  faith  in  the  Buddha  and  his  Doctrine  and  his
Confraternity,  and  [254]  is  an  embodiment  of  all  noble
and  lovely  virtue;  and,  all  through  the  Lord,  she  has
an  unclouded  belief  in  the  Four  Truths  of  Ill,  the
origin  of.Iil,  the  cessation  of  111,  and  the  path  that  leads
to  the  cessation  of  111.  Yes,  the  Lord  hai  been  of  great
service  to  her  too.

Quite  so,  Ananda ;  quite  so.  For,  if  a  man  has
been  led  by  a  teacher  to  hod  refuge  in  die  Buddba  and
his  Doctrine  and  his  Confraternity,  the  service  rendered
him  cannot  be  requited  by  salutations  or  civilities  or
by  presents  of  robes  and  other  requisites ;  nor  ^ain  are
such  things  a  recompense  for  being  led  either  to  abstain
from  taking  life,  stealing,  lechery,  lying  and  strong
drink,  or  to  have  absolute  faith  in  the  Buddha  and  his
Doctrine  and  his  Confraternity,  or  to  have  become  an
embodiment  of  all  noble  and  lovely  virtue,  or  to  have
an  unclouded  belief  in  the  Four  Truths.

Donations  to  individuals  are  ranked  in  fourteen

Sades.  First  ranks  giving  to  a  Truth-finder,  Arahat
j-£nlightened  ;  second  comes  ^ving  to  a  Pacceka-
Buddba;  the  third  is  giving  to  a  Truth-finder's  Arahat
disciples;  the  fourth  is  giving  to  one  who  is  on
the  way  to  become  a  pertected  Arahat ;  the  fifth  is
giving  to  one  who  will  never  be  reborn  on  earth ;  [255]
the  sixdi  is  giving  to  one  who  is  on  the  way  never  to
be  reborn  on  earth  ;  the  seventh  is  giving  to  one  who
will  return  to  earth  only  once  more ;  the  eighth  is
giving  to  one  who  is  on  the  way  to  return  to  earth  but
once  again ;  the  ninth  is  giving  to  one  who  has  entered
the  Paths ;  the  tenth  is  giving  to  one  who  is  on  the  way
Co  enter  the  Paths ;  the  eleventh  is  giving  to  one  who,
though  outside  our  pale,  is  superior  to  sensual  pleasure ;
the  twelfth  is  giving  to  an  ordinary  but  virtuous  man;
the  thirteen^  is  giving  to  an  ordinary  but  non- virtuous


M.  lii.  d5&.


ANALYSIS  OP  ALMSOmWC.


301


man  ;  and  the  fourteenth  1$  giving  to  those  who  have
been  reborn  as  animals.

,  fTerein,  Ananda,  the  yield  to  be  looked  for  from  a
donation  to  an  animal  is  a  hundred-fold,  to  an  ordinary
non-virtuous  man  a  thousand-fold,  to  an  ordinary  but
.virtuous  man  a  hundred-thousand-fold,  to  him  who,
though  outside  the  pale,  is  superior  to  sensual  pleasure
a  million-million -fold,  to  the  man  who  is  on  his  way  to
enter  the  Paths  incalculable  and  beyond  aJl  measure.
What  words  can  express  it  for  the  higher  stages?
What  words  can  express  it  for  a  Truth-finder,  Arahat
all-enlightened  ?

Donations  to  the  Confraternity  are  seven.  First
among  these  ranks  the  donation  to  both  Almsmen  and
Alms  women  with  the  Buddha  at  their  head;  second
comes  a  donation  to  both  Almsmen  and  Alnxswomen
when  the  Buddha  is  no  more ;  third  is  givlt^  10  the
whole  body  of  Almsmen ;  fourth  to  the  whSe  body
of  Alms  women ;  fifth  [250]  is  to  a  fixed  number
of  selected  Almsmen  and  Alms  women :  sixth  to  a
fixed  number  of  selected  Almsmen  and  the  seventh
Confraternity  donation  is  giving  to  a  fixed  number  of
selected  Almswomen.

In  days  to  come  there  will  be  yellow- wbed  members
of  this  spiritual  clan  without  virtue  and  of  bad  disposi¬
tions,  to  whom  for  the  Confraternity’s  sake  gifts  mil  be

S'ven.  Even  then,  say  1,  a  donation  to  the  Con-
item  I  ty  is  of  incalculable  and  measureless  worth ;

'  but  never,  say  I,  is  a  donation  to  ait  individual  more
fruitful  than  a  donation  to  the  Confraternity  as  a  whole.

There  are  four  degrees  of  purity  In  donations, — there
may  be  purity  (i)  of  donor  but  not  of  recipient,  (li)  of
recipient  but  not  of  donor,  pii)  of  neither,  and  (iv)  of
both.

The  first  of  the  four  is  when  the  donor  is  a  virtuous
man  of  good  dispositions,  while  the  recipients  are
.  without  virtue  and  of  bad  dispositions.

*  The  second  is  when  the  donor  is  without  virtue  and
of  bad  dispositions,  while  the  recipients  are  virtuous
men  of  good  dispositions.


302  CXLII.  ©AKKHt^fWlBHANOA-SirTTA.  M-  »l  iS7>


The  third  is  when  both  are  without  virtue  and  of  bad
dispositions.

And  the  fourth  is  when  both  donor  and  recipient^,
are  virtuous  men  of  good  dispositions.

[257]  Thus  spoke  the  Lord ;  and  the  Blessed  One,
as  Master,  added  the  following : —

fV/Un  to  ik'  unworthy  pious  virluo  gtvos^
with  ^  rounded  vjhat's  rightly  its  to  gitJO,
then  from  the  action  fruit  abundant  grows.

~^Ths gift  is  hallosdd  here  by  him  who  gives.

When  from  th'  unworthy  pious  virtue  takes
what  ne’er  was  theirs  to  give,  nor  have  they  faith,
'Still  from  ike  action  frutt  abundant  grows.

—  The  gift  is  hallow'd  here  by  him  who  lakes.

When  from  unworthy  hands  ik'  unworthy  lake
wkai  ne'er  was  theirs  to  give,  nor  have  they  faith,
still  from  the  action  fruit  abundant  grows.

— The  gift  is  hallow'd  here  by  neither  side.

When  pious  virtue  unto  virtue  gives,

with  grounded  faith  what's  rightly  its  to  give,

then  from  the  action  fruit  abundant  grows,

^Tkat  gift,  say  I,  bears  overflowing  fruits.

When  pious  Saint  on  Saint  bestows  as  gifls,
with  grounded  faith,  wkafs  rightly  his  to  give,
then  from  the  action  fruit  abundant  grows.

—  7m  things  thus  given  make  a  mighty  gift.


CXLIII.  anathapindik-ovada-sutta.

anAthapi^jdika’s  end.

[258]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  stay  fez  at  SavatthI  in  Jeta*s  grove  in  AnStba-
pi^diha’s  pTeasaunce,  the  householder  AnStbapin^ika,
being  ill  and  in  pain  and  in  grave  danger,  sent  a  man


M.  Hu  259.


anXthapiijpika's  BKD.


303


10  go  in  his  name  to  the  Lord  and,  bowing  his  head  at
the  Lord's  feet,  to  say  how  ill  he  was  and  how  he
>owed  his  head  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord ;  and  further  to
carry  the  same  message  to  the  reverend  Ssripucta,  with
the  added  request  to  the  latter  to  be  so  good  as  to
come  to  the  house.  The  two  messages  having  been
duly  delivered,  Siri^utta— with  Xnanda  in  attendance
-;<ame  to  AnSthapindika’s  house  and,  [25&]  seating
himself  on  the  seat  set  for  him,  asked  the  householder
whether  he  was  getting  better  and  able  to  hold  on,
whether  his  pains  were  leaving  him  and  not  coming  on,
and  whether  he  found  him^f  pr^ressing  and  not
losing  ground  with  his  pain.

Not  at  all,  SSriputca;  I  am  not  getting  better  but
worse;  .  .  .  {6tc.  as  in  SuttaNo.  97)  ...  I  am  losing
gpund ;  my  pains  grow  on  me.

•  You  must,  therefore,  train  yourself  not  to  be  the
creature  of  sight  nor  ever  to  let  your  consciousness
hang  on  sight,— or  hiring — or  smell — or  taste — or
touch— or  mind,  or  upon  form  and  the  other  objects  o(
these  six  senses.  You  must  train  yourself  not  to  be
the  creature  of  consciousness  nor  of  any  particular  mode
of  consciousness,  whether  ocular,  or  auditory,  or
olfactory,  or  gustatory,  or  tactile  or  mental,  You  must
train  yourself  not  to  be  the  creature  of  ocular  Contact
or  of  the  other  five  Contacts,  [260]  or  of  feelings  bred
of  such  Contacts.  You  must  train  yourself  not  to  be
the  creature  of  the  earth  element  or  of  the  water*
element  or  of  the  fire*element  or  of  the  wind-element
or  of  the  space-element  or  of  the  consciousness-
element.  You  must  train  yourself  not  to  be  the
cre^ure  of  form  or  any  consciousness  of  form, — or  of
feeling— or  of  perception — or  of  the  plastic  forces — or  of
conscjousness.  You  must  train  yourself  not  to  be  the
creature  of  the  Realm  of  Infinite  Space — or  of  the
Realm  of  Naught— [261]  or  of  the  Realm  of  Neither*
perception  •  nor  -  Non  -  perception,  You  must  train
yourself  not  to  be  the  creature  of  this  world  or  of  any
other  world.  You  must  train  yourself  not  to  be  the
creature  of,  or  to  let  your  consciousness  hang  on,  any-


304  CXLIU.  ANi.THAPiyplK-07iX>A-8UTTA.  M.  I'i.


thing  seen,  heard,  thought,  cogniied,  sought  or  explored
by  tne  mind.

As  Sariputta  ended,  the  householder  Anathapin^ik^
cried  aloud  and  shed  tears.  To  him  the  reverend
Ananda  said : — Are  you  in  the  toils,  householder?  Are
you  sinking?

Not  at  all,  Ananda.  Though  I  have  long  been
round  the  Master  and  Almsmen  of  great  intellect,
never  yet  heard  1  such  a  homily.

Such  homilies,  householder,  are  not  vouchsafed  Co
the  white-robed  laity,  but  reserved  for  Pilgrims.

.  But  let  ^em  be  vouchsafed  to  the  laity,  reverend
SSriputta ; — young  men  there  are  whose  vision  is  but
little  dimmed,  who  are  perishing  because  they  do  not
hear  the  Doctrine,  and  these  will  understand  it

The  exhortation  over,  SSriputta  and  Ananda  rose  up
and  departed;  nor  had  they  been  gone  long  when  the
hous^older  Anithapin^a  [262t  at  his  body’s  dis-
solnnon  after  death,  passed  to  the  Tusita  heavens.

As  night  waned,  the  deified  AnStbapipdika  in  sur-
passbg  beauty  came  to  the  Lord,  illumining  the  whole
of  J eta's  grove.  Seating  himself  after  salutations,  the
•  deity  addressed  the  Loro  in  the  following  verses :

Dear  grove  of  Jeia,  hauni  of  sages,  home
of  Truth's  sole  monarch  !  Bliss  lo  thee  I  owe.
Here  toil  wins  knowledge  and  Truth's  ry^steriess
here  virtue  still  inspires  the  highest  life
and  hallows  mortals  not  by  rank  or  wealth.

Alive  to  their  true  welfare,  let  the  wise
still  search  the  Doctrine  till  they  hallowed  are.

Ok,  Shriputtds  wisdom,  virtue,  peace  /

— No  Sainted  Almsman  can  yet  higher  go.

Thus  spoke  the  deified  AnSthapindika,  and  the
Master  approved.  Marking  the  approval  of  the  Master,
the  deity  saluted  the  l^rd  with  deep  reverence
and  vanished  away.

When  night  was  passed  the  Lord  narrated  to  the
Almsmen  how  he  had  been  visited  by  a  deity  and
detailed  all  that  had  passed.  t^68]  I'hereupon  the


Vl.V\Li64-


ANATHAPI^rpiKA’S  SND.


305


reverend  Ananda  said  to  the  Lord  that  this  deity  must
have  been  AnSth^iodika,  the  householder,  who  had
such  perfect  trust  in  the  reverend  Saripgtta.

Quite^  right.  Ananda.  All  chat  inference  can
bestow,  IS  yours.  The  deity  was  indeed  no  other  than
AoSthapipdilt^

Tht«  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXLIV.  chann-ovAda-sutta.

CH ANNA’S  SUICIDE.

Thus  have  1  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Rsjagaha  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where  the

E  rels  were  fed,  the  reverend  Saripuita,  the  reverend
fi-Cunda  and  the  reverend  Channa  were  living  on
Ae  heights  of  Vulture’s  Peak.  Channa  fell  sick  and  was
inpain  and  dangerously  ill.  At  eventide,  on  rising  up
from  his  mediutions,  SSripuita  went  to  MahS-Cuni  to
suggest  they  should  go  and  ask  after  Channa’s  con¬
dition.  So  tc^erher  we  two  went  to  the  sick  man  and
after  greetings  asked  him  [264]  whether  he  was  getting
better  and  able  to  bold  on,  whether  his  pains  were

Shim  and  not  coming  on,  and  whether  he  found
pr(»res$ingand  not  losing  ground  with  his  pain.
Not  at  all,  Siriputta ;  [  am  not  getting  better  but
worse ;  .  .  .  (tU.  as  in  Sutia  No,  97)  ...  I  am
losing  ground;  mv  pains  grow  on  me.  I  shall  use  a
knife  on  myself ;  I  have  no  wish  to  live.

Don't  think  of  killing  yourself,  Channa.  Bear  up,  as
we  wish  you  to  bear  up.  If  you  lack  food  that  will  do
you  gwd,  I  will  get  it  for  you ;  if  you  lack  medicines
that  will  do  you  good,  I  will  get  them  for  you  ;  If  you
lack  a  suitable  personal  atten^nt,  I  myself  will  attend
on  you.  But  don't  think  of  killing  yourself ;  bear  up
as  we  wish  you  to  bear  up.

No,  Saripuita;  I  have  no  lack  of  suitable  food  or
drugs ;  nor  do  I  lack  a  suitable  attendant.  Yes,  and  1


306


CXLIV.  CKAWN-OVADA-SUTTA.


M.  HI.  26$.


have  long  been  a  votary  of  the  Lord  with  unbroken
satisfaction  to  myself,  as  beseems  a  disciple.  But  take
it  from  me,  SSriputia,  that  I  shall  use  a  knife  on  myself
and  that  without  blame  attaching  to  me.

1  should  like,  Channa,  if  you  will  allow  me,  to  put
one  small  point  to  you.

Do  so,  SSriputta ;  and  when  I  have  heard  it,  I  will
answer.

In  Sight  and  in  ocular  perception  and  m  the  objects
of  ocular  perception,  do  you  hold  that  this  is  mine,  I
am  this  or  [266)  this  is  tny  Self?  Do  you  hold  this  of
hearing  or  the  foot  other  Senses?

No,  Sariputta I  hold  the  precise  opposite,

What  is  it  that  you  see  and  discern  in  eadi  and
every  one  of  these  that  leads  you  to  intend  what
you  do  ?

Their  cessation,  Sariputta.

[266]  You  must  think  too.  Cbanna,  of  the  Lord’s
eternal  leaching  that  agitation  marks  the  enthralled ;
that  the  un- enthralled  know  no  agitation ;  that,  if  there
be  no  agitation,  there  is  serenity ;  that  with  serenity
there  is  no  craving ;  that  without  craving  there  is
no  round  of  rebirths ;  that  without  the  round  of  re-»
births  there  is  no  passing  hence,  no  arising  elsewhere ;
that  without  any  passing  hence  or  arising  ebewbere
there  is  no  further  term  in  this  world  or  elsewhere  or
both ;  and  that  thus  alone  is  III  ended  for  ever.

With  these  exhortations  to  Channa,  Sariputta  and
MahS-Cunda  rose  up  and  departed  They  had  not
been  gone  long  when  Channa  used  the  knife  on  him*
self ;  and  they  brought  the  news  to  the  Lord,  asking
what  future  awaits  Channa  and  what  his  destiny
would  be.

Did  not  the  Almsman  Channa  insist  on  his  blame¬
lessness  to  you,  SSriputta  ?

In  his  Vajjian  village  of  Pubbajira  Channa's  familiars
and  associates  are  all  blameworthy.

No  doubt,  Siriputta ;  but  h  is  not  in  that  sense  that
I  use  the  term  blamewortlty.  That  term  I  apply  to  a
man  who  divests  himself  of  this  body  because  he  wants


M,  jn,a67,  C?IANWA'S  SUraDE.  30/

aaocher.  This  was  not  the  case  with  Channa  who
was  blameless  in  using  the  knife  upon  himself.

•  Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
S&rlputta  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


CXLV.  PUNN-OVADA-SUTTA.

COUNSEL  TO  PUNNA.

[267]  Tiius  have  1  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Sftvatthf  in  Jeca's  grove  in  AnTitha*
piljdika’s  pTeasaunce,  the  reverend  Punoa,  rising  at
eventide  from  his  meditations,  came  to  the  Lord  and,
when  seated  after  due  salutations,  asked  the  Lord  to
teach  him  concisely  how.  having  listened  to  the  Lord's
Doctrine,  he  should  live  alone  and  aloof,  strenuous,
ardent  and  purged  of  self.

Listen  then,  Punna,  and  pay  attention  ;  and  1  will
speak.

Then  to  the  attentive  Pun^ia  the  Lord  began : —

There  are  forms  of  which  sight  is  conscious,  sounds
of  which  the  bearing  is  conscious,  odours  of  which
smell  is  conscious,  savours  of  which  taste  b  conscious,
impressions  of  which  touch  is  conscious,  and  mental
objects  of  which  the  mind  is  conscious, — all  of  them
desirable,  agreeable,  pleasant  and  attractive,  all  of
them  bouna  up  with  lusts  and  exciting  to  passion.
I  fan  Almsman  hails  and  welcomes  any  of  these  and
cleaves  to  them,  delight  will  thus  arise  in  him;  and
from  the  beginning  of  delight,  say  I,  comes  the  begin¬
ning  of  llL  But  If  he  does  not  hall  and  welcome  and
cleave  to  them,  delight  wlU  thus  cease  in  him  ;  and  from
the  cessation  of  delight,  say  1,  comes  the  cessation  of  III

[26$]  With  this  concise  teaching  from  me,  Pu^na,
in  what  country  will  you  take  up  your  abode.

In  SunEparanta,  sir.

They  are  a  fierce  and  violent  race,  Pu^na,  in  SunS-
paranta.  If  they  were  to  abuse  and  revile  you  there,
what  would  you  think?


CXLV.  vada-sctta  .


M.  ill.  269.


308


l  should  think.  Lord,  that  the  good  folk  of  SiinS-
paranta  were  really  nice  people,  very  nice  people
indeed,  in  that  they  forbore  to  strike  me.

But  if  they  did  strike  you  ?

1  should  think.  Lord,  .  .  .  forbore  to  pelt  me  with

clods,  1  .  >

But  if  they  did  pell  you  with  clods  (

I  should  think,  Urd,  .  .  .  forbore  to  cudgel  me,

KBut  if  they  did  cudgel  you  i

uld  think,  Lord,  .  .  .  forbore  to  knife  me.

But  if  they  did  knife  you  ?  .  t  r

1  should  think,  Lord,  .  .  .  forbore  to  take  my  life.
But  if  they  did  cake  your  life.

If  they  did,  Lord,  1  should  think  chat  there  are
disciples  of  the  Lord  who,  in  their  tribulation  and
despair,  are  on  the  look-out  for  someone  with  a  kmte,
and  chat  I  have  found  him  without  having  to  hunt
about.  That  is  what  I  should  think.  Lord  ;  that  would
be  my  thought,  Blessed  One.

Good  indeed,  Punna,  With  such  a  comm^d  of
yourself,  you  will  be  able  to  live  with  the  folk  ot

Sunfiparania.  .  _  ,  •  i.  j

With  grateful  thanks  to  the  Lord  for  what  he  had
said,  the  reverend  Puooa  rose,  look  his  leave  of  the
Lord  with  deep  reverence,  and,  after  putting  hts  bedding
away  properly,  departed,  bowl  in  hand  and  duly  rofae^
to  beg  his  way  to  the  SunSparanta  country,  to  which  m
due  course  he  came  and  there  dwelt.  Before  the  close
of  his  very  first  rainy  season,  Pupija  had  gathered
round  him  five  hundred  disciples  of  each  sex,  and  had
realized  the  Three  Knowledges.  Time  came  when
the  reverend  Pupna  passed  away,  and  the  Almsmen
came  to  the  Lord  to  ask  [270]  what  future  awaited  him
and  what  his  destiny  would  be.

Instructed,  Almsmen,  was  the  young  man  Punpa ;  he
readily  embraced  the  Doctrine  and  its  corollaries ;  he
gave  me  no  trouble  doctrinal ly.  He  has  passed  to
Nirvana.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alma-
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M.  Hi.  ^71.


kandaka's  EOUILY  to  ALUSW0&C£».  309


CXLVI.  NANDAK-OVADA-SUTTA,


N  AND  AKA’S  HOMILY  TO  ALMS  WOMEN.

Thc;s  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SSvatchi  in  Jeta^s  grove  In  Anathapindika's

Eleasaunce,  MahSpajSpatr  the  Gotamid  brought  five
uodred  Almswomen  with  her  to  the  Lord  with  the
reouest  that  he  would  exhort  and  instruct  them.

Now  at  that  time  senior  Almsmen  used  to  take
turns  in  preaching  to  Almswomen ;  but  the  reverend
Nandaka  did  not  want  to  take  his  turn.  When  there¬
fore  the  Lord  asked  Ananda  whose  turn  it  was  to

E reach  to  Almswomen,  he  was  told  it  was  Nandaka’s
ut  he  did  not  want  to  take  it.  Then  the  Lord  ordered
him  to  preach  and  Nandaka  said  he  would.  [271]  So
io  the  morning  early,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  band,  the
reverend  Nandaka  went  into  SavatthT  for  alms  and  on
his  way  back  after  his  meal  came,  with  a  companion,
to  the  pleasaunce  which  King  Pasenadl  gave.  Espying
him  coming  some  way  off,  the  Almswomen  sec  a  seat  for
him  and  got  water  for  his  feet.  Seating  himself  on  the
seat  set  for  him,  Nandaka  washed  his  f^c,  af^er  which,
with  proper  salutations,  the  Almswomen  also  seated
themselves  to  one  side.  Said  Nandaka  to  them : — I
am  going  co  catechise  you,  Altns women.  Those  chat
understand  will  say  so,  as  also  will  those  who  do  not
understand ;  anyone  who  has  doubts  or  perplexities
will  question  me  as  to  how  this  or  that  Is,  and  what
the  meaning  is.

We  are  pleased  and  delighted,  sir,  with  just  what
your  reverence  si^^gesis  to  us-
What  think  you,  ladies? — Is  sight  permanent  or
impermanent  ?

Impermanent,  sir.

Does  the  impercoanenc  give  pleasure  or  p<un  ?

Pain,

Is  it  proper  that  what  is  impermanent  and  fraught


CXLVI.  NANDAK'0VAt»A-8UTTA.


M.  ill.  372.


3J0


with  pain  and  change  should  be  regarded  as  mine,  or
1  am  it,  or  it  is  my  Self?

No.  .  ..  u  *

And  does  the  same  apply  to  bearing  and  the  other

five  senses  ?  ,  ,

[272]  It  does,  sir.  And  why  ?— Because  already,
we  knew  and  saw,  dearly  and  aright,  that  these  six
internal  senses  had  no  permanence.

Quite  so,  ladies,  quite  so.  This  is  the  conclusion
reached  by  a  disciple  of  the  Noble,  who  knows  and
sees  dearly  and  aright.  Do  you  think  forms  are
permanent  or  impermanent  ?

Impermanent,  sir.

Does  the  impermanent.  .  .  ,  And  why  ?— Because
already  we  knew  and  saw,  dearly  and  aright,  that  these
external  objects  of  the  six  senses  had  no  permanenw-

Quice  so,  ladies,  quite  so.  This  is  the  conclusion
reached  by  a  disciple  of  the  Noble,  who  knows  and
sees  dearly  and  aright  Do  you  think  ocular  percep¬
tion  is  permanent  or  impermanent?

Impermanent,  sir.

Does  the  impermanent.  .  .  .  [273]  And  why  ? —
Because  already  we  knew  and  saw,  dearly  and  aright,
that  these  six  groups  of  perceptions  had  no  permanence.

Quite  so,  iadiesj  quite  so.  This  is  the  condusioa
reached  by  a  disciple  of  the  Noble,  who  knows  and
sees  clearly  and  aright.

It  is  just  like  a  lighted  lamp,  where  oil,  wick,  shine
and  sheen  are  each  and  all  impermanent  and  subject
CO  change.  Would  it  be  correct  to  say  that,  while
oil,  wick  and  shine  were  impermanent  and  subject  to
change,  yet  its  sheen  was  permanently  stable,  eternal
and  subject  to  no  change  ?

sir. — Because,  if  there  was  impermanence  in
oil,  wick  and  shine,  much  more  would  the  sheen  be
impermanent.

Just  ID  the  same  way,  would  anyone  be  correct  who
afiirmed  that,  his  six  internal  senses  being  imperma¬
nent,  and  his  feelings — pleasant  painful  or  neutral —
being  felt-  chroijgh  chose  six  senses,  his  feelings  were


M.  ill.  774.  HAUDKiL/LS  KOUILY  TO  ALUgWOUEN.  3 1 1


permanent  and  stable,  eternal  and  subject  to  no
change  ?

•  No,  sir. — Because  it  is  always  from  specific  condi>
tions  that  specific  feelings  arise ;  [274]  and  these
specific  feelings  disappear  with  the  disappearance  of
(be  specific  condicioos.

Quite  so,  ladies  ;  quite  so,  This  is  the  conclusion
reaped  by  a  disciple  of  the  Noble,  who  knows  and
sees  clearly  and  aright

It  is  just  like  a  fine  upstanding  timber-tree,  of  which
roots  crunk  branches  and  shadow  are  impermanent  and
subject  10  change,  Would  anyone  be  correct  who
affirmed  chat,  while  root  crunk  and  branches  were  all
impermanent  and  subject  to  change,  the  tree's  shadow
was  permanent,  stable,  eternal  and  subject  to  no  change  ?

No,  sir. — Because,  if  all  else  be  impermanent,  much
more  would  the  shadow  be  impermanent,

Just  in  the  same  way,  would  anyone  be  correct  in
affirming  chat,  the  sense-objects  of  his  six  external
senses  being  impermanent,  and  his  several  feelings
being  felt  through  those  sense* objects,  his  feelings
were  permanent  and  stable,  eternal  and  subject  to  no
change  ?

No,  sir. — Because  it  is  always  from  specific  condi¬
tions  that  specific  feelings  arise ;  and  these  disappear
with  the  disappearance  of  the  specific  conditions.

Quite  so,  ladies ;  quite  so.  This  is  the  conclusion
reached  by  a  disciple  of  the  Noble,  who  knows  and
sees  clearly  and  aright

It  is  just  like  an  expert  butcher  or  butcher’s  man
who,  having  killed  a  cow,  should  with  a  sharp  knife
dissect  out  the  carcase,  so  as  not  to  spoil  the  fiesh
within  or  the  hide  without,  by  cutting  out  severing
and  dissevering  all  the  inward  tendons  and  sinews  and
fastenings,  and  then  should  [276]  cloche  the  cow  in
its  hide  once  more  and  deefare  that  under  the  hide
she  was  connected  together  just  the  same  as  before.
Would  be  be  correct  in  so  declaring  ?

No,  sir,  the  cow  would  be  disconnected  beneath  the
hide.


3  1 2  CXLVZ.  NAND A  K-  OV^ D A-SUTTA.  M.  iii.  #76.

This  illustration  has  been  adduced  lo  make  my
meaning  clear,- — whii^  is  this  ;-^the  flesh  >vithin  is
another  expression  for  the  six  internal  senses,  as  fhe*
hide  is  for  the  external  objects  of  the  six  senses ;  the
tendons  and  sinews  and  fastenings  within  represent
passion’s  delight ;  the  sharp  knife  means  Noble  under¬
standing  which  severs,  dissevers,  and  cuts  out  inner
vices  and  bonds  and  ties.

There  are  seven  factors  of  Enliehtcnment,  ladies,  by
the  growth  and  increase  of  which  within  himself  an
Almsman,  by  tbe  destruction  of  the  Cankers,  comes,
here  and  now,  to  dwell  in  the  Deliverance  of  heart  and
mind  that  knows  no  Cankers,  which,  of  and  by  himself,
he  has  discerned  realised  and  developed,  what  are
these  seven  factors? — Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman
who  cultivates  tbe  several  factors — each  dependent  on
aloofness,  passionlessness,  and  cessation,  each  maturing
by  Renunciation— of  mindfulness,  study  of  the  Doctrine,
zeal,  bliss,  tranquillity  and  rapt  concentration.  These
the  seven  factors  of  Enlightenment.  •

[276]  His  exhortation  ended,  the  reverend  Nandaka
told  the  ladies  it  was  now  time  for  them  to  be  going.

With  grateful  thanks  for  his  discourse,  those  Alms-
women  rose  up  and,  with  salutations  and  with  deep
reverence,  departed  to  the  Lord,  whom  they  saluted,
remaining  standing  respectfully  to  one  side,  As  they
stood  there,  the  Lord  fold  the  Almswomec  it  was  time
for  them  to  be  going.  So  with  salutations  and  with
deep  reverence  they  withdrew.  They  had  not  been
gone  long  when  the  Lord  addressed  the  Almsmen,
saying: — Just  as  on  the  mid- month  Sabbath  there  is
no  doubt  or  perplexity  in  the  minds  of  the  people
whether  there  is  no  moon  or  full- moon,  for  there  is
then  no  moon  at  all, — even  so  in  the  same  way  those
Alms  women  are  glad  to  have  heard  Nandaka's  exposi¬
tion  but  their  thought  has  not  yet  waxed  to  tbe  full.

Turning  then  to  Nandaka,  the  Lord  directed  him  to
repeat  the  same  exposition  over  again  to  those  same
Alms  women,

Obediently,  the  reverend  Nandaka  did  so,  in  the


M.Hi.J77*  NAKDaKa’S  BOMrLV  TO  ALMSWOMBN.  $13


selfsame  words,  on  the  morrow.  [277]  With  graceful
thanks  once  more  for  his  discourse,  chose  A  1ms women
•rose  up  and,  with  salutations  and  deep  reverence,
departed  to  the  Lord,  whom  they  saluted,  remaining
standing  to  one  side.  As  they  stood  there,  the  Lord
told  diem  it  was  time  for  them  to  be  going.  So  with
salutations  and  with  deep  reverence  they  withdrew.
They  had  not  been  gone  lon^  when  the  Lord  addressed
the  Almsmen,  saying  : — It  is  ;usc  like  the  Sabbath  of
the  full-moon,  when  there  is  no  doubt  or  perplexity  in
che  minds  of  the  people  whether  there  is  no  moon  or
full- moon,  for  it  is  full-moon.  Just  in  the  same  way
those  Almswomen  are  glad  to  have  beard  Nandaka's
discourse  and  now  their  thoughts  have  waxed  to  che
full.  Of  all  those  five  hundred  Almswomen  even  the
most  backward  Is  of  the  conversion,  immune  from  future
states  of  sudering,  safe  and  sure,  destined  to  win  entire
Enlightenment

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  che  Lord  had  s^d.


CXLVri.  C0i.A-RAHUL-OVS.DA-$UTTA.

THE  TRANSITORY.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  st  SSvatthI  in  ]  eta's  grove  in  Anithapin4ika'8
pleasaunce,  be  was  alone  with  his  meditations  when  the
thought  came  to  him  that,  as  Ribula  was  now  ripe  in
the  qualities  which  mature  unto  Deliverance,  he  might
school  him  in  the  eradication  of  the  Cankers.  So  when
next  morning,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  band,  he  had
been  into  Savattbi  for  alths  and  was  back  again  after
his  meal,  thg  Lord  told  Rihula  to  bring  a  mat  to  sit  on
and  they  would  go  together  to  pass  the  beat  of  the  day
in  Aedha-vana.  [27^  Obedient  to  the  Lord’s  com¬
mands,  the  reverend  fiahula  took  a  mat  and  followed
bdiind  in  the  Lord's  footsteps.

Now  at  that  time  some  thousands  of  deities  followed


314  '  CXLVir.  COIvA-HAHUL-OVADA-SOTTA.


M.  ill  a79.


after  the  Lord,  because  the  Lord  would  that  day
school  Rshula  in  the  eradication  of  the  Cankers.

Plunging  into  Andha-vana’s  glades,  the  Lord  took*
his  seat  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  on  the  mat  set  for  him  ;
and  Rshula  coo,  with  salutations,  seated  himself  hard
by.  As  Rahula  sat  there,  the  Lord  put  this  question
to  Rahula : — Is  sight  permanent  or  impermanent  ?

Impermanent,  sir.

Is  the  impermanent  fraught  with  Weal  or  Ill.

With  Ill.

Is  it  proper,  when  a  thing  is  fraught  with  Ill  and
change,  to  regard  it  as — Mine,  or  this  is  I,  is

aiy  Self  ?

No,  sir.

Is  form  permanent  or  impermanent  ?

Impermanent,  sir.

Is  the  impermanent  fraught  .  .  .  this  is  my  Self?

[27d]  No,  sir.

Is  visual  Contact  permanent  or  impermanent  ?

Impermanent,  sir.

Is  the  impermanent  fraught  -  .  .  this  is  my  Self?

No,  sir.

Are  feelings,  or  perception  or  factors  or  the  con¬
sciousness  which  arises  under  the  conditions  of  visual
coatacq^permanenc  or  impermanent  ?

Impermanent,  sir.

Is  the  impermanent  frai^hc  .  .  .  this  is  my  Sdf?

No,  sir,

And  is  all  this  equally  true  of  hearing,  smelling,
tastmg,  touching  and  the  mind  and  of  their  respective
sense-objects  ?

Yes,  sir-

When  he  sees  all  this,  Rshula,  the  disciple  of  the
Noble  becomes  sick  and  weary  of  sight,  form,  visual
contact  and  of  the  feelings  and  so  forth  thence  arising j
sick  9Sid  weary  of  hearing,  sounds,  auditory  contact,
and  the  feelings  and  so  forth  thence  arising ;  sick  and
weary  of  smell,  odours,  olfactory  contact,  and  the  feel¬
ings  and  so  forth  thence  arising;  sick  and  weary  of
taste,  savours,  gustatory  contact,  and  the  feelings  and


M.  ni.  aSo.


TUI!  TRANSrrORy.


3>5


so  forth  thence  arising ;  sick  and  weary  too  of  mind,
mental  objects,  mental  contact,  and  the  feelings  and  so
•  forth  thence  arising ; — [280]  sick  and  weary  of  it  all ;
and  so  is  Delivered  and  to  him,  being  Delivered,  comes
the  knowledge  of  his  Deliverance  in  the  conviction
that  this  is  his  last  birth,  that  he  has  lived  the  highest
life,  that  his  task  Is  done  and  that  now  for  him  there  is
now  no  more  of  what  he  has  been.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  The  reverend  Rah u la
rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.  While  this  ex¬
position  was  being  spoken,  the  reverend  Rahula’s  heart
was  delivered  from  the  Cankers  by  leaving  nothing  to
support  them.  There  arose,  too,  in  all  chose  thousands
of  deities  the  passionless  and  stainless  Eye  of  Truth,
whereby  they  saw  how  everything  that  originates  must
also  cease  to  be.

CXLVIII.  CHA-CHAKKA-SUTTA.

THE  SIX  SIXES.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SJlvatth!  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  AnSthapfudika's
pleasaunce,  he  there  addressed  the  listening  Alms>
men : — I  will  teach  you  the  Doctrine— so  lovdy  in  its
beginning,  so  lovely  in  the  middle  and  so  lovely  (n  Its
close— -with  its  meaning  and  text,  the  complete  and
pure  higher  life, — namely,  the  Six  Sixes.  Listen  and
pay  attentbn  and  I  will  speak.  Then  to  the  attentive
Brethren  the  Lord  b^an  •

There  are  six  internal  senses,  six  external  sense-
objects,  six  groups  of  perceptions,  six  groups  of  Con¬
tacts,  six  groups  of  feelings,  and  six  groups  of  cravings.

I  have  said  that  there  are  six  internal  senses  to  be
recognised  :  and  these  are  the  senses  of  si^t,  hearing,
smell,  taste,  touch  and  mind. — These  form  the  first  Six.

[281]  1  have  said  that  sense-objects  are  six  In
number  ;  and  they  are  forms,  sounds,  odours,  savours,
touch  and  mental  objects. — These  form  the  second  Six.

I  have  said  there  are  six  groups  of  perceptions  j


3 1 6  CXLVin.  CHA-CHAKtC  i-SUTTA.  M .  Hi.  i9a .

they  are  the  classes  of  perceptions  which  severally
arise  from  (a)  sight  and  forms,  (6)  hearing  and  sounds,
(ir)  smell  and  o^urs,  (d)  taste  and  savours,  (s)  touch,
and  tangible  things,  and  (/)  mind  and  mental  objects.
^These  form  the  third  Six.

I  have  said  there  are  six  groups  of  Contacts , — they
are  ^s  follows : — from  sight  and  forms  results  ocular

fjrcepcion  and  the  meeting  of  these  three  is  Contact
he  like  happens  with  each  of  the  other  five  senses
and  their  sense-oWects  and  perception  combing. —
This  is  the  fourth  Six.

I  have  said  that  there  are  six  groups  of  feelings ;
they  are  the  classes  of  feelings  whicn  severally  arise  as
follows: — from  sight  and  forms  results  ocular  percep¬
tion,  and  the  meeting  of  aJI  three  is  contact,  from  which
contact  come  feelings.  The  like  happens  with  each  of
die  other  five  senses  and  their  sense ‘Objects  and  per¬
ception  combined  so  as  to  result  in  feelings.  [2821 —
This  is  the  fifth  Six.

I  have  said  there  are  six  groups  of  cravings they
are  the  kinds  of  craving  which  severally  arise  as
follows  : — from  sight  and  forms  results  ocular  percep¬
tion,  and  the  meeting  of  all  three  is  contact,  from
which  come  feelings  and  out  of  feelings  come  cravings.
The  like  happens  with  each  of  the  other  five  senses
and  their  sense-objects  and  perception  combined  so
to  result  in  contact,  from  which  contact  come  feelings
from  which  come  cravings. — This  is  ie  sixth  Six.

If  it  be  said  the  eye  is  Self,  that  does  not  hold.
^or,)  the  arising  and  the  passing  of  the  eye  is  manifest
But  when  anything  manifestly  nas  its  arising  and  its
passing,  we  are  brought  to  this,  that  Self  arises  and
then  passes  away  again ;  and  therefore  to  say  the  eye
is  Sell  does  not  bold^  as  the  eye  is  thus  non-Self.

The  same  aigument  applies  to  forms,  so  that  the  eye
and  forms  are  oon-Self.  It  applies  also  to  ocular  per*
option,  so  that  the  eye,  its  sense-objects  and  ocular
perceprioQ  axe  all  three  non-Self.  It  applies  also  to
ocular  contact,  so  that  the  eye,  its  sense-objects,  ocular
perception  and  ocular  contact  axe  .all  fouc  non- Seif.


Tilt  SIX  SIXES.


h  applies  also  to  feelings,  [288]  so  that  the  eye,  its
sense-objects,  ocular  perception  and  feelings  are  all
five  non 'Seif  It  applies,  lastly,  to  cravings,  so  that
the  eye,  its  sense-objects,  ocular  perception,  feelings
and  cravings  are  all  six  non-Self.

And  what  applies  to  the  sense  of  sight  applies  equally
to  the  other  five  senses, — each  with  Its  sense-object^
its  perceptions,  its  feelings,  and  Its  cravings;  they  are
non-Self  all  of  them.

[284]  The  way  that  leads  to  the  origination  of  the
tn£vidua]ity  view  is  to  regard  as  Mine — or  this  is  I — or
this  is  my  Self— either  the  eye,  or  forms,  or  ocular
perception,  or  ocular  contact,  or  feelings  or  cravings ;  or
similarly  to  regard  hearing  and  the  four  other  senses
with  their  adjuncts.

The  way  that  leads  to  the  cessation  of  the  indi¬
viduality  view  IS  noi  to  zog&Td  as  mine,  and  so  forth,
either  eye  or  hearing  or  any  of  the  four  other  senses
or  their  adjuncts.

[285]  From  sight  and  forms  arises  ocular  perception
and  the  meeting  of  all  three  is  Contact,  from  which  con¬
tact  come  feelings,  pleasant  or  unpleasant  or  neither.
When  experiencing  a  pleasant  feeling,  a  man  rejoices
in  it,  hails  it,  and  clings  tight  to  it ;  and  a  trend  to

Ssion  ensues.  When  exp^ienclng  an  unpleasant
ing,  the  man  sorrows,  is  miserable,  wails,  beats  his
breast  and  goes  distra^ht ;  and  a  trend  to  repugnance
ensues,  when  experiencing  a  feeling  that  is  neither
pleasant  nor  unpleasant,  he  has  no  true  and  causa!
comprehension  of  chat  feeling's  origin,  disappearance,
agreeableness,  perils  and  outcome ;  and  a  trend  to
ignorance  ensues.  It  can  never  possibly  result  that —
without  first  discarding  the  pleasant  feeling's  trend  to
passion,  without  first  dispelling  the  unpleasant  feeling's
trend  to  repugnance,  without  getting  rid  of  the  neutral
feeling’s  trend  to  ignorance,  without  discarding  ignor¬
ance  and  stopping  it  from  arising — he  will  put  an  end,
here  and  now,  to  ill.  And  what  is  true  of  sight  is
equally  true  of  each  of  the  other  five  senses.

[286]  From  sight  and  forms  arises  ocular  percep-


3i8  CXLVIII.  CHA-CHAKKA‘SUTTA.  M.ijj.  287-

tion  and  the  meeting  of  all  three  is  Contact,  from
which  Contact  come  feelings>  pleasant  or  unpleasant
or  neither.  If,  when  experiencing  a  pleasant  feeling,  a  •
man  does  not  rejoice  in  it,  does  not  hail  it,  does  not  cling
eight  to  it; — so  no  trend  to  passion  ensues.  If,  when
experiencing  an  unpleasant  feeling,  he  does  not  sorrow,
become  miserable,  wail,  beat  his  breast  or  go  dis-
craught ; — so  no  trend  to  repugnance  ensues.  If,  when
experiencing  a  feeling  that  is  neither  pleasant  nor
unpleasant,  he  has  a  true  and  causal  comprehension
of  char  feding's  origin,  disappearance,  agreeableness,
perils  and  outcome ; — so  no  trend  to  ignorance  ensues.
Inasmuch  as  he  has  already  discarded  the  pleasant
feeling’s  trend  to  passion,  has  already  dispelled  the
unpleasant  feelings  trend  to  repugnance,  has  already
got  rid  of  the  neutral  feeling’s  trend  to  ignorance,
has  already  discarded  ignorance  and  fostered  under¬
standing, — the  result  is  that  he  will  put  an  end,  here
and  now,  to  111.  And  what  is  true  of  sight  is  equally
true  of  each  of  the  ocher  five  senses.

With  vision  such  as  this,  the  instructed  disciple  of
the  Noble  is  sick  and  weary  of  sight  and  the  other
senses,  is  sick  and  weary  of  their  sense-objects,  is  sick
and  weary  of  perceptions  and  contacts  and  feelings  and
cravings, — -sick  and  weary  of  it  all  [287]  and  so  is
Delivered ;  and  to  him,  being  Delivered,  comes  the
knowledge  of  his  Deliverance  in  the  conviction  that
this  is  his  last  birth,  that  he  has  lived  the  highest  life,
(hat  his  task  is  done  and  that  now  for  him  there  is
now  no  more  of  what  he  has  been.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  chose  Alms*
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.

While  this  discourse  was  being  spoken,  the  hearts  of
sixty  Almsmen  were  delivered  from  the  Cankers  by
ieavii^  nothing  to  support  them.


M.  Ml.  3S8.


DOMAINS  OF  SENSE.


3>9


,  CXLIX.  mahA-salayatanika-sutta.

DOHAIKS  OF  SENSE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Sivacthi  in  J  eta's  grove  in  An£lhapici«Jika's
plewunce,  he  intimated  to  the  Almsmen  that  he
would  instruct  them  in  the  import  of  the  Six  Great
Domains  of  Sense,  and  thus  began  ; —

If  a  man  lacks  ken  and  vision  of  the  sense  of  sight —
and  of  Forms — and  of  ocular  perception — and  of  ocular
Contact — and  of  the  feelings,  pleasant  unpleasant  or
neither,  which  arise  because  of  ocular  contact, — then  he
grows  enamoured  of  all  these  things.  As  he  lives  thus
enamoured  and  immersed  and  Infatuated  with  them  and
with  the  satisfaction  they  bring,  the  five  factors  of  love
of  existence  grow  up ;  and  there  is  a  sturdy  growth  ot
cravings  for  a  future  life  with  a  passionate  delight  and
revdllng  in  the  thought  of  it,  There  Is  a  growth  both
of  bodily  [288]  and  of  mental  distress,  of  bodily  and
mental  infiammation  and  of  bodily  and  mental  fever;  the
man  experiences  ills  of  mind  and  ills  of  body.

And  precisely  the  same  happens  with  each  of  the
other  five  senses.

If,  however,  a  man  has  ken  and  vision  of  the  sense  of
sight  and  Its  objects,  and  of  ocular  perception,  Contact
and  the  feelings,  pleasant  unpleasant  or  neither,  which
arise  because  of  ocolar  contact, — then  he  never  grows
enamoured  of  these  things.  As  he  lives  thus  un-
enamoured,  un-Immersed  and  un-infacuated  either  with
them  or  with  the  satisfaction  they  bring,  the  five  factors
love  of  existence  wane ;  and  there  is  a  decay  of
cravings  for  a  future  life  and  no  passionate  delight  and
revelling  in  the  thought  of  It.  There  is  a  decay  both
of  bodify  and  of  mental  distress,  of  bodily  and  mental
Infiammationand  of  bodily  and  [288]  men^  fever  ;  the
man  experiences  weal  in  mind  and  weal  in  body.  The
outlook  of  the  man  with  heart  sec  aright  and  at  ease, —
this  right  oudook  is  his;  and  his  too  Is  the  right


320  CXUX.  MAHA^SA^AyATAWIKA-SUTTA.  M.  ill.  290.

aspiration,  the  right  endeavour,  the  right  mindfuln^
and  the  right  rapture  of  concentratloii  which  m^k  the
man  whose  heart  is  set  right  and  at  ease.  Ere  thi^  he,
has  already  attained  to  purity  of  act  and  word  and  oj
mode  of  livelihood,  Thus,  the  (whole)  Noble  Eightfold
Path  proceeds  to  its  perfected  development ;  and  with
the  Path’s  development  the  fourfold  mustering  of  mind¬
fulness  similarly  proceeds  to  its  perfected  development,
as  coo  do  the  four  efforts,  the  four  psychic  powers,  the
five  faculties,  the  five  forces  and  the  seven  factors  of
enlightenment,  while  the  twin  yoke-fellows,  calm  and
intuition,  are  at  their  work.  ,  .  l

By  transcendent  knowledge  (c)  he  comprehen^  what
transcendent  knowledge  should  comprehend,  (^) discards
what  transcendent  knowledge  should  discard,  (r)hwt^
what  transcendent  knowledge  should  foster,  and  (a)
realises  what  transcendent  knowledge  should  realize.

(a)  That  which  transcendent  knowledge  should
comprehend,  implies  the  five  supporting  factors  of
fin-ms,  feelings,  perception,  the  factors  and  con¬
sciousness.  ,  ,  .  ,  j.

(d)  That  which  transcendent  knowledge  should  dis¬
card,  is  ignorance  and  craving  for  continuing  existence
(tf)  That  which  transcendent  knowledge,  should
foster,  is  calm  and  intuition.

{dj  [290]  That  which  transceodent  knowledge
should  realize,  is  Understanding  and  Deliverance.

And  all  that  has  been  said  of  the  sense  of  sight
applies  equally  to  the  other  five  senses.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  sacd.


CL  NAGARA-VINDEYYA-SUTTA.

CRinClSM  OF  ‘WANDERERS.'

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
on  an  alms-pilgrimage  among  the  Kosalaos.  he  came
with  a  great  company  of  Almsmen  to  the  brahmin


M.  iiL  391.


CRmClSM  OF  ‘  WANOES^RS.^


351


village  of  Nagara-Vinda.  Tidings  reached  the  brahmin
heads  of  houses  in  Nagara-Vinda  that,  in  the  course
of  his  alms-pilgrimage  through  Kosala,  the  recluse
*Gotama  of  the  Sakyan  clan,  who  had  gone  forth  from
a  Sakyan  family  as  a  Pilgrim,  had  arrived  with  a  large
train  of  Almsmen  [201]  in  N^ara-Vinda.  Su3i,
according  to  report,  was  the  high  repute  .  .  .  as
in  Shita  No.  82)  .  .  .  Aranafs  like  him.  So  the
brahmins  of  Nagara-Vinda  went  to  the  Lord  and,  after
exchanging  with  him  the  friendly  greetings  of  courtesy
and  civility,  took  their  seats  to  one  side, — some  after
salutations,  some  after  greetings,  some  with  palms
cotdoined  in  salutation,  some  with  mention  of  their  name
and  surnames,  and  others  again  in  silence.  To  them
so  seated,  the  Lord  spoke  as  follows >

If,  sirs,  Wanderers  of  other  schools  were  to  ask  you
what  typ^  of  recluses  and  brahmins  ought  not  to
receive  honour,  reverence,  devotion  and  worship,  you
rfiould  make  answer  to  them  that :  Honour,  reverence,
devotion  and  worship  ought  not  to  be  shown  to  recluses
and  brahmins  who,  in  connection  with  visible  forms
and  xht  sense-objects  of  the  other  hve  senses,  have  not
sbed  all  lust,  all  hate  and  all  folly,  and,  having  hearts
not  yet  tranquil,  walk  somedmes  righteously  but  some*
rimes  unrighteously  in  body,  speech  and  mind.  And
why? — Because,  you  will  say,  we  ourselves  coo  behave
just  the  same,  and  fail  to  see  a  higher  righteousness
in  these  men ;  and  therefore  we  ought  not  to  show
such  recluses  and  brahmins  honour,  reverence,  devotion
and  worship. — [292]  This  should  be  your  answer  to
this  encjuiry  from  Wanderers  of  other  schools.

But  if  Wanderers  of  other  schools  ask  you  what
types  of  recluses  and  brahmins  ought  to  receive  honour,
reverence,  devotion  and  worship,  you  should  make
answer  to  them  that :  Honour,  reverence,  devotion  and
worship  ought  to  be  shown  to  those  recluses  and
brahmins  wno,  in  connection  with  visible  forms  and
the  sense  objects  of  the  other  five  senses,  have
abed  all  lust,  all  hate  and  all  folly,  and,  with  tranquil
heuts,  walk  always  righteously  in  body,  speech  and  ,

ti.


333


CL.


NAGAfiA-VINOBYYA-SDTTA.  M'  29>


mind.  And  why  ?— Because,  you  will  say,  we  our¬
selves  have  not  shed  all  this  lust,  hate  and  folly
but,  having  hearts  not  yet  tranquil,  walk  sometimes
rishteously  and  sometimes  unrighteously  m  body,
speech  aiid  mind ;  but  we  see  a  higher  righteous-
in  these  recluses  and  brahmins ;  and  therefore
wc  ought  to  show  them  honour,  reverence,  devotion
and  worship-— This  should  be  your  answer  to  this
enciuiry  from  Wanderers  of  other  schools.

If  Wanderers  of  other  schools  ask  you  what  attributes
and  results  in  such  recluses  and  brahmins  lead  you  to
SAY  that  they  are  [298]  either  void  of  passion  and
triumphant  over  passion,  or  void  of  hate  and  triumphant
over  bate,  or  void  of  folly  and  triumphant  over  foUy,—
then  you  should  make  answer  to  these  Wanders  ol
other  schools  that :  These  reverend  men  lodg«  m
remote  solitudes  where  there  are  no  forms  to  be  seen
to  excite  their  admiration  by  familiar  occurrence  5  nor
sounds,  nor  odours,  nor  savours,  nor  things  to  touch,
Such  are  the  attributes  and  results  m  their  reverences
which  lead  us  to  say  they  are  void  of
or  folly  or  triumphant  over  them.— This  should  be
your  answer  to  this  enquiry  from  Wanderers  of  other

schools-  . **.  t  'j  .

At  the  close,  the  brahmins  of  Nagara-Vin^  said  to
Lord:— Excellent,  Gotama,  excellent)  Just  as  a
man  might  set  upright  ^n  what  bad  been  c^t  down,
or  reveal  what  had  been  hidden  away,  or  tell  a  man
who  had  gone  astray  which  was  his  way,  or  bring  a
lamp  into  darkness  so  that  those  with  eyes  to  see
might  sec  the  things  about  them,— even  so,  in  many  a
figure,  has  the  reverend  Gocama  made  his  Doctnne
clear  We  come  to  the  Lord  as  our  refuge  and  co  bis
Doctrine  and  to  his  Confraternity.  May  the  reverend
Gotama  accept  us  as  followers  who  have  found  an
abiding  refuge  from  this  day  onward  while  life  lasts.


P8WLS  OP  THB  DAILY  SIOUND.


323


M.  Hi  3^4.


♦  CLl,  pindapAta-parisuddhi-sutta.

PERILS  OF  THB  DAILY  ROUND.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay:
ing:  at  Rsjagaha  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where  the
ojuirrels  were  fed,  the  reverend  Saripucca,  rising  from
his  medications  at  eventide,  came  to  the  Lord  and  after
salatations  cook  his  seat  to  one  side.  As  he  sat  there,
the  Lord  said  to  him : — Your  faculties,  SSripucta,  are
acute;  and  your  complexion  is  clear  and  un¬

sullied.  What  manner  of  life  do  you  mostly  live
nowadays  ?

Mostly  aloof  nowadays,  sir.

Quite  right,  Slriputt^  quite  right.  Yours  is  indeed
the  Superman’s  life,  for  his  is  a  life  aloof.  If  an  Alms-
coan  desires  td  live  mostly  aloof,  he  should  ask  himself
whether,  on  the  way  he  took  to  the  village  for  alms  or  in
the  district  he  frequented  for  alms  or  on  the  way  he
came  back  from  hts  round  for  alms,  he  there  found  chat
the  sense-objects  of  sight — or  of  hearing  or  of  the
ocher  senses — had  aroused  longings  or  lust  or  bate  or
folly  or  repugnance  of  heart.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  be
finds  that  they  had  aroused  such  emotions,  then  he
must  strive  to  get  rid  of  those  bad  and  wrong  disposi¬
tions.  But  if  he  finds  that  nothing  of  the  sort  nad  oeen
aroused,  then  he  should  dwell  on  in  this  selfsame  joy
and  bliss,  day  and  night  immersed  in  studious  aspiiu-
tion  for  right  dispositions,

[595]  If,  on  questioning  himself  similarly  about  the
five  pleasures  of  the  senses,  he  finds  they  are  not  got
rid  of  from  his  heart,  he  must  strive  to  get  rid  of  them.
But  if  he  finds  that  he  is  rid  of  them,  he  should  dwell  on
in  this  self-same  joy  and  bliss,  day  and  night  Immersed
in  studious  aspiration  for  right  dispositions.

If,  on  questioning  himself  similarly  about  the  five
hindrances,  be  finds  .  .  .  right  disposicions.

If,  on  questioning  himself  similarly  about  the  five


324  CLI.


PIN  » APiTA-P ARTSU  DDHI-SUTTA.  M-  HI  »0-


factors  of  attachment,  he  finds  that  he  not  fathomed
them,  he  must  strive  to  do  so.  But  if  he  finds  that
[296]  he  has  done  so,  he  should  dwell  on  in  this  self-^
same  joy  and  bliss,  day  and  night  immersed  in  studious
aspiration  for  right  dispositions.

If,  on  questioning  himself*  similarly  about  the  four
Jjascs  of  mindfulness,  he  finds  that  he  has  not  developed
them,  he  must  strive  to  do  so.  But  if  he  finds  chat  he
has  .  .  .  right  dispositions.

And  the  like  course  should  he  take  with  developing
the  four  right  efforts,  the  five  faculties,  the  five  forces,
the  seven  factors  of  enlightenment,  the  Noble  Eight¬
fold  Path,  [297]  and  calm  and  intuition.

If,  on  quesdonine  himself  similarly  about  realidng
Understanding  and  Deliverance,  he  finds  that  he  has  not
'realized  them,  he  must  strive  to  do  so.  But  if  he  finds
that  he  has  done  so,  then  he  should  dwell  on  in  this
selfsame  joy  and  bliss,  day  and  night  immersed  in
studious  aspiration  for  right  dispositions.

For,  SJripucta,  all  those  recluses  or  brahmins  who
have  in  the  past  observed  purity  in  collecting  aims,
have  done  so  by  constant  review  and  self-questioning;
and  so  too  it  shall  always  be  in  days  to  come,  as  it  is
to-day.  Therefore,  Ssriputta,  you  must  study  by
constant  review  to  observe  purity  in  collecting  alms.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Sariputta  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said-


CLII.  INDRIYA-BHAVANA-SUTTA,

CULTURE  Of  FACULTIES.

[296]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Kajangala  in  the  Mukhelu  grove,  the
youi^  brahmin  Uttara,  a  pupil  of  the  brahmia  PsrS-
sariya,  came  to  the  Lord  and  after  exchange  of  civil
greetings  took  his  seat  to  one  side.  As  he  sat  there,
the  Lord  asked  whether  the  brahmin  P&rSsariya  taught
his  disciples  the  development  of  faculties.


M.  m-  399.


CULTURE  07  FACULTIES.


325


Yes»  he  does,  Gocama.

And  what  is  his  teachm<^  on  this  matter?

•  It  U  when  the  man  neither  sees  forms  with  his  eyes
nor  hears  sounds  with  his  ear.

On  that  showing,  U  tears,  the  blind  and  the  deaf  have
developed  their  faculties, — according  to  the  brahmin
P&risarlysu  For  a  blind  man  can  see  no  forms  nor  can
a  deaf  man  hear  sounds.

At  these  words  U  tears  sat  silent  and  upset,  with  his
shoulders  hunched  up  and  his  eyes  downcast,  much
exercised  in  mind  but  hading  no  words  to  utter.

Seeing  the  state  the  young  brahmin  was  in,  the  Lord
observed  to  Ananda  chat  there  was  a  difference  between
the  development  of  the  faculties  as  taught  by  the
brahmin  Pfiritsariya  and  the  consummate  ^velopment
of  the  Rule  of  the  Noble.

Now,  Lord,  is  the  time;  now.  Blessed  One,  is  the
time  for  the  Lord  to  teach  [2d9l  the  consummate
development  of  the  faculties  according  to  the  Rule  of
the  Noble.

Well  then,  Ananda,  listen  and  pay  attention ;  and  I
will  speak.  Ves,  sir,  said  Ananda  In  assent ;  and  the
Lord  began : —

How  does  the  consummate  development  of  the
faculties  come  about  in  the  rule  of  the  Noble?— Take
the  case  of  an  Almsman  in  whom,  as  he  sees  a  given
form,  there  arises  a  something  agreeable  or  dis^ree-
able  or  neither,  Recognising  the  fact,  he  bethinks
him  chat  this  something  which  arose  in  him  arose
because  of  something  compounded  and  material,  but
that  the  good  and  excellent  thing  is  poised  indifference.
So  the  someebiog  agreeable,  or  disa^eeable,  or  neutral
is  stilled,  and  poised,  indifference  is  established.  It  is
just  like  a  man  with  eyes  to  see  who,  having  opened
iis  eyes,  then  doses  them,  or  who,  havi^  dosed  his
eyes,  then  opens  them  again,  Just  with  the  same
speed  and  swiftness  and  ease,  indifference  is  estab¬
lished,  and  the  something  agreeable — or  disagreeable
—or  neutral — is  laid  to  rest.  This  is  called  uie  con¬
summate  development  of  the  faculties  in  the  Rule  of


^26  CLIt  IKX>RIYA-BHAVANA“8UTTA-  M.iiujoft

the  Noble,  with  reference  to  the  forms  which*  the  eye
sees.

Further*  as  the  Almsman  hears  a  sound,  there  arises*
in  him  a  something  agreeable  or  .  .  .  indifference  is
established.  Just  as  a  strongman  can  snap  his  fingers
with  ease^  so,  with  the  same  speed  .  .  .  the  Rule  of
the  Noble,  with  reference  to  the  sounds  the  car  hears,

Further,  as  the  Almsman  smells  an  odour,  there
arises  in  him  a  some  thing — agreeable.  .  .  indifference
is  established.  Just  as  1800]  on  an  upstanding  lotus-
leaf,  as  yet  unfurled,  drops  of  water  come  about  it  but,
finding  no  resiiiw-place,  glide  off,  so,  with  the  same
speed  ...  the  Rule  of  the  Noble,  with  reference  to
the  odours  the  nose  smells.

Further,  as  the  Almsman  with  his  tongue  tastes  a
savour,  there  arises  in  him  .  .  .  indifference  is  estab¬
lished.  Just  as  a  strong  man,  with  a  fleck  of  mucus
collected  on  his  tongue-tip,  can  with  ease  spit  it  out,  so
with  the  same  speed  .  .  .  Noble,  with  reference  to  the
savours  the  tongue  tastes.

Further,  as  uie  Almsman  with  his  body  touches  a
tangible  thing,  there  arises  in  him  .  .  .  indifference  is
established.  Just  as  a  strong  man  can  stretch  out  his
retracted  arm  or  retract  his  outstretched  arm,  so  with
the  same  speed  .  .  .  Noble,  with  reference  to  tangible
tilings  which  the  body  touches.

Further,  as  the  Almsman  with  his  mind  cc^nlses  a
mental  object,  there  arises  in  him  .  .  .  indifference  is
established.  Just  as  a  man  might  let  two  or  three
drops  of  water  fall  on  a  red-hot  sheet  of  iron,  and  then,
slow  though  the  fall  of  those  water-drops,  they  speedily
shrivd  up  and  disappear, — so  with  the  same  speed  .  . .
Noble,  with  reference  to  mental  objects  which  the
mind  cognizes.

Thus,  Ananda,  does  the  consummate  development
of  the  faculties  come  about  in  the  Rule  of  the  Noble.

How  now  does  the  Almsman  who  is  still  under
training  come  to  enter  the  true  path  ? — Take  the  case
of  an  AJmsman  in  whom,  as  he  sees  a  given  form — or
beam  a  sound  etc, — ,  there  arises  a  something — agree-


M.ili.  SOI.  CULTURE  OF  FACULTIKS.  $27

able,  or  disagreeable,  or  neither — and  on  its  arising  he
is  filled  with  loathing  and  abhorrence  and  disgust. —
.[801]  This  is  how  he  comes  to  enter  the  true  path.

Lastly,  how  comes  about  the  Noble  development  of
faculties? — Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  in  whom,  as
he  sees  a  given  form*^r  hears  a  sound  etc. — ,  there
arises  a  something — agreeable,  or  disagreeable,  or
neither.  Should  his  desire  be  to  live  without  con¬
sciousness  of  the  loathsomeness  of  the  loathsome,  with¬
out  that  consciQusness  he  lives.  Should  his  desire  be
to  live  with  consciousness  of  the  loathsomeness  of  the
loathsome,  with  that  consciousness  he  lives.  Should  his
desire  be  to  live  without  consciousness  of  the  loathsome*
ness  alike  of  the  loathsome  and  the  unloathsome,  without
that  consciousness  he  lives.  Should  his  desire  be  to
live  with  consciousness  of  the  loathsomeness  alike  of
the  unloathsome  and  the  loathsome,  with  that  con¬
sciousness  he  lives.  Should  his  desire  be  to  be  quit
and  rid  of  both  the  loathsome  and  the  unloathsome
[802]  and  to  live  in  poised  indifference,  mindful  and
alive  to  everything, — then  in  poised  indifference  be
livM,  mindful  and  alive  to  everything. — That  is  how
the  Noble  come  to  developed  faculties.

Thus,  Ananda,  I  have  taught  the  consummate
development  of  the  faculties  in  die  Rule  of  the  Noble  ;
I  have  taught  how  the  Almsman  under  training  comes
to  enter  the  true  path ;  1  have  taught  how  there  comes
the  Noble  development  of  faculties,  All  that  a  fond
and  compassionate  teacher  can  do  for  bis  disciples  out
of  his  compassion  for  them, — all  that  have  f  done  for
you.  Here,  Ananda,  are  trees  to  sic  under ;  here  are
the  abodes  of  solitude.  Ponder  deeply  and  never  flag;
lay  not  up  remorse  for  yourselves  hereafter ; — this  is
my  ejdiortation  to  you.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said


THE  END.


INDEX.

By  MRS.  RHYS  DAVIDS.


[Irt  (b«  G«e«(ml  Indtx  it  btt  been  »ou|bt  not  oply  to  aid  Ibe  r«*d»f  io  th«

ordiotry  vsy  ol  reforonn^  but  iJso  to  rurd  bSis  lo  throo  wijv.

r.  Tu  Eapl(«b  Innaktor  of  (oldor)  riJi  htj  oot  only  to  copo  ai  boat  w(b  ralativo
poverty  words  or  of  neanioff  ia  bit  own  Uorvifet  ^vT*  but  alfo^  in  ochof  0OO«
Wxto.  with  a  aorilar  poverty  is  Pali.  BuddhUo  wai  ooe  of, the  forw^  rem^e*  of
tbo  Indies  mnd.  It  had  to  uie  currant  words  for  aoisotliiitf  to  whl<b  It  was  ^vlof
new  ralwOi  and  for  which  it  ladced  ths  word.  It  app^eo  for  inicaoM  GO  Bias  aa
WiVar.  bot  bad  no  word  for  will,  wllar.  Words  for  esort.  aaerrv.  avorboo.  dsaire.


^ba  ooava^^a.

0.  A  Pali  ptaaoe  loay  often  ba  fUy  rondored  by  a  ‘frefr’  traosJatioB.  Tlta  £^Uib
reader  incUoas  to  read.  In  aacfi,  a  Utaral  rcodori^,  tad  aay  oeott  dtabook  Moajnv
whiisseettbeca  'silace  is  best*  (L  238) ;  thb b oot an aclKrion but UgmJct
'taba  oo  tMubie.*

3.  Tba  oceurmir  often  orsaidom  lo  1  book  may  ba  a  nattar  of  historical  aietlfbaeca.
tha  occarrasca  of  ‘Trutb-ftnder*  rather  tbie  of*  Buodba’;  the

occunemaefa'  Mrk*  atSbvaRbi  1  quUdispieportionala  number  of  timn  ie  the  nfaof
awaDderin^teacAer;  the  rtcratioe  of^  Deftvenoce  *  aeaBOtaabaeet  in  tha  l^t  sermon,
bata  iray  ooouiJ  d^lOBnsot  is  a  aank's  ideal  of  Ida.  Tb«  founder's  can^  note
it  the  Middle  WM^Mber^e  of  the  *areryTnaB  *^aa  of  pricoary  religloee  impeetaiK*.
^B«e  tbo  eahauiova  wiMeecmtion  io  such  case*,  wfaart  a  Menn  n)i(hi  be  deemed
bsfter,  it  gives  co  UmwiisUrUai  sigBlfvcanca  of  thb  bind  into  trilef.J

Abhaya._  QoUnnaa,  i.  lii  f.  Ajitssattu,  king.  i.  165 :  It.  61,  {$9

Abhibbu,  i.  1  Ajita  Kesa-Kainbati,  1. 144, 179;  as

Abhidhamma.  i.  15^  ^33;  n.  138  Al&ra  KiUma,  teach ar,  1.  115  f.,
Abbiya-Kacciaa,  diaci^,  ii  Sdf  iso;  ii.  48
Abaoliua  {ammi/Ut),\L  215  Alive  to  (fiafiss^vefUyoJf},  I.  30J.

Accepted,  m  Truth  (saa^^A/io)  /u  PorposeRil

AccoMtan-t,  -toy,  H.  1 5J  All  (the),  t.  337, 351  f. ;  allnos,  Mf,

Acela-Kassapa,  li.  326  AU-kaowing,  alf.aeeiDfi’,  of  Nita,  i,;

Achieved  much,  i.  13;  d.  16  f.,  isj;  of  Gctama^  who

Aciravata.  aovic^  ;L  239  daoioe  It,  L  340 ;  U.  67,  sd$ :  <f.  u

AriraTatt,  river,  k  60,  62  36$  i  of  other  teenAer#,  i.  3^

Acttona,  JM  Deed  Alins,  >.  140

Acts,  set  Dud  Almsiean,  1,  t  ^sim.  Keaderad

Adew,  I  254  fn  3*3  *  it  x6  ‘  Brother,’  L  6 ;  the  Ftve,  i.  Z2i,

Adhikakka,  fbit,  l  28  177  ^  ii.  48

Adjudicotioiis  (fourX  ii.  141  AJmswones,  i.  85,  331 ;  K.  aooi

Aeoosp  i,  366  £  Aloof  set  SoUtodiL

Affiicnoa  ^apadd^va)  for  master  AlterutioD,  i&  body  and  miaA  ii.

and  disciple,  ii.  221  284  f.

Afes.  of  man  (Mwwn),  i.  366  Ambaia^ika.  i.  297

Agrtated,  j.  182  Ajnhro$ia{l),  j,  77,  tJ5,  rdr

ASTicolture,  ii.  I13  Amity, J49, 330  f.,  286

Aggivesaana,  stt  Saccaka,  Digba-  Aoalogues  (ofoidA^fmA  ft.  293
oakha  Analysis  (vtftsdih/jietrdi  L  208.

Ahead,  su  Ideal  iL  scy  (nrf/iiru

Aims,  1.222  6«i5e),  il.  246.  (e^Aqy'oir^),  it.

."^r,  L  *37  273  ^  '

328


IKDEX.


329


Auaiida  (attendant  disciple),  i.  113,
153  i.,  170,  *59  3oa»  3*9,  36? ;
»■  *3  39»  59  U  *40,  153,

►  >»•  «88,  199,  ate,  «t7,  «3  f.,

«3,  299  f*’  303,  3*5
AaAibapkjjdika.  11. 30a  f.
Aakha^e^ka^a  park,  1.  4  12,
a$.  2%  4*,  59,  71.  74, 79,  82,  85,
9c^  too,  104,  108,  1:3,  125,  133,
143.  1(7,  183.  307,  219,  332,  837,
334,386»  300,  304,  308,  3M,  34t  j
11.  13,  3!»  30,  $2,  56,  59,  84,  100.

llj,  131,  J7o,i73r  177,  180,  j88,

J9f  199,  30$,  an,  314.  »33,  339,
348,  33^  36r,  363,  367,  86B,  378,
«3,  *«,  303,  3©7,  309,  353,  3JS,
3*9

AnceMry,  il.  joa
Anc^tortte,  ii.  8t

Aagt'9,  i.  191,  t99>359,  318;  ii.  2,
78

AnffTraae,  brahmia,  li.  97,  1 14
Atunjbin^  dcKipie.  \C  $0
AnwaZ,  i.  347

paiofol  leie,  ii.  3$i
vorid,  i.  49;  ii.  a$i
AoimaZeolie,  i.  5^  270
Anaibiktioaiim,  1 43, 99, 366,  S/e
Kxiateoce  (boo*)

AattU),  I  10!

AatitbeM*  (four),  to  hi^ar  Life  (/rZ
MB'b.  I  oeeUndoaa),  i.  365
Aata,  white,  i.  330
Aseigi/K  *  Weaderer  ’  ii.  !
Anajudd^  db»ciple.t.  148  153

3*9  j  ii,  199, 339  £„  34$  f.

Apa^  townabip,  i.  359, 318 :  il  79
ApoLofv  (foraulA),  i.  318  j  li.  395
App«^tlOD.IL  34$
Appeth«(AV»X*-^^5:

m  Coaecoosneai.  S/e  ai»  Pea*

M.  73,  83,  174-

m  Greed,

L  J38.  bepond  1.  347

Apprec^tion,  Me  S(7udB7.*
Apprdjttd,  L  308
Anbat(e)  (Mliati),  L  i,  n.  t,  a  fl,  33,
82,  /03>  ro7,  126,  Ido,  163,  175,
197.  738,  *53,  *8*,  345»  349  i  U*
«,  3^,4^  54, 77, 8li  83,  *57*

3CO,  338.  (fewvX  1*  3*6.
u  1 32.  See  oJtQ  Adepc
Ardent,  ardoor  L  149;

ii,  6,  243  f.  (cJie/uia),  \.  336
Aigoiog  about  one's  adf,  i.  70
AiBBeat^  il.  6
A<q(be.  disdpie,  i.  90


Aritfba,  Paeeeka  Buddha,  ii.  193  f.
An  ya  (aoble),  1. 1 97.  lew  0^  i.  2$9.

—aruets.  1.290.  Se/ainCnid,

Dbamma,  Dlsclj:^  KoowJedge,
Truths,  ruleof,  1.3:4
Arrack,  it.  ad

Ascetic  i.  53,  67  i,  320.

(aakeaV  i.  170,  bovine,  casine,
i.  378  f.

Asceticism,  1,364.  ibnxiutaof,i.  $3.

348;  il.  tft  93
Asila  Devtfa.  ttgt,  1).  87
Aspiration(s)  I,  139.

c  4$.  I  i.  246

Aseaji,  discl^e,  of  the  first  five,  i.

163,  334

AaaaUynna,  brahmin,  once  a  Wan*
derer,  li.  84  f.

AsMipura,  1.  ipr.  190
Asiem biles  (eight),  i.  49
Assent,  formula  of,  I.  132,  148, 164,
add,  371, 381, 28$,  29?i  344,  34?.
353:  n.3i,  33,  46,  50,78.  89,9*1
ICO,  103,  1 19,  ii),  *59.  J»
Asiursnce  1. 40.  {a/Aa~

^nda),  ii.  1 16
Asura's,  I  iSs

Atone  {niUkirea  vaiiaiCi,  L  aid
Attachment  (M/ddSlaa),  i.  fio,  43,
*33.  *38.  *'4343  ;  ii'  **o>  *6*,

*34.  {u^a/iAt^  ti.  ICO,  and  m
11,  root  of,  depenceat  00  (m*
uMdina).  il,  153.  &cGon  (JtkaM-
of 164. 174.  Onp.^ef
I-  net  in  He  lext;  a  Commetdary
£tess-

AitalnnMnt(t),  U  150
Attendant  pMomena  !k

3l8

AlcenboB,  1  317,  338.  (mptX  IL  3,
6$.  (to  drawX  1. 86
Atfaeka,  brebndn,  li.  97, 1 14
A^baka.  town,  i.  %y
Attitudes,  good  aod  bad  {tU.  dAoM-
mdX  il.  *77  f
At&ibute,  lu  348  f
Aura,  ii  245  f.

Aostenties  (i^pe'^AsxnssJX  i  336 ;


88,


386


114,  **S.

Autbonty  Tradition

Avail,  of  freatf  I  w
AvaBtipuR^  bog,  li  43
Avoidance  (per^j/a^),  l  7

Babe.i.  >»8;  ii  13.  *56
Bdbukft,  river,  i.  38
B&bumatt,  river,  1. 36


330


INDEX.


Bakhtla,  <Usciple,  li.  22$  f.

B&Uka,  village*  1.  i6i
B&lakaiQ9aklra*gijna,  ii.  34$
Bao<^t.  i.  61,  90,  134
Banisb*  this  by  Ibat,  ii.  tZi
Dalh*  tbeioper,  1.  28
3&tbiog,  u  28*  113 i>.  24*  36,  ioa*
263.  relijrloas  rice,  1. 2vs
Becoming  lilce  (tb<»e),  I-  332
Behaviour,  ii.  6oi;  100  C
BeiQg  aod  ooc-beuig.  Su  Talk,
beastly

Belief,  conAdence  (Jasiaa).  t.  42.

faith,  ii.  V,  131
Bellevess,  uiIJqw.  u  42
Beluva,  hamlet,  i.  251
Besares.  1 121 ;  ii.  2c,  8^  296
Best,  acQis  (BrahraaO.  9^
BbaddSli,  discipl^  1. 312
Bh^ga,  couotiy,  u  69 ;  li.  46
Bhs^ava,  pott».  m  290
Bbagu,  braemin,  iL  97?  1^4
Bhagu,  diedple,  U329;  li.  24S
SbaBAa,  u.  299

BbSradvftja,  bcabrnb.  ii.  97>  lod,
ri4

Bb&iadv^a  gotra,  brahroici,  1.  353
Bbesakali.  Groves
BbCUaija,  disdple,  il.  236  f.

Billers,  i.32S

BimWHra,  king,  69 ;  ii.  52. 8o.9<
Bir^  1 38,  !87. 306,  330 1  li.  296  f.
<ooc«pt>Oo,  i.  189;  ssii.  89.  o(
a  Bodbisat,  IL  22$

Black  rock,  1. 67

Bleobbes,  i.  18 1

Blessed  <Oa«)»tbe  Lord>  u  119.

{Strata},  i  ^

Blessing  (MkafAsa),  I  128,  dr.
fruit,  L  272

Bliss  (tviia).  u  17?  aod  passm-
absolute,  iL  19.  (ds/ta^rd),  I
290  i  (teaX  ii.  209>  de«^(  I  3$6.
(^X  ii  3®S-  pr«®nb  '*

‘1*344

Blissful  qualities  (dV.  faiih'vortby,
paiSd^/(t),  ii.  160  f.

Blood  (sot  m  testX  L  260

Bo(*cree<»dv(ii^  I.  12I

Bodhi,  yu  46  f.

BodJasuo,  i.  (3,  79*  "$«  >73 1  >i
122,  223  U  MB

Body,  fonsola  of,  1. 352 ;  il.  9,  m.
as  earth,  i.  133  t,  300  f.  as  otfaer
elemeats,  i.  ^  {,  dead,  i.  63  {■,
211,  364;  ti.  38.  fraX  i>  242.
tveary,  i.  80.  a»au  as  b.,  i.  364.


as  o  ot  selX  rve  Self.  *s  esdi&g,  9.
S93.  the  other  body,  ii.  io>
mestiog  of,  i.  53  f«,  l7l  f«  with
senses,  11.2:5.  asdmiBd,i.  i79f*.
22  J,  247.  b.  word  and  thought,
i.  i;o  f.,  22:,  247«  mindfulness
as  to,  1.  246 ;  ofui  tea  Miadfsl-
aese,  applicatioos  etc.  of.
Bondages  i.  72  i-

Bonds  1. 6, 24, 308  ^

SIX ;  ii.  27»  7^  295-  ^

steers.  329

Bom,  happMS  to  be  (AV.  wbarever
is  birta  of  tbe  *self*«eateO»

102

Boone  (pari^o:Ana\  1.  180
Bowl,  example  of  dialects,  11*  288,
and  see  EHilecta.

BnbmE,  I.  1,  48  f  .  $9*  98,  r97,
202  f. ;  ii.  84,

Psychic  powee,  formal^  Uni'
verse.  B.  Baka,  u  234.  $abam-
pat(,  i.  1X9,  326.  Saoatikiimbn,

r,  258.  ‘  Wy  B.'  (wf  in  *atfX  «*
III.  B.  world,  il'  42«.  69,  t07*

union  with,  u.  Ii8.  «viliKr^  taa
Radiant  thoughts.

Brahm&yu,  brabxnln,  u.  70
Brahmin,  i.  12  f,  48,  S9i  >9l,  lt6,
197,  202  f. ;  li.  77>  84»212  32**

recluse  and,  or,  >•  43,  $6,  and
passim-  tbe  true,  saint,  1.76;  ii  •
uo.  householders,  i.  241.  good
mil  ofi  i>  e66*  prtfeasions  oXu«
43  84f-.93f'*  toff.

Bceatbing,suneaded,i.  175*  oxe^
cises.  i.  300?. :  ii.  20t  f*  ,

33ridge  over  mire,  i-  313
Bisdaba,  Dbacnma,  Sanebi,  L  26 1;
il  3, 300.  full  formula  of  oae  or
all,  i.  128,  190,  202,  354 ;  ii*  20,
79,93,109,232,291,321.  'what
a  Buddha il  $0
Buddhss,  1 135,  277 H.  223  f
Bullion,  il  32

Bustle  (ibur  Pall  wotds),  il  112  t
Butchenog,  i.  248

Cabins,  ii.  87

Call  (mauSfaX  ii.  5d

Cblm  (sftmSifaX  li.  293.  c*  and

iAsigbt  (or  inCuitiosX  i*  348
3«V  3*4

Can]>cowosbip,  1.  tl?

Campi,  L  246
Caa^lelcappa,  n.  tao  f.

Caodana,  oeva,  li.  267


IVDEX


331


CmM,  brabmln,  ii.  93  U  108, 116

Caakon  (iJtfPdX  xxih :  i.  3,4>i6,
*$.  »7.  39.  47  (;  $0.  5«.  74.  *«•

•  f02,  tn,  I9i»  134.  131,  151.  136,

160,  j68,  (78,  197,  Ml,  906, 339.

246, 2  $0  C,  35$,  36^  363, 3 3  (
3J7,  $y>>  33^  34^5.  34S.  346.  349.
370;  II.  22,  ai,  aa,  83,  13c,  157,
i4a,  m,  x8g,  t9S  f.,  200,  air,
2t4,  9T6,  218,  23$.  313.  3^4. 3i8
Ca&aAlet]  icriplureJi  ii.  aao
C«rp«*,  Ii  47  ,  ^

Camaf«,  i.  i«S  f-  •  ^  **>“*l^*

Carul  '•  3i6:

QwgQn  (Aa  aaiembly).  i\.  9>*
(U^d),  ii.  roa
Cftiuma,  i.  324

Cauial.  la*',  I.  187  5  '*•  >7.  ‘89.
denied,  i.  293.  3^5!  <8$.  :94.

'99

CasMiDOfu  ii*  67

Cuje  I  134.  <84  f.

(ebaiaoO.  I*  1381  ii.  i83
Ca?e,  i  193,  314.  38a.  (fioai'a),  1.

77.  »53

CeiuUcD,  ru  Kinftoa  and  Ponr
Truth*  tan>QU4.  ha»iuc(H/n7>
JA^-khamma),  ii.  al6
CUngie,  i.  ds,  242 ;  il-  284.  un.
chacLgeable,  I  95-  changeless-
oees.QteraaLadi
Cbanaa  (^scipU),  il.  30$.
Saicidft.

Chant,  rep^,  reheane,  ii.  9;
Cbaplaio,  ua49

Cbaeur  (of  Order,  nor  worded  lo

*  Pali),  n.  m
Charioteer,  la??,  285
Chared  gMoao.  i.  S5<  '93.  3H
Oiaaticy,  K.  114
Chatter,!.  168
<>n4,  i,  sS4,  Babe

Chromic  (0rmfiMAa),  if.  3d
C^re  up,  ii  38

u.  301

Classes  (fiw),  1 252  j  fi  07  *oo  f.
intermarrisife  m.  i'«  36  £  5«#
Brahmin,  pretenriona
deavio^,  j.  138,  and  r«  Attadi-
meni

{p&Hmekkha),  li.

5, 14C


Comfort,  ii  2^  -les*.  x-  36$
C^raerc^  ii.  1 13
Compiny  (h’r,  eumberaX  ^'7
Compassion  (anuioM^S^y  1.  9.  *7
54,  83,  85  £,  138;  ii.  it8,  137.
154,  2«  I,  3*7-  (pity,  ierwph), '•
201,  084,  303 !  ii.  MI.  Saa  «i»
Goiama,  teacher
Coioplate  (ifvela),  i.  255
Complex  (wiiWrw),  i- 280
Complexion,  i.  (21, 176, 278 :  11.323
Componenci  m  Plastic  Forces
Composite,  the.  ii.  132

Comprehend,  U.  320^  324
ComprehensioB,  seem?  with  n^ht,

1.  39

Comrades,  ue  Lift,  fellows  10
higher

Concentration,  ).  8,  47,  81,  83  f.,
ltd  f.,  146.  ‘54,  '78,  Mi.a'js

194  fv  215,  *46

Conception,  m  Birth
CoceUiatory  thii^,  H.  i44

,CondusJ0ii(«<tfA),  li  laa

Concert,  I.  149,  *3'.

Coaiimn,  it.  te

Condidoos,  ttt  Cause,  (faetajia),

t  200,  311  ,  .

Conduct  (iarntnim), ».  184*

I  ySi  and  the  heieafier.  u  aoi.

Q.  '13

Coafeeron  U.  14' t

Confidence  (vrsir^’a),  u  346.

iscdMi  il.  48
Ctmfidest  (Mdiwa),  \u  67
(^nfirroadon  (t^famfiadSii  n.  295

Conftmtenilty  ihUMusoM-

gia.  fiUkkA^  i.  20, 28  ri.
CMgd,fbrmala,  I.  179  .

ConjuBCtton  (conJtmecnreX  u  lep
Coomotatloi^  deootatloa,  I  a  12
Conqueror^  1.  i3t
CMOueat*  ii.  37

CoasrisBttous  (/£/.  fiudtTU),  |.  X9>,
856

Consdousnesf  Ca»fi45),  li.  132,  3^7*
realm  of  (foMdguid),  1.  27-  {idf
«9«X  i'  38.  *37,  '6a,  184 1,  ao8,
as?,  SM.  J43,  i  »92,  305/
»J?  ^p/%  STayS  I  siace^
of  i-  X,  43, 66,  7X,  76,

8 1 , 86,  »  130, 145 ,  *77,  *  *9*1

197,  «8, 331 , 2  46, 359, 3 17, 3'»
334.  S35»  353  5  ii-  *0,  49.  60,  97,
124


333


INDEX.


CoD$i&t9i)cy,  i'  166, 351

Con&^riatioa  {sara^^  ii'  140>  Ste

Comfort

C<m$titueGt$T  ste  PUstic  Forces.
{ania\  i.  347

CoDsumirisw  {aeeanla\  u  i8o.

i.  247  >'

c.  perfe^ion,  11.  is
CoDsuomistioii  f.^ar{yot&/ia\  v  scK
Couitcu  1 3T,  44*  77, 134,  1*6,  si6 :
It.  164.  166,  303.  six  groups  oC.
li.S78f.,  Ml,  315
Co0tedsfi«d,  t.  314
CoDteupleciofi,  i.  303
CoAteei,  i .  legi  i  a9«  3ao.
il.  200

Conongeat  on  {Ut-  U  .  .  •  is  oocX
1.  30c

CoPUOv«Tsi4ii»,  i'  162
Convene,  U  209
CoBvmioo.  i.  234
Corporeal  faiboroed  tbe  (iSyataX-
Aw). ).  3j6
Corruptioo,  1.  303
.  Coaotnr'iRitnfti,  i.  358
Couaierpart,  1 218
Coune  (j^atipadS).  Stt  Middle
Way,  ISlX.  Pcsctice
CovenngQp,  ii.  zn.  143
CovetoQsoen,covecise(a4>to>’AA).  1.
130,  229;  ii.  151,  294.  {/ftriO,

U.  221

Cow,  cattle,  1. 1 57, 159, 279 ;  i'  >  *©4
'kerd,  I.  55.  at  ncrifice, ;.  249
Craviof  (fiwAsX  i«  8,  37,  43  (■>  95.
Z18,  180, •  X88  f.,  191,  209,  214.
356 »  ii'  35t  XII.  147.  *96,  281,
297«  ^5istX“»3XS'  ([a~yam//ta-
.y»«X  lu  28 1.  I  3.

CttiXt,  U  215,  w
Creator  (itsar^  ji.  127, 130
Crearures,  linog  things,  beings,
9.  293.  ^5.  thirty-six  tracks  m,
il  278  f.  wild,  ii.  64
Creed  (Aa/tuna),  u  44,  45.  (jad-
dM),  1.  J20.  (s&tofia},  Ii.  c6.
(0^*0, '  »3*  f-  (other),  i.  272,
founders  Q({tii{iaiani),  11.  2
Creeper,  I  220
Crocodile  Peak,  i.  69
Ccossiog  the  streara,  i.  160  f.  the
flood,  i.  idS

Crows  (-goal,  PfifSna),  ii.  38
Cultivate  w^nuVX  i.  222  f.

Calrute  (M6%>^nS),  i-  8.  Sft
Develop,  Grow,  ^cboolisg
Cunda,  ootice,  ii.  140


Current  pbraaeolMy  (AV.  what  is
said  in  (he  worit^l,  i.  333
Ctury,  j.  171,319;  ii-  5.  *9,74
Curse,  power  of:  (0)  rishls’,  i.  271.  e
(3)  brahtnins*,  ii.  88
Cushion  for  head,  i.  !o6

Dap^a,  wilderness^  i.  271
Da^pApi,  Sakyan,  i.  j6
Dasaortu  bouseboldtr,  1.  251
DMd,  oblations  to,  U.  87  :  .ter  9is9
Body,  to  tbe  world  (tM^<!oX  ’I*

1  ^35

!  Death,  ii>  297-  and  trance,  l>  211.
d.  or  deauy  woe^  11.  zfo
Peathlessuesa,  U4  Ambrosia(l)

Debt,  i.  1 19. 194

Decay,  il  3^.  and  desUsi  i.  3, 86,
114.  *37,  t97»  239.  306,  330;  ii-
294.  youdi and,!.  37,63
Deceit  (rtfAjfd),  i.  199
Decoy,  1.8 1

Deed,  i.  267  {■  blade,  brighc.  I-
280.  harvest,  result  of,  lu  $<,
274.  without  rerul^  i  289, 36$  ^
Sa  ais4  Cause,  deoled.  rwolt
ant  of  having  (is*]eSeotiral

light),  il.  278.  d.  word  and
thought,  su  Body,  sell^ees,  >1.
j66.  done  by  one's  seh)  ii.  256 :
ii.  256.  divide  people,  lu  268  f.
Deer,  i.  208  f.

DefiJemeni,  1. 80
Delight  and  III,  It.  307
Deliverance  (vfmtd/i),  I  2,  17.  37,
$2,  98,  103,  ti8,  137,  i$4i  156,
168,  j8o  1, 190  {.,  201,  209.

218,  246,  2$o  f.,  238,  26i  3JI,

313.  315.  331/  33^1 340,  340,  353.
370;  ji.  25,  **  U  55.  fSO,  »39.
150,  173,  201.  204,  214  fi.  *r6  f..
235, 240  U  26t ,  3  IS,  3 1 5, 320. 324.
(««eAU). ) ,  24, 47, 334.  ( aght),
ii,  7.  i,  304.  (7W2*

mt/eC'),  i  4^.  {fuueWM),
temporary,  1. 142.  tbe  noble,  li.
154,  difference  in,  ii.  68
Delosion  (waAsX  i>  18  f>,  83;  ii,  33.

a»yul(Ajta),  u  309.  S*e  oiM
>,  illasioo.

Demerit,  i.  267  f.

Dependence  (u6ddAfia\  i.  187
Desire  (nieMX  1.  64,  222 ;  il  i6«.

I  (vuaOiAa),  i  124.  carnal
I  /oAno),  ii.  227.  Ste  also  Will.

J  to  esecpe«not  to  get),  li.

I  *9?


INDEX.


DesriQies  i.  49'

Ueiciay.  Set  Fate.

Deuctamtiit,  to  perfect  m  {hr&JuA

i*  2^

Deradeea^  towothip.  )t.

Devedattt,  i.  139.  2S5
l>ev«(e](d«i(iae,|0^  /Amama  beings
in  other  wtriis),  1. 49  '5<^«

175,  '8'*  »8.  295»  367  J  *8,
3CS  6$,  107,  132,  213,  163  f.,  304,
3r$.  Abhaenre,  I  t,  257,  tree
(d.y  i.  330.  reborHi  ii.  66.
VMuppbate,  i.  i»  }37>  Subhe*
kiMa.  I.  ii  237i  2bi.  (bur  other
ftoupii  U.24 1.  DrtbmftSi  eeer.  f.
Devaka(a>poot,  i.  362
Dev^op  (vuddAt),  i.d6.  {Mitfreii),
i»:^322ril<  99)  J24
Devalcpmeei.  of  faculties,  ii.  32$  f.

eoaiuDraatadi  ii.  325
Davotee.  See  Ascetic
Devotion  to  ionu/tga).  ii- 187  f.
DbaamadioBl,  dUciple.  i.  213  f.
Dblnafllifti,  brtboio,  iu  103  £
DhifiiA^li  hrthoioee,  ii.  lat  f.
Dialeeti,  e.jf.  c(,  i.  121.  3541  366  f.

ii.  2S8,  afid  soo  Dowl.
DiewicQGsIy.  i.  3^

Diet,  freodoTB  \a,  i.  27.  See  Food.
DiAVrocce  (Goluui'a  and  others*
tencbia^ ),  L  59^  In  soon'i  facal-
tic*,  etc,  i,  ill.  323)  33^ i

til

Dighca'&iry/  i.  (51
D^bt  Kirtysaa,  11.  62  £

D«U  Tapaa*.  J41D.  I.  26?  £
Difhasakna,  ‘  Wsboderer/  i.  351
DifORioA,  good,  ii.  49


Dirt,  «u  (Meifltf).  y.  23
Diaeard,  U.  320

DijcmBeat  (e^atrawl).  1.  209
Dtsdfto  (rdcwAf),  I  9,  168  pashta.
wh^  to  dog  maatoFs  fbocsteps,
ii.  23a  disciple's  aclmowle*^*
Bene  C8)nada),  i.  ry,  08 ;  (as*
seat,  g.pX  (Dobk),  i<  238 :  if.  1  s  i .
esteem,  iL  9 ;  o^re  Master
Dircoorse,  fonmait,  L  272 ;  iL  77
Discussion  ball,  ii.  l,  13
Disgust,  i.  30J  f. ;  i>.  292,  3(4,  St8,
327

P&Btegraticn  etc.  of  worid.  See
Fal»rtb,  recall  of

Disposer  (/sA  'maker,  crearor’),  1.

«35


Dispositions.  See  Coosciousnass,
states  ^

Disputes.  See  (Quarrels
DissadsfactiODS,  li.  280
Distraction  i  134

Distress  {daratba)^  \i.  215  f.

Docile,  t,  88

Doctrina  id^amma),  i.  9  Co/’
not  in  tezCi^  48,  72,  86.  93,  roo,
J 13,  1(6  £,  i44i  178.  229,  328,
335,  35 J.  369;  5CS  (45)  22a
29(>3IS*  (nlrMo),  !•  l6d.  truth
of  {^•dkamma).  i.  33.  of  the
Noble,  i.  1,93 :  iu  102, 165.  tod
Rule,  see  Kule.  excellent
purlsa-\  \.  t,  95.  self-avolv^

I.  45.  hard,  i.  143  :  ?}•

lieu  of  teacher,!.  989;  li.  l6e.
•mongers  (/it.  knowtrs  of  d.}
ti.  100.  transcendent,  11.  102.
GotiBia's,  ii.  (37  f.  lord  of
(•idmf).  iu244.  bow  preached,

II.  387
Dm,  I  279

Daags,  deads  1. 67  £,281,

341.  deed,  word,  auad.M  Body
DonatioQS,  grade  in.  ii.300.  purity
in,  n.  30t

Doom  {dvggatii.  u  300 ;  ii.  44  (net

in  PaU),  275

Door,  i.  240.  Goiama  at  the,  u
ii4i  U.  63.  ef  the  deatblaea,  1.
119,  161

Doubt,  i.  72,  102,  168,  (86,  308,
353;f

Dreaded,  1.  323
Dreams,  1.  ^

DumtDUkba,  a  Ucebavi,  L  167

DQsL  a  Mlia,  i.  940

Doty  (Atertfif),  U  199.  (ki^earapS-

i-  235


Ear  ^  ceJenia] '  (of  next  world).  1
46)348,  355;  tO,2JO
Earth,  i.  i,  183,  237.  See  else
EleoMAta

Ease  imihaX  appiais«i:Deat  u.
286

Eastacn  BambOodaeat,  il.  245
Ecstaeyof  delict  {mJ/AanakAanzi),

1. 338

Ecstasy  the  fbcmnlas,  1.

14  f.,  Sr,  1(1  £,  124.  150,  i77i
190,  309  t,  290,  952,  256.  287.
$10  {.,  314,  $69',  ii.  9)  15*  •9>
122,  129,  i§7>  170,  179)  *^4.
298  i  Fourth,  1. 21 1.  First  two,


334


INrEX.


ii.  J17,  fixity  in  Fourth  only,
{.3^3.  {aMiin4AaJM,fta\\.  ijAt

collocdvely,  i  23, 47i  64  f.,  130  f.»

154^  ii.  161.  207,  3i9.  as
positive  pleasures  in  this  life.  i.
30,  147.  coBCOBuiants  of,  ii.
170

Ecstatic.  Set  Tnoce
Educated  mao  {ttjJMyaiA  iepsui\ta),
u'Orth  ia»  ii.  87
EfiMt  [a^uattkhata\  ii.  3i6
EifoTt  (s^>9>a),  i.  fi.  (4,^)4 3^5'
(OMlUAd).  see  Sirujnles.  {ussa-
Ash*),  ii.  99.  (p^Xamika),  ii.
13$.  excessive,  li.  246
EfO,  Hi;  (  am  {asmi}%  \-  98
i^tfold  Path,  St*  Middle  Way,
roiar  Trodw
EiatiOD,  ii.  246
Elders,  i.  ttS
Elect  (sttiXM),  it.  77
Ekmenta  (Fotu),  i.  133,  157,  235>
300  f.;  ii.  9,  15*1 3«3'  (fi«)

with  Space,  q.v-  (Sbt)  with  Miod,

ii.  174,  J88  f.,  391.  (^£Ar),  i.

348?u.  x88f.

Elephant,  1.  {14, 125,  133, 169,  343.
gained  '  Lotus,’ ii.  ^9.  •cramer,
i  346.  expen  on,  ii.  48  f.
Sbffiination  {fioMMo),  \.  304
BmencipatioD,  i.  168
£CBbol4eoed  {usseAah),  i.  338
Etupoor  li.  40.  (eah-

kervaU^  Ii.  ?<  (■

Ecnptir.ess,  1. 312, 3i6 ;  IL  31$  f.
Satmoured  of  ii.  319

Eadearoors  (e^mun),  i*.  14
Eodurance  f^iitAsems^,  i.  7

EgersT  ^

U.99

Enlignte&ed,  fully,  AU*,  i.  44,  79
Eolith  tetuneQt(rM^<>44^ '4),  i.  la,
>3,  24,  48,  66,  73»  ”5,  ”9.
i5t,  riS,  t7i,  177, 3$4, 333»  33X ;
il  77,  «t,  i»3, 136, 301,  346, 3t3.
<fev«n  factors),  ii.  7, 1 37..l*^  30i ,
330,  334.  {armifisCia},  >1.  ps
Bamiry  f^Aihia),i.  254
Baouen  («^),  ii.  244.  StePutiftP'
torily

Eotenainmi:  Rental  states^  k  4  f.
Embusiasm  ^iiraveeia),  u  331,
ioteUectoal,  a  ^7, 10$
EhvironxDents  (six),  L  393,  365,
366;  iL  18®,  iw

B^animlty  i.  i’,  55. 13$,

3ot,  217,  83X,  S6X,  966.  303;  ii.


138,  253, 201.  Sts  aito  Ecstasy
^rmulas),

Equity  ([o^jAimczrdH),  11. 104
Equivocation,  i.  369
Error  (dS«A),  i-  5.  (avi^'A),  i.  23$  •
Escape  {Htsseroifa).  Set  Salvation
Essence  i4i^  ^’d),  i.  176
Esteeai  for  master.  Sts  Gotaa&
EsukIJf,  brahecin,  ii.  zoo  C
Eternal,  i-  95  ►  *34^.5  ii.  134
Etemalisnt,  43

Examine,  question,  press,  il.  256
Excellence,  i.  i$o,  309;  ii.  64.  tbe
three;  L  i63

Excellent  {mAHsa),  I  181,  23$

ExtftioD  i.  72;  u.  201.

(;ytriya\  ii.  7.  Su  sUk  Effort
Exisceoce  {Ut.  becoming.  iAffva\  1.

36, 23$:  il.  297.  (.aiutfotfiXa),  I.

67 ;  see  Life,  furmee,  tl  (23  f. ;
see  Rebirth,  non  ex.,  1.  93 1
297

Experiences  (vs^yaeii,  i.  180;  n.

273.  {pafi'sa^sJet^  i.  184
ExwsitiOD  and  analysis  (or  eluci*
ution),  ii.  264

Expunge,  bow  to  {su//eMa\  L  21  f.
Extremes,  the  two,  in  life,  h.  2I6
Eye.  i.  137.  of  affection,  i.  M9,

286 ;  ii.  64'  of  understanding,  i.
209,  of  truth,  i.  353;  g.  223.
restraint  c^,  i.  6, 3$$.  the  noble,

i.  360.  to  catch  (he  eye,  il.  96.
'celestial*  (nexMvorld  siffht)^  t

16,  35,47, 50.  lai,  154.  17^  I97i
357>  *63,  3l>  340»  349i  ST®;  li*
ri.  17,20,  IW,  211,  234.  *74

Fact,  as  it  realty  Is,  i.  l$6
Factors  (of  hearh  smAHra),  I.  305.

of  attacbment,  root  of,  11.  (6^  174
Faculties,!,  xai,  36? ; ».  323.  (five),

ii.  7,  136  140.  five  moral,  ii.

|2e,  324.  reprossed,  &  325

Fairy,  rrr  Devas  ,

Fait^  {taddiiSj,  i.  1 1 6  £>  356.  $S6  £,
639;  tt,  97,  too,  125.  as  ^pks#o
force,’  h.  212.  (fiasS^X  229  i  *

’s  sake,  i.  85,  l  U,  I39  f.,  Z45, 5*7.  . '

529.  another, i. 345  ..j

Fallows  (of  tbe  bean),  1. 71  '

Fanning-,  i.  $8,  J53  v  .  -

Fashns,  l9,5(Ci“xC'

Fate  {/li.  fixed  coj^cpifld^L
365.  eotnpticsCiORs  hi.  iV  277
Farbtt  (of  all,  Erabot&l,  t.  33$.
bereave^  Ii,  $6


335


Pm1]o91|  CotDprabCfid
Tftnjiry,  I  8o  ...  .

FaTOuiu  of  fortoae  (fiAatiremu’

JkAa,  I  TOO

Fotii  i.  tit  ifi  tbe  Dighti  u  U>
feu  not  I  ii.  53*  no  t,  t.  4^
80,  177,  «8;  lu  tto.  pMl,  H.
36(

FttrlaicnMit  4^

i.  »7.  4^«Si  77,  9J.

173,  «86,  20ft  fle  f.,  27$.  286  /

(ilx),  il-  3C5«  iwu«A‘«

300.  33S.  3S2,  5  ‘35.

303,  mionfulaesi  M  to,  34o>  ^0
m  MladfuIiiM,  applications
etc.  of

Fddey  {tuAM.  i'*  9‘

Fdl«w»bip,»i.  37
rettoia,  i  (oo,  16  r,  seo,  34^  ou
^0  Boodi  _  .

Fever,  unfevered  {lii-  cool),  1.  *47
Fevenah  loagiof  {^ori\Sh<i\  1.  X74.

356;  i».  5‘C  .  ,

Fl^  honoa  of,  bodioe,  v  $07

Fbe,  i.  T36.  ‘691  83*  ^

&d,  II  xo*  t  '•  S7‘

L  35J.  •ofiferinj.  i.  *49.  to  nre

Ii.  38

Firm,  T.  $3  £  .  .

FUbermae,  i.  i8>  349.  nocsf,  1
33d

Fi»iy  (*«  '•  321

Fleedar  uturo.  .^Ve  Tru  neat
FlMl^  r.364f.

Flood,  il. ‘54  ,  ^

Ptorty  aad  *0^7  w  mitia**  far
‘elotlx  aod  torptt’X  Ii.  246
Flu*,  1.352  ^  ..

Focaeeutf,  1.  ‘46.  X77  f..  *‘55  C^f
II,  194,2x8.

fl.  393

Foetn*,  1. 367  -  _  ,

Tt^  \faoU)y  it  331  £  $9*  Dolu-
non  ,  ,

Food,  U  5^  8ft  J76  £,  242,  ad4  f.,
S*7.  0130  tneel  a  oay.  ••  3“  '•>
3‘9t  334  ^  SoatenaAc^

modenmoB  io,  I.  ip*>  255,  333  i

PotiiA  pe«oa(»)  (wro/A^),  >'  45,
ato,  330  £,  3^  I  u- 145»  »6ft  373

ii.  38,  60,  c8ft  *44,  *48  L,

Foot'priols,  I-  125«  waafcmf  of
ii.  309

Forott,  s*9  Plastic  Slrenftbs

Fc^l  158


Fores^  i  J2  f.,  55, 193,  314,  >de«
of,  li.  314.  ‘fue  {-fiiriyAya),  ^
74  L  (oraMofta^As),  i.  154
Forest  Hut,  11.  339,  273
Fora  (ahape,  rutterl  i.  78. 95,  Uft
157. 163, 30C^  3x0;  11.  15*.  34S  f-T
oMtu  Attacbiaeat,  factoca  of
Fortune  i/ii.  if  you  m),  ii.  *45
Forty,  er^sitiOD  c?  toe  8‘‘^

194  f.,  t98  i.

Foster  1. 333  f.  (3aA«tfn*),

ii.  99  {^akuUkar^t),  323,  (3>4*
vtt^,  il.  32c
Foul  and  fair,  v  2^

Foulneaa,  i.  391 ;  1).  soi
PoundatiOQS,  re^  of
(AV  with  brobon  shtioea),  ii.  140
Frank  and  open,  i.  191
Frets,  i.  346

Fricrdlmeas.  5«  Love  (jnr/tf)
Fiixit  \.  209,  334,  339 ;  Ii.  ti3, 126,
*3^,301

Fruitful  i-fata/tt),  u  X9X.  i99,
(ai(Miea%  a  133
Fuat  >S>i  Attachaenc
FuMtioB  of  (Ar.  depeodeoC  upon,
il.  381

Fundamental,  i.  306
Further  refuge.  Sf*  Salvation,
Futua  atate,  poecpone  to,  II.  1*6.
ibeorisiu  OD,  li.  C3C  C,  134.
longing  tor,  il.  363

Cabled  Kail.  VaaUt,  I.  162.  170.

339;  ii.  ifr*

Gagga.ix.53  ,  ^

Gamrft  queen,  u  246
Gamblen,  ti.  56  f.

Camel,  i  189

Canaka^Moggallina,  bahmin,  »■
Gai^habba,  'preaidtng'  oz  'tutelary

deicy/  u  189 1  89

Ganges,  1. 1 59. 292.  $09.  347.  565 :
ii  32

Gaoler,  1. 349
Oayft  c  38.  13 1

Ocae^  edi&cacicc  (faf.  m  order  to
make  UAdentand),  u  178

GUti.  28,11?

Gba{Skka«  potter,  it  *4
GbaUfA,  Sakyao,  It  *17
Ghosw  OM/a),  1 49  .  ,

Gbo(amokka,  brabain,  it  89  £
Gifts,  II.  6x,  399-  S*i  aifc  Dona,*
tieaa

GifyaUvasatha,  t  148


336


INDEX.


CkibbAja,  1.  32

Civiax  do  (/{/.cutting  olTX  plMii*
tude  of,  i.  3d  I

CIadne$s,  ut  Joy.  over  oihera'
velforc,  sn  Sympathy.

Gluttony,  j,  32S
Goal  {nfpfM),  1. 42  ;  u.  t  $7-
yttfta),  i.  2itS.  (don^<u&«o),  i.
>48^^36.  (^drt*^n.  33.  (tvjd*
AoX  h.  t21

Goblia  {fiOM),  i.  319.

i  367

Gods,  jfe  Dova.  are  there  ?  ii.  dS>

X33

Good  (Aiia).  i  9^  149,  [4uiAa),  i.
399.  ia/tAa),  il.  29&  temporary
good,  i.  9$.  discard  good,  i.  95.
transcending  good.  it.  1 5
Good  and  bad  men,  n>  tdy  f.
G^^fca'Moggalllaa,  brabcnio,  U.

*59  <•

Goauiga,  i.  14&  iVr  Groves

Coapu  i.  ?$.

(oAoPtma),  i.  238;  Il  158
Cotama,  i.  12.  Kosalae.  ii.  6$.
lover  of  tjuiel,  i.  363 ;  ii.  214  f.
as  roacbcr  among  toachers,  ii.  3.
left  no  suceeaeotj  ii.  ido.  auto¬
biographical,  i.  115  f.  wbat
.  did  be  teach?  i.  ids.  praise  0^
ii.  130.  dispraise  of,  1.4$.  seduc¬
tive,  i.  369,  2?$.  denies  be  is
omnisdeot,  i.  340.  worded  by
devas^i.jSO.  repiessioni8^i.354.

!|ualiries  esteemed  in,  ii.  f.  asks
oc  the  honest  man,  11.33.  amiles.
il  33  f,  39.  voice,  ii.  75,  haviog
o«it  docG^^  ji.  £4,  121  f,  his
descent,  ii.  94.  wbat  bo  re* .
oouBced,  it  9^  appevaace,  ii.
9;.  rebirires  a  you^  ii.  96.  on
work  ia  tbe  world,  ii.  1 13  f.  wby
did  he  teach?  li.  137  i  way-
shower,  it.  tsd.  on  ecstasies,  ti.
163.  pleads  for  friendliness  in
pupils,  ii.  332.  S«e  ais»  Euddba,
Lord,  Master,  Teacher
Gndual  [achtevemeatj  {anupui^\
i.  3j«

Great  gatheriog,  i.  169
Greater  end  matter,  ii.  23$

Greed  C/fW«X  i  r  x,  66, 345-  {oM^
jhS^,  i.  with  nnuevolence
and  detuuon,  ir.  9^,  and
Greetings  I  xa.  forms

oC  i.  104  i  a.  3SI
Grey  hairs,  ii  3^


Grief,  ii.  297

Grip,  i.  103.  S«e  aZro  Attachment.

gnp  and  grasp,  i.  317
'  Grisly  Discourse,*  L  5$

Grot, ).  t93,  314
Groups,  in  tbe  Path,  i.  31$

Groves,  pleasaunces,  Anitbapio-
dika's,  se^  s.v.  Andba.  j.  so^
104  ii.  313.  Bamboo,  i.  toj,

213,333.397,  33*.  34^  J  *1

203. 1 59,  **S.  **9>  236,  273,  30s,
333.  BhesakaJft,  1.  69,  339;  11.
46.  Butesu  i.  529.  Enstere^  i.
113.  'Gladness,*  1 357.  Ghosita,
1.231,363;  11.50,344.  Gosipga,
i.  (48. 163  f.  Great  Wood;  i  75,
162,  170,  367.  GundA,  ii.  43.
IsipalaBa,  i,  (2i.  Jeta,  set  AsA-
ibapiQ^ka’s.  Kmg*s,  ij.  309.

Ku^buts,  i.  351.  Lotus,  u  181.
UaUikl’s.  H.  13.  Makbidevn’s

mango,  ii.  39,75.  Mango,  i.  264,
267.  Myrooalan,  i.  324.  Mu-
khelu,  ii.  334.  Nigiodba.  i.  66,
75,  254;  ii.  3t7»  267.  Wd  (Pub-
ba-X  i.  180;  ji.59,  154,  167,  *99.
214.  Sabniga,  1.  i,  234 ;  u.  1x5.
SU,  it.  93.  TranquiUr^,  n.  8^
Wanderers’,  i  339 ;  ii.  1
Grow  (6V,  make  become),  L  303.
Sm  also  Develop,  develop,  g.
and  iocroase,  i.  £0
Growth  ,  (HHZdx),  1.  86.  (^a6ir/v
bznm4X  ii.  99.  growth  widtin
(not  in  Vali),  i.  75.  (am-],  ti.
155.  g.,  intzease  and  progress,),
7t,  164  i  ii.  133

Guerdon  in /Au),  1. 148.  {£«>

MerdX  i.  309 ;  ii.  86
Guide  {vMfyaAa^,  ti .  48^  onwards,

i.  (89

Guild  ii-  >83

Guile,  -less,  h.  33

CuUt  (AV,  black  deed),  i.  28,  292

Gulisduii,  disciple,  i.  332

Raiiddsvasana,  township,  >.  278
Rail.  See  Meotbouse.  of  truth,

ii.  40.  of  many  storeys,  ii.  145
Handed  down,  i.  368
Kaokerings  (aMijjAS),  1 246.  OU-

ii.  22  (

Happiness,  and  pain,  it.  91.  and
wtiiare,  ii.  222

Harm  {tyiUitiia),  t.  64  £,  79  f,
399  ;  il  60.  {AeAtia),  i.  239
Hatmony,  i.  237,  386;  il  138, 144


INDBX.


H»te  <^(MaX  T.  l8  35,  66,  3^

(wmX  il.  345

He«Ier,  \u  it

Health  (•ikC  ill),  u  ii.  68,
*  105.  lack  <-*be  much  ill),  ii.  48
Heart  {iadeya),  1.  22.  (,cii/a)y
36  f.,  7%,  74,  80,  83  85  f.,  15s.

3,  i^3rS,332,  246,  yn,  333,
;  li.  II,  r4,  103,  151,  i6i,
903.  (««V7X  I.  46,  $0,  71  (.,  I54j
>74/n3J7;  i'*96*  *l5i  3i7i  *4®
M«rt  and  nuod  («e/9\  il.  11$.
(4dn>X  i.  148.  fixuaiea,  eee  f.v,
b.  free  ai  «d]d  things,  i.  330 ;  ii.
64*  b.’i  ease.  ii.  389.  impte*
meot  the  b.  {/iV.  are  equipments
4>0>  <<«  Ii8.  fixes,  sets,  trains,  ii.
It  t

Heat,  ].  3(0

Heaven  <•  225,  341;

ii.  35^'  374

Heir,  ii.  38}  «»  i.  9  r/  rmdtrtd
*  partaker’

Heibs,  i.23o

Herdsman,  i.  157  f.,  159,  340
Here  vov  (idha,  fU  le
f'.T.S.  text),  ii.  38
Hereafter,  here  ud,  !i.  153.  and
(Boraia,  ii.  85.  and  quuitiea.  ii.
164

Hereiy.  i.  pt
Hennila^e.  ii.  87
Here,  1. 1  tp
Kittiioff  aod  bacfiiog
vlih9),  \.  339

Kigber,  aomeibinf  (mn/AAi^,  i.

M  r.  (MMw7^  /spWa  X  t.

387  £  bTiAChes  of  doebioe*'
Abbidhamaa.  p.e.

HhdciDcea  (FiveA  i  loa,  190,  J93,
310,  373,  330 )  ii.  30,  216,  139,
x?6  U  333

Kobgobba  (domifUAloe),  !i.  17.
$14  Gobba

Hole  and  corner^  tu  Li£e,  World
(/bnnula  of  Uavtag)

Korney  ii.  63
Home,  at,  i,  m,*  ii.  176
Hoiaelesea«M,  L  (26  ^sim,  Sh
World  (fennula  of  Inviag)
Honest  (aot
ii.  33, 48, 68

Hoetiliry,  sprit  of,  IL  333
^vtaairy,  as  foul  {^.  beings  are
fenl),  ik  54

Honibty  (anon^arragance),  u  360
Hunters,  i,  68, 349


Hurl  (saiiitin^X  i<  79  f.  {oAita),  i.

*39  _

Hypnotics  (TenX  u.  9

IccblnaaVala,  Ii.  108
Ideas  (jdAte^X  i<  323
Ideal  [ufUtri^),  192  £

IgDorance,  i.  441  iox>  118,28?,  S09.
3iS;'ii.  33,  330.  /.  and  lack  of
knowledge  and  delusioe,  it.  126

111  IduJkAAa),  i.  $  f.,  36,  4<X  91,  89,
166,  187,  197,  207,  350,  2?3,  310,
361 ;  il.  273.  Su  aite  Tnitbs.
a  root  of,!.,  1.  j,  T38,  333 ;  ii.  150.
ripeos  into  i.,  ii.  60.  frtuBht
with,  i.  65  i  ii.  279.  end  of,  i.  34.
481  23»i  3»7  341.  cease-

tion  of,  ii.  307,  oftd  s*<  Truths,
deliverance  from,  i.  43.  I  out¬
worn.  1.68.  in  jainisen,  iu  193  f..
transient.  11.  id6.  (.  and  per*
sonality,  ii.  166.  (w^pikdAsX  >.  306.
Sh  Wo4'

lllasion  [sn^kaV  1.  66.  St4  oIm
DelueiOD,  PMly
(roeginings,  ii.  291, 304
(sidatta,  carriage-builder,  Ii.  6$
(sig^li,  Mt,  1. 67 ;  ii.  193  f.
Ivpatana,  i.  ia( :  ii.  aj,  296
Immediate  {aA&Iiia),  1.  189
Immoitalily,  personal  (wrds  not  in

PallX  !•  97

[mrannity  (jvgaiiAtitutyx.  t
ItnpenneBeat,  ttt  Tnnaknt
Implement,  tee  Heaie

lir^easions,  bodily  (rsAf^draX  ^
303

laspuUe  1>  83

Impurities,  1.  26  f.
loclmakioa  {rw^,  n.  97,  {23
Income^  il  /oi  f

IndifiutBce  1.  1901  il

153, 393*  six  kinds,  1 1  380.  tiro
trads.  li.  38t.  pmeed,  il  32$.
Su  9hQ  Sooaniaitp
Individual  {mefsAi},  ibot  types,  i.
247, 296;  cf\\.  90.  seven  types,
3^  t  four  r>^es,  I.  322.  two
types,  li.  91.  four  types,  il  274 ;
‘  they  wlw  ii.  287
Individualicv  ipL  frcidtiesX  1 322 1.
Indra  (^da),  i  98
loert,  u.  48

In&coation,  u  T74.  (nar&U/i),  u.

3Z1

Inftictioa  ^

Infomed  ^^tn^oX  >>•  188  f.


a


338


mDEX.


I&fi0c«ac^  iu  f-
lasAsit^,  ii.  141  r.

Ins^bt  {oiAiMS),  1.  it-  (vifiof
taaS\  i.  33  i  ii.  3iO-  ».

79  f.

In&truetion.  i.  309;  ii«  312
Intellect  o(gmi(U't.  miDd*<levelop*
ini:),  ii.  304.  Under*

eteadiag,  Wi^oen.
ii.  12

jQtellectioo  Su  Coo'

scioiuoess

laltlUgvnce.  of  (viAiu),  I.  36$  i  n.

23,  132

lAieat  iaeeation  {saniafifio).  Sh
MiddleWa;  (second  itea),  ldM»»
A4p(r«doo8,  Tboagtre
Interrupted  talk  (fonsula),  i.  ^3 ;

IntetTuptioBS)  11. 05
Icwonceled,  i.  139
IsCuldoR,  celn,  &ad  i.(er  lQ2>gbt^i
f-V-)

In  xarn(^^/&jvna),  j.  156
InvesdgauoD  7


Jain,  i  t62, 170,  a»d  m  Kigaatba.
jambu,  T>T«r,  il.  213
JSfussopi.  brabffiia,  i.  12,  125;  ii.

loS,  ii6f  130
'ftialeas,  i.  93  (wr^ag
auedif^  i.  326

ayasena,  prince,  il  329  236 1

eta,  ii.  304,  Oft^  set  Groves
Jbiaa.  Stt  licsnsy
T«B.  Sa  Life

ivaVa  XomSiabhacca,  physician,
\,  264  f.

{odpftia,  brabcaln,  fi-  ^4

i.  71,  i>8,  idi,

200,  299.  j.  and  bliss
rmwa),  ii.  333.  find  joy  ia

i'  ^9

Joyous.  &  64. 69

/ongte  (eraMa),  i.  232,  303.  Stf
forest,  Solirnde


RajanfalA.  ii.  324
Kalmsaad^  &]ddbn,  u  249
KUs'^nieinaka,  Sakyao,  n,  2 17 ,
Kalara  Janaka,  son  of  Nimt,  u.  42
Ksit.  1. 240
KSUparbo),  I  Sdf.

K&liag^  wilderness,  1.  272
Kaasboja,  ii.  9$

Kammlrndhamaia,  towa,  i.  41^
3535  ‘i'lSi


Kasdaraka.  wanderer,  i.  346
Kanpakactbala,  11  66
Kipathika,  bnbmia,  H.  96
Kapilavanhu.i.66, 175,254:  ^.217, «

267, 299

Karina,  fff  Doing

Kisi.  connfry,  i.  isf,  334 :  »■  t5i  59

Kassapa,  brumia,  Ii*  97,  114

Kassapa,  Buddb^  iU  24

Ken  and  visioa,  ii.  5.  J73  L

Ke^jyi.  worshipper,  ii.  79

Key  to  ceils,  ii.  228  •

Kiki,  king,  li,  3$

KicnbUa.mscipK  1 148, 329;  U.243
Kiadllnesl,  i.  J29
Kiadly,  1 9$  f.

Kiu,  1.  165,  249;  iu  69,  9i.  of
Ji^ala.  M.  37,  66,  69,  and  su
Fasnadi

Kjsa-Saokicca,  ascetic,  n  170, 371

KitIgirV  towasbip,  I

Ksow.  who  knows  sees,  i.  4

367;  ii-96

Knowledge  I  2i9,  339 ;  n.

204,  3<».  (amS),  ii.  a».  utter
Jc,i,  346;  il.  22, 157-  Ww),  !•
369.  MitaM,  li*  14-

aiaeof(<iftU*Xi.339.  transcend'
eni  (oiUrXdd),  or  kaowledgee,  v
209:  ii-  5,  320.  noble,  ii.  115.
stabltsbedin,  i.  33:

Koliyas.  i.  278
Koraudi,  a  noQtb.  K.  200
Kosaia,  i.  205,  165,  203,  269, 329  ;

H.  »3,  JO,  38,93,  tt6y  180,336
Kosambi,  tows,  {.  330,  362 ;  n.  50,
244

Kostya*  Sakka,  1. 181
KuiDbrs'Kassapa,  diacipla,  I  loo  £
Kupdadbioa,  i.  325
Kutos,  pe»te,  L  42, 353 ;  il  2$,  i  $  1
KuisiniM,  ^  136

Ladies  f  (lit,  sirtera  f),  n>  3C9  i

Ladles  (oblation*),  il  89

Lakes,  i.  367

Laaenlation,  )i.  297

Last  of  the  line  'Oi-  last  man),  ii.  42

Law  {dAopimata),  i.  233.

SM  Kule

Laws  of  being  i/ikoMmait),  I S30
Las^Q,  laywoman.  i.  21,  273.  a
>  lower  stale,  L  327  5  'i-  3t  3*,  *49*
does  not  ^d  Ill,  L  34i*  can  get
»  C  heaven  ’J  f.  341,
Learoea  Dobles,  etc.,  1. 125  t,  2^
354


IKOEX.


339


f. 78.  ‘by heart,'

.  '  *93  ,  ...
letter  aoa  ^ini.  1. 153
•Lewdaats,  b.  346
Ubenli^,  iL  aia
Ltccbaves,  u  165 ;  i\.  $5
Life  (/Irus),  ii,  3$.  (pva),  u  111,
3^  342>  i^Aapa),  T  338,  oa^  stt
Krtawiea.  (vti»r»0).i,  i?3,33i,
•ittipassim.  fortot  o{\ift(y9m)^

1. 360.  llf^iood  (Ui.  red;,  n  td^

L  4a  you  like  (ttrii’iAfirit),  i
333  t  necewitiea  of,  i.  7  I,  74,

Xbole  and  corner  (taiMM-
f,  I.  isS,  and paalm.  of  soli*
lude,  apart,  i.  10,  13,  inner
I  103.  return  to
eaith  l,  i.  339-  ioouiriei  (o)  d!i-  I
ooura^ed,  1. 188 ;  welcomed,  i.  j
302  f.,  33 1 :  ii.  apeculatlon
on  dlacooraaed,  it.  294
Life,  Hi^er  (AraAma^ariyd\,\.  $3,  .
IM,  taa,  141,  153,  r8cs  221,  <

S3a7»  pm  n.  3,  21,  64,  88,  J
baaii  0^  11.  12!.  fuoda*
meotal  fer.  ii  364.  aOlctiOB  ie,  j
331.  feUowa  Id,  i.  70,  103,  330,  '
andpoffdn.  Sm  Afitithaaee
Lumom  <L  roi,  100  t

Lion.N  roar  (chafle&g:a).  1.  46  f«
eoUtary,  ii.  80.  pwora,  Ii.  >

156  [

crea^  iti.  dose),  ll  56.  ^

Middle  Way  1

Uv^oodf-a),  1 3d7  (

Living  th/Dge  (fioa\  fi,  109  {.

Lcatfiinf  I  30).  and

abborrance  aod  oiaguai  (afffyai/,
«fc).  U.  327

Loatbli&eee  U&iAtt),  \.  43
li«iroiiaif>ft|tya,  diedne^  H.  367
Loc^u  ii.  330.  {pofiJta/p  ;

Look  aaer  {padharoi^,  \.  326  1

Lord,  eltt>  •-  Bhaj^v^  Buddha,
Oeasm.  (dmra),  I  33;  i  ii  127.
foloral),  ii.  2.  root'jude,  baue
(wrmola),  I  121,  2*7,  330  j  U.
220

Lore  i  256,  s$t  higher  j

fMwMAX  li  138.  «7ipty  of  I
.  i^'ddam),  i.  43.  ibreWbld  f
*  340

Lot,  ae.  1. 236  I

Lo^ii  46  I

Lore  <aM^,  i.  85  (>,  88  i,  i$8|  11  !


86,  Ice,  301.  (Ai/[esiaJi,  1.  82,
•  ipema),  I  100.  brings  sorrow,  Ii.

S6  £  acts  ir.  144
,  L<Hng  kindness  i  303

]  Low  erodes,  11.  86
'  Lure  i<ufada\  {.  43.  (i&ni),  ii.  38.

{/fiH/riim),  1. 10
:  Luet,  bate  arid  felly,  ii.  331
'•  Lusts  of  the  desh
i.  3^

'  LuxurfnueDess,  luxury  {isi,  fulnessX
I  I.  177 ;  il  221
I  Lying,  I.  398
Lynch  pin,  i.  87

I  Mndhum,  il.  43

,  Magadha,  i.  117,  119.  159  f.,  165;

I  ii.  3,6 1,  80,  I $9, 200
;  MSgandiya,  wanderer,  i.  3^4
Magician's  art,  it.  117
Ma£A*Cunda,  disciple,  i.  39  f. ;  il.
>99i  y>$

;  MabA-Raccloa,  dUdple,  L  77;  il.

'  .  43  f-,  199.  *64, 283  f.
MehiUlCappiu,  disciple,  ii.  199
Mehft-lCasiapa,  disciple,  i.  154;  n.


'Konblta,  diedpie,  I  207  i ;


ul^

disciple,  I.  j8,
^i5S»  L,  324;  il  196.

Uanfiloa  (CotaiDafs  kioaaanh
I.  66, 25^

Mahi>  PajApau,  step*ix)oth«r  to
Cotaaa,  u.  298  £,  309
Uakbldeva.  ki&f,  (I.  39  £

MekkbaJt  Coali^  ceecber,  I.  144,

«7«.  ^79>  37^ :  d-  *

Malevoieoce,  i.  308
MalUans,  1. 165
MallikI,  queen,  Ii.  is
hUluokyaputia,  disciple,  L  304  /.,
3081

Mac,  e7ery*day  02.,  L  i
MutSbi,  II,  53

Uba,  i.  48,  1 10, 123  1, 16:,  235  1,
239  1;  ii.  82,  151,  208  I,  220.
-s.  i.  and M  UnWertt
MerV^L  I'  IS7*  d.  24Z  t

of  superman,  ii.  71 1, 8t .  94  f
Master,  ‘rtA  slaves,  il  85
Master,  the  I.  so>  44,

72.  116,  183,  i\2,  313  f.,  317,

339 ;  »•  3»  m  •  u- 1 38.

teacbes  out  of  compaasion,  il
281


N«ttry,  of  €rtft

i,  1 10.  »ph»res  of  (eight),  «.  »,
cf.  2t2

MftUpMsX  i.  3SJ*  ''  *9®'  3'3
MUaIT.  charioteer,  \i.  41
MStaiv^ss  wilderness,  i.  271
Mateiial  things  {3msa).  Sfi
Worldly.  (r^a),i.36l
Mamialism.  i.  564
Matter.  ^raFonn.
Meaoi&g.connotacioo  I'Si  3,

aj?.  (import),  i.

MedataUimpa,  tovaship,  \i.  03
Meditation,  trains  of
fldwi),  ii.  343
Meekness,  U  70,  S8,  ^30
Meijha,  wildemeas,  u  371
Memory  (raA^  L  177»  *5^«  <*4^
1.  tSi.  {dJOrfOa),  1.
rot  •,  M.  98

Meadioat  I.  34 1,  37'

Meoul  armngs,  ii.  1801.

Meotal  consciotfs&ess  (apart  nom
se&se),  i.  309
Mental  poverty,  i.  too
Mental  prodw  (a»kiM^ajt/s).
ti.  3l6

Meoui  researches

tfir4),li.378  f.,  391  f-
Merit  ’*■  S^S*

femd,  i.  1 6^  atlaintnent  of,  a.
114,  118

Mesfrengots,  (three)  of  devas,  u.
356/.

mw9  Way.  I.  12,  3'i  3S  f  -
2H,  jra,  55^5  »•  7,  l6»  43>r38>
140, 1 94  f« ,  30*.  *  86.  *9^  330r  334

Migfira,  roocher  of,  i.  i*$,  loot;

ii,  59,  r54.  164. 167. 199. 314
Miod  [viMiwX  1 30.  (uS»\  u  ao;
it  {cittoX  i.  i7<^  JUf  .  336,
ofta  s«e  Heart.  (««ia)  and
sense,  i.  3  to.  's  deroteee
1.  370.  frames  0/  (e[Aanx44),  i.
348.  unsenled,  it.  284
Mindful,  and  purposeful,  ii  l$6,
j34.  ^37.  mediufro&a,  rre
(appUeadons  of)

Mindfulaesa  (rsfr),  !•  /4i  74,  81,
116  t,  134.  >56,  174  L,  1781  T93.
3j8,  *31,  363,3««.  303,  3*5,  333  i
iu  I  $6,301.  owsteciog  of,  i.  31$;
tl  *33.  330.  appltcauoBs  of,  t.
346;  ii  137,  140*  20''  'kiree
bases,  ii«  S3.  8tartiB|  poinU  of,

ii. &  ofbody>U.305 1
Miracles, ».  93


MisceU  antes,  i.  93

Misery,  ii.  397  ^  .

Misrepresent  (the  Teacberi  i«  93»

i8s,  365,349;  H«67,  3361.  «

Mithil^  ii.  39>70
Modal,  uni*.  multi*,  ii.  133
Mollya.Phagffnne,  disciple,  u  85
Mollify  (/«4d5r/0,  i.  3*5
Money,  not  Uk«i  by  moalu.  n.  93
Mooa,  ii.  83,  i64»  »*<f  Sabbath,

Siioiles

Moot'bouse,  -hall  i  163.  *$$.  335
Morals,  i.  aS9  C.34S'  asaltema-
live  to  aucedcisoi,  h.  19,  so,  44.
85,  109,  181,  369  fi  (blgher,  ^
the  raduse),  i.  128  C.  334  f. ;  ti.
4S,  :55> f.  .

Mother,  of  lloohJiaCta,  n.  224  t
SSriputta  as  a  mother,  v.  :.9-
Uodves  (for  reclusestup),  1.  i  >4  •* '
ji.  34

Mould  the  amd  {naff),  i-  ^
Mountain,  from  a,  i.  119;  ik  230
Mukhelu,  Groves
87

MultipUeity,  i.  2

Mundane  UtAarfraX  I  85.  (owp-
rafi^*),  I C03
Munl6c«tc«,  iL  lU
Music,  i.  181
Mutable,  h.  3?9
Mysric  rnaigte.  i.  141.  >4^

K&di>3i,i  143

Nagaraka,  township,  ii.  2x4

Nigaravifida,  it  jsi

yagas,  I.  36?  ,  ,  .

ySgani^Ja,  ducipie,  1.  58

NabkapSoa,  i.  329

KaUk&Tag4aia,  il,  ( 18

Ksluda.  u  267

Nali  jangba,  bnhmm,  11.  $7

Niuate,  and  ^sape,  i.  38,  187 ;  n.

16$.  oaroes  for  a  Sana,  ii.  >9*
Nan^  Vaccha.  aacetk,  i.  tyo,  371
Nandaba,  disciple.  U.  309  f.
Mandiya,  disei^e,  i.  (41^  329;  fi.
24$

Nangsrtha,  ii.  63  <cf.  214)

Nttspeita  { Vardhamana  tbe  Jai&)r
I  67, 144, 179.  267  f*.  28a  C  ?  it  »r

17,  r35  f,  J39

Harural  desire  (fif.  cbe  eelMesir*

iflg).  'i«  91

Natore  (w/  w*  Paff)»  n.  109,
•dhamms,  Ii.  223
Kaaght.r»  Realms,  Planes


INDEX.


Nifa^tbss  i.  2^7

13.')  f.  ten  iaierences  About,  jl.
1*7  f.

^Nibilifi.  I  3^g :  u.  (99
Munt,  bios,  iL  4c

Nlr/m*.  I  $0,  it 5,  *18,  J47,
*$9.  (kiUms),  u  161.  [out]  con¬
ducive  to,  i.  79  f.,  307.  here  and
fiov,  ii.  133.  Its  formuU'gTOup,

I  (*.  1(7,  307.  5(0;  ii.  4}«  3i9i

986,296.  poece  oC  i.  (93.  heart
let  C&,  II.  (48.  to  realise,  i  4},
947;  ii.  138.  to  win,  I.  44,  (80,
9  $3.  absolute  1.  10$,

996:  li.  15).  eleven  portals  to,
1. 953.  not  inerely  a  path.  n.  136.
ultvmate  ifoat.  il  157,  [mfiiufa),
ij.  261.  (be  highest  true  thing,
j).  294.  to  pass  to,  nv  I’ass  away
lTobie.M«Ariya.  (nr^urinr),)!.  12*
Kobleman,  1.  2$8
Koiiy  disciples  disnvssed.  t.  326
Koa  cbancterind,  1.  2(6
Novices,  il.  t09
NTQiphs,  i.  (8*:  ii.  33

Obedience,  1.  412
Oblationa,  1.  366 ;  ii.  93
Obligatioef,  code  of
}.  23,  ifUsH  Code
Observaeoes.  attach  cnent  to,  i>  308
Observation.  1. 331 :  ii.  247^  and  tn

Ecttaey,  first

Obeessloos  i.  4>  76  C

Obttacle  (ffU'erepa),  i.  260
Obstinacy  and  percioadey,  ii.  275
Obatrsferom,  i.  69  f.

Ocean.  L  136

Qcakr  peretpdon,  il.  306, 317
Oibodel  i.  172,  179.  y>*  U

316  j  n.  *2,  Its,  X17. 138
^£»f)re  reinatv  (qt^aeya^edgg),
il  243

Offhanc  (iAAnaM\  i.  28$ :  iL  tas
Ooiaisciefieei  Q.  70,  nna  sta  AH
Opasida,  brumin  it  93

Opo  (aiA  i-  isS,3(4
Oral  repwiion,  i.  115
Orgaoisoi  (/£4  bocooe),  1. 1 85
Otberwiseness,  alteratlca,  i.  325  >

^/L3T9

Outcone  ii.  117.  alcama-

dve,  fu  125
Outflow,  Ii,  291

Ondandisb,  1.  (59.  {araflUakdl,  i.
.  ($9,  204 1,  209


Cvenbrow,  I.  79  f
Owls’  wings,  L  S5

I’acceVs*  Buddhas,  11.  19*  f.

Pacing  up  aud  down^  il.  *19
Packed  u  p  bedding, )  1 . 244,  *67

Pain,  it  397

Pajipalt,  u  1.98,235

Panot*.  king,  ii.  159

Ptlradbt  Kacclyana,i.i44. 179;  '»•  x

Palsy,  Ii.  246

I’tAcakanga.  carpentar,  t  386  ;  il.

(3  f'r*3dt
Fau^va,  Mt.,  11.  (93
Papdu putts  (ascetic),  i.  22
I’lrisariya,  bralimi  0  teacher,

Paroxysmi  t.  174

Partakers.  iieir
Pasenadi.  king,  i.  10$,  16$;  it  $0  f*.

57l‘.,93.«.  .

Pass  away  (fiarinM3jatt),  11.  40,
93.  338.  308

Passion  (r^a),  i.  18  f.,  25, 43
stm.  p.,  wrath,  delusion,  u  991.
p..le5i,  1 304
Fast,  the,  ti.  361
PltajlputU,  1. 9St  t  ii.  92
Path,  course,  way,  t  309,  366:  it.
140.  t6o.  true  path  (-traiDiag,
etc.),  Il  3*6.  Sea  rUq  Eightfuid
Paifa,  Sfiddls  Way
P&vi,  ii.  139
Pivtrika,  1.  067
Payfl^  (gbttX  t  28
Peace  \ftpnsam<k\\.  la;  it  uo.
(reuUA,  it.  5$.  it  64.

lyagMium^  1.  Its.  3)6.
at  peace  (roete),  1. 168,  2861  ft.
1 55.  of  bean  {•dMamma\  t.  33 1 .
(br  his  heart,  su  Pocussiu.
beyond  cooipare  (.  .  -

Mm  .  .  I  73.  xaj ;  it  157*
utter  1. 253

Peaeod^  i.  sso;  it  i^t6
Pettoctdiiy  (-  purity),  li.  l6i
PerceptloD,  I.  1.  95, 162,  208,  343,
361111,15,24^,3x5.  product  of,
I,  sod  nesther,  nor  non-,  su
ELeaims,  Planee.  admission  ot
it  185

?eren>p»r*ly  (St,  eoengh  I),  t.  176
PerfJaciion,  I-  t  53, 180 ;  ii.  3.  (»>
^),  1.  226.  i.  246.

'  17»32.  (fiara-

tot),  ii,  I2(

PerU  (fidteeva),  i.  60,  66,  8c,  1 1  $,
291 :  ii.  165  f.


342


INDEX.


Pcmaucnce  '5^

PermaD«nf,  i.  95,  i§6)  2^  wper*
naneoc,  i.  y^,eivi  tet  Transience
Perseverance,  I.  7a,  ii6f,  {pir^o),

i.  174  ;  ii'6

?er5onaJity(Mi4447tf),  1. 311,  sc$ ;

ii.  (J5,  164  f.  sclUiof,  I.  31O1
ltUiaMva\  entemioment  of,  H.

i$6

^eftarbatleo,  It.  sS^

Pern,  elephant  tramer,  1. 246
Phecoffvfto&l  relations  (rt/miifa),  i.
211

Pbiloio^v  ifif.  view,  i  IS5
Pbilosopbical^  {yfiHus),  H.  j;;
pilgrim  L  !»,  «,  39,

ao4

PiUri^ege,  for  doctrine’s  sake
fkWiaiUd),  if.  go  i  anipastim.
Pitedka  (Waoderar),  i.  13$
Pingala.iCoccba,  brabnam,  i,  143
Pity,  He  Compas«m
Plan,  the  i^h^ma-dennSi.  is.  3^7
Plane  (&a/MsX  i*  t<3,  ti6  f,  147,

150,  «7,  ssr.w ;  ii,  %  hm  titn
Realm,  u.  of  thought
L145.  (illy-),  i,  337
Flastio  fovc^  coasnwoDts  (nsn-
AM>3),  i.  39.95^..  n8,  S63,  tft?,
010,343,361  :il.  13$,  133.  three,
L  213.  five,  »i.  3t(

Peasant,  1.  ar9

Pleasure  i.  3 1£  23s,  egg,  356.  See
SlappiDess.  Sarimctioii  {/itkKa),
Sense,  see.  reftnement  of  Uti.
height  of).  <1. 23

Pleainide  of  knowledge  and  reality,
i.  168

Poems,  i.  93

Poise^  He  Bouanloity,  Feeling
teeunal),  rnalfler^ce
Pokkharassti,  brahmin,  ii.  95,  xoS,

Pop  «p  (umm0aii\  U.  275
Porter  (door),  i.  273
Posswon,  alee, «,  174 1
Potalipota,  Wanderer,  H.  272
Poraliy^  househt^der,  i.  959
Pouer,  Tj.990

PoweM»,  the  ten.  i-  4A  f.  and
potency,  i.  189.  magrcaj,  1.  937.
psychic  see  s.t.

Practice  (isevanS),  It  09,  >86  i.  .
Praise,  i  125.  and  dispraise,  ii.
287.  absence  of.  commended,  ii.
289.  of  self,  dispraise  of  others,
ii.  1S9»  f77


Precepts  (five),  tikkAUfiadSn^,  if.  3
Precinca.  Ii.  87  f.

Predpices^  i,  367

Predisposition  (peuiyuUhiftd^ut^o*
Pregnant  uttennee  (a/Xfo),  L  77
Pretensions,  fee  brutnin
Pride  (^dfle),  i.  98.  In  '  I  *  and
‘mine,’  li.  t66,  175
Prin  (e&.fas),  i.

Profession  (of  doetdne),  I.  9t9  fn
292  f.  ovemeMing  in,  IL  145  £
FrofiaUe,  1. 306
Propngation,  t.  367
PropMsIa  {anustya),  at?
Provhiciaiisfris  {fmsi^a^-eiine/H^  '
ii.  288

Psychic  power  (AfirtO,  i  24, 4*i  75.
348;  IK  7,  <t,  7 1,^17.  idr.aoi,

910,  3201  \omuUd  M  «^sM.)  324

PuM)4^ra,  village,  li.  306
PuSedupv  L  t45
PukhuAti,  1\.  VM  f.

Puoabbasaka,  disciple,  I  334
PuocdLio  {»tot  in  iL63
Pmushments,  legal,  i.  6t  f.,  165  il

Pu9i?a,  KioUfSA,  i.  378  £
Pu9fia*Ma&S9i,  1.  103  £

PuMa  (SuniMmieekak  iv  307  i.
Puonikl,  mudseivacl,  u.  1 1 3
Pupu  and  master.  II.  $7
Piu4^  carriige-hnilderi  ii.  65
P6ra9a*Kampa,  i.  rsa :  U.  9
Pvue  and  mlx^  1. 328 1
Purgato^,  1.  47,  49,  63,  219,  335,
2*»,  3W;  ».  55<  349,  «5^

269,  974'  noes  of,  ii.  3  $7  £
Purged.  K  197,  3*0
Punty  {sudkkf)^  56  i,

L  41.  {fierieied4Ai),  i.  1 3, 26, 221,
399.  of  life  [iUe,\  i.  to^  01
heart  (efttt),  I.  103
PiirpOM(A&s»dSs),i.73.
faftika),  ii.  S72.  served  a  useful
{m.  bS4  fbateredX  il.  9>

PuTpossful,  see  Mindful
Pusiuleoce,  i.  310

ual),  i.  330

ualified,  not  absolute  {hi.  {  bold
with  distiorttlshiog,  not  tvith
general  bog),  il.  113, » 973

^  C£  Tb.  AqQieas’s  ^iatistguo,
and  the  curreai  Analysis  (Vtbh^a-
vddln)  school,  anneseed  by  early
Baddbism.


IKDEX


343


Quurellini;,  Quurreh,  i.  230,  287  i
li.  139,244  lixrootaoOi.  i4or.
Que»tjon,  i.  125,218;  u.  16,  17,  69,
145.  ntura*,  i.  1^5:  ii.  242.
pM  of  {not  in  t4xf\,  1.  306.  q.
one’*  mU,  U.  323  £

Quertv  the  tvo,  i.  1 14  f,  questen,
{,  192  £  <•«*»),  il.  33
Qdiet,  Silence
<^ocuiCD2,  i.  93  f.

Redlence  235

IUd34at  thougbq  I  27,  88  f.,  aei,
212.  24ii  252,  265;  ti.  40,  107,
119.  240

tUft,  «lt^ory,  i.  94.  referred  lo,

I  (86

Rjiiny  teteon,  i.  (03, 159, 178.  227,
313  :  iL  2

Ruule.  eon  and  disciple,  1.  297  f>,
300  i.  313  f.

R&jt^ha.  I.  22,  67,  lOi  I39»  ^13,

264.  «82,  3971  3ih  345»  35 '  i  »•  •>
16*  }©3. 157  i- I59i  19*.  «5i  W5»

Riuimaiki.,  brebmm  bermit,  i.  113
Reok,  i.  3$8

RauoQ^iit  I.  368
RadoneUy  poeeibie  and  v,c'>i  11, 188
Ratfbaplia,  daneoaD,  il  29  f.
Reedy,  eye  reedy  (satatofsamtiag),

RMT^Tnie

Reel  Deaire  (il^dundeniending  oO*
121$,  (veAfdAM/M),  L  223
ReeUtt  annt
nitf),  i.  18  I  ii.  ^
R«eiine(dnM),ut£,  295:  Tvia?,
1^  173, 180,  213, 303.  Su  (Utfi

Rnaonioff,  I  360.  {amundna,  in*

fenec«T.  ib  3^5
Reecone  abonq  C  77
Rebm^  (/Uf.  etc.),  1 3,  m,  118,
133.  13 1,  i»T  197.  *34  f,  S15'
(#Awe\  i.  209.  i«  S7»

SCO.  u.  251  £  r«^

caJUog  fMeer,  f.  15.  {fl>r»uJa),
*S.  47,  *5®,  340,  54t  370  i  ii-  XI,
77.  145,  ns>  176,  2i6y  234;
delivecence  ton  {formt^,  1. 1 7,
28,  45,  844,  353.  37C;  IL  23,  54,
83, 167, 235.  r.  Domere»  it  214.
ea  uicoaL  ecc,.  ii ,  zo6.  ee  wSUed,
lL2ri£  with  and  wiAout  body
ocaundali.  isaf  four  states  o£
K,240f.


Recalcitrant  {i^tivaUttkdiy  i.  235
Recall  post  eustences,  ii,  17*  6>r
aUo  Rebirths

Recluse  Uamapa]  1.  13, 42. 76,  z88,
191,  Ld7,  11^  264:  il  100;  r,
and  his  robe.  )>  2ce
Recluseshi^  1. 365  £

Records,  disei^ant  accounts,  i.

Recrutcs.  1. 325
Rectitude.  ii,  14  £

Refectory,  Ii.  66

Refiectioa,  i,  71,  299.  (viOra),  ii,
247  {.,  <mS  ste  Ecstasy,  6rtt  two
Refuge,  ii.  tSo.  300
Regents,  four  Great. ).  49
Regimen,  rigoun  of,  uniinportaeq

il,  ISO

Reioidng  with,  ffo  Sympathy
R^ays,  u  10$  I

Release,  fu  Deliverance  {vimuU^)
Reluctance  to  preach,  i,  1 18
Remorse,  ii,  327
Removal  (vinoJona),  u  8
Rccuneiatloe  (^nviv4^\  1,  it«
(nMAMAamma),’ t  St,  117,  190;
li.  279  f.  }.  304  >

{pdMuta),  i.  70^.  U^h  1>-
Repose  (sleep,  disp^ing  fhtigiie)i

.  .

Repreasiomst,  v  354
Repagnance,  i.2t7
Researcbee,  tu  Mental
Reseaccber  (vCkoiuC).  fl.  121
Resentment  {dosa),  i  !  1
Reaobnion  !.  134 ;  ti.  38.

could  not  mueter  np  (lu.  was  top
arelMS),  ii.  256.  AndtuE^X'
son,  E68rt

Resolve  {ehofM,  it.  6.  ?.  foor
{adMffkfytd^ ,  ii.  29 1  f,  {sanMt^^t
ass  Intention
Respication,  i  215  /,

Rseta’aiat  {sogvord},  i.  9,  270
Residotsn,  ii,  2(6
Revata.  disciple,  L  153, 329 ;  il.  199
Remend  (dewo),  L  122
Rica,  I  jiq,  il  *7,  $h

74.  m  odermgs,  if.  87
Right  (rarawd).  Sm  Middle  VTay
^adi)

Right,  tha  I  33-  (JbifnU),  i-  365,
369;  il  13,  104,  113.  sehieee-
ment  o£li.  114

Right  ideas  (soounOdrtfAt),  1. 33
Right  outlook  {tnmmddiffAi),  1. 12,
3X


344


INDEX.


RighKoufi  CdoducL  i.204;  ii.  {04.

unnftiieous  conduct,  1.  303
Ritual.etc.fi.  189
Road  (maggv),  1 158  ;  ii.  213  f.
Rottea,  i,  2^3,  259.  robe  folded,
).  t?8.  'inakmg,  jj.  317  f.

Rule  ( Vffiaya),  i.  30,  44,  45, 73, 755,
|33  and  passtm,  (Miu^oikih
1.312.  more  rnles,  I.  326
Rums,«.  ?i,  79. 87, 94, 961  'M
Roatic  (epeechX  11.  219

Sabbat,  ij.  160,  164,  167,  299,312
Saccaka,  Jain,  i.  162,  170
SacriSce,  I  57,363
oacrificial  wood,  the,  U.  136
Sa^,  L  367 ;  Ii,  77, 261.  aaaqoil,
iL  291

Saint,  ta  Atnhat.  (sania),  H.  261,
ii,  302

Sakka  (gownor  of  near  world),
1. 180;  ii.  41, 112

Salads,  pnoceaa,  ii.66

Sabilud&yi,  Waaderor,  Ii.  1  f.,  t6
Sikyans,  i.  66,  75,  17«,  203,  238,
*54,  3*5,  354  r  »<  62,  123,  139,
214, 217.  redcses,  ii.  52
SSJJL  Tillage,  i  203,  289
SalvWoD  (wicrjrsqa),  1.  236 :
ii.  X65  f.  fh),  jj.  170.

(jatafiitnna),  i.

S&magAaa,  it.  139
SaaaQa-Kao^k^  >1.  12
Samiddbi,  disciple,  ii.  263  f,,  272  f.
Sambv  wanoii^bdilder,  l  32
Saactky  (m.  purity,  twiifia),  i.  290
Sandaka.  Wanderer,  j.  362  f.
Sangsrava.  brabmin,  11.  129  f.
Safl^aya  AK»ag:otta,  brabole ,  n.  67
Saijaya  BeJafthiputra,  1,  t 44, 179  -,

Sa^ika*piiitaf  brafamin,  ii.  47
Sadiiya,  j,  240
SaraaeaS,  river,  i,  28
Sftrjputia,  dieelple,  f.  lo,  18,  45,
»•.  *33,  T5sf,  207  f.,  300, 335,
33*»  353 ;  »  103/.,  170,  J  8  r.  199,
^3  t,  30^,  323.  as  a  son  of
Gotaaa,  tu  173,  as  a  loolher.

1U206  '

SM,  aisdpte.  i.  183  f.

Sa^^iction  L  50,  66;

11.  J65  /.  (MMonscro),  V.  in,
^  r«  Zest-

(sui^)  u  66  {.,  /95, 330.  (a6&.
rtandaif),  it.  297


Satisfied  {fAiojindj.n.  151,  214

Savaltht,  1. 12,  7X,  ?4,  79»  U

ICC,  104  f„  108.  113,  12$,  133,
143,  157,  180,  183,  307,  219,  227,
234, 286, 300,  304,  3®8»  3",  8*3.
Ml  ;  ii.  X*,  *1, 30,  50,  56,  59,

84,  ico,  113,  X31,  154,  1S4,  X67,
170/  1?3»  '77,  X80,  X88,  19a,  199,
205,  2ti,  214,  222,  239,  248,  255,
261,  263,  267,  268,  278,  283.  25s,
*9:,  3w,  307,  309,  313,  3f5»  3'9-
DCtlacBing  ID  aai&ts,  K.  113
Saw,  allegory,  i.  90.  refOTed  to,

Schoijtng  body,  ixtbd(^^d»<w>d\
i.  170 1  [^sik*kaii),  i.  209, 303  ?


i.  ^  303;
11. 201, 303.  (gradual),  \u  X55
Scriptural  X^ffiMofampadOiumX
i.  368

Scrapolooi,  i.  23,  <3.  (oUa^\
19  r.  (ibJUuff  A  t.  $18

Scrutiny  (Awwm),  j.  4.  {fiUra-
^<trivilaiJta),  ii.  97.  (^/edm),
)  1.203

Sectaries,  i.  59
Sects,!.  t43

Seised  of  i.  232  i.

Sola,  brahmin,  u.  79  r.

SeJC  as  bale  (not-iU^  H.  18,  131,
six  queedeos  on,  u  5.  as  net
body  or  mind,  i  99,  134.  162.
214  U  390;  ii.  165.  *62,  284,
5^  314,  316.  formula  denying
self  as  either,  i  29,  98,  X34.
empty  o4  i.  si2;  il  152.  non-
self,  I.  eio.  views  about,  j,  sp,
^5*97 1 U'  X3 1  f<  the  undefiled  a ,
li.  128.  pu^ed  of  {6aMtai/A).
i.  x6f,,  Bl,  149,338;  It  99,  245  f,
or  others  or  botla  ii.  60.  aeMoei

happenings,  sn  Deed
Self*colleccedAess  (asA)/  '•  8
Selfcoodemned,  1.  260
Self’iaonificaQoii,  ii.  286
Self-possessed,  i.  T93
Seniors,  I,  xt

Seniya,  Canine  ascetic,  v  278  £
Seoiya,  king,  tu  BimtMSfira
Sense  (six  spberesk  i.  9S,  44,  ?8,
r86j  ii.  188,  278  £,  303,  315.
objects  ef  (sea),  it.  315.  gimo,
coairtrf  of,  j.  130,  158,  X92,  255,
328, 355.  Imml),  s*t  Faculties,
five.  ••  »X3

Sensitive  to  re^oacb,  1. 256
SeosBOus  pleaenre  (iSms),  i.  43,
59  f.,  91,  102,  123,  189,  2t9  f.,


INDEX,


79$,  as  I.  *87.  3»3i  3*8.  37»;
n.  aa,  «6,63,  »»6»  U5  fT,  151,320,


n.  aa,  j6,63,  »»6»  U$  r,  151, 220,

asa  3«6,

it  323

j.  ^50

Smvic*  (/flrtrtTryJ),  11.  ICO  f.

Sv.Ude.  1.315

8«v«m,  tb«ory  o/,  I.  366  t
fthimifa^til  m  Cooscieotious
6tep«.  M*  Form
Steiiof,  i.  331
Shtfin^  1.  3M

3hi»«liaf,  1.341;  H.  joo,  (31
SbUof  H^bti  (tif.  ODward  ^rs),

1-37*

ShoCTi  Mt'bftcif,  set  Olherwiieness
Sbeckftd  ii.  133

S|sfa(»  theory  of,  i.  77,  137
Sin,  ii.  34E  t.

Siluce,  i.  165,  1E5,  363;  ii.  (,
200.  accept!  by,  1.  1:4;  il  7$,
79,  $.  ia  bear  (/a/,  take  oo
trouble),  I.  338.  noble  a.,  i.  114.
Ands«t  Ootama
Siny.  ut  Foolish
Sioiias,  Sii  s^areUt  lul
Six  Sixes,  n*3‘5  ^

Sladraasa,  il.  3^

Slaves,  i.  349 ;  li.  85.  aod  servias-
Jbl^  ii.  105

Sie^  of  Gotacna,  i.  178
Sioira,  M  Cocaitia
SneVe,  L  ibo
Sure,  I.  los
Snow.  L  4$

Selinide,  u  193.  i.  53.

{Jim^ha%  if.  1 35.  (jtMiffOni),

C«a,  I54>  a3a.ip3l  'S*-  »•>

*05,  J77'  {fma(a)y  ti.  714  i,
917  £,  3*3.  (/ottMiitf),  ii.  3M.
widM  Gocema
S^&li,  prificees,  ii.  66
SoROW,  bun,  grief,  paio,  il.  140,
andi9t  lU

Soal  {■  ‘owo*),  f.  149.  cbeories,
304.  04*  alto  Life  C/Tev),

Sou^em  HIQs.  Ii  <03

Space,  as  fifth  elec^e  (f.n),  i.


Spaik  cX  UhratBAtioa  (uiitAtaia),

>  9*.  ids'

Spew  iqifa^y  11,  31  z
Specolativo  ioeae  (or  riewi).  i.  43,
95.  HI,  304^1  S4‘  ii*  *®5
Speech,  proper,  n.  288  t;  uo*
pleasM^  if  true,  u  383.  right.


*%«  Middle  Way,  Behaviour,
Coadoct,  Moials
Sphere,  su  Planes,  Realms
SpontaaeousI?,  i.  173
Sprites,  ttt  Deva

Squirrels’  feeding'grouod,  1.  332,

345;  ii-  159.  *38, 373,333

Stain,  it.  155

Sted&st,  j.  74  £,  81,83  f  '  146.  333
Strands  (gxibi),  ».  33, 145
Streogtbs  (five),  ii.  7, 137>  i4o,  320,

324

Strenuous  {aipainalla),  1.  149;
ii.  245  f.  (dhUfn),  i.  3^.
{virl/iii,  j.  333  \  ii.  68
Htrenuouaness  (mm/4/),  i.  73
Strife,  with  none,  1. 76  to  prevent,
ii.  138.  bars  Nirvtna,  ii.  13$
Strive,  ii.  6

Striving  HaAfwui),  \.  It?;  ii.9^
12$.  five  quaJIcias  for,  ii.  67  fi
stt  alto  Struggles
Study,  laam,  and  roaiter,  ii.  264
Study  (pvNo^ud),  i,  73.  {tuia),
i.  109.  {wktna),  ii.  114
SlrufSle(sj^lour,  ii.  6,  (4.  l^o,  324
aptfor.  11. 49

Stiunbling-blocb  {an/ar^),  i.  48,

90

Stump,  of  palm,  t  266,  330,  344,
34$  i  ii.  147, 394
Subba,  brabulo,  ii.  1 13  f ,  268
SubhUci  (?  diadple),  ii.  290
Snbofdiiiaxe  to  Ii

13)

Substances  (<^>4),  seven,  f.  366
Suicide  from  gnef,  ii.  58.  ftom
pain,  U,  306.  when  bUroeloes,
li.  307

Sumeary.  li.  283
Summer,  1.  55, 108, 278,  ftp
SdQsumara^.  i.  939 ;  il^
SoxiaJdthat^  Liccbtvi,  i  4$ ;  H.  145
Saafpannta,  il  307  C
Sufidanka  6bir^vd^s«  u  28
Supererogation  I  364  f.
Soperbiupiuai  i.  45
SupennaA  (£4  great  ma^,  !L  71
80  £,  9$.  his  lifo  aloof,  ii.  32$
Support,  il  T$3
Sustenances,  four,  L  34, 188
SosCestatioo,  tat  Artachment
Stmas,  i  93.  tides  of,  i.  58 ;  ii.  192
Sweat,  i.  167

Sympathy,  i.  201,  303 ;  u.  201
System  (uys).  i.  247  ;  iu  113.
-moager#  (foiK),  u.  121


INDEX.


14^


Talk,  ‘beasdy/  i.  362  ;  IL

i,  13, 16,  219.  »ynem  ini  H.  90
Tamer,  a.  $4
Tn^ula  pila  Cate,  ii.  J03
Tapoda.  t  l  263

TSnikkha,  brUmiB,  U  joS,  iid
Task,  dpoe,  i.  ico
Taught,  aad  left  untaught,  i,  30$  (.
Teacher  (M/Mor),  j.  9  £,  42,  82.
j|l,  188,  «9,2:?7,  2^,363  C;  ii.

Teaing  iiisana),  I  339,  t  of
ttadwrs  (J4£ariya),  \.  359  ;  li,
97.  compassfoBaM,  li,  327
Tears,!.  2S(,  279;  !i.  304

Temper,  L  327

Tenet  {<iA<itmn%AaiAS}i  I  3^.

(itgarfyalia),  i>.  17
Terrors,  of  the  water,  i.  327  f,
'fhatch,  u.  27

Themes,  iu  Mindlulnessj  appl>ea'
dons  of

Theorising,  su  Speoulauve  views
ThioloDi;  fouaded  aHght  {yffnita
mMnetrikSra),  1.  4,  {sanSoppA),
».  13-  how  Co  conduct,  ii.  2^2  i.
Thirst  (*jeir4ki,  174
ThtMfbt^)  (fiua\  1.  27.  (w«w<?X
1. 267.  (vtiAikaX  i  79  f.,  82  f.,  8$.

(fmMappal  ii.  13  £  acd

ii.  322.  word  and
wd  1. 3/,  39, 67 ;  u.  238.  higher
{adJua^ta],  u  83.  systemafired,  1.
909.  wasted  to  the  fuU,  Ii,  312  f.
ThuUakoRbita,  township,  ii.  28
Tbunderb^  1.  j66
Tlea  i-  322  £

Timber  (best  of)  j.7?,  139/.,
144  £,  Afuf  m  Similes
Tune,  fior  teaching  ^armuidi,  1,
*48.  308 ;  n.  873.  ioconsetuent,
_ts83

TocsiA(««druiDX  i.  i2i
Todeyya,  brnhieui,  Ii.  jo8,  tid
his  *«,  U.  113.  dan  or  school.

H,  i2|

Toe,  L  t|s

XotToeotlog  sdf  and  ethers,  1.

24;/.;  u.  90/.

Torftio^,  I  369

Tracker  (d^ants),  L  127
Tudltlos  (ammavA),  !l.  07,  121.

{AaMLfm  b  30

T»diQQnaL  j.  3S8
Traffic  srttb,fi.  220
Traic,  rre  Scaling*

Trainer,  !L  282


]  Training,  course  o£  L  72,  246
I  Tranc^  i.  stT,  2i6,’24o*  on-,  dD*»
d«-,  i.  241

TranquiUiiy  (Paf/aMA/f,  i.  8,  81,

300.  (rc2«^,  iu  302.  (AiU9^),

I.  4

Traoquilliratioa  (sapia/AA\  L  209
j  Transcendent,  sff  Knowledge
j  TranKendttilal  (iAbutiora)X  232  f.
i  Transcending  ordinary  (vawe),  i.

I  314

Transient,  Traositoryi  U  6$,  134
163,  242,  304,  3ioi  it  152,  2ot,

oi4,  279,  309  t,  3f4i  ^

Body,  Feelmg,  IU

I  TraQslaaon  (^pAfiMkaX  i.  49, 310 ;

II. 27,  78.  395

TransmjgradMt  (eoprdns),  i.  37,

^3^ibS8

Trapper,  i.  108  £

l^ees,  coral,  ii.  367.  cre^,  I
230.  white  mango,  L  339.  (Tlotus)

.  .  ,  pin^  8S.  tosweMle
C7<mdu),  i.  27d.  saodak  ii.  eS.
sUa,  I  r,  86,  aso,  344.  ondutaL
L  54.  234 ;  ii.  13,  86-  vilva,  176
Tnbaladofi,  ij.  297
Tnumpbanc  Urttiances,  i.  93.

dose,  il  23  f.

Troughs,  a  86
Tme,  il.  273

Trust  (jaOdMx  i*  3^6
Truth  (-tnie  (tbiogl,  soeea),  ii.
392,  294.  grouDdM  in,  i.  adpf.
(^i^aamA),  il.  905,  etrui  tu  Doe-
trioe.  homage  to  the  t.  (&  tbe
thing  uaderseoodX  i>  99'  Go-
tama's  disaples  crutbfd,  u.  53.
TtuthfadeKs  truth,  ii.  37.  h«e
alone  Is,  il  96  f..  273.  eolemo
mtesiatioD  of  (iu.  by  this  true
thing),  ii.  34.  accepted  t.  [sem-
m$ui),  li  1 16.  among  brahmins,
il  114.  maiotenaace  of,  ii.
attaiomeat,  it.  99,  realise  phyato*
ally,  ii.  99.  professes,  ii.  118
Truths,  Ae  four,  i.  6, 133,  272, 307,
3»5J  27,296

Trath-finder  (Tathlgata),  i.  3,  58,
39.  77,  82,  9^  98, 101,  rc8, 122,
136,  151,  163,  168,  179,  lOQi,  228,
939.  *49.  *5^  266,  283,  aid,  297.
A®**  330. 337, 339/  344, 35S,  W  5
It.  23,  89,  48,  102,  U9,  130, 145,

138, 173,  22  J,  223,  232,  273/  295,

290.  300.  ten  powers, 46.  too
onabties  of,  U.  X30  f.


4


INDEX.


347


TumoU  cl.  269
TusltA  world,  tu  »93

Tusks,  i.  ii7

i.  139*  144  :  »-  46?
Twis^  wnrti*  and  contomoa,  1.
31S

U<U?)t  dltdplo,  L  2B6,  3z8  f! :  iL
>73

U44«ka  Rljupucia.  i.  1:7,  iso
Udsniu  dlsdpta.  ti.  89  C
Ufrlhamina,  Wanderer,  ii.  ts  f.
(^Afta,  li.66
UlikIcsUL  L  IS9
UkUU,  H.  (99
Ukkanoa^t.  i,  234
Undertiand,  tbey  will,  1.  119;  ii.
3^

UedentaodiB^,  i.  so^;  n.  68,  ?$c,
311,  392.  {vijJAX  li.  320,  33*
Uo6evered  cool),  ji.  90
Uni»oa.  1.  339

UoUjr,  j.  s.  331,286}  ij.  138,  144
IJnivacuIrcy,  {.  3
Univem,  i.  76,  lot ;  ii.  rS?
JJorufflad,  i.  320

Unsoofbi  1.  si6
Upaka.  I.  J31
Upiui,  Jado,  i.  269  £

UpaasAAa,  lept,  ii.  iz$

(Jpariiw,  u  106
Upset  (aMattiaa4\  !i.  26

UNvetti  i.  (17,  !S(

Uw  (/fltfwiwrf),  f.  6  £

Uuiffc  braliain,  it  70 1,  324 1

VaedMSOtEa,  Wanderer,  u  339  t,
Ml  348  f-

Viccbt Tenet,  i.  (35  (wl^Uotfka}
Vaifi  ii.  S7S

VaJ)laD(sr  t.  isz,  {59, 165.  viUefe,


Veins  like  wbip-cord,  il  64
Vejeyante,  i.  >82
V^haoasse,  Wenderer,  il  21

Vepalla,  Mtl,  ii.  193
Veralija,  i.  207
Versed,  1. 197

VesUl,  oty,  i.  45, 163,  (70,  2$! ;  H.
*45i  *63

V«ss4ffli(ta,  11.  Q7
Veetereea,  1.  lea
Vices  i.  66

Vidaha,  i.  («;  Ii.  41.  70,  159-

V-  lady,  i6s
Videhiki,  1 86 1.

Vidhura,  (.  240

Viddijabba,  genera^  U.  jS,  67, 69
Views,  dcve^en(,  ii.  13I.  nnt,  it

«ivi4  /rr  Kpeculadve,  Mtddk
/,  first  item

Vljplaijce,  i.  192,  4S5»  333  •  *’*  15^

Village,  confines  ct,  1. 334
Virtue  {sUc),  I.  103,  no,  140, 146,
1C4,  209.  35s,  3931  li.  109.  SIS.
higber.  cL  $.  (4i»m4s),  it  §$•

pious  isVatwt/i,  it  303
Vision  ( jSarrew),  i.  i  68, 314,  «m4  m
Kee.  dahty  of  {S^omoKM),  I

Vkc^^  (dm),  t  SIO

Vocarioa,  li.  soo,  r#r  Course
Vow  to  achieve,  1.  339 ;  it . .  .
Vulgar,  the  ^uiAuffatia),  L  232 1
Vulcurwnai^er,  i  90
Vulcure's  Peek,  I  X39,  3Si  /
I94»305


Vs^iiTi  princess,  II.  38
Vuutdeva.  bcnhmln,  11. 97, 1 14
Vittake]  ^ahmio,  it  97,  zz4
Vearsfa,  1. 237
Vafiitv,  i.  29  (

Varedben,  Wanderer  It  t
Vftsebh  qaMo.  it  5S
V3«e?t6a,  onhoiin.  li.  97,  (08,  Z14
Vasea.  it  199

Vseseielra,  brahenn,  ii.  i$9

Vebhlra,  Ut,  ii.  192

Vedani  &arigTeha*sattenta,  1.35 1  n.

Vedas,  il  7c^  83, 84, 94.  isi

Vduliagn.  I1.  24

V^icle,  used  as,  it  ato


t  Wsddaffdntertal,  i.  283, 347  £

[  Wander^  1 43,  rss,

5  464^,367  fit  273,  331.  (fe-

<  nale),  I.  219.  w.'spane,v59
*  Wanting:  Urde,  1. 103
j  War,  cause  of,  1.  60  fi

WasW, !.  (97

Water,  l  255
Waxes,  wanes,  i.  122 1
Way,  the  only,  i.  41*  Su
Middle  Wav

Weal  (stMa),  iv  319-  *o“  W
wea^  1 66 ;  il  47  £  (^)x  1 99*
16  (.  weal  and  woe  [AtedJu/a),  I
247.  ii.  54.  weal  and

wdUare  (su.fc^  it  68
Weapons,  1.  61

Weansu:  out  (ill  deeds),  ii.  12$

Weird,  1.202, 367

Welcome  itOgata),  t.  x8i.  23$,  363;

ii.  a.  159


348


INDEX.


Welfare  i.  94,  161 ;  n.  m

WtlUbeis;  i  «I.  ituAAa),  i.
99.  {aUia),  ii.  305.  {Misin>t~
Mra),  L  i$o.  Su  Good
Wellonionoed,  i.  356
Wh«),  of  Truth,  or  Doctrioe,  I  48,
x*i;  li.  81,  J73,  39$

White  cloth^  f.  247,  346;  ii.  15,
139*  >N

Wifsfyouftr).  I.  135
Wijde  (of  (be  foresiK  I.  332  f.

Will  [virtya),  j.  73.  {donJa),  H.
14.  {eUta],  i.  (49.  -ma
UAarida),  L  ifi.  t  293.

development  of  (Hi  uprising  M
thougbc),i.  3t.  good*  friend¬
ly  work  of  mind),  i,  230.  {Aiid-
>$u4an^),  i.  238.  (puuS)>  i.  24  r.
76^an4patfm~  lU,  U.

Wisdom  (#0AftS),  i.  102,  103. 134;

u.  38.  fioteUect),  L  311 ;  i\.  4
Wiseman^  marks,  ii,  232  f.
Wlnbes,  f.  233
Woe  i.  68, 299

Wondera,  ii  223 1
Wood,  cbana  oj  it  62.  ‘keeper,  I
J49;  it.  245

wotnaa,  scaled,  1, 319.  sharks,  i.
musicius.i  30.  In  labour,
ti.  |4<  erased  with  grief,  ii,  5;.
and  chastity,  ii.  181.  canaot  be
Buddha  or  *  WoiW-mooercb,'  ii.
J91


I  Word'inongers,  ii.  244
*  Works  ’  {vfrsus  faUb\  i,  43
World,  ii.  36.  w.-speech,  i.  353.
news  about,  1.  29.  whether
another,  I.  290

Worldly  {umUa),  \.  9,  339  ;  1).  146.
ii.  279

Worlds,  i.  26t.  vision  of  twa  ii.
2$$,  .  .  .  Tusitn,  ii.  304.  Pure
Abodes,  i.  $7
Worth  (orvaMOe),  i.  226
Worthy  of  honour,  ii.  tat
Wrestles  (^oaSsAont),  Tl.  129
Wrong,  the,  i.  33

Yaldcha,  u  182,  278
Y&ma,  it  2$6

Yamuagffi.  brahmio,  il.  97
Yearaingfs),  j.  23  f.,  149  («/

w  Ux^  217,  2^  24&  314
m  336.  u.  280

Yellow>gvb^  ii.  301
Yon^  country,  i).  85
Youth  and  age,  IL  35

Ze^  i.  7^  iiSijl  55i »

H.  204

Zealous  ii.  103

Zest  l^Wf,  I.  8,  27,  6^  71, 195, 200,
830;  217,  204.  ffithoat  2

i.  295.  joy  without  t.,

t.  299


SIMILES,


Akthill,  etc,»  i,  tos
iuxher{il  1 58,  12$ ;  ii,  6$

b&b«  io  iwftddting  rlDlhei.  ii,  23

b*ll  ofttriDi*  it.  ao8

hAll  cf  twine,  i.  i&7

burner  towered,  i.  98

bu  in  neck,  i.  38:

bftre  bone.  1. 91

bUbmtn.  I.  ros

beuts  ir«med  or  not,  \l  330

benting  back  radiaoce,  1.33$

belle  of  the  Inni^  tl,  tS

bird's  Ivggan.  1. 1 29

blind  from  birth,  !.  359f :  ii>  ^15

blind  lOeD,  li,  97)  >>5

borrowed  wealth,  i,  262

Unrower, !,  194

brass  bowl,  i,  18

boll's  hide.  ii.  21$

burden  laid  doan.  i.  98,  loc^  (88

bvslut  caoebt,  ii.  38

borVM  boards  found,  Ii.  *i6

bomlttf  Csam,  i,  89

bent  ^d,  1.  233

baiter.  U.  scd

cstf  motfaerlom,  i.  32|
carcase  round  oaci.  i.  83
cetcbinf  qu^  ti,  248

catatia  dt^ed,  I  89

cfasflM,  L  33  ^

cbiu  root  axfcd  flower,  il  ($8
child  ebolmr,  i.  284  .
child  of  cbiliLese,  u  37  ‘
choice  of  rotd>  i.  32

choice  limber^  U  309

d^ooaa;  act,  1.  84
cbeouflff  aot  to  see,  t.  83
lato  i,  197  i  ii.  la
cleft  rock,  il  146

doth  i.  26 ;  (anotber).  L  3?a
clocb«s<hes(.  i.
coerdog  a  weaker,  i-  84.  174  i
Confortable  bouse,  b  52

coiuii^ower,  11. 10


cool  lake,  i.  20 1
cow  and  calf.  I  233
cows  in  safoty,  i.  8of.
crab,  i.  167

crafisman  and  work.  11.  le
creme  and  tree.  i.  220
cribbed.  I.  98
crossing  Canges,  i,  309  f*
crowd  and  boueycomb,  11.  3

dainty  ixiesi,  ii.  147
<laug8ter-in-lsw.  1.  13;.  tB2
deer*  decoy,  i.  8t,  110
di^ng  the  earth  away,  i.  88
dithers,  fletcher,  jdiiers,  il  S3
dogaud  post,  ib  Z33
dream,  I  ot.  282
driver  and  thoro^bb^ds.  il,  209
drop  on  red'bot  iron,  ii.  328
drops  oe  bot  jar,  323
drops  00  lotus  leaf.  li.  328
droogbc  ia  spriog,  i.  vs
dyeoDoak^,  i.  273$.

alephaot  batbiag,  i.  183
el^bant-bonds,  u  yto  a
elephaaMrakl,  1,  12$,  137,  133
elephant  craloing,  li.  48  f.
eiephafit  uutsm^  ii.  23$

Sechin  t's  tronk, :.  298
emMlc  myrobaJan,  ii.  sr2
expert  butcher's  cut.  8.3(1
eyes  opened,  closed.  11. 325

foiling  Into  beU,  1.  23s
folbog  fruit,  ii.  38
fooiikar  ne^hbotubood,  fu  119
fosterisg  corpse,  li.  206
Are  aoo  dry  wood,  11.  208
fire  aod  Bofoeb  li  117

firefly,  lamp,  fire,  tnoniag  star,
oxooD,  sun,  ii.  (8,  33
firesHcks.  IL  292
flame  in  lamps,  il.  241
fletcher,  li.  55,  (29
flies  on  piago,  Il  241


549


350


SIMILES.


fbul  oU  io  tampi  ii.  243
fuel  and  Idod  offire,  I  tSs
full  poad,  n.
full  water-pot,  ii.  209

Kner,  ii,  2$^  95$

«$  to  sea,  i.  347
fariatid-maker,  i.  27S
^esi  00  (brttd,  ii.  9,  z8,  213

fold,  wrought  ii.  212
fourd,  i.  2at  f.

gnea  and  dry  wood,  >.  <73  L;  H  4$
grip  of  serpent,  i.  93 1

baagiag  fruU,  i.  91, 263
bay'Corcb,  i«  pr,  262
bea  wd  eggs,  i  7},2$7
becdssan.  1. 13^
bidden  srilotto,^  >.  200
honeyed  cahe,  1,  ^9
horse-breaker  and  colt.  il.  I  $$
house,  7.  157
huckster,  U.  233

bvoaog  in  the  impoasible,  ii.

236 1 U)
hot  aad  nre,  11.

kspaliof  stake,  k  91
itch  of  wunCiag,  i.  98

^ekah  cat,  ase.  in  iraaee,  i.  24 1

f'ealous  man,  ii.  125
eta  ^i^gou,  i.  99
yjiner,  n.  $5

lakes,  1 51

leper  and  leech,  i.  357
light  and  dame,  i.  2jo
1 02,  262

lonely  elephant,  ii,  24$
lotuses,  i.  120

lotuses  bdow  Surface,  i,  196
lamp  of  carrion,  t.  91,  2dJ
luD^  of  meat,  i.  261

medkane,  u  226
Birror,  L  298 1
moat  (filed,  1. 98
Doon,  b.  28,  22,
osoracog  star,  u.  rl,  22  *
ueu&nio -shadows,  ii.  24^  253
medUted  man,  i  371

no  (bel  AO  fire,  i.  349  C
so  moon  nigfats,  ii.  3(2

oQ,  vick,  and  shbe,  ii.  3x0
offl  In  ti^ce^  1. 241


paiotlng  the  air,  L  89
psIm-sTump,  i.  33®*  I79;  »■  »47
palsy,  ii.  246
peg  knockout,  i.  83

pit  of  embers,  1. 91, 202
poisoned  arrow,  il  u;
poisoned  goblet,  i.  226 ;  ii.  15^
pool  and  wood,  i.  52
poor  man’s  bonds.  1.  321
prisoner,  i.  194
pure  lake,  ii.  200

quail,  i.  320

quest  of  limber,  i.  77,  139  f.,  144  f  >
166,  ii.  2(t$
quit  cd  bolt,  i.  98

raft,  j.  94,  186
reed  and  sheath,  h.  to
refined  gold,  it.  292!
refiecleo  usage,  i.  7f
rich  iTvaa’s  bonds,  i.  322
river  in  spate,  11. 62
road  to  Rijagaba,  ti.  2$?
robber  cau^r,  ii,  249
roof-de,  i.  232

8&]*gtove,  i,  86

sU-tunber.  u  344
sere  lea/,  U.  Z46
aeven  treasures,  Ii.  25:4
shade  passing  off,  ii.  (35
sbadeless  tree,  I  $l
shady  tree,  i.  51
si^  mac,  r«  194
slaughter ’house.  1 91
Slava,  i.  J94
smut  redacted,  It.  it
snake,  slough,  h.  10
snake's  head,  i.  91
snap  fingers,  ii.  326
spitting,  ii.  326
spring  waters,  i.  195
starvug  dogi  i.  261
stone  and  Him&laya,  ii.  249, 234
'  storied  palace,  ii.  155
,  strong  man  torruriag,  ii.  to6
sun,  i.  227;  ii.  18, 22
sweet  medicine,  i.  227
sword,  scabbard,  li.  IC

tbe  rain,  i.  163
thoroughbred  colt.  1. 317
training  beasts,  ii.  68
training  elephant,  li.  23  r,  233
tipped  doe^  i.  123


SIMILBS.


35*


traveller,  u  194  ,  ..

traveUer  Ttturoin^j  ••  19« »  *

trae  and  shadow,  11. 311
_  turtle  aodyofc«,n.  2^1

twoboasea,  i.  19?  J  -55
unSsd  lamp.  i\.  >93

*  vatotyagaAi  ^

vfawovtD  snouetam,  )i  >30 1.
▼iper,  U.  150
vagfeQ’wneel,  1.  ss


water  and  jar.  i.  >98
water  and  coltk.  11.  ^
water 'tenors,  uiij
white  robe, l9o
wide  view,  1. 1S4

will  acting  OB  ann,  u  181,  io3»>34;
)i.  3S6

will  lag  horse*,  1.  86  „
woods  for  kiadltag,  »•  6®
wounded  curious  nan,  i.  395  *'
wou  nded  man  aware  of  heal  mg  pro*
cess,  ii.  t34


■Sfc',.

I


or  MrtTAW  ^  wsfcwo  •«“**  entprirta  AVt  un*


Ceolra]  Archaeolc^iai)  Libr


NEW  DELHI.


Author


Title-


'A  b^ok  that  is  shut  U  but  a  block


^  GOVT.  OF  INDIA  ^
r  D«ptno<ntof  Archac^ogr

NEWDEim  *


Pleaae  help  ti»
ole&o  and  mo^utg.
